LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7605818
1921
Brain Res Bull
Brain Res. Bull.
Brain research bulletin
0361-9230
1873-2747

27609296
5079776
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.09.002
NIHMS817976
Article
Specialized Roles of Neurofilament Proteins in Synapses: Relevance to Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Yuan Aidong 12
Nixon Ralph A. 123
1 Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, New York 10962
2 Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016
3 Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016
Authors for correspondence :yuan@nki.rfmh.org; nixon@nki.rfmh.org
22 9 2016
5 9 2016
9 2016
05 9 2017
126 Pt 3 334346
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurofilaments are uniquely complex among classes of intermediate filaments in being composed of four subunits (NFL, NFM, NFH and alpha-internexin in the CNS) that differ in structure, regulation, and function. Although neurofilaments have been traditionally viewed as axonal structural components, recent evidence has revealed that distinctive assemblies of neurofilament subunits are integral components of synapses, especially at postsynaptic sites. Within the synaptic compartment, the individual subunits differentially modulate neurotransmission and behavior through interactions with specific neurotransmitter receptors. These newly uncovered functions suggest that alterations of neurofilament proteins not only underlie axonopathy in various neurological disorders but also may play vital roles in cognition and neuropsychiatric diseases. Here, we review evidence that synaptic neurofilament proteins are a sizable population in the CNS and we advance the concept that changes in the levels or post-translational modification of individual NF subunits contribute to synaptic and behavioral dysfunction in certain neuropsychiatric conditions.

Neurofilament subunit
synapse
dendritic spine
neuropsychiatric disease

1. Introduction

Neurofilaments (NFs), the intermediate filaments of mature neurons, are among the most abundant proteins in brain. Unlike the intermediate filaments of other cell types, which are usually homopolymers, NFs in the CNS are hetero-polymers composed of NFL, NFM, NFH and alpha-internexin subunits [187]. Although structurally distinctive, these four NF subunits share a basic tripartite domain structure consisting of a conserved central α-helical rod region, a short variable head domain at the amino-terminal end and a tail of highly variable length at the C-terminal end. The short head domain is rich in serine and threonine residues and contains consensus sites for O-linked glycosylation and phosphorylation [188]. The central rod domain, which is relatively conserved among intermediate filament family members, contains long stretches of hydrophobic heptad repeats favoring formation of α-helical coiled-coil dimers. The C-terminal domains contain glutamic- and lysine-rich stretches of varying length that mainly establish the size range (58–200 kDa on SDS gels) of the four NF subunits. Although all intermediate filament types serve roles as structural scaffolds, NF subunit heterogeneity also confers specialized structural properties to NF, in axons where the filaments are extremely long and are often arranged in parallel with uniform spacing conferred by the long C-terminal tails of NFM and NFH extending perpendicularly from the filament core [141, 142]. These unique space filling properties of NF facilitate their well-established role in caliber expansion of large-diameter myelinated axons of peripheral nerves, which is critical for effective nerve conduction [198]. NFs also extensively cross-link with other cytoskeletal elements along axons to form a large metabolically stable stationary NF network [126, 185, 190] that is critical to axon caliber expansion [66, 84, 129] and organelle distribution along axons [143].

Besides these unique structural and functional features, NF subunits are distinguished from other intermediate filament proteins by the complex regulation of their head and tail domains by phosphorylation, especially those of NFM and NFH, which involves actions of multiple protein kinases and phosphatases at many polypeptide sites [133]. Although certain phosphorylation events are known to control tail extension and subunit assembly and slow turnover, the purpose of such complex and dynamically changing phosphate topography on NF subunits [49, 127, 133] has remained puzzling, given the mainly static structural support roles ascribed to NF. Both the complex hetero-polymeric structure and dynamically changing phosphate topography of NF proteins suggests that individual NF proteins might serve additional biological roles although there has been relatively little exploration of this issue until recently.

NF gene mutations are well recognized as causes of several neurological disorders mainly involving degeneration of peripheral nerve fibers in accordance with the prominent function of NF in supporting large-diameter myelinated axons [26]. Notably, however, NF proteins are abundant in grey matter CNS regions as well as white matter [33] but influence caliber expansion much less dramatically in most populations of CNS axons [55]. These observations and evidence that NF subunits can be axonally transported in various minimally assembled forms (including as heterodimers) suggest a broader distribution and range of assembly forms of NF subunits within CNS neurons, including substantial populations in synapses. In light of these findings, alterations of a particular NF subunit as seen in specific brain regions in psychiatric and neuropsychiatric disorders [30, 40, 69] may reflect an alteration within synapses which influences the clinical phenotype.

Psychiatric diseases, affecting an estimated 54 million Americans yearly, cause mild to severe disturbances in thought or behavior usually in the absence of known changes in axonal integrity. Nevertheless, changes in levels and phosphorylation of NF subunits have consistently been noted in certain psychiatric disorders although the location of these changes within neurons is poorly understood. Psychiatric diseases prominently involve alterations of synaptic transmission. The highly specialized composition of synapses includes not only the well characterized vesicular and protein receptor machinery supporting neurotransmission but also a specialized cytoskeleton important for delivering, inserting, and recycling synaptic components. Like other domains in a neuron, the cytoskeleton in synapses is composed of microtubules, actin filaments, the spectrin-rich membrane skeleton, and as recently shown, NF assemblies [191, 193]. Evidence is also emerging that the cytoskeleton, and especially the NF scaffold, acts as a docking platform to organize the topography of organelles within different neuronal compartments. Rearrangements of this topography are dynamically coordinated at least in part by cellular signals regulating the phosphorylation state of the binding partners [137, 143, 163, 193]. Such evidence suggests a range of possibilities for understanding the newly recognized roles of individual NF subunits in modulating synaptic function. In this review, we consider the properties of synaptic NF assemblies in the CNS and, in this context, raise the possibility that certain changes in levels or phosphorylation of NF subunits reported in neuropsychiatric disorders (Table 1) disrupt synaptic signaling or, in some cases, reflect adaptive or maladaptive responses to these synaptic disruptions.

2. NF proteins in synapses

2.1 Distinctive assemblies of NF subunits in synapses

Synapses have long been considered to be degradative sites for NF reaching terminals by axonal transport [145]. When NF proteins have been detected in synaptic fractions and bound to synaptic proteins in vitro, they have previously been viewed as contaminating axonal NF proteins [112] and their possible role in synapses has rarely been entertained. Using multiple independent approaches, however, Yuan et al. recently provided definitive evidence that all four CNS NF subunits are integral resident proteins of synapses and have distinct roles in synaptic function and behavior (Figure 1)[191, 193]. The NF assemblies isolated from synapses are distinctive as compared to those in other parts of the neuron in terms of their morphology and in having higher proportions of alpha-internexin, a lowered phosphorylation state of NFM, and a higher NFH phosphorylations state. This unique population of synaptic NF proteins is more abundant in the postsynaptic area than in adjacent dendritic areas or presynaptic terminals and exhibits a different response to subunit perturbation than the axonal population. For example, when NFM is deleted from mice, NFH phosphorylation and the ratio of NFH to NFL subunit increase significantly in the synaptic pool in comparison to the total NF pool [193]. Because NF subunit monomers are inefficiently transported along axons [186, 187, 193], NF proteins in synapses are at least oligomeric in form and can be transported as such in axons, providing one possible basis for their synaptic location. It is also possible that some NF protein in postsynaptic boutons is synthesized locally because mRNAs of NFL [45, 134] and alpha-internexin [180] are reported to be present in dendrites and polyribosomes are preferentially localized under the base of dendritic spines [161]. In this regard, evidence suggests that NF proteins identified in nerve terminals isolated from squid brain are produced by local protein synthesis [46, 110].In light of these findings, aforementioned reports noting the presence of NF in synaptic fractions and interactions of NF proteins with known synaptic proteins can be viewed as further support for a substantial synaptic pool of NF proteins in the brain.

Remarkably, previous proteomic analyses of synaptic fractions have consistently identified NF proteins but these findings were not followed up with additional proof of a synaptic localization or function. During the study of activity-regulated proteins in postsynaptic density fractions by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, Satoh et al. identified a total of 90 spots containing 47 different protein species in the PSD fractions isolated from mouse forebrain [148]. Among these spots, alpha-internexin and NFM accounted for 8 and 4 spots, respectively. With an improved proteomic method involving nanoflow HPL coupled to electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), Jordan et al. identified all four CNS NF proteins (NFL, NFM, NFH and alpha-internexin) as abundant components of biochemically purified PSD fractions from rat or mouse brain[92]. A subsequent phospho-proteomic analysis of PSD proteins, identified 42 phosphoproteins in PSD preparations from mouse brains [172]. Out of 90 phosphorylated peptides derived from these 42 phosphoproteins, NF proteins accounted for 23 (NFL 1, NFM 5 and NFH 17), indicating the considerable abundance of NF proteins in the PSD. NF proteins are also glycosylated and in a glyco-proteomic analysis of PSD preparations from mouse brain, NFL, NFM and alpha-internexin were among 18 identified GlcNAc-modified proteins [181]. A limited idea of how NF proteins are organized within the PSD has been achieved using a novel solid phase and chemical crosslinking approach to distinguish proteins that reside either at the surface of the PSD or in its interior [108]. The analysis suggested that NFM, NFH and alpha-internexin together with tubulin subunits reside in the interior of the PSD while actin resides primarily on the surface. Recently, Moczulska et al. performed precise quantification of the mouse synaptosomal proteome during postnatal maturation (from 3 – 8 weeks of age) using peptide-based iTRAQ labeling and high-resolution two-dimensional peptide fractionation [119]. Among the 3422 identified proteins with complete quantifications, NFL, NFM, NFH and alpha-internexin were established to be components of the synaptosomes and their levels increased during brain postnatal maturation, a period when synapse formation sharply increases [2]. Alpha-internexin had long been believed to form a separate filament system from NF triplet proteins until it was shown to be the fourth subunit of NFs in the mature CNS [187] although somewhat over-represented among the other NF subunits present in synapses [193]. Benson et al. detected alpha-internexin immunoreactivity in dendrites extending into dendritic spines of cultured hippocampal neurons [17]. This immunoreactivity receded from spines and remained at the base of dendritic protrusions when cells were treated with latrunculin A to disrupt actin filaments [195].

Besides their association with the PSD, NF subunits have been noted to interact with other synaptic proteins. The synapse-specific PSD95-associated protein SAPAP interacts via its N-terminal region with all 4 NF subunits, co-immunoprecipitates with NF proteins from rat brain, and co-localizes with NFs in transfected COS cells [80]. Spinophilin, a synaptic protein highly enriched in dendritic spines [3], regulates the formation and function of the spines [59]. Using a shotgun proteomic approach, Baucum et al. showed that spinophilin interacts via its N-terminal domain with NFL, NFM, and alpha-internexin in mouse striatum [13, 14, 79]. Moreover, the association increased significantly during mouse brain maturation [14] during the period of synaptogenesis [2] and was dependent on the phosphorylation state of either spinophilin or NF protein [79]. The NFL subunit also directly binds to tau [118], a protein initially considered to localize in dendritic spines only under pathological conditions [86], but is not believed to have a physiological role in dendritic functioning [65, 90]. Knockdown of tau using specific shRNA significantly decreased the spine density of cultured hippocampal neurons [36] and deletion of tau in mice abolished long-term depression [95]. Thus the interaction between NFL and tau in dendritic spine could be important for normal synaptic transmission.

NF polymers are highly abundant in myelinated axons as estimated by conventional electron microscopy but 10nm filaments have also been noted in the perikarya and dendrites of neurons, including ones lacking a myelinated axon [55, 81, 98, 196]. In 1977, Blomberg et al. reported 10 nm filaments as major constituents of the partially broken up PSD isolated from dog cerebral cortex and assumed that they were composed of NF proteins [21]. Using a rapid-freezing technique, Landis and Reese described infrequent 9–10nm filaments in dendritic spines of mouse brain but interpreted these structures as actin filaments due to their periodicity [104]. Yuan et al. also identified in some synapses that short 10 nm filaments were decorated by immunogold antibodies to different NF subunits indicating that at least some synaptic NF subunits exist in polymerized form (Yuan et al. 2015b)[193]. Although NF proteins are present in both pre- and postsynaptic areas, 10nm NF polymers are not abundant in synaptic areas compared to myelinated axons, estimated by conventional electron microscopy. The infrequency of conventional long intermediate-sized polymers in synapses indicates that most NF subunits in synapses are probably in the form of oligomeric structures (protofilaments or protofibrils). Consistent with this interpretation, transport of NFM in non-filamentous, but oligomeric form, has been reported [166, 184, 186]. The organization of oligomeric NF assemblies in synapses, quite different from those parallel arrays with spacing controlled by C-terminal extensions of NFH/MFM in axons, might be closely associated with the synaptic actin network since disruption of such actin filaments also remarkably affects the distribution of NF assemblies [195]. The relative abundance of NF proteins in synapses is synapse type-dependent, e.g., NF proteins are not present at the postsynaptic sites of neuromuscular junctions. Instead, another intermediate filament protein desmin is highly concentrated near the AChR-rich crests of the junctional folds at the neuromuscular junctions [154].

2.2 NF subunit-specific modulation of synaptic functions and behavior

N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are excitatory neurotransmitter receptors critical for synaptic plasticity and neuronal development in the mammalian brains [107]. These receptors are highly concentrated in postsynaptic membranes of glutamatergic synapses. Yeast-two-hybrid screening revealed that NFL interacts through its rod domain directly with the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain of NR1 [56] suggesting that NFs may anchor or localize NMDA receptors within the neuronal plasma membrane. Co-expression of NFL with either NR1 or NR2B subunits in HEK293 cells did not increase surface expression of these subunits whereas expression of all three components increased surface abundance of NR1 by 20% and concomitantly increased NMDA-mediated cytotoxicity [144]. The NR1 subunit is ubiquitinated in HEK293 cells and the co-expression with NFL antagonizes this ubiquitination process, suggesting another way that the interaction of NFL with NR1 may stabilize the NMDA receptor. NFL also binds to protein phosphatase-I (PP1), a protein /serine /threonine phosphatase in the PSD [168]. NFL-bound PP1 could regulate the phosphorylation states of NF subunits and NMDA NR1 receptors the cellular distribution of which is regulated by the phosphorylation of specific serines in the C1 exon cassette [57]. On the one hand, NFL may modulate synaptic plasticity through interactions with NR1, PP1 or 14-3-3 [56, 115, 168]. On the other hand, the phosphorylation state of NFL is regulated by synaptic plasticity events such as long-term potentiation (LTP) [78] and long-term potentiation depression (LTD) [77]. NFL selectively influences dendritic spine and glutamate receptor function since NFL-null mice not only have abnormal spines but also dysfunction of hippocampal-dependent spatial memory, NMDA receptor protein expression and synaptic plasticity (Yuan, Veeranna et al. unpublished data). LTP is a persistent increase in synaptic strength following high-frequency stimulation of a chemical synapse and is generally considered one of the major cellular mechanisms that underlie learning and memory [20]. Yuan et al. recently determined LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway of the hippocampal slices prepared from wild-type control and IHL-TKO mice lacking alpha-internexin, NFH and NFL subunits [192]. The tetanic stimulation evoked a typical LTP of fEPSP in slices from wild-type mice. These responses were stable for 120 min. However, tetanic stimulation evoked a significantly reduced fEPSP slopes in IHL-TKO mice, indicating NF proteins are, therefore, required for synaptic plasticity. Because LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway of the hippocampus is NMDA receptor-dependent, altered LTP may be associated with reduced levels of NMDA-NR1 receptor (Yuan, Veeranna et al. unpublished data). Yuan et al. also conducted a 5-trial social memory assay to determine if IHL-TKO mice have a social memory defect. In this test, the subject mouse was given four brief exposures (trials 1–4) in its home cage to the same stimulus mouse (intruder). In the 5th trial, the subject mouse encountered an entirely novel stimulus mouse (novel intruder). Wild-type control mice displayed normal social memory, as demonstrated by a marked habituation (decreased exploration) during the first 4 trials and a striking dishabituation (increased exploration) on the presentation of a novel animal on the 5th trial. In contrast, IHL-TKO mice showed no significant habituation during the 4 exposures to the stimulus mouse or dishabituation to the novel stimulus mouse. Consistent with reduced LTP, IHL-TKO showed social interaction deficits, indicating that mice lacking NF proteins failed to develop normal social memory.

Dopamine receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors that mediate functions of dopamine ranging from voluntary movement and reward to hormonal regulation and hypertension [72]. These receptors are highly concentrated in the postsynaptic membrane of dopaminergic synapses. Yeast-two-hybrid screening has shown that the C-terminal tail of NFM directly interacts with the cytoplasmic loop of dopamine D1receptor [94] and that their co-expression in HEK-293 cells resulted in more than 50% reduction of receptor binding. Recently, the relevance of this interaction at synapses was established in genetically modified mice. Deletion of NFM, but not deletion of any of the other NF subunits, greatly amplified dopamine D1-receptor-mediated motor responses to cocaine while redistributing postsynaptic D1-receptors from endosomes to the plasma membrane (Figure 2)[193]. In wild-type mice, NFM colocalized with the D1 receptor in synaptic boutons by immunogold electron microscopy. Deletion of NFM also significantly increased D1R–stimulated hippocampal LTP further indicating an in vivo interaction between NFM and D1R [193]. Depressed hippocampal LTP induction is NF subunit-selective: maintenance of LTP is deficient in NFH-null mice while basal neurotransmission and induction of LTP are normal in NFM-null mice. Eliminating all NF proteins from the CNS profoundly disrupted synaptic plasticity and social memory without altering the structural integrity of synapses [193].

Peripherin, a subunit of peripheral nerve NFs, is almost exclusively expressed in the neurons of PNS and in the CNS only in defined subsets of neurons directly projecting to the periphery [25, 189]. However, brain injuries such as stab lesions and focal ischemia can trigger peripherin expression in CNS neurons normally silent for this gene [15]. Although definitive evidence for the presence of peripherin in synapses in the CNS is lacking, electrophysiological studies revealed synaptic plasticity was markedly altered in transgenic mice over-expressing the normal peripherin gene under its own promoter [101]. LTP was 50% greater in CA3 and 50% diminished in CA1 of hippocampus of the mutant mice than in wild-type controls. These data indicate a role for peripherin as a mediator of plasticity of hippocampal synapses potentially relevant to cognitive diseases. Peripherin was recently shown to be a strong binding partner of Rab-7A mutations of which are capable of altering the ratio of soluble and insoluble peripherin in vitro and are causative of CMT2B [42], indicating that peripherin may also have a role in vesicular transport. More recent studies involving yeast two-hybrid screens established interactions of peripherin and SNAP25-interacting protein SIP30 through coiled-coil domains [71] further suggesting a potential important role of peripherin in regulating vesicular trafficking at the synapses.

3. Alterations of NF proteins in psychiatric disorders

3.1. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder

Schizophrenia, a severe chronic brain disorder affecting ∼1% of the population [136], is characterized by abnormal interpretation of reality and social behavior. The behavioral syndrome reflects a combination of positive symptoms (eg. hallucinations, delusions, and disordered thinking and behavior), negative symptoms (eg. reduced expression, feelings, and speech production), and cognitive deficits (eg. poor executive functioning, working memory, and attention). The causes of schizophrenia are unknown. Various alterations of neuronal and glial functions have been reported although loss of neurons or neurodegenerative change is not considered fundamental to disease development. Postmortem brains from individuals with schizophrenia are usually characterized by reduced dendritic spine density [70, 73, 165].

Pharmacological and biochemical evidence supports an important role of NMDA receptor hypofunction in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia [11, 44]. Many genetic risk factors for schizophrenia have been reported, including inherited common single nucleotide polymorphisms, copy number variants, rare single nucleotide variants and rare de novo variants. De novo genomic copy number variants known to substantially increase susceptibility to schizophrenia are enriched for members of the NMDA receptor postsynaptic signaling complex and are significantly more frequent in individuals with schizophrenia than in controls [96]. Fromer et al. confirmed these findings and further implicated abnormalities of synaptic cytoskeleton regulation and glutamatergic neurotransmission [67]. The fact that NFL, NFM and NFH genes map to chromosomal regions (8p21, 8p22 and 22q12, respectively) that are strongly implicated in schizophrenia suggests the involvement of NF proteins in this disease [8, 106]. As earlier noted, NFL in synapses [193] binds the NR1 receptor and may stabilize its presence in the cell membrane by preventing its ubiquitination and subsequent degradation [56, 144]. Besides binding NR1 to influence NMDA receptor function, NFL has also been shown to interact in a phosphorylation-dependent manner with 14-3-3 gamma [115], another protein implicated in schizophrenia [117, 171].

Of further potential relevance to NMDA receptor dysfunction in schizophrenia is a consistent body of evidence that points to selectively reduced levels of NFL subunits in brain regions essential for the cognitive and behavior functions affected in schizophrenia [100]. In dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), NFL transcript expression is significantly increased across all cortical isodense layers in DLPFC from elderly individuals with schizophrenia (mean patient age 80y) while levels of NFL protein are decreased about 50%, collectively suggesting possibly that turnover of NFL is abnormally high. Proteomic analysis of the DLPFC in schizophrenia revealed synaptic and metabolic abnormalities, including significantly reduced NFL (1.5-fold) and NFM levels (1.2-fold) without changes in NFH and alpha-internexin proteins [135]. Reduced NFL and NFM levels were also found in study of DLPFC deep white matter in schizophrenia (English et al.) and in the ACC (anterior cingulate cortex) white matter [39] where a 3-fold increase (p&lt;0.05) in alpha-internexin was also measured. Similar changes in NFL and alpha-internexin levels were seen in another proteomic analysis of schizophrenic corpus callosum [157]. Although NFL transcription was significantly decreased in the thalamus of younger adult schizophrenics (mean age 43y), it was increased 25%-30% relative to controls, along with NFM levels, in elderly schizophrenics (mean age 70y) [41]. Collectively, these results implicate regional abnormalities of NFL transcription and /or accelerated NFL degradation in schizophrenia. NFL protein has been shown to be more vulnerable than NFM and NFH subunits to calcium-dependent proteases [199]. The changes observed in NFs may be part of the dynamic cytoskeletal remodeling in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Dramatic changes in the levels of NF proteins were also observed in axotomized motor and sensory neurons [84, 169, 183]. In light of evidence linking NFL to the functional activity of the NMDA receptor, the lowered levels of NFL could be a potential contributor to the NMDA hypofunction proposed to underlie various phenotypic features of schizophrenia.

Bipolar disorder is a brain disease that causes extreme mood swings that include emotional highs and lows. The exact cause of bipolar is unknown. Imaging and cellular studies have identified dysfunction of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in bipolar disease [54, 140, 162]. NFL transcripts are reported significantly reduced, along with NFM and alpha-internexin proteins [135], in adults with bipolar disorder (mean age 42y), but not in major depressive disorder [41]. Examining the differential protein expression in the deep white matter from DLPFC from individuals with bipolar disorder and controls, English et al. identified differences in 15% of proteins classified as cytoskeletal proteins which included increased NFM (1.66 fold, p= 0.03)[58].

Given that most studies of psychiatric disorders focusing on cytoskeletal changes analyzed brain areas enriched in white matter axons and the alterations of NF proteins may well reflect disturbed function of the axonal compartment. Given the ubiquity and abundance of synapses in CNS, it is also possible that even white matter analyses capture alterations of the significant synaptic NF protein pool in neuropsychiatric disorders. It is also reasonable to expect that future deeper analyses that include terminal regions of these same vulnerable brain regions and target additional relevant grey matter regions enriched with synaptic boutons, may identify dysfunction of the synaptic cytoskeletal network, including NF subunit interactions, more sensitively.

3.2. Drug addiction

Drug addiction is a chronic brain disorder that causes compulsive drug seeking and use despite adverse consequences. The mesolimbic pathway, which connects the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the nucleus accumbens, has been implicated in common mechanisms of drug addition [139]. The mesolimbic pathway releases dopamine into the nucleus accumbens, where it affects motivation for rewarding stimuli. Drugs abused by humans such as morphine, cocaine, ethanol and nicotine have very different chemical structures but all preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system [53]. This is believed to be the neural substrate mediating the reinforcing properties of drugs of abuse. Given their diverse primary sites of action on cell surface receptors, these addictive drugs have to act indirectly on intracellular proteins as a convergence point to exert similar effects on mesolimbic dopamine function. Beitner-Johnson et al. first reported that NF proteins NFL, NFM and NFH were decreased 15–50% in the VTA by chronic administration of morphine or cocaine in rats [16]. The lowering of NF protein levels by these drugs was selective since the levels of 8 other major cytoskeletal or cytoskeletal-associated proteins did not change. Chronic exposure to psychotropic drugs lacking reinforcing properties did not alter NF levels. In separate studies, morphine administration caused a decrease of NFL immunoreactivity in rat cerebral cortex, which was antagonized completely by concurrent administration of naloxone [22]. Similar antagonism was achieved in three separate knockout mice of opioid receptors (mu or delta or kappa) [68], implicating all opioid receptor subtypes in these effects of morphine. Chronic morphine and cocaine also increased phosphorylation of NFH and NFM tail domains, an effect ablated by knockout of cortical mu-opioid receptors [68]. Interestingly, chronic cocaine, but not chronic morphine, lowered alpha-internexin levels in the VTA, hinting at somewhat different mechanisms at play for these two drugs, which are known to act at different receptors [16].

Rats inbred for alcohol preference expressed lower levels of NF subunits, suggesting that NF proteins in the VTA may influence preference for drugs [74, 75]. Examining its influence on NF proteins, GFAP and NMDA receptors, Ortiz et al. reported that chronic ethanol treatment significantly decreased NF protein levels in VTA (by 14%-37%) while increasing GFAP (by 40%) and NMDA NR1 subunit (by 27%) [131]. Similar to other drugs of abuse, nicotine activates the mesolimbic pathway by increasing cell firing of dopaminergic neurons in the VTA via nicotinic receptors [113]. Nicotine microinfusions into the VTA which resulted in sensitization of dopamine release [10], also reduced NFL (by 34%, p&lt;0.05), NFM (by 42%, p&lt;0.01), and NFH levels (by 38%, p&lt;0.05) in the VTA but not in the substantia nigra in rats [28, 150] without altering neuron numbers. The similar reductions of NF proteins in the VTA by the chronic treatment of different drugs of abuse with reinforcing properties suggest that common mechanisms underlie these addictive states.

Other brain targets, such as frontal cortex [29, 156], also show lowered NFL levels (47%, p &lt; 0.001) in brains of addicts dying from opiate overdose [69]. Similar NFL reductions (49%, p&lt;0.001) are also seen in the frontal cortex of rats after chronic morphine treatment. Narayana et al. reported immunohistochemical evidence for a significant decrease in NFH expression in the fimbria and internal capsule of rats after chronic cocaine administration [123]. Analysis of NF phosphorylation in the prefrontal cortex of human opioid addicts uncovered significantly reduced nonphosphorylated forms of NFH, NFM, and NFL and corresponding increases in phosphorylated forms [61, 62]. Similar changes are seen in brain regions of rats chronically treated with cocaine [109]. Acute morphine exposure also induces a marked increase in phosphorylated NFH whereas chronic morphine administration followed by opiate withdrawal results in a time-dependent decline in phosphorylated NFH [32, 91]. A recent study found chronic morphine causes persistent nitration of NFL in cortex and subcortex in mice even during abstinence [132], although its significance remains unclear.

Since PP2A has been shown to be the most effective in the nervous system in dephosphorylating the sites in NFH known to be phosphorylated by cdk5 [177], this phosphatase together with cdk5 were also examined. Surprisingly, the levels of PP2A were found unchanged while the levels of cdk5 and its neuron-specific activator p35 in the prefrontal cortex of human opioid addicts were decreased by 18% and 26–44%, respectively [62]. In these brains, phosphorylated NFH significantly correlated with p35 but not with cdk5. Further studies showed that acute treatment of rats with morphine increased the density of cdk5 by 35% in the cerebral cortex. In contrast to the acute effects, chronic morphine induced a marked decrease in cdk5 by 40% and p35 by 47% in rat brain [62]. It therefore appears that, despite the possible stimulating effect of the deadly opiate overdose on cdk5, the reduced expression of the cdk5/p35 complex in brains of opioid addicts is the net result of a chronic opiate effect. These results indicate that opioid addiction is associated with down regulation of cdk5/p35 levels in the brain and the hyperphosphorylation of NFH is not the result of a reduced dephosphorylation process. Although the abundance of cdk5 was decreased in the brains from chronic opioid abusers, Narita et al. showed that the level of phosphorylated cdk5 (serine-159) immunoreactivity in the frontal cortex was significantly increased by chronic morphine treatment [124] and phosphorylation of cdk5 at serine-159 dramatically increases cdk5 activation [155]. They also demonstrated that the treatment of selective cdk5 inhibitor, roscovitine and a half deletion of the cdk5 gene caused a significant inhibition of the rewarding effect of morphine. In addition, chronic cocaine or morphine administration also activates extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), a known NF protein kinase [176], by promoting its phosphorylation [18, 174]. Altogether, these data indicate the hyperphosphorylation of NF proteins under these conditions may be related to the up-regulation of phosphorylated cdk5 and increased ERK activity.

D1R and NMDA NR1 receptors are assembled as an oligomeric complex and are functionally interdependent [63, 105]. Both receptors bind to NF proteins [56, 94] and are also involved in drug addiction [43, 173]. Cocaine has been shown to reduce the D1R-NR1 physical interaction and may influence intracellular signaling [164]. On the one hand, D1R is a primary target of stimulant drugs and chronic exposure to drugs of abuse lower levels of NF proteins and alter their phosphorylation state [16]. On the other hand, NMDA receptor inhibition increases the phosphorylation state and the solubility of NFM protein [64]. Glutamate has been shown to inhibit NF transport, which can be reversed by NMDA receptor blocker MK-801 [1]. Over-activation of primarily NMDA receptors by glutamate leads to rapid disruption of NF proteins in cultured neurons [37]. The basis for these NF changes and their relationship to synaptic function remain elusive. As discussed above, our recent studies demonstrated that deletion of NFM in mice amplifies D1R–mediated motor responses to cocaine while redistributing postsynaptic D1R from endosomes to the plasma membrane, indicating a role of this NF subunit in drug addiction [193].

4. Alterations of NF proteins in Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease is an irreversible, degenerative brain disorder that progressively destroys memory and other mental functions. Early striking loss of synaptic connections within brain regions involved in memory and thinking skills is followed by loss of neurons of many types. Accompanying neurodegenerative changes is the development of defining neuropathological hallmarks of AD, neuritic plaques, and neurofibrillary tangles, along with extracellular deposition of β-amyloid. The causes of the most common late-onset forms of AD (more than 95% of all cases) are not fully understood: the much less common early-onset familial forms (less than 5% of all cases) are caused by mutations of either of three genes, amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilins 1 and 2(PSEN1 and PSEN2) [76, 175]. These causative genes and other risk factors influence the production and clearance of APP metabolites that mediate APP signaling cascades and may also have cytotoxic properties.

An important feature of AD is the disruption of the neuronal cytoskeleton leading to formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) [27, 102] numbers of which correlate well with neurodegeneration and severity of cognitive decline in AD [5, 19, 23]. The main constituents of tangles are paired helical filaments (PHF), initially believed to be composed of NF proteins [4, 47, 88] and later shown to be mainly fibrillar aggregates of tau protein [99, 103, 128]. Although NF proteins were somewhat ignored as tangle constituents, data has amply confirmed that NF proteins are integral components of the NFTs [138]. Most recently, mass spectrometry analysis by Pant and colleagues confirmed the presence of NFM and NFH in purified NFTs from AD brain independently of antibody cross-reaction between NF protein and tau [147]. The NFTs are far more complex than that of tau - PHFs. They also contain abundant NF proteins, vimentin, phosphorylated MAP1, phosphorylated MAP2, nonphosphorylated MAP1B, nonphosphorylated MAP2, nonphosphorylated MAP4 and nonphosphorylated MAP6. The question of whether the formation of tau-PHF is the initiating event in NFT formation has not been thoroughly addressed and the possibility that another NFT constituent, like NF protein, may initiate the process has not been excluded. In this regard, Morrison and colleagues reported that, certain populations of cortico-cortical pyramidal neurons that contain abundant perikaryal NF in relatively low states of phosphorylation are highly vulnerable to neurodegeneration through NFT formation [82, 83, 121, 178, 179]. More recent studies have provided independent evidence for loss of SMI32 immunopositive neurons in temporal cortical areas of AD brain [170]. The loss of SMI32 immunoreactivity on cortical regions of AD brain is often paralleled by increase in NFTs and AT8-positive tau immunoreactivity in neurons [121], indicating nonphosphorylated NF proteins may play a protective role in preventing the formation of NFTs. In fact, it is suggested that the development of neurofibrillary pathology may begin with abnormal NF accumulations in damaged distal processes followed by reactive perikaryal cytoskeletal changes that ultimately lead to tau hyperphosphorylation and NFT formation [178]. The co-localization of caspase-3 cleaved spectrin with nonphosphorylated NF-immunoreactive neurons in AD suggests that caspase-3 activation may be a pathological event responsible for the loss of these vulnerable neurons [6].

NFL mRNA is significantly reduced in AD cortex [38, 114] [97] and CA1 and CA2 regions of hippocampus [159]. Like NFL, NFM mRNA was also significantly decreased while NFH mRNA was unaltered in AD temporal cortex as compared to controls [97]. Also significantly increased in AD are NFH (by 1.7-fold), NFM (by 1.5-fold) and NFL proteins (by 1.6-fold) and the degree of phosphorylation of NFH (by 1.6–2.7-fold) and NFM (by 1.3–1.9-fold) as compared to Huntington disease [182]. Proteomic studies revealed increases of alpha-internexin and NFM proteins in the postsynaptic densities isolated from AD cortex as compared to controls with the increase of alpha-internexin being validated by Western blots [197]. Using quantitative phosphoproteomic methodology, Pant and colleagues recently reported 13 hyperphosphorylated sites in the C-terminal domain of NFM and 10 hyperphosphorylated sites of that of NFH in the frontal cortex of AD brain and all of these sites are in a higher state of phosphorylation in AD (4–8-fold higher) compared with control brains [146]. Surprisingly, the abundance and number of KSP repeat hyperphosphorylation of NFM are significantly higher compared with NFH, even though potential phosphorylation sites in NFH are more numerous. Based on the NF stoichiometry [4:2:2:1 (NFL:alpha-internexin:NFM:NFH)] [187], there are 2-fold more KSP repeat sites hyperphosphorylated in NFM compared with NFH, indicating that NFM might contribute more to aberrant NF phosphorylation in AD compared with NFH.

Additional abnormalities of NF have also been observed in AD. Significantly decreased O-GlcNAcylation of NFM was observed in AD cortex as compared to controls [51] while carbonyl-related posttranslational modification of NFH protein was also present in the AD NFTs [158]. Chapman et al. showed that sera of AD patients contain antibodies that bind specifically to NFH of Torpedo cholinergic neurons [35]. AD patients also have elevated intrathecal synthesis of anti-NFH antibody [12]. Behavioral tests revealed that rats immunized with cholinergic NFH for 12 month performed significantly worse than controls in in T-maze alternation test [34]. This prolonged immunization of rats with NFH results in cognitive impairment, IgG accumulation in the septum, hippocampus and entorhinal cortex with marked loss of neurons in the septum [130]. Interestingly, this cognitive impairment can be reversed by the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine administered 30 min prior to testing [116]. These findings suggest that NFH may play a role in the pathogenesis of AD neurons.

Further support for NF protein involvement in AD pathogenesis comes from genetic studies. Deletion of NFL or NFH subunits in T44 mice overexpressing htau resulted in a dramatic decrease in the total number of tau-positive spheroids in the spinal cord and brainstem, indicating a role of NF proteins in the pathogenesis of neurofibrillary tau pathology [89]. Deletion of NFL in APP/PS1 transgenic mice, unexpectedly, increased neocortical β-amyloid deposition, synapse vulnerability and microgliosis surrounding β-amyloid plaques, suggesting a protective role of this NF subunit in AD [60].

The abundance of NFs in axons and the frequency of axonal injury in neurodegenerative disease has led to the use of NF protein measurements as a clinical index of brain injury in various neurological disorders. Higher than normal levels of NFL and NFH in CSF have been reported in AD [24, 87] and correlate with disease severity in a recent study of frontotemporal dementia [153]. CSF NFL concentration is increased by the early clinical stage of AD, correlates with cognitive deterioration and structural changes over time [194] and may be a useful marker of disease progression in AD [7].

Although amyloid plaques and tau tangles are two hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease, synaptic loss is more robustly correlated than these pathological lesions with cognitive deficits [50, 167]. Synaptic loss is more pronounced in the hippocampus [152] than in temporal and frontal cortex [48] and disturbance of synaptic integrity occurs very early on in the process of AD [111]. Ultrastructural stereological studies on rapid postmortem autopsy samples showed an 18% synapse loss in the hippocampal CA1 region of MCI patients that progressed to a 55% synapse loss in mild AD [151]. Since oligomeric NF proteins are present in synapses where they interact with synaptic proteins, loss of synapses in early AD could affect the level of this synaptic NF pool and may thus contribute to the increased NF protein levels in CSF and blood [7]. Alterations of NF proteins in early AD could also reflect synaptic reorganization while changes of NF subunits in late AD may suggest reorganization of both synaptic and axonal pools.

5. Conclusion

The etiology of major neuropsychiatric disorders critically involves dysfunction of synapses and, in late-onset dementias, the ultimate loss of synapses early in the disease. Relatively little attention, however, has been paid to the dynamics of cytoskeletal proteins at synaptic terminals and particularly the possible synaptic involvement of NF proteins. Until recently, the functioning of NF protein assemblies within synapses has been unappreciated and the focus has been on their axonal roles (eg. radial growth) and disruption in axonopathies involving mainly neurons with long myelinated axons that contain abundant NFs. In the CNS, however, even axons in major fiber tracts like the corpus callosum change minimally in caliber in NF triple knockout mice nearly completely lacking all 4 CNS NF subunits. This finding underscores growing evidence that NF proteins in the CNS have important functions beyond caliber expansion. Emerging evidence shows that NF proteins are present and functional in synapses. The synaptic population of NF proteins is distinctive in phosphorylation state, likely present in unconventional stoichiometries and assembly forms including oligomeric structures, and possibly more plastic in exchanging subunits and altering form in response to signals. Further evidence that individual subunits differentially modulate neurotransmission and behavior through interactions with specific neurotransmitter receptors heightens expectations that alterations of NF proteins could influence synaptic function in psychiatric disorders and dementias. Despite the very frequent occurrence of NF protein changes in multiple major psychiatric states, most of the analyses have been on white matter tracts and the changes seen, often involving levels of only one or two subunit, have been difficult to interpret mechanistically from a perspective of changes in the axonal NF cytoskeleton. The newly uncovered sizable population of synaptic NF proteins should encourage more directed attention to regional analyses that interrogate this synaptic NF protein pool and will potentially yield valuable new insights into the significance of NF subunits in neuropsychiatric disease.

This work was supported by Grant 5R01AG005604 from the National Institutes on Aging.

Figure 1 Functional NF subunit assemblies in synapses

Left panel: Immunogold labeled antibodies against the NFM subunit decorating synaptic structures in a linear pattern (immunogold particles outlined in blue) suggesting the presence of short NFs and protofilament /protofibril or unit length filament assemblies. In the upper inset, a filament within a postsynaptic bouton is decorated by immunogold antibodies to both NFL (large gold dots) and NFH (small gold dots). Morphometric analysis indicates a higher density of immunogold labeling in postsynaptic boutons than in preterminal dendrites or presynaptic terminals (graph inset). Middle panel: Ultrastructural image of a human synapse depicts membranous vesicles, many of which appear to be associated with a loose network of short 10nm filaments in the post-synaptic region. Right panel: Evidence supports a biological mechanism whereby D1 dopamine receptors internalized on endosomes from the postsynaptic surface (red asterisks) dock on synaptic NF subunit assemblies (outlined in blue) where they are readily available to recycle on endosomes to the surface in response to ligand stimulation (adapted from Yuan et al. Mol Psychiatry 2015; 20:915 with permission).

Figure 2 Model of D1R–containing endosomes anchored on NFM-containing cytoskeletal assemblies

Based on collective findings on NF scaffolding functions and our D1R data on NF subunit null mice, we propose a model by which NFM acts in synaptic terminals to anchor D1R–containing endosomes formed after agonist-induced internalization of membrane D1R. Retention of D1R in a readily available internal pool within the synapse would favor desensitization to D1R stimulation: in the absence of NFM, the greater recycling back to the plasma membrane surface would favor hypersensitivity to D1R agonists, as observed in our in vivo studies (adapted from Yuan et al. Mol Psychiatry 2016; 20:986–994 with permission).

Table 1 Neurofilament Subunit Expression in Human and Rodent Models of Psychiatric Disease

Disease	NF
subunit
(gene
symbol)	Model
system	Regulation	
Protein
level	Phosphorylation	Brain
region	Method	Reference	
Schizophrenia	NEFL	Human	Decrease		DLPFC	WB	[100]	
		Human	Decrease		ACC
white
matter	Proteomic	[39]	
		Human	Decrease		CC	Proteomic	[157]	
		Human	Decrease		DLPFC	Proteomic	[135]	
		Human	Decrease		DLPFC
white
matter	Proteomic	[58]	
	NEFM	Human	Decrease		CC	Proteomic	[157]	
	NEFH	Human	Decrease		DLPFC
white
matter	Proteomic	[58]	
	INA	Human	Increase		ACC
white
matter	Proteomic	[39]	
		Human	Increase		CC	Proteomic	[157]	
Bipolar
disorder	NEFL	Human	Decrease		DLPFC	Prpteomic	[135]	
		Human	Decrease		DLPFC
white
matter	Proteomic	[58]	
	NEFM	Human	Increase		DLPFC	Proteomic	[135]	
		Human	Increase		DLPFC
white
matter		[58]	
	NEFH	Human	Decrease		DLPFC
white
matter	Proteomic	[58]	
	INA	Human	Decrease		DLPFC	Proteomic	[135]	
Drug
addiction	NEFL	Rat	Decrease		VTA	WB	[16]	
		Rat	Decrease		VTA	IHC	[28]	
		Human	Decrease		Frontal
cortex	WB	[69]	
		Neuronal
culture	Decrease		Hippocampus	IHC	[149]	
	NEFM	Rat	Decrease	Increase	VTA	WB	[16]	
		Rat	Decrease		VTA	IHC	[28]	
		Neuronal
culture	Decrease		Hippocampus	IHC	[149]	
	NEFH	Rat	Decrease	Increase	VTA	WB	[16]	
		Rat		Decrease	VTA	IHC	[28]	
		Neuronal
culture	Decrease		Hippocampus	IHC	[149]	
Alzheimer
disease	NEFL	Human	Decrease		Occipital
cortex	WB	[9]	
	NEFM	Human	Decrease	Decrease	Sciatic
nerve	WB	[85]	
		Human		Increase	Hippocampus	IHC	[160]	
		Human		Increase	Hippocampus	WB	[179]	
		Human		Increase	Frontal
cortex	WB,
IHC &amp;
iTRAQ	[146]	
	NEFH	Human	Decrease	Decrease	Sciatic
nerve	WB	[85]	
		Human		Increase	Hippocampus	IHC	[160]	
		Human		Increase	Hippocampus	WB	[179]	
		Human		Increase	Frontal
cortex	WB,
IHC &amp;
iTRAQ	[146]	
		Human		Increase	Temporal
cortex	IHC	[170]	
	INA	Human	Increase		Cortex	Proteomic &amp;
WB	[197]	
Note: DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; CC, corpus callosum; WB, Western blotting; IHC, immunohistochemistry; iTRAQ, isobaric peptide tags for relative and absolute quantification;

Highlights

Distinctive assemblies of neurofilament subunits are integral components of synapses

Synaptic neurofilament proteins are a sizable population in the CNS

NF subunits modulate neurotransmission and behavior via interactions with receptors

Alterations of NF subunits may contribute to neuropsychiatric dysfunction

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.


References

1 Ackerley S Grierson AJ Brownlees J Thornhill P Anderton BH Leigh PN Shaw CE Miller CC Glutamate slows axonal transport of neurofilaments in transfected neurons J Cell Biol 2000 150 165 176 10893265
2 Aghajanian GK Bloom FE The formation of synaptic junctions in developing rat brain: a quantitative electron microscopic study Brain research 1967 6 716 727 4169903
3 Allen PB Ouimet CC Greengard P Spinophilin, a novel protein phosphatase 1 binding protein localized to dendritic spines Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94 9956 9961 9275233
4 Anderton BH Breinburg D Downes MJ Green PJ Tomlinson BE Ulrich J Wood JN Kahn J Monoclonal antibodies show that neurofibrillary tangles and neurofilaments share antigenic determinants Nature 1982 298 84 86 6178036
5 Arriagada PV Growdon JH Hedley-Whyte ET Hyman BT Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1992 42 631 639 1549228
6 Ayala-Grosso C Tam J Roy S Xanthoudakis S Da Costa D Nicholson DW Robertson GS Caspase-3 cleaved spectrin colocalizes with neurofilament-immunoreactive neurons in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 2006 141 863 874 16750894
7 Bacioglu M Maia LF Preische O Schelle J Apel A Kaeser SA Schweighauser M Eninger T Lambert M Pilotto A Shimshek DR Neumann U Kahle PJ Staufenbiel M Neumann M Maetzler W Kuhle J Jucker M Neurofilament Light Chain in Blood and CSF as Marker of Disease Progression in Mouse Models and in Neurodegenerative Diseases Neuron 2016
8 Badner JA Gershon ES Meta-analysis of whole-genome linkage scans of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia Mol Psychiatry 2002 7 405 411 11986984
9 Bajo M Yoo BC Cairns N Gratzer M Lubec G Neurofilament proteins NF-L, NF-M and NF-H in brain of patients with Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Amino Acids 2001 21 293 301 11764410
10 Balfour DJ Benwell ME Birrell CE Kelly RJ Al-Aloul M Sensitization of the mesoaccumbens dopamine response to nicotine Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1998 59 1021 1030 9586863
11 Balu DT Li Y Puhl MD Benneyworth MA Basu AC Takagi S Bolshakov VY Coyle JT Multiple risk pathways for schizophrenia converge in serine racemase knockout mice, a mouse model of NMDA receptor hypofunction Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 E2400 E2409 23729812
12 Bartos A Fialova L Svarcova J Ripova D Patients with Alzheimer disease have elevated intrathecal synthesis of antibodies against tau protein and heavy neurofilament J Neuroimmunol 2012 252 100 105 22948089
13 Baucum AJ 2nd Jalan-Sakrikar N Jiao Y Gustin RM Carmody LC Tabb DL Ham AJ Colbran RJ Identification and validation of novel spinophilin-associated proteins in rodent striatum using an enhanced ex vivo shotgun proteomics approach Mol Cell Proteomics 2010 9 1243 1259 20124353
14 Baucum AJ 2nd Strack S Colbran RJ Age-dependent targeting of protein phosphatase 1 to Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II by spinophilin in mouse striatum PLoS One 2012 7 e31554 22348105
15 Beaulieu JM Kriz J Julien JP Induction of peripherin expression in subsets of brain neurons after lesion injury or cerebral ischemia Brain research 2002 946 153 161 12137917
16 Beitner-Johnson D Guitart X Nestler EJ Neurofilament proteins and the mesolimbic dopamine system: common regulation by chronic morphine and chronic cocaine in the rat ventral tegmental area The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1992 12 2165 2176 1376774
17 Benson DL Mandell JW Shaw G Banker G Compartmentation of alpha-internexin and neurofilament triplet proteins in cultured hippocampal neurons J Neurocytol 1996 25 181 196 8737171
18 Berhow MT Hiroi N Nestler EJ Regulation of ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase), part of the neurotrophin signal transduction cascade, in the rat mesolimbic dopamine system by chronic exposure to morphine or cocaine The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1996 16 4707 4715 8764658
19 Bierer LM Hof PR Purohit DP Carlin L Schmeidler J Davis KL Perl DP Neocortical neurofibrillary tangles correlate with dementia severity in Alzheimer’s disease Arch Neurol 1995 52 81 88 7826280
20 Bliss TV Collingridge GL A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus Nature 1993 361 31 39 8421494
21 Blomberg F Cohen RS Siekevitz P The structure of postsynaptic densities isolated from dog cerebral cortex. II. Characterization and arrangement of some of the major proteins within the structure J Cell Biol 1977 74 204 225 406264
22 Boronat MA Garcia-Fuster MJ Garcia-Sevilla JA Chronic morphine induces up-regulation of the pro-apoptotic Fas receptor and down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 oncoprotein in rat brain Br J Pharmacol 2001 134 1263 1270 11704646
23 Braak H Braak E Staging of Alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes Neurobiology of aging 1995 16 271 278 discussion 278–284 7566337
24 Brettschneider J Petzold A Schottle D Claus A Riepe M Tumani H The neurofilament heavy chain (NfH) in the cerebrospinal fluid diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2006 21 291 295 16484807
25 Brody BA Ley CA Parysek LM Selective distribution of the 57 kDa neural intermediate filament protein in the rat CNS The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1989 9 2391 2401 2746334
26 Brownlees J Ackerley S Grierson AJ Jacobsen NJ Shea K Anderton BH Leigh PN Shaw CE Miller CC Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease neurofilament mutations disrupt neurofilament assembly and axonal transport Hum Mol Genet 2002 11 2837 2844 12393795
27 Buee L Bussiere T Buee-Scherrer V Delacourte A Hof PR Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders Brain Res Brain Res Rev 2000 33 95 130 10967355
28 Bunnemann B Terron A Zantedeschi V Merlo Pich E Chiamulera C Chronic nicotine treatment decreases neurofilament immunoreactivity in the rat ventral tegmental area Eur J Pharmacol 2000 393 249 253 10771021
29 Busquets X Escriba PV Sastre M Garcia-Sevilla JA Loss of protein kinase C-alpha beta in brain of heroin addicts and morphine-dependent rats Journal of neurochemistry 1995 64 247 252 7798919
30 Cairns NJ Perry RH Jaros E Burn D McKeith IG Lowe JS Holton J Rossor MN Skullerud K Duyckaerts C Cruz-Sanchez FF Lantos PL Patients with a novel neurofilamentopathy: dementia with neurofilament inclusions Neurosci Lett 2003 341 177 180 12697277
31 Cairns NJ Zhukareva V Uryu K Zhang B Bigio E Mackenzie IR Gearing M Duyckaerts C Yokoo H Nakazato Y Jaros E Perry RH Lee VM Trojanowski JQ alpha-internexin is present in the pathological inclusions of neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease Am J Pathol 2004 164 2153 2161 15161649
32 Cao MH JI FT He HY Liu FN Liang JJ L L Phosphorylation of tau and neurofilament in prefrontal cortex of rat brain after acute and chronic morphine administration Chinese Journal of Pathophysiology 2010 26 1718 1721
33 Chan SO Peng D Chiu FC Heterogeneous expression of neurofilament proteins in forebrain and cerebellum during development: clinical implications for spinocerebellar ataxia Brain research 1997 775 107 118 9439834
34 Chapman J Alroy G Weiss Z Faigon M Feldon J Michaelson DM Anti-neuronal antibodies similar to those found in Alzheimer’s disease induce memory dysfunction in rats Neuroscience 1991 40 297 305 2027463
35 Chapman J Bachar O Korczyn AD Wertman E Michaelson DM Alzheimer’s disease antibodies bind specifically to a neurofilament protein in Torpedo cholinergic neurons The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1989 9 2710 2717 2475591
36 Chen Q Zhou Z Zhang L Wang Y Zhang YW Zhong M Xu SC Chen CH Li L Yu ZP Tau protein is involved in morphological plasticity in hippocampal neurons in response to BDNF Neurochem Int 2012 60 233 242 22226842
37 Chung RS McCormack GH King AE West AK Vickers JC Glutamate induces rapid loss of axonal neurofilament proteins from cortical neurons in vitro Exp Neurol 2005 193 481 488 15869950
38 Clark AW Krekoski CA Parhad IM Liston D Julien JP Hoar DI Altered expression of genes for amyloid and cytoskeletal proteins in Alzheimer cortex Annals of neurology 1989 25 331 339 2469380
39 Clark D Dedova I Cordwell S Matsumoto I Altered proteins of the anterior cingulate cortex white matter proteome in schizophrenia Proteomics Clin Appl 2007 1 157 166 21136665
40 Clinton SM Abelson S Haroutunian V Davis KL Meador-Woodruff JH Neurofilament subunit protein abnormalities in the thalamus in schizophrenia Thalamus &amp; Related System 2004 4 265 272
41 Clinton SM Meador-Woodruff JH Abnormalities of the NMDA Receptor and Associated Intracellular Molecules in the Thalamus in Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder Neuropsychopharmacology 2004 29 1353 1362 15054476
42 Cogli L Progida C Thomas CL Spencer-Dene B Donno C Schiavo G Bucci C Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2B disease-causing RAB7A mutant proteins show altered interaction with the neuronal intermediate filament peripherin Acta neuropathologica 2013 125 257 272 23179371
43 Comings DE Gade R Wu S Chiu C Dietz G Muhleman D Saucier G Ferry L Rosenthal RJ Lesieur HR Rugle LJ MacMurray P Studies of the potential role of the dopamine D1 receptor gene in addictive behaviors Mol Psychiatry 1997 2 44 56 9154217
44 Coyle JT Glutamate and schizophrenia: beyond the dopamine hypothesis Cell Mol Neurobiol 2006 26 365 384 16773445
45 Crino PB Eberwine J Molecular characterization of the dendritic growth cone: regulated mRNA transport and local protein synthesis Neuron 1996 17 1173 1187 8982164
46 Crispino M Capano CP Kaplan BB Giuditta A Neurofilament proteins are synthesized in nerve endings from squid brain Journal of neurochemistry 1993 61 1144 1146 8360679
47 Dahl D Selkoe DJ Pero RT Bignami A Immunostaining of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s senile dementia with a neurofilament antiserum The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1982 2 113 119 7033478
48 Davies CA Mann DM Sumpter PQ Yates PO A quantitative morphometric analysis of the neuronal and synaptic content of the frontal and temporal cortex in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Journal of the neurological sciences 1987 78 151 164 3572454
49 de Waegh SM Lee VM Brady ST Local modulation of neurofilament phosphorylation, axonal caliber, and slow axonal transport by myelinating Schwann cells Cell 1992 68 451 463 1371237
50 DeKosky ST Scheff SW Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in Alzheimer’s disease: correlation with cognitive severity Annals of neurology 1990 27 457 464 2360787
51 Deng Y Li B Liu F Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Brandt R Gong CX Regulation between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation of neurofilament-M and their dysregulation in Alzheimer disease FASEB J 2008 22 138 145 17687114
52 Dequen F Cairns NJ Bigio EH Julien JP Gigaxonin mutation analysis in patients with NIFID Neurobiology of aging 2011 32 1528 1529 19782434
53 Di Chiara G Imperato A Drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988 85 5274 5278 2899326
54 Drevets WC Price JL Simpson JR Jr Todd RD Reich T Vannier M Raichle ME Subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in mood disorders Nature 1997 386 824 827 9126739
55 Dyakin VV Chen Y Branch CA Yuan A Rao M Kumar A Peterhoff CM Nixon RA The contributions of myelin and axonal caliber to transverse relaxation time in shiverer and neurofilament-deficient mouse models Neuroimage 2010 51 1098 1105 20226865
56 Ehlers MD Fung ET O’Brien RJ Huganir RL Splice variant-specific interaction of the NMDA receptor subunit NR1 with neuronal intermediate filaments The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1998 18 720 730 9425014
57 Ehlers MD Tingley WG Huganir RL Regulated subcellular distribution of the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor Science 1995 269 1734 1737 7569904
58 English JA Dicker P Focking M Dunn MJ Cotter DR 2-D DIGE analysis implicates cytoskeletal abnormalities in psychiatric disease Proteomics 2009 9 3368 3382 19562803
59 Feng J Yan Z Ferreira A Tomizawa K Liauw JA Zhuo M Allen PB Ouimet CC Greengard P Spinophilin regulates the formation and function of dendritic spines Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 9287 9292 10922077
60 Fernandez-Martos CM King AE Atkinson RA Woodhouse A Vickers JC Neurofilament light gene deletion exacerbates amyloid, dystrophic neurite, and synaptic pathology in the APP/PS1 transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiology of aging 2015 36 2757 2767 26344875
61 Ferrer-Alcon M Garcia-Sevilla JA Jaquet PE La Harpe R Riederer BM Walzer C Guimon J Regulation of nonphosphorylated and phosphorylated forms of neurofilament proteins in the prefrontal cortex of human opioid addicts J Neurosci Res 2000 61 338 349 10900081
62 Ferrer-Alcon M La Harpe R Guimon J Garcia-Sevilla JA Downregulation of neuronal cdk5/p35 in opioid addicts and opiate-treated rats: relation to neurofilament phosphorylation Neuropsychopharmacology 2003 28 947 955 12637947
63 Fiorentini C Gardoni F Spano P Di Luca M Missale C Regulation of dopamine D1 receptor trafficking and desensitization by oligomerization with glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors J Biol Chem 2003 278 20196 20202 12646556
64 Fiumelli H Riederer IM Martin JL Riederer BM Phosphorylation of neurofilament subunit NF-M is regulated by activation of NMDA receptors and modulates cytoskeleton stability and neuronal shape Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2008 65 495 504 18412220
65 Frandemiche ML De Seranno S Rush T Borel E Elie A Arnal I Lante F Buisson A Activity-dependent tau protein translocation to excitatory synapse is disrupted by exposure to amyloid-beta oligomers The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2014 34 6084 6097 24760868
66 Friede RL Samorajski T Axon caliber related to neurofilaments and microtubules in sciatic nerve fibers of rats and mice Anat Rec 1970 167 379 387 5454590
67 Fromer M Pocklington AJ Kavanagh DH Williams HJ Dwyer S Gormley P Georgieva L Rees E Palta P Ruderfer DM Carrera N Humphreys I Johnson JS Roussos P Barker DD Banks E Milanova V Grant SG Hannon E Rose SA Chambert K Mahajan M Scolnick EM Moran JL Kirov G Palotie A McCarroll SA Holmans P Sklar P Owen MJ Purcell SM O’Donovan MC De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks Nature 2014 506 179 184 24463507
68 Garcia-Sevilla JA Ferrer-Alcon M Martin M Kieffer BL Maldonado R Neurofilament proteins and cAMP pathway in brains of mu-, delta- or kappa-opioid receptor gene knock-out mice: effects of chronic morphine administration Neuropharmacology 2004 46 519 530 14975676
69 Garcia-Sevilla JA Ventayol P Busquets X La Harpe R Walzer C Guimon J Marked decrease of immunolabelled 68 kDa neurofilament (NF-L) proteins in brains of opiate addicts Neuroreport 1997 8 1561 1565 9189892
70 Garey LJ Ong WY Patel TS Kanani M Davis A Mortimer AM Barnes TR Hirsch SR Reduced dendritic spine density on cerebral cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998 65 446 453 9771764
71 Gentil BJ McLean JR Xiao S Zhao B Durham HD Robertson J A two-hybrid screen identifies an unconventional role for the intermediate filament peripherin in regulating the subcellular distribution of the SNAP25-interacting protein, SIP30 Journal of neurochemistry 2014 131 588 601 25113441
72 Girault JA Greengard P The neurobiology of dopamine signaling Arch Neurol 2004 61 641 644 15148138
73 Glantz LA Lewis DA Decreased dendritic spine density on prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000 57 65 73 10632234
74 Guitart X Beitner-Johnson D Marby DW Kosten TA Nestler EJ Fischer and Lewis rat strains differ in basal levels of neurofilament proteins and their regulation by chronic morphine in the mesolimbic dopamine system Synapse 1992 12 242 253 1362292
75 Guitart X Lumeng L Li TK Nestler EJ Alcohol-preferring and nonpreferring rats display different levels of neurofilament proteins in the ventral tegmental area Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1993 17 580 585 8101433
76 Hardy J Selkoe DJ The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics Science 2002 297 353 356 12130773
77 Hashimoto R Nakamura Y Komai S Kashiwagi Y Matsumoto N Shiosaka S Takeda M Phosphorylation of neurofilament-L during LTD Neuroreport 2000 11 2739 2742 10976954
78 Hashimoto R Nakamura Y Komai S Kashiwagi Y Tamura K Goto T Aimoto S Kaibuchi K Shiosaka S Takeda M Site-specific phosphorylation of neurofilament-L is mediated by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II in the apical dendrites during long-term potentiation Journal of neurochemistry 2000 75 373 382 10854283
79 Hiday AC Phosphorylation state modulates the interaction between spinophilin and neurofilament medium, in: Biology Department Purdue University 2015 96
80 Hirao K Hata Y Deguchi M Yao I Ogura M Rokukawa C Kawabe H Mizoguchi A Takai Y Association of synapse-associated protein 90/ postsynaptic density-95-associated protein (SAPAP) with neurofilaments Genes Cells 2000 5 203 210 10759891
81 Hirokawa N Glicksman MA Willard MB Organization of mammalian neurofilament polypeptides within the neuronal cytoskeleton J Cell Biol 1984 98 1523 1536 6425303
82 Hof PR Cox K Morrison JH Quantitative analysis of a vulnerable subset of pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer’s disease: I. Superior frontal and inferior temporal cortex J Comp Neurol 1990 301 44 54 2127598
83 Hof PR Morrison JH Quantitative analysis of a vulnerable subset of pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer’s disease: II. Primary and secondary visual cortex The Journal of comparative neurology 1990 301 55 64 1706358
84 Hoffman PN Cleveland DW Griffin JW Landes PW Cowan NJ Price DL Neurofilament gene expression: a major determinant of axonal caliber Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987 84 3472 3476 3472217
85 Holzer M Holzapfel HP Krohn K Gertz HJ Arendt T Alterations in content and phosphorylation state of cytoskeletal proteins in the sciatic nerve during ageing and in Alzheimer’s disease J Neural Transm (Vienna) 1999 106 743 755 10907733
86 Hoover BR Reed MN Su J Penrod RD Kotilinek LA Grant MK Pitstick R Carlson GA Lanier LM Yuan LL Ashe KH Liao D Tau mislocalization to dendritic spines mediates synaptic dysfunction independently of neurodegeneration Neuron 2010 68 1067 1081 21172610
87 Hu YY He SS Wang XC Duan QH Khatoon S Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Wang JZ Elevated levels of phosphorylated neurofilament proteins in cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer disease patients Neurosci Lett 2002 320 156 160 11852185
88 Ihara Y Nukina N Sugita H Toyokura Y Staining of Alzheimer’s neurofibrillary tangles with antiserum against 200K component of neurofilament Proc. Japan Acd 1981 57 152 156
89 Ishihara T Higuchi M Zhang B Yoshiyama Y Hong M Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Attenuated neurodegenerative disease phenotype in tau transgenic mouse lacking neurofilaments The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2001 21 6026 6035 11487626
90 Ittner LM Ke YD Delerue F Bi M Gladbach A van Eersel J Wolfing H Chieng BC Christie MJ Napier IA Eckert A Staufenbiel M Hardeman E Gotz J Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models Cell 2010 142 387 397 20655099
91 Jaquet PE Ferrer-Alcon M Ventayol P Guimon J Garcia-Sevilla JA Acute and chronic effects of morphine and naloxone on the phosphorylation of neurofilament-H proteins in the rat brain Neurosci Lett 2001 304 37 40 11335049
92 Jordan BA Fernholz BD Boussac M Xu C Grigorean G Ziff EB Neubert TA Identification and verification of novel rodent postsynaptic density proteins Mol Cell Proteomics 2004 3 857 871 15169875
93 Josephs KA Holton JL Rossor MN Braendgaard H Ozawa T Fox NC Petersen RC Pearl GS Ganguly M Rosa P Laursen H Parisi JE Waldemar G Quinn NP Dickson DW Revesz T Neurofilament inclusion body disease: a new proteinopathy? Brain 2003 126 2291 2303 12876145
94 Kim OJ Ariano MA Lazzarini RA Levine MS Sibley DR Neurofilament-M interacts with the D1 dopamine receptor to regulate cell surface expression and desensitization The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2002 22 5920 5930 12122054
95 Kimura T Whitcomb DJ Jo J Regan P Piers T Heo S Brown C Hashikawa T Murayama M Seok H Sotiropoulos I Kim E Collingridge GL Takashima A Cho K Microtubule-associated protein tau is essential for long-term depression in the hippocampus Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2014 369 20130144 24298146
96 Kirov G Pocklington AJ Holmans P Ivanov D Ikeda M Ruderfer D Moran J Chambert K Toncheva D Georgieva L Grozeva D Fjodorova M Wollerton R Rees E Nikolov I van de Lagemaat LN Bayes A Fernandez E Olason PI Bottcher Y Komiyama NH Collins MO Choudhary J Stefansson K Stefansson H Grant SG Purcell S Sklar P O’Donovan MC Owen MJ De novo CNV analysis implicates specific abnormalities of postsynaptic signalling complexes in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia Mol Psychiatry 2012 17 142 153 22083728
97 Kittur S Hoh J Endo H Tourtellotte W Weeks BS Markesbery W Adler W Cytoskeletal neurofilament gene expression in brain tissue from Alzheimer’s disease patients. I. Decrease in NF-L and NF-M message J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 1994 7 153 158 7522458
98 Kong J Tung VW Aghajanian J Xu Z Antagonistic roles of neurofilament subunits NF-H and NF-M against NF-L in shaping dendritic arborization in spinal motor neurons J Cell Biol 1998 140 1167 1176 9490729
99 Kosik KS Joachim CL Selkoe DJ Microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) is a major antigenic component of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986 83 4044 4048 2424016
100 Kristiansen LV Beneyto M Haroutunian V Meador-Woodruff JH Changes in NMDA receptor subunits and interacting PSD proteins in dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex indicate abnormal regional expression in schizophrenia Mol Psychiatry 2006 11 737 747 705 16702973
101 Kriz J Beaulieu JM Julien JP Krnjevic K Up-regulation of peripherin is associated with alterations in synaptic plasticity in CA1 and CA3 regions of hippocampus Neurobiology of disease 2005 18 409 420 15686970
102 Krstic D Knuesel I Deciphering the mechanism underlying late-onset Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurol 2013 9 25 34 23183882
103 Ksiezak-Reding H Dickson DW Davies P Yen SH Recognition of tau epitopes by anti-neurofilament antibodies that bind to Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987 84 3410 3414 2437579
104 Landis DM Reese TS Cytoplasmic organization in cerebellar dendritic spines J Cell Biol 1983 97 1169 1178 6684661
105 Lee FJ Xue S Pei L Vukusic B Chery N Wang Y Wang YT Niznik HB Yu XM Liu F Dual regulation of NMDA receptor functions by direct protein-protein interactions with the dopamine D1 receptor Cell 2002 111 219 230 12408866
106 Lewis CM Levinson DF Wise LH DeLisi LE Straub RE Hovatta I Williams NM Schwab SG Pulver AE Faraone SV Brzustowicz LM Kaufmann CA Garver DL Gurling HM Lindholm E Coon H Moises HW Byerley W Shaw SH Mesen A Sherrington R O’Neill FA Walsh D Kendler KS Ekelund J Paunio T Lonnqvist J Peltonen L O’Donovan MC Owen MJ Wildenauer DB Maier W Nestadt G Blouin JL Antonarakis SE Mowry BJ Silverman JM Crowe RR Cloninger CR Tsuang MT Malaspina D Harkavy-Friedman JM Svrakic DM Bassett AS Holcomb J Kalsi G McQuillin A Brynjolfson J Sigmundsson T Petursson H Jazin E Zoega T Helgason T Genome scan meta-analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, part II: Schizophrenia Am J Hum Genet 2003 73 34 48 12802786
107 Li F Tsien JZ Memory and the NMDA receptors N Engl J Med 2009 361 302 303 19605837
108 Liu SH Cheng HH Huang SY Yiu PC Chang YC Studying the protein organization of the postsynaptic density by a novel solid phase- and chemical cross-linking-based technology Mol Cell Proteomics 2006 5 1019 1032 16501281
109 Liu SJ Fang ZY Yang Y Deng HM Wang JZ Alzheimer-like phosphorylation of tau and neurofilament induced by cocaine in vivo Acta Pharmacol Sin 2003 24 512 518 12791176
110 Martin R Schilling K Fritz W Giuditta A Visualization of differential neurofilament phosphorylation in the pre- and postsynaptic axoplasm of the squid giant synapse: an electron spectroscopic study Neuroscience 1990 37 553 562 2133359
111 Masliah E Mallory M Alford M DeTeresa R Hansen LA McKeel DW Jr Morris JC Altered expression of synaptic proteins occurs early during progression of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 2001 56 127 129 11148253
112 Matus A Pehling G Ackermann M Maeder J Brain postsynaptic densities: the relationship to glial and neuronal filaments J Cell Biol 1980 87 346 359 7000794
113 McGehee&gt;McGehee DS Heath MJ Gelber S Devay P Role LW Nicotine enhancement of fast excitatory synaptic transmission in CNS by presynaptic receptors Science 1995 269 1692 1696 7569895
114 McLachlan DR Lukiw WJ Wong L Bergeron C Bech-Hansen NT Selective messenger RNA reduction in Alzheimer’s disease Brain research 1988 427 255 261 3401702
115 Miao L Teng J Lin J Liao X Chen J 14-3-3 proteins interact with neurofilament protein-L and regulate dynamic assembly of neurofilaments J Cell Sci 2013 126 427 436 23230147
116 Michaelson DM Alroy G Goldstein D Chapman J Feldon J Characterization of an experimental autoimmune dementia model in the rat Ann N Y Acad Sci 1991 640 290 294 1776754
117 Middleton FA Peng L Lewis DA Levitt P Mirnics K Altered expression of 14-3-3 genes in the prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia Neuropsychopharmacology 2005 30 974 983 15726117
118 Miyata Y Hoshi M Nishida E Minami Y Sakai H Binding of microtubule-associated protein 2 and tau to the intermediate filament reassembled from neurofilament 70-kDa subunit protein. Its regulation by calmodulin J Biol Chem 1986 261 13026 13030 3093477
119 Moczulska KE Pichler P Schutzbier M Schleiffer A Rumpel S Mechtler K Deep and precise quantification of the mouse synaptosomal proteome reveals substantial remodeling during postnatal maturation J Proteome Res 2014 13 4310 4324 25157418
120 Momeni P Cairns NJ Perry RH Bigio EH Gearing M Singleton AB Hardy J Mutation analysis of patients with neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID) Neurobiology of aging 2006 27 778 e771 778 e776 16005115
121 Morrison JH Lewis DA Campbell MJ Huntley GW Benson DL Bouras C A monoclonal antibody to non-phosphorylated neurofilament protein marks the vulnerable cortical neurons in Alzheimer’s disease Brain research 1987 416 331 336 3113670
122 Mosaheb S Thorpe JR Hashemzadeh-Bonehi L Bigio EH Gearing M Cairns NJ Neuronal intranuclear inclusions are ultrastructurally and immunologically distinct from cytoplasmic inclusions of neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease Acta neuropathologica 2005 110 360 368 16025283
123 Narayana PA Herrera JJ Bockhorst KH Esparza-Coss E Xia Y Steinberg JL Moeller FG Chronic cocaine administration causes extensive white matter damage in brain: diffusion tensor imaging and immunohistochemistry studies Psychiatry Res 2014 221 220 230 24507117
124 Narita M Shibasaki M Nagumo Y Narita M Yajima Y Suzuki T Implication of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 in the development of psychological dependence on and behavioral sensitization to morphine Journal of neurochemistry 2005 93 1463 1468 15935062
125 Neumann M Roeber S Kretzschmar HA Rademakers R Baker M Mackenzie IR Abundant FUS-immunoreactive pathology in neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease Acta neuropathologica 2009 118 605 616 19669651
126 Nixon RA Logvinenko KB Multiple fates of newly synthesized neurofilament proteins: evidence for a stationary neurofilament network distributed nonuniformly along axons of retinal ganglion cell neurons J Cell Biol 1986 102 647 659 2418034
127 Nixon RA Sihag RK Neurofilament phosphorylation: a new look at regulation and function Trends Neurosci 1991 14 501 506 1726767
128 Nukina N Kosik KS Selkoe DJ Recognition of Alzheimer paired helical filaments by monoclonal neurofilament antibodies is due to crossreaction with tau protein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987 84 3415 3419 3106969
129 Ohara O Gahara Y Miyake T Teraoka H Kitamura T Neurofilament deficiency in quail caused by nonsense mutation in neurofilament-L gene J Cell Biol 1993 121 387 395 8468353
130 Oron L Dubovik V Novitsky L Eilam D Michaelson DM Animal model and in vitro studies of anti neurofilament antibodies mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease J Neural Transm Suppl 1997 49 77 84 9266416
131 Ortiz J Fitzgerald LW Charlton M Lane S Trevisan L Guitart X Shoemaker W Duman RS Nestler EJ Biochemical actions of chronic ethanol exposure in the mesolimbic dopamine system Synapse 1995 21 289 298 8869159
132 Pal A Das S Morphine causes persistent induction of nitrated neurofilaments in cortex and subcortex even during abstinence Neuroscience 2015 291 177 188 25684749
133 Pant HC Veeranna, Neurofilament phosphorylation Biochem Cell Biol 1995 73 575 592 8714676
134 Paradies MA Steward O Multiple subcellular mRNA distribution patterns in neurons: a nonisotopic in situ hybridization analysis Journal of neurobiology 1997 33 473 493 9322162
135 Pennington K Beasley CL Dicker P Fagan A English J Pariante CM Wait R Dunn MJ Cotter DR Prominent synaptic and metabolic abnormalities revealed by proteomic analysis of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder Mol Psychiatry 2008 13 1102 1117 17938637
136 Perala J Suvisaari J Saarni SI Kuoppasalmi K Isometsa E Pirkola S Partonen T Tuulio-Henriksson A Hintikka J Kieseppa T Harkanen T Koskinen S Lonnqvist J Lifetime prevalence of psychotic and bipolar I disorders in a general population Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007 64 19 28 17199051
137 Perrot R Julien JP Real-time imaging reveals defects of fast axonal transport induced by disorganization of intermediate filaments FASEB J 2009 23 3213 3225 19451279
138 Perry G Rizzuto N Autilio-Gambetti L Gambetti P Paired helical filaments from Alzheimer disease patients contain cytoskeletal components Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985 82 3916 3920 3889918
139 Pierce RC Kumaresan V The mesolimbic dopamine system: the final common pathway for the reinforcing effect of drugs of abuse? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006 30 215 238 16099045
140 Rajkowska G Halaris A Selemon LD Reductions in neuronal and glial density characterize the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in bipolar disorder Biol Psychiatry 2001 49 741 752 11331082
141 Rao MV Campbell J Yuan A Kumar A Gotow T Uchiyama Y Nixon RA The neurofilament middle molecular mass subunit carboxyl-terminal tail domains is essential for the radial growth and cytoskeletal architecture of axons but not for regulating neurofilament transport rate J Cell Biol 2003 163 1021 1031 14662746
142 Rao MV Garcia ML Miyazaki Y Gotow T Yuan A Mattina S Ward CM Calcutt NA Uchiyama Y Nixon RA Cleveland DW Gene replacement in mice reveals that the heavily phosphorylated tail of neurofilament heavy subunit does not affect axonal caliber or the transit of cargoes in slow axonal transport J Cell Biol 2002 158 681 693 12186852
143 Rao MV Mohan PS Kumar A Yuan A Montagna L Campbell J Veeranna Espreafico EM Julien JP Nixon RA The myosin Va head domain binds to the neurofilament-L rod and modulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) content and distribution within axons PLoS One 2011 6 e17087 21359212
144 Ratnam J Teichberg VI Neurofilament-light increases the cell surface expression of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and prevents its ubiquitination Journal of neurochemistry 2005 92 878 885 15686490
145 Roots BI Neurofilament accumulation induced in synapses by leupeptin Science 1983 221 971 972 6192501
146 Rudrabhatla P Grant P Jaffe H Strong MJ Pant HC Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of neuronal intermediate filament proteins (NF-M/H) in Alzheimer’s disease by iTRAQ FASEB J 2010 24 4396 4407 20624930
147 Rudrabhatla P Jaffe H Pant HC Direct evidence of phosphorylated neuronal intermediate filament proteins in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs): phosphoproteomics of Alzheimer’s NFTs FASEB J 2011 25 3896 3905 21828286
148 Satoh K Takeuchi M Oda Y Deguchi-Tawarada M Sakamoto Y Matsubara K Nagasu T Takai Y Identification of activity-regulated proteins in the postsynaptic density fraction Genes Cells 2002 7 187 197 11895482
149 Saunders DE DiCerbo JA Williams JR Hannigan JH Alcohol reduces neurofilament protein levels in primary cultured hippocampal neurons Alcohol 1997 14 519 526 9305469
150 Sbarbati A Bunnemann B Cristofori P Terron A Chiamulera C Merigo F Benati D Bernardi P Osculati F Chronic nicotine treatment changes the axonal distribution of 68 kDa neurofilaments in the rat ventral tegmental area Eur J Neurosci 2002 16 877 882 12372024
151 Scheff SW Price DA Schmitt FA DeKosky ST Mufson EJ Synaptic alterations in CA1 in mild Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment Neurology 2007 68 1501 1508 17470753
152 Scheff SW Price DA Schmitt FA Mufson EJ Hippocampal synaptic loss in early Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment Neurobiology of aging 2006 27 1372 1384 16289476
153 Scherling CS Hall T Berisha F Klepac K Karydas A Coppola G Kramer JH Rabinovici G Ahlijanian M Miller BL Seeley W Grinberg LT Rosen H Meredith J Jr Boxer AL Cerebrospinal fluid neurofilament concentration reflects disease severity in frontotemporal degeneration Annals of neurology 2014 75 116 126 24242746
154 Sealock R Murnane AA Paulin D Froehner SC Immunochemical identification of desmin in Torpedo postsynaptic membranes and at the rat neuromuscular junction Synapse 1989 3 315 324 2740991
155 Sharma P Sharma M Amin ND Albers RW Pant HC Regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 catalytic activity by phosphorylation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 96 11156 11160 10500146
156 Simonato M The neurochemistry of morphine addiction in the neocortex Trends Pharmacol Sci 1996 17 410 415 8990957
157 Sivagnanasundaram S Crossett B Dedova I Cordwell S Matsumoto I Abnormal pathways in the genu of the corpus callosum in schizophrenia pathogenesis: a proteome study Proteomics Clin Appl 2007 1 1291 1305 21136626
158 Smith MA Rudnicka-Nawrot M Richey PL Praprotnik D Mulvihill P Miller CA Sayre LM Perry G Carbonyl-related posttranslational modification of neurofilament protein in the neurofibrillary pathology of Alzheimer’s disease Journal of neurochemistry 1995 64 2660 2666 7539057
159 Somerville MJ Percy ME Bergeron C Yoong LK Grima EA McLachlan DR Localization and quantitation of 68 kDa neurofilament and superoxide dismutase-1 mRNA in Alzheimer brains Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1991 9 1 8 1850065
160 Sternberger NH Sternberger LA Ulrich J Aberrant neurofilament phosphorylation in Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985 82 4274 4276 3159022
161 Steward O Levy WB Preferential localization of polyribosomes under the base of dendritic spines in granule cells of the dentate gyrus The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1982 2 284 291 7062109
162 Strakowski SM Adler CM DelBello MP Volumetric MRI studies of mood disorders: do they distinguish unipolar and bipolar disorder? Bipolar Disord 2002 4 80 88 12071513
163 Styers ML Salazar G Love R Peden AA Kowalczyk AP Faundez V The endo-lysosomal sorting machinery interacts with the intermediate filament cytoskeleton Mol Biol Cell 2004 15 5369 5382 15456899
164 Sun WL Zhou L Quinones-Jenab V Jenab S Cocaine effects on dopamine and NMDA receptors interactions in the striatum of Fischer rats Brain Res Bull 2009 80 377 381 19716863
165 Sweet RA Henteleff RA Zhang W Sampson AR Lewis DA Reduced dendritic spine density in auditory cortex of subjects with schizophrenia Neuropsychopharmacology 2009 34 374 389 18463626
166 Terada S Nakata T Peterson AC Hirokawa N Visualization of slow axonal transport in vivo Science 1996 273 784 788 8670416
167 Terry RD Masliah E Salmon DP Butters N DeTeresa R Hill R Hansen LA Katzman R Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment Annals of neurology 1991 30 572 580 1789684
168 Terry-Lorenzo RT Inoue M Connor JH Haystead TA Armbruster BN Gupta RP Oliver CJ Shenolikar S Neurofilament-L is a protein phosphatase-1-binding protein associated with neuronal plasma membrane and post-synaptic density J Biol Chem 2000 275 2439 2446 10644697
169 Tetzlaff W Leonard C Krekoski CA Parhad IM Bisby MA Reductions in motoneuronal neurofilament synthesis by successive axotomies: a possible explanation for the conditioning lesion effect on axon regeneration Experimental neurology 1996 139 95 106 8635572
170 Thangavel R Sahu SK Van Hoesen GW Zaheer A Loss of nonphosphorylated neurofilament immunoreactivity in temporal cortical areas in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 2009 160 427 433 19250962
171 Toyooka K Muratake T Tanaka T Igarashi S Watanabe H Takeuchi H Hayashi S Maeda M Takahashi M Tsuji S Kumanishi T Takahashi Y 14-3-3 protein eta chain gene (YWHAH) polymorphism and its genetic association with schizophrenia Am J Med Genet 1999 88 164 167 10206237
172 Trinidad JC Thalhammer A Specht CG Schoepfer R Burlingame AL Phosphorylation state of postsynaptic density proteins Journal of neurochemistry 2005 92 1306 1316 15748150
173 Trujillo KA Akil H Inhibition of morphine tolerance and dependence by the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 Science 1991 251 85 87 1824728
174 Valjent E Corvol JC Pages C Besson MJ Maldonado R Caboche J Involvement of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase cascade for cocaine-rewarding properties The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2000 20 8701 8709 11102476
175 Van Cauwenberghe C Van Broeckhoven C Sleegers K The genetic landscape of Alzheimer disease: clinical implications and perspectives Genet Med 2016 18 421 430 26312828
176 Veeranna Amin ND Ahn NG Jaffe H Winters CA Grant P Pant HC Mitogen-activated protein kinases (Erk1,2) phosphorylate Lys-Ser-Pro (KSP) repeats in neurofilament proteins NF-H and NF-M The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1998 18 4008 4021 9592082
177 Veeranna Shetty KT Link WT Jaffe H Wang J Pant HC Neuronal cyclin-dependent kinase-5 phosphorylation sites in neurofilament protein (NF-H) are dephosphorylated by protein phosphatase 2A Journal of neurochemistry 1995 64 2681 2690 7760048
178 Vickers JC Chin D Edwards AM Sampson V Harper C Morrison J Dystrophic neurite formation associated with age-related beta amyloid deposition in the neocortex: clues to the genesis of neurofibrillary pathology Experimental neurology 1996 141 1 11 8797662
179 Vickers JC Riederer BM Marugg RA Buee-Scherrer V Buee L Delacourte A Morrison JH Alterations in neurofilament protein immunoreactivity in human hippocampal neurons related to normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 1994 62 1 13 7816192
180 Villace P Marion RM Ortin J The composition of Staufen-containing RNA granules from human cells indicates their role in the regulated transport and translation of messenger RNAs Nucleic acids research 2004 32 2411 2420 15121898
181 Vosseller K Trinidad JC Chalkley RJ Specht CG Thalhammer A Lynn AJ Snedecor JO Guan S Medzihradszky KF Maltby DA Schoepfer R Burlingame AL O-linked N-acetylglucosamine proteomics of postsynaptic density preparations using lectin weak affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry Mol Cell Proteomics 2006 5 923 934 16452088
182 Wang J Tung YC Wang Y Li XT Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Hyperphosphorylation and accumulation of neurofilament proteins in Alzheimer disease brain and in okadaic acid-treated SY5Y cells FEBS Lett 2001 507 81 87 11682063
183 Wong J Oblinger MM A comparison of peripheral and central axotomy effects on neurofilament and tubulin gene expression in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1990 10 2215 2222 2115908
184 Yabe JT Pimenta A Shea TB Kinesin-mediated transport of neurofilament protein oligomers in growing axons J Cell Sci 112 Pt 21 1999 3799 3814
185 Yuan A Hassinger L Rao MV Julien JP Miller CC Nixon RA Dissociation of Axonal Neurofilament Content from Its Transport Rate PLoS One 2015 10 e0133848 26208164
186 Yuan A Rao MV Kumar A Julien JP Nixon RA Neurofilament transport in vivo minimally requires hetero-oligomer formation The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2003 23 9452 9458 14561875
187 Yuan A Rao MV Sasaki T Chen Y Kumar A Veeranna Liem RK Eyer J Peterson AC Julien JP Nixon RA Alpha-internexin is structurally and functionally associated with the neurofilament triplet proteins in the mature CNS The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2006 26 10006 10019 17005864
188 Yuan A Rao MV Veeranna Nixon RA Neurofilaments at a glance J Cell Sci 2012 125 3257 3263 22956720
189 Yuan A Sasaki T Kumar A Peterhoff CM Rao MV Liem RK Julien JP Nixon RA Peripherin is a subunit of peripheral nerve neurofilaments: implications for differential vulnerability of CNS and peripheral nervous system axons The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2012 32 8501 8508 22723690
190 Yuan A Sasaki T Rao MV Kumar A Kanumuri V Dunlop DS Liem RK Nixon RA Neurofilaments form a highly stable stationary cytoskeleton after reaching a critical level in axons The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2009 29 11316 11329 19741138
191 Yuan A Sershen H Veeranna Basavarajappa BS Kumar A Hashim A Berg M Lee JH Sato Y Rao MV Mohan PS Dyakin V Julien JP Lee VM Nixon RA Functions of neurofilaments in synapses Mol Psychiatry 2015 20 915 26201270
192 Yuan A Sershen H Veeranna Basavarajappa BS Kumar A Hashim A Berg M Lee JH Sato Y Rao MV Mohan PS Dyakin V Julien JP Lee VM Nixon RA Neurofilament subunits are integral components of synapses and modulate neurotransmission and behavior in vivo Mol Psychiatry 2015
193 Yuan A Sershen H Veeranna Basavarajappa BS Kumar A Hashim A Berg M Lee JH Sato Y Rao MV Mohan PS Dyakin V Julien JP Lee VM Nixon RA Neurofilament subunits are integral components of synapses and modulate neurotransmission and behavior in vivo Mol Psychiatry 2015 20 986 994 25869803
194 Zetterberg H Skillback T Mattsson N Trojanowski JQ Portelius E Shaw LM Weiner MW Blennow K I. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, Association of Cerebrospinal Fluid Neurofilament Light Concentration With Alzheimer Disease Progression JAMA Neurol 2015 1 8 26659895
195 Zhang W Benson DL Stages of synapse development defined by dependence on F-actin The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2001 21 5169 5181 11438592
196 Zhang Z Casey DM Julien JP Xu Z Normal dendritic arborization in spinal motoneurons requires neurofilament subunit L J Comp Neurol 2002 450 144 152 12124759
197 Zhou J Jones DR Duong DM Levey AI Lah JJ Peng J Proteomic analysis of postsynaptic density in Alzheimer’s disease Clin Chim Acta 2013 420 62 68 23537733
198 Zhu Q Couillard-Despres S Julien JP Delayed maturation of regenerating myelinated axons in mice lacking neurofilaments Experimental neurology 1997 148 299 316 9398473
199 Zimmerman UJ Schlaepfer WW Characterization of a brain calcium-activated protease that degrades neurofilament proteins Biochemistry 1982 21 3977 3982 6751383
