LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985190R
5004
J Neurochem
J. Neurochem.
Journal of neurochemistry
0022-3042
1471-4159

26990533
5858159
10.1111/jnc.13594
NIHMS949879
Article
The ABCD’s of 5′-Adenosine Monophosphate-activated Protein Kinase and Adrenoleukodystrophy
Weidling Ian 12
Swerdlow Russell H. 1234*
1 University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
2 Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
3 Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
4 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: Russell H. Swerdlow, MD, Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66160, rswerdlow@kumc.edu
12 3 2018
15 3 2016
7 2016
19 3 2018
138 1 1013
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
ABCD1
adrenoleukodystrophy
AMPK
metformin
mitochondria

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a rare but typically devastating neurologic disorder. Most non-neurologists probably first heard of it through the Hollywood movie “Lorenzo’s Oil.” X-ALD and a less fulminant but related phenotype, adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), belong to a broader category of diseases called the peroxisomal disorders which arise as a consequence of peroxisome dysfunction. In X-ALD and AMN, mutation of the ABCD1 gene causes loss of function of the ABCD1 gene product, adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP). ALDP facilitates the transfer of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), which contain over 22 carbons, into peroxisomes where they are catabolized via β-oxidation. On biochemical, molecular, and pathology levels loss of ALDP function results in increased VLCFA levels, neuroinflammation, brain white matter demyelination, and adrenal failure. Clinically, this leads to a spectrum of phenotypes that can feature developmental regression, progressive disability, blindness, deafness, dementia, and in many cases even death. Because the ABCD1 gene resides on the X-chromosome, males are far more susceptible than females although women can also experience symptoms and signs. Available treatment options, such as Lorenzo’s oil, have a limited impact and other potential interventions such as stem cell transplantation (through the introduction of umbilical cord or bone marrow stem cells from a matched donor) can only be considered in a small subset of those affected (Shapiro et al. 2000). Effective, widely applicable therapies are desperately needed.

One potential therapeutic strategy involves the leveraging of genes whose products can to some extent substitute for ALDP (Netik et al. 1999, Pujol et al. 2004). This includes proteins encoded by two ABCD1-related genes, ABCD2 and ABCD3, which are also members of the ATP binding cassette transporter superfamily. The obvious question that arises, though, is whether ABCD2 and ABCD3 expression can be effectively enhanced using currently feasible clinical approaches.

One recent line of investigation suggests the answer to this question may be yes. Recently, investigators found AMPKα1 protein is reduced in X-ALD subject-derived fibroblasts and lymphocytes, a change that is likely to be at least partly due to decreased transcription and increased ubiquitin-mediated degradation (Singh &amp; Giri 2014). An association between AMPKα1 and inflammation was also demonstrated, further suggesting a potential role for AMPKα1 in X-ALD pathophysiology. In this volume of the Journal of Neurochemistry, the authors of this initial study now present additional evidence that AMPKα1 is reduced in X-ALD, make a case for increasing AMPKα1 activity for therapeutic purposes in this disease, and indicate how this goal may be achieved (Singh et al. 2016).

The current study expands on the previous fibroblast and lymphocyte study by showing for the first time that levels of activated, phosphorylated AMPKα1 and total AMPKα1 are decreased in the white matter of X-ALD patient postmortem brains. From further work performed using X-ALD subject-derived fibroblasts, the authors provided evidence that mitochondrial function was reduced and that increasing AMPKα1 levels was to some extent able to reverse this, and indeed increased rates of fatty acid oxidation and ATP levels. Of arguably equal import, increasing AMPKα1 levels decreased levels of VLCFAs, reduced markers of inflammation (evident as a reduction in iNOS and IL-6 levels in X-ALD-derived lymphocytes), and increased levels of the ABCD2 gene product, Abcd2 (ALDP-related protein).

AMPKα1 activation in this study was achieving using metformin, a drug approved by the United States of America’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Metformin is a known activator of AMPK, although it has other effects as well (Viollet et al. 2012, Miller &amp; Birnbaum 2010). In the Singh et al. study the metformin-induced increase in Abcd2 appeared to work through an AMPKα1-dependent pathway, since metformin did not increase Abcd2 levels in AMPKα1 knock-out (KO) cells or in cells treated with an AMPK inhibitor. Metformin was further found to have in vivo effects, as ABCD1-KO mice treated with the drug for 60 days were found to have increased brain levels of Abcd2 and mitochondrial oxidative-phosphorylation (OXPHOS) protein subunits. From a pre-clinical drug development perspective, demonstrating changes in the brains of mice systemically administered metformin (in this case the metformin was dissolved in the water supply) is critical, since when it comes to the development of central nervous system treatments the blood brain barrier can constitute a clinically relevant obstacle.

In this study, though, some of metformin’s beneficial effects did not appear to be AMPK-mediated. Levels of Abcd3 protein increased with metformin treatment in AMPKα1 KO cells for unclear reasons. It would have been interesting to know whether Abcd3 levels increased in the metformin-treated mice, but the authors did not comment on this parameter. Beyond this, work to date does not clearly establish why a loss of ALDP function leads to a decline in AMPKα1 levels and function; is the secondary AMPKα1 problem a relatively direct consequence of the primary lesion, or more of a non-specific result of tissue degeneration?

AMPK is a cell energy sensor activated by, among other things, prolonged exercise and fasting (Hardie et al. 2012). Through its phosphorylation of downstream targets AMPK stimulates catabolic pathways to generate ATP, and inhibits anabolic pathways to conserve ATP (Figure 1). Tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2) phosphorylation ultimately leads to inhibition of cell growth by causing mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) inhibition, unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1 (ULK1) phosphorylation stimulates autophagy and mitophagy, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1 α (PGC1α) phosphorylation promotes mitochondrial biogenesis (it is particularly interesting that AMPK appears able to promote both mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy). AMPK activity is itself modulated by calcium fluxes and fluctuations in AMP/ATP ratios. It contains three subunits, a catalytic α subunit and regulatory β and γ subunits. The γ-subunit in particular mediates AMPK’s sensitivity to energy change, as AMP or ADP binding to the γ-subunit enhances phosphorylation of the activation loop and blocks its dephosphorylation, thereby increasing α-subunit activity. The α-subunit kinase has two isoforms, α1 and α2. Metformin appears to preferentially activate AMPKα1, while 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) appears to preferentially activate AMPKα2. Whether activating AMPKα1, AMPKα2, or both might prove therapeutically advantageous, in general or in specific contexts, is unclear.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinflammation are observed in a number of other neurodegenerative processes, which raises the question of whether metformin-induced AMPKα1 activation should also be considered for the treatment of some of those disorders. To this point, a study in rodents found metformin treatment enhanced neurogenesis and spatial memory formation (Wang et al. 2012). Paired with other findings on the link between diabetes and neurodegeneration, metformin’s ability to enhance neurogenesis suggest it to be a reasonable Alzheimer’s disease (AD) therapeutic candidate (Yarchoan &amp; Arnold 2014). Clinical trials of metformin in AD patients have been initiated.

Overall, Singh et al. try to make the point that metformin treatment may benefit X-ALD through several routes: (1) a general enhancement of deficient mitochondrial function and cell bioenergetics, (2) an AMPKα1-mediated induction of Abcd2, with at least a partial functional restoration of activities usually provided by ALDP, and (3) an AMPKα1-independent induction of Abcd3, which could also to some extent substitute for lost ALDP function. Attempts to treat loss of function diseases by inducing the expression of functionally overlapping genes would seem to have tremendous potential. This idea has previously been proposed for the treatment of other neurologic diseases, including Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy and spinal muscular atrophy, but efforts to date have yet to pay off.

Pre-clinical attempts to justify the “re-purposing” of existing drugs for conditions they were not designed or initially intended to treat has become an extremely popular theme in drug development circles. Simply stated, this is largely because determining whether currently FDA-approved drugs may benefit a particular disease or condition is far less expensive and far less time-consuming than developing drugs de novo. It is important to note, however, that success in a pre-clinical setting does not guarantee success in the clinical arena. A preclinical-clinical disconnect can occur for a variety of reasons, including limitations in the ability of pre-clinical models to replicate human diseases, an inability to administer the drug of interest to human subjects at concentrations used in the pre-clinical studies, or differences in the ways that human and non-human tissues respond to a drug of interest. So, while the current work of Singh et al. presents a rationale case for evaluating the effects of metformin in X-ALD and AMN clinical trials, it must be cautioned substantial work needs to be done before a role for metformin in the treatment of these diseases can be established. It is important to further note that sometimes interventions that show promise in pre-clinical models can have unanticipated harmful effects when used to treat a human condition.

These caveats aside, X-ALD is a very serious disorder. Those suffering from it or its associated phenotypes deserve hope, and beyond that, accessible and effective treatments. It will prove interesting to watch this translational line of investigation play out in the setting of a carefully structured clinical trial.

The authors are supported by the University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center (P30AG035982), the Frank and Evangeline Thompson Alzheimer’s Treatment Program Fund, the Hugh and Betty Libby Foundation, the Greater Kansas City Automobile Dealers Association, the Gene and Marge Sweeney Chair, and the Self Endowment for Biomedical Research Training.

Abbreviations

ABCD1 ATP-binding cassette subfamily D member 1

Abcd2 ALDP-related protein

ACC1 acetyl CoA carboxylase

AD Alzheimer’s disease

AMN adrenomyeloneuropathy

AMPK 5`-adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase

ALDP adrenoleukodystrophy protein

FDA Food and Drug Administration

HMGR 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase

KO knock-out

mTORC1 mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1

OXPHOS oxidative-phosphorylation

PFKFB3 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 3

PFKFB4 6-Phosphofructo-2-Kinase/Fructose-2,6-Biphosphatase 4

PGC1α peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1 α

TSC2 tuberous sclerosis complex 2

ULK1 unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1

VLCFA very long chain fatty acids

X-ALD x-linked adrenoleukodystrophy

Figure 1 Some AMPK effects

When phosphorylated at its threonine 172 residue, AMPK profoundly affects cell energy metabolism by directly and indirectly altering cell energy production and consumption. Effects include the promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis, the promotion of autophagy/mitophagy, inhibition of cell growth, inhibition of fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis with a concomitant increase in fatty acid oxidation, and stimulation of glucose uptake and glycolysis. Some of the enzymes, enzyme complexes, and transcriptional co-activators that mediate these effects are indicated. Abbreviations not defined in the text include: ACC1, acetyl CoA carboxylase; HMGR, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase; PFKFB3, 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 3; PFKFB4, 6-Phosphofructo-2-Kinase/Fructose-2,6-Biphosphatase 4.

Conflict of Interest: The authors report no conflicts of interest.


Hardie DG Ross FA Hawley SA 2012 AMPK: a nutrient and energy sensor that maintains energy homeostasis Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13 251 262 22436748
Miller RA Birnbaum MJ 2010 An energetic tale of AMPK-independent effects of metformin The Journal of clinical investigation 120 2267 2270 20577046
Netik A Forss-Petter S Holzinger A Molzer B Unterrainer G Berger J 1999 Adrenoleukodystrophy-related protein can compensate functionally for adrenoleukodystrophy protein deficiency (X-ALD): implications for therapy Human molecular genetics 8 907 913 10196381
Pujol A Ferrer I Camps C 2004 Functional overlap between ABCD1 (ALD) and ABCD2 (ALDR) transporters: a therapeutic target for X-adrenoleukodystrophy Human molecular genetics 13 2997 3006 15489218
Shapiro E Krivit W Lockman L 2000 Long-term effect of bone-marrow transplantation for childhood-onset cerebral X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy Lancet (London, England) 356 713 718
Singh J Giri S 2014 Loss of AMP-activated protein kinase in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy patient-derived fibroblasts and lymphocytes Biochemical and biophysical research communications 445 126 131 24491542
Singh J Olle B Suhail H Felicella MM Giri S 2016 Metformin-induced mitochondrial function and ABCD2 up regulation in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy involves AMP activated protein kinase J Neurochem
Viollet B Guigas B Sanz Garcia N Leclerc J Foretz M Andreelli F 2012 Cellular and molecular mechanisms of metformin: an overview Clinical science (London, England: 1979) 122 253 270
Wang J Gallagher D DeVito LM 2012 Metformin activates an atypical PKC-CBP pathway to promote neurogenesis and enhance spatial memory formation Cell stem cell 11 23 35 22770240
Yarchoan M Arnold SE 2014 Repurposing diabetes drugs for brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer disease Diabetes 63 2253 2261 24931035
