LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370121
6712
Prog Neurobiol
Prog. Neurobiol.
Progress in neurobiology
0301-0082
1873-5118

27084354
5705228
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2016.04.003
NIHMS780969
Article
HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers
Rahimian Pejman
He Johnny J. *
Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Texas Health Science Center, 3500 Camp Bowie Blvd., Fort Worth, TX 76107, Tel (817) 735-2642, Fax (817) 735-0181, johnny.he@unthsc.edu
25 4 2016
12 4 2016
10 2017
01 10 2018
157 117132
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
HIV infection often causes neurological symptoms including cognitive and motor dysfunction, which have been collectively termed HIV/neuroAIDS. Neuropsychological assessment and clinical symptoms have been the primary diagnostic criteria for HIV/neuroAIDS, even for the mild cognitive and motor disorder, the most prevalent form of HIV/neuroAIDS in the era of combination antiretroviral therapy. Those performance-based assessments and symptoms are generally descriptive and do not have the sensitivity and specificity to monitor the diagnosis, progression, and treatment response of the disease when compared to objective and quantitative laboratory-based biological markers, or biomarkers. In addition, effects of demographics and comorbidities such as substance abuse, psychiatric disease, nutritional deficiencies, and co-infection on HIV/neuroAIDS could be more readily determined using biomarkers than using neuropsychological assessment and clinical symptoms. Thus, there have been great efforts in identification of HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers over the past two decades. The need for reliable biomarkers of HIV/neuroAIDS is expected to increase as the HIV-infected population ages and their vulnerability to neurodegenerative diseases, particularly Alzheimer’s disease increases. Currently, three classes of HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers are being pursued to establish objective laboratory-based definitions of HIV-associated neurologic injury: cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, blood biomarkers, and neuroimaging biomarkers. In this review, we will focus on the current knowledge in the field of HIV/neuroAIDS biomarker discovery.

Graphical abstract

HIV/neuroAIDS
Biomarkers
CSF
Blood
Neuroimaging

1. Introduction

Thirty-three million people are estimated to be currently living with HIV worldwide, with over 2.7 million newly infected individuals annually. Within the United States, over one million adults and adolescents may be living with diagnosed or undiagnosed HIV infection, with an estimated 56,000 new HIV infections occurring annually (Hall et al., 2008; UNAIDS, 2015). The introduction of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) in the mid-1990’s led to reduced viral replication, improved immune function and increased life expectancy among HIV-infected individuals (Egger et al., 2002; May et al., 2007; May et al., 2006; Munoz et al., 1997; Pedersen et al., 2015).

HIV-1 infects the central nervous system (CNS) and often causes neurological symptoms that include motor and cognitive dysfunction (Etherton et al., 2015; Price et al., 1988), which are collectively called HIV/neuroAIDS. In the era of cART, a more discrete form of CNS dysfunction so-called minor cognitive motor disorder (MCMD) has become more common (Brew, 2009; Cohen and Gongvatana, 2009; Sacktor, 2002; Simoes and Justino, 2015). HIV-associated neuropathologies mainly include widespread reactive astrocytes so-called astrocytosis and other changes in the brain depending on the severity of the diseases (Bell et al., 2006; Brew, 2009; Cohen and Gongvatana, 2009; Del Valle and Pina-Oviedo, 2006; Ellis et al., 2007; Gelman, 2015; Sacktor, 2002). At the cellular level, the primary cell targets for HIV infection are macrophages/microglia and, to a lesser extent, astrocytes (Gorry et al., 1998; Lee et al., 1993; Liu et al., 2004; Luo and He, 2015; Saito et al., 1994; Schweighardt and Atwood, 2001; Tornatore et al., 1994). However, neurons that are mostly affected in the brain of HIV-infected individuals are rarely infected. Therefore, indirect mechanisms have been proposed for HIV/neuroAIDS pathogenesis; they can generally be grouped into three categories: improper immune activation of macrophages/microglia, soluble factors of both viral and host origins from macrophages/microglia and astrocytes, and astrocyte dysfunction.

Since its recognition more than two decades ago, clinical symptoms, neuropsychological testing, and post-mortem neuropathology have been used for HIV/neuroAIDS diagnosis. Meanwhile, more objective laboratory-based biological markers, so called biomarkers have also been pursued to predict and define HIV/neuroAIDS as well as to monitor treatment response and help therapeutic development for HIV/neuroAIDS. Those biomarkers can be derived from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) such as beta-2-microglobulin, neopterin, quinolinic acid, and monocyte chemo-attractant protein-1 (MCP-1) (Brew et al., 1990; Brew et al., 1992; Cinque et al., 2005; Heyes et al., 1991; Letendre et al., 1999; Thames et al., 2015), or from peripheral blood such as CD16+ monocytes (Kusdra et al., 2002; Luo et al., 2003; Pulliam et al., 1997; Shiramizu et al., 2005); Neuroimaging markers have also been proposed as HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers to document changes in the size and structure of brain and metabolites in the context of HIV infection (Cao et al., 2015; Cloak et al., 2004; Cysique et al., 2004; Dousset et al., 1997; Filippi et al., 2001; Ge et al., 2003; Hall et al., 1996; Jakobsen et al., 1989; Lee et al., 2003; Paul et al., 2002; Pomara et al., 2001a; Ragin et al., 2004a; Ragin et al., 2004b; Ragin et al., 2005; Tarasow et al., 2003; Thompson et al., 2006; Thompson et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2006). While not eliminating the need for clinical recognition and perhaps neuropsychological testing to measure severity and given that neuroimaging is expensive and not readily accessible, identification of objective laboratory-based quantitative CSF/blood biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS represents a major advance in all aspects of HIV/neuroAIDS.

Most of our knowledge about HIV/neuroAIDS is derived from clade B HIV. However, it should be pointed out that clade C HIV have been shown to be less neurotoxic compared to clade B HIV (Rao et al., 2008). Several factors may have attributed to this difference, and they include mutations in the dicysteine motif of clade C Tat protein (Mishra et al., 2008), weaker chemotactic activity of clade C Tat protein (Gandhi et al., 2009), and lower replication efficiency of clade C HIV in macrophages (Constantino et al., 2011). However, a more recent study has found no significant differences in the incidence of cognitive impairment between clade B and C HIV (de Almeida et al., 2013). This study has attributed lower prevalence of HIV/neuroAIDS complications in regions with higher clade C infection (India and Sub-Saharan Africa) to less intensive study of impairments, presence of a myriad of comorbid disorders of CNS, and application of routine neurological exam instead of standardized neuropsychological assessments. In the review, we will aim to summarize all studies on HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers.

2. CSF biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

CSF is the optimal medium for monitoring the alterations in the CNS environment due to its proximity to brain parenchyma (Mattsson, 2011). The enrichment of CNS proteins in this biofluid makes it superior to blood in studies of neurodegenerative disorders. The relatively simple, cost-effective, and routine sampling in clinics is considered the great advantage of CSF over neuroimaging markers which require highly specialized instruments (Blennow and Zetterberg, 2015).

Alterations in CSF frequently occur throughout the course of systemic HIV infection (McArthur et al., 1988). In the pre-cART era, detection of viral RNA in the CSF was an indicator of presence and severity of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) (Fox, 2013). This association however no longer exists in the cART era since both neurocognitively unimpaired and HIV/neuroAIDS patients have been reported to have a low level of CSF viral RNA while replication of the virus has been undetectable in blood. Although there is debate on the nature of this CSF viral escape, a plausible explanation is ongoing replication in the CNS (Dahl et al., 2014). In the cART era, the quest for the identification of objective markers has shifted towards the CSF-secreted products by the CNS cells that are specifically damaged by HIV and its toxic products.

Most of the CSF biomarkers that have been studied to date can be grouped into one of the three categories: viral, immune-related, and neural markers. Studies of CSF HIV can be quantitative measurement of virus, most commonly assessing viral RNA and the CSF viral load, and qualitative characterization of CSF virus, including genotypic and functional properties. Despite the fact that HIV infection is the pre-requisite for HIV/neuroAIDS (Spudich et al., 2005) and the fact that HIV exhibit CNS compartmentalization with respect to blood virus (Harrington et al., 2005; Power et al., 1995; Strain et al., 2005), none of these has so far proven to be predictive of CNS injury. On the other hand, the relationship of intrathecal immunoactivation to CNS injury was recognized early in the epidemic, several CSF immunologic markers were found at elevated levels during CNS infection of HIV before introduction of assays for HIV RNA (Brew et al., 1990; Brew et al., 1992). Among the biomarkers of immune activation that have been studied most extensively are beta-2-microglobulin, neopterin, quinolinic acid, and MCP-1 (Brew et al., 1990; Brew et al., 1992; Cinque et al., 2005; Heyes et al., 1991; Letendre et al., 1999). None of these has entered mainstream clinical practice related to the diagnosis of HIV/neuroAIDS. Use of brain-specific biomarkers to document neurodegeneration has been pursued in a variety of neurologic diseases, but until more recently, not with the same enthusiasm in HIV/neuroAIDS. Candidate biomarkers in this category include molecular products of neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia. There are two general issues with these biomarkers. The first relates to their individual sensitivity to detect ongoing brain injury in the setting of HIV/neuroAIDS. This needs to be established for each biomarker. The second relates to the intrinsic non-specificity of these biomarkers as a group. Thus, virtually by definition, many types of injury can result in release of neural biomarkers into CSF (Norgren et al., 2003). However, this limitation becomes less critical if one uses this class of biomarkers as indicators of active injury rather than to define the type of injury. In that context, sensitive neural biomarkers should have a critical and useful role. To date, several CSF biomarkers of cellular injury have been studied in the context of HIV/neuroAIDS; we will discuss them based on the type of the cell involved and the significance and correlation of those biomarkers with HIV-induced injury.

2.1 Cellular biomarkers

The consequence of HIV invasion of the CNS is neuronal damage in the form of synaptodendritic loss and neuron death (Rao et al., 2014). Identifying sensitive surrogate biomarkers of HIV-induced neuronal damage in the CSF is of great importance in staging of HIV/neuroAIDS, response to therapy, and uncovering other mechanisms of injury to neurons. We have summarized the available cellular HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers in the order of their significance along with their detection methods, strengths, and limitation (Table 1).

2.1.1 Neurofilament proteins (NF)

Subunits of the NF have been proposed as suitable biomarkers of neuronal damage in multiple neurodegenerative disorders (Skillbäck et al., 2014). These are neuron-specific intermediate filaments with roles in structural support for axons and are classified based upon the molecular weight of their core chains as light, medium or heavy NF. Elevated levels of neurofilament proteins, especially light NF, have been found in the CSF following damage to the axons in Alzheimer’s (Zetterberg et al., 2015), multiple sclerosis (MS) (Gresle et al., 2011), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Norgren et al., 2003).

In the context of HIV infection, elevation in CSF light NF has been reported by several groups. Highest levels of CSF NFL are observed in HIV-associated dementia (HAD), decreasing with cART and resurging following the interruption of treatment (Abdulle et al., 2007). In primary HIV infection, chronic neuro-asymptomatic infection, and HAD, CSF light NF seems to be the most sensitive CSF biomarker when compared to other CSF biomarkers such as soluble amyloid precursor protein (sAPP) and total tau protein (t-Tau) (Jessen Krut et al., 2014). CSF light NF has been shown to be positively correlated to plasma viral load, and negatively with CD4 cell count, suggesting a link between neuronal injury and systemic HIV infection (McGuire et al., 2015). Direct association of monocyte activation with neuronal injury at all stages of HAND has also been noted because of the significant correlation of CSF light NF with monocyte activation markers, soluble CD163 (sCD163) and soluble CD14 (sCD14) (McGuire et al., 2015). A recent study indicates lack of elevation in CSF light NF in acute HIV infection, confirming light NF as a suitable marker of neuronal injury supported by the fact that this injury occurs later in the disease (Peluso et al., 2015).

2.1.2 Amyloid precursor protein (APP)

APP is a membrane spanning protein with neuroprotective roles; it is ubiquitously expressed in neuronal cells. Secretase cleavage products of this precursor protein however have been linked to a variety of neurodegenerative disorders. β-amyloid 42 (Aβ42) is the product of APP cleavage by β-secretase, and its aggregation is considered a major contributor to Alzheimer’s pathology (Nhan et al., 2015).

The inflammatory cascade initiated by HIV invasion of the CNS and some of the viral products are capable of altering amyloid metabolism. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) secreted by HIV-infected microglia have been shown to induce elevated APP transcription and cleavage. MCP-1 secreted by HIV-infected and activated astrocytes increases extracellular Aβ42 levels. HIV Tat protein, a neurotoxic protein of HIV-1, has been shown to inhibit neprilysin, the proteolytic enzyme that prevents Aβ42 aggregation, leading to the elevation of Aβ42 and soluble forms of APP and altered metabolism of Aβ42 and APP (Liu et al., 2000; Ortega and Ances, 2014).

The effect of HIV infection of the CNS on amyloid levels has been studied for both soluble APP forms (sAPPα/β), and Aβ42 deposits in the brain. The consistent finding seems to be a decrease in soluble forms of CSF APP with HIV/neuroAIDS, but there are discrepancies in reports regarding Aβ42 deposition. Among these studies, one reports reduced sAPPα/β in HAD but no change in primary HIV infection (Peterson et al., 2014). Another study reports a decrease only in CSF Aβ42 of HIV/neuroAIDS patients compared to HIV-infected individuals without cognitive impairment (Clifford et al., 2009); and the third study finds reductions in both CSF sAPPα/β and Aβ42 of HAD patients (Krut et al., 2013). Reductions in soluble forms of CSF APP could be explained by an increase in deposition of Aβ42 in neurons; and one study confirms this relationship in early infection with HIV (Peluso et al., 2013), and another suggests that increase in Aβ42 deposition is concomitant with increased frequency of detection in plasma of Aβ42 in HIV-related cognitive impairments (Mothapo et al., 2015). Two other studies however report no change in Aβ42 deposition in the context of HIV/neuroAIDS (Ances et al., 2012a; Steinbrink et al., 2013). An explanation for the discrepancies among studies of Aβ42 deposition in HIV/neuroAIDS patients would be the age difference of the cohorts studied. The reports with increased amyloid deposition within cognitively impaired HIV patients happen to have more middle-aged and older cohorts, while studies that have reported no change in deposition seem to have recruited younger cognitively impaired HIV patients. It is conceivable to conclude that sAPP reduction in CSF serves as a suitable biomarker for HAND while aging has to be considered when amyloid deposition is being studied.

2.1.3 Protease resistant protein, cellular isoform (PrPC)

PrPC is a GPI-anchored protein found in the lipid raft domains of plasma membrane in neurons and astrocytes (Coleman and Hill, 2015). PrPC is the non-pathological isoform of the prion protein and is involved in adhesion and signaling, transmigration of leukocytes across the endothelium, and neuroprotection. In prion diseases however, this normal host protein is converted to PrPSc, the transmissible agent of prion diseases which causes neurotoxicity (Bujdoso et al., 2015). Prion-like, misfolded protein transmission is a common feature of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson, and Huntington.

PrPC has been shown to be significantly increased in the CNS of HIV patients with neurocognitive impairments and also in SIV-infected macaques with encephalitis. The soluble form of this protein (sPrPC) is released into CSF and its levels have been shown to be correlated with the compromised CNS (Roberts et al., 2010). Increased monocyte influx into the CNS due to HIV infection seems to be involved in PrPC elevation and release in the CSF, since PrPC levels are correlated with increased MCP-1 in CSF, but are independent of viral load and CD4 count (Megra et al., 2013). Anti-HIV properties of PrPC are another reason for making this protein a valuable biomarker of CNS infection. PrPC has been shown to bind viral RNA, inhibiting its translation, and depleting PrPC favors HIV-1 replication (Alais et al., 2012).

2.1.4 Tau protein

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein involved in the formation and stabilization of microtubules and movement of organelles along the axons and dendrites. Phosphorylation of tau occurs following inflammation, and its hyper-phosphorylated form (p-Tau) detaches from microtubules, destabilizing axons and leading to self-assembly of neurofibrillary tangles (Calcagno et al., 2015). Hyper-phosphorylated Tau detected in tangles is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease and detection of elevated total tau (t-Tau) in CSF is considered a valuable biomarker in the diagnosis of AD (Peterson et al., 2014). Epidemiological studies on Tau levels in HIV/neuroAIDS patients however have been controversial; some reports find no correlations while others show elevated total Tau (t-Tau), p-Tau or both in cognitively impaired HIV patients. Of the 12 total studies in the literature that investigated Tau levels in CSF of HIV/neuroAIDS patients, four recent studies show elevations of t-Tau (Gisslén et al., 2009; Peterson et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2014; Steinbrink et al., 2013). Three early studies also show increases in CSF levels of p-Tau in HIV/neuroAIDS (Anthony et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2015; Patrick et al., 2011), and two other studies show increase in both t-Tau and p-Tau (Brew et al., 2005; Calcagno et al., 2015). The other three studies report no change in the levels of t-Tau or p-Tau in HIV/neuroAIDS patients (Clifford et al., 2009; Green et al., 2000; McNamara et al., 2015). Since Tau, unlike amyloid plaques, is detected in brains of the majority of normally aged older adults, it is necessary to consider the age of the patient population while using this protein as a biomarker for HIV/neuroAIDS. Total Tau seems to be more closely correlated with the severity of cognitive impairment and therefore a more accurate biomarker for staging of HIV/neuroAIDS in younger patients.

2.1.5 Human cartilage glycoprotein 39 (YKL-40)

YKL-40 is a secreted glycoprotein expressed in several cell types with functions in growth stimulation, adhesion, and migration. Up-regulated levels of YKL-40 have been reported in several inflammatory diseases such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, as well as in cancer (Craig-Schapiro et al., 2010). YKL-40 in both plasma and CSF has been shown to increase in AD and both YKL-40 and Aβ-42 have been proposed as a potential prognostic biomarker for pre-clinical AD (Craig-Schapiro et al., 2010). Previous studies have only detected YKL-40 expression in macrophages/microglia, but not in neurons and astrocytes in the context of HIV infection (Bonneh-Barkay et al., 2008). Nevertheless, differential up-regulation of CSF YKL-40 has been reported in SIV-infected pigtailed macaques that had developed encephalitis, and have been correlated with increases in the CSF viral load (Beck et al., 2015). These studies have attributed the elevated YKL-40 expression to productive HIV and SIV infections of microglia (Kolson, 2008). More recent reports however have found increased detection of YKL-40 in activated astrocytes and perivascular macrophages in the context of multiple sclerosis and lentiviral encephalitis (Bonneh-Barkay et al., 2010). The induction of YKL-40 in astrocytes begins immediately following activation and continues for approximately 12 days. CSF levels of YKL-40 have also been positively correlated with IL-1β and TNF-α (Bonneh-Barkay et al., 2012). These properties make YKL-40 a valuable biomarker of acute neuroinflammation. But it is important to note that most of the studies have focused on SIV models; therefore, further investigation of the usefulness of this biomarker for HIV/neuroAIDS is needed.

2.1.6 Calcium binding protein B (S100B)

S100B is a small acidic protein mainly expressed in astrocytes in the CNS and has important roles in cellular energy metabolism, cytoskeletal rearrangement, proliferation, and differentiation (Rothermundt et al., 2003). S100B secretion is elevated in the CSF in various neurodegenerative, inflammatory, and psychiatric disorders including AD, dementia, stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, ischemia, and brain trauma. The elevation is indicative of tissue damage or blood brain barrier disruption (Rohlwink and Figaji, 2014). In HIV infection, patients with advanced neurocognitive problems have been shown to have higher levels of CSF S100B (Pemberton and Brew, 2001). In normal physiological concentrations, S100B has been shown to have trophic effects on neurons, but following injury and rise in concentration, this protein could exacerbate the damage. Increased S100B secretion also induces interleukin-6 (IL-6) secretion in CSF, which has been shown to contribute to neuroinflammation and further damage (Piazza et al., 2013). S100B also functions as an inhibitor of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the structural intermediate filament (IF) exclusive to astrocytes, by inhibiting the phosphorylation and assembly of GFAP (Sorci et al., 1998). Elevated concentrations of S100B along with IL-1β have been shown to induce gliosis, disrupt neurite growth, and cause calcium mediated neuronal loss in HAD (Stanley et al., 1994). Considering the specificity of this protein to astrocyte dysfunction and blood brain barrier disruption, S100B could be a useful biomarker of early CNS damage and BBB penetration in the context of HIV/neuroAIDS.

2.1.7 Neopterin

Neopterin is a pteridine and a metabolite of guanosine triphosphate catabolism; it is synthesized in macrophages and microglia following stimulation with interferon γ (IFN-γ). Increased neopterin production and secretion in CSF have been noted in viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections, autoimmune disorders, cancer, and neurocognitive impairments. For this reason, neopterin is considered an excellent intrathecal biomarker of macrophage and microglial activation in the CNS (Fuchs et al., 1988). Neopterin is elevated in CSF of untreated HIV patients (Fuchs et al., 1989). Its CSF concentrations initially drop with cART, but following a short plateau, bounce back and persist at higher levels throughout the course of infection despite continued treatment. Highest levels of CSF neopterin have been associated with advanced neurological impairment in HAD, while neuro-asymptomatic HIV patients do not demonstrate such elevation (Griffin et al., 1991). Positive correlation between concentrations of CSF neopterin and NFL has been reported in HAND, indicating association of axonal degeneration with macrophage activation (Abdulle et al., 2007). Neopterin is a well-studied biomarker of immune activation; it can be helpful in staging and therapeutic monitoring of HIV/neuroAIDS, because of its microglial specificity, initial drop following cART, and continued high levels through cART therapy.

2.1.8 Soluble CD163 (sCD163)

sCD163 is the secreted form of the scavenger receptor for hemoglobin; it is expressed on monocytes and macrophages and has roles in endothelial cell adhesion and dampening of systemic inflammation. Several pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators regulate the expression of sCD163; for instance, TNF-α and IFN-γ inhibit its expression while IL-6 and interleukin-10 (IL-10) induce it. sCD163 has been used as a biomarker for systemic monocyte activation in coronary artery disease, rheumatoid arthritis, Gaucher lysosomal storage disease, and cancer (Onofre et al., 2009). In SIV-infected pigtailed macaques, plasma sCD163 is significantly higher in individuals with encephalitis compared to those without encephalitis (Beck et al., 2015). In humans, plasma levels of sCD163 but not CSF levels are shown to be elevated in both early and chronic infection with HIV. Plasma levels have also been correlated with viral load and associated with monocyte expansion following infection (Burdo et al., 2011). Higher levels of sCD163 in plasma have been reported in HIV patients with more severe neurological impairments. These levels decreased with effective cART, but did not return to the pre-infection baseline levels, indicating persistent immune activation (Burdo et al., 2013). Tracking studies on CD163+ monocytes and macrophages have shown that these cells accumulated in the perivascular regions of brain in HIV encephalitis, and that their numbers are correlated with plasma HIV load (Fischer-Smith et al., 2008).

Despite its solubility and release in plasma, sCD163 levels have not been found to be significantly increased in the CSF of HIV/neuroAIDS patients. This might be due to phenotypic change in monocytes following transmigration and establishment in the perivascular regions. Plasma levels however have been useful in staging, as they indicate an initial drop following cART but present at higher levels during the course of infection. Overall, sCD163 can be useful in staging and therapeutic monitoring of HIV/neuroAIDS in a panel along with other CSF and blood biomarkers.

2.1.9 Soluble CD14 (sCD14)

sCD14 is the soluble form of the monocyte lipopolysaccharide (LPS) receptor which is cleaved and released from the membrane following the activation of monocytes (McGuire et al., 2015). Low concentrations of sCD14 are sufficient to confer LPS responsiveness to non-CD14-expressing cells. Soluble CD14 has also been shown to be present in human milk and linked to the regulation of microbial growth in infant gut (Funda et al., 2001).

Both plasma and CSF levels of sCD14 have been shown to be elevated in HIV infection regardless of cART status and correlated with the severity of neurocognitive impairment; HIV patients with lower test scores in attention and learning had higher sCD14 (Lyons et al., 2011). HIV patients with cognitive impairments showed elevated plasma sCD14, which was correlated with neuropsychological test scores and neuroimaging biomarkers of HIV/neuroAIDS. These levels have also been found to be elevated in HIV patients with cerebral atrophy compared to those without atrophy (Ryan et al., 2001). Plasma levels of sCD14 have been shown to independently predict mortality in HIV infection; patients with highest plasma levels of sCD14 have six times higher risk of death. This is due to the association of chronic HIV infection with intestinal permeability which increases the risk for bacterial sepsis (Sandler et al., 2011). Altogether, soluble CD14 is a useful plasma and CSF biomarker in HIV/neuroAIDS, as it reflects the severity of cognitive impairments, effectiveness of therapy, and risk of death.

2.1.10. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)

GFAP is a type III intermediate filament protein that has a characteristic structure composed of a highly conserved central-helical rod domain flanked by nonhelical head and tail domains (Fuchs, 1996; Fuchs and Weber, 1994). It is expressed in all astroglial cells but predominantly in the fibrillary astrocytes and has been widely used as an astrocyte marker (Eng et al., 2000). GFAP expression is developmentally and pathophysiologically regulated. It begins to express as astrocytes mature (Chiu and Goldman, 1985), and its expression is always increased in reactive astrocytes, or astrocytosis, which is one of the main characteristics of the astrocytic reaction commonly observed in CNS injury, either as a result of physical, pathological, or chemical insults (Norenberg, 1998). GFAP is mainly located in cytoskeletal compartments, while little is found in the cytosolic (Bertelli et al., 2000). In normal and pathological conditions GFAP leaks out from the central nervous system to the CSF (Rosengren et al., 1995)

The serum and CSF GFAP levels have been shown to be a sensitive and specific indicator for a number of subacute or chronic CNS diseases including AD (Schmued and Hopkins, 2000), normal pressure hydrocephalus (Lord and Papoian, 2004; Ridet et al., 1997), cerebral vasculitis (Lord and Papoian, 2004; Ridet et al., 1997), multiple sclerosis (Kreutzberg, 1996), Lyme neuroborreliosis (de Olmos et al., 1994) and trypanosomiasis (Norton et al., 1992; O’Callaghan and Sriram, 2005). In HIV infection, one study shows only slight to moderate increase of the CSF GFAP level in some HIV-infected patients without detectable CNS complications (Andersson et al., 2006), while the other two studies show no differences in the CSF GFAP levels and the frequency of increased GFAP levels between the three groups of HIV-infected patients with different degrees of neuroAIDS (Andersson et al., 1998; Sporer et al., 2000). The difference may be likely due to the small size of the samples in these later two studies. Thus, to further evaluate the exact sensitivity and specificity of the CSF GFAP as a HIV/neuroAIDS biomarker is clearly warranted.

2.2 Immune activation biomarkers

Infiltration of HIV-infected macrophages, monocytes and T cells into the CNS establishes a cascade of inflammation that leads to the activation of microglia, astrocytes, and perivascular macrophages. The combination of cytokines and chemokines produced by these infiltrated cells induces more inflammation and invites more immune cells from the periphery, contributing to neuronal injury. TNF-α, IL-1-β, and IFN-γ produced by infected monocytes and T cells activate microglia and astrocytes. These cells in turn produce IL-6, MCP-1, and macrophage inflammatory protein 1 (MIP-1), which bring in more immune cells into the CNS and contribute to neuroinflammation and injury (Hong and Banks, 2015). We have summarized the most commonly used immune activation biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS in the order of their significance along with their detection methods, strengths, and limitation (Table 2).

Several soluble factors in both plasma and CSF of HIV patients have been studied as biomarkers for immune activation before and after the advent of cART. Early studies show that CSF and serum IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α are more frequently detected in HIV patients presenting with HAD (Perrella et al., 1992). Elevation of plasma and CSF HIV RNA, TNF-α, MCP-1, matrix metalloprotease-2 and macrophage colony stimulating factor have also been shown to be predictive of HAD (Sevigny et al., 2004). Higher levels of chemokines such as MCP-1 and interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (CXCL-10) are also reported in the CSF of HIV patients with dementia (Mehla et al., 2012). Astrocytes are the major producers of MCP-1 following exposure to or expression of HIV-1 Tat protein (Conant et al., 1998). CSF MCP-1 has been reported to be particularly higher in CSF of HIV patients with dementia, suggesting that monocyte infiltration of CNS is closely correlated with severe cognitive impairment. Other studies have confirmed the significant correlation of CSF MCP-1 with cognitive impairment and found that other immune activation biomarkers of CSF such as IL-6, interleukin-8 (IL-8), MIP-1α, CXCL10, and IFN-γ are elevated in HIV independent of cognitive status (Kamat et al., 2012). A recent study has shown that HIV-positive individuals with a specific genotype of MCP-1 have significantly higher CSF levels of this chemokine and suffer more severe cognitive decline (Thames et al., 2015). CSF MCP-1 has been shown to be correlated with neopterin (Price et al., 2007), and both are elevated in HAD, dropping with cART regimen with more CNS penetration (Tiraboschi et al., 2015). Elevated MCP-1 in CNS induces leukocytosis (Eugenin et al., 2006) and is associated with increased CSF viral loads following the interruption of cART (de Almeida et al., 2006). Transmigration of CD8 T cells into the CNS resulting in elevated CSF IFN-γ has specifically been correlated with increased risk of HIV-associated cognitive impairments (Schrier et al., 2015). These findings have encouraged combinational analysis of cytokines and chemokines for the purpose of monitoring severity and progression of neurological impairments in HIV infection. In general, most of the immune activation markers with the exception of monocyte/macrophage markers have shown normalization within one year after the initiation of cART (Wada et al., 2015). This observation maintains combinational monitoring of soluble immune activation biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS.

2.3 Lipid biomarkers

Disruption in the lipid metabolism in the CNS is a common feature of CNS disorders with acute or chronic inflammation. As the second fattiest tissue in the body, the CNS, the high concentration of lipid components in the CNS, is susceptible to the insults of cytokines, chemokines, and reactive oxygen species. Other than HIV, the presence of activated microglia in the CNS capable of producing copious amounts of inflammatory factors has been observed in neurodegenerative disorders such as AD, Parkinson, Huntington, and MS (Takeuchi et al., 2005). There is elevation of lipid metabolites in the brain and CSF for several above-mentioned disorders; for example, ceramide, a product of sphingomyelinase activation, is elevated in astroglia of frontal cortex and CSF of AD and ALS patients (Satoi et al., 2005), contributing to neuronal apoptosis. Accumulation of ganglioside GD3 has been shown in the CSF of MS (Miyatani et al., 1990) and prion disease (Ohtani et al., 1996). Free fatty acids and their carrier, carnitine, have been documented to increase in meningitis, seizures, neuropathies (Shinawi et al., 1998), traumatic brain injury, and stroke (Pilitsis et al., 2003).

Cytokines and chemokines produced by glial cells are capable of inducing enzymes involved in lipid metabolism such as phospholipase A2 (PLA2), phospholipase C (PLC), and cyclooxygenase (Farooqui et al., 2007). This induction of enzymes occurs through transcription factors that control cytokine and chemokine gene expression. For example, nuclear factor kappa light-chain enhancer of activated B cells directly stimulates PLA2, resulting in phospholipid membrane disintegration and release of arachidonic acid along with the generation of reactive oxygen species (Shmelzer et al., 2003). Phospholipid oxidation of neural membranes also occurs in the process of ongoing inflammation in the CNS, leading to the accumulation of oxidized lipid products, which can influence the inflammatory process, themselves. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) are a family of nuclear hormone receptors that exist in different isoforms in neural tissue (α, γ, δ). PPAR have anti-inflammatory properties once activated by their ligands most of which are composed of long-chain poly-unsaturated fatty acids, eicosanoid derivatives, and phospholipids. Deficiency in PPARs or modifications in their ligands, including oxidation of phospholipids, have been associated with delay in anti-inflammatory responses (Drew et al., 2006).

Aside from their indirect effects on lipid metabolism, cytokine and chemokines produced in the CNS directly bind to receptors that are coupled with PLA2 and PLC and induce their enzymatic activity against lipids. TNF-α and IL-1β, for instance, have been shown to stimulate PLC and sphingomyelinase, leading to increased ceramide generation (Machleidt et al., 1996). Ceramide is also produced as a result of oxidative assault on lipid membranes in the CNS; its accumulation has been reported in CSF of HIV/neuroAIDS patients. Inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase through minocycline treatment resulted in normalization of this metabolite in CSF (Sacktor et al., 2014). We have summarized the lipid HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers in the order of their significance along with their detection methods, strengths, and limitation (Table 3).

Initial investigations of lipid accumulation in CSF of HIV patients began with cell-specific lipid species. Ganglioside GD3, for example, is considered a microglial/macrophage- and astrocyte-enriched lipid component and has been found to be elevated in CSF of HIV patients. This elevation has been associated with the activation of microglia and astrocytes in HIV infection, resulting in a higher cell turnover (Andersson et al., 1998). Then a global, mass spectrometric analysis of CNS lipid components was introduced and has revealed the accumulation of sphingolipids and ceramide in frontal, parietal, and temporal cortices of brain with HIV infection (Haughey et al., 2004). It has also shown that the degree of sphingolipid and ceramide accumulation is correlates with severity of cognitive impairments of HIV (Haughey et al., 2004). Using the same approach, additional elevated components such as triglyceride C52 and vitamin E have also been detected in the CSF and correlated with the stage of cognitive impairment progression (Bandaru et al., 2007). Sphingolipid accumulation is correlated with moderate cognitive dysfunction in earlier stages of HAD when anti-oxidant defense barriers of the brain fails to protect CNS cells against acute oxidative and inflammatory storm. Ceramide is produced from sphingolipid in later stages and are associated with declining and more severe cognitive impairments. A mass-based metabolomics study shows elevation in phospholipids, and free fatty acids associated with the activation of phospholipases in SIV encephalitis (Wikoff et al., 2008). Recent efforts in characterizing the relationship between lipidoses of the CNS and HIV infection indicate similarities of HIV/neuroAIDS to lysosomal storage disorders, suggesting disruptive effects of HIV proteins on the endolysosomal system (Bandaru et al., 2013). Worsening of cognitive impairment is associated with a shift in lipid accumulation in the CNS from single lipid species to multiple species. These findings together support the utility of lipids as prognostic and staging biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS.

2.4 microRNA (miRNA) biomarkers

Circulating, small, non-coding RNA have become attractive surrogates for evaluating disease progression, pathogenesis, therapeutic effect, and prognosis. Potential use of miRNA as biomarkers is supported by the accumulating evidence from numerous studies, which show that conditions of disease change the physiological expression patterns of these transcription-regulating molecules. Moreover, the resistance to degradation, the tissue specificity, the fast response to cellular environment, and the predictable effects on biological pathways also make miRNA ideal candidates for monitoring processes and aberrations in biological systems (Rao et al., 2013). Extracellular miRNA can be detected in all biofluids in association with lipoproteins, proteins of the argonaute family, or exosomes, which adds to their value as resistant molecules capable of tolerating common problems of sample handling without degradation.

Studies on tractable miRNA signatures in the context of CNS disorders are particularly attractive because these brain-specific small RNA can be identified in the CSF or plasma and provide a rare snapshot of the status of the inaccessible brain tissues. Although several studies have successfully demonstrated differential expression patterns of brain-specific miRNA in plasma, CSF remains the biofluid of choice. The main reasons are the less heterogeneity of sources of miRNA in CSF compared to blood, the small volume of CSF imposing less diluting effects on miRNA concentrations, and the proximity to the source tissue. All of those unique properties allow use of miRNA to precisely predict the pathological process. miRNA profiling has been performed in the context of various CNS disorders including AD, Parkinson, Schizophrenia, ALS, and MS and have led to identification of specific miRNA expression patterns associated with each of the diseases (Jin et al., 2013).

Investigating the global expression pattern of miRNA in response to HIV infection has also revealed disease-specific miRNA signatures that could potentially be used as biomarkers of staging, progression, and therapeutic monitoring. The initial study compared miRNA expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) between HIV patients and healthy controls (Houzet et al., 2008). Expression of 63 miRNA is altered in PBMC of HIV infected patients. Several mostly down-regulated miRNA are T- cell specific and have the anti-HIV property. In a follow-up study, HIV patients are divided into four groups: asymptomatic, cART naïve, cART treated, and cART resistant, significant correlation is found in miRNA expression between plasma and PBMC. In addition, two differentially expressed miRNA in both plasma and PBMC could potentially predict progression of disease and response to therapy (Munshi et al., 2014; Witwer et al., 2012). miRNA profile in PBMC of viremic subjects and elite controllers show the same pattern of down-regulation of anti-HIV miRNA in both groups, but also differentially expressed miRNA specific to patients with HIV viremia (Witwer et al., 2012). Down-regulation of the let-7 miRNA family has been noted in HIV-infected T cells and correlated with increase in IL-10 expression and inhibition of T cell responses against HIV infection (Swaminathan et al., 2012). Besides those studies, the other study also shows a general trend in down-regulation of anti-viral defenses in T cells and PBMC following infection with HIV (Duskova et al., 2013). Overall down-regulation in miRNA expression in HIV infection has also been associated with RNA silencing suppressor (RSS) activity of HIV Tat (Bennasser and Jeang, 2006; Hayes et al., 2011) and Vpr (Coley et al., 2010).

To date, only four comprehensive miRNA profiling studies have been conducted to identify suitable biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS. Two of these studies have been performed on archived and post-mortem brain tissue, one on plasma, and one on CSF. Parallel analysis of mRNA and miRNA expression profiles in the frontal cortex of HIV patients with or without HAD have shown 68 differentially expressed miRNA in HAD, 49 of which are down-regulated and 19 are up-regulated (Zhou et al., 2012). Furthermore, gene ontology and clustering analysis reveal involvement of significantly altered miRNA in axon guidance and down-stream signaling. Five miRNA are identified as potential biomarkers of neurodegeneration based on the fact that they are all enriched in neurons and have previously been shown to be involved in processes related to pathology in AD, Huntington, MS, and Schizophrenia. miRNA expression profiling in the brains of four HIV patients with encephalitis shows that the majority of up-regulated miRNA are involved in the transcriptional control of gene products important in immune response and inflammation, nucleotide metabolism, and cell cycle control (Noorbakhsh et al., 2010). These findings are consistent with infiltration and proliferation of immune cells in the CNS. Down-regulated miRNA are shown to be involved in cell death and resting state of glial cells (Noorbakhsh et al., 2010). Paired miRNA profiling of the plasma in HIV patients with or without cognitive impairment shows that 30 pairs of miRNA are differentially expressed but only 10 of them can be used to distinguish cognitively impaired HIV patients from unimpaired (Kadri et al., 2015). Interestingly, three of these identified miRNA targeted brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Kadri et al., 2015).

The first and only CSF miRNA profiling study compared frontal cortex tissue and CSF of HIV patients with or without neurocognitive impairment to healthy controls (Pacifici et al., 2013). The study found 66 differentially expressed miRNA in CSF samples and 35 of those miRNA were also detected in frontal cortex. There were 4 miRNA with identical expression patterns between both sample sources and one miRNA with more than 20 fold higher expression in CSF compared to brain tissue. Computer-assisted target prediction of significantly altered miRNA indicated involvement in cytoskeletal remodeling, cell adhesion, chemokine expression, neurogenesis, axonal guidance, notch signaling, synaptogenesis, and nerve impulses.

Comparing the reported miRNA signatures of these four studies, we have found 6 brain-enriched miRNA with shared differential expression patterns. Interestingly, each of the identified miRNA have been reported as significant in various processes in the brain; miR-495 and miR-744 in BDNF regulation (Mellios et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2010), miR-19 in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders (Lee et al., 2008), miR-16 in neurotransmitter transport regulation (Baudry et al., 2010), miR-92 in neuronal differentiation (Bian et al., 2013), and miR-139 in regulation of neuronal apoptosis (Qu et al., 2014). We have summarized the miRNA studies on brain tissue and CSF of HIV patients along with shared signatures of expression with potential use as HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers (Table 4).

More studies of miRNA profiling in both brain tissue and CSF of HIV patients need to be performed in order to define HIV/neuroAIDS-specific miRNA signatures. Overall, relevant disease-specific changes in miRNA have been noted in the above-mentioned studies, those miRNA could potentially enlighten the path to accurate biomarker discovery. This is particularly important with the changing dynamics of HIV/neuroAIDS and potential effects of the aging co-morbidity. Considering the close relationship of circulating miRNA with exosomes and the fact that these extracellular vesicles serve as significant intercellular communication vehicles between cells in the CNS, profiling of the exosome-associated miRNA in the CSF in the context of HIV infection is necessary for identification of potentially more specific miRNA for HIV/neuroAIDS.

3. Blood biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

Compared to CSF, blood has the advantage of being easily sampled and is a desirable source for identification of biomarkers for diagnosis and management. However, this source has proved less useful than CSF in most of the CNS diseases including HIV/neuroAIDS. A number of studies have examined blood concentrations of the same type of biomarkers as discussed for CSF, without suggesting any clinical utility. One exception is that circulating proviral HIV DNA within peripheral blood CD16+ monocytes has recently been suggested as a prognostic marker for HIV/neuroAIDS (Shiramizu et al., 2005). In the pre-cART era, monocytes from individuals with HAD exhibit increased expression of CD69, CD16, and TNF-α (Pulliam et al., 1997). Subsequently, in cART-treated patients, circulating CD69 and CD16 monocytes are decreased compared to earlier observations, suggesting either inactive disease or that treatment might down-regulate monocyte activation even in patients with HAD/HIV encephalitis (HIVE) (Kusdra et al., 2002). Proteomics has been used to analyze CSF and monocyte/macrophage products derived from HIV-infected individuals with varying cognitive impairments (Luo et al., 2003). This methodology holds the great promise in discovering truly novel molecules associated with HIV/neuroAIDS.

4. Neuroimaging biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

The rationale for applying neuroimaging modalities to HAD/HIVE parallels those for CSF biomarkers. In fact, neuroimaging has contributed significantly to defining the neurologic manifestations of HIV-1 infection since the onset of the AIDS pandemic; neuroimaging remains invaluable in distinguishing lesions due to opportunistic CNS disease. Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were utilized early in the HIV epidemic to detect encephalitis and damage to white matter (WM) (Thompson and Jahanshad, 2015). These earlier studies found that WM and caudate loss was accompanied with a larger CNS space in HIV patients (Stout et al., 1998). We have summarized the most commonly utilized neuroimaging methodologies in HIV/neuroAIDS (Table 5).

In the context of HIV/neuroAIDS, neuroimaging methods have the obvious advantage of anatomic definition that can be combined with various functional assessments. Ideally, a neuroimaging marker should be (1) specific for the diagnosis of CNS injury that underlies HIV associated neurocognitive impairment; (2) sensitive in detecting these processes during the presymptomatic stages; and (3) able to define disease stage and track the effects of treatment. Morphometric MRI studies focus on quantitative volumetric changes of the brain or its subanatomic regions and have shown that the reduced size of various brain regions including basal ganglia, caudate nucleus, corpus callosum, cortex, hippocampus, and lateral ventricles in HIV/neuroAIDS patients is correlated with impaired neuropsychological test performance of these individuals (Cysique et al., 2004; Hall et al., 1996; Jakobsen et al., 1989; Paul et al., 2002; Thompson et al., 2006; Thompson et al., 2005). Smaller thalamic volume and larger frontal sulcal volume has been reported in MRI studies of HIV compared to controls (Pfefferbaum et al., 2012). Cortical atrophy has also been reported from MRI studies of HIV-affected brain and is interpreted as a sign of neuronal and myelin loss (Archibald et al., 2004).

HIV infection of the CNS is associated with accelerated and/or accentuated aging. Particularly in the post-cART era, an increasing number of HIV patients are presenting with more severe symptoms and co-morbidities of aging compared to their seronegative counterparts. Signs of accelerated aging are identifiable even through the MRI screening in the pre-cART era (Holt et al., 2012). Later, voxel-based morphometry has been used to characterize age-related changes in the HIV-affected brain. Based on this method, change in the gray matter (GM) due to ageing becomes identifiable from HIV-related atrophy in the GM (Towgood et al., 2012). HIV is still causing volume loss in WM and GM in the post-cART era and these reductions in volume are independent of ageing (Becker et al., 2011). Contribution of HIV and aging to volume reduction in several brain regions are shown to be independent and distinct. Aging has been shown to be associated with atrophy in amygdala, while in HIV, a reduction in corpus callosum is observed (Ances et al., 2012b). Also, HIV-associated atrophy in frontal, temporal, parietal, and cerebellar regions, as well as basal ganglia are found to be greater than age-related atrophy (Chang et al., 2011). These studies confirm the advantage of imaging studies in differentiating respective assaults of HIV and aging on the HIV population that is experiencing dramatically improved life expectancy.

Both diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and magnetization transfer imaging (MTR) are quantitative MRI modalities that provide information on brain microstructures. DTI is to measure diffusion parameters of water in the brain, while MTR is based on the study of interactions between protons in free and restricted (macromolecular) environments. DTI is a useful method in studying WM changes since neuroinflammation is associated with increase in fluid volume in the brain. Two main values are measured by DTI techniques: fractional anisotropy (FA), which reflects integrity and organization of WM fibers, and mean diffusion (MD), which indicates the average of diffusion along the axons (axial diffusion) and diffusion perpendicular to axon fibers (radial diffusion). This technique has enabled the detection of WM abnormalities in seemingly normal MRI screenings of the HIV brain (Pomara et al., 2001b). Studies have shown using both strategies that structural changes in white matter, subcortex, and corpus callosum correlate with cognitive status measures, including the severity of dementia and the degree of impairment in specific cognitive domains (Cloak et al., 2004; Filippi et al., 2001; Pomara et al., 2001a; Ragin et al., 2004a). Also, higher diffusion and lower FA in several brain regions have been documented in HIV. In a one-year follow up study of neuroasymptomatic HIV patients, MD values are recorded as highly significant with lower FA in parietal WM at baseline. Follow-up evaluation however shows increased MD in frontal and parietal WM, putamen and genu regions (Chang et al., 2008). DTI has enabled the differentiation of age-related changes in WM, as well as changes associated with co-infections, from HIV-related abnormalities in brain regions. Reductions in FA of frontal regions has been shown to be an age-specific change in HIV, while a lower WM FA with higher diffusion in parietal and occipital regions indicates co-infection with the hepatitis C virus (Gongvatana et al., 2011). These findings confirm the utility of DTI in differentiating the assaults of aging and other co-morbidities from HIV specific effects in an aging HIV affected population.

Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is a widely available MRI modality that measures regional changes of the metabolites in the brain. These neurometabolites include N-acetylaspartate (NAA) which is a marker for neuronal and axonal damage, choline (CHO) and myoinositol (MI) which are indicators of membrane turnover and glial activation, and creatine (Cr) which is a marker of high energy metabolism associated with glial activation. MRS studies have shown that a reduced level of N-acetylaspartate and an increased level of myoinositol in frontal white matter are markers for neuronal or axonal loss or damage in basal ganglia and glial activation, respectively and have been correlated with the severity of cognitive impairment and the permeability of the blood-brain barrier (Dousset et al., 1997; Ge et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2003; Ragin et al., 2004b; Ragin et al., 2005; Tarasow et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2006). Reduced NAA along with increased CHO has been noted in the frontal WM and lenticular nuclei of cognitively unimpaired HIV patients (Chong et al., 1993; McCONNELL et al., 1994). A recent proton MRS study on SIV model of rhesus macaques has shown that in acute infection, MRS glial markers MI, Cr, and CHO increase by 28%, 15%, and 10% respectively while NAA remains unchanged. These results indicate that activation of glia occurs prior to neuronal injury (Wu et al., 2015). Another study on the basis for creatine alterations in a rapid SIV progression model in macaques shows that reduction of NAA and elevation in creatine in this model have been correlated with reduced synaptophysin and MAP-2 levels, indicating neuronal injury, while GFAP and Iba-I are significantly upregulated. These findings establish a relationship between astrocytosis and enhanced high-energy phosphate turnover as indicated by creatine levels (Ratai et al., 2011).

MRS studies have proven to be useful in monitoring cART treatment. Initiation of cART has been shown to normalize NAA/Cr and Cho/Cr ratios (Chang et al., 2004b; Stankoff et al., 2001; Tarasów et al., 1999), while lactate/Cr has been reported to be significantly higher in HIV patients receiving cART who have moderate to severe cognitive impairment (Roc et al., 2007). Increase in lactate is an indicator of anaerobic glycolysis in macrophages and glia due to the ongoing inflammation despite HAART implementation. Decrease in NAA has been associated with more severe dementia in HIV (Holt et al., 2012). MRS studies of cART-naïve HIV patients have shown that elevation of MI in frontal WM is linked to poor performance on executive function test while increase in CHO in the same region of the brain is correlated with slower performance in working memory tasks (Chang et al., 2002).

Several groups have shown significant correlations between magnetic resonance data and other CSF biomarkers of HIV/neuroAIDS. A cross-sectional study of HIV patients investigating cognitive status, CSF biomarkers of HIV/neuroAIDS, and MRI structural evaluation has found that the severity of brain atrophy, signal changes in basal ganglia, and degree of cognitive impairment are positively correlated with the amount of Tau protein in CSF (Steinbrink et al., 2013). This study demonstrates that HIV/neuroAIDS can be differentiated from AD using this combinational approach to biomarker detection since p-Tau is unchanged by HIV infection. The recent study has looked at global biomarkers of chronic inflammation in plasma and CSF of HIV patients along with proton MRS of the brain (Anderson et al., 2015). The study shows an association between increased MCP-1 in plasma and CSF with reductions in NAA/Cr of midfrontal cortex and basal ganglia. The study further shows that sCD14 in plasma and CSF is exclusively correlated with Glucose/Cr ratio. The inverse relationship between MCP-1 levels and NAA/Cr has been described previously as the link between transmigration of monocytes and neuronal injury in HIV/neuroAIDS (Chang et al., 2004a). These results emphasize again the presence of persistent immune activation in chronic HIV and its role in neuronal injury.

MRS can be used to reliably differentiate age-related changes in neurometabolites in HAND from other cognitive impairments. Applying this technique in aging research has shown that in the process of normal aging, metabolites such as creatine, myoinositol, and choline increase in a linear fashion (Chang et al., 1996). Discrimination of healthy aging individuals from subjects with mild cognitive impairment has also been reported by comparing MI/Cr ratios through MRS (Catani et al., 2001). In HIV, changes in MRS metabolites due to accelerated aging of the brain have been documented in both cART-naïve and cART-treated subjects. A study on young, untreated HIV patients shows the usual reduction in NAA along with substantial increases in MI and CHO which are significantly higher than age-associated changes in these markers (Ernst and Chang, 2004). In cART-treated HIV patients, NAA/Cr ratios are lower even in young individuals compared to seronegatives; this ratio decreases with age. These data indicate that abnormalities in MRS metabolites resulting from pre-mature aging can be detected in cART-treated HIV patients. Evaluation of glutamate levels using MRS has shown that the levels of this metabolite are decreased in parietal region of HIV/neuroAIDS patients while patients without cognitive impairment have higher glutamate in basal ganglia (Ernst et al., 2010). In addition, glutamate levels have been found to be lower in young HIV patients, which are comparable to the levels normally seen in seronegatives who are 10 years older. These MRS studies of aging HIV population suggest the great utility of this technique in the aged HIV population.

Functional MRI (fMRI) measures cerebral blood flow by detecting changes in the concentration of paramagnetic deoxyhemoglobin. This technology has allowed documentation of compensatory brain hyperactivation in mildly impaired patients, prior to the appearance of abnormalities on neuropsychological testing (Ernst et al., 2002). The blood oxygen level-dependent contrast imaging (BOLD) method of fMRI can be used as an indirect measure of neuronal function and activity (Arthurs and Boniface, 2002). In HIV infection, fMRI studies have consistently shown reduced activity of normal attention networks along with increased usage of reserve networks of the brain (Chang et al., 2004c). This increased involvement of reserve networks that acts as a compensatory mechanism to maintain normal cognitive performance is also observed in neuroasymptomatic HIV subjects. Greater need for the activation of brain reserve networks has also been shown in studies that employ both MRS and fMRI. Elevated glial metabolites such as MI, CHO, and Cr lead to stronger BOLD signals, associating neuroinflammation with greater need for reserve network activation (Ernst et al., 2003). A longitudinal fMRI study of cognitively unimpaired HIV patients and seronegative controls has shown greater baseline BOLD signals in occipital, cerebellar, and right prefrontal regions of HIV brain during the completion of visual attention tasks. Followup measurements one year after the baseline reading have shown significantly increased BOLD activity in prefrontal and parietal regions of HIV brain and decreased BOLD activity in seronegatives (Ernst et al., 2009). These results are consistent with signs of HIV-associated premature aging, as increased activation of reserve networks have also been observed in normal aging brains following visual attention tasks. Evaluating resting cerebral blood flow (CBF) and its alterations in response to visual stimulation has shown that HIV patients have reduced CBF when compared to seronegatives who are 15 years older. Assessing activation of brain regions during visual tasks, HIV patients show a reduced activity that is equivalent to the brain activity of seronegatives who are 21 years older (Ances et al., 2010). The data from fMRI studies of HIV brain suggest that although this technique can identify changes in the activity of brain networks and cerebral blood flow in the context of HIV infection, it cannot discriminate the similar effects from the aging brain. However, this technique along with MRS is useful in demonstrating increased need for brain reserves in HIV infection. Moreover, despite the technical complexity of fMRI that limits its general utility in clinical settings, advances in areas associated with language lateralization (e.g., prior to temporal lobe surgery for intractable epilepsy) suggest that this technique should soon be more readily available in clinical settings.

5. Conclusion

Clinical symptoms, neuropsychological testing and post-mortem pathology have been the main approaches for diagnosis of HIV/neuroAIDS. A great deal of studies have been attempted to identify more objective laboratory-based quantitative CSF/blood biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS. Neuroimaging for HIV/neuroAIDS still remains an attractive option, despite the nature of being expensive and not readily accessible. It is conceivable that proteomics and metabolomics will expedite the HIV/neuroAIDS biomarker discovery and validation and will surely facilitate development of anti-HIV/neuroAIDS therapeutics and clinical management of HIV/neuroAIDS. Considering the variable specificity of each biomarker, a combinational approach in clinical implementation of multiple HIV/neuroAIDS biomarkers is expected to improve the detection, staging, and therapeutic monitoring of HIV/neuroAIDS.

This work was supported by the grants NIH/NINDS R01NS065785, NIH/NINDS R01094108 and NIH/NIMH R01MH092673 (to JJH) from National Institutes of Health. PJ was supported in part by the Neurobiology of Ageing Training Grant T32 AG020494 (PI: Dr. Meharvan Singh).

List of Abbreviations

Aβ42 β-amyloid of 42 kiloDaltons

AD Alzheimer’s disease

APP amyloid precursor protein

ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

BOLD blood oxygen level-dependent contrast imaging

cART combination anti-retroviral therapy

CBF cerebral blood flow

CHO choline

CNS central nervous system

Cr creatine

CSF cerebrospinal fluid

CT computerized tomography

CXCL-10 interferon gamma-induced protein 10

DTI diffusion tensor imaging

FA fractional anisotropy

fMRI functional magnetic resonance imaging

GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein

GM grey matter

HAD HIV-associated dementia

HAND HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders

HIV human immune deficiency virus

HIVE HIV encephalitis

IF intermediate filament

IFN-γ interferon γ

IL-1β interleukin-1β

IL-6 interleukin-6

IL-8 interleukin-8

IL-10 interleukin-10

LPS lipopolysaccharide

MCMD mild cognitive and motor disorder

MCP-1 monocyte chemo-attractant protein-1

MD mean diffusion

MI myoinositol

MIP-1 macrophage inflammatory protein

miRNA microRNA

MRI magnetic resonance imaging

MS multiple sclerosis

MRS magnetic resonance spectroscopy

MTR magnetization transfer imaging

NAA N-acetylaspartate

NF neurofilament protein

PLA2 phospholipase A2

PLC phospholipase C

PMBC peripheral blood mononuclear cells

PPAR peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors

PrPC protease resistant protein, cellular isoform

p-Tau hyperphosphorylated Tau protein

S100B calcium binding protein B

sAPP soluble amyloid precursor protein

sCD14 soluble CD14

sCD163 soluble CD163

SIV simian immune deficiency virus

sPrPC soluble protease resistant protein, cellular isoform

TNF-α Tumor necrosis factor α

t-Tau total Tau protein

WM white matter

YKL-40 human cartilage glycoprotein 39

Table 1 Cellular biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

Biomarker	Detection Method	Strengths	Limitations	References	
NFL	ELISA	-Levels are reliable reflection of disease progression or therapy
-Differentiates primary, chronic, and neuroasymptomatic HIV
-Correlates positively with plasma viral load and negatively with CD4 count	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders
-Detectable only in mid-late phase of disease	Abdulle et al. 2007
Jessen Krut et al. 2014
McGuire et al. 2015	
Neopterin	HPLC,ELISA	-Levels are reliable reflection of disease progression or therapy
-Correlates positively with NFL levels
-Reliable biomarker of macrophage and microglial activation	-Also elevated in other CNS Disorders
-Detectable only in mid-late phase of disease	Griffin et al. 1991
Abdulle et al. 2007
Fuchs et al. 1988	
SB100	ELISA	-Levels are reliable indicator of early damage to BBB and astrocyte activation
-Correlates with severity of neurocognitive Impairment	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders	Rohlwink et al. 2014
Pemberton et al. 2001	
sCD14	ELISA	-Correlates with severity of neurocognitive impairment
-Correlates with neuroimaging biomarkers
-Levels predict risk of death	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders	Lyons et al. 2011
Ryan et al. 2001
Sandler et al. 2011	
YKL-40	ELISA	-Correlates with productive HIV infection of microglia and with acute neuroinflammation	- Also elevated in other CNS Disorders
-Few human studies conducted	Kolson et al. 2008
Bonneh-Barkay et al. 2012	
sCD163	ELISA	-Correlates with viral load in plasma and with monocyte expansion
-Levels are reliable reflection of disease progression or therapy	-Detectable only in plasma
- Also elevated in other CNS disorders	Burdo et al. 2011
Burdo et al. 2013	
PrPC	ELISA	-Levels correlate with CNS compromise and with monocyte influx into CNS	- Also elevated in other CNS
-Does not correlate with viral load or CD4 count	Roberts et al. 2010
Megra et al. 2013	
Tau	ELISA	-Correlates with severity of neurocognitive impairment	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders
-Results not consistent between groups	Peterson et al. 2014
Gisslen et al. 2009	
GFAP	ELISA	-Correlates with astrocytosis	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders
-Few studies conducted	Norenberg 1998
Andersson et al. 2006	

Table 2 Immune activation biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

Biomarker	Detection Method	Strengths	Limitations	References	
MCP-1	ELISA	-Correlates with Monocyte infiltration and with severity of cognitive impairment
-Correlates with Neopterin levels and CSF viral load
-Can be used for cART monitoring	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders	Thames et al. 2015
Price et al. 2007
Tiraboschi et al. 2015	
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α CXCL10	ELISA	-Can be used to monitor infiltration of HIV infected cells into the CNS
-Correlate with early stage of disease prior to astrocyte activation	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders
-Do not correlate with cognitive status	Hong et al. 2015
Kamat et al. 2012	
IFN-γ	ELISA	-Correlates with CD8 T cell transmigration into CNS
-Associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders	Schrier et al. 2015	

Table 3 Lipid biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

Biomarker	Detection Method	Strengths	Limitations	References	
Ceramide, GD3 2004	Immunoblotting
Immunostaining	-Correlate with more severe cognitive impairment in late stages of HAND
-Associated with activation of microglia and astrocytes
-Accumulation of multiple species indicator of worsening cognitive status	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders
-Only detectable in late stages	Haughey et al.
Andersson et al. 1998
Bandaru et al. 2013	
C52, Vitamin E 2007
Sphingolipid	Mass Spectrometry	-Correlate with stage of cognitive impairment
-Correlates with earlier stage of disease and with moderate cognitive dysfunction	-Also elevated in other CNS disorders	Bandaru et al.	

Table 4 MicroRNA biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

	

Table 5 Neuroimaging biomarkers for HIV/neuroAIDS

	

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Abdulle S Mellgren Å Brew BJ Cinque P Hagberg L Price RW Rosengren L Gisslén M 2007 CSF neurofilament protein (NFL)—a marker of active HIV-related neurodegeneration Journal of neurology 254 1026 1032 17420923
Alais S Soto-Rifo R Balter V Gruffat H Manet E Schaeffer L Darlix JL Cimarelli A Raposo G Ohlmann T 2012 Functional mechanisms of the cellular prion protein (PrPC) associated anti-HIV-1 properties Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 69 1331 1352 22076653
Ances BM Benzinger TL Christensen JJ Thomas J Venkat R Teshome M Aldea P Fagan AM Holtzman DM Morris JC 2012a HIV associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) is not associated with increased fibrillar amyloid deposits using 11C-PiB in middle-aged HIV+ participants Archives of neurology 69 72 22232345
Ances BM Ortega M Vaida F Heaps J Paul R 2012b Independent effects of HIV, aging, and HAART on brain volumetric measures Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes (1999) 59 469 22269799
Ances BM Vaida F Yeh MJ Liang CL Buxton RB Letendre S McCutchan JA Ellis RJ 2010 HIV infection and aging independently affect brain function as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging Journal of Infectious Diseases 201 336 340 20047503
Anderson AM Harezlak J Bharti A Mi D Taylor MJ Daar ES Schifitto G Zhong J Alger JR Brown MS 2015 Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers predict cerebral injury in HIV-infected individuals on stable combination antiretroviral therapy JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 69 29 35 25622053
Andersson LM Fredman P Lekman A Rosengren L Gisslen M 1998 Increased cerebrospinal fluid ganglioside GD3 concentrations as a marker of microglial activation in HIV type 1 infection AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 14 1065 1069 9718122
Andersson LM Hagberg L Rosengren L Fuchs D Blennow K Gisslen M 2006 Normalisation of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers parallels improvement of neurological symptoms following HAART in HIV dementia–case report BMC Infect Dis 6 141 16978408
Anthony IC Ramage SN Carnie FW Simmonds P Bell JE 2006 Accelerated Tau deposition in the brains of individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus-1 before and after the advent of highly active anti-retroviral therapy Acta Neuropathol 111 529 538 16718349
Archibald SL Masliah E Fennema-Notestine C Marcotte TD Ellis RJ McCutchan JA Heaton RK Grant I Mallory M Miller A 2004 Correlation of in vivo neuroimaging abnormalities with postmortem human immunodeficiency virus encephalitis and dendritic loss Archives of Neurology 61 369 376 15023814
Arthurs OJ Boniface S 2002 How well do we understand the neural origins of the fMRI BOLD signal? TRENDS in Neurosciences 25 27 31 11801335
Bandaru VV McArthur JC Sacktor N Cutler RG Knapp EL Mattson MP Haughey NJ 2007 Associative and predictive biomarkers of dementia in HIV-1–infected patients Neurology 68 1481 1487 17470750
Bandaru VVR Mielke MM Sacktor N McArthur JC Grant I Letendre S Chang L Wojna V Pardo C Calabresi P 2013 A lipid storage–like disorder contributes to cognitive decline in HIV-infected subjects Neurology 81 1492 1499 24027056
Baudry A Mouillet-Richard S Schneider B Launay JM Kellermann O 2010 miR-16 targets the serotonin transporter: a new facet for adaptive responses to antidepressants Science 329 1537 1541 20847275
Beck SE Queen SE Witwer KW Pate KAM Mangus LM Gama L Adams RJ Clements JE Zink MC Mankowski JL 2015 Paving the path to HIV neurotherapy: Predicting SIV CNS disease European journal of pharmacology 759 303 312 25818747
Becker JT Sanders J Madsen SK Ragin A Kingsley L Maruca V Cohen B Goodkin K Martin E Miller EN 2011 Subcortical brain atrophy persists even in HAART-regulated HIV disease Brain imaging and behavior 5 77 85 21264551
Bell JE Anthony IC Simmonds P 2006 Impact of HIV on regional &amp; cellular organisation of the brain Curr HIV Res 4 249 257 16842078
Bennasser Y Jeang KT 2006 HIV-1 Tat interaction with Dicer: requirement for RNA Retrovirology 3 95 17181864
Bertelli E Regoli M Gambelli F Lucattelli M Lungarella G Bastianini A 2000 GFAP is expressed as a major soluble pool associated with glucagon secretory granules in A-cells of mouse pancreas J Histochem Cytochem 48 1233 1242 10950880
Bian S Hong J Li Q Schebelle L Pollock A Knauss JL Garg V Sun T 2013 MicroRNA cluster miR-17-92 regulates neural stem cell expansion and transition to intermediate progenitors in the developing mouse neocortex Cell reports 3 1398 1406 23623502
Blennow K Zetterberg H 2015 Understanding Biomarkers of Neurodegeneration: Ultrasensitive detection techniques pave the way for mechanistic understanding Nature medicine 21 217 219
Bonneh-Barkay D Bissel SJ Wang G Fish KN Nicholl GC Darko SW Medina-Flores R Murphey-Corb M Rajakumar PA Nyaundi J 2008 YKL-40, a marker of simian immunodeficiency virus encephalitis, modulates the biological activity of basic fibroblast growth factor The American journal of pathology 173 130 143 18556781
Bonneh-Barkay D Wang G Starkey A Hamilton RL Wiley CA 2010 In vivo CHI3L1 (YKL-40) expression in astrocytes in acute and chronic neurological diseases Journal of neuroinflammation 7 34 20540736
Bonneh-Barkay D Bissel SJ Kofler J Starkey A Wang G Wiley CA 2012 Astrocyte and Macrophage Regulation of YKL-40 Expression and Cellular Response in Neuroinflammation Brain pathology 22 530 546 22074331
Brew BJ 2009 HIV, the brain, children, HAART and ‘neuro-HAART’: a complex mix AIDS 23 1909 1910 19550290
Brew BJ Bhalla RB Paul M Gallardo H McArthur JC Schwartz MK Price RW 1990 Cerebrospinal fluid neopterin in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection Ann Neurol 28 556 560 2252366
Brew BJ Bhalla RB Paul M Sidtis JJ Keilp JJ Sadler AE Gallardo H McArthur JC Schwartz MK Price RW 1992 Cerebrospinal fluid beta 2-microglobulin in patients with AIDS dementia complex: an expanded series including response to zidovudine treatment AIDS 6 461 465 1616651
Brew BJ Pemberton L Blennow K Wallin A Hagberg L 2005 CSF amyloid beta42 and tau levels correlate with AIDS dementia complex Neurology 65 1490 1492 16275845
Bujdoso R Landgraf M Jackson WS Thackray AM 2015 Prion-induced neurotoxicity: Possible role for cell cycle activity and DNA damage response World journal of virology 4 188 197 26279981
Burdo TH Lo J Abbara S Wei J DeLelys ME Preffer F Rosenberg ES Williams KC Grinspoon S 2011 Soluble CD163, a novel marker of activated macrophages, is elevated and associated with noncalcified coronary plaque in HIV-infected patients Journal of Infectious Diseases 204 1227 1236 21917896
Burdo TH Weiffenbach A Woods SP Letendre S Ellis RJ Williams KC 2013 Elevated sCD163 in plasma but not cerebrospinal fluid is a marker of neurocognitive impairment in HIV infection AIDS (London, England) 27
Calcagno A Atzori C Romito A Vai D Audagnotto S Stella M Montrucchio C Imperiale D Di Perri G Bonora S 2015 Blood brain barrier impairment is associated with cerebrospinal fluid markers of neuronal damage in HIV-positive patients Journal of neurovirology 1 5
Cao B Kong X Kettering C Yu P Ragin A 2015 Determinants of HIV-induced brain changes in three different periods of the early clinical course: A data mining analysis NeuroImage Clinical 9 75 82 26413474
Catani M Cherubini A Howard R Tarducci R Pelliccioli G Piccirilli M Gobbi G Senin U Mecocci P 2001 1H-MR spectroscopy differentiates mild cognitive impairment from normal brain aging Neuroreport 12 2315 2317 11496102
Chang L Andres M Sadino J Jiang C Nakama H Miller E Ernst T 2011 Impact of apolipoprotein E ε4 and HIV on cognition and brain atrophy: antagonistic pleiotropy and premature brain aging Neuroimage 58 1017 1027 21803164
Chang L Ernst T Poland RE Jenden DJ 1996 In vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the normal aging human brain Life sciences 58 2049 2056 8637436
Chang L Ernst T St Hillaire C Conant K 2004a Antiretroviral treatment alters relationship between MCP-1 and neurometabolites in HIV patients Antiviral therapy 9 431 440 15259906
Chang L Ernst T Witt MD Ames N Gaiefsky M Miller E 2002 Relationships among brain metabolites, cognitive function, and viral loads in antiretroviral-naıve HIV patients Neuroimage 17 1638 1648 12414302
Chang L Lee P Yiannoutsos C Ernst T Marra C Richards T Kolson D Schifitto G Jarvik J Miller E 2004b A multicenter in vivo proton-MRS study of HIV-associated dementia and its relationship to age Neuroimage 23 1336 1347 15589098
Chang L Tomasi D Yakupov R Lozar C Arnold S Caparelli E Ernst T 2004c Adaptation of the attention network in human immunodeficiency virus brain injury Annals of neurology 56 259 272 15293278
Chang L Wong V Nakama H Watters M Ramones D Miller EN Cloak C Ernst T 2008 Greater than age-related changes in brain diffusion of HIV patients after 1 year Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 3 265 274 18709469
Chiu FC Goldman JE 1985 Regulation of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) expression in CNS development and in pathological states J Neuroimmunol 8 283 292 2989328
Chong W Sweeney B Wilkinson I Paley M Hall-Craggs M Kendall B Shepard J Beecham M Miller R Weller I 1993 Proton spectroscopy of the brain in HIV infection: correlation with clinical, immunologic, and MR imaging findings Radiology 188 119 124 8099750
Cinque P Bestetti A Marenzi R Sala S Gisslen M Hagberg L Price RW 2005 Cerebrospinal fluid interferon-gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10, CXCL10) in HIV-1 infection J Neuroimmunol 168 154 163 16091292
Clifford D Fagan A Holtzman D Morris J Teshome M Shah A Kauwe J 2009 CSF biomarkers of Alzheimer disease in HIV-associated neurologic disease Neurology 73 1982 1987 19907013
Cloak CC Chang L Ernst T 2004 Increased frontal white matter diffusion is associated with glial metabolites and psychomotor slowing in HIV J Neuroimmunol 157 147 152 15579292
Cohen RA Gongvatana A 2009 HIV-associated brain dysfunction in the era of HAART: reasons for hope, but continued concern Neurology 73 338 339 19553591
Cohen RA Seider TR Navia B 2015 HIV effects on age-associated neurocognitive dysfunction: premature cognitive aging or neurodegenerative disease? Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy 7 37
Coleman BM Hill AF 2015 Extracellular vesicles–Their role in the packaging and spread of misfolded proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases Seminars in cell &amp; developmental biology 40 89 96 25704308
Coley W Van Duyne R Carpio L Guendel I Kehn-Hall K Chevalier S Narayanan A Luu T Lee N Klase Z 2010 Absence of DICER in monocytes and its regulation by HIV-1 Journal of Biological Chemistry 285 31930 31943 20584909
Conant K Garzino-Demo A Nath A McArthur JC Halliday W Power C Gallo RC Major EO 1998 Induction of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in HIV-1 Tat-stimulated astrocytes and elevation in AIDS dementia Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95 3117 3121
Constantino AA Huang Y Zhang H Wood C Zheng JC 2011 HIV-1 clade B and C isolates exhibit differential replication: relevance to macrophage-mediated neurotoxicity Neurotoxicity research 20 277 288 21336667
Craig-Schapiro R Perrin RJ Roe CM Xiong C Carter D Cairns NJ Mintun MA Peskind ER Li G Galasko DR Clark CM Quinn JF D’Angelo G Malone JP Townsend RR Morris JC Fagan AM Holtzman DM 2010 YKL-40: a novel prognostic fluid biomarker for preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Biological psychiatry 68 903 912 21035623
Cysique LA Maruff P Brew BJ 2004 Prevalence and pattern of neuropsychological impairment in human immunodeficiency virus-infected/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) patients across pre- and post-highly active antiretroviral therapy eras: a combined study of two cohorts J Neurovirol 10 350 357 15765806
Dahl V Peterson J Fuchs D Gisslen M Palmer S Price RW 2014 Low levels of HIV-1 RNA detected in the cerebrospinal fluid after up to 10 years of suppressive therapy are associated with local immune activation Aids 28 2251 2258 25022595
de Almeida SM Letendre S Zimmerman J Kolakowski S Lazzaretto D McCutchan JA Ellis R 2006 Relationship of CSF leukocytosis to compartmentalized changes in MCP-1/CCL2 in the CSF of HIV-infected patients undergoing interruption of antiretroviral therapy Journal of neuroimmunology 179 180 185 16901548
de Almeida SM Ribeiro CE de Pereira AP Badiee J Cherner M Smith D Maich I Raboni SM Rotta I Barbosa FJ Heaton RK Umlauf A Ellis RJ 2013 Neurocognitive impairment in HIV-1 clade C- versus B-infected individuals in Southern Brazil Journal of neurovirology 19 550 556 24277437
de Olmos JS Beltramino CA de Olmos de Lorenzo S 1994 Use of an amino-cupric-silver technique for the detection of early and semiacute neuronal degeneration caused by neurotoxicants, hypoxia, and physical trauma Neurotoxicol Teratol 16 545 561 7532272
Del Valle L Pina-Oviedo S 2006 HIV disorders of the brain: pathology and pathogenesis Front Biosci 11 718 732 16146764
Dousset V Armand JP Huot P Viaud B Caille JM 1997 Magnetization transfer imaging in AIDS-related brain diseases Neuroimaging Clin N Am 7 447 460 9376963
Drew PD Xu J Storer PD Chavis JA Racke MK 2006 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonist regulation of glial activation: relevance to CNS inflammatory disorders Neurochemistry international 49 183 189 16753239
Duskova K Nagilla P Le HS Iyer P Thalamuthu A Martinson J Bar-Joseph Z Buchanan W Rinaldo C Ayyavoo V 2013 MicroRNA regulation and its effects on cellular transcriptome in human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infected individuals with distinct viral load and CD4 cell counts BMC infectious diseases 13 250 23721325
Egger M May M Chene G Phillips AN Ledergerber B Dabis F Costagliola D D’Arminio Monforte A de Wolf F Reiss P Lundgren JD Justice AC Staszewski S Leport C Hogg RS Sabin CA Gill MJ Salzberger B Sterne JA 2002 Prognosis of HIV-1-infected patients starting highly active antiretroviral therapy: a collaborative analysis of prospective studies Lancet 360 119 129 12126821
Ellis R Langford D Masliah E 2007 HIV and antiretroviral therapy in the brain: neuronal injury and repair Nat Rev Neurosci 8 33 44 17180161
Eng LF Ghirnikar RS Lee YL 2000 Glial fibrillary acidic protein: GFAP-thirty-one years (1969-2000) Neurochem Res 25 1439 1451 11059815
Ernst T Chang L 2004 Effect of aging on brain metabolism in antiretroviral-naive HIV patients Aids 18 61 67
Ernst T Chang L Arnold S 2003 Increased glial metabolites predict increased working memory network activation in HIV brain injury Neuroimage 19 1686 1693 12948723
Ernst T Chang L Jovicich J Ames N Arnold S 2002 Abnormal brain activation on functional MRI in cognitively asymptomatic HIV patients Neurology 59 1343 1349 12427881
Ernst T Jiang CS Nakama H Buchthal S Chang L 2010 Lower brain glutamate is associated with cognitive deficits in HIV patients: A new mechanism for HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging 32 1045 1053 21031507
Ernst T Yakupov R Nakama H Crocket G Cole M Watters M Ricardo-Dukelow ML Chang L 2009 Declined neural efficiency in cognitively stable human immunodeficiency virus patients Annals of neurology 65 316 325 19334060
Etherton MR Lyons JL Ard KL 2015 HIV-associated Neurocognitive Disorders and Antiretroviral Therapy: Current Concepts and Controversies Current infectious disease reports 17 485 25916996
Eugenin EA Osiecki K Lopez L Goldstein H Calderon TM Berman JW 2006 CCL2/monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 mediates enhanced transmigration of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected leukocytes across the blood–brain barrier: a potential mechanism of HIV–CNS invasion and NeuroAIDS The Journal of neuroscience 26 1098 1106 16436595
Farooqui AA Horrocks LA Farooqui T 2007 Modulation of inflammation in brain: a matter of fat Journal of neurochemistry 101 577 599 17257165
Filippi CG Ulug AM Ryan E Ferrando SJ van Gorp W 2001 Diffusion tensor imaging of patients with HIV and normal-appearing white matter on MR images of the brain AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22 277 283 11156769
Fischer-Smith T Tedaldi EM Rappaport J 2008 CD163/CD16 coexpression by circulating monocytes/macrophages in HIV: potential biomarkers for HIV infection and AIDS progression AIDS research and human retroviruses 24 417 421 18373432
Fox HS 2013 Biomarkers for NeuroAIDS: recent progress in the field Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 8 1055 1058 24292958
Fuchs D Chiodi F Albert J Asjö B Hagberg L Hausen A Norkrans G Reibnegger G Werner ER Wachter H 1989 Neopterin concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid and serum of individuals infected with HIV-1 Aids 3 285 288 2504232
Fuchs D Hausen A Reibnegger G Werner ER Dierich MP Wachter H 1988 Neopterin as a marker for activated cell-mediated immunity: application in HIV infection Immunology today 9 150 155 3076770
Fuchs E 1996 The cytoskeleton and disease: genetic disorders of intermediate filaments Annu Rev Genet 30 197 231 8982454
Fuchs E Weber K 1994 Intermediate filaments: structure, dynamics, function, and disease Annu Rev Biochem 63 345 382 7979242
Funda DP Tuckova L Farre MA Iwase T Moro I Tlaskalova-Hogenova H 2001 CD14 is expressed and released as soluble CD14 by human intestinal epithelial cells in vitro: lipopolysaccharide activation of epithelial cells revisited Infection and immunity 69 3772 3781 11349042
Gandhi N Saiyed Z Thangavel S Rodriguez J Rao KV Nair MP 2009 Differential effects of HIV type 1 clade B and clade C Tat protein on expression of proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines by primary monocytes AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 25 691 699 19621989
Ge Y Kolson DL Babb JS Mannon LJ Grossman RI 2003 Whole brain imaging of HIV-infected patients: quantitative analysis of magnetization transfer ratio histogram and fractional brain volume AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 24 82 87 12533331
Gelman BB 2015 Neuropathology of HAND With Suppressive Antiretroviral Therapy: Encephalitis and Neurodegeneration Reconsidered Current HIV/AIDS reports 12 272 279 25860316
Gisslén M Krut J Andreasson U Blennow K Cinque P Brew BJ Spudich S Hagberg L Rosengren L Price RW 2009 Amyloid and tau cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in HIV infection BMC neurology 9 63 20028512
Gongvatana A Cohen RA Correia S Devlin KN Miles J Kang H Ombao H Navia B Laidlaw DH Tashima KT 2011 Clinical contributors to cerebral white matter integrity in HIV-infected individuals Journal of neurovirology 17 477 486 21965122
Gorry P Purcell D Howard J McPhee D 1998 Restricted HIV-1 infection of human astrocytes: potential role of nef in the regulation of virus replication J Neurovirol 4 377 386 9718129
Green AJ Giovannoni G Hall-Craggs MA Thompson EJ Miller RF 2000 Cerebrospinal fluid tau concentrations in HIV infected patients with suspected neurological disease Sexually transmitted infections 76 443 446 11221126
Gresle MM Butzkueven H Shaw G 2011 Neurofilament proteins as body fluid biomarkers of neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis Multiple sclerosis international 2011
Griffin DE McArthur JC Cornblath DR 1991 Neopterin and interferon-gamma in serum and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with HIV-associated neurologic disease Neurology 41 69 69
Hall HI Song R Rhodes P Prejean J An Q Lee LM Karon J Brookmeyer R Kaplan EH McKenna MT Janssen RS 2008 Estimation of HIV incidence in the United States JAMA 300 520 529 18677024
Hall M Whaley R Robertson K Hamby S Wilkins J Hall C 1996 The correlation between neuropsychological and neuroanatomic changes over time in asymptomatic and symptomatic HIV-1-infected individuals Neurology 46 1697 1702 8649573
Harrington PR Haas DW Ritola K Swanstrom R 2005 Compartmentalized human immunodeficiency virus type 1 present in cerebrospinal fluid is produced by short-lived cells J Virol 79 7959 7966 15956542
Haughey NJ Cutler RG Tamara A McArthur JC Vargas DL Pardo CA Turchan J Nath A Mattson MP 2004 Perturbation of sphingolipid metabolism and ceramide production in HIV-dementia Annals of neurology 55 257 267 14755730
Hayes AM Qian S Yu L Boris-Lawrie K 2011 Tat RNA silencing suppressor activity contributes to perturbation of lymphocyte miRNA by HIV-1 Retrovirology 8 36 21569500
Heyes MP Brew BJ Martin A Price RW Salazar AM Sidtis JJ Yergey JA Mouradian MM Sadler AE Keilp J 1991 Quinolinic acid in cerebrospinal fluid and serum in HIV-1 infection: relationship to clinical and neurological status Ann Neurol 29 202 209 1826418
Holt JL Kraft-Terry SD Chang L 2012 Neuroimaging studies of the aging HIV-1-infected brain Journal of neurovirology 18 291 302 22653528
Hong S Banks WA 2015 Role of the immune system in HIV-associated neuroinflammation and neurocognitive implications Brain, behavior, and immunity 45 1 12
Houzet L Yeung ML de Lame V Desai D Smith SM Jeang KT 2008 MicroRNA profile changes in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) seropositive individuals Retrovirology 5 118 19114009
Jakobsen J Gyldensted C Brun B Bruhn P Helweg-Larsen S Arlien-Soborg P 1989 Cerebral ventricular enlargement relates to neuropsychological measures in unselected AIDS patients Acta Neurol Scand 79 59 62 2784608
Jessen Krut J Mellberg T Price RW Hagberg L Fuchs D Rosengren L Nilsson S Zetterberg H Gisslén M 2014 Biomarker evidence of axonal injury in neuroasymptomatic HIV-1 patients PloS one 9 e88591 24523921
Jin XF Wu N Wang L Li J 2013 Circulating microRNAs: a novel class of potential biomarkers for diagnosing and prognosing central nervous system diseases Cellular and molecular neurobiology 33 601 613 23633081
Kadri F LaPlante A De Luca M Doyle L Velasco-Gonzalez C Patterson JR Molina PE Nelson S Zea A Parsons CH 2015 Defining Plasma MicroRNAs Associated With Cognitive Impairment in Hiv-Infected Patients Journal of cellular physiology
Kamat A Lyons JL Misra V Uno H Morgello S Singer EJ Gabuzda D 2012 Monocyte activation markers in cerebrospinal fluid associated with impaired neurocognitive testing in advanced HIV infection Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes (1999) 60 234 22569268
Kolson DL 2008 YKL-40: a candidate biomarker for simian immunodeficiency virus and human immunodeficiency virus encephalitis? The American journal of pathology 173 25 29 18583323
Kreutzberg GW 1996 Microglia: a sensor for pathological events in the CNS Trends Neurosci 19 312 318 8843599
Krut JJ Zetterberg H Blennow K Cinque P Hagberg L Price RW Studahl M Gisslén M 2013 Cerebrospinal fluid Alzheimer’s biomarker profiles in CNS infections Journal of neurology 260 620 626 23052602
Kusdra L McGuire D Pulliam L 2002 Changes in monocyte/macrophage neurotoxicity in the era of HAART: implications for HIV-associated dementia AIDS 16 31 38 11741160
Lee PL Yiannoutsos CT Ernst T Chang L Marra CM Jarvik JG Richards TL Kwok EW Kolson DL Simpson D Tang CY Schifitto G Ketonen LM Meyerhoff DJ Lenkinski RE Gonzalez RG Navia BA 2003 A multi-center 1H MRS study of the AIDS dementia complex: validation and preliminary analysis J Magn Reson Imaging 17 625 633 12766890
Lee SC Hatch WC Liu W Brosnan CF Dickson DW 1993 Productive infection of human fetal microglia in vitro by HIV-1 Ann N Y Acad Sci 693 314 316 8267290
Lee Y Samaco RC Gatchel JR Thaller C Orr HT Zoghbi HY 2008 miR-19, miR-101 and miR-130 co-regulate ATXN1 levels to potentially modulate SCA1 pathogenesis Nature neuroscience 11 1137 1139 18758459
Letendre SL Lanier ER McCutchan JA 1999 Cerebrospinal fluid beta chemokine concentrations in neurocognitively impaired individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 J Infect Dis 180 310 319 10395844
Liu Y Jones M Hingtgen CM Bu G Laribee N Tanzi RE Moir RD Nath A He JJ 2000 Uptake of HIV-1 tat protein mediated by low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein disrupts the neuronal metabolic balance of the receptor ligands Nature medicine 6 1380 1387
Liu Y Liu H Kim BO Gattone VH Li J Nath A Blum J He JJ 2004 CD4-independent infection of astrocytes by human immunodeficiency virus type 1: requirement for the human mannose receptor J Virol 78 4120 4133 15047828
Lord PG Papoian T 2004 Genomics and drug toxicity Science 306 575 15498974
Luo X Carlson KA Wojna V Mayo R Biskup TM Stoner J Anderson J Gendelman HE Melendez LM 2003 Macrophage proteomic fingerprinting predicts HIV-1-associated cognitive impairment Neurology 60 1931 1937 12821735
Luo X He JJ 2015 Cell-cell contact viral transfer contributes to HIV infection and persistence in astrocytes Journal of neurovirology 21 66 80 25522787
Lyons JL Uno H Ancuta P Kamat A Moore DJ Singer EJ Morgello S Gabuzda D 2011 Plasma sCD14 is a biomarker associated with impaired neurocognitive test performance in attention and learning domains in HIV infection Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes (1999) 57 371 21646912
Machleidt T Krämer B Adam D Neumann B Schütze S Wiegmann K Krönke M 1996 Function of the p55 tumor necrosis factor receptor “death domain” mediated by phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase C The Journal of experimental medicine 184 725 733 8760826
Mattsson N 2011 CSF biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases Clinical chemistry and laboratory medicine : CCLM/FESCC 49 345 352
May M Sterne JA Sabin C Costagliola D Justice AC Thiebaut R Gill J Phillips A Reiss P Hogg R Ledergerber B D’Arminio Monforte A Schmeisser N Staszewski S Egger M 2007 Prognosis of HIV-1-infected patients up to 5 years after initiation of HAART: collaborative analysis of prospective studies AIDS 21 1185 1197 17502729
May MT Sterne JA Costagliola D Sabin CA Phillips AN Justice AC Dabis F Gill J Lundgren J Hogg RS de Wolf F Fatkenheuer G Staszewski S d’Arminio Monforte A Egger M 2006 HIV treatment response and prognosis in Europe and North America in the first decade of highly active antiretroviral therapy: a collaborative analysis Lancet 368 451 458 16890831
McArthur JC Cohen BA Farzedegan H Cornblath DR Selnes OA Ostrow D Johnson RT Phair J Polk BF 1988 Cerebrospinal fluid abnormalities in homosexual men with and without neuropsychiatric findings Ann Neurol 23 Suppl S34 37 3348599
McCONNELL JR SWINDELLS S ONG CS GMEINER WH CHU WK BROWN DK GENDELMAN HE 1994 Prospective utility of cerebral proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in monitoring HIV infection and its associated neurological impairment AIDS research and human retroviruses 10 977 982 7811549
McGuire JL Gill AJ Douglas SD Kolson DL 2015 Central and peripheral markers of neurodegeneration and monocyte activation in HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders Journal of neurovirology 1 10
McNamara P Dunne P Lawlor B Redmond J Doherty C Doherty D Bergin C 2015 Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Findings of Patients with HIV Associated Neurocognitive Disorders (HAND)(P2.316) Neurology 84
Megra B Eugenin E Roberts T Morgello S Berman J 2013 Protease Resistant Protein Cellular Isoform (PrPc) as a Biomarker: Clues into the Pathogenesis of HAND Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 8 1159 1166 23616272
Mehla R Bivalkar-Mehla S Nagarkatti M Chauhan A 2012 Programming of neurotoxic cofactor CXCL-10 in HIV-1-associated dementia: abrogation of CXCL-10-induced neuro-glial toxicity in vitro by PKC activator J Neuroinflammation 9 2094 2099
Mellios N Huang HS Grigorenko A Rogaev E Akbarian S 2008 A set of differentially expressed miRNAs, including miR-30a-5p, act as post-transcriptional inhibitors of BDNF in prefrontal cortex Hum Mol Genet 17 3030 3042 18632683
Mishra M Vetrivel S Siddappa NB Ranga U Seth P 2008 Clade-specific differences in neurotoxicity of human immunodeficiency virus-1 B and C Tat of human neurons: significance of dicysteine C30C31 motif Annals of neurology 63 366 376 18074388
Miyatani N Saito M Ariga T Yoshino H Robert KY 1990 Glycosphingolipids in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with multiple sclerosis Molecular and chemical neuropathology 13 205 216 2099783
Mothapo K Stelma F Janssen M Kessels R Miners S Verbeek M Koopmans P van der Ven A 2015 Amyloid beta-42 (Aβ-42), neprilysin and cytokine levels. A pilot study in patients with HIV related cognitive impairments Journal of neuroimmunology 282 73 79 25903731
Munoz A Sabin CA Phillips AN 1997 The incubation period of AIDS Aids 11 Suppl A S69 76 9451969
Munshi SU Panda H Holla P Rewari BB Jameel S 2014 MicroRNA-150 is a potential biomarker of HIV/AIDS disease progression and therapy PloS one 9 e95920 24828336
Nhan H Chiang K Koo E 2015 The multifaceted nature of amyloid precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments: friends and foes Acta Neuropathol 129 1 19 25287911
Noorbakhsh F Ramachandran R Barsby N Ellestad KK LeBlanc A Dickie P Baker G Hollenberg MD Cohen ÉA Power C 2010 MicroRNA profiling reveals new aspects of HIV neurodegeneration: caspase-6 regulates astrocyte survival The FASEB Journal 24 1799 1812 20097875
Norenberg MD 1998 Active and passive roles of astrocytes in neurologic disease: commentary on forum position paper Neurotoxicology 19 23 26 discussion 37-28 9498216
Norgren N Rosengren L Stigbrand T 2003 Elevated neurofilament levels in neurological diseases Brain Res 987 25 31 14499942
Norton WT Aquino DA Hozumi I Chiu FC Brosnan CF 1992 Quantitative aspects of reactive gliosis: a review Neurochem Res 17 877 885 1407275
O’Callaghan JP Sriram K 2005 Glial fibrillary acidic protein and related glial proteins as biomarkers of neurotoxicity Expert Opin Drug Saf 4 433 442 15934851
Ohtani Y Tamai Y Ohnuki Y Miura S 1996 Ganglioside alterations in the central and peripheral nervous systems of patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Neurodegeneration 5 331 338 9117545
Onofre G Kolackova M Jankovicova K Krejsek J 2009 Scavenger receptor CD163 and its biological functions Acta medica 52 57 61
Ortega M Ances B 2014 Role of HIV in Amyloid Metabolism Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 9 483 491 24816714
Pacifici M Delbue S Ferrante P Jeansonne D Kadri F Nelson S Velasco-Gonzalez C Zabaleta J Peruzzi F 2013 Cerebrospinal fluid miRNA profile in HIV-encephalitis Journal of cellular physiology 228 1070 1075 23042033
Patrick C Crews L Desplats P Dumaop W Rockenstein E Achim CL Everall IP Masliah E 2011 Increased CDK5 expression in HIV encephalitis contributes to neurodegeneration via tau phosphorylation and is reversed with Roscovitine The American journal of pathology 178 1646 1661 21435449
Paul R Cohen R Navia B Tashima K 2002 Relationships between cognition and structural neuroimaging findings in adults with human immunodeficiency virus type-1 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 26 353 359 12034135
Pedersen KK Eiersted MR Gaardbo JC Pedersen M Gerstoft J Troseid M Nielsen SD 2015 Lower Self-Reported Quality of Life in HIV-Infected Patients on cART and With Low Comorbidity Compared With Healthy Controls Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes 70 16 22 26017659
Peluso MJ Meyerhoff DJ Price RW Peterson J Lee E Young AC Walter R Fuchs D Brew BJ Cinque P 2013 Cerebrospinal fluid and neuroimaging biomarker abnormalities suggest early neurological injury in a subset of individuals during primary HIV infection Journal of Infectious Diseases jit088
Peluso MJ Valcour V Ananworanich J Sithinamsuwan P Chalermchai T Fletcher JL Lerdlum S Chomchey N Slike B Sailasuta N Gisslen M Zetterberg H Spudich S Rv254/Search, Teams, S.S. 2015 Absence of Cerebrospinal Fluid Signs of Neuronal Injury Before and After Immediate Antiretroviral Therapy in Acute HIV Infection The Journal of infectious diseases
Pemberton LA Brew BJ 2001 Cerebrospinal fluid S-100β and its relationship with AIDS dementia complex Journal of clinical virology 22 249 253 11564589
Perrella O Carrieri PB Guarnaccia D Soscia M 1992 Cerebrospinal fluid cytokines in AIDS dementia complex Journal of neurology 239 387 388 1403021
Peterson J Gisslen M Zetterberg H Fuchs D Shacklett BL Hagberg L Yiannoutsos CT Spudich SS Price RW 2014 Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Neuronal Biomarkers across the Spectrum of HIV Infection: Hierarchy of Injury and Detection PloS one 9 e116081 25541953
Pfefferbaum A Rosenbloom MJ Sassoon SA Kemper CA Deresinski S Rohlfing T Sullivan EV 2012 Regional brain structural dysmorphology in human immunodeficiency virus infection: effects of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, alcoholism, and age Biological psychiatry 72 361 370 22458948
Piazza O Leggiero E De Benedictis G Pastore L Salvatore F Tufano R De Robertis E 2013 S100B induces the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines in alveolar type I-like cells International journal of immunopathology and pharmacology 26 383 391 23755753
Pilitsis JG Coplin WM O’Regan MH Wellwood JM Diaz FG Fairfax MR Michael DB Phillis JW 2003 Free fatty acids in cerebrospinal fluids from patients with traumatic brain injury Neuroscience letters 349 136 138 12946571
Pomara N Crandall DT Choi SJ Johnson G Lim KO 2001a White matter abnormalities in HIV-1 infection: a diffusion tensor imaging study Psychiatry Res 106 15 24 11231096
Pomara N Crandall DT Choi SJ Johnson G Lim KO 2001b White matter abnormalities in HIV-1 infection: a diffusion tensor imaging study Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 106 15 24 11231096
Power C McArthur JC Johnson RT Griffin DE Glass JD Dewey R Chesebro B 1995 Distinct HIV-1 env sequences are associated with neurotropism and neurovirulence Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 202 89 104 7587373
Price R Epstein L Becker J Cinque P Gisslén M Pulliam L McArthur J 2007 Biomarkers of HIV-1 CNS infection and injury Neurology 69 1781 1788 17967994
Price RW Brew B Sidtis J Rosenblum M Scheck AC Cleary P 1988 The brain in AIDS: central nervous system HIV-1 infection and AIDS dementia complex Science 239 586 592 3277272
Pulliam L Gascon R Stubblebine M McGuire D McGrath MS 1997 Unique monocyte subset in patients with AIDS dementia Lancet 349 692 695 9078201
Qu Y Wu J Chen D Zhao F Liu J Yang C Wei D Ferriero DM Mu D 2014 MiR-139-5p inhibits HGTD-P and regulates neuronal apoptosis induced by hypoxia-ischemia in neonatal rats Neurobiology of disease 63 184 193 24333693
Ragin AB Storey P Cohen BA Edelman RR Epstein LG 2004a Disease burden in HIV-associated cognitive impairment: a study of whole-brain imaging measures Neurology 63 2293 2297 15623689
Ragin AB Storey P Cohen BA Epstein LG Edelman RR 2004b Whole brain diffusion tensor imaging in HIV-associated cognitive impairment AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 25 195 200 14970017
Ragin AB Wu Y Storey P Cohen BA Edelman RR Epstein LG 2005 Diffusion tensor imaging of subcortical brain injury in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus J Neurovirol 11 292 298 16036809
Rao P Benito E Fischer A 2013 MicroRNAs as biomarkers for CNS disease Frontiers in molecular neuroscience 6 39 24324397
Rao VR Ruiz AP Prasad VR 2014 Viral and cellular factors underlying neuropathogenesis in HIV associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) AIDS research and therapy 11 13 24894206
Rao VR Sas AR Eugenin EA Siddappa NB Bimonte-Nelson H Berman JW Ranga U Tyor WR Prasad VR 2008 HIV-1 clade-specific differences in the induction of neuropathogenesis The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 28 10010 10016 18829958
Ratai EM Annamalai L Burdo T Joo CG Bombardier JP Fell R Hakimelahi R He J Lentz MR Campbell J 2011 Brain creatine elevation and N-acetylaspartate reduction indicates neuronal dysfunction in the setting of enhanced glial energy metabolism in a macaque model of NeuroAIDS Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 66 625 634 21381104
Ridet JL Malhotra SK Privat A Gage FH 1997 Reactive astrocytes: cellular and molecular cues to biological function Trends Neurosci 20 570 577 9416670
Roberts TK Eugenin EA Morgello S Clements JE Zink MC Berman JW 2010 PrP C, the cellular isoform of the human prion protein, is a novel biomarker of HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment and mediates neuroinflammation The American journal of pathology 177 1848 1860 20724601
Roc AC Ances BM Chawla S Korczykowski M Wolf RL Kolson DL Detre JA Poptani H 2007 Detection of human immunodeficiency virus–induced inflammation and oxidative stress in lenticular nuclei with magnetic resonance spectroscopy despite antiretroviral therapy Archives of neurology 64 1249 1257 17620480
Rohlwink UK Figaji AA 2014 Biomarkers of brain injury in cerebral infections Clinical chemistry 60 823 834 24170612
Rosengren LE Lycke J Andersen O 1995 Glial fibrillary acidic protein in CSF of multiple sclerosis patients: relation to neurological deficit J Neurol Sci 133 61 65 8583233
Rothermundt M Peters M Prehn JH Arolt V 2003 S100B in brain damage and neurodegeneration Microscopy research and technique 60 614 632 12645009
Ryan LA Zheng J Brester M Bohac D Hahn F Anderson J Ratanasuwan W Gendelman HE Swindells S 2001 Plasma levels of soluble CD14 and tumor necrosis factor-α type II receptor correlate with cognitive dysfunction during human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection Journal of Infectious Diseases 184 699 706 11517430
Sacktor N 2002 The epidemiology of human immunodeficiency virus-associated neurological disease in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy J Neurovirol 8 Suppl 2 115 121 12491162
Sacktor N Miyahara S Evans S Schifitto G Cohen B Haughey N Drewes JL Graham D Zink MC Anderson C 2014 Impact of minocycline on cerebrospinal fluid markers of oxidative stress, neuronal injury, and inflammation in HIV-seropositive individuals with cognitive impairment Journal of neurovirology 20 620 626 25377444
Saito Y Sharer LR Epstein LG Michaels J Mintz M Louder M Golding K Cvetkovich TA Blumberg BM 1994 Overexpression of nef as a marker for restricted HIV-1 infection of astrocytes in postmortem pediatric central nervous tissues Neurology 44 474 481 8145918
Sandler NG Wand H Roque A Law M Nason MC Nixon DE Ruxrungtham K Lewin SR Emery S Neaton JD 2011 Plasma levels of soluble CD14 independently predict mortality in HIV infection Journal of Infectious Diseases 203 780 790 21252259
Satoi H Tomimoto H Ohtani R Kitano T Kondo T Watanabe M Oka N Akiguchi I Furuya S Hirabayashi Y 2005 Astroglial expression of ceramide in Alzheimer’s disease brains: a role during neuronal apoptosis Neuroscience 130 657 666 15590150
Schmued LC Hopkins KJ 2000 Fluoro-Jade: novel fluorochromes for detecting toxicant-induced neuronal degeneration Toxicol Pathol 28 91 99 10668994
Schrier RD Hong S Crescini M Ellis R Pérez-Santiago J Spina C Letendre S Group, H. 2015 Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) CD8+ T-Cells That Express Interferon-Gamma Contribute to HIV Associated Neurocognitive Disorders (HAND) PloS one 10 e0116526 25719800
Schweighardt B Atwood WJ 2001 HIV type 1 infection of human astrocytes is restricted by inefficient viral entry AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 17 1133 1142 11522183
Sevigny J Albert S McDermott M McArthur J Sacktor N Conant K Schifitto G Selnes O Stern Y McClernon D 2004 Evaluation of HIV RNA and markers of immune activation as predictors of HIV-associated dementia Neurology 63 2084 2090 15596754
Shinawi M Gruener N Lerner A 1998 CSF levels of carnitine in children with meningitis, neurologic disorders, acute gastroenteritis, and seizure Neurology 50 1869 1871 9633746
Shiramizu B Gartner S Williams A Shikuma C Ratto-Kim S Watters M Aguon J Valcour V 2005 Circulating proviral HIV DNA and HIV-associated dementia AIDS 19 45 52 15627032
Shmelzer Z Haddad N Admon E Pessach I Leto TL Eitan-Hazan Z Hershfinkel M Levy R 2003 Unique targeting of cytosolic phospholipase A2 to plasma membranes mediated by the NADPH oxidase in phagocytes The Journal of cell biology 162 683 692 12913107
Simoes E Justino JD 2015 HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders: A review for NPs The Nurse practitioner 40 1 7
Skillbäck T Farahmand B Bartlett JW Rosén C Mattsson N Nägga K Kilander L Religa D Wimo A Winblad B 2014 CSF neurofilament light differs in neurodegenerative diseases and predicts severity and survival Neurology 83 1945 1953 25339208
Smith DB Simmonds P Bell JE 2014 Brain viral burden, neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in HAART-treated HIV positive injecting drug users Journal of neurovirology 20 28 38 24420447
Sorci G Agneletti AL Bianchi R Donato R 1998 Association of S100B with intermediate filaments and microtubules in glial cells Biochimica et biophysica acta 1448 277 289 9920418
Sporer B Koedel U Paul R Kohleisen B Erfle V Fontana A Pfister HW 2000 Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 Nef protein induces blood-brain barrier disruption in the rat: role of matrix metalloproteinase-9 J Neuroimmunol 102 125 130 10636480
Spudich SS Nilsson AC Lollo ND Liegler TJ Petropoulos CJ Deeks SG Paxinos EE Price RW 2005 Cerebrospinal fluid HIV infection and pleocytosis: relation to systemic infection and antiretroviral treatment BMC Infect Dis 5 98 16266436
Stankoff B Tourbah A Suarez S Turell E Stievenart J Payan C Coutellier A Herson S Baril L Bricaire F 2001 Clinical and spectroscopic improvement in HIV-associated cognitive impairment Neurology 56 112 115 11148248
Stanley LC Mrak RE Woody RC Perrot LJ Zhang S Marshak DR Nelson SJ Griffin WST 1994 Glial cytokines as neuropathogenic factors in HIV infection: pathogenic similarities to Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Neuropathology &amp; Experimental Neurology 53 231 238 8176406
Steinbrink F Evers S Buerke B Young P Arendt G Koutsilieri E Reichelt D Lohmann H Husstedt IW 2013 Cognitive impairment in HIV infection is associated with MRI and CSF pattern of neurodegeneration European Journal of Neurology 20 420 428 23095123
Stout JC Ellis RJ Jernigan TL Archibald SL Abramson I Wolfson T McCutchan JA Wallace MR Atkinson JH Grant I 1998 Progressive cerebral volume loss in human immunodeficiency virus infection: a longitudinal volumetric magnetic resonance imaging study Archives of neurology 55 161 168 9482357
Strain MC Letendre S Pillai SK Russell T Ignacio CC Gunthard HF Good B Smith DM Wolinsky SM Furtado M Marquie-Beck J Durelle J Grant I Richman DD Marcotte T McCutchan JA Ellis RJ Wong JK 2005 Genetic composition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in cerebrospinal fluid and blood without treatment and during failing antiretroviral therapy J Virol 79 1772 1788 15650202
Swaminathan S Suzuki K Seddiki N Kaplan W Cowley MJ Hood CL Clancy JL Murray DD Méndez C Gelgor L 2012 Differential regulation of the Let-7 family of microRNAs in CD4+ T cells alters IL-10 expression The Journal of Immunology 188 6238 6246 22586040
Takeuchi H Mizuno T Zhang G Wang J Kawanokuchi J Kuno R Suzumura A 2005 Neuritic beading induced by activated microglia is an early feature of neuronal dysfunction toward neuronal death by inhibition of mitochondrial respiration and axonal transport Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 10444 10454 15640150
Tarasów E Wiercińska-Drapało A Jaroszewicz J Orzechowska-Bobkiewicz A Dzienis W Prokopowicz D Walecki J 1999 Antiretroviral therapy and its influence on the stage of brain damage in patients with HIV–1H MRS evaluation Medical Science Monitor 10 101 106
Tarasow E Wiercinska-Drapalo A Kubas B Dzienis W Orzechowska-Bobkiewicz A Prokopowicz D Walecki J 2003 Cerebral MR spectroscopy in neurologically asymptomatic HIV-infected patients Acta Radiol 44 206 212 12694109
Thames AD Briones MS Magpantay LI Martinez-Maza O Singer EJ Hinkin CH Morgello S Gelman BB Moore DJ Heizerling K 2015 The role of chemokine CC motif ligand 2 genotype and cerebrospinal fluid chemokine CC motif ligand 2 in neurocognition among HIV-infected patients AIDS 29 1483 1491 26244388
Thompson PM Dutton RA Hayashi KM Lu A Lee SE Lee JY Lopez OL Aizenstein HJ Toga AW Becker JT 2006 3D mapping of ventricular and corpus callosum abnormalities in HIV/AIDS Neuroimage 31 12 23 16427319
Thompson PM Dutton RA Hayashi KM Toga AW Lopez OL Aizenstein HJ Becker JT 2005 Thinning of the cerebral cortex visualized in HIV/AIDS reflects CD4+ T lymphocyte decline Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 15647 15652 16227428
Thompson PM Jahanshad N 2015 Novel Neuroimaging Methods to Understand How HIV Affects the Brain Current HIV/AIDS reports 12 289 298 25902966
Tiraboschi JM Munoz-Moreno JA Puertas MC Alonso-Villaverde C Prats A Ferrer E Rozas N Maso M Ouchi D Martinez-Picado J Podzamczer D 2015 Viral and inflammatory markers in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with HIV-1-associated neurocognitive impairment during antiretroviral treatment switch HIV medicine 16 388 392 25721471
Tornatore C Chandra R Berger JR Major EO 1994 HIV-1 infection of subcortical astrocytes in the pediatric central nervous system Neurology 44 481 487 8145919
Towgood KJ Pitkanen M Kulasegaram R Fradera A Kumar A Soni S Sibtain NA Reed L Bradbeer C Barker GJ 2012 Mapping the brain in younger and older asymptomatic HIV-1 men: Frontal volume changes in the absence of other cortical or diffusion tensor abnormalities Cortex 48 230 241 21481856
UNAIDS 2015 UNAIDS Fact Sheet 2015 http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/campaigns/HowAIDSchangedeverything/factsheet
Wada NI Jacobson LP Margolick JB Breen EC Macatangay B Penugonda S Martínez-Maza O Bream JH 2015 The effect of HAART-induced HIV suppression on circulating markers of inflammation and immune activation AIDS (London, England) 29 463
Wikoff WR Pendyala G Siuzdak G Fox HS 2008 Metabolomic analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid reveals changes in phospholipase expression in the CNS of SIV-infected macaques The Journal of clinical investigation 118 2661 18521184
Witwer KW Watson AK Blankson JN Clements JE 2012 Relationships of PBMC microRNA expression, plasma viral load, and CD4+ T-cell count in HIV-1-infected elite suppressors and viremic patients Retrovirology 9 1 15 22214232
Wu H Tao J Chen PJ Shahab A Ge W Hart RP Ruan X Ruan Y Sun YE 2010 Genome-wide analysis reveals methyl-CpG-binding protein 2-dependent regulation of microRNAs in a mouse model of Rett syndrome Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107 18161 18166 20921386
Wu WE Babb JS Tal A Kirov II George AE Ratai EM Gonzalez RG Gonen O 2015 Early glial activation precedes neurodegeneration in the cerebral cortex after SIV infection: a 3D, multivoxel proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy study HIV medicine 16 381 387 25689120
Wu Y Storey P Cohen BA Epstein LG Edelman RR Ragin AB 2006 Diffusion alterations in corpus callosum of patients with HIV AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 27 656 660 16552012
Zetterberg H Skillback T Mattsson N Trojanowski JQ Portelius E Shaw LM Weiner MW Blennow K Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, I. 2015 Association of Cerebrospinal Fluid Neurofilament Light Concentration With Alzheimer Disease Progression JAMA neurology 1 8
Zhou L Pupo GM Gupta P Liu B Tran SL Rahme R Wang B Rua R Rizos H Carroll A Cairns MJ Saksena NK 2012 A parallel genome-wide mRNA and microRNA profiling of the frontal cortex of HIV patients with and without HIV-associated dementia shows the role of axon guidance and downstream pathways in HIV-mediated neurodegeneration BMC genomics 13 677 23190615
