LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8219232
5883
Neurol Clin
Neurol Clin
Neurologic clinics
0733-8619
1557-9875

28410663
5472209
10.1016/j.ncl.2017.01.008
NIHMS859441
Article
Frontotemporal Dementia
Olney Nicholas T. MD Clinical Fellow in the Department of Neurology, UCSF School of Medicine, where he holds the A.W. &amp; Mary Margaret Clausen Distinguished Chair, and directs the UCSF Memory and Aging Center

Spina Salvatore MD, PhD An Assistant Adjunct Professor of Neurology at the UCSF School of Medicine, where he holds the A.W. &amp; Mary Margaret Clausen Distinguished Chair, and directs the UCSF Memory and Aging Center

Miller Bruce L. MD Professor of Neurology at the UCSF School of Medicine, where he holds the A.W. &amp; Mary Margaret Clausen Distinguished Chair, and directs the UCSF Memory and Aging Center

Address correspondence to: Nicholas Olney, MD, 675 Nelson Rising Lane, Suite 190, San Francisco, CA 94158; Nicholas.Olney@ucsf.edu
22 3 2017
5 2017
01 5 2018
35 2 339374
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) is a heterogeneous disorder with distinct clinical phenotypes associated with multiple neuropathologic entities. Presently, the term FTD encompasses clinical disorders that include changes in behavior, language, executive control and often motor symptoms. The core FTD spectrum disorders include: behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), and semantic variant PPA (svPPA). Related FTD disorders include frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND), progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSP-S) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). In this chapter we will discuss the clinic presentation, diagnostic criteria, neuropathology, genetics and treatments of these disorders.

Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD)
Primary Progressive Aphasia
nonfluent PPA
semantic PPA
motor neuron disease
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)
corticobasal syndrome (CBS)

Introduction

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) has undergone numerous changes in nomenclature and categorization schemes since it was first described by Pick in 1892. Presently, FTD encompasses clinical disorders that include changes in behavior, language, executive control and motor symptoms. Here, we use the term to characterize the core FTD spectrum disorders: behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), and semantic variant PPA (svPPA). Related FTD disorders will be discussed including frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND), progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSP-S) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). The term Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD) is used for pathological conditions that cause degeneration of frontal and temporal lobes. FTD is a heterogeneous disorder with distinct clinical phenotypes associated with multiple neuropathologic substrates.

A brief history of Frontotemporal Dementia

In 1892, Pick, a Czech neurologist, provided the first known description of a patient with FTD(Pick, 1892). He depicted a patient with progressive deterioration of language associated with left temporal lobe atrophy, a process that would presently be classified as svPPA (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). Histologic analysis of Pick’s clinical cases, performed by Alois Alzheimer in 1911, showed silver staining argyrophilic cytoplasmic inclusions within neurons (Alzheimer, 1911). In 1923, Gans described “Pick’s atrophy” to characterize unique cases with atrophy in the frontal and temporal lobes (Thibodeau &amp; Miller, 2013). By 1926, Pick’s students Onari and Spatz expanded on Alzheimer’s pathologic description by delineating Pick’s bodies from Pick’s cells identifying “Pick’s disease” as a neuropathological entity (Rosen, Lengenfelder, &amp; Miller, 2000; Thibodeau &amp; Miller, 2013).

There was then a dearth of research into dementia until the 1970’s. During this period, the majority of clinical, anatomical and pathological patterns gleaned by these early pioneers was largely overlooked (Bruce L. Miller, 2014). Until the late 1950’s to early 1960’s, a vascular etiology was the accepted cause of “senility,” purportedly emanating from decreased cerebral blood flow and miniature infarctions and deemed “arteriosclerotic dementia” (Jellinger, 2007; Roman, 2003). Only a few groups continued Pick’s work during this time, using accurate clinical descriptions correlated with neuroanatomical and pathological analysis. The perseverance of these researchers would not be appreciated until decades afterwards. Marginal progress in frontotemporal dementia research was made until Delay, Brion and Escourolle, a French group of researchers, published their seminal paper emphasizing the clinical and neuropathological differences between Alzheimer’s disease and Pick’s disease. Pick’s disease was described to feature frontotemporal atrophy with sparing of the posterior lobes with histology revealing ballooned cells and cortical-sub-cortical gliosis (Thibodeau &amp; Miller, 2013). The clinical syndrome of Pick’s disease showed increased behavioral alterations, lack of insight, and relative freedom from apraxia and agnosia (Thibodeau &amp; Miller, 2013). In contrast, Alzheimer’s disease featured more diffuse cerebral atrophy and on histology showed neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques. Clinically, Alzheimer’s patients had symptoms of agnosia, apraxia and problems with spatial orientation. In 1974, Constantinidis divided Pick’s disease into three subtypes. Only one of the three subtypes had classic Pick’s bodies suggesting that Pick’s bodies were not required for a diagnosis of Pick’s disease (Constantinidis, Richard, &amp; Tissot, 1974).

By the 1970’s, there was a major shift in reasoning: arteriosclerotic dementia was no longer considered the underlying pathology for senility and the concept of dementia became associated with Alzheimer’s neuropathology (Roman, 2003; Ryan, Rossor, &amp; Fox, 2015). In 1976 Katzman wrote about an Alzheimer’s epidemic suggesting that in the United States 880,000–1,200,000 people over the age of 65 may have Alzheimer’s disease (Katzman, 1976). During this period, the phrase, “don’t pick Pick’s disease” was often repeated to young researchers looking for careers in neurology, based on the misconception that Pick’s disease was both very rare and indistinguishable from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) during life (Bruce L. Miller, 2014). While the majority of dementia research in the United States was focused on Alzheimer’s disease, two groups in Europe started following large cohorts of persons with non-Alzheimer’s dementias. In Lund, Sweden, Gustafson, Ingvar and Brun, found clinical correlation of frontal lobe atrophy with hypoperfusion in the frontal lobes and only 20% of cases had classic Pick bodies on autopsy (Brun, 1993; Ingvar &amp; Gustafson, 1970). In Manchester, England, Neary, Snowden and Mann described a large cohort of patients with dementia of the frontal type and found clinical correlations with neuroimaging (SPECT), neuropsychiatric testing and neuropathology (Rosen et al., 2000). Around the same time, Mesulam described patients with non-fluent and fluent aphasia without Alzheimer’s pathology (M. M. Mesulam, 1982; Rosen et al., 2000). Mesulam eventually coined the term primary progressive aphasia (PPA)(M. M. Mesulam, 2001). In 1989, Snowden suggested the term “semantic dementia” to describe the patient with predominant left temporal atrophy and aphasia that Pick originally described (J.S. Snowden, Goulding, &amp; Neary, 1989), while predominant right temporal lobe atrophy was not associated with behavioral disturbances and less language involvement until later (Edwards-Lee et al., 1997). Collaboration between the two groups in Manchester, England and Lund, Sweden led to the first research criteria for FTD (“Clinical and neuropathological criteria for frontotemporal dementia. The Lund and Manchester Groups,” 1994). The clinical diagnostic criteria were revised in the late 1990s, when the FTD spectrum was divided into a behavioral variant, a nonfluent aphasia variant and a semantic dementia variant (Neary et al., 1998). With modernized neuroimaging techniques and neuropsychological evaluations, these groups proved that FTD was distinct from AD during life and that within FTD specific subtypes could better characterize patients.

Further advances in neuroimaging, genetics and neuropathology have been incorporated in the most recent revision of the clinical research criteria (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011; Rascovsky et al., 2011). This chapter will focus on providing the most up to date information on the FTD clinical spectrum and its neuropathologic and genetic substrates.

Epidemiology

The incidence of FTD is estimated to be 1.61 to 4.1 cases per one hundred thousand people annually (Coyle-Gilchrist et al., 2016; Knopman &amp; Roberts, 2011). One study showed the prevalence of FTD, PSP and CBS was 10.8 per 100,000 with peak prevalence at the age range of 65 to 69 years (Coyle-Gilchrist et al., 2016). There is an estimated twenty to thirty thousand people in the United States with FTD at one time (Knopman &amp; Roberts, 2011). FTD accounts is the second most common dementia in persons under the age of 65, and is thought to be less frequent that Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Hodges, Davies, Xuereb, Kril, &amp; Halliday, 2003; Knopman &amp; Roberts, 2011). The average age of onset is between 45 and 65 but there have been documented cases younger than age 30 and in the elderly (J. S. Snowden, Neary, &amp; Mann, 2002). In a systematic review of 26 studies on FTD prevalence, men and women were found to be equally affected, and the diagnosis of bvFTD was four times more prevalent than the PPA diagnoses (Hogan et al., 2016). BvFTD accounts for roughly 60% of FTD cases and the other 40% are language variants of FTD (Onyike &amp; Diehl-Schmid, 2013). FTD is likely underdiagnosed amongst non-neurologists due to the lack of recognition and the overlap with a multitude of psychiatric disorders (Knopman &amp; Roberts, 2011; Lanata &amp; Miller, 2016).

Behavioral Variant Frontotemporal Dementia

Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) presents with early changes in behavior, personality, emotion and executive control (Rascovsky et al., 2011). These changes can include new behavioral symptoms such as disinhibition, new compulsions, dietary changes or symptoms like apathy and lack of empathy. Many of these initial symptoms are easily mistaken for a psychiatric illness making bvFTD patients at high risk for misdiagnosis (Woolley, Khan, Murthy, Miller, &amp; Rankin, 2011). In order to meet clinical criteria for a diagnosis of bvFTD, there needs to be a constellation of at least three symptoms fitting into the six categories which include: disinhibition, apathy, lack of empathy, compulsions, hyperorality and executive dysfunction (Rascovsky et al., 2011) (Table 1: Diagnostic Criteria for behavioral variant FTD). These will be discussed in further detail below.

The behavioral symptoms of bvFTD correlate with dysfunction in the paralimbic areas including medial frontal, orbital frontal, anterior cingulate and frontoinsular cortices (Rosen et al., 2005; Seeley et al., 2008). Right hemisphere atrophy is associated more with behavior changes (Rosen et al., 2005). Von Economo neurons (VENs), present primarily in large brained, socially complex animals (Seeley et al., 2006) are found in the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex, frontoinsular and orbital frontal cortex (Seeley, 2008; Seeley et al., 2006). Seeley has shown that VENs are selectively vulnerable in bvFTD but not AD. These VEN-containing areas within the salience network are selectively vulnerable and represent the epicenter of bvFTD pathology, before there is spread to other areas within the network (Schroeter, Raczka, Neumann, &amp; von Cramon, 2008; Seeley et al., 2007; Seeley, Zhou, &amp; Kim, 2012). Neurodegeneration is thought to spread within the network with toxic protein aggregates moving from cell to cell in a prion-like manner (Kfoury, Holmes, Jiang, Holtzman, &amp; Diamond, 2012; Walker &amp; Jucker, 2015).

It is imperative to take an excellent and thorough clinical history with the goal of identifying the brain region where the disease begins. New symptoms developing through time can localize the spread of neuropathologic changes with disease progression. There are heterogeneous clinical phenotypes with bvFTD based upon the regional spread in the individual patient. Executive control is lost once the neuropathology involves the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex that interacts with bilateral parietal lobes (Kramer et al., 2003; Seeley et al., 2007).

Disinhibition includes socially inappropriate behavior such as invading interpersonal space, inappropriate touching or over-familiarity with strangers. There can be impulsive or careless actions like new onset gambling, stealing, poor decision-making without regards to the consequences (e.g. buying matching motor cycles for themselves and their 7 year old son). Disinhibition is linked to right orbital frontal cortex degeneration (Tekin &amp; Cummings, 2002; Tranel, Bechara, &amp; Denburg, 2002). New criminal behaviors are seen in 37%–54% of bvFTD patients (Diehl-Schmid, Perneczky, Koch, Nedopil, &amp; Kurz, 2013; Liljegren et al., 2015). Loss of social decorum such as telling off color jokes, using crude language, and rudeness with lack of embarrassment is common in bvFTD. There can be dramatic change in self-awareness, with lack of insight into one’s disease (Rankin, Baldwin, Pace-Savitsky, Kramer, &amp; Miller, 2005).

Apathy can present in many ways (Chow et al., 2009). Affective apathy presents as indifference or not caring. Motor apathy manifests as decreased drive to move and less movement overall (Merrilees, Hubbard, Mastick, Miller, &amp; Dowling, 2009) whereas cognitive apathy is a loss of desire to engage in goal oriented activities (Chow et al., 2009). Symptoms of apathy may also include social withdrawal in work activities, family functions or hobbies. Patients often need prompting to stay engaged in conversation, do chores or even to move. Apathy is easily misinterpreted as depression. Atrophy in the medial prefrontal lobes and anterior cingulate have been correlated with apathy in bvFTD (Holroyd &amp; Yeung, 2012; Rosen et al., 2005; Rosen, Gorno-Tempini, et al., 2002).

Lack of empathy or sympathy is common. In one scenario a bvFTD patient has an improper response to a family member being diagnosed with a serious medical condition. Other responses that fit this category include insensitivity and lack of interest towards others or making cruel comments towards others. Another symptom included within this category is a patient’s indifference towards their own diagnosis of bvFTD and the impact it may have on others, which has been called “frontal anosodiaphoria” (Mendez &amp; Shapira, 2011). Lack of empathy has been more strongly correlated with atrophy in the right temporal lobe in right svPPA patients and the subcallosal gyrus in bvFTD patients (Rankin et al., 2006).

Perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive behaviors often ritualistic in quality can occur in bvFTD (Ames, Cummings, Wirshing, Quinn, &amp; Mahler, 1994; Josephs, Whitwell, &amp; Jack, 2008; Perry et al., 2012; Rosso et al., 2001). Simple repetitive motor behaviors include tapping, clapping, rubbing, picking, and lip smacking. More complex behaviors included in this category are collecting cigarette butts, counting rituals, walking fixed routes or repetitive trips to the bathroom. Speech can also become stereotyped with specific repetitive patterns. Stereotyped and compulsive behaviors have been associated with several brain areas. Aberrant motor behavior has been affiliated with atrophy in the right dorsal anterior cingulate and left pre motor cortex (Rosen et al., 2005). Atrophy in the striatum has been associated with stereotypies (tapping, rocking, protruding ones tongue) (Josephs et al., 2008). Complex compulsions have been associated with asymmetric temporal lobe atrophy (Rosso et al., 2001). Obsessive compulsive behaviors in bvFTD have been correlated with loss of grey matter in bilateral globus pallidus, left putamen, and lateral temporal pole (left middle and inferior temporal gyri) (Perry et al., 2012).

Hyperorality and major changes in dietary habits can also manifest in bvFTD. Changes in food preference, particularly an inclination towards sweets or carbohydrates, are common and lead to weight gain (B. L. Miller, Darby, Swartz, Yener, &amp; Mena, 1995). Patients may overeat, stuffing food in their mouth and in such cases satiety will be an insufficient cue to stop. One study showed that bvFTD patients continued to eat sweet sandwiches despite claiming to be full (Woolley et al., 2007). As patients become more disinhibited they may grab food off other people’s plates. Later in the course of bvFTD, hyperorality can occur, with oral exploration or eating inedible objects. Changes in eating behavior have been associated with atrophy in the orbital frontal cortex, right insular cortex and the striatum (Whitwell et al., 2007; Woolley et al., 2007). Some suggest involvement of the hypothalamus (Piguet, 2011).

Neuropsychological testing of patients with bvFTD should test multiple domains and be anatomically oriented to target specific brain structures (Bruce L. Miller, 2014). Notation of abnormal behaviors and impaired emotional processing should be described by the examiner if present. Formal neuropsychological testing can be normal in early stages of the disease (Gregory, Serra-Mestres, &amp; Hodges, 1999). As pathology involves the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, executive function will emerge on neuropsychological testing and can help differentiate bvFTD patients from those with Alzheimer’s disease (Kramer et al., 2003).

There is subset of patients that exhibit a clinical presentation called “FTD-phenocopy” or slowly progressive bvFTD, that meet clinical criteria for possible bvFTD. In some instances, these patients do not suffer from a neurodegenerative condition (Kipps, Hodges, &amp; Hornberger, 2010). However, in one study, two of four patients identified as slowly progressive bvFTD, carried the pathogenic repeat in the C9ORF72 gene (Khan et al., 2012). Recently, at UCSF, a new sub group was identified with slow progression associated with minimal cortical atrophy but with subcortical atrophy, of whom 88% carry the C9ORF72 repeat (Ranasinghe et al., 2016). This suggests that patients with slowly progressive bvFTD, or the “FTD-phenocopy” presentation should be tested for the C9ORF72 repeat as a possible etiology for their neurodegeneration.

Frontal and/or anterior temporal lobe atrophy on structural (MRI or CT) neuroimaging or hypometabolism on PET or SPECT can further support a diagnosis of bvFTD (Figure 1: bvFTD MRI) (Rascovsky et al., 2011). Neurologists are encouraged to interpret their patients’ MRI images, as radiologists may underestimate atrophy patterns that are suggestive of bvFTD (Suarez et al., 2009).

Primary Progressive Aphasias

The PPAs are neurodegenerative syndromes, where language is the primary impairment in the first two years of symptom onset, that Mesulam initially described as a “slowly progressive aphasia” and later renamed primary progressive aphasia (M.-M. Mesulam, 1987; M. M. Mesulam, 1982). For approximately 2 decades, PPAs were divided into semantic dementia and progressive non fluent aphasia, although several PPA cases did not fit into this binary categorization (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). A third type of variant that was fluent with syntactically simple sentences but frequent word finding pauses was described by Gorno-Tempini et al and called logopenic primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA) (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004; Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). The most recent clinical research criteria for PPAs include semantic variant of PPA (svPPA), nonfluent/agramamtic variant of PPA (nfvPPA) and logopenic variant PPA (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). The logopenic variant of PPA has been correlated predominantly with AD pathology so will not be discussed in detail in this chapter (M. Mesulam et al., 2008; Rabinovici et al., 2008). The other two types of PPA, svPPA and nfvPPA, are considered part of the FTD spectrum and are predominantly associated with FTD neuropathology.

Semantic Variant Primary Progressive Aphasia

The study of temporal lobe variants of FTD has furthered our understanding of language and behavior. If the left temporal lobe is involved, as in left svPPA, symptoms are predominantly language-based with a slow loss of semantic knowledge. When the right temporal lobe is primarily involved (right svPPA), behavioral symptoms predominate. As time progresses both temporal lobes become involved and symptoms begin to overlap (Seeley et al., 2005). By five to seven years, patients get more frontal lobe structures involved and develop symptoms of bvFTD with disinhibition, change in food preference and weight gain (Seeley et al., 2005). Patients with svPPA, tend to have slow progression and can live a decade or more after symptom onset (Hodges et al., 2010). Of the core clinical phenotypes in FTD, svPPA is the least likely to have a genetic cause underlying the etiology (Flanagan et al., 2015; Goldman et al., 2005).

The initial features of classic left temporal svPPA are anomia and single word comprehension deficits (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). The earliest symptom is often poor comprehension of single low frequency words such as “giraffe” with initial preservation of higher frequency words like “dog”. Neuropsychogical testing must include semantic screening for low frequency words, with a test like the Boston Naming Test (BNT), as the 2 words (pen, watch) in the MMSE are not sensitive enough to detect early svPPA (Kramer et al., 2003; Bruce L. Miller, 2014). As symptoms progress, patients also lose semantic knowledge about objects (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011), so if a patient does not know the word “giraffe,” they will not improve with phonemic cues or semantic hints like “animal with a long neck.” When svPPA patients are asked to read irregularly spelled words (yacht, gnat), they will sound them out, attempting phonetic “regularization”, having lost the knowledge or their unconventional sound (i.e. y-act, ga-nat), a phenomenon known as surface dyslexia (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). In svPPA, repetition is spared, speech apraxia is not present, and syntax and grammar remain impressively intact. If the mesial temporal lobes are involved, memory can be affected but executive function and visuospatial skills typically are preserved (Hodges et al., 1999). Clinical research criteria for language predominant (left) svPPA must include the core features of impaired confrontational naming and impaired single word comprehension. There also must be three of the following four criteria: impaired object knowledge, surface dyslexia, spared repetition, and spared speech production (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011) (Table 2: Diagnostic Criteria for semantic variant PPA).

Right temporal svPPA patients present with prominent behavioral changes that include emotional distance, irritability, social isolation, bizarre alterations in dress, compulsions, disruption of sleep, appetite and libido (Edwards-Lee et al., 1997; B. L. Miller, Chang, Mena, Boone, &amp; Lesser, 1993; Seeley et al., 2005). Patients with right temporal svPPA can often lack social pragmatics. They can be viscous, with telling long-winded stories, interrupting loved ones and not picking up on normal social cues that they may be acting inappropriately. It is thought that this inability to pick up social cues has to do with an inability to read the emotions on faces. Worsening degrees of right amygdala atrophy has been correlated with impairment in processing facial emotions (Rosen, Perry, et al., 2002).

Patients with either left or right temporal svPPA can have new compulsions. Left svPPA patients have been shown to have compulsions directed towards visual or non-verbal stimuli where objects are devoid of verbal information like coins or pictures. Right svPPA have compulsions around games with words and symbols (Seeley et al., 2005).

An interesting phenomenon is the development of new artistic abilities that has been observed in svPPA. Left svPPA patients have developed new visual abilities in painting, drawing, music, and gardening (B. L. Miller, Boone, Cummings, Read, &amp; Mishkin, 2000; B. L. Miller et al., 1998; B. L. Miller, Ponton, Benson, Cummings, &amp; Mena, 1996). Right svPPA patients can have emergent abilities in writing despite their progressive neurodegenerative condition (Bruce L. Miller, 2014). One patient with bilateral, right worse than left, svPPA was studied in depth at UCSF. As the right temporal lobe became more involved, he showed decline in emotional perception displayed through his new skill of painting (Liu et al., 2009). The topics of the painting would show couples and landscapes, but as his disease progressed the facial expressions became less genuine. Painted couples would stand next to each other, not holding hands, with bizarre smiles showing teeth (Liu et al., 2009). One could theorize that this case illustrates the difficulty the patient had understanding emotions in others as the right temporal lobe involvement progressed (Figure 2: Paintings of a right svPPA patient).

Neuroimaging can further support a diagnosis of svPPA, with anterior temporal pole atrophy on structural imaging or hypoperfusion on functional imaging (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011) (Figure 3: Left svPPA MRI, Figure 4: Right svPPA MRI). Traditionally, early symptoms originate from anterior and inferior temporal lobes involving the amygdala, with later symptoms deriving from pathologic spread into the contralateral temporal lobe and then into the ventromedial frontal cortex and insula (Rohrer &amp; Rosen, 2013; Rosen, Gorno-Tempini, et al., 2002; Seeley et al., 2005).

Nonfluent/agrammatic Primary Progressive Aphasia

Patients with nonfluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasias (nfvPPA) first present with effortful speech and often endorse word-finding problems. Over time, the speech becomes labored, slow, slurred, and choppy with disrupted prosody. The patient begins making inconsistent speech sound errors without awareness of this deficit. There can be inconsistent insertions, deletions, distortions, and substitutions in speech sounds. If a patient is asked to repeat a complexly structured word like “catastrophe” five times in a row, he or she will demonstrate a motor speech apraxia by repeating this word differently each time (Ogar et al., 2006). Improper use of grammar is frequently present in nfvPPA, but can be subtle, or even absent in the early stages of the illness. Patients can often have an aphemia, but can still communicate correctly with written language. Eventually agrammatism will involve both verbal and written language. Effortful speech often occurs before clear apraxia of speech or agrammatism (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). The neuroanatomical correlate for the symptoms of nfvPPA are Broadman’s Area 44, 45 (Broca’s area) in the left inferior frontal gyrus and the anterior insula (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004) As time progresses, patients will have decreased verbal output and eventually become non-verbal. Mutism in nfvPPA is correlated to a larger lesion expanding beyond the typical inferior frontal and insular regions involved early in nfvPPA (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2006).

On neuropsychological testing, patients with nfvPPA eventually show deficits on the Boston Naming Test (BNT) and will still show retained semantic knowledge for these pictures (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004). Usually, at least during the early stages, word-finding difficulty is common, but frank anomia is rare. Comprehension typically remains intact, except for longer complex sentences. Executive function can show subtle dysfunction but memory and visuospatial skills remain relatively spared early in the disease course (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004).

For a patient to meet clinical criteria for nfvPPA, they must have effortful speech with motor speech apraxia or agrammatism, as well as supporting features of nfvPPA (Table 3: Diagnostic Criteria for nonfluent agrammatic variant PPA) (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). Neuroimaging support for nfvPPA consists of atrophy on MRI or hypometabolism on PET or SPECT scan in the left inferior frontal gyrus, near the perisylvian area and involving Broca’s area (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004) (Figure 5: nfvPPA MRI).

Related FTD syndromes

The core FTD disorders are bvFTD, svPPA (right and left temporal variants), and nfvPPA, but there are other disorders within the FTD spectrum that include FTD-MND, PSP-S and CBS.

Frontotemporal Dementia with Motor Neuron Disease

The relationship of dementia, motor neuron disease (MND) and parkinsonism was first noted in the Guamanian Chamorros, after World War II, in the ALS-parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam (Lomen-Hoerth, Anderson, &amp; Miller, 2002; McGeer, Schwab, McGeer, Haddock, &amp; Steele, 1997). Up to 15% of FTD patients and up to 30% of patients with motor neuron disease experience overlap between the two syndromes (Lomen-Hoerth, 2011). The coexistence of two disorders may be under recognized, as patients tend to present to either a neuromuscular disease clinic or a dementia clinic (Lomen-Hoerth, 2011). To meet criteria for MND, an FTD patient needs upper and lower motor neuron signs on physical examination or electromyogram (EMG) (Geevasinga et al., 2016). The El Escorial criteria are one of the most widely accepted criteria for the diagnosis of ALS but the Awaji criteria are also used which deemphasizes the use of EMG to make an earlier diagnosis (Brooks, 1994; Carvalho &amp; Swash, 2009; Geevasinga et al., 2016). If an FTD patient presents with fasciculations, muscle weakness, trouble swallowing, spastic tone, hyperreflexia, or pathological laughing or crying, this should raise concern for MND and prompt a neuromuscular work up. If patients with ALS presents with symptoms concerning for bvFTD, this should prompt a cognitive work up. There is a shorter survival in patients with both FTD and MND since patients with FTD symptoms are less compliant with standard ALS treatments (Olney et al., 2005).

The overlap story between FTD and MND became much richer in 2005, when Mackenzie used ubiquitin immunohistochemistry to show that MND, FTD-MND and FTD were related pathologically and fit on a spectrum (Mackenzie &amp; Feldman, 2005). Then in 2006, TDP-43 was shown to be the major disease protein in the neuropathology of tau-negative FTD and MND (Arai et al., 2006; Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011; Neumann et al., 2006). In 2009, human genetic studies and post mortem analysis linked mutations in the Fused in sarcoma (FUS) gene to a familial form of MND (Kwiatkowski et al., 2009; Neumann et al., 2011; Vance et al., 2009). This finding prompted researchers to look for FUS pathology in FTD patients. FUS inclusions were found in patients with FTD that did not have a mutation in the FUS gene (Mackenzie, Rademakers, &amp; Neumann, 2010; Neumann, Rademakers, et al., 2009; J. S. Snowden et al., 2011; Urwin et al., 2010). A genetic linkage between FTD -MND and chromosome 9q21-q22 had been known since 2000 (Hosler et al., 2000) but a hexanucleotide repeat, GGGGCC, in the non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) was not discovered until 2011 (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Renton et al., 2011).

Corticobasal Degeneration

Corticobasal Degeneration (CBD) was first described by Rebeiz in 1968, in three patients with progressive asymmetric symptoms of movement and posturing that were found to have “corticodentatonigral degeneration with neuronal achromasia” on autopsy (Rebeiz, Kolodny, &amp; Richardson, 1968). Despite numerous revisions in diagnostic criteria, predicting CBD neuropathology has proven to be a diagnostic challenge for clinicians with the correct CBD pathology predicted before death in only 56% of cases (Armstrong et al., 2013). Currently, the term corticobasal syndrome (CBS) is used to describe the “canonical” clinical entity associated with CBD, understanding that many cases of CBS are not associated with CBD neuropathology and vice versa. Many cases of CBD pathology have early clinical presentations different than CBS (Boeve et al., 1999). The clinical syndrome of CBS has been associated with Alzheimer’s disease, PSP, CBD, Pick’s disease, TDP type A, Lewy Body and rarely prion pathology (Armstrong et al., 2013; Boeve et al., 1999; Josephs et al., 2006; S. E. Lee et al., 2011; Ling et al., 2010). The term CBD is today only used to refer to the 4R tau specific neuropathologic entity.

To meet the most recent clinical criteria for probable CBS, a patient must have an asymmetric presentation with two of the following motor symptoms: limb rigidity or akinesia, limb dystonia, or limb myoclonus, as well as two of the following higher cortical symptoms: orobuccal or limb apraxia, cortical sensory deficit, or alien limb phenomena (Armstrong et al., 2013). Although asymmetry occurs with CBD, data have shown that CBD is not more likely to be asymmetric than any other neurodegenerative condition (Hassan et al., 2010; S. E. Lee et al., 2011). CBD tends to affect a dorsal frontal network involved with drive, movement, language and behavior. In a paper by Lee and colleagues CBD was predicted by clinical syndromes bvFTD, nfvPPA and an executive motor disorder (S. E. Lee et al., 2011). Typically, patients first present with a behavioral, language or executive dysfunction, leading to suspicion of bvFTD or nfvPPA. Eventually they exhibit motor dysfunction, often parkinsonism with axial rigidity (Kertesz, Davidson, McCabe, Takagi, &amp; Munoz, 2003; Kertesz, McMonagle, Blair, Davidson, &amp; Munoz, 2005). The absence of early motor symptoms should not exclude CBD (S. E. Lee et al., 2011). There is significant overlap with PSP clinically and in some cases series, over 50% of patients diagnosed with CBS in life had PSP pathology (Wadia &amp; Lang, 2007). Patients with an H1H1 haplotype of the MAPT gene are associated with an increased risk for CBD and PSP pathology (Myers et al., 2007). In general, if the disease begins in the parietal region or there is a parietally-predominant syndrome the diagnosis is more likely to be Alzheimer’s disease than CBD.

There are no specific biomarkers that allow the prediction of CBD pathology. In patients who meet CBS criteria, current PET scan technology and CSF biomarkers can identify patients with Alzheimer’s pathology and those considered amyloid negative can be considered more likely to have 4R CBD neuropathology (Rabinovici et al., 2011). Neuroimaging with MRI is associated with more posterior atrophy in CBS associated with Alzheimer’s pathology and there is more frontal atrophy associated with CBD tau pathology (S. E. Lee et al., 2011; Whitwell et al., 2010). Dorsal atrophy can help predict underlying CBD 4R tau pathology especially in cases presenting as bvFTD (Boxer et al., 2006; Rankin et al., 2011).

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy

Progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSP-S), previously known as Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome was first described in 1964 (Steele, Richardson, &amp; Olszewski, 1964). The initial description of nine patients displayed vertical greater than horizontal supranuclear gaze palsy, axial rigidity, dysarthria, frequent falls, pseudobulbar affect, lack of tremor, and mild dementia with vague changes in personality and psychiatric symptoms (Steele et al., 1964). Neuropathologically, nerve cells loss and neurofibrillary tangles in the basal ganglia, brainstem and cerebellum were reported decades before the identification of PSP as a 4R tau pathology (Chambers, Lee, Troncoso, Reich, &amp; Muma, 1999). PSP-S can be a difficult diagnosis to make in the early stages since it can overlap with many syndromes but by the final exam, clinicians have had accuracy as high as over 80% in predicting the correct PSP pathology (Osaki 2004, Hughes 2002). At UCSF nearly all cases (&gt;92%) with a clinical diagnosis of PSP-S showed PSP pathology. Most of the other PSP-S cases had CBD.

The 1996 consensus clinical research criteria for possible PSP defines the following core features: onset after age 40, gradual progression, either vertical supranuclear gaze palsy or slow vertical saccades, and postural instability with falls in the first year (Litvan, Agid, et al., 1996). Patients must also have no exclusion criteria. Probable PSP is inclusive of both a vertical supranuclear gaze palsy and postural instability with falls (Litvan, Agid, et al., 1996). Severe impairment of postural reflexes and bradykinesia make PSP falls extremely dangerous since patients are often unable to protect themselves from objects during the fall. The falls in PSP can be multifactorial from either the impaired eye movements, postural instability, impulsivity or all three symptoms.

Patients can present with predominant executive dysfunction, personality changes, reduced mental speed and attention deficits giving a more frontal behavior syndrome that is not emphasized in the current PSP criteria (Donker Kaat et al., 2007). Patients presenting with frontal behavior symptoms and without falls or supranuclear gaze palsy in their first year of presentation are likely to be among the 20% of PSP patients that are clinically misdiagnosed (Donker Kaat et al., 2007; Williams &amp; Lees, 2009). Clinical presentations of bvFTD or nfvPPA can progress to PSP or alternatively, an initial presentation of PSP can progress into bvFTD or nfvPPA (Donker Kaat et al., 2007; Kertesz &amp; McMonagle, 2010; Kertesz et al., 2005). Williams has proposed a system to further differentiate PSP. He classifies Richardson’s syndrome as the classic PSP-S described above. PSP-Parkinsonism (PSP-P), is the most common non Steele-Richardson PSP subtype, which is similar to Richardson’s syndrome but has tremor and mild responsiveness to Levodopa. PSP-pure akinesia with gait freezing (PSP-PAGF) is a PSP-S subtype which can have a slower disease course in spite of severe atrophy in the globus pallidus, substantia nigra and subthalamic nucleus. There are also PSP-Corticobasal Syndrome (PSP-CBS) as well as PSP-progressive nonfluent aphasia (PSP-PNFA) (Williams &amp; Lees, 2009).

There are no definitive biomarkers for PSP. Recently, levels of neurofilament light chain in serum have been correlated with PSP disease severity but this marker is not specific for PSP and has been associated with other neurodegenerative disorders (Lu et al., 2015; Meeter et al., 2016; Rohrer et al., 2016; Rojas et al., 2016). Midbrain atrophy and the hummingbird sign on neuroimaging have been associated with PSP. The utility of the hummingbird sign in predicting midbrain atrophy has been debated but there is evidence showing it can help differentiate PSP from idiopathic Parkinson’s disease and multisystem atrophy (Kim, Kang, Ma, Ju, &amp; Kim, 2015). Boxer et al showed that with neuroimaging, one can differentiate CBD from PSP with 93% accuracy using only the differences between atrophy of the midbrain and left frontal eye fields (Boxer et al., 2006).

Neuropathology of FTLD

“Frontotemporal lobar degeneration” (FTLD) is defined as the neurodegenerative process causing selective neuronal loss and gliosis of the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain (Mackenzie et al., 2009). The term is also used, less strictly, to encompass the diverse group of neuropathologic substrates of disease associated with the clinical phenotypes of FTD, although some of these pathological processes display a wider range of neurodegeneration than the one limited to the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. The current classification of “FTLD” subtypes is based on the immunohistochemical staining for specific intracellular protein accumulations associated with distinct molecular defects (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011; Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2010). We will discuss the basic groupings of FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, FTLD-FET and FTLD-UPS. We will also discuss clinicopathological correlations that are known for these neuropathologic entities (Figure 6: Clinical and pathological correlations in FTD spectrum disorders).

FTLD-Tau

The protein tau was first discovered in 1975 as an essential protein in microtubule assembly (Weingarten, Lockwood, Hwo, &amp; Kirschner, 1975). It was later found to assist in cellular transport and stabilization of the structure of the cell (Mandelkow &amp; Mandelkow, 2012). More recently it has been established that tau is also involved in cellular signaling pathways (Jenkins &amp; Johnson, 1998; Leugers &amp; Lee, 2010; Morris, Maeda, Vossel, &amp; Mucke, 2011). The tau gene, MAPT, was found to be on chromosome 17q21 and over fifty mutations have been linked to FTLD-tau pathology (Clark et al., 1998; Hutton, Lendon, Rizzu, Baker, Froelich, Houlden, Pickering-Brown, Chakraverty, Isaacs, Grover, Hackett, Adamson, Lincoln, Dickson, Davies, Petersen, Stevens, de Graaff, Wauters, van Baren, Hillebrand, Joosse, Kwon, Nowotny, Che, et al., 1998; Mandelkow &amp; Mandelkow, 2012; Poorkaj et al., 1998; Spillantini et al., 1998; K. C. Wilhelmsen, T. Lynch, E. Pavlou, M. Higgins, &amp; T. G. Nygaard, 1994). Alternative splicing of MAPT generates six different isoforms of tau. Alternative inclusion of exon 10 generates tau isoform with either four (4R tau) (3R tau) microtubule binding domain repeats (Mandelkow &amp; Mandelkow, 2012). Neurodegenerative diseases characterized by predominant accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau inclusions are also called tauopathies. Neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease are composed of both hyperphosphorylated 4R tau and 3R tau inclusions. In FTLD-tau, Pick’s disease is characterized by predominant deposition of 3R tau aggregates, while CBD, PSP, globular glial tauopathy (GGT) and argyrophilic grain disease (AGD) are 4R tauopathies. Distinct tauopathies have unique patterns of immunohistochemistry and western blot profiles (Ghetti et al., 2015).

Pick’s Disease (3R Tau)

The neuropathology of Pick’s disease displays ballooned neurons, known as Pick’s cells, as well as large spherical argyrophilic neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions, known as Pick bodies (Figure 7: Pick’s 3R tau). Pick’s bodies are predominantly composed of 3R tau, although 4R can be present (Zhukareva et al., 2002). Pick’s disease is associated with severe atrophy of the ventral regions of the frontal and temporal lobes as well as anterior cingulate gyrus and insula. Pick’s disease occurs predominantly sporadically, although it has been rarely reported in association with specific MAPT mutations: L315R, S320F, Q336H and G389R (Ghetti et al., 2015; Tacik et al., 2015). Pick’s presents more commonly as bvFTD, though nfvPPA and svPPA phenotypes are not infrequent (Graff-Radford et al., 1990; Irwin, 2016; Irwin et al., 2016). In autopsy confirmed cases within the UCSF cohort, 23% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of nfvPPA and 9% of svPPA had Pick’s 3R tau.

PSP (4R Tau)

The neuropathology of PSP is characterized by the presence of tufted astrocytes, thorny astrocytes and spherical ‘globose’ neurofibrillary tangles in subcortical nuclei (Figure 8: PSP 4R tau) (D. W. Dickson et al., 2002; Josephs et al., 2011; Josephs et al., 2006; Litvan, Hauw, et al., 1996). Outside the brainstem, flame shaped neurofibrillary tangles are seen, along with diffuse granular ‘pre-tangles (D. Dickson &amp; ebrary Inc., 2011). Oligodendroglial cytoplasmic inclusions known as coiled bodies are seen in the cortex and more abundantly in the subcortical white matter (D. Dickson &amp; ebrary Inc., 2011). The tau inclusions are predominantly composed of 4R tau and are present in the brainstem more than the cortex (V. M. Lee, Goedert, &amp; Trojanowski, 2001). Cortical involvement can be variable, with the primary motor cortex and the frontal eye fields being more often involved while worse cognitive performance is associated with wider cortical involvement (Bigio, Brown, &amp; White, 1999).

CBD (4R Tau)

Astrocytic plaques (Figure 9: CBD 4R tau) are the most characteristic neuropathological hallmark of CBD (Feany &amp; Dickson, 1996). Just like in tufted astrocytes of PSP, astrocytic plaques are made of hyperphosphorylated 4R tau deposits in astrocytic processes (V. M. Lee et al., 2001). In astrocytic plaques these deposits localize in the most distal portion of the process as opposed to the localization of deposits (proximal to the cell body) in tufted astrocytes (D. Dickson &amp; ebrary Inc., 2011). Neuronal inclusions in the form of granular cytoplasmic accumulation of tau or neurofibrillary tangles are seen in the cortex (D. W. Dickson et al., 2002). Ballooned neurons are a common feature of CBD, although they are also seen in Pick’s disease (D. W. Dickson et al., 2002) A distinctive feature of CBD is the extensive involvement of the subcortical white matter with tau deposits in neurites and oligodendroglial coiled bodies (D. Dickson &amp; ebrary Inc., 2011). CBD pathology affects a wider range of cortical involvement than PSP pathology involving more dorsal regions and tends to be found in the pre and post central gyri (D. W. Dickson et al., 2002).

Globular Glial Tauopathy (GGT)

Globular Glial Tauopathy (GGT) is a rare 4R tauopathy, whose pathological classification has been recently revised. Proposed criteria describe three different pathological subtypes that are variably associated with the clinical phenotypes of bvFTD and/or MND, with or without extrapyramidal signs (Ahmed et al., 2013). Microscopically, the disease is characterized by the presence of large 4R tau inclusions with globular morphology in oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, particularly abundant within the white matter (Ahmed et al., 2013).

Argyrophilic Grain Disease (AGD)

Argyrophilic gain disease (AGD) is a 4R tauopathy mainly characterized by the accumulation of small dot like, comma-like argyrophilic 4R tau positive inclusions (“grains”), predominantly seen in the temporal lobes and limbic structures. AGD can occur alone or contextually to other neurodegenerative diseases, more often Alzheimer’s disease pathology (Fujino et al., 2005; Thal et al., 2005). The clinical presentation ranges from mild cognitive impairment to AD-like dementia and a slowly progressive bvFTD (Grinberg et al., 2013; Ishihara et al., 2005; Tsuchiya et al., 2001). Tau deposits in AGD lack acetylation, a post-translational modification step thought to be essential for the acquisition of pathogenic features by tau species in AD, hence the hypothesis of a potential protective role of AGD in AD that may explain the more benign clinical phenotype (slow disease course) often associated with this underlying neuropathology (Grinberg et al., 2013).

FTLD-TDP

In 2006, TDP-43 was shown to be the major disease protein in the neuropathology of both FTLD-U (tau negative, ubiquitin positive FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Arai et al., 2006; Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011; Neumann et al., 2006). TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) belongs to the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins family, and has been shown to be involved with micro RNA processing, mRNA stabilization, transport and translation (Baralle, Buratti, &amp; Baralle, 2013). The exact role of TDP-43 is unknown but it has been associated with thousands of mRNA targets and thought to be vital for cell function (Polymenidou et al., 2011). Pathological TDP-43 in neurodegenerative diseases is found as aggregates in the cytoplasm leading to phosphorylation, ubiquitination and it’s degradation (Buratti &amp; Baralle, 2009). In 2011, a harmonized classification of FTLD-TDP pathology was proposed to categorize TDP-43 neuropathology into 4 groups (A, B, C, D) which has since been widely accepted (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011).

TDP-43 type A neuropathology is characterized by abundance of neuronal rounded or crescent-like cytoplasmic inclusions, and short dystrophic neurites and rare lentiform neuronal intranuclear inclusions (Figure 10: TDP-43 Type A) which are more commonly found in cortical layer II (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011). TDP-43 type A neuropathology can present with the clinical phenotypes of bvFTD, nfvPPA, and CBS while MND is less common (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011). Pathogenic mutations in GRN on chromosome 17 are associated with TDP-43 type A pathology (Cairns, Neumann, et al., 2007).

TDP-43 type B neuropathology is characterized by much less frequent neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and dystrophic neurites found in both superficial and deep cortical layers (Figure 11: TDP-43 Type B) (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011). TDP-43 type B pathology is the most common subtype associated with presence of neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in lower motor neurons, with or without clinical signs of MND (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011). Clinical phenotypes of FTD, MND and FTD-MND can have TDP-43 type B neuropathology (Mackenzie, 2007b; Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011). Patients with C9ORF72 repeat expansions most often have TDP-43 type B although TDP-43 type A is seen as well (J. S. Snowden et al., 2015).

TDP-43 type C neuropathology is characterized by long tortuous dystrophic neurites, and few neuronal intracytoplasmic inclusions (Figure 12: TDP-43-C) (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011), while neuronal intranuclear inclusions are uncommon. TDP-43 type C is the most common neuropathology substrate of svPPA and in the UCSF autopsy cohort it is pathology confirmed in 90% of the cases.

TDP-43 type D is characterized by the presence of frequent lentiform neuronal intranuclear inclusions as well as short dystrophic neurites and rare neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in all layers (Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011), though these findings are more common in superficial layers. This subtype of FTLD-TDP is uniquely associated with mutations in the VCP gene and the clinical phenotype of Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget’s disease and FTD (Cairns, Bigio, et al., 2007; Mackenzie, Neumann, et al., 2011).

FTLD-FET

In 2009, human genetic studies found mutations in the Fused in sarcoma (FUS) gene were linked to familial MND and FUS cytoplasmic inclusions were found in post mortem analyses (Kwiatkowski et al., 2009; Neumann et al., 2011; Vance et al., 2009). The role of FUS is not fully understood but it has DNA/RNA binding properties and is thought to be similar to TDP-43 (Baloh, 2012; Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2012; Vance et al., 2009). Given the known overlap of MND and FTD, involvement of FUS in FTD was explored and FUS cytoplasmic inclusions were found in patients with FTD (Mackenzie, Rademakers, et al., 2010; Neumann, Rademakers, et al., 2009; Urwin et al., 2010). MND were correlated with mutations in the FUS gene, but FUS pathology in FTD was shown to be sporadic and not affiliated with a mutation in FUS (J. S. Snowden et al., 2011). FUS is a member of the FET protein family, which also consists of other RNA/DNA binding proteins Ewing’s sarcoma (EWS) and TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15) (Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2012). In 2011, immunohistochemical analysis of FUS inclusions in FTLD showed that the whole FET family (FUS, EWS and TAF15) were found in FTLD pathology but not MND FUS inclusions (Neumann et al., 2011). This suggests different mechanism for FTLD and MND with FUS pathology (Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2012). FET proteins were also found in neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID) and basophilic inclusion body disease (BIBD) (Munoz et al., 2009) (Neumann et al., 2011; Neumann, Roeber, et al., 2009). Previously aFTLD-U, NIFID, BIBD were considered FTLD-FUS subtypes but since they are all positive for FET-positive inclusions, they can now grouped together under FTLD-FET (Mackenzie, Munoz, et al., 2011; Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2012).

Atypical FTLD-U (aFTLD-U) neuropathology is characterized by neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions containing FET proteins and most distinctively by the presence of rare and unique neuronal intranuclear inclusions with a peculiar vermiform shape (Mackenzie, Munoz, et al., 2011) (Figure 13: aFTLD-U binding FUS).

Neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder with distinct neuropathology due to immunoreactive neurofilament inclusions that were later found to bind all class IV intermediate filaments (Neumann, Roeber, et al., 2009). In 2009, NIFID was found to have intracellular FUS accumulation (Neumann, Roeber, et al., 2009) and in 2011 it was found to have widespread FET proteins accumulation (Neumann et al., 2011).

Basophilic inclusion body disease (BIBD), displays pathognomonic basophilic round inclusions, when stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Basophilic inclusions are more common in subcortical regions such as the basal ganglia and brainstem tegmentum. There is severe frontotemporal atrophy in FTD cases and spinal cord involvement in MND cases (E. B. Lee et al., 2013).

FTLD-UPS

A rare form of FTD has been linked to chromosome 3 in a large Danish family (Holm, Isaacs, &amp; Mackenzie, 2009), and was later associated with a mutation in the CHMP2B (charged multivesicular body protein 2B) gene (Skibinski et al., 2005). CHMP2B mutations have been associated with familial FTD and ALS. The neuropathology is characterized by the presence of inclusions that are immunoreactive for ubiquitin and are negative for tau, TDP-43 and FET proteins, though the exact nature of an eventual pathogenic protein remains unknown (Holm et al., 2009).

Genetics

Frontotemporal dementia frequently has a strong genetic component contributing to its pathogenesis. Over half of FTD cases are sporadic, but up to 40% of cases have a family history of dementia, psychiatric disease or motor symptoms, with at least 10% of cases having an autosomal dominant pattern (Chow, Miller, Hayashi, &amp; Geschwind, 1999; Goldman et al., 2005). Of the clinical syndromes, FTD-MND is the most heritable and svPPA is the least heritable (Goldman et al., 2005). The three most common genes associated with FTD are C9ORF72, MAPT and GRN. Other less common genes associated with FTD include: VCP, CHMP2B, TARDBP, FUS, EXT2, TBK1 and SQSTM1.

Microtubule Associated Protein Tau (MAPT)

In the mid 1900’s, FTD was observed by Malamud, Waggoner and Sjogren, to have a genetic contribution and some families with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance (Bruce L. Miller, 2014). In 1994, Wilhelmsen linked a family that had an autosomal dominant pattern of FTD, which he called disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy-complex (DDPAC), to a region on chromosome 17 (K.C. Wilhelmsen, T. Lynch, E. Pavlou, M. Higgins, &amp; T. G. Nygaard, 1994). In 1998, as more FTD families were linked to chromosome 17, missense mutations in tau exons 9–13 and a splice site mutation in intron 10 was linked to increased 4R tau production as a possible mechanism for the tau pathology (Grover et al., 1999; Hutton, Lendon, Rizzu, Baker, Froelich, Houlden, Pickering-Brown, Chakraverty, Isaacs, Grover, Hackett, Adamson, Lincoln, Dickson, Davies, Petersen, Stevens, de Graaff, Wauters, van Baren, Hillebrand, Joosse, Kwon, Nowotny, Heutink, et al., 1998).

Clinical presentations of patients with MAPT mutations vary with bvFTD, nfPPA, PSP-S, and CBS all described (Rohrer &amp; Warren, 2011). Symptoms of motor neuron disease are rarely associated with MAPT mutations (J. S. Snowden et al., 2015). The phenotype can vary between family members affected with the same mutation (Yasuda et al., 2005). The neuroimaging of patients with MAPT mutations tends to show a more symmetric pattern of atrophy than other genetic causes of FTD (Rohrer &amp; Warren, 2011; Whitwell et al., 2009).

An H1H1 haplotype of the MAPT gene increases a patient’s risk for PSP and CBD (Conrad et al., 1997; Myers et al., 2007). The rare sequence variant in MAPT, p. A152T was found initially in patients with PSP, but in a larger study was shown to increase the risk of developing AD and FTD spectrum disorders, when compared to controls (Coppola et al., 2012). This is the first time a tau polymorphism has been linked to both FTD and AD.

Progranulin (GRN)

In 2006, mutations in GRN, also on chromosome 17, were linked to FTLD (Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006). Further research of GRN, revealed that the haploinsufficiency was the mechanism for the neurodegeneration (Petkau &amp; Leavitt, 2014; Ward &amp; Miller, 2011). Patients with mutations in GRN, have 50% less GRN mRNA progranulin levels in both CSF and plasma supporting the haploinsufficiency theory (Coppola et al., 2008; Van Damme et al., 2008). The exact role of progranulin is not fully understood, but it has been linked to neuronal growth, lysosomal function plus inflammation and stress response (Petkau &amp; Leavitt, 2014; Ward &amp; Miller, 2011). The neuropathology associated with GRN is predominantly TDP-43 type A (Cairns, Neumann, et al., 2007; Mackenzie, 2007a).

Patients with GRN mutations most often present with bvFTD or nfvPPA, but CBS is also common and MND is rare (Le Ber et al., 2008; Mackenzie, 2007a). On average patients tend to be older with age of onset, mean age 60, and apathy is often a predominant symptom (J. S. Snowden et al., 2015). MRI imaging can show asymmetry with atrophy in the fronto-temporo-parietal atrophy, suggesting a GRN mutation (Rohrer &amp; Warren, 2011). Only 70–90% of families with a GRN mutation have a family history of neurodegenerative disease suggesting it has lower penetrance than other FTD genes (van Swieten &amp; Heutink, 2008). Homozygote GRN carriers develop a syndrome suggestive of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with early onset retinal degeneration, seizures and cerebellar ataxia (Smith et al., 2012).

Chromosome 9 Open Reading Frame 72 (C9ORF72)

A genetic linkage between FTD -MND and chromosome 9q21-q22 had been known since 2000 (Hosler et al., 2000) but a mutation was not discovered until 2011 (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Renton et al., 2011). This mutation is a hexanucleotide repeat, GGGGCC, in a non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Renton et al., 2011). The pathologic C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion is the most frequent genetic cause of familial FTD (11.7%) and familial ALS (23.5%) (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011). The maximum size of hexanucleotide repeats in controls was 2–23. Expansion sizes from 700 to 1600 have been associated with pathogenesis causing FTD, MND or FTD-MND (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011). The exact role of C9ORF72 is still being studied, but the repeat expansions of C9ORF72 are thought to cause loss of function in transcription as well as possible gain of function due to toxic RNA foci (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011). Dipeptides are produced by the abnormal expansions that also likely contribute to the neurodegeneration (Mann, 2015).

The most common neuropathology associated with the pathologic C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions (C9+) is TDP-43 type B, (Mackenzie et al., 2013; J. S. Snowden et al., 2015). There is current debate over the significance of inclusions with dipeptide repeat (DPR) proteins that are specifically found in all C9+ phenotypes (Mackenzie et al., 2013; Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2016; Mann, 2015; Vatsavayai et al., 2016). The DPR proteins have not been correlated specifically with neurodegeneration and cases of C9+ patients that died prematurely had DPR pathology, no TDP-43 pathology and no symptoms of FTD or MND suggesting DPR accumulates early (Baborie et al., 2015; Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2016; Proudfoot et al., 2014). C9+ patients show RNA aggregates, and these RNA foci have sparked theories about mechanism of neurotoxicity (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Mackenzie &amp; Neumann, 2016).

The most common clinical phenotype with C9+ patients is bvFTD, although MND and FTD-MND are also common (Boeve et al., 2012; J. S. Snowden et al., 2015). When compared to other gene FTD gene carriers, C9+ patients showed a higher likelihood of exhibiting psychotic symptoms, and delusions (Sha et al., 2012; J. S. Snowden et al., 2015). In one study C9+ patients were less likely to exhibit dietary changes but were more socially appropriate and warm (J. S. Snowden et al., 2015). C9+ patients can have a long disease course (Khan et al., 2012; Sha et al., 2012).

MRI imaging of C9+ patients have shown typical FTD atrophy patterns when compared to controls but when compared to other FTD genes the atrophy pattern is atypical (Sha et al., 2012; Whitwell et al., 2012). Patients with FTD-MND have shown more atrophy in dorsal frontal, parietal, the thalamus and cerebellum (Sha et al., 2012; Whitwell et al., 2012). Functional connectivity studies associated diminished salience network connectivity with atrophy of the left medial pulvinar thalamic nucleus in C9+ patients (S. E. Lee et al., 2014).

Rare genetic causes of FTD

A rare autosomal dominant disorder with inclusion body myositis, Paget’s disease of the bone and FTD has been linked to a mutation in VCP on chromosome 9 (Neumann et al., 2007; Watts et al., 2007). Exome studies have linked VCP mutations to MND (Johnson et al., 2010). Mutations in VCP are linked to a unique form of neuropathology, TDP-43 type D (Neumann et al., 2007).

Mutations in FUS are rare and predominantly associated with familial ALS. Neuropathologically, they present as FTLD-FUS diseases with inclusions made of FUS protein in the absence of other FET proteins (Kwiatkowski et al., 2009; Neumann et al., 2011).

There are numerous other genes that have been associated with FTLD which are uncommon. These include mutations in: TARDBP (Borghero et al., 2011; Kovacs et al., 2009; Mosca et al., 2012), CHMP2B (Skibinski et al., 2005), TBK1 (Freischmidt et al., 2015; Pottier et al., 2015), OPTN (Pottier et al., 2015; Pottier, Ravenscroft, Sanchez-Contreras, &amp; Rademakers, 2016), SQMSTM1 (Fecto et al., 2011; Pottier et al., 2016), UBQLN2 (Deng et al., 2011), and EXT-2 (Narvid et al., 2009)

Treatments

There are currently no FDA approved treatments for FTD, but off-label pharmacological and behavioral modification techniques can be used to manage symptoms in FTD.

The FDA approved treatments for Alzheimer’s disease have not shown benefit in FTD. There is evidence that acetylcholinesterase inhibitors actually make symptoms in FTD worse (Kimura &amp; Takamatsu, 2013; Mendez, Shapira, McMurtray, &amp; Licht, 2007). Memantine was tolerated in patients with FTD but in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial there was no benefit to behavior or cognition (Boxer, Knopman, et al., 2013; Vercelletto et al., 2011).

It is accepted that FTD symptoms and behavior can improve with selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (Herrmann et al., 2012; Ikeda et al., 2004; Mendez, Shapira, &amp; Miller, 2005; Swartz, Miller, Lesser, &amp; Darby, 1997). A small randomized, placebo controlled double blinded trial with Trazadone showed improvement in NPI scores of FTD patients but no change in MMSE (Lebert, Stekke, Hasenbroekx, &amp; Pasquier, 2004).

Atypical antipsychotics should be used with caution in patients with FTLD given that they may have increase vulnerability to the extrapyramidal side effects and there is a black box warning for use in the elderly (Pijnenburg, Sampson, Harvey, Fox, &amp; Rossor, 2003). There is little evidence for benefit from mood stabilizers in FTLD and evidence is limited (Chow &amp; Mendez, 2002; Cruz, Marinho, Fontenelle, Engelhardt, &amp; Laks, 2008). Oxytocin has been proposed as a potential therapy targeting the emotional changes in FTD and a small study showed mild improvement on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory after its use (Finger, 2011; Jesso et al., 2011).

There are also important non-pharmacological therapies to treat FTD symptoms. FTD symptoms can improve with caregiver education about behavioral, environmental and physical techniques to minimize or redirect unwanted behaviors (Merrilees, 2007). Benefits from physical exercise have been shown to delay cognitive decline and should be recommended to all FTD patients that can safely tolerate it (Cheng et al., 2014). Patients with nfvPPA, svPPA, and language deficits, may benefit from speech therapy (Kortte &amp; Rogalski, 2013).

Although there are no FDA-approved treatments for FTD, this is a hopeful time for FTD treatments to come to fruition. There are currently active clinical trials targeting specific FTD mechanisms and pathology. There are trials targeted at tau pathology with therapeutics aimed at preventing tau aggregation, tau microtubule stabilization and removal of tau with tau-targeted antibodies (Karakaya, Fusser, Prvulovic, &amp; Hampel, 2012; Schneider &amp; Mandelkow, 2008; Tsai &amp; Boxer, 2016). There are trials currently targeting the haploinsufficiency in GRN gene expression by using different methods of increasing progranulin (Boxer, Gold, Huey, Gao, et al., 2013; Boxer, Gold, Huey, Hu, et al., 2013; Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2013). Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) therapies are being developed to target the toxin gain of function with C9ORF72 genetic mutation (Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2013). Molecular based treatments for FTD are closer than they have ever been.

Dr. Olney has received grant support from the National Institute of Health/National Institute of Aging T32AG023481-11S1 grant. Dr. Spina receives research support from the National Institute of Health/National Institute of Aging grant K08AG052648. Dr. Miller has served as an Advisor/Director to The Tau Consortium, The John Douglas French Foundation, The Larry L. Hillblom Foundation, Medical Advisory Board, National Institute for Health Research, Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre and its subunit, the Biomedical Research Unit in Dementia (UK); he has served as an External Advisor to University of Washington ADRC, Stanford University ADRC, and University of Pittsburgh ADRC; he has received grant/research support from National Institute of Health/National Institute of Aging grants P50AG023501, P01AG019724, and P50 AG1657303, Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (CMS) Dementia Care Ecosystem 1C1CMS3313460100, and a UCSF/Quest Diagnostics Dementia Pathway Collaboration Research Grant; he receives royalties from Cambridge University Press, Guilford Publications, Inc., and Neurocase.

Figure 1 bvFTD MRI

MRI of a patient with bvFTD showing severe frontal and temporal lobe atrophy. The patient is a 60 year old female who developed symptoms of withdrawal, not taking care of her farm animals, 8 years prior. Her symptoms progressed to impaired hygiene, lack of empathy, and disobeying the rules of the road. In the last 2 years she developed repetitive behaviors, hyperorality, incontinence and a non-fluent aphasia.

Figure 2 Paintings

Paintings made by a 53 year old male with FTLD that had both language and behavioral symptoms. He developed compuslions for painting as one of his early symptoms and it is postulated that as his right temporal lobe become more involved that the faces in his work became less detailed and began to have a more generic smile with teeth.

Figure 3 Left svPPA MRI

MRI showing left temporal lobe atrophy in sagittal, coronal and axial cuts.

The patient is a 61 year old man, whose first symptom was 6 years prior with the inability to name apples in a fruit bowl. His problems with semantics and naming progressed and 3 years prior he had difficulty recognizing faces of neighbors. More recent symptoms include the urge to lick people and things (hyperorality).

Figure 4 Right svPPA MRI

MRI shows bitemporal atrophy right greater than left. The patient is a 64 year old woman, whose first symptom was 10 years prior, telling repetitive stories that slowly became less appropriate and embarrassed her friends and family. Six years prior, she developed obsessions of taking specific walking routes to collect cigarette butts. More recently she has shown lack of empathy towards her family and dog.

Figure 5 nfvPPA MRI

MRI showing predominant left posterior fronto-insular atrophy.

The patient is an 84 year old woman, whose first symptom was word finding difficulties 7 years prior. Over time she developed impaired grammar and a speech apraxia as her speech output diminished.

Figure 6 Clinical and pathological correlations in FTD spectrum disorders

This figure summarizes the overlap of FTD spectrum disorders (bvFTD, PSP, CBS, FTD-MND, svPPA, nfPPA) and their neuropathology (FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, FTLD-FET, FTLD-UPS) with a small portion of clinical syndromes being caused by AD pathology. The clinical syndrome of lvPPA is highly correlated with AD pathology.

Figure 7 3R tau in Pick’s Disease

Photomicrograph of the middle frontal gyrus from a patient with Pick’s disease. Tau immunohistochemistry demonstrates numerous Pick’s bodies (black arrow) and ballooned neurons or Pick’s cells (red arrows). Image courtesy of Salvatore Spina MD, PhD UCSF

Figure 8 4R tau in PSP

Tau immunohistochemistry of the superior frontal sulcus showing tufted astrocytes (black arrows), and a globose tangle (red arrow).

Image courtesy of Salvatore Spina MD, PhD UCSF

Figure 9 4R tau in CBD

Tau immunohistochemistry in the paracentral gyrus showing astrocytic plaques (black arrows).

Image courtesy of Salvatore Spina MD, PhD UCSF

Figure 10 TDP-43 Type A

Orbitofrontal gyrus showing many short dystrophic neurites (black arrow), neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (green arrow) and a lentiform neuronal intranuclear inclusions (red arrow). TDP immunohistochemistry. Image courtesy of Lea Grinberg MD, PhD UCSF

Figure 11 TDP-43 Type B

TDP immunohistochemistry of the precentral gyrus showing moderate neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (black arrow). TDP immunohistochemistry.

Image courtesy of Lea Grinberg MD, PhD UCSF

Figure 12 TDP-43 Type C

TDP immunohistochemistry of the insula showing long tortuous dystrophic neurites (black arrows), and few neuronal intranuclear inclusions.

Image courtesy of Lea Grinberg MD, PhD UCSF

Figure 13 aFTLD-U binding FUS

FUS immunohistochemistry of the dentate fascia (hippocampus) showing many FUS positive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (black arrows).

Image courtesy of Lea Grinberg MD, PhD UCSF

Table 1 Diagnostic Criteria for behavioral variant FTD

(From Rascovsky K, Hodges JR, Knopman D, et al. Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain. 2011)

I. Neurodegenerative disease
The following symptom must be present to meet criteria for bvFTD Shows progressive deterioration of behavior and/or cognition by observation or history (as provided by a knowledgeable informant).

	
II. Possible bvFTD
Three of the following behavioral/cognitive symptoms (A–F) must be present to meet criteria. Ascertainment requires that symptoms be persistent or recurrent, rather than single or rare events. Early behavioral disinhibition [one of the following symptoms (A.1–A.3) must be present]: A.1 Socially inappropriate behavior

A.2 Loss of manners or decorum

A.3 Impulsive, rash or careless actions

Early apathy or inertia [one of the following symptoms (B.1–B.2) must be present]: B.1 Apathy

B.2 Inertia

Early loss of sympathy or empathy [one of the following symptoms (C.1–C.2) must be present]: C.1 Diminished response to other people’s needs and feelings

C.2 Diminished social interest, interrelatedness or personal warmth

Early perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive/ritualistic behavior [one of the following symptoms (D.1–D.3) must be present]: D.1 Simple repetitive movements

D.2 Complex, compulsive or ritualistic behaviors

D.3 Stereotypy of speech

Hyperorality and dietary changes [one of the following symptoms (E.1–E.3) must be present]: E.1 Altered food preferences

E.2 Binge eating, increased consumption of alcohol or cigarettes

E.3 Oral exploration or consumption of inedible objects

Neuropsychological profile: executive/generation deficits with relative sparing of memory and visuospatial functions [all of the following symptoms (F.1–F.3) must be present]: F.1 Deficits in executive tasks

F.2 Relative sparing of episodic memory

F.3 Relative sparing of visuospatial skills

	
III. Probable bvFTD
All of the following symptoms (A–C) must be present to meet criteria. Meets criteria for possible bvFTD

Exhibits significant functional decline (by caregiver report or as evidenced by Clinical Dementia Rating Scale or Functional Activities Questionnaire scores)

Imaging results consistent with bvFTD [one of the following (C.1–C.2) must be present]: C.1 Frontal and/or anterior temporal atrophy on MRI or CT

C.2 Frontal and/or anterior temporal hypoperfusion or hypometabolism on PET or SPECT

	
IV. Behavioral variant FTD with definite FTLD Pathology
Criterion A and either criterion B or C must be present to meet criteria. Meets criteria for possible or probable bvFTD

Histopathological evidence of FTLD on biopsy or at post-mortem

Presence of a known pathogenic mutation

	
V. Exclusionary criteria for bvFTD
Criteria A and B must be answered negatively for any bvFTD diagnosis. Criterion C can be positive for possible bvFTD but must be negative for probable bvFTD. Pattern of deficits is better accounted for by other non-degenerative nervous system or medical disorders

Behavioral disturbance is better accounted for by a psychiatric diagnosis

Biomarkers strongly indicative of Alzheimer’s disease or other neurodegenerative process

	

Table 2 Diagnostic Criteria for the semantic variant PPA

(From Gorno-Tempini ML, Hillis AE, Weintraub S, et al. Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology. 2011)

I. Clinical diagnosis of semantic variant PPA
Both of the following core features must be present: Impaired confrontation naming

Impaired single-word comprehension

	
At least three of the following other diagnostic features must be present: Impaired object knowledge, particularly for low-frequency or low-familiarity items

Surface dyslexia or dysgraphia

Spared repetition

Spared speech production (grammar and motor speech)

	
II. Imaging-supported semantic variant PPA diagnosis
Both of the following criteria must be present: Clinical diagnosis of semantic variant PPA

Imaging must show one or more of the following results: Predominant anterior temporal lobe atrophy

Predominant anterior temporal hypoperfusion or hypometabolism on SPECT or PET

	
III. Semantic variant PPA with definite pathology
Clinical diagnosis (criterion A below) and either criterion B or C must be present: Clinical diagnosis of semantic variant PPA

Histopathologic evidence of a specific neurodegenerative pathology (e.g., FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, AD, other)

Presence of a known pathogenic mutation

	

Table 3 Diagnostic criteria for nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA

(From Gorno-Tempini ML, Hillis AE, Weintraub S, et al. Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology. 2011)

I. Clinical diagnosis of nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA:
At least one of the following core features must be present: Agrammatism in language production

Effortful, halting speech with inconsistent speech sound errors and distortions (apraxia of speech)

	
At least 2 of 3 of the following other features must be present: Impaired comprehension of syntactically complex sentences

Spared single-word comprehension

Spared object knowledge

	
II. Imaging-supported nonfluent/agrammatic variant diagnosis
Both of the following criteria must be present: Clinical diagnosis of nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA

Imaging must show one or more of the following results: Predominant left posterior frontoinsular atrophy on MRI or

Predominant left posterior frontoinsular hypoperfusion or hypometabolism on SPECT or PET

	
III. Nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA with definite pathology
Clinical diagnosis (criterion A below) and either criterion B or C must be present: Clinical diagnosis of nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA

Histopathologic evidence of a specific neurodegenerative pathology (e.g., FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, AD, other)

Presence of a known pathogenic mutation

	

Key Points

- The core FTD spectrum disorders include: behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), and semantic variant PPA (svPPA).

- Related FTD disorders include frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS).

- The most common neuropathologic substrates of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) are: FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, and FTLD-FET.

- The three genes most commonly associated with FTD are C9ORF72, MAPT and GRN.

- There are currently no FDA approved treatments for FTD

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

The Authors have nothing to disclose.


Ahmed Z Bigio EH Budka H Dickson DW Ferrer I Ghetti B Kovacs GG 2013 Globular glial tauopathies (GGT): consensus recommendations Acta Neuropathol 126 4 537 544 10.1007/s00401-013-1171-0 23995422
Alzheimer A 1911 Uber eigenartige Krankheitsfalle des spateren Alters Z Gesamte Neruol Psychiatr 4 356 385
Ames D Cummings JL Wirshing WC Quinn B Mahler M 1994 Repetitive and compulsive behavior in frontal lobe degenerations Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 6 2 100 113 8044031
Arai T Hasegawa M Akiyama H Ikeda K Nonaka T Mori H Oda T 2006 TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Biochem Biophys Res Commun 351 3 602 611 17084815
Armstrong MJ Litvan I Lang AE Bak TH Bhatia KP Borroni B Weiner WJ 2013 Criteria for the diagnosis of corticobasal degeneration Neurology 80 5 496 503 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0fd1 23359374
Baborie A Griffiths TD Jaros E Perry R McKeith IG Burn DJ Mann DM 2015 Accumulation of dipeptide repeat proteins predates that of TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with hexanucleotide repeat expansions in C9ORF72 gene Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 41 5 601 612 10.1111/nan.12178 25185840
Baker M Mackenzie IR Pickering-Brown SM Gass J Rademakers R Lindholm C Hutton M 2006 Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17 Nature 442 7105 916 919 16862116
Baloh RH 2012 How do the RNA-binding proteins TDP-43 and FUS relate to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal degeneration, and to each other? Curr Opin Neurol 25 6 701 707 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32835a269b 23041957
Baralle M Buratti E Baralle FE 2013 The role of TDP-43 in the pathogenesis of ALS and FTLD Biochem Soc Trans 41 6 1536 1540 10.1042/BST20130186 24256250
Bigio EH Brown DF White CL 1999 Progressive supranuclear palsy with dementia: cortical pathology J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58 4 359 364 10218631
Boeve BF Boylan KB Graff-Radford NR DeJesus-Hernandez M Knopman DS Pedraza O Rademakers R 2012 Characterization of frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72 Brain 135 Pt 3 765 783 doi:aws004 [pii] 10.1093/brain/aws004 22366793
Boeve BF Maraganore DM Parisi JE Ahlskog JE Graff-Radford N Caselli RJ Petersen RC 1999 Pathologic heterogeneity in clinically diagnosed corticobasal degeneration Neurology 53 4 795 800 10489043
Borghero G Floris G Cannas A Marrosu MG Murru MR Costantino E Chio A 2011 A patient carrying a homozygous p.A382T TARDBP missense mutation shows a syndrome including ALS, extrapyramidal symptoms, and FTD Neurobiol Aging 32 12 2327 e2321 2325 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.06.009
Boxer AL Geschwind MD Belfor N Gorno-Tempini ML Schauer GF Miller BL Rosen HJ 2006 Patterns of brain atrophy that differentiate corticobasal degeneration syndrome from progressive supranuclear palsy Arch Neurol 63 1 81 86 16401739
Boxer AL Gold M Huey E Gao FB Burton EA Chow T Cummings J 2013 Frontotemporal degeneration, the next therapeutic frontier: molecules and animal models for frontotemporal degeneration drug development Alzheimers Dement 9 2 176 188 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.03.002 S1552-5260(12)01750-5 [pii] 23043900
Boxer AL Gold M Huey E Hu WT Rosen H Kramer J Cummings JL 2013 The advantages of frontotemporal degeneration drug development (part 2 of frontotemporal degeneration: the next therapeutic frontier) Alzheimers Dement 9 2 189 198 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.03.003 23062850
Boxer AL Knopman DS Kaufer DI Grossman M Onyike C Graf-Radford N Miller BL 2013 Memantine in patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial Lancet neurology 12 2 149 156 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70320-4 23290598
Brooks BR 1994 El Escorial World Federation of Neurology criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Subcommittee on Motor Neuron Diseases/Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis of the World Federation of Neurology Research Group on Neuromuscular Diseases and the El Escorial “Clinical limits of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis” workshop contributors J Neurol Sci 124 Suppl 96 107 7807156
Brun A 1993 Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type revisited Dementia 4 126 131 8401779
Buratti E Baralle FE 2009 The molecular links between TDP-43 dysfunction and neurodegeneration Adv Genet 66 1 34 10.1016/S0065-2660(09)66001-6 19737636
Cairns NJ Bigio EH Mackenzie IR Neumann M Lee VM Hatanpaa KJ Mann DM 2007 Neuropathologic diagnostic and nosologic criteria for frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus of the Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 114 1 5 22 17579875
Cairns NJ Neumann M Bigio EH Holm IE Troost D Hatanpaa KJ Mackenzie IR 2007 TDP-43 in familial and sporadic frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions Am J Pathol 171 1 227 240 17591968
Carvalho MD Swash M 2009 Awaji diagnostic algorithm increases sensitivity of El Escorial criteria for ALS diagnosis Amyotroph Lateral Scler 10 1 53 57 10.1080/17482960802521126 18985466
Chambers CB Lee JM Troncoso JC Reich S Muma NA 1999 Overexpression of four-repeat tau mRNA isoforms in progressive supranuclear palsy but not in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 46 3 325 332 10482263
Cheng ST Chow PK Song YQ Yu EC Chan AC Lee TM Lam JH 2014 Mental and physical activities delay cognitive decline in older persons with dementia Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 22 1 63 74 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.060 23582750
Chow TW Binns MA Cummings JL Lam I Black SE Miller BL van Reekum R 2009 Apathy symptom profile and behavioral associations in frontotemporal dementia vs dementia of Alzheimer type Arch Neurol 66 7 888 893 10.1001/archneurol.2009.92 19597092
Chow TW Mendez MF 2002 Goals in symptomatic pharmacologic management of frontotemporal lobar degeneration Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 17 5 267 272 12392261
Chow TW Miller BL Hayashi VN Geschwind DH 1999 Inheritance of frontotemporal dementia Arch Neurol 56 7 817 822 10404983
Clark LN Poorkaj P Wszolek Z Geschwind DH Nasreddine ZS Miller B Wilhelmsen KC 1998 Pathogenic implications of mutations in the tau gene in pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration and related neurodegenerative disorders linked to chromosome 17 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95 22 13103 13107 9789048
Clinical and neuropathological criteria for frontotemporal dementia. The Lund and Manchester Groups 1994 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 57 4 416 418 8163988
Conrad C Andreadis A Trojanowski JQ Dickson DW Kang D Chen X Saitoh T 1997 Genetic evidence for the involvement of tau in progressive supranuclear palsy [see comments] Ann Neurol 41 2 277 281 9029080
Constantinidis J Richard J Tissot R 1974 Pick’s disease: histological and clinical correlations European Neurology 11 208 217 4137107
Coppola G Chinnathambi S Lee JJ Dombroski BA Baker MC Soto-Ortolaza AI Geschwind DH 2012 Evidence for a role of the rare p.A152T variant in MAPT in increasing the risk for FTD-spectrum and Alzheimer’s diseases Hum Mol Genet 21 15 3500 3512 10.1093/hmg/dds161 dds161 [pii] 22556362
Coppola G Karydas A Rademakers R Wang Q Baker M Hutton M Geschwind DH 2008 Gene expression study on peripheral blood identifies progranulin mutations Ann Neurol 64 1 92 96 10.1002/ana.21397 18551524
Coyle-Gilchrist IT Dick KM Patterson K Vazquez Rodriquez P Wehmann E Wilcox A Rowe JB 2016 Prevalence, characteristics, and survival of frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes Neurology 86 18 1736 1743 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002638 27037234
Cruts M Gijselinck I van der Zee J Engelborghs S Wils H Pirici D Van Broeckhoven C 2006 Null mutations in progranulin cause ubiquitin-positive frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17q21 Nature 442 7105 920 924 10.1038/nature05017 16862115
Cruz M Marinho V Fontenelle LF Engelhardt E Laks J 2008 Topiramate may modulate alcohol abuse but not other compulsive behaviors in frontotemporal dementia: case report Cogn Behav Neurol 21 2 104 106 10.1097/WNN.0b013e31816bdf73 18541987
DeJesus-Hernandez M Mackenzie IR Boeve BF Boxer AL Baker M Rutherford NJ Rademakers R 2011 Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS Neuron 72 2 245 256 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.011 21944778
Deng HX Chen W Hong ST Boycott KM Gorrie GH Siddique N Siddique T 2011 Mutations in UBQLN2 cause dominant X-linked juvenile and adult-onset ALS and ALS/dementia Nature 477 7363 211 215 10.1038/nature10353 21857683
Dickson D ebrary Inc. 2011 Neurodegeneration the molecular pathology of dementia and movement disorders xvii 477 p. chiefly col. ill.). Retrieved from http://site.ebrary.com/lib/princeton/Doc?id=10501281
Dickson DW Bergeron C Chin SS Duyckaerts C Horoupian D Ikeda K Litvan I 2002 Office of Rare Diseases neuropathologic criteria for corticobasal degeneration J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 61 11 935 946 12430710
Diehl-Schmid J Perneczky R Koch J Nedopil N Kurz A 2013 Guilty by suspicion? Criminal behavior in frontotemporal lobar degeneration Cogn Behav Neurol 26 2 73 77 10.1097/WNN.0b013e31829cff11 23812170
Donker Kaat L Boon AJ Kamphorst W Ravid R Duivenvoorden HJ van Swieten JC 2007 Frontal presentation in progressive supranuclear palsy Neurology 69 8 723 729 10.1212/01.wnl.0000267643.24870.26 17709703
Edwards-Lee T Miller BL Benson DF Cummings JL Russell GL Boone K Mena I 1997 The temporal variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 120 Pt 6 1027 1040 9217686
Feany MB Dickson DW 1996 Neurodegenerative Disorders with Extensive Tau Pathology: A Comparative Study and Review Annals of Neurology 40 2 139 148 8773594
Fecto F Yan J Vemula SP Liu E Yang Y Chen W Siddique T 2011 SQSTM1 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Arch Neurol 68 11 1440 1446 10.1001/archneurol.2011.250 22084127
Finger EC 2011 New potential therapeutic approaches in frontotemporal dementia: oxytocin, vasopressin, and social cognition J Mol Neurosci 45 3 696 701 10.1007/s12031-011-9550-2 21618004
Flanagan EP Baker MC Perkerson RB Duffy JR Strand EA Whitwell JL Josephs KA 2015 Dominant frontotemporal dementia mutations in 140 cases of primary progressive aphasia and speech apraxia Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 39 5–6 281 286 10.1159/000375299 25765123
Freischmidt A Wieland T Richter B Ruf W Schaeffer V Muller K Weishaupt JH 2015 Haploinsufficiency of TBK1 causes familial ALS and fronto-temporal dementia Nat Neurosci 18 5 631 636 10.1038/nn.4000 25803835
Fujino Y Wang DS Thomas N Espinoza M Davies P Dickson DW 2005 Increased frequency of argyrophilic grain disease in Alzheimer disease with 4R tau-specific immunohistochemistry J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64 3 209 214 15804052
Geevasinga N Loy CT Menon P de Carvalho M Swash M Schrooten M Vucic S 2016 Awaji criteria improves the diagnostic sensitivity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A systematic review using individual patient data Clin Neurophysiol 127 7 2684 2691 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.04.005 27212114
Ghetti B Oblak AL Boeve BF Johnson KA Dickerson BC Goedert M 2015 Invited review: Frontotemporal dementia caused by microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) mutations: a chameleon for neuropathology and neuroimaging Neuropathology and applied neurobiology 41 1 24 46 10.1111/nan.12213 25556536
Goldman JS Farmer JM Wood EM Johnson JK Boxer A Neuhaus J Miller BL 2005 Comparison of family histories in FTLD subtypes and related tauopathies Neurology 65 11 1817 1819 16344531
Gorno-Tempini ML Dronkers NF Rankin KP Ogar JM Phengrasamy L Rosen HJ Miller BL 2004 Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 55 3 335 346 14991811
Gorno-Tempini ML Hillis AE Weintraub S Kertesz A Mendez M Cappa SF Grossman M 2011 Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants Neurology 76 11 1006 1014 21325651
Gorno-Tempini ML Ogar JM Brambati SM Wang P Jeong JH Rankin KP Miller BL 2006 Anatomical correlates of early mutism in progressive nonfluent aphasia Neurology 67 10 1849 1851 10.1212/01.wnl.0000237038.55627.5b 16931509
Graff-Radford NR Damasio AR Hyman BT Hart MN Tranel D Damasio H Rezai K 1990 Progressive aphasia in a patient with Pick’s disease: a neuropsychological, radiologic, and anatomic study Neurology 40 620 626 2320235
Gregory CA Serra-Mestres J Hodges JR 1999 Early diagnosis of the frontal variant of frontotemporal dementia: how sensitive are standard neuroimaging and neuropsychologic tests? Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology 12 2 128 135
Grinberg LT Wang X Wang C Sohn PD Theofilas P Sidhu M Seeley WW 2013 Argyrophilic grain disease differs from other tauopathies by lacking tau acetylation Acta neuropathologica 125 4 581 593 10.1007/s00401-013-1080-2 23371364
Grover A Houlden H Baker M Adamson J Lewis J Prihar G Hutton M 1999 5’ splice site mutations in tau associated with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 affect a stem-loop structure that regulates alternative splicing of exon 10 J Biol Chem 274 21 15134 15143 10329720
Hassan A Whitwell JL Boeve BF Jack CR Jr Parisi JE Dickson DW Josephs KA 2010 Symmetric corticobasal degeneration (S-CBD) Parkinsonism Relat Disord 16 3 208 214 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.013 20018548
Herrmann N Black SE Chow T Cappell J Tang-Wai DF Lanctot KL 2012 Serotonergic function and treatment of behavioral and psychological symptoms of frontotemporal dementia Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 20 9 789 797 10.1097/JGP.0b013e31823033f3 21878805
Hodges JR Davies R Xuereb J Kril J Halliday G 2003 Survival in frontotemporal dementia Neurology 61 3 349 354 12913196
Hodges JR Mitchell J Dawson K Spillantini MG Xuereb JH McMonagle P Patterson K 2010 Semantic dementia: demography, familial factors and survival in a consecutive series of 100 cases Brain 133 Pt 1 300 306 10.1093/brain/awp248 19805492
Hodges JR Patterson K Ward R Garrard P Bak T Perry R Gregory C 1999 The differentiation of semantic dementia and frontal lobe dementia (temporal and frontal variants of frontotemporal dementia) from early Alzheimer’s disease: a comparative neuropsychological study Neuropsychology 13 1 31 40 10067773
Hogan DB Jette N Fiest KM Roberts JI Pearson D Smith EE Maxwell CJ 2016 The Prevalence and Incidence of Frontotemporal Dementia: a Systematic Review Can J Neurol Sci 43 Suppl 1 S96 S109 10.1017/cjn.2016.25 27307130
Holm IE Isaacs AM Mackenzie IR 2009 Absence of FUS-immunoreactive pathology in frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 3 (FTD-3) caused by mutation in the CHMP2B gene Acta Neuropathol 118 5 719 720 10.1007/s00401-009-0593-1 19844732
Holroyd CB Yeung N 2012 Motivation of extended behaviors by anterior cingulate cortex Trends Cogn Sci 16 2 122 128 10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.008 22226543
Hosler BA Siddique T Sapp PC Sailor W Huang MC Hossain A Brown RH Jr 2000 Linkage of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia to chromosome 9q21–q22 JAMA 284 13 1664 1669 11015796
Hutton M Lendon CL Rizzu P Baker M Froelich S Houlden H Heutink P 1998 Association of missense and 5’-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 Nature 393 6686 702 705 10.1038/31508 9641683
Hutton M Lendon CL Rizzu P Baker M Froelich S Houlden H 1998 Association of missense and 5’-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 Nature 393 6686 702 705 9641683
Ikeda M Shigenobu K Fukuhara R Hokoishi K Maki N Nebu A Tanabe H 2004 Efficacy of fluvoxamine as a treatment for behavioral symptoms in frontotemporal lobar degeneration patients Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 17 3 117 121 10.1159/000076343 14739531
Ingvar DH Gustafson L 1970 Regional cerebral blood flow in organic dementia with early onset Acta Neurol Scand 46 Suppl 43 42+
Irwin DJ 2016 Tauopathies as clinicopathological entities Parkinsonism Relat Disord 22 Suppl 1 S29 33 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.09.020 26382841
Irwin DJ Brettschneider J McMillan CT Cooper F Olm C Arnold SE Trojanowski JQ 2016 Deep clinical and neuropathological phenotyping of Pick disease Ann Neurol 79 2 272 287 10.1002/ana.24559 26583316
Ishihara K Araki S Ihori N Shiota J Kawamura M Yoshida M Nakano I 2005 Argyrophilic grain disease presenting with frontotemporal dementia: a neuropsychological and pathological study of an autopsied case with presenile onset Neuropathology 25 2 165 170 15875911
Jellinger KA 2007 The enigma of vascular cognitive disorder and vascular dementia Acta Neuropathol 113 4 349 388 10.1007/s00401-006-0185-2 17285295
Jenkins SM Johnson GV 1998 Tau complexes with phospholipase C-gamma in situ NeuroReport 9 1 67 71 9592050
Jesso S Morlog D Ross S Pell MD Pasternak SH Mitchell DG Finger EC 2011 The effects of oxytocin on social cognition and behaviour in frontotemporal dementia Brain 134 Pt 9 2493 2501 10.1093/brain/awr171 21859765
Johnson JO Mandrioli J Benatar M Abramzon Y Van Deerlin VM Trojanowski JQ Traynor BJ 2010 Exome sequencing reveals VCP mutations as a cause of familial ALS Neuron 68 5 857 864 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.036 21145000
Josephs KA Hodges JR Snowden JS Mackenzie IR Neumann M Mann DM Dickson DW 2011 Neuropathological background of phenotypical variability in frontotemporal dementia Acta Neuropathol 122 2 137 153 10.1007/s00401-011-0839-6 21614463
Josephs KA Petersen RC Knopman DS Boeve BF Whitwell JL Duffy JR Dickson DW 2006 Clinicopathologic analysis of frontotemporal and corticobasal degenerations and PSP Neurology 66 1 41 48 16401843
Josephs KA Whitwell JL Jack CR Jr 2008 Anatomic correlates of stereotypies in frontotemporal lobar degeneration Neurobiol Aging 29 12 1859 1863 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.04.027 17574708
Karakaya T Fusser F Prvulovic D Hampel H 2012 Treatment options for tauopathies Curr Treat Options Neurol 14 2 126 136 10.1007/s11940-012-0168-7 22307450
Katzman R 1976 Editorial: The prevalence and malignancy of Alzheimer disease. A major killer Arch Neurol 33 4 217 218 1259639
Kertesz A Davidson W McCabe P Takagi K Munoz D 2003 Primary progressive aphasia: diagnosis, varieties, evolution J Int Neuropsychol Soc 9 5 710 719 10.1017/S1355617703950041 12901777
Kertesz A McMonagle P 2010 Behavior and cognition in corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy J Neurol Sci 289 1–2 138 143 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.036 19733862
Kertesz A McMonagle P Blair M Davidson W Munoz DG 2005 The evolution and pathology of frontotemporal dementia Brain 128 Pt 9 1996 2005 16033782
Kfoury N Holmes BB Jiang H Holtzman DM Diamond MI 2012 Trans-cellular propagation of Tau aggregation by fibrillar species J Biol Chem 287 23 19440 19451 10.1074/jbc.M112.346072 22461630
Khan BK Yokoyama JS Takada LT Sha SJ Rutherford NJ Fong JC Miller BL 2012 Atypical, slowly progressive behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia associated with C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 83 4 358 364 doi:jnnp-2011-301883 [pii] 10.1136/jnnp-2011-301883 22399793
Kim YE Kang SY Ma HI Ju YS Kim YJ 2015 A Visual Rating Scale for the Hummingbird Sign with Adjustable Diagnostic Validity J Parkinsons Dis 5 3 605 612 10.3233/JPD-150537 26406141
Kimura T Takamatsu J 2013 Pilot study of pharmacological treatment for frontotemporal dementia: risk of donepezil treatment for behavioral and psychological symptoms Geriatr Gerontol Int 13 2 506 507 10.1111/j.1447-0594.2012.00956.x 23551349
Kipps CM Hodges JR Hornberger M 2010 Nonprogressive behavioural frontotemporal dementia: recent developments and clinical implications of the ‘bvFTD phenocopy syndrome’ Curr Opin Neurol 23 6 628 632 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283404309 20962637
Knopman DS Roberts RO 2011 Estimating the number of persons with frontotemporal lobar degeneration in the US population J Mol Neurosci 45 3 330 335 10.1007/s12031-011-9538-y 21584654
Kortte KB Rogalski EJ 2013 Behavioural interventions for enhancing life participation in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and primary progressive aphasia Int Rev Psychiatry 25 2 237 245 10.3109/09540261.2012.751017 23611353
Kovacs GG Murrell JR Horvath S Haraszti L Majtenyi K Molnar MJ Spina S 2009 TARDBP variation associated with frontotemporal dementia, supranuclear gaze palsy, and chorea Mov Disord 24 12 1843 1847 10.1002/mds.22697 19609911
Kramer JH Jurik J Sha SJ Rankin KP Rosen HJ Johnson JK Miller BL 2003 Distinctive neuropsychological patterns in frontotemporal dementia, semantic dementia, and Alzheimer disease Cogn Behav Neurol 16 4 211 218 14665820
Kwiatkowski TJ Jr Bosco DA Leclerc AL Tamrazian E Vanderburg CR Russ C Brown RH Jr 2009 Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 323 5918 1205 1208 10.1126/science.1166066 323/5918/1205 [pii] 19251627
Lagier-Tourenne C Baughn M Rigo F Sun S Liu P Li HR Ravits J 2013 Targeted degradation of sense and antisense C9orf72 RNA foci as therapy for ALS and frontotemporal degeneration Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 47 E4530 4539 10.1073/pnas.1318835110 24170860
Lanata SC Miller BL 2016 The behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) syndrome in psychiatry J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 87 5 501 511 10.1136/jnnp-2015-310697 26216940
Le Ber I Camuzat A Hannequin D Pasquier F Guedj E Rovelet-Lecrux A Brice A 2008 Phenotype variability in progranulin mutation carriers: a clinical, neuropsychological, imaging and genetic study Brain 131 Pt 3 732 746 10.1093/brain/awn012 awn012 [pii] 18245784
Lebert F Stekke W Hasenbroekx C Pasquier F 2004 Frontotemporal dementia: a randomised, controlled trial with trazodone Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 17 4 355 359 10.1159/000077171 15178953
Lee EB Russ J Jung H Elman LB Chahine LM Kremens D McCluskey LF 2013 Topography of FUS pathology distinguishes late-onset BIBD from aFTLD-U Acta Neuropathol Commun 1 9 1 11 10.1186/2051-5960-1-9
Lee SE Khazenzon AM Trujillo AJ Guo CC Yokoyama JS Sha SJ Seeley WW 2014 Altered network connectivity in frontotemporal dementia with C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion Brain 137 Pt 11 3047 3060 10.1093/brain/awu248 25273996
Lee SE Rabinovici GD Mayo MC Wilson SM Seeley WW DeArmond SJ Miller BL 2011 Clinicopathological correlations in corticobasal degeneration Ann Neurol 70 2 327 340 10.1002/ana.22424 21823158
Lee VM Goedert M Trojanowski JQ 2001 Neurodegenerative tauopathies Annu Rev Neurosci 24 1121 1159 10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.1121 11520930
Leugers CJ Lee G 2010 Tau potentiates nerve growth factor-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling and neurite initiation without a requirement for microtubule binding J Biol Chem 285 25 19125 19134 10.1074/jbc.M110.105387 20375017
Liljegren M Naasan G Temlett J Perry DC Rankin KP Merrilees J Miller BL 2015 Criminal behavior in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer disease JAMA Neurol 72 3 295 300 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.3781 25559744
Ling H O’Sullivan SS Holton JL Revesz T Massey LA Williams DR Lees AJ 2010 Does corticobasal degeneration exist? A clinicopathological re-evaluation Brain 133 Pt 7 2045 2057 10.1093/brain/awq123 20584946
Litvan I Agid Y Calne D Campbell G Dubois B Duvoisin RC Zee DS 1996 Clinical research criteria for the diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy (Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome): report of the NINDS-SPSP international workshop Neurology 47 1 1 9 8710059
Litvan I Hauw JJ Bartko JJ Lantos PL Daniel SE Horoupian DS Anderson DW 1996 Validity and reliability of the preliminary NINDS neuropathologic criteria for progressive supranuclear palsy and related disorders J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 55 1 97 105 8558176
Liu A Werner K Roy S Trojanowski JQ Morgan-Kane U Miller BL Rankin KP 2009 A case study of an emerging visual artist with frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurocase 15 3 235 247 10.1080/13554790802633213 19274573
Lomen-Hoerth C 2011 Clinical phenomenology and neuroimaging correlates in ALS-FTD J Mol Neurosci 45 3 656 662 10.1007/s12031-011-9636-x 21971978
Lomen-Hoerth C Anderson T Miller B 2002 The overlap of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia Neurology 59 7 1077 1079 12370467
Lu CH Macdonald-Wallis C Gray E Pearce N Petzold A Norgren N Malaspina A 2015 Neurofilament light chain: A prognostic biomarker in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurology 84 22 2247 2257 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001642 25934855
Mackenzie IR 2007a The neuropathology and clinical phenotype of FTD with progranulin mutations Acta Neuropathol 114 1 49 54 10.1007/s00401-007-0223-8 17458552
Mackenzie IR 2007b The neuropathology of FTD associated With ALS Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 21 4 S44 49 10.1097/WAD.0b013e31815c3486 00002093-200710000-00016 [pii] 18090423
Mackenzie IR Arzberger T Kremmer E Troost D Lorenzl S Mori K Neumann M 2013 Dipeptide repeat protein pathology in C9ORF72 mutation cases: clinico-pathological correlations Acta Neuropathol 126 6 859 879 10.1007/s00401-013-1181-y 24096617
Mackenzie IR Feldman HH 2005 Ubiquitin immunohistochemistry suggests classic motor neuron disease, motor neuron disease with dementia, and frontotemporal dementia of the motor neuron disease type represent a clinicopathologic spectrum J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64 8 730 739 16106222
Mackenzie IR Munoz DG Kusaka H Yokota O Ishihara K Roeber S Neumann M 2011 Distinct pathological subtypes of FTLD-FUS Acta Neuropathol 121 2 207 218 10.1007/s00401-010-0764-0 21052700
Mackenzie IR Neumann M 2012 FET proteins in frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Brain Res 1462 40 43 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.010 22261247
Mackenzie IR Neumann M 2016 Molecular neuropathology of frontotemporal dementia: insights into disease mechanisms from postmortem studies J Neurochem 10.1111/jnc.13588
Mackenzie IR Neumann M Baborie A Sampathu DM Du Plessis D Jaros E Lee VM 2011 A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology Acta Neuropathol 122 1 111 113 10.1007/s00401-011-0845-8 21644037
Mackenzie IR Neumann M Bigio EH Cairns NJ Alafuzoff I Kril J Mann DM 2009 Nomenclature for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus recommendations Acta Neuropathol 117 1 15 18 10.1007/s00401-008-0460-5 19015862
Mackenzie IR Neumann M Bigio EH Cairns NJ Alafuzoff I Kril J Mann DM 2010 Nomenclature and nosology for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an update Acta Neuropathol 119 1 1 4 10.1007/s00401-009-0612-2 19924424
Mackenzie IR Rademakers R Neumann M 2010 TDP-43 and FUS in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia Lancet Neurol 9 10 995 1007 S1474-4422(10)70195-2 [pii] 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70195-2 20864052
Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E 2012 Biochemistry and cell biology of tau protein in neurofibrillary degeneration Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 7 a006247 10.1101/cshperspect.a006247 22762014
Mann DM 2015 Dipeptide repeat protein toxicity in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and in motor neurone disease associated with expansions in C9ORF72-a cautionary note Neurobiol Aging 36 2 1224 1226 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.10.011 25457023
McGeer PL Schwab C McGeer EG Haddock RL Steele JC 1997 Familial nature and continuing morbidity of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam Neurology 49 2 400 409 9270568
Meeter LH Dopper EG Jiskoot LC Sanchez-Valle R Graff C Benussi L van Swieten JC 2016 Neurofilament light chain: a biomarker for genetic frontotemporal dementia Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3 8 623 636 10.1002/acn3.325 27606344
Mendez MF Shapira JS 2011 Loss of emotional insight in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia or “frontal anosodiaphoria” Conscious Cogn 20 4 1690 1696 S1053-8100(11)00213-3 [pii] 10.1016/j.concog.2011.09.005 21959203
Mendez MF Shapira JS McMurtray A Licht E 2007 Preliminary findings: behavioral worsening on donepezil in patients with frontotemporal dementia Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 15 1 84 87 10.1097/01.JGP.0000231744.69631.33 17194818
Mendez MF Shapira JS Miller BL 2005 Stereotypical movements and frontotemporal dementia Mov Disord 20 6 742 745 15786492
Merrilees J 2007 A model for management of behavioral symptoms in frontotemporal lobar degeneration Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 21 4 S64 69 10.1097/WAD.0b013e31815bf774 18090427
Merrilees J Hubbard E Mastick J Miller BL Dowling GA 2009 Rest-activity and behavioral disruption in a patient with frontotemporal dementia Neurocase 15 6 515 526 10.1080/13554790903061371 914594846 [pii] 19736599
Mesulam MM 1987 Primary progressive aphasia: differentiation from Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 37 1448 1553
Mesulam M Wicklund A Johnson N Rogalski E Leger GC Rademaker A Bigio EH 2008 Alzheimer and frontotemporal pathology in subsets of primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 63 6 709 719 18412267
Mesulam MM 1982 Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia Annals of Neurology 11 6 592 598 7114808
Mesulam MM 2001 Primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 49 4 425 432 11310619
Miller BL 2014 Frontotemporal Dementia Oxford University Press
Miller BL Boone K Cummings JL Read SL Mishkin F 2000 Functional correlates of musical and visual ability in frontotemporal dementia Br J Psychiatry 176 458 463 10912222
Miller BL Chang L Mena I Boone K Lesser IM 1993 Progressive right frontotemporal degeneration: clinical, neuropsychological and SPECT characteristics Dementia 4 3–4 204 213 8401793
Miller BL Cummings J Mishkin F Boone K Prince F Ponton M Cotman C 1998 Emergence of artistic talent in frontotemporal dementia Neurology 51 4 978 982 9781516
Miller BL Darby AL Swartz JR Yener GG Mena I 1995 Dietary changes, compulsions and sexual behavior in frontotemporal degeneration Dementia 6 4 195 199 7550598
Miller BL Ponton M Benson DF Cummings JL Mena I 1996 Enhanced artistic creativity with temporal lobe degeneration [letter] Lancet 348 9043 1744 1745
Morris M Maeda S Vossel K Mucke L 2011 The many faces of tau Neuron 70 3 410 426 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.04.009 21555069
Mosca L Lunetta C Tarlarini C Avemaria F Maestri E Melazzini M Penco S 2012 Wide phenotypic spectrum of the TARDBP gene: homozygosity of A382T mutation in a patient presenting with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and in neurologically healthy subject Neurobiol Aging 33 8 1846 e1841 1844 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.01.108
Munoz DG Neumann M Kusaka H Yokota O Ishihara K Terada S Mackenzie IR 2009 FUS pathology in basophilic inclusion body disease Acta Neuropathol 118 5 617 627 10.1007/s00401-009-0598-9 19830439
Myers AJ Pittman AM Zhao AS Rohrer K Kaleem M Marlowe L Hardy J 2007 The MAPT H1c risk haplotype is associated with increased expression of tau and especially of 4 repeat containing transcripts Neurobiol Dis 25 3 561 570 10.1016/j.nbd.2006.10.018 17174556
Narvid J Gorno-Tempini ML Slavotinek A Dearmond SJ Cha YH Miller BL Rankin K 2009 Of brain and bone: the unusual case of Dr. A Neurocase 15 3 190 205 10.1080/13554790802632967 20183548
Neary D Snowden JS Gustafson L Passant U Stuss D Black S Benson DF 1998 Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a consensus on clinical diagnostic criteria Neurology 51 6 1546 1554 9855500
Neumann M Bentmann E Dormann D Jawaid A DeJesus-Hernandez M Ansorge O Mackenzie IR 2011 FET proteins TAF15 and EWS are selective markers that distinguish FTLD with FUS pathology from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations Brain 134 Pt 9 2595 2609 10.1093/brain/awr201 21856723
Neumann M Mackenzie IR Cairns NJ Boyer PJ Markesbery WR Smith CD Forman MS 2007 TDP-43 in the ubiquitin pathology of frontotemporal dementia with VCP gene mutations J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 66 2 152 157 10.1097/nen.0b013e31803020b9 17279000
Neumann M Rademakers R Roeber S Baker M Kretzschmar HA Mackenzie IR 2009 A new subtype of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with FUS pathology Brain 132 Pt 11 2922 2931 doi:awp214 [pii] 10.1093/brain/awp214 19674978
Neumann M Roeber S Kretzschmar HA Rademakers R Baker M Mackenzie IR 2009 Abundant FUS-immunoreactive pathology in neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease Acta Neuropathol 118 5 605 616 10.1007/s00401-009-0581-5 19669651
Neumann M Sampathu DM Kwong LK Truax AC Micsenyi MC Chou TT Lee VM 2006 Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 314 5796 130 133 10.1126/science.1134108 17023659
Ogar J Willock S Baldo J Wilkins D Ludy C Dronkers N 2006 Clinical and anatomical correlates of apraxia of speech Brain Lang 97 3 343 350 10.1016/j.bandl.2006.01.008 16516956
Olney RK Murphy J Forshew D Garwood E Miller BL Langmore S Lomen-Hoerth C 2005 The effects of executive and behavioral dysfunction on the course of ALS Neurology 65 11 1774 1777 16344521
Onyike CU Diehl-Schmid J 2013 The epidemiology of frontotemporal dementia Int Rev Psychiatry 25 2 130 137 10.3109/09540261.2013.776523 23611343
Perry DC Whitwell JL Boeve BF Pankratz VS Knopman DS Petersen RC Josephs KA 2012 Voxel-based morphometry in patients with obsessive-compulsive behaviors in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Eur J Neurol 19 6 911 917 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2011.03656.x 22284815
Petkau TL Leavitt BR 2014 Progranulin in neurodegenerative disease Trends Neurosci 37 7 388 398 10.1016/j.tins.2014.04.003 24800652
Pick A 1892 Uber die Beziehungen der senilen Hirnatrophie zur Aphasie Prager Medizinische Wochenschrift 17 165 167
Piguet O 2011 Eating disturbance in behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia J Mol Neurosci 45 3 589 593 10.1007/s12031-011-9547-x 21584651
Pijnenburg YA Sampson EL Harvey RJ Fox NC Rossor MN 2003 Vulnerability to neuroleptic side effects in frontotemporal lobar degeneration Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 18 1 67 72 10.1002/gps.774 12497558
Polymenidou M Lagier-Tourenne C Hutt KR Huelga SC Moran J Liang TY Cleveland DW 2011 Long pre-mRNA depletion and RNA missplicing contribute to neuronal vulnerability from loss of TDP-43 Nat Neurosci 14 4 459 468 10.1038/nn.2779 21358643
Poorkaj P Bird TD Wijsman E Nemens E Garruto RM Anderson L Schellenberg GD 1998 Tau is a candidate gene for chromosome 17 frontotemporal dementia Annals of neurology 43 6 815 825 10.1002/ana.410430617 9629852
Pottier C Bieniek KF Finch N van de Vorst M Baker M Perkersen R Rademakers R 2015 Whole-genome sequencing reveals important role for TBK1 and OPTN mutations in frontotemporal lobar degeneration without motor neuron disease Acta Neuropathol 130 1 77 92 10.1007/s00401-015-1436-x 25943890
Pottier C Ravenscroft TA Sanchez-Contreras M Rademakers R 2016 Genetics of FTLD: overview and what else we can expect from genetic studies J Neurochem 138 Suppl 1 32 53 10.1111/jnc.13622 27009575
Proudfoot M Gutowski NJ Edbauer D Hilton DA Stephens M Rankin J Mackenzie IR 2014 Early dipeptide repeat pathology in a frontotemporal dementia kindred with C9ORF72 mutation and intellectual disability Acta Neuropathol 127 3 451 458 10.1007/s00401-014-1245-7 24445903
Rabinovici GD Jagust WJ Furst AJ Ogar JM Racine CA Mormino EC Gorno-Tempini ML 2008 Abeta amyloid and glucose metabolism in three variants of primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 64 4 388 401 18991338
Rabinovici GD Rosen HJ Alkalay A Kornak J Furst AJ Agarwal N Jagust WJ 2011 Amyloid vs FDG-PET in the differential diagnosis of AD and FTLD Neurology 77 23 2034 2042 doi:WNL.0b013e31823b9c5e [pii] 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823b9c5e 22131541
Ranasinghe KG Rankin KP Lobach IV Kramer JH Sturm VE Bettcher BM Miller BL 2016 Cognition and neuropsychiatry in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia by disease stage Neurology 86 7 600 610 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002373 26802093
Rankin KP Baldwin E Pace-Savitsky C Kramer JH Miller BL 2005 Self awareness and personality change in dementia J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 76 5 632 639 15834018
Rankin KP Gorno-Tempini ML Allison SC Stanley CM Glenn S Weiner MW Miller BL 2006 Structural anatomy of empathy in neurodegenerative disease Brain 129 Pt 11 2945 2956 17008334
Rankin KP Mayo MC Seeley WW Lee S Rabinovici G Gorno-Tempini ML Miller BL 2011 Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia with corticobasal degeneration pathology: phenotypic comparison to bvFTD with Pick’s disease J Mol Neurosci 45 3 594 608 10.1007/s12031-011-9615-2 21881831
Rascovsky K Hodges JR Knopman D Mendez MF Kramer JH Neuhaus J Miller BL 2011 Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 134 Pt 9 2456 2477 doi:awr179 [pii] 10.1093/brain/awr179 21810890
Rebeiz JJ Kolodny EH Richardson EP Jr 1968 Corticodentatonigral degeneration with neuronal achromasia Arch Neurol 18 1 20 33 5634369
Renton AE Majounie E Waite A Simon-Sanchez J Rollinson S Gibbs JR Traynor BJ 2011 A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD Neuron 72 2 257 268 doi:S0896-6273(11)00797-5 [pii] 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.010 21944779
Rohrer JD Rosen HJ 2013 Neuroimaging in frontotemporal dementia Int Rev Psychiatry 25 2 221 229 10.3109/09540261.2013.778822 23611351
Rohrer JD Warren JD 2011 Phenotypic signatures of genetic frontotemporal dementia Curr Opin Neurol 24 6 542 549 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834cd442 21986680
Rohrer JD Woollacott IO Dick KM Brotherhood E Gordon E Fellows A Zetterberg H 2016 Serum neurofilament light chain protein is a measure of disease intensity in frontotemporal dementia Neurology 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003154
Rojas JC Karydas A Bang J Tsai RM Blennow K Liman V Boxer AL 2016 Plasma neurofilament light chain predicts progression in progressive supranuclear palsy Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3 3 216 225 10.1002/acn3.290 27042681
Roman G 2003 Vascular dementia: a historical background Int Psychogeriatr 15 Suppl 1 11 13 10.1017/S1041610203008901 16191211
Rosen HJ Allison SC Schauer GF Gorno-Tempini ML Weiner MW Miller BL 2005 Neuroanatomical correlates of behavioural disorders in dementia Brain 128 Pt 11 2612 2625 16195246
Rosen HJ Gorno-Tempini ML Goldman WP Perry RJ Schuff N Weiner M Miller BL 2002 Patterns of brain atrophy in frontotemporal dementia and semantic dementia Neurology 58 2 198 208 11805245
Rosen HJ Lengenfelder J Miller B 2000 Frontotemporal dementia Neurol Clin 18 4 979 992 11072270
Rosen HJ Perry RJ Murphy J Kramer JH Mychack P Schuff N Miller BL 2002 Emotion comprehension in the temporal variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 125 Pt 10 2286 2295 12244085
Rosso SM Roks G Stevens M de Koning I Tanghe HLJ Kamphorst W van Swieten JC 2001 Complex compulsive behaviour in the temporal variant of frontotemporal dementia J Neurol 248 11 965 970 11757960
Ryan NS Rossor MN Fox NC 2015 Alzheimer’s disease in the 100 years since Alzheimer’s death Brain 138 Pt 12 3816 3821 10.1093/brain/awv316 26541346
Schneider A Mandelkow E 2008 Tau-based treatment strategies in neurodegenerative diseases Neurotherapeutics 5 3 443 457 10.1016/j.nurt.2008.05.006 18625456
Schroeter ML Raczka K Neumann J von Cramon DY 2008 Neural networks in frontotemporal dementia–a meta-analysis Neurobiol Aging 29 3 418 426 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.10.023 17140704
Seeley WW 2008 Selective functional, regional, and neuronal vulnerability in frontotemporal dementia Curr Opin Neurol 21 6 701 707 18989116
Seeley WW Bauer AM Miller BL Gorno-Tempini ML Kramer JH Weiner M Rosen HJ 2005 The natural history of temporal variant frontotemporal dementia Neurology 64 8 1384 1390 10.1212/01.WNL.0000158425.46019.5C 15851728
Seeley WW Carlin DA Allman JM Macedo MN Bush C Miller BL Dearmond SJ 2006 Early frontotemporal dementia targets neurons unique to apes and humans Ann Neurol 60 6 660 667 17187353
Seeley WW Crawford R Rascovsky K Kramer JH Weiner M Miller BL Gorno-Tempini ML 2008 Frontal paralimbic network atrophy in very mild behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Arch Neurol 65 2 249 255 18268196
Seeley WW Menon V Schatzberg AF Keller J Glover GH Kenna H Greicius MD 2007 Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control J Neurosci 27 9 2349 2356 17329432
Seeley WW Zhou J Kim EJ 2012 Frontotemporal Dementia: What Can the Behavioral Variant Teach Us about Human Brain Organization? Neuroscientist 18 4 373 385 doi:1073858411410354 [pii] 10.1177/1073858411410354 21670424
Sha SJ Takada LT Rankin KP Yokoyama JS Rutherford NJ Fong JC Boxer AL 2012 Frontotemporal dementia due to C9ORF72 mutations: Clinical and imaging features Neurology 79 10 1002 1011 doi:WNL.0b013e318268452e [pii] 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318268452e 22875087
Skibinski G Parkinson NJ Brown JM Chakrabarti L Lloyd SL Hummerich H Collinge J 2005 Mutations in the endosomal ESCRTIII-complex subunit CHMP2B in frontotemporal dementia Nat Genet 37 8 806 808 16041373
Smith KR Damiano J Franceschetti S Carpenter S Canafoglia L Morbin M Berkovic SF 2012 Strikingly different clinicopathological phenotypes determined by progranulin-mutation dosage Am J Hum Genet 90 6 1102 1107 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.021 22608501
Snowden JS Adams J Harris J Thompson JC Rollinson S Richardson A Pickering-Brown S 2015 Distinct clinical and pathological phenotypes in frontotemporal dementia associated with MAPT, PGRN and C9orf72 mutations Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 16 7–8 497 505 10.3109/21678421.2015.1074700 26473392
Snowden JS Goulding PJ Neary D 1989 Semantic dementia: a form of circumscribed cerebral atrophy Behavioural Neurology 2 167 182
Snowden JS Hu Q Rollinson S Halliwell N Robinson A Davidson YS Mann DM 2011 The most common type of FTLD-FUS (aFTLD-U) is associated with a distinct clinical form of frontotemporal dementia but is not related to mutations in the FUS gene Acta Neuropathol 122 1 99 110 10.1007/s00401-011-0816-0 21424531
Snowden JS Neary D Mann DM 2002 Frontotemporal dementia Br J Psychiatry 180 140 143 11823324
Spillantini MG Murrell JR Goedert M Farlow MR Klug A Ghetti B 1998 Mutation in the tau gene in familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95 13 7737 7741 9636220
Steele JC Richardson JC Olszewski J 1964 Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Arch Neurol 10 4 333 360 14107684
Suarez J Tartaglia MC Vitali P Erbetta A Neuhaus J Laluz V Miller BL 2009 Characterizing radiology reports in patients with frontotemporal dementia Neurology 73 13 1073 1074 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b9c8a6 19786700
Swartz JR Miller BL Lesser IM Darby AL 1997 Frontotemporal dementia: treatment response to serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors J Clin Psychiatry 58 5 212 216 9184615
Tacik P DeTure M Hinkle KM Lin WL Sanchez-Contreras M Carlomagno Y Dickson DW 2015 A Novel Tau Mutation in Exon 12, p.Q336H, Causes Hereditary Pick Disease Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 74 11 1042 1052 10.1097/NEN.0000000000000248 26426266
Tekin S Cummings JL 2002 Frontal-subcortical neuronal circuits and clinical neuropsychiatry: an update J Psychosom Res 53 2 647 654 12169339
Thal DR Schultz C Botez G Del Tredici K Mrak RE Griffin WS Ghebremedhin E 2005 The impact of argyrophilic grain disease on the development of dementia and its relationship to concurrent Alzheimer’s disease-related pathology Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 31 3 270 279 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2005.00635.x 15885064
Thibodeau MP Miller BL 2013 ‘Limits and current knowledge of Pick’s disease: its differential diagnosis’. A translation of the 1957 Delay, Brion, Escourolle article Neurocase 19 5 417 422 10.1080/13554794.2012.667133 22554132
Tranel D Bechara A Denburg NL 2002 Asymmetric functional roles of right and left ventromedial prefrontal cortices in social conduct, decision-making, and emotional processing Cortex 38 4 589 612 12465670
Tsai RM Boxer AL 2016 Therapy and clinical trials in frontotemporal dementia: past, present, and future J Neurochem 138 Suppl 1 211 221 10.1111/jnc.13640 27306957
Tsuchiya K Mitani K Arai T Yamada S Komiya T Esaki Y Ikeda K 2001 Argyrophilic grain disease mimicking temporal Pick’s disease: a clinical, radiological, and pathological study of an autopsy case with a clinical course of 15 years Acta Neuropathol 102 2 195 199 11563637
Urwin H Josephs KA Rohrer JD Mackenzie IR Neumann M Authier A Isaacs AM 2010 FUS pathology defines the majority of tau- and TDP-43-negative frontotemporal lobar degeneration Acta Neuropathol 120 1 33 41 20490813
Van Damme P Van Hoecke A Lambrechts D Vanacker P Bogaert E van Swieten J Robberecht W 2008 Progranulin functions as a neurotrophic factor to regulate neurite outgrowth and enhance neuronal survival J Cell Biol 181 1 37 41 10.1083/jcb.200712039 18378771
van Swieten JC Heutink P 2008 Mutations in progranulin (GRN) within the spectrum of clinical and pathological phenotypes of frontotemporal dementia Lancet Neurol 7 10 965 974 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70194-7 18771956
Vance C Rogelj B Hortobagyi T De Vos KJ Nishimura AL Sreedharan J Shaw CE 2009 Mutations in FUS, an RNA processing protein, cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6 Science 323 5918 1208 1211 10.1126/science.1165942 19251628
Vatsavayai SC Yoon SJ Gardner RC Gendron TF Vargas JN Trujillo A Seeley WW 2016 Timing and significance of pathological features in C9orf72 expansion-associated frontotemporal dementia Brain 10.1093/brain/aww250
Vercelletto M Boutoleau-Bretonniere C Volteau C Puel M Auriacombe S Sarazin M French research network on Frontotemporal, d. 2011 Memantine in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia: negative results J Alzheimers Dis 23 4 749 759 10.3233/JAD-2010-101632 21157021
Wadia PM Lang AE 2007 The many faces of corticobasal degeneration Parkinsonism Relat Disord 13 Suppl 3 S336 340 10.1016/S1353-8020(08)70027-0 18267261
Walker LC Jucker M 2015 Neurodegenerative diseases: expanding the prion concept Annu Rev Neurosci 38 87 103 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-033828 25840008
Ward ME Miller BL 2011 Potential mechanisms of progranulin-deficient FTLD J Mol Neurosci 45 3 574 582 10.1007/s12031-011-9622-3 21892758
Watts GD Thomasova D Ramdeen SK Fulchiero EC Mehta SG Drachman DA Kimonis VE 2007 Novel VCP mutations in inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia Clin Genet 72 5 420 426 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00887.x 17935506
Weingarten MD Lockwood AH Hwo SY Kirschner MW 1975 A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 72 5 1858 1862 1057175
Whitwell JL Jack CR Jr Boeve BF Parisi JE Ahlskog JE Drubach DA Josephs KA 2010 Imaging correlates of pathology in corticobasal syndrome Neurology 75 21 1879 1887 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181feb2e8 21098403
Whitwell JL Jack CR Jr Boeve BF Senjem ML Baker M Rademakers R Josephs KA 2009 Voxel-based morphometry patterns of atrophy in FTLD with mutations in MAPT or PGRN Neurology 72 9 813 820 10.1212/01.wnl.0000343851.46573.67 72/9/813 [pii] 19255408
Whitwell JL Sampson EL Loy CT Warren JE Rossor MN Fox NC Warren JD 2007 VBM signatures of abnormal eating behaviours in frontotemporal lobar degeneration Neuroimage 35 1 207 213 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.12.006 17240166
Whitwell JL Weigand SD Boeve BF Senjem ML Gunter JL DeJesus-Hernandez M Josephs KA 2012 Neuroimaging signatures of frontotemporal dementia genetics: C9ORF72, tau, progranulin and sporadics Brain 135 Pt 3 794 806 doi:aws001 [pii] 10.1093/brain/aws001 22366795
Wilhelmsen KC Lynch T Pavlou E Higgins M Nygaard TG 1994 Localization of disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy complex to 17q21-22 American journal of human genetics 55 6 1159 1165 7977375
Wilhelmsen KC Lynch T Pavlou E Higgins M Nygaard TG 1994 Localization of Disinhibition-Dementia-Parkinsonism-Amyotrophy Complex to 17q21-22 American Journal of Human Genetics 55 1159 1165 7977375
Williams DR Lees AJ 2009 Progressive supranuclear palsy: clinicopathological concepts and diagnostic challenges Lancet Neurol 8 3 270 279 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70042-0 S1474-4422(09)70042-0 [pii] 19233037
Woolley JD Gorno-Tempini ML Seeley WW Rankin K Lee SS Matthews BR Miller BL 2007 Binge eating is associated with right orbitofrontal-insular-striatal atrophy in frontotemporal dementia Neurology 69 14 1424 1433 17909155
Woolley JD Khan BK Murthy NK Miller BL Rankin KP 2011 The diagnostic challenge of psychiatric symptoms in neurodegenerative disease: rates of and risk factors for prior psychiatric diagnosis in patients with early neurodegenerative disease J Clin Psychiatry 72 2 126 133 10.4088/JCP.10m06382oli 21382304
Yasuda M Nakamura Y Kawamata T Kaneyuki H Maeda K Komure O 2005 Phenotypic heterogeneity within a new family with the MAPT p301s mutation Ann Neurol 58 6 920 928 10.1002/ana.20668 16240366
Zhukareva V Mann D Pickering-Brown S Uryu K Shuck T Shah K Lee VM 2002 Sporadic Pick’s disease: a tauopathy characterized by a spectrum of pathological tau isoforms in gray and white matter Ann Neurol 51 6 730 739 12112079
