LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8704771
1572
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
Alzheimer disease and associated disorders
0893-0341
1546-4156

27819841
5119898
10.1097/WAD.0000000000000162
NIHMS798771
Article
Recruiting U.S. Chinese Elders into Clinical Research for Dementia
Li Clara Ph.D. 1
Neugroschl Judith M.D. 1
Umpierre Mari Ph.D., LCSW. 1
Martin Jane Ph.D. 1
Huang QiYing MSW. 1
Zeng Xiaoyi B.A. 1
Cai Dongming M.D., Ph.D. 1
Sano Mary Ph.D. 12
1 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
2 James J. Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, NY
Corresponding Author: Clara Li, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1230, New York, NY 10029-6574, Tel: 212.241.6500 ext. 88786, Fax: 212.996.0987, clara.li@mssm.edu
7 7 2016
Oct-Dec 2016
01 10 2017
30 4 345347
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Purpose

This study described and evaluated the rapid recruitment of elderly Chinese into clinical research at the Mount Sinai Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (MSADRC).

Design and Methods

Methods of publicizing the study included lectures to local senior centers/churches and publications in local Chinese newspapers. The amount of time and success of these methods were evaluated. A “go to them” model of evaluation was employed to enable participants to complete the study visit at locations where they were comfortable.

Results

From January to December 2015, we recruited 98 participants aged ≥ 65 who primarily speak Mandarin/Cantonese and reside in New York. The mean age and years of education was 73.93±6.34 and 12.79±4.58, respectively. The majority of participants were female (65.3%) and primarily Mandarin speaking (53.1%). Of all enrollees, 54.1% were recruited from community lectures, 29.6% through newspapers, 10.2% through word of mouth, and 6.1% from our clinical services. 40.8% of participants underwent evaluations at the MSADRC, 44.9% at local senior centers/churches, and 14.3% at home.

Implications

Given that the majority of our participants had low English proficiency, the use of bilingual recruiters probably allowed us to overcome the language barrier, facilitating recruitment. Our “go to them” model of evaluation is another important factor contributing to our successful recruitment.

elderly Chinese Americans
clinical study
dementia
aging
recruitment
minority

Chinese Americans are one of the fastest growing populations among the elders in the United States (U.S.).1 Many elderly Chinese are at a high risk for developing cognitive loss and dementia, probably due to the high prevalence of vascular risk factors,2 low level of education,3 and limited access to healthcare services.4 However, recruitment of elderly Chinese Americans into research remains to be a challenge for a variety of reasons, such as misconceptions that memory loss is an inevitable part of aging, lack of trust in research and/or researchers, and social stigma associated with dementia.5 Additionally, many elderly Chinese Americans are fearful of going to a medical center and/or reluctant to leave their neighborhood for healthcare. This manuscript describes the experience with recruitment of U.S. Chinese elders into aging and dementia research at the Mount Sinai Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (MSADRC) in New York City.

Design and Methods

Chinese Outreach Program

Our Chinese Outreach Program was staffed by a bilingual Ph.D. level neuropsychologist (CL) at 70% effort and a bilingual research coordinator (QH) at 50% effort. The bilingual staff translated recruitment flyers, brochures, and consent forms from English into Simplified and Traditional Chinese. The Chinese recruitment flyers and brochures were distributed in local senior centers and churches following community talks. All study materials were approved by the local Intuitional Review Board (IRB). PowerPoint lectures on dementia and cognitive aging were given at four local churches and six senior centers frequented by elderly Chinese. The lectures were conducted in Cantonese and simultaneously translated into Mandarin. These lectures varied in length from 30 minutes to one hour and ended with information about research opportunities at the MSADRC. At the end of the lectures, audiences were given the opportunity to sign up to participate in the aging and dementia study at the MSADRC. A newspaper announcement about the lecture was printed in a local Chinese newspaper and paid for by the church where the lecture took place. The contexts of the lecture and research opportunities at the MSADRC were published as a column in a local Chinese newspaper at no cost following an interview with the newspaper journalist who attended the announced lecture.

Subjects

Our outreach effort targeted individuals who were 65 years of age or older, primarily Chinese speaking, New York residents, and able to complete cognitive assessments.

Study Procedures

An IRB approved Chinese version of the MSADRC consent form was signed by participants or study partners as appropriate prior to study participation. The study involved a 3-hour in-person clinical evaluation modeled by the MSADRC, which includes medical, functional, and cognitive assessments. An optional blood draw for DNA banking and genetic analysis was included as part of the standard dementia evaluation. The “go to them” model of evaluation was used, which allows participants to complete the study procedures in locations that were comfortable and convenient for them, such as participants’ own home, local senior centers/churches, and the MSADRC. Upon completion of the evaluation, all participants were assigned a research diagnosis of normal cognition, Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and dementia using the diagnostic criteria used by the MSADRC. A brief report, written in both Chinese and English, was mailed to each research participant detailing results of the cognitive testing along with research diagnosis and clinical recommendations.

Results

Through our Chinese outreach program, we successfully enrolled 98 participants between January and December 2015. In the one-year period, community lectures generated 65 potential interests and 54 enrollees. Newspaper exposures, on the other hand, produced 66 potential interests and 29 enrollees. Table 1 shows details in recruitment efforts and outcomes from the two recruitment methods. Figure 1 shows the lag time between outreach and recruitment. Of all the enrollees, 54.1% were recruited from community talks; 29.6% from newspapers; 10.2% through word of mouth; and 6.1% from our clinical services (e.g. social workers and physician referrals). The average age at initial interviews was 73.93±6.34 years. The sample cohort has a relatively high level of education (12.79± 4.58 years). Many of the research subjects have been living in the U.S. for over three decades. Most were right-hand predominant (92.9%), married (65.3%), females (65.3%), and Mandarin speaking (53.1%). 40.8% of participants were evaluated at MSADRC, 44.9% at their senior centers/church, and 14.3% at home. 87.5% of the participants and 59.3% of the informants reported concerns about memory functioning and/or thinking abilities of the research participants. The informants were spouses (43.9%), children (33.7%), other family member (6.1%), friends (9.2%), and health aides (4.1%). 81.6% of participants agreed to have their blood drawn.

Discussion

Our Chinese outreach program, established to engage elderly Chinese Americans into research, demonstrates that direct face to face outreach with bilingual staff members is the most successful recruitment technique. A majority of our elderly Chinese Americans enrolled in that year were a result of this face to face approach. While newspaper exposures generated a greater number of potential interests than community lectures, the lectures (a face to face methodology) produced greater enrollment. In addition, community talks appeared to be less time consuming and yielded a higher success rate in recruiting the targeted population compared to newspaper announcements, suggesting that direct face to face outreach with bilingual staff members was a more successful form of recruitment.

Overall, our experience provides a template for successful recruitment of elderly Chinese Americans, and perhaps recruitment of other immigrant elderly populations, into aging and dementia research. First, we find that U.S. elderly Chinese participants, like many older adults, have concerns about their memory functions, and are willing to participate in clinical research. Most participants agreed to DNA banking and genetic analysis, suggesting that other biomarker studies may be of interest. A factor that appears to increase willingness to participate is participants’ desires to understand their levels of cognitive health. Most of our participants reported experiencing a decline in their memory and were motivated to learn more about their cognitive functions. Most of our participants do not speak English well, and the use of bilingual recruiters allowed us to overcome the language barrier that would prevent access to cognitive assessment. In addition, our graph illustrates that recruitment efforts takes time to show effect. It took several talks before enrollments occurred and there was a sharp increase in enrollment following each outreach event but then recruitment reached a plateau and needed another outreach to boost enrollment. Further, nearly 60% of our evaluations were conducted at the participants’ homes and senior centers/churches, indicating our “go to them” model of evaluation was another essential element to our successful recruitments.

Data from the current study indicates that our participants were largely in their 70s, high school graduates, residents in the U.S. for over three decades, females, married, right-handed, born in China, and Mandarin speaking. The results help to identify specific sub-groups of participants who are more likely to participate in research and those who may require more attention for improving future recruitments in clinical research for elderly Chinese Americans. While our data showed that it is possible to recruit the minority population into aging and dementia research, our cohort may not represent the average population of elderly Chinese Americans in New York. In addition, our sample has a relatively high level of education. Previous studies have reported that low education may threaten the validity of diagnostic testing.6 Systematic collection of clinical data will help to establish better norms. Future studies focusing on recruitment of participants with low levels of education are needed.

Source of Support:

NIH National Institute on Aging grant (P50AG05138)

Figure 1 Graph 1: Lag Time between Outreach and Recruitment

Community talks and newspaper announcements were successful in recruiting participants but their effectiveness began to fade towards the end of the year.

Table 1 Outreach Recruitment Efforts and Outcomes

Community talks provided an opportunity for information sharing pertaining to study project and resulted in less one-on-one calls to explain study proceudre and yielded more eligible participants compared to newspaper annoucements.

Recruitment Methods	Community Lectures	Newspaper Announcements	
Total exposures	249	38,000	
Total potential interests	65	66	
Total enrollments	54	29	
Bilingual staff efforts	Giving community lectures (11 hours)
Speaking with potential participants (6 hours)
Scheduling participants for study visits (5 hours)
Creating power point slides (5 hours)
Translating brochures/flyers (6 hours)
Contacting local senior centers/churches (3 hours)	An interview with a newspaper journalist (1 hour)
Speaking with potential participants (36 hours)
Scheduling participants for study visits (4 hours)	
Total staff hours	36 hours	41 hours	
Staff hour(s) spent to enroll one participant	0.67 hour	1.41 hours	
Total costs	$600	$0	


References

1 Asian/Pacific American Heritage Month EaSAW USDoC Facts for Features U.S. Census Bureau 2011 5 Washington, DC USA 2011
2 He J Iosif AM Lee DY Brain structure and cerebrovascular risk in cognitively impaired patients: Shanghai Community Brain Health Initiative-pilot phase Archives of neurology 2010 10 67 10 1231 1237 20937951
3 Salmon DP Jin H Zhang M Grant I Yu E Neuropsychological assessment of Chinese elderly in the Shanghai Dementia Survey The Clinical Neuropsychologist 1995 9 159 168
4 Nguyen D Bornheimer LA Mental health service use types among Asian Americans with a psychiatric disorder: considerations of culture and need The journal of behavioral health services &amp; research 2014 10 41 4 520 528 24402440
5 Chao SZ Lai NB Tse MM Recruitment of Chinese American elders into dementia research: the UCSF ADRC experience The Gerontologist 2011 6 51 Suppl 1 S125 S133 21565814
6 Lezak M Neuropsychological assessment 1995 New York Oxford University Press
