LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8915233
1782
NMR Biomed
NMR Biomed
NMR in biomedicine
0952-3480
1099-1492

28301071
5501085
10.1002/nbm.3700
NIHMS865062
Article
Applications of High-Resolution Magic Angle Spinning MRS in Biomedical Studies I -- Cell Lines and Animal Models
Kaebisch Eva *‡
Fuss Taylor L. *
Vandergrift Lindsey *
Toews Karin *‡
Habbel Piet ‡
Cheng Leo L. *†
* Departments of Radiology and Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 02114 USA
‡ Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
† Corresponding Author: Leo L. Cheng, PhD, 149 13th Street, CNY-6, Charlestown, MA 02129, Ph.617-724-6593, Fax.617-726-5684, cheng@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu
19 4 2017
16 3 2017
6 2017
01 6 2018
30 6 10.1002/nbm.3700This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Summary

High-resolution magic angle spinning (HRMAS) magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) allows for direct measurements of non-liquid tissue and cell specimens to present valuable insights of the cellular metabolisms of physiological and pathological processes. HRMAS produces high resolution spectra comparable to those obtained from solutions of specimen extracts but without complex metabolite extraction processes, and preserves the tissue cellular structure suitable for pathological examinations following spectroscopic analysis. The technique has been applied in a wide variety of biomedical and biochemical studies and become one of the major platforms of metabolomic studies. By quantifying single metabolites, metabolite ratios or metabolic profiles in their entirety, HRMAS presents promising possibilities for diagnosis and prediction of clinical outcomes for various diseases, as well as deciphering of metabolic changes resulting from drug therapies or xenobiotic interactions. In this review, we evaluate HRMAS MRS results on animal models and cell lines reported in literature, and present the diverse applications of the method for the understanding of pathological processes, the effectiveness of therapies, the developments of disease animal models, and the new progresses in the HRMAS methodology.

Graphical Abstract

High resolution magic angle spinning (HRMAS) magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is a method which enhances resolution for non-liquid biological samples. Since its introduction in 1996 (19), HRMAS has been used in a wide variety of biomedical and biochemical studies and is one of the major techniques used in metabolomic analysis. In this review, HRMAS results on animal models and cell lines are evaluated, with discussions of applications for understanding pathological processes, therapy effectiveness, disease animal model development, and methodology progress.

metabolomics
high resolution magic angle spinning (HRMAS)
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
cell lines
animal model

Introduction

Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) has been widely used as analytical method in biochemical and biomedical studies to elucidate molecular structures of new compounds (1,2), and investigate cellular metabolisms in tissue specimens (3) and cultured cells (4). MRS has further found broad implementations in investigations of new diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic evaluation tools for a wide range of diseases (5–8).

Metabolites are the signatures of biochemical pathways, providing insight into cellular carbohydrate, protein, lipid, amino acid and xenobiotic metabolism. The ability of MRS to explore the metabolic statuses within healthy or diseased cells can help in the understanding of the physiological and pathological transformations accompanying various diseases and provide detailed insights into the metabolic mechanisms at cellular levels (9–11). Moreover, MRS enables the evaluation of cellular metabolic responses towards the developments of new and the monitoring of established drug therapies (12,13). Furthermore, complementary to genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics, the field of metabolomics, currently investigated by MRS alongside with mass spectrometry, is an emerging innovative tool for drug developments (14–16), biomarker discoveries (17) and for understanding the underlying molecular mechanisms of diseases (10,11). Thus, MRS offers the opportunity to identify and quantify metabolites within cells and tissue specimens, and assists in the understanding and construction of metabolic profiles of benign or diseased tissues or cell lines to visualize the overall metabolic changes within the metabolome (18).

High-resolution magic angle spinning (HRMAS) proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) is a MRS technique introduced in 1996 to enhance the resolution of MRS for non-liquid biological samples (19). It can significantly increase the spectral resolution of non-liquid samples by averaging both the residual dipolar interactions and the isotropic bulk magnetic susceptibility existing in these samples (20). In comparison with solution MRS approaches assisted by chemical extractions of these non-liquid cell and tissue samples, HRMAS method allows a direct metabolic analysis at high spectral resolution comparable to that achieved with extract solutions, while preserves intact cellular structures (21,22). Therefore, not only the sample preparation time is significantly shortened, and procedures simplified, but the native morphological structures of these samples are preserved. Thus, HRMAS allows the analyzed tissue to be further studied including the regular histopathological evaluations and molecular biology analyses, such as IHC, PCR etc. (23,24). This benefit, for the first time, permitted histological and high resolution metabolic information to be collected from the exact same samples.

Here, studies employing HRMAS in cell line and animal models are reviewed and discussed. The review is organized in sections including studies aiming at providing a better understanding of disease mechanisms; utilizations for the assessment of new animal models; evaluations of therapy responses; and new developments and improvements in HRMAS methodology.

Understanding disease mechanisms

A variety of research reports have been focused on providing better understandings of the underlying biochemical processes for a wide range of diseases through studies of bodily cells and tissues by employing HRMAS.

In this section, first we discuss studies demonstrating new opportunities in diagnostic analyses, whether by providing new (lipid) biomarkers for certain diseases (25–27) or enabling new approaches in genetic diagnostics (28,29) and cancer subtype discrimination (30). Further, evaluations focusing on metabolic changes due to noxae (31–38) as well as, the HRMAS-assisted elucidation of molecular bacterial structures (39–41) will be reviewed.

Lipid biomarkers

As lipids and their metabolism as well as its regulation are essential in the context of cellular biology, alterations in cellular homeostasis are likely to be reflected in a change in lipid profile. Thus, lipid biomarkers play an important role within the metabolic evaluation of numerous diseases and are being discussed in a variety of publications.

In this context a study published in 2012 quantified lipids in nervous system cancer cell lines of both murine and human origin via HRMAS, finding a specific profile for each cell line as depicted in Fig. 1 (42). It was found that MRS visible lipid signals were likely derived only from lipid droplets within the cells, and the detected lipid signals were mostly attributed to unsaturated and saturated fatty acids. The study further showed that the detected signal was dependent on the type of cell as well as on the size of the droplets, and lipid droplets with a diameter less than 0.34μm induced only weak signals. This information is crucial for the assessment of many other studies, which often discuss signals from unsaturated and saturated lipids as diagnostic tool, especially in association with malignant diseases (12,43,44). In a second study from 2013, the group investigated the same nervous system cancer cell lines with respect to the differences in lipid composition of isolated lipid droplets and whole cell lipid extraction. They revealed that lipid signals from isolated lipid droplets compared with those from whole cell extraction were similar but also showed substantial differences concerning the distribution of the lipid components, such that the whole cell lipid extraction contains lipids from lipid droplets, as well as cell and organelle membranes, which dominate the signal. (45). The study also confirmed that NMR of isolated lipid droplets compares to HRMAS of whole intact cells, suggesting that HRMAS lipid signals are from lipid droplets. Therefore, the possibly confounding influence that cell and organelle membrane lipids might have on the acquired lipid signal should be considered when performing HRMAS on the lipid fraction of whole cell lipids and their extracts. Thus, HRMAS may help identify malignant cells by evaluating their lipid profiles and furthermore, help specify these lipid signals as an analytical chemistry technique regarding the derivation of the respective lipid signals.

Lipids are also considered to be useful biomarkers for conditions other than cancer. Studies investigated the viability of intramyocellular lipids (IMCL) and other molecules as biomarkers in burn trauma and infections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen commonly found in soil and water, that typically infects the human airway, urinary tract, burns, and wounds (25,27). In these studies, IMCLs showed significant increases with severity of the condition and could serve as biomarkers for grading the progression of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection as well as for the therapeutic effectiveness in burn trauma patients. Further, correlations between IMCL concentrations and down-regulations of various genes such as IRS1, PGC-1β were reported, indicating alterations in insulin signaling and glucose metabolism, as well as mitochondrial dysfunction, all assisting understanding of molecular and metabolic processes relevant to burn trauma and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection (25,27). Hence, by applying HRMAS, the authors were able to identify possible lipid biomarkers, and also obtained an understanding of molecular and metabolic processes attendant to burn trauma and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection.

Moreover, studies indicate that in the context of lipid detection HRMAS resolves the issue of the known dependability of the measurable lipid intensities on the specific chemical extraction procedure employed. This phenomenon has been reported for other metabolic alterations resulted from non-cancer diseases. For instance, a study of intact mouse brain tissue revealed a new marker, N-acetyl, for the lysosomal storage disorder Sandhoff’s disease (26). The detected N-acetyl resonance was not visible in both HPLC and mass spectrometry measurements of tissue extracts, thus emphasizing the usefulness of HRMAS intact tissue studies by detecting signals that might otherwise be lost in the process of chemical extraction.

Genetic diagnostics

Research explored the potential of HRMAS for genetic diagnostics by evaluating metabolic profiles to detect and classify genetic diseases (28,46). A murine pancreatic cell model study investigated a mutation in the tumor suppressor gene, MEN1, responsible for the hereditary multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome (46). The study showed that four metabolites (glycerol, glutathione, γ-amino-N-butyrate and inosine) are able to significantly discriminate between wild type and MEN1 variants. Until now, while genetic testing can identify variants in the genome, it often fails to classify the impact of a certain mutation on cell functions. Nevertheless, this gap may be filled by metabolic observations and consequent interpretations of the exact impact of certain gene alterations. Thus, the metabolic phenotyping of genomic mutations by HRMAS may provide the possibility to carry out functional tests of yet unclassified metabolic effects associated with genomic mutations.

In this context HRMAS has been applied in order to identify potential therapeutic targets for genetically different types of neuroblastoma based on metabolic profiles of patient-derived MYCN-amplified and non-amplified neuroblastoma cells (28). In this study, the HRMAS-assisted establishment of the different molecular signatures which follow the various amplification of the oncogene MYCN first served to distinguish between different cancer subtypes and subsequently helped to reveal potential therapeutic targets in the choline pathway. Significant increases in phosphocholine (PC)/total choline (tCho) and taurine/tCho ratios and a decrease in glycerophosphocholine (GPC)/tCho were observed in MYCN amplified cells. Further, the study established that GPC was significantly lowered with amplification and might be a better marker and target than the increase in PC (28).

In this context, HRMAS was applied to investigate the metabolic changes due to genetic alterations in association with mechanisms underlying cancer metastasis. Here the metabolic information was not used for the diagnosis of a certain disease or cancer subtype but rather, to understand the mechanism of metastasis in an animal breast cancer model (29). It was demonstrated before that CXCR4, an alpha chemokine receptor, is up-regulated in many different cancer types (47). The truncation of the receptor’s C-terminal end (34-CXCR4) has been linked to an enhanced invasiveness and metastasis in human breast cancer as recently reviewed by Muller et al. (31). In this context, HRMAS successfully characterized the metabolic signature of the described CXCR4-gene mutation and also a significant decrease in fatty acids was observed in the truncated 34-CXCR4 cells indicating marked metabolic changes due to the genetic alteration (29). Thus, HRMAS may help to evaluate the metastatic potential within cancer diagnostics in the future, although further studies are needed in this context.

Discrimination of cancer subtypes

Another interesting HRMAS-approach was pursued to examine the possibility of diagnosing and distinguishing glioma subtypes by provoking metabolic challenges (e.g. hyperglycemia under moderate hypothermia or normothermia) in glioma bearing mice. The study used HRMAS to assist MRS imaging (MRSI) for the detection of possible differences in glucose levels between healthy and tumor bearing animals (Fig. 2). Alongside the perception of an existing spatial heterogeneity in glioma concerning the response to hyperglycemia, an increase in glucose up to 6.6 fold in the tumor center was observed under hypothermia. Thus, the authors suggest that the MRSI, assisted by HRMAS, could be employed in future studies characterizing different brain tumor subtypes in vivo (30). Nevertheless further studies are needed in order to confirm the ability of HRMAS-assisted MRSI to discriminate different tumor types and grades and its implementation in future studies of other animal models of human brain tumors.

Noxae impacts

A number of reports investigated the effects of various noxae using animal models with the assistance of HRMAS. Among other things, the effects of alcohol on murine brains were studied (32–35). Results from brain tissue studies show that ethanol exposure evokes significant metabolic changes within different parts of the brain, indicating neuronal degeneration and dysfunction as a consequence of alcohol consumption. These metabolic alterations were reported to be independent of the length of ethanol exposure and the age of the animal. Most alterations were observed in the frontal cortex; however, one study investigated fetal ethanol syndrome and localized the most prominent metabolic changes in the cerebellum and striatum of neonatal rat brains including deficits in glutamate, N-acetylaspartate (NAA) and creatine (35). In adult mice, a decrease in NAA and taurine and an increase in GABA (34,35), as well as changes in phospholipid metabolism and myo-inositol, were detected (32). Worth mentioning is a study conducted in 2012, in which the investigators compared ex vivo HRMAS and in vivo 1H MRS data in order to eradicate overlapped peaks seen in the lower resolution in vivo MRS (32). Such a comparison allowed differentiating choline-containing metabolite peaks overlapped in in vivo spectra and achieved a more accurate characterization of metabolic changes following ethanol exposure. The choline-containing resonance observed in the in vivo spectra could clearly be divided into separate peaks, including free Cho, PC, and GPC.

In summary, all reports agreed that the described metabolic alterations might eventually aid quantitative diagnosis, the development of therapeutic drugs, or serve as biomarkers for understanding of alcohol consumption.

Besides the effects of ethanol, another study focused on the impact of neurotoxin kainic acid on rat hippocampi to understand changes in neurochemistry due to microglia activation. Kainic acid is a widely used excitotoxic agent which can lead to a variety of neuropathological events and facilitate the experimental simulation of many neurological conditions. The HRMAS work successfully demonstrated the possibility to measure changes in GABA, glutamate, and myo-inositol due to neurotoxicity, apoptosis, epileptic seizures, and brain injuries, as well as other mechanisms related to excitatory amino acid transmission (36).

HRMAS was further employed to study metabolic alterations caused by such toxic industrial solvents as ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (EGME) and toluene (37,38). The effects of EGME on rat male reproductive organs were investigated and presented distinct metabolic changes in testes and capita epididymides, indicating a disturbance in energy supply processes and oxidative stress due to EGME exposure. The dominant metabolic changes in the reproductive organs entailed an increase in lactate, acetate, and amino acid levels and a decrease of creatine, glutathione, and PC, as well as a decrease in lipids in the caput epididymides region (37).

Toluene is used in the production of spray paints, gasoline and paint thinners and is frequently misused for its euphoric effects, mostly by adolescents. Toluene HRMAS study investigated metabolic changes due to binge toluene exposure in adolescent rat brains and reported brain region and toluene concentration dependent effects on glutamate and GABA. The initially observed increase in metabolic activities was followed by a dose-dependent decrease in the activities. Some metabolic effects endured for more than one week after the exposure. The study concluded that age-dependent neurochemical responses to toluene may contribute to unique behavioral patterns associated with drug abuse among adolescents (38). The aforementioned studies indicate the ability of HRMAS to reveal and decipher pathological processes arising not only from diseases but also from intoxications.

HRMAS has also shown utility as a useful tool for the development of new toxicological screening methods: a spheroid rat liver cell model and the liver toxin D-galactosamine were used to distinguish toxic treatment effects from untreated cell cultures. Metabolic alterations such as elevations in free cholesterol, cholesterolesters, saturated and unsaturated triglycerides, as well as a decrease in other saturated triglyceride resonances, were able to separate treated samples from untreated controls (48).

Besides the investigation of the impact of chemical noxae, the impact of ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation on rat lenses as a probable cause for cataract development was systematically studied by using HRMAS (49–51). Between 2004 and 2006, a research group pursued different approaches to understand the correlation between UVB radiation and the formation of cataract. Starting with the investigation of a possible dose dependent relationship between UVB exposure and cataract, the research group was able to detect metabolic changes following UVB radiation of the rat lens and rule out a dose dependency (49). In all experiments, changes in water soluble metabolites were observed, namely decreases in e.g. taurine, PC, betaine and GSH, possibly indicating membrane damage caused by UVB irradiation. HRMAS results were cross-measured by lens forward light-scattering, which confirmed the lens damage occurred due to UVB exposure. Moreover, the group tried to elucidate the protective and repair mechanisms following the UVB radiation of the lens. Through utilization of HRMAS they came to the conclusion that all provoked metabolic changes returned to normal levels after 26 days, indicating a reversibility of the damage if no repeated UVB radiation was applied within the first month after exposure (Fig. 3) (50). Finally the group examined changes in different compartments of the murine lens after a high-dose UVB radiation exposure (51). Interestingly, they concluded that metabolic differences between the compartments within unexposed lenses are more distinct than in exposed lenses. UVB radiation seemed to generally reduce metabolic activity in certain compartments of the lens and to have triggered several biochemical mechanisms such as oxidation, osmotic changes, membrane dysfunction and problems with cell transportation.

HRMAS of bacteria

HRMAS has also been employed in order to investigate bacterial strains of Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) for various purposes (39–41). C. jejuni colonizes poultry intestines and is a common source for human enteritis (39). Thus, researchers have been focused on the elucidation of its capsular polysaccharide structure (CPS), which plays a crucial role in its pathogenic potential. By characterizing defined CPS variants and mutants, HRMAS was utilized to evaluate the role of CPS modifications in C. jejuni phage recognition and infectivity as well as in the development of phage resistance in vivo. With this knowledge, the authors hope to promote phage therapy against human pathogens, including C. jejuni, by targeting components within the CPS (39).

In addition, a study was implemented to understand the involvement of CPS, particularly of O-methyl phosphoramidate (MeOPN), in the process of infection and cellular interaction (41). With the aid of HRMAS, serum resistance assays and other methods, the authors were able to prove that the presence of MeOPN on the cell surface of Campylobacter jejuni provides significant protection against the humoral immune system, proving MeOPN to be a vital part of C. jejuni’s virulence.

Moreover, studies of the mechanism of colonization of poultry with focus on the in vivo biosynthesis of N-linked glycans in C. jejuni, an important player in infections, were also conducted (40). In this study, by employing HRMAS, the authors were able to characterize the bacterial N-linked protein glycolisation pathway for the first time. According to the authors, this information can be exploited for the purposes of glycoengineering, and hence, help to optimize the creation of antibodies with enhanced immune cell recruitment abilities (40).

Developing new animal models

HRMAS has been used to assess the suitability of metabolic phenotyping of new animal models for human diseases, for which there is still a lack of reliable models in the context of research and clinic.

One example is the HRMAS-assisted characterization of murine models for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFDL stages are classified by environmental, genetic, and histopathological features with different metabolic profiles measurable via HRMAS. The metabolic profiles showed an increase in the total lipid to water ratio, a decrease in polyunsaturated fatty acids as well as a decrease in choline compounds with increasing severity of disease. Thus, normal liver tissue and different stages of steatosis can be distinguished accurately by these metabolic profiles (52).

A different approach for evaluating potential animal models via HRMAS is to directly compare metabolic profiles of potential models with profiles obtained from human tissue to confirm the suitability of these models. Such an approach has been demonstrated in acquiring metabolic abnormalities in guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) knockout mice successfully simulating GAMT deficiency (53); and in investigating metabolomic alongside transcriptomic characteristics of a panel of human breast cancer xenografts (54) (Fig. 4).

Diagnosis of neuropsychiatric disorders represents another area in which HRMAS murine model investigations provided insight into the complex pathophysiology and etiology of diseases, acknowledging that the lack of a comprehensive understanding of neuropsychiatric diseases has presented challenges in developing suitable animal models. Nonetheless, several studies have successfully applied HRMAS measurements in the testing and design of murine models that display similar neurochemical patterns as those observed in human patients, such as the proposed NMDA hypofunction model of schizophrenia. In this context, two HRMAS studies assessed the effects of NMDA glutamate receptor blockage on neurochemical profiles to evaluate whether the observed metabolic abnormalities are consistent with clinical 1H MRS findings of patients with schizophrenia and may be used as chemical murine models of the disease. A ketamine induced increase in glutamate levels in rat prefrontal cortex detected with HRMAS is found to be consistent with the hyper-glutamatergic state seen in early stages of schizophrenia (55); and prolonged exposure to a low dose of the NMDA glutamate receptor antagonist phencyclidine produces different neurochemical profiles for different rat brain regions, including the frontal cortex, Ncl. accumbens, striatum, amygdala and hippocampus (56). These results are consistent with the observed decreases in glutamate seen in chronically ill patients (55), most likely due to the neuronal damage caused by the early excitotoxic state induced by the activation of glutamatergic neurotransmission. Supporting the hypothesis that the observed neurochemical changes are the results of the disease itself rather than a treatment effect caused by psychotropic drugs, an earlier study demonstrated that no changes in neurochemical profiles occurred after long term treatment with haloperidol, a common antipsychotic drug (57). Murine models for schizophrenia have been further investigated with HRMAS by comparing metabolic profiles of murine hippocampus and frontal cortex tissue exposed to single and early maternal deprivation with described neurochemical changes seen in patients of schizophrenia (58–60). Their results also indicate a reduction in glutamatergic signaling shown by decreases in glutamine and glutamate, similar to the observations made in chronically ill patients (55).

Furthermore, HRMAS has also been used for neuropsychiatric evaluation of a single prolonged stress (SPS) protocol as a model for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in mice (61). In contrast to the maternal deprivation protocol, biochemical changes in neurochemicals critical for energy metabolism (creatine and lactate), excitatory (glutamate and glutamine) and inhibitory (GABA) neurotransmission, and neuronal integrity (NAA) in the medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala complex, and hippocampus observed in SPS mice only agree with metabolic alterations seen in the prefrontal cortex of patients with PTSD, but did not agree with the observed neurochemical patterns in the other human brain regions, such as hippocampus and amygdala. Therefore, HRMAS studies caution the SPS murine model for PTSD may only be used to investigate certain aspects of the disease.

In summary, HRMAS provides the opportunity to control the functionality of already established models as well as to create reliable new animal models for all kinds of pathologies, including the establishment of models for psychiatric diseases, which still present a very challenging and partially uncharted field within medical research.

Evaluating therapy responses

The evaluations of treatment responses and drug interactions within the human body have always been an essential part of medical research. MRS has been utilized to develop new or assess known chemotherapeutics drugs. In addition to oncology-oriented research, HRMAS has also been applied by other clinical disciplines in the search for new treatment possibilities (62–64).

Evaluation of cancer and stem cell treatment

While numerous HRMAS-based studies investigated well established chemotherapeutics, such as Cisplatin, Methotrexat (MTX), Doxorubicin, Tamoxifen, tyrosine kinase inhibitors and Bevacizumab (12,13,65–70) – mostly focused on providing a more detailed understanding of the drugs’ mechanisms of action and intracellular processes triggered by those drugs, such as apoptosis - others explored the possibilities of new agents (14–16,63,64,71–76).

In the following section, first studies investigating known chemotherapeutics will be reviewed, followed by a presentation of new therapy approaches. Finally, stem cell treatments are discussed.

A number of studies tested the alkylating drug Cisplatin on different cell lines and with varied goals, but all attempted to discover viable biomarkers for monitoring treatment outcome (Fig. 5) (12,67,68). These studies include the investigation of glioma cells exposed to either Cisplatin or starvation to measure common and distinct metabolite changes following these two different origins of cell death (68); and comparing metabolic changes due to Cisplatin treatment vs. treatments of Doxorubicin and Methotrexate in human osteosarcoma cells (67) to discover differentiating biomarkers as well as the synergism among different drug effects. Metabolic changes following Cisplatin treatment are summarized in Table 1. This table reveals that except for valine and leucine, most amino acids consistently tend to decrease after treatments with Cisplatin (68). These metabolic changes may be interpreted as the consequence of changes in biochemical pathways, including activated anti-oxidative protection (67), increased activity of the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (12,67), and increased catabolism in general (12). It is worth noting that all studies measured significant alterations in the lipid signals after the administration of Cisplatin, likely reflecting cell cycle arrest and PCD (43,77–79). Differences in the observed choline-containing metabolites were also discussed, but were considered to be in need of further investigations for conclusive statements. It also has to be kept in mind, that these are in vitro results that do not necessarily translate into an in vivo setting.

In comparison to Cisplatin, other drugs such as MTX, Doxorubicin, and Chloroethyl-nitrosurea showed very different metabolic changes regardless of their similar therapeutic effects through interaction with DNA in cells to reach eventual cell death (Table 2). Unsaturated fatty acids and GPC increases are seen in all studies presented in Table 2, indicating the involvement of membrane degradation in the process of PCD. However, regarding amino acids, unlike Cisplatin treatment under which almost all amino acids decrease, there is a clear tendency for increase in the cells treated with MTX and Chloroethylnitrosurea. A study investigating Chloroethylnitrosurea treatment of lung carcinoma and melanoma tissue reported an accumulation of glutamine, glycine and aspartate, which was interpreted to be consequent to a down-regulation in nucleotide triphosphate and deoxynucleotide triphosphate synthesis (13), and further being suggested that glutamine, behaving as a PCD suppressor (80), was likely accumulated through treatment to protect the tumor cells.

HRMAS-assisted drug studies have also been controlled by and compared to in vivo measurements. Such an example is the investigation of the efficacy of two drugs targeting the VEGF pathway, monoclonal antibody Bevacizumab and VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor SU1498, in cultured glioma cells (70). Bevacizumab, a VEGF-antibody established in 2004, has been utilized to treat various types of solid cancer diseases including colon and breast cancer (81) and was approved for glioblastoma treatment by the FDA in 2009 (82,83), however, it was rejected by the European Medical Agency (EMA) due to lack of evidence (84). Appositely to this discordance, the HRMAS cell results reviewed here show that, although a treatment effect of Bevacizumab was observed in vivo in glioblastoma patients (82), there are no significant metabolic changes taking place in in vitro experiments. In contrast, cells treated with SU1498 showed distinctive changes in lipids and GPC, hence proving the PCD effect of SU1498 in vitro. Results concerning the in vivo effectiveness of SU1498 are widely unknown. Remarkably, it was reported that HRMAS analysis could demonstrate the metabolic changes prior to visible evaluations that could be conducted by conventional cell viability assays, indicating the ability of HRMAS to detect early changes in cell metabolism following drug therapies. However, one should challenge the eligibility of a cell culture model, if the investigated drug knowingly exerts its main effect on blood vessels. As the authors discuss, using a primary glioblastoma cell culture model can only investigate the direct antibody effect on glioma cells, which often do express VEGF and VEGFR. Nonetheless, the effect on the vasculature may not be fully examined. A potential off-target effect by the small molecule inhibitor SU1498 should also be considered.

While the above study presented contradictory results concerning in vivo and in vitro experiments, there are also publications which report significant correlations between in vivo and in vitro/ex vivo results in the context of drug studies.

In 2006, the effectiveness of the vascular disrupting agent ZD6126 used for treatment of fibrosarcoma was analyzed in vivo and ex vivo in mice and correlating results of reductions in PC and GPC levels with therapy were reported (74). Similarly, in vivo 1H MRS and ex vivo HRMAS comparisons of the treatment responses of murine xenograft breast cancer models to Docetaxel were reported in 2009 (69). Both studies revealed significant decreases in choline, indicating changes in the vascular dynamics and proliferation as well as in the metabolic profile of the tumors. From these comparisons, it was suggested that both 1H MRS and HRMAS are useful methods for studying treatment responses in in vivo and ex vivo/in vitro (animal) studies, respectively. Although especially HRMAS studies of cultured cells are considered to be a valid and potentially powerful model to understand and simulate tumor treatment and drug response in vivo, the metabolic results observed in in vivo/ex vivo and in vivo/in vitro comparisons respectively, need to be treated with caution and evaluated critically and carefully. Hence, when comparing in vivo experiments with ex vivo tissue investigations, confounding factors like overlapping metabolite signals in vivo as well as ischemia time and commencing autolysis of the ex vivo tissue have to be reflected; when using in vitro cell culture models, the lacking existence of a (tumor) microenvironment and the differences in drug concentrations achieved at target should be considered.

In addition, to utilize HRMAS measurements to understand the therapeutic effect of chemotherapies, the method has also been used to examine the adverse effects of hormonal therapeutic Tamoxifen treatment in endometrial cancer cells (85). Tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, acts as an estrogen receptor antagonist in breast tissue and is, therefore, used to treat hormone-receptor positive breast cancer. However, Tamoxifen, as an estrogen receptor agonist in endometrial tissue, increases the risk of endometrial cancer in breast cancer patients (86,87). HRMAS results showed that cultured endometrial cells treated with Tamoxifen presented significant metabolic changes in nucleotides and choline-containing metabolites seemingly indicating proliferation and cell growth. Beyond that, the changes in nucleotides, namely an increase in uridine, adenosine, and their derivatives might reflect the drug’s effect on RNA transcription for proliferation and thereby explaining further the mechanism of action of Tamoxifen in endometrial cells. However, since the reported measurements were conducted with Ishikawa cells, derived from a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the endometrium, they are likely to react differently to the drug than benign endometrial cells. Nevertheless, HRMAS may represent a powerful tool to further understand these adverse effects in the context of anti-hormonal treatment of breast cancer.

As mentioned above, HRMAS has also been used to study and develop new anti-cancer agents and investigate their therapeutic efficacy against different cancer types (14–16,63,64,71–76,85).

One new therapeutic approach in oncology is presented by the application of glycolipid derivatives or glycosides in glioma treatment. Although glycosides exhibit antimitotic activity on different glioma cell lines (88), it is still unclear as how the drugs exert their activity on the molecular level. Studies of cultured glioma cells treated with glycosides have reported a significant increase in total choline levels (15,71). A significant decrease in Coenzyme A (CoA) metabolites accounts for either an inhibition of the de novo synthesis of fatty acids or an increase in β-oxidation (71). Since the described alterations in phospholipid and fatty acid metabolism have been frequently associated with cell death, these studies reinforced the proposed cytostatic abilities of glycosides.

Another example for a new cancer treatment option is the investigation of rat glioma treated with a thymidine kinase–ganciclovir gene therapy regimen (73,75,85). With lipid resonances showing prominent presence in tumors (89), MRS visible lipids were investigated and characterized during programmed cell death (PCD) caused by gene therapy. Changes in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), namely CH=CH and CH=CHCH2CH=CH, became evident as the most characteristic for PCD following a time-dependent increase (85). Furthermore, results show that the detected lipids possessed a high degree of rotational freedom, and therefore are unlikely to be membrane-bound. This observation is consistent with the idea that lipid resonances detected with HRMAS can only arise from intracellular droplets, i.e. lipid bodies or droplets (43), as previously discussed. Results also indicated the extensive increases in saturated and polyunsaturated lipids during PCD, and presented them as the most informative markers for PCD (73). Moreover, changes in other metabolites, including increases in PC, GPC and taurine were observed (75). Thus, the association of lipid bodies with a progression of PCD can prospectively enable the monitoring of thymidine kinase-ganciclovir gene therapy and other apoptosis-inducing drugs.

The potential of HRMAS for monitoring cellular differentiation processes including stem cell therapy also has been evaluated. Mouse liposarcoma cells’ response to the PPARγ-ligands treatment, Thiazolidinedione, was investigated by HRMAS. Thiazolidinedione, a medication traditionally used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus type 2 (72), is believed to induce terminal adipozyte differentiation in liposarcoma cells and, thereby, making the cancer cells resume the process of maturation. HRMAS results suggested that the increases in PTC:PC ratio, myo-inositol, and glycerol might be possible biomarkers for the monitoring of the differentiation treatment with Thiazolidinedione. Similarly, metabolic profiling for differentiation of murine mesenchymal stem cells was monitored by HRMAS (62). Mesenchymal stem cells present a considerable potential for clinical applications within cell replacement therapies but cannot be monitored or tracked well once transplanted. The reported HRMAS study presented differentiated cells of showing significant decreases in choline, creatine, glutamate and myo-inositol, as well as increases in fatty acids, and suggested them, particularly those of fatty acids as biomarker for mesenchymal stem cell differentiation may be mornitored in vivo during stem cell therapies.

Evaluation of neurological therapies

HRMAS has been frequently used to investigate new pharmacological interventions for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). A study using a transgenic mouse model of ALS showed a significant decrease in both glutamate and glutamine levels in murine brain tissue and an extended lifespan following methionine sulfoximine (MSO) treatment, a glutamine synthetase inhibitor (64). Glutamate toxicity has been discussed as a mechanism for the degeneration of motor neurons in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases (90). By employing HRMAS measurements of intact mouse brain tissue, this study successfully proved that the in vivo treatment with MSO reduced glutamate and glutamine brain levels by inhibiting in vivo glutamate synthesis. As the disease manifests in both brain and spinal cord, the reported results emphasized the need for further investigations using metabolic profiling to determine the disease-specific response to MSO treatment for different parts of the central nerve system.

Many treatment approaches for AD focus on decreasing the amyloid plaque load, one of the currently known hallmarks of AD. In this context, HRMAS was successfully utilized to study the effects of different pharmacological agents inhibiting the formation of A β-oligomers and, thus the onset of the β-amyloid pathology seen in AD.

Based on the known ability of cyclohexanols, such as scyllo-inositol (s-Ino), in inhibiting the formation of oligomers in vitro (91), a study evaluated the ability of HRMAS to quantify s-Ino levels in cortical and hippocamal tissues of two different transgenic AD mouse models following s-Ino administration in vivo (92). The intact tissue HRMAS results show that dietary supplementation of s-Ino led to an increase of s-Ino levels in cortex and hippocampus of AD mice (Fig. 6) and suggest HRMAS as a useful tool for the evaluation of future inositol treatment trials. The observed metabolic differences in glutamate, NAA, and taurine levels in transgenic AD mouse models and wild type animals also support this conception.

A more recent study investigated methylene blue (MB) as another promising pharmacological agent for AD control. Behavioral tests evaluated the effect of MB on cognitive impairment in a transgenic AD mouse model. The results showed a positive effect of MB application on cognitive impairment, as well as a decreased β-amyloid deposition. To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the biochemical mechanisms involved in β-amyloid deposition, HRMAS was used to define several metabolites that enable a differentiation between AD and wild type animals (63). The results are in agreement with a decrease in NAA and GABA accompanying AD as described in the literature (93). However, no significant differences between taurine and inositol levels were observed. The authors attributed these differences to the variable age of the mice, resulting in different plaque loads, a factor that has to be considered when conducting mouse brain experiments. Following MB treatment, two of seven defined metabolites measured through HRMAS, alanine and lactate, were restored. Both alanine and lactate are classic markers of mitochondrial dysfunction, which has been shown to be a part of AD’s pathophysiology by several studies (94,95).

Improving methodologies

Although HRMAS has been utilized as a research tool for almost twenty years, continuing improvements of the methodology have been achieved. Varieties of proposals published within the last ten years testify to the interest in this method and the broad spectrum of possible applications. The foci of those studies range from investigations of the impact of sample preparation, data acquisition, to new approaches in data processing and interpretation.

Data acquisition

A number of studies have been devoted to different sample preparation procedures and their possibly confounding impacts on the measured results. All of these studies aimed at better and more accurate presentations of cellular metabolites based on HRMAS measurements of intact tissues and cells.

Considering that data acquisition times can be long, sample spinning rates may be high, and biologically intact samples can still undergo various metabolic reactions, microwave radiation of samples was proposed to enhance their metabolic stability for measurement. Heating tissue samples rapidly to 80–90 degrees Celsius for 1–2 s with pulsed microwaves inactivates enzyme activity within the tissue specimens and “freezes” the tissue’s metabolic state for HRMAS analysis. No significant change was seen both in the metabolic profile by HRMAS measuring of samples at 37°C and in tissue histology following microwave radiation (96,97). The impact of sample ischemia, prolonged spinning times (98) and freeze-thawing of samples (99) also have been studied. Three hours of spinning at 5kHz and 4°C resulted in more significant metabolic changes in rat brain tissue than the affect of a three-hour period of ischemia in a 20°C environment. The metabolic changes due to spinning entail increases in acetate, alanine, GABA, lactate and glycine, and decreases in GPC, tCho and glutamine.

Significant changes in rat kidney tissue before and after freeze-thawing were reported with more metabolites observed after freeze-thawing, probably due to a release of metabolites out of their macromolecule compounds (99). The information presented by this study is critical for all studies investigating changes in the metabolic profile as a consequence of a disease or therapeutic intervention, as studies have to make certain that any observed changes are effectively derived from a pathology or drug treatment, not due to experimental conditions. When discussing the role of data acquisition conditions, another study investigating the effect of the acquisition temperature on the metabolic pattern should be noted (100). In the respective study, reversible temperature-dependent changes mostly affecting mobile lipids and choline-containing compounds resonances were observed. Mobile lipid signals showed increased intensity at 37°C when compared to 0°C, presumably due to phase change in the neutral lipids contained in the lipid droplets. Despite the fact that the study’s findings were ascertained in human brain tissue, they can be adapted to an animal ex vivo setting. Following from this, the many possible confounders occurring during data acquisition should be evaluated carefully before planning and conducting HRMAS experiments.

Shortly after the introduction of HRMAS, a study conducted in 1998 determined the benefit of spinning cell pellets in comparison to static conditions demonstrated that HRMAS allows for the identification of a large number of metabolites that were invisible under non-spinning conditions (20). Similar studies have been undertaken in more recent years (101,102), and accomplished comparisons between metabolic profiles through HRMAS of intact tissue samples and static MRS tissue extract experiments in animal brain tissues. While some results showed no significant difference between HRMAS and extract solution MRS experiments except a weaker Cho resonance seen in the HRMAS experiment that was absent in the extract measurement (101), the others concluded that some metabolite peaks could only be accurately identified through metabolite extraction (102). Nevertheless, all of these reports considered HRMAS method as a valuable alternative to extract solution MRS with the advantage of shorter preparation times and enhanced resolution when compared to in vivo or unspun ex vivo tissue investigations.

Work on new pulse programs for HRMAS data acquisition also has been introduced to identify and potentially quantify metabolites within tissue and cell lines (103,104). A two-dimensional HRMAS 1H MRS program for quantitative metabolite analysis was proposed by using human breast and prostate cancer cells (103), as well as a new algorithm, TARQUIN (totally automatic robust quantitation in NMR), enabling the quantification of metabolites in any HRMAS data set was introduced (104). Both studies state that the essential information obtainable by quantitative HRMAS analysis would improve the validity of the method in functional genomic testing as well as drug response investigations. In addition to metabolic quantifications, an HRMAS method that facilitates the measurement of 1H relaxation times in biological samples has been suggested (105). The utility of relaxation time information in the measurements of i.e. drug response was emphasized, together with its critical role in quantification analyses of metabolites.

Use of different pulse sequences represents one method by which more accurate metabolite measurements are achieved. Pulse and acquire sequences allow concentrations to be obtained free from the effects of T2 decay and free from the modulation of lipid and macromolecule resonances. Where lipids are large, however, such as in breast cancer tissue, the large size and overlapping nature of metabolite peaks makes difficult quantification of small molecule resonances. To solve this issue, a Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (cpmg) sequence with an echo time (TE) of about 270 ms can be employed, which attenuates the lipids and essentially removes macromolecules. This change allows easier quantification of metabolites, but concentrations are no longer accurate due to the different T2 values of the metabolites.

Concentration standards can also complicate data acquisition, such as the fact that the common standard trimethylsilylpropanoic acid (TSP) binds to proteins. As an alternative, the Electronic Reference To access In vivo Concentrations (ERETIC) method has been explored, which inputs an electronically-generated NMR signal into the spectrum as a quantification reference point (106,107).

Proper metabolite assessment also can be complicated if repetition time (TR) between pulses is not long enough. If TR is too short, signal intensity for each metabolite will vary inversely with T1 relaxation time for each rather than actually representing metabolite concentration (108).

While the advantages of HRMAS in ex vivo analyses of intact tissues and cells are evident from the above discussions, in vivo application of the concept is difficult and challenging. Nevertheless, efforts in applying magic angle spinning (MAS) for in vivo profiling are noted (109–113). Studies examining the link between innate immune-deficiency, trauma in aging and insulin resistance found the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster present a useful model for the investigation of genetics and physiology (Fig. 7). The fruit flies’ metabolic profiles, obtained under 2 kHz spinning and 4°C of living animals, were analyzed to understand pathophysiological occurrences inside cells, such as mitochondrial dysfunction that accompanies insulin resistance and muscle wasting that occurs in trauma, as well as aging and immune deficiencies leading to higher susceptibility for infection. The studies compared and related the observed metabolic changes to the human pathophysiology and evaluated Drosophila melanogaster as an accurate model for the MRS investigation of genetic and metabolic diseases (109–111).

Studies further investigated a living mammal with phase-corrected magic angle turning (PHORMAT) (112). The ultra-slow spinning (1Hz) of a live mouse showed an enhanced spectral resolution compared with static in vivo MRS studies (Fig. 8). Recently, a new method, localized magic angle turning (LOCMAT), that extended PHORMAT, was also proposed. The approach allows acquisition of spectra from particular volumes of interest (VOI), instead of acquiring a spectrum from the entire body (113). Therefore, LOCMAT has the potential to open up new possibilities within research of metabolic activity, molecular diagnostics, therapy response evaluations, and drug testing in live animals. Furthermore, the LOCMAT technique may be used in a future clinical setting, where not the patient but the magnetic field could be spun.

Although HRMAS has overcome a number of confounding physical factors hampering 1H NMR spectroscopy, such as chemical shift anisotropy, dipolar couplings and bulk magnetic susceptibility, assignments and quantifications of metabolites can be difficult when co-resonances occur. A number of studies have employed diffusion ordered spectroscopy (DOSY) in order to separate co-resonant signals, which particularly pose a problem in tissues with high lipid content (114,115).

Data processing

Various HRMAS data processing schemes have been reported (116–119). In a 2012 study conducted by Maria et al., a filter diagonalization method, similar to fast Fourier transformation (FFT), was suggested by fitting MRS time-domain signals and presented a viable alternative for processing heterogeneous biological materials without the need of water suppression and T2 filtering (116). Other suggestions included detection and analyses of magnetization transfers between water and protons in phospholipids and proteins. By assessing the magnetization transfer through mapping of the magnetization transfer network, variables such as water relaxation and the amount of bound and free metabolites can be calculated to determine pulse sequences for adequate water suppression based on the information on interaction between water and cellular metabolites (117).

Data interpretation

Methods for understanding and interpretation of HRMAS spectra in terms of magnetic susceptibility and cell volume changes due to spinning and the impacts of these factors on the observed spectral results have been discussed (120,121). Magnetic susceptibility variation can be responsible for significant changes in the measured spectra, including the proposed interpretation of the apparent two water peaks seen in measurements of spinning cell suspensions (120). Contrary to previous assumptions (72,122), it is assumed that the two peaks don’t derive from intra- and extracellular water resonances, but as a result of the formation of two water phases within the spinning rotor, where almost no exchange of water occurs between these two phases. A study has also reported that cell volume seemed to be independent of spinning rate or pressure from spinning, and no volume changes result due to fast rotation (121).

HRMAS has also been exerted as means to improve the interpretation of MR images. Investigations of the cell uptake of specific contrast agents commonly used in clinical radiology (Gd-BOPTA, Gd-DTPA, and Gd-DOTA), and the analogous complexes obtained by replacing Gd(III) with Dy(III), Nd(III), and Tb(III)) were reported (122). Based on the consideration that the centrifugal force occurring in HRMAS separates cells from the extracellular water within the rotor, the intracellular and extracellular water may be investigated separately, and water exchange across erythrocyte plasma membrane was studied (123). The results showed very little water transport across the plasma membrane of erythrocytes. In respect of the fact that contrast agents either target the intracellular or the extracellular compartment, this information is valuable for properly interpreting contrast agent assisted MR images.

Overall observations

Since the introduction of HRMAS 20 years ago, its utilization in medical research has increased significantly, particularly during the last 10 years. Although the investigation of cancer diseases is still the number one area for applications of HRMAS, a wide range of other fields, particularly in the investigation of neurological and psychiatric diseases, has also been witnessed (Fig. 9).

Conclusion

We reviewed a diverse and broad implementation of HRMAS MRS spectroscopy in biomedical research. This volume of work emphasizes the tremendous potential that HRMAS can contribute to medical sciences. This review demonstrates the diverse and broad implementation of HRMAS MRS spectroscopy in biomedical research and emphasizes the tremendous potential that lies within this method. Although the methodology itself is still being modified and improved, HRMAS has been implemented in a wide range of studies, including the investigation of the biochemical and molecular mechanisms of diseases or drug responses. Furthermore, HRMAS has also been utilized to augment and verify results of lower resolution in vivo MRS studies (69,74,124) for its ability to detect low concentration metabolites. Regrettably, HRMAS has not yet been used in clinical settings. The technique of HRMAS cannot be performed on human subjects. Among others, impeding factors for its clinical implementation include specialized expertise and access to high field MR spectrometers since most experimental studies are conducted with high magnetic field spectrometers of 7T or more, while clinically used magnets have maximum magnetic field strengths of 1.5–3T. Although high magnetic field spectrometers have the advantage of higher resolution, studies conducted at lower resolution at 3T or less would be more compatible with the existing equipment in most clinics. These circumstances might also explain why metabolic approaches have not yet substituted conventional pathological diagnostic approaches, such as histology or gene and protein expression analyses. Above all, the most important factor for the implementation of a technique like HRMAS in clinical practice is the establishment of the necessary synergy between the ones who have the medical questions, the clinicians, and the ones who have the technical means, the scientists. Nevertheless, considering the increase in synergic developments seen in laboratories around the world, HRMAS holds many possibilities in terms of diagnosis and prediction of clinical outcomes for various diseases and its potential clinical applications should be further explored.

We thank the Massachusetts General Hospital Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging for research support.

Funding: This work was funded by PHS NIH grants CA115746, CA115746S2, and CA162959.

Abbreviations

1H MRS proton magnetic resonance

AD Alzheimer’s disease

Ado adenosine

Ala alanine

ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Cho choline

cpmg sequence Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill sequence

CPS capsular polysaccharide

EGME ethylene glycole monoethyl ether

ERETIC Electronic Reference To access In vivo Concentrations

f.a fatty acid

FFT fast Fourier transformation

GAMT guanidinoacetate methyltransferase

Glu glucose

GPC glycerophosphocholine

GSH glutathione

HRMAS high-resolution magic angle spinning

IMCL intramyocellular lipid

L lipid

Leu leucine

LOCMAT localized magic angle turning

Lys lysine

MB methylene blue

MRSI magnetic resonance spectroscopz imaging

MSO methionine sulfoximine

MTX methotrexat

NAA n-acetylaspartate

NAFLD non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

PC phosphocholine

PCD programmed cell death

PE phosphoethanolamine

Phe phenylalanine

PHORMAT phase-corrected magic angle turning

Pro proline

PTC phosphatidylcholine

PTSD post-traumatic stress disorder

PUFA polyunsaturated fatty acids

sIns scyllo-inositol

SPS single prolonged stress

TARQUIN totally automatic robust quantification in NMR

Tau taurine

tCho total choline

TE echo time

TG triacylglyceride

TR reptition time

Tyr tyrosine

T1 spin-lattice relaxation time

T2 spin-spin relaxation time

UDP uridine diphosphate

UDP-GalNaC uridine diphosphate galactosamine

UDP-GlcNaC uridine diphosphate glucosamine

UFA unsaturated fatty acids

Urd uridine

UTP uridine triphosphate

UVB ultraviolet B radiation

Val valine

VOI volumes of interest

Figure 1 HRMAS spectra of five brain and nervous system tumor cell lines. The assignment of lipid signals is as follows: 1-CH3, 2-(CH2)n-, 3-CH2–CH2–C=O, 4-CH2–CH=, 5-CH2–CH2–C=O, 6=CH–CH2–CH=‘ 7-CH=CH– (42).

Figure 2 (A) MRSI time-course spectral patterns in hyperglycemic, hypothermic animals collected from position that best describes the center of the tumor mass displayed on the image at: euglycemia (black), 22 min hyperglycemia (blue), 44 min hyperglycemia (green) and 66 min hyperglycemia (red). (B) Ex vivo HRMAS water-suppressed spectra (LB = 12.0 Hz) obtained from euglycemic and hypothermic (1) and hyperglycemic and hypothermic (2) groups ((1) straight lines and (2) dotted lines), shown overlaid; spectra corresponding to samples collected from the tumor center. Right Column, enlarged views of the highlighted grey regions shown in the left column spectra (30).

Figure 3 Relative differences in metabolite concentrations between exposed and non-exposed rat lenses 5 (n = 6), 25 (n = 6), 125 (n = 7), and 625 (n = 6) hr after UVB irradiation. Data were calculated as (exposed lens – control lens)/control lens. The bars represent 95% confidence internals for the mean differences (50).

Figure 4 Mean HRMAS spectra of different breast cancer subtypes. Spectra of a) basal-like (n = 19), b) luminal-B (n = 6), c) ER negative (n = 27) and d) ER positive (n = 6) xenograft samples, and of e) ER negative (n = 13), and f) ER positive (n = 37) breast cancer tissue samples from patients (54).

Figure 5 HRMAS NMR spectra of (a) control and (b) cisplatin-treated cells, at 48 h (12).

Figure 6 Four HRMAS spectra from the hippocampus of two triple transgene mice with and two without dietary scyllo-inositol supplementation. There was little overlap in the scyllo-inositol values between the two groups of mice (p &lt; 0.001) (92).

Figure 7 Experimental set up of in vivo HRMAS for the investigation of live Drosophila at 14.1 T. External standard trimethylsilyl-propionic-2,2,3,3-d4 acid in deuterated water (TSP/D2O). In the square: rotor position at the magic angle in HRMAS probe (109).

Figure 8 The mouse-MAS NMR probe. a: An 70-day-old anesthetized female BALBc mouse placed in one-half of the mold. Also shown is the second half containing the mouse-shaped cavity. When the mold is closed the tail of the mouse is folded under its body. The area between the dotted lines indicates the part of the body generating the NMR signal in the PHORMAT experiment. b: Top part of the probe with the mouse and the mold mounted in place. The area between the arrows is the NMR-sensitive area of the NMR coil (112).

Figure 9 Fields of Application. Others: Regenerative medicine (1), Dermatology (2), Biochemistry (1), Traumatology (1), Food industry (2), Pulmonology (1).

Table 1 Selected metabolic changes due to Cisplatin treatment from (12,67,68).

	Duarte et al. ((12))	Mirbahai et al. ((68))	Lamego et al. ((67))	
Lipids and Choline-containing metabolites	GPC↑
PC↓
UFA↑
TG↑	GPC↑
PC↓	GPC↑
PC↑
UFA↑	
Amino Acids	Glu↓
Ala↓
Lys↓
Phe↓
Pro↓
Tyr↓	Glu↓
Ala↓
Lys↓
Phe↓
Pro↓
Tyr↓
Val↑
Leu↑	Glu↓Ala↓
Gly↓
Tau↓	
Nucleotides	UDP-GlcNac↑
UDP-GalNac↑
Niaciamide↓	n/a	UDP-GlcNac↑
UTP↑
UDP↑
Inosine↓
Adenosine↓	

Table 2 Metabolic changes due to classic chemotherapeutics from (12,67,68) for Cisplatin; (67) for Doxorubicin and Methotrexate; (66) and (13) for Chloroethyl-nitrosurea.

	Cisplatin	Doxorubicin	Methotrexate	Chloroethyl-nitrosurea	Chloroethyl-nitrosurea	
Cell line/Tissue	Cell line	Cell line	Cell line	Cell line	Tissue	
Cell type	Glioma(G)/Lung(L)/Osteosarcoma(O)	Osteosarcoma	Osteosarcoma	Melanoma	Melanoma (M)/Lung(L)	
Lipids and Choline-containing metabolites	GPC↑
PC↓(G,L)/↑(O)
UFA↑
-
-	GPC↑*

PC↓*
UFA↑
Cho↑
-	GPC↑*

PC↓
UFA↑*
Cho↑*
-	GPC↑

PC↓
-
Cho↔
PE↑	GPC↑(M)/GPC↓ (L)
PC↑(M)/PC↑(L)
UFA↑(L)
Cho↑ (L)
PE↑	
Amino Acids	Tyr↓(G,L)
-
Glu↓
Ala↓
Tau↓(O)
Lys↓(G,L)
Phe↓ (G,L)
Pro↓(G,L)
Val↑(G)
Leu↑(G)	Tyr↑
Gly↓
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-	Tyr↑*
Gly↑*
Glu↓*
-
-
-
Phe↑
-
Val↑*
-	-
Gly?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-	-
Gly↑ (M)
Glu↑
Ala↑(M)
Tau↑(M)
Lys↑
-
Pro↑(M)/Pro↓(L)
-

Leu↑	
Nucleotides	UDP-GlcNac↑(L,O)
UTP↑(L,O)
UDP↑(L,O)
-	UDP-GlcNac↑
UTP↑*
UDP↑*
Uridine↑*	-
UTP↓*
UDP↓*
Uridine↑*	-
-
-
-	-
-
-
-	
Other compounds	Sorbitol↑
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-	-
GSH↓*
Creatine↑*
M-inositol↓
S-inositol↓
-
-
-
-	-
GSH↓*
Creatine↓*
-
-
-
-
-
-	-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-	-
GSH↔(M)
Creatine↑
-
-
Glucose↑
Succinate↓(M)
Acetate↑(L)
Format↑(L)	
* p&gt;0.05

Competing Interests: The authors acknowledge no competing financial interests.

Author Contributions: Kaebisch: research, writing; Fuss: writing; Vandergrift: writing; Toews: research, writing; Habbel: writing; Cheng: research, writing, funding.


1 Cao P Liang Y Gao X Li XM Song ZQ Liang G Monoterpenoid indole alkaloids from Alstonia yunnanensis and their cytotoxic and anti-inflammatory activities Molecules 2012 17 11 13631 13641 10.3390/molecules171113631 23159924
2 Ding X Hou Y Zhu Y Wang P Fu L Zhu H Zhang N Qin H Qu W Wang F Hou W Structure elucidation, anticancer and antioxidant activities of a novel polysaccharide from Gomphus clavatus Gray Oncol Rep 2015 33 6 3162 3170 10.3892/or.2015.3921 25901792
3 Wang AS Lodi A Rivera LB Izquierdo-Garcia JL Firpo MA Mulvihill SJ Tempero MA Bergers G Ronen SM HR-MAS MRS of the pancreas reveals reduced lipid and elevated lactate and taurine associated with early pancreatic cancer NMR Biomed 2014 27 11 1361 1370 10.1002/nbm.3198 25199993
4 Rosi A Ricci-Vitiani L Biffoni M Grande S Luciani AM Palma A Runci D Cappellari M De Maria R Guidoni L Pallini R Viti V (1) H NMR spectroscopy of glioblastoma stem-like cells identifies alpha-aminoadipate as a marker of tumor aggressiveness NMR Biomed 2015 28 3 317 326 10.1002/nbm.3254 25581615
5 Moestue S Sitter B Bathen TF Tessem MB Gribbestad IS HR MAS MR spectroscopy in metabolic characterization of cancer Curr Top Med Chem 2011 11 1 2 26 20809888
6 Nicholson JK Connelly J Lindon JC Holmes E Metabonomics: a platform for studying drug toxicity and gene function Nat Rev Drug Discov 2002 1 2 153 161 10.1038/nrd728 12120097
7 Kang J Zhu L Lu J Zhang X Application of metabolomics in autoimmune diseases: insight into biomarkers and pathology J Neuroimmunol 2015 279 25 32 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2015.01.001 25669996
8 DeFeo EM Cheng LL Characterizing human cancer metabolomics with ex vivo 1H HRMAS MRS Technol Cancer Res Treat 2010 9 4 381 391 20626203
9 Papas KK Colton CK Gounarides JS Roos ES Jarema MA Shapiro MJ Cheng LL Cline GW Shulman GI Wu H Bonner-Weir S Weir GC NMR spectroscopy in beta cell engineering and islet transplantation Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001 944 96 119 11797699
10 Ippolito JE Merritt ME Backhed F Moulder KL Mennerick S Manchester JK Gammon ST Piwnica-Worms D Gordon JI Linkage between cellular communications, energy utilization, and proliferation in metastatic neuroendocrine cancers Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 33 12505 12510 10.1073/pnas.0605207103 16895983
11 Nyblom HK Nord LI Andersson R Kenne L Bergsten P Glucose-induced de novo synthesis of fatty acyls causes proportional increases in INS-1E cellular lipids NMR Biomed 2008 21 4 357 365 10.1002/nbm.1197 17691080
12 Duarte IF Ladeirinha AF Lamego I Gil AM Carvalho L Carreira IM Melo JB Potential markers of cisplatin treatment response unveiled by NMR metabolomics of human lung cells Mol Pharm 2013 10 11 4242 4251 10.1021/mp400335k 24050386
13 Morvan D Demidem A Metabolomics by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the response to chloroethylnitrosourea reveals drug efficacy and tumor adaptive metabolic pathways Cancer Res 2007 67 5 2150 2159 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2346 17332345
14 Debiton E Borel M Communal Y Mshvildadze V Barthomeuf C In addition to membrane injury, an affinity for melanin might be involved in the high sensitivity of human melanoma cells to hederacolchiside A1 Melanoma Res 2004 14 2 97 105 15057038
15 Garcia-Alvarez I Garrido L Romero-Ramirez L Nieto-Sampedro M Fernandez-Mayoralas A Campos-Olivas R The effect of antitumor glycosides on glioma cells and tissues as studied by proton HR-MAS NMR spectroscopy PLoS One 2013 8 10 e78391 10.1371/journal.pone.0078391 24194925
16 Morvan D Functional metabolomics uncovers metabolic alterations associated to severe oxidative stress in MCF7 breast cancer cells exposed to ascididemin Mar Drugs 2013 11 10 3846 3860 10.3390/md11103846 24152560
17 Gruppen EG Connelly MA Otvos JD Bakker SJ Dullaart RP A novel protein glycan biomarker and LCAT activity in metabolic syndrome Eur J Clin Invest 2015 45 8 850 859 10.1111/eci.12481 26081900
18 Zhang A Sun H Xu H Qiu S Wang X Cell metabolomics OMICS 2013 17 10 495 501 10.1089/omi.2012.0090 23988149
19 Cheng LL Lean CL Bogdanova A Wright SC Jr Ackerman JL Brady TJ Garrido L Enhanced resolution of proton NMR spectra of malignant lymph nodes using magic-angle spinning Magn Reson Med 1996 36 5 653 658 8916014
20 Weybright P Millis K Campbell N Cory DG Singer S Gradient, high-resolution, magic angle spinning 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of intact cells Magn Reson Med 1998 39 3 337 345 9498588
21 Millis K Weybright P Campbell N Fletcher JA Fletcher CD Cory DG Singer S Classification of human liposarcoma and lipoma using ex vivo proton NMR spectroscopy Magn Reson Med 1999 41 2 257 267 10080272
22 Griffin JL Bollard M Nicholson JK Bhakoo K Spectral profiles of cultured neuronal and glial cells derived from HRMAS (1)H NMR spectroscopy NMR Biomed 2002 15 6 375 384 10.1002/nbm.792 12357551
23 Kaul D Wu CL Adkins CB Jordan KW Defeo EM Habbel P Peterson RT McDougal WS Pohl U Cheng LL Assessing prostate cancer growth with mRNA of spermine metabolic enzymes Cancer Biol Ther 2010 9 9 736 742 20215859
24 Huuse EM Jensen LR Goa PE Lundgren S Anderssen E Bofin A Gribbestad IS Bathen TF Monitoring the Effect of Docetaxel Treatment in MCF7 Xenografts Using Multimodal In Vivo and Ex Vivo Magnetic Resonance Methods, Histopathology, and Gene Expression Transl Oncol 2010 3 4 252 263 20689767
25 Tzika AA Astrakas LG Cao H Mintzopoulos D Zhang Q Padfield K Yu H Mindrinos MN Rahme LG Tompkins RG Murine intramyocellular lipids quantified by NMR act as metabolic biomarkers in burn trauma Int J Mol Med 2008 21 6 825 832 18506378
26 Lowe JP Stuckey DJ Awan FR Jeyakumar M Neville DC Platt FM Griffin JL Styles P Blamire AM Sibson NR MRS reveals additional hexose N-acetyl resonances in the brain of a mouse model for Sandhoff disease NMR Biomed 2005 18 8 517 526 10.1002/nbm.984 16206131
27 Tzika AA Constantinou C Bandyopadhaya A Psychogios N Lee S Mindrinos M Martyn JA Tompkins RG Rahme LG A small volatile bacterial molecule triggers mitochondrial dysfunction in murine skeletal muscle PLoS One 2013 8 9 e74528 10.1371/journal.pone.0074528 24098655
28 Peet AC McConville C Wilson M Levine BA Reed M Dyer SA Edwards EC Strachan MC McMullan DJ Wilkes TM Grundy RG 1H MRS identifies specific metabolite profiles associated with MYCN-amplified and non-amplified tumour subtypes of neuroblastoma cell lines NMR Biomed 2007 20 7 692 700 10.1002/nbm.1181 17506115
29 Vermeer LS Fruhwirth GO Pandya P Ng T Mason AJ NMR metabolomics of MTLn3E breast cancer cells identifies a role for CXCR4 in lipid and choline regulation J Proteome Res 2012 11 5 2996 3003 10.1021/pr300111x 22432781
30 Simoes RV Delgado-Goni T Lope-Piedrafita S Arus C 1H-MRSI pattern perturbation in a mouse glioma: the effects of acute hyperglycemia and moderate hypothermia NMR Biomed 2010 23 1 23 33 10.1002/nbm.1421 19670263
31 Muller A Homey B Soto H Ge N Catron D Buchanan ME McClanahan T Murphy E Yuan W Wagner SN Barrera JL Mohar A Verastegui E Zlotnik A Involvement of chemokine receptors in breast cancer metastasis Nature 2001 410 6824 50 56 10.1038/35065016 11242036
32 Lee DW Kim SY Kim JH Lee T Yoo C Nam YK Jung JY Shin HC Kim HY Kim DJ Choe BY Quantitative assessment of neurochemical changes in a rat model of long-term alcohol consumption as detected by in vivo and ex vivo proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy Neurochem Int 2013 62 4 502 509 10.1016/j.neuint.2013.02.007 23411411
33 Lee DW Kim SY Lee T Nam YK Ju A Woo DC You SJ Han JS Lee SH Choi CB Kim SS Shin HC Kim HY Kim DJ Rhim HS Choe BY Ex vivo detection for chronic ethanol consumption-induced neurochemical changes in rats Brain Res 2012 1429 134 144 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.10.017 22079322
34 Lee DW Nam YK Kim TK Kim JH Kim SY Min JW Lee JH Kim HY Kim DJ Choe BY Dose-dependent influence of short-term intermittent ethanol intoxication on cerebral neurochemical changes in rats detected by ex vivo proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy Neuroscience 2014 262 107 117 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.12.061 24406441
35 O’Leary-Moore SK McMechan AP Galloway MP Hannigan JH Neonatal alcohol-induced region-dependent changes in rat brain neurochemistry measured by high-resolution magnetic resonance spectroscopy Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2008 32 10 1697 1707 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00747.x 18631322
36 Mao H Toufexis D Wang X Lacreuse A Wu S Changes of metabolite profile in kainic acid induced hippocampal injury in rats measured by HRMAS NMR Exp Brain Res 2007 183 4 477 485 10.1007/s00221-007-1061-6 17668196
37 Yamamoto T Horii I Yoshida T Integrated NMR-based metabonomic investigation of early metabolic effects of ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (EGME) on male reproductive organs in rats J Toxicol Sci 2007 32 5 515 528 18198483
38 Perrine SA O’Leary-Moore SK Galloway MP Hannigan JH Bowen SE Binge toluene exposure alters glutamate, glutamine and GABA in the adolescent rat brain as measured by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy Drug Alcohol Depend 2011 115 1–2 101 106 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.11.001 21126832
39 Holst Sorensen MC van Alphen LB Fodor C Crowley SM Christensen BB Szymanski CM Brondsted L Phase variable expression of capsular polysaccharide modifications allows Campylobacter jejuni to avoid bacteriophage infection in chickens Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2012 2 11 10.3389/fcimb.2012.00011 22919603
40 Kelly J Jarrell H Millar L Tessier L Fiori LM Lau PC Allan B Szymanski CM Biosynthesis of the N-linked glycan in Campylobacter jejuni and addition onto protein through block transfer J Bacteriol 2006 188 7 2427 2434 10.1128/JB.188.7.2427-2434.2006 16547029
41 van Alphen LB Wenzel CQ Richards MR Fodor C Ashmus RA Stahl M Karlyshev AV Wren BW Stintzi A Miller WG Lowary TL Szymanski CM Biological roles of the O-methyl phosphoramidate capsule modification in Campylobacter jejuni PLoS One 2014 9 1 e87051 10.1371/journal.pone.0087051 24498018
42 Pan X Wilson M McConville C Arvanitis TN Kauppinen RA Peet AC The size of cytoplasmic lipid droplets varies between tumour cell lines of the nervous system: a 1H NMR spectroscopy study MAGMA 2012 25 6 479 485 10.1007/s10334-012-0315-x 22543553
43 Hakumaki JM Kauppinen RA 1H NMR visible lipids in the life and death of cells Trends Biochem Sci 2000 25 8 357 362 10916153
44 Opstad KS Bell BA Griffiths JR Howe FA An investigation of human brain tumour lipids by high-resolution magic angle spinning 1H MRS and histological analysis NMR Biomed 2008 21 7 677 685 10.1002/nbm.1239 18186027
45 Pan XWM McConville C Arvanitis T Kauppinen R Peet AC Cytoplasmic lipid droplets in nervous system tumour cell lines: Size and lipid species as analysed by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy Biomedical Spectroscopy and Imaging 2013 9 19 10.3233/BSI-130035
46 Blaise BJ Lopez C Vercherat C Lacheretz-Bernigaud A Bayet-Robert M Rezig L Scoazec JY Calender A Emsley L Elena-Herrmann B Cordier-Bussat M Metabolic expressivity of human genetic variants: NMR metabotyping of MEN1 pathogenic mutants J Pharm Biomed Anal 2014 93 118 124 10.1016/j.jpba.2013.09.029 24183932
47 Sun X Cheng G Hao M Zheng J Zhou X Zhang J Taichman RS Pienta KJ Wang J CXCL12/CXCR4/CXCR7 chemokine axis and cancer progression Cancer Metastasis Rev 2010 29 4 709 722 10.1007/s10555-010-9256-x 20839032
48 Bollard ME Xu J Purcell W Griffin JL Quirk C Holmes E Nicholson JK Metabolic profiling of the effects of D-galactosamine in liver spheroids using (1)H NMR and MAS-NMR spectroscopy Chem Res Toxicol 2002 15 11 1351 1359 12437325
49 Risa O Saether O Lofgren S Soderberg PG Krane J Midelfart A Metabolic changes in rat lens after in vivo exposure to ultraviolet irradiation: measurements by high resolution MAS 1H NMR spectroscopy Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004 45 6 1916 1921 15161858
50 Risa O Saether O Kakar M Mody V Lofgren S Soderberg PG Krane J Midelfart A Time dependency of metabolic changes in rat lens after in vivo UVB irradiation analysed by HR-MAS 1H NMR spectroscopy Exp Eye Res 2005 81 4 407 414 10.1016/j.exer.2005.02.012 16185952
51 Tessem MB Bathen TF Lofgren S Saether O Mody V Meyer L Dong X Soderberg PG Midelfart A Biological response in various compartments of the rat lens after in vivo exposure to UVR-B analyzed by HR-MAS 1H NMR spectroscopy Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006 47 12 5404 5411 10.1167/iovs.05-1633 17122130
52 Cobbold JF Anstee QM Goldin RD Williams HR Matthews HC North BV Absalom N Thomas HC Thursz MR Cox RD Taylor-Robinson SD Cox IJ Phenotyping murine models of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease through metabolic profiling of intact liver tissue Clin Sci (Lond) 2009 116 5 403 413 10.1042/CS20080159 18694396
53 Renema WK Schmidt A van Asten JJ Oerlemans F Ullrich K Wieringa B Isbrandt D Heerschap A MR spectroscopy of muscle and brain in guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT)-deficient mice: validation of an animal model to study creatine deficiency Magn Reson Med 2003 50 5 936 943 10.1002/mrm.10627 14587004
54 Grinde MT Skrbo N Moestue SA Rodland EA Borgan E Kristian A Sitter B Bathen TF Borresen-Dale AL Maelandsmo GM Engebraaten O Sorlie T Marangoni E Gribbestad IS Interplay of choline metabolites and genes in patient-derived breast cancer xenografts Breast Cancer Res 2014 16 1 R5 10.1186/bcr3597 24447408
55 Kim SY Lee H Kim HJ Bang E Lee SH Lee DW Woo DC Choi CB Hong KS Lee C Choe BY In vivo and ex vivo evidence for ketamine-induced hyperglutamatergic activity in the cerebral cortex of the rat: Potential relevance to schizophrenia NMR Biomed 2011 24 10 1235 1242 10.1002/nbm.1681 21560175
56 Bustillo J Galloway MP Ghoddoussi F Bolognani F Perrone-Bizzozero N Medial-frontal cortex hypometabolism in chronic phencyclidine exposed rats assessed by high resolution magic angle spin 11.7 T proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy Neurochem Int 2012 61 1 128 131 10.1016/j.neuint.2012.04.003 22522288
57 Bustillo J Barrow R Paz R Tang J Seraji-Bozorgzad N Moore GJ Bolognani F Lauriello J Perrone-Bizzozero N Galloway MP Long-term treatment of rats with haloperidol: lack of an effect on brain N-acetyl aspartate levels Neuropsychopharmacology 2006 31 4 751 756 10.1038/sj.npp.1300874 16132064
58 Llorente R Villa P Marco EM Viveros MP Analyzing the effects of a single episode of neonatal maternal deprivation on metabolite profiles in rat brain: a proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy study Neuroscience 2012 201 12 19 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.11.033 22120435
59 Theberge J Bartha R Drost DJ Menon RS Malla A Takhar J Neufeld RW Rogers J Pavlosky W Schaefer B Densmore M Al-Semaan Y Williamson PC Glutamate and glutamine measured with 4.0 T proton MRS in never-treated patients with schizophrenia and healthy volunteers Am J Psychiatry 2002 159 11 1944 1946 12411236
60 Shirayama Y Obata T Matsuzawa D Nonaka H Kanazawa Y Yoshitome E Ikehira H Hashimoto K Iyo M Specific metabolites in the medial prefrontal cortex are associated with the neurocognitive deficits in schizophrenia: a preliminary study Neuroimage 2010 49 3 2783 2790 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.031 19850131
61 Knox D Perrine SA George SA Galloway MP Liberzon I Single prolonged stress decreases glutamate, glutamine, and creatine concentrations in the rat medial prefrontal cortex Neurosci Lett 2010 480 1 16 20 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.05.052 20546834
62 Shi C Wang X Wu S Zhu Y Chung LW Mao H HRMAS 1H-NMR measured changes of the metabolite profile as mesenchymal stem cells differentiate to targeted fat cells in vitro: implications for non-invasive monitoring of stem cell differentiation in vivo J Tissue Eng Regen Med 2008 2 8 482 490 10.1002/term.120 18932127
63 Paban V Manrique C Filali M Maunoir-Regimbal S Fauvelle F Alescio-Lautier B Therapeutic and preventive effects of methylene blue on Alzheimer’s disease pathology in a transgenic mouse model Neuropharmacology 2014 76 Pt A 68 79 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.06.033 23891615
64 Ghoddoussi F Galloway MP Jambekar A Bame M Needleman R Brusilow WS Methionine sulfoximine, an inhibitor of glutamine synthetase, lowers brain glutamine and glutamate in a mouse model of ALS J Neurol Sci 2010 290 1–2 41 47 10.1016/j.jns.2009.11.013 20060132
65 Griffin JL Pole JC Nicholson JK Carmichael PL Cellular environment of metabolites and a metabonomic study of tamoxifen in endometrial cells using gradient high resolution magic angle spinning 1H NMR spectroscopy Biochim Biophys Acta 2003 1619 2 151 158 12527111
66 Morvan D Demidem A Papon J Madelmont JC Quantitative HRMAS proton total correlation spectroscopy applied to cultured melanoma cells treated by chloroethyl nitrosourea: demonstration of phospholipid metabolism alterations Magn Reson Med 2003 49 2 241 248 10.1002/mrm.10368 12541243
67 Lamego I Duarte IF Marques MP Gil AM Metabolic markers of MG-63 osteosarcoma cell line response to doxorubicin and methotrexate treatment: comparison to cisplatin J Proteome Res 2014 13 12 6033 6045 10.1021/pr500907d 25382592
68 Mirbahai L Wilson M Shaw CS McConville C Malcomson RD Griffin JL Kauppinen RA Peet AC 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy metabolites as biomarkers for cell cycle arrest and cell death in rat glioma cells Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2011 43 7 990 1001 10.1016/j.biocel.2010.07.002 20633697
69 Jensen LR Huuse EM Bathen TF Goa PE Bofin AM Pedersen TB Lundgren S Gribbestad IS Assessment of early docetaxel response in an experimental model of human breast cancer using DCE-MRI, ex vivo HR MAS, and in vivo 1H MRS NMR Biomed 2010 23 1 56 65 10.1002/nbm.1426 19650073
70 Mesti T Savarin P Triba MN Le Moyec L Ocvirk J Banissi C Carpentier AF Metabolic impact of anti-angiogenic agents on U87 glioma cells PLoS One 2014 9 6 e99198 10.1371/journal.pone.0099198 24922514
71 Garcia-Alvarez I Garrido L Doncel-Perez E Nieto-Sampedro M Fernandez-Mayoralas A Detection of metabolite changes in C6 glioma cells cultured with antimitotic oleyl glycoside by 1H MAS NMR J Med Chem 2009 52 5 1263 1267 10.1021/jm8012807 19199478
72 Chen JH Enloe BM Weybright P Campbell N Dorfman D Fletcher CD Cory DG Singer S Biochemical correlates of thiazolidinedione-induced adipocyte differentiation by high-resolution magic angle spinning NMR spectroscopy Magn Reson Med 2002 48 4 602 610 10.1002/mrm.10256 12353276
73 Lehtimaki KK Valonen PK Griffin JL Vaisanen TH Grohn OH Kettunen MI Vepsalainen J Yla-Herttuala S Nicholson J Kauppinen RA Metabolite changes in BT4C rat gliomas undergoing ganciclovir-thymidine kinase gene therapy-induced programmed cell death as studied by 1H NMR spectroscopy in vivo, ex vivo, and in vitro J Biol Chem 2003 278 46 45915 45923 10.1074/jbc.M306209 12954643
74 Madhu B Waterton JC Griffiths JR Ryan AJ Robinson SP The response of RIF-1 fibrosarcomas to the vascular-disrupting agent ZD6126 assessed by in vivo and ex vivo 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy Neoplasia 2006 8 7 560 567 10.1593/neo.06319 16867218
75 Valonen PK Griffin JL Lehtimaki KK Liimatainen T Nicholson JK Grohn OH Kauppinen RA High-resolution magic-angle-spinning 1H NMR spectroscopy reveals different responses in choline-containing metabolites upon gene therapy-induced programmed cell death in rat brain glioma NMR Biomed 2005 18 4 252 259 10.1002/nbm.955 15884096
76 Moestue SA Dam CG Gorad SS Kristian A Bofin A Maelandsmo GM Engebraten O Gribbestad IS Bjorkoy G Metabolic biomarkers for response to PI3K inhibition in basal-like breast cancer Breast Cancer Res 2013 15 1 R16 10.1186/bcr3391 23448424
77 Huang Z Tong Y Wang J Huang Y NMR studies of the relationship between the changes of membrane lipids and the cisplatin-resistance of A549/DDP cells Cancer Cell Int 2003 3 1 5 12718757
78 Rainaldi G Romano R Indovina P Ferrante A Motta A Indovina PL Santini MT Metabolomics using 1H-NMR of apoptosis and Necrosis in HL60 leukemia cells: differences between the two types of cell death and independence from the stimulus of apoptosis used Radiat Res 2008 169 2 170 180 10.1667/RR0958.1 18220461
79 Boren J Brindle KM Apoptosis-induced mitochondrial dysfunction causes cytoplasmic lipid droplet formation Cell Death Differ 2012 19 9 1561 1570 10.1038/cdd.2012.34 22460322
80 Mates JM Perez-Gomez C Nunez de Castro I Asenjo M Marquez J Glutamine and its relationship with intracellular redox status, oxidative stress and cell proliferation/death Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2002 34 5 439 458 11906817
81 Shih T Lindley C Bevacizumab: an angiogenesis inhibitor for the treatment of solid malignancies Clin Ther 2006 28 11 1779 1802 10.1016/j.clinthera.2006.11.015 17212999
82 Friedman HS Prados MD Wen PY Mikkelsen T Schiff D Abrey LE Yung WK Paleologos N Nicholas MK Jensen R Vredenburgh J Huang J Zheng M Cloughesy T Bevacizumab alone and in combination with irinotecan in recurrent glioblastoma J Clin Oncol 2009 27 28 4733 4740 10.1200/JCO.2008.19.8721 19720927
83 Cloughesy T FDA accelerated approval benefits glioblastoma Lancet Oncol 2010 11 12 1120 10.1016/S1470-2045(10)70269-2 21126686
84 Gil-Gil MJ Mesia C Rey M Bruna J Bevacizumab for the treatment of glioblastoma Clin Med Insights Oncol 2013 7 123 135 10.4137/cmo.s8503 23843722
85 Griffin JL Lehtimaki KK Valonen PK Grohn OH Kettunen MI Yla-Herttuala S Pitkanen A Nicholson JK Kauppinen RA Assignment of 1H nuclear magnetic resonance visible polyunsaturated fatty acids in BT4C gliomas undergoing ganciclovir-thymidine kinase gene therapy-induced programmed cell death Cancer Res 2003 63 12 3195 3201 12810648
86 Anzai Y Holinka CF Kuramoto H Gurpide E Stimulatory effects of 4-hydroxytamoxifen on proliferation of human endometrial adenocarcinoma cells (Ishikawa line) Cancer Res 1989 49 9 2362 2365 2706624
87 Neven P De Muylder X Van Belle Y Vanderick G De Muylder E Tamoxifen and the uterus and endometrium Lancet 1989 1 8634 375
88 Garcia-Alvarez I Corrales G Doncel-Perez E Munoz A Nieto-Sampedro M Fernandez-Mayoralas A Design and synthesis of glycoside inhibitors of glioma and melanoma growth J Med Chem 2007 50 2 364 373 10.1021/jm0611556 17228879
89 Kauppinen RA Monitoring cytotoxic tumour treatment response by diffusion magnetic resonance imaging and proton spectroscopy NMR Biomed 2002 15 1 6 17 11840548
90 Bruijn LI Miller TM Cleveland DW Unraveling the mechanisms involved in motor neuron degeneration in ALS Annu Rev Neurosci 2004 27 723 749 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144244 15217349
91 McLaurin J Golomb R Jurewicz A Antel JP Fraser PE Inositol stereoisomers stabilize an oligomeric aggregate of Alzheimer amyloid beta peptide and inhibit abeta -induced toxicity J Biol Chem 2000 275 24 18495 18502 10.1074/jbc.M906994199 10764800
92 Choi JK Carreras I Dedeoglu A Jenkins BG Detection of increased scyllo-inositol in brain with magnetic resonance spectroscopy after dietary supplementation in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models Neuropharmacology 2010 59 4–5 353 357 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.03.011 20399219
93 Klunk WE Panchalingam K Moossy J McClure RJ Pettegrew JW N-acetyl-L-aspartate and other amino acid metabolites in Alzheimer’s disease brain: a preliminary proton nuclear magnetic resonance study Neurology 1992 42 8 1578 1585 1353623
94 Anandatheerthavarada HK Devi L Amyloid precursor protein and mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscientist 2007 13 6 626 638 10.1177/1073858407303536 17911214
95 Schon EA Area-Gomez E Mitochondria-associated ER membranes in Alzheimer disease Mol Cell Neurosci 2013 55 26 36 10.1016/j.mcn.2012.07.011 22922446
96 Davila M Candiota AP Pumarola M Arus C Minimization of spectral pattern changes during HRMAS experiments at 37 degrees celsius by prior focused microwave irradiation MAGMA 2012 25 5 401 410 10.1007/s10334-012-0303-1 22286777
97 Detour J Elbayed K Piotto M Moussallieh FM Nehlig A Namer IJ Ultrafast in vivo microwave irradiation for enhanced metabolic stability of brain biopsy samples during HRMAS NMR analysis J Neurosci Methods 2011 201 1 89 97 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.07.014 21803072
98 Opstad KS Bell BA Griffiths JR Howe FA An assessment of the effects of sample ischaemia and spinning time on the metabolic profile of brain tumour biopsy specimens as determined by high-resolution magic angle spinning (1)H NMR NMR Biomed 2008 21 10 1138 1147 10.1002/nbm.1296 18666093
99 Middleton DA Bradley DP Connor SC Mullins PG Reid DG The effect of sample freezing on proton magic-angle spinning NMR spectra of biological tissue Magn Reson Med 1998 40 1 166 169 9660567
100 Valverde-Saubi D Candiota AP Molins MA Feliz M Godino O Davila M Acebes JJ Arus C Short-term temperature effect on the HRMAS spectra of human brain tumor biopsies and their pattern recognition analysis MAGMA 2010 23 4 203 215 10.1007/s10334-010-0218-7 20549297
101 Ratai EM Pilkenton S Lentz MR Greco JB Fuller RA Kim JP He J Cheng LL Gonzalez RG Comparisons of brain metabolites observed by HRMAS 1H NMR of intact tissue and solution 1H NMR of tissue extracts in SIV-infected macaques NMR Biomed 2005 18 4 242 251 10.1002/nbm.953 15759297
102 Risa O Melo TM Sonnewald U Quantification of amounts and (13)C content of metabolites in brain tissue using high-resolution magic angle spinning (13)C NMR spectroscopy NMR Biomed 2009 22 3 266 271 10.1002/nbm.1317 19012315
103 Bayet-Robert M Loiseau D Rio P Demidem A Barthomeuf C Stepien G Morvan D Quantitative two-dimensional HRMAS 1H-NMR spectroscopy-based metabolite profiling of human cancer cell lines and response to chemotherapy Magn Reson Med 2010 63 5 1172 1183 10.1002/mrm.22303 20432288
104 Reynolds G Wilson M Peet A Arvanitis TN An algorithm for the automated quantitation of metabolites in in vitro NMR signals Magn Reson Med 2006 56 6 1211 1219 10.1002/mrm.21081 17029227
105 Hu JZ Wind RA Rommereim DN (1)H relaxation times of metabolites in biological samples obtained with nondestructive ex-vivo slow-MAS NMR Magn Reson Chem 2006 44 3 269 275 10.1002/mrc.1764 16477679
106 Akoka S Barantin L Trierweiler M Concentration Measurement by Proton NMR Using the ERETIC Method Anal Chem 1999 71 13 2554 2557 10.1021/ac981422i 21662801
107 Silvestre V Goupry S Trierweiler M Robins R Akoka S Determination of substrate and product concentrations in lactic acid bacterial fermentations by proton NMR using the ERETIC method Anal Chem 2001 73 8 1862 1868 11338603
108 Roth K Basic Principles of NMR Spectroscopy Telger TC NMR-Tomography and -Spectroscopy in Medicine: An Introduction Berlin, Germany Springer-Verlag 1984 16
109 Righi V Apidianakis Y Rahme LG Tzika AA Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of live Drosophila melanogaster using magic angle spinning J Vis Exp 2010 38 10.3791/1710
110 Righi V Apidianakis Y Mintzopoulos D Astrakas L Rahme LG Tzika AA In vivo high-resolution magic angle spinning magnetic resonance spectroscopy of Drosophila melanogaster at 14.1 T shows trauma in aging and in innate immune-deficiency is linked to reduced insulin signaling Int J Mol Med 2010 26 2 175 184 20596596
111 Righi V Apidianakis Y Psychogios N Rahme LG Tompkins RG Tzika AA In vivo high-resolution magic angle spinning proton NMR spectroscopy of Drosophila melanogaster flies as a model system to investigate mitochondrial dysfunction in Drosophila GST2 mutants Int J Mol Med 2014 34 1 327 333 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1757 24789699
112 Wind RA Hu JZ Rommereim DN High-resolution 1H NMR spectroscopy in a live mouse subjected to 1.5 Hz magic angle spinning Magn Reson Med 2003 50 6 1113 1119 10.1002/mrm.10650 14648558
113 Wind RA Hu JZ Majors PD Localized in vivo isotropic-anisotropic correlation 1H NMR spectroscopy using ultraslow magic angle spinning Magn Reson Med 2006 55 1 41 49 10.1002/mrm.20740 16315205
114 Rooney OM Troke J Nicholson JK Griffin JL High-resolution diffusion and relaxation-edited magic angle spinning 1H NMR spectroscopy of intact liver tissue Magn Reson Med 2003 50 5 925 930 10.1002/mrm.10620 14587002
115 Griffin JL Williams HJ Sang E Nicholson JK Abnormal lipid profile of dystrophic cardiac tissue as demonstrated by one- and two-dimensional magic-angle spinning (1)H NMR spectroscopy Magn Reson Med 2001 46 2 249 255 11477627
116 Maria RM Moraes TB Magon CJ Venancio T Altei WF Andricopulo AD Colnago LA Processing of high resolution magic angle spinning spectra of breast cancer cells by the filter diagonalization method Analyst 2012 137 19 4546 4551 10.1039/c2an35451a 22896835
117 Chen JH Sambol EB Decarolis P O’Connor R Geha RC Wu YV Singer S High-resolution MAS NMR spectroscopy detection of the spin magnetization exchange by cross-relaxation and chemical exchange in intact cell lines and human tissue specimens Magn Reson Med 2006 55 6 1246 1256 10.1002/mrm.20889 16676334
118 Chen Y Cai S Cai C Cui X Chen Z High-resolution NMR spectroscopy in inhomogeneous fields via Hadamard-encoded intermolecular double-quantum coherences NMR Biomed 2012 25 9 1088 1094 10.1002/nbm.2773 22290717
119 Huang Y Cai S Chen X Chen Z Intermolecular single-quantum coherence sequences for high-resolution NMR spectra in inhomogeneous fields J Magn Reson 2010 203 1 100 107 10.1016/j.jmr.2009.12.007 20053574
120 Chen JH Enloe BM Xiao Y Cory DG Singer S Isotropic susceptibility shift under MAS: the origin of the split water resonances in 1H MAS NMR spectra of cell suspensions Magn Reson Med 2003 50 3 515 521 10.1002/mrm.10569 12939759
121 Kuchel PW Bubb WA Ramadan S Chapman BE Philp DJ Coen M Gready JE Harvey PJ McLean AJ Hook J 31P MAS-NMR of human erythrocytes: independence of cell volume from angular velocity Magn Reson Med 2004 52 3 663 668 10.1002/mrm.20139 15334588
122 Calabi L Alfieri G Biondi L De Miranda M Paleari L Ghelli S Application of high-resolution magic-angle spinning NMR spectroscopy to define the cell uptake of MRI contrast agents J Magn Reson 2002 156 2 222 229 12165257
123 Bruno E Digilio G Cabella C de Reggi A Baroni S Mainero V Aime S Water exchange across the erythrocyte plasma membrane studied by HR-MAS NMR spectroscopy Magn Reson Med 2006 56 5 978 985 10.1002/mrm.21054 17036282
124 Jimenez-Xarrie E Davila M Gil-Perotin S Jurado-Rodriguez A Candiota AP Delgado-Mederos R Lope-Piedrafita S Garcia-Verdugo JM Arus C Marti-Fabregas J In vivo and ex vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the infarct and the subventricular zone in experimental stroke J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2015 35 5 828 834 10.1038/jcbfm.2014.257 25605287
