LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101295070
34116
Soft Matter
Soft Matter
Soft matter
1744-683X
1744-6848

26526630
5980645
10.1039/c5sm02022k
NIHMS968123
Article
The twisted tauopathies: surface interactions of helically patterned filaments seen in alzheimer’s disease and elsewhere
Rochman Nash D. a
Sun Sean X. b
a Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, USA
b Departments of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
16 5 2018
03 11 2015
21 1 2016
31 5 2018
12 3 779789
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
This paper broadly examines the dynamics of helically patterned filaments interacting with a surface and focuses on the surface interaction of amyloid fibrils formed by tau protein. Two structures are addressed in detail: cylindrical filaments with periodic thinning (CF-PT) and paired helical filaments (PHFs). PHFs are observed in neural tissue affected by Alzheimer’s disease and may aggregate to form the pathological neurofibrillary tangles associated with the illness. Work using electron microscopy has demonstrated the conversion of CF-PT into PHFs in vitro, suggesting CF-PT to be a PHF precursor in vivo. Here we model CF-PT as a patterned elastic rod placed on a flat surface (characteristic of the environment during microscopy) and examine the conformational changes resulting in stable surface bonding. Analysis of this conformational space reveals structures resembling PHFs and thus provides a mechanistic explanation of the CF-PT to PHF transition. We develop a general phase diagram of the filament conformation as a function of filament twist and bend rigidity. Results of this work also suggest that we can obtain desired filament conformations by patterning interactions of elastic filaments with a substrate, and therefore can be used as a method in microfabrication.


I. Introduction

Tauopathies are a group of diseases linked by the pathological aggregation of the tau protein. Tau is known to be a microtubule stabilizing protein prevalent in neurons of the central nervous system. Owing to this fact, many tauopathies are neurodegenerative disorders perhaps the most commonly discussed being Alzheimer’s disease.1 Beginning with the original characterization by Alois Alzheimer in 1907, great interest has been taken in the striking structural changes of affected neurons showing the accumulation of dense, tangled fiber bundles completely reshaping neural tissue.2 Over time much improved imaging techniques have become available, and as great efforts have been taken to determine the composition of these tangles; increasingly finer structures have been elucidated encouraging the suggestion of the detailed mechanisms of formation. In particular, recent developments in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) have presented many striking images of the fine structure of individual, unbundled fibers. One such a structure which may aggregate to form these tangles, and the primary concern of this discussion, is the paired helical filament (PHF) which has recently been realized to be an amyloid fibril formed by tau protein.3

As the name suggests, PHFs were initially posited to be pairs of individual filaments twisted about one another,4 an explanation favored until electron microscopic data became available5 which suggests PHFs to be single filament structures. In these images, another class of filament is often seen in regions occupied by PHFs, namely cylindrical filaments with periodic thin regions (CF-PT) also labelled “straight filaments”.6 CF-PT bears a close resemblance to PHFs, sharing the same turn period; however, CF-PT has a smaller radial variance than PHFs with larger thin regions and smaller wide regions. In addition, upon sonication, it has been observed that a mixed population of CF-PT and PHFs is converted into one wholly composed of PHFs.5 Motivated by this information, Ruben et al. have suggested CF-PT to be a PHF precursor filament. It is a primary goal of this paper to provide a surface mediated mechanism for the conversion of CF-PT to PHFs. Towards this aim, let us take a closer look at the fine structure of amyloid fibrils.

Utilizing the electron microscopic data discussed above in addition to solid state NMR, Paravastu et al. have suggested a structural model for amyloid fibrils where each fiber is composed of a series of triangular sheets subject to an intrinsic twist along the fibril axis (see Fig. 1a)7 In the next section, we will consider the Paravastu model to be the primary structure of each fibril and examine what secondary structures develop when fibrils are allowed to rest on a flat, attractive surface.

We will begin our investigation by working with a simplified, cylindrical model for the fibril and examine the system in terms of elastic bending and twisting energies, and bonding energies with the underlying surface. We use analytic theory to find preferred filament conformations resulting in stable bonding with the surface and thus restrict our analysis to a simple system where we assume isotropic bend stiffness. The general case, for filaments with anisotropic bend stiffness, has been studied recently8 presenting a rich description of the possible conformational states. Here, with our simpler model, we cannot recreate all the conformations presented in that work, but instead focus on generating those with out-of-plane (writhing) configurations. With the exception of a single conformation (introduced as the “Unwound” filament below) we will be exclusively examining conformations which are kinetically-quenched with a fixed linking number. These problems fall under the general category of elastic filaments interacting with other objects. A prime example of this is the coiled coil structure encountered in proteins,9 which through a helical bonding interaction between alpha-helical filaments can form a variety of geometries.10–12 Others have examined the conformations of filament bundles and ropes. These complex structures are formed by balancing mechanical deformation energy with bonding energy between filaments.

The theory developed for the fibril will then be reconsidered in the context of the Paravastu structure and we will provide a surface mediated mechanism for the conversion of CF-PT to PHFs identifying CF-PT as a non-bending Paravastu fibril and PHFs as its helical secondary structure. Before we begin the construction of the model we first wish to state that, for simplicity, we assume that the cylindrical filaments with helical bonding patterns (representing CF-PT) form free from the surface and make contact with the surface all at once. We recognize the limitations inherent to this assumption towards direct comparison with dynamic experimental data.

II. Modeling method

Note that over the course of this discussion we will introduce parameters relevant to the description of the fibril. A summary of key parameters can be found in Table 1. The first thing we must do is motivate the substitution of cylinders for the more detailed fibril structure. To do so, consider one period of the Paravastu structure and identify the edges of each triangular face that are closest to and thus most likely to bond with the surface. Each face has exactly one such an edge apart from the face directly in the middle of the period (and completely inverted) which has two. If each face is replaced by a disc, and the identified edges become designated bonding points rotated about the axis of the filament by an angle equal to that of the original edge, we find that these points map the outer third of a helix with the “center” missing – that is the region where the pattern would lie primarily in the upper hemisphere of the cylinder with respect to the surface. If this region is primarily non-bonding, a fact which will be demonstrated below, a cylinder with a simple helical bonding region will well approximate the fibril structure. The greatest discrepancy is the fact that a full helix is represented by a twist of 2π over the turn length whereas the actual fibril structure twists by a total of 2π3; thus the preferred bonding state for the fibril will have less accumulated twist than the cylinder. This will be addressed later; for now, let us focus on the simplified case.

Here we will explore the dynamic conformation changes of helically patterned rods or filaments – that is cylinders with a helical bonding pattern on their surfaces. We will label the period of the helical pattern L and a filament segment of length L a “monomer” (see Fig. 2). This bonding pattern will be able to stick to objects on which a filament is placed (for instance a flat plate) with a “close-contact” approximation depending on the nature of that object’s surface. The filament will then twist along its longitudinal (or tangential) axis and bend along its radial axes to increase contact of the bonding pattern with the object while balancing the mechanical strain induced by this process. In particular, we will be discussing the case where the filament twists to increase bonding contact and bends to facilitate that twist. We will only consider filaments of total length mL where m is an integer number of monomers.

Our goal is to find the most stable geometries for these filaments when they are placed on a flat plate to which the bonding pattern can stick. Perhaps the most natural place to start will be with a general expression defining filament geometry and to show how one can derive the energy from that geometry. Beginning with a point in three dimensional space pn, and a coordinate frame (three orthonormal vectors e1, e2, and e3), one may trace out any space curve containing that point in the following way (noting that without a loss of generality, one may select e3 to be the tangent vector of the filament at the selected point) with index n: pick three angles, θ1(n − 1), θ2(n − 1), and θ3(n − 1); rotate e1(n − 1), e2(n − 1), and e3(n − 1) by angles θ1(n − 1), θ2(n − 1), and θ3(n − 1) about axes e1(n − 1), e2(n − 1), and e3(n − 1) respectively; pick the next point to be pn = pn−1 + Se3(n − 1) where S is a real number; and repeat. It should be noted that θ1, θ2, and θ3 must be sufficiently small so that the three dimensional rotations are commutative and the construction is well defined. This can be ensured by converting this discrete construction to a continuous one replacing the angles θi with angular velocities dθids and defining the space curve in the following way with a general infinitesimal rotation matrix. Here ei(s) is the solution to the equation: (1) dei(s)dt=[0dθ3ds-dθ2ds-dθ3ds0dθ1dsdθ2ds-dθids0]ei(s)

subject to the initial conditions ei(0)=ei0, and p(s) is given by: (2) p(s)=p0+∫0se3(s′)ds′

For convenience, we will choose p0 = [0, 0, a] and ei0=-ez,ex,ey. p(s) specifies the point corresponding to the center of the slice (a disk) of the filament a length s down from p0. Now to define the bonding pattern b(s), we can label the radius of the filament a, and (again without a loss of generality) choose the bonding point such that e1 is the radial vector satisfying b0 = p0 + ae1(0). We can now prescribe a helical pattern in terms of, e1(s), and e2(s): (3) b(s)=p(s)+a[cos(-2πLs)e1(s)+sin(-2πLs)e2(s)]

Finally we can note b0 = [0, 0, 0].

Equipped with the tools to define filament geometry, we can construct the formalism for the energy. Considering the elastic limit, the filament may be approximated to behave in a spring-like fashion such that the strain energy is a function of angular shift squared i.e.: (4) EBend=κB∫0mL(dθ1ds)2+(dθ2ds)2ds

(5) ETwist=κT∫0mL(dθ3ds)2ds

where κB and κT are the elastic moduli for the bend and twist of the filament respectively – a measure of filament stiffness. There is one more term to consider – the bonding energy of the filament. Given a “contact” distance, ε, and the bonding energy with the flat plate per unit length, γ(&lt;0), we can fix the plate in the x – y plane and write down a bonding function as follows: (6) GBond(s)={1B(s)·ez≤ε0else

and the bonding energy: (7) EBond=γ∫0mLGBond(s)ds

Putting these three terms together, we get a general expression for filament energy: (8) E(κB,κT,γ,dθids(s))=∫0mLκB[(dθ1ds)2+(dθ2ds)2]+κT(dθ3ds)2+γGBond(s)ds

As clean as this construction may be, it is unfortunately quite difficult to ascertain GBond(s) given an arbitrary form for dθids(s). For this reason, we will start by trying to restrict the form of dθ3ds(s) in a way that will make the problem more tractable without losing any strongly bonded configurations. In addition we will take the limit ε → 0 for close contact.

A. Selecting relevant conformations

Before we continue, we would like to note again that we are focused primarily on kinetically-quenched structures where the linking-number is fixed. Let us consider three simple filament confirmations in contact with the surface. The first case is an unbent filament segment of length l which, before twisting, has one point of contact between its bonding pattern and the bonding surface. Further let dθ3ds(s)=c over this local region. If c = 0, the twist energy attains its minimum value of 0 and a finite number of points (one point) on the filament are bonded to the surface. The second case is when -∞&lt;c&lt;2πL or 2πL&lt;c&lt;∞. The twist energy is nonzero and still only a finite number of points on the filament can bind to the surface. The third case is when c=±2πL, it is possible for every point of the bonding pattern to bond to the surface. Recalling, EBond=γ∫0lGBond(s)ds, and noting that GBond(s) takes the form of a sum of finitely valued delta functions, in cases one and two we find the filament energies to be: EBondFirst=EBondSecond=0 and EBondThird&lt;0;ETwistFirst=0,ETwistSecond,ETwistThird&gt;0. Thus we see that to find the minimum energy solution for the segment, c takes one of the two possible magnitudes; for the limiting case of high κT, c = 0, otherwise c=±2πL. We can also see that if the same condition, dθ3ds(s)=c, is imposed on an unbent segment, which has no points of contact between its bonding pattern and the surface before twisting, the bonding energy is zero. Thus we will restrict ourselves to considering dθ3ds(s) to be a piecewise constant function attaining the values ±2πL or 0 over each segment depending on whether it is bonding or nonbonding (note that this requirement will be slightly relaxed later). Now we would like to find similar restrictions for dθ1ds(s) and dθ2ds(s). To do so, we will first need to discuss the coupling between the filament bend and the twist.

When a filament begins to strain to bond with the surface, as discussed above, every region around a point of contact between the bonding pattern and the surface may twist to increase the magnitude of the bonding energy; but regions without these contact points may not. For a filament of length mL there are m + 1 such points. Different shapes develop depending on how many of these points initially twist. The two extreme cases corresponding to one point and all m + 1 points initiating twist are depicted in the bottom and top of Fig. 3 respectively.

When twist initiates from a single point (Fig. 3b), maximal contact can be achieved by twisting; however, reaching this conformation requires all but one of the points initially bound to the surface to be temporarily lifted. This is a special case which will be referred to as an “unwound” filament and will be investigated in more detail later when a fuller energy landscape has been developed. On the other hand, when multiple points initiate twist (Fig. 3a), the filament faces a geometric constraint that forces the introduction of a complementary bend or twist. This can be seen as follows: consider that two points p and q are initiating twist. In the region [p, q], p initiates twist with an angular velocity of -2πL and q initiates twist with an angular velocity of 2πL. If each twisted region is of length δ2, then the point p+δ2 is twisted by an angle of 2πδL from the point q-δ2. Without allowing the filament to break, this requires that the region [p+δ2,q-δ2] bend or twist by at least 2πδL.

We must also determine what types of bend are equivalent to twisting the filament. The basic problem statement is that we want to know what collections of rotations about e1 and e2 are equivalent to a single rotation about e3. One may quickly show (see Appendix A) that any rotation about e3 can be achieved by moving the plane formed by e1 and e2 into the plane normal to e3 and rotating about e1 by an equivalent angle. Additionally we can verify (see Appendix A) that any arbitrary rotation may be written as a rotation about only two axes (i.e. that combinations of bend deformations alone is equivalent to an arbitrary rotation of the coordinate frame). Before we go on, we may note that excepting the special case where the desired rotation about e3 is 2π which will be discussed below (as the “looped” case in the next section), the minimum number of rotations about e1 and e2 that can achieve the desired result is three. In short, to accomplish a net rotation about e3 by only rotating about e1 and e2 in this fashion, one must rotate an extra π radian about e1 or e2.

Finally we note that the lowest energy solution for a non-bonding region is also one of constant twist and bend. Note that we only consider regions that bend around either e1 or e2, but not both to ensure the boundary conditions are satisfied. Consider a non-bonding region of length l that must bend/twist by an angle ψ. We may write the angular velocity over this region as dθi,jds=ψl+f(s) such that integrating the angular velocity over the total length yields ψ: (9) ∫0lψl+f(s)ds=ψ⇒∫0lf(s)ds=0.

Integrating the square of the velocity over l yields the deformation energy (up to some multiplicative constant): (10) ∫0l(ψl+f(s))2ds=ψ2l+2ψl∫0lf(s)ds+∫0lf2(s)ds=ψ2l+∫0lf2(s)ds

We see that the strain is minimized when f(s) ≡ 0 and the angular velocity is constant.

Now we have suitable restrictions on dθi,jds(s): between points bonded to the surface: they integrate to null (or 2πn); they are piecewise constant; and over bonding regions |dθ3ds(s)|=2πL. These rules all lead to strongly bonded conformations. In particular let us look at the following class of filaments: considering a total length of mL, divide the filament into regions of length Δ such that: (11) Δ=mLM

where M is an integer (see Fig. 3). Now we may define dθids(s) as follows. We want the strain to be constant over both regions that bend along e2, and those that bend along e1. According to eqn (35), the total bend in e2 is of angle d=2πδL where δ is the length of the bonding region with the surface and the total bend in e1 is of angle a + c = π. Stated another way, this means that if li is the length of the non-bonding region over which ei bends, then: (12) πl1=(2πδL)l2⇒l1=L2δl2

because the total angular velocity is constant as stated in eqn (10). The total length of the non-bonding region is Δ − δ = l1 + l2, which yields: (13) l1+l2=(1+L2δ)l2=Δ-δ⇒l2=Δ-δL2δ+1

This specifies the following functions for our angular velocities: (14) dθ3ds(s)={2πLs∈[nΔ,nΔ+δ2]∪[(n+1)Δ-δ2,(n+1)Δ]0else

(15) dθ1ds(s)={2πδ/L+πΔ-δs∈[nΔ+δ2,nΔ+12(Δ-l2)]∪[(n+1)Δ-12(Δ-l2),(n+1)Δ-δ2]0else

(16) dθ2ds(s)={2πδ/L+πΔ-δs∈[nΔ+12(Δ-l2),(n+1)Δ-12(Δ-l2)]0else

where n is an integer between 0 and M − 1, and δ &lt; Δ. We can calculate the energies of filament configurations as follows: (17) E(Δ,δ)=M[∫0Δ-δκB(2πδ/L+πΔ-δ)ds︸nonbondingregion+∫0δκT(2πL)2ds︸bondingregion]+∫0mLγGBond(s)ds

We have restricted dθids(s) so that we can write down the bonding term as

(18) ∫0mLγGBond(s)ds=γδ2∑n=0M∑α=0mΓ(n,α)

where: (19) Γ(n,α)={2nΔ=αL,n≠0,M1nΔ=αL,n=0,M0else

This function is merely restating that only regions around points of initial contact between the bonding pattern and the surface can initiate twist to increase bonding energy. Plugging this into eqn (17) yields (the general form of the energy for the “helix” conformation in the next section): (20) E(Δ,δ)=M[κBΔ-δ(2πδL+π)2+κTδ(2πL)2]+γδ2∑n=0M∑α=0mΓ(n,α)

We can now explore the possibilities for Δ and find the optimal δ minimizing the energy (see Fig. 4). We see that the minimum energy configurations occur for Δ that meet the following condition: (21) NΔ=mLwhereNisaninteger

So we see a natural length scale Δ developing for the filament – but we can do even better than eqn (21). We can argue that the preferred Δ is in fact: (22) Δ=LormL

This is because to forma conformation with a Δ greater than L, it requires lifting a point already bonded to the surface. Since all bonded points are equally likely to be lifted, there are multiple kinetic traps indicative of a frustrated system. Thus Δ = L is the most readily accessible configuration while Δ = mL maximizes bonding (again referencing the “unwound” conformation).

Fig. 4 shows that when the bending modulus is much less than the twist modulus, there are no structures where L &lt; Δ &lt; mL that correspond to a significantly lower energy state than for Δ = L. As the bending modulus increases, larger Δ configurations become preferred since the filament must bend by π radians no matter how small δ becomes. The energy barriers present in this landscape originate from choices of Δ for which most of the twisted regions of the filament do not coincide with where the binding pattern is in contact with the surface. For these cases, the filament strains and “straightens out” the binding pattern, but does not increase the binding energy. For many of these choices of Δ the no-strain solution with zero energy is the preferred conformation.

For the amyloid case, L represents the turn period for CF-PT and Δ represents the turn period for PHFs. As mentioned in the Introduction, we know this value to be shared between the two filaments and so will focus on a discussion of structures corresponding to the length scale Δ = L. For an arbitrary filament where the bend modulus is much larger than the twist modulus, the treatment below will remain relevant with the selection of a larger preferred Δ. We should also note at this time that the special “unwound” case (Δ = mL) does correspond to a lower energy state than any structure of period Δ = L for certain values of κB and κT. We will keep this case in mind as we construct the energy landscape.

B. Filament energy landscape

Allowing the twist to be piecewise constant still produces an infinite number of possible filament configurations (see Fig. 5). Here we will investigate four simple filament configurations and calculate their equilibria. Two unbending configurations are considered – the original, “Flat” filament, and one that merely twists, “Twisted,” on the surface to increase bonding character then reverses that twist to meet the boundary conditions. Two bending configurations are considered – “Looped” of accumulated twist 2π(|dθ3ds|≡2πL) and “Helix” introduced in the previous section (|dθids|piecewiseconstant). The “Looped”, “Helix”, and “Twisted” conformations are all kinetically quenched with fixed linking number.

To find the minimum energy configuration, a single parameter is varied: for the Looped case, this is the radius of the loop; for the Twisted and Helix cases this is the bonding length, δ (note for convenience the parameter β≡Lδ2π is introduced in the description of the Helix). Also note that the parameter β remains in the equation for the Helix due to the fact that the energy for this conformation is minimized numerically. The Flat, unstrained filament, has zero energy. (See Appendix B for the calculations.)

(23) ELooped=γL+2π[2-γκB+κT(2πL)]EHelix(β)=κB(β+π)2L(1-β2π)+κTβ2πL+γβL2πETwisted=4π-γκT-(2π)2κTL+γLEFlat=0

A table containing a list of all parameters used to define the energies above and construct the phase diagram in Fig. 6. is displayed below.

Before we move on, we would like to take a moment to discuss the physical nature of these parameters. κB and κT are mechanical properties of the filament representing their rigidity with respect to bending and twisting. γ depends on the nature of the binding between the surface and the helical pattern of the filament: the stronger the binding is, the more negative γ becomes. L is the length of repeat for the helical pattern of the filament. Δ is the period for the filament conformation (e.g. the Looped period). δ is the length over which the filament twists and binds to the surface within each period Δ.

We may see that even after energy minimization with respect to β is completed, the above equations still contain four parameters; however, we may scale the energy by length and γ to return only two degrees of independence (the compound parameters κB-γL2 and κT-γL2).

(24) ELooped-γL=2π[2κB-γL2+2πκT-γL2]-1Ehelix(β)-γL=κB(β+π)2-γL2(1-β2π)+κT-γL22πβ-β2πETwisted-γL=2π[2κT-γL2-2πκT-γL2]-1EFlat-γL=0

The first thing we may notice from the equilibria with the untwisted states is that all three mechanically strained phases have the same maximum twisting modulus such that if it is above the critical value, the filament remains “flat” and does not strain to interact with the surface for any bending modulus. Scaling in the same fashion as above: (25) κTcritical-γL2=(12π)2

Similarly, we can generate an upper bound for the critical bending modulus beyond which the Twisted configuration is preferred. Taking the limiting case κT = 0: (26) EHelix(β)-γL=κB(β+π)2-γL2(1-β2π)-β2π

we have the following condition for the boundary between the Helix and the Flat: (27) EHelix(β)=0⇔κB-γL2=β(1-β2π)2π(β+π)2

This function attains its maximum with respect to β when β=π2 and in that substitution we get an upper bound for κB: (28) κBcritical-γL2≤13(12π)2

The phase diagram for the four configurations discussed above is shown in Fig. 6. For any point where κT&lt;κTcritical, we know the filament strains to interact with the surface. Further, for any point in this region where κB&gt;κBcritical, the Twisted phase is preferred.

Let us finally return to consider the “unwound” case: (29) Eunwoundm=1m∫0mLκT(2πL)2+γ(1)ds

(30) =L(κT(2πL)2+γ)

We see that: (31) Eunwound=0⇒κT-γL2=(12π)2

which is the critical point shared by all other mechanically strained phases. As mentioned earlier, this phase is lower in energy than any other phase considered within this critical value of κT. It is the only conformation described in this work for which the linking number changes with strain. If the linking number changes, the other conformations examined here are predicted to destabilize and degenerate to this conformation; however relaxation of the linking number requires the propagation of twist directed from a single initial point of contact throughout the length of the entire filament and a suppression of twist originating from any other point. In a statistically relevant ensemble there must be some distribution of this case, but it will be easy to distinguish from the other phases present as it will not appear curved.

C. Modeling the CF-PT to PHF transition

We have shown the existence of a helical secondary structure for a cylindrical filament with a helical bonding pattern. Now we want to show that this work is relevant for the CF-PT fibril as well. As displayed in Fig. 1, CF-PT is a twisted triangular prism; thus each slice of the fibril has three potential bonding edges and these edges form three helices over the length of the fibril. In order to map this shape to our toy model, we first have to identify L, the period of the fibril. This is one third the period of the triple helix: the distance between slices where an edge is facing downward (in contact with the surface). See Fig. 7.

Over this length, we can identify the edge in each slice closest to the surface and label it as the bonding edge. This leaves us with a bonding pattern which is the first sixth of a helix of period 3L stitched together with the last sixth of such a helix. This shape is indistinguishable from our toy model when constructing the Helix secondary structure since that conformation does not twist or touch the surface in the center of each period. We may now return to our expression for the energy of the Helix conformation, identified as PHFs. The only thing we must change is the bonding twist which was 2πL for the toy model and is 2π3L for the real fibril since the triple helix in the real fibril has period 3L.

Returning to (23) and introducing the factor of 13 yields: (32) EHelix(β)=κB(β+π)2L(1-3β2π)+κTβ2π3L+γβ3L2π

with the critical points: (33) κTcritical=-γ(3L2π)2andκBcritical=-γ35(L2π)2(1-κT-γ(2π3L)2)

beyond which the Flat conformation is preferred. Allowing only this proposed PHF secondary structure for the fibril and identifying the Flat conformation as CF-PT we can construct a phase diagram as was done above for the toy model (see Fig. 8).

We can further illustrate the detail of the fibril periods by constructing them directly (through rigid body rotation and translation) from the atomic coordinates published online by Paravastu et al.7 (PDB ID: 2LMP) in the Protein Data Bank13 (www.rcsb.org). Shown below (in Fig. 9) is the original PDB structure of the amyloid segment alongside three fibrils of one period in length: CF-PT, PHFs (described above), and modified PHFs. The modified PHF structure is a higher energy conformation included for visual comparison with experimental images (see Fig. 10); however, it should be noted that the associated bend energy is higher. The fibril may assume such a higher energy conformation with more tightly bent segments to reduce the movement of period endpoints during bending.

III. Discussion

We have explored a variety of filament shapes possible for helically patterned elastic filaments binding to a surface, and provided a surface mediated mechanism for the conversion of CF-PT to PHFs. Motivated by experimental images, we focused on writhing conformations for which the linking number remains fixed. When the linking number changes, all of the strained conformations explored here are predicted to degenerate into the “Unwound” case.

Below in Fig. 10, we show a visual comparison between STEM images reprinted from Ruben et al.5 and simplified versions of the molecular structures shown in Fig. 9. The color in these images is due to the dye used in STEM: the dye is placed on the surface and thus higher regions appear lighter in color. The simulated structures follow this convention.

Recent work coupling experiment and simulation-based image analysis14 has provided evidence to suggest the untwisting of amyloid fibrils when they are membrane-bound. While it is yet unclear whether this untwisting observed is directly a CF-PT to PHF conversion, the work nonetheless motivates further consideration of amyloid fibril-membrane interactions that may forestall pathological aggregation. More generally, results of this paper suggest that helical filaments and their interaction with substrates can generate a variety of configurations. This is relevant for the microfabrication of devices constructed from a variety of materials (e.g. collagen15 and other proteins,16 hydrogel,17 etc.) which allow for the design of increasingly sophisticated systems (e.g. synthetic flagella18) from the directed or self assembly of nanoscale filaments. Recent theoretical work has complemented these experimental advances by predicting a variety of shapes that filament bundles may adopt depending on the relative values of the bend and twist moduli, and the nature of the filament–filament bonding interactions.19,20 Additionally, many cell cytoskeletal systems are composed of filament bundles (e.g. actin networks,21,22 membrane traffic complexes,23 etc.) motivating work on the elucidation of intermediate filament structures12 (e.g. CF-PT and PHFs) and their often nontrivial (e.g. fractal patterning24) organization. We hope that the work presented here will be useful both for microfabrication and the investigation of tau fibrils and other intermediate filament structures.

IV. Appendix

A. Bend and twist equivalency

There is also one further consideration we must take into account: we must determine what types of bend are equivalent to twisting the filament. The basic problem statement is that we want to know what collections of rotations about e1 and e2 are equivalent to a single rotation about e3. Note that in the description below without a loss of generality e1 = ex etc. Stated another way, we want to know the requirements of angles a, b, and c such that a rotation about e2 by c, followed by a rotation about e1 by b, and then about e2 by a are equivalent to a rotation about e3 by d: (34) [cos(a)0-sin(a)010sin(a)0cos(a)][1000cos(b)-sin(b)0sin(b)cos(b)][cos(c)0-sin(c)010sin(c)0cos(c)]=[cos(d)-sin(d)0sin(d)cos(d)0001]

We discover the following relationships hold: (35) c=π2,a=3π2,b=-dorc=3π2,a=π2,b=d

In other words, any rotation about e3 can be achieved by moving the plane formed by e1 and e2 into the plane normal to e3 and rotating about e1 by an equivalent angle. Now let us verify that any arbitrary rotation may be written as a rotation about only two axes (i.e. that combinations of bend deformations alone are equivalent to an arbitrary rotation of the local coordinate frame). Let X, Y, and Z represent rotation matrices about axes e1, e2, and e3 respectively. We begin with an arbitrary rotation of the form ZXY. We can write this rotation as ZXY = Z′Y′TX′Y″ where Y′ is a rotation of π2 or 3π2 and Z′, X′ and Y″ are arbitrary. Now we can rewrite Z′ as a rotation about only e1 and e2 as Z′ = Y′X″Y′ where X″ is another rotation. We obtain Z′Y′TX′Y″ = (Y′X″Y′)Y′TX′Y″ = Y′X″X′Y″ = Y′X″Y″. Thus we have verified that any arbitrary rotation can be decomposed into rotations about e1 and e2.

B. Conformation energy minimization

To find the minimum energy for the three filament conformations considered (“Twisted”, “Looped”, and “Helix”), a single parameter is varied: for the Looped case, this is the radius of the loop; for the Twisted and Helix cases, this is the bonding length, δ. Let us begin with the purely twisted case. First, divide the filament into two sections. One with twist of 2π/L over length δ and a second of negative twist over the nonbonding region L − δ to ensure that a null rotation is achieved from end to end. Labelling these regions A and B, we have

(36) ∂θ3A∂s=2πL

(37) ∂θ3B∂s=2πLδL-δ=2πL[δL-δ]

(38) ⇒ETwisted=κT(2πL)2δ[1+δL-δ]+γL

with the preferred δ value that corresponds to the lowest energy: (39) δ∗=L[1-2πLκT-γ]

This yields a minimum energy of the Twisted configuration: (40) ⇒ETwisted=4π-γκT-(2π)2κTL+γL

With this we can find the line of coexistence with the untwisted Flat configuration (null energy): (41) EFlat=ETwisted⇔κT-γ=L24π2

Now let us investigate the Looped configuration. The filament length is given by: (42) L=2δ+2πR

where δ again is the length of each bonding region, and R is the radius of the circular portion. This yields for bonding energy: Ebond = γ(L − 2πR). To calculate the bending energy we first note that the curvature is constant around the circular portion of the curve and zero elsewhere, yielding: (43) dθ2ds=2π2πR=1R

Therefore the bending energy is

(44) Ebend=κB2πR

The twist energy is the same as for the Twisted case above: (45) Etwist=κT(2π)2L

which leads to a total energy of: (46) ELooped=Ebend+Etwist+Ebond=κB2πR+κT(2π)2L+γ(L-2πR)

and a preferred R corresponding to the minimum energy solution: (47) R∗=κB-γ

which yields: (48) ELooped=γL+2π[2-γκB+κT(2πL)]

As before, we can find the line of coexistence with the untwisted configuration (null energy): (49) ELooped=EFlat⇔κB-γ=(L4π-πLκT-γ)2

For the Helix case we can begin by rewriting eqn (17) for a single period where Δ = L: (50) EL,δ=κBL-δ(2πδL+π)2+κTδ(2πL)2+γδ

identifying β=Lδ2π: (51) EHelix(β)=κB(β+π)2L(1-β2π)+κTβ2πL+γβL2π

We will calculate the preferred β (and thus the minimum energy) numerically; however, we can note right away that for all values of β: (52) min(EHelix(β))≥0forκT≥-γ(L2π)2

Restated, the energy of each configuration is as follows: (53) ELooped=γL+2π[2-γκB+κT(2πL)]EHelix(β)=κB(β+π)2L(1-β2π)+κTβ2πL+γβL2πETwisted=4π-γκT-(2π)2κTL+γLEFlat=0

Fig. 1 (a) Overlay of the molecular structure constructed using the atomic coordinates published online7 (PDB ID: 2LMP) in the Protein Data Bank13 with our graphical representation. The lighter blue cylinders are regions where the triangular faces are omitted to better represent the twist over the length of the fibril. (b) Motivation for the simplified fibril representation in two steps: first, identification of each face as a disc with a single bonding point replacing the edge of each face closest to the surface; second, the continuation of the resultant helical bonding pattern. (c) Visualization of the section of the bonding pattern missing from the actual filament.

Fig. 2 (a) Two monomers overlaid with the coordinate axes defined at each point p(s) of the center of the fibril: e3, the unit vector tangent to the fibril; e1, the unit vector in the direction of the bonding point b(s); and e2 defined to be e1 cross e3. (b) An illustration of fibril bend along the e2 axis, dθ2ds. (c) An illustration of fibril twist along the e3 axis, dθ3ds– in this image the pattern appears in the same spot on both discs because the fibril was twisted: with no twist the bonding pattern on the right disc would have been where the grey dot is.

Fig. 3 Depictions of the two types of filament bonding twists. On the bottom – single initial point. On the top – multiple. Here Δ specifies the period of physical twisting and L that of the bonding pattern.

Fig. 4 The conformation energy of the filament, eqn (20), as a function of the periodicity, Δ. For each Δ, the plotted energy is also minimized with respect to the length of the bonding region δ. When NΔ = mL where N is an integer and mL is the total filament length, we find a local minimum energy configuration. On the left, for κB/κT = 10−3, we find a degenerate set of minimum energies. On the right, for κB/κT = 10, we do not see similar degenerate configurations and the minimum energy solution is found only when Δ = mL.

Fig. 5 Pictures of the four calculated filament configurations with piece-wise constant twist interacting with a flat surface.

Fig. 6 The phase diagram for the four filament configurations where the rightmost Flat configuration change occurs at κTcritical-γL2=(12π)2 and the upper limit for the y-axis is taken to be our upper bound for κBcritical-γL2=13(12π)2. The “Looped”, “Helix”, and “Twisted” conformations are all kinetically-quenched with a fixed linking number.

Fig. 7 (a) A single monomer of the original model: here the period of the pattern (rotation of 2π) is equal to the period of the single helix, L. (b) Three monomers in the model corresponding to CF-PT: here the period of the pattern (L) is one third the period of the three helices. Note in (b) the three helices are drawn in brown, white, and blue and the bonding pattern (comprising sections of each helix) is drawn in red.

Fig. 8 CF-PT and PHF phase diagram with the critical twist and bend κTcritical-γ=(3L2π)2 and κBcritical-γ≡35(L2π)2 specifying the axis delimiters.

Fig. 9 Molecular models of the fibril where: (a) is the axial view of the fibril section published online (PDB ID: 2MLP), (b) is a CF-PT monomer, (c) is a PHF monomer, and (d) is a modified PHF monomer with a higher associated bend energy but requiring less motion of the endpoints (when converting from CF-PT).

Fig. 10 Visual comparison between experimental STEM images (reprinted from Ruben et al.5) and simplified versions of the molecular structures shown in Fig. 9 colored to resemble the staining pattern of the STEM images: (a) shows the PHF and modified PHF structures where the white arrows labelling the experimental image refer to the raised section of each period and (b) shows the CF-PT where the arrows refer to the thin sections of each period.

Table 1 A summary of the key parameters used in this study. While it may be difficult to do so for some, all are measurable quantities

Parameter	Meaning	
κ B	Bend modulus	
κ T	Twist modulus	
γ	Surface binding character (energy density)	
L	Filament pattern period	
Δ	Filament conformation period	
δ	Length of binding region within period	
β	Lδ2π	


1 Lee VM Goedert M Trojanowski JQ Annu Rev Neurosci 2001 24 1121 1159 11520930
2 Stelzmann RA Norman Schnitzlein H Reed Murtagh F Clin Anat 1995 8 429 431 8713166
3 Goldsbury C Baxa U Simon MN Steven AC Engel A Wall JS Aebi U Müller SA J Struct Biol 2011 173 1 13 20868754
4 Kidd M Nature 1963 197 192 193
5 Ruben GC Wang J-z Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Microsc Res Tech 2005 67 175 195 16104003
6 Ramachandran G Udgaonkar JB Biochemistry 2013 52 4107 4126 23721410
7 Paravastu AK Leapman RD Yau WM Tycko R Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 18349 18354 19015532
8 Quint DA Gopinathan A Grason GM Soft Matter 2012 8 9460 9468
9 Mason JM Arndt KM Chem Bio Chem 2004 5 170 176
10 Wolgemuth CW Sun SX Phys Rev Lett 2006 97 248101 17280328
11 Yogurtcu ON Wolgemuth CW Sun SX Biophys J 2010 99 3895 3904 21156131
12 Köster S Weitz DA Goldman RD Aebi U Herrmann H Curr Opin Cell Biol 2015 32 82 91 25621895
13 Berman HM Westbrook J Feng Z Gilliland G Bhat T Weissig H Shindyalov IN Bourne PE Nucleic Acids Res 2000 28 235 242 10592235
14 Gorbenko G Trusova V Girych M Adachi E Mizuguchi C Akaji K Saito H Soft Matter 2015 11 6223 6234 26153461
15 Shin KH Kim JW Koh YH Kim HE Mater Lett 2015 143 265 268
16 Dong H Paramonov SE Hartgerink JD J Am Chem Soc 2008 130 13691 13695 18803383
17 Zhang S Marini DM Hwang W Santoso S Curr Opin Chem Biol 2002 6 865 871 12470743
18 Williams BJ Anand SV Rajagopalan J Saif MT Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) 2014 IEEE 27th International Conference on 2014 192 195
19 Bruss IR Grason GM Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 10781 10786 22711799
20 Bruss IR Grason GM Soft Matter 2013 9 8327 8345
21 Enrique M Gardel ML J Biol Chem 2015 jbc-R115
22 Sun SX Jiang H Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2011 75 543 565 22126993
23 Gillingham AK Munro S Biochim Biophys Acta, Mol Cell Res 2003 1641 71 85
24 Lomander A Hwang W Zhang S Nano Lett 2005 5 1255 1260 16178220
