LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370712
3660
Exp Neurol
Exp. Neurol.
Experimental neurology
0014-4886
1090-2430

28622913
5693633
10.1016/j.expneurol.2017.06.017
NIHMS888092
Article
Targeting urate to reduce oxidative stress in Parkinson disease
Crotty Grace F. M.B.B.CH., B.A.O. 1
Ascherio Alberto M.D., Dr.P.H. 2
Schwarzschild Michael A. M.D., Ph.D. 1
1 Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
2 Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
Corresponding author: Grace F. Crotty, M.B.B.CH., B.A.O.; GCROTTY@PARTNERS.ORG
23 7 2017
13 6 2017
12 2017
01 12 2018
298 Pt B 210224
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Oxidative stress has been implicated as a core contributor to the initiation and progression of multiple neurological diseases. Genetic and environmental factors can produce oxidative stress through mitochondrial dysfunction leading to the degeneration of dopaminergic and other neurons underlying Parkinson disease (PD). Although clinical trials of antioxidants have thus far failed to demonstrate slowed progression of PD, oxidative stress remains a compelling target. Rather than prompting abandonment of antioxidant strategies, these failures have raised the bar for justifying drug and dosing selections and for improving study designs to test for disease modification by antioxidants. Urate, the main antioxidant found in plasma as well as the end product of purine metabolism in humans, has emerged as a promising potential neuroprotectant with advantages that distinguish it from previously tested antioxidant agents. Uniquely, higher urate levels in plasma or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) have been linked to both a lower risk of developing PD and to a slower rate of its subsequent progression in numerous large prospective epidemiological and clinical cohorts. Laboratory evidence that urate confers neuroprotection in cellular and animal models of PD, possibly via the Nrf2 antioxidant response pathway, further strengthened its candidacy for rapid clinical translation. An early phase trial of the urate precursor inosine demonstrated its capacity to safely produce well tolerated, long-term elevation of plasma and CSF urate in early PD, supporting a phase 3 trial now underway to determine whether oral inosine dosed to elevate urate to concentrations predictive of favorable prognosis in PD slows clinical decline in people recently diagnosed, dopamine transporter-deficient PD.

Parkinson disease
urate
uric acid
antioxidant
epidemiology
biomarker
antioxidant
nrf2 activator neuroprotection
mitochondrial dysfunction
oxidative stress

Introduction

Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease and has an incidence of 8 to 18 per 100,000 person-years (1). Its prevalence is age-related, affecting more than 1% of those older than 60 years and up to 4% of those older than 80 years (1). Although the phenotype of PD as traditionally defined is relatively homogeneous, its genotype and putative environmental influences are increasingly viewed as heterogeneous with the underlying etiology and pathogenesis likely multifactorial in nature. Over the past few decades significant advances have been made in our understanding of PD including greater awareness of environmental, genetic and stochastic factors contributing to the development and progression of PD. Biochemical and cellular abnormalities have been identified in the brains of people with PD including mitochondrial dysfunction, free radical-mediated damage, excitotoxicity and inflammatory changes with oxidative stress proposed to play a critical role. Oxidative stress may represent a common pathway following the convergence of genetic and environmental etiologic factors.

In the first half of our paper we will review oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of PD and evidence to support antioxidant therapies. In the second half of the paper we will focus on evidence that urate elevation strategies targeting oxidative stress pathways may lead to neuroprotective therapy in PD.

Oxidative stress

Oxidative stress has been implicated as a core contributor to the initiation and progression of multiple neurological diseases including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), PD, multiple sclerosis (MS) and stroke (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7). The brain is particularly susceptible to oxidative stress for many reasons. First and foremost, although it comprises only 2% of total body weight the brain consumes 20% of the body’s total oxygen supply, with a significant portion of that oxygen subsequently being converted into reactive oxygen species (ROS) (7, 8, 9). Secondly, in the brain there are specific neurochemical reactions, like dopamine oxidation, which create large amounts of reactive oxygen or nitrogen species (ROS, RNS). Thirdly, the brain has large amounts of lipids (e.g., myelin), which are sensitive to oxidative stress. Lastly, with aging there is increased deposition of metal ions in the brain, which are catalysts in the production of ROS and RNS (9, 10).

Oxidative stress occurs when there is an imbalanced redox state due to either excessive oxidants (including ROS and RNS) or dysfunction of the antioxidant system. ROS and RNS are generated in both neurons and glia by the enzymes, monoamine oxidase, NADPH oxidase, nitric oxide synthase and other flavoenzymes. They are generated by infiltrating monocytes, macrophages and activated microglia (11). The electron transport chain is the major contributor of ROS at the mitochondrial level (12). Impaired cellular antioxidant defense also predisposes to oxidative stress, resulting in an inflammatory state, contributing to neurodegeneration. This is seen with reduction in the activities of enzymes superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione/glutathione peroxidase or decreased α-tocopherol and urate (a.k.a. uric acid) levels (13).

Oxidative stress in PD

In PD mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and pro-oxidant environmental toxins have been postulated to play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease (14, 15). Oxidative stress occurs with protein misfolding and aggregation, mitochondrial dysfunction, cell cycle reactivation, apoptosis and excitotoxicity, all of which are observed in PD (16, 17). Evidence of oxidative stress has been found in post-mortem studies of people with PD with decreased levels of antioxidant enzyme activity including glutathione peroxidase and catalase; reduced levels of glutathione (GSH); increased iron; increased activity of superoxide dismutase and decreased activity of complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (18–20). The reduction in the antioxidant defense system may result in increased lipoxygenase activity, a branch of the arachidonate cascade. In PD, selective loss of GSH in the substantia nigra (reduced by 40% compared to control subjects) has been seen (21). This loss of GSH is thought to be one of the earliest biochemical changes in PD (22–25) and was not found in other parts of the brain (21). A reduction in mitochondrial complex I activity was also demonstrated in PD compared to controls (26–29).

In post-mortem brains of PD patients, lipid peroxidation products, cholesterol lipid hydroperoxides and malondialdehyde are 10-fold higher when compared with other brain regions and age-matched controls (30). There is also damage to protein in PD through nitration with increased amounts of nitrotyrosine (3-NT), which have been identified in peripheral polymorphonuclear cells in Parkinson’s patients and in their brains in Lewy bodies, the pathological hallmark of the disease (31, 32). Protein carbonyls are also found throughout the brain in PD compared to controls (33). Also, the presence of toxic products of oxidative lipid damage, such as 4-hydroxynonenal, impairs cell viability by interacting with various proteins (18). Lastly, oxidized adducts of nucleic acid (DNA and RNA) are also increased in the central nervous system (CNS) of PD patients, with elevated levels of 8-OHG and 8-OHdG in the substantia nigra (SN) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (34–37).

Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) in PD has identified high-energy phosphate levels in the temporoparietal region (38) and occipital lobe (39), and increased cerebral lactate (40) consistent with oxidative stress and a shift to anaerobic metabolism in vivo. Using specific spectral editing techniques such as MEscher-GArwood-PRESS (MEGA-PRESS) one can also measure GSH and vitamin C levels in the human brain (41). A small, preliminary study measured GSH by MRS in PD with no evidence of altered levels (42). Reduced glutathione levels are found in the human brain, particularly in the hippocampus and frontal cortices of patients with Alzheimer disease (43). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies showed a rise in iron concentrations in the SN in PD patients (44).

Positron emission tomography (PET) using [62Cu] diacetyl-bis (N4-methylthiosemicarbazone) ([62Cu] ATSM) as a radiotracer can identify an intracellular over-reductive state (45). This PET tracer accumulates in the brain regions in an over-reductive state through the reduction of Cu (II) to Cu (I) (46). In patients with PD, deposition of [62Cu] ATSM has been observed in the striatum, suggesting a regional over-reductive state secondary to mitochondrial dysfunction (47).

Dopaminergic neurons in the SN are particularly susceptible to oxidative injury in PD. This differs from the selective neuronal vulnerability seen in other neurodegenerative conditions, in which oxidative stress is also postulated to have a pathogenic role. For example, in AD the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus CA1 region are most affected. Interestingly, even within the dopaminergic neurons of the SN, some areas are spared in PD, with the ventral tier rather than the dorsal layers of the nigra seen to be most affected (48). Dopaminergic neurons are thought to be affected in PD due to their high intrinsic basal oxidative stress from both the enzymatic and non-enzymatic metabolism and autoxidation of dopamine, including through semiquinone formation and its polymerization (18, 49–51). The degradation of dopamine by monoamine oxidase can produce 6-hydroxydopamine and hydrogen peroxide, which create increased amounts of oxidized GSH impairing the antioxidant system (51). Hydrogen peroxide, in the presence of high iron levels in the SN, is also converted by Fenton reactions to the highly toxic hydroxyl radical, another free radical resulting in further oxidative damage (52, 53). 6-hydroxydopamine is polymerized to neuromelanin, which is also demonstrated to induce apoptosis in these cells (15). In PD, dopamine oxidation is increased due to early compensatory changes in dopamine turnover secondary to nigral cell degeneration (54).

In addition to dopamine oxidation, the dopaminergic neurons in the SN pars compacta are known to experience increased oxidative stress from their autonomous pacemaker mechanism, which utilizes L-type calcium channels resulting in intracellular calcium oscillations. These channels control the repeated and persistent entry of calcium into dopaminergic cells and require ATP-dependent pumps to restore the calcium concentration. Interestingly, these calcium channels are also seen in other areas of the brain which are selectively involved in PD such as the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei, and neurons of the locus coeruleus. The functioning of these channels result in high levels of oxidative stress in mitochondria (55).

Mitochondrial dysfunction in PD

The relatively recent discovery of familial PD cases and their genetic associations with mitochondrial function support the role of mitochondrial dysfunction leading to oxidative stress. In addition, mitochondrial electron transport chain NADH dehydrogenase (complex I) deficiency has been demonstrated in the SN and prefrontal cortex of subjects with PD compared to controls (27, 29, 56). Subsequent studies also found complex I deficiency in the platelets, lymphocytes and skeletal muscle tissues of patients with PD, although this was not consistently seen in skeletal muscle (28, 57). Complex I deficiency is thought to render cells more vulnerable to Bax-induced apoptosis by reducing ATP production and generating free radicals, which cumulatively contribute to the demise, or at least dysfunction, of cells during the disease process (58).

Mitochondrial proteins and familial PD

Alpha-synuclein, Parkin, PINK1, DJ-1 and LRRK2, all products of genes whose mutations can cause familial PD, are proteins involved in mitochondrial function (59). Mutations in Parkin, also known as PARK2, are the most common cause of autosomal recessive PD in people younger than 45 years (60). Parkin is transcribed ubiquitously and is located in the mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, synaptic vesicles and golgi apparatus (61, 62). It is an E3 ubiquitin ligase which is involved in the ubiquitin proteasomal pathway (63). In the setting of excitotoxicity-mediated damage it can become impaired due to S-nitrosylation and result in the accumulation of its substrates – Pael-R leading to cell death (64). PARK2 knockout mouse models have decreased mitochondrial respiratory chain function and reduced antioxidant proteins (65). In people with PARK2 mutations they have decreased complex I and IV activities in peripheral blood (66).

PINK1-PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 gene mutations cause autosomal recessive PD due to homozygous mutations resulting in loss of function of the gene. They typically lead to onset of parkinsonism before 40 years of age (67). The PINK1 gene encodes a serine/threonine kinase which is rapidly imported into mitochondria when there is loss of membrane potential (68). Like the Parkin gene, it is also involved in mitochondrial quality control through mitophagy (68). PINK1 knockout flies have increased susceptibility to paraquat and rotenone. PINK1 or Parkin knockout flies or mice have synaptic dysfunction that correlates with progressive loss of mitochondrial function and increased oxidative stress in the striatum with age (68). They both appear to participate in the same pathogenetic linear pathway. PINK1 is upstream of Parkin in their pathophysiological cascade, which allows rescue of PINK1-related abnormalities by overexpression of Parkin (69).

DJ-1 gene (PARK7) mutations also are a cause of autosomal recessive young-onset PD (70). The gene encodes a 23kDa protein, which is present throughout the body and is located in the intermembrane space and matrix of the mitochondria (71). It acts as an oxidative sensor which relocates to the outer mitochondrial membrane during oxidative stress (72). It forms a nuclear complex with RNA-binding and DNA-binding proteins, and thereby regulates gene transcription and prevents apoptotic cell death by alpha-synuclein or oxidative stress (59). Further support for this mechanism is seen in cells with deleted or silenced DJ-1, which are sensitized to oxidative stress, in contrast to cells with overexpressed DJ-1, which are protected (73, 74).

Alpha-synuclein gene (PARK1 or SNCA) mutations are a cause of autosomal dominant PD. Its protein product is present on the inner mitochondrial membrane and presynaptic nerve terminals of human brains. Overexpression of mutant alpha-synuclein and phosphorylation of the serine residue at position 129 may contribute to oxidative stress (75). Toxicity is seen with wild-type alpha-synuclein in cell models and patients with familial PD with multiplications of gene encoding alpha-synuclein (76). Higher amounts of alpha-synuclein are seen in the mitochondria of PD subjects compared to the controls (68). Its presence reduces mitochondrial complex I activity and increases the production of ROS and calcium (68).

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene mutations produce an autosomal dominant form of PD found in 5–8% of individuals with a first-degree relative with PD and 0.4–1.6% of patients with sporadic PD (59). G2019S is the most common mutation of LRRK2. LRRK2 is found in the cytoplasmic membrane and the microsomal and outer mitochondrial membrane (68). Mutations in this gene result in mitochondrial fragmentation and reduced mitochondrial fusion resulting in oxidative stress, as well as increased kinase activity (68).

Oxidative stress and toxins

The wide range of dopaminergic neuron-targeting toxins used to model the degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway in PD highlight its vulnerability to free radical attack. MPTP/MPP+ administration disrupts mitochondrial respiratory chain function resulting in enhanced superoxide formation, in turn resulting in reduced mitochondrial membrane potential and apoptosis (18). 6-OHDA also causes dopaminergic cell degeneration through free-radical mediated mechanisms (77). Several pesticides (e.g., rotenone and paraquat) employed in more recent toxin models of PD similarly rely on disruption of mitochondrial respiration and on oxidative stress to produce dopaminergic cell death (78).

Both in vivo and in vitro studies have raised the possibility that L-dopa treatment adds to the oxidative load in PD by free radical-mediated mechanisms or potentiating selective toxins (79–81). However other in vitro studies have shown contradicting results, with L-dopa causing neuroprotective effects by either inducing neurotrophic factors or increasing glutathione levels (82, 83). Animal and human models have not shown oxidative damage or nigral cell degeneration with L-dopa use (84, 85).

Antioxidants

In the human body there are both endogenous and exogenous antioxidant agents. Endogenous antioxidants include enzymes and non-enzymatic molecules. Among the enzymes are superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase/reductase (GPx/GR), catalase and peroxiredoxin. The non-enzymatic molecules include urate, glutathione, pyruvate, amino acids, transferrin and ferritin. There are also precursors of antioxidants (e.g. N-acetyl cysteine and inosine) and cofactors of antioxidants (e.g. selenium and coenzyme Q10). Lastly, there are also nutritional antioxidants including those that are water-soluble (ascorbate and other polyphenols) and lipid soluble (α-tocopherol, carotenoids, quinones, some polyphenols) (10).

Epidemiology of antioxidants other than urate in PD

Case-control studies investigating antioxidants other than urate (see below) in PD have reported largely inconsistent results. SOD activity has been measured in PD patients with variable results (86–89). Marttila et al. showed increased levels of SOD in the SN and basal ganglia in PD patients without any alteration in the activities of catalase, GPx, and GR compared to age-matched controls (90). On the contrary, another study of 11 patients found a small reduction (19%) in the activity of GPx in the SN in patients with PD (91).

Although reduced levels of antioxidants vitamin A, C and E and reduced activities of SOD and glutathione reductase have been reported in AD (92, 93), most early studies of vitamin A, C and E and beta-carotene found no association with PD (94–98). Abbott et al. found lower plasma levels of vitamins E and A in PD cases than in controls (99). Hellenbrand et al. found no association with vitamin E or beta-carotene intake but found that PD risk was inversely related to vitamin C intake (p for trend 0.04; OR for highest quartile compared to lowest 0.60, 95% CI 0.33–1.09) (100). A population-based case-control study conducted in the state of Washington found no associations for vitamin C, E, A or beta-carotene intake in the initial study or in an extended dataset (102).

A few prospective epidemiological studies have also investigated antioxidants. No association between intake of vitamin E and PD was found in the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (103). In contrast, an inverse association with vitamin E intake (OR 0.3, 95% CI 0.1–0.9 for the highest vs. the lowest tertile, P for trend 0.03), but no association between PD and vitamin C or beta-carotene intake, was found in the Rotterdam study (101). In the Leisure World Cohort Study, in California, an increased risk of PD with dietary vitamin C and A intake was found in univariate analysis, but results were not significant in multivariate analysis (104). In the Singapore Chinese Health Study, an inverse relationship was found between total vitamin E intake and PD risk (RR 0.64, 95% CI 0.39–1.05 for highest vs. lowest quartile, p for trend 0.03), but there was no association with intake of vitamins C or A (105). Lastly, no association between intakes of total vitamin E, vitamin C or beta-carotenoids and PD was found in the Nurses’ Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (106, 107). However, vitamin E from food alone was inversely associated with PD risk (RR 0.68, 95% CI 0.49–0.93 for highest vs. lowest quintile of dietary vitamin E intake) (108).

Clinical studies on antioxidant use

Prompted by the data cited above, there have now been multiple studies investigating the effect of antioxidant administration in PD. Vitamin E, creatine and coenzyme Q10 have been the most commonly and thoroughly trial-tested antioxidants in PD. Vitamin E (α-tocopherol), a major scavenger of lipid peroxidation in the brain, was studied in the Deprenyl and Tocopherol Antioxidant Therapy of Parkinsonism study (DATATOP study), a randomized clinical trial of early PD, with no beneficial effect seen from α-tocopherol (2,000 IU/day) in either symptom control or slowing disease progression (109). Vitamin E has been included in subsequent studies as a supplement in both coenzyme Q10 and its placebo (110, 111).

Coenzyme Q10, which transfers electrons from complexes I and II to complex III in the mitochondrial respiratory chain, was evaluated in several multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials. Subjects with early PD given 1200 mg per day showed some evidence for slowed functional decline compared to placebo with marginal statistical significance (111) prompting further evaluation in a phase 3 trial. However, the QE3 trial did not demonstrate long-term benefit of coenzyme Q10 at either of two doses (1200 and 2400 mg/day) taken over 16 months in 600 patients with early PD (110).

Creatine monohydrate, a nutritional supplement which enhances cellular energy function and has antioxidant properties, and minocycline, an antibiotic with anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic properties, were studied in a phase 2 trial on subjects with early PD, diagnosed within 5 years. Subjects were given creatinine (10 grams/day), minocycline (200 mg/day) or placebo in 1:1:1 ratio for 12 months. This study showed that these drugs were safe, well tolerated and did not interfere with symptomatic therapy. An ambitious phase 3 trial was then carried out with 1,741 PD subjects randomized to receive placebo versus creatine (10 grams/day) for five years. This study was discontinued early as a planned interim analysis showed no benefit of creatine compared to placebo based on a composite long-term measure of clinical decline (112–115).

Both GSH and N-acetylcysteine (a GSH precursor) have been tested in small preliminary clinical studies in PD. In an open-label, single-group pilot study, Sechi et al. 600 mg of intravenous GSH twice daily for 30 days to nine patients in the early stages of PD, and reported a reduction in clinical disability by 42% lasting 2 to 4 months (116). N-acetylcysteine given orally or intravenously has been shown to increase GSH levels in the blood, brain and cerebrospinal fluid (117, 118).

Despite a large, compelling body of evidence supporting the contribution of oxidative stress to PD pathogenesis, agents with antioxidant properties have thus far failed to show benefit in slowing disease progression. It is unclear whether the lack of clinical translation of antioxidant promise in PD is due to antioxidant selection, clinical trial design (dose selection, target engagement, outcome measures, etc.) or to the oxidative stress hypothesis itself. Urate has emerged as an antioxidant with several a priori advantages over previously pursued antioxidant targets and has recently advanced to phase 3 efficacy testing. The remainder of the review will focus on urate as a candidate disease-modifying therapy in PD based on its antioxidant and neuroprotective properties and convergent epidemiological and clinical data linking it to reduced risk and progression of PD.

Urate

Urate, the anionic form of uric acid (pKa 5.4) (119), predominates at physiological plasma and CSF pH (120). It is present intracellularly and in all body fluids. It is synthesized by the xanthine oxidoreductase enzyme (a.k.a. xanthine oxidase), which successively oxidizes hypoxanthine to xanthine and then to urate (figure 1). Urate is the enzymatic end product of purine metabolism in humans and higher primates, unlike all other mammals in which urate is metabolized further to allantoin by the enzyme urate oxidase (a.k.a. uricase) (121). Over the past 10 to 15 million years during the Miocene epoch with hominid evolution, the urate oxidase gene (UOx) appears to have undergone several spontaneous independent mutations leading to incomplete transcription of UOx and thus the absence of its enzyme product in humans and apes, leading in turn to higher urate levels (121).

There are multiple theories as to why the uricase enzyme disappeared during primate evolution and why this was advantageous to humans. Humans and other ‘higher’ primates, which include apes and certain New World monkeys, have higher urate levels (&gt;2 mg/dl) compared with other mammals (122). Having higher levels of urate may be beneficial as it is an antioxidant and has been posited to act as a defense against aging and cancer by preventing oxidative damage by reactive oxygen species which is of increasing importance with increased lifespan (123). In addition, higher urate may have been essential in human ancestors for a suspected hypertensive effect when low-salt diets may have been common and resulted in symptomatic hypotension otherwise (124). Interestingly, the first hypothesis proposed to explain an evolutionary advantage for higher urate in humans was that it might have played a critical role as “catalyzer of mental development”. It was posed because urate has a similar purine-based structure to the cerebral stimulant caffeine (1,3,7-trimethyl-2, 6-dioxy-purine), which can enhance cognition, alertness and motivation in humans (125).

Evolutionary increases in circulating urate have been attributed not only to UOx disruption but also to mutations in urate transporter genes accounting for the human kidney’s capacity to resorb 90% of filtered urate, thus contributing to our higher urate levels. This development of an efficient reabsorption mechanism is critical for high plasma urate levels as humans who do not actively reabsorb urate from the kidney have abnormally low urate levels (0.2–1.8 mg/dl) (126). Lastly, with evolution from prosimians to monkeys, ascorbate synthesis was lost and ascorbate was replaced by urate as the main antioxidant in plasma. This replacement may be advantageous as ascorbate as an antioxidant is limited by its propensity to oxidize, generating oxygen radicals and mutagens (127). However, urate can also act like a pro-oxidant at higher concentrations or under other conditions (128, 129).

Nonetheless, there are established adverse effects of higher urate levels attributable to crystal deposition, primarily gouty arthritis and uric acid urolithiasis. Hyperuricemia is also associated with hypertension, cardiovascular disease including myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure, along with stroke, renal disease and metabolic syndrome (130–134).

Urate properties

Urate accounts for 60% of total plasma antioxidant capacity and may serve as one of our major endogenous defenses against oxidative and nitrosative damage (135). It has been demonstrated to scavenge singlet oxygen, hydroxyl radicals, hydroxyl peroxide and peroxynitrite (123, 136). By scavenging peroxynitrite it produces a nitrated urate derivative, which acts as a vasoactive nitric oxide donor and prevents free radical-mediated DNA damage (137–139). It interacts with and stabilizes other antioxidant systems including superoxide dismutase (SOD), ascorbate, and tetrahydrobiopterin. By preventing the degradation of SOD, urate allows clearance of superoxide from the cell, thereby preventing its reaction with nitric oxide and reducing the formation of peroxynitrite (140, 141). Urate has also been show to prevent peroxynitrite from nitrating the tyrosine residues of proteins, which prevents inactivation of cellular enzymes and modification of the cytoskeleton (140).

Urate has metal-complexing properties too, allowing it to bind with iron and copper ions (52). It chelates iron by forming stable complexes with Fe3+, and thus blocking iron-dependent oxidation reactions, diminishing the oxidizing potential of Fe3+ and preventing ascorbate oxidation (52). Low urate concentration may reduce iron-chelating capacity and expose dopaminergic neurons to iron toxicity (142, 143). Both urate and ribosylurate protect against copper ion-induced peroxidation of arachidonate, linolenate and erythrocyte membrane lipids (144–146). Urate has also been shown to inhibit ascorbate oxidation by forming urate-metal ion complexes and thus preventing transition metal ions from interacting with ascorbate (147). EDTA and DTPA, which are metal ion-chelating agents, also inhibit ascorbate oxidation (51).

Despite the evidence (see below) of urate’s role in neuroprotection there have been other studies questioning its role. In humans there has been mixed evidence of its antioxidant action under pathophysiological conditions (148, 149).

Urate levels in PD brain

Church and Ward in 1994 (150) examined postmortem caudate and substantia nigra samples from PD patients and controls (n=4 for each group) and found that urate levels were lower in the SN (p&lt;0.05) and caudate (p&lt;0.1) of PD patients compared with controls, consistent with others and our subsequent findings in a larger post-mortem series (151, 152). They also observed a higher dopamine oxidation rate constant in PD compared to the control striatum homogenates, supporting a “pro-oxidative stress” state in PD. By adding urate they were able to reduce the dopamine oxidation rate in PD nigral homogenates. By adding urate oxidase to control homogenates they demonstrated an increase in the dopamine oxidation rate. Their study increased interest in studying urate in PD along with its role in oxidative stress and the hypothesis that urate could reduce or prevent oxidative damage (150).

Determinants of urate levels

Urate levels are ten times higher in humans than most other mammals due to the absence of the urate oxidase enzyme (153). The levels of urate in blood are dependent on a balance between the uricogenic dietary factors (including purine intake), the metabolism of purines to urate, its reabsorption and excretion by kidneys and its excretion by the intestines (154). Higher levels of serum urate are seen in men compared to women (126) with urate’s reference range in clinical practices being for example, 3.4–7.2 mg/dl for men and 2.4–6.1 mg/dl for women (155), apparently due to renal estrogen effects (156). Its concentration is consistently lower in CSF (30 µmol/l), approximately ten times lower than it peripheral concentration in blood (157, 158). This CSF concentration is dependent on blood urate and integrity of the blood-CSF barrier. CSF urate concentrations also have a strong caudo-rostral gradient from the lumbar space, with lumbar region values approximately 50% higher than those arising at the cisterna magna (brainstem) level (159, 160).

Genetic determinants of PD

Urate levels are also in part heritable with the estimate of between-person variation due to inherited genetic factors ranging from 25 to 70% (161). Rare mutations in purine metabolism or transport genes can alter urate levels. For example, Lesch–Nyhan syndrome caused by deficiency in the enzyme hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl-transferase results in elevated urate levels (162), whereas mutations in the major urate transporter genes SLC2A9 and URAT1 can lead to marked hypouricemia (163, 164). The product of the SLC2A9 is GLUT9, a facilitative glucose transporter expressed in the kidneys and brain. It is one of the main urate transporters determining serum urate levels and has been implicated in PD pathogenesis. The SLC2A9 gene is also the strongest inherited determinant of serum urate in humans (165). Allelic variants among the single nucleotide polymorphisms identified in SLC2A9 have been linked to lower serum urate, an earlier age for PD onset and faster clinical decline among those with early PD (166, 167). Interestingly, a recent preliminary finding of lower PD incidence and prevalence in the native Maori population of New Zealand (approximately half the rates of New Zealanders of European descent) (168) may be explained by the significantly greater urate levels among Maori, which precede adulthood (169) and have been attributed to SLC2A9 gene variants (170).

Dietary determinants of PD

Meat, alcohol and fructose increase blood urate levels with a 1.0 mg/dl reduction in urate achieved by strict avoidance of dietary purines (171). Dairy products have been shown to reduce urate levels (172, 173). Prospective epidemiological studies have studied men on a urate-elevating diet or with gout and found that they had a reduced likelihood of PD, supporting further the PD-urate link. Gao et al. used data from a subpopulation of the Health Professionals Follow-up Study in order to create a diet composite index, which included dietary factors associated with higher urate levels. They investigated whether particular diets could predict a reduced risk of developing PD. Their dietary urate index included lower dairy protein, higher alcohol and other factors that correlated with higher plasma urate levels. The subpopulation was followed for 14 years with 248 cases of PD documented among 47,406 men. Gao et al. found that a higher dietary urate index was associated with a lower risk of PD (relative risk 0.47 between top quintile vs. bottom, p-value of the trend = 0.0008). Analysis was adjusted for age, smoking, caffeine intake and other potential confounders (174).

Dairy protein, which lowers serum urate, has also been studied in regards to its risk of PD. In the Honolulu Heart Program milk was linked to a reduced risk of PD among 7,504 men (175). During 30 years of follow-up, there was a 2.3-fold lower risk of PD (95% CI: 1.3–4.1) among those who consumed no milk compared with those in the highest intake group (175). This association between dairy products and PD was also seen in another prospectively study by the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort which followed a cohort of 57,689 men and 73,175 women of which 250 men and 138 women developed PD during the study (176). Those men and women who consumed higher amounts of dairy products, in particular milk, were found to have a higher risk of developing PD (RR comparing the highest versus the lowest intake categories was 1.5 [95 percent CI: 1.0–2.3, p for trend=0.07] for total dairy and 1.7 [95 percent CI: 1.2–2.5, p for trend=0.03] for milk) (176). A meta-analysis of all prospective studies confirmed a moderately elevated risk of PD among persons with higher dairy product consumption. The combined RRs between extreme intake categories were 1.6 (95% CI: 1.3–2.0, p&lt;0.0001) for men and women combined (176), findings that were recently substantiated (177). Although the higher concentration of pesticides and other toxins in milk and other dairy products has been pointed out as a potential explanation for the dairy link to PD, the inverse link between urate levels and dairy consumption has emerged as a similarly compelling hypothesis.

Meat and alcohol also cause elevated urate levels and may therefore also be linked to a reduced PD risk. A prospective nested–case control study in rural China, surveyed 16,488 subjects and analyzed 85 PD cases and 340 controls. They found that more meat consumption was inversely associated with developing PD (178). A similar inverse association was seen in a Swedish case-control questionnaire study between meat consumption (broiled or smoked) and PD risk (179). While wine, liquor and alcohol in general have inconsistently or modestly been associated to a lower likelihood of PD (180), beer, which is rich in purines and can increase urate (181, 182), has a stronger link to a reduced risk of PD in some (183, 184) but not all studies (185).

Urate and PD risk

Numerous case-control studies and prospective epidemiological studies have investigated the association between urate levels and PD. They have generally reported lower urate levels among men who have PD or who will later develop it, with less consistent results among women. In addition to the few post-mortem studies with small sample sizes suggesting lower levels of urate in brains of PD patients compared to controls (150–152), others have typically measured urate concentrations in biofluids, particularly plasma and serum (which are effectively indistinguishable with respect to urate concentration). Case-control studies have consistently shown lower urate in subjects with PD compared to controls. Qin et al. compared bilirubin and urate levels in 425 PD patients and 460 controls and found lower urate levels in PD compared to controls (p&lt;0.0001) (186). Sakuta et al. evaluated serum urate levels in 100 patients with PD, 42 patients with MSA, 30 patients with PSP, and 100 controls. They found reduced urate levels in male patients with PD, MSA and PSP compared to controls (p&lt;0.05). This relationship was not observed in female patients (187). Pan et al. compared 160 Chinese patients with Parkinson disease and vascular parkinsonism and found that urate levels were lower in PD compared to vascular parkinsonism (188). Another study investigating levels of urate in 40 patients with PD and 29 controls found lower levels of serum urate in patients with PD compared to controls (p 0.03) (189). However, Ahlskog et al. found no difference in the levels of urate between PD cases and controls (190). The differences in results may be due to the inclusion of confounding factors, such as medication, BMI, gender and nutrition (120).

Multiple prospective epidemiological studies have similarly reported an inverse association between urate level and subsequent development of PD. In contrast, to cross-sectional case-control studies these longitudinal cohort studies can assess true risk of developing PD, and because its incidence is determined after urate levels are measured, they avoid the reverse causation bias that can confound the interpretation of case-control studies. The Honolulu Heart Program, which followed 7,968 men of Japanese or Okinawan ancestry for 30 years, found an inverse trend between urate levels and development of PD. They reported a 40% reduction in the incidence of idiopathic PD if baseline serum urate concentrations were higher than the median (rate ratio 0.6, 95% CI 0.4–1.0 vs. below the median) (175).

The largest prospective study in men to date was conducted by Weisskopf et al. at the Harvard School of Public Health, who followed 18,018 men who had blood samples taken between 1993 and 1995 in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study. 84 subjects were diagnosed with PD between the time of blood collection and 2002. They reported a lower mean plasma urate concentration in the PD cases compared to controls (p&lt;0.01) and that men in the top quartile for plasma urate had a 55% lower risk of developing PD than men in the bottom quartile (rate ratio 0.43 with 95% CI 0.18–1.02). This decrease in risk was even greater in those with blood collected at least 4 years before diagnosis (rate ratio 0.17, 95% CI 0.04–0.69 for highest vs. lowest quartile of serum urate), suggesting that urate level was not a consequence of dietary, behavioral, or medical treatment changes early in the course of the disease. Analyses were adjusted for age, smoking and caffeine intake (107).

The Rotterdam study, a prospective study of 4,695 men and women aged 55 years and older, reported 68 new cases of PD within 9.4 years of follow-up. They also found a lower PD risk with increasing baseline serum urate (hazard ratio: 0.71; 95% CI: 0.51–0.98, p-value for the trend = 0.04). Their results were adjusted for sex, age and smoking (191).

The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study, which enrolled 15,792 participants with a majority of women aged 45 to 64 years between 1987 and 1989, identified 95 new cases of PD over a 20-year follow-up. They also found an association between urate and PD occurrence with an odds ratio of 0.4 (95% CI: 02–0.8) for PD occurrence between the highest and lowest quartiles of baseline plasma urate. Analysis was adjusted for age, sex and race (192). Stratified analysis demonstrated that lower urate was a PD risk factor in men and in Caucasians, while suggesting it was also a PD predictor in women and in African-Americans of the ARIC cohort.

A 2007 meta-analysis of these three available prospective studies on urate and PD risk showed that patients with higher plasma urate concentration had a lower risk of PD, with RR of 0.80 (95% CI 0.71–0.90), a 20% reduction in the pooled rate ratio of PD for each standard deviation, 1.3 mg/dL increase in blood urate concentration (p&lt;0.0001) (107). A more recent meta-analysis of cohort studies of urate and PD incidence in these and three additional qualifying studies substantiated the lower serum urate as a PD risk factor, particularly in men (193).

A community-based cross-sectional survey which had 69,000 subjects, found that participants with higher urate levels had lower odds of reporting PD on treatment compared to those with lower urate levels, indicating an association between higher urate levels and lower PD prevalence (194).

Gender and urate in PD

For men, lower serum urate concentration has consistently been shown to be a risk factor for PD, reproducible in multiple studies, as above. However, this inverse association has been inconsistently observed or weaker in women. A prospective female-only nested case-control study within the Nurses’ Health Study between 1990 and 2004, demonstrated no significant difference in PD risk across quartiles of baseline plasma urate (p-value 0.17) (106). It remains unknown whether this finding represents a true gender difference in the underlying disease biology. Alternatively, the reduced risk observed among those with higher serum urate (in the 6–8 mg/dL range) (107) may be similar in men and women but less apparent in women, who on average have substantially lower concentrations than men (e.g., with means of 4.8 and 6.4 mg/dL) (199).

Gout and PD

Studies have investigated the association between gout, a marker for elevated serum urate concentration, and the risk of developing PD. The General Practice Research Database, UK, which is a computerized dataset from GP practices containing information on 3 million Britons, identified 1,052 PD cases and 6,634 controls. They found that those patients with gout had a lower risk of developing PD (OR 0.69, 95% CI 0.48–0.99), with the strongest associations among non-smokers and individuals above 60 years (196). This association was significant among men (OR: 0.60; 95% CI: 0.40–0.91), but not present among women (OR: 1.26; 95% CI: 0.57–2.81; p value: 0.11). They also found that anti-gout medications were associated with a lower risk of PD (OR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.19–1.70) (196). In a population cohort, health insurance records in British Columbia, USA were reviewed and they also found that individuals with gout had a lower PD risk (RR 0.70,95%CI 0.59–0.83) (197). However, other studies did not find an inverse link between gout and PD (198, 199).

Urate as a prognostic marker in PD

The discovery of urate as an inverse risk factor for PD in healthy populations raised the possibility that higher urate levels may also serve as a favorable prognostic marker among people diagnosed with PD. In collaboration with the Parkinson Study Group we investigated this question using two clinical trials, DATATOP and PRECEPT (200, 201). These two studies collectively enrolled over 1,600 early cases of PD.

In PRECEPT (Parkinson Research Experiment on CEP-1347 Trial), the original investigators’ aim was to determine whether the anti-apoptosis drug CEP-1347 could slow the clinical progression of PD. The study comprised 804 subjects with early PD who were not on dopaminergic therapy at enrollment (200, 202). After all patients were followed an average of 21.4 months, the study was stopped early based on a determination at a planned interim analysis that continuing would be futile. At that point 493 patients had reached the original trial’s primary endpoint of developing disability that required dopamine treatment. CEP-1347 failed to show efficacy in slowing PD progression. Serum urate concentration was measured at the start of the trial to monitor the safety of the drug. Our group found that a higher urate level at baseline was associated with slower clinical progression with the hazard ratio declining with increasing serum urate (P for trend &lt;0.0001). Subjects in the top quintile of urate reached the endpoint at only half the rate of subjects in the bottom quintile (HR: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.37–0.72; p-value for the trend &lt;0.001). This association was stronger in men (HR: 0.39; 95% CI: 0.26–0.60; p-value for the trend &lt;0.001) than in women (HR: 0.77: 95% CI: 0.39–1.50), for whom the trend was not statistically significant (p = 0.3). Baseline urate levels also predicted favorable outcomes using the secondary clinical (Unified PD Rating Scale [UPDRS]) and radiographic (dopamine transporter brain scan) outcomes collected in the PRECEPT study. For the latter, loss of striatal dopamine transporter binding sites was estimated as the change in striatal uptake of [123I] β-CIT, a cocaine analog that binds the transporter, over the course of the trial. Increasing serum urate concentration was predictive of slower rates of losing [123I] β-CIT binding sites in striatum (p-value for the trend = 0.002). Again, the relationship was robust in men (p = 0.001) but not significant in women (p = 0.43), despite a similar trend (200).

In DATATOP (Deprenyl and Tocopherol Antioxidative Therapy of Parkinsonism), a placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blinded, clinical trial which was designed to test the hypothesis that treatment of patients with early PD with monoamine oxidase type-B inhibitor deprenyl (selegiline) 10 mg/d and/or α-tocopherol (vitamin E) 2000 IU/d will slow the progression of disease and disability requiring dopaminergic therapy (primary end point) (203). Of the 800 US and Canadian subjects with early, untreated PD who enrolled in DATATOP, 774 had available values of baseline serum urate, which was originally measured as a routine safety laboratory. 50% of these patients progressed to the primary end point during the 2 years of follow-up. Our group found a similar association as observed in PRECEPT with higher serum urate associated with slower clinical progression of PD. The adjusted hazard ratio for highest versus lowest quintile of serum urate concentration progressing to the development of disability warranting dopaminergic therapy was 0.64; 95% CI: 0.44–0.94; p for trend=0.002. The risk of PD progression was reduced by 18% for each 1.5 mg/dL increase in serum urate concentration.

In addition to serum, CSF was collected from DATATOP subjects. Some twenty years later, frozen samples of baseline CSF available from 713 patients were analyzed for their urate concentration. Although CSF urate levels on average were an order of magnitude lower than serum urate, individuals’ CSF and serum urate correlated well in DATATOP (r=0.73; p&lt;0.0001). Like urate in serum, its CSF concentration was a predictor of a slower rate of clinical progression. The hazard ratio for progressing to the need for dopaminergic therapy in the highest versus lowest quintile of CSF urate concentration was 0.65; 95% CI: 0.54 to 0.96; p=0.009 (201).

PRECEPT and DATATOP studies both showed that higher serum urate concentrations were associated with slower clinical progression, defined by development of disability warranting dopaminergic therapy (primary endpoint) and rate of UPDRS score worsening (secondary endpoint) (200, 201). There was no statistically significant interaction between serum urate and sex for either the DATATOP or PRECEPT cohorts (200, 201).

The weaker relationship in women may reflect the fact that there were fewer women than men with PD with a 1:2 ratio of women to men in both the DATATOP and PRECEPT cohorts (200, 201). Also, as previously noted, women on average have considerably lower blood urate levels. In both the DATATOP and PRECEPT studies, women accounted for approximately 75% of the first (lowest) quintiles of serum urate but only 14% or less of the fifth (highest) quintiles, in which progression was most reduced.

Interestingly, exploratory analyses in DATATOP also suggested an interaction between urate levels and vitamin E (but not deprenyl) treatment. Stratification by vitamin E assignment showed that urate was strongly associated with progression rate among those not taking vitamin E but was not significantly predictive in those assigned to this antioxidant vitamin. Conversely, among those subjects in the lowest quintile of serum urate at baseline, randomization to vitamin E appeared to slow progression of PD based on the primary endpoint or rate of change in UPDRS (p&lt;0.01; without post-hoc analysis corrections), raising the possibility that those with the lowest levels of endogenous antioxidants, like urate, may represent responders to exogenous antioxidant treatment.

Sun et al. studied serum urate concentration in their cohort of Chinese patients and found a similar association between urate and clinical progression, which they defined by Hoehn and Yahr stages (204). Moccia et al’s group also reported that higher serum urate concentrations predicted a slower rate of worsening for non-motor symptoms in PD (205).

Together, the above studies provide substantial evidence for urate as a molecular marker of both the risk of PD and its rate of clinical progression. We will now discuss the neuroprotective potential of urate in PD including published data on urate elevation in cellular and animal models of PD and in clinical trials for early PD.

Urate in Cellular and animal models of PD

As clinical and epidemiological data have increasingly substantiated urate as a predictive and prognostic biomarker in PD, the possibility that urate may mediate as well as mark favorable outcomes has prompted investigation of urate’s neuroprotective actions in PD models. The first preclinical studies of urate and inosine (a precursor of urate) (figure 1) as potential neuroprotective strategies were carried out in cellular and animal models of other neurological diseases including multiple sclerosis, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, stroke and spinal cord injury.

In mouse models of multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, urate or its precursor inosine were demonstrated to delay the onset of disease while inhibiting peroxynitrite-mediated oxidation, likely preventing CNS inflammation and tissue damage in the mice (160, 206, 207, 208). Urate treatment in rat models of stroke also showed that urate treatment preceding or administered simultaneously with stroke onset protected against cortical or striatal damage by reducing the final infarct volume, reducing ischemia-induced tyrosine nitration, inducing axonal rewiring and improving behavioral performance (209, 210, 211, 212). Urate administration similarly showed benefit in spinal cord injury models by protecting against glutamate toxicity and secondary damage including lipid peroxidation, activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and general tissue damage (213, 214). Intraperitoneal urate therapy given to mice resulted in increased glutathione production in the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in slice culture, protecting these cells from oxidative stress (215).

Urate’s neuroprotective properties have also been demonstrated in both cellular and rodent models of PD. Urate administration prevented spontaneous degeneration of cultured nigral neurons and dopaminergic cell death induced by oxidative and mitochondrial toxins. Jones et al. and Zhu et al. demonstrated in PC12 cells that urate protected against 6-OHDA toxicity and in parallel reduced malondialdehyde, 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and lactate dehydrogenase formation and release while inducing SOD activity and increasing glutathione levels, in turn blocking oxidative stress and reducing dopamine-induced apoptosis (216, 217). In a rotenone toxicity model of PD, co-treating with urate was shown to prevent membrane depolarization and dopaminergic cell death by homocysteine plus rotenone or iron (142). Urate treatment has also been found to protect primary cultures of ventral mesencephalon dopaminergic neurons, possibly by reducing intracellular reactive oxygen species thereby preventing their spontaneous degeneration in vitro (218).

In an in vivo rodent model of PD, urate reduced 6-OHDA toxicity (217). In a complementary genetic approach to modeling urate elevation in humans, our group found that mice with a urate oxidase gene (UOx) knockout had elevated brain urate levels, were resistant to 6-OHDA toxicity on dopaminergic neurons and had preserved functional performance. Conversely, transgenic overexpression of UOx led to lower urate levels in the brain along with enhanced susceptibility to unilateral 6-OHDA resulting in more dopamine depletion, more extensive neuron loss, and exacerbated asymmetry of movement (219).

Interestingly, increased levels of urate have also been seen in MPTP rat models and after the administration of MPP+, 6-OHDA or iron chloride. This phenomenon is thought to reflect either an increase in the oxidative metabolism rate or a compensatory protective mechanism after these insults to prevent dopaminergic cell death, which older animals are unable to mount after injury (220, 221, 222).

In addition to its direct antioxidant effect, urate also appears to work indirectly in conferring neuroprotection. Urate’s indirect action may actually be more pathophysiologically relevant as studies have shown that without astrocytes present in culture, urate concentrations need to be 100-fold higher (158, 223) or 200 µM and above, whereas CNS concentrations of endogenous urate are typically 10- to 100-fold lower (201, 219). In the presence of astrocytes, lower levels of urate are required (201, 219). Du et al’s group demonstrated this in a cell culture model of spinal cord injury. They observed that urate required astrocytes for neuroprotection and that urate acted upon astroglial cells to increase the protein levels of EAAT-1, a glutamate transporter, which protected spinal cord neurons from glutamate-induced toxicity (213). In pure neuronal cultures from the same tissue, urate did not protect against glutamate toxicity (213).

We subsequently found that the urate’s protective effect on dopaminergic nigral neurons in culture was enhanced in the presence of astrocytes (224), and showed that isolated astrocytes treated with urate produced a soluble neuroprotective factor, which was insensitive to urate oxidase (223). Further characterization identified glutathione as the astrocytic factor induced by urate that likely accounts for its neuroprotective effects (225).

Urate’s non-cell autonomous neuroprotective effects also appear to be mediated by nuclear factor E2 (erythroid-derived 2)-related factor 2 (Nrf2) signaling in astrocytes. Nrf2 is a regulator of cellular defense against oxidative stress (158). It is a transcription factor that controls the expression of antioxidant response element (ARE)-containing genes such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase-1, glutathione-S-transferases and other glutathione synthesizing enzymes (226), with subsequent increase in glutathione levels (158). Impaired Nrf2 signaling results in abnormal redox homeostasis. Zhang et al. reported on the role of Nrf2 in association with urate for neuroprotection in 6-OHDA- and hydrogen peroxide-induced dopaminergic cell death (158). In 6-OHDA and MPTP models of PD, Nrf2 knockout mice show increased vulnerability to the toxins and reduced glutathione concentration in contrast to the wild type mice, suggesting that the Nrf2/ARE pathway acts as an endogenous defense against neurotoxicity (227). Urate-induced Nrf2 accumulation in cells by inhibiting its ubiquitination and degradation, promoting Nrf2 translocation into nuclei, where it transactivates the transcription and translation of Nrf2 target genes including c-GCLC and HO-1, which are oxidation-related genes involved with redox homeostasis (228). However, urate does not modulate Nrf2 mRNA and Keap1 protein levels, nor does it disrupt Nrf2-Keap1 association (158).

Inosine, a nucleoside and purine precursor of urate (figure 1), has also been shown to have trophic protective effects on neurons and astrocytes after they are subjected to hypoxia (229) or glucose-oxygen deprivation (230). Inosine has been demonstrated to induce axonal growth by upregulating the expression of axonal growth-associated genes following neuronal insult in vivo and in vitro (231, 232). Its neuroprotective effects have also been suggested to occur by a receptor-independent mechanism, like its direct activation of the cytoplasmic protein kinase Mst3b as seen in rodents after a stroke or traumatic brain injury (233).

Extracellular inosine is also known to act via the G-protein coupled receptors of its aminated purine precursor adenosine, which are known to modulate cell death. In fact, adenosine A1, A2A and A3 receptors have been identified in studies to act as a mediator of inosine effects in the setting of inflammatory or ischemic injury (212, 234–236). Inosine was found to reduce ischemic brain injury in rats, likely via an adenosine A3 receptor-dependent pathway (212). In addition, our lab found that inosine could prevent oxidative stress induced-cell death in dopaminergic MES 23.5 cells cultured with astrocytes, independent of increased intracellular urate levels (237). However, because systemically administered inosine is rapidly metabolized to urate peripherally (238), it is likely that any neuroprotective effects of oral inosine are mediated by its metabolites.

Urate elevation therapy

The feasibility of elevating urate in humans as a therapeutic strategy was first systematically tested in multiple sclerosis (MS). Although intravenous administration of urate was found to be well tolerated and capable of significantly increasing serum total antioxidant capacity (239), Spitsin et al. found oral urate to have poor bioavailability (240). They went on to show that by contrast, oral administration of its precursor inosine increased both serum and likely CSF urate levels in MS patients (240). Though several MS trials of urate-elevating inosine did not consistently demonstrate slowed clinical progression, these studies established the feasibility of chronic urate elevation as a neurotherapeutic strategy and identified nephrolithiasis as the most common adverse effect and safety concern (241–244).

Whereas intravenous administration of urate is not a practical strategy for long-term urate elevation in neurodegenerative disease, it is being applied to effectively achieve a transient elevation of urate as a candidate protectant against acute neurotoxic insults. Specifically, when infused together with a thrombolytic agent during ischemic stroke, urate has shown potential benefit for long-term outcomes along with reduction in biomarkers associated with oxidative stress and neuroprotection (245–247).

For PD, the multiple convergent lines of laboratory, clinical and epidemiological evidence prompted us to pursue long-term urate elevation in a phase 2 clinical trial of oral inosine. The Safety of Urate Elevation in PD (SURE-PD) trial was a safety-focused, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging trial of oral inosine. Its objectives were to determine the safety, tolerability and ability to raise urate of inosine taken daily by mouth for up to two years in early PD (248). It also sought to assess its suitability and potential design features for a disease-modification trial. SURE-PD enrolled 75 early PD subjects who were randomized at their baseline visits in a 1:1:1 distribution to three treatment groups: 1) placebo, 2) inosine titrated to mildly elevate serum urate (to 6.1 – 7.0 mg/dL), and 3) inosine titrated to moderately elevate serum urate (to 7.1 – 8.0 mg/dL). They found that treatment with inosine for up to 24 months was clinically safe and well tolerated at doses that elevated serum urate concentrations from a mean of 4.5 mg/dL to 6–7 and 7–8 mg/dL in the two dosing regimens. It provided proof-of-principle of the ability of oral inosine to raise urate to concentrations in CSF (&gt;0.50 mg/dL) and serum (&gt;6.0 mg/dL) that are predictive of slower disease progression in prior studies. In a secondary analysis we also noted modest trends towards slower PD progression rates with increasing urate, although the study was not powered to assess efficacy. Interestingly, they also found that treatment with inosine appeared to prevent slight worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial, which if confirmed in future studies, could strengthen the long-standing theory of enhanced motivation as one of the reasons for urate elevation during human evolution (249–252).

Regarding side-effects, though there were no gout-like episodes, 6% of subjects who were randomized to active drug developed a kidney stone. Despite theoretical concerns, inosine showed no evidence of adverse effect on blood pressure, body mass index, serum glucose and cholesterol or electrocardiographic parameters (248).

Currently a phase 3 study, SURE-PD3 trial; NCT02642393, is enrolling early PD patients within 3 years of diagnosis and not on dopaminergic medications. It is a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial of placebo versus inosine. Its main objective is to determine whether oral inosine dosed to moderately elevate serum urate (from ≤5.7 mg/dL to 7.1–8.0 mg/dL) over 2 years slows clinical decline in early PD (253). Clinical decline will be assessed as change in the Movement Disorders Society-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS).

Urate and genetic PD

Associations between the multiple causative genes underlying familial PD and mitochondrial pathophysiology provide supportive evidence that oxidative stress secondary to mitochondrial dysfunction may contribute to genetic forms of PD. Alpha-synuclein, Parkin, PINK1, DJ-1 and LRRK2 mutations, are all associated with familial PD and are all proteins linked to mitochondrial function (254). In a study investigating idiopathic PD, LRRK2 PD and LRRK2 controls, Johansen et al. found that urate was lower in both idiopathic and LRRK2 PD compared to controls (18% decrease, p&lt;0.01). They also found a 10% decrease in urate levels in asymptomatic LRRK2 mutation carriers, compared to controls, although the latter difference was not significant and further studies with larger numbers of asymptomatic LRRK2 mutation carriers are warranted (255).

Urate and other neurological conditions

Given the common pathogenic mechanism of oxidative stress across neurodegeneration, urate has been considered as marker or modulator of other neurodegenerative and acutely neurotoxic disorders. Lower urate levels have been implicated in Lewy body disease more broadly (256), Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment (257–259). In a study investigating urate levels in 95 patients with Lewy body disorders (55 non-demented PD patients, PDND; 20 PD patients with dementia, PDD; and 20 Diffuse Lewy body patients) and 76 controls, the authors found lower serum urate in patients with Lewy body disorders compared to controls. They also saw higher CSF urate in PD patients without dementia (median 0.7 mg/dl) compared to patients with Lewy body disorders and dementia (0.4 mg/dl; p = 0.03) (256). A prospective population-based cohort study following 1,724 participants who were dementia free at 11 years, found that after correcting for cardiovascular risk factors, higher urate was associated with reduced risk of dementia (HR 0.89; 95% CI 0.80–0.99, per standard deviation increase in urate). Higher serum urate at baseline was also associated with better cognitive function later in life for all cognitive domains evaluated (257). A study that measured antioxidants including urate in AD, mild cognitive impairment and controls found lower levels of urate in patients with mild cognitive impairment and AD (258).

Reduced urate has also been associated with Huntington’s disease (HD) (260), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (261–265). Higher serum urate has been associated with slower progression of HD (260) and prolonged survival of ALS (263).

Recent or ongoing trials have investigated urate elevation for neuroprotection in patients with ALS. There was a pilot, open-label, phase 1 study of urate elevation with inosine in ALS (NCT02288091) that demonstrated the feasibility of using inosine to elevate urate levels in patients with ALS (264). A follow-up, multi-center, biomarker-driven, placebo-controlled phase 2 study (SURE-ALS2) is scheduled to begin enrollment in 2017.

Urate therapy in stroke showed encouraging clinical results following the Safety and Efficacy of Uric Acid in Patients with Acute Stroke (URICO-ICTUS) study, a phase 2b/3 randomized, double-blind trial of intravenous urate administration, within a few hours of stroke onset (246, 247). Although a greater proportion of excellent outcomes 3 months after the stroke was not demonstrated for the primary analysis (adjusted risk ratio of 1.23 for urate vs placebo; p=0.099), secondary analysis of this study indicated that the addition of urate treatment to thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke improved these clinical outcomes in women (p=0.036). The finding mirrored that of a preliminary gender-stratified secondary analysis of the phase 2 study of urate-elevating inosine in PD in SURE-PD, raising the possibility that women, who have lower urate levels than men, might have more to gain by urate-elevating therapy.

Supported by National Institutes of Health grant U01NS090259, Department of Defense grant W81XWH-14-1-0131, Target ALS and the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research.

Figure 1 Purine Metabolism in Humans: Urate as enzymatic end product due to urate oxidase gene (UOx) mutations during hominoid evolution

The catabolism of purines such as adenosine ends with urate in humans and apes (hominoids) due to multiple unique exonic mutations (red bar in circle) in the UOx gene (see text for references). The resulting loss of functional UOx and increase in urate concentrations distinguish hominoids from other mammals, in which UOx metabolizes urate disrupting its purine ring structure and generating allantoin. Although the putative evolutionary advantages of increased urate remain speculative, its established antioxidant properties have suggested health benefits including neuroprotective actions. However, the higher concentrations of urate in humans approach the limits of its solubility, occasionally exceeding them, leading to crystal deposition disorders of uric acid kidney stones and gouty arthritis.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Wirdefeldt K Adami HO Cole P Epidemiology and etiology of Parkinson’s disease: a review of the evidence Eur J Epidemiol 2011 6 26 S1 S58 10.1007/s10654-011-9581-6 Epub 2011 May 28 21626386
2 Burkhardt CR Weber HK Parkinson’s disease: a chronic, low-grade antioxidant deficiency? Med Hypotheses 1994 8 43 2 111 14 7990737
3 Fahn S Cohen G The oxidant stress hypothesis in Parkinson’s disease: evidence supporting it Ann Neurol 1992 12 32 6 804 12 10.1002/ana.410320616 1471873
4 Chamorro A Dirnagl U Urra X Neuroprotection in acute stroke: targeting excitotoxicity, oxidative and nitrosative stress, and inflammation Lancet Neurol 2016 7 15 8 869 81 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)00114-9 Epub 2016 May 11 27180033
5 Shirley R Ord EN Work LM Oxidative Stress and the Use of Antioxidants in Stroke Antioxidants (Basel) 2014 7 3 3 3 472 501 10.3390/antiox3030472 26785066
6 Rowley S Patel M Mitochondrial involvement and oxidative stress in temporal lobe epilepsy Free Radic Biol Med 2013 9 62 121 31 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.02.002 Epub 2013 Feb 11 23411150
7 Kim GH Kim JE Rhie SJ The role of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases Exp Neurobiol 2015 12 24 4 325 340 10.5607/en.2015.24.4.325 26713080
8 Johnson WM Wilson-Delfosse AL Mieyal JJ Dysregulation of glutathione homeostasis in neurodegenerative diseases Nutrients 2012 4 1399 1440 10.3390/nu4101399 23201762
9 Chiurchiu V Orlacchio A Maccarrone M Is Modulation of Oxidative Stress an Answer? The State of the Art of Redox Therapeutic Actions in Neurodegenerative Diseases Oxid Med Cell Longev 2016 2016 7909380 10.1155/2016/7909380 Epub 2015 Dec 31 26881039
10 Chiurchiu V Maccarrone M Chronic inflammatory disorders and their redox control: from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities Antioxid Redox Signal 2011 11 1 15 9 2605 41 10.1089/ars.2010.3547 Epub 2011 Jun 6 21391902
11 Chiurchiu V Novel targets in multiple sclerosis: to oxidative stress and beyond Curr Top Med Chem 2014 14 22 2590 9 25478879
12 Yan MH Wang X Zhu X Mitochondrial defects and oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease Free Radic Biol Med 2013 9 62 90 101 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.11.014 Epub 2012 Nov 29 23200807
13 Langemann H Kabiersch A Newcombe J Measurement of low-molecular weight antioxidants, uric acid, tyrosine and tryptophan in plaques and white matter from patients with multiple sclerosis Eur Neurol 1992 32 5 248 52 1521544
14 Blesa J Trigo-Damas I Quiroga-Varela A Oxidative stress and Parkinson’s disease Front Neuroanat 2015 7 8 9 91 10.3389/fnana.2015.00091 eCollection 2015 26217195
15 Pamphlett R Uptake of environmental toxicants by the locus ceruleus: a potential trigger for neurodegenerative, demyelinating and psychiatric disorders Med Hypotheses 2014 1 82 1 97 104 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.11.016 Epub 2013 Nov 21 24315447
16 Mosharov EV Larsen KE Kanter E Interplay between cytosolic dopamine, calcium, and alpha-synuclein causes selective death of substantia nigra neurons Neuron 2009 4 30 62 2 218 29 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.01.033 19409267
17 Tsang AH Chung KK Oxidative and nitrosative stress in Parkinson’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 7 1792 7 643 50 10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.12.006 Epub 2008 Dec 30. Review 19162179
18 Jenner P Oxidative stress in Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 2003 53 Suppl 3 S26 36 discussion S36–8 10.1002/ana.10483 12666096
19 Pearce RK Owen A Daniel S Alterations in the distribution of glutathione in the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease J Neural Transm 1997 104 661 77 10.1007/BF01291884 9444566
20 Morris CM Edwardson JA Iron histochemistry of the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease Neurodegeneration 1994 3 277 82 7842298
21 Sian J Dexter DT Lees AJ Alterations in glutathione levels in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders affecting basal ganglia Ann Neurol 1994 9 36 3 348 55 10.1002/ana.410360305 8080242
22 Perry TL Yong VW Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy and glutathione metabolism in the substantia nigra of patients Neurosci Lett 1986 6 30 67 3 269 74 3737015
23 Perry TL Godin DV Hansen S Parkinson’s disease: a disorder due to nigral glutathione deficiency Neurosci Lett 1982 12 13 33 3 305 10 7162692
24 Danielson SR Andersen JK Oxidative and nitrative protein modifications in Parkinson’s disease Free Radic Biol Med 2008 5 15 44 10 1787 94 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2008.03.005 Epub 2008 Mar 18 18395015
25 Riederer P Sofic E Rausch W Transition metals, ferritin, glutathione, and ascorbic acid in parkinsonian brains J Neurochem 1989 2 52 2 515 20 2911028
26 Parker WD Jr Boyson SJ Parks JK Abnormalities of the electron transport chain in idiopathic Parkinson's disease Ann Neurol 1989 26 719 723 10.1002/ana.410260606 2557792
27 Schapira AH Cooper JM Dexter D Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson's disease Lancet 1989 1 1269 2566813
28 Mann VM Cooper JM Krige D Brain, skeletal muscle and platelet homogenate mitochondrial function in Parkinson's disease Brain 1992 115 Pt 2 333 342 1606472
29 Mizuno Y Ohta S Tanaka M Deficiencies in complex I subunits of the respiratory chain in Parkinson's disease Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1989 163 1450 1455 2551290
30 Dexter DT Carter CJ Wells FR Basal lipid peroxidation in substantia nigra is increased in Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 1989 2 52 2 381 9 2911023
31 Gatto EM Riobo NA Carreras MC Overexpression of neutrophil neuronal nitric oxide synthase in Parkinson’s disease Nitric Oxide 2000 4 534 539 10.1006/niox.2000.0288 11020342
32 Good PF Hsu A Werner P Protein nitration in Parkinson’s disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1998 4 57 4 338 42 9600227
33 Alam ZI Daniel SE Lees AJ A generalised increase in protein carbonyls in the brain in Parkinson’s but not incidental Lewy body disease J Neurochem 1997 69 1326 1329 9282961
34 Zhang J Perry G Smith MA Parkinson’s disease is associated with oxidative damage to cytoplasmic DNA and RNA in substantia nigra neurons Am J Pathol 1999 154 1423 1429 10329595
35 Alam ZI Jenner A Daniel SE Oxidative DNA damage in the Parkinsonian brain: an apparent selective increase in 8- hydroxyguanine levels in substantia nigra J Neurochem 1997 69 1196 1203 9282943
36 Kikuchi A Takeda A Onodera H Systemic increase of oxidative nucleic acid damage in Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy Neurobiol Dis 2002 9 244 248 11895375
37 Isobe C Abe T Terayama Y Levels of reduced and oxidized coenzymeQ-10 and 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with living Parkinson’s disease demonstrate that mitochondrial oxidative damage and/or oxidative DNA damage contributes to the neurodegenerative process Neurosci Lett 2010 469 159 163 19944739
38 Hu MT Taylor-Robinson SD Chaudhuri Cortical dysfunction in nondemented Parkinson’s disease patients: a combined 31P-MRS and 18FDG-PET study Brain 2000 2 123 340 352 10648441
39 Rango M Bonifati C Bresolin N Parkinson’s disease and brain mitochondrial dysfunction: a functional phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy study J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006 2 26 2 283 90 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600192 16094320
40 Bowen BC Block RE Sanchez-Ramos J Proton MR spectroscopy of the brain in 14 patients with Parkinson disease AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1995 1 16 1 61 8 7900603
41 Terpstra M Henry PG Gruetter R Measurement of reduced glutathione (GSH) in human brain using LCModel analysis of difference-edited spectra Magn Reson Med 2003 7 50 1 1923 10.1002/mrm.10499
42 Mischley LK Standish LJ Weiss NS Glutathione as a Biomarker in Parkinson's Disease: Associations with Aging and Disease Severity Oxid Med Cell Longev 2016 2016 9409363 Epub 2016 Jun 30 27446510
43 Mandal PK Tripathi M Sugunan S Brain oxidative stress: detection and mapping of anti-oxidant marker 'Glutathione' in different brain regions of healthy male/ female, MCI and Alzheimer patients using non-invasive magnetic resonance spectroscopy Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2012 1 6 417 1 43 8 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.047 Epub 2011 Nov 19 22120629
44 Gorell JM Ordidge RJ Brown GG Increased iron-related MRI contrast in the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease Neurology 1995 6 45 6 1138 43 7783878
45 Ikawa M Okazawa H Tsujikawa T Increased oxidative stress is related to disease severity in the ALS motor cortex: a PET study Neurology 2015 5 19 84 20 2033 9 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001588 Epub 2015 Apr 22 25904686
46 Fujibayashi Y Taniuchi H Yonekura Y Copper-62-ATSM: a new hypoxia imaging agent with high membrane permeability and low redox potential J Nucl Med 1997 7 38 7 1155 60 9225812
47 Ikawa M Okazawa H Kudo T Evaluation of striatal oxidative stress in patients with Parkinson's disease using [62Cu]ATSM PET Nucl Med Biol 2011 10 38 7 945 51 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2011.02.016 Epub 2011 Apr 21 21982566
48 Gibb WR Lees AJ The relevance of the Lewy body to the pathogenesis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1988 6 51 6 745 52 2841426
49 Graham DG Oxidative pathways for catecholamines in the genesis of neuromelanin and cytotoxic quinines Mol Pharmacol 1978 7 14 4 633 43 98706
50 Tse DC McCreery RL Adams RN Potential oxidative pathways of brain catecholamines J Med Chem 1976 1 19 1 37 40 1246050
51 Adams RN Murrill E McCreery R 6-hydroxy-dopamine, a new oxidation mechanism Eur J Pharmacol 1972 2 17 2 287 92 4337349
52 Davies KJ Sevanian A Muakkassah-Kelly SF Uric acid-iron ion complexes. A new aspect of the antioxidant functions of uric acid Biochem J 1986 5 1 235 3 747 54 3753442
53 Youdim MB Ben Shachar D Riederer P Is Parkinson’s disease a progressive siderosis of substantia nigra resulting in iron and melanin induced neurodegeneration? Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 1989 126 47 54 2618593
54 Chen X Wu G Schwarzschild MA Urate in Parkinson’s disease: More than a Biomarker? Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2012 8 12 4 367 75 10.1007/s11910-012-0282-7 22580741
55 Surmeier DJ Guzman JN Sanchez-Padilla J The origins of oxidant stress in parkinson’s disease and therapeutic strategies Antioxid Redox Signal 2011 4 1 14 7 1289 301 10.1089/ars.2010.3521 Epub 2010 Dec 15 20712409
56 Beal MF Mitochondria and neurodegeneration Novartis Found Symp 2007 287 183 92 18074639
57 Haas RH Nasirian F Nakano K Low platelet mitochondrial complex I and complex II/III activity in early untreated Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 1995 6 37 6 714 22 10.1002/ana.410370604 7778844
58 Perier C Tieu K Guegan C Complex I deficiency primes Bax dependent neuronal apoptosis through mitochondrial oxidative damage Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 12 27 102 52 19126 31 Epub 2005 Dec 19 10.1073/pnas.0508215102 16365298
59 Schapira A Mitochondria in the aetiology and pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease Lancet Neurol 2008 7 97 109 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70327-7 18093566
60 Lucking CB Durr A Bonifati V Association between early-onset Parkinson’s disease and mutations in the parkin gene. French Parkinson’s Disease Genetics Study Group N Engl J Med 2000 5 25 342 21 1560 7 10.1056/NEJM200005253422103 10824074
61 Kubo SI Kitami T Noda S Parkin is associated with cellular vesicles J Neurochem 2001 7 78 1 42 54 11432972
62 Stichel CC Augustin M Kuhn K Parkin expression in the adult mouse brain Eur J Neurosci 2000 12 12 12 4181 94 11122330
63 Zhang Y Gao J Chung KK Parkin functions as an E2-dependent ubiquitin- protein ligase and promotes the degradation of the synaptic vesicle-associated protein, CDCrel-1 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 11 21 97 24 13354 9 10.1073/pnas.240347797 11078524
64 Chung KK Thomas B Li X S-nitrosylation of parkin regulates ubiquitination and compromises parkin’s protective function Science 2004 5 28 304 5675 1328 31 Epub 2004 Apr 22 10.1126/science.1093891 15105460
65 Palacino JJ Sagi D Goldberg MS Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage in parkin-defi cient mice J Biol Chem 2004 4 30 279 18 18614 22 Epub 2004 Feb 24 10.1074/jbc.M401135200 14985362
66 Muftuoglu M Elibol B Dalmizrak O Mitochondrial complex I and IV activities in leukocytes from patients with parkin mutations Mov Disord 2004 5 19 5 544 8 10.1002/mds.10695 15133818
67 Valente EM Salvi S Ialongo T PINK1 mutations are associated with sporadic early-onset parkinsonism Ann Neurol 2004 9 56 3 336 41 10.1002/ana.20256 15349860
68 Johri A Beal MF Mitochondrial dysfunction in Neurodegenerative diseases. Perspectives in Pharmacology Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics September 2012 342 3 619 630 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.112.192138
69 Park J Lee SB Lee S Mitochondrial dysfunction in Drosophila PINK1 mutants is complemented by parkin Nature 2006 6 29 441 7097 1157 61 Epub 2006 May 3 10.1038/nature04788 16672980
70 Bonifati V Rizzu P van Baren MJ Mutations in the DJ-1 gene associated with autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism Science 2003 1 10 299 5604 256 9 Epub 2002 Nov 21 10.1126/science.1077209 12446870
71 Zhang L Shimoji M Thomas B Mitochondrial localization of the Parkinson’s disease related protein DJ-1: implications for pathogenesis Hum Mol Genet 2005 7 15 14 14 2063 73 Epub 2005 Jun 8 10.1093/hmg/ddi211 15944198
72 Taira T Saito Y Niki T DJ-1 has a role in antioxidative stress to prevent cell death EMBO Rep 2004 2 5 2 213 8 Epub 2004 Jan 23 10.1038/sj.embor.7400074 14749723
73 Yokota T Sugawara K Ito K Down regulation of DJ-1 enhances cell death by oxidative stress, ER stress, and proteasome inhibition Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 12 26 312 4 1342 8 14652021
74 Pisani A Martella G Tscherter A Enhanced sensitivity of DJ- 1-deficient dopaminergic neurons to energy metabolism impairment: role of Na+/K+ ATPase Neurobiol Dis 2006 7 23 1 54 60 Epub 2006 Apr 19 10.1016/j.nbd.2006.02.001 16624565
75 Chen L Feany MB Alpha-synuclein phosphorylation controls neurotoxicity and inclusion formation in a Drosophila model of Parkinson disease Nat Neurosci 2005 5 8 5 657 63 Epub 2005 Apr 17 10.1038/nn1443 15834418
76 Hsu LJ Sagara Y Arroyo A Alpha-synuclein promotes mitochondrial deficit and oxidative stress Am J Pathol 2000 8 157 2 401 10 10934145
77 Cohen G Heikkila RE The generation of hydrogen peroxide, superoxide radical, and hydroxyl radical by 6-hydroxydopamine, dialuric acid, and related cytotoxic agents J Biol Chem 1974 4 25 249 8 2447 52 4362682
78 Bove J Perier C Neurotoxin-based models of Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience 2012 6 1 211 51 76 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.10.057 22108613
79 Tanaka M Sotomatsu A Kanai H Dopa and dopamine cause cultured neuronal death in the presence of iron J Neurol Sci 1991 2 101 2 198 203 1903438
80 Cheng N Maeda T Kume T Differential neurotoxicity induced by L-DOPA and dopamine in cultured striatal neurons Brain Res 1996 12 16 743 1–2 278 83 9017256
81 Ogawa N Edamatsu R Mizukawa K Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons and free radicals. Possible participation of levodopa Adv Neurol 1993 60 242 50 8380518
82 Han SK Mytilineou C Cohen G L-DOPA up-regulates glutathione and protects mesencephalic cultures against oxidative stress J Neurochem 1996 2 66 2 501 10 8592119
83 Mena MA Davila V Sulzer D Neurotrophic effects of L-DOPA in postnatal midbrain dopamine neuron/cortical astrocyte cocultures J Neurochem 1997 10 69 4 1398 408 9326268
84 Hefti F Melamed E Bhawan J Wurtman R Long term administration of L-dopa does not damage dopaminergic neurons in the mouse Neurology 1981 31 1194 1195 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.31.9.1194
85 Perry TL Yong VW Ito M Nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons remain undamaged in rats given high doses of L-DOPA and carbidopa chronically Neurochem 1984 10 43 4 990 3
86 Ilic TV Jovanovic M Jovicic A Tomovic M Oxidative stress indicators are elevated in de novo Parkinson's disease patients Funct Neurol 1999 Jul-Sep 14 3 141 7 10568214
87 Kocatürk PA Akbostanci MC Tan F Kavas GO Superoxide dismutase activity and zinc and copper concentrations in Parkinson's disease Pathophysiology 2000 4 7 1 63 67 10825687
88 Serra JA Domínguez RO de Lustig ES Parkinson's disease is associated with oxidative stress: comparison of peripheral antioxidant profiles in living Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and vascular dementia patients J Neural Transm (Vienna) 2001 108 10 1135 48 10.1007/s007020170003 11725816
89 Younes-Mhenni S Frih-Ayed M Kerkeni A Peripheral blood markers of oxidative stress in Parkinson's disease Eur Neurol 2007 58 2 78 83 Epub 2007 Jun 12 10.1159/000103641 17565220
90 Marttila RJ Lorentz H Rinne UK Oxygen toxicity protecting enzymes in Parkinson’s disease: increase of superoxide dismutase-like activity in the substantia nigra and basal nucleus J Neurol Sci 1988 9 86 2–3 321 31 3221244
91 Kish SJ Morito C Hornykiewicz O Glutathione peroxidase activity in Parkinson’s disease brain Neurosci Lett 1985 8 5 58 3 343 6 4047494
92 Rinaldi P Polidori MC Metastasio A Plasma antioxidants are similarly depleted in mild cognitive impairment and in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2003 11 24 7 915 9 12928050
93 Lovell MA Ehmann WD Butler SM Elevated thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances and antioxidant enzyme activity in the brain in Alzheimer's disease Neurology 1995 8 45 8 1594 601 7644059
94 King D Playfer JR Roberts NB Concentrations of vitamins A, C and E in elderly patients with Parkinson’s disease Postgrad Med J 1992 8 68 802 634 7 1448403
95 Fernandez-Calle P Jimenez-Jimenez FJ Molina JA Serum levels of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in patients with Parkinson’s disease J Neurol Sci 1993 8 118 1 25 8 8229047
96 Jimenez-Jimenez FJ Molina JA Fernandez-Calle P Serum levels of betacarotene and other carotenoids in Parkinson’s disease Neurosci Lett 1993 157 103 6 499 8233018
97 Fernandez-Calle P Molina JA Jimenez-Jimenez FJ Serum levels of alphatocopherol (vitamin E) in Parkinson’s disease Neurology 1992 42 1064 6 1579230
98 Jimenez-Jimenez FJ Molina JA Fernandez-Calle P Serum levels of vitamin A in Parkinson’s disease J Neurol Sci 1992 8 111 1 73 6 1403000
99 Abbott RA Cox M Markus H Diet, body size and micronutrient status in Parkinson’s disease Eur J Clin Nutr 1992 12 46 12 879 84 1483417
100 Hellenbrand W Boeing H Robra BP Diet and Parkinson’s disease. II: A possible role for the past intake of specific nutrients. Results from a self administered food-frequency questionnaire in a case-control study Neurology 1996 9 47 3 644 50 8797457
101 Powers KM Smith-Weller T Franklin GM Parkinson’s disease risks associated with dietary iron, manganese, and other nutrient intakes Neurology 2003 6 10 6 11 1761 6
102 Morens DM Grandinetti A Waslien CI Case-control study of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease and dietary vitamin E intake Neurology 1996 5 46 5 1270 4 8628465
103 De Rijk MC Breteler MM den Breeijen JH Dietary antioxidants and Parkinson disease. The Rotterdam Study Arch Neurol 1997 6 54 6 762 5 9193212
104 Paganini-Hill A Risk factors for parkinson’s disease: the leisure world cohort study Neuroepidemiology 2001 5 20 2 118 24 DOI: 54770 11359079
105 Tan LC Koh WP Yuan JM Differential effects of black versus green tea on risk of Parkinson’s disease in the Singapore Chinese Health Study Am J Epidemiol 2008 3 1 167 5 553 60 Epub 2007 Dec 20 10.1093/aje/kwm338 18156141
106 O’Reilly EJ Gao X Weisskopf MG Plasma urate and Parkinson’s disease in women Am J Epidemiol 2010 9 15 172 6 666 70 10.1093/aje/kwq195 Epub 2010 Aug 2 20682521
107 Weisskopf MG O’Reilly E Chen H Plasma urate and risk of Parkinson’s disease Am J Epidemiol 2007 9 1 166 5 561 7 Epub 2007 Jun 20 10.1093/aje/kwm127 17584757
108 Zhang SM Hernan MA Chen H Intakes of vitamins E and C, carotenoids, vitamin supplements, and PD risk Neurology 2002 10 22 59 8 1161 9 12391343
109 The Parkinson Study Group N Effects of tocopherol and deprenyl on the progression of disability in early Parkinson’s disease N Engl J Med 1993 1 21 328 3 176 83 10.1056/NEJM199301213280305 8417384
110 Parkinson Study Group QE3 Investigators Beal MF A randomized clinical trial of high-dosage coenzyme Q10 in early Parkinson disease: no evidence of benefit JAMA Neurol 2014 5 71 5 543 52 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.131 24664227
111 Shults CW Oakes D Kieburtz K Effects of coenzyme Q10 in early Parkinson disease: evidence of slowing of the functional decline Arch Neurol 2002 10 59 10 1541 50 12374491
112 NINDS NET-PD Investigators A randomized, double-blind, futility clinical trial of creatine and minocycline in early Parkinson disease Neurology 2006 3 14 66 5 664 71 Epub 2006 Feb 15 10.1212/01.wnl.0000201252.57661.e1 16481597
113 NINDS NET-PD Investigators A pilot clinical trial of creatine and minocycline in early Parkinson disease: 18-month results. Clin Neuropharmacol 31:141–150 Clin Neuropharmacol 2008 May-Jun 31 3 141 50 10.1097/WNF.0b013e3181342f32 18520981
114 Bender A Koch W Elstner M Creatine supplementation in Parkinson disease: a placebo-controlled randomized pilot trial Neurology 2006 10 10 67 7 1262 4 10.1212/01.wnl.0000238518.34389.12 17030762
115 Writing Group for the NINDS Exploratory Trials in Parkinson Disease (NET-PD) Investigators Kieburtz K Tilley BC Effect of creatine monohydrate on clinical progression in patients with Parkinson disease: a randomized clinical trial JAMA 2015 2 10 313 6 584 93 10.1001/jama.2015.120 25668262
116 Sechi G Deledda MG Bua G Reduced intravenous glutathione in the treatment of early Parkinson’s disease Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 1996 10 20 7 1159 70 8938817
117 Holmay MJ Terpstra M Coles LD N-acetylcysteine boosts brain and blood glutathione in Gaucher and Parkinson diseases Clin Neuropharmacol 2013 Jul-Aug 36 4 103 6 10.1097/WNF.0b013e31829ae713 23860343
118 Katz M Won SJ Park Y Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of N-acetylcysteine after oral administration in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2015 5 21 5 500 3 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.02.020 Epub 2015 Feb 28 25765302
119 National Center for Biotechnology Information PubChem Compound Database; CID=1175 https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/1175 accessed Apr. 15, 2017
120 Ciprani S Chen X Schwarzschild MA Urate: a novel biomarker of Parkinson’s disease risk, diagnosis and prognosis Biomark Med 2010 10 4 5 701 12 10.2217/bmm.10.94 20945982
121 Wu XW Muzny DM Lee CC Two independent mutational events in the loss of urate oxidase during hominoid evolution J Mol Evol 1992 1 34 1 78 84 1556746
122 Johnson RJ Kang DH Feig D Is there a pathogenetic role for uric acid in hypertension and cardiovascular and renal disease? Hypertension 2003 6 41 6 1183 90 Epub 2003 Apr 21 10.1161/01.HYP.0000069700.62727.C5 12707287
123 Ames BN Cathcart R Schwiers E Uric acid provides an antioxidant defense in humans against oxidant- and radical-caused aging and cancer: a hypothesis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1981 11 78 11 6858 62 6947260
124 Watanabe S Kang DH Feng L Uric acid, hominoid evolution, and the pathogenesis of salt sensitivity Hypertension 2002 9 40 3 355 60 12215479
125 Orowan E The origin of man Nature 1955 4 16 175 4459 683 4 14370192
126 Hediger MA Johnson RJ Miyazaki H Molecular physiology of urate transport Physiology (Bethesda) 2005 4 20 125 33 10.1152/physiol.00039.2004 15772301
127 Rosin MP San RH Stich HF Mutagenic activity of ascorbate in mammalian cell cultures Cancer Lett 1980 2 8 4 229 305
128 Sanguinetti SM Batthyány C Trostchansky A Nitric oxide inhibits prooxidant actions of uric acid during copper-mediated LDL oxidation Arch Biochem Biophys 2004 3 15 423 2 302 8 10.1016/j.abb.2003.12.034 15001394
129 Gersch C Palii SP Imaram W Reactions of peroxynitrite with uric acid: formation of reactive intermediates, alkylated products and triuret, and in vivo production of triuret under conditions of oxidative stress Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 2009 2 28 2 118 49 10.1080/15257770902736400 19219741
130 Jossa F Farinaro E Panico S Serum uric acid and hypertension: the Olivetti heart study J Hum Hypertens 1994 9 8 9 677 81 7807497
131 Freedman DS Williamson DF Gunter EW Relation of serum uric acid to mortality and ischemic heart disease. The NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study Am J Epidemiol 1995 4 1 141 7 637 44 7702038
132 Kang DH Nakagawa T Feng L A role for uric acid in the progression of renal disease J Am Soc Nephrol 2002 12 13 12 2888 97 12444207
133 Choi HK Mount DB Reginato AM Pathogenesis of gout. Choi HK, Mount DB, Reginato AM, et al Pathogenesis of gout Ann. Intern. Med 2005 143 7 499 516 16204163
134 Bos MJ Koudstaal PJ Hofman A Uric acid is a risk factor for myocardial infarction and stroke: the Rotterdam study Stroke 2006 6 37 6 1503 7 Epub 2006 May 4 10.1161/01.STR.0000221716.55088.d4 16675740
135 Yeum KJ Russell RM Krinsky NI Biomarkers of antioxidant capacity in the hydrophilic and lipophilic compartments of human plasma Arch Biochem Biophys 2004 10 1 430 1 97 103 10.1016/j.abb.2004.03.006 15325916
136 Kutzing MK Firestein BL Altered uric acid levels and disease states J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008 1 324 1 1 7 Epub 2007 Sep 21 10.1124/jpet.107.129031 17890445
137 Aruoma OI Halliwell B Inactivation of α1-antiproteinase by hydroxyl radicals. The effect of uric acid FEBS Lett 1989 2 13 244 1 76 80 2538353
138 Whiteman M Ketsawatsakul U Halliwell B A reassessment of the peroxynitrite scavenging activity of uric acid Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002 5 962 242 59 12076979
139 Skinner KA White CR Patel R Nitrosation of uric acid by peroxynitrite. Formation of a vasoactive nitric oxide donor J Biol Chem 1998 9 18 273 38 24491 7 9733742
140 Pacher P Beckman JS Liaudet L Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease Physiol Rev 2007 1 87 1 315 424 10.1152/physrev.00029.2006 17237348
141 Van der Veen RC Hinton DR Extensive peroxynitrite activity during progressive stages of central nervous system inflammation J Neuroimmunol 1997 7 77 1 1 7 9209262
142 Duan W Ladenheim B Cutler RG Dietary folate deficiency and elevated homocysteine levels endanger dopaminergic neurons in models of Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 2002 1 80 1 101 10 11796748
143 Sian-Hülsmann J Mandel S Youdim MB The relevance of iron in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 2011 9 118 6 939 57 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07132.x Epub 2011 Jan 31 21138437
144 Smith RC Lawing L Antioxidant activity of uric acid and 3-N-ribosyluric acid with unsaturated fatty acids and erythrocyte membranes Arch Biochem Biophys 1983 5 223 1 166 72 6859855
145 Matsushita S Ibuki F Aoki A Chemical reactivity of the nucleic acid bases. 1. Antioxidative ability of the nucleic acids and their related substances on the oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids Arch Biochem Biophys 1963 9 102 446 51 14072524
146 Kellogg EW 3rd Fridovich I Liposome oxidation and erythrocyte lysis by enzymically generated superoxide and hydrogen peroxide J Biol Chem 1977 10 10 252 19 6721 8 197102
147 Sevanian A Davies KJ Hochstein P Conservation of vitamin C by uric acid in blood J Free Radic Biol Med 1985 1 2 117 24 3836238
148 Hershfield MS Roberts LJ 2nd Ganson NJ Treating gout with pegloticase, a PEGylated urate oxidase, provides insight into the importance of uric acid as an antioxidant in vivo Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 8 10 107 32 14351 6 10.1073/pnas.1001072107 Epub 2010 Jul 26 20660758
149 Fabbrini E Serafini M Colic Baric I Effect of plasma uric acid on antioxidant capacity, oxidative stress, and insulin sensitivity in obese subjects Diabetes 2014 3 63 3 976 81 10.2337/db13-1396 Epub 2013 Dec 18 24353177
150 Church WH Ward VL Uric acid is reduced in the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease: effect on dopamine oxidation Brain Res. Bull 1994 33 4 419 425 8124580
151 McFarland NR Postmortem brain levels of urate and precursors in Parkinson's disease and related disorders Neurodegener Dis 2013 12 4 189 98 10.1159/000346370 Epub 2013 Feb 28 23467193
152 Fitzmaurice PS Ang L Guttman M Nigral glutathione deficiency is not specific for idiopathic Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2003 9 18 9 969 76 10.1002/mds.10486 14502663
153 Roch-Ramel F Guisan B Renal transport of urate in humans News Physiol Sci 1999 4 14 80 84 11390825
154 Lipkowitz MS Regulation of uric acid excretion by the kidney Curr Rheumatol Rep 2012 4 14 2 179 88 10.1007/s11926-012-0240-z 22359229
155 Enomoto A Kimura H Chairoungdua A Molecular identification of a renal urate anion exchanger that regulates blood urate levels Nature 2002 5 23 417 6887 447 52 Epub 2002 Apr 14 10.1038/nature742 12024214
156 Hak AE Choi HK Menopause, postmenopausal hormone use and serum uric acid in US women—the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Arthritis Res Ther 2008 10 8 R116 10.1186/ar2519 18822120
157 Tohgi H Abe T Takahashi S The urate and xanthine concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid in patients with vascular dementia of the Binswanger type, Alzheimer type dementia, and Parkinson's disease J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect 1993 6 2 119 26 8117408
158 Zhang N Shu H-Y Huang T Nrf2 signaling contributes to the neuroprotective effects of urate against 6-OHDA toxicity PLoS One 2014 6 24 9 6 e100286 10.1371/journal.pone.0100286 eCollection 2014 24959672
159 Niklasson F Hetta J Degrell I Hypoxanthine, xanthine, urate and creatinine concentration gradients in cerebrospinal fluid Ups J Med Sci 1988 93 2 225 232 3238822
160 Hooper DC Scott GS Zborek A Uric acid, a peroxynitrite scavenger, inhibits CNS inflammation, blood-CNS barrier permeability changes, and tissue damage in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis FASEB J 2000 4 14 15 691 8 10744626
161 Yang Q Guo CY Cupples LA Genome-wide search for genes affecting serum uric acid levels: the Framingham Heart Study Metabolism 2005 11 54 11 1435 1441 10.1016/j.metabol.2005.05.007 16253630
162 Lesch M Nyhan WL A familial disorder of uric acid metabolism and central nervous system function Am J Med 1964 4 36 561 70 14142409
163 Dinour D Gray NK Campbell S Homozygous SLC2A9 mutations cause severe renal hypouricemia J Am Soc Nephrol 2010 1 21 1 64 72 10.1681/ASN.2009040406 Epub 2009 Nov 19 19926891
164 Dinour D Bahn A Ganon L URAT1 mutations cause renal hypouricemia type 1 in Iraqi Jews Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011 7 26 7 2175 81 10.1093/ndt/gfq722 Epub 2010 Dec 9 21148271
165 Kolz M Johnson T Sanna S Meta-analysis of 28,141 individuals identifies common variants within five new loci that influence uric acid concentrations PLoS Genet 2009 6 5 6 e1000504 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000504 Epub 2009 Jun 5 19503597
166 Facheris MF Hicks A Variation in the uric acid transporter gene SLC2A9 and its association with AAO of Parkinson’s disease J Mol Neurosci 2011 3 43 3 246 50 10.1007/s12031-010-9409-y Epub 2010 Jun 30 20589538
167 Simon KC Eberly S Gao X Mendelian randomization of serum urate and parkinson disease progression Ann Neurol 2014 12 76 6 862 8 10.1002/ana.24281 Epub 2014 Oct 3 25257975
168 Pitcher TL Myall DJ MacAskill MR Ethnic differences in rates of Parkinson’s in New Zealand: A nation-wide prevalence and incidence study [abstract] Mov Disord 2016 31 suppl 2
169 Stanhope Jm Prior IA Uric acid, joint morbidity, and streptococcal antibodies in Maori and European teenagers. Rotorua Lakes study 3 Ann Rheum Dis 1975 8 34 4 359 63 1190855
170 Hollis-Moffatt JE Xu X Dalbeth Role of the urate transporter SLC2A9 in susceptibility to gout in New Zealand Maori, Pacific Island, and Caucasian case-control sample sets Arthritis Rheum 2009 11 60 11 3485 92 19877038
171 Wortmann RL Disorders of purine and pyrimidine metabolism Fauci AS Braunwald E Kasper DL Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine NY, USA McGraw-Hill Medical Publishing Division 2008v
172 Park M Ross GW Petrovitch H Consumption of milk and calcium in midlife and the future risk of Parkinson disease Neurology 2005 64 6 1047 1051 15781824
173 Choi HK Liu S Intake of purine-rich foods, proteins, and dairy products and relationship to serum levels of uric acid: the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Arthritis Rheum 52 1 283 289
174 Gao X Chen H Choi HK Diet, urate, and Parkinson’s disease risk in men. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;167(7):831–8. (6):666–70 Am J Epidemiol 2008 4 1 167 7 831 8 10.1093/aje/kwm385 Epub 2008 Mar 7 18326873
175 Davis JW Grandinetti A Waslien CI Observations on serum uric acid levels and the risk of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease Am J Epidemiol 1996 144 480 4 8781463
176 Chen H O’Reilly E McCullough Dairy products and risk of Parkinson’s disease Am J Epidemiol 2007 5 1 165 9 998 1006 17272289
177 Hughes KC Gao X Kim IY Wang M Weisskopf MG Schwarzschild MA Ascherio A Intake of dairy foods and risk of Parkinson’s disease Neurology (In press)
178 Ma L Zhang L Gao XH Dietary factors and smoking as risk factors for PD in a rural population in China: a nested case-control study Acta Neurol Scand 2006 4 113 4 278 81 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2005.00571.x 16542169
179 Fall PA Fredrikson M Axelson O Nutritional and occupational factors influencing the risk of Parkinson’s disease: a case-control study in southeastern Sweden Mov Disord 1999 1 14 1 28 37 9918341
180 Zhang D Jiang H Xie J Alcohol intake and risk of Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis of observational studies Mov Disord 2014 5 29 6 819 22 10.1002/mds.25863 Epub 2014 Mar 3 24590499
181 Choi HK Curhan G Beer, liquor, and wine consumption and serum uric acid level: the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Arthritis Rheum 2004 12 15 51 6 1023 9 10.1002/art.20821 15593346
182 Gibson T Rodgers AV Simmonds HA Beer drinking and its effect on uric acid Br J Rheumatol 1984 8 23 3 203 9 6743968
183 Hernán MA Chen H Schwarzschild MA Alcohol consumption and the incidence of Parkinson's disease Ann Neurol 2003 8 54 2 170 5 10.1002/ana.10611 12891669
184 Liu R Guo X Park Y Alcohol Consumption, Types of Alcohol, and Parkinson's Disease PLoS One 2013 6 19 8 6 e66452 10.1371/journal.pone.0066452 Print 2013 23840473
185 Palacios N Gao X O'Reilly E Alcohol and risk of Parkinson's disease in a large, prospective cohort of men and women Mov Disord 2012 7 27 8 980 7 10.1002/mds.25050 Epub 2012 Jun 19 22714720
186 Qin XL Zhang QS Sun L Lower Serum Bilirubin and Uric Acid Concentrations in Patients with Parkinson's Disease in China Cell Biochem Biophys 2015 5 72 1 49 56 10.1007/s12013-014-0402-x 25449297
187 Sakuta H Suzuki K Miyamoto T Serum uric acid levels in Parkinson's disease and related disorders Brain Behav 2016 10 31 7 1 e00598 10.1002/brb3.598 eCollection 2017 28127516
188 Pan M Gao H Long L Serum uric acid in patients with Parkinson's disease and vascular parkinsonism: a cross-sectional study Neuroimmunomodulation 2013 20 1 19 28 10.1159/000342483 Epub 2012 Nov 14 23154271
189 Annanmaki T Muuronen A Murros K Low plasma uric acid level in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2007 6 15 22 8 1133 7 10.1002/mds.21502 17443703
190 Ahlskog JE Uitti RJ Low PA No evidence for systemic oxidant stress in Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s disease Mov Disord 1995 9 10 5 566 73 10.1002/mds.870100507 8552107
191 de Lau LM Koudstaal PJ Hofman A Serum uric acid levels and the risk of Parkinson disease Ann Neurol 2005 11 58 5 797 800 10.1002/ana.20663 16240356
192 Chen H Mosley TH Alonso A Plasma urate and Parkinson’s disease in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study Am J Epidemiol 2009 5 1 169 9 1064 9 10.1093/aje/kwp033 Epub 2009 Mar 18 19299404
193 Shen C Guo Y Luo W Serum urate and the risk of Parkinson's disease: results from a meta-analysis Can J Neurol Sci 2013 1 40 1 73 9 23250131
194 Winquist A Steenland K Shankar A Higher serum uric acid associated with decreased Parkinson’s disease prevalence in a large community-based survey Mov Disord 2010 5 15 25 7 932 6 10.1002/mds.23070 20310031
195 Iseki K Ikemiya Y Inoue T Significance of hyperuricemia as a risk factor for developing ESRD in a screened cohort Am J Kidney Dis 2004 10 44 4 642 50 15384015
196 Alonso A Rodriguez LA Logroscino G Gout and risk of Parkinson disease: a prospective study Neurology 2007 10 23 69 17 1696 700 10.1212/01.wnl.0000279518.10072.df 17954784
197 De Vera M Rahman MM Rankin J Gout and the risk of Parkinson’s disease: a cohort study Arthritis Rheum 2008 11 15 59 11 1549 54 10.1002/art.24193 18975349
198 Pakpoor J Seminog OO Ramagopalan SV Clinical associations between gout and multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease and motor neuron disease: record-linkage studies BMC Neurol 2015 2 28 15 16 10.1186/s12883-015-0273-9 25884318
199 Schernhammer E Qiu J Wermuth L Gout and the risk of Parkinson's disease in Denmark Eur J Epidemiol 2013 4 28 4 359 60 10.1007/s10654-013-9791-1 Epub 2013 Mar 2 23456139
200 Schwarzschild MA Schwid SR Marek K Serum urate as a predictor of clinical and radiographic progression in Parkinson disease Arch Neurol 2008 6 65 6 716 23 10.1001/archneur.2008.65.6.nct70003 Epub 2008 Apr 14 18413464
201 Ascherio A LeWitt PA Xu K Urate as a predictor of the rate of clinical decline in Parkinson disease Arch Neurol 2009 12 66 12 1460 8 10.1001/archneurol.2009.247 19822770
202 Parkinson Study Group PRECEPT Investigators Mixed lineage kinase inhibitor CEP-1347 fails to delay disability in early Parkinson disease Neurology 2007 10 9 69 15 1480 90 Epub 2007 Sep 19 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277648.63931.c0 17881719
203 Parkinson Study Group DATATOP: a multicenter controlled clinical trial in early Parkinson’s disease Arch Neurol 1989 10 46 10 1052 60 2508608
204 Sun C Luo F Wei L Association of serum uric acid levels with the progression of Parkinson’s disease in Chinese patients Chin Med J (Engl) 2012 2 125 4 583 7 22490478
205 Moccia M Presence and progression of non-motor symptoms in relation to uric acid in de novo Parkinson's disease Eur J Neurol 2015 1 22 1 93 8 10.1111/ene.12533 Epub 2014 Aug 7 25104282
206 Hooper DC Spitsin S Kean RB Uric acid, a natural scavenger of peroxynitrite in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 1 20 95 2 675 80 9435251
207 Hooper DC Bagasra O Marini JC Prevention of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis by targeting nitric oxide and peroxynitrite: implications for the treatment of multiple sclerosis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 3 18 94 6 2528 33 9122229
208 Scott GS Spitsin SV Kean RB Therapeutic intervention in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis by administration of uric acid precursors Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 12 10 99 25 16303 8 Epub 2002 Nov 25 10.1073/pnas.212645999 12451183
209 Yu ZF Bruce-Keller AJ Goodman Y Uric acid protects neurons against excitotoxic and metabolic insults in cell culture and against focal ischemic brain injury in vivo J Neurosci Res 1998 9 1 53 5 613 25 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(19980901)53:5&lt;613::AID-JNR11&gt;3.0.CO;2-1 9726432
210 Romanos E Planas AM Amaro S Uric acid reduces brain damage and improves the benefits of rt-PA in a rat model of thromboembolic stroke J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2007 1 27 1 14 20 Epub 2006 Apr 5 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600312 16596120
211 Chen P Goldberg DE Kolb B Inosine induces axonal rewiring and improves behavorial outcome after stroke Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 6 25 99 13 9031 6 10.1073/pnas.132076299 12084941
212 Shen H Chen GJ Harvey BK Inosine reduces ischemic brain injury in rats Stroke 2005 3 36 3 654 9 Epub 2005 Feb 3 10.1161/01.STR.0000155747.15679.04 15692110
213 Du Y Chen CP Tseng CY Eisenberg Y Firestein BL (2007) Astroglia-mediated effects of uric acid to protect spinal cord neurons from glutamate toxicity Glia 2007 4 1 55 5 463 72 10.1002/glia.20472 17203476
214 Scott GS Cuzzocrea S Genovese T Uric acid protects against secondary damage after spinal cord injury Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 3 1 102 9 3483 8 Epub 2005 Feb 10.1073/pnas.0500307102 15728348
215 Aoyama K Matsumura N Watabe M Caffeine and uric acid mediate glutathione synthesis for neuroprotection Neuroscience 2011 5 5 181 206 15 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.02.047 Epub 2011 Mar 1 21371533
216 Jones DC Gunasekar PG Borowitz JL Dopamine induced apoptosis is mediated by oxidative stess and is enhanced by cyanide in differentiated PC12 cells J Neurochem 2000 6 74 6 2296 304 10820189
217 Zhu TG Wang XX Luo WF Protective effects of urate against 6-OHDA-induced cell injury in PC12 cells through antioxidant action Neurosci Lett 2012 1 11 506 2 175 9 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.075 Epub 2011 Nov 6 22094380
218 Guerreiro S Ponceau A Toulorge D Protection of midbrain dopaminergic neurons by the end-product of purine metabolism uric acid: potentiation by low-level depolarization J Neurochem 2009 109 4 1118 28 19302482
219 Chen X Disrupted and transgenic urate oxidase alter urate and dopaminergic neurodegeneration Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 1 2 110 1 300 5 10.1073/pnas.1217296110 Epub 2012 Dec 17 23248282
220 Serra PA Sciola L Delogu MR The neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine(MPTP) induces apoptosis in mouse nigrostriatal glia. Relevance to nigral neuronal death and striatal neurochemical changes J Biol Chem 2002 9 13 277 37 34451 61 Epub 2002 Jun 25 10.1074/jbc.M202099200 12084711
221 Church WH Fong YT Changes in uric acid during acute infusion of MPP+, 6-OHDA, and FeCl3. A microdialysis studying the substantia nigra of the guinea pig Mol Chem Neuropathol 1996 2 27 2 131 44 10.1007/BF02815089 8962598
222 De Luca MA Cauli O Morelli M Simola N Elevation of striatal urate in experimental models of Parkinson's disease: a compensatory mechanism triggered by dopaminergic nigrostriatal degeneration? J Neurochem 2014 11 131 3 284 9 10.1111/jnc.12809 Epub 2014 Jul 30 24989117
223 Cipriani S Protection of dopaminergic cells by urate requires its accumulation in astrocytes J Neurochem 2012 10 123 1 172 81 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07820.x Epub 2012 Aug 22 22671773
224 Cipriani S Desjardins CA Burdett TC Urate and its transgenic depletion modulate neuronal vulnerability in a cellular model of Parkinson's disease PLoS One 2012 7 5 e37331 10.1371/journal.pone.0037331 Epub 2012 May 14 22606360
225 Bakshi R Zhang H Logan R Neuroprotective effects of urate are mediated by augmenting astrocytic glutathione synthesis and release Neurobiol Dis 2015 10 82 574 9 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.08.022 Epub 2015 Sep 1 26341543
226 Ansari N Khodagholi F Amini M 2-Ethoxy-4,5-diphenyl-1,3-oxazine-6one activates the Nrf2/HO-1 axis and protects against oxidative stress-induced neuronal death Eur J Pharmacol 2011 5 11 658 2–3 84 90 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.02.028 Epub 2011 Mar 1 21371450
227 Chen PC Vargas MR Pani AK Smeyne RJ Johnson DA Nrf2-mediated neuroprotection in the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease: Critical role for the astrocyte Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 2 24 106 8 2933 8 10.1073/pnas.0813361106 Epub 2009 Feb 5 19196989
228 Yu J Zhao Y Li B 17beta-estradiol regulates the expression of antioxidant enzymes in myocardial cells by increasing Nrf2 translocation J Biochem Mol Toxicol 2012 7 26 7 264 9 10.1002/jbt.21417 Epub 2012 Jun 21 22730333
229 Litsky ML Hohl CM Lucas JH Jurkowitz MS Inosine and guanosine preserve neuronal and glial cell viability in mouse spinal cord cultures during chemical hypoxia Brain Res 1999 3 13 821 2 426 32 10064830
230 Haun SE Segeleon JE Trapp VL Clotz MA Horrocks LA Inosine mediates the protective effect of adenosine in rat astrocyte cultures subjected to combined glucose-oxygen deprivation J Neurochem 1996 11 67 5 2051 9 8863513
231 Benowitz LI Jing Y Tabibiazar R Jo SA Petrausch B Stuermer CA Rosenberg PA Irwin N Axon outgrowth is regulated by an intracellular purine-sensitive mechanism in retinal ganglion cells J Biol Chem 1998 11 6 273 45 29626 34 9792672
232 Petrausch B Tabibiazar R Roser T Jing Y Goldman D Stuermer CA Irwin N Benowitz LI A purine-sensitive pathway regulates multiple genes involved in axon regeneration in goldfish retinalganglion cells J Neurosci 2000 11 1 20 21 8031 41 11050124
233 Zai L Ferrari C Dice C Subbaiah S Havton LA Coppola G Geschwind D Irwin N Huebner E Strittmatter SM Benowitz LI Inosine augments the effects of a Nogo receptor blocker and of environmental enrichment to restore skilled forelimb use after stroke J Neurosci 2011 4 20 31 16 5977 88 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4498-10.2011 21508223
234 Rahimian R Fakhfouri G Daneshmand A Adenosine A2A receptors and uric acid mediate protective effects of inosine against TNBS-induced colitis in rats Eur J Pharmacol 2010 12 15 649 1–3 376 81 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.044 Epub 2010 Sep 22 20868668
235 Jin X Shepherd RK Duling BR Linden J Inosine binds to A3 adenosine receptors and stimulates mast cell degranulation J Clin Invest 1997 12 1 100 11 2849 57 10.1172/JCI119833 9389751
236 Gomez G Sitkovsky MV Differential requirement for A2a and A3 adenosine receptors for the protective effect of inosine in vivo Blood 2003 12 15 102 13 4472 8 Epub 2003 Aug 28 10.1182/blood-2002-11-3624 12947007
237 Cipriani S Bakshi R Schwarzschild MA Protection by inosine in a cellular model of Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience 2014 8 22 274 242 9 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.05.038 Epub 2014 May 29 24880154
238 Yamamoto T Moriwaki Y Cheng J Effect of inosine on the plasma concentration of uridine and purine bases Metabolism 2002 4 51 4 438 42 11912550
239 Waring WS Webb DJ Maxwell SR Systemic uric acid administration increases serum antioxidant capacity in healthy volunteers J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2001 9 38 3 365 71 11486241
240 Spitsin S Hooper DC Leist T Inactivation of peroxynitrite in multiple sclerosis patients after oral administration of inosine may suggest possible approaches to therapy of the disease Mult Scler 2001 10 7 5 313 9 10.1177/135245850100700507 11724447
241 Toncev G Therapeutic value of serum uric acid levels increasing in the treatment of multiple sclerosis Vojnosanit Pregl 2006 10 63 10 879 82 17121380
242 Markowitz CE Spitsin S Zimmerman V The treatment of multiple sclerosis with inosine J Altern Complement Med 2009 6 15 6 619 25 10.1089/acm.2008.0513 19425822
243 Gonsette RE Sindic C D’hooghe MB ASIIMS study group Boosting endogenous neuroprotection in multiple sclerosis: the ASsociation of Inosine and Interferon beta in relapsing remitting Multiple Sclerosis (ASIIMS) trial Mult Scler 2010 4 16 4 455 62 10.1177/1352458509360547 Epub 2010 Mar 3 20200198
244 Muñoz García D Midaglia L Martinez Vilela J Associated Inosine to interferon: results of a clinical trial in multiple sclerosis Acta Neurol Scand 2015 6 131 6 405 10 10.1111/ane.12333 Epub 2014 Oct 14 25313094
245 Amaro S Chamorro Á Translational stroke research of the combination of thrombolysis and antioxidant therapy Stroke 2011 5 42 5 1495 9 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.615039 Epub 2011 Apr 7 21474803
246 Chamorro A Amaro S Castellanos M Safety and efficacy of uric acid in patients with acute stroke (URICO-ICTUS): a randomised, double-blind phase 2b/3 trial Lancet Neurol 2014 5 13 5 453 60 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70054-7 Epub 2014 Apr 2 24703208
247 Llull L Laredo C Renu A Uric Acid Therapy Improves Clinical Outcome in Women With Acute Ischemic Stroke Stroke 2015 8 46 8 2162 7 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.009960 Epub 2015 Jul 9 26159792
248 The Parkinson Study Group SURE-PD Investigators Inosine to increase serum and CSF urate in Parkinson disease: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial JAMA Neurol 2014 2 71 2 141 50 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5528 24366103
249 Brooks GW Mueller E Serum Urate Concentrations Among University Professors Relation to Drive, Achievement, and Leadership JAMA 1966 195 6 415 418 10.1001/jama.1966.03100060055017 5951870
250 Kasl SV Brooks GW Cobb S Serum Urate Concentrations in Male High-School Students A Predictor of College Attendance JAMA 1966 198 7 713 716 10.1001/jama.1966.03110200069020 5953325
251 Kasl SV Brooks GW Rodgers WL Serum Uric Acid and Cholesterol in Achievement Behavior and Motivation I. The Relationship to Ability, Grades, Test Performance, and Motivation JAMA 1970 213 7 1158 1164 10.1001/jama.1970.03170330040005 5468262
252 Kasl SV Brooks GW Rodgers WL Serum Uric Acid and Cholesterol in Achievement Behavior and Motivation II. The Relationship to College Attendance, Extracurricular and Social Activities, and Vocational Aspirations JAMA 1970 213 8 1291 1299 10.1001/jama.1970.03170340013002 5468326
253 Study of Urate Elevation in Parkinson's Disease, Phase 3 (SURE-PD3) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02642393 accessed April 24, 2017
254 Dias V Junn E Mouradian MM The role of oxidative stress in Parkinson's disease J Parkinsons Dis 2013 3 4 461 91 10.3233/JPD-130230 24252804
255 Johansen KK Wang L Aasly JO Metabolomic profiling in LRRK2-related Parkinson's disease PLoS One 2009 10 22 4 10 e7551 10.1371/journal.pone.0007551 19847307
256 Maetzler W Stapf AK Schulte C Serum and cerebrospinal fluid uric acid levels in lewy body disorders: associations with disease occurrence and amyloid-β pathway J Alzheimers Dis 2011 27 1 119 26 10.3233/JAD-2011-110587 21765209
257 Euser SM Hofman A Westendorp RGI Serum uric acid and cognitive function and dementia Brain 2009 2 132 Pt 2 377 82 10.1093/brain/awn316 Epub 2008 Nov 26 19036766
258 Polidori MC Mattioli P Aldred S Plasma antioxidant status, immunoglobulin g oxidation and lipid peroxidation in demented patients: relevance to Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2004 18 3–4 265 70 15286458
259 Irizarry MC Raman R Schwarzschild MA Plasma urate and progression of mild cognitive impairment Neurodegener Dis 2009 6 1–2 23 8 10.1159/000170883 Epub 2008 Nov 5 19066433
260 Auinger P Kieburtz K McDermott MP The relationship between uric acid levels and Huntington’s disease progression Mov Disord 2010 1 30 25 2 224 8 10.1002/mds.22907 20063429
261 Zoccolella S Simone IL Capozzo R An exploratory study of serum urate levels in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurol 2011 2 258 2 238 43 10.1007/s00415-010-5735-9 Epub 2010 Sep 15 20842370
262 Keizman D Ish-Shalom M Berliner S Low uric acid levels in serum of patients with ALS: further evidence for oxidative stress? Ish-Shalom M, Berliner S, et al Low uric acid levels in serum of patients with ALS: further evidence for oxidative stress
263 Paganoni S Zhang M Quiroz Zárate A Uric acid levels predict survival in men with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurol 2012 9 259 9 1923 8 10.1007/s00415-012-6440-7 Epub 2012 Feb 10 22323210
264 A Pilot Study of Inosine in ALS https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02288091 accessed April 24, 2017
