LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0101032
1015
Biochem Pharmacol
Biochem. Pharmacol.
Biochemical pharmacology
0006-2952
1873-2968

29223352
5899931
10.1016/j.bcp.2017.11.018
NIHMS925982
Article
ATP-binding cassette transporter-2 (ABCA2) as a therapeutic target
Davis Warren Jr.
Tew Kenneth D. *
Dept. of Cell &amp; Molecular Pharmacology &amp; Experimental Therapeutics, Medical University of South Carolina, 173 Ashley Avenue, BSB, MSC 509, Charleston S.C. 29425
* Corresponding author: Kenneth D. Tew, Department of Cell &amp; Molecular Pharmacology &amp; Experimental Therapeutics, Medical University of South Carolina, 173 Ashley Avenue, BSB, MSC 509, Charleston S.C. 29425. tewk@musc.edu
16 12 2017
06 12 2017
5 2018
01 5 2019
151 188200
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The ATP binding cassette transporter ABCA2 is primarily an endolysosomal membrane protein that demonstrates pleiotropic functionalities, coalescing around the maintenance of homeostasis of sterols, sphingolipids and cholesterol. It is most highly expressed in brain tissue and ABCA2 knockout mice express neurological defects consistent with aberrant myelination. Increased expression of the transporter has been linked with resistance to cancer drugs, particularly those possessing a steroid backbone and gene expression (in concert with other genes involved in cholesterol metabolism) was found to be regulated by sterols. Moreover, in macrophages ABCA2 is influenced by sterols and has a role in regulating cholesterol sequestration, potentially important in cardiovascular disease. Accumulating data indicate the critical importance of ABCA2 in mediating movement of sphingolipids within cellular compartments and these have been implicated in various aspects of cholesterol trafficking. Perhaps because the functions of ABCA2 are linked with membrane building blocks, there are reports linking it with human pathologies, including, cholesterolemias and cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer’s and cancer. The present review addresses whether there is now sufficient information to consider ABCA2 as a plausible therapeutic target.

Graphical Abstract

ABCA2
transporter
cancer
Alzheimer
cholesterol
sphingolipid

1. Introduction

ATP binding cassette transporters shuttle biological materials into and out of cells in an ordered, energy dependent fashion. Humans are multicellular organisms that have 48 separate genes that code for such transporters and these have been classified into seven distinct families designated by the nomenclature ABCA-G [1]. Within the ABCA family there are twelve examples that are split into two subgroups, where ABCA1 and ABCA2 share homology and represent among the largest of the family (~270kD; [2]). The importance of each of these in human disease [3] has been established through the analysis of multiple SNP’s and genetic mutations. Interestingly, Pubmed searches for publications that carry ABCA1 in their title have reached approximately 1000, while for ABCA2 the number is presently less than 50. To some degree this reflects the initial publication that reported linkage of ABCA1 mutations with Tangier disease, a cholesterolemia that causes high levels of morbidity and mortality in young adults in isolated island geography [4].

Perhaps the discovery of this linkage has served to catapult much of the work on ABCA1, leaving its family member in need of a relationship with a defined human pathology. In this regard, there is by now a quite mature literature that suggests that ABCA2 may have been overlooked in terms of its importance to human metabolism. Some of the earliest reports detailed overexpression of ABCA2 through an amplification and gene duplication of a region of chromosome 9q34 in a human ovarian cancer cell line with resistance to the anticancer drug estramustine [5], an anti-microtubule chemotherapeutic, structurally similar to estradiol [6] used in the 1990’s to treat hormone refractory prostate cancer [7]. Because estramustine is an estrogen-based therapeutic (although its cytotoxic properties are related to antimicrotubule activity [8], this may have been a predication of the involvement of ABCA2 with sterol homeostasis. While there are numerous transporters involved in the efflux of small molecules, and ABCA2 has been shown to enhance sequestration of some agents into lysosomes [9], much of the more recent published material perhaps indicates a broader association of the transporter with CNS and brain function, although this does not preclude other role(s) in oncology. The remainder of this article will detail some of the findings that may serve to invigorate interest in this transporter and its role in cellular homeostasis and human diseases.

2. ABCA2: general information

Initially, both ABCA1 and ABCA2 were co-isolated from embryonic mouse brain tissue [10]. They share the general protein structure of two transmembrane domains (TMD) and two nucleotide-binding domains (NBD) with an intervening highly hydrophobic loop domain (Figure 1).

The Abca2 gene locus mapped to chromosome 9q34 within a 21kb region [11], containing 48 exons encoding a polypeptide of 2436 residues [12, 13]. The minimal promoter region mapped 321 bp upstream of the translation start site [14] with the promoter containing consensus sequences for transcription factors HNF-3, c-myc and AP-1. In addition, it has two GC-boxes, encoding overlapping sites for the early growth response-1 (EGR-1) and Sp1 transcription factors [14]. ABCA2 is the largest of the ABC transporters, with a molecular mass of ~270 kD [1]. Full length human ABCA2 was cloned and a detailed tissue distribution studies confirmed high levels in brain, but also described expression patterns in ovary, leukocytes and macrophages [12, 13]. Temporal localization in oligodendrocytes in brain [15] and spinal cord [15] of the CNS, as well as Schwann cells in peripheral nerves [16, 17] has been found. Yeast two-hybrid studies revealed that within the hypothalamus, amygdala, cortex and selected brain stem nuclei ABCA2 colocalized with the orphan G protein-coupled receptor 50. This implies a link between functional aspects of G protein and neurotransmitter signaling strengthening a plausible role for this complex in stress response and energy homeostasis. (GPR50; [18]). Within the cell, fluorescent antibody studies revealed that ABCA2 primarily localizes to intracellular structures such as late endosomes/lysosomes, trans-Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum [19], although there are also indications of some expression at the cell membrane. Isoforms of 1A and 1B of ABCA2 are generated by alternative splicing [20], where exon 1 of isoform 1A encodes 22 amino acids, while that of isoform 1B, located 699 bp upstream contains a coding sequence for 52 amino acids. Both splice variants share similar tissue expression profiles and co-localize with lysosome-associated membrane proteins-1 and -2 (LAMP-1 and -2)[20]. Their specific functions in differentiation and/or development remain to be determined.

Within the A sub-family ABCA2 shares amino acid sequence homology with ABCA1 (50), ABCA7 (44), ABCA3 (43), ABCA4 (40) and ABCA6 (32) [9]. With ABCA1, this includes two cytoplasmic NBD’s and two conserved sequences in the N- and C-terminal domains (LLLWKN and VFVNFA, respectively). The LLLWKN (function unknown) sequence is present in all members except ABCA6 and 9 [9]. The VFVNFA motif is critical for apolipoprotein A-I binding and HDL cholesterol efflux in ABCA1 [21], obviously implying a similar function for ABCA2. A lipocalin signature sequence exists downstream of the first NBD and this is present in other proteins including, apolipoprotein D, prostaglandin D synthase, complement component C8 γ-chain and α-1-microglobulin [9]. Lipocalin motifs form a small pocket for binding to hydrophobic compounds, such as lipids and sterols. This is consistent with studies implicating small, hydrophobic compounds, such as estramustine as transport substrates for ABCA2 [22].

3. ABCA2 and cancer drug response

Overall, the expression of ABC transporters has been linked with multidrug resistance phenotypes through the efflux of drugs via ATP-dependent transport. For example, 13 distinct transporters (ABCA2, ABCB1, ABCB4, ABCB11, ABCC1–6 ABCC10, ABCC11 and ABCG2) have been associated with drug transport/resistance [23]. Historically, members of the MDR and MRP subfamilies (e.g. ABCB1/MDR1 and ABCC1/MRP1) have garnered the most attention [1], since their primary functions appear to be with efflux of foreign compounds such as cancer drugs. ABCA2 expression has been measured in cancer cell lines, (especially those with acquired drug resistance), normal and cancer stem cells and in human biopsies from cancer patients undergoing therapy. In most instances correlations were drawn between the extent of expression and drug response in the samples. The first report [5] was in an ovarian carcinoma cell line with acquired resistance to estramustine (EM). These selected cells amplified a region in chromosome 9q34, resulting in 5-fold increase in ABCA2 expression and an increased rate of efflux of dansyl-labeled EM. The resistance rendered by ABCA2 expression was reversed upon antisense treatment [5]. Resistance to EM and estradiol was also shown in transfected HEK293 cells [12], but not in dominant negative ABCA2 transfected cells [20] and further cross resistance to a free radical initiator, 2,2′-azobis-(2-amidinopropane) (AAPH) [24], a compound structurally unrelated to steroids [25] was also detailed. ABCA2 may mediate the transport and sequestration of damaged lipids into the lysosome, preventing any propagation of chain reactions, where initiation, propagation and termination of lipid peroxides is prevented. ABCA2 was also linked with resistance to mitoxantrone and EM in a small cell lung cancer cell line [26] and treatment with both agents caused accumulation of mitoxantrone, indicating that EM may block its transport, although there was no direct proof that ABCA2 was the mediator of the transport. ABCA2 was also over-expressed in a daunorubicin-resistant promyelocytic leukemia cell line [27]. Overall, ABCA2 has been implicated in resistance to a diverse range of compounds, both sterol and non-sterol. The localization of ABCA2 to intracellular membrane organelles suggest that enhanced ABCA2 levels may protect cells through sequestration of toxic products into lysosomes, where specific examples have been shown [28]. Perhaps post-translational modifications may also influence substrate specificity and these could be both species and organ specific. Recently, Celecoxib has been shown to sensitize tumor cells resistant to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib. The authors concluded that this reversal was mediated at least in part by inhibition of ABCA2 [29].

Many cancers also have deregulated cholesterol metabolism and it is a critical early precursor for a number of pathways that influence the development and progression of cancer [30]. Hormones can influence cholesterol metabolism in cancer patients [31] and interfering with cholesterol metabolic pathways (e.g. HMGCoA R inhibition via statins) has been suggested to be a possible target in the therapeutic management of cancer patients [32]. Lysosomes in cancer cells have been suggested as viable drug targets [33]. Reducing the availability of this essential component of membranes and lipid raft domains may influence survival in rapidly dividing cancer cells. The plausible role of ABCA2 in regulating availability of cholesterol may validate it as a target for drug development.

There is now a better understanding of the importance of cancer stem cells as the arbiters of drug resistance. These cells have many of the properties of normal stem cells that permit them to survive chemotherapy, including high expression of various ABC transporters [34]. Such stem cells can provide a reserve of drug resistant progenitor cells that might repopulate the tumor following chemotherapy. ABC transporter over-expression is not uncommon among normal and malignant hematopoietic stem cells [35]. In AML progenitor cells, ABCA2 expression was significantly enriched in CD34+CD38− cells compared to more differentiated CD34+CD38+ cells [36]. These CD34+CD38− cells have greater malignant and self-renewing properties and such observations concur with the fact that ABCA2 expression has been implicated in leukemic cell multi-drug resistance in both AML [37] and T-ALL [38]. ABCA2 is also prevalent in some pluripotent side populations of lung cancer cells. These cells had high expression of ABCA2, ABCG2, ABCB1 and ABCC1 and showed resistance to a range of anticancer drugs. These cells also displayed stem cell properties indicative of a quiescent state, but higher replicative potential [39].

There is a growing literature on ABCA2 expression in human biopsies, where it has been described as a potential biomarker of leukemias. In childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, ABCA2 and ABCA3 were expressed at high levels, which upon treatment with methotrexate, vinblastine and doxorubicin was amplified further [38], implying a function in resistance. Since normal brain and bone marrow express high levels, it is unsurprising that greater abundance occurs in their neoplastic counterparts. Specifically, high expression occurs in vestibular schwannomas, a benign intracranial tumor originating from a branch of the acoustic nerve in the PNS [17]. ABCA2 was abundant in histologically defined Antoni type A and type B areas of the biopsies [17]. The transporter was also shown in oligodendrogliomas of the CNS [40], where it outperformed Olig2 as a biomarker for oligodendrogliomas from astrocytic tumors. Most recently, within a group of ALL patients, quantification of the protein levels of ABCA2 and ABCA3 had a prognostic impact on pediatric ALL MDR. These authors deduced the tertiary structure of ABCA2 and using docking analysis revealed a possible compensatory effect between ABCA2 and ABCA3, which they thought might contribute to drug efflux and ultimately, to chemoresistance [41].

4. ABCA2 knockout studies/phenotypes

Two groups have independently generated ABCA2 knockout mice [19, 42]. Our own and Sakai et al observed a distinct shaking phenotype particularly affecting the hind limbs, that we termed “Skittish”. While in general the mouse phenotypes were very similar, there were some apparent differences in myelin sheath morphology and in brain lipid profiles. Our group reported that mice displayed tremor, hyperactivity and abnormal myelin ultrastructure, i.e., compaction of the myelin sheath in the brain and spinal cord that we proposed was the cause of the tremor. In contrast, the Sakai group did not observe abnormalities in the cytoarchitectonic and compact myelin structure or oligodendroglia differentiation. Analysis of brain lipids of mice aged 11 days to 14 weeks revealed differences in the sphingolipid profile. They reported age-related deficiencies in the brains of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidylserine (PS), sphingomyelin (SM) and a significant (two-fold) accumulation of ganglioside GM1 in ABCA2 knockout mice compared to wild-type littermates. Similar results were obtained in the myelin fraction of ABCA2-null brain. They proposed that ABCA2 functions to modulate the intracellular metabolism of sphingolipids in the brain. These results provide additional evidence in vivo that ABCA2 is a key molecule that regulates sphingolipid homeostasis. The appearance of the skittish phenotype prevented the extension of any further cancer related work on the transporter and instead altered focus onto neurological pathologies. Given the extreme nature of the knockout mouse tremors, it would appear that there may be added opportunities for further research with this model.

5. Rationale for studying the endogenous function of ABCA2

Our rationale for studying the endogenous function of ABCA2 in cells involved a consideration of the similarity between its DNA sequence and predicted protein structure compared to ABCA1. ABCA1 is the key molecule involved in reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) [43]. We hypothesized that ABCA2 was also a key molecule in maintaining intracellular cholesterol homeostasis. However, the subcellular distribution of ABCA1 and ABCA2 differ significantly; whereas ABCA1 is predominantly localized to the plasma membrane compartment [44], ABCA2 is predominantly localized in the late-endosome/lysosomal membrane compartment (LE/LY) [12, 45]. The LE/LY is the terminal endocytic compartment where free cholesterol, liberated from cholesteryl ester molecules contained in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles by acid lipase, is distributed to other intracellular compartments in a highly regulated process. This difference in subcellular localization suggested fundamental differences in the roles of ABCA1 and ABCA2 in maintaining intracellular cholesterol homeostasis.

6. ABCA2 is a sterol-responsive gene

The first evidence to demonstrate that ABCA2 expression responded to sterol loading was provided in an experiment involving monocyte to macrophage differentiation in vitro. Upon sterol loading with enzymatically degraded LDL (eLDL), ABCA2 expression increased only in differentiated macrophages and not in monocytes [13]; however, the mechanism for the increase in expression or its relevance in vivo was not investigated.

Our early studies that investigated a functional role for ABCA2 in cholesterol homeostasis sought answers to the following questions: 1) was endogenous ABCA2 expression coordinately regulated with other sterol-responsive genes; 2) did constitutive overexpression of ABCA2 in cells alter the expression of other sterol-responsive genes; 3) did overexpression of ABCA2 affect the delivery of free-cholesterol to the endoplasmic reticulum for esterification by acyl CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT); 4) did overexpression of ABCA2 sequester free cholesterol in the LE/LY upon sterol-loading; 5) did pharmacological agents that sequestered free cholesterol in the LE/LY alter ABCA2 expression; 6) did cells with genetic defects in cholesterol uptake by LDLR (familial hypercholesterolemia fibroblasts) or defects in cholesterol exit from the LE/LY that results in cholesterol sequestration (Niemann-Pick type C1 fibroblasts) alter ABCA2 expression.

To investigate whether ABCA2 was coordinately regulated with other sterol-responsive genes, we measured the mRNA levels of several genes in HepG2 liver hepatocarcinoma cells cultured in lipoprotein-deficient medium (LPDS) and in medium supplemented with exogenous sterols. The mRNA levels of both the Low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and Hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A synthase (HMGCS) genes are sensitive to changes in the level of cellular cholesterol. Transcription of these genes is increased when cells are cultured in lipoprotein-deficient medium and repressed when exogenous sterols are added to the culture medium. Up-regulation of the LDLR under lipoprotein-deficient conditions facilitates the increased uptake of extracellular LDL (salvage pathway) to restore cellular cholesterol levels. HMGCS is one of a battery of enzymes whose expression is up regulated under sterol-deficient conditions to synthesize cholesterol de novo from acetyl CoA precursors to restore cellular cholesterol levels (synthetic pathway). Under lipoprotein-deficient culture conditions we measured increased mRNA levels for ABCA2, LDLR and HMGCS that were repressed upon supplementation of culture medium with exogenous cholesterol [46]. The results of these studies provided further evidence that ABCA2 was a sterol-responsive gene involved in cholesterol homeostasis.

To determine whether the constitutive overexpression of ABCA2 in cells alters the expression of other sterol-responsive genes, we generated a CHO cell line that constitutively overexpressed human ABCA2 under control of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter control element. The mRNA of the transcription factor, Sterol response element binding protein-2 (SREBP2), is elevated in cells under sterol-depleted conditions and repressed upon sterol loading [47]. SREBP2 regulates the transcription of both the LDLR as well as other enzymes in the cholesterol synthetic pathway, including HMGCS. We hypothesized that constitutive overexpression of ABCA2 in CHO cells in culture medium containing serum (a source of LDL-derived free cholesterol) would mimic sterol-deprivation. Under these conditions, ABCA2-mediated inhibition of cholesterol trafficking from the LE/LY to cholesterol sensors in the endoplasmic reticulum would activate the cholesterol synthetic pathway and sterol-responsive gene expression would be up regulated. In fact, this was what we observed, i.e., both the LDLR and SREBP-2 mRNAs were elevated in CHO cells overexpressing ABCA2 compared to control CHO cells [46]. The results were recapitulated in a study of the human LDLR promoter coupled to the luciferase gene in CHO cells under the same cell culture conditions. These findings indicated that constitutive overexpression of ABCA2 in cells was sufficient to increase the expression of genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis.

7. Progesterone and U18666a increase expression of ABCA2 mRNA

To gain insight into a functional role for ABCA2, we treated cells with agents that are known to modulate cholesterol homeostasis in the LE/LY. Numerous investigators have reported that treatment of cells in culture with the either the hormone progesterone or a pharmacological reagent, the cationic amphiphile U18666a, resulted in the sequestration of free-cholesterol in the LE/LY [46, 48–50]. More recent work has elucidated the mechanism of U18666a function in inhibiting cholesterol exit from the LE/LY. When an U18666a-derivative, synthesized to contain an ultraviolet light-sensitive benzophenone moiety was added to CHO cells, exposure to UV light induced the crosslinking of the derivative to the sterol-sensing domain (SSD) of the Niemann Pick Type C1 protein (NPC1), abrogating its activity [51]. We hypothesized that these LE/LY cholesterol-sequestering agents would mimic the cellular physiological effects of ABCA2 in cells and may in fact be modulators of ABCA2 expression. Treatment of CHO cells with either progesterone or U18666a resulted in an elevation of ABCA2 mRNA expression over 2-fold and 3.5-fold, respectively [46]. These results indicated that ABCA2 expression is responsive to hormonal and pharmacological agents that sequester cholesterol in the LE/LY.

8. ABCA2 mRNA expression is elevated in Niemann-Pick type C and Familial Hypercholesterolemia fibroblasts

Niemann-Pick Type C disease is a neurological disorder of adolescents due to an autosomal-recessive mutations in either one or both Niemann-Pick -2 (NPC2) and NPC1 genes, which, like ABCA2, are localized to the LE/LY compartment [52]. Cholesterol exit from the LE/LY requires the concerted action of both NPC2 and NPC1 to deliver free cholesterol from the lumen to the limiting membrane of the LE/LY, where it traffics to other intracellular compartments, e.g., Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum, by vesicular and non-vesicular mechanisms [53–55]. Mutant NPC1 fibroblasts have a defect in the delivery of LDL-derived free cholesterol from the LE/LY leading to cholesterol accumulation within this compartment [56, 57]. In addition to cholesterol accumulation, other lipids including sphingomyelin, glycosphingolipids and sphingosine also accumulate in the LE/LY [58, 59]. The expression of the LDLR and the cholesterol synthetic genes are also elevated in mutant NPC1 fibroblasts. Fibroblasts from Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FHC) patients lack functional LDL receptors that are required for LDL uptake from the plasma [60].

We hypothesized that in cultured cells, decreased delivery of LDL-FC to the endoplasmic reticulum in NPC1 fibroblasts or decreased uptake of LDL in FHC fibroblasts would mimic sterol-deprivation and induce cholesterol sequestration and result in activation of ABCA2 expression. Human fibroblasts from normal, FHC and NPC1 patients were cultured in complete medium and following RNA isolation, ABCA2 expression was measured by Northern blot. ABCA2 expression was elevated in NPC1 and FHC fibroblasts compared to normal fibroblasts. These studies were significant in that they represented the first reports that modeled sterol deprivation and ABCA2 expression in cells with genetic defects in cholesterol uptake and exit from the LE/LY. These results are also consistent with the results of experiments described above, where ABCA2 expression was elevated in cells cultured in LPDS containing medium (sterol deprivation).

9. Role of ABCA2 in intracellular cholesterol transport

We discovered that ABCA2 overexpression functioned to sequester cholesterol in the LE/LY compartment. In one set of experiments, we employed a CHO cell line that stably overexpressed ABCA2 [46]. Cells were cultured in lipoprotein-deficient serum (LPDS) to up-regulate LDL receptors and then cultured in increasing concentrations of LDL. Radioactive [14C]oleate fatty acid was added and the esterification of free cholesterol to [14C]cholesteryl ester by ACAT in the ER was determined following extraction of lipids, thin layer chromatography (TLC) and autoradiography. In control CHO cells cholesteryl ester formation increased in a dose-dependent fashion while overexpression of ABCA2 reduced the magnitude of cholesteryl ester formation. Measurement of in vitro ACAT activity confirmed that the decrease in cholesteryl ester was not due to defects in ACAT activity in ABCA2 overexpressing cells. Filipin, a polyene antibiotic that binds to free cholesterol, decorated the abundant cholesterol in the plasma membrane in control cells, as revealed by ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy. In contrast, in cells treated with U18666a or in CHO cells overexpressing ABCA2 there was reduced plasma membrane staining and increased punctate staining of free cholesterol in the cytosol (filipin positive droplets) that was indicative of the LE/LY.

Since ABCA2 is most highly expressed in the brain, we extended our studies to determine the effects of ABCA2 overexpression on cholesterol metabolism in mouse N2a neuroblastoma cells. In the first set of experiments to measure the effects of ABCA2 on uptake and trafficking of LDL-derived cholesterol back to the plasma membrane, we replaced the cholesteryl ester in the LDL particle with radioactive [3H]cholesteryl linoleate ([3H]CL-LDL). We were able to measure the recycling of cholesterol to the plasma membrane by its efflux to the cholesterol-binding molecule 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin [61]. ABCA2 did not significantly alter cholesterol trafficking to the plasma membrane. These results suggested that following endocytosis of LDL/LDLR by receptor-mediated endocytosis into early endosomes, cholesterol recycling back to the plasma membrane occurred mainly between early endosomes and the endocytic-recycling compartment (ERC). Under these experimental conditions (i.e., short duration culture with [3H]CL-LDL), cholesterol recycling to the plasma membrane was not sensitive to ABCA2 activity because the free cholesterol did not reach the more mature acidic endosomes of the LE/LY, where it would be sequestered.

As an alternative approach to determine the effects of ABCA2 overexpression on LDL-derived cholesterol recycling to the plasma membrane, we measured the efflux of lipoprotein-derived cholesterol from the plasma membrane to the physiological cholesterol acceptor apolipoprotein E (ApoE) that was added exogenously to the cell culture medium. When control N2a cells and N2a cells overexpressing ABCA2 were cultured for longer periods with [3H]CL-LDL, we did observe a modest reduction in efflux of free cholesterol from the plasma membrane to ApoE in ABCA2 overexpressing cells. We interpreted from these results that over extended periods of time of cells in culture a greater fraction of cholesterol had trafficked from the ERC to more mature endosomal compartments (LE/LY), where ABCA2 functions in cholesterol sequestration, thereby reducing cholesterol trafficking back to the plasma membrane for efflux to ApoE.

Since non-lipoprotein-derived free cholesterol is recycled from the plasma membrane through the endosomal system through receptor-independent mechanisms, we wanted to determine whether ABCA2 could alter the trafficking of this source of free cholesterol. Our approach was to measure the effect of mobilizing cholesterol at the plasma membrane by reducing its association with the sphingolipid sphingomyelin and measuring free cholesterol trafficking to the plasma membrane for esterification by ACAT. In this experiment we radiolabeled cells overnight to equilibrium with [3H]cholesterol and then treated cells over several hours with bacterial sphingomyelinase (beta SMase) that selectively hydrolyzes plasma membrane sphingomyelin to ceramide. Increased ceramide levels displace cholesterol from membrane phospholipids and enhance its delivery to the ER for esterification [62, 63]. We observed that under these conditions, ABCA2 overexpression reduced cholesteryl ester formation with increasing duration of beta SMase treatment, compared to control N2a cells [61, 64]. In other experiments we determined the effect of depletion of endogenous ABCA2 by RNAi treatment, beta SMase mobilization of plasma membrane cholesterol, cholesterol trafficking to the ER and cholesterol esterification. We utilized the rat schwannoma cell line, D6P2T that expresses high levels of endogenous ABCA2 and stably expressing a lamin control RNAi and a D6P2T cell that stably expresses a rat ABCA2-specific RNAi to silence ABCA2 expression. In contrast to the ABCA2 overexpression studies, reduction of endogenous ABCA2 by RNAi increased the basal level as well as the beta SMase-treated level of cholesteryl ester formation [64]. These studies indicated that changes in ABCA2 expression level were sufficient to modulate non-lipoprotein-derived free cholesterol trafficking to the ER for esterification. Interestingly, addition of the oxysterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC), increased the mobilization of free cholesterol by forcing its displacement from membrane phospholipids [65, 66] and increased cholesterol esterification in both N2a cells and N2a cells overexpressing ABCA2. Importantly, the magnitude of the increase in cholesteryl ester formation mediated by 25-HC alone could be reduced to the level of control untreated N2a cells by co-culture in 25-HC/U18666a containing medium. These data indicated that a fraction of the 25-HC-released cholesterol trafficked through an U18666a-sensitive compartment, i.e., the LE/LY [64].

10. Basal ABCA2 expression is regulated by general transcription factors

In order to understand the mechanisms responsible for regulating the transcription of the human ABCA2 gene, the basal promoter and cis-DNA regulatory control elements have been determined. Over 5 kilobases of the ABCA2 gene containing DNA control elements was analyzed and the basal promoter to 321 base pairs upstream of the ATG (methionine) start codon demonstrated a functional role for two GC-rich boxes containing overlapping early growth response protein-1 (EGR-1) and Sp1 binding sites [14]. When oligonucleotides containing overlapping EGR-1/Sp1 sites were incubated with nuclear extracts from BE(2)-M17 human neuroblastoma cells, binding the Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors was found. When these cells were treated with a protein kinase C activator, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), inducible expression and binding of the EGR-1 transcription factor to the two GC-boxes was detected. Transfection of Sp1 SP3 or Sp4 expression constructs into Drosophila S2 insect cells, which do not express endogenous Sp-factors, induced dose-dependent increases in the expression of the human ABCA2 promoter but transfection of an EGR-1 expression construct alone failed to activate transcription. Co-transfection of an EGR-1 expression construct and an ABCA2 reporter construct into cells resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in expression of the ABCA2 basal promoter. The results from these studies suggested that Sp-factors and Egr-1 factors compete for binding to the GC-boxes in the proximal human ABCA2 promoter to regulate its transcription. This mechanism has also been established for other genes, e.g., SREBP-1a [67]; β(1)-Adrenergic Receptor [68] and Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B [69]. Understanding of the regulation of ABCA2 expression may lead to the identification of molecular targets for therapeutic intervention to prevent or ameliorate diseases due to altered expression of ABCA2.

11. Mechanisms for regulation of intracellular cholesterol homeostasis

Cells maintain intracellular free cholesterol levels and distribution within stringent tolerances by several mechanisms [55]: (1) uptake of native LDL (the major extracellular carrier of cholesterol) by LDL receptors and modified LDL (e.g. oxLDL) by scavenger receptors; (2) removal of excess intracellular cholesterol by efflux transporters ABCA1 and ABCG1 that function in the lipidation of plasma apolipoprotein acceptors to form high-density lipoprotein particles, HDL or “good cholesterol” and circulation to the liver for excretion in the bile [70]; (3) re-esterification of intracellular free cholesterol by ACAT and storage of the cholesteryl esters in cytoplasmic lipid droplets and (4) sequestration of free cholesterol in the LE/LY subcellular compartment.

Due to its hydrophobic nature, very little cholesterol exists in aqueous compartments in cells and is primarily associated with lipid bilayers of membranes, consisting of phospholipids and sphingolipids or associated with sterol binding proteins. The plasma membrane and endocytic-recycling compartment (ERC) are key physiological buffers that harbor most of the free cholesterol in cells [71]. Net expansion of the free cholesterol pools above a threshold level signals transport mechanisms that deliver free cholesterol to the ER for esterification by ACAT [72]. In fact, the steady-state level of free cholesterol in the plasma membrane is set primarily by the capacity of its association with phospholipids [73, 74]. Phospholipid headgroup and acyl chain composition are the primary determinants for the strength of phospholipid-cholesterol interaction in order of sphingomyelin (SM) &gt; phosphatidylserine (PS) &gt; phosphatidylcholine (PC) &gt; phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) [75].

12. Mechanisms of transport of cholesterol from LE/LY to ER cholesterol sensors

Cholesterol traffics from the LE/LY to the ER by both non-vesicular and vesicular pathways [53–55]. Following the hydrolysis of cholesteryl esters contained in lipoproteins by the action of lipoprotein lipase in acidic endosomal compartments and release free cholesterol, it binds to the Niemann-Pick type C protein-2 (NPC2) within the aqueous compartment of the LE/LY lumen [76]. The cholesterol is directly transferred from NPC2 to the Niemann-Pick type C protein-1 (NPC1) protein and into the limiting membrane of the LE/LY. Members of the oxysterol-binding protein family, i.e. oxysterol-binding protein-related protein 1L/ORP1L, sense the cholesterol content in the LE/LY limiting membrane. The fate of cholesterol at this point moves from the LE/LY to intracellular compartments, e.g. from NPC1 compartments to the Trans-Golgi apparatus, by vesicular transport mechanisms involving the SNARE protein complex [53] or directly to the endoplasmic reticulum by non-vesicular transport mechanisms, involving the involving the cholesterol sensor ORP1L [54] or ORP5 [77].

ORP1L functions in the reversible assembly of protein complexes including Rab-7 and RILP proteins that modulate LE/LY vesicle trafficking [54, 78]. ORP1L and NPC1 containing late-endosomes mediate cholesterol export to the ER [78]. Studies suggest that in the non-vesicular transport pathway, the oxysterol binding protein-related protein-5 (ORP5) binds the LE/LY membrane, forming a membrane contact site (MCS) between the LE/LY and ER and mediates desorption of free-cholesterol from the limiting membrane of the LE/LY to the ER membrane. ORP5 can also physically interact with NPC1 to facilitate the transfer of cholesterol to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane [76, 77, 79]. ORP5 is tethered to the ER through its carboxy-terminal domain and binds to the LE/LY membrane by its pleckstrin homology domain (PH) to membrane phospholipids, perhaps phosphoinositide 4 phosphate (PI4P) [80]. ORP5 can bind cholesterol, PI4P and phosphatidylserine (PS) through its oxysterol binding protein related domain (ORD) and recent reports demonstrate that ORP5 can also function in PS/PI4P exchange at ER/plasma membrane MCS [81, 82]. Disassembly of the cholesterol transport protein complex of NPC1, ORP5 and perhaps other proteins may be mediated through the action of the AAA ATPase VPS4/SKD1 upon completion of cholesterol exchange [83].

13. ABCA2 modulates intracellular sphingolipid metabolism in the LE/LY

Recycling of plasma membrane lipids that occurs by constitutive endocytosis and vesicularization of complex glycolipids, complex sphingolipids and cholesterol as well as free cholesterol liberated from LDL after receptor-mediated endocytosis of the LDLR. As depicted in figure 2, following endocytosis of plasma membrane lipids into vesicles, further invagination of endosomal vesicles into intraluminal vesicles and the progressive acidification of the lumen by proton pumps establish distinct compartments, (i.e., early endsosome to late endosome/lysosome maturation) favorable to the enzymatic activities (glucocerebrosidase, acid sphingomyelinase, acid ceramidase). Their catalytic activities are restricted to defined acidic pH optima. The results of the enzymatic activities recycle membrane lipid components (salvage pathway) to other intracellular compartments for structural and signaling functions dependent on lipid metabolism [84] (Figure 2). At the acidic pH of LE/LY (~ 5.0 to 5.5), the action of sphingolipid recycling enzymes (salvage pathway), (e.g. glucocerebrosidase, acid sphingomyelinase and acid ceramidase modulate the catabolism of the membrane sphingolipids derived from the plasma membrane [85].

The central molecule of sphingolipid metabolism is ceramide, which consists of the sphingoid base sphingosine covalently linked to a fatty acid [86]. Ceramide is produced through the action of de novo synthetic pathways as well as through catabolism of more complex sphingolipids in the salvage/recycling pathway in the LE/LY [85]. Ceramide is the precursor for the synthesis of more complex lipids, including sphingomyelin, cerebrosides and complex glycosphingolipids. In the umbrella model both ceramide and free cholesterol, which have small polar head groups and relatively large nonpolar bodies, compete for coverage of their headgroups by phospholipids in the membrane bilayer, to prevent exposure of their nonpolar bodies to aqueous environments [87]. Elevated ceramide levels contained within intraluminal vesicles in the LE/LY displace free cholesterol onto the aqueous free cholesterol acceptor NPC2 protein. NPC2 loaded with free cholesterol then interacts with NPC1 present at the limiting membrane of the LE/LY and transfers free-cholesterol to the limiting membrane of the LE/LY [88].

We hypothesize that the ceramide/sphingosine ratio is a key regulator of the movement of LE/LY cholesterol onto NPC2. Since sphingosine is less effective than ceramide in displacing cholesterol onto NPC2 [89], elevation of sphinogsine in the salvage pathway at the expense of ceramide may reduce free cholesterol loading onto aqueous NPC2, resulting in cholesterol sequestration in the LE/LY. Sphingosine is produced by catabolism of membrane sphingolipids to ceramide (i.e., glucocerebrosidase and sphingomyelinase to ceramide) and by the deacylation of the resulting ceramide by acid ceramidase in the LE/LY [90, 91]. Agents that decrease ceramide levels or increase sphingosine in the LE/LY would be expected to decrease free cholesterol loading onto NPC2 for transfer to NPC1 and cholesterol exit, resulting in cholesterol sequestration in the LE/LY. In fact, Niemann-Pick Type C disease has been characterized as a sphingosine storage disease since elevation of sphingosine levels precedes the sequestration of other lipids associated with the disease [92].

We have reported that modulation of ABCA2 expression level alters the cellular sphingolipid profile by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI/MS/MS). Lipidomics analysis was performed in control N2a cells, in N2a cells that overexpress human ABCA2, in control D6P2T cells that express high levels of endogenous ABCA2 and in RNAi-treated D6P2T [61, 64]. ABCA2 overexpression in mouse N2a neuroblastoma cells exhibited reduced levels of key ceramide metabolites and a greater than two-fold increase in sphingosine levels. Conversely, depletion of endogenous ABCA2 expression in D6P2T cells exhibited elevated the levels of key ceramide metabolites. In addition, we measured an increase in in vitro acid ceramidase activity in microsomes isolated from ABCA2 overexpressing N2a cells. These results suggest that ABCA2 expression may modulate the ceramide: sphingosine ratio necessary for cholesterol loading onto NPC2. In a broader sense, our studies have suggested a convergence between ABCA2 expression, sphingolipid salvage pathway catabolism and cholesterol exit from the LE/LY.

14. Theoretical mechanism of ABCA2 activity in LE/LY in modulation of cholesterol trafficking

It is important to confirm that ABCA2 is a lipid transporter and identify the substrates that are mechanistic in its cholesterol sequestering activity. We hypothesize that ABCA2 modulates cholesterol sequestration in the LE/LY by altering the intraluminal membrane lipid bilayer organization that results in increased acid ceramidase activity in the LE/LY, facilitating ceramide deacylation to sphingosine (Figure 3). At the acidic pH of the LE/LY, enzymes in the sphingolipid salvage pathway are positively charged. In addition, Saposin Activator Proteins (e.g. SAP-C, SAP-D) that facilitate salvage pathway enzymatic activity are also positively charged [90]. Electrostatic interactions between the positively charged SAP proteins and anionic phospholipids [e.g. bis-monoacylglycerol phosphate (BMP), PS, phosphatidylinositol (PI), phosphatidic acid (PA) phosphatidylglycerol (PG)] mediate salvage pathway enzymatic activity (e.g., glucocerebrosidase, acid sphingomyelinase [91, 93, 94] (Figure 4). In addition, acid ceramidase activity also requires the anionic phospholipid interaction with salvage pathway enzymes and SAP proteins. We hypothesize that ABCA2 may function as an anionic phospholipid transporter, facilitating acid ceramidase activity and elevation of LE/LY sphingosine levels.

Interestingly, elevated sphingosine levels in the LE/LY are associated with depleted calcium levels in the LE/LY by modulating calcium channel activity [95, 96]. Elevated calcium levels in the LE/LY are critical for vesicular budding in the non-vesicular pathway of cholesterol trafficking [92]. Depleted calcium levels in the LE/LY may indirectly result in cholesterol sequestration.

In summary, ABCA2 may function in: (1) the intramembrane transport of anionic phospholipids in the LE/LY; (2) increased salvage pathway conversion of ceramide to sphingosine by acid ceramidase activity, (3) increased LE/LY sphingosine levels that result in cholesterol sequestration.

15. ABCA2 and Alzheimer’s disease

ABCA2 has been most strongly linked to Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Three independent groups have identified a genetic link to both early-onset and sporadic late-onset AD. The first group identified a synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (C to T transition in the third nucleotide position of the aspartate codon, rs908832) (C679T) in exon 14 of ABCA2 [97]. A second independent group confirmed the first finding that rs908832 was linked to AD, although in an ethnicity-dependent manner [98]. A more recent third epidemiological study, employing a meta-analysis of eight polymorphisms associated with AD, identified the same rs908832 SNP as a significant risk factor for AD in certain ethnic populations [99]. How the rs908832 SNP mutation modulates ABCA2 function and AD etiology is unknown.

Our laboratory demonstrated that overexpression of ABCA2 in human embryonic kidney cells was associated with increased expression of genes associated with AD, including the amyloid precursor protein (APP) [24]. We also determined that overexpression of ABCA2 in N2a mouse neuroblastoma cells increased transcription from the human APP promoter and resulted in a shift in the subcellular trafficking and processing of the APP holoprotein to early endosomal compartments that promoted Aβ production [100]. In contrast, Michaki et al found that knockdown of endogenous ABCA2 in mammalian cells in vitro, in a Drosophila melanogaster model system and in ABCA2 knockout mice reduced Aβ production by altering nicastrin maturation, a key component of γ-secretase [101]. As described above, ABCA2 overexpression in N2a cells increases sphingosine levels. We determined that elevated sphingosine directly modulated a protein kinase C signaling pathway that regulated APP transcription at the AP-1 and E-box control sites in the basal APP promoter [102]. These results indicate that ABCA2 is a viable target for continuing studies into its role in Alzheimer’s disease pathology.

16. ABCA2 and Cardiovascular disease

Cardiovascular disease is a major risk factor responsible for human mortality. The link between elevated plasma cholesterol and the etiology of cardiovascular disease is unequivocal and reducing circulating plasma cholesterol carried in the LDL particle has been a major pharmacological goal due to its effects on target tissues.

A principal mechanism for initiation and progression of cardiovascular disease involves the cellular response to lipoprotein-derived cholesterol, i.e., low-density lipoprotein (LDL) [103, 104]. The effects of ABCA2 on LDLR expression in N2a cells provides a viable experimental model to study these effects. Steady-state levels of both LDLR mRNA and LDLR protein are decreased when ABCA2 is overexpressed. Immunoprecipitation of biotinylated cell surface proteins indicated that ABCA2 overexpression reduced surface LDLR levels [61]. Measurement of LDL uptake by the LDLR using a fluorescently labeled LDL (DiI-LDL) was also lower in ABCA2 overexpressing N2a cells. Kinetic experiments by metabolic radiolabeling with [35S]methionine and immunoprecipitation of the LDLR indicated that ABCA2 overexpression decreased LDLR stability (i.e., increased metabolic turnover). These results in neuroblastoma cells are in contrast to those described for stable ABCA2 overexpression in CHO cells and suggest that mechanisms of modulation of LDLR by ABCA2 may be cell type/tissue type dependent. However, such results could be significant given the various pharmacological efforts employed to increase plasma LDL clearance (e.g., antibodies to PCSK9, inhibition of internalization of dietary cholesterol through NPC1L1) [105–107]. Although only modest reductions in plasma cholesterol levels were measured in ABCA2 knockout mice [19], these experiments were performed on mice fed standard rodent chow and not chow enriched in cholesterol, which may more accurately assess the effects of ABCA2 on modulation of LDL and plasma cholesterol levels. Importantly, ABCA2 overexpression was sufficient to reduce LDLR and therefore may be an attractive target for LDLR therapies (e.g., selective reduction of endogenous ABCA2 to increase LDLR levels and increase plasma LDL clearance).

The macrophage is the major cell type responsible for cholesterol uptake and metabolism associated with the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis in focal areas of the arterial subendothelial space. In advanced atherosclerotic lesions of cardiovascular disease, cholesterol-induced macrophage apoptosis generates cell debris that can promote the formation of the necrotic core of the atherosclerotic plaque [108]. The lipid-rich plaques may become unstable, increasing the potential risk for thrombosis, cardiac arrest and death. Although the mechanisms regulating cholesterol uptake, efflux, esterification and storage in cytoplasmic neutral lipid droplets in macrophages have been well-characterized, a role for ABCA2 in modulating macrophage response to excess sterol loading, free cholesterol trafficking from the LE/LY compartment to the endoplasmic to the ER and apoptosis has not been fully elucidated.

Excess free cholesterol is toxic to macrophages [109–113]. The principal site of cholesterol-induced toxicity in macrophages is the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), through activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and initiation of apoptosis [112]. In cell culture, sterol loading of macrophages with acetylated LDL (AcLDL) together with a pharmacological inhibition of ACAT re-esterification of free cholesterol to cholesteryl esters produced an increase of free cholesterol-induced toxicity [113]. Significantly, addition of U18666A or progesterone, inhibitors of cholesterol transport from the LE/LY, reduced cholesterol-induced toxicity. Importantly, macrophages from mice, heterozygous for a loss of function mutation in the Niemann-Pick type C1 (NPC1) gene, exhibited reduced cholesterol trafficking from the LE/LY to the ER and were more resistant to cholesterol-induced apoptosis [112]. This in vivo finding suggests that cholesterol trafficking from the LE/LY to the endoplasmic reticulum is a key pathway for modulating cholesterol-induced toxicity in macrophages. ABCA2 may function to modulate cholesterol trafficking from the LE/LY to the ER in macrophages to reduce free cholesterol induced toxicity under conditions of high plasma lipoprotein-derived cholesterol.

A possible mechanistic role for ABCA2 in the etiology of cardiovascular disease was suggested by a study describing the effects of ABCA2 deletion in ABCA2 knockout macrophages generated in LDL receptor knockout mice [114]. They reported diminished lesion size in the aortic root and descending thoracic aorta, and a 3-fold increase in apoptotic cells. While wild-type macrophages developed filipin positive droplets in lysosomal-like compartments, corresponding to free cholesterol accumulation, ABCA2-deficient macrophages displayed an abnormal diffuse distribution of free cholesterol over peripheral regions, as well as an accumulation of neutral sterols in lipid droplets. Finally, in oxLDL-loaded macrophages, a source of lipoprotein-derived cholesterol, apoptosis was increased 2.7-fold. These studies provide additional evidence of a key role for macrophage ABCA2 in modulating free cholesterol sequestration in the LE/LY that may be important for the initiation and progression of cardiovascular disease.

17. Conclusions &amp; Perspectives

To date, the mechanisms for how ABCA2 modulates cholesterol trafficking by sequestration in the LE/LY have not been elucidated. In this report we have postulated several mechanisms that suggest avenues for further study: (1) what lipid substrates are transported across membranes by ABCA2? (2) Are anionic phospholipids translocated across intraluminal membranes of the LE/LY to modulate the salvage pathway of sphingolipid metabolism? (3) Does ABCA2 modulation of sphingosine levels by the action of acid ceramidase in the LE/LY modulate cholesterol loading onto NPC2 and cholesterol levels at the limiting membrane by NPC1? (4) Does ABCA2 modulate calcium channel function and calcium influx from the cytosol into the LE/LY and thereby modulate cholesterol trafficking by the vesicular pathway to other cellular compartments? The answers to these and other questions may provide support for a mechanistic model of ABCA2 activity and suggest possible targets for therapeutic intervention to ameliorate diseases dependent on ABCA2 function. By necessity, balancing this is the concern that neither agonists nor antagonists of transporter function have previously met with a great deal of pharmaceutical success. While in theory, ABC transporters should prove to be viable drug targets, in practice, there have been few successes, particularly in cancer. One issue is certainly the high degree of homology within the family, particularly regions of functional commonality. Because members of the B and C family were shown to be involved in resistance to a range of anticancer drugs, in the 90’s testing of modulators of transporter function were studied in clinical trials. However, clinical efficacy was never realized.

In addition, pleiotropic functionalities have been ascribed to ABCA2 and while there are certainly commonalities, there are few definitive examples of mutations linked with specific disease pathologies. In this regard, associations with neurological and cardiovascular diseases as well as cancer may speak to broad based functions that might be challenging in terms of controlling the therapeutic index of any drug. A successful drug would in all likelihood also need to cross the blood brain barrier, instilling a further series of medicinal challenges. Such issues notwithstanding, the unravelling of ABCA2 structure/function has now provided a springboard to consider the challenges associated with medicinal manipulations of this quite important transporter protein.

Figure 1 ABCA2 Structural Organization in Membrane Bilayer

ABCA2 is synthesized as a single polypeptide consisting of twelve transmembrane (TM) alpha helices that cross the lipid bilayer, spanning the aqueous (luminal) and cytosolic environments. Within the cytosolic compartment, are two nucleotide binding domains (NBD1 and NBD2) that bind and hydrolyze ATP to energize lipid translocation from the between the inner leaflet (IL) and outer leaflet (OL). The NBDs also contain the “ABC signature motif” common to all ATP transporters as well as Walker A and Walker B domains that function in binding hydrolysis of ATP.

Figure 2 Endosomal Maturation and Sphingolipid Salvage

Uptake of plasma membrane sphingolipids and glycolipids from the plasma membrane at coated pits and caveolae fuse with the membranes of early endosomes. Here, the membrane topology reverses as they pinch off intraluminal vesicles, where the lumen is derived from the cytosol. Progressive acidification of endosomes by H+/ATP pumps as they mature results in a dramatic decrease in pH to ~ 4.5 to 5.5 in late-endosomes/lysosomes. This pH is optimal for the activity of sphingolipid salvage pathway enzymes, e.g., Acid sphingomyelinase and Glucocerebrosidase. Catabolism of the complex sphingolipids and glycolipids generate ceramide that displaces free cholesterol from intraluminal membranes onto the soluble cholesterol carrier NPC2, which then transfers the cholesterol to NPC1 on the limiting membrane of the LE/LY. From the limiting membrane cholesterol sensors distribute cholesterol from the LE/LY to intracellular sites including the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum.

Figure 3 Hypothetical Model of ABCA2 Function in the LE/LY

Under reduced ABCA2 expression levels or ABCA2 loss of function (LOF) conditions e.g., ABCA2 RNAi or ABCA2 knockout, the ceramide generated from sphingolipid salvage displaces cholesterol from LE/LY intraluminal vesicles onto soluble NPC2, which then transfers the cholesterol to NPC1 on the limiting LE/LY membrane, where it is distributed to other intracellular sites. Genetic mutations (stable ABCA2 expression under constitutive promoter in cell lines) or pharmacological agents that increase ABCA2 expression (GOF) increase acid ceramidase activity and sphingosine production. Because of its lipid structure, sphingosine is less effective than ceramide in displacing cholesterol onto soluble NPC2 and ultimately transfers to NPC1 on the LE/LY limiting membrane, resulting in cholesterol sequestration in the LE/LY.

Figure 4 Negatively charged phospholipids promote sphingolipid salvage enzymatic activity

On the membranes of LE/LY intraluminal vesicles, the presence of negatively charged phospholipids, e.g., bis-(monoacylglycero) phosphate (BMP), phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylinositol (PI), phosphatidylglycerol interact with positively charged (at acidic pH) Saposin (C and D) proteins and positively charged (at acidic pH) acid ceramidase and glucocerebrosidase to promote salvage pathway enzymatic activity. The mechanism for the establishment and maintenance of negatively charged phospholipid asymmetry has not been determined, but we theorize that it may be due to ABCA2 translocation of these substrates across the intraluminal membrane bilayer.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Ambudkar SV Dey S Hrycyna CA Ramachandra M Pastan I Gottesman MM Biochemical, cellular, and pharmacological aspects of the multidrug transporter Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 39 1999 361 98 10331089
2 Wilkens S Structure and mechanism of ABC transporters F1000Prime Rep 7 2015 14 25750732
3 Albrecht C Viturro E The ABCA subfamily--gene and protein structures, functions and associated hereditary diseases Pflugers Arch 453 5 2007 581 9 16586097
4 Oram JF Tangier disease and ABCA1 Biochim Biophys Acta 1529 1–3 2000 321 30 11111099
5 Laing NM Belinsky MG Kruh GD Bell DW Boyd JT Barone L Testa JR Tew KD Amplification of the ATP-binding cassette 2 transporter gene is functionally linked with enhanced efflux of estramustine in ovarian carcinoma cells Cancer Res 58 7 1998 1332 7 9537224
6 Punzi JS Duax WL Strong P Griffin JF Flocco MM Zacharias DE Carrell HL Tew KD Glusker JP Molecular conformation of estramustine and two analogues Mol Pharmacol 41 3 1992 569 76 1545778
7 Hudes GR Greenberg R Krigel RL Fox S Scher R Litwin S Watts P Speicher L Tew K Comis R Phase II study of estramustine and vinblastine, two microtubule inhibitors, in hormone-refractory prostate cancer J Clin Oncol 10 11 1992 1754 61 1383436
8 Laing N Dahllof B Hartley-Asp B Ranganathan S Tew KD Interaction of estramustine with tubulin isotypes Biochemistry 36 4 1997 871 8 9020786
9 Schmitz G Kaminski WE ABCA2: a candidate regulator of neural transmembrane lipid transport Cell Mol Life Sci 59 8 2002 1285 95 12363033
10 Luciani MF Denizot F Savary S Mattei MG Chimini G Cloning of two novel ABC transporters mapping on human chromosome 9 Genomics 21 1 1994 150 9 8088782
11 Zhao LX Zhou CJ Tanaka A Nakata M Hirabayashi T Amachi T Shioda S Ueda K Inagaki N Cloning, characterization and tissue distribution of the rat ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter ABC2/ABCA2 Biochem J 350 Pt 3 2000 865 72 10970803
12 Vulevic B Chen Z Boyd JT Davis W Jr Walsh ES Belinsky MG Tew KD Cloning and characterization of human adenosine 5′-triphosphate-binding cassette, subfamily A, transporter 2 (ABCA2) Cancer Res 61 8 2001 3339 47 11309290
13 Kaminski WE Piehler A Pullmann K Porsch-Ozcurumez M Duong C Bared GM Buchler C Schmitz G Complete coding sequence, promoter region, and genomic structure of the human ABCA2 gene and evidence for sterol-dependent regulation in macrophages Biochem Biophys Res Commun 281 1 2001 249 58 11178988
14 Davis W Jr Chen ZJ Ile KE Tew KD Reciprocal regulation of expression of the human adenosine 5′-triphosphate binding cassette, sub-family A, transporter 2 (ABCA2) promoter by the early growth response-1 (EGR-1) and Sp-family transcription factors Nucleic Acids Res 31 3 2003 1097 107 12560508
15 Tanaka Y Yamada K Zhou CJ Ban N Shioda S Inagaki N Temporal and spatial profiles of ABCA2-expressing oligodendrocytes in the developing rat brain J Comp Neurol 455 3 2003 353 67 12483687
16 Saito T Yamada K Wang Y Tanaka Y Ohtomo K Ishikawa K Inagaki N Expression of ABCA2 protein in both non-myelin-forming and myelin-forming Schwann cells in the rodent peripheral nerve Neurosci Lett 414 1 2007 35 40 17240058
17 Wang Y Yamada K Tanaka Y Ishikawa K Inagaki N Expression of ABCA2 protein in human vestibular schwannoma and peripheral nerve J Neurol Sci 232 1–2 2005 59 63 15850583
18 Grunewald E Tew KD Porteous DJ Thomson PA Developmental expression of orphan G protein-coupled receptor 50 in the mouse brain ACS Chem Neurosci 3 6 2012 459 72 22860215
19 Mack JT Beljanski V Soulika AM Townsend DM Brown CB Davis W Tew KD “Skittish” Abca2 knockout mice display tremor, hyperactivity, and abnormal myelin ultrastructure in the central nervous system Mol Cell Biol 27 1 2007 44 53 17060448
20 Ile KE Davis W Jr Boyd JT Soulika AM Tew KD Identification of a novel first exon of the human ABCA2 transporter gene encoding a unique N-terminus Biochim Biophys Acta 1678 1 2004 22 32 15093135
21 Fitzgerald ML Okuhira K Short GF 3rd Manning JJ Bell SA Freeman MW ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 contains a novel C-terminal VFVNFA motif that is required for its cholesterol efflux and ApoA-I binding activities J Biol Chem 279 46 2004 48477 85 15347662
22 Mack JT Brown CB Garrett TE Uys JD Townsend DM Tew KD Ablation of the ATP-binding cassette transporter, Abca2 modifies response to estrogen-based therapies Biomed Pharmacother 66 6 2012 403 8 22898081
23 Gottesman MM Ludwig J Xia D Szakacs G Defeating drug resistance in cancer Discov Med 6 31 2006 18 23 17234123
24 Chen ZJ Vulevic B Ile KE Soulika A Davis W Jr Reiner PB Connop BP Nathwani P Trojanowski JQ Tew KD Association of ABCA2 expression with determinants of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 18 10 2004 1129 31 15155565
25 Mack JT Townsend DM Beljanski V Tew KD The ABCA2 transporter: intracellular roles in trafficking and metabolism of LDL-derived cholesterol and sterol-related compounds Curr Drug Metab 8 1 2007 47 57 17266523
26 Boonstra R Timmer-Bosscha H van Echten-Arends J van der Kolk DM van den Berg A de Jong B Tew KD Poppema S de Vries EG Mitoxantrone resistance in a small cell lung cancer cell line is associated with ABCA2 upregulation Br J Cancer 90 12 2004 2411 7 15150577
27 Gillet JP Efferth T Steinbach D Hamels J de Longueville F Bertholet V Remacle J Microarray-based detection of multidrug resistance in human tumor cells by expression profiling of ATP-binding cassette transporter genes Cancer Res 64 24 2004 8987 93 15604263
28 Chapuy B Koch R Radunski U Corsham S Cheong N Inagaki N Ban N Wenzel D Reinhardt D Zapf A Schweyer S Kosari F Klapper W Truemper L Wulf GG Intracellular ABC transporter A3 confers multidrug resistance in leukemia cells by lysosomal drug sequestration Leukemia 22 8 2008 1576 86 18463677
29 Dharmapuri G Doneti R Philip GH Kalle AM Celecoxib sensitizes imatinib-resistant K562 cells to imatinib by inhibiting MRP1–5, ABCA2 and ABCG2 transporters via Wnt and Ras signaling pathways Leuk Res 39 7 2015 696 701 25916699
30 Freeman MR Solomon KR Cholesterol and prostate cancer J Cell Biochem 91 1 2004 54 69 14689582
31 Mastroianni A Bellati C Facchetti G Oldani S Franzini C Berrino F Increased plasma HDL-cholesterol and apo A-I in breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant tamoxifen therapy Clin Biochem 33 6 2000 513 6 11074246
32 Brower V Of cancer and cholesterol: studies elucidate anticancer mechanisms of statins J Natl Cancer Inst 95 12 2003 844 6 12813163
33 Fehrenbacher N Jaattela M Lysosomes as targets for cancer therapy Cancer Res 65 8 2005 2993 5 15833821
34 Li D Su D Xue L Liu Y Pang W Establishment of pancreatic cancer stem cells by flow cytometry and their biological characteristics Int J Clin Exp Pathol 8 9 2015 11218 23 26617845
35 Mack JT Brown CB Tew KD ABCA2 as a therapeutic target in cancer and nervous system disorders Expert Opin Ther Targets 12 4 2008 491 504 18348684
36 de Grouw EP Raaijmakers MH Boezeman JB van der Reijden BA van de Locht LT de Witte TJ Jansen JH Raymakers RA Preferential expression of a high number of ATP binding cassette transporters in both normal and leukemic CD34+CD38− cells Leukemia 20 4 2006 750 4 16467867
37 Steinbach D Gillet JP Sauerbrey A Gruhn B Dawczynski K Bertholet V de Longueville F Zintl F Remacle J Efferth T ABCA3 as a possible cause of drug resistance in childhood acute myeloid leukemia Clin Cancer Res 12 14 Pt 1 2006 4357 63 16857811
38 Efferth T Gillet JP Sauerbrey A Zintl F Bertholet V de Longueville F Remacle J Steinbach D Expression profiling of ATP-binding cassette transporters in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia Mol Cancer Ther 5 8 2006 1986 94 16928819
39 Lou H Dean M Targeted therapy for cancer stem cells: the patched pathway and ABC transporters Oncogene 26 9 2007 1357 60 17322922
40 Soichi O Masanori N Hideo T Kazunori A Nobuya I Jun-ichi K Clinical significance of ABCA2′ a possible molecular marker for oligodendrogliomas Neurosurgery 60 4 2007 707 14 discussion 714 17415208
41 Aberuyi N Rahgozar S Khosravi Dehaghi Z Moafi A Masotti A Paolini A The translational expression of ABCA2 and ABCA3 is a strong prognostic biomarker for multidrug resistance in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia Onco Targets Ther 10 2017 3373 3380 28744141
42 Sakai H Tanaka Y Tanaka M Ban N Yamada K Matsumura Y Watanabe D Sasaki M Kita T Inagaki N ABCA2 deficiency results in abnormal sphingolipid metabolism in mouse brain J Biol Chem 282 27 2007 19692 9 17488728
43 Oram JF Lawn RM ABCA1. The gatekeeper for eliminating excess tissue cholesterol J Lipid Res 42 8 2001 1173 9 11483617
44 Neufeld EB Remaley AT Demosky SJ Stonik JA Cooney AM Comly M Dwyer NK Zhang M Blanchette-Mackie J Santamarina-Fojo S Brewer HB Jr Cellular localization and trafficking of the human ABCA1 transporter J Biol Chem 276 29 2001 27584 90 11349133
45 Zhou C Zhao L Inagaki N Guan J Nakajo S Hirabayashi T Kikuyama S Shioda S Atp-binding cassette transporter ABC2/ABCA2 in the rat brain: a novel mammalian lysosome-associated membrane protein and a specific marker for oligodendrocytes but not for myelin sheaths J Neurosci 21 3 2001 849 57 11157071
46 Davis W Jr Boyd JT Ile KE Tew KD Human ATP-binding cassette transporter-2 (ABCA2) positively regulates low-density lipoprotein receptor expression and negatively regulates cholesterol esterification in Chinese hamster ovary cells Biochim Biophys Acta 1683 1–3 2004 89 100 15238223
47 Hampton RY Cholesterol homeostasis: ESCAPe from the ER Curr Biol 10 8 2000 R298 301 10801406
48 Butler JD Blanchette-Mackie J Goldin E O’Neill RR Carstea G Roff CF Patterson MC Patel S Comly ME Cooney A Progesterone blocks cholesterol translocation from lysosomes J Biol Chem 267 33 1992 23797 805 1429719
49 Metherall JE Waugh K Li H Progesterone inhibits cholesterol biosynthesis in cultured cells. Accumulation of cholesterol precursors J Biol Chem 271 5 1996 2627 33 8576232
50 Liscum L Faust JR The intracellular transport of low density lipoprotein-derived cholesterol is inhibited in Chinese hamster ovary cells cultured with 3-beta-[2-(diethylamino)ethoxy]androst-5-en-17-one J Biol Chem 264 20 1989 11796 806 2745416
51 Lu F Liang Q Abi-Mosleh L Das A De Brabander JK Goldstein JL Brown MS Identification of NPC1 as the target of U18666A, an inhibitor of lysosomal cholesterol export and Ebola infection Elife 4 2015
52 Vanier MT Millat G Niemann-Pick disease type C Clin Genet 64 4 2003 269 81 12974729
53 Urano Y Watanabe H Murphy SR Shibuya Y Geng Y Peden AA Chang CC Chang TY Transport of LDL-derived cholesterol from the NPC1 compartment to the ER involves the trans-Golgi network and the SNARE protein complex Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 43 2008 16513 8 18946045
54 Rocha N Kuijl C van der Kant R Janssen L Houben D Janssen H Zwart W Neefjes J Cholesterol sensor ORP1L contacts the ER protein VAP to control Rab7-RILP-p150 Glued and late endosome positioning J Cell Biol 185 7 2009 1209 25 19564404
55 Iaea DB Maxfield FR Cholesterol trafficking and distribution Essays Biochem 57 2015 43 55 25658343
56 Pentchev PG Brady RO Blanchette-Mackie EJ Vanier MT Carstea ED Parker CC Goldin E Roff CF The Niemann-Pick C lesion and its relationship to the intracellular distribution and utilization of LDL cholesterol Biochim Biophys Acta 1225 3 1994 235 43 8312368
57 Peake KB Vance JE Defective cholesterol trafficking in Niemann-Pick C-deficient cells FEBS Lett 584 13 2010 2731 9 20416299
58 Butler JD Vanier MT Pentchev PG Niemann-Pick C disease: cystine and lipids accumulate in the murine model of this lysosomal cholesterol lipidosis Biochem Biophys Res Commun 196 1 1993 154 9 8216287
59 te Vruchte D Lloyd-Evans E Veldman RJ Neville DC Dwek RA Platt FM van Blitterswijk WJ Sillence DJ Accumulation of glycosphingolipids in Niemann-Pick C disease disrupts endosomal transport J Biol Chem 279 25 2004 26167 75 15078881
60 Schneider WJ The low density lipoprotein receptor Biochim Biophys Acta 988 2 1989 303 17 2655710
61 Davis W Jr The ATP-binding cassette transporter-2 (ABCA2) regulates cholesterol homeostasis and low-density lipoprotein receptor metabolism in N2a neuroblastoma cells Biochim Biophys Acta 1811 12 2011 1152 64 21810484
62 Porn MI Slotte JP Reversible effects of sphingomyelin degradation on cholesterol distribution and metabolism in fibroblasts and transformed neuroblastoma cells Biochem J 271 1 1990 121 6 2222406
63 Luker GD Nilsson KR Covey DF Piwnica-Worms D Multidrug resistance (MDR1) P-glycoprotein enhances esterification of plasma membrane cholesterol J Biol Chem 274 11 1999 6979 91 10066752
64 Davis W Jr The ATP-binding cassette transporter-2 (ABCA2) regulates esterification of plasma membrane cholesterol by modulation of sphingolipid metabolism Biochim Biophys Acta 1841 1 2014 168 79 24201375
65 Miller SC Melnykovych G Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis and esterification by 25-hydroxycholesterol in a macrophage-like cell line: uncoupling by progesterone J Lipid Res 25 9 1984 991 9 6491542
66 Du X Pham YH Brown AJ Effects of 25-hydroxycholesterol on cholesterol esterification and sterol regulatory element-binding protein processing are dissociable: implications for cholesterol movement to the regulatory pool in the endoplasmic reticulum J Biol Chem 279 45 2004 47010 6 15317807
67 Fernandez-Alvarez A Tur G Lopez-Rodas G Casado M Reciprocal regulation of the human sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP)-1a promoter by Sp1 and EGR-1 transcription factors FEBS Lett 582 2 2008 177 84 18068676
68 Bahouth SW Beauchamp MJ Vu KN Reciprocal regulation of beta(1)-adrenergic receptor gene transcription by Sp1 and early growth response gene 1: induction of EGR-1 inhibits the expression of the beta(1)-adrenergic receptor gene Mol Pharmacol 61 2 2002 379 90 11809863
69 Fukada T Tonks NK The reciprocal role of Egr-1 and Sp family proteins in regulation of the PTP1B promoter in response to the p210 Bcr-Abl oncoprotein-tyrosine kinase J Biol Chem 276 27 2001 25512 9 11316810
70 Yokoyama S ABCA1 and biogenesis of HDL J Atheroscler Thromb 13 1 2006 1 15 16505586
71 Mondal M Mesmin B Mukherjee S Maxfield FR Sterols are mainly in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane and the endocytic recycling compartment in CHO cells Mol Biol Cell 20 2 2009 581 8 19019985
72 Xu XX Tabas I Lipoproteins activate acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase in macrophages only after cellular cholesterol pools are expanded to a critical threshold level J Biol Chem 266 26 1991 17040 8 1894601
73 Lange Y Ye J Steck TL How cholesterol homeostasis is regulated by plasma membrane cholesterol in excess of phospholipids Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 32 2004 11664 7 15289597
74 Lange Y Ye J Steck TL Activation of membrane cholesterol by displacement from phospholipids J Biol Chem 280 43 2005 36126 31 16129675
75 Niu SL Litman BJ Determination of membrane cholesterol partition coefficient using a lipid vesicle-cyclodextrin binary system: effect of phospholipid acyl chain unsaturation and headgroup composition Biophys J 83 6 2002 3408 15 12496107
76 Yu XH Jiang N Yao PB Zheng XL Cayabyab FS Tang CK NPC1, intracellular cholesterol trafficking and atherosclerosis Clin Chim Acta 429 2014 69 75 24296264
77 Du X Brown AJ Yang H Novel mechanisms of intracellular cholesterol transport: oxysterol-binding proteins and membrane contact sites Curr Opin Cell Biol 35 2015 37 42 25932595
78 van der Kant R Fish A Janssen L Janssen H Krom S Ho N Brummelkamp T Carette J Rocha N Neefjes J Late endosomal transport and tethering are coupled processes controlled by RILP and the cholesterol sensor ORP1L J Cell Sci 126 Pt 15 2013 3462 74 23729732
79 Shawahna R Uchida Y Decleves X Ohtsuki S Yousif S Dauchy S Jacob A Chassoux F Daumas-Duport C Couraud PO Terasaki T Scherrmann JM Transcriptomic and quantitative proteomic analysis of transporters and drug metabolizing enzymes in freshly isolated human brain microvessels Mol Pharm 8 4 2011 1332 41 21707071
80 Du X Yang H Endosomal cholesterol trafficking: protein factors at a glance Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai) 45 1 2013 11 7 23165745
81 Moser von Filseck J Copic A Delfosse V Vanni S Jackson CL Bourguet W Drin G INTRACELLULAR TRANSPORT. Phosphatidylserine transport by ORP/Osh proteins is driven by phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate Science 349 6246 2015 432 6 26206936
82 Chung J Torta F Masai K Lucast L Czapla H Tanner LB Narayanaswamy P Wenk MR Nakatsu F De Camilli P INTRACELLULAR TRANSPORT. PI4P/phosphatidylserine countertransport at ORP5- and ORP8-mediated ER-plasma membrane contacts Science 349 6246 2015 428 32 26206935
83 Du X Kazim AS Dawes IW Brown AJ Yang H The AAA ATPase VPS4/SKD1 regulates endosomal cholesterol trafficking independently of ESCRT-III Traffic 14 1 2013 107 19 23009658
84 Schulze H Sandhoff K Sphingolipids and lysosomal pathologies Biochim Biophys Acta 1841 5 2014 799 810 24184515
85 Sandhoff K Metabolic and cellular bases of sphingolipidoses Biochem Soc Trans 41 6 2013 1562 8 24256255
86 Gault CR Obeid LM Hannun YA An overview of sphingolipid metabolism: from synthesis to breakdown Adv Exp Med Biol 688 2010 1 23 20919643
87 Ali MR Cheng KH Huang J Ceramide drives cholesterol out of the ordered lipid bilayer phase into the crystal phase in 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine/cholesterol/ceramide ternary mixtures Biochemistry 45 41 2006 12629 38 17029417
88 Wang ML Motamed M Infante RE Abi-Mosleh L Kwon HJ Brown MS Goldstein JL Identification of surface residues on Niemann-Pick C2 essential for hydrophobic handoff of cholesterol to NPC1 in lysosomes Cell Metab 12 2 2010 166 73 20674861
89 Alanko SM Halling KK Maunula S Slotte JP Ramstedt B Displacement of sterols from sterol/sphingomyelin domains in fluid bilayer membranes by competing molecules Biochim Biophys Acta 1715 2 2005 111 21 16126159
90 Schulze H Kolter T Sandhoff K Principles of lysosomal membrane degradation: Cellular topology and biochemistry of lysosomal lipid degradation Biochim Biophys Acta 1793 4 2009 674 83 19014978
91 Kolter T Sandhoff K Principles of lysosomal membrane digestion: stimulation of sphingolipid degradation by sphingolipid activator proteins and anionic lysosomal lipids Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 21 2005 81 103 16212488
92 Lloyd-Evans E Morgan AJ He X Smith DA Elliot-Smith E Sillence DJ Churchill GC Schuchman EH Galione A Platt FM Niemann-Pick disease type C1 is a sphingosine storage disease that causes deregulation of lysosomal calcium Nat Med 14 11 2008 1247 55 18953351
93 Oninla VO Breiden B Babalola JO Sandhoff K Acid sphingomyelinase activity is regulated by membrane lipids and facilitates cholesterol transfer by NPC2 J Lipid Res 55 12 2014 2606 19 25339683
94 Wilkening G Linke T Sandhoff K Lysosomal degradation on vesicular membrane surfaces. Enhanced glucosylceramide degradation by lysosomal anionic lipids and activators J Biol Chem 273 46 1998 30271 8 9804787
95 Shen D Wang X Li X Zhang X Yao Z Dibble S Dong XP Yu T Lieberman AP Showalter HD Xu H Lipid storage disorders block lysosomal trafficking by inhibiting a TRP channel and lysosomal calcium release Nat Commun 3 2012 731 22415822
96 Hoglinger D Haberkant P Aguilera-Romero A Riezman H Porter FD Platt FM Galione A Schultz C Intracellular sphingosine releases calcium from lysosomes Elife 4 2015
97 Mace S Cousin E Ricard S Genin E Spanakis E Lafargue-Soubigou C Genin B Fournel R Roche S Haussy G Massey F Soubigou S Brefort G Benoit P Brice A Campion D Hollis M Pradier L Benavides J Deleuze JF ABCA2 is a strong genetic risk factor for early-onset Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 18 1 2005 119 25 15649702
98 Wollmer MA Kapaki E Hersberger M Muntwyler J Brunner F Tsolaki M Akatsu H Kosaka K Michikawa M Molyva D Paraskevas GP Lutjohann D von Eckardstein A Hock C Nitsch RM Papassotiropoulos A Ethnicity-dependent genetic association of ABCA2 with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 141B 5 2006 534 6 16752360
99 Xu X Wang Y Wang L Liao Q Chang L Xu L Huang Y Ye H Xu L Chen C Shen X Zhang F Ye M Wang Q Duan S Meta-analyses of 8 polymorphisms associated with the risk of the Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 8 9 2013 e73129 24039871
100 Davis W Jr The ATP-binding cassette transporter-2 (ABCA2) increases endogenous amyloid precursor protein expression and Abeta fragment generation Curr Alzheimer Res 7 7 2010 566 77 20704561
101 Michaki V Guix FX Vennekens K Munck S Dingwall C Davis JB Townsend DM Tew KD Feiguin F De Strooper B Dotti CG Wahle T Down-regulation of the ATP-binding cassette transporter 2 (Abca2) reduces amyloid-beta production by altering Nicastrin maturation and intracellular localization J Biol Chem 287 2 2012 1100 11 22086926
102 Davis W Jr The ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter-2 (ABCA2) Overexpression Modulates Sphingosine Levels and Transcription of the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) Gene Curr Alzheimer Res 12 9 2015 847 59 26510981
103 Lusis AJ Atherosclerosis Nature 407 6801 2000 233 41 11001066
104 Maxfield FR Tabas I Role of cholesterol and lipid organization in disease Nature 438 7068 2005 612 21 16319881
105 Gouni-Berthold I PCSK9 antibodies: A new class of lipid-lowering drugs Atheroscler Suppl 18 2015 21 7 25936300
106 Chang TY Chang C Ezetimibe blocks internalization of the NPC1L1/cholesterol complex Cell Metab 7 6 2008 469 71 18522826
107 Ge L Wang J Qi W Miao HH Cao J Qu YX Li BL Song BL The cholesterol absorption inhibitor ezetimibe acts by blocking the sterol-induced internalization of NPC1L1 Cell Metab 7 6 2008 508 19 18522832
108 Libby P Geng YJ Aikawa M Schoenbeck U Mach F Clinton SK Sukhova GK Lee RT Macrophages and atherosclerotic plaque stability Curr Opin Lipidol 7 5 1996 330 5 8937525
109 Tabas I Free cholesterol-induced cytotoxicity a possible contributing factor to macrophage foam cell necrosis in advanced atherosclerotic lesions Trends Cardiovasc Med 7 7 1997 256 63 21235894
110 Kellner-Weibel G Jerome WG Small DM Warner GJ Stoltenborg JK Kearney MA Corjay MH Phillips MC Rothblat GH Effects of intracellular free cholesterol accumulation on macrophage viability: a model for foam cell death Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 18 3 1998 423 31 9514411
111 Yao PM Tabas I Free cholesterol loading of macrophages induces apoptosis involving the fas pathway J Biol Chem 275 31 2000 23807 13 10791964
112 Feng B Yao PM Li Y Devlin CM Zhang D Harding HP Sweeney M Rong JX Kuriakose G Fisher EA Marks AR Ron D Tabas I The endoplasmic reticulum is the site of cholesterol-induced cytotoxicity in macrophages Nat Cell Biol 5 9 2003 781 92 12907943
113 Warner GJ Stoudt G Bamberger M Johnson WJ Rothblat GH Cell toxicity induced by inhibition of acyl coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase and accumulation of unesterified cholesterol J Biol Chem 270 11 1995 5772 8 7890706
114 Calpe-Berdiel L Zhao Y de Graauw M Ye D van Santbrink PJ Mommaas AM Foks A Bot M Meurs I Kuiper J Mack JT Van Eck M Tew KD van Berkel TJ Macrophage ABCA2 deletion modulates intracellular cholesterol deposition, affects macrophage apoptosis, and decreases early atherosclerosis in LDL receptor knockout mice Atherosclerosis 223 2 2012 332 41 22748276
