LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985190R
5004
J Neurochem
J. Neurochem.
Journal of neurochemistry
0022-3042
1471-4159

29049853
5735008
10.1111/jnc.14242
NIHMS913693
Article
Nutrient-driven O-GlcNAc in proteostasis and neurodegeneration
Akan Ilhan *
Olivier-Van Stichelen Stephanie *
Bond Michelle R. *
Hanover John A.
Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD 20850
Corresponding author: jah@helix.nih.gov
* These authors contributed equally to this review

18 10 2017
20 11 2017
1 2018
01 1 2019
144 1 734
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Proteostasis is essential in the mammalian brain where post-mitotic cells must function for decades to maintain synaptic contacts and memory. The brain is dependent on glucose and other metabolites for proper function and is spared from metabolic deficits even during starvation. In this review, we outline how the nutrient sensitive nucleocytoplasmic posttranslational modification O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) regulates protein homeostasis. The O-GlcNAc modification is highly abundant in the mammalian brain, and has been linked to proteopathies, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s. C. elegans, Drosophila, and mouse models harboring O-GlcNAc transferase and O-GlcNAcase knockout (KO) alleles have helped define the role O-GlcNAc plays in development as well as age-associated neurodegenerative disease. These enzymes add and remove the single monosaccharide from protein serine and threonine residues, respectively. Blocking O-GlcNAc cycling is detrimental to mammalian brain development and interferes with neurogenesis, neural migration, and proteostasis. Findings in C. elegans and Drosophila model systems indicate that the dynamic turnover of O-GlcNAc is critical for maintaining levels of key transcriptional regulators responsible for neurodevelopment cell fate decisions. In addition, pathways of autophagy and proteasomal degradation depend on a transcriptional network that is also reliant on O-GlcNAc cycling. Like the quality control system in the endoplasmic reticulum which uses a “mannose-timer” to monitor protein folding, we propose that cytoplasmic proteostasis relies on an “O-GlcNAc timer” to help regulate the lifetime and fate of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. O-GlcNAc-dependent developmental alterations impact metabolism and growth of the developing mouse embryo and persist into adulthood. Brain-selective KO mouse models will be an important tool for understanding the role of O-GlcNAc in the physiology of the brain and its susceptibility to neurodegenerative injury.

Graphical abstract

Proteostasis is essential in the mammalian brain where post-mitotic cells must function for decades to maintain synaptic contacts and memory. The brain is dependent on glucose and other metabolites for proper function and is spared from metabolic deficits even during starvation. In this review, we outline how the nutrient sensitive nucleocytoplasmic posttranslational modification O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) regulates protein homeostasis. This cyclic modification is coordinately regulated with other PTMs such as phosphorylation to regulate the required intricacies of cellular processes. Deregulation of PTMs including O-GlcNAc leads to several pathologies that are associated with neurodegeneration.


Introduction

George Cahill, in his groundbreaking article “Starvation in Man” (Cahill, 1970) emphasized that the brain is the last organ to succumb to starvation owing to its strong dependence on glucose as a source of energy. The mammalian brain has evolved such that it has an unusually high requirement for glucose and does not easily tolerate its absence. In humans, the brain accounts for only about 2% of the total body weight, yet it consumes about 20% of glucose-derived energy making it the main consumer of glucose (Erbsloh et al., 1958). In addition, specialized centers in the brain sense central and peripheral glucose levels and regulate glucose metabolism through the vagal nerve as well as neuroendocrine signals. Glucose supply to the brain is under tight regulation by neurovascular coupling and enters the brain from the blood by crossing the blood-brain-barrier through glucose transporters (e.g., GLUT1). Glucose and other metabolites such as lactate are distributed through a highly coupled metabolic network of brain cells. The brain’s dependence on glucose metabolism to maintain neurotransmitter release, axonal transport, and cell survival has important implications for understanding human disease. In diabetics, dangerously high or low glucose can lead to diabetic coma. The high flux of glucose required for maintenance of the central nervous system may also be linked to the formation of reactive oxygen species causing oxidative damage in the brain. Since most neurons are post-mitotic, this is thought to impact the brain disproportionately. Moreover, there is a growing awareness that adult neurogenesis may be more important than once recognized, particularly in the dentate gyrus, hippocampus, and olfactory bulb. Since neurogenesis requires significant amount of energy from glucose, abnormal levels of glucose supply could perturb healthy neurogenesis in these regions.

Neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) have been directly linked with altered brain glucose consumption. It has been estimated that 5.4 million people in the US currently have AD. The risk of AD increases with age, and so by 2050, the Alzheimer’s Association estimates that between 11 and 16 million Americans will have the disease, with one new case appearing every 33 seconds (Association, 2017). The economic cost of AD is already immense and disproportionally high in countries with longer life expectancies. While some estimates suggest that the total worldwide economic cost of dementias represents about 1% of world gross domestic product, the human cost of these diseases is much greater. In this review, we evaluate the accumulating body of evidence suggesting that a signaling pathway that integrates the flux of nutrients including glucose, glutamine, and acetyl-CoA, and terminates in O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) addition to proteins, may contribute to the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. With a central role in the regulation of gene expression, cellular signaling, protein synthesis, and degradation, the nutrient-responsive O-GlcNAc pathway may represent a unique therapeutic option for diagnosis and management of these disorders. But what makes the brain uniquely sensitive to deregulation of O-GlcNAc metabolism?

A. Protein aggregates in neurodegenerative disease

Human neurodegenerative diseases are associated with deposits of aggregated proteins. These aggregates and their designations are summarized in Figure 1 (right side). As Figure 1 suggests, the proteostasis networks that maintain protein folding involve every aspect of the life cycle of proteins involved. This includes transcription, translation, folding, posttranslational modification, targeting and degradation. It has been noted that many of the proteins that are involved in aggregation in neurodegenerative diseases have been found to be O-GlcNAc modified. The known consequences of these proteins’ modification are discussed below in sections relevant to the individual OGT substrates. However, the question of whether these protein aggregates are pathogenic or simply represent a cellular response to stress is currently unknown. Parkinson’s disease (PD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington’s disease (HD), and other polyglutamine diseases each have characteristic deposits of protein aggregates in the brain (Ross and Poirier, 2005). These deposits can be cytoplasmic, nuclear, or even extracellular. In some cases, this protein aggregation results from a mutation in a disease-related protein, processing of those proteins, or elevation in their levels. Even proteins that are not associated with disease can aggregate in inclusion bodies and cause toxicity.

Neuritic plaques in AD contain mainly Aβ peptide, a proteolytic product of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). AD is also characterized by the accumulation of intracellular aggregates of the microtubule-associated protein tau, termed neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Tauopathies such as fronto-temporal dementia with Parkinsonism can be caused by mutations in the tau protein itself. PD, which is characterized by tremor, loss of motor function, and autonomic instability, is caused by degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra of the midbrain. Point mutations or increased gene expression of the α-synuclein gene cause an autosomal dominant form of PD (Levine et al., 2017), whereas recessive PD can be caused by mutations in the genes encoding several proteins including parkin, DJ-1, or PINK1. Mutations in parkin and PINK1, key regulators of neuronal mitophagy, are associated with cell death correlated with immobile mitochondria unable to be sequestered (Wang et al., 2011). These recessive forms of PD are presumably induced by a loss-of-function of the associated proteins. The aggregates that form in PD are Lewy bodies, cytoplasmic perinuclear inclusion bodies in neurons, in which the α-synuclein protein is a major constituent (Ross and Poirier, 2004; Ross and Poirier, 2005). ALS is characterized by degeneration of motor neurons leading to progressive motor weakness with ubiquitinated protein aggregates present in patient brains. HD is caused by genomic expansion of a triplet CAG repeat coding for polyglutamine near the N-terminus of the huntingtin protein. Protein inclusions containing huntingtin and other proteins are present in regions of the brain that degenerates and there is a good correlation between the extent of triplet expansion and inclusion density. Other polyglutamine diseases such as spino-cerebellar ataxia (SCA) present with similar aggregates containing expanded polyglutamine repeats in the protein Atx-1. The Prion diseases are also associated with amyloid plaques which form both intra- and extra-cellularly by self-propagation of an abnormal protein conformation (Ross and Poirier, 2004; Ross and Poirier, 2005).

Domains common to neurodegenerative protein aggregates

Many of the proteins that are prone to aggregation in neurodegenerative diseases have domains that can be characterized as intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). These intrinsically disordered segments are also often the sites of posttranslational modification. Such domains are dynamic structures that interconvert between collapsed and extended structures on a timescale that differs from globular proteins. IDPs are relatively depleted in bulky hydrophobic amino acids and enriched in polar residues and structure-breaking amino acids like Pro and Gly. Aβ is about 20% disordered, tau is greater than 80% disordered, α-synuclein is greater than 90% disordered, and the ataxins range from 50–90% disordered (Uversky, 2015). Not surprisingly, many of the chaperones and other proteins involved in maintaining proteostasis are also extensively disordered (Uversky, 2015). Some of these proteins have an intrinsic propensity to adopt pathological conformations and persistently high concentrations, interaction with chaperones, or point mutations can initiate the aggregation cascade. Disruption of protein folding or protein degradation can contribute to aggregation and posttranslational modifications such as advanced glycation products, deamidation, and phosphorylation may influence the aggregation process (Ross and Poirier, 2005) (Figure 1). O-GlcNAcylation, like glycation, may be elevated under conditions of hyperglycemia and other forms of stress, although this is not always the case (Yang and Qian, 2017). The present review focuses on the many influences of O-GlcNAcylation on neurodegeneration through its role on pathways including protein folding, phosphorylation, and cellular protein degradation pathways. O-GlcNAc transferase, the enzyme responsible for the addition of O-GlcNAc to target proteins, has a propensity to interact with IDPs including many of those proteins that form aggregates in neurodegenerative disease (Trinidad et al., 2012; Bond and Hanover, 2015). In the following sections, we summarize the accumulating evidence for the involvement of O-GlcNAc metabolism in neurodegenerative toxicity. A timeline detailing the sequence of findings leading to our current understanding of the importance of O-GlcNAc cycling in neurodegeneration is shown in Figure 2.

B. The enzymes of O-GlcNAc cycling and roles in neurophysiology

1. Hexosamine signaling pathway in the brain

Besides its function as an energy source, glucose is also an important precursor for the synthesis of downstream metabolites. Through metabolic pathways including glycolysis and the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP), the brain takes advantage of glucose as its primary energy source and converts this simple sugar to a myriad of critical metabolites. The HBP is an essential player in brain physiology with 2 to 3% of glucose (Simpson et al., 2008) converted to the pathway’s ultimate product, UDP-GlcNAc (Bouché et al., 2004) . The synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc integrates lipid, energy, and nucleotide metabolism making the nucleotide sugar sensitive to cellular metabolite flux (Hanover et al., 2012).

The concentration of nutrient-sensitive UDP-GlcNAc impacts many glycosylation processes, with those that are cyclic arguably the most affected by changes in metabolic flux. Glycosyltransferases utilize nucleotide sugars such as UDP-GlcNAc as substrates to add carbohydrates to proteins that ultimately reside both intra- and extra-cellularly. OGT utilizes UDP-GlcNAc to post translationally modify intracellular serine and threonine residues with O-GlcNAc. Tight regulation of O-GlcNAc cycling relies not only on the concentrations of UDP-GlcNAc and OGT but also on O-GlcNAcase (OGA), the enzyme responsible for the modification’s removal. While modification of some proteins is sub-stoichiometric, others are more-or-less permanently modified by O-GlcNAc supporting a varied role in protein structure, localization, and function In this way, this single monosaccharide post translational modification (PTM) can dynamically respond to changes in glucose-dependent cellular metabolism and modify it’s target proteins thereby potentially acting as an “O-GlcNAc timer” for the processes it influences.

Along with the pancreas, the brain is the most heavily O-GlcNAcylated tissue, consistent with its high glucose consumption. In fact, 40% of all neuronal proteins and 19% of synaptosomal proteins are O-GlcNAc modified. Moreover, mRNAs encoding OGT and OGA are highly enriched in the brain (Kreppel et al., 1997; Lubas et al., 1997; Gao et al., 2001). O-GlcNAc modifies thousands of proteins including those correlated with neurodegenerative disease such as amyloid precursor protein and tau (associated with pathophysiology of AD), α-synuclein (component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson’s Disease, PD)(Spillantini et al., 1997; Wang et al., 2010a), superoxide dismutase (Sprung et al., 2005), and neurofilament proteins (Dong et al., 1993) (involved in amyotropic lateral sclerosis, ALS). How is O-GlcNAc regulated in the brain? Do O-GlcNAc levels change globally or only on a subset of proteins upon neurodegeneration? Which of the many roles of O-GlcNAc are important in neurodegeneration? These are some of the questions that have come under scrutiny and are summarized in (Table 1).

2. OGT: isoforms and localization

It is intriguing that O-GlcNAc addition is regulated by a single, ubiquitously expressed, essential enzyme, OGT. Elimination of OGT is lethal in most organisms and in dividing cells: generation of Ogt KO stem cells and Ogt KO mice has been unsuccessful. Interestingly, two recent papers have successfully removed OGT in post-mitotic adult neurons, thus opening a new area to examine how O-GlcNAcylation of proteins regulates normal brain function in viable animals.

OGT expression, localization, and regulation

The Ogt gene produces several splice variants differing at the amino (N) terminal region in mammals with splicing and multiple start codons (Hanover et al., 2012; Abramowitz et al., 2014). Indeed, in Drosophila, levels of the genes encoding OGT and a small number of other transcripts are directly modulated by the function of spliceosome (Ashton-Beaucage et al., 2010; Hanover et al., 2012; Abramowitz et al., 2014).

The three canonic isoforms that are produced from alternative start codons in the splice variants of mammalian Ogt are found in the nucleus (ncOGT and sOGT), cytoplasm (ncOGT and sOGT), or mitochondria (mOGT). The largest isoform, ncOGT, is ~110 kDa and contains 12 tetratricopeptide (TPR) repeats at the N-terminus. The structure of the dimeric ncOGT with its 12 TPR repeats is shown in Figure 3A. The TPR repeats form a structure like the armadillo repeats of importin alpha in which Asn residues line a concave surface of the molecule and interact with target proteins as demonstrated by recent crystallographic findings (Lazarus et al., 2013). For example, the TPR repeats of OGT interact with regions of the unstructured domains of nucleoporins (Cordes and Krohne, 1993) suggesting that OGT will also have an affinity for unstructured regions of other substrates (Cordes and Krohne, 1993; Lubas and Hanover, 2000; Bond and Hanover, 2015). The 102 kDa mOGT has a unique mitochondrial targeting sequence and 9 TPR domains. And, the smallest isoform, sOGT, is about 75 kDa with only 2.5 TPR domains (Lazarus et al., 2006; Lazarus et al., 2009). Given that the sOGT isoform lacks the dimerization motif found in ncOGT and mOGT, it is likely to exist in complexes either as a monomer or higher order multimers (Jinek et al., 2004).

N-terminal variation in OGT’s TPR domains influences substrate recognition (Lubas and Hanover, 2000) and, therefore, enzyme localization, and cellular activity. Indeed, while all splice variants include the same linker region and the C-terminal catalytic domain responsible for transferase activity, the shortest isoform, sOGT, has not been shown to add O-GlcNAc to proteins in vivo (Lazarus et al., 2006). mOGT targets the inner mitochondrial membrane and displays different substrate specificity from ncOGT (Love et al., 2003; Lazarus et al., 2006). Some literature suggests that ncOGT, rather than mOGT, can catalyze O-GlcNAcylation of the mitochondrial proteome (Trapannone et al., 2016); however, recent work identified that mOGT was required for glycosylation of specific mitochondrial proteins (Sacoman et al., 2017). Interestingly, overexpression of mOGT caused apoptosis in a variety of cell lines (Shin et al., 2011) supporting that tight regulation of OGT and its downstream functions is essential for cellular homeostasis.

Modulation of OGT expression or activity through UDP-GlcNAc concentration, transcription, and post-translational modification not only influences O-GlcNAc addition but also other properties. For example, the OGT C-terminal domain was shown to have an unusual UDP-GlcNAc-dependent protease activity against epigenetic cell cycle regulator HCF-1 (Capotosti et al., 2011). The posttranslational modification of OGT itself is critical for modulating OGT activity in cells, such as neuronal cells. Phosphorylation of serine 3 or 4 by GSK3β is necessary for OGT activity and phosphorylation of Thr144 by AMPK plays a role in OGT substrate selectivity. Interestingly, both GSK3β and AMPK are O-GlcNAc modified by OGT showing a feedback loop in activity modulation (Kreppel et al., 1997; Kaasik et al., 2013; Bullen et al., 2014). Cysteine (S) nitrosylation inhibits OGT activity in resting immune cells and in neuroblastoma cells. S-nitrosylation of OGT is increased by β-amyloid peptide treatment, which results in reduced O-GlcNAcylation and increased tau phosphorylation in human neuroblastoma cells (Ryu and Do, 2011; Ryu et al., 2016)

OGT and its binding partners in the brain

Recent advances in proteomics have accelerated the discovery of protein-interaction networks and OGT has emerged as a common binding partner for proteins implicated in diseases associated with human neurodegeneration. Interactions that have been mapped on the OGT protein are summarized in Figure 3A and described below.

There is evidence that an abnormal cell cycle precedes the other known hallmarks of neurodegenerative diseases and cell cycle aberrations are a known part of AD etiology and will be discussed in more depth in later sections. OGT interacts with proteins required for regulation of gene expression and cell fate decisions including HCF-1, mSin3A, and TETs (Wysocka et al., 2003; Ruan et al., 2012; Deplus et al., 2013). Among these proteins, HCF-1 is a transcriptional co-regulator necessary for cell cycle progression. Mature HCF-1 is O-GlcNAcylated and proteolytically cleaved by OGT. Following its cleavage by OGT, the N and C termini of HCF-1 functions in G1 and M phase of cell cycle, respectively (Capotosti et al., 2011). Moreover, the OGT interaction with HCF-1 regulates gene expression during G1-S progression. In addition, transcriptional regulation through either histone modification or direct modification of DNA appears to be influenced by OGT, which interacts with the histone deacetylase complex through corepressor Sin3A to promote effective, specific gene silencing (Yang et al., 2002). Further, CARM1 histone methyltransferase interacts with OGT and is O-GlcNAc modified for correct CARM1 localization during mitosis (Sakabe and Hart, 2010). Finally, ten-eleven translocation (TET) 5-mC hydroxylases promote DNA demethylation thereby functioning to modulate transcriptional activation and repression. The importance of the OGT and TET interaction is largely unknown, especially in the nervous system where one of the earliest reports about TET mediated hydroxymethylation was discovered (Kriaucionis and Heintz, 2009).

Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia is directly linked to an ATTCT pentanucleotide expansion in intron 9 of ATXN10 (SCA10). The ataxin-10 (Atx-10) protein is predicted to have a helical armadillo-like three-dimensional structure like the Huntingtin protein. This motif is thought to regulate protein-protein interactions, including the interaction of Atx-10 with ncOGT in the cytoplasm. In tissues, such as the pancreas, this interaction modulates OGT activity as Atx-10 competes with known ncOGT inhibitor, sOGT. Interestingly, while sOGT expression is high in the pancreas, it is absent in the brain (Andrali et al., 2005; März et al., 2006) suggesting that the Atx-10 interaction with ncOGT in neuronal tissue may alter OGT activity or protein binding in some other way. Indeed, both OGT and Atx-10 are known to modulate cytokinesis through interaction with Aurora-B, which phosphorylates Atx-10. Intriguingly, knockdown of either Atx-10 or OGT causes cytokinesis defects (Slawson et al., 2005; Li et al., 2011). The OGT/Atx-10 protein interaction is promising for understanding these proteins’ role in neuronal maintenance and neurodegeneration. What is learned about this axis may be applied to better understand the role OGT plays in interactions with other proteins containing the aforementioned secondary structure.

Along with the dynamic regulation of the enzyme in neuronal cells and its high level of expression in brain tissue, the OGT gene maps to the locus associated with the Parkinsonian dystonia (DYT3) region in mammals (Németh et al., 1999; Shafi et al., 2000), supporting its foundational importance for ensuring efficacy of neuronal nutrient-sensitive processes. Gene mutations in an important cell cycle related transcription factor, THAP1, have been linked with DYT6 dystonia (Fuchs et al., 2009). THAP1 is an atypical DNA-binding zinc finger protein known to regulate cell proliferation by binding to specific DNA regions and is part of a family of proteins that affect pRB/E2F, proposed to be involved in PD cell death (Houlden et al., 2010). Like OGT, which is highly expressed in the nervous system, THAP1 protein is found in the cerebral cortex, thalamus, substantia nigra and hypothalamus (Zhao et al., 2013). The binding of OGT to THAP1 is critical for proper timing of the G1-S cell cycle progression (Cayrol et al., 2007; Mazars et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2013) Together, these connections suggest that understanding the interaction between OGT and THAP1 may lead us to better understand dystonias.

OGT, NF-kB, and MIBP1 are evolving as potential theraputic targets for treatment of neuronal pathologies. c-MYC intron binding protein (MIBP1) is highly expressed in postmitotic neurons and its appropriate expression is required for perinatal development of the brain as well as immunological processes. This transcription factor binds to various genomic regions including the first intron of the c-MYC gene and its most prominent binding partner, OGT, is responsible for its O-GlcNAcylation. MIBP1, whose activity is suppressed by O-GlcNAcylation, binds and decreases of the transcription of NF-kB target genes. Loss of the MIBP1 154-amino acid region mapped to bind OGT yields an increase in MIBP1-dependent suppression of NF-kB pathway target genes (Iwashita et al., 2012). Interestingly, NF-kB activation is dependent on O-GlcNAc modification of the c-Rel subunit (Ramakrishnan et al., 2013). Expressed in many cells including neurons in the cortex and hippocampus (O’Neill and Kaltschmidt, 1997), NF-kB is a critical mediator of numerous physiological processes including inflammation and the cell cycle and plays a role in neurological disorders (Shih et al., 2015). OGT, through its interaction with the proteins above, has been shown to be a key regulator of cellular homeostasis via its influence on gene expression. Thus, deregulation of OGT and related mechanisms may be associated with the cascade of events leading to neurodegeneration.

3. OGA: isoforms and localization

OGA was first identified as a hyaluronidase triggering an immune response in a meningioma patient, therefore named as MGEA5 (Meningioma-Expressed Antigen 5), (Heckel et al., 1998). Subsequently, purified OGA was shown to be the enzyme previously described as hexosaminidase C, a glycosidase acting at neutral pH (Braidman et al., 1974). Oga is located on human chromosome 10q24 (mouse Chr 19) (Gao et al., 2001) in a locus associated with AD (Myers et al., 2000) and a predisposition to type II diabetes in the Mexican American subpopulation (Farook et al., 2002; Lehman et al., 2005). While ACEVIEW and other public databases annotate multiple isoforms, only two have been studied extensively and have varied levels of activity in vitro (Kim et al., 2006; Macauley and Vocadlo, 2009). OGA-L (OGA long, 130 kDa) is localized to the cytoplasm. OGA-S (OGA short, 75 kDa) is predominantly found in the nucleus (Comtesse et al., 2001) and associated with lipid droplets (Keembiyehetty et al., 2011) with the short 11- amino acid extension of the linker domain important for targeting to lipid droplets.

Figure Figure 3B depicts a model summarizing the structure of human OGA, which was derived from three X-Ray density maps (Elsen et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Roth et al., 2017). The protein has an interlocking dimer interface composed of helices from the opposing monomer. Both OGA isoforms harbor the N-terminal catalytic domain responsible for glycosidase activity, but the C-terminal domains are different. Indeed, while OGA-L was originally published to have C-terminal Histone Acetyl Transferase (HAT) activity in vitro, recent work demonstrates that the domain is a pseudo-HAT as OGA-L does not function this way in vivo (Toleman et al., 2004; Rao et al., 2013). However, the pseudo-HAT domain extends from the interlocking helices and could potentially alter the conformation of the catalytic domains and is critical for binding chromatin. The linker region between catalytic and pseudo-HAT domains of OGA-L is a caspase 3 site cleaved during apoptosis (Butkinaree et al., 2008).

While OGA is thought to interact with at least 90 proteins, (Groves et al., 2017) further studies will be required to understand the consequences of OGA deregulation on individual proteins. Importantly, it has been shown that the two canonic isoforms of OGA are expressed differentially during rat development; OGA-S seems more abundant in the first 19 days and then disappears whereas the OGA-L levels are maintained throughout development (Liu et al., 2012). Further, recent studies knocking out OGA in mice revealed critical roles for OGA in development – including development of the brain (Yang et al., 2012; Keembiyehetty et al., 2015; Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017). Thus, OGA – and by extension O-GlcNAc cycling – plays a critical role in neuronal homeostasis.

C. Genetic approaches targeting O-GlcNAc in neurodegenerative disease

Manipulation of OGT and OGA have been explored in isolated tissues, cultured cells, and model organisms (Summarized in Table 1). To date, the data from different neurodegenerative disease models suggest that elevated O-GlcNAc levels can both increase or attenuate symptoms. These conflicting viewpoints call for a critical review of the literature, examination of experimental conditions, and an appropriate level of weight for findings in animals other than humans. Importantly, proteins associated with neurodegenerative disease including amyloid precursor peptide (APP) (Griffith et al., 1995), tau, and α-synuclein are O-GlcNAc modified (Arnold et al., 1996; Cuervo et al., 2004) with varied consequences. In this section, we focus on results from studies in which OGT and OGA were globally manipulated in whole organisms. These data support that the enzymes of O-GlcNAc cycling and O-GlcNAc itself impact brain development and neuronal plasticity.

1. C. elegans: O-GlcNAc as a regulator of proteostasis and proteotoxicity

OGT-1 and OGA-1 were identified as regulators of proteotoxicity in multiple C. elegans models of neurodegenerative disease (Wang et al., 2012). Phenotypes in transgenic models of tauopathy, amyloid beta-peptide, and polyglutamine expansion were ameliorated in animals lacking OGT-1 while loss of OGA-1 enhanced some phenotypes. These findings appear to contradict some of the findings from rodent studies wherein increases in O-GlcNAc through OGA inhibition appear to improve tau-driven neurodegeneration phenotypes (see section below) (Yuzwa et al., 2008; Yuzwa et al., 2012) . While developmental regulation may explain some differences in findings from mammals to C. elegans, the variation in phenotypes scored and the life stage at which O-GlcNAc was perturbed may also contribute.

Perturbation in O-GlcNAc alters proteostasis in C. elegans (see section on autophagy), a process which is critical for neuronal health. Transcription of proteasome subunit genes is induced in response to proteasome dysfunction caused by pathogen or proteasome inhibitor exposure. This pathway may also be induced by proteotoxic challenge and that response requires SKN-1, a transcription factor related to mammalian Nrf1/2. Intriguingly, Nrf1/2 is negatively regulated by O-GlcNAcylation and is thus an ideal target for pharmacological intervention (Chen et al., 2015).

2. Drosophila: O-GlcNAc and epigenetic regulation of development, cell cycle, and circadian rhythm

The Drosophila ogt(sxc) was discovered as a homeotic gene about 3 decades ago (Ingham, 1984). Subsequent studies underscored its importance as a member of the Polycomb repressor complex (PRC). Polyhomeotic (Ph) is O-GlcNAc modified and in the absence of OGT and, Ph forms large aggregates resulting in a non-functional PRC. Consequently, Hox genes were inappropriately expressed throughout the embryo (Gambetta et al., 2009b; Gambetta and Muller, 2014) resulting in ogt mutant embryos arresting during development.

Epigenetic regulation of gene activation is also partly regulated by O-GlcNAcylation. Trithorax (TRX), Absent Small or Homeotic 1 (ASH1), and SET1 O-GlcNAc modified. In Drosophila lacking OGA, increased O-GlcNAc results in changes in the expression of cell cycle related genes (Akan et al., 2016). Cell cycle dysregulation is an early indicator of neurodegeneration and these findings support O-GlcNAc as critical for appropriate developmental and cell cycle dynamics. In addition, work in Drosophila has revealed a role for O-GlcNAc in regulating circadian rhythm (Kim et al., 2012; Kaasik et al., 2013). Reduction in OGT levels in clock cells shortened circadian rhythm. Drosophila PERIOD (dPER) is O-GlcNAc modified this modification and stabilize and locates dPER in cytoplasm, where it is inactive. Upon reduction in O-GlcNAc levels, dPER could go to nucleus where it functions to repress its own transcription by inhibiting the activity of CLOCK/CYCLE heterodimer (Kim et al., 2012). Based on these results, O-GlcNAcylation seems to regulate proper circadian timing. Such disturbance in daily rhythms involing sleep, activity and hormone release have been linked to human neurodegenerative disease and therefore may represent a possible contributor to neurodegenerative disease progression (Association, 2017).

3. Mouse: neurodegenerative phenotypes associated with perturbation of O-GlcNAc

To decipher the role of O-GlcNAc and the proteins responsible for its cycling, numerous studies have used genetics to alter OGT and OGA expression in mice. Although full body knockout of Ogt and Oga are lethal in mice (Shafi et al., 2000; Keembiyehetty et al., 2015), tissue specific approaches have been fruitful. These studies have allowed researchers to better understand the role of O-GlcNAc cycling in the brain.

Ogt knockout in mouse models

Knockout of Ogt in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells is lethal requiring knockout of Ogt in selected tissues (Shafi et al., 2000; Hanover et al., 2003; O’Donnell et al., 2004). Using Syn1-Cre driver, O’Donnell et al. triggered Ogt deletion in neuronal cells (O’Donnell et al., 2004). While heterozygote animals exhibited no phenotypes, homozygous knockout of Ogt was rare and animals rarely survived past nursing. Further, those that survived were considerably smaller with reduced motility compared to wild type (WT) littermates. Biochemical analysis demonstrated that tau expression and phosphorylation was increased in animals lacking Ogt in neurons. These findings suggest a possible mechanistic link between O-GlcNAc and neurodegeneration given that tau phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are linked in vivo.

More recently, excitatory neuron-specific knockouts have been generated in mice by multiple groups who took advantage of an αCamKII-Cre driver (Lagerlöf et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016). These two studies looked at animal development, glucose tolerance, and later physiological phenotypes. Surprisingly, the findings from the studies and interpretations are divergent. Wang, et al. demonstrated that animals without Ogt in excitatory neurons had reduced weight at 7 weeks of age (Wang et al., 2016). In contrast, mice in the related study showed increased weight gain and a significant amount of fat 3 weeks after birth (Lagerlöf et al., 2016). The weight gain in the latter was attributed to satiety defects and could be regulated by food restriction. Major loss of OGT was localized to the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hippocampus and Lagerlof and colleagues concluded that loss of OGT regulates the excitatory synaptic transmission in PVN neurons (Lagerlöf et al., 2016). Conversely, Wang et al. showed significant increases in neuronal cell death by 6 months after Ogt ablation (Wang et al., 2016). This coincided with decreases in brain size, cortical thickness, and neuronal density. Loss of OGT yielded mice that recapitulate neurodegenerative phenotypes with increased cell cycle and immune response, phosphorylation of tau, appearance of tau aggregates, and soluble oligomeric Aβ peptide. Ogt loss also increased anxiety, another characteristic feature of neurodegeneration. While these studies used the same promoter to drive Cre expression, it is important to note that the approaches differed in other details. Lagerlof, et al. used a tamoxifen-inducible system, knocking out the Ogt in αCamKII expressing cells at 6 weeks of age whereas the Wang, et al. knockout of Ogt is initiated earlier (4 weeks) at the onset of αCamKII expression and synaptic maturation (Lagerlöf et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016). Some common findings emerged. Both studies demonstrated the importance of OGT in excitatory neurons and provide clear evidence for O-GlcNAc cycling involvement in metabolism and neurodegeneration. However, the contrasting findings underscore the importance of taking developmental timing into account when analyzing the results of such knockout models. It is also critically important to examine toxicity and cell viability at every stage in such experiments.

Knockout of OGT in sensory neurons cause axonal defects, leading to thermal and mechanical hyposensitivity (Su and Schwarz, 2017). The phenotype is most likely due to the decrease in axonal endings. Moreover, OGT knockout in AgRP neurons results in a loss in neuronal excitability (Ruan et al., 2014). Possibility of OGT knockout in the nervous system is promised to highlight many essential functions of O-GlcNAc in the cell.

Oga knockout in mouse models

Previously, we generated a full body knockout of Oga (MGEA5) in mice using an oocyte-expressing Cre-line (MMTV-Cre) and demonstrated that Oga KO mice are largely perinatal lethal with few offspring surviving more than 3 weeks (Keembiyehetty et al., 2015). The perinatal lethality was associated with defects in neonatal liver glycogen storage, possibly linked to altered autophagy (Keembiyehetty et al., 2015). A similar perinatal lethality phenotype was observed in non-conditional, genetrap knockout model targeting Oga (Yang et al., 2012). The surviving Oga KO mice we generated were obese, and even heterozygous animals showed evidence of insulin-resistance. In addition to gross structural and developmental defects, Oga KO animals exhibit metabolic deregulation including impaired insulin and glucose homeostasis. A key feature of the Oga heterozygous mice included insulin resistance when challenged with a high fat diet. Due to their short lifespan and poor survival at birth, full body Oga KO animals are difficult to study and tissue-specific knockout models were used for further interrogation.

Using a highly neuron specific Nestin-Cre promoter to knockout Oga in the brain (Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017), we found that Oga brain KO animals show significant increases in brain O-GlcNAc levels but little change in other tissues such as liver, heart, and muscle. Intriguingly, the levels of brain OGT is also diminished suggesting a feedback-regulation of OGT in response to elevated O-GlcNAc levels. The mechanism of this reduction in OGT levels is not known but may be due to changes in chromatin structure or splicing since the decreases occurred principally to the ncOGT isoform. The brain Oga KO animals exhibit several anatomical, behavioral, and metabolic phenotypes. Compared to WT, brain Oga KO animals were smaller, obese, and have a visibly flattened forehead. Closer neuroanatomic analysis revealed enlarged ventricles (lateral ventricles, 3rd and 4th), smaller forebrain structures, cortical layering, and a very small olfactory bulb. Examining neurogenesis, we found that brain Oga KO animals showed a dramatic developmental delay associated with persistent neurogenesis long after neurogenesis has ended in WT animals. The Oga brain knockout animals also exhibited striking metabolic imbalances including increased body fat, circulating leptin, triglycerides, and insulin as well as decreased insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels. Consistent with lower levels of GH and IGF-1, the brain Oga KO animals have a pituitary that is much smaller than in WT animals. These findings reinforce that O-GlcNAc cycling is important for maintaining the hypothalamus-pituitary axis and, thus, the maintenance of metabolic homeostasis (Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017). Despite the physiological changes cataloged above, loss of Oga in the brain did not increase neurodegenerative damage or physiological apoptosis (Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017).

Pharmacological findings have suggested that inhibitors of OGA may have therapeutic potential by reducing protein aggregation (Yuzwa et al., 2012; Yuzwa et al., 2014; Hastings et al., 2017). As Oga brain KO animals show reduced levels of OGT in the brain, it is unclear whether interference with O-GlcNAc cycling may provide neuroprotective effects by reducing OGA levels, by lowering OGT levels, or altering protein O-GlcNAcylation on specific substrates. While the brain specific Oga KO has provided essential information about the role of O-GlcNAc in neuronal development and function, neuron-specific Oga KO in a neurodegenerative disease mouse model will be required to examine the potential neuroprotective effects of interfering with O-GlcNAc cycling.

4. O-GlcNAc in neurodevelopment: impact of the intrauterine environment

Human neurodevelopment can be influenced by environmental perturbations in the intrauterine environment. Prenatal development represents a vulnerable period where the fetal and maternal compartments exchange nutrients and neuroendocrine signals. The mammalian placenta plays a critical role in this exchange and environmental factors including nutrients can influence developmental programming. Based on evolutionary and transcriptional evidence, we proposed a role for the enzymes of O-GlcNAc cycling as epigenetic regulators in the intrauterine environment (Love et al., 2010; Hanover et al., 2012). Subsequent work demonstrated that the enzymes of O-GlcNAc cycling are likely to play a crucial role in developmental programming (Howerton et al., 2013; Howerton and Bale, 2014; Nugent and Bale, 2015; Bale, 2016; Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017; Pantaleon et al., 2017). As described above, disruption of OGT and OGA in the brain profoundly impacts brain development and function. Further, mutations in human OGT are associated with X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) providing direct evidence for an important role for this enzyme in neurodevelopment (Bouazzi et al., 2015; Niranjan et al., 2015; Vaidyanathan et al., 2017).

Several studies suggest that maternal stress increases the risk of neurodevelopmental diseases including autism, stuttering, dyslexia, and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and that males are more significantly affected than females (reviewed in (Bale, 2016)). These sex differences could be due to hormonal and metabolic influences, sex chromosomes, or a combination of these two factors. By examining the expression of X-linked genes differentially expressed in the placenta itself, OGT has emerged as a major biomarker of placental stress (Howerton et al., 2013; Howerton and Bale, 2014). Intriguingly, the increases observed are far more pronounced in the male offspring-specific placental stress response.

The presence of OGT on the mammalian X-chromosome near the Xist locus (lnRNA triggering X-inactivation) has important implications for OGT expression and subsequent functioning in both males and females (reviewed in (Love et al., 2010; Abramowitz et al., 2014; Olivier-Van Stichelen and Hanover, 2014; Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2014a)). OGT is one of the genes on the human X-chromosome with a low ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rates suggesting that it may represent a clinically significant gene that is subject to negative selection (Ge et al., 2015). In addition, OGT escapes X inactivation in the placenta resulting in transcript levels that are nearly 2-fold higher in female compared to male placenta (Howerton et al., 2013; Howerton and Bale, 2014). Knockout of OGT in the placenta to produce hemizygous and homozygous deletion of OGT in trophoblasts produced offspring with altered hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis function. These changes largely recapitulate the early placental stress phenotype (Howerton and Bale, 2014). Thus, OGT is likely to play an important role in mediating the response to stress in the intrauterine environment, thereby impacting fetus development.

D. O-GlcNAc: A central role in cellular regulation of neuronal health and disease

There are several lines of evidence supporting that appropriate maintenance of O-GlcNAc at both global levels and on individual proteins is critical for mitigating neurodegenerative disease. To understand how changes in O-GlcNAc may impact brain function, researchers have focused on individual proteins associated with neurodegenerative disease noting that disease-associated proteins are O-GlcNAc modified (Griffith et al., 1995). Individual proteins’ roles are impacted by their O-GlcNAc status and thereby influence processes ranging from proteostasis and autophagy to insulin signaling and the cell cycle.

Insulin Signaling

Insulin signaling in the brain is considered a key player in brain homeostasis. The molecular response of the brain to insulin is analogous to the response in other organs. Insulin receptors (IR) are found throughout the brain (Marks et al., 1990) with internal or peripheral secretion of insulin triggering insulin signaling through PI3K activation and transcriptional activity. Both type 1 and 2 diabetic patients have increased risk of neurodegeneration (Kern et al., 2001) and altered expression of diabetes-related genes have been linked to AD pathology (Hokama et al., 2014). With insulin response impaired in AD brains, AD has been categorized as ‘type 3 diabetes’ without hyperglycemia. Moreover, insulin resistance in peripheral tissue reduces insulin uptake, increases amyloid beta levels (Baker et al., 2011), and accelerates the formation of neurite plaques (Matsuzaki et al., 2010).

While other tissues use the insulin pathway mainly for glucose metabolism, brain insulin signaling influences pathology by triggering multiple functions including glucose metabolism, reproduction, proliferation, differentiation, neuroprotection, cognition, and memory. Insulin in the brain does not induce a significant uptake of glucose likely due to low levels of the insulin responsive glucose transporter GLUT4. Nevertheless, brain insulin signaling participates in peripheral glucose homeostasis. Insulin signaling modulates glucose production by the liver (Obici et al., 2002), influences satiety (Kim et al., 2000), and regulates hormone secretion (Tanaka et al., 2000). Multiple studies have demonstrated the importance of insulin signaling for brain development, growth, neuronal outgrowth and maturation, and axon regeneration (Schubert et al., 2003; Toth et al., 2006; Parathath et al., 2008). Similarly, proliferation and differentiation of multipotent neural stem cells are regulated by insulin (Wozniak et al., 1993)

In addition to promoting proliferation, insulin signaling seems to protect neural cells against apoptosis though the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway (Ryu et al., 1999) and prevents beta-amyloid induced cell death though an undefined mechanism (Rensink et al., 2004). Cognitive function may also be influenced by insulin signaling in the brain as increasing insulin signaling in the hippocampus improved memory and learning (Zhao et al., 1999). Furthermore, it has been shown that insulin administration eliminates the loss of memory due to ischemic lesions (Voll et al., 1989).

Nutrient-driven O-GlcNAc may be an important regulator of brain insulin signaling. First, secretion of insulin is epigenetically regulated by O-GlcNAcylation in pancreatic beta cells (Durning et al., 2016). Major components of the insulin signaling pathway are O-GlcNAc modified including: the insulin receptor (beta-chain), IRS (Insulin Receptor Substrate), PI3K (Phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase), PDK1 (Phosphoinositide-Dependent Kinase 1), and Akt/PKB (Ball et al., 2006; Gandy et al., 2006; Klein et al., 2009; Whelan et al., 2010). It has been proposed that phosphorylation of IRS1, PI3K, and Akt/PKB activates the insulin signaling pathway while O-GlcNAcylation of the same proteins prevents pathway activation (Holman and Kasuga, 1997). In this model, O-GlcNAc competition with phosphorylation is accentuated by OGT recruitment to the plasma membrane through PPO domain (PIP-binding activity of OGT) (Yang et al., 2008b; Perez-Cervera et al., 2013). However, this proposed mechanism remains controversial as both supporting (Vosseller et al., 2002; Arias et al., 2004; Gandy et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2008b; Klein et al., 2009) and refuting data have been published (Macauley et al., 2008; Macauley et al., 2010). While O-GlcNAc influences insulin signaling, a direct connection with insulin resistance in neurodegenerative diseases has yet to be defined.

Co-translational O-GlcNAcylation and quality control

Quality control of newly synthesized proteins is an essential feature in cell homeostasis. Failure to detect and dispose of misfolded proteins results in proteotoxity and often correlates with disease. One of the key steps in cytosolic quality control is the co-translational ubiquitination of proteins targeted for proteasomal degradation (Bengtson and Joazeiro, 2010). For example, the generation of non-stop mRNA is a phenomenon common across all organisms and a major source of proteotoxicity. Non-stop mRNA encodes aberrant, non-stop proteins sequestrated in the ribosomal complex that cannot be recycled or corrected by a quality control chaperone (Doma and Parker, 2007). Interestingly, O-GlcNAcylation also occurs co-translationally (Starr and Hanover, 1990) and acts with ubiquitination to regulate the stability of the nascent proteins (Zhu et al., 2015b). Previous work supports that O-GlcNAc is a key player in protein stability (e.g., Sp1, beta-catenin) (Han and Kudlow, 1997; Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2014b) resulting from direct competition with phosphorylation or through O-GlcNAc modification of the proteasome itself (Sümegi et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2003). O-GlcNAc addition was initially shown to occur on nascent chains and post-translationally by in vitro translation of the O-GlcNAc target nuclear pore protein p62 (Nup62) (Starr and Hanover, 1990). More recently Zhu et al. demonstrated that co-translational O-GlcNAcylation of Sp1 and Nup62 prevents the nascent proteins from precocious proteasomal degradation (Zhu et al., 2015b). O-GlcNAc addition and removal may then be regarded as an ‘O-GlcNAc timer’ serving a protective role at the time of synthesis on the ribosome and regulating the rate of degradation of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. This is similar to the so called ‘Mannose timer’ in the endoplasmic where the action of mannosidase I can trigger proteasomal degradation. It would appear that O-GlcNAc may play an analogous role in the nucleus and cytosol. We therefore suggest that an ‘O-GlcNAc’ timer’ may act in a similar manner to regulate protein stability. If O-GlcNAc addition and removal are both timed events in the life-cycle of the protein, then independent regulation of these activities could alter the stability of the target protein. When altered, O-GlcNAcylation may also significantly contribute to neurodegenerative pathologies.

Cell cycle regulation

Although neurons in the CNS are often viewed as post-mitotic and stable in number, a large body of recent evidence suggests that adult neurogenesis depends upon continued cell division of stem cell precursors. The major sites of adult neurogenesis in humans are two “neurogenic” brain regions. These sites are the subgranular zone (SGZ) in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles where new neurons are generated before migrating through the rostral migratory stream (RMS) to the olfactory bulb to become interneurons (Gage, 2000). The relationship between adult neurogenesis and neurodegenerative disease is complex and has been reviewed elsewhere (Winner et al., 2011; Winner and Winkler, 2015).

The cell cycle is essential for every organism to emerge, develop and survive. Divided in 4 major phases (G0, S, G1 and M), cell cycle progression is regulated by expression and action of cyclins (A, B, D, E) and their partners, the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). In neurodegenerative diseases, there is growing evidence that abnormal cell cycle re-entry precedes other hallmarks of the disease and implicates an aberrant cell cycle in disease progression. Data suggest that at the onset of AD, neurons increase cell cycle re-entry but fail to complete the mitotic phase and thus die (Bonda et al., 2010). AD neurons exhibit elevated cell cycle markers (cyclin D, cdk4, Ki67, cyclin E/cdk4) (McShea et al., 1997; Nagy et al., 1997; Vincent et al., 1997). Indeed, no sign of a complete mitotic phase is found in AD neurons (Ogawa et al., 2003a; Ogawa et al., 2003b).

Inhibition of OGT and OGA prevents cell cycle progression indicating that O-GlcNAc levels are regulated to ensure proper cell cycle progression (Slawson et al., 2005; Dehennaut et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2010b; Drougat et al., 2012). Moreover, OGT and OGA are associated with the midbody and participate in cytokinesis (Slawson et al., 2008). In response to a mitogenic signal, protein O-GlcNAcylation increases as does localization of O-GlcNAc modified proteins to the nucleus (Kearse and Hart, 1991a). Functional studies of O-GlcNAc modified proteins such as p53 (Yang et al., 2006), p27 (Qiu et al., 2017), cyclin D1 (Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2012), CDK5 (Ning et al., 2017), c-myc (Chou et al., 1995), beta-catenin (Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2014b), NF-kB (Yang et al., 2008a; Kawauchi et al., 2009; Ramakrishnan et al., 2013), FoxM1 (Caldwell et al., 2010), HCF-1 (Capotosti et al., 2011), and Erk1/2 (Jiang et al., 2016) have been critical for furthering the understanding of O-GlcNAc in cell cycle progression. Key AD players are known to be O-GlcNAc modified including APP and tau, which have also been implicated in cell cycle regulation. Both APP and Aβ are mitogenic in vitro (Schubert et al., 1989; Milward et al., 1992). Interestingly, if APP is cleaved by α-secretase facilitated by O-GlcNAcylation, it becomes non-amyloidogenic and neuroprotective sAPPα (Jacobsen and Iverfeldt, 2011). Hyperphosphorylated tau is present in normal mitotic cells and has been linked to CDK activity (Brion et al., 1994; Preuss and Mandelkow, 1998). That O-GlcNAc cycling has been implicated as a key regulator of cell cycle progression and modifies proteins associated with neurodegeneration supports that O-GlcNAc might be involved in the aberrant cell cycles found in neurodegenerative diseases.

Autophagy and mitophagy

Recycling of cellular contents and elimination of damaged organelles/protein aggregates is required to ensure cellular homeostasis. Autophagy, the dynamic lysosomal degradation process, works in concert with endocytic mechanisms to process these proteins and organelles. Autophagy deregulation threatens neuronal health, especially as the brain ages. Mutations in autophagy pathway components are associated with neurodegenerative diseases as cataloged by Nixon (Nixon, 2013). Defects in autophagy induction, cargo recognition and sequestration, and efficient digestion of sequestered substrates yield accumulation of toxic proteins. Indeed, neurons accumulate waste over a lifetime and, while young neurons are effective and efficient at clearing waste, neurons that are compromised in autophagy accumulate protein aggregates and ultimately degenerate.

In multiple neurodegenerative diseases, there is increased autophagy induction (AD and ALS (Boland et al., 2008)), lysosome biogenesis (Cataldo et al., 1994; Cataldo et al., 1995; Cataldo et al., 1996; Ginsberg et al., 2010), and increased transcription of autophagy-related genes (Lipinski et al., 2010). Accumulation of autophagic structures are often noticeable in affected brain tissue (Kegel et al., 2000; Nixon et al., 2005; Boland et al., 2008). In Huntington’s disease, autophagosomes are unusually devoid of cargoes (Nixon, 2013). Mutation of α-synuclein in PD yields aggregates than cannot be degraded by chaperone-mediated autophagy (Cuervo et al., 2004). Recent evidence supports that the O-GlcNAc modification of calpain, responsible for α-synuclein cleavage, inhibits its action (Levine et al., 2017), thereby influencing processing of this key neurodegenerative protein. And, PINK1 and parkin mutations result in mitochondria that cannot undergo mitophagic disposal (Kitada et al., 1998; Valente et al., 2004; Park and Lee, 2006). Neurons in AD show strong phenotypic overlap with lysosomal storage disorders, but these findings have yet to be fully understood (Querfurth and LaFerla, 2010; Platt et al., 2012)

Given that neurons are particularly susceptible to dysfunction in the cellular waste stream, many researchers have endeavored to examine the regulators of autophagy and apoptosis. The dynamic O-GlcNAc is poised to provide crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis by acting as rheostat to fine-tune these processes by modulating protein folding, localization, stability, etc (Fahie and Zachara, 2016). Loss of OGT and OGA lead to elevated induction of starvation-induced autophagy in the model organism C. elegans (Wang et al., 2012). This study also suggested that O-GlcNAc cycling plays a key role in regulating autophagy flux and proteasome activity when faced with a proteotoxic challenges such as pathological tau accumulation. Several studies in C. elegans noted that OGT is associated with phagosomes and protein O-GlcNAcylation influences autophagosome and lysosome fusion (Wang et al., 2012; Guo et al., 2014).

In vitro work in Neuro2A cells suggests that modulation of O-GlcNAc cycling affects autolysosome formation. Furthermore, the same study demonstrated that in cells and Drosophila, changes in O-GlcNAcylation modulate huntingtin toxicity (Kumar et al., 2014). Modulation of Atg proteins by O-GlcNAcylation is likely to alter autophagy (Jo et al., 2016; Wani et al., 2016b). It is not surprising that O-GlcNAc plays a role in autophagy as key autophagy regulators including Beclin1 (involved in autophagy initiation), SNAP-29 (SNARE complex member), (Guo et al., 2014) BCL2 (Marsh et al., 2013) and Atg7 (Park et al., 2015) are modified by O-GlcNAc. The interaction axis between SNAP-29, Syntaxin-17, and VAMP8 is thought to be controlled by OGT expression in HeLa cells. The authors argue that O-GlcNAcylation of SNAP-29 in both mammalian cells and C. elegans abrogates the complex’s formation thereby decreasing fusion between autophagosomes and endosomes/lysosomes (Guo et al., 2014). Further, they suggest this is intimately involved with nutrient status as starvation influences O-GlcNAcylation of SNAP-29. In Drosophila, a decrease in OGT is associated with an increase of Atg proteins and autolysosomes, and it has been shown that autophagy is regulated through Akt/dFOXO signaling (Park et al., 2015). Defective autophagy induction and processing are associated with accelerated pathology and increased neurotoxicity. Thus, we suggest that O-GlcNAc is poised to influence processing of autophagosome-targeted proteins, and thus neurodegeneration, given its key roles in autophagy.

Apoptosis

In rodent models of neurodegeneration, apoptotic cell death has been convincingly linked to neurodegeneration; although in humans, this connection is less clear (Radi et al., 2014). The regulation of apoptosis is tightly linked to cellular growth signals and, in the central nervous system where many post-mitotic cells must exist for decades, these control mechanisms are extraordinarily important (Frade and Ovejero-Benito, 2015). O-GlcNAcylation has long been known to influence apoptosis by modification of proteins linked to regulation of apoptotic cell death (Omary et al., 1998; Liu et al., 2004b; O’Donnell et al., 2004; Lazarus et al., 2009; Shin et al., 2011). More recently, the mechanisms by which this may occur on targets such as p53 have been examined (Yang et al., 2006; Kawauchi et al., 2009). There are numerous reports of O-GlcNAcylation altering mitochondrial function linked to apoptosis(Shin et al., 2011; Palaniappan et al., 2013; Bond and Hanover, 2015; Zhu et al., 2015a; Wani et al., 2016a; van der Harg et al., 2017). A link between apoptosis and neurodegenerative disease has been made in some studies (Liu et al., 2004b; Zhu et al., 2015a; Chen et al., 2017; Ning et al., 2017). Knockout of Ogt in excitatory neurons led to neurodegeneration with some indications that apoptosis-related genes might be altered (Wang et al., 2016), whereas another study showed no effect on apoptosis or neuron viability (Lagerlöf et al., 2016). Thus, the impact of OGT loss on apoptotic neuronal cell death is unclear. Deletion of Oga in the brain did not significantly increase the number of cortical neurons undergoing apoptosis (Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017). Taken together, these findings suggest that O-GlcNAc may play limited role in neuronal cell death during neurodegeneration and that the modification may serve a protective role.

Mitochondrial movement &amp; metabolism

Mitochondria, the cell’s primary source of ATP, is essential to sensing nutrient status as it utilizes glucose as its major carbon source. Neurons’ complex morphology results in a spatially heterogeneous glucose intake and, consequently, mitochondria need to rapidly re-localize to ensure rapid production of ATP (Detmer and Chan, 2007). Rapid ATP production is crucial for processes including synaptic assembly, transmission, and Ca2+ buffering with motor proteins including kinesin and dynein regulating mitochondrial motility (Schwarz, 2013). Deregulation of mitochondrial trafficking is associated with neurological disorders including AD, ALS, and PD. For example, the GTPase Miro (also called RhoT1/2) interacts with the adaptor protein Milton (also called TRAK1/2 and OIP106/98) thus coupling motor protein complexes to the mitochondria (Glater et al., 2006; Macaskill et al., 2009; van Spronsen et al., 2013). OGT interacts with Milton in both Drosophila and mammals (Iyer et al., 2003; Glater et al., 2006; Brickley et al., 2011). In response to an increase in glucose flux, O-GlcNAcylation of Milton1 (OIP106) decreases mitochondrial motility (Pekkurnaz et al., 2014). Furthermore, knockout of OGT or blockage of UDP-GlcNAc synthesis in both Drosophila and mouse models resulted in 60% of axonal mitochondria to remain stationary (Pekkurnaz et al., 2014). Finally, the Milton-like protein OIP106 forms a complex with OGT and RNA Pol II suggesting that OGT is also targeted to transcriptional machinery thereby potentially regulating downstream targets by O-GlcNAcylation. While Milton O-GlcNAcylation seems to be the main driver of mitochondrial trafficking, tubulin, kinesin, and dynein are also substrates of OGT and their O-GlcNAcylation may also contribute to mitochondrial dynamics (Ji et al., 2011; Ruan et al., 2012; Trinidad et al., 2012). Thus, impaired mitochondrial motility likely impacts the development of neurological disorders and OGT/ O-GlcNAcylation may play a critical role linking nutrient status to mitochondrial motility (MacAskill and Kittler, 2010).

Beyond proteins directly involved in mitochondrial motility, Hu et al. demonstrated that mitochondrial proteins including electron transport chain (ETC) complex members such as NDUFA9 and COX1 are O-GlcNAc modified (Hu et al., 2009). The activity of the ETC complexes was impaired by high glucose treatment mimicking diabetic conditions, with reduced ATP production. The authors interpreted this to suggest that protein O-GlcNAcylation of ETC complex members directly impacts mitochondrial function. Proteins including the TCA cycle enzymes (such as ACO2, IDH3A/3B, OGDH, etc.), redox enzymes (SOD2, PRDX3), and fatty acid oxidation enzymes are also modified by O-GlcNAc (Ma et al., 2016). Surprisingly, the diabetic conditions did not lead to an increase in protein O-GlcNAcylation across the board. In fact, 40% of the detected O-GlcNAc modified sites displayed a 20% reduction in O-GlcNAc levels under high glucose treatment (Ma et al., 2016).

Appropriate levels of protein O-GlcNAcylation are essential for mitochondrial function. Cividini et al. reported that mitochondrial 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (Ogg1) activity is negatively regulated by O-GlcNAc (Cividini et al., 2016). Diabetic mice displayed increased Ogg1 O-GlcNAcylation in cardiac myopathy, leading to decreased Ogg1 activity and that could result in mDNA damage. In addition, O-GlcNAcylation of the voltage dependent anion channel (VDAC) is protective of mitochondrial function preventing the formation of calcium induced mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) (Ngoh et al., 2008). Upon formation, mPTP disrupts the mitochondrial membrane potential thereby preventing ETC mediated ATP production, triggering events in the apoptosis cascade by releasing pro-apoptotic proteins (Ngoh et al., 2008).

Combined, these studies support that the O-GlcNAc modification must be examined at the single protein – or even single site – level and that the regulation of mitochondrial function by O-GlcNAc is nuanced. This is particularly important for nervous system, and the brain, since most neurons are post mitotic and perturbed mitochondrial function could cause irreversible damage to the neurons. The ubiquity of O-GlcNAc in brain tissue and its dynamic nature on mitochondrial proteins support its role in mitochondrial motility as well as synaptic transmission.

E. Prospects for Imaging and Diagnostics

Modern brain imaging modalities exploit glucose uptake and differential blood flow as surrogates for neuronal activity allowing the monitoring of brain activity and probing neuropathology. While the brain is highly dependent on glucose under normal conditions, neurodegenerative diseases greatly change the brain’s metabolism of glucose. Therefore, glucose metabolism has been a surrogate for monitoring neuronal activity with hypo- and hyper-metabolism diagnostic for diseases (Zhu et al., 2014), including AD and PD (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). Indeed, loss of neurons can result in decreased localized glucose consumption but increased regional consumption elsewhere.

1. O-GlcNAc levels as a surrogate for neurodegenerative damage

Tantalizing evidence suggests that altered brain O-GlcNAc levels correlate with changes in neuronal cell death, neuroinflammation, production of hyperphosphorylated tau, amyloidogenic Aβ peptides, and memory deficits (Wang et al., 2016). A number of studies demonstrate that O-GlcNAcylation is decreased in AD brain tissue (Liu et al., 2004b) compared to control and OGT protein expression is reduced in AD human cortical brain tissue (Liu et al., 2009). The authors suggest that hypometabolism of glucose in AD coupled with the decreased nutrient-sensor O-GlcNAc correlates directly with neurodegeneration in these tissues. However, other work suggests that levels of O-GlcNAc increase in AD brain tissue (Förster et al., 2014). Experimental differences including choice of brain region likely influences the conclusions about global O-GlcNAc levels. Indeed, genetic and pharmacological manipulation in different organisms occasionally yields conflicting results and it is essential to continue profiling how O-GlcNAc levels are altered in neurodegenerative human tissue. There is great promise in being able to visualize O-GlcNAc, OGT, or OGA in patients in real time to give an indication of disease progression. Below, we discuss the use various imaging modalities to monitor glucose consumption and downstream nutrient-sensitive OGA in human patients in real time.

2. Can O-GlcNAc-based imaging improve diagnostics and patient outcomes?

With clinically overlapping features, neurodegenerative diseases including PD, multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, dementia with Lewy Bodies, AD, and frontotemporal dementia are difficult to differentiate at early stages. To improve patient care, the following strategies are employed: techniques that can assist in early diagnosis, define disease stage, stratify patients, and determine whether chosen therapies are successful. Thus, prediction of which patients will develop neurodegenerative diseases by use of non-invasive imaging techniques is of great interest (Weiner and Khachaturian, 2005) .

Methods including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) have long been employed by physicians to monitor the structure and function of the brain, respectively. Briefly, MRI is a non-invasive method providing pictures of anatomy. PET imaging takes advantage of bio-available compounds tagged with radionuclides that are metabolized or bind to receptors/sites of drug action. These so-called radiotracers can be used to track a given compound’s biological utilization. Of note, PET scans are increasingly used in combination with imaging that provides anatomic information so that anatomy and function can be interpreted simultaneously.

Based on nuclear magnetic resonance, MRI utilizes magnetic fields, radio waves, and field gradients to generate contrast images as different tissues and fluids provide natural contrast. Topographic distribution of brain tissue can be characterized by neuroimaging and brain atrophy is a clear indicator of AD with loss of brain volume correlating with cognitive deterioration (Fox et al., 1999). While structural imaging can give an indication of pathological features prior to evident clinical symptoms, it is questionable whether this technique can be used early enough to improve outcomes (Johnson et al., 2012). Current optimal uses for MRI include patient stratification and measuring outcomes after treatment. As MRI cannot be used to assess function, functional MRI (fMRI) has become more common. fMRI monitors how the brain responds to an external stimulus or pharmacological agent by measurement of neuronal activity inferred from changes in signal and is often used to evaluate functional connectivity within brain networks (Johnson et al., 2012). This technique has great potential to assess treatment strategies in real-time. However, longitudinal fMRI studies in neurodegenerative patients is challenging and must be further explored to understand pitfalls and its potential impact.

Researchers have long used PET to monitor drug uptake, elimination, and bio-distribution in a living animal. Glucose hypo-metabolism is found in brain regions prone to neurodegeneration, thus profiling glucose utilization and associated molecules of interest to assess disease state and treatment efficacy is increasing in popularity. Several radiotracers have been developed to monitor brain function and the chemical arsenal of PET ligands includes compounds labeled with isotopes such as fluorine-18 (half-life of ~110 min) and carbon-11 (~20 min). For example, the biologically active glucose analog fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) can be labeled with tracer fluorine-18 (FDG-PET) and used to measure glucose consumption. In patients with AD, FDG-PET measurements correlate with continued decline in cognitive function (Weiner and Khachaturian, 2005) and co-registered MRI and FDG-PET images have equivalent classification values (Santi et al., 2001) . Further, FDG-PET has shown efficacy in distinguishing frontotemporal dementia from AD (Weiner and Khachaturian, 2005) thereby demonstrating its utility beyond other diagnostic tools.

While monitoring FDG retention has proven useful, it is a non-specific indicator of metabolism and can indicate variation in glucose use for a number of reasons beyond neurodegeneration (i.e., ischemia and inflammation). Thus, PET ligands were developed to determine amyloid plaque formation. However, Aβ levels rise and fall depending on the neurodegenerative stage and the extent of plaques does not correlate with defined neurodegenerative stages (McLean et al., 1999) suggesting other targets must be tried. More recently, ligands for monitoring neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques have also been in development and as tau deposition is more strongly linked with cognition in AD may prove more useful in the long-term (Shoghi-Jadid et al., 2002). It is hoped that with increasingly specific ligands and improved sensitivities, PET will increase accuracy of differential diagnosis of neurodegeneration at early clinical stages.

Given that O-GlcNAc appears critical for protein stability and, in some studies, increased O-GlcNAc has been shown to decrease tau aggregation; modulating global brain O-GlcNAc levels has become an attractive therapeutic target. To note, while compounds specifically targeting OGT would be of great interest, given this enzyme’s importance in global nutrient-sensing, targeting OGA has been a more achievable goal. Further, targeting OGT has been challenging because developed analogs often also target and inhibit other transferases, are polar thereby limiting cellular availability, and have been associated with cellular toxicity (Trapannone and Rafie…, 2016). Recently published crystal structures of OGT will give improved insight toward developing ligands (Ma et al., 2013; Janetzko and Walker, 2014). OGA inhibitors and complementary PET ligands to monitor inhibitor efficacy and outcomes have been developed with some rapidity and their use will be explored in the following paragraphs.

Therapeutic OGA inhibitors have been seen in model organism work as well as pre-clinical studies. Use of OGA PET ligands in clinical studies will give an indication of bioavailability (including passage of the blood brain barrier), retention, and potentially the efficacy of therapeutic agents. Companies including Merck and Alectos are pursuing at least one compound related to OGA imaging (Sean M. Smith1, 2016). The chemistries to generate these compounds must be robust, straightforward, and require minimal purification as they must be generated in a nearby cyclotron close to the imaging facility and used while active. The nature of many of the inhibitors heretofore generated gives options for potential clinical imaging modalities, as they are amenable to medicinal chemistry. The production of OGA inhibitors, with varying specificity, has spanned at least two decades (Macauley et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2013). With the publication of improved crystallography data, informed decisions about inhibitor/probe synthesis will only improve options. Thiazoline derivatives have proved of particular interest given that they are orally available, cross the blood brain barrier, and show decreased tau oligomerization in one mouse model (Yuzwa et al., 2012). Whether the data from mouse models will be recapitulated in human patients and ultimately quality of life is improved remains to be seen, but PET ligands targeting OGA, OGT, or O-GlcNAc have the potential to help us to understand treatment regimens.

3. O-GlcNAcase inhibitors targeting neurodegeneration

With accumulating evidence suggesting that the regulation of O-GlcNAcylation is tightly linked to neurodegenerative diseases, pharmaceutical inhibitors of O-GlcNAc cycling have emerged as a potential therapeutic solution to neurodegeneration.

Recent studies on Tau

Human tau is highly phosphorylated with nearly 85 phosphorylation sites and reported to have at least 12 sites of O-GlcNAcylation (Arnold et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2004b). Tau phosphorylation is 2–3 fold higher and O-GlcNAc levels are reduced in AD compared to healthy samples (Alonso et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2004b), as might be expected given the reciprocity between these PTMs (Alonso et al., 1996; Lazarus et al., 2009; Yuzwa et al., 2012). These changes are associated with a self-aggregating, toxic molecule that is detrimental to neuronal microtubule function and neuronal death (Alonso et al., 1996). Furthermore, the conditional mouse brain Ogt KO showed increased tau phosphorylation (O’Donnell et al., 2004) suggesting that these PTMs play key roles in maintaining appropriate levels of soluble protein.

It is interesting to note that regulation of tau modifications is intimately linked to OGT: the kinases GSK3B and CDK5 are responsible for tau phosphorylation and are known OGT substrates (Lubas and Hanover, 2000). GSK3B and CDK5 are part of a complex, in which phosphorylation of tau by CDK5 can prime tau phosphorylation by GSK3B (Mietelska-Porowska et al., 2014). GSK3B can then phosphorylate about 30 sites on tau and its activity is increased in AD. Furthermore, OGT activity is increased by GSK3B mediated phosphorylation under physiological conditions. OGT could then O-GlcNAc modify and increase GSK3B activity, thereby generating a feedback loop by which tau protein solubility is modulated (Yu et al., 2012). While the biological role of O-GlcNAcylation on tau function is still unclear, it has been suggested that O-GlcNAc is necessary to prevent tau from aggregation in mice and in vitro (Yuzwa et al., 2012; Yuzwa and Vocadlo, 2017). How this intricate relationship between OGT, GSK3B and tau plays a role in tauopathies remains to be determined.

With studies supporting that neurodegenerative diseases display lower O-GlcNAcylation in the brain, attempts have been made to increase O-GlcNAc levels in mouse models of neurodegeneration. These studies seek possible use of OGA inhibitors for future therapeutics. In one promising study, researchers have treated a neurodegenerative mouse model with the OGA inhibitor Thiamet-G and found that treatment limits tau aggregation (Yuzwa et al., 2012). In a separate study, Thiamet-G treatment by injection into lateral ventricle in the brain led to a decrease in tau phosphorylation at residues Thr181, Thr212, Ser214, Ser262/Ser356, Ser404 and Ser409, and an increase in tau phosphorylation at Ser199, Ser202, Ser396 and Ser422 in the mouse brain (Yu et al., 2012). In addition, Thiamet-G mediated increase in O-GlcNAcylation also upregulated the GSK3B activity. Since GSK3B is known to phosphorylate tau, its activation by O-GlcNAcylation may explain the increased tau phosphorylation on certain sites (Yu et al., 2012). Long term treatment with OGA inhibitor led to an increased O-GlcNAc and reduced pathologic tau levels (Yu et al., 2012). Another study using the same OGA inhibitor treatment in a tau mutant mouse model (rTg4510) reduced pathological tau phosphorylation levels (Graham et al., 2014). OGA inhibitor was also used in a mouse model with mutations in tau and APP (TAPP) and lead to reductions in levels of both neuritic plaques and amyloidogenic β-amyloid peptides in the TAPP mice (Yuzwa et al., 2014). However, one should consider the possible side effects of systemic use of OGA inhibitor. As we discussed throughout this review and other published excellent reviews about the importance of physiological levels of O-GlcNAc in cellular and organismal biology, increasing O-GlcNAc could lead to pathological conditions in other tissues or organs.

Systemic effects of altered O-GlcNAc cycling: A cautionary Tale

There are several cautionary notes regarding pharmacological manipulation of O-GlcNAc levels. Specifically, acute and chronic changes to O-GlcNAc may yield different cellular outcomes. Acute OGA inhibition correlates with decreased protein phosphorylation but longer-term inhibition does not affect phosphorylation on proteins such as tau suggesting that cells adapt (Zhu et al., 2014). Also, while tau is among the proteins modified by O-GlcNAc, there are thousands of other proteins whose O-GlcNAc status may be modulated by therapeutics targeting of OGT or OGA resulting in unintended consequences. Furthermore, off-target side effects in the brain and other tissues as well as disrupted glucose homeostasis can lead to complications and must be carefully considered for any treatment regimen. Concerns were raised based on the potential insulin resistance induction following increased O-GlcNAcylation. Studies in C. elegans and Drosophila have demonstrated that changes in O-GlcNAc cycling can induce changes in insulin-sensitivity (Hanover et al., 2003; Forsythe et al., 2006; Sekine et al., 2010). Previous studies had also suggested that overexpression of OGT in mice (McClain et al., 2002) or inhibition of OGA in the L1-3T3 cell model (Wells et al., 2003) could induce insulin resistance. However, Macauley, et al. demonstrated that the whole body treatment using OGA inhibitor NButGT does not trigger insulin resistance or alter glucose homeostasis in rats or in adipocytes (Macauley et al., 2008; Macauley et al., 2010). This is presumably due to compensation by other homeostatic physiological mechanisms that cannot occur in genetic experiments or experiments carried out in vitro. Importantly, treatment of mice with NButGT reduced Aβ production both in vitro and in vivo. Low γ-secretase activity mediated by increase of O-GlcNAcylation is suggested as a potential explanation. Since O-GlcNAc is a key epigenetic regulator, alteration in the levels or activities of O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes could have unforeseen effects on transcriptional programs and potentially transgenerational effects (Lewis and Hanover, 2014).

Summary and Conclusions

Genetic, pharmacological, and biochemical evidence suggests that intracellular protein O-GlcNAcylation is emerging as a major pathway contributing to age-dependent neurodegenerative damage. Yet, research in this area remains in its infancy. A summary of the major topics of this review appears in Figure 4. Nutrient-driven O-GlcNAcylation is likely to be a key player in maintaining normal proteostasis in the brain. Intriguingly, mutations in Ogt have been linked to X-linked intellectual deficiency suggesting a major role for O-GlcNAc metabolism in the normal functioning of the brain (Niranjan et al., 2015; Vaidyanathan et al., 2017). The brain’s heavy dependence on glucose metabolism renders postmitotic neurons particularly susceptible to age-dependent changes in proteostasis. Maintenance of synapses, axonal transport, neural mitochondrial metabolism, and trafficking are regulated by O-GlcNAcylation. In addition, nearly all the cellular degradation pathways are either directly or indirectly dependent upon O-GlcNAcylation. The enzymes of O-GlcNAc metabolism are known to partner with chaperones, transcriptional complexes, and other epigenetic regulators. These factors dictate the levels of proteins prone to aggregation in neurodegenerative disease. O-GlcNAcylation also acts on globular domains of kinases and phosphorylated substrates to directly alter signaling cascades. OGT acts co-translationally and post-translationally to modify IDPs prone to aggregation.

The close association between O-GlcNAcylation and neurodegeneration provides unique opportunities for both diagnostics and therapeutics. Imaging paradigms based on monitoring O-GlcNAcylation or the enzymes modulating the modification’s addition and removal are currently in development. In addition, small molecule inhibitors of OGT and OGA may prove useful for therapy. These may act by directly preventing the formation of protein aggregates or by altering the signaling cascades leading to the onset of neurodegenerative damage. Yet, since O-GlcNAc metabolism is tightly regulated and ubiquitous, it may be difficult to target the pathway for inhibition using traditional pharmacological means. In addition, targeting therapies to the brain is complicated by the blood-brain barrier limiting the bioavailability of some therapeutic compounds. Finally, since all tissues are likely to exhibit a requirement for O-GlcNAc cycling, selective targeting of the brain may prove difficult. Such off-target effects may limit the usefulness of inhibitors that might otherwise prove useful. Despite these limitations, as one of the key cellular responses to stress and nutrient availability, O-GlcNAcylation represents a promising target for therapeutic strategies.

Supported by funds from Intramural NIDDK

ABBREVIATIONS

O-GlcNAc O-linked N-acetylglucosamine

GLUT1 Glucose Transporter type 1

GLUT4 Glucose Transporter type 4

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

PD Parkinson’s disease

ALS Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

HD Huntington’s disease

APP Amyloid precursor protein

NFT Neurofibrillary tangles

PINK1 PTEN induced kinase 1

SCA spino-cerebellar ataxia

Atx-1 Ataxin-1

IDPs Intrinsically disordered proteins

HBP Hexosamine biosynthetic pathway

UDP Uridine Diphosphate

PTM Post translational modification

OGT O-GlcNAc Transferase

ncOGT Nuclear and Cytoplasmic OGT

mOGT Mitochondrial OGT

sOGT Short isoform of OGT

OGA O-GlcNacase

OGA-L OGA Long isoform

OGA-S OGA Short isoform

KO Knockout

TPR Tetratricopeptide Repeat

HCF-1 Host Cell Factor-1

GSK3B Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3B

AMPK AMP activated Protein Kinase

TET Ten-eleven Translocation

CARM1 Coactivator Associated Arginine Methyltransferase 1

Atx-10 Ataxin-10

DYT3 Parkinsonian dystonia

THAP1 THAP Domain containing Protein 1

pRB Retinoblastoma protein

E2F Transcription Factor E2F1

NF-kB Nuclear Factor kappa Beta

MIBP1 c-MYC intron binding protein

MGEA5 Meningioma-Expressed Antigen 5

HAT Histone Acetyl Transferase

SKN-1 Skinhead 1

Nrf1/2 Nuclear respiratory factor 1/1

PRC Polycomb repressor complex

Ph Polyhomeotic

TRX Trithorax

ASH1 Absent Small or Homeotic 1

SET1 SET domain containing protein 1

Syn1 Synapsin 1

αCamKII α-calcium–calmodulin-dependent kinase II

MMTV-Cre Cre Recombinase under mouse mammary tumor virus promoter

PVN Paraventricular nucleus

IGF-1 Insulin-like growth factor 1

GH Growth Hormone

XLID X-linked intellectual disability

Xist lnRNA triggering X-inactivation

IR Insulin receptors

PI3K Phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase

Akt/PKB Protein Kinase B

mTOR Mammalian Target of Rapamycin

PDK1 Phosphoinositide-Dependent Kinase 1

IRS1 Insulin Receptor Substrate 1

Sp1 Specificity Protein 1

Nup62 Nuclear pore protein p62

CNS Central nervous system

RMS Rostral migratory stream

SVZ Subventricular zone

SGZ Subgranular zone

CDK Cyclin-dependent kinase

SNAP-29 Synaptosome associated protein 29

VAMP8 Vesicle associated membrane protein 8

BCL2 B-cell lymphoma 2

Atg7 Autophagy related 7

ATP Adenosine triphosphate

TRAK1/2 Trafficking kinesin-binding protein 1

OIP106/98 O-linked N-acetylglucosamine transferase interacting protein 106

NDUFA9 NADH dehaydrogenase 1 aplha subunit A9

COX1 Cyclooxygenase 1

ETC Electron transport chain

TCA Tricarboxylic acid

ACO2 Aconitase 2

IDH Isocitrate dehydrogenase

SOD Superoxide dismutase

PRDX3 Peroxiredoxin 3

VDAC Voltage dependent anion channel

mPTP Mitochondrial permeability transition pore

Ogg1 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase

MRI Magnetic resonance imaging

PET Positron emission tomography

PTM Post translational modification

GSK3B Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta

CDK5 Cell division protein kinase 5

Figure 1 The potential roles of O-GlcNAcylation in maintaining the cellular proteostasis network and relationship to protein aggregates in neurodegeneration

O-GlcNAcylation has been shown to be a key regulator of transcription, translation, protein folding and degradation that may be regulated in in neurodegenerative disease. The protein aggregates that are associated with human disease are listed at the right. O-GlcNAcylation can influence aggregation by modulating processes including transcription, protein folding, the cellular quality control, and stress pathways. Acting in consort with other post-translational modifications, O-GlcNAc may influence signaling pathways and the regulation of protein degradation including proteasomal degradation, autophagy, and the cellular stress response.

Figure 2 A timeline summarizing the major advancements in understanding O-GlcNAc as a modulator of neurodegeneration

The timeline was derived from publication dates of these references and references therein: (Torres and Hart, 1984; Holt and Hart, 1986; Davis and Blobel, 1987; Hanover et al., 1987; Holt et al., 1987; Park et al., 1987; Snow et al., 1987; D’Onofrio et al., 1988; Caillet-Boudin et al., 1989; Datta et al., 1989; Inaba and Maede, 1989; Haltiwanger et al., 1990; Starr and Hanover, 1990; Starr et al., 1990; Kearse and Hart, 1991a; Kearse and Hart, 1991b; Lüthi et al., 1991; Chou et al., 1992; Hagmann et al., 1992; Haltiwanger et al., 1992; Reason et al., 1992; Roquemore et al., 1992; Dong et al., 1993; Elliot et al., 1993; Kelly et al., 1993; Murphy et al., 1994; Bailer et al., 1995; Chou et al., 1995; Griffith and Schmitz, 1995; Griffith et al., 1995; Dong et al., 1996; Roquemore et al., 1996; Kreppel et al., 1997; Lubas et al., 1997; Roos et al., 1997; Haltiwanger et al., 1998; Yao and Coleman, 1998a; Yao and Coleman, 1998b; Akimoto et al., 1999; Griffith and Schmitz, 1999; Hanover et al., 1999; Akimoto et al., 2000; Lubas and Hanover, 2000; Ross et al., 2000; Cole and Hart, 2001; Gao et al., 2001; Hanover, 2001; Rex-Mathes et al., 2001; Zachara et al., 2001; McClain et al., 2002; Vosseller et al., 2002; Wells et al., 2002; Zachara et al., 2002; Akimoto et al., 2003; Gao et al., 2003; Hanover et al., 2003; Iyer et al., 2003; Lefebvre et al., 2003a; Lefebvre et al., 2003b; Love et al., 2003; Marshall et al., 2003; Whelan and Hart, 2003; Zhang et al., 2003; Cieniewski-Bernard et al., 2004; Jínek et al., 2004; Khidekel et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2004a; Robertson et al., 2004; Brickley et al., 2005; Gross et al., 2005; Hanover et al., 2005; Lefebvre et al., 2005; Dorfmueller et al., 2006; Forsythe et al., 2006; März et al., 2006; Nandi et al., 2006; Andrali et al., 2007; Deng et al., 2008; Rexach et al., 2008; Bleckmann et al., 2009; Gambetta et al., 2009a; Lazarus et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2009; Sinclair et al., 2009; Yanagisawa and Yu, 2009; Yuzwa and Vocadlo, 2009; Di Domenico et al., 2010; Rexach et al., 2010; Srikanth et al., 2010; Kim, 2011; Lazarus et al., 2011; Smet-Nocca et al., 2011; Yuzwa et al., 2011; Nakamura et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2012; Yuzwa et al., 2012; Cameron et al., 2013; Diwu et al., 2013a; Diwu et al., 2013b; Hanover and Wang, 2013; Wang and Hanover, 2013; Graham et al., 2014; Skorobogatko et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2014; Cha et al., 2015; Mao et al., 2015; Marotta et al., 2015; Akan et al., 2016; Gatta et al., 2016; Gong et al., 2016; Lagerlöf et al., 2016; Lagerlöf et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2017; Olivier-Van Stichelen et al., 2017)

Figure 3 The structures of OGT, OGA, and the sites of interaction with some of the binding partners of the enzymes of O-GlcNAc cycling

The crystal structures pictured are derived from crystal structures 1W3B and 3PE4 (OGT) (Jínek et al., 2004; Lazarus et al., 2011) and 5UN8 and 3ZJ0 (OGA) (Rao et al., 2013; Li et al., 2017). (A) Structure and interaction partners of dimer ncOGT. OGT has many binding partners that are crucial for cellular processes mediating neuronal homeostasis. The substrate UDP-GlcNAc bound to the active site is shown in red. The positions in the structure corresponding the interaction domains between OGT and these molecules are indicated in brackets B) Structure and binding partners of the long isoform of O-GlcNAcase. The O-GlcNAcylated p53 peptide binds in the active site is highlighted in red. The sites of caspase 3 cleavage are indicated by the arrows. This form of OGA has been shown to interact with OGT and histones. For discussion of these interactions, see associated portions of the text.

Figure 4 A summary of the role of O-GlcNAc in regulating essential brain functions

UDP-GlcNAc, the end product of the nutrient-sensitive HBP, is dynamically used by OGT to catalyze the addition of O-GlcNAc to substrate proteins. This cyclic modification is coordinately regulated with other PTMs such as phosphorylation to regulate the required intricacies of cellular processes. Deregulation of PTMs including O-GlcNAc leads to several pathologies that are associated with neurodegeneration. Methods for detecting O-GlcNAc and understanding its role in these pathologies continue to improve providing a strong foundation for considering targeted therapeutics based on individual or global protein O-GlcNAcylation and the activities of OGT and OGA.

Table I The major targets and pathways shown to be altered by O-GlcNAc cycling in Neurodegenerative Disease

The target, manipulation and cell type or organism are listed on the left. The basic finding and reference are in the two right panels. The Table is not an exhaustive compilation of the published literature but is meant to illustrate the approaches that have been taken

Molecule/Protein	Agent Used	Tissue or cell line	Relevant result	Ref.	
Tau	OGA inhibitor Thiamet-G	tau mutant (Pro301-&gt;Leu) mouse model of AD	Systemic administration of Thiamet-G reduced neurofibrillary tangles (NFT)	(Yuzwa et al., 2012)	
Tau, APP	AD mouse model (TAPP) carrying tau (Pro301-&gt;Leu) and APP (APPSwe) mutations	Decreased tau phosphorylation and neurite plaques	(Yuzwa et al., 2014)	
Tau		Post mortem AD brain frontal cerebral cortex, and cerebellum	O-GlcNAc levels reduced	(Liu et al., 2004)	
	Isolated proteins from AD patients brains	Normal tau entangles with hyperphosphorylated tau	(Alonso et al., 1996)	
	OGT Knockout mouse brain	Tau phosphorylation increased	(O’Donnell et al., 2004)	
Tau, APP or polyglutamine expansion		C. elegans: OGT-1 and OGA-1 mutants	Neurodegeneration worsened in OGA-1 mutants, and ameliorated in OGT-1 mutant	(Wang et al., 2012)	
APP		SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells	O-GlcNAcylation induced α-secretase mediated cleavage of APP, resulting in neuroprotective sAPPα	(Jacobsen and Iverfeldt, 2011)	
Milton		Rat Hippocampal neurons	Increased O-GlcNAcylation decrease mitochondrial motility	(Pekkurnaz et al., 2014)	
Ogg1		Murine neonatal cardiac myocytes	O-GlcNAcylation decreased Ogg1 activity that could lead to mDNA damage	(Cividini et al., 2016)	
MIBP1		HEK293 cells	MIBP1 activity is suppressed by O-GlcNAcylation	(Iwashita et al., 2012)	
Electron Transport Chain (ETC)		Diabetic rat hearts	Increased O-GlcNAcylation could reduce ATP production by inhibiting the activity of ETC complexes	(Ma et al., 2016)	
TCA cycle enzymes		Diabetic rat hearts	Increased O-GlcNAc could reduce TCA activity	(Ma et al., 2016)	
Insulin Signaling Pathway		3T3-L1 adipocytes	Increased O-GlcNAcylation inhibits insulin signaling pathway activation	(Vosseller et al., 2002)	
SNAP-29		HeLa cells	Increased O-GlcNAcylation reduced autophagy by decreasing fusion between autophagosomes and endosome/lysosomes	(Guo et al., 2014)	
BCL2		Diabetic db/db mice cardiomyocytes	(Marsh et al., 2013)	
Atg7		Mouse brain lysate	(Park et al., 2015)	
α-synuclein		In vitro recombinant protein	O-GlcNAcylation prevents α-synuclein aggregation	(Marotta et al., 2015)	
Period		D. melanogaster	O-GlcNAcylation of regulate circadian timing by altering dPER subcellular localization	(Kim et al., 2012; Kaasik et al., 2013)	
KV7.3 (Kcnq3)		AgRP neurons in mouse	O-GlcNAcylation is essential for excitability of AgRP neurons by modifying Kcnq3	(Ruan et al., 2014)	

The authors have no conflicts to declare


Abramowitz LK Olivier-Van Stichelen S Hanover JA 2014 Chromosome imbalance as a driver of sex disparity in disease J Genomics 2 77 88 25031659
Akan I Love DC Harwood KR Bond MR Hanover JA 2016 Drosophila O-GlcNAcase Deletion Globally Perturbs Chromatin O-GlcNAcylation J Biol Chem 291 9906 9919 26957542
Akimoto Y Comer FI Cole RN Kudo A Kawakami H Hirano H Hart GW 2003 Localization of the O-GlcNAc transferase and O-GlcNAc-modified proteins in rat cerebellar cortex Brain Res 966 194 205 12618343
Akimoto Y Kreppel LK Hirano H Hart GW 1999 Localization of the O-linked N-acetylglucosamine transferase in rat pancreas Diabetes 48 2407 2413 10580430
Akimoto Y Kreppel LK Hirano H Hart GW 2000 Increased O-GlcNAc transferase in pancreas of rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes Diabetologia 43 1239 1247 11079742
Alonso AC Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K 1996 Alzheimer’s disease hyperphosphorylated tau sequesters normal tau into tangles of filaments and disassembles microtubules Nature medicine
Andrali SS März P Ozcan S 2005 Ataxin-10 interacts with O-GlcNAc transferase OGT in pancreatic beta cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 337 149 153 16182253
Andrali SS Qian Q Ozcan S 2007 Glucose mediates the translocation of NeuroD1 by O-linked glycosylation J Biol Chem 282 15589 15596 17403669
Arias EB Kim J Cartee GD 2004 Prolonged incubation in PUGNAc results in increased protein O-Linked glycosylation and insulin resistance in rat skeletal muscle Diabetes 53 921 930 15047606
Arnold CS Johnson GV Cole RN Dong DL Lee M Hart GW 1996 The microtubule-associated protein tau is extensively modified with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine J Biol Chem 271 28741 28744 8910513
Ashton-Beaucage D Udell CM Lavoie H Baril C Lefrançois M Chagnon P Gendron P Caron-Lizotte O Bonneil E Thibault P Therrien M 2010 The exon junction complex controls the splicing of MAPK and other long intron-containing transcripts in Drosophila Cell 143 251 262 20946983
Association, A 2017 2017 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia
Bailer SM Berlin WK Starr CM Hanover JA 1995 Characterization of nuclear pore protein p62 produced using baculovirus Protein Expr Purif 6 546 554 8527942
Baker LD Cross DJ Minoshima S Belongia D Watson GS Craft S 2011 Insulin resistance and Alzheimer-like reductions in regional cerebral glucose metabolism for cognitively normal adults with prediabetes or early type 2 diabetes Arch Neurol 68 51 57 20837822
Bale T 2016 The placenta and neurodevelopment: sex differences in prenatal vulnerability Dialogues Clin Neurosci 18 459 464 28179817
Ball LE Berkaw MN Buse MG 2006 Identification of the major site of O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine modification in the C terminus of insulin receptor substrate-1 Mol Cell Proteomics 5 313 323 16244361
Bengtson MH Joazeiro CA 2010 Role of a ribosome-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase in protein quality control Nature 467 470 473 20835226
Bleckmann C Geyer H Reinhold V Lieberoth A Schachner M Kleene R Geyer R 2009 Glycomic analysis of N-linked carbohydrate epitopes from CD24 of mouse brain J Proteome Res 8 567 582 19053835
Boland B Kumar A Lee S Platt FM Wegiel J Yu WH Nixon RA 2008 Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 28 6926 6937 18596167
Bond MR Hanover JA 2015 A little sugar goes a long way: the cell biology of O-GlcNAc J Cell Biol 208 869 880 25825515
Bonda DJ Lee HP Kudo W Zhu X Smith MA Lee HG 2010 Pathological implications of cell cycle re-entry in Alzheimer disease Expert Rev Mol Med 12 e19 20584423
Bouazzi H Lesca G Trujillo C Alwasiyah MK Munnich A 2015 Nonsyndromic X-linked intellectual deficiency in three brothers with a novel MED12 missense mutation [c.5922G&gt;T (p.Glu1974His)] Clin Case Rep 3 604 609 26273451
Bouché C Serdy S Kahn CR Goldfine AB 2004 The cellular fate of glucose and its relevance in type 2 diabetes Endocr Rev 25 807 830 15466941
Braidman I Carroll M Dance N Robinson D 1974 Separation and properties of human brain hexosaminidase C Biochem J 143 295 301 4477952
Brickley K Pozo K Stephenson FA 2011 N-acetylglucosamine transferase is an integral component of a kinesin-directed mitochondrial trafficking complex Biochim Biophys Acta 1813 269 281 21034780
Brickley K Smith MJ Beck M Stephenson FA 2005 GRIF-1 and OIP106, members of a novel gene family of coiled-coil domain proteins: association in vivo and in vitro with kinesin J Biol Chem 280 14723 14732 15644324
Brion JP Octave JN Couck AM 1994 Distribution of the phosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau in developing cortical neurons Neuroscience 63 895 909 7898684
Bullen JW Balsbaugh JL Chanda D Shabanowitz J Hunt DF Neumann D Hart GW 2014 Cross-talk between two essential nutrient-sensitive enzymes: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) J Biol Chem 289 10592 10606 24563466
Butkinaree C Cheung WD Park S Park K Barber M Hart GW 2008 Characterization of beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase cleavage by caspase-3 during apoptosis J Biol Chem 283 23557 23566 18586680
Cahill GF 1970 Starvation in man N Engl J Med 282 668 675 4915800
Caillet-Boudin ML Strecker G Michalski JC 1989 O-linked GlcNAc in serotype-2 adenovirus fibre Eur J Biochem 184 205 211 2776765
Caldwell SA Jackson SR Shahriari KS Lynch TP Sethi G Walker S Vosseller K Reginato MJ 2010 Nutrient sensor O-GlcNAc transferase regulates breast cancer tumorigenesis through targeting of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 Oncogene 29 2831 2842 20190804
Cameron A Giacomozzi B Joyce J Gray A Graham D Ousson S Neny M Beher D Carlson G O’Moore J Shearman M Hering H 2013 Generation and characterization of a rabbit monoclonal antibody site-specific for tau O-GlcNAcylated at serine 400 FEBS Lett 587 3722 3728 24113653
Capotosti F Guernier S Lammers F Waridel P Cai Y Jin J Conaway JW Conaway RC Herr W 2011 O-GlcNAc transferase catalyzes site-specific proteolysis of HCF-1 Cell 144 376 388 21295698
Cataldo AM Barnett JL Berman SA Li J Quarless S Bursztajn S Lippa C Nixon RA 1995 Gene expression and cellular content of cathepsin D in Alzheimer’s disease brain: evidence for early up-regulation of the endosomal-lysosomal system Neuron 14 671 680 7695914
Cataldo AM Hamilton DJ Barnett JL Paskevich PA Nixon RA 1996 Properties of the endosomal-lysosomal system in the human central nervous system: disturbances mark most neurons in populations at risk to degenerate in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 16 186 199 8613784
Cataldo AM Hamilton DJ Nixon RA 1994 Lysosomal abnormalities in degenerating neurons link neuronal compromise to senile plaque development in Alzheimer disease Brain Res 640 68 80 8004466
Cayrol C Lacroix C Mathe C Ecochard V Ceribelli M Loreau E Lazar V Dessen P Mantovani R Aguilar L Girard JP 2007 The THAP-zinc finger protein THAP1 regulates endothelial cell proliferation through modulation of pRB/E2F cell-cycle target genes Blood 109 584 594 17003378
Cha MY Cho HJ Kim C Jung YO Kang MJ Murray ME Hong HS Choi YJ Choi H Kim DK Choi H Kim J Dickson DW Song HK Cho JW Yi EC Kim J Jin SM Mook-Jung I 2015 Mitochondrial ATP synthase activity is impaired by suppressed O-GlcNAcylation in Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 24 6492 6504 26358770
Chen J Liu X Lü F Liu X Ru Y Ren Y Yao L Zhang Y 2015 Transcription factor Nrf1 is negatively regulated by its O-GlcNAcylation status FEBS Lett 589 2347 2358 26231763
Chen R Gong P Tao T Gao Y Shen J Yan Y Duan C Wang J Liu X 2017 O-GlcNAc Glycosylation of nNOS Promotes Neuronal Apoptosis Following Glutamate Excitotoxicity Cell Mol Neurobiol
Chou CF Smith AJ Omary MB 1992 Characterization and dynamics of O-linked glycosylation of human cytokeratin 8 and 18 J Biol Chem 267 3901 3906 1371281
Chou TY Hart GW Dang CV 1995 c-Myc is glycosylated at threonine 58, a known phosphorylation site and a mutational hot spot in lymphomas J Biol Chem 270 18961 18965 7642555
Cieniewski-Bernard C Bastide B Lefebvre T Lemoine J Mounier Y Michalski JC 2004 Identification of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine proteins in rat skeletal muscle using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry Mol Cell Proteomics 3 577 585 14985449
Cividini F Scott BT Dai A Han W Suarez J Diaz-Juarez J Diemer T Casteel DE Dillmann WH 2016 O-GlcNAcylation of Ogg1 Impairs Oxidative Mitochondrial DNA Lesion Repair in Diabetic Hearts J Biol Chem
Cole RN Hart GW 2001 Cytosolic O-glycosylation is abundant in nerve terminals J Neurochem 79 1080 1089 11739622
Comtesse N Maldener E Meese E 2001 Identification of a nuclear variant of MGEA5, a cytoplasmic hyaluronidase and a beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase Biochem Biophys Res Commun 283 634 640 11341771
Cordes VC Krohne G 1993 Sequential O-glycosylation of nuclear pore complex protein gp62 in vitro Eur J Cell Biol 60 185 195 8462594
Cuervo AM Stefanis L Fredenburg R Lansbury PT Sulzer D 2004 Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy Science 305 1292 1295 15333840
D’Onofrio M Starr CM Park MK Holt GD Haltiwanger RS Hart GW Hanover JA 1988 Partial cDNA sequence encoding a nuclear pore protein modified by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 85 9595 9599 3200844
Datta B Ray MK Chakrabarti D Wylie DE Gupta NK 1989 Glycosylation of eukaryotic peptide chain initiation factor 2 (eIF-2)-associated 67-kDa polypeptide (p67) and its possible role in the inhibition of eIF-2 kinase-catalyzed phosphorylation of the eIF-2 alpha-subunit J Biol Chem 264 20620 20624 2511207
Davis LI Blobel G 1987 Nuclear pore complex contains a family of glycoproteins that includes p62: glycosylation through a previously unidentified cellular pathway Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 84 7552 7556 3313397
Dehennaut V Lefebvre T Sellier C Leroy Y Gross B Walker S Cacan R Michalski JC Vilain JP Bodart JF 2007 O-linked N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase inhibition prevents G2/M transition in Xenopus laevis oocytes J Biol Chem 282 12527 12536 17329255
Deng Y Li B Liu F Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Brandt R Gong CX 2008 Regulation between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation of neurofilament-M and their dysregulation in Alzheimer disease FASEB J 22 138 145 17687114
Deplus R Delatte B Schwinn MK Defrance M Mendez J Murphy N Dawson MA Volkmar M Putmans P Calonne E Shih AH Levine RL Bernard O Mercher T Solary E Urh M Daniels DL Fuks F 2013 TET2 and TET3 regulate GlcNAcylation and H3K4 methylation through OGT and SET1/COMPASS EMBO J 32 645 655 23353889
Di Domenico F Owen JB Sultana R Sowell RA Perluigi M Cini C Cai J Pierce WM Butterfield DA 2010 The wheat germ agglutinin-fractionated proteome of subjects with Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment hippocampus and inferior parietal lobule: Implications for disease pathogenesis and progression J Neurosci Res 88 3566 3577 20936705
Diwu Y Tian J Shi J 2013a Effect of xixin decoction on O-linked N-acetylglucosamine glycosylation of tau proteins in rat brain with sporadic Alzheimer disease J Tradit Chin Med 33 367 372 24024334
Diwu Y Tian J Shi J 2013b [Effects of Xixin decoction on enzymes related to O-GlcNAc glycosylation of tau proteins in the brain of rats with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease] Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao 33 1442 1447 24144743
Doma MK Parker R 2007 RNA quality control in eukaryotes Cell 131 660 668 18022361
Dong DL Xu ZS Chevrier MR Cotter RJ Cleveland DW Hart GW 1993 Glycosylation of mammalian neurofilaments. Localization of multiple O-linked N-acetylglucosamine moieties on neurofilament polypeptides L and M J Biol Chem 268 16679 16687 8344946
Dong DL Xu ZS Hart GW Cleveland DW 1996 Cytoplasmic O-GlcNAc modification of the head domain and the KSP repeat motif of the neurofilament protein neurofilament-H J Biol Chem 271 20845 20852 8702840
Dorfmueller HC Borodkin VS Schimpl M Shepherd SM Shpiro NA van Aalten DM 2006 GlcNAcstatin: a picomolar, selective O-GlcNAcase inhibitor that modulates intracellular O-glcNAcylation levels J Am Chem Soc 128 16484 16485 17177381
Drougat L Olivier-Van Stichelen S Mortuaire M Foulquier F Lacoste AS Michalski JC Lefebvre T Vercoutter-Edouart AS 2012 Characterization of O-GlcNAc cycling and proteomic identification of differentially O-GlcNAcylated proteins during G1/S transition Biochim Biophys Acta 1820 1839 1848 22967762
Durning SP Flanagan-Steet H Prasad N Wells L 2016 O-Linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) Acts as a Glucose Sensor to Epigenetically Regulate the Insulin Gene in Pancreatic Beta Cells J Biol Chem 291 2107 2118 26598517
Elliot SP Schmied R Gabel CA Ambron RT 1993 An 83 kDa O-GlcNAc-glycoprotein is found in the axoplasm and nucleus of Aplysia neurons J Neurosci 13 2424 2429 8501515
Elsen NL Patel SB Ford RE Hall DL Hess F Kandula H Kornienko M Reid J Selnick H Shipman JM Sharma S Lumb KJ Soisson SM Klein DJ 2017 Insights into activity and inhibition from the crystal structure of human O-GlcNAcase Nat Chem Biol 13 613 615 28346407
Erbsloh F BERNSMEIER A HILLESHEIM H 1958 [The glucose consumption of the brain &amp; its dependence on the liver] Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr Z Gesamte Neurol Psychiatr 196 611 626 13534602
Fahie K Zachara NE 2016 Molecular functions of glycoconjugates in autophagy Journal of Molecular Biology
Farook VS Bogardus C Prochazka M 2002 Analysis of MGEA5 on 10q24.1-q24.3 encoding the beta-O-linked N-acetylglucosaminidase as a candidate gene for type 2 diabetes mellitus in Pima Indians Mol Genet Metab 77 189 193 12359146
Förster S Welleford AS Triplett JC Sultana R Schmitz B Butterfield DA 2014 Increased O-GlcNAc levels correlate with decreased O-GlcNAcase levels in Alzheimer disease brain Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 1333 1339 24859566
Forsythe ME Love DC Lazarus BD Kim EJ Prinz WA Ashwell G Krause MW Hanover JA 2006 Caenorhabditis elegans ortholog of a diabetes susceptibility locus: oga-1 (O-GlcNAcase) knockout impacts O-GlcNAc cycling, metabolism, and dauer Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 11952 11957 16882729
Fox NC Scahill RI Crum WR Rossor MN 1999 Correlation between rates of brain atrophy and cognitive decline in AD Neurology 52 1687 1689 10331700
Frade JM Ovejero-Benito MC 2015 Neuronal cell cycle: the neuron itself and its circumstances Cell Cycle 14 712 720 25590687
Fuchs T Gavarini S Saunders-Pullman R Raymond D Ehrlich ME Bressman SB Ozelius LJ 2009 Mutations in the THAP1 gene are responsible for DYT6 primary torsion dystonia Nat Genet 41 286 288 19182804
Gage FH 2000 Mammalian neural stem cells Science 287 1433 1438 10688783
Gambetta MC Muller J 2014 O-GlcNAcylation Prevents Aggregation of the Polycomb Group Repressor Polyhomeotic Dev Cell 31 629 639 25468754
Gambetta MC Oktaba K Müller J 2009a Essential role of the glycosyltransferase sxc/Ogt in polycomb repression Science 325 93 96 19478141
Gambetta MC Oktaba K Muller J 2009b Essential role of the glycosyltransferase sxc/Ogt in polycomb repression Science 325 93 96 19478141
Gandy JC Rountree AE Bijur GN 2006 Akt1 is dynamically modified with O-GlcNAc following treatments with PUGNAc and insulin-like growth factor-1 FEBS Lett 580 3051 3058 16684529
Gao Y Miyazaki J Hart GW 2003 The transcription factor PDX-1 is post-translationally modified by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine and this modification is correlated with its DNA binding activity and insulin secretion in min6 beta-cells Arch Biochem Biophys 415 155 163 12831837
Gao Y Wells L Comer FI Parker GJ Hart GW 2001 Dynamic O-glycosylation of nuclear and cytosolic proteins: cloning and characterization of a neutral, cytosolic beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase from human brain J Biol Chem 276 9838 9845 11148210
Gatta E Lefebvre T Gaetani S dos Santos M Marrocco J Mir AM Cassano T Maccari S Nicoletti F Mairesse J 2016 Evidence for an imbalance between tau O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation in the hippocampus of a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Pharmacol Res 105 186 197 26816085
Ge X Kwok PY Shieh JT 2015 Prioritizing genes for X-linked diseases using population exome data Hum Mol Genet 24 599 608 25217573
Ginsberg SD Alldred MJ Counts SE Cataldo AM Neve RL Jiang Y Wuu J Chao MV Mufson EJ Nixon RA Che S 2010 Microarray analysis of hippocampal CA1 neurons implicates early endosomal dysfunction during Alzheimer’s disease progression Biol Psychiatry 68 885 893 20655510
Glater EE Megeath LJ Stowers RS Schwarz TL 2006 Axonal transport of mitochondria requires milton to recruit kinesin heavy chain and is light chain independent J Cell Biol 173 545 557 16717129
Gong CX Liu F Iqbal K 2016 O-GlcNAcylation: A regulator of tau pathology and neurodegeneration Alzheimers Dement 12 1078 1089 27126545
Graham DL Gray AJ Joyce JA Yu D O’Moore J Carlson GA Shearman MS Dellovade TL Hering H 2014 Increased O-GlcNAcylation reduces pathological tau without affecting its normal phosphorylation in a mouse model of tauopathy Neuropharmacology 79 307 313 24326295
Griffith LS Mathes M Schmitz B 1995 Beta-amyloid precursor protein is modified with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine J Neurosci Res 41 270 278 7650762
Griffith LS Schmitz B 1995 O-linked N-acetylglucosamine is upregulated in Alzheimer brains Biochem Biophys Res Commun 213 424 431 7646495
Griffith LS Schmitz B 1999 O-linked N-acetylglucosamine levels in cerebellar neurons respond reciprocally to pertubations of phosphorylation Eur J Biochem 262 824 831 10411645
Gross BJ Kraybill BC Walker S 2005 Discovery of O-GlcNAc transferase inhibitors J Am Chem Soc 127 14588 14589 16231908
Groves JA Maduka AO O’Meally RN Cole RN Zachara NE 2017 Fatty acid synthase inhibits the O-GlcNAcase during oxidative stress J Biol Chem 292 6493 6511 28232487
Guo B Liang Q Li L Hu Z Wu F Zhang P Ma Y 2014 O-GlcNAc-modification of SNAP-29 regulates autophagosome maturation Nature cell
Hagmann J Grob M Burger MM 1992 The cytoskeletal protein talin is O-glycosylated J Biol Chem 267 14424 14428 1629228
Haltiwanger RS Blomberg MA Hart GW 1992 Glycosylation of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. Purification and characterization of a uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine:polypeptide beta-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase J Biol Chem 267 9005 9013 1533623
Haltiwanger RS Grove K Philipsberg GA 1998 Modulation of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine levels on nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins in vivo using the peptide O-GlcNAc-beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase inhibitor O-(2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranosylidene)amino-N-phenylcarbamate J Biol Chem 273 3611 3617 9452489
Haltiwanger RS Holt GD Hart GW 1990 Enzymatic addition of O-GlcNAc to nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. Identification of a uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine:peptide beta-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase J Biol Chem 265 2563 2568 2137449
Han I Kudlow JE 1997 Reduced O glycosylation of Sp1 is associated with increased proteasome susceptibility Mol Cell Biol 17 2550 2558 9111324
Hanover JA 2001 Glycan-dependent signaling: O-linked N-acetylglucosamine FASEB J 15 1865 1876 11532966
Hanover JA Cohen CK Willingham MC Park MK 1987 O-linked N-acetylglucosamine is attached to proteins of the nuclear pore. Evidence for cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic glycoproteins J Biol Chem 262 9887 9894 3110163
Hanover JA Forsythe ME Hennessey PT Brodigan TM Love DC Ashwell G Krause M 2005 A Caenorhabditis elegans model of insulin resistance: altered macronutrient storage and dauer formation in an OGT-1 knockout Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 11266 11271 16051707
Hanover JA Krause MW Love DC 2012 Bittersweet memories: linking metabolism to epigenetics through O-GlcNAcylation Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13 312 321 22522719
Hanover JA Lai Z Lee G Lubas WA Sato SM 1999 Elevated O-linked N-acetylglucosamine metabolism in pancreatic beta-cells Arch Biochem Biophys 362 38 45 9917327
Hanover JA Wang P 2013 O-GlcNAc cycling shows neuroprotective potential in C. elegans models of neurodegenerative disease Worm 2 e27043 24744983
Hanover JA Yu S Lubas WB Shin SH Ragano-Caracciola M Kochran J Love DC 2003 Mitochondrial and nucleocytoplasmic isoforms of O-linked GlcNAc transferase encoded by a single mammalian gene Arch Biochem Biophys 409 287 297 12504895
Hastings NB Wang X Song L Butts BD Grotz D Hargreaves R Fred Hess J Hong KK Huang CR Hyde L Laverty M Lee J Levitan D Lu SX Maguire M Mahadomrongkul V McEachern EJ Ouyang X Rosahl TW Selnick H Stanton M Terracina G Vocadlo DJ Wang G Duffy JL Parker EM Zhang L 2017 Inhibition of O-GlcNAcase leads to elevation of O-GlcNAc tau and reduction of tauopathy and cerebrospinal fluid tau in rTg4510 mice Mol Neurodegener 12 39 28521765
Heckel D Comtesse N Brass N Blin N Zang KD Meese E 1998 Novel immunogenic antigen homologous to hyaluronidase in meningioma Hum Mol Genet 7 1859 1872 9811929
Hokama M Oka S Leon J Ninomiya T Honda H Sasaki K Iwaki T Ohara T Sasaki T LaFerla FM Kiyohara Y Nakabeppu Y 2014 Altered expression of diabetes-related genes in Alzheimer’s disease brains: the Hisayama study Cereb Cortex 24 2476 2488 23595620
Holman GD Kasuga M 1997 From receptor to transporter: insulin signalling to glucose transport Diabetologia 40 991 1003 9300235
Holt GD Haltiwanger RS Torres CR Hart GW 1987 Erythrocytes contain cytoplasmic glycoproteins. O-linked GlcNAc on Band 4.1 J Biol Chem 262 14847 14850 3117790
Holt GD Hart GW 1986 The subcellular distribution of terminal N-acetylglucosamine moieties. Localization of a novel protein-saccharide linkage, O-linked GlcNAc J Biol Chem 261 8049 8057 3086323
Houlden H Schneider SA Paudel R Melchers A Schwingenschuh P Edwards M Hardy J Bhatia KP 2010 THAP1 mutations (DYT6) are an additional cause of early-onset dystonia Neurology 74 846 850 20211909
Howerton CL Bale TL 2014 Targeted placental deletion of OGT recapitulates the prenatal stress phenotype including hypothalamic mitochondrial dysfunction Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 9639 9644 24979775
Howerton CL Morgan CP Fischer DB Bale TL 2013 O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) as a placental biomarker of maternal stress and reprogramming of CNS gene transcription in development Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 5169 5174 23487789
Hu Y Suarez J Fricovsky E Wang H Scott BT Trauger SA Han W Hu Y Oyeleye MO Dillmann WH 2009 Increased enzymatic O-GlcNAcylation of mitochondrial proteins impairs mitochondrial function in cardiac myocytes exposed to high glucose J Biol Chem 284 547 555 19004814
Inaba M Maede Y 1989 O-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine moiety on discrete peptide of multiple protein 4.1 isoforms regulated by alternative pathways J Biol Chem 264 18149 18155 2808371
Ingham PW 1984 A gene that regulates the bithorax complex differentially in larval and adult cells of Drosophila Cell 37 815 823 6430566
Iwashita Y Fukuchi N Waki M Hayashi K Tahira T 2012 Genome-wide repression of NF-kappaB target genes by transcription factor MIBP1 and its modulation by O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase J Biol Chem 287 9887 9900 22294689
Iyer SP Akimoto Y Hart GW 2003 Identification and cloning of a novel family of coiled-coil domain proteins that interact with O-GlcNAc transferase J Biol Chem 278 5399 5409 12435728
Jacobsen KT Iverfeldt K 2011 O-GlcNAcylation increases non-amyloidogenic processing of the amyloid-β precursor protein (APP) Biochem Biophys Res Commun 404 882 886 21182826
Janetzko J Walker S 2014 The making of a sweet modification: structure and function of O-GlcNAc transferase Journal of Biological Chemistry
Ji S Kang JG Park SY Lee J Oh YJ Cho JW 2011 O-GlcNAcylation of tubulin inhibits its polymerization Amino Acids 40 809 818 20665223
Jiang M Qiu Z Zhang S Fan X Cai X Xu B Li X Zhou J Zhang X Chu Y Wang W Liang J Horvath T Yang X Wu K Nie Y Fan D 2016 Elevated O-GlcNAcylation promotes gastric cancer cells proliferation by modulating cell cycle related proteins and ERK 1/2 signaling Oncotarget
Jinek M Rehwinkel J Lazarus BD Izaurralde E Hanover JA Conti E 2004 The superhelical TPR-repeat domain of O-linked GlcNAc transferase exhibits structural similarities to importin alpha Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 1001 1007 15361863
Jínek M Rehwinkel J Lazarus BD Izaurralde E Hanover JA Conti E 2004 The superhelical TPR-repeat domain of O-linked GlcNAc transferase exhibits structural similarities to importin alpha Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 1001 1007 15361863
Jo YK Park NY Park SJ Kim BG Shin JH Jo DS 2016 O-GlcNAcylation of ATG4B positively regulates autophagy by increasing its hydroxylase activity Oncotarget
Johnson KA Fox NC Sperling RA Klunk WE 2012 Brain imaging in Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 a006213 22474610
Kaasik K Kivimae S Allen JJ Chalkley RJ Huang Y Baer K Kissel H Burlingame AL Shokat KM Ptacek LJ Fu YH 2013 Glucose sensor O-GlcNAcylation coordinates with phosphorylation to regulate circadian clock Cell Metab 17 291 302 23395175
Kawauchi K Araki K Tobiume K Tanaka N 2009 Loss of p53 enhances catalytic activity of IKKbeta through O-linked beta-N-acetyl glucosamine modification Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 3431 3436 19202066
Kearse KP Hart GW 1991a Lymphocyte activation induces rapid changes in nuclear and cytoplasmic glycoproteins Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88 1701 1705 2000378
Kearse KP Hart GW 1991b Topology of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine in murine lymphocytes Arch Biochem Biophys 290 543 548 1929421
Keembiyehetty C Love DC Harwood KR Gavrilova O Comly ME Hanover JA 2015 Conditional knock-out reveals a requirement for O-linked N-Acetylglucosaminase (O-GlcNAcase) in metabolic homeostasis J Biol Chem 290 7097 7113 25596529
Keembiyehetty CN Krzeslak A Love DC Hanover JA 2011 A lipid-droplet-targeted O-GlcNAcase isoform is a key regulator of the proteasome J Cell Sci 124 2851 2860 21807949
Kegel KB Kim M Sapp E McIntyre C 2000 Huntingtin expression stimulates endosomal–lysosomal activity, endosome tubulation, and autophagy Journal of …
Kelly WG Dahmus ME Hart GW 1993 RNA polymerase II is a glycoprotein. Modification of the COOH-terminal domain by O-GlcNAc J Biol Chem 268 10416 10424 8486697
Kern W Peters A Fruehwald-Schultes B Deininger E Born J Fehm HL 2001 Improving influence of insulin on cognitive functions in humans Neuroendocrinology 74 270 280 11598383
Khidekel N Ficarro SB Peters EC Hsieh-Wilson LC 2004 Exploring the O-GlcNAc proteome: direct identification of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins from the brain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 13132 13137 15340146
Kim C Nam DW Park SY Song H Hong HS Boo JH Jung ES Kim Y Baek JY Kim KS Cho JW Mook-Jung I 2013 O-linked β-N-acetylglucosaminidase inhibitor attenuates β-amyloid plaque and rescues memory impairment Neurobiol Aging 34 275 285 22503002
Kim EJ 2011 Chemical arsenal for the study of O-GlcNAc Molecules 16 1987 2022 21358590
Kim EJ Kang DO Love DC Hanover JA 2006 Enzymatic characterization of O-GlcNAcase isoforms using a fluorogenic GlcNAc substrate Carbohydr Res 341 971 982 16584714
Kim EY Jeong EH Park S Jeong HJ Edery I Cho JW 2012 A role for O-GlcNAcylation in setting circadian clock speed Genes Dev 26 490 502 22327476
Kim YB Uotani S Pierroz DD Flier JS Kahn BB 2000 In vivo administration of leptin activates signal transduction directly in insulin-sensitive tissues: overlapping but distinct pathways from insulin Endocrinology 141 2328 2339 10875232
Kitada T Asakawa S Hattori N Matsumine H Yamamura Y Minoshima S Yokochi M Mizuno Y Shimizu N 1998 Mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism Nature 392 605 608 9560156
Klein AL Berkaw MN Buse MG Ball LE 2009 O-linked N-acetylglucosamine modification of insulin receptor substrate-1 occurs in close proximity to multiple SH2 domain binding motifs Mol Cell Proteomics 8 2733 2745 19671924
Kreppel LK Blomberg MA Hart GW 1997 Dynamic glycosylation of nuclear and cytosolic proteins. Cloning and characterization of a unique O-GlcNAc transferase with multiple tetratricopeptide repeats J Biol Chem 272 9308 9315 9083067
Kriaucionis S Heintz N 2009 The nuclear DNA base 5-hydroxymethylcytosine is present in Purkinje neurons and the brain Science 324 929 930 19372393
Kumar A Singh PK Parihar R Dwivedi V 2014 Decreased O-linked GlcNAcylation protects from cytotoxicity mediated by huntingtin exon1 protein fragment Journal of Biological …
Lagerlöf O Hart GW Huganir RL 2017 O-GlcNAc transferase regulates excitatory synapse maturity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 1684 1689 28143929
Lagerlöf O Slocomb JE Hong I Aponte Y Blackshaw S Hart GW Huganir RL 2016 The nutrient sensor OGT in PVN neurons regulates feeding Science 351 1293 1296 26989246
Lazarus BD Love DC Hanover JA 2006 Recombinant O-GlcNAc transferase isoforms: identification of O-GlcNAcase, yes tyrosine kinase, and tau as isoform-specific substrates Glycobiology 16 415 421 16434389
Lazarus BD Love DC Hanover JA 2009 O-GlcNAc cycling: implications for neurodegenerative disorders Int J Biochem Cell Biol 41 2134 2146 19782947
Lazarus MB Jiang J Kapuria V Bhuiyan T Janetzko J Zandberg WF Vocadlo DJ Herr W Walker S 2013 HCF-1 is cleaved in the active site of O-GlcNAc transferase Science 342 1235 1239 24311690
Lazarus MB Nam Y Jiang J Sliz P Walker S 2011 Structure of human O-GlcNAc transferase and its complex with a peptide substrate Nature 469 564 567 21240259
Lefebvre T Caillet-Boudin ML Buée L Delacourte A Michalski JC 2003a O-GlcNAc glycosylation and neurological disorders Adv Exp Med Biol 535 189 202 14714896
Lefebvre T Ferreira S Dupont-Wallois L Bussière T Dupire MJ Delacourte A Michalski JC Caillet-Boudin ML 2003b Evidence of a balance between phosphorylation and O-GlcNAc glycosylation of Tau proteins–a role in nuclear localization Biochim Biophys Acta 1619 167 176 12527113
Lefebvre T Guinez C Dehennaut V Beseme-Dekeyser O Morelle W Michalski JC 2005 Does O-GlcNAc play a role in neurodegenerative diseases Expert Rev Proteomics 2 265 275 15892570
Lehman DM Fu DJ Freeman AB Hunt KJ Leach RJ Johnson-Pais T Hamlington J Dyer TD Arya R Abboud H Goring HH Duggirala R Blangero J Konrad RJ Stern MP 2005 A single nucleotide polymorphism in MGEA5 encoding O-GlcNAc-selective N-acetyl-beta-D glucosaminidase is associated with type 2 diabetes in Mexican Americans Diabetes 54 1214 1221 15793264
Levine PM De Leon CA Galesic A Balana A Marotta NP Lewis YE Pratt MR 2017 O-GlcNAc modification inhibits the calpain-mediated cleavage of α-synuclein Bioorg Med Chem
Lewis BA Hanover JA 2014 O-GlcNAc and the epigenetic regulation of gene expression J Biol Chem 289 34440 34448 25336654
Lewis YE Galesic A Levine PM De Leon CA Lamiri N Brennan CK Pratt MR 2017 O-GlcNAcylation of α-Synuclein at Serine 87 Reduces Aggregation without Affecting Membrane Binding ACS Chem Biol 12 1020 1027 28195695
Li B Li H Lu L Jiang J 2017 Structures of human O-GlcNAcase and its complexes reveal a new substrate recognition mode Nat Struct Mol Biol 24 362 369 28319083
Li J Wang J Hou W Jing Z Tian C Han Y Liao J Dong MQ Xu X 2011 Phosphorylation of Ataxin-10 by polo-like kinase 1 is required for cytokinesis Cell Cycle 10 2946 2958 21857149
Lipinski MM Zheng B Lu T Yan Z 2010 Genome-wide analysis reveals mechanisms modulating autophagy in normal brain aging and in Alzheimer’s disease Proceedings of the …
Liu F Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Hart GW Gong CX 2004a O-GlcNAcylation regulates phosphorylation of tau: a mechanism involved in Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 10804 10809 15249677
Liu F Shi J Tanimukai H Gu J Gu J Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Gong CX 2009 Reduced O-GlcNAcylation links lower brain glucose metabolism and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease Brain 132 1820 1832 19451179
Liu K Paterson AJ Zhang F McAndrew J Fukuchi K Wyss JM Peng L Hu Y Kudlow JE 2004b Accumulation of protein O-GlcNAc modification inhibits proteasomes in the brain and coincides with neuronal apoptosis in brain areas with high O-GlcNAc metabolism J Neurochem 89 1044 1055 15140202
Liu Y Li X Yu Y Shi J Liang Z Run X Li Y Dai CL Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Liu F Gong CX 2012 Developmental regulation of protein O-GlcNAcylation, O-GlcNAc transferase, and O-GlcNAcase in mammalian brain PLoS One 7 e43724 22928023
Love DC Kochan J Cathey RL Shin SH Hanover JA Kochran J 2003 Mitochondrial and nucleocytoplasmic targeting of O-linked GlcNAc transferase J Cell Sci 116 647 654 12538765
Love DC Krause MW Hanover JA 2010 O-GlcNAc cycling: emerging roles in development and epigenetics Semin Cell Dev Biol 21 646 654 20488252
Lubas WA Frank DW Krause M Hanover JA 1997 O-Linked GlcNAc transferase is a conserved nucleocytoplasmic protein containing tetratricopeptide repeats J Biol Chem 272 9316 9324 9083068
Lubas WA Hanover JA 2000 Functional expression of O-linked GlcNAc transferase. Domain structure and substrate specificity J Biol Chem 275 10983 10988 10753899
Lüthi T Haltiwanger RS Greengard P Bähler M 1991 Synapsins contain O-linked N-acetylglucosamine J Neurochem 56 1493 1498 1901592
Ma J Banerjee P Whelan SA Liu T Wei AC Ramirez-Correa G McComb ME Costello CE O’Rourke B Murphy A Hart GW 2016 Comparative Proteomics Reveals Dysregulated Mitochondrial O-GlcNAcylation in Diabetic Hearts J Proteome Res 15 2254 2264 27213235
Ma X Liu P Yan H Sun H Liu X Zhou F Li L Chen Y 2013 Substrate specificity provides insights into the sugar donor recognition mechanism of O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) PloS one
MacAskill AF Kittler JT 2010 Control of mitochondrial transport and localization in neurons Trends Cell Biol 20 102 112 20006503
Macaskill AF Rinholm JE Twelvetrees AE Arancibia-Carcamo IL Muir J Fransson A Aspenstrom P Attwell D Kittler JT 2009 Miro1 is a calcium sensor for glutamate receptor-dependent localization of mitochondria at synapses Neuron 61 541 555 19249275
Macauley MS Bubb AK Martinez-Fleites C Davies GJ Vocadlo DJ 2008 Elevation of global O-GlcNAc levels in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by selective inhibition of O-GlcNAcase does not induce insulin resistance J Biol Chem 283 34687 34695 18842583
Macauley MS Shan X Yuzwa SA Gloster TM Vocadlo DJ 2010 Elevation of Global O-GlcNAc in rodents using a selective O-GlcNAcase inhibitor does not cause insulin resistance or perturb glucohomeostasis Chem Biol 17 949 958 20851344
Macauley MS Vocadlo DJ 2009 Enzymatic characterization and inhibition of the nuclear variant of human O-GlcNAcase Carbohydr Res 344 1079 1084 19423084
Mao X Zhang D Tao T Liu X Sun X Wang Y Shen A 2015 O-GlcNAc glycosylation of p27(kip1) promotes astrocyte migration and functional recovery after spinal cord contusion Exp Cell Res 339 197 205 26562163
Marks JL Porte D Stahl WL Baskin DG 1990 Localization of insulin receptor mRNA in rat brain by in situ hybridization Endocrinology 127 3234 3236 2249648
Marotta NP Lin YH Lewis YE Ambroso MR Zaro BW Roth MT Arnold DB Langen R Pratt MR 2015 O-GlcNAc modification blocks the aggregation and toxicity of the protein α-synuclein associated with Parkinson’s disease Nat Chem 7 913 920 26492012
Marsh SA Powell PC Dell’italia LJ Chatham JC 2013 Cardiac O-GlcNAcylation blunts autophagic signaling in the diabetic heart Life Sci 92 648 656 22728715
Marshall S Duong T Orbus RJ Rumberger JM Okuyama R 2003 Measurement of UDP-N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase (OGT) in brain cytosol and characterization of anti-OGT antibodies Anal Biochem 314 169 179 12654302
März P Stetefeld J Bendfeldt K Nitsch C Reinstein J Shoeman RL Dimitriades-Schmutz B Schwager M Leiser D Ozcan S Otten U Ozbek S 2006 Ataxin-10 interacts with O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine transferase in the brain J Biol Chem 281 20263 20270 16714295
Matsuzaki T Sasaki K Tanizaki Y Hata J Fujimi K Matsui Y Sekita A Suzuki SO Kanba S Kiyohara Y Iwaki T 2010 Insulin resistance is associated with the pathology of Alzheimer disease: the Hisayama study Neurology 75 764 770 20739649
Mazars R Gonzalez-de-Peredo A Cayrol C Lavigne AC Vogel JL Ortega N Lacroix C Gautier V Huet G Ray A Monsarrat B Kristie TM Girard JP 2010 The THAP-zinc finger protein THAP1 associates with coactivator HCF-1 and O-GlcNAc transferase: a link between DYT6 and DYT3 dystonias J Biol Chem 285 13364 13371 20200153
McClain DA Lubas WA Cooksey RC Hazel M Parker GJ Love DC Hanover JA 2002 Altered glycan-dependent signaling induces insulin resistance and hyperleptinemia Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 10695 10699 12136128
McLean CA Cherny RA Fraser FW 1999 Soluble pool of Aβ amyloid as a determinant of severity of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Annals of …
McShea A Harris PL Webster KR Wahl AF Smith MA 1997 Abnormal expression of the cell cycle regulators P16 and CDK4 in Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 150 1933 1939 9176387
Mergenthaler P Lindauer U Dienel GA Meisel A 2013 Sugar for the brain: the role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain function Trends Neurosci 36 587 597 23968694
Mietelska-Porowska A Wasik U Goras M 2014 Tau protein modifications and interactions: their role in function and dysfunction International journal of …
Milward EA Papadopoulos R Fuller SJ Moir RD Small D Beyreuther K Masters CL 1992 The amyloid protein precursor of Alzheimer’s disease is a mediator of the effects of nerve growth factor on neurite outgrowth Neuron 9 129 137 1632967
Murphy JE Hanover JA Froehlich M DuBois G Keen JH 1994 Clathrin assembly protein AP-3 is phosphorylated and glycosylated on the 50-kDa structural domain J Biol Chem 269 21346 21352 8063760
Myers A Holmans P Marshall H Kwon J Meyer D Ramic D Shears S Booth J DeVrieze FW Crook R Hamshere M Abraham R Tunstall N Rice F Carty S Lillystone S Kehoe P Rudrasingham V Jones L Lovestone S Perez-Tur J Williams J Owen MJ Hardy J Goate AM 2000 Susceptibility locus for Alzheimer’s disease on chromosome 10 Science 290 2304 2305 11125144
Nagy Z Esiri MM Cato AM Smith AD 1997 Cell cycle markers in the hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 94 6 15 9224524
Nakamura S Nakano S Nishii M Kaneko S Kusaka H 2012 Localization of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins in neuromuscular diseases Med Mol Morphol 45 86 90 22718293
Nandi A Sprung R Barma DK Zhao Y Kim SC Falck JR Zhao Y 2006 Global identification of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins Anal Chem 78 452 458 16408927
Németh AH Nolte D Dunne E Niemann S Kostrzewa M Peters U Fraser E Bochukova E Butler R Brown J Cox RD Levy ER Ropers HH Monaco AP Müller U 1999 Refined linkage disequilibrium and physical mapping of the gene locus for X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (DYT3) Genomics 60 320 329 10493831
Ngoh GA Watson LJ Facundo HT Dillmann W Jones SP 2008 Non-canonical glycosyltransferase modulates post-hypoxic cardiac myocyte death and mitochondrial permeability transition J Mol Cell Cardiol 45 313 325 18539296
Ning X Tao T Shen J Ji Y Xie L Wang H Liu N Xu X Sun C Zhang D Shen A Ke K 2017 The O-GlcNAc Modification of CDK5 Involved in Neuronal Apoptosis Following In Vitro Intracerebral Hemorrhage Cell Mol Neurobiol 37 527 536 27316643
Niranjan TS Skinner C May M Turner T Rose R Stevenson R Schwartz CE Wang T 2015 Affected kindred analysis of human X chromosome exomes to identify novel X-linked intellectual disability genes PLoS One 10 e0116454 25679214
Nixon RA 2013 The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease Nat Med 19 983 997 23921753
Nixon RA Wegiel J Kumar A Yu WH 2005 Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study Journal of …
Nugent BM Bale TL 2015 The omniscient placenta: Metabolic and epigenetic regulation of fetal programming Front Neuroendocrinol 39 28 37 26368654
O’Donnell N Zachara NE Hart GW Marth JD 2004 Ogt-dependent X-chromosome-linked protein glycosylation is a requisite modification in somatic cell function and embryo viability Mol Cell Biol 24 1680 1690 14749383
O’Neill LA Kaltschmidt C 1997 NF-kappa B: a crucial transcription factor for glial and neuronal cell function Trends Neurosci 20 252 258 9185306
Obici S Feng Z Karkanias G Baskin DG Rossetti L 2002 Decreasing hypothalamic insulin receptors causes hyperphagia and insulin resistance in rats Nat Neurosci 5 566 572 12021765
Ogawa O Lee HG Zhu X Raina A Harris PL Castellani RJ Perry G Smith MA 2003a Increased p27, an essential component of cell cycle control, in Alzheimer’s disease Aging Cell 2 105 110 12882323
Ogawa O Zhu X Lee HG Raina A Obrenovich ME Bowser R Ghanbari HA Castellani RJ Perry G Smith MA 2003b Ectopic localization of phosphorylated histone H3 in Alzheimer’s disease: a mitotic catastrophe Acta Neuropathol 105 524 528 12677454
Olivier-Van Stichelen S Abramowitz LK Hanover JA 2014a X marks the spot: does it matter that O-GlcNAc transferase is an X-linked gene Biochem Biophys Res Commun 453 201 207 24960196
Olivier-Van Stichelen S Dehennaut V Buzy A Zachayus JL Guinez C Mir AM El Yazidi-Belkoura I Copin MC Boureme D Loyaux D Ferrara P Lefebvre T 2014b O-GlcNAcylation stabilizes β-catenin through direct competition with phosphorylation at threonine 41 FASEB J 28 3325 3338 24744147
Olivier-Van Stichelen S Drougat L Dehennaut V El Yazidi-Belkoura I Guinez C Mir AM Michalski JC Vercoutter-Edouart AS Lefebvre T 2012 Serum-stimulated cell cycle entry promotes ncOGT synthesis required for cyclin D expression Oncogenesis 1 e36 23552487
Olivier-Van Stichelen S Hanover JA 2014 X-inactivation normalizes O-GlcNAc transferase levels and generates an O-GlcNAc-depleted Barr body Front Genet 5 256 25136351
Olivier-Van Stichelen S Wang P Comly M Love DC Hanover JA 2017 Nutrient-driven O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) cycling impacts neurodevelopmental timing and metabolism J Biol Chem 292 6076 6085 28246173
Omary MB Ku NO Liao J Price D 1998 Keratin modifications and solubility properties in epithelial cells and in vitro Subcell Biochem 31 105 140 9932491
Palaniappan KK Hangauer MJ Smith TJ Smart BP Pitcher AA Cheng EH Bertozzi CR Boyce M 2013 A chemical glycoproteomics platform reveals O-GlcNAcylation of mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel 2 Cell Rep 5 546 552 24120863
Pantaleon M Steane SE McMahon K Cuffe JSM Moritz KM 2017 Placental O-GlcNAc-transferase expression and interactions with the glucocorticoid receptor are sex specific and regulated by maternal corticosterone exposure in mice Sci Rep 7 2017 28515473
Parathath SR Mainwaring LA Fernandez-L A Campbell DO Kenney AM 2008 Insulin receptor substrate 1 is an effector of sonic hedgehog mitogenic signaling in cerebellar neural precursors Development 135 3291 3300 18755774
Park MK D’Onofrio M Willingham MC Hanover JA 1987 A monoclonal antibody against a family of nuclear pore proteins (nucleoporins): O-linked N-acetylglucosamine is part of the immunodeterminant Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 84 6462 6466 2442757
Park S Lee Y Pak JW Kim H Choi H Kim J 2015 O-GlcNAc modification is essential for the regulation of autophagy in Drosophila melanogaster Cellular and molecular …
Park SS Lee D 2006 Selective loss of dopaminergic neurons and formation of Lewy body-like aggregations in alpha-synuclein transgenic fly neuronal cultures Eur J Neurosci 23 2908 2914 16819979
Pekkurnaz G Trinidad JC Wang X Kong D Schwarz TL 2014 Glucose regulates mitochondrial motility via Milton modification by O-GlcNAc transferase Cell 158 54 68 24995978
Perez-Cervera Y Dehennaut V Aquino Gil M Guedri K Solórzano Mata CJ Olivier-Van Stichelen S Michalski JC Foulquier F Lefebvre T 2013 Insulin signaling controls the expression of O-GlcNAc transferase and its interaction with lipid microdomains FASEB J 27 3478 3486 23689613
Platt FM Boland B van der Spoel AC 2012 The cell biology of disease: lysosomal storage disorders: the cellular impact of lysosomal dysfunction J Cell Biol 199 723 734 23185029
Preuss U Mandelkow EM 1998 Mitotic phosphorylation of tau protein in neuronal cell lines resembles phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease Eur J Cell Biol 76 176 184 9716264
Qiu H Liu F Tao T Zhang D Liu X Zhu G Xu Z Ni R Shen A 2017 Modification of p27 with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine regulates cell proliferation in hepatocellular carcinoma Mol Carcinog 56 258 271 27175940
Querfurth HW LaFerla FM 2010 Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 362 329 344 20107219
Radi E Formichi P Battisti C Federico A 2014 Apoptosis and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases J Alzheimers Dis 42 Suppl 3 S125 52 25056458
Ramakrishnan P Clark PM Mason DE Peters EC Hsieh-Wilson LC Baltimore D 2013 Activation of the Transcriptional Function of the NF-kappaB Protein c-Rel by O-GlcNAc Glycosylation Sci Signal 6 ra75 23982206
Rao FV Schüttelkopf AW Dorfmueller HC Ferenbach AT Navratilova I van Aalten DM 2013 Structure of a bacterial putative acetyltransferase defines the fold of the human O-GlcNAcase C-terminal domain Open Biol 3 130021 24088714
Reason AJ Morris HR Panico M Marais R Treisman RH Haltiwanger RS Hart GW Kelly WG Dell A 1992 Localization of O-GlcNAc modification on the serum response transcription factor J Biol Chem 267 16911 16921 1512232
Rensink AA Otte-Höller I de Boer R Bosch RR ten Donkelaar HJ de Waal RM Verbeek MM Kremer B 2004 Insulin inhibits amyloid beta-induced cell death in cultured human brain pericytes Neurobiol Aging 25 93 103 14675735
Rex-Mathes M Werner S Strutas D Griffith LS Viebahn C Thelen K Schmitz B 2001 O-GlcNAc expression in developing and ageing mouse brain Biochimie 83 583 590 11522386
Rexach JE Clark PM Hsieh-Wilson LC 2008 Chemical approaches to understanding O-GlcNAc glycosylation in the brain Nat Chem Biol 4 97 106 18202679
Rexach JE Rogers CJ Yu SH Tao J Sun YE Hsieh-Wilson LC 2010 Quantification of O-glycosylation stoichiometry and dynamics using resolvable mass tags Nat Chem Biol 6 645 651 20657584
Robertson LA Moya KL Breen KC 2004 The potential role of tau protein O-glycosylation in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 6 489 495 15505370
Roos MD Su K Baker JR Kudlow JE 1997 O glycosylation of an Sp1-derived peptide blocks known Sp1 protein interactions Mol Cell Biol 17 6472 6480 9343410
Roquemore EP Chevrier MR Cotter RJ Hart GW 1996 Dynamic O-GlcNAcylation of the small heat shock protein alpha B-crystallin Biochemistry 35 3578 3586 8639509
Roquemore EP Dell A Morris HR Panico M Reason AJ Savoy LA Wistow GJ Zigler JS Earles BJ Hart GW 1992 Vertebrate lens alpha-crystallins are modified by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine J Biol Chem 267 555 563 1730617
Ross CA Poirier MA 2004 Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative disease Nat Med 10 Suppl S10 7 15272267
Ross CA Poirier MA 2005 Opinion: What is the role of protein aggregation in neurodegeneration Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 891 898 16167052
Ross SA Chen X Hope HR Sun S McMahon EG Broschat K Gulve EA 2000 Development and comparison of two 3T3-L1 adipocyte models of insulin resistance: increased glucose flux vs glucosamine treatment Biochem Biophys Res Commun 273 1033 1041 10891367
Roth C Chan S Offen WA Hemsworth GR Willems LI King DT Varghese V Britton R Vocadlo DJ Davies GJ 2017 Structural and functional insight into human O-GlcNAcase Nat Chem Biol 13 610 612 28346405
Ruan HB Dietrich MO Liu ZW Zimmer MR Li MD Singh JP Zhang K Yin R Wu J Horvath TL Yang X 2014 O-GlcNAc transferase enables AgRP neurons to suppress browning of white fat Cell 159 306 317 25303527
Ruan HB Han X Li MD Singh JP Qian K Azarhoush S Zhao L Bennett AM Samuel VT Wu J Yates JR Yang X 2012 O-GlcNAc transferase/host cell factor C1 complex regulates gluconeogenesis by modulating PGC-1alpha stability Cell Metab 16 226 237 22883232
Ryu BR Ko HW Jou I Noh JS Gwag BJ 1999 Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-mediated regulation of neuronal apoptosis and necrosis by insulin and IGF-I J Neurobiol 39 536 546 10380075
Ryu IH Do SI 2011 Denitrosylation of S-nitrosylated OGT is triggered in LPS-stimulated innate immune response Biochem Biophys Res Commun 408 52 57 21453677
Ryu IH Lee KY Do SI 2016 Aβ-affected pathogenic induction of S-nitrosylation of OGT and identification of Cys-NO linkage triplet Biochim Biophys Acta 1864 609 621 26854602
Sacoman JL Dagda RY Burnham-Marusich AR Dagda RK Berninsone PM 2017 Mitochondrial O-GlcNAc Transferase (mOGT) Regulates Mitochondrial Structure, Function, and Survival in HeLa Cells J Biol Chem 292 4499 4518 28100784
Sakabe K Hart GW 2010 O-GlcNAc transferase regulates mitotic chromatin dynamics J Biol Chem 285 34460 34468 20805223
Santi SD Leon MJD Rusinek H Convit A 2001 Hippocampal formation glucose metabolism and volume losses in MCI and AD Neurobiology of …
Schubert D Cole G Saitoh T Oltersdorf T 1989 Amyloid beta protein precursor is a mitogen Biochem Biophys Res Commun 162 83 88 2502115
Schubert M Brazil DP Burks DJ Kushner JA Ye J Flint CL Farhang-Fallah J Dikkes P Warot XM Rio C Corfas G White MF 2003 Insulin receptor substrate-2 deficiency impairs brain growth and promotes tau phosphorylation J Neurosci 23 7084 7092 12904469
Schwarz TL 2013 Mitochondrial trafficking in neurons Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5
Sean M Smith1 AS Jonathan1 Daniel Declercq1 Ruben Marcus2 Jacob Toolan1 Dawn Wang1 Xiaohai Schachter1 Joel B Cosden1 Mali Pearson1 Michelle Hess1 Fred Selnick1 Harold Salinas1 Cristian Li1 Wenping Duffy1 Joseph McEachern3 Ernest Vocadlo3 David Renger1 John J Eric1 Hostetler D Forman1 Mark Schoepp1 Darryle 2016 EARLY CLINICAL RESULTS AND PRECLINICAL VALIDATION OF THE O-GLCNACASE (OGA) INHIBITOR MK-8719 AS A NOVEL THERAPEUTIC FOR THE TREATMENT OF TAUOPATHIES Alzheimers and Dementia 261
Sekine O Love DC Rubenstein DS Hanover JA 2010 Blocking O-linked GlcNAc cycling in Drosophila insulin-producing cells perturbs glucose-insulin homeostasis J Biol Chem 285 38684 38691 20926386
Shafi R Iyer SP Ellies LG O’Donnell N Marek KW Chui D Hart GW Marth JD 2000 The O-GlcNAc transferase gene resides on the X chromosome and is essential for embryonic stem cell viability and mouse ontogeny Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 5735 5739 10801981
Shih RH Wang CY Yang CM 2015 NF-kappaB Signaling Pathways in Neurological Inflammation: A Mini Review Front Mol Neurosci 8 77 26733801
Shin SH Love DC Hanover JA 2011 Elevated O-GlcNAc-dependent signaling through inducible mOGT expression selectively triggers apoptosis Amino Acids 40 885 893 20824293
Shoghi-Jadid K Small GW Agdeppa ED 2002 Localization of neurofibrillary tangles and beta-amyloid plaques in the brains of living patients with Alzheimer disease The American Journal of …
Simpson IA Dwyer D Malide D 2008 The facilitative glucose transporter GLUT3: 20 years of distinction American Journal of …
Sinclair DA Syrzycka M Macauley MS Rastgardani T Komljenovic I Vocadlo DJ Brock HW Honda BM 2009 Drosophila O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is encoded by the Polycomb group (PcG) gene, super sex combs (sxc) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 13427 13432 19666537
Skorobogatko Y Landicho A Chalkley RJ Kossenkov AV Gallo G Vosseller K 2014 O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) site thr-87 regulates synapsin I localization to synapses and size of the reserve pool of synaptic vesicles J Biol Chem 289 3602 3612 24280219
Slawson C Lakshmanan T Knapp S Hart GW 2008 A mitotic GlcNAcylation/phosphorylation signaling complex alters the posttranslational state of the cytoskeletal protein vimentin Mol Biol Cell 19 4130 4140 18653473
Slawson C Zachara NE Vosseller K Cheung WD Lane MD Hart GW 2005 Perturbations in O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine protein modification cause severe defects in mitotic progression and cytokinesis J Biol Chem 280 32944 32956 16027160
Smet-Nocca C Broncel M Wieruszeski JM Tokarski C Hanoulle X Leroy A Landrieu I Rolando C Lippens G Hackenberger CP 2011 Identification of O-GlcNAc sites within peptides of the Tau protein and their impact on phosphorylation Mol Biosyst 7 1420 1429 21327254
Snow CM Senior A Gerace L 1987 Monoclonal antibodies identify a group of nuclear pore complex glycoproteins J Cell Biol 104 1143 1156 2437126
Spillantini MG Schmidt ML Lee VMY Trojanowski JQ 1997 α-Synuclein in Lewy bodies Nature
Sprung R Nandi A Chen Y Kim SC Barma D Falck JR Zhao Y 2005 Tagging-via-substrate strategy for probing O-GlcNAc modified proteins J Proteome Res 4 950 957 15952742
Srikanth B Vaidya MM Kalraiya RD 2010 O-GlcNAcylation determines the solubility, filament organization, and stability of keratins 8 and 18 J Biol Chem 285 34062 34071 20729549
Starr CM D’Onofrio M Park MK Hanover JA 1990 Primary sequence and heterologous expression of nuclear pore glycoprotein p62 J Cell Biol 110 1861 1871 2190987
Starr CM Hanover JA 1990 Glycosylation of nuclear pore protein p62. Reticulocyte lysate catalyzes O-linked N-acetylglucosamine addition in vitro J Biol Chem 265 6868 6873 2182631
Su C Schwarz TL 2017 O-GlcNAc Transferase Is Essential for Sensory Neuron Survival and Maintenance J Neurosci 37 2125 2136 28115479
Sümegi M Hunyadi-Gulyás E Medzihradszky KF Udvardy A 2003 26S proteasome subunits are O-linked N-acetylglucosamine-modified in Drosophila melanogaster Biochem Biophys Res Commun 312 1284 1289 14652013
Tanaka T Nagatani S Bucholtz DC Ohkura S Tsukamura H Maeda K Foster DL 2000 Central action of insulin regulates pulsatile luteinizing hormone secretion in the diabetic sheep model Biol Reprod 62 1256 1261 10775174
Taylor EW Wang K Nelson AR Bredemann TM Fraser KB Clinton SM Puckett R Marchase RB Chatham JC McMahon LL 2014 O-GlcNAcylation of AMPA receptor GluA2 is associated with a novel form of long-term depression at hippocampal synapses J Neurosci 34 10 21 24381264
Toleman C Paterson AJ Whisenhunt TR Kudlow JE 2004 Characterization of the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain of a bifunctional protein with activable O-GlcNAcase and HAT activities J Biol Chem 279 53665 53673 15485860
Torres CR Hart GW 1984 Topography and polypeptide distribution of terminal N-acetylglucosamine residues on the surfaces of intact lymphocytes. Evidence for O-linked GlcNAc J Biol Chem 259 3308 3317 6421821
Toth C Brussee V Martinez JA McDonald D Cunningham FA Zochodne DW 2006 Rescue and regeneration of injured peripheral nerve axons by intrathecal insulin Neuroscience 139 429 449 16529870
Trapannone R Mariappa D Ferenbach AT van Aalten DM 2016 Nucleocytoplasmic human O-GlcNAc transferase is sufficient for O-GlcNAcylation of mitochondrial proteins Biochem J 473 1693 1702 27048592
Trapannone R Rafie K 2016 O-GlcNAc transferase inhibitors: current tools and future challenges Biochemical Society …
Trinidad JC Barkan DT Gulledge BF Thalhammer A Sali A Schoepfer R Burlingame AL 2012 Global identification and characterization of both O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation at the murine synapse Mol Cell Proteomics 11 215 229 22645316
Uversky VN 2015 Intrinsically disordered proteins and their (disordered) proteomes in neurodegenerative disorders Front Aging Neurosci 7 18 25784874
Vaidyanathan K Niranjan T Selvan N Teo CF May M Patel S Weatherly B Skinner C Opitz J Carey J Viskochil D Gecz J Shaw M Peng Y Alexov E Wang T Schwartz C Wells L 2017 Identification and characterization of a missense mutation in the O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase gene that segregates with X-linked intellectual disability J Biol Chem 292 8948 8963 28302723
Valente EM Abou-Sleiman PM Caputo V Muqit MM Harvey K Gispert S Ali Z Del Turco D Bentivoglio AR Healy DG Albanese A Nussbaum R González-Maldonado R Deller T Salvi S Cortelli P Gilks WP Latchman DS Harvey RJ Dallapiccola B Auburger G Wood NW 2004 Hereditary early-onset Parkinson’s disease caused by mutations in PINK1 Science 304 1158 1160 15087508
van der Harg JM van Heest JC Bangel FN Patiwael S van Weering JR Scheper W 2017 The UPR reduces glucose metabolism via IRE1 signaling Biochim Biophys Acta 1864 655 665 28093214
van Spronsen M Mikhaylova M Lipka J Schlager MA van den Heuvel DJ Kuijpers M Wulf PS Keijzer N Demmers J Kapitein LC Jaarsma D Gerritsen HC Akhmanova A Hoogenraad CC 2013 TRAK/Milton motor-adaptor proteins steer mitochondrial trafficking to axons and dendrites Neuron 77 485 502 23395375
Vincent I Jicha G Rosado M Dickson DW 1997 Aberrant expression of mitotic cdc2/cyclin B1 kinase in degenerating neurons of Alzheimer’s disease brain J Neurosci 17 3588 3598 9133382
Voll CL Whishaw IQ Auer RN 1989 Postischemic insulin reduces spatial learning deficit following transient forebrain ischemia in rats Stroke 20 646 651 2655186
Vosseller K Wells L Lane MD Hart GW 2002 Elevated nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation by O-GlcNAc results in insulin resistance associated with defects in Akt activation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 5313 5318 11959983
Wang AC Jensen EH Rexach JE Vinters HV Hsieh-Wilson LC 2016 Loss of O-GlcNAc glycosylation in forebrain excitatory neurons induces neurodegeneration Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 15120 15125 27956640
Wang P Hanover JA 2013 Nutrient-driven O-GlcNAc cycling influences autophagic flux and neurodegenerative proteotoxicity Autophagy 9 604 606 23328586
Wang P Lazarus BD Forsythe ME Love DC Krause MW Hanover JA 2012 O-GlcNAc cycling mutants modulate proteotoxicity in Caenorhabditis elegans models of human neurodegenerative diseases Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 17669 17674 22988095
Wang X Winter D Ashrafi G Schlehe J Wong YL Selkoe D Rice S Steen J LaVoie MJ Schwarz TL 2011 PINK1 and Parkin target Miro for phosphorylation and degradation to arrest mitochondrial motility Cell 147 893 906 22078885
Wang Z Udeshi ND O’Malley M Shabanowitz J 2010a Enrichment and site mapping of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine by a combination of chemical/enzymatic tagging, photochemical cleavage, and electron transfer … … &amp; Cellular Proteomics
Wang Z Udeshi ND Slawson C Compton PD Sakabe K Cheung WD Shabanowitz J Hunt DF Hart GW 2010b Extensive crosstalk between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation regulates cytokinesis Sci Signal 3 ra2 20068230
Wani WY Chatham JC Darley-Usmar V McMahon LL Zhang J 2016a O-GlcNAcylation and neurodegeneration Brain Res Bull
Wani WY Chatham JC Darley-Usmar V 2016b O-GlcNAcylation and neurodegeneration … Research Bulletin
Weiner M Khachaturian Z 2005 The use of MRI and PET for clinical diagnosis of dementia and investigation of cognitive impairment: a consensus report Alzheimer’s Association
Wells L Gao Y Mahoney JA Vosseller K Chen C Rosen A Hart GW 2002 Dynamic O-glycosylation of nuclear and cytosolic proteins: further characterization of the nucleocytoplasmic beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase, O-GlcNAcase J Biol Chem 277 1755 1761 11788610
Wells L Vosseller K Hart GW 2003 A role for N-acetylglucosamine as a nutrient sensor and mediator of insulin resistance Cell Mol Life Sci 60 222 228 12678487
Whelan SA Dias WB Thiruneelakantapillai L Lane MD Hart GW 2010 Regulation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1)/AKT kinase-mediated insulin signaling by O-Linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine in 3T3-L1 adipocytes J Biol Chem 285 5204 5211 20018868
Whelan SA Hart GW 2003 Proteomic approaches to analyze the dynamic relationships between nucleocytoplasmic protein glycosylation and phosphorylation Circ Res 93 1047 1058 14645135
Winner B Kohl Z Gage FH 2011 Neurodegenerative disease and adult neurogenesis Eur J Neurosci 33 1139 1151 21395858
Winner B Winkler J 2015 Adult neurogenesis in neurodegenerative diseases Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 a021287 25833845
Wozniak M Rydzewski B Baker SP Raizada MK 1993 The cellular and physiological actions of insulin in the central nervous system Neurochem Int 22 1 10 8443563
Wysocka J Myers MP Laherty CD Eisenman RN Herr W 2003 Human Sin3 deacetylase and trithorax-related Set1/Ash2 histone H3-K4 methyltransferase are tethered together selectively by the cell-proliferation factor HCF-1 Genes Dev 17 896 911 12670868
Yanagisawa M Yu RK 2009 O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosaminylation in mouse embryonic neural precursor cells J Neurosci Res 87 3535 3545 19598243
Yang WH Kim JE Nam HW Ju JW Kim HS Kim YS Cho JW 2006 Modification of p53 with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine regulates p53 activity and stability Nat Cell Biol 8 1074 1083 16964247
Yang WH Park SY Nam HW Kim do H Kang JG Kang ES Kim YS Lee HC Kim KS Cho JW 2008a NFkappaB activation is associated with its O-GlcNAcylation state under hyperglycemic conditions Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 17345 17350 18988733
Yang X Ongusaha PP Miles PD Havstad JC Zhang F So WV Kudlow JE Michell RH Olefsky JM Field SJ Evans RM 2008b Phosphoinositide signalling links O-GlcNAc transferase to insulin resistance Nature 451 964 969 18288188
Yang X Qian K 2017 Protein O-GlcNAcylation: emerging mechanisms and functions Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 452 465 28488703
Yang X Zhang F Kudlow JE 2002 Recruitment of O-GlcNAc transferase to promoters by corepressor mSin3A: coupling protein O-GlcNAcylation to transcriptional repression Cell 110 69 80 12150998
Yang YR Song M Lee H Jeon Y Choi EJ Jang HJ Moon HY Byun HY Kim EK Kim DH Lee MN Koh A Ghim J Choi JH Lee-Kwon W Kim KT Ryu SH Suh PG 2012 O-GlcNAcase is essential for embryonic development and maintenance of genomic stability Aging Cell 11 439 448 22314054
Yao PJ Coleman PD 1998a Reduction of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine-modified assembly protein-3 in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 18 2399 2411 9502801
Yao PJ Coleman PD 1998b Reduced O-glycosylated clathrin assembly protein AP180: implication for synaptic vesicle recycling dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 252 33 36 9756352
Yu Y Zhang L Li X Run X Liang Z Li Y Liu Y Lee MH Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Vocadlo DJ Liu F Gong CX 2012 Differential effects of an O-GlcNAcase inhibitor on tau phosphorylation PLoS One 7 e35277 22536363
Yuzwa SA Macauley MS Heinonen JE Shan X Dennis RJ He Y Whitworth GE Stubbs KA McEachern EJ Davies GJ Vocadlo DJ 2008 A potent mechanism-inspired O-GlcNAcase inhibitor that blocks phosphorylation of tau in vivo Nat Chem Biol 4 483 490 18587388
Yuzwa SA Shan X Jones BA Zhao G Woodward ML Li X Zhu Y McEachern EJ Silverman MA Watson NV Gong CX Vocadlo DJ 2014 Pharmacological inhibition of O-GlcNAcase (OGA) prevents cognitive decline and amyloid plaque formation in bigenic tau/APP mutant mice Mol Neurodegener 9 42 25344697
Yuzwa SA Shan X Macauley MS Clark T Skorobogatko Y Vosseller K Vocadlo DJ 2012 Increasing O-GlcNAc slows neurodegeneration and stabilizes tau against aggregation Nat Chem Biol 8 393 399 22366723
Yuzwa SA Vocadlo DJ 2009 O-GlcNAc modification and the tauopathies: insights from chemical biology Curr Alzheimer Res 6 451 454 19874270
Yuzwa SA Vocadlo DJ 2017 Production of O-GlcNAc Modified Recombinant Tau in E. coli and Detection of Ser400 O-GlcNAc Tau In Vivo Methods Mol Biol 1523 237 248 27975253
Yuzwa SA Yadav AK Skorobogatko Y Clark T Vosseller K Vocadlo DJ 2011 Mapping O-GlcNAc modification sites on tau and generation of a site-specific O-GlcNAc tau antibody Amino Acids 40 857 868 20706749
Zachara NE Cole RN Hart GW Gao Y 2001 Detection and analysis of proteins modified by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine Curr Protoc Protein Sci Chapter 12:Unit 12.8
Zachara NE Hart GW Cole RN Gao Y 2002 Detection and analysis of proteins modified by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine Curr Protoc Mol Biol Chapter 17:Unit 17.6
Zhang F Su K Yang X Bowe DB Paterson AJ Kudlow JE 2003 O-GlcNAc modification is an endogenous inhibitor of the proteasome Cell 115 715 725 14675536
Zhao W Chen H Xu H Moore E Meiri N Quon MJ Alkon DL 1999 Brain insulin receptors and spatial memory. Correlated changes in gene expression, tyrosine phosphorylation, and signaling molecules in the hippocampus of water maze trained rats J Biol Chem 274 34893 34902 10574963
Zhao Y Xiao J Gong S Clara JA Ledoux MS 2013 Neural expression of the transcription factor THAP1 during development in rat Neuroscience 231 282 295 23219941
Zhu L Tao T Zhang D Liu X Ke K Shen A 2015a NOS1AP O-GlcNAc Modification Involved in Neuron Apoptosis Induced by Excitotoxicity Int J Mol Sci 16 16560 16575 26197318
Zhu Y Liu TW Cecioni S Eskandari R Zandberg WF Vocadlo DJ 2015b O-GlcNAc occurs cotranslationally to stabilize nascent polypeptide chains Nat Chem Biol 11 319 325 25774941
Zhu Y Shan X Yuzwa SA Vocadlo DJ 2014 The emerging link between O-GlcNAc and Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 289 34472 34481 25336656
