LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8215016
7188
Stat Med
Stat Med
Statistics in medicine
0277-6715
1097-0258

29266591
5801265
10.1002/sim.7547
NIHMS914896
Article
Time-to-event data with time-varying biomarkers measured only at study entry, with applications to Alzheimer’s disease
Lee Catherine a*
Betensky Rebecca A. a
for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
* a Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA
* Correspondence to: cal373@mail.harvard.edu. The corresponding author is currently employed by Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, CA
* Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf

25 10 2017
20 12 2017
15 3 2018
15 3 2019
37 6 914932
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Relating time-varying biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) to time-to-event using a Cox model is complicated by the fact that AD biomarkers are sparsely collected, typically only at study entry; this is problematic since Cox regression with time-varying covariates requires observation of the covariate process at all failure times. The analysis might be simplified by using study entry as the time origin and treating the time-varying covariate measured at study entry as a fixed baseline covariate. In this paper, we first derive conditions under which using an incorrect time origin of study entry results in consistent estimation of regression parameters when the time-varying covariate is continuous and fully observed. We then derive conditions under which treating the time-varying covariate as fixed at study entry results in consistent estimation. We provide methods for estimating the regression parameter when a functional form can be assumed for the time-varying biomarker, which is measured only at study entry. We demonstrate our analytical results in a simulation study and apply our methods to data from the Rush Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project, and data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

survival analysis
Cox model
time-dependent covariates
time origin
delayed entry
left truncation

1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia in older adults, characterized by loss of cognition and functional impairment. Its prevalence is estimated to be 5.5 million in 2017,1 with an estimated incidence of 476,000 in 2016 for people age 65 or older. Much of Alzheimer’s research over the past decade has been dedicated to the identification and validation of biomarkers that reflect the underlying neuropathology of the disease. Biomarkers will help identify subjects early in their disease course, when therapeutic interventions might be successful. They also will help identify surrogate endpoints for progression, which will allow for clinical trials that do not require long follow-up to a clinical AD diagnosis.

Several models have been proposed for time-varying AD biomarkers such as PET-PIB, FDG-PET, and MRI measures.2,3 Relating these biomarker trajectories to time-to-event using a Cox regression model would allow for the prediction of disease progression. However, such an analysis presents a challenge, as imaging biomarkers are typically sparsely collected. This is problematic since the Cox regression with time-varying covariates requires observation of the covariate process at all failure times. The analysis could be simplified by treating the time-varying covariate collected only at study entry as a fixed baseline covariate representative of a subject’s disease state at the time of measurement. However, in longitudinal AD studies, the time at study entry tends to be arbitrary and the interpretability of such an analysis is tenuous.4,5 In a time-to-event analysis, a well-chosen time origin should align subjects with respect to risk, so that conditional on baseline covariates subjects are comparable.6 In addition, the choice of time origin should address the goals of the analysis and provide meaningful estimates.4,7,8,9,10,11,12 A natural choice of time origin in Alzheimer’s disease is pathological disease onset, a point at which individuals are comparable with respect to risk. However, disease onset precedes clinical symptoms by decades and thus the exact time of onset is unknown. As an alternative, the time of first clinical diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a reasonable and measurable time origin. Birth is a plausible time origin since disease risk increases with age, however individuals at a given age may not necessarily be comparable with respect to risk, even after conditioning on fixed covariates. In summary, while using study entry as the time origin would enable use of the time varying biomarker as a fixed covariate in the analysis, it would jeopardize the interpretability of the analysis.

Several authors have considered the use of an incorrect time origin of study entry in a proportional hazards model with a fixed-time covariate. Assuming the true time origin is birth, Korn and colleagues8 showed that fitting a proportional hazards model that uses study entry as the time origin does preserve the true regression coefficient corresponding to a fixed baseline covariate, provided that age at entry is included as a covariate in the model and the baseline hazard on the age scale follows an exponential form. Thiebaut and Benichou13 and Pencina et al.11 investigated the practical ramifications of this result when the baseline hazard is not of exponential functional form (e.g., Weibull or piecewise Weibull), and found that the bias in the regression coefficient was not large for a wide range of true values.

In the case of time-varying covariates, some simulation studies have suggested an extension of the result from Korn et al.,8 however this has not been established analytically. Cnaan and Ryan4 argued that using an incorrect time origin would preserve the regression parameter of interest provided that survival on the age scale is exponentially distributed. In a simulation study, Thiebaut and Benichou13 found that use of study entry as the time origin results in unbiased estimates for a Cox model with constant baseline hazard function and a fully-observed time-varying binary covariate. Through simulations, Thiebaut and Benichou13 and Griffin et al.14 illustrated that bias can result when an incorrect choice of time origin is used in a Cox model with time-varying covariates when the true baseline hazard is Weibull. There are no papers that consider estimation based on a time-varying covariate that is observed only at study entry, with the time origin taken either to be onset or study entry.

There is a considerable literature on dealing with sparse observation of time-varying covariates15,16,17,18,19,20,21 in survival regression models; standard methods include imputation, likelihood estimation, and joint modeling. These methods are not applicable to many current Alzheimer’s studies due to the their very sparse observation of the time-varying imaging biomarker. Relevant to this setting, Sperrin and Buchan12 proposed a two-stage method for analyzing survival data with time-varying covariates measured at a single, arbitrary time point. They assume that the covariate process can be expressed as the sum of a population-level function and individual time-independent errors. The first stage involves estimating the population parameters of the covariate function and then calculating for each subject the residual error relative to the observed value. In the second stage, the estimated residual for each subject is included as a covariate in a survival model. They provided an analytical argument for the use of birth as the time origin, rather than study entry. They showed through simulations that their two-stage residual method has superior predictive ability, as measured by Brier and logarithmic scores, when birth is used as the origin and the estimated residuals and age are included in the model as covariates, compared to two competing models that treat the time-varying covariate as fixed: one from study entry that adjusts for age as a covariate and another from birth that does not adjust for age.

In this paper, we consider the analysis of time-to-event data in conjunction with a time-varying covariate that is observed only at study entry. We assume the true time origin for the risk model is known and precedes study entry. We extend the results of Korn et al. to the case of time-varying biomarkers, and derive the conditions for which treating a time-varying biomarker as fixed at study entry results in an unbiased regression coefficient estimator. We then extend the work of Sperrin and Buchan12, who proposed methods for relating a time-varying covariate with fixed-time residuals to time-to-event when the covariate is measured only at study entry, by incorporating time-varying residuals. Furthermore, whereas Sperrin and Buchan focused on predictive ability, we investigate bias and standard error estimation. We use the sigmoidal AD biomarker model22 as the basis for this approach. We support our analytical results and methods with simulation studies. Finally, we apply our methods to data from the Rush Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project and from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and demonstrate the impact of different treatments of the time-varying biomarker.

2. Notation and models

For subject i, let Ui denote the time from disease onset to event, let Ci denote the time from disease onset to censoring, let Ei denote the time from disease onset to study entry, and let Zi(u) denote a time-varying covariate. We use the notation Z̄i(u) to denote the history of Z up to and including time u. Then Ti = Ui − Ei represents the time from study entry to event. The observed time from onset to event is Yi = min(Ui, Ci), and δi = I (Yi ≤ Ci) is the status indicator. We assume that the time-varying covariates are collected only at study entry. The observed data are thus (Ei, Yi, Zi(Ei), δi).

We assume that the time-varying covariate, or biomarker, Zi(u), after transformation via f(·), satisfies a general additive error model, f(Zi(u)) = f(S(u)) + εi(u), where S(u) is the population-level biomarker trajectory and εi(u) is an individual-level time-dependent deviation. We assume that the individual-level deviations are defined by εi(u) = ai + biu, so that

(1) f(Zi(u))=f(S(u))+ai+biu,

where ai and bi are randomly distributed, both with mean 0; consequently, εi(u) has mean 0. When f is the identity function, we refer to (1) as the absolute error model since the individual-level deviations are on the same scale as the population-level trajectory. When f is the identify function and bi ≡ 0, the covariate model in (1) coincides with the covariate model provided by Sperrin and Buchan12. When f(x) = logit(x/M), for some constant M, we refer to (1) as the logit error model.

In the setting of Alzheimer’s disease, many population-level biomarker trajectories are plausibly modeled using a sigmoidal function2

(2) S(u)=M1+e-λ(u-T0),

where the upper bound M is assumed to be known as the maximum value of the biomarker, and the parameters λ and T0, which dictate the shape of the sigmoid, are not known. When T0 = 0, S(0) = M/2; the value of T0 determines the lateral shift of this curve. The parameter λ determines the rate at which the sigmoid accelerates to its maximum value with larger values indicating a faster rate of increase; at u = T0 the slope of the sigmoid is Mλ/4.

The covariate function S(u) should be selected on the basis of prior studies and subject matter understanding. Scatter plots of the cross-sectional data may also give insight into to the functional form of the covariate process. Choice of the error function, f(·), also requires consideration. The absolute error model may not be appropriate for covariates that are constrained by a maximum measured value, such as PET amyloid, as it may lead to individual-specific trajectories that exceed the maximum value. The logit error model with time-varying deviations has an attractive interpretation when the population-level function is assumed to be the sigmoid in (2). The individual specific deviations modify the acceleration parameter, λ, and the shift parameter, T0, so that each subject is allowed to have an individual-specific trajectory. In particular, inserting the sigmoidal function (2) into the logit error model (1) yields an individual specific sigmoidal covariate function, Zi(u)=M/[1+e-λ∼(u-T0∼)], where λi∼=λ+bi and T0,i∼=(λT0-ai)/(λ+bi). The logit error model assumes that the time-varying covariate is linear on the logit scale, which may be appropriate only in some settings.

We assume that the true hazard function for the event of interest conditional on the history of Z, with time measured from onset, is

(3) λUi(u∣Zi¯(·))=λ0U(u)eβg(Zi(u)),

for some function g, and baseline hazard function, λ0U(u). In this paper, we consider the case g = f. In general, g should be defined to best capture the nature of the biomarker trajectory and its relationship to the hazard of the event.

3. Implications of using study entry as the time origin for Cox models with time-varying predictors

When an appropriate time origin precedes study entry and the covariate of interest is not time-varying, Korn et al.8 provided sufficient conditions under which fitting a model that uses study entry as the time origin preserves the desired estimated regression coefficient corresponding to the fixed covariate. They assumed that while the true survival model is given by

λUi(u∣xi,Ei)=λ0U(u)eβxi,

where xi is a fixed covariate, the data are fit instead to the model,

(4) λTi(t∣xi,Ei)=λ0T(t)eξxi+γEi,

which uses study entry as the time origin. It is clear that ξ = β provided that λ0U(u) = c exp{γu} and λ0T(t) = c exp{γt}, for some positive constant c. Under these conditions, ξ̂ based on fitting the Cox model specified in (4) will be a consistent estimator of β.

We now extend the results of Korn et al. to the case of a continuous time-varying covariate, wi(u), and provide conditions under which using study entry as the time origin and/or treating a time-varying covariate as fixed will preserve the Cox regression parameter of interest. Suppose that the true survival model is

(5) λUi(u∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ0U(u)eβwi(u).

We assume further that E and U are continuous random variables, and that the time-varying biomarker w(u) is continuous and defined on the support of U. Without loss of generality, we assume that the support of E is contained in the support of U. In addition, we assume that β ≠ 0, and the study entry times, Ei, and biomarkers, wi(u), are not constant across individuals.

We consider three possible models that might be fit to these data. First, we consider the model that uses study entry as the time origin and adjusts for study entry time as a covariate

(6) λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ0T(t)eξwi(t+Ei)+γEi,

where w̄(t) denotes the history of w up to and including time t. In Theorem 1 part (a) below, we derive conditions on the true baseline hazard function under which the coefficient of wi(t + Ei) is equal to β. Assuming only that λ0U(u) = ceγu, the Cox partial likelihood derived from (6) can be used for estimation of β. Note that this extends the fixed covariate case (Korn et al.).

Next we consider models that treat the time-varying predictor as fixed, using either onset or study entry as the origin, and derive conditions under which we obtain a consistent estimator of β. If the value of the time-varying covariate is known only at study entry, it can be included in a Cox model as a fixed covariate in a second model with onset as the time origin: (7) λUi(u∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ1U(u)eαwi(Ei).

Note that estimation of this model must adjust for delayed entry (left truncation). If time from onset to study entry is known, we can include Ei as a covariate in a third model using study entry as the time origin: (8) λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ2T(t)eζwi(Ei)+ηEi.

The case where there is no covariate adjustment for study entry time is included in this model when η = 0. Alternatively, the time of study entry could be adjusted for through stratification or through covariate adjustment by a non-linear function of Ei, which we do not consider here. In Theorem 1 parts (b) and (c), we derive conditions under which the coefficients of wi(Ei) in (7) and (8) are equal to β.

Theorem 1

Suppose the true hazard regression model is given by ( 5 ).

(Korn et al. extension) Consider the model in (6): β = ξ ⇔ λ0U(u) = ceγu and λ0T(t) = ceγt, for some positive constant c. In practice, if λ0U(u) = ceγu, (6) can be used to estimate β without specifying that λ0T(t) = ceγt.

Consider the model in (7): β = α ⇔ wi(u) = wi(Ei) + g(u), for some continuous function g that is zero on the support of E. In practice, if wi(u) = wi(Ei) + g(u), (7) can be used to estimate β in an analysis that adjusts for left-truncation.

Consider the model in (8): β = ζ ⇔ wi(t + Ei) − wi(Ei) = k(t), λ0U(u) = ceηu and λ2T(t) = ceβk(t)+ηt, for c &gt; 0. In practice, under these conditions on λ0U and wi(t + Ei) − wi(t), (8) can be used to estimate β even if λ2T(t) ≠ ceβk(t)+ηt.

The proof for Theorem 1 is given in the Appendix. Theorem 1 provides guidelines for implementing Cox regression with a time-varying covariate using study entry as the origin or when the time-varying covariate is measured only at study entry. Theorem 1 part (a) shows that study entry can be used as the origin if the covariate process is fully-observed or if its functional form is known, as long as the baseline hazard is of exponential functional form. These conditions are reasonable in some settings: in many instances, a covariate process can be modeled using subject-level knowledge23, and constant hazard functions have been empirically shown to model incidence in many epidemiological studies24, and exponential-form (Gompertz) baseline hazards are widely used to model mortality.

If the time-varying covariate is observed only at study entry and its functional form is known, then the covariate process can be treated as fixed in an analysis from onset, as long as the covariate function, wi(u), satisfies the condition in Theorem 1 part (b). An example of such a function is wi(u) = ai + m · (h(u) − h(L))1{u &gt; L}, where L is the upper bound of the support of E and h is continuous; this is a time-varying continuous covariate function that is constant on the support of E but can vary for values of u outside of the support of E. Since we are mainly concerned with w(u) on the support of E, Theorem 1 part (b) indicates that treating a time-varying (i.e., non-constant) biomarker as fixed using onset as the origin is not valid.

Theorem 1 part (c) shows that if the time-varying covariate is observed only at study entry, an analysis using study entry as the origin is valid only for special cases of the baseline hazard and covariate process. As discussed above, the baseline hazard assumptions are realistic in some settings. One example of a time-varying covariate that satisfies the condition in Theorem 1 part(c) is wi(t) = ai + a1t, a linear function with a subject-specific intercept. Thus, in some instances it is reasonable to treat time-varying covariates as fixed in an analysis from study entry.

In Theorem 1 parts (a) and (c), when the true baseline hazard function is of an exponential form the results of the theorem are contingent upon the incorporation of study entry time, E, into the model as a linear covariate. It can be shown, using arguments analogous to the proofs of Theorem 1 parts (a) and (c), that adjustment of study entry time through a transformation of E results in biased estimation, however the extent of the bias is unknown. However, correct specification of E may be important if entry time is highly correlated with the biomarker. For the case of a fixed covariate, Pencina et al.11 illustrated through simulations that in an analysis from study entry, adjusting for E using a quadratic term and also through stratified methods can result in negligible bias.

The focus of this paper is the impact of the time-varying covariate wi(u) = f(S(u)) + ai + biu, as defined in (1), on the hazard function through the Cox model defined in (5). Theorem 1 part (a) allows for valid estimation of β using study entry as the time origin provided that f, ai and bi are known, Ei is included in the model as a covariate, and λ0U(u) = c exp{γu}. If the covariate process is known only at study entry, then it is not valid to treat the time-varying covariate as fixed in an analysis from onset because wi(u) − wi(Ei) = f(S(u)) − f(S(Ei)) + bi(u − Ei) is a function that depends on i and violates the condition of part (b) of the Theorem.

The implications of Theorem 1 part (c) differ for the two examples of f introduced in Section 2. First consider the absolute error model with wi(u) = S(u) + ai + biu, where S(u) is the sigmoid in (2). Theorem 1 part (c) establishes that using study entry as the origin and treating the time-varying covariate as fixed will yield biased estimates of β. To see this, Theorem 1 part (c) requires that wi(t + Ei) − wi(Ei) is independent of i, however in this case wi(t + Ei) − wi(Ei) = S(t + Ei) − S(Ei) + bit is not independent of i. This is the case even if bi ≡ 0. Alternatively, for the logit error model with wi(u) = logit[S(u)/M] + ai + biu, if bi ≡ b, using study entry as the origin and treating the time-varying biomarker as fixed is valid, provided that the baseline hazard is of an exponential form, since wi(t + Ei) − wi(Ei) = (λ + b)t is independent of i. If bi ≠ b, this condition is not satisfied.

Note that the results of Theorem 1, parts (a) and (c), apply even when β = 0. In contrast, Theorem 1 part (b) does not apply to this case. If β = 0, then the true survival model is

λUi(u∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ0U(u).

If we fit the model in (7), it is easy to see that α = 0 ⇔ λ0U(u) = λ1U(u). In practice, this implies that fitting (7) when β = 0 will yield α̂ = 0 without restrictions on wi(u).

4. Methods

Based on our analysis in Section 3, it is not advisable to treat time-varying biomarkers measured only at study entry as fixed covariates for the time origin of disease onset. And for the time origin of study entry, this can be done only under strong assumptions on the baseline hazard function and the covariate function. Thus, lacking full observation of the biomarkers over time, we require an approach that will allow us to estimate the full biomarker trajectory based on cross-sectional observation of it, and importantly, does not require restrictive assumptions on the baseline hazard function of the functional form of the covariate process.

Assuming that the time-varying biomarker follows the general error model in (1) and the true hazard can be modeled as in (3) for g = f, we provide methods for estimating the regression parameter β when the fully-observed time-varying biomarker is measured only at study entry. We note that the components of the error, ai and bi, cannot be simultaneously estimated when only a single biomarker measurement is available for each subject. We thus consider the cases ai ≡ 0 and bi ≡ 0 separately.

4.1. Case: bi ≡ 0

The covariate process in this case is defined as f(Zi(u)) = f(S(u; λ, T0)) + ai, with individual-level deviations that are fixed over time. We assume that E(ai) = 0. We assume that the value of M, which represents the maximum value of the sigmoidal predictor in (2), is known. In order to estimate the regression parameter β, we first estimate the parameters λ and T0 of the population-level sigmoid S(u; λ, T0) using least squares to minimize

∑i[f(Zi(Ei))-f(S(Ei;λ,T0))]2

with respect to λ and T0. We then estimate the ai as ai^=f(Zi(Ei))-f(S(Ei;λ^,T0^)), and the time-varying covariate process as f(Zi(u))^=f(S(u;λ^,T0^))+ai^. The true hazard function λUi(u∣f(Zi¯(·))) can then be approximated as

(9) λUi(u∣f(Zi(·))^)=λ0U(u)exp{β·f(Zi(u))^}=λ0U(u)exp{β·[f(S(u;λ^,T0^))+ai^]}=λ0U∼(u)exp{β·a^i}.

The model in (9) shows that the desired regression parameter β can be estimated by fitting a Cox model with âi included as a fixed-covariate.

Note that if f(Zi(u)) is linear in u, as is the case with the sigmoid-based logit error model, where

f(Zi(u))=logit[Zi(u)/M]=λ(u-T0)+ai,

then the model based on f(Zi(t+Ei))^) is equal to that based on f(Zi(Ei)). In this case,

f(Zi(t+Ei))^=λ^(t+Ei-T^0)+a^i=λ^t+f(Zi(Ei))^=λ^t+f(Zi(Ei)),

by the definition of âi. Thus, fitting a Cox model from study entry with f(Zi(t+Ei))^ as a time-varying covariate is equivalent to fitting the model from entry with the fixed covariate f(Zi(Ei)), since the population-level λ̂t term will be absorbed into the baseline hazard function and will not affect estimation.

4.2. Case: ai ≡ 0

The covariate process in this case is defined as f(Zi(u)) = f(S(u); λ, T0) + biu, with time-varying individual-level deviations. At each Ei it follows that

(10) f(Zi(Ei))Ei=f(S(Ei;λ,T0))Ei+bi,

and thus λ and T0 can be estimated via least squares by minimizing

∑i[f(Zi(Ei))Ei-f(S(Ei;λ,T0))Ei]2

with respect to λ and T0. We then estimate bi as

bi^=f(Zi(Ei))Ei-f(S(Ei;λ^,T0^))Ei.

Note that estimation of bi uses only those entry times Ei that are nonzero; in some settings it is possible that a time origin, such as disease onset, may coincide with study entry for some subjects. We estimate the time-varying covariate process as f(Zi(u))^=f(S(u;λ^,T0^))+bi^u. The true hazard function λUi(u∣f(Zi¯(·))) is approximated as

(11) λUi(u∣f(Zi(·))^)=λ0U(u)exp{β·f(Zi(u))^}=λ0U(u)exp{β·[f(S(u;λ^,T0^))+bi^u]}=λ0U∼(u)exp{β·b^iu}.

The regression parameter β can be estimated using Cox regression with the time-varying covariate b̂iu.

4.3. Adjusting sigmoid for disease severity

In the AD setting, individual sigmoidal trajectories might be explained by individual-level covariates (e.g., APOE4 allele status, gender) and not just simply by unexplained individual deviations. We propose to incorporate this into the sigmoidal model by allowing the lateral shift of the population-level sigmoid, given by T0, to be a function of covariates. Let wi denote a vector of individual-specific covariates reflecting disease severity. We model the individual-specific lateral shifts as T0,i = γ′wi, for a vector of coefficients γ. Then the sigmoid is redefined as

S(u,wi;λ,γ)=M1+e-λ(u-γ′wi),

additional individual deviations are modeled as f(Zi(u, wi)) = f(S(u, wi; λ, γ)) + ai + biu, and the true hazard model is assumed to be

(12) λUi(u∣f(Zi¯(·)))=λ0U(u)exp{βf(Zi(u,wi;λ,γ))}.

This can be implemented for any f. In the case of the logit error model (1),

logit[Zi(u,wi)M]=logit[S(u,wi);λ,γM]+ai+biu=λ(u-γ′wi)+ai+biu,

so that the individual-specific lateral shifts are given by γ′wi. The model in (12) then simplifies as: λUi(u∣logit(Zi¯(·)/M))=λ0U(u)exp{β[logit(Zi(u,wi;λ,γ)/M)]}=λ0U(u)exp{β[λ(u-γ′wi)+ai+biu]}=λ0U∼(u)exp{β[ai+biu-λγ′wi]}.

As discussed above, both error components ai and bi, cannot be estimated simultaneously. The estimation procedure is analogous to that described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, and differs only with regard to the parameters of disease severity adjusted population-level sigmoid; least squares is used to estimate λ and γ. For example, for the case bi ≡ 0, we use least squares to minimize

∑i[f(Zi(Ei))-f(S(Ei;λ,γ))]2

with respect to λ and γ.

5. Simulations

We simulated left-truncated time-to-event data such that the time from onset to event, Ui, satisfies the hazard model in (3) and the transformed time-varying predictor, f(Zi(u)), follows the logit error model in (1) with sigmoidal S in (2), upper bound M, and f(x) = logit(x/M). Study entry times, Ei, were generated independently of the survival times, Ui. The time-varying covariates were available only from the times of study entry. The data, (Ei, Ui, f(Zi(Ei))), were generated to achieve specified truncation probabilities, denoted πtrunc = P(Ui &lt; Ei). Parameters of the covariate process were chosen to reflect PIB PET measurements of the AD biomarker, Aβ; hazard regression parameters were chosen so that time-to-AD diagnosis values align with those observed in AD studies. The data were generated in the following steps:

1 Select β ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5}, n ∈ {100, 250}, M = 3, λ ∈ {0.1, 0.25, 0.4}, T0= 40, σa ∈ {0.5, 1}, σb ∈ {0.01, 0.05}.

2 Generate error components, ai~N(0,σa2) and set bi = 0 or generate bi~N(0,σb2) and set ai = 0.

3 Generate Vi ~ Unif(0, 1) and solve for Ui in (13) Vi=exp{-∫0UiλUi(w)dw}=exp{-∫0Uiλ0U(w)exp{β·[f(S(w))+ai+biw]}dw}.

This can be easily done when the integral in (13) can be calculated in closed form.25 This is the case under the logit error model (1) where f(S(u)) = λ(u − T0) + ai + biu. We considered three separate baseline hazard functions, λ0U(u), defined below: constant, exponential-form, normal density kernel. The constant and exponential-form baseline hazard functions appear in Theorem 1 and were chosen to confirm our theoretical results. The normal density kernel baseline hazard function was chosen because it permits a closed form solution for Ui and violates the requirements of the theorem, and thus also confirms our theoretical results.

Baseline hazard functions

(Constant baseline hazard) λ0U(u) = c, where c = 0.0154, 0.01, 0.004, 0.001, 0.001 corresponding to β = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5,

(Exponential-form baseline hazard) λ0U(u) = ceψu, where c &gt; 0 and ψ ≠ 0 with c = 7× 10−8and ψ = 0.2,

(Normal density kernel baseline hazard) λ0U(u) = m exp {−c(u − a)2}, where (c, a, m) = (0.001, 60, 1) for the fixed-deviations case (bi ≡ 0) and (c, a, m) = (0.1, 70, 100) for the time-varying deviations case (ai ≡ 0). The hazard function can be expressed as follows, λUi(u)=mexp{-c(u-a)2+β[λ(u-T0)+ai+biu]}=ϕ(u;μi,σ2)·Ki,

where ϕ(u; μi, σ2) is the normal density with mean μi = a + β(λ + bi)/(2c) and variance σ2 = 1/(2c), and Ki=mexp{β[a(λ+bi)+ai+β(λ+bi)24c-λT0]}2πσ2.

4 Generate study entry times Ei ~ Uniform(0, Rtrunc), where Rtrunc is chosen to achieve P(Ui &lt; Ei) = πtrunc = 0.2, 0.4, and is a function of the parameters of the distribution of U. Values of Rtrunc used can be found in Table A1 of the Supporting Information online.

5 Retain the first n observations that satisfy Ei &lt; Ui, i.e. incorporate delayed entry to this study (left-truncation).

6 Calculate f(Zi(Ei)) = f(S(Ei)) + ai + biEi = λ(Ei − T0) + ai + biEi, where either ai or bi is zero.

7 Estimate λ and T0 using least squares as in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.

8 Estimate ai or bi using λ̂ and T0^ as in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.

9 Define f(Zi(u))^=λ^(u-T0^)+ai^ or f(Zi(u))^=λ^(u-T0^)+bi^u, as appropriate.

10 Fit the following models, adjusting for left truncation when the origin is onset: (A) λUi(u∣f(Zi¯(·)),Ei)=λ0U(u)eβ1f(Zi(u))

(A′) λUi(u∣f(Zi¯(·)),Ei)=λ0U(u)eβ2f(Zi(u))^

(B) λUi(u∣f(Zi(Ei)),Ei)=λ1U(u)eαf(Zi(Ei))

(C) λTi(t∣f(Zi(Ei)),Ei)=λ1T(t)eζ1f(Zi(Ei))

(D) λTi(t∣f(Zi(Ei)),Ei)=λ2T(t)eζ2f(Zi(Ei))+ηEi

(E) λTi(t∣f(Zi¯(·)),Ei)=λ3T(t)eξ1f(Zi^(t+Ei))

(F) λTi(t∣f(Zi¯(·)),Ei)=λ4T(t)eξ2f(Zi^(t+Ei))+γEi

Model (A) is the true survival model, where f(Zi(u)) = λ(u − T0) + ai + biu. Model (A′) corresponds to the proposed method in Section 4 where f(Zi(u))^ is defined in Step 9. Model (B) corresponds to Theorem 1 part (b), and models (C) and (D) correspond to Theorem 1 part (c), where f(Zi(Ei)) is from Step 3. Models (E) and (F) correspond to Theorem 1 part (a), where f(Zi(t+Ei))^=λ^(t+Ei-T0^)+ai^+bi^(t+Ei). Given the linear form of f(Zi(u)) with bi ≡ 0, estimation via Models E and F is equivalent to that via Models C and D, respectively.

11 Repeat 5000 times.

The statistical package R26 version 3.1.2 was used for all data analyses. Nonlinear least squares minimization was executed using the nls function in the stats package27 with convergence parameters set to maxiter=1e4 and minFactor=1e-10 and with the default tolerance tol = 1e-5. Hazard regression was implemented using the function coxph in the survival package28. Cox models with time-varying predictors were fit using the time-transform option of coxph or with the use of counting process style input. R code is available in the Supporting Information.

The simulation results are given in Table 1 for varying values of β, λ = 0.25, σa = 0.5 and σb = 0.05, and πtrunc = 0.2 for the fixed (ai) and time-varying (bi) individual-level deviations models, respectively. Means and standard deviations of simulated estimates are presented. Type I error and power were taken to be the proportion of simulations which rejected the test statistic with probability less than 0.05 for β = 0 and β &gt; 0, respectively. Type I error and power corresponding to β = 0.5 are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectively, for the parameter values used in Table 1. For the case of fixed deviations (ai) and a normal density kernel baseline hazard, the parameters originally chosen for the baseline hazard function to align with the AD setting result in a baseline hazard function that closely resembles an exponential, and thus do not serve the purpose of illustrating results under deviations from the exponential. Thus, the parameters of the normal density kernel baseline hazard were then chosen to illustrate this contrast, (c, a, m) = (0.05, 30, 1), and the results for this parameterization of the normal kernel density baseline hazard function in the fixed deviations case are given in Table 1.

The simulation results in column one of Table 1 confirm that fitting the true survival model, in (A), gives consistent estimates of β. The second column demonstrates that the proposed method described in Section 4, which corresponds to model (A′), performs nearly as well as fitting the true model in column one for all baseline hazard distributions considered (constant, exponential-form, normal density kernel), with slightly higher standard errors, due to estimation of the covariate process.

When the covariate process follows the general error model in (1), Theorem 1 part (b) guarantees that treating a time-varying biomarker as fixed at its value at study entry will always produce biased estimates of β if the true origin is used, for nonzero values of β. This analysis corresponds to fitting model (B) and the results are listed in column three of Table 1 for β ≠ 0 for both fixed and time-varying deviations and for all three baseline hazards considered, and are as expected. When β = 0, we expect the estimated regression coefficient to be zero (see discussion following Theorem 1); this is seen in the table, as well.

Theorem 1 part (c) provides conditions for when using an incorrect origin of study entry and treating the time-varying predictors as fixed results in consistent estimates of β. For the fixed deviation models (i.e., ai), the discussion following Theorem 1 ensures that inference is valid if study entry is used as the time origin and the time-varying biomarker is treated as fixed (with or without covariate adjustment for study entry time), as in models (C) and (D), provided that the baseline hazard is constant. Similarly, if the baseline hazard follows an exponential form and both the value of the time-varying biomarker at study entry and study entry time are included in the model as covariates, as in (D), estimates of β are unbiased. For the time-varying deviations models (bi), Theorem 1 (c) guarantees that estimates of β will be biased if study entry is used as the time origin and the time-varying biomarker is treated as a fixed covariate (with or without covariate adjustment for study entry time), as in (C) and (D). These theoretical findings are illustrated through our simulation results in columns four and five.

Theorem 1 part (a) corresponds to models (E) and (F). It asserts that for a constant baseline hazard, the model that uses study entry as the origin and includes f(Zi(t + Ei)) as a time-varying covariate, with or without covariate adjustment for study entry time, will give consistent estimates of β for fixed or time-varying deviations. For a baseline hazard that is of an exponential form, fitting the model that uses study entry as the origin, including both f(Zi(t + Ei)) and study entry time as covariates, will give consistent estimates of β. These results are supported through our simulations when f(Zi(t+Ei))^ is used to approximate f(Zi(t + Ei)). When the baseline hazard does not follow an exponential form, Theorem 1 part (a) guarantees that estimates of β will be biased if a model is fit using study entry as the origin, including both f(Zi(t + Ei)) and study entry time as covariates. For the case of the normal density kernel baseline hazard and fixed deviations, this is confirmed through our simulation results, when f(Zi(t+Ei))^ is used to approximate f(Zi(t + Ei)), with greater bias corresponding to larger values of β. For the case of the normal density kernel baseline hazard and time-varying deviations, our simulation results indicate that the bias increases with β.

For the models with fixed-deviations (ai), notice that fitting models (C) and (E) give identical results. The same is true for models (D) and (F). As noted at the end of Section 4.1, this is expected when the form of the covariate model is linear in u, as is the case with the sigmoid-based logit error model.

Table 2 shows that the type I error is within 0.06 for all analyses that use onset as the time origin. For the analyses that use study entry as the origin, the type I error is less than 0.06 for baseline hazard functions that are constant, or follow an exponential form, provided that study entry time is included as a covariate (models D, E); the type I error is inflated for all other analyses from study entry. This follows from Theorem 1 parts (a) and (c), which hold for β = 0; specifically, when β = 0and the conditions of Theorem 1 parts (a) and (c) are not met, then the estimated regression coefficients are expected to be nonzero. Table 3 shows that the null hypothesis test is well powered, under the simulation parameters specified in Table 1, for all analyses except for when onset is used as the time origin and the time-varying covariate is treated as fixed (model B). In this case, the population-level covariate function is absorbed by the baseline hazard function and the impact of the covariate is due to the individual-specific deviations, as in (9); it is likely that β · ai is close to zero for all subjects so that the likelihood of rejecting the null is also small.

In additional simulations (not shown), variations in the truncation probability, πtrunc, had little effect on bias, type I error and power. Larger values of σa and σb, the standard deviations of ai and bi, were associated with smaller standard errors and greater power, but had little effect on type I error. Varying λ, the acceleration parameter of the sigmoid S(u), gave comparable results with respect to bias, type I error and power, however greater values of β were required to see bias in the case of a normal density based baseline hazard and a covariate process with time-varying deviations (bi). Reducing the sample size to n = 100 resulted in larger standard errors and less power, but had little effect on type I error and bias, except for the case of a normal density based baseline hazard and time-varying deviations (bi) where greater values of β were needed to see bias.

The analytical standard errors from the Cox model do not account for the variability from estimating the sigmoidal parameters and may therefore be underestimated. Bootstrapped standard errors would account for the two sources of variation, however bootstrapping within this simulation study is not computationally feasible. Because of this, we present the analytical standard errors. In Section 6, where we apply our methods to Alzheimer’s data, we compare the analytical and bootstrapped standard errors.

6. Application to Alzheimer’s data

We applied our methodology to two Alzheimer’s studies: one from the Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center (RADC) and the other from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We chose to study the impact of a single biomarker on disease progression. Recently, Capuano and colleagues3 at Rush University provided convincing evidence for a sigmoidal trajectory for a measure of global cognition in the RADC dataset. This complements the existing literature on sigmoidal biomarker models for AD proposed by Jack and colleagues.2 Based on this theoretical framework for Alzheimer’s biomarkers and empirical evidence, we assumed a sigmoidal trajectory (2) for the time-varying biomarker in both analyses.

We fit models (A′), (B), (C), (D), (E), and (F). We also fit the model that adjusts the lateral shift based on an individual’s disease severity in Section 4.3. In order to account for estimation of the covariate process in variance estimation, we employed a simple bootstrap with 5000 resamples. For each study, we describe below the analyses, study population, biomarker, error model, origin, endpoint and study entry definitions.

6.1. Global cognition

We obtained a limited data set from from the RADC that combines data from the Religious Orders Study and the Memory and Aging Project (ROS/MAP).29,30 The biomarker was an average of a battery of 19 cognitive test z-scores,31 which was taken to be a measure of global cognitive function. The origin was defined as birth, study entry was defined as the time of baseline visit, and the endpoint was defined to be time of death or time of last cognitive testing based on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE),32 which is the last time the patient is known to be alive. Only subjects with at least one biomarker measurement and who carried a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at the time of biomarker measurement were included in the study. The global measure of cognition was translated by two units to achieve positive values. Gender and body mass index (BMI)33 were included as covariates in the model that adjusts the lateral shift based on an individual’s disease severity.

In choosing an error model, we used graphical diagnostics to determine goodness-of-fit of the absolute error and logit error models based on the sigmoid, S(u), in (2). The absolute error model assumes that Z(u) = S(u; λ, T0) + ai + biu. We used least squares to estimate λ and T0 based on data (Ei, Z(Ei)) and plotted the residuals, Z(Ei)-S(Ei;λ^,T0^), against study entry time, Ei. We saw that the residuals were centered around zero with nearly constant variance, indicating that the sigmoid-based absolute error model with fixed deviations aligned well with the observed biomarker data. We also considered the sigmoid-based logit error model which assumes that the transformed biomarker, logit(Zi(u)/M), is linear in u. We plotted the transformed observed biomarker values collected at study entry, logit(Zi(Ei)/M), against time at study entry, Ei and saw a non-linear, decreasing trend that accelerates with time. Based on these diagnostics, we assumed the global measure of cognition followed a sigmoid-based absolute error model with fixed deviations. As a sensitivity analysis, we also fit the sigmoid-based absolute error model with time-varying deviations, the sigmoid-based logit error model with both fixed and time-varying deviations, and the following linear absolute error model,

(14) Zi(u)=λ(u-T0)+ai+biu,

where λ and T0 play similar roles as they do in the sigmoidal function. The corresponding severity adjusted model is given by

(15) Zi(u)=λ(u-γ′wi)+ai+biu,

where wi is a vector of individual-specific covariates reflecting disease severity, which alter the lateral shift of the linear function.

Descriptive statistics are given in Table 4. A total of 737 subjects were included in the analysis, of whom 473 experienced the event. A plot of the cross-sectional global cognition score at time of baseline visit with a fitted loess curve is displayed in Figure 1. Although based on cross-sectional, and not longitudinal data, a sigmoidal functional form is discernible, and a clear downward trend is present indicating a decline in global cognition with increasing age.

The results of the analysis are displayed in Table 5. For each of the six covariate models assumed (absolute error, sigmoid ai, etc.), the estimated regression coefficient of the biomarker, considering two different origins and treating the biomarker as time-varying or fixed, are presented. Note that models (B), (C) and (D), which include the time-varying biomarker value at study entry as a fixed covariate, do not involve estimation of the covariate function, and are thus listed with the same results for fixed (ai) as for time-varying deviations (bi). For these models, the two-stage method proposed by Sperrin and Buchan12 is comparable to our method. Assuming the sigmoid-based absolute error model with fixed deviations, ai, the hazard ratio comparing the biomarker level over a one unit difference in the biomarker is 0.60 (exp(−0.51)) based on our proposed method (A′). It is 0.49 (exp(−.72)) based on (E) that assumes the origin is study entry and treats the biomarker as a fixed covariate, adjusting for time between the origin and study entry. This difference highlights the importance of selection of the analytic approach for answering the clinical question. Given that there is support for the sigmoid-based absolute error model with fixed deviations based on our diagnostics, and it does not require any assumptions on the baseline hazard, we would report the hazard ratio of 0.60.

For the birth origin analyses, the estimates from the model that treats the biomarker as fixed (B) are smaller in magnitude by approximately 30% than those from the model that estimates the full covariate trajectory (A′), with the exception of the absolute error model with time-varying deviations (second row) where the effect is increased in magnitude by 30%. The estimates from the severity adjusted analyses using birth as the origin (column three) are also moderately different from the estimated time-varying model (A′), with more of a difference seen with the linear trend biomarker models, in which the change in magnitude of the regression estimates is more than 65%. This suggests that subject specific adjustments to the sigmoidal model are potentially important. This is seen as well with respect to the covariate function parameter estimates given in Table A2, which is given in the Supplementary Information. When study entry is taken to be the origin, there are moderate differences across the four models that we fit (columns four through seven), and these estimates can vary dramatically from the estimates that are obtained when using birth as the origin (columns one through three).

In summary, for this data example the choice of time origin and treatment of time varying covariates do impact inference and thought must be given to the implications of these choices. Although the magnitude of the estimates for the models differ slightly, the direction of the effect among all models using both origins agree.

As mentioned in the Section 5, the analytical standard errors from the Cox model do not account for the variability in estimating the sigmoidal parameters and are likely to be underestimated. Table 6 compares the analytical standard errors with the bootstrapped standard errors. For the logit error models, the analytical standard errors are comparable to those that are obtained via bootstrapping. For the biomarker models based on the sigmoid with an absolute error model and based on the linear model, the analytical standard errors are greatly underestimated, suggesting that bootstrapped standard errors should be used.

6.2. Hippocampal volume

We also analyzed data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). Launched in 2003, the ADNI is a longitudinal study aimed at using biomarkers of AD, and clinical and neuropsychiatric assessments to measure the progression of MCI and AD.34

The origin was defined as birth, study entry was defined as the first biomarker measurement, and the endpoint was defined to be the time of the first diagnosis of AD in the ADNI study. Only subjects with at least one biomarker measurement and who carried a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at the time of biomarker measurement were included in the study. Gender and APOE-4 allele status were included as covariates in the model that adjusts the lateral shift based on an individual’s disease severity. After considering several potential markers in a preliminary analysis, we chose to focus on hippocampal volume, where a clear downward trend was seen in the cross-sectional plot. We standardized and shifted the values by three units so that all resulting biomarkers quantities were positive. Descriptive statistics for the study population are given in Table 7.

We used graphical diagnostics, as described for the Rush data, to chose an error model for these data. A plot of logit(Z(Ei)/M) against Ei resulted in a clear linear trend with constant variability. In considering an absolute error model based on the sigmoid in (2) and linear trends in (14), neither of the residual plots had mean zero. Therefore, we assumed a sigmoid-based logit error model for this analysis. We fit the sigmoid- and linear trend-based absolute error models as sensitivity analyses.

The results of the analysis are reported in Table 8. There were only small differences seen across the three birth origin models and the four study entry origin models that were fit, regardless of the biomarker model chosen. This was likely due to short follow-up and only small variations in the measured biomarker levels, but potentially a non-exponential functional form for the baseline hazard function.

7. Discussion

In settings such as Alzheimer’s disease, using study entry as the time origin in a time-to-event analysis is convenient because time-varying biomarkers are often measured only at study entry and thus can be used as fixed baseline covariates. If study entry is not an appropriate time origin, the question of interest is “under what conditions is it valid to use an incorrect time origin of study entry in a Cox model with time-varying covariates?” The answer to this question for the case of fixed covariates was established by Korn et al.8 We have extended the work of Korn et al. to the case of a time-varying covariate; we have shown that using an incorrect origin of study entry is valid only for special cases of the baseline hazard function provided that the functional form of the covariate process is fully-observed. We further examined the implications of treating a continuous, time-varying covariate as fixed at its value at study entry for both the onset and study entry origins; we showed that this is only valid in certain cases of the baseline hazard and time-varying covariate. These theoretical findings underscore the necessity for full observation of time-varying covariates or good modeling of them. This is challenging unless good prior data is available.

For situations in which the full covariate function is not available, we developed methods for estimating regression coefficients when the time-varying covariate follows the general error model f(Zi(u)) = f(S(u)) + ai + biu, when only f(Zi(Ei)) is observed; this is a generalization of the covariate model with fixed residuals given by Sperrin and Buchan.12 While Sperrin and Buchan focused on predictive ability, we have examined the bias and standard errors of hazard model estimates.

Our analysis of the RADC data provides an example of where the choice of time origin and biomarker model can dramatically affect estimation in the presence of a time-varying covariate. Estimates from an analysis from study entry that treats the time-varying biomarker as fixed are quite different from the estimates of our proposed model, even when time between onset and study entry is adjusted for as a continuous covariate. On the other hand, our analysis of ADNI data provides an example of when incorrectly viewing a time-varying covariate as fixed had little effect on estimation which was likely due to covariate measurements that are nearly constant over a short follow-up period. However, the choice of time origin did have a noticeable effect, suggesting that the baseline hazard was not of the requisite exponential functional form to permit the use of study entry as the origin.

In this paper, we assume that the history of the biomarker is not used for case ascertainment. If it were used, such as through a requirement that subjects’ value for the biomarker be below a threshold, we would potentially have to adjust our estimation procedure in Section 4 to account for partial observation of the biomarker function, S. Furthermore, interpretation of results would be limited to the sample population.

A main limitation of our results in Theorem 1 parts (a) and (c) is that the time of onset must be known. While exact onset dates are not known within the setting of Alzheimer’s disease, there are intermediate milestone times that may be known up to short intervals of time. And given the relatively long period of time during which biomarkers such as cognitive tests or amyloid are non-elevated, the error around the exact onset date may not be critical. However, if we cannot trust the purported time origin and revert to using study entry as the origin, the contribution of our paper is to identify when that is a reasonable approach and when it is not. Specifically, our analytical results show that it is valid to use study entry as the origin and treat time-varying covariates as fixed only when the baseline hazard measured from onset of disease is constant and the continuous, time-varying covariate process satisfies the condition in Theorem 1 (c).

The strength of this work is that our analytical results and methods can be applied to any setting in which time-varying covariates follow continuous trajectories. It is important to note that our results are particular to the Cox model in which time-dependent population-level expressions are absorbed into the baseline hazard function, as in (9). For example, the methods we proposed cannot be directly applied to AFT regression, as the AFT model with time-varying covariates cannot be simplified in this way. However, Sperrin and Buchan12 showed through simulations that including individual-specific deviations in an AFT regression model is superior in its predictive ability to the model that includes the time-varying covariate treated as fixed.

As serial biomarker measurements are increasingly collected in longitudinal studies such as the RADC studies and ADNI, possibilities exist for improved analyses via better parametric modeling, identification of both components of individual level deviation, ai and bi, and more efficient estimation of the dependence between the event-time and biomarker. With two or more biomarker measurements per individual, our methods would allow for the estimation of the desired regression parameter whereas methods for Cox regression with missing data and joint modeling of survival and longitudinal data are not likely to be robust with so few covariate measurements.

Supplementary Material

Supp info

Contract/grant sponsor: This research was supported in part by NIH T32NS048005, R01NS094610, P50AG005134, P01AG036694, and P30AG10161 and R01AG17917 (RADC). We thank the study participants and staff of the Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center.

The authors wish to thank Deborah Blacker for helpful feedback in preparation of this manuscript. Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: AbbVie, Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Cogstate; Eisai Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research &amp; Development, LLC.; Johnson&amp;Johnson Pharmaceutical Research&amp;Development LLC.; Lumosity; Lundbeck; Merck&amp;Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and Transition Therapeutics. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute at the University of Southern California. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California.

Appendix

Proof of Theorem 1 part (a) (Korn et al. extension)

Substituting the definition of time from study entry, Ti = Ui − Ei, into the definition of the hazard function

λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=limδ→0P(t&lt;Ti≤t+δ∣Ti≥t,wi¯(·),Ei)/δ.

gives

(16) λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=limδ→0P(t+Ei&lt;Ti+Ei≤t+δ+Ei∣Ti+Ei≥t+Ei,wi¯(·),Ei)/δ=limδ→0P(t+Ei&lt;Ui≤t+δ+Ei∣Ui≥t+Ei,wi¯(·),Ei)/δ,=λUi(t+Ei∣wi¯(·),Ei)=(5)λ0U(t+Ei)eβwi(t+Ei).

If λ0U(u) = ceγu for some c &gt; 0, then (16) yields

λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=ceγteβwi(t+Ei)+γEi.

Thus in comparison to model (6), it is clear that β = ξ provided λ0T(t) = ceγt.

If β = ξ, it follows that

λ0T(t)=λ0U(t+Ei)e-γEi,

because λTi(t) = λ0T(t)eξwi(t+Ei)+γEi by (6) and λTi(t) = λ0U(t + Ei)eβwi(t+Ei) by (16). In order for λ0T(t) to be independent of i, it must be that λ0U(u) = ceγu.

Proof of Theorem 1 part (b)

First observe that the true survival model in (5) can be rewritten as

(17) λUi(u∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ0U(u)eβwi(Ei)eβ[wi(u)-wi(Ei)].

If β in (17) is equal to α in (7), then

(18) λ1Ui(u)=λ0U(u)eβ[wi(u)-wi(Ei)]

This implies that wi(u) − wi(Ei) = g(u) for some function g that is independent of i; otherwise λ1U(u) would depend on i which is not the case. The condition wi(u) − wi(Ei) = g(u) requires that the function g is zero on the support of E since it is zero at all study entry times, Ei. Note that g(u) may be nonzero outside of the support of E.

If wi(u) = wi(Ei) + g(u), then the true model given by (5) and fitted model given by (7) are equivalent and β = α.

Proof of Theorem 1 part (c)

Note that the true survival model in (16) can be rewritten as

(19) λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=λ0U(t+Ei)eβ[wi(t+Ei)-wi(Ei)]eβwi(Ei)).

If β in (19) is equal to ζ in (8), then

(20) λ2T(t)=λ0U(t+Ei)eβ[wi(t+Ei)-wi(Ei)]-ηEi.

It must be that λ0U(t + Ei)e−ηEi = h(t) and wi(t + Ei) − wi(Ei) = k(t) for some functions h and k independent of i; otherwise the right-hand side of (20) would depend on i and cannot be equal to λ2T(t), an expression independent of i. Since we are assuming that all hazard functions are continuous, λ0U(t + Ei)e−ηEi = h(t) implies λ0U(u) = ceηu, for some c &gt; 0.

If wi(t + Ei) − wi(Ei) = k(t) and λ0U(u) = ceηu for c &gt; 0, then the true model in (19) is

λTi(t∣wi¯(·),Ei)=ceηt+βk(t)eβwi(Ei)+ηEi.

Comparing this to (8), it must be that β = ζ and λ2T(t) = ceηt+βk(t).

Figure 1 Plot of global cognition at study entry versus age at study entry with fitted loess curve.

Table 1 Bias and analytical standard errors of Cox parameter estimates for the logit error model for specified covariate model and baseline hazard function using n = 250 and 5000 iterations

Covariate model	β	Onset origin	Study entry origin	
		
A: f(Zi(u))	A′:f(Zi(u))^	B: f(Zi(Ei))	C: f(Zi(Ei))	D: f(Zi(Ei)) + Ei	E:f(Zi(t+Ei))^	F:f(Zi(t+Ei))^+Ei	
Fixed deviations, ai	
 Normal density based hazard	0	0.001 (0.131)	0.001 (0.132)	0 (0.034)	1.306 (0.108)	0.002 (0.169)	1.306 (0.108)	0.002 (0.169)	
0.25	0.003 (0.132)	0.003 (0.132)	−0.234 (0.033)	1.188 (0.104)	0.059 (0.168)	1.188 (0.104)	0.059 (0.168)	
0.5	0.004 (0.135)	0.004 (0.135)	−0.471 (0.032)	1.033 (0.117)	0.121 (0.174)	1.033 (0.117)	0.121 (0.174)	
1	0.006 (0.144)	0.002 (0.144)	−0.951 (0.031)	0.770 (0.158)	0.191 (0.174)	0.770 (0.158)	0.191 (0.174)	
1.5	0.008 (0.158)	−0.005 (0.157)	−1.438 (0.030)	0.436 (0.260)	0.162 (0.176)	0.436 (0.260)	0.162 (0.176)	
 Constant hazard	0	−0.002 (0.129)	−0.002 (0.129)	0 (0.031)	0 (0.030)	−0.002 (0.130)	0 (0.030)	−0.002 (0.130)	
0.25	0.002 (0.131)	0.002 (0.132)	−0.248 (0.014)	0.001 (0.019)	0.001 (0.132)	0.001 (0.019)	0.001 (0.132)	
0.5	0.005 (0.135)	0.003 (0.135)	−0.495 (0.014)	0.002 (0.030)	0.004 (0.136)	0.002 (0.030)	0.004 (0.136)	
1	0.008 (0.145)	0.003 (0.145)	−0.990 (0.015)	0.004 (0.055)	0.009 (0.146)	0.004 (0.055)	0.009 (0.146)	
1.5	0.009 (0.156)	−0.003 (0.157)	−1.484 (0.016)	0.006 (0.082)	0.010 (0.157)	0.006 (0.082)	0.010 (0.157)	
 Exponential-form hazard	0	0 (0.131)	0.001 (0.131)	0 (0.012)	0.729 (0.041)	0 (0.135)	0.729 (0.041)	0 (0.135)	
0.25	0.002 (0.131)	0.003 (0.131)	−0.248 (0.014)	0.708 (0.053)	0.002 (0.135)	0.708 (0.053)	0.002 (0.135)	
0.5	0.005 (0.135)	0.004 (0.135)	−0.495 (0.014)	0.688 (0.065)	0.004 (0.138)	0.688 (0.065)	0.004 (0.138)	
1	0.008 (0.145)	0.006 (0.145)	−0.989 (0.016)	0.652 (0.089)	0.009 (0.148)	0.652 (0.089)	0.009 (0.148)	
1.5	0.009 (0.155)	0.003 (0.156)	−1.483 (0.017)	0.615 (0.112)	0.011 (0.157)	0.615 (0.112)	0.011 (0.157)	
Time-varying deviations, bi	
 Normal density based hazard	0	0 (0.021)	0 (0.021)	−0.001 (0.013)	0.556 (0.052)	0 (0.044)	0.289 (0.02)	0 (0.026)	
0.25	0.002 (0.025)	0.001 (0.026)	−0.206 (0.014)	0.360 (0.057)	0.122 (0.049)	0.063 (0.021)	0.014 (0.029)	
0.5	0.003 (0.034)	0 (0.035)	−0.434 (0.014)	0.156 (0.062)	0.133 (0.061)	−0.166 (0.022)	0.021 (0.040)	
1	0.005 (0.056)	−0.022 (0.078)	−0.917 (0.016)	−0.267 (0.071)	−0.118 (0.087)	−0.632 (0.023)	−0.011 (0.069)	
1.5	0.006 (0.083)	−0.065 (0.150)	−1.411 (0.016)	−0.696 (0.078)	−0.523 (0.108)	−1.102 (0.024)	−0.165 (0.133)	
 Constant hazard	0	0 (0.015)	0 (0.015)	0 (0.029)	0.001 (0.028)	−0.001 (0.081)	0 (0.013)	0 (0.015)	
0.25	0.001 (0.025)	0 (0.025)	−0.204 (0.013)	−0.014 (0.019)	0.155 (0.046)	0.001 (0.018)	0.001 (0.023)	
0.5	0.002 (0.035)	−0.002 (0.036)	−0.436 (0.014)	−0.113 (0.028)	0.244 (0.061)	−0.001 (0.029)	0.001 (0.032)	
1	0.004 (0.057)	−0.021 (0.078)	−0.921 (0.015)	−0.474 (0.044)	0.222 (0.083)	−0.010 (0.055)	−0.006 (0.057)	
1.5	0.007 (0.083)	−0.052 (0.137)	−1.410 (0.017)	−0.890 (0.055)	0.029 (0.104)	−0.026 (0.087)	−0.019 (0.087)	
 Exponential-form hazard	0	0 (0.018)	0 (0.018)	0 (0.012)	0.372 (0.031)	0 (0.032)	0.221 (0.017)	0 (0.019)	
0.25	0.001 (0.025)	0.001 (0.025)	−0.206 (0.013)	0.364 (0.047)	0.109 (0.042)	0.103 (0.022)	0.001 (0.024)	
0.5	0.002 (0.035)	−0.001 (0.036)	−0.433 (0.015)	0.348 (0.060)	0.152 (0.056)	−0.012 (0.027)	0.001 (0.034)	
1	0.006 (0.057)	−0.016 (0.073)	−0.913 (0.016)	0.181 (0.067)	0.088 (0.080)	−0.237 (0.040)	−0.001 (0.056)	
1.5	0.007 (0.080)	−0.049 (0.132)	−1.404 (0.018)	−0.195 (0.078)	−0.117 (0.099)	−0.464 (0.055)	−0.011 (0.085)	

Table 2 Type I error for the logit error model for specified covariate model and baseline hazard function using n = 250 and 5000 iterations

Covariate model	Onset origin	Study entry origin	
		
A: f(Zi(u))	A′:f(Zi(u))^	B: f(Zi(Ei))	C: f(Zi(Ei))	D: f(Zi(Ei)) + Ei	E:f(Zi(t+Ei))^	F:f(Zi(t+Ei))^+Ei	
Fixed deviations, ai	
 Normal density based hazard	0.051	0.052	0.054	1	0.124	1	0.124	
 Constant hazard	0.048	0.048	0.052	0.053	0.048	0.053	0.048	
 Exponential-form hazard	0.054	0.054	0.048	1	0.055	1	0.055	
Time-varying deviations, bi	
 Normal density based hazard	0.061	0.060	0.050	1	0.060	1	0.070	
 Constant hazard	0.056	0.056	0.044	0.049	0.053	0.050	0.058	
 Exponential-form hazard	0.050	0.052	0.052	1	0.052	1	0.051	

Table 3 Power corresponding to β = 0.5 for the logit error model for specified covariate model and baseline hazard function using n = 250 and 5000 iterations

Covariate model	Onset origin	Study entry origin	
		
A: f(Zi(u))	A′:f(Zi(u))^	B: f(Zi(Ei))	C: f(Zi(Ei))	D: f(Zi(Ei)) + Ei	E:f(Zi(t+Ei))^	F:f(Zi(t+Ei))^+Ei	
Fixed deviations, ai	
 Normal density based hazard	0.97	0.97	0.15	1	0.98	1	0.98	
 Constant hazard	0.97	0.97	0.07	1	0.97	1	0.97	
 Exponential-form hazard	0.97	0.97	0.07	1	0.96	1	0.96	
Time-varying deviations, bi	
 Normal density based hazard	1	1	0.99	1	1	1	1	
 Constant hazard	1	1	0.99	1	1	1	1	
 Exponential-form hazard	1	1	0.99	1	1	1	1	

Table 4 Descriptive statistics of subjects included in the RADC analyses

	n	(%)	
Number of subjects	737		
Male	218	29.6	
	
	Mean	SD	
	
BMI	26.6	5.1	
Global cognition score	0.42	0.46	
Age at baseline visit	80.9	7.5	
Time from birth to last observation	87.8	7.2	
Time from study entry to last visit	6.9	4.8	

Table 5 Estimated regression coefficients corresponding to the biomarker (for two choices of origin and treating the biomarker as time-varying or fixed) and bootstrapped standard errors (5000 replications) of RADC analysis with global cognition biomarker

Covariate model	Birth origin	Study entry origin	
		
A′:f(Zi(u))^	B: f(Zi(Ei))	Sev. Adj.	C: f(Zi(Ei))	D: f(Zi(Ei)) + Ei	E:f(Zi(t+Ei))^	F:f(Zi(t+Ei))^+Ei	
Absolute error, sigmoid, ai	−0.51 (0.10)	−0.36 (0.10)	−0.35 (0.10)	−0.82 (0.10)	−0.72 (0.11)	−0.66 (0.09)	−0.72 (0.10)	
Absolute error, sigmoid, bi	−0.27 (0.09)	−0.36 (0.10)	−0.30 (0.10)	−0.82 (0.10)	−0.72 (0.11)	−0.61 (0.09)	−0.65 (0.10)	
Logit error, sigmoid, ai	−0.60 (0.07)	−0.40 (0.07)	−0.38 (0.07)	−0.93 (0.07)	−0.81 (0.08)	−0.67 (0.06)	−0.81 (0.07)	
Logit error, sigmoid, bi	−0.56 (0.07)	−0.40 (0.07)	−0.33 (0.07)	−0.93 (0.07)	−0.81 (0.08)	−0.58 (0.06)	−0.74 (0.07)	
Absolute error, linear trend, ai	−0.54 (0.10)	−0.36 (0.10)	−0.19 (0.09)	−0.82 (0.10)	−0.72 (0.11)	−0.59 (0.09)	−0.72 (0.10)	
Absolute error, linear trend, bi	−0.50 (0.09)	−0.36 (0.10)	−0.15 (0.09)	−0.82 (0.10)	−0.72 (0.11)	−0.52 (0.09)	−0.65 (0.10)	

Table 6 Analytical standard errors versus bootstrapped standard errors (5000 replications) for RADC analysis

	Birth origin	Study entry origin	
		
f(Zi(u))^	f(Zi(Ei))	Sev. Adj.	f(Zi(Ei))	f(Zi(Ei)) + Ei	f(Zi(t+Ei))^	f(Zi(t+Ei))^+Ei	
							
Wald	Boot	Wald	Boot	Wald	Boot	Wald	Boot	Wald	Boot	Wald	Boot	Wald	Boot	
Absolute error, sigmoid, ai	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.11	0.06	0.09	0.06	0.10	
Absolute error, sigmoid, bi	0.05	0.09	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.11	0.05	0.09	0.06	0.10	
Logit error, sigmoid, ai	0.06	0.07	0.07	0.07	0.07	0.07	0.06	0.07	0.07	0.08	0.07	0.06	0.07	0.07	
Logit error, sigmoid, bi	0.06	0.07	0.07	0.07	0.07	0.07	0.06	0.07	0.07	0.08	0.06	0.06	0.06	0.07	
Absolute error, linear trend, ai	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.09	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.11	0.06	0.09	0.06	0.10	
Absolute error, linear trend bi	0.05	0.09	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.09	0.06	0.10	0.06	0.11	0.05	0.09	0.06	0.10	

Table 7 Descriptive statistics of subjects included in the ADNI analyses

	n	(%)	
Number of subjects	786		
Male	465	59	
One or more APOE4 alleles	408	52	
	
	Mean	SD	
	
Hippocampal volume	6735	1158	
Age at first Hippocampal measurement	73	7	
Time from birth to last visit	76	8	
Time from study entry to last visit	3	2	
Converted to AD	280		

Table 8 Estimated regression coefficients corresponding to the biomarker (for two choices of origin and treating the biomarker as time-varying or fixed) and bootstrapped standard errors (5000 replications) of ADNI analysis with hippocampal volume biomarker

Covariate model	Birth origin	Study entry origin	
		
A′:f(Zi(u))^	B: f(Zi(Ei))	Sev. Adj.	C: f(Zi(Ei))	D: f(Zi(Ei)) + Ei	E:f(Zi(t+Ei))^	F:f(Zi(t+Ei))^+Ei	
Absolute error, sigmoid, ai	−0.78 (0.07)	−0.75 (0.07)	−0.76 (0.07)	−0.72 (0.07)	−0.83 (0.08)	−0.83 (0.08)	−0.83 (0.08)	
Absolute error, sigmoid, bi	−0.74 (0.07)	−0.75 (0.07)	−0.74 (0.07)	−0.72 (0.07)	−0.83 (0.08)	−0.81 (0.07)	−0.81 (0.08)	
Logit error, sigmoid, ai	−0.83 (0.14)	−0.80 (0.13)	−0.81 (0.13)	−0.86 (0.09)	−0.93 (0.12)	−0.93 (0.12)	−0.93 (0.12)	
Logit error, sigmoid, bi	−0.83 (0.13)	−0.80 (0.13)	−0.80 (0.13)	−0.86 (0.09)	−0.93 (0.12)	−0.92 (0.12)	−0.92 (0.12)	
Absolute error, linear trend, ai	−0.79 (0.07)	−0.75 (0.07)	−0.73 (0.07)	−0.72 (0.07)	−0.83 (0.08)	−0.82 (0.08)	−0.83 (0.08)	
Absolute error, linear trend, bi	−0.78 (0.07)	−0.75 (0.07)	−0.72 (0.07)	−0.72 (0.07)	−0.83 (0.08)	−0.80 (0.07)	−0.81 (0.08)	


1 Association Alzheimer’s Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures Alzheimer’s and Dementia 2014 10 2
2 Jack C Knopman D Jagust W Hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers of the Alzheimer’s pathological cascade Lancet Neurol 2010 9 1 119 128 20083042
3 Capuano A Wilson R Leurgans S Dawson J Bennett D Hedeker D Sigmoidal mixed models for longitudinal data Stat Methods Med Res 2016
4 Cnaan A Ryan L Survival analysis in natural history studies of disease Stat Med 1989 8 10 1255 68 2814073
5 Keiding N Knuiman M Comments on ‘Survival analysis in natural history studies of disease’ by Cnaan and Ryan Stat Med. 1989 Oct;8(10):1255–68 Stat Med 1990 9 10 1221 2 2247722
6 Cox DR Oakes D Analysis of survival data New York Chapman and Hall 1984
7 Fieberg J DelGiudice G What time is it? Choice of time origin and scale in extended proportional hazards models Ecology 2009 90 6 1687 1697 19569383
8 Korn E Graubard B Midthune D Time-to-event analysis of longitudinal follow-up of a survey: choice of the time-scale Am J Epidemiol 1997 145 1 72 80 8982025
9 Lamarca R Alonso J Gomez G Munoz A Left-truncated data with age as time scale: an alternative for survival analysis in the elderly population J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1998 53 5 M337 43 9754138
10 Liestol K Andersen P Updating of covariates and choice of time origin in survival analysis: problems with vaguely defined disease states Stat Med 2002 21 23 3701 3714 12436465
11 Pencina M Larson M D’Agostino R Choice of time scale and its effect on significance of predictors in longitudinal studies Stat Med 2007 26 1343 1359 16955538
12 Sperrin M Buchan I Modelling time to event with observations made at arbitrary times Stat Med 2013 32 1 99 109 22807157
13 Thiébaut A Bénichou J Choice of time-scale in Cox’s model analysis of epidemiologic cohort data: a simulation study Stat Med 2004 23 24 3803 3820 15580597
14 Griffin B Anderson G Shih R Whitsel E Use of alternative time scales in Cox proportional hazard models: implications for time-varying environmental exposures Stat Med 2012 31 27 3320 3327 22531976
15 Lin D Ying Z Cox regression with incomplete covariate measurements J Am Stat Assoc 1993 88 424 1341 1349
16 Zhou H Pepe M Auxiliary covariate data in failure time regression Biometrika 1995 82 1 139 149
17 Chen H Little R Proportional hazards regression with missing covariates J Am Stat Assoc 1999 94 447 896 908
18 Wu L Liu W Yi G Huang Y Analysis of longitudinal and survival data: joint modeling, inference methods, and issues J Probab Stat 2012 2012
19 Wang Y Taylor J Jointly Modeling Longitudinal and Event Time Data with Application to Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome J Am Stat Assoc 2001 96 455 895 905
20 Tsiatis A DeGruttola V Wulfsohn M Modeling the relationship of survival to longitudinal data measured with error. Applications to survival and CD4 counts in patients with AIDS J Am Stat Assoc 1995 90 429 27 37
21 Wulfsohn M Tsiatis A A joint model for survival and longitudinal data measured with error Biometrics 1997 53 1 330 339 9147598
22 Jack C Knopman D Jagust W Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers Lancet Neurol 2013 12 2 207 216 23332364
23 Fisher L Lin D Time-dependent covariates in the Cox proportional-hazards regression model Annu Rev Public Health 1999 20 145 57 10352854
24 Ingram D Makuc D Feldman J RE: ‘Time-to-event analysis of longitudinal follow-up of a survey: choice of the time scale’ Am J Epidemiol 1997 146 6 528 529 9290515
25 Bender R Augustin T Blettner M Generating survival times to simulate Cox proportional hazards models Stat Med 2005 24 11 1713 1723 15724232
26 R Core Team R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing 2014
27 Brazzale A hoa: An R package bundle for higher order likelihood inference Rnews 1 5 2005 20 27
28 Therneau T A Package for Survival Analysis in S 2015 version 2.38
29 Bennett D Schneider J Arvanitakis Z Wilson R Overview and findings from the religious orders study Curr Alzheimer Res 2012 9 6 628 645 22471860
30 Bennett D Schneider J Buchman A Barnes L Boyle P Wilson R Overview and findings from the rush Memory and Aging Project Curr Alzheimer Res 2012 9 6 646 663 22471867
31 Wilson R Boyle P Yu L Temporal course and pathologic basis of unawareness of memory loss in dementia Neurology 2015 85 11 984 991 26311746
32 Folstein M Folstein S McHugh P Mini-mental state?: a practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician J Psychiatr Res 1975 12 3 189 198 1202204
33 Buchman A Wilson R Bienias J Shah R Evans D Bennett D Change in body mass index and risk of incident Alzheimer disease Neurology 2005 65 6 892 897 16186530
34 Mueller S Weiner M Thal L Ways toward an early diagnosis in Alzheimer’s disease: The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Alzheimers Dement 2005 1 55 66 17476317
