LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370121
6712
Prog Neurobiol
Prog. Neurobiol.
Progress in neurobiology
0301-0082
1873-5118

27107797
5073045
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2016.04.006
NIHMS785092
Article
Microglial phenotypes in Parkinson’s disease and animal models of the disease
Joers Valerie 12
Tansey Malú G. 1*
Mulas Giovanna 3
Carta Anna R. 3*
1 Department of Physiology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
2 Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
3 Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Italy
* Co-corresponding authors: Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Via Ospedale 72, 09124, Cagliari, Italy, Malú G. Tansey, Ph.D. Department of Physiology, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael Street NE, Whitehead Biomedical Research Bldg., Atlanta, Georgia 30322
10 5 2016
20 4 2016
8 2017
01 8 2018
155 5775
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Over the last decade the important concept has emerged that microglia, similar to other tissue macrophages, assume different phenotypes and serve several effector functions, generating the theory that activated microglia can be organized by their pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory and repairing functions. Importantly, microglia exist in a heterogenous population and their phenotypes are not permanently polarized into two categories; they exist along a continuum where they acquire different profiles based on their local environment. In Parkinson’s disease (PD), neuroinflammation and microglia activation are considered neuropathological hallmarks, however their precise role in relation to disease progression is not clear, yet represent a critical challenge in the search of disease-modifying strategies. This review will critically address current knowledge on the activation states of microglia as well as microglial phenotypes found in PD and in animal models of PD, focusing on the expression of surface molecules as well as pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokine production during the disease process. While human studies have reported an elevation of both pro- or anti-inflammatory markers in the serum and CSF of PD patients, animal models have provided insights on dynamic changes of microglia phenotypes in relation to disease progression especially prior to the development of motor deficits. We also review recent evidence of malfunction at multiple steps of NFκB signaling that may have a causal interrelationship with pathological microglia activation in animal models of PD. Finally, we discuss the immune-modifying strategies that have been explored regarding mechanisms of chronic microglial activation.

microglia
neurodegeneration
neuroinflammation
Parkinson's
immune
neuroprotection

1. Introduction

The pathological hallmarks of Parkinson’s disease (PD) are a loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SN) and the presence of proteinaceous inclusions termed Lewy bodies and neurites. In addition, numerous studies have highlighted a potential role for neuroinflammation in PD, the hallmark of which is microgliosis (Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). Microglia are the resident immune cells in the brain derived from progenitors originating in the yolk sac during embryogenesis (Alliot et al., 1999). They serve various functions that include eliminating and remodeling synapses during development, surveying the environment to maintain homeostasis, and responding to injury to limit tissue damage, initiate repair processes, and promote neuronal survival. On the other hand, in response to an insult or in various neurodegenerative disorders microglia can proliferate, display morphological changes, alter their gene expression and surface markers to those that are characteristic of chronic activation. Together this response is termed microgliosis, yet it is not clear if microglia play a beneficial or detrimental role in the neurodegenerative process. Similarly, it is not well understood if microglia solely contribute to PD as a pathogenic response that facilitates disease or as a disease-initiating component. Although microglia are the primary cell in the brain responsible for immune surveillance, under pathological conditions, peripheral macrophages and other immune cells can traffic across a disrupted blood brain barrier (BBB) and most likely contribute to the role of neuroinflammation in PD. A new and growing area of PD research is now focused on understanding whether microglia exert a protective function via production of neurotrophic factors, or contribute to neuronal death by producing inflammatory factors that are toxic to DA and other vulnerable neurons. In order to address the impact of microglia on neurodegeneration in PD, whether protective or deleterious, we must better understand the behavior of microglia during disease progression. We posit that the microglial phenotypes in the aging brain become further altered in PD giving rise to a prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia, which likely contribute to progressive neuronal loss (Figure 1). To support our view we will discuss the complex microglial phenotypes found in PD and in animal models of PD and the immune-modifying strategies that have been explored regarding mechanisms of chronic microglial activation.

1.1 Microglia Activation States: complex and heterogeneous phenotypes

Over the last decade the important concept has emerged that microglia, similar to other tissue macrophages, assume different phenotypes and perform specific effector functions depending on the precise nature of the stimulus, its intensity and duration (Olah et al., 2011; Perry et al., 2007; Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). Activation of microglia through various pattern recognition receptors such as toll-like receptors (TLRs) leads to the synthesis of a range of different cytokines, inflammatory mediators, growth factors and cell surface molecules. These secondary effects of microglial activation have been used to classify them as either pro- or anti-inflammatory. However it is crucial to understand that activated microglia exist in a heterogenous population and that their phenotypes are not necessarily polarized into two categories, either pro- or anti-inflammatory, but instead exist along a continuum where they acquire different profiles based on their local environment. And as the brain ages, a progressive pro-inflammatory status also referred to as inflammaging manifests increasing the risk of age-related disorders and leading to microglial priming that may increase the propensity to develop neurodegenerative diseases such as PD (Perry and Holmes, 2014).

Microglia undergo morphological changes when they shift from a quiescent to an activated state. Morphologically, resting, quiescent microglia have long ramified processes with small cell bodies in vivo, while activated microglia take on an amoeboid shape with shorter processes and larger cell bodies. Functionally, one way that microglia remain in a quiescent state is via the interaction between the glycoprotein CD200 located on surrounding neurons and the receptor CD200R located on microglia (Hoek et al., 2000). There are multiple other ligand-receptor pairs that make up an important system for cross-talk between neurons and microglia including CD45-CD22 and fractalkine-CX3CR1. Recent evidence suggests that morphological changes should not be interpreted as a sign of activation but instead that the microglia are impaired and can no longer efficiently perform their intrinsic functions (Heppner et al., 2015). Microglia Aβ-binding scavenger receptors that are largely involved in Aβ plaque clearance were downregulated in aged Alzheimer’s disease mice (Hickman et al., 2008), suggesting alterations in microglial receptors may be a process that coincides with a shift in morphology. Furthermore, in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, the phagocytic capacity of microglia was reduced and inversely correlated to the Aβ plaque burden, suggesting that microglia function declined with severity of disease (Krabbe et al., 2013). Similar defective phagocytic activity was described in aged mice whereby primary microglia isolated from aged mice had less effectively taken up exosome associated α-synuclein oligomers compared to microglia from young mice (Bliederhaeuser et al., 2015). On the contrary, results from other studies in animal models of PD have suggested long-term phagocytic activation of microglia (Barcia et al., 2013; Rodriguez et al., 2007). These studies used immunohistochemical techniques to highlight presence of phagocytic markers, thus potentially suggesting that some microglia in the heterogeneous population maintain their phagocytic capacity in late stages of the disease but the presence of phagocytic markers does not necessarily correlate with in vivo phagocytic capacity. Therefore we must be cautioned to evaluate more than the morphological changes in order to understand the functions of the microglia and their relationship with neurodegeneration in PD.

The term “activated microglia” is an oversimplified term that lacks information about the heterogeneous nature of activated microglia and their various and complex effector functions. Activated macrophages also have diverse functions that historically have been categorized by their distinct patterns of secreted factors and cell surface markers following stimuli such as cytokines. The original concept of macrophage polarization described an M1 stage as cytotoxic and maintaining a pro-inflammatory phenotype, while a M2 stage was associated with repair and healing or an anti-inflammatory phenotype (Mackaness, 1962; Mills et al., 2000). Stereotypical M1 phenotypes occur when challenged with LPS and IFN-γ which are produced in large quantities during bacterial and viral infections, respectively, leading to the production of inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interlukin-6 (IL-6), IL-12, and IL-1β and lead to the upregulation of cell surface markers such as major histocompatibility complex-II (MHC-II) and CD86 (Martinez et al., 2006; Nau et al., 2002). The M2 state is divided into 3 different sub-classes each having distinct activation mechanisms: M2a, M2b, and M2c (Biswas and Mantovani, 2010; Edwards et al., 2006; Martinez and Gordon, 2014; Stout et al., 2005). Macrophages stimulated by IL-4 adopt an M2a-like phenotype that functions to suppress inflammation. Alternatively, M2b responses control selective phagocytosis and regulate inflammation. This response is stimulated by TLR ligands that become activated by the fusion of Fc gamma receptors (FcγRII) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) complexes. Lastly, the M2c phenotype has been implicated in tissue remodeling and immunoregulation and is stimulated by the binding of IL-10 to its receptor and can be enhanced by glucocorticoids (Gratchev et al., 2008). The proposed distinct macrophage activation states became controversial in 2011 when activation pathways were found to overlap, suggesting that states of activation may be intermittent and dynamic. A recent publication authored by 25 senior investigators proposes new nomenclature to describe the complex landscape of macrophage responses to various stimuli (Martinez and Gordon, 2014; Murray et al., 2014).

Based on the similarities between microglia and macrophages, microglia activation responses were also initially classified using M1/M2 polarization terminology. Based on the emergence of new cutting-edge technologies such as single-cell RNA sequencing and cytometry time-of-flight (CyTOF) mass spectrometer for high-speed acquisition of highly multi-parametric single cell data it has become clear that describing the states of microglia activation by the M1 or classical activation and M2 or alternative activation phenotypes is not accurate. The phenotypic responses of microglia do not necessarily mimic those of macrophages. For example, IL-4 stimulus promotes CD163 and CD206 expression in macrophages but not in microglia (Mittelbronn, 2014). Furthermore, the responsiveness of primary human microglia to LPS and IFN-γ is minimal to absent depending on culture conditions in contrast to the robust induction of TNF and CCR7 observed in monocyte-derived macrophages. Moreover, primary microglia produce increased CD163 and CCL18 after stimulation with dexamethasone, while the response of monocyte-derived macrophages is largely restricted to increases in CD163 (Melief et al., 2012).

Although microglia can be manipulated in vitro to elicit polarized responses, the in vivo profiling of microglia activation is more complex and much less clear with distinctions by species and/or location. Anatomical regional differences have been reported for microglia frequency with greater density found in the telencephalon, while within the same region, more microglia are found in myelinated areas compared to non-myelinated (Lawson et al., 1990; Mittelbronn et al., 2001). In relation to PD, early reports describe, within the less dense mescencephalon, that microglia are more numerous in the SN, particularly in the pars reticulata, compared to adjacent structures (Lawson et al., 1990). Interestingly, microglial density is positively correlated to LPS-induced neurodegeneration suggesting regional differences in cell responsiveness (Kim et al., 2000). Potentially contributing to their functional response, variability in microglia basal gene expression exists among brain regions. For example, TNF mRNA is greater in microglia freshly isolated from the SN compared to the hippocampus of Wistar rats, suggesting that microglial profiles may contribute to regional vulnerability and susceptibility of neurons in a diseased state such as PD (Doorn et al., 2015). This idea is further supported by the non-uniform transcriptional identity of aged microglia across brain regions. Recent investigations have shown that microglia isolated from aged mice lose their younger, more distinct gene expression profile with greatest changes in found in the hippocampus which may result in a lack of homeostatic support to the surrounding tissue and further influence the location dependent susceptibility to neurodegenerative disorders (Grabert et al., 2016). Future studies to better understand regional functionality of microglia should be conducted using the translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP) methodology (Heiman et al., 2008). Furthermore, microglial surface markers also have demonstrated regional diversity. Using flow cytometry, isolates from gray matter (occipital cortex) had increased levels of CD45 compared to white matter (corpus callosum), suggesting that gray matter microglia may be in a more immunosuppressed state (Melief et al., 2012). Understanding region-specific differences may provide insight into the contribution of microglial responsiveness to disease and their vast capacity to produce a spectrum of responses versus merely polarized responses.

2. Microglia in Parkinson’s disease (PD)

Research into disequilibrium and complexity of microglial activation responses became an area of intense focus in hope to identify a potential mechanism that could contribute to neuroinflammation and potentially underlie PD pathogenesis. The idea was that identifying neuroinflammatory profiles in the brains of PD patients may help define potential targets for anti-inflammatory neuroprotective therapies and could help determine the success of immunotherapies (Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2013; Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). However, the challenges of such targeted therapies require sensitive methods to detect microglial activation states and phenotypic changes which remains a challenging undertaking given these factors are likely to display complex temporal associations with PD depending on Braak disease stage, rate of disease progression and duration of disease. In order to move forward and conquer these challenges we will discuss current understandings of the activation states of microglia in PD as determined by post-mortem histological evaluation and in vivo imaging and the microglia phenotypes found in PD tissues and biofluids.

2.1 Evidence for Microglia Activation in PD

Multiple studies have described reactive microglial in postmortem brain samples of PD patients. Specifically, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) immunoreactive microglia were identified in areas of the SN and striatum in PD patients and in patients with induced parkinsonism from a self-administered analog of synthetic meperidine analogue known as 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) that resulted from faulty chemistry and was responsible for “frozen addicts” with extreme parkinsonian bradykinesia (Imamura et al., 2003; Langston et al., 1999; McGeer et al., 1988). Located in the vicinity of the few remaining nigral DA neurons, these microglia displayed morphologies characteristic of activated and phagocytic cells, similar to those seen in aging (Jyothi et al., 2015), and displayed increased HLA immunoreactivity with some microglia containing visible evidence of phagocytized neuromelanin, the characteristic pigment of nigral DA neurons (Langston et al., 1999). Interestingly, Croisier et al. found an inverse correlation of CD68 immunoreactivity with disease duration, and suggested that elevated phagocytosis was associated with ongoing tissue destruction, decreasing in final disease stages when it was no longer functionally relevant (Croisier et al., 2005). These and other associations between the presence of activated microglia and advanced parkinsonian stages as well as the presence of α-synuclein aggregation suggest a significant contribution of microglial activation to the progressive pathological process in PD. However, given that most of these observations were taken at the end stage of disease, it remains unclear whether the activation of inflammatory responses and microgliosis could play a detrimental or beneficial role at earlier stages of the neuropathology. In either case, the involvement of the immune system and potentially microglial activation in the pathogenesis of PD has been supported by a large genome-wide association study (GWAS) that identified a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA-DRA) gene, which encodes HLA-DR antigens that are expressed by antigen-presenting cells such as microglia, as a genetic risk factor for late-onset PD (Hamza et al., 2010).

Evidence for the ongoing activation of microglia in PD has been confirmed using positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. Radioligands such as 11C-PK11195, 11C-PBR, or 18F-FEPPA selectively bind to peripheral benzodiazepine receptors (PBR), more recently termed translocator proteins (TSPO), which generally have low expression in a healthy brain, but are greatly enhanced in the presence of neuroinflammation and therefore widely accepted as a measurement of activated microglia (Banati et al., 1997; Papadopoulos et al., 2006). Widespread microglial activation in PD as reflected by increased binding of 11C-PK11195 was reported in the pons, basal ganglia and frontal and temporal cortex of PD patients compared to age-matched normal controls (Gerhard et al., 2006). Yet longitudinal evaluation of 11C-PK11195 binding potential 18-28 months later did not show significant changes in radioligand binding regardless of the significant increases in UPDRS scores, suggesting that PBR binding does not correlate with disease progression. However, other studies have demonstrated a positive correlation in the levels of 11C-PK11195 in the midbrain with the UPDRS in early stage PD patients (Ouchi et al., 2005), and although not significant, trends of higher levels of 11C-PK11195 were found in advanced stages of PD compared to unmedicated patients within a year of their diagnosis (Bartels et al., 2010). Diffuse binding of 11C-PK11195 has also been described in PD patients with a 25-30% increase in the temporal and occipital cortical regions (Edison et al., 2013); whereas, other studies demonstrated selective binding potential increases in the SN and putamen (Iannaccone et al., 2013) or the midbrain (Ouchi et al., 2005). While these disparate findings may partly reflect the large variability of neuroinflammation in PD patients, the largest inherent limitation of these studies is that quantitative interpretations of binding signal are confounded by large inter-individual variability in binding affinity due to genetic polymorphisms in TSPO (Owen et al., 2012; Yoder et al., 2013); therefore, caution should be used when comparing between individuals in cross-sectional studies. Even in a study that controlled for the rs6971 polymorphism, 18F-FEPPA binding was not significant in the striatum of PD patients compared to controls, yet interestingly within the PD group demonstrated trends of increased TSPO expression in high compared to mixed affinity binders (Koshimori et al., 2015). The most conservative interpretation of these findings is that the progressive degeneration in PD may not be associated with increasing microgliosis, suggesting there is not a parallel relationship and instead there may exist a threshold of microglial activation or dysfunction that continues to contribute to cell death. Yet, it also leaves open the possibility that microglia phenotypes fluctuate along with disease progression. However, PBR ligands are unlikely to distinguish across the spectrum of microglia activation states, therefore nowadays it is not possible to evaluate microglia phenotype in the brain and make a clear correlation with different stages of PD progression in parkinsonian patients. Clearly it would be advantageous to develop PET radioligands that can detect microglial phenotypes or functional behavior. Furthermore, development of radioligands for α-synuclein aggregation would allow comparisons between Lewy pathology and not only DA neuron dysfunction but also microglial activation.

Future application of microglial imaging to evaluate patterns of temporal activation in PD are needed. Animal models of ischemia have demonstrated microglial temporal activation and distribution shifts. Mice induced with focal cerebral ischemia show CD68 expressing microglia bordering the ischemic core 24 hours after lesion, but then migrated into the core by 7 days post-ischemic lesion (Perego et al., 2011), suggesting that phagocytic behavior increased by 7 days because nerve loss was irreversible. However, little is known about the exact mechanisms by which microglia influence the outcome of disease, especially a progressive neurodegenerative disorder.

2.2 Microglia phenotypes in PD

Given the complex profile of microglia, the presence of reactive microglia alone does not define their helpful or harmful role in PD neuropathology. Evaluation of soluble factors such as cytokines in brain tissue, cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) or serum from PD patients may provide hints to the pathogenic impact of microglia activation (Table 1). Elevated levels of cytokines including TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β were reported in CSF and striatal samples of individuals with PD (Blum-Degen et al., 1995; Mogi et al., 1994a; Mogi et al., 1994b; Mogi et al., 2007; Muller et al., 1998). Additionally with the use of immunohistochemistry, nitric oxide synthase, cyclo-oxygenases 1 and 2 (COX1 and COX2) were found elevated in amoeboid microglia from PD samples of the SN (Knott et al., 2000), while microglia in the putamen (Imamura et al., 2003) or SN (Hunot et al., 1999) of PD patients were also immunoreactive for cytokines such as IL-6, TNF-α and IL-1β. More recently, evaluation of CSF from PD patients compared to a reference healthy control group revealed no significant differences in the inflammatory markers Flt3 ligand and fractalkine (Shi et al., 2011) or C-reactive protein (CRP), IL-6, TNF-α, eotaxin, interferon gamma-induced protein-10 (IP-10), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), and macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β) (Lindqvist et al., 2013). Interestingly, and perhaps not surprisingly, increased CSF levels of CRP correlated with non-motor symptoms including depression and fatigue, while MCP-1 expression was significantly associated with depression (Lindqvist et al., 2013), suggesting a role for cytokine production in non-motor disease symptoms with significant inter-individual variability of inflammatory phenotypes in relation to disease pathology. The interaction of neuroinflammation and non-motor symptoms is further supported by a significant correlation between 11C-PK11195 binding in the cortical regions and cognitive impairment in both PD patients with dementia and Alzheimer patients (Fan et al., 2015). Another cytokine transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), known to inhibit microglia activation, has been observed in the brains and CSF of PD patients (Mogi et al., 1995; Vawter et al., 1996). Therefore, it is possible that adaptive changes in the brain occur at some point along disease progression to induce a protective microglia phenotype, which would account for pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines co-existence in CSF. To date, the relationship between aggregated or soluble α-synuclein and CSF inflammatory markers has not been evaluated in-depth in PD patients.

In the plasma, inflammatory cytokines have been found and correlated to PD severity as determined by Hoehn and Yahr staging (Brodacki et al., 2008; Hofmann et al., 2009; Koziorowski et al., 2012). Another study evaluated a total of 17 cytokines and chemokines in plasma of PD patients that were homozygous carriers of the rs3129882 G SNP, but found no changes with the exception of increased CCL-3, also known as MIP-1α (Kannarkat et al., in press). The rs3129882 SNP is located in the first intron on the HLA-DRA gene and homozygous carriers of the high-risk G allele have elevated baseline and inducibility of MHC-II expression on antigen presenting cells, suggesting that cellular immune phenotypes may be an alternative marker to the soluble markers found in biofluids.

Based on the above reports, conclusions of microglial phenotypes throughout the different stages of PD are difficult not only because of the limited number of studies and the effect of method and timing of collection, but are also likely distorted by an exceeding number of patients who die in late stages of the disease. A recent study examined mRNA levels of cytokines and mediators of the immune response PD patients across stages and found increased expression of IL-6 signal transducer in the SN of patients in stage 1-2 while at later stages of the disease the same marker was downregulated (Garcia-Esparcia et al., 2014). This observation further reveals the complex responses dependent on the stage of PD-related pathology; yet again the low number of samples collected from patients in early stage PD and the inability to corroborate their findings at the protein level limited this study. Moreover, long-term L-DOPA therapy or antidepressant therapy often administered to patients in late disease stage, may affect immune responses in opposite directions, adding a factor of complication to human studies (Barnum et al., 2008; Baumeister et al., 2015; Lindqvist et al., 2013). Unfortunately, these limitations restrict our ability to fully understand the state of microglia during progressive neurodegeneration and α-synuclein deposition. Future evaluation of microglial gene expression in post-mortem brains of PD patients who died at different stages of disease may aid investigators to better define microglial phenotypes. It is becoming increasingly clear that in many diseases, microglia largely express complex gene expression signatures (Butovsky et al., 2014; Moore et al., 2015; Pisanu et al., 2014; Tang and Le, 2015), and mixed phenotypes most likely reflect a dynamic state or may be simply due to the presence of a heterogeneous population of microglia during disease. Until human studies can be conducted to evaluate the neuroinflammatory interaction with neurodegeneration and other histopathological hallmarks like Lewy Body formation, conclusions about these relationships will have to be drawn from animal models of the disease.

In summary, it remains to be established whether the activation of inflammatory responses and reactive microglia could play a beneficial role at some stage during the progression of PD in humans. As described above, human studies have reported an elevation of both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in the serum and CSF of PD patients, suggesting that pro- and anti-inflammatory microglia may coexist in the PD brain and complex changes in microglia phenotypes are likely to maintain and exacerbate PD neuropathology (Brodacki et al., 2008; Mogi et al., 1995; Mogi et al., 1994a; Mogi et al., 1996; Rentzos et al., 2009). Noteworthy, in Alzheimer's disease and in the elderly brain an imbalance of pro- and anti-inflammatory microglia phenotypes have been reported (Hoozemans et al., 2006; Jimenez et al., 2008). Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that there is an array of activated microglia that coalesce in the PD brain and potentially drive disease progression via cytokine release (Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). Improvements in single-cell phenotyping and development of PET ligands for neuroimaging that can distinguish specific phenotypes among the vast array of heterogeneous microglia profiles will be needed to resolve these unanswered questions.

3. Microgliosis in models of PD-like degeneration

It is generally believed that stress signals produced by damaged neurons or aggregated misfolded proteins released by dead neurons activate microglia, which in turn lead to secondary degeneration, being responsible for the massive neurodegeneration in PD. Animal models have added pivotal insights to the understanding of microglia involvement in PD neuropathology. Neurotoxins such as MPTP and 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) induce different degrees of microgliosis in lesioned areas. Moreover, a number of pro-inflammatory stimuli have been used to activate microglia in order to mediate DA neuron toxicity including lipopolysaccharide (LPS), α-synuclein, and inflammatory cytokines. While all models induce some degree of activated microglia surrounding damaged DA neurons, they display differences in the time-course of microglia activation in response to the toxic stimulus. Moreover, different results have been reported on the sequence of toxic events in DA areas, where microglia activation may either precede neuronal damage or be a secondary event, depending on the animal model investigated (Frank-Cannon et al., 2009; Ramsey and Tansey, 2014). Differences mostly relate to the species used and to the primary trigger of degeneration, that is whether a neurotoxin or an inflammatory insult is delivered. Moreover, the protocol chosen to administer the neurotoxin, either an acute or chronic protocol, thereby determining the time-course of the degenerative process, will also influence microgliosis progression. Since microglia may display different phenotypes and perform specific effector functions depending both on the type and strength of the stimulus, a careful evaluation of the choice of animal model is pivotal in the experimental design so that it is suitable for the purpose of the study.

3.1 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) models

Monkey studies have consistently reported HLA-DR-stained reactive microglia in the SN of MPTP-injected monkeys years after neurotoxin injection, suggesting that an ongoing and long-lasting microgliosis was triggered and persisted in the absence of MPTP (Barcia et al., 2004; Hurley et al., 2003; McGeer et al., 2003; Vazquez-Claverie et al., 2009). Moreover, a similar extent of microgliosis was reported after subacute or chronic MPTP administration, which was independent from the extent of neuronal loss in the SN (Vazquez-Claverie et al., 2009). In rodents, the majority of studies aimed at investigate microgliosis in PD have been performed in acute models of MPTP toxicity. Pioneer studies performed in mice administered acute doses of MPTP reported early and transient presence of reactive microglia in the SN, which preceded neuronal loss and disappeared within a few weeks after toxin exposure (Czlonkowska et al., 1996; Kohutnicka et al., 1998; Kurkowska-Jastrzebska et al., 1999; Liberatore et al., 1999; Smeyne and Jackson-Lewis, 2005; Vazquez-Claverie et al., 2009). More recent studies have investigated reactive microglia in chronic regimens of MPTP administration, which more closely reproduces the progressive nature of neurodegeneration and symptom development observed in PD neuropathology. These models show an early time course of microglia activation in the SN that is detectable in the absence of nigral cell loss in the premotor phase of the neuropathology when non-motor symptoms such as olfactory dysfunction have been observed (Rodriguez et al., 2007; Schintu et al., 2009). Along with the chronic administration regimen, reactive microglia proliferate as the DA degeneration progresses, and persist at least six months after discontinuation of MPTP. Moreover, in presence of advanced nigral degeneration, microglial cells are closely associated with apoptotic cells, suggesting an active role in the scavenging of dying neurons (Meredith, 2005).

3.2 6-Hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) models

6-OHDA injections induce strong microglial activation in the SN or the striatum; yet microglia activation has been described as an early, simultaneous or delayed event with respect to DA degeneration depending on the site of 6-OHDA injection (Marinova-Mutafchieva et al., 2009; Sanchez-Pernaute et al., 2004; Walsh et al., 2011). After intrastriatal 6-OHDA infusion, reactive microglia were detectable histologically in the striatum days after terminal degeneration (Walsh et al., 2011), while microgliosis in the SN was absent or elicited subsequently to DA degeneration (Depino et al., 2003; Henry et al., 2009; Walsh et al., 2011). In contrast, microgliosis preceding DA degeneration was detected in both the striatum and SN of rats intrastriatally treated with 6-OHDA (Armentero et al., 2006). Interestingly, when the neurotoxin was infused directly into axons, microgliosis preceded striatal terminal degeneration and occurred together with nigral degeneration (Walsh et al., 2011). Evaluation of 3H-PK11195 autoradiography from rats administered unilateral intrastriatal 6-OHDA showed early strong microgliosis in the striatum starting 3 days after toxin delivery, but delayed and progressive increases in radiotracer density in the SN, synchronous with the timeline of degeneration (Maia et al., 2012). Overall, studies performed in toxin-based models support early and enduring microglia activation in the course of DA neuronal loss.

3.3 Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) models

The bacterial endotoxin LPS administered either intranigrally or peripherally, induces a potent activation of microglia and secretion of pro-inflammatory factors which precede the degeneration of the nigrostriatal DA pathway, and is therefore used to investigate direct neuroinflammation-induced dopamine loss (Castano et al., 1998; Dutta et al., 2008). Depending upon the dose of LPS administration, the resulting DA neurodegeneration has been described as rapid or delayed and progressive. Acute LPS intranigral infusion in C57BL/6 mice or rats induced rapid activation of microglial cells and degeneration of dopamine neurons in the SN within 7 days, which remained stable up to one year (Arai et al., 2004; Herrera et al., 2000). Subacute or chronic infusion of low-dose LPS into rodent brain triggered a rapid and persistent activation of microglia, followed by a delayed and gradual loss of nigral DA neurons that began at 3-4 weeks, reaching 70% of neuronal loss by 10 weeks (Gao et al., 2002; McCoy et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2013). When LPS was administered as a single intraperitoneal injection, it caused rapid microglia activation and increased brain TNF, that remained elevated for 10 months followed by delayed and progressive loss of nigral DA neurons starting at 7 months after LPS treatment that reached 47% loss at 10 months (Qin et al., 2007). Therefore, data from the LPS models indicate that neuroinflammation may be both an initiating stimulus and a self-propelling mechanism of progressive neuron degeneration.

3.4 α-synuclein models

A variety of α-synuclein-based models have been developed in an attempt to replicate the α-synucleinopathy observed in PD patients. These models include overexpression of wild type human α-synuclein or mutant A53T human α-synuclein, and transgenic mice overexpressing truncated human α-synuclein in DA neurons, as extensively reviewed (Dawson et al., 2010; Giasson et al., 2002; Magen and Chesselet, 2010; Masliah et al., 2000; Wakamatsu et al., 2008). Although none of these models replicate the main hallmarks of PD, such as progressive and severe loss of DA neurons and motor deficits, they have greatly contributed to the understanding of α-synuclein-induced toxicity. Alternative models include mice overexpressing human wild type α-synuclein under the Thy-1 promoter (Chesselet et al., 2012) or the tyrosine hydroxylase promoter (Su et al., 2008), and viral vector driven α-synuclein overexpression in rodents (Decressac et al., 2012; Lo Bianco et al., 2002; Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2010; Van der Perren et al., 2015; Yamada et al., 2004) and primates (Eslamboli et al., 2007). Viral vector-based models show a progressive degeneration of nigrostriatal neurons that is associated with gradual motor impairment (Decressac et al., 2012; Van der Perren et al., 2015). Independent of the extent of nigrostriatal degeneration, α-synuclein models offer the opportunity to study pathologic mechanisms specific to early disease stage, and to elucidate mechanisms of cellular dysfunction which precede cell death (Chesselet et al., 2012), including inflammatory responses and the relationship between α-synuclein accumulation and subsequent inflammation (Allen Reish and Standaert, 2015; Gao et al., 2008; Gao et al., 2011a). In Thy-1 α-synuclein mice an early and progressive increase of activated microglia and inflammatory cytokine TNF was specifically observed in striatum and SN that preceded dopamine fiber damage (Watson et al., 2012). Similarly, one-month old TH α-synuclein mice displayed an increase of Iba1-positive ameboid shaped microglia in the SN and increased expression of TNF in both the SN and striatum (Su et al., 2008). As mentioned above, different forms of wild type or mutated α-synuclein have been overexpressed in the rodent brain, which were shown to affect microglia activation in different ways. LPS induced a persistent microgliosis, production of inflammatory molecules, and a progressive degeneration of nigrostriatal neurons when administered to transgenic mice overexpressing human A53T mutant α-synuclein, but not in wild type α-synuclein mice, suggesting that microglia bridge neuroinflammation and α-synuclein-induced cellular damage in mediating chronic degeneration in PD (Gao et al., 2011a). Moreover, studies in α-synuclein overexpressing mice and primates have been pivotal to demonstrate that levels of α-synuclein-induced neuronal pathology, either in presence or absence of DA degeneration, strictly modulate the phenotype of activated microglia (Barkholt et al., 2012; Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2010).

3.5 LRRK2 models

Cells or mice bearing a genetic mutation of the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene have provided direct evidence of the causal relationship between neuroinflammation and DA neuron degeneration in late-onset PD. LRRK2 expression is upregulated in activated microglia under pathological conditions, whereas LRRK2 ablation or inhibition prevents a full inflammatory response, resulting in attenuated inflammatory cytokine production following LPS, reduced nuclear factor (NF)-κB transcriptional activity, and reduced microglial morphological activation, chemotactic and phagocytic activity (Kim et al., 2012; Marker et al., 2012; Moehle et al., 2012). Missense mutations in LRRK2 are the most common cause of both genetic and idiopathic PD where disease penetrance is variable (Healy et al., 2008). The G2019S LRRK2 mutation is the most frequent mutation responsible for dominantly inherited PD, and is associated with increased kinase activity. PD patients with the G2019S LRRK2 mutation present clinical and pathological phenotypes nearly indistinguishable from idiopathic disease (Paisan-Ruiz et al., 2004; West et al., 2005; Zimprich et al., 2004). Remarkably, LRRK2 KO rats were resistant to DA degeneration when challenged by either intracranial LPS or α-synuclein overexpression, while LRRK2 overexpression accelerated the progression of neuropathology in A53T α-synuclein transgenic mice (Daher et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2009). Of note, one study reported an age-dependent partial loss of nigral neurons and damage to the nigrostriatal system in mice carrying the G2019S LRRK2 mutation (Ramonet et al., 2011). Overall, results from transgenic LRRK2 mutant mice suggest that there is another contributing factor in the brain environment leading to the progressive neurodegeneration in PD. Therefore, inhibition of LRRK2 protects from DA cell loss by preventing the recruitment of activated microglia and potentially infiltrating myeloid cells, while LRRK2 overexpression causes neuronal damage, placing the neuroinflammatory response center stage among causal factors of neurodegeneration in this PD model.

Recently, mice carrying null mutation for the c-Rel gene, a regulatory subunit of the transcriptional regulator of inflammation NFκB, have been characterized and suggested to be a useful model of progressive inflammation-induced nigral degeneration (Baiguera et al., 2012). c-Rel KO mice develop an age-dependent PD-like progressive neurodegeneration and accumulation of aggregated α-synuclein with activation of CD11b-positive microglial cells in the SN, highlighting NFκB as a potential downstream target for the regulation of microglial activation.

4. Microglia activation states in animal models of PD-like degeneration

As described above, PET imaging studies in human subjects have revealed that the extent of microglia activation does not increase as the clinical features of the disease progress (Gerhard et al., 2006). In line with this evidence, the extent of reactive microglia in monkeys was similar after a subacute or a chronic MPTP regimen and appeared independent from the lesion extent in the SN (Hurley et al., 2003; Vazquez-Claverie et al., 2009). These findings suggest that progressive degeneration of DA neurons and terminals may not be due to progressively increasing microglial proliferation, but leave open the possibility that changes in the microglia phenotype occur along with disease progression that confer to them a permanent and increasing neurotoxicity for DA neurons that cannot be appreciated using the current PET imaging methodologies.

4.1 Pro-inflammatory microglia

In an attempt to explore changes in microglia phenotype in PD and their time-course, a number of studies have investigated the expression of surface immune molecules in microglial cells in animal models. These pioneer studies have revealed that the time-course of expression displayed by these molecules does not necessarily reflect the time-course of microglia activation during disease progression, suggesting that dynamic changes in the phenotype of activated microglia are occurring in experimental models of PD. Following an acute MPTP protocol in mice, an early upregulation of MHC-I and ICAM-I were found in reactive microglia on days 1-7 post treatment, while MHC-II was transiently upregulated on days 7-14, then became undetectable on day 21 and up to 6 months after the lesion; these findings provided the first suggestion of dynamic changes in microglia effector function in an animal model of PD (Kurkowska-Jastrzebska et al., 1999; Yasuda et al., 2007). Primary murine ventral midbrain cultures exposed to media with elevated IFN-γ from microglia stimulated with LPS, α-synuclein, or A53T mutated α-synuclein had significantly heightened proportions of MHC-I expression compared to the same cultures either plated with control media from microglia that were not stimulated or exposed directly to these stimuli, or compared to primary cortical and striatal cultures exposed to the same stimulated media. Furthermore, induction of MHC-I on murine catecholamine neurons by factors (IFN-γ) released from stimulated microglia triggered extensive neuronal death, suggesting that stimulated microglia can selectively promote MHC-I presentation in SN catecholamine neurons (Cebrian et al., 2014). In mice intravenously injected with peripheral bone-marrow-derived cells, chronic MPTP induced an early microglia proliferation greatest in areas of rich DA innervation such as the anterior, medial and posterior striatum, which began to express the marker of phagocytosis CD68 only at later stages of degeneration (Rodriguez et al., 2007). Following 6-OHDA injection into the medial forebrain bundle (MFB), an increase in OX-42 and MHC-II immunoreactivity was detected as early as day 1 post-lesion, while levels of CD68 started to increase after 3 days, reaching maximal levels 9-13 days post-lesion (Marinova-Mutafchieva et al., 2009). Interestingly, upregulation of CD68 was coincident with dopaminergic degeneration in a microglia subpopulation located near dopaminergic neurons (Kurkowska-Jastrzebska et al., 1999). Therefore, phagocytic mechanisms may be responsible for microglia-mediated secondary neuronal degeneration, being mostly upregulated in presence of intense tissue destruction, which is in line with human findings (Cebrian et al., 2014; Croisier et al., 2005). In support of this concept, similar results were reported after medial forebrain bundle (MFB) transection, where early microglia activation was followed by a delayed upregulation of CD68 that occurred together with DA degeneration (Cho et al., 2006). Although interpretation of data obtained from toxin-based models is undermined by the diverse induction of microglia activation depending on the model and protocol used (as discussed above), overall these studies strongly suggest that microglia phenotypes are modulated in a manner that depends on the degree of DA damage/degeneration in their microenvironment, perhaps first characterized by an antigen-presentation effector function, then followed by the induction of a heightened pro-inflammatory phenotype, followed by phagocytic phenotype in the more advanced stages of degeneration.

Studies in rats and primates overexpressing viral vector driven human α-synuclein have provided convincing evidence that microglia acquire different phenotypes and display different effector functions at early versus late stages of neurodegeneration (Barkholt et al., 2012; Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2010). In rats overexpressing viral driven human α-synuclein, microglia assumed different morphology and phenotype depending on the level of α-synuclein expression and the related degree of α-synuclein-induced DA degeneration (Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2010). Upon exposure to levels of human α-synuclein that cause neuronal damage but not cell death perhaps modeling early disease stages, microglia displayed an antigen-presenting phenotype with increased MHC-II expression, in contrast to the more macrophage-like morphology with increased CD68 expression when exposed to human α-synuclein levels that induced DA degeneration (Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2010). Similar results were reported in primates, where human α-synuclein overexpression induced a long-term microglia polarization (Barkholt et al., 2012). Importantly, in this study human A53T mutant α-synuclein overexpression induced neurodegeneration that resulted in nigral dopaminergic cell death, while wild type human α-synuclein overexpression induced by recombinant adeno-associated virus injections resulted in degeneration that was limited to DA fibers. In addition, although the extent of activated microglia was similar across primates that received α-synuclein compared to controls, microglia polarization into a macrophage-like morphology was more pronounced in the A53T over-expressing animals (Barkholt et al., 2012). The significance of this is unclear but highlights the complexity of the molecular interactions between different forms of α-synuclein and brain microglia that shapes microglial responses.

In addition to cell surface molecules, a number of studies have investigated soluble factors such as cytokines and chemokines, following administration of different neurodegeneration-inducing neurotoxins and inflammagens, highlighting their role in DA degeneration and revealing dynamic changes in the production of these molecules coincident with the neurodegenerative process. Genes involved in the inflammatory response including cytokines, chemokines and pro-inflammatory enzymes, contain in their promoter region the DNA binding site for the transcription factor NFκB, a master regulator of inflammatory responses (Hayden and Ghosh, 2004). In the SN of PD patients and of MPTP-intoxicated monkeys and mice, a robust expression of the p65 subunit of NFκB has been described in the nucleus and cytoplasm of glial cells (Ghosh et al., 2007; Hunot et al., 1997; Mondal et al., 2012). Accordingly, the concentration of a number of inflammatory cytokines is elevated in either CSF or affected brain regions in PD patients, and pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF and IFN-γ were found elevated years after neurotoxin injection in MPTP-treated monkeys (Barcia et al., 2011; Nagatsu et al., 2000). Emphasizing the cardinal role of inflammatory cytokines in DA degeneration, blocking of soluble TNF by intranigral administration of TNF dominant negative variants rescued DA neurons from intrastriatal 6-OHDA toxicity (Harms et al., 2011; McCoy et al., 2006; McCoy et al., 2008), while transgenic mice carrying homozygous mutant alleles for the TNF receptors or lacking TNF were completely protected against the DA neurotoxicity of MPTP, indicating that the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF is an obligatory component of DA neurodegeneration (Ferger et al., 2004; Sriram et al., 2002). Moreover, overexpression of TNF in the SN through adenoviral vector was sufficient to cause nigral degeneration, while IL-1β overexpression exacerbated 6-OHDA induced nigral degeneration and microglia activation (De Lella Ezcurra et al., 2010; Pott Godoy et al., 2008). Interestingly, in TNF and IFN-γ KO mice, MPTP caused microglia activation, but cells displayed limited phenotypical changes, suggesting that these cytokines were necessary for full microglia activation (Barcia et al., 2011; Harms et al., 2012). An increase of mRNA and protein for inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β, TNF and IL-6, has been consistently reported after acute MPTP exposure together with an increase of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) levels, suggesting that reactive microglia acquired an early pro-inflammatory phenotype in this model (Bian et al., 2009; Liberatore et al., 1999; Lofrumento et al., 2011; Pattarini et al., 2007; Yasuda et al., 2008). Interestingly, such increase of inflammatory cytokines was followed by a delayed upregulation of the microglial receptor CX3CR1 for the chemokine fractalkine CX3CL, presumably as a compensatory mechanism to limit neuronal damage and decrease levels of CX3CL (Cardona et al., 2006; Pattarini et al., 2007). In the chronic MPTP model, progressive dopaminergic degeneration was associated with an early and persistent increase of TNF, which preceded neuronal degeneration, followed by a later rise of IL-1β (Luchtman et al., 2009; Pisanu et al., 2014). In the rat intrastriatal 6-OHDA model, reactive microglia was observed early after toxin infusion, while an increase of IL-1β mRNA, but not protein, was reported 30 days after infusion, suggesting a different temporal profile of microglia activation relative to cytokine production in this model (Depino et al., 2003; Luchtman et al., 2009; Pisanu et al., 2014). Interestingly, in non-human primates administered chronic low doses of MPTP, serum levels of IL-6, TNF-β, IL-16 or IL-8 did not fluctuate significantly in either asymptomatic or parkinsonian monkeys, but increases in TNF and IFN-γ were observed in monkeys displaying parkinsonism (Barcia et al., 2011).

In summary, studies in animal models of PD suggest that overproduction of inflammatory cytokines is an early and persistent event that is associated with microglia activation from the early stages of injury, preceding and likely driving microglia polarization towards a phagocytic, CD68-expressing phenotype present in later stages of neurodegeneration. Increased phagocytic function clearly is not a detrimental feature per se, however the upregulation of phagocytosis in microglial cells which have mostly assumed a pro-inflammatory phenotype in earlier stages of the disease is likely to contribute to progressive neuronal loss.

4.2 Anti-inflammatory microglia

Despite evidence in humans, the expression of anti-inflammatory molecules has been poorly described in experimental models of PD. As a consequence, a pivotal yet unresolved question is whether microglia neurotoxicity is driven by the switch from a beneficial neuroprotective phenotype to one in which microglia are chronically activated to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines that enhance apoptotic cell death cascades in neurons. Chronic MPTP treatment in mice has been reported to increase pro- and decrease anti-inflammatory markers in microglia, creating a ratio of inflammatory mediators that may perpetuate and accelerate the course of disease (Pisanu et al., 2014; Rojo et al., 2010). Specifically, expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as COX-2 and iNOS was increased in parkinsonian mice, while expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, and surface markers including CD206, YM-1, Arg-1 and FIZZ-1 were decreased in the SN, suggesting that the toxin-induced degeneration of DA neurons was associated with a skewed microglia polarization and prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia (Pisanu et al., 2014; Rojo et al., 2010). Moreover, while upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines was early and persistent during the chronic MPTP treatment in mice, downregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines and CD206 was delayed and associated with appearance of motor symptoms and extensive degeneration of the SN (Pisanu et al., 2014). Therefore, while both pro- and anti-inflammatory phenotypes of microglia co-existed in the early phase of the disease, this balance slowly gave way to a prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia in the late stages of degeneration.

Additional insights come from LRRK2 transgenic mice. Primary microglia from mice overexpressing the PD-linked LRRK2 R1441G mutation exhibited increased expression and secretion of inflammatory cytokines (TNF, IL-1β, IL-12) upon LPS stimulation compared to wild type microglia, while production of IL-10 was decreased. In addition, reduced expression of the pro-inflammatory marker iNOS was detected in CD68-positive microglia in LRRK2 KO mice compared to wild type mice. Moreover, conditioned medium from LPS-stimulated microglia from LRRK2 R1441G transgenic mice induced significant cell death when added to neuronal cultures, suggesting that enhanced neuroinflammation and a prevalent pro-inflammatory phenotype may be a key mechanism underlying neuroinflammation in LRRK2-associated PD (Gillardon et al., 2012). Although molecular mechanisms regulating the skewed microglia polarization in PD are currently under investigation, they remain largely unknown.

4.3 Role and regulation of NFκB in microglia activation states

Recent studies have highlighted a role for aberrant NFκB activation in PD pathogenesis, suggesting that enhanced NFκB activation may sustain the activated state of pro-inflammatory microglia. Persistent NFκB activation in both neurons and glia has been associated with progressive neurodegeneration in PD (Ghosh et al., 2007; Glass et al., 2010; Hunot et al., 1997; Mogi et al., 2007), while inhibition of the NFκB pathway has been shown to confer neuroprotection in animal models of PD by dampening inflammatory responses (Flood et al., 2011; Ghosh et al., 2007; Tran et al., 2008). Conversely, NFκB activity in neurons may promote neuronal survival (Mattson et al., 1997), suggesting that the source of NFκB may dictate its overall function, yet this distinction is still not clear.

NFκB is expressed in neurons and glia but its role has been better characterized in glia where it regulates the expression of inflammatory cytokines but also growth factors and effector enzymes in response to activation of many receptors involved in immunity (Grinberg-Bleyer et al., 2015; O'Neill and Kaltschmidt, 1997; Panet et al., 2001; Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). Therefore, NFκB plays a crucial role in maintaining cellular homeostasis, and the activation of NFκB signaling is tightly controlled (Grinberg-Bleyer et al., 2015; Ruland, 2011). NFκB is normally inactive in the cytoplasm in a complex with IκB family proteins. External stimuli lead to the activation of IκB kinases (IKK) complex, which then phosphorylates IκB allowing its subsequent degradation in the proteasome, and releasing NFκB, which translocates to the nucleus where it binds to specific sequences in the promoter or enhancer regions of target genes (Baldwin, 2001; Hayden and Ghosh, 2004). Relevant to PD pathogenesis, NFκB signaling may take place through either the classical or alternative pathway (Bonizzi and Karin, 2004). In the classical pathway, binding of activating molecules including TNF or LPS to their respective receptors causes the activation of the IKKβ subunit (also called NEMO), leading to translocation of the NFκB dimer p65/p50 or p65/c-Rel to the nucleus, where they transcriptionally activate pro-inflammatory genes (Grinberg-Bleyer et al., 2015). In the non-canonical pathway, binding of NFB inducers such as LTβ, BAFF and CD40 to their receptors causes the activation of the IKKα subunit, which lead to phosphorylation of the precursor IkB protein p100 and its proteasomal processing into p52, which translocates to the nucleus upon dimerization with RelB, where it activates growth and survival genes that may be of particular importance in neurons during inflammatory stress.

In recent years, the NFκB activation pathway has been investigated in detail in relation to PD pathogenesis. One hypothesis that has emerged is that in PD a skewed activation of the canonical NFκB pathway may dominate over a more balanced stimulation of both the canonical and non-canonical pathways, leading to microglia polarization and DA degeneration. Of note, NFκB has been recognized as a key pathway in α-synuclein dependent activation of phagocytic microglia and increased production of inflammatory cytokines (Fellner et al., 2013). We will further discuss evidence for the protective effect of NFκB key regulators in animal models of PD including regulator of G-protein signaling 10 (RGS10), RING finger protein 11 (RNF11), and NEMO (Figure 2).

4.3.1 Regulator of G-protein Signaling-10 (RGS10)

Recently RGS10, a microglia-enriched GTPase activating protein (GAP), has been recognized as a key negative regulator of NFκB activity and microglia/macrophage polarization in inflammatory conditions (Fellner et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2008). RGS10-null mice display increased microglial burden, while RGS10-null microglia/macrophages treated with LPS display a pro-inflammatory phenotype, with increased production of inflammatory cytokines over anti-inflammatory phenotype markers as compared to wild type cells, and enhanced cytotoxicity on DA neurons (Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2011). Interestingly, RGS10-null microglia showed higher levels of p50/p65 NFkB subunits both in resting and TNF-stimulated conditions, suggesting a dysregulated NFκB activation, with canonical pathway prevailing over the alternative pathway (Lee et al., 2011). Moreover, in vivo gene transfer of RGS10 into the rat SN reduced microgliosis and protected against 6-OHDA neurotoxin-induced death of DA neurons, while RGS10-null macrophages exerted higher cytotoxicity on DA MN9D neuroblastoma cells, suggesting a link between NFκB dysregulation, prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia and nigral degeneration (Lee et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2011).

4.3.2 Ring Finger Protein 11 (RNF11)

As mentioned above, NFκB is expressed in glia as well as neurons, where it can either mediate inflammation-induced toxicity or promote the expression of survival genes. RNF11, in association with A20 ubiquitin-editing complex, is a key negative regulators of NFκB signaling pathway, whose role has been demonstrated in neurons and more recently in microglia (Dalal et al., 2012; Pranski et al., 2013). In microglia RNF11 expression levels were inversely correlated to NFκB activation, in that RNF11 silencing increased NFκB activation, inflammatory molecules production, and inflammation-mediated cytotoxicity, whereas RNF11 overexpression conferred protection against LPS-induced cell cytotoxicity through an inhibition of the inflammatory response, suggesting that RNF11 may be a potential target for modulating inflammatory responses in neurodegenerative diseases (Dalal et al., 2012). Similar results were observed in TNF-stimulated neurons in culture, where RNF11 silencing resulted in enhanced p65RelA nuclear translocation and heightened inflammatory responses (Pranski et al., 2013). Interestingly, targeted knockdown of RNF11 in nigral DA neurons of 6-OHDA-induced hemiparkinsonian rats, was associated with increased NFκB activity and promoted DA cell survival, while RNF11 overexpression inhibited NFκB activity and increased dopaminergic cell loss (Pranski et al., 2013). Of note, RNF11 suppression was associated with enhanced expression of antioxidants GSS and SOD1, neurotrophic factor BDNF and the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl2, whose transcription is believed to rely on non-canonical NFκB pathway activation. Overall these studies highlight the dual role of NFκB in neuroprotection, and emphasize the importance of tight regulation of NFκB pathway activation within the context of neuroinflammation during neurodegenerative conditions.

4.3.3 NFκB essential modulator (NEMO)

The selective NEMO inhibitor compound A is a small molecule that specifically blocks the catalytic activity of IKKβ, and therefore the activation of the p50/p65 NFκB heterodimer (May et al., 2000). Compound A inhibited the production of pro-inflammatory factors by LPS-activated microglia and p65 nuclear translocation, and protected DA neurons from LPS-induced degeneration in vivo (Zhang et al., 2010). Accordingly, another IKK-targeted molecule, the peptide corresponding to the IKK NEMO-binding domain (NBD), reduced nigral activation of NFκB, suppressed microglial activation in the SN, protected nigrostriatal neurons, and improved motor performance in MPTP-treated mice and monkeys, while suppressing inflammatory molecule production (Ghosh et al., 2007; Mondal et al., 2012).

Taken together, these pre-clinical studies strongly suggest that selective targeting of the canonical NFκB activation pathway may afford protection against neurodegeneration in PD (Ghosh et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2010). More specifically, the identification of selective inhibitors of the canonical pathway, which may target specific components like IKKβ and IKKγ but not molecules belonging to the non-canonical pathway like IKKα or the P100/p52, may represent therapeutic agents in the treatment of chronic inflammation-induced neurotoxicity in PD.

5. Clinical studies to target microglia activation with immune-modulating drugs

It is reasonable to speculate that different phenotypes of activated microglia co-exist in the PD brain, given that functionally distinct microglia have been reported in Alzheimer's disease and in the aging brain (Hoozemans et al., 2006; Jimenez et al., 2008). Therefore, it is possible that the dynamic interactions between microglia and other pathogenic components drive PD progression via excessive cytokine release (Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). For these reasons, microglia polarization has been proposed to be a reasonable target for neuroprotective therapies by several researchers (Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2013; Tansey and Goldberg, 2010). The recognition that pro-inflammatory microglia are likely to play a critical role in responses that hasten neuronal death has prompted great interest in testing anti-inflammatory drugs as disease-modifying agents in PD. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have provided positive results in preclinical models; however epidemiological studies have yielded conflicting results on the extent to which chronic intake of these drugs reduce the risk of PD (Bower et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2005; Esposito et al., 2007; Gao et al., 2011b; Noyce et al., 2012). More recent understanding of the complex immune-regulatory function of microglia in PD, and the recognition of phenotypes with diverse effector functions in the course of this pathology, have suggested that strategies aimed at modulating rather than inhibiting microglia activation may represent a promising therapeutic approach in the treatment of PD (Tansey and Goldberg, 2010).

5.1. Peroxisome proliferator receptor (PPAR) gamma (PPAR-γ)

PPAR-γ is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. This receptor was first characterized in adipose tissue as a key regulator of lipid and glucose metabolism through modulation of gene expression. Endogenous ligands include oxidized fatty acids, unsaturated fatty acids, 15-deoxy-Δ-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2). Synthetic ligands are some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, fenoprofen, indomethacin, and thiazolidinediones (TZDs) including pioglitazone and rosiglitazone, that are FDA approved drugs for the treatment of type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (Carta, 2013). More recently, the main role of PPAR-γ in the regulation of immune responses and neuroinflammation, has gained increasing attention and led to the investigation of synthetic agonists as a therapeutic against pathologies with a neuroinflammatory component, such as neurodegenerative diseases. As a result, preclinical studies have consistently reported the neuroprotective efficacy of PPAR-γ agonists in different PD models in rodents as well as in primates (Carta et al., 2011; Dehmer et al., 2004; Schintu et al., 2009; Swanson et al., 2011). A phase II clinical trial with the agonist pioglitazone, tested as a disease modifying agent in early PD, has failed to confirm preclinical results (NCT01280123). However, several issues mostly related to the PK profile of this drug, including the scarce BBB permeability, leave uncertain whether the drug sufficiently reached the target, suggesting the need for further clinical evaluation of PPAR-γ agonists in PD (Carta and Simuni, 2015; NETPD-Investigators, 2014).

PPAR-γ is highly expressed in peripheral immune cells, including macrophages, lymphocytes, and dendritic cells, as well as in immune cells in the brain. Besides microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons also express PPAR-γ (Bernardo et al., 2000; Varga et al., 2011). Gene expression is regulated by PPAR-γ through mechanisms involving transactivation, where the PPAR-γ/retinoid × receptor heterodimer binds to the PPAR-responsive elements (PPREs) in the promoter region of target genes (Ricote and Glass, 2007). Alternatively, inhibition of gene expression may occur via transrepression mechanisms, that are independent from DNA-binding, involving physical sequestration of activated transcriptional factors, including NFkB through a direct interaction with the p65 subunit (Ricote and Glass, 2007). Relevant to the present discussion, modulation of target genes involved in the inflammatory response includes: suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and induction of anti-inflammatory molecules, upregulation of antioxidant enzymes, upregulation of scavenger receptors such as CD36 (Ballesteros et al., 2014; Carta, 2013; Martin et al., 2012; Reddy et al., 2008). Targeting PPAR-γ is known to modulate the phenotype of peripheral macrophages via the above cited mechanisms. Hence, a number of studies have shown that PPAR-γ modulates the production of both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines by these cells, boosting the anti-inflammatory benefit while suppressing the harmful macrophage phenotype (Odegaard et al., 2007; Pascual et al., 2007; Satoh et al., 2010; Straus and Glass, 2007; Szanto et al., 2010). In contrast, in infected peripheral macrophages the natural PPAR-γ ligand 15dPGJ2 increased both anti-inflammatory polarization and phagocytic activity of these cells (Penas et al, 2013). We have recently shown in a chronic MPTP mouse model of PD, that PPAR-γ agonists administered in a neuroprotective regimen, hampered pro-inflammatory microglia while boosting an anti-inflammatory phenotype, suggesting that the immunomodulatory properties may contribute to the disease modifying potential of PPAR-γ agonists in PD (Pisanu et al., 2014).

5.2 Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)

GLP-1 is a target for neuroprotection and has elicited much interest in recent years (Aviles-Olmos et al., 2013; Holscher, 2014). GLP-1 is an incretin hormone which facilitates insulin release in hyperglycemic episodes and overcome insulin desensitization, and GLP-1 mimetics are a successful strategy to treat T2DM (Holscher, 2014). Specifically, the GLP-1 synthetic agonist exenatide has shown neuroprotective properties in multiple animal models of PD (Bertilsson et al., 2008; Harkavyi et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2009; Li et al., 2009; Rampersaud et al., 2012). Exenatide has been recently evaluated in a proof of concept study using a single-blind trial design, where 45 patients with moderate PD were monitored for disease progression, and randomly assigned to receive subcutaneous exenatide for 12 months or to act as controls. In this pilot study, exenatide group suggested clinically relevant improvements across motor and cognitive measures as compared with the control group (NCT01174810) (Aviles-Olmos et al., 2013; Foltynie and Aviles-Olmos, 2014). The mechanism underlying GLP-1-mediated neuroprotection is still a matter of controversy. As a growth factor, GLP-1 neuroprotective effects may be partly due to classic growth factor effects such as increased expression of genes involved in cell growth and repair, increase of cell metabolism, and inhibition of apoptosis (Holscher, 2014). In addition, accumulating evidence indicates that GLP-1 mimetics display anti-inflammatory properties, which may largely support the neuroprotective action of these compounds, by suppressing the expression of inflammatory molecules as exemplified by the inhibition of IL-1β production in LPS-stimulated astrocytes treated with GLP-1 (Iwai et al., 2006). In mouse macrophages, exenatide treatment suppressed LPS-induced mRNA expression of TNF-α, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and nuclear translocation of p65, while in human monocytes it reduced the expression of CD11b (Arakawa et al., 2010). In MPTP-intoxicated mice, exenatide prevented the MPTP induced microglia activation and expression of TNF-α, IL-1β and MMP-3 mRNA in the SN (Kim et al., 2009). A recent study showed that increase of GLP-1 levels obtained by the delivery of dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-4 inhibitor saxagliptin, resulted in neuroprotection in the rotenone rat model of dopaminergic degeneration, and decreased the rotenone-induced inflammatory response, by reducing NF-κΒ activation, iNOS, TNF-α, ICAM-1 and myeloperoxidase (Nassar et al., 2015).

5.3 Minocycline

Minocycline is a tetracycline derivative used for treating a variety of infections. Besides antimicrobial effects, minocycline was shown to exert neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory activity in preclinical studies in the MPTP model of PD (Du et al., 2001; Thomas and Le, 2004; Wu et al., 2002). In vitro, minocycline inhibited MPP(+)-induced neurotoxicity and iNOS expression via suppression of p38 MAPK phosphorylation, but neuroprotection was afforded only in the presence of glial cells (Du et al., 2001). In MPTP-treated mice, minocycline inhibited MPTP-induced activation of microglia and production of IL-1β and iNOS in the SN (Wu et al., 2002). A Phase II futility trial in early untreated PD patients and an 18-month follow-up study indicated that minocycline could not be rejected as futile and did present safety concerns; it therefore received consideration for definitive Phase III trials in order to determine whether it had disease-modifying activity on the long term progression of PD (Investigators, 2006, 2008).

5.4 Cannabinoid receptor 2 (CB2)

Cannabinoids act as a major signaling regulator of various neurotransmitters and have anti-inflammatory properties (Giuffrida et al., 1999; Gomez-Galvez et al., 2015; Romero et al., 1996). The role of the cannabinoid system is thought to be dependent on which receptor is activated, CB1 or CB2. Earlier therapeutic studies focused on altering CB1 activity because of its high expression in the central nervous system, specifically in the basal ganglia, and its hypokinesia effect on levodopa induced motor complications (Fox et al., 2002; Morgese et al., 2007; Sieradzan et al., 2001). However, the therapeutic potential of CB1 antagonists is controversial due to inconsistent results including a clinical trial testing rimonabant, a CB1 antagonist, which did not demonstrate any antiparkinsonian effects on either the severity of motor deficits or levodopa-induced dyskinesias (Mesnage et al., 2004). Whereas, CB2 receptors are highly expressed on activated microglia and are upregulated in the SN of PD patients (Gomez-Galvez et al., 2015). Various studies have selectively blocked CB2 receptors to modulate the microglial activation state leading to neuroprotection in a mouse model of PD (Gomez-Galvez et al., 2015) and mice with mild traumatic brain injury (Reiner et al., 2015). Both studies demonstrate a reduction in pro-inflammatory mediators such as TNFα, IL-1 β, IL-6, IL-10 following CB2 antagonism in primary human microglial cells (Reiner et al., 2015) or intrastriatal LPS-treated mice (Gomez-Galvez et al., 2015). Although there are currently no clinical trials modulating CB2 activity, pre-clinical work demonstrates its great promise as a therapeutic target.

5.5 Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)

GM-CSF is an immune modulator that has been safely used to reduce infections in immunosuppressed patients following chemotherapy by increasing myeloid progenitor proliferation, and more recently has shown to induce regulatory T cells (Tregs), which are dysfunctional in PD (Buchsel et al., 2002; Rowin et al., 2012; Sheng et al., 2011). GM-CSF treatment demonstrated neuroprotective properties in MPTP- (Kosloski et al., 2013) and paraquat-treated mice (Mangano et al., 2011), with increases in Tregs and downregulation of CD11b+ microglia, suggesting a role for GM-CSF to effect the pro-inflammatory nature of microglia. After the success of GM-CSF in animal models of PD, a clinical trial is currently recruiting patients to evaluate the safety of an engineered GM-CSF called Leukine (sargamostrim) in idiopathic PD (NCT01882010).

6. Concluding remarks

The idea that microglia may assume a spectrum of phenotypes and serve multiple effector functions has revolutionized the classical view of “activated microglia” as an oversimplified concept pointing to the need for a deeper characterization of their heterogeneous nature in relation with disease progression. In light of this novel view a growing area of research is now focusing on understanding whether activated microglia may exert a protective function at some stage of PD via production of neurotrophic factors, or contribute to neuronal death by producing inflammatory factors that are toxic to DA and other vulnerable neurons, and whether they influence typical pathological mechanisms such as α-synuclein aggregation and propagation. Yet is likely that the age-associated changes in inflammatory responses, along with genetic and environmental factors, give rise to a prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia in PD, which likely contribute to progressive neuronal loss.

Studies in biofluids from PD patients have shown an overproduction and coexistence of both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, yet understanding the time course and degree to which microglia produce these mediators may provide hints to therapeutic immunomodulatory targets and identify appropriate candidates for successful intervention. Moreover, human studies are limited by an exceeding number of patients who die in late stages of the disease, and by a therapeutic history which may have affected disease-related immune responses, undermining the possibility to understand the complex dynamic of microglia states in the different stages of PD. Post mortem studies have demonstrated the presence of activated and phagocytic cells in the vicinity of remaining nigral DA neurons, suggesting the contribution of microglia to the progression of neurodegeneration, yet leaving undetermined whether they could play a beneficial role at earlier stages of the neuropathology. While imaging studies have provided evidence of ongoing, persistent activation of microglia in PD by detection of TSPO ligand binding, techniques that would distinguish different phenotypes of activated microglia are needed in the future for a better understanding of microglia phenotype in the brain particularly during the early stages of PD.

Animal studies have permitted a closer and more specific look at the activation state of microglia in relation to the extent of neurodegeneration, and have given the possibility to follow dynamic changes in phenotype and function along with disease progression. According to the concept that microglia may display different phenotypes depending both on the type and strength of the stimulus, a comparative look at animal studies reveals that progression of microgliosis and microglia polarization is to some extent dependent upon the animal model and species, whether a toxin or inflammatory stimulus has been administered, and the regimen of administration. This peculiarity has offered the great possibility to dissect and manipulate the inflammatory process at different stages of degeneration. Overall, studies conducted in parkinsonian monkeys and toxin-based models support an early microglia activation in the course of DA neuronal loss, while inflammation-based models as well as LRRK2 transgenic mice have added the pivotal concept that neuroinflammation may be both an initiating stimulus and a self-propelling mechanism of progressive neuron degeneration. Studies based on α-synuclein overexpression have disclosed the relationship between the accumulation of different forms of α-synuclein and subsequent inflammation, and have been pivotal to understand that levels of α-synuclein-induced neuronal pathology strictly modulate the phenotype of activated microglia, inducing different phenotypes and effector functions at early versus late stages of neurodegeneration. A careful evaluation of cytokines content in the different PD models has attributed a specific pathological role to pro-inflammatory cytokines in disease progression, suggesting that an early and persistent overproduction of detrimental cytokines may precede microglia polarization towards the phagocytic phenotype expressing high levels of CD68, which characterize later stages of intense neurodegeneration, likely contributing to spreading of neuronal loss. On the other hand, a still scarce number of studies have described the expression and production of anti-inflammatory molecules from activated microglia. These studies have shown that markers typically associated with a beneficial phenotype were gradually decreased in the SN, and that the increased production of pro-inflammatory mediators was associated with motor impairment and massive cell death. All together animal studies lead to the suggestion that inflammation-driven DA neuron degeneration may be underpinned by a gradual process of skewed microglia polarization, with prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia beginning early in the course of the disease, and further polarization to phagocytic phenotype which sustains massive cell destruction and its progression toward late end-stages. Further studies in this direction will be needed to fully address the still unresolved question whether microglia neurotoxicity is driven by the switch from a beneficial neuroprotective phenotype to one in which microglia are chronically activated to secrete harmful pro-inflammatory cytokines that enhance apoptotic cell death cascades in neurons.

From a mechanistic perspective, enhanced NFκB activation may hold a role in pathologically activated state of pro-inflammatory microglia, given the evidence that inhibition of the NFκB pathway confer neuroprotection in animal models of PD by dampening inflammatory responses. Based on this assumption, the NFκB activation pathway has been profoundly dissected and investigated in relation to PD pathogenesis. The emerging hypothesis is that in PD a skewed activation of the canonical NFκB pathway may dominate over a more balanced stimulation of both the canonical and non-canonical pathways, leading to microglia polarization and DA degeneration. Several studies support this concept by showing that manipulation of specific molecules belonging to the canonical NFκB signaling including regulator of G-protein signaling 10 (RGS10), RING finger protein 11 (RNF11), and NEMO can drive protection or degeneration effects in animal models of PD, leading to the hope that selective regulators of the canonical NFκB pathway may represent therapeutic agents in the treatment of chronic inflammation-induced neurotoxicity in PD.

Based on advancing knowledge on the spectrum microglia phenotypes, chronic microglia activation is proposed as a reasonable target for neuroprotective therapies in PD. Testing of drugs with anti-inflammatory and/or immunomodulatory properties such PPAR-γ agonists, CB2 modulators, the GLP-1 synthetic agonist exenatide, subclinical dosage of antibiotic minocycline and the immunomodulator GM-CSF goes in this direction. All of these drugs have shown beneficial results in animal models of PD when administered in the early stages of degeneration and some are now being tested in clinical trials. Given that all evidence points to neuroinflammation being present in the early stages of the degenerative process, it will be critical to test the efficacy of these drugs in patient populations prior to significantly advanced disease in order to maximize chances for success in modifying the course of disease progression.

Acknowledgments

We thank members of the Carta and Tansey labs for useful discussions. Funding for the authors of this review came from NIH/NINDS R01NS072467-05 (MGT), the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research (MGT), NIH/NIEHS 2T32ES012870-11 (VJ), The Perry &amp; Ruby Stevens Foundation (ARC) and Fondazione Banco di Sardegna U629.2013/AI.553 MGB (ARC).

Abbreviation List

BBB blood-brain barrier

CSF cerebral spinal fluid

COX1 cyclo-oxygenase 1

COX2 cyclo-oxygenase 2

CRP C reactive protein

DA dopamine

EGF Epidermal growth factor

FACIT functional assessment of chronic illness therapy

FcγRII Fc gamma receptor II

HADS hospital anxiety and depression scale

IFN-γ interferon-gamma

IL-1β interleukin-1 beta

IL-6 interleukin-6

IL-12 interleukin-12

IP-10 interferon gamma-induced protein-10

LRRK2 leucine-rich repeat kinase 2

LPS lipopolysaccharide

MHC-II major histocompatibility complex-II

MCP-1 monocyte chemotactic protein-1

MIP-1β macrophage inflammatory protein-1β

MPTP 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine

NFκB nuclear factor kappa beta

NT-proCNP N-terminal Pro-C-type natriuretic peptide

PET positron emission tomography

RNF11 Ring Finger Protein 11

SN substantia nigra

TGF- β transforming growth factor β

TNF tumor necrosis factor

TLR toll-like receptor

6-OHDA 6-hydroxydopamine

Figure 1 Potential role of inflammation in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

Results of microglial phenotypes have varied across studies and PD patients. Genetic background and aging, along with other environmental factors (ie: illness) impact the susceptibility of microglia activation leading to a lack of homeostatic support (increased antigen presentation, phagocytic microglia, pro-inflammatory status and decreased anti-inflammatory status) to the surrounding tissue that may further influence the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Multiple immune modulating therapies are currently being investigated for their effect on the phenotypes and effector functions of activated microglia and may represent promising approaches in the treatment of PD.

Figure 2 Microglial NFκΒ regulation of immune responses in animal models of PD

Malfunctions at multiple steps of NFκB signaling have been argued to have a causal interrelationship with pathological microglia leading to increased pro-inflammatory gene expression and further contributing to neurodegeneration. Regulator of G-protein signaling 10 (RGS10), RING finger protein 11 (RNF11), and NEMO inhibitor exert negative regulation on NFκΒ signaling producing a dampened immune response and reduced neurodegeneration.

Table 1 Cytokines detected in brain tissue, cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) or serum of Parkinson’s disease patients. Results are in comparison with control patients. CRP, C reactive protein; EGF, Epidermal growth factor; FACIT, functional assessment of chronic illness therapy; HADS, hospital anxiety and depression scale; IFN-γ, interferon-gamma; IP-10, interferon gamma-induced protein-10; MCP-1, monocyte chemotactic protein-1; MIP-1β, macrophage inflammatory protein-1β; NT-proCNP, N-terminal Pro-C-type natriuretic peptide; SN, substantia nigra; TGF- β, transforming growth factor β; TNF, tumor necrosis factor

Tissue or
Biofluid	Number of
PD patients
(M;F)	Mean age
of PD
(years)	Hoehn
&amp;
Yahr	duration
of
disease
(years)	Number
of
controls
(M;F)	Mean
age of
controls
(years)	Results	Comments	Reference	
Caudate
and
putamen	5M;4F	72	-	-	6M;5F	71	Caudate/Putamen:
↑  IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α
Caudate only:
↑  EGF	No significant
changes found in
the cerebral
cortex of PD
compared to
controls.	Mogi et al., 1994a	
Caudate
and
putamen	9	No mean
defined
(75 - 91)	-	-	8	No
mean
defined
(75 -
91)	↑  TNF-α		Mogi et al., 1994b	
Caudate
and
putamen	5M;4F	72	-	-	6M;5F	71	↑  TGF-β1		Mogi et al., 1995	
Caudate,
Putamen
and SN	12M;3F	69.7	-	16.9	6M; 8F	60.8	Caudate/Putamen/SN:
↑  IFNγ and NF-
κBp65
Caudate:
↑  p53 (apoptosis
related protein)	Similar levels of
INFγ,NF-κBp65,
and p53 in
cerebellum and
frontal cortex of
PD and controls.	Mogi et al., 2007	
	
	6M;9F	58	-	-	6M;10F	46	↑  TNF-α		Mogi et al., 1994b	
	12M;10F	61 ± 1.54	1-3	0.5 - 3	6M;6F	61 ±
4.15	↑  IL-1β, IL-6	No changes in
CSF IL-2. No
significant
differences
found in plasma.
Measurements
taken off
medication.	Blum-degen et al., 1995	
CSF	7M;7F	68	-	-	10M;3F	46	↑  TGF-β1	Evaluations
completed on
ventricular CSF.	Mogi et al., 1995	
22M;8F	73.8 ± 1.4	-	-	11M;5F	72.7 ±
3.1	↑  TGF-β1 and TGF-
β2	Evaluations
completed on
ventricular CSF	Vawter et al., 1996	
	8M;4F	57.5 ± 2.6	-	-			↑  IL-6	Evaluated
de novo patients.
IL-6 negatively
correlated with
UPDRS scores.	Muller et al., 1998	
	44M;27F
(non-
demented)	64.1 ±
10.5	1.9 ±
0.8	6.4 ±
10.5	14M;19F	65.8 ±
8.8	No significant
differences in CRP, IL-
6, TNF-α, eotaxin, IP-
10, MCP-1, and MIP-
1β
↑  CRP (compared
to non-demented PD
and controls)	CRP and MCP-1
correlated with
HADS depression
score. CRP
correlated with
FACIT score
(fatigue)	Lindqvist et al., 2013	
	12M;4F
(demented)	72 ± 5.8	3.1 ±
0.9	15.8 ±
6.5				
	93M;33F	63.8 ±
10.4	-	-	76M;61F	58.9 ±
18.4	No significant
difference in
fractalkine	Frackalkine/Aβ1-
42 positively
correlated to
UPDRS score and
H&amp;Y.	Shi et al., 2013	
	
	17M;14F	61.5 ± 2.8	2-4	6.9 ± 1	10M;10F	67 ± 3.2	↑  TNF-α, IL-6, IFNγ,
IL-10, IL-4, IL-2	Significant
increases (1.5x)
in TBARS (lipid
peroxidation)
compared to
controls.	Brodacki et al., 2008	
Serum	7M;10F	65.3 ±
13.1
(without
levodopa)	70.6%
&lt;3	2.8 ± 3.9	8M;15F	60 ± 7.8	No significant
difference in IL-6	Negative
correlation
found between
serum IL-6 and
activities of daily
living scale in
levodopa group.	Hofmann et al., 2009	
15M;8F	66.5 ± 8.8
(with levodopa)	47.8%
&lt;3	8.1 ± 6.1	
	30M;30F	59.17 ±
15.48	2.35 ±
0.83	11.27 ±
10.69	12M;12F	64 ± 5.8	↑  TNF-α, NT-
proCNP	Positive
correlation
between IL-6
and IL-1β; IL-6
and H&amp;Y stage in
PD.	Koziorowski et al., 2012	

Highlights

microglia exist in a heterogenous population and their phenotypes are not permanently polarized into two categories

neuroinflammation and microglia activation are considered neuropathological hallmarks, however their precise role in relation to disease progression is not clear

animal models have provided insights on dynamic changes of microglia phenotypes in relation to disease progression especially prior to the development of motor deficits microglial phenotypes in the aging brain become further altered in PD giving rise to a prevalence of pro-inflammatory microglia, which likely contribute to progressive neuronal loss

malfunction at multiple steps of NFκB signaling that may have a causal interrelationship with pathological microglia activation in animal models of PD

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Allen Reish HE Standaert DG Role of alpha-Synuclein in Inducing Innate and Adaptive Immunity in Parkinson Disease J Parkinsons Dis 2015 5 1 19 25588354
Alliot F Godin I Pessac B Microglia derive from progenitors, originating from the yolk sac, and which proliferate in the brain Brain Res Dev Brain Res 1999 117 145 152 10567732
Arai H Furuya T Yasuda T Miura M Mizuno Y Mochizuki H Neurotoxic effects of lipopolysaccharide on nigral dopaminergic neurons are mediated by microglial activation, interleukin-1beta, and expression of caspase-11 in mice J Biol Chem 2004 279 51647 51653 15383538
Arakawa M Mita T Azuma K Ebato C Goto H Nomiyama T Fujitani Y Hirose T Kawamori R Watada H Inhibition of monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells and attenuation of atherosclerotic lesion by a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist, exendin-4 Diabetes 2010 59 1030 1037 20068138
Armentero MT Levandis G Nappi G Bazzini E Blandini F Peripheral inflammation and neuroprotection: systemic pretreatment with complete Freund's adjuvant reduces 6-hydroxydopamine toxicity in a rodent model of Parkinson's disease Neurobiol Dis 2006 24 492 505 17023164
Aviles-Olmos I Dickson J Kefalopoulou Z Djamshidian A Ell P Soderlund T Whitton P Wyse R Isaacs T Lees A Exenatide and the treatment of patients with Parkinson's disease J Clin Invest 2013 123 2730 2736 23728174
Baiguera C Alghisi M Pinna A Bellucci A De Luca MA Frau L Morelli M Ingrassia R Benarese M Porrini V Late-onset Parkinsonism in NFkappaB/c-Rel-deficient mice Brain 2012 135 2750 2765 22915735
Baldwin AS Jr. Series introduction: the transcription factor NF-kappaB and human disease J Clin Invest 2001 107 3 6 11134170
Ballesteros I Cuartero MI Pradillo JM de la Parra J Perez-Ruiz A Corbi A Ricote M Hamilton JA Sobrado M Vivancos J Rosiglitazone-induced CD36 up-regulation resolves inflammation by PPARgamma and 5-LO-dependent pathways J Leukoc Biol 2014 95 587 598 24338629
Banati RB Myers R Kreutzberg GW PK ('peripheral benzodiazepine')--binding sites in the CNS indicate early and discrete brain lesions: microautoradiographic detection of [3H]PK11195 binding to activated microglia J Neurocytol 1997 26 77 82 9181482
Barcia C Ros CM Annese V Gomez A Ros-Bernal F Aguado-Yera D Martinez-Pagan ME de Pablos V Fernandez-Villalba E Herrero MT IFN-gamma signaling, with the synergistic contribution of TNF-alpha, mediates cell specific microglial and astroglial activation in experimental models of Parkinson's disease Cell Death Dis 2011 2 e142 21472005
Barcia C Ros CM Ros-Bernal F Gomez A Annese V Carrillo-de Sauvage MA Yuste JE Campuzano CM de Pablos V Fernandez-Villalba E Herrero MT Persistent phagocytic characteristics of microglia in the substantia nigra of long-term Parkinsonian macaques J Neuroimmunol 2013 261 60 66 23759319
Barcia C Sanchez Bahillo A Fernandez-Villalba E Bautista V Poza YPM Fernandez-Barreiro A Hirsch EC Herrero MT Evidence of active microglia in substantia nigra pars compacta of parkinsonian monkeys 1 year after MPTP exposure Glia 2004 46 402 409 15095370
Barkholt P Sanchez-Guajardo V Kirik D Romero-Ramos M Long-term polarization of microglia upon alpha-synuclein overexpression in nonhuman primates Neuroscience 2012 208 85 96 22342967
Barnum CJ Eskow KL Dupre K Blandino P Jr. Deak T Bishop C Exogenous corticosterone reduces L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in the hemi-parkinsonian rat: role for interleukin-1beta Neuroscience 2008 156 30 41 18687386
Bartels AL Willemsen AT Doorduin J de Vries EF Dierckx RA Leenders KL [11C]-PK11195 PET: quantification of neuroinflammation and a monitor of anti-inflammatory treatment in Parkinson's disease? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2010 16 57 59 19487152
Baumeister D Ciufolini S Mondelli V Effects of psychotropic drugs on inflammation: consequence or mediator of therapeutic effects in psychiatric treatment? Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2015
Bernardo A Levi G Minghetti L Role of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) and its natural ligand 15-deoxy-Delta12, 14-prostaglandin J2 in the regulation of microglial functions Eur J Neurosci 2000 12 2215 2223 10947800
Bertilsson G Patrone C Zachrisson O Andersson A Dannaeus K Heidrich J Kortesmaa J Mercer A Nielsen E Ronnholm H Wikstrom L Peptide hormone exendin-4 stimulates subventricular zone neurogenesis in the adult rodent brain and induces recovery in an animal model of Parkinson's disease J Neurosci Res 2008 86 326 338 17803225
Bian MJ Li LM Yu M Fei J Huang F Elevated interleukin-1beta induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine aggravating dopaminergic neurodegeneration in old male mice Brain Res 2009 1302 256 264 19631617
Biswas SK Mantovani A Macrophage plasticity and interaction with lymphocyte subsets: cancer as a paradigm Nat Immunol 2010 11 889 896 20856220
Bliederhaeuser C Grozdanov V Speidel A Zondler L Ruf WP Bayer H Kiechle M Feiler MS Freischmidt A Brenner D Age-dependent defects of alpha-synuclein oligomer uptake in microglia and monocytes Acta Neuropathol 2015
Blum-Degen D Muller T Kuhn W Gerlach M Przuntek H Riederer P Interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6 are elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer's and de novo Parkinson's disease patients Neurosci Lett 1995 202 17 20 8787820
Bonizzi G Karin M The two NF-kappaB activation pathways and their role in innate and adaptive immunity Trends Immunol 2004 25 280 288 15145317
Bower JH Maraganore DM Peterson BJ Ahlskog JE Rocca WA Immunologic diseases, anti-inflammatory drugs, and Parkinson disease: a case-control study Neurology 2006 67 494 496 16894114
Brodacki B Staszewski J Toczylowska B Kozlowska E Drela N Chalimoniuk M Stepien A Serum interleukin (IL-2, IL-10, IL-6, IL-4), TNFalpha, and INFgamma concentrations are elevated in patients with atypical and idiopathic parkinsonism Neurosci Lett 2008 441 158 162 18582534
Buchsel PC Forgey A Grape FB Hamann SS Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor: current practice and novel approaches Clin J Oncol Nurs 2002 6 198 205 12087615
Butovsky O Jedrychowski MP Moore CS Cialic R Lanser AJ Gabriely G Koeglsperger T Dake B Wu PM Doykan CE Identification of a unique TGF-beta-dependent molecular and functional signature in microglia Nat Neurosci 2014 17 131 143 24316888
Cardona AE Pioro EP Sasse ME Kostenko V Cardona SM Dijkstra IM Huang D Kidd G Dombrowski S Dutta R Control of microglial neurotoxicity by the fractalkine receptor Nat Neurosci 2006 9 917 924 16732273
Carta AR PPAR-gamma: therapeutic prospects in Parkinson's disease Curr Drug Targets 2013 14 743 751 23469878
Carta AR Frau L Pisanu A Wardas J Spiga S Carboni E Rosiglitazone decreases peroxisome proliferator receptor-gamma levels in microglia and inhibits TNF-alpha production: new evidences on neuroprotection in a progressive Parkinson's disease model Neuroscience 2011 194 250 261 21839812
Carta AR Simuni T Thiazolidinediones under preclinical and early clinical development for the treatment of Parkinson's disease Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2015 24 219 227
Castano A Herrera AJ Cano J Machado A Lipopolysaccharide intranigral injection induces inflammatory reaction and damage in nigrostriatal dopaminergic system J Neurochem 1998 70 1584 1592 9580157
Cebrian C Zucca FA Mauri P Steinbeck JA Studer L Scherzer CR Kanter E Budhu S Mandelbaum J Vonsattel JP MHC-I expression renders catecholaminergic neurons susceptible to T-cell-mediated degeneration Nat Commun 2014 5 3633 24736453
Chen H Jacobs E Schwarzschild MA McCullough ML Calle EE Thun MJ Ascherio A Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use and the risk for Parkinson's disease Ann Neurol 2005 58 963 967 16240369
Chesselet MF Richter F Zhu C Magen I Watson MB Subramaniam SR A progressive mouse model of Parkinson's disease: the Thy1-aSyn ("Line 61") mice Neurotherapeutics 2012 9 297 314 22350713
Cho BP Song DY Sugama S Shin DH Shimizu Y Kim SS Kim YS Joh TH Pathological dynamics of activated microglia following medial forebrain bundle transection Glia 2006 53 92 102 16206155
Croisier E Moran LB Dexter DT Pearce RK Graeber MB Microglial inflammation in the parkinsonian substantia nigra: relationship to alpha-synuclein deposition J Neuroinflammation 2005 2 14 15935098
Czlonkowska A Kohutnicka M Kurkowska-Jastrzebska I Czlonkowski A Microglial reaction in MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) induced Parkinson's disease mice model Neurodegeneration 1996 5 137 143 8819134
Daher JP Volpicelli-Daley LA Blackburn JP Moehle MS West AB Abrogation of alpha-synuclein-mediated dopaminergic neurodegeneration in LRRK2-deficient rats Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 111 9289 9294 24927544
Dalal NV Pranski EL Tansey MG Lah JJ Levey AI Betarbet RS RNF11 modulates microglia activation through NF-kappaB signalling cascade Neurosci Lett 2012 528 174 179 22975135
Dawson TM Ko HS Dawson VL Genetic animal models of Parkinson's disease Neuron 2010 66 646 661 20547124
De Lella Ezcurra AL Chertoff M Ferrari C Graciarena M Pitossi F Chronic expression of low levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in the substantia nigra elicits progressive neurodegeneration, delayed motor symptoms and microglia/macrophage activation Neurobiol Dis 2010 37 630 640 19969084
Decressac M Mattsson B Lundblad M Weikop P Bjorklund A Progressive neurodegenerative and behavioural changes induced by AAV-mediated overexpression of alpha-synuclein in midbrain dopamine neurons Neurobiol Dis 2012 45 939 953 22182688
Dehmer T Heneka MT Sastre M Dichgans J Schulz JB Protection by pioglitazone in the MPTP model of Parkinson's disease correlates with I kappa B alpha induction and block of NF kappa B and iNOS activation J Neurochem 2004 88 494 501 14690537
Depino AM Earl C Kaczmarczyk E Ferrari C Besedovsky H del Rey A Pitossi FJ Oertel WH Microglial activation with atypical proinflammatory cytokine expression in a rat model of Parkinson's disease Eur J Neurosci 2003 18 2731 2742 14656322
Doorn KJ Breve JJ Drukarch B Boddeke HW Huitinga I Lucassen PJ van Dam AM Brain region-specific gene expression profiles in freshly isolated rat microglia Front Cell Neurosci 2015 9 84 25814934
Du Y Ma Z Lin S Dodel RC Gao F Bales KR Triarhou LC Chernet E Perry KW Nelson DL Minocycline prevents nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurodegeneration in the MPTP model of Parkinson's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98 14669 14674 11724929
Dutta G Zhang P Liu B The lipopolysaccharide Parkinson's disease animal model: mechanistic studies and drug discovery Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2008 22 453 464 18710400
Edison P Ahmed I Fan Z Hinz R Gelosa G Ray Chaudhuri K Walker Z Turkheimer FE Brooks DJ Microglia, amyloid, and glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease with and without dementia Neuropsychopharmacology 2013 38 938 949 23303049
Edwards JP Zhang X Frauwirth KA Mosser DM Biochemical and functional characterization of three activated macrophage populations J Leukoc Biol 2006 80 1298 1307 16905575
Eslamboli A Romero-Ramos M Burger C Bjorklund T Muzyczka N Mandel RJ Baker H Ridley RM Kirik D Long-term consequences of human alpha-synuclein overexpression in the primate ventral midbrain Brain 2007 130 799 815 17303591
Esposito E Di Matteo V Benigno A Pierucci M Crescimanno G Di Giovanni G Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in Parkinson's disease Exp Neurol 2007 205 295 312 17433296
Fan Z Aman Y Ahmed I Chetelat G Landeau B Ray Chaudhuri K Brooks DJ Edison P Influence of microglial activation on neuronal function in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease dementia Alzheimers Dement 2015 11 608 621 e607 25239737
Fellner L Irschick R Schanda K Reindl M Klimaschewski L Poewe W Wenning GK Stefanova N Toll-like receptor 4 is required for alpha-synuclein dependent activation of microglia and astroglia Glia 2013 61 349 360 23108585
Ferger B Leng A Mura A Hengerer B Feldon J Genetic ablation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and pharmacological inhibition of TNF-synthesis attenuates MPTP toxicity in mouse striatum J Neurochem 2004 89 822 833 15140182
Flood PM Qian L Peterson LJ Zhang F Shi JS Gao HM Hong JS Transcriptional Factor NF-kappaB as a Target for Therapy in Parkinson's Disease Parkinsons Dis 2011 2011 216298 21603248
Foltynie T Aviles-Olmos I Exenatide as a potential treatment for patients with Parkinson's disease: first steps into the clinic Alzheimers Dement 2014 10 S38 46 24529524
Fox SH Henry B Hill M Crossman A Brotchie J Stimulation of cannabinoid receptors reduces levodopa-induced dyskinesia in the MPTP-lesioned nonhuman primate model of Parkinson's disease Mov Disord 2002 17 1180 1187 12465055
Frank-Cannon TC Alto LT McAlpine FE Tansey MG Does neuroinflammation fan the flame in neurodegenerative diseases? Mol Neurodegener 2009 4 47 19917131
Gao HM Jiang J Wilson B Zhang W Hong JS Liu B Microglial activation-mediated delayed and progressive degeneration of rat nigral dopaminergic neurons: relevance to Parkinson's disease J Neurochem 2002 81 1285 1297 12068076
Gao HM Kotzbauer PT Uryu K Leight S Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Neuroinflammation and oxidation/nitration of alpha-synuclein linked to dopaminergic neurodegeneration J Neurosci 2008 28 7687 7698 18650345
Gao HM Zhang F Zhou H Kam W Wilson B Hong JS Neuroinflammation and alpha-synuclein dysfunction potentiate each other, driving chronic progression of neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease Environ Health Perspect 2011a 119 807 814 21245015
Gao X Chen H Schwarzschild MA Ascherio A Use of ibuprofen and risk of Parkinson disease Neurology 2011b 76 863 869 21368281
Garcia-Esparcia P Llorens F Carmona M Ferrer I Complex deregulation and expression of cytokines and mediators of the immune response in Parkinson's disease brain is region dependent Brain Pathol 2014 24 584 598 24593806
Gerhard A Pavese N Hotton G Turkheimer F Es M Hammers A Eggert K Oertel W Banati RB Brooks DJ In vivo imaging of microglial activation with [11C](R)-PK11195 PET in idiopathic Parkinson's disease Neurobiol Dis 2006 21 404 412 16182554
Ghosh A Roy A Liu X Kordower JH Mufson EJ Hartley DM Ghosh S Mosley RL Gendelman HE Pahan K Selective inhibition of NF-kappaB activation prevents dopaminergic neuronal loss in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 18754 18759 18000063
Giasson BI Ischiropoulos H Lee VM Trojanowski JQ The relationship between oxidative/nitrative stress and pathological inclusions in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases Free Radic Biol Med 2002 32 1264 1275 12057764
Gillardon F Schmid R Draheim H Parkinson's disease-linked leucine-rich repeat kinase 2(R1441G) mutation increases proinflammatory cytokine release from activated primary microglial cells and resultant neurotoxicity Neuroscience 2012 208 41 48 22342962
Giuffrida A Parsons LH Kerr TM Rodriguez de Fonseca F Navarro M Piomelli D Dopamine activation of endogenous cannabinoid signaling in dorsal striatum Nat Neurosci 1999 2 358 363 10204543
Glass CK Saijo K Winner B Marchetto MC Gage FH Mechanisms underlying inflammation in neurodegeneration Cell 2010 140 918 934 20303880
Gomez-Galvez Y Palomo-Garo C Fernandez-Ruiz J Garcia C Potential of the cannabinoid CB receptor as a pharmacological target against inflammation in Parkinson's disease Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2015
Grabert K Michoel T Karavolos MH Clohisey S Baillie JK Stevens MP Freeman TC Summers KM McColl BW Microglial brain region-dependent diversity and selective regional sensitivities to aging Nat Neurosci 2016
Gratchev A Kzhyshkowska J Kannookadan S Ochsenreiter M Popova A Yu X Mamidi S Stonehouse-Usselmann E Muller-Molinet I Gooi L Goerdt S Activation of a TGF-beta-specific multistep gene expression program in mature macrophages requires glucocorticoid-mediated surface expression of TGF-beta receptor II J Immunol 2008 180 6553 6565 18453574
Grinberg-Bleyer Y Dainichi T Oh H Heise N Klein U Schmid RM Hayden MS Ghosh S Cutting Edge: NF-kappaB p65 and c-Rel Control Epidermal Development and Immune Homeostasis in the Skin J Immunol 2015 194 2472 2476 25681334
Hamza TH Zabetian CP Tenesa A Laederach A Montimurro J Yearout D Kay DM Doheny KF Paschall J Pugh E Common genetic variation in the HLA region is associated with late-onset sporadic Parkinson's disease Nat Genet 2010 42 781 785 20711177
Harkavyi A Abuirmeileh A Lever R Kingsbury AE Biggs CS Whitton PS Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor stimulation reverses key deficits in distinct rodent models of Parkinson's disease J Neuroinflammation 2008 5 19 18492290
Harms AS Barnum CJ Ruhn KA Varghese S Trevino I Blesch A Tansey MG Delayed dominant-negative TNF gene therapy halts progressive loss of nigral dopaminergic neurons in a rat model of Parkinson's disease Mol Ther 2011 19 46 52 20959812
Harms AS Lee JK Nguyen TA Chang J Ruhn KM Trevino I Tansey MG Regulation of microglia effector functions by tumor necrosis factor signaling Glia 2012 60 189 202 21989628
Hayden MS Ghosh S Signaling to NF-kappaB Genes Dev 2004 18 2195 2224 15371334
Healy DG Wood NW Schapira AH Test for LRRK2 mutations in patients with Parkinson's disease Pract Neurol 2008 8 381 385 19015299
Heiman M Schaefer A Gong S Peterson JD Day M Ramsey KE Suarez-Farinas M Schwarz C Stephan DA Surmeier DJ A translational profiling approach for the molecular characterization of CNS cell types Cell 2008 135 738 748 19013281
Henry V Paille V Lelan F Brachet P Damier P Kinetics of microglial activation and degeneration of dopamine-containing neurons in a rat model of Parkinson disease induced by 6-hydroxydopamine J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 1092 1102 19918121
Heppner FL Ransohoff RM Becher B Immune attack: the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurosci 2015 16 358 372 25991443
Herrera AJ Castano A Venero JL Cano J Machado A The single intranigral injection of LPS as a new model for studying the selective effects of inflammatory reactions on dopaminergic system Neurobiol Dis 2000 7 429 447 10964613
Hickman SE Allison EK El Khoury J Microglial dysfunction and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways in aging Alzheimer's disease mice J Neurosci 2008 28 8354 8360 18701698
Hoek RM Ruuls SR Murphy CA Wright GJ Goddard R Zurawski SM Blom B Homola ME Streit WJ Brown MH Down-regulation of the macrophage lineage through interaction with OX2 (CD200) Science 2000 290 1768 1771 11099416
Hofmann KW Schuh AF Saute J Townsend R Fricke D Leke R Souza DO Portela LV Chaves ML Rieder CR Interleukin-6 serum levels in patients with Parkinson's disease Neurochem Res 2009 34 1401 1404 19214748
Holscher C Central effects of GLP-1: new opportunities for treatments of neurodegenerative diseases J Endocrinol 2014 221 T31 41 23999914
Hoozemans JJ Veerhuis R Rozemuller JM Eikelenboom P Neuroinflammation and regeneration in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease pathology Int J Dev Neurosci 2006 24 157 165 16384684
Hunot S Brugg B Ricard D Michel PP Muriel MP Ruberg M Faucheux BA Agid Y Hirsch EC Nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB is increased in dopaminergic neurons of patients with parkinson disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94 7531 7536 9207126
Hunot S Dugas N Faucheux B Hartmann A Tardieu M Debre P Agid Y Dugas B Hirsch EC FcepsilonRII/CD23 is expressed in Parkinson's disease and induces, in vitro, production of nitric oxide and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in glial cells J Neurosci 1999 19 3440 3447 10212304
Hurley SD O'Banion MK Song DD Arana FS Olschowka JA Haber SN Microglial response is poorly correlated with neurodegeneration following chronic, low-dose MPTP administration in monkeys Exp Neurol 2003 184 659 668 14769357
Iannaccone S Cerami C Alessio M Garibotto V Panzacchi A Olivieri S Gelsomino G Moresco RM Perani D In vivo microglia activation in very early dementia with Lewy bodies, comparison with Parkinson's disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2013 19 47 52 22841687
Imamura K Hishikawa N Sawada M Nagatsu T Yoshida M Hashizume Y Distribution of major histocompatibility complex class II-positive microglia and cytokine profile of Parkinson's disease brains Acta Neuropathol 2003 106 518 526 14513261
Investigators, N.N.-P. A randomized, double-blind, futility clinical trial of creatine and minocycline in early Parkinson disease Neurology 2006 66 664 671 16481597
Investigators, N.N.-P. A pilot clinical trial of creatine and minocycline in early Parkinson disease: 18-month results Clin Neuropharmacol 2008 31 141 150 18520981
Iwai T Ito S Tanimitsu K Udagawa S Oka J Glucagon-like peptide-1 inhibits LPS-induced IL-1beta production in cultured rat astrocytes Neurosci Res 2006 55 352 360 16720054
Jimenez S Baglietto-Vargas D Caballero C Moreno-Gonzalez I Torres M Sanchez-Varo R Ruano D Vizuete M Gutierrez A Vitorica J Inflammatory response in the hippocampus of PS1M146L/APP751SL mouse model of Alzheimer's disease: age-dependent switch in the microglial phenotype from alternative to classic J Neurosci 2008 28 11650 11661 18987201
Jyothi HJ Vidyadhara DJ Mahadevan A Philip M Parmar SK Manohari SG Shankar SK Raju TR Alladi PA Aging causes morphological alterations in astrocytes and microglia in human substantia nigra pars compacta Neurobiol Aging 2015 36 3321 3333 26433682
Kannarkat GT Cook D Lee J Chang J Chung J Sandy E Paul K Ritz B Bronstein J Factor S Common Genetic Variant Association with Altered HLA Expression, Synergy with Pyrethroid Exposure, and Risk for Parkinson's Disease: An Observational and Case-Control Study NPJ Parkinson’s Disease in press
Kim B Yang MS Choi D Kim JH Kim HS Seol W Choi S Jou I Kim EY Joe EH Impaired inflammatory responses in murine Lrrk2-knockdown brain microglia PLoS One 2012 7 e34693 22496842
Kim S Moon M Park S Exendin-4 protects dopaminergic neurons by inhibition of microglial activation and matrix metalloproteinase-3 expression in an animal model of Parkinson's disease J Endocrinol 2009 202 431 439 19570816
Kim WG Mohney RP Wilson B Jeohn GH Liu B Hong JS Regional difference in susceptibility to lipopolysaccharide-induced neurotoxicity in the rat brain: role of microglia J Neurosci 2000 20 6309 6316 10934283
Knott C Stern G Wilkin GP Inflammatory regulators in Parkinson's disease: iNOS, lipocortin-1, and cyclooxygenases-1 and -2 Mol Cell Neurosci 2000 16 724 739 11124893
Kohutnicka M Lewandowska E Kurkowska-Jastrzebska I Czlonkowski A Czlonkowska A Microglial and astrocytic involvement in a murine model of Parkinson's disease induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) Immunopharmacology 1998 39 167 180 9754903
Koshimori Y Ko JH Mizrahi R Rusjan P Mabrouk R Jacobs MF Christopher L Hamani C Lang AE Wilson AA Imaging Striatal Microglial Activation in Patients with Parkinson's Disease PLoS One 2015 10 e0138721 26381267
Kosloski LM Kosmacek EA Olson KE Mosley RL Gendelman HE GM-CSF induces neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory responses in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine intoxicated mice J Neuroimmunol 2013 265 1 10 24210793
Koziorowski D Tomasiuk R Szlufik S Friedman A Inflammatory cytokines and NT-proCNP in Parkinson's disease patients Cytokine 2012 60 762 766 22910321
Krabbe G Halle A Matyash V Rinnenthal JL Eom GD Bernhardt U Miller KR Prokop S Kettenmann H Heppner FL Functional impairment of microglia coincides with Beta-amyloid deposition in mice with Alzheimer-like pathology PLoS One 2013 8 e60921 23577177
Kurkowska-Jastrzebska I Wronska A Kohutnicka M Czlonkowski A Czlonkowska A The inflammatory reaction following 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3, 6-tetrahydropyridine intoxication in mouse Exp Neurol 1999 156 50 61 10192776
Langston JW Forno LS Tetrud J Reeves AG Kaplan JA Karluk D Evidence of active nerve cell degeneration in the substantia nigra of humans years after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine exposure Ann Neurol 1999 46 598 605 10514096
Lawson LJ Perry VH Dri P Gordon S Heterogeneity in the distribution and morphology of microglia in the nor mal adult mouse brain Neuroscience 1990 39 151 170 2089275
Lee JK Chung J Kannarkat GT Tansey MG Critical role of regulator G-protein signaling 10 (RGS10) in modulating macrophage M1/M2 activation PLoS One 2013 8 e81785 24278459
Lee JK Chung J McAlpine FE Tansey MG Regulator of G-protein signaling-10 negatively regulates NF-kappaB in microglia and neuroprotects dopaminergic neurons in hemiparkinsonian rats J Neurosci 2011 31 11879 11888 21849548
Lee JK McCoy MK Harms AS Ruhn KA Gold SJ Tansey MG Regulator of G-protein signaling 10 promotes dopaminergic neuron survival via regulation of the microglial inflammatory response J Neurosci 2008 28 8517 8528 18716210
Li Y Perry T Kindy MS Harvey BK Tweedie D Holloway HW Powers K Shen H Egan JM Sambamurti K GLP-1 receptor stimulation preserves primary cortical and dopaminergic neurons in cellular and rodent models of stroke and Parkinsonism Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 1285 1290 19164583
Liberatore GT Jackson-Lewis V Vukosavic S Mandir AS Vila M McAuliffe WG Dawson VL Dawson TM Przedborski S Inducible nitric oxide synthase stimulates dopaminergic neurodegeneration in the MPTP model of Parkinson disease Nat Med 1999 5 1403 1409 10581083
Lin X Parisiadou L Gu XL Wang L Shim H Sun L Xie C Long CX Yang WJ Ding J Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 regulates the progression of neuropathology induced by Parkinson's-disease-related mutant alpha-synuclein Neuron 2009 64 807 827 20064389
Lindqvist D Hall S Surova Y Nielsen HM Janelidze S Brundin L Hansson O Cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory markers in Parkinson's disease--associations with depression, fatigue, and cognitive impairment Brain Behav Immun 2013 33 183 189 23911592
Lo Bianco C Ridet JL Schneider BL Deglon N Aebischer P alpha -Synucleinopathy and selective dopaminergic neuron loss in a rat lentiviral-based model of Parkinson's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 99 10813 10818 12122208
Lofrumento DD Saponaro C Cianciulli A De Nuccio F Mitolo V Nicolardi G Panaro MA MPTP-induced neuroinflammation increases the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and their receptors in mouse brain Neuroimmunomodulation 2011 18 79 88 20938211
Luchtman DW Shao D Song C Behavior, neurotransmitters and inflammation in three regimens of the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson's disease Physiol Behav 2009 98 130 138 19410592
Mackaness GB Cellular resistance to infection J Exp Med 1962 116 381 406 14467923
Magen I Chesselet MF Genetic mouse models of Parkinson's disease The state of the art Prog Brain Res 2010 184 53 87 20887870
Maia S Arlicot N Vierron E Bodard S Vergote J Guilloteau D Chalon S Longitudinal and parallel monitoring of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in a 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of Parkinson's disease Synapse 2012 66 573 583 22337286
Mangano EN Peters S Litteljohn D So R Bethune C Bobyn J Clarke M Hayley S Granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor protects against substantia nigra dopaminergic cell loss in an environmental toxin model of Parkinson's disease Neurobiol Dis 2011 43 99 112 21377529
Marinova-Mutafchieva L Sadeghian M Broom L Davis JB Medhurst AD Dexter DT Relationship between microglial activation and dopaminergic neuronal loss in the substantia nigra: a time course study in a 6-hydroxydopamine model of Parkinson's disease J Neurochem 2009 110 966 975 19549006
Marker DF Puccini JM Mockus TE Barbieri J Lu SM Gelbard HA LRRK2 kinase inhibition prevents pathological microglial phagocytosis in response to HIV-1 Tat protein J Neuroinflammation 2012 9 261 23190742
Martin HL Mounsey RB Mustafa S Sathe K Teismann P Pharmacological manipulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) reveals a role for anti-oxidant protection in a model of Parkinson's disease Exp Neurol 2012 235 528 538 22417924
Martinez FO Gordon S The M1 and M2 paradigm of macrophage activation: time for reassessment F1000Prime Rep 2014 6 13 24669294
Martinez FO Gordon S Locati M Mantovani A Transcriptional profiling of the human monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and polarization: new molecules and patterns of gene expression J Immunol 2006 177 7303 7311 17082649
Masliah E Rockenstein E Veinbergs I Mallory M Hashimoto M Takeda A Sagara Y Sisk A Mucke L Dopaminergic loss and inclusion body formation in alpha-synuclein mice: implications for neurodegenerative disorders Science 2000 287 1265 1269 10678833
Mattson MP Goodman Y Luo H Fu W Furukawa K Activation of NF-kappaB protects hippocampal neurons against oxidative stress-induced apoptosis: evidence for induction of manganese superoxide dismutase and suppression of peroxynitrite production and protein tyrosine nitration J Neurosci Res 1997 49 681 697 9335256
May MJ D'Acquisto F Madge LA Glockner J Pober JS Ghosh S Selective inhibition of NF-kappaB activation by a peptide that blocks the interaction of NEMO with the IkappaB kinase complex Science 2000 289 1550 1554 10968790
McCoy MK Martinez TN Ruhn KA Szymkowski DE Smith CG Botterman BR Tansey KE Tansey MG Blocking soluble tumor necrosis factor signaling with dominant-negative tumor necrosis factor inhibitor attenuates loss of dopaminergic neurons in models of Parkinson's disease J Neurosci 2006 26 9365 9375 16971520
McCoy MK Ruhn KA Martinez TN McAlpine FE Blesch A Tansey MG Intranigral lentiviral delivery of dominant-negative TNF attenuates neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits in hemiparkinsonian rats Mol Ther 2008 16 1572 1579 18628756
McGeer PL Itagaki S Boyes BE McGeer EG Reactive microglia are positive for HLA-DR in the substantia nigra of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease brains Neurology 1988 38 1285 1291 3399080
McGeer PL Schwab C Parent A Doudet D Presence of reactive microglia in monkey substantia nigra years after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine administration Ann Neurol 2003 54 599 604 14595649
Melief J Koning N Schuurman KG Van De Garde MD Smolders J Hoek RM Van Eijk M Hamann J Huitinga I Phenotyping primary human microglia: tight regulation of LPS responsiveness Glia 2012 60 1506 1517 22740309
Meredith SC Protein denaturation and aggregation: Cellular responses to denatured and aggregated proteins Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005 1066 181 221 16533927
Mesnage V Houeto JL Bonnet AM Clavier I Arnulf I Cattelin F Le Fur G Damier P Welter ML Agid Y Neurokinin B, neurotensin, and cannabinoid receptor antagonists and Parkinson disease Clin Neuropharmacol 2004 27 108 110 15190231
Mills CD Kincaid K Alt JM Heilman MJ Hill AM M-1/M-2 macrophages and the Th1/Th2 paradigm J Immunol 2000 164 6166 6173 10843666
Mittelbronn M The M1/M2 immune polarization concept in microglia: a fair transfer? Neuroimmunol Neuroinflammation 2014 1 2
Mittelbronn M Dietz K Schluesener HJ Meyermann R Local distribution of microglia in the normal adult human central nervous system differs by up to one order of magnitude Acta Neuropathol 2001 101 249 255 11307625
Moehle MS Webber PJ Tse T Sukar N Standaert DG DeSilva TM Cowell RM West AB LRRK2 inhibition attenuates microglial inflammatory responses J Neurosci 2012 32 1602 1611 22302802
Mogi M Harada M Kondo T Narabayashi H Riederer P Nagatsu T Transforming growth factor-beta 1 levels are elevated in the striatum and in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid in Parkinson's disease Neurosci Lett 1995 193 129 132 7478158
Mogi M Harada M Kondo T Riederer P Inagaki H Minami M Nagatsu T Interleukin-1 beta, interleukin-6, epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-alpha are elevated in the brain from parkinsonian patients Neurosci Lett 1994a 180 147 150 7700568
Mogi M Harada M Narabayashi H Inagaki H Minami M Nagatsu T Interleukin (IL)-1 beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and transforming growth factor-alpha levels are elevated in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid in juvenile parkinsonism and Parkinson's disease Neurosci Lett 1996 211 13 16 8809836
Mogi M Harada M Riederer P Narabayashi H Fujita K Nagatsu T Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) increases both in the brain and in the cerebrospinal fluid from parkinsonian patients Neurosci Lett 1994b 165 208 210 8015728
Mogi M Kondo T Mizuno Y Nagatsu T p53 protein, interferon-gamma, and NF-kappaB levels are elevated in the parkinsonian brain Neurosci Lett 2007 414 94 97 17196747
Mondal S Roy A Jana A Ghosh S Kordower JH Pahan K Testing NF-kappaB-based therapy in hemiparkinsonian monkeys J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2012 7 544 556 22661311
Moore CS Ase AR Kinsara A Rao VT Michell-Robinson M Leong SY Butovsky O Ludwin SK Seguela P Bar-Or A Antel JP P2Y12 expression and function in alternatively activated human microglia Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 2015 2 e80 25821842
Morgese MG Cassano T Cuomo V Giuffrida A Anti-dyskinetic effects of cannabinoids in a rat model of Parkinson's disease: role of CB(1) and TRPV1 receptors Exp Neurol 2007 208 110 119 17900568
Muller T Blum-Degen D Przuntek H Kuhn W Interleukin-6 levels in cerebrospinal fluid inversely correlate to severity of Parkinson's disease Acta Neurol Scand 1998 98 142 144 9724016
Murray PJ Allen JE Biswas SK Fisher EA Gilroy DW Goerdt S Gordon S Hamilton JA Ivashkiv LB Lawrence T Macrophage activation and polarization: nomenclature and experimental guidelines Immunity 2014 41 14 20 25035950
Nagatsu T Mogi M Ichinose H Togari A Changes in cytokines and neurotrophins in Parkinson's disease J Neural Transm Suppl 2000 277 290 11205147
Nassar NN Al-Shorbagy MY Arab HH Abdallah DM Saxagliptin: a novel antiparkinsonian approach Neuropharmacology 2015 89 308 317 25446674
Nau GJ Richmond JF Schlesinger A Jennings EG Lander ES Young RA Human macrophage activation programs induced by bacterial pathogens Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 99 1503 1508 11805289
NETPD-Investigators 2014 annual meetings Ann Neurol 2014 76 Suppl 18 S1 S254 25303632
Noyce AJ Bestwick JP Silveira-Moriyama L Hawkes CH Giovannoni G Lees AJ Schrag A Meta-analysis of early nonmotor features and risk factors for Parkinson disease Ann Neurol 2012 72 893 901 23071076
O'Neill LA Kaltschmidt C NF-kappa B: a crucial transcription factor for glial and neuronal cell function Trends Neurosci 1997 20 252 258 9185306
Odegaard JI Ricardo-Gonzalez RR Goforth MH Morel CR Subramanian V Mukundan L Red Eagle A Vats D Brombacher F Ferrante AW Chawla A Macrophage-specific PPARgamma controls alternative activation and improves insulin resistance Nature 2007 447 1116 1120 17515919
Olah M Biber K Vinet J Boddeke HW Microglia phenotype diversity CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2011 10 108 118 21143141
Ouchi Y Yoshikawa E Sekine Y Futatsubashi M Kanno T Ogusu T Torizuka T Microglial activation and dopamine terminal loss in early Parkinson's disease Ann Neurol 2005 57 168 175 15668962
Owen DR Yeo AJ Gunn RN Song K Wadsworth G Lewis A Rhodes C Pulford DJ Bennacef I Parker CA An 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) polymorphism explains differences in binding affinity of the PET radioligand PBR28 J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012 32 1 5 22008728
Paisan-Ruiz C Jain S Evans EW Gilks WP Simon J van der Brug M Lopez de Munain A Aparicio S Gil AM Khan N Cloning of the gene containing mutations that cause PARK8-linked Parkinson's disease Neuron 2004 44 595 600 15541308
Panet H Barzilai A Daily D Melamed E Offen D Activation of nuclear transcription factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) is essential for dopamine-induced apoptosis in PC12 cells J Neurochem 2001 77 391 398 11299301
Papadopoulos V Baraldi M Guilarte TR Knudsen TB Lacapere JJ Lindemann P Norenberg MD Nutt D Weizman A Zhang MR Gavish M Translocator protein (18kDa): new nomenclature for the peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor based on its structure and molecular function Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006 27 402 409 16822554
Pascual G Ricote M Hevener AL Macrophage peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma as a therapeutic target to combat Type 2 diabetes Expert Opin Ther Targets 2007 11 1503 1520 18028013
Pattarini R Smeyne RJ Morgan JI Temporal mRNA profiles of inflammatory mediators in the murine 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyrimidine model of Parkinson's disease Neuroscience 2007 145 654 668 17258864
Perego C Fumagalli S De Simoni MG Temporal pattern of expression and colocalization of microglia/macrophage phenotype markers following brain ischemic injury in mice J Neuroinflammation 2011 8 174 22152337
Perry VH Cunningham C Holmes C Systemic infections and inflammation affect chronic neurodegeneration Nat Rev Immunol 2007 7 161 167 17220915
Perry VH Holmes C Microglial priming in neurodegenerative disease Nat Rev Neurol 2014 10 217 224 24638131
Pisanu A Lecca D Mulas G Wardas J Simbula G Spiga S Carta AR Dynamic changes in pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in microglia after PPAR-gamma agonist neuroprotective treatment in the MPTPp mouse model of progressive Parkinson's disease Neurobiol Dis 2014 71 280 291 25134730
Pott Godoy MC Tarelli R Ferrari CC Sarchi MI Pitossi FJ Central and systemic IL-1 exacerbates neurodegeneration and motor symptoms in a model of Parkinson's disease Brain 2008 131 1880 1894 18504291
Pranski EL Dalal NV Sanford CV Herskowitz JH Gearing M Lazo C Miller GW Lah JJ Levey AI Betarbet RS RING finger protein 11 (RNF11) modulates susceptibility to 6-OHDA-induced nigral degeneration and behavioral deficits through NF-kappaB signaling in dopaminergic cells Neurobiol Dis 2013 54 264 279 23318928
Qin L Wu X Block ML Liu Y Breese GR Hong JS Knapp DJ Crews FT Systemic LPS causes chronic neuroinflammation and progressive neurodegeneration Glia 2007 55 453 462 17203472
Ramonet D Daher JP Lin BM Stafa K Kim J Banerjee R Westerlund M Pletnikova O Glauser L Yang L Dopaminergic neuronal loss, reduced neurite complexity and autophagic abnormalities in transgenic mice expressing G2019S mutant LRRK2 PLoS One 2011 6 e18568 21494637
Rampersaud N Harkavyi A Giordano G Lever R Whitton J Whitton P Exendin-4 reverts behavioural and neurochemical dysfunction in a pre-motor rodent model of Parkinson's disease with noradrenergic deficit Br J Pharmacol 2012 167 1467 1479 22774922
Ramsey CP Tansey MG A survey from 2012 of evidence for the role of neuroinflammation in neurotoxin animal models of Parkinson's disease and potential molecular targets Exp Neurol 2014 256 126 132 23726958
Reddy RC Narala VR Keshamouni VG Milam JE Newstead MW Standiford TJ Sepsis-induced inhibition of neutrophil chemotaxis is mediated by activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-{gamma} Blood 2008 112 4250 4258 18535203
Reiner A Heldt SA Presley CS Guley NH Elberger AJ Deng Y D'Surney L Rogers JT Ferrell J Bu W Motor, visual and emotional deficits in mice after closed-head mild traumatic brain injury are alleviated by the novel CB2 inverse agonist SMM-189 Int J Mol Sci 2015 16 758 787
Rentzos M Nikolaou C Andreadou E Paraskevas GP Rombos A Zoga M Tsoutsou A Boufidou F Kapaki E Vassilopoulos D Circulating interleukin-10 and interleukin-12 in Parkinson's disease Acta Neurol Scand 2009 119 332 337 18976327
Ricote M Glass CK PPARs and molecular mechanisms of transrepression Biochim Biophys Acta 2007 1771 926 935 17433773
Rodriguez M Alvarez-Erviti L Blesa FJ Rodriguez-Oroz MC Arina A Melero I Ramos LI Obeso JA Bone-marrow-derived cell differentiation into microglia: a study in a progressive mouse model of Parkinson's disease Neurobiol Dis 2007 28 316 325 17897835
Rojo AI Innamorato NG Martin-Moreno AM De Ceballos ML Yamamoto M Cuadrado A Nrf2 regulates microglial dynamics and neuroinflammation in experimental Parkinson's disease Glia 2010 58 588 598 19908287
Romero J Garcia-Palomero E Fernandez-Ruiz JJ Ramos JA Involvement of GABA(B) receptors in the motor inhibition produced by agonists of brain cannabinoid receptors Behav Pharmacol 1996 7 299 302 11224422
Rowin J Thiruppathi M Arhebamen E Sheng J Prabhakar BS Meriggioli MN Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor treatment of a patient in myasthenic crisis: effects on regulatory T cells Muscle Nerve 2012 46 449 453 22907239
Ruland J Return to homeostasis: downregulation of NF-kappaB responses Nat Immunol 2011 12 709 714 21772279
Sanchez-Guajardo V Barnum CJ Tansey MG Romero-Ramos M Neuroimmunological processes in Parkinson's disease and their relation to alpha-synuclein: microglia as the referee between neuronal processes and peripheral immunity ASN Neuro 2013 5 113 139 23506036
Sanchez-Guajardo V Febbraro F Kirik D Romero-Ramos M Microglia acquire distinct activation profiles depending on the degree of alpha-synuclein neuropathology in a rAAV based model of Parkinson's disease PLoS One 2010 5 e8784 20098715
Sanchez-Pernaute R Ferree A Cooper O Yu M Brownell AL Isacson O Selective COX-2 inhibition prevents progressive dopamine neuron degeneration in a rat model of Parkinson's disease J Neuroinflammation 2004 1 6 15285796
Satoh N Shimatsu A Himeno A Sasaki Y Yamakage H Yamada K Suganami T Ogawa Y Unbalanced M1/M2 phenotype of peripheral blood monocytes in obese diabetic patients: effect of pioglitazone Diabetes Care 2010 33 e7 20040670
Schintu N Frau L Ibba M Garau A Carboni E Carta AR Progressive dopaminergic degeneration in the chronic MPTPp mouse model of Parkinson's disease Neurotox Res 2009 16 127 139 19526289
Sheng JR Muthusamy T Prabhakar BS Meriggioli MN GM-CSF-induced regulatory T cells selectively inhibit anti-acetylcholine receptor-specific immune responses in experimental myasthenia gravis J Neuroimmunol 2011 240-241 65 73 22099723
Shi M Bradner J Hancock AM Chung KA Quinn JF Peskind ER Galasko D Jankovic J Zabetian CP Kim HM Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Parkinson disease diagnosis and progression Ann Neurol 2011 69 570 580 21400565
Sieradzan KA Fox SH Hill M Dick JP Crossman AR Brotchie JM Cannabinoids reduce levodopa-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease: a pilot study Neurology 2001 57 2108 2111 11739835
Smeyne RJ Jackson-Lewis V The MPTP model of Parkinson's disease Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005 134 57 66 15790530
Sriram K Matheson JM Benkovic SA Miller DB Luster MI O'Callaghan JP Mice deficient in TNF receptors are protected against dopaminergic neurotoxicity: implications for Parkinson's disease FASEB J 2002 16 1474 1476 12205053
Stout RD Jiang C Matta B Tietzel I Watkins SK Suttles J Macrophages sequentially change their functional phenotype in response to changes in microenvironmental influences J Immunol 2005 175 342 349 15972667
Straus DS Glass CK Anti-inflammatory actions of PPAR ligands: new insights on cellular and molecular mechanisms Trends Immunol 2007 28 551 558 17981503
Su X Maguire-Zeiss KA Giuliano R Prifti L Venkatesh K Federoff HJ Synuclein activates microglia in a model of Parkinson's disease Neurobiol Aging 2008 29 1690 1701 17537546
Swanson CR Joers V Bondarenko V Brunner K Simmons HA Ziegler TE Kemnitz JW Johnson JA Emborg ME The PPAR-gamma agonist pioglitazone modulates inflammation and induces neuroprotection in parkinsonian monkeys J Neuroinflammation 2011 8 91 21819568
Szanto A Balint BL Nagy ZS Barta E Dezso B Pap A Szeles L Poliska S Oros M Evans RM STAT6 transcription factor is a facilitator of the nuclear receptor PPARgamma-regulated gene expression in macrophages and dendritic cells Immunity 2010 33 699 712 21093321
Tanaka S Ishii A Ohtaki H Shioda S Yoshida T Numazawa S Activation of microglia induces symptoms of Parkinson's disease in wild-type, but not in IL-1 knockout mice J Neuroinflammation 2013 10 143 24289537
Tang Y Le W Differential Roles of M1 and M2 Microglia in Neurodegenerative Diseases Mol Neurobiol 2015
Tansey MG Goldberg MS Neuroinflammation in Parkinson's disease: its role in neuronal death and implications for therapeutic intervention Neurobiol Dis 2010 37 510 518 19913097
Thomas M Le WD Minocycline: neuroprotective mechanisms in Parkinson's disease Curr Pharm Des 2004 10 679 686 14965330
Tran TA McCoy MK Sporn MB Tansey MG The synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-methyl ester modulates microglial activities, inhibits TNF production, and provides dopaminergic neuroprotection J Neuroinflammation 2008 5 14 18474101
Van der Perren A Toelen J Casteels C Macchi F Van Rompuy AS Sarre S Casadei N Nuber S Himmelreich U Osorio Garcia MI Longitudinal follow-up and characterization of a robust rat model for Parkinson's disease based on overexpression of alpha-synuclein with adeno-associated viral vectors Neurobiol Aging 2015 36 1543 1558 25599874
Varga T Czimmerer Z Nagy L PPARs are a unique set of fatty acid regulated transcription factors controlling both lipid metabolism and inflammation Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 1812 1007 1022 21382489
Vawter MP Dillon-Carter O Tourtellotte WW Carvey P Freed WJ TGFbeta1 and TGFbeta2 concentrations are elevated in Parkinson's disease in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid Exp Neurol 1996 142 313 322 8934562
Vazquez-Claverie M Garrido-Gil P San Sebastian W Izal-Azcarate A Belzunegui S Marcilla I Lopez B Luquin MR Acute and chronic 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine administrations elicit similar microglial activation in the substantia nigra of monkeys J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 977 984 19680145
Wakamatsu M Ishii A Iwata S Sakagami J Ukai Y Ono M Kanbe D Muramatsu S Kobayashi K Iwatsubo T Yoshimoto M Selective loss of nigral dopamine neurons induced by overexpression of truncated human alpha-synuclein in mice Neurobiol Aging 2008 29 574 585 17174013
Walsh S Finn DP Dowd E Time-course of nigrostriatal neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in the 6-hydroxydopamine-induced axonal and terminal lesion models of Parkinson's disease in the rat Neuroscience 2011 175 251 261 21145947
Watson MB Richter F Lee SK Gabby L Wu J Masliah E Effros RB Chesselet MF Regionally-specific microglial activation in young mice over-expressing human wildtype alpha-synuclein Exp Neurol 2012 237 318 334 22750327
West AB Moore DJ Biskup S Bugayenko A Smith WW Ross CA Dawson VL Dawson TM Parkinson's disease-associated mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 augment kinase activity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 102 16842 16847 16269541
Wu DC Jackson-Lewis V Vila M Tieu K Teismann P Vadseth C Choi DK Ischiropoulos H Przedborski S Blockade of microglial activation is neuroprotective in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse model of Parkinson disease J Neurosci 2002 22 1763 1771 11880505
Yamada M Iwatsubo T Mizuno Y Mochizuki H Overexpression of alpha-synuclein in rat substantia nigra results in loss of dopaminergic neurons, phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein and activation of caspase-9: resemblance to pathogenetic changes in Parkinson's disease J Neurochem 2004 91 451 461 15447678
Yasuda Y Shimoda T Uno K Tateishi N Furuya S Yagi K Suzuki K Fujita S The effects of MPTP on the activation of microglia/astrocytes and cytokine/chemokine levels in different mice strains J Neuroimmunol 2008 204 43 51 18817984
Yasuda Y Shinagawa R Yamada M Mori T Tateishi N Fujita S Long-lasting reactive changes observed in microglia in the striatal and substantia nigral of mice after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine Brain Res 2007 1138 196 202 17275793
Yoder KK Nho K Risacher SL Kim S Shen L Saykin AJ Influence of TSPO genotype on 11C-PBR28 standardized uptake values J Nucl Med 2013 54 1320 1322 23785173
Zhang W Wang J Zhang Y Yuan Y Guan W Jin C Chen H Wang X Yang X He F The scaffold protein TANK/I-TRAF inhibits NF-kappaB activation by recruiting polo-like kinase 1 Mol Biol Cell 2010 21 2500 2513 20484576
Zimprich A Biskup S Leitner P Lichtner P Farrer M Lincoln S Kachergus J Hulihan M Uitti RJ Calne DB Mutations in LRRK2 cause autosomal-dominant parkinsonism with pleomorphic pathology Neuron 2004 44 601 607 15541309
