LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9108167
2510
Hippocampus
Hippocampus
Hippocampus
1050-9631
1098-1063

27997993
5396955
10.1002/hipo.22693
NIHMS851402
Article
Longitudinal imaging reveals sub-hippocampal dynamics in glutamate levels associated with histopathologic events in a mouse model of tauopathy and healthy mice
Crescenzi Rachelle 12*
DeBrosse Catherine 12
Nanga Ravi P.R. 2
Byrne Matthew D. 3
Krishnamoorthy Guruprasad 2
D’Aquilla Kevin 2
Nath Hari 2
Morales Knashawn H. 4
Iba Michiyo 3
Hariharan Hari 2
Lee Virginia M.Y 3
Detre John A. 5
Reddy Ravinder 2
1 Department of Biochemistry &amp; Molecular Biophysics (BMB), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
2 Center for Magnetic Resonance and Optical Imaging (CMROI), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
3 Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research (CNDR), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
4 Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
5 Center for Functional Neuroimaging (CfN), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
* Corresponding author: Rachelle Crescenzi, Ph.D., Department of Biochemistry &amp; Molecular Biophysics (BMB), Center for Magnetic Resonance and Optical Imaging (CMROI), University of Pennsylvania, B1 Stellar-Chance Laboratories, 422 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6100, Tel: (215) 898-2045, Fax: (215) 573-2113, rachelle.crescenzi@gmail.com
18 2 2017
03 2 2017
3 2017
01 3 2018
27 3 285302
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Tauopathies are neurodegenerative disorders characterized by abnormal intracellular aggregates of tau protein, and include Alzheimer’s disease, corticobasal degeneration, frontotemporal dementia, and traumatic brain injury. Glutamate metabolism is altered in neurodegenerative disorders manifesting in higher or lower concentrations of glutamate, its transporters or receptors. Previously, glutamate chemical exchange saturation transfer (GluCEST) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated that glutamate levels are reduced in regions of synapse loss in the hippocampus of a mouse model of late-stage tauopathy. We performed a longitudinal GluCEST imaging experiment paired with a cross-sectional study of histologic markers of tauopathy to determine whether 1) early GluCEST changes are associated with synapse loss before volume loss occurs in the hippocampus, and whether 2) subhippocampal dynamics in GluCEST are associated with histopathologic events related to glutamate alterations in tauopathy. Live imaging of the hippocampus in three serial slices was performed without exogenous contrast agents, and subregions were segmented based on a k-means cluster model. Subregions of the hippocampus were analyzed (cornu ammonis CA1, CA3, dentate gyrus, and ventricle) in order to associate local MRI-observable changes in glutamate with histological measures of glial cell proliferation (GFAP), synapse density (synaptophysin, VGlut1) and glutamate receptor (NMDA-NR1) levels. Early differences in GluCEST between healthy and tauopathy mice were measured in the CA1 and DG subregions (30% reduction, p≤0.001). Synapse density was also significantly reduced in every subregion of the hippocampus in tauopathy mice by 6 months. Volume was not significantly reduced in any subregion until 13 months. Further, a gradient in glutamate levels was observed in vivo along hippocampal axes that became polarized as tauopathy progressed. Dynamics in hippocampal glutamate levels throughout lifetime were most closely correlated with combined changes in synaptophysin and GFAP, indicating that GluCEST imaging may be a surrogate marker of glutamate concentration in glial cells and at the synaptic level.


B. Introduction

A variety of neurodegenerative disorders are classified as tauopathies due to an abnormal presence of intracellular aggregates of tau protein in the brain. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most well known tauopathy. Other diseases in which tau pathology is the most dominant feature include frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and Pick’s disease (PiD) (Lee et al., 2001; Thibodeau et al., 2009). Recently, research interest in tauopathies has further intensified with the discovery that chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) and traumatic brain injury (TBI), which particularly affect athletes of contact sports and military personnel exposed to repeated explosions, is a progressive tauopathy (Lakis et al., 2013; McKee et al., 2009).

The earliest symptoms of tauopathy are found at the synaptic level (Selkoe, 2002). In mouse models of tauopathy, structural and functional abnormalities of synapses in the hippocampus are measurable earlier (Yoshiyama et al., 2007) and independent of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) (Rocher et al., 2010). Synapse loss in cortical tissue of AD patients is the closest histologic correlate to cognitive deficits (Terry et al., 1991), and to the severity of cognitive deficits (DeKosky and Scheff, 1990). In several mouse models of tauopathy, early synapse loss has likewise been shown to correlate with deficits in learning and memory tasks: a P301L human tau mouse model (Maurin et al., 2014), a regulated P301L expression model rTG4510 (Hoover et al., 2011), and a pro-aggregate human tau model (Hochgräfe et al., 2013). With the possibility that these cognitive deficits are reversible (Hochgräfe et al., 2013; Sydow et al., 2011; Van der Jeugd et al., 2012), development of an in vivo diagnostic biomarker which correlates with synapse loss is highly desirable for testing potential therapies.

A novel magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) method, glutamate chemical exchange saturation transfer (GluCEST) imaging, is able to measure glutamate levels in vivo (Cai et al., 2012). The GluCEST technique magnetically labels amine protons residing on endogenous glutamate that exchange with bulk water to produce contrast proportional to the concentration of total free glutamate (5–15mM per kg wet weight brain tissue, Schousboe 1981). With such high concentrations in the brain, GluCEST is able to image glutamate levels with high sensitivity and spatial resolution without the use of contrast agents. While GluCEST imaging has shown deficits in mouse models of AD (Haris et al., 2013) and tauopathy (Crescenzi et al., 2014), the sensitivity of GluCEST to changes in glutamate levels throughout the course of disease has not yet been examined.

There are two main sources of neuronal glutamate: synthesized during the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and derived from glutamine from astrocytes as part of the glutamine-glutamate cycle. Reduced synthesis of glutamate and glutamine were measured in hippocampal tissue of a rat model of AD with advanced pathology (Nilsen et al., 2014a). In younger rats with AD, before amyloid beta pathology is detectable, reduced glutamate was measured in the hippocampus (Nilsen et al., 2014b). These age effects were primarily determined from excised tissue using complimentary techniques of MR spectroscopy, which motivates the use of in vivo GluCEST imaging to determine longitudinal changes in glutamate levels.

It is also important to consider that glutamate functions as the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS). A portion of neuronal glutamate is packaged into neurotransmitter vesicles to be transported to the presynapses via vesicular glutamate transporter protein (VGlut, Bellocchio et al., 2000). VGlut1 was discovered to be reduced in AD cortical tissue (Kirvell et al., 2006), and found to correlate with cognitive impairment scores (Kashani et al., 2008). VGlut1 was also reduced in the perforant pathway of patients with cognitive impairment (Robinson et al., 2014); however, in patients a decade younger (mean age 88.8 yrs) with cognitive impairment, VGlut1 was found to be elevated over healthy controls in the mid-frontal gyrus (Bell et al., 2007).

Once released into the synaptic cleft, glutamate doesn’t remain long in the extracellular space, or else it would become excitotoxic (Hertz et al., 1999). Glutamate is actively transported into astrocytes by the glutamate transporter protein (GLT-1), also known as excitatory amino acid transporter protein (EAAT). Astrocytes are the location of the glutamine-glutamate cycle, by which three quarters of glutamate is ultimately recycled and stored in the form of glutamine (Benjamin and Quastel, 1975; Westergaard et al., 1995). In the hippocampus and mid-frontal gyrus from sporadic AD patients, reduced expression and protein levels of EAAT1 and EAAT2 were observed local to amyloid beta plaques (Jacob et al., 2007). This reduction may be due to their association with phosphorylated tau localized to NFTs in AD, PSP, and CBD patients (EAAT2, Sasaki et al., 2009).

Postsynapses of other neurons and glia accept extracellular glutamate via glutamatergic receptors. Early autoradiography and immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies in AD tissue have shown reduced NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate) binding in the cortex (Greenamyre and Young, 1989; Jansen, 1990; Penney et al., 1990), reduced AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) binding in the hippocampus (Dewar et al., 1991) and reduced AMPA receptors in the entorhinal cortex (Yasuda et al., 1995) and hippocampus (Aronica et al., 1997). Reduced expression levels of genes encoding NMDA and AMPA receptors were also measured in the AD hippocampus (Jacob et al., 2007).

What is known about changes in glutamate levels in vivo at the subhippocampal level is primarily from long-term potentiation (LTP) studies. Glutamate levels are an indicator of synaptic growth during LTP (Dolphin et al., 1982), and may be an indicator of synaptic dysfunction in neurodegenerative disease (Clare et al., 2011; Gong and Lippa, 2010). LTP is dependent upon NMDA receptors in the cornu ammonis hippocampal subfield CA1 and the dentate gyrus (DG), however synaptic transmission does not depend on NMDA receptors in the mossy fibers of CA3 (Lynch et al., 2004; Nicoll and Schmitz, 2005). LTP was found to be impaired in the CA1 and not the CA3 of a mouse model of tauopathy exhibiting cognitive deficits (Chong et al., 2011). In contrast, LTP is enhanced in the DG of young (2 to 3 months) tauopathy mice (Boekhoorn et al., 2006; Pennanen et al., 2006). An effective in vivo surrogate biomarker of synapse loss based on glutamate levels would correlate with the subhippocampal location and dynamics of synapse loss.

Previously GluCEST deficits have been measured in locations of severe synapse loss in a tauopathy mouse model (Crescenzi et al., 2014). However, this study focused on the late stage of disease after synapse loss and volume loss had already occurred. The primary goal of the current study, therefore, was to measure longitudinal dynamics in subhippocampal glutamate levels, from early to late stage pathology, in order to determine when glutamate changes occur in relation to synapse and volume loss. Subregions of the hippocampus were analyzed in order to associate local changes in GluCEST contrast with histological markers. A variety of cell-type specific antibodies (GFAP), a general synapse marker (synaptophysin) and presynaptic glutamate transporter (VGlut1) and postsynaptic receptor (NMDA-NR1) antibodies were applied to tissue from age-matched littermates. This study was driven by two main hypotheses: 1) decreased GluCEST signal will occur when synapse loss is measurable, and before volume loss; and 2) GluCEST signal will be sensitive to dynamics in glutamate levels in specific subregions of the hippocampus, and associated with histologic events as disease progresses in PS19 mice. The findings will aid our interpretation of GluCEST image contrast and its potential utility to image onset of synapse loss and disease progression in preclinical tauopathy.

C. Methods

C1. Experimental Design

The IACUC of the University of Pennsylvania approved all experiments. These experiments were performed on a PS19 mouse model of tauopathy that overexpresses mutated human-tau (T34 isoform, 1N4R) at P301S (first described by Yoshiyama et al., 2007, specific generation used here described by Hurtado et al., 2010). This is a mutation found in FTDP-17 patients. In mice this mutation causes decreased microtubule density and impaired LTP in the CA1 by 3 months (Yoshiyama et al., 2007) and impaired cognition in a Barnes maze test by 6 months (Brunden et al., 2010). Hyper-phosphorylated tau inclusions develop progressively, with eventual neurofibrillary tangle formation (see stages by Hurtado et al., 2010). There is an insignificant and minor drop-off in the Kaplan–Meier Survival Curve between 6 and 7 months (Hurtado et al., 2010). Male mice were housed in a humidity controlled room ~22°C under a 12 hour light/ dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and water. PS19 mice and their WT littermates were imaged at successive time points, in two cohorts: Cohort 1 WT (n=6) and PS19 (n=6) at 3, 7 and 13 months of age; and Cohort 2 WT (n=3) and PS19 (n=6) at 9 and 13 months of age. In order to correlate in vivo imaging data to histological measures as PS19 mice age, from the same generation of littermates raised under identical housing conditions, sectioned tissue was retrospectively obtained from the CNDR library at available ages: 3 months (n=4 WT, n=4 PS19), 6 months (n=6 PS19), and 9 months (n=6 PS19). Histology was also performed on the mice that were imaged (13 months of age).

C2. MRI preparation

In vivo imaging was performed on a 9.4T small-animal spectrometer (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA). Mice were anesthetized using isoflurane gas (induced with 2% isoflurane, maintained with 1.5–2% isoflurane mixed with oxygen at 2 L/min), and secured to a body-bed inside a 20mm diameter volume coil (M2M Imaging Corp., Cleveland, OH). Mice were prepared on a warming table, and body temperature was monitored during imaging using an anal temperature probe and maintained at 37°C using forced hot-air inside the bore of the magnet (M2M Imaging Corp., S2PAM software). Respiratory rate was monitored using a pressure-pillow underneath the chest, connected to a fiber-optic readout, and maintained free breathing between 40–80bpm.

C3. Glutamate Chemical Exchange Saturation Transfer (GluCEST) MRI

The GluCEST MRI technique provides high-resolution maps of glutamate levels in the brain by magnetically labeling endogenous amine protons of free glutamate. Amine protons undergo chemical exchange with bulk-water protons, transferring their magnetic saturation state that reduces the water signal. This is the chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST) effect. The reduction in water signal is measured as the asymmetry between images acquired with saturation at the resonant frequency of amine protons of glutamate (3 ppm offset from water) and with saturation equidistant from water (−3ppm), according to the equation: Eqn. (1) GluCESTasym=Msat(-3ppm)-Msat(3ppm)Msat(-3ppm)

In equation 1, Msat is the signal acquired after a saturation pulse. Subtraction of these images and normalization provides a map that is proportional to the CEST effect, with minor contributions from direct saturation and magnetization transfer effects on water. GluCEST asymmetry % (CEST %) is proportional to the concentration of total free glutamate within the voxel. Contributions from other labile amine and amide protons contribute to &lt;30% of the GluCEST asymmetry. Detailed descriptions of the GluCEST technique can be found in Cai et al., 2012, Haris et al., 2013, and Crescenzi et al., 2014.

The pulse sequence is comprised of a frequency selective saturation preparation pulse (B1rms = 5.87 μT and duration of 1s as four pulses of 250 ms duration each) applied before a spoiled gradient echo readout (effective TR/TE = 6.6/3.3 ms). The whole preparation/acquisition combination is repeated every 8s. Four averages were acquired at each saturation frequency from ± 2.5 – 3.5 ppm offset from water with a step size of 0.25 ppm. This range allows for B0 inhomogeneity to be corrected up to 0.5 ppm. B0 and B1 maps were also acquired and used to correct the GluCEST contrast as described previously (Crescenzi et al., 2014). GluCEST, B0, and B1 maps were acquired from 3 consecutive slices (1mm thick each, in-plane resolution 156 μm2) spanning the hippocampus from rostral to caudal (Figure 1i). The center slice position was chosen 2.3 mm rostral to the Lambda marker, which was identified on a sagittal scout image. The total scan time including GluCEST, B0 and B1 mapping for each slice was approximately 15 min. Anatomical T2-weighted images were acquired with identical resolution and position (multi-slice fast spin-echo, TR/TE = 3000/36 ms, 2 averages, matrix = 128 × 128, FOV = 20mm, slice thickness = 1 mm).

C4. Image segmentation by k-means cluster analysis

We were interested in observing the GluCEST signal from four anatomical subregions of the hippocampus: the DG, the CA1 and CA3, and the adjacent fourth ventricle containing cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). It is not possible to delineate these subregions from a T2-weighted in vivo MRI (Figure 1i). Although high spatial resolution atlases exist, both for MRI (Johnson et al., 2010) and histology (Adler et al., 2014), these methods require registration with exact ex vivo tissue, which cannot be obtained in a longitudinal study.

Therefore, we first manually segmented the hippocampus proper from the T2-weighted image (Figure 1i). The outline of the hippocampus can be adequately delineated in each slice: rostral (“R”), middle (“M”, mid), and caudal (“C”). The hippocampal mask was applied to the corresponding GluCEST map (Figure 1ii–iii).

A secondary segmentation was then applied to each hippocampus using the k-means clustering algorithm (Matlab script by Jose Vicente Manjon Herrera, 2005). This algorithm uses a statistical method to set a threshold between high, medium, and low GluCEST values with respect to each hippocampus slice (Figure 1iv). The k-means method has been used to segment gray matter, white matter, and CSF regions of interest (ROIs) from in vivo anatomical MRIs of the brain (Leung et al., 2015; Vemuri et al., 2008). We adapted this approach to segment three “clusters” or final subhippocampal ROIs from each hippocampus slice based on the GluCEST contrast. Examples of segmented clusters from three slices of the mouse hippocampus are shown in Figure 1v. The locations of subhippocampal ROIs within each slice roughly fall along the dorsal-ventral axis. Therefore segmented regions are labeled within each slice: dorsal “D” in red, intermediate “I” in green, and ventral “V” in blue (Figure 1v–vii). This nomenclature was motivated by the segmentation presented by Dong et al., 2009 based on gene-expression patterns within the hippocampus.

The ROIs qualitatively correspond to the location of hippocampal subregions of interest, thereby extending the cluster analysis of GluCEST to anatomical subregions of the hippocampus. In Figure 1vi the relevant subregions (CA1, DG, CA3) are outlined on hippocampus atlases and colored according to their corresponding ROI. In total, 9 subregions were segmented from the hippocampus of each mouse.

The average GluCEST value in each region was averaged across the group of WT and PS19 mice at each age. Additionally, the volume of each region was measured as the number of pixels normalized to the total hippocampus volume. Group averages from the 9 regions were arranged in a grid, and are referenced according to slice position [rostral (R), middle (M), caudal (C)] and ROI location [dorsal (D), intermediate (I), ventral (V)]. An anatomical model of corresponding hippocampal subregions is provided in Figure 1vii for reference.

C5. Immunohistochemistry

All mice brains were prepared using standard methods of transcardial perfusion/fixation. Briefly, mice were deeply anesthetized using a mixture of xylazine, ketamine, and acepromazine (100:10:1 mg/kg, according to their weight). Intracardiac perfusion was then performed using phosphate-buffered saline (0.01M), followed by 20 mL of 10% neutral buffered Formalin. Brains were then dissected and stored overnight at 4°C in 10% NBF, and embedded in paraffin the following day. Paraffin blocks were sliced 6 μm thick.

Several antibodies were applied to sectioned brain tissue. AT8 monoclonal antibody was utilized to depict phosphorylated tau at residues Ser202/Thr205 (applied primary antibody concentration 1:7500, generated at the CNDR), developed with a horseradish peroxidase developing system (BioGenex, Hyderbad, AP India) with diaminobenzidine peroxidase substrate as the chromogen (DAB, ImmPACT(TM), Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and counterstained using hemetoxylin. Synaptophysin (syn., Milipore Corporation, Bedford, MA, USA, Mab38 anti-rabbit, 1:500) was applied for presynaptic terminals, developed using the ABC system (VECTASTAIN(R), Vector Laboratories). VGlut1 (presynaptic vesicular glutamate transporter protein, Synaptic Systems, Catalog #135304, anti-guinea pig, 1:5000) received microwave pre-treatment for 15 minutes at 100°C in citrate buffer (Vector Antigen Unmasking Solution, Vector Laboratories), and was developed using the ABC system. To quantify glial cell proliferation, antibody to GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein, generated at the CNDR, 1:2000) was applied, developed using the ABC system, and counterstained with hemetoxylin. An antibody for NMDA glutamate receptor subunit 1 (NR1, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1:5000, with citrate pretreatment) was applied, developed using the BioGenex system, and counterstained with hemetoxylin.

Binding of the following antibodies were quantified in the mid-hippocampus corresponding to the imaged slice position: synaptophysin, VGlut1, and GFAP. Slides were chosen in the mid-hippocampus based on a visual match to Bregma −2.18 anatomy (see Figure 1vi, middle atlas section). Sections were discarded if damaged or incorrect anatomy was determined after immunostaining. Immunostained PS19 tissue at 13 months was not quantified due to the atrophic hippocampus in aged PS19 mice, so that ROI selection was not possible. Actual slice positions of stained tissue sections used for quantification were evaluated by an independent observer (M.D.B), by comparing atlas anatomy with slices stained for synaptophysin. Note that alternative immunogens were applied to subsequent tissue sections. An average Bregma position of −2.05 mm, standard deviation 0.8 mm, standard error of the mean 0.12 mm, was determined. The standard deviation is within the comparative MRI slice thickness of 1 mm.

Stained slides were scanned using an automatic slide scanner (Lamina Scanner, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA). Scanned slides were viewed using CaseViewer (v1.3.0.41885, Histech, Budapest, Hungary), and snapshots were taken at 10x magnification. ROIs were segmented by hand in the dentate gyrus polymorph and granule cell layer, and all laminae of the CA1 and CA3 (see Figure 5b for example ROIs). Images were thresholded to the same level for all mice (ImageJ, NIH). The amount of immunostaining was measured as the percentage of area occupied (% AOC) by positive staining within the ROI. GFAP immunostaining was distinguished from hemetoxylin by the color deconvolution plug-in (Ruifrok 2001) for ImageJ using the hemetoxylin and DAB optical densities (ODs) provided; the hemetoxylin image was used for ROI identification, and the chromagen image was thresholded before measuring the %AOC.

Slides immunostained with NR1 were quantified in the caudal hippocampus (Bregma -3.18, see Figure 1vi third atlas section) because tissue from the middle hippocampus was limited after optimization of previously described immunostaining protocols. ROIs were outlined in the DG, CA1, and CA3. Positive chromagen signal was measured in the NR1 stain by identification and averaging of red, blue, green (RGB) OD values from five random NR1 positive neurons for color deconvolution of signal from background and counterstain. A minimum OD threshold was applied to measure the percentage of area occupied (% AOC) by NR1 positive neurons, confirmed for accuracy by visual inspection. Note that caudal tissue from 6 month (n=4) and 9 month (n=1) PS19 mice was combined to gain statistical power.

C6. Statistical analyses

To determine the effects of age and genotype on GluCEST and volume results, linear mixed effect models (LMM) for repeated measures were applied. The models combined all data across ROIs and considered random intercepts for mouse, region and slice in addition to a random slope for age. Fixed effects included indicators for the 9 clusters (including 3 regions in each of 3 slices), age, genotype and an interaction between age and genotype. Age was modeled as a categorical variable if departures from linear trends were observed. A significant age by genotype interaction indicated differences in the outcome over time by genotype. A significance level of p≤0.05 was considered statistically significant and Chi-square values are reported wherever necessary. Higher order interactions with region and slice indicators were included in the models to test for group difference by cluster. Scheffe’s method was used to account for multiple testing. GluCEST data from Cohort 1 acquired at 7 months and Cohort 2 at 9 months were combined to gain statistical power. Data from Cohort 2 at 3 months was not acquired, however LMM was chosen for its flexibility in handling missing data.

Student’s two-tailed t-tests were also performed to determine significant differences between group averages at various timepoints, assuming unequal variance. For GluCEST and volume data, a significance level of p≤0.001 was determined after Bonferroni correction for 3 slices, 4 timepoints, and 3 regions. For histology data that was quantified in a single slice, comparisons were made between PS19 mice against WT mice at 3 months; a significance level of p≤0.004 was determined after Bonferroni correction for 3 regions and 4 time-points. A significance level of p≤0.01 was also reported but is not significant in the strictest sense. Additional t-tests were performed among PS19 mice between age-groups for each region, with a significance level of p≤0.025 after Bonferroni correction between two timepoints. Error bars express the standard error of the mean (SEM).

D. Results

D1. Longitudinal glutamate imaging in subregions of the hippocampus

Representative GluCEST maps from the hippocampus of a WT and PS19 mouse are shown at each age in Figure 2. GluCEST contrast is clearly not homogeneous within the hippocampus. Several obvious features can be observed. The caudal slice generally has higher GluCEST asymmetry than the rostral slice. A region of high GluCEST is maintained throughout lifetime in the dorsal hippocampus. The ventral hippocampus has reduced GluCEST contrast and is enlarged in the PS19 mouse compared to WT.

Figure 3 illustrates that a spatial gradient is observed in glutamate levels in the mouse hippocampus. GluCEST values are highest in the most caudal-dorsal regions of the hippocampus, and are lowest in the more rostral-ventral regions. Specifically, the caudal-dorsal (C-D) region has the highest GluCEST value at each age, and the rostral-ventral (R-V) region has the lowest GluCEST value in both WT and PS19 mice.

In comparison between PS19 and WT mice, at 3 months of age the average GluCEST asymmetry is elevated throughout the hippocampus in PS19 mice (insignificant trend, positive values in Figure 3c). In all regions of PS19 mice, GluCEST decreases from 3 to 7 months. In WT mice GluCEST increases in all regions from 3 to 7 months. The combination of these effects produces the earliest and greatest significant difference in GluCEST between WT and PS19 mice at 7 months in the middle-dorsal (M-D) region (30% difference, p≤0.001, starred in Figure 3c). After adjusting for multiple comparisons, the change in GluCEST from ages 3 to 7 months was significantly different by genotype (LMM analysis, Scheffe p-value=0.012).

After 7 months, GluCEST in WT mice progressively diminishes but remains higher than PS19 mice in all regions except the M-D. Rather, at 13 months in the PS19 M-D region, GluCEST is elevated over WT levels (positive value in Figure 3c). Several other dorsal regions of the PS19 hippocampus show increases in GluCEST compared to earlier time-points in the PS19 cohort: the M-D and R-D regions increase from 7 to 9 months and from 9 to 13 months, the C-D and M-I regions increase from 9 to 13 months (Figure 3). LMM analysis confirms that within PS19 mice, there was a significant difference in GluCEST over time by slice and region (Chi-square (df=8) = 68.0, p≤0.001).

In contrast, the ventral and majority of intermediate regions of the PS19 hippocampus progressively decrease from 3 to 13 months. GluCEST in the M-V region of PS19 mice is significantly lower than WT at 9 months (p≤0.001, starred in Figure 3c). By 13 months GluCEST is significantly reduced in all ventral regions of PS19 mice compared to WT, and the C-I region. According to the LMM analysis, there is a significant difference in GluCEST over time by genotype and region adjusting for slice (Chi-square (df=6) = 46.98, p≤0.001), and by genotype and slice adjusting for region (Chi-square (df=6) = 23.87, p≤0.001).

D2. Proportional volume changes in subregions of the hippocampus

Longitudinal volume changes are represented as proportion of the total hippocampus, and subregion results are arranged in a grid (Figure 4) following the scheme of Figure 1vii. The volume of the ventral hippocampus of PS19 mice generally follows that of WT mice until 13 months. The greatest and most significant difference in volume is measured in the M-V region at 13 months (58% higher compared to WT, p≤0.001). The C-V region also occupies a larger volume of the PS19 hippocampus than WT by 13 months (p≤0.001).

Volume of the intermediate PS19 hippocampus decreases throughout lifetime below WT volume. The volume of the C-I and M-I regions reach a significant reduction by 13 months (p≤0.001). Concurrently, the dorsal PS19 hippocampus increases in volume through 9 months. The volume of the C-D region remains elevated over WT at 13 months (p≤0.001). Although volume differences at 13 months are significant, the LMM analysis considers longitudinal volume changes and reports that volume is not significantly different over time by genotype (Chi-square (df=1) = 0, p&gt;0.99), adjusting for region and slice.

D3. Pathological events in PS19 tauopathy

Tau pathology in this cohort of PS19 mice is presented in Supplemental Figure 1 (Figure S1). At 3 months of age, hyper-phosphorylated tau (by AT8 immunostaining) is present in the first layer of the caudal cortex, the entorhinal cortex, and mossy fibers of the CA3 from rostral to caudal (Figure S1a). As PS19 mice age to 6 months, AT8 pathology is present in all layers of the hippocampus, and has infiltrated deeper layers of the cortex, the entorhinal cortex, and amygdala (Figure S1b). By 9 months tau pathology is present throughout the hippocampus, and tissue degeneration is observed in some mice at this age (Figure S1c). Additional affected regions include the thalamus (Figure S1c rostral iii) and frontal cortex (not shown). By 13 months, volume loss is notable with an expanded fourth ventricle throughout the hippocampus (Figure S1d).

The middle section was used for subsequent immunohistochemistry considering that the largest, earliest deficits in GluCEST were measured in the middle hippocampus. The earliest significant difference in synapse density was measured at 6 months in PS19 mice compared to WT mice at 3 months in the CA1 (Figure S2) and CA3 subregions of the hippocampus (p≤0.004, Figure 5d, Table 1a). Synapse density continues to decrease in all subregions of the hippocampus of PS19 mice out to 9 months.

VGlut1, a marker of glutamatergic presynapses, reveals interesting dynamics as PS19 mice age. At 3 months VGlut1 is reduced in all subregions of the PS19 hippocampus compared to WT (Figure S3, Table 1b). By 6 months VGlut1 immunostaining %AOC is higher than 3 and 13 month WT values. In the DG of PS19 mice at 6 months, there is a trend of increased VGlut1 compared to the 3 month PS19 cohort (p=0.02, Figure S3c). By 9 months VGlut1 is again reduced from WT in all subregions (p≤0.01 in CA3, Table 1b). VGlut1 immunostaining is also reduced in WT mice throughout lifetime (Table 1b), though to a lesser extent.

GFAP immunostaining increases with aging in both healthy and tauopathy mice. Figure 6a shows more affected regions in the PS19 brain including the hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus, and cortex compared to WT. By 9 months, GFAP was significantly increased in all subregions of the PS19 hippocampus compared to WT (p≤0.004, Figure 6c, Table 1c).

Immunostaining of glutamate receptor NR1 reveals fewer NR1-positive cells in the PS19 CA1 (Figure S4). This trend was observed in all subregions of 3 month PS19 mice compared to WT (Table 1d). Further reductions were measured by 6 to 9 months in all subregions (p=0.06 compared to WT in the CA1, Table 1d).

E. Discussion

E1. Glutamate gradient measured in vivo by GluCEST MRI

To facilitate interpretation of the cluster analysis segmentation of ROIs in terms of hippocampal subregions, an anatomical model is provided in Figure 1vii. Dorsal ROIs correspond anatomically to the DG and may include contributions from CA1, although they remain more dorsal than CA3. The intermediate ROIs therefore include the CA3. In the caudal slice, the CA1 extends from the dorsal to ventral hippocampus in young mice, and may therefore be represented by the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral ROIs. The ventral ROIs contain subfields of the CA in younger mice, and transition to CSF in older mice as tissue is lost and the ventricle expands. These regions are subject to partial volume effects between adjacent anatomies.

The purpose of displaying GluCEST averages in a grid, along the rostral-caudal and dorsal-ventral axes, is to visualize the gradient in glutamate levels measured here in vivo. Anatomically this could also be interpreted as a glutamate gradient along the septo-temporal axis, also known as the functional “long” axis of the hippocampus (Strange et al., 2014).

Numerous studies have reported gradients along these axes within the hippocampus in terms of gene expression (Fanselow and Dong, 2010; Thompson et al., 2008), connectivity (Risold and Swanson, 1996), electrophysiology (Staresina et al., 2012), and spatial processing functions (Kjelstrup et al., 2008).

Gradients of neuron activation and neurogenesis have also been observed along these axes within the rodent hippocampus. Neurons in the most dorsal hippocampus are highly active even without a stimulating memory task (Snyder et al., 2011). There is also a greater density of newborn neurons in the dorsal DG compared to ventral regions of the DG in young (Snyder et al., 2009) and old rats (Snyder et al., 2011). These findings are consistent with our observation that the highest glutamate levels measured by GluCEST imaging were observed in the dorsal DG from rostral to caudal (Figure 3).

While the discovery of a glutamate gradient is largely confirmatory in this study, we have demonstrated that GluCEST imaging is capable of measuring this gradient in vivo with high spatial resolution and coverage of the entire hippocampus. The GluCEST MRI method may be used as a complimentary technique to a variety of biological measurements in the mouse hippocampus.

E2. Reduced GluCEST and synaptic density are measured before volume loss in the PS19 mouse model of tauopathy

Differences in hippocampal GluCEST levels between WT and PS19 mice occur at each age measured in this study. The earliest and greatest difference in GluCEST between PS19 and WT mice was measured at 7 months of age in the middle-dorsal region (30% reduced from WT, p≤0.001). LMMs report a significant difference in GluCEST over time by genotype (Chi-square (df=3) = 13.37, p=0.0039), however volume is not significantly different over time by genotype (Chi-square (df=1) = 0, p&gt;0.99), adjusting for region and slice. This is likely due to the fact that hippocampal volume loss was not significantly different until 13 months in PS19 mice compared to their WT littermates.

The only other study to date to report volume loss and reduced CEST contrast in a tau mouse model with hippocampal tau tangles uses complimentary techniques to show significant total hippocampal volume loss and significant differences in total hippocampal CEST contrast (Wells et al., 2015). Our findings show that reduced GluCEST occurs not only earlier than volume loss, but also in a different location than volume changes within the subhippocampal fields. A shift in location of GluCEST deficits is observed in Figure 3c, where differences shift from the more dorsal-caudal regions at 7 months to the more ventral-caudal regions by 13 months (red highlight Figure 3c).

In vivo GluCEST results reflect a deficit in glutamate levels which is concurrent with reduced synapse density in the same subregions. Early deficits in GluCEST at 7 months occur throughout the entire middle (p≤0.001) and caudal hippocampus slices. Synapse density was also significantly reduced in the middle hippocampus in PS19 mice at 6 months (p≤0.004 in CA1 and CA3). The caudal CA1 also shows reduced synapse density by 6 months (Figure S2).

This is in contrast to lower GluCEST in the ventral hippocampus of older PS19 mice. By 13 months, the C-V region is filled with CSF which has low glutamate concentration compared to brain tissue. This is a result of hippocampal volume loss and ventricle volume increase. Volume changes in subhippocampal regions normalized by total hippocampal volume should be interpreted as a proportional volume measurement. The steep changes in PS19 volume at 13 months are driven by a large increase in the ventral hippocampus subregion, which proportionally decreases dorsal and intermediate regions such that the majority of the hippocampal space is ventricle by 13 months. Prior to 13 months there is an increasing trend in the volume of the dorsal PS19 hippocampus in all the rostral, middle, and caudal slices. This can be understood as a polarization of glutamate distribution in the hippocampus such that the highest GluCEST values become concentrated in the dorsal hippocampus that appears to grow (see GluCEST maps in Figure 2 from a 13 month PS19 mouse).

E3. Early glutamate elevation may correspond with excitotoxicity

Early signs of tau pathology were observed in both the GluCEST measurement and synaptophysin immunostaining. At 3 months there was a trend of higher glutamate levels in every subregion of the PS19 hippocampus compared to WT (positive difference Figure 3c), which may be relevant in the pathway of excitotoxicity. At this age hyperphosphorylated tau pathology was only present in the CA3 mossy fibers, whereas the trend in synapse density was lower in all subregions analyzed. A potential explanation for this early state of widespread elevated glutamate, which associates with synapse deficits in the absence of phosphorylated tau, could be excitotoxicity. A higher GluCEST signal of 1–2% measured in 3 month old PS19 hippocampus corresponds to an elevation of glutamate by approximately 2–3 mM/L (Cai et al., 2012). This is more than sufficient to induce excitotoxicity (Nicholls and Budd, 1998). Additional experiments are needed to confirm this relationship; however, this finding demonstrates the potential for GluCEST imaging to measure excitotoxicity in vivo.

Throughout the hippocampus, elevated GluCEST levels at 3 months (Figure 3) preceded an increase in VGlut1 levels at 6 months in PS19 mice (Figure S3). Another study found a similar trend of elevated VGlut1 at 5 months in a P301L mouse model by immunoblotting of hippocampus tissue compared to WT mice (Hunsberger et al., 2015). Elevated VGlut1 coincided with decreased expression of GLT-1, a transporter involved in clearing glutamate from the extracellular space (Hunsberger et al., 2015), which may be a response to excitotoxicity. We have also shown a progressive decrease in NR1, an NMDA receptor, which resides on the post-synapse (Figure S4, Table 1d). Direct evidence in cultured cortical neurons shows that reduced expression of NMDA receptors may be protective, in that NMDA receptor activation is required for tau-induced cell death (Amadoro et al., 2006). In a tauopathy mouse model, reduced levels of AMPA receptor GluR1 were found in post-synaptic dendritic spines, where pathologic tau accumulates preferentially over the pre-synapse (Hoover et al., 2010). This occurred at a similar age to VGlut1 dynamics, 4.5 months, before loss of the spine structure itself.

This trend may translate to early stages of clinical neurodegeneration. Elevated presynaptic density via VGlut1 was shown in the mid-frontal gyrus of patients with early stages of mild cognitive impairment (Bell et al., 2007). Early elevations in glutamate represent an important therapeutic window for intervention. GluCEST MRI has the potential to show early dynamics in glutamate levels during neurodegeneration in vivo and would be a useful tool to monitor onset and therapeutic response.

E4. GluCEST as a surrogate marker of combined trends in synaptophysin and GFAP

As WT and PS19 mice age, glutamate levels have complex dynamics in distinct subregions of the hippocampus. We suspect there are both developmental effects and pathologic effects creating these dynamics. An unexpected finding of this study is a ubiquitous increase in hippocampal GluCEST levels in WT mice, measured longitudinally from 3 to 7 months. One process that may elevate glutamate levels during lifetime is proliferation of glial cells. It is known that GFAP immunostaining increases during healthy aging in mice (Kohama et al., 1995), rhesus macaques (Haley et al., 2010), and humans (David et al., 1997).

Tauopathy mice do not exhibit a longitudinal increase in hippocampal glutamate at 7 months likely due to impaired synapse plasticity during development. Tau protein is highly functional during neonatal development, although microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) gene knock out mice have no overt phenotype and develop normally (Denk and Wade-Martins 2009) due to compensation by other MAP proteins. The mouse model used here incorporates transgenic mutant human tau. The primary result is formation of hyperphosphorylated tau (Figure S1), which reduces the number of microtubules and reduces fast axonal transport (Zhang et al., 2012), possibly disrupting development by means of reduced transmission and synapse plasticity. In tau transgenic mice in general, cognitive deficits are not measurable until hyperphosphorylated tau is present (Denk and Wade-Martins 2009). Cognitive deficits are significant in the PS19 mouse model by 6 months (Brunden et al., 2010), the age that mice display significantly lower synapse density and thereafter GluCEST deficits throughout the hippocampus.

Increased GluCEST is observed later at 9 months in the PS19 hippocampus in the dorsal ROIs only, from rostral and middle slices, and further at 13 months in all dorsal ROIs and the M-I region (Figure 3b). These regions correspond to the DG and CA1 from rostral to caudal. This is concurrent with more than 15-fold increase in GFAP immunostaining in each subregion of the PS19 hippocampus at 9 months (Figure 6c). Astrocyte activity may reflect an effort to clear extracellular glutamate to be recycled through the glutamate-glutamine cycle. However, while the neurotransmitter pool of glutamate in the extracellular space can be up to 100 μM during transmission, the metabolic pool of glutamate as an energy source to cells is likely a more significant component of the GluCEST signal. The largest concentration of glutamate occurs in neurons (10–15mM, 7-fold greater than that of other metabolites), and there is a substantial contribution from glial cells (6–10mM) (McKenna et al., 2007).

The GluCEST signal is directly proportional to the amount of total free glutamate in the brain, and may reflect dynamics in neuronal and glial glutamate metabolism. For instance, GluCEST levels in the caudal-ventral hippocampus progressively decrease in PS19 mice (red highlight Figure 3c), associated with greater deficits in synapse density of the CA1 and CA3 by 9 months for both general and glutamatergic synapses (Table 1a–b). There is further evidence that reduced glutamate metabolism in late stage AD pathology is specific to mitochondrial metabolism (Nilsen et al., 2014a), and more specifically mitochondria that reside in neuronal synapses (Volgyi et al., 2015). Therefore, GluCEST imaging appears to be most closely associated with the temporal and spatial trends in synaptophysin and GFAP immunostaining.

E5. Evidence of neuroprotective physiology

Increased glutamate levels in the dorsal hippocampus persisted through late stage pathology so that GluCEST levels in PS19 mice exceeded those in WT mice by 13 months, agreeing with our previous report (Crescenzi et al., 2014). Increased glutamate levels observed in the PS19 hippocampus may be consistent with evidence of neuroprotective physiology, specifically hyperperfusion and hypermetabolism. Evidence of regional hyperperfusion was presented in patients with FTLD and AD using arterial spin-labeling (ASL) MRI (Hu et al., 2010). Another ASL-MRI study in a mouse model of tauopathy measured elevated cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the thalamus, cortex, and hippocampus (Wells et al., 2015). A caveat is that isoflurane increases CBF in the thalamus and cortex of mice, an effect that is resisted by the hippocampus (Zheng et al., 2009). It is possible that isofluorane elevates the absolute GluCEST signal given the involvement of glutamate neurotransmission in the regulation of blood flow. However, both studies appropriately control for these effects by imaging healthy mice that receive the same regimen of anesthesia.

While later stages of AD are characterized by reduced regional glucose metabolism using FDG-PET imaging (Landau et al., 2009; Jagust et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2011), reports of elevated glucose metabolism are measured in the hippocampus specifically (Dai et al., 2009; Alsop et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2010; Li et al., 2008). This is very interesting considering our findings of persistent elevation in GluCEST in the dorsal hippocampus of this tauopathy mouse model, while the ventral-caudal hippocampus is characterized by synapse loss and decreased neuronal glutamate metabolism. It is reasonable that trends in glutamate metabolism would follow those of glucose metabolism, given that glutamate is a metabolic intermediate. Further, a state of elevated glucose metabolism and elevated glutamate metabolism potentially reflects a transient compensatory mechanism in response to synaptic failure. Whether GluCEST imaging as a measure of neuronal and glial glutamate metabolism would correlate with measures of gray matter perfusion or glucose metabolism remains to be investigated. This is an important opportunity for future studies to apply GluCEST imaging as a complimentary marker of brain metabolism, which may be useful as neurogenic therapies are developed (Chadwick et al., 2011; Chohan et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2010).

E6. Considerations for future studies in PS19 mice with tauopathy

Future studies in this mouse model should consider the time course of disease presented here, and the relevant regions of pathologic symptoms. The middle hippocampus slice (centered on Bregma −2.18 mm) was sufficient to show the greatest and earliest significance difference in GluCEST levels. Furthermore 9 months is a sufficient endpoint where pathologic events including the formation of hyperphosphorylated tau, synapse loss, and metabolic dynamics in hippocampal glutamate have already occurred prior to consistent volume loss. A practical limitation of this study is that the histology cohorts are not the same as those imaged, and tissue was obtained retrospectively at a slightly earlier age of 6 months. WT littermate tissue was not available at ages 6 and 9 months, therefore normal aging dynamics in VGlut1 for instance remain unknown in this cohort.

Regarding longitudinal timepoints, the interval between 7 to 9 months marks a shift in location of GluCEST deficits from the dorsal to ventral hippocampus. While dynamics in histopathology markers of synaptophysin, VGlut1, and GFAP were observed in this study at 3 month intervals, a relevant extension of this study would be to measure glutamate and IHC at finer intervals. Several remaining questions could be investigated: what are the intermediate histologic events between synapse loss and volume loss associated with GluCEST dynamics? Is there a breaking point of cellular stress which triggers neuronal death? For instance, calpain I is a calcium-dependent protease whose activity yields reactive oxygen species (McCord 1985). Calpain I was discovered to be a necessary mechanistic link between NMDA-excitotoxicity and pathologic tau degradation leading to cell death (Amadoro et al., 2006). Regarding measured elevations in GluCEST, if GluCEST in young PS19 mice is indeed a measure of excitotoxicity, how is glutamate metabolism affected before neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction? Subsequently, is the increase in dorsal hippocampal glutamate protective? GluCEST imaging could aid in vivo detection of early pathophysiology and the time course of neuronal death or therapeutic rescue.

Investigating questions such as these will require different experimental methods at the tissue level to be paired with GluCEST imaging in order to further validate its molecular basis. While we have presented quantitative imaging and IHC methods, the two measures are not causative. For the purpose of this study, our goal was to associate GluCEST signal changes with an indirect measure of glutamate neurotransmission and metabolism using methods that are translatable to clinical neuropathology, as was called for in the field by Serrano-Pozo et al. 2011. GluCEST MRI remains the only technique able to measure glutamate physiology in an intact system, and is presented here in a mouse model of tauopathy with associated synapse loss and astrogliosis to show its relevance as an imaging biomarker of dementia.

F. Conclusion

In vivo imaging of hippocampal glutamate confirms a gradient in glutamate levels in vivo along the dorsal-ventral and rostral-caudal axes of the mouse hippocampus. This gradient becomes steeper and polarized as tauopathy mice age, compared to normal aging WT mice. GluCEST levels in the hippocampus are decreased in early stages of PS19 tauopathy compared to WT littermates, which is concurrent with synapse loss before structural volume loss. Further, we have presented evidence of GluCEST signal dynamics associated with altered markers of glutamate neurotransmission, both VGlut1 as a pre-synaptic marker and NR1 as a post-synaptic marker. Subsequent elevations in GluCEST occurred in the dorsal hippocampus and were associated with a concurrent proliferation of glial cells marked by GFAP. Together, these results support GluCEST MRI as a valuable preclinical biomarker of histopathologic events in tauopathy, specifically the combined trends in synapse density and glial cell proliferation, which can be applied in vivo and analyzed in subhippocampal regions.

Supplementary Material

Supp info

We would like to thank Drs. W. Liu and S. Pickup for their technical assistance with this research from the Small Animal Imaging Facility (SAIF). Additionally we thank the histology core of the Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research (CNDR).

H. Funding

This work was supported by grants from NIBIB (P41EB015893S1), NIA (P01AG17586), and NINDS (R01NS087516). The project described was supported by the National Center for Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, through grant UL1TR000003. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.

Figure 1 Image acquisition and segmentation pipeline

i. Anatomical T2-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) acquired from a live mouse brain. The example images shown here are from a 3 month old PS19 mouse. Slice positions were chosen relative to the lambda marker (yellow) identified on the sagittal scout image. The three slices (1mm thick each) span the hippocampus from rostral to caudal.

GluCEST asymmetry maps represent glutamate levels in vivo with high spatial resolution (156 μm2 inplane).

Gray matter regions such as the thalamus have higher glutamate levels, compared to white matter regions like the corpus callosum where glutamate levels are low.

iii. Hippocampus proper segmented from the T2-weighted MRI and applied to GluCEST maps represents the hippocampus region of interest (ROI).

iv. Histogram of GluCEST values in an example slice of the hippocampus. The k-means clustering algorithm segments three “clusters” or subregions within the hippocampus based on high, medium, and low GluCEST values.

v. The three clusters are anatomically correlated to the dorsal (D, red), intermediate (I, green), and ventral (V, blue) hippocampus. The cluster mask displays the final subhippocampal ROIs.

vi. Three corresponding slices of the hippocampus from the Allen Brain Atlas (Johnson et. al., 2010).

Hippocampal sub-regions of interest are outlined: dentate gyurs (DG), cornu ammonus (CA1, and CA3), and the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). Each region is colored to indicate their approximate cluster position.

vii. An approximate anatomical model of the subhippocampal ROIs which contribute to each cluster (dorsal, intermediate, ventral) in each slice (rostral, middle, caudal). In younger mice the CA1 extends through the caudal-ventral hippocampus, which later becomes CSF as mice age (arrow).

Figure 2 Example longitudinal GluCEST maps in multiple slices of the hippocampus

Representative GluCEST maps in the hippocampus are shown here from a PS19 mouse and a healthy WT mouse as they age from 3 to 13 months. At 9 months maps are shown from different mice due to the fact that only Cohort 2 was imaged at this timepoint. All three slices are from the same mice

Figure 3 Glutamate gradient in the hippocampus measured in vivo by GluCEST MRI

a–b) Group average GluCEST asymmetry (average CEST %) values from subhippocampal ROIs arranged on an anatomical grid. A gradient in glutamate levels is observed along the rostral-caudal and dorsal-ventral axes of the hippocampus. In WT mice there is a ubiquitous increase in GluCEST levels as mice age to 7 months; glutamate levels decline back to baseline by 13 months. PS19 mice have progressively decreased GluCEST throughout lifetime in most regions. An increase in GluCEST is measured among the dorsal regions of PS19 mice from 9 to 13 months. c) The differences in GluCEST asymmetry (WT values subtracted from PS19 values) were compared for each cluster using a Student’s t-test. A (+) indicates higher GluCEST in PS19 mice compared to WT. Red highlight (&gt;5 CEST % or significant difference *p&lt;0.001) is added to visually show the shift in GluCEST differences from the dorsal-caudal hippocampus in early stages of PS19 tauopathy, to the ventral-caudal hippocampus in later stages as tissue is lost.

Figure 4 Longitudinal volume changes in subregions of the hippocampus

The volume of each subhippocampal ROI normalized with the total volume of the hippocampus. Graphs are arranged according to their anatomical position (see Figure 1vii). Significant differences are measured in the more caudal-ventral regions by 13 months. Significance is reported between WT and PS19 group averages at each age using the Student’s t-test. *p≤0.001.

Figure 5 Synaptophysin immunostaining and quantification of presynapse density

a) An example section through the hippocampus at approximately Bregma −2.05 mm, corresponding to the mid-slice which was imaged. The black box outlines the region shown in part (c). b) Regions of interest including the dentate gyrus (DG), CA1, and CA3 were segmented from 10x images, and percent area occupied (%AOC) was quantified. c) Representative immunostaining in the CA3 of PS19 and WT mice at various ages. d) Group average synaptophysin %AOC in the CA3 is significantly lower in PS19 mice at 6 and 9 months compared to the WT cohort at 3 months (*p≤0.004). The same trend occurs in the CA1 (p≤0.004) and DG (p≤0.01, see Table 1a).

Figure 6 GFAP immunostaining and quantification in the DG

a) GFAP contrast in a PS19 mouse at 9 months compared to a healthy-aging WT mouse at 13 months. b) Representative immunostaining in the DG of PS19 and WT mice at various ages. All images are shown at 20x magnification. c) Group average GFAP %AOC in the DG sub-region is significantly increased at 9 months in PS19 mice compared to WT at 3 months (*p≤0.004). Aged WT mice at 13 months also show significantly elevated GFAP levels (*p≤0.004), though to a lesser degree. A significant trend was measured in all subregions (p≤0.004, see Table 1c).

Table 1 Quantification of IHC for various antibodies in each sub-region of the hippocampus

Group average %AOC ± standard error of the mean are reported. Student’s t-tests were performed for each region and time-point against the WT 3 month (mo) cohort. Significance after Bonferonni correction for comparisons of 3 regions and 4 time-points is ** p&lt;0.004, and for comparisons of 4 time-points for one region is * p&lt;0.01.

		WT	PS19	
		3 mo	13 mo	3 mo	6 mo	9 mo	
a) Syn	#N	4	8	4	6	6	
DG	69.9 ± 0.9	69.7 ± 1.5	67.5 ± 1.9	64.3 ± 1.5 *	58.1 ± 3.3 *	
CA1	65.5 ± 0.1	63.2 ± 2.9	63.0 ± 1.9	61.6 ± 0.8 **	53.0 ± 2.6 **	
CA3	70.6 ± 1.3	65.6 ± 1.7	67.3 ± 1.4	63.0 ± 1.1 **	47.9 ± 2.7 **	
	
b) VGlut1	#N	4	6	4	5	6	
DG	76.2 ± 1.4	71.2 ± 3.7	66.0 ± 3.1	77.9 ± 1.8 ‡	64.9 ± 3.5	
CA1	71.0 ± 1.6	66.8 ± 3.3	65.1 ± 6.6	74.4 ± 1.4	62.7 ± 3.1	
CA3	77.1 ± 0.8	70.9 ± 3.2	72.5 ± 4.4	78.5 ± 1.3	57.1 ± 5.4 *	
	
c) GFAP	#N	4	7	4	5	6	
DG	5.4 ± 1.1	25.5 ± 3.2 **	4.6 ± 1.2	4.3 ± 1.5	79.5 ± 6.6 **	
CA1	3.4 ± 0.7	20.5 ± 3.8 **	2.5 ± 0.3	3.3 ± 1.1	61.2 ± 11.0 **	
CA3	2.6 ± 0.8	14.0 ± 3.0 *	1.9 ± 0.3	2.4 ± 1.0	64.7 ± 7.5 **	
	
d) NR1	#N	4	5	4	5	¥	
DG	0.33 ± 0.16	0.59 ± 0.38	0.18 ± 0.09	0.11 ± 0.04		
CA1	0.44 ± 0.16	0.45 ± 0.19	0.15 ± 0.08	0.08 ± 0.03		
CA3	0.73 ± 0.33	0.76 ± 0.30	0.27 ± 0.11	0.15 ± 0.04		
# N: number of mice included in each group average.

¥ NR1 group average at 6 mo includes N=4 PS19 6 mo and N=1 PS19 9 mo

* p≤0.01;

** p≤0.004 compared with WT at 3 mo

‡ p=0.02 compared with PS19 at 3 mo

I. Disclosure Statement for Authors

The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.


J. References

Adler DH Pluta J Kadivar S Craige C Gee JC Avants BB Yushkevich Pa 2014 Histology-derived volumetric annotation of the human hippocampal subfields in postmortem MRI Neuroimage 84 505 523 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.067 24036353
Alsop DC Casement M de Bazelaire C Fong T Press DZ 2008 Hippocampal hyperperfusion in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 42 1267 1274 18602481
Amadoro G Ciotti MT Costanzi M Cestari V Calissano P Canu N 2006 NMDA receptor mediates tau-induced neurotoxicity by calpain and ERK/MAPK activation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 2892 2897 10.1073/pnas.0511065103 16477009
Aronica E Dickson DW Kress Y Morrison JH Zukin RS 1997 Non-plaque dystrophic dendrites in Alzheimer hippocampus: A new pathological structure revealed by glutamate receptor immunocytochemistry Neuroscience 82 979 991 10.1016/S0306-4522(97)00260-1
Bell KFS Bennett Da Cuello aC 2007 Paradoxical upregulation of glutamatergic presynaptic boutons during mild cognitive impairment J Neurosci 27 10810 10817 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3269-07.2007 17913914
Bellocchio EE 2000 Uptake of Glutamate into Synaptic Vesicles by an Inorganic Phosphate Transporter Science 289 957 960 10.1126/science.289.5481.957 10938000
Benjamin AM Quastel JH 1975 Metabolism of amino acids and ammonia in rat brain cortex slices in vitro: a possible role of ammonia in brain function J Neurochem 25 197 206 10.1111/j.1471-4159.1975.tb06953.x 1159417
Boekhoorn K Terwel D Biemans B Borghgraef P Wiegert O Ramakers GJA de Vos K Krugers H Tomiyama T Mori H Joels M van Leuven F Lucassen PJ 2006 Improved long-term potentiation and memory in young tau-P301L transgenic mice before onset of hyperphosphorylation and tauopathy J Neurosci 26 3514 23 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5425-05.2006 16571759
Brunden K Zhang B Carroll J 2010 Epothilone D improves microtubule density, axonal integrity, and cognition in a transgenic mouse model of tauopathy J Neurosci 30 13861 6 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3059-10.2010 20943926
Cai K Haris M Singh A Kogan F Greenberg JH Hariharan H Detre Ja Reddy R 2012 Magnetic resonance imaging of glutamate Nat Med 18 302 6 10.1038/nm.2615 22270722
Chadwick W Mitchell N Caroll J Zhou Y Park SS Wang L Becker KG Zhang Y Lehrmann E Wood WH Martin B Maudsley S 2011 Amitriptyline-mediated cognitive enhancement in aged 3xTg Alzheimer’s disease mice is associated with neurogenesis and neurotrophic activity PLoS One 6 10.1371/journal.pone.0021660
Chen Y Wolk DA Reddin JS 2011 Voxel-level comparison of arterial spinlabeled perfusion MRI and FDG-PET in Alzheimer disease Neurology 77 1977 1985 22094481
Chohan MO Li B Blanchard J Tung YC Heaney AT Rabe A Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I 2011 Enhancement of dentate gyrus neurogenesis, dendritic and synaptic plasticity and memory by a neurotrophic peptide Neurobiol Aging 32 1420 1434 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.08.008 19767127
Chong S-A Benilova I Shaban H De Strooper B Devijver H Moechars D Eberle W Bartic C Van Leuven F Callewaert G 2011 Synaptic dysfunction in hippocampus of transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease: a multi-electrode array study Neurobiol Dis 44 284 91 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.07.006 21807097
Clare R King VG Wirenfeldt M Vinters HV 2011 NIH Public Access 88 2083 2090 10.1002/jnr.22392.Synapse
Crescenzi R DeBrosse C Nanga RPR Reddy S Haris M Hariharan H Iba M Lee VMY Detre Ja Borthakur A Reddy R 2014 In vivo measurement of glutamate loss is associated with synapse loss in a mouse model of tauopathy Neuroimage 101 185 92 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.06.067 25003815
Dai W Lopez OL Carmichael OT Becker JT Kuller LH Gach HM 2009 Mild cognitive impairment and alzheimer disease: patterns of altered cerebral blood flow at MR imaging Radiology 250 856 866 19164119
David JP Ghozali F Fallet-Bianco C Wattez a Delaine S Boniface B Di Menza C Delacourte a 1997 Glial reaction in the hippocampal formation is highly correlated with aging in human brain Neurosci Lett 235 53 56 9389594
DeKosky ST Scheff SW 1990 Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in Alzheimer’s disease: correlation with cognitive severity Ann Neurol 27 457 464 10.1002/ana.410270502 2360787
Denk F Wade-Martins R 2009 Knock-out and transgenic mouse models of tauopathies Neurobiology of aging 30 1 13 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.05.010 17590238
Dewar D Chalmers DT Graham DI McCulloch J 1991 Glutamate metabotropic and AMPA binding sites are reduced in Alzheimer’s disease: An autoradiographic study of the hippocampus Brain Res 553 58 64 10.1016/0006-8993(91)90230-S 1933277
Dong H-W Swanson LW Chen L Fanselow MS Toga AW 2009 Genomic-anatomic evidence for distinct functional domains in hippocampal field CA1 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 11794 11799 10.1073/pnas.0812608106 19561297
Donovan MH Yazdani U Norris RD Games D German DC Eisch AJ 2006 Decreased adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the PDAPP mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Comparative Neurology 495 70 83 10.1002/cne.20840
Dolphin AC Errington ML Bliss TVP 1982 Long-term Potentiation of the Perforant Path In Vivo is Associated with Increased Glutamate Release Nature 297 496 498 10.1038/297496a0 6123949
Fanselow MS Dong HW 2010 Are the dorsal and ventral hippocampus functionally distinct structures? Neuron 65 7 19 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.11.031 20152109
Gong Y Lippa CF 2010 Review: disruption of the postsynaptic density in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative dementias Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 25 547 555 10.1177/1533317510382893 20858652
Greenamyre J Young A 1989 Excitatory amino acids and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 10 593 602 2554168
Haley GE Kohama SG Urbanski HF Raber J 2010 Age-related decreases in SYN levels associated with increases in MAP-2, apoE, and GFAP levels in the rhesus macaque prefrontal cortex and hippocampus Age (Omaha) 32 283 296 10.1007/s11357-010-9137-9
Haris M Nath K Cai K Singh A Crescenzi R Kogan F Verma G Reddy S Hariharan H Melhem ER Reddy R 2013 Imaging of glutamate neurotransmitter alterations in Alzheimer’s disease NMR Biomed 26 386 91 10.1002/nbm.2875 23045158
Hertz L Dringen R Schousboe A Robinson SR 1999 Mini-Review Astrocytes: Glutamate Producers for Neurons 428 417 428
Hochgräfe K Sydow A Mandelkow E-M 2013 Regulatable transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer disease: onset, reversibility and spreading of Tau pathology FEBS J 280 4371 81 10.1111/febs.12250 23517246
Hoover BR Reed MN Su J Penrod RD Kotilinek La Grant MK Pitstick R Carlson Ga Lanier LM Yuan LL Ashe KH Liao D 2010 Tau Mislocalization to Dendritic Spines Mediates Synaptic Dysfunction Independently of Neurodegeneration Neuron 68 1067 1081 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.030 21172610
Hoover BR Reed MN Su J Penrod RD Linda A Grant MK Pitstick R Carlson GA Lanier LM 2011 NIH Public Access 68 1067 1081 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.030.Tau
Hu WT Wang Z Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Detre JA Grossman M 2010 Distinct cerebral perfusion patterns in FTLD and AD Neurology 75 881 888 20819999
Hunsberger HC Rudy CC Batten SR Gerhardt Ga Reed MN 2015 P301L tau expression affects glutamate release and clearance in the hippocampal trisynaptic pathway J Neurochem 132 169 182 10.1111/jnc.12967 25319522
Jacob CP Koutsilieri E Bartl J Neuen-Jacob E Arzberger T Zander N Ravid R Roggendorf W Riederer P Grünblatt E 2007 Alterations in expression of glutamatergic transporters and receptors in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 11 97 116 17361039
Jagust WJ Landau SM Shaw LM 2009 Relationships between biomarkers in aging and dementia Neurology 73 1193 1199 19822868
Jansen KLR Faull RLM Dragunow M Synek BL 1990 Alzheimer’s disease: changes in hippocampal A’-methyl-D-asparate, quisqualate, neurotensin, adenosine, benzodiazepine, serotonin and opioid receptors—an autoradiographic study Neuroscience 39 613 627 1965859
Johnson GA Badea A Brandenburg J Cofer G Fubara B Liu S Nissanov J 2010 Waxholm space: an image-based reference for coordinating mouse brain research Neuroimage 53 365 72 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.067 20600960
Kashani A Lepicard È Poirel O Videau C David JP Fallet-Bianco C Simon A Delacourte A Giros B Epelbaum J Betancur C El Mestikawy S 2008 Loss of VGLUT1 and VGLUT2 in the prefrontal cortex is correlated with cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease Neurobiol Aging 29 1619 1630 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.04.010 17531353
Kirvell SL Esiri M Francis PT 2006 Down-regulation of vesicular glutamate transporters precedes cell loss and pathology in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 98 939 950 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.03935.x 16893425
Kjelstrup KB Solstad T Brun VH Hafting T Witter MP Moser EI Moser M Kjelstrup KB Solstad T Brun VH Hafting T 2008 Finite Scale of Spatial Representation in the Hippocampus Science (80-) 321 140 143
Kohama SG Goss JR Finch CE McNeill TH 1995 Increases of glial fibrillary acidic protein in the aging female mouse brain Neurobiol Aging 16 59 67 7723937
Lakis N Corona RJ Toshkezi G Chin LS 2013 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy - neuropathology in athletes and war veterans Neurol Res 35 290 9 10.1179/1743132813Y.0000000177 23485056
Landau SM Harvey D Madison CM 2009 Associations between cognitive, functional, and FDGPET measures of decline in AD and MCI Neurobiol Aging 32 1207 1218 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.07.002 19660834
Lee VMY Goedert M Trojanowski JQ 2001 Neurodegenerative tauopathies Annu Rev Neurosci 24 1121 1159 11520930
Leung KK Malone IM Ourselin S Gunter JL Bernstein Ma Thompson PM Jack CR Weiner MW Fox NC 2015 Effects of changing from non-accelerated to accelerated MRI for follow-up in brain atrophy measurement Neuroimage 107 46 53 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.049 25481794
Li Y Rinne J Mosconi L 2008 Regional analysis of FDG and PIB-PET images in normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease European J of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging 35 2169 81 10.1007/s00259-008-0833-y
Lynch MA Introduction I Erk B Potentiation L Age D Cognition E Potentiation L 2004 Long-Term Potentiation and Memory 87 136
Martens U Capito B Wree A 1998 Septotemporal distribution of [3H]MK-801, [3H]AMPA and [3H]Kainate binding sites in the rat hippocampus Anat Embryol 198 195 204 10.1007/s004290050177 9764974
Maurin H Chong SA Kraev I Davies H Kremer A Seymour CM Lechat B Jaworski T Borghgraef P Devijver H Callewaert G Stewart MG Van Leuven F 2014 Early structural and functional defects in synapses and myelinated axons in stratum lacunosum moleculare in two preclinical models for tauopathy PLoS One 9 e87605 10.1371/journal.pone.0087605 24498342
McKee AC Cantu RC Nowinski CJ Hedley-Whyte ET Gavett BE Budson AE Santini VE Lee H-S Kubilus CA Stern RA 2009 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in athletes: progressive tauopathy after repetitive head injury J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 709 35 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181a9d503 19535999
McKenna MC 2007 The Glutamate-Glutamine Cycle Is Not Stoichiometric: Fates of Glutamate in Brain Journal of Neuroscience Research 85 3347 3358 17847118
Mu Y Gage FH 2011 Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and its role in Alzheimer’s disease Molecular Neurodegeneration 6 85 22192775
Nicholls DG Budd SL 1998 Mitochondria and neuronal glutamate excitotoxicity Biochim Biophys Acta - Bioenerg 1366 97 112 10.1016/S0005-2728(98)00123-6
Nicoll Ra Schmitz D 2005 Synaptic plasticity at hippocampal mossy fibre synapses Nat Rev Neurosci 6 863 876 10.1038/nrn1786 16261180
Nilsen L Witter M Sonnewald U 2014 Neuronal and astrocytic metabolism in a transgenic rat model of Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 34 906 914 24594625
Nilsen L Witter M Sonnewald U 2014 Early Differences in Dorsal Hippocampal Metabolite Levels in Males But Not Females in a Transgenic Rat Model of Alzheimer’s Disease Neurochemical Research M 305 312 10.1007/s11064-013-1222-x 24338370
Pandis C Sotiriou E Kouvaras E Asprodini E Papatheodoropoulos C Angelatou F 2006 Differential expression of NMDA and AMPA receptor subunits in rat dorsal and ventral hippocampus Neuroscience 140 163 175 16542781
Pennanen L Wolfer DP Nitsch RM Götz J 2006 Impaired spatial reference memory and increased exploratory behavior in P301L tau transgenic mice Genes, Brain Behav 5 369 379 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2005.00165.x 16879631
Penney JB Maragos WF Greenamyre JT Debowey DL Hollingsworth Z Young aB 1990 Excitatory amino acid binding sites in the hippocampal region of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 53 314 320 2160518
Risold PY Swanson LW 1996 Structural evidence for functional domains in the rat hippocampus Science 272 1484 1486 10.1126/science.272.5267.1484 8633241
Robinson JL Molina-Porcel L Corrada MM Raible K Lee EB Lee VMY Kawas CH Trojanowski JQ 2014 Perforant path synaptic loss correlates with cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease in the oldest-old Brain 137 2578 87 10.1093/brain/awu190 25012223
Rocher AB Crimins JL Amatrudo JM Kinson MS Todd-Brown MA Lewis J Luebke JI 2010 Structural and functional changes in tau mutant mice neurons are not linked to the presence of NFTs Exp Neurol 223 385 93 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.07.029 19665462
Sasaki K Shimura H Itaya M Tanaka R Mori H Mizuno Y Kosik KS Tanaka S Hattori N 2009 Excitatory amino acid transporter 2 associates with phosphorylated tau and is localized in neurofibrillary tangles of tauopathic brains FEBS Lett 583 2194 200 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.06.015 19527721
Schousboe A 1981 Transport and metabolism of glutamate and GABA in nerons and glial cells International review of neurobiology 22 1 45 6115823
Selkoe DJ 2002 Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure Science 298 789 91 10.1126/science.1074069 12399581
Snyder JS Radik R Wojtowicz JM Cameron Ha 2009 Anatomical gradients of adult neurogenesis and activity: Young neurons in the ventral dentate gyrus are activated by water maze training Hippocampus 19 360 370 10.1002/hipo.20525 19004012
Snyder JS Ramchand P Rabbett S Radik R Wojtowicz JM Cameron Ha 2011 Septo-temporal gradients of neurogenesis and activity in 13-month-old rats Neurobiol Aging 32 1149 56 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.05.022 19632743
Staresina BP Fell J Do Lam ATa Axmacher N Henson RN 2012 Memory signals are temporally dissociated in and across human hippocampus and perirhinal cortex Nat Neurosci 15 1167 1173 10.1038/nn.3154 22751037
Strange Ba Witter MP Lein ES Moser EI 2014 Functional organization of the hippocampal longitudinal axis Nat Rev Neurosci 15 655 669 10.1038/nrn3785 25234264
Sydow A Van der Jeugd A Zheng F Ahmed T Balschun D Petrova O Drexler D Zhou L Rune G Mandelkow E D’Hooge R Alzheimer C Mandelkow E-M 2011 Reversibility of Tau-related cognitive defects in a regulatable FTD mouse model J Mol Neurosci 45 432 7 10.1007/s12031-011-9604-5 21822709
Terry RD Masliah E Salmon DP Butters N DeTeresa R Hill R Hansen LA Katzman R 1991 Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment Ann Neurol 30 572 80 10.1002/ana.410300410 1789684
Thibodeau M Chertkow H Léger G 2009 An Evolution of the Diagnostic Criteria for Tauopathies The Canadian Review of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias 4 8.1
Thompson CL Pathak SD Jeromin A Ng LL MacPherson CR Mortrud MT Cusick A Riley ZL Sunkin SM Bernard A Puchalski RB Gage FH Jones AR Bajic VB Hawrylycz MJ Lein ES 2008 Genomic Anatomy of the Hippocampus Neuron 60 1010 1021 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.008 19109908
Van der Jeugd A Hochgräfe K Ahmed T Decker JM Sydow A Hofmann A Wu D Messing L Balschun D D’Hooge R Mandelkow E-M 2012 Cognitive defects are reversible in inducible mice expressing pro-aggregant full-length human Tau Acta Neuropathol 123 787 805 10.1007/s00401-012-0987-3 22532069
Vemuri P Whitwell JL Kantarci K Josephs KA Parisi JE Shiung MS Knopman DS Boeve BF Petersen RC Dickson DW Jack CR 2008 Antemortem MRI based STructural Abnormality iNDex (STAND)-scores correlate with postmortem Braak neurofibrillary tangle stage Neuroimage 42 559 567 ST – Antemortem MRI based STructural Abno 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.012 18572417
Volgyi K Juhasz G Kovacs Z Penke B 2015 Dysfunction of Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) and Mitochondria (MT) in Alzheimer’s Disease: The Role of the ER-MT Cross-Talk Curr Alzheimer Research 12 655 672
Wang M Singh C Liu L Irwin RW Chen S Chung EJ Thompson RF Ming J Singh C Liu L Irwin RW Chen S Ji E 2010 Correction for Wang et al Allopregnanolone reverses neurogenic and cognitive deficits in mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease 107 11145 10.1073/pnas.1006236107
Wells JA O’Callaghan JM Holmes HE Powell NM Johnson RA Siow B Torrealdea F Ismail O Walker-Samuel S Golay X Rega M Richardson S Modat M Cardoso MJ Ourselin S Schwarz AJ Ahmed Z Murray TK O’Neill MJ Collins EC Colgan N Lythgoe MF 2015 In vivo imaging of tau pathology using multi-parametric quantitative MRI Neuroimage 111 369 378 25700953
Westergaard N Sonnewald U Schousboe A 1995 Metabolic Trafficking between Neurons and Astrocytes: The Glutamate/Glutamine Cycle Revisited Dev Neurosci 17 203 211 10.1159/000111288 8575339
Wolk DA Detre JA 2012 Arterial spin labeling MRI: an emerging biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative conditions Curr Opin Neurol 25 421 8 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328354ff0a 22610458
Yasuda RP Ikonomovic MD Sheffield R Rubin RT Wolfe BB Armstrong DM 1995 Reduction of AMPA-selective glutamate receptor subunits in the entorhinal cortex of patients with Alzheimer’s disease pathology: a biochemical study Brain Res 678 161 167 10.1016/0006-8993(95)00178-S 7542540
Yoshiyama Y Higuchi M Zhang B Huang SM Iwata N Saido TC Maeda J Suhara T Trojanowski JQ Lee VMY 2007 Synapse loss and microglial activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy mouse model Neuron 53 337 351 ST – Synapse loss and microglial activati 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.010 17270732
Zhang B Carroll J Trojanowski J Yao Y Iba M Potuzak JS Hogan a-ML 2012 The Microtubule-Stabilizing Agent, Epothilone D, Reduces Axonal Dysfunction, Neurotoxicity, Cognitive Deficits, and Alzheimer-Like Pathology in an Interventional Study with Aged Tau Transgenic Mice J of Neuroscience 32 3601 3611 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4922-11.2012 22423084
Zheng B Lee PTH Golay X High-sensitivity cerebral perfusion mapping in mice by kbGRASE-FAIR at 9.4T NMR Biomedicine 23 1061 1070 10.1002/nbm.1533
