LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9216781
2602
Brain Pathol
Brain Pathol.
Brain pathology (Zurich, Switzerland)
1015-6305
1750-3639

28805003
5578412
10.1111/bpa.12536
NIHMS896881
Article
Protein astrogliopathies (PAG) in human neurodegenerative diseases and aging
Kovacs Gabor G. MD PhD 1
Lee Virginia M. PhD 2
Trojanowski John Q. MD PhD 2
1 Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2 Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Institute on Aging and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine of the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PA, USA
Address correspondence to: Gabor G. Kovacs MD PhD, Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, AKH 4J, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1097 Vienna, Austria; gabor.kovacs@meduniwien.ac.at
10 8 2017
9 2017
01 9 2018
27 5 675690
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by progressive dysfunction and loss of neurons associated with depositions of pathologically altered proteins showing hierarchical involvement of brain regions. The role of astrocytes in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases is explored as contributors to neuronal degeneration or neuroprotection pathways, and also as potential mediators of the transcellular spreading of disease-associated proteins. Protein astrogliopathy (PAG), including deposition of amyloid-β, prion protein, tau, α-synuclein, and very rarely transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is not unprecedented or unusual in neurodegenerative diseases. Morphological characterization of PAG is considered, however, only for the neuropathological diagnosis and classification of tauopathies. Astrocytic tau pathology is seen in primary frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) associated with tau pathologies (FTLD-Tau), but also in the form of aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG). Importantly, ARTAG shares common features with primary FTLD-Tau as well as with the astroglial tau pathologies that are thought to be hallmarks of a brain injury related tauopathy known as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). Supported by experimental observations, the morphological variability of PAG might reflect distinct pathogenic involvement of different astrocytic populations. PAG might indicate astrocytic contribution to spreading or clearance of disease-associated proteins, however, this might lead to astrocytic dysfunction and eventually contribute to the degeneration of neurons. Here we review recent advances in understanding ARTAG and other related forms of PAG.

A-beta
ARTAG
alpha-synuclein
astrocyte
neurodegeneration
Protein astrogliopathy
PAG
prion
prion protein
tau
TDP-43

Introduction: astrocytes and neurodegeneration

Neurodegenerative diseases (NDD) comprise disorders thought to affect predominantly neurons. Based on the anatomical distribution of malfunctioning and dying neurons, the clinical symptomatology and prognosis varies considerably. In contrast to neurons, astrocytes, as well as oligodendrocytes, have been long considered as side players or bystanders in the pathogenesis of NDD. Recent studies, however, highlighted an underestimated spectrum of astrocytic functions (130, 150, 165) that might be considered as contributory to the development of neuronal dysfunction and degeneration thereby implicating astroglial responses in mechanisms of diverse NDD and brain ageing (34).

In addition to the loss of neurons in NDD, most NDD are characterized by the presence of inclusions, such as Lewy bodies, neurofibrillary tangles, or Pick bodies, that have been detected in neurons in neurodegenerative conditions more than a century ago. The introduction of silver staining methods showing positivity for example of neurofibrillary tangles and Pick bodies (4) indicated that these bodies include components with altered physicochemical properties. Indeed, the finding that altered proteins are central in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative conditions lead to the introduction of immunohistochemical (IHC) methods applying specific antibodies against different modifications of proteins, complemented by ultrastructural examinations and biochemistry. These revealed an unexpected plethora of various intra- and extracellular protein depositions. Argyrophilic inclusions have been described in glial cells as well: first in oligodendroglia as glial cytoplasmic inclusions morphologically unifying different clinical forms of multiple system atrophy (MSA) (129) followed soon by the elucidation of astroglial inclusions (5) such as tufted astrocytes (48, 126, 172), thorn-shaped astrocytes (56, 126) and astrocytic plaques (32, 107). However, in contrast to the oligodendroglial Papp-Lantos bodies in multiple system atrophy (MSA), the recognition of argyrophilic inclusions in astrocytes was inspired first by tau IHC observations.

The next highly significant milestone for NDD research was the introduction of the concept of cell-to-cell spreading of pathological disease proteins; this has been discussed mostly for neurons leading to hierarchical involvement of anatomical regions in the human brain (18, 45, 62). However, it has been recognized that astrocytes also appear early in the pathogenesis and might also internalize different pathological disease proteins (41, 71, 78, 90, 96). Therefore, the role of astrocytes is now explored not only as players in neuronal degeneration or neuroprotection pathways, but also as potential participants in the transcellular spreading of disease-associated proteins. In the present review we summarize the spectrum of protein depositions in astrocytes, termed here protein astrogliopathy (PAG), in various neurodegenerative conditions and aging.

The relevance of PAG for the classification of neurodegenerative diseases

Classification of NDD includes three levels: i) clinical: reflecting the anatomical involvement of the disease process; ii) protein-based: indicating that specific disease proteins with various physiological functions show conformational change and biochemical modifications related to distinct groups of NDD; and iii) cellular and subcellular pathology: implying that pathological disease protein deposits involve neurons or glial cells, furthermore, which of their subcellular compartment, or whether these are found extracellularly (69). NDD are more frequently associated with ageing. Various gene alterations with distinct protein products are associated with rare disease forms; however, the most frequent NDD of the adult or ageing brain involve six proteins: amyloid-β (Aβ), prion protein (PrP), microtubule-associated protein tau, α-synuclein (α-syn), transactive response (TAR) DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), and FET proteins, which include the fused in sarcoma (FUS), Ewing’s sarcoma RNA-binding protein 1 (EWSR1), and TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15) (69).

For the molecular pathologic classification (i.e., protein and cellular distribution) mostly morphological criteria are used, although genetic abnormalities and biochemical modifications also are considered in the assessment of NDD (69). Alzheimer disease (AD) is characterized by extracellular Aβ deposits known as amyloid plaques and intracellular tau aggregates known as neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). The distribution of NFTs shows stages in the progressive accumulation of this tau pathology, which also include plaque associated tau positive neurites and neuropil threads distributed diffusely in the grey matter neuropil (15), while the distribution of different morphologies of parenchymal Aβ deposits are defined as occurring in progressive phases stereotypically involving ever wider regions of cortex followed by deep grey structures, brainstem and eventually cerebellum in the most advanced stages of AD (159). Intracellular Aβ deposits, including those in astrocytes, are discussed but not included in the neuropathological classification of AD, and the significance of these intracellular species of Aβ are uncertain (30). Classification of prion diseases is based on the etiology and molecular subtyping; the latter includes a gene polymorphism (codon 129 of the prion protein gene) and biochemical examination of the size of the proteinase kinase (PK)-resistant core of the abnormal prion protein (PrP); IHC demonstrates mostly extracellular deposits and astrocytes are not considered in the classification (72). Tauopathies are distinguished based on the cellular distribution of tau pathology, exemplified by Pick`s disease (PiD) and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT)-dementia or primary age-related tauopathy (PART), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), and globular glial tauopathies (GGT), showing variable involvement of neurons and glial cells (68). Indeed, the morphology of astrocytic pathology is crucial to distinguish PSP and CBD (68), furthermore, its importance is highlighted in aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) (73). Neuropathological classification conforms with different bands and isoforms demonstrated in Western blots of insoluble tau (92). α-Synuclein pathology characterizes dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson disease (PD) and MSA. DLB and PD are distinguished upon clinical symptoms and show predominance of intraneuronal cytoplasmic and neuritic deposits (cortical and brainstem type Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites) showing stages or different anatomical patterns (11, 16, 111). MSA is dominated by oligodendroglial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) (162). All forms show various morphologies of astrocytic α-syn deposition, however, considered as irrelevant for disease-classification (69). TDP-43 is a major component of the ubiquitin-positive inclusions that characterize amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and a common form of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) (124). The spectrum of TDP-43 immunoreactive structures includes neuronal cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions, dystrophic neurites, and oligodendroglial cytoplasmic inclusions (86); therefore, astrocytic TDP-43 protein is not included in classification systems (102–104). This is true for FUS (FET)-proteinopathies, including basophilic inclusion body disease, atypical FTLD-U, and neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID), where mostly neuronal and less frequently oligodendroglial inclusions are detected (116, 120, 122, 123).

In summary, astrocytic protein pathology is not unprecedented or unusual in NDD; however, morphological characterization of these is considered only for the neuropathological diagnosis and classification of tauopathies. Thus, there is a need for a closer look at the spectrum (Figs. 1 and 2) and relationships of astrocytic protein deposition to neuronal protein or extracellular pathological aggregates so here we provide a careful reconsideration of the importance of PAG.

PAG in non-tauopathy neurodegenerative diseases

Aβ-PAG

Aβ is produced not only by neurons but also non-neural cells; indeed human astrocytes produce high levels of intact Aβ (19). Using different anti-Aβ antibodies, Funato et al. reported dot-like Aβ deposits, associated mostly with Aβ40 immunoreactive diffuse plaques in the ageing human brain (41). These deposits colocalized with GFAP positive astrocytes and further ultrastructural studies revealed their association to lipofuscin granules. The authors theorized that astrocytes may take up and degrade Aβ in lysosomes in the ageing brain (41). An ultrastructural study of AD brain biopsies also found Aβ immunoreactivity in astrocytes (85). Thal et al. showed that large numbers of GFAP-positive astrocytes containing N-terminal-truncated Aβ fragments appear in the vicinity of N-terminal-truncated Aβ deposits, thus the authors concluded that N-terminal-truncated Aβ peptide may be cleared preferentially from the extracellular space by astrocytic uptake and processing (160). Another study examining the entorhinal cortex in AD affected brains showed that activated astrocytes are abundant near amyloid plaques and they showed Aβ42 immunoreactivity in astrocytes in the molecular layer (118). They discussed the possibility that subpial plaques are in fact astrocyte-derived following the lysis of the astrocytes (118). Oide et al. considered Aβ deposits of diffuse and neuritic plaques to be shredded by astrocytic processes from the marginal zone of plaques, and to gradually disintegrate into smaller compartments (128). In a further study on individuals with Down syndrome (under the age of 30 years) reported Aβ1–28 and Aβ40 immunostaining in astrocytic cell bodies and in processes that extended to the vicinity of blood vessels (46). These studies raise the possibility that astrocytes interact with Aβ deposition in the brain. However, more studies are needed for better interpretation, particularly that, similarly to the detection of intraneuronal Aβ deposits, most of the antibodies that show intracellular deposits are unable to distinguish Aβ from AβPP (2).

PrP-PAG

Prion diseases are characterized by the deposition of disease-associated PrP together with spongiform change of the neuropil associated with neuronal loss and reactive astrogliosis (72). Early IHC studies reported granular PrP deposits in astrocytes in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (100); this has been already described in an experimental mouse model with scrapie infection (29). Indeed, it has been shown, that this PrP accumulates in astrocytes prior to the cardinal neuropathological changes in scrapie (29). Double immunolabeling confocal microscopy studies in human prion disease confirmed that astroglial cells harbor intracytoplasmic disease-associated PrP granules and that there is additionally a periastrocytic accumulation of disease-associated PrP deposits suggesting that astroglial cells may have a role in the processing, degradation, or removal of disease-associated PrP (78). However, in the early stages of prion diseases in humans this cannot be ascertained with certainty; therefore astrocytic PrP is never seen as a pure neuropathological feature and also not considered in the diagnostic description of immunostaining patterns. Finally, the role of astrocytes in the formation of neuropil vacuolation has been addressed in a comprehensive ultrastructural study. This revealed that the ultrastructural correlates of spongiform change develop within neuronal processes and, most likely, not astrocytic processes, in contrast to the intra-astrocytic vacuolation found in some rodent models (93).

TDP-43-PAG and FUS-PAG

TDP-43 proteinopathies are associated with the mislocalization of TDP-43 from the neuronal nucleus into the cytoplasm; however, TDP-43 pathology is consistently observed in the oligodendrocytes as well. In contrast, astrocytic TDP-43 pathology is not a consistent feature of, or less examined in, FTLD-TDP or ALS. Interestingly, astrocytic TDP-43 immunoreactivity has been reported in non-TDP-43 disorders (121). For example, Uryu et al. reported TDP-43 in astrocytic plaques of the FTLD-tau disease CBD (163). Furthermore, a study evaluating three cases with FTLD-TDP due to mutations in the gene for progranulin and a case of familial LB disease due to the A53T mutation in the gene encoding α-syn demonstrated astrocytic end-feet with abnormal TDP-43 fibrillary inclusions, while glial fibrils of reactive astrocytes were negative for TDP-43 (94). In addition, round phospho-TDP-43-positive structures associated to astrocytes have been described in Cockayne syndrome (143). Lee et al. reported TDP-43 in astrocyte-related Rosenthal fibers and eosinophilic granular bodies associated with low-grade tumors and reactive brain tissue (89). A further study demonstrated widespread TDP-43 pathology in astrocytes of Alexander disease, a primarily astrocytic neurodegenerative disease, which lacks neuronal TDP-43 deposits (169). Interestingly, phosphorylation, and increased insolubility of TDP-43 is similar in Alexander disease to what has been reported in other neurodegenerative diseases, however, insoluble C-terminal fragments of TDP-43 were absent or barely detectable in immunoblots contrasting neurodegenerative TDP-43 proteinopathies. One of the most frequent genetic cause of FTLD-TDP is related to C9orf72 mutation; this leads to prominent TDP-43 pathology but also shows TDP-43 negative ubiquitinated neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions, which are immunoreactive for antibodies generated against putative GGGGCC repeat RAN-translated peptides (anti-C9RANT); however astroglia do not show these peptide deposits (10).

Similarly to TDP-43 proteinopathies, astrocytic FUS-inclusions are not considered to be major pathological hallmarks of FTLD-FUS. Astrocytic FUS inclusions have been described in the white matter in NIFID, but relatively infrequently when compared to neuronal inclusions (9). A comparative analysis of six cases of ALS-FUS revealed glial inclusions; however, in spite a ramified morphology of some of these, an astrocytic origin could not be confirmed by double-labeling experiments using sensitive and specific markers of these cell types, therefore, these inclusions were not considered to be astroglial (101). Finally, the glial intranuclear inclusions in intranuclear inclusion body disease show FUS immunoreactivity (113).

α-Synuclein PAG

It is generally accepted that PD is a neuron-predominant, while MSA is a glia-predominant α-synucleinopathy. However, α-syn inclusions in oligodendrocytes can be seen in PD; this has been reported first in the substantia nigra (6, 166) and later it has been shown that oligodendroglial inclusions, with overlapping features to that seen in MSA, can be seen in the pallidothalamic tract (139). Astrocytic α-syn pathology has received less attention. Wakabayashi et al. mentioned already that some astrocytes in the brainstem show crescent-shaped inclusions (166). Terada et al. reported astrocytic star-like inclusions detectable also by Gallyas-Braak staining mostly in the temporal lobe in DLB cases; however, the anti-α-syn antibody used in that study did not label these (158). Braak and colleagues performed a comprehensive study using different anti-α-syn antibodies and found immunoreactive astrocytes in Braak PD stage 4 or higher preferentially in prosencephalic regions (amygdala, thalamus, septum, striatum, claustrum, and cerebral cortex) (17). Importantly, these were detected mostly by antibodies covering the NAC (non-amyloid component) region of the α-syn molecule, but they were ubiquitin and p62 negative and also were undetectable using silver methods, including the Gallyas stain (17); thus contrasting with the findings of Terada et al. (158). Braak et al. concluded that labeling of astrocytes appears to accompany the formation of neuronal inclusion bodies and the presence of Aβ protein or neurofibrillary changes of the Alzheimer type, do not appear to influence the development of these (17). A further study, focusing on neostriatal phosphorylated-α-syn pathology, revealed coiled-like glial inclusions correlating with Braak PD stage (115). The morphology of these glial inclusions was different from that reported by Braak (17) suggesting that phosphorylated-α-syn antibodies do not reveal the whole spectrum of astrocytic α-syn pathology as seen by selected non-phospho antibodies (17, 71). Indeed, an antibody (5G4) against the epitope containing amino acids 47–53 in α-syn, which detects exclusively disease-associated α-syn but not the monomer form (82), revealed abundant non-ubiquitinated α-syn astroglial pathology correlating with dots and thin neurites but not with the thick neurites and neuronal immunoreactivity (71). This study showed that in the cortex and amygdala the morphology is more star-like, while in the striatum fine granular astrocytic deposits were seen; ultrastructural examinations revealed a relation to endocytosis (71). These observations can be better interpreted in the context of a comprehensive study on experimental models and human brains (90). This showed an endocytosis-dependent transfer of α-syn to astrocytes and suggested that α-syn proteins may be released from neurons and therefore could be a source of astroglial α-syn pathology and an important mediator of astroglial inflammatory responses (90).

It also should be mentioned that based on a double-labeling immunofluorescence study α-syn-positive doughnut-shaped often ubiquitin-positive structures were located in the GFAP-positive, swollen processes of Bergmann glia of the cerebellum in DLB/PD and less in MSA (131). Furthermore, several types of oxidized-γ-syn positive astrocytes with different morphologies were reported in PD/DLB but also in controls (155). An interesting aspect of glial α-syn immunoreactivity was highlighted by a study comparing different epitope-retrieval methods in distinctly processed tissue: this revealed that in the normal human brain both oligodendroglia and astroglia show prominent α-syn immunoreactivity detectable in vibratome sections using proteinase K and formic acid pretreatment (114). This study emphasizes the pathogenic role of posttranslationally modified α-syn in the disease-processes of α-synucleinopathies (114).

In contrast to PD/DLB, another morphological type of α-syn inclusion has been described in MSA: phosphorylated-α-syn and 5G4 (82) immunoreactive processes appeared in the subpial surface of the spinal cord and brainstem, as well as the subependymal region of the lateral ventricles (119). They were not visualized by Gallyas-Braak staining and were ubiquitin and p62 negative. While the morphology of these α-syn inclusions is reminiscent of subpial and subependymal ARTAG (73), however, the anatomical distribution in the brainstem is different; mostly dorsolateral for tau in ARTAG (80) and ventrolateral for α-syn in MSA (119).

Tau-PAG in primary FTLD-tauopathies and aging

In spite the application of silver-staining methods many decades prior to IHC, only the introduction and development of tau IHC methods enable the recognition that astroglial tau pathology is an important component of FTLD-tau. Many studies described these as glial fibrillary tangles, by analogy to neuronal NFTs, however, this does not reflect the fact that tau pathology involves different astroglial populations and associates with dramatically different morphological appearances. It has been also noted that the descriptions of morphologies varied between disorders and also between publications, the latter possibly complicating the comparison of studies. The recognition that the nomenclature and definitions of astrocytic tau morphologies in FTLD tauopathies and aging can vary between experts signifies that this topic still requires further consensus studies (83). Recent experimental studies show that glial tau pathology can be reproduced in animal models of tauopathies through injections of diseased brain homogenates from AD and FTLD-Tau patients (12, 22), thereby suggesting the existence of pathological tau strains involving different astrocytic populations or inducing distinct astrocytic responses. Currently, there is emerging consensus that at least six types of astrocytic tau pathologies should be distinguished (Figure 3): tufted astrocytes, astrocytic plaques, ramified astrocytes, globular astroglial inclusions seen mostly in primary FTLD-tauopathies, while thorn-shaped astrocytes (TSA) and granular/fuzzy astrocytes (GFA) are discussed in the context of ARTAG (73).

Astrocytic tau pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy

In 1988, Probst et al. described a surprisingly high number of stellate neurons showing Gallyas positive material (135); re-evaluation of the images (see Figure 1A in that paper) suggest that these would be now interpreted as tufted astrocytes. Hauw and colleauges mentioned tufts of abnormal fibers in PSP cases using the Bodian silver method and tau IHC (48), soon confirmed to be related to astrocytes (170, 172). Tufted astrocytes are characterized by the accumulation of phospho-tau immunoreactivity in the proximal part of astrocytic processes that shows argyrophilia particularly with Gallyas staining (68). They are found mostly in the striatum, frontal and motor cortices. Ultrastructural observations described tubular profiles and suggested that tufted astrocytes are protoplasmic astrocytes (7, 126). Importantly, tufted astrocytes do not represent a reactive process but rather astrocytic degeneration, which does not seem to contribute to gliosis or neuronal loss, therefore its clinical significance has yet to be clarified (161). The interesting finding that tufted astrocytes are usually GFAP negative (66, 151) raises questions about whether they are really protoplasmic astrocytes, however, they are negative for another type of astrocyte, NG2, as well (151). It has been speculated that oxidative damage leads to GFAP fragmentation, explaining its lost, all together indicating dysfunction of pathological tau-harboring protoplasmic astrocytes associated with neuronal dysfunction (144, 151). Contrasting NFTs with tufted astrocytes shows that the latter remain more localized in their distribution and may retain their original regular pattern of clustering in subcortical areas, and this is associated with a lack of spatial correlation that has be observed between neuronal and glial cell pathologies in specific regions (8). A further aspect on the origin of tufted astrocytes was highlighted by a study showing that these, together with astrocytic plaques of CBD, are positioned in close proximity to blood vessels (149). Tufted astrocytes were found to be closer to blood vessels than were astrocytic plaques (149). In the original paper by Nishimura et al. on glial pathology in PSP, in addition to tufted astrocytes, argyrophilic masses with flame- or thorn-like shape were described (126). TSA are GFAP positive (58) and they have received more focus in the context of ageing-related changes (73). Since PSP pathology can be seen associated with different clinical presentations (28), the distribution and amount of astrocytic pathology might vary between these forms, making the development of widely applicable staging system more difficult.

Astrocytic tau pathology in corticobasal degeneration

In 1994 a study by Wakabayashi et al. reported that flame-shaped glial inclusions revealed by Bielschowsky silver staining also showed IHC positivity for tau, but they remained undetectable with the Bodian silver method while the Gallyas silver staining was not used (167). Ultrastructurally, these inclusions were demonstrated to contain straight tubules and the affected cells were interpreted to be in oligodendroglia (167). Similar observation were reported by others at the same time (84). The observation of tau positive pathology resembling neuritic plaques, but without Aβ amyloid cores in CBD (107) was a first step towards the recognition that, apart from oligodendrocytes, tau appears in astroglia in CBD, mainly in the distal segments of astrocytic processes (32). Accordingly astrocytic plaques in CBD are defined as focal and densely tau-immunoreactive stubby dilatations of distal processes of astrocytes giving an Aβ senile-plaque-like appearance without Aβ amyloid cores (73). Gallyas staining demonstrates astrocytic plaques clearly, and ultrastructurally, these are characterized by randomly arranged bundles of straight and twisted tubules with diameters of 15–20 nm (175). It has been noted that the number of astrocytic plaques may vary between cases; furthermore, description of so called incidental CBD cases suggested that indeed astrocytic tau pathology in the cortex might be one of the first pathological steps in the onset of CBD (96). This has been supported by observations in CBD cases with prominent neuronal tau pathology where astrocytes harboring tau immunoreactive pathology appear in areas without neuronal tau pathology (80). Indeed, considerable CBD pathology can exist in individuals without significant clinical symptoms suggesting that astrocytic plaques are not the major tau pathologies that are responsible for clinical symptomatology in CBD (106, 112). Komori et al. reported that astrocytic plaques and tufted astrocytes, the two morphologically different types of astroglial inclusions found in CBD and PSP brains, respectively, do not coexist (67). Notably, CBD-like and PSP-like disorders also are caused by MAPT mutations that are pathogenic for hereditary tauopathies initially referred as frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). Interestingly, although protoplasmic astrocytes seem to be abnormal and reactive in CBD as in PSP, abnormal tau proteins accumulate in these astrocytes in PSP but not CBD (151).

Astrocytic tau pathology in argyrophilic grain disease

AGD has been described as a disorder showing accumulation of argyrophilic grains (14). In spite of the presence of argyrophilic oligodendroglial coiled bodies, astrocytic tau pathology does not show striking arygrophilia or dense inclusions as in PSP. The tau immunoreactive morphology has been described also as bush-like astrocytes without glial fibrillary tangles (13). Furthermore, thin astrocytic plaques, periventricular and subpial astrocytes as well as small clusters of astrocytic processes also have been mentioned in reports on some AGD cases (38). Tau immunoreactive astrocytes vary between cases (38) and thought to become more abundant in later stages of AGD (141). Moreover, the significant morphological and anatomical overlap of these astrocytes with those seen in elderly individuals without arygrophilic grains supports the concept that these astrocytes are better interpreted as GFA representing gray matter ARTAG (73, 76, 80). Finally, one comprehensive study on AGD and PSP cases indicated that at least some of these GFA-like morphologies (termed tufted astrocyte-like astrocytic lesions in that study) can potentially evolve into Gallyas-positive tufted astrocytes in AGD brains (55).

Astrocytic tau pathology in globular glial tauopathies

The concept of GGT unified glial-predominant tauopathy disorders either with globular inclusions mainly in oligodendroglia or in astrocytes (1). Globular astroglial inclusions are defined as tau immunoreactive distinct globules (up to the size of the astroglial nucleus; 1–5 μm) and dots (1–2 μm) in the perikarya and proximal parts of astrocytic processes, found in the gray matter (73). These are somewhat reminiscent of tufted astrocytes, but they are non-argyrophilic thereby contrasting not only with tufted astrocytes but also with the globular oligodendroglial inclusions of GGT (1, 68). GGT types are distinguished based upon the anatomical involvement and the predominance of astroglial or oligodendroglial inclusions (1). In cases with predominantly white matter and oligodendroglial involvement, astrocytic globular inclusions are seen mostly in the frontal and temporal cortical areas, amygdala, striatum and medial thalamus (75). A subset of GGT cases involving frontotemporal, motor cortex and corticospinal tract show abundant astroglial inclusions (40).

Astrocytic tau pathology in Pick’s disease

PiD is considered to show small amounts of astrocytic tau pathology, termed ramified astrocytes, when compared to neuronal tau pathology. However, there is considerable variability among reports on this in the literature. This can be due to the fact that before the introduction of isoform specific tau antibodies (3R and 4R) the definition of Pick`s disease was not uniform (27, 81). Feany et al. provided a precise description of the morphology of ramified astrocytes in Pick’s disease, indicating that these astrocytic inclusions “tended to occupy more of the cell body and to ramify into the astrocytic cell processes”, and that they were “often localized to one side of the cell soma” (33). Ultrastructurally, the tau aggregates in ramified astrocytes are formed by straight tubules (66), and may show 3R immunoreactivity (36, 81), which is clearly different from PSP and CBD, where the astrocytic tau pathology is 4R isoform immunoreactive. Although ramified astrocytes appear in severely damaged cortical areas (60, 66), it has been suggested that astroglial tau pathology that is distinct from ramified astrocytes can appear in regions without neuronal inclusions (60, 80). For the sake of completeness it must be mentioned that glial inclusions in PiD with globular morphology occurring in the white matter are partly in oligodendrocytes (171) (usually smaller than the cell nucleus in contrast to the globular oligodendroglial inclusions of GGT with larger globules) (68), however, astrocytes in the subcortical white matter can also harbor globular tau inclusions (173). Ultrastructurally, these show juxtanuclear aggregates of abnormal filaments with straight tubules practically indistinguishable from those seen in neuronal Pick bodies (173).

Astrocytic tau pathology in MAPT mutations

FTDP-17 or hereditary frontotemporal dementia associated with mutations in the MAPT gene shows a wide variety of tau pathologies (42). In addition to different tau positive neuronal inclusions, astroglial and oligodendroglial tau positive inclusions are described (43). Since some of these are reminiscent of the tau pathologies seen in primary FTLD-tauopathies, papers on FTLDP-17 often refer to these tau pathologies as MAPT mutation associated inclusions with disease phenotypes that resemble sporadic PSP, CBD, Pick`s disease or GGT Although oligodendroglial inclusions in MAPT mutation cases are usually termed coiled bodies (70), meticulous descriptions of astrocytic tau inclusions are lacking in many papers while a lack of consensus terminology on astroglial tau pathologies also makes comparison of these publications difficult. Ghetti et al. noted that the cell types involved vary according to the location of the MAPT gene mutation; usually mutations in exons 1, 10, 11, and 12 as well as introns following exons 9 and 10 show glial (i.e., oligo- and astroglial) inclusions (43). For example rare cortical tuft-shaped astrocytes have been reported in exon 1 R5H mutation (49), numerous tufted astrocytes in the caudate, putamen, and thalamus in exon 1 R5L mutation (134). The L266V mutation is one of the rare mutations in exon 9 where astrocytic tau pathology has been described. Kobayashi et al. reported unique features of these frequent tau positive astrocytic inclusions in the cerebral cortex, some which were stained positively with the Bodian silver method, but they were rarely stained with Gallyas-Braak method, and other inclusions showing fibrillary morphologies were strongly stained with Bodian and Gallyas-Braak methods (64). Hogg et al. noted coarse astrocytic tau immunoreactivity in the cortex in another case with this mutation (52). Tufted astrocytes and tau-immunoreacive inclusions have been reported in intron 9 and 10 MAPT mutations (43, 105). Exon 10 mutations are not infrequently associated with astrocytic tau pathologies; however, the details of the descriptions vary. In the N279K MAPT mutation cases mostly oligodendroglial tau-inclusions are seen, and only rare astrocytic tau positive inclusions have been noted but without showing a clear similarity to tufted astrocytes or astrocytic plaques (26, 43, 136). Glial tau pathology was mentioned but not specified whether being astrocytic in L284L (24) and N296N (152) mutations, while prominent granular astrocytic tau inclusions (but not like tufted astrocytes) have been mentioned in association with cortical neuronal loss in a N296H MAPT mutation case (61). Furthermore, a wide range of morphologies of astrocytic tau inclusions, referred to as tufted forms, have been linked to the deln296 MAPT mutation (37). The P301L, P301S, and P301T MAPT mutations are associated with a wide range of tau positive glial inclusion morphologies described as tufted astrocytes and astrocytic plaques (43) while in P301L globular astrocytic inclusions (as in GGT) and GFA (as in ARTAG) have been emphasized (157). Unspecified intense tau immunostaining in affected astrocytes has been mentioned in a G303V MAPT mutation case (140) and also in S305N MAPT mutation cases (54, 63). The S305S mutation shows a spectrum of different astrocytic tau immunoreactivities, termed glial tangles, tufted astrocytes (154) and astrocytic plaques (47) by the authors. Unspecified extensive astrocytic tau deposits have been reported in the exon 11 L315V MAPT mutation (164). Prominent astroglial tau immunoreactive inclusions have been reported to be associated with the K317M MAPT mutation (176); a later study on the K317N MAPT mutation, which described globular astroglial inclusions similar to GGT, pointed out the resemblance of the astrocytic and oligodendroglial tau inclusions in the K317M MAPT mutation cases with that of GGT (156). In the exon 12 G335S MAPT mutation cases, astrocytes containing granular and/or punctate tau-immunoreactive deposits in cell bodies and the proximal portion of processes (reminiscent of tufted astrocytes) or in the distal part only (reminiscent of astrocytic plaques) have been described (153). These resemble GFA of gray matter ARTAG supporting the concept that some of these might be pre-mature forms of astrocytic tau pathologies (80). Interestingly, further ARTAG types (subpial TSA), together with cortical astrocytic plaques, have been observed in a 49-year old demented individual with MAPT gene duplication (3, 88). This case indicates that an imbalance of tau homeostasis contributes to the development of a clearly age-related pathology as observed earlier with mutations that alter the 3R:4R tau isoform ratio (53). Further descriptions of ARTAG type pathology in other MAPT mutations are lacking. Finally, astrocytic tau immunoreactive inclusions without specification of the morphology, have been reported in the cerebral cortex and white matter in the Q336R MAPT mutation (132), in the frontal white matter in E342V MAPT mutation (97), and astrocytes interpreted as tufted astrocytes by the authors in the K369I MAPT mutation (125). Notably, the concomitant presence of astrocytic plaques and tufted astrocyes, a phenomenon not recognized in primary FTLD-tauopathies (67), also has been reported in MAPT mutation cases. In summary, much is known about the spectrum of MAPT mutation associated astroglial tau pathologies but little is known how the astrocytic tau pathology relates to primary FTLD-tauopathies, and there is a lack of harmonized terminology in the reports on these pathologies.

Astrocytic tau pathology in ageing: ARTAG

In the ageing brain astrocytic tau pathology has been described in the subpial and subependymal regions of the gray and white matter and frequently in the depths of gyri, as well as in the basal forebrain and brainstem, morphologically in the form of TSA (57–59). Similarity to some astrocytes described in PSP (126) has been also noted. Later Schultz et al. reported a high prevalence of TSA in aged human, particularly at the level of the amygdala; interestingly similar astroglial tau pathology also has been observed in baboons (146, 148). The study by the MRC-CFAS group supported these findings and mentioned additionally that less commonly TSA can be observed also in the vicinity of neuronal cell bodies in gray matter areas such as amygdala and dentate gyrus (87). TSA have been considered as non-specific but are relatively underreported in studies since neuron-related tau pathology, such as NFTs and AGD seemed to be more relevant age-related tau pathologies (23, 38). Moreover, the descriptions focused on the medial temporal lobe and did not provide details on further tau astroglial tau pathologies such as those in the gray matter. Importantly, Munoz et al. described ”argyrophilic thorny astrocyte clusters (ATACs)” in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortices and in subcortical white matter in a cohort of patients with nonfluent variant of primary progressive aphasia associated with AD pathology and discussed the possibility that these might have clinical relevance (117). The question whether gray matter astroglial tau pathologies have any relevance for clinical symptoms was further highlighted in a study reporting a peculiar constellation of tau pathology in cases wherein diffuse granular immunopositivity of astrocytic processes and patchy accumulation of thin threads were observed in a distinctive distribution (frontal and temporal cortices, hippocampus, amygdala, basal ganglia, locus coeruleus, and substantia nigra)(77). In a follow-up of this study on a community based-cohort gray matter tau astrogliopathy was grouped into four groups based on the anatomical involvement and morphological appearance: Group I (medial temporal lobe with few astrocytes with granular tau); Group II (amygdala with granular, thorny and tufted-like astrogliopathy type); Group III (limbic regions-basal ganglia-substantia nigra with granular and thorny astrogliopathy); and Group IV (hippocampal-dentate gyrus-amygdala predominant with granular and thorny astrogliopathy). These tau pathologies were either not (e.g. group I) or were associated with various constellations of clinical symptoms (76). Together with a paper on focal glial tau pathology associated with progressive aphasia (168), these studies argued that tau astrogliopathies in the gray matter might reflect neuronal dysfunction leading to clinical symptoms. In a series of studies Ferrer and colleagues demonstrated that these tau astrogliopathies in the white and gray matter show a distinct biochemical signature such as inconsistent detectability using phospho-specific anti-tau antibody Ser262 or conformational tau modifications at amino acids 312 to 322 (MC1), or tau truncated at aspartic acid 421 (tau-C3)(36, 99, 144). Further reports in elderly patients exemplified by the description of isolated tufted astrocytes in the occipitotemporal gyrus in a population-representative cohort (87), or prominent subcortical white matter astrocytic tau pathology in brains from two elderly patients in whom CBD was considered (142), emphasized the need for the harmonization of terminology and evaluation strategies. Therefore, the umbrella term ARTAG has been introduced to encompass all of these aging related astroglial tau pathologies, with or without accompanying morphological features of other NDD, including primary FTLD-tauopathies (73). Accordingly, ARTAG should be considered when detecting either TSA or GFA (Fig. 4A–F). TSA represents tau immunoreactivity in astrocytic perikarya with extension into the proximal parts of the astrocytic processes, as well as tau positive inclusions in the astrocytic endfeet at the glia limitans around blood vessels and at the pial surface; GFA represents fine granular immunoreactivity of branching processes of gray matter astrocytes where the perinuclear soma is densely immunoreactive in most of these (73). A four-step characterization algorithm called TReSS to signify Type, Regional involvement, Severity, Subegional involvement has been proposed: 1) identification of five types based on the location of either morphologies of tau astrogliopathy: subpial, subependymal, perivascular, white matter, gray matter; 2) documentation of the regional involvement: medial temporal lobe, lobar, subcortical, and brainstem; 3) documentation of the severity of tau astrogliopathy; and 4) description of subregional involvement (73). A recent multisite study proposed more specified description of the severity (83). Furthermore, the latter study suggested that the spectrum of coexisting pathological astrocytic tau immunoreactivities might be wider than generally assumed in primary FTLD-Tau disorders if more care is taken to describe these lesions (83). ARTAG (except for the gray matter type) shows a predilection for the basal brain regions. A study focusing on the anterior basal forebrain showed that ARTAG is most prevalent in the subpial location (39.13 %) followed by a perivascular distribution (30.43 %) and the authors of this study emphasized that ARTAG might share common pathways with chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)(98). A comprehensive study on ARTAG reported the systematic mapping of ARTAG types in different anatomical regions in more than six hundred cases and correlated these with clinicopathological and genetic variables (80). This study further highlighted the considerable overlap of ARTAG with CTE and primary FTLD-tauopathy-related tau pathologies presenting a concept that some of the grey matter ARTAG may represent early forms of primary FTLD-tauopathies (80). A notable observation was the strong association of AD-related variables with the presence of lobar white matter ARTAG. Furthermore, five constellations were recognized: i) Subpial ± white matter ± perivascular ARTAG in basal brain areas and medial temporal lobe; ii) Subpial ± white matter ± perivascular ARTAG in the brainstem; iii) Subpial ± perivascular ± grey matter ARTAG in lobar areas; iv) White matter ± perivascular ARTAG in lobar areas; iii) Grey matter ARTAG in limbic ± neocortical ± subcortical ± brainstem areas with or without features of primary FTLD-tauopathies. These constellations might reflect different etiologies or eventually different entities (80). Finally, a remarkable mix of neuronal and astroglial tauopathy compatible with ARTAG has been described in the mammillary bodies in AD patients (133) distinct from the sex-dependent cytoskeletal changes consisting of neurofibrillary tangles, a network of dystrophic neurites, and terminal-like vessel-associated processes seen in the infundibular hypothalamic nucleus in elderly men (145, 147).

Further astrocytic tau pathologies

As already mentioned, astrocytic tau pathology is an important component of the morphological alterations reported in CTE, a disorder associated with repetitive brain trauma and progressive neurological deterioration (108–110). Indeed, there are many overlaps with ARTAG, such as accumulation of subpial astrocytes in basal brain regions, but also in dorsolateral lobar areas, and additionally an overrepresentation of males in both CTE and ARTAG, or association of ARTAG with ventricular enlargement, an alteration seen in CTE as well (80, 98, 108–110). Therefore, for the definition of CTE-associated lesions the presence of neuronal tau pathology is important to emphasize (108) while the presence of pure subpial of cortical clusters of astrocytic tau immunoreactivities should not be at once interpreted as CTE. Using strict criteria and standardized approaches can help to distinguish the rare CTE-like pathology from the frequent ARTAG-related tau pathology in the diagnostic practice (127) or research studies (65).

Tufted astrocytes in PSP or other astrocytic tau pathologies usually are less prominent or spare the cornu ammonis subregions of the hippocampus. In this context it is important to mention recent reports on cases with or without PSP pathology and peculiar 4R isoform tau immunoreactive spherical neuronal inclusions in the hippocampus, which show prominent argyrophilic astrocytic tau pathology in the hippocampus (74). Unexpectedly, a genetic prion disease associated with the V203I mutation in the prion protein gene (PRNP) also showed hippocampal astrocytic tau pathology reminiscent of these but without the neuronal inclusions (79). Finally, a recent study on a familial behavioral variant frontotemporal in two sisters born from consanguineous parents described prominent astrocytic tau pathology (35). The tau-positive astrocytes were reminiscent of reactive astrocytes but in addition to the cytoplasm, perivascular foot processes around the majority of cortical blood vessels were decorated with heavy deposits of hyper-phosphorylated tau, massively involving cortical, hippocampal and subcortical regions (35). In addition, cerebellar Bergmann glia were also heavily stained with the AT8 antibody (35). These studies also indicate that we are far from understanding the variability of tau accumulations in different populations of astrocytes in different anatomical regions.

Conceptual summary of astrocytic tau pathology

Tau mRNA is found in neurons in the human brain (44) suggesting that astrocytic tau immunoreactivity could be reflecting purely uptake of tau from neurons. However, astrocytic tau pathology is seen in regions without other types of tau pathology (80, 96). Observations of preclinical and incidental forms of primary FTLD-tauopathies (31, 76, 96, 106, 112, 174) can help to elucidate the pathogenic role of astrocytes. Recent studies suggest that the first step of astrocytic pathology might be the fine granular accumulation in astrocytic processes; these tau deposits are then transported to distal or proximal segment of the astrocytic cytoskeleton and eventually aggregate, become arygrophilic and/or ubiquitinated (55, 80). Therefore, pure detection of single astrocytes with fine granular (dot-like) phospho-tau immunoreactivity in the human brain might be just a less likely and potentially transient expression of a phospho-tau epitope as a reaction to a yet to be identified pathogenic event, however, it can represent an early preclinical form of primary FTLD-tauopathy or ARTAG (Fig. 3) (80). In particular, that the regional appearance of these single astrocytes usually overlap with the anatomical regions involved in primary FTLD tauopathies and ARTAG, moreover, gray matter ARTAG also overlaps with the involvement patterns of primary FTLD-tauopathies and potentially could represent early subtypes of those (80).

Concluding remarks

Immunohistochemical and molecular biological methods highlighted the wide spectrum and involvement of astrocytes in the disease protein pathology characteristic of NDD. Moreover, there are further protein deposits associated with astrocytes, such as those seen in the hyaline protoplasmic astrocytopathy of neocortex usually detected in the clinical setting of epilepsy and/or psychomotor retardation in younger individuals (50). Apart from clearly distinct PAG morphologies and staining patterns such as argyrophilia, there are peculiar similarities to be noted. For example subpial accumulation of PAG are seen in MSA (α-syn), PSP, CBD, ARTAG and CTE (tau) and AD (Aβ). Subependymal PAG in seen in MSA (α-syn) and ARTAG (tau). In the gray matter GFA (tau) or morphologies reminiscent of GFA are seen in PD/DLB (α-syn) and rarely in prion disease.

What can be the role and consequence of astrocytic protein pathology? The fine granular (non-argyrophilic) morphology of protein immunoreactivity in astrocytes seen in prion diseases (prion protein), Lewy body disorders (α-syn) and tauopathies (tau) raises the hypothesis that common pathogenic steps might underlie these astroglial pathologies (Figs. 2 and 5), such as phagocytosis of pathologically altered proteins. Indeed, astrocytes have been found to highly express an array of phagocytic receptors exemplified by their contribution to phagocytizing synapses (21) or axonal mitochondria (25) in the brain. Experimental studies in tau transgenic mouse model of astrocytic tau pathologies suggest that this pathology contributes to glial degeneration (51); furthermore as functional consequence of astrocytic tau pathology neuronal degeneration can be detected in the absence of neuronal tau inclusions (39). Moreover, astrocytes play an important role in the clearance of toxic α-syn species from the extracellular space (95) and uptake and spreading of α-syn from astrocytes to neurons can lead to neuronal death (20). Glial cells are discussed as mediators of Aβ removal from the brain, and many of the proteins involved in the enzymatic degradation of Aβ are produced by glial cells (137) so they should be able to endocytose monomeric and oligomeric Aβ and degrade them (91). Thus, astroglial NDD proteinopathies might reflect their contribution to disease spreading or clearance of disease-associate proteins, and, depending on the disease protein (i.e., tau), it might lead to astroglial dysfunction and eventually contribute to the degenerations of neurons.

In conclusion, the studies presented here and in other review articles (34, 165) show that astrocytes and oligodendroglial cells (138, 139) may have an underappreciated spectrum of roles to play in mechanisms NDD. Thus, the time may now have arrived for astrocytes and oligodendroglia to receive more attention and become the focus of studies of NDD mechanisms as well for investigating potential NDD therapies.

Support for this work was provided by grants from the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health (P30-AG10124, PO1-AG17586, NS088341 and NS094003).

Figure 1 Stratification of PAG in neurodegenerative diseases.

* indicates that these are variably argyrophilic.

Figure 2 Various type of PAG.

Amyloid-β (Aβ; left: frontal cortex; right: frontal white matter; antibody used: anti-Aβ, clone 6F/3D directed against amino acids 8–17 of the peptide, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark, 1:100), prion protein (PrP: temporal cortex; antibody used: anti-PrP 12F10, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 1:2000), and α-synuclein (left: striatum; right: temporal cortex; antibody used: anti-α-synuclein 5G4, Roboscreen, Leipzig, Germany, 1:4000) PAG showing coarse and fine granules of immunoreactivity: compare with granular/fuzzy astrocytes of ARTAG (temporal cortex; antibody used: anti-tau AT8 pS202/pT205, Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA, 1:200).

Figure 3 Conceptual summary of the development of astroglial tau pathologies.

Figure 4 Examples of astroglial tau immunoreactivies in the aging brain.

A and B: Clusters of granular/fuzzy astrocytes in the gray matter (accumbens nucleus); C: Thorny astrocytes in the dentate gyrus; D: Granular/fuzzy astrocytes in the substantia nigra:E: Thorn-shaped astrocytes in the temporal white matter; F: subpial thorn-shaped astrocytes.

Figure 5 Overlapping immunoreactive patterns in PAG.

Astroglial granular immunoreactivity (indicated by asterisk) can be seen for example for α synuclein, tau and PrP, moreover astroglial (see enlarged image in the right indicated by white arrowheads in the left images) end-feets show immunoreacitivity in α-synucleinopathies or tauopathies.

Authors report no conflict of interest.


1 Ahmed Z Bigio EH Budka H Dickson DW Ferrer I Ghetti B Giaccone G Hatanpaa KJ Holton JL Josephs KA Powers J Spina S Takahashi H White CL 3rd Revesz T Kovacs GG 2013 Globular glial tauopathies (GGT): consensus recommendations Acta Neuropathol 126 537 44 23995422
2 Aho L Pikkarainen M Hiltunen M Leinonen V Alafuzoff I 2010 Immunohistochemical visualization of amyloid-beta protein precursor and amyloid-beta in extra- and intracellular compartments in the human brain J Alzheimers Dis 20 1015 28 20413866
3 Alexander J Kalev O Mehrabian S Traykov L Raycheva M Kanakis D Drineas P Lutz MI Strobel T Penz T Schuster M Bock C Ferrer I Paschou P Kovacs GG 2016 Familial early-onset dementia with complex neuropathologic phenotype and genomic background Neurobiol Aging 42 199 204 27143436
4 Alzheimer A 1911 Über eigenartige Krankheitsfälle des späten Alters Zeitschr Gesamte Neurol Psychiat 1911 365 85
5 Arai N Oda M 1996 A variety of glial pathological structures by the modified Gallyas-Braak method Neuropathology 16 133 8
6 Arai T Ueda K Ikeda K Akiyama H Haga C Kondo H Kuroki N Niizato K Iritani S Tsuchiya K 1999 Argyrophilic glial inclusions in the midbrain of patients with Parkinson’s disease and diffuse Lewy body disease are immunopositive for NACP/alpha-synuclein Neurosci Lett 259 83 6 10025563
7 Arima K 2006 Utrastructural characteristics of tau filaments in tauopathies: Immuno-electron microscopic demonstration of tau filaments in tauopathies Neuropathology 26 475 83 17080728
8 Armstrong RA Cairns NJ 2013 Spatial patterns of the tau pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy Neurol Sci 34 337 44 22411688
9 Armstrong RA Gearing M Bigio EH Cruz-Sanchez FF Duyckaerts C Mackenzie IR Perry RH Skullerud K Yokoo H Cairns NJ 2011 The spectrum and severity of FUS-immunoreactive inclusions in the frontal and temporal lobes of ten cases of neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease Acta Neuropathol 121 219 28 20886222
10 Ash PE Bieniek KF Gendron TF Caulfield T Lin WL Dejesus-Hernandez M van Blitterswijk MM Jansen-West K Paul JW 3rd Rademakers R Boylan KB Dickson DW Petrucelli L 2013 Unconventional translation of C9ORF72 GGGGCC expansion generates insoluble polypeptides specific to c9FTD/ALS Neuron 77 639 46 23415312
11 Beach TG Adler CH Lue L Sue LI Bachalakuri J Henry-Watson J Sasse J Boyer S Shirohi S Brooks R Eschbacher J White CL 3rd Akiyama H Caviness J Shill HA Connor DJ Sabbagh MN Walker DG Arizona Parkinson’s Disease C 2009 Unified staging system for Lewy body disorders: correlation with nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and motor dysfunction Acta Neuropathol 117 613 34 19399512
12 Boluda S Iba M Zhang B Raible KM Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2015 Differential induction and spread of tau pathology in young PS19 tau transgenic mice following intracerebral injections of pathological tau from Alzheimer’s disease or corticobasal degeneration brains Acta Neuropathol 129 221 37 25534024
13 Botez G Probst A Ipsen S Tolnay M 1999 Astrocytes expressing hyperphosphorylated tau protein without glial fibrillary tangles in argyrophilic grain disease Acta Neuropathol 98 251 6 10483782
14 Braak H Braak E 1987 Argyrophilic grains: characteristic pathology of cerebral cortex in cases of adult onset dementia without Alzheimer changes Neurosci Lett 76 124 7 2438598
15 Braak H Braak E 1991 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 82 239 59 1759558
16 Braak H Del Tredici K Rub U de Vos RA Jansen Steur EN Braak E 2003 Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Aging 24 197 211 12498954
17 Braak H Sastre M Del Tredici K 2007 Development of alpha-synuclein immunoreactive astrocytes in the forebrain parallels stages of intraneuronal pathology in sporadic Parkinson’s disease Acta Neuropathol 114 231 41 17576580
18 Brettschneider J Del Tredici K Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2015 Spreading of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: a focus on human studies Nat Rev Neurosci 16 109 20 25588378
19 Busciglio J Gabuzda DH Matsudaira P Yankner BA 1993 Generation of beta-amyloid in the secretory pathway in neuronal and nonneuronal cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 2092 6 8446635
20 Cavaliere F Cerf L Dehay B Ramos-Gonzalez P De Giorgi F Bourdenx M Bessede A Obeso JA Matute C Ichas F Bezard E 2017 In vitro alpha-synuclein neurotoxicity and spreading among neurons and astrocytes using Lewy body extracts from Parkinson disease brains Neurobiol Dis 103 101 12 28411117
21 Chung WS Clarke LE Wang GX Stafford BK Sher A Chakraborty C Joung J Foo LC Thompson A Chen C Smith SJ Barres BA 2013 Astrocytes mediate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways Nature 504 394 400 24270812
22 Clavaguera F Akatsu H Fraser G Crowther RA Frank S Hench J Probst A Winkler DT Reichwald J Staufenbiel M Ghetti B Goedert M Tolnay M 2013 Brain homogenates from human tauopathies induce tau inclusions in mouse brain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 9535 40 23690619
23 Crary JF Trojanowski JQ Schneider JA Abisambra JF Abner EL Alafuzoff I Arnold SE Attems J Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Dickson DW Gearing M Grinberg LT Hof PR Hyman BT Jellinger K Jicha GA Kovacs GG Knopman DS Kofler J Kukull WA Mackenzie IR Masliah E McKee A Montine TJ Murray ME Neltner JH Santa-Maria I Seeley WW Serrano-Pozo A Shelanski ML Stein T Takao M Thal DR Toledo JB Troncoso JC Vonsattel JP White CL 3rd Wisniewski T Woltjer RL Yamada M Nelson PT 2014 Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging Acta Neuropathol 128 755 66 25348064
24 D’Souza I Poorkaj P Hong M Nochlin D Lee VM Bird TD Schellenberg GD 1999 Missense and silent tau gene mutations cause frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-chromosome 17 type, by affecting multiple alternative RNA splicing regulatory elements Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 5598 603 10318930
25 Davis CH Kim KY Bushong EA Mills EA Boassa D Shih T Kinebuchi M Phan S Zhou Y Bihlmeyer NA Nguyen JV Jin Y Ellisman MH Marsh-Armstrong N 2014 Transcellular degradation of axonal mitochondria Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 9633 8 24979790
26 Delisle MB Murrell JR Richardson R Trofatter JA Rascol O Soulages X Mohr M Calvas P Ghetti B 1999 A mutation at codon 279 (N279K) in exon 10 of the Tau gene causes a tauopathy with dementia and supranuclear palsy Acta Neuropathol 98 62 77 10412802
27 Dickson DW 1998 Pick’s disease: a modern approach Brain Pathol 8 339 54 9546291
28 Dickson DW Ahmed Z Algom AA Tsuboi Y Josephs KA 2010 Neuropathology of variants of progressive supranuclear palsy Curr Opin Neurol 23 394 400 20610990
29 Diedrich JF Bendheim PE Kim YS Carp RI Haase AT 1991 Scrapie-associated prion protein accumulates in astrocytes during scrapie infection Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88 375 9 1671170
30 Duyckaerts C Delatour B Potier MC 2009 Classification and basic pathology of Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 118 5 36 19381658
31 Evidente VG Adler CH Sabbagh MN Connor DJ Hentz JG Caviness JN Sue LI Beach TG 2011 Neuropathological findings of PSP in the elderly without clinical PSP: possible incidental PSP? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 17 365 71 21420891
32 Feany MB Dickson DW 1995 Widespread cytoskeletal pathology characterizes corticobasal degeneration Am J Pathol 146 1388 96 7778678
33 Feany MB Mattiace LA Dickson DW 1996 Neuropathologic overlap of progressive supranuclear palsy, Pick’s disease and corticobasal degeneration J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 55 53 67 8558172
34 Ferrer I 2017 Diversity of astroglial responses across human neurodegenerative disorders and brain aging Brain Pathol In press
35 Ferrer I Legati A Garcia-Monco JC Gomez-Beldarrain M Carmona M Blanco R Seeley WW Coppola G 2015 Familial behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia associated with astrocyte-predominant tauopathy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 74 370 9 25756587
36 Ferrer I Lopez-Gonzalez I Carmona M Arregui L Dalfo E Torrejon-Escribano B Diehl R Kovacs GG 2014 Glial and neuronal tau pathology in tauopathies: characterization of disease-specific phenotypes and tau pathology progression J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 73 81 97 24335532
37 Ferrer I Pastor P Rey MJ Munoz E Puig B Pastor E Oliva R Tolosa E 2003 Tau phosphorylation and kinase activation in familial tauopathy linked to deln296 mutation Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 29 23 34 12581337
38 Ferrer I Santpere G van Leeuwen FW 2008 Argyrophilic grain disease Brain 131 1416 32 18234698
39 Forman MS Lal D Zhang B Dabir DV Swanson E Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2005 Transgenic mouse model of tau pathology in astrocytes leading to nervous system degeneration J Neurosci 25 3539 50 15814784
40 Fu YJ Nishihira Y Kuroda S Toyoshima Y Ishihara T Shinozaki M Miyashita A Piao YS Tan CF Tani T Koike R Iwanaga K Tsujihata M Onodera O Kuwano R Nishizawa M Kakita A Ikeuchi T Takahashi H 2010 Sporadic four-repeat tauopathy with frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Parkinsonism, and motor neuron disease: a distinct clinicopathological and biochemical disease entity Acta Neuropathol 120 21 32 20140439
41 Funato H Yoshimura M Yamazaki T Saido TC Ito Y Yokofujita J Okeda R Ihara Y 1998 Astrocytes containing amyloid beta-protein (Abeta)-positive granules are associated with Abeta40-positive diffuse plaques in the aged human brain Am J Pathol 152 983 92 9546359
42 Ghetti B Oblak AL Boeve BF Johnson KA Dickerson BC Goedert M 2015 Invited review: Frontotemporal dementia caused by microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) mutations: a chameleon for neuropathology and neuroimaging Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 41 24 46 25556536
43 Ghetti B Wszolek Z Boeve B Spina S Goedert M 2011 Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 Neurodegeneration: The molecular pathology of dementia and movement disorders Dickson DW Weller RO 110 34 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Chichester, UK
44 Goedert M Spillantini MG Potier MC Ulrich J Crowther RA 1989 Cloning and sequencing of the cDNA encoding an isoform of microtubule-associated protein tau containing four tandem repeats: differential expression of tau protein mRNAs in human brain EMBO J 8 393 9 2498079
45 Guo JL Lee VM 2014 Cell-to-cell transmission of pathogenic proteins in neurodegenerative diseases Nat Med 20 130 8 24504409
46 Gyure KA Durham R Stewart WF Smialek JE Troncoso JC 2001 Intraneuronal abeta-amyloid precedes development of amyloid plaques in Down syndrome Arch Pathol Lab Med 125 489 92 11260621
47 Halliday GM Song YJ Creasey H Morris JG Brooks WS Kril JJ 2006 Neuropathology in the S305S tau gene mutation Brain 129 E40 16477083
48 Hauw JJ Verny M Delaere P Cervera P He Y Duyckaerts C 1990 Constant neurofibrillary changes in the neocortex in progressive supranuclear palsy. Basic differences with Alzheimer’s disease and aging Neurosci Lett 119 182 6 1704110
49 Hayashi S Toyoshima Y Hasegawa M Umeda Y Wakabayashi K Tokiguchi S Iwatsubo T Takahashi H 2002 Late-onset frontotemporal dementia with a novel exon 1 (Arg5His) tau gene mutation Ann Neurol 51 525 30 11921059
50 Hedley-Whyte ET Goldman JE Nedergaard M Friedman A Han X Schmidt RE Powers JM 2009 Hyaline protoplasmic astrocytopathy of neocortex J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 136 47 19151628
51 Higuchi M Ishihara T Zhang B Hong M Andreadis A Trojanowski J Lee VM 2002 Transgenic mouse model of tauopathies with glial pathology and nervous system degeneration Neuron 35 433 46 12165467
52 Hogg M Grujic ZM Baker M Demirci S Guillozet AL Sweet AP Herzog LL Weintraub S Mesulam MM LaPointe NE Gamblin TC Berry RW Binder LI de Silva R Lees A Espinoza M Davies P Grover A Sahara N Ishizawa T Dickson D Yen SH Hutton M Bigio EH 2003 The L266V tau mutation is associated with frontotemporal dementia and Pick-like 3R and 4R tauopathy Acta Neuropathol 106 323 36 12883828
53 Hong M Zhukareva V Vogelsberg-Ragaglia V Wszolek Z Reed L Miller BI Geschwind DH Bird TD McKeel D Goate A Morris JC Wilhelmsen KC Schellenberg GD Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 1998 Mutation-specific functional impairments in distinct tau isoforms of hereditary FTDP-17 Science 282 1914 7 9836646
54 Iijima M Tabira T Poorkaj P Schellenberg GD Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Schmidt ML Takahashi K Nabika T Matsumoto T Yamashita Y Yoshioka S Ishino H 1999 A distinct familial presenile dementia with a novel missense mutation in the tau gene Neuroreport 10 497 501 10208578
55 Ikeda C Yokota O Nagao S Ishizu H Oshima E Hasegawa M Okahisa Y Terada S Yamada N 2016 The Relationship Between Development of Neuronal and Astrocytic Tau Pathologies in Subcortical Nuclei and Progression of Argyrophilic Grain Disease Brain Pathol 26 488 505 26439704
56 Ikeda K 1996 Glial fibrillary tangles and argyrophilic threads: Classification and disease specificity Neuropathology 16 71 7
57 Ikeda K 1996 Glial fibrillary tangles and argyrophilic threads: Classification and disease specificity Neuropathology 16 71 7
58 Ikeda K Akiyama H Arai T Nishimura T 1998 Glial tau pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: their nature and comparison with neuronal tangles Neurobiol Aging 19 S85 91 9562475
59 Ikeda K Akiyama H Kondo H Haga C Tanno E Tokuda T Ikeda S 1995 Thorn-shaped astrocytes: possibly secondarily induced tau-positive glial fibrillary tangles Acta Neuropathol 90 620 5 8615083
60 Irwin DJ Brettschneider J McMillan CT Cooper F Olm C Arnold SE Van Deerlin VM Seeley WW Miller BL Lee EB Lee VM Grossman M Trojanowski JQ 2016 Deep clinical and neuropathological phenotyping of Pick disease Ann Neurol 79 272 87 26583316
61 Iseki E Matsumura T Marui W Hino H Odawara T Sugiyama N Suzuki K Sawada H Arai T Kosaka K 2001 Familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism with a novel N296H mutation in exon 10 of the tau gene and a widespread tau accumulation in the glial cells Acta Neuropathol 102 285 92 11585254
62 Jucker M Walker LC 2013 Self-propagation of pathogenic protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases Nature 501 45 51 24005412
63 Kobayashi K Kidani T Ujike H Hayashi M Ishihara T Miyazu K Kuroda S Koshino Y 2003 Another phenotype of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome-17 (FTDP-17) with a missense mutation of S305N closely resembling Pick’s disease J Neurol 250 990 2 12928922
64 Kobayashi T Ota S Tanaka K Ito Y Hasegawa M Umeda Y Motoi Y Takanashi M Yasuhara M Anno M Mizuno Y Mori H 2003 A novel L266V mutation of the tau gene causes frontotemporal dementia with a unique tau pathology Ann Neurol 53 133 7 12509859
65 Koga S Dickson DW Bieniek KF 2016 Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy Pathology in Multiple System Atrophy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 75 963 70 27543120
66 Komori T 1999 Tau-positive glial inclusions in progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration and Pick’s disease Brain Pathol 9 663 79 10517506
67 Komori T Arai N Oda M Nakayama H Mori H Yagishita S Takahashi T Amano N Murayama S Murakami S Shibata N Kobayashi M Sasaki S Iwata M 1998 Astrocytic plaques and tufts of abnormal fibers do not coexist in corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy Acta Neuropathol 96 401 8 9797005
68 Kovacs GG 2015 Invited review: Neuropathology of tauopathies: principles and practice Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 41 3 23 25495175
69 Kovacs GG 2016 Molecular Pathological Classification of Neurodegenerative Diseases: Turning towards Precision Medicine Int J Mol Sci 17
70 Kovacs GG 2017 Globular glial inclusions unveil enigmas of MAPT mutations Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 43 191 3 27992965
71 Kovacs GG Breydo L Green R Kis V Puska G Lorincz P Perju-Dumbrava L Giera R Pirker W Lutz M Lachmann I Budka H Uversky VN Molnar K Laszlo L 2014 Intracellular processing of disease-associated alpha-synuclein in the human brain suggests prion-like cell-to-cell spread Neurobiol Dis 69 76 92 24878508
72 Kovacs GG Budka H 2009 Molecular pathology of human prion diseases Int J Mol Sci 10 976 99 19399233
73 Kovacs GG Ferrer I Grinberg LT Alafuzoff I Attems J Budka H Cairns NJ Crary JF Duyckaerts C Ghetti B Halliday GM Ironside JW Love S Mackenzie IR Munoz DG Murray ME Nelson PT Takahashi H Trojanowski JQ Ansorge O Arzberger T Baborie A Beach TG Bieniek KF Bigio EH Bodi I Dugger BN Feany M Gelpi E Gentleman SM Giaccone G Hatanpaa KJ Heale R Hof PR Hofer M Hortobagyi T Jellinger K Jicha GA Ince P Kofler J Kovari E Kril JJ Mann DM Matej R McKee AC McLean C Milenkovic I Montine TJ Murayama S Lee EB Rahimi J Rodriguez RD Rozemuller A Schneider JA Schultz C Seeley W Seilhean D Smith C Tagliavini F Takao M Thal DR Toledo JB Tolnay M Troncoso JC Vinters HV Weis S Wharton SB White CL 3rd Wisniewski T Woulfe JM Yamada M Dickson DW 2016 Aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG): harmonized evaluation strategy Acta Neuropathol 131 87 102 26659578
74 Kovacs GG Kwong LK Grossman M Irwin DJ Lee EB Robinson JL Suh E Van Deerlin VM Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2016 Tauopathy with hippocampal 4-repeat tau immunoreactive spherical inclusions: a report of three cases Brain Pathol
75 Kovacs GG Majtenyi K Spina S Murrell JR Gelpi E Hoftberger R Fraser G Crowther RA Goedert M Budka H Ghetti B 2008 White matter tauopathy with globular glial inclusions: a distinct sporadic frontotemporal lobar degeneration J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 963 75 18800011
76 Kovacs GG Milenkovic I Wohrer A Hoftberger R Gelpi E Haberler C Honigschnabl S Reiner-Concin A Heinzl H Jungwirth S Krampla W Fischer P Budka H 2013 Non-Alzheimer neurodegenerative pathologies and their combinations are more frequent than commonly believed in the elderly brain: a community-based autopsy series Acta Neuropathol 126 365 84 23900711
77 Kovacs GG Molnar K Laszlo L Strobel T Botond G Honigschnabl S Reiner-Concin A Palkovits M Fischer P Budka H 2011 A peculiar constellation of tau pathology defines a subset of dementia in the elderly Acta Neuropathol 122 205 22 21437732
78 Kovacs GG Preusser M Strohschneider M Budka H 2005 Subcellular localization of disease-associated prion protein in the human brain Am J Pathol 166 287 94 15632020
79 Kovacs GG Rahimi J Strobel T Lutz MI Regelsberger G Streichenberger N Perret-Liaudet A Hoftberger R Liberski PP Budka H Sikorska B 2017 Tau pathology in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease revisited Brain Pathol 27 332 44 27377321
80 Kovacs GG Robinson JL Xie SX Lee EB Grossman M Wolk DA Irwin DJ Weintraub D Kim CF Schuck T Yousef A Wagner ST Suh E Van Deerlin VM Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2017 Evaluating the Patterns of Aging-Related Tau Astrogliopathy Unravels Novel Insights Into Brain Aging and Neurodegenerative Diseases J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 76 270 88 28340083
81 Kovacs GG Rozemuller AJ van Swieten JC Gelpi E Majtenyi K Al-Sarraj S Troakes C Bodi I King A Hortobagyi T Esiri MM Ansorge O Giaccone G Ferrer I Arzberger T Bogdanovic N Nilsson T Leisser I Alafuzoff I Ironside JW Kretzschmar H Budka H 2013 Neuropathology of the hippocampus in FTLD-Tau with Pick bodies: a study of the BrainNet Europe Consortium Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 39 166 78 22471883
82 Kovacs GG Wagner U Dumont B Pikkarainen M Osman AA Streichenberger N Leisser I Verchere J Baron T Alafuzoff I Budka H Perret-Liaudet A Lachmann I 2012 An antibody with high reactivity for disease-associated alpha-synuclein reveals extensive brain pathology Acta Neuropathol 124 37 50 22370907
83 Kovacs GG Xie SX Lee EB Robinson JL Caswell C Irwin DJ Toledo JB Attems J Bencze J Bieniek KF Bigio EH Bodi I Budka H Dickson DW Dugger BN Duyckaerts C Ferrer I Forrest SL Gelpi E Gentleman SM Giaccone G Grinberg LT Halliday G Hatanpaa KJ Hof PR Hofer M Hortobagyi T Ironside JW King A Kofler J Kövari E Kril JJ Love S Mackenzie IR Mao W Matej R McLean C Munoz DG Murray ME Neltner J Nelson PT Ritchie D Rodriguez RD Rohan Z Rozemuller A Sakai K Schultz C Seilhean D Smith V Tacik P Takahashi H Takao M Thal DR Weis S Wharton SB White CL 3rd Woulfe JM Yamada M Trojanowski JQ 2017 Multisite assessment of aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) J Neuropathol Exp Neurol In press
84 Ksiezak-Reding H Morgan K Mattiace LA Davies P Liu WK Yen SH Weidenheim K Dickson DW 1994 Ultrastructure and biochemical composition of paired helical filaments in corticobasal degeneration Am J Pathol 145 1496 508 7992852
85 Kurt MA Davies DC Kidd M 1999 beta-Amyloid immunoreactivity in astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease brain biopsies: an electron microscope study Exp Neurol 158 221 8 10448435
86 Kwong LK Uryu K Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2008 TDP-43 proteinopathies: neurodegenerative protein misfolding diseases without amyloidosis Neurosignals 16 41 51 18097159
87 Lace G Ince PG Brayne C Savva GM Matthews FE de Silva R Simpson JE Wharton SB 2012 Mesial temporal astrocyte tau pathology in the MRC-CFAS ageing brain cohort Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 34 15 24 22868294
88 Le Guennec K Quenez O Nicolas G Wallon D Rousseau S Richard AC Alexander J Paschou P Charbonnier C Bellenguez C Grenier-Boley B Lechner D Bihoreau MT Olaso R Boland A Meyer V Deleuze JF Amouyel P Munter HM Bourque G Lathrop M Frebourg T Redon R Letenneur L Dartigues JF Martinaud O Kalev O Mehrabian S Traykov L Strobel T Le Ber I Caroppo P Epelbaum S Jonveaux T Pasquier F Rollin-Sillaire A Genin E Guyant-Marechal L Kovacs GG Lambert JC Hannequin D Campion D Rovelet-Lecrux A 2016 17q21.31 duplication causes prominent tau-related dementia with increased MAPT expression Mol Psychiatry 10.1038/mp.2016.226
89 Lee EB Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Neumann M 2008 TDP-43 immunoreactivity in anoxic, ischemic and neoplastic lesions of the central nervous system Acta Neuropathol 115 305 11 18087705
90 Lee HJ Suk JE Patrick C Bae EJ Cho JH Rho S Hwang D Masliah E Lee SJ 2010 Direct transfer of alpha-synuclein from neuron to astroglia causes inflammatory responses in synucleinopathies J Biol Chem 285 9262 72 20071342
91 Lee SJ Seo BR Koh JY 2015 Metallothionein-3 modulates the amyloid beta endocytosis of astrocytes through its effects on actin polymerization Mol Brain 8 84 26637294
92 Lee VM Goedert M Trojanowski JQ 2001 Neurodegenerative tauopathies Annu Rev Neurosci 24 1121 59 11520930
93 Liberski PP Streichenberger N Giraud P Soutrenon M Meyronnet D Sikorska B Kopp N 2005 Ultrastructural pathology of prion diseases revisited: brain biopsy studies Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 31 88 96 15634235
94 Lin WL Castanedes-Casey M Dickson DW 2009 Transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43 microvasculopathy in frontotemporal degeneration and familial Lewy body disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 1167 76 19816201
95 Lindstrom V Gustafsson G Sanders LH Howlett EH Sigvardson J Kasrayan A Ingelsson M Bergstrom J Erlandsson A 2017 Extensive uptake of alpha-synuclein oligomers in astrocytes results in sustained intracellular deposits and mitochondrial damage Mol Cell Neurosci 82 143 56 28450268
96 Ling H Kovacs GG Vonsattel JP Davey K Mok KY Hardy J Morris HR Warner TT Holton JL Revesz T 2016 Astrogliopathy predominates the earliest stage of corticobasal degeneration pathology Brain 139 3237 52 27797812
97 Lippa CF Zhukareva V Kawarai T Uryu K Shafiq M Nee LE Grafman J Liang Y St George-Hyslop PH Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2000 Frontotemporal dementia with novel tau pathology and a Glu342Val tau mutation Ann Neurol 48 850 8 11117541
98 Liu AK Goldfinger MH Questari HE Pearce RK Gentleman SM 2016 ARTAG in the basal forebrain: widening the constellation of astrocytic tau pathology Acta Neuropathol Commun 4 59 27297017
99 Lopez-Gonzalez I Carmona M Blanco R Luna-Munoz J Martinez-Mandonado A Mena R Ferrer I 2013 Characterization of thorn-shaped astrocytes in white matter of temporal lobe in Alzheimer’s disease brains Brain Pathol 23 144 53 22882361
100 MacDonald ST Sutherland K Ironside JW 1996 A quantitative and qualitative analysis of prion protein immunohistochemical staining in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease using four anti prion protein antibodies Neurodegeneration 5 87 94 8731387
101 Mackenzie IR Ansorge O Strong M Bilbao J Zinman L Ang LC Baker M Stewart H Eisen A Rademakers R Neumann M 2011 Pathological heterogeneity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations: two distinct patterns correlating with disease severity and mutation Acta Neuropathol 122 87 98 21604077
102 Mackenzie IR Neumann M 2017 Reappraisal of TDP-43 pathology in FTLD-U subtypes Acta Neuropathol 10.1007/s00401-017-1716-8
103 Mackenzie IR Neumann M 2017 Reappraisal of TDP-43 pathology in FTLD-U subtypes Acta Neuropathol
104 Mackenzie IR Neumann M Baborie A Sampathu DM Du Plessis D Jaros E Perry RH Trojanowski JQ Mann DM Lee VM 2011 A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology Acta Neuropathol 122 111 3 21644037
105 Malkani R D’Souza I Gwinn-Hardy K Schellenberg GD Hardy J Momeni P 2006 A MAPT mutation in a regulatory element upstream of exon 10 causes frontotemporal dementia Neurobiol Dis 22 401 3 16503405
106 Martinez-Maldonado A Luna-Munoz J Ferrer I 2016 Incidental corticobasal degeneration Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 42 659 63 27461552
107 Mattiace LA Wu E Aronson M Dickson DW 1991 A new type of neuritic plaque without amyloid in corticonigral degeneration without achromasia J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 50 310 abstr
108 McKee AC Cairns NJ Dickson DW Folkerth RD Keene CD Litvan I Perl DP Stein TD Vonsattel JP Stewart W Tripodis Y Crary JF Bieniek KF Dams-O’Connor K Alvarez VE Gordon WA group TC 2016 The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Acta Neuropathol 131 75 86 26667418
109 McKee AC Stein TD Kiernan PT Alvarez VE 2015 The neuropathology of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Brain Pathol 25 350 64 25904048
110 McKee AC Stern RA Nowinski CJ Stein TD Alvarez VE Daneshvar DH Lee HS Wojtowicz SM Hall G Baugh CM Riley DO Kubilus CA Cormier KA Jacobs MA Martin BR Abraham CR Ikezu T Reichard RR Wolozin BL Budson AE Goldstein LE Kowall NW Cantu RC 2013 The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy Brain 136 43 64 23208308
111 McKeith IG Dickson DW Lowe J Emre M O’Brien JT Feldman H Cummings J Duda JE Lippa C Perry EK Aarsland D Arai H Ballard CG Boeve B Burn DJ Costa D Del Ser T Dubois B Galasko D Gauthier S Goetz CG Gomez-Tortosa E Halliday G Hansen LA Hardy J Iwatsubo T Kalaria RN Kaufer D Kenny RA Korczyn A Kosaka K Lee VM Lees A Litvan I Londos E Lopez OL Minoshima S Mizuno Y Molina JA Mukaetova-Ladinska EB Pasquier F Perry RH Schulz JB Trojanowski JQ Yamada M Consortium on DLB 2005 Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB Consortium Neurology 65 1863 72 16237129
112 Milenkovic I Kovacs GG 2013 Incidental corticobasal degeneration in a 76-year-old woman Clin Neuropathol 32 69 72 23006474
113 Mori F Tanji K Kon T Odagiri S Hattori M Hoshikawa Y Kono C Yasui K Yokoi S Hasegawa Y Yoshida M Wakabayashi K 2012 FUS immunoreactivity of neuronal and glial intranuclear inclusions in intranuclear inclusion body disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 38 322 8 21883376
114 Mori F Tanji K Yoshimoto M Takahashi H Wakabayashi K 2002 Demonstration of alpha-synuclein immunoreactivity in neuronal and glial cytoplasm in normal human brain tissue using proteinase K and formic acid pretreatment Exp Neurol 176 98 104 12093086
115 Mori F Tanji K Zhang H Kakita A Takahashi H Wakabayashi K 2008 alpha-Synuclein pathology in the neostriatum in Parkinson’s disease Acta Neuropathol 115 453 9 18000672
116 Munoz DG Neumann M Kusaka H Yokota O Ishihara K Terada S Kuroda S Mackenzie IR 2009 FUS pathology in basophilic inclusion body disease Acta Neuropathol 118 617 27 19830439
117 Munoz DG Woulfe J Kertesz A 2007 Argyrophilic thorny astrocyte clusters in association with Alzheimer’s disease pathology in possible primary progressive aphasia Acta Neuropathol 114 347 57 17637999
118 Nagele RG D’Andrea MR Lee H Venkataraman V Wang HY 2003 Astrocytes accumulate A beta 42 and give rise to astrocytic amyloid plaques in Alzheimer disease brains Brain Res 971 197 209 12706236
119 Nakamura K Mori F Kon T Tanji K Miki Y Tomiyama M Kurotaki H Toyoshima Y Kakita A Takahashi H Yamada M Wakabayashi K 2016 Accumulation of phosphorylated alpha-synuclein in subpial and periventricular astrocytes in multiple system atrophy of long duration Neuropathology 36 157 67 26331967
120 Neumann M Bentmann E Dormann D Jawaid A DeJesus-Hernandez M Ansorge O Roeber S Kretzschmar HA Munoz DG Kusaka H Yokota O Ang LC Bilbao J Rademakers R Haass C Mackenzie IR 2011 FET proteins TAF15 and EWS are selective markers that distinguish FTLD with FUS pathology from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations Brain 134 2595 609 21856723
121 Neumann M Kwong LK Truax AC Vanmassenhove B Kretzschmar HA Van Deerlin VM Clark CM Grossman M Miller BL Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2007 TDP-43-positive white matter pathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 66 177 83 17356379
122 Neumann M Rademakers R Roeber S Baker M Kretzschmar HA Mackenzie IR 2009 A new subtype of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with FUS pathology Brain 132 2922 31 19674978
123 Neumann M Roeber S Kretzschmar HA Rademakers R Baker M Mackenzie IR 2009 Abundant FUS-immunoreactive pathology in neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease Acta Neuropathol 118 605 16 19669651
124 Neumann M Sampathu DM Kwong LK Truax AC Micsenyi MC Chou TT Bruce J Schuck T Grossman M Clark CM McCluskey LF Miller BL Masliah E Mackenzie IR Feldman H Feiden W Kretzschmar HA Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2006 Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 314 130 3 17023659
125 Neumann M Schulz-Schaeffer W Crowther RA Smith MJ Spillantini MG Goedert M Kretzschmar HA 2001 Pick’s disease associated with the novel Tau gene mutation K369I Ann Neurol 50 503 13 11601501
126 Nishimura M Namba Y Ikeda K Oda M 1992 Glial fibrillary tangles with straight tubules in the brains of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy Neurosci Lett 143 35 8 1436679
127 Noy S Krawitz S Del Bigio MR 2016 Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy-Like Abnormalities in a Routine Neuropathology Service J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 75 1145 54 27815395
128 Oide T Kinoshita T Arima K 2006 Regression stage senile plaques in the natural course of Alzheimer’s disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 32 539 56 16972888
129 Papp MI Kahn JE Lantos PL 1989 Glial cytoplasmic inclusions in the CNS of patients with multiple system atrophy (striatonigral degeneration, olivopontocerebellar atrophy and Shy-Drager syndrome) J Neurol Sci 94 79 100 2559165
130 Pekny M Pekna M Messing A Steinhauser C Lee JM Parpura V Hol EM Sofroniew MV Verkhratsky A 2016 Astrocytes: a central element in neurological diseases Acta Neuropathol 131 323 45 26671410
131 Piao YS Mori F Hayashi S Tanji K Yoshimoto M Kakita A Wakabayashi K Takahashi H 2003 Alpha-synuclein pathology affecting Bergmann glia of the cerebellum in patients with alpha-synucleinopathies Acta Neuropathol 105 403 9 12624794
132 Pickering-Brown SM Baker M Nonaka T Ikeda K Sharma S Mackenzie J Simpson SA Moore JW Snowden JS de Silva R Revesz T Hasegawa M Hutton M Mann DM 2004 Frontotemporal dementia with Pick-type histology associated with Q336R mutation in the tau gene Brain 127 1415 26 15047590
133 Plowey ED Ziskin JL 2016 Hippocampal phospho-tau/MAPT neuropathology in the fornix in Alzheimer disease: an immunohistochemical autopsy study Acta Neuropathol Commun 4 114 27793193
134 Poorkaj P Muma NA Zhukareva V Cochran EJ Shannon KM Hurtig H Koller WC Bird TD Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Schellenberg GD 2002 An R5L tau mutation in a subject with a progressive supranuclear palsy phenotype Ann Neurol 52 511 6 12325083
135 Probst A Langui D Lautenschlager C Ulrich J Brion JP Anderton BH 1988 Progressive supranuclear palsy: extensive neuropil threads in addition to neurofibrillary tangles. Very similar antigenicity of subcortical neuronal pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy and Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 77 61 8 3149122
136 Reed LA Schmidt ML Wszolek ZK Balin BJ Soontornniyomkij V Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Schelper RL 1998 The neuropathology of a chromosome 17-linked autosomal dominant parkinsonism and dementia (“pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration”) J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57 588 601 9630238
137 Ries M Sastre M 2016 Mechanisms of Abeta Clearance and Degradation by Glial Cells Front Aging Neurosci 8 160 27458370
138 Rohan Z Matej R Rusina R Kovacs GG 2014 Oligodendroglial response in the spinal cord in TDP-43 proteinopathy with motor neuron involvement Neurodegener Dis 14 117 24 25115814
139 Rohan Z Milenkovic I Lutz MI Matej R Kovacs GG 2016 Shared and Distinct Patterns of Oligodendroglial Response in alpha-Synucleinopathies and Tauopathies J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 75 1100 9 27678346
140 Ros R Thobois S Streichenberger N Kopp N Sanchez MP Perez M Hoenicka J Avila J Honnorat J de Yebenes JG 2005 A new mutation of the tau gene, G303V, in early-onset familial progressive supranuclear palsy Arch Neurol 62 1444 50 16157753
141 Saito Y Ruberu NN Sawabe M Arai T Tanaka N Kakuta Y Yamanouchi H Murayama S 2004 Staging of argyrophilic grains: an age-associated tauopathy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63 911 8 15453090
142 Sakai K Piao YS Kikugawa K Ohara S Hasegawa M Takano H Fukase M Nishizawa M Kakita A Takahashi H 2006 Corticobasal degeneration with focal, massive tau accumulation in the subcortical white matter astrocytes Acta Neuropathol 112 341 8 16804710
143 Sakurai A Makioka K Fukuda T Takatama M Okamoto K 2013 Accumulation of phosphorylated TDP-43 in the CNS of a patient with Cockayne syndrome Neuropathology 33 673 7 23581709
144 Santpere G Ferrer I 2009 Delineation of early changes in cases with progressive supranuclear palsy-like pathology. Astrocytes in striatum are primary targets of tau phosphorylation and GFAP oxidation Brain Pathol 19 177 87 18462470
145 Schultz C Braak H Braak E 1996 A sex difference in neurodegeneration of the human hypothalamus Neurosci Lett 212 103 6 8832649
146 Schultz C Dehghani F Hubbard GB Thal DR Struckhoff G Braak E Braak H 2000 Filamentous tau pathology in nerve cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes of aged baboons J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 59 39 52 10744034
147 Schultz C Ghebremedhin E Braak E Braak H 1999 Sex-dependent cytoskeletal changes of the human hypothalamus develop independently of Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 160 186 93 10630203
148 Schultz C Ghebremedhin E Del Tredici K Rub U Braak H 2004 High prevalence of thorn-shaped astrocytes in the aged human medial temporal lobe Neurobiol Aging 25 397 405 15123344
149 Shibuya K Yagishita S Nakamura A Uchihara T 2011 Perivascular orientation of astrocytic plaques and tuft-shaped astrocytes Brain Res 1404 50 4 21722877
150 Sofroniew MV Vinters HV 2010 Astrocytes: biology and pathology Acta Neuropathol 119 7 35 20012068
151 Song YJ Halliday GM Holton JL Lashley T O’Sullivan SS McCann H Lees AJ Ozawa T Williams DR Lockhart PJ Revesz TR 2009 Degeneration in different parkinsonian syndromes relates to astrocyte type and astrocyte protein expression J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 1073 83 19918119
152 Spillantini MG Yoshida H Rizzini C Lantos PL Khan N Rossor MN Goedert M Brown J 2000 A novel tau mutation (N296N) in familial dementia with swollen achromatic neurons and corticobasal inclusion bodies Ann Neurol 48 939 43 11117553
153 Spina S Murrell JR Yoshida H Ghetti B Bermingham N Sweeney B Dlouhy SR Crowther RA Goedert M Keohane C 2007 The novel Tau mutation G335S: clinical, neuropathological and molecular characterization Acta Neuropathol 113 461 70 17186252
154 Stanford PM Halliday GM Brooks WS Kwok JB Storey CE Creasey H Morris JG Fulham MJ Schofield PR 2000 Progressive supranuclear palsy pathology caused by a novel silent mutation in exon 10 of the tau gene: expansion of the disease phenotype caused by tau gene mutations Brain 123 Pt 5 880 93 10775534
155 Surgucheva I Newell KL Burns J Surguchov A 2014 New alpha- and gamma-synuclein immunopathological lesions in human brain Acta Neuropathol Commun 2 132 25209836
156 Tacik P DeTure M Lin WL Sanchez Contreras M Wojtas A Hinkle KM Fujioka S Baker MC Walton RL Carlomagno Y Brown PH Strongosky AJ Kouri N Murray ME Petrucelli L Josephs KA Rademakers R Ross OA Wszolek ZK Dickson DW 2015 A novel tau mutation, p.K317N, causes globular glial tauopathy Acta Neuropathol 130 199 214 25900293
157 Tacik P Sanchez-Contreras M DeTure M Murray ME Rademakers R Ross OA Wszolek ZK Parisi JE Knopman DS Petersen RC Dickson DW 2017 Clinicopathologic heterogeneity in frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) due to microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) p.P301L mutation, including a patient with globular glial tauopathy Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 43 200 14 27859539
158 Terada S Ishizu H Haraguchi T Takehisa Y Tanabe Y Kawai K Kuroda S 2000 Tau-negative astrocytic star-like inclusions and coiled bodies in dementia with Lewy bodies Acta Neuropathol 100 464 8 11045667
159 Thal DR Rub U Orantes M Braak H 2002 Phases of A beta-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 58 1791 800 12084879
160 Thal DR Schultz C Dehghani F Yamaguchi H Braak H Braak E 2000 Amyloid beta-protein (Abeta)-containing astrocytes are located preferentially near N-terminal-truncated Abeta deposits in the human entorhinal cortex Acta Neuropathol 100 608 17 11078212
161 Togo T Dickson DW 2002 Tau accumulation in astrocytes in progressive supranuclear palsy is a degenerative rather than a reactive process Acta Neuropathol 104 398 402 12200627
162 Trojanowski JQ Revesz T Neuropathology Working Group on MSA 2007 Proposed neuropathological criteria for the post mortem diagnosis of multiple system atrophy Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 33 615 20 17990994
163 Uryu K Nakashima-Yasuda H Forman MS Kwong LK Clark CM Grossman M Miller BL Kretzschmar HA Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Neumann M 2008 Concomitant TAR-DNA-binding protein 43 pathology is present in Alzheimer disease and corticobasal degeneration but not in other tauopathies J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 555 64 18520774
164 van Herpen E Rosso SM Serverijnen LA Yoshida H Breedveld G van de Graaf R Kamphorst W Ravid R Willemsen R Dooijes D Majoor-Krakauer D Kros JM Crowther RA Goedert M Heutink P van Swieten JC 2003 Variable phenotypic expression and extensive tau pathology in two families with the novel tau mutation L315R Ann Neurol 54 573 81 14595646
165 Verkhratsky A Zorec R Parpura V 2017 Stratification of astrocytes in healthy and diseased brain Brain Pathol In press
166 Wakabayashi K Hayashi S Yoshimoto M Kudo H Takahashi H 2000 NACP/alpha-synuclein-positive filamentous inclusions in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes of Parkinson’s disease brains Acta Neuropathol 99 14 20 10651022
167 Wakabayashi K Oyanagi K Makifuchi T Ikuta F Homma A Homma Y Horikawa Y Tokiguchi S 1994 Corticobasal degeneration: etiopathological significance of the cytoskeletal alterations Acta Neuropathol 87 545 53 8091948
168 Wakabayashi K Shibasaki Y Hasegawa M Horikawa Y Soma Y Hayashi S Morita T Iwatsubo T Takahashi H 2000 Primary progressive aphasia with focal glial tauopathy Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 26 477 81 11054189
169 Walker AK Daniels CM Goldman JE Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Messing A 2014 Astrocytic TDP-43 pathology in Alexander disease J Neurosci 34 6448 58 24806671
170 Yamada T Calne DB Akiyama H McGeer EG McGeer PL 1993 Further observations on Tau-positive glia in the brains with progressive supranuclear palsy Acta Neuropathol 85 308 15 7681616
171 Yamada T McGeer PL 1990 Oligodendroglial microtubular masses: an abnormality observed in some human neurodegenerative diseases Neurosci Lett 120 163 6 2293103
172 Yamada T McGeer PL McGeer EG 1992 Appearance of paired nucleated, Tau-positive glia in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy brain tissue Neurosci Lett 135 99 102 1371861
173 Yamazaki M Nakano I Imazu O Kaieda R Terashi A 1994 Astrocytic straight tubules in the brain of a patient with Pick’s disease Acta Neuropathol 88 587 91 7879608
174 Yoshida K Hata Y Kinoshita K Takashima S Tanaka K Nishida N 2017 Incipient progressive supranuclear palsy is more common than expected and may comprise clinicopathological subtypes: a forensic autopsy series Acta Neuropathol 133 809 23 28064358
175 Yoshida M 2014 Astrocytic inclusions in progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration Neuropathology 34 555 70 25124031
176 Zarranz JJ Ferrer I Lezcano E Forcadas MI Eizaguirre B Atares B Puig B Gomez-Esteban JC Fernandez-Maiztegui C Rouco I Perez-Concha T Fernandez M Rodriguez O Rodriguez-Martinez AB de Pancorbo MM Pastor P Perez-Tur J 2005 A novel mutation (K317M) in the MAPT gene causes FTDP and motor neuron disease Neurology 64 1578 85 15883319
