LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8809320
1600
Neuron
Neuron
Neuron
0896-6273
1097-4199

28641106
5821515
10.1016/j.neuron.2017.04.010
NIHMS867420
Article
Antisense oligonucleotides: Translation from mouse models to human neurodegenerative diseases
Schoch Kathleen M. 1
Miller Timothy M. 1
1 Department of Neurology, Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110
Corresponding Author: Timothy M. Miller, Washington University in St. Louis, 115 Biotech Bldg, Box 8111, 660 S. Euclid St., St. Louis, MO 63110, (314) 362-8169., miller.t@wustl.edu
9 2 2018
21 6 2017
21 6 2018
94 6 10561070
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Multiple neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by single protein dysfunction and aggregation. Treatment strategies for these diseases have often targeted downstream pathways to ameliorate consequences of protein dysfunction; however, targeting the source of that dysfunction, the affected protein itself, seems most judicious to achieve a highly effective therapeutic outcome. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are small sequences of DNA able to target RNA transcripts resulting in reduced or modified protein expression. ASOs are ideal candidates for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases given numerous advancements made to their chemical modifications and delivery methods. Successes achieved in both animal models and human clinical trials have proven ASOs both safe and effective. With proper considerations in mind regarding the human applicability of ASOs, we anticipate ongoing in vivo research and clinical trial development of ASOs for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.

antisense oligonucleotides
clinical trial
in vivo models
neurodegeneration
therapy

A Re-Emergence of Antisense Technology

Recent years have seen a re-emergence of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) as valuable tools to inform on disease mechanisms and as powerful therapeutics for disease intervention. Part of this recent success can be attributed to improvements made to the ASO structure and chemical modifications that have made ASOs more advantageous and efficient as potential strategies for the treatment of disease. ASOs can exert their gene targeting effects through different mechanisms of action making them amenable to a variety of molecular targets and disease processes. These advancements in ASO technology have been coupled with the surprising empiric finding that, despite being highly charged and large, ASOs distribute widely throughout the central nervous system (CNS) when delivered to the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). This characteristic has greatly enabled the application of ASOs as therapeutic strategies for CNS disorders, many of which currently have no adequate treatment.

The first ASO to enter clinical trial, targeted against p53 in acute myelogenous leukemia, drew upon 20 years of chemical advancements prior to its introduction in 1993 (Bayever et al., 1993). This milestone was closely followed by the first market approval for the antisense therapeutic, fomivirsen, in 1998 for the treatment of cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with immunodeficiency (Marwick, 1998). Since then, numerous ASOs have progressed to human clinical trial for diseases including cancer, diabetes, and muscular dystrophy (Bennett and Swayze, 2010), taking advantage of the various mechanisms and synthetic structures now available for the design of ASO therapies. Neurodegenerative diseases, specifically, are in imminent need of an effective therapy, and ASOs offer one possible strategy. Considering the remarkable clinical trial successes that, to date, have been achieved in diseases like spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, researchers and patients are enthusiastic about ASO application to neurodegenerative diseases. Many neurodegenerative diseases collectively are characterized by the dysfunction or abnormal accumulation of toxic proteins. Therefore, strategies aimed at reducing levels of the toxic protein or creating non-toxic modifications are attractive approaches for clinical development. ASOs and their gene targeting effects provide a promising solution, and their successful translation from rodent models to human patients underscores their vast potential.

Harnessing Antisense Oligonucleotide Structure and Function

Structure and chemical modifications

ASOs are small, single stranded sequences of DNA, 8-50 base pairs in length, composed of a phosphate backbone and sugar rings. The structure and sequence allows for specific, complementary matching with target RNA by Watson-Crick base pairing. ASO properties including solubility, binding, potency, and stability derive from various modifications to both the backbone and sugar rings. Backbone modifications both increase affinity to the RNA target and protect the ASO from nuclease degradation. One of the first and most commonly used modifications made to the phosphate backbone replaced the singly bonded oxygen group with a sulfur ion, creating a phosphorothioate (PS) linkage (Figure 1). This modification endows the ASO with enhanced stability and protection against nuclease degradation, increased binding to plasma proteins to maintain stable concentrations in serum, better cellular uptake, and the ability to recruit RNase H enzyme for target degradation (Bennett and Swayze, 2010). A major disadvantage to the PS backbone modification is the potential inflammatory response generated at high concentrations (Crooke, 2007) and prohibitive affinity for plasma protein binding (Geary et al., 2001) which may produce adverse effects and other limitations in a clinical setting.

Creating PS molecules and other ASOs with nuclease resistance and enhanced potency must be balanced against activation of the innate immune response. For instance, CpG oligodeoxynucleotides motifs (i.e. an unmethylated “C” followed by a “G” base separated by a phosphodiester linkage, common in particular base sequences) are potent immune activators (Younis et al., 2006) and, therefore are often avoided in designing ASOs for in vivo application. An exception might be when immune stimulation is a desired property, for example with immunotherapies (Vollmer and Krieg, 2009). Yet, even with these considerations, it is likely that all ASOs are recognized as foreign DNA by toll-like receptors of the innate immune system. Much of the chemistry at the 2′ position has been focused on ways to stabilize the ASO without activating an immune response. In concert with the PS backbone modification, recent ASO pharmacology typically includes 2′ ribose sugar modifications (Figure 1). Of these, the 2′-O-methyl (2′-O-Me) and 2′-O-methoxyethyl (2′-MOE) are the most frequently used enabling stronger binding affinity to target RNA and enhanced resistance to nuclease degradation (Bennett and Swayze, 2010). These modifications may help to overcome the disadvantageous immunostimulatory properties of the PS backbone. Both 2′-O-Me and 2′-MOE design are reported to have a lowered pro-inflammatory response and be well tolerated compared to unmodified motifs (Henry et al., 2000; Tluk et al., 2009). ASOs consisting of fully modified 2′ sugar moieties do not enable RNase H enzyme activity but instead support non-degrading ASO mechanisms such as changes to alternative splicing or translational inhibition (Bennett and Swayze, 2010). Activating RNase H and thus cleaving the target mRNA requires a creative pharmacologic manipulation to produce a chimeric or “gapmer” design which takes advantage of the tolerability of 2′-O-Me or 2′-MOE sugar rings combined with the RNase H-mediated degradation property of the PS backbone (Figure 1). A gapmer consists of 2′ modified sugar ring bases separated by a central region of unmodified nucleotides to enable target degradation without inducing overt inflammatory responses (Geary et al., 2015).

ASO chemistry continues to evolve and modifications including a morpholino backbone, peptide nucleic acid (PNA) chemistry, and locked nucleic acid (LNA) modifications are becoming more prevalent in preclinical and clinical use (Figure 1). Both morpholinos and PNA designs afford highly stable RNA complementarity and, although they do not stimulate degradation of their target, they are useful for other mechanisms of action discussed below (Bennett and Swayze, 2010). LNA sugar moieties are similar to the 2′-O-methyl structures but exhibit greater potency and can be designed to support RNase H activity. Although these modifications are advantageous for their potency and nuclease resistant properties, problems associated with toxicity or poor penetration, continue to be explored (McMahon et al., 2002; Swayze et al., 2007). As various ASOs move closer toward clinical trial, ASO design remains an important avenue of development.

Mechanisms of action

Before ASOs can exert their gene modulating effects, they must overcome membrane barriers and traffic to subcellular locations, typically the nucleus. These events can be viewed as limiting steps for ASO activity and underscore the importance of effective chemical designs to modulate both uptake and distribution at the cellular level. The proposed entry method of ASOs into cells involves association with high- and low-binding plasma proteins, internalization into lysosomal or endosomal compartments, and trafficking within the cell (Geary et al., 2015), although the exact details of these processes are complex and may differ across cell types. A recent review of phosphorothioate ASO cellular uptake and intracellular trafficking summarizes the reported receptors, proteins and pathways involved (Crooke, 2007). In brief, proteins that interact with ASOs at the cell surface and within intracellular organelles, in part, determine their subcellular trafficking and escape into the cytosol; however, many questions regarding specific protein interactions remain unanswered. Once inside cells, ASOs are able to travel between the cytosol and nucleus via proposed binding to cellular molecules (Lorenz et al., 2000). The single-stranded ASOs bind to their target RNA through Watson-Crick base pairing, which, depending on the target and ASO design, can trigger distinct mechanisms of action by which the ASO ultimately degrades or modifies its target. These mechanisms can be divided into several common categories, discussed below: RNase-mediated degradation, mRNA modification, or microRNA inhibition (Figure 2).

RNase-mediated degradation is particularly advantageous in the context of many neurodegenerative disorders in which a distinct RNA/protein dysregulation or accumulation is recognized as the central cause of disease. It is not surprising, therefore, that RNase activation continues to be employed in preclinical ASO development and several clinical trials. Degradation of the mRNA target via this mechanism begins in the nucleus where the DNA-RNA pairing of ASOs to their mRNA target triggers recruitment of the enzyme ribonuclease H1 (RNase H1) (Wu et al., 2004). Binding of the ASO to mRNA mimics the DNA-RNA binding that occurs during DNA replication, in which RNase H cleaves the RNA primer from newly synthesized DNA (Cerritelli and Crouch, 2009). For ASO therapeutics, destruction of the mRNA prohibits its translation into protein, yielding a reduction of the intended target. RNase H activation is facilitated by the PS backbone modification or gapmer ASO design. Because RNase H specifically cleaves RNA, the ASO itself avoids degradation and, therefore, is able to bind to additional target mRNA enabling sustained mRNA and, in turn, protein reduction. Destruction of the cognate mRNA is the most common mechanism by which ASOs are used, yet several additional mechanisms can be employed to achieve protein lowering or manipulation (Bennett and Swayze, 2010). Other possible mechanisms of ASO-mediated protein reduction include translational inhibition or altered RNA stability via RNA modification.

RNA modification is a second, common mechanism by which ASOs can function. Acting within the nucleus, these ASOs pair with the target mRNA but, given their design, will not initiate the direct degradation of the mRNA. Instead, ASOs modify the mRNA at the 5′-cap or polyadenylation site to prevent mRNA translation or alter RNA stability thereby lowering the intended mRNA and protein in a non-degrading fashion (Bennett and Swayze, 2010). In addition, one surprisingly effective use of RNA-modifying ASOs has been to change alternative splicing patterns of mRNA. ASO binding to intron/exon junctions can affect recruitment and binding of splicing factors or destabilize splicing sites (Havens and Hastings, 2016). Such a strategy might be most beneficial for disorders with a known splicing defect to either restore protein function or to exclude mutated stretches of DNA. The degree of shift in splicing patterns has been striking in animals, as will be discussed below, and has advanced to successful clinical trial use. The most notable of these is the ASO design to promote the inclusion of exon 7 in the survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene, now FDA-approved for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (FDANewsRelease, 2016a).

ASOs can also act through binding of microRNA or other small RNA targets to inhibit their actions. MicroRNAs are sequences of approximately 22 base pairs in length and function in the regulation of gene expression through binding target mRNAs. ASOs act by binding these miRNA targets to inhibit their mRNA interaction by sequestration or degradation (Davis et al., 2006; Davis et al., 2009). Dysregulation of miRNAs has been identified in numerous disease states including cancer, virology, and neurodegenerative disease, highlighting these small RNAs as potential targets for therapeutic intervention. This strategy is already being applied successfully in clinical trials for hepatitis C infection (Janssen et al., 2013). Although no miRNA-targeted ASO for neurodegenerative disorder is in clinical use, emerging knowledge on the roles of miRNA in disease continues to provide motivation for their future application to human patients.

Delivery methods to the central nervous system

In order for ASOs to be effective, they must achieve delivery to affected regions or cells at appropriate concentrations. In addition, they must be stable and maintain efficacy over time for feasible treatment throughout the course of disease. Diseases of the CNS often pose problems that limit efficient and effective drug delivery. Most notably, the blood brain barrier restricts entry of certain molecules based on size, charge, or solubility (Pardridge, 1998), which will not only limit the effective concentrations that reach the brain or spinal cord but also completely exclude certain drugs. ASOs lack the ability to cross the blood brain barrier, a limitation that was initially considered an exclusion for their use as a therapeutic approach for neurodegenerative diseases. However, in the clinical setting, multiple drugs including chemotherapies, some spasticity medications, and pain medications are routinely delivered to the CSF that circulates throughout the CNS (Bottros and Christo, 2014). Despite the prediction that highly charged ASOs would remain localized to the site of CSF infusion, empiric data strikingly show widespread distribution throughout the brain and spinal cord in mice (DeVos et al., 2013; Kordasiewicz et al., 2012; Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2013; Passini et al., 2011), rats (Smith et al., 2006), and non-human primates (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012; Passini et al., 2011; Rigo et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2006) using intraventricular or intrathecal injection. Intrathecal ASO delivery has already been implemented in human clinical trials for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy with safe and tolerable results (Chiriboga et al., 2016; Miller et al., 2013). The adequate distribution achieved with intrathecal delivery and the growing clinical experience with ASO delivery by this method will likely lead to an increasing number of clinical studies being performed with an intrathecal delivery route. Intraventricular delivery in humans remains open to further study and may have some practical advantages in patients with anatomic abnormalities, such as severe scoliosis, that make intrathecal delivery more challenging.

Intraventricular or intrathecal injections are relatively invasive compared with orally delivered medications, yet thus far have been well tolerated. Ongoing research is focused on developing novel ASO delivery methods for the CNS including oral, subcutaneous, and intranasal routes. Success with intrathecal delivery programs including current and potential commercialization of some ASO candidates is likely to spark innovative approaches to make a successful therapy even easier to administer. On the other hand, with the urgent need for neurodegenerative disease therapies, intrathecal delivery will likely continue as a standard method.

Challenges for Antisense Application

Potential side effects

One general concern often raised regarding ASO application for human diseases is the possibility of adverse side effects. ASO toxicities and off-target effects are known to be both sequence- and chemistry-dependent and thus, each ASO molecule must be considered independently and with a complete toxicology evaluation. However, there are some general points to consider.

The first consideration is on-target toxicity as a result of lowering levels of a total protein. The effects of gene deletion in rodents provides a useful first-pass evaluation of the potential toxicities resulting from protein reduction, but these models have the potential to be over-interpreted in both directions. While protein reduction from birth – as in knockout mouse experiments – may be deleterious, lowering this same protein in the adult – as is proposed in many ASO programs – may be very well tolerated. Conversely, protein reduction from birth may be assumed safe, but this conclusion may be misguided by the known caveat for potential compensation of gene deletion in mice. ASO administration with substantial lowering of mRNA and protein in diseased and age-matched rodents and in non-human primates may provide the best reassurance of safety for an ASO approach. Yet, ASO studies in non-human primates are typically in a relatively small number of animals and for limited periods of time. Thus, the broad array of potential problems associated with lowering protein levels remains unknown and is still challenging to predict in the adult human. For many neurodegenerative diseases, this small theoretical risk is dwarfed by the ongoing, known hazard of the disease-causing protein, yet ASOs will continue to be evaluated for their on-target toxicity in preclinical and clinical testing.

Second, concerns for “off-target” toxicity focus on binding to other mRNAs and immune activation. For human clinical candidates, each ASO is screened in silico against the human genome and “hits” with 1, 2, or 3 mismatches are empirically tested for ASO-mediated changes of these mRNAs (Kamola et al., 2015; Monia et al., 1992). Thus, ASOs with potential overlap can be routinely screened against. In vivo, the ASO is recognized as foreign DNA by toll-like receptors and likely causes “off-target” activation of the immune system (Agrawal and Kandimalla, 2004). This response has been largely mitigated by screening for chemistries and sequences which are well-tolerated, such as avoiding potent immune-activating CpG motifs, as mentioned above. Extensive research and development has dampened some of the concerns for adverse side effects and preclinical and clinical ASO application appears promising. However, on- and off-target issues, some of which may not yet be recognized, remain an important consideration.

Alternative approaches

In areas of research for which ASO application may be currently limited or absent, alternative approaches for mRNA and protein modulation are available including RNA interference (RNAi) and antibody-mediated therapeutics, as well as traditional small molecules. RNAi uses small double-stranded RNA molecules that are processed within the cell and assembled into an RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) for targeting cellular mRNA. Similar to the mechanisms by which ASOs act, RNAi enables gene expression changes such as mRNA degradation, alternative splicing manipulation, miRNA inhibition, and transcriptional silencing (Allo et al., 2009; Carthew and Sontheimer, 2009). In vivo delivery of the RNA sequences requires viral packaging and off-target effects remain a concern, though continued research and safety data are likely to allay some of this apprehension in the future.

A second alternative to ASOs involve antibodies that are targeted against a protein of interest. Once bound to their protein target, antibodies stimulate the host's immune system to sequester, neutralize, or damage that protein. Intracellular delivery of antibodies may be difficult and, therefore, ineffective against CNS diseases that stem from intracellular mechanisms. However, diseases with extracellular targets may benefit from an antibody-mediated strategy. Cumulative evidence points to extracellular proteins including tau (Clavaguera et al., 2009; de Calignon et al., 2012; Holmes and Diamond, 2014), amyloid beta (Eisele et al., 2010; Meyer-Luehmann et al., 2006) and alpha-synuclein (Luk et al., 2012; Mougenot et al., 2012) as the drivers of pathological propagation within the brain. In support of this and the therapeutic application of antibodies, anti-Aβ immunization abolished Aβ deposition in AD model mice (Meyer-Luehmann et al., 2006) and anti-tau antibody treatment cleared tau pathology in mutant tau mice (Yanamandra et al., 2013). Antibodies targeted against Aβ, solanezumab and aducanumab, are currently in clinical trial and reporting efficacy (Sevigny et al., 2016; Siemers et al., 2016), suggesting antibody-mediated therapeutics are on par with ASOs in their clinical application.

Application to Neurodegenerative Diseases

The application of ASOs for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases has shown great success in mouse models of disease allowing ASOs to be steadily applied to human disease through clinical trial developments (Figure 3). ASOs are currently being applied to several neurodegenerative diseases but have been most pivotal in the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy, completing Phase III status and achieving FDA drug approval within the past year. Not too far behind are ASO therapeutics for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Huntington's disease in which clinical trials are ongoing. These neurodegenerative diseases or their genetic subpopulations may be benefiting most readily from an ASO intervention strategy given the well-characterized, single gene disruption that can be targeted. For this reason and others, ASO application in Alzheimer's disease and related dementias continues to be challenging. Translational success of ASOs may also be limited in different diseases given the predictive challenges posed by available mouse models and by the potential downsides of long-term protein lowering. However, it is clear that ASOs and their applications continue to develop as researchers try to harness their mechanisms of action toward treating neurodegenerative diseases.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, is characterized by progressive loss of motor neurons and muscle wasting. Patients are typically diagnosed at age 40-70 and succumb to the disease in only 2-5 years from the time of diagnosis. An overwhelming 90% of ALS cases have no known cause, termed sporadic or singleton ALS (sALS), while 10% of cases comprise familial ALS (fALS) and arise from gene mutations (Pasinelli and Brown, 2006). Of the fALS cases, 15-20% are caused by mutations within the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 gene (SOD1). More recently, fALS cases have been linked to the abnormal hexanucleotide repeat expansion within the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) gene, accounting for about 40% of familial cases (Majounie et al., 2012). Current treatment options for ALS patients are ineffective at halting disease progression. As major factors leading to fALS, both C9orf72 and SOD1 have been at the forefront of therapeutic targets for ALS and sparked preclinical research and clinical translation of ASO therapies to human patients. In addition, other targets for ASOs, including miR-155, have also shown promise.

SOD1

Since its identification in 1993 as a contributing factor to fALS (Rosen et al., 1993), SOD1 has become an important target for disease intervention. Mutations in SOD1 have been identified throughout its transcript, although the effect of the mutation on SOD1 enzymatic activity does not correlate with disease characteristics. Mouse data demonstrate that expression of mutant SOD1 causes motor neuron disease while genetic deletion of SOD1 does not (Philips and Rothstein, 2015). Taken together, these data support a toxic gain-of-function associated with the aggregation of misfolded SOD1. The first study using an ASO to target SOD1 by RNase H-mediated degradation identified striking widespread ASO distribution throughout the brain and spinal cord of rat and non-human primate, affording extensive SOD1 mRNA and protein knockdown (Smith et al., 2006). This pivotal study confirmed ASOs as an effective technique to target CNS proteins in vivo. Importantly, ASOs were able to reduce the mutated (G93A) form of SOD1 resulting in extended survival (Smith et al., 2006). Given its promising preclinical results, ASO 333611 entered Phase I testing in patients with SOD1-related fALS on January 2010 and was completed in January 2012 (NCT01041222, clinicaltrials.gov). This first-in-man study for intrathecal administration of the ASO demonstrated an excellent safety profile and established important pharmacokinetic measurements (Miller et al., 2013). This study did not show a reduction in SOD1 protein; however, low concentrations of ASO were used as a conservative, initial test. SOD1-directed ASOs continue to progress through clinical trial testing for patient use. In late 2015, the second generation of SOD1-targeting ASO compound, BIIB067 (IONIS-SOD1Rx), entered Phase I/II trial (NCT02623699; clinicaltrials.gov), with a single dose cohort to be followed by a multiple dose cohort in SOD1 fALS patients. Escalating doses in this study are anticipated to garner more effective SOD1 reduction compared to its initial Phase I dose. Importantly, SOD1 measured in the CSF will be an important pharmacodynamics marker for an SOD1-targeted ASO to determine efficacy in this ongoing study and to help direct design of future clinical trials (Crisp et al., 2015; Winer et al., 2013).

C9orf72

The emergence of C9orf72 expansion as the most frequent cause to date of fALS has directed efforts toward identifying its toxic role in the pathogenesis of ALS as well as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011). Not only is the normal physiological function of C9orf72 unknown, but the exact mechanism by which the abnormal C9orf72 hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) expansion mediates disease pathogenesis remains under debate. Loss of normal C9orf72 function, gain of RNA toxicity, and gain of protein toxicity have all been proposed mechanisms of disease (Ling et al., 2013). Initially, one of the major hurdles to C9orf72 research was the lack of a rodent model that recapitulates both the molecular and behavioral characteristics of the disease, making it difficult to test potential therapeutics, including ASO strategies, in an in vivo setting. Researchers initially used human iPSC-derived neurons and fibroblasts from C9orf72-positive ALS patients to test ASO efficacy with promising results (Donnelly et al., 2013; Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2013; Sareen et al., 2013). More recently, mouse models expressing the expanded C9orf72 gene have been developed, enabling in vivo study of ASOs (Jiang et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016; O'Rourke et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2015).

Early studies validated ASOs that bind within the repeat expansion or within surrounding N-terminal regions of the C9orf72 mRNA transcript that act by either recruiting RNase H to degrade the transcript or by blocking the interaction between the repeat expansion and RNA binding proteins (Donnelly et al., 2013). Although no reduction in RNA levels were observed with ASOs designed to hinder RNA binding protein interaction, they effectively reduced toxic RNA foci, restored normal gene expression markers, and protected against glutamate toxicity (Donnelly et al., 2013). This important finding supports a gain-of-function by a toxic RNA mechanism. Concurrent studies using ASOs that lowered the C9orf72 transcript agreed, finding both reductions in RNA foci and corrected gene expression with ASO application to iPSC-derived human cells (Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2013; Sareen et al., 2013). The recent development of animal models that express the abnormally expanded C9orf72 gene aims to bridge the gap between ASO application in iPSC-derived cells and disease models (Jiang et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016; O'Rourke et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2015). In one of these models, ASOs were shown to suppress several pathological features of C9orf72 ALS including RNA foci and dipeptide proteins in primary cortical neurons cultured from mice expressing the C9orf72 expansion (O'Rourke et al., 2016). ASOs targeting the expanded C9orf72 gene in a novel mouse model similarly reduced the expression of RNA foci and dipeptide proteins, and also attenuated cognitive impairments (Jiang et al., 2016).

Together, these studies provide support for RNA or protein toxicity as a primary disease mechanism and successful mitigation of pathology with ASO use. Since RNA foci and dipeptide products are generated from both sense and antisense directions of the C9orf72 transcript, it remains unclear whether reducing the antisense transcript will also be important for therapeutics. While deletion of C9orf72 from birth in mice does show abnormalities (Jiang et al., 2016; O'Rourke et al., 2016) raising some concerns for an ASO-mediated lowering strategy, the short term administration of ASO to the endogenous mouse homologue was well tolerated (Jiang et al., 2016; Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2013). This promising in vivo data suggests that ASOs for C9orf72 ALS and ALS/FTD are likely to be in initial clinical trial in the near future.

miR-155 and other targets

While targeting SOD1 and C9orf72 have been at the forefront of ALS research, other targets also show promise in modulating disease pathogenesis. Intraventricular delivery of ASOs against miR-155, a target miRNA found to be upregulated in ALS tissues, resulted in de-repression of miR-155 targets throughout the brain and spinal cord and remarkably led to a significant extension in survival of SOD1G93A mutant mice (Butovsky et al., 2014; Koval et al., 2013). It is clear that miR-155 plays a pathological role in ALS models and likely in humans and an ASO strategy can be effective in achieving an improved outcome. Other preclinical studies have identified acetylcholine (Gotkine et al., 2013), phospholipase A2α (Solomonov et al., 2016), p75 (Turner et al., 2003), and prostate apoptosis response 4 (Pedersen et al., 2000) as potential targets for ASOs to mitigate ALS and putative targets like ataxin-2 have been proposed for future research (van den Heuvel et al., 2014).

Concluding remarks

Positive strides made in the preclinical and clinical development of an ASO strategy has greatly increased enthusiasm for ASOs as an applicable therapy for ALS. ASOs have not only enabled increased understanding of disease processes but also have shown successful translation to human patients in the case of SOD1. Notably, this clinical effort implemented an intrathecal administration of ASOs to CNS in adults, a strategy that is likely to be employed in subsequent ASO trials targeting SOD1 in ALS and in trials aimed at other neurodegenerative disorders.

Spinal Muscular Atrophy

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) results from the deletion of the survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene, a loss that is predicted to be lethal in all other species except human. Humans express a second form of the SMN gene – SMN2 – which is able to partially restore SMN protein expression and function. The number of SMN2 gene copies expressed determines the degree to which SMN function is restored, which in turn affects the severity of the disease. SMN2 cannot fully compensate for the loss of SMN1 in disease due to a C/T nucleotide variation within exon 7 that causes weakening of the 3′ splice site and exon 7 skipping. The resulting protein product is unstable and degraded. Therefore, strategies designed to improve the ability of the SMN2 gene to produce full-length, functional SMN protein are paramount for disease intervention. ASOs have been advantageous in designing treatment strategies targeted against splicing regulatory elements of SMN2 to promote exon 7 inclusion with remarkably successful results in mouse models and human clinical trials and has led to the first FDA-approved treatment of SMA.

SMN2 exon 7 trans-splicing targeting ISS-N1

Initial efforts to pinpoint targetable sequences within SMN2 to regulate exon 7 splicing identified an inhibitory splicing sequence, known as intronic splicing silencer N1 (ISS-N1), located in intron 7 of the SMN2 gene. When targeted against ISS-N1, 2′-O-Me-modified ASOs potently stimulated exon 7 inclusion and increased SMN protein levels in patient fibroblasts (Singh et al., 2006). When the ASO was injected into the CNS of delta7-SMA mutant mice during the first 10 days after birth, the ASO distributed throughout the CNS, elevated levels of SMN protein, and improved early postnatal body weight gain and righting response (Williams et al., 2009), confirming the in vivo efficacy of ISS-N1 targeting ASOs.

Independent validation of the critical role of ISS-N1 in exon 7 skipping and intervention using ASOs was executed using an ASO “microwalk” along SMN2, identifying 2′-MOE ASOs that block hnRNP A1/A2 motifs within the ISS-N1 sequence (Hua et al., 2008). This ASO, termed ASO 10-27, was first tested in hSMN2 mice, demonstrating robust exon 7 inclusion. As few as two intravenous injections of ASO 10-27 were able to significantly stimulate exon 7 inclusion (approximately 50% of SMN2 transcripts) in the liver and kidney of hSMN2 mice and, after four weeks of treatment, inclusion increased to over 90% (Hua et al., 2008). No effect was evident in spinal cord tissue, reflecting the poor ability of ASOs to cross the BBB. In an effort to achieve central delivery, ASO 10-27 was infused directly into the lateral ventricle of hSMN2 mice resulting in dose-dependent, long-lasting exon 7 inclusion and increased total SMN protein within the spinal cord (Hua et al., 2010). Remarkably, a single intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of ASO was able to curb the necrotic tail and ear phenotype (Hua et al., 2010) and restored muscle physiology and motor function (Passini et al., 2011) in severe SMA mouse models (type III SMA mice and Smn-/-, hSMN2+/+, SMNΔ7+/+ mice, respectively). Because some SMN function is likely required in all cells, central and peripheral administration methods were compared to identify the best route for the most effective outcomes. Peripheral administration of ASO surprisingly provided substantial phenotypic rescue and significantly prolonged survival (Hua et al., 2011), suggesting a peripheral component of SMA is very important in mouse models. Whether peripheral administration will be a needed component in humans remains unknown.

Modulation of SMN splicing was separately identified with a morpholino oligonucleotide against the ISS-N1 SMN sequence, which differ from phosphorothioate ASOs in its backbone modification (Figure 2). Using a morpholino design, researchers identified a 3-fold increase in exon 7 inclusion and SMN protein expression within the brain and spinal cord after a single ICV injection in SMA model mice, conferring a dose-dependent, 97-day extension in survival (Porensky et al., 2012). Restoration of SMA expression also corrected electrophysiological and motor unit dysfunction in delta7-SMA mutant mice (Arnold et al., 2016; Arnold et al., 2014). Collectively, ISS-N1 targeting studies agree on the early and central delivery of ASOs to not only correct SMN2 splicing but also improve functional outcomes and survival. Preclinical research continues to adjust and improve ISS-N1 targeted ASO therapeutics to establish a more efficient and successful compound without adverse effects. In addition, newly developed mouse models have enabled delayed treatment paradigms in order to fully evaluate SMN-targeted ASOs (Bogdanik et al., 2015).

ASO 10-27, or nusinersen (previously IONIS-SMNRx), achieved clinical trial status in December 2011 with the initiation of a Phase I trial to determine the safety, tolerability, and dose range (NCT01494701, NCT01780246; clinicaltrials.gov) followed by Phase II testing in 2013 (NCT01839656; clinicaltrials.gov). In 2016, researchers reported on Phase I results, citing preliminary clinical improvement without safety and tolerability concerns following nusinersen treatment in SMA patients aged 2-14 years old (Chiriboga et al., 2016). Only six years following its preclinical debut, nusinersen entered Phase III trial testing (NCT02193074, NCT02292537; clinicaltrials.gov) which speaks to both the urgent need for SMA therapies and the effectiveness of ASOs in treating SMA. While the primary data have not been released at the time of this review, a joint press release on August 1, 2016 from Biogen Idec, Inc. and Ionis Pharmaceuticals stated that the Phase III ENDEAR trial, which was conducted in Type 1 SMA patients, met its clinical endpoint. Infants treated with ASO targeting SMN2 reached motor milestones on the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination scale (BusinessWire, 2016). While we are unable to judge the strength of these clinical data and, importantly, the magnitude of the effect at this time, meeting the primary endpoint in a Phase III clinical study is a major accomplishment which has since assured the advancement of nusinersen in the market. Spinraza™ (nusinersen) was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in December 2016, becoming the first drug available for the treatment of SMA in children and adults (FDANewsRelease, 2016a).

SMN repressor Element 1 and other regulatory elements

In addition to manipulating the missplicing of exon 7 via ISS-N1, alternative strategies seek to use ASOs to target other regulatory proteins to increase exon 7 inclusion. Exon 7 is surrounded by several splicing enhancers and silencers, exonic and intronic, to intricately regulate the splicing patterns. Baughan and colleagues (2009) confirmed the presence of an additional splicing repressor sequence upstream of exon 7. When this region, known as Element 1 (E1), was deleted, potent increases in full length SMN mRNA were noted prompting the design of bifunctional RNAs to target the E1 sequence. In the case of SMN, the bifunctional RNA consists of an antisense sequence complementary to E1 linked to an RNA segment that would recruit exonic splice enhancer proteins. A single ICV injection of E1 bifunctional RNA into Smn-/-SMN2+/+ mice restored expression of SMN protein and improved weight gain (Baughan et al., 2009). Subsequently, morpholino ASOs were found to elevate SMN protein expression, drastically extend life span, and improve neuromuscular junction structure in two separate mouse models of varying SMA severity (Osman et al., 2014). This same group identified a separate target within the exon 8 splice site of SMN involved in recruitment the splicing silencer, hnRNPA1, to stimulate upstream exon 7 inclusion (Dickson et al., 2008). A modest increase in SMN protein was achieved in the SMA mouse brain (Dickson et al., 2008). Interestingly, a dual treatment strategy targeted at both the ISS-N1 element and exon 8 regulatory site produced a 2-fold increase in SMN mRNA and protein levels compared to single ASOs given alone (Pao et al., 2014), suggesting that combinatorial therapy may result in even better outcomes than already successful single treatments.

Concluding rhemarks

SMA mouse model experiments have paved the way for translation into human patients, with Spinraza™ at the forefront of clinical application. Notably, this therapy employs one of the remarkable features of ASOs – an alternative splicing manipulation to restore functional levels of the disrupted SMN protein. While alternative strategies including pharmaceutical inhibitors, viral SMN gene replacement, stem cells and small molecules are under current investigation (Duque et al., 2015; Van Meerbeke et al., 2013; Zanetta et al., 2014), the early success of ASOs in clinical studies will likely make this approach a benchmark to which others are compared. While primary data from the pivotal Phase III nusinersen trial are not yet available, this ASO has successfully transitioned from basic research to clinical trial. Now, with FDA approval, ASOs are a veritable treatment for SMA where none existed before. The success of Spinraza™ ensures that ASOs will likely remain a therapeutic option for SMA in the near future.

Huntington's disease

Huntington's disease (HD) is an adult-onset, neurodegenerative condition characterized by both locomotor and cognitive decline. On average, patients are diagnosed between ages 30-40 based on symptoms that worsen over the course of disease. HD is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and caused by abnormal expansion of a CAG repeat in the huntingtin (Htt) gene. Once mutant Htt is translated, the expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) protein likely mediates a toxic gain-of-function through the formation of intraneuronal aggregates or interaction with other proteins (Ordway et al., 1997; Rubinsztein, 2002). The medium spiny neurons of the striatum are particularly affected, yet neurons within other brain regions appear to be vulnerable (Rubinsztein, 2002), thus requiring a more global approach to treatment. Gene silencing approaches, including those activating the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway as well as by ASO, have been extensively researched to achieve reductions in mutant Htt and curb disease progression.

Huntingtin

A major breakthrough for an ASO therapy for HD reported on the in vivo effectiveness of ASOs targeted against mutant Htt mRNA by employing several mouse models of HD as well as testing intrathecal infusion in non-human primates (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012). Researchers exploited the RNase H-mediated degradation properties of ASOs and 2′-MOE modifications for potent, stable, and tolerable ASO delivery. This study identified that a human Htt-targeted ASO afforded a significant decrease of Htt with lasting reduction for three months post-treatment. In addition, continuous infusion of the ASO resulted in its widespread distribution throughout the mouse brain including deeper structures of the striatum and thalamus in neuronal and non-neuronal cells (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012) suggesting Htt ASOs are able to penetrate brain structures to reach the affected cellular populations. Remarkably, an approximate 50-80% reduction of mutant human Htt mRNA was achieved in most brain regions. Pre-symptomatic and post-symptomatic ASO administration in an HD mouse model (YAC128) lessened disease phenotypes (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012; Stanek et al., 2013) and when applied to a more severe, quickly progressing HD mouse model (R6/2), ASO treatment afforded a significant extension in survival (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012). While debate still exists regarding how well mouse models recapitulate human disease, ASO testing in multiple HD mouse models with repeated success helped to confirm Htt-targeted ASO efficacy. Finally, ASO infusion into non-human primates did not result in any adverse effects; however, a more limited distribution of the ASO was noted (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012). Overall, this study identified in vivo safety and good distribution of an Htt-targeted ASO, suggesting ASOs as applicable interventions for human studies. Behavioral improvements observed in mouse models show sustained therapeutic effect even after Htt target mRNA levels returned, underscoring the therapeutic potential for ASOs in HD. This success has recently sparked the initiation of clinical trial testing of Htt-targeted ASOs in Canada and Europe (PRSNewswire, 2015).

One possible limitation associated with the above study is the targeting and reduction of both the normal and mutant Htt allele. Huntingtin has known physiological roles in neuronal survival (Rigamonti et al., 2000) and axon stability (Dragatsis et al., 2000). In order to address this, Kordasiewicz and colleagues (2012) demonstrated that reduction of endogenous mouse Htt along with mutant human Htt did not result in any adverse events, suggesting that reduction of Htt in the adult may be well tolerated. Nevertheless, enthusiasm remains for identifying a strategy that can specifically reduce the mutant allele. One possible mechanism to identify mutant Htt and therefore target it specifically would use genetic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the CAG repeat that distinguish the mutant allele from the normal allele. Recent studies have focused on the identification of several lead SNP-targeted compounds to distinguish mutant Htt allele. In particular, a lead candidate modified for increased potency and selectively, achieved significant Htt mRNA reductions and striatal delivery without overt inflammatory effects in mice. This ASO and others have undergone further development and improvement for human application to increase the specificity of the ASO to greater than 100-fold for mutant Htt allele over normal allele (Ostergaard et al., 2013). When evaluated in Hu97/18 mice exhibiting expression of both the mutant and wildtype Htt allele, specificity for the mutant allele was confirmed with specific reduction of mutant Htt without change to the normal mRNA or protein (Southwell et al., 2015) and demonstrated an extended duration of action from 16 to 32 weeks depending on the 2′ modification (Skotte et al., 2014). Whether these impressive qualities afford a therapeutic effect for modulating locomotor or cognitive deficits in HD mouse models remains to be determined.

Concluding remarks

Therapeutic strategies utilizing ASOs to reduce mutant Htt have shown great promise in preclinical Huntington's disease animal models and Htt lowering ASOs have entered early phase clinical studies in Europe (PRSNewswire, 2015). A mutant Htt allele-specific design seems advantageous as some evidence may point to the requirement of Htt in normal cellular function, though lowering of Htt in mice and non-human primates was well tolerated (Kordasiewicz et al., 2012) and may, in fact, not be a concern. Regardless, ASOs that target toxic Htt alone are currently undergoing development and comprehensive characterization. Additional ASO designs including morpholino (Sun et al., 2014) or those targeting Htt by splicing manipulation (Evers et al., 2014) may provide alternative strategies to reduce Htt toxicity without lowering total protein.

Alzheimer's Disease and Primary Tauopathies

One of the most devastating and common neurodegenerative conditions is Alzheimer's disease (AD) which currently affects nearly 5.4 million individuals. As the population ages, the number of AD patients is expected to rise exponentially. The two major protein pathologies associated with AD are amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau. Abnormal aggregation or mutation of tau extends beyond AD to several neurodegenerative disorders including corticobasal degeneration (CBD), frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 (FTDP-17), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and Pick's disease, collectively known as tauopathies. Although the molecular cascades of disease pathogenesis are highly researched, there are currently no effective therapies to stop disease progression and prevent cognitive decline. ASO application in AD and tauopathies has, to this point, centered on preclinical models targeted against proteins involved in amyloid formation and tau deposition. In addition, several groups have recognized the upregulation of miRNAs in the pathogenesis of AD and have employed ASOs to target these molecules.

Amyloid precursor protein

The characteristic Aβ plaque pathology of AD arises through intracellular processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). APP normally exists as a transmembrane protein with known cleavage sites for α-, β-and γ-secretases but unknown physiological function. When APP is cleaved by β- and γ-secretase, the resulting Aβ fragment can oligomerize and form the insoluble fibrils and plaques present in AD. APP mutations have been identified in a percentage of human AD patients accounting for a rare, rapid onset familial form. Given its genetic link and originating role in Aβ production, APP can be overexpressed or mutated in mouse models to derive AD pathology and behavioral abnormalities and is a primary target for ASO development.

APP-targeting ASO research has initially focused on development of an APP lowering ASO targeted against the region that will become the central portion of the Aβ protein (corresponding to Aβ amino acids 17-30), specifically between the sites of β- and y-secretase cleavage. While these ASOs were modestly effective at lowering APP protein and generated cognitive improvements (Erickson et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2000), both the mouse model used and the route of ASO administration limit interpretation of these results. Senescence accelerated mouse-prone (SAMP8) mice (Erickson et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2000) and, later, Tg2576 (K670M/N671L Swedish APP mutation) (Farr et al., 2014) were treated with peripheral injection of the ASO. ASOs exhibit poor ability to cross the BBB, preventing clear interpretations of ASO-mediated effects in these studies. In addition, the behavioral changes observed in SAMP8 mice may be confounded by the naturally-occurring neuropathological and behavioral phenotype likely resulting from age-related changes in numerous genes and proteins (Butterfield and Poon, 2005). To date, these limitations have slowed the advancement of an APP-targeted ASO strategy, and further studies with other mouse models or improved delivery methods are necessary.

An alternative approach to reducing levels of APP is targeting proteins involved in the production or clearance of Aβ. Pharmacological β-secretase (BACE) inhibitors have achieved preclinical success (Vassar, 2014) and have advanced into Phase II/III clinical trials (NCT02245737, NCT02783573; clinicaltrials.gov). Using an ASO, inhibition of BACE was effective at decreasing Aβ fragments in rodent brain (McMahon et al., 2003). While exciting from a treatment perspective, BACE reduction by ASO may carry several downsides associated with altering normal BACE function as several groups have reported negative phenotypes in BACE null mice (Dominguez et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2006; Laird et al., 2005). Using a method that avoids issues associated with complete loss of BACE expression, researchers targeted the BACE cleavage site within APP demonstrating that weekly intraventricular ASO injections in Tg2576 mice increased levels of soluble APPα and lowered levels of acetylcholinesterase, a marker of Aβ toxicity (Chauhan and Siegel, 2007). While these results suggest that β-secretase activity was blocked, only modest effect sizes were reported and key neurodegenerative features of Tg2576 mice, including plaque pathology and cognitive impairments, were not addressed. Thus, the effectiveness of BACE targeting by ASO is difficult to conclude at this stage.

Recently, ASO targeting of apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2) has been tested, linking a potential ASO target to the known AD risk gene, APOE. It is well-established that the apolipoprotein isoform ApoE-ε4 confers a 2- to 12-fold risk for developing AD in humans depending on the number of ε4 alleles (Corder et al., 1993). While the role of ApoER2 in mediating AD pathogenesis is not fully understood, the receptor may modulate APP localization and processing resulting in increased Aβ production (Fuentealba et al., 2007; He et al., 2007) and its different splice variants confer its ligand binding and signaling function (Sun and Soutar, 1999). Specifically, inclusion of exon 19 in the ApoER2 gene enables interaction with NMDA receptors to facilitate synaptic function and plasticity (Vollmer and Krieg, 2009). This splicing event at exon 19 appears deregulated in human AD and in aged mice (Hinrich et al., 2016). Restoration of full-length ApoER2 via ASO-mediated splicing correction afforded improvements in synaptic function and cognitive behavior in APP mutant mice (TgCRND8) (Hinrich et al., 2016). This study and those directed against APP or APP-processing genes highlight the flexibility of ASOs in identifying potential targets and the variety of mechanisms – degradation or splicing modulation – that can be harnessed for therapeutic gain.

Tau

The microtubule associated protein, tau, is implicated in AD pathogenesis and other neurodegenerative diseases known as tauopathies. Under normal conditions, tau functions to stabilize microtubules and may also be involved in intracellular signaling, scaffolding, and neurogenesis (Morris et al., 2011). In humans, tau is expressed as six different isoforms that differ based on alternative splicing within the N-terminus (0N, 1N, 2N) and repeat domain region of the tau (MAPT) gene. This latter splicing event at exon 10 regulates expression of a 3-repeat or 3R (- exon 10) transcript and a 4-repeat or 4R (+ exon 10) transcript. In disease, tau becomes abnormally hyperphosphorylated and accumulates within neurons, and is associated with neuronal dysfunction and cell death. Therefore, targeting of tau by itself with ASOs is a plausible therapeutic intervention for tauopathies, some of which have known mechanisms tied to the abnormal regulation MAPT mRNA via mutations and altered isoform expression. Given the aggregation of tau and recognized exon 10 splicing changes, there are two potential therapeutic strategies for tauopathies: 1) lowering of total tau by RNase H-directed degradation and 2) lowering of 4R tau alone by an ASO splicing strategy. The advantage of lowering total tau is the development of one therapeutic approach that would work for all tauopathies. The advantage of specifically reducing 4R tau may be its selectivity, leaving total tau unaltered.

Genetic deletion of tau in mice has shown no abnormalities (Ittner et al., 2010; Roberson et al., 2007) and, in adult mice, lowering mouse tau with ASO for one month did not demonstrate any behavioral defects (DeVos et al., 2013). This latter experiment compares most closely to how and when ASOs might be applied therapeutically and supports the safety of a total tau lowering strategy. In contrast, there are some reports demonstrating synaptic abnormalities and cognitive impairment with genetic deletion of tau in mice (Lei et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2014). Overall, our interpretation of the current data is that lowering tau will be well tolerated in humans, but further toxicology data are needed in large animals to better assess this outcome.

In human mutant (E10+14) tau-expressing mice, use of a tau-targeted ASO significantly reduced total tau mRNA and protein (Sud et al., 2014), confirming in vivo application. Although this study did not assess pathological outcomes, an improvement might be expected in light of previous findings in which doxycycline-induced tau transgene suppression could halt tau aggregates (Mocanu et al., 2008; Polydoro et al., 2013) and arrest neuronal death and cognitive deficits (Santacruz et al., 2005). In support of this work, ASO-mediated total tau reduction was also highly effective in mitigating disease pathology. PS19 mice, expressing the P301S MAPT mutation, exhibit widespread phosphorylated tau, neuronal loss, and premature death (Yoshiyama et al., 2007). However, when a tau-lowering ASO was administered to aged PS19 mice, phosphorylated tau burden was prevented, hippocampal neurons were spared, and survival was significantly extended (DeVos et al., 2017). Furthermore, tau reduction was evident in non-human primates following ASO administration (DeVos et al., 2017). This study is the first to apply a total tau-targeting ASO strategy to alter disease outcome and provides critical support for a therapeutic tau ASO. In addition to dementia, emerging evidence suggests tau may also mediate hyperexcitability in neurodegenerative states (Holth et al., 2013; Ittner et al., 2010; Roberson et al., 2007). To investigate this link, ASOs designed to degrade endogenous tau were used to investigate seizure outcomes in adult mice. Robust tau knockdown afforded significant reductions in hyperexcitability in two separate methods of seizure induction (DeVos et al., 2013). These results not only support the association between tau and hyperexcitability but also show that lowering tau could be an important therapeutic for both tauopathies and epilepsy.

In light of the MAPT mutations identified in FTDP-17 that alter splicing of exon 10, splicing alteration by ASO is an intriguing treatment strategy. The majority of primary tauopathies exhibit mutations within exon 10, thus using splicing ASOs could be a way to excise an existing mutation and correct deficits without affecting total tau levels. Recently, ASOs were used manipulate MAPT splicing in vivo, demonstrating that ASO-mediated splicing toward increased 4R tau elevated aggregated tau, increased seizure severity, and impaired nesting behavior (Schoch et al., 2016), suggested greater 4R is detrimental. The reverse approach, an exon 10-skipping ASO, to bias toward 3R tau expression was also evaluated. In two human tau-expressing mouse models, ASO treatment significantly shifted splicing patterns to lower 4R tau without change to total tau levels (Schoch et al., 2016). Tau-targeted splicing ASOs appear to be effective based on their mRNA target sites that can interfere with splicing regulatory sequences or disruption of secondary structural components necessary for interactions with splicing factors. While changes to neuronal cytoskeleton or other function will be a consideration for future application in vivo, these studies highlight the potential for corrections in tau splicing for therapeutic development, especially in diseases affected by exon/intron 10 mutations or splicing abnormalities.

miRNA inhibition

Although tau- and Aβ-targeting strategies have dominated the field, research focused on miRNA changes in AD is an exciting new area and introduces potential targets for ASOs. Several regulatory miRNAs, including miR-34a and miR-206, were found to be highly expressed in mouse models of AD or postmortem human AD brain tissues (Faghihi et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2009). ASOs targeted against miR-34a, a likely regulator of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2, resulted in de-repression of Bcl-2 protein and decreased caspase-3 in APP/presenilin 1 mutant mice (Wang et al., 2009). Thus, miR-34a inhibition by ASO may block cell death pathways occurring in neurodegeneration. In the Tg2576 mouse model, ASO inhibition of miR-206, a predicted regulator of BDNF, resulted in de-repression and normalization of BDNF levels in multiple brain regions and improved memory function (Lee et al., 2012). Similar results were seen with intranasal delivery (Lee et al., 2012) highlighting this method as possible noninvasive delivery route for ASOs. Overall, miRNA sequestration by ASO appears to modulate aspects of neurodegeneration that may prove beneficial as a treatment strategy.

Concluding remarks

The various targets and pathogenic mechanisms that mediate AD and tauopathies offer multiple opportunities for intervention in human dementias. The most straightforward approach, and one that can be achieved by ASOs, is to reduce levels of pathogenic protein itself, namely APP or tau. While animal data thus far suggests that this will be well tolerated, issues associated with disruption of the normal protein function will remain a potential safety issue and will need to be weighed against the severity of the disease being treated. Creative developments in ASO design including tau splicing intervention or targeting regulatory miRNA pathways are also promising. ASO therapeutics for dementias are on a path toward human clinical trials and will be an exciting area of translation.

Promise for ASO Therapeutics

ASOs hold considerable promise for neurodegenerative disease therapies as evidenced by SMA and ALS human clinical trial successes, and preclinical efforts in other CNS disorders continue to progress. From a therapeutic perspective, the use of ASO technology extends far beyond the scope of neurodegenerative disorders. The ASOs mipomersen (Kynamro™) for familial hypercholesterolemia (FDANewsRelease, 2013) and eteplirsen for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (FDANewsRelease, 2016b) have been approved by the FDA. In addition, ASOs are currently being investigated in models and human patients for multiple sclerosis, cancer, and cholesterol management. Even more targets for ASOs may become available as more information regarding the pathogenic role for specific genes or proteins emerges. Given their widespread application, advancements in design, and achievements in clinical application, ASOs continue to garner enthusiasm for the treatment of many human diseases.

With the newness of ASO application to CNS disorders, there are likely still many lessons to be learned regarding how to translate preclinical results to human clinical trials. While intrathecal delivery is safe and well tolerated, identifying an even easier route of administration may be an important step to achieve more ubiquitous application of this approach. To this end, ASOs are constantly being modified and restructured in order to enhance their target potency and improve delivery. ASOs offer a possible treatment for neurodegenerative diseases, and given their specificity, flexibility, and overall safety, we anticipate a number of ASO clinical trials in the near future.

The authors would like to acknowledge Elena Fisher for her assistance in preparation of the manuscript. This work was supported by the NIH National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (R01NS097816) and National Institute Aging (R21AG044719) to T.M.M. Ionis Pharmaceuticals supplies ASOs to T.M.M. for ongoing studies. Washington University, with T.M.M. as co-inventor, has filed for patents regarding the use of ASOs to treat neurodegenerative diseases. T.M.M. served on a medical advisory board for Biogen Idec, Inc. and for Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and currently serves as a consultant for Cytokinetics Inc.

Figure 1 Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) chemical modifications, properties, and common uses

Decades of synthetic chemical research have produced various ASO structural designs to enhance the pharmacokinetic properties, target affinity, and tolerability profile for ASO application. Common modifications have been made to the phosphodiester backbone to create phosphorothioate (PS) DNA, morpholino, and peptide nucleic acid (PNA) designs, which all confer excellent nuclease resistance for more potent ASO activity. Notably, PS designs exhibit stability, high binding affinity to proteins enabling efficient uptake into cells, and support RNase H-mediated cleavage of the target. Therefore, PS modifications are broadly employed in preclinical studies and are the primary design for human clinical trials for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Huntington's disease (HD). In combination, 2′ ribose substitutions – 2′-O-methyl (2′-O-Me), 2′-O-methoxyethyl (2′-MOE), and locked nucleic acid (LNA) – greatly enhance target binding, increase resistance to degradation by nucleases, and generally confer less toxicity than unmodified designs. Uniform 2′ modifications support non-degrading mechanisms of action, including splice site modification and translational inhibition; however, introduction of a “gapmer” strategy will permit RNase H-mediated activity. Both 2′-O-methyl and 2′-O-methoxyethyl modifications are commonly used in preclinical research and clinical trials.

Figure 2 Common antisense oligonucleotide (ASOs) mechanisms of action

When administered, ASOs bind to target RNA with base pair complementarity and exert various effects based on the ASO chemical structure and design. Three mechanisms, commonly employed in preclinical models of neurodegenerative disease and human clinical trial development, are shown. These mechanisms include mRNA target degradation via recruitment of the RNase H enzyme, alternative splicing modification to include or exclude exons, and miRNA inhibition to inhibit miRNA binding to its target mRNA.

Figure 3 Progression of select antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) candidates for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases

Successful translation of ASOs from preclinical rodent models to human clinical trials is evident particularly for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases spinal muscular atrophy targeting the survival motor neuron 2 (SMN2) gene and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis targeting the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene. The C9orf72 gene is an additional target in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with key pathological improvements identified in patient iPSC-derived neurons and novel mouse models. ASOs targeting the huntingtin gene demonstrate notable efficacy in Huntington's disease models and are in human clinical trial in Canada and Europe. ASOs for application in Alzheimer's disease and tauopathies, most notably those targeting amyloid precursor protein (APP) and tau (MAPT), respectively, show promise in preclinical development.

1Hua, Y. et al., 2010. Genes Dev 24, 1634-1644.

2Williams, J.H. et al., 2009. J Neurosci 29, 7633-7638.

3Porensky, P.N. et al., 2012. Hum Mol Genet 21, 1625-1638.

4Passini, M.A. et al., 2011. Sci Transl Med 3, 72ra18.

5Chiriboga, C.A. et al., 2016. Neurology 86, 890-897.

6Smith, R.A. et al., 2006. J Clin Invest 116, 2290-2296.

7Miller, T.M. et al., 2013. Lancet Neurol 12, 435-442.

8Stanek, L.M. et al., 2013. J Huntingtons Dis 2, 217-228.

9Kordasiewicz, H.B. et al., 2012. Neuron 74, 1031-1044.

10Donnelly, C.J. et al., 2013. Neuron 80, 415-428.

11Lagier-Tourenne, C. et al., 2013. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110, E4530-4539.

12Sareen, D. et al., 2013. Sci Transl Med 5, 208ra149.

13O'Rourke, J.G. et al., 2016. Science 351, 1324-1329.

14Jiang J. et al., 2016. Neuron 90, 535-50.

15Sud, R. et al., 2014. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 3, e180.

16Schoch, K.M. et al., 2016. Neuron 90, 941-947.

17DeVos, S.L. et al., 2017. Sci Trans Med 9.

18Kumar, V.B. et al., 2000. Peptides 21, 1769-1775.

19Erickson, M.A. et al., 2012. J Alzheimers Dis 28, 951-960.

20Farr S.A., et al., 2014. J Alzheimers Dis 40, 1005-1016.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Agrawal S Kandimalla ER 2004 Role of Toll-like receptors in antisense and siRNA [corrected] Nat Biotechnol 22 1533 1537 15583662
Allo M Buggiano V Fededa JP Petrillo E Schor I de la Mata M Agirre E Plass M Eyras E Elela SA 2009 Control of alternative splicing through siRNA-mediated transcriptional gene silencing Nat Struct Mol Biol 16 717 724 19543290
Arnold W McGovern VL Sanchez B Li J Corlett KM Kolb SJ Rutkove SB Burghes AH 2016 The neuromuscular impact of symptomatic SMN restoration in a mouse model of spinal muscular atrophy Neurobiol Dis 87 116 123 26733414
Arnold WD Porensky PN McGovern VL Iyer CC Duque S Li X Meyer K Schmelzer L Kaspar BK Kolb SJ 2014 Electrophysiological Biomarkers in Spinal Muscular Atrophy: Preclinical Proof of Concept Ann Clin Transl Neurol 1 34 44 24511555
Baughan TD Dickson A Osman EY Lorson CL 2009 Delivery of bifunctional RNAs that target an intronic repressor and increase SMN levels in an animal model of spinal muscular atrophy Hum Mol Genet 18 1600 1611 19228773
Bayever E Iversen PL Bishop MR Sharp JG Tewary HK Arneson MA Pirruccello SJ Ruddon RW Kessinger A Zon G 1993 Systemic administration of a phosphorothioate oligonucleotide with a sequence complementary to p53 for acute myelogenous leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome: initial results of a phase I trial Antisense Res Dev 3 383 390 8155979
Bennett CF Swayze EE 2010 RNA targeting therapeutics: molecular mechanisms of antisense oligonucleotides as a therapeutic platform Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 50 259 293 20055705
Bogdanik LP Osborne MA Davis C Martin WP Austin A Rigo F Bennett CF Lutz CM 2015 Systemic, postsymptomatic antisense oligonucleotide rescues motor unit maturation delay in a new mouse model for type II/III spinal muscular atrophy Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 E5863 5872 26460027
Bottros MM Christo PJ 2014 Current perspectives on intrathecal drug delivery J Pain Res 7 615 626 25395870
BusinessWire 2016 Biogen and Ionis Pharmaceuticals Report Nusinersen Meets Primary Endpoint at Interim Analysis of Phase 3 ENDEAR Study in Infantile-Onset Spinal Muscular Atrophy
Butovsky O Jedrychowski MP Cialic R Krasemann S Murugaiyan G Fanek Z Greco DJ Wu PM Doykan CE Kiner O 2014 Targeting miR-155 restores abnormal microglia and attenuates disease in SOD1 mice Ann Neurol
Butterfield DA Poon HF 2005 The senescence-accelerated prone mouse (SAMP8): a model of age-related cognitive decline with relevance to alterations of the gene expression and protein abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease Exp Gerontol 40 774 783 16026957
Carthew RW Sontheimer EJ 2009 Origins and Mechanisms of miRNAs and siRNAs Cell 136 642 655 19239886
Cerritelli SM Crouch RJ 2009 Ribonuclease H: the enzymes in eukaryotes FEBS J 276 1494 1505 19228196
Chauhan NB Siegel GJ 2007 Antisense inhibition at the beta-secretase-site of beta-amyloid precursor protein reduces cerebral amyloid and acetyl cholinesterase activity in Tg2576 Neuroscience 146 143 151 17303345
Chiriboga CA Swoboda KJ Darras BT Iannaccone ST Montes J De Vivo DC Norris DA Bennett CF Bishop KM 2016 Results from a phase 1 study of nusinersen (ISIS-SMN(Rx)) in children with spinal muscular atrophy Neurology 86 890 897 26865511
Clavaguera F Bolmont T Crowther RA Abramowski D Frank S Probst A Fraser G Stalder AK Beibel M Staufenbiel M 2009 Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain Nat Cell Biol 11 909 913 19503072
Corder EH Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Gaskell PC Small GW Roses AD Haines JL Pericak-Vance MA 1993 Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer's disease in late onset families Science 261 921 923 8346443
Crisp MJ Mawuenyega KG Patterson BW Reddy NC Chott R Self WK Weihl CC Jockel-Balsarotti J Varadhachary AS Bucelli RC 2015 In vivo kinetic approach reveals slow SOD1 turnover in the CNS J Clin Invest 125 2772 2780 26075819
Crooke ST 2007 Antisense Drug Technology: Principles, Strategies, and Applications 2nd Boca Raton, FL CRC Press
Davis S Lollo B Freier S Esau C 2006 Improved targeting of miRNA with antisense oligonucleotides Nucleic Acids Res 34 2294 2304 16690972
Davis S Propp S Freier SM Jones LE Serra MJ Kinberger G Bhat B Swayze EE Bennett CF Esau C 2009 Potent inhibition of microRNA in vivo without degradation Nucleic Acids Res 37 70 77 19015151
de Calignon A Polydoro M Suarez-Calvet M William C Adamowicz DH Kopeikina KJ Pitstick R Sahara N Ashe KH Carlson GA 2012 Propagation of tau pathology in a model of early Alzheimer's disease Neuron 73 685 697 22365544
DeJesus-Hernandez M Mackenzie IR Boeve BF Boxer AL Baker M Rutherford NJ Nicholson AM Finch NA Flynn H Adamson J 2011 Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS Neuron 72 245 256 21944778
DeVos SL Goncharoff DK Chen G Kebodeaux CS Yamada K Stewart FR Schuler DR Maloney SE Wozniak DF Rigo F 2013 Antisense reduction of tau in adult mice protects against seizures J Neurosci 33 12887 12897 23904623
DeVos SL Miller RL Schoch KM Holmes BB Kebodeaux CS Wegener AJ Chen G Shen T Tran H Nichols B 2017 Tau reduction prevents neuronal loss and reverses pathological tau deposition and seeding in mice with tauopathy Sci Transl Med 9
Dickson A Osman E Lorson CL 2008 A negatively acting bifunctional RNA increases survival motor neuron both in vitro and in vivo Hum Gene Ther 19 1307 1315 19848583
Dominguez D Tournoy J Hartmann D Huth T Cryns K Deforce S Serneels L Camacho IE Marjaux E Craessaerts K 2005 Phenotypic and biochemical analyses of BACE1- and BACE2-deficient mice J Biol Chem 280 30797 30806 15987683
Donnelly CJ Zhang PW Pham JT Haeusler AR Mistry NA Vidensky S Daley EL Poth EM Hoover B Fines DM 2013 RNA toxicity from the ALS/FTD C9ORF72 expansion is mitigated by antisense intervention Neuron 80 415 428 24139042
Dragatsis I Levine MS Zeitlin S 2000 Inactivation of Hdh in the brain and testis results in progressive neurodegeneration and sterility in mice Nat Genet 26 300 306 11062468
Duque SI Arnold WD Odermatt P Li X Porensky PN Schmelzer L Meyer K Kolb SJ Schumperli D Kaspar BK 2015 A large animal model of spinal muscular atrophy and correction of phenotype Ann Neurol 77 399 414 25516063
Eisele YS Obermuller U Heilbronner G Baumann F Kaeser SA Wolburg H Walker LC Staufenbiel M Heikenwalder M Jucker M 2010 Peripherally applied Abeta-containing inoculates induce cerebral beta-amyloidosis Science 330 980 982 20966215
Erickson MA Niehoff ML Farr SA Morley JE Dillman LA Lynch KM Banks WA 2012 Peripheral administration of antisense oligonucleotides targeting the amyloid-beta protein precursor reverses AbetaPP and LRP-1 overexpression in the aged SAMP8 mouse brain J Alzheimers Dis 28 951 960 22179572
Evers MM Tran HD Zalachoras I Meijer OC den Dunnen JT van Ommen GJ Aartsma-Rus A van Roon-Mom WM 2014 Preventing formation of toxic N-terminal huntingtin fragments through antisense oligonucleotide-mediated protein modification Nucleic Acid Ther 24 4 12 24380395
Faghihi MA Zhang M Huang J Modarresi F Van der Brug MP Nalls MA Cookson MR St-Laurent G 3rd Wahlestedt C 2010 Evidence for natural antisense transcript-mediated inhibition of microRNA function Genome Biol 11 R56 20507594
Farr SA Erickson MA Niehoff ML Banks WA Morley JE 2014 Central and peripheral administration of antisense oligonucleotide targeting amyloid-beta protein precursor improves learning and memory and reduces neuroinflammatory cytokines in Tg2576 (AbetaPPswe) mice J Alzheimers Dis 40 1005 1016 24577464
FDANewsRelease 2013 FDA approves new orphan drug Kynamro to treat inherited cholesterol disorder
FDANewsRelease 2016a FDA approves first drug for spinal muscular atrophy
FDANewsRelease 2016b FDA grants accelerated approval to first drug for Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Fuentealba RA Barria MI Lee J Cam J Araya C Escudero CA Inestrosa NC Bronfman FC Bu G Marzolo MP 2007 ApoER2 expression increases Abeta production while decreasing Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) endocytosis: Possible role in the partitioning of APP into lipid rafts and in the regulation of gamma-secretase activity Mol Neurodegener 2 14 17620134
Geary RS Norris D Yu R Bennett CF 2015 Pharmacokinetics, biodistribution and cell uptake of antisense oligonucleotides Adv Drug Deliv Rev 87 46 51 25666165
Geary RS Watanabe TA Truong L Freier S Lesnik EA Sioufi NB Sasmor H Manoharan M Levin AA 2001 Pharmacokinetic properties of 2′-O-(2-methoxyethyl)-modified oligonucleotide analogs in rats J Pharmacol Exp Ther 296 890 897 11181921
Gotkine M Rozenstein L Einstein O Abramsky O Argov Z Rosenmann H 2013 Presymptomatic treatment with acetylcholinesterase antisense oligonucleotides prolongs survival in ALS (G93A-SOD1) mice Biomed Res Int 2013 845345 24455732
Havens MA Hastings ML 2016 Splice-switching antisense oligonucleotides as therapeutic drugs Nucleic Acids Res 44 6549 6563 27288447
He X Cooley K Chung CH Dashti N Tang J 2007 Apolipoprotein receptor 2 and X11 alpha/beta mediate apolipoprotein E-induced endocytosis of amyloid-beta precursor protein and beta-secretase, leading to amyloid-beta production J Neurosci 27 4052 4060 17428983
Henry S Stecker K Brooks D Monteith D Conklin B Bennett CF 2000 Chemically modified oligonucleotides exhibit decreased immune stimulation in mice J Pharmacol Exp Ther 292 468 479 10640282
Hinrich AJ Jodelka FM Chang JL Brutman D Bruno AM Briggs CA James BD Stutzmann GE Bennett DA Miller SA 2016 Therapeutic correction of ApoER2 splicing in Alzheimer's disease mice using antisense oligonucleotides EMBO Mol Med 8 328 345 26902204
Holmes BB Diamond MI 2014 Prion-like properties of Tau protein: the importance of extracellular Tau as a therapeutic target J Biol Chem 289 19855 19861 24860099
Holth JK Bomben VC Reed JG Inoue T Younkin L Younkin SG Pautler RG Botas J Noebels JL 2013 Tau loss attenuates neuronal network hyperexcitability in mouse and Drosophila genetic models of epilepsy J Neurosci 33 1651 1659 23345237
Hu X Hicks CW He W Wong P Macklin WB Trapp BD Yan R 2006 Bace1 modulates myelination in the central and peripheral nervous system Nat Neurosci 9 1520 1525 17099708
Hua Y Sahashi K Hung G Rigo F Passini MA Bennett CF Krainer AR 2010 Antisense correction of SMN2 splicing in the CNS rescues necrosis in a type III SMA mouse model Genes Dev 24 1634 1644 20624852
Hua Y Sahashi K Rigo F Hung G Horev G Bennett CF Krainer AR 2011 Peripheral SMN restoration is essential for long-term rescue of a severe spinal muscular atrophy mouse model Nature 478 123 126 21979052
Hua Y Vickers TA Okunola HL Bennett CF Krainer AR 2008 Antisense masking of an hnRNP A1/A2 intronic splicing silencer corrects SMN2 splicing in transgenic mice Am J Hum Genet 82 834 848 18371932
Ittner LM Ke YD Delerue F Bi M Gladbach A van Eersel J Wolfing H Chieng BC Christie MJ Napier IA 2010 Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer's disease mouse models Cell 142 387 397 20655099
Janssen HL Reesink HW Lawitz EJ Zeuzem S Rodriguez-Torres M Patel K van der Meer AJ Patick AK Chen A Zhou Y 2013 Treatment of HCV infection by targeting microRNA N Engl J Med 368 1685 1694 23534542
Jiang J Zhu Q Gendron TF Saberi S McAlonis-Downes M Seelman A Stauffer JE Jafar-Nejad P Drenner K Schulte D 2016 Gain of Toxicity from ALS/FTD-Linked Repeat Expansions in C9ORF72 Is Alleviated by Antisense Oligonucleotides Targeting GGGGCC-Containing RNAs Neuron 90 535 550 27112497
Kamola PJ Kitson JD Turner G Maratou K Eriksson S Panjwani A Warnock LC Douillard Guilloux GA Moores K Koppe EL 2015 In silico and in vitro evaluation of exonic and intronic off-target effects form a critical element of therapeutic ASO gapmer optimization Nucleic Acids Res 43 8638 8650 26338776
Kordasiewicz HB Stanek LM Wancewicz EV Mazur C McAlonis MM Pytel KA Artates JW Weiss A Cheng SH Shihabuddin LS 2012 Sustained therapeutic reversal of Huntington's disease by transient repression of huntingtin synthesis Neuron 74 1031 1044 22726834
Koval ED Shaner C Zhang P du Maine X Fischer K Tay J Chau BN Wu GF Miller TM 2013 Method for widespread microRNA-155 inhibition prolongs survival in ALS-model mice Hum Mol Genet 22 4127 4135 23740943
Kumar VB Farr SA Flood JF Kamlesh V Franko M Banks WA Morley JE 2000 Site-directed antisense oligonucleotide decreases the expression of amyloid precursor protein and reverses deficits in learning and memory in aged SAMP8 mice Peptides 21 1769 1775 11150636
Lagier-Tourenne C Baughn M Rigo F Sun S Liu P Li HR Jiang J Watt AT Chun S Katz M 2013 Targeted degradation of sense and antisense C9orf72 RNA foci as therapy for ALS and frontotemporal degeneration Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 E4530 4539 24170860
Laird FM Cai H Savonenko AV Farah MH He K Melnikova T Wen H Chiang HC Xu G Koliatsos VE 2005 BACE1, a major determinant of selective vulnerability of the brain to amyloid-beta amyloidogenesis, is essential for cognitive, emotional, and synaptic functions J Neurosci 25 11693 11709 16354928
Lee ST Chu K Jung KH Kim JH Huh JY Yoon H Park DK Lim JY Kim JM Jeon D 2012 miR-206 regulates brain-derived neurotrophic factor in Alzheimer disease model Ann Neurol 72 269 277 22926857
Lei P Ayton S Finkelstein DI Spoerri L Ciccotosto GD Wright DK Wong BX Adlard PA Cherny RA Lam LQ 2012 Tau deficiency induces parkinsonism with dementia by impairing APP-mediated iron export Nat Med 18 291 295 22286308
Ling SC Polymenidou M Cleveland DW 2013 Converging mechanisms in ALS and FTD: disrupted RNA and protein homeostasis Neuron 79 416 438 23931993
Liu Y Pattamatta A Zu T Reid T Bardhi O Borchelt DR Yachnis AT Ranum LP 2016 C9orf72 BAC Mouse Model with Motor Deficits and Neurodegenerative Features of ALS/FTD Neuron 90 521 534 27112499
Lorenz P Misteli T Baker BF Bennett CF Spector DL 2000 Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling: a novel in vivo property of antisense phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotides Nucleic Acids Res 28 582 592 10606658
Luk KC Kehm V Carroll J Zhang B O'Brien P Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2012 Pathological alpha-synuclein transmission initiates Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice Science 338 949 953 23161999
Ma QL Zuo X Yang F Ubeda OJ Gant DJ Alaverdyan M Kiosea NC Nazari S Chen PP Nothias F 2014 Loss of MAP function leads to hippocampal synapse loss and deficits in the Morris Water Maze with aging J Neurosci 34 7124 7136 24849348
Majounie E Renton AE Mok K Dopper EG Waite A Rollinson S Chio A Restagno G Nicolaou N Simon-Sanchez J 2012 Frequency of the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: a cross-sectional study Lancet Neurol 11 323 330 22406228
Marwick C 1998 First “antisense” drug will treat CMV retinitis JAMA 280 871 9739955
McMahon BM Mays D Lipsky J Stewart JA Fauq A Richelson E 2002 Pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of a peptide nucleic acid after intravenous administration Antisense Nucleic Acid Drug Dev 12 65 70 12074366
McMahon BM Stewart J Fauq A Younkin S Younkin L Richelson E 2003 Peptide nucleic acids targeted to the amyloid precursor protein J Mol Neurosci 20 261 265 14501006
Meyer-Luehmann M Coomaraswamy J Bolmont T Kaeser S Schaefer C Kilger E Neuenschwander A Abramowski D Frey P Jaton AL 2006 Exogenous induction of cerebral beta-amyloidogenesis is governed by agent and host Science 313 1781 1784 16990547
Miller TM Pestronk A David W Rothstein J Simpson E Appel SH Andres PL Mahoney K Allred P Alexander K 2013 An antisense oligonucleotide against SOD1 delivered intrathecally for patients with SOD1 familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase 1, randomised, first-in-man study Lancet Neurol 12 435 442 23541756
Mocanu MM Nissen A Eckermann K Khlistunova I Biernat J Drexler D Petrova O Schonig K Bujard H Mandelkow E 2008 The potential for beta-structure in the repeat domain of tau protein determines aggregation, synaptic decay, neuronal loss, and coassembly with endogenous Tau in inducible mouse models of tauopathy J Neurosci 28 737 748 18199773
Monia BP Johnston JF Ecker DJ Zounes MA Lima WF Freier SM 1992 Selective inhibition of mutant Ha-ras mRNA expression by antisense oligonucleotides J Biol Chem 267 19954 19962 1400312
Morris M Maeda S Vossel K Mucke L 2011 The many faces of tau Neuron 70 410 426 21555069
Mougenot AL Nicot S Bencsik A Morignat E Verchere J Lakhdar L Legastelois S Baron T 2012 Prion-like acceleration of a synucleinopathy in a transgenic mouse model Neurobiol Aging 33 2225 2228 21813214
O'Rourke JG Bogdanik L Yanez A Lall D Wolf AJ Muhammad AK Ho R Carmona S Vit JP Zarrow J 2016 C9orf72 is required for proper macrophage and microglial function in mice Science 351 1324 1329 26989253
Ordway JM Tallaksen-Greene S Gutekunst CA Bernstein EM Cearley JA Wiener HW Dure LSt Lindsey R Hersch SM Jope RS 1997 Ectopically expressed CAG repeats cause intranuclear inclusions and a progressive late onset neurological phenotype in the mouse Cell 91 753 763 9413985
Osman EY Miller MR Robbins KL Lombardi AM Atkinson AK Brehm AJ Lorson CL 2014 Morpholino antisense oligonucleotides targeting intronic repressor Element1 improve phenotype in SMA mouse models Hum Mol Genet 23 4832 4845 24781211
Ostergaard ME Southwell AL Kordasiewicz H Watt AT Skotte NH Doty CN Vaid K Villanueva EB Swayze EE Bennett CF 2013 Rational design of antisense oligonucleotides targeting single nucleotide polymorphisms for potent and allele selective suppression of mutant Huntingtin in the CNS Nucleic Acids Res 41 9634 9650 23963702
Pao PW Wee KB Yee WC Pramono ZA 2014 Dual masking of specific negative splicing regulatory elements resulted in maximal exon 7 inclusion of SMN2 gene Mol Ther 22 854 861 24317636
Pardridge WM 1998 CNS drug design based on principles of blood-brain barrier transport J Neurochem 70 1781 1792 9572261
Pasinelli P Brown RH 2006 Molecular biology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: insights from genetics Nat Rev Neurosci 7 710 723 16924260
Passini MA Bu J Richards AM Kinnecom C Sardi SP Stanek LM Hua Y Rigo F Matson J Hung G 2011 Antisense oligonucleotides delivered to the mouse CNS ameliorate symptoms of severe spinal muscular atrophy Sci Transl Med 3 72ra18
Pedersen WA Luo H Kruman I Kasarskis E Mattson MP 2000 The prostate apoptosis response-4 protein participates in motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis FASEB J 14 913 924 10783145
Peters OM Cabrera GT Tran H Gendron TF McKeon JE Metterville J Weiss A Wightman N Salameh J Kim J 2015 Human C9ORF72 Hexanucleotide Expansion Reproduces RNA Foci and Dipeptide Repeat Proteins but Not Neurodegeneration in BAC Transgenic Mice Neuron 88 902 909 26637797
Philips T Rothstein JD 2015 Rodent Models of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Curr Protoc Pharmacol 69 5 67 61 21 26344214
Polydoro M de Calignon A Suarez-Calvet M Sanchez L Kay KR Nicholls SB Roe AD Pitstick R Carlson GA Gomez-Isla T 2013 Reversal of neurofibrillary tangles and tau-associated phenotype in the rTgTauEC model of early Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 33 13300 13311 23946388
Porensky PN Mitrpant C McGovern VL Bevan AK Foust KD Kaspar BK Wilton SD Burghes AH 2012 A single administration of morpholino antisense oligomer rescues spinal muscular atrophy in mouse Hum Mol Genet 21 1625 1638 22186025
PRSNewswire 2015 Isis Pharmaceuticals Initiates Clinical Study of ISIS-HTT Rx in Patients With Huntington's Disease
Rigamonti D Bauer JH De-Fraja C Conti L Sipione S Sciorati C Clementi E Hackam A Hayden MR Li Y 2000 Wild-type huntingtin protects from apoptosis upstream of caspase-3 J Neurosci 20 3705 3713 10804212
Rigo F Chun SJ Norris DA Hung G Lee S Matson J Fey RA Gaus H Hua Y Grundy JS 2014 Pharmacology of a central nervous system delivered 2′-O-methoxyethyl-modified survival of motor neuron splicing oligonucleotide in mice and nonhuman primates J Pharmacol Exp Ther 350 46 55 24784568
Roberson E Scearce-Levie K Palop J Yan F Cheng I Wu T Gerstein H Yu G Mucke L 2007 Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-induced deficits in an Alzheimer's disease mouse model Science 316 750 753 17478722
Rosen DR Siddique T Patterson D Figlewicz DA Sapp P Hentati A Donaldson D Goto J O'Regan JP Deng HX 1993 Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nature 362 59 62 8446170
Rubinsztein DC 2002 Lessons from animal models of Huntington's disease Trends Genet 18 202 209 11932021
Santacruz K Lewis J Spires T Paulson J Kotilinek L Ingelsson M Guimaraes A DeTure M Ramsden M McGowan E 2005 Tau suppression in a neurodegenerative mouse model improves memory function Science 309 476 481 16020737
Sareen D O'Rourke JG Meera P Muhammad AK Grant S Simpkinson M Bell S Carmona S Ornelas L Sahabian A 2013 Targeting RNA foci in iPSC-derived motor neurons from ALS patients with a C9ORF72 repeat expansion Sci Transl Med 5 208ra149
Schoch KM DeVos SL Miller RL Chun SJ Norrbom M Wozniak DF Dawson HN Bennett CF Rigo F Miller TM 2016 Increased 4R-Tau Induces Pathological Changes in a Human-Tau Mouse Model Neuron 90 941 947 27210553
Sevigny J Chiao P Bussiere T Weinreb PH Williams L Maier M Dunstan R Salloway S Chen T Ling Y 2016 The antibody aducanumab reduces Abeta plaques in Alzheimer's disease Nature 537 50 56 27582220
Siemers ER Sundell KL Carlson C Case M Sethuraman G Liu-Seifert H Dowsett SA Pontecorvo MJ Dean RA Demattos R 2016 Phase 3 solanezumab trials: Secondary outcomes in mild Alzheimer's disease patients Alzheimers Dement 12 110 120 26238576
Singh NK Singh NN Androphy EJ Singh RN 2006 Splicing of a critical exon of human Survival Motor Neuron is regulated by a unique silencer element located in the last intron Mol Cell Biol 26 1333 1346 16449646
Skotte NH Southwell AL Ostergaard ME Carroll JB Warby SC Doty CN Petoukhov E Vaid K Kordasiewicz H Watt AT 2014 Allele-specific suppression of mutant huntingtin using antisense oligonucleotides: providing a therapeutic option for all Huntington disease patients PLoS One 9 e107434 25207939
Smith RA Miller TM Yamanaka K Monia BP Condon TP Hung G Lobsiger CS Ward CM McAlonis-Downes M Wei H 2006 Antisense oligonucleotide therapy for neurodegenerative disease J Clin Invest 116 2290 2296 16878173
Solomonov Y Hadad N Levy R 2016 Reduction of cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha upregulation delays the onset of symptoms in SOD1G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neuroinflammation 13 134 27250836
Southwell AL Smith SE Davis TR Caron NS Villanueva EB Xie Y Collins JA Ye ML Sturrock A Leavitt BR 2015 Ultrasensitive measurement of huntingtin protein in cerebrospinal fluid demonstrates increase with Huntington disease stage and decrease following brain huntingtin suppression Sci Rep 5 12166 26174131
Stanek LM Yang W Angus S Sardi PS Hayden MR Hung GH Bennett CF Cheng SH Shihabuddin LS 2013 Antisense oligonucleotide-mediated correction of transcriptional dysregulation is correlated with behavioral benefits in the YAC128 mouse model of Huntington's disease J Huntingtons Dis 2 217 228 25063516
Sud R Geller ET Schellenberg GD 2014 Antisense-mediated Exon Skipping Decreases Tau Protein Expression: A Potential Therapy For Tauopathies Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 3 e180 25072694
Sun X Marque LO Cordner Z Pruitt JL Bhat M Li PP Kannan G Ladenheim EE Moran TH Margolis RL 2014 Phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers suppress mutant huntingtin expression and attenuate neurotoxicity Hum Mol Genet 23 6302 6317 25035419
Sun XM Soutar AK 1999 Expression in vitro of alternatively spliced variants of the messenger RNA for human apolipoprotein E receptor-2 identified in human tissues by ribonuclease protection assays Eur J Biochem 262 230 239 10231386
Swayze EE Siwkowski AM Wancewicz EV Migawa MT Wyrzykiewicz TK Hung G Monia BP Bennett CF 2007 Antisense oligonucleotides containing locked nucleic acid improve potency but cause significant hepatotoxicity in animals Nucleic Acids Res 35 687 700 17182632
Tluk S Jurk M Forsbach A Weeratna R Samulowitz U Krieg AM Bauer S Vollmer J 2009 Sequences derived from self-RNA containing certain natural modifications act as suppressors of RNA-mediated inflammatory immune responses Int Immunol 21 607 619 19332442
Turner BJ Cheah IK Macfarlane KJ Lopes EC Petratos S Langford SJ Cheema SS 2003 Antisense peptide nucleic acid-mediated knockdown of the p75 neurotrophin receptor delays motor neuron disease in mutant SOD1 transgenic mice J Neurochem 87 752 763 14535957
van den Heuvel DM Harschnitz O van den Berg LH Pasterkamp RJ 2014 Taking a risk: a therapeutic focus on ataxin-2 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis? Trends Mol Med 20 25 35 24140266
Van Meerbeke JP Gibbs RM Plasterer HL Miao W Feng Z Lin MY Rucki AA Wee CD Xia B Sharma S 2013 The DcpS inhibitor RG3039 improves motor function in SMA mice Hum Mol Genet 22 4074 4083 23727836
Vassar R 2014 BACE1 inhibitor drugs in clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Res Ther 6 89 25621019
Vollmer J Krieg AM 2009 Immunotherapeutic applications of CpG oligodeoxynucleotide TLR9 agonists Adv Drug Deliv Rev 61 195 204 19211030
Wang L Deng HX Grisotti G Zhai H Siddique T Roos RP 2009 Wild-type SOD1 overexpression accelerates disease onset of a G85R SOD1 mouse Hum Mol Genet 18 1642 1651 19233858
Williams AH Valdez G Moresi V Qi X McAnally J Elliott JL Bassel-Duby R Sanes JR Olson EN 2009 MicroRNA-206 delays ALS progression and promotes regeneration of neuromuscular synapses in mice Science 326 1549 1554 20007902
Winer L Srinivasan D Chun S Lacomis D Jaffa M Fagan A Holtzman DM Wancewicz E Bennett CF Bowser R 2013 SOD1 in Cerebral Spinal Fluid as a Pharmacodynamic Marker for Antisense Oligonucleotide Therapy JAMA Neurol 70 201 207 23147550
Wu H Lima WF Zhang H Fan A Sun H Crooke ST 2004 Determination of the role of the human RNase H1 in the pharmacology of DNA-like antisense drugs J Biol Chem 279 17181 17189 14960586
Yanamandra K Kfoury N Jiang H Mahan TE Ma S Maloney SE Wozniak DF Diamond MI Holtzman DM 2013 Anti-tau antibodies that block tau aggregate seeding in vitro markedly decrease pathology and improve cognition in vivo Neuron 80 402 414 24075978
Yoshiyama Y Higuchi M Zhang B Huang SM Iwata N Saido TC Maeda J Suhara T Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2007 Synapse loss and microglial activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy mouse model Neuron 53 337 351 17270732
Younis HS Vickers T Levin AA Henry SP 2006 CpG and Non-CpG oligodeoxynucleotides induce differential proinflammatory gene expression profiles in liver and peripheral blood leukocytes in mice J Immunotoxicol 3 57 68 18958686
Zanetta C Riboldi G Nizzardo M Simone C Faravelli I Bresolin N Comi GP Corti S 2014 Molecular, genetic and stem cell-mediated therapeutic strategies for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) J Cell Mol Med 18 187 196 24400925
