LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101500072
35770
Nat Rev Neurol
Nat Rev Neurol
Nature reviews. Neurology
1759-4758
1759-4766

28257128
5643027
10.1038/nrneurol.2017.27
NIHMS879316
Article
Cognitive decline in Parkinson disease
Aarsland Dag 12
Creese Byron 13
Politis Marios 14
Chaudhuri K. Ray 15
ffytche Dominic H. 12
Weintraub Daniel 167
Ballard Clive 13
1 KCL-PARCOG group, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &amp; Neuroscience, King’s College London, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, UK
2 Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &amp; Neuroscience, King’s College London, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, UK
3 University of Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter EX1 2LU, UK
4 Neurodegeneration Imaging Group, Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &amp; Neuroscience, King’s College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, UK
5 Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, National Parkinson Foundation Centre of Excellence, King’s College London/Kings College Hospital, 5 Cutcombe Road, London SE5 9RT, UK
6 Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania 3615 Chestnut Street, #330, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
7 Parkinson’s Disease and Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Centres (PADRECC and MIRECC), Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Centre 3900 Woodland Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
Correspondence to D.A. KCL-PARCOG group, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &amp; Neuroscience, King’s College London, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, UK. daarsland@gmail.com
Author contributions

All authors contributed equally to all aspects of manuscript preparation.

27 5 2017
03 3 2017
4 2017
01 4 2018
13 4 217231
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Dementia is a frequent problem encountered in advanced stages of Parkinson disease (PD). In recent years, research has focused on the pre-dementia stages of cognitive impairment in PD, including mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Several longitudinal studies have shown that MCI is a harbinger of dementia in PD, although the course is variable, and stabilization of cognition — or even reversal to normal cognition — is not uncommon. In addition to limbic and cortical spread of Lewy pathology, several other mechanisms are likely to contribute to cognitive decline in PD, and a variety of biomarker studies, some using novel structural and functional imaging techniques, have documented in vivo brain changes associated with cognitive impairment. The evidence consistently suggests that low cerebrospinal fluid levels of amyloid-β42, a marker of comorbid Alzheimer disease (AD), predict future cognitive decline and dementia in PD. Emerging genetic evidence indicates that in addition to the APOE*ε4 allele (an established risk factor for AD), GBA mutations and SCNA mutations and triplications are associated with cognitive decline in PD, whereas the findings are mixed for MAPT polymorphisms. Cognitive enhancing medications have some effect in PD dementia, but no convincing evidence that progression from MCI to dementia can be delayed or prevented is available, although cognitive training has shown promising results.


Parkinson disease (PD) is one of the most common age-related brain disorders. PD is defined primarily as a movement disorder, with the typical symptoms being resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and postural instability, and is pathologically characterized by degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons and the presence of Lewy bodies (misfolded α-synuclein) in the surviving neurons. In addition to the defining dopamine-related motor symptoms, however, PD is increasingly recognized as a heterogeneous multisystem disorder involving other neurotransmitter systems, such as the serotonergic, noradrenergic and cholinergic circuits. Thus, a wide variety of nonmotor symptoms (NMS) linked with these neurotransmitters are commonly observed in patients with PD. In light of this variability, subtyping of PD has been proposed, including a system based on time of onset and ongoing rate of cognitive decline1.

Cognitive decline is among the most common and important NMS, and in this article we review the current status of knowledge regarding cognitive impairment in PD. Robust evidence indicates that in comparison with age-matched groups without PD, people with PD exhibit more rapid decline in a number of cognitive domains — in particular, executive, attentional and visuospatial domains, but also memory. The full spectrum of cognitive abilities can be observed in PD, from normal cognition, through early mild subjective and objective decline (mild cognitive impairment (MCI)), to mild, moderate and even severe PD dementia (PDD). Studies from the 1990s onwards convincingly demonstrated a much higher cumulative risk of dementia in people with PD than in the general population, and systematic reviews showed that the point prevalence of dementia was 25–30%. Several long-term longitudinal studies have indicated that the majority of patients with PD will develop dementia if they survive for more than 10 years after diagnosis. On the basis of numerous, varied studies, we now know that dementia in PD has important adverse implications for functioning, quality of life, caregiver burden, and health-related costs2.

The timing, profile and rate of cognitive decline vary widely among individuals with PD, so identifying and predicting future cognitive decline in this population is crucial for researchers and clinicians alike. Identification of clinical and biological markers that can predict which patients are at increased risk of early and rapid cognitive decline is important for communicating the prognosis and managing patients clinically and, thus, is a focus of this article. Established demographic and clinical risk factors include increasing age and more severe parkinsonism, in particular, non-tremor features2. Here, we focus on cognitive and biomarker features as potential predictors of cognitive decline in PD.

Cognitive syndromes in PD

Subjective cognitive decline

In recent years, interest has focused on subjective cognitive decline (SCD), in which cognitive impairments are noted by the patient, family members or health personnel, but cognitive test performance is in the normal range. In the general population, SCD is associated with an increased risk of future cognitive decline, that is, progression to MCI or dementia, including Alzheimer disease (AD). Relatively little is known about SCD in PD, and there are no established criteria for this syndrome. No reliable method of capturing SCD in PD yet exists, possibly owing partly to the confounding effects of motor symptoms and NMS. Nevertheless, SCD has been reported in patients with PD, and might be a harbinger of further cognitive decline in this population3.

MCI and the risk of PD dementia

The two most common cognitive syndromes in patients with PD, PDD and PD-MCI, were operationally defined in diagnostic and assessment guidelines from the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society (MDS)4,5. In PDD, but not in PD-MCI, the cognitive deficits are severe enough to impair daily life (for example, social and occupational functioning, and personal care), independently of the impairment ascribable to motor or autonomic symptoms.

Among PD patients without dementia, approximately 25–30% have MCI, which is evident at the time of diagnosis in 10–20% of patients2. Presence of MCI is associated with a shorter time to progression to a dementia diagnosis, although considerable variability is observed, with some patients remaining stable and some even reverting to normal cognition. For example, in one study of patients with early PD6, over 20% of those with MCI reverted to normal cognition after 1 year, although persistent MCI was associated with a much lower remission rate.

Early studies indicated that the mean time to dementia after PD diagnosis was approximately 10 years. This figure is supported by more recent studies, including some that monitored patients from the time of PD diagnosis (TABLE 1), which reported dementia prevalence of 15–20% after 5 years and 46% at 10 years7,8. However, lower dementia rates (5% after 4 years) have been reported elsewhere9. One study that selected only PD patients with normal cognition reported that nearly 50% had developed cognitive decline after 6 years10. Some studies11 suggest that cortical posterior cognitive deficits (that is, memory and language impairment), but not frontally based dysfunction, indicate a higher risk of dementia, leading to the ‘dual syndrome hypothesis’ of cognition in PD12. Discrepancies between studies are likely to be attributable to a variety of factors, including differences in case selection, whether duration was measured from onset of symptoms or diagnosis, use of different criteria for PD-MCI and PDD, and loss to follow-up.

Clinical challenges

Cognitive decline in PD is a continuous process affecting nearly all patients over time, and the demarcations between the four cognitive groups — cognitively normal, SCD, PD-MCI and PDD— are not strict. The distribution of patients in these four groups varies markedly among different studies, depending on factors including the case selection procedures, the criteria applied, the study design (cross-sectional or longitudinal), and the cognitive measurement procedures utilized. A recent study, which attempted to define the optimal criteria for PD-MCI, found that impairment (&gt;1.5 SD below the normative mean) on two tests within the same cognitive domain — rather than across different domains — was the best predictor of progression to dementia during the next 4 years13. As highlighted above, the separation between MCI and dementia hinges on whether the functional impact of cognitive impairment is ‘severe enough to impair daily life’, a criterion that is difficult to operationalize and requires an element of clinical judgement.

Another clinical challenge is the distinction between PDD and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), owing to their clinical and pathological overlap. The ‘1-year rule’, in which PDD is defined as dementia that occurs at least 1 year after onset of PD motor symptoms, whereas dementia occurring before, simultaneously with, or within the first year of onset of parkinsonism is classified as DLB, is often difficult to apply, as a substantial proportion of patients lie within the grey zone, and categorization is usually performed retrospectively. In addition, prodromal PD and DLB symptoms overlap; for example, REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) can evolve into either PD or DLB. Recent evidence indicates that cognitive impairment can be present in prodromal PD, further blurring the distinction between PD and DLB14. The recently revised MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for PD propose that PD can be diagnosed regardless of when dementia occurs in relation to parkinsonism onset, and in cases where parkinsonism subsequently develops in a patient with dementia, the diagnosis ‘PD (DLB subtype)’ is recommended15. The relationship between PD and DLB requires further exploration. For example, recent findings indicate several nonmotor subtypes of PD, including cognitive and non-cognitive forms, which can occur in early untreated motor disease in late-onset PD, as well as in early-onset PD16,17. From a practical perspective, an algorithm in which premotor NMS such as RBD are channelled towards potential transformation to motor PD, including cognitive phenotypes, has been proposed17.

Visual hallucinations and dementia risk

Several longitudinal studies have identified visual hallucinations and illusions as risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia in PD, with the time frame depending on the study design. In one study, a history of visual hallucinations at baseline was found to increase the risk of dementia at 8 years (OR 3.1, 95% CI 1.6–6.2)18, and another group found that baseline visual hallucinations (OR 10.2, 90% CI 2.4–44.0) or illusions (OR 8.2, 90% CI 2.4–28.4) increased the risk of dementia at 4–5 years19. The association between visual hallucinations and dementia that has been observed in prospective studies might reflect progression of cognitive dysfunction, which seems to be present before or coincident with hallucination onset20.

Mechanisms

A variety of mechanisms, in addition to the classic nigrostriatal α-synuclein misfolding and dopaminergic neuronal loss, contribute to the brain changes associated with PD (BOX 1). PD is now recognized to involve multisystem, multipeptide neurodegeneration, with non-dopaminergic degeneration having a crucial role.

Compared with the motor symptoms, little is known about the mechanisms underlying cognitive decline in PD, and several key questions remain unresolved. First, is cognitive decline merely a result of more severe and widespread involvement of primary PD neuropathophysiology? Second, are some of the PD-related mechanisms particularly relevant for cognitive decline? Last, is cognitive impairment related to regional involvement or specific mechanisms?

Information on the mechanisms underlying cognitive decline in PD has come from a variety of sources. In addition to postmortem studies, in vivo studies, including clinicopathological studies and biomarker studies involving electrophysiological, imaging, electrophysiology and biofluid analyses, and genetic studies, have all contributed to an increased understanding. However, animal models for PD-related cognitive deficits have been difficult to develop.

Evidence from pathological studies

The pathological contributions to dementia in PD have been studied in some detail, and have been reviewed elsewhere21. Good evidence from postmortem studies indicates that limbic and cortical Lewy body pathology is the main pathological correlate of dementia in PD. In most cases, α-synuclein pathology seems to spread from sites in the lower brainstem or olfactory bulb — or even extracranially from the gut or other areas innervated by the vagus nucleus1 — to the midbrain, forebrain and limbic structures and, finally, neocortical regions22.

In addition, there is strong evidence that the extent of amyloid plaque pathology is a significant contributor to dementia in up to one-third of patients with PD), whereas the role of tau-related pathology is less clear. Importantly, the three proteinopathies in combination seem to have an additive effect over and above the effect of any single pathology23,24. This finding is in line with basic neuroscience studies, which show an interaction between the processing of these three proteins. For example, transgenic mice with double pathology (that is, overexpression of α-synuclein on a background of amyloid-β (Aβ) or tau pathology) show more severe Lewy body pathology than mice overexpressing α-synuclein pathology only25. Clinically, these effects manifest as earlier and more rapid cognitive decline in patients with combined Lewy body and amyloid pathology26. The roles of other pathologies, including cerebrovascular disease, hippocampal sclerosis and cerebral amyloid angiopathy, are also beginning to be explored.

Synaptic pathology and cognition

The structural pathologies described above are relevant, but only partially explain the variance in cognitive decline in patients with PD. A better understanding of the disease substrate is needed for targeted drug discovery and to enable better monitoring of disease progression. Changes in synaptic function followed by synaptic loss are likely to be early and key events in neurodegenerative diseases: in AD, loss of synapses was found to be more robustly correlated with cognitive decline than was morphological pathology27. Less is known regarding the role of synaptic dysfunction in cognition in PD, but synaptic alterations have been demonstrated (reviewed elsewhere28).

In PD, mounting evidence indicates that the initial damage in dopaminergicnigral neurons occurs at the synapse, with subsequent retrograde axonal damage and, finally, somatic degeneration, leading to the typical motor symptoms of PD (reviewed elsewhere29). Similar mechanisms might underlie limbic and cortical involvement in PD. These events probably involve α-synuclein, which is mainly located synaptically and regulates synaptic homeostasis, vesicles and neurotransmitter release, and initially aggregates at the synaptic terminal during PD pathogenesis30. Of note, several other proteins implicated in PD — in particular, PINK1, Parkin, leucine-rich repeat serine/threonine-protein kinase 2 (LRRK2) and DJ1 — are also involved in synaptic regulation. We have found that reduced neocortical levels of ZnT3, a marker of synaptic plasticity, and two key synaptic proteins, neurogranin and SNAP25 (REFS 31,32), are associated with cognition in PD. These findings suggest that cortical synaptic changes lead to cognitive decline in PD, consistent with imaging findings (see below), and preliminary work indicates that synaptic changes are also reflected in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Neurogranin levels were found to be increased in the CSF in AD33, probably due to increased intracellular sequestration, and similar findings have been reported — and linked with cognitive decline — in PD34. Thus, CSF levels of synaptic proteins are potential biomarkers of future cognitive decline.

Neurotransmitters

Convincing evidence is available that mesolimbic and mesocortical dopaminergic activity is associated with cognitive functioning. The association between dopaminergic drugs and cognition is complex, however, and antiparkinson drugs can improve, worsen or have no influence on cognition35. In addition, a number of non-dopaminergic transmitter systems are affected in PD, and are likely to contribute to cognitive impairment21. For example, good evidence from postmortem and imaging studies indicates that the cholinergic system is affected relatively early in PD and contributes to the cognitive decline. Interestingly, whereas Lewy body and amyloid plaque pathologies were associated with earlier onset of dementia, cholinergic deficits were more pronounced in individuals with dementia occurring later in the disease course26,36. These observations provide a rationale for the positive effects of cholinesterase inhibitors in PD (see Management section below), as well as the worsening cognition associated with the use of medications with anticholinergic activity37.

Non-dopaminergic monoaminergic nuclei such as the noradrenergic locus coeruleus and the serotonergic raphe nuclei, with their long and widespread mesocortical connections, may affect cognition due to their influence on the activity of synaptic networks. This hypothesis was supported in a recent study, which showed that the ability of atomoxetine-mediated noradrenergic or citalopram-mediated serotonergic reuptake inhibition to improve response inhibition — a frontal executive task relevant to impulsivity — in patients with PD could be predicted by differences in brain activation, as measured by functional imaging38. In the serotonin system, several receptors are associated with cognition, including the 5-HT1B receptor, which was found to be downregulated in early PD in a recent PET study using a novel ligand, but was not associated with executive or attentional functioning39.

Striatal GABAergic neurons express adenosine A2A receptors, which have become a drug target to improve motor functioning in PD. These receptors are also located in the thalamus and neocortex, and some evidence indicates that increased receptor activity is associated with worsening cognition. Adenosine A2A antagonists may increase dopamine activity in the prefrontal cortex, and preliminary evidence suggests that they can improve cognition — in particular, working memory — in PD40,41.

Mitochondrial activity

Mitochondrial dysfunction occurs in PD, but little is known regarding its potential role in cognitive decline. However, mitochondrial pathology seems to contribute to cognitive decline in AD, and a recent postmortem study showed that deficiency in mitochondrial complex 1 activity and reduced mitochondrial DNA levels in the prefrontal cortex were more pronounced in PDD than in PD without dementia42. Mitochondrial activity is particularly high at the synapse, and is crucial to synaptic activity. A relationship between α-synuclein and mitochondrial activities at the level of synapses has been demonstrated, but their causal relationship needs to be further explored. Therapeutic approaches targeting mitochondrial activity, including complex 1 deficiency, are being developed, and manipulation of mitochondrial retrograde signalling has shown promising results in animal studies43. The role of mitochondrial dysfunction in cognitive decline in PD needs to be further explored.

Inflammation and neurotrophic factors

Neuroinflammation is relevant for both AD and PD, and might have important implications for cognitive decline in PD44, with a potential for novel treatment targets. Increased microglial activation is thought to lead to cell death in AD and PDD45, and inflammation markers represent possible prognostic biomarkers. Interestingly, CSF levels of cytokines are found to be associated with cognitive impairment in PD46 and, thus, represent possible biomarkers (see below).

Findings from many different sources convincingly demonstrate a link between diabetes, insulin resistance and PD, possibly via mechanisms involving neuro-inflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction47. A recent imaging study in a cohort of 36 patients, 12 of whom had diabetes, reported an association between diabetes, grey matter loss and cognitive impairment in PD48, indicating a possible role for antidiabetic drugs in the treatment or prevention of cognitive decline in PD, as has been suggested in AD.

Neurotrophic factors are crucial for neuronal plasticity and, thus, learning and other cognitive functions. A longitudinal study showed that cognitive impairment in PD was associated with reduced levels of growth factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor and epidermal growth factor, in CSF49 and plasma50.

Summary

In addition to α-synuclein, tau and amyloid pathologies, a number of other mechanisms, including different neurotransmitter systems, early synaptic changes, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction, are likely to contribute to cognitive decline in PD. The roles of these as well as other potentially relevant mechanisms for cognitive impairment, such as the unfolded protein response51, the ubiquitin–proteasome system52, and increased neurogenesis (for example, in response to neurotrophic factors)53, need to be explored further (see Management section below).

Genetic contributions

The link between risk genes for cognitive impairment and decline in PD has been the subject of several detailed reviews2,21,54. BOX 2 provides a summary of genes examined to date, and the discussion below focuses on those with the largest bodies of evidence.

Genetic variants that cause monogenic forms of PD have been extensively investigated with respect to their effects on the clinical presentation of PD, including cognition and susceptibility to dementia. The LRRK2 Gly2019Ser substitution is the most commonly studied mutation, and has been shown in the majority of studies to either have no effect on cognition or to be protective55–63. However, the sample sizes of the studies were restricted by the rarity of LRRK2 mutations, so an association with cognitive impairment cannot be ruled out. Moreover, limited longitudinal follow-up, along with assessment tools that lack the sensitivity to detect subtle changes, might mask true associations. α-Synuclein gene (SNCA) mutations are another major cause of autosomal dominant PD and, in contrast to LRRK2 mutations, most seem to have deleterious effects on cognition, with the exception of duplications, which produce a clinical presentation similar to sporadic PD64–67.

Polymorphisms in SNCA also confer a risk of sporadic PD, but examination of one risk variant (rs356219) in a large study failed to find any evidence of a relationship with cognition68. However, the recent identification of a haplotype in intron 4 of the gene and its association with PDD raises the possibility that SNCA-related mechanisms are associated with cognition in sporadic PD, warranting additional studies in longitudinally assessed cohorts69.

Most other research in sporadic PD has largely focused on four candidate genes: glucosylceramidase (GBA), microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), apolipoprotein E (APOE) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Of these, GBA has the strongest evidence base for association with cognitive measures: heterozygous mutations in this gene have been reliably shown to increase the risk of dementia70–74 and less severe impairments in frontal cognitive domains75. GBA is a highly polymorphic gene, and two large independent studies found that the type of mutation modulates the relationship with cognitive decline, furthering the possibility of disease subtyping on the basis of genetic status76,77.

The strong association between APOE and AD has led to extensive investigation of the relationship between AD risk alleles and cognition in PD. Tentative conclusions were drawn from a large meta-analysis showing a relationship with dementia78, and some68,79,80 — but not all81,82 — subsequent studies have reported effects on cognition, as measured by a variety of neuropsychological tests. These findings point to potential genetic overlap between AD and PD, a position strengthened by recent research leveraging PD genome-wide association study data, which found evidence of genetic pleiotropy at the MAPT locus83. Whether these findings provide a mechanistic explanation specifically for cognitive impairment in PD remains to be fully established.

Regional and cognitive domain-specific alterations in cortical activation associated with MAPT, APOE and COMT variants have been reported in two neuroimaging studies84,85. These findings complement those from neuropsychological studies, and might also go some way towards explaining the inconsistent results. In particular, although neuropsychological associations may not always be detected owing to low statistical power or lack of sensitivity of the measures used, evidence is accumulating that genetic variation drives mechanistic alterations that are consistent with different patterns of cognitive deficits. These findings warrant clinical studies with larger sample sizes, conducted with cognitive batteries specific to the neural correlates of the genes of interest.

Despite some compelling findings, experiments designed to examine the effects of single genes can only capture a small proportion of the variance of complex traits such as cognition. Genome-wide association studies go some way towards addressing this issue by simultaneously genotyping markers across the genome. One such study conducted in PD cognition found no genome-wide significant hits but, with only 443 cases, was underpowered86. The application of genome-wide methods in other diseases across neurology and psychiatry has generated promising findings83,87, but much larger data sets are needed in PD. The availability of such samples — and, consequently, the potential to conduct more powerful genetic analyses — is increasing.

Biomarkers of cognitive decline in PD

Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers

The variety of CSF-based markers in PD, and the biological factors that influence their levels in the CSF, was recently reviewed88. The most commonly studied markers have been the AD markers Aβ42 (a marker of Aβ pathology), total tau (t-tau, a marker of neurodegeneration) and phosphorylated tau (p-tau, a marker of tau pathology), and the PD marker α-synuclein. In a comprehensive review of biomarkers and cognition in PD, Lin and Wu89 identified 18 CSF studies. The most consistent finding was an association between reduced CSF Aβ42 levels and cognitive impairment, which was reported in 14 of 15 studies. By contrast, findings for t-tau and p-tau were inconsistent, with some studies reporting an association between increased CSF levels and cognitive impairment, but most reporting no associations. Subsequently, several more studies were published, including longitudinal studies reporting an association between CSF markers and future cognitive decline (TABLE 2) — a particularly relevant question for clinicians. In AD, CSF markers can accurately predict which patients with MCI will develop AD dementia in the near future, and CSF markers to predict accelerated cognitive decline in PD are an important priority. Two cross-sectional studies reported an association between low CSF Aβ42 levels and cognitive impairment in PD90,91. In addition, four longitudinal studies reported that reduced Aβ42 predicted more rapid cognitive decline92–95, confirming previous findings96–98 (TABLE 2). DeNoPa, a multimodal biomarker study in de novo PD99, found no link between PD progression and CSF markers, but the results could have been confounded by the low number of participants agreeing to serial CSF sampling, variations in CSF sample preparation, and the demographics of the cohort.

Several studies of CSF levels of total α-synuclein have been published. Most reported low values in PD, as confirmed by a recent meta-analysis100, but the association with cognition continues to be inconsistent, with both low90 and high93,101 values found to be associated with cognitive decline in different studies. The discrepant findings might be explained by differences in disease stage. CSF α-synuclein levels may increase with disease stage, and the association between high levels and cognitive impairment was found in more advanced disease but not early disease stages. In one study of CSF biomarker change with time, Hall et al.102 found that levels of t-tau, p-tau, total α-synuclein, neurofilament and YKL-40 (a marker of inflammation), but not Aβ42, increased over a 2-year period and were associated with worsening cognition, and the increase was particularly marked in patients with longer disease duration. These findings are consistent with reports that α-synuclein levels increase with more severe neurodegeneration. However, the DeNoPa study reported no change in α-synuclein or other CSF markers during a 24-month study period99. In addition to total α-synuclein, post-translationally modified forms of α-synuclein, including phosphorylated, nitrated and ubiquitylated forms, as well as oligomers, have been identified, and show some promise as markers of disease progression in PD103–105, but further research is needed to confirm their diagnostic and prognostic utility as markers for cognitive impairment in PD.

Neuroimaging

Over the past decade, structural, functional and molecular neuroimaging techniques such as MRI106 and PET107–109 have considerably advanced our understanding of the complex mechanisms underlying the development of cognitive impairment in PD106,109. Two large, ongoing 5-year observational biomarker studies, PPMI and COPPADIS, are using a range of imaging assessments, and are expected to yield important information on the utility of MRI to detect brain pathology in PD patients with cognitive impairment110. In such patients, PET imaging has provided in vivo evidence for the interplay between several pathological processes, including degeneration of subcortical cholinergic and dopaminergic projections, microglial activation, and neocortical pathology associated with misfolded protein deposition or vascular pathology45,107,111. Also, functional polymorphisms in the COMT gene, which influence dopamine storage, might contribute to cognitive deficits in PD112.

MRI measures of cortical and subcortical volume loss

Structural MRI can localize differences in regional cortical and subcortical tissue volume between groups of individuals. In PD patients without a formal diagnosis of PD-MCI or PDD, loss of tissue volume in frontal and parietal cortices has been associated with worse performance in decision-making, facial expression recognition, visual memory and executive function113–115. Studies in patients with PD-MCI have demonstrated a pattern of cortical volume loss in posterior, parietal and frontal cortices, and atrophy in the hippocampus, that correlates with memory deficits116–118. Longitudinal assessments of cortical thickness and subcortical volumes in patients with PD-MCI have indicated progression of cortical thinning in temporal, occipital, parietal and frontal cortices, and further loss of hippocampal volume that is associated with cognitive decline117,119. Retrospective analysis of structural MRI scans has demonstrated that in PD patients without cognitive impairment, this technique can predict conversion to PD-MCI status at 6 months on the basis of baseline hippocampal atrophy120, at 18 months on the basis of baseline temporal cortex thinning117, and at 2 years on the basis of baseline prefrontal thinning, and insular and caudate volume loss121. At the time when a PDD diagnosis is established, cortical thinning becomes more severe in parietal, occipital, temporal and frontal cortices, and the volume loss in the hippocampus is substantial, including atrophy of the parahippocampus, insula and cingulate gyrus, which is associated with further decline of cognitive functions122–125. The pattern of cortical thinning has also been suggested to differentiate PDD, which is characterized by predominant frontal cortex thinning, from DLB, which is characterized by predominant thinning of the parietal and occipital cortices126.

MRI-based structural and functional connectivity

Diffusion tensor imaging measures the magnitude (mean diffusivity) and direction (fractional anisotropy) of water molecule flow in brain tissue. Neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by damage to white matter tracts (structural connectivity) that results in increased mean diffusivity and decreased fractional anisotropy. In PD patients without a formal diagnosis of PD-MCI or PDD, increased mean diffusivity in the hippocampus, and in frontal and parietal white matter tracts, is associated with worse performance in terms of verbal and visuospatial memory, semantic fluency and other executive functions115,127–129. Also, decreased hippocampal fractional anisotropy correlates with measures of global cognitive decline129.

Resting state functional MRI (fMRI) measures blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal in the brain without an externally prompted task, and is useful to explore the functional organization of networks (functional connectivity) in the human brain. PD patients without a formal diagnosis of PD-MCI or PDD exhibited progressive loss of resting state functional connectivity over a period of 3 years in multiple brain regions — especially the posterior parts of the brain — which correlated with decreasing cognitive per-formance130. Studies have demonstrated that cognitive decline in PDD is associated with disruption of corticostriatal and frontal cortex functional connectivity131,132. As seen with the pattern of cortical thinning on structural MRI, the pattern of functional connectivity disruption can differentiate PDD, which is characterized by predominant frontal cortex disruption, from DLB, which is characterized by predominant disruption of parietal and occipital cortices126. Further studies are needed to replicate these findings, and specifically to pinpoint the structural and functional brain networks that underlie cognitive decline in patients with PD.

Perfusion imaging

Arterial spin labelling (ASL) is an MRI-based technique that allows quantification of altered cerebral blood flow. ASL studies have demonstrated patterns of hypoperfusion in patients with PDD compared with cognitively normal PD patients133. The pattern of brain hypoperfusion in PDD largely overlaps with the hypoperfusion observed in the posterior cingulategyrus, precuneus and occipital regions in patients with AD, but differs in the temporal lobes (AD &lt; PDD) and right frontal cortex (PDD &lt; AD)134. ASL is a promising technique that merits additional study in patients with PD and cognitive impairment.

Dopaminergic molecular imaging

Studies involving dopamine decarboxylase and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 PET imaging have demonstrated decline in regional mesolimbic and mesocortical monoaminergic capacity in patients with PDD135,136. These patients show only subtle loss of monoaminergic capacity in the anterior cingulate, ventral striatum and caudate, which can be detected at a single-voxel level135. Visual or semi-quantitative assessment of dopamine transporters by PET or single-photon emission CT (SPECT) imaging reveals nigrostriatal degeneration in patients with PDD, and reduced caudate dopamine transporter uptake has been associated with impairment of executive functions137,138. However, dopaminergic molecular imaging can detect only subtle differences between PDD and PD, and no differences between PDD and DLB have been reported to date.

PET imaging of glucose metabolism

Studies using PET to image glucose metabolism have demonstrated metabolic decreases in the parietal, temporal, cingulate and frontal cortices in PD-MCI and PDD139–141. PDD and DLB are characterized by similar patterns of glucose metabolic changes142. When PDD and AD were compared, however, patients with PDD showed greater metabolic reduction in the visual cortex and relative preservation of metabolism in the medial temporal cortex139,140,142. The use of more sophisticated PET analysis has allowed the identification of PD-related metabolic brain networks underlying cognitive dysfunction in PD, including smaller areas, detected at the single-voxel level, in the occipital, parietal and frontal cortices143. However, even with advanced methods, discrimination between PDD and DLB has been difficult in view of the aforementioned similarities in metabolic network patterns, with the exception that metabolic decrease in the anterior cingulate is greater in patients with DLB than in those with PDD144.

Cholinergic PET molecular imaging

The cholinergic system has a key role in functional and structural remodelling of the cortical circuits that underlie cognitive processing145. Cholinergic PET imaging studies seem to be consistent with postmortem evidence suggesting that loss of cholinergic function, in the forebrain, is associated with the manifestation of PDD36,146–148. PET molecular imaging of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity has indicated that cholinergic denervation of the cerebral cortex is an early phenomenon in the course of PD, and is more widespread and profound in patients with PDD36,146. AChE PET imaging studies have demonstrated mean cortical AChE loss of 20–30% in patients with PDD, compared with 11–13% in patients with PD36,147–149. In PDD, loss of cholinergic function is evident in the temporal, frontal and medial occipital cortices, and in the thalamus36,147,150. A similar pattern is seen in DLB136,150, and to a lesser extent in AD148; however, thalamic cholinergic denervation is not observed in AD150. Cholinergic PET might also be sensitive to subclinical dementia. In PD patients without a diagnosis of cognitive impairment, lower cortical AChE PET activity was associated with reduced cognitive performance scores for attention, memory and executive functions145,148,151. A number of molecular targets related to the cholinergic system can be evaluated with PET, and further studies are needed to understand cholinergic system involvement in the development of cognitive impairment in PD.

Amyloid-β and tau PET in PDD

PET imaging of Aβ plaques in vivo has demonstrated that most AD cases and a subset of DLB cases show increased cortical Aβ retention152. Aβ PET imaging (FIG. 1) indicates that cortical and striatal Aβ pathology is relatively infrequent (incidence 15–20%) in patients with PDD152–155, but is sometimes uncovered by histopathology at post mortem156. Compared with cortical β-amyloidopathy alone, the combined presence of striatal and cortical Aβ plaques was associated with worse cognitive impairment in PD157. Aβ retention in patients with PD-MCI predicted an increased risk of future cognitive decline158.

A recent tau PET study has shown increased signal in the inferior temporal gyrus and precuneus in patients with PPD, which was associated with heightened cognitive impairment. These findings suggest that tau cortical aggregates are present in patients with PDD, and that tau PET data could be a marker of cognitive impairment159.

As regards future research, application of novel neuroimaging techniques, including molecular imaging of α-synuclein, and of mitochondrial and non-TSPO (translocator protein) neuroinflammatory targets, could enhance our understanding of the mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment in PD, and accelerate the development of novel therapeutics.

Electrophysiology

Several studies, using a range of EEG and cognitive measures, have reported associations between slowing of the EEG in PD and cognitive deficits. The findings include associations between executive dysfunction160 or Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score161 and spectral ratio (the ratio of fast to slow activity), between performance deficits in attention, executive function and memory and increased delta power162 or decreased EEG median frequency163, and between clinical ratings of background EEG slowing and combined MMSE and clock drawing test scores164. An increase in low-frequency (delta and theta) EEG spectral power distinguishes PDD from PD and AD165.

Indices of EEG slowing are predictive of the transition to dementia at 5 years (HR 13)166. Peak frequency magnetoencephalogram (MEG) slowing is also predictive of the transition to dementia (HR 3.9 at 7 years)130; however, unlike in EEG studies, greater MEG predictive power was found at higher, beta band frequencies (HR 5.2). Interestingly, combining MEG and cognitive markers improved the prognostic power over and above the single markers, with a very high hazard ratio (&gt;27)130. A recent review of evoked potential studies in PD has suggested that a delayed (but not decreased-amplitude) P3b component in classic oddball tasks is a trait-like marker of PD cognitive impairment and dementia167. The review also noted that the mismatch negativity component of pre-attentive deviance detection tasks might be reduced more in PDD than in AD or DLB167.

Combination of biomarkers

As described above, the mechanisms underlying cognitive decline in PD are heterogeneous and, thus, the various biomarker modes show different yet connected brain changes. Creation of multiple models, by combining different types of markers, may provide complementary information and improve the prognostic accuracy for cognitive decline in PD. CSF or blood-based markers can inform the biochemical changes underlying volume reductions identified in imaging studies, as shown with some success in AD168.

Compta and colleagues reported interesting associations between structural imaging and CSF protein changes. In a cross-sectional study, high t-tau and p-tau and low Aβ42 values were associated with reduced grey matter volume in patients with PDD, but not in PD and non-PD controls169. Similar findings were reported by a different group170. In a subsequent longitudinal study, low CSF Aβ42 was associated with cortical thinning, and a combination of biomarker pathologies was a stronger predictor of cognitive decline and dementia than was a single biomarker pathology97. Finally, low CSF α-synuclein was associated with frontal cortical thinning in PD patients without dementia and in a group with idiopathic RBD, whereas in patients with PDD, cortical atrophy was associated with increased total CSF α-synuclein and t-tau89.

In two studies combining CSF biomarkers and SPECT striatal dopamine transporter uptake in early PD, reduced striatal uptake was associated with low CSF levels of t-tau and p-tau171 but not α-synuclein172. In an fMRI study, activity in motor-related networks correlated with CSF total α-synuclein, indicating that α-synuclein contributes to motor-related resting state networks in PD. In PD patients without dementia, CSF α-synuclein was associated with the dorsal attentional network, suggesting that α-synuclein is also involved in cognition. No associations between resting state fMRI networks and CSF Aβ were found173.

Taken together, these studies support the hypothesis that the cognition-related volume loss in PD is related to three key pathologies: α-synuclein, tau and amyloid. This idea is consistent with postmortem studies demonstrating that amyloid, tau and α-synuclein pathologies contribute to neuronal loss and cognitive decline from relatively early disease stages.

Management

Antidementia drugs for PDD

Robust evidence is available to support the use of cholinesterase inhibitors to treat dementia in PD174. The best evidence came from the EXPRESS study of rivastigmine175, and supportive data for donepezil were reported in the EDON study176. Memantine was tested in two medium-sized studies including both PDD and DLB cohorts177,178; only one of these studies found an effect in the PDD group177. Effect sizes were relatively small; for example, the difference in MMSE scores between patients treated with rivastigmine and placebo was 1.0 (REF. 175), with an SD of 3.8 in the treated group, indicating a Cohen’s d effect size between 0.25 and 0.30. A meta-analysis174 indicated that antidementia drugs did not increase mortality, and the drop-out rates did not differ between donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine and placebo groups. Compared with placebo, rivastigmine — but not donepezil or memantine — was associated with an increased incidence of adverse events. Preservation of frontoparietal and default mode cholinergic networks was recently reported to be associated with a positive response to cholinergic agents179, and might enable the identification of patients who are likely to benefit from this treatment.

Potential treatments for PD-MCI

As yet, no disease-modifying treatments with effects on cognition in PD are available, and there is no robust evidence that progression to dementia can be impeded. Epidemiological studies indicate that green tea and coffee can influence the risk of PD and, thus, a potential preventive role has been explored, although the effects on cognitive decline are unclear180,181.

In the first trial in PD-MCI, rivastigmine patch offered some benefit, although the primary outcome measure — clinical impression of change — was not significantly affected182. However, significant effects were observed on one of the secondary outcomes, a scale measuring everyday cognitive activities. Of note, the study had a crossover design, and included only 26 patients. Further studies of rivastigmine or other cholinesterase inhibitors for PD-MCI are warranted.

Theoretical and preliminary empirical evidence supports the hypothesis that rasagiline, a selective monoamine oxidase B inhibitor with effects on motor symptoms in PD, also has a positive cognitive effect. In a relatively large, placebo-controlled, randomized trial over 24 weeks, however, rasagiline did not significantly improve cognitive functioning in patients with PD-MCI183.

In a study focusing on depression, atomoxetine, a selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor, was associated with some cognitive benefit in patients with PD184. On a relatively insensitive screening instrument such as the MMSE, the placebo group worsened by 0.5 points whereas the atomoxetine group improved by 0.8 points, a statistically significant difference. Further support for the use of atomoxetine or other noradrenergic agents was provided in a single-dose, placebo-controlled study, which showed that 40 mg atomoxetine improved selected tests of decision-making and attention in PD185. We are not aware of any systematic studies of serotonergic agents in the context of cognition in PD, but vortioxetine, a novel agent that acts on a number of serotonergic receptors in addition to inhibiting serotonin reuptake, has produced cognitive improvement in elderly patients with depression186 and is a candidate for trials in PD. Various studies are ongoing, including trials of 5-HT6 receptor antagonists and donepezil for PD-MCI. 5-HT6 receptor antagonists might exert effects on cognition and mood owing to enhancement of cholinergic, glutamatergic, noradrenergic and dopaminergic neurotransmission, and the SYNAPSE study is exploring the effects of these agents in PDD.

Disease-modifying agents that slow disease progression in PD, including delaying the onset of dementia, are an urgent unmet need. The most interesting approaches include passive and active immunotherapies targeting Aβ, tau and α-synuclein, which might be particularly relevant for diseases such as PD that are characterized by accumulation and prion-like propagation of toxic protein aggregates187. Other potential strategies include drugs addressing mitochondrial dysfunction, anti-inflammatory agents, GBA-active agents, stimulation of neurogenesis, and neurotrophic factors53. As amyloid pathology has a prominent role in dementia development in PD, strategies to reduce Aβ toxicity — for example, by influencing clusterin-associated pathways188 — might be relevant in this context. Interestingly, apomorphine, which is used to treat motor complications in PD, has been shown in animal studies to reduce Aβ accumulation and toxicity, possibly via antioxidative mechanisms189. In a recent postmortem study, PD patients without dementia who had received apomorphine treatment showed reduced Aβ deposition compared with untreated patients190, and in a comparative open-label trial, apomorphine infusion was associated with improvement of several NMS191. Thus, placebo-controlled clinical trials to test whether apomorphine can delay dementia onset in PD are warranted.

Non-pharmacological approaches

Cognitive training

Studies employing systematic cognitive training to improve cognition have been conducted in AD and, more recently, in PD. A review and meta-analysis192 based on seven studies involving 272 patients with PD (MMSE scores 27–29) showed small but statistically significant improvements in working memory, processing speed and executive functioning after cognitive training. Large multicentre studies are needed to confirm these encouraging findings.

Physical exercise

Aerobic physical exercise has a range of beneficial effects on the brain, with potential relevance to cognition. A review based on seven studies concluded that physical exercise can improve motor symptoms and several NMS in PD193, possibly by improving perfusion, or by promoting growth hormone release or angiogenesis. In one relatively large study, 51 PD patients without dementia were randomly assigned to a progressive strengthening exercise training programme or to a simpler programme focusing on stretching, balance, breathing and non-progressive strengthening, administered twice a week for 24 months194. No differences between the groups were observed, although both groups showed evidence of improvement of attention and working memory after 24 months. Larger studies with carefully designed control conditions are needed to test whether physical exercise can improve cognition in PD.

Neurostimulation

Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus is an established practice in PD. However, cognition might be adversely affected in the immediate postoperative period and beyond, with accelerated decline of executive functions being reported195. By contrast, there is some preliminary evidence of positive cognitive effects after stimulation of the cholinergic nucleus basalis of Meynert in patients with AD196. Given the probable contribution of cholinergic deficits to cognitive impairment in PD, this approach might be relevant in the PD context197, and studies are ongoing.

Conclusions

In addition to the well-known high risk of dementia in the later stages of PD, recent research has established the high frequencies of SCD and MCI as harbingers of dementia in PD. Cognitive impairment might occur very early in the disease course, even before the onset of motor symptoms in the prodromal state. A variety of mechanisms contributing to cognitive decline in PD are gradually being revealed: in addition to α-synuclein toxicity, the potential contributions of other pathologies, mitochondrial disturbances, inflammatory changes and genetic factors are currently under investigation (FIG. 2). Related to these changes, a number of imaging, electrophysiological and CSF-based bio-markers have already been shown to be associated with cognitive impairment in PD, and studies consistently show that reduced CSF Aβ42 concentrations predict more rapid cognitive decline. However, following the demonstration of efficacy of a cholinesterase inhibitor for the treatment of PDD more than 10 years ago, no additional convincing evidence has emerged regarding the treatment or prevention of PD-MCI and PDD. Therapies for PDD remain a key avenue for future investigations, and several promising candidates are now being explored.

The authors thank Dr Michael Haworth for help in preparing the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Mental Health Biomedical Research Centre and Dementia Unit at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London, UK. D.A. is a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award Holder and would like to thank the Wolfson Foundation and the Royal Society for their support. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.

D.A. has received research support and/or honoraria from Astra-Zeneca, H. Lundbeck, Novartis Pharmaceuticals and GE Health, and serves as a paid consultant for H. Lundbeck and Axovant. K.R.C. has consulted and served on advisory boards for Britannia, AbbVie, Neuronova, Mundipharma and UCB, and has also served on advisory boards for Synapsus and Medtronic. He has received honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, AbbVie, Britannia, UCB, Mundipharma, Otsuka and Zambon, and grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Britannia, AbbVie, UCB and Neuronova. He holds intellectual property rights for the KPP scale and the PDSS, and receives royalties for the books Non-Motor Symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease and Fastfacts: Parkinson’s Disease. C.B. declares grants and personal fees from Lundbeck and Acadia, and personal fees from Roche, Orion, GlaxoSmithKline, Otusaka, Heptares and Lilly.

Figure 1 Amyloid-β PET scans in Parkinson disease dementia

Axial slices from two patients with Parkinson disease dementia, showing a | absence and b | presence of amyloid-β binding. 11C-PiB, 11C-labelled Pittsburgh compound B.

Figure 2 Overview of risk factors for Parkinson disease dementia

Three different categories of risk factors for Parkinson disease dementia (PDD) — clinical, molecular, and structural/functional imaging — are illustrated. Factors with evidence from longitudinal studies are shaded pink, and factors with evidence from cross-sectional studies are shaded grey. Interrelationships between factor categories (bidirectional arrows) and temporal relationships between cross-sectional factors and PDD (unidirectional arrows) remain unclear. MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MEG, magnetoencephalogram.

Table 1 Development of MCI and dementia from time of PD diagnosis: longitudinal studies

Study	N	Duration
(years)	MCI at
baseline (%)	MCI at
follow-up (%)	Dementia
during study (%)	Comments	MCI and risk of
dementia	Refs	
Pigott, K. et al. (2015)	141	4.4	0	47.4*	28	Normal cognition at baseline	–	10	
PARKWEST: Pedersen, K. F. et al. (2013)	182	5	20.3	–	19.2	–	RR 39.2, P &lt; 0.001	6	
Amsterdam: Broeders, M. et al. (2013)	123	5	35	50‡	13.8	–	“All patients who progressed to PD dementia had MCI at a previous assessment”	213	
PPMI: Weintraub, D et al. (unpublished work)	423	3	10	15–21§	3–6§	–	–	–	
CamPaIGN: Williams-Gray, C. H. et al. (2013)	142	10	364	62 at 3 years‖	46 (17 at 5years)	–	Reduced semantic fluency (HR 3.05) and pentagon copying (HR 2.55)	8	
Napoli: Santangelo, G. et al. (2015)	76	4	32.9	38.2	5.4	50% MCI at 4 years	–	9	
NYPUM: Domellöf, M. E. et al. (2015)	147	5	42.6	–	27.6	–	MCI at baseline: 6.5 × increased risk of dementia	214	
Sydney: Hely, M. A. et al. (2008)	136	20	–	–	83	MCI criteria not available at study start	–	215	
* Any cognitive impairment.

‡ Of those without dementia.

§ Using different criteria.

‖ Cognitive impairment rather than MCI. MCI, mild cognitive impairment; N, number of participants; PD, Parkinson disease.

Table 2 Predictive effects of CSF markers on cognitive decline in PD: longitudinal studies

Study	N	Baseline
MMSE
score	Disease
duration
(years)	Duration of
follow-up
(years)	CSF markers studied
(in addition to total
tau, phosphorylated
tau and Aβ42)	Outcome measures	Results	Refs	
Compta, Y. et al.	27	28	10	1.5	–	Dementia	Low Aβ42 predicted dementia	97	
Siderowf, A. et al.	45	DRS score: 133	11	1.5	–	DRS score	Low Aβ42 predicted more rapid decline on DRS	96	
Parnetti, L. et al.	44	27	3	3	α-Synuclein (total, oligomer)	MMSE and Montreal Cognitive Assessment score	Low Aβ42 predicted more rapid decline	98	
Alves, G. et al.	104	28	De novo	5	–	Dementia	Low Aβ predicted early dementia	94	
Bäckström, D. C. et al.	99	29	1.4	5–9	α-Synuclein total, NFL, H-FABP	Dementia	Low Aβ42, NFL and H-FABP predicted dementia	92	
Hall, S. et al.	42	29	7	2	α-Synuclein total, NFL	Dementia	Low Aβ predicted memory decline, high α-synuclein predicted reduced cognitive speed	93	
Terrelonge, M. et al.	341	–	0.6	2	α-Synuclein total	Four domains: memory, visuospatial, working memory–executive function, and attention processing speed	Low Aβ42 predicted cognitive impairment at follow-up	95	
Stewart, T. et al.	403	28.9	2.1	1.8	α-Synuclein total	Tests of verbal memory, cognitive processing speed, and visuospatial working memory	Lower α-synuclein predicted better preservation of cognitive function	101	
Aβ, amyloid-β; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DRS, Dementia Rating Scale; H-FABP, fatty acid-binding protein, heart; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; N, number of participants; NFL, neurofilament light chain protein; PD, Parkinson disease.

Box 1 | Mechanisms of cognitive decline

The following mechanisms are proposed to contribute to cognitive decline in Parkinson disease: Protein misfolding (α-synuclein, amyloid and tau)

Neurotransmitter activity

Synaptic dysfunction and loss

Neuroinflammation and diabetes

Mitochondrial dysfunction and retrograde signalling

Microglial and astroglial changes

Genetics

Epigenetics

Adenosine receptor activation

Cerebral network disruption

Box 2 | Potential genetic risk factors for cognitive impairment in PD

GBA (glucosylceramidase)

Mutations are associated with greater cognitive impairment and risk of dementia in patients with Parkinson disease (PD)70–75.

MAPT (microtubule-associated protein tau)

Mixed findings for cognitive impairment: the H1 haplotype is associated with an increased risk of dementia and modulation of temporal-parietal activation, as measured by functional MRI (fMRI)8, 68, 79, 80, 84, 85, 198,199.

APOE (apolipoprotein E)

The APOE*ε4 allele was associated with cognition in most (but not all) studies: evidence of distinct word list learning and semantic verbal fluency deficits; mixed evidence for dementia risk; associated with modulation of temporal-parietal activation, as measured by fMRI68,78–81,84,200

LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat serine/threonine-protein kinase 2)

No association in the majority of studies, but some larger studies reported a reduced prevalence of cognitive impairment and dementia in carriers of LRRK2 mutations55–63,201,202.

SNCA (α-synuclein)

One study found no association between the rs356219 polymorphism and cognition in sporadic PD, but multiplications and disease-causing mutations are associated with cognitive decline and dementia in monogenic PD64,65,68,203.

COMT (catechol O methyltransferase)

Mixed findings for cognition; some evidence that the Met allele is associated with impairment on frontal-dependent tasks; no evidence for dementia risk; associated with modulation of frontal networks7,11,79,80,84,204,205.

BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor)

Mixed findings: one of three studies reported an association between cognitive impairment and the Gly196Ala polymorphism206–208.

UBQLN1 (ubiquilin-1)

No association with cognitive impairment209.

FMR1 (fragile X mental retardation protein 1)

No association with cognitive impairment210.

Immune/inflammatory genes: IL10, IL17A, IL-18, IFNG

Mixed findings: IL10 was associated with lower risk of cognitive impairment and IL17A was associated with greater risk in one study211, but not in a subsequent study212.

Key points

The full spectrum of cognitive impairment, from subjective cognitive decline to dementia, has been observed in Parkinson disease (PD)

Mild cognitive impairment in PD usually progresses to dementia, but can be stable and even revert in some patients

The aetiology of cognitive impairment in PD has not been fully elucidated, but limbic and cortical Lewy body pathology seems to be the main cause

Amyloid plaque pathology also contributes to cognitive decline in PD, and amyloid pathology detected by cerebrospinal fluid analysis and imaging can predict subsequent dementia

Other probable mechanisms include genetics, synaptic pathology, neurotransmitter changes and inflammation

Cholinesterase inhibitors have symptomatic effects, but no disease-modifying treatments are available to reduce the risk of dementia in PD

Competing interests statement

The other authors declare no competing interests.


1 Sauerbier A Jenner P Todorova A Chaudhuri KR Non motor subtypes and Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 22 Suppl. 1 S41 S46 2016 26459660
2 Svenningsson P Westman E Ballard C Aarsland D Cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson’s disease: diagnosis, biomarkers, and treatment Lancet Neurol 11 697 707 2012 22814541
3 Erro R Do subjective memory complaints herald the onset of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease? J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol 27 276 281 2014 24789732
4 Emre M Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 22 1689 1707 2007 17542011
5 Litvan I Diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: Movement Disorder Society Task Force guidelines Mov. Disord 27 349 356 2012 22275317
6 Pedersen KF Larsen JP Tysnes OB Alves G Prognosis of mild cognitive impairment in early Parkinson disease: the Norwegian ParkWest study JAMA Neurol 70 580 586 2013 23529397
7 Williams-Gray CH The distinct cognitive syndromes of Parkinson’s disease: 5 year follow-up of the CamPaIGN cohort Brain 132 2958 2969 2009 19812213
8 Williams-Gray CH The CamPaIGN study of Parkinson’s disease: 10-year outlook in an incident population-based cohort J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 84 1258 1264 2013 23781007
9 Santangelo G Mild cognitive impairment in newly diagnosed Parkinson’s disease: a longitudinal prospective study Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 21 1219 1226 2015 26321021
10 Pigott K Longitudinal study of normal cognition in Parkinson disease Neurology 85 1276 1282 2015 26362285
11 Williams-Gray CH Hampshire A Robbins TW Owen AM Barker RA Catechol O-methyltransferase Val1 58 Met genotype influences frontoparietal activity during planning in patients with Parkinson’s disease J. Neurosci 27 4832 4838 2007 17475791
12 Kehagia AA Barker RA Robbins TW Cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: the dual syndrome hypothesis Neurodegener. Dis 11 79 92 2013 23038420
13 Wood K-L Different PD-MCI criteria and risk of dementia in Parkinson’s disease: 4-year longitudinal study NPJ Parkinsons Dis 2 15027 2016 28725690
14 Chahine LM Cognition in individuals at risk for Parkinson’s: Parkinson associated risk syndrome (PARS) study findings Mov. Disord 31 86 94 2016 26293177
15 Postuma RB MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 30 1591 1601 2015 26474316
16 Marras C Chaudhuri KR Nonmotor features of Parkinson’s disease subtypes Mov. Disord 31 1095 1102 2016 26861861
17 Chaudhuri KR Sauerbier A Parkinson disease: unravelling the nonmotor mysteries of Parkinson disease Nat. Rev. Neurol 12 10 11 2016 26714657
18 Aarsland D Andersen K Larsen JP Lolk A Kragh-Sorensen P Prevalence and characteristics of dementia in Parkinson disease: an 8-year prospective study Arch. Neurol 60 387 392 2003 12633150
19 Anang JB Predictors of dementia in Parkinson disease: a prospective cohort study Neurology 83 1253 1260 2014 25171928
20 ffytche DH Risk factors for early psychosis in PD: insights from the Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry (in press)
21 Halliday GM Leverenz JB Schneider JS Adler CH The neurobiological basis of cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 29 634 650 2014 24757112
22 Braak H Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol. Aging 24 197 211 2003 12498954
23 Compta Y Lewy- and Alzheimer-type pathologies in Parkinson’s disease dementia: which is more important? Brain 134 1493 1505 2011 21596773
24 Howlett DR Regional multiple pathology scores are associated with cognitive decline in Lewy body dementias Brain Pathol 25 401 408 2015 25103200
25 Irwin DJ Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Parkinson’s disease dementia: convergence of α-synuclein, tau and amyloid-β pathologies Nat. Rev. Neurosci 14 626 636 2013 23900411
26 Ballard C Differences in neuropathologic characteristics across the Lewy body dementia spectrum Neurology 67 1931 1934 2006 17159096
27 Terry RD Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment Ann. Neurol 30 572 580 1991 1789684
28 Pienaar IS Burn D Morris C Dexter D Synaptic protein alterations in Parkinson’s disease Mol. Neurobiol 45 126 143 2012 22205299
29 Bellucci A Review: Parkinson’s disease: from synaptic loss to connectome dysfunction Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 42 77 94 2016 26613567
30 Schulz-Schaeffer WJ The synaptic pathology of α-synuclein aggregation in dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson’s disease dementia Acta Neuropathol 120 131 143 2010 20563819
31 Whitfield DR Assessment of ZnT3 and PSD95 protein levels in Lewy body dementias and Alzheimer’s disease: association with cognitive impairment Neurobiol. Aging 35 2836 2844 2014 25104558
32 Bereczki E Synaptic proteins predict cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease and Lewy body dementia Alzheimers Dement 12 1149 1158 2016 27224930
33 Wellington H Increased CSF neurogranin concentration is specific to Alzheimer disease Neurology 86 829 835 2016 26826204
34 Bereczki E Synaptic proteins in CSF relate to Parkinson`s disease stage markers NPJ Parkinsons Dis 3 7 2017 28649607
35 Kulisevsky J Role of dopamine in learning and memory: implications for the treatment of cognitive dysfunction in patients with Parkinson’s disease Drugs Aging 16 365 379 2000 10917074
36 Shimada H Mapping of brain acetylcholinesterase alterations in Lewy body disease by PET Neurology 73 273 278 2009 19474411
37 Ehrt U Broich K Larsen JP Ballard C Aarsland D Use of drugs with anticholinergic effect and impact on cognition in Parkinson’s disease: a cohort study J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 81 160 165 2010 19770163
38 Ye Z Predicting beneficial effects of atomoxetine and citalopram on response inhibition in Parkinson’s disease with clinical and neuroimaging measures Hum. Brain Mapp 37 1026 1037 2016 26757216
39 Varrone A 5-HT1B receptor imaging and cognition: a positron emission tomography study in control subjects and Parkinson’s disease patients Synapse 69 365 374 2015 25914348
40 Vorovenci RJ Antonini A The efficacy of oral adenosine A2A antagonist istradefylline for the treatment of moderate to severe Parkinson’s disease Expert Rev. Neurother 15 1383 1390 2015 26630457
41 Ko WK An evaluation of istradefylline treatment on Parkinsonian motor and cognitive deficits in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridi ne (MPTP)-treated macaque models Neuropharmacology 110 48 58 2016 27424102
42 Gatt AP Dementia in Parkinson’s disease is associated with enhanced mitochondrial complex I deficiency Mov. Disord 31 352 359 2016 26853899
43 Cagin U Mitochondrial retrograde signaling regulates neuronal function Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112 E6000 E6009 2015 26489648
44 Rocha NP Plasma levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors are associated with cognitive performance in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 29 527 531 2014 24301904
45 Fan Z Influence of microglial activation on neuronal function in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease dementia Alzheimers Dement 11 608 621 e7 2015 25239737
46 Lindqvist D Cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory markers in Parkinson’s disease — associations with depression, fatigue, and cognitive impairment Brain Behav. Immun 33 183 189 2013 23911592
47 Aviles-Olmos I Limousin P Lees A Foltynie T Parkinson’s disease, insulin resistance and novel agents of neuroprotection Brain 136 374 384 2013 22344583
48 Petrou M Diabetes, gray matter loss, and cognition in the setting of Parkinson disease Acad. Radiol 23 577 581 2016 26874576
49 Leverenz JB Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and cognitive performance in non-demented patients with Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 17 61 64 2011 21044858
50 Lim NS Plasma EGF and cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 3 346 355 2016 27231704
51 Baek JH Unfolded protein response is activated in Lewy body dementias Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 42 352 365 2015 26202523
52 Bajic N Jenner P Ballard CG Francis PT Proteasome inhibition leads to early loss of synaptic proteins in neuronal culture J. Neural Transm. (Vienna) 119 1467 1476 2012 22592936
53 Paul G Safety and tolerability of intracerebroventricular PDGF-BB in Parkinson’s disease patients J. Clin. Invest 125 1339 1346 2015 25689258
54 Collins LM Williams-Gray CH The genetic basis of cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson’s disease Front. Psychiatry 7 89 2016 27242557
55 Healy DG Phenotype, genotype, and worldwide genetic penetrance of LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s disease: a case-control study Lancet Neurol 7 583 590 2008 18539534
56 Srivatsal S Cognitive profile of LRRK2-related Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 30 728 733 2015 25650144
57 Shanker V Mood and cognition in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 G2019S Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 26 1875 1880 2011 21611978
58 Ben Sassi S Cognitive dysfunction in Tunisian LRRK2 associated Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 18 243 246 2012 22056842
59 Belarbi S LRRK2 G2019S mutation in Parkinson’s disease: a neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric study in a large Algerian cohort Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 16 676 679 2010 20933457
60 Nichols WC Genetic screening for a single common LRRK2 mutation in familial Parkinson’s disease Lancet 365 410 412 2005 15680455
61 Goldwurm S LRRK2 G2019S mutation and Parkinson’s disease: a clinical, neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric study in a large Italian sample Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 12 410 419 2006 16750929
62 Alcalay RN Self-report of cognitive impairment and mini-mental state examination performance in PRKN, LRRK2, and GBA carriers with early onset Parkinson’s disease J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol 32 775 779 2010 20182943
63 Aasly JO Clinical features of LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s disease in central Norway Ann. Neurol 57 762 765 2005 15852371
64 Chartier-Harlin MC α-Synuclein locus duplication as a cause of familial Parkinson’s disease Lancet 364 1167 1169 2004 15451224
65 Somme JH Initial neuropsychological impairments in patients with the E46K mutation of the α-synuclein gene (PARK 1) J. Neurol. Sci 310 86 89 2011 21880335
66 Seidel K First appraisal of brain pathology owing to A30P mutant alpha-synuclein Ann. Neurol 67 684 689 2010 20437567
67 Puschmann A A Swedish family with de novoα-synuclein A53T mutation: evidence for early cortical dysfunction Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 15 627 632 2009 19632874
68 Mata IFAPOE MAPT, and SNCA genes and cognitive performance in Parkinson disease JAMA Neurol 71 1405 1412 2014 25178429
69 Guella I α-Synuclein genetic variability: a biomarker for dementia in Parkinson disease Ann. Neurol 79 991 999 2016 27091628
70 Alcalay RN Cognitive performance of GBA mutation carriers with earlyonset PD: the CORE-PD study Neurology 78 1434 1440 2012 22442429
71 Setó-Salvia N Glucocerebrosidase mutations confer a greater risk of dementia during Parkinson’s disease course Mov. Disord 27 393 399 2012 22173904
72 Winder-Rhodes SE Glucocerebrosidase mutations influence the natural history of Parkinson’s disease in a community-based incident cohort Brain 136 392 399 2013 23413260
73 Chahine LM Clinical and biochemical differences in patients having Parkinson disease with versus without GBA mutations JAMA Neurol 70 852 858 2013 23699752
74 Oeda T Impact of glucocerebrosidase mutations on motor and nonmotor complications in Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol. Aging 36 3306 3313 2015 26422360
75 Mata IF GBA variants are associated with a distinct pattern of cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 31 95 102 2016 26296077
76 Liu G Specifically neuropathic Gaucher’s mutations accelerate cognitive decline in Parkinson’s Ann. Neurol 80 674 685 2016 27717005
77 Cilia R Survival and dementia in GBA-associated Parkinson’s disease: the mutation matters Ann. Neurol 80 662 673 2016 27632223
78 Williams-Gray CH Apolipoprotein E genotype as a risk factor for susceptibility to and dementia in Parkinson’s disease J. Neurol 256 493 498 2009 19308307
79 Morley JF Genetic influences on cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 27 512 518 2012 22344634
80 Paul KCAPOE MAPT, and COMT and Parkinson’s disease susceptibility and cognitive symptom progression J. Parkinsons Dis 6 349 359 2016 27061069
81 Mengel D Apolipoprotein E ε4 does not affect cognitive performance in patients with Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 29 112 116 2016 27321987
82 Federoff M Jimenez-Rolando B Nalls MA Singleton AB A large study reveals no association between APOE and Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol. Dis 46 389 392 2012 22349451
83 Desikan RS Genetic overlap between Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease at the MAPT locus Mol. Psychiatry 20 1588 1595 2015 25687773
84 Nombela C Genetic impact on cognition and brain function in newly diagnosed Parkinson’s disease: ICICLE-PD study Brain 137 2743 2758 2014 25080285
85 Winder-Rhodes SE Association between MAPT haplotype and memory function in patients with Parkinson’s disease and healthy aging individuals Neurobiol. Aging 36 1519 1528 2015 25577413
86 Chung SJ Genomic determinants of motor and cognitive outcomes in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 18 881 886 2012 22658654
87 Andreassen OA Genetic pleiotropy between multiple sclerosis and schizophrenia but not bipolar disorder: differential involvement of immune-related gene loci Mol. Psychiatry 20 207 214 2015 24468824
88 Mollenhauer B Biological confounders for the values of cerebrospinal fluid proteins in Parkinson’s disease and related disorders J. Neurochem 139 Suppl. 1 290 317 2016 26452984
89 Lin CH Wu RM Biomarkers of cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 21 431 443 2015 25737398
90 Skogseth RE Associations between cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and cognition in early untreated Parkinson’s disease J. Parkinsons Dis 5 783 792 2015 26599300
91 Stav AL Amyloid-β and α-synuclein cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and cognition in early Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 21 758 764 2015 25971633
92 Backstrom DC Cerebrospinal fluid patterns and the risk of future dementia in early, incident Parkinson disease JAMA Neurol 72 1175 1182 2015 26258692
93 Hall S CSF biomarkers and clinical progression of Parkinson disease Neurology 84 57 63 2015 25411441
94 Alves G CSF Aβ42 predicts early-onset dementia in Parkinson disease Neurology 82 1784 1790 2014 24748671
95 Terrelonge M Marder KS Weintraub D Alcalay RN CSF β-amyloid 1–42 predicts progression to cognitive impairment in newly diagnosed Parkinson disease J. Mol. Neurosci 58 88 92 2016 26330275
96 Siderowf A CSF amyloid β 1–42 predicts cognitive decline in Parkinson disease Neurology 75 1055 1061 2010 20720189
97 Compta Y Combined dementia-risk biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease: a prospective longitudinal study Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 19 717 724 2013 23643469
98 Parnetti L Differential role of CSF alpha-synuclein species, tau, and Aβ42 in Parkinson’s disease Front. Aging Neurosci 6 53 2014 24744728
99 Mollenhauer B Monitoring of 30 marker candidates in early Parkinson disease as progression markers Neurology 87 168 177 2016 27164658
100 Zhou B Wen M Yu W-F Zhang C-L Jiao L The diagnostic and differential diagnosis utility of cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein levels in Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis Parkinsons Dis 2015 567386 2015 26336612
101 Stewart T Cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein predicts cognitive decline in Parkinson disease progression in the DATATOP cohort Am. J. Pathol 184 966 975 2014 24625392
102 Hall S Longitudinal measurements of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 31 898 905 2016 26878815
103 Ohrfelt A Identification of novel α-synuclein isoforms in human brain tissue by using an online nanoLC-ESI-FTICR-MS method Neurochem. Res 36 2029 2042 2011 21674238
104 Hansson O Levels of cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein oligomers are increased in Parkinson’s disease with dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies compared to Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Res. Ther 6 25 2014 24987465
105 Simonsen AH The utility of α-synuclein as biofluid marker in neurodegenerative diseases: a systematic review of the literature Biomark. Med 10 19 34 2016 26314196
106 Rocchi L Niccolini F Politis M Recent imaging advances in neurology J. Neurol 262 2182 2194 2015 25808503
107 Niccolini F Su P Politis M Dopamine receptor mapping with PET imaging in Parkinson’s disease J. Neurol 261 2251 2263 2014 24627109
108 Loane C Politis M Positron emission tomography neuroimaging in Parkinson’s disease Am. J. Transl Res 3 323 341 2011 21904653
109 Politis M Neuroimaging in Parkinson disease: from research setting to clinical practice Nat. Rev. Neurol 10 708 722 2014 25385334
110 Santos-Garcia D COPPADIS-2015 (COhort of Patients with PArkinson’s DIsease in Spain, 2015), a global — clinical evaluations, serum biomarkers, genetic studies and neuroimaging prospective, multicenter, non-interventional, long-term study on Parkinson’s disease progression BMC Neurol 16 26 2016 26911448
111 Politis M Su P Piccini P Imaging of microglia in patients with neurodegenerative disorders Front. Pharmacol 3 96 2012 22661951
112 Wu K The catechol-O-methyltransferase Val158Met polymorphism modulates fronto-cortical dopamine turnover in early Parkinson’s disease: a PET study Brain 135 2449 2457 2012 22843413
113 Ibarretxe-Bilbao N Neuroanatomical correlates of impaired decision-making and facial emotion recognition in early Parkinson’s disease Eur. J. Neurosci 30 1162 1171 2009 19735293
114 Ellfolk U Brain volumetric correlates of memory in early Parkinson’s disease J. Parkinsons Dis 3 593 601 2013 24225360
115 Duncan GW Gray and white matter imaging: a biomarker for cognitive impairment in early Parkinson’s disease? Mov. Disord 31 103 110 2016 26202802
116 Yildiz D Impaired cognitive performance and hippocampal atrophy in Parkinson disease Turk. J. Med. Sci 45 1173 1177 2015 26738364
117 Mak E Baseline and longitudinal grey matter changes in newly diagnosed Parkinson’s disease: ICICLE-PD study Brain 138 2974 2986 2015 26173861
118 Pereira JB Aberrant cerebral network topology and mild cognitive impairment in early Parkinson’s disease Hum. Brain Mapp 36 2980 2995 2015 25950288
119 Hanganu A Mild cognitive impairment is linked with faster rate of cortical thinning in patients with Parkinson’s disease longitudinally Brain 137 1120 1129 2014 24613932
120 Kandiah N Hippocampal volume and white matter disease in the prediction of dementia in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 20 1203 1208 2014 25258331
121 Lee JE Exploratory analysis of neuropsychological and neuroanatomical correlates of progressive mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 85 7 16 2014 23828835
122 Rektorova I Grey matter changes in cognitively impaired Parkinson’s disease patients PLoS ONE 9 e85595 2014 24465612
123 Hwang KS Mapping cortical atrophy in Parkinson’s disease patients with dementia J. Parkinsons Dis 3 69 76 2013 23938313
124 Zarei M Cortical thinning is associated with disease stages and dementia in Parkinson’s disease J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 84 875 881 2013 23463873
125 Pagonabarraga J Pattern of regional cortical thinning associated with cognitive deterioration in Parkinson’s disease PLoS ONE 8 e54980 2013 23359616
126 Borroni B Structural and functional imaging study in dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease dementia Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 21 1049 1055 2015 26109553
127 Carlesimo GA Hippocampal abnormalities and memory deficits in Parkinson disease: a multimodal imaging study Neurology 78 1939 1945 2012 22649213
128 Agosta F Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease is associated with a distributed pattern of brain white matter damage Hum. Brain Mapp 35 1921 1929 2014 23843285
129 Chen B Fan GG Liu H Wang S Changes in anatomical and functional connectivity of Parkinson’s disease patients according to cognitive status Eur. J. Radiol 84 1318 1324 2015 25963506
130 Olde Dubbelink KT Functional connectivity and cognitive decline over 3 years in Parkinson disease Neurology 83 2046 2053 2014 25355821
131 Seibert TM Murphy EA Kaestner EJ Brewer JB Interregional correlations in Parkinson disease and Parkinson-related dementia with resting functional MR imaging Radiology 263 226 234 2012 22371611
132 Rektorova I Krajcovicova L Marecek R Mikl M Default mode network and extrastriate visual resting state network in patients with Parkinson’s disease dementia Neurodegener. Dis 10 232 237 2012 22269223
133 Lin WC Dopaminergic therapy modulates cortical perfusion in Parkinson disease with and without dementia according to arterial spin labeled perfusion magnetic resonance imaging Medicine (Baltimore) 95 e2206 2016 26844450
134 Le Heron CJ Comparing cerebral perfusion in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease dementia: an ASL-MRI study J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 34 964 970 2014 24619276
135 Ito K Striatal and extrastriatal dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease with dementia: a 6-[18F]fluoro-L-dopa PET study Brain 125 1358 1365 2002 12023324
136 Klein JC Neurotransmitter changes in dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson disease dementia in vivo Neurology 74 885 892 2010 20181924
137 Marquie M Striatal and extrastriatal dopamine transporter levels relate to cognition in Lewy body diseases: an 11C altropane positron emission tomography study Alzheimers Res. Ther 6 52 2014 25429309
138 Song IU Kim YD Cho HJ Chung SW Chung YA An FP-CIT PET comparison of the differences in dopaminergic neuronal loss between idiopathic Parkinson disease with dementia and without dementia Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 27 51 55 2013 22354157
139 Vander Borght T Cerebral metabolic differences in Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases matched for dementia severity J. Nucl. Med 38 797 802 1997 9170449
140 Gonzalez-Redondo R Grey matter hypometabolism and atrophy in Parkinson’s disease with cognitive impairment: a two-step process Brain 137 2356 2367 2014 24951642
141 Pappata S Mild cognitive impairment in drug-naive patients with PD is associated with cerebral hypometabolism Neurology 77 1357 1362 2011 21940621
142 Minoshima S Alzheimer’s disease versus dementia with Lewy bodies: cerebral metabolic distinction with autopsy confirmation Ann. Neurol 50 358 365 2001 11558792
143 Huang C Changes in network activity with the progression of Parkinson’s disease Brain 130 1834 1846 2007 17470495
144 Yong SW Yoon JK An YS Lee PH A comparison of cerebral glucose metabolism in Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies Eur. J. Neurol 14 1357 1362 2007 17941855
145 Roy R Niccolini F Pagano G Politis M Cholinergic imaging in dementia spectrum disorders Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 43 1376 1386 2016 26984612
146 Shinotoh H Positron emission tomographic measurement of acetylcholinesterase activity reveals differential loss of ascending cholinergic systems in Parkinson’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy Ann. Neurol 46 62 69 1999 10401781
147 Hilker R Dementia in Parkinson disease: functional imaging of cholinergic and dopaminergic pathways Neurology 65 1716 1722 2005 16344512
148 Bohnen NI Cortical cholinergic function is more severely affected in parkinsonian dementia than in Alzheimer disease: an in vivo positron emission tomographic study Arch. Neurol 60 1745 1748 2003 14676050
149 Hiraoka K Cholinergic deficit and response to donepezil therapy in Parkinson’s disease with dementia Eur. Neurol 68 137 143 2012 22832236
150 Kotagal V Muller ML Kaufer DI Koeppe RA Bohnen NI Thalamic cholinergic innervation is spared in Alzheimer disease compared to parkinsonian disorders Neurosci. Lett 514 169 172 2012 22414859
151 Bohnen NI Heterogeneity of cholinergic denervation in Parkinson’s disease without dementia J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 32 1609 1617 2012 22569194
152 Edison P Amyloid load in Parkinson’s disease dementia and Lewy body dementia measured with [11C]PIB positron emission tomography J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 79 1331 1338 2008 18653550
153 Petrou M Aβ-amyloid deposition in patients with Parkinson disease at risk for development of dementia Neurology 79 1161 1167 2012 22933741
154 Maetzler W [11C]PIB binding in Parkinson’s disease dementia Neuroimage 39 1027 1033 2008 18035558
155 Petrou M Amyloid deposition in Parkinson’s disease and cognitive impairment: a systematic review Mov. Disord 30 928 935 2015 25879534
156 Akhtar RS Amyloid-beta positron emission tomography imaging of Alzheimer’s pathology in Parkinson’s disease dementia Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract 3 367 375 2016 27500181
157 Shah N Striatal and cortical β-amyloidopathy and cognition in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 31 111 117 2016 26380951
158 Gomperts SN Amyloid is linked to cognitive decline in patients with Parkinson disease without dementia Neurology 80 85 91 2013 23243071
159 Gomperts SN Tau positron emission tomographic imaging in the Lewy body diseases JAMA Neurol 73 1334 1341 2016 27654968
160 Kamei S Morita A Serizawa K Mizutani T Hirayanagi K Quantitative EEG analysis of executive dysfunction in Parkinson disease J. Clin. Neurophysiol 27 193 197 2010 20461018
161 Morita A Kamei S Mizutani T Relationship between slowing of the EEG and cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease J. Clin. Neurophysiol 28 384 387 2011 21811128
162 Caviness JN Longitudinal EEG changes correlate with cognitive measure deterioration in Parkinson’s disease J. Parkinsons Dis 5 117 124 2015 25420672
163 Zimmermann R Correlation of EEG slowing with cognitive domains in nondemented patients with Parkinson’s disease Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 39 207 214 2015 25591733
164 Schlede N Clinical EEG in cognitively impaired patients with Parkinson’s disease J. Neurol. Sci 310 75 78 2011 21705023
165 Fonseca LC Tedrus GM Carvas PN Machado EC Comparison of quantitative EEG between patients with Alzheimer’s disease and those with Parkinson’s disease dementia Clin. Neurophysiol 124 1970 1974 2013 23746496
166 Klassen BT Quantitative EEG as a predictive biomarker for Parkinson disease dementia Neurology 77 118 124 2011 21633128
167 Seer C Lange F Georgiev D Jahanshahi M Kopp B Event-related potentials and cognition in Parkinson’s disease: an integrative review Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 71 691 714 2016 27498083
168 Zhang D Multimodal classification of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment Neuroimage 55 856 867 2011 21236349
169 Compta Y Grey matter volume correlates of cerebrospinal markers of Alzheimer-pathology in Parkinson’s disease and related dementia Parkinsonism Relat Disord 18 941 947 2012
170 Beyer MK Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ levels correlate with structural brain changes in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 28 302 310 2013 23408705
171 Chiaravalloti A Do CSF levels of t-Tau, p-Tau and β1–42 amyloid correlate with dopaminergic system impairment in patients with a clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease? A 123I-FP-CIT study in the early stages of the disease Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 41 2137 2143 2014 25007849
172 van Dijk KD Reduced α-synuclein levels in cerebrospinal fluid in Parkinson’s disease are unrelated to clinical and imaging measures of disease severity Eur. J. Neurol 21 388 394 2014 23631635
173 Campbell MC CSF proteins and resting-state functional connectivity in Parkinson disease Neurology 84 2413 2421 2015 25979701
174 Wang HF Efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine in cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies: systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 86 135 143 2015 24828899
175 Emre M Rivastigmine for dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease N. Engl. J. Med 351 2509 2518 2004 15590953
176 Dubois B Donepezil in Parkinson’s disease dementia: a randomized, double-blind efficacy and safety study Mov. Disord 27 1230 1238 2012 22915447
177 Aarsland D Memantine in patients with Parkinson’s disease dementia or dementia with Lewy bodies: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial Lancet Neurol 8 613 618 2009 19520613
178 Emre M Memantine for patients with Parkinson’s disease dementia or dementia with Lewy bodies: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial Lancet Neurol 9 969 977 2010 20729148
179 Colloby SJ Cholinergic and perfusion brain networks in Parkinson disease dementia Neurology 87 178 185 2016 27306636
180 Jurado-Coronel JC Implication of green tea as a possible therapeutic approach for Parkinson disease CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 15 292 300 2016 26831259
181 Postuma RB Caffeine for treatment of Parkinson disease: a randomized controlled trial Neurology 79 651 658 2012 22855866
182 Mamikonyan E Xie SX Melvin E Weintraub D Rivastigmine for mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease: a placebo-controlled study Mov. Disord 30 912 918 2015 25914281
183 Weintraub D Rasagiline for mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: a placebo-controlled trial Mov. Disord 31 709 714 2016 27030249
184 Weintraub D Atomoxetine for depression and other neuropsychiatric symptoms in Parkinson disease Neurology 75 448 455 2010 20679638
185 Kehagia AA Targeting impulsivity in Parkinson’s disease using atomoxetine Brain 137 1986 1997 2014 24893708
186 Katona C Hansen T Olsen CK A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, duloxetine-referenced, fixed-dose study comparing the efficacy and safety of Lu AA21004 in elderly patients with major depressive disorder Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol 27 215 223 2012 22572889
187 Valera E Spencer B Masliah E Immunotherapeutic approaches targeting amyloid-β, α-synuclein, and tau for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders Neurotherapeutics 13 179 189 2016 26494242
188 Killick R Clusterin regulates β-amyloid toxicity via Dickkopf-1-driven induction of the wnt-PCP-JNK pathway Mol. Psychiatry 19 88 98 2014 23164821
189 Himeno E Apomorphine treatment in Alzheimer mice promoting amyloid-β degradation Ann. Neurol 69 248 256 2011 21387370
190 Yarnall AJ Apomorphine: a potential modifier of amyloid deposition in Parkinson’s disease? Mov. Disord 31 668 675 2016 27156393
191 Martinez-Martin P EuroInf: a multicenter comparative observational study of apomorphine and levodopa infusion in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 30 510 516 2015 25382161
192 Leung IH Cognitive training in Parkinson disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis Neurology 85 1843 1851 2015 26519540
193 Reynolds GO Otto MW Ellis TD Cronin-Golomb A The therapeutic potential of exercise to improve mood, cognition, and sleep in Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 31 23 38 2016 26715466
194 David FJ Exercise improves cognition in Parkinson’s disease: the PRET-PD randomized, clinical trial Mov. Disord 30 1657 1663 2015 26148003
195 Klingelhoefer L Samuel M Chaudhuri KR Ashkan K An update of the impact of deep brain stimulation on non motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease J. Parkinsons Dis 4 289 300 2014 24613865
196 Kuhn J Deep brain stimulation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Alzheimer’s dementia Mol. Psychiatry 20 353 360 2015 24798585
197 Gratwicke J The nucleus basalis of Meynert: a new target for deep brain stimulation in dementia? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 37 2676 2688 2013 24035740
198 Seto-Salvia N Dementia risk in Parkinson disease: disentangling the role of MAPT haplotypes Arch. Neurol 68 359 364 2011 21403021
199 Goris A Tau and α-synuclein in susceptibility to, and dementia in, Parkinson’s disease Ann. Neurol 62 145 153 2007 17683088
200 Kurz MW APOE alleles in Parkinson disease and their relationship to cognitive decline: a population-based, longitudinal study J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol 22 166 170 2009 19321880
201 Marras C Motor and nonmotor heterogeneity of LRRK2-related and idiopathic Parkinson’s disease Mov. Disord 31 1192 1202 2016 27091104
202 Thaler A Lower cognitive performance in healthy G2019S LRRK2 mutation carriers Neurology 79 1027 1032 2012 22914834
203 Farrer M Comparison of kindreds with parkinsonism and α-synuclein genomic multiplications Ann. Neurol 55 174 179 2004 14755720
204 Foltynie T Planning ability in Parkinson’s disease is influenced by the COMT val158met polymorphism Mov. Disord 19 885 891 2004 15300652
205 Williams-Gray CH Hampshire A Barker RA Owen AM Attentional control in Parkinson’s disease is dependent on COMT val158met genotype Brain 131 397 408 2008 18178571
206 Svetel M No association between brain-derived neurotrophic factor G196A polymorphism and clinical features of Parkinson’s disease Eur. Neurol 70 257 262 2013 24051673
207 Gao L Brain-derived neurotrophic factor G196A polymorphism and clinical features in Parkinson’s disease Acta Neurol. Scand 122 41 45 2010 20085561
208 Białecka M BDNF G196A (Val66Met) polymorphism associated with cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease Neurosci. Lett 561 86 90 2014 24394906
209 Arias-Vasquez A Relationship of the Ubiquilin 1 gene with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease and cognitive function Neurosci. Lett 424 1 5 2007 17709205
210 Kurz MW FMR1 alleles in Parkinson’s disease: relation to cognitive decline and hallucinations, a longitudinal study J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol 20 89 92 2007 17548778
211 Nie K Polymorphisms in immune/inflammatory cytokine genes are related to Parkinson’s disease with cognitive impairment in the Han Chinese population Neurosci. Lett 541 111 115 2013 23485736
212 Liu Z Lack of association between IL-10 and IL-18 gene promoter polymorphisms and Parkinson’s disease with cognitive impairment in a Chinese population Sci. Rep 6 19021 2016 26830320
213 Broeders M Evolution of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease Neurology 81 346 352 2013 23794682
214 Domellof ME Ekman U Forsgren L Elgh E Cognitive function in the early phase of Parkinson’s disease, a five-year follow-up Acta Neurol. Scand 132 79 88 2015 25644230
215 Hely MA Reid WG Adena MA Halliday GM Morris JG The Sydney multicenter study of Parkinson’s disease: the inevitability of dementia at 20 years Mov. Disord 23 837 844 2008 18307261
