LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370121
6712
Prog Neurobiol
Prog. Neurobiol.
Progress in neurobiology
0301-0082
1873-5118

27084356
5061605
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2016.04.001
NIHMS788120
Article
Monoaminergic Neuropathology in Alzheimer's disease
Šimić Goran 1*
Leko Mirjana Babić 1
Wray Selina 2
Harrington Charles 3
Delalle Ivana 4
Jovanov-Milošević Nataša 1
Bažadona Danira 5
Buée Luc 6
de Silva Rohan 2
Di Giovanni Giuseppe 7
Wischik Claude 3
Hof Patrick R. 8
1 Department of Neuroscience, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia
2 Reta Lila Weston Institute and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK
3 School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK
4 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
5 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
6 Université Lille-Nord de France and INSERM U837, Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Centre, IMPRT, Lille, France
7 Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta and School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
8 Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Corresponding author: Goran Šimić, gsimic@hiim.hr, Phone: +385-1-4596807, Address: Šalata 12, HR-10000, Zagreb, Croatia
19 5 2016
12 4 2016
4 2017
01 4 2018
151 101138
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
None of the proposed mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) fully explains the distribution patterns of the neuropathological changes at the cellular and regional levels, and their clinical correlates. One aspect of this problem lies in the complex genetic, epigenetic, and environmental landscape of AD: early-onset AD is often familial with autosomal dominant inheritance, while the vast majority of AD cases are late-onset, with the ε4 variant of the gene encoding apolipoprotein E (APOE) known to confer a 5–20 fold increased risk with partial penetrance. Mechanisms by which genetic variants and environmental factors influence the development of AD pathological changes, especially neurofibrillary degeneration, are not yet known. Here we review current knowledge of the involvement of the monoaminergic systems in AD. The changes in the serotonergic, noradrenergic, dopaminergic, histaminergic, and melatonergic systems in AD are briefly described. We also summarize the possibilities for monoamine-based treatment in AD. Besides neuropathologic AD criteria that include the noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC), special emphasis is given to the serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN). Both of these brainstem nuclei are among the first to be affected by tau protein abnormalities in the course of sporadic AD, causing behavioral and cognitive symptoms of variable severity. The possibility that most of the tangle-bearing neurons of the LC and DRN may release amyloid β as well as soluble monomeric or oligomeric tau protein trans-synaptically by their diffuse projections to the cerebral cortex emphasizes their selective vulnerability and warrants further investigations of the monoaminergic systems in AD.

5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
Alzheimer's disease
amyloid beta (Aβ) protein
blood-brain barrier
cerebrospinal fluid
epigenetics
locus coeruleus
metals
monoamines
neurofibrillary degeneration
non-cognitive symptoms
nucleus raphe dorsalis
phosphorylation
sleep-wake cycle
tau protein

1. Clinical and neuropathological criteria for AD diagnosis

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) accounts for 60–70% of cases of dementia (World Health Organization, WHO Fact Sheet No. 362, March 2015). The report of Alzheimer’s Disease International (ADI, Alzheimer World Report, 2015) showed that nearly 35.6 million people suffered from dementia in 2012. It is estimated that this number will quadruple by 2050. Therefore, the WHO in 2012 declared AD a global public health priority. There is still no effective treatment to prevent or cure AD. Currently, approved drugs only temporarily alleviate some of the disease’s symptoms to a limited extent. Cholinomimetics (tacrine, rivastigmine, donepezil, and galantamine) do so by enhancing the cholinergic neurotransmission, whereas memantine (a non-competitive antagonist of N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors, NMDAR) is considered to have protective activity against glutamate-induced excitotoxic neuronal death (Yiannopoulou and Papageorgiou, 2013).

1.1. Clues to the etiology of AD

After the milestone discoveries that cerebrovascular amyloid (due to cerebral amyloid angiopathy, CAA) and senile plaques (SP) are composed of amyloid β (Aβ) protein, that the same antigenic determinants (Glenner and Wong, 1984a; Wong et al., 1985) are shared in both AD and Down’s syndrome (Glenner and Wong, 1984b), and that the Val717Ile missense (“London”) mutation in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene on chromosome 21 was found to be causally related to the early-onset autosomal-dominant familial AD (Goate et al., 1991), Hardy, Selkoe and colleagues (Hardy and Allsop, 1991; Selkoe, 1991; Hardy and Higgins, 1992) formulated the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which has become a dominant view of AD pathogenesis ever since. An illustration of amyloid plaques in the brain of an AD case is given in Figure 1. According to the amyloid theory, excessive production of Aβ (which exists in monomeric, oligomeric, and aggregated forms as SP) via serial cleavage of the larger amyloid precursor protein (APP) molecule by β-secretase (β-site APP cleaving enzyme, BACE, encoded by the BACE1 gene) and γ-secretase (multiprotein complex now known to minimally consist of 4 individual proteins: presenilin, nicastrin, anterior pharynx-defective 1, APH-1, and presenilin enhancer 2, PEN-2) (Blanquet et al. 1987; Robakis et al., 1987; St George-Hyslop et al., 1987; Shoji et al., 1992; Citron et al., 1992), is the key pathological event which drives all other pathological changes. These pathological changes include altered calcium homeostasis, microglial activation/inflammation, astrocytosis, an upregulated production of nitric oxide and DNA damage (Šimić et al., 2000), dysregulation of energy metabolism and cell cycle control, a significant increase in the full-length mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) accompanied by extensive fragmentation of the unamplified mtDNA (Diana et al., 2008), the development of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), synaptic loss, excitotoxicity, neuronal death, and dementia, not only in early-onset cases (EOAD) but also in late-onset cases of AD (LOAD). In 1987 Goldgaber and collaborators isolated APP and localized its gene to chromosome 21 (Goldgaber et al., 1987). Interestingly, the first APP mutation discovered, a G to C mutation at codon 693 (APP Glu693Gln) was not causing AD, but instead coused hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis – Dutch type (HCHWA-D; Van Broeckhoven et al., 1990; Levy et al., 1990). This is most probably due to the fact that affected individuals died from cerebral bleeding at a younger age before developing clinical AD. Interestingly enough, two out of four other known mutations within the Aβ-coding part of APP (exons 16 and 17) also cause fatal hemorrhages due to amyloid angiopathy (APP Cys692Gly – Flemish, and APP Glu693Lys – Italian), while only the rare “Arctic” (APP Glu693Gly) and Osaka (APP Glu693Δ) mutations cause EOAD.

The long-known fact that there are many families in which AD has an early onset (before age of 60) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner (Lowenberg and Waggoner, 1934) could therefore not be explained by a very small number of AD families with APP mutations. This question had been resolved by the discovery of mutations in the presenilin 1 (PSEN1) gene on chromosome 14 (St. George-Hyslop et al., 1992; Sherrington et al., 1995) and homologous gene PSEN2, on chromosome 1 (Schellenberg et al., 1992; Levy-Lahad et al., 1995). PSEN1 and PSEN2 are components of the γ-secretase complex, which can cleave APP at several points resulting in Aβ of various lengths. The peptides associated with AD are 40 and 42 amino acid-long, with Aβ42 more likely to aggregate to form SP in the brain than Aβ40. All PSEN mutations lead to an increase in the Aβ42:Aβ40 ratio, although the total quantity of Aβ produced remains constant (Citron et al., 1997; Czech et al., 2000). Whether PSEN mutations correspond to a gain or loss of function is still controversial, although PS1 mutations were expressed at normal levels, they impaired γ-secretase activity but not γ-secretase-independent functions of PS1 (Woodruff et al., 2013). Thus, PS1 mutations do not act as simple loss of PS1 function, but instead dominantly as gain of PS1 activity toxic to some, but not all conditions. Presenilins are also implicated in the processing of Notch (Okochi et al., 2002; De Strooper et al., 2012), an important developmental protein. PS1 knockout mice die early in development from abnormalities similar to those found when Notch is disrupted (Shen et al., 1997). APP can also be cleaved by α-secretases such as a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) converting enzyme (TACE), but this cleavage does not result in Aβ, instead generating a neurotrophic and neuroprotective fragment APPs-α (Corrigan et al., 2011; for review see Endres and Fahrenholz, 2012).

1.1.1. The role of amyloid β protein (Aβ)

Most researchers still held the view, usually unwritten, that Aβ was just a waste product of APP metabolism, while some others have suggested that Aβ1–42 may have an acute “protective” role in sealing microhemorrhages in the extensive network of blood vessels that meanders for more than 600 km through the human brain (Atwood et al., 2003; Hardy, 2007; Hardy, 2009). The upregulation of N-terminal fragment of APP would, under such a scheme, be part of the attempt to prevent clotting in the hemorrhaged region caused by blood contact with the brain tissue (if the coagulation cascade would exist in the brain, vascular blockage would lead to ischemic stroke and permanent neuronal death because the brain, unlike other tissues, has close to zero ability to replace terminally differentiated neurons), whereas Aβ would be a vascular sealant, anticoagulant and remodeling molecule (Atwood et al., 2003). This would also explain close and intimate relationships between plaques and blood vessels in transgenic mouse models (Kumar-Singh et al., 2005), the presence of iron in every plaque (Falangola et al., 2005), and the association of APOE ε2 genotype with cerebral hemorrhage (McCarron and Nicoll, 2000; Loehrer et al., 2014; Charidimou et al., 2015). Unlike microbleeds in the deep and infratentorial regions, which are thought to reflect hypertensive arteriopathy, lobar microbleeds are associated clinically with CAA, and frequently observed in seemingly asymptomatic populations (Loehrer et al., 2014). If the above concept is true, it would also be useful to explain the fact why about around 40% of AD patients have normotensive hydrocephalus (because CAA would prevent the proper exchange of water and ions through the blood-brain barrier, BBB), and why about 40% of adult patients with idiopathic chronic normal pressure hydrocephalus have histological lesions characteristic of AD, as revealed from cortical biopsies (Golomb et al., 2000). Alternatively, the role of Aβ in maintaining vascular homeostasis (mediated by sealing the BBB) may be related to restraining periarterial drainage in order to prevent the elimination of high molecular weight substances from the brain, as such a drainage of brain antigens from brain’s interstitial fluid to cervical lymph nodes would cause autoimmune encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis (Weller, 1998). These insights may also explain the root cause of the encephalomyelitis suffered by individuals in immunotherapy trials as being directly associated with removal of Aβ from the vasculature, as immunological responses to Aβ vaccination do not discriminate between vascular deposits of Aβ and deposits of Aβ in SP (Lambracht-Washington and Rosenberg, 2012), which has been confirmed in a mouse model (Furlan et al., 2003). Furthermore, it would also fit well to in vivo evidence that the removal of deposited Aβ from the vasculature leads to increased cerebral hemorrhages (Uro-Coste et al., 2010), again strongly supporting the above mentioned concept of APP/Aβ functions as sealant, anticoagulant and remodeling molecule (Atwood et al., 2003, Hardy, 2009).

1.1.2. Genetics of AD

Collectively, the genetic etiology of AD is very complex. EOAD (less than 1% of cases) is often familial (fAD), with autosomal dominant and fully penetrant inheritance and can be caused by any of more than 200 pathogenic mutations in APP (33 mutations, duplication), PSEN1 (185 mutations) and PSEN2 (13 mutations; http://www.molgen.ua.ac.be/ADmutations). A rare mutation in the APP gene that protects against AD and cognitive decline in the elderly without AD was also reported (Jonsson et al., 2012). Most AD cases (over 99%) however are sporadic, late-onset (sAD, LOAD) and have few evident genetic components. The ε4 variant of the gene encoding apolipoprotein E (APOE) is known to confer increased risk for LOAD (Strittmatter et al., 1993; Saunders et al., 1993) with partial penetrance. Based on 320 meta-analyses of 1395 studies in which 695 genes and their 2973 polymorphisms have been tested as late-onset AD candidate genes, over 30 yield positive evidence for association. The number one gene is APOE, with a Bayes factor (BF) &gt; 50. Using APOE genotype ε3/ε3 as a neutral benchmark for comparison, individuals with a single copy of ε4 allele manifest a 5-fold increased risk of developing LOAD, while those with two copies have an estimated 20-fold increased risk (Strittmatter, 2012). It seems that different APOE alleles are not associated with an increase in Aβ production, but with an inability to clear Aβ from the brain (Mawuenyega et al., 2010; Castellano et al., 2011). This may be related to the reduced production of Aβ auto-antibodies in AD subjects (Qu et al., 2014).

The next nine genes with the highest association with LOAD are: BIN1 (BF = 23.4) which encodes several isoforms of a nucleoplasmic adaptor protein, one of which was identified as MYC-interacting protein; CLU (BF = 20.1), which encodes apolipoprotein J, ABCA7 (BF = 18.8) for ATP-binding cassette transporter, subfamily A [ABC1], member 7, CR1 (BF = 18.1) for complement component receptor 1; PICALM (BF = 17.3), for phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein; MS4A6A (BF = 8.7), CD33 (BF = 7.7) for a transmembrane receptor expressed on cells of myeloid lineage – cluster of differentiation 33; MS4A4E (BF = 6.9), coding for protein membrane-spanning 4-domains, subfamily A, member 4E, and CD2AP (BF = 6.6) which codes for a scaffolding molecule that regulates the actin cytoskeleton (according to www.alzgene.org assessed in December 2015). Genetic variants of all of these genes have a relatively minor influence on AD progression when altered (Cacabelos, 2007). Although their influence on the development and course of sAD remain largely unknown (Hollingworth et al., 2011; Naj et al., 2011; Lardenoije et al., 2015), most of them are presumably involved in the metabolism of Aβ. Some of them, such as APOE and ABCA7, are known to be also centrally involved in cholesterol transport and metabolism; both of these genes are targets of transcription factors and nuclear receptors called liver-X receptors (LXR) (Štefulj et al., 2013). Most recently, rare mutations of TREM2 (Jonsson et al., 2013, Guerreiro et al., 2013) and PLD3 (Cruchaga et al., 2014) were proposed to confer a much larger increase in risk for LOAD than the aforementioned common sequence variants. However, a role for PLD3 rare variants in AD could not be confirmed in a European Consortium Cohort (Cacace et al., 2015). Recent evidence also suggests that, besides mutations causing EOAD, there are novel, rare additional variants in APP, PSEN1, PSEN2, and ADAM10 that alter the risk for LOAD (Karch and Goate, 2015). For example, rare variants in APP may increase (e.g., APP Asn660Tyr), decrease (e.g., APP Ala673Thr), or have no effect on risk (e.g., APP Glu599Lys), whereas PSEN1 polymorphism Glu318Gly (Benitez et al., 2013) and ADAM10 risk variants Gln170His and Arg181Gly (Kim et al., 2009) are associated with a significant increase in LOAD risk. In addition to increasing Aβ levels in vitro (Kim et al., 2009), in one of the best characterized mouse models for AD, the Tg2576, the two aforementioned ADAM risk variants were also shown to disrupt α-secretase activity and shift APP processing toward amyloidogenic cleavage, thus yielding increased plaque load (Suh et al., 2013).

1.1.3. The role of tau protein

The significance of tau protein, essential for microtubule (MT) assembly (Weingarten et al., 1975), in the pathogenesis of AD remained in the shadow of the amyloid theory during the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, the distribution pattern and overall quantity of Aβ turned out to be of limited significance for pathological staging of AD progression and symptom severity. After detailed studies of the maturation and distribution of NFT showing correlation with the degree of cognitive decline and memory impairment in AD using classical silver staining (Braak and Braak, 1991; Fig. 2) and immunohistochemical staining for hyperphosphorylated tau (Braak et al., 2006; see example in Fig. 3), a neuropathological staging of tau deposition in the brain, including NFT and neuropil threads (NT) in neurites, was proposed (Fig. 4). The possibility that the burden of NFT provides a better association with cognitive impairment was soon confirmed (Arriagada et al. 1992; Bierer et al., 1995), supporting a significant role for tau pathology in the disease. As shown in Figure 4, the Braak’s staging system classifies the topographic progression of AD neurofibrillary degeneration in six stages. Spreading from the transentorhinal region to the hippocampal formation (initial stages I and II) clinically correlate with subjective or objective impairment of memory for recent events and mild spatial disorientation, but with preservation of general cognitive functioning with or without minimum impairment of daily living activities (Braak and Braak, 1991; Šimić et al., 2005; Šimić et al., 2009). Further spread to the temporal, frontal, and parietal neocortex (intermediate stages III and IV) correlates with impaired recall, delayed word recall and word finding difficulties, disorientation in time and space, and impaired concentration, comprehension, and conceptualization, among other symptoms of dementia. Finally, neurofibrillary degeneration affects unimodal and primary sensory and motor areas of the neocortex (late stages V and VI), which roughly correlates with disturbances in object recognition, and other perceptual and motor skills.

One explanation for early AD changes in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and temporal neocortex can be an age-dependent BBB breakdown in the hippocampus, as recently revealed by an advanced dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocol with high spatial and temporal resolutions to quantify regional BBB permeability in the living human brain (Montagne et al., 2015). Indeed, the BBB breakdown in the hippocampus and dentate gyrus worsened with MCI that correlated with injury to BBB-associated pericytes, as shown by CSF analysis (Montagne et al., 2015).

Neurons in layers II and III of the transentorhinal and entorhinal cortex are consistently affected by neurofibrillary degeneration, either during normal aging or in primary age-related tauopathy, PART (Braak and Braak, 1991; Šimić et al., 2005; Crary et al., 2014; Jellinger et al., 2015). Stereologic estimates showed a 43.5% average neuron loss in 32–83 year old subjects (Šimić et al., 2005). Hof and collaborators showed that a considerable proportion (73–77%) of entorhinal layer II neurons affected by neurofibrillary degeneration might preserve some function even at stages with a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score of 3 (Hof et al., 2003). As long as elderly patients do not suffer from AD, they appear neuropathologically quite comparable as a group (Hof et al., 2003). It is therefore not surprising that significant neuron loss due solely to aging cannot be revealed without younger adult cases included in the regressions. On the other hand, when neuronal loss attributable to aging is superimposed to an unbiased estimate of the number of NFT in AD, regions like the entorhinal cortex and hippocampal formation may display neuronal loss larger than that accounted for by NFT counts alone (Šimić et al., 1998; Krill et al., 2002). Thus, the pattern of neuron loss does not necessarily match the pattern of NFT formation, due to mechanisms other than neurofibrillary degeneration (Šimić et al., 1998a, 1998b; Hof et al., 2003; Andrade-Moraes et al., 2013). Based on the notion that NFT evolved from an accumulation of abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau without PHF formation (described as the ‘pretangle’ stage, Bancher et al., 1989), Braak and others also demonstrated that hyperphosphorylation is probably a crucial step leading to the formation of both soluble and insoluble tau filaments (Braak et al., 1994), that neuronal damage in AD actually begins many years before any clinical symptoms and signs (Braak and Del Tredici, 2015), and that, unlike Aβ, the distribution of tau pathology is associated with the clinical progression of AD (Bierer et al., 1995). In contrast to the amyloid cascade hypothesis of AD, which implies that tau pathology is a secondary, downstream phenomenon, the neuropathological findings of Braak and collaborators have fueled a significant controversy concerning the importance or contributions of Aβ burden-induced damage compared to that caused by tau pathology, particularly in LOAD. Additionally, the pathological Aβ and tau proteins mutually interact and are influenced by many other factors, such as epigenetic (Lardenoije et al., 2015), inflammatory (Joshi and Praticò, 2014), vascular, and possibly direct environmental causes (metals, metalloids, pollutants, various compounds in food), as well as compensatory neuroplastic response to counteract neural injury associated with neurodegenerative processes (Wang et al., 2011), all of which may promote cognitive and behavioral decline.

Compelling evidence that tau malfunction or dysregulation alone can be sufficient to cause neurodegeneration came from the identification of mutations in the tau-encoding MAPT gene on chromosome 17, which cause frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism (FTDP-17; Hutton et al., 1998). This finding strengthens cytoskeletal abnormalities as a possible pivotal mechanism in neurodegeneration in AD (Terry, 1996; Šimić et al., 1998a), and positioned AD as the most important secondary tauopathy (as the tau-coding MAPT geneitself is not mutated), while mutations in the MAPT gene subsequently identified into a new group of diseases now called primary tauopathies. In the years to follow, both in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that reducing endogeneous tau ameliorates Aβ-induced deficits (Roberson et al., 2007; Bhatia and Hall, 2013; for review see Wang and Mandelkow, 2016), which provided compelling evidence that tau is sufficient and necessary for Aβ-induced neurodegeneration.

Genetic studies, including genome-wide association (GWAS), have demonstrated the importance of both the inversion polymorphism and haplotype-specific polymorphisms (the common haplotype clades marking the majority and inverted sequences are termed H1 and H2, respectively) of MAPT in various tauopathies (Anaya et al., 2011; for review, see Trabzuni et al., 2012). More specifically, abnormal phosphorylation, aggregation, and proteolysis of the tau protein in a “pre-tangle” stage of neurofibrillary degeneration have been neuropathologically documented to be an early and crucial event in the pathogenesis of AD, but also other sporadic tauopathies, such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) (Luk et al., 2010) and argyrophilic grain disease (AgD) (Šimić, 2002; Williams, 2006; Murray, 2014), confirming involvement of tau in common pathogenetic pathways. Based on the tau isoforms found in the aggregates, tauopathies are classified into three groups: 4R tauopathies (including PSP, AgD, and cortico-basal degeneration, CBD), 3R tauopathies (e.g. frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau inclusions, FTLD-tau, previously known as Pick’s disease) and 3R/4R tauopathies (e.g. AD). Owing to an additional repeat microtubule-binding domain (R2), 4R tau isoforms show higher affinity for microtubules than 3R isoforms. Tau repeat domains bind at the interface between α- and β-tubulin heterodimers, suggesting that there is competition between their physiological interaction with tubulin and pathogenic misfolding (Kadavath et al., 2015). Most recently, Huntington’s disease has been confirmed as 4R tauopathy (Fernández-Nogales et al., 2014).

1.1.3.1. Phoshorylation of tau protein

Phosphorylation plays a crucial role in regulating functions of tau, including it binding to microtubules. The longest brain isoform of tau, tau1–441, has about 80 Ser/Thr and 5 Tyr residues that can be phosphorylated by various protein kinases encoded by 518 protein kinase genes in the human genome (Buée et al., 2000; Manning et al., 2002; Šimić et al., 2016). Immunolabeling with phopho-dependent antibodies raised against various tau phosphorylation sites, as well as spectrometric analysis, revealed that over 40 Ser/Thr and 2 Tyr residues are phosphorylated in PHF (Buée et al., 2000; Iqbal et al., 2016; Šimić et al., 2016). In AD, Ser/Thr residues followed by Pro are the most frequently phosphorylated sites, accounting for about half of phosphorylated residues. These sites are outside the microtubule-binding domain and are phosphorylated by proline-directed protein kinases (PDPK). The main PDPK are glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), cyclin-dependent-like kinase 5 (CDCK5) and dual specificity tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A; Buée et al., 2000; Iqbal et al., 2016). Ser/Thr residues that are not followed by Pro (i.e. non-proline-directed sites of tau) are phosphorylated by non-PDPK. Non-PDPK are directed toward KXGS-motif and some of the most well known are: calcium/calmodulin-activated protein kinase II (CaMKII), microtubule-affinity-regulated kinase 110 (MARK p110), protein kinase A (PKA), and kasein kinase 1 (CK1; Buée et al., 2000; Iqbal et al., 2016). Phosphorylation of KXGS motifs in the repeat domain of tau (particularly Ser262) reduce the affinity of tau to microtubules and, together with phosphorylation of Ser212 Thr231, trigger the detachment of tau from microtubules (Wang and Mandelkow, 2016), similarly as MAPT mutations affecting tau protein near the microtubule-binding domain (e.g., Gly272Val, Asn279Lys, ΔLys280, Pro301Leu, Val337Met and Arg406Trp) reduce its affinity for microtubules and increase tendency for aggregation (Hong et al., 1998).

Regardless of the large number of various protein kinases that can phosphorylate tau, the phosphorylation state of a protein is the net sum of the activities of both its kinases and phosphatases. The main regulator of tau dephosphorylation is protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which accounts for about 70% of the total tau phosphatase activity in the human brain (Liu et al., 2005). PP2A regulates dephosphorylation of tau directly and indirectly, by regulating the activities of CaMKII, PKA, CDK5, and GSK-3β; Iqbal et al., 2005; Jazvinšćak Jembrek et al., 2013). As it has been well known that PP2A activity is compromised in AD (Gong et al., 1995), PP2A represents one of the most important therapeutic targets. Targeting PP2A for potential treatment of AD has gained even more attention after finding that dietary supplementation with a minor component of coffee unrelated to caffeine, eicosanoyl-5-hydroxytryptamide (EHT), provided protection in a rat model of AD (Basurto-Islas et al., 2014). The effect of EHT was due to its ability to inhibit demethylation of the PP2A catalytic C subunit (PP2Ac), thereby preventing a decline in PP2A activity (Basurto-Islas et al., 2014). A similar effect of enhancing PP2A activity had also been observed for metformin and sodium selenite, which are currently under development for inhibition of tau phosphorylation (Iqbal et al., 2016).

Normal tau protein is thought to have a paper clip-like form, where its C- and N-termini fold over the microtubule-binding domains as short and long ‘arms’, respectively, probably preventing the protein from self-aggregation (Mandelkow et al., 2007). According to Luna-Muñoz and collaborators, at least five different events take place in the “pre-tangle” stage: 1) C-terminal truncation of tau species (Glu-391); 2) a cascade of specific phosphorylations of tau protein in the N-terminus; 3) C-terminal truncation by the action of caspase-3; 4) oligomerization and aggregation of tau; and 5) assembly of tau into PHF (Luna-Muñoz et al., 2013; reviewed in Šimić et al., 2016). However, which form of tau is the most toxic (aggregated misfolded/fibrillar, soluble hyperphosphorylated/mislocalized, or both) and whether that toxicity represents a gain or loss of function continues to be debated. The hypothesis that soluble forms of tau are more toxic to neuronal and synaptic function is increasingly gaining favor, implying that the formation of NFT may protect neurons acutely from the effects of toxic soluble tau (Kopeikina et al., 2012). This hypothesis is supported by the observation that neuron loss in the cerebral cortex of the superior temporal sulcus (Gómez-Isla et al., 1997), as well as entorhinal cortex and hippocampal formation exceeds the number of NFT in AD (Šimić et al., 1998b; Krill et al., 2002).

As tau AD-like hyperphosphorylation occurs in vivo during animal hibernation (Arendt et al., 2003) and in anaesthesia-induced hypothermia (as a consequence of the fact that hypothermia inhibits phosphatases exponentially, but inhibits protein kinases linearly, Planel et al., 2004), it is still not known whether hyperphosphorylation alone is sufficient for tau aggregation. Conversely, aggregation of tau can be induced in vitro e.g. by heparin or other polyanions (Goedert et al., 1996), regardless tau phosphorylation status. Thus, besides hyperphosphorylation, the truncation of tau also seems to be of paramount importance as it promotes tau aggregation through oligomerization of the microtubule-binding repeats (Iqbal et al., 2016; Wang and Mandelkow, 2016). However, although the phosphorylation of tau is in general considered to increase chances of tau for aggregation, phosphorylation of tau at some specific sites seem to be protective, e.g. phosphorylation at Ser422 inhibits the cleavage of tau by caspase-3 at Asp421 (Guillozet-Bongaards et al., 2006), illustrating insufficient knowledge of precise sequence of early molecular events that lead to tau aggregation. What is much better known is that microtubule-binding repeat region R3, which is common to all six tau isoforms, and R2, which is an extra repeat in 4R tau, contain the two hydrophobic hexapeptide motifs with β-sheet structure (VQIINK and VQIVYK, respectively, see Fig. 2 in Šimić et al., 2016), which are responsible for downstream tau aggregation by a nucleation-elongation mechanism (von Bergen et al., 2000) and PHF formation (for review, see Šimić et al., 2016). It is believed that generation of tau transgenic mouse strains with ‘pro-aggregant’ (e.g. ΔK280 mutation in the R2 domain) and ‘anti-aggregant’ (e.g. by adding proline substitutions in the hexapeptide motifs) it will enable better understanding of the importance of tau aggregation for neurodegeneration. Aggregation of tau can experimentally be accelerated in mouse models by adding external seeds from preformed PHF (see below). The third most important post-translational modification of tau is probably O-GlcNAcylation, because it depends highly on intracellular glucose metabolism (Knezović et al., 2015).

1.1.3.2. Acetylation of tau protein

Since its discovery, the role of acetylation of tau pathology has been controversial. First, it has been proposed that tau protein acetylation may be responsible for tau aggregation in AD. On the contrary, however, it was recently shown that the acetylation of tau on KXGS motifs inhibits phosphorylation of the same motif, consequently also preventing tau polymerization and aggregation (Cook et al., 2014). Namely, using a site-specific antibody to detect acetylation of KXGS motifs, it has been found that these sites are hypoacetylated in AD patients as well as in a mouse tauopathy model, suggesting that loss of acetylation on KXGS motifs may be an early event in AD (and that augmenting acetylation of the KXGS motifs would probably decrease tau seeding capacity) (Cook et al., 2014). The first antibody developed to detect acetylation of tau at Lys280 (Irwin et al., 2012) showed that tau acetylated at this epitope colocalized with other classical markers of tau pathology (most prominently in moderate to severe disease stages), and is therefore rather a response to than a cause of the disease process (Cook et al., 2014). Strikingly, subsequent usage of the second antibody developed to dectect acetylation at Lys274 residue of tau, has shown that that acetylation of this epitope is a very early change in AD brains (Min et al., 2015), which occurs even before tangles are detectable (Grinberg et al., 2013). Interestingly enough, acetylation of tau at Lys274 was detected in all tauopathies (both primary and secondary), except in AgD (Grinberg et al., 2013). Argyrophilic grain disease is a common sporadic 4R tauopathy. The term ‘argyrophilic grains’ is derived from their strong staining with the Gallyas silver iodide method, although not all silver methods permit their visualization. In combination with AD or alone, AgD significantly contributes to dementia in older age subjects and alone accounts for about 5% of all dementia cases (Braak and Braak, 1998; Šimić, 2002). Due to the fact that AgD pathological changes are mostly confined to the CA1 subfield of the cornu ammonis, entorhinal and transentorhinal cortices, the amygdala, and the hypothalamic lateral tuberal nuclei (Šimić, 2002), it has been hypothesized that tau acetylation at Lys274 could also promote spreading of tau pathology (whereas in AgD it could have a protective role in this respect) (Cook et al., 2014). The acetylation of tau protein, however, seems to be much more complex than described here due to the fact that, besides Lys274 and Lys280, there are many self-acetylation (including Lys280 site, Luo et al., 2014) and sites acetylated by the CBP (cAMP response element binding protein) and P300 acetyltransferase (Kamah et al., 2014). Lysin residues acetylated by CBP may be deacetylated by histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), whereas P300 acetyltransferase sites can be deacetylated by sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) (Cook et al., 2014). In conclusion, depending on the sites involved, the acetylation of tau could both inhibit its degradation (lysine residues 163, 280, 281, and 369) or facilitate its degradation, at the same time suppressing its phosphorylation and aggregation (lysine residues within the KXGS motifs 259, 290, 321, 353, according to the numbering of the longest isoform; acetylation of these sites is reduced in AD and rTg4510 transgenic mice). Targeting specific lysine residues through specific binding of the molecular tweezer molecule CLR01 has been shown to inhibit both tau (Sinha et al., 2011) and Aβ aggregation and fibrillogenesis in vitro (Attar et al., 2013).

1.1.3.3. Propagation of tau protein pathology

Since 2009, the evidence has been mounting that tau protein can also be directly involved in spreading of AD pathology to neighbouring neurons, however, strong evidence supporting this hierarchical progression (“prion-like behavior of misprocessed tau”) is still missing (Hall and Patuto, 2012). Data support the hypotesis that tau hyperphosphorylation alone or in combination with other post-translational tau modifications of tau protein, such as truncation, acetylation, ubiquitination, glycation, N-glycosylation, O-GlcNAcylation, nitration, lipoperoxidation and sumoylation, can induce its ability to template normal tau (for review see Iqbal et al., 2016; Šimić et al., 2016), but whether misfolded tau can catalyse the conformational changes of normal tau to cause the propagation of pathological changes still remains to be elucidated.

At first, it was shown that injection of brain extract from mice that express human mutant Pro301Ser tau into transgenic mice expressing human wild-type tau (ALZ17 model) was sufficient to induce tau pathology not only within, but also adjacent to, the injection site along anatomically connected pathways (Clavaguera et al., 2009). Second, injection of brain extracts from humans who had died with different tauopathies into the hippocampus or cerebral cortex of either ALZ17 or nontransgenic mice was shown to be not only sufficient to drive inclusion formation, but actually effectively reproduced the classic hallmark lesions of the specific tauopathy characteristic of the inoculating brain extract, either AgD, PSP or CBD (Clavaguera et al., 2013). By measuring synaptic levels of total tau using synaptosomes prepared from cryopreserved human postmortem AD and control samples, Sokolow and collaborators demonstrated the abundance of tau, mainly C-terminal truncated tau, in synaptic terminals in aged control and AD samples, whereas tau fragments and dimers/oligomers were found to be a prominent feature of AD synapses (Sokolow et al., 2015). By using quantitative in vitro models, Calafate and collaborators showed that, in parallel to discovered non-synaptic mechanisms, synapses (but not merely the close distance between the cells) enhance the propagation of tau pathology between acceptor hippocampal neurons and tau donor cells (Calafate et al., 2015). Taken together, these studies have provided additional support for the concept that pathologically altered tau species possess a remarkable self-propagating and seeding capacity, and also indicate that seeding-competent tau species are somehow different and distinct across the class of tauopathies (likely depending on a precise biochemical pattern of post-translational modifications that differentially impact conformation and determine aggregate structure), such that the inoculating material acts as an exact template in the new host (Cook et al., 2014).

Tau pathology can indeed be induced and propagated after the injection of tau oligomers (seeds) or aggregates in either wild-type or mutated MAPT transgenic mice (Iba et al., 2013; Peeraer et al., 2015), in a transgenic mouse model overexpressing Pro301Leu mutated MAPT under the control of an inducible neuropsin promoter in the entorhinal cortex (de Calignon et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2012), and tau aggregates can be spread from cell to cell in vitro (Frost et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2013). These new findings suggest that suppressing tau spreading could be an attractive target for the development of disease-modifying therapeutics for AD and other tauopathies, although more in vitro and in vivo studies are needed to determine whether pathologic tau oligomers spread trans-synaptically, by exosomes, or both ways. In the case of soluble monomeric or small oligomeric tau protein, the endocytosis appears to be clathrin-dependent (reviewed in Rubinsztein, 2006). In contrast, larger aggregates of tau could bind heparin in the extracellular matrix and be internalized through macropinocytosis (Holmes et al., 2014). Additionally, it seems that microglia, the primary phagocytes in the brain, may also spread tau via smaller exosome vesicle (40–100 nm in diameter, Asai et al., 2015) or larger ectosome vesicle (50–1000 nm) secretion (Dujardin et al., 2014). Hypotheses on mechanisms by which products of several of the top LOAD risk genes (APOE, BIN1, CLU, ABCA7, CR1 and PICALM), may be involved in spreading tau have been recently formulated (Avila et al., 2015).

1.1.3.4. The role of tau pathology in synaptic damage

Another important aspect of how tau may be involved in neurodegeneration is through its involvement in neurotransmission (for review, see Jadhav et al., 2015). Namely, finding that tau protein can also be phosphorylated on tyrosines, in addition to threonine and serine residues, led to the discovery that human tau Tyr18 in the N-terminal projection domain is phosphorylated in synapses by Fyn tyrosine kinase from the Src family (at least two tyrosine residues - Tyr18 and Tyr29 - are phosphorylated in NFT; Lee et al., 2004). Additionally, as the projection domain of tau in synapses also interacts with postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95) and NMDAR, it is not surprising that tau is essential for NMDA-dependent long-term potentiation (LTP) and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic (AMPA)-dependent long-term depression (LTD), as shown in tau knockout mice (Frandemiche et al., 2014; Jadhav et al., 2015). Thus, pathological tau proteins play an important role in the synaptic impairment of human tauopathies and these changes may occur due to an increase in intracellular Aβ.

Lastly, and importantly, tau acts as a HDAC6 inhibitor. This finding places tau on the map of genotype - environment interactions, because it may mediate environmental stresses via its influence on the regulation of transcriptional activity (Valenzuela-Fernández et al., 2008; Perez et al., 2009). Large protein aggregates such as tau aggregates are excluded from the proteasome and can only be degraded by autophagy in lysosomes. Because selective autophagy of protein aggregates requires ubiquitin-binding receptor proteins such as HDAC6, an excess of tau protein expectedly impairs autophagic clearance by binding to HDAC6 (Leyk et al., 2015). Conversely, decrease in HDAC activity or expression, e.g. by using a novel ubiquitin ligase C-terminus of Hsp70 interacting protein (CHIP) that binds and ubiquitinates HDAC6, could serve to alleviate abnormal tau accumulation (Cook et al., 2012; Cook et al., 2014).

1.1.4 Epigenetic changes in pathogenesis of AD

AD is not an accelerated form of aging (Morrison and Hof, 1997; Šimić et al., 1997) and gene changes alone cannot explain the etiopathogenesis of AD. The moderate concordance of AD among twins (Iacono et al., 2014) suggests other factors, potentially epigenetic and environmental, are related to AD pathogenesis. Epigenetics relate to stable and heritable patterns of gene expression and genomic functions that do not involve changes in DNA sequence, but act at the interface of genetic and environmental factors. Many individual studies have suggested a possible role for epigenetic changes in AD etiology. The most investigated epigenetic mark is DNA methylation, a reversible modification that affects genome function and chromosomal stability through the addition of methyl groups to cytosine located in CpG dinucleotides to form 5-methylcytosine (5mC). In a rare set of monozygotic twins discordant for AD, significantly reduced levels of DNA methylation were observed in the neuronal nuclei of temporal neocortex in the AD twin (Mastroeni et al., 2009). Significantly reduced DNA methylation was also found in entorhinal cortex layer II neurons of 20 AD patients and in particular in the PHF-1/pSer396-immunoreactive NFT-containing neurons (Mastroeni et al., 2010). Together with the repetitive DNA elements Alu and Satellite-α, long interspersed element 1 (LINE-1) is one of the three major contributors of global DNA methylation pattern, which constitute 17%, 4% and 11% of the genome, respectively. Interestingly, a group of AD patients with the best Mini-Mental State Examinaton (MMSE) scores showed a higher level of LINE-1 methylation, than the AD group with the worst MMSE scores (Bollati et al., 2011). However, firm conclusions cannot be drawn yet as, unfortunately, epigenomic studies of AD so far had only limited coverage of DNA methylation sites and microRNAs (miRNAs), whereas other epigenomic markers have not been systematically studied (for review, see Bennett et al., 2015). Of particular interest is the fact that AD patients diplay high homocysteine and low B12 vitamine and folate levels in blood, which represents a physiological response to prevent methionine deficiency is the so-called ‘methyl folate trap’ (Scott and Weir, 1981), and may also occur due to B12 deficiency. This suggests a dysregulation in the S-adenosylmethionine cycle that strictly contributes methyl donors for DNA methylation of the promotors of the genes involved in Aβ processing (Scarpa et al., 2006). A further support for this possibility is the observation of an age-specific epigenetic drifts associated with consistently lower methylation patterns in elderly and LOAD subjects than in young and mid aged people, supporting a strong role for epigenetic effects in the development of AD (Wang et al., 2008).

Environmental toxins, pollutants and metals negatively affect global DNA methylation patterns (LaSalle, 2011). For example, prenatal methylmercury exposure resulted in long-lasting depression-like behavior and hypermethylation of brain-derived neurotropic factor gene (Bdnf) in mouse hippocampus (Onishchenko et al., 2008). Air pollution exposure especially damages the BBB in the brainstem and can trigger an autoimmune response contributing to the neuroinflammatory and AD pathology present in children from very large urban centers (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al., 2015; Brockmeyer and D’Angiulli, 2016). Even though numerous studies connect specific metals and metalloids with Aβ and tau pathology (e.g., Aβ spontaneously self-aggregates in the presence of divalent metals like Fe, Cu, and Zn into amyloid fibrils, Mandel et al., 2007), recently bringing a “metal hypothesis of AD” into focus (Bush and Tanzi, 2008; Bush, 2013; Singh et al., 2014), such data remain rather controversial, warranting further investigations until convincing conclusions might be drawn. Some environmental toxins, such as β-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) produced by cyanobacteria cause misfolding and aggregation of various proteins (Dunlop et al., 2013). Chronic dietary exposure to BMAA has been shown to trigger the formation of both NFT and Aβ deposits in the brain of vervet monkeys (Cox et al., 2016).

1.2. Diagnosis of AD

The clinical diagnosis of AD has been generally based on the original 1984 protocol of the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke – Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA; McKhann et al., 1984). It required that the presence of cognitive impairment and a suspected dementia syndrome be confirmed by neuropsychological testing for a diagnosis of possible or probable AD. Similarly to NINCDS-ADRDA, the American Psychiatric Association issued its 4th revised edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR) criteria in 2000. Besides a memory disorder and impairment in at least one additional cognitive domain, the DSM-IV-TR criteria also required both of these impairments to interfere with social functioning or activities of daily living (ADL; American Psychiatric Association, 2000). The advances in newly developed functional neuroimaging techniques, such as single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET), that had proven their utility to differentiate AD from other possible causes (Okamura et al., 2002; Dougall et al., 2004; Patwardhan et al., 2004), as well as the discovery of distinctive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers (Blennow and Hampel, 2003; Hansson et al., 2006; Blennow et al., 2010; Counts and Mufson, 2010a; Babić et al., 2014), led to a proposed revision of the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria to take into account findings obtained using these methods (Dubois et al., 2007). Unfortunately, multicenter studies showed that usage of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits from different manufacturers significantly affects outcome, making it impossible to use them interchangeably to achieve consensus cut-off values (Babić et al. 2013). In addition to so-called core CSF biomarkers (Aβ1–42, total and tau phosphorylated at Thr181 and Thr231), the usage of new proteomics-based strategies are revealing additional new biomarkers in CSF, some of which have been already validated in clinics (Babić Leko et al., 2016). AD biomarkers are considered of extreme importance due to their use for improving the accuracy of clinical diagnosis, stratification of AD cases, safety monitoring and theragnostics (Blennow et al., 2010).

After this initial effort to incorporate biomarkers into the diagnosis of AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI; Dubois et al., 2007), the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association (NIA/AA) launched new guidelines for AD in 2011 (Sperling et al., 2011; Albert et al., 2011; McKhann et al., 2011; Hyman et al., 2012; http://www.alz.org/research/diagnostic_criteria/). These guidelines identify three stages of AD: 1) preclinical (presymptomatic) AD (Sperling et al., 2011); 2) MCI, or minor neurocognitive disorder according to the DSM-5 (American Psychatric Association, 2013) due to AD, at which stage it is considered that mild changes in episodic memory and thinking are noticeable and can be measured by neuropsychological testing, but are not severe enough to disrupt a person's daily life (Albert et al., 2011); and 3) dementia (or major neurocognitive disorder, according to DSM-5) due to AD, where impairments in memory, thinking, and behavior decrease a person's ability to function independently in everyday life (McKhann et al., 2011). In addition, the neuropathological criteria for AD have been updated and revised to recognize the preclinical stage of AD (Hyman et al., 2012). In a "preclinical" disease stage, biological changes are under way, but the disease has not yet caused any noticeable (clinical) symptoms. Indeed, it has been shown that in preclinical AD, brain changes caused by the disease may begin even decades before symptoms such as memory deterioration and confusion occur (Braak and Braak, 1997; Braak et al., 2011; Sperling et al., 2011). The guidelines do not include specific diagnostic criteria for this stage; rather, they propose a research agenda to identify biomarkers, such as brain imaging and identification of proteins in CSF, which may signal when presymptomatic brain changes appear (Sperling et al., 2011).

1.3. Neuropathological criteria for AD

The fourth part of the NIA/AA guidelines (Hyman et al., 2012; Montine et al., 2012) updated the 1997 NIA/Reagan Institute neuropathological criteria for AD (Hyman and Trojanowski, 1997). Basically, AD neuropathologic changes are ranked along three parameters to obtain an “ABC score” (A – for amyloid β, Aβ, score: A0: no Aβ or amyloid plaques (AP), A1 Thal phase 1 or 2, A2: Thal phase 3, and A3: Thal phase 4 or 5 (modified from Thal et al., 2002); B – for the Braaks’ six neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) stages (Braak and Braak, 1991; see Fig. 4) that can be reduced to four with improved inter-rater reliability (Nagy et al., 1998): B0: no NFT, B1: Braak stages I/II, with NFT predominantly in entorhinal cortex and closely related areas, B2: stages III/IV, with NFTs more abundant in the hippocampus and amygdala while extending slightly into association cortex, and B3: stages V/VI, with NFT, neuropil threads and dystrophic neurites widely distributed throughout the neocortex and ultimately involving primary motor and sensory areas; and C – for neuritic plaques (composed of a core of Aβ and surrounded by dystrophic neurites made of abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau aggregated into PHF), NP, score: C0: no NP, C1: sparse NP, C2: moderate NP, and C3: frequent NP (modified from the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s disease, CERAD; Mirra et al., 1991). Recommended brain regions for such tiered evaluation are: the medulla oblongata (including the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus), pons (including the locus coeruleus, LC), midbrain (including the substantia nigra, SN), cerebellar cortex and dentate nucleus, thalamus and subthalamic nucleus, basal ganglia at the level of anterior commissure with the basal nucleus of Meynert, hippocampus and entorhinal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala, mid frontal gyrus, superior and mid temporal gyri, inferior parietal lobule, occipital cortex (Brodmann’s areas 17 and 18), and white matter at the anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries’ watershed areas.

The preferred method for visualization of Aβ plaques is immunohistochemistry for Aβ, and for NFT is immunohistochemistry for tau or phosphorylated tau epitopes (Braak et al., 2006; see Fig. 3). Other acceptable methods for NFT are thioflavin S or sensitive silver histochemical stains (Braak and Braak, 1991). The preferred method for NP is thioflavin S or modified Bielschowsky stain (water solution of silver nitrate, AgNO3; Fig. 2), as recommended by the CERAD protocol (Mirra et al., 1991). Although CAA is not a part of the ABC score, it is suggested to report it using the staging system for CAA of Vonsattel et al. (1991) and association with inheritance of the ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE) recognized (Thal et al., 2008). Finally, the ABC scores obtained are transformed into one of four levels of AD neuropathologic change: no change, low, intermediate, or high level of AD neuropathologic change, where intermediate or high AD neuropathologic changes are considered as a sufficient explanation for the presence of dementia/major neurocognitive disorder.

1.4. Clinicopathologic correlations

With respect to clinicopathologic correlations, the NIA/AA guidelines also provide a table with the frequency and confidence intervals of cases within each range of ABC scores for CDR sum of boxes score, which represents the sum of scores of clinical impression of symptom severity (ranging from 0 - normal to 3 - marked impairments), in each of six domains of behavioral and cognitive function (Morris, 1993; O’Bryant et al., 2008), to help interpret results from autopsies with incomplete medical records. Although AD is the most common cause of dementia/major neurocognitive disorder and can exist as a pure form in 17–72% of cases irrespective of the clinical symptoms, according to Jellinger and Attems (2015), it commonly coexists with pathologic changes of other diseases that also contribute to cognitive and behavioral impairments.

The most common comorbidities are: 1) Lewy body disease (LBD, a subset of diseases which includes Parkinson’s disease, PD, and dementia with Lewy bodies, DLB, that share the feature of abnormal accumulation of α-synuclein in neurons); 2) cerebrovascular diseases (CVD) that cause vascular brain injury (VBI), including atherosclerosis, arteriolosclerosis (small-vessel disease or lipohyalinosis), and CAA; 3) hippocampal sclerosis (HS); 4) argyrophilic grain disease (AgD); 5) TDP-43 proteinopathy; and 6) cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) as well as many other neuropathologic changes.

For a given amount of AD neuropathologic change, cognitive and behavioral symptoms tend to be worse in the presence of these comorbidities (which are frequently missed clinically and may be difficult to identify neuropathologically) that may have an additive or synergistic effect, although their mutual impact often remains unclear (for a review see Nelson et al., 2012, and Jellinger and Attems, 2015). As such, it may be very difficult to judge the extent to which each disease process observed at autopsy may have contributed to a given patient’s cognitive state, particularly when a low level of AD-related neuropathology is observed in the setting of cognitive and behavioral impairment. Additionally, the recommended semiquantitative ABC criteria for routine use does not preclude the possibility that other processes or lesions may critically contribute to the pathophysiology of AD. In this respect it is important to emphasize that soluble forms of both Aβ (Walsh and Selkoe, 2007) and tau protein (Kopeikina et al., 2012) have been implicated in AD pathogenesis, but would not be apparent through using by the conventional techniques used and described in the NIA/AA guidelines.

It needs to be kept in mind that medial temporal lobe NFT may be found in old and very old people in the absence or relative absence of Aβ or NP (Yamada, 2003; Jellinger and Attems, 2007; Nelson et al., 2009). Previously known as “tangle-predominant senile dementia” (TPSD, Jellinger and Attems, 2007) or “tangle-only dementia” (Yamada, 2003), this neuropathological entity has recently been termed primary age-related tauopathy (PART; Crary et al., 2014; Jellinger et al., 2015). Symptoms in persons with PART usually range from normal to amnestic cognitive changes, with only a minority exhibiting profound impairment (Crary et al., 2014). In addition, other diseases that must be considered in the differential diagnosis of dementia/major neurocognitive disorder include tauopathies other than PART, most importantly FTLD (its clinical presentation is usually called frontotemporal dementia, FTD) and its subtypes, such as FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP (for TDP-43 protein), FTLD-FUS (fused in sarcoma protein), FTLD-UPS (ubiquitin proteasome system), FTLD-ni (no inclusions, also known as dementia lacking distinctive histopathology; Mackenzie et al., 2010), and prion disease. Mutations in several genes have been associated with the majority of genetic FTLD: MAPT (encoding protein tau), GRN (encoding for protein progranulin), TARDBP (encoding transactive response DNA-binding protein 43, TDP-43, which is often associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ALS, or ALS/FTD, but also with FTD subjects without ALS), VCP (encoding valosin-containing protein, which is also mutated in ALS), C9ORF72 (encoding C9orf72 protein, also mutated in ALS), and TMEM106B (Benussi et al., 2015). Two new loci associated with FTLD have been recently reported: one linked to HLA (human leukocyte antigen) locus on 6p21.3 and the other to 11q14 locus (CHMP2B, whose transcripts are related to lysosomes), suggesting that immune system processes and possibly lysosomal and autophagy pathways, may also potentially be involved in FTLD (Ferrari et al., 2014; Clayton et al., 2015).

Several recent reports drew attention to the possibility of selective and early involvement of not only the LC (Hyman and Trojanowski, 1997) but also the raphe nuclei, particularly the DRN, in the pathogenesis of AD (Rüb et al., 2000; Grinberg et al., 2009; Michelsen et al., 2008; Šimić et al., 2009). In a clinicopathological series of 118 cases, out of which 38 were categorized as stage B0 (at least four sections at different levels of transentorhinal cortex were free of neurofibrillary changes, based on lack of immunoreactivity for monoclonal antibodies PHF-1 and AT8), and 80 as stage B1 (rare neurofibrillary changes in the transentorhinal cortex), more than 20% of B0 and all of B1 cases had substantial neurofibrillary changes in the DRN. However, because raphe nuclei dysfunction due to neurofibrillary changes is not included even in the new criteria (Hyman et al., 2012; Montine et al., 2012), its possible behavioral consequences are not yet considered as a potential early characteristic clinical feature of AD.

Numerous clinical and neuropathological studies performed from the early 1980s to the present have established compelling links between wide range of structural and functional abnormalities of subcortical monoaminergic systems and the pathophysiology of AD. Here below, we first provide brief general information on involvement of each monoaminergic system in AD, followed by its more detailed chemical neuroanatomy (origins of neurons, distribution of receptors) and functional relevance of their alterations in AD. Finally, we discuss interactions among monoaminergic systems and with the cholinergic system in AD and prospect for future monoamine-based treatments in AD.

2. Chemical neuroanatomy of the monoaminergic systems

2.1. Serotonergic system

The impairment of serotonergic system in AD was shown in humans both in vivo and postmortem. Early non-cognitive behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), such as disturbances in mood, emotion expression and recognition (Waanders-Oude Elferink et al., 2015), appetite, wake-sleep cycle, confusion, agitation, and depression are probably clinical signs of serotonergic nuclei involvement in AD (Šimić et al., 2009). One of them, sundowning (the increase in one or more abnormal behaviors such as agitation or activity during evening hours), is estimated to occur in about 45% of individuals diagnosed with AD (Scarmeas et al., 2007). Depression as the most pronounced clinical symptom is considered as a risk factor for neurodegeneration (Donovan et al., 2015). AD patients also typically show sleep fragmentation with frequent awakenings during the night, and a propensity to sleep during the daytime (Ancoli-Israel et al., 1994; Lim et al., 2014). Recent animal studies confirmed how early occurence of AD pathology in serotonergic nuclei leads to wake-sleep cycle disturbances (Sterniczuk et al., 2010; Roh et al., 2012).

Many studies found reductions of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), along with its metabolites and receptors in AD postmortem brain tissue (Nazarali and Reynolds, 1992; Garcia-Alloza et al., 2005; Ramirez et al., 2014), as well as reduced serotonergic innervation of the cerebral cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, globus pallidus, lateral nucleus of the thalamus and elsewhere (for review see Trillo et al., 2013).

5-HT is an indoleamine produced from L-tryptophan by the sequential action of tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH, EC 1.14.16.4) and aromatic-L-amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD, EC 4.1.1.28) (Green, 1989). TPH is the rate-limiting enzyme in 5-HT biosynthesis. For many years, only one gene encoding TPH in vertebrates was known. In 2003, a second TPH gene (termed TPH2) was identified on chromosome 12 (Walther et al., 2003). The finding that TPH2 is predominantly expressed in the brain, whereas TPH1 is expressed in peripheral tissues justified the concept of the “central” serotonergic system (Côté et al., 2003; Patel et al., 2004). Unlike other monoamines that are mainly metabolized by monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A, EC 1.4.3.4), serotonergic neurons and astrocytes contain predominantly monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B, EC 1.4.3.4), which metabolizes 5-HT into 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) (Beck et al., 1987; Green, 1989; Fitzgerald et al., 1990). Therefore, the role of MAO-B in serotonergic neurons might be to eliminate intracellular competition of 5-HT with dopamine and other monoamines at low concentrations (as at high concentrations of substrates, MAO isoenzymes loose their selectivity). Besides 5-HT, MAO oxidases catalyze the oxidative deamination of noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine, melatonin, tryptamine, histamine, and taurine. In addition to an aldehyde, in MAO catalyzed reaction ammonia and hydrogen peroxide are also formed. Aldehydes are further oxidized by aldehyde dehydrogenase into carboxylic acids, whereas hydrogen peroxide in the presence of transition divalent metals (iron, copper, zinc) may be converted to highly reactive hydroxyl radical (by the Fenton reaction). Thus, along with mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, MAO activity is probably the second most significant source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress in the brain (Edmondson et al., 2014). Another unfavourable consequence of MAO activity, the production of ammonia, puts additional strain on the NH4+-clearing system of monoaminergic neurons making them more vulnerable, because it involves glutamate transporters (Šalković-Petrišić and Riederer, 2010), glutamate dehydrogenase 1 (GLUD1) and glutamine synthetase (also glutamate ammonia ligase, GLUL), which decrease the 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and glutamate pools. Neurons are very sensitive to the depletion of these pools, especially 2OG, because it decreases adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production in the citric acid cycle. Interestingly, by inhibiting ATP synthase and target of rapamycin (TOR), α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) has been shown to be a key metabolite that mediates longevity by dietary restriction and extends lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans (Chin et al., 2014). It can be thus concluded that lowered metabolism of monoamine neurotransmitters, as a consequence of therapeutic effect of MAO inhibitors, increases availability of monoamine neurotransmitters, which underlie the antidepressant action, and at the same time decreases oxidative stress, particularly in the case of MAO-B inhibitors. That was the main reason they have been suggested as options for AD treatment (Bortolato et al., 2008; Di Giovanni et al., 2014). MAO inhibitors are therefore an integral part of the concept of the multitarget-directed ligand design strategy based on combination of pharmacophores of diverse compounds to get hybrid drugs. New drugs for AD, for example, may combine acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEI) with compounds acting on metabolism of Aβ, tau, monoamines, iron, transporter activities, channels, etc. (Bolea et al., 2013). Consumption of coffee appears to improve glucose metabolism and reduce the risk of dementia, but more studies are required to identify the active components involved to address this issue (Varghese et al., 2014).

5-HT is produced in serotonergic neuron groups. These groups are mainly embedded in the raphe nuclei. The general organization of the raphe nuclei and the distribution of serotonergic neurons appear to be very similar among mammalian species with the exception of the B4 group in the floor of the fourth ventricle, which is absent in primates, and has been confirmed in humans (Halliday et al., 1988; Halliday and Törk, 1989; Törk, 1990; Hornung 2003, 2004) (see Table 1). The raphe nuclei are located along the midline of the brainstem and span as loosely arranged cells aggregations from the midbrain to the junction of the medulla oblongata with the spinal cord. The continuity of the raphe nuclei is interrupted only by the reticulotegmental nucleus of the pons, which separates the serotonergic neurons into two large groups: one in the rostral pontine and mesencephalic tegmentum (rostral raphe group, B5–B9) and one in the medulla oblongata (caudal raphe group, B1–B3) (Takahashi et al., 1986; Halliday et al., 1988; Baker et al., 1990; Törk, 1990; Törk and Hornung, 1990; Nieuwenhuys et al., 2008).

The rostral (oral) raphe group in humans comprises the centromedian part, which consists of the nucleus raphe centralis pars principalis (NRC-P), the nucleus raphe centralis pars annularis (NRC-A), and the nucleus raphe linearis (NRL). The dorsal part is also known as the DRN. There are apparent difficulties when comparisons are made in regard to the DRN subdivisions used in various publications. For example, Ohm and collaborators considered the interfascicular, dorsofascicular and intercalate subnuclei as principal minor subdivisions of DRN (Ohm et al., 1989), whereas Baker and collaborators subdivided the DRN into five subnuclei: interfascicular, ventral, ventrolateral, dorsal, and caudal (Baker et al., 1990). According to the classification made by Braak (1970), which is one of the most commonly used (Michelsen et al., 2008), the DRN is comprised of the pars supratrochlearis (DRN ST), pars interfascicularis (DRN IF), pars caudalis compacta (DRNCC), and the caudal lamellar subnucleus (DRN CL). These nuclei generally correspond to the B5–B9 nuclei originally described in rodents (Dahlström and Fuxe 1964a, 1964b; Fuxe, 1965) (see Fig. 5). The rostral group gives rise to ascending cortical, cerebellar, and local cortical and subcortical projections. The caudal raphe group consists of the nucleus raphe magnus (NRM), nucleus raphe obscurus (NRO), and the nucleus raphe pallidus (NRP), which correspond to B3, B2, and B1, respectively (Fig. 5). The caudal group is reciprocally connected to the brainstem, the cerebellum, and the spinal cord, whereas ascending projections are not as far-reaching as in the case of the rostral group (Table 1).

Quantitative studies of the total number of serotonergic neurons in the raphe nuclei report that the human DRN contains about 235,000 ± 13,000 neurons (Baker et al., 1990), of which approximately 165,000 ± 34,000 neurons (or about 70%) contain serotonin (Baker et al., 1991a). Using a monoclonal antibody raised against TPH (PH8), which recognizes the 5-HT-synthesizing enzyme in formalin-fixed human brain tissue, it was shown that the contingent of serotonergic neurons within the DRN amounts to about 80% of the total neuronal population, while the caudal raphe group contains only about 10–20% of serotonergic neurons (Baker et al., 1991b; Hornung, 2004). The large numbers of scattered 5-HT-synthesizing neurons in the pontine, and particularly in the mesencephalic tegmentum in primates, contrast with their relative paucity in nonprimate species (Baker et al., 1991a).

There are two morphologically distinct classes of serotonergic axons (Kosofsky and Molliver, 1987): beaded axons with large, spherical varicosities (up to 5 µm in diameter), which make synaptic contact with their targets (so-called M-fibers, Törk, 1990), and fine axons with small (smaller than 1 µm in diameter) varicosities (the main fibers, ubiquitous throughout the mammalian cerebral cortex and also called D-fibers, Törk, 1990), which lack membrane junctional complexes (synapse) and release serotonin diffusely through volume transmission (Törk, 1990; Descarries et al., 1991; Descarries and Mechawar, 2000; De-Miguel and Trueta, 2005; Fuxe et al., 2012). The third and least common type was first described in the marmoset, and is thought to be the stem fibers for M-fibers (Hornung et al., 1990). This third type of fibers can be noted throughout the cortex of all mammalian species. The M-fibers are found in the supragranular cortical layers, but can also be occasionally seen in infragranular layers of chimpanzees and humans (Raghanti et al., 2008a). Compared with macaque monkeys, humans and chimpanzees also display a greater density of serotonergic axons in layers V and VI in prefrontal cortical areas 9 and 32 (implicated to mediate working memory and higher cognitive functions), but not in the primary motor cortex (Raghanti et al., 2008). Interestingly, morphological specializations of M-fibers called coils of axons were observed in humans and chimpanzees in all cortical layers, but are absent in macaques and all other primate and non-primate mammalian species (Raghanti et al., 2008a). It has been hypothesized that these morphological features similar to coils described for tyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactive axons in humans (Gaspar et al., 1989; Benavides-Piccione and DeFelipe, 2003; Raghanti et al., 2008b) and clusters described for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)-containing fibers, also in humans, may represent a substrate for a greater capacity for cortical plasticity (hence behavioral flexibility) exclusive to hominoids (anthropoid apes and humans) (Raghanti et al., 2008a).

The described two types of axons originate from different raphe nuclei: M-fibres with coarse varicosities take their origin from the nucleus raphe pontis (medianus and dorsalis; fibers colored in purple in Fig. 5) and nucleus raphe pallidus (light blue fibers in Fig. 5) ascending through the tegmental area as the ventral bundle, whereas D-fibres with small varicosities arise from the DRN (fibers colored in light green in Fig. 5) and nucleus raphe magnus (fibers colored in dark green in Fig. 5) and collect in the dorsal bundle. There is an increase in serotonergic neuron number in the nucleus raphe pontis medianus of cats and primates relative to rodents (Jacobs et al., 1984; Azmitia and Gannon, 1986). The dorsal bundle was identified and described by Forel in 1877; the area containing ascending fibers of this bundle first coincides approximately with the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus (Arslan, 2015) and then with the dorsal trigeminothalamic tract. At the border with the forebrain, the ventral and dorsal bundles join together and continue towards the subthalamus and thalamus and their cortical targets via the medial forebrain bundle that passes through the internal capsule. The dorsal bundle (also known as the dorsal raphe cortical tract) is phylogenetically newer than the ventral bundle, is more prominent in primates (presumably due to an increase in fibers projecting to the cortex through the dorsal pathway, Piñeyro and Blier, 1999) and more vulnerable to neurotoxic amphetamine derivatives methylenedioxyamphetamine and p-chloroamphetamine (Mamounas et al., 1991).

The two systems of serotonergic fibers coexist in most parts of the brain, with the cerebral cortex being the best example of dual contribution to serotonergic innervation. However, although they share many of their targets (Table 1), the main targets of the dorsal bundle (comprised mostly of DRN projections) are the entorhinal cortex, lateral geniculate nucleus, the olfactory bulb, the amygdala, and the striatum, which is almost exclusively innervated by the Dfibers of this system, whereas the pontine dorsal (B6) raphe nucleus mainly projects via the ventral bundle (M-fibers) to the septum, basal forebrain, and especially hippocampus (Steinbusch et al., 1980; Kohler and Steinbusch, 1982; Imai et al., 1986; Morrison and Foote, 1986; Törk, 1990). The pontine median (B5) raphe nucleus connects with the interpeduncular nucleus, substantia nigra, and the mammillary body, but its cortical projection is rather sparse (O’Hearn and Molliver, 1984).

The serotonergic system is one of the oldest neurotransmitter systems and seven distinct serotonergic receptors (5-HT1 – 5HT7), each with several subpopulations of receptors (altogether, at least 14 members in the family are known), mediate both central and peripheral control on numerous physiological functions such as sleep-wake cycle, feeding behavior, thermoregulation, nociception, affective (mood) control and sexual behavior, locomotion and motor control (via interactions with the basal ganglia dopaminergic system), blood coagulation, and cardiovascular homeostasis (Darmon et al., 2015). 5-HT receptors are different in terms of localization and downstream signaling. All 5-HT receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors except 5-HT3, which is a Cys-loop ligand-gated ion channel. 5-HT1 (1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, and 1E) and 5-HT5 receptors (5A and 5B) have an inhibitory effect on adenylyl cyclase through Gαi/o protein. 5-HT2 receptors (2A, 2B, and 2C) activate phospholipase C cascade through the Gαq/11 protein. 5-HT3 receptors (3A, 3B, and recently discovered 3C, 3D and 3E) have a direct influence on the cell’s processes as ion channels. 5-HT4, 5-HT6 and 5-HT7 receptors activate adenylyl cyclase through GαS protein. The majority of 5-HT receptors are postsynaptic, except for 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors, which are mostly presynaptic, and 5-HT1A receptors that are located both on presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes (Seyedabadi et al., 2014 and Darmon et al., 2015).

2.2. Noradrenergic system

The most prominent effect of AD on the noradrenergic system is the loss of up to 70% of locus coeruleus (LC) noradrenergic neurons (Bondareff et al., 1982; Iversen et al., 1983; Zweig et al., 1989). Together with the serotonergic nuclei, the LC is involved in the control of the sleep-wake cycle and, among other symptoms, its impairment can cause early and prominent wake-sleep cycle disturbances in AD (Roh et al., 2012). As noradrenergic projections innervate cerebral vasculature and optimize neurovascular coupling, the diminished ability to couple blood volume to oxygen demand may also contribute to AD pathogenesis (Bekar et al., 2012).

The catecholamine noradrenaline is synthesized from dopamine by the enzyme dopamine-β-hydroxylase (DBH, EC 1.14.17.1) and is metabolized by MAO and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT; EC 2.1.1.6). Noradrenaline binds solely to metabotropic α-(α1A, α1B, α1D, α2A, α2B, α2C) and β-adrenoreceptors (β1, β2 and β3) (Ruffolo and Hieble, 1994). The noradrenergic system regulates visceral functions (respiration, cardiovascular function, secretion of hormones), cognitive functions (responsiveness to novel stimuli, vigilance, learning through reinforcement), arousal, attention, sleep-wake cycle, emotion, mood, motor control, and pain control (Harley, 1987; Szabadi, 2013).

The brainstem neurons that produce noradrenaline form noradrenergic nuclei (A1–A7) are divided into dorsal (A2, A4, A6) and ventral (A1, A5, A7) columns. A1, A2, A5 and A7 project to the basal telencephalon, hypothalamus, brainstem, and spinal cord, while A4 and A6 (locus coeruleus, LC) project to the cortex, cerebellum, thalamus, and spinal cord (Pearson et al., 1991). The nucleus locus coeruleus (A6) contains approximately 50% of all noradrenergic neurons and is the only noradrenergic nucleus that innervates the cortex (Samuels and Szabadi, 2008).

While fibers from the LC project to the forebrain, cerebellum and spinal cord, noradrenergic fibers from the lateral brainstem tegmentum project to the ventral forebrain, hypothalamus, amygdala and spinal cord (Heimer, 1995). More precisely, noradrenergic fibres from the LC together with cholinergic and serotonergic fibres form an ascending arousal system (AAS). Noradrenergic and serotonergic fibres form the ventral branch of the AAS, enter the hypothalamus and as a part of the medial forebrain bundle reach the mediobasal telencephalon. On this path, noradrenergic fibers innervate forebrain regions like the basal forebrain, preoptic area, olfactory structures, hypothalamus, thalamus, hippocampus, and neocortex (Foote and Morrison, 1987; Raghanti et al., 2009). Fibers from the LC and A5 and A7 noradrenergic nuclei descend to the spinal cord as a part of tractus pontospinalis and tractus coeruleospinalis, and innervate many regions of the rhombencephalon (Westlund et al., 1982). The cerebellum is also innervated by the noradrenergic fibers from the LC, A5, and A7 noradrenergic nuclei (Voogd et al., 1996). In addition to the neighboring structures, fibers from the A1 and A2 noradrenergic nuclei innervate the thalamus, amygdala, and hypothalamus (Petrov et al., 1993).

The projections from the LC constitute an arousal system, since the noradrenergic neurons are active specifically during waking (Kayama and Koyama, 2003). Broadly speaking, if LC activity is too low, an animal is drowsy and inattentive. If LC activity is too high, the animal is distractible and anxious, but with the intermediate levels of LC activity, the animal is optimally attentive and aroused (España and Scammell, 2011). Mice deficient of noradrenaline exhibit normal sleep and wake states, but fall asleep after exposure to a mild stressor more rapidly than control mice, measured both behaviorally and with electroencephalography (Hunsley and Palmiter, 2003). Noradrenaline tone is also clearly related to cognition as LC neurons in monkeys fire phasically in response to a salient stimulus that signals a reward such as food, but do not respond to a distracting stimulus (Aston-Jones et al., 1994), suggesting that LC activity promote arousal in a way that optimizes attention and task performance (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005).

2.3. Dopaminergic system

The reduction of dopamine, dopamine metabolites, and dopamine receptors has been observed in AD (Storga et al., 1996; Trillo et al., 2013). Additionally, polymorphisms in dopaminergic system genes are associated to BPSD in AD (Holmes et al., 2001; Borroni et al., 2004). Enhancement of dopaminergic transmission alleviates cognitive impairment in AD (Martorana et al., 2013; Stefani et al., 2015).

Dopamine is a catecholamine synthesized from tyrosine by the rate-limiting enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, EC 1.14.16.2) and AAAD, and degraded by the enzymes MAO and COMT. Dopamine binds to five metabotropic receptors (D1–D5) that are divided into two families; D1-like receptors (D1 and D5) and D2-like receptors (D2, D3, and D4) (Wolstencroft et al., 2007; Beaulieu and Gainetdinov, 2011).

Dopamine is produced by dopaminergic neurons that form the A8–A17 nuclei within the mesencephalon and diencephalon. These nuclei are located in the retrorubral field (A8), substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc; A9), ventral tegmental area (VTA; A10), nucleus linearis (A11), preoptic area (A12–A15), olfactory bulb (A16) and retina (A17) (Dahlström and Fuxe, 1964; Frederick et al., 1982). Dopaminergic neurons send their axons through four major dopaminergic tracts: 1) nigrostriatal tract, 2) mesolimbic tract, 3) mesocortical tract and 4) tuberoinfundibular pathway. The nigrostriatal pathway is a dopaminergic projection from the SNc (A9) into the basal ganglia (striatum) and is important for motor control. The mesolimbic and mesocortical tracts are often termed mesocorticolimbic pathway. This pathway originates in the VTA (A10), projects to the nucleus accumbens and further to subcortical structures, hippocampus, and neocortex (Anden et al., 1964; Dahlström and Fuxe, 1964). It is a key component of the reward system, crucial for the development of bonding/attachment and addictive behaviors (Šešo-Šimić et al., 2010). The tuberoinfundibular system projects from hypothalamic arcuate nucleus to the pituitary gland and regulates the secretion of prolactin. In addition to addictive behaviors and attachment disorder, two severe neurologic and psychiatric conditions are the results of the disturbed dopaminergic pathways: Parkinson’s disease (nigrostriatal pathway) and schizophrenia (mesocorticolimbic pathway) (Bogerts et al., 1983; Schultz, 2002; Mladinov et al., 2010).

The dopaminergic system is involved in the regulation of a plethora of physiological functions such as the control of movement, mood, cognitive functions (motivation, attention, working memory, motor planning, thinking and abstract reasoning, temporal analysis, speech and language, learning, maternal/paternal and social behaviors), reward system, emotions, pain control, visceral functions and secretion of hormones (Sawaguchi and Goldman-Rakic, 1991; Jääskeläinen et al., 2001; Schultz, 2002; Iversen and Iversen, 2007; Šešo-Šimić et al., 2010; Yamaguchi et al., 2015). A general theory has been proposed that attributes the evolution of human intelligence and cognitive specializations to an expansion and elaboration of the laminar, sublaminar and regional pattern of dopaminergic cortical innervation (e.g. human-specific coils/clusters of axons and a greater dopamine innervation of infragranular layers in cortical areas involved in high-level processing, such as Brodmann's areas 9 and 32), particularly in the left hemisphere (Hof et al., 1995; Previc, 1999; Raghanti et al., 2008b).

2.4. Histaminergic system

The tuberomammillary nucleus, the major histaminergic nucleus, is affected early by neuropathological changes in AD (Braak and Braak, 1991; Nakamura et al., 1993). A lack of histamine in the AD brain contributes to the disturbances of cognitive functions and sleep. Thus, the enhancers of histamine release in the brain such as histamine H3 receptor antagonists were considered as potential therapeutics in AD (Egan et al., 2012; Grove et al., 2014).

Histamine is synthesized from the essential amino acid histidine by decarboxylation by the histidine decarboxylase (HDC, EC 4.1.1.22). It is mainly metabolized by transmethylation by the N-methyltransferase (HMT, EC 2.1.1.8) to N'-methylhistamine. N'-methylhistamine is further metabolized by MAO-B and aldehyde dehydrogenase. It could by also be metabolized with diamine oxidase (also known as histaminase) to imidazole acetaldehyde (Schayer et al., 1978). Histamine binds to four metabotropic histamine receptors (H1R, H2R, H3R and H4R) and histamine-gated chloride channel (Panula et al., 2015).

Histaminergic neurons in humans are exclusively located in the posterior lateral hypothalamus within the tuberomammillary nucleus into two clusters, one located ventrolaterally, and the other dorsomedially (Panula et al., 1990; Shan et al., 2015). Clusters of histaminergic neurons contain five cell groups: medial, ventral, caudal, lateral, and diffuse. The fact that the lateral hypothalamus contains about 32,000 histaminergic neurons indicates the importance of this system (Airaksinen et al., 1991). Histaminergic neurons give rise to fibers that innervate the whole brain, including the cerebral cortex.

The histaminergic system is involved in the regulation of the level of behavioral arousal, sleep-wake cycle, learning and memory, cognition, attention, control of body temperature, and food uptake (Haas et al., 2003). Injury of the tuberomammillary nucleus causes hypersomnia and blockade of histaminergic neurons with antihistaminic drugs promotes sleep (Brown et al., 2001). Classic antihistamines cause sedation via H1 receptors (Mochizuki et al., 2002).

2.5. Melatonergic system

Secretion of melatonin is decreased in AD (Mishima et al., 1999). Therefore, melatonin supplementation was tested in many clinical trials in the past 20 years as a potential therapy in AD (for review, see Cardinali et al., 2010). While the majority of studies showed ameliorating effects on sundowning, sleep disturbance, and cognitive impairment in AD (for review see Cardinali et al., 2010), some of them failed to confirm these findings (Serfaty et al., 2002; Gehram et al., 2009).

Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is synthesized in the pineal gland from 5-HT as its precursor (Axelrod, 1974; Namboodiri et al., 1987). More precisely, 5-HT is acetylated by arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT, EC 2.3.1.87) to N-acetylserotonin. By the action of N-acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase (ASMT, EC 2.1.1.4), N-acetylserotonin is turned into melatonin (Wurtman et al., 1968). Melatonin binds to metabotropic MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors (Dubocovich et al., 2005). Melatonin controls the circadian rhythm of the sleep-wake cycle. Pinealocytes, the main cells of the pineal gland, produce melatonin in high concentration principally during the night (Vaughan et al., 1976).

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) located in the anterior hypothalamus acts as circadian pacemaker (“Zeitgeber”) and is the main regulator of rhythmic melatonin release. It is activated by light, while light is inhibitory in the pineal gland. Through the direct retinohypothalamic projection, SCN receives information on the luminance of retina (Sadun et al., 1984). SCN projects to hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus. These neurons are connected to the preganglionic sympathetic neurons in the thoracic spinal cord, which project to the superior cervical ganglion (postganglionic sympathetic neurons). These neurons are directly connected with the pineal gland and activate pinealocytes (Nieuwenhuys et al., 2008).

3. Monoaminergic systems in AD

3.1. Alterations of the serotonergic system in AD

Similarly to NIA/AA guidelines, the current clinical criteria for diagnosis of AD of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-5) are mostly focused on cognitive deficits produced by the dysfunction of hippocampal and association neocortical areas. These changes are neuropsychologically scored as number of points that, in the most commonly used Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), ranges from 0 to 30 points, where 30 reflects normal mental status across many cognitive domains (Folstein et al., 1975). Depending on demographic variables such as age, gender, and education, the optimal cutoff point for screening (cognitively normal vs. MCI/minor neurocognitive disorder and dementia/major neurocognitive disorder) can be standardized and validated for any given general population (Boban et al., 2012). However, non-cognitive BPSD have been much less considered, perhaps due to their transient and fluctuating nature and variable severity. The early occurrence of these symptoms, especially mood change (most often depressive mood), anxiety, apathy, social withdrawal/socially intrusive behavior, confusion, irritability, agitation, restlessness, hyperactivity, aggression (first verbal then also physical), psychosis, disinhibition, and disturbances in wake-sleep cycle (“sundowning”), emotion and appetite, and others (hallucinations, delusions, etc.), suggests primarily early involvement of the serotonergic raphe nuclei, particularly the DRN, but also of dopaminergic pathways (Borroni et al., 2010; Martorana et al., 2013; Stefani et al., 2015). An example of early neurofibrillary changes in the DRN of a subject with MCI and BPSD is given in Figure 6. Unfortunately, in spite of the possibility of selective early involvement of the DRN in the pathogenesis of AD (Rüb et al., 2000; for review, see Šimić et al., 2009), among brainstem structures, only the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, LC, and SN have been specifically included in the current diagnostic criteria (Hyman et al., 2012; Montine et al., 2012). Additionally, the relationship between depression and AD pathology is of significant interest because diagnosed depression is likely to represents a risk factor of AD (Ownby et al., 2006). In some cases, this can be explained by depression occurring as a preclinical manifestation of neurocognitive disorder/dementia in the context of AD progression. Moreover, chronic or recurrent episodes of depressive symptoms have been found to be associated with hippocampal volume reduction, hypometabolism, and an increased risk for neurocognitive disorder/dementia, suggesting that depression per se is indeed a risk factor for neurodegeneration (Donovan et al., 2015).

Extensive serotonergic denervation of the neocortex and hippocampus has been reported in AD (Curcio and Kemper, 1984; Halliday et al., 1992; Chen et al., 2000; for review see Trillo et al., 2013), while reduction of 5-HT as well as its metabolites, primarily 5-HIAA, have been reported in many studies of postmortem AD brains (for instance, Nazarali and Reynolds, 1992; Garcia-Alloza et al., 2005). Both 5-HT and 5-HIAA cortical levels negatively correlate with the number of NFT, suggesting that the impairment of serotonergic system parallels AD progression (Palmer et al., 1987). It has been shown that 5-HT levels are more severely affected in AD brains than the levels of catecholamines (Gottfries et al., 1986). As pointed out by Ramirez et al., similarly to [3H]5-HT binding in AD patients, depletion of 5-HT and its metabolites is more severe in EOAD than LOAD brains, which suggests that serotonergic changes occurring in both aging and AD are degenerative (Ramirez et al., 2014). Depletion of 5-HT also leads to decreased melatonin synthesis, so its concentrations in the CSF samples of AD patients are significantly reduced, particularly in the preclinical stages of the disease (Zhou et al., 2003). As 5-HT is produced from L-tryptophan, reduced dietary intake of tryptophan in AD patients accelerates deterioration of cognitive symptoms (Porter et al., 2000).

Impaired serotonergic functioning has been implicated in many different neurological and psychiatric disorders, among others antisocial personality disorder and depression, both of which have been characterized by the reduced CSF concentrations of 5-HIAA (Deakin, 2003), and higher 5-HT turnover, particularly in female patients (Hou et al., 2006). Animal data suggest that these neurochemical and behavioral changes in adults may have their origins in perinatal exposure, e.g. to 5-HT precursor 5-hydroxytriptophan, 5-HTP, or MAO inhibitors (Blažević and Hranilović, 2013), as well as other pre- and postnatal factors, most likely via epigenetic mechanisms (Pishva et al., 2012). Such changes have also been described as a part of the clinical picture in very early stages of AD (Cummings, 1992; Mychack et al., 2001; Michelsen, 2008). However, as the M-fiber system mainly arises from the median (B5) and dorsal (B6) pontine raphe nuclei it may be of higher relevance for depression and learning and memory, based on its innervation of the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex (Deakin, 2003; Lei, 2012), while the D-fiber system may be more implicated in personality changes.

The entorhinal cortex is the gate to control the flow of information into and out of the hippocampus and the place from which neurofibrillary degeneration spreads throughout the cerebral cortex (Braak and Braak, 1991). Therefore, it is of great importance to know that the entorhinal cortex receives profuse serotonergic innervations from both the nuclei raphe pontis and DRN and expresses a very high density of serotonergic receptors, including 5-HT1A, 5-HT1D, 5-HT1E, 5-HT2A, 5-HT3 and 5-HT6 (Lei, 2012). Mood disorders, depression, and anxiety have been managed with different drugs and diets (Dixon Clarke and Ramsay, 2010), modulating serotonin metabolism (for example, by inhibiting monoamine oxidase A and B), 5-HT transporters and reuptake systems for almost 30 years. Based on preclinical studies, certain 5-HT receptor ligands may the ability to modify or improve memory and cognition, specifically acting at 5-HT1A, 5-HT4 and 5-HT6 receptors (Ramirez et al., 2014).

Together with the noradrenergic LC, the cholinergic pedunculopontine and lateral dorsal tegmental nucleus, with which it is highly interconnected, the serotonergic DRN is also involved in sleep-waking control (España and Scammell, 2011; Monti, 2011). The activity of the DRN is high during waking, low during slow wave sleep and abolished during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (España and Scammell, 2011). Thus, some drugs, such as modafinil, which modulate 5-HT transmission in the DRN and prefrontal cortex, reduce sleep and promote vigilance (Ferraro et al., 2013), whereas lesions of the raphe nuclei cause insomnia (Monti, 2011). In fact, recent data showed that plaque formation in the brain of the APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of AD causes the deterioration of the sleep-wake cycle and loss of diurnal fluctuation of Aβ measured in the interstitial fluid (Roh et al., 2012). In addition to the effect that accumulated Aβ causes sleep deprivation, it has been shown that sleep deprivation leads to the inadequate clearance of Aβ (Roh et al., 2012; Ju et al., 2013; Lim et al., 2014; Šimić et al., 2014), contributing to more Aβ accumulation and creating a vicious circle. Besides Aβ release from raphe projection axons (Braak and Del Tredici, 2013), accumulation of Aβ due to sleep deprivation may also add to the pathology of raphe and other brainstem nuclei, particularly in the ‘pre-tangle’ stage.

It has been demonstrated that even cognitively normal individuals with biomarker evidence of preclinical AD have worse quality sleep and sleep efficiency than control individuals (Ju et al., 2013). This in turn can cause a disruption of the default-mode network (DMN) connectivity (for review, see Šimić et al., 2014). Two studies have revealed that the DMN (also known as the resting-state or task-negative network) cortical hubs exhibit high amounts of Aβ deposits in AD (Sheline and Raichle, 2010; Wang et al., 2013) and that clinically normal subjects with high amyloid burden in these regions have significantly reduced functional correlations within the DMN. It is therefore possible that due to DMN neurons’ enhanced (constant) activity dependent processing of APP, these neurons may produce and release more Aβ than occur elsewhere in the neocortex. In a recent cross-sectional cohort study, the decreased CSF values of Aβ1–42 (&lt;500 pg/ml) and increased CSF values of p-tau181 (more than 80 pg/ml) were associated with significant reduction in DMN functional integrity (Wang et al., 2013). The most prominent decreases in functional connectivity were observed between the posterior cingulate and medial temporal regions, and were not attributable to age or structural atrophy, suggesting that both Aβ and tau pathology affect DMN integrity before the clinical onset of AD. Because processing of the APP is activity-dependent, where regional increases in neuronal activity are associated with regional increases in the concentration of Aβ in the interstitial fluid (Cirrito et al., 2005), it can be speculated that due to their constant activity, DMN neurons produce and release more Aβ than occur elsewhere in the neocortex. As DMN connectivity persists during light sleep because self-reflective thoughts do not abruptly cease but rather decrease gradually as a person falls asleep, what particularly matters is the duration of the deepest stages of slow-wave sleep (SWS) during which the activity of DMN is virtually absent and cerebral metabolic rate declines by 43.8% in comparison with wakefulness and REM sleep (Horovitz et al., 2009; Dang-Vu et al., 2010). Out of three models constructed to determine the nature of the interaction among Aβ deposition in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and its non-REM SW activity, hippocampal activation and memory retention, the model with the best statistical fit was a sleep-dependent one, in which the Aβ impairs memory via its effect on sleep (Mander et al., 2013). As sleep deprivation accelerates Aβ deposition in APP transgenic mice, whereas orexin (hypocretin) deficiency (which increases sleep) decreases it, a bidirectional relationship between sleep and Aβ deposition has been proposed: sleep disruption leads to Aβ deposits and Aβ deposits result in sleep disturbance (Lucey and Holzman, 2015).

Serotonergic receptors are selectively affected in AD, especially 5-HT2 (Ramirez et al., 2014). The loss of 5-HT2A receptors has also been supported by PET imaging (Marner et al., 2012). Reduced 5-HT1A receptor binding in the temporal cortex has been shown to correlate with aggressive behavior in AD patients (Lai et al., 2003), whereas their reduced binding in the hippocampus is better correlated with cognitive decline (Kepe et al., 2006). Also, PET imaging revealed a reduction in 5-HT1A receptor binding in the hippocampus and parahippocampus of patients with mild AD (Truchot et al., 2008). Density of 5-HT1B/1D and 5-HT6 receptors was reduced in the frontal and temporal cortex of AD patients (see Table 2; Garcia Alloza et al., 2004). Studies on polymorphisms in 5-HT receptors support the important role of the serotonergic system in AD too. For instance, T102C polymorphism in the gene for 5-HT2A receptor has been linked to psychosis and psychotic symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions in AD patients (Trillo et al., 2013).

3.2. Alterations of the serotonergic system in other primary and secondary tauopathies

Although not as prominent as in AD, NFT in the DRN are seen in both PSP and CBD; Ishino et al., 1975; Shiozawa et al., 2000). In PSP, NFT and NT are seen in the nucleus raphe magnus and nucleus raphe obscurus less than one year after initial clinical symptoms and do not correlate in number with the disease duration. It is suspected that tau pathology is present in the preclinical stages of the disease (Rüb et al., 2002). In PSP and postencephalitic parkinsonism (PEP), NFT and NT are found in raphe nuclei, partly contributing to oculomotor abnormalities (Revesz et al., 1996; Yang et al., 2001). Supranuclear gaze palsy was also described in a case with clinical PSP, which was later pathologically confirmed as CBD with NFT and tau-positive inclusions present in the raphe nuclei (Shiozawa et al., 2000). Marked reduction in a number of neurons and NFT pathology to a lesser extent was found in the NRC and DRN in FTD (Yang et al., 2001). Low brain levels of serotonin have been evident in patients with FTD, manifesting aggression, impulsivity, depressive symptoms and alterations in frontal cortex metabolism, leading to clinical improvement after usage of selective 5-HTreceptor inhibitors (Huey et al., 2006; Mendez, 2009). A significant reduction in the number of neurons in the NRC and DRN with NFT in pontine (B5 and B6) and DRN is speculated to contribute to hypersomnia in myotonic dystrophy (Yoshimura et al., 1990; Ono et al., 1995; Ono et al., 1998; Oyamada et al., 2006). In Down’s syndrome, NFT in the raphe nuclei also increase in number with age (Mann et al., 1986). Low 5-HTlevels are seen in the amygdala and cingulate cortex, which receive serotonergic projections from the NRC and DRN, both in AD and Down’s syndrome (Yates et al., 1986). NFT in the raphe nuclei are also seen in the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam, Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome, chronic subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, non-Guamanian motor neuron disease and white matter tauopathy with globular glial inclusions (Yamamoto et al., 1985; Mandybur et al., 1990; Hilton et al., 1995; Yamazaki et al., 1999; Kovacs et al., 2008). Further investigations are needed fully to understand the extent of the raphe nuclei involvement in the clinical expression of these tauopathies.

In an animal model for tau aggregation, THY-Tau22 mouse (Schindowski et al., 2006), which expresses human 4R tau mutated at sites Gly272Val and Pro301Ser under a Thy1.2 promotor, and shows hyperphosphorylation of tau on several AD-relevant epitopes and NFT-like inclusions, in addition to the cognitive impairments, at least some BPSD were seen (Van der Jeugd et al., 2013). Namely, in addition to early tau pathology in hippocampus and basal forebrain (Belarbi et al., 2009), 12-month old THY-Tau22 mice, relative to wild-type littermates displayed increased depression-like and aggressive behavior, co-occurring with disturbances in nocturnal activity (Van der Jeugd et al., 2013). These changes were linked to a decreased hippocampal concentration in 5-HT and 5-HIAA (Van der Jeugd et al., 2013).

3.3. Alterations of the noradrenergic, dopaminergic systems, histaminergic, and melatonergic systems in AD

The LC is the main noradrenergic nucleus affected in AD (Zarow et al., 2003), with up to 70% LC neurons being lost in the brain of AD patients (Bondareff et al., 1982; Zweig et al., 1989). The loss of noradrenergic neurons from the LC correlates with the increase of extracellular Aβ deposition in mice (Heneka et al., 2010), neurofibrillary abnormalities in early stage of AD (Grudzien et al., 2007), onset (Counts and Mufson, 2010b), and duration of dementia (Counts and Mufson, 2010). New studies hypothesize that accumulation of heavy metals such as organic mercury in LC may be an early event in AD, since LC neurons are prone to taking up circulating toxins. Mercury leads to the development of AD pathology within the LC, and pathology is spread further to the neighboring raphe neurons. Actually, dorsal raphe neurons in AD subjects often contain as much hyperphosphorylated tau as those in the LC (Pamphlett and Kum Jew, 2015). To date, clinical and experimental evidence indicate that neurons of the LC modulate several processes that are altered in the brains of AD patients, including synaptic plasticity, neuronal metabolism, and BBB permeability, while enhancement of the brain's noradrenergic neurotransmission reduces both neuroinflammation and cognitive decline (Mravec et al., 2014). Importantly, noradrenergic projections from the LC also regulate neurovascular coupling, so that degeneration of LC neurons diminish the ability to couple blood volume to oxygen demand in AD subjects (Bekar et al., 2012). Apart from its role as a neurotransmitter, noradrenaline may also act as an endogeneous anti-inflammatory agent by inhibition of activation of microglial cells (Feinstein et al., 2002), thereby potentially contributing to the pathogenesis of AD. It seems that the inconsistent findings regarding the role of noradrenaline modulators in improving behavioral symptoms (such as agitation and aggression) in AD patients, such as the use of classical α1-adrenoreceptor agonist prazosin (e.g., Gliebus and Lippa, 2007; and Wang et al., 2009), can only be explained by a strong compensatory mechanism, where the increase in noradrenaline is detected in the absence of metabolite increase consistentwith compensatory activation of surviving noradrenergic projections (Raskind et al., 1999). That the activity and levels of plasma DBH are reduced from early stages of AD suggests that treatment with selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors may be helpful in compensating for the loss of noradrenergic activity due to degeneration of neurons in LC in the early stages of AD (Mustapić et al., 2013).

Both the LC and DRN nuclei have been shown to be among the first affected by tau protein abnormalities during the course of AD, causing fluctuating non-cognitive, but also cognitive symptoms of varying degrees of severity (Zweig et al., 1989; for review, see Šimić et al., 2009). In one of the most comprehensive clinicopathological studies that analyzed the earliest AD-related cytoskeletal pathology, 8 of 38 individuals who were categorized as Braak stage 0 and all of the 80 cases characterized as Braak stage 1 or higher than 1 had substantial neurofibrillary changes in the DRN (Grinberg et al., 2009). Braak stages were defined based on the level of neurofibrillary lesions in the transentorhinal cortex. Braak stage 0 had no lesions, stage 1 had rare changes and stages higher than 1 showed more extensive neurofibrillary pathology in the transentorhinal cortex. The finding that all cases of Braak stage 1 and higher, and even a fifth of the cases with Braak stage 0 had neurofibrillary lesions in the brainstem nuclei supports the model in which AD pathology starts in the brainstem and spreads transneuronally to the cortical targets, primarily transentorhinal cortex. This possibility is in agreement with the clinical observations showing that BPSD occur 2–3 years before the onset of cognitive impairment (for review, see Šimić et al., 2009).

Despite the direct harmful effects of hyperphosphorylated soluble tau and progression of intracellular tau protein changes characteristic for AD, as well as their accumulation of heavy metals (Pamphlett and Kum Jew, 2015), many of the tangle-bearing neurons of the LC and DRN are remarkably sturdy and survive for a lifetime (Rüb et al., 2000). Therefore, even when affected by neurofibrillary changes, LC and DRN projecting neurons may release Aβ (Braak and Del Tredici, 2013), as well as soluble monomeric or small oligomeric tau protein, trans-synaptically through M-fibers or, more likely, from the non-synaptic varicosities of their fine D-axons (otherwise dedicated to volume transmission) (Braak and Del Tredici, 2015). As LC and DRN neurons massively project to transentorhinal and entorhinal cortex, it should be also taken into account that they may be contributing to early neurofibrillary changes seen in those regions (Fig. 7), from where tau pathological changes may spread throughout the cerebral cortex. The described presumptive set of events may help explain similarities in size distribution of Aβ deposits in the cerebral cortex of AD subjects and patients with other neurodegenerative disorders (Armstrong, 2012) and the prion-like behavior of misprocessed tau in various tauopathies (de Calignon et al., 2012; Hall et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2012; Avila et al., 2015).

Dopamine, dopamine transporter, L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA), DOPAC, D1 and D2 receptors are reduced in AD brains (Storga et al., 1996; Trillo et al., 2013). Dopamine is also variably decreased in the CSF of AD subjects (Tohgi et al., 1992; Stefani et al., 2015). D1 and D3 receptor polymorphisms have been linked with psychosis and aggression in AD (Holmes et al., 2001), while certain COMT polymorphisms lead to psychosis in AD (Borroni et al., 2004). Biochemical, genetic, and animal models studies have also documented alterations of the dopaminergic system in AD. Both double mutant APP mice and 3xTg-AD mouse models of AD have reduced dopamine release in the hippocampus and insular cortex (Ambree et al., 2009; Guzman-Ramos et al., 2012). In conclusion, cognitive impairment in AD may, at least in part, be also mediated through deficit in dopaminergic transmission.

Neuropathological changes characteristic for AD are pronounced in tuberomammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus (Braak et al., 1993). These changes may condition disturbances in sleep and thermoregulation in AD patients. The acetylcholinesterase inhibitor tacrine (1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-9-acridinamine monohydrochloride), used as a symptomatic treatment in AD, also increases the levels of histamine by activation of histaminergic hypothalamic neurons and inhibition of histamine-N-methyltransferase (Taraschenko et al., 2005). Histamine H3R antagonists also enhance the release of histamine in the brain. An effect of H3R antagonists on acetylcholine, noradrenaline, and dopamine levels that also modulate cognition has been reported (Medhurst et al., 2007; Galici et al., 2009). As such, H3R antagonists were tested in preclinical and clinical trials for their effect on cognitive processes in AD (see Table 3; for review see Brioni et al., 2011).

The production of melatonin from the pineal gland decreases with the increasing age (Pandi-Perumal et al., 2005). This is relevant as age is the main predisposing factor in AD. The fact that melatonin secretion is also decreased in AD is thus not surprising (Mishima et al., 1999). Decreased melatonin levels in cerebrospinal fluid in preclinical AD could serve as an early biomarker of AD (Zhou et al., 2003). Additionally, patients with the APOE ε4/ε4 genotype have a more prominent melatonin decrease (Liu et al., 1999). Decrease in melatonin secretion results in heightened afternoon agitation seen in so many AD patients (Volicer et al., 2001), sleep disturbance, and circadian rhythm disorganization in patients with AD. In the elderly, melatonin mainly promotes non-rapid eye movement (non-REM) restorative phases of sleep (Monti et al., 1999). In addition to melatonin antioxidant effects, its anti-amyloid properties were also observed. Melatonin inhibits Aβ generation, formation of amyloid fibrils, and protects cells from Aβ-mediated toxicity (Matsubara et al., 2003; Feng et al., 2004). Melatonin receptors MT2 also appear to be important in mechanisms of hippocampal learning and memory in mice (Larson et al., 2006).

3.4. Interactions among monoaminergic systems and with the cholinergic system in AD

Monoaminergic systems are not functioning independently. In fact, their interconnection is obvious at both the anatomical and molecular levels. Often different monoaminergic systems innervate the same brain regions and their fibres together share pathways in the brain, the most obvious example being the medial forebrain bundle. The control of the sleep-wake cycle is mainly regulated by the noradrenergic LC (REM sleep), and the serotonergic DRN and cholinergic pedunculopontine and lateral dorsal tegmental nuclei (non-REM sleep; Arslan, 2015). The serotonergic and melatonergic systems are closely related at the molecular level, 5-HT being the precursor of melatonin (Axelrod, 1974; Namboodiri et al., 1987). Association of the serotonergic and dopaminergic systems also occurs in the activation of 5-HT1B receptors leading to increase of dopamine release in the brain (Gonzalez-Burgos and Feria-Velasco, 2008), while neonatal lesions of raphe nuclei cause compensatory increase in number of dopaminergic fibers in adult rats (Bolte Taylor et al., 1998). Association of histaminergic system with other monoaminergic systems has been shown, for example H3R antagonists stimulate 5-HT, noradrenergic and dopaminergic neurotransmission (Flik et al., 2015). Trillo et al. (2013) elaborated that monoaminergic systems are especially vulnerable in AD due to: 1) the fact that the number of monoaminergic neurons is low in the brain, 2) having long, unmyelinated axons, monoaminergic neurons have increased vulnerability to abnormalities of anterograde or retrograde transport, and 3) monoaminergic fibers innervate many regions affected by amyloid and tau pathology. Besides the possibility that plaques and NFT could damage monoaminergic nerve endings, Aβ and tau could be also retrogradely transported back to their cell bodies (Trillo et al., 2013). Finally, degeneration of the cholinergic neurons is one of the main features of late-stage AD. As the cholinergic system is most important for the generation and modulation of the event related potential component P300 wave (since its initial discovery, it has been shown that it has two components - P3a – related to novelty, and the classic P300, which has been renamed P3b), some parts of the cholinergic magnocellular chain of nuclei that can be of particular clinical significance for non-invasive diagnostics and follow-up of AD subjects could be those rostro-lateral parts of the basal nucleus involved in innervation of the cortical speech areas (Šimić et al., 1999; Boban et al., 2006; Raghanti et al., 2011). Blockade of serotonergic and cholinergic systems leads to loss of learning and memory abilities in rats (Vanderwolf, 1987). Garcia-Alloza et al. (2005) postulated that imbalance of cholinergic and serotonergic system contributes to both cognitive and behavioral symptoms in AD patients. Interdependence of monoaminergic and cholinergic systems can also be seen as a possibility to create potential multifunctional therapeutics for AD treatment in the future. For example, ladostigil, is a reversible AChE and butyrylcholinersterase (BuChE) inhibitor and an irreversible MAO-B inhibitor that combines the mechanisms of action of older drugs rivastigmine (an AChEI) and rasagiline (MAO-B inhibitor) into a single molecule, which also enhances the expression of neurotrophic factors BDNF and glia-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and shows beneficial effects in neurodegenerative rat models (Weinreb et al., 2012). Another example could be the compound ASS234, a multipotent drug that inhibits monoamine oxidase enzymes (MAO A and B), AChE and BuChE, Aβ aggregation, protects cells from Aβ-induced apoptosis, and shows antioxidant properties (Bolea et al., 2013). Therapeutics targeting of cholinergic system only can also show beneficial effects on monoaminergic systems. Treatment with tacrine, an AChEI, increased histamine release in the brain (Taraschenko et al., 2005). Additionally, therapeutics tested for treatment of AD and targeting one monoaminergic system can influence another, such as the supposedly antihistaminic drug latrepirdine, which besides its autophagy-enhancing properties (Steele and Gandy, 2013) has also shown affinity for 5-HT receptors, adrenoreceptors, and dopamine receptors (Okun et al., 2010).

3.5. Monoamine-based treatments in AD

Numerous potential AD therapeutics targeting the serotonergic system have been tested in preclinical and clinical trials (Table 3). 5-HT is seen as having indirect influences on neuronal degeneration and memory deficits (Jia et al., 2014). 5-HT1A, 5-HT4, and 5-HT6 receptors are even considered as novel therapeutic targets in AD (Ramirez et al., 2014). Lecozotan, a 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, was a very promising drug in preclinical and clinical studies, but due to adverse effects failed in phase II of clinical trials (Sabbagh, 2009). Nevertheless, partial agonists of the 5-HT1A receptor, tandospirone and buspirone, are useful in the treatment of BPSD (Salzman, 2001; Sato et al., 2007). Additionally, 5-HT4 receptor agonists increased the release of acetylcholine and reduce Aβ in both preclinical and phase I clinical trials (PF-04995274, PRX-3140, RQ-9; Ramirez et al., 2014). Pharmacological activation of the 5-HT4 receptor by the SSP-002392 compound decreased production and deposition of Aβ in the hAPP/PS1 mouse model of AD, making it another potential AD therapeutic (Tesseur et al., 2013; Pimenova et al., 2014). Interestingly, although they have not found evidence for a direct α-secretase stimulation neither in vivo nor in vitro, De Strooper and collaborators (Tesseur et al., 2013; Pimenova et al., 2014) explained their findings by stating that activation of 5-HT4 receptors had probably stimulated α-secretase activity, which in turn increased non-amyloidogenic proteolysis of APP responsible for the observed decreased soluble and insoluble Aβ concentrations measured (both in cultured human neuroblastoma cells and in the hippocampus of the hAPP/PS1 mouse model of AD). Because Aβ may leak from serotonergic afferents (Braak and Del Tredici, 2013), an alternative and much simpler explanation not considered by the authors would be that it is a decreased activity of the originating serotonergic neurons (due to a pharmacological overstimulation of their target receptors), with consequent decreased Aβ leakage and deposition, responsible for the observed lower concentrations of Aβ (rather than due to a shift in APP processing, as the authors tried to explain). Besides the mentioned ones, several different 5-HT6 receptor antagonists are also currently in clinical trials as drug candidates for AD (Table 3). Because 5-HT6 antagonists were reported to rescue anticholinergic drug-induced amnesia (Hirst et al., 2003), evidence indicates that inhibition of 5-HT6 receptors could facilitate acetylcholine release and, via elevated cholinergic activity, improve memory and learning deficits. Two new agents, PRX-03140 (a 5-HT4 antagonist) and SB-742457 (a 5-HT6 antagonist), have also recently completed phase II trials, whereas LuAE58054, an antagonist of the 5-HT6 receptor, has progressed to a phase III trial with 930 mild to moderate AD patients, in combination with the AChEI donepezil (Jia et al., 2014).

Drugs targeting the noradrenergic system have mainly been used in ameliorating behavioral symptoms in AD, like the α1-adrenoreceptor agonist prazosin (Wang et al., 2009), the β-adrenoreceptor antagonist propranolol (Shankle et al., 1995) for aggression and agitation, and the antidepressant imipramine (Reifler et al., 1989) and venlafaxine (NCT01609348) for depression, as well as β-blockers for slowing cognitive decline (Hajjar et al., 2005; Khachaturian et al., 2006; Rosenberg et al., 2008). Preclinical studies have shown that drugs targeting the noradrenergic system can in fact reduce amyloid burden and neuroinflammation (reviewed in Chalermpalanupap et al., 2013). α2-Adrenoreceptor antagonists improved memory deficits in aged mice (piperoxane; Zornetzer et al., 1998) and APP/PS1 mice (fluparoxan; Scullion et al., 2011), while the β3-adrenoreceptor agonist CL316243 improved learning in chicks impaired by the injection of Aβ42 (Gibbs et al., 2010). The noradrenaline precursor L-thre-odihydroxyphenylserine (L-DOPS) showed very good results in improving memory of APP transgenic mice (Heneka et al., 2010) and DBH−/−, APP/PS1 double-mutant mice (Hammerschmidt et al., 2013) and in reducing Aβ burden in 5xFAD mice (Kalinin et al., 2012). By taking into account the beneficial effects of L-DOPS in animal models of AD, its effects on cognitive functions of demented patients should be further investigated. The efficacy of noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors atomoxetine (used in the treatment of attention-deficit disorder) and reboxetine (used in depression) in the treatment of demented patients is currently in clinical trials. Phase II trials on the effect of atomoxetine on CSF biomarkers of AD in MCI patients is ongoing, whereas the effect of reboxetine in treatment of patients with dementia is investigated along with other potential therapeutics in a large multicenter study currently in phase III of clinical trials (Table 3).

Cognitive impairment in AD can be partially restored by levodopa and dopamine agonists (Martorana et al., 2013). The dopamine agonist rotigotine was shown to be effective in restoring LTP-like cortical plasticity in AD patients (Koch et al., 2014). This finding is not surprising as pharmacological experiments demonstrated the efficacy of the non-selective dopamine agonist apomorphine in reverting perturbed behavioural tasks (such as water-maze) due to oxidopamine-induced parkinsonism in rodents (Brusa et al., 2003), promoting Aβ degradation and protecting of hippocampal neurons from oxidative stress (Himeno et al., 2011). The MAO-B inhibitor selegiline was also considered as a promising therapeutic for AD (Tariot et al., 1987), but it was rejected from further use as it failed to show beneficial effect on cognitive and behavioral functions in AD patients (Burke et al., 1993; Freedman et al., 1998). An effect of many dopaminergic drugs sought in the treatment of AD is to reduce apathy, a behavioral symptom in about 70% of patients (Mitchell et al., 2011). Dopamine uptake inhibitors dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate (Herrmann et al., 2008), used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and the antidepressant bupropion have been tested for treatment of apathy in AD. Haloperidol, an antipsychotic D2 receptor antagonist has been tested in phase IV clinical trials for treatment of psychosis and agitation in AD. The antipsychotic risperidone, a dopamine receptor antagonist, was tested for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions, and agitation and aggression in AD patients. A currently ongoing phase IV clinical trial is testing the effect of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) for treatment of apathy in AD (Table 3).

The research for potential therapeutics targeting histaminergic system in AD focused on histamine H3R antagonists. Seven H3R antagonists showed beneficial effects on cognition in preclinical models: thioperamide, BF2.649, ABT-239, ABT-288, GSK189254, JNJ-10181457 and PF-03654746 (see Table 3; for review, see Brioni et al., 2011). In clinical studies, the H3R antagonist ABT-288 was shown to be safe in healthy elderly subjects and demonstrated efficacy across several cognitive domains (Haig et al., 2014). However, the drug failed in patients with mild to moderate AD (Haig et al., 2012). A pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) study showed that MK-0249, a histamine H3R inverse agonist, could not improve cognition in mild to moderate AD (Egan et al., 2012). However, the histamine H3R antagonist GSK239512 improved episodic memory in mild to moderate AD patients, but had no effect on executive function and working memory (Grove et al., 2014). This suggests that H3R antagonists can selectively affect cognitive function in AD patients (Grove et al., 2014). The H2R antagonist nizatidine failed to show any benefical effect in AD (Carlson et al., 2002).

Therapeutic effects of melatonin in AD have been tested in 14 trials including AD patients and 8 trials including MCI patients (reviewed in Cardinali et al., 2014). Melatonin supplementation slows the progression of cognitive impairment in AD and MCI patients, ameliorates sundowning and improves sleep (reviewed in Cardinali et al., 2010). A search of ClinicalTrials.gov on 15th February 2016 yielded two studies that tested the effect of melatonin on cognitive functions in MCI patients (phase II) and sleep disturbance associated with AD (phase III). However, some clinical trials in AD patients showed no effects of melatonin on sleep disturbance and agitation (Serfaty et al., 2002; Gehram et al., 2009), suggesting that its efficacy in AD should be further investigated possibly at higher doses (Cardinali et al., 2014). The focus of recent studies is the development of melatonin analogs that could prolong the effect of melatonin. The effect of prolonged-release melatonin on patients with mild to moderate AD is in phase II of clinical trials (Table 3).

4. Conclusions

Pathological changes in monoaminergic nuclei, particularly the noradrenergic LC and serotonergic DRN, but also dopaminergic, histaminergic and melatonergic nuclei and pathways, observed during the early course of AD probably have a profound influence not only on the complex symptoms and pathogenesis in AD, but also in other primary and secondary tauopathies, especially FTD (Boban et al., 2010). The link between depression and AD, depression being a frequent preclinical manifestation of AD, is important in this context. Association of depressive symptoms with hippocampal volume reduction in early stages of AD (Šimić et al., 1997), as well as hypometabolism and an increased risk for neurocognitive disorder or dementia, further strengthen the concept of depression as a risk factor for neurodegeneration in general (Brendel et al., 2015).

One of the problems surrounding depression is that many of its primary symptoms (such as low self-esteem, depressed mood, suicidal ideation, guilt) are by nature difficult to measure in animals. However, the lack of interest in pleasurable experiences may be similar to anhedonia in laboratory animals (Anisman and Matheson, 2005), which can be assessed by a variety of tests, including those based on food consumption and sucrose preference.

Another important connection is disruption of the sleep-wake cycle in AD, which is also most probably caused by the neuropathological changes of the DRN (mostly involved in non-REM sleep) and LC (mostly involved in REM sleep). Both of these brainstem nuclei are among the first to be affected by tau protein abnormalities in the course of LOAD, causing behavioral and cognitive symptoms of variable severity. The possibility that most of the tangle-bearing neurons of the LC and DRN may still release Aβ as well as soluble monomeric or small oligomeric tau protein trans-synaptically by their diffuse projections to the cerebral cortex warrants further investigations of the monoaminergic systems in AD.

In conclusion, evidence from human and animal studies suggest that alterations in serotonergic and noradrenergic transmission may be the link to the early mood, aggression, feeding, and sleep changes observed in AD patients (Šimić et al., 2009). Therefore, expanding our understanding of the brainstem nuclei, particularly the LC and DRN involvement in the early stages of AD to functional concepts beyond neuropathological descriptions, will likely have a significant impact on diagnosis and tracking of AD progression as well as on development of biomarkers, novel therapeutic targets, and preventive strategies. One of the recent breaktroughs in that direction was the successful visualization of the DRN using PET imaging of 5-HT1A receptor binding (Kranz et al., 2012). Other potential pharmacological interventions directed mainly at serotonergic system targets are expected to alleviate symptoms of neurodegeneration, and to expand our understanding of the relationship between monoaminergic systems and the pathogenesis of AD.

A more comprehensive assessment of the genome and improvements in understanding of how the epigenomic influences change the methylome and structure of chromatine through histone protein modifications will enable detection of the early molecular networks that drive AD pathology. Because the human DNA methylomes of different neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, share common epigenomic patterns, at least for the prefrontal cortex (Sanchez-Mut et al., 2016), a key challenge for future studies will be to describe how genetic and environmental interactions shape epigenetic changes of genes related to monoaminergicand other neurotransmitter systems, and their differential vulnerability to AD. Moreover, an evaluation of younger subjects with life experiences such as depression will also be necessary to investigate the role of non-genetic factors to delineate more precisely the cause-effect relationships of molecular events that lead to dementia. Fortunately, the approval of epigenetic drugs for cancer (Adwan and Zawia, 2013) paves the road for the development of such drugs for other disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.

This work was supported by The Croatian Science Foundation grant. no. IP-2014-09-9730 ("Tau protein hyperphosphorylation, aggregation, and trans-synaptic transfer in Alzheimer’s disease: cerebrospinal fluid analysis and assessment of protective neuroprotective compounds") and European Cooperation in Science and Technology (COST) Action CM1103 ("Stucture-based drug design for diagnosis and treatment of neurological diseases: dissecting and modulating complex function in the monoaminergic systems of the brain"). PRH is supported in part by NIH grant P50 AG005138.

Abbreviations

2OG 2-oxoglutarate

5-HT 5-hydroxytryptamine

5-HIAA 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid

5mC 5-methylcytosine

α-KG α-ketoglutarate

AAAD aromatic-L-amino acid decarboxylase

AANAT aralkylamine N-acetyltransferase

AAS ascending arousal system

Aβ amyloid β

AChE acetylcholinesterase

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ADI Alzheimer’s Disease International

ADAM10 a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10

ADL activities of daily living

AgD argyrophilic grain disease

Alu Alu (repetitive) element

AMPAR α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors

AP amyloid plaques

APOE apolipoprotein E

APP amyloid precursor protein

ASMT N-Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase

ATP adenosine triphosphate

BACE β-site APP cleaving enzyme

BBB blood-brain barrier

BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor

BF Bayes factor

BMAA β-methylamino-l-alanine

BPSD behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia

BuChE butyrilcholinesterase

CAA cerebral amyloid angiopathy

CADASIL cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy

CDR Clinical Dementia Rating

CERAD Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s disease

ChAT choline acetyltransferase

CHIP carboxyl-terminus of Hsp70 interacting protein

COMT Catechol-O-methyltransferase

CSF cerebrospinal fluid

CVD cerebrovascular diseases

DBH dopamin-β-hydroxylase

DLB dementia with Lewy bodies

DMN default-mode network

DRN dorsal raphe nucleus

DRN-CC dorsal raphe nucleus, pars caudalis compacta

DRN-CL dorsal raphe nucleus, caudal lamellar subnucleus

DRN-IF dorsal raphe nucleus, pars interfascicularis

DRN-ST dorsal raphe nucleus, pars supratroclearis

DSM Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders

ELISA Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay

FTD frontotemporal dementia

FTLD frontotemporal lobar degneration

GWAS genome-wide association study

HCHWA-D hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis – Dutch type

HDC histidine decarboxylase

HLA human leukocyte antigen

HMT histamine N-methyltransferase

HS hippocampal sclerosis

HSV1 herpes simplex virus type 1

LBD Lewy body disease

LC locus coeruleus

L-DOPA L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine

LINE-1 long interspersed (repetitive) element 1

LTD long-term depression

LTP long-term potentiation

MAO-A monoamine oxidase A

MAPT microtubule-associated protein tau

MCI mild cognitive impairment

miRNA microRNA

MMSE Mini-Mental State Examination

MRI magnetic resonance imaging

mtDNA mitochondrial DNA

NFT neurofibrillary tangles

NIA/AA National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association

NINCDS-ADRDA National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke – Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association

NMDAR N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors

NRC-A nucleus raphe centralis, pars annularis

NRC-P nucleus raphe centralis, pars principalis

NRD nucleus raphe dorsalis

NP neuritic plaques

NRL nucleus raphe linearis

NRM nucleus raphe magnus

NRO nucleus raphe obscures

NRP nucleus raphe pallidus

NT neuropil threads

PART primary age-related tauopathy

PD Parkinson’s disease

PET positron emission tomography

PHF paired helical filaments

PP2A protein phosphatase 2A

PSEN presenilin

PSP progressive supranuclear palsy

RCT randomized controlled trial

REM sleep rapid eye movement sleep

rs reference single nucleotide polymorphism

rTMS repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation

Sat-α Satellite-α repetitive element

SCN suprachiasmatic nucleus

SDS sodium dodecylsulfate

SF straight filaments

SN substantia nigra

SNc substantia nigra pars compacta

SP senile plaques

SPECT single-photon emission computed tomography

SWS slow-wave sleep

TACE TNF-α converting enzyme

TH tyrosine hydroxylase

TNF-α tumor necrosis factor alpha

TPSD tangle-predominant senile dementia

TPH tryptophan hydroxylase

VBI vascular brain injury

VTA ventral tegmental area

WHO World Health Organization

Fig. 1 Amyloid plaques, as revealed by Campbell-Switzer-Martin's method. The anterior part of the parahippocampal gyrus of an 84-year-old woman who died 3.5 years after the clinical diagnosis of AD was made. Scale bar = 1 mm.

Fig. 2 Neurofibrillary changes in AD. Modified silver staining of the CA1 field from the body of the hippocampus of an 84-year-old woman, who died 3.5 years after clinical diagnosis of AD was made. NP = neuritic plaque. Numbers designate groups or "classes" of neurons with neurofibrillary changes, as defined and described in Braak et al., 1994b: 2 = early rod-like argyrophilic inclusions in the soma, 3 = typical developed NFT, which fills almost the whole cytoplasm and therefore acquires the shape of the neuron („flame-like“ appearance in the case of this pyramidal neuron), 4 = early extracellular NFT (such tangles are called „tombstone“ or „ghost“ tangles because the neurons have died and only the NFT remain), 5 = late extracellular tangle. Scale bar = 100 µm.

Figure 3 Vizualization of the hyperphosphorylated tau protein by using antibody AT8. A. The earliest detectable changes: hyperphosphorylated tau is localized in somatodendritic compartment of an isolated layer III pyramidal neuron in the transentorhinal cortex of a cognitively normal 59-year-old adult person. According to the criteria put forward in Braak et al. 1994b, such neurons belong to the group 1 neurons (they cannot be revealed by silver staining as they are bearing no tangle, just containing hyperphosphorylated tau). It is not known whether this change is reversible. B. Enlarged image from A. Note evenly distributed AT8-immunoreactive material in soma and all neuronal processes as well as grossly normal neuronal morphology. C. A group of temporal cortex pyramidal neurons in advanced stages of neurofibrillary degenerative changes in the brain of a 73-year old subject with a 7-year history of AD. A spectrum of conspicuous cytoskeletal alterations is visible in all five neurons (belonging to all groups/“classes“ neurons according to Braak et al., 1994, except group 5 end-stage neurons when their AT8 immunoreactivity is gone). All of these neurons also show argyrophilia, meaning that their neurofibrillary tangles can be revealed by using silver stainging methods. D. AT8 - immunoreactivity in 'granules' and tortuous apical and basal dendrites of granule cells of the hippocampal dentate gyrus of the same subject as in C. Perikarya of granule cells are rarely AT8-positive and do not usually contain typical NFT (even in cases with long-lasting history of AD), perhaps because this special neuronal type does not express MAPT mRNAs containing exon 10 (4R isoforms), supposedly conferring their resistance to neurofibrillary changes. Scale bars = 100 µm.

Fig. 4 The Braak’s staging system (Braak and Braak, 1991). The topographic progression of AD classifies neurofibrillary degeneration in 6 stages, spreading from the transentorhinal region to the hippocampal formation (initial stages I and II, which clinically correlates with subjective or objective impairment of memory for recent events and mild spatial disorientation, but with preservation of general cognitive functioning without or with minimum impairment of activities of daily living), then to the temporal, frontal, and parietal neocortex (intermediate stages III and IV, which correlates with impaired recall, delayed word recall and word finding difficulties, disorientation in time and space, and impaired concentration, comprehension and conceptualization, among other symptoms of dementia), and finally to unimodal and primary sensory and motor areas of the neocortex (late stages V and VI, which roughly correlates with disturbances in object recognition, and other perceptual and motor skills). Braak staging system can be reduced to four with improved inter-rater reliability (Nagy et al., 1998): B0: no NFT, B1: Braak stages I/II, with NFT predominantly in entorhinal cortex and closely related areas, B2: stages III/IV, with NFTs more abundant in hippocampus and amygdala while extending slightly into the association cortex, and B3: stages V/VI, with NFT, neuropil threads and dystrophic neurites widely distributed throughout the neocortex and ultimately involving primary motor and sensory areas.

Figure 5 Schematic drawing of monoaminergic nuclei (except histaminergic and melatonergic cell groups). A1–A7 denote noradrenergic cell groups (A3 is missing in primates), A8–A16 dopaminergic cell groups (A11 is missing in humans, whereas retinal dopaminergic neurons are sometimes denoted as A17 group), B1–B9 serotonergic cell groups (B4 is missing in primates), whereas C1 and C2 denote adrenergic cell groups (C3 group is not present in humans). Histamine neurons in humans are located exclusively in tuberomammilary nucleus (stippled area caudal to A12). Melatonin neurons are located in the pineal gland (stippled area posterior to LGN). Emphasis is given on a rough sketch of two main ascending serotonergic systems: M-fibres with coarse varicosities take their origin from the nucleus raphe pontis (dorsalis, B6, purple lines) and nucleus raphe pallidus (B1, light blue lines) as well as from the nucleus raphe pontis medianus (B5) to a lesser extent (fibers from B5 not drawn) ascending through the tegmental area as the ventral bundle (vb), whereas fibres with small varicosities arise from NRD (light green lines, B7) and nucleus raphe magnus (dark green lines, B3) and collect in a dorsal bundle (db). Large serotonergic axons of the ventral bundle make synaptic contact with their targets, whereas fine axons with small varicosities release serotonin diffusely (volume transmission). AMY, amygdala; BF, basal forebrain; LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; db, dorsal bundle of serotonergic fibers; EC, entorhinal cortex; HIPP, hippocampus; OB, olfactory bulb; NPF, nucleus parafascicularis; PFC, prefrontal cortex; S, septum; vb, ventral bundle of serotonergic fibers; see Table 1 for the designation of the serotonergic cells groups and their afferent and efferent connections. See text for detailed description.

Fig. 6 Bielschowsky silver staining (left panel) and Gallyas silver iodide staining (right panel) of the supratrochlear part of the nucleus raphe dorsalis (NRD) of a 69-year-old woman with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), who had also documented several behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD). Although silver staining seems not to show many changes, on one of the adjacent sections from the same block of tissue more sensitive Gallyas silver iodide reveals a plethora of neurofibrillary changes, including NFT and degenerating neurites. Scale bars = 100 µm.

Figure 7 Schematic drawing of a speculative spreading of tau pathology from LC and DRN to the transentorhinal/entorhinal cortex.

Table 1 Overview on the main serotonergic cells groups, their afferent and efferent projections, and functional consequences of their lesion or dysfunction.

The designation of
the serotonergic
cell group	The name of the
raphe nucleus
where the
appropriate
serotonergic cell
group is located	Location
of the
cell
group	Main afferent
projections	Main efferent
projections	Consequences
elicited due to
a lesion	
Caudal raphe group	B1	Nucleus raphe
pallidus	
Medulla
oblongata	PAG, reticular formation,
parabrachial n. (Kölliker-Fuse),
hypothalamus, preoptic area,
PFC	Laminae I, II and V of the
dorsal horns of the spinal
cord, intermediolateral
column of the spinal cord,
sensory nuclei of the brain
stem, superior colliculus,
praetectal nn., intralaminar
thalamic nn., preoptic nn.,
motoneurons of the
anterior horn of the spinal
cord (via fibers in the
lateral and ventral
funiculus) including Onuf’s
nucleus (Rexed’s lamina IX)	Loss of pain-
controlling input
from PAG to the
spinal cord;
changes in
excitability of
cranial and spinal
motoneurons	
B2	Nucleus raphe
obscurus	Loss of regulation
of sympathetic
system, especially
regarding
cardiovascular
functions; changes
in excitability of
cranial and spinal
motoneurons	
B3	Nucleus raphe
magnus	Spinal trigeminal n., gracile n.
and cuneate n., PAG, LC
(=noradrenergic nucleus A6), n.
cuneiformis, gigantocellular
reticular n., superior colliculus,
inferior colliculus, pretectal nn.,
hypothalamus, parafascicular
thalamic n., hypothalamus,
preoptic area,lateral habenular
n., central n. of amygdala, zona
incerta, BNST, PFC	Sensory nuclei of the brain
stem, cranial motor nuclei,
LC (=noradrenergic nucleus
A6), superior colliculus,
praetectum, intralaminar
thamalic nn., preoptic area,
septum, hypothalamus
(ventromedial,
suprachiasmatic),
putamen, caudate n.,
amygdala, mammillary
bodies, hippocampal
formation, SN, olfactory
cortex, lateral geniculate
nucleus, habenula,
parabrachialis n.,
noradrenergic nuclei A7
and A5, solitary nucleus,
dorsal horn of the spinal
cord (laminae I and II) via
fibers in the dorsolateral
funiculus (Lissauer’s tract),
intermediolateral n.	Lack of
endogeneous
analgesia (i.e.
inhibition of
nociceptive
transmission in the
superficial laminae
of the caudal
spinal nucleus of
the trigeminal
nerve and the
spinal dorsal
horn),
diminished motor
response to
nociceptive stimuli	
Rostral (oral) raphe group	B5	Pontine raphe
nucleus (median
and dorsal)	Pons	Solitary nucleus, PAG, SN,
interpeduncular n.,
hypothalamus, preoptic area,
lateral habenular n., vental
pallidum, BNST, medial septal
n., nucleus of diagonal band (of
Broca), PFC	Cranial motor nuclei,
cerebellum, LC,
hypothalamus, septum,
hippocampus, entorhinal
cortex, limbic cortex	low mood, low
self-esteem
(hopelessness and
pessimism)	
B6	
B7	Dorsal raphe
nucleus
(NRD)	Mesen-
cephalon	Solitary nucleus, laterodorsal
tegmental n. (cholinergic
nucleus Ch6), SN, pontine raphe
n., LC (= noradrenergic nucleus
A6), parabrachialis n. (Kölliker-
Fuse), VTA, hypothalamus, tuber
cinereum and nuclei tuberis,
preoptic area, lateral habenular
n., central nucleus of amygdala,
ventral pallidum, zona incerta,
BNST, nucleus of the diagonal
band (of Broca), PFC	Cerebral cortex, especially
transentorhinal and
entorhinal cortex
(especially from ST, IF, and
CC), hippocampal
formation (especially from
NRC), and PFC (especially
from
NRL, NRC, NRD CC and CL),
olfactory bulb, striatum
(including caudate n.,
putamen, n. accumbens,
ventral pallidum, and
especially globus pallidus),
septum, amygdala
(especially central n.),
BNST, intralaminar
thalamic nn., thalamic
relay nn., lateral
parabrachial n., retina,
pretectum and superior
colliculus, SN, n. raphe
magnus, n. raphe pallidus,
pedunculopontine n.,
cranial motor nuclei,
sensory nuclei of the brain
stem, spinal cord	Mood changes
(most often
depressive
symptoms),
anxiety, abnormal
conditioned fear
response, social
withdrawal,
confusion,
irritability,
agitation,
restlessness and
aggression (first
verbal then also
physical),
disturbances in
wake-sleep cycle
(“sundowning”),
disturbances of
NREM sleep,
emotion and
appetite; oppose
the action of
dopamine and
mediate avoidance
of threats;
impaired function
sensitizes the
dopamine system
resulting in
impulsivity and
drug addiction)	
B8	
B9	
Legend: BNST, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; CC, NRD pars caudalis compacta; CL, NRD pars caudalis lamellaris; IF, NRD pars interfascicularis; LC, locus coeruleus; PAG, periaqueductal gray matter; NRD, nucleus raphe dorsalis; NRC, nucleus raphe centralis; NREM, non-rapid eye movement sleep (sleep stages 1–3); NRL, nucleus raphe linearis; SN, substantia nigra; ST, NRD pars supratrochlearis; VTA, ventral tegmental area. Caution: data on the connections of the raphe nuclei (and also other monoaminergic cell groups were mostly collected in rodents and carnivores, while observations in humans and non-human primates are rare). The table is based mainly upon Nieuwenhuys et al., 2008; Michelsen et al., 2008, and Arslan, 2015.

Table 2 Overview of the involvement of the monoaminergic systems in animal models of Alzheimer’s disease and humans.

Monoaminergic
system	Component of
monoaminergic
system in
Alzheimer’s
disease	Animal studies	Human subject research	
In vivo	Postmortem	
Serotonergic system	Serotonin
innervation
(fibers),
serotonin, SERT,
serotonin
metabolites and
enzymes	Progressive degeneration and loss of
forebrain afferent 5-HT fibers in
APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of AD (Liu et al., 2008)

No 5-HT fiber degeneration and SERT
reduction in APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of
AD (Holm et al., 2010)

Increased density of 5-HT afferent terminals
to hippocampal CA1 field with abnormal 5-
HT fiber sprouting in 3×Tg-AD mouse model
of AD (Noristani et al., 2011)	Decreased levels of serotonin, its precursor 5-HTP,
and its major metabolite 5-HIAA in CSF in AD
(Soininen et al., 1981; Volicer et al., 1985; Zubenko et al., 1986; Bareggi et al., 1982; Blennow et al., 1992; Sjogren et al., 1998)

Increased levels of 5-HIAA in CSF in AD (Zubenko et al., 1986; van der Cammen et al., 2006)

No change in 5-HIAA levels in CSF in AD (Stuerenburg et al., 2004)	Significantly decreased concentration of 5-HT in
amygdala, caudate nucleus, putamen, and temporal
cortex in postmortem AD brains (Nazarali and Reynolds, 1992)

Significantly decreased concentration of 5-HIAA in
amygdala and caudate nucleus in postmortem AD
brains (Nazarali and Reynolds, 1992)

Reduced levels of 5-HT and 5-HIAA in postmortem AD
brains (Gottfries et al., 1986)

Reduced levels of 5-HT and 5-HIAA in postmortem
samples of frontal and temporal cortex in AD subjects
(Palmer et al., 1987; Garcia-Alloza et al., 2005)

ChAT/5-HT ratio in frontal and temporal cortex
correlated with MMSE scores in 22 AD patients,
whereas AChE/5-HT and ACh/5-HT correlated with
MMSE decline in female patients (Garcia-Alloza et al., 2005)

Negative correlation of 5-HIAA and tangle formation in
temporal and frontal cortex in AD subjects (Palmer et al., 1987)	
Receptors	5-HT4 receptor activation decreases
quantity of both soluble and insoluble Aβ in
the hippocampus of hAPP/PS1 mouse
model of AD (Tesseur et al., 2013)

Significant decrease of 5-HT2A receptor
binding in mPFC of 11-month-old
APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of AD (Holm et al., 2010)	Reduced 5-HT1A receptor binding in the temporal
cortex (Lai et al., 2003), hippocampus (Kepe et al., 2006; Truchot et al., 2008) and parahippocampal
gyrus (Truchot et al., 2008)

Loss of 5-HT2A receptors exceeds loss of loss of
serotonergic projections in early AD (Marner et al., 2012)

Thr102Cys polymorphism in the gene for 5-HT2A
receptor linked to psychosis and psychotic symptoms
in AD patients (Trillo et al., 2013)	Significantly reduced densities of 5-HT1B/1D and 5-HT6
receptors in frontal and temporal cortex of AD
subjects (Garcia Alloza et al., 2004)	
Nuclei	Ectopic cell cycle events that are linked to
neurodegenerative process in AD are
increased in dorsal raphe of 5 AD mice
models (Li et al., 2011)	Association of early occurrence of BPSD in AD with
early pathology of serotonergic raphe nuclei (Borroniet al., 2010; Martorana et al., 2013; Stefani et al., 2015)

Greater loss of DRN neurons in depressed AD
patients (Zweig et al., 1989)	As the source of the ascending 5-HT system, the
involvement of the oral raphe nuclei, particularly DRN,
may be responsible for the early manifestation of the
non-cognitive BPSD in AD (Rüb et al., 2000; Grinberg et al., 2009; for review, see Šimić et al., 2009; Braak and Del Tredici, 2013; Šimić et al., 2014)	
Noradrenergic system	Noradrenaline
innervation
(fibers),
noradrenaline
metabolites and
enzymes	Progressive degeneration and loss of
forebrain afferent NA fibers in
APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of AD (Liu et al., 2008)

Reduced levels of NA within hippocampus,
temporoparietal and frontal cortices, and
cerebellum in TgCRND8 mouse model of
AD, which preceded memory impairment
for objects and behavioral despair in tail
suspension test (Francis et al., 2012)

One-month treatment of 5-month old male
5xFAD transgenic mice with L-DOPS (NA
precursor), increases CNS NA levels and
improves learning in the Morris water maze
task (Kalinin et al., 2012)
	Decreased plasma DBH activity in early AD (Mustapić et al., 2013)

Concentrations of NA and its principal metabolite
MHPG in CSF increased with the progression of
intellectual disability of AD subjects (Tohgi et al., 1992; Elrod et al., 1997)

Reduction of NA and MHPG levels in CSF of AD
subjects (Martignoni et al., 1991; Sjogren et al., 1998)

No change in NA and MHPG levels in CSF of AD
subjects (Parnetti et al., 1992; Blennow et al., 1992)	Decreased concentration of NA in temporal cortex of
AD subjects (Nazarali and Reynolds, 1992)

Decreased concentration of NA in temporal and
frontal cortex of AD subjects (Palmer et al., 1987)

Increased concentration of MHPG in frontal cortex of
AD subjects (Palmer et al., 1987)

Increased ratio of MHPG/NA in temporal cortex of AD
subjects (Palmer et al., 1987)	
Receptors	Decreased density of α1-adrenoreceptors in
olfactory bulb, piriform and somatosensory
cortex of LRP1 mouse model of AD (von Staden, 2014)

Increased density of α2-adrenoreceptors in
olfactory bulb, motor and somatosensory
cortex, striatum, and hippocampus of LRP1,
tg5xFAD and tg5xFAD/LRP1 mice (von Staden, 2014)	α1-adrenoreceptor agonist prazosin showed positive
effects on behavioral symptoms of AD (agitation,
aggression) (Wang et al., 2009)

β1-adrenergic blockers can cause worsening of
delayed memory retrieval in cognitively impaired
patients (Gliebus and Lippa, 2007)	Increased concentration of α2-adrenoreceptors, β1-
and β2-adrenoreceptors in cerebellar cortex of
aggressive AD patients in comparison to non-
aggressive patients (Russo-Neustadt and Cotman, 1997)	
Nuclei	Induced degeneration of LC neurons in APP-
transgenic mice resulted in elevated Aβ
deposition, increased expression of
inflammatory mediators, and impaired
microglial Aβ phagocytosis, while supplying
the mice with DOPS (precursor of NE)
restored microglial functions (Heneka et al., 2010)	Subjects with AD complicated by depression had
significantly fewer LC neurons than non-depressed
cases (Zweig et al., 1989)	LC is affected by neurofibrillary pathology very early
during the course of AD (Rüb et al., 2000; Grinberg et al., 2009; for review, see Šimić et al., 2009; Braak and Del Tredici, 2013; Šimić et al., 2014; Pamphlett and Kum Jew, 2015)

About 70% of LC neurons lost in the AD brain
(Bondareff et al., 1982; Zweig et al., 1989)	
Dopaminergic system	Dopaminergic
innervation
(fibers),
dopamine
metabolites and
enzymes	Elevated level of dopamine in striatum and
frontal cortex and reduced levels in the
hippocampus (Ambree et al., 2009) and
insular cortex (Guzman-Ramos et al., 2012)
of a murine and 3xTg-AD mouse models of
AD (respectively, compared to wild types)

Increased dopamine levels in the brain after
treatment with L-DOPA in a murine model
of AD (Ambree et al., 2009)	Decreased levels of dopamine, and dopamine
metabolites HVA and DOPAC in CSF in AD (Soininen et al., 1981; Zubenko et al., 1986; Tohgi et al., 1992;
Pinessi et al., 1987; Bareggi et al., 1982; Blennow et al., 1992; Sjogren et al., 1998)

Increased levels of HVA in CSF in AD (Zubenko et al., 1986; van der Cammen et al., 2006)

No change of HVA (Stuerenburg et al., 2004) and
dopamine levels (Stefani et al., 2015) in CSF in AD

COMT polymorphisms linked with psychosis in AD
(Borroni et al., 2004)	Reduced content of HVA in caudate nucleus of AD
subjects (Nazarali and Reynolds, 1992)

Increased concentration of HVA in frontal cortex of AD
patients (Palmer et al., 1987)

Reduced levels of dopamine, dopamine transporter, L-
DOPA and DOPAC in AD brains (Storga et al., 1996; Trillo et al., 2013)	
Receptors	Non-selective dopamine agonist
apomorphine reverted perturbed
behavioral tasks (such as water maze)
caused by 6-OHDA-lesioned rodents
(Stefani et al., 2015)	Polymorphisms in D1 and D3 receptors linked with
psychosis and aggression in AD (Holmes et al., 2001)	Concentrations of L-DOPA, DA, and DOPAC are
significantly reduced in post-mortem brains of AD
subjects (Storga et al., 1996)

Significant reduction in the number of D1 and D2
receptors in the striatum of AD subjects (for review,
see Trillo et al., 2013)

Density of D3 receptors in striatum was found to be
selectively increased in AD subjects with psychosis and
associated with Lewy body pathology (Sweet et al., 2001)	
Nuclei	Allopregnanolone reverses the loss of
dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra
pars compacta in 3xTgAD mouse model of
AD by increasing neurogenesis (Sun et al., 2012)	Loss of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra
associated with decreased binding of dopaminergic
transporter in striatum in vivo using using123I-N-
fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)
nortropane SPECT (Colloby et al., 2012)	Substantia nigra affected by tau pathology in later
stages of AD (Attems et al., 2012)	
Histaminergic system	Histamine,
histamine
metabolites and
enzymes	HDC-knockout mice showed improved
contextual fear conditioning and
hippocampal CA1 long-term potentiation
(Liu et al., 2007)

HDC-knockout mice showed improved
water-maze performance and impairment
in non-reinforced object memory (Dere et al., 2003)	Reversible AChE inhibitor tacrine given to AD
subjects inhibited the activity of HNMT (the
histamine deactivating enzyme), resulting in
increased levels of histamine (Taraschenko et al., 2005)

Slightly decreased t-MeHA levels in CSF of AD
subjects (Motawaj et al., 2010)

H3R antagonists had modest positive effects on
episodic memory in mild to moderate AD subjects,
while no improvements were observed on executive
functions, working memory, and other cognitive
domains (Grove et al., 2014)

H3R antagonists had no effect on cognitive functions
in AD patients (Haig et al., 2012; Egan et al., 2012)

Neurodegenerative pathological changes in
tuberomammillary histaminergic system cause
disturbances of sleep and thermoregulation in

AD patients (for review, see Shan et al., 2013)	Histamine content was significantly reduced in
hypothalamus (42%), hippocampus (43%) and
temporal cortex (53% of control value) in postmortem
AD brains (Panula et al., 1998)	
Receptors	Seven H3R antagonists (thioperamide,
BF2.649, ABT-239, ABT-288, GSK189254,
JNJ-10181457, and PF-03654746) showed
wake-promoting effects and improved
cognitive efficacy in preclinical models of
AD (for review see Brioni et al., 2011)

Knockout mice lacking H1R and H2R showed
impaired maze performance and object
recognition (Dai et al., 2007)	No change of H3R density in frontal and temporal
cortex of AD brains (Medhurst et al., 2009)

Higher binding density of H3R antagonist binding in
frontal cortex of AD patients with more severe
dementia (Medhurst et al., 2009)	
Nuclei		Tuberomammillary hypothalamic area affected
relatively early during the course of AD (Braak et al., 1993)	
Melatonergic system	Melatonin,
melatonin
metabolites and
enzymes	Melatonin inhibits Aβ generation and
formation of amyloid fibrils, and protects
cells from Aβ-mediated toxicity in Tg2576
(Matsubara et al., 2003) and APP 695 (Feng et al., 2004) transgenic mouse model of AD	Early neuropathological AD changes are
accompanied by decreased CSF melatonin levels
(Zhou et al., 2003)

Melatonin receptors MT1 and MT2 agonist ramelteon
suggested as protective against insomnia-induced
neuronal damage in AD (Srinivasan et al., 2010)

Pineal melatonin levels highly correlate with CSF
melatonin levels, which are decreased already in
cognitively intact subjects in preclinical AD with the
earliest neuropathological changes (Braak stages I–II)
(Wu et al., 2013)	Significantly decreased melatonin levels in CSF of AD
patients with ε4/ε4 genotype than in AD patients with
ε3/ε4 genotype (Liu et al., 1999)	
Receptors	Increase of MT2 receptor expression in the
hippocampus of adult male Sprague-Dawley
rats following chronic treatment with
valproic acid (Bahna et al., 2014)	Overall decrease of MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors
in pineal gland and occipital cortex in AD subjects
(Brunner et al., 2006)

Overall intensity of MT2 receptor staining distinctly
decreased in AD hippocampus (Savaskan et al., 2005)	
Nuclei		Decreased nocturnalmelatonin production and
secretion from pineal gland with increasing age (Pandi-Perumal et al., 2005)	
Legend: 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HTP, 5-hydroxytryptophan; 6-OHDA, 6-hydroxydopamine; Aβ, amyloid β protein; ACh, Acetylcholin; AChE, Acetylcholinesterase; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; APOE, apolipoprotein E; APP, amyloid precursor protein; AT8, antibody specific for phospho-tau epitopes Ser202 and Thr205; BA, Brodmann area; BPSD, behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia; ChAT, Cholinacetyltransferase; COMT, Catechol-O-methyltransferase; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CNS, central nervous system; DBH, dopamin-β-hydroxylase; DOPAC, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; DRN, dorsal raphe nucleus; HDC, L-histidine decarboxylase; HNMT, histamine-N-methyltransferase; HVA, homovanilic acid; L-DOPA, L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine; L-DOPS, L-threo-dihydroxyphenylserine; LC, locus coeruleus; MHPG, 3-Methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; mPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; NA, noradrenaline; SERT, serotonin transporter; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography; t-MeHA, tele-methylhistamine

Table 3 Monoamine-based treatments in Alzheimer’s disease.

Monoaminergic
system	Preclinical trials	Clinical trials	
Phase I	Phase II	Phase III	Phase IV	
Serotonergic system	SSP-002392

5-HT4 receptor agonist

(Tesseur et al., 2013)	SR-444

5-HT1A receptor
antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00499200	Lecozotan

5-HT1A receptor antagonist

(Sabbagh, 2009)	Lu AE58054

5-HT6 receptor
antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01955161	Tandospirone

treatment of BPSD

(Sato et al., 2007)	
SB-271046

5-HT6 receptor antagonist

(Da Silva Costa-Aze et al., 2012)	PF-04995274

5-HT4 receptor agonist

(Sawant-Basak et al., 2013)	PRX-3140

5-HT4 receptor agonist

(Shen et al., 2011)

Nanotherapeutics		Buspirone

treatment of BPSD

(Salzman, 2001)	
E-6801

5-HT6 receptor agonist

(Kendall et al., 2011)	RQ-9

5-HT4 receptor agonist
(Fujiuchi et al., 20109)	SB-742457

5-HT6 receptor antagonist
(Maher-Edwards et al., 2011)
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00710684	Escitalopram

SSRI

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02161458	
	PRX-07034

5-HT6 receptor
antagonist
EpixPharmaceuticals	SUVN-502

5-HT6 receptor antagonist

https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02580305		
	AVN-322

5-HT6 receptor antagonist

AvineuroPharmaceuticals	
Dimebon

antihistamine, affinity for 5-HT6
receptor

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00377715	
Noradrenergic system	Piperoxane

α2-adrenoreceptor antagonist

(Zornetzer et al., 1998)		Atomoxetine

noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitor

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01522404	Reboxetine

noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitor

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02374567		
Fluparoxan

α2-adrenoreceptor antagonist

(Scullion et al., 2011)	
CL316243

β3-adrenoreceptor agonist

(Gibbs et al., 2010)	
L-DOPS

Noradrenaline precursor

(Heneka et al., 2010; Kalinin et al., 2012)	
Dopaminergicsystem	Apomorphine

dopamine agonist

(Brusa et al., 2003; Himeno et al., 2011)			Bupropion

dopamine uptake
inhibitor

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01047254	Levodopa

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00306124	
	Risperidone

dopamine receptor
antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00287742	Dextroamphetamine

dopamine uptake inhibitor

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00254033	
	Haloperidol

D2 receptor antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00009217 and
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00000179	
Risperidone

dopamine receptor
antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00417482 and

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00208819	
Histaminergic system	Thioperamide

H3R antagonist

(Prast et al., 1996)	GSK239512

H3R antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00675090	GSK239512

H3R antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01009255			
BF2.649

H3R antagonist

(Ligneau et al., 2007)	PF-03654746

H3R antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01028911	ABT-288

H3R antagonist

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01018875	
ABT-239

H3R antagonist

(Fox et al., 2005			
GSK189254

H3R antagonist

(Medhurst et al., 2008)	
JNJ-10181457

H3R antagonist

(Galici et al., 2009)	
Melatonergic system	Melatonin

(Matsubara et al., 2003; Lahiri et al., 2004)		Melatonin

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00544791	Melatonin

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00000171		
	Circadin

https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00940589		
Legend: BPSD, behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia; L-DOPS, L-threo-dihydroxyphenylserine; SSRI, serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

Highlights

Monoaminergic systems are altered in Alzheimer’s disease.

Noradrenergic LC and serotonergic DRN are among the first affected by tau pathology.

Changes in DRN and LC lead to the deterioration of the sleep-wake cycle in AD.

Depression in preclinical AD further indicates monoaminergic alteration in AD.

In view of its early involvement in AD, the serotonergic system could serve as a therapeutic target.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Adwan L Zawia NH Epigenetics: a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease Pharmacol. Ther 2013 139 41 50 (PubMed: 23562602) 23562602
Airaksinen MS Paetau A Paljarvi L Reinikainen K Riekkinen P Suomalainen R Panula P Histamine neurons in human hypothalamus: anatomy in normal and Alzheimer diseased brains Neuroscience 1991 44 465 481 (PubMed: 1719449) 1719449
Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D Dubois B Feldman HH Fox NC Gamst A Holtzman DM Jagust WJ Petersen RC Snyder PJ Carrillo MC Thies B Phelps CH The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging – Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 270 279 (PubMed: 21514249) 21514249
Alzheimer´s Association Alzheimer’s Association Trial Match Accessed 17 Apr 2014 http://www.alz.org/research/clinical_trials/find_clinical_trials_trialmatch.asp
Ambree O Richter H Sachser N Lewejohann L Dere E de Souza Silva MA Herring A Keyvani K Paulus W Schabitz WR Levodopa ameliorates learning and memory deficits in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol. Aging 2009 30 1192 1204 (PubMed: 18079024) 18079024
American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistic Manual of Mental Disorders ((IV-TR) 2000 4th Washington DC American Psychiatric Publishing text revised
American Psychiatric Association The Diagnostic and Statistic Manual of Mental Disorders 2013 Arlington, VA American Psychiatric Publishing (th Ed.)
Anaya F Lees A de Silva R Tau gene promoter rs242557 and allele-specific protein binding Transl. Neurosci 2011 2 176 205
Anden NE Carlsson A Dahlstroem A Fuxe K Hillarp NA Larsson K Demonstration and mapping out of nigro-neostriatal dopamine neurons Life Sci 1964 3 523 530 (PubMed: 14187491) 14187491
Andrade-Moraes CH Oliveira-Pinto AV Castro-Fonseca E de Silva CG Guimarães DM Szczupak D Parente-Bruno DR Carvalho LR Polichiso L Gomes BV Oliveira LM Rodriguez RD Leite RE Ferretti-Rebustini RE Jacob-Filho W Pasqualucci CA Grinberg LT Lent R Cell nuber changes in Alzheimer's disease relate to dementia, not to plaques and tangles Brain 13 3738 3752 (PubMed: 24136825)
Anisman H Matheson K Stress, depression, and anhedonia: caveats concerning animal models Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 2005 29 525 546 (PubMed: 15925696) 15925696
Arendt T Stieler J Strijkstra AM Hut RA Rüdiger J Van der Zee EA Harkany T Holzer M Härtig W Reversible paired helical filament-like phosphorylation of tau is an adaptive process associated with neuronal plasticity in hibernating animals J. Neurosci 2003 23 6972 6981 (PubMed: 12904458) 12904458
Armstrong RA Size frequency distributions of β-amyloid (Aβ) deposits: a comparative study of four neurodegenerative disorders Folia Neuropathol 2012 50 240 249 (PubMed: 23023338) 23023338
Arriagada PV Growdon JH Hedley-Whyte ET Hyman BT Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer's disease Neurology 1992 42 631 639 (PubMed: 1549228) 1549228
Arslan OE Neuroanatomic basis of clinical neurology 2015 Taylor &amp; Francis, Boca Raton, FL, USA CRC Press
Asai H Ikezu S Tsunoda S Medalla M Luebke J Haydar T Wolozin B Butovsky O Kügler S Ikezu T Depletion of microglia and inhibition of exosome synthesis halt tau propagation Nat. Neurosci 2015 18 1584 1593 (PubMed: 26436904) 26436904
Aston-Jones G Rajkowski J Kubiak P Alexinsky T Locus coeruleus neurons in monkey are selectively activated by attended cues in a vigilance task J. Neurosci 1994 14 4467 4480 (PubMed: 8027789) 8027789
Aston-Jones G Cohen JD An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: adaptive gain and optimal performance Annu. Rev. Neurosci 28 403 450 (PubMed: 16022602)
Attar A Rahimi F Bitan G Modulators of amyloid protein aggregation and toxicity: EGCG and CLR01 Transl. Neurosci 2013 4 385 409
Atwood CS Bowen RL Smith MA Perry G Cerebrovascular requirement for sealant, anti-coagulant and remodeling molecules that allow for the maintenance of vascular integrity and blood supply Brain Res. Rev 2003 43 164 178 (PubMed: 14499467) 14499467
Avila J Gómez-Ramos A Bolós M AD genetic risk factors and tau spreading Frontiers Aging Neurosci 2015 7 99 (PubMed: 26052285)
Axelrod J The pineal gland: a neurochemical transducer Science 1974 184 1341 1348 (PubMed: 4151465) 4151465
Azmitia EC Gannon PJ The primate serotonergic system: a review of human and animal studies and a report on Macaca fascicularis Adv. Neurol 1986 43 407 468 (PubMed: 2418648) 2418648
Babić M Vogrinc Ž Diana A Klepac N Borovečki F Hof PR Šimić G Comparison of two commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for cerebrospinal fluid measurement of amyloid β1–42 and total tau Transl. Neurosci 2013 4 234 240 (PubMed: 24376914)
Babić M Švob Štrac D Mück-Šeler D Pivac N Stanić G Hof PR Šimić G Update on the core and developing cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease Croat. Med. J 2014 28 347 365 (PubMed: 25165049)
Babić Leko M Borovečki F Dejanović N Hof PR Šimić G Predictive value of cerebrospinal fluid visinin-like protein-1 levels for Alzheimer’s disease early detection and differential diagnosis in patients with mild cognitive impairment J. Alzheimers Dis 2016 50 765 778 (PubMed: 26836160) 26836160
Bahna SG Sathiyapalan A Foster JA Niles LP Regional upregulation of hippocampal melatonin MT2 receptors by valproic acid: therapeutic implications for Alzheimer's disease Neurosci. Lett 2014 576 84 87 (PubMed: 24909617) 24909617
Baker KB Halliday GM Halasz P Hornung J-P Geffen LB Cotton RGH Törk I Cytoarchitecture of serotonin-synthesizing neurons in the pontine tegmentum of the human brain Synapse 1990 7 301 320 (PubMed: 2042112)
Baker KG Halliday GM Törk I Cytoarchitecture of the human dorsal raphe nucleus J. Comp. Neurol 1990 301 147 161 (PubMed: 2262589) 2262589
Baker KG Halliday GM Halasz P Hornung JP Geffen LB Cotton RGH Törk I Cytoarchitecture of serotonin-synthesizing neurons in the pontine tegmentum of the human brain Synapse 1991a 7 301 320 (PubMed: 2042112) 2042112
Baker KG Halliday GM Hornung JP Geffen LB Cotton RGH Törk I Distribution, morphology and number of monoamine-synthesizing and substance P-containing neurons in the human dorsal raphe nucleus Neuroscience 1991b 42 757 775 (PubMed: 1720227) 1720227
Bancher C Brunner C Lassmann H Budka H Jellinger K Wiche G Seitelberger F Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Wisniewski HM Accumulation of abnormally phosphorylation tau precedes the formation of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res 1989 477 90 99 (PubMed: 2495152) 2495152
Bareggi SR Franceschi M Bonini L Zecca L Smirne S Decreased CSF concentrations of homovanillic acid and gamma-aminobutyric acid in Alzheimer's disease. Age- or disease-related modifications? Arch. Neurol 1982 39 709 712 (PubMed: 6181768) 6181768
Basurto-Islas G Blanchard J Tung YC Fernandez JR Voronkov M Stock M Zhang S Stock JB Iqbal K Therapeutic benefits of a component of coffee in a rat model of Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol. Aging 2014 35 2701 2712 (PubMed: 25034344) 25034344
Bateman RJ Holtzman DM Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-β peptide clearance Sci. Transl. Med 2011 3 89ra57 (PubMed: 21715678)
Beaulieu JM Gainetdinov RR The physiology, signaling, and pharmacology of dopamine receptors Pharmacol. Rev 2011 63 182 217 (PubMed: 21303898) 21303898
Beck O Lundman A Jonsson G 5-Hydroxytryptophol and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels in rat brain: effects of various drugs affecting serotonergic transmitter mechanisms J. Neural. Transm 1987 69 287 298 (PubMed: 2442302) 2442302
Bekar LK Wei HS Nedergaard M The locus coeruleus-norepinephrine network optimizes coupling of cerebral blood volume with oxygen demand J. Cereb. Blood. Flow. Metab 2012 32 2135 2145 (PubMed: 22872230) 22872230
Belarbi K Schindowski K Burnouf S Caillierez R Grosjean ME Demeyer D Hamdane M Sergeant N Blum D Buée L Early tau pathology involving the septo-hippocampal pathway in a tau transgenic model: relevance to Alzheimer's disease Curr. Alzheimer Res 2009 6 152 157 (PubMed: 19355850) 19355850
Benavides-Piccione R DeFelipe J Different populations of tyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactive neurons defined by differential expression of nitric oxide synthase in the human temporal cortex Cereb. Cortex 2003 13 297 307 (PubMed: 12571119) 12571119
Benitez BA Karch CM Cai Y Jin SC Cooper B Carrell D Bertelsen S Chibnik L Schneider JA Bennett DA Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Genetic and Environmental Risk for Alzheimer's Disease Consortium GERAD Fagan AM Holtzman D Morris JC Goate AM Cruchaga C The PSEN1, p.E318G variant increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease in APOE-ε4 carriers PLoS Genet 2013 9 e1003685 (PubMed: 23990795) 23990795
Bennett DA Yu L Yang J Srivastava GP Aubin C De Jager PL Epigenomics of Alzheimer's disease Transl. Res 2015 165 200 220 (PubMed: 24905038) 24905038
Benussi A Padovani A Borroni B Phenotypic heterogeneity of monogenic frontotemporal dementia Front. Aging Neurosci 2015 7 171 (PubMed: 26388768) 26388768
Bhatia N Hall G Untangling the role of tau in Alzheimer’s disease: a unifying hypothesis Transl. Neurosci 2013 4 155 133
Bierer LM Hof PR Purohit DP Carlin L Schmeidler J Davis KL Perl DP Neocortical neurofibrillary tangles correlate with dementia severity in Alzheimer’s disease Arch. Neurol 1995 52 81 88 (PubMed: 7826280) 7826280
Blanquet V Goldgaber D Turleau C Créau-Goldberg N Delabar J Sinet PM Roudier M de Grouchy J The Aβ protein (AD-AP) cDNA hybridizes in normal and Alzheimer individuals near the interface of 21q21 and q22.1 Ann. Genet 1987 30 68 69 (PubMed: 3314665) 3314665
Blažević S Hranilović D Expression of 5-HT related genes after perinatal treatment of 5-HT agonists Transl. Neurosci 2013 4 165 171
Blennow K Hampel H CSF markers for incipient Alzheimer’s disease Lancet Neurol 2003 2 605 613 (PubMed: 14505582) 14505582
Blennow K Wallin A Gottfries CG Lekman A Karlsson I Skoog I Svennerholm L Significance of decreased lumbar CSF levels of HVA and 5-HIAA in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol. Aging 1992 13 107 113 (PubMed: 1371850) 1371850
Blennow K Hampel H Weiner M Zetterberg H Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease Nat. Rev. Neurol 2010 6 131 144 (PubMed: 20157306) 20157306
Boban M Kostović I Šimić G Nucleus subputaminalis: neglected part of the basal nucleus of Meynert Brain 2006 129 E42 (PubMed: 16543395) 16543395
Boban M Šarac H Mimica N Mladinov M Süßmair C Ackl N Bader B Huzak M Danek A Hof PR Šimić G CSF tau proteins in differential diagnosis of dementia Transl. Neurosci 2010 1 43 48
Boban M Malojčić B Mimica N Vuković S Zrilić I Hof PR Šimić G The reliability and validity of the mini-mental state examination in the elderly Croatian population Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 2012 33 385 392 (PubMed: 22814030) 22814030
Bogerts B Häntsch J Herzer M A morphometric study of the dopamine-containing cell groups in the mesencephalon of normals, Parkinson patients, and schizophrenics Biol. Psychiatry 1983 18 951 969 (PubMed: 6640008) 6640008
Bolea I Gella A Monjas L Pérez C Rodríguez-Franco MI Marco-Contelles J Samadi A Unzeta M Multipotent, permeable drug ASS234 inhibits Aβ aggregation, possesses antioxidant properties and protects from Aβ-induced apoptosis in vitro Curr. Alzheimer Res 2013 10 797 808 (PubMed: 23919774) 23919774
Bollati V Galimberti D Pergoli L Dalla Valle E Barretta F Cortini F Scarpini E Betazzi PA Baccarelli A DNA methylation in repetitive elements and Alzheimer's disease Brain Behav. Immun 2011 25 1078 1083 (PubMed: 21296655) 21296655
Bolognin S Zatta P Drago D Tognon G Parnigotto PP Ricchelli F Mutual stimulation of Aβ fibrillogenesis by clioquinol and divalent metals Neuromolecular Med 10 322 332 (PubMed: 18712494)
Bolte Taylor J Cunningham MC Benes FM Neonatal raphe lesionsincrease dopamine fibers in prefrontal cortex of adult rats Neuroreport 1998 9 1811 1815 (PubMed: 9665606) 9665606
Bondareff W Mountjoy CQ Roth M Loss of neurons of origin of the adrenergic projection to cerebral cortex (nucleus locus ceruleus) in senile dementia Neurology 1982 32 164 168 (PubMed: 7198741) 7198741
Borroni B Agosti C Archetti S Costanzi C Bonomi S Ghianda D Lenzi GL Caimi L Di Luca M Padovani A Catechol-O-methyltransferase genepolymorphism is associated with risk of psychosis in Alzheimer Disease Neurosci. Lett 2004 370 127 129 (PubMed: 15488308) 15488308
Borroni B Costanzi C Padovani A Genetic susceptibility to behavioural and psychological symptoms in Alzheimer disease Curr. Alzheimer Res 2010 7 158 164 (PubMed: 19715553) 19715553
Bortolato M Chen K Shih JC Monoamine oxidase inactivation: from pathophysiology to therapeutics Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev 2008 60 1527 1533 (PubMed: 18652859) 18652859
Braak H On the nuclei of the human brain stem. II The raphe nuclei. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat 1970 107 123 141 (PubMed: 4194341) 4194341
Braak H Alafuzoff I Arzberger T Kretzschmar H Del Tredici K Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry Acta Neuropathol 2006 112 389 404 (PubMed: 16906426) 16906426
Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 1991 82 239 259 (PubMed: 1759558) 1759558
Braak H Braak E Frequency of stages of Alzheimer-related lesions in different age categories Neurobiol. Aging 1997 18 351 357 (PubMed: 9330961) 9330961
Braak H Braak E Bohl J Staging of Alzheimer-related cortical destruction Eur. Neurol 1993 33 403 408 (PubMed: 8307060) 8307060
Braak H Braak E Argyrophilic grain disease: frequency of occurrence in different age categories and neuropathological diagnostic criteria J. Neural Transm 1998 105 801 819 (PubMed: 9869320) 9869320
Braak H Braak E Mandelkow E-M A sequence of cytoskeleton changes related to the formation of neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads Acta Neuropathol 1994 87 554 567 (PubMed: 7522386) 7522386
Braak H Del Tredici K Amyloid-β may be released from non-junctional varicosities of axons generated from abnormal tau-containing brainstem nuclei in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: a hypothesis Acta Neuropathol 2013 126 303 306 (PubMed: 23824268) 23824268
Braak H Del Tredici K The preclinical phase of the pathological process underlying sporadic Alzheimer's disease Brain 2015 138 2814 2833 (PubMed: 26283673) 26283673
Braak H Thal DR Ghebremedhin E Del Tredici K Stages of the pathologic process in Alzheimer disease: age categories from 1 to 100 years J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 2011 70 960 969 (PubMed: 22002422) 22002422
Brendel M Pogarell O Xiong G Delker A Bartenstein P Rominger A Depressive symptoms accelerate cognitive decline in amyloid-positive MCI patients Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 2015 42 716 724 (PubMed: 25631614) 25631614
Brioni JD Esbenshade TA Garrison TR Bitner SR Cowart MD Discovery of histamine H3 antagonists for the treatment of cognitive disorders and Alzheimer’s disease J Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 2011 336 38 46 (PubMed: 20864505) 20864505
Brockmeyer A D’Angiulli A How air pollution alters brain development: the role of neuroinflammation Transl. Neurosci 2016 7 24 30 28123818
Brown RE Stevens DR Haas HL The physiology of brain histamine Prog. Neurobiol 2001 63 637 672 (PubMed: 11164999) 11164999
Brunner P Sözer-Topcular N Jockers R Ravid R Angeloni D Fraschini F Eckert A Müller-Spahn F Savaskan E Pineal and cortical melatonin receptors MT1 and MT2 are decreased in Alzheimer's disease Eur. J. Histochem 2006 50 311 316 (PubMed: 17213040) 17213040
Brusa L Bassi A Stefani A Pierantozzi M Peppe A Caramia MD Boffa L Ruggieri S Stanzione P Pramipexole in comparison to l-dopa: a neuropsychological study J. Neural. Transm 2003 110 373 380 (PubMed: 12658365) 12658365
Buée L Bussière T Buée-Scherrer V Delacourte A Hof PR Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders Brain Res. Rev 2000 33 95 130 (PubMed: 10967355) 10967355
Burke WJ Roccaforte WH Wengel SP Bayer BL Ranno AE Willcockson NK L-deprenyl in the treatment of mild dementia of the Alzheimer type: results of a 15-month trial J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 1993 41 1219 1225 (PubMed: 8227897) 8227897
Bush AI The metal theory of Alzheimer's disease J. Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 Suppl. 1 S277 S281 (PubMed: 22635102) 22635102
Bush AI Tanzi RE Therapeutics for Alzheimer's disease based on the metal hypothesis Neurotherapeutics 2008 5 421 432 (PubMed: 18625454) 18625454
Cacabelos R Pharmacogenetic basis for therapeutic optimization in Alzheimer's disease Mol. Diagn. Ther 2007 11 385 405 (PubMed: 18078356) 18078356
Cacace R Van den Bossche T Engelborghs S Geerts N Laureys A Dillen L Graff C Thonberg H Chiang HH Pastor P Ortega-Cubero S Pastor MA Diehl-Schmid J Alexopoulos P Benussi L Ghidoni R Binetti G Nacmias B Sorbi S Sanchez-Valle R Lladó A Gelpi E Almeida MR Santana I Tsolaki M Koutroumani M Clarimon J Lleó A Fortea J de Mendonça A Martins M Borroni B Padovani A Matej R Rohan Z Vandenbulcke M Vandenberghe R De Deyn PP Cras P van der Zee J Sleegars K Van Broeckhoven C Belgium Neurology (BELNEU) Consortium and the European Early-Onset Dementia (EU EOD) Consortium Rare variant in PLD3 do not affect risk for early-onset Alzheimer’s disease in a European Consortium Cohort Hum. Mutat 2015 36 1126 1235 (PubMed: 26411346)
Calafate S Buist A Miskiewicz K Vijayan V Daneels G De Strooper B de Wit J Verstreken P Moechars D Synaptic contacts enhance cell-to-cell tau pathology propagation Cell Rep 2015 11 1176 1183 (PubMed: 25981034) 25981034
Calderón-Garcidueñas L Vojdani A Blaurock-Busch E Busch Y Friedle A Franco-Lira M Sarathi-Mukherjee P Martínez-Aguirre X Park SB Torres-Jardón R D’Angiulli A Air pollution and children: neural and tight junction antibodies and combustion metals, the role of barrier breakdown and brain immunity in neurodegeneration J. Alzheimers Dis 2015 43 1039 1058 (PubMed: 25147109) 25147109
Cardinali DP Furio AM Brusco LI Clinical aspects of melatonin intervention in Alzheimer's disease progression Curr. Neuropharmacol 2010 8 218 227 (PubMed: 21358972) 21358972
Cardinali DP Vigo DE Olivar N Vidal MF Brusco LI Melatonin therapy in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Antioxidants 2014 3 245 277 (PubMed: 26784870) 26784870
Carlson MC Tschanz JT Norton MC Welsh-Bohmer K Martin BK Breitner JC H2 histamine receptor blockade in the treatment of Alzheimer disease:a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of nizatidine Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 2002 16 24 30 (PubMed: 11882746) 11882746
Castellano JM Kim J Stewart FR Jiang H DeMattos RB Patterson BW Fagan AM Morris JC Mawuenyega KG Cruchaga C Goate AM Bales KR Paul SM Bateman RJ Holtzman DM Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain Aβ peptide clearance Sci. Transl. Med 2011 3 89ra57 (PubMed: 21715678)
Chalermpalanupap T Kinkead B Hu WT Kummer MP Hammerschmidt T Heneka MT Weinshenker D Levey AI Targeting norepinephrine in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Res. Ther 2013 5 21 (PubMed: 23634965) 23634965
Charidimou A Martinez-Ramirez S Shoamanesh A Oliveira-Filho J Frosch M Vashkevich A Ayres A Rosand J Gurol ME Greenberg SM Viswanathan A Cerebral amyloid angiopathy with and without hemorrhage: evidence for different disease phenotypes Neurology 2015 84 1206 1212 (PubMed: 25716356) 25716356
Chen CPLH Eastwood SL Hope T McDonald B Francis PT Esiri MM Immunocytochemical study of the dorsal and median raphe nuclei in patients with Alzheimer’s disease prospectively assessed for behavioural changes Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 2000 26 347 355 (PubMed: 10931368) 10931368
Chin RM Fu X Pai MY Vergnes L Hwang H Deng G Diep S Lomenick B Meli VS Monsalve GC Hu E Whelan SA Wang JX Jung G Solis GM Fazlollahi F Kaweeteerawat C Quach A Nili M Krall AS Godwin HA Chang HR Faull KF Guo F Jiang M Trauger SA Saghatelian A Braas D Christofk HR Clarke CF Teitell MA Petraschek M Reue K Jung ME Frand AR Huang J The metabolite α–ketoglutarate extends lifespan by inhibiting ATP synthase and TOR Nature 2014 510 397 401 (PubMed: 24828042) 24828042
Cirrito JR Yamada KA Finn MB Sloviter RS Bales KR May PC Schoepp DD Paul SM Mennerick S Holtzman DM Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid Aβ levels in vivo Neuron 2005 48 913 922 (PubMed: 16364896) 16364896
Citron M Teplow DB Selkoe DJ Generation of Aβ protein from its precursor is sequence specific Neuron 1995 14 661 670 (PubMed: 7695913) 7695913
Citron M Westaway D Xia W Carlson G Diehl T Levesque G Johnson-Wood K Lee M Seubert P Davis A Kholodenko D Motter R Sherrington R Perry B Yao H Strome R Lieberburg I Rommens J Kim S Schenk D Fraser P St George Hyslop P Selkoe DJ Mutant presenilins of Alzheimer's disease increase production of 42-residue Aβ-protein in both transfected cells and transgenic mice Nat. Med 1997 3 67 72 (PubMed: 8986743) 8986743
Clavaguera F Bolmont T Crowther RA Abramovski D Frank S Probst A Fraser G Stalder AK Beibel M Staufenbiel M Jucker M Goedert M Tolnay M Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain Nat. Cell Biol 2009 11 909 913 (PubMed: 19503072) 19503072
Clavaguera F Akatsu H Fraser G Crowther RA Frank S Hench J Probst A Winkler DT Reichwald J Staufenbiel M Ghetti B Goedert M Tolnay M Brain homogenates from human tauopathies induce tau inclusions in mouse brain Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013 110 9535 9540 (PubMed: 23690619) 23690619
Clayton EL Mizielinska S Edgar JR Nielsen TT Marshall S Norona FE Robbins M Damirji H Holm IE Johannsen P Nielsen JE Asante EA Collinge J FReJA consortium Isaacs AM Frontotemporal dementia caused by CHMP2B mutation is characterised by neuronal lysosomal storage pathology Acta Neuropathol 2015 130 511 523 (PubMed 26358247) 26358247
Colloby SJ McParland S O'Brien JT Attems J Neuropathological correlates of dopaminergic imaging in Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementias Brain 2012 135 2798 2808 (PubMed: 22961551) 22961551
Cook C Gendron TF Scheffel K Carlomagno Y Dunmore J DeTure M Petrucelli L Loss of HDAC6, a novel CHIP substrate, alleviates abnormal tau accumulation Hum. Mol. Genet 2012 21 2936 2945 (PubMed: 22492994) 22492994
Cook C Carlomagno Y Gendron TF Dunmore J Scheffel K Stetler C Davis M Dickson D Jarpe M DeTure M Petrucelli L Acetylation of the KXGS motifs in tau is a critical determinant in modulation of tau aggregation and clearance Hum. Mol. Genet 2014 23 104 116 (PubMed: 23962722) 23962722
Corrigan F Pham CL Vink R Blumbergs PC Masters CL van den Heuvel C Cappai R The neuroprotective domains of the amyloid precursor protein, in traumatic brain injury, are located in the two growth factor domains Brain Res 2011 1378 137 143 (PubMed: 21215734) 21215734
Côté F Thévenot E Fligny C Fromes Y Darmon M Ripoche MA Bayard E Hanoun N Saurini F Lechat P Dandolo L Hamon M Mallet J Vodjdani G Disruption of the nonneuronal tph1 gene demonstrates the importance of peripheral serotonin in cardiac function Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 2003 100 13525 13530 (PubMed: 14597720) 14597720
Counts SE Mufson EJ Putative CSF protein biomarker candidates for amnestic mild cognitive impairment Transl. Neurosci 2010a 1 2 8 (PubMed: 21311725) 21311725
Counts SE Mufson EJ Noradrenaline activation of neurotrophic pathways protects against neuronal amyloid toxicity J. Neurochem 2010b 113 649 660 (PubMed: 20132474) 20132474
Cox PA Davis DA Mash DC Metcalf JS Banack SA Dietary exposure to an environmental toxin triggers neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid deposits in the brain Proc. Biol. Sci 2016 283 20152397 (PubMed: 26791617) 26791617
Crary JF Trojanowski JQ Schneider JA Abisambra JF Abner EL Alafuzoff I Arnold SE Attems J Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Dickson DW Gearing M Grinberg LT Hof PR Hyman BT Jellinger K Jicha GA Kovacs GG Knopman DS Kofler J Kukull WA Mackenzie IR Masliah E McKee A Montine TJ Murray ME Neltner JH Santa-Maria I Seeley WW Serrano-Pozo A Shelanski ML Stein T Takao M Thal DR Toledo JB Troncoso JC Vonsattel JP White CL 3rd Wisniewski T Woltjer RL Yamada M Nelson PT Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging Acta Neuropathol 2014 128 755 766 (PubMed: 25348064) 25348064
Cruchaga C Karch CM Jin SC Benitez BA Cai Y Guerreiro R Harari O Norton J Budde J Bertelsen S Jeng AT Cooper B Skorupa T Carrell D Levitch D Hsu S Choi J Ryten M UK Brain Expression Consortium Hardy J Ryten M Trabzuni D Weale ME Ramasamy A Smith C Sassi C Bras J Gibbs JR Hernandez DG Lupton MK Powell J Forabosco P Ridge PG Corcoran CD Tschanz JT Norton MC Munger RG Schmutz C Leary M Demirci FY Bamne MN Wang X Lopez OL Ganguli M Medway C Turton J Lord J Braae A Barber I Brown K Alzheimer’s Research UK Consortium Passmore P Craig D Johnston J McGuinness B Todd S Heun R Kölsch H Kehoe PG Hooper NM Vardy ER Mann DM Pickering-Brown S Brown K Kalsheker N Lowe J Morgan K David Smith A Wilcock G Warden D Holmes C Pastor P Lorenzo-Betancor O Brkanac Z Scott E Topol E Morgan K Rogaeva E Singleton AB Hardy J Kamboh MI St George-Hyslop P Cairns N Morris JC Kauwe JS Goate AM Rare coding variants in the phospholipase D3 gene confer risk for Alzheimer’s disease Nature 2014 505 550 554 (PubMed: 24336208) 24336208
Cummings JL Stuart C Yudofsky E Robert E Hales E Neuropsychiatric aspects of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementing illnesses American Psychiatric Press textbook of neuropsychiatry 1992 2nd Washington, DC American Psychiatric Press 605 620
Curcio CA Kemper T Nucleus raphe dorsalis in dementia of the Alzheimer type: neurofibrillary change and neuronal packing density J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 1984 43 359 368 (PubMed: 6737007) 6737007
Czech C Tremp G Pradier L Presenilins and Alzheimer's disease: biological functions and pathogenic mechanisms Prog. Neurobiol 2000 60 363 384 (PubMed: 10670705) 10670705
Da Silva Costa-Aze V Dauphin F Boulouard M 5-HT6 receptor blockade differentially affects scopolamine-induced deficits of working memory, recognition memory and aversive learning in mice Psychopharmacology 2012 2221 99 115 (PubMed: 22367167)
Dahlström A Fuxe K Evidence for the exitstance of monoamine-containing neurons in the central nervous system. I. Demonstration of monoamines in the cell bodies of the brain stem neurons Acta Physiol. Scand 1964a 62 1 55 (PubMed: 14229500) 14210262
Dahlström A Fuxe K Localization of monoamines in the lower brain stem Experientia 1964b 20 398 399 (PubMed: 5856530) 5856530
Dai H Kaneko K Kato H Fujii S Jing Y Xu A Sakurai E Kato M Okamura N Kuramasu A Yanai K Selective cognitive dysfunction in mice lacking histamine H1 and H2 receptors Neurosci. Res 2007 57 306 313 (PubMed: 17145090) 17145090
Dang-Vu TT Schabus M Desseilles M Sterpenich V Bonjean M Maquet P Functional neuroimaging insights into the physiology of human sleep Sleep 2010 33 1589 1603 (PubMed: 21120121) 21120121
Darmon M Al Awabdh S Emerit M-B Masson J Insights into serotonin receptor trafficking: cell membrane targeting and internalization Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci 2015 132 97 126 (PubMed: 26055056) 26055056
de Calignon A Polydoro M Suárez-Calvet M William C Adamowicz DH Kopeikina KJ Pitstick R Sahara N Ashe KH Carlson GA Spires-Jones TL Hyman BT Propagation of tau pathology in a model of early Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2012 73 685 697 (PubMed: 22365544) 22365544
De Strooper B Iwatsubo T Wolfe MS Presenilins and γ-secretase: structure, function, and role in Alzheimer Disease Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2012 2 a006304 (PubMed: 22315713) 22315713
Deakin JF Depression and antisocial personality disorder: two contrasting disorders of 5HT function J. Neural. Transm. Suppl 2003 64 79 93 (PubMed: 12830930) 12830930
De-Miguel FF Trueta C Synaptic and extrasynaptic secretion of serotonin Cell Mol. Neurobiol 2005 25 297 312 (PubMed: 16047543) 16047543
Dere E De Souza-Silva MA Topic B Spieler RE Haas HL Huston JP Histidine-decarboxylase knock out mice show deficient non reinforced episodic object memory, improved negatively reinforced water-maze performance, and increased neo- and ventro-striatal dopamine turnover Learn. Mem 2003 10 510 519 (PubMed: 14657262) 14657262
Descarries L Mechawar N Ultrastructural evidence for diffuse transmission by monoamine and acetylcholine neurons of the central nervous system Prog. Brain Res 2000 125 27 47 (PubMed: 11098652) 11098652
Descarries L Seguela E Watkins KC Fuxe K Agnati LE Nonjunctional relationships of monoamine axon terminals in the cerebral cortex of adult rat Volume Transmission in the Brain: Novel Mechanisms for Neural Transmission 1991 New York Raven Press 53 62
Diana A Šimić G Sinforiani E Orrù N Pichiri G Bono G Mitochondria morphology and DNA content upon sublethal exposure to Aβ1–42 peptide Coll. Antropol 2008 32 Suppl. 1 51 58 (PubMed: 18405058) 18405058
Di Giovanni G García I Colangeli R Pierucci M Rivadulla ML Soriano E Chioua M Della Corte L Yáñez M De Deurwaerdère P Fall Y Marco-Contelles J N-(furan-2-ylmethyl)-N-methylprop-2-yn-1-amine (F2MPA): a potential cognitive enhancer with MAO inhibitor properties CNS Neurosci. Ther 2014 20 633 640 (PubMed: 24848125) 24848125
Dixon Clarke SE Ramsay RR Dietary inhibitors of monoamine oxidase J. Neural. Transm 2011 118 1031 1041 (PubMed: 21190052) 21190052
Donovan NJ Hsu DC Dagley AS Schultz AP Amariglio RE Mormino EC Okereke OI Rentz DM Johnson KA Sperling RA Marshall GA Depressive symptoms and biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease in cognitively normal older adults J. Alzheimers Dis 2015 46 63 73 (PubMed: 25697700) 25697700
Doody RS Gavrilova SI Sano M Thomas RG Aisen PS Bachurin SO Seely L Hung D Dimebon Investigators Effect of dimebon on cognition, activities of daily living, behaviour, and global function in patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled study Lancet 2008 372 207 215 (PubMed: 18640457) 18640457
Dougall NJ Bruggink S Ebmeier KP Systematic review of the diagnostic accuracy of 99mTc-HMPAO-SPECT in dementia Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2004 12 554 570 (PubMed: 15545324) 15545324
Dubocovich ML Markowska M Functional MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors in mammals Endocrine 2005 27 101 110 (PubMed: 16217123) 16217123
Dubois B Feldman HH Jacova C DeKosky ST Barberger-Gateau P Cummings J Delacourte A Galasko D Gauthier S Jicha G Meguro K O’Brien J Pasquier F Robert P Rossor M Salloway S Stern Y Visser PJ Scheltens P Research criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: revising the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria Lancet Neurol 2007 6 734 746 (PubMed: 17616482) 17616482
Dunlop RA Cox PA Banack SA Rodgers KJ The non-protein amino acid BMAA is misincorporated into human proteins in place of l-serine causing protein misfolding and aggregation PLoS One 2013 8 e75376 (PubMed: 24086518) 24086518
Dujardin S Bégard S Caillierez R Lachaud C Delattre L Carrier S Loyens A Galas MC Bousser L Melki R Aurégan G Hantraye P Brouillet E Buée L Colin M Ectosomes: a new mechanism for non-exosomal secretion of tau protein PLoS One 2014 9 e100760 (PubMed: 24971751) 24971751
Edmondson DE Hydrogen peroxide produced by mitochondrial monoamine oxidase catalysis: biological implications Curr. Pharm. Des 2014 20 155 160 (PubMed: 23701542) 23701542
Egan M Yaari R Liu L Ryan M Peng Y Lines C Michelson D Pilot randomized controlled study of a histamine receptor inverse agonist in the symptomatic treatment of AD Curr. Alzheimer Res 2012 9 481 490 (PubMed: 22272611) 22272611
Elrod R Peskind ER DiGiacomo L Brodkin KI Veith RC Raskind MA Effects of Alzheimer's disease severity on cerebrospinal fluid norepinephrineconcentration Am. J. Psychiatry 1997 154 25 30 (PubMed: 8988954) 8988954
Endres K Fahrenholz F Regulation of α-secretase ADAM10 expression and activity Exp. Brain Res 2012 217 343 352 (PubMed: 21969210) 21969210
España RA Scammell TE Sleep neurobiology from a clinical perspective Sleep 2011 34 845 858 (PubMed: 21731134) 21731134
Falangola MF Lee SP Nixon RA Duff K Helpern JA Histological co-localization of iron in Aβ plaques of PS/APP transgenic mice Neurochem. Res 30 201 205 (PubMed: 15895823)
Feinstein DL Heneka MT Gavrilyuk V Dello Russo C Weinberg G Galea E Noradrenergic regulation of inflammatory gene expression in brain Neurochem. Int 2002 41 357 365 (PubMed: 12176079) 12176079
Feng Z Chang Y Cheng Y Zhang BL Qu ZW Qin C Zhang JT Melatonin alleviates behavioral deficits associated with apoptosis and cholinergic system dysfunction in the APP 695 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease J. Pineal Res 2004 37 129 136 (PubMed: 15298672) 15298672
Ferrari R Hernandez DG Nalls MA Rohrer JD Ramasamy A Kwok JB Dobson-Stone C Brooks WS Shoefield PR Halliday GM Hodges JR Piquet O Bartley L Thompson E Haan E Hernández I Ruiz A Boada M Borroni B Padovani A Cruchaga C Cairns NJ Benussi L Binetti G Ghidoni R Forloni G Galimberti D Fenoglio C Serpente M Scarpini E Clarimón J Lleó A Blesa R Waldö ML Nilsson K Nilsson C Mackenzie IR Hsiung GY Mann DM Grafman J Morris CM Attems J Griffiths TD McKeith IG Thomas AJ Pietrini P Huey ED Wassermann EM Baborie A Jaros E Tierney MC Pastor P Razquin C Ortega-Cubero S Alonso E Perneczky R Diehl-Schmid J Alexopoulos P Kurz A Rainero I Rubino E Pinessi L Rogaeva E St George-Hyslop P Rossi G Tagliavini F Giaccone G Rowe JB Schlachetzki JC Uphill J Collinge J Mead S Danek A Van Deerlin VM Grossman M Trojanowski JQ van der Zee J Deschamps W Van Langenhove T Cruts M Van Broeckhoven C Cappa SF Le Ber I Hannequin D Golfier V Vercelletto M Brice A Nacmias B Sorbi S Bagnoli S Piaceri I Nielsen JE Hjermind LE Riemenschneider M Mayhaus M Ibach B Gasparoni G Pichler S Gu W Rossor MN Fox NC Warren JD Spillantini MG Morris HR Rizzu P Heutink P Snowden JS Rollinson S Richardson A Gerhard A Bruni AC Maletta R Frangipane F Cupidi C Bernardi L Anfossi M Gallo M Conidi ME Smirne N Rademakers R Baker M Dickson DW Graff-Radford NR Petersen RC Knopman D Josephs KA Boeve BF Parisi JE Seeley WW Miller BL Karydas AM Rosen H van Swieten JC Dopper EG Seelaar H Pijnenburg YA Scheltens P Logroscino G Cappozzo R Novelli V Puca AA Franceschi M Postiglione A Milan G Sorrentino P Kristiansen M Chiang HH Graff C Pasquier F Rollin A Deramecourt V Lebert F Kapogiannis D Ferrucci L Pickering-Brown S Singleton AB Hardy J Momeni P Frontotemporal dementia and its subtypes: a genome-wide association study Lancet Neurol 2014 13 686 699 (PubMed: 24943344) 24943344
Fernández-Nogales M Cabrera JR Santos-Galindo M Hoozemans JJ Ferrer I Rozemuller AJ Hernández F Avila J Lucas JJ Huntington’s disease is a four-repeat tauopathy with tau nuclear rods Nat. Med 2014 20 881 885 (PubMed: 25038828) 25038828
Ferraro L Antonelli T Beggiato S Cristina Tomasini M Fuxe K Tanganelli S The vigilance promoting drug modafinil modulates serotonin transmission in the rat prefrontal cortex and dorsal raphe nucleus. Possible relevance for its postulated antidepressant activity Mini Rev. Med. Chem 2013 13 478 492 (PubMed: 22512571) 22512571
Filip V Kolibás E Selegiline in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: a long-term randomized placebo-controlled trial. Czech and Slovak Senile Dementia of Alzheimer Type Study Group J. Psychiatry Neurosci 1999 24 234 243 (PubMed: 10354658) 10354658
Fitzgerald LW Kaplinsky L Kimelberg HK Serotonin metabolism by monoamine oxidase in rat primary astrocyte cultures J. Neurochem 1990 55 2008 2014 (PubMed: 1700071) 1700071
Flik G Folgering JH Cremers TI Westerink BH Dremencov E Interaction between brain histamine and serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine systems: in vivo microdialysis and electrophysiology study J. Mol. Neurosci 2015 56 320 328 (PubMed: 25820671) 25820671
Folstein MF Folstein SE McHugh PR "Mini-mental state". A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician J. Psychiatr. Res 1975 12 189 198 (PubMed: 1202204) 1202204
Foote SL Morrison JH Extrathalamic modulation of cortical function Annu. Rev. Neurosci 1987 10 67 95 (PubMed: 3551766) 3551766
Fox GB Esbenshade TA Pan JB Radek RJ Krueger KM Yao BB Browman KE Buckley MJ Ballard ME Komater VA Miner H Zhang M Faghih R Rueter LE Bitner RS Drescher KU Wetter J Marsh K Lemaire M Porsolt RD Bennani YL Sullivan JP Cowart MD Decker MW Hancock AA Pharmacological properties of ABT-239 [4-(2-{2-[(2R)-2-methylpyrrolidinyl]ethyl}-benzofuran-5-yl)benzonitrile]: II. Neurophysiological characterization and broad preclinical efficacy in cognition and schizophrenia of a potent and selective histamine H3 receptor antagonist J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 2005 313 176 190 (PubMed: 15608077) 15608077
Francis BM Yang J Hajderi E Brown ME Michalski B McLaurin J Fahnestock M Mount HT Reduced tissue levels of noradrenaline are associated with behavioral phenotypes of the TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Neuropsychopharmacology 2012 37 1934 1944 (PubMed: 22491352) 22491352
Frandemiche ML De Serrano S Rush T Borel E Elie A Arnal I Lanté F Buisson A Activity-dependent tau protein translocation to excitatory synaps is disrupted by exposure to Aβ oligomers J. Neurosci 2014 34 6084 6097 (PubMed: 24760868) 24760868
Freedman M Rewilak D Xerri T Cohen S Gordon AS Shandling M Logan AG L-deprenyl in Alzheimer’s disease: cognitive and behavioral effects Neurology 1998 50 660 668 (PubMed: 9521253) 9521253
Frederick JM Rayborn ME Laties AM Lam DM Hollyfield JG Dopaminergic neurons in the human retina J. Comp. Neurol 1982 210 65 79 (PubMed: 6127354) 6127354
Frost B Jacks RL Diamond MI Propagation of tau misfolding from the outside to the inside of a cell J. Biol. Chem 2009 284 12845 12852 (PubMed: 19282288) 19282288
Fujiuchi A Sugiura A Ohshiro H Watanabe S Yamamoto T Take Y RQ-00000009, a selective 5-HT4 receptor partial agonist, suppressed brain amyloid-b protein levels and improved memory and cognitive performances in rodents Alzheimers Dement 2010 6 S538
Furlan R Brambilla E Sanvito F Roccatagliata L Olivieri S Bergami A Pluchino S Uccelli A Comi G Martino G Vaccination with Aβ peptide induces autoimmune encephalomyelitis in C57/BL6 mice Brain 2003 126 285 291 (PubMed: 12538398) 12538398
Fuxe K Evidence for the existence of monoamine neurons in the central nervous system. IV. Distribution of monoamine nerve terminals in the central nervous system Acta Physiol. Scand. Suppl 1965 64 37 85 (PubMed: 14319769)
Fuxe K Borroto-Escuela DO Romero-Fernandez W Ciruela F Manger P Leo G Díaz-Cabiale Z Agnati LF On the role of volume transmission and receptor-receptor interactions in social behaviour: focus on central catecholamine and oxytocin neurons Brain Res 2012 1476 119 131 (PubMed: 22373652) 22373652
Galici R Boggs JD Aluisio L Fraser IC Bonaventure P Lord B Lovenberg TW JNJ-10181457, a selective non-imidazole histamine H3 receptor antagonist, normalizes acetylcholine neurotransmission and has efficacy in translational rat models of cognition Neuropharmacology 2009 56 1131 1137 (PubMed: 19345233) 19345233
Garcia-Alloza M Gil-Bea FJ Diez-Ariza M Chen CP Francis PT Lasheras B Ramirez MJ Cholinergic–serotonergic imbalance contributes to cognitive and behavioral symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychologia 2005 43 442 449 (PubMed: 15707619) 15707619
Garcia-Alloza M Hirst WD Chen CP Lasheras B Francis PT Ramírez MJ Differential involvement of 5-HT(1B/1D) and 5-HT6 receptors in cognitive and non-cognitive symptoms in Alzheimer's disease Neuropsychopharmacology 2004 29 410 416 (PubMed: 14571255) 14571255
Gaspar P Berger B Febvret A Vigny A Henry JP Catecholamine innervation of the human cerebral cortex as revealed by comparative immunohistochemistry of tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine-β-hydroxylase J. Comp. Neurol 1989 279 249 271 (PubMed: 2563268) 2563268
Gehrman PR Connor DJ Martin JL Shochat T Corey-Bloom J Ancoli-Israel S Melatonin fails to improve sleep or agitation in double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial of institutionalized patients with Alzheimer’s disease Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2009 17 166 169 (PubMed: 19155748) 19155748
Gibbs ME Maksel D Gibbs Z Hou X Summers RJ Small DH Memory loss caused by Aβ protein is rescued by a β3-adrenoceptor agonist Neurobiol. Aging 2010 31 614 624 (PubMed: 18632189) 18632189
Glenner GG Wong CW Alzheimer’s disease and Down’s syndrome: sharing of a unique cerebrovascular amyloid fibril protein Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 1984b 122 1131 1135 (PubMed 6236805) 6236805
Glenner GG Wong CW Alzheimer’s disease: initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 1984a 120 885 890 (PubMed 6375662) 6375662
Gliebus G Lippa CF The influence of β-blockers on delayed memory function in people with cognitive impairment Am. J. Alzheimers Dis. Other Demen 2007 22 57 61 (PubMed: 17534003) 17534003
Goate AM Chartier-Harlin MC Mullan M Brown J Crawford F Fidani L Giuffra L Haynes A Irving N James L Mant R Newton P Rooke K Roques P Talbot C Pericak-Vance M Roses A Williamson R Rossor M Owen M Hardy J Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer’s disease Nature 1991 349 704 706 (PubMed 1671712) 1671712
Goedert M Jakes R Spillantini MG Hasegawa M Smith MJ Crowther RA Assembly of microtubule-associated protein tau into Alzheimer-like filaments induced by sulphated glycosaminoglycans Nature 1996 383 550 553 (PubMed: 8849730) 8849730
Goldgaber D Lerman MI McBride WO Saffiotti U Gajdusek DC Isolation, characterization, and chromosomal localization of human brain cDNA clones coding for the precursor of the amyloid of brain in Alzheimer's disease, Down's syndrome and aging J. Neural Trans 1987 24 23 28 (PubMed: 2960782)
Golomb G Wisoff J Miller DC Boksay I Kluger A Weiner H Salton J Graves W Alzheimer’s disease comorbidity in normal pressure hydrocephalus: prevalence and shunt response J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 2000 68 778 781 (PubMed: 10811706) 10811706
Gómez-Isla T Hollister R West H Mui S Growdon JH Petersen RC Parisi JE Hyman BT Neuronal loss correlates with but exceeds neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease Ann. Neurol 1997 41 17 24 (PubMed: 9005861) 9005861
Gong CX Shaikh S Wang JZ Zaidi T Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Phosphatase activity toward abnormally phosphorylated tau: decrease in Alzheimer's disease brain J. Neurochem 1995 65 732 738 (PubMed: 7616230) 7616230
Gonzalez-Burgos I Feria-Velasco A Serotonin/dopamine interaction in memory formation Prog. Brain Res 2008 172 603 623 (PubMed: 18772052) 18772052
Gottfries CG Bartfai T Carlsson A Eckernas S Svennerholm L Multiple biochemical deficits in both gray and white matter of Alzheimer brains Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 1986 10 405 413 (PubMed: 3797685) 3797685
Green JP Siegel GJ Agranoff B Albers RW Molinoff P Histamine and serotonin Basic neurochemistry 1987 Fourth New York, NY, USA Raven Press 253 269
Grinberg LT Rüb U Ferreti REL Nitrini R Farfel JM Polichiso L Gierga K Jacob-Filho W Heinsen H The dorsal raphe nucleus shows phospho-tau neurofibrillary changes before the transentorhinal region in AD. A precocious onset? Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 2009 35 406 416 (PubMed: 19508444) 19508444
Grinberg LT Wang X Wang C Sohn PD Theofilas P Sidhu M Arevalo JB Heinsen H Huang EJ Rosen H Miller BL Gan L Seeley WW Argyrophilic grain disease differs from other tauopathies by lacking tau acetylation Acta Neuropathol 2013 125 581 593 (PubMed: 23371364) 23371364
Grove RA Harrington CM Mahler A Beresford I Maruff P Lowy MT Nicholls AP Boardley RL Berges AC Nathan PJ Horrigan JP A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 16-week study of the H3 receptor antagonist, GSK239512 as a monotherapy in subjects with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease Curr. Alzheimer Res 2014 11 47 58 (PubMed: 24359500) 24359500
Grudzien A Shaw P Weintraub S Bigio E Mash DC Mesulam MM Locus coeruleus neurofibrillary degeneration in aging, mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol. Aging 2007 28 327 335 (PubMed: 16574280) 16574280
Guerreiro R Wojtas A Bras J Carrasquillo M Rogaeva E Majounie E Cruchaga C Sassi C Kauwe JS Younkin S Hazrati L Collinge J Pocock J Lashley T Williams J Lambert JC Amouyel P Goate A Rademakers R Morgan K Powell J St George-Hyslop P Singleton A Hardy J Alzheimer Genetic Analysis Group TREM2 variants in Alzheimer's disease N. Engl. J. Med 2013 368 117 127 (PubMed: 23150934) 23150934
Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Cahill ME Cryns VL Reynolds MR Berry RW Binder LI Pseudophosphorylation of tau at serine 422 inhibits caspase cleavage: in vitro evidence and implications for tangle formation in vivo J. Neurochem 2006 97 1005 1014 (PubMed: 16606369) 16606369
Guo JL Lee VM Neurofibrillary tangle-like tau pathology induced by synthetic tau fibrils in primary neurons over-expressing mutant tau FEBS Lett 2013 587 717 723 (PubMed: 23395797) 23395797
Guzman-Ramos K Moreno-Castilla P Castro-Cruz M McGaugh JL Martinez-Coria H LaFerla FM Bermudez-Rattoni F Restoration of dopamine release deficits during object recognition memory acquisition attenuates cognitive impairment in a triple transgenic mice model of Alzheimer’s disease Learn. Mem 2012 19 453 460 (PubMed: 22984283) 22984283
Haas H Panula P The role of histamine and the tuberomamillary nucleus in the nervous system Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2003 4 121 130 (PubMed: 12563283) 12563283
Haig GM Bain E Robieson W Othman AA Baker J Lenz RA A randomized trial of the efficacy and safety of the H3 antagonist ABT-288 in cognitive impairment associated with schizophrenia Schizophr. Bull 2014 40 1433 1442 (PubMed: 24516190) 24516190
Haig GM Meier A Pritchett Y Hall C Gault L Lenz R Evaluation of efficacy and safety of the H3 antagonist ABT-288 in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2012 8 P601 P602
Hajjar I Catoe H Sixta S Boland R Johnson D Hirth V Wieland D Eleazer P Cross-sectional and longitudinal association between antihypertensive medications and cognitive impairment in an elderly population J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 2005 60 67 73 (PubMed: 15741285) 15741285
Hall GF Patuto BA Is tau ready for admission to the prion club? Prion 2012 6 223 233 (PubMed: 22561167) 22561167
Halliday GM Li YW Joh TH Cotton RGH Howe PRC Geffen LB Blessing WW Distribution of monoamine-synthesizing neurons in the human medulla oblongata J. Comp. Neurol 1988 273 301 317 (PubMed: 2905364) 2905364
Halliday GM Törk I Serotonin-like immunoreactive cells and fibres in the rat ventromedial mesencephalic tegmentum Brain Res. Bull 1989 22 725 735 (PubMed: 2736398) 2736398
Halliday GM McCann HL Pamphlett R Brooks WS Creasey H McCusker E Cotton RG Broe GA Harper CG Brain stem serotonin-synthesizing neurons in Alzheimer’s disease: a clinicopathological correlation Acta Neuropathol 1992 84 638 650 (PubMed: 1281956) 1281956
Hammerschmidt T Kummer MP Terwel D Martinez A Gorji A Pape HC Rommelfanger KS Schroeder JP Stoll M Schultze J Weinshenker D Heneka MT Selective loss of noradrenaline exacerbates early cognitive dysfunction and synaptic deficits in APP/PS1 mice Biol. Psychiatry 2013 73 454 463 (PubMed: 22883210) 22883210
Hansson O Zetterberg H Buchhave P Londos E Blennow K Minthon L Association between CSF biomarkers and incipient Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive impairment: a follow-up study Lancet Neurol 2006 5 228 234 (PubMed: 16488378) 16488378
Haraguchi T Ishizu H Terada S Takehisa Y Tanabe Y Nishinaka T Kawai K Kuroda S Komoto Y Namba M An autopsy case of postencephalitic parkinsonism of von Economo type: some new observations concerning neurofibrillary tangles and astrocytic tangles Neuropathology 2000 20 143 148 (PubMed: 10935451) 10935451
Hardy J Allsop D Amyloid deposition as the central event in the aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease Trends Pharmacol. Sci 1991 12 383 388 (PubMed: 1763432) 1763432
Hardy JA Higgins GA Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis Science 1992 256 184 185 (PubMed: 1566067) 1566067
Hardy J Does Aβ 42 have a function related to blood homeostasis? Neurochem. Res 2007 32 833 835 (PubMed: 17186373) 17186373
Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer’s disease: a critical reappraisal J. Neurochem 2009 110 1129 1134 (PubMed: 19457065) 19457065
Harley CW A role for norepinephrine in arousal, emotion and learning?: limbic modulation by norepinephrine and the Kety hypothesis Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 1987 11 419 458 (PubMed: 3321150) 3321150
Heneka MT Nadrigny F Regen T Martinez-Hernandez A Dumitrescu-Ozimek L Terwel D Jardanhazi-Kurutz D Walter J Kirchhoff F Hanisch UK Kummer MP Locus ceruleus controls Alzheimer’s disease pathology by modulating microglial functions through norepinephrine Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010 107 6058 6063 (PubMed: 20231476) 20231476
Herrmann N Rothenburg LS Black SE Ryan M Liu BA Busto UE Lanctot KL Methylphenidate for the treatment of apathy in Alzheimer disease: prediction of response using dextroamphetamine challenge J. Clin. Psychopharmacol 2008 28 296 301 (PubMed: 18480686) 18480686
Hilton DA Love S Ferguson I Newman P Motor neuron disease with neurofibrillary tangles in a non-Guamanian patient Acta Neuropathol 1995 90 101 106 (PubMed: 7572072) 7572072
Himeno E Ohyagi Y Ma L Nakamura N Miyoshi K Sakae N Motomura K Soejima N Yamasaki R Hashimoto T Tabira T LaFerla FM Kira J Apomorphine treatment in Alzheimer mice promoting amyloid-b degradation Ann. Neurol 2011 69 248 256 (PubMed: 21387370) 21387370
Hirst WD Abrahamsen B Blaney FE Calver AR Aloj L Price GW Medhurst AD Differences in the central nervous system distribution and pharmacology of the mouse 5-hydroxytryptamine-6 receptor compared with rat and human receptors investigated by radioligand binding, site-directed mutagenesis, and molecular modeling Mol. Pharmacol 2003 64 1295 1308 (PubMed 14645659) 14645659
Heimer L The Human Brain and Spinal Cord 1995 2nd New York, Berlin Springer-Verlag
Heneka MT Nadrigny F Regen T Martinez-Hernandez A Dumitrescu-Ozimek L Terwel D Jardanhazi-Kurutz D Walter J Kirchhoff F Hanisch UK Kummer MP Locus ceruleus controls Alzheimer’s disease pathology by modulating microglial functions through norepinephrine Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2010 107 6058 6063 (PubMed: 20231476) 20231476
Hof PR Glezer II Revishchin AV Bouras C Charnay Y Morgane PJ Distribution of dopaminergic fibers and neurons in visual and auditory cortices of the harbor porpoise and pilot whale Brain Res Bull 1995 36 275 284 (PubMed: 7697381) 7697381
Hollingworth P Harold D Sims R Gerrish A Lambert JC Carrasquillo MM Abraham R Hamshere ML Pahwa JS Moskvina V Dowzell K Jones N Stretton A Thomas C Richards A Ivanov D Widdowson C Chapman J Lovestone S Powell J Proitsi P Lupton MK Brayne C Rubinsztein DC Gill M Lawlor B Lynch A Brown KS Passmore PA Craig D McGuinness B Todd S Holmes C Mann D Smith AD Beaumont H Warden D Wilcock G Love S Kehoe PG Hooper NM Vardy ER Hardy J Mead S Fox NC Rossor M Collinge J Maier W Jessen F Rüther E Schürmann B Heun R Kölsch H van den Bussche H Heuser I Kornhuber J Wiltfang J Dichgans M Frölich L Hampel H Gallacher J Hüll M Rujescu D Giegling I Goate AM Kauwe JS Cruchaga C Nowotny P Morris JC Mayo K Sleegers K Bettens K Engelborghs S De Deyn PP Van Broeckhoven C Livingston G Bass NJ Gurling H McQuillin A Gwilliam R Deloukas P Al-Chalabi A Shaw CE Tsolaki M Singleton AB Guerreiro R Mühleisen TW Nöthen MM Moebus S Jöckel KH Klopp N Wichmann HE Pankratz VS Sando SB Aasly JO Barcikowska M Wszolek ZK Dickson DW Graff-Radford NR Petersen RC Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative van Duijn CM Breteler MM Ikram MA DeStefano AL Fitzpatrick AL Lopez O Launer LJ Seshadri S CHARGE consortium Berr C Campion D Epelbaum J Dartigues JF Tzourio C Alpérovitch A Lathrop M EADI1 consortium Feulner TM Friedrich P Riehle C Krawczak M Schreiber S Mayhaus M Nicolhaus S Wagenpfeil S Steinberg S Stefansson H Stefansson K Snaedal J Björnsson S Jonsson PV Chouraki V Genier-Boley B Hiltunen M Soininen H Combarros O Zelenika D Delepine M Bullido MJ Pasquier F Mateo I Frank-Garcia A Porcellini E Hanon O Coto E Alvarez V Bosco P Siciliano G Mancuso M Panza F Solfrizzi V Nacmias B Sorbi S Bossù P Piccardi P Arosio B Annoni G Seripa D Pilotto A Scarpini E Galimberti D Brice A Hannequin D Licastro F Jones L Holmans PA Jonsson T Riemenschneider M Morgan K Younkin SG Owen MJ O'Donovan M Amouyel P Williams J Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer's disease Nat. Genet 2011 43 429 435 (PubMed: 21460840) 21460840
Holm P Ettrup A Klein AB Santini MA El-Sayed M Elvang AB Stensbøl TB Mikkelsen JD Knudsen GM Aznar S Plaque deposition dependent decrease in 5-HT2A serotonin receptor in AβPPswe/PS1dE9 amyloid over expressing mice J. Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 1201 1213 (PubMed: 20413853) 20413853
Holmes BB Furman JL Mahan TE Yamasaki TR Mirbaha H Eades WC Belaygorod L Cairns NJ Holtzman DM Diamond MI Proteopathic tau seeding predicts tauopathy in vivo Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2014 111 E4376 E4385 (PubMed: 25261551) 25261551
Holmes C Smith H Ganderton R Arranz M Collier D Powell J Lovestone S Psychosis and aggression in Alzheimer’s disease: the effect of dopaminereceptor gene variation J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 2001 71 777 779 (PubMed: 11723200) 11723200
Hong M Zhukareva V Vogelsberg-Ragaglia V Wszolek Z Reed L Miller BI Geschwind DH Bird TD McKeel D Goate A Morris JC Wilhelmsen KC Schellenberg GD Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Mutation-specific functional impairments in distinct tau isoforms of hereditary FTDP-17 Science 1998 282 1914 1917 (PubMed: 9836646) 9836646
Hornung JP Fritschy JM Törk I Distribution of two morphologically distinct subsets of serotoninergic axons in the cerebral cortex of the marmoset J. Comp. Neurol 1990 297 165 181 (PubMed: 2115053) 2115053
Hornung JP The human raphe nuclei and the serotonergic system J. Chem. Neuroanat 2003 26 331 343 (PubMed: 14729135) 14729135
Hornung JP Paxinos G Mai JK Raphe nuclei The human nervous system 2004 Amsterdam Elsevier 425 450
Horovitz SG Braun AR Carr WS Picchioni D Balkin TJ Fukunaga M Duyn JH Decoupling of the brain’s default mode network during deep sleep Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009 106 11376 11381 (PubMed: 19549821) 19549821
Hou C Jia F Liu Y Li L CSF serotonin, 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid and neuropeptide Y levels in severe major depressive disorder Brain Res 2006 1095 154 158 (PubMed: 16713589) 16713589
Huey ED Putnam KT Grafman J A systematic review of neurotransmitter deficits and treatments in frontotemporal dementia Neurology 2006 66 17 22 (PubMed: 16401839) 16401839
Hunsley MS Palmiter RD Norepinephrine-deficient mice exhibit normal sleep-wake states but have shorter sleep latency after mild stress and low doses of amphetamine Sleep 2003 26 521 526 (PubMed: 12938804) 12938804
Hutton M Lendon CL Rizzu P Baker M Froelich S Houlden H Pickering-Brown S Chakraverty S Isaacs A Grover A Hackett J Adamson J Lincoln S Dickson D Davies P Petersen RC Stevens M de Graaff E Wauters E van Baren J Hillebrand M Joosse M Kwon JM Nowotny P Che LK Norton J Morris JC Reed LA Trojanowski J Basun H Lannfelt L Neystat M Fahn S Dark F Tannenberg T Dodd PR Hayward N Kwok JB Schofield PR Andreadis A Snowden J Craufurd D Neary D Owen F Oostra BA Hardy J Goate A van Swieten J Mann D Lynch T Heutink P Association of missense and 5'-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 Nature 1998 393 702 705 (PubMed: 9641683) 9641683
Hyman BT Phelps CH Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Carillo MC Dickson DW Duyckaerts C Frosch MP Masliah E Mirra SS Nelson PT Schneider JA Thal DR Thies B Trojanowski JQ Vinters HV Montine TJ National Institute on Aging - Alzheimer's Association guidelines for the neuropathological assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2012 8 1 13 (PubMed: 22265587) 22265587
Hyman BT Trojanowski JQ Consensus recommendations for the postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer disease from the National Institute on Aging and the Reagan Institute Working Group on diagnostic criteria for the neuropathological assessment of Alzheimer disease J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 1997 56 1095 1097 (PubMed: 9329452) 9329452
Iacono D Volkman I Nennesmo I Pedersen NL Fratiglioni L Johansson B Karlsson D Winblad B Gatz M Neuropathologic assessment of dementia markers in identical and fraternal twins Brain Pathol 2014 24 317 333 (PubMed: 24450926) 24450926
Iba M Guo JL McBride JD Zhang B Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Synthetic tau fibrils mediate transmission of neurofibrillary tangles in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s-like tauopathy J. Neurosci 2013 33 1024 1037 (PubMed: 23325240) 23325240
Imai H Steindler DA Kitai ST The organization of divergent axonal projections from the midbrain raphe nuclei in the rat J. Comp. Neurol 1986 243 363 380 (PubMed: 2419370) 2419370
Irwin DJ Cohen TJ Grossman M Arnold SE Xie SX Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Acetylated tau, a novel pathological signature in Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies Brain 2012 135 807 818 (PubMed: 22366796) 22366796
Ishino H Otsuki S Distribution of Alzheimer's neurofibrillary tangles in the basal ganglia and brain stem of progressive supranuclear palsy and Alzheimer's disease Folia Psychiatr. Neurol. Jpn 1975 29 179 187 (PubMed: 1176072) 1176072
Iversen LL Rossor MN Reynolds GP Hills R Roth M Mountjoy CQ Foote SL Morrison JH Bloom FE Loss of pigmented dopamine-β-hydrohylase positive cells from locus coeruleus in senile dementia of Alzheimer's type Neurosci. Lett 1983 39 95 100 (PubMed: 6633940) 6633940
Iversen SD Iversen LL Dopamine:50 years in perspective Trends Neurosci 2007 30 188 193 (PubMed: 17368565) 17368565
Iqbal K Alonso Adel C Chen S Chohan MO El-Akkad E Gong CX Khatoon S Li B Liu F Rahman A Tanimukai H Grundke-Iqbal I Tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2005 1739 198 210 (PubMed: 15615638) 15615638
Iqbal K Liu F Gong CX Tau and neurodegenerative disease: the story so far Nat. Rev. Neurol 2016 12 15 27 (PubMed: 26635213) 26635213
Jacobs BL Gannon PJ Azmitia EC Atlas of serotonergic cell bodies in the cat brainstem: an immunocytochemical analysis Brain Res. Bull 1984 13 1 31 (PubMed: 6478260) 6478260
Jadhav S Cubinkova V Zimova I Brezovakova V Madari A Cigankova V Zilka N Tau-mediated synaptic damage in Alzheimer's disease Transl. Neurosci 2015 6 214 226 28123806
Jääskeläinen SK Rinne JO Forssell H Tenovuo O Kaasinen V Sonninen P Bergman J Role of the dopaminergic system in chronic pain -- a fluorodopa-PET study Pain 2001 90 257 260 (PubMed: 11207397) 11207397
Jazvinšćak Jembrek M Babić M Pivac N Hof PR Šimić G Hyperphosphorylation of tau by GSK3β in Alzheimer’s disease: the interaction of Aβ and sphingolipid mediators as a therapeutic target Transl. Neurosci 2013 4 466 476
Jellinger KA Alafuzoff I Attems J Beach TG Cairns NJ Crary JF Dickson DW Hof PR Hyman BT Jack CR Jr Jicha GA Knopman DS Kovacs GG Mackenzie IR Masliah E Montine TJ Nelson PT Schmitt F Schneider JA Serrano-Pozo A Thal DR Toledo JB Trojanowski JQ Troncoso JC Vonsattel JP Wisniewski T PART, a distinct tauopathy, different from classical sporadic Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 2015 129 757 762 (PubMed: 25778618) 25778618
Jia Q Deng Y Qing H Potential therapeutic strategies for Alzheimer’s disease targeting or beyond β-amyloid: insights from clinical trials Biomed. Res. Int 2014 837157 (PubMed: 25136630) 25136630
Jellinger KA Atems J Challenges of multimorbidity of the aging brain: a critical update J. Neural Transm 2015 122 505 521 (PubMed: 25091618) 25091618
Jellinger KA Attems J Neurofibrillary tangle-predominant dementia: comparison with classical Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 2007 113 107 117 (PubMed: 17089134) 17089134
Jonsson T Atwal JK Steinberg S Snaedal J Jonsson PV Bjornsson S Stefansson H Sulem P Gudbjartsson D Maloney J Hoyte K Gustafson A Liu Y Lu Y Bhangale T Graham RR Huttenlocher J Bjornsdottir G Andreassen OA Jönsson EG Palotie A Behrens TW Magnusson OT Kong A Thorsteinsdottir U Watts RJ Stefansson K A mutation in APP protects against Alzheimer's disease and age-related cognitive decline Nature 2012 488 96 99 (PubMed: 22801501) 22801501
Jonsson T Stefansson H Steinberg S Jonsdottir I Jonsson PV Snaedal J Bjornsson S Huttenlocher J Levey AI Lah JJ Rujescu D Hampel H Giegling I Andreassen OA Engedal K Ulstein I Djurovic S Ibrahim-Verbaas C Hofman A Ikram MA van Duijn CM Thorsteinsdottir U Kong A Stefansson K Variant of TREM2 associated with the risk of Alzheimer's disease N. Engl. J. Med 2013 368 107 116 (PubMed: 23150908) 23150908
Joshi YB Praticò D Neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease: lessons learned from 5-lypoxigenase Transl. Neurosci 2014 5 197 202
Ju YE McLeland JS Toedebusch CD Xiong C Fagan AM Duntley SP Morris JC Holtzman DM Sleep quality and preclinical Alzheimer disease JAMA Neurol 2013 70 587 593 (PubMed: 23479184) 23479184
Kadavath H Hofele RV Biernat J Kumar S Tepper K Urlaub H Mandelkow E Zweckstetter M Tau stabilizes microtubules by binding at the interface between tubulin heterodimers Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015 112 7501 7506 (PubMed: 26034266) 26034266
Kalinin S Polak PE Lin SX Sakharkar AJ Pandey SC Feinstein DL The noradrenaline precursor L-DOPS reduces pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol. Aging 2012 33 1651 1663 (PubMed: 21705113) 21705113
Kamah A Huvent I Cantrelle FX Qi H Lippens G Landrieu I Smet-Nocca C Nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of the acetylation pattern of the neuronal tau protein Biochemistry 2014 53 3020 3032 (PubMed: 24708343) 24708343
Karch CM Goate AM Alzheimer's disease risk genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis Biol. Psychiatry 77 43 51 (PubMed: 24951455)
Kayama Y Koyama Y Control of sleep and wakefulness by brainstem monoaminergic and cholinergic neurons Acta Neurochir. Suppl 2003 87 3 6 14518513
Kendall I Slotten HA Codony X Burgueno J Pauwels PJ Vela JM Fone KC E-6801, a 5-HT6 receptor agonist, improves recognition memory by combined modulation of cholinergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission in the rat Psychopharmacology 2011 213 413 430 (PubMed: 20405281) 20405281
Kepe V Barrio JR Huang SC Ercoli L Siddarth P Shoghi-Jadid K Cole GM Satyamurthy N Cummings JL Small GW Phelps ME Serotonin 1A receptors in the living brain of Alzheimer’s disease patients Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2006 103 702 707 (PubMed: 16407119) 16407119
Kim M Suh J Romano D Truong MH Mullin K Hooli B Norton D Tesco G Elliott K Wagner SL Moir RD Becker KD Tanzi RE Potential late-onset Alzheimer's disease-associated mutations in the ADAM10 gene attenuate α-secretase activity Hum. Mol. Genet 2009 18 3987 3996 (PubMed: 19608551) 19608551
Khachaturian AS Zandi PP Lyketsos CG Hayden KM Skoog I Norton MC Tschanz JT Mayer LS Welsh-Bohmer KA Breitner JC Antihypertensive medication use and incident Alzheimer disease: the Cache County Study Arch. Neurol 2006 63 686 692 (PubMed: 16533956) 16533956
Knezović A Osmanović-Barilar J Ćurlin M Hof PR Šimić G Riederer P Šalković-PetriŠić M Staging of cognitive deficits and neuropathological and ultrastructural changes in streptozotocin-induced rat model of Alzheimer's disease J. Neural Transm 2015 122 577 592 (PubMed: 25808906) 25808906
Koch G Di Lorenzo F Bonnì S Giacobbe V Bozzali M Caltagirone C Martorana A Dopaminergic modulation of cortical plasticity in Alzheimer's disease patients Neuropsychopharmacology 2014 39 2654 2661 (PubMed: 24859851) 24859851
Kohler C Steinbusch HW Identification of serotonin and non-serotonin-containing neurons of the mid-brain raphe projecting to the entorhinal area and the hippocampal formation. A combined immunohistochemical and fluorescent retrograde tracing study in the rat brain Neuroscience 1982 7 951 975 (PubMed: 7048127) 7048127
Kopeikina K Hyman B Spires-Jones T Soluble forms of tau are toxic in Alzheimer’s disease Transl. Neurosci 2012 3 223 233 (PubMed: 23029602) 23029602
Kosofsky BE Molliver ME The serotoninergic innervation of cerebral cortex: different classes of axon terminals arise from dorsal and median raphe nuclei Synapse 1987 1 153 168 (PubMed: 2463687) 2463687
Kovacs GG Majtenyi K Spina S Murrell JR Gelpi E Hoftberger R Fraser G Crowther RA Goedert M Budka H Ghetti B White matter tauopathy with globular glial inclusions: a distinct sporadic frontotemporal lobar degeneration J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 2008 67 963 975 (PubMed: 18800011) 18800011
Kranz GS Hahn A Savli M Lanzenberger R Challenges in the differentiation of midbrain raphe nuclei in neuroimaging research Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012 109 E2000 (PubMed: 22711836) 22711836
Krill JJ Patel S Harding AJ Halliday GM Neuron loss from the hippocampus of Alzheimer's disease exceeds extracellular neurofibrillary tangle formation Acta Neuropathol 103 370 376 (PubMed: 11904757)
Kumar-Singh S Pirici D McGowan E Serneels S Ceuterick C Hardy J Duff K Dickson D Van Broeckhoven C Dense-core plaques in Tg2576 and PSAPP mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease are centered on vessel walls Am. J. Pathol 2005 167 527 543 (PubMed: 16049337) 16049337
Lahiri DK Chen D Ge YW Bondy SC Sharman EH Dietary supplementation with melatonin reduces levels of amyloid β-peptides in the murine cerebral cortex J. Pineal Res 2004 36 224 231 (PubMed: 15066046) 15066046
Lai MK Tsang SW Francis PT Esiri MM Keene J Hope T Chen CP Reduced serotonin 5-HT1A receptor binding in the temporal cortex correlates with aggressive behavior in Alzheimer disease Brain Res 2003 974 82 87 (PubMed: 12742626) 12742626
Lambracht-Washington D Rosenberg RN Active DNA Ab42 vaccination as immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease Transl. Neurosci 2012 3 307 313 (PubMed: 23741624) 23741624
Lardenoije R Iatrou A Kenis G Kompotis K Steinbusch HW Mastroeni D Coleman P Lemere CA Hof PR van den Hove DL Rutten BP The epigenetics of aging and neurodegeneration Prog. Neurobiol 2015 131 21 64 (PubMed: 26072273) 26072273
Larson J Jessen RE Uz T Arslan AD Kurtuncu M Imbesi M Manev H Impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation in melatonin MT2 receptor-deficient mice Neurosci. Lett 2006 393 23 26 (PubMed: 16203090) 16203090
LaSalle JM A genomic point-of-view on environmental factors influencing the human brain methylome Epigenetics 2011 6 862 869 (PubMed: 21617367) 21617367
Lee G Thangavel R Sharma VM Litersky JM Bhaskar K Fang SM Do LH Andreadis A Van Hoesen G Ksiezak-Reding H Phosphorylation of tau by fyn: implications for Alzheimer's disease J. Neurosci 2004 24 2304 2312 (PubMed: 14999081) 14999081
Lei S Serotonergic modulation of neural activities in the entorhinal cortex Int. J. Physiol. Pathophysiol. Pharmacol 2012 4 201 210 (PubMed: 23320133) 23320133
Levy E Carman MD Fernandez-Madrid IJ Power MD Lieberburg I van Duinen SG Bots GT Luyendijk W Frangione B Mutation of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid gene in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, Dutch type Science 1990 248 1124 1126 (PubMed: 2111584) 2111584
Levy-Lahad E Wasco W Poorkaj P Romano DM Oshima J Pettingell WH Yu CE Jondro PD Schmidt SD Wang K Crowley AC Fu Y-H Guenette SY Galas D Nemens E Wijsman EM Bird TD Schellenberg GD Tanzi RE Candidate gene for the chromosome 1 familial Alzheimer’s disease locus Science 1995 269 973 977 (PubMed: 7638622) 7638622
Leyk J Goldbaum O Noack M Richter-Landsberg C Inhibition of HDAC6 modifies tau inclusion body formation and impairs autophagic clearance J. Mol. Neurosci 2015 55 1031 1046 (PubMed: 25434725) 25434725
Li L Cheung T Chen J Herrup K A comparative study of five mouse models of Alzheimer's disease: cell cycle events reveal new insights into neurons at risk for death Int. J. Alzheimers Dis 2011 171464 2011. (PubMed: 21912750) 21912750
Ligneau X Perrin D Landais L Camelin JC Calmels TP Berrebi-Bertrand I Lecomte JM Parmentier R Anaclet C Lin JS Bertaina-Anglade V la Rochelle CD d'Aniello F Rouleau A Gbahou F Arrang JM Ganellin CR Stark H Schunack W Schwartz JC BF2.649 [1-{3-[3-(4-chlorophenyl) propoxy] propyl} piperidine, hydrochloride], a nonimidazole inverse agonist/antagonist at the human histamine H3 receptor: preclinical pharmacology J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 2007 320 365 375 (PubMed: 17005916) 17005916
Lim MM Gerstner JR Holtzman DM The sleep-wake cycle and Alzheimer's disease: what do we know? Neurodegener. Dis. Manag 2014 4 351 362 (PubMed: 25405649) 25405649
Liu L Drouet V Wu JW Witter MP Small SA Clelland C Duff K Trans-synaptic spread of tau pathology in vivo PLoS One 2012 7 e31302 (PubMed: 22312444) 22312444
Liu F Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Gong CX Contributions of protein phosphatases PP1, PP2A, PP2B and PP5 to the regulation of tau phosphorylation Eur. J. Neurosci 2005 22 1942 1950 (PubMed: 16262633) 16262633
Liu L Zhang S Zhu Y Fu Q Zhu Y Gong Y Ohtsu H Luo J Wei E Chen Z Improved learning and memory of contextual fear conditioning and hippocampal CA1 long-term potentiation in histidine decarboxylase knock-out mice Hippocampus 2007 17 634 641 (PubMed: 17534971) 17534971
Liu RY Zhou JN van Heerikhuize J Hofman MA Swaab DF Decreased melatonin levels in postmortem cerebrospinal fluid in relation to aging, Alzheimer's disease, and apolipoprotein E-ε4/4 genotype J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 1999 84 323 327 (PubMed: 9920102) 9920102
Liu Y Yoo MJ Savonenko A Stirling W Price DL Borchelt DR Mamounas L Lyons WE Blue ME Lee MK Amyloid pathology is associated with progressive monoaminergic neurodegeneration in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease J. Neurosci 2008 28 13805 13814 (PubMed: 19091971) 19091971
Loehrer E Vernooij MW Ikram MA Cerebral microbleeds: spatial distribution implications Transl. Neurosci 2014 5 160 163
Lowenberg K Waggoner R Familial organic psychosis (Alzheimer’s type) Arch. Neurol 1934 31 737
Lucey BP Holtzman DM How amyloid, sleep and memory connect Nat. Neurosci 2015 18 933 934 (PubMed: 26108720) 26108720
Luk C Vandrovcova J Malzer E Lees A de Silva R Brain tau isoform mRNA and protein correlation in PSP brain Transl. Neurosci 2010 1 30 36
Luna-Muñoz J Harrington CR Wischik CM Flores-Rodríguez P Avila J Zamudio SR De la Cruz F Mena R Meraz-Ríos MA Floran-Garduño B Zerr I Phosphorylation of tau protein associated as a protective mechanism in the presence of toxic, C-terminally truncated tau in Alzheimer's disease Understanding Alzheimer's disease 2013 Rijeka, Croatia InTech 89 107
Luo Y Ma B Nussinov R Wei G Structural insight into tau protein’s paradox of intrinsically disordered behavior, self-acetylation activity, and aggregation J. Phys. Chem. Lett 2014 5 3026 3031 (PubMed: 25206938) 25206938
Ma QF Li YM Du JT Kanazawa K Nemoto T Nakanishi H Zhao YF Binding of copper (II) ion to an Alzheimer's tau peptide as revealed by MALDI-TOF MS, CD, and NMR Biopolymers 79 74 85 (PubMed: 15986501)
Mackenzie IR Neumann M Bigio EH Cairns NJ Alafuzoff I Kril J Kovacs GG Ghetti B Halliday G Holm IE Ince PG Kamphorst W Revesz T Rozenmuller AJ Kumar-Singh S Akiyama H Baborie A Spina S Disckson DW Trojanowski JQ Mann DM Nomenclature and nosology for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an update Acta Neuropathol 2010 119 1 4 (PubMed: 19924424) 19924424
Maher-Edwards G Dixon R Hunter J Gold M Hopton G Jacobs G Hunter J Williams P SB-742457 and donepezil in Alzheimer disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled study Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2011 26 536 544 (PubMed: 20872778) 20872778
Mamounas LA Mullen CA O’Hearn E Molliver ME Dual serotoninergic projections to forebrain in the rat: morphologically distinct 5-HT axon terminals exhibit differential vulnerability to neurotoxic amphetamine derivatives J. Comp. Neurol 1991 314 558 586 (PubMed: 1814975) 1814975
Mandel S Amit T Bar-Am O Youdim MB Iron dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease: multimodal brain permeable iron chelating drugs, possessing neuroprotective-neurorescue and amyloid precursor protein-processing regulatory activities as therapeutic agents Prog. Neurobiol 2007 82 348 360 (PubMed: 17659826) 17659826
Mandelkow E von Bergen M Biernat J Mandelkow EM Structural principles of tau and the paired helical filaments of Alzheimer's disease Brain Pathol 2007 17 83 90 (PubMed: 17493042) 17493042
Mandybur TI The distribution of Alzheimer's neurofibrillary tangles and gliosis in chronic subacute sclerosing panencephalitis Acta Neuropathol 1990 80 307 310 (PubMed: 1698006) 1698006
Mann DM Yates PO Marcyniuk B Ravindra CR The topography of plaques and tangles in Down's syndrome patients of different ages Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 1986 12 447 457 (PubMed: 2946973) 2946973
Manning G Whyte DB Martinez R Hunter T Sudarsanam S The protein kinase complement of the human genome Science 2002 298 1912 1934 (PubMed: 12471243) 12471243
Marner L Frokjaer VG Kalbitzer J Lehel S Madsen K Baaré WF Knudsen GM Hasselbalch SG Loss of serotonin 2A receptors exceeds loss of serotonergic projections in early Alzheimer’s disease: a combined [11C]DASB and [18F]altanserin-PET study Neurobiol. Aging 2012 33 479 487 (PubMed: 20510480) 20510480
Martignoni E Bono G Blandini F Sinforiani E Merlo P Nappi G Monoamines and related matabolite levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with dementia of Alzheimer type. Influence of treatment with L-deprenyl J. Neural. Transm. Park. Dis. Dement. Sect 1991 3 15 25 (PubMed: 1712206) 1712206
Martorana A Di Lorenzo F Esposito Z Lo Giudice T Bernardi G Caltagirone C Koch G Dopamine D2-agonist rotigotine effects on cortical excitability and central cholinergic transmission in Alzheimer's disease patients Neuropharmacology 2013 64 108 113 (PubMed: 22863599) 22863599
Mastroeni D McKee A Grover A Rogers J Coleman PD Epigenetic differences in cortical neurons from a pair of monozygotic twins discordant for Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 2009 4 e6617 (PubMed: 19672297) 19672297
Mastroeni D Grover A Delvaux E Whiteside C Coleman PD Rogers J Epigenetic changes in Alzheimer's disease: decrements in DNA methylation Neurobiol. Aging 2010 31 2025 2037 (PubMed: 19117641) 19117641
Matsubara E Bryant-Thomas T Pacheco QJ Henry TL Poeggeler B Herbert D Cruz-Sanchez F Chyan YJ Smith MA Perry G Shoji M Abe K Leone A Grundke-Ikbal I Wilson GL Ghiso J Williams C Refolo LM Pappolla MA Chain DG Neria E Melatonin increases survival and inhibits oxidative and amyloid pathology in a transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease J. Neurochem 2003 85 1101 1108 (PubMed: 12753069) 12753069
Mawuenyega KG Sigurdson W Ovod V Munsell L Kasten T Morris JC Yarasheski KE Bateman RJ Decreased clearance of CNS Aβ in Alzheimer's disease Science 2010 330 1774 (PubMed: 21148344) 21148344
McCarron MO Nicoll JA Apolipoprotein E genotype and cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related hemorrhage Ann. NY Acad. Sci 2000 903 176 179 (PubMed: 10818505) 10818505
McKhann G Drachman D Folstein M Katzman R Price D Stadlan EM Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: report of the NINCDS-ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of Department of Health and Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer's Disease Neurology 1984 34 939 944 (PubMed: 6610841) 6610841
McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H Hyman BT Jack CR Jr Kawas CH Klunk WE Koroshetz WJ Manly JJ Mayeux R Mohs RS Morris JC Rossor MN Scheltens P Carrillo MC Thies B Weintraub S Phelps CH The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging – Alzheimer’s Association work groups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 263 269 (PubMed: 21514250) 21514250
Medhurst AD Atkins AR Beresford IJ Brackenborough K Briggs MA Calver AR Cilia J Cluderay JE Crook B Davis JB Davis RK Davis RP Dawson LA Foley AG Gartlon J Gonzalez MI Heslop T Hirst WD Jennings C Jones DN Lacroix LP Martyn A Ociepka S Ray A Regan CM Roberts JC Schogger J Southam E Stean TO Trail BK Upton N Wadsworth G Wald JA White T Witherington J Woolley ML Worby A Wilson DM GSK189254, a novel H3 receptor antagonist that binds to histamine H3 receptors in Alzheimer’s disease brain and improves cognitive performance in preclinical models J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 2007 321 1032 1045 (PubMed: 17327487) 17327487
Medhurst AD Roberts JC Lee J Chen CP Brown SH Roman S Lai MK Characterization of histamine H3 receptors in Alzheimer's Disease brain and amyloid over-expressing TASTPM mice Br. J. Pharmacol 2009 157 130 138 (PubMed: 19222483) 19222483
Mendez MF Frontotemporal dementia: therapeutic interventions Front. Neurol. Neurosci 2009 24 168 178 (PubMed: 19182475) 19182475
Michelsen KA Prickaerts J Steinbusch HW The dorsal raphe nucleus and serotonin: implications for neuroplasticity linked to major depression and Alzheimer’s disease Prog. Brain Res 2008 172 233 264 (PubMed: 18772036) 18772036
Min SW Chen X Tracy TE Li Y Zhou Y Wang C Shirakawa K Minami SS Defensor E Mok SA Sohn PD Schilling B Cong X Ellerby L Gibson BW Johnson J Krogan N Shamloo M Gestwicki J Masliah E Verdin E Gan L Critical roles of acetylation in tau-mediated neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits Nat. Med 2015 21 1154 1162 (PubMed: 26390242) 26390242
Mirra SS Heyman A McKeel D Sumi SM Crain BJ Brownlee LM Vogel FS Hughes JP van Belle G Berg L The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD). Part II. Standardization of the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1991 41 479 486 (PubMed: 2011243) 2011243
Mishima K Tozawa T Satoh K Matsumoto Y Hishikawa Y Okawa M Melatonin secretion rhythm disorders in patients with senile dementia of Alzheimer's type with disturbed sleep-waking Biol. Psychiatry 1999 45 417 421 (PubMed: 10071710) 10071710
Mitchell RA Herrmann N Lanctot KL The role of dopamine in symptoms and treatment of apathy in Alzheimer’s disease CNS Neurosci. Ther 2011 17 411 427 (PubMed: 20560994) 20560994
Mladinov M Mayer D Brčić L Wolstencroft E Man N Holt I Hof PR Morris GE Šimić G Astrocyte expression of D2-like dopamine receptors in the prefrontal cortex Transl. Neurosci 2010 1 238 243
Mochizuki H Tashiro M Tagawa M Kano M Itoh M Okamura N Watanabe T Yanai K The effects of a sedative antihistamine, d-chlorpheniramine, on visuomotor spatial discrimination and regional brain activity as measured by positron emission tomography (PET) Hum. Psychopharmacol 2002 17 413 418 (PubMed: 12457377) 12457377
Montagne A Barnes SR Sweeney MD Halliday MR Sagare AP Zhao Z Toga AW Jacobs RE Liu CY Amezcua L Harrington MG Chui HC Law M Zlokovic BV Blood-brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippocampus Neuron 2015 85 296 302 (PubMed: 25611508) 25611508
Monti JM Serotonin control of sleep-wake behavior Sleep Med. Rev 2011 15 269 281 (PubMed: 21459634) 21459634
Monti JM Alvarino F Cardinali DP Savio I Pintos A Polysomnographic study of the effect of melatonin on sleep in elderly patients with chronic primary insomnia Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr 1999 28 85 98 (PubMed: 15374088) 15374088
Montine TJ Phelps CH Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Dickson DW Duyckaerts C Frotsch MP Masliah E Mirra SS Nelson PT Schneider JA Thal DR Trojanowski JQ Vinters HV Hyman BT National Institute on Aging - Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach Acta Neuropathol 2012 123 1 11 (PubMed: 22101365) 22101365
Morris JC The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules Neurology 1993 43 2412 2414 (PubMed: 8232972)
Morrison JH Foote SL Noradrenergic and serotoninergic innervation of cortical, thalamic, and tectal visual structures in Old and New World monkeys J. Comp. Neurol 1986 243 117 138 (PubMed: 3950077) 3950077
Motawaj M Peoc'h K Callebert J Arrang JM CSF levels of the histamine metabolite tele-methylhistamine are only slightly decreased in Alzheimer's disease J. Alzheimers Dis 2010 22 861 871 (PubMed: 20858978) 20858978
Mravec B Lejavova K Cubinkova V Locus (coeruleus) minoris resistentiae in pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease Curr. Alzheimer Res 2014 11 992 1001 (PubMed: 25387337) 25387337
Murray ME Kouri N Lin WL Jack CR Jr Dickson DW Vemuri P Clinicopathologic assessment and imaging of tauopathies in neurodegenerative dementias Alzheimers Res. Ther 2014 6 1 (PubMed: 24382028) 24382028
Mustapić M Presečki P Pivac N Mimica N Hof PR Šimić G Folnegović-Šmalc V Mück-Šeler D Genotype-independent decrease in plasma dopamine β-hydroxylase activity in Alzheimer’s disease Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 2013 44 94 99 (PubMed: 23416088) 23416088
Mychack P Rosen H Miller BL Novel applications of social-personality measures to the study of dementia Neurocase 2001 7 131 143 (PubMed: 11320161) 11320161
Nagy Z Yilmazer-Hanke DM Braak H Braak E Schultz C Hanke J Assessment of the pathological stages of Alzheimer’s disease in thin paraffin sections: a comparative study Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 1998 9 140 144 (PubMed: 9622001) 9622001
Naj AC Jun G Beecham GW Wang LS Vardarajan BN Buros J Gallins PJ Buxbaum JD Jarvik GP Crane PK Larson EB Bird TD Boeve BF Graff-Radford NR De Jager PL Evans D Schneider JA Carrasquillo MM Ertekin-Taner N Younkin SG Cruchaga C Kauwe JS Nowotny P Kramer P Hardy J Huentelman MJ Myers AJ Barmada MM Demirci FY Baldwin CT Green RC Rogaeva E St George-Hyslop P Arnold SE Barber R Beach T Bigio EH Bowen JD Boxer A Burke JR Cairns NJ Carlson CS Carney RM Carroll SL Chui HC Clark DG Corneveaux J Cotman CW Cummings JL DeCarli C DeKosky ST Diaz-Arrastia R Dick M Dickson DW Ellis WG Faber KM Fallon KB Farlow MR Ferris S Frosch MP Galasko DR Ganguli M Gearing M Geschwind DH Ghetti B Gilbert JR Gilman S Giordani B Glass JD Growdon JH Hamilton RL Harrell LE Head E Honig LS Hulette CM Hyman BT Jicha GA Jin LW Johnson N Karlawish J Karydas A Kaye JA Kim R Koo EH Kowall NW Lah JJ Levey AI Lieberman AP Lopez OL Mack WJ Marson DC Martiniuk F Mash DC Masliah E McCormick WC McCurry SM McDavid AN McKee AC Mesulam M Miller BL Miller CA Miller JW Parisi JE Perl DP Peskind E Petersen RC Poon WW Quinn JF Rajbhandary RA Raskind M Reisberg B Ringman JM Roberson ED Rosenberg RN Sano M Schneider LS Seeley W Shelanski ML Slifer MA Smith CD Sonnen JA Spina S Stern RA Tanzi RE Trojanowski JQ Troncoso JC Van Deerlin VM Vinters HV Vonsattel JP Weintraub S Welsh-Bohmer KA Williamson J Woltjer RL Cantwell LB Dombroski BA Beekly D Lunetta KL Martin ER Kamboh MI Saykin AJ Reiman EM Bennett DA Morris JC Montine TJ Goate AM Blacker D Tsuang DW Hakonarson H Kukull WA Foroud TM Haines JL Mayeux R Pericak-Vance MA Farrer LA Schellenberg GD Common variants in MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease Nat. Genet 2011 43 436 441 (PubMed: 21460841) 21460841
Nakamura S Takemura M Ohnishi K Suenaga T Nishimura M Akiguchi I Kimura J Kimura T Loss of large neurons and occurrence of neurofibrillary tangles in the tuberomammillary nucleus of patients with Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci. Lett 1993 151 196 199 (PubMed: 8506080) 8506080
Namboodiri MA Dubbels R Klein DC Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase from mammalian pineal gland Methods Enzymol 1987 142 583 590 (PubMed: 3298986) 3298986
Nazarali AJ Reynolds GP Monoamine neurotransmitters and their metabolites in brain regions in Alzheimer’s disease: a postmortem study Cell Mol. Neurobiol 1992 12 581 587 (PubMed: 1283363) 1283363
Nelson PT Alafuzoff I Bigio EH Bouras C Braak H Cairns NJ Castellani RJ Crain BJ Davies P Del Tredici K Duyckaerts C Frosch MP Haroutunian V Hof PR Hulette CM Hyman BT Iwatsubo T Jellinger KA Jicha GA Kövari E Kukull WA Leverenz JB Love S Mackenzie IR Mann DM Masliah E McKee AC Montine TJ Morris JC Schneider JA Sonnen JA Thal DR Trojanowski JQ Troncoso JC Wisniewski T Woltjer RL Beach TG Correlation of Alzheimer’s disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 2012 71 362 381 (PubMed: 22487856) 22487856
Nelson PT Abner EL Schmitt FA Kryscio RJ Jicha GA Santacruz K Smith CD Patel E Markesbery WR Brains with medial temporal lobe neurofibrillary tangles but no neuritic amyloid plaques are a diagnostic dilemma but may have pathogenetic aspects distinct from Alzheimer disease J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 2009 68 774 784 (PubMed: 19535994) 19535994
Nieuwenhuys R Voogd J van Huijzen C The human central nervous system 2008 4th New York Springer 889 916
Noristani HN Meadows RS Olabarria M Verkhratsky A Rodríguez JJ Increased hippocampal CA1 density of serotonergic terminals in a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease: an ultrastructural study Cell Death Dis 2011 2 e210 (PubMed: 21918544) 21918544
O’Bryant SE Waring SC Cullum CM Hall J Lacritz L Massman PJ Lupo PJ Reisch JS Doody R Texas Alzheimer’s Research Consortium Staging dementia using Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes scores: a Texas Alzheimer’s research consortium study Arch. Neurol 2008 65 1091 1095 (PubMed: 18695059) 18695059
O’Hearn E Molliver ME Organization of raphe-cortical projections in rat: a quantitative retrograde study Brain Res. Bull 1984 13 709 726 (PubMed: 6099744) 6099744
Ohm TG Heilmann R Braak H The human oral raphe system. Architectonics and neuronal types in pigment-Nissl preparations Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 1989 180 37 43 (PubMed: 2476947) 2476947
Okamura N Arai H Maruyama M Higuchi M Matsui T Tanji H Seki T Hirai H Chiba H Itoh M Sasaki H Combined analysis of CSF tau levels and [123I] iodoamphetamine SPECT in mild cognitive impairment: implications for a novel predictor of Alzheimer’s disease Am. J. Psychatry 2002 159 474 476 (PubMed: 11870015)
Okochi M Steiner H Fukumori A Tanii H Tomita T Tanaka T Iwatsubo T Kudo T Takeda M Haass C Presenilins mediate a dual intramembranous gamma-secretase cleavage of Notch-1 EMBO J 2002 21 5408 5416 (PubMed: 12374741) 12374741
Okun I Tkachenko SE Khvat A Mitkin O Kazey V Ivachtchenko AV From anti-allergic to anti-Alzheimer's: molecular pharmacology of Dimebon Curr. Alzheimer Res 2010 7 97 112 (PubMed: 19939222) 19939222
Onishchenko N Karpova N Sabri F Castrén E Ceccatelli S Long-lasting depression like behavior and epigenetic changes of BDNF gene expression induced by perinatal exposure to methylmercury J. Neurochem 2008 106 1378 1387 (PubMed: 18485098) 18485098
Ono S Kanda F Takahashi K Fukuoka Y Jinnai K Kurisaki H Mitake S Inagaki T Nagao K Neuronal cell loss in the dorsal raphe nucleus and the superior central nucleus in myotonic dystrophy: a clinicopathological correlation Acta Neuropathol 1995 89 122 125 (PubMed: 7732784) 7732784
Ono S Takahashi K Jinnai K Kanda F Fukuoka Y Kurisaki H Mitake S Inagaki T Yamano T Nagao K Loss of serotonin-containing neurons in the raphe of patients with myotonic dystrophy: a quantitative immunohistochemical study and relation to hypersomnia Neurology 1998 50 535 538 (PubMed: 9484393) 9484393
Ownby RL Crocco E Acevedo A John V Loewenstein D Depression and risk for Alzheimer disease: systematic review, meta-analysis, and metaregression analysis Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2006 63 530 538 (PubMed: 16651510) 16651510
Oyamada R Hayashi M Katoh Y Tsuchiya K Mizutani T Tominaga I Kashima H Neurofibrillary tangles and deposition of oxidative products in the brain in cases of myotonic dystrophy Neuropathology 2006 26 107 114 (PubMed: 16708543) 16708543
Palmer AM Wilcock GK Esiri MM Francis PT Bowen DM Monoaminergic innervation of the frontal and temporal lobes in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res 1987 401 231 238 (PubMed: 2434191) 2434191
Pamphlett R Kum Jew S Different populations of human locus ceruleus neurons contain heavy metals or hyperphosphorylated tau: implications for amyloid-β and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease J. Alzheimers Dis 2015 45 437 447 (PubMed: 25547633) 25547633
Pandi-Perumal SR Zisapel N Srinivasan V Cardinali DP Melatonin and sleep in aging population Exp. Gerontol 2005 40 911 925 (PubMed: 16183237) 16183237
Panula P Airaksinen MS Pirvola U Kotilainen E A histamine-containing neuronal system in human brain Neuroscience 1990 34 127 132 (PubMed: 2325846) 2325846
Panula P Chazot PL Cowart M Gutzmer R Leurs R Liu WLS Stark H Thurmond RL Haas HL International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. XCVIII. Histamine receptors Pharmacol. Rev 2015 67 601 655 (PubMed: 26084539) 26084539
Panula P Rinne J Kuokkanen K Eriksson KS Sallmen T Kalimo H Relja M Neuronal histamine deficit in Alzheimer's disease Neuroscience 1998 82 993 997 (PubMed: 9466423) 9466423
Parnetti L Gaiti A Reboldi GP Santucci C Mecocci P Brunetti M Cadini D Senin U CSF monoamine metabolites in old age dementias Mol. Chem. Neuropathol 1992 16 143 157 (PubMed: 1381590) 1381590
Patel PD Pontrello C Burke S Robust and tissue-specific expression of TPH2 versus TPH1 in rat raphe and pineal gland Biol. Psychiatry 2004 55 428 433 (PubMed: 14960297) 14960297
Patwardhan MB McCrory DC Matchar DB Samsa GP Rutschmann OT Alzheimer’s disease: operating characteristics of PET – a meta-analysis Radiology 2004 231 73 80 (PubMed: 15068942) 15068942
Pearson J Halliday G Sakamoto N Michel P Paxinos G Catecholaminergic neurons The Human Nervous System 1990 Academic Press San Diego 1023 1049
Peeraer E Bottelbergs A Van Kolen K Stancu IC Vasconcelos B Mahieu M Duytschaever H Ver Donck L Torremans A Sluydts E Van Acker N Kemp JA Mercken M Brunden KR Trojanowski JQ Dewachter I Lee VM Moechars D Intracerebral injection of preformed synthetic tau fibrils initiates widespread tauopathy and neuronal loss in the brains of the transgenic mice Neurobiol. Dis 2015 73 83 95 (PubMed: 25220759) 25220759
Perez M Santa-Maria I Gomez de Barreda E Zhu X Cuadros R Cabrero JR Sanchez-Madrid F Dawson HN Vitek MP Perry G Smith MA Avila J Tau – an inhibitor of deacetylase HDAC6 function J. Neurochem 2009 109 1756 1766 (PubMed: 19457097) 19457097
Petrov T Krukoff TL Jhamandas JH Branching projections of catecholaminergic brainstem neurons to the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus and the central nucleus of the amygdala in the rat Brain Res 1993 609 81 92 (PubMed: 8099526) 8099526
Pimenova AA Thathiah A De Strooper B Tesseur I Regulation of amyloid precursor protein processing by serotonin signaling PLoS One 2014 21 e87014 (PubMed: 2446315)
Piñeyro G Blier P Autoregulation of serotonin neurons: role in antidepressant drug action Pharmacol. Rev 1999 51 533 591 (PubMed: 10471417) 10471417
Pinessi L Rainero I De Gennaro T Gentile S Portaleone P Bergamasco B Biogenic amines in cerebrospinal fluid and plasma of patients with dementia of Alzheimer type Funct. Neurol 1987 2 51 58 (PubMed: 3678940) 3678940
Pishva E Kenis G Lesch KP Prickaerts J Steinbusch HMW van den Hove DLA van Os J Rutten BP Epigenetic epidemiology in psychiatry: a translational neuroscience perspective Transl. Neurosci 2012 3 196 212
Planel E Miyasaka T Launey T Chui DH Tanemura K Sato S Murayama O Ishiguro K Tatebayashi Y Takashima A Alterations in glucose metabolism induce hypothermia leading to tau hyperphosphorylation through differential inhibition of kinase and phosphatase activities: implications for Alzheimer’s disease J. Neurosci 2004 24 2401 2411 (PubMed: 15014115) 15014115
Porter RJ Lunn BS Walker LL Gray JM Ballard CG O'Brien JT Cognitive deficit induced by acute tryptophan depletion in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Am. J. Psychiatry 2000 157 638 640 (PubMed: 10739429) 10739429
Prast H Argyriou A Philippu A Histaminergic neurons facilitate social memory in rats Brain Res 1996 734 316 318 (PubMed: 8896839) 8896839
Previc FH Dopamine and the origins of human intelligence Brain Cogn 1999 41 299 350 (PubMed: 10585240) 10585240
Qu BX Gong Y Moore C Fu M German DC Chang LY Rosenberg R Diaz-Arrastia R Aβ auto-antibodies are reduced in Alzheimer's disease J. Neuroimmunol 2014 274 168 173 (PubMed: 25022335) 25022335
Raghanti MA Stimpson CD Marcinkiewicz JL Erwin JM Hof PR Sherwood CC Differences in cortical serotonergic innervation among humans, chimpanzees, and macaque monkeys: a comparative study Cereb. Cortex 2008a 18 584 597 (PubMed: 17586605) 17586605
Raghanti MA Stimpson CD Marcinkiewicz JL Erwin JM Hof PR Sherwood CC Cortical dopaminergic innervation among humans, chimpanzees, and macaque monkeys: a comparative study Neuroscience 2008b 155 203 220 (PubMed: 18562124) 18562124
Raghanti MA Spocter MA Stimpson CD Erwin JM Bonar CJ Allman JM Hof PR Sherwood CC Species-specific distribution of tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactive neurons in the prefrontal cortex of anthropoid primates Neuroscience 2009 158 1551 1559 (PubMed: 19041377) 19041377
Raghanti MA Šimić G Watson S Stimpson CD Hof PR Sherwood CC Comparative analysis of the nucleus basalis of Meynert among primates Neuroscience 2011 184 1 15 (PubMed: 21504783) 21504783
Ramirez MJ Lai MK Tordera RM Francis PT Serotonergic therapies for cognitive symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease: rationale and current status Drugs 2014 74 729 736 (PubMed: 24802806) 24802806
Raskind MA Peskind ER Holmes C Goldstein DS Patterns of cerebrospinal fluid catechols support increased central noradrenergic responsiveness in aging and Alzheimer's disease Biol. Psychiatry 1999 46 756 765 (PubMed: 10494443) 10494443
Reifler BV Teri L Raskind M Veith R Barnes R White E McLean P Doubleblind trial of imipramine in Alzheimer’s disease patients with and without depression Am. J. Psychiatry 1989 146 45 49 (PubMed: 2643356) 2643356
Revesz T Sangha H Daniel SE The nucleus raphe interpositus in the Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome (progressive supranuclear palsy) Brain 1996 119 1137 1143 (PubMed: 8813278) 8813278
Ramakrishna N Wolfe G Silverman WP Brown WT Chromosome 21q21 sublocalisation of gene encoding Aβ peptide in cerebral vessels and neuritic (senile) plaques of people with Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome Lancet 1987 1 384 385 (PubMed: 2880184) 2880184
Roberson ED Scearce-Levie K Palop JJ Yan F Cheng IH Wu T Gerstein H Yu GQ Mucke L Reducing endogeneous tau ameliorates Aβ-induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model Science 2007 316 750 754 (PubMed: 17478722) 17478722
Roh JH Huang Y Bero AW Kasten T Stewart FR Bateman RJ Holtzman DM Disruption of the sleep-wake cycle and diurnal fluctuation of β-amyloid in mice with Alzheimer's disease pathology Sci. Transl. Med 2012 4 150ra122 (PubMed: 22956200)
Rosenberg PB Mielke MM Tschanz J Cook L Corcoran C Hayden KM Norton M Rabins PV Green RC Welsh-Bohmer KA Breitne JC Munger R Lyketsos CG Effects of cardiovascular medications on rate of functional decline in Alzheimer disease Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2008 16 883 892 (PubMed: 18978249) 18978249
Rubinsztein DC The roles of intracellular protein-degradation pathways in neurodegeneration Nature 2006 443 780 786 (PubMed: 17051204) 17051204
Russo-Neustadt A Cotman CW Adrenergic receptors in Alzheimer's disease brain: selective increases in the cerebella of aggressive patients J. Neurosci 1997 17 5573 5589 (PubMed: 9204938) 9204938
Rüb U Del Tredici K Schultz C de Vos RA Jansen Steur EN Arai K Braak H Progressive supranuclear palsy: neuronal and glial cytoskeletal pathology in the higher order processing autonomic nuclei of the lower brainstem Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 2002 28 12 22 (PubMed: 11849559) 11849559
Rüb U Del Tredici K Schultz C Thal DR Braak E Braak H The evolution of Alzheimer’s disease-related cytoskeletal pathology in the human raphe nuclei Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 2000 26 553 567 (PubMed: 11123722) 11123722
Ruffolo RR Jr Hieble JP α-Adrenoceptors Pharmacol. Ther 1994 61 1 64 (PubMed: 7938167) 7938167
Sabbagh MN Drug development for Alzheimer’s disease: where are we now and where are we headed? Am. J. Geriatr. Pharmacother 2009 7 167 185 (PubMed: 19616185) 19616185
Sadun AA Schaechter JD Smith LE A retinohypothalamic pathway in man: light mediation of circadian rhythms Brain Res 1984 302 371 377 (PubMed: 6733517) 6733517
Salzman C Treatment of the agitation of late-life psychosis and Alzheimer’s disease Eur. Psychiatry. Suppl 2001 1 25s 28s (PubMed: 11520475)
Samuels ER Szabadi E Functional Neuroanatomy of the Noradrenergic Locus Coeruleus: Its Roles in the Regulation of Arousal and Autonomic Function Part II: Physiological and Pharmacological Manipulations and Pathological Alterations of Locus Coeruleus Activity in Humans Curr. Neuropharmacol 2008 6 254 285 (PubMed: 19506724) 19506724
Sanchez-Mut JV Heyn H Vidal E Moran S Sayols S Delgado-Morales M Schultz D Ansoleaga B Garcia-Esparcia P Pons-Espinal M de Lagran MM Dopazo J Rabano A Avila J Dierssen M Lott I Ferrer I Ecker JR Esteller M Human DNA methylomes of neurodegenerative diseases show common epigenomic patterns Transl. Psychiatry 2016 6 e718 (PubMed: 26784972) 26784972
Sato S Mizukami K Asada T A preliminary open-label study of 5-HT1A partial agonist tandospirone for behavioural and psychological symptoms associated with dementia Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol 2007 10 281 283 (PubMed: 16817981) 16817981
Saunders A Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel D St George-Hyslop PH Pericak-Vance MA Joo SH Rosi BL Gusella JF Crapper-MacLachlan DR Alberts MJ Association of apoliprotein E allele ε4 with the late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease Neurology 1993 43 1467 1472 (PubMed: 8350998) 8350998
Savaskan E Ayoub MA Ravid R Angeloni D Fraschini F Meier F Eckert A Müller-Spahn F Jockers R Reduced hippocampal MT2 melatonin receptor expression in Alzheimer's disease J. Pineal Res 2005 38 10 16 (PubMed: 15617532) 15617532
Sawaguchi T Goldman-Rakic PS D1 dopamine receptors in prefrontal cortex: involvement in working memory Science 1991 251 947 950 (PubMed: 1825731) 1825731
Sawant-Basak A Coffman KJ Walker GS Ryder TF Tseng E Miller E Lee C Vanase-Frawley MA Wong JW Brodney MA Rapp T Obach RS Metabolism of a serotonin-4 receptor partial agonist 4-{4-[4-tetrahydrofuran-3-yloxy)-benzo[d]isoxazol-3-yloxymethyl]- piperidin-1-ylmethyl}-tetrahydropyran-4-ol (TBPT): identification of an unusual pharmacologically active cyclized oxazolidine metabolite in human J. Pharm. Sci 2013 102 3277 3293 (PubMed: 23589342) 23589342
Scarmeas N Brandt J Blacker D Albert M Hadjigeorgiou G Dubois B Devanand D Honig L Stern Y Disruptive behavior as a predictor in Alzheimer's disease Arch. Neurol 2007 64 1755 1761 (PubMed: 18071039) 18071039
Scarpa S Cavallaro RA D'Anselmi F Fuso A Gene silencing through methylation: an epigenetic intervention on Alzheimer's disease J. Alzheimers Dis 2006 9 407 414 (PubMed: 16917149) 16917149
Schayer RW Wetterqvist H Beaven MA Horakova Z Rocha M Metabolism and excretion of histamine Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology 1987 18/2 Berlin Springer-Verlag 109 173
Schellenberg GD Bird TD Wijsman EM Orr HT Anderson L Nemens E White JA Bonnycastle L Weber JL Alonso ME Genetic linkage evidence for a familial Alzheimer’s disease locus on chromosome 14 Science 1992 258 668 671 (PubMed: 1411576) 1411576
Schindowski K Bretteville A Leroy K Bégard S Brion JP Hamdane M Buée L Alzheimer's disease-like tau neuropathology leads to memory deficits and loss of functional synapses in a novel mutated tau transgenic mouse without any motor deficits Am. J. Pathol 2006 169 599 616 (PubMed: 16877359) 16877359
Schultz W Getting formal with dopamine and reward Neuron 2002 36 241 263 (PubMed: 12383780) 12383780
Scott JM Weir DG The methyl folate trap. A physiological response in man to prevent methyl group deficiency in kwashiorkor (methionine deficiency) and an explanation for folic-acid induced exacerbation of subacute combined degeneration in pernicious anaemia Lancet 1981 2 337 340 (PubMed: 6115113) 6115113
Scullion GA Kendall DA Marsden CA Sunter D Pardon MC Chronic treatment with the alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist fl uparoxan prevents age-related deficits in spatial working memory in APPxPS1 transgenic mice without altering Aβ plaque load or astrocytosis Neuropharmacology 2011 60 223 234 (PubMed: 20850464) 20850464
Selkoe DJ The molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 1991 6 487 498 (PubMed: 1673054) 1673054
Serfaty M Kennell-Webb S Warner J Blizard R Raven P Double blind randomised placebo controlled trial of low dose melatonin for sleep disorders in dementia Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2002 17 1120 1127 (PubMed: 12461760) 12461760
Seyedabadi M Fakhfouri G Ramezani V Mehr SE Rahimian R The role of serotonin in memory: interactions with neurotransmitters and downstream signalling Exp. Brain Res 2014 232 723 738 (PubMed: 24430027) 24430027
Shan L Swaab DF Bao AM Neuronal histaminergic system in aging and age-related neurodegenerative disorders Exp. Gerontol 2013 48 603 607 (PubMed: 22910064) 22910064
Shan L Bao AM Swaab DF The human histaminergic system in neuropsychiatric disorders Trends Neurosci 2015 38 167 177 (PubMed: 25575625) 25575625
Shankle WR Nielson KA Cotman CW Low-dose pro pranolol reduces aggression and agitation resembling that associated with orbitofrontal dysfunction in elderly demented patients Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 1995 9 233 237 (PubMed: 8749613) 8749613
Sheline YI Raichle ME Resting state functional connectivity in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Biol. Psychiatry 2013 74 340 347 (PubMed: 23290495) 23290495
Shen J Bronson RT Chen DF Xia W Selkoe DJ Tonegawa S Skeletal and CNS defects in Presenilin-1-deficient mice Cell 1997 89 629 639 (PubMed: 9160754) 9160754
Shen F Smith JA Chang R Bourdet DL Tsuruda PR Obedencio GP Beattie DT 5-HT4 receptor agonist mediated enhancement of cognitive function in vivo and amyloid precursor protein processing in vitro: a pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic assessment Neuropharmacology 2011 61 69 79 (PubMed: 21392515) 21392515
Sherrington R Rogaev EI Liang Y Rogaeva EA Levesque G Ikeda M Chi H Lin C Li G Holman K Tsuda T Mar L Foncin JF Bruni AC Montesi MP Sorbi S Rainero I Pinessi L Nee L Chumakov I Pollen D Brookes A Sanseau P Polinsky RJ Wasco W Da Silva HA Haines JL Perkicak-Vance MA Tanzi RE Roses AD Fraser PE Rommens JM St George-Hyslop PH Cloning of a gene bearing missense mutations in early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease Nature 1995 375 754 760 (PubMed: 7596406) 7596406
Shiozawa M Fukutani Y Sasaki K Isaki K Hamano T Hirayama M Imamura K Mukai M Arai N Cairns NJ Corticobasal degeneration: an autopsy case clinically diagnosed as progressive supranuclear palsy Clin. Neuropathol 2000 19 192 199 (PubMed: 10919351) 10919351
Shoji M Golde TE Ghiso J Cheung TT Estus S Shaffer LM Cai XD McKay DM Tintner R Frangione B Production of the Alzheimer Aβ protein by normal proteolytic processing Science 1992 258 126 129 (PubMed: 1439760) 1439760
Singh DB Kumar Gupta M Kumar Kesharwani R Sagar M Dwivedi S Misra K Molecular drug targets and therapies for Alzheimer’s disease Transl. Neurosci 2014 5 203 217
Singh I Sagare AP Coma M Perlmutter D Gelein R Bell RD Deane RJ Zhong E Parisi M Ciszewski J Kasper RT Deane R Low levels of copper disrupt brain Aβ homeostasis by altering its production and clearance Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013 110 14771 14776 (PubMed: 23959870) 23959870
Sinha S Lopes DH Du Z Pang ES Shanmugam A Lomakin A Talbiersky P Tennstaedt A McDaniel K Bakshi R Kuo PY Ehrmann M Benedek GB Loo JA Klärner FG Schrader T Wang C Bitan G Lysine-specific molecular tweezers are broad-spectrum inhibitors of assembly and toxicity of amyloid proteins J. Am. Chem. Soc 2011 133 16958 16969 (PubMed: 21916458) 21916458
Sjögren M Minthon L Passant U Blennow K Wallin A Decreased monoamine metabolites in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease Neuobiol. Aging 1998 19 379 384 (PubMed: 9880039)
Soininen H MacDonald E Rekonen M Riekkinen PJ Homovanillic acid and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with senile dementia of Alzheimer type Acta Neurol. Scand 1981 64 101 107 (PubMed: 6172950) 6172950
Sokolow S Henkins KM Bilousova T Gonzalez B Vinters HV Miller CA Cornwell L Poon WW Gylys KH Pre-synaptic C-terminal truncated tau is released from cortical synapses in Alzheimer’s disease J. Neurochem 2015 133 368 379 (PubMed: 25393609) 25393609
Sperling RA Aisen PS Beckett LA Bennett DA Craft S Fagan AM Iwatsubo T Jack CR Jr Kaye J Montine TJ Park DC Reiman EM Rowe CC Siemers E Stern Y Yaffe K Carrillo MC Thies B Morrison-Bogorad M Wagster MV Phelps CH Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 280 292 (PubMed: 21514248) 21514248
Srinivasan V Kaur C Pandi-Perumal S Brown GM Cardinali DP Melatonin and its agonist ramelteon in Alzheimer's disease: possible therapeutic value Int. J. Alzheimers Dis 2010 2011 741974 (PubMed: 21197086) 21197086
Steele JW Gandy S Latrepirdine (Dimebon®), a potential Alzheimer therapeutic, regulates autophagy and neuropathology in an Alzheimer mouse model Autophagy 2013 9 617 618 (PubMed: 23380933) 23380933
St George-Hyslop PH Haines JL Rogaev E Mortilla M Vaula G Pericak-Vance M Foncin JF Montesi M Bruni A Sorbi S Rainero I Pinessi L Pollen D Polinsky R Nee L Kennedy J Macciardi F Rogaeva E Liang Y Alexandrova N Lukiw W Schlumpf K Tanzi R Tsuda T Farrer L Cantu JM Duara R Amaducci L Bergamini L Gusella J Roses A Crapper McLachlan D Genetic evidence for a novel familial Alzheimer’s disease locus on chromosome 14 Nat. Genet 1992 2 330 334 (PubMed: 1303289) 1303289
Stefani A Olivola E Liguori C Hainsworth AH Saviozzi V Angileri G D'Angelo V Galati S Pierantozzi M Catecholamine-based treatment in Alzheimer’s disease patients: expectations and delusions Front. Aging Neurosci 2015 7 67 (PubMed: 25999852) 25999852
Sterniczuk R Dyck RH Laferla FM Antle MC Characterization of the 3xTg-AD mouse model of Alzheimer's disease: part 1. Circadian changes Brain Res 2010 1348 139 148 (PubMed: 20471965) 20471965
Strittmatter WJ Medicine. Old drug, new hope for Alzheimer’s disease Science 2012 335 1447 1448 (PubMed: 22442467) 22442467
Strittmatter WJ Saunders AM Schmechel D Pericak-Vance MA Enghild J Salvesen GS Roses AD Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to Aβ and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1993 90 1977 1981 (PubMed: 8446617) 8446617
Sun C Ou X Farley JM Stockmeier C Bigler S Brinton RD Wang JM Allopregnanolone increases the number of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra of a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Curr. Alzheimer Res 2012 9 473 480 (PubMed: 22272610) 22272610
Steinbusch HW van der Kooy D Verhofstad AA Pellegrino A Serotonergic and non-serotonergic projections from the nucleus raphe dorsalis to the caudate-putamen complex in the rat, studied by a combined immunofluorescence and fluorescent retrograde axonal labeling technique Neurosci. Lett 1980 19 137 142 (PubMed: 6302595) 6302595
Storga D Vrecko K Birkmayer JG Reibnegger G Monoaminergic neurotransmitters, their precursors and metabolites in brains of Alzheimer patients Neurosci. Lett 1996 203 29 32 (PubMed: 8742039) 8742039
Stuerenburg HJ Ganzer S Muller-Thomsen T 5-Hydroxy indol acetic acid and homovanillic acid concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid in patients with Alzheimer's disease, depression and mild cognitive impairment Neuro. Endorinol. Lett 2004 25 435 437 (PubMed: 15665806)
Suh J Choi SH Romano DM Gannon MA Lesinski AN Kim DY Tanzi RE ADAM10 missense mutations potentiate Aβ accumulation by impairing prodomain chaperone function Neuron 2013 80 385 401 (PubMed: 24055016) 24055016
Sweet RA Hamilton RL Healy MT Wisniewski SR Henteleff R Pollock BG Lewis DA DeKosky ST Alterations of striatal dopamine receptor binding in Alzheimer's disease are associated with Lewy body pathology and antemortem psychosis Arch. Neurol 2001 58 466 472 (PubMed: 11255451) 11255451
Szabadi E Functional neuroanatomy of the central noradrenergic system J. Psychopharmacol 2013 27 659 693 (PubMed: 23761387) 23761387
Šalković-Petrišić M Riederer P Brain glucose transporter protein 2 and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Transl. Neurosci 2010 1 200 206
Šešo-Šimić Đ Sedmak G Hof PR Šimić G Recent advances in the neurobiology of attachment behavior Transl. Neurosci 2010 1 148 159
Šimić G Mrzljak L Fučić A Winblad B Lovrić H Kostović I Nucleus subputaminalis (Ayala): the still disregarded magnocellular component of the basal forebrain may be human specific and connected with the cortical speech area Neuroscience 1999 89 73 89 (PubMed: 10051218) 10051218
Šimić G Kostović I Winblad B Bogdanović N Volume and number of neurons of the human hippocampal formation in normal aging and Alzheimer's disease J. Comp. Neurol 1997 379 482 494 (PubMed: 9067838) 9067838
Šimić G Gnjidić M Kostović I Cytoskeletal changes as an alternative view on pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease Period. Biol 1998a 100 165 173
Šimić G Winblad B Bogdanović N Relationship between hippocampal neurofibrillary degeneration and neuronal loss in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol. Aging 1998b 19 Suppl. 4 239
Šimić G Lucassen PJ Krsnik Ž Krušlin B Kostović I Winblad B Bogdanović N nNOS expression in reactive astrocytes correlates with increased cell death related DNA damage in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer’s disease Exp. Neurol 2000 165 12 26 (PubMed: 10964481) 10964481
Šimić G Pathological tau proteins in argyrophilic grain disease Lancet Neurol 2002 1 276 (PubMed: 12849422) 12849422
Šimić G Bexheti S Kelović Z Kos M Grbić K Hof PR Kostović I Hemispheric asymmetry, modular variability and age-related changes in the human entorhinal cortex Neuroscience 2005 130 911 925 (PubMed: 15652989) 15652989
Šimić G Stanić G Mladinov M Jovanov Milošević N Kostović I Hof PR Does Alzheimer's disease begin in the brainstem? Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 2009 35 532 554 (PubMed: 19682326) 19682326
Šimić G Babić M Borovečki F Hof PR Early failure of the default-mode network and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease CNS Neurosci. Ther 2014 20 692 698 (PubMed: 24712393) 24712393
Šimić G Babić Leko M Wray S Harrington C Delalle I Jovanov-Milošević N Bažadona D Buée L de Silva R Di Giovanni G Wischik C Hof PR Tau protein hyperphosphorylation and aggregation in Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies, and possible neuroprotective strategies Biomolecules 2016 6 E6 (PubMed: 26751493) 26751493
Štefulj J Panzenboeck U Hof PR Šimić G Pathogenesis, modulation, and therapy of Alzheimer’s disease: a perspective on roles of liver-X receptors Transl. Neurosci 2013 4 349 356
Takahashhi H Nakashima S Ohama E Taked S Ikuta F Distribution of serotonin-containing cell bodies in the brainstem of the human fetus determined with immunohistochemistry using antiserotonin serum Brain Dev 1986 8 355 365 (PubMed: 3541662) 3541662
Taraschenko OD Barnes WG Herrick-Davis K Yokoyama Y Boyd DL Hough LB Actions of tacrine and galanthamine on histamine-N-methyltransferase Methods Find. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol 2005 27 161 165 (PubMed: 15834447) 15834447
Tariot PN Sunderland T Weingartner H Murphy DL Welkowitz JA Thompson K Cohen RM Cognitive effects of L-deprenyl in Alzheimer’s disease Psychopharmacology 1987 91 489 495 (PubMed: 3108930) 3108930
Terry RD The pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: an alternative to the amyloid hypothesis J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 1996 55 1023 1025 (PubMed: 8857998) 8857998
Tesseur I Pimenova AA Lo AC Ciesielska M Lichtenthaler SF De Maeyer JH Schuurkes JA D'Hooge R De Strooper B Chronic 5-HT4 receptor activation decreases Aβ production and deposition in hAPP/PS1 mice Neurobiol. Aging 2013 34 1779 1789 (PubMed: 23474291) 23474291
Thal DR Griffin WS de Vos RA Ghebremedhin E Cerebral amyloid angiopathy and its relationship to Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 2008 115 599 609 (PubMed: 18369648) 18369648
Thal DR Rüb U Orantes M Braak H Phases of Aβ-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 2002 58 1791 1800 (PubMed: 12084879) 12084879
The World Alzheimer Report The global impact of dementia: an analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost and trends 2015 London Alzheimer's Disease International (ADI)
Tohgi H Ueno M Abe T Takahashi S Nozaki Y Concentrations of monoamines and their metabolites in the cerebrospinal fluid from patients with senile dementia of the Alzheimer type and vascular dementia of the Binswanger type J. Neural Transm. Park. Dis. Dement. Sect 1992 4 69 77 (PubMed: 1540305) 1540305
Törk I Anatomy of the serotonergic system Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1990 600 9 34 discussion 34–35 (PubMed: 2252340) 2252340
Törk I Hornung JP Paxinos G Raphe nuclei and serotonin containing systems The Human Nervous System 1990 San Diego, CA, USA Academic Press 1001 1022
Trabzuni D Wray S Vandrovcova J Ramasamy A Walker R Smith C Luk C Gibbs JR Dillman A Hernandez DG Arepalli S Singleton AB Cookson MR Pittman AM de Silva R Weale ME Hardy J Ryten M MAPT expression and splicing is differentially regulated by brain region: relation to genotype and implication for tauopathies Hum. Mol. Genet 2012 21 4094 4103 (PubMed 22723018) 22723018
Trillo L Das D Hsieh W Medina B Moghadam S Lin B Dang V Sanchez MM De Miguel Z Ashford JW Salehi A Ascending monoaminergic systems alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Translating basic science into clinical care Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 2013 37 1363 1379 (PubMed: 23707776) 23707776
Truchot L Costes N Zimmer L Laurent B Le Bars D Thomas-Antérion C Mercier B Hermier M Vighetto A Krolak-Salmon P A distinct [18F]MPPF PET profile in amnestic mild cognitive impairment compared to mild Alzheimer's disease Neuroimage 2008 40 1251 1256 (PubMed: 18313943) 18313943
Uro-Coste E Russano de Paiva G Guilbeau-Frugier C Sastre N Ousset PJ da Silva NA Lavialle-Guillotreau V Vellas B Delisle MB Cerebral amyloid angiopathy and microhemorrhages after Aβ vaccination: case report and brief review Clin. Neuropathol 2010 29 209 216 (PubMed: 20569670) 20569670
Valenzuela-Fernández A Cabrero JR Serrador JM Sánchez-Madrid F HDAC6: a key regulator of cytoskeleton, cell migration and cell-cell interactions Trends Cell Biol 2008 18 291 297 (PubMed: 18472263) 18472263
Yamaguchi Y Lee YA Goto Y Dopamine in socioecological and evolutionary perspectives: implications for psychiatric disorders Front. Neurosci 2015 9 219 (PubMed: 26136653) 26136653
Van Broeckhoven C Haan J Bakker E Hardy J Van Hul W Webnert A Vegter-Van der Vlis M Roos RA Aβ protein precursor gene and hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis (Dutch) Science 1990 248 1120 1122 (PubMed: 1971458) 1971458
van der Cammen TJ Tiemeier H Engelhart MJ Fekkes D Abnormal neurotransmitter metabolite levels in Alzheimer patients with a delirium Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2006 21 838 843 (PubMed: 16955437) 16955437
van Groen T Tollefsbol TO DNA methylation and Alzheimer’s disease Epigenetics of Aging 2010 Netherlands Springer 315 326
Van der Jeugd A Blum D Raison S Eddarkaoui S Buée L D'Hooge R Observations in THY-Tau22 mice that resemble behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms of dementia Behav. Brain Res 242 34 39 (PubMed: 23247080)
Vanderwolf CH Near-total loss of learning and memory as a result of combined cholinergic and serotonergic blockade in the rat Behav. Brain Res 1987 23 43 57 (PubMed: 2950902) 2950902
Varghese M Ho L Wang J Zhao W Levine S Ono K Mannino S Pasinetti GM Green coffee as a novel agent for Alzheimer’s disease prevention by attenuating diabetes Transl. Neurosci 2014 5 111 116
Vaughan GM Pelham RW Pang SF Loughlin LL Wilson KM Sandock KL Vaughan MK Koslow SH Reiter RJ Nocturnal elevation of plasma melatonin and urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in young men: attempts at modification by brief changes in environmental lighting and sleep and by autonomic drugs J Clin. Endocr. Metab 1976 42 752 764 (PubMed: 1262447) 1262447
Volicer L Langlais PJ Matson WR Mark KA Gamache PH Serotoninergic system in dementia of the Alzheimer type. Abnormal forms of 5-hydroxytryptophan and serotonin in cerebrospinal fluid Arch. Neurol 1985 42 1158 1161 (PubMed: 2415092) 2415092
Volicer L Harper DG Manning BC Goldstein R Satlin A Sundowning and circadian rhythms in Alzheimer's disease Am. J. Psychiatry 2001 158 704 711 (PubMed: 11329390) 11329390
Von Bergen M Friedhoff P Biernat J Heberle J Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E Assembly of tau protein into Alzheimer paired helical filaments depends on a local sequence motif (306VQIVYK311) forming β structure Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2000 97 5129 5134 (PubMed: 10805776) 10805776
von Staden E Neurotransmitter receptors in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Dissertation, Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakultät 2014 Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn
Vonsattel JP Myers RH Hedley-Whyte ET Ropper AH Bird ED Richardson EP Jr Cerebral amyloid angiopathy without and with cerebral hemorrhages: a comparative histological study Ann. Neurol 1991 30 637 649 (PubMed: 1763890) 1763890
Voogd J Jaarsma D Marani E Hökfelt T The cerebellum Chemoarchitecture and Anatomy 1996 Elsevier Amsterdam 1 369
Waanders-Oude Elferink M van Tilborg I Kessels RPC Perception of emotions in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s dementia: does intensity matter? Transl. Neurosci 2015 6 139 149 28123797
Walsh DM Selkoe DJ Aβ oligomers - a decade of discovery J. Neurochem 2007 101 1172 1184 (PubMed: 17286590) 17286590
Walther DJ Peter JU Bashammakh S Hörtnagl H Voits M Fink H Bader M Synthesis of serotonin by a second tryptophan hydroxylase isoform Science 2003 299 76 (PubMed: 12511643) 12511643
Wang SC Oelze B Schumacher A Age-specific epigenetic drift in late-onset Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 2008 3 e2698 (PubMed: 18628954) 18628954
Wang LY Shofer JB Rohde K Hart KL Hoff DJ McFall YH Raskind MA Peskind ER Prazosin for the treatment of behavioral symptoms in patients with Alzheimer disease with agitation and aggression Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2009 17 744 751 (PubMed: 19700947) 19700947
Wang H-Y Stucky A Hahn C-G Wilson R Bennett D Arnold S BDNF-trkB signaling in late life cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease Transl. Neurosci 2011 2 91 100
Wang L Brier MR Snyder AZ Thomas JB Fagan AM Xiong C Benzinger TL Holtzman DM Morris JC Ances BM Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ1–42, phosphorylated tau181, and resting-state functional connectivity JAMA Neurol 2013 70 1242 1248 (PubMed: 23959173) 23959173
Wang Y Mandelkow E Tau in physiology and pathology Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2016 17 22 35 (PubMed: 26631930) 26656254
Weingarten MD Lockwood AH Hwo S-Y Kirschner MW A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 1975 72 1858 1862 (PubMed: 1057175) 1057175
Weinreb O Amit T Bar-Am O Youdim MB Ladostigil: a novel multimodal neuroprotective drug with cholinesterase and brain-selective monoamine oxidase inhibitory activities for Alzheimer's disease treatment Curr. Drug Targets 2012 13 483 494 (PubMed: 22280345) 22280345
Weller RO Pathology of cerebrospinal fluid and interstitial fluid of the CNS: significance for Alzheimer disease, prion disorders and multiple sclerosis J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 1998 57 885 894 (PubMed: 9786239) 9786239
Westlund KN Bowker RM Ziegler MG Coulter JD Descending noradrenergic projections and their spinal terminations Prog. Brain Res 1982 57 219 238 (PubMed: 7470856) 6296917
Williams DR Tauopathies: classification and clinical update on neurodegenerative diseases associated with microtubule-associated protein tau Intern. Med. J 2006 36 652 660 (PubMed: 16958643) 16958643
Wolstencroft EC Šimić G thi Man N Holt I Lam, le T Buckland PR Morris GE Endosomal location of dopamine receptors in neuronal cell cytoplasm J. Mol. Histol 2007 38 333 340 (PubMed: 17593530) 17593530
Wong CW Quaranta V Glenner GG Neuritic plaques and cerebrovascular amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease are antigentically related Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1985 82 8729 8732 (PubMed 2934737) 2934737
Woodruff G Young JE Martinez FJ Buen F Gore A Kinaga J Li Z Yuan SH Zhang K Goldstein LS The presenilin-1 ΔE9 mutation results in reduced γ-secretase activity, but not total loss of PS1 function, in isogenic human stem cells Cell Rep 2013 5 974 985 (PubMed: 24239350) 24239350
Wu YH Feenstra MG Zhou JN Liu RY Toranõ JS Van Kan HJ Fischer DF Ravid R Swaab DF Molecular changes underlying reduced pineal melatonin levels in Alzheimer disease: alterations in preclinical and clinical stages J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 2003 88 5898 5906 (PubMed: 14671188) 14671188
Wurtman RJ Larin F Axelrod J Shein HM Rosasco K Formation of melatonin and 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid from 14C-tryptophan by rat pineal glands in organ culture Nature 1968 217 953 954 (PubMed: 5300432) 5300432
Yamada M Senile dementia of the neurofibrillary tangle type (tangle-only dementia): neuropathological criteria and clinical guidelines for diagnosis Neuropathology 2003 23 311 317 (PubMed: 14719548) 14719548
Yamamoto T Hirano A Nucleus raphe dorsalis in parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam Acta Neuropathol 1985 67 296 299 (PubMed: 4050345) 4050345
Yamazaki M Oyanagi K Mori O Kitamura S Ohyama M Terashi A Kitamoto T Katayama Y Variant Gerstmann-Sträussler syndrome with the P105L prion gene mutation: an unusual case with nigral degeneration and widespread neurofibrillary tangles Acta Neuropathol 1999 98 506 511 (PubMed: 10541874) 10541874
Yang Y Schmitt HP Frontotemporal dementia: evidence for impairment of ascending serotoninergic but not noradrenergic innervation. Immunocytochemical and quantitative study using a graph method Acta Neuropathol 2001 101 256 270 (PubMed: 11307626) 11307626
Yates CM Simpson J Gordon A Regional brain 5-hydroxytryptamine levels are reduced in senile Down's syndrome as in Alzheimer's disease Neurosci. Lett 1986 65 189 192 (PubMed: 2940479) 2940479
Yiannopoulou KG Papageorgiou SG Current and future treatments for Alzheimer’s disease Ther. Adv. Neurol. Disord 2013 6 19 33 (PubMed: 23277790) 23277790
Yoshimura N Otake M Igarashi K Matsunaga M Takebe K Kudo H Topography of Alzheimer's neurofibrillary change distribution in myotonic dystrophy Clin. Neuropathol 1990 9 234 239 (PubMed: 2272143) 2272143
Zhou JN Liu RY Kamphorst W Hofman MA Swaab DF Early neuropathological Alzheimer’s changes in aged individuals are accompanied by decreased cerebrospinal fluid melatonin levels J. Pineal. Res 2003 35 125 130 (PubMed: 12887656) 12887656
Zhou LX Du JT Zeng ZY Wu WH Zhao YF Kanazawa K Ishizuka Y Nemoto T Nakanishi H Li YM Copper (II) modulates in vitro aggregation of a tau peptide Peptides 2007 28 2229 2234 (PubMed: 17919778) 17919778
Zornetzer SF Catecholamine system involvement in age-related memory dysfunction Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1985 444 242 254 (PubMed: 2990292) 2990292
Zubenko GS Marquis JK Volicer L Direnfeld LK Langlais PJ Nixon RA Cerebrospinal fluid levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme, acetylcholinesterase, and dopamine metabolites in dementia associated with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease: a correlative study Biol. Psychiatry 1986 21 1365 1381 (PubMed: 3024746) 3024746
Zweig RM Ross CA Hedreen JC Steele C Cardillo JE Whitehouse PJ Folstein MF Price DL Neuropathology of aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer's disease Prog. Clin. Biol. Res 1989 317 353 365 (PubMed: 2602423) 2602423
