LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8219232
5883
Neurol Clin
Neurol Clin
Neurologic clinics
0733-8619
1557-9875

26613998
5549462
10.1016/j.ncl.2015.08.007
NIHMS881322
Article
Frontotemporal Dementia
Kelley Roger E. MD *
El-Khoury Ramy MD
Department of Neurology, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, 8065, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA
* Corresponding author. rkelley2@tulane.edu
6 7 2017
2 2016
09 8 2017
34 1 171181
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Dementia
Behavioral disturbance
Abulia
Inattention
Disinhibition
Impulsivity
Aphasia neurodegenerative disorder

OVERVIEW

A major challenge in the detection of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the potential for subtle presentation, which can result in serious consequences for patients unless the confounding early manifestations are correctly identified.1–3 This point is illustrated in the following 3 case presentations:

Case Presentation 1

A 56-year-old right-handed man is brought to your office accompanied by his wife of 30 years. He is an accountant who is on administrative leave from his work because of increasing errors over the past several months. He has been described as a mild-mannered salt-of-the-earth type who regularly attends church and serves as a deacon. However, over the past year, he has made suggestive comments to several of his female coworkers, which is highly atypical for him according to his wife, and began looking at porn sites on his computer. This behavior is also viewed as highly atypical. He comes across as a bit reserved initially, and his wife provides much of his history. Generally, he has been in excellent health outside of hypertension of several years’ duration and recently placed on a statin for dyslipidemia.

He has a college education, never smoked, drinks an occasional beer or glass of wine, and has never used illicit drugs. He has no history of sexually transmitted disease and has no history of significant head trauma. There is the question of dementia affecting his maternal grandfather in his 60s as well as a maternal uncle, but the specifics are not well known. There was an interesting recollection of a great uncle, described as a religious teetotaler, who ended up being killed in a brothel under mysterious circumstances.

The general examination is unremarkable. He does not come across as overly depressed and seems to cooperate fairly well with testing, often glancing over at his wife. On neurologic testing, he is somewhat delayed in his responses, with 2 mistakes on serial 7 subtractions, difficulty reproducing a design, and scores 27 out of 30 on the mini-mental state examination. The neurologic examination is otherwise quite normal. You order routine laboratory tests along with a serum vitamin B12 and folate level and thyroid profile with all coming back normal. A computed tomography (CT) brain scan and MRI brain scan both reveal fairly prominent frontotemporal atrophy, especially on the right. An electroencephalogram (EEG) reveals some bifrontal slowing but no epileptiform activity.

Case Presentation 2

A 62-year-old right-handed woman comes to your office with her female partner. They have lived together for the past 12 years and both have worked as elementary school teachers. The patient has been noted to having some communication issues in recent months, and it is beginning to be picked up by other teachers as well as the students. She has word-finding difficulty, with speech hesitancy, and uses inappropriate word choices at times. She has complained of some reading difficulty as well, and this is of particular concern to her as she has been an avid reader.

She has been quite healthy all her life and was a marathon runner at one time as well as a state tennis champion. She has been on no medications and continues an active daily exercise program but is noticing diminished exercise tolerance in recent months. She is quite selective in her diet and has maintained a weight of 120 lb during her adult life with a height of 5 ft 3 in. However, her weight is recorded at 114 lb in your office. The patient is surprised by this, although her partner has noticed a reduction in her typically finely toned musculature over the past half year. She has never smoked, drinks a glass of wine each evening, and does not use recreational drugs. The family history is noncontributory as she is adopted.

On examination, she looks quite healthy but has some obvious speech hesitancy and the suggestion of a mild bulbar type of dysarthria at times. The general physical is quite normal. She has some difficulty with naming and repetition, although comprehension seems to be intact. Her palate elevates symmetrically, and her gag reflex is intact. Her tongue is not of full bulk with suggestion of fasciculations. There is fair rapid alternating movement of the tongue. Strength and tone seems to be normal on motor testing, with some atrophy of the shoulder muscles; scattered fasciculations are noted. She does well with cerebellar testing and with gait, and no sensory loss is noted. Deep tendon reflexes are 3+ in both biceps and triceps and 3+ to 4− at both knees with a crossed adduction response, and there are several beats of clonus at both ankles, with the Babinski response positive on both sides and with a 2+ jaw jerk.

Brain imaging reveals the suggestion of frontal lobe atrophy, more prominent on the left. Blood tests come back fine. The cervical spine MRI is normal. Electromyography reveals increased insertional activity in several muscles of the upper and lower extremities with denervation and reinnervation changes.

Case Presentation 3

This patient is a 60-year-old gentleman whose cousin has made this appointment. He is accompanied by the cousin who provides essentially all of the history. The patient was once the life of the party and had several wives in his younger years. He was a very successful car salesman and could sell ice to the Eskimos, as his cousin termed it. He was known to drink liberally in the past and was a former smoker. He was under treatment of gout and had been treated for a manic episode by a psychiatrist several years ago. He refused to take medication for this episode and was never the same, according to his cousin. A former wife tried to make contact with him recently and found him to be somewhat rambling and incoherent on the phone leading her to call the cousin to check on him.

The cousin had found the patient in a disheveled condition in his apartment. He had not been seen by neighbors for several days and typically ventured out at night to get some groceries. The apartment was in shambles with food scattered about. The patient was noted to have poor personal hygiene. He is initially quite passive and apathetic but becomes easily irritated with any attempt at questioning him. He was not cooperative in the examination. He responds, “I don’t know,” to most questions. The examiner makes note of facial blunting and obvious bradykinesia. No tremor is noted. There is the suggestion of resistance to passive movement versus actual rigidity during the limited motor testing that the patient allows. Strength is fairly good throughout with limited cooperation in assessment of dexterity or in cerebellar function. He walks with a somewhat stooped posture with limited arm swing. A bilateral grasp reflex and suck reflex is noted.

CASE DISCUSSION

The first case illustrates the not-uncommon presentation of the behavioral form of FTD. This gentleman demonstrates personality change, which is initially subtle but progressive. Such patients are often referred for psychiatric evaluation. However, the onset of symptoms, at this age, with no prior psychiatric history suggests the vagaries of the behavioral form of FTD. Impulsive behavior, with disinhibition, can lead to physical interactions as well as criminal activity. Pillars of the community may end up in illicit sexual relationships, which causes extreme embarrassment for the family. Recognition of the cause of such personality change is obviously of great value in determining how best to avoid such activity. On the other hand, some patients display increasing loss of initiative with apathy and are pretty much confined to a listless life-style based on their selective involvement by the pathologic process.

The second patient is an example of the primary progressive aphasia (PPA) form of FTD. The onset tends to be insidious and usually does not invoke acute stroke in the differential. However, an atypical subtle stroke presentation affecting the communication centers of the dominant cerebral hemisphere is a potential explanation in some patients as is a structural lesion, such as neoplasm, abscess, or subdural hematoma. This second case also illustrates the potential association of FTD and motor neuron disease.4 This relationship has been identified with the GGCCC (G4C2) repeat expansion of the C9orf72 gene, which is the most common cause for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), FTD, as well as ALS-FTD.5

In addition, to the potential overlap of ALS and FTD, one can also see features of parkinsonism with FTD.6 The parkinsonism is typically of the akinetic-rigid type and is not generally responsive to levodopa. This type is illustrated in the third case. The overlap of FTD and parkinsonism has been linked to mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT; Online Mendelian Inheritance of Man [OMIM] + 157140) on chromosome 17.7 However, not all kindreds with this familial overlap presentation have been attributed to a tauopathy with MAPT mutations. Certain kindreds have mutations of the gene encoding progranulin (PGRN; OMIM *138945), which is in close proximity to the MAPT location on chromosome 17.8

MANIFESTATION KEY POINTS

It is the most common cause of dementia in adults less than 60 years of age.9

The most common age of onset is in the sixth decade.

Most cases of FTD are sporadic.

Up to 10% to 15% of cases are associated with an autosomal dominant genetic mutation.10

The initial manifestations are often initially reported to psychiatrists, psychologists, marriage or addiction counselors, human relations officers, or those in the legal realm reflective of the potential for aberrant behavior.11

Semantic PPA type is characterized by impaired single-word comprehension and marked anomia but with fluent speech.12

The nonfluent/agrammatic PPA type is characterized by limited speech production with grammatical and syntax errors.12

The logopenic PPA type is characterized by intermixed fluent and nonfluent speech related to significant word-finding difficulty typically resulting in slow or delayed speech.12

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The potential manifestations of FTD result in a bridging between psychiatric disease and other causes of dementia. The potential alternative explanations are outlined in Box 1.

GENOTYPIC AND PHENOTYPIC FACTORS

The phenotypic variability reflects genetic variations, which can include tau mutations, progranulin gene mutations, as well as repeat expansions (GGGCCC) of the C9orf72 gene. Three subtypes of FTD have been designated based on the type of inclusions in brain tissue.13 These subtypes include tau protein, transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), and RNA-binding protein fused in sarcoma (FUS). Such inclusions impact on the potential manifestations. Tau pathology is often associated with features of parkinsonism but typically not with ALS. On the other hand, TDP-43 and FUS are not uncommonly seen in combined FTD and ALS. In terms of frequency, roughly 50% of patients with FTD have FTD-TDP as the major pathologic subtype,14,15 whereas FTD-tau accounts for roughly 45% of patients and FTD-FUS 5% or less.16

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH KEY POINTS

Clinicians must have a certain index of suspicion that the behavioral disturbance or communication deficit is not in the psychiatric realm but in the neurodegenerative realm.

Atypical presentations can obviously be misleading, such as an unexpectedly young age of onset, such as in the 20s or 30s.

Neuroimaging is key, with the finding of atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobes on either brain CT or MRI scan of key importance.

The potential for familial predisposition can be an important clue.

Coexistent manifestations, such as motor neuron disease or parkinsonism, can help in putting the clinical picture in proper perspective.

As with other dementing illness, exclusion of other potential explanations with brain imaging, blood work, and possibly EEG can be elucidating.

Special imaging techniques, such as 18fludeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scan, and new techniques, such as beta-amyloid and tau imaging PET scan as well as diffusion tensor MRI, can provide pertinent supportive or nonsupportive information.

The particular frontotemporal involvement can be demonstrated anatomically with CT brain scan or MRI brain scan as mentioned earlier (Fig. 1). Significant hypodensity changes in the subcortical white matter in the periventricular region on a CT brain scan or the corresponding signal hyperintensity changes on an MRI brain scan tends to reflect microvascular ischemic disease. One can readily exclude a significant component of communicating hydrocephalus on such scans as well as potential structural lesions or larger vessel cerebrovascular disease on such scans.

Cerebral PET scan with 18FDG can demonstrates hypometabolism in the frontotemporal region, which will help distinguish FTD from the fairly characteristic pattern for Alzheimer disease of biparietal hypometabolism earlier on in the course of this disorder. The fluorine 18 –florbetapir PET scan allows in vivo imaging of beta-amyloid plaque deposition within the brain and can be of potential value in determining a primarily Alzheimer component to the dementia.17 More recently, tau in vivo brain imaging with PET has become available with the potential to identify primarily tau-mediated neuro-degenerative disease.16 The potential for such advanced imaging in distinguishing one form of dementia from another was illustrated in a recent case report.18

Diagnostic biomarkers may also have utility in the diagnostic assessment. In Alzheimer disease, for example, there is a fairly consistent pattern of elevated total tau protein and diminished beta-amyloid-42 protein concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid.19 It is hoped that similar biomarkers will be identified for FTD. One potential biomarker for FTD is a specific antibody for TDP-43 for patients with FTD who have a proteinopathy characterized by brain inclusions for transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDA.20

MONITORING OF DISEASE ACTIVITY

Obviously, the expected clinical course of a neurodegenerative disease is progression. However, the natural history of FTD, reflective of the significant variability in phenotypic expression, makes accurate prognostication for patients and family members challenging at best. Unlike Alzheimer disease, whereby the progression over 6- to 12-month intervals can be fairly accurately determined by reports of family members and simple office cognitive testing, the behavioral variant of FTD can be difficult to objectively quantitate with the not-unexpected fluctuation. Even for the language variant of FTD, it is not at all uncommon to see fluctuation in communication ability from day to day.

Volumetric analysis of dementia with modalities such as MRI can provide quantitative measurement of tissue loss, that is, atrophy, over time. Efforts have been made to distinguish the selective atrophy of FTD from the atrophy pattern seen with Alzheimer disease.21 In an MRI volumetric analysis of Alzheimer disease and FTD,22 the investigators reported some differentiation of the degree of atrophy for the hippocampus and amygdale in Alzheimer disease versus FTD but not for the cingulated gyrus. There has been a recent report of the potential value of longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging as a biomarker of disease activity in FTD.23 This study was of the behavioral variant group with measurements at baseline and approximately 1.3 years later. Rates of change in fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity suggested selective involvement over time of the pericallosal cingulate region, in the 23 patients as a whole, with MAPT carriers showing greatest change in the left uncinate fasciculus and sporadic and C9orf72 carriers with the greatest change in the left uncinate fasciculus.

TREATMENT APPROACH

Addressing the underlying molecular pathology will eventually significantly impact the treatment approach.12 There are presumably multiple pathways potentially involved, which lead to the progressive atrophic process within the frontal and temporal lobes as illustrated in Fig. 2. This patient was a case presentation of the case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital published in the New England Journal of Medicine.11 The onset of personality change and progressive neurologic decline was at 28 years of age with death in a debilitated state, with manifestations of both dementia with behavioral disturbance as well as parkinsonism at 33 years of age. This case reflects the not-uncommon progressive impairment seen in a neurodegenerative-related dementia over a 5-year time frame. The pathology for this gentleman is illustrated in Fig. 3. Special staining reflected tau-based pathology, specifically tau-positive inclusions of the Pick disease subtype. This particular presentation was due to a Gly389Arg mutation. Unfortunately, no specific treatment is presently available for such a presentation outside of supportive care. Not uncommonly, such patients will be tried on cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine, and vitamin E supplementation, along with various mediations related to the behavioral disturbance variant.

In order to develop effective strategies against such proteinopathies, neuroscientists will need to elucidate the responsible network of RNA and protein interactions.24 Biomarkers for specific disease identification and level of expression have significant potential in this quest.25 Elucidation of genetic susceptibility, such as determination of low-frequency coding variants with intermediate effect size by genome-wide exom array multi-ancestral studies,26 will also be important. An example of where such innovative research might take us, McMillan and colleagues27 reported recently on the potential for C9orf72 promoter hypermethylation to be potentially neuroprotective in disorders associated with inclusions of TDP-43. They surmised that such an approach could result in transcriptional silencing of mutant C9orf72 and be a potential avenue for drug development in both FTD and ALS.

Fig. 1 (A) Fluid-attentuated inversion recovery MRI brain scan of 68-year-old gentleman with 5-year history of increasing difficulty with executive function, impulsivity, mood swings, and inattention, which displays frontotemporal region atrophy. (B) Coronal T1-weighted MRI demonstrating particular involvement of the temporal lobes.

Fig. 2 Brains sections at autopsy of a man in his 30s with progressive cognitive impairment, behavioral disturbance, and parkinsonism. (A) Demonstrates a moderate degree of frontal and temporal lobe atrophy. (B) Demonstrated evidence of cortical atrophy and ventricular enlargement. (C) Demonstrates selective atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobe region with relative sparing of the superior temporal gyrus (arrow). (From Miller BL, Dickerson BC, Lucente DE, et al. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 9-2015. A 31-year-old man with progressive personality changes and progressive neurologic decline. N Engl J Med 2015;372:1158; with permission.)

Fig. 3 Microscopic neuropathologic images of the patient in Fig. 2. (A) Stain that reveals reactive gliosis and neuronal loss in the frontal lobe (Luxol fast blue [LFB] and hematoxylin and eosin [H&amp;E]). (B) Demonstration of a Pick body (arrow) (LFB and H&amp;E). (C) Demonstration of a Pick body (Bielschowsky silver method) (arrow). (D, E) Immunohistochemical staining with phospho-specific antibodies against tau reflective of tau protein-containing inclusions. (F) Stain demonstrating neuronal loss in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra (LFB and H&amp;E). (G) Immunohistochemical staining for PHF1 shows cytoplasmic inclusions and neuropil threads, within the substantia nigra, which contain phosphorylated tau. (From Miller BL, Dickerson BC, Lucente DE, et al. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 9-2015. A 31-year-old man with progressive personality changes and progressive neurologic decline. N Engl J Med 2015;372:1159; with permission.)

Box 1 Differential diagnosis of FTD

Previously unrecognized bipolar disorder

Previously unrecognized schizoaffective disorder

Sociopathic personality disorder

Alzheimer disease

Dementia with Lewy bodies

Parkinsonism-dementia complex

Normal pressure hydrocephalus

Neoplastic disease of the brain

Remote effect of malignancy, such as limbic encephalitis

Anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor encephalitis

Human immunodeficiency virus–related dementia

Spinocerebellar ataxia 3 (Machado-Joseph disease)

Epilepsy-related encephalopathy

Medication-induced encephalopathy

Metabolic encephalopathy

Endocrine-related encephalopathy, for example, Hashimoto encephalopathy

Neurosyphilis

Cryptococcal meningitis

Herpes simplex encephalitis

West Nile encephalitis

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy

Vascular dementia

Mercury toxicity

Methamphetamine/phencyclidine/cocaine/psychostimulant abuse

Late-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy

Late-onset Nasu-Hakola disease

Late-onset Niemann-Pick disease type C

Adult Tay-Sachs disease

Adult Gaucher disease

Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis

Adult polyglucosan body disorder

KEY POINTS

The initial description of this disorder is attributed to Arnold Pick in 1892.

Involvement of the dominant hemisphere is characterized by primary progressive aphasia.

The primary manifestations of the behavioral variant, reflective of nondominant hemisphere involvement, include the following: cognitive impairment including loss of initiative with apathy, abulia reflective of this loss of initiative including impaired executive function and lack of spontaneity, impulsivity, disinhibition, oral fixation, lack of sympathy and empathy, and repetitive behavior.

There is well-recognized heterogeneity of clinicopathologic correlations.

Disclosures: None.


1 Pick A Ṻber die Beziehungen der senile Hirnatrophie zur Aphasie Prager Med Wochenschr 1892 17 165 7
2 Gorno-Tempini ML Hillis AE Weintraub S Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants Neurology 2011 76 1006 14 21325651
3 Rascovsky K Hodges JR Knopman D Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 2011 134 2456 77 21810890
4 Majounie E Renton AE Mok K Frequency of the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: a cross-sectional study Lancet Neurol 2012 11 323 30 22406228
5 Cruts M Gijselnick I Van Langenhove T Current insights into the C9orf72 repeat expansion diseases of the FTLD/ALS spectrum Trends Neurosci 2013 36 450 9 23746459
6 Boeve BF Hutton M Refining frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 Arch Neurol 2008 65 460 4 18413467
7 Pickering-Brown SM Baker M Gass J Mutations in progranulin explain atypical phenotypes with variants in MAPT Brain 2006 129 3124 6 17071927
8 Rosenberg RN Progranulin and tau gene mutations both as cause for dementia; 17q21 finally defined Arch Neurol 2007 64 18 9 17210804
9 Knopman DS Petersen RC Edland SD The incidence of frontotemporal lobar dementia in Rochester, Minnesota 1990 through 1994 Neurology 2004 62 506 8 14872045
10 Seelaar H Kamphorst W Rosso SM Distinct genetic forms of frontotemporal dementia Neurology 2008 71 1220 6 18703462
11 Miller BL Dickerson BC Lucente DE Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 9-2015. A 31-year-old man with progressive personality changes and progressive neurologic decline N Engl J Med 2015 372 1151 62 25785973
12 Harris JM Jones M Pathology in primary progressive aphasia syndromes Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2014 14 466 74 24952480
13 Sieben A Van Langehove T Engelborghs S The genetics and neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration Acta Neuropathol 2012 124 353 72 22890575
14 Neumann M Sampathu DM Kwong LK Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 2006 314 130 3 17023659
15 Irwin DJ Cairns NJ Grossman M Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: defining phenotypic diversity through personalized medicine Acta Neuropathol 2015 129 469 91 25549971
16 Mitsis EM Bender HA Kostakoglu L A consecutive case series experience with [18 F] florbetapir PET imaging in an urban dementia center: impact on quality of life, decision making, and disposition Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 10 24484858
17 Xia CF Arteaga J Chen G [(18)F]T807, a novel tau positron emission tomography imaging agent for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 666 76 23411393
18 Mitsis EM Riggio S Kostakoglu L Tauopathy PET and amyloid PET in the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathies: studies of a retired NFL player and a man with FTD with severe head injury Transl Psychiatry 2014 4 1 8
19 Frankfort SV Tulner LR van Campen JP Amyloid beta protein and tau in the cerebrospinal fluid and plasma as biomarkers for dementia: a review of recent literature Curr Clin Pharmacol 2008 3 123 31 18700307
20 Goossens J Vanmechelen E Trojanowski JQ TDP-43 as a possible biomarker for frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a systematic review of existing antibodies Acta Neuropathol Commun 2015 3 1 8 25627031
21 Bocti C Rockel C Roy P Differential topography of Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia: an MRI volumetric analysis from Sunnybrook dementia study Brain Cogn 2004 54 151 3 15025046
22 Varghese T Kumari S Mathuranath PS Volumetric analysis of regional atrophy for the differential diagnosis of AD and FTD Int J Comp App 2013 62 43 8
23 Mahoney CJ Simpson IJ Nicholas JM Longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging in frontotemporal dementia Ann Neurol 2015 77 33 46 25363208
24 Fontana F Siva K Denti MA A network of RNA and protein interactions in fronto temporal dementia Front Mol Neurosci 2015 8 1 30 25674046
25 Grossman M Biomarkers in primary progressive aphasias Aphasiology 2014 28 922 40 25580048
26 Chen JA Wang Q Davis-Turak J A multiancestral genome-wide exome array study of Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia, and progressive supranuclear palsy JAMA Neurol 2015 72 414 22 25706306
27 McMillan CT Russ J Wood EW C9orf72 promoter hypermethylation is neuroprotective. Neuroimaging and neuropathologic evidence Neurology 2015 84 1622 30 25795648
