LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0045503
1920
Brain Res
Brain Res.
Brain research
0006-8993
1872-6240

31351977
6755063
10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146352
NIHMS1536407
Article
Lost in translational biology: Understanding sex differences to inform studies of diseases of the nervous system
Pearse Richard V. II 1*
Young-Pearse Tracy L. 1*
1 Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA USA
* Correspondence to: Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 60 Fenwood Rd, Boston, MA, 02115, rpearse@bwh.harvard.edu (R. Pearse), tyoung@rics.bwh.harvard.edu (T. Young-Pearse)
2 8 2019
25 7 2019
01 11 2019
01 11 2020
1722 146352146352
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Female and male humans are different. As simple and obvious as that statement is, in biomedical research there has been an historical tendency to either not consider sex at all or to only use males in clinical and in preclinical model system studies. The result is a large volume of research that reflects the average biology and pathology of males even though we know that disease risk, presentation, and response to therapies can be different between females and males. This is true, albeit to differing degrees, for virtually all neurological and psychiatric diseases. However, the days of ignoring sex as a biological variable are over – both because of the realization that genetic sex impacts brain function, and because of the 2014 mandate by the U.S. National Institutes of Health that requires that “sex as a biological variable” be addressed in each grant application. This review is written for neuroscientists who may not have considered sex as a biological variable previously but who now are navigating the best way to adapt their research programs to consider this important biology. We first provide a brief overview of the evidence that male versus female differences in the brain are biologically and clinically meaningful. We then present some fundamental principles that have been forged by a dedicated but small group of ground-breaking researchers along with a description of tools and model systems for incorporating a sex differences component into a research project. Finally, we will highlight some key technologies that, in the coming years, are likely to provide critical information about sex differences in the human brain.


1. Introduction: basic biological processes differentially impacting the male and female brain

Understanding the mechanism of how a population responds to a therapy or is more susceptible to an environmental or genetic insult is at the core of translational medicine. A relatively recent push towards personalized medicine offers the hope of understanding and developing custom treatments for maladies at the level of the individual human subject. Thus, rather than relying on the general trends of populations to diagnose and treat individuals, the field seeks to identify the underlying genetic and external influences that will predict precisely who will develop a disease or respond to a particular clinical intervention. We know that genomic variation between individuals can influence the susceptibility to disease, response to treatment, and the presentation of biomarkers. However, we generally discuss genomic variation within a given human population in the context of the inherited genetic signatures that have been passed down through a specific familial and ethnic lineage. But while ethnic and geographical genomic variation clearly plays a role in differential human biology, the greatest biological variability is between males and females. Without external hormonal intervention or rare sex chromosomal anomalies, sister/brother fraternal twins are more biologically and genetically different from each other than either one is from a same sexed individual of an entirely different ethnic background (Genomes Project et al., 2015; Zerbino et al., 2018).

So, what are the factors that drive differential biology between human males and females? At the highest level there are three primary effectors: hormonal environment, genetic composition, and social influences. While it can be tempting to speculate on the effects of society’s different treatment and expectations of men and women on health outcome, it is an extraordinarily complicated subject that biologists and medical researchers are woefully ill-equipped to address in a rigorous scientific manner. Because of this, we will predominantly limit this particular review to the hormonal and genetic drivers of sex differences in the brain.

We are currently seeing a surge of interest in studying sex differences in human biology. However, historically the effect of sex on biology and disease has been minimized. On the genetic level we have effectively rounded an XX genotype to an XY genotype citing X-inactivation to dismiss the effect of the second X chromosome in women and dismissing the Y chromosome as small and primarily involved in sex determination during embryogenesis. However, we now know that well over 100 X-linked genes escape inactivation showing full to partial bi-allelic expression in adult female tissues (Disteche, 2012; Tukiainen et al., 2017). In addition, there are at least 26 protein-coding genes as well as many long-non-coding RNAs and miRNAs on the Y chromosome (Skaletsky et al., 2003). Quite telling is the fact that 98% of human embryos with Turner Syndrome (defined by a 45, XO genotype) do not survive gestation (Cockwell et al., 1991; Saenger, 1996). That extraordinary embryonic mortality rate is a direct result of the lack of either an X or a Y chromosome in the second sex chromosome position and underscores the importance of X/Y chromosome complement beyond sex determination.

It is worthwhile mentioning that we will use the term sex to mean genetic sex, and it will be assumed that the hormonal environment follows the genetics in the studies referenced. While this is the case with the vast majority of humans, there are people for whom those assumptions do not apply. In cases of sex reversal (XX with male external genitalia and XY with female external genitalia), genital development is unlinked to genetic sex. While sex reversal is thought to be rare, occurring an estimated 1 in 10,000 people, it is a condition that can likely go undiagnosed (and therefore underestimated) as people can live relatively normal lives unaware that their genetics do not match their external genitalia (Martins et al., 2017). More commonly, it is estimated that between 0.1 and 0.7% of the population are transgender or gender non-conforming and up to 25% of these individuals are on cross-hormone therapy (Unger, 2016; Williams Institute, 2017). These numbers would imply that more than 100,000 people in the US alone have a sex hormone milieu that fits their gender but is opposite to their genetic sex. Gender, though often erroneously used as a synonym of sex, is a term that combines both the internal and external perception of an individual’s sex (as defined by the World Health Organization). While the influence of gender roles might ultimately impact neural biology, to date there are few major studies that differentiate sex and gender in analyses of diseases of the human brain. Thus, in this review, references to males assumes an XY genotype and a circulating hormonal environment dominated by testosterone while a reference to females assumes an XX genotype and a circulating hormonal environment dominated by estrogen. Finally, we will use the term “sexually dimorphic” to refer to traits that are systematically different between males and females and “sex difference” to refer to measurements that have statistically significant differences in male-female population averages. To be clear, most of the sex differences observed are differences in the population average of a particular measurement with considerable overlap between men and women. Thus, one way to approach studying sex as a biological variable is to consider sex as a differentiation axis that can be used to evaluate natural variations in human biology. In the case of sex differences, the particular variations would tend to be ones influenced by sex hormones, X and Y chromosomes, differential cultural environments or a combination of those.

2. Sex differences in neurological diseases, psychiatric disorders, and beyond

The influence of sex on risk and presentation of neurologic disease and response to clinical interventions is becoming increasingly clear. Virtually every neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disease shows some variation, often striking, between males and females. Males have a higher incidence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), while females are at a higher lifetime risk for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), major depressive disorder (MDD), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and multiple sclerosis (MS) (reviewed in (Zagni et al., 2016)). However, sex differences in these diseases are much more nuanced and interesting than a simple differential susceptibility would imply. Below we highlight a few examples of sex differences in specific disorders and diseases of the nervous system.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

The prevalence of autism shows a striking sex difference. A 2014 report from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention reported that Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) occurs in 1.6% of all 8yr old children and is 4 times more common in boys than in girls (Baio et al., 2018). While the overall prevalence of ASD diagnoses has risen in the past 10 years, reports of a sex bias toward males have been consistent (Fombonne, 2005). ASD is diagnosed in children as young as 2 years old indicating that the initiating problem would have likely had to occur during fetal development or in the very early post-natal period, prior to overt gender-specific socialization and about a decade before pubescent hormones differentiate male and female biology more dramatically. Because of the strong difference in prevalence, there are numerous studies of sex differences in ASD in humans and in animal models, and multiple thorough reviews have been written on the topic (McCarthy and Wright, 2017; Rubenstein et al., 2015; Werling and Geschwind, 2013). Evidence from numerous studies reveal that there are well validated sex differences in the clinical phenotypic presentation of ASD and suggest that both genetic and hormonal influences contribute to these differences.

Schizophrenia

The lifetime prevalence rate for schizophrenia is similar for males and females but the average age of onset, morphological disruptions in the brain, and clinical presentations have been shown to be quantifiably different (reviewed in (Mendrek and Mancini-Marie, 2016)). Males have a higher risk for developing the disease early in life while females have a greater risk later in life. The exact window of risk varies from study to study but the general conclusion that males tend to develop the disease early and females late is consistent across many studies (Abel et al., 2010; Leung and Chue, 2000; McGrath et al., 2008; Salem and Kring, 1998; van der Werf et al., 2014). Additionally, men tend to present with more severe structural abnormalities of the brain, having reduced frontal and temporal volumes than women, and men with schizophrenia tend to show a reversal in the normal left-right asymmetry in the grey matter in the inferior parietal lobe while women do not (Mendrek and Mancini-Marie, 2016). Several lines of evidence have indicated a role of sex hormones in the presentation and progression of schizophrenia, though a direct role of the sex chromosomes themselves also has been implied by observations that Klinefelter patients (47, XXY) have a higher incidence of schizophrenia than do individuals with a traditional sex chromosome complement (DeLisi et al., 2005; van Rijn et al., 2006).

Alzheimer’s disease

It is often stated that females have a higher risk of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) than males of the same age, and it is clearly true that females bear a considerably greater burden from AD than males. There are approximately 3.3 million women compared with 2.0 million men living with AD in the United States (Alzheimer’s, 2016) and the estimated lifetime risk for AD is about double for women compared to men (20% compared to 10%). However, much (though not all) of this sex disparity is a result of the increased lifespan of females. Age is the strongest risk factor for AD, and age-related risk spikes dramatically as one approaches their late 80’s and 90s. While some European studies and one US study reported a higher prevalence of AD in women than in men, a recent meta-analysis of many studies from both Europe and the US showed that when combined, the difference was no longer significant when controlling for age (Fiest et al., 2016; Nebel et al., 2018). Nonetheless, there is consensus that there are clinical differences in progression between men and women. Females are subject to a more rapid decline in cognition after diagnosis than males (Henderson and Buckwalter, 1994; Holland et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2015; Proust-Lima et al., 2008; Read et al., 2006; Tifratene et al., 2015). Furthermore, studies of the pathological hallmarks of AD (Aβ plaques and tau-containing tangles) also show differences between the sexes. In the analysis of postmortem data from 1,453 individuals, it was found that women have a significantly higher tangle density than men, but only borderline differences in plaque burden (Oveisgharan et al., 2018). In a neuroimaging study of cognitively normal individuals, it was shown that while there are no differences between men and women with regards to level of plaque burden, females with a high plaque burden show more rapid cognitive decline than men with the equivalent plaque burden (Buckley et al., 2018).

There is evidence that the sex differences in AD are at least partly the result of post-menopausal estrogen decline in women (Doraiswamy et al., 1997; Henderson et al., 1994; Mulnard et al., 2000; Paganini-Hill and Henderson, 1994; Tang et al., 1996). For example, pre-menopausal oophorectomies and surgical menopause at an early age increase the risk for cognitive impairment (Bove et al., 2014; Rocca et al., 2007). In addition, there is evidence that estrogen replacement therapy begun close in time to menopause onset can lessen the risk and symptoms of AD in women (Doraiswamy et al., 1997; Henderson et al., 1994; Mulnard et al., 2000; Paganini-Hill and Henderson, 1994; Shao et al., 2012; Tang et al., 1996). However, the precise molecular mechanism of how estrogen may affect AD pathology and cognition is not clear.

Parkinson’s disease

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterized by the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta that results in motor as well as non-motor symptoms. Both the incidence and prevalence of PD are significantly higher in men than in women, with men having approximately a 60% greater prevalence and an earlier average age of onset (Elbaz et al., 2002; Hirsch et al., 2016; Twelves et al., 2003; Wooten et al., 2004; Zagni et al., 2016). In addition, there is evidence that females have less severe motor symptoms than men (Haaxma et al., 2007). At the morphological level, researchers have observed sex differences in the basal ganglia in both animal models and humans. Female mice have been reported to have higher numbers of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (Beyer et al., 1991; Cantuti-Castelvetri et al., 2007), while in humans, PET imaging studies have shown male-female differences in dopamine transporter binding (Haaxma et al., 2007; Kaasinen et al., 2015; Wong et al., 2012). At a molecular level, gene expression differences in male vs female dopaminergic neurons in the human substantia nigra have been reported, as well as differences in lipid profiles in the substantia nigra in men vs women (Cantuti-Castelvetri et al., 2007). Additional studies using the available tools and technologies described below will be necessary to tease apart the molecular mechanisms underlying elevated male risk for PD.

Multiple sclerosis

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating autoimmune disease. It is highly heterogeneous in its course, with patients showing very different rates of progression of the disease, and some having a benign form that does not progress beyond the initial presentation. There is a well-established sex bias in MS risk and course, with women having a higher risk for MS, and men more likely to have a rapidly progressing form of the disease (Compston et al., 2006; Koch et al., 2010; Tomassini et al., 2005). In the past decades, the female-to-male ratio of MS has increased (now approximately 3:1) due to a puzzling increase in female cases of MS in many different parts of the world (Kingwell et al., 2015; Maghzi et al., 2010; Orton et al., 2006; Trojano et al., 2012). Several studies have implicated sex hormones in the differential risk and presentation of MS between males and females. Notably in females there is a correlation of disease onset with the onset of puberty (Ramagopalan et al., 2009), a decline in MS relapse rate during pregnancy (Alroughani et al., 2018; Confavreux et al., 1998), and a worsening of symptoms with menopause (Bove et al., 2016; Smith and Studd, 1992). Sex chromosome complement also is thought to contribute to the male-female differences in MS rates and progression, and has been studied using models of MS coupled to the “four-core genotype” mice described in the next section (Du et al., 2014; Smith-Bouvier et al., 2008). Further investigation of the molecular mechanisms underlying sex differences in MS will both increase our understanding of disease mechanisms and aid in the identification of improved therapies.

Pain

In addition to neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases, sex differences have been observed in basic neurological functions of individuals who have no chronic disease, notably in pain perception and response to opioid treatment (Loyd and Murphy, 2014; Rosen et al., 2017; Sorge and Totsch, 2017). In these studies, it has been consistently observed that females have a much higher prevalence of chronic pain than males. for Additionally, in response to discrete pain events, women exhibit a higher sensitivity, rate the pain higher, and have a lower overall tolerance pain (reviewed in (Mogil, 2012)). Many experiential and sociological explanations for these differences have been proposed including differing gender role expectations of pain tolerance, and different life experiences (such as child birth) affecting an individual’s application of the pain scale. But there also are relevant measurements that hint at the biological basis of some of the differences observed. A positron emission tomography (PET) study that imaged brains of males and females during pain tolerance tasks demonstrated that males had a higher activation of the mu opioid receptor than women in discrete brain regions, specifically the amygdala, anterior thalamus, and ventral basal ganglia (Zubieta et al., 2002). Consistent with this observation, male rodents show a consistently greater molecular response to morphine treatment than females (Loyd and Murphy, 2006). While this doesn’t address chronic pain, the observation indicates that on average the endogenous analgesic response is quantifiably different between males and females. These are important observations in a field where effect sizes in humans are, by necessity, self-reported and thus challenging to quantify across different subjects.

Sex differences in pharmacologic response

Clinical studies in humans have demonstrated sex differences in the response to many classes of psychotropic and sedative/hypnotic drugs. One example is morphine, which was described above. Another, famous example of this is differential response to the sleep-aid zolpidem (Ambien), which has a significantly more persistent effect in women than in men. This can lead to dangerously high levels of the sedative in the blood streams of women during the waking hours the day after taking the medication (a primary concern being driving or operating machinery while still under the influence of the drug). The longer-term effects of the drug in women seems to be an indirect effect of the medication being metabolized more slowly in women compared to men (Greenblatt et al., 2000; Olubodun et al., 2003; Tripodianakis et al., 2003). In response to the data, the FDA announced in 2013 a reduced recommended dosage of zolpidem for women relative to men. Sex differences in pharmacologic response are not limited to Ambien and morphine; women also have a tendency to respond better to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), respond more strongly (and adversely) to anti-anxiety medication, and have a more persistent response to benzodiazepines than men (reviewed in (Lange et al., 2017; Sramek et al., 2016)).

Above is a selection of the many examples of sex differences across disease risk, presentation and response to neuromodulators. There are numerous other examples in the primary literature that underscore the undeniable truth that there are measurable differences in the basic neurobiology between human males and females. These differential clinical measures imply the existence of variant molecular activity between human males and females that can result in a long-term impact on disease. In addition to the processes that directly affect brain function, some differences certainly result from indirect effects due to differences in cardiovascular biology, liver metabolism, microbiome composition, and a number of other biological functions that are different between men and women. So, in answer to the implied underlying question of this section “why is studying sex as a biological variable in the brain important?”- it is important because the biology, disease risk, pharmacology, and pathology are measurably different between the sexes. It is worth stating that while men and women are clearly more biologically alike than they are different, the culmination of numerous small variances over a lifetime can result in significant changes to overall health as we age. A more intimate knowledge of exactly what those differences are at the molecular level will ultimately have a positive impact on clinical outcomes.

3. Existing paradigms in sex differences

While the new NIH mandate and research funding initiatives have sparked a strong current interest in studying sex differences, there is an “old guard” who have been steadily advancing knowledge about sex differences in neurobiology and pathology since well before it was popular or easy to do so. This handful of researchers dedicated to the topic have had to overcome decades of skepticism and overt pushback regarding the recognition of sex differences in the brain. Here, we summarize a subset of the established paradigms that sculpt the current understanding of the differential basic biology between the male and female brain.

A historic theory of mammalian sexual differentiation that had been widely accepted since the 1940’s was that it consisted of a linear two-step process: 1) sexual determination is directed by the chromosome complement (traditionally XX or XY) that instructs the embryonic genital anlage to differentiate into fetal ovaries or testes respectively, and 2) hormonal secretions from the developed genitalia (predominantly estrogen from the ovaries and testosterone from the testes) then determine all aspects of the differential biology (and pathology) between males and females. In this model, exposure to androgens during development actively “masculinized” the brain and the female brain was considered to be the “default” result of lack of androgen exposure. Importantly, this historic model broke hormone action on the brain into early (neonatal and perinatal) effects that are classified as being “organizational” and permanent, and late, (post- pubertal) effects that are classified as “activational” and transient. The rigidly linear historic model completely discounted any direct effect of genes on the second X or the Y chromosome on postnatal biology. The theory was driven by the extraordinarily strong effect of exogenous hormones on human biology and by a technological inability to clearly test the effects of the sex chromosome genes in adult cells. Though it is occasionally still repeated as current, it has been shown to be a highly oversimplified model with major caveats (reviewed in (Arnold, 2017; Fitch and Denenberg, 1998; Koebele and Bimonte-Nelson, 2015; McCarthy et al., 2017b)). A large, and growing, body of work have demonstrated that a) sex chromosomes influence feminization and masculinization of the brain outside of hormonal influences; b) full feminization of the mammalian brain requires active signaling by estrogens rather than simply being a passive “default” pathway; and c) male and female hormones exert organizational effects in the mammalian brain well beyond early development.

The “General Theory of Sexual Differentiation”

Work from the Arnold lab and others has allowed researchers to clearly separate the effects of sex hormones from the effects of sex chromosomes in a mouse model, and has demonstrated that sex chromosome complement has a direct effect on many processes in adult cells irrespective of hormonal environment (Arnold and Chen, 2009; De Vries et al., 2002; Koopman et al., 1991). Outside of the critical role of the Y chromosome in directing differentiation of male gonads and a lifetime of androgen exposure vs. estrogen exposure, there are at least 5 potential mechanisms by which the sex chromosomes can differentially affect biology between males and females: 1) Expression of Y chromosome genes in non-gonadal tissues; 2) X-inactivation escapers having higher gene transcript dosage in XX vs. XY cells; 3) Differential imprinting between maternal and paternal X chromosomes (males only ever inherit maternal X chromosomes); 4) High expression of the Xist gene in every XX cell with potential downstream effects on autosomal genes; and 5) Presence of the large inactive X chromosome in XX cells acting as a heterochromatic “sink” that then impacts autosomal gene expression. For a more detailed description of each of these possibilities, see (Arnold, 2017).

This fundamental shift in thinking regarding the sex chromosomes was made possible by the development of a valuable set of animal models that uncoupled gonadal sex from genetic sex. The “four core” genotypes mouse model leverages the power of the Y-linked Sry gene to singularly determine male gonadal development in the embryo regardless of the presence or absence of the remaining Y chromosome. By starting with a mouse containing a spontaneous 11Kb loss of ChrY (XY−) which included the endogenous Sry gene (Lovell-Badge and Robertson, 1990), and breeding to a mouse carrying a genomic Sry transgene inserted into an autosome (XYsry) (Koopman et al., 1991), the gonadal phenotypes of offspring mice were unlinked to the complement of sex chromosomes (De Vries et al., 2002). Thus, by simply breeding the resulting XY−sry males (where the sry gene has effectively been moved to an autosome) to XX females, “four core” genotypes are generated which are: XY− females, XX females, XY−sry males, XXsry males. This elegant system has served as a tool to uncover clear actions of genetic chromosome complement -irrespective of hormonal milieu - in many biological processes including but not limited to: embryonic numbers of TH+ dopaminergic neurons (higher number in XY relative to XX (Carruth et al., 2002)), the sensitivity of response to morphine in pain tests (XY more sensitive than XX, (Gioiosa et al., 2008a; Gioiosa et al., 2008b)), and vulnerability in multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus models (greater effects on XX than XY (Smith-Bouvier et al., 2008)).

For those not familiar with the gene complement on the X and Y chromosomes, it should be noted here that the tips of the X and Y chromosomes in humans share homologous sequences called the pseudoautosomal regions (PARs). Because of their homology, crossing over between the X and Y occurs within the human PARs during meiotic recombination, and thus the genes in these regions are inherited in the same manner as autosomal genes. The section of the Y chromosome between the PARs is referred to as the male specific region (MSR) and consists of some genes that are entirely unique to the Y and some genes that have structurally similar paired genes on the X chromosome having arisen from a common ancestral gene. It has been demonstrated that some of the unique Y chromosome genes (including the testes determining factor Sry) are both expressed and function in the adult mammalian brain (Czech et al., 2012; Czech et al., 2014; Dewing et al., 2006; Mayer et al., 1998; Milsted et al., 2004). Additionally, the paired genes existing on both the X and the MSR of the Y chromosomes are generally escapers of X-inactivation which would seem to effectively balance their activity between XX and XY cells. However, while these paired genes are similar, they are not identical in either sequence or in transcriptional regulation and thus may confer different biology between XX and XY cells. One example of this in humans is a pair of genes, TSPY and TSPX, arising from a common ancient ancestor but located on the MSR(Y) and the X chromosomes respectively. Females have two transcribed copies of TSPX (TSPX is an X-inactivation escaper) while males have a maternal TSPX and a paternal TSPY. While the naming scheme may imply a common gene function that is simply located on different sex chromosomes, the two genes have been shown to have opposite functional effects on the androgen receptor. This difference is mediated by an inhibitory domain in TSPX that is absent in TSPY (Li et al., 2017).

More broadly, any gene that escapes X chromosome inactivation will be more highly expressed in XX cells than in XY cells. In a recent, extensive survey of 29 different tissues from 449 humans, researchers demonstrated that at least 23% of X chromosome genes are incompletely inactivated, and that the specific genes that escape inactivation vary across tissues and individuals (Tukiainen et al., 2017). The same study demonstrated that, surprisingly, most PAR genes are more highly expressed in males than in females. Finally, there are the genetic sex differences resulting from imprinting inequality. While males have only a maternal X chromosome, females have both a maternal and a paternal X chromosome. X-linked genes with differential expression due to maternal vs. paternal imprinting will have strongly different male/female expression patterns in adult tissues. For a review of the functional implications of genomic imprinting on brain development and function, please see (Huang et al., 2018).

Masculinization vs feminization of the fetal rodent brain

Traditionally, basic research on the impact of sex on embryonic development and maturation of the mammalian brain was necessarily limited to animal models. While there is much still undiscovered that connects the observed mechanisms in rodents to equivalent processes in humans, the current knowledge in animal models offers a fascinating insight in to sex specific regulation of fundamental biological processes such as neurogenesis, glial proliferation, and synaptic function (reviewed in (McCarthy et al., 2017a)). Elegant work has illustrated how the rodent brain can be either “masculinized” or “feminized” during embryonic development depending on the hormonal environment. Embryonic rodent brains are protected from the effects of circulating maternal estrogen by alpha-fetoprotein which binds and sequesters circulating estrogen (Bakker et al., 2006). After gonadal differentiation, male and female embryos secrete fetal testosterone and estrogen, respectively, but while the fetal estrogen in female embryos is sequestered by alpha-fetoprotein (like the maternal estrogen), embryonic testosterone in male embryos is not and passes into the developing brain. In a fascinating twist, the aromatase enzyme, synthesized in the male embryonic brain, converts fetal testosterone to estrogen which then activates a transcriptional pathway resulting in a masculinization of the developing brain (Bakker et al., 1993; Bakker et al., 2006; Baum, 1979; MacLusky and Naftolin, 1981; VanRyzin et al., 2018). Thus, the female sex hormone estrogen (synthesized in the brain) is responsible for masculinization of the male rodent brain. In females, the sequestration of gonadal estrogen coupled to the lack of testosterone results in “feminization” of the brain.

Researchers have used this knowledge of rodent development to artificially masculinize the female brain or feminize the male brain. Treatment of newborn female pups with either testosterone, or else eliminating embryonic alpha-fetoprotein, results in brain masculinization of females while blocking the aromatase that converts testosterone to estrogen feminizes male brains. But what does it mean to be masculinized or feminized? In the case of the developing rat brain, several reproducible differences have been described with masculinization of the female brain or feminization of the male brain. One very intriguing finding is that during a particular developmental time window (postnatal day 4), there are a consistently greater number of microglia in specific regions of the masculinized rodent brain including the amygdala, parietal cortex, hippocampus, paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the medial preoptic area (mPOA) (Schwarz et al., 2012). Additionally, mPOA of the masculinized brain has two-fold greater dendritic spine density than the feminized brain, which is a direct result of estrogen receptor activating the cyclooxygenase 2 gene that in turn stimulates prostaglandin synthesis in the developing masculinized mPOA (Amateau and McCarthy, 2002; Amateau and McCarthy, 2004; Wright et al., 2008; Wright and McCarthy, 2009). Beyond these observations are numerous detailed descriptions of sex differences in the neurophysiological, morphological and neurochemical makeup of the feminized vs masculinized rodent brain that are thoroughly reviewed elsewhere (McCarthy et al., 2017a). In some cases, the differences observed during development are transient, and the functional consequences of the particular trait on the adult brain are not yet known.

Male vs Female Endocannabinoid-based Synaptic Regulation

The endocannabinoid system modulates many biological processes that have been shown to be variable between the sexes including stress response, appetite regulation, thermoregulation, social behavior and anxiety, metabolism, analgesia, sleep, and reproduction. The discovery that there is a sexually dimorphic mechanism of action in this particular system hints at a potential molecular explanation for the described differences.

The continuing story of how the endocannabinoid response differs between males and females starts more than 35 years ago with the observation that physiological concentrations of 17-β-estradiol (E2) increased excitability of hippocampal pyramidal cells in electrophysiological analyses in brain slices (Smejkalova and Woolley, 2010; Teyler et al., 1980; Wong and Moss, 1992). Numerous follow-up analyses refined the understanding of this initial observation uncovering the specific molecular players that mediate the observed E2 response (Smejkalova and Woolley, 2010; Teyler et al., 1980; Wong and Moss, 1992). About a decade ago it was further shown that rather than relying on gonadal hormones for neuronal signaling, E2 is actually produced in both male and female hippocampal neurons through the local action of P450 aromatase (Hojo et al., 2004; Woolley, 2007). Then in a landmark study, while following up on a curious observation that E2 signaling is reduced in ERα knockout mice (it had previously been thought that E2 effect in the hippocampus was mediated by ERβ), it was demonstrated that E2 strongly suppressed inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in CA1 pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus in females but not at all in males (Fugger et al., 2001; Huang and Woolley, 2012). Unlike the previously observed excitatory effect, this E2 effect on inhibitory currents was shown to be mediated through ERα and required mobilization of the endocannabinoids and the activity of the Cannabinoid Receptor 1 (CB1R) (Huang and Woolley, 2012). This effect was further shown to require IP3 signaling which is differentially regulated (through direct interaction of the IP3R with mGluR1) in male and female hippocampal neurons (Tabatadze et al., 2015). Interestingly, this same study demonstrated a tonic endocannabinoid activity in females that is in Whether absent males. this different tonic activity contributes to the differential E2 response, and whether this is modulated directly by the sex chromosomes or some other mechanism is currently unknown. While these studies are necessarily done in a rodent model, they demonstrate clear molecular differences that affect the functioning of the endocannabinoid system between the brains of mammalian males and females.

Challenges relating rodent models to humans

The ability to freely manipulate the hormonal milieu and genetic composition of developing rodents has allowed researchers to perform near perfectly controlled comparisons between males and females as highlighted above. However, not all mechanisms will be conserved between rodents and humans and so it is important to understand how these different observations from model systems relate to human biology. It is still unclear if and to what extent the differential endocannabinoid mechanisms observed in rodents will apply to humans, however a recent tracer-based imaging study reported a 40% greater availability of CB1R in men relative to women (Laurikainen et al., 2019). With respect to brain masculinization in humans, insight can be gained by analyzing the brains of individuals with specific genetic conditions such as sex reversal due to complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) resulting in XY females. A recent imaging study demonstrated that CAIS women displayed feminized brain morphology in some brain regions including thicker parietal and occipital cortices and stronger connection in the default mode network, but had masculinized morphologies in other regions including in the thickness of the motor cortex and the volume of the caudate nucleus (Savic et al., 2017). While the mechanism of the role of specific hormones in the masculinization or feminization of the embryonic human brain is still debated (Luoto and Rantala, 2018; Puts and Motta-Mena, 2018), the CAIS imaging study, along with many others, point to a role for both hormonal environment and genetic complement as drivers in the masculinization and feminization of different parts of the human brain.

4. Emerging insights in sex differences: human studies

Relatively new technologies available in the last few decades are providing an unprecedented depth of information about the human brain. Here, we highlight two such technologies: 1) new methods of in vivo neuroimaging and 2) omics-level analyses such as bulk and single cell RNA sequencing, proteomics, epigenomic profiling and genome sequencing. These technologies are become more widely available due to both a reduction in cost and the development of user-friendly analytic tools. With more widespread application across multiple large cohorts, the power to detect and therefore study sex differences in the human brain will be realized.

Large Scale Neuroimaging Studies of Males and Females

It has long been known that there are morphological differences between the male and female brains of mammals and non-mammalian vertebrates, notably with the early observation that a region in the songbird brain that controls vocalization is visibly larger in male birds than in female birds (Nottebohm and Arnold, 1976). From that observation stemmed a series of studies interrogating differential morphology in rodent brains that led to the of the much referenced “sexually dimorphic nucleus discovery of the preoptic area” (SDN-POA) (Gorski et al., 1980) which is larger in male than in female rats due the previously mentioned effects of embryonic estrogen on the male brain (Davis et al., 1996). The identification of the SDN-POA was very important for the field of sex differences, and it became a model system for studying the mechanisms by which hormones impact brain structure. It’s discovery also affirmed the value of comparative approaches to studying sexual differentiation.

After description of the SDN-POA in rodents there were a series of descriptions of male-female differences in human brain structure and morphology using post mortem tissue, which compared differences in average size between specific nuclei or fiber tracts (reviewed in (Hines, 2002)). These studies were limited by the high degree of inter-individual variability owing to differences in age, health, environment and cause of death that, when coupled to low numbers of individuals, made it difficult to fully rule out other potentially confounding causes of the observed differences. The tremendous advancements made in imaging technology have facilitated some well-controlled large studies that have greatly increased our understanding of the sex differences in the structure and morphology of the living human brain (Jahanshad and Thompson, 2017). A recent highly-powered study using 5,216 living human subjects (2,750 females and 2,466 males ranging in age from 44–77) from the UK biobank analyzed brain imaging data, all generated from a single MRI scanner to minimize technical variability (Ritchie et al., 2018). The study found that, while on average males had a higher total brain volume and raw surface area, females had a higher cortical thickness and white matter complexity. They also saw a significantly greater variability of raw structural measurements among males than among females. A resting state fMRI connectivity analysis in the same study demonstrated several sex differences including a stronger connectivity of the default mode network in females and a stronger connectivity in the sensorimotor and visual networks in males. Importantly, in addition to identifying new sex differences in brain structure, this study also confirmed a multitude of sex differences described in previously published studies that had lower numbers of individuals (reviewed in (Jahanshad and Thompson, 2017)).

It is worth noting here that the identification of sex differences in the human brain through imaging studies has been an area of controversy. Multiple early studies reporting sex differences in the brain between men and women were overhyped in the popular press and misused by some as biological evidence supporting female inferiority. Several of these studies were underpowered, and their findings not replicated in larger cohorts. These unfortunate events coupling weak study design to overinterpretation of results was quite damaging to the larger field of sex differences research, leading some to make conclusions such as “The history of sex-difference research is rife with innumeracy, misinterpretation, publication bias, weak statistical power, inadequate controls and worse” (Eliot, 2019). For the myriad of reasons discussed throughout this review, these past events should not deter researchers from considering sex as an important biological variable. Rather, they should remind us to be rigorous in our experimental design, and precise and clear in relaying the implications of our findings.

One of the primary reasons for investigating sex differences in the brain is to better understand and treat diseases of the nervous system. One powerful approach for investigating disease is to use advanced neuroimaging to follow the trajectory of pathological changes in the brain that relate to disease course. For example, diffusion tensor imaging and T1- and T2-weighted MRI have been used to describe sex differences in structural presentation and progression of MS and acquired demyelinating syndrome (Longoni et al., 2017; Schoonheim et al., 2014). A second example comes from the field of Parkinson’s disease research. PET and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging studies have suggested that women have higher dopamine transporter densities than men in certain regions of the basal ganglia, supporting the hypothesis that the higher incidence of PD in men is in part determined by a higher “dopaminergic reserve” in women (Kaasinen et al., 2015; Laakso et al., 2002; Lavalaye et al., 2000; Mozley et al., 2001; Varrone et al., 2013; Yamamoto et al., 2017).

Longitudinal neuroimaging studies, wherein the same human subjects receive multiple imaging sessions over time, reduce the issues related to inter-individual variation. For studies of aging and AD, new longitudinal imaging studies for the pathological hallmarks of AD (Aβ-rich plaques and tau containing tangles) are providing key information about the early events and trajectory of the disease. A recent study using neuroimaging of plaques and tangles longitudinally in aging individuals was able to define tau and Aβ propagation patterns, and showed an association of tangles with cognitive levels (Sepulcre et al., 2018). In a related longitudinal study, it was shown that females with a high Aβ plaque burden show faster cognitive decline compared to males with equivalent plaque burdens (Buckley et al., 2018). The steadily increasing numbers of participants in studies such as these will be instrumental in defining disease trajectory in males versus females, providing clues into the initiating events leading to differential risk.

Large scale omics level analyses of human brain: differential genetic regulation

Clearly there are quantifiable sex differences in the context of neurologic disease and the healthy human brain. In order to help translate these findings into actionable steps for personalized medicine, researchers need to understand the underlying neural chemistry that drives the observed differences. However, once molecular differences between men and women are observed, the identification of the drivers of those sex differences can be quite challenging. Transient differences in gene regulation, whether in response to hormones or differential expression of a sex chromosome gene, could affect a temporary change in a basic cellular process that results, over time, in potentially important differences. Thus, when molecular differences are identified, they could be nascent causal events (which may no longer be observable at later time points), or downstream indirect effects not related to causation but potentially relevant to clinical intervention. While there is a goal of understanding the mechanistic role of individual genes in neurobiology, our current era of genome-wide analyses has shifted much of the focus toward describing the entirety of the chemical make-up of a particular brain region or cell-type. Coupling these descriptions with a comparison of molecular signatures between different populations then can be used to highlight pathways that drive biological differences. A recent explosion of large cohort omics-level studies of the human brain includes tissue and single-cell RNA sequencing (RNAseq), unbiased and targeted proteomics, lipidomics, epigenetic profiling, and metabolomics. These are highly valuable techniques for identifying pathways relevant to sex differences in the brain but can be cost intensive and unapproachable for some researchers. Fortunately, advances in data-sharing technology along with new sharing guidelines enacted by funding institutions and a general positive trend toward open-science initiatives have collectively resulted in a number of collaborative data platforms and unprecedented access to large data sets.

Examining molecular sex differences in a comprehensive manner requires large numbers of samples. Fortunately, there are now several accessible databases representing large cohorts and tissue collections each with unique populations, clinical measurements and goals. One example is the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project (Carithers et al., 2015). Data collected includes RNAseq and whole genome or exome sequencing. All of the data is open access, and the current release (v7) includes data from 11,688 samples, 53 tissues (including 13 different regions of the brain), and 714 healthy donors. The donors all range in age from 20–79, with 34.2% female and 65.8% male. The GTEx data portal (http://gtexportal.org) allows one to search for any gene, and returns expression levels across tissues, with a radio button that breaks down the data by sex. One of the first studies using GTEx data was the previously discussed analysis of X-chromosome inactivation across tissues and individuals (Tukiainen et al., 2017).

There are handful of other open access omics datasets of human brain that are targeted to more specific populations and allow for examinations of molecular sex differences in disease states. One such initiative was established through the NIA-led Accelerating Medicines Partnership-Alzheimer’s Disease (AMP-AD) Target Discovery and Preclinical Validation Project (https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/dn/amp-ad-target-discovery-and-preclinical-validation-project). Data from this project can be found through the AMP-AD Knowledge Portal (https://www.synapse.org/ampad), which houses data obtained from both human and model systems. Within this database are three major sources of human brain data: the Mount Sinai Brain Bank (Allen et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018), the Mayo Clinic (Allen et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018), and the Religious Order Study (ROS) and Memory and Aging Project (MAP) of Rush University (Bennett et al., 2012a; Bennett et al., 2012b; De Jager et al., 2018). A variety of different omics level molecular data are acquired from the brain in these studies. For example, for the ROS and MAP cohorts, the following data sets are available (number of human donors included shown in parentheses): SNP (2,090); WGS (1,196); RNAseq (639); miRNA (744); H3K9Ac-ChIP-Seq (728); and DNA methylation (740). All of these studies in AMP-AD have comparable proportions of males and females, providing rich data sets to interrogate sex differences at the molecular level. A large meta-analysis of expression across different brain regions using the AMP-AD database uncovered two separate gene expression clusters with consistent and strong heterogeneity between males and females in AD-related expression (Logsdon et al., 2019).

The CommonMind Consortium (CMC) and PsychENCODE Consortium (PEC), which are focused on psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, are other examples of efforts aiming to collect large-scale omics level data from human brain. Data generated by these consortia is distributed through the PEC and CMC knowledge portals hosted on the Sage Bionetworks Synapse system: https://www.synapse.org/pec and https://www.synapse.org/cmc. While the primary driving force behind these projects is not the study of sex differences, these databases may be sufficiently powered to interrogate certain sex differences. A recent study using transcriptome and epigenome data from PsychENCODE sought to comprehensively compile human brain data across developmental time, brain region, and cell type (Li et al., 2018). Included in the study was an analysis of sex differences in the transcriptome over developmental time from 8 weeks post conception to adult (40 yrs). This study identified modules of co-expressed genes that were enriched for male-biased or female-biased expression during particular developmental windows. Interestingly, many of these modules showed sex-bias only during a specific developmental window, and some even switched from being male-biased to female-biased (or vice-versa) between different developmental windows. These findings were based on data from 18 males and 23 females spread over a ~41-year age range. Follow up studies interrogating larger numbers of males and females at targeted developmental windows will provide greater power to define the molecular differences between male and female brain development.

Gene expression studies in specific diseases have the potential to uncover differential mechanisms of disease in men and women. For example, transcriptomic studies of corticolimbic brain areas revealed that different sets of transcripts are significantly upregulated or downregulated in males versus females with MDD (Labonte et al., 2017; Seney et al., 2018). Importantly, some of the male-female differences observed in the human brain also were observed in the mouse brain in a chronic variable stress model (Labonte et al., 2017). The linking of studies of sex differences in the human brain to studies in animal models is a powerful approach for the identification of convergent mechanisms of brain function and disease.

While these expression analyses can highlight molecular differences in the brain, genetic studies such as genome wide association studies (GWAS) and family-based studies provide a method for identifying genetic influences on disease and prioritization of pathways likely to play causative roles. However, few genetic studies separate data by sex, mainly because this dramatically lowers the power of the study. Thus, aside from X-linked diseases, for most genetic risk factors of neurological disease it is not known whether there are differential impacts on men versus women. One exception to this is the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene, which is the greatest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (Farrer et al., 1997). For many decades, the ε4 allele of APOE was described as being more detrimental for women than for men (Bretsky et al., 1999; Farrer et al., 1997; Payami et al., 1996; Poirier et al., 1993). However, a recent meta-analysis of 27 independent studies including ~58,000 participants revealed that the elevated risk for AD in female ε4 carriers over males was restricted to earlier age ranges while the lifetime risk of AD conferred by the ε4 allele is not different between men and women (Neu et al., 2017). In addition to studies of relative risk, neuroimaging studies have shown differences between male and female ε4 carriers. These include differences in: hippocampal atrophy (Holland et al., 2013); cortical thinning (Sampedro et al., 2015); and connectivity in the default network (Damoiseaux et al., 2012). Future studies such as these that couple neuroimaging with examinations of genetic risk factors will provide a powerful resource for interrogating sex differences in human disease.

5. Conclusion

There is insufficient space in any review article to cover all of the work (both historical and emergent) that has provided mechanistic insights into observations of sex differences in neurobiology and disease. We have presented here a relatively small sampling of observations that demonstrate the extraordinary reach of the descriptions of differential neurobiology between females and males. These differences and dimorphisms are wide-spread, persistent and have been shown to result in impactful long-term differences in clinical measures. Understanding the mechanism of exactly how these differential clinical outcomes develop over time holds a very real promise of significantly advancing personalized medicine for everyone.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by R01AG055909 and R01MH101148.

Highlights

Virtually every neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disease shows differences between males and females with respect to risk, presentation, trajectory and/or pathology.

While there is genomic variation across ethnicity, the greatest genetic variability between individuals is between males and females.

Sex differences in the brain may be a result of differential gonadal hormones, X and Y chromosome complement, differential societal influences or a combination of these.

Most of the sex differences observed are differences in the population average of a particular measurement with considerable overlap between men and women.

New studies using neuroimaging and large-scale omics approaches are providing an everexpanding understanding of sex differences in human neurobiology and disease

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Declarations of interest: none


References

Abel KM , Drake R , Goldstein JM , 2010 Sex differences in schizophrenia. Int Rev Psychiatry. 22 , 417–28.21047156
Allen M , Carrasquillo MM , Funk C , Heavner BD , Zou F , Younkin CS , Burgess JD , Chai HS , Crook J , Eddy JA , Li H , Logsdon B , Peters MA , Dang KK , Wang X , Serie D , Wang C , Nguyen T , Lincoln S , Malphrus K , Bisceglio G , Li M , Golde TE , Mangravite LM , Asmann Y , Price ND , Petersen RC , Graff-Radford NR , Dickson DW , Younkin SG , Ertekin-Taner N , 2016 Human whole genome genotype and transcriptome data for Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative diseases. Sci Data. 3 , 160089.27727239
Alroughani R , Alowayesh MS , Ahmed SF , Behbehani R , Al-Hashel J , 2018 Relapse occurrence in women with multiple sclerosis during pregnancy in the new treatment era. Neurology. 90 , e840–e846.29429970
Alzheimer’s A , 2016 2016 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 12 , 459–509.27570871
Amateau SK , McCarthy MM , 2002 A novel mechanism of dendritic spine plasticity involving estradiol induction of prostaglandin-E2. J Neurosci. 22 , 8586–96.12351732
Amateau SK , McCarthy MM , 2004 Induction of PGE2 by estradiol mediates developmental masculinization of sex behavior. Nat Neurosci. 7 , 643–50.15156148
Arnold AP , Chen X , 2009 What does the “four core genotypes” mouse model tell us about sex differences in the brain and other tissues? Front Neuroendocrinol. 30 , 1–9.19028515
Arnold AP , 2017 A general theory of sexual differentiation. J Neurosci Res. 95 , 291–300.27870435
Baio J , Wiggins L , Christensen DL , Maenner MJ , Daniels J , Warren Z , Kurzius-Spencer M , Zahorodny W , Robinson Rosenberg C , White T , Durkin MS , Imm P , Nikolaou L , Yeargin-Allsopp M , Lee LC , Harrington R , Lopez M , Fitzgerald RT , Hewitt A , Pettygrove S , Constantino JN , Vehorn A , Shenouda J , Hall-Lande J , Van Naarden Braun K , Dowling NF , 2018 Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Children Aged 8 Years - Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveill Summ. 67 , 1–23.
Bakker J , Brand T , van Ophemert J , Slob AK , 1993 Hormonal regulation of adult partner preference behavior in neonatally ATD-treated male rats. Behav Neurosci. 107 , 480–7.8329137
Bakker J , De Mees C , Douhard Q , Balthazart J , Gabant P , Szpirer J , Szpirer C , 2006 Alpha-fetoprotein protects the developing female mouse brain from masculinization and defeminization by estrogens. Nat Neurosci. 9 , 220–6.16388309
Baum MJ , 1979 Differentiation of coital behavior in mammals: a comparative analysis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 3 , 265–84.120519
Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Wilson RS , 2012a Overview and findings from the religious orders study. Curr Alzheimer Res. 9 , 628–45.22471860
Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Buchman AS , Barnes LL , Boyle PA , Wilson RS , 2012b Overview and findings from the rush Memory and Aging Project. Curr Alzheimer Res. 9 , 646–63.22471867
Beyer C , Pilgrim C , Reisert I , 1991 Dopamine content and metabolism in mesencephalic and diencephalic cell cultures: sex differences and effects of sex steroids. J Neurosci. 11 , 1325–33.1674002
Bove R , Secor E , Chibnik LB , Barnes LL , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , 2014 Age at surgical menopause influences cognitive decline and Alzheimer pathology in older women. Neurology. 82 ,222–9.24336141
Bove R , Healy BC , Musallam A , Glanz BI , De Jager PL , Chitnis T , 2016 Exploration of changes in disability after menopause in a longitudinal multiple sclerosis cohort. Mult Scler. 22 , 935–43.26447063
Bretsky PM , Buckwalter JG , Seeman TE , Miller CA , Poirier J , Schellenberg GD , Finch CE , Henderson VW , 1999 Evidence for an interaction between apolipoprotein E genotype, gender, and Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 13 , 216–21.10609670
Buckley RF , Mormino EC , Amariglio RE , Properzi MJ , Rabin JS , Lim YY , Papp KV , Jacobs HIL , Burnham S , Hanseeuw BJ , Dore V , Dobson A , Masters CL , Waller M , Rowe CC , Maruff P , Donohue MC , Rentz DM , Kirn D , Hedden T , Chhatwal J , Schultz AP , Johnson KA , Villemagne VL , Sperling RA , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I., Australian Imaging B., Lifestyle study of, a., Harvard Aging Brain, S., 2018 Sex, amyloid, and APOE epsilon4 and risk of cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: Findings from three well-characterized cohorts. Alzheimers Dement. 14 , 1193–1203.29803541
Cantuti-Castelvetri I , Keller-McGandy C , Bouzou B , Asteris G , Clark TW , Frosch MP , Standaert DG , 2007 Effects of gender on nigral gene expression and parkinson disease. Neurobiol Dis. 26 , 606–14.17412603
Carithers LJ , Ardlie K , Barcus M , Branton PA , Britton A , Buia SA , Compton CC , DeLuca DS , Peter-Demchok J , Gelfand ET , Guan P , Korzeniewski GE , Lockhart NC , Rabiner CA , Rao AK , Robinson KL , Roche NV , Sawyer SJ , Segre AV , Shive CE , Smith AM , Sobin LH , Undale AH , Valentino KM , Vaught J , Young TR , Moore HM , Consortium GT , 2015 A Novel Approach to High-Quality Postmortem Tissue Procurement: The GTEx Project. Biopreserv Biobank. 13 , 311–9.26484571
Carruth LL , Reisert I , Arnold AP , 2002 Sex chromosome genes directly affect brain sexual differentiation. Nat Neurosci. 5 , 933–4.12244322
Cockwell A , MacKenzie M , Youings S , Jacobs P , 1991 A cytogenetic and molecular study of a series of 45,X fetuses and their parents. J Med Genet. 28 , 151–5.1675683
Compston A , Confavreux C , Lassmann H , McDonald I , Miller D , Noseworthy J , Smith , Wekerle H , 2006 The Natural History of Multiple Sclerosis McAlpine’s Multiple Sclerosis, Vol, Elsevier, Churchill Livingstone.
Confavreux C , Hutchinson M , Hours MM , Cortinovis-Tourniaire P , Moreau T , 1998 Rate of pregnancy-related relapse in multiple sclerosis. Pregnancy in Multiple Sclerosis Group. N Engl J Med. 339 , 285–91.9682040
Czech DP , Lee J , Sim H , Parish CL , Vilain E , Harley VR , 2012 The human testis-determining factor SRY localizes in midbrain dopamine neurons and regulates multiple components of catecholamine synthesis and metabolism. J Neurochem. 122 , 260–71.22568433
Czech DP , Lee J , Correia J , Loke H , Moller EK , Harley VR , 2014 Transient neuroprotection by SRY upregulation in dopamine cells following injury in males. Endocrinology. 155 , 2602–12.24708242
Damoiseaux JS , Seeley WW , Zhou J , Shirer WR , Coppola G , Karydas A , Rosen HJ , Miller BL , Kramer JH , Greicius MD , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I , 2012 Gender modulates the APOE epsilon4 effect in healthy older adults: convergent evidence from functional brain connectivity and spinal fluid tau levels. J Neurosci. 32 ,8254–62.22699906
Davis EC , Popper P , Gorski RA , 1996 The role of apoptosis in sexual differentiation of the rat sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area. Brain Res. 734 ,10–8.8896803
De Jager PL , Ma Y , McCabe C , Xu J , Vardarajan BN , Felsky D , Klein HU , White CC , Peters MA , Lodgson B , Nejad P , Tang A , Mangravite LM , Yu L , Gaiteri C , Mostafavi S , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , 2018 A multi-omic atlas of the human frontal cortex for aging and Alzheimer’s disease research. Sci Data. 5 , 180142.30084846
De Vries GJ , Rissman EF , Simerly RB , Yang LY , Scordalakes EM , Auger CJ , Swain A , Lovell-Badge R , Burgoyne PS , Arnold AP , 2002 A model system for study of sex chromosome effects on sexually dimorphic neural and behavioral traits. J Neurosci. 22 , 9005–14.12388607
DeLisi LE , Maurizio AM , Svetina C , Ardekani B , Szulc K , Nierenberg J , Leonard J , Harvey PD , 2005 Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY) as a genetic model for psychotic disorders. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 135B , 15–23.15729733
Dewing P , Chiang CW , Sinchak K , Sim H , Fernagut PO , Kelly S , Chesselet MF , Micevych PE , Albrecht KH , Harley VR , Vilain E , 2006 Direct regulation of adult brain function by the male-specific factor SRY. Curr Biol. 16 , 415–20.16488877
Disteche CM , 2012 Dosage compensation of the sex chromosomes. Annu Rev Genet. 46 , 537–60.22974302
Doraiswamy PM , Bieber F , Kaiser L , Krishnan KR , Reuning-Scherer J , Gulanski B , 1997 The Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale: patterns and predictors of baseline cognitive performance in multicenter Alzheimer’s disease trials. Neurology. 48 , 1511–7.9191757
Du S , Itoh N , Askarinam S , Hill H , Arnold AP , Voskuhl RR , 2014 XY sex chromosome complement, compared with XX, in the CNS confers greater neurodegeneration during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 111 , 2806–11.24550311
Elbaz A , Bower JH , Maraganore DM , McDonnell SK , Peterson BJ , Ahlskog JE , Schaid DJ , Rocca WA , 2002 Risk tables for parkinsonism and Parkinson’s disease. J Clin Epidemiol. 55 , 25–31.11781119
Eliot L , 2019 Neurosexism: the myth that men and women have different brains. Nature. 566 , 453–454.
Farrer LA , Cupples LA , Haines JL , Hyman B , Kukull WA , Mayeux R , Myers RH , Pericak-Vance MA , Risch N , van Duijn CM , 1997 Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Disease Meta Analysis Consortium. JAMA. 278 , 1349–56.9343467
Fiest KM , Roberts JI , Maxwell CJ , Hogan DB , Smith EE , Frolkis A , Cohen A , Kirk A , Pearson D , Pringsheim T , Venegas-Torres A , Jette N , 2016 The Prevalence and Incidence of Dementia Due to Alzheimer’s Disease: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Can J Neurol Sci. 43 Suppl 1 , S51–82.27307128
Fitch RH , Denenberg VH , 1998 A role for ovarian hormones in sexual differentiation of the brain. Behav Brain Sci. 21 , 311–27; discussion 327–52. 10097016
Fombonne E , 2005 Epidemiological studies of pervasive developmental disorder In Handbook of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Vol, Volkmar F , Paul R , Klin A , Cohen D , ed.êds. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, pp. 42–69.
Fugger HN , Kumar A , Lubahn DB , Korach KS , Foster TC , 2001 Examination of estradiol effects on the rapid estradiol mediated increase in hippocampal synaptic transmission in estrogen receptor alpha knockout mice. Neurosci Lett. 309 , 207–9.11514077
Genomes Project C , Auton A , Brooks LD , Durbin RM , Garrison EP , Kang HM , Korbel JO , Marchini JL , McCarthy S , McVean GA , Abecasis GR , 2015 A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature. 526 , 68–74.26432245
Gioiosa L , Chen X , Watkins R , Klanfer N , Bryant CD , Evans CJ , Arnold AP , 2008a Sex chromosome complement affects nociception in tests of acute and chronic exposure to morphine in mice. Horm Behav. 53 , 124–30.17956759
Gioiosa L , Chen X , Watkins R , Umeda EA , Arnold AP , 2008b Sex chromosome complement affects nociception and analgesia in newborn mice. J Pain. 9 , 962–9.18635401
Gorski RA , Harlan RE , Jacobson CD , Shryne JE , Southam AM , 1980 Evidence for the existence of a sexually dimorphic nucleus in the preoptic area of the rat. J Comp Neurol. 193 , 529–39.7440781
Greenblatt DJ , Harmatz JS , von Moltke LL , Wright CE , Durol AL , Harrel-Joseph LM , Shader RI , 2000 Comparative kinetics and response to the benzodiazepine agonists triazolam and zolpidem: evaluation of sex-dependent differences. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 293 , 435–43.10773013
Haaxma CA , Bloem BR , Borm GF , Oyen WJ , Leenders KL , Eshuis S , Booij J , Dluzen DE , Horstink MW , 2007 Gender differences in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 78 , 819–24.17098842
Henderson VW , Buckwalter JG , 1994 Cognitive deficits of men and women with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 44 , 90–6.8290098
Henderson VW , Paganini-Hill A , Emanuel CK , Dunn ME , Buckwalter JG , 1994 Estrogen replacement therapy in older women. Comparisons between Alzheimer’s disease cases and nondemented control subjects. Arch Neurol. 51 , 896–900.8080389
Hines M , 2002 Sexual differentiation of human brain and behavior Hormones, brain and behavior, Vol, Academic Press, London, UK.
Hirsch L , Jette N , Frolkis A , Steeves T , Pringsheim T , 2016 The Incidence of Parkinson’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Neuroepidemiology. 46 , 292–300.27105081
Hojo Y , Hattori TA , Enami T , Furukawa A , Suzuki K , Ishii HT , Mukai H , Morrison JH , Janssen WG , Kominami S , Harada N , Kimoto T , Kawato S , 2004 Adult male rat hippocampus synthesizes estradiol from pregnenolone by cytochromes P45017alpha and P450 aromatase localized in neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 101 , 865–70.14694190
Holland D , Desikan RS , Dale AM , McEvoy LK , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I , 2013 Higher rates of decline for women and apolipoprotein E epsilon4 carriers. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 34 , 2287–93.23828104
Huang GZ , Woolley CS , 2012 Estradiol acutely suppresses inhibition in the hippocampus through a sex-specific endocannabinoid and mGluR-dependent mechanism. Neuron. 74 , 801–8.22681685
Huang WC , Bennett K , Gregg C , 2018 Epigenetic and Cellular Diversity in the Brain through Allele-Specific Effects. Trends Neurosci. 41 , 925–937.30098802
Jahanshad N , Thompson PM , 2017 Multimodal neuroimaging of male and female brain structure in health and disease across the life span. J Neurosci Res. 95 , 371–379.27870421
Kaasinen V , Joutsa J , Noponen T , Johansson J , Seppanen M , 2015 Effects of aging and gender on striatal and extrastriatal [123I]FP-CIT binding in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 36 , 1757–1763.25697414
Kingwell E , Zhu F , Marrie RA , Fisk JD , Wolfson C , Warren S , Profetto-McGrath J , Svenson LW , Jette N , Bhan V , Yu BN , Elliott L , Tremlett H , 2015. High incidence and increasing prevalence of multiple sclerosis in British Columbia, Canada: findings from over two decades (1991–2010). J Neurol. 262 , 2352–63.26205633
Koch M , Kingwell E , Rieckmann P , Tremlett H , Neurologists UMC , 2010 The natural history of secondary progressive multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 81 , 1039–43.20639385
Koebele SV , Bimonte-Nelson HA , 2015 Trajectories and phenotypes with estrogen exposures across the lifespan: What does Goldilocks have to do with it? Horm Behav. 74 , 86–104.26122297
Koopman P , Gubbay J , Vivian N , Goodfellow P , Lovell-Badge R , 1991 Male development of chromosomally female mice transgenic for Sry. Nature. 351 , 117–21.2030730
Laakso A , Vilkman H , Bergman J , Haaparanta M , Solin O , Syvalahti E , Salokangas RK , Hietala J , 2002 Sex differences in striatal presynaptic dopamine synthesis capacity in healthy subjects. Biol Psychiatry. 52 , 759–63.12372667
Labonte B , Engmann O , Purushothaman I , Menard C , Wang J , Tan C , Scarpa JR , Moy G , Loh YE , Cahill M , Lorsch ZS , Hamilton PJ , Calipari ES , Hodes GE , Issler O , Kronman H , Pfau M , Obradovic ALJ , Dong Y , Neve RL , Russo S , Kazarskis A , Tamminga C , Mechawar N , Turecki G , Zhang B , Shen L , Nestler EJ , 2017 Sex-specific transcriptional signatures in human depression. Nat Med. 23 , 1102–1111.28825715
Lange B , Mueller JK , Leweke FM , Bumb JM , 2017 How gender affects the pharmacotherapeutic approach to treating psychosis - a systematic review. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 18 , 351–362.28129701
Laurikainen H , Tuominen L , Tikka M , Merisaari H , Armio RL , Sormunen E , Borgan F , Veronese M , Howes O , Haaparanta-Solin M , Solin O , Hietala J , group M., 2019 Sex difference in brain CB1 receptor availability in man. Neuroimage. 184 , 834–842.30296558
Lavalaye J , Booij J , Reneman L , Habraken JB , van Royen EA , 2000 Effect of age and gender on dopamine transporter imaging with [123I]FP-CIT SPET in healthy volunteers. Eur J Nucl Med. 27 , 867–9.10952500
Leung A , Chue P , 2000 Sex differences in schizophrenia, a review of the literature. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl. 401 , 3–38.10887978
Li M , Santpere G , Imamura Kawasawa Y , Evgrafov OV , Gulden FO , Pochareddy S , Sunkin SM , Li Z , Shin Y , Zhu Y , Sousa AMM , Werling DM , Kitchen RR , Kang HJ , Pletikos M , Choi J , Muchnik S , Xu X , Wang D , Lorente-Galdos B , Liu S , Giusti-Rodriguez P , Won H , de Leeuw CA , Pardinas AF , BrainSpan C , Psych EC , Psych EDS , Hu M , Jin F , Li Y , Owen MJ , O’Donovan MC , Walters JTR , Posthuma D , Reimers MA , Levitt P , Weinberger DR , Hyde TM , Kleinman JE , Geschwind DH , Hawrylycz MJ , State MW , Sanders SJ , Sullivan PF , Gerstein MB , Lein ES , Knowles JA , Sestan N , 2018 Integrative functional genomic analysis of human brain development and neuropsychiatric risks. Science. 362 .
Li Y , Zhang DJ , Qiu Y , Kido T , Lau YC , 2017 The Y-located proto-oncogene TSPY exacerbates and its X-homologue TSPX inhibits transactivation functions of androgen receptor and its constitutively active variants. Hum Mol Genet. 26 , 901–912.28169398
Lin KA , Choudhury KR , Rathakrishnan BG , Marks DM , Petrella JR , Doraiswamy PM , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I , 2015 Marked gender differences in progression of mild cognitive impairment over 8 years. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 1 , 103–110.26451386
Logsdon BA , Perumal TM , Swarup V , Wang M , Funk C , Gaiteri C , Allen M , Wang X , Dammer EB , Srivastava G , Mukherjee S , Sieberts SK , Omberg L , Dang KD , Eddy JA , Snyder P , Chae Y , Amberkar S , Wei W , Hide W , Preuss C , Ergun A , Ebert PJ , Airey DC , Carter GW , Mostafavi S , Yu L , Klein HU , Consortium, t.A.-A., Collier DA , Golde T , Levey A , Bennett DA , Estrada K , Decker M , Liu Z , Shulman JM , Zhang B , Schadt E , De Jager PL , Price ND , Ertekin-Taner N , Mangravite LM , 2019 Meta-analysis of the human brain transcriptome identifies heterogeneity across human AD coexpression modules robust to sample collection and methodological approach. bioRxiv.
Longoni G , Brown RA , MomayyezSiahkal P , Elliott C , Narayanan S , Bar-Or A , Marrie RA , Yeh EA , Filippi M , Banwell B , Arnold DL , Canadian Pediatric Demyelinating Disease, N., 2017 White matter changes in paediatric multiple sclerosis and monophasic demyelinating disorders. Brain. 140 , 1300–1315.28334875
Lovell-Badge R , Robertson E , 1990 XY female mice resulting from a heritable mutation in the primary testis-determining gene, Tdy. Development. 109 , 635–46.2401216
Loyd DR , Murphy AZ , 2006 Sex differences in the anatomical and functional organization of the periaqueductal gray-rostral ventromedial medullary pathway in the rat: a potential circuit mediating the sexually dimorphic actions of morphine. J Comp Neurol. 496 , 723–38.16615128
Loyd DR , Murphy AZ , 2014 The neuroanatomy of sexual dimorphism in opioid analgesia. Exp Neurol. 259 , 57–63.24731947
Luoto S , Rantala MJ , 2018 On estrogenic masculinization of the human brain and behavior. Horm Behav. 97 , 1–2.28778538
MacLusky NJ , Naftolin F , 1981 Sexual differentiation of the central nervous system. Science. 211 , 1294–302.6163211
Maghzi AH , Ghazavi H , Ahsan M , Etemadifar M , Mousavi S , Khorvash F , Minagar A , 2010 Increasing female preponderance of multiple sclerosis in Isfahan, Iran: a population-based study. Mult Scler. 16 , 359–61.20086021
Martins JM , Fraga M , Miguens J , Tortosa F , Marques B , Sousa AD , 2017 Very late presentation of a disorder of sex development. Andrologia. 49 .
Mayer A , Lahr G , Swaab DF , Pilgrim C , Reisert I , 1998 The Y-chromosomal genes SRY and ZFY are transcribed in adult human brain. Neurogenetics. 1 , 281–8.10732804
McCarthy MM , Nugent BM , Lenz KM , 2017a Neuroimmunology and neuroepigenetics in the establishment of sex differences in the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 18 , 471–484.28638119
McCarthy MM , Woolley CS , Arnold AP , 2017b Incorporating sex as a biological variable in neuroscience: what do we gain? Nat Rev Neurosci. 18 ,707–708.29097784
McCarthy MM , Wright CL , 2017 Convergence of Sex Differences and the Neuroimmune System in Autism Spectrum Disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 81 , 402–410.27871670
McGrath J , Saha S , Chant D , Welham J , 2008 Schizophrenia: a concise overview of incidence, prevalence, and mortality. Epidemiol Rev. 30 , 67–76.18480098
Mendrek A , Mancini-Marie A , 2016 Sex/gender differences in the brain and cognition in schizophrenia. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 67 , 57–78.26743859
Milsted A , Serova L , Sabban EL , Dunphy G , Turner ME , Ely DL , 2004 Regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene transcription by Sry. Neurosci Lett. 369 , 203–7.15464265
Mogil JS , 2012 Sex differences in pain and pain inhibition: multiple explanations of a controversial phenomenon. Nat Rev Neurosci. 13 , 859–66.23165262
Mozley LH , Gur RC , Mozley PD , Gur RE , 2001 Striatal dopamine transporters and cognitive functioning in healthy men and women. Am J Psychiatry. 158 , 1492–9.11532737
Mulnard RA , Cotman CW , Kawas C , van Dyck CH , Sano M , Doody R , Koss E , Pfeiffer E , Jin S , Gamst A , Grundman M , Thomas R , Thal LJ , 2000 Estrogen replacement therapy for treatment of mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: a randomized controlled trial. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. JAMA. 283 , 1007–15.10697060
Nebel RA , Aggarwal NT , Barnes LL , Gallagher A , Goldstein JM , Kantarci K , Mallampalli MP , Mormino EC , Scott L , Yu WH , Maki PM , Mielke MM , 2018 Understanding the impact of sex and gender in Alzheimer’s disease: A call to action. Alzheimers Dement. 14 , 1171–1183.29907423
Neu SC , Pa J , Kukull W , Beekly D , Kuzma A , Gangadharan P , Wang LS , Romero K , Arneric SP , Redolfi A , Orlandi D , Frisoni GB , Au R , Devine S , Auerbach S , Espinosa A , Boada M , Ruiz A , Johnson SC , Koscik R , Wang JJ , Hsu WC , Chen YL , Toga AW , 2017 Apolipoprotein E Genotype and Sex Risk Factors for Alzheimer Disease: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 74 , 1178–1189.28846757
Nottebohm F , Arnold AP , 1976 Sexual dimorphism in vocal control areas of the songbird brain. Science. 194 , 211–3.959852
Olubodun JO , Ochs HR , von Moltke LL , Roubenoff R , Hesse LM , Harmatz JS , Shader RI , Greenblatt DJ , 2003 Pharmacokinetic properties of zolpidem in elderly and young adults: possible modulation by testosterone in men. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 56 , 297–304.12919178
Orton SM , Herrera BM , Yee IM , Valdar W , Ramagopalan SV , Sadovnick AD , Ebers GC , Canadian Collaborative Study G , 2006 Sex ratio of multiple sclerosis in Canada: a longitudinal study. Lancet Neurol. 5 , 932–6.17052660
Oveisgharan S , Arvanitakis Z , Yu L , Farfel J , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , 2018 Sex differences in Alzheimer’s disease and common neuropathologies of aging. Acta Neuropathol. 136 , 887–900.30334074
Paganini-Hill A , Henderson VW , 1994 Estrogen deficiency and risk of Alzheimer’s disease in women. Am J Epidemiol. 140 , 256–61.8030628
Payami H , Zareparsi S , Montee KR , Sexton GJ , Kaye JA , Bird TD , Yu CE , Wijsman EM , Heston LL , Litt M , Schellenberg GD , 1996 Gender difference in apolipoprotein E-associated risk for familial Alzheimer disease: a possible clue to the higher incidence of Alzheimer disease in women. Am J Hum Genet. 58 , 803–11.8644745
Poirier J , Davignon J , Bouthillier D , Kogan S , Bertrand P , Gauthier S , 1993 Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet. 342 , 697–9.8103819
Proust-Lima C , Amieva H , Letenneur L , Orgogozo JM , Jacqmin-Gadda H , Dartigues JF , 2008 Gender and education impact on brain aging: a general cognitive factor approach. Psychol Aging. 23 , 608–20.18808250
Puts D , Motta-Mena NV , 2018 Is human brain masculinization estrogen receptor-mediated? Reply to Luoto and Rantala. Horm Behav. 97 , 3–4.28818501
Ramagopalan SV , Valdar W , Criscuoli M , DeLuca GC , Dyment DA , Orton SM , Yee IM , Ebers GC , Sadovnick AD , Canadian Collaborative Study G , 2009 Age of puberty and the risk of multiple sclerosis: a population based study. Eur J Neurol. 16 , 342–7.19170744
Read S , Pedersen NL , Gatz M , Berg S , Vuoksimaa E , Malmberg B , Johansson B , McClearn GE , 2006 Sex differences after all those years? Heritability of cognitive abilities in old age. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 61 , P137–43.16670182
Ritchie SJ , Cox SR , Shen X , Lombardo MV , Reus LM , Alloza C , Harris MA , Alderson HL , Hunter S , Neilson E , Liewald DCM , Auyeung B , Whalley HC , Lawrie SM , Gale CR , Bastin ME , McIntosh AM , Deary IJ , 2018 Sex Differences in the Adult Human Brain: Evidence from 5216 UK Biobank Participants. Cereb Cortex. 28 , 2959–2975.29771288
Rocca WA , Bower JH , Maraganore DM , Ahlskog JE , Grossardt BR , de Andrade M , Melton LJ 3rd , 2007 Increased risk of cognitive impairment or dementia in women who underwent oophorectomy before menopause. Neurology. 69 , 1074–83.17761551
Rosen S , Ham B , Mogil JS , 2017 Sex differences in neuroimmunity and pain. J Neurosci Res. 95 , 500–508.27870397
Rubenstein E , Wiggins LD , Lee LC , 2015 A Review of the Differences in Developmental, Psychiatric, and Medical Endophenotypes Between Males and Females with Autism Spectrum Disorder. J Dev Phys Disabil. 27 , 119–139.26146472
Saenger P , 1996 Turner’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 335 , 1749–54.8929268
Salem JE , Kring AM , 1998 The role of gender differences in the reduction of etiologic heterogeneity in schizophrenia. Clin Psychol Rev. 18 , 795–819.9827322
Sampedro F , Vilaplana E , de Leon MJ , Alcolea D , Pegueroles J , Montal V , Carmona-Iragui M , Sala I , Sanchez-Saudinos MB , Anton-Aguirre S , Morenas-Rodriguez E , Camacho V , Falcon C , Pavia J , Ros D , Clarimon J , Blesa R , Lleo A , Fortea J , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I , 2015 APOE-by-sex interactions on brain structure and metabolism in healthy elderly controls. Oncotarget. 6 , 26663–74.26397226
Savic I , Frisen L , Manzouri A , Nordenstrom A , Linden Hirschberg A , 2017 Role of testosterone and Y chromosome genes for the masculinization of the human brain. Hum Brain Mapp. 38 , 1801–1814.28070912
Schoonheim MM , Vigeveno RM , Rueda Lopes FC , Pouwels PJ , Polman CH , Barkhof F , Geurts JJ , 2014 Sex-specific extent and severity of white matter damage in multiple sclerosis: implications for cognitive decline. Hum Brain Mapp. 35 , 2348–58.23982918
Schwarz JM , Sholar PW , Bilbo SD , 2012 Sex differences in microglial colonization of the developing rat brain. J Neurochem. 120 , 948–63.22182318
Seney ML , Huo Z , Cahill K , French L , Puralewski R , Zhang J , Logan RW , Tseng G , Lewis DA , Sibille E , 2018 Opposite Molecular Signatures of Depression in Men and Women. Biol Psychiatry. 84 , 18–27.29548746
Sepulcre J , Grothe MJ , d’Oleire Uquillas F , Ortiz-Teran L , Diez I , Yang HS , Jacobs HIL , Hanseeuw BJ , Li Q , El-Fakhri G , Sperling RA , Johnson KA , 2018 Neurogenetic contributions to amyloid beta and tau spreading in the human cortex. Nat Med. 24 , 1910–1918.30374196
Shao H , Breitner JC , Whitmer RA , Wang J , Hayden K , Wengreen H , Corcoran C , Tschanz J , Norton M , Munger R , Welsh-Bohmer K , Zandi PP , Cache County I , 2012 Hormone therapy and Alzheimer disease dementia: new findings from the Cache County Study. Neurology. 79 , 1846–52.23100399
Skaletsky H , Kuroda-Kawaguchi T , Minx PJ , Cordum HS , Hillier L , Brown LG , Repping S , Pyntikova T , Ali J , Bieri T , Chinwalla A , Delehaunty A , Delehaunty K , Du H , Fewell G , Fulton L , Fulton R , Graves T , Hou SF , Latrielle P , Leonard S , Mardis E , Maupin R , McPherson J , Miner T , Nash W , Nguyen C , Ozersky P , Pepin K , Rock S , Rohlfing T , Scott K , Schultz B , Strong C , Tin-Wollam A , Yang SP , Waterston RH , Wilson RK , Rozen S , Page DC , 2003 The male-specific region of the human Y chromosome is a mosaic of discrete sequence classes. Nature. 423 , 825–37.12815422
Smejkalova T , Woolley CS , 2010 Estradiol acutely potentiates hippocampal excitatory synaptic transmission through a presynaptic mechanism. J Neurosci. 30 , 16137–48.21123560
Smith R , Studd JW , 1992 A pilot study of the effect upon multiple sclerosis of the menopause, hormone replacement therapy and the menstrual cycle. J R Soc Med. 85 , 612–3.1433038
Smith-Bouvier DL , Divekar AA , Sasidhar M , Du S , Tiwari-Woodruff SK , King JK , Arnold AP , Singh RR , Voskuhl RR , 2008 A role for sex chromosome complement in the female bias in autoimmune disease. J Exp Med. 205 , 1099–108.18443225
Sorge RE , Totsch SK , 2017 Sex Differences in Pain. J Neurosci Res. 95 , 1271–1281.27452349
Sramek JJ , Murphy MF , Cutler NR , 2016 Sex differences in the psychopharmacological treatment of depression. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 18 , 447–457.28179816
Tabatadze N , Huang G , May RM , Jain A , Woolley CS , 2015 Sex Differences in Molecular Signaling at Inhibitory Synapses in the Hippocampus. J Neurosci. 35 , 11252–65.26269634
Tang MX , Jacobs D , Stern Y , Marder K , Schofield P , Gurland B , Andrews H , Mayeux R , 1996 Effect of oestrogen during menopause on risk and age at onset of Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet. 348 , 429–32.8709781
Teyler TJ , Vardaris RM , Lewis D , Rawitch AB , 1980 Gonadal steroids: effects on excitability of hippocampal pyramidal cells. Science. 209 , 1017–8.7190730
Tifratene K , Robert P , Metelkina A , Pradier C , Dartigues JF , 2015 Progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia due to AD in clinical settings. Neurology. 85 , 331–8.26136516
Tomassini V , Onesti E , Mainero C , Giugni E , Paolillo A , Salvetti M , Nicoletti F , Pozzilli C , 2005 Sex hormones modulate brain damage in multiple sclerosis: MRI evidence. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 76 , 272–5.15654051
Tripodianakis J , Potagas C , Papageorgiou P , Lazaridou M , Matikas N , 2003 Zolpidem-related epileptic seizures: a case report. Eur Psychiatry. 18 , 140–1.12763302
Trojano M , Lucchese G , Graziano G , Taylor BV , Simpson S Jr. , Lepore V , Grand’maison F , Duquette P , Izquierdo G , Grammond P , Amato MP , Bergamaschi R , Giuliani G , Boz C , Hupperts R , Van Pesch V , Lechner-Scott J , Cristiano E , Fiol M , Oreja-Guevara C , Saladino ML , Verheul F , Slee M , Paolicelli D , Tortorella C , D’Onghia M , Iaffaldano P , Direnzo V , Butzkueven H , Group MSS , the New Zealand MSPSG , 2012 Geographical variations in sex ratio trends over time in multiple sclerosis. PLoS One. 7 , e48078.23133550
Tukiainen T , Villani AC , Yen A , Rivas MA , Marshall JL , Satija R , Aguirre M , Gauthier L , Fleharty M , Kirby A , Cummings BB , Castel SE , Karczewski KJ , Aguet F , Byrnes A , Consortium, G.T., Laboratory, D.A., Coordinating Center -Analysis Working, G., Statistical Methods groups-Analysis Working, G., Enhancing, G.g., Fund, N.I.H.C., Nih/Nci, Nih/Nhgri, Nih/Nimh, Nih/Nida, Biospecimen Collection Source Site, N., Biospecimen Collection Source Site, R., Biospecimen Core Resource, V., Brain Bank Repository-University of Miami Brain Endowment, B., Leidos Biomedical-Project, M., Study, E., Genome Browser Data, I., Visualization, E.B.I., Genome Browser Data, I., Visualization-Ucsc Genomics Institute, U.o.C.S.C., Lappalainen T , Regev A , Ardlie KG , Hacohen N , MacArthur DG , 2017 Landscape of X chromosome inactivation across human tissues. Nature. 550 , 244–248.29022598
Twelves D , Perkins KS , Counsell C , 2003 Systematic review of incidence studies of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord. 18 , 19–31.12518297
Unger CA , 2016 Hormone therapy for transgender patients. Transl Androl Urol. 5 , 877–884.28078219
van der Werf M , Hanssen M , Kohler S , Verkaaik M , Verhey FR , Investigators R , van Winkel R , van Os J , Allardyce J , 2014 Systematic review and collaborative recalculation of 133,693 incident cases of schizophrenia. Psychol Med. 44 , 9–16.23244442
van Rijn S , Aleman A , Swaab H , Kahn R , 2006 Klinefelter’s syndrome (karyotype 47,XXY) and schizophrenia-spectrum pathology. Br J Psychiatry. 189 , 459–60.17077438
VanRyzin JW , Pickett LA , McCarthy MM , 2018 Microglia: Driving critical periods and sexual differentiation of the brain. Dev Neurobiol. 78 , 580–592.29243403
Varrone A , Dickson JC , Tossici-Bolt L , Sera T , Asenbaum S , Booij J , Kapucu OL , Kluge A , Knudsen GM , Koulibaly PM , Nobili F , Pagani M , Sabri O , Vander Borght T , Van Laere K , Tatsch K , 2013 European multicentre database of healthy controls for [123I]FP-CIT SPECT (ENC-DAT): age-related effects, gender differences and evaluation of different methods of analysis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 40 , 213–27.23160999
Wang M , Beckmann ND , Roussos P , Wang E , Zhou X , Wang Q , Ming C , Neff R , Ma W , Fullard JF , Hauberg ME , Bendl J , Peters MA , Logsdon B , Wang P , Mahajan M , Mangravite LM , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Lah JJ , Seyfried NT , Levey AI , Buxbaum JD , Ehrlich M , Gandy S , Katsel P , Haroutunian V , Schadt E , Zhang B , 2018 The Mount Sinai cohort of large-scale genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Data. 5 , 180185.30204156
Werling DM , Geschwind DH , 2013 Sex differences in autism spectrum disorders. Curr Opin Neurol. 26 , 146–53.23406909
Williams Institute, T., 2017 Estimates of Transgender Populations in States with Legislation Impacting Transgender People. Vol, ed.êds., UCLA School of Law.
Wong KK , Muller ML , Kuwabara H , Studenski SA , Bohnen NI , 2012 Gender differences in nigrostriatal dopaminergic innervation are present at young-to-middle but not at older age in normal adults. J Clin Neurosci. 19 , 183–4.22030267
Wong M , Moss RL , 1992 Long-term and short-term electrophysiological effects of estrogen on the synaptic properties of hippocampal CA1 neurons. J Neurosci. 12 , 3217–25.1353794
Woolley CS , 2007 Acute effects of estrogen on neuronal physiology. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 47 , 657–80.16918306
Wooten GF , Currie LJ , Bovbjerg VE , Lee JK , Patrie J , 2004 Are men at greater risk for Parkinson’s disease than women? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 75 , 637–9.15026515
Wright CL , Burks SR , McCarthy MM , 2008 Identification of prostaglandin E2 receptors mediating perinatal masculinization of adult sex behavior and neuroanatomical correlates. Dev Neurobiol. 68 , 1406–19.18726914
Wright CL , McCarthy MM , 2009 Prostaglandin E2-induced masculinization of brain and behavior requires protein kinase A, AMPA/kainate, and metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling. J Neurosci. 29 , 13274–82.19846715
Yamamoto H , Arimura S , Nakanishi A , Shimo Y , Motoi Y , Ishiguro K , Murakami K , Hattori N , Aoki S , 2017 Age-related effects and gender differences in Japanese healthy controls for [(123)I] FP-CIT SPECT. Ann Nucl Med. 31 , 407–412.28382589
Zagni E , Simoni L , Colombo D , 2016 Sex and Gender Differences in Central Nervous System-Related Disorders. Neurosci J. 2016 , 2827090.27314003
Zerbino DR , Achuthan P , Akanni W , Amode MR , Barrell D , Bhai J , Billis K , Cummins C , Gall A , Giron CG , Gil L , Gordon L , Haggerty L , Haskell E , Hourlier T , Izuogu OG , Janacek SH , Juettemann T , To JK , Laird MR , Lavidas I , Liu Z , Loveland JE , Maurel T , McLaren W , Moore B , Mudge J , Murphy DN , Newman V , Nuhn M , Ogeh D , Ong CK , Parker A , Patricio M , Riat HS , Schuilenburg H , Sheppard D , Sparrow H , Taylor K , Thormann A , Vullo A , Walts B , Zadissa A , Frankish A , Hunt SE , Kostadima M , Langridge N , Martin FJ , Muffato M , Perry E , Ruffier M , Staines DM , Trevanion SJ , Aken BL , Cunningham F , Yates A , Flicek P , 2018 Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 46 , D754–D761.29155950
Zubieta JK , Smith YR , Bueller JA , Xu Y , Kilbourn MR , Jewett DM , Meyer CR , Koeppe RA , Stohler CS , 2002 mu-opioid receptor-mediated antinociceptive responses differ in men and women. J Neurosci. 22 , 5100–7.12077205
