LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7607088
673
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol
Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.
Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology
0362-1642
1545-4304

30208281
6636329
10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-010818-021807
NIHMS1035376
Article
Nuclear Receptors as Therapeutic Targets for Neurodegenerative Diseases: Lost in Translation
Moutinho Miguel *
Codocedo Juan F. *
Puntambekar Shweta S. *
Landreth Gary E.
Stark Neuroscience Research Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA
glandret@iu.edu
* These authors contributed equally to this article

13 6 2019
12 9 2018
06 1 2019
17 7 2019
59 237261
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by a progressive loss of neurons that leads to a broad range of disabilities, including severe cognitive decline and motor impairment, for which there are no effective therapies. Several lines of evidence support a putative therapeutic role of nuclear receptors (NRs) in these types of disorders. NRs are ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate the expression of a wide range of genes linked to metabolism and inflammation. Although the activation of NRs in animal models of neurodegenerative disease exhibits promising results, the translation of this strategy to clinical practice has been unsuccessful. In this review we discuss the role of NRs in neurodegenerative diseases in light of preclinical and clinical studies, as well as new findings derived from the analysis of transcriptomic databases from humans and animal models. We discuss the failure in the translation of NR-based therapeutic approaches and consider alternative and novel research avenues in the development of effective therapies for neurodegenerative diseases.

nuclear receptors
neurodegenerative diseases
Alzheimer’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
Huntington’s disease
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

1. INTRODUCTION

Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by progressive neuronal loss that leads to a broad range of clinical manifestations typically associated with severe motor disability, cognitive decline, and dementia. Currently, more than 40 million people worldwide are affected by these disorders, and since age is the major risk factor for most neurodegenerative diseases, the aging of the global population will further increase the burden of these disorders (1). Available therapeutic strategies are limited and mainly focus on symptomatology, as they are not able to delay the underlying progressive loss of neurons. Therefore, the development of novel and effective therapies to treat these diseases is urgent. Several lines of evidence have established an association between neurodegenerative diseases and type II nuclear receptors (NRs), namely the retinoid X receptor (RXR), the retinoic acid receptor (RAR), the liver X receptor (LXR), the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), and, more recently, the nuclear receptor related-1 protein (Nurr1) (2, 3). NRs belong to a superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate the expression of a wide range of genes. In general, NR activity modulates energy and lipid homeostasis in response to environmental and dietary changes (4). Over the past two decades, a myriad of studies have built a robustbodyofevidenceshowingthattheactivationofNRsinanimalmodelsofneurodegenerative diseases exerts salutary effects (3). However, the translation of this strategy to human patients has been unsuccessful in several clinical trials that have failed to show therapeutic efficacy. Given the promising preclinical results, it remains unclear why the clinical translation of NR activation has been unsuccessful. In this review, we summarize the role of NRs in neurodegenerative diseases, considering both preclinical and clinical data. Our objectives are to better understand the reasons forfailureinthetranslationofthistherapeuticstrategyandtosuggestalternativeresearchavenues, in the context of NR signaling, that could have a better chance to succeed in patients suffering from these diseases.

1.1. Neurodegenerative Diseases

Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are among the most prevalent neurodegenerative diseases. These disorders exhibit a marked neuroinflammatory component and are predominantly associated with the abnormal accumulation of proteins such as β-amyloid (Aβ), microtubule-associated protein tau, α-synuclein (α-syn), huntingtin (htt), superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), and TDP43.

1.1.1. Alzheimer’s disease.

AD is characterized by the accumulation of Aβ peptides generated from the sequential cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β and γ secretases, giving rise to mainly Aβ peptides that are either 40 or 42 amino acids in length. The self-aggregating Aβ42 peptide drives the generation of oligomeric species, which ultimately results in Aβ deposition in the brain parenchyma where they form amyloid plaques (5, 6). The accumulation of amyloid peptides and deposits leads to neuroinflammatory processes, hyperphosphorylation of the tau protein (p-tau), and subsequent neurodegeneration (5). Although the majority of AD patients exhibit the sporadic, late-onset disease, thought to be due to the impairment of Aβ clearance mechanisms, a subset of patients inherit familial AD, which is due to genetic variants that favor the generation of Aβ1–42 species (5, 7).

1.1.2. Parkinson’s disease.

The predominant form of PD is sporadic with only about 10% of cases being inherited (8). Traditionally, PD has been diagnosed based on the presence of Lewy bodies composed of misfolded and/or aggregated forms of the protein α-syn, which is associated with the progressive loss of vulnerable dopaminergic neurons, primarily in the substantia nigra. Specific point mutations in the α-syn gene, SNCA, as well as SNCA multiplications, have been linked to inherited forms of PD (9). Along with protein misfolding, several other pathological mechanisms seem to underlie PD pathology, such as mitochondrial dysfunction, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, aberrant ubiquitin, and chaperon-mediated autophagy clearance (10, 11).

1.1.3. Huntington’s disease.

HD is a rare inherited autosomal-dominant disorder that results from the presence of expanded CAG repeats in the gene encoding htt. The CAG repeats give rise to mutant forms of htt (mhtt) harboring a polyglutamine (polyQ) domain, which induces conformational changes, resulting in intracellular aggregates (12). Although the exact mechanisms by which intracellular polyQ-htt aggregates cause neuronal death remain unclear, it has been suggested that transcriptional deregulation due to sequestration of critical transcription factors, such as p53, SP1, and CBP, by intracellular mhtt aggregates might play an important role (13).

1.1.4. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

ALS is characterized by the degeneration of large motor neurons in the brain and spinalcord, and has a multifaceted etiology that includes impaired messenger RNA (mRNA) stability and microRNA processing; altered axonal trafficking of mRNA; dysregulated transcription due to mutations in genes such as TDP43, FUS, and C9ORF72; glutamate mediated excitotoxicity; and impaired neurotransmitter release (14). Additionally, mutations in the SOD1 gene, including G93A, result in the misfolding and aggregation of the mutant SOD1 protein within motor neurons, which leads to ER stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and further disruption of axonal transport, which in turn results in neuronal loss. Similar to HD, neurodegeneration in ALS is also associated with dysregulated transport of ubiquitinated proteins to the proteosome and impaired proteosome/autophagosome functions (14, 15).

1.2. Nuclear Receptors

The type II NRs compose a family of ligand-activated transcription factors that form obligate heterodimerswithRXR.Thedimericreceptorbindstosequence-specificDNAresponseelements that are positioned in the enhancer and promoter regions of their target genes, and act to directly regulate gene transcription (16) (Figure 1). Importantly, NR heterodimers can be considered permissive when the heterodimer is activated by ligation of either member of the receptor pair, and when it is simultaneously ligated, it can respond in an additive or synergistic fashion. This is the case for LXR, PPAR, and Nurr1 heterodimers with RXR. On the other hand, heterodimers of RARwithRXRareconsideredtobeconditionallypermissivesinceitisthebindingofaRARligand that activates the dimer and subsequently allows the binding of RXR ligands, which increases the transcriptional potential of RAR. This type of heterodimer is not activated by RXR ligands alone; there are also nonpermissive RXR heterodimers, such as the thyroid hormone receptor, which respond only to ligands of the nonpermissive binding partner and not RXR (17, 18). In the absence of ligand binding, RXR heterodimers are bound to DNA and inhibit transcription through their interaction with corepressor complexes (16, 18, 19). Interestingly, monomers of PPARγ, LXRs, and Nurr1 are also able to repress gene expression, namely of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) target genes, which inhibit the inflammatory response (19, 20).

1.2.1. RXR.

The three RXR, isoforms RXRα, RXRβ, and RXRγ, are expressed in several regions of the adult brain in sex- and isoform-specific patterns (21, 22). The roles of RXRs are very diverse owing to their ability to dimerize with other type II NRs, activating many different genes and pathways.Although9-cis- retinoic acid was initially proposed to be the endogenous ligand for RXR, several inconsistencies have raised doubts about this assumption, and the primary endogenous or natural ligands for these receptors remain unclear. Finally, n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), such as docosahexaenoic acid, have been identified as RXR ligands, as have 9-cis-13,14dihydroretinoic acid, and phytanic acid (23, 24).

1.2.2. RAR.

Similar to RXR, the three RAR isoforms, RARα, RARβ, and RARγ, are expressed throughout the adult brain in sex- and isoform-dependent, region-specific patterns (21, 22). RARs bind to all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), which serves as its principal ligand, but also interact with 9cis-retinoic acid (25). Mice lacking RARβ exhibit impaired long-term depression and long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission (26), and the knockout of RARα in mice revealed that this receptorisrequiredforthehomeostaticsynapticplasticity,i.e.,theabilityofneuronstoadjusttheir own excitability to maintain the stability of circuit activity, mediated by RA (27). Aside from their role in cognition, RARs also seem to play a role in motor function in coordination with RXR (25). It has also been suggested that RARs are important regulators of sleep and the circadian cycle (28).

1.2.3. LXR.

Although both LXR isoforms, LXRα and LXRβ, are expressed in the brain, LXRβ exhibits a more extensive expression pattern in this organ (29). LXRs regulate lipid homeostasis and inflammation and are activated by endogenous oxysterols derived from cholesterol. The critical role of LXR in the brain is demonstrated by genetic models lacking these receptors. LXR double-knockout mice exhibit several brain abnormalities, including excessive lipid deposition, astrogliosis, and extensive neuronal loss (30). LXRβ-specific knockout mice also exhibit lipid accumulation, motor neuron degeneration, and astrocytic proliferation (31).

1.2.4. PPARs.

The three PPAR isoforms, PPARα, PPARβ/δ, and PPARγ, are expressed throughout the brain, and it seems that PPARs are more highly expressed in neurons than in other cell types (32). Endogenous and natural ligands of PPARs include mainly PUFAs and their derivatives, as well as other lipids (33). PPARγ has an important role in the anti-inflammatory response, neuroprotection, and neuronal differentiation and function (34, 35). PPARα has been linked to neuroprotection and anti-inflammatory responses (36), as well as to the regulation of energy homeostasis (37) and synaptic function (38). Finally, PPARβ/δ is involved in astroglial and oligodendrocyte differentiation, myelination, and neuroprotection (39).

1.2.5. Nurr1.

Nurr1 is a member of the NR4A family, and, unlike type II receptors, it can directly bind to DNA and regulate transcription as a monomer or homodimer, or as a heterodimer with RXR (40). Nurr1 is expressed at high levels in the brain (41), and studies using Nurr1 knockout and conditional knockout mice have established the critical role of Nurr1 in the generation and development of dopaminergic neurons as well as in the maintenance and survival of these cells (42–44). It is still not clear whether Nurr1 interacts with an endogenous or natural ligand; however, the transcriptional activity of the Nurr1:RXR heterodimer can be stimulated by ligands interacting with RXR (45).

2. THE ROLE OF NUCLEAR RECEPTORS IN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES

Although the therapeutic role of NRs in neurodegenerative diseases has been extensively characterized by numerousstudies usingdifferent animal models and ligands, NR agonists have generally failed to demonstrate clinical efficacy. In this section, we review preclinical evidence for a neuroprotective role of NR activation in different animal models (summarized in Table 1), systematize crucial mechanisms underlying their effects (Figure 2), and summarize the clinical outcomes arising from this therapeutic strategy (Table 1). We also review studies and analyze transcriptomic databases containing data from the central nervous system of human patients to better understand the role of NRs in these pathologies. The expression profile of NRs as well as the levels of endogenous or natural ligands observed in these patients is summarized in Table 2.

2.1. RXR in Alzheimer’s Disease

RXRα Mrna and protein expression levels are increased in the brains of AD patients (Table 2), which is evident at very early stages of dementia in the temporal gyrus and hippocampus and persists throughout the disease (46). The analysis of global gene expression in neurons obtained from several areas in the brains of AD patients indicates that the neuronal expression of RXRα is not altered (Table 2), suggesting that the increase in RXRα expression is likely to occur in non-neuronal cells. The RXR agonist bexarotene was initially described to increase astrocytic apolipoprotein E (ApoE) expression and ApoE-mediated Aβ clearance, as it rapidly lowered brain Aβ burden and rescued cognitive deficits in the AD mouse model APP/PS1 (47). Although subsequent reports using bexarotene and LG100268, another RXR agonist, did not fully recapitulate these first findings with respect to plaque clearance, many of the beneficial effects have been reproduced in different studies (48, 49). RXR activation induces ApoE and ABCA1 expression, leading to an increase in ABCA1-mediated lipidation of ApoE and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels in the brain. ApoE-containing HDLs were shown to stimulate the proteolytic degradation of Aβ through microglial neprilysin and extracellular insulin-degrading enzyme (47, 50). It has been found that RXR activation by bexarotene induces Aβ phagocytosis by brain myeloid cells, which is associated with an increase in the expression of the phagocytic receptors MerTK, Axl, and Trem2 (51, 52). Bexarotene has also demonstrated direct neuroprotective effects in the AD mouse model 5xFAD, where it repressed inflammation, prevented neuronal loss, and was accompanied by an increase in synaptic markers and behavioral improvement (53). Although bexarotene has shown great therapeutic potential for AD in several animal models, its performance in clinical trials has been disappointing as it penetrates the blood-brain barrier poorly and elicits serious side effects, including hypertriglyceridemia (54). In a small clinical trial, however, AD patients with ApoE3 alleles experienced significant reduction in amyloid burden within 30 days of the start of treatment (55).

2.2. RXR in Parkinson’s Disease

The available data indicate that there is adecrease in RXRα mRNA expression in the dopaminergic neurons of PD patients (Table 2). In 2013, a large screen of possible Nurr1/RXR ligands found that bexarotene preferentially bound to the Nurr1/RXR heterodimer. A low dose of bexarotene significantly protected dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra of the 6-hydroxydopamine (6OHDA) rat PD model, suggesting that low oral doses of bexarotene might provide an effective and well-tolerated therapy for PD (45). However, a different study reported conflicting results as bexarotene treatment failed to protect against dopaminergic cell loss, striatum innervation, and consequently motor impairment in PD animal models with 6-OHDA and α-syn overexpression (56). Nevertheless, bexarotene treatment did restore the expression of a subset of Nurr1 target genes, including GDNF and the receptor kinase Ret. Recently, it was shown that treatment of both α-syn overexpression and neurotoxin-lesioned PD mice models with BRF110, a synthetic molecule that is able to activate Nurr1 specifically through RXRα, exerted neuroprotective effects (57). Similarly, IRX4204, another synthetic drug that activates Nurr1 through RXR binding, prevented a PD-like phenotype at the molecular, cellular, and behavioral levels in the 6- OHDA rat model (58). These reports support the potential value in exploring Nurr1:RXRα activation as a therapeutic approach for PD.

2.3. RXR in Huntington’s Disease

RXR isoform expression seems to be differentially regulated in the frontal cortex and caudate of HD patients, although an increase in RXRα is the most consistent change in these brain regions (Table 2). Recently, the RXR agonist bexarotene was shown to be neuroprotective when administered to the HD mouse model N171–82Q, rescuing the HD neurological phenotype and significantly extending the survival of these animals (59). Since RXR agonists are able to dimerize with different NRs, the authors proposed that bexarotene exerts its salutary effects by inducing the formation of an RXR:PPARβ/δ heterodimer. This heterodimer activates a specific genetic program that subsequently restores altered neuronal mitochondrial function and protein quality control in HD, leading to neuroprotection. Although a PPARβ/δ-specific ligand elicited a similar range of neuroprotective effects (60), it is important to note that RXR activation by bexarotene leads to the activation of several different genetic programs regulated by distinct NRs; hence, it is likely that PPARβ/δ is not the only receptor playing a role in this bexarotene effect.

2.4. RXR in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Among the RXR isoforms there is a selective decrease of RXRγ mRNA levels in the spinal cords of ALS patients (Table 2). Treating the ALS mouse model SOD1G93A with the RXR agonist bexarotene attenuated the impaired motor function and weight loss, and increased survival by 30 % (61). The authors suggested that bexarotene exerted a neuroprotective effect on motor neurons by preserving synapses and reducing reactive astrogliosis. Given the limited therapeutic options for ALS, a clinical trial of bexarotene might be warranted.

2.5. RAR in Alzheimer’s Disease

Increased RARα expression in the cortex of AD patients, possibly in both neuronal and nonneuronal cells depending on the specific cortical area (Table 2), could indicate important cell type–specific roles for this isoform in AD. The activation of this specific isoform, but not the others, is able to repress the production of Aβ (61) while simultaneously inducing microglial-mediated Aβ clearance (62), further suggesting an important role for RARα in AD pathology. As previously mentioned, vitamin A (retinol) metabolites, such as RA and 9-cis-retinoic acid, are important endogenous agonists for RAR and RXR (23–25). Vitamin A deficiency has been correlated with cognitive decline in the elderly (63), and numerous studies have found lower levels of vitamin A in AD patients (Table 2). Both vitamin A deficiency and marginal vitamin A deficiency have been suggested to facilitate AD pathogenesis by increasing Aβ levels and deposition (63, 64) , which is consistent with the observation that RXR and RARs modulate both Aβ clearance and production in AD animal models (49).

It has been postulated that AD pathology is linked to the lack of availability of RA in the brain, which results in a feedback activation of retinaldehyde dehydrogenase (raldh), an enzyme involved in RA synthesis from vitamin A (65). Low levels of RA could be due to vitamin A deficiency in AD (Table 2), but it has also been observed that Aβ is able to repress RA synthesis (62), which suggests that there are pathological mechanisms that could be responsible for decreasing RA availability in the AD brain even in the presence of normal levels of vitamin A. Overall, RA deficiency and the subsequent impairment of RAR signaling might be important mechanisms in AD pathogenesis or disease progression. Unfortunately, adverse side effects and cytotoxicity of RA at higher concentrations have restricted its clinical applications. Tamibarotene ( Am80), a synthetic retinoid approved in Japan for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia, is a RAR agonist with high specificity for RARα and RARβ. Treatment of APP23 transgenic mice with Am80 lowered insoluble Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels by upregulating expression of α-secretase (66), and in combination with HX630, an RXR agonist, Am80 drastically enhanced the learning ability of these mice (67). Am80 has been tested in patients suffering from AD in a small phase II clinical trial (68), but the results have not yet been disclosed. Acitretin, another RAR agonist, has also been tested in a pilot phase II clinical trial for AD (69). This study demonstrated the safety and tolerability of acitretin in human patients, and also reported that this drug promotes the nonamyloidogenic processing pathway of APP. In light of these results, the authors suggest that acitretin has promising therapeutic potential and should be tested in larger and longer trials. This is an uncommon case of a clinical trial using an NR-targeted therapy that yielded promising results for a neurodegenerative disease, which warrants further clinical testing.

2.6. RAR in Parkinson’s Disease

Global gene expression analysis indicates that RARγ mRNA is increased in the striatum of PD patients (Table 2). There are no differences in serum levels of vitamin A in PD patients compared to controls (Table 2). It has been reported, however, that the transcript levels of raldh1 are markedly lower in the niagral neurons of PD patients, and that low levels of this enzyme in dopaminergic neurons correlate with neuronal dysfunction (68). This suggests that reduced production of RA and retinoid signaling might be involved in PD pathogenesis; however, the study of RAR as a therapeutic target for PD has been very limited. The administration of RA-loaded polymeric nanoparticles to MPTP mice has a neuroprotective effect on dopaminergic neurons (70) , and the treatment of 6-OHDA mice with 9-cis-retinoic acid, which binds RAR even though it is an agonist of RXR, leads to neuroprotection of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons (71). Moreover, the RAR agonist Am80 prevents dopaminergic cell loss in the substantia nigra in mice challenged with lipopolysaccharide (72), which further suggests a potential neuroprotective role of RAR in diseases such as PD.

2.7. RAR in Huntington’s Disease

RARβ seems to be the only RAR isoform that exhibits abnormal expression in the brain of HD patients, as evidenced by reduced mRNA levels in the caudate (Table 2). Notably, the raldh1a1 transcript level is increased in the caudate of HD patients (73). Although vitamin A levels in HD patients have not been reported, one could speculate that this increase in raldh1a1 might be a compensatory mechanism for reduced vitamin A levels, analogous to what occurs in AD. The potential therapeutic role of RAR activation has not been explored in HD; however, it was recently reported that RARβ target genes are particularly affected in HD, which is thought to be due to sequestration of RARβ in htt protein aggregates (74). Hence, RARβ activation could be therapeutically relevant in HD.

2.8. RAR in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

RARα and RARγ transcript levels are downregulated in spinal cord motor neurons from ALS patients (Table 2). Conversely, the nuclear levels of RARβ are reported to be increased in motor neurons of sporadic ALS patients, suggesting higher activity (Table 2), which is proposed to be neuroprotective since increased RARβ activity is antiapoptotic and protects motor neurons from oxidative-induced cell death (75). It has been hypothesized that a defect in retinoid signaling could be a key factor in ALS pathogenesis. In spinal cord motor neurons from ALS patients, the expression of Raldh2, an enzyme that produces RA, is decreased (76), which suggests that there might be a depletion of retinoid ligands in spite of no changes in vitamin A levels, similar to what has been reported in PD (Table 2). The subsequent reduction in retinoid signaling could play an important role in disease progression. These data suggest that RARs could be a potential therapeutic target for ALS; however, the administration of RA to the ALS mouse model SOD1G93A was found to decrease the life span of the animals, although this effect was not due to an exacerbation of the pathology (77). In a small pilot trial, the treatment of ALS patients with RA and pioglitazone as an add-on to the traditional riluzole therapy did not delay disease progression (78).Nonetheless, the limitations of this study confound interpretation of the data, specifically the relatively small size of the trial, in which a significant number of patients discontinued RA due to their inability to tolerate its side effects, and the fact that all subjects started with a three-drug regimen.

2.9. LXR in Alzheimer’s Disease

Since LXR expression is not greatly affected in AD (Table 2), the availability of endogenous ligands might be a crucial factor that dictates LXR activity. A recent study reported that the levels of several oxysterols, including well-characterized LXR agonists, exhibit an abnormal profile in the brain of late-stage AD patients (Table 2). Specifically, 27-hydroxycholesterol (27 OHC ) and 25-hydroxycholesterol (25OHC) levels were found to be increased and the levels of 24Shydroxycholesterol (24OHC) decreased. Moreover, desmosterol, another endogenous ligand of LXR, is also decreased in the AD brain (Table 2). Hence, it is not clear if the overall balance between the levels of LXR agonists in the AD brain would result in increased or reduced LXR activation. It is important to consider that desmosterol inhibits inflammatory gene expression, in part, through LXR-dependent mechanisms (79). A decrease in the LXR-mediated anti-inflammatory response in the AD brain due to reduced levels of desmosterol could be a relevant mechanism in AD pathogenesis or progression. Many studies have reported beneficial effects of different LXR ligands, with several animal models of AD showing a decreased Aβ burden and improved cognitive function. The underlying mechanisms are diverse, including modulation of neuronal function, Aβ degradation, anti-inflammatory mechanisms (3, 49), and the restoration of microvasculature architecture, which decreases Aβ deposition in blood vessels (80). It is still not clear to what extent the therapeutic roles of LXRα and LXRβ isoforms differ in neurodegenerative diseases; however, the development and utilization of isoform-selective agonists could shed some light on that subject. Since LXRβ activation, in contrast to LXRα, does not seem to induce hepatic steatosis, the side effects generally associated with LXR agonists could also be addressed by the use of isoform selective ligands (81).

2.10. LXR in Parkinson’s Disease

Similar to AD, both LXRα and LXRβ transcript levels do not seem to change in the striatum and substantia nigra of the brains of PD patients (Table 2). The plasma levels of 24OHC and 27 OHC are similar in PD patients and controls, but 10% of a cohort of PD patients exhibited an increase in both of these oxysterols in the CSF (Table 2). The levels of 27OHC are particularly relevant in PD since it has been reported that 27OHC increases the levels of α-syn in human neuroblastoma cell lines through LXRβ, suggesting a deleterious effect on dopaminergic neurons in PD (82–84). On the other hand, the synthetic LXR agonist GW3965 exerts a neuroprotective effect in the MPTP PD mouse model by reducing the glial inflammatory response (85). Nonetheless, the role of LXRβ in an acute insult model, such as MPTP-lesioned mice, may greatly differ from its role in the context of a chronic progressive pathology.

2.11. LXR in Huntington’s Disease

In HD patients, transcriptomic analysis reveals that LXRα expression is increased in the caudate and LXRβ expression is decreased in the cerebellum (Table 2). It has been reported that wild-type htt acts as an LXR cofactor and that mhtt loses this function, thereby reducing the transcriptional activity of LXR and the expression of its target genes (86). Additionally, mhtt reduces ApoE secretion and cholesterol transport from astrocytes to neurons, leading to neuronal dysfunction, due to reduced expression of the LXR targets ABCA1 and Apo Einastrocytes(87,88).HD patients exhibit reduced levels of 24OHC in the putamen and caudate, while 27OHC and desmosterol are increased in the caudate (Table 2). Although the expression profile of LXR isoforms is not consistent across HD brain regions, the decrease in 24OHC is consistent with repression of the LXR pathway in glial cells, since 24OHC has been proposed to be an important regulator of the cholesterol shuttle from astrocytes to neurons (89). This reduction of 24OHC is also observed in the CSF of several HD mouse models (87). The lack of LXR signaling, due to the interaction of this receptor with mhtt, and reduced levels of the LXR ligand 24OHC are likely to reduce cholesterol transport to neurons, which will very likely affect neuronal function and disease progression. Treatment of the R6/2 murine model of HD with cholesterol-loaded nanoparticles rescued synaptic dysfunction and cognitive deficits (90), which could be due to a compensation for the lack of LXR-mediated cholesterol transport. The treatment of R6/2 brain slices with the LXR agonist T0901317 reversed the abnormal electrophysiological profile observed in these mice (91). The same compound is able to partially rescue the phenotype of zebrafish lacking huntingtin (86). These studies suggest that LXR activation might be a promising therapeutic approach for HD.

2.12. LXR in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Global gene expression analysis of motor neurons obtained from the spinal cord of sporadic ALS and control patients suggests that neuronal LXR expression does not change in ALS (Table 2). Hence, the levels of endogenous ligands may strongly dictate the activation status of these NRs. Although the CSF levels of desmosterol seem to be elevated in ALS patients compared to control samples, it is not clear how the levels of 24OHC and 27OHC change (Table 2). The CSF and serum levels of 25OHC are increased in ALS patients (Table 2), and serum levels of 25OHC are positively correlated with disease severity and progression (92). Based on in vitro results, these authors suggested that 25OHC is implicated in ALS progression by eliciting neurotoxic effects through activation of LXR in neurons. Although activation of LXR seems deleterious in this context, the lack of LXRβ in mice leads to the adult onset of an ALS-like motor neuron pathology (93). This apparent discrepancy might be related to the signaling of LXR in different cell types or even to the differences in signaling between LXR isoforms.

2.13. PPARs in Alzheimer’s Disease

The analysis of several transcriptomic data sets suggests that the expression of the PPAR isoforms remains unchanged in the brain of AD patients compared to controls (Table 2). However, a comparison between AD patients in different Braak stages revealed decreased mRNA expression of PPARα and PPARβ/δ and increased PPARγ expression in the brain throughout AD progression (94). The levels of several PUFA PPAR ligands, including DHA, are increased or decreased depending on the brain region (Table 2). Some of these changes in PUFA levels exhibit a significant correlation with disease progression in terms of neurofibrillar pathology, amyloid plaque burden, and cognitive decline (95). Furthermore, DHA and DHA-derived metabolites are able to specifically activate PPARγ, which leads to an inhibited inflammatory response and reduced Aβ production in animal models of AD (96, 97); in light of these findings, it has been suggested that dietary intake of DHA could reduce the risk of AD (98). Several epidemiological studies have reported that treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduces the risk of AD, possibly due to their ability to activate PPARγ (99), and the treatment of diabetic patients with the PPARγagonistpioglitazonereducestheriskofdementiaby47%(100).Thesefindingssupportthe idea that compromised PPARγ signaling might be involved in AD pathogenesis. The increase in PPARγ expression as AD progresses might result from a feedback mechanism that boosts PPARγ signaling and controls inflammation. PPAR ligands seem to be beneficial in several experimental animal models of AD. Treatment of AD mouse models with pan-PPAR agonists or agonists for specific PPARs isoforms leads to a decrease in Aβ burden, p-tau, and inflammation, accompanied by an overall improvement of behavioral outcomes. The mechanisms underlying these PPAR effects seem to be related to Aβ production and clearance, neuronal function, anti-inflammatory mechanisms, and mitochondrial function (49, 101). The PPARγ agonist pioglitazone was recently described as being effective in reversing the Aβ-induced blood-brain barrier dysfunction in APP mice, rescuing the expression of several proteins involved in a variety of functions, including cerebrovascular vasocontractile tone and vascular compliance (102). A phase III study of pioglitazone, initiated by Takeda and Zinfandel Pharmaceuticals, is currently underway and is estimated to be completed in 2019. However, rosiglitazone, another PPARγ agonist, has shown no clinical efficacy in three phase III trials (103, 104).

2.14. PPARs in Parkinson’s Disease

ThemRNAexpressionofallPPARisoformsdoesnotseemtochangeinthestriatumandsubstantia nigra of PD patients compared to controls (Table 2). A significant decrease in the levels of several PUFA PPAR ligands has been reported in the anterior cingulate cortex, a region that shows accumulation of α-syn in PD (Table 2). In the occipital cortex, a region largely devoid of pathology, the levels of PUFAs are similar between PD and control samples (Table 2), suggesting that the changes in PUFAs are likely related to the pathophysiology of PD. Interestingly, in vitro evidence indicates that α-syn decreases PPARγ expression and signaling, which can be rescued by overexpressing PPARs or RXRα (105). A retrospective cohort study revealed that diabetic patients who were prescribed the PPARγ agonists rosiglitazone or pioglitazone exhibited a reduced risk of PD onset (106). These findings support the idea that inactivation of PPAR signaling in PD, specifically PPARγ, due to the lack of endogenous ligands and/or interaction with α-syn possibly contributes to PD pathogenesis and progression. Several studies have shown that various PPAR isoform agonists are neuroprotective in animal models of PD (107–111). Recently, pioglitazone was shown to exert its neuroprotective effects by facilitating hippocampal neurogenesis in 6OHDA-lesioned rats (112). Rosiglitazone was also found to be neuroprotective in PD animal models, primarily by rescuing mitochondrial function and inducing the expression of antioxidative enzymes (107, 113). Despite the promising preclinical data and a good pharmacological profile, clinical trials using PPAR agonists have failed. A recent clinical trial concluded that pioglitazone is unlikely to be an effective intervention to slow disease progression in early PD and recommends that it should not be considered for further study (114).

2.15. PPARs in Huntington’s Disease

In HD patients, the pattern of PPAR expression is isoform and region specific, and plasma levels of fatty acids remain unaltered relative to controls (Table 2). Recently, it has been shown that mhtt interacts not only with LXR but also with the PPARβ/δ isoform and represses transactivation (60). Although PPARβ/δ expression levels do not change in the brains of patients (Table 2), the PPARβ/δ pathway is likely to be inhibited in the HD brain, especially in areas that accumulate mhtt. Treatment of the HD mouse model R6/2 with the pan-PPAR agonist benzafibrate served a neuroprotective function, reduced HD neuropathologic features, and increased mitochondrial density in the striatum of these animals (115). Furthermore, the treatment of R6/2 mice with the PPARγ agonist rosiglitazone reversed motor deficits and weight loss and reduced htt aggregates, although there was only a modest increase in survival (116). The activation of PPARγ with rosiglitazone in the HD mouse model N171–82Q significantly improved motor function (117). The mechanisms underlying this protective effect of PPARγ in HD seem to be related to rescuing compromised mitochondrial function in HD, an increase in mechanisms that protect from oxidative stress, and preventing BDNF depletion (117, 118). Treatment of the HD mouse models BAC-HD97 and N171–82Q with the PPARβ/δ agonist KD3010 rescued the HD neurological phenotype, conferred neuroprotection, and extended survival (60). The underlying mechanism for the beneficial effects of PPARβ/δ in HD animal models, similar to PPARγ, seems to involve the rescuing of neuronal mitochondrial function. These preclinical results are very promising and support the idea of using this therapeutic strategy in future clinical trials for HD.

2.16. PPARs in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

In motor neurons obtained from the spinal cords of ALS patients, the transcript levels of PPAR isoforms do not change when compared to controls (Table 2). Nonetheless, DHA levels in the spinal cords of ALS patients are reduced (Table 2). The dietary intake of PUFAs, including DHA, has been correlated with a decreased risk or delayed onset of ALS (119, 120). In light of these findings, one could hypothesize that a reduction in PPAR activation in the spinal cord motor neurons of ALS, due to lack of endogenous ligands, could contribute to disease pathogenesis or progression. Treatment of the ALS mouse model SOD1G93A with the PPARγ agonist pioglitazone was neuroprotective and led to a decrease in inflammation, improved motor behavior, and extended survival (121, 122). In a recent screening of 1,200 US Food and Drug Administration–approved compounds, pioglitazone was identified as a neuroprotective agent in Drosophila ALS models. The treatment of the TDP-43 Drosophila ALS model with pioglitazone attenuated neuronal loss and mitigated motor dysfunction, although there was no increase in life span (123). These authors also demonstrated that pioglitazone is neuroprotective in an FUS, but not a SOD1G93A, Drosophila model. One of the proposed mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects of PPARγ in ALS is related to its role in the defense against lipid peroxidation by inducing the expression of lipid detoxification enzymes, such as lipoprotein lipase and glutathione S-transferase α−2 (124). Administration of fenofibrate, a pan-PPAR agonist to SOD1G93A mice, elicited a significant delay in disease onset and progression, as well as prolonged survival of treated mice (125). The authors proposed that the neuroprotective properties of fenofibrate are related to a reduction in neuroinflammation and the protection of mitochondrial integrity. These encouraging findings suggest that PPAR is a promising drug target in ALS. However, a clinical trial using pioglitazone as an add-on therapy to riluzole reported that pioglitazone has no beneficial effects on the survival of ALS patients (126). Another trial also showed that pioglitazone treatment failed to alter clinical disease progression over a 6-month period in patients taking riluzole and tretinoin (78).

2.17. Nurr1 in Alzheimer’s Disease

Although mRNA levels of Nurr1 were reported to be elevated in neurons of specific brain regions in AD, there seems to be a decrease in Nurr1 protein expression, particularly in neurons affected by p-tau aggregates (Table 2), suggesting that there might be region- and cell type–specific regulation of Nurr1 expression in AD.

2.18. Nurr1 in Parkinson’s Disease

There is a decrease in Nurr1 protein expression that appears to be selective to the substantia nigra and specifically to niagral neurons that contain α-syn inclusions (127). This observation is in line with another study reporting that α-syn is able to reduce Nurr1 expression in niagral dopaminergic neurons in rats (40). The activation of Nurr1 using ligands for RXR is a promising strategy for PD, and a different class of drugs that activate Nurr1 through physical interaction with its ligand binding domain has also shown neuroprotective properties in PD models. The antimalarial drugs amodiaquine and chloroquine interact with the Nurr1 ligand binding domain and stimulate its transcriptional activity. This activation leads to a Nurr1-mediated increase in transcriptional activation of dopaminergic-specific genes in neurons and the transrepression of neurotoxic proinflammatory gene expression in microglia. This dual mechanism was proposed to be responsible for the significant improvement in behavioral deficits in the 6-OHDA rat model of PD that was treated with amodiaquine (128).

3. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

3.1. Experimental Models and Design

An extensive body of evidence has established that NR activation exerts a beneficial effect in preclinical animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. However, as Section 2 highlights, the translation of this therapeutic strategy to the clinic has not yet been successful. One possible reason could be related to the fact that the current animal models do not truly recapitulate human biology and pathology in all its complexity. Furthermore, the stage of the disease in which the model animals are treated with NR agonists could also be a critical determinant. In many studies, the treatment of these animal models starts significantly before they exhibit neuronal loss and cognitive or motor deficits, which therefore does not correspond to the symptomatic stage of patients when starting medication. In essence, many of the treatment paradigms used in a vast number of animal studies are more analogous to a prevention strategy rather than a treatment strategy. This could contribute to the failure of translation into clinical practice, as the activation of particular NRs might only be effective at very early stages of disease, or merely as a prevention strategy, and not in patients with advanced symptomatic pathologies. This rationale could explain why the epidemiological studies demonstrating a reduced risk for neurodegenerative diseases in people taking PPAR agonists for other indications are in agreement with several studies using animal models, while later-stage clinical trials fail to demonstrate the efficacy of this type of drug. Overall, the different biology of animal models compared to humans is an unavoidable limitation that will account for translational limitations; however, the stage of disease progression at which researchers start treatment of these animals should be carefully determined, taking into account clinical practice in human patients. This might be a crucial detail in the study design that could dictate the translational success of a particular therapeutic strategy. Another key factor to consider is the peripheral impact of NR agonists, especially with respect to adverse effects. This can be circumvented by designing selective agonists for particular NR isoforms, using targeted strategies for drug delivery, adjusting the dosage, or using combination therapies with drugs that mitigate the peripheral side effects. Taking these concerns into consideration when designing experiments in animal models will increase the chance of a successful translation to clinical trials.

3.2. Novel Research Avenues

The analysis of different experimental data sets and human studies suggests that each neurodegenerative disease exhibits its own distinct pattern of NR dysfunction. Indeed, the activation of some NRs, such as LXR, might be detrimental in particular diseases, such as PD or ALS (82–84 , 92), and beneficial in others. Hence, novel therapeutic strategies involving NRs might need to be specific for each disease. However, as highlighted in Sections 2.5–2.8, the gene expression analysis of human patients suggests that the repression of RA synthesis, which leads to a reduction of retinoid signaling through RAR, might be a common mechanism involved in the pathogenesis or disease progression of AD, PD, HD, and ALS (Figure 3). This idea is supported by several preclinical and a few clinical studies using synthetic agonists for RAR, highlighted in Sections 2.5 and 2.8. Although this latter strategy has already shown promising results in both preclinical and some clinical studies, it is a very targeted approach to RARs. Thus, it might not fully reestablish the endogenous roles of RA in the brain, such as the regulation of RARs activation patterns in specific cell types or brain regions that synthetic agonists may not be able to recapitulate and also other endogenous roles not directly related to NRs. An alternate strategy to address this retinoid deficit could be to restore the levels of RA synthesis in the affected areas by activating the synthesis pathway, which seems to be compromised in these diseases. The inhibition of RA catabolism by inhibiting the retinoic acid 4-hydroxylase (CYP26) could also be a promising approach (Figure 3). Additionally, this strategy would restore not only RAR signaling but also other NR pathways, including PPAR, Nurr1, and LXR. Indeed, RA has been shown to activate PPARβ/δ (129), maintain Nurr1 expression in a PD mouse model (130), and induce the LXR target gene ABCA1 in macrophages (131). Overall, the restoration of RA homeostasis might be a very promising therapeutic approach for several neurodegenerative diseases, as it seems to be a common feature across these disorders.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a Weston Brain Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship Award from the W. Garfield Weston Foundation and an Eli Lilly–Stark Research Fellowship in neurodegeneration.

Figure 1 NR mechanisms of action. (a) NRs of the type II family, namely RARs, LXRs, and PPARs, bind to DNA-specific NRE within the promoters of their target genes as obligate heterodimers with RXR and regulate gene expression. In the absence of ligand binding, these NR heterodimers associate with corepressor complexes such as NCoR/SMRT and HDAC3, which results in the repression of target genes. Conformational changes upon binding of NR ligands result in the dismissal of the corepressor complex and the association of NRs with coactivators, resulting in the transcriptional activation of target gene expression. (b) NR monomers such as PPARγor LXR can undergo sumoylation upon ligand binding and recruit a NCor/SMRT corepressor complex inhibiting gene expression, such as NF-κB-regulated proinflammatory genes. (c) Unlike RARs, PPARs, and LXRs, Nurr1 can directly bind to response elements not only as RXR:Nurr1 heterodimers but also as monomers or homodimers and activate target genes. Nurr1 homodimers bind to NurRE, while RXR:Nurr1 heterodimers bind to DR5. Sumoylation of Nurr1 leads to monomerization, and these monomers can activate NBRE, or interact with p65 on NF-κB RE and recruit the corepressor CoREST, inhibiting the expression of NF-κBregulated proinflammatory genes. Abbreviations: CoREST, REST corepressor; DR5, direct repeats separated by five nucleotides; HDAC3, histone deacetylase 3; LXR, liver X receptor; NBRE, NGFI-B responsive elements; NCoR, nuclear receptor corepressor; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; NF-κB RE, NF-κB response elements; NR, nuclear receptor; NRE, nuclear receptor response elements; Nurr1, nuclear receptor related-1 protein; NurRE, Nur response element; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; RAR: retinoic acid receptor; RXR, retinoid X receptor; SMRT, silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors. Original and modified images from somersault:1824 (http://www.somersault1824.com).

Figure 2 NR activation in neurodegenerative diseases. Several natural and synthetic ligands of NRs exert beneficial effects in different neurodegenerative disease models. The activation of NRs counteracts pathological mechanisms that are common across neurodegenerative diseases, such as inflammation and neuronal dysfunction, and rescues several compromised biological functions, including mitochondrial function and protein homeostasis. The beneficial effect of NR ligands in neurodegenerative diseases relies on the combination of the different mechanisms. (a) NRs exert a neuroprotective effect by stimulating neurogenesis, dendritic arborization, and synaptic function. (b) Neuroprotection is also a consequence of other mechanisms, including a decrease in microglia activation and inflammation. (c) Additionally, NR activation preserves the mitochondrial function and the induced anti-oxidative machinery, reducing the production of ROS and apoptosis. (d) NRs have also been known to regulate the production of pathological proteins and stimulate the clearance of aggregates of these proteins, such as Aβ. Abbreviations: NR, nuclear receptor; ROS, reactive oxygen species; RXR, retinoid X receptor. Original and modified images from somersault:1824 (http://www.somersault1824.com).

Figure 3 RAR signaling deficiency in the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Several lines of evidence suggest that RAR activation mediates neuroprotection in the context of neurodegenerative diseases, and the lack of RAR signaling could play a major role in the progression or pathogenesis of this type of disorder. Across several neurodegenerative diseases, there is evidence that points to a reduction in the availability of RA, the endogenous RAR ligand, which could underlie the repression of RAR activation in the brain. Considering the analysis of tissue from patients, this reduced RA availability could be due to low levels of its precursor, vitamin A, but also because of a reduced expression of the enzymes responsible for its synthesis, such as Raldh. Therefore, therapeutic strategies aimed at particular targets (red dots) to normalize retinoid signaling, such as the activation of enzymes responsible for RA synthesis, the inhibition of RA metabolism, or directly activating RAR with synthetic agonists, may be of utility. Abbreviations: CYP26, retinoic acid 4- hydroxylase; RA, all-trans-retinoic acid; Raldh, retinaldehyde dehydrogenase; RAR, retinoic acid receptor; RXR, retinoid X receptor. Original and modified images from somersault:1824 (http://www.somersault1824.com).

Table 1 Ligands of nuclear receptors that exhibit beneficial effects in preclinical models of neurodegenerative diseases, and their current status in clinical trials

Nuclear receptors	Ligands	Disease	Models	Clinical trials	References	
RXR	Bexarotene	AD	Genetic models: 5XFAD, APP/PS1, APP/PS1–21, Tg2576 mice	Pilot trial: no clinical benefit	47, 49, 54, 55	
PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: 6-OHDA rats	None	45	
HD	Genetic models: N171–82Q mice	None	60	
ALS	Genetic models: SOD1G93A mice	None	61	
BRF110	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: MPTP and 6-OHDA mice	None	57	
IRX4204	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity (in vivo): 6-OHDA rats	Phase 1: no results posted	58 a	
RAR	Tamibarotene (Am80)	AD	Genetic models: APP23 mice	Phase 2: no results posted	66 b	
Acitretin	AD	Genetic models: APP/PS1–21 mice	Phase 2: acitretin drives nonamyloidogenic APP processing in human patients	69, 132	
RA-loaded polymeric nanoparticles	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: MPTP mice	None	70	
9-cis-retinoic acid	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity (in vivo): 6-OHDA rats	None	71	
LXR	TO901317	AD	Genetic models: Tg2576, APP23, APP/PS1, 3xTg mice	None	49	
GW3965	AD	Genetic models: Tg2576, APP23, APP/PS1, 3xTg mice	None	49	
GW3965	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: MPTP mice	None	85	
PPARs	Pioglitazone	AD	Genetic models: Tg2576, 5XFAD, APP/PS1, 3xTg, APPV7171 mice and several others	Phase 2: no efficacy demonstrated on clinical outcomes	49, 101, 133	
PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: MPTP, 6-OHDA rodents	Phase 2: unlikely to modify disease progression	107–109, 112, 114	
ALS	Genetic models: SOD1G93A mice, TDP and FUS Drosophila	Pilot trial: failed as an add-on to riluzole and tretinoin therapy
Phase 2: failed as an add-on to riluzole therapy	78, 121–123, 126	
Rosiglitazone	AD	Genetic models: Tg2576, 5XFAD, APP/PS1	Phase 3: fail as monotherapy in cognition or global function
Phase 3: fail as an add-on to acetylcholine esterase inhibitor	49, 101, 103, 104	
PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity MPTP, 6-OHDA animals	None	107, 108	
HD	Genetic models: N171–82Q, R6/2 mice	None	117, 118	
Genistein	AD	Hippocampal injection of Aβ peptides in rats
Genetic models: APP/PS1 mice	Phase 1: recruiting	134	
Nurr1	Amodiaquine	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: 6-OHDA mice	None	128	
	Chloroquine	PD	Toxin-induced neurotoxicity: 6-OHDA mice	None	128	
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; APP, amyloid precursor protein; HD, Huntington’s disease; PD, Parkinson’s disease; RA, all-trans-retinoic acid.

a NCT02438215.

b NCT01120002.

Table 2 Transcript expression patterns and ligand levels of nuclear receptors in neurodegenerative diseases

NR Isoform	Alzheimer’s disease	Parkinson’s disease	Huntington’s disease	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis	
Expression	Ligands	References	Expression	Ligands	References	Expression	Ligands	References	Expression	Ligands	References	
RXRα	NC cx, hp, n
↑(dg)
↑(tg, hp)a	↓ Retinol (serum)	135–142	↓ dopaminergic n
NC st, sn	NC Retinol (serum)	139, 143–145	↑ fc, cd
NC cb	NA	73, 146	NC sc	NC Retinol (serum)	75, 76, 147–149	
RXRβ	NC cx, hp	NC st, sn	↑ fc
NC cd, cb	NC sc	
RXRγ	NC cx, hp	NC st, sn	↑ fc
↓ cd
NC cb	↓ sc	
RARα	NC fc, hp
↑ n-pcc
↓ ec	NC st, sn	NC fc, cd, cb	↓ mn-sc	
RARβ	NC cx, hp
↑ n-pcc
↓ n-mtg	NC st, sn	↓ cd
NC fc, cb	↑ nuclei of mn	
RARγ	NA	↑ st
NC sn	NC fc, cd, cb	↓ mn-sc	
LXRα	NC cx, hp	↑ 25OHC, 27OH
↓ 24OHC, DESM (brain)	136, 137, 150, 151	NC st, sn	NC 27OHC, 24OHC, DESM (plasma)	144, 152	↑ caud
NC cb, fc	↓ 24OHC (put, cd)
↑ 27OHC (cd), DESM (cd)	73, 146, 153	NC mn-sc	↓/↑ 24OHC
NC/↑ 27OHC
↑ DESM, 25OHC (CSF)	92, 149, 154	
LXRβ	NC cx, hp
↑ n-pcc	NC st, sn	↑ 27OHC, 24OHC (CSF 10% patients)	↓ cb
NC (caud, fc)	NCmn-sc	
PPARα	NC cx, hp
↑ n-mtg	↓ PUFAs (itg, mfg)
↑ PUFAS (b7)
↓ DHA (hp)
↑ DHA (itg, mfg, b7)
	95, 136, 137, 155	NC st, sn	↓ PUFAs (acc)
NC PUFAs (oc)	144, 156	↑ fc
NC cb, cd	NA	73, 146	NC mn-sc	↓ DHA sc	149, 157	
PPARβ/δ	NC cx, hp
↑ n-mtg, pcc	NC cb, cd cb	
PPARγ	NC cx, hp	↓ fc, cd
NC cb	
Nurr1	NC cx, hp
↑ n-mtg, hp
↓ niagral na	NA	127, 136, 137	↓ niagral na
NC st, sn	NA	127, 144	↓ mc, cb
NC cd, fc	NA	73, 146, 158	NC (mn-sc)	NA	149	
Table shows increase (↑), decrease (↓), or no change (NC) in the transcript expression patterns and ligand levels of nuclear receptors in neurodegenerative diseases. Abbreviations: acc, anterior cingulate cortex; b7, Broadmann region 7; cb, cerebellum; cd, caudate; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; cx, cortex; DESM, desmosterol; DHA, docosahexaenoic acid; fc, frontal cortex; hp, hippocampus; mfg, medial frontal gyrus; mn, motor neurons; mtg, middle temporal gyrus; n, neurons; NA, not applicable; NR, nuclear receptor; oc, occipital cortex; OHC, hydroxycholesterol; pcc, posterior cingulate cortex; PPARs, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors; PUFAs, polyunsaturated fatty acids; put, putamaten; sc, spinal cord; sn, substantia nigra; st, striatum.

a Proteinexpression.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.


LITERATURE CITED

1. Wood LB , Winslow AR , Strasser SD . 2015 Systems biology of neurodegenerative diseases. Integr. Biol 7 :758–75
2. Saijo K , Crotti A , Glass CK . 2010 Nuclear receptors, inflammation, and neurodegenerative diseases. Adv. Immunol 106 :21–59 20728023
3. Skerrett R , Malm T , Landreth G . 2014 Nuclear receptors in neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiol. Dis 72 (Pt. A ):104–16 24874548
4. Evans RM , Mangelsdorf DJ . 2014 Nuclear receptors, RXR, and the Big Bang. Cell 157 :255–66 24679540
5. Musiek ES , Holtzman DM . 2015 Three dimensions of the amyloid hypothesis: time, space and ‘wingmen’. Nat. Neurosci 18 :800–6 26007213
6. Chow VW , Mattson MP , Wong PC , Gleichmann M . 2010 An overview of APP processing enzymes and products. Neuromolecular Med 12 :1–12 20232515
7. Mawuenyega KG , Sigurdson W , Ovod V , Munsell L , Kasten T , 2010 Decreased clearance of CNS β-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 330 :1774 21148344
8. Klein C , Westenberger A . 2012 Genetics of Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 :a008888 22315721
9. Stefanis L . 2012 α-Synuclein in Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 :a009399 22355802
10. Dauer W , Przedborski S . 2003 Parkinson’s disease: mechanisms and models. Neuron 39 :889–909 12971891
11. Nolan YM , Sullivan AM , Toulouse A . 2013 Parkinson’s disease in the nuclear age of neuro inflammation. Trends Mol. Med 19 :187–96 23318001
12. Saudou F , Humbert S . 2016 The biology of Huntingtin. Neuron 89 :910–26 26938440
13. Landles C , Bates GP . 2004 Huntingtin and the molecular pathogenesis of Huntington’s disease. EMBO Rep 5 :958–63 15459747
14. Ajroud-Driss S , Siddique T . 2015 Sporadic and hereditary amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1852 :679–84 25193032
15. Kiernan MC , Vucic S , Cheah BC , Turner MR , Eisen A , 2011 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet 377 :942–55 21296405
16. Sever R , Glass CK . 2013 Signaling by nuclear receptors. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol 5 :a016709 23457262
17. Dawson MI , Xia Z . 2012 The retinoid X receptors and their ligands. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1821 :21–56 22020178
18. Lammi J , Perlmann T , Aarnisalo P . 2008 Corepressor interaction differentiates the permissive and non-permissive retinoid X receptor heterodimers. Arch. Biochem. Biophys 472 :105–14 18282463
19. Glass CK , Saijo K . 2010 Nuclear receptor transrepression pathways that regulate inflammation in macrophages and T cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol 10 :365–76 20414208
20. Saijo K , Winner B , Carson CT , Collier JG , Boyer L , 2009 A Nurr1/CoREST pathway in microglia and astrocytes protects dopaminergic neurons from inflammation-induced death. Cell 137 :47–59 19345186
21. Krezel W , Kastner P , Chambon P . 1999 Differential expression of retinoid receptors in the adult mouse central nervous system. Neuroscience 89 :1291–300 10362315
22. Arfaoui A , Lobo MV , Boulbaroud S , Ouichou A , Mesfioui A , Arenas MI . 2013 Expression of retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X receptors in normal and vitamin A deficient adult rat brain. Ann. Anat 195 :111–21 23017197
23. Desvergne B . 2007 RXR: from partnership to leadership in metabolic regulations. Vitam. Horm 75 :1–32 17368310
24. Ruhl R , Krzyzosiak A , Niewiadomska-Cimicka A , Rochel N , Szeles L , 2015 9-cis-13,14dihydroretinoic acid is an endogenous retinoid acting as RXR ligand in mice. PLOS Genet 11 :e1005213 26030625
25. Lane MA , Bailey SJ . 2005 Role of retinoid signaling in the adult brain. Prog. Neurobiol 75 :275–93 15882777
26. Chiang MY , Misner D , Kempermann G , Schikorski T , Giguere V , 1998 An essential role for retinoid receptors RARβand RXRγin long-term potentiation and depression. Neuron 21 :1353–61 9883728
27. Sarti F , Schroeder J , Aoto J , Chen L . 2012 Conditional RARαknockout mice reveal acute requirement for retinoic acid and RARαin homeostatic plasticity. Front. Mol. Neurosci 5 :16 22419906
28. Ransom J , Morgan PJ , McCaffery PJ , Stoney PN . 2014 The rhythm of retinoids in the brain. J. Neurochem 129 :366–76 24266881
29. Whitney KD , Watson MA , Collins JL , Benson WG , Stone TM , 2002 Regulation of cholesterol homeostasis by the liver X receptors in the central nervous system. Mol. Endocrinol 16 :1378–85 12040022
30. Wang L , Schuster GU , Hultenby K , Zhang Q , Andersson S , Gustafsson JA . 2002 Liver X receptors in the central nervous system: from lipid homeostasis to neuronal degeneration. PNAS 99 :13878–83 12368482
31. Andersson S , Gustafsson N , Warner M , Gustafsson JA . 2005 Inactivation of liver X receptor βleads to adult-onset motor neuron degeneration in male mice. PNAS 102 :3857–62 15738425
32. Warden A , Truitt J , Merriman M , Ponomareva O , Jameson K , 2016 Localization of PPAR isotypes in the adult mouse and human brain. Sci. Rep 6 :27618 27283430
33. Wahli W , Michalik L . 2012 PPARs at the crossroads of lipid signaling and inflammation. Trends Endocrinol. Metab 23 :351–63 22704720
34. Kapadia R , Yi JH , Vemuganti R . 2008 Mechanisms of anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective actions of PPAR-γ agonists. Front. Biosci 13 :1813–26 17981670
35. Quintanilla RA , Utreras E , Cabezas-Opazo FA . 2014 Role of PPAR γin the differentiation and function of neurons. PPAR Res 2014 :768594 25246934
36. Fidaleo M , Fanelli F , Ceru MP , Moreno S . 2014 Neuroprotective properties of peroxisome proliferator -activated receptor alpha (PPARα) and its lipid ligands. Curr. Med. Chem 21 :2803–21 24606520
37. Chakravarthy MV , Zhu Y , Lopez M , Yin L , Wozniak DF , 2007 Brain fatty acid synthase activates PPARαto maintain energy homeostasis. J. Clin. Investig 117 :2539–52 17694178
38. Roy A , Jana M , Kundu M , Corbett GT , Rangaswamy SB , 2015 HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors bind to PPARα to upregulate neurotrophin expression in the brain and improve memory in mice. Cell Metab 22 :253–65 26118928
39. Hall MG , Quignodon L , Desvergne B . 2008 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor β/δ in the brain: facts and hypothesis. PPAR Res 2008 :780452 19009042
40. Decressac M , Volakakis N , Bjorklund A , Perlmann T . 2013 NURR1 in Parkinson disease—from pathogenesis to therapeutic potential. Nat. Rev. Neurol 9 :629–36 24126627
41. Law SW , Conneely OM , DeMayo FJ , O’Malley BW . 1992 Identification of a new brain-specific transcription factor, NURR1. Mol. Endocrinol 6 :2129–35 1491694
42. Zetterstrom RH , Solomin L , Jansson L , Hoffer BJ , Olson L , Perlmann T . 1997 Dopamine neuron agenesis in Nurr1-deficient mice. Science 276 :248–50 9092472
43. Jiang C , Wan X , He Y , Pan T , Jankovic J , Le W . 2005 Age-dependent dopaminergic dysfunction in Nurr1 knockout mice. Exp. Neurol 191 :154–62 15589522
44. Kadkhodaei B , Ito T , Joodmardi E , Mattsson B , Rouillard C , 2009 Nurr1 is required for maintenance of maturing and adult midbrain dopamine neurons. J. Neurosci 29 :15923–32 20016108
45. McFarland K , Spalding TA , Hubbard D , Ma JN , Olsson R , Burstein ES . 2013 Low dose bexarotene treatment rescues dopamine neurons and restores behavioral function in models of Parkinson’s disease. ACS Chem. Neurosci 4 :1430–38 24117438
46. Akram A , Schmeidler J , Katsel P , Hof PR , Haroutunian V . 2010 Increased expression of RXRα in dementia: an early harbinger for the cholesterol dyshomeostasis? Mol. Neurodegener 5 :36 20843353
47. Cramer PE , Cirrito JR , Wesson DW , Lee CY , Karlo JC , 2012 ApoE-directed therapeutics rapidly clear β-amyloid and reverse deficits in AD mouse models. Science 335 :1503–6 22323736
48. Tesseur I , De Strooper B . 2013 When the dustsettles: What did we learn from the bexarotene discussion? Alzheimers Res. Ther 5 :54 24229456
49. Moutinho M , Landreth GE . 2017 Therapeutic potential of nuclear receptor agonists in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Lipid Res 58 :1937–49 28264880
50. Jiang Q , Lee CY , Mandrekar S , Wilkinson B , Cramer P , 2008 ApoE promotes the proteolytic degradation of Aβ. Neuron 58 :681–93 18549781
51. Savage JC , Jay T , Goduni E , Quigley C , Mariani MM , 2015 Nuclear receptors license phagocytosis by trem2+ myeloid cells in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 35 :6532–43 25904803
52. Yamanaka M , Ishikawa T , Griep A , Axt D , Kummer MP , Heneka MT . 2012 PPARγ/RXRα- induced and CD36-mediated microglial amyloid-β phagocytosis results in cognitive improvement in amyloid precursor protein/presenilin 1 mice. J. Neurosci 32 :17321–31 23197723
53. Mariani MM , Malm T , Lamb R , Jay TR , Neilson L , 2017 Neuronally-directed effects of RXR activation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 7 :42270 28205585
54. Ghosal K , Haag M , Verghese PB , West T , Veenstra T , 2016 A randomized controlled study to evaluate the effect of bexarotene on amyloid-β and apolipoprotein E metabolism in healthy subjects. Alzheimers Dement 2 :110–20
55. Cummings JL , Zhong K , Kinney JW , Heaney C , Moll-Tudla J , 2016 Double-blind, placebocontrolled, proof-of-concept trial of bexarotene Xin moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther 8 :4 26822146
56. Volakakis N , Tiklova K , Decressac M , Papathanou M , Mattsson B , 2015 Nurr1 and retinoid X receptor ligands stimulate Ret signaling in dopamine neurons and can alleviate α-synuclein disrupted gene expression. J. Neurosci 35 :14370–85 26490873
57. Spathis AD , Asvos X , Ziavra D , Karampelas T , Topouzis S , 2017 Nurr1:RXRα heterodimer activation as monotherapy for Parkinson’s disease. PNAS 114 :3999–4004 28348207
58. Wang J , Bi W , Zhao W , Varghese M , Koch RJ , 2016 Selective brain penetrable Nurr1 transactivator for treating Parkinson’s disease. Oncotarget 7 :7469–79 26862735
59. Dickey AS , Sanchez DN , Arreola M , Sampat KR , Fan W , 2017 PPARδactivation by bexarotene promotes neuroprotection by restoring bioenergetic and quality control homeostasis. Sci. Transl. Med 9 (419 ): eaal 2332
60. Dickey AS , Pineda VV , Tsunemi T , Liu PP , Miranda HC , 2016 PPAR-δ is repressed in Huntington’s disease, is required for normal neuronal function and can be targeted therapeutically. Nat. Med 22 :37–45 26642438
61. Riancho J , Ruiz-Soto M , Berciano MT , Berciano J , Lafarga M . 2015 Neuroprotective effect of bexarotene in the SOD1G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Front. Cell. Neurosci 9 :250 26190974
62. Goncalves MB , Clarke E , Hobbs C , Malmqvist T , Deacon R , 2013 Amyloid βinhibits retinoic acid synthesis exacerbating Alzheimer disease pathology which can be attenuated by an retinoic acid receptor αagonist. Eur. J. Neurosci 37 :1182–92 23379615
63. Zeng J , Chen L , Wang Z , Chen Q , Fan Z , 2017 Marginal vitamin A deficiency facilitates Alzheimer’s pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol 133 :967–82 28130638
64. Reinhardt S , Grimm MO ,Stahlmann C , Hartmann T , Shudo K , 2016 .Rescue of hypovitaminosis A induces non-amyloidogenic amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing. Curr. Alzheimer Res 13 :1277–89 27335034
65. Goodman AB , Pardee AB . 2003 Evidence for defective retinoid transport and function in late onset Alzheimer’s disease. PNAS 100 :2901–5 12604774
66. Kawahara K , Nishi K , Suenobu M , Ohtsuka H , Maeda A , 2009 Oral administration of synthetic retinoid Am80 (tamibarotene) decreases brain β-amyloid peptides in APP23 mice. Biol. Pharm. Bull 32 :1307–9 19571405
67. Kawahara K , Suenobu M , Ohtsuka H , Kuniyasu A , Sugimoto Y , 2014 Cooperative therapeutic action of retinoic acid receptor and retinoid X receptor agonists in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 42 :587–605 24916544
68. Fukasawa H , Nakagomi M , Yamagata N , Katsuki H , Kawahara K , 2012 Tamibarotene: a candidate retinoid drug for Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Pharm. Bull 35 :1206–12 22863914
69. Endres K , Fahrenholz F , Lotz J , Hiemke C , Teipel S , 2014 Increased CSF APPs-α levels in patients with Alzheimer disease treated with acitretin. Neurology 83 :1930–35 25344383
70. Esteves M , Cristovao AC , Saraiva T , Rocha SM , Baltazar G , 2015 Retinoic acid-loaded polymeric nanoparticles induce neuroprotection in a mouse model for Parkinson’s disease. Front. Aging Neurosci 7 :20 25798108
71. Yin LH , Shen H , Diaz-Ruiz O , Backman CM , Bae E , 2012 Early post-treatment with 9-cis retinoic acid reduces neurodegeneration of dopaminergic neurons in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. BMC Neurosci 13 :120 23040108
72. Katsuki H , Kurimoto E , Takemori S , Kurauchi Y , Hisatsune A , 2009 Retinoic acid receptor stimulation protects midbrain dopaminergic neurons from inflammatory degeneration via BDNF-mediated signaling. J. Neurochem 110 :707–18 19457078
73. Hodges A , Strand AD , Aragaki AK , Kuhn A , Sengstag T , 2006 Regional and cellular gene expression changes in human Huntington’s disease brain. Hum. Mol. Genet 15 :965–77 16467349
74. Niewiadomska-Cimicka A , Krzyzosiak A , Ye T , Podlesny-Drabiniok A , Dembele D , 2017 Genome-wide analysis of RARβ transcriptional targets in mouse striatum links retinoic acid signaling with Huntington’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Mol. Neurobiol 54 :3859–78 27405468
75. Kolarcik CL , Bowser R . 2012 Retinoid signaling alterations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am. J. Neurodegener. Dis 1 :130–45 23383387
76. Corcoran J , So PL , Maden M . 2002 Absence of retinoids can induce motoneuron disease in the adult rat and a retinoid defect is present in motoneuron disease patients. J. Cell Sci 115 :4735–41 12432062
77. Crochemore C , Virgili M , Bonamassa B , Canistro D , Pena-Altamira E , 2009 Long-term dietary administration of valproic acid does not affect, while retinoic acid decreases, the lifespan of G93A mice, a model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Muscle Nerve 39 :548–52 19296491
78. Levine TD , Bowser R , Hank NC , Gately S , Stephan D , 2012 A pilot trial of pioglitazone HCl and tretinoin in ALS: cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers to monitor drug efficacy and predict rate of disease progression. Neurol. Res. Int 2012 :582075 22830016
79. Spann NJ , Garmire LX , McDonald JG , Myers DS , Milne SB , 2012 Regulated accumulation of desmosterol integrates macrophage lipid metabolism and inflammatory responses. Cell 151 :138–52 23021221
80. Sandoval-Hernandez AG , Restrepo A , Cardona-Gomez GP , Arboleda G . 2016 LXR activation protects hippocampal microvasculature in very oldtriple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett 621 :15–21 27057732
81. Lee JH , Park SM , Kim OS , Lee CS , Woo JH , 2009 Differential SUMO ylation of LXRα and LXRβ mediates transrepression of STAT1 inflammatory signaling in IFN-γ-stimulated brain astrocytes. Mol. Cell 35 :806–17 19782030
82. Cheng D , Kim WS , Garner B . 2008 Regulation of α-synuclein expression by liver X receptor ligands in vitro. Neuroreport 19 :1685–89 18841091
83. Marwarha G , Rhen T , Schommer T , Ghribi O . 2011 The oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol regulates α-synuclein and tyrosine hydroxylase expression levels in human neuroblastoma cells through modulation of liver X receptors and estrogen receptors—relevance to Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem 119 :1119–36 21951066
84. Rantham Prabhakara JP , Feist G , Thomasson S , Thompson A , Schommer E , Ghribi O . 2008 Differential effects of 24-hydroxycholesterol and 27-hydroxycholesterol on tyrosine hydroxylase and α-synuclein in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. J. Neurochem 107 :1722–29 19014385
85. Dai YB , Tan XJ , Wu WF , Warner M , Gustafsson JA . 2012 Liver X receptor βprotects dopaminergic neurons in a mouse model of Parkinson disease. PNAS 109 :13112–17 22826221
86. Futter M , Diekmann H , Schoenmakers E , Sadiq O , Chatterjee K , Rubinsztein DC . 2009 Wild-type but not mutant huntingtin modulates the transcriptional activity of liver X receptors. J. Med. Genet 46 :438–46 19451134
87. Valenza M , Leoni V , Karasinska JM , Petricca L , Fan J , 2010 Cholesterol defect is marked across multiple rodent models of Huntington’s disease and is manifest in astrocytes. J. Neurosci 30 :10844–50 20702713
88. Valenza M , Marullo M , Di Paolo E , Cesana E , Zuccato C , 2015 Disruption of astrocyte-neuron cholesterol cross talk affects neuronal function in Huntington’s disease. Cell Death Differ 22 :690–702 25301063
89. Abildayeva K , Jansen PJ , Hirsch-Reinshagen V , Bloks VW , Bakker AH , 2006 24(S)hydroxycholesterol participates in a liver X receptor-controlled pathway in astrocytes that regulates apolipoprotein E-mediated cholesterol efflux. J. Biol. Chem 281 :12799–808 16524875
90. Valenza M , Chen JY , Di Paolo E , Ruozi B , Belletti D , 2015 Cholesterol-loaded nanoparticles ameliorate synaptic and cognitive function in Huntington’s disease mice. EMBO Mol. Med 7 :1547–64 26589247
91. Chen JY , Tran C , Hwang L , Deng G , Jung ME , 2016 Partial amelioration of peripheral and central symptoms of Huntington’s disease via modulation of lipid metabolism. J. Huntingtons Dis 5 :65–81 27031732
92. Kim SM , Noh MY , Kim H , Cheon SY , Lee KM , 2017 25-Hydroxycholesterol is involved in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Oncotarget 8 :11855–67 28060747
93. Bigini P ,Steffensen KR ,Ferrario A ,Diomede L ,Ferrara G , 2010 Neuropathologicandbiochemical changes during disease progression in liver X receptor β−/− mice, a model of adult neuron disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 69 :593–605 20467332
94. de la Monte SM , Wands JR . 2006 Molecular indices of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction occur early and often progress with severity of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimer’s Dis 9 :167–81 16873964
95 Snowden SG , Ebshiana AA , Hye A , An Y , Pletnikova O , 2017 Association between fatty acid metabolism in the brain and Alzheimer disease neuropathology and cognitive performance: anontargeted metabolomic study. PLOS Med 14 :e1002266 28323825
96. Zhao Y , Calon F , Julien C , Winkler JW , Petasis NA , 2011 Docosahexaenoic acid-derived neuroprotectin D1 induces neuronal survival via secretase- and PPARγ-mediated mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease models. PLOS ONE 6 :e15816 21246057
97. Lim GP , Calon F , Morihara T , Yang F , Teter B , 2005 A diet enriched with the omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid reduces amyloid burden in an aged Alzheimer mouse model. J. Neurosci 25 :3032–40 15788759
98. Morris MC , Evans DA , Bienias JL , Tangney CC , Bennett DA , 2003 Consumption of fish and n-3 fatty acids and risk of incident Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol 60 :940–46 12873849
99. Kummer MP , Heneka MT . 2008 PPARs in Alzheimer’s disease. PPAR Res 2008 :403896 18645613
100. Heneka MT , Fink A , Doblhammer G . 2015 Effect of pioglitazone medication on the incidence of dementia. Ann. Neurol 78 :284–94 25974006
101. Heneka MT , Reyes-Irisarri E , Hull M , Kummer MP . 2011 Impact and therapeutic potential of PPARs in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Neuropharmacol 9 :643–50 22654722
102. Badhwar A , Brown R , Stanimirovic DB , Haqqani AS , Hamel E . 2017 Proteomic differences in brain vessels of Alzheimer’s disease mice: normalization by PPARγ agonist pioglitazone. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 37 :1120–36 27339263
103. Harrington C , Sawchak S , Chiang C , Davies J , Donovan C , 2011 Rosiglitazone does not improve cognition or global function when used as adjunctive therapy to AChE inhibitors in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: two phase 3 studies. Curr. Alzheimer Res 8 :592–606 21592048
104. Gold M , Alderton C , Zvartau-Hind M , Egginton S , Saunders AM , 2010 Rosiglitazone monotherapy in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 30 :131–46 20733306
105. Yakunin E , Kisos H , Kulik W , Grigoletto J , Wanders RJ , Sharon R . 2014 The regulation of catalase activity by PPAR γis affected by α-synuclein. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 1 :145–59 25356396
106. Brauer R , Bhaskaran K , Chaturvedi N , Dexter DT , Smeeth L , Douglas I . 2015 Glitazone treatment and incidence of Parkinson’s disease among people with diabetes: a retrospective cohort study. PLOS Med 12 :e1001854 26196151
107. Corona JC , Duchen MR . 2015 PPARγand PGC-1αas therapeutic targets in Parkinson’s. Neurochem. Res 40 :308–16 25007880
108. Carta AR . 2013 PPAR-γ: therapeutic prospects in Parkinson’s disease. Curr. Drug Targets 14 :743–51 23469878
109. Barbiero JK , Santiago RM , Persike DS , da Silva Fernandes MJ , Tonin FS , 2014 Neuroprotective effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha and gamma agonists in model of parkinsonism induced by intranigral 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahyropyridine. Behav. Brain Res 274 :390–99 25127682
110. Martin HL , Mounsey RB , Sathe K , Mustafa S , Nelson MC , 2013 A peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-δ agonist provides neuroprotection in the 1methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine model of Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 240 :191–203 23500098
111. Chaturvedi RK ,Beal MF . 2008 PPAR:atherapeutictargetinParkinson’sdisease. J.Neurochem 106 :506–18 18384649
112. Bonato JM , Bassani TB , Milani H , Vital M , de Oliveira RMW . 2018 Pioglitazone reduces mortality, prevents depressive-like behavior, and impacts hippocampal neurogenesis in the 6-OHDA model of Parkinson’s disease in rats. Exp. Neurol 300 :188–200 29162435
113. Jung TW , Lee JY , Shim WS , Kang ES , Kim SK , 2007 Rosiglitazone protects human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells against MPP+ induced cytotoxicity via inhibition of mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS production. J. Neurol. Sci 253 :53–60 17266988
114. NINDS Exploratory Trials in Parkinson Disease (NET-PD) FS-ZONE Investigators. 2015 Pioglitazone in early Parkinson’s disease: a phase 2, multicentre, double-blind, randomised trial. Lancet. Neurol 14 :795–803 26116315
115. Johri A , Calingasan NY , Hennessey TM , Sharma A , Yang L , 2012 Pharmacologic activation of mitochondrial biogenesis exerts widespread beneficial effects in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 21 :1124–37 22095692
116. Chiang MC , Chen CM , Lee MR , Chen HW , Chen HM , 2010 Modulation of energy deficiency in Huntington’s disease via activation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ. Hum. Mol. Genet 19 :4043–58 20668093
117. Jin J , Albertz J , Guo Z , Peng Q , Rudow G , 2013 Neuroprotective effects of PPAR-γ agonist rosiglitazone in N171–82Q mouse model of Huntington’s disease. J. Neurochem 125 :410–19 23373812
118. Chiang MC , Chern Y , Huang RN . 2012 PPARγrescue of the mitochondrial dysfunction in Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis 45 :322–28 21907283
119. Veldink JH , Kalmijn S , Groeneveld GJ , Wunderink W , Koster A , 2007 Intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids and vitamin E reduces the risk of developing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 78 :367–71 16648143
120. Fitzgerald KC , O’Reilly EJ , Falcone GJ , McCullough ML , Park Y , 2014 Dietary ω−3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake and risk for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. JAMA Neurol 71 :1102–10 25023276
121. Kiaei M , Kipiani K , Chen J , Calingasan NY , Beal MF . 2005 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptorγ agonist extends survival in transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp. Neurol 191 :331–36 15649489
122. Schutz B , Reimann J , Dumitrescu-Ozimek L , Kappes-Horn K , Landreth GE , 2005 The oral an tidiabetic pioglitazone protects from neurodegeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-like symptoms in superoxide dismutase-G93A transgenic mice. J. Neurosci 25 :7805–12 16120782
123. Joardar A , Menzl J , Podolsky TC , Manzo E , Estes PS , 2015 PPAR gamma activation is neuroprotective in a Drosophila model of ALS based on TDP-43. Hum. Mol. Genet 24 :1741–54 25432537
124. Benedusi V , Martorana F , Brambilla L , Maggi A , Rossi D . 2012 The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) controls natural protective mechanisms against lipid peroxidation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Biol. Chem 287 :35899–911 22910911
125. Esmaeili MA , Yadav S , Gupta RK , Waggoner GR , Deloach A , 2016 Preferential PPAR-α activation reduces neuroinflammation, and blocks neurodegeneration in vivo. Hum. Mol. Genet 25 :317–27 26604138
126. Dupuis L , Dengler R , Heneka MT , Meyer T , Zierz S , 2012 A randomized, double blind, placebocontrolled trial of pioglitazone in combination with riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PLOS ONE 7 :e37885 22715372
127. Chu Y , Le W , Kompoliti K , Jankovic J , Mufson EJ , Kordower JH . 2006 Nurr1 in Parkinson’s disease and related disorders. J. Comp. Neurol 494 :495–514 16320253
128. Kim CH , Han BS , Moon J , Kim DJ , Shin J , 2015 Nuclear receptor Nurr1 agonists enhance its dual functions and improve behavioral deficits in an animal model of Parkinson’s disease. PNAS 112 :8756–61 26124091
129. Shaw N , Elholm M , Noy N . 2003 Retinoic acid is a high affinity selective ligand for the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor β/δ. J. Biol. Chem 278 :41589–92 12963727
130. Dong J , Li S , Mo JL , Cai HB , Le WD . 2016 Nurr1-based therapies for Parkinson’s disease. CNS Neurosci. Ther 22 :351–59 27012974
131. Costet P , Lalanne F , Gerbod-Giannone MC , Molina JR , Fu X , 2003 Retinoic acid receptormediated induction of ABCA1 in macrophages. Mol. Cell. Biol 23 :7756–66 14560020
132. Tippmann F , Hundt J , Schneider A , Endres K , Fahrenholz F . 2009 Up-regulation of the α- secretase ADAM10 by retinoic acid receptors and acitretin. FASEB J 23 :1643–54 19144697
133. Geldmacher DS , Fritsch T , McClendon MJ , Landreth G . 2011 A randomized pilot clinical trial of the safety of pioglitazone in treatment of patients with Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol 68 :45–50 20837824
134. Bagheri M , Joghataei MT , Mohseni S , Roghani M . 2011 Genistein ameliorates learning and memory deficits in amyloid β(1–40) rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem 95 :270–76 21144907
135. Zaman Z , Roche S , Fielden P , Frost PG , Niriella DC , Cayley AC . 1992 Plasma concentrations of vitamins A and E and carotenoids in Alzheimer’s disease. Age Ageing 21 :91–94 1575097
136. Hargis KE , Blalock EM . 2017 Transcriptional signatures of brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease: What are our rodent models telling us? Behav. Brain Res 322 :311–28 27155503
137. Liang WS , Dunckley T , Beach TG , Grover A , Mastroeni D , 2010 Neuronal gene expression in non-demented individuals with intermediate Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. Neurobiol. Aging 31 :549–66 18572275
138. Jeandel C , Nicolas MB , Dubois F , Nabet-Belleville F , Penin F , Cuny G . 1989 Lipid peroxidation and free radical scavengers in Alzheimer’s disease. Gerontology 35 :275–82 2630382
139. Jimenez-Jimenez FJ , Molina JA , de Bustos F , Orti-Pareja M , Benito-Leon J , 1999 Serum levels of β-carotene, α-carotene and vitamin A in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Neurol 6 :495–97 10362906
140. Foy CJ , Passmore AP , Vahidassr MD , Young IS , Lawson JT . 1999 Plasma chain-breaking antioxidants in Alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia and Parkinson’s disease. QJM 92 :39–45 10209671
141. Bourdel-Marchasson I ,Delmas-Beauvieux MC ,Peuchant E ,Richard-Harston S , Decamps A , 2001 Antioxidant defences and oxidative stress markers in erythrocytes and plasma from normally nourished elderly Alzheimer patients. Age Ageing 30 :235–41 11443025
142. Mullan K , Williams MA , Cardwell CR , McGuinness B , Passmore P , 2017 Serum concentrations of vitamin E and carotenoids are altered in Alzheimer’s disease: a case-control study. Alzheimers Dement 3 :432–39
143. Elstner M , Morris CM , Heim K , Bender A , Mehta D , 2011 Expression analysis of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease and aging links transcriptional dysregulation of energy metabolism to cell death. Acta Neuropathol 122 :75–86 21541762
144. Miller RM , Kiser GL , Kaysser-Kranich TM , Lockner RJ , Palaniappan C , Federoff HJ . 2006 Robust dysregulation of gene expression in substantia nigra and striatum in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis 21 :305–13 16143538
145. Kim JH , Hwang J , Shim E , Chung EJ , Jang SH , Koh SB . 2017 Association of serum carotenoid, retinol, and tocopherol concentrations with the progression of Parkinson’s disease. Nutr. Res. Pract 11 :114–20 28386384
146. Labadorf A , Hoss AG , Lagomarsino V , Latourelle JC , Hadzi TC , 2015 RNA sequence analysis of human Huntington disease brain reveals an extensive increase in inflammatory and developmental gene expression. PLOS ONE 10 :e0143563 26636579
147. Dangond F , Hwang D , Camelo S , Pasinelli P , Frosch MP , 2004 Molecular signature of late-stage human ALS revealed by expression profiling of postmortem spinal cord gray matter. Physiol. Genom 16 :229–39
148. Iwasaki Y , Ikeda K , Kinoshita M . 1995 Vitamin A and E levels are normal in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Neurol. Sci 132 :193–94 8543947
149. Batra R , Hutt K , Vu A , Rabin SJ , Baughn MW , 2016 Gene expression signatures of sporadic ALS motor neuron populations. bioRxiv 038448 10.1101/038448
150. Testa G , Staurenghi E , Zerbinati C , Gargiulo S , Iuliano L , 2016 Changes in brain oxysterols at different stages of Alzheimer’s disease: their involvement in neuroinflammation. Redox Biol 10 :24–33 27687218
151. Wisniewski T , Newman K , Javitt NB . 2013 Alzheimer’s disease: brain desmosterol levels. J. Alzheimers Dis 33 :881–88 23042211
152. Bjorkhem I , Lovgren-Sandblom A , Leoni V , Meaney S , Brodin L , 2013 Oxysterols and Parkinson’s disease: evidence that levels of 24S-hydroxycholesterol in cerebrospinal fluid correlates with the duration of the disease. Neurosci. Lett 555 :102–5 24035896
153. Kreilaus F , Spiro AS , Hannan AJ , Garner B , Jenner AM . 2015 Brain cholesterol synthesis and metabolism is progressively disturbed in the R6/1 mouse model of Huntington’s disease: a targeted GC-MS/MSsterol analysis. J. Huntingtons Dis 4 :305–18 26639223
154. Abdel-Khalik J , Yutuc E , Crick PJ , Gustafsson JA , Warner M , 2017 Defective cholesterol metabolism in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Lipid Res 58 :267–78 27811233
155. Nasaruddin ML , Holscher C , Kehoe P , Graham SF , Green BD . 2016 Wide-ranging alterations in the brain fatty acid complement of subjects with late Alzheimer’s disease as detected by GC-MS. Am. J. Transl. Res 8 :154–65 27069549
156. Abbott SK , Jenner AM , Spiro AS , Batterham M , Halliday GM , Garner B . 2015 Fatty acid composition of the anterior cingulate cortex indicates a high susceptibility to lipid peroxidation in Parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons Dis 5 :175–85 25613350
157. Ilieva EV , Ayala V , Jove M , Dalfo E , Cacabelos D , 2007 Oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress interplay in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 130 :3111–23 17716997
158. Lin L , Park JW , Ramachandran S , Zhang Y , Tseng YT , 2016 Transcriptome sequencing reveals aberrant alternative splicing in Huntington’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 25 :3454–66 27378699
