LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9607835
20545
Mol Psychiatry
Mol. Psychiatry
Molecular psychiatry
1359-4184
1476-5578

29679070
6195869
10.1038/s41380-018-0036-2
NIHMS939221
Article
The role of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in brain health and disease
Toda Tomohisa 1*
Parylak Sarah 1*
Linker Sara B. 1
Gage Fred H. 1
1 Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to: Dr. Fred H. Gage, Laboratory of Genetics – LOG-G, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, gage@salk.edu
* These authors contributed equally to this work

1 2 2018
20 4 2018
1 2019
10 1 2019
24 1 6787
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus is highly regulated by a number of environmental and cell-intrinsic factors to adapt to environmental changes. Accumulating evidence suggests that adult-born neurons may play distinct physiological roles in hippocampus-dependent functions such as memory encoding and mood regulation. In addition, several brain diseases, such as neurological diseases and mood disorders, have deleterious effects on adult hippocampal neurogenesis, and some symptoms of those diseases can be partially explained by the dysregulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Here we review a possible link between the physiological functions of adult-born neurons and their roles in pathological conditions.


Introduction

Since the discovery and subsequent affirmation of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus, adult hippocampal neurogenesis has been implicated in cognitive processes under normal physiological conditions such as learning, memory, pattern separation, and cognitive flexibility. The addition of new neurons in the DG provides substantial structural and functional plasticity to the tri-synaptic hippocampal circuit through characterized physiological and connective features of immature adult-born neurons during their critical periods. Feedback inhibition onto mature dentate granule cells (DGCs) from immature adult-born neurons seems to regulate the sparse coding of DGCs, which may underlie contextual discrimination and a degree of meta-plasticity. Importantly, adult hippocampal neurogenesis is conserved in most mammalian brains, including human. Accumulating evidence suggests that dysregulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis may be associated with cognitive decline in neurological disorders and psychological symptoms in psychiatric disorders. However, most of our knowledge regarding the physiological and pathological contributions of adult-born hippocampal neurons to brain function has been obtained from rodent models, which exhibit a significant amount of adult hippocampal neurogenesis and provide technical advantages, such as the availability of genetic, imaging and detailed behavioral analyses. Due to the technical limitations of human studies, our understanding of the functional role of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in humans relies on retrospective analyses using post-mortem tissues. Therefore, it remains unclear how adult-born DGCs functionally modulate complex behavior and how dysregulation of adult neurogenesis mediates brain disorders in the human brain.

In the first half of this review, we summarize the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis and the functional contributions of adult-born neurons to the neural network and to hippocampus-dependent behavior with the main focuses on rodent experiments. In the latter half, we summarize how dysregulation of adult neurogenesis may mediate malfunctions of hippocampus-dependent processing and behavior, and we discuss whether future research can translate the findings from rodent models to humans to develop therapeutic strategies by manipulating adult hippocampal neurogenesis.

Overview of adult neurogenesis

Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is a process that describes the generation of new functional DGCs from adult neural stem cells through the amplification of intermediate progenitors and neuroblasts, as well as the integration of these new neurons into the existing neural circuits. In other words, adult hippocampal neurogenesis provides a substantial degree of structural and functional plasticity in the tri-synaptic hippocampal circuit. Adult hippocampal neural stem cells (radial glia-like cells, RGLs; Type 1 cells) exist in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the DG (Fig. 1). The evidence for adult hippocampal neurogenesis was first observed in rodents1, 2 and was subsequently confirmed to exist in humans and non-human primates by several groups 3–8. Further evidence of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in humans was provided by immunohistochemical analysis, retrospective birth dating methods using the level of 14C9, double-immunohistochemical analyses7, and gene expression associated with neurogenesis10.

Various forms of activation of the environmental niche stimulate quiescent RGLs and facilitate their proliferation. Active RGLs self-renew and also generate intermediate neural progenitors (NPs) that subsequently differentiate into neuroblasts and finally give rise to DGCs or, to a lesser extent, to astrocytes. These processes, including proliferation, differentiation, migration, neurite extension and synaptic integration, are regulated by a number of signals from the environmental niche and local neural circuits, which are summarized in Table 1.

Environmental factors

An intriguing feature of adult hippocampal neurogenesis is that the process is regulated by such factors as the environment and an individual’s emotional or physiological status. In other words, adult-born DGCs can in theory be generated on demand in response to environmental signals, which could provide a degree of meta-plasticity in the adult hippocampal neurogenesis-dependent reorganization of hippocampal circuits. An enriched environment, including a larger cage area, novel objects, and running wheels, has been shown to significantly increase the number of adult-born neurons and the volume of the granule cell layer and to improve the speed of spatial learning in rodents 3. A follow-up study revealed that voluntary running alone selectively increased proliferation of adult NPs/neuroblasts, whereas environmental enrichment promoted the survival of adult-born DGCs through the increased integration of immature neurons 120.

These processes are mediated by several types of signaling, including glutamatergic and GABAergic inputs from local neural networks 111114, 121–123. Glutamatergic inputs through NMDA receptors are critical for the survival of immature neurons121, and surviving neurons are functionally integrated into existing circuits within one month124. A short exposure to an enriched environment depolarizes immature neurons through GABAergic inputs that enable activation of NMDA receptors, which in turn allows immature neurons to respond to future glutamatergic synaptic inputs 125. A recent study revealed that the combination of GABAergic inputs from the molecular layer and the granule cell layer in the gamma frequency range evoked action potentials in young adult-born DGCs108. Furthermore, the study revealed the spatial and temporal integration dynamics of the GABAergic and glutamatergic inputs required to elicit action potentials in young adult-born DGCs. Thus, the oscillatory activity in the hippocampus could regulate the integration of young DG neurons into hippocampal neuronal networks through GABAergic signaling. Importantly, the effects of environmental enrichment on the survival and integration of adult-born DGCs are restricted to the first three weeks after the birth of the neurons122.

Following the survival checkpoint, the time course of neuronal maturation is also modulated by local network activity, which in turn is also modulated by physical activity or exposure to an enriched environment126, 127. Optogenetic silencing of the dentate during exposure to a novel environment prevents the environmentally induced increase in integration of immature DGCs 128. Furthermore, GABAergic inputs from parvalbumin-positive interneurons are essential for an enriched environment to enhance the integration and maturation of young DG neurons123. The increase in surviving and integrating immature neurons based on environmental inputs could be crucial, as the surviving adult-born DGCs could potentially be tuned to respond to future occurrences of the same experiences that they experience during their maturation periods122, 129 (see also the following section for the functional roles of adult-born DGCs). Intriguingly, an enriched environment can also change the connectivity of adult-born DGCs114, implying that those neurons may play distinct roles in local neural circuits. Exercise itself also alters the connectivity of the DG. Neurogenesis recruits additional inputs from entorhinal cortex but increases the frequency of inhibitory input to mature DGCs, potentially contributing to the overall sparsity of the DG network 130. Conversely, stress and aging reduce adult neurogenesis in the DG through corticosteroid signaling 4, 33, 131, 132. Importantly, adverse experiences during childhood can have prolonged effects on adult neurogenesis and hippocampus-mediated stress responses34, suggesting that experience in early life may epigenetically modulate the process of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. In addition, the levels of hormones such as estrogen and thyroid hormones regulate the rate of adult neurogenesis 25, 133. Thus, in addition to environmental stimuli from the external world, the physiological state of an individual plays a prominent role in the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the physiological and pathological conditions described below.

Physiological maturation of newborn neurons and their synaptic integration

Adult hippocampal neurogenesis begins with the division of NPs in the SGZ of the DG. Progenitors that commit to a neuronal cell fate migrate into the granule cell layer, typically stopping within the inner third 134. Many of these newborn neurons will not survive to maturity. At least two crucial checkpoints exist for survival: the first within the first few days after cell birth and the second at around three weeks 135. Ambient GABA provides the first input to immature DGCs 107, followed within the first two weeks of life by synaptic connections from local inhibitory interneurons 113, 134. GABAergic inputs are depolarizing prior to three weeks of age of the newly born neurons113 and are capable of triggering action potentials108. As immature DGCs develop, they send axons through the mossy fiber pathway to contact CA3 and also send dendrites into the molecular layer to receive perforant path input from the entorhinal cortex. Dendritic growth and connectivity are sensitive to changing conditions during the maturation period, such as exposure to an enriched environment123, 127. Synaptic connections from the perforant path are detectable within three to five weeks 113, 134. Axonal projections to CA3 are detectable within two weeks 136, 137 but appear immature and are targeted to dendritic shafts of CA3 pyramidal neurons rather than to the thorny excrescences where mature DGCs send their boutons 136, 137. Functional connections to CA3 can be observed by four to six weeks138. Proper integration of new DGCs is dependent upon activity in the existing dentate circuitry during the maturation period. Aberrant activity, such as epileptic seizures, can cause ectopic integration of adult-born DGCs in the hilus as well as improper targeting of DGCs axons back to the granule cell layer 94. Aberrant GABAergic activity due to the presence of the apolipoprotein E 4 (apoE4) allele, which is associated with high Alzheimer’s disease (AD) risk, has been observed to reduce dendritic length and complexity in adult-born DGCs 37. The total time to achieve a mature morphological and electrophysiological phenotype is approximately eight weeks in rodents.

During a window of time four to six weeks after birth, adult-born DGCs are functionally connected to the tri-synaptic circuit but are electrophysiologically distinct from their mature counterparts. In slice preparations, immature DGCs are responsive to a broader range of inputs139, hyperexcitable to stimulation140, 141, and have a lower threshold for plasticity 111, 140 than mature DGCs. In vivo, at six weeks of age or less, DGCs show greater rates of Ca2+ transients and show less spatial tuning than mature cells142. Immature DGCs may be more likely to be recruited into the active ensemble of neural networks during learning, as shown by higher rates of immediate early gene (IEG) expression129; however, some reports suggest that immature DGCs are no more likely to be recruited than developmentally born cells143. Immature neurons receive less inhibition but also lower excitatory drive than mature cells144. This distinct physiological state suggests that immature DGCs play a unique role within the circuit. Paradoxically, part of that role appears to be to keep neighboring mature DGCs quiet. Using voltage-sensitive dyes, Ikrar et al. 145 found that ablation of neurogenesis resulted in a wider spread of depolarization after stimulation. A similar effect of adult-born neurons on sparsity has been observed using IEG staining. Knocking down neurogenesis results in a higher proportion of DGCs that are IEG+ during a reversal learning task146, whereas optogenetic activation of adult-born cells under seven weeks of age reduced the fraction of IEG+ mature DGCs after exposure to a novel environment147. When animals are exposed sequentially to two similar environments, increased neurogenesis has been associated with lower rates of overlap between the DG ensembles activated by each exposure 148. These results suggest that adult-born DGCs, despite their individual hyperexcitability, support network level sparsity and allow similar events to be represented by distinct neuronal ensembles.

Recent efforts have sought to understand the mechanisms of adult-born DGC-induced sparsity by investigating the maturation of immature DGC connections. Anatomical evidence has identified a transient period around four weeks of age in which immature DGCs have a greater number of filopodia-like synapses on CA3 interneurons than mature DGCs138. At the same time, synapses onto excitatory CA3 pyramidal cells do not appear mature until six to eight weeks, and optogenetic stimulation of four-week-old cells is sufficient to induce the IEG FOS in CA3 interneurons but not in pyramidal cells138. This finding suggests that one of the earliest impacts of immature DGCs reaching CA3 is feedforward inhibition, not excitation. In support of this hypothesis, neurogenesis knockdown in DG leads to increased overlap of IEG+ CA3 neurons after exposure to two similar contexts 149. The increased overlap arises from an increase in the number of CA3 neurons responsive to the second exposure, reflecting a loss of sparsity when the network is challenged with a novel yet similar stimulus.

How immature DGCs might inhibit mature DGCs within the granule cell layer is less clear. Optogenetic stimulation of immature four-week-old DGCs recruited less feedback inhibition than stimulating seven-week-old DGCs109, suggesting that the development of connections providing feedback inhibition occurs relatively late in the maturation process. Similarly, stimulation of the perforant path in combination with a pre-stimulation of DGCs resulted in a greater overall reduction in the population spike when seven-week-old rather than four-week-old cells were stimulated. When a broader range of zero- to seven-week-old old adult-born DGCs were stimulated in another study, however, the net effect of immature cell activation was increased inhibition to mature cells147. Ablating neurogenesis with irradiation resulted in a pronounced drop in inhibition, with a significant but smaller reduction in excitation147. In both of these studies, data were collected from ex vivo slices, where some connections were inevitably severed. The net balance of excitatory and inhibitory forces provided by specific ages of DGCs in vivo remains unresolved. In vivo, competition over synaptic contacts may also impact the contribution of mature DGCs. Increasing neurogenesis by deleting the pro-apoptotic gene Bax leads to a loss of spine density and reduced excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) in mature DGCs. In contrast, neurogenesis knockdown enhances EPSCs in mature cells 150. These results suggest that some existing synaptic contacts may be redistributed from mature neurons to immature neurons as the latter integrate into the DG circuitry.

The functional role of adult-born neurons in cognition and behavior

The incorporation of adult-born neurons into the hippocampal circuitry is a remarkable example of plasticity. The conservation across mammals of such an energetically expensive process of generating and culling new neurons suggests that adult-born DGCs must serve some important function that developmentally born DGCs alone are insufficient to provide. Although the precise nature of that function is still being debated (Table 2), a common theme is the appropriate separation of overlapping or conflicting information.

Pattern separation vs. interference

The most pervasive proposed function of adult neurogenesis in the current literature is to aid in pattern separation. This term arises from computational models of hippocampus function, in which the DG transforms overlapping patterns of input from cortex into outputs to CA3 that are more distinct151–153. For example, if two patterns of activity arriving in the DG overlapped by 50% but the activity of CA3 pyramidal cells following exposure to those two patterns only overlapped by 20%, it would be concluded that pattern separation occurred. The reduction in overlap is thought to be achieved in part by the sparse coding of the DG, in which rates of activity are notoriously low based on electrophysiological and immunohistochemical evidence154–157. Overlapping patterns from cortical inputs can be dispersed over a large number of sparsely active DGCs, which in turn have few but strong synapses onto CA3 pyramidal cells 158.

At the behavioral level, the presumed manifestation of pattern separation is an improvement in distinguishing highly similar events or environments. A role for adult-born neurons in such ‘behavioral pattern separation’ has been demonstrated by knocking down neurogenesis and assessing the ability to distinguish similar fear conditioning contexts 142, 159, 160, nearby locations on a radial arm maze161, and object-location pairings162. Adult-born neurons most consistently impact performance on these tasks when new or conflicting information is presented, i.e., conditions that would be predicted to send overlapping patterns of sensory input to DG and tax pattern separation heavily. Indeed, knocking down neurogenesis impairs reversal learning on the Morris water maze163, active avoidance tasks 146, 164, and touchscreen-based location discrimination165. Manipulations to increase neurogenesis can have the opposite effect, improving the ability to distinguish nearby locations on a touchscreen task166 or similar fear conditioning contexts167. A recent meta analysis supports the general conclusion that adult neurogenesis is important for behavioral pattern separation tasks as described above 168. However, behavioral findings exploring other facets of hippocampus-dependent processes have not been entirely consistent. Adult-born neurons do not typically seem to be necessary for the initial acquisition of most hippocampus-dependent memories, such as associating contexts with an aversive shock169 or navigating to a hidden platform in the Morris water maze 163, 170. However, there are a few reports of neurogenesis knockdown impairing the initial acquisition of the Morris water maze171 or contextual fear conditioning172, 173, and increasing neurogenesis via running does not universally lead to improvement174. Some of these differences may be byproducts of the knockdown or enhancement strategy. Multiple methods have been employed to impair neurogenesis, including genetic ablation of proliferating progenitor cells 146, 169, 173, anti-mitotic agents163, and focal x-irradiation 161, 164, 175. Of these, x-irradiation achieves the greatest knockdown, but it is also permanent. Ablating proliferating progenitors in nestin-tk transgenic mice achieves lower levels of knockdown but neurogenesis recovers within a few weeks, allowing specific ages of newborn cells to be assessed169.

Despite some inconsistencies, a general consensus is emerging that adult-born neurons do play a role in learning and memory. The missing link is whether this behavioral-level improvement actually reflects differences in pattern separation at the level of underlying coding mechanisms. It is also important to note that theories implicating the DG in pattern separation predated the widespread acceptance of adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus by a decade or more. Incorporating adult-born neurons into computational models is an area of active study176, and it has been difficult to reconcile how the addition of hyperexcitable cells to the dentate would improve overall pattern separation. The lack of a clear link between ‘behavioral pattern separation’ and neuronal activity has also sparked a sometimes-heated debate over whether this terminology is appropriate. It has been suggested that the essential feature common to behaviors impacted by neurogenesis is the presence of a high level of potential interference 177–179, which can occur due to the overlap between features of the environment or can be due to the presence of prior learning (reversal tasks) or the passage of time that erodes the fine details of a memory. Although a few studies have observed both changes in the ability to distinguish similar contexts at the behavioral level and a corresponding change in the overlap of active neuronal ensembles in either DG 148 or CA3 149, this assessment of cell activity has been limited to a single subfield. A more comprehensive assessment of activation throughout entorhinal cortex, DG, and CA3 during multiple behavioral pattern separation tasks might serve to defuse some of these arguments.

Forgetting and memory clearance

Recently, it has been proposed that adult neurogenesis may play a role not just in learning new conflicting information but also in forgetting. In contrast to the vast majority of studies that first manipulate neurogenesis levels and then test memory function, Akers et al180 first trained mice to perform hippocampus-dependent tasks and then kept them sedentary or provided running wheels for six weeks. When tested at the end of the running period, running mice with enhanced neurogenesis showed poorer memory for a context or spatial location learned prior to their running experience than sedentary controls. Blocking the running-induced neurogenesis using a transgenic system prevented the running-induced memory deficit. In contrast, reducing neurogenesis in infant mice, which normally show infantile amnesia, mitigated signs of forgetting four weeks later. These results suggest that high rates of neurogenesis during the early postnatal period contribute to the infantile amnesia effects, and boosting neurogenesis during adulthood may open a new period of enhanced forgetting. Why would adult neurogenesis be conserved across most mammals if it promotes forgetting? One possibility is that there is a tradeoff between minimizing interference and maintaining stability of memories. If memory storage capacity is limited, perhaps some old memories must be destabilized and cleared away so that new memories can be incorporated into their own distinct circuit. Epp et al181 reported that, although increasing neurogenesis via running produced a less robust memory for the platform location in a Morris water maze test, running did produce an increase in the rate of reversal learning. On another task where mice had to learn to associate particular odors with particular contexts, running similarly reduced the ability to correctly identify odor-context pairs. However, when challenged to reverse this information and associate the odors with the opposite context, running animals performed better than sedentary controls. No advantage was observed in a low-conflict condition, where entirely novel odor-context pairs had to be learned. This study adds further evidence that adult neurogenesis offers an advantage in situations where the potential for interference with previous memories is high. The specific theory that adult neurogenesis promotes forgetting is relatively controversial, as the field is not in agreement about whether forgetting is a categorically separate process from plasticity. Indeed, the experiments described above could also be interpreted as examples of an extreme form of plasticity. With the passage of time, no two experiences will ever truly be identical, and even subtle changes in the environment between two testing experiences could be interpreted as a clue to the animal that conditions may have changed.

Adult neurogenesis in aging and pathological conditions

Soon after the discovery of adult hippocampal neurogenesis, it was found that the adult neurogenesis process is highly sensitive to environmental factors and pathological conditions in rodents and non-human primates, and possibly in humans. Accumulating evidence suggests that physical and psychological stresses can impair the process of adult neurogenesis in model animals, which might further augment the symptoms of disorders. Therefore, it is possible that dysregulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in humans is also linked to several brain disorders, such as age-dependent cognitive decline, AD, major depressive disorders (MDD) and medial-temporal lobe epilepsy (mTLE), although clear links between the impairment of adult hippocampal neurogenesis and these diseases need to be shown in future studies. Although our knowledge regarding the interaction of these disorders with adult hippocampal neurogenesis and related functions in the human brain is very limited, animal models provide some indications of links between them. In this section, we summarize the effect of neurological disorders on adult neurogenesis in humans, the possibility of dysregulation of adult neurogenesis as a cause of those disorders, and future directions to develop adult hippocampal neurogenesis-based treatment.

Aging

One prominent negative biological factor in adult hippocampal neurogenesis is aging. Although aging itself is not a pathological process, it is a process that interacts with health and disease states, and it is one of the most significant risk factors for cognitive decline and neurodegenerative disorders. Understanding the process of brain aging is crucial to understand successful cognitive brain aging. In parallel with aging, the rate of adult hippocampal neurogenesis, the number of RGLs, and the number of intermediate progenitors decrease in the DG of rodents, carnivores, non-human primates, and humans4, 9, 182–185. A recent immunohistochemical analysis of adult hippocampal neurogenesis with unbiased stereology across the age of 0.2 to 59 years revealed that proliferating cells in the SGZ rapidly decline in early childhood 186, consistent with an earlier study7. Thus, the decline of adult hippocampal neurogenesis during aging could reduce forms of structural and functional plasticity that depend on adult-born neurons. Interestingly, the level of adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus has been linked to cognitive abilities both in rodents and non-human primates183. Hippocampus-dependent cognitive abilities also decline with age in humans187, 188, but it is not clear whether the levels of adult hippocampal neurogenesis correlate with cognitive abilities in human subjects. Technical advances in non-invasive in vivo imaging of neurogenesis using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or positron emission tomography (PET) may allow investigators to obtain quantitative data relating adult hippocampal neurogenesis to cognitive metrics in humans 189, 190.

In addition, the amount of gliogenesis increases whereas that of neurogenesis decreases during aging9, 191. These alterations could be due to both intrinsic changes in adult neural stem cells and environmental changes. Interestingly, activated RGLs differentiate into astrocytes after several rounds of cell division, which raises the possibility of a “disposable” stem cell model182. This observation implies that the reduction of adult hippocampal neurogenesis during aging is a unidirectional process due to the depletion of the adult neural cell pool. However, the capacity for proliferation and survival can be reversed by voluntary running or environmental enrichment in aged mice104, 191–193, suggesting that environmental cues can induce some capacity for adult hippocampal neurogenesis in aged brains, and the ability to generate new DGCs in the aged brain is suppressed by aging of the environmental niche. In fact, recent reports uncovered that the levels of Bmp4 and Bmp6 are increased during aging in the hippocampus in both mice and humans 194, 195, and the attenuation of BMP signaling increased the proliferation of neural progenitors in the aged hippocampus. These findings suggest that the increase in BMP secretion as a result of aging of the environmental niche could be part of the reason behind reduced neurogenesis, implying that the reduction of adult neurogenesis during aging seems to be the consequence of systemic changes in the brain. Importantly, increasing adult-born DGCs in aged mice by overexpressing Klf9 or attenuating BMP signaling improved cognitive abilities and long-term memory148, 194, 195. These results suggest that cognitive decline with aging can be reversed at least in part by increasing hippocampal adult neurogenesis.

In addition to changes in the local environment, changes in the systemic milieu during aging have a significant impact on adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Wyss-Coray and colleagues have used heterochronic parabiosis to show that the systemic milieu from old animals inhibits adult neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity and impairs hippocampus-dependent memory42. Using a proteomics approach, they demonstrated that several chemokines such as CCL11 increased with aging, and the injection of CCL11 into young animals decreased adult neurogenesis and impaired hippocampus-dependent spatial memory. Subsequent studies showed that the levels of b2-microglobulin, a component of the major histocompatibility complex class 1 (MHC1) molecule, which is involved in synaptic plasticity196, 197, were also identified as an aging-dependent negative regulator of adult hippocampal neurogenesis43, suggesting that immune signaling could have other unconventional functions in the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. In contrast, the systemic milieu from young animals can increase adult neurogenesis and improve synaptic plasticity as well as hippocampus-dependent cognitive performance, likely through the CREB pathway198. Based on these findings, the same group hypothesized that plasma from an early developmental stage might contain beneficial systemic factors for adult hippocampal neurogenesis; surprisingly, they demonstrated that tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP2) is enriched in human umbilical cord and young mouse plasma and TIMP2 is necessary for the effect of human umbilical cord plasma on synaptic plasticity and cognitive improvement41. These observations suggest that the reduction in adult hippocampal neurogenesis during aging can be at least in part reversed by cell-extrinsic factors. However, it is not entirely clear how these systemic factors in the plasma and blood affect adult neurogenesis and hippocampal function, whether these factors directly affect the process of adult neurogenesis (ex. changes in synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus may indirectly affect adult neurogenesis), and whether the few already-identified factors in the systemic milieu are the only factors. In addition, it is not clear yet whether the changes of systemic milieu during aging affect cognitive abilities and adult hippocampal neurogenesis in other species, including humans. As part of future studies, understanding the underlying mechanisms and functional relevance in humans could help develop therapeutic tools.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD)

In addition to aging, accumulating evidence suggests that aging-related neurological diseases such as AD and Parkinson’s Disease (PD) may impair adult hippocampal neurogenesis, although available data from human research is very limited. Modeling in animals by overexpressing proteins linked to familial AD such as mutant amyloid precursor proteins (APP) and presenilin partially recapitulates AD pathology, but the animals also have unrelated phenotypes due to the overexpression of transgenes, and therefore interpretations based on studies using those animal models should be approached cautiously 199. AD is the most common dementia, and AD patients show functional impairment in memory and cognitive function. The accumulation of tau and APP, which is a hallmark of AD, starts in the entorhinal cortex (EC), a gateway to the hippocampus (Fig. 1), and spreads to the cortex and the hippocampus200. Accumulation of APP and tau elicits synaptic and neuronal loss, which is believed to induce functional impairments at least in part. The effect of AD on human adult hippocampal neurogenesis is limited and somewhat controversial. Some studies have reported that adult hippocampal neurogenesis and neuronal maturation are inhibited in AD patients whereas gliogenesis is increased 201–203. On the other hand, Jin et al. reported that adult hippocampal neurogenesis is increased in AD patients204. These discrepancies may reflect different stages of AD or the heterogeneous nature of AD pathology. In addition, all human AD studies relied on the expression of marker proteins, which could be misexpressed under pathological conditions. More comprehensive analyses using different technical approaches to quantitatively measure the number of adult neural stem cells, intermediate progenitor cells, and newborn cells using double-labeling immunohistochemistry, BrdU labeling4 or the detection of 14C in genomic DNA will be essential in future human studies9.

Similarly, studies using animal models of AD have shown variable effects of AD pathology on adult hippocampal neurogenesis depending on the specific AD-model transgenic mouse lines used and their ages. Several mouse models of AD with distinct genetic mutations have been found to have impairments in adult hippocampal neurogenesis and neuronal maturation 205–211. However, in contrast, cell proliferation in the adult DG has been found to be increased204, 212. The increased proliferation is observed with relatively earlier timing (three to six months of age), and increased proliferation may not reflect increased neurogenesis but rather gliogenesis, suggesting that the effect of AD pathology could indeed differ depending on the stage of AD as well as genetic background. Interestingly, GABAergic signaling is enhanced in immature DGCs in a human APP transgenic mouse line, which consequently impairs morphological and functional maturation of adult-born DGCs203. Since GABAergic signaling from the local neural network appears to be crucial for the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in many aspects (Table 1), defective GABAergic signaling could be one of the mediators of AD pathology. Importantly, knockout of apoE and knockin of human apoE4, one of the major genetic risk factors for AD, impairs GABAeric signaling onto immature adult-born DGCs and reduce neurogenesis while increasing gliogenesis37. Thus, known genetic risk factors for AD can affect adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Further investigation of other genetic risk factors for AD may help us to understand the heterogeneous nature of AD pathology through the lens of adult hippocampal neurogenesis.

Parkinson’s disease (PD)

PD is the most common movement disorder. It is strongly linked to the aggregation of a–synuclein in Lewy bodies and the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Dopaminergic signaling regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis in rodent models (Table 1). Postmortem analysis of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in PD is very limited, but a few reports have consistently shown that adult neural stem cells were reduced in PD individuals and correlated with a–synuclein accumulation 213, 214. Several genes related to PD, including a–synuclein, leucin-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), and PINK1, have been studied using transgenic mouse models214–218. An important physiological function of a–synuclein is the regulation of presynaptic transmission. A/b–synuclein-double knockout mice have exhibited increased adult hippocampal neurogenesis214, whereas overexpression of a–synuclein decreased neurogenesis and impaired morphological maturation of adult-born DGCs214, 216–218. Therefore, adequate levels of a–synuclein are crucial for proper regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Similarly, a transgenic mouse line harboring the most frequent G2019S mutation in Lrrk2 exhibited high expression of Lrrk2 in the hippocampus and showed defects in proliferation/morphogenesis and survival of adult neural progenitors/adult-born DGCs214. These data suggest that genetic mutations in PD patients could affect adult hippocampal neurogenesis, which mediates at least some of the pathology of PD.

Mood disorders

In addition to neurological diseases, anxiety and depression have links to adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Adult neurogenesis is required for some of the beneficial effects of antidepressants through 5HT1A receptors219. In human subjects, hippocampal volume and adult hippocampal neural progenitors are reduced in depression 220, 221, and antidepressant treatments in MDD patients increase the numbers of adult neural progenitors in the DG and the volume of DG222–226. Thus, it is possible that the increase in adult hippocampal neurogenesis mediates the effect of antidepressants in human patients, although whether the effects of antidepressants are mediated by adult hippocampal neurogenesis seems to depend on signaling pathways modulated by antidepressants in rodent models100, 221, 225, 227. Importantly, no consensus has been reached on the role of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the effects of antidepressants228, 229.

Conversely, environmental challenges such as unpredictable chronic mild stress, prenatal stress, chronic social defeat, early life stress, and glucocorticoid administration all impair adult hippocampal neurogenesis 34, 35, 131, 132, 219, 224, 227, 230, 231. The adult-born cells in the ventral DG appear particularly susceptible to such stressors35, 232, 233. Prolonged stressors may create a vicious cycle in which stress impairs neurogenesis, low neurogenesis fails to mitigate stress, and further adult-born neurons are lost. Augmented stress responses might eventually increase anxiety and depression-like behavior131, 234–237.

However, determining precisely how adult hippocampal neurogenesis contributes to regulating the emotional state has remained elusive. Most studies, but not all238, have shown that the ablation of adult-born neurons does not affect baseline levels of anxiety but rather that adult-born neurons modulate the stress response100, 234, 239–241. Adult-born cells in the ventral DG may be especially important in this modulation. The ventral hippocampus is associated with social memory and anxiety, and the activation of ventral DG neurons by optogenetic approaches can reduce anxiety levels 242, 243, possibly by regulating the activity of the HPA axis. The ability of adult-born DGCs to increase circuit plasticity in the hippocampus, as described above, may provide an additional buffer against stress. Interestingly, genetic ablation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis by knocking out Tbr2 in the adult brain reduced anxiety-related behavior during the dark cycle, and the recovery of corticosterone levels after restraint stress was quicker in Tbr2 KO mice than WT mice238. On the other hand, depletion of adult-born neurons using GFAP-tk mice showed opposite effects131. In this study, animals with higher neurogenesis also had improved recovery from an acute stressor than animals with low neurogenesis131. These discrepancies may derive from methodological differences, and adult-born DGCs may contribute to mood regulation in a context-dependent manner. Thus, although adult-born DGCs seem to be involved in sensing and responding to stress, further studies are required to clarify how the context affects the functionality of adult neurogenesis.

The impairment of adult hippocampal neurogenesis may thus have prolonged effects on both cognitive and emotional function. Importantly, depression and cognitive impairments are also common symptoms in aged adults and patients with AD/PD. Of interest, pattern separation, the computational process associated with the DG, is impaired with aging and AD as well188, 244, 245. Thus, dysregulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis may contribute to functional deficits of DG-specific information processing in humans. In addition, patients undergoing cancer treatments, which can eliminate dividing cells including adult neural stem cells, experience depression and cognitive impairment246. Understanding the common mechanisms underlying the dysregulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in pathological conditions could impact a large population of patients suffering from several diseases and the side effects of treatments.

Epilepsy

Although most of the pathological conditions discussed thus far reduce the number of adult neural stem cells and neurogenesis, seizure activity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (mTLE) dramatically increases aberrant neurogenesis in rodent models and human subjects soon after seizure247–251. Consequently, chronic seizure damages and exhausts adult neural stem cells and eventually decreases adult neurogenesis a few months after the induction of seizures95, 252. In addition to cell proliferation, adult-born neurons generated by seizure activity exhibit aberrant cell migration, morphogenesis and synaptic integration through several signaling pathways and eventually establish recurrent networks247, 253–260. Thus, seizure-induced enhanced adult neurogenesis substantially reorganizes the local neural network in the DG and may impair cognitive functions. In fact, a recent report has shown that reducing adult neurogenesis using nestin-tk mice prior to the induction of seizure reduces the frequency of spontaneous recurrent seizures, and reducing aberrant neurogenesis by seizure also has some benefits for cognitive abilities261. Further investigation of how and to what extent seizure-induced adult-born neurons contribute to the etiology of mTLE will be interesting.

Summary and future directions

As summarized in this review, significant progress in our understanding of adult hippocampal neurogenesis has been made in rodent models using advanced transgenic mice, viral circuit tracing, next generation sequencing, and imaging. However, since most of our knowledge comes from research using rodent models, it is still not clear how adult hippocampal neurogenesis is regulated and contributes to cognitive abilities in humans and if impairment of adult neurogenesis contributes to the pathophysiology of human diseases. Human lifetimes are much longer than those of rodents, and it is unclear whether the time course of maturation and integration of adult-born DGCs in rodents and their functional contribution to local network activity and behavior are comparable in humans. Recent progress in non-invasive imaging of adult neurogenesis with MRI and PET may allow us to address these questions. One major limitation of studying adult hippocampal neurogenesis in humans is the inability to access live samples, which makes it difficult to characterize and manipulate adult hippocampal neurogenesis. However, recent advances in 3D culture systems derived from human pluripotent cells called organoids may provide a good model system to study several aspects of human development and disease 262. The advantage of such systems is that they preserve some cytoarchitectural and organizational aspects of sub-regions of the human brain. Development of such systems specified toward hippocampal and DG fates may provide a good model system to study adult neurogenesis in vitro. While several studies have already developed organoid systems that resemble different human brain regions, including hippocampus 263, these organoids in general seems to recapitulate only prenatal stages. Some remaining challenges include differentiating organoid DGs and achieving postnatal stages that resemble quiescent and multi-potent neural stem cells.

We thank M. L. Gage for comments on the manuscript, V. Mertens for the illustrations and Dr. Abed Al Fattah Mansour for discussion. This work was supported by NIH R01 MH095741, NIH U01 MH106882, The G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation, The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust (grant #2012-PG-MED00), Annette C. Merle-Smith, JPB Foundation and The McKnight Foundation. T.T. was supported by JSPS and the Kanae Foundation.

Figure 1 Development of adult-born DGCs and the trisynaptic circuit in the hippocampus

(a) The trisynaptic neural circuit in the hippocampus from the entorhinal cortex through the dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1. (b) Developmental processes of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Adult neural stem cells in the hippocampus (radial glia-like cells, Type 1 cells) and their differentiation through intermediate progenitors to mature DG neurons.

Figure 2 Somatic mosaicism during adult neurogenesis drives functional heterogeneity

(a) Adult-born neurons are generated in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus; during this period of maturation they are prone to DNA damage, replication stress, and retrotransposition. Neuron A (green), B (purple), and C (orange) represent three distinct adult-born neurons. (b) Each newborn neuron will have a unique complement of neurogenesis-driven mutations. Each tick mark represents a unique mutation in the respective neuron such as an aneuploidy event, a CNV, or a newly inserted retrotransposon. (c) Depending on the complement of mutations, the neuron may be shifted further away from the mean function of all dentate granule neurons, thereby increasing diversity within the DG.

Table 1 Signals regulating adult hippocampal neurogenesis

	Stages	Regulators	
Secreted factors and downstream effectors (Morphogens, growth factors, cytokines, etc)	Type 1 (RGLs)	Maintenance of RGLs
BMPs 11–14, VEGF15, Shh16–19
Proliferation of RGLs/NPs
IGF220	
	Type2a, 2b	Proliferation of NPs
FGF221, IGF-220, EGF22, 23, ERK5 24, estrogen25
Promoting differentiation
Wnt26–28, IGF-129, 30, VEGF15, BDNF/NT-331, BMPs14, 32
Inhibition of proliferation
Cortisol33–35, Chronic Opioid Use 36, ApoE437	
	Neuroblasts &amp; immature neurons	Promoting neuronal maturation
Wnt/PCP 28, 38, BDNF/NT-339, 40, TIMP241
Inhibition of proliferation
CCL1142, β2M43	
Adhesion molecules	Type 1, 2a &amp; 2b	Maintenance of RGLs
Notch44–46
Inhibition of proliferation
Integrin 47, 48
Promoting differentiation
Eph-Ephrin49,	
	Neuroblasts &amp; immature neurons	Neuronal migration and synaptogenesis
Semaphorin/Plexin 50, 51
Inhibition of proliferation
Tenasin-R52	
Transcription factors	Type 1	Maintenance of RGLs
REST53, 54, Sox255, Hes546, FoxO56, NFIX13, NFIB57
Activation of RGLs
Ascl158, 59	
	Type 2a	Maintenance of NPs
Sox255, 60, TLX1 61–63, REST 53, 64
Differentiation of NPs
Ascl165	
	Type 2b	Differentiation into intermediate progenitors
Tbr266
Neuronal differentiation
Neurog2 67, 68, NeuroD126, 27	
	Neuroblasts	Neuronal differentiation
NeuroD126, 27	
	Immature neurons	Neuronal maturation
Prox128, 69, 70, CREB71, 72, Klf973	
Epigenetic modifiers	Type 1, 2a &amp; 2b	Proliferation of RGLs/NPs
GADD45b74, TET175, miR-13776, miR-17-9277, Nup15378
Differentiation of RGLs/NPs
MBD179–82, HDAC127, 83, HDAC284, MeCP2 76, 83, 85–87, miR-18480, miR-199 87	
	Immature neurons	Synaptogenesis
MeCP2 88, HDAC2 84, 87
Neuronal migration/dendritic growth
miR1989, miR-13290	
Neurotransmitters	Type 1	Activation of RGLs
GABA 91–93, Glutamate94, 95	
	Type2a, 2b &amp; neuroblasts	Proliferation of NPs
GABA93, 96–98, Dopamine99, Serotonin 31, 99, 100, Norepinephrine101, Acetylcholine 102–105
Inhibition of proliferation
Chronic opioid use106	
	Immature neurons	Activation of immature neurons
GABA107–114, Glutamate108, 112, 114–116, Acetylcholine 112, 117, 118, Dopamine 119	

Table 2 The effects of manipulation of adult neurogenesis on hippocampus-dependent behavio

Reference	Method	Direction of Manipulation	Age at treatment onset	Behavioral testing start relative to treatment onset	Behavioral Task	Phenotype	
Saxe 2006	X-IRR; GFAP-tk	Down	12–25 weeks for IRR; 12–20 weeks for GFAP-tk	12 weeks for IRR; 6 weeks for GFAP-tk	CFC, MWM, Y-maze	impaired acquisition of contextual but not cued FC; IRR had no effect on other tasks	
Meshi 2006	X-IRR +/− enrichment	Both	10 weeks for IRR; 22 weeks for enrichment	6 weeks after enrichment	MWM; novelty-suppressed feeding	improved MWM probe performance and reduced latency to feed in enriched mice regardless of IRR	
Kitamura 2009	X-IRR	Down	5 weeks	5 weeks	CFC	no effect on remote memory at 28 days; minimal impairment of recent memory at 1 day depending on strain	
Clelland 2009	X-IRR	Down	8 weeks	8 weeks	Radial arm maze; touchscreen location discrimination task	impairment discriminating small but not large separations on both tasks	
Deng 2009	nestin-tk	Down	8 weeks	3 weeks	MWM, CFC	no change in MWM acquisition but poor long-term retention 1 week later; normal CFC acqusition but impaired extinction	
Garthe 2009	TMZ	Down	6–8 weeks	8 weeks	MWM	transiently impaired acquisition and impaired reversal learning	
Creer 2010	Running	Up	4 mo, 23 mo	1 week	touchscreen location discrimination task	improvement on small separations in young mice only	
Sahay 2011	Bax KO (iBaxNes)	Up	8+ weeks	8 weeks	novel object; MWM; active avoidance; CFC; open field; novelty-suppressed feeding; forced swim test	only impact is improved CFC discrimination of similar contexts; no effect on CFC extinction; no effect on MWM reversal	
Tronel 2012	Bax overexpression (Tet-Bax × nestin-rtta)	Down	8 weeks	9 weeks	CFC; odor discrimination	impaired CFC discrimination between similar contexts; odor discrimination unaffected	
Burghardt 2012	X-IRR; GFAP-tk	Down	10 weeks for IRR; 6–8 weeks for GFAP-tk	12–16 weeks for IRR; 8–11 weeks for GFAP-tk	active place avoidance	normal learning of initial shock zone, but impaired reversal and learning of an additional zone	
Denny 2012	X-IRR, GFAP-tk	Down	9–15 weeks for IRR; 6 weeks for GFAP-tk	2–8 weeks for IRR; 6 weeks for GFAP-tk	novel object; CFC	impairment on one-shock CFC at 6 weeks; hyperactivity to novel object at 6 weeks	
Nakashiba 2012	X-IRR	Down	9–12 weeks	6 weeks post	CFC	impaired CFC discrimination between similar contexts	
Bekinschtein 2014	dnWnt	Down	7–8 weeks	5 weeks	spontaneous location recognition	impaired discrimination of small but not large separations	
Swan 2014	GFAP-tk	Down	6–8 weeks	4 weeks	touchscreen location discrimination; nonspatial brightness discrimination	reduction in location discrimination, but only after a reversal, not related to size of separation; no effect on brightness discrimination	
Denny 2014	X-IRR	Down	9 weeks	6 weeks	CFC	impaired acquisition of one-shock but not 3-shock CFC	
Wang 2014	Constitutively active MEK5	Up	8–10 weeks	7–8 weeks	MWM; novel object recognition; open field	improved MWM acquisition, probe, and reversal; improved novel object recognition at 24–48hr	
Zou 2015	ERK5 KO	Down	10–12 weeks	7–8 weeks	CFC; open field; elevated plus maze; light-dark test; novelty-suppressed feeding; novelty-induced hypophagia; sucrose splash test; sucrose preference test; forced swim test; tail suspension test	impaired remote fear memory at 5 weeks; but no impact on any anxiety or mood tests	
Clemenson 2015	Running; enrichment; x-IRR	Both	8 weeks	4 weeks post-RUN; 3 weeks post EE; 9 weeks post-IRR	CFC	enrichment, but not running, rescues immediate shock deficit and is blocked by irraditation; enrichment alone leads to loss of CFC discrimination if animals are pre-exposed to shock context	
Park 2015	X-IRR	Down	10 weeks	12–16 weeks	active place avoidance	normal learning of initial shock zone, but impaired reversal	
Tsai 2015	Tbr2 KO; X-IRR	Down	7 weeks	12 weeks	elevated plus maze; novelty-suppressed feeding; forced swim test; sucrose preference test	reduction in anxiety during dark cycle only; no change in depressive-like behavior at any time	
McAoy 2016	Klf9 overexpression	Up	3, 11, or 17months	6 weeks	MWM; CFC; open field; light-dark test; novel object recognition	improvements in MWM probe after reversal, remote CFC discrimination, and novel object recognition with no effect on anxiety tests in young; improved remote CFC discrimination in middle aged and old	
Danielson 2016	optogenetic silencing	Down	8 weeks	6 weeks	CFC	inactivation of &lt;6-week old DGCs during training impairs test performance 24hr later; inactivation during test phase results in impairment when silenced in the similar but not training context	
Zhuo 2016	optogenetic silencing	Down	10–11 weeks	5–10 weeks; 14–18 weeks	touchscreen location discrimination task	inactivation of 5–10 week old DGCs impairs discrimination of small separations during acquisition phase but not after reaching asymptotic performance; inactivating 14–18 week old DGCs has no effect	
Abbreviations: IRR = IRR; MWM = Morris water maze; CFC = contextual fear conditioning

Box Genetic mutation, variation and retrotransposons

It is now becoming clear that the process of neurogenesis puts the neuronal genome in a state that is prone to new mutations. Developing neurons sustain genetic mutations ranging from chromosomal aneuploidy to copy number variations (CNVs), single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and mobilized retrotransposons (RTs) 83, 264–267. This somatic mosaicism shines a light on an additional impact of adult neurogenesis: the ability to generate an increase in genomic complexity within the brain of a single individual. However, the functional impact of these mutations is still largely unknown.

Early studies of adult-born neurons in the mouse subventricular zone revealed that chromosomal mis-segregation occurred during mitosis and, as a result, a subset of neurons experienced the complete loss or gain of a chromosome264, 268. Since this discovery, there has been intense debate over the degree of aneuploidy in neurons, with estimates ranging from 1–33%; the most recent high-powered study placed the degree of aneuploidy at 10% 264, 269–271. Despite the debate over the exact frequency, aneuploidy likely has a profound impact on neuronal function, as evidenced by the common elimination of these cells when mutations arise during early development272. Although the specific impact of aneuploidy during adult neurogenesis is unclear, these events result in altered expression of the associated genes268.

Human neurons also harbor a mosaic complement of CNVs residing within the kilo- and megabase range272–274. NPs have a propensity to generate large-scale structural rearrangements due to replication stress in actively transcribing regions275, 276. Importantly, the DNA damage that drives these mutations in NPs is often localized to hotspots that are focused around genes that are important for neuronal development and function275, indicating that there might be an associated recurring functional role of repair.

An additional layer of genomic diversity imparted during neurogenesis is the amplification of RTs. RTs are expressed and mobilized in NPs both in vitro and in vivo, where they colocalize with neurogenic and non-neurogenic areas of the brain277. Interestingly, retrotransposition dysregulation has been associated with the diagnosis of a subset of neurological disorders. For example, MeCP2, a gene that is mutated in Rett syndrome, works to modulate RT mobilization in NPs, and brains of individuals with Rett syndrome exhibit higher levels of RTs83. Similarly, genomic levels of RTs are also higher in the brains of individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia83, 278, further indicating that somatic retrotransposition may be linked to cognitive function.

It is tempting to speculate that somatic mutations during adult neurogenesis impart an additional layer of heterogeneity to the broader circuit. We know from decades of study that the above-mentioned mutations can have a profound impact on neurological phenotypes when present in the germline. Therefore, if a single new neuron harbors changes in the copy number of key neuronal genes, or perhaps a more subtle alteration in the ability to regulate those genes, it is likely that the function of that individual neuron will be modified and may even be differentially tuned in comparison to surrounding neurons that have their own, but different, sets of somatic mutations (Fig. 2). To move towards a deeper understanding of the true impact of somatic mutations, the Brain Somatic Mosaicism Network was recently formed with the goal of exhaustively characterizing such mutations within the human brain266. As we begin to refine strategies for identifying somatic variants in neurons, the next few years should prove to be an exciting time to study how mutations that arise in adult-born neurons impact neural function and potentially generate increased diversity within a single human brain.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare there is no conflict of interest to disclose.


1 Altman J Autoradiographic investigation of cell proliferation in the brains of rats and cats Anat Rec 1963 145 573 591 14012334
2 Altman J Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals? Science 1962 135 1127 1128 13860748
3 Kempermann G Kuhn HG Gage FH More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an enriched environment Nature 1997 386 493 495 9087407
4 Kuhn HG Dickinson-Anson H Gage FH Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat: age-related decrease of neuronal progenitor proliferation J Neurosci 1996 16 2027 2033 8604047
5 Seki T Arai Y Temporal and spacial relationships between PSA-NCAM-expressing, newly generated granule cells, and radial glia-like cells in the adult dentate gyrus J Comp Neurol 1999 410 503 513 10404415
6 Eriksson PS Perfilieva E Bjork-Eriksson T Alborn AM Nordborg C Peterson DA Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus Nat Med 1998 4 1313 1317 9809557
7 Knoth R Singec I Ditter M Pantazis G Capetian P Meyer RP Murine features of neurogenesis in the human hippocampus across the lifespan from 0 to 100 years PLoS One 2010 5 e8809 20126454
8 Roy NS Wang S Jiang L Kang J Benraiss A Harrison-Restelli C In vitro neurogenesis by progenitor cells isolated from the adult human hippocampus Nat Med 2000 6 271 277 10700228
9 Spalding KL Bergmann O Alkass K Bernard S Salehpour M Huttner HB Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult humans Cell 2013 153 1219 1227 23746839
10 Mathews KJ Allen KM Boerrigter D Ball H Shannon Weickert C Double KL Evidence for reduced neurogenesis in the aging human hippocampus despite stable stem cell markers Aging Cell 2017 16 1195 1199 28766905
11 Mira H Andreu Z Suh H Lie DC Jessberger S Consiglio A Signaling through BMPR-IA regulates quiescence and long-term activity of neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus Cell Stem Cell 2010 7 78 89 20621052
12 Bonaguidi MA Peng CY McGuire T Falciglia G Gobeske KT Czeisler C Noggin expands neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus J Neurosci 2008 28 9194 9204 18784300
13 Martynoga B Mateo JL Zhou B Andersen J Achimastou A Urban N Epigenomic enhancer annotation reveals a key role for NFIX in neural stem cell quiescence Genes Dev 2013 27 1769 1786 23964093
14 Brooker SM Gobeske KT Chen J Peng CY Kessler JA Hippocampal bone morphogenetic protein signaling mediates behavioral effects of antidepressant treatment Mol Psychiatry 2017 22 910 919 27698430
15 Kirby ED Kuwahara AA Messer RL Wyss-Coray T Adult hippocampal neural stem and progenitor cells regulate the neurogenic niche by secreting VEGF Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015 112 4128 4133 25775598
16 Ahn S Joyner AL In vivo analysis of quiescent adult neural stem cells responding to Sonic hedgehog Nature 2005 437 894 897 16208373
17 Breunig JJ Sarkisian MR Arellano JI Morozov YM Ayoub AE Sojitra S Primary cilia regulate hippocampal neurogenesis by mediating sonic hedgehog signaling Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 13127 13132 18728187
18 Han YG Spassky N Romaguera-Ros M Garcia-Verdugo JM Aguilar A Schneider-Maunoury S Hedgehog signaling and primary cilia are required for the formation of adult neural stem cells Nat Neurosci 2008 11 277 284 18297065
19 Li G Fang L Fernandez G Pleasure SJ The ventral hippocampus is the embryonic origin for adult neural stem cells in the dentate gyrus Neuron 2013 78 658 672 23643936
20 Bracko O Singer T Aigner S Knobloch M Winner B Ray J Gene expression profiling of neural stem cells and their neuronal progeny reveals IGF2 as a regulator of adult hippocampal neurogenesis J Neurosci 2012 32 3376 3387 22399759
21 Gage FH Coates PW Palmer TD Kuhn HG Fisher LJ Suhonen JO Survival and differentiation of adult neuronal progenitor cells transplanted to the adult brain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995 92 11879 11883 8524867
22 Kuhn HG Winkler J Kempermann G Thal LJ Gage FH Epidermal growth factor and fibroblast growth factor-2 have different effects on neural progenitors in the adult rat brain J Neurosci 1997 17 5820 5829 9221780
23 Ray J Gage FH Differential properties of adult rat and mouse brain-derived neural stem/progenitor cells Mol Cell Neurosci 2006 31 560 573 16426857
24 Pan YW Zou J Wang W Sakagami H Garelick MG Abel G Inducible and conditional deletion of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 disrupts adult hippocampal neurogenesis J Biol Chem 2012 287 23306 23317 22645146
25 Tanapat P Hastings NB Reeves AJ Gould E Estrogen stimulates a transient increase in the number of new neurons in the dentate gyrus of the adult female rat J Neurosci 1999 19 5792 5801 10407020
26 Lie DC Colamarino SA Song HJ Desire L Mira H Consiglio A Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis Nature 2005 437 1370 1375 16251967
27 Kuwabara T Hsieh J Muotri A Yeo G Warashina M Lie DC Wnt-mediated activation of NeuroD1 and retro-elements during adult neurogenesis Nat Neurosci 2009 12 1097 1105 19701198
28 Karalay O Doberauer K Vadodaria KC Knobloch M Berti L Miquelajauregui A Prospero-related homeobox 1 gene (Prox1) is regulated by canonical Wnt signaling and has a stage-specific role in adult hippocampal neurogenesis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108 5807 5812 21436036
29 Hsieh J Aimone JB Kaspar BK Kuwabara T Nakashima K Gage FH IGF-I instructs multipotent adult neural progenitor cells to become oligodendrocytes J Cell Biol 2004 164 111 122 14709544
30 Aberg MA Aberg ND Hedbacker H Oscarsson J Eriksson PS Peripheral infusion of IGF-I selectively induces neurogenesis in the adult rat hippocampus J Neurosci 2000 20 2896 2903 10751442
31 Li Y Luikart BW Birnbaum S Chen J Kwon CH Kernie SG TrkB regulates hippocampal neurogenesis and governs sensitivity to antidepressive treatment Neuron 2008 59 399 412 18701066
32 Bond AM Peng CY Meyers EA McGuire T Ewaleifoh O Kessler JA BMP signaling regulates the tempo of adult hippocampal progenitor maturation at multiple stages of the lineage Stem Cells 2014 32 2201 2214 24578327
33 Cameron HA McKay RD Restoring production of hippocampal neurons in old age Nat Neurosci 1999 2 894 897 10491610
34 Mirescu C Peters JD Gould E Early life experience alters response of adult neurogenesis to stress Nat Neurosci 2004 7 841 846 15273691
35 Lehmann ML Brachman RA Martinowich K Schloesser RJ Herkenham M Glucocorticoids orchestrate divergent effects on mood through adult neurogenesis J Neurosci 2013 33 2961 2972 23407954
36 Eisch AJ Barrot M Schad CA Self DW Nestler EJ Opiates inhibit neurogenesis in the adult rat hippocampus Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 7579 7584 10840056
37 Li G Bien-Ly N Andrews-Zwilling Y Xu Q Bernardo A Ring K GABAergic interneuron dysfunction impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in adult apolipoprotein E4 knockin mice Cell Stem Cell 2009 5 634 645 19951691
38 Schafer ST Han J Pena M von Bohlen Und Halbach O Peters J Gage FH The Wnt adaptor protein ATP6AP2 regulates multiple stages of adult hippocampal neurogenesis J Neurosci 2015 35 4983 4998 25810528
39 Scharfman H Goodman J Macleod A Phani S Antonelli C Croll S Increased neurogenesis and the ectopic granule cells after intrahippocampal BDNF infusion in adult rats Exp Neurol 2005 192 348 356 15755552
40 Rossi C Angelucci A Costantin L Braschi C Mazzantini M Babbini F Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is required for the enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis following environmental enrichment Eur J Neurosci 2006 24 1850 1856 17040481
41 Castellano JM Mosher KI Abbey RJ McBride AA James ML Berdnik D Human umbilical cord plasma proteins revitalize hippocampal function in aged mice Nature 2017 544 488 492 28424512
42 Villeda SA Luo J Mosher KI Zou B Britschgi M Bieri G The ageing systemic milieu negatively regulates neurogenesis and cognitive function Nature 2011 477 90 94 21886162
43 Smith LK He Y Park JS Bieri G Snethlage CE Lin K beta2-microglobulin is a systemic pro-aging factor that impairs cognitive function and neurogenesis Nat Med 2015 21 932 937 26147761
44 Ehm O Goritz C Covic M Schaffner I Schwarz TJ Karaca E RBPJkappa-dependent signaling is essential for long-term maintenance of neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus J Neurosci 2010 30 13794 13807 20943920
45 Ables JL Decarolis NA Johnson MA Rivera PD Gao Z Cooper DC Notch1 is required for maintenance of the reservoir of adult hippocampal stem cells J Neurosci 2010 30 10484 10492 20685991
46 Lugert S Basak O Knuckles P Haussler U Fabel K Gotz M Quiescent and active hippocampal neural stem cells with distinct morphologies respond selectively to physiological and pathological stimuli and aging Cell Stem Cell 2010 6 445 456 20452319
47 Porcheri C Suter U Jessberger S Dissecting integrin-dependent regulation of neural stem cell proliferation in the adult brain J Neurosci 2014 34 5222 5232 24719101
48 Brooker SM Bond AM Peng CY Kessler JA beta1-integrin restricts astrocytic differentiation of adult hippocampal neural stem cells Glia 2016 64 1235 1251 27145730
49 Ashton RS Conway A Pangarkar C Bergen J Lim KI Shah P Astrocytes regulate adult hippocampal neurogenesis through ephrin-B signaling Nat Neurosci 2012 15 1399 1406 22983209
50 Duan Y Wang SH Song J Mironova Y Ming GL Kolodkin AL Semaphorin 5A inhibits synaptogenesis in early postnatal- and adult-born hippocampal dentate granule cells Elife 2014 3
51 Ng T Hor CH Chew B Zhao J Zhong Z Ryu JR Neuropilin 2 Signaling Is Involved in Cell Positioning of Adult-born Neurons through Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) J Biol Chem 2016 291 25088 25095 27687730
52 Xu JC Xiao MF Jakovcevski I Sivukhina E Hargus G Cui YF The extracellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin-R regulates neurogenesis during development and in the adult dentate gyrus of mice J Cell Sci 2014 127 641 652 24338367
53 Mukherjee S Brulet R Zhang L Hsieh J REST regulation of gene networks in adult neural stem cells Nat Commun 2016 7 13360 27819263
54 Gao Z Ure K Ding P Nashaat M Yuan L Ma J The master negative regulator REST/NRSF controls adult neurogenesis by restraining the neurogenic program in quiescent stem cells J Neurosci 2011 31 9772 9786 21715642
55 Favaro R Valotta M Ferri AL Latorre E Mariani J Giachino C Hippocampal development and neural stem cell maintenance require Sox2-dependent regulation of Shh Nat Neurosci 2009 12 1248 1256 19734891
56 Renault VM Rafalski VA Morgan AA Salih DA Brett JO Webb AE FoxO3 regulates neural stem cell homeostasis Cell Stem Cell 2009 5 527 539 19896443
57 Rolando C Erni A Grison A Beattie R Engler A Gokhale PJ Multipotency of Adult Hippocampal NSCs In Vivo Is Restricted by Drosha/NFIB Cell Stem Cell 2016 19 653 662 27545503
58 Urban N van den Berg DL Forget A Andersen J Demmers JA Hunt C Return to quiescence of mouse neural stem cells by degradation of a proactivation protein Science 2016 353 292 295 27418510
59 Andersen J Urban N Achimastou A Ito A Simic M Ullom K A transcriptional mechanism integrating inputs from extracellular signals to activate hippocampal stem cells Neuron 2014 83 1085 1097 25189209
60 Amador-Arjona A Cimadamore F Huang CT Wright R Lewis S Gage FH SOX2 primes the epigenetic landscape in neural precursors enabling proper gene activation during hippocampal neurogenesis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015 112 E1936 1945 25825708
61 Shi Y Chichung Lie D Taupin P Nakashima K Ray J Yu RT Expression and function of orphan nuclear receptor TLX in adult neural stem cells Nature 2004 427 78 83 14702088
62 Zhang CL Zou Y He W Gage FH Evans RM A role for adult TLX-positive neural stem cells in learning and behaviour Nature 2008 451 1004 1007 18235445
63 Shimozaki K Zhang CL Suh H Denli AM Evans RM Gage FH SRY-box-containing gene 2 regulation of nuclear receptor tailless (Tlx) transcription in adult neural stem cells J Biol Chem 2012 287 5969 5978 22194602
64 Kim HJ Denli AM Wright R Baul TD Clemenson GD Morcos AS REST Regulates Non-Cell-Autonomous Neuronal Differentiation and Maturation of Neural Progenitor Cells via Secretogranin II J Neurosci 2015 35 14872 14884 26538656
65 Jessberger S Toni N Clemenson GD Jr Ray J Gage FH Directed differentiation of hippocampal stem/progenitor cells in the adult brain Nat Neurosci 2008 11 888 893 18587391
66 Hodge RD Nelson BR Kahoud RJ Yang R Mussar KE Reiner SL Tbr2 is essential for hippocampal lineage progression from neural stem cells to intermediate progenitors and neurons J Neurosci 2012 32 6275 6287 22553033
67 Ozen I Galichet C Watts C Parras C Guillemot F Raineteau O Proliferating neuronal progenitors in the postnatal hippocampus transiently express the proneural gene Ngn2 Eur J Neurosci 2007 25 2591 2603 17466019
68 Galichet C Guillemot F Parras CM Neurogenin 2 has an essential role in development of the dentate gyrus Development 2008 135 2031 2041 18448566
69 Iwano T Masuda A Kiyonari H Enomoto H Matsuzaki F Prox1 postmitotically defines dentate gyrus cells by specifying granule cell identity over CA3 pyramidal cell fate in the hippocampus Development 2012 139 3051 3062 22791897
70 Yu DX Di Giorgio FP Yao J Marchetto MC Brennand K Wright R Modeling hippocampal neurogenesis using human pluripotent stem cells Stem Cell Reports 2014 2 295 310 24672753
71 Nakagawa S Kim JE Lee R Chen J Fujioka T Malberg J Localization of phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein in immature neurons of adult hippocampus J Neurosci 2002 22 9868 9876 12427843
72 Jagasia R Steib K Englberger E Herold S Faus-Kessler T Saxe M GABA-cAMP response element-binding protein signaling regulates maturation and survival of newly generated neurons in the adult hippocampus J Neurosci 2009 29 7966 7977 19553437
73 Scobie KN Hall BJ Wilke SA Klemenhagen KC Fujii-Kuriyama Y Ghosh A Kruppel-like factor 9 is necessary for late-phase neuronal maturation in the developing dentate gyrus and during adult hippocampal neurogenesis J Neurosci 2009 29 9875 9887 19657039
74 Ma DK Jang MH Guo JU Kitabatake Y Chang ML Pow-Anpongkul N Neuronal activity-induced Gadd45b promotes epigenetic DNA demethylation and adult neurogenesis Science 2009 323 1074 1077 19119186
75 Zhang RR Cui QY Murai K Lim YC Smith ZD Jin S Tet1 regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis and cognition Cell Stem Cell 2013 13 237 245 23770080
76 Szulwach KE Li X Smrt RD Li Y Luo Y Lin L Cross talk between microRNA and epigenetic regulation in adult neurogenesis J Cell Biol 2010 189 127 141 20368621
77 Jin J Kim SN Liu X Zhang H Zhang C Seo JS miR-17-92 Cluster Regulates Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis, Anxiety, and Depression Cell Rep 2016 16 1653 1663 27477270
78 Toda T Hsu JY Linker SB Hu L Schafer ST Mertens J Nup153 Interacts with Sox2 to Enable Bimodal Gene Regulation and Maintenance of Neural Progenitor Cells Cell Stem Cell 2017 21 618 634 e617 28919367
79 Li X Barkho BZ Luo Y Smrt RD Santistevan NJ Liu C Epigenetic regulation of the stem cell mitogen Fgf-2 by Mbd1 in adult neural stem/progenitor cells J Biol Chem 2008 283 27644 27652 18689796
80 Liu C Teng ZQ Santistevan NJ Szulwach KE Guo W Jin P Epigenetic regulation of miR-184 by MBD1 governs neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation Cell Stem Cell 2010 6 433 444 20452318
81 Liu C Teng ZQ McQuate AL Jobe EM Christ CC von Hoyningen-Huene SJ An epigenetic feedback regulatory loop involving microRNA-195 and MBD1 governs neural stem cell differentiation PLoS One 2013 8 e51436 23349673
82 Zhao X Ueba T Christie BR Barkho B McConnell MJ Nakashima K Mice lacking methyl-CpG binding protein 1 have deficits in adult neurogenesis and hippocampal function Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 6777 6782 12748381
83 Muotri AR Marchetto MC Coufal NG Oefner R Yeo G Nakashima K L1 retrotransposition in neurons is modulated by MeCP2 Nature 2010 468 443 446 21085180
84 Jawerka M Colak D Dimou L Spiller C Lagger S Montgomery RL The specific role of histone deacetylase 2 in adult neurogenesis Neuron Glia Biol 2010 6 93 107 20388229
85 Ballas N Grunseich C Lu DD Speh JC Mandel G REST and its corepressors mediate plasticity of neuronal gene chromatin throughout neurogenesis Cell 2005 121 645 657 15907476
86 Li H Zhong X Chau KF Santistevan NJ Guo W Kong G Cell cycle-linked MeCP2 phosphorylation modulates adult neurogenesis involving the Notch signalling pathway Nat Commun 2014 5 5601 25420914
87 Tsujimura K Irie K Nakashima H Egashira Y Fukao Y Fujiwara M miR-199a Links MeCP2 with mTOR Signaling and Its Dysregulation Leads to Rett Syndrome Phenotypes Cell Rep 2015 12 1887 1901 26344767
88 Smrt RD Eaves-Egenes J Barkho BZ Santistevan NJ Zhao C Aimone JB Mecp2 deficiency leads to delayed maturation and altered gene expression in hippocampal neurons Neurobiol Dis 2007 27 77 89 17532643
89 Han J Kim HJ Schafer ST Paquola A Clemenson GD Toda T Functional Implications of miR-19 in the Migration of Newborn Neurons in the Adult Brain Neuron 2016 91 79 89 27387650
90 Magill ST Cambronne XA Luikart BW Lioy DT Leighton BH Westbrook GL microRNA-132 regulates dendritic growth and arborization of newborn neurons in the adult hippocampus Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 20382 20387 21059906
91 Song J Zhong C Bonaguidi MA Sun GJ Hsu D Gu Y Neuronal circuitry mechanism regulating adult quiescent neural stem-cell fate decision Nature 2012 489 150 154 22842902
92 Song J Sun J Moss J Wen Z Sun GJ Hsu D Parvalbumin interneurons mediate neuronal circuitry-neurogenesis coupling in the adult hippocampus Nat Neurosci 2013 16 1728 1730 24212671
93 Dumitru I Neitz A Alfonso J Monyer H Diazepam Binding Inhibitor Promotes Stem Cell Expansion Controlling Environment-Dependent Neurogenesis Neuron 2017 94 125 137 e125 28343864
94 Parent JM Yu TW Leibowitz RT Geschwind DH Sloviter RS Lowenstein DH Dentate granule cell neurogenesis is increased by seizures and contributes to aberrant network reorganization in the adult rat hippocampus J Neurosci 1997 17 3727 3738 9133393
95 Sierra A Martin-Suarez S Valcarcel-Martin R Pascual-Brazo J Aelvoet SA Abiega O Neuronal hyperactivity accelerates depletion of neural stem cells and impairs hippocampal neurogenesis Cell Stem Cell 2015 16 488 503 25957904
96 Giachino C Barz M Tchorz JS Tome M Gassmann M Bischofberger J GABA suppresses neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus through GABAB receptors Development 2014 141 83 90 24284211
97 Tozuka Y Fukuda S Namba T Seki T Hisatsune T GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal progenitor cells Neuron 2005 47 803 815 16157276
98 Deisseroth K Singla S Toda H Monje M Palmer TD Malenka RC Excitation-neurogenesis coupling in adult neural stem/progenitor cells Neuron 2004 42 535 552 15157417
99 Park JH Enikolopov G Transient elevation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis after dopamine depletion Exp Neurol 2010 222 267 276 20079351
100 David DJ Samuels BA Rainer Q Wang JW Marsteller D Mendez I Neurogenesis-dependent and -independent effects of fluoxetine in an animal model of anxiety/depression Neuron 2009 62 479 493 19477151
101 Jhaveri DJ O’Keeffe I Robinson GJ Zhao QY Zhang ZH Nink V Purification of neural precursor cells reveals the presence of distinct, stimulus-specific subpopulations of quiescent precursors in the adult mouse hippocampus J Neurosci 2015 35 8132 8144 26019330
102 Cooper-Kuhn CM Winkler J Kuhn HG Decreased neurogenesis after cholinergic forebrain lesion in the adult rat J Neurosci Res 2004 77 155 165 15211583
103 Harrist A Beech RD King SL Zanardi A Cleary MA Caldarone BJ Alteration of hippocampal cell proliferation in mice lacking the beta 2 subunit of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor Synapse 2004 54 200 206 15472930
104 Itou Y Nochi R Kuribayashi H Saito Y Hisatsune T Cholinergic activation of hippocampal neural stem cells in aged dentate gyrus Hippocampus 2011 21 446 459 20054812
105 Mohapel P Leanza G Kokaia M Lindvall O Forebrain acetylcholine regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis and learning Neurobiol Aging 2005 26 939 946 15718053
106 Dominguez-Escriba L Hernandez-Rabaza V Soriano-Navarro M Barcia JA Romero FJ Garcia-Verdugo JM Chronic cocaine exposure impairs progenitor proliferation but spares survival and maturation of neural precursors in adult rat dentate gyrus Eur J Neurosci 2006 24 586 594 16903860
107 Ge S Goh EL Sailor KA Kitabatake Y Ming GL Song H GABA regulates synaptic integration of newly generated neurons in the adult brain Nature 2006 439 589 593 16341203
108 Heigele S Sultan S Toni N Bischofberger J Bidirectional GABAergic control of action potential firing in newborn hippocampal granule cells Nat Neurosci 2016 19 263 270 26752162
109 Temprana SG Mongiat LA Yang SM Trinchero MF Alvarez DD Kropff E Delayed coupling to feedback inhibition during a critical period for the integration of adult-born granule cells Neuron 2015 85 116 130 25533485
110 Overstreet Wadiche L Bromberg DA Bensen AL Westbrook GL GABAergic signaling to newborn neurons in dentate gyrus J Neurophysiol 2005 94 4528 4532 16033936
111 Ge S Yang CH Hsu KS Ming GL Song H A critical period for enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated neurons of the adult brain Neuron 2007 54 559 566 17521569
112 Vivar C Potter MC Choi J Lee JY Stringer TP Callaway EM Monosynaptic inputs to new neurons in the dentate gyrus Nat Commun 2012 3 1107 23033083
113 Deshpande A Bergami M Ghanem A Conzelmann KK Lepier A Gotz M Retrograde monosynaptic tracing reveals the temporal evolution of inputs onto new neurons in the adult dentate gyrus and olfactory bulb Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 E1152 1161 23487772
114 Bergami M Masserdotti G Temprana SG Motori E Eriksson TM Gobel J A critical period for experience-dependent remodeling of adult-born neuron connectivity Neuron 2015 85 710 717 25661179
115 Toni N Teng EM Bushong EA Aimone JB Zhao C Consiglio A Synapse formation on neurons born in the adult hippocampus Nat Neurosci 2007 10 727 734 17486101
116 Sultan S Li L Moss J Petrelli F Casse F Gebara E Synaptic Integration of Adult-Born Hippocampal Neurons Is Locally Controlled by Astrocytes Neuron 2015 88 957 972 26606999
117 Kaneko N Okano H Sawamoto K Role of the cholinergic system in regulating survival of newborn neurons in the adult mouse dentate gyrus and olfactory bulb Genes Cells 2006 11 1145 1159 16999735
118 Campbell NR Fernandes CC Halff AW Berg DK Endogenous signaling through alpha7-containing nicotinic receptors promotes maturation and integration of adult-born neurons in the hippocampus J Neurosci 2010 30 8734 8744 20592195
119 Mu Y Zhao C Gage FH Dopaminergic modulation of cortical inputs during maturation of adult-born dentate granule cells J Neurosci 2011 31 4113 4123 21411652
120 van Praag H Kempermann G Gage FH Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus Nat Neurosci 1999 2 266 270 10195220
121 Tashiro A Sandler VM Toni N Zhao C Gage FH NMDA-receptor-mediated, cell-specific integration of new neurons in adult dentate gyrus Nature 2006 442 929 933 16906136
122 Tashiro A Makino H Gage FH Experience-specific functional modification of the dentate gyrus through adult neurogenesis: a critical period during an immature stage J Neurosci 2007 27 3252 3259 17376985
123 Alvarez DD Giacomini D Yang SM Trinchero MF Temprana SG Buttner KA A disynaptic feedback network activated by experience promotes the integration of new granule cells Science 2016 354 459 465 27789840
124 Jessberger S Kempermann G Adult-born hippocampal neurons mature into activity-dependent responsiveness Eur J Neurosci 2003 18 2707 2712 14656319
125 Chancey JH Adlaf EW Sapp MC Pugh PC Wadiche JI Overstreet-Wadiche LS GABA depolarization is required for experience-dependent synapse unsilencing in adult-born neurons J Neurosci 2013 33 6614 6622 23575858
126 Piatti VC Davies-Sala MG Esposito MS Mongiat LA Trinchero MF Schinder AF The timing for neuronal maturation in the adult hippocampus is modulated by local network activity J Neurosci 2011 31 7715 7728 21613484
127 Goncalves JT Bloyd CW Shtrahman M Johnston ST Schafer ST Parylak SL In vivo imaging of dendritic pruning in dentate granule cells Nat Neurosci 2016 19 788 791 27135217
128 Kirschen GW Shen J Tian M Schroeder B Wang J Man G Active Dentate Granule Cells Encode Experience to Promote the Addition of Adult-Born Hippocampal Neurons J Neurosci 2017 37 4661 4678 28373391
129 Kee N Teixeira CM Wang AH Frankland PW Preferential incorporation of adult-generated granule cells into spatial memory networks in the dentate gyrus Nat Neurosci 2007 10 355 362 17277773
130 Vivar C Peterson BD van Praag H Running rewires the neuronal network of adult-born dentate granule cells Neuroimage 2016 131 29 41 26589333
131 Snyder JS Soumier A Brewer M Pickel J Cameron HA Adult hippocampal neurogenesis buffers stress responses and depressive behaviour Nature 2011 476 458 461 21814201
132 Gould E McEwen BS Tanapat P Galea LA Fuchs E Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult tree shrew is regulated by psychosocial stress and NMDA receptor activation J Neurosci 1997 17 2492 2498 9065509
133 Montero-Pedrazuela A Venero C Lavado-Autric R Fernandez-Lamo I Garcia-Verdugo JM Bernal J Modulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis by thyroid hormones: implications in depressive-like behavior Mol Psychiatry 2006 11 361 371 16446739
134 Esposito MS Piatti VC Laplagne DA Morgenstern NA Ferrari CC Pitossi FJ Neuronal differentiation in the adult hippocampus recapitulates embryonic development J Neurosci 2005 25 10074 10086 16267214
135 Ming GL Song H Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain: significant answers and significant questions Neuron 2011 70 687 702 21609825
136 Faulkner RL Jang MH Liu XB Duan X Sailor KA Kim JY Development of hippocampal mossy fiber synaptic outputs by new neurons in the adult brain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 14157 14162 18780780
137 Toni N Laplagne DA Zhao C Lombardi G Ribak CE Gage FH Neurons born in the adult dentate gyrus form functional synapses with target cells Nat Neurosci 2008 11 901 907 18622400
138 Restivo L Niibori Y Mercaldo V Josselyn SA Frankland PW Development of Adult-Generated Cell Connectivity with Excitatory and Inhibitory Cell Populations in the Hippocampus J Neurosci 2015 35 10600 10612 26203153
139 Marin-Burgin A Mongiat LA Pardi MB Schinder AF Unique processing during a period of high excitation/inhibition balance in adult-born neurons Science 2012 335 1238 1242 22282476
140 Schmidt-Hieber C Jonas P Bischofberger J Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus Nature 2004 429 184 187 15107864
141 Mongiat LA Esposito MS Lombardi G Schinder AF Reliable activation of immature neurons in the adult hippocampus PLoS One 2009 4 e5320 19399173
142 Danielson NB Kaifosh P Zaremba JD Lovett-Barron M Tsai J Denny CA Distinct Contribution of Adult-Born Hippocampal Granule Cells to Context Encoding Neuron 2016 90 101 112 26971949
143 Stone SS Teixeira CM Zaslavsky K Wheeler AL Martinez-Canabal A Wang AH Functional convergence of developmentally and adult-generated granule cells in dentate gyrus circuits supporting hippocampus-dependent memory Hippocampus 2011 21 1348 1362 20824726
144 Dieni CV Nietz AK Panichi R Wadiche JI Overstreet-Wadiche L Distinct determinants of sparse activation during granule cell maturation J Neurosci 2013 33 19131 19142 24305810
145 Ikrar T Guo N He K Besnard A Levinson S Hill A Adult neurogenesis modifies excitability of the dentate gyrus Front Neural Circuits 2013 7 204 24421758
146 Burghardt NS Park EH Hen R Fenton AA Adult-born hippocampal neurons promote cognitive flexibility in mice Hippocampus 2012 22 1795 1808 22431384
147 Drew LJ Kheirbek MA Luna VM Denny CA Cloidt MA Wu MV Activation of local inhibitory circuits in the dentate gyrus by adult-born neurons Hippocampus 2016 26 763 778 26662922
148 McAvoy KM Scobie KN Berger S Russo C Guo N Decharatanachart P Modulating Neuronal Competition Dynamics in the Dentate Gyrus to Rejuvenate Aging Memory Circuits Neuron 2016 91 1356 1373 27593178
149 Niibori Y Yu TS Epp JR Akers KG Josselyn SA Frankland PW Suppression of adult neurogenesis impairs population coding of similar contexts in hippocampal CA3 region Nat Commun 2012 3 1253 23212382
150 Adlaf EW Vaden RJ Niver AJ Manuel AF Onyilo VC Araujo MT Adult-born neurons modify excitatory synaptic transmission to existing neurons Elife 2017 6
151 Marr D Simple memory: a theory for archicortex Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1971 262 23 81 4399412
152 Rolls ET Kesner RP A computational theory of hippocampal function, and empirical tests of the theory Prog Neurobiol 2006 79 1 48 16781044
153 Jung HJ Lee JM Yang SH Young SG Fong LG Nuclear lamins in the brain - new insights into function and regulation Mol Neurobiol 2013 47 290 301 23065386
154 Jung MW McNaughton BL Spatial selectivity of unit activity in the hippocampal granular layer Hippocampus 1993 3 165 182
155 Chawla MK Guzowski JF Ramirez-Amaya V Lipa P Hoffman KL Marriott LK Sparse, environmentally selective expression of Arc RNA in the upper blade of the rodent fascia dentata by brief spatial experience Hippocampus 2005 15 579 586 15920719
156 Leutgeb JK Leutgeb S Moser MB Moser EI Pattern separation in the dentate gyrus and CA3 of the hippocampus Science 2007 315 961 966 17303747
157 Deng W Mayford M Gage FH Selection of distinct populations of dentate granule cells in response to inputs as a mechanism for pattern separation in mice Elife 2013 2 e00312 23538967
158 McNaughton BL Morris RG Hippocampal synaptic enhancement and information storage within a distributed memory system Trends in neurosciences 1987 10 408 415
159 Tronel S Belnoue L Grosjean N Revest JM Piazza PV Koehl M Adult-born neurons are necessary for extended contextual discrimination Hippocampus 2012 22 292 298 21049483
160 Nakashiba T Cushman JD Pelkey KA Renaudineau S Buhl DL McHugh TJ Young dentate granule cells mediate pattern separation, whereas old granule cells facilitate pattern completion Cell 2012 149 188 201 22365813
161 Clelland CD Choi M Romberg C Clemenson GD Jr Fragniere A Tyers P A functional role for adult hippocampal neurogenesis in spatial pattern separation Science 2009 325 210 213 19590004
162 Bekinschtein P Kent BA Oomen CA Clemenson GD Gage FH Saksida LM Brain-derived neurotrophic factor interacts with adult-born immature cells in the dentate gyrus during consolidation of overlapping memories Hippocampus 2014 24 905 911 24825389
163 Garthe A Behr J Kempermann G Adult-generated hippocampal neurons allow the flexible use of spatially precise learning strategies PLoS One 2009 4 e5464 19421325
164 Park EH Burghardt NS Dvorak D Hen R Fenton AA Experience-Dependent Regulation of Dentate Gyrus Excitability by Adult-Born Granule Cells J Neurosci 2015 35 11656 11666 26290242
165 Swan AA Clutton JE Chary PK Cook SG Liu GG Drew MR Characterization of the role of adult neurogenesis in touch-screen discrimination learning Hippocampus 2014 24 1581 1591 25074617
166 Creer DJ Romberg C Saksida LM van Praag H Bussey TJ Running enhances spatial pattern separation in mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 2367 2372 20133882
167 Sahay A Scobie KN Hill AS O’Carroll CM Kheirbek MA Burghardt NS Increasing adult hippocampal neurogenesis is sufficient to improve pattern separation Nature 2011 472 466 470 21460835
168 Franca TFA Bitencourt AM Maximilla NR Barros DM Monserrat JM Hippocampal neurogenesis and pattern separation: A meta-analysis of behavioral data Hippocampus 2017 27 937 950 28597491
169 Deng W Saxe MD Gallina IS Gage FH Adult-born hippocampal dentate granule cells undergoing maturation modulate learning and memory in the brain J Neurosci 2009 29 13532 13542 19864566
170 Jessberger S Clark RE Broadbent NJ Clemenson GD Jr Consiglio A Lie DC Dentate gyrus-specific knockdown of adult neurogenesis impairs spatial and object recognition memory in adult rats Learn Mem 2009 16 147 154 19181621
171 Dupret D Revest JM Koehl M Ichas F De Giorgi F Costet P Spatial relational memory requires hippocampal adult neurogenesis PLoS One 2008 3 e1959 18509506
172 Wojtowicz JM Askew ML Winocur G The effects of running and of inhibiting adult neurogenesis on learning and memory in rats Eur J Neurosci 2008 27 1494 1502 18364025
173 Denny CA Burghardt NS Schachter DM Hen R Drew MR 4- to 6-week-old adult-born hippocampal neurons influence novelty-evoked exploration and contextual fear conditioning Hippocampus 2012 22 1188 1201 21739523
174 Clemenson GD Lee SW Deng W Barrera VR Iwamoto KS Fanselow MS Enrichment rescues contextual discrimination deficit associated with immediate shock Hippocampus 2015 25 385 392 25330953
175 Denny CA Kheirbek MA Alba EL Tanaka KF Brachman RA Laughman KB Hippocampal memory traces are differentially modulated by experience, time, and adult neurogenesis Neuron 2014 83 189 201 24991962
176 Aimone JB Computational Modeling of Adult Neurogenesis Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2016 8 a018960 26933191
177 Besnard A Sahay A Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis, Fear Generalization, and Stress Neuropsychopharmacology 2016 41 24 44 26068726
178 Luu P Sill OC Gao L Becker S Wojtowicz JM Smith DM The role of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in reducing interference Behav Neurosci 2012 126 381 391 22642883
179 Becker S Neurogenesis and pattern separation: time for a divorce Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci 2017 8
180 Akers KG Martinez-Canabal A Restivo L Yiu AP De Cristofaro A Hsiang HL Hippocampal neurogenesis regulates forgetting during adulthood and infancy Science 2014 344 598 602 24812394
181 Epp JR Silva Mera R Kohler S Josselyn SA Frankland PW Neurogenesis-mediated forgetting minimizes proactive interference Nat Commun 2016 7 10838 26917323
182 Encinas JM Michurina TV Peunova N Park JH Tordo J Peterson DA Division-coupled astrocytic differentiation and age-related depletion of neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus Cell Stem Cell 2011 8 566 579 21549330
183 Aizawa K Ageyama N Yokoyama C Hisatsune T Age-dependent alteration in hippocampal neurogenesis correlates with learning performance of macaque monkeys Exp Anim 2009 58 403 407 19654438
184 Amrein I Isler K Lipp HP Comparing adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mammalian species and orders: influence of chronological age and life history stage Eur J Neurosci 2011 34 978 987 21929629
185 Patzke N Spocter MA Karlsson KAE Bertelsen MF Haagensen M Chawana R In contrast to many other mammals, cetaceans have relatively small hippocampi that appear to lack adult neurogenesis Brain Struct Funct 2015 220 361 383 24178679
186 Dennis CV Suh LS Rodriguez ML Kril JJ Sutherland GT Human adult neurogenesis across the ages: An immunohistochemical study Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2016 42 621 638 27424496
187 Yassa MA Mattfeld AT Stark SM Stark CE Age-related memory deficits linked to circuit-specific disruptions in the hippocampus Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108 8873 8878 21555581
188 Yassa MA Lacy JW Stark SM Albert MS Gallagher M Stark CE Pattern separation deficits associated with increased hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus activity in nondemented older adults Hippocampus 2011 21 968 979 20865732
189 Manganas LN Zhang X Li Y Hazel RD Smith SD Wagshul ME Magnetic resonance spectroscopy identifies neural progenitor cells in the live human brain Science 2007 318 980 985 17991865
190 Tamura Y Takahashi K Takata K Eguchi A Yamato M Kume S Noninvasive Evaluation of Cellular Proliferative Activity in Brain Neurogenic Regions in Rats under Depression and Treatment by Enhanced [18F]FLT-PET Imaging J Neurosci 2016 36 8123 8131 27488633
191 Kempermann G Kuhn HG Gage FH Experience-induced neurogenesis in the senescent dentate gyrus J Neurosci 1998 18 3206 3212 9547229
192 Kempermann G Gast D Gage FH Neuroplasticity in old age: sustained fivefold induction of hippocampal neurogenesis by long-term environmental enrichment Ann Neurol 2002 52 135 143 12210782
193 van Praag H Shubert T Zhao C Gage FH Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice J Neurosci 2005 25 8680 8685 16177036
194 Meyers EA Gobeske KT Bond AM Jarrett JC Peng CY Kessler JA Increased bone morphogenetic protein signaling contributes to age-related declines in neurogenesis and cognition Neurobiol Aging 2016 38 164 175 26827654
195 Yousef H Morgenthaler A Schlesinger C Bugaj L Conboy IM Schaffer DV Age-Associated Increase in BMP Signaling Inhibits Hippocampal Neurogenesis Stem Cells 2015 33 1577 1588 25538007
196 Huh GS Boulanger LM Du H Riquelme PA Brotz TM Shatz CJ Functional requirement for class I MHC in CNS development and plasticity Science 2000 290 2155 2159 11118151
197 Corriveau RA Huh GS Shatz CJ Regulation of class I MHC gene expression in the developing and mature CNS by neural activity Neuron 1998 21 505 520 9768838
198 Villeda SA Plambeck KE Middeldorp J Castellano JM Mosher KI Luo J Young blood reverses age-related impairments in cognitive function and synaptic plasticity in mice Nat Med 2014 20 659 663 24793238
199 Sasaguri H Nilsson P Hashimoto S Nagata K Saito T De Strooper B APP mouse models for Alzheimer’s disease preclinical studies EMBO J 2017 36 2473 2487 28768718
200 Khan UA Liu L Provenzano FA Berman DE Profaci CP Sloan R Molecular drivers and cortical spread of lateral entorhinal cortex dysfunction in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Nat Neurosci 2014 17 304 311 24362760
201 Boekhoorn K Joels M Lucassen PJ Increased proliferation reflects glial and vascular-associated changes, but not neurogenesis in the presenile Alzheimer hippocampus Neurobiol Dis 2006 24 1 14 16814555
202 Crews L Adame A Patrick C Delaney A Pham E Rockenstein E Increased BMP6 levels in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients and APP transgenic mice are accompanied by impaired neurogenesis J Neurosci 2010 30 12252 12262 20844121
203 Li B Yamamori H Tatebayashi Y Shafit-Zagardo B Tanimukai H Chen S Failure of neuronal maturation in Alzheimer disease dentate gyrus J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2008 67 78 84 18091557
204 Jin K Peel AL Mao XO Xie L Cottrell BA Henshall DC Increased hippocampal neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 343 347 14660786
205 Feng R Rampon C Tang YP Shrom D Jin J Kyin M Deficient neurogenesis in forebrain-specific presenilin-1 knockout mice is associated with reduced clearance of hippocampal memory traces Neuron 2001 32 911 926 11738035
206 Haughey NJ Nath A Chan SL Borchard AC Rao MS Mattson MP Disruption of neurogenesis by amyloid beta-peptide, and perturbed neural progenitor cell homeostasis, in models of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 2002 83 1509 1524 12472904
207 Donovan MH Yazdani U Norris RD Games D German DC Eisch AJ Decreased adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the PDAPP mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Comp Neurol 2006 495 70 83 16432899
208 Dong H Goico B Martin M Csernansky CA Bertchume A Csernansky JG Modulation of hippocampal cell proliferation, memory, and amyloid plaque deposition in APPsw (Tg2576) mutant mice by isolation stress Neuroscience 2004 127 601 609 15283960
209 Wang R Dineley KT Sweatt JD Zheng H Presenilin 1 familial Alzheimer’s disease mutation leads to defective associative learning and impaired adult neurogenesis Neuroscience 2004 126 305 312 15207348
210 Rodriguez JJ Jones VC Tabuchi M Allan SM Knight EM LaFerla FM Impaired adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 2008 3 e2935 18698410
211 Zhang C McNeil E Dressler L Siman R Long-lasting impairment in hippocampal neurogenesis associated with amyloid deposition in a knock-in mouse model of familial Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 2007 204 77 87 17070803
212 Mirochnic S Wolf S Staufenbiel M Kempermann G Age effects on the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis by physical activity and environmental enrichment in the APP23 mouse model of Alzheimer disease Hippocampus 2009 19 1008 1018 19219917
213 Hoglinger GU Rizk P Muriel MP Duyckaerts C Oertel WH Caille I Dopamine depletion impairs precursor cell proliferation in Parkinson disease Nat Neurosci 2004 7 726 735 15195095
214 Winner B Regensburger M Schreglmann S Boyer L Prots I Rockenstein E Role of alpha-synuclein in adult neurogenesis and neuronal maturation in the dentate gyrus J Neurosci 2012 32 16906 16916 23175842
215 Agnihotri SK Shen R Li J Gao X Bueler H Loss of PINK1 leads to metabolic deficits in adult neural stem cells and impedes differentiation of newborn neurons in the mouse hippocampus FASEB J 2017 31 2839 2853 28325755
216 Winner B Lie DC Rockenstein E Aigner R Aigner L Masliah E Human wild-type alpha-synuclein impairs neurogenesis J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2004 63 1155 1166 15581183
217 Nuber S Petrasch-Parwez E Winner B Winkler J von Horsten S Schmidt T Neurodegeneration and motor dysfunction in a conditional model of Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci 2008 28 2471 2484 18322092
218 Crews L Mizuno H Desplats P Rockenstein E Adame A Patrick C Alpha-synuclein alters Notch-1 expression and neurogenesis in mouse embryonic stem cells and in the hippocampus of transgenic mice J Neurosci 2008 28 4250 4260 18417705
219 Santarelli L Saxe M Gross C Surget A Battaglia F Dulawa S Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants Science 2003 301 805 809 12907793
220 Campbell S Marriott M Nahmias C MacQueen GM Lower hippocampal volume in patients suffering from depression: a meta-analysis Am J Psychiatry 2004 161 598 607 15056502
221 Lucassen PJ Stumpel MW Wang Q Aronica E Decreased numbers of progenitor cells but no response to antidepressant drugs in the hippocampus of elderly depressed patients Neuropharmacology 2010 58 940 949 20138063
222 Boldrini M Hen R Underwood MD Rosoklija GB Dwork AJ Mann JJ Hippocampal angiogenesis and progenitor cell proliferation are increased with antidepressant use in major depression Biol Psychiatry 2012 72 562 571 22652019
223 Boldrini M Underwood MD Hen R Rosoklija GB Dwork AJ John Mann J Antidepressants increase neural progenitor cells in the human hippocampus Neuropsychopharmacology 2009 34 2376 2389 19606083
224 Anacker C Zunszain PA Cattaneo A Carvalho LA Garabedian MJ Thuret S Antidepressants increase human hippocampal neurogenesis by activating the glucocorticoid receptor Mol Psychiatry 2011 16 738 750 21483429
225 Perera TD Coplan JD Lisanby SH Lipira CM Arif M Carpio C Antidepressant-induced neurogenesis in the hippocampus of adult nonhuman primates J Neurosci 2007 27 4894 4901 17475797
226 Boldrini M Santiago AN Hen R Dwork AJ Rosoklija GB Tamir H Hippocampal granule neuron number and dentate gyrus volume in antidepressant-treated and untreated major depression Neuropsychopharmacology 2013 38 1068 1077 23303074
227 Surget A Saxe M Leman S Ibarguen-Vargas Y Chalon S Griebel G Drug-dependent requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis in a model of depression and of antidepressant reversal Biol Psychiatry 2008 64 293 301 18406399
228 Huang GJ Bannerman D Flint J Chronic fluoxetine treatment alters behavior, but not adult hippocampal neurogenesis, in BALB/cJ mice Mol Psychiatry 2008 13 119 121 18202694
229 Holick KA Lee DC Hen R Dulawa SC Behavioral effects of chronic fluoxetine in BALB/cJ mice do not require adult hippocampal neurogenesis or the serotonin 1A receptor Neuropsychopharmacology 2008 33 406 417 17429410
230 Coe CL Kramer M Czeh B Gould E Reeves AJ Kirschbaum C Prenatal stress diminishes neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of juvenile rhesus monkeys Biol Psychiatry 2003 54 1025 1034 14625144
231 Gould E Tanapat P McEwen BS Flugge G Fuchs E Proliferation of granule cell precursors in the dentate gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by stress Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 95 3168 3171 9501234
232 Tanti A Rainer Q Minier F Surget A Belzung C Differential environmental regulation of neurogenesis along the septo-temporal axis of the hippocampus Neuropharmacology 2012 63 374 384 22561281
233 Cameron HA Gould E Adult neurogenesis is regulated by adrenal steroids in the dentate gyrus Neuroscience 1994 61 203 209 7969902
234 Bessa JM Ferreira D Melo I Marques F Cerqueira JJ Palha JA The mood-improving actions of antidepressants do not depend on neurogenesis but are associated with neuronal remodeling Mol Psychiatry 2009 14 764 773 739 18982002
235 Surget A Tanti A Leonardo ED Laugeray A Rainer Q Touma C Antidepressants recruit new neurons to improve stress response regulation Mol Psychiatry 2011 16 1177 1188 21537331
236 Hill AS Sahay A Hen R Increasing Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis is Sufficient to Reduce Anxiety and Depression-Like Behaviors Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 2368 2378 25833129
237 Revest JM Dupret D Koehl M Funk-Reiter C Grosjean N Piazza PV Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is involved in anxiety-related behaviors Mol Psychiatry 2009 14 959 967 19255582
238 Tsai CY Tsai CY Arnold SJ Huang GJ Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis in mice impairs the response to stress during the dark cycle Nat Commun 2015 6 8373 26415720
239 Saxe MD Battaglia F Wang JW Malleret G David DJ Monckton JE Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis impairs contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 17501 17506 17088541
240 Kitamura T Saitoh Y Takashima N Murayama A Niibori Y Ageta H Adult neurogenesis modulates the hippocampus-dependent period of associative fear memory Cell 2009 139 814 827 19914173
241 Deng W Gage FH The effect of immature adult-born dentate granule cells on hyponeophagial behavior is related to their roles in learning and memory Front Syst Neurosci 2015 9 34 25798094
242 Okuyama T Kitamura T Roy DS Itohara S Tonegawa S Ventral CA1 neurons store social memory Science 2016 353 1536 1541 27708103
243 Kheirbek MA Drew LJ Burghardt NS Costantini DO Tannenholz L Ahmari SE Differential control of learning and anxiety along the dorsoventral axis of the dentate gyrus Neuron 2013 77 955 968 23473324
244 Ally BA Hussey EP Ko PC Molitor RJ Pattern separation and pattern completion in Alzheimer’s disease: evidence of rapid forgetting in amnestic mild cognitive impairment Hippocampus 2013 23 1246 1258 23804525
245 Huffman DJ Stark CE Age-related impairment on a forced-choice version of the Mnemonic Similarity Task Behav Neurosci 2017 131 55 67 28004951
246 Pereira Dias G Hollywood R Bevilaqua MC da Luz AC Hindges R Nardi AE Consequences of cancer treatments on adult hippocampal neurogenesis: implications for cognitive function and depressive symptoms Neuro Oncol 2014 16 476 492 24470543
247 Parent JM Elliott RC Pleasure SJ Barbaro NM Lowenstein DH Aberrant seizure-induced neurogenesis in experimental temporal lobe epilepsy Ann Neurol 2006 59 81 91 16261566
248 Jessberger S Romer B Babu H Kempermann G Seizures induce proliferation and dispersion of doublecortin-positive hippocampal progenitor cells Exp Neurol 2005 196 342 351 16168988
249 Bengzon J Kokaia Z Elmer E Nanobashvili A Kokaia M Lindvall O Apoptosis and proliferation of dentate gyrus neurons after single and intermittent limbic seizures Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94 10432 10437 9294228
250 Blumcke I Schewe JC Normann S Brustle O Schramm J Elger CE Increase of nestin-immunoreactive neural precursor cells in the dentate gyrus of pediatric patients with early-onset temporal lobe epilepsy Hippocampus 2001 11 311 321 11769312
251 Huttmann K Sadgrove M Wallraff A Hinterkeuser S Kirchhoff F Steinhauser C Seizures preferentially stimulate proliferation of radial glia-like astrocytes in the adult dentate gyrus: functional and immunocytochemical analysis Eur J Neurosci 2003 18 2769 2778 14656326
252 Hattiangady B Rao MS Shetty AK Chronic temporal lobe epilepsy is associated with severely declined dentate neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus Neurobiol Dis 2004 17 473 490 15571983
253 Ribak CE Tran PH Spigelman I Okazaki MM Nadler JV Status epilepticus-induced hilar basal dendrites on rodent granule cells contribute to recurrent excitatory circuitry J Comp Neurol 2000 428 240 253 11064364
254 Shapiro LA Ribak CE Newly born dentate granule neurons after pilocarpine-induced epilepsy have hilar basal dendrites with immature synapses Epilepsy Res 2006 69 53 66 16480853
255 Scharfman HE Goodman JH Sollas AL Granule-like neurons at the hilar/CA3 border after status epilepticus and their synchrony with area CA3 pyramidal cells: functional implications of seizure-induced neurogenesis J Neurosci 2000 20 6144 6158 10934264
256 Gong C Wang TW Huang HS Parent JM Reelin regulates neuronal progenitor migration in intact and epileptic hippocampus J Neurosci 2007 27 1803 1811 17314278
257 Overstreet-Wadiche LS Bromberg DA Bensen AL Westbrook GL Seizures accelerate functional integration of adult-generated granule cells J Neurosci 2006 26 4095 4103 16611826
258 Pun RY Rolle IJ Lasarge CL Hosford BE Rosen JM Uhl JD Excessive activation of mTOR in postnatally generated granule cells is sufficient to cause epilepsy Neuron 2012 75 1022 1034 22998871
259 Kron MM Zhang H Parent JM The developmental stage of dentate granule cells dictates their contribution to seizure-induced plasticity J Neurosci 2010 30 2051 2059 20147533
260 Jessberger S Zhao C Toni N Clemenson GD Jr Li Y Gage FH Seizure-associated, aberrant neurogenesis in adult rats characterized with retrovirus-mediated cell labeling J Neurosci 2007 27 9400 9407 17728453
261 Cho KO Lybrand ZR Ito N Brulet R Tafacory F Zhang L Aberrant hippocampal neurogenesis contributes to epilepsy and associated cognitive decline Nat Commun 2015 6 6606 25808087
262 Bredenoord AL Clevers H Knoblich JA Human tissues in a dish: The research and ethical implications of organoid technology Science 2017 355 28126774
263 Sakaguchi H Kadoshima T Soen M Narii N Ishida Y Ohgushi M Generation of functional hippocampal neurons from self-organizing human embryonic stem cell-derived dorsomedial telencephalic tissue Nat Commun 2015 6 8896 26573335
264 Rehen SK McConnell MJ Kaushal D Kingsbury MA Yang AH Chun J Chromosomal variation in neurons of the developing and adult mammalian nervous system Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98 13361 13366 11698687
265 Westra JW Peterson SE Yung YC Mutoh T Barral S Chun J Aneuploid mosaicism in the developing and adult cerebellar cortex J Comp Neurol 2008 507 1944 1951 18273885
266 McConnell MJ Moran JV Abyzov A Akbarian S Bae T Cortes-Ciriano I Intersection of diverse neuronal genomes and neuropsychiatric disease: The Brain Somatic Mosaicism Network Science 2017 356
267 Lodato MA Woodworth MB Lee S Evrony GD Mehta BK Karger A Somatic mutation in single human neurons tracks developmental and transcriptional history Science 2015 350 94 98 26430121
268 Kaushal D Contos JJ Treuner K Yang AH Kingsbury MA Rehen SK Alteration of gene expression by chromosome loss in the postnatal mouse brain J Neurosci 2003 23 5599 5606 12843262
269 Knouse KA Wu J Whittaker CA Amon A Single cell sequencing reveals low levels of aneuploidy across mammalian tissues Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 111 13409 13414 25197050
270 van den Bos H Spierings DC Taudt AS Bakker B Porubsky D Falconer E Single-cell whole genome sequencing reveals no evidence for common aneuploidy in normal and Alzheimer’s disease neurons Genome Biol 2016 17 116 27246599
271 Vitak SA Torkenczy KA Rosenkrantz JL Fields AJ Christiansen L Wong MH Sequencing thousands of single-cell genomes with combinatorial indexing Nat Methods 2017 14 302 308 28135258
272 McConnell MJ Kaushal D Yang AH Kingsbury MA Rehen SK Treuner K Failed clearance of aneuploid embryonic neural progenitor cells leads to excess aneuploidy in the Atm-deficient but not the Trp53-deficient adult cerebral cortex J Neurosci 2004 24 8090 8096 15371510
273 Cai X Evrony GD Lehmann HS Elhosary PC Mehta BK Poduri A Single-cell, genome-wide sequencing identifies clonal somatic copy-number variation in the human brain Cell Rep 2014 8 1280 1289 25159146
274 Knouse KA Wu J Amon A Assessment of megabase-scale somatic copy number variation using single-cell sequencing Genome Res 2016 26 376 384 26772196
275 Wei PC Chang AN Kao J Du Z Meyers RM Alt FW Long Neural Genes Harbor Recurrent DNA Break Clusters in Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells Cell 2016 164 644 655 26871630
276 Schwer B Wei PC Chang AN Kao J Du Z Meyers RM Transcription-associated processes cause DNA double-strand breaks and translocations in neural stem/progenitor cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016 113 2258 2263 26873106
277 Muotri AR Chu VT Marchetto MC Deng W Moran JV Gage FH Somatic mosaicism in neuronal precursor cells mediated by L1 retrotransposition Nature 2005 435 903 910 15959507
278 Bundo M Toyoshima M Okada Y Akamatsu W Ueda J Nemoto-Miyauchi T Increased l1 retrotransposition in the neuronal genome in schizophrenia Neuron 2014 81 306 313 24389010
