LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0047061
3650
Exp Gerontol
Exp. Gerontol.
Experimental gerontology
0531-5565
1873-6815

31445108
6744963
10.1016/j.exger.2019.110707
NIHMS1538359
Article
Behavioral and molecular markers of death in Drosophila melanogaster
Tower John 1
Agrawal Siddharth
Alagappan Muthu Palaniappan
Bell Hans S.
Demeter Marton
Havanoor Nitin
Hegde Vinaykumar S.
Jia Yiding 2
Kothawade Suraj
Lin Xinyi
Nadig Chaitanya
Rajashekharappa Naveen S.
Rao Divyashree
Rao Sanjay Subba
Sancheti Prathamesh
Saria Anuj
Shantharamu Nagarabhi H.
Sharma Vatsal
Tadepalli Karthik
Varma Anuj
Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles CA 90089-2910
2 Current address: Hakuhodo Incorporated, Akasaka Biz Tower, 5-3-1 Akasaka, Minato-ku, Tokyo 107-6322, Japan

1 Corresponding author: John Tower, 1050 Childs Way, RRI 201, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2910, jtower@usc.edu
27 8 2019
21 8 2019
15 10 2019
15 10 2020
126 110707110707
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Fly movement was tracked through 3-dimensional (3D) space as the fly died, using either reflected visible light, reflected infrared (IR) light, or fly GFP fluorescence. Behaviors measured included centrophobism, negative geotaxis, velocity, and total activity. In addition, frequency of directional heading changes (FDHC) was calculated as a measure of erratic movement. Nine middle-aged flies were tracked as they died during normal aging, and fifteen young flies were tracked as they died from dehydration/starvation stress. Episodes of increased FDHC were observed 0-8 hours prior to death for the majority of the flies. FDHC was also increased with age in flies with neuronal expression of a human Abeta42 protein fragment associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Finally, green autofluorescence appeared in the eye and body immediately prior to and coincident with death, and fluorescence of GFP targeted to the retina increased immediately prior to and coincident with death. The results suggest the potential utility of FDHC, green autofluorescence, and retinal GFP as markers of neuronal malfunction and imminent death.

death dance
biomarker
seizure
death fluorescence
video tracking
Alzheimer’s disease

1. Introduction

Biomarkers of aging and death have many potential applications in research (Baker and Sprott, 1988; Timmons, 2017). Finding a non-invasive, or at least non-destructive, assay that will better predict remaining life span than does chronological age, has long been a goal of the aging research field. Many physiological parameters and gene expression levels correlate with age in mammals and invertebrates (Helfand and Rogina, 2003; Roy and Chatterjee, 1983; Sierra et al., 1989; Wheeler et al., 1995). In contrast, only a small subset of these measures have been shown to be predictive biomarkers of remaining life span, using longitudinal analysis of individual animals. Among the first predictive biomarkers of remaining life span identified were transgenic reporters derived from genes whose expression increases during aging and upon stress. The promoters of innate immune response genes from Drosophila (Landis et al., 2004) and heat shock protein (Hsp) genes from Drosophila and C. elegans (Rea et al., 2005; Yang and Tower, 2009) were used to drive expression of GFP, and levels of GFP measured in young animals were partly predictive of remaining life span. In C. elegans, red autofluorescence increases with age, and is also partly predictive of remaining life span (Pincus et al., 2016). Behavioral parameters are also useful as biomarkers of remaining life span. Decreased egg-laying and decreased spontaneous movement are partly predictive of remaining life span in Drosophila and C. elegans (Carey et al., 2006; Collins et al., 2008; Mueller et al., 2007; Pickett et al., 2013; Rogina et al., 2007), and in male medflies, supine behavior (fly lying on its back) was predictive of limited remaining life span (Papadopoulos et al., 2002). Similarly, in humans, gait speed is partly predictive of remaining life span (Bair et al., 2019; Studenski et al., 2011). Recently, patterns of DNA methylation in human blood cells have been found to show a striking correlation with biological age, and longitudinal analyses reveal these patterns are a powerful predictor of remaining human life span (Levine et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2019).

There have also been recent successes in identifying biomarkers of death. In C. elegans, a wave of calcium release and body-wall muscle contraction (“death contraction”) moves through the animal coincident with death, with similarities to human rigor mortis (Galimov et al., 2018). Coupled with the death contraction, a wave of necrotic cell death moves through the C. elegans intestinal tissues. The gut cell necrosis in turn causes the release of anthranilic acid from lysosome-related granules in the gut cells (called “gut granules”), resulting in a burst of intense blue fluorescence (Coburn et al., 2013; Coburn and Gems, 2013). The C. elegans gut granules are lysosome-like organelles, with similarities to pigment-containing melanosomes in humans, and eye pigment granules in Drosophila (Marks et al., 2013; Stark et al., 1989). Given the similarities between the C. elegans gut granules and Drosophila eye pigment granules, it was of interest to ask if death fluorescence might be observed in the Drosophila eye. Here we report that proximal to death, Drosophila often exhibit episodes of erratic movement, as marked by increases in FDHC. In addition, green autofluorescence appeared in the eye and body coincident with death, and transgenic GFP fluorescence in the retina increased coincident with death.

2. Materials and Methods

2.1 Drosophila strains and culture

Flies were cultured and maintained at 25°C, using a standard yeast/agar/cornmeal/dextrose media, as previously described (Ren et al., 2009); newly-eclosed flies were collected over a period of 48 hours, male and females were then separated, and maintained at 25°C at ~20 flies per vial in culture vials with food, and transferred to fresh food every other day until assay; in certain experiments flies were maintained individually in vials, as indicated. The w[1118]; 3xP3-GFP[M1] line (Ardekani et al., 2012; Horn et al., 2000) includes a synthetic promoter containing three binding sites for the Eyeless/PAX6 transcription factor driving high-level expression of eGFP specifically in retinal tissue (abbreviated “eyeless-GFP”; where indicated the independent transgenic line for this construct [14] was used). The Drosocin 826-A3 II GFP reporter strain (abbreviated “Drosoc-GFP”) was generously provided by B. Lemaître and J.L. Imler (Tzou et al., 2000). The y-ac-w strain contains a deletion of both the white and yellow genes (Patton et al., 1992). Several strains were obtained from Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center (BDSC): The w[1118] strain is the isogenized version (w[1118]-iso; 2-iso; 3-iso) described by Ryder et al and sequenced by Platts et al (Platts et al., 2009; Ryder et al., 2004); this strain was cleared of Wolbachia by three generations culture on doxycycline followed by &gt;3 generations culture in absence of doxycycline prior to use (Ren et al., 2007). The strain w[1118]; P{w[+mC]=tub-mito-roGFP2-Orp1}6 (abbreviated “Tub-roGFP”) is described in (Albrecht et al., 2011)(BDSC stock #67673). Strain P{w[+mW.hs]=GawB}elav[C155] (abbreviated “Elav-GAL4”, BDSC #458). Strain y[1] w[1118]; P{w[+mC]=UAS-APP.Abeta42.E693G.VTR}4 (abbreviated “UAS-Abeta42[4]”, BDSC #33773). Strain w[1118]; P{w[+mC]=UAS-APP.Abeta42.E693G.VTR}8 (abbreviated “UAS-Abeta42[8]”, BDSC #33774). Both the Oregon-R (Or-R, BDCS#5) and Canton-S (C-S, BDSC#64349) wild-type strains were obtained from BDSC.

2.2 Generation and analysis of AD model flies

To generate flies with nervous system expression of human Abeta42 (experimental group), virgins from the Elav-GAL4 strain were crossed to males of the indicated UAS-Abeta42 strain. The control group flies were generated by crossing virgins of Elav-GAL4 to males of the w[1118] strain. Age-synchronized progeny were collected from both crosses and passaged until assay at the indicated age time points. At each time point, 10 experimental females and 10 control females were each individually tracked for 4 minutes using reflected green light. For each fly the mean total activity and mean FDHC were determined and averaged across the 10 flies for each group, and is expressed in relative units. At each time point, the experimental group was compared to the control group using unpaired, two-sided t-tests.

2.3 Criteria for death

The criteria for death for flies examined by microscopy was complete absence of movement, including fine-scale movements (tremors or twitching) of the legs, including upon prodding of the animal with a paint brush. For video tracking (where physical access to the fly was not possible), the criteria for death was complete absence of movement, including fine-scale movements (tremors or twitching) of the legs (for visible light video) or complete absence of movement of the eye (for GFP video), as determined by 3D video tracking analysis and by inspection of the video. For plots of movement behaviors, the death of the fly is indicated with an arrow. Please note that for certain plots the apparent peaks of activity and/or fluorescence after the death of the fly are due to opening of the tracking chamber at the end of the experiment.

2.4 Video tracking

For tracking natural deaths during aging, flies were placed in standard glass Drosophila vials containing media adjusted to 0.25% FD&amp;C Blue No. 1 dye (for w[1118] flies, to increase contrast), or to vials containing grape agar media (Genesee Scientific) adjusted to 0.5% Casein protein (Sigma)(for Drosoc-GFP flies); grape agar media produces little to no background fluorescence (Ardekani et al., 2012). For tracking deaths due to dehydration/starvation, flies were placed in empty glass vials with a black paper disc placed at the bottom to reduce background light reflection. The 3D tracking and quantification of GFP fluorescence was carried out essentially as previously described (Ardekani et al., 2012). Briefly, two video cameras (Grasshopper type GRAS-20S4C, Point Grey Research, Scottsdale, AZ) were directed at the glass vial containing the fly. The vial was illuminated by two LED lights, and video was recorded at 30fps. For GFP fluorescence tracking, blue LEDs were used (V Star Blue Lambertian, Luxeon), as follows: The MF469-35 filters (Thorlabs, Inc.) were fixed in front of the blue LEDs to limit the light to a range of approximately 452 nm to 486 nm, which overlaps the eGFP absorption peak at approximately 488 nm. The MF525-39 filters were placed in front of the camera lenses to limit the light to the range of approximately 510 nm to 548 nm, which overlaps the emission peak for eGFP at approximately 509 nm. In this way, reflected light is prevented from entering the cameras, and the video consists only of GFP fluorescence emitted from the flies. The FluoreScore software suite (Table S1) was used to capture and analyze the video data. FlycapSDK software (Point Grey Research) is provided with the cameras and was used to capture video. The cameras are calibrated using CameraCalibrationTools. VideoGrabber controls FlycapSDK to allow synchronous recording from the two cameras. FluoreScore identifies the flies in the videos as bright objects against a darker background that move in position between frames, and generates 2D position values for the fly in each frame. FluoresScore also calculates intensity values (0-256) for red, blue and green pixels that represent the fly. FluoreScoreSQ processes the data by removing objects smaller than a user-chosen threshold for fly size (in pixels), and combines the data from the two cameras. CalibHelp converts the output from CameraCalibrationTools to a projection matrix, which is then used by FS3Doutput software to calculate 3D positions for the fly in each frame. Finally, a custom R script FsAnalyzer was used to analyze the 3D position data to determine movement parameters and behaviors; any gaps in the trajectory were interpolated assuming the fly moved in a straight line at constant velocity. For visible light tracking, green LED (V Star Green Lambertian, Luxeon) lights were used, with no filters on either the lights or cameras. For infrared light (IR) tracking, infrared LEDs were used (IR30 WideAngle IR Illuminator, CMVision), and the IR filters were removed from the cameras to allow passage of the IR light. Accelerated video clips were generated using open source video editing software OpenShot v2.4.4 (https://www.openshot.org/). All FluoreScore software, behavior analysis software, and a detailed user manual are available free upon request (https://dornsife.usc.edu/towerlab/).

2.5 Fluorescence imaging and quantification

Fluorescent images, visible images, and overlays (merged images) were generated using the Leica MZFLIII fluorescence stereomicroscope and Spot imaging software (Tower et al., 2014; Yang and Tower, 2009). Green autofluorescence was visualized using the GFP1 filter set (425/60 nm excitation filter, 480 nm barrier filter), 20sec exposure, high gain. Retinal eGFP was visualized using the GFP2 filter set (480/40 nm excitation filter, 510 nm LP barrier filter), 12sec exposure, low gain. Flies were photographed from a lateral angle to reveal one eye, and the mean fluorescence intensity of the eye was determined using Image J software. For quantification, three GFP images were generated for each fly, and 3 or more flies were used for each group. The mean and standard deviation were determined for each group, and experimental and control groups were compared using unpaired, two-sided t-tests. A simple Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons was applied to determine significant p values (0.05/#comparisons).

2.6 Generating live and dead flies for fluorescence microscopy

Live and dead flies were generated for fluorescence microscopy analysis using either dehydration/starvation (D/S) stress, heat stress, or decapitation. For dehydration/starvation stress, in the first experimental design, flies (2-14 days of age, mixed sex) were placed in empty vials (~20 flies per vial), and at 18 hours, dead flies were compared to live flies. In the second experimental design for dehydration/starvation stress, flies (2-14 days of age, mixed sex) were placed in empty vials (~20 flies per vial), whereas control flies were maintained alongside in vials with media. At 48 hours, dead flies were cleared from the empty vials, and at 50 hours any dead flies (0-2 hours post death) were compared to live flies remaining in the empty vials; these flies were considered “near-death flies”, 0-6 hours prior to death, as all flies in the empty vials were dead by 56 hours. The dead and near-death flies were compared to live control flies from the vials with media. For heat stress, flies in vials with food media were placed in a 42°C water bath for three hours. The cotton plugs in the vials were moved down so that the flies were beneath the level of the water surface, to ensure exposure to the heat. All flies were dead after 3 hours exposure to 42°C; control flies were maintained in vials with food, outside the water bath at room temperature. For decapitation, flies were briefly anesthetized with CO2 gas, and for the experimental group, the heads were removed using razor blade, by severing the small connection between the head and thorax. The removed heads were maintained on black filter paper at 25°C for two hours before fluorescence microscopy analysis; control flies were maintained alongside in vials with media, and analyzed live under light CO2 anesthesia next to the isolated heads.

2.7 Calculation of movement and behavior parameters

The R script FsAnalyzer uses the 3D position data from each frame of video to calculate basic movement parameters and simple behaviors. Movement and behavioral parameters were calculated as follows, and the data from visible light tracking of a fly dying during aging (Fig. 1) is used to illustrate methods. A single w[1118] female fly, age ~30 days, was tracked in a vial with media until death (Fig. 1). In plots of behavior change with time (Fig. 1D), the light blue line is the movement trajectory representing the 3D points in each frame of video. The green line is a locally-estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOESS).

“Centrophobism” is a behavior where the fly preferentially explores the outer limits of the container (Besson and Martin, 2005). The area for analysis of centrophobism is determined by inspection of a top-view 2D plot of the total fly positions over one hour (Fig. 1B, upper panel). An outer circle is generated with radius X such that it incorporates the great majority of points; typically, this corresponds well to the 12mm diameter of the vial. An inner circle is generated with radius X/sqrt(2) to mark the inner half (50%) of the vial volume. Centrophobism is then calculated as the number of points in the outer half of the volume divided by the total number of points. The light blue line is the per-minute centrophobism value, and the dark blue line is a per-hour average centrophobism value (Fig. 1D).

“Negative Geotaxis” is a behavior where the fly preferentially climbs away from gravity (Gargano et al., 2005; Murphy and Hall, 1969). In previous studies, negative geotaxis is typically measured by gently knocking flies down to the bottom of the container, and then counting the number of flies that have climbed to a given height in a given amount of time. Here negative geotaxis is calculated by taking all the 3D points for the analysis, and using these to estimate the 50% height of the tracking area (Fig. 1B, lower panel). Fly positions below the 50% height are indicated in darker color, whereas fly positions above the 50% height are indicated in lighter color. Negative geotaxis is then calculated as the number of points in the upper 50% of tracking area volume divided by the total number of points. In this way, our measurement is indicative of a negative-geotactic exploratory behavior, as opposed to the more traditional method, which is more influenced by speed of climbing (Jones and Grotewiel, 2011). The light blue line is the per-minute negative geotaxis value, and the dark blue line is a per-hour average negative geotaxis value (Fig. 1D).

“Velocity” is calculated as average velocity per minute, as follows: the distance travelled by the fly in two consecutive frames is multiplied by 30 (30 frames per second) to calculate velocity per second. This velocity, calculated per frame, is then averaged over 30 frames (1 second) to get average velocity per second. These average per second values are then averaged over 60 seconds to get average velocity per minute, which is plotted as the light blue line (Fig. 1D); the velocity units equal 4.4mm/sec. Drosophila flight speed is approximately 0.1-0.2m/sec (Straw et al., 2011), and walking speed average is approximately 28mm/sec (Mendes et al., 2013). Therefore, our measured average velocity of ~l-2 units (~5-10mm/sec) is consistent with a combination of fly walking and resting behavior (Fig 1D), and the spikes are consistent with occasional flight or jumping behaviors.

“Activity” is calculated as total movement per minute, as follows: the average fly position per second is calculated, by averaging over 30 frames. The distance between each two consecutive points then yields velocity per second. An average of 60 of these values then yields average velocity per minute, which is plotted as the light blue line. In this way, “Activity” is more consistent over time relative to the velocity calculation above, which is more sensitive to small changes (Fig. 1D).

“FDHC” (frequency of directional heading changes) is a measure of how often the fly changes direction of movement. The FDHC calculation is based on the velocity vectors, which are calculated by taking the difference in position in two consecutive seconds. The angle between each two consecutive velocity vectors is calculated by finding the dot product between the two vectors. If the angle is not 0, it is counted as a change in direction of heading. These values are then averaged per minute as FDHC. Because normal fly movement includes heading changes, FDHC is divided by activity to yield normalized FDHC, to reveal any changes in FDHC relative to total fly activity (Fig. 1D). “Rate of Change FDHC” is a further measure of erratic movement. Rate of Change in FDHC is calculated as the difference in FDHC in consecutive frames, to show the rate at which FDHC increases or decreases.

2.8 Identifying peaks of erratic behavior (FDHC) proximal to death

The locally-estimated scatterplot smoothing function (LOESS) was applied to the normalized FDHC data for each fly, to reduce noise and to identify any peaks of normalized FDHC. The LOESS plot was used to identify the maximal value of normalized FDHC in each hour of tracking (the local maxima), beginning with hour 1 and ending with the hour in which the fly died; hour 0 data was omitted from the analysis of several flies, to avoid any noise resulting from the fly adapting to the new environment when introduced into the vial. The global maxima is defined as the largest of the local maxima. The time duration between the global maxima and the death of the fly (DELTA) was then determined for each fly (Table 1). For several flies, the DELTA distance between the death of the fly and the second-largest global maxima (DELTA*) was also determined (Table 1).

3. Results

3.1 Experimental design for 3D tracking of death of the fly

Single flies were placed in glass vials, and tracking was initiated at 11AM. Flies were continuously tracked for 48 hour periods; this facilitated transfer of flies to fresh media every other day for flies tracked during normal aging. Flies subjected to dehydration/starvation stress typically died within the 48 hour tracking period (Table 1). Flies tracked during normal aging were tracked for successive 48 hour periods, and only the final 48 hour period containing the death of the fly was analyzed, except for two flies (indicated in bold font in Table 1), where data is presented for &gt;48 hours. The analysis presented several challenges, including data handling, as the complete analysis for 48 hours of tracking is ~37GB. The current FluoreScore system uses two lights and two cameras, which is the minimum required to track 3D positions. Limiting the system to two cameras helps reduce the complexity of the analysis and the resultant data size, however, occasionally a fly would die in an area of the vial that was not captured by both cameras and the dataset had to be discarded. Finally, capturing deaths during normal aging presents a challenge when only one or a small number of tracking stations is available. Under our conditions, Drosophila can live over 100 days. A middle-aged fly placed in the tracker in a vial with media might die in the next 48 hours, or might not die for the next two months.

3.1 Tracking death using reflected visible light

A single, w[1118] middle-aged female fly was tracked during normal aging until death, using reflected green light (Fig. 1; death indicated by arrow at hour 25). Both negative geotaxis behavior and centrophobism behavior have previously been shown to decrease with age in Drosophila (White et al., 2010). Consistent with those observations, the aged fly exhibited limited centrophobism and negative geotaxis behaviors relative to young flies, as expected (compare Fig. 1B, C, D to Fig. 2B, C, D and Fig. 3B, C, D). Notably, in the ~8 hours prior to death, the fly exhibited several episodes of increased FDHC and rate of change FDHC (Fig. 1D; indicated with asterisks), indicating episodes of erratic movement. The LOESS plot of normalized FDHC identifies the global maxima at 14.5 hours, which is 10.5 hours prior to the death of the fly (the “DELTA” value, summarized in Table 1). The LOESS identifies the second global maxima at 17 hours, corresponding to several apparent peaks in the normalized FDHC and rate of change FDHC plots (Fig. 1D), and yielding a DELTA* value of 8 hours (Table 1). Finally, inspection of the plots reveals spikes of normalized FDHC and rate of change FDHC at ~18.5 hours, where there is little to no corresponding increase in the activity level plot (Fig. 1D). These cryptic events are not identified by the LOESS analysis (see Discussion), and the presence of such events (yes or no) was scored by inspection of the plots (summarized in Table 1, E-FDHC). Similar results were obtained with additional flies dying during aging, including limited activity, centrophobism and negative geotaxis behavior (Fig. S1A, B), and episodes of increased FDHC prior to death (Fig. S2, summarized in Table 1). For periods of tracking where total fly activity is very low, such as is often observed for old flies, the centrophobism and negative geotaxis values are often observed to alternate between the minimum and maximum values (see for example Fig. S2E,F). This is because when a fly become stationary in the center of the vial this period is scored as zero centrophobism, and when a fly becomes stationary at the perimeter of the vial this period is scored as 100% centrophobism. Similarly, a stationary fly at the bottom of the vial is scored as zero negative geotaxis, whereas a stationary fly at the top of the vial is scored as 100% negative geotaxis.

Finally, a fly placed in an empty vial will typically die from dehydration/starvation (D/S) stress within 48 hours. Visible light tracking of a young fly dying from D/S stress also suggested cryptic episodes of increased FDHC immediately prior to death (Fig. S3K, indicated with asterisk).

3.2 Tracking death using reflected infrared (IR) light

To confirm that episodes of increased FDHC detected prior to death are not specific to a particular analysis method, flies were tracked using reflected IR light, both for flies dying during normal aging and for flies dying from dehydration/starvation stress. A single w[1118] female fly, age 1 day, was placed in an empty vial, and tracked using reflected IR light until death (Fig. 2; death indicated by arrow at hour 37). Both centrophobism and negative geotaxis behaviors remained relatively intact until ~3 hours prior to death, when these behaviors decreased coincident with the decrease in fly activity (Fig. 2D; hours 35-37). Inspection of the plots suggests the fly exhibits several episodes of increased FDHC and rate of change FDHC in the ~6 hours prior to death, including the interval from hour 32-34.5 (indicated with asterisk), and a smaller event at hour 36.5 (Fig. 2D). For this fly these apparent events proximal to death were not identified as peaks in the LOESS plot of normalized FDHC (Fig. 2D, see Discussion). However, for the majority of flies dying of dehydration/starvation stress (8/15), the LOESS plot of normalized FDHC identified global maxima within 5 hours of the death of the fly that corresponded to events identified by inspection of the plots (for examples see Fig. S3B–F, summarized in Table 1). Centrophobism and negative geotaxis also remained relatively intact in additional flies subjected to dehydration/starvation stress (Fig. S1B, Fig. S3).

3.3 Increased FDHC with age in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer’s disease

The episodes of increased FDHC prior to death indicate erratic movement of the fly, suggestive of neurological malfunction. We wished to determine if FDHC, as calculated here, would be observed in another situation of nervous system malfunction, such as the Drosophila model of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Previous studies have used activity monitors and video recordings to assay movement in a Drosophila model of AD. In this model, the Abeta42 protein fragment associated with human AD is expressed in Drosophila neurons. The previous studies found that Abeta42 expression caused an age-dependent loss of activity and velocity (Jahn et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2015), and the flies appeared to have relatively non-linear walking trajectories in a negative geotaxis assay (Moloney et al., 2010). The binary GAL4/UAS system was used to drive neuronal expression of a human Abeta42 protein fragment, containing the Arctic mutation associated with human AD (mutation E693G). The neuronal-specific Elav-GAL4 driver strain was crossed to the UAS-Abeta42[4] target strain to yield neuronal expression of Abeta42, whereas control flies were generated by crossing Elav-GAL4 to the w[1118] control strain. Age-synchronized cohorts of female flies were assayed at ages 1 day, 12 days and 35 days. At each time point, 10 experimental flies and 10 control flies were each individually tracked for 4 minutes using reflected green light, and activity and FDHC were quantified. The flies showed an age-dependent loss of activity (Fig. S4A), and an age-dependent increase in FDHC (Fig. S4B). Similar results were obtained with an independent UAS-Abeta42[8] strain with a stronger phenotype (earlier onset of behavioral changes; Fig. S4C, D).

3.4 Increased fluorescence of retinal GFP coincident with death

In C. elegans, death is associated with a spike of blue fluorescence from the gut, due to the release of fluorescent anthranilic acid from lysosome-like pigment granules called gut granules (Coburn et al., 2013; Coburn and Gems, 2013). The Drosophila eye pigment granules are similar to the C. elegans gut granules (Marks et al., 2013; Stark et al., 1989), and so it was of interest to ask if there might be any changes in the fluorescence properties of the Drosophila eye upon death. The Drosophila eyeless-GFP strain (Ardekani et al., 2012; Horn et al., 2000) contains a synthetic promoter with three binding sites for the Eyeless/PAX6 transcription factor driving high-level expression of eGFP specifically in retinal tissue. A single ~2 day old female fly was placed in an empty vial, and tracked until death from dehydration/starvation stress, using the GFP fluorescence emitted from the eye. Centrophobism and negative geotaxis behaviors remained relatively intact until ~1 hour prior to death (Fig. 3B, C, D). Notably this fly is one of the 5/24 analyzed that did not exhibit apparent episodes of increased FDHC prior to death (Table 1, E-FDHC, FLYID#09-25-18-4).

The FluoreScore software allows for quantification of fly fluorescence coincident with analysis of movement behaviors. The “Green Channel” (Fig. 3D) is a measure of the green (GFP) fluorescence emitted by the fly. The software calculates intensity values for the pixels that represent the fly, in each frame of video. The Green Channel value is calculated as the average sum of pixel intensities per minute, and is plotted as the light green line. GFP detection is sometimes more efficient when the fly is moving, for example, orientation of the eyes towards the camera as opposed to away from the camera. To correct for this potential effect, the Green Channel values were divided by the Activity level to generate the “Normalized Green Channel” value, to emphasize any increase in GFP fluorescence that is independent of an increase in fly movement. Strikingly, GFP was observed to spike in the Green Channel, and in the Normalized Green Channel, in the two hours (hours 22-23) immediately preceding and overlapping the death of the fly (Fig. 3D; indicated by asterisk). The video for hour 22 (minutes 40-60) was accelerated 20x to illustrate the increase in eye fluorescence with time (video clip 1). A spike in GFP fluorescence at death was also observed with an eyeless-GFP strain fly in a replicate video tracking assay (Fig. S3H, FLY ID#10-15-18-4; video clip 2). In the video for this fly, the GFP fluorescence from the eye is visible as a green object in the lower, right region of the video, and the larger blue object to the right is the blue light illumination; the eye is observed to increase in brightness over two hours (hours 34-35) as the fly dies (video clip 2). Because the FluoreScore software tracks the fly based upon the fly’s movement between frames, once the fly has died and ceased movement the fly is no longer detected, and the Green Channel value decreases to zero (Fig. 3D, indicated with arrow). However, fluorescence microscopy analysis reveals that the increased eye fluorescence persists for several hours after death. Flies of the eyeless-GFP reporter strain were subjected to 18 hours dehydration/starvation stress, and assayed for GFP fluorescence using the fluorescence microscope. Under these conditions ~1/4 of the flies have died, and the dead flies undergo desiccation, resulting in flattening of the abdomen and curvature of the body (Fig. 3E). In this image, the upper fly is alive, and the lower fly is dead; note the increased GFP fluorescence and apparent deterioration of retinal tissue structure in the dead fly. Increased GFP fluorescence was also quantified by fluorescence microscopy, in eyeless-GFP reporter flies that had been dead for 0-3 hours (Fig. 4A,B).

Increased retinal GFP fluorescence was also observed upon death due to dehydration/starvation stress with an independent transgenic line containing the eyeless-GFP construct (Fig. S5C), and was also observed upon death due to decapitation (Fig. S5D). Interestingly, increased retinal GFP was not observed upon death due to 42°C heat stress, and instead the retinal GFP fluorescence was reduced (Fig. S5G); we speculate this result may be due to heat lability of the GFP protein (see Discussion).

3.5 Increased green autofluorescence coincident with death

Finally, flies of the w[1118] strain exhibited an increase in endogenous green autofluorescence in the eye and body coincident with death (Fig. 4C–E). This autofluorescence was detected using blue input light, the GFP1 filter set, and longer photographic exposures. In the first experimental design, flies were placed in an empty vial for 18 hours, at which time ~1/4 of the flies had died from dehydration/starvation stress. Analysis of the live and dead flies using fluorescence microscopy revealed increased autofluorescence in the eye and the body of the dead flies (Fig. 4C). Quantification of autofluorescence in the eye using Image J software showed approximately three-fold increase in autofluorescence in the dead flies (Fig. 4D); however, this autofluorescence was not of sufficient intensity to be reliably detected using our current 3D video tracking methods. In the second experimental design, flies were subjected to 48 hours dehydration/starvation stress, and the control (live) flies were maintained alongside on normal media. Flies in the empty vials that were near death (0-6 hours prior to death) had increased autofluorescence relative to the live control flies, and the autofluorescence of the stressed flies was further increased upon death (Fig. 4E). These results indicate that the green autofluoresence increases immediately prior-to and coincident with death, and continues to increase for several hours thereafter.

Increased endogenous green autofluorescence upon death was also observed with additional strains of flies, and with additional methods of causing death. Like the w[1118] strain used above, the y-ac-w strain lacks eye pigments, and robust endogenous fluorescence was detected in the eye and body upon death due to dehydration starvation (Fig. S5B), and in the eye and head tissues upon death due to decapitation (Fig. S5E). Wild-type flies contain dark red pigments in the eye, and these pigments become darker upon death (Figure S5A). The red pigments in the wild-type eye tend to occlude detection of fluorescence, however, by using long exposures it was possible to detect endogenous green autofluorescence in the eye of Canton-S and Oregon-R wild-type strains upon death by decapitation (Fig. S5F). Finally, death due to 42°C heat stress produced particularly strong endogenous green autofluorescence throughout the body, for each of eyeless-GFP strain (Fig. S5H), y-ac-w strain (Fig. S5I), and the Oregon-R and Canton-S wild-type strains (Fig. S5J). However, as mentioned above, 42°C heat stress caused a decrease in retinal GFP fluorescence (Fig S5G), that might be related to heat lability of the GFP protein.

4. Discussion

4.1 Identifying episodes of erratic behavior prior to death

In this study, 24 flies were tracked through 3D space as they died, including 9 middle-aged flies dying during normal aging, and 15 young flies dying from dehydration/starvation stress. Movement behaviors at the time of death are not well characterized for Drosophila, and it was not possible to predict a priori whether behavior might become less erratic, more erratic or stay the same. The data indicate that in the 8 hours prior to death, total activity levels generally decline, but the behavior often becomes more erratic. Inspection of the plots suggests that one or more episodes of erratic movement occurred in the 8 hours prior to death for the majority (19/24) of the flies (summarized in Table 1). These episodes were scored as spikes in the plots of normalized FDHC and rate of change FDHC that did not correlate with spikes in activity. Consistent with those observations, the LOESS plot of normalized FDHC identified a corresponding global maxima in the 8 hours preceding death for 12/24 of the flies, and if the secondary global maxima is also considered, this number increases to 18/24 of the flies. One reason the LOESS analysis might sometimes fail to identify episodes of erratic behavior scored by inspection is that the LOESS uses data points both before and after the peak to estimate the peak; peaks that end abruptly due to the death of the fly might therefore be underestimated due to the lack of subsequent data points (for example, see Fig. 2D, hour 34). In the future, it may be of interest to identify alternative statistical tests that might better identify these “cryptic” episodes of erratic behavior, such as a machine learning approach.

4.2 Implications of episodes of erratic behavior prior to death

FDHC was also increased with age in a Drosophila model of AD, consistent with FDHC as a marker of neurological malfunction. The episodes of increased FDHC prior to death suggest that nervous system malfunction often precedes death, and might play a causative role. These episodes of increased FDHC may be related to previous reports of a Drosophila “death dance” (Levine et al., 2002). Drosophila locomotion is often assayed using activity monitors that count the number of times the fly crosses and breaks an infrared light beam, and such monitors have been used to assay circadian variation in fly movement. Increases in arrhythmic movement, referred to as the death dance, were sometimes observed preceding fly death (Levine et al., 2002), and this was also reported for worker bumblebees (Stelzer et al., 2010). Recently, Gaitanidis et al used reflected red light to record video of male flies during aging, and inspection of the video revealed episodes of hyperactivity prior to death for approximately half the flies (Gaitanidis et al., 2019); conceivably, that hyperactivity might be related to the episodes of FDHC reported here, and to a death dance; however we note that in our data the episodes of erratic behavior did not appear to correlate with increased total activity. Finally, flies subjected to starvation (with water provided by agar media) exhibited a prolonged period of hyperactivity prior to death. This prolonged hyperactivity was dependent upon AKH-signaling, and is thought to represent a food-searching behavior (Lee and Park, 2004; Yu et al., 2016), which may or may not be related to the death dance. Taken together, the results from our experiments and the studies from other groups are consistent with the idea that neurological malfunction might play a causative role in Drosophila death, and it will be important in the future to test this hypothesis. In C. elegans, integrity of the nervous system is well maintained during aging, at least at the ultrastructual level (Herndon et al., 2002). In Drosophila, certain olfactory neurons are reported to die by apoptosis during aging (Chihara et al., 2014), however, possible neuronal cell death or malfunction associated with death of the animal is relatively unexplored. It will be of interest in the future to ask if and how neuronal cell malfunction and/or programmed cell death/apoptosis might be related to episodes of increased FDHC.

A loss of intestinal barrier function, as indicated by leakage of blue dye out of the gut into peripheral tissues (the “SMURF” assay), has also been reported to be a biomarker of impending death in Drosophila (Rera et al., 2012), C. elegans and Danio reiro fish (Dambroise et al., 2016). In our hands, the majority of Drosophila (&gt;75%) die without ever exhibiting the SMURF phenotype (G. Landis and J.T., unpublished data), consistent with the idea of neurological malfunction as a possible cause in many flies; however, the occurrence of SMURF phenotype is likely to depend on several variables, including genotype, media recipe and microbiome composition. In C. elegans, pharyngeal deterioration and bacterial infection have been implicated as possible causes of death (Gomez et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2017).

In this analysis, a sub-set of flies (2/9) that were tracked in vials with media became trapped in a supine (fly lying on its back) position, with the wings adhering to the surface of the food, in the hours preceding death (Table 1). For example, for one of the deaths during aging analyzed above (Fig. 1), inspection of the video suggests that episodes of erratic movement result in the fly falling onto the food on its back, leading to the fly being trapped in this supine position and unable to right itself (video clip 3). In this case, the immobility was partial, as there was extensive movement of the legs, and the fly translocated across the surface of the vial in the supine position over the course of ~20 minutes. The other 3/5 flies analyzed here in vials with media died without evidence of trapping or adherence to the food. Previous studies have reported that a transient supine position, or a fly irreversibly trapped in a supine position, is a common event prior to death for both Drosophila and medflies (Gaitanidis et al., 2019; Papadopoulos et al., 2002).

In humans, rapid and repeated contractions and relaxation of muscles (convulsions) can have multiple causes (Sabu et al., 2016). These causes include cerebral hypoperfusion, such as from heart malfunction or acute blood loss, as well as seizures, which can result from epilepsy or at death. Drosophila has been used a model for seizure (Johan Arief et al., 2018; Schutte et al., 2016), and it will be of interest in the future to ask if the episodes of increased FDHC observed here might be related to seizure and/or convulsions.

4.3 Increased endogenous autofluorescence and retinal GFP fluorescence upon death

Lipofuscin is a brown pigment that accumulates in several tissues of mammals and other species during aging, and is characterized by autofluorescence under 360nm UV light (Jung et al., 2010). Drosophila accumulate a dramatic brown pigment in the oenocytes during aging, however this pigment does not detectably fluoresce under 365nm UV light or visible light (Tower et al., 2014). During aging, Drosophila accumulate material that fluoresces faintly violet under 365nm light in the head, ventral thorax and ventral abdomen (Tower et al., 2014), however no increase was observed upon death (data not shown). In contrast, both white mutant flies (w[1118] strain andy-ac-w strain) and wild-type flies (Oregon-R and Canton-S strains) exhibited a green autofluorescence under blue light in the eyes and body (Fig. 4, Fig. S5), that persisted for several hours after death. This autofluorescence was observed with death due to normal aging, dehydration/starvation, decapitation and 42°C heat stress. The possible origin and nature of this green autofluorescence is not clear, and may be of interest to pursue in the future.

The blue death fluorescence observed in the C. elegans gut results from anthranilic acid generated through the kynurenine pathway (Coburn and Gems, 2013). Because the Drosophila green autofluorescence observed here has different spectral properties, it is unlikely to be due to anthranilate; however, mutations in the kynurenine pathway exist for Drosophila that could be used to test the possible role of this pathway (Breda et al., 2016). Green autofluorescence is observed in C. elegans and increases both with age and upon death in the C. elegans gut and peripheral tissues (Pincus et al., 2016). Flavins have been implicated as one source of green autofluorescence in C. elegans (Davis et al., 1982; Pincus et al., 2016), and in the future it will be of interest to ask how the green autofluorescence in Drosophila might relate to the green autofluorescence in C. elegans and/or to flavins.

In flies with high-level expression of GFP in the retina, GFP fluorescence was observed to spike coincident with the death of the fly (Fig. 3; Fig. 4; Fig. S5; video clip 1; video clip 2). These flies were null-mutant for the white gene, which results in a lack of endogenous pigments in the eye, resulting in a white eye phenotype. The lack of endogenous pigments greatly increases the amount of GFP fluorescence that can be detected, thereby facilitating the video tracking analysis. In live flies, the GFP fluorescence is relatively evenly distributed across the eye. In contrast, upon death, the GFP fluorescence was increased, and showed an uneven distribution, suggesting a deterioration of retinal tissue structure (Fig. 3E; Fig. S5D). Increased fluorescence of GFP in the retina was also observed with an independent transgenic strain, and was also observed upon death due to decapitation (Fig. S5). Interestingly, retinal GFP was not increased upon death due to 42°C heat stress, in fact GFP was decreased (Fig. S5G), even though this stress caused robust expression of endogenous fluorescence in the same flies (Fig. S5H). We speculate that the decreased fluorescence of GFP upon 42°C heat stress is due to the heat-lability of the GFP protein; for example, in vitro, a 46°C heat treatment caused complete GFP denaturation within 10 minutes (Sagar et al., 2013). In contract, the molecular species producing the endogenous fluorescence appear to be relatively heat stable (Fig. S5H–J).

Inspection of the GFP video (video clip 1, video clip 2) suggests that the increase in GFP at death begins in the posterior region of the eye and then advances further across the eye. In C. elegans, the death fluorescence in the gut results from a progressive wave of necrotic cell death moving through the tissue (Coburn et al., 2013); the necrotic cell death causes release of anthranilic acid from gut granules into an environment that increases fluorescence. The apparent deterioration of Drosophila retinal structure associated with increased GFP fluorescence observed here might likewise indicate necrotic cell death, and possible release of GFP from cellular granules. Programmed cell death (PCD), including necrotic cell death, is mis-regulated during human aging and is thought to contribute to aging-related disease (Fan et al., 2017; Tower, 2015). It will be of interest in the future to ask how the green autofluorescence and increased GFP fluorescence in Drosophila observed here might relate to cell death, and to ask to what extent waves of cell death might be a common feature of organismal death across tissues and species.

Supplementary Material

1 Fig. S1. 2D/3D plots of exploratory behaviors in additional flies dying during normal aging and from dehydration/starvation (D/S) stress. One hour of tracking data is presented for each fly; the hour most proximal to death with sufficient points to visualize was chosen for presentation. (A) Death during normal aging. Data for eight additional flies dying during normal aging. (B) Death due to dehydration/starvation (D/S) stress. Data for eight additional flies dying due to D/S stress.

2 Fig. S2. X/Y plots of movement behaviors and RGB light detected for additional flies analyzed by video during normal aging. (Flies listed in Table 1). (A) FLY ID# 07-08-153. (B) FLY ID# 6-23-15-6. (C) FLY ID# 10-15-18-3. (D) FLY ID# 12-05-18-3. (E) FLY ID# 6-24-19-5. (F) FLY ID# 6-28-19-5. (G) FLY ID# 6-28-19-5. (H) FLY ID# 7-10-19-5.

3 Fig. S3. X/Y plots of movement behaviors and RGB light detected for additional flies analyzed by video during dehydration/starvation (D/S) stress. (Flies listed in Table 1). (A) FLY ID# 11-26-18-5. (B) FLY ID# ID# 5-26-19-5. (C) FLY ID# 6-13-19-5. (D) FLY ID# 6-15-19-5. (E) FLY ID# 6-17-19-5. (F) FLY ID# 6-19-19-5. (G) FLY ID# 6-21-19-5. (H) FLY ID# 10-15-18-4. (I) FLY ID# 11-26-18-4. (J) FLY ID# 12-05-18-2. (K) FLY ID# 10-03-18-6. (L) FLY ID# 10-15-18-6. (M) FLY ID# 11-26-18-6.

4 Fig. S4. Alzheimer’s disease model. The nervous-system specific driver strain Elav-GAL4 was crossed to strain UAS-Abeta42[4] (A, B), or to independent strain UAS-Abeta42[8] (C, D), to produce expression of human disease-associated Abeta42 in neurons. Control flies were produced by cross of Elav-GAL4 to the w[1118] control strain. At each time point, 10 individual females from each group were tracked for 4 minutes, and average activity (A, C) and frequency of direction heading change (B, D) were calculated. Plots show average +/− Standard Deviation expressed in relative units. Experimental group was compared to control group at each time point using unpaired, two-sided t tests, and significant differences (p &lt; 0.05) are indicated by asterisk.

5 Fig. S5. GFP fluorescence and endogenous green fluorescence in live and dead flies. In each panel the live fly is on the left, and the dead fly (or dead fly tissue) is on the right. Or-R, Oregon-R strain. C-S, Canton-S strain. (A-C) Flies killed by dehydration/starvation stress (overnight). (D-F) Flies killed by decapitation (head tissue assayed two hours after decapitation). (G-J) Flies killed by 42°C heat stress (three hours). (A) Oregon-R strain. Visible light image. Note darker eye color in the dead fly. Darker eye color was also observed in Canton-S strain flies killed by dehydration/starvation, as well as in Oregon-R and Canton-S strain flies killed by heat stress or decapitation (data not shown). (B) y-ac-w strain. Endogenous fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (C) eyeless-GFP[I4] strain. GFP fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (D) eyeless-GFP[M1] strain. GFP fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (E) y-ac-w strain. Endogenous fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (F) Canton-S strain. Endogenous fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (G) eyeless-GFP[M1] strain. GFP fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (H) eyeless-GFP[M1] strain. Endogenous fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (I) y-ac-w strain. Endogenous fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. (J) Oregon-R strain. Endogenous fluorescence image overlaid with visible image. The same result was obtained with Canton-S strain flies (data not shown).

6 Table S1. Software

7 Video clip 1: FLYID9-25-18-4Hour22:40-60mins

8 Video clip 2: FLYID10-15-18-4Hours34-35

9 Video clip 3: FLYID6-20-15-6Hour17:0-30mins

Acknowledgements

Declarations of interest: none. This work was supported by a grant to J.T. from the Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging (R01AG057741). We thank Nasrullah Husami for technical assistance.

Fig. 1. 3D tracking using reflected visible light. A w[1118] female (ID#6-20-15-6), age ~30 days, was tracked during aging on media until death, using reflected green light. (A) A single frame of video (~1/4 of tracking area is shown). (B) Exploratory behaviors in hour 11. Upper panel is 2D plot of fly positions (top view), illustrating presence/absence of centrophobism behavior. The circles indicate the outer 50% of vial volume versus inner 50% of vial volume. Lower panel is 3D plot of fly positions, illustrating presence/absence of negative geotaxis behavior. Dashed lines indicate midline of the tracking volume. Fly positions below the midline are indicated in dark color, and fly positions above the midline in light color. (C) Exploratory behaviors in hour 17. (D) Behavioral parameters. The first global maxima of normalized FDHC is at hour 14.5 (indicated by asterisk), the second global maxima is at hour 17 (indicated by asterisk), and an apparent episode of erratic movement not detected as a LOESS peak occurs at hour 18.5 (indicated by asterisk); death of the fly is indicated by arrow at hour 25.

Fig. 2. 3D tracking using reflected infrared (IR) light. A single one-day old female w[1118] fly (ID#11-21-18-5) was placed in an empty vial and tracked until death from dehydration/starvation. (A) A single frame of video (~1/4 of tracking volume is shown). (B) 2D plot of fly positions illustrating centrophobism and 3D plot of fly positions illustrating negative geotaxis, hour 12. (C) 2D plot of fly positions illustrating centrophobism and 3D plot of fly positions illustrating negative geotaxis, hour 33. (D) Behavioral parameters. An apparent episode of erratic behavior scored by inspection of the plots is indicated by asterisk, death of the fly is indicated by arrow.

Fig. 3. 3D tracking using fly GFP fluorescence. (A-D) A single 2-day old female eyeless-GFP fly (ID#09-25-18-4) was placed in an empty vial, and tracked until death from dehydration starvation. (A) A single frame of video (~1/4 of the tracking volume is shown). (B) 2D plot of fly positions illustrating centrophobism, and 3D plot of fly positions illustrating negative geotaxis hour 17. (C) 2D plot of fly positions illustrating centrophobism and 3D plot of fly positions illustrating negative geotaxis, hour 22. (D) Behavioral parameters and quantification of GFP fluorescence (Green Channel). Note a peak of GFP fluorescence (indicated by asterisk) coincides with death (indicated by arrow). (E) Male eyeless-GFP reporter flies subjected to 18 hours dehydration/starvation. The image presented is an overlay of the visible light image and the GFP image. Upper fly is alive, lower fly is dead; note increased GFP and apparent deterioration of retinal tissue structure in the dead fly.

Fig. 4. Quantification of fluorescence using microscopy. (A, B) Increased GFP fluorescence in retina of dead flies. Flies of the eyeless-GFP strain (~20 flies per vial, 2-14 days of age, mixed sex) were placed in empty vials, and control flies were maintained alongside in vials with media. After 18 hours, dead flies were cleared from the empty vials, and flies that died in the next three hours were compared to control flies using the fluorescence microscope. (A) Overlay (merge) of GFP image and visible image. The three flies on the left of the panel are alive, and the three flies on the right of the panel are dead (0-3 hours post death). (B) Quantification of GFP fluorescence in the eye. Image J software was used to quantify mean green fluorescence intensity in the eye region in the GFP image for each fly, using three independent images. The values were averaged for each of the live and dead groups. Statistical significance of the difference was determined using unpaired, two-sided t-test, and p = 1.68 x 10[−5] is indicated by asterisk. (C-E) Increased endogenous green autofluorescence in the eye of dead flies. Flies of the w[1118] strain were placed in empty vials for 18 hours, and then examined under the fluorescence microscope. The three flies on the left are alive, and the three flies on the right are dead, as indicated. (C) Overlay (merge) of GFP image and visible light image. (D) Image J software was used to quantify mean green fluorescence intensity in the eye region for each fly, using three independent GFP images, including the GFP image used in (C). The values were averaged for each of the live and dead (0-18 hours post death) groups. Statistical significance of the difference between live and dead groups was determined using unpaired, two-sided t-test, and p = 1.28 x 10[−9] is indicated by asterisk. (E) Quantification of endogenous green autofluorescence in the eye for flies near death. Flies of the w[1118] strain were placed in empty vials for 48 hours. Control flies were maintained alongside in vials with food. At 48 hours, all dead flies were cleared from the empty vial. At 50 hours, dead flies (0-2 hours post death) were removed from the vial, and the remaining live flies in the empty vial were removed and used as the “near-death” group (note all empty-vial flies were dead by 56 hours, therefore these flies are within 0-6 hours of death). Live group flies were obtained from the control group maintained on food. Image J software was used to quantify mean green fluorescence intensity in the eye region in the GFP image for each fly, using three independent images. The values were averaged for each of the groups: live, dead (0-2 hours post death) and near-death. Statistical significance of the difference between groups was determined using unpaired, two-sided t-test: Live compared to Near Death, p = 2.54 x 10[−6], indicated by asterisk. Live compared to Dead, p = 1.65 x 10[−9], indicated by asterisk. Near Death compared to Dead, p = 5.45 × 10[−4], The criteria for significance with three comparisons (0.05/3) is p &lt; 0.0167.

Table 1. Summary of fly deaths analyzed using 3D video tracking. Age is expressed in days since eclosion, at beginning of assay. “D/S” indicates death due to dehydration/starvation stress. “AGING” indicates death during normal aging in presence of media. “Hour trap” refers to the hour that the fly became completely or partially immobilized by adhesion to the food surface, if such occurred; NA, not applicable. Flies with Fly ID# in bold font were tracked for &gt;48 hours; all other flies were tracked for 48 hours. The presence of episodes of increased FDHC (E-FDHC) within 8 hours of death was scored by inspection, as indicated by spikes in the normalized FDHC and/or rate of change FDHC plots, that occurred in the absence of an increase in activity. DELTA is the time interval between the death of the fly and the global maxima of the LOESS plot of normalized FDHC. Numbers with asterisk indicate the DELTA value calculated using the second-largest global maxima.

FLY ID#	Type	Genotype	Sex	Age	Tracking	Hour trap	Hour death	E-FDHC	DELTA	
06-20-15-6 (Fig 1, Clip 3)	AGING	w[1118]	F	~30	Visible	17	25	YES	10.5
8*	
07-08-15-3	AGING	w[1118]	F	~46	Visible	9	12	YES	7.5	
06-23-15-6	AGING	w[1118]	F	~33	Visible	NA	2	YES	0.233	
10-15-18-3	AGING	Drosoc-GFP	F	53	GFP	NA	28	YES	6.14	
12-05-18-3	AGING	Drosoc-GFP	M	46	GFP	NA	12	YES	10.4
2.64*	
11-21-18-5 (Fig 2)	D/S	w[1118]	F	1	IR	NA	37	YES	27.2	
11-26-18-5	D/S	eyeless-GFP	F	7-14	IR	NA	4	YES	1.15	
5-26-19-5	D/S	w[1118]	M	3-5	IR	NA	22	YES	2.77	
6-13-19-5	D/S	w[1118]	F	14	IR	NA	25	YES	3.37	
6-15-19-5	D/S	w[1118[	F	3-7	IR	NA	19	YES	4.25	
6-17-19-5	D/S	w[1118]	F	1	IR	NA	27	YES	1.74	
6-19-19-5	D/S	w[1118]	M	2	IR	NA	32	YES	2.85	
6-21-19-5	D/S	w[1118]	F	1	IR	NA	36	YES	4.72	
6-24-19-5	AGING	w[1118]	M	60	IR	NA	52	YES	46.14	
6-28-19-5	AGING	w[1118]	M	64	IR	NA	59	YES	13.2	
7-1-19-5	AGING	w[1118]	M	66	IR	NA	44	NO	5.54	
7-10-19-5	AGING	eyeless-GFP	M	75	IR	NA	24	YES	8.47
4.5*	
09-25-18-4 (Fig 3, Clip 1)	D/S	eyeless-GFP	M	1-3	GFP	NA	24	NO	9.59
4.95*	
10-15-18-4 (Clip2)	D/S	eyeless-GFP	F	3-7	GFP	NA	35	YES	6.57	
11-26-18-4	D/S	eyeless-GFP	F	7-14	GFP	NA	24	NO	16.0
0.37*	
12-05-18-2	D/S	Tub-roGFP	F	1	GFP	NA	14	YES	1.63	
10-03-18-6	D/S	eyeless-GFP	M	2-7	Visible	NA	47	YES	39.69	
10-15-18-6	D/S	eyeless-GFP	F	3-7	Visible	NA	32	NO	8.89	
11-26-18-6	D/S	eyeless-GFP	F	7-14	Visible	NA	5	NO	22.91
4*	

Highlights

Flies were tracked through 3D space as they died, using either reflected visible light, reflected infrared (IR) light, or fly fluorescence

Flies exhibited episodes of increased erratic behavior (frequency of directional heading changes) in the hours preceding death

Green autofluorescence appeared in the eye and body immediately prior to and overlapping death

The fluorescence of GFP targeted to the retina spiked immediately prior to and overlapping death

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Albrecht SC , Barata AG , Grosshans J , Teleman AA , Dick TP , 2011 In vivo mapping of hydrogen peroxide and oxidized glutathione reveals chemical and regional specificity of redox homeostasis. Cell Metab 14 , 819–29.22100409
Ardekani R , Huang YM , Sancheti P , Stanciauskas R , Tavare S , Tower J , 2012 Using GFP Video to Track 3D Movement and Conditional Gene Expression in Free-Moving Flies. PLoS One 7 , e40506.22829875
Bair WN , Petr M , Alfaras I , Mitchell SJ , Bernier M , Ferrucci L , Studenski SA , de Cabo R , 2019 Of aging mice and men: gait speed decline is a translatable trait, with species-specific underlying properties. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
Baker GT 3rd , Sprott RL , 1988 Biomarkers of aging. Exp Gerontol 23 , 223–39.
Besson M , Martin JR , 2005 Centrophobism/thigmotaxis, a new role for the mushroom bodies in Drosophila. J Neurobiol 62 , 386–96.15547935
Breda C , Sathyasaikumar KV , Sograte Idrissi S , Notarangelo FM , Estranero JG , Moore GG , Green EW , Kyriacou CP , Schwarcz R , Giorgini F , 2016 Tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) inhibition ameliorates neurodegeneration by modulation of kynurenine pathway metabolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 5435–40.27114543
Carey JR , Papadopoulos N , Kouloussis N , Katsoyannos B , Muller HG , Wang JL , Tseng YK , 2006 Age-specific and lifetime behavior patterns in Drosophila melanogaster and the Mediterranean fruit fly, Ceratitis capitata. Exp Gerontol 41 , 93–7.16297586
Chihara T , Kitabayashi A , Morimoto M , Takeuchi K , Masuyama K , Tonoki A , Davis RL , Wang JW , Miura M , 2014 Caspase inhibition in select olfactory neurons restores innate attraction behavior in aged Drosophila. PLoS Genet 10 , e1004437.24967585
Coburn C , Allman E , Mahanti P , Benedetto A , Cabreiro F , Pincus Z , Matthijssens F , Araiz C , Mandel A , Vlachos M , Edwards SA , Fischer G , Davidson A , Pryor RE , Stevens A , Slack FJ , Tavernarakis N , Braeckman BP , Schroeder FC , Nehrke K , Gems D , 2013 Anthranilate fluorescence marks a calcium-propagated necrotic wave that promotes organismal death in C. elegans. PLoS Biol 11 , e1001613.23935448
Coburn C , Gems D , 2013 The mysterious case of the C. elegans gut granule: death fluorescence, anthranilic acid and the kynurenine pathway. Front Genet 4 , 151.23967012
Collins JJ , Huang C , Hughes S , Kornfeld K , 2008 The measurement and analysis of age-related changes in Caenorhabditis elegans. WormBook, 1–21.
Dambroise E , Monnier L , Ruisheng L , Aguilaniu H , Joly JS , Tricoire H , Rera M , 2016 Two phases of aging separated by the Smurf transition as a public path to death. Sci Rep 6 , 23523.27002861
Davis BO Jr. , Anderson GL , Dusenbery DB , 1982 Total luminescence spectroscopy of fluorescence changes during aging in Caenorhabditis elegans. Biochemistry 21 , 4089–95.7126532
Fan J , Dawson TM , Dawson VL , 2017 Cell Death Mechanisms of Neurodegeneration. Adv Neurobiol 15 , 403–425.28674991
Gaitanidis A , Dimitriadou A , Dowse H , Sanyal S , Duch C , Consoulas C , 2019 Longitudinal assessment of health-span and pre-death morbidity in wild type Drosophila. Aging (Albany NY).
Galimov ER , Pryor RE , Poole SE , Benedetto A , Pincus Z , Gems D , 2018 Coupling of Rigor Mortis and Intestinal Necrosis during C. elegans Organismal Death. Cell Rep 22 , 2730–2741.29514100
Gargano JW , Martin I , Bhandari P , Grotewiel MS , 2005 Rapid iterative negative geotaxis (RING): a new method for assessing age-related locomotor decline in Drosophila. Exp Gerontol 40 , 386–95.15919590
Gomez F , Monsalve GC , Tse V , Saiki R , Weng E , Lee L , Srinivasan C , Frand AR , Clarke CF , 2012 Delayed accumulation of intestinal coliform bacteria enhances life span and stress resistance in Caenorhabditis elegans fed respiratory deficient E. coli. BMC Microbiol 12 , 300.23256533
Helfand SL , Rogina B , 2003 Genetics of aging in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Annu Rev Genet 37 , 329–48.14616064
Herndon LA , Schmeissner PJ , Dudaronek JM , Brown PA , Listner KM , Sakano Y , Paupard MC , Hall DH , Driscoll M , 2002 Stochastic and genetic factors influence tissue-specific decline in ageing C. elegans. Nature 419 , 808–14.12397350
Horn C , Jaunich B , Wimmer EA , 2000 Highly sensitive, fluorescent transformation marker for Drosophila transgenesis. Dev Genes Evol 210 , 623–9.11151299
Jahn TR , Kohlhoff KJ , Scott M , Tartaglia GG , Lomas DA , Dobson CM , Vendruscolo M , Crowther DC , 2011 Detection of early locomotor abnormalities in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci Methods 197 , 186–9.21315762
Johan Arief MF , Choo BKM , Yap JL , Kumari Y , Shaikh MF , 2018 A Systematic Review on Non-mammalian Models in Epilepsy Research. Front Pharmacol 9 , 655.29997502
Jones MA , Grotewiel M , 2011 Drosophila as a model for age-related impairment in locomotor and other behaviors. Exp Gerontol 46 , 320–5.20800672
Jung T , Hohn A , Grune T , 2010 Lipofuscin: detection and quantification by microscopic techniques. Methods Mol Biol 594 , 173–93.20072918
Landis GN , Abdueva D , Skvortsov D , Yang J , Rabin BE , Carrick J , Tavare S , Tower J , 2004 Similar gene expression patterns characterize aging and oxidative stress in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 , 7663–8.15136717
Lee G , Park JH , 2004 Hemolymph sugar homeostasis and starvation-induced hyperactivity affected by genetic manipulations of the adipokinetic hormone-encoding gene in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 167 , 311–23.15166157
Levine JD , Funes P , Dowse HB , Hall JC , 2002 Signal analysis of behavioral and molecular cycles. BMC Neurosci 3 , 1.11825337
Levine ME , Lu AT , Quach A , Chen BH , Assimes TL , Bandinelli S , Hou L , Baccarelli AA , Stewart JD , Li Y , Whitsel EA , Wilson JG , Reiner AP , Aviv A , Lohman K , Liu Y , Ferrucci L , Horvath S , 2018 An epigenetic biomarker of aging for lifespan and healthspan. Aging (Albany NY) 10 , 573–591.29676998
Liu H , Han M , Li Q , Zhang X , Wang WA , Huang FD , 2015 Automated rapid iterative negative geotaxis assay and its use in a genetic screen for modifiers of Abeta(42)-induced locomotor decline in Drosophila. Neurosci Bull 31 , 541–9.26077703
Lu AT , Quach A , Wilson JG , Reiner AP , Aviv A , Raj K , Hou L , Baccarelli AA , Li Y , Stewart JD , Whitsel EA , Assimes TL , Ferrucci L , Horvath S , 2019 DNA methylation GrimAge strongly predicts lifespan and healthspan. Aging (Albany NY) 11 , 303–327.30669119
Marks MS , Heijnen HF , Raposo G , 2013 Lysosome-related organelles: unusual compartments become mainstream. Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 , 495–505.23726022
Mendes CS , Bartos I , Akay T , Marka S , Mann RS , 2013 Quantification of gait parameters in freely walking wild type and sensory deprived Drosophila melanogaster. Elife 2 , e00231.23326642
Moloney A , Sattelle DB , Lomas DA , Crowther DC , 2010 Alzheimer’s disease: insights from Drosophila melanogaster models. Trends Biochem Sci 35 , 228–35.20036556
Mueller LD , Rauser CL , Rose MR , 2007 An evolutionary heterogeneity model of late-life fecundity in Drosophila. Biogerontology 8 , 147–61.17028930
Murphy RM , Hall CF , 1969 Some correlates of negative geotaxis in Drosophila melanogaster. Animal Behaviour 17 , 181–185.
Papadopoulos NT , Carey JR , Katsoyannos BI , Kouloussis NA , Muller HG , Liu X , 2002 Supine behaviour predicts the time to death in male Mediterranean fruitflies (Ceratitis capitata). Proc Biol Sci 269 , 1633–7.12204122
Patton JS , Gomes XV , Geyer PK , 1992 Position-independent germline transformation in Drosophila using a cuticle pigmentation gene as a selectable marker. Nucleic Acids Research 20 , 5859–5860.1333590
Pickett CL , Dietrich N , Chen J , Xiong C , Kornfeld K , 2013 Mated progeny production is a biomarker of aging in Caenorhabditis elegans. G3 (Bethesda) 3 , 2219–32.24142929
Pincus Z , Mazer TC , Slack FJ , 2016 Autofluorescence as a measure of senescence in C. elegans: look to red, not blue or green. Aging (Albany NY) 8 , 889–98.27070172
Platts AE , Land SJ , Chen L , Page GP , Rasouli P , Wang L , Lu X , Ruden DM , 2009 Massively parallel resequencing of the isogenic Drosophila melanogaster strain w(1118); iso-2; iso-3 identifies hotspots for mutations in sensory perception genes. Fly (Austin) 3 , 192–203.19690466
Rea SL , Wu D , Cypser JR , Vaupel JW , Johnson TE , 2005 A stress-sensitive reporter predicts longevity in isogenic populations of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Genet 37 , 894–8.16041374
Ren C , Finkel SE , Tower J , 2009 Conditional inhibition of autophagy genes in adult Drosophila impairs immunity without compromising longevity. Exp Gerontol 44 , 228–35.18955126
Ren C , Webster P , Finkel SE , Tower J , 2007 Increased internal and external bacterial load during Drosophila aging without life-span trade-off. Cell Metab 6 , 144–52.17681150
Rera M , Clark RI , Walker DW , 2012 Intestinal barrier dysfunction links metabolic and inflammatory markers of aging to death in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 21528–33.23236133
Rogina B , Wolverton T , Bross TG , Chen K , Muller HG , Carey JR , 2007 Distinct biological epochs in the reproductive life of female Drosophila melanogaster. Mech Ageing Dev 128 , 477–85.17681363
Roy AK , Chatterjee B , 1983 Sexual dimorphism in the liver. Annu Rev Physiol 45 , 37–50.6189449
Ryder E , Blows F , Ashburner M , Bautista-Llacer R , Coulson D , Drummond J , Webster J , Gubb D , Gunton N , Johnson G , O’Kane CJ , Huen D , Sharma P , Asztalos Z , Baisch H , Schulze J , Kube M , Kittlaus K , Reuter G , Maroy P , Szidonya J , Rasmuson-Lestander A , Ekstrom K , Dickson B , Hugentobler C , Stocker H , Hafen E , Lepesant JA , Pflugfelder G , Heisenberg M , Mechler B , Serras F , Corominas M , Schneuwly S , Preat T , Roote J , Russell S , 2004 The DrosDel collection: a set of P-element insertions for generating custom chromosomal aberrations in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 167 , 797–813.15238529
Sabu J , Regeti K , Mallappallil M , Kassotis J , Islam H , Zafar S , Khan R , Ibrahim H , Kanta R , Sen S , Yousif A , Nai Q , 2016 Convulsive Syncope Induced by Ventricular Arrhythmia Masquerading as Epileptic Seizures: Case Report and Literature Review. J Clin Med Res 8 , 610–5.27429683
Sagar DM , Aoudjane S , Gaudet M , Aeppli G , Dalby PA , 2013 Optically induced thermal gradients for protein characterization in nanolitre-scale samples in microfluidic devices. Sci Rep 3 , 2130.23823279
Schutte SS , Schutte RJ , Barragan EV , O’Dowd DK , 2016 Model systems for studying cellular mechanisms of SCN1A-related epilepsy. J Neurophysiol 115 , 1755–66.26843603
Sierra F , Fey GH , Guigoz Y , 1989 T-kininogen gene expression is induced during aging. Mol Cell Biol 9 , 5610–6.2479831
Stark WS , Sapp R , Haymer DS , 1989 Eye color pigment granules in Drosophila mauritiana: mosaics produced by excision of a transposable element. Pigment Cell Res 2 , 86–92.2541422
Stelzer RJ , Stanewsky R , Chittka L , 2010 Circadian Foraging Rhythms of Bumblebees Monitored by Radio-frequency Identification. Journal of Biological Rhythms 25 , 257–267.20679495
Straw AD , Branson K , Neumann TR , Dickinson MH , 2011 Multi-camera realtime three-dimensional tracking of multiple flying animals. J R Soc Interface 8 , 395–409.20630879
Studenski S , Perera S , Patel K , Rosano C , Faulkner K , Inzitari M , Brach J , Chandler J , Cawthon P , Connor EB , Nevitt M , Visser M , Kritchevsky S , Badinelli S , Harris T , Newman AB , Cauley J , Ferrucci L , Guralnik J , 2011 Gait speed and survival in older adults. JAMA 305 , 50–8.21205966
Timmons JA , 2017 Molecular Diagnostics of Ageing and Tackling Age-related Disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 38 , 67–80.27979318
Tower J , 2015 Programmed cell death in aging. Ageing Res Rev 23 , 90–100.25862945
Tower J , Landis G , Gao R , Luan A , Lee J , Sun Y , 2014 Variegated expression of Hsp22 transgenic reporters indicates cell-specific patterns of aging in Drosophila oenocytes. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 69 , 253–9.23723429
Tzou P , Ohresser S , Ferrandon D , Capovilla M , Reichhart JM , Lemaitre B , Hoffmann JA , Imler JL , 2000 Tissue-specific inducible expression of antimicrobial peptide genes in Drosophila surface epithelia. Immunity 13 , 737–48.11114385
Wheeler JC , Bieschke ET , Tower J , 1995 Muscle-specific expression of Drosophila hsp70 in response to aging and oxidative stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 , 10408–12.7479794
White KE , Humphrey DM , Hirth F , 2010 The dopaminergic system in the aging brain of Drosophila. Front Neurosci 4 , 205.21165178
Yang J , Tower J , 2009 Expression of hsp22 and hsp70 transgenes is partially redictive of drosophila survival under normal and stress conditions. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 64 , 828–38.19420297
Yu Y , Huang R , Ye J , Zhang V , Wu C , Cheng G , Jia J , Wang L , 2016 Regulation of starvation-induced hyperactivity by insulin and glucagon signaling in adult Drosophila. Elife 5 .
Zhao Y , Gilliat AF , Ziehm M , Turmaine M , Wang H , Ezcurra M , Yang C , Phillips G , McBay D , Zhang WB , Partridge L , Pincus Z , Gems D , 2017 Two forms of death in ageing Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Commun 8 , 15458.28534519
