LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J. Alzheimers Dis.
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

30776012
6708279
10.3233/JAD181028
NIHMS1046843
Article
Is Alzheimer’s Disease Risk Modifiable?
Serrano-Pozo Alberto ab
Growdon John H. ab*
a Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
b Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
* Correspondence to: John H. Growdon, MD, Memory Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 15 Parkman St, Wang Ambulatory Care Center, Suite 830, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Tel.: 617-726-1728; Fax: 617-726-4101; jgrowdon@partners.org.
20 8 2019
2019
24 8 2019
67 3 795819
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Population-based clinic-pathological studies have established that the most common pathological substrate of dementia in community-dwelling elderly people is mixed, especially Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and cerebrovascular ischemic disease (CVID), rather than pure AD. While these could be just two frequent unrelated comorbidities in the elderly, epidemiological research has reinforced the idea that mid-life (age &lt; 65 years) vascular risk factors increase the risk of late-onset (age ≥ 65 years) dementia, and specifically AD. By contrast, healthy lifestyle choices such as leisure activities, physical exercise, and Mediterranean diet are considered protective against AD. Remarkably, several large population-based longitudinal epidemiological studies have recently indicated that the incidence and prevalence of dementia might be decreasing in Western countries. Although it remains unclear whether these positive trends are attributable to neuropathologically definite AD versus CVID, based on these epidemiological data it has been estimated that a sizable proportion of AD cases could be preventable. In this review, we discuss the current evidence about modifiable risk factors for AD derived from epidemiological, preclinical, and interventional studies, and analyze the opportunities for therapeutic and preventative interventions.

Alcohol drinking
Alzheimer’s disease
dementia
diet
diabetes mellitus
education
exercise
hypertension
hyperlipidemia
smoking

PATHOLOGICAL HETEROGENEITY UNDERLYING DEMENTIA

Dementia is a health care problem with an enormous economic and societal impact. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is considered the most common cause of dementia, the most common neurodegenerative disease, and one of the most common neurological disorders [1,2]. AD affects 5.4 million Americans and is the fifth leading cause of death among Americans aged 65 years or older [3]. While we have witnessed considerable advances in our understanding of its molecular and cellular underpinnings in the last four decades [4], AD remains incurable.

Although AD is pathologically defined by the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in sufficient number and distribution to cause dementia [5], population-based clinic-pathological studies have established that the most common pathological substrate of dementia in community-dwelling elderly people is not pure AD, but mixed pathologies, especially some proportion of AD and cerebrovascular ischemic disease (CVID), but also Lewy body disease and hippocampal sclerosis with Tar DNA binding protein 43 KDa (TDP-43) pathology [6–9]. CVID is a heterogeneous clinic-pathological entity that encompasses both large vessel infarcts and small vessel disease. Attempts to operationalize CVID as a cause of cognitive impairment and a clinic-pathological entity distinct from AD have evolved from the first vascular dementia criteria [10,11] to the more recent and broader vascular cognitive impairment construct [12,13] . Within this CVID spectrum, it is small vessel disease due to lipohyalinosis of small size arteries that frequently coexists with some degree of AD neuropathological changes. Of note, CVID contributes to the severity of cognitive decline even in a convenience sample selected to represent the AD clinic-pathological continuum and devoid of cases with vascular dementia as the primary neuropathological diagnosis [14]. Up to 30% of subjects clinically diagnosed with probable AD dementia in the United States Alzheimer Disease Centers database actually do not meet neuropathological criteria for AD, mainly due to insufficient AD neuropathological changes and the co-occurrence of CVID and other neuropathologic findings [15,16].

The expansion of brain imaging and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers in clinical practice is enabling clinicians to appreciate this clinic-pathological heterogeneity when diagnosing and treating patients with dementia and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) [17–19]. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become the gold-standard imaging diagnostic method to evaluate both the CVID burden and the severity and regional pattern of brain atrophy in patients with dementia. A bilateral temporo-parietal hypometabolism in [18F]-fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography ([18F]-FDG-PET) is typical of AD dementia and can often be already seen in patients with MCI due to AD. Similarly, amyloid PET and CSF AD biomarkers (amyloid-β (Aβ) and phospho-tau) can demonstrate the presence of AD pathology already at the MCI stage and predict conversion from MCI to AD dementia with high accuracy. Tau PET radiotracers are being developed and may soon be added to our clinical practice.

Although AD and CVID could just be frequent brain comorbidities in the elderly, the realization of this clinic-pathological complexity and heterogeneity has led researchers to inquire about a pathophysiological link between both entities. If this link exists, controlling the modifiable vascular risk factors and promoting cardio- and cerebrovascular health could help prevent AD dementia, as well as vascular dementia.

In this review, we discuss the current evidence about modifiable risk and protective factors for AD derived from epidemiological, preclinical, and interventional studies, and analyze the opportunities for therapeutic and preventative interventions. While multiple other risk factors have been postulated, we selected only those for which there are sufficient data within these three domains. Whenever the distinction was available, we will discern between all-cause dementia, vascular dementia, and AD, and between autopsy-proven, biomarker-supported, and clinically-based diagnosis.

AGE-ADJUSTED INCIDENCE AND PREVALENCE OF DEMENTIA MIGHT BE DECREASING

Remarkably, although the expansion of human lifespan is leading to an increase in the total number of patients with dementia in developed and many developing countries, many recent longitudinal epidemiological studies have revealed that the age-adjusted estimates of incidence and prevalence of dementia might be decreasing, especially in Western countries (Figs. 1 and 2) [20–35].

It should be noted that, in order to obtain comparable measures of incidence and prevalence of dementia across decades in the same population, the methods of ascertainment of incident and prevalent cases must be kept constant in spite of the remarkable advances achieved in diagnostic biomarkers. Moreover, implementation of imaging and CSF diagnostic biomarkers in population scale epidemiological studies is logistically and financially challenging. Thus, most of these epidemiological studies ascertained dementia using either old sets of clinical diagnostic criteria or algorithms based on predetermined cut-off scores in brief cognitive screening tests, which might not be sensitive or specific for the detection of very mild dementia, and do not discern between different etiologies of dementia such as CVID and AD. Hence, it is not possible to accurately know what proportion of the observed decrease in dementia incidence and prevalence is attributable to AD versus CVID. For example, stroke incidence is decreasing among people aged 65 years and older in the United States [36], which predicts a decrease in vascular dementia incidence.

Also of note, dementia prevalence studies were overall less positive than dementia incidence studies (Figs. 1 and 2). One possible explanation is that prevalence measures can be strongly influenced by changes in survival trends. While no disease-modifying drugs are yet available for AD, currently approved drugs and specialized care might be prolonging AD survival [37], and therefore increasing its age-adjusted prevalence. Stroke care has improved enormously in the last two decades with the expansion of cardiovascular secondary prevention, in-hospital acute interventions, and rehabilitation programs, which could be contributing to decrease stroke mortality [36,38] but, secondarily, increasing the prevalence of vascular dementia [38].

Notwithstanding these potential caveats, the findings of these epidemiological studies have reinforced the role of modifiable environmental factors in AD pathophysiology and fueled optimism in preventative strategies. Indeed, it has been estimated that between a third to half of AD cases could be attributable to modifiable risk factors and, therefore, preventable [39–41]. However, it should be noted that many of these “AD cases” likely bear mixed pathologies in the brain and that the preventable component could just be the concurrent CVID burden. In any case, whether this decreasing incidence and prevalence of dementia is due to a resistance to accumulate AD neuropathological changes and/or CVID, or to resilience mechanisms that enable elderly people to better cope with their AD neuropathological and CVID burdens (“cognitive reserve” and “brain reserve” hypotheses) [42], remains to be elucidated.

GENETIC RISK FOR ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

Besides aging itself, the main other unmodifiable risk factor for sporadic AD is a genetic polymorphism in the APOE gene encoding for apolipoprotein E: the ϵ4 allele. Compared to ϵ3/ ϵ3 individuals—the most common genotype in the general population—, carrying one APOE ϵ4 allele increases the risk of developing AD ≈3 fold, whereas carrying two APOE ϵ4 alleles increases the risk up to 12 times. In addition, the APOE ϵ4 allele anticipates the clinical onset of AD in a dose-dependent fashion, with individuals who are homozygous often presenting before age 65. By contrast, carrying the APOE e2 allele reduces the risk of developing AD by half, delays its clinical onset, and reduces the age-related burden of AD neuropathological changes [43,44]. Among other mechanisms, it has been proposed that the apolipoprotein E4 isoform encoded by the APOE ϵ4 allele leads to Aβ accumulation in amyloid plaques and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) [43] by both reducing its clearance and promoting its aggregation [45]. Of note, clinic-pathological studies have also linked the APOE ϵ4 allele to an increased risk of CVID [46] and TDP-43 pathology [47] in the context of AD.

While APOE ϵ4 is the strongest known genetic factor for sporadic AD, it is not necessary nor sufficient to cause AD, and it is by no means the only genetic risk factor. Genome-wide association studies have discovered multiple susceptibility loci in as many genes, which correspond to common variants of small effect size [48]. These genetic variants have been used to devise polygenic hazard scores that improve the estimation of the genetic risk for AD beyond the APOE genotype [49]. However, as with many common diseases, the development of AD is thought to be ultimately determined by the combination of the individual’s genetic make-up and his/her exposure to certain (modifiable) environmental factors. In fact, APOE and many of the recently discovered susceptibility gene polymorphisms are related to the innate immune system, thus highlighting the crucial role of microglia—the macrophage of the brain—in AD pathophysiology, and linking the individual’s genome with his/her response to environmental exposures.

MODIFIABLE RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS FOR ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

Given the premises above, we sought to review the literature on the main modifiable risk and protective factors for the development of AD, which include the classic vascular risk factors (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, and smoking), alcohol drinking, physical exercise, diet, educational attainment, and leisure and social activities. We will analyze the findings of epidemiological studies, the discoveries of preclinical research in AD mouse models, and the results of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) conducted in human subjects. We will highlight the opportunities for therapeutic and preventative interventions, as well as the remaining areas of uncertainty and knowledge gaps.

Hypertension

Epidemiological studies

Midlife hypertension has been associated with an increased risk of all cause and AD dementia in multiple longitudinal studies [50–53]. In a clinic-pathological study, hypertension was associated with increasing numbers of amyloid plaques and NFTs, as well as lower brain weight (indicating greater atrophy) [54]. However, the relationship between blood pressure and dementia is probably complex; a “goldilocks” phenomenon, whereby not only midlife hypertension but also late-life hypotension (hypoperfusion), have deleterious effects on brain health and cognition has been suggested. Both low blood pressure in late-life and a steeper decline in blood pressure between mid and late life have been associated with an increased risk of dementia and AD [53,55–58]. It has been recently reported that the association of blood pressure with AD dementia is U-shaped, with the lowest risk of AD dementia near the center of the systolic and diastolic blood pressure ranges [59]. Along the same lines, the age of onset of hypertension might be relevant to the risk of developing dementia and AD because, in fact, onset of hypertension in octogenarians and nonagenarians has been associated with a lower risk of dementia [60]. Notwithstanding this finding, an alternative possible explanation to this phenomenon is that incident AD dementia is associated with a reduction in body mass index (BMI), which would lead to a reduction in blood pressure.

Preclinical studies

Numerous experimental animal studies have linked hypertension and AD pathophysiology. Chronically induced hypertension in transgenic AD mice via administration of high salt diet plus deoxycorticosterone (DOCA), angiotensin II or hypertensive drugs [i.e., Nω-Nitro-l-arginine methyl ester hydrochloride (L-NAME)] increases brain Aβ accumulation in the form of amyloid plaques and CAA—leading to disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB)—, accelerates neuron loss, and worsens cognitive decline [61–63]. Conversely, a high salt diet alone induced an increase in cerebral blood flow without hypertension, and led to a reduction of amyloid plaque burden in transgenic AD mice [64]. Angiotensin II has been shown to increase Aβ levels through favoring the amyloidogenic processing of AβPP [63]. Multiple classes of anti-hypertensive drugs have shown to improve pathological and/or behavioral/cognitive phenotypes in transgenic AD mice, including beta-blockers [65,66], calcium-channel blockers [67], ACE inhibitors [68], and angiotensin receptor blockers [69]. Proposed mechanisms are unrelated to blood pressure control and include: decreased Aβ production [67], increased Aβ degradation by insulin degrading enzyme (IDE) [66,69], increased clearance of Aβ through the BBB [67], inhibition of Aβ oligomerization into high molecular weight neurotoxic species [69], and reduction of inflammation [65,68] and oxidative stress [68]. Of note, blood pressure may be less responsive to anti-hypertensive drugs in hypertensive transgenic AD mice than in wild-type mice [70].

Interventional studies

The Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study (PROGRESS) was a secondary prevention RCT conducted in elderly people with history of prior stroke or transient ischemic attack who were randomized to either the ACE inhibitor perindopril/indapamide (n = 3,051) or placebo (n = 3,054). Cognitive impairment, as indicated by a new diagnosis of dementia [based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV (DSM-IV) criteria] or a decline in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score of 3 or more, was a primary outcome. Compared to placebo, the perindopril/indapamide combination was associated with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of dementia and cognitive decline [71]. However, this risk reduction was only significant for the subgroups of “dementia/cognitive decline with recurrent stroke”, not for the “other dementia/cognitive decline” subgroup, indicating that vascular cognitive impairment rather than AD was driving the beneficial effects of perindopril/indapamide on cognition.

Diabetes mellitus

Epidemiological studies

Longitudinal epidemiological studies have yielded conflicting results regarding whether diabetes mellitus (DM) in midlife increases the risk of developing late onset dementia and AD. Some studies have shown such association [72–75], but others have failed to detect it [76]. A recent meta-analysis of 17 longitudinal cohort studies amounting ≈1.7 million people concluded that DM increases the risk of developing AD with a relative risk (RR) of ≈1.5 [77]. However, clinic-pathological studies have reported either no association between a DM diagnosis and the extent of AD neuropathological changes, or exacerbated AD neuropathology only in APOE ϵ4 carriers [78–80].

Preclinical studies

Experimental studies in AD mouse models have supported a contribution of DM to AD pathology and cognitive impairment. Although multiple links between Aβ and DM have already been unveiled, the mechanism(s) by which DM promotes AD remains an area of active research. As mentioned above, IDE is one of the major Aβ-degrading enzymes [81]. The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) is a receptor for Aβ present in neurons, microglia, and endothelial cells [82]. RAGE mediates the influx of Aβ from the plasma to the brain interstitial fluid (ISF) through the BBB [83]. Plasma insulin growth factor I (IGF-I) reduces brain Aβ levels and amyloid plaque burden in transgenic AD mice [84]. Plasma hyperinsulinemia in the setting of normoglycemia leads to an increase in brain ISF Aβ levels without altering brain insulin levels or brain insulin signaling, whereas direct delivery of insulin to the brain does not affect Aβ levels, despite stimulating the insulin signaling pathway [85]. Acute hyperglycemia can increase ISF Aβ levels by augmenting neuronal activity, which is known to enhance Aβ generation, in a K-ATP channel dependent fashion [86]. Peritoneal administration of streptozotocin leading to hypoinsulinemia (a model of type 1 DM) reduces amyloid plaque deposition but increases the levels of soluble Aβ species and the severity of CAA, accelerates neurodegeneration, and worsens cognition in transgenic AD mice [87]. A similar phenotype can be seen in transgenic AD mice fed with high fat diet to develop insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia, or crossed with the leptin receptor null mice (db/db), the most widely used mouse model of insulin resistance and type 2 DM [88].

Interventional studies

Small pilot randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials have suggested that metformin [89,90], intranasal regular insulin [91,92], and intranasal long-acting insulin (detemir) [92,93] may have a beneficial effect on cognition in patients with amnestic MCI or mild AD dementia. In addition, a positive effect on AD biomarkers has been suggested in these pilot trials, including a slower rate of brain atrophy by MRI, an improved cerebral hypometabolism by [18F]-FDG-PET scan, an improved profile of CSF AD biomarkers (Aβ/phospho-tau) with intranasal regular insulin [91,92], and an improved cerebral perfusion with metformin by resting-state arterial spin labeling MRI [90]. Larger phase III RCTs are needed to confirm these promising results. Conversely, rosiglitazone did not impact cognition compared to placebo in subjects mild to moderate AD dementia [94].

Hypercholesterolemia

Epidemiological studies

The relationship between hypercholesterolemia and AD risk remains unclear and is probably complex. For example, two studies assessing the effects of mid-life serum cholesterol on late-life risk of dementia and AD have yielded conflicting results. One showed a positive association between serum cholesterol level in midlife and development of AD 21 years later [95], whereas the other did not find any significant association between midlife serum cholesterol level and risk of AD 32 years later [96]. However, both studies concurred in finding that a decrease in serum cholesterol levels between mid and late life is associated with a higher risk of developing AD. Survival and competing risk biases associated with death from cardiovascular causes could explain these apparently contradictory results. In addition, late life hypercholesterolemia has been reported to both reduce [97] and not change [98] dementia risk. Similarly, while early cross-sectional revealed an up to 70% reduction in dementia risk in statin users [99,100], longitudinal prospective studies subsequently rendered mixed results [101–105]. Moreover, mild hypercholesterolemia has been associated with increased early amyloid plaque deposition in the brain independently of the APOE genotype [106], but no association between late life cholesterol and AD neuropathological changes was found in the Adult Changes in Thought (ACT) population-based study [107]. Last, statin use has been associated with reduced AD neuropathological changes, specifically NFTs, in the autopsy cohort of the ACT study [108], but not in the Religious Orders Study [104].

Preclinical studies

Diet-induced hypercholesterolemia enhances Aβ plaque deposition in transgenic AD mice [109,110]. Atorvastatin and pitavastain therapy can reduce Aβ plaque burden and microglial inflammation in transgenic AD mice [111], whereas simvastatin has been reported to improve the cognitive deficits in these mice without altering amyloid plaque burden [112,113]. Simvastatin, atorvastatin, and ezetimibe have been shown to reduce NFTs in a mouse model of tauopathy [114].

Interventional studies

Two large RCTs investigated the effects of statins on cognition in non-demented elderly people with high cardiovascular risk and both concluded that statins have no significant protective effect on cognition. The Heart Protection Study (HPS) compared the effects of simvastatin versus placebo at reducing cardiovascular risk in a large sample of elderly individuals at high risk of suffering cardiovascular disease. Cognitive impairment was assessed at baseline and at the trial completion by means of the modified Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status (TICS-m), which was administered either in person or by telephone, and considered a tertiary endpoint. No significant differences were found in TICS-m scores or the proportion of TICS-m impaired versus non-impaired subjects between the simvastatin (n=10,269) and the placebo (n=10,267) groups [115]. The PROspective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk (PROSPER) trial enrolled high cardiovascular risk elderly subjects to test the effects of pravastatin (n=2,891) versus placebo (n=2,913) in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Cognitive function was evaluated at baseline and 5 more times over a 42-month follow-up with the MMSE and a brief battery of executive and memory tests (Stroop-Color-Word test, Letter-Digit Coding test, and Picture Learning test immediate and delayed recall), and included as a tertiary endpoint. No significant differences in cognitive scores between pravastatin and placebo were observed at any follow-up visit [116,117].

RCTs of statins in patients at the stage of mild-to-moderate AD dementia have also rendered disappointing results. A positive signal in cognitive, functional, and behavioral outcome measures was observed in the Alzheimer’s Disease Cholesterol-Lowering Treatment (ADCLT) trial, which compared atorvastatin (80 mg/day, n = 32) with placebo (n = 31) in a small sample (n = 63) of mild to moderate AD dementia patients [118]. However, longer and larger clinical trials failed to reproduce these promising results. The Lipitor’s Effect in Alzheimer’s Dementia (LEADe) study randomized 640 patients with mild to moderate AD dementia to atorvastatin (80 mg/day, n = 297) or placebo (n = 317). After 72 weeks, no differences were observed in the primary endpoints: a measure of global cognition and a measure of global level of functioning [119]. Similarly, simvastatin (40 mg/day) also failed to impact rate of cognitive decline in another clinical trial conducted in 406 patients with mild-to-moderate AD dementia and normal lipid profile [120].

Smoking

Epidemiological studies

Several large population-based cohort studies have reported a 2–4-fold increased risk of being diagnosed with AD among current smokers, but only within APOE ϵ4 non-carriers [121–123]. A more recent meta-analysis of 37 prospective cohort studies has confirmed that smoking increases the risk of all-cause dementia and vascular dementia, whereas AD risk is significantly increased only among APOE ϵ4 non-carriers [124]. Of note, the analysis of the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (HAAS) autopsy cohort revealed an association between mid-life smoking and higher numbers of cortical neuritic amyloid plaques at autopsy independently of age of death, presence of the APOE ϵ4 allele, systolic blood pressure, and neuropathological evidence of stroke [125]. Environmental tobacco exposure, colloquially called passive or second-hand smoking, has also been associated with an increased risk of dementia and AD [126,127]. Importantly, ex-smokers have a similar risk of dementia as never smokers, suggesting that smoking cessation alone could prevent many dementia cases 124].

Preclinical studies

Exposure of transgenic AD mice to high dose cigarette smoke in a smoking chamber leads to an increased amyloid plaque deposition, microglial and astrocyte responses, and hyperphosphorylated tau in plaque-associated neuritic dystrophies, but not neuron loss [128]. Studies investigating the effects of nicotine have yielded conflicting results. Chronic nicotine administration has been reported to reduce amyloid deposition in one mouse model of β-amyloidosis [129], but not in another more aggressive model [130], and to worsen tau aggregation in a triple transgenic mouse which develops both plaques and tangles [131]. Cotinine, the main metabolite of nicotine, reduced Aβ deposition and ameliorated cognitive deficits in AD transgenic mice [132].

Interventional studies

A smoking cessation program in the elderly led to significantly slower rates of cognitive decline over the following 2 years in successful quitters compared with unsuccessful quitters [133]. Smoke-free laws banning smoking in workspaces and designated public areas have been implemented in many developed countries. In some of these countries, the anti-tobacco legislation is more comprehensive and encompasses also restrictions to tobacco advertising in mass media, as well as the addition of a “healthcare” tax on tobacco purchase. Smoke-free legislation has been shown to reduce the number of hospitalizations for acute coronary syndrome [134] and the rates of preterm birth and hospital attendances for childhood asthma [135]. Thus, although research evidence is awaiting, it is conceivable that anti-tobacco public health policies could be contributing to reduce the incidence of vascular dementia and possibly AD.

Alcohol drinking

Epidemiological studies

Although epidemiological studies based on self-reported measurements such as alcohol intake should be taken with caution, light to moderate alcohol consumption in late life has been associated with a reduced risk of AD dementia [136–138]. A meta-analysis of 15 longitudinal prospective studies confirmed that moderate alcohol drinkers have a significantly reduced risk of AD and vascular dementia compared to non-drinkers [139]. With regards to the alcohol beverage type, the Rotterdam study [137] found no difference between wine, beer, or liquor, whereas the Washington Heights Inwood-Columbia Aging Project [138] found that only wine was protective. Somewhat surprisingly, late life heavy drinking has been shown to have no effect on the risk of dementia compared to non-drinkers [137,139]. However, the HUNT study, a large population-based study from Norway, found that, relative to infrequent alcohol intake (1–4 times in last 14 days), frequent alcohol intake (≥5 times in last 14 days) is associated with an increased risk of both AD and vascular dementia up to 27 years later [140].

Despite this epidemiological evidence, the relationship between alcohol and dementia may not be straightforward; confounding factors such as socioeconomic status, education, and healthy lifestyle choices (such as diet and exercise), which are frequently associated with light to moderate alcohol consumption, could be influencing or even driving the above results.

Preclinical studies

Multiple studies have shown that resveratrol, a sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) activator, and other polyphenols present in the grapes of red wine reduce Aβ plaque burden and improve cognitive phenotype, through specific mechanisms depending on the polyphenol: promoting the non-amyloidogenic pathway of AβPP processing [141], interfering with Aβ oligomerization [142,143], favoring Aβ degradation through the proteasome [144], and reducing oxidative stress [145].

Interventional studies

A phase II double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT of resveratrol in mild-to-moderate AD patients showed that resveratrol is detectable in CSF and is safe and well tolerated. Of note, resveratrol reduced CSF Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels but accelerated brain atrophy [146]. A larger phase III RCT is needed to confirm these promising results.

Obesity and diet

Epidemiological studies

Numerous epidemiological studies have agreed that midlife obesity, measured with anthropometric parameters such as BMI and/or the waist-to-hip ratio, is associated with an increased risk of late-life dementia independently of other vascular or socioeconomic risk factors [147–153]. However, most of these studies have also concurred in that there is a reverse causality effect whereby the BMI declines in the years prior to the onset of dementia. It has been proposed that this “obesity paradox” or weight loss immediately prior to and during the clinical phase of dementia is related to an increase in energy expenditure and a hypothalamic dysregulation. Whether the significant association between mid-life obesity and late-life dementia is driven by AD, vascular dementia, or mixed AD/vascular dementia remains controversial [147,150]. However, obesity (higher BMI) has been linked with greater cortical atrophy in 700 AD and MCI patients in a large study combining the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the Cardiovascular Health Study-Cognition Study (CHS-CS) datasets [154], and midlife obesity was associated with an earlier age of AD clinical onset, greater amyloid burden by PET imaging, and greater Braak NFT stage at autopsy, but not higher CERAD neuritic plaque score, in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA) [155].

Mediterranean diet, that is, a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole-grain cereals, fish and olive oil, has been associated with cognitive health and a lower risk of developing MCI and AD dementia, and of converting from MCI to AD dementia [156–159]. Furthermore, adherence to Mediterranean diet might be associated with a lower mortality risk in AD patients [160]. While it is clear that adherence to Mediterranean diet is associated with cardiovascular health and protects against cerebrovascular disease [161–165], the protective association between Mediterranean diet and AD dementia does not seem to be mediated by its effects on the incidence of stroke and/or vascular risk factors [166]. In fact, of particular relevance to AD prevention, a 3-year serial amyloid and FDG-PET imaging study has recently reported that adherence to a Mediterranean-style diet by middle-aged cognitively healthy adults slowed down both amyloid plaque deposition and cerebral hypometabolism independently of APOE genotype and vascular risk factors [167]. This finding strongly supports a preventative or protective effect of Mediterranean diet against AD.

Perhaps because of the cumulative beneficial effects of its many components, the evidence in favor of the Mediterranean diet as a whole is more solid that the evidence on individual nutrients or food groups [168]. Attempts to dissect which components of the Mediterranean diet are beneficial for cognition have supported a role of nutrients and bioactive compounds contained in fish [169,170], and cruciferous and green leafy vegetables, but not fruits [171–173]. Conversely, a diet rich in saturated fat has generally been associated with an increased risk of dementia [174–176] (but see also [177]). Low vitamin E and D levels have been associated with a higher risk of developing dementia [178–180], whereas studies investigating the association between vitamin B12 and folic acid levels and dementia have yielded conflicting results [181,182]. It should be noted, however, that patients with AD can exhibit an impaired nutritional status already at the stage of mild dementia and that this aspect of the disease could be a confounder of many of the above cross-sectional epidemiological studies [183,184].

Preclinical studies

As mentioned above, a high fat diet promotes amyloid plaque deposition and cognitive deficits in transgenic AD mice [88,185,186]. Of note, these effects can be effectively reverted by environmental enrichment and exercise, despite continuation of high fat diet [185,186]. It is unclear whether high fat diet-induced obesity can also accelerate tau pathology independently of its effects on Aβ [187,188]. The components of Mediterranean diet have been extensively studied in AD mouse models. Oleuropein aglycone, the main polyphenol present in extra virgin olive oil, reduced Aβ plaque burden in transgenic AD mice through enhancing autophagy [189]. Oleocanthal, another phenolic component of extra virgin olive oil, reduced Aβ plaque burden in transgenic AD mice by facilitating Aβ clearance through the BBB [190]. A diet deficient in folate, and vitamins B6 and B12 can accelerate Aβ plaque deposition in transgenic AD mice [191]. Vitamin E supplementation can prevent Aβ plaque deposition in young, but not aged, transgenic AD mice [192]. Genetic depletion of vitamin E in transgenic AD mice increases Aβ plaque deposition through a reduction in plaque clearance, a phenotype than can be reverted with vitamin E supplementation [193,194]. Studies investigating the effects of supplementation with ω3-poly-unsaturated fatty acids (ω3-PUFA) such as docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) in the brain Aβ levels and cognition of transgenic AD mice have rendered contradictory results [195,196].

Interventional studies

Despite all this epidemiological and preclinical evidence, all diet-based clinical trials have essentially failed to slow down the progression of cognitive decline in AD. Vitamin E supplementation failed to prevent the progression from MCI to AD dementia [197]. A combination of the antioxidants vitamin C, vitamin E, and lipoic acid in a small sample of mild to moderate AD patients failed to impact AD biomarker levels in CSF and, actually, accelerated cognitive decline compared to placebo [198]. Supplementation with ω3-PUFA failed to delay cognitive decline in a small RCT enrolling 174 patients with mild to moderate AD dementia [199]. Moreover, ω3-PUFA, with or without a multi-domain intervention consisting of a physical exercise program, cognitive training and dietary advice, failed to prevent cognitive decline in a 3-year RCT conducted in elderly people with memory complaints but not demented [200]. Souvenaid®, containing Fortasyn Connect®, a micronutrient combination including DHA, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), uridine monophosphate, choline, vitamins B12, B6, C, E, and folic acid, phospholipids and selenium, improved cognition in a 12-week proof-of-concept RCT in drug-naïve patients with mild AD [201]. A subsequent 24-week RCT in drug-naïve mild AD patients also revealed a trend towards cognitive improvement in the experimental group [202]. However, another 24-week RCT of Souvenaid® as add-on therapy in patients treated for mild-to-moderate AD dementia [203] and a 24-month RCT targeting the earliest stage of AD (prodromal or pre-symptomatic AD) [204] failed to show improvement of the cognitive primary outcome. Of note, Souvenaid® corrected the micronutrient deficits in the plasma of mild and mild-to-moderate AD patients [205], preserved a quantitative electroencephalogram measure representing brain network integrity in mild AD patients [206], and improved both a cognitive/functional secondary outcome and an MRI-based hippocampal volume measurement in prodromal AD patients [204]. If these findings are confirmed in larger samples of cognitively intact individuals, it would support its value as a protective, rather than therapeutic, intervention. The FINGER trial is a 2-year RCT that compared a multi-modal intervention with diet, exercise, cognitive and social stimulation against just counseling in a large cohort (n = 1260) of at risk but non-demented elderly subjects. A significant beneficial effect of the intervention on the cognitive outcome measure (Neuropsychological Test Battery or NBT), especially on the executive functioning and processing speed scores, was reported. While the contribution of each of the components of this multi-domain intervention to this favorable result is unclear, the recommended diet was very similar to a Mediterranean-style diet [207].

Exercise

Epidemiological studies

A vast majority of epidemiological longitudinal prospective studies have established that a lower level of physical activity is associated with a higher risk of developing AD dementia and, conversely, a higher level of physical activity protects against AD dementia [208–213]. While elderly people who exercise are more likely to follow a healthy diet, the beneficial effect of exercise is independent of the protective effects of Mediterranean diet [214]. According to a recent meta-analysis of prospective studies, the protective association between leisure time physical activity and AD risk is dose-dependent [215].

Preclinical studies

Numerous studies have established that aerobic physical exercise can ameliorate neuropathology and cognition in multiple Aβ [216,217] and tau [218,219] mouse models of AD. Exercise can promote neuronal plasticity and the non-amyloidogenic processing of AβPP through enhancing brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) signaling [220]. Another protective mechanism invoked is a change in microglia phenotype towards inhibition of neuroinflammation [217].

Intervention studies

A number of clinical trials have indicated that a program of regular aerobic exercise has beneficial effects on cognition and level of functioning in patients with subjective cognitive complaints [221], MCI [221–224], and very mild AD dementia [225], but not in patients with mild to moderate dementia [226]. In the successful FINGER trial described above, the exercise program consisted of 1 to 3 weekly sessions of progressive muscle strength exercises for the eight main muscle groups plus 2 to 5 weekly sessions of aerobic individual and group activities [207]. Of note, in its new guidelines for the assessment and management of MCI, the American Academy of Neurology has recently issued a Level B (moderate confidence) recommendation for regular (twice per week) exercise in MCI patients [227], based on the promising results of two 6-month-long RCTs [223,224].

Education attainment, leisure, and social activities

Epidemiological studies

Epidemiological research has established that the level of education is inversely correlated with the risk of developing dementia due to both CVID and AD [228–232]. Leisure cognitive and physical activities have also been associated with a reduced risk of developing dementia [233–235]. Conversely, loneliness and single or widow/widower marital status have been associated with a higher risk of developing dementia [236,237]. It should be noted that education and leisure and social activities are intimately related to other lifestyle factors (i.e., level of physical exercise, diet quality, alcohol/tobacco use, adherence to pharmacological treatment of vascular risk factors), which could be driving or contributing to these effects and may not have been fully accounted for in the above studies.

Nonetheless, this epidemiological evidence has lent support to the “cognitive reserve” hypothesis, which posits that some highly educated individuals can exhibit either resistance to the development of AD neuropathology, or a special resilience that allows them to remain asymptomatic despite high burdens of amyloid plaques and NFTs thanks to their “brain reserve” (so called “mismatch AD”, “high pathology control”, or “asymptomatic AD” individuals) [238–243]. Recent imaging studies in cognitively healthy subjects support the existence of both resistance and resilience pathways linking education and intellectual enrichment with risk of AD dementia [244–249]. Specifically, some studies have reported that a higher education attainment and intellectual enrichment during midlife predict greater cortical thickness in brain MRI, even after adjusting for early life intelligence [249], lower amyloid burden in amyloid PET scan [246,248], and greater cortical metabolism in FDG-PET [246] in late life, whereas other studies have found an association between a higher education and intellectual activity levels and better cognitive performance in late life independently of cerebral amyloid burden, metabolism, and atrophy [244,247].

Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to explain the resilience of some individuals to high AD neuropathological burden, including a higher or preserved number of neurons and synapses [241], a compensatory hypertrophy of the neuronal somas and nuclei [239,240], lower levels of toxic Aβ and tau oligomers at the synapses [241,242], limited microglial and astrocyte inflammatory responses [238,241], and a greater expression of the glutamate transporter GLT-1 in astrocytes to palliate glutamate-mediated neuronal excitotoxicity [243].

Preclinical studies

Social isolation by housing individual mice in separate cages can exacerbate AD-like pathology and cognitive deficits in mouse models of AD [250–252]. Conversely, environmental enrichment by introduction of novel objects in their cages as a method of cognitive stimulation has been reported to reduce the AD-like pathology and alleviate or prevent cognitive impairment in multiple mouse models of amyloid plaque [253–259] as well as NFT deposition [257,260] (but see [261]).

Intervention studies

A meta-analysis of 17 RCTs of computerized cognitive training in patients with MCI rendered small to moderate but significant benefits in cognition, whereas the beneficial effects for dementia patients were weaker. Unfortunately, most studies are short-lasting and have not assessed long term effects on cognition [262]. A recent 2-year RCT testing a behavioral activation paradigm designed to increase the level of cognitive, physical and/or social activity versus supportive (counseling) therapy in a sample of 221 black patients with MCI revealed a significant slowing in memory and functional decline in the behavioral activation group [263]. The recent American Academy of Neurology guidelines for the assessment and management of MCI assign a Level C (low confidence) recommendation for cognitive stimulation interventions at this early stage [227].

OPPORTUNITIES FOR THERAPEUTIC AND PREVENTATIVE INTERVENTIONS

We have shown that there is a substantial body of epidemiological evidence consistent with the idea that mid-life vascular risk and metabolic factors increase the risk of late-onset dementia and AD, whereas education attainment, leisure and social activities, physical exercise, and Mediterranean diet protect against AD dementia (Fig. 3). Importantly, although the most widely used AD mouse models only recapitulate some aspects of the disease (i.e., either plaques or NFTs), the results of preclinical mechanistic research are largely in agreement with these epidemiological findings, adding support to the pursuit of preventative and therapeutic interventions that target these factors. Moreover, it is tempting to speculate that the recently reported trends of reduction of all-cause dementia and AD incidence and prevalence are related to a higher prevalence of modifiable protective factors and/or a lower prevalence of modifiable risk factors [264]. Indeed, a more widespread and stricter control of vascular risk factors through the popularization of antiplatelet, antihypertensive and statin drugs [265], the smoke-free policies resulting in lower numbers of tobacco users and second-hand smokers [266], and the expansion of college level education [267] could all be contributing to some extent to this positive trend. Noteworthy, while antiplatelet drugs have proven to be beneficial in secondary prevention of cardiovascular events, recent large primary prevention RCTs with aspirin have failed to prevent cardiovascular events and dementia in healthy elderly subjects [268,269]. Conversely, the rapidly propagating vicious cycle of sedentary life, high fat diet, obesity, and type 2 diabetes mellitus could threaten this positive trend in the near future [270].

Despite this epidemiological and preclinical evidence, virtually all attempts of clinical translation have failed to date, casting doubts about the validity of these modifiable factors as therapeutic targets. Rather than attributing the failure of these interventions to the selection of wrong targets, one alternative plausible explanation could be that most interventional studies have been designed with a therapeutic rather than preventative goal. For example, many of the RCTs have targeted MCI or mild-to-moderate AD dementia patients, when the AD neurodegenerative cascade has already begun and seems unstoppable. In addition, in most cases the diagnosis of MCI or AD dementia at enrollment was based on clinical criteria without biomarker support, but the clinical constructs of MCI and AD dementia are pathologically heterogeneous due to the high frequency of pathological comorbidities and to clinical misdiagnosis [8,15,16].

Whereas efforts to reduce cardiovascular and metabolic and increase healthy lifestyle factors have weak therapeutic impact in patients with established AD dementia, they may play much larger roles in lowering the risk of AD in cognitively normal individuals. It is now clear that both amyloid plaques and NFTs start to accumulate one to two decades before the first cognitive symptoms arise, and that this preclinical phase is a window of opportunity for preventative interventions [271]. The challenge, therefore, is to identify and then treat individuals at heightened risk for AD before cognitive symptoms and signs develop. To address this opportunity for preventative therapy, a recent consensus research framework has redefined the concept of AD based on CSF and imaging biomarkers of the AD pathophysiological process, rather than on the presence of clinical symptoms. A biomarker-based staging system termed AT(N) has been proposed, where A+ indicates evidence of Aβ accumulation (either by amyloid PET or low CSF Aβ levels), T+ indicates evidence of hyperphosphorylated tau pathology (either by tau PET or elevated CSF phospho-tau levels), and (N)+ refers to evidence of neurodegeneration (either by a typical atrophy pattern in brain MRI, hypometabolism in FDG-PET, or elevated CSF total tau levels) [272]. While this staging system is a working research model that remains to be fully validated [273], biomarker-based staging may enable the design of primary prevention RCTs in cognitively intact individuals with negative AD biomarkers [A−T−(N)−] and secondary prevention RCTs in cognitively normal subjects who have positive AD biomarkers [i.e., those with A+T−(N)− (termed “preclinical Alzheimer pathologic change”), and those with A+T+(N)− or A+T+(N)+ (categorized as “preclinical AD”)]. By identifying different groups of subjects with different pathologies, it will be possible to determine the target populations in which interventions to modify risk factors for AD are most likely to prevent or delay onset of dementia. The observation that nutritional [167,202,206] and educational factors [244–249] can alter some of these biomarkers emphasizes the potential these modifiable risk and lifestyle factors have for reducing the risk of developing AD in healthy populations.

Last, future research should clarify the effects of other potential environmental risk factors, such as mild traumatic brain injury [274,275], air pollution [276,277], and other toxic exposures [278]. If confirmed as risk factors, appropriate public health policies against them could also have a huge beneficial impact on AD incidence and prevalence. Moreover, although methodologically challenging, a lifespan approach to evaluate whether and how the above genetic and acquired risk and protective factors influence brain development and/or vulnerability to injury in early life [279–282] could decisively inform public health policies aimed at preventing AD in late-life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We want to thank Bradley T. Hyman for his critical review of this manuscript. This work was supported by the National Institute on Aging (P50 AG005134 to AS-P and JHG), the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke R25 (R25NS065743 to AS-P) and the Alzheimer’s Association (AACF-17–524184 to AS-P).

Fig. 1. Trends in dementia prevalence.

Dementia prevalence appears to be decreasing in the United States and Western Europe, but not in Japan or Sweden. Graphs depicting the changing prevalence of cognitive impairment not dementia (CIND, light grey diamonds), all-cause dementia (black circles), Alzheimer’s disease (AD, steel grey squares), vascular dementia (VaD, aluminum grey triangles), and other/unclassified dementias (inverted silver-grey triangles). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (95%CI). A) Prevalence results for all-cause dementia and CIND from the 2000 and 2012 waves of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) [34], conducted among people ≥ 65 years across the United States. B) Prevalence results for all-cause dementia and AD from the 1992 and 2001 waves of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Project (IIDB) [25], conducted among ≥ 70 years old African-Americans in Indianapolis, Indiana (USA). C) Prevalence results for all-cause dementia from the waves I (1989–1994) and II ( 2008–2011) of the Medical Research Council Cognitive and Function Aging Study (MRC-CFAS) [27], conducted among people ≥ 65 years old in three geographically defined areas of England (UK). D) Prevalence rates for the algorithmic diagnosis of dementia (“cognitive impairment with disability” or CIWD) from the Persones Agées Quid (PAQUID, 1988–1989) and the Aging Multidisciplinary Investigation (AMI, 2007–2009) studies [31], conducted among farmers aged 65 and older in the area of Bourdeaux, France. E) Crude prevalence rates for all-cause dementia in the 1976–1977, 2000–2001, and 2005–2006 waves of the H70 study [22], conducted among 70- and 75-year-old residents of Gothenburg, Sweden (95%CI not available). F) Crude prevalence rates for all-cause dementia from the Nordanstig Project (NP, 1995–1998) and the Swedish National study on Aging and Care in Nordanstig (SNAC-N, 2001–2003), derived from residents aged 78 and older in the municipality of Nordanstig, Sweden [33]. G) Prevalence rates for all-cause dementia from the Kungsholmen Project (KP, 1987–1989) and the Swedish National study on Aging and Care in Kungsholmen (SNAC-K, 2001–2004) [23], conducted among people ≥ 75 years old in central Stockholm, Sweden. H) Prevalence rates for all-cause dementia from the waves 0 (1988–89) and I (1994–1996) of the Zaragoza Dementia Depression Project (ZARADEMP) [21], conducted among people ≥ 65 years old in the city of Zaragoza, Spain. I) Prevalence rates for all-cause dementia, AD, VaD, and other/unclassified dementia from the 1985, 1992, 1998, 2005, and 2012 waves of the Hisayama Study [32], conducted among people ≥ 65 years old in Hisayama, Japan.

Fig. 2. Trends in dementia incidence.

Dementia incidence appears to be decreasing in the United States and Western Europe, but not in Japan. Graphs depicting the changing incidence of all-cause dementia (black circles), Alzheimer’s disease (AD, steel-grey squares), vascular dementia (VaD, aluminum-grey triangles), and other/unclassified dementias (inverted silver-grey triangles). Error bars represent 95 confidence intervals (95%CI). A) Age- and sex-adjusted 5-year cumulative hazard rate (cumulative incidence per 100 persons over a period of 5 years) for all-cause dementia, AD, and VaD from the Framingham Heart Study (FHS) [29], conducted among people ≥ 65 years old in Framingham, Massachusetts (USA). B) Age-standardized annual incidence rate (%) for all cause dementia and AD from the 1992 and 2001 waves of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Project (IIDB) [26], conducted among ≥ 70 years old African-Americans in Indianapolis, Indiana (USA). C) Crude dementia incidence (expressed as rate per 100 person-years) of the serial birth cohorts from the Einstein Aging Study [35], conducted among people ≥ 70 years old in the Bronx County, New York (USA) (95%CI not available). D) Incidence rates per 1000 person-years from the Medical Research Council Cognitive and Function Aging Study (MRC-CFAS) I and II [28], conducted among people ≥ 65 years in three geographically defined areas from England (UK). E) Age-adjusted incidence per 1000 person-years from the 1990 and 2000 waves of the Rotterdam Study [20], conducted among people aged 60 to 90 in Rotterdam, Netherlands. The 95%CI are not available, but the incidence rate ratio of the 2000 cohort relative to the 1990 cohort was 0.75 (0.56–1.02). F) Crude dementia incidence per 1000 person-years based on the algorithmic diagnosis from the Three-City Study (3C, 2000s cohort) compared with the Personnes Agées Quid study (PAQUID, 1990s cohort) [30], both conducted among people ≥ 65 years old in the Bourdeaux area of France. The 95%CI are not available, but the fully adjusted (for age, education, vascular risk factors and depression) hazard ratio of the 3C versus the PAQUID cohorts was 0.77 (0.61–0.97). G) Age-standardized annual incidence rate (%) for all cause dementia and AD in the 1992 and 2001 waves of the Indianapolis-Ibadan Dementia Project (IIDB) [26], conducted among ≥ 70 years old Yoruba in Indaba, Nigeria. H) Age- and sex-adjusted incidence per 1000 person-years for all-cause dementia, AD, VaD, and other/unclassified dementia from the 1988 and 2002 cohorts of the Hisayama Study [32], conducted among people ≥ 65 years old in Hisayama, Japan.

Fig. 3. Schematic representing the risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease as a balance between modifiable and unmodifiable protective and risk factors.

Authors’ disclosures available online (https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/18–1028r2).


REFERENCES

[1] Hirtz D , Thurman DJ , Gwinn-Hardy K , Mohamed M , Chaudhuri AR , Zalutsky R (2007) How common are the “common” neurologic disorders?. Neurology 68 , 326–337.17261678
[2] GBD 2015 Neurological Disorders Collaborator Group (2017) Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders during 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet Neurol 16 , 877–897.28931491
[3] Alzheimer’s, Association (2016) 2016 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 12 , 459–509.27570871
[4] Serrano-Pozo A , Aldridge GM , Zhang Q (2017) Four decades of research in Alzheimer’s Disease (1975–2014): a bibliometric and scientometric analysis. J Alzheimers Dis 59 , 763–783.28671119
[5] Serrano-Pozo A , Frosch MP , Masliah E , Hyman BT (2011) Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 1 , a006189.22229116
[6] Neuropathology Group. Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Aging Study (2001) Pathological correlates of late-onset dementia in a multicentre, community-based population in England and Wales. Neuropathology Group of the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (MRC CFAS). Lancet 357 , 169–175.11213093
[7] Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Bang W , Bennett DA (2007) Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons. Neurology 69 , 2197–2204.17568013
[8] Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Leurgans SE , Bennett DA (2009) The neuropathology of probable Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Ann Neurol 66 , 200–208.19743450
[9] Boyle PA , Yu L , Wilson RS , Leurgans SE , Schneider JA , Bennett DA (2018) Person-specific contribution of neuropathologies to cognitive loss in old age. Ann Neurol 83 , 74–83.29244218
[10] Chui HC , Victoroff JI , Margolin D , Jagust W , Shankle R , Katzman R (1992) Criteria for the diagnosis of ischemic vascular dementia proposed by the State of California Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnostic and Treatment Centers. Neurology 42 , 473–480.1549205
[11] Román GC , Tatemichi TK , Erkinjuntti T , Cummings JL , Masdeu JC , Garcia JH , Amaducci L , Orgogozo JM , Brun A , Hofman A (1993) Vascular dementia: diagnostic criteria for research studies. Report of the NINDS-AIREN International Workshop. Neurology 43 , 250–260.8094895
[12] Gorelick PB , Scuteri A , Black SE , Decarli C , Greenberg SM , Iadecola C , Launer LJ , Laurent S , Lopez OL , Nyenhuis D , Petersen RC , Schneider JA , Tzourio C , Arnett DK , Bennett DA , Chui HC , Higashida RT , Lindquist R , Nilsson PM , Roman GC , Sellke FW , Seshadri S , American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, and Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia (2011) Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 42 , 2672–2713.21778438
[13] Sachdev P , Kalaria R , O’Brien J , Skoog I , Alladi S , Black SE , Blacker D , Blazer DG , Chen C , Chui H , Ganguli M , Jellinger K , Jeste DV , Pasquier F , Paulsen J , Prins N , Rockwood K , Roman G , Scheltens P , Internationlal Society for Vascular Behavioral and Cognitive Disorders (2014) Diagnostic criteria for vascular cognitive disorders: a VASCOG statement. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 28 , 206–218.24632990
[14] Serrano-Pozo A , Qian J , Monsell SE , Frosch MP , Betensky RA , Hyman BT (2013) Examination of the clinicopathologic continuum of Alzheimer disease in the autopsy cohort of the National Alzheimer Coordinating Center. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 72 , 1182–1192.24226270
[15] Beach TG , Monsell SE , Phillips LE , Kukull W (2012) Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease at National Institute on Aging Alzheimer Disease Centers, 2005–2010. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 71 , 266–273.22437338
[16] Serrano-Pozo A , Qian J , Monsell SE , Blacker D , GómezIsla T , Betensky RA , Growdon JH , Johnson KA , Frosch MP , Sperling RA , Hyman BT (2014) Mild to moderate Alzheimer dementia with insufficient neuropathological changes. Ann Neurol 75 , 597–601.24585367
[17] Albert MS , DeKosky ST , Dickson D , Dubois B , Feldman HH , Fox NC , Gamst A , Holtzman DM , Jagust WJ , Petersen RC , Snyder PJ , Carrillo MC , Thies B , Phelps CH (2011) The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 , 270–279.21514249
[18] McKhann GM , Knopman DS , Chertkow H , Hyman BT , Jack CR , Kawas CH , Klunk WE , Koroshetz WJ , Manly JJ , Mayeux R , Mohs RC , Morris JC , Rossor MN , Scheltens P , Carrillo MC , Thies B , Weintraub S , Phelps CH (2011) The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 , 263–269.21514250
[19] Dubois B , Feldman HH , Jacova C , Hampel H , Molinuevo JL , Blennow K , DeKosky ST , Gauthier S , Selkoe D , Bateman R , Cappa S , Crutch S , Engelborghs S , Frisoni GB , Fox NC , Galasko D , Habert M-O , Jicha GA , Nordberg A , Pasquier F , Rabinovici G , Robert P , Rowe C , Salloway S , Sarazin M , Epelbaum S , de Souza LC , Vellas B , Visser PJ , Schneider L , Stern Y , Scheltens P , Cummings JL (2014) Advancing research diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease: the IWG-2 criteria. Lancet Neurol 13 , 614–629.24849862
[20] Schrijvers EMC , Verhaaren BFJ , Koudstaal PJ , Hofman A , Ikram MA , Breteler MMB (2012) Is dementia incidence declining?: Trends in dementia incidence since 1990 in the Rotterdam Study. Neurology 78 , 1456–1463.22551732
[21] Lobo A , Saz P , Marcos G , Dia JL , De-la-Camara C , Ventura T , Montaẽs JA , Lobo-Escolar A , Aznar S , ZARADEMP Workgroup (2007) Prevalence of dementia in a southern European population in two different time periods: the ZARADEMP Project. Acta Psychiatr Scand 116 , 299–307.17803760
[22] Wiberg P , Waern M , Billstedt E , Ostling S , Skoog I (2013) Secular trends in the prevalence of dementia and depression in Swedish septuagenarians 1976–2006. Psychol Med 43 , 2627–2634.23480822
[23] Qiu C , von Strauss E , Bäckman L , Winblad B , Fratiglioni L (2013) Twenty-year changes in dementia occurrence suggest decreasing incidence in central Stockholm, Sweden. Neurology 80 , 1888–1894.23596063
[24] Rocca WA , Petersen RC , Knopman DS , Hebert LE , Evans DA , Hall KS , Gao S , Unverzagt FW , Langa KM , Larson EB , White LR (2011) Trends in the incidence and prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease, dementia, and cognitive impairment in the United States. Alzheimers Dement 7 , 80–93.21255746
[25] Hall KS , Gao S , Baiyewu O , Lane KA , Gureje O , Shen J , Ogunniyi A , Murrell JR , Unverzagt FW , Dickens J , Smith-Gamble V , Hendrie HC (2009) Prevalence rates for dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in African Americans: 1992 versus 2001. Alzheimers Dement 5 , 227–233.19426950
[26] Gao S , Ogunniyi A , Hall KS , Baiyewu O , Unverzagt FW , Lane KA , Murrell JR , Gureje O , Hake AM , Hendrie HC (2016) Dementia incidence declined in African-Americans but not in Yoruba. Alzheimers Dement 12 , 244–251.26218444
[27] Matthews FE , Arthur A , Barnes LE , Bond J , Jagger C , Robinson L , Brayne C , Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Collaboration (2013) A two-decade comparison of prevalence of dementia in individuals aged 65 years and older from three geographical areas of England: results of the Cognitive Function and Ageing Study I and II. Lancet 382 , 1405–1412.23871492
[28] Matthews FE , Stephan BCM , Robinson L , Jagger C , Barnes LE , Arthur A , Brayne C , Cognitive Function and Ageing Studies. (CFAS) Collaboration (2016) A two decade dementia incidence comparison from the Cognitive Function and Ageing Studies I and II. Nat Commun 7 , 11398.27092707
[29] Satizabal CL , Beiser AS , Chouraki V , Cheˆne G , Dufouil C , Seshadri S (2016) Incidence of dementia over three decades in the Framingham Heart Study. N Engl J Med 374 , 523–532.26863354
[30] Grasset L , Brayne C , Joly P , Jacqmin-Gadda H , Peres K , Foubert-Samier A , Dartigues J-F , Helmer C (2016) Trends in dementia incidence: Evolution over a 10-year period in France. Alzheimers Dement 12 , 272–280.26693893
[31] Pérès K , Brayne C , Matharan F , Grasset L , Helmer C , Letenneur L , Foubert-Samier A , Baldi I , Tison F , Amieva H , Dartigues J-F (2017) Trends in prevalence of dementia in French farmers from two epidemiological cohorts. J Am Geriatr Soc 65 , 415–420.27991652
[32] Ohara T , Hata J , Yoshida D , Mukai N , Nagata M , Iwaki T , Kitazono T , Kanba S , Kiyohara Y , Ninomiya T (2017) Trends in dementia prevalence, incidence, and survival rate in a Japanese community. Neurology 88 , 1925–1932.28424272
[33] Wimo A , Sjölund B-M , Sköldunger A , Qiu C , Klarin I , Nordberg G , von Strauss E (2016) Cohort effects in the prevalence and survival of people with dementia in a rural area in northern Sweden. J Alzheimers Dis 50 , 387–396.26639970
[34] Langa KM , Larson EB , Crimmins EM , Faul JD , Levine DA , Kabeto MU , Weir DR (2017) A comparison of the prevalence of dementia in the United States in 2000 and 2012. JAMA Intern Med 177 , 51–58.27893041
[35] Derby CA , Katz MJ , Lipton RB , Hall CB (2017) Trends in dementia incidence in a birth cohort analysis of the Einstein Aging Study. JAMA Neurol 74 , 1345–1351.28873124
[36] Koton S , Schneider ALC , Rosamond WD , Shahar E , Sang Y , Gottesman RF , Coresh J (2014) Stroke incidence and mortality trends in US communities, 1987 to 2011. JAMA 312 , 259–268.25027141
[37] Black CM , Fillit H , Xie L , Hu X , Kariburyo MF , Ambegaonkar BM , Baser O , Yuce H , Khandker RK (2018) Economic burden, mortality, and institutionalization in patients newly diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 61 , 185–193.29103033
[38] Ukraintseva S , Sloan F , Arbeev K , Yashin A (2006) Increasing rates of dementia at time of declining mortality from stroke. Stroke 37 , 1155–1159.16601210
[39] Barnes DE , Yaffe K (2011) The projected effect of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. Lancet Neurol 10 , 819–828.21775213
[40] Norton S , Matthews FE , Barnes DE , Yaffe K , Brayne C (2014) Potential for primary prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: an analysis of population–based data. Lancet Neurol 13 , 788–794.25030513
[41] Ashby-Mitchell K , Burns R , Shaw J , Anstey KJ (2017) Proportion of dementia in Australia explained by common modifiable risk factors. Alzheimers Res Ther 9 , 11.28212674
[42] Arenaza-Urquijo EM , Vemuri P (2018) Resistance vs resilience to Alzheimer disease: Clarifying terminology for preclinical studies. Neurology 90 , 695–703.29592885
[43] Serrano-Pozo A , Qian J , Monsell SE , Betensky RA , Hyman BT (2015) APOEs2 is associated with milder clinical and pathological Alzheimer disease. Ann Neurol 77 , 917–929.25623662
[44] Shinohara M , Kanekiyo T , Yang L , Linthicum D , Shinohara M , Fu Y , Price L , Frisch-Daiello JL , Han X , Fryer JD , Bu G (2016) APOE2 eases cognitive decline during Aging: Clinical and preclinical evaluations. Ann Neurol 79 , 758–774.26933942
[45] Kim J , Basak JM , Holtzman DM (2009) The role of apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 63 , 287–303.19679070
[46] Yip AG , McKee AC , Green RC , Wells J , Young H , Cupples LA , Farrer LA (2005) APOE, vascular pathology, and the AD brain. Neurology 65 , 259–265.16043796
[47] Wennberg AM , Tosakulwong N , Lesnick TG , Murray ME , Whitwell JL , Liesinger AM , Petrucelli L , Boeve BF , Parisi JE , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Dickson DW , Josephs KA (2018) Association of apolipoprotein E ε4 with transactive response DNA-binding protein 43. JAMA Neurol 75 , 1347.30422173
[48] Lambert JC , Ibrahim-Verbaas CA , Harold D , Naj AC , Sims R , Bellenguez C , DeStafano AL , Bis JC , Beecham GW , Grenier-Boley B , Russo G , Thorton-Wells TA , Jones N , Smith AV , Chouraki V , Thomas C , Ikram MA , Zelenika D , Vardarajan BN , Kamatani Y , Lin CF , Gerrish A , Schmidt H , Kunkle B , Dunstan ML , Ruiz A , Bihoreau MT , Choi SH , Reitz C , Pasquier F , Cruchaga C , Craig D , Amin N , Berr C , Lopez OL , De Jager PL , Deramecourt V , Johnston JA , Evans D , Lovestone S , Letenneur L , Morón FJ , Rubinsztein DC , Eiriksdottir G , Sleegers K , Goate AM , Fiévet N , Huentelman MW , Gill M , Brown K , Kamboh MI , Keller L , Barberger-Gateau P , McGuiness B , Larson EB , Green R , Myers AJ , Dufouil C , Todd S , Wallon D , Love S , Rogaeva E , Gallacher J , St George-Hyslop P , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Bayer A , Tsuang DW , Yu L , Tsolaki M , Bossú P , Spalletta G , Proitsi P , Collinge J , Sorbi S , Sanchez-Garcia F , Fox NC , Hardy J , Deniz Naranjo MC , Bosco P , Clarke R , Brayne C , Galimberti D , Mancuso M , Matthews F , European Alzheimer’s Disease Initiative (EADI), Genetic and Environmental Risk in Alzheimer’s Disease; Alzheimer’s Disease Genetic Consortium; Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology, Moebus S , Mecocci P , Del Zompo M , Maier W , Hampel H , Pilotto A , Bullido M , Panza F , Caffarra P , Nacmias B , Gilbert JR , Mayhaus M , Lannefelt L , Hakonarson H , Pichler S , Carrasquillo MM , Ingelsson M , Beekly D , Alvarez V , Zou F , Valladares O , Younkin SG , Coto E , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Gu W , Razquin C , Pastor P , Mateo I , Owen MJ , Faber KM , Jonsson PV , Combarros O , O’Donovan MC , Cantwell LB , Soininen H , Blacker D , Mead S , Mosley TH , Bennett DA , Harris TB , Fratiglioni L , Holmes C , de Bruijn RF , Passmore P , Montine TJ , Bettens K , Rotter JI , Brice A , Morgan K , Foroud TM , Kukull WA , Hannequin D , Powell JF , Nalls MA , Ritchie K , Lunetta KL , Kauwe JS , Boerwinkle E , Riemenschneider M , Boada M , Hiltuenen M , Martin ER , Schmidt R , Rujescu D , Wang LS , Dartigues JF , Mayeux R , Tzourio C , Hofman A , Nöthen MM , Graff C , Psaty BM , Jones L , Haines JL , Holmans PA , Lathrop M , Pericak-Vance MA , Launer LJ , Farrer LA , van Duijn CM , Van Broeckhoven C , Moskvina V , Seshadri S , Williams J , Schellenberg GD , Amouyel P (2013) Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 45 , 1452–1458.24162737
[49] Desikan RS , Fan CC , Wang Y , Schork AJ , Cabral HJ , Cupples LA , Thompson WK , Besser L , Kukull WA , Holland D , Chen C-H , Brewer JB , Karow DS , Kauppi K , Witoelar A , Karch CM , Bonham LW , Yokoyama JS , Rosen HJ , Miller BL , Dillon WP , Wilson DM , Hess CP , Pericak-Vance M , Haines JL , Farrer LA , Mayeux R , Hardy J , Goate AM , Hyman BT , Schellenberg GD , McEvoy LK , Andreassen OA , Dale AM (2017) Genetic assessment of age-associated Alzheimer disease risk: Development and validation of a polygenic hazard score. PLoS Med 14 , e1002258.28323831
[50] Launer LJ , Ross GW , Petrovitch H , Masaki K , Foley D , White LR , Havlik RJ (2000) Midlife blood pressure and dementia: the Honolulu-Asia aging study. Neurobiol Aging 21 , 49–55.10794848
[51] Kivipelto M , Helkala EL , Laakso MP , Hänninen T , Hallikainen M , Alhainen K , Soininen H , Tuomilehto J , Nissinen A (2001) Midlife vascular risk factors and Alzheimer’s disease in later life: longitudinal, population based study. BMJ 322 , 1447–1451.11408299
[52] Whitmer RA , Sidney S , Selby J , Johnston SC , Yaffe K (2005) Midlife cardiovascular risk factors and risk of dementia in late life. Neurology 64 , 277–281.15668425
[53] McGrath ER , Beiser AS , DeCarli C , Plourde KL , Vasan RS , Greenberg SM , Seshadri S (2017) Blood pressure from mid- to late life and risk of incident dementia. Neurology 89 , 2447–2454.29117954
[54] Petrovitch H , White LR , Izmirilian G , Ross GW , Havlik RJ , Markesbery W , Nelson J , Davis DG , Hardman J , Foley DJ , Launer LJ (2000) Midlife blood pressure and neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and brain weight at death: the HAAS. Honolulu-Asia aging Study. Neurobiol Aging 21 , 57–62.10794849
[55] Qiu C , von Strauss E , Fastbom J , Winblad B , Fratiglioni L (2003) Low blood pressure and risk of dementia in the Kungsholmen project: a 6-year follow-up study. Arch Neurol 60 , 223–228.12580707
[56] Ruitenberg A , Skoog I , Ott A , Aevarsson O , Witteman JC , Lernfelt B , van Harskamp F , Hofman A , Breteler MM (2001) Blood pressure and risk of dementia: results from the Rotterdam study and the Gothenburg H-70 Study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 12 , 33–39.11125239
[57] Verghese J , Lipton RB , Hall CB , Kuslansky G , Katz MJ (2003) Low blood pressure and the risk of dementia in very old individuals. Neurology 61 , 1667–1672.14694027
[58] Qiu C , Winblad B , Fratiglioni L (2009) Low diastolic pressure and risk of dementia in very old people: a longitudinal study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 28 , 213–219.19752556
[59] Rajan KB , Barnes LL , Wilson RS , Weuve J , McAninch EA , Evans DA (2018) Blood pressure and risk of incident Alzheimer’s disease dementia by antihypertensive medications and APOE ε4 allele. Ann Neurol 83 , 935–944.29637601
[60] Corrada MM , Hayden KM , Paganini-Hill A , Bullain SS , DeMoss J , Aguirre C , Brookmeyer R , Kawas CH (2017) Age of onset of hypertension and risk of dementia in the oldest-old: The 90+ Study. Alzheimers Dement 13 , 103–110.28108119
[61] Cifuentes D , Poittevin M , Dere E , Broquères-You D , Bonnin P , Benessiano J , Pocard M , Mariani J , Kubis N , Merkulova-Rainon T , Lévy BI (2015) Hypertension accelerates the progression of Alzheimer-like pathology in a mouse model of the disease. Hypertension 65 , 218–224.25331846
[62] Kruyer A , Soplop N , Strickland S , Norris EH (2015) Chronic hypertension leads to neurodegeneration in the TgSwDI mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Hypertension 66 , 175–182.25941345
[63] Faraco G , Park L , Zhou P , Luo W , Paul SM , Anrather J , Iadecola C (2016) Hypertension enhances Aβ-induced neurovascular dysfunction, promotes β-secretase activity, and leads to amyloidogenic processing of APP. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 36 , 241–252.25920959
[64] Taheri S , Yu J , Zhu H , Kindy MS (2016) High-sodium diet has opposing effects on mean arterial blood pressure and cerebral perfusion in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 54 , 1061–1072.27567835
[65] Wang J , Wright HM , Vempati P , Li H , Wangsa J , Dzhuan A , Habbu K , Knable LA , Ho L , Pasinetti GM (2013) Investigation of nebivolol as a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 33 , 1147–1156.23128558
[66] Dobarro M , Gerenu G , Ramírez MJ (2013) Propranolol reduces cognitive deficits, amyloid and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 16 , 2245–2257.23768694
[67] Paris D , Bachmeier C , Patel N , Quadros A , Volmar C- H , Laporte V , Ganey J , Beaulieu-Abdelahad D , Ait-Ghezala G , Crawford F , Mullan MJ (2011) Selective antihypertensive dihydropyridines lower Aβ accumulation by targeting both the production and the clearance of Aβ across the blood-brain barrier. Mol Med 17 , 149–162.21170472
[68] Dong Y-F , Kataoka K , Tokutomi Y , Nako H , Nakamura T , Toyama K , Sueta D , Koibuchi N , Yamamoto E , Ogawa H , Kim-Mitsuyama S (2011) Perindopril, a centrally active angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, prevents cognitive impairment in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J 25 , 2911–2920.21593435
[69] Wang J , Ho L , Chen L , Zhao Z , Zhao W , Qian X , Humala N , Seror I , Bartholomew S , Rosendorff C , Pasinetti GM (2007) Valsartan lowers brain beta-amyloid protein levels and improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Clin Invest 117 , 3393–3402.17965777
[70] Wiesmann M , Capone C , Zerbi V , Mellendijk L , Heerschap A , Claassen JAHR , Kiliaan AJ (2015) Hypertension impairs cerebral blood flow in a mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer Res 12 , 914–922.26502817
[71] Tzourio C , Anderson C , Chapman N , Woodward M , Neal B , MacMahon S , Chalmers J , Collaborative PROGRESS, Group (2003) Effects of blood pressure lowering with perindopril and indapamide therapy on dementia and cognitive decline in patients with cerebrovascular disease. Arch Intern Med 163 , 1069–1075.12742805
[72] Peila R , Rodriguez BL , Launer LJ , Honolulu-Asia Aging, Study (2002) Type 2 diabetes, APOE gene, and the risk for dementia and related pathologies: The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Diabetes 51 , 1256–1262.11916953
[73] Schnaider Beeri M , Goldbourt U , Silverman JM , Noy S , Schmeidler J , Ravona-Springer R , Sverdlick A , Davidson M (2004) Diabetes mellitus in midlife and the risk of dementia three decades later. Neurology 63 , 1902–1907.15557509
[74] Irie F , Fitzpatrick AL , Lopez OL , Kuller LH , Peila R , Newman AB , Launer LJ (2008) Enhanced risk for Alzheimer disease in persons with type 2 diabetes and APOE epsilon4: the Cardiovascular Health Study Cognition Study. Arch Neurol 65 , 89–93.18195144
[75] Wang K-C , Woung L-C , Tsai M-T , Liu C-C , Su Y-H , Li C-Y (2012) Risk of Alzheimer’s disease in relation to diabetes: a population-based cohort study. Neuroepidemiology 38 , 237–244.22572745
[76] Akomolafe A , Beiser A , Meigs JB , Au R , Green RC , Farrer LA , Wolf PA , Seshadri S (2006) Diabetes mellitus and risk of developing Alzheimer disease: results from the Framingham Study. Arch Neurol 63 , 1551–1555.17101823
[77] Zhang J , Chen C , Hua S , Liao H , Wang M , Xiong Y , Cao F (2017) An updated meta-analysis of cohort studies: Diabetes and risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 124 , 41–47.28088029
[78] Arvanitakis Z , Schneider JA , Wilson RS , Li Y , Arnold SE , Wang Z , Bennett DA (2006) Diabetes is related to cerebral infarction but not to AD pathology in older persons. Neurology 67 , 1960–1965.17159101
[79] Malek-Ahmadi M , Beach T , Obradov A , Sue L , Belden C , Davis K , Walker DG , Lue L , Adem A , Sabbagh MN (2013) Increased Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology is associated with type 2 diabetes and ApoE s.4 carrier status. Curr Alzheimer Res 10 , 654–659.23627755
[80] Dos Santos Matioli MNP , Suemoto CK , Rodriguez RD , Farias DS , da Silva MM , Leite REP , Ferretti-Rebustini REL , Farfel JM , Pasqualucci CA , Jacob Filho W , Arvanitakis Z , Naslavsky MS , Zatz M , Grinberg LT , Nitrini R (2017) Diabetes is not associated with Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. J Alzheimers Dis 60 , 1035–1043.28984587
[81] Kurochkin IV , Goto S (1994) Alzheimer’s beta-amyloid peptide specifically interacts with and is degraded by insulin degrading enzyme. FEBS Lett 345 , 33–37.8194595
[82] Yan SD , Chen X , Fu J , Chen M , Zhu H , Roher A , Slattery T , Zhao L , Nagashima M , Morser J , Migheli A , Nawroth P , Stern D , Schmidt AM (1996) RAGE and amyloid-beta peptide neurotoxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 382 , 685–691.8751438
[83] Mackic JB , Stins M , McComb JG , Calero M , Ghiso J , Kim KS , Yan SD , Stern D , Schmidt AM , Frangione B , Zlokovic BV (1998) Human blood-brain barrier receptors for Alzheimer’s amyloid-beta 1– 40. Asymmetrical binding, endocytosis, and transcytosis at the apical side of brain microvascular endothelial cell monolayer. J Clin Invest 102 , 734–743.9710442
[84] Carro E , Trejo JL , Gomez-Isla T , LeRoith D , Torres-Aleman I (2002) Serum insulin-like growth factor I regulates brain amyloid-beta levels. Nat Med 8 , 1390–1397.12415260
[85] Stanley M , Macauley SL , Caesar EE , Koscal LJ , Moritz W , Robinson GO , Roh J , Keyser J , Jiang H , Holtzman DM (2016) The effects of peripheral and central high insulin on brain insulin signaling and amyloid-β in young and old APP/PS1 mice. J Neurosci 36 , 11704–11715.27852778
[86] Macauley SL , Stanley M , Caesar EE , Yamada SA , Raichle ME , Perez R , Mahan TE , Sutphen CL , Holtzman DM (2015) Hyperglycemia modulates extracellular amyloid-β concentrations and neuronal activity in vivo. J Clin Invest 125 , 2463–2467.25938784
[87] Ramos-Rodriguez JJ , Infante-Garcia C , Galindo-Gonzalez L , Garcia-Molina Y , Lechuga-Sancho A , Garcia-Alloza M (2016) Increased spontaneous central bleeding and cognition impairment in APP/PS1 mice with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus. Mol Neurobiol 53 , 2685–2697.26156287
[88] Ramos-Rodriguez JJ , Spires-Jones T , Pooler AM , Lechuga-Sancho AM , Bacskai BJ , Garcia-Alloza M (2017) Progressive neuronal pathology and synaptic loss induced by prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurobiol 54 , 3428–3438.27177549
[89] Luchsinger JA , Perez T , Chang H , Mehta P , Steffener J , Pradabhan G , Ichise M , Manly J , Devanand DP , Bagiella E (2016) Metformin in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: results of a pilot randomized placebo controlled clinical trial. J Alzheimers Dis 51 , 501–514.26890736
[90] Koenig AM , Mechanic-Hamilton D , Xie SX , Combs MF , Cappola AR , Xie L , Detre JA , Wolk DA , Arnold SE (2017) Effects of the insulin sensitizer metformin in Alzheimer disease: pilot data from a randomized placebo-controlled crossover study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 31 , 107–113.28538088
[91] Craft S , Baker LD , Montine TJ , Minoshima S , Watson GS , Claxton A , Arbuckle M , Callaghan M , Tsai E , Plymate SR , Green PS , Leverenz J , Cross D , Gerton B (2012) Intranasal insulin therapy for Alzheimer disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a pilot clinical trial. Arch Neurol 69 , 29–38.21911655
[92] Craft S , Claxton A , Baker LD , Hanson AJ , Cholerton B , Trittschuh EH , Dahl D , Caulder E , Neth B , Montine TJ , Jung Y , Maldjian J , Whitlow C , Friedman S (2017) Effects of regular and long-acting insulin on cognition and Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers: a pilot clinical trial. J Alzheimers Dis 57 , 1325–1334.28372335
[93] Claxton A , Baker LD , Hanson A , Trittschuh EH , Cholerton B , Morgan A , Callaghan M , Arbuckle M , Behl C , Craft S (2015) Long-acting intranasal insulin detemir improves cognition for adults with mild cognitive impairment or early-stage Alzheimer’s disease dementia. J Alzheimers Dis 44 , 897–906.25374101
[94] Gold M , Alderton C , Zvartau-Hind M , Egginton S , Saunders AM , Irizarry M , Craft S , Landreth G , Linnamägi U , Sawchak S (2010) Rosiglitazone monotherapy in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 30 , 131–146.20733306
[95] Solomon A , Kåreholt I , Ngandu T , Winblad B , Nissinen A , Tuomilehto J , Soininen H , Kivipelto M (2007) Serum cholesterol changes after midlife and late-life cognition: twenty-one-year follow-up study. Neurology 68 , 751–756.17339582
[96] Mielke MM , Zandi PP , Shao H , Waern M , Ö stling S , Guo X , Björkelund C , Lissner L , Skoog I , Gustafson DR (2010) The 32-year relationship between cholesterol and dementia from midlife to late life. Neurology 75 , 1888–1895.21068429
[97] Mielke MM , Zandi PP , Sjögren M , Gustafson D , Ostling S , Steen B , Skoog I (2005) High total cholesterol levels in late life associated with a reduced risk of dementia. Neurology 64 , 1689–1695.15911792
[98] Li G , Shofer JB , Kukull WA , Peskind ER , Tsuang DW , Breitner JCS , McCormick W , Bowen JD , Teri L , Schellenberg GD , Larson EB (2005) Serum cholesterol and risk of Alzheimer disease: a community-based cohort study. Neurology 65 , 1045–1050.16217057
[99] Jick H , Zornberg GL , Jick SS , Seshadri S , Drachman DA (2000) Statins and the risk of dementia. Lancet 356 , 1627–1631.11089820
[100] Wolozin B , Kellman W , Ruosseau P , Celesia GG , Siegel G (2000) Decreased prevalence of Alzheimer disease associated with 3-hydroxy-3-methyglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors. Arch Neurol 57 , 1439–1443.11030795
[101] Zandi PP , Sparks DL , Khachaturian AS , Tschanz J , Norton M , Steinberg M , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Breitner JCS , Cache County Study investigators (2005) Do statins reduce risk of incident dementia and Alzheimer disease? The Cache County Study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62 , 217–224.15699299
[102] Rea TD , Breitner JC , Psaty BM , Fitzpatrick AL , Lopez OL , Newman AB , Hazzard WR , Zandi PP , Burke GL , Lyketsos CG , Bernick C , Kuller LH (2005) Statin use and the risk of incident dementia: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Arch Neurol 62 , 1047–1051.16009757
[103] Haag MDM , Hofman A , Koudstaal PJ , Stricker BHC , Breteler MMB (2009) Statins are associated with a reduced risk of Alzheimer disease regardless of lipophilicity. The Rotterdam Study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 80 , 13–17.18931004
[104] Arvanitakis Z , Schneider JA , Wilson RS , Bienias JL , Kelly JF , Evans DA , Bennett DA (2008) Statins, incident Alzheimer disease, change in cognitive function, and neuropathology. Neurology 70 , 1795–1802.18199831
[105] Cramer C , Haan MN , Galea S , Langa KM , Kalbfleisch JD (2008) Use of statins and incidence of dementia and cognitive impairment without dementia in a cohort study. Neurology 71 , 344–350.18663180
[106] Pappolla MA , Bryant-Thomas TK , Herbert D , Pacheco J , Fabra Garcia M , Manjon M , Girones X , Henry TL , Matsubara E , Zambon D , Wolozin B , Sano M , Cruz-Sanchez FF , Thal LJ , Petanceska SS , Refolo LM (2003) Mild hypercholesterolemia is an early risk factor for the development of Alzheimer amyloid pathology. Neurology 61 , 199–205.12874399
[107] Bettcher BM , Ard MC , Reed BR , Benitez A , Simmons A , Larson EB , Sonnen JA , Montine TJ , Li G , Keene CD , Crane PK , Mungas D (2017) Association between cholesterol exposure and neuropathological findings: The ACT Study. J Alzheimers Dis 59 , 1307–1315.28731431
[108] Li G , Larson EB , Sonnen JA , Shofer JB , Petrie EC , Schantz A , Peskind ER , Raskind MA , Breitner JCS , Montine TJ (2007) Statin therapy is associated with reduced neuropathologic changes of Alzheimer disease. Neurology 69 , 878–885.17724290
[109] Refolo LM , Malester B , LaFrancois J , Bryant-Thomas T , Wang R , Tint GS , Sambamurti K , Duff K , Pappolla MA (2000) Hypercholesterolemia accelerates the Alzheimer’s amyloid pathology in a transgenic mouse model. Neurobiol Dis 7 , 321–331.10964604
[110] Shie F-S , Jin L-W , Cook DG , Leverenz JB , LeBoeuf RC (2002) Diet-induced hypercholesterolemia enhances brain A beta accumulation in transgenic mice. Neuroreport 13 , 455–459.11930160
[111] Kurata T , Miyazaki K , Kozuki M , Morimoto N , Ohta Y , Ikeda Y , Abe K (2012) Atorvastatin and pitavastatin reduce senile plaques and inflammatory responses in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol Res 34 , 601–610.22732109
[112] Li L , Cao D , Kim H , Lester R , Fukuchi K- I (2006) Simvastatin enhances learning and memory independent of amyloid load in mice. Ann Neurol 60 , 729–739.17192930
[113] Tong X-K , Lecrux C , Rosa-Neto P , Hamel E (2012) Age-dependent rescue by simvastatin of Alzheimer’s disease cerebrovascular and memory deficits. J Neurosci 32 , 4705–4715.22492027
[114] Boimel M , Grigoriadis N , Lourbopoulos A , Touloumi O , Rosenmann D , Abramsky O , Rosenmann H (2009) Statins reduce the neurofibrillary tangle burden in a mouse model of tauopathy. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 , 314–325.19225406
[115] Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group (2002) MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol lowering with simvastatin in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 360 , 7–22.12114036
[116] Shepherd J , Blauw GJ , Murphy MB , Bollen ELEM , Buckley BM , Cobbe SM , Ford I , Gaw A , Hyland M , Jukema JW , Kamper AM , Macfarlane PW , Meinders AE , Norrie J , Packard CJ , Perry IJ , Stott DJ , Sweeney BJ , Twomey C , Westendorp RGJ , PROSPER study group. PROspective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk (2002) Pravastatin in elderly individuals at risk of vascular disease (PROSPER): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 360 , 1623–1630.12457784
[117] Trompet S , van Vliet P , de Craen AJM , Jolles J , Buckley BM , Murphy MB , Ford I , Macfarlane PW , Sattar N , Packard CJ , Stott DJ , Shepherd J , Bollen ELEM , Blauw GJ , Jukema JW , Westendorp RGJ (2010) Pravastatin and cognitive function in the elderly. Results of the PROSPER study. J Neurol 257 , 85–90.19653027
[118] Sparks DL , Sabbagh MN , Connor DJ , Lopez J , Launer LJ , Browne P , Wasser D , Johnson-Traver S , Lochhead J , Ziolwolski C (2005) Atorvastatin for the treatment of mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: preliminary results. Arch Neurol 62 , 753–757.15883262
[119] Feldman HH , Doody RS , Kivipelto M , Sparks DL , Waters DD , Jones RW , Schwam E , Schindler R , Hey-Hadavi J , DeMicco DA , Breazna A , LEADe Investigators (2010) Randomized controlled trial of atorvastatin in mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: LEADe. Neurology 74 , 956–964.20200346
[120] Sano M , Bell KL , Galasko D , Galvin JE , Thomas RG , van Dyck CH , Aisen PS (2011) A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of simvastatin to treat Alzheimer disease. Neurology 77 , 556–563.21795660
[121] Ott A , Slooter AJ , Hofman A , van Harskamp F , Witteman JC , Van Broeckhoven C , van Duijn CM , Breteler MM (1998) Smoking and risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in a population-based cohort study: the Rotterdam Study. Lancet 351 , 1840–1843.9652667
[122] Merchant C , Tang MX , Albert S , Manly J , Stern Y , Mayeux R (1999) The influence of smoking on the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 52 , 1408–1412.10227626
[123] Aggarwal NT , Bienias JL , Bennett DA , Wilson RS , Morris MC , Schneider JA , Shah RC , Evans DA (2006) The relation of cigarette smoking to incident Alzheimer’s disease in a biracial urban community population. Neuroepidemiology 26 , 140–146.16493200
[124] Zhong G , Wang Y , Zhang Y , Guo JJ , Zhao Y (2015) Smoking is associated with an increased risk of dementia: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies with investigation of potential effect modifiers. PloS One 10 , e0118333–.25763939
[125] Tyas SL , White LR , Petrovitch H , Webster Ross G , Foley DJ , Heimovitz HK , Launer LJ (2003) Mid-life smoking and late-life dementia: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Neurobiol Aging 24 , 589–596.12714116
[126] Barnes DE , Haight TJ , Mehta KM , Carlson MC , Kuller LH , Tager IB (2010) Secondhand smoke, vascular disease, and dementia incidence: findings from the cardiovascular health cognition study. Am J Epidemiol 171 , 292–302.20051462
[127] Chen R (2012) Association of environmental tobacco smoke with dementia and Alzheimer’s disease among never smokers. Alzheimers Dement 8 , 590–595.22197095
[128] Moreno-Gonzalez I , Estrada LD , Sanchez-Mejias E , Soto C (2013) Smoking exacerbates amyloid pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 4 , 1495.23422663
[129] Nordberg A , Hellström-Lindahl E , Lee M , Johnson M , Mousavi M , Hall R , Perry E , Bednar I , Court J (2002) Chronic nicotine treatment reduces beta-amyloidosis in the brain of a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease (APPsw). J Neurochem 81 , 655–658.12065674
[130] Sabbagh MN , Walker DG , Reid RT , Stadnick T , Anand K , Lue L-F (2008) Absence of effect of chronic nicotine administration on amyloid beta peptide levels in transgenic mice overexpressing mutated human APP (Sw, Ind). Neurosci Lett 448 , 217–220.18926877
[131] Oddo S , Caccamo A , Green KN , Liang K , Tran L , Chen Y , Leslie FM , LaFerla FM (2005) Chronic nicotine administration exacerbates tau pathology in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 , 3046–3051.15705720
[132] Echeverria V , Zeitlin R , Burgess S , Patel S , Barman A , Thakur G , Mamcarz M , Wang L , Sattelle DB , Kirschner DA , Mori T , Leblanc RM , Prabhakar R , Arendash GW (2011) Cotinine reduces amyloid-β aggregation and improves memory in Alzheimer’s disease mice. J Alzheimers Dis 24 , 817–835.21321389
[133] Almeida OP , Garrido GJ , Alfonso H , Hulse G , Lautenschlager NT , Hankey GJ , Flicker L (2011) 24-month effect of smoking cessation on cognitive function and brain structure in later life. Neuroimage 55 , 1480–1489.21281718
[134] Pell JP , Haw S , Cobbe S , Newby DE , Pell ACH , Fischbacher C , McConnachie A , Pringle S , Murdoch D , Dunn F , Oldroyd K , Macintyre P , O’Rourke B , Borland W (2008) Smoke-free legislation and hospitalizations for acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med 359 , 482–491.18669427
[135] Been JV , Nurmatov UB , Cox B , Nawrot TS , van Schayck CP , Sheikh A (2014) Effect of smoke-free legislation on perinatal and child health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 383 , 1549–1560.24680633
[136] Orgogozo JM , Dartigues JF , Lafont S , Letenneur L , Commenges D , Salamon R , Renaud S , Breteler MB (1997) Wine consumption and dementia in the elderly: a prospective community study in the Bordeaux area. Rev Neurol (Paris) 153 , 185–192.9296132
[137] Ruitenberg A , van Swieten JC , Witteman JCM , Mehta KM , van Duijn CM , Hofman A , Breteler MMB (2002) Alcohol consumption and risk of dementia: the Rotterdam Study. Lancet 359 , 281–286.11830193
[138] Luchsinger JA , Tang M-X , Siddiqui M , Shea S , Mayeux R (2004) Alcohol intake and risk of dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc 52 , 540–546.15066068
[139] Anstey KJ , Mack HA , Cherbuin N (2009) Alcohol consumption as a risk factor for dementia and cognitive decline: meta-analysis of prospective studies. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 17 , 542–555.19546653
[140] Langballe EM , Ask H , Holmen J , Stordal E , Saltvedt I , Selbæk G , Fikseaunet A , Bergh S , Nafstad P , Tambs K (2015) Alcohol consumption and risk of dementia up to 27 years later in a large, population-based sample: the HUNT study, Norway. Eur J Epidemiol 30 , 1049–1056.25968174
[141] Wang J , Ho L , Zhao Z , Seror I , Humala N , Dickstein DL , Thiyagarajan M , Percival SS , Talcott ST , Pasinetti GM (2006) Moderate consumption of Cabernet Sauvignon attenuates Abeta neuropathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J 20 , 2313–2320.17077308
[142] Wang J , Ho L , Zhao W , Ono K , Rosensweig C , Chen L , Humala N , Teplow DB , Pasinetti GM (2008) Grapederived polyphenolics prevent Abeta oligomerization and attenuate cognitive deterioration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 28 , 6388–6392.18562609
[143] Ho L , Chen LH , Wang J , Zhao W , Talcott ST , Ono K , Teplow D , Humala N , Cheng A , Percival SS , Ferruzzi M , Janle E , Dickstein DL , Pasinetti GM (2009) Heterogeneity in red wine polyphenolic contents differentially influences Alzheimer’s disease-type neuropathology and cognitive deterioration. J Alzheimers Dis 16 , 59–72.19158422
[144] Marambaud P , Zhao H , Davies P (2005) Resveratrol promotes clearance of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-beta peptides. J Biol Chem 280 , 37377–37382.16162502
[145] Karuppagounder SS , Pinto JT , Xu H , Chen H-L , Beal MF , Gibson GE (2009) Dietary supplementation with resveratrol reduces plaque pathology in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem Int 54 , 111–118.19041676
[146] Turner RS , Thomas RG , Craft S , van Dyck CH , Mintzer J , Reynolds BA , Brewer JB , Rissman RA , Raman R , Aisen PS , Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study (2005) A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of resveratrol for Alzheimer disease. Neurology 85 , 1383–1391.
[147] Kivipelto M , Ngandu T , Fratiglioni L , Viitanen M , Kareholt˚ I , Winblad B , Helkala E-L , Tuomilehto J , Soininen H , Nissinen A (2005) Obesity and vascular risk factors at midlife and the risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 62 , 1556–1560.16216938
[148] Wolf PA , Beiser A , Elias MF , Au R , Vasan RS , Seshadri S (2007) Relation of obesity to cognitive function: importance of central obesity and synergistic influence of concomitant hypertension. The Framingham Heart Study Curr Alzheimer Res 4 , 111–116.17430232
[149] Fitzpatrick AL , Kuller LH , Lopez OL , Diehr P , O’Meara ES , Longstreth WT , Luchsinger JA (2009) Midlife and late-life obesity and the risk of dementia: cardiovascular health study. Arch Neurol 66 , 336–342.19273752
[150] Gustafson DR , Bäckman K , Waern M , Ostling S , Guo X , Zandi P , Mielke MM , Bengtsson C , Skoog I (2009) Adiposity indicators and dementia over 32 years in Sweden. Neurology 73 , 1559–1566.19901247
[151] Tolppanen A-M , Ngandu T , Kareholt˚ I , Laatikainen T , Rusanen M , Soininen H , Kivipelto M (2014) Midlife and late-life body mass index and late-life dementia: results from a prospective population-based cohort. J Alzheimers Dis 38 , 201–209.23948937
[152] Singh-Manoux A , Dugravot A , Shipley M , Brunner EJ , Elbaz A , Sabia S , Kivimaki M (2018) Obesity trajectories and risk of dementia: 28 years of follow-up in the Whitehall II Study. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 178–186.28943197
[153] Kivimäki M , Luukkonen R , Batty GD , Ferrie JE , Pentti J , Nyberg ST , Shipley MJ , Alfredsson L , Fransson EI , Goldberg M , Knutsson A , Koskenvuo M , Kuosma E , Nordin M , Suominen SB , Theorell T , Vuoksimaa E , Westerholm P , Westerlund H , Zins M , Kivipelto M , Vahtera J , Kaprio J , Singh-Manoux A , Jokela M (2018) Body mass index and risk of dementia: Analysis of individual-level data from 1.3 million individuals. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 601–609.29169013
[154] Ho AJ , Raji CA , Becker JT , Lopez OL , Kuller LH , Hua X , Lee S , Hibar D , Dinov ID , Stein JL , Jack CR , Weiner MW , Toga AW , Thompson PM , Cardiovascular Health Study ADNI (2010) Obesity is linked with lower brain volume in 700 AD and MCI patients. Neurobiol Aging 31 , 1326–1339.20570405
[155] Chuang Y-F , An Y , Bilgel M , Wong DF , Troncoso JC , O’Brien RJ , Breitner JC , Ferruci L , Resnick SM , Thambisetty M (2016) Midlife adiposity predicts earlier onset of Alzheimer’s dementia, neuropathology and presymptomatic cerebral amyloid accumulation. Mol Psychiatry 21 , 910–915.26324099
[156] Scarmeas N , Stern Y , Tang M-X , Mayeux R , Luchsinger JA (2006) Mediterranean diet and risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 59 , 912–921.16622828
[157] Scarmeas N , Stern Y , Mayeux R , Manly JJ , Schupf N , Luchsinger JA (2009) Mediterranean diet and mild cognitive impairment. Arch Neurol 66 , 216–225.19204158
[158] Gardener S , Gu Y , Rainey-Smith SR , Keogh JB , Clifton PM , Mathieson SL , Taddei K , Mondal A , Ward VK , Scarmeas N , Barnes M , Ellis KA , Head R , Masters CL , Ames D , Macaulay SL , Rowe CC , Szoeke C , Martins RN , AIBL Research Group (2012) Adherence to a Mediterranean diet and Alzheimer’s disease risk in an Australian population. Transl Psychiatry 2 , e164.23032941
[159] Anastasiou CA , Yannakoulia M , Kosmidis MH , Dardiotis E , Hadjigeorgiou GM , Sakka P , Arampatzi X , Bougea A , Labropoulos I , Scarmeas N (2017) Mediterranean diet and cognitive health: Initial results from the Hellenic Lon-gitudinal Investigation of Ageing and Diet. PloS One 12 , e0182048.28763509
[160] Scarmeas N , Luchsinger JA , Mayeux R , Stern Y (2007) Mediterranean diet and Alzheimer disease mortality. Neurology 69 , 1084–1093.17846408
[161] Scarmeas N , Luchsinger JA , Stern Y , Gu Y , He J , DeCarli C , Brown T , Brickman AM (2011) Mediterranean diet and magnetic resonance imaging-assessed cerebrovascular disease. Ann Neurol 69 , 257–268.21387371
[162] Tektonidis TG , Åkesson A , Gigante B , Wolk A , Larsson SC (2015) A Mediterranean diet and risk of myocardial infarction, heart failure and stroke: A population-based cohort study. Atherosclerosis 243 , 93–98.26363438
[163] Gardener H , Wright CB , Gu Y , Demmer RT , Boden-Albala B , Elkind MSV , Sacco RL , Scarmeas N (2011) Mediterranean-style diet and risk of ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, and vascular death: the Northern Manhattan Study. Am J Clin Nutr 94 , 1458–1464.22071704
[164] Estruch R , Ros E , Salas-Salvadó J , Covas M-I , Corella D , Arós F , Gómez-Gracia E , Ruiz-Gutiérrez V , Fiol M , Lapetra J , Lamuela-Raventos RM , Serra-Majem L , Pintó X , Basora J , Munoz MA , Sorlí JV , Martinez JA , Martinez-González MA , PREDIMED Study Inves- JA , tigators (2013) Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet N Engl J Med 368 , 1279–1290.23432189
[165] Panagiotakos DB , Georgousopoulou EN , Pitsavos C , Chrysohoou C , Skoumas I , Pitaraki E , Georgiopoulos GA , Ntertimani M , Christou A , Stefanadis C , ATTICA Study Group (2015) Exploring the path of Mediterranean diet on 10-year incidence of cardiovascular disease: the ATTICA study (2002–2012). Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 25 , 327–335.25445882
[166] Scarmeas N , Stern Y , Mayeux R , Luchsinger JA (2006) Mediterranean diet, Alzheimer disease, and vascular mediation. Arch Neurol 63 , 1709–1717.17030648
[167] Berti V , Walters M , Sterling J , Quinn CG , Logue M , Andrews R , Matthews DC , Osorio RS , Pupi A , Vallabhajosula S , Isaacson RS , de Leon MJ , Mosconi L (2018) Mediterranean diet and 3-year Alzheimer brain biomarker changes in middle-aged adults. Neurology 90 , e1789–e1798.29653991
[168] Scarmeas N , Anastasiou CA , Yannakoulia M (2018) Nutrition and prevention of cognitive impairment. Lancet Neurol 17 , 1006–1015.30244829
[169] Morris MC , Evans DA , Tangney CC , Bienias JL , Wilson RS (2005) Fish consumption and cognitive decline with age in a large community study. Arch Neurol 62 , 1849–1853.16216930
[170] Qin B , Plassman BL , Edwards LJ , Popkin BM , Adair LS , Mendez MA (2014) Fish intake is associated with slower cognitive decline in Chinese older adults. J Nutr 144 , 1579–1585.25080536
[171] Kang JH , Ascherio A , Grodstein F (2005) Fruit and vegetable consumption and cognitive decline in aging women. Ann Neurol 57 , 713–720.15852398
[172] Morris MC , Evans DA , Tangney CC , Bienias JL , Wilson RS (2006) Associations of vegetable and fruit consumption with age-related cognitive change. Neurology 67 , 1370–1376.17060562
[173] Morris MC , Wang Y , Barnes LL , Bennett DA , Dawson-Hughes B , Booth SL (2018) Nutrients and bioactives in green leafy vegetables and cognitive decline: Prospective study. Neurology 90 , e214–e222.29263222
[174] Kalmijn S , Launer LJ , Ott A , Witteman JC , Hofman A , Breteler MM (1997) Dietary fat intake and the risk of incident dementia in the Rotterdam Study. Ann Neurol 42 , 776–782.9392577
[175] Morris MC , Evans DA , Bienias JL , Tangney CC , Wilson RS (2004) Dietary fat intake and 6-year cognitive change in an older biracial community population. Neurology 62 , 1573–1579.15136684
[176] Morris MC , Evans DA , Tangney CC , Bienias JL , Schneider JA , Wilson RS , Scherr PA (2006) Dietary copper and high saturated and trans fat intakes associated with cognitive decline. Arch Neurol 63 , 1085–1088.16908733
[177] Engelhart MJ , Geerlings MI , Ruitenberg A , Van Swieten JC , Hofman A , Witteman JCM , Breteler MMB (2002) Diet and risk of dementia: Does fat matter?: The Rotterdam Study. Neurology 59 , 1915–1921.12499483
[178] Morris MC , Evans DA , Bienias JL , Tangney CC , Wilson RS (2002) Vitamin E and cognitive decline in older persons. Arch Neurol 59 , 1125–1132.12117360
[179] Li F-J , Shen L , Ji H-F (2012) Dietary intakes of vitamin E, vitamin C, and b-carotene and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis. J Alzheimers Dis 31 , 253–258.22543848
[180] Balion C , Griffith LE , Strifler L , Henderson M , Patterson C , Heckman G , Llewellyn DJ , Raina P (2012) Vitamin D, cognition, and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurology 79 , 1397–1405.23008220
[181] Wang HX , Wahlin A , Basun H , Fastbom J , Winblad B , Fratiglioni L (2001) Vitamin B(12) and folate in relation to the development of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 56 , 1188–1194.11342684
[182] Morris MC , Evans DA , Bienias JL , Tangney CC , Hebert LE , Scherr PA , Schneider JA (2005) Dietary folate and vitamin B12 intake and cognitive decline among community-dwelling older persons. Arch Neurol 62 , 641–645.15824266
[183] Lopes da Silva S , Vellas B , Elemans S , Luchsinger J , Kamphuis P , Yaffe K , Sijben J , Groenendijk M , Stijnen T (2014) Plasma nutrient status of patients with Alzheimer’s disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Alzheimers Dement 10 , 485–502.24144963
[184] Olde Rikkert MGM , Verhey FR , Sijben JWC , Bouwman FH , Dautzenberg PLJ , Lansink M , Sipers WMW , van Asselt DZB , van Hees AMJ , Stevens M , Vellas B , Scheltens P (2014) Differences in nutritional status between very mild Alzheimer’s disease patients and healthy controls. J Alzheimers Dis 41 , 261–271.24614903
[185] Maesako M , Uemura K , Kubota M , Kuzuya A , Sasaki K , Asada M , Watanabe K , Hayashida N , Ihara M , Ito H , Shimohama S , Kihara T , Kinoshita A (2012) Environmental enrichment ameliorated high-fat diet-induced Ab deposition and memory deficit in APP transgenic mice Neurobiol Aging 33 , 1011.e11–23.
[186] Maesako M , Uemura K , Kubota M , Kuzuya A , Sasaki K , Hayashida N , Asada-Utsugi M , Watanabe K , Uemura M , Kihara T , Takahashi R , Shimohama S , Kinoshita A (2012) Exercise is more effective than diet control in preventing high fat diet-induced b-amyloid deposition and memory deficit in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. J Biol Chem 287 , 23024–23033.22563077
[187] Leboucher A , Laurent C , Fernandez-Gomez F-J , Burnouf S , Troquier L , Eddarkaoui S , Demeyer D , Caillierez R , Zommer N , Vallez E , Bantubungi K , Breton C , Pigny P , Buée-Scherrer V , Staels B , Hamdane M , Tailleux A , Buée L , Blum D (2013) Detrimental effects of diet-induced obesity on τ pathology are independent of insulin resistance in τ transgenic mice. Diabetes 62 , 1681–1688.23250356
[188] Gratuze M , Julien 1J , Morin F , Calon F , Hébert SS , Marette A , Planel E (2016) High-fat, high-sugar, and high-cholesterol consumption does not impact tau pathogenesis in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease-like tau pathology. Neurobiol Aging 47 , 71–73.27565300
[189] Grossi C , Rigacci S , Ambrosini S , Ed Dami T , Luc-carini I , Traini C , Failli P , Berti A , Casamenti F , Stefani M (2013) The polyphenol oleuropein aglycone protects TgCRND8 mice against Aß plaque pathology. PloS One 8 , e71702.23951225
[190] Qosa H , Batarseh YS , Mohyeldin MM , El Sayed KA , Keller JN , Kaddoumi A (2015) Oleocanthal enhances amyloid-b clearance from the brains of TgSwDI mice and in vitro across a human blood-brain barrier model. ACS Chem Neurosci 6 , 1849–1859.26348065
[191] Zhuo J-M , Praticò D (2010) Acceleration of brain amyloidosis in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model by a folate, vitamin B6 and B12-deficient diet. Exp Gerontol 45 , 195–201.20005283
[192] Sung S , Yao Y , Uryu K , Yang H , Lee VM-Y , Trojanowski JQ , Praticò D (2004) Early vitamin E supplementation in young but not aged mice reduces Abeta levels and amyloid deposition in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J 18 , 323–325.14656990
[193] Nishida Y , Yokota T , Takahashi T , Uchihara T , Jishage K , Mizusawa H (2006) Deletion of vitamin E enhances phenotype of Alzheimer disease model mouse. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 350 , 530–536.17026966
[194] Nishida Y , Ito S , Ohtsuki S , Yamamoto N , Takahashi T , Iwata N , Jishage K-I , Yamada H , Sasaguri H , Yokota S , Piao W , Tomimitsu H , Saido TC , Yanagisawa K , Terasaki T , Mizusawa H , Yokota T (2009) Depletion of vitamin E increases amyloid beta accumulation by decreasing its clearances from brain and blood in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem 284 , 33400–33408.19679659
[195] Lim GP , Calon F , Morihara T , Yang F , Teter B , Ubeda O , Salem N , Frautschy SA , Cole GM (2005) A diet enriched with the omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid reduces amyloid burden in an aged Alzheimer mouse model. J Neurosci 25 , 3032–3040.15788759
[196] Arendash GW , Jensen MT , Salem N , Hussein N , Cracchiolo J , Dickson A , Leighty R , Potter H (2007) A diet high in omega-3 fatty acids does not improve or protect cognitive performance in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Neuroscience 149 , 286–302.17904756
[197] Petersen RC , Thomas RG , Grundman M , Bennett D , Doody R , Ferris S , Galasko D , Jin S , Kaye J , Levey A , Pfeiffer E , Sano M , van Dyck CH , Thal LJ , Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study Group (2005) Vitamin E and donepezil for the treatment of mild cognitive impairment. N Engl J Med 352 , 2379–2388.15829527
[198] Galasko DR , Peskind E , Clark CM , Quinn JF , Ringman JM , Jicha GA , Cotman C , Cottrell B , Montine TJ , Thomas RG , Aisen P , Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative, Study (2012) Antioxidants for Alzheimer disease: a randomized clinical trial with cerebrospinal fluid biomarker measures. Arch Neurol 69 , 836–841.22431837
[199] Freund-Levi Y , Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M , Cederholm T , Basun H , Faxén-Irving G , Garlind A , Vedin I , Vessby B , Wahlund L-O , Palmblad J (2006) Omega-3 fatty acid treatment in 174 patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: OmegAD study: a randomized double-blind trial. Arch Neurol 63 , 1402–1408.17030655
[200] Andrieu S , Guyonnet S , Coley N , Cantet C , Bonnefoy M , Bordes S , Bories L , Cufi M-N , Dantoine T , Dartigues J-F , Desclaux F , Gabelle A , Gasnier Y , Pesce A , Sudres K , Touchon J , Robert P , Rouaud O , Legrand P , Payoux P , Caubere J-P , Weiner M , Carrié I , Ousset P-J , Vellas B , MAPT Study Group (2017), Effect of long-term omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation with or without multidomain intervention on cognitive function in elderly adults with memory complaints (MAPT): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 16 , 377–389.28359749
[201] Scheltens P , Kamphuis PJGH , Verhey FRJ , Olde Rikkert MGM , Wurtman RJ , Wilkinson D , Twisk JWR , Kurz A . (2010) Efficacy of a medical food in mild Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized, controlled trial. Alzheimers Dement 6 , 1–10.20129316
[202] Scheltens P , Twisk JWR , Blesa R , Scarpini E , von Arnim CAF , Bongers A , Harrison J , Swinkels SHN , Stam CJ , de Waal H , Wurtman RJ , Wieggers RL , Vellas B , Kamphuis PJGH (2012) Efficacy of Souvenaid in mild Alzheimer’s disease: results from a randomized, controlled trial. J Alzheimers Dis 31 , 225–236.22766770
[203] Shah RC , Kamphuis PJ , Leurgans S , Swinkels SH , Sad-owsky CH , Bongers A , Rappaport SA , Quinn JF , Wieggers RL , Scheltens P , Bennett DA (2013) The S-Connect study: results from a randomized, controlled trial of Souvenaid in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 5 , 59.24280255
[204] Soininen H , Solomon A , Visser PJ , Hendrix SB , Blennow K , Kivipelto M , Hartmann T , LipiDiDiet clinical study group (2017), 24-month intervention with a specific multinutrient in people with prodromal Alzheimer’s disease (LipiDiDiet): a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 16 , 965–975.29097166
[205] Rijpma A , Meulenbroek O , van Hees AMJ , Sijben JWC , Vellas B , Shah RC , Bennett DA , Scheltens P , Olde Rikkert MGM (2015) Effects of Souvenaid on plasma micronutrient levels and fatty acid profiles in mild and mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 7 , 51.26213579
[206] de Waal H , Stam CJ , Lansbergen MM , Wieggers RL , Kamphuis PJGH , Scheltens P , Maesté F , van Straaten ECW (2014) The effect of souvenaid on functional brain network organisation in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised controlled study. PloS One 9 , e86558.24475144
[207] Ngandu T , Lehtisalo J , Solomon A , Levälahti E , Ahtilu-oto S , Antikainen R , Bäckman L , Hänninen T , Jula A , Laatikainen T , Lindström J , Mangialasche F , Paajanen T , Pajala S , Peltonen M , Rauramaa R , Stigsdotter-Neely A , Strandberg T , Tuomilehto J , Soininen H , Kivipelto M (2015) A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385 , 2255–2263.25771249
[208] Abbott RD , White LR , Ross GW , Masaki KH , Curb JD , Petrovitch H (2004) Walking and dementia in physically capable elderly men. JAMA 292 , 1447–1453.15383515
[209] Buchman AS , Boyle PA , Yu L , Shah RC , Wilson RS , Bennett DA (2012) Total daily physical activity and the risk of AD and cognitive decline in older adults. Neurology 78 , 1323–1329.22517108
[210] Middleton LE , Manini TM , Simonsick EM , Harris TB , Barnes DE , Tylavsky F , Brach JS , Everhart JE , Yaffe K (2011) Activity energy expenditure and incident cognitive impairment in older adults. Arch Intern Med 171 , 1251–1257.21771893
[211] de Bruijn RFAG , Schrijvers EMC , de Groot KA , Witte-man JCM , Hofman A , Franco OH , Koudstaal PJ , Ikram MA (2013) The association between physical activity and dementia in an elderly population: the Rotterdam Study. Eur J Epidemiol 28 , 277–283.23385659
[212] Kishimoto H , Ohara T , Hata J , Ninomiya T , Yoshida D , Mukai N , Nagata M , Ikeda F , Fukuhara M , Kumagai S , Kanba S , Kitazono T , Kiyohara Y (2016) The long-term association between physical activity and risk of dementia in the community: the Hisayama Study. Eur J Epidemiol 31 , 267–274.26857126
[213] Tan ZS , Spartano NL , Beiser AS , DeCarli C , Auerbach SH , Vasan RS , Seshadri S (2017) Physical activity, brain volume, and dementia risk: The Framingham Study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 72 , 789–795.27422439
[214] Scarmeas N , Luchsinger JA , Schupf N , Brickman AM , Cosentino S , Tang MX , Stern Y (2009) Physical activity, diet, and risk of Alzheimer disease. JAMA 302 , 627–637.19671904
[215] Xu W , Wang HF , Wan Y , Tan C-C , Yu J-T , Tan L (2017) Leisure time physical activity and dementia risk: a dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. BMJ Open 7 , e014706.
[216] Adlard PA , Perreau VM , Pop V , Cotman CW (2005) Voluntary exercise decreases amyloid load in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 25 , 4217–4221.15858047
[217] Nichol KE , Poon WW , Parachikova AI , Cribbs DH , Glabe CG , Cotman CW (2008) Exercise alters the immune profile in Tg2576 Alzheimer mice toward a response coincident with improved cognitive performance and decreased amyloid. J Neuroinflammation 5 , 13.18400101
[218] Belarbi K , Burnouf S , Fernandez-Gomez F-J , Laurent C , Lestavel S , Figeac M , Sultan A , Troquier L , Leboucher A , Caillierez R , Grosjean M-E , Demeyer D , Obriot H , Brion I , Barbot B , Galas M-C , Staels B , Humez S , Sergeant N , Schraen-Maschke S , Muhr-Tailleux A , Hamdane M , Buée L , Blum D (2011) Beneficial effects of exercise in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease-like Tau pathology. Neurobiol Dis 43 , 486–494.21569847
[219] Ohia-Nwoko O , Montazari S , Lau Y-S , Eriksen JL (2014) Long-term treadmill exercise attenuates tau pathology in P301S tau transgenic mice. Mol Neurodegener 9 , 54.25432085
[220] Nigam SM , Xu S , Kritikou JS , Marosi K , Brodin L , Matt-son MP (2017) Exercise and BDNF reduce Ab production by enhancing a-secretase processing of APP. J Neurochem 142 , 286–296.28382744
[221] Lautenschlager NT , Cox KL , Flicker L , Foster JK , van Bockxmeer FM , Xiao J , Greenop KR , Almeida OP (2008) Effect of physical activity on cognitive function in older adults at risk for Alzheimer disease: a randomized trial. JAMA 300 , 1027–1037.18768414
[222] Baker LD , Frank LL , Foster-Schubert K , Green PS , Wilkinson CW , McTiernan A , Plymate SR , Fishel MA , Watson GS , Cholerton BA , Duncan GE , Mehta PD , Craft S (2010) Effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive impairment: a controlled trial. Arch Neurol 67 , 71–79.20065132
[223] Nagamatsu LS , Handy TC , Hsu CL , Voss M , Liu-Ambrose T (2012) Resistance training promotes cognitive and functional brain plasticity in seniors with probable mild cognitive impairment. Arch Intern Med 172 , 666–668.22529236
[224] Suzuki T , Shimada H , Makizako H , Doi T , Yoshida D , Ito K , Shimokata H , Washimi Y , Endo H , Kato T (2013) A randomized controlled trial of multicomponent exercise in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. PloS One 8 , e61483.23585901
[225] Morris JK , Vidoni ED , Johnson DK , Van Sciver A , Mahnken JD , Honea RA , Wilkins HM , Brooks WM , Billinger SA , Swerdlow RH , Burns JM (2017) Aerobic exercise for Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized controlled pilot trial. PloS One 12 , e0170547.28187125
[226] Lamb SE , Sheehan B , Atherton N , Nichols V , Collins H , Mistry D , Dosanjh S , Slowther AM , Khan I , Petrou S , Lall R , DAPA Trial Investigators (2018) Dementia And Physical Activity (DAPA) trial of moderate to high intensity exercise training for people with dementia: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 361 , k1675.29769247
[227] Petersen RC , Lopez O , Armstrong MJ , Getchius TSD , Ganguli M , Gloss D , Gronseth GS , Marson D , Pringsheim T , Day GS , Sager M , Stevens J , Rae-Grant A (2018) Practice guideline update summary: Mild cognitive impairment: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 90 , 126–135.29282327
[228] Stern Y , Gurland B , Tatemichi TK , Tang MX , Wilder D , Mayeux R (1994) Influence of education and occupation on the incidence of Alzheimer’s disease. JAMA 271 , 1004–1010.8139057
[229] Cobb JL , Wolf PA , Au R , White R , D’Agostino RB (1995) The effect of education on the incidence of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in the Framingham Study. Neurology 45 , 1707–1712.7675231
[230] Del Ser T , Hachinski V , Merskey H , Munoz DG (1999) An autopsy-verified study of the effect of education on degenerative dementia. Brain 122 (Pt 12 ), 2309–2319.10581224
[231] Qiu C , Bäckman L , Winblad B , Agüero-Torres H , Fratiglioni L (2001) The influence of education on clinically diagnosed dementia incidence and mortality data from the Kungsholmen Project. Arch Neurol 58 , 2034–2039.11735777
[232] Xu W , Tan L , Wang H-F , Tan M-S , Tan L , Li J-Q , Zhao Q-F , Yu J-T (2016) Education and risk of dementia: dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Mol Neurobiol 53 , 3113–3123.25983035
[233] Verghese J , Lipton RB , Katz MJ , Hall CB , Derby CA , Kuslansky G , Ambrose AF , Sliwinski M , Buschke H (2003) Leisure activities and the risk of dementia in the elderly. N Engl J Med 348 , 2508–2516.12815136
[234] Wilson RS , Scherr PA , Schneider JA , Tang Y , Bennett DA (2007) Relation of cognitive activity to risk of developing Alzheimer disease. Neurology 69 , 1911–1920.17596582
[235] Akbaraly TN , Portet F , Fustinoni S , Dartigues J- F , Artero S , Rouaud O , Touchon J , Ritchie K , Berr C (2009) Leisure activities and the risk of dementia in the elderly: results from the Three-City Study. Neurology 73 , 854–861.19752452
[236] Wilson RS , Krueger KR , Arnold SE , Schneider JA , Kelly JF , Barnes LL , Tang Y , Bennett DA (2007) Loneliness and risk of Alzheimer disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 64 , 234–240.17283291
[237] Sommerlad A , Ruegger J , Singh-Manoux A , Lewis G , Livingston G (2018) Marriage and risk of dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 89 , 231–238.29183957
[238] Lue LF , Brachova L , Civin WH , Rogers J (1996) Inflammation, A beta deposition, and neurofibrillary tangle formation as correlates of Alzheimer’s disease neurode-generation. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 55 , 1083–1088.8858005
[239] Riudavets MA , Iacono D , Resnick SM , O’Brien R , Zonderman AB , Martin LJ , Rudow G , Pletnikova O , Troncoso JC (2007) Resistance to Alzheimer’s pathology is associated with nuclear hypertrophy in neurons. Neurobiol Aging 28 , 1484–1492.17599696
[240] Iacono D , O’Brien R , Resnick SM , Zonderman AB , Pletnikova O , Rudow G , An Y , West MJ , Crain B , Troncoso JC (2008) Neuronal hypertrophy in asymptomatic Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 , 578–589.18520776
[241] Perez-Nievas BG , Stein TD , Tai H-C , Dols-Icardo O , Scotton TC , Barroeta-Espar I , Fernandez-Carballo L , de Munain EL , Perez J , Marquie M , Serrano-Pozo A , Frosch MP , Lowe V , Parisi JE , Petersen RC , Ikonomovic MD , López OL , Klunk W , Hyman BT , Gómez-Isla T (2013) Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to Alzheimer’s pathology. Brain 136 , 2510–2526.23824488
[242] Bilousova T , Miller CA , Poon WW , Vinters HV , Corrada M , Kawas C , Hayden EY , Teplow DB , Glabe C , Albay R , Cole GM , Teng E , Gylys KH (2016) Synaptic amyloid-b oligomers precede p-Tau and differentiate high pathology control cases. Am J Pathol 186 , 185–198.26718979
[243] Kobayashi E , Nakano M , Kubota K , Himuro N , Mizoguchi S , Chikenji T , Otani M , Mizue Y , Nagaishi K , Fujimiya M (2018) Activated forms of astrocytes with higher GLT-1 expression are associated with cognitive normal subjects with Alzheimer pathology in human brain. Sci Rep 8 , 1712.29374250
[244] Vemuri P , Lesnick TG , Przybelski SA , Knopman DS , Roberts RO , Lowe VJ , Kantarci K , Senjem ML , Gunter JL , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Jack CR (2012) Effect of lifestyle activities on Alzheimer disease biomarkers and cognition. Ann Neurol 72 , 730–738.23280791
[245] Vemuri P , Lesnick TG , Przybelski SA , Machulda M , Knopman DS , Mielke MM , Roberts RO , Geda YE , Rocca WA , Petersen RC , Jack CR (2014) Association of lifetime intellectual enrichment with cognitive decline in the older population. JAMA Neurol 71 , 1017–1024.25054282
[246] Vemuri P , Lesnick TG , Przybelski SA , Knopman DS , Machulda M , Lowe VJ , Mielke MM , Roberts RO , Gunter JL , Senjem ML , Geda YE , Rocca WA , Petersen RC , Jack CR (2016) Effect of intellectual enrichment on AD biomarker trajectories: Longitudinal imaging study. Neurology 86 , 1128–1135.26911640
[247] Gidicsin CM , Maye JE , Locascio JJ , Pepin LC , Philiossaint M , Becker JA , Younger AP , Dekhtyar M , Schultz AP , Amariglio RE , Marshall GA , Rentz DM , Hedden T , Sperling RA , Johnson KA (2015) Cognitive activity relates to cognitive performance but not to Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology 85 , 48–55.26062627
[248] Arenaza-Urquijo EM , Bejanin A , Gonneaud J , Wirth M , La Joie R , Mutlu J , Gaubert M , Landeau B , de la Sayette V , Eustache F , Chételat G (2017) Association between educational attainment and amyloid deposition across the spectrum from normal cognition to dementia: neuroimaging evidence for protection and compensation. Neurobiol Aging 59 , 72–79.28764930
[249] Cox SR , Dickie DA , Ritchie SJ , Karama S , Pattie A , Royle NA , Corley J , Aribisala BS , Valdés Hernández M , Muñoz Maniega S , Starr JM , Bastin ME , Evans AC , Wardlaw JM , Deary IJ (2016) Associations between education and brain structure at age 73 years, adjusted for age 11 IQ. Neurology 87 , 1820–1826.27664981
[250] Dong H , Goico B , Martin M , Csernansky CA , Bertchume A , Csernansky JG (2004) Modulation of hippocampal cell proliferation, memory, and amyloid plaque deposition in APPsw (Tg2576) mutant mice by isolation stress. Neuroscience 127 , 601–609.15283960
[251] Huang H-J , Liang K-C , Ke H-C , Chang Y-Y , Hsieh-Li HM (2011) Long-term social isolation exacerbates the impairment of spatial working memory in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Brain Res 1371 , 150–160.21114967
[252] Huang H , Wang L , Cao M , Marshall C , Gao J , Xiao N , Hu G , Xiao M (2015) Isolation housing exacerbates Alzheimer’s disease-like pathophysiology in aged APP/PS1 mice. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 18 , 116.
[253] Arendash GW , Garcia MF , Costa DA , Cracchiolo JR , Wefes IM , Potter H (2004) Environmental enrichment improves cognition in aged Alzheimer’s transgenic mice despite stable beta-amyloid deposition. Neuroreport 15 , 1751–1754.15257141
[254] Lazarov O , Robinson J , Tang Y-P , Hairston IS , Korade-Mirnics Z , Lee VM-Y , Hersh LB , Sapolsky RM , Mirnics K , Sisodia SS (2005) Environmental enrichment reduces Abeta levels and amyloid deposition in transgenic mice. Cell 120 , 701–713.15766532
[255] Jankowsky JL , Melnikova T , Fadale DJ , Xu GM , Slunt HH , Gonzales V , Younkin LH , Younkin SG , Borchelt DR , Savonenko AV (2005) Environmental enrichment mitigates cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 25 , 5217–5224.15917461
[256] Costa DA , Cracchiolo JR , Bachstetter AD , Hughes TF , Bales KR , Paul SM , Mervis RF , Arendash GW , Potter H (2007) Enrichment improves cognition in AD mice by amyloid-related and unrelated mechanisms. Neurobiol Aging 28 , 831–844.16730391
[257] Pietropaolo S , Feldon J , Yee BK (2014) Environmental enrichment eliminates the anxiety phenotypes in a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 14 , 996–1008.24492993
[258] Polito L , Chierchia A , Tunesi M , Bouybayoune I , Kehoe PG , Albani D , Forloni G (2014) Environmental enrichment lessens cognitive decline in APP23 mice without affecting brain sirtuin expression. J Alzheimers Dis 42 , 851–864.24961946
[259] Hüttenrauch M , Walter S , Kaufmann M , Weggen S , Wirths O (2017) Limited effects of prolonged environmental enrichment on the pathology of 5XFAD mice. Mol Neurobiol 54 , 6542–6555.27734334
[260] Lahiani-Cohen I , Lourbopoulos A , Haber E , Rozenstein-Tsalkovich L , Abramsky O , Grigoriadis N , Rosenmann H (2011) Moderate environmental enrichment mitigates tauopathy in a neurofibrillary tangle mouse model. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 , 610–621.21666497
[261] Jankowsky JL , Xu G , Fromholt D , Gonzales V , Borchelt DR (2003) Environmental enrichment exacerbates amyloid plaque formation in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 62 , 1220–1227.14692698
[262] Hill NTM , Mowszowski L , Naismith SL , Chadwick VL , Valenzuela M , Lampit A (2017) Computerized cognitive training in older adults with mild cognitive impairment or dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 174 , 329–340.27838936
[263] Rovner BW , Casten RJ , Hegel MT , Leiby B (2018) Preventing cognitive decline in black individuals with mild cognitive impairment: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol 75 , 1487–1493.30208380
[264] Kivipelto M , Mangialasche F , Ngandu T (2018) Lifestyle interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, dementia and Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol 14 , 653–666.30291317
[265] Gao L , Maidment I , Matthews FE , Robinson L , Brayne C , Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (2017) Medication usage change in older people (65+) in England over 20 years: findings from CFAS I and CFAS II. Age Ageing 47 , 220–225.
[266] Hopkins DP , Razi S , Leeks KD , Priya Kalra G Chattopadhyay SK Soler RE , Task Force on Community Preventive Services (2010) Smokefree policies to reduce tobacco use. A systematic review. Am J Prev Med 38 , S275–289.20117612
[267] OECD. (2017) Education at a Glance 2017: OECD Indicators.
[268] McNeil JJ , Woods RL , Nelson MR , Reid CM , Kirpach B , Wolfe R , Storey E , Shah RC , Lockery JE , Tonkin AM , Newman AB , Williamson JD , Margolis KL , Ernst ME , Abhayaratna WP , Stocks N , Fitzgerald SM , Orchard SG , Trevaks RE , Beilin LJ , Donnan GA , Gibbs P , Johnston CI , Ryan J , Radziszewska B , Grimm R , Murray AM , ASPREE Investigator Group (2018) Effect of aspirin on disability-free survival in the healthy elderly. N Engl J Med 379 , 1499–1508.30221596
[269] McNeil JJ , Wolfe R , Woods RL , Tonkin AM , Donnan GA , Nelson MR , Reid CM , Lockery JE , Kirpach B , Storey E , Shah RC , Williamson JD , Margolis KL , Ernst ME , Abhayaratna WP , Stocks N , Fitzgerald SM , Orchard SG , Trevaks RE , Beilin LJ , Johnston CI , Ryan J , Radziszewska B , Jelinek M , Malik M , Eaton CB , Brauer D , Cloud G , Wood EM , Mahady SE , Satterfield S , Grimm R , Murray AM , ASPREE Investigator Group (2018) Effect of aspirin on cardiovascular events and bleeding in the healthy elderly. N Engl J Med 379 , 1509–1518.30221597
[270] GBD 2016 DALYs and HALE Collaborators (2017) Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) for 333 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 195 countries and territories, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet 390 , 1260–1344.28919118
[271] Jack CR , Knopman DS , Jagust WJ , Petersen RC , Weiner MW , Aisen PS , Shaw LM , Vemuri P , Wiste HJ , Weigand SD , Lesnick TG , Pankratz VS , Donohue MC , Trojanowski JQ (2013) Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol 12 , 207–216.23332364
[272] Jack CR , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Dunn B Haeberlein SB , Holtzman DM Jagust W , Jessen F Karlawish J , Liu E Molinuevo JL Montine T , Phelps C , Rankin KP Rowe CC Scheltens P , Siemers E , Snyder HM , Sperling R , Contributors (2018) NIA-AA Research Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 535–562.29653606
[273] Illán-Gala I , Pegueroles J , Montal V , Vilaplana E , Carmona-Iragui M , Alcolea D , Dickerson BC , Sánchez-Valle R , de Leon MJ , Blesa R , Lleó A , Fortea J (2018) Challenges associated with biomarker-based classification systems for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 10 , 346–357.30175226
[274] Hayes JP , Logue MW , Sadeh N , Spielberg JM , Verfaellie M , Hayes SM , Reagan A , Salat DH , Wolf EJ , McGlinchey RE , Milberg WP , Stone A , Schichman SA , Miller MW (2017) Mild traumatic brain injury is associated with reduced cortical thickness in those at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 140 , 813–825.28077398
[275] Barnes DE , Byers AL , Gardner RC , Seal KH , Boscardin WJ , Yaffe K (2018) Association of mild traumatic brain injury with and without loss of consciousness with dementia in US military veterans. JAMA Neurol 75 , 1055–1061.29801145
[276] Chen H , Kwong JC , Copes R , Tu K , Villeneuve PJ , van Donkelaar A , Hystad P , Martin RV , Murray BJ , Jessiman B , Wilton AS , Kopp A , Burnett RT (2017) Living near major roads and the incidence of dementia, Parkinson’s disease, and multiple sclerosis: a population-based cohort study. Lancet 389 , 718–726.28063597
[277] Cullen B , Newby D , Lee D , Lyall DM , Nevado-Holgado AJ , Evans JJ , Pell JP , Lovestone S , Cavanagh J (2018) Cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses of outdoor air pollution exposure and cognitive function in UK Biobank. Sci Rep 8 , 12089.30108252
[278] Yegambaram M , Manivannan B , Beach TG , Halden RU (2015) Role of environmental contaminants in the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease: a review. Curr Alzheimer Res 12 , 116–146.25654508
[279] Luciano M , Gow AJ , Harris SE , Hayward C , Allerhand M , Starr JM , Visscher PM , Deary IJ (2009) Cognitive ability at age 11 and 70 years, information processing speed, and APOE variation: the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 study. Psychol Aging 24 , 129–138.19290744
[280] Dean DC , Jerskey BA , Chen K , Protas H , Thiyyagura P , Roontiva A , O’Muircheartaigh J , Dirks H , Waskiewicz N , Lehman K , Siniard AL , Turk MN , Hua X , Madsen SK , Thompson PM , Fleisher AS , Huentelman MJ , Deoni SCL , Reiman EM (2014) Brain differences in infants at differential genetic risk for late-onset Alzheimer disease: a cross-sectional imaging study. JAMA Neurol 71 , 11–22.24276092
[281] Chang L , Douet V , Bloss C , Lee K , Pritchett A , Jernigan TL , Akshoomoff N , Murray SS , Frazier J , Kennedy DN , Amaral DG , Gruen J , Kaufmann WE , Casey BJ , Sowell E , Ernst T , Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition, and Genetics (PING) Study Consortium (2016) Gray matter maturation and cognition in children with different APOE å genotypes. Neurology 87 , 585–594.27412137
[282] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Gónzalez-Maciel A , Reynoso-Robles R , Delgado-Chávez R , Mukherjee PS , Kulesza RJ , Torres-Jardon R , Avila-Ramirez J , Villarreal-Rios R (2018) Hallmarks of Alzheimer disease are evolving relentlessly in Metropolitan Mexico City infants, children and young adults. APOE4 carriers have higher suicide risk and higher odds of reaching NFT stage V at &lt;40 years of age. Environ Res 164 , 475–487.29587223
