LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8607908
21032
J Control Release
J Control Release
Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release Society
0168-3659
1873-4995

30928488
6587581
10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.03.022
NIHMS1527795
Article
A Pharmaceutical Answer to Nonadherence: Once Weekly Oral Memantine for Alzheimer’s Disease
Kanasty Rosemary a
Low Susan a
Bhise Nupura a
Yang Jung a
Peeke Erick a
Schwarz Marlene a
Wright Jim a
Carter Bennett a
Moorthy Saumya a
Grant Tyler a
DeBenedictis Ben a
Bishoff Megan a
Simses Craig a
Bellinger Andrew M. ab
a Lyndra, Inc. 65 Grove St, Watertown, MA 02471
b Brigham and Women’s Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 75 Francis St, Boston, MA 02115
* Corresponding Author: Andrew M. Bellinger, 65 Grove St, Watertown, MA 02471, (857) 304-4512, abellinger@lyndra.com
3 5 2019
27 3 2019
10 6 2019
10 6 2020
303 3441
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Adherence to medication regimens is a major barrier to effective treatment in many disease areas, notably in dementia which causes cognitive impairment that reduces patients’ awareness of non-adherence and their ability to manage medication. The development of oral dosage forms that can be infrequently dosed, and therefore improve adherence rate and facilitate direct observed therapy, has been a goal for decades. We describe the first demonstration of an oral formulation that achieves greater than 7-day gastric retention and sustained pharmacokinetics in the challenging dog model. Gastric retention requires physical resistance of the dosage form to gastric emptying forces, which are known to be stronger in dogs than in humans, making successful gastric retention in dogs a stringent test for predicting human translatability. This formulation of memantine hydrochloride is the first oral dosage form that achieves multi-day drug release with near zero-order kinetics and efficient delivery. In the dog model, relative memantine bioavailability approaches 100% with sustained plasma levels of memantine over seven days and profiles that can be tuned by varying components of the formulation. A single gastric resident dosage form achieves an AUC equivalent to 7 daily treatments with the marketed daily capsule, with a Cmax that is no higher than the daily product. PK modeling predicts that the gastroretentive formulation will maintain therapeutic blood levels in humans when administered once weekly. The formulation methodology presented here is applicable to many water soluble drugs and may enable the development of long-acting oral therapies for a wide variety of conditions.

Graphical Abstract

Gastric retention
memantine
adherence
drug delivery

Introduction

Adherence to long-term therapies averages 50% in the developed world, which diminishes the effectiveness of treatment and adversely affects health outcomes in many therapeutic areas1,2. In the US alone, medication non-adherence is estimated to cost more than $100 billion each year in avoidable hospitalizations2. Long-acting oral (LAO) gastro-retentive drug delivery systems have the potential to improve adherence to medication regimens, improve pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles, and achieve better patient outcomes compared to immediate release (IR) formulations3,4. A novel dosage form approach based on a stellate design5 is described in this study that achieves 7-day gastric residence in dogs for the first time and this platform is used to create a once-weekly formulation of memantine hydrochloride (HCl) for treating patients with Alzheimer’s type dementia.

Prior approaches to gastric residence have been described in a recent review and have included floatation, sedimentation, mucoadhesion, and expansion4. One of these, Assertio’s Acuform® technology, is used in several marketed products. Acuform® uses swelling polymers in a tablet that expands upon hydration to achieve gastric residence for 8-10h. IntecPharma’s Accordion Pill® is currently in Phase III clinical trials. The Accordion Pill consists of a multilayer film folded into a capsule, which expands upon capsule dissolution to achieve gastric retention for up to 12 h. In the 1980s, Cargill et al. demonstrated consistent 24h gastric retention of expandable dosage forms in a beagle model. This design used a foldable tetrahedral dosage form composed of erodible polymers. In humans, the tetrahedral dosage form passed from the stomach within about 12h. To date, no orally administered dosage form has demonstrated consistent multi-day gastric retention in a dog model or in humans.4

Gastric emptying forces in dogs have been estimated to be 3-4 -fold higher than in humans6. As the mechanism of gastric retention requires resistance to the forces of gastric migratory motor complexes (MMCs), demonstrating gastric retention in a dog model would provide validation of the gastric retentive approach and increase confidence in the translation potential to humans. Earlier studies have evaluated gastric retention of simplified lab-scale prototypes containing the hydrophobic drug ivermectin in a pig model5. While the pig model is representative of the human stomach in terms of size and chemical environment7, the mechanism of gastric retention requires validation in a model that represents the physical forces applied by the stomach during gastric emptying. The dosage form described herein is the first to achieve consistent 7-day gastric retention in a dog model. It is also the first demonstration of a dosage form that achieves efficient delivery of loaded drug with near zero-order release kinetics over seven plus days and in a form produced using scalable methods commonly employed in the medical device and pharmaceutical industries.

The stellate is designed with modular components each engineered to perform specific functions during oral administration, gastric residence, and lower GI passage (Figure 1). The stellate dosage form consists of three components: a central elastomeric “core”, memantine-loaded “arms” projecting radially from the core, and disintegrating matrix (DM) layers that join the arms to the core (Figure 1b). The stellate is folded to fit inside a size 00EL capsule for oral administration. The capsule dissolves in the stomach, allowing the stellate dosage form to unfold into an open configuration that resists passage through the pylorus based on its size and physical properties (Figure 1a). The elastomeric core allows the dosage form to fold into a capsule, to open in the stomach, and to bend elastically with the motion of the stomach during residence. The six arms of the stellate dosage form are the only drug-containing components and control drug release. Disintegrating matrices (DMs) are small segments that join the drug arms to the elastomeric core and are formulated to gradually weaken, allowing arms to detach from the core after about seven days of gastric residence to ensure safe passage out of the stomach and through the lower GI tract. The stellate may move freely within the stomach as the method of gastric retention does not rely on muco-adhesion, attachment, flotation, or sedimentation. The stellate is designed to withstand normal gastric motility without obstructing or disrupting normal gastric activity. As demonstrated herein, the drug-loaded arms are formulated to achieve near-linear drug release over seven days and to resist dose dumping in the variable gastric environment. This manuscript describes a once-weekly LAO memantine formulation that can sustain therapeutic plasma memantine concentrations and achieve week-long retention when administered in the fasted or fed state in a large animal model commonly used for pharmacology and toxicology.

Results and Discussion

Formulation Development

Formulations for LAO dosage forms must provide robust and consistent controlled drug release and physical properties sufficient to resist the forces of the gastric migratory motor complex (MMC) in the harsh chemical environment of the stomach. In addition, the drug-releasing formulation component must be processable and capable of joining to other components. Stellate arms are composed of memantine-polymer blends in which drug is suspended in an inert polymer matrix. The polymer material, in addition to having the right physical and processing properties, must be insoluble in water, biocompatible, and chemically stable to the changing gastric environment. It should permit blending with other formulation components by established processes such as hot melt extrusion (HME). Polycaprolactone (PCL) is a widely used, biocompatible thermoplastic material that has excellent physical and chemical properties for this application. Its low melting point (60-65°C) enables processing by HME under mild conditions, minimizing heat exposure of blended drugs. The melt properties of PCL also facilitate dosage Form assembly through thermal joining to the DM and elastomeric core.

To develop a PCL-based controlled release matrix for memantine hydrochloride, the release properties of PCL-memantine HCl blends were first characterized. Drug release rate from these two-component blends varied with drug loading in a manner consistent with a percolation threshold existing at 35-45% drug load (Figures 2a, 2b). At drug loads of 30% or lower, cumulative drug release did not exceed 8% in 7 days, consistent with dissolution of surface drug and very little release of drug from the bulk of the matrix. Release accelerated modestly as drug load was increased to 40%, but more than half of the loaded drug remained in the PCL matrix after 7 days. At drug loads of 45% and higher, release occurred significantly faster, with half of the drug load released in 1-2 days. A plot of 24-hour release versus drug load shows a clear change in release efficiency at drug loads between 40 and 45% (Figure 2a, black circles, s.d. error bars shown but generally not visible as they lie within the marker).

This threshold behavior is expected for matrices composed of distinct phases with large differences in their permeability to water8. PCL is essentially impermeable to water and memantine HCl is highly water soluble. Dissolution of drug particles leaves pores in the matrix that permit water entry. The pore size is determined by drug particle size which was controlled through the use of a micronized form of the drug substance. In high drug load formulations, contact of drug particles creates a continuous phase that allows water penetration to the center of the matrix, resulting in fast and complete drug dissolution. In low drug load formulations, discontinuous pores limit water entry, resulting in incomplete drug release. Blends of PCL and memantine alone provide limited control of the rate of drug release over seven days. Essentially, either too much or too little drug is released over day 1, providing limited tunability. Blending water soluble or water permeable components into the polymer matrix modulates the release profile by increasing water penetration into the matrix. For example, small amounts (2-5 wt%) of the water-soluble polymer Poloxamer 407 have a significant impact on the release rate of formulations with drug loads below the percolation threshold (Figure 2b). When drug load is varied, formulations including poloxamer do not demonstrate the same threshold behavior in release rate observed for PCL-memantine blends alone (Figures 2b, SI) and sustained release over 7 days is achievable. Release rate for a given drug load can be tuned by varying the type and quantity of water soluble excipient in the formulation (Figure 2c).

While the overall rate of memantine release from PCL-based blends can be tuned to various rates, release profiles from these matrix-controlled systems are nonlinear. Release varies with the square root of time (Figure S2), consistent with the Higuchi model for matrix based drug release9. The tapering in release over time may be explained by surface area effects – the mass transfer area shrinks over time as drug is depleted from the outermost regions of the matrix.

To better understand the mechanism of drug release from the polymer matrix, formulation microstructure was observed before and during drug release by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and wavelength dispersive spectroscopy (WDS). After partial dissolution of the drug from the matrix, imaging of cryo fractured drug arm cross sections by SEM revealed a clear border between a porous outer region and the center (Figure 2d). This migrating front, also observable by backscatter imaging, moved toward the center of the cross section as drug release progressed (Figure 2e, top and middle panels). To confirm that the migrating porous-solid wavefront represented the dissolution of drug particles out of the matrix, the location of memantine in the formulation was determined by measuring the presence of the chlorine in memantine hydrochloride. WDS imaging of chlorine confirmed that the memantine hydrochloride remaining in the matrix was present exclusively in the central region inside the migrating front (Figure 2e, bottom panel). The sharply defined migrating front between the two regions and the observed tapering release rate over time together suggest that memantine dissolution occurs in a small area and that release rate is limited by water entry rather than by the kinetics of dissolution or diffusion of solubilized drug.

Oral Controlled Release for a Week

While a tapering release profile may be desirable for certain applications, many therapies benefit from more constant delivery of drug to maintain therapeutic blood levels. Release profiles that are controlled solely by the matrix tend to release rapidly over the first 24 hours as surface drug is dissolved. To reduce burst release of surface drug and linearize release profiles, the addition of diffusion-limiting polymer coatings was explored. Coated formulations demonstrated substantially improved linearity of release compared to uncoated matrices over a seven day interval, primarily by slowing release at early timepoints (Figures 3a, S3). Release rates at later time points tended to be sustained rather than slowed by addition of coating, suggesting that the coating played a role in maintaining a consistent driving force for mass transfer throughout the profile (Figure 3a, S3). As with other oral controlled release systems, release rates from coated formulations can be tuned by varying coating weight, pore former content, and plasticizer content (Figure S3).

Over one hundred controlled release formulations of memantine hydrochloride were evaluated (Figure 3b). Drug-polymer matrices varied in drug content, hydrophilic excipient composition, particle size, and processing conditions. Drug release was analyzed with and without polymer coatings of varying composition, weight, and coating application method. Though multiple parameters influence release rate and can be tuned, we consistently observed tradeoffs between linearity and efficiency of release (percentage of loaded drug released in 7 days). We analyzed these formulations in aggregate to identify commonalities among formulations with the most favorable release profiles. A plot of each formulation’s linearity (as quantified by release on day 7/release on day 1) versus total release in 7 days shows a clear effect of coating on linearity for a wide range of formulations (Figure 3b). Formulations with the combination of the highest release efficiency (&gt;80%) and linearity (&gt;0.5 Day7/Day1 release) tended to pair polymer matrices with high release efficiency over less than seven days with release modulating coatings (e.g. the formulation shown in Figure 3a).

A once weekly oral dosage form contains approximately seven times the usual daily dose. Therefore, dosage forms must be highly resistant to dose dumping either through burst release or through accelerated release from food, alcohol, or other potential gastric content. A drug polymer matrix that consists of insoluble and hydrophobic polymer containing drug particles as a crystalline suspension is well suited to protect against dose dumping. No significant drug reservoir is present and the polymer matrix provides robust barrier to rapid dissolution. Coating the matrix can provide an additional level of control. Coated formulations resisted dose dumping in the presence of biorelevant gastrointestinal media including fasted state simulated gastric fluid (FaSSGF), fed state simulated gastric fluid (FeSSGF), and fasted state simulated intestinal fluid (FaSSIF) (Figure S5).

Dose dumping in the presence of ingested ethanol poses a particular challenge. To identify an ethanol-resistant coating material, several polymer coatings were evaluated for resistance to a 40% ethanol challenge, in accordance with FDA guidelines. Polymer coatings included several polymers commonly used as controlled release coatings in solid oral dosage forms (ethyl cellulose, cellulose acetate, and Eudragit RS), and PCL. Eudragit RS-coated formulations, when exposed to the ethanolic media, experienced a nine-fold increase in release rate compared to the same formulation in SGF (Figure 4a). Cellulose acetate and ethyl cellulose, though less ethanol soluble than Eudragit, released roughly four times faster in 40% ethanol than in SGF (Figure 4b and 4c, respectively). PCL-coated formulations experienced a 2.2-fold increase in release during the hour in 40% ethanol and release was essentially unchanged during the rest of the assay (Figure 4d). The superior ethanol resistance of PCL may be attributed to its insolubility in ethanol compared to other polymers.

To assess the feasibility of manufacturing the formulations in a continuous process, three 1-kg batches of a matrix formulation were produced and characterized for performance and stability. Drug, polymer, and excipients were blended by continuous twin screw compounding at a rate of 500 g/h. The blends were then formed into rods of triangular cross section by continuous profile extrusionand were cut to length to form drug arms. Analysis showed good uniformity both intra-batch (assay of all samples ranged from 97-100% of the target drug load, Table S2) and inter-batch (drug release at 24h ranged from 61-65% for all batches, Table S3). The formulation was then dip coated, assembled into stellate dosage forms, and analyzed for storage stability. Throughout 6 months storage, drug release rate, assay, and purity remained consisitent (Table S4).

In Vivo Evaluation

LAO Memantine dosage forms were evaluated in a dog model, a common and accepted model for preclinical pharmacology and toxicology evaluations. The performance of dosage forms in the beagle model was evaluated for both gastric retention and drug release. Gastric retention time was observed by X-ray imaging and drug release was evaluated by measuring plasma levels of memantine.

The ability of the drug-polymer matrix and polymer coating to control in vivo drug release and PK was evaluated. Prototype LAO memantine dosage forms were assembled with uncoated drug arms or ethyl cellulose coated drug arms. Greater than seven-day gastric retention was achieved for both coated and uncoated dosage forms as demonstrated by daily X-rays and sustained memantine plasma levels in beagles (Figure 3d). PK results confirm that the ethyl cellulose coating reduced burst release and linearized release profiles in vivo (Figure 3d). In addition, Cmax was reduced and Tmax was delayed compared to the group that received uncoated formulations (Cmax of 45 ng/mL at 48h for the coated formulation compared to 88 ng/mL at 6 h for the uncoated formulation) indicating controlled and sustained drug release. Greater control of drug release in the ethyl cellulose coated dosage forms is also demonstrated by quantifiable plasma levels of memantine (9 ng/mL) after 7 days in the coated group, compared to undetectable plasma levels in the uncoated group. In all animals the dosage forms were well tolerated and no adverse effects were observed.

Impact of food on initial retention and drug absorption

Previous attempts at developing gastroretentive dosage forms required administration after a high fat meal in order to slow or delay gastric emptying to enable retention10. Therefore, an important question was whether stellate LAO dosage forms are able to achieve retention when administered in both a prolonged fasted state and in various fed state. Further, effects of the administration condition on drug absorption can be assessed, with a particular eye towards the potential for accelerated drug release in the fed state. The effects of food on drug absorption are expected to be greatest at early time points when drug load in the dosage form, and therefore potential for burst release, is greatest. We therefore chose to focus this prelinimary analysis of food effects on PK on the first day after dosing under three conditions: 1) prolonged fast (&gt;14 hr) with feeding 4 hours after dosing 2) prolonged fast (&gt;14 hr) with food 1 hour after dosing, 3) food 1 hour before dosing. Dosage forms were well tolerated under all conditions. In all groups, dosage forms deployed consistently and were retained in the stomach for at least 7 days (Figure 5a) after which dosage forms began to break apart and were ultimately safely excreted (example of X-rays showing intact dosage form on Day 7 followed by breakdown starting on Day 11 and complete excretion by Day 22 shown in Figure 5b). Plasma bioanalysis revealed that there was no burst release of memantine from the stellate irrespective of the fasted or fed state of the dogs. Total drug exposure as quantified by area under the curve (AUC inf) was similar for all groups (Figure S6).

The timing of administration of feeding did not significantly affect Day 1 memantine plasma area under the curve (AUC Day1). A subtle reduction in drug release over the first eight hours was seen in the fed state but was overcome by 24 hours (Figure S6). This was hypothesized to reflect a delay in absorption in the fed state, rather than a reduction in absorption, perhaps due to delayed gastric emptying of gastric fluid.

Memantine is marketed in an extended release once daily form as Namenda XR. A single dose crossover pharmacokinetic study in 16 male beagles was performed with Namenda XR (28mg) and a 145mg form of PCL coated LAO memantine HCl (LYN-057). Plasma memantine-time concentration profiles for both formulations are shown in Figure 6a, and Cmax and AUC comparisons are shown in Figures 6b and 6c. These data show a higher Cmax and faster Tmax for a single 28 mg dose of NAMENDA XR (65 ng/mL at 9.0 hr) than a single 145 mg dose of LYN-057 (46 ng/mL at 37.0 hr) indicating controlled and sustained release for LYN-057 compared to Namenda XR. The AUCinf of LYN-057 was approximately seven-fold higher than Namenda XR once daily, indicating a similar memantine bioavailability for Namenda XR and LYN-057.

Human pharmacokinetic predictions

Memantine hydrochloride has a short terminal half-life in dogs (~4-8 hr)11 while memantine hydrochloride population pharmacokinetics in humans has been reported by several groups with a terminal half-life of 60-80 hr12. Therefore, modelling was undertaken to predict clinical pharmacokinetic profiles based on the dog PK data generated for LYN-057 (model development described in methods). Repeat dose modeling suggests that doses of ~150-200 mg of LAO memantine may be expected to result in steady state concentrations of memantine in the therapeutic range of 80-120 ng/mL. The same therapeutic plasma concentrations are achieved with NAMENDA XR administered daily at a dose of 28 mg/day (nominally equivalent to 196 mg/week; Figure 6d).

Conclusions

Adherence to medication regimens is especially challenging in neuropsychiatric diseases such as dementia, in which the symptoms of the disease interfere with a patient’s ability to manage medication regimens13,14. For therapy with memantine hydrochloride in patients with dementia, discontinuation rates were estimated to be 45-65% within 12 months15. In other neuropsychiatric diseases like schizophrenia, long-acting injectable therapies that increase adherence have proven beneficial and are widely adopted in some parts of the world. In that disease, which also impacts a patient’s ability to remain adherent, injectable depot formulations have been shown to reduce rates of relapse and hospitalization16. It is believed that the benefits of long-acting injectables are due to more steady pharmacology without peaks and troughs, advantages accruing from direct-observed therapy (DOT), and better long-term adherence than daily pills. To that end, long-acting oral therapies which provide treatment durations of days to weeks have been a goal for decades.

We demonstrate for the first time a once weekly gastroretentive oral dosage form robust enough to be retained in a dog model for seven days. We describe a once weekly matrix formulation that can deliver memantine HCl for seven days and achieve pharmacokinetic targets comparable to a once daily commercial extended release memantine product. While previously described gastro-retentive products require dosing with a fatty meal10, the stellate LAO dosage form achieved prolonged gastric residence when administered in both a prolonged fasted state and in various fed state. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of an oral dosage form achieving prolonged gastric residence and drug delivery without a food requirement. Dosage forms were well tolerated in dog, retained in the stomach consistently, and passed safely.

Pharmacokinetic studies confirmed that the gastroretentive formulations provided continuous seven day memantine exposure after a single administration. Inter-subject variability of the once weekly LAO dosage form in dog was comparable to the marketed extended release product in a cross-over study in dog. Based on pharmacokinetic modeling, the in vivo release profiles demonstrated by the long-acting formulation have the potential to achieve sustained therapeutic blood levels of memantine in human subjects with once weekly repeat dosing.

The gastric retention times observed in the dog model surpass the target of 7 days and may be longer than is optimal for a commercial product. Prolonged gastric residence in the dog model provides optimism that the dosage form could achieve multi-day retention in humans. The day of passage is tunable by altering the properties of the disintegrating components that join the drug-containing formulation to the elastomeric core. As no other dosage form has achieved consistent multiday retention in dogs, it is unclear how retention time in dogs will translate to humans. As such, tuning of residence time will be pursued after gastric residence data in humans has been collected.

We describe hot melt extrusion formulations of crystalline suspensions of memantine hydrochloride that display controlled release through a combination of polymer matrix percolation and a rate-limiting polymer coating. For highly water soluble compounds like memantine, release from the drug-polymer matrix appears to depend primarily upon the rate of water entry into the matrix, which is tunable by varying hydrophilic excipient content. Release rate and linearity is further controlled by a polymer coating, whose permeability can be adjusted by varying thickness and porosity. By altering matrix wetting and coating permeability, this formulation design can be adapted to accommodate various drug loads and release profiles. Through selection of matrix and coating polymer materials, drug release was similar despite exposure to conditions in the gastric environment including food, alcohol, and varying pH effects and was consistent after three months of storage. The formulation approach presented here may be applicable to delivery of a wide variety of water-soluble drugs, with single capsule drug loads of up to about 250 mg. The performance and manufacturability make this once weekly memantine dosage form an attractive candidate for future development. The dosage form can be produced by scalable methods including hot melt extrusion, profile extrusion, and injection molding. Hot melt extruded formulations were consistently generated with good purity, content uniformity, and inter-batch reproducibility.

Gastroretentive LAO dosage forms could provide a platform for future development of ultra long-acting oral products that may benefit patients in many therapeutic areas.

Methods

For materials and detailed methods, see Supplemental Information.

Preparation and of drug-polymer blends

Micronized memantine HCl was blended with 80k MW PCL and other excipients using a bench top twin screw micro compounder (Haake MiniCTW). Blended extrudates were shaped into stellate arms of triangular cross section by compression molding after extrusion. For coated formulations, coating polymers were dissolved in organic solvent and applied to drug-polymer arms by dip coating or pan coating.

Evaluation of drug release

Drug release was characterized by incubating formulations in biorelevant simulated gastric fluid at 37°C in a shaking incubator. To maintain sink conditions, release media was replaced at each time point. Memantine in release media was quantified by HPLC with precolumn derivatization to allow UV detection of drug17.

Evaluation of coating resistance to ethanol

Formulations were coated with Eudragit RS, ethyl cellulose, cellulose acetate, or PCL by dip coating. Coating solution concentration was varied to achieve comparable drug release rates in FaSSGF for all four polymer coatings prior to ethanol release studies. For ethanol release studies, coated formulations were incubated in 40% ethanol/60% FaSSGF for 1 hour and then transferred to 100% FaSSGF for the remainder of the 7-day release assay.

In vivo evaluation of gastro-retentive dosage forms

All animal activities were approved by the Institutional Animal Care Committees and performed in accordance with the Guide to the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. For all in vivo studies, dosage forms were prepared with radio-opaque stainless steel beads incorporated into the end of each drug arm to facilitate tracking of the dosage forms by X-ray. Dosage forms were administered in standard HPMC capsules (VCaps Plus, Capsugel, size 00el). Plasma was collected and memantine concentration determined by protein precipitation and LC-MS/MS. For PK evaluation of coated versus uncoated dosage forms (Figure 3d), eight male beagles (n=4 per group; ~10kg) were administered single capsules of modified release seven-day memantine hydrochloride dosage forms (155mg) with uncoated drugs arms or coated (dip coated with ethyl cellulose to a weight gain of 4.6 ± 1.1%) drug arms. Drug arms were composed of memantine HCl (20% w/w), Eudragit RL (12% w/w), Poloxamer P407 (5% w/w), alpha tocopherol (anti-oxidant, 0.5% w/w), and fumed silica (glidant, 0.5% w/w). Deployment and gastric retention of dosage forms was confirmed by X ray within one hour of dosing and daily for 7 days. For evaluation of food effects (Figure 5), 16 male beagles were fasted overnight and then either fed 1 hour before dosing (n=5), or fed 1 hour (n=5) or 4 hours (n=6) after dosing. Gastric retention was monitored by X-ray imaging within one hour of dosing and then periodically until complete passage of the dosage form components was confirmed.

Pharmacokinetic modelling

The rate of drug release and absorption (F) vs time (t) was calculated for each beagle from the data in Figure 6a using the Wagner-Nelson method and a one compartment model. The rate of change in fraction absorbed (dF/dt) was calculated using a linear approximation. The rate of drug absorption (R(t), = dose x dF/dT), and the rate of elimination (keVC, where ke = human elimination rate constant for memantine (0.01 hr−1), V = average human volume of distribution for memantine (10 L/kg) and C = estimated human plasma concentration determined using the constant slope method) were also calculated. The model assumes that the LAO dosage form remains resident in the stomach for 7 days after dosing in human, and that memantine release from the drug polymer arms is nearly complete with absolute bioavailability of LAO memantine of 90% (consistent with data from figure 3c and figure 6b).

Supplementary Material

1

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Colin Gardner, Ray Knox, and Gio Traverso for their guidance and advice throughout the research process. The authors also thank Erik Ryde, Juan Jaramillo Montezco, Steve Zale, and the rest of the team at Lyndra, Inc for their efforts and support. Financial support was provided in part by Lyndra and by NIH grant numbers 1R44TR001889-01A1, 5R01AI131416-02, and 1R43AI127062-01.

Figure 1. Lyndra’s gastroretentive dosage form

a. The stellate dosage form is administered in a 00EL capsule. Upon capsule dissolution in the stomach, the dosage form unfolds into a flat, flexible stellate structure that resists passage out of the stomach while drug elutes from the stellate arms. After drug release, disintegrating matrix linkers facilitate breakdown of the dosage form into smaller components that pass safely through the lower GI tract. b. Components of gastroretentive dosage form. Drug-loaded arms control drug release, flexible elastomeric cores allow folding into a capsule and deployment in the stomach, disintegrating matrices control breakdown and passage out of the stomach.

Figure 2. Drug release from polymeric matrices is tuned by varying soluble excipient content

a. Seven-day drug release from formulations composed solely of memantine HCl blended with polycaprolactone (PCL). For panels a-c, n=3 independent samples for each condition and data point, marker and error bars represent mean ± s.d. In most cases, the error bars are not visible as they lie within the marker symbol. Formulation compositions are available in Table S1. b. Drug release in 24h from formulations composed of memantine HCl, PCL, and Poloxamer P407. c. Seven-day drug release from formulations composed of memantine HCL (20% w/w), PCL, and different amounts of water soluble excipients shows that release is tuned by excipient type and content. d. Representative scanning electron microscopy image of the cross section of a memantine-polymer formulation before incubation (top panel, scale bar= 500 μm), after 1 day of incubation in simulated gastric fluid (FaSSGF) (middle panel and bottom panel). Middle panel scale bar= 500 μm. Bottom panel scale bar = 10 μm. For panels d and e, at least three independent samoles and images were analyzed. e. Representative backscatter electron microscopy images of memantine-polymer formulation after 6h incubation in FaSSGF (top panel, scale bar = 100 μm) and after 24h incubation (middle panel, scale bar = 100 μm). Bottom panel: Wavelength dispersive spectroscopy imaging of chlorine, scale bar = 20 μm.

Figure 3. Drug release from coated polymer matrices achieves near linear profiles.

a. In vitro drug release from a memantine-polymer formulation (M57, Table S1) with and without ethylcellulose coating (n=3, mean ± s.d., error bars often not visible within marker). b. Linearity of drug release as measured by release on day 7/release on day 1 versus extent of release for &gt;100 coated and uncoated formulations (Each data point represents a distinct matrix formulation or coating and is graphed at the mean of n=3 replicates). c. Scanning electron microscopy image of the cross section of a dip coated formulation after 6h incubation in FaSSGF shows the presence of a thin polymer coating. Scale bar = 10 μm. d. Plasma memantine in beagles after single dose administration of the coated and uncoated formulations shown in panel a (n=4 per group, mean ± s.d.).

Figure 4. PCL coating confers resistance to dose dumping in ethanol.

a-d. In vitro drug release from a memantine-polymer formulation (M77, Table S1) dip coated with different coating polymers. Closed circles show release in FaSSGF, open squares show drug release in 40% ethanol/FaSSGF (n=3, mean ± s.d.). e. Release from PCL-coated formulation over 7 days after ethanol challenge. Closed circles: release in FaSSGF for 7 days; open squares: release in 40% ethanol/FaSSGF for one hour, followed by release in FaSSGF for the remainder of the 7 day assay (n=3, mean ± s.d.). For release from uncoated M77 formulation, see Fig. S4.

Figure 5. Gastric Residence is independent of food.

a. Box and whisker plot of gastric residence time of dosage forms as monitored by X-ray in sixteen beagles with and without food upon administration. Residence time defined as when fewer than three steel beads visible in the stomach by X-ray. b. Representative series of X rays from dog ID 2001 over 22 days post dosing. Steel beads incorporated into the end of each drug arm appear as white circles. The dosage form is seen intact in the stomach on days 1, 4, and 7. X-rays on days 11 and 15 show broken dosage forms in the stomach. Day 22 X-ray shows no dosage form as all components have passed.

Figure 6. Pharmacokinetics in dog predicts therapeutic delivery in humans.

a. Plasma memantine concentration after single dose administration of Namenda XR or gastro-retentive memantine dosage form (LYN-057, Table S1). (n=16, mean ± s.d.) b. Box and whisker plot of area under the curve (AUCinf) for Namenda XR and LYN-057. c. Comparison of maximum serum concentration (Cmax) for Namenda XR and LYN-057 d. Predicted human plasma levels upon repeated weekly administration of LYN-057.

Declarations of interest

Authors RK, SL, NB, JY, EP, MS, SM, TG, BD, MB, CS, and AB are employed by Lyndra and own stock in the company. Authors RK, SL, NB, JY, JW, BC, SM, TG, BD, and AB are inventors on patents licensed to Lyndra and/or patents filed by Lyndra.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

1. WHO. Adherence to long-term therapies: Evidence for action. (2003).
2. Traverso G &amp; Langer R Perspective: Special delivery for the gut. Nature 519 , S19 (2015).25806494
3. Argoff E , Chen &amp; Cowles E Clinical development of a once-daily gastroretentive formulation of gabapentin for treatment of postherpetic neuralgia: an overview. Expert Opin Drug Del 9 , 1147 (2012).
4. Altreuter DH Changing the pill: developments toward the promise of an ultra-long-acting gastroretentive dosage form. Expert Opin Drug Del 15 , 1189 (2018).
5. Bellinger AM Oral, ultra-long-lasting drug delivery: Application toward malaria elimination goals. Sci Transl Med 8 , 365ra157 (2016).
6. Laulicht B , Tripathi A , Schlageter V , Kucera P &amp; Mathiowitz E Understanding gastric forces calculated from high-resolution pill tracking. Proc National Acad Sci 107 , 8201 (2010).
7. Kararli TT Comparison of the gastrointestinal anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry of humans and commonly used laboratory animals. Biopharm Drug Dispos 16 , 351 (1995).8527686
8. Leuenberger H , ROHERA B &amp; Haas C Percolation theory–A novel-approach to solid dosage form design. International Journal of Pharmaceutics - INT J PHARM 38 , 109 (1987).
9. Brophy M &amp; Deasy P Application of the Higuchi model for drug release from dispersed matrices to particles of general shape. International Journal of Pharmaceutics 37 , 41 (1987).
10. Gordi T , Hou E , Kasichayanula S &amp; Berner B Pharmacokinetics of gabapentin after a single day and at steady state following the administration of gastric-retentive- extended-release and immediate-release tablets: A randomized, open-label, multiple-dose, three-way crossover, exploratory study in healthy subjects. Clin Ther 30 , 909 (2008).18555937
11. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Summary Basis of Approval: NDA 21-487. (2003).
12. Noetzli M Population Pharmacokinetic Study of Memantine: Effects of Clinical and Genetic Factors. Clin Pharmacokinet 52 , 211 (2013).23371894
13. Elliott RA , Goeman D , Beanland C &amp; Koch S Ability of older people with dementia or cognitive impairment to manage medicine regimens: a narrative review. Curr Clin Pharmacol 10 , 213 (2015).26265487
14. Arlt S , Lindner R , Rösler A &amp; von Renteln-Kruse W Adherence to Medication in Patients with Dementia. Drugs Aging 25 , 1033 (2008).19021302
15. Haider B Medication adherence in patients with dementia: an Austrian cohort study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 28 , 128 (2014).24113561
16. Miyamoto S &amp; Fleischhacker WW The Use of Long-Acting Injectable Antipsychotics in Schizophrenia. Curr Treat Options Psychiatry 4 , 117 (2017).28580230
17. Puente B Determination of Memantine in Plasma and Vitreous Humour by HPLC with Precolumn Derivatization and Fluorescence Detection. J Chromatogr Sci 49 , 745 (2011).22080801
