LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9607835
20545
Mol Psychiatry
Mol. Psychiatry
Molecular psychiatry
1359-4184
1476-5578

29955163
6310674
10.1038/s41380-018-0125-2
NIHMS973218
Article
Molecular Windows into the Human Brain for Psychiatric Disorders
Egervari Gabor 1234*
Kozlenkov Alexey 145
Dracheva Stella 145
Hurd Yasmin L. 1234
1 Department of Psychiatry at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
2 Department of Neuroscience at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
3 Addiction Institute at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
4 Friedman Brain Institute at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
5 James J. Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA
Corresponding author: Dr. Yasmin L. Hurd, Hess Center for Science and Medicine, 10th Floor, Room 105, 1470 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029, Tel: 212-824-9314, yasmin.hurd@mssm.edu
* current affiliation: Epigenetics Institute and Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

6 6 2018
28 6 2018
5 2019
26 4 2019
24 5 653673
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Delineating the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders has been extremely challenging but technological advances in recent decades have facilitated a deeper interrogation of molecular processes in the human brain. Initial candidate gene expression studies of the postmortem brain have evolved into genome wide profiling of the transcriptome and the epigenome, a critical regulator of gene expression. Here, we review the potential and challenges of direct molecular characterization of the post-mortem human brain, and provide a brief overview of recent transcriptional and epigenetic studies with respect to neuropsychiatric disorders. Such information can now be leveraged and integrated with the growing number of genome-wide association databases to provide a functional context of trait-associated genetic variants linked to psychiatric illnesses and related phenotypes. While it is clear that the field is still developing and challenges remain to be surmounted, these recent advances nevertheless hold tremendous promise for delineating the neurobiological underpinnings of mental diseases and accelerating the development of novel medication strategies.


Introduction

Every day, nearly half a billion people worldwide struggle to manage their psychiatric disorders that cloud cognition, dampen or sensitize their emotions, alter perception, erase their memories, induce delusions and compromise their communication skills. The estimated cost of the global disease burden of mental illnesses tops that of other medical diseases in western societies1, 2 with an enormous toll on the individual, their family and communities that has had crippling economic, medical and social consequences. Depression, anxiety and substance use disorders constitute the largest group of mental disorders in most western societies with an opioid epidemic currently gripping the USA killing approximately 100 people daily and suicide being one of the leading causes of death worldwide. Psychiatric illnesses span all ages from childhood disorders such as autism or schizophrenia emerging in young adulthood and Alzheimer’s disease expressing in later stages of life. Each has unique features but there are overlapping struggles with societal stigmas, misconceptions about the disorders and the loss of quality of life. Perhaps the greatest challenge is that despite the devastating impact of these disorders, effective treatments are still lacking. Thus afflicted persons have limited options to regain control of their minds and lives.

Decoding the mystery of psychiatric illnesses has been the Holy Grail for scientists and clinicians hoping to uncover their biological underpinnings and to develop medications and eventual cures. Such goals are hampered by the complexity of the brain and the multidimensional nature of psychiatric disorders that are highly heterogeneous even within one diagnosis and with overlapping symptomatologies among disorders. Additionally, diagnoses still rely predominantly on clinical interviews with no biological markers, which altogether makes it challenging to expand neurobiological knowledge about these disorders. Animal models are extremely important for delineating causal relationships with behavior but have inherent limitations, being developed based on hypothesis of a particular underlying pathology though the pathophysiology of these human diseases is still unknown. Such challenges and the advancement of molecular techniques have shifted more research attention in recent years on human studies and translational strategies.

Indeed, as human disorders, psychiatric illnesses necessitate concerted efforts for direct investigation of the human brain. Here, we review the potential and challenges of human postmortem molecular strategies to expand knowledge about the underlying neuropathology of psychiatric disorders and provide a narrow overview of some of the published neurobiological findings that might offer clues regarding disease neuropathology and for targeting future medication strategies. We focus on gene expression and epigenetic strategies that provide windows into alterations of transcription and its regulation (Figure 1), given the importance of gene disturbances and the environment contributions to psychiatric vulnerability and disease course.

Transcriptional studies of the post-mortem human brain

The case for post-mortem human transcriptional profiling

Transcriptional studies have been at the forefront of the molecular exploration of the post-mortem human brain. However, initial attempts to dissect genes and related protein networks that underlie disease in the human postmortem brain were met with significant criticism and skepticism. Critics argued that the rapid degradation of RNA, combined with relatively long (hours or even days) post-mortem intervals (PMIs), would be prohibitive for extracting high quality RNA and for conducting quantitative transcriptional experiments. However, by minimizing PMI (&lt;24 hours), optimizing transport and storage conditions, and by careful sterile and RNase-free practices during brain dissection and RNA extraction, the field has been able to demonstrate consistent success in obtaining high quality RNA from post-mortem human brains. Consequently, transcriptional profiling, both in an unbiased and a hypothesis-driven manner, continues to play a central role in our improved understanding of the molecular underpinnings of neuropsychiatric conditions.

In vitro cell culture and in vivo animal models are invaluable for mechanistic studies, but the direct assessment of the post-mortem human brain remains critical to understand underlying neurobiology and to also drive the development and optimization of various disease models. This has been strongly emphasized by a number of studies pointing to human-specific transcriptional profiles particularly evident in certain brain regions3–8. For example, whereas gene expression in some brain areas like the caudate nucleus appears to maintain relatively strong conservation, the frontal cortex displays a large number of differentially expressed genes when compared even to non-human primates7, 9. Intriguingly, human-specific co-expression networks in the frontal cortex are enriched for genes involved in neuronal differentiation and process formation, which underlie neuronal functional activity and brain plasticity7. That the prefrontal cortex shows great species differences is not surprising considering the marked relative expansion of this brain region during human evolution and its role in higher cognitive function that distinguishes humans from other species. Even in brain areas with greater transcriptional conservation among species there are still noted differences in gene expression patterns that can have important implications. For example, in the caudate nucleus the PDYN gene, which encodes the opioid neuropeptide prodynorphin that regulates emotion, memory and motor function, and in which the regulation of its transcription has been favored in human evolution10 has far higher expression in humans particularly within the patch (striosome) organization of the striatum that is predominantly aligned to limbic/emotion neuronal networks.11, 12 Moreover, not only is the expression of the kappa opioid receptor, which binds dynorphin-like agents, up to 100-fold higher in the human compared to the rodent brain, it is also expressed in different neuronal populations between the species 13, 14. The discrete anatomical expression and human-specific regulatory changes of numerous genes emphasize the importance of obtaining greater insights regarding the molecular anatomical organization of the human brain.

The increased focus to expand the molecular understanding of the human brain in regard to psychiatric disorders has led to close to a hundred postmortem human datasets deposited currently in GEO (Supplementary Table 1), several brain banks and publicly available resources (Table 1) plus hundreds of publications. This review cannot provide an in-depth evaluation of all the molecular data that exist for each psychiatric disorder, but we provide below a glance to what potentially has been gleaned to guide future focused investigations.

Hypothesis-driven and unbiased transcriptional studies of substance use disorders

Molecular studies relevant to psychiatric disorders have paid significant attention to substance use since animal models that dominate the literature have better predictive validity for this pathology compared to other psychiatric illnesses. Decades of preclinical and in vivo neuroimaging research have documented that drugs of abuse increase dopaminergic signaling from the midbrain to, for example, the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens)15–17, and alter glutamate release in corticostriatal projections18–26. Persistent synaptic alterations in the mesocorticolimbic circuitry play a central role in neuronal maladaptations that underlie reward, craving, drug-seeking and relapse even after protracted periods of abstinence. As such, a large body of literature has focused on delineating molecular alterations that drive synaptic plasticity, such as membrane trafficking and alterations of the surface expression of neurotransmitter receptors27–30, and changes in intracellular signaling pathways both pre- and post-synaptically31–34. Since gene expression changes are at the core of drug-induced molecular adaptations19, 35, 36, they have comprised an important area of investigation in the post-mortem human brain of addicted individuals.

Most of the literature relates to hypothesis-driven molecular approaches in interrogating specific genes using real time polymerase chain reaction or in situ hybridization histochemistry. Such studies have proven fruitful in substantiating dysregulation of known neurobiological systems associated with substances of use.37–59 A more unbiased exploration of the whole transcriptome has increasingly become more feasible and widely utilized in recent years. Through these efforts, several genome-wide human datasets have been generated and made available to the public (Supplementary Table 1). In our assessment of human heroin users using microarray to profile gene expression in the nucleus accumbens, a brain region central to reward and emotion, we revealed marked abnormalities related to glutamatergic neurotransmission19. Intriguingly, these glutamatergic impairments strongly related to epigenetic dysregulation in long-term heroin users19. Transcriptome analyses of corticolimbic brain areas of cocaine users or other substances of abuse also emphasized significant alterations of genes associated with synaptic plasticity60, 61 and epigenetic processes62.

Though genome-wide interrogations of human substance abusers have validated disturbances of neurobiological systems previously documented in candidate gene strategies, other genes and gene networks have also been identified using the discovery approaches. For example, we determined that a large portion (approximately 20%) of dysregulated genes in the striatum of heroin users were targets of the transcription factor ELK163. We confirmed ELK1 impairment on the protein level and showed that striatal ELK1 in human heroin abusers is associated with genetic variants of ORPM1, the gene encoding for the mu opioid receptor, in a genotype dose-dependent manner. Moreover, ELK1 expression correlated with the documented history of heroin use in the human subjects, an effect reproduced in the animal model63. ELK1 had not been of any focus in the field driven mainly by animal studies in which the transcription factor CREB has been predominantly highlighted. However, the strong relationship to OPRM1 suggests that ELK1 as a master transcriptional regulator might have significant relevance for opioid abuse vulnerability.

The observation that ELK1 levels in heroin abusers correlated with the history of drug use highlights another important challenge of human postmortem studies. Namely dissociating the acute and long-term drug effects. A critical aspect of human studies that impacts interpretation of data is that some of the observed molecular changes may be due to acute pharmacological effects of the drugs and therefore not necessarily reflective of the chronic, pathological maladaptations that underlie the repeated use of drugs in individuals with substance use disorders. The combination of toxicological analysis and information regarding the history of drug use can help to address this limitation. Indeed, differential effects of acute and long-term drug exposure have been observed both on transcriptional and epigenetic levels19, 63. As such, it was possible to distinguish an opposite relationship between ELK1 levels in the striatum of heroin users based on acute opioid toxicology versus their years of heroin use.

To date, the majority of transcriptome studies related to illicit drugs have focused on cocaine and heroin use. Most investigations are, however, confounded by a high degree of polysubstance use among these populations, which makes it inherently challenging to assess the individual contribution of different substances. Clearly, studying individuals who had predominantly used one drug type is ideal. Nevertheless, studies thus far have revealed a large number of differentially expressed genes in multiple brain regions using high-throughput microarrays61, 64–66 or RNA-seq62, 67 approaches. Interestingly, the affected neural gene networks appear largely unique with limited overlap among different abused substances. For instance, a recent study identified significant reduction in the expression of numerous genes encoding proteins involved in presynaptic neurotransmitter release in heroin abusers, a finding not observed in a cocaine-abusing cohort68. Conversely, a striking decrease in myelin-related genes observed in cocaine abusers was not evident in their cohort of heroin subjects. Overall, little overlap in gene expression profiles was seen by Albertson and colleagues between the two drug-abusing cohorts: out of the approximately 39,000 detected transcripts, only 25 were significantly changed in both cocaine and heroin abusers, with nearly a half of these being altered in opposite directions68. Despite the small sample size of that study (n=7–10/group), the alterations of genes expressed in different directions are consistent with prior findings. Specifically, ACTN2 (Actinin Alpha 2), which codes for actin-binding cytoskeletal proteins, was increased in cocaine users and decreased in heroin subjects in line with increased and reduced spine density characteristic of cocaine and heroin exposure, respectively. Similarly, cocaine users had increased PDYN (prodynorphin) expression that was decreased in heroin users, a direction of change documented in the previous candidate-gene-approach human studies of these stimulant69 and opioid70 drugs. Similarly, transcriptional impairments were also largely non-overlapping in the hippocampus between cocaine and alcohol users62. The differences in transcriptional alterations induced by different classes of drugs may be due to the distinct pharmacological actions and pharmacokinetics of each drug, the time period after drug use at which the subjects are studied, differences in the causes of death and small sample sizes for many of the existing studies. Decisive conclusions will require a larger number of transcriptome investigations of subjects with substance use disorders for each drug before common and unique features of the different drug classes can be fully uncovered.

Among all substances of abuse, the largest number of transcriptome studies relate to alcohol use disorder. Several genome-wide microarray and RNA-seq datasets spanning multiple brain regions are publically available. They comprise investigation of the hippocampus, where McClintock and colleagues identified alterations of stress-response pathways in chronic alcohol users71. In the nucleus accumbens, Mamdani et al. described mRNA and miRNA co-expression networks enriched for genome-wide association studies (GWAS) signals from the COGA (Collaborative Studies on Genetics of Alcoholism) database72. In the basolateral amygdala, alcohol use was shown to affect a broad range of genes with many systems involved in synaptic transmission, neurotransmitter transport, structural plasticity, metabolism, energy production, transcription and RNA processing and the circadian cycle. A number of the impairments such as down-regulation of excitatory amino acid transporters GLAST, GLT-1 and AMPA glutamate receptor 2 genes revealed by this microarray were confirmed at the protein level73. In the PFC, Farris and colleagues identified gene co-expression networks associated with alcohol dependence and lifetime alcohol consumption. These networks were enriched for GWAS signals of alcohol dependence and included many genes related to neurophysiological targets and signaling mechanisms affected by ethanol. The dataset also provided intriguing new insights into alcohol biology by highlighting a potential role of alternative splicing - expression of a human-specific isoform of the voltage-gated sodium channel subunit SCN4B was significantly correlated to lifetime alcohol consumption74. Thus, there appears to be significant transcriptional disturbances throughout the brain associated with the history of alcohol use and to the genetic risk of alcohol. Such insights could be leveraged to determine mechanistic causality and potential new treatment targets.

Beyond substance use disorders – transcriptional window of psychiatric disease

A common neurobiological feature of mental illnesses is pathology of synaptic plasticity that is not only evident in relation to drug addiction but in disorders that span the entire development and aging of the brain that is perhaps reflective of the sensitivity of these dynamic and adaptive processes. Transcriptome analyses have validated such plasticity disturbances and offer insights about other biological processes that may have important implications for disease etiology and treatments. A recent publication from Daniel Geschwind and colleagues, for example, identified shared and disease-specific transcriptomic perturbations across autism, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression and alcoholism75. Intriguingly, dysregulation of synaptic plasticity was common for many of these disorders. Most studies to date have, however, focused on specific patient populations and are reviewed below.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)

This spectrum of developmental disorders that occurs early in life is not fatal but afflicted individuals do incur a high incidence of injuries leading to death at relatively younger age compared to the general population76. Of the few existing post-mortem brain collections, microarray strategies have thus far been the discovery approach conducted most often to profile gene expression patterns in ASD. For example, Liu and colleagues examined developmental gene expression trajectories in the cerebral cortex of individuals with ASD as well as of controls and of non-human primates77. Among a large number of developmentally disrupted networks that were detected in autism, genes of only one, which mainly included synaptic genes, were enriched in autism-linked mutations. Intriguingly, the same gene set exhibited more developmental expression changes unique to the human brain than any other developmental pattern disrupted in autism77. Since the clinical and biological complexity of neuropsychiatric disorders often results in a lack of consensus between findings of individual studies, meta-analyses of published transcriptomic datasets can be invaluable to identify pathways that are consistent across populations and studies. Emphasizing this potential, a recent meta-analysis of over 1000 microarray profiles from several independent studies determined that many of the genes that were most robustly affected across studies were not previously underscored in ASD literature78. In addition to highlighting genes such as PDYN that have been shown to be relevant to other neuropsychiatric vulnerability,43, 79 but never really emphasized previously in ASD despite validation in replication cohorts80, the meta-analysis revealed several novel genes suggesting a strong contribution of mitochondrial dysfunction to ASD78. These previously unreported genes are of significant interest since they emphasize a common transcriptome ASD signature that can be further explored mechanistically and that could offer potential future therapy development.

Affective disorders

Synaptic plasticity in brain regions that regulate reward, emotional expression and executive control strongly influence mood. Genome-wide transcriptional studies have begun to shed light on gene expression profiles associated with mood disorders, and a recent study examining gene expression and exon usage within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) of suicide victims with major depressive disorder (MDD) revealed low expression of genes involved in the regulation of glutamatergic neurotransmission.81 Dysregulation of neuroplasticity in the PFC of depressed patients was also reported by other RNA-seq and microarray studies82. Psychiatric disorders are often characterized by sex differences in their prevalence, symptomatology and treatment response such as in MDD that occurs twice as much in females than in men. In a fascinating new study, Labonte and colleagues reported that depression and stress susceptibility in males and females is associated with different genes and neural pathways, potentially relevant to the well-known sexual dimorphism in MDD prevalence83. The authors performed a comprehensive characterization of transcriptional profiles across six brain regions and discovered major rearrangement of gene expression networks with limited overlap between genders. Key regulators identified in both sexes (DUSP6 in females and EMX1 in males) were manipulated in the mouse PFC and, in addition to recapitulating transcriptional remodeling, resulted in increased stress susceptibility83. Such insights could be useful in helping to develop treatment strategies for MDD selectively tailored to either sex, since a ‘one size fits all’ strategy has not proven effective for meeting the therapeutic needs of most patients with the disorder in which sex is such an important factor in the expression of the disorder and associated suicide attempts. It is important to emphasize that the spectrum of mood disorders is not as yet captured in regard to brain transcriptional signatures since limited post-mortem populations exist for anxiety disorders though molecular data are actively being obtained for MDD and suicide. However, recent attention has been focused on developing PTSD brain collections.

Schizophrenia (SCZ)

Studies of subjects diagnosed with schizophrenia constitute the largest numbers of postmortem brain studies to date (Supplementary Table 1) and not surprisingly, the vast majority focused on the prefrontal cortex given the cognitive impairments that are characteristic of this disorder. A recent meta-analysis of six independent transcriptional studies of SCZ patients identified marked sex differences with many more differentially expressed genes altered in the PFC of male patients compared to females84. Such findings might point to distinct underlying molecular pathology in male and female SCZ subjects that could have important implications for the well-know sex differences in SCZ patients including the age of onset as well as clinical symptom profiles. Another meta-analysis of gene co-expression networks in the post-mortem PFC of SCZ patients and controls identified altered expression of gene networks related to biological processes such as synaptic transmission, oxidative phosphorylation, myelination, and immune function85.These findings are consistent with previous candidate gene studies, thus verifying the prior focus on those biological functions for the disease. The large number of schizophrenia brain collections has helped to develop large consortiums needed to drive discoveries. One such Public-Private partnership, the CommonMind Consortium has sequenced RNA from the dlPFC of hundreds of schizophrenic and control subjects. This dataset was recently used to elucidate the functional impact of polygenic risk in SCZ, in which Fromer and colleagues identified ~700 differentially expressed genes and observed that 20% of SCZ risk loci could affect gene expression86. Five of the SCZ risk loci overlapped individual genes, which thus represent ideal candidates for targeted interventions. The value of this unbiased transcriptional profiling was strongly emphasized by follow-up mechanistic experiments, in which altering the expression of some of these candidate genes (FURIN, TSNARE1, CNTN4) in a zebrafish model affected neurodevelopment, and a knockdown of FURIN in human neural progenitor cells yielded abnormal neuronal migration86. Impairment of neuronal migration has been highly implicated in schizophrenia, a disorder that is hypothesized to incur its initial neurobiological insult during early fetal development as part of its etiology.

Combining genome-wide gene expression data with genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is a particularly powerful tool of human molecular studies to identify the most functionally relevant and potentially ‘druggable’ risk variants. The availability of GWAS datasets for schizophrenia can thereby be leveraged in combination with RNA-seq data. Using this approach, researchers have revealed the involvement of ion channels and calcium-related processes in SCZ risk87. In addition, large-scale transcriptional datasets are particularly amenable for network analyses that have the potential to uncover new aspects of underlying disease biology. For example, a weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) of transcriptomic profiles (microarray) of cerebrocortical regions identified oligodendrocyte, microglial, mitochondrial, as well as neuronal modules associated with SCZ88. The involvement of oligodendrocyte-related gene expression changes was in line with earlier microarray findings from 15 different brain regions in SCZ and control subjects, indicating that gene classes associated with oligodendrocytes and myelin function were among the most profoundly affected differentially expressed genes89. Overall, the availability of these large collections of postmortem brain specimens from patients with schizophrenia are poised to provide the most rigorous data regarding the neurobiological underpinnings of schizophrenia not to mention valuable information regarding the molecular organization of the normal (healthy control) brain.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD)

AD is a devastating disorder at the end of the psychiatric neurodevelopmental spectrum. In contrast to other mental disorders where there are minimal neuropathological biological markers to guide diagnoses, this neuropsychiatric disorder is characterized by hyperphosphorylated tau, neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques consisting of beta amyloid aggregates. Nevertheless, etiology and effective treatment options remain elusive, necessitating novel insights through leveraging genome-wide transcriptional profiling of the post-mortem human brain. Some novel findings have been reported by a recent transcriptome meta-analysis that revealed a central role for sex steroids in the degeneration of hippocampal neurons in AD90. Furthermore, RNA-seq identified significant transcriptional alterations associated with late-onset AD related to myelination and innate immune response91, 92. A recent integrative network analysis of 19 brain regions identified further molecular signatures of AD. Wang and colleagues analyzed a large-scale single-cell gene expression dataset from 1053 postmortem brain samples across 125 individuals with dementia and AD93. The neurobiological pathways detected by these analyses included actin cytoskeleton, axon guidance, and nervous system development. Analysis based on disease severity suggested that many of the gene expression changes occurred early in the progression of disease, making them potential treatment development targets and unlikely to be mere bystanders of neurodegeneration93. Another investigation measured expression levels of ~25,000 transcripts in hundreds of brain samples from the cerebellum and temporal cortex of autopsied subjects with AD and other brain pathologies and then conducted an expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) using ~200,000 SNPs located near the tested transcripts94. This study detected SNP-transcript associations for disease-related variants, demonstrating significant contributions of genetic factors to human brain gene expression and thus assigning functional relevance to these variants94. Large transcriptional databases and large populations coupled with GWAS data will be of significant value to expanding knowledge regarding disease risk and potentially personalized precision treatment strategies.

Epigenetic strategies to unmask the psychiatric genome

Epigenetics encompasses the regulation of gene expression that occurs during development or in response to environmental influences that do not involve alterations in DNA sequence. Epigenetic mechanisms include DNA methylation (DNAm) or hydroxymethylation (DNAhm) at cytosine residues (mC or hmC), histone post-translational modifications, histone variants, changes in nucleosome positioning, microRNAs (miRNAs), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) 95–97. It is recognized that epigenetic remodeling is essential for developmental processes, including tissue and cell specification 98. In addition, epigenetic mechanisms mediate the effects of environmental influences on gene expression during the development and throughout adult life, influencing such processes as synaptic plasticity or acquisition and consolidation of memory 99. Epigenetic dysregulation has also been implicated in impaired cognition and neuronal death 100, 101. Therefore, during the last decade numerous studies have explored the potential role of epigenetic modifications in psychiatric and neurological diseases. Several recent reviews provide a comprehensive coverage of epigenetic alterations detected in postmortem human brain of patients with various brain disorders 101–107. Here we focus on studies, which have employed genome-wide profiling of epigenetic modifications that mark major classes of non-coding genomic regions and are important in the emergence of psychiatric and neurologic diseases.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression via non-coding genomic regulatory elements

Over the last few years, GWASs have made significant progress in identifying genetic risk factors for many psychiatric disorders, including SCZ, bipolar disorder (BD) and ASD, providing evidence that these disorders involve both common and rare risk variants 108. The common theme that has emerged from these studies has been that of polygenicity of SCZ, BD, and ASD, as variants in many genes influence risk in the population. Most of the risk variants identified so far fall into non-coding regions of DNA (introns and intergenic regions). Unlike genetic variations in coding sequences where the functional implications are often apparent, the effects of non-coding variants are difficult to interpret. Recent advances in genome-wide sequencing and large-scale studies (e.g., ENCODE and RoadMap projects) has enabled the scientific community to recognize that non-coding DNA comprises numerous genomic regulatory elements (GREs) that are involved in the regulation of transcription through interactions with regulatory proteins (e.g., transcription factors and transcription co-regulators), chromatin architecture, and non-coding RNAs 109–114. Depending on their function, GREs are classified into different groups, including promoters, enhancers, and insulators, with enhancers being the most numerous GREs (the human genome harbors ~400,000 putative enhancers vs. ~70,000 promoters 115). GREs can function across considerable genomic distances, making it difficult to annotate them on the genome 116, 117. The collective effort by many investigators worldwide has established that different classes of GREs are distinguished by specific epigenetic marks. Although other epigenetic mechanisms are also important for the regulation of gene expression, two key processes that influence the activity of GREs are DNAm and post-translational modifications of histone tails.

Various epigenomic studies have illustrated that different classes of GREs are characterized by unique chromatin states formed by a combination of multiple post-translational histone modifications within the nucleosomes (the basic units of DNA packaging in eukaryotes) 112, 118. Such histone marks combined with other modifications (e.g., DNAm/hm levels) 119–121 have proven a useful measure for active GREs. In most cases, enhancers of active genes display a high level of mono- or di-methylation on histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me1/2) but are devoid of H3K4me3, whereas promoters show the opposite pattern. In addition to H3K4me1/2, two mutually exclusive modifications on H3K27 residues co-segregate with active or inactive/poised enhancers 122, 123. Active enhancers are enriched with the H3K27ac mark deposited by histone acetyltransferases 124, while poised enhancers are enriched with the H3K27me3 mark deposited by Polycomb repressive complex 2 and associated with transcriptionally repressed regions 125. DNAm is frequently associated with transcriptional repression in such cellular processes as X chromosome inactivation, genomic imprinting and silencing of repetitive DNA elements 126, 127. However, a number of recent studies suggest that the function of mC (in both CG and non-CG contexts) as well as its oxidized derivatives such as hmC could be far more complex than previously thought, and that depending on the cell type and genomic location, (h)mC could recruit a wide variety of transcriptional modulators and even be compatible with transcriptional activation in certain biological contexts 120, 128–132. Notably, studies in neurons have revealed large-scale changes in DNAm during development and in response to neuronal activity 130, 133, suggesting the contribution of dynamic DNAm to these processes 100, 134, 135.

GREs can also be annotated by chromatin accessibility. This approach maps genomic regions of open chromatin, as these sites are depleted of nucleosomes and are more readily accessible to transcription factors and co-regulators. Open chromatic regions have been detected through sequencing of the DNase I hypersensitive sites (DNase-seq) 136, 137 and more recently by Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin (ATAC) using sequencing (ATAC-seq) 138, 139. The latter method probes DNA accessibility using hyperactive Tn5 transposase that inserts sequencing adapters into accessible regions of chromatin. Sequencing reads are then used to identify regions of increased accessibility in order to map transcription-factor binding sites and nucleosome position. The ATAC-seq method proved to be a fast low-input alternative to DNase-seq for assaying chromatin accessibility genome-wide140, 141.

Whereas the primary sequence of the human genome is largely preserved in all human cell types, the epigenomic landscape of each tissue and cell type can vary considerably, contributing to distinct gene expression programs and biological functions 142. To better understand how the epigenome contributes to cellular function, lineage specification, and the onset and progression of disease, recent studies of the NIH-supported Roadmap Epigenomics Mapping Consortium (REMC) created &gt;100 reference epigenomes (including histone marks, DNA methylation, DNA accessibility, and RNA expression) spanning diverse cell and tissue types from clinically unremarkable donors 114. In addition to other tissues, eight different regions of the adult brain, fetal brain as well as neuronal progenitors and brain-derived primary cultures were examined by REMC. REMC data are publicly available (Table 1).

REMC studies resulted in high-resolution maps of GREs that were annotated across all tissues. The analyses demonstrated the usefulness of the regulatory annotations for interpreting human genetic variation and disease. In an unbiased sampling across many GWASs, the authors found that genetic variants associated with complex traits (including brain disorders) are highly enriched in epigenomic annotations of trait-relevant tissues. The GWAS enrichments were strongest for enhancer-associated marks, which is consistent with their highly tissue-specific nature. Tissue and cell-type specificity of enhancers allows adaptations to occur within particular tissues and cells without invoking pleiotropic effects that are associated with changes to genes. The enrichment of disease-associated variants within GREs and the fact that this enrichment is stronger in the tissue most relevant to a particular disorder have been confirmed by several recent investigations 137, 143–145. These findings emphasize that epigenetic annotations of GREs in relevant tissues/cells are extremely valuable in the study of human disease. Notably, among other findings, REMC studies showed that epigenetic landscapes of many embryonic stem cells (ES)-derived cell lines are closer to pluripotent states than corresponding somatic states114. Therefore, although ES-derived neural lines are important for testing mechanistic hypothesis, the REMC results clearly demonstrate that epigenetic regulation of gene expression in healthy and diseased brain should be investigated using human brain specimens, thus highlighting the paramount importance of postmortem brain research.

Covalent modifications of RNA

Similarly to the epigenetic modifications of DNA, over 100 known covalent base modifications are found on almost all types of RNA, including mRNA, tRNA, rRNA and snRNA 146. This exciting discovery provides yet another dynamic and reversible biological mechanism for regulating transcription. Among the RNA modifications, the most abundant and the most extensively characterized is N6-methyladenosine (m6A) in mammalian mRNA 147, 148. Using next-generation sequencing, ~120,000 m6A peaks in over 12,000 genes have been identified in the human transcriptome 149. It was also demonstrated that m6A tags are enriched near stop codons and in 5′ untranslated regions (UTRs), and to a lesser extent in introns and long internal exonal regions 147, 148, 150. m6A is enzymatically added to mRNA molecules by heterodimer of METTL3–METTL14 in complex with several other proteins, and enzymatically removed from mRNA molecules by FTO and ALKBH5 151–153. In addition, numerous m6A-reader proteins have been identified, including fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) 154. As such, m6A might play a significant role in psychiatric disorders.

It has been shown in mouse brain that, compared to other tissues, m6A mRNA methylation is high and increases during development 148. In addition, m6A levels and patterns are highly diverse in different regions of the adult brain 155, and based on single-cell RNA-seq data, all known m6A-modifying enzymes and readers are expressed in the major brain cell types including neurons and glia as well as their subtypes 156. Recent work from the Hongjun Song lab found that m6A is critical for perinatal and early postnatal cortical neurogenesis in the mouse brain and in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids 157. This study also showed enrichment of human-specific m6A tagging of transcripts related to brain-disorder risk genes. However, to the best of our knowledge, studies of m6A RNA methylation in human postmortem brain have not been published to-date, probably because the existing assays require large amounts of input material. Precise quantification of the m6A modification dynamics in the human brain will be crucial to elucidate the importance of this mechanism for brain function and disease.

Hierarchical organization of chromatin structure

Recent advances in genomic science have shown that chromatin is organized into hierarchical 3D structures that play an important role in gene regulation 158–160. In particular, to direct gene activity, specific interactions are formed between gene promoters and distal enhancers. The interacting elements can be situated at a very large distance from each other, yet they communicate by looping out the intervening sequences and engage in direct contacts that are facilitated by the recruited transcription factors 161. Also, chromosomes are structurally demarcated into large topologically associated domains (TADs) that encompass ~ 1 megabase of genome and act to reduce the contact between the GREs to within each of these domains 162, 163. To-date, only few studies have examined 3D genome annotations in the human brain. High-resolution 3D maps of chromatin contacts during human corticogenesis have been recently obtained, identifying hundreds of novel enhancer–promoter interactions 164. In this study, brain tissue-relevant chromatin contacts were used to inform the biological interpretation of SCZ risk variants. A recent exciting paper from the Schahram Akbarian lab examined the role of a H3K9 methyltransferase SETB1 in FACS-separated neuronal nuclei 165. The study showed that SETB1 regulates epigenetic landscape and gene expression of a large neuron-specific TAD; this domain encompasses &gt;70 genes at the clustered protocadherin (cPcdh) locus and is conserved in humans and mice. This work demonstrates the importance of cell-type specific approaches in obtaining mechanistic understanding of locus-specific 3D chromatin-determined gene expression regulation in differentiated brain cells.

Epigenetic studies of schizophrenia (SCZ)

As of today, SCZ has received the most attention in genome-wide epigenetic studies of the post-mortem human brain. There is strong evidence that the etiology of SCZ is determined by both genetic background and environmental influences 166–169, the latter being the domain of epigenetic studies. Notably, a large scale GWAS analysis by the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium has identified 145 SCZ-associated loci, the vast majority of which were located outside of gene coding sequences and were significantly enriched in enhancers active in the brain 170, 171.

Initially, a large number of human postmortem epigenetic studies in SCZ focused on DNAm analysis of promoters of individual genes, suggesting evidence for DNAm alterations in RELN, GAD1, BDNF, COMT, and other genes (see 172, 173, as well as 105–107 and references therein). The progress in experimental approaches allowed researchers to shift the focus to genome-wide profiling of DNAm in human brain174–180. Wockner et al 176 profiled DNAm in 24 SCZ and 24 control subjects and detected changes at 4641 CpG sites at 2929 unique genes, confirming many previously found associations (NOS1, AKT1, DTNBP1, DNMT1, PPP3CC, SOX10). A recent study from the Jonathan Mill lab 179 explored DNAm differences in PFC and cerebellum between SCZ and control postmortem brain samples. The authors detected multiple differentially methylated positions (DMPs) and regions (DMRs), with the most significant alterations uncovered in the PFC, which were successfully validated in a replication cohort. Notably, the genes associated with the detected DMPs and DMRs were found to be enriched for neurodevelopmental pathways. Furthermore, the SCZ-associated DMPs showed a significant overlap with CpG sites that undergo highly dynamic methylation changes during human fetal brain development 181. Subsequently, this group 180 studied DNAm in 4 brain regions (PFC, striatum, hippocampus and cerebellum) from 41 SCZ patients and 47 controls, detecting multiple disease-associated alterations that were consistent across three of the four studied brain regions (not including cerebellum), as well as multiple sites of DNAm variation associated with SCZ polygenic risk score. These studies suggest significant DNAm alterations in the brains of SCZ patients that have just started to be uncovered.

In contrast to DNAm studies, the profiling of histone modifications in human postmortem SCZ brain has received significantly less attention. One recent study 182 focused on the role of GAD1 gene expression regulation in SCZ, and uncovered concurrent changes in gene expression, the activity of a distal enhancer that was measured by the H3K27ac marks, as well as altered strength of the looping interaction between this enhancer and the promoter. Notably, using the REMC’s annotations of enhancers that employed the measurements of multiple histone modifications in the brain, it was also shown that a SCZ GWAS SNP near the CACNA1C gene is situated within a distal regulatory element that directly interacts with the gene promoter 183. Moreover, the risk allele was found to affect the promoter activity in a luciferase assay.

In addition, the above-mentioned approach of open chromatin profiling using ATAC-seq has emerged as a powerful low-input method of detecting active promoters and enhancers. A recent study by Fullard and colleagues 141 described its application to flow cytometry-sorted neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei. Whereas only samples from clinically insignificant subjects were used, the detected open chromatin regions helped assign functional roles to many non-coding SCZ risk variants, suggesting that the ATAC-seq approach may prove to be of great value in future studies of epigenetic alterations in brain disorders.

Epigenetic studies of autism spectrum disorder (ASD)

In contrast to SCZ, a smaller number of publications describing human genome-wide epigenetic profiling on ASD is available (reviewed in 184, 185). Among them are DNAm studies employing the Illumina 450K arrays 186, 187, which uncovered significant autism-associated alterations at multiple genomic regions, some of which overlapped between the two reports. A recent DNAm profiling 188 employing Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing provided evidence for autism-associated increase in the levels of the methyl-CpH modification, a subtype of DNAm that is specifically enriched in neurons 130, 189 and is established in early postnatal stage of brain development 130, 190. Also, Shulha and colleagues profiled the H3K4me3 modification, indicative of active promoters, using chromatin isolated from FACS-separated neuronal nuclei (16 ASD, 16 controls) 191. This work found recurring alterations in variable subsets of cases, located at genes with important roles in neurodevelopment and cognition. A recent seminal study from the Shyam Prabhakar and Daniel Geschwind labs 192 generated genome-wide H3K27ac profiles in a cohort of ASD and matched control individuals (45 ASD, 49 controls) using postmortem tissue from 3 regions: PFC, temporal cortex and cerebellum. They observed that the activity of over 5,000 enhancer or promoter loci was altered in autism and the nearby genes were enriched for GO categories of synaptic transmission, epilepsy, behavioral abnormality, histone acetylation, and immunity. Notably, the H3K27ac enrichment in ASD subjects was detected not only near genes expressed in adult brain, but also near genes upregulated at 1 year after birth, a developmental stage associated with the processes of neuronal maturation and synapse formation.

Epigenetic studies of substance use disorders

As of today, few studies have assessed epigenetic impairments directly in the addicted post-mortem human brain. One of the first investigations was carried out by the teams of Deborah Mash and David Goldman62 and showed genome-wide enrichment of H3K4me3 in the promoter regions of protein coding genes of the hippocampus of cocaine abusers and individuals with alcoholism. There was a significant overlap of the H3K4me3 disturbances between cocaine and alcohol users indicating common epigenetic perturbations associated with the use of these addictive substances. We also recently observed increased enrichment of H3K27ac in the dorsal striatum of human heroin users compared to matched controls19. Intriguingly, acute morphine toxicology and heroin use history showed negative and positive correlations with H3K27ac, respectively, suggesting potentially different or even opposing epigenetic states during acute versus long-term heroin use. Strikingly, H3K27ac was strongly enriched at genes related to glutamatergic neurotransmission and is associated with a more open state of chromatin (identified by ATAC-seq) that drives the expression of these genes, well-known to underlie drug-induced synaptic plasticity. Of note, these findings were closely translatable to heroin self-administering rats, where the administration of JQ1 (a small molecule blocking members of the BET family of histone acetylation readers) led to decreased self-administration and drug-seeking behaviors19. These findings highlight specific epigenetic dysregulation in heroin abusers associated with synaptic plasticity and identify JQ1-related compounds as promising candidates for targeted clinical interventions in opioid use disorder.

Epigenetic studies of affective disorders

A number of postmortem studies have explored epigenetic alterations in the brains of patients with MDD and of suicide victims with MDD. The majority of these studies explored DNAm in the promoters or gene bodies of individual candidate genes (reviewed in 103, 193, 194). In particular, DNAm changes, that often involved hypermethylation of promoter regions accompanied by a decrease in gene expression, were detected in genes associated with stress response (e.g. NR3C1 that encodes glucocorticoid receptor GR), neurotrophic signaling (e.g., BDNF and its receptor TrkB/NTRK2), and the polyamine system (e.g., SAT1). Genome-wide profiling of MDD patients with and without suicide also identified numerous promoter DNAm differences that were often inversely correlated with gene expression 195–198 as well as coordinated changes in DNAm of multiple genes 199. Importantly, a seminal paper by McGowan et al., revealed that hyperactivity of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis observed in depressed suicide victims with childhood abuse as compared to those without childhood abuse might be partly explained by decreased hippocampal expression of NR3C1 resulting from an increase in DNAm of its promoter 200. This suggests that early-life adversity increases suicide risk through long-term epigenetic regulation of specific genes. This hypothesis was supported by a recent postmortem study of depressed suicides in which a history of childhood abuse was associated with cell-type-specific changes in DNAm of oligodendrocyte-specific genes as well as with global impairment of the myelin-related transcriptional program 201. These effects were absent in the depressed suicide decedents with no history of childhood abuse. Another study suggested that DNAm status of SKA2 mediates vulnerability to suicidal behavior and PTSD through dysregulation of the HPA axis in response to stress 202.

In addition to DNAm, histone modifications have also been implicated in the etiology of MDD (reviewed in 203). For example, the reduction of histone acetylation in the brain of MDD patients was observed in regulatory regions of CAMK2A and RAC1, genes that are involved in synaptic function and plasticity 204, 205. Histone methylation changes were also demonstrated at promoters of several genes including BDNF and genes that encode synapsin proteins 206, 207.

Postmortem studies also suggested that epigenetic mechanisms could also play an important role in bipolar disorder as well as in anxiety disorders 208–210 (also see 101, 211 for review). For example, the Infinium HumanMethylation450 array DNAm profiling of human hippocampus in schizophrenic, bipolar and control subjects (N=8 per group) revealed epigenetic and transcriptional alterations in the GAD1 regulatory network, associated with the function of GABAergic neurotransmission209. Future work in larger cohorts of subjects probing different epigenetic modifications will be needed to understand how this misregulation contributes to disease.

Epigenetic studies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD)

In the field of the epigenetics of neurodegenerative disorders, the largest progress has been made in epigenome-wide studies of AD (for a recent review, see 212). However, the studies are mostly limited to exploring DNAm. An important example is an Illumina 450K DNAm profiling study (N = 122) by Lunnon and colleagues 213, which detected significant hypermethylation of the ANK1 gene in entorhinal cortex (the brain region displaying earliest pathological signs in AD), PFC, and superior temporal gyrus, but not in cerebellum or blood. The findings were replicated in three independent cohorts. Similarly, De Jager and colleagues 214 assessed DNAm in a large cohort of AD and control individuals (N = 708), detecting alterations at many CpG sites, including those within the ANK1 gene, which were mirrored by changes in gene expression of ANK1.

In a very recent postmortem study of the lateral temporal lobe of AD patients 215, the Shelley Berger lab examined the genome-wide enrichment of the histone acetylation mark H4K16ac which has been implicated in preclinical models of aging and cellular senescence 216, 217. The authors discovered that while normal aging leads to H4K16ac enrichment, AD leads to significant losses of H4K16ac in the proximity of genes linked to aging and AD. In addition, the study discovered an association between the genomic locations of significant H4K16ac changes with genetic variants identified in prior AD GWAS and eQTLs. The relevance of discrete epigenetic disturbances associated with certain disorders remains to be explored in regard to their potential to inform the development of novel treatments in the future.

Challenges and Future Directions

As with most scientific strategies, challenges and limitations still exist with molecular studies of the postmortem human brain. A number of these have been mentioned throughout the review and in Table 2. Nevertheless, the experiences gained over the past few decades have clearly helped to address potential confounds through optimization of tissue processing, advancement of techniques, consideration of rigor and reproducibility (e.g., adding replication cohorts). One limitation that is still is not well integrated into postmortem studies is the clinical phenotyping of subjects which depending on the psychiatric illness can be extremely challenging to obtain from clinical records. Improved availability of complete patient records, pre-mortem and/or next of kin interviews could significantly aid the establishment of definite clinical diagnoses.

The large size of the brain and the still enormous expense of sequencing modalities continue to be a limitation for expanding molecular insights across the entire human brain outside the normal list of usual suspects of neuroanatomical regions studied (e.g., PFC and striatum). Moreover, even within brain regions frequently examined, the targets are often based on hypotheses driven from animal research, so discrete anatomical subregions derived from human pathological insights are still not used to guide translational investigations. For instance, most animal studies of the amygdala relevant to psychiatric disorders focus on the basal and central nuclei with limited molecular knowledge about the multiple other subnuclei. However, molecular characterization of the amygdala in individuals diagnosed with psychiatric diseases revealed disturbances of PDYN gene expression in cortical subnuclei of MDD and bipolar disorder subjects (but not schizophrenia subjects),218 an impairment also evident in heroin abusers particularly in the periamgydala cortical subregion. 50 Using an biased biobehavioral imaging strategy,219, 220 we determined the important relevance of the periamgydala cortical Pdyn neurons to specifically regulate the extended amygdala circuit, regulate peripheral stress corticosterone levels and induce anhedonia phenotype that altogether emphasize a role in mood and anxiety.50 Post-mortem molecular neuropathological interrogation of the human brain is therefore an important first step to guide translational approaches to subsequently provide functional insights. The challenge is to have the financial resources to profile the molecular signatures of multiple complex subregions throughout the human brain that could have functional relevance for behaviors linked to psychiatric disorders. Some information, however, will be obtained from public resources such as the Allen Brain Atlas (Table 1) as they continue to enhance the resolution of gene expression data available about the normal human brain.

Due to the extreme cellular heterogeneity of the brain, an important future direction will also be to expand the use of FACS (fluorescence assisted cell sorting)/FANS (fluorescence assisted nuclear sorting), laser-capture microdissection (LCM) or other new techniques for transcriptional profiling of single cell populations which will help to discern the contribution of specific cell types and uncover subtle molecular impairments masked by unaffected cell populations. LCM-dissected pyramidal neurons were, for example, used to study glutamate receptor splice variants in SCZ221, while FACS-sorted neurons from the medial PFC revealed previously uncataloged transposable elements in the DNA, long interspersed nuclear elements-1 (LINE1) insertions, some of which were validated by PCR222. Strikingly, LINE1 insertions in cocaine samples were enriched in gene ontologies and pathways previously associated with cocaine addiction222, pointing to an interesting genetic mechanism that could drive transcriptional alterations underlying substance use. In a more recent study, Ribeiro and colleagues performed RNA sequencing on neuronal nuclei isolated from post-mortem dlPFC of cocaine abusers and healthy controls223. The authors identified an AP-1 transcription factor regulated gene expression network in dlPFC neurons which was associated with cocaine use disorder and contained several differentially expressed hub genes, many of which were GWAS hits for traits that might involve dysfunction of brain reward circuitry (obesity) or dlPFC (bipolar disorder, schizophrenia)223.

Indeed, regulatory changes affecting particular cell types cannot be reliably inferred from data obtained from bulk (cellular heterogeneous) brain specimens that combine signals from all cell types. Such masking of cell-type-specific signals is particularly relevant for low abundance cell types. Although the majority of transcriptional and epigenetic work has been performed in bulk tissue specimens, many investigators have begun to shift efforts toward studies in individual cellular populations. This direction initiated by Akbarian and colleagues have demonstrated the successful separation of neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei in frozen postmortem human brain specimens using FANS and antibodies against pan-neuronal marker RNA-Binding Protein RBFOX3 (also known as NeuN) 224. Those and subsequent studies allowed detailed investigations demonstrating significant differences in epigenetic landscapes not only between neuronal and non-neuronal cells 130, 189, 225, 226 but also between major neuronal subtypes 227. Moreover, specific markers amenable for FANS-sorting of different populations of glial nuclei (e.g., SOX10 oligodendrocytes) have been also identified 228. Notably, regions marked by brain cell-type-specific epigenetic modifications were found to be enriched for common risk variants identified in GWASs of psychiatric diseases 189, 227. It is expected that data obtained from cell-type-specific epigenetic studies will help to further refine risk variant-GRE interactions towards relevant cell types in which the pathological effects of the variants can be further tested in future work. For example, as documented in Figure 2, our recent studies (Kozlenkov, Dracheva, Hurd unpublished) show that genes encoding two major opioid receptors, OPRM1 and OPRD1, differ in their expression in glutamate and GABA neurons. Whereas OPRM1 is expressed in both neuronal subtypes, OPRD1 has significantly higher expression in GABA versus glutamate cells (Figure 2, left panel). Importantly, the intronic OPRD1 SNP that predicts treatment outcome for opioid dependence in African-Americans (rs678849)229, is localized within a putative enhancer, which is predicted (based on enrichment of H3K27ac, an active enhancer mark) to be more active in GABA than in glutamate neurons (Figure 2, right panel). Additionally, among four polymorphisms that alter OPRM1 expression in normal human brain tissue (eQTLs) and that were found to be associated with heroin addiction in European American and African American cases from the Urban Health Study (meta-analysis p&lt;0.01)230, one SNP (rs3778150) is localized within a putative enhancer region that is active in glutamate but not in GABA neurons (Figure 2, right panel). The ability to characterize regulatory regions across the genome in a cell-type-specific manner in the human brain provides unparalleled possibilities of elucidating regulatory mechanisms that orchestrate the regulation of gene expression associated with genetics and neuropsychiatric traits. An atlas of chromatin accessibility based on ATAC-seq of neurons from multiple regions throughout the human brain is currently being made available as a resource for the field (Brain Open Chromatin Atlas; BOCA).

The recent advances of techniques to allow single cell resolution of the molecular repertoire within multiple cell types of the human brain will no doubt continue to grow exponentially. In a very recent study, Xiaogun Wang and collaborators analyzed approximately 2,300 single cells in the developing human PFC from early (week 8) to mid-gestation (week 26) using RNA-seq to characterize the complex molecular diversity of the cortical landscape231. They identified 35 subtypes of cells within 6 main classes and were able to track the developmental trajectory of these cells emphasizing the power of this approach. Extending this strategy to brain specimens from individuals with psychiatric disorders is clearly of key interest in the near future. Additional strategies in the pipeline such as high dimensional multiomic analyses in the same specimens will allow for the integration across multiple levels of biological systems to better inform the relationship between the epigenome, transcriptome and proteome that will expand our understanding of the relevance of discrete molecular perturbations to cell function and disease. In addition to single cell RNA-seq, a variety of single-cell epigenomic assays have recently been developed (reviewed in 232, 233). These methods allow the assessment of open chromatin, chromosome conformation, and DNA methylation, among others, providing complementary approaches to transcriptome profiling for classifying cell types based on differences in their epigenomic landscapes. Thus, future single cell profiling of healthy and diseased brain might employ multi-omic techniques, combining transcriptomics, epigenomics, and proteomics in single cells to further increase the power of molecular approaches to help discriminate cell subtypes and understand differences that contribute to disease 234.

Several other issues should be considered in future epigenetic investigations of postmortem brain tissue. First, although the recent whole-genome (or genome-wide) studies in the human brain have been mostly concentrated on DNAm and H3K4me3 (indicative of active promoters) or H3K27ac (indicative of active enhancers) histone modifications, other epigenetic marks (e.g., H3K27me3 or H3K9me2/3) are important in uncovering the regulatory potential of genomic DNA 235, 236. Second, because the field of epigenetic regulation of gene expression is still evolving, several different epigenetic markers should be simultaneously assessed in order to obtain more reliable annotations of regulatory elements and chromatin state in each particular tissue/cell type. These are clearly challenging strategies for even studies of animal models but still important to also conduct in the human post-mortem brain.

Gaining insight into how GREs influence disease risk requires production of comprehensive maps of gene expression and regulatory regions (e.g., enhancers and promoters) in both healthy (i.e., clinically unremarkable) and diseased human brains. As emphasized above, such studies should be preferably performed in cell-type- and discrete brain-region-specific manner. Also, given that mental illnesses have a neurodevelopmental origin, the developmental trajectories of GRE activity need to be explored. The recently established PsychENCODE Consortium (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn4921369/wiki) aims to accelerate discovery of the GREs in human brain, and to elucidate their role in the molecular pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. The Consortium is currently producing a public resource of genome-wide RNA-seq, ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq data on tissue and cell-type specific samples from approximately 1000 phenotypically well-characterized healthy and diseased human post-mortem brains with antemortem diagnoses of SCZ, bipolar disorder, and ASD 237. Undoubtedly the PsychENCODE will be a valuable resource for driving future targeted research efforts.

Ultimately, the establishment of multi-site consortia is critical in order to achieve large sample sizes needed to enhance statistical power. However, many factors need to be considered in establishing these cohorts in order to obtain reliable and reproducible data. Detailed clinical phenotyping along with assessment of comorbid disorders (depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, mood disorders, etc.) and agonal factors (cause and manner of death) are important. Moreover, studies will need to include systematic reporting of many variables, such as those highlighted in Table 2, in order to support future meta-analysis of molecular studies. Such cohorts will also be ideal to elucidate the molecular signatures within multiple brain regions of the same individual, which as of today has only been performed in a limited number of studies113, 238, 239; as most investigations have focused on one or two brain areas. Being able to identify the transcriptomic and epigenomic networks within and between discrete neural circuits (as opposed to individual brain regions) will provide a profound shift in understanding the molecular underpinnings of psychiatric disorders that can inform the development of improved therapeutic strategies.

Conclusions

Overall, the field has come far despite the initial skepticism that it would not be possible to study molecular mechanisms in the postmortem human brain. A large and growing body of evidence has emphasized not only that it is indeed feasible, but that the pursuit of neurobiological knowledge through direct studies of the human brain has even been an important drive for molecular technological advances. However, it is clear that we are still in the infancy of discovery science, and conclusive findings that can completely move the field forward regarding disease etiology, biological diagnosis and new treatment strategies are yet to be actualized. We are nevertheless moving in the right direction as state-of-the-art techniques continue to be developed and large consortia of human brain collections are being established.

While it has proven challenging until recently (and still does for some psychiatric disorders) to gather large sample sizes to identify strong candidates that meet the criteria for genome-wide significance, the large consortia and multi-site collaborations, such as the genotype-tissue expression (GTEx) project, CommonMind Consortium and PsychENCODE, will help to achieve this goal 113, 238, 240, 241. Large datasets nevertheless have not negated the importance of small studies in which replication is conducted or coupled with translational animal models to improve interpretation of the findings. Indeed, various small population studies conducted over the years indicate that molecular alterations detected in discrete brain areas are reproduced. Moreover, while there appears to be largely distinct patterns of the molecular signatures associated with specific psychiatric disorders, some common disturbances involve biological processes linked to synaptic transmission and myelin and epigenetic mechanisms. While we await the future generation of multi-omic data based on different cell types in multiple regions of the postmortem human brain, it is important for the field to interrogate genes that have already been identified from current validated strategies to begin to garner more in-depth knowledge about their potential functional relevance to disease and behavior and for which druggable targets of these genes/gene networks and related proteins can be explored. Elucidating molecular signatures of the human brain for mental illnesses is already feasible to begin to guide the development of potential novel medication strategies critical to meet the need of the millions of individuals who suffer from psychiatric disorders.

Supplementary Material

1 Supplementary Table 1

Post-mortem human databases available in the Gene Expression Omnibus.

This work was supported by NIH DA15446 (YLH), DA008227 (YLH), DA043247 (SD, YLH), MH103877 (a part of the PsychEncode consortium; SD), and VA BX001829 (SD).

Figure 1 Molecular phenotyping of the post-mortem human brain has progressed along with technological advancements

Gene expression that initially was assessed in a low-throughput and hypothesis-driven manner using qPCR or in situ hybridization histochemistry for individual genes, can now be profiled genome-wide employing microarray or RNA-sequencing technologies. The epigenetic landscape (comprised of DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation, histone post-translational modifications, nucleosome positioning, microRNAs, and long non-coding RNAs as well as hierarchical 3D structures of the chromatin) mediates the effects of environmental influences on gene expression during development and throughout adult life. Epigenetic modifications mark non-coding regulatory elements (such as promoters and enhancers) and can now be assessed using multiple whole-genome strategies, including DNA bisulfite sequencing, ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq. These datasets can then be integrated with GWAS findings to infer the functional significance of risk variants. Lastly, due to extreme cellular heterogeneity of the brain and because many epigenetic marks differ between the cell types, an important future direction is to obtain transcriptional and epigenetic profiling of different cell populations and single cells, which are now feasible to carry out with postmortem human brain specimens.

Figure 2 OPRM1 and OPRD1 expression (RNA-seq, Left) and H3K27ac enrichment profiles (ChIP-seq, Right) in GABA and Glu nuclei from human PFC

Left, RNA-seq data from 10 individuals are analyzed. Right, H3K27ac data are shown for 3 individuals. Two SNPs (red triangles) implicated in opioid addiction are situated within cell-type specific H3K27ac peaks. For each of the two genes, the signals are presented in the same scale across cell types and biological replicates.

Table 1 Human brain gene expression datasets and brain banks

Name	URL	Description	
Gene Expression Omnibus	https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/	Repository of high-throughput gene expression data	
NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Project	http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org/	Public resource of human epigenomic data	
Psychiatric Genomics Consortium	http://www.med.unc.edu/pgc	Genome-wide genomic data for psychiatric disorders	
Allen Human Brain Atlas	http://human.brain-map.org/	Multi-modal atlas mapping gene expression	
NIH Neurobiobank	https://neurobiobank.nih.gov/	Six U.S. repositories	
BrainNet Europe	http://www.brainnet-europe.org/	19 European brain banks	
UK Brain Banks Network	https://www.mrc.ac.uk/research/facilities-and-resources-for-researchers/brain-banks/	Searchable directory for UK cohorts	
Australian Brain Bank Network	http://www.austbrainbank.org.au/	4 Australian brain banks	
Brain Bank for Aging Research	http://www.mci.gr.jp/BrainBank/index.cgi	Japan	

Table 2 Standardized reporting of factors important for postmortem human studies.

Variable	
Age	
Sex	
Inclusion/exclusion criteria	
Drug use history (substances, years of use, former overdoses)	
Psychiatric history	
Cause of death	
Manner of death	
Toxicology (urine, blood; illicit and prescription drugs)	
Comorbidities (psychiatric and general, head trauma)	
Post-mortem interval (PMI)	
Brain storage time and condition	
Dissection method	
Brain pH	
RNA integrity number	

Conflict of Interests

The authors declare no conflict of interests.


1 Global Burden of Disease Study C Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Lancet 2015 386 9995 743 800 26063472
2 Vigo D Thornicroft G Atun R Estimating the true global burden of mental illness Lancet Psychiatry 2016 3 2 171 178 26851330
3 Caceres M Lachuer J Zapala MA Redmond JC Kudo L Geschwind DH Elevated gene expression levels distinguish human from non-human primate brains Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2003 100 22 13030 13035 14557539
4 Enard W Khaitovich P Klose J Zollner S Heissig F Giavalisco P Intra- and interspecific variation in primate gene expression patterns Science 2002 296 5566 340 343 11951044
5 Khaitovich P Muetzel B She X Lachmann M Hellmann I Dietzsch J Regional patterns of gene expression in human and chimpanzee brains Genome Res 2004 14 8 1462 1473 15289471
6 Konopka G Bomar JM Winden K Coppola G Jonsson ZO Gao F Human-specific transcriptional regulation of CNS development genes by FOXP2 Nature 2009 462 7270 213 217 19907493
7 Konopka G Friedrich T Davis-Turak J Winden K Oldham MC Gao F Human-specific transcriptional networks in the brain Neuron 2012 75 4 601 617 22920253
8 Oldham MC Konopka G Iwamoto K Langfelder P Kato T Horvath S Functional organization of the transcriptome in human brain Nature neuroscience 2008 11 11 1271 1282 18849986
9 He Z Han D Efimova O Guijarro P Yu Q Oleksiak A Comprehensive transcriptome analysis of neocortical layers in humans, chimpanzees and macaques Nature neuroscience 2017 20 6 886 895 28414332
10 Rockman MV Hahn MW Soranzo N Zimprich F Goldstein DB Wray GA Ancient and recent positive selection transformed opioid cis-regulation in humans PLoS Biol 2005 3 12 e387 16274263
11 Hurd YL Herman MM Hyde TM Bigelow LB Weinberger DR Kleinman JE Prodynorphin mRNA expression is increased in the patch versus matrix compartment of the caudate nucleus in suicide subjects Molec Psychiat 1997 2 495 500
12 Hurd YL Differential messenger RNA expression of prodynorphin and proenkephalin in the human brain Neuroscience 1996 72 767 783 9157322
13 Mansour A Fox CA Akil H Watson SJ Opioid-receptor mRNA expression in the rat CNS: anatomical and functional implications Trends Neurosci 1995 18 1 22 29 7535487
14 Peckys D Landwehrmeyer GB Expression of mu, kappa, and delta opioid receptor messenger RNA in the human CNS: a 33P in situ hybridization study Neuroscience 1999 88 4 1093 1135 10336124
15 Di Chiara G Imperato A Drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1988 85 14 5274 5278 2899326
16 Luscher C Malenka RC Drug-evoked synaptic plasticity in addiction: from molecular changes to circuit remodeling Neuron 2011 69 4 650 663 21338877
17 Nestler EJ Is there a common molecular pathway for addiction? Nature neuroscience 2005 8 11 1445 1449 16251986
18 D’Souza MS Glutamatergic transmission in drug reward: implications for drug addiction Front Neurosci 2015 9 404 26594139
19 Egervari G Landry J Callens J Fullard JF Roussos P Keller E Striatal H3K27 Acetylation Linked to Glutamatergic Gene Dysregulation in Human Heroin Abusers Holds Promise as Therapeutic Target Biological psychiatry 2017 81 7 585 594 27863698
20 Gipson CD Kupchik YM Shen H Reissner KJ Thomas CA Kalivas PW Relapse induced by cues predicting cocaine depends on rapid, transient synaptic potentiation Neuron 2013 77 5 867 872 23473317
21 LaLumiere RT Kalivas PW Glutamate release in the nucleus accumbens core is necessary for heroin seeking J Neurosci 2008 28 12 3170 3177 18354020
22 Lou ZZ Chen LH Liu HF Ruan LM Zhou WH Blockade of mGluR5 in the nucleus accumbens shell but not core attenuates heroin seeking behavior in rats Acta Pharmacol Sin 2014 35 12 1485 1492 25399651
23 Scofield MD Heinsbroek JA Gipson CD Kupchik YM Spencer S Smith AC The Nucleus Accumbens: Mechanisms of Addiction across Drug Classes Reflect the Importance of Glutamate Homeostasis Pharmacol Rev 2016 68 3 816 871 27363441
24 Shen H Moussawi K Zhou W Toda S Kalivas PW Heroin relapse requires long-term potentiation-like plasticity mediated by NMDA2b-containing receptors Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2011 108 48 19407 19412 22084102
25 Shen HW Scofield MD Boger H Hensley M Kalivas PW Synaptic glutamate spillover due to impaired glutamate uptake mediates heroin relapse The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2014 34 16 5649 5657 24741055
26 Smith AC Kupchik YM Scofield MD Gipson CD Wiggins A Thomas CA Synaptic plasticity mediating cocaine relapse requires matrix metalloproteinases Nature neuroscience 2014 17 12 1655 1657 25326689
27 Gao J Wang WY Mao YW Graff J Guan JS Pan L A novel pathway regulates memory and plasticity via SIRT1 and miR-134 Nature 2010 466 7310 1105 1109 20622856
28 Malinow R Malenka RC AMPA receptor trafficking and synaptic plasticity Annu Rev Neurosci 2002 25 103 126 12052905
29 Russo SJ Dietz DM Dumitriu D Morrison JH Malenka RC Nestler EJ The addicted synapse: mechanisms of synaptic and structural plasticity in nucleus accumbens Trends Neurosci 2010 33 6 267 276 20207024
30 Zhang Y Venkitaramani DV Gladding CM Zhang Y Kurup P Molnar E The tyrosine phosphatase STEP mediates AMPA receptor endocytosis after metabotropic glutamate receptor stimulation The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2008 28 42 10561 10566 18923032
31 Bowers MS McFarland K Lake RW Peterson YK Lapish CC Gregory ML Activator of G protein signaling 3: a gatekeeper of cocaine sensitization and drug seeking Neuron 2004 42 2 269 281 15091342
32 Chen L Huang LY Sustained potentiation of NMDA receptor-mediated glutamate responses through activation of protein kinase C by a mu opioid Neuron 1991 7 2 319 326 1678615
33 Martin G Nie Z Siggins GR mu-Opioid receptors modulate NMDA receptor-mediated responses in nucleus accumbens neurons The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 1997 17 1 11 22 8987732
34 Xi ZX Stein EA Blockade of ionotropic glutamatergic transmission in the ventral tegmental area reduces heroin reinforcement in rat Psychopharmacology 2002 164 2 144 150 12404076
35 Robison AJ Nestler EJ Transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms of addiction Nat Rev Neurosci 2011 12 11 623 637 21989194
36 Wolf ME The Bermuda Triangle of cocaine-induced neuroadaptations Trends Neurosci 2010 33 9 391 398 20655604
37 Bach H Arango V Kassir SA Tsaava T Dwork AJ Mann JJ Alcoholics have more tryptophan hydroxylase 2 mRNA and protein in the dorsal and median raphe nuclei Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2014 38 7 1894 1901 24942188
38 Bannon MJ Pruetz B Manning-Bog AB Whitty CJ Michelhaugh SK Sacchetti P Decreased expression of the transcription factor NURR1 in dopamine neurons of cocaine abusers Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2002 99 9 6382 6385 11959923
39 Bannon MJ Savonen CL Hartley ZJ Johnson MM Schmidt CJ Investigating the potential influence of cause of death and cocaine levels on the differential expression of genes associated with cocaine abuse PloS one 2015 10 2 e0117580 25658879
40 Covington HE 3rd Maze I Sun H Bomze HM DeMaio KD Wu EY A role for repressive histone methylation in cocaine-induced vulnerability to stress Neuron 2011 71 4 656 670 21867882
41 Damez-Werno DM Sun H Scobie KN Shao N Rabkin J Dias C Histone arginine methylation in cocaine action in the nucleus accumbens Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2016 113 34 9623 9628 27506785
42 Engmann O Labonte B Mitchell A Bashtrykov P Calipari ES Rosenbluh C Cocaine-Induced Chromatin Modifications Associate With Increased Expression and Three-Dimensional Looping of Auts2 Biological psychiatry 2017
43 Egervari G Jutras-Aswad D Landry J Miller ML Anderson SA Michaelides M A Functional 3’UTR Polymorphism (rs2235749) of Prodynorphin Alters microRNA-365 Binding in Ventral Striatonigral Neurons to Influence Novelty Seeking and Positive Reward Traits Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2016 41 10 2512 2520 27074815
44 Maze I Shen L Zhang B Garcia BA Shao N Mitchell A Analytical tools and current challenges in the modern era of neuroepigenomics Nature neuroscience 2014 17 11 1476 1490 25349914
45 Drakenberg K Nikoshkov A Horvath MC Fagergren P Gharibyan A Saarelainen K Mu opioid receptor A118G polymorphism in association with striatal opioid neuropeptide gene expression in heroin abusers Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2006 103 20 7883 7888 16682632
46 Nikoshkov A Drakenberg K Wang X Horvath MC Keller E Hurd YL Opioid neuropeptide genotypes in relation to heroin abuse: dopamine tone contributes to reversed mesolimbic proenkephalin expression Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2008 105 2 786 791 18184800
47 Nikoshkov A Hurd YL Yakovleva T Bazov I Marinova Z Cebers G Prodynorphin transcripts and proteins differentially expressed and regulated in the adult human brain FASEB J 2005 19 11 1543 1545 16014400
48 Horvath MC Hurd YL Rajs J Keller E Variations in respiratory distress characterize the acute agonal period during heroin overdose death: relevance to postmortem mRNA studies Brain Res Bull 2006 70 3 251 259 16861111
49 Koo JW Mazei-Robison MS LaPlant Q Egervari G Braunscheidel KM Adank DN Epigenetic basis of opiate suppression of Bdnf gene expression in the ventral tegmental area Nat Neurosci 2015 18 3 415 422 25643298
50 Anderson SA Michaelides M Zarnegar P Ren Y Fagergren P Thanos PK Impaired periamygdaloid-cortex prodynorphin is characteristic of opiate addiction and depression J Clin Invest 2013 123 12 5334 5341 24231353
51 Okvist A Fagergren P Whittard J Garcia-Osta A Drakenberg K Horvath MC Dysregulated postsynaptic density and endocytic zone in the amygdala of human heroin and cocaine abusers Biol Psychiatry 2011 69 3 245 252 21126734
52 Feng J Shao N Szulwach KE Vialou V Huynh J Zhong C Role of Tet1 and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in cocaine action Nature neuroscience 2015 18 4 536 544 25774451
53 Hemby SE Tang W Muly EC Kuhar MJ Howell L Mash DC Cocaine-induced alterations in nucleus accumbens ionotropic glutamate receptor subunits in human and non-human primates J Neurochem 2005 95 6 1785 1793 16363995
54 Johnson MM David JA Michelhaugh SK Schmidt CJ Bannon MJ Increased heat shock protein 70 gene expression in the brains of cocaine-related fatalities may be reflective of postdrug survival and intervention rather than excited delirium J Forensic Sci 2012 57 6 1519 1523 22803793
55 Kristiansen LV Bannon MJ Meador-Woodruff JH Expression of transcripts for myelin related genes in postmortem brain from cocaine abusers Neurochem Res 2009 34 1 46 54 18357522
56 Mash DC Ouyang Q Pablo J Basile M Izenwasser S Lieberman A Cocaine abusers have an overexpression of alpha-synuclein in dopamine neurons The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2003 23 7 2564 2571 12684441
57 Moyer RA Wang D Papp AC Smith RM Duque L Mash DC Intronic polymorphisms affecting alternative splicing of human dopamine D2 receptor are associated with cocaine abuse Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2011 36 4 753 762 21150907
58 Robison AJ Vialou V Mazei-Robison M Feng J Kourrich S Collins M Behavioral and structural responses to chronic cocaine require a feedforward loop involving DeltaFosB and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II in the nucleus accumbens shell The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2013 33 10 4295 4307 23467346
59 Sun H Damez-Werno DM Scobie KN Shao NY Dias C Rabkin J Regulation of BAZ1A and nucleosome positioning in the nucleus accumbens in response to cocaine Neuroscience 2017 353 1 6 28412501
60 Lehrmann E Colantuoni C Deep-Soboslay A Becker KG Lowe R Huestis MA Transcriptional changes common to human cocaine, cannabis and phencyclidine abuse PloS one 2006 1 e114 17205118
61 Mash DC ffrench-Mullen J Adi N Qin Y Buck A Pablo J Gene expression in human hippocampus from cocaine abusers identifies genes which regulate extracellular matrix remodeling PloS one 2007 2 11 e1187 18000554
62 Zhou Z Yuan Q Mash DC Goldman D Substance-specific and shared transcription and epigenetic changes in the human hippocampus chronically exposed to cocaine and alcohol Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2011 108 16 6626 6631 21464311
63 Sillivan SE Whittard JD Jacobs MM Ren Y Mazloom AR Caputi FF ELK1 transcription factor linked to dysregulated striatal mu opioid receptor signaling network and OPRM1 polymorphism in human heroin abusers Biol Psychiatry 2013 74 7 511 519 23702428
64 Albertson DN Pruetz B Schmidt CJ Kuhn DM Kapatos G Bannon MJ Gene expression profile of the nucleus accumbens of human cocaine abusers: evidence for dysregulation of myelin J Neurochem 2004 88 5 1211 1219 15009677
65 Allen M Zou F Chai HS Younkin CS Crook J Pankratz VS Novel late-onset Alzheimer disease loci variants associate with brain gene expression Neurology 2012 79 3 221 228 22722634
66 Bannon MJ Johnson MM Michelhaugh SK Hartley ZJ Halter SD David JA A molecular profile of cocaine abuse includes the differential expression of genes that regulate transcription, chromatin, and dopamine cell phenotype Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2014 39 9 2191 2199 24642598
67 Enoch MA Zhou Z Kimura M Mash DC Yuan Q Goldman D GABAergic gene expression in postmortem hippocampus from alcoholics and cocaine addicts; corresponding findings in alcohol-naive P and NP rats PloS one 2012 7 1 e29369 22253714
68 Albertson DN Schmidt CJ Kapatos G Bannon MJ Distinctive profiles of gene expression in the human nucleus accumbens associated with cocaine and heroin abuse Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2006 31 10 2304 2312 16710320
69 Hurd YL Herkenham M Molecular alterations in the neostriatum of human cocaine addicts Synapse 1993 13 357 369 7683144
70 Drakenberg K Nikoshkov A Horvath MC Fagergren P Gharibyan A Saarelainen K Mu Opioid receptor A118G polymorphism in association with striatal opioid neuropeptide gene expression in heroin abusers Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 20 7883 7888 16682632
71 McClintick JN Xuei X Tischfield JA Goate A Foroud T Wetherill L Stress-response pathways are altered in the hippocampus of chronic alcoholics Alcohol 2013 47 7 505 515 23981442
72 Mamdani M Williamson V McMichael GO Blevins T Aliev F Adkins A Integrating mRNA and miRNA Weighted Gene Co-Expression Networks with eQTLs in the Nucleus Accumbens of Subjects with Alcohol Dependence PloS one 2015 10 9 e0137671 26381263
73 Kryger R Wilce PA The effects of alcoholism on the human basolateral amygdala Neuroscience 2010 167 2 361 371 20153402
74 Farris SP Arasappan D Hunicke-Smith S Harris RA Mayfield RD Transcriptome organization for chronic alcohol abuse in human brain Mol Psychiatry 2015 20 11 1438 1447 25450227
75 Gandal MJ Haney JR Parikshak NN Leppa V Ramaswami G Hartl C Shared molecular neuropathology across major psychiatric disorders parallels polygenic overlap Science 2018 359 6376 693 697 29439242
76 Guan J Li G Injury Mortality in Individuals With Autism Am J Public Health 2017 107 5 791 793 28323463
77 Liu X Han D Somel M Jiang X Hu H Guijarro P Disruption of an Evolutionarily Novel Synaptic Expression Pattern in Autism PLoS Biol 2016 14 9 e1002558 27685936
78 Ch’ng C Kwok W Rogic S Pavlidis P Meta-Analysis of Gene Expression in Autism Spectrum Disorder Autism Res 2015 8 5 593 608 25720351
79 Egervari G Ciccocioppo R Jentsch JD Hurd YL Shaping vulnerability to addiction - the contribution of behavior, neural circuits and molecular mechanisms Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2017
80 Voineagu I Wang X Johnston P Lowe JK Tian Y Horvath S Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent molecular pathology Nature 2011 474 7351 380 384 21614001
81 Pantazatos SP Huang YY Rosoklija GB Dwork AJ Arango V Mann JJ Whole-transcriptome brain expression and exon-usage profiling in major depression and suicide: evidence for altered glial, endothelial and ATPase activity Mol Psychiatry 2017 22 5 760 773 27528462
82 Akula N Barb J Jiang X Wendland JR Choi KH Sen SK RNA-sequencing of the brain transcriptome implicates dysregulation of neuroplasticity, circadian rhythms and GTPase binding in bipolar disorder Mol Psychiatry 2014 19 11 1179 1185 24393808
83 Labonte B Engmann O Purushothaman I Menard C Wang J Tan C Sex-specific transcriptional signatures in human depression Nat Med 2017 23 9 1102 1111 28825715
84 Qin W Liu C Sodhi M Lu H Meta-analysis of sex differences in gene expression in schizophrenia BMC Syst Biol 2016 10 Suppl 1 9 26818902
85 Mistry M Gillis J Pavlidis P Meta-analysis of gene coexpression networks in the post-mortem prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia and unaffected controls BMC Neurosci 2013 14 105 24070017
86 Fromer M Roussos P Sieberts SK Johnson JS Kavanagh DH Perumal TM Gene expression elucidates functional impact of polygenic risk for schizophrenia Nature neuroscience 2016 19 11 1442 1453 27668389
87 Hertzberg L Katsel P Roussos P Haroutunian V Domany E Integration of gene expression and GWAS results supports involvement of calcium signaling in Schizophrenia Schizophr Res 2015 164 1–3 92 99 25702973
88 Roussos P Katsel P Davis KL Siever LJ Haroutunian V A system-level transcriptomic analysis of schizophrenia using postmortem brain tissue samples Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012 69 12 1205 1213 22868662
89 Haroutunian V Katsel P Dracheva S Stewart DG Davis KL Variations in oligodendrocyte-related gene expression across multiple cortical regions: implications for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2007 10 4 565 573 17291370
90 Winkler JM Fox HS Transcriptome meta-analysis reveals a central role for sex steroids in the degeneration of hippocampal neurons in Alzheimer’s disease BMC Syst Biol 2013 7 51 23803348
91 Humphries CE Kohli MA Nathanson L Whitehead P Beecham G Martin E Integrated whole transcriptome and DNA methylation analysis identifies gene networks specific to late-onset Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2015 44 3 977 987 25380588
92 Humphries C Kohli MA Whitehead P Mash DC Pericak-Vance MA Gilbert J Alzheimer disease (AD) specific transcription, DNA methylation and splicing in twenty AD associated loci Mol Cell Neurosci 2015 67 37 45 26004081
93 Wang M Roussos P McKenzie A Zhou X Kajiwara Y Brennand KJ Integrative network analysis of nineteen brain regions identifies molecular signatures and networks underlying selective regional vulnerability to Alzheimer’s disease Genome Med 2016 8 1 104 27799057
94 Zou F Chai HS Younkin CS Allen M Crook J Pankratz VS Brain expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) identifies human disease-associated variants PLoS Genet 2012 8 6 e1002707 22685416
95 Sweatt JD The emerging field of neuroepigenetics Neuron 2013 80 3 624 632 24183015
96 Maze I Noh KM Soshnev AA Allis CD Every amino acid matters: essential contributions of histone variants to mammalian development and disease Nat Rev Genet 2014 15 4 259 271 24614311
97 Varela MA Roberts TC Wood MJ Epigenetics and ncRNAs in brain function and disease: mechanisms and prospects for therapy Neurotherapeutics 2013 10 4 621 631 24068583
98 Nord AS Pattabiraman K Visel A Rubenstein JL Genomic perspectives of transcriptional regulation in forebrain development Neuron 2015 85 1 27 47 25569346
99 Fagiolini M Jensen CL Champagne FA Epigenetic influences on brain development and plasticity Curr Opin Neurobiol 2009 19 2 207 212 19545993
100 Day JJ Kennedy AJ Sweatt JD DNA methylation and its implications and accessibility for neuropsychiatric therapeutics Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2015 55 591 611 25340930
101 Nestler EJ Pena CJ Kundakovic M Mitchell A Akbarian S Epigenetic Basis of Mental Illness Neuroscientist 2016 22 5 447 463 26450593
102 Abdolmaleky HM Zhou JR Thiagalingam S An update on the epigenetics of psychotic diseases and autism Epigenomics 2015 7 3 427 449 26077430
103 Almeida D Turecki G A Slice of the Suicidal Brain: What Have Postmortem Molecular Studies Taught Us? Curr Psychiatry Rep 2016 18 11 98 27671915
104 Delgado-Morales R Neuroepigenomics in aging and disease Advances in experimental medicine and biology Springer Cham, Switzerland 2017 1 online resource
105 Fullard JF Halene TB Giambartolomei C Haroutunian V Akbarian S Roussos P Understanding the genetic liability to schizophrenia through the neuroepigenome Schizophr Res 2016 177 1–3 115 124 26827128
106 Pries LK Guloksuz S Kenis G DNA Methylation in Schizophrenia Adv Exp Med Biol 2017 978 211 236 28523549
107 Cariaga-Martinez A Alelu-Paz R Rethinking the Epigenetic Framework to Unravel the Molecular Pathology of Schizophrenia Int J Mol Sci 2017 18 4
108 Geschwind DH Flint J Genetics and genomics of psychiatric disease Science 2015 349 6255 1489 1494 26404826
109 Barrera LO Ren B The transcriptional regulatory code of eukaryotic cells--insights from genome-wide analysis of chromatin organization and transcription factor binding Curr Opin Cell Biol 2006 18 3 291 298 16647254
110 Lelli KM Slattery M Mann RS Disentangling the many layers of eukaryotic transcriptional regulation Annu Rev Genet 2012 46 43 68 22934649
111 Kornienko AE Guenzl PM Barlow DP Pauler FM Gene regulation by the act of long non-coding RNA transcription BMC Biol 2013 11 59 23721193
112 Consortium EP An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome Nature 2012 489 7414 57 74 22955616
113 Consortium GT The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project Nat Genet 2013 45 6 580 585 23715323
114 Roadmap Epigenomics C Kundaje A Meuleman W Ernst J Bilenky M Yen A Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes Nature 2015 518 7539 317 330 25693563
115 Pletikos M Sousa AM Sedmak G Meyer KA Zhu Y Cheng F Temporal specification and bilaterality of human neocortical topographic gene expression Neuron 2014 81 2 321 332 24373884
116 Sexton T Schober H Fraser P Gasser SM Gene regulation through nuclear organization Nat Struct Mol Biol 2007 14 11 1049 1055 17984967
117 Bickmore WA The spatial organization of the human genome Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2013 14 67 84 23875797
118 Ernst J Kheradpour P Mikkelsen TS Shoresh N Ward LD Epstein CB Mapping and analysis of chromatin state dynamics in nine human cell types Nature 2011 473 7345 43 49 21441907
119 Stadler MB Murr R Burger L Ivanek R Lienert F Scholer A DNA-binding factors shape the mouse methylome at distal regulatory regions Nature 2011 480 7378 490 495 22170606
120 Wen L Li XL Yan LY Tan YX Li R Zhao YY Whole-genome analysis of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and 5-methylcytosine at base resolution in the human brain Genome Biology 2014 15 3
121 Gross JA Pacis A Chen GG Drupals M Lutz PE Barreiro LB Gene-body 5-hydroxymethylation is associated with gene expression changes in the prefrontal cortex of depressed individuals Transl Psychiatry 2017 7 5 e1119 28485726
122 Creyghton MP Cheng AW Welstead GG Kooistra T Carey BW Steine EJ Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and predicts developmental state Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 50 21931 21936 21106759
123 Rada-Iglesias A Bajpai R Swigut T Brugmann SA Flynn RA Wysocka J A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental enhancers in humans Nature 2011 470 7333 279 283 21160473
124 Tie F Banerjee R Stratton CA Prasad-Sinha J Stepanik V Zlobin A CBP-mediated acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 antagonizes Drosophila Polycomb silencing Development 2009 136 18 3131 3141 19700617
125 Simon JA Kingston RE Mechanisms of polycomb gene silencing: knowns and unknowns Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 10 10 697 708 19738629
126 Schubeler D Function and information content of DNA methylation Nature 2015 517 7534 321 326 25592537
127 Smith ZD Meissner A DNA methylation: roles in mammalian development Nature Reviews Genetics 2013 14 3 204 220
128 Varley KE Gertz J Bowling KM Parker SL Reddy TE Pauli-Behn F Dynamic DNA methylation across diverse human cell lines and tissues Genome Res 2013 23 3 555 567 23325432
129 Maunakea AK Nagarajan RP Bilenky M Ballinger TJ D’Souza C Fouse SD Conserved role of intragenic DNA methylation in regulating alternative promoters Nature 2010 466 7303 253 257 20613842
130 Lister R Mukamel EA Nery JR Urich M Puddifoot CA Johnson ND Global epigenomic reconfiguration during mammalian brain development Science 2013 341 6146 1237905 23828890
131 Spruijt CG Gnerlich F Smits AH Pfaffeneder T Jansen PW Bauer C Dynamic readers for 5-(hydroxy)methylcytosine and its oxidized derivatives Cell 2013 152 5 1146 1159 23434322
132 Yin Y Morgunova E Jolma A Kaasinen E Sahu B Khund-Sayeed S Impact of cytosine methylation on DNA binding specificities of human transcription factors Science 2017 356 6337
133 Guo JU Ma DK Mo H Ball MP Jang MH Bonaguidi MA Neuronal activity modifies the DNA methylation landscape in the adult brain NatNeurosci 2011 14 10 1345 1351
134 Graff J Kim D Dobbin MM Tsai LH Epigenetic regulation of gene expression in physiological and pathological brain processes Physiol Rev 2011 91 2 603 649 21527733
135 Shin J Ming GL Song H DNA modifications in the mammalian brain Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2014 369 1652
136 Gusev A Lee SH Trynka G Finucane H Vilhjalmsson BJ Xu H Partitioning heritability of regulatory and cell-type-specific variants across 11 common diseases Am J Hum Genet 2014 95 5 535 552 25439723
137 Maurano MT Humbert R Rynes E Thurman RE Haugen E Wang H Systematic localization of common disease-associated variation in regulatory DNA Science 2012 337 6099 1190 1195 22955828
138 Buenrostro JD Wu B Chang HY Greenleaf WJ ATAC-seq: A Method for Assaying Chromatin Accessibility Genome-Wide Curr Protoc Mol Biol 2015 109 21 29 21 29
139 Corces MR Trevino AE Hamilton EG Greenside PG Sinnott-Armstrong NA Vesuna S An improved ATAC-seq protocol reduces background and enables interrogation of frozen tissues Nat Methods 2017 14 10 959 962 28846090
140 Wu J Huang B Chen H Yin Q Liu Y Xiang Y The landscape of accessible chromatin in mammalian preimplantation embryos Nature 2016 534 7609 652 657 27309802
141 Fullard JF Giambartolomei C Hauberg ME Xu K Voloudakis G Shao Z Open chromatin profiling of human postmortem brain infers functional roles for non-coding schizophrenia loci Hum Mol Genet 2017 26 10 1942 1951 28335009
142 Rivera CM Ren B Mapping human epigenomes Cell 2013 155 1 39 55 24074860
143 Farh KK Marson A Zhu J Kleinewietfeld M Housley WJ Beik S Genetic and epigenetic fine mapping of causal autoimmune disease variants Nature 2015 518 7539 337 343 25363779
144 Trynka G Sandor C Han B Xu H Stranger BE Liu XS Chromatin marks identify critical cell types for fine mapping complex trait variants Nat Genet 2013 45 2 124 130 23263488
145 Finucane HK Bulik-Sullivan B Gusev A Trynka G Reshef Y Loh PR Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using genome-wide association summary statistics Nat Genet 2015 47 11 1228 1235 26414678
146 Helm M Alfonzo JD Posttranscriptional RNA Modifications: playing metabolic games in a cell’s chemical Legoland Chem Biol 2014 21 2 174 185 24315934
147 Dominissini D Moshitch-Moshkovitz S Schwartz S Salmon-Divon M Ungar L Osenberg S Topology of the human and mouse m6A RNA methylomes revealed by m6A-seq Nature 2012 485 7397 201 206 22575960
148 Meyer KD Saletore Y Zumbo P Elemento O Mason CE Jaffrey SR Comprehensive analysis of mRNA methylation reveals enrichment in 3’ UTRs and near stop codons Cell 2012 149 7 1635 1646 22608085
149 Sun WJ Li JH Liu S Wu J Zhou H Qu LH RMBase: a resource for decoding the landscape of RNA modifications from high-throughput sequencing data Nucleic Acids Res 2016 44 D1 D259 265 26464443
150 Schwartz S Mumbach MR Jovanovic M Wang T Maciag K Bushkin GG Perturbation of m6A writers reveals two distinct classes of mRNA methylation at internal and 5’ sites Cell Rep 2014 8 1 284 296 24981863
151 Zheng G Dahl JA Niu Y Fedorcsak P Huang CM Li CJ ALKBH5 is a mammalian RNA demethylase that impacts RNA metabolism and mouse fertility Mol Cell 2013 49 1 18 29 23177736
152 Jia G Fu Y Zhao X Dai Q Zheng G Yang Y N6-methyladenosine in nuclear RNA is a major substrate of the obesity-associated FTO Nat Chem Biol 2011 7 12 885 887 22002720
153 Liu J Yue Y Han D Wang X Fu Y Zhang L A METTL3-METTL14 complex mediates mammalian nuclear RNA N6-adenosine methylation Nat Chem Biol 2014 10 2 93 95 24316715
154 Edupuganti RR Geiger S Lindeboom RGH Shi H Hsu PJ Lu Z N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) recruits and repels proteins to regulate mRNA homeostasis Nat Struct Mol Biol 2017 24 10 870 878 28869609
155 Chang M Lv H Zhang W Ma C He X Zhao S Region-specific RNA m(6)A methylation represents a new layer of control in the gene regulatory network in the mouse brain Open Biol 2017 7 9
156 Zeisel A Manchado AB Codeluppi S Lonnerberg P La Manno G Jureus A Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq Science 2015
157 Yoon KJ Ringeling FR Vissers C Jacob F Pokrass M Jimenez-Cyrus D Temporal Control of Mammalian Cortical Neurogenesis by m(6)A Methylation Cell 2017 171 4 877 889 e817 28965759
158 Jin F Li Y Dixon JR Selvaraj S Ye Z Lee AY A high-resolution map of the three-dimensional chromatin interactome in human cells Nature 2013 503 7475 290 294 24141950
159 Lieberman-Aiden E van Berkum NL Williams L Imakaev M Ragoczy T Telling A Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome Science 2009 326 5950 289 293 19815776
160 Rao SS Huntley MH Durand NC Stamenova EK Bochkov ID Robinson JT A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping Cell 2014 159 7 1665 1680 25497547
161 Garcia-Gonzalez E Escamilla-Del-Arenal M Arzate-Mejia R Recillas-Targa F Chromatin remodeling effects on enhancer activity Cell Mol Life Sci 2016 73 15 2897 2910 27026300
162 Dixon JR Selvaraj S Yue F Kim A Li Y Shen Y Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions Nature 2012 485 7398 376 380 22495300
163 Gonzalez-Sandoval A Gasser SM On TADs and LADs: Spatial Control Over Gene Expression Trends Genet 2016 32 8 485 495 27312344
164 Won H de la Torre-Ubieta L Stein JL Parikshak NN Huang J Opland CK Chromosome conformation elucidates regulatory relationships in developing human brain Nature 2016 538 7626 523 527 27760116
165 Jiang Y Loh YE Rajarajan P Hirayama T Liao W Kassim BS The methyltransferase SETDB1 regulates a large neuron-specific topological chromatin domain Nat Genet 2017 49 8 1239 1250 28671686
166 Cannon M Jones PB Murray RM Obstetric complications and schizophrenia: historical and meta-analytic review Am J Psychiatry 2002 159 7 1080 1092 12091183
167 Brown AS Derkits EJ Prenatal infection and schizophrenia: a review of epidemiologic and translational studies Am J Psychiatry 2010 167 3 261 280 20123911
168 Khashan AS Abel KM McNamee R Pedersen MG Webb RT Baker PN Higher risk of offspring schizophrenia following antenatal maternal exposure to severe adverse life events Arch Gen Psychiatry 2008 65 2 146 152 18250252
169 Susser E Neugebauer R Hoek HW Brown AS Lin S Labovitz D Schizophrenia after prenatal famine Further evidence Arch Gen Psychiatry 1996 53 1 25 31 8540774
170 Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics C Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci Nature 2014 511 7510 421 427 25056061
171 Pardinas AF Holmans P Pocklington AJ Escott-Price V Ripke S Carrera N Common schizophrenia alleles are enriched in mutation-intolerant genes and in regions under strong background selection Nat Genet 2018 50 3 381 389 29483656
172 Guidotti A Grayson DR Caruncho HJ Epigenetic RELN Dysfunction in Schizophrenia and Related Neuropsychiatric Disorders Front Cell Neurosci 2016 10 89 27092053
173 Mitchell AC Jiang Y Peter C Akbarian S Transcriptional regulation of GAD1 GABA synthesis gene in the prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia Schizophr Res 2015 167 1–3 28 34 25458568
174 Mill J Tang T Kaminsky Z Khare T Yazdanpanah S Bouchard L Epigenomic profiling reveals DNA-methylation changes associated with major psychosis AmJ HumGenet 2008 82 3 696 711 18319075
175 Numata S Ye T Herman M Lipska BK DNA methylation changes in the postmortem dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia Front Genet 2014 5 280 25206360
176 Wockner LF Noble EP Lawford BR Young RM Morris CP Whitehall VL Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of human brain tissue from schizophrenia patients Transl Psychiatry 2014 4 e339 24399042
177 Wockner LF Morris CP Noble EP Lawford BR Whitehall VL Young RM Brain-specific epigenetic markers of schizophrenia Transl Psychiatry 2015 5 e680 26575221
178 Alelu-Paz R Carmona FJ Sanchez-Mut JV Cariaga-Martinez A Gonzalez-Corpas A Ashour N Epigenetics in Schizophrenia: A Pilot Study of Global DNA Methylation in Different Brain Regions Associated with Higher Cognitive Functions Front Psychol 2016 7 1496 27746755
179 Pidsley R Viana J Hannon E Spiers H Troakes C Al-Saraj S Methylomic profiling of human brain tissue supports a neurodevelopmental origin for schizophrenia Genome Biol 2014 15 10 483 25347937
180 Viana J Hannon E Dempster E Pidsley R Macdonald R Knox O Schizophrenia-associated methylomic variation: molecular signatures of disease and polygenic risk burden across multiple brain regions Hum Mol Genet 2017 26 1 210 225 28011714
181 Spiers H Hannon E Schalkwyk LC Smith R Wong CC O’Donovan MC Methylomic trajectories across human fetal brain development Genome Res 2015 25 3 338 352 25650246
182 Bharadwaj R Jiang Y Mao W Jakovcevski M Dincer A Krueger W Conserved chromosome 2q31 conformations are associated with transcriptional regulation of GAD1 GABA synthesis enzyme and altered in prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2013 33 29 11839 11851 23864674
183 Roussos P Mitchell AC Voloudakis G Fullard JF Pothula VM Tsang J A role for noncoding variation in schizophrenia Cell Rep 2014 9 4 1417 1429 25453756
184 Vogel Ciernia A LaSalle J The landscape of DNA methylation amid a perfect storm of autism aetiologies Nat Rev Neurosci 2016 17 7 411 423 27150399
185 Grayson DR Guidotti A Merging data from genetic and epigenetic approaches to better understand autistic spectrum disorder Epigenomics 2016 8 1 85 104 26551091
186 Nardone S Sams DS Reuveni E Getselter D Oron O Karpuj M DNA methylation analysis of the autistic brain reveals multiple dysregulated biological pathways Transl Psychiatry 2014 4 e433 25180572
187 Ladd-Acosta C Hansen KD Briem E Fallin MD Kaufmann WE Feinberg AP Common DNA methylation alterations in multiple brain regions in autism Mol Psychiatry 2014 19 8 862 871 23999529
188 Ellis SE Gupta S Moes A West AB Arking DE Exaggerated CpH methylation in the autism-affected brain Mol Autism 2017 8 6 28316770
189 Kozlenkov A Roussos P Timashpolsky A Barbu M Rudchenko S Bibikova M Differences in DNA methylation between human neuronal and glial cells are concentrated in enhancers and non-CpG sites Nucleic Acids Research 2014 42 1 109 127 24057217
190 Guo JU Su Y Shin JH Shin J Li H Xie B Distribution, recognition and regulation of non-CpG methylation in the adult mammalian brain NatNeurosci 2014 17 2 215 222
191 Shulha HP Cheung I Whittle C Wang J Virgil D Lin CL Epigenetic signatures of autism: trimethylated H3K4 landscapes in prefrontal neurons ArchGenPsychiatry 2012 69 3 314 324
192 Sun W Poschmann J Cruz-Herrera Del Rosario R Parikshak NN Hajan HS Kumar V Histone Acetylome-wide Association Study of Autism Spectrum Disorder Cell 2016 167 5 1385 1397 e1311 27863250
193 Turecki G The molecular bases of the suicidal brain Nat Rev Neurosci 2014 15 12 802 816 25354482
194 Pishva E Rutten BPF van den Hove D DNA Methylation in Major Depressive Disorder Adv Exp Med Biol 2017 978 185 196 28523547
195 Labonte B Suderman M Maussion G Lopez JP Navarro-Sanchez L Yerko V Genome-wide methylation changes in the brains of suicide completers Am J Psychiatry 2013 170 5 511 520 23511308
196 Sabunciyan S Aryee MJ Irizarry RA Rongione M Webster MJ Kaufman WE Genome-wide DNA methylation scan in major depressive disorder PLoS One 2012 7 4 e34451 22511943
197 Dempster EL Wong CC Lester KJ Burrage J Gregory AM Mill J Genome-wide methylomic analysis of monozygotic twins discordant for adolescent depression Biol Psychiatry 2014 76 12 977 983 24929637
198 Nagy C Suderman M Yang J Szyf M Mechawar N Ernst C Astrocytic abnormalities and global DNA methylation patterns in depression and suicide Mol Psychiatry 2015 20 3 320 328 24662927
199 Murphy TM Crawford B Dempster EL Hannon E Burrage J Turecki G Methylomic profiling of cortex samples from completed suicide cases implicates a role for PSORS1C3 in major depression and suicide Transl Psychiatry 2017 7 1 e989 28045465
200 McGowan PO Sasaki A D’Alessio AC Dymov S Labonte B Szyf M Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with childhood abuse Nat Neurosci 2009 12 3 342 348 19234457
201 Lutz PE Tanti A Gasecka A Barnett-Burns S Kim JJ Zhou Y Association of a History of Child Abuse With Impaired Myelination in the Anterior Cingulate Cortex: Convergent Epigenetic, Transcriptional, and Morphological Evidence Am J Psychiatry 2017 appiajp201716111286
202 Kaminsky Z Wilcox HC Eaton WW Van Eck K Kilaru V Jovanovic T Epigenetic and genetic variation at SKA2 predict suicidal behavior and post-traumatic stress disorder Transl Psychiatry 2015 5 e627 26305478
203 Deussing JM Jakovcevski M Histone Modifications in Major Depressive Disorder and Related Rodent Models Adv Exp Med Biol 2017 978 169 183 28523546
204 Robison AJ Vialou V Sun HS Labonte B Golden SA Dias C Fluoxetine epigenetically alters the CaMKIIalpha promoter in nucleus accumbens to regulate DeltaFosB binding and antidepressant effects Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2014 39 5 1178 1186 24240473
205 Golden SA Christoffel DJ Heshmati M Hodes GE Magida J Davis K Epigenetic regulation of RAC1 induces synaptic remodeling in stress disorders and depression Nat Med 2013 19 3 337 344 23416703
206 Chen ES Ernst C Turecki G The epigenetic effects of antidepressant treatment on human prefrontal cortex BDNF expression Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2011 14 3 427 429 21134314
207 Cruceanu C Alda M Nagy C Freemantle E Rouleau GA Turecki G H3K4 tri-methylation in synapsin genes leads to different expression patterns in bipolar disorder and major depression Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2013 16 2 289 299 22571925
208 Dong E Grayson DR Guidotti A Costa E Antipsychotic subtypes can be characterized by differences in their ability to modify GABAergic promoter methylation Epigenomics 2009 1 1 201 211 22122643
209 Ruzicka WB Subburaju S Benes FM Circuit- and Diagnosis-Specific DNA Methylation Changes at gamma-Aminobutyric Acid-Related Genes in Postmortem Human Hippocampus in Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder JAMA Psychiatry 2015 72 6 541 551 25738424
210 Kaminsky Z Tochigi M Jia P Pal M Mill J Kwan A A multi-tissue analysis identifies HLA complex group 9 gene methylation differences in bipolar disorder Mol Psychiatry 2012 17 7 728 740 21647149
211 Bartlett AA Singh R Hunter RG Anxiety and Epigenetics Adv Exp Med Biol 2017 978 145 166 28523545
212 Roubroeks JAY Smith RG van den Hove DLA Lunnon K Epigenetics and DNA methylomic profiling in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases J Neurochem 2017 143 2 158 170 28805248
213 Lunnon K Smith R Hannon E De Jager PL Srivastava G Volta M Methylomic profiling implicates cortical deregulation of ANK1 in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Neurosci 2014 17 9 1164 1170 25129077
214 De Jager PL Srivastava G Lunnon K Burgess J Schalkwyk LC Yu L Alzheimer’s disease: early alterations in brain DNA methylation at ANK1, BIN1, RHBDF2 and other loci Nat Neurosci 2014 17 9 1156 1163 25129075
215 Nativio R Donahue G Berson A Lan Y Amlie-Wolf A Tuzer F Dysregulation of the epigenetic landscape of normal aging in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Neurosci 2018
216 Dang W Steffen KK Perry R Dorsey JA Johnson FB Shilatifard A Histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation regulates cellular lifespan Nature 2009 459 7248 802 807 19516333
217 Kozak ML Chavez A Dang W Berger SL Ashok A Guo X Inactivation of the Sas2 histone acetyltransferase delays senescence driven by telomere dysfunction EMBO J 2010 29 1 158 170 19875981
218 Hurd YL Subjects with major depression or bipolar disorder show reduction of prodynorphin mRNA expression in discrete nuclei of the amygdaloid complex Mol Psychiatry 2002 7 1 75 81 11803449
219 Michaelides M Anderson SA Ananth M Smirnov D Thanos PK Neumaier JF Whole-brain circuit dissection in free-moving animals reveals cell-specific mesocorticolimbic networks J Clin Invest 2013 123 12 5342 5350 24231358
220 Michaelides M Hurd YL DREAMM: a biobehavioral imaging methodology for dynamic in vivo whole-brain mapping of cell type-specific functional networks Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 1 239 240 25482170
221 O’Donovan SM Hasselfeld K Bauer D Simmons M Roussos P Haroutunian V Glutamate transporter splice variant expression in an enriched pyramidal cell population in schizophrenia Transl Psychiatry 2015 5 e579 26057049
222 Doyle GA Doucet-O’Hare TT Hammond MJ Crist RC Ewing AD Ferraro TN Reading LINEs within the cocaine addicted brain Brain Behav 2017 7 5 e00678 28523221
223 Ribeiro EA Scarpa JR Garamszegi SP Kasarskis A Mash DC Nestler EJ Gene Network Dysregulation in Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Neurons of Humans with Cocaine Use Disorder Sci Rep 2017 7 1 5412 28710498
224 Jiang Y Matevossian A Huang HS Straubhaar J Akbarian S Isolation of neuronal chromatin from brain tissue BMCNeurosci 2008 9 42
225 Iwamoto K Bundo M Ueda J Oldham MC Ukai W Hashimoto E Neurons show distinctive DNA methylation profile and higher interindividual variations compared with non-neurons Genome Res 2011 21 5 688 696 21467265
226 Cheung I Shulha HP Jiang Y Matevossian A Wang J Weng Z Developmental regulation and individual differences of neuronal H3K4me3 epigenomes in the prefrontal cortex Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 19 8824 8829 20421462
227 Kozlenkov A Wang M Roussos P Rudchenko S Barbu M Bibikova M Substantial DNA methylation differences between two major neuronal subtypes in human brain Nucleic Acids Res 2016 44 6 2593 2612 26612861
228 Ernst A Alkass K Bernard S Salehpour M Perl S Tisdale J Neurogenesis in the striatum of the adult human brain Cell 2014 156 5 1072 1083 24561062
229 Crist RC Clarke TK Ang A Ambrose-Lanci LM Lohoff FW Saxon AJ An intronic variant in OPRD1 predicts treatment outcome for opioid dependence in African-Americans Neuropsychopharmacology 2013 38 10 2003 2010 23612435
230 Hancock DB Levy JL Gaddis NC Glasheen C Saccone NL Page GP Cis-Expression Quantitative Trait Loci Mapping Reveals Replicable Associations with Heroin Addiction in OPRM1 Biol Psychiatry 2015 78 7 474 484 25744370
231 Zhong S Zhang S Fan X Wu Q Yan L Dong J A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental landscape of the human prefrontal cortex Nature 2018 555 7697 524 528 29539641
232 Clark SJ Lee HJ Smallwood SA Kelsey G Reik W Single-cell epigenomics: powerful new methods for understanding gene regulation and cell identity Genome Biol 2016 17 72 27091476
233 Schwartzman O Tanay A Single-cell epigenomics: techniques and emerging applications Nat Rev Genet 2015 16 12 716 726 26460349
234 Macaulay IC Ponting CP Voet T Single-Cell Multiomics: Multiple Measurements from Single Cells Trends Genet 2017 33 2 155 168 28089370
235 Margueron R Reinberg D The Polycomb complex PRC2 and its mark in life Nature 2011 469 7330 343 349 21248841
236 Brami-Cherrier K Anzalone A Ramos M Forne I Macciardi F Imhof A Epigenetic reprogramming of cortical neurons through alteration of dopaminergic circuits Mol Psychiatry 2014 19 11 1193 1200 25023144
237 Akbarian S Liu C Knowles JA Vaccarino FM Farnham PJ Crawford GE The PsychENCODE project Nat Neurosci 2015 18 12 1707 1712 26605881
238 Consortium GT Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: multitissue gene regulation in humans Science 2015 348 6235 648 660 25954001
239 Webb A Papp AC Curtis A Newman LC Pietrzak M Seweryn M RNA sequencing of transcriptomes in human brain regions: protein-coding and non-coding RNAs, isoforms and alleles BMC Genomics 2015 16 990 26597164
240 Bahcall OG Human genetics: GTEx pilot quantifies eQTL variation across tissues and individuals Nat Rev Genet 2015 16 7 375 26077371
241 eGP Enhancing GTEx by bridging the gaps between genotype, gene expression, and disease Nat Genet 2017
