LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol. Dis.
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

30030024
6396690
10.1016/j.nbd.2018.07.015
NIHMS1013837
Article
Mechanisms of selective autophagy and mitophagy: Implications for neurodegenerative diseases
Chu Charleen T. *
Departments of Pathology and Ophthalmology, Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Center for Protein Conformational Diseases, Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
* Corresponding author at: 200 Lothrop Street, S701 Scaife Hall, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA., ctc4@pitt.edu.
26 2 2019
17 7 2018
2 2019
01 3 2019
122 2334
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Over the past 20 years, the concept of mammalian autophagy as a nonselective degradation system has been repudiated, due in part to important discoveries in neurodegenerative diseases, which opened the field of selective autophagy. Protein aggregates and damaged mitochondria represent key pathological hallmarks shared by most neurodegenerative diseases. The landmark discovery in 2007 of p62/SQSTM1 as the first mammalian selective autophagy receptor defined a new family of autophagy-related proteins that serve to target protein aggregates, mitochondria, intracellular pathogens and other cargoes to the core autophagy machinery via an LC3-interacting region (LIR)-motif. Notably, mutations in the LIR-motif proteins p62 (SQSTM1) and optineurin (OPTN) contribute to familial forms of frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Moreover, a subset of LIR-motif proteins is involved in selective mitochondrial degradation initiated by two recessive familial Parkinson’s disease genes. PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) activates the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin (PARK2) to mark depolarized mitochondria for degradation. An extensive body of literature delineates key mechanisms in this pathway, based mostly on work in transformed cell lines. However, the potential role of PINK1-triggered mitophagy in neurodegeneration remains a conundrum, particularly in light of recent in vivo mitophagy studies. There are at least three major mechanisms by which mitochondria are targeted for mitophagy: transmembrane receptor-mediated, ubiquitin-mediated and cardiolipin-mediated. This review summarizes key features of the major cargo recognition pathways for selective autophagy and mitophagy, highlighting their potential impact in the pathogenesis or amelioration of neurodegenerative diseases.


1. Cellular quality control and neurodegeneration

Protein aggregates and damaged mitochondria represent key pathological hallmarks shared by most neurodegenerative diseases. From the α-synuclein-containing Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites in Parkinson’s disease (PD) to beta-amyloid plaques or neurofibrillary tangles of tau in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), these pathological aggregates are highlighted by immunohistochemistry for ubiquitin (Chu et al., 2000). As polyubiquitination represents a classic signal for protein degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system, the accumulation of ubiquitinated aggregates was thought to reflect proteasomal failure in neurodegeneration (Moore et al., 2003; Ross and Pickart 2004). The proteasomal system classically degrades soluble, short-lived proteins that can be unfolded to pass inside the cylindrical proteasome structure, which may limit its ability to handle aggregated proteins. The autophagy-lysosomal system represents another major quality control system, which is capable of degrading both protein aggregates and organelles such as mitochondria (Ashford and Porter 1962; Elmore et al., 2001; Fortun et al., 2003; Ravikumar et al., 2002; Rideout et al., 2004). Whereas chaperone-mediated autophagy is also restricted to proteins that can be unfolded (Cuervo, 2004), macroautophagy (here-after referred to as autophagy) involves the formation of de novo organelles called autophagosomes (Fig. 1), which surround and sequester intracellular cargoes of various sizes and compositions. In the last decade, it has become clear that ubiquitin not only regulates proteasomal degradation, but also plays a key role in selective autophagy (Kim et al., 2008; Pankiv et al., 2007; Tan et al., 2007). Accumulation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates may thus reflect dysregulation of either proteasomal and/or autophagic quality control systems.

Impairment in one cellular degradation pathway often results in compensatory upregulation of other pathways, complicating cause and effect relationships (Ding et al., 2003; Xilouri et al., 2009). Nevertheless, there is now extensive evidence from both post-mortem analysis of patient brain tissues (Table 1) and in experimental models of disease (Table 2) that support a key role for autophagy dysregulation in multiple neurodegenerative diseases. These range from proposed deficits in cargo targeting or impaired completion of autophagy (autophagic stress) to excessive degradation of mitochondria, neuronal atrophy and possibly autophagic cell death [Reviewed in (Boland and Nixon 2006; Cherra III and Chu, 2008; Chu 2006; Harris and Rubinsztein 2012; Liu and Levine 2015)]. It is evident that autophagy can be dysregulated at multiple steps and the effects of inducing autophagy may be beneficial or detrimental depending on cellular context and downstream factors (Table 2). Importantly from a therapeutic standpoint, neurons may be involved in a double bind, whereby upregulation of autophagic flux elicits beneficial clearance of aggregates and damaged mitochondria (Dagda et al., 2009; Ravikumar et al., 2004), but may also contribute to pathological synaptic remodeling, excess mitochondrial depletion and axo-dendritic shrinkage (Cherra III et al., 2013; Gusdon and Chu 2011; Hernandez et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2007). Due to crosstalk among components of the proteostasis network, which includes biosynthetic, chaperone and degradative components, the outcome of autophagy or mitophagy stimulation in a particular pathological context may be difficult to predict and should be experimentally tested.

Although electron microscopy and biochemistry played key roles in the original description and early studies of autophagy, a series of seminal yeast nitrogen starvation studies have contributed to a molecular rennaissance in the study of autophagy. New tools to experimentally manipulate autophagy were made possible by the identification of evolutionarily conserved core components of the autophagy machinery (Scott et al., 1996; Thumm et al., 1994; Tsukada and Ohsumi 1993). Moreover, the discovery of novel ubiquitin-like conjugation systems that resulted in covalent attachment of yeast Atg8 to the autophagic membrane (Ichimura et al., 2000) enabled the development of new molecular strategies for detangling cause, effect and correlation. With rare exceptions, however, autophagy was still thought to represent predominantly a non-selective bulk degradation system in the first decade of the new millennium. This relatively narrow perspective has been markedly expanded by important discoveries in neurodegenerative disease research, which have moved the field of selective autophagy into the limelight.

2. Selective autophagy in neurons: a brief history

Although research in selective macroautophagy mechanisms has rapidly expanded over the last decade, the ability of cells to selectively degrade specific cargoes had been noted in early ultrastructural studies that predate the term autophagy itself. These pathological studies, referring to autophagosomes as “foci of physiologic autolysis” (Ashford and Porter 1962) or “focal cytoplasmic degradation” noted that the content of autophagic inclusions was dependent upon the type of injury or stimulus (Hruban et al., 1963). Nevertheless, at the dawn of the molecular age of autophagy research following the discovery of Atg genes in the 1990’s (Harding et al., 1995; Thumm et al., 1994; Tsukada and Ohsumi 1993), autophagy was still primarily conceptualized, with rare exceptions in yeast, as a bulk degradation response with little mechanism for specificity. A resurgence of interest in autophagy in pathological contexts following the discovery of the Atg8 lipidation reaction (Ichimura et al., 2000) began to shift the emphasis from starvation-induced autophagy to injury or damage-induced autophagy.

In brief, both nonselective and selective macroautophagy proceed through a set of basic steps (Fig. 1). These include: (1) integration of stimulatory and inhibitory signals, (2) extension of phagophore membranes and their fusion to form a spherical autophagosome that encapsulates degradative cargoes, (3) maturation of the autophagosome through additional fusion and transport steps that result in lumenal acidification and delivery of lysosomal enzymes, and (4) enzymatic cargo hydrolysis and release of the products. Recycling of certain autophagy proteins and the biosynthetic usage of degradation products (5) complete the cycle. Additional molecular mechanisms that enrich for specific cargoes within the growing phagophore confer selectivity to this cellular degradation and recycling process (Fig. 1, step 2a).

Research interest in selective mammalian mitophagy emerged from studies of apoptotic pathways in hepatocytes and neurons. Early in the course of apoptosis, live fluorescence imaging studies reveal that a small number of hepatic mitochondria lose their membrane potentials and enter acidic lysosomal compartments (Lemasters et al., 1998). Furthermore, NGF-deprived neurons are able to completely and selectively remove their entire cohort of mitochondria if apoptosis is inhibited (Xue et al., 2001). While this has been proposed to confer tolerance to an anaerobic environment in the short term, these primary cells are nevertheless committed to cell death. In 2002, a marked increase in small aggregates of phosphorylated ERK1/2 were noted in the substantia nigra neurons of patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) (Zhu et al., 2002): These were ultrastructurally shown to represent abnormal mitochondria engulfed in autophagosomes (Zhu et al., 2003). These early studies anticipated two essential features of a heavily studied mitophagy pathway described in 2008 (Narendra et al., 2008) – namely, the ability of depolarizing ionophores to trigger complete mitochondrial removal and the potential importance of mitophagy in PD pathogenesis.

Meanwhile, studies focusing on the role of autophagy in clearing protein aggregates in neurological diseases resulted in delineation of a new class of intracellular mammalian selective autophagy cargo receptors. Aggregate-prone proteins such as exon 1 of huntingtin, α-synuclein implicated in PD, or aggresomes containing misfolded peripheral myelin protein 22 in hereditary neuropathies could all be degraded by autophagy (Fortun et al., 2003; Ravikumar et al., 2002; Webb et al., 2003). Moreover, pharmacological induction of autophagy proved beneficial in several models of Huntington’s disease (HD) (Ravikumar et al., 2004), and the p62/SQSTM1 protein was implicated in this process (Bjorkoy et al., 2005). In 2007, the molecular mechanism by which p62 promotes autophagic aggregate clearance was elucidated (Fig. 2C), due to its ability to simultaneously bind ubiquitinated cargo and the mammalian Atg8 homolog known as microtubule-associated proteins 1A/1B light chain 3 (LC3), a key component of the core autophagy machinery (Pankiv et al., 2007). Indeed, the ability to interact with Atg8 proteins, including members of both the mammalian LC3 subfamily and the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein (GABARAP) subfamily, forms a common theme as additional selective autophagy mechanisms emerge (Stolz et al., 2014). These cargo recognition signals involve not only protein-protein interactions, but also protein-lipid interactions (Chu et al., 2013).

3. LIR-motif proteins – targeting cargo to phagophores

Originally referred to as cargo adapters, because they link autophagic cargoes to LC3 during selective autophagy, these proteins have more recently been referred to as autophagy receptors because they bind and/or are degraded along with the cargo. The structural motif that ties this family of proteins together is the LC3 interacting region (LIR), which consists of 2–3 acidic residues followed by a 4 residue motif [W/F/Y]-X1-X2-[L/I/V] (Birgisdottir et al., 2013). Subsequent to the identification of p62 as a selective autophagy receptor for ubiquitinated protein aggregates, it has become clear that there are both cytosolic and transmembrane proteins that bear the LIR motif (Fig. 2A–B). While most studies have focused upon the LC3 branch of the Atg8 family, which includes three human protein isoforms LC3A, LC3B and LC3C, members of the GABARAP subfamily, which include GABARAP, GABARAPL1 and GABARAPL2/Golgi-associated ATPase enhancer of 16 kDa (GATE-16), are also implicated in cargo targeting (Novak et al., 2010). Notably, genes for LIR-motif proteins such as p62 and optineurin are mutated in rare familial forms of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-frontotemporal dementia spectrum (ALS-FTD), implicating deficient cargo-recognition as a possible pathological mechanism. Mutant forms of the HD protein huntingtin may also act to interfere with autophagic cargo sequestration, resulting in decreased protein degradation despite increased turnover of autophagosome markers (Martinez-Vicente et al., 2010).

3.1. Cytosolic LIR-motif proteins

In general, these proteins contain both LIR-motifs and ubiquitin binding domains. They serve to connect cargoes tagged by ubiquitin to Atg8 family members (Fig. 2C). The presence of additional protein-protein interaction domains, such as PB1 or CC1 domains, regulates cargo binding avidity and the ability to cooperate with other cargo receptors or adapters (Nakamura et al., 2010). In addition, some LIR-motif proteins show greater affinity for certain Atg8 family members. For example, NDP52 has a noncanonical LIR lacking an aromatic residue, which accounts a 10-fold greater affinity for LC3C relative to LC3A (von Muhlinen et al., 2012). Given the surface charge differences between the LC3 and the GABARAP subfamilies (Sugawara et al., 2004), it is likely that additional proteins will be discovered that link specific cargoes to the less studied human Atg8 homologs.

In addition to ubiquitinated protein aggregates, p62 mediates degradation of ubiquitinated cytosolic bacteria (Zheng et al., 2009). However, its roles in selective mitophagy (Geisler et al., 2010) and pexophagy have been controversial, and may relate to cargo clustering and enhancement of other cargo targeting mechanisms (Narendra et al., 2010b; Yamashita et al., 2014). Differences observed in different experimental systems may also relate to post-translational regulation of p62, as phosphorylation at S403 appears to be necessary for p62-mediated mitophagy (Matsumoto et al., 2015). NDP52 is another LIR-motif protein implicated in selective autophagy of intracellular bacteria and depolarized mitochondria (Lazarou et al., 2015; von Muhlinen et al., 2012). Multimerization of cargo receptors enhances the avidity of binding to surface-bound LC3B, as well as conferring selectivity for certain types of ubiquitin chains (Wurzer et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2015). Similarly, dimerization of NBR1, which is necessary and sufficient for pexophagy (Deosaran et al., 2013), confers a slight preference for K63-linked ubiquitin over K48-linked ubiquitin (Walinda et al., 2014). Given that both p62 and NBR1 can be found in the same disease-associated protein aggregates (D’Agostino et al., 2011; Mori et al., 2012; Odagiri et al., 2012), it is likely that they cooperate to recognize slightly different cargo modifications, and that multiple cargo targeting mechanisms act together to enhance the overall avidity of interactions with the autophagic machinery.

Optineurin was recently shown to mediate mitophagy in neuronal cells (Wong and Holzbaur 2014). It is also involved in elimination of ubiquitinated bacteria. Phosphorylation of OPTN enhances its ability to bind LC3 and to restrict Salmonella growth (Wild et al., 2011). Phosphorylation and the post-translational regulation of autophagy receptors/adapters (Deng et al., 2012) and of Atg8/LC3 family members themselves (Cherra III et al., 2010; Wilkinson et al., 2015), comprise new areas of research emphasis. Given potential redundancies in function among members of this family, understanding how post-translational modifications regulate degradation of specific substrates and how disease mechanisms may hijack or intefere with this process will be important for understanding why mutation of a single LIR-motif protein contributes to neurodegeneration.

3.2. Transmembrane LIR-motif proteins

Another group of LIR-motif containing proteins exhibit a transmembrane domain and are expressed on the outer mitochondrial membrane or endoplasmic reticulum. These include the yeast Atg32 protein (Kanki et al., 2009) and mammalian proteins implicated in developmental or stress-induced mitophagy. These receptors will be discussed in greater detail below. Another member of this group of receptors is the cell cycle progression protein 1 (CCPG1). CCPG1 is upregulated with ER stress and mediates selective reticulophagy (or ER-phagy). It has a canonical LIR motif WTVI, which also functions as a GABARAP-interaction motif with the addition of V/I in the X1 position (Rogov et al., 2017). In addition, CCPG1 interacts with FIP200, a component of the ULK/Atg1 autophagy initiating complex (Smith et al., 2018). Conceivably, this interaction could provide a mechanism linking cargo recognition to induction of autophagosome formation.

3.3. Beyond cargo recognition

In addition to mediating interactions between Atg8 family members and cargoes for selective autophagy, LIR-motif proteins play other important roles in autophagy regulation. For example, pleckstrin homology and RUN domain containing M1 (PLEKHM1), which is essential for bone resorption, acts to regulate the interaction between the autophagy machinery and endosomal sorting complexes (McEwan et al., 2015). In neurons, the autophagic and endocytic pathways intersect at multiple levels (Plowey and Chu 2011), and genes involved in endosome, retromer and autophagy regulation have been implicated in several neurodegenerative diseases (Lane et al., 2012; Nixon 2013). In addition, dysregulation of autophagic maturation and flux is a prominent feature of several neurodegenerative diseases (Chu 2006). The SNARE protein syntaxin 17 is essential for the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes (Itakura et al., 2012). Recently it has been shown that interactions between syntaxin 17 and LC3 is mediated by a LIR-motif (Kumar et al., 2018). The involvement of Atg8 family members in both core autophagosome formation/maturation events and in cargo targeting likely explain early observations that LC3 is covalently deposited on both the inside and outside curvatures of the phagophore as it extends to form an autophagosome (Kabeya et al., 2000).

4. Other cargo recognition mechanisms

4.1. Protein-protein interactions

Among the cargoes that have been shown to undergo selective autophagy is the iron-binding ferritin complex (Dowdle et al., 2014). Recently, it was discovered that the androgen receptor-binding nuclear receptor coactivator 4 (NCOA4) serves as a cargo receptor for ferritinophagy. Interestingly, NCOA4 does not have a classic LIR-motif (Mancias et al., 2014), and the amino acid residues responsible for its assumed interaction with LC3 remain undefined by mapping studies. One possibility is that its association with LC3 puncta is indirect, as GST pull-down was strongest for GABARAPL2 and other cargo receptors were also present in the isolated autophagosomes.

The ubiquilins represent a family of ubiquitin-binding proteins involved in several degradative pathways. Ubiquilin 1, whose polymorphisms modulate risk for Alzheimer’s disease (Kamboh et al., 2006), is degraded by both macroautophagy and chaperone mediated autophagy (Rothenberg et al., 2010). Besides protein aggregates, ubiquilin 1 interacts with intracellular Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is important in xenophagy (Sakowski et al., 2015), although it does not directly bind LC3 (Rothenberg et al., 2010). Conversely, ubiquilin 4 does bind LC3 through a novel interaction requiring the N-terminal STI1 repeats (Lee et al., 2013). As ubiquilin 4 also binds to ubiquilin 1, it may function as a selective autophagy adapter for ubiquilin 1-labeled cargoes.

Alfy (autophagy-linked FYVE domain containg protein, or WDF3Y), is a large scaffold protein that facilitates formation of autophagosomes around protein aggregates. It is capable of binding directly to p62 as well as to Atg5 (Filimonenko 2010). Moreover, its FYVE domain enables it to interact with PI3P, enriched on autophagic precursor membranes by the activity of the Beclin 1-type 3 phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PIK3C3/Vps34) complex. As with CCPG1, this could be a mechanism to coordinate general autophagy processes such as nucleation with cargo recognition. It is likely that additional adapter proteins will be identified that link cargoes not only to Atg8 family members, but also to other components of the core autophagy machinery.

4.2. Protein-lipid and protein-carbohydrate interactions

The ability of non-protein macromolecules to bind to Atg8 family members and mediate cargo recognition for selective autophagy is likely to reflect a growing area given the macromolecular heterogeneity of potential autophagic cargoes. As discussed below, mitochondrial cardiolipin is redistributed to the surface of damaged mitochondria, where it recruits LC3 to mediate the formation of autophagosomes centered on mitochondria (mitophagosomes) (Chu et al., 2013). While it remains unknown whether or not cardiolipin, which is found in both mitochondria and bacteria, participates in xenophagy, the ability of NDP52 to target glycoconjugates through interaction with galectin 8 plays an important role in host defense against bacterial invasion (Thurston et al., 2012). Indeed, galectin 8-mediated recruitment of cargo receptors to bacteria-damaged intracellular membranes occurs earlier and may be essential for the subsequent, more heavily studied phase of ubiquitin-dependent recruitment. It is reasonable to assume that protein-lipid interactions may play an important role in the selective autophagy of lipid droplets (Singh et al., 2009) and other organelles.

5. Mitophagy in neurons

The structural and functional properties of neurons necessitate metabolic dependence on mitochondria (Kann and Kovacs 2007). As such, cellular quality control mechanisms to recognize and recycle mitochondria damaged with usage, aging or disease are critically regulated in neurons (Dagda et al., 2009; Tatsuta and Langer 2008). Mitochondrial quality control may be mediated by antioxidant and chaperone expression, localized remodeling/proteolysis and autophagic degradation (Chu 2010). In addition, mitochondrial proteins may be delivered to the lysosome through mitochondria-derived vesicles (Soubannier et al., 2012). Nevertheless, macroautophagy is currently believed to represent the major mechanism for mitochondrial recycling. Basal mitophagy is an ongoing process, thought to be required for maintaining neuronal health. In addition, mitophagy can be upregulated in neurons by a variety of pathological stimuli.

Alterations in mitophagy have been observed in nearly all genetic or toxic-environmental models of PD pathogenesis (Cherra III et al., 2013; Chinta et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2013; Dagda et al., 2009; Dagda et al., 2008; Osellame and Duchen 2013; Zhu et al., 2007). While many of these studies did not address selectivity, selective degradation of mitochondria is induced in response to low dose treatment with the complex I inhibitor MPP+ (Zhu et al., 2012), commonly used to model PD pathogenesis. The dopaminergic midbrain neurons that degenerate in PD have been shown to experience elevated basal mitophagy in vivo compared to other midbrain neurons (Guzman et al., 2018). Excitatory calcium dysregulation in cortical neurons triggered by mutations in the dominant PD gene LRRK2 (Plowey et al., 2014) also elicits increased mitophagy accompanied by mitochondrial depletion and autophagic dendrite retraction (Cherra III et al., 2013; Verma et al., 2017). Moreover, susceptible neurons in post-mortem studies of patients with PD or DLB exhibit increased numbers of autophagocytosed mitochondria, which accounts for a distinctive punctate staining pattern for activated extracellular-signal regulated protein kinases (ERK1/2) (Zhu et al., 2003). Additional evidence supporting a possible role for mitophagy dysregulation in neurodegeneration include observations that two recessive PD genes (Kawajiri et al., 2010; Matsuda et al., 2010; Narendra et al., 2010a; Vives-Bauza et al., 2010) and two LIR-motif proteins linked to ALS-FTD (Majcher et al., 2015) are involved in the ubiquitin-mediated pathway of mitophagy.

6. Mechanisms of cargo recognition for selective mitophagy

There are many stimuli that result in mitophagosome formation and mitochondrial clearance. These include developmental, environmental and genetic modulation of physiological and pathological cues. Given that a given mitophagy stimulus may trigger more than one pathway, I have classified the pathways with a focus on the specific cargo-associated signals that allow recognition by the autophagy machinery (Fig. 2D–F). Some of these tags are transcriptionally upregulated in response to developmental or hypoxic-ischemic cues, while others are post-translationally modified or exposed to stimulate mitophagy.

6.1. Ubiquitin-mediated mitophagy

In addition to protein aggregates and intracellular bacterial pathogens, mitochondria can be targeted for selective autophagic degradation by virtue of ubiqutin tags on their outer surfaces (Fig. 2D). Details of this process, commonly referred to as the PINK1-Parkin pathway of mitophagy, have been extensively reviewed (Hamacher-Brady and Brady 2016; McWilliams and Muqit 2017; Yin and Ding 2013). In brief, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential causes a disruption in the normal import of mitochondrial proteins. As a result, the PINK1 protein accumulates on the outer mitochondrial membrane (Kawajiri et al., 2010; Matsuda et al., 2010; Narendra et al., 2010a), to recruit and activate Parkin (Shiba-Fukushima et al., 2012) through phosphorylation of ubiquitin (Kane et al., 2014; Kazlauskaite et al., 2014; Koyano et al., 2014). Ubiquitination of outer mitochondrial membrane proteins then leads to their degradation via the proteasomal or lysosomal systems (Chan et al., 2011; Yoshii et al., 2011). With relation to Parkin-independent mitophagy mechanisms discussed below, it is interesting to note that other ubiquitin ligases have also been implicated in mitophagy (Szargel et al., 2016).

Optineurin and NDP52 represent the most commonly studied mitophagy adapters, although phosphorylated p62 also contributes to mitophagic clearance (Geisler et al., 2010; Lazarou et al., 2015; Matsumoto et al., 2015; Wong and Holzbaur 2014). Increased staining for phospho-ubiquitin has been observed in degenerating substantia nigra neurons (Fiesel et al., 2015), with a similar staining pattern to phospho-ERK1/2-labeled mitophagosomes in PD/DLB patients (Zhu et al., 2003). Taken together, these studies indicate activation of ubiquitin-mediated mitophagy in PD and related dementias.

PINK1-Parkin-regulated mitophagy represents the most heavily studied pathway of cargo specification. Despite this, the relative importance of the PINK1-Parkin mitophagy pathway in neurons remains controversial (Cummins and Gotz 2017; Grenier et al., 2013; Pogson et al., 2014; Rakovic et al., 2013). Caveats include the frequent requirement of Parkin overexpression, use of chemicals or photoirradiation that elicit severe depolarization and/or cessation of electron transport, and potential differences in mitophagy regulation between tumor cells and neurons (Van Laar et al., 2011). Studies focusing on primary neurons or neurons differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells have yielded conflicting interpretations concerning activation of the PINK1-Parkin pathway, ranging from no significant increase over baseline in cortical, striatal or midbrain neurons to involvement of &lt; 20% of Killer red-depolarized mitochondria in hippocampal neurons (Ashrafi et al., 2014; Cai et al., 2012; Rakovic et al., 2013; Van Laar et al., 2011). Moreover, recent in vivo studies suggest that PINK1 and Parkin are not required for basal mitophagy in a range of tissues including the brain (Lee et al., 2018; McWilliams et al., 2018). It is thus pertinent to consider alternative pathways of cargo targeting for mitophagy.

6.2. Transmembrane receptor-mediated mitophagy

In yeast, the transmembrane LIR-motif protein Atg32 is responsible for targeting mitochondria to the yeast cargo adaptor Atg11 during mitophagy triggered in media containing lactate as the sole carbon source (Kanki et al., 2009). Although there are no structural homologs of Atg32 or Atg11 in mammals, outer mitochondrial membrane proteins with LIR domains are involved in regulating developmental mitophagy in erthryocytes and lens cells (Fig. 2E). The BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19 kDa protein-interacting protein 3-like (BNIP3L), which is also referred to as Nix, is transcriptionally upregulated during erythrocyte differentiation. Nix interacts with LC3B or GATE-16 via a classic LIR to mediate mitophagic sequestration (Novak et al., 2010). Transcriptional upregulation is also involved in mitophagy induced by hypoxia, during which Nix expression is markedly induced along with the related BNIP3 (Liu et al., 2014). Another mitophagy receptor of the outer mitochondrial membrane is FUN14 Domain Containing 1 (FUNDC1), which is dephosphorylated during hypoxic stress to activate mitophagy (Liu et al., 2012; Lv et al., 2017). Given that Nix overexpression rescues impaired CCCP-induced mitophagy in fibroblasts from patients with mutations in PINK1 or PARK2 (Koentjoro et al., 2017), these PD genes are not required for receptor-mediated mitophagy. Other outer membrane proteins with LIR domains such as FK506 Binding Protein 8 (FKBP8) (Bhujabal et al., 2017) have also been reported to recruit LC3A for Parkin-independent mitophagy.

It remains unknown the extent to which Nix and BNIP3 may participate in mitophagy in neurons, although both proteins have been reported to be upregulated in neurons in response to stress (Prabhakaran et al., 2007; Yeh et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2007). In these contexts, however, these proteins play a pro-death role, and the potential involvement of Nix- or BNIP-mediated mitophagy were not examined.

6.3. Cardiolipin-mediated mitophagy

Recently an alternative mitophagy pathway was discovered in cortical neurons and neuroblastoma cells treated with sublethal doses of two PD toxins, rotenone and 6-hydroxydopamine (Chu et al., 2013). In contrast to protein-protein interactions, this pathway involves the interaction of the phospholipid cardiolipin with LC3 (Fig. 2F). This unusual phospholipid is found in bacteria and the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells, where it is concentrated in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Exposure of cardiolipin to the surface of injured mitochondria requires three enzymatic translocations mediated by the mitochondrial phospholipid scramblase-3 (Chu et al., 2013) and the inner- and outer- membrane spanning hexameric complex of mitochondrial nucleoside diphosphate kinase-D (Kagan et al., 2016). The cardiolipin-mediated mitophagy cargo targeting mechanism does not require PINK1 accumulation or Parkin recruitment to the mitochondria (Chu et al., 2013). Besides neurons, it can be observed in pulmonary cells treated with staurosporine or CCCP, acting upstream to or in parallel with the PINK1-Parkin pathway. Cardiolipin interacts with multiple Atg8 family members in vitro, but LC3 appears to be the main binding partner for selective mitophagy in glioma cells (Anton et al., 2016).

In addition to cardiolipin synthase, whose expression is regulated by PINK1 (Chen et al., 2014), tafazzin regulates cardiolipin by remodeling its fatty acyl chains. Interestingly, tafazzin deficiency causes defective mitophagosome biogenesis in fibroblasts (Hsu et al., 2015), implicating a possible differential role of different cardiolipin species in mitophagy. While oxidation of cardiolipin is associated with apoptosis (Shidoji et al., 1999), there is no evidence of cardiolipin oxidation during mitophagy (Chu et al., 2013). Interestingly, brain cardiolipin is composed of fewer unsaturated fatty acids, rendering it more resistant to peroxidation (Bradley et al., 2016). These differences may be predicted to favor cardiolipin-mediated mitophagy over cell death in the brain.

In addition to cardiolipin, ceramide may also act to target mitochondria for autophagy (Sentelle et al., 2012) to elicit a form of autotic cell death (Liu and Levine 2015). In addition, genome-wide screens implicate components of steroid and lipogenesis pathways in a regulatory role for mitophagy (Ivatt et al., 2014).

6.4. Other mitophagy stimuli with unclear cargo targeting mechanims

Several other stimuli elicit PINK1- and/or Parkin-independent mitophagy. These include the application of iron chelators (Allen et al., 2013). While the cargo targeting mechanism remains unknown, it is also independent of BNIP3. Cardiomyocyte mitophagy in vivo appears to proceed through two parallel pathways, one that is Parkin-independent, but requiring the mitochondrial fission protein dynamin related protein 1 (Drp1) and one mediated by Parkin (Kageyama et al., 2014). Mitochondrial fission can act to promote degradation of unhealthy segments of mitochondria or to spare healthy segments from degradation (Burman et al., 2017). Fission is also important for PINK1-independent mitophagy elicited in PINK1-deficient neuronal cells (Dagda et al., 2009). Constitutively active ERK1/2 spontaneously localizes to mitochondria, where it is capable of driving mitophagy in the absence of other injurious stimuli (Dagda et al., 2008). ERK1/2 is involved in stimulating a non-canonical form of Beclin-1-independent mitophagy in the MPP+ model (Chu et al., 2007; Zhu et al., 2007), but the mechanism of cargo specification remains elusive. Finally, the activating molecule in Beclin-1-regulated autophagy 1 (AMBRA1) is a LIR-motif protein that has been implicated in both Parkin-dependent (Van Humbeeck et al., 2011) and Parkin-independent mitophagy (Strappazzon et al., 2015).

7. Mitophagy in vivo

While there is clearly evidence of mitophagy pathway activation in human brain tissues from neurodegenerative disease patients (Fiesel et al., 2015; Ye et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2003), whether or not this reflects increased or decreased flux has been difficult to address in vivo. In Drosophila, PINK1 and Parkin act to regulate mitochondrial protein turnover (Vincow et al., 2013). However, the pattern of protein buildup with PINK1 deficiency is not a subset of the pattern elicited by autophagy (Atg7) deficiency, suggesting that PINK1 regulates respiratory complex proteins through Atg7-independent mechanisms. It remains to be determined whether this may relate to mitochondria derived vesicles (McLelland et al., 2014), or the destabilizing effects of PINK1 deficiency on cristae structure (Dagda et al., 2009) that may be due to its interaction with mitofilin (Tsai et al., 2018). Recently a set of transgenic animals that express sensors for mitochondrial delivery into the acidic compartment of the lysosome have been used to address the potential in vivo role of PINK1 and Parkin in basal mitophagy.

The first is a mouse (Sun et al., 2015) transgenically expressing a pH sensitive matrix-targeted Keima protein, which is excited predominantly by 458-nm light in the slightly basic pH of the normal mitochondrial matrix (Katayama et al., 2011). However, the peak excitation shifts to 561-nm in the acidic environment of a normal lysosome. The second mouse, called mito-QC (McWilliams et al., 2016), is based on the differential fluorescence sensitivity of GFP versus mCherry to acidic environments (Allen et al., 2013). The tandem reporter is targeted to the outer mitochondrial membrane, emitting both red and green fluorescence in the neutral cytosol, but only red in acidic lysosomes. An advantage of mito-QC is that the tissues can be fixed, although the mechanism by which the intra-lysosomal GFP fluorescence continues to be suppressed after fixation is unclear.

Although commonly referred to as flux reporters, it is important to keep in mind that the sensors measure autophagosome maturation to autolysosomes rather than actual flux. Changes in the biosynthesis or mitochondrial import rates of the sensor may affect the ratios. Also, the sensors detect pH rather than enzymatic activity, which could be affected by impaired delivery or function of lysosomal enzymes with aging or disease states. These possibilities can be experimentally addressed through other methods. Another consideration is that the sensors on their own are not designed to differentiate selective mitophagy from passive entrapment of mitochondria during bulk autophagy.

Nevertheless, a set of recent papers using these sensors confirm that mitochondria are actively delivered into lysosomes in vivo, and that this rate varies in different tissues (McWilliams et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2015). Moreover, the mito-QC mouse has been crossed to Pink1−/− mice to reveal that basal mitophagy occurs through a PINK1-in-dependent mechanism (McWilliams et al., 2018). In the pancreatic islet, the rates of mitophagy appeared to be increased in Pink1-deficient mice. Increased rates of mitophagy have also been observed in neuroblastoma cells with chronic PINK1 shRNA knockdown (Dagda et al., 2009) and in primary neurons from Pink1-knockout mice (Dagda et al., 2011). Interestingly, PINK1 message is downregulated in skeletal muscle by inactivity or type 2 diabetes (Scheele et al., 2007), suggesting that altered mitophagy in beta cells may play a role in metabolic syndrome. Drosophila expressing either mt-Keima or mito-QC have been constructed, revealing widespread basal mitophagy in multiple tissues as well (Lee et al., 2018). However, there were no effects of null mutations of either Pink1 or Parkin on rates of mitochondrial delivery to lysosomes.

These studies of basal mitochondrial turnover are consistent with observations that there are multiple distinct mechanisms for targeting mitochondria to the autophagy machinery. It is possible that transmembrane LIR proteins, cardiolipin, or other as yet undefined mechanisms play a key role in basal mitophagy. Alternatively, given the limitations mentioned above, it is also possible that basal mitochondrial turnover results from stochastic rather than selective inclusion of mitochondria in autophagosomes, as neurons exhibit a high rate of housekeeping autophagic flux (Boland et al., 2008). On the other hand, the correlation between dendritic calcium pacemaking and elevated basal mitophagy in dopaminergic substantia nigra neurons (Guzman et al., 2018) suggests that calcium-mediated mitochondrial injury plays a role in elevating basal mitophagy in susceptible neuron types. Indeed, mutations in LRRK2 result in enhanced excitatory neurotransmission and mitochondrial calcium dysregulation (Cherra III et al., 2013; Plowey et al., 2014; Verma et al., 2017), which leads to depletion of mitochondria from dendrites. Given that PINK1-Parkin, cardiolipin and FUNDC1 pathways are each activated by distinct as well as overlapping stimuli in cultured cells, their potential involvement in response to specific disease-relevant stressors that upregulate mitophagy in vivo remains to be determined.

8. Role(s) of PINK1 or Parkin in recessive PD?

While it is clear that loss of PINK1 or Parkin cause recessively inherited parkinsonian neurodegeneration, central questions remain unanswered. What are the possible roles of PINK1 and Parkin in neuro-protection, and which function(s) are lost that cannot be compensated? Deficiency in the function of either protein show striking effects on mitochondrial structure and function in culture systems, with often less prominent effects in mouse models. For example, primary mouse Pink1−/− neurons exhibit reduced membrane potential, mitochondrial fragmentation, increased mitophagy and lysosomal expansion (Dagda et al., 2011). Neurons differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells of PARK2- or PINK1-mutated patients also exhibit mitochondrial dysfunction (Chung et al., 2016). Just as with PINK1-triggered ubiquitin-mediated mitophagy, which is most robust in transformed cells in culture, many of these highly reproducible culture phenotypes are not as striking in Pink1−/− mice, and deciphering whether or not these changes play a pathogenic role in human neurodegeneration has not been straighforward.

Other functions of PINK1 that could impact mitochondrial quality involve direct or indirect effects on phosphorylation of complex I subunits, mitochondrial fission or transport proteins, mitochondrial calcium transporters, chaperones and proteins important for cardiolipin synthesis and cristae structure (Chen et al., 2014; Kostic et al., 2015; Morais et al., 2014; Pridgeon et al., 2007; Sandebring et al., 2009; Shlevkov et al., 2016; Tsai et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2013). Cytosolic functions of PINK1 and Parkin include the regulation of PGC-1α mediated mitochondrial biogenesis (Lee et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2011; Siddiqui et al., 2015), suppression of toxin-induced autophagy (Dagda et al., 2009; Fedorowicz et al., 2014) and activation of mTORC2 (Murata et al., 2011). With regard to neurons, PINK1 acts to promote neuronal differentiation and mitochondrial transport into dendrites (Dagda et al., 2014; Das Banerjee et al., 2017). These alternative roles of PINK1 or Parkin have been more extensively reviewed elsewhere (Arena and Valente 2017; Chu 2010; Scarffe et al., 2014; Steer et al., 2015).

9. Self-eating in neurodegeneration: future perspectives

Advances in basic autophagy research have given rise over the past 25 years to new molecular tools enabling researchers to demonstrate that changes in autophagy or mitophagy play important roles in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. In turn, neurodegenerative disease studies focused on protein aggregates and mitochondrial injury have led to major basic science discoveries that firmly establish the existence of specific macromolecular interactions responsible for autophagic cargo recognition and selective autophagy. Research in HD not only revealed a new family of LIR-motif autophagy cargo receptors that recognize protein aggregates (Pankiv et al., 2007), but also provided the first in vivo evidence supporting autophagy modulation as a potential disease therapy (Ravikumar et al., 2004). Mitochondrial studies in the PD field led to the discovery of two distinct pathways for selective mitophagy, one involving genes mutated in PD (Kawajiri et al., 2010; Narendra et al., 2010a) and ALS-FTD (Wong and Holzbaur 2014) and the other triggered in neurons by complex I inhibition (Chu et al., 2013) as a model of sporadic PD.

In part as a result of this expansion from starvation-focused to disease-focused autophagy research, it has become evident that the molecular regulation of selective autophagy involves multiple pathways of recognition involving direct and indirect interactions of the core autophagy machinery with cargo receptors, phospholipids and glycoproteins. Multiplication of Atg8 genes and cargo receptor genes during evolution confer at least partial redundancy, and this increased complexity compared to unicellular organisms attests to the importance of autophagic quality control in mammalian neurons. Selective autophagy of just about every intracellular constituent has now been described, giving rise to a new viewpoint that selective autophagy under conditions of adequate nutrition may be the norm rather than the exception.

Several lines of evidence implicate dysregulation not only of autophagy in general, but also of aggrephagy, mitophagy and other forms of selective autophagy in neurodegeneration. Mutations in neurodegenerative disease genes discussed above either directly or indirectly trigger or regulate selective autophagy. Cargo receptors and their ligands, kinases and other regulatory proteins are observed in pathological aggregates or in association with abnormal mitochondria in diseased human tissues (Fiesel et al., 2015; King et al., 2011; Kurosawa et al., 2016; Nogalska et al., 2009; Zhu et al., 2003). Moreover, it is reasonable to postulate that defective cargo recognition may result from saturation of the autophagy machinery by aggregate-prone proteins that are not properly handled by chaperone and proteasomal systems.

Yet, key questions remain. Given that there are several distinct pathways of cargo selection for mitophagy, to what extent does loss of one pathway contribute to neurodegeneration? Clearly, this answer may depend upon the major pathway(s) operating in a given cell type or tissue under a particular disease-related stress. The new animal tools discussed above will yield an unprecedented opportunity to determine what types of in vivo stressors may trigger activation of ubiquitin-mediated, transmembrane receptor-mediated or cardiolipin-mediated pathways of mitophagy.

Likewise, the kinetics and fate of protein aggregates that develop in vivo, or in different compartments of primary neurons are areas of research that may be approached using an analogous strategy to follow delivery of aggregate-protein proteins, or of specific cargo receptor proteins into lysosomes in response to different injuries. Whereas different pathways of cargo recognition may be primarily triggered by different stimuli, a multiplicity of direct molecular interactions would enhance avidity for cargo targeting. It is thus conceivable that therapeutic strategies may be designed to upregulate alternative pathways to compensate for disease-related impairments in a given selective autophagy pathway.

Finally, it has become clear from studies in AD, PD, ALS and FTD that upregulated induction of autophagy or mitophagy may have either beneficial or detrimental effects in a particular context (Table 2). An improved understanding of regulatory mechanisms for selective autophagy is necessary to facilitate the development of new strategies to promote degradation of selected cargoes while minimizing excessive turnover of other cellular constituents.

Acknowledgements

Research in the Chu Laboratory is supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (AG026389, NS065789, NS101628-co-funded by NINDS/NIA) and the Helen Mendel Fund. The content is solely the responsibility of the author and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Dr. Chu holds the A. Julio Martinez Chair in Neuropathology at the University of Pittsburgh. Special thanks to Salvatore J. Cherra III, Ph.D. for assistance with Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Major steps in macroautophagy.

Cells integrate a variety of extracellular and intracellular signals that act to inhibit or promote autophagy (1). Autophagy initiation and membrane nucleation mediated by Atg1 and Beclin 1 complexes, respectively, is followed by phagophore membrane extension (2), a process regulated by covalent lipidation of LC3 and other Atg8 family members, to form an autophagosome. Selective autophagy is mediated by molecular interactions that enrich certain cargoes within the phagophore (2a). Maturation of the autophagosome to form an autolysosme proceeds through vesicular fusion with late endosomes and lysosomes (3). Within the acidic lysosomal lumen, enzymatic hydrolysis completes the degradation process (4). Hydrolysis products serve to downregulate autophagy initiation while providing substrates for energy or biosynthetic pathways (5).

Fig. 2. Cargo receptors and pathways of selective mitophagy.

A subset of proteins that contain LIR-motifs (green) and ubiquitin binding domains (teal) function as selective autophagy receptors for ubiquitinated cargoes (A). LIR-motif proteins that exhibit membrane-spanning sequences (red) function in selective mitophagy (B). Ubiquitin tags on protein aggregates recruit cytosolic LIR-motif proteins, which target them to phagophore-bound LC3 (C). Many of the same LIR proteins also recognize mitochondria that are ubiquitinated following the recruitment and phosphorylations (yellow circle) of Parkin and ubiquitin by PINK1 (D). A group of transmembrane LIR-receptors expressed on the outer mitochondrial membrane function in developmental or hypoxia-induced mitophagy, regulated by transcriptional upregulation or dephosphorylation (E). The inner mitochondrial membrane phospholipid cardiolipin undergoes translocation to the outer membrane, where it can directly interact with LC3 to mediate mitophagy in neurons (F).

Table 1 Altered autophagy and mitophagy in human post-mortem patient brain tissues.

Altered autophagy	
Alzheimer’s disease	Granulovacuolar degeneration reflects accumulation of a type of autophagosome by EM	(Okamoto et al., 1991)	
Dystrophic neurites contain numerous autophagic structures by EM	(Nixon et al., 2005)	
Granulovacuolar degeneration colocalizes weakly with LC3 and p62, and strongly with lysosomal associated membrane protein 1	(Funk et al., 2011)	
Parkinson’s disease	Apoptosis and autophagic degeneration detected in substantia nigra neurons by EM	(Anglade et al., 1997)	
Lewy body dementia	LC3-II and beclin 1 increased by WB	(Yu et al., 2009)	
Aging	Decreased beclin 1 protein expression with aging by WB	(Shibata et al., 2006)	
	
Altered mitophagy	
	
Alzheimer’s disease	         Localization of lipoic acid to lipofuscin by immunogold EM	(Moreira et al., 2007)	
         Elevated Parkin and LC3-II protein in mitochondrial fractions by WB; decreased Parkin at high Braak stages	(Ye et al., 2015)	
Parkinson’s disease and Lewy body dementia	         Increased autophagosomes containing abnormal mitochondria and activated ERK1/2 by IF and immunogold EM	(Zhu et al., 2003)	
Aging	         Phospho-ubiquitin IHC/IF in a 93-year old control and two aged PD patients	(Fiesel et al., 2015)	
EM – electron microscopy; IF – immunofluorescence; IHC – immunohistochemistry; WB – Western blot.

Table 2 Altered autophagy and mitophagy in neurodegenerative disease models. Selected studies that illustrate new concepts or mechanisms by which alterations in autophagy may contribute to pathogenesis or neuroprotection, in chronological order by disease.

Disease	Process	Changes observed	Proposed mechanism/impact	References	
HD	Autophagy	HD-expanded Htt exon 1 accumulates in early and late autophagic structures in striatal neurons	Kegel - Proposed autophagic cell death; Petersen - susceptibility to DA toxicity	(Kegel et al., 2000); (Petersen et al., 2001)	
Autophagy	Inhibition of mTOR alleviates toxicity in fly and mouse HD models	First paper to show therapeutic potential of inducing autophagy to clear aggregates in vivo	(Ravikumar et al., 2004)	
Autophagy	Mutant Htt sequesters beclin 1 and inhibits beclin 1-mediated protein degradation	Impaired beclin-dependent autophagy with aging may predispose to HD	(Shibata et al., 2006)	
Autophagy	Small molecule that upregulates mTOR-independent autophagy in neurons is neuroprotective	mTOR-independent autophagy inducer clears aggregates in primary neurons	(Tsvetkov et al., 2010)	
Autophagy	Mutant Htt interfers with the function of PGC-1alpha, which regulates mitochondrial biogenesis, oxidative stress and TFEB	Upregulation of lysosomal biogenesis by TFEB rescues Htt aggregation and neurotoxicity	(Tsunemi et al., 2012)	
Autophagy	Increased rates of autophagosome marker flux, but decreased cargo proteolysis with empty appearance ultrastructurally	Mutant Htt interferes with cargo recognition for selective autophagy	(Martinez-Vicente et al., 2010)	
		
AD	Autophagy	Autophagic vacuoles generate Abeta	Autophagic structures may promote pathogenesis by serving as reservoirs for Abeta generation	(Yu et al., 2005)	
Autophagy	Beclin 1 deficiency in AD brains; beclin haploinsufficiency exacerbates pathology in APP transgenic mice	Impaired beclin-dependent autophagy induction may predispose to AD	(Pickford et al., 2008)	
Autophagy	Normal neurons have high rates of autophagic flux; inhibiting lysosomal proteolysis causes accumulation of autophagic structures similar in appearance to those observed in AD neurons	Autophagic pathology in AD arises from impaired clearance rather than strong induction alone	(Boland et al., 2008)	
Mitophagy	Increased parkin recruitment in mutant hAPP neurons; depletion of parkin with higher Braak stages	Diminished mitochondrial cargo targeting may occur in later stages of AD	(Ye et al., 2015)	
Autophagy	mTOR activity correlates with tau pathology and behavioral deficits in vivo	Suppression of mTOR signaling may be beneficial for tauopathies	(Caccamo et al., 2013)	
		
PD	Autophagy	Mutant SNCA blocks chaperone-mediated uptake of proteins into the lysosome via LAMP-2A	CMA blockage contributes to activation of autophagy by mutant SNCA	(Cuervo et al., 2004)	
Autophagy	Increased autophagy in the MPP+ model	First report of beclin-independent autophagy, which promotes cell death	(Zhu et al., 2007)	
Autophagy	Plowey, Cherra- mutant LRRK2 elicits increased autophagy; inhibiting autophagy induction rescues neurite retraction. Alegre-Abarrategui - WT LRRK2 knockdown increases LC3-II flux in HEK293 cells. Schapansky - WT LRRK2 activation induces autophagy in monocytes.	LRRK2 has cell type or compartment-specific effects on autophagy. Autophagy contributes to shrinkage of neuronal processes.	(Alegre-Abarrategui et al., 2009; Cherra III et al.,2010; Plowey et al., 2008; Schapansky et al., 2014)	
Mitophagy	First report of parkin-mediated mitophagy that triggered major advances defining the ubiquitin pathway of mitophagy	Diminished mitochondrial cargo targeting may contribute to recessive PD	(Matsuda et al., 2010; Narendra et al., 2008) and papers too numerous to list	
Mitophagy	Increased mitophagy is observed in PINK1 deficient neuronal cells, in which it plays a neuroprotective role	PINK1 deficiency triggers mitochondrial damage, which elicits mitophagy	(Dagda et al., 2009)	
Autophagy	Beclin 1 gene transfer ameliorates synaptic and dendritic pathology in a lentiviral SNCA overexpression model	Therapeutic potential for beclin 1-dependent autophagy in synucleinopathies	(Spencer et al., 2009)	
Autophagy	Rapamycin effective for clearing acute rotenone induced SNCA aggregates, but not during chronic rotenone exposure	Mitochondrial dysfunction may limit efficacy of autophagy induction	(Yu et al., 2009)	
Autophagy	Lysosomal depletion contributes to accumulation of autophagosomes in the MPTP mouse model	Inducing lysosomal biogenesis alleviates autophagic stress	(Dehay et al., 2010)	
Mitophagy	Selective mitophagy induced by chronic MPP+ treatment in conjunction with impaired mitochondrial biogenesis	Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis determines outcome of mitophagy	(Zhu et al., 2012)	
Mitophagy	Loss of ATP13A2 decreases autophagic flux, resulting in accumulation of ROS-generating mitochondria	Impaired mitochondrial quality control due to lysosomal mechanisms	(Gusdon et al., 2012)	
Mitophagy	SNCA-induced mitophagy and autophagy shortens lifespan	Excess mitophagy may be harmful with aging	(Sampaio-Marques et al., 2012)	
Autophagy	The small molecule ambroxol not only increases glucocerebrocidase activity, but also favors exocytosis while suppressing autophagic flux	Reduction of SNCA levels by ambroxol or TFEB may be due to exocytosis rather than autophagy	(Magalhaes et al., 2018)	
Mitophagy	Cherra, Verma - LRRK2 promotes calcium dysregulation to elicit mitophagy-dependent dendrite retraction in neurons. Zhu - mutant LRRK2 interacts with ULK1 to induce autophagy and mitophagy.	Autophagic neurite retraction may be a side effect of mitochondrial clearance	(Cherra III et al., 2013; Verma et al., 2017; Zhu et al.,2013)	
		
ALS	Autophagy	Increased autophagy and decreased p-mTOR in SOD1-G93Amice	Descriptive, role of autophagy not explicitly investigated	(Morimoto et al., 2007)	
Mitophagy	Optineurin, which is mutated in ALS, is a mitophagy receptor in parkin-mediated mitophagy	Diminished mitochondrial cargo targeting may contribute to ALS	(Wong and Holzbaur 2014)	
Autophagy	Reducing beclin expression increased lifespan of mutant SOD1 transgenic mice	Autophagy may play a pathogenic rather than a protective role in familial ALS	(Nassif et al., 2014)	
		
FTD	Autophagy	Mutant CHMP2B interferes with autophagosome maturation in cortical neurons and flies; inhibiting autophagy is protective	Autophagy induction may be harmful by increasing autophagic stress	(Lee et al., 2007; Lee and Gao 2009)	
Autophagy	Valosin-containing protein is necessary for autophagosome maturation and this function is disrupted by an IBMPFD mutation	Impaired autophagosome maturation as a pathogenic factor	(Ju et al., 2009)	
Autophagy	Rapamycin-induced autophagy aggravates pathology and weakness in a mouse model of VCP-associated myopathy	Autophagy induction may be harmful by increasing autophagic stress	(Ching and Weihl 2013)	
Autophagy	A152T tau allele causes neurodegeneration that can be ameliorated in a zebrafish model by autophagy induction	Autophagy upregulation may be protective in FTLD-tau	(Lopez et al., 2017)	
APP – amyloid precursor protein; CHMP2B – charged multivesicular body protein 2B; Htt – huntingtin protein; IBMPFD - Inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia; LRRK2 – leucine-rich repeat kinase 2; MPP+ - the complex I inhibitor 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium; mTOR – mammalian target of rapamycin; ROS – reactive oxygen species; SNCA – alpha synuclein; SOD1 – superoxide dismutase 1; ULK1 - Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; VCP – valosin-containing protein; WT – wild type.


References

Alegre-Abarrategui J , , 2009 LRRK2 regulates autophagic activity and localises to specific membrane microdomains in a novel human genomic reporter cellular model. Hum. Mol. Genet 18 (21 ), 4022–4034.19640926
Allen GF , , 2013 Loss of iron triggers PINK1/Parkin-independent mitophagy. EMBO Rep 14 , 1127–1135.24176932
Anglade P , , 1997 Apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons of patients with Parkinson’s disease. Histol. Histopathol 12 , 25–31.9046040
Anton Z , , 2016 Human Atg8-cardiolipin interactions in mitophagy: specific properties of LC3B, GABARAPL2 and GABARAP. Autophagy 12 , 2386–2403.27764541
Arena G , Valente EM , 2017 PINK1 in the limelight: multiple functions of an eclectic protein in human health and disease. J. Pathol 241 , 251–263.27701735
Ashford TP , Porter KR , 1962 Cytoplasmic components in hepatic cell lysosomes. J. Cell Biol 12 , 198–202.13862833
Ashrafi G , , 2014 Mitophagy of damaged mitochondria occurs locally in distal neuronal axons and requires PINK1 and Parkin. J. Cell Biol 206 (5 ), 655–670.25154397
Bhujabal Z , , 2017 FKBP8 recruits LC3A to mediate Parkin-independent mitophagy. EMBO Rep 18 , 947–961.28381481
Birgisdottir AB , , 2013 The LIR motif - crucial for selective autophagy. J. Cell Sci 126 , 3237–3247.23908376
Bjorkoy G , , 2005 p62/SQSTM1 forms protein aggregates degraded by autophagy and has a protective effect on huntingtin-induced cell death. J. Cell Biol 171 , 603–614.16286508
Boland B , , 2008 Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 28 , 6926–6937.18596167
Boland B , Nixon RA , 2006 Neuronal macroautophagy: from development to degeneration. Mol. Asp. Med 27 , 503–519.
Bradley RM , , 2016 Influence of tissue, diet, and enzymatic remodeling on cardiolipin fatty acyl profile. Mol. Nutr. Food Res 60 , 1804–1818.27061349
Burman JL , , 2017 Mitochondrial fission facilitates the selective mitophagy of protein aggregates. J. Cell Biol 216 , 3231–3247.28893839
Caccamo A , , 2013 mTOR regulates tau phosphorylation and degradation: implications for Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies. Aging Cell 12 , 370–380.23425014
Cai Q , , 2012 Spatial parkin translocation and degradation of damaged mitochondria via mitophagy in live cortical neurons. Curr. Biol 22 , 545–552.22342752
Chan NC , , 2011 Broad activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by Parkin is critical for mitophagy. Hum. Mol. Genet 20 , 1726–1737.21296869
Chen BB , , 2014 E3 ligase subunit Fbxo15 and PINK1 kinase regulate cardiolipin synthase 1 stability and mitochondrial function in pneumonia. Cell Rep 7 , 476–487.24703837
Cherra SJ III , Chu CT , 2008 Autophagy in neuroprotection and neurodegeneration: a question of balance. Future Neurol 3 , 309–323.18806889
Cherra SJ III , , 2010 Regulation of the autophagy protein LC3 by phosphorylation. J. Cell Biol 190 , 533–539.20713600
Cherra SJ III , , 2013 Mutant LRRK2 elicits calcium imbalance and depletion of dendritic mitochondria in neurons. Am. J. Pathol 182 , 474–484.23231918
Ching JK , Weihl CC , 2013 Rapamycin-induced autophagy aggravates pathology and weakness in a mouse model of VCP-associated myopathy. Autophagy 9 , 799–800.23439279
Chinta SJ , , 2010 Mitochondrial alpha-synuclein accumulation impairs complex I function in dopaminergic neurons and results in increased mitophagy in vivo. Neurosci. Lett 486 , 235–239.20887775
Chu CT , , 2000 Ubiquitin immunochemistry as a diagnostic aid for community pathologists evaluating patients who have dementia. Mod. Pathol 13 , 420–426.10786809
Chu CT , 2006 Autophagic stress in neuronal injury and disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 65 , 423–432.16772866
Chu CT , , 2007 Beclin 1-independent pathway of damage-induced mitophagy and autophagic stress: implications for neurodegeneration and cell death. Autophagy 3 , 663–666.17622797
Chu CT , 2010 A pivotal role for PINK1 and autophagy in mitochondrial quality control: implications for Parkinson disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 19 , R28–R37.20385539
Chu CT , , 2013 Cardiolipin externalization to the outer mitochondrial membrane acts as an elimination signal for mitophagy in neuronal cells. Nat. Cell Biol 15 , 1197–1205.24036476
Chung SY , , 2016 Parkin and PINK1 patient iPSC-derived midbrain dopamine neurons exhibit mitochondrial dysfunction and alpha-synuclein accumulation. Stem Cell Rep 7 , 664–677.
Cuervo AM , 2004 Autophagy: in sickness and in health. Trends Cell Biol 14 , 70–77.15102438
Cuervo AM , , 2004 Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy. Science 305 , 1292–1295.15333840
Cummins N , Gotz J , 2017 Shedding light on mitophagy in neurons: what is the evidence for PINK1/Parkin mitophagy in vivo? Cell. Mol. Life Sci 75 (7 ), 1151–1162.29085955
Dagda RK , , 2008 Mitochondrially localized ERK2 regulates mitophagy and autophagic cell stress: implications for Parkinson’s disease. Autophagy 4 , 770–782.18594198
Dagda RK , , 2009 Loss of PINK1 function promotes mitophagy through effects on oxidative stress and mitochondrial fission. J. Biol. Chem 284 , 13843–13855.19279012
Dagda RK , , 2011 Mitochondrially localized PKA reverses mitochondrial pathology and dysfunction in a cellular model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell Death Differ 18 , 1914–1923.21637291
Dagda RK , , 2014 Beyond the mitochondrion: cytosolic PINK1 remodels dendrites through protein kinase A. J. Neurochem 128 , 864–877.24151868
D’Agostino C , , 2011 Abnormalities of NBR1, a novel autophagy-associated protein, in muscle fibers of sporadic inclusion-body myositis. Acta Neuropathol 122 , 627–636.21935636
Das Banerjee T , , 2017 PINK1 regulates mitochondrial trafficking in dendrites of cortical neurons through mitochondrial PKA. J. Neurochem 142 , 545–559.28556983
Dehay B , , 2010 Pathogenic lysosomal depletion in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci 30 , 12535–12544.20844148
Deng X , , 2012 Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 inhibitors: a patent review (2006– 2011). Expert Opin. Ther. Pat 22 , 1415–1426.23126385
Deosaran E , , 2013 NBR1 acts as an autophagy receptor for peroxisomes. J. Cell Sci 126 , 939–952.23239026
Ding Q , , 2003 Characterization of chronic low-level proteasome inhibition on neural homeostasis. J. Neurochem 86 , 489–497.12871590
Dowdle WE , , 2014 Selective VPS34 inhibitor blocks autophagy and uncovers a role for NCOA4 in ferritin degradation and iron homeostasis in vivo. Nat. Cell Biol 16 , 1069–1079.25327288
Elmore SP , , 2001 The mitochondrial permeability transition initiates autophagy in rat hepatocytes. FASEB J 15 , 2286–2287.11511528
Fedorowicz MA , , 2014 Cytosolic cleaved PINK1 represses Parkin translocation to mitochondria and mitophagy. EMBO Rep 15 , 86–93.24357652
Fiesel FC , , 2015 (Patho-)physiological relevance of PINK1-dependent ubiquitin phosphorylation. EMBO Rep 16 , 1114–1130.26162776
Fortun J , , 2003 Emerging role for autophagy in the removal of aggresomes in Schwann cells. J. Neurosci 23 , 10672–10680.14627652
Funk KE , , 2011 Granulovacuolar degeneration (GVD) bodies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) resemble late-stage autophagic organelles. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 37 , 295–306.20946470
Geisler S , , 2010 PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy is dependent on VDAC1 and p62/SQSTM1. Nat. Cell Biol 12 , 119–131.20098416
Grenier K , , 2013 Parkin- and PINK1-dependent mitophagy in neurons: will the real pathway please stand up? Front. Neurol 4 , 100.23882257
Gusdon AM , , 2012 ATP13A2 regulates mitochondrial bioenergetics through macroautophagy. Neurobiol. Dis 45 , 962–972.22198378
Gusdon AM , Chu CT , 2011 To eat or not to eat: neuronal metabolism, mitophagy, and Parkinson’s disease. Antioxid. Redox Signal 14 , 1979–1987.21126205
Guzman JN , , 2018 Systemic isradipine treatment diminishes calcium-dependent mitochondrial oxidant stress. J. Clin. Invest 128 (6 ), 2266–2280.29708514
Hamacher-Brady A , Brady NR , 2016 Mitophagy programs: mechanisms and physiological implications of mitochondrial targeting by autophagy. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 73 , 775–795.26611876
Harding TM , , 1995 Isolation and characterization of yeast mutants in the cytoplasm to vacuole protein targeting pathway. J. Cell Biol 131 , 591–602.7593182
Harris H , Rubinsztein DC , 2012 Control of autophagy as a therapy for neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 8 , 108–117.
Hernandez D , , 2012 Regulation of presynaptic neurotransmission by macroautophagy. Neuron 74 , 277–284.22542182
Hruban Z , , 1963 Focal cytoplasmic degradation. Am. J. Pathol 42 , 657–683.13955261
Hsu P , , 2015 Cardiolipin remodeling by TAZ/tafazzin is selectively required for the initiation of mitophagy. Autophagy 11 , 643–652.25919711
Ichimura Y , , 2000 A ubiquitin-like system mediates protein lipidation. Nature 408 , 488–492.11100732
Itakura E , , 2012 The hairpin-type tail-anchored SNARE syntaxin 17 targets to autophagosomes for fusion with endosomes/lysosomes. Cell 151 , 1256–1269.23217709
Ivatt RM , , 2014 Genome-wide RNAi screen identifies the Parkinson disease GWAS risk locus SREBF1 as a regulator of mitophagy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 111 , 8494–8499.24912190
Ju JS , , 2009 Valosin-containing protein (VCP) is required for autophagy and is disrupted in VCP disease. J. Cell Biol 187 , 875–888.20008565
Kabeya Y , , 2000 LC3, a mammalian homologue of yeast Apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after processing. EMBO J 19 , 5720–5728.11060023
Kagan VE , , 2016 NDPK-D (NM23-H4)-mediated externalization of cardiolipin enables elimination of depolarized mitochondria by mitophagy. Cell Death Differ 23 (7 ), 1140–1151.26742431
Kageyama Y , , 2014 Parkin-independent mitophagy requires Drp1 and maintains the integrity of mammalian heart and brain. EMBO J 33 , 2798–2813.25349190
Kamboh MI , , 2006 Genetic association of ubiquilin with Alzheimer’s disease and related quantitative measures. Mol. Psychiatry 11 , 273–279.16302009
Kane LA , , 2014 PINK1 phosphorylates ubiquitin to activate Parkin E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. J. Cell Biol 205 , 143–153.24751536
Kanki T , , 2009 Atg32 is a mitochondrial protein that confers selectivity during mitophagy. Dev. Cell 17 , 98–109.19619495
Kann O , Kovacs R , 2007 Mitochondria and neuronal activity. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol 292 , C641–C657.17092996
Katayama H , , 2011 A sensitive and quantitative technique for detecting autophagic events based on lysosomal delivery. Chem. Biol 18 , 1042–1052.21867919
Kawajiri S , , 2010 PINK1 is recruited to mitochondria with parkin and associates with LC3 in mitophagy. FEBS Lett 584 (6 ), 1073–1079.20153330
Kazlauskaite A , , 2014 Parkin is activated by PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of ubiquitin at Ser65. Biochem. J 460 , 127–139.24660806
Kegel KB , , 2000 Huntingtin expression stimulates endosomal-lysosomal activity, endosome tubulation, and autophagy. J. Neurosci 20 , 7268–7278.11007884
Kim PK , , 2008 Ubiquitin signals autophagic degradation of cytosolic proteins and peroxisomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 105 , 20567–20574.19074260
King A , , 2011 Ubiquitinated, p62 immunopositive cerebellar cortical neuronal inclusions are evident across the spectrum of TDP-43 proteinopathies but are only rarely additionally immunopositive for phosphorylation-dependent TDP-43. Neuropathology 31 , 239–249.21118398
Koentjoro B , , 2017 Nix restores mitophagy and mitochondrial function to protect against PINK1/Parkin-related Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Rep 7 , 44373.28281653
Kostic M , , 2015 PKA phosphorylation of NCLX reverses mitochondrial calcium overload and depolarization, promoting survival of PINK1-deficient dopaminergic neurons. Cell Rep 13 , 376–386.26440884
Koyano F , , 2014 Ubiquitin is phosphorylated by PINK1 to activate parkin. Nature 510 , 162–166.24784582
Kumar S , , 2018 Mechanism of Stx17 recruitment to autophagosomes via IRGM and mammalian Atg8 proteins. J. Cell Biol 217 (3 ), 997–1013.29420192
Kurosawa M , , 2016 Serine 403-phosphorylated p62/SQSTM1 immunoreactivity in inclusions of neurodegenerative diseases. Neurosci. Res 103 , 64–70.26302676
Lane RF , , 2012 Vps10 family proteins and the retromer complex in aging-related neurodegeneration and diabetes. J. Neurosci 32 , 14080–14086.23055476
Lazarou M , , 2015 The ubiquitin kinase PINK1 recruits autophagy receptors to induce mitophagy. Nature 524 , 309–314.26266977
Lee JA , , 2007 ESCRT-III dysfunction causes autophagosome accumulation and neurodegeneration. Curr. Biol 17 , 1561–1567.17683935
Lee DY , , 2013 Ubiquilin4 is an adaptor protein that recruits Ubiquilin1 to the autophagy machinery. EMBO Rep 14 , 373–381.23459205
Lee Y , , 2017 PINK1 primes Parkin-mediated ubiquitination of PARIS in dopaminergic neuronal survival. Cell Rep 18 , 918–932.28122242
Lee JJ , , 2018 Basal mitophagy is widespread in Drosophila but minimally affected by loss of Pink1 or parkin. J. Cell Biol 217 (5 ), 1613–1622.29500189
Lee JA , Gao FB , 2009 Inhibition of autophagy induction delays neuronal cell loss caused by dysfunctional ESCRT-III in frontotemporal dementia. J. Neurosci 29 , 8506–8511.19571141
Lemasters JJ , , 1998 The mitochondrial permeability transition in cell death: a common mechanism in necrosis, apoptosis and autophagy. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1366 , 177–196.9714796
Liu L , , 2012 Mitochondrial outer-membrane protein FUNDC1 mediates hypoxia-induced mitophagy in mammalian cells. Nat. Cell Biol 14 , 177–185.22267086
Liu L , , 2014 Receptor-mediated mitophagy in yeast and mammalian systems. Cell Res 24 , 787–795.24903109
Liu Y , Levine B , 2015 Autosis and autophagic cell death: the dark side of autophagy. Cell Death Differ 22 , 367–376.25257169
Lopez A , , 2017 A152T tau allele causes neurodegeneration that can be ameliorated in a zebrafish model by autophagy induction. Brain 140 , 1128–1146.28334843
Lv M , , 2017 Structural insights into the recognition of phosphorylated FUNDC1 by LC3B in mitophagy. Protein Cell 8 , 25–38.27757847
Magalhaes J , , 2018 Effects of ambroxol on the autophagy-lysosome pathway and mitochondria in primary cortical neurons. Sci. Rep 8 , 1385.29362387
Majcher V , , 2015 Autophagy receptor defects and ALS-FTLD. Mol. Cell. Neurosci 66 , 43–52.25683489
Mancias JD , , 2014 Quantitative proteomics identifies NCOA4 as the cargo receptor mediating ferritinophagy. Nature 509 , 105–109.24695223
Martinez-Vicente M , , 2010 Cargo recognition failure is responsible for inefficient autophagy in Huntington’s disease. Nat. Neurosci 13 , 567–576.20383138
Matsuda N , , 2010 PINK1 stabilized by mitochondrial depolarization recruits Parkin to damaged mitochondria and activates latent Parkin for mitophagy. J. Cell Biol 189 , 211–221.20404107
Matsumoto G , , 2015 TBK1 controls autophagosomal engulfment of polyubiquitinated mitochondria through p62/SQSTM1 phosphorylation. Hum. Mol. Genet 24 , 4429–4442.25972374
McEwan DG , , 2015 PLEKHM1 regulates autophagosome-lysosome fusion through HOPS complex and LC3/GABARAP proteins. Mol. Cell 57 , 39–54.25498145
McLelland GL , , 2014 Parkin and PINK1 function in a vesicular trafficking pathway regulating mitochondrial quality control. EMBO J 33 , 282–295.24446486
McWilliams TG , , 2016 mito-QC illuminates mitophagy and mitochondrial architecture in vivo. J. Cell Biol 214 , 333–345.27458135
McWilliams TG , , 2018 Basal mitophagy occurs independently of PINK1 in mouse tissues of high metabolic demand. Cell Metab, 27 , 439–449 e5.29337137
McWilliams TG , Muqit MM , 2017 PINK1 and Parkin: emerging themes in mitochondrial homeostasis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol 45 , 83–91.28437683
Moore DJ , , 2003 Role for the ubiquitin-proteasome system in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative brain amyloidoses. NeuroMolecular Med 4 , 95–108.14528055
Morais VA , , 2014 PINK1 loss-of-function mutations affect mitochondrial complex I activity via NdufA10 ubiquinone uncoupling. Science 344 , 203–207.24652937
Moreira PI , , 2007 Autophagocytosis of mitochondria is prominent in Alzheimer disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 66 , 525–532.17549012
Mori F , , 2012 Autophagy-related proteins (p62, NBR1 and LC3) in intranuclear inclusions in neurodegenerative diseases. Neurosci. Lett 522 , 134–138.22728060
Morimoto N , , 2007 Increased autophagy in transgenic mice with a G93A mutant SOD1 gene. Brain Res 1167 , 112–117.17689501
von Muhlinen N , , 2012 LC3C, bound selectively by a noncanonical LIR motif in NDP52, is required for antibacterial autophagy. Mol. Cell 48 , 329–342.23022382
Murata H , , 2011 A new cytosolic pathway from a Parkinson disease-associated kinase, BRPK/PINK1: activation of AKT via mTORC2. J. Biol. Chem 286 , 7182–7189.21177249
Nakamura K , , 2010 PB1 domain interaction of p62/sequestosome 1 and MEKK3 regulates NF-kappaB activation. J. Biol. Chem 285 , 2077–2089.19903815
Narendra D , , 2008 Parkin is recruited selectively to impaired mitochondria and promotes their autophagy. J. Cell Biol 183 , 795–803.19029340
Narendra DP , , 2010a PINK1 is selectively stabilized on impaired mitochondria to activate Parkin. PLoS Biol 8 , e1000298.20126261
Narendra DP , , 2010b p62/SQSTM1 is required for Parkin-induced mitochondrial clustering but not mitophagy; VDAC1 is dispensable for both. Autophagy 6 .
Nassif M , , 2014 Pathogenic role of BECN1/Beclin 1 in the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Autophagy 10 , 1256–1271.24905722
Nixon RA , , 2005 Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 64 , 113–122.15751225
Nixon RA , 2013 The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Med 19 , 983–997.23921753
Nogalska A , , 2009 p62/SQSTM1 is overexpressed and prominently accumulated in inclusions of sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers, and can help differentiating it from polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Acta Neuropathol 118 , 407–413.19557423
Novak I , , 2010 Nix is a selective autophagy receptor for mitochondrial clearance. EMBO Rep 11 , 45–51.20010802
Odagiri S , , 2012 Autophagic adapter protein NBR1 is localized in Lewy bodies and glial cytoplasmic inclusions and is involved in aggregate formation in alpha-synucleinopathy. Acta Neuropathol 124 , 173–186.22484440
Okamoto K , , 1991 Reexamination of granulovacuolar degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 82 , 340–345.1722607
Osellame LD , Duchen MR , 2013 Defective quality control mechanisms and accumulation of damaged mitochondria link Gaucher and Parkinson diseases. Autophagy 9 , 1633–1635.23989665
Pankiv S , , 2007 p62/SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8/LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates by autophagy. J. Biol. Chem 282 , 24131–24145.17580304
Petersen A , , 2001 Expanded CAG repeats in exon 1 of the Huntington’s disease gene stimulate dopamine-mediated striatal neuron autophagy and degeneration. Hum. Mol. Genet 10 , 1243–1254.11406606
Pickford F , , 2008 The autophagy-related protein beclin 1 shows reduced expression in early Alzheimer disease and regulates amyloid beta accumulation in mice. J. Clin. Invest 118 , 2190–2199.18497889
Plowey ED , , 2008 Role of autophagy in G2019S-LRRK2-associated neurite shortening in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. J. Neurochem 105 , 1048–1056.18182054
Plowey ED , , 2014 Mutant LRRK2 enhances glutamatergic synapse activity and evokes excitotoxic dendrite degeneration. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1842 , 1596–1603.24874075
Plowey ED , Chu CT , 2011 Synaptic dysfunction in genetic models of Parkinson’s disease: a role for autophagy? Neurobiol. Dis 43 , 60–67.20969957
Pogson JH , , 2014 The complex I subunit NDUFA10 selectively rescues Drosophila pink1 mutants through a mechanism independent of mitophagy. PLoS Genet 10 , e1004815.25412178
Prabhakaran K , , 2007 Upregulation of BNIP3 and translocation to mitochondria mediates cyanide-induced apoptosis in cortical cells. Neuroscience 150 , 159–167.17980495
Pridgeon JW , , 2007 PINK1 protects against oxidative stress by phosphorylating mitochondrial chaperone TRAP1. PLoS Biol 5 , e172.17579517
Rakovic A , , 2013 Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog (PTEN)-induced Putative Kinase 1 (PINK1)-dependent ubiquitination of endogenous Parkin attenuates Mitophagy: study in human primary fibroblasts and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. J. Biol. Chem 288 , 2223–2237.23212910
Ravikumar B , , 2002 Aggregate-prone proteins with polyglutamine and polyalanine expansions are degraded by autophagy. Hum. Mol. Genet 11 , 1107–1117.11978769
Ravikumar B , , 2004 Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of Huntington disease. Nat. Genet 36 , 585–595.15146184
Rideout HJ , , 2004 Involvement of macroautophagy in the dissolution of neuronal inclusions. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol 36 , 2551–2562.15325592
Rogov VV , , 2017 Structural and functional analysis of the GABARAP interaction motif (GIM). EMBO Rep 18 , 1382–1396.28655748
Ross CA , Pickart CM , 2004 The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Trends Cell Biol 14 , 703–711.15564047
Rothenberg C , , 2010 Ubiquilin functions in autophagy and is degraded by chaperone-mediated autophagy. Hum. Mol. Genet 19 , 3219–3232.20529957
Sakowski ET , , 2015 Ubiquilin 1 promotes IFN-gamma-induced xenophagy of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. PLoS Pathog 11 , e1005076.26225865
Sampaio-Marques B , , 2012 SNCA (alpha-synuclein)-induced toxicity in yeast cells is dependent on sirtuin 2 (Sir2)-mediated mitophagy. Autophagy 8 , 1494–1509.22914317
Sandebring A , , 2009 Mitochondrial alterations in PINK1 deficient cells are influenced by calcineurin-dependent dephosphorylation of dynamin-related protein 1. PLoS One 4 , e5701.19492085
Scarffe LA , , 2014 Parkin and PINK1: much more than mitophagy. Trends Neurosci 37 , 315–324.24735649
Schapansky J , , 2014 Membrane recruitment of endogenous LRRK2 precedes its potent regulation of autophagy. Hum. Mol. Genet 23 , 4201–4214.24682598
Scheele C , , 2007 Altered regulation of the PINK1 locus: a link between type 2 diabetes and neurodegeneration? FASEB J 21 , 3653–3665.17567565
Scott SV , , 1996 Cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting and autophagy employ the same machinery to deliver proteins to the yeast vacuole. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 93 , 12304–12308.8901576
Sentelle RD , , 2012 Ceramide targets autophagosomes to mitochondria and induces lethal mitophagy. Nat. Chem. Biol 8 , 831–838.22922758
Shiba-Fukushima K , , 2012 PINK1-mediated phosphorylation of the Parkin ubiquitin-like domain primes mitochondrial translocation of Parkin and regulates mitophagy. Sci. Rep 2 , 1002.23256036
Shibata M , , 2006 Regulation of intracellular accumulation of mutant Huntingtin by Beclin 1. J. Biol. Chem 281 , 14474–14485.16522639
Shidoji Y , , 1999 Loss of molecular interaction between cytochrome c and cardiolipin due to lipid peroxidation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 264 , 343–347.10529366
Shin JH , , 2011 PARIS (ZNF746) repression of PGC-1alpha contributes to neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease. Cell 144 , 689–702.21376232
Shlevkov E , , 2016 Miro phosphorylation sites regulate Parkin recruitment and mitochondrial motility. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 113 , E6097–E6106.27679849
Siddiqui A , , 2015 Mitochondrial quality control via the PGC1alpha-TFEB signaling pathway is compromised by Parkin Q311X mutation but independently restored by rapamycin. J. Neurosci 35 , 12833–12844.26377470
Singh R , , 2009 Autophagy regulates lipid metabolism. Nature 458 , 1131–1135.19339967
Smith MD , , 2018 CCPG1 is a non-canonical autophagy cargo receptor essential for ER-Phagy and pancreatic ER proteostasis. Dev Cell, 44 , 217–232 e11.29290589
Soubannier V , , 2012 A vesicular transport pathway shuttles cargo from mitochondria to lysosomes. Curr. Biol 22 , 135–141.22226745
Spencer B , , 2009 Beclin 1 gene transfer activates autophagy and ameliorates the neurodegenerative pathology in alpha-synuclein models of Parkinson’s and Lewy body diseases. J. Neurosci 29 , 13578–13588.19864570
Steer EK , , 2015 Beyond mitophagy: cytosolic PINK1 as a messenger of mitochondrial health. Antioxid. Redox Signal 22 , 1047–1059.25557302
Stolz A , , 2014 Cargo recognition and trafficking in selective autophagy. Nat. Cell Biol 16 , 495–501.24875736
Strappazzon F , , 2015 AMBRA1 is able to induce mitophagy via LC3 binding, regardless of PARKIN and p62/SQSTM1. Cell Death Differ 22 , 419–432.25215947
Sugawara K , , 2004 The crystal structure of microtubule-associated protein light chain 3, a mammalian homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Atg8. Genes Cells 9 , 611–618.15265004
Sun N , , 2015 Measuring in vivo mitophagy. Mol Cell 60 , 685–696.26549682
Szargel R , , 2016 The PINK1, synphilin-1 and SIAH-1 complex constitutes a novel mitophagy pathway. Hum. Mol. Genet 25 , 3476–3490.27334109
Tan JM , , 2007 Lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin potentially partners with p62 to promote the clearance of protein inclusions by autophagy. Autophagy 4 .
Tatsuta T , Langer T , 2008 Quality control of mitochondria: protection against neurodegeneration and ageing. EMBO J 27 , 306–314.18216873
Thumm M , , 1994 Isolation of autophagocytosis mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 349 , 275–280.8050581
Thurston TL , , 2012 Galectin 8 targets damaged vesicles for autophagy to defend cells against bacterial invasion. Nature 482 , 414–418.22246324
Tsai PI , , 2018 PINK1 phosphorylates MIC60/Mitofilin to control structural plasticity of mitochondrial crista junctions. Mol Cell, 69 , 744–756 e6.29456190
Tsukada M , Ohsumi Y , 1993 Isolation and characterization of autophagy-defective mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 333 , 169–174.8224160
Tsunemi T , , 2012 PGC-1alpha rescues Huntington’s disease proteotoxicity by preventing oxidative stress and promoting TFEB function. Sci. Transl. Med 4 , 142ra97.
Tsvetkov AS , , 2010 A small-molecule scaffold induces autophagy in primary neurons and protects against toxicity in a Huntington disease model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 107 , 16982–16987.20833817
Van Humbeeck C , , 2011 Parkin interacts with Ambra1 to induce mitophagy. J. Neurosci 31 , 10249–10261.21753002
Van Laar VS , , 2011 Bioenergetics of neurons inhibit the translocation response of Parkin following rapid mitochondrial depolarization. Hum. Mol. Genet 20 , 927–940.21147754
Verma M , , 2017 Mitochondrial calcium dysregulation contributes to dendrite degeneration mediated by PD/LBD-associated LRRK2 mutants. J. Neurosci 37 , 11151–11165.29038245
Vincow ES , , 2013 The PINK1-Parkin pathway promotes both mitophagy and selective respiratory chain turnover in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 110 , 6400–6405.23509287
Vives-Bauza C , , 2010 PINK1-dependent recruitment of Parkin to mitochondria in mitophagy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 107 , 378–383.19966284
Walinda E , , 2014 Solution structure of the ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain of human autophagy receptor NBR1 and its interaction with ubiquitin and polyubiquitin. J. Biol. Chem 289 , 13890–13902.24692539
Webb JL , , 2003 Alpha-Synuclein is degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome. J. Biol. Chem 278 , 25009–25013.12719433
Wild P , , 2011 Phosphorylation of the autophagy receptor optineurin restricts Salmonella growth. Science 333 , 228–233.21617041
Wilkinson DS , , 2015 Phosphorylation of LC3 by the Hippo kinases STK3/STK4 is essential for autophagy. Mol. Cell 57 , 55–68.25544559
Wong YC , Holzbaur EL , 2014 Optineurin is an autophagy receptor for damaged mitochondria in parkin-mediated mitophagy that is disrupted by an ALS-linked mutation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 111 , E4439–E4448.25294927
Wurzer B , , 2015 Oligomerization of p62 allows for selection of ubiquitinated cargo and isolation membrane during selective autophagy. Elife 4 , e08941.26413874
Xie X , , 2015 Molecular basis of ubiquitin recognition by the autophagy receptor CALCOCO2. Autophagy 11 , 1775–1789.26506893
Xilouri M , , 2009 Abberant alpha-synuclein confers toxicity to neurons in part through inhibition of chaperone-mediated autophagy. PLoS One 4 , e5515.19436756
Xue L , , 2001 Mitochondria are selectively eliminated from eukaryotic cells after blockade of caspases during apoptosis. Curr. Biol 11 , 61–365.
Yamashita S , , 2014 The membrane peroxin PEX3 induces peroxisome-ubiquitination-linked pexophagy. Autophagy 10 , 1549–1564.25007327
Yang Y , , 2007 Induction of autophagy in neurite degeneration of mouse superior cervical ganglion neurons. Eur. J. Neurosci 26 , 2979–2988.18001292
Ye X , , 2015 Parkin-mediated mitophagy in mutant hAPP neurons and Alzheimer’s disease patient brains. Hum. Mol. Genet 24 , 2938–2951.25678552
Yeh SH , , 2011 Selective inhibition of early—but not late—expressed HIF-1alpha is neuroprotective in rats after focal ischemic brain damage. Brain Pathol 21 ,249–262.21029239
Yin XM , Ding WX , 2013 The reciprocal roles of PARK2 and mitofusins in mitophagy and mitochondrial spheroid formation. Autophagy 9 , 1687–1692.24162069
Yoshii SR , , 2011 Parkin mediates proteasome-dependent protein degradation and rupture of the outer mitochondrial membrane. J. Biol. Chem 286 , 19630–19640.21454557
Yu WH , , 2005 Macroautophagy—a novel Beta-amyloid peptide-generating pathway activated in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Cell Biol 171 , 87–98.16203860
Yu WH , , 2009 Metabolic activity determines efficacy of macroautophagic clearance of pathological oligomeric alpha-synuclein. Am. J. Pathol 175 , 736–747.19628769
Zhang S , , 2007 Evidence of oxidative stress-induced BNIP3 expression in amyloid beta neurotoxicity. Brain Res 1138 , 221–230.17274962
Zhang L , , 2013 TRAP1 rescues PINK1 loss-of-function phenotypes. Hum. Mol. Genet 22 , 2829–2841.23525905
Zheng YT , , 2009 The adaptor protein p62/SQSTM1 targets invading bacteria to the autophagy pathway. J. Immunol 183 , 5909–5916.19812211
Zhu J-H , , 2002 Cytoplasmic aggregates of phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase in Lewy body diseases. Am. J. Pathol 161 , 2087–2098.12466125
Zhu JH , , 2003 Localization of phosphorylated ERK/MAP kinases to mitochondria and autophagosomes in Lewy body diseases. Brain Pathol 13 , 473–481.14655753
Zhu JH , , 2007 Regulation of autophagy by extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases during 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium-induced cell death. Am. J. Pathol 170 , 75–86.17200184
Zhu JH , , 2012 Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis contributes to depletion of functional mitochondria in chronic MPP(+) toxicity: dual roles for ERK1/2. Cell Death Dis 3 , e312.22622131
Zhu Y , , 2013 ULK1 and JNK are involved in mitophagy incurred by LRRK2 G2019S expression. Protein Cell 4 , 711–721.27023913
