LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9216781
2602
Brain Pathol
Brain Pathol.
Brain pathology (Zurich, Switzerland)
1015-6305
1750-3639

30506549
6542723
10.1111/bpa.12687
NIHMS1004270
Article
Aberrant accrual of BIN1 near Alzheimer’s disease amyloid deposits in transgenic models
De Rossi Pierre 1
Andrew Robert J. 1
Musial Timothy F. 2
Buggia-Prevot Virginie 1
Xu Guilian 3
Ponnusamy Moorthi 1
Ly Han 4
Krause Sofia V. 1
Rice Richard C. 1
de l’Estoile Valentine 1
Valin Tess 1
Salem Someya 1
Despa Florin 4
Borchelt David R. 3
Bindokas Vytas P. 5
Nicholson Daniel A. 2
Thinakaran Gopal 16
1 Department of Neurobiology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
2 Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
3 Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
4 Departments of Pharmacology and Nutritional Sciences, and Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
5 Integrated Light Microscopy Facility, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
6 Departments of Neurology, and Pathology, The University of Chicago, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Corresponding author: Gopal Thinakaran, PhD., Professor of Neurobiology, Neurology, and Pathology, The University of Chicago, JFK R212, 924 East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, U.S.A., gopal@uchicago.edu
11 1 2019
27 12 2018
7 2019
10 7 2019
29 4 485501
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
BIN1 is the most significant late-onset Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) susceptibility locus identified via genome-wide association studies. BIN1 is an adaptor protein that regulates membrane dynamics in the context of endocytosis and membrane remodeling. An increase in BIN1 expression and changes in the relative levels of alternatively-spliced BIN1 isoforms have been reported in the brains of patients with AD. BIN1 can bind to Tau, and an increase of BIN1 expression correlates with Tau pathology. In contrast, the loss of BIN1 expression in cultured cells elevates Aβ production and Tau propagation by influencing endocytosis and recycling. Here we show that BIN1 accumulates adjacent to amyloid deposits in vivo. We found an increase in insoluble BIN1 and a striking accrual of BIN1 within and near amyloid deposits in the brains of multiple transgenic models of AD. The peri-deposit aberrant BIN1 localization was conspicuously different from the accumulation of APP and BACE1 within dystrophic neurites. Although BIN1 is highly expressed in mature oligodendrocytes, BIN1 association with amyloid deposits occurred in the absence of the accretion of other oligodendrocyte or myelin proteins. Finally, super-resolution microscopy and immunogold electron microscopy analyses highlight the presence of BIN1 in proximity to amyloid fibrils at the edges of amyloid deposits. These results reveal the aberrant accumulation of BIN1 is a feature associated with AD amyloid pathology. Our findings suggest a potential role for BIN1 in extracellular Aβ deposition in vivo that is distinct from its well-characterized function as an adaptor protein in endocytosis and membrane remodeling.


INTRODUCTION

The vast majority of patients with AD develop clinical symptoms after 65 years of age. Despite showing significant heritability, these individuals with late-onset AD (LOAD) do not present with a clear pattern of Mendelian inheritance. Genome-wide association studies have identified the gene encoding Bridging INtegrator 1 (BIN1), within a major susceptibility locus for late-onset AD (34, 42, 52). BIN1 is a member of the Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs family of adaptor proteins that regulate membrane dynamics (44). Alternate splicing of BIN1 generates ubiquitous and tissue-specific isoforms, which differ in their tissue distribution, subcellular localization, and function. BIN1 can bind to the endocytic adaptor proteins clathrin and AP2 via a CLAP domain present only in the brain-specific BIN1 isoforms, leading to the suggestion that the function of BIN1 in the brain is to regulate clathrin-mediated endocytosis. An increase in BIN1 expression has been reported in the brains of individuals with LOAD (8, 30, 36). Although a microarray-based splicing analysis revealed no significant change in BIN1 splicing profile in the temporal cortex in relation to AD-related tangle pathology (36), we and others have reported significant decreases of brain-specific BIN1 isoform protein levels in AD brains concomitant with an increase of ubiquitous BIN1 isoforms lacking the CLAP domain (13, 20, 25, 38).

The mechanism through which BIN1 confers risk in the LOAD population remains unclear. The loss of BIN1 expression in cultured cortical neurons was recently shown to elevate Aβ production (40) in support of previously reported data in HeLa cells (2). Subsequent interrogation of the molecular mechanism in HeLa cells pointed to reduced endosomal-lysosomal trafficking and degradation of BACE1 (40). Recent evidence also suggested that reduced expression of BIN1 in neurons prevented BACE1 exit from early endosomes leading to the increased spatial proximity between BACE1 and APP and a subsequent increase in Aβ production (54). In addition, BIN1’s SH3 domain can directly bind to a proline-rich domain in Tau, leading to the suggestion that increased expression of BIN1 in AD exacerbates Tau pathology (8, 58). In contrast, the knockdown of BIN1 expression in cultured neurons promoted cell-to-cell Tau pathology propagation by modulating endocytic flux of Tau aggregates, whereas the overexpression of BIN1 inhibited the process (6).

In the human brain, BIN1 appears to be predominantly expressed in oligodendrocytes and white matter tracts (1, 13). In agreement, proteomic analysis identified BIN1 in human and mouse brain myelin preparations (26). Indeed, BIN1 is among the top 50 highly expressed genes in cultured rat oligodendrocytes in a microarray study (17). The upregulation of BIN1 during synchronous differentiation of cultured oligodendrocytes (13, 17) is also consistent with recent RNAseq data from oligodendrocytes isolated from rat and the human brain (17, 61). Interestingly, whereas neuronal BIN1 is extremely low in controls, neurons in AD cases have readily-detectable levels of BIN1 (1, 13). How these observations translate to increased risk for AD is not clear. There has been considerable interest in the contribution of microglial mechanisms in LOAD (18). Although high-level BIN1 transcripts have been reported by RNAseq analysis in acutely-isolated microglia (4, 61), robust BIN1 protein expression in microglia has not been observed by immunostaining in rodent and the human brain (1, 8, 12, 13). A systematic analysis of large-scale genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data identified BIN1 among a core oligodendrocyte/myelin-enriched gene set that is strongly dysregulated in AD (38). In contrast, another integrative analysis found no significant correlation of the oligodendrocyte gene module with aging or AD (32). Thus, although large-scale integrative studies have been informative, they also yield seemingly contradicting results. Therefore, careful investigations of BIN1 using model systems are needed to glean insights on how BIN1 influences AD progression.

In this study, we explored the relation between BIN1 and Aβ pathology using transgenic models for AD and post-mortem brain samples from patients with AD. Our results describe for the first time an aberrant accumulation of insoluble BIN1 within or near the core of the amyloid deposits in transgenic models of AD. BIN1 accumulated with an amorphous pattern, distinct from dystrophic neurites and white matter projections. BIN1 protein was not detected in astrocytes or microglia cells accumulating at deposit sites, confirming our previous observations (13). Finally, we used super-resolution microscopy and immunogold electron microscopy (immunogold-EM) to precisely define extracellular BIN1 accumulation in a particulate pattern in close spatial proximity to the Aβ fibrils of the deposits. Altogether, our study describes for the first time the accumulation of BIN1 in the form of aggregates near AD-associated amyloid deposits in transgenic models.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Experimental animals

Animals of both sexes were used in the study. 5XFAD mice (43) were maintained in a hybrid background by back-crossing to B6SJLF1/J F1 mice purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). APP/PS1 [line 85] (28), PDAPP (19), and Tg21 (45) transgenic mice were maintained in C57BL/6J background. TgF344-AD rat transgenic model has been described (9). All procedures related to animal care and treatment conformed to the policies of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Chicago.

Sequential detergent fraction

Freshly-harvested hemi-brains from 5-month-old non-transgenic (NTg) and 5XFAD mice were sequentially extracted by homogenizing in PBS and TEN buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 100 mM NaCl) containing 0.5% NP-40, 2% sodium deoxycholate, or 1% SDS as described previously (60). The SDS-insoluble pellet was resuspended in TEN buffer containing 1% SDS.

Immunoblot analysis

Protein samples were resolved on 4–20% SDS-PAGE gels and analyzed by immunoblots using the antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 1. The blots were developed with IR680 anti-rabbit and IR800 anti-mouse secondary antibodies and imaged with the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-COR Biosciences). Quantification was performed using ImageJ software (46).

Immunofluorescence staining

Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation before perfusion with PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde and 4% sucrose. Brains were harvested and post-fixed overnight in the same fixative and then stored at 4°C in PBS containing 30% sucrose. Forty μm-thick coronal sections were cut on a cryostat and processed for free-floating immunofluorescence staining. The sections were subjected to epitope retrieval by incubating for 2 h at 85°C in 10 mM trisodium citrate [pH 6] buffer containing 0.05% Tween-20. Brain sections were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies (Supplementary Table 1) for 48 h at 4°C followed by secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature. The antibodies were diluted in TBS containing 10% donkey serum, 3% BSA, and 0.25% Triton-X100. Nuclei were labeled using Hoechst stain (Molecular Probes) before mounting the sections on slides with Vectashield mounting medium (VectorLabs) for confocal microscopy or Prolong Diamond (Life Technologies) for stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy.

Passive CLARITY and immunofluorescence labeling

The system and reagents for tissue clearing were from Logos Biosystems. 50 μm-thick brain slices were processed following the passive CLARITY technique (33). Briefly, the sections were incubated in the hydrogel solution overnight before polymerization with the X-CLARITY polymerization system. Slices were then washed in PBS before passive clearance for 5 h at 37°C using electrophoretic tissue clearing solution. Cleared sections were incubated with primary and secondary antibodies at 37°C for 72 h and 48 h, respectively. The slices were then mounted in X-CLARITY mounting solution.

Immunohistochemistry

Human post-mortem brain samples from individuals with and without AD were obtained from the University of Chicago autopsy archives and the University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Center biobank (Supplementary Table 2) and processed as described (12). Briefly, 5 μm thick paraffin-embedded brain sections (humans and mice) were rehydrated, treated with antigen retrieval buffer (DAKO, S1609) in a steamer for 20 min, followed by a 5 min incubation with 3% H2O2 and permeabilized with PBST (PBS containing 0.025% Triton-X 100). The sections were blocked with 10% normal rabbit serum in PBST and then sequentially incubated with the indicated primary and secondary antibodies. The antigen-antibody reactions were detected by Envision+ kit (Dako). The nuclei were counterstained using hematoxylin. The slides were scanned using CRi Pannoramic Scan Whole Slide Scanner and analyzed by Pannoramic Viewer (3DHISTECH).

Fluorescence Microscopy and STED image acquisition

Epifluorescence image stacks were acquired on a Nikon TE 2000 microscope using 60X (NA 1.49) objective. The z-stacks were deconvolved using Huygens Professional software (Scientific Volume Imaging). Confocal images were acquired on a Leica SP5 or Leica SP8 microscope using 10X (NA 0.4), 20X (NA 0.75), 40X (NA 1.25), 63X (NA 1.4), and 100X (NA 1.4) objectives. For Supplementary Fig. 2A, nine tiled images were acquired using the 20X objective and automatically stitched using Leica LAS X software. Super-resolution images of BIN1 (BSH3-Alexa555) and Aβ (mAb 3D6-Alexa647) were acquired on a Leica SP8 3D, 3-color gated STED laser scanning confocal microscope. A white light laser was used for excitation of the red and far red dyes [at 561 and 633 nm respectively] and a pulsed 775 nm depletion laser was used to deplete both the dyes. For STED imaging emission was acquired between 567–640 nm for Alexa568 and 638 – 744 nm for Alexa647. The detector time gates were set from 0.5 – 6 ns and 0.7 to 6 ns for the red and far red channels. Single plane images of 1024×1024 pixels were acquired at 8 kHz scan rate with line averaging of 64, using a 100X (1.40) objective with digital zoom factor 5, yielding 23 nm pixels.

Image quantification

Fluorescence intensities were quantified from epifluorescence image stacks acquired on a Nikon TE 2000 microscope using 20X (NA 0.75) objective. Images of Thioflavin S (ThioS) fluorescence were thresholded to generate a binary mask for each image, and individual deposits were defined using integrated morphometry analysis tools in Metamorph 7.5 (Molecular Dynamics). The integrated intensities of ThioS and BIN1 staining were measured for well-segmented deposits to obtain the relative ratio for individual deposits. A similar approach was used to obtain the relative antibody staining intensities of BIN1 as compared with Aβ (mAb 3D6), BACE1, GFAP, and Iba1. The STED images were deconvolved using Huygens Professional using the gated STED module (SVI). The images were analyzed using the built-in particle analysis function in Fiji and color-coded using Matplolib-Inferno look up table (49). The data were plotted using Prism 7.

Pre-embedding immunogold electron microscopy

EM reagents were from Electron Microscopy Sciences (Hatfield, PA) unless otherwise noted. Samples were processed as previously described (15). Briefly, 6-months-old female 5XFAD mice were anesthetized by isoflurane, transcardially perfused with acidic followed by basic fixative (2% paraformaldehyde and 1% glutaraldehyde). 70 μm-thick coronal sections were treated with 1% NaBH4 in TBS for 30 min followed by antigen retrieval with citrate buffer at 90°C for 30 min. Sections were incubated in blocking solution [10% normal goat serum (NGS) in TBS] for 30 min and incubated overnight at 4°C in pAb BSH3 diluted 1:700 in 2% NGS + 0.1% Triton X-100 in TBS. Sections were then incubated in secondary blocking buffer (2% NGS + 1% BSA + 0.3% cold water fish skin gelatin in TBS) for 1 h followed by incubation in Ultra Small Immunogold (Aurion) anti-rabbit secondary antibody at 1:100 in 2% NGS + 1% BSA-C + 0.3% cold water fish skin gelatin for 48 h at 4 °C. Immunogold antibodies were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde in PBS for 1 h and silver enhanced with R-Gent SE-EM Plus enhancement mixture (Aurion) for 90 min. Sections were osmicated in 0.4% OsO4 for 10 min, stained en bloc with 1% aqueous uranyl acetate for 10 min, dehydrated and flat-embedded in Araldite 502. Regions of interest (cortex and CA1 of hippocampus) were dissected and re-embedded in Araldite 502. Blocks were mounted perpendicular to the original plane of sectioning such that depth from the section surface (antibody penetration) was easily discernable. 500-nm-thick histological sections were cut by ultramicrotome and stained with toluidine blue to confirm regions of interest. Serial sections (52 nm thick) were then collected on formvar-coated, nickel slotted grids and counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Images were acquired with a Zeiss Sigma SE-EM in STEM mode with an accelerating voltage of 29 kV at a pixel size of 2 nm.

RESULTS

A fraction of BIN1 becomes insoluble in the brains of transgenic AD mouse models

Previously, it was reported that an accumulation of Aβ in cerebral deposits in APP/PS1 transgenic mice (line 85) is accompanied by the loss of solubility of numerous cytoplasmic proteins (60). We sought to assess whether cerebral amyloid deposition in transgenic mice affects BIN1 solubility. First, we examined proteomic datasets of SDS-insoluble fractions prepared from line 85 and other transgenic mouse models of AD amyloidosis (59). Multiple peptides corresponding to BIN1 were found among the spectra identified by LC-MS/MS analysis in mouse models of AD (Supplementary Table 3). The presence of peptides derived from residues encoded by exon 7 (190LQAHLVAQTNLLR202; amino acid numbering based on NP_033798), the junction of exons 7 and 8 (203NQAEEELIK211), exon 12 (313VNHEPEPASGASPGATIPK331), and exon 13 (338KGPPVPPPPK347) in the SDS-insoluble fractions indicate that multiple BIN1 isoforms, including the brain-enriched BIN1 isoform 1 (BIN1iso1), become insoluble in the brains of mice with amyloid deposition.

To validate the MS data, we analyzed BIN1 solubility by performing biochemical fractionation of brain tissue from the well-characterized 5XFAD Tg model (43). Soluble and insoluble proteins were sequentially extracted from 5-month old 5XFAD mice and NTg littermates using PBS, NP-40, DOC, and SDS and subjected to Western blot analysis. As expected, BIN1 was predominantly recovered in the PBS soluble fractions, with only minor recovery in NP40-soluble and SDS-insoluble fractions (Fig. 1A). Whereas BIN1 levels in total brain homogenates and soluble fractions were similar between NTg and 5XFAD mice, a significant increase in the levels of SDS-insoluble BIN1 was observed in 5XFAD mice as compared with NTg animals (Fig. 1A and B). Although the ®60 kDa BIN1:L ubiquitous isoforms and the ®80 kDa BIN1:H neuronal isoforms were found in the SDS-insoluble fractions of Ntg and 5XFAD mice, BIN1:H isoforms preferentially became insoluble in 5XFAD mice. This finding is consistent with the identification of peptides that are unique to the BIN1:H isoforms by LC-MS/MS analysis (Supplementary Table 3). As previously reported (43), nearly all extractable Aβ in the brains of 5XFAD mice was recovered in the SDS-insoluble fraction (Fig. 1A). Also, as expected from previous studies (22), there was an increase in the levels of SDS-insoluble BACE1 and dynamin (Fig. 1C and D). Unlike BIN1, its paralog Amphiphysin 1 remained soluble in PBS and NP-40, with no difference between NTg and 5XFAD mice (Fig. 1A and D). As controls, we analyzed the levels of synaptophysin (presynaptic protein), PSD-95 (post-synaptic protein), aspartoacylase (ASPA, an oligodendrocyte enzyme enriched in the nucleus and cell body), and CNPase (myelin-associated enzyme). While there were differences in the extent to which these marker proteins were differentially extracted in PBS and detergents, there were no quantitative differences in the levels of these proteins in the SDS-insoluble fractions from 5XFAD mice and NTg mice (Fig. 1A and D). These biochemical data suggest that a subset of the BIN1:H isoform becomes insoluble in the brains of 5XFAD mice and other mouse models of amyloid deposition.

Aberrant localization of BIN1 near amyloid deposits in transgenic models of AD

Cytosolic proteins that undergo secondary misfolding such as dynamin, clathrin heavy chain 1, phosphoglycerate kinase 1, and 14–3-3 protein localize in abundance within amyloid deposits or in adjacent dystrophic neurites (35, 48, 60). To assess whether the localization of BIN1 may be altered in the brain with AD pathology, we performed immunohistochemistry using brain tissue from 5-month-old 5XFAD mice. In serial paraffin brain sections immuno-stained with multiple BIN1 antibodies (rabbit mAb EPR13463, mouse mAb 2F11, and rabbit pAb BSH3; Supplementary Fig. 1), we observed the expected BIN1 staining of oligodendrocytes and white matter tracts. In addition, a striking accumulation of BIN1 that closely resembled the distribution of amyloid deposits [revealed by an antibody against fibrillar Aβ (rabbit pAb M78) or an N-terminal Aβ mAb 3D6] was apparent within the cortex, hippocampal CA fields, and subiculum (Fig. 2). In higher magnification images, granular and/or globular BIN1 immunoreactivity appeared restricted to a discrete, central region of the larger amyloid deposits, which was quite distinct from the strong BACE1 immunoreactivity associated with dystrophic neurites encircling the deposits (Fig. 2, bottom panels).

We performed immunofluorescence imaging using mAb 2F11 and pAb BSH3 to compare BIN1 expression in the brains of 8-month old 5XFAD mice and their NTg littermates. In both NTg and 5XFAD brain, BIN1 staining was strongest within the corpus callosum and other white matter tracts, and along slender processes with short barbed branches in the cortex. In addition, BIN1 staining in the cortex of 5XFAD mice revealed numerous small granular patches in deep cortical layers that coincided with amyloid deposits, visualized by pAb M78 (Fig. 3A). In the subiculum, a region with the highest density of amyloid deposits in this transgenic model, virtually every mAb 3D6-positive deposit was associated with aberrant BIN1 staining (Supplementary Fig. 2). High-resolution confocal imaging revealed that the irregular-shaped edematous BIN1-immunoreactive patches were found within or in juxtaposition to amyloid deposits (Fig. 3B). Quantitative analysis of the number of deposits positive for BIN1 in the cortex using two antibodies (goat pAb N19 and pAb BSH3; Supplementary Fig. 1), which recognize non-overlapping epitopes on all BIN1 isoforms, revealed that the patch-like BIN1 immunostaining present only in 5XFAD brain was associated with more than 90% of amyloid deposits (Fig. 3C; [N19, 90.39 ± 0.78%; BSH3, 92.16 ± 0.66%]). Similar results were obtained using a third antibody, mAb 2F11, which is specific for BIN1 isoforms lacking the exon 7-encoded residues (88.73 ± 1.44%).

The 5XFAD mice display a sharp increase in cerebral Aβ levels coinciding with robust amyloid deposition between 4 and 6 months of age (43). Intracellular amyloid and a few extracellular amyloid deposits developed in deep layers of the cortex as early as 1 month of age, as visualized by staining with antibody M78, which selectively reacts with fibrillar Aβ (Fig. 4A). BIN1 accumulation in amyloid deposits can be observed even at these early (i.e., less dense) deposits (Fig. 4A). Moreover, amyloid deposit associated-BIN1 was also observed at late stages of pathogenesis (13-month-old animals; data not shown). These findings indicate that the association of BIN1 with amyloid deposits is neither a terminal feature of the pathology nor specific for early stages of pathogenesis.

We wanted to exclude the possibility that the epitope retrieval step required for optimal staining of BIN1 in oligodendrocyte and processes could have contributed to non-selective BIN1 staining in and near amyloid deposits. To this end, we optimized the conditions for BIN1 staining of brain tissue processed using passive CLARITY technique, without the need for epitope retrieval (33). In optimally cleared brain sections from a 2-month-old 5XFAD animal, we could visualize BIN1 localization in smaller oligodendrocyte cell bodies and along parallel-oriented processes with short barbed branches (Supplementary Fig. 3A and B). Under these staining conditions, we readily observed BIN1 accumulation in amorphous structures adjacent to Aβ deposits, visualized by mAb 3D6 (Supplementary Fig. 3). In addition to extracellular deposits, intracellular Aβ accumulation in neuronal perikaryal and apical dendrites is apparent at this early stage of pathogenesis in this model (43). However, these intraneuronal Aβ accumulations showed no overlap with BIN1 staining (Supplementary Fig. 3A and B). Interestingly, we also observed lower-intensity BIN1 staining of indeterminate structures that are virtually devoid of Aβ staining (Supplementary Fig. 3C).

To confirm the findings from 5XFAD mice, we performed immunostaining of brain tissue from additional transgenic mouse and rat models of amyloid deposition (29). Aberrant BIN1 accumulation in close proximity to amyloid deposits was confirmed in three transgenic mouse models: PDAPP mice (APPV717F; line 109), APP/PS1 mice (APPSwe/PS1ΔE9; line 85), and Tg21 (APPSwe/PS1L166P) mice (19, 28, 45) (Fig. 4B). Finally, BIN1 immunoreactivity associated with amyloid deposits was also observed in a transgenic rat model of AD (APPSwe/PS1ΔE9; line TgF344-AD) (9) (Fig. 4B). Thus, antibodies raised in three different species against non-overlapping epitopes of BIN1 reveal amyloid deposit-associated BIN1 immunoreactivity in independent transgenic models of AD. To determine whether the BIN1-immunoreactivity associated with amyloid deposits is also present in human AD, we performed immunohistochemistry on serial sections of frontal cortex Brodmann Area 9 in patients with AD. As reported in our previous work (12), staining with independent antibodies displayed a general decrease of punctate BIN1 staining associated with myelinated fibers in the amyloid zone within senile plaques, visualized by mAb 4G8 in adjacent sections. A closer examination revealed patchy and edematous BIN1 immunoreactivity within and tangential to the area occupied by amyloid plaques (Fig. 4C). Despite these abnormalities, BIN1 immunoreactivity does not show an obvious association with senile plaques of individuals with AD, when observed using the available commercial and in-house antibodies.

Characterization of BIN1 localization with amyloid deposits

Dystrophic neurites and neuropil threads in the corona of senile plaques in human AD and in transgenic models accumulate APP, BACE1, ubiquitin, and other proteins (10, 62). To further characterize BIN1 immunoreactivity associated with amyloid deposits, we performed immunofluorescence confocal microscopy analysis of the relative localization of BIN1 in comparison to APP and BACE1. As expected, APP and BACE1 localized to bulbous structures around amyloid deposits in the cortex and hippocampus of 5XFAD mice. However, BIN1 did not localize to these axonal swellings, indicating that BIN1 is not a component of the dystrophic neurites encircling amyloid deposits (Fig. 5A). To confirm the above findings, we performed staining of BIN1 with APP in brain tissue processed using passive CLARITY technique. Whereas APP localized within dystrophic neurites is striking, BIN1 appeared to flocculate in the area enclosed by dystrophic neurites but was not present within the swollen neurites (Supplementary Fig. 4). In addition, we observed BIN1 accumulation in amorphic structures surrounded by APP-positive dystrophic neurites (Supplementary Fig. 3). To further validate the notion that amyloid deposit-associated BIN1 does not represent the accumulation within axonal structures, we performed co-immunofluorescence analysis of BIN1 and its paralog Amphiphysin 1, which is enriched axons and axon terminals (11). Amphiphysin 1 staining appeared punctate, which is consistent with its presynaptic localization, but was absent in the area occupied by amyloid deposits. There was little, if any, co-localization of Amphiphysin 1 with BIN1 that has accumulated near amyloid deposits (Fig. 5A). Furthermore, as reported previously (53), axonal protein phosphor-neurofilament-H staining was apparent in bulb-like swellings and tortuous axons in the area bounding amyloid deposits. However, BIN1 staining showed no overlap with these dystrophic structures containing phospho-neurofilament-H (Fig. 5B).

The presence of an increased number of activated astrocytes and microglia near amyloid deposits is a characteristic neuroinflammatory feature of AD pathology (24). We considered the possibility that deposit-associated BIN1 might represent an elevated BIN1 expression mediated by neuroinflammation during amyloid deposition. To test this hypothesis, we performed confocal microscopy analysis of BIN1 and glial cell markers. In 5-month-old 5XFAD mice, numerous GFAP+ reactive astrocytes were found surrounding the sites of amyloid deposition, visualized by ThioS staining. However, these hypertrophic astrocytes were found negative for BIN1 staining (Fig. 5C). Similarly, numerous Iba1+ reactive microglia, whose processes were modeled to a bushy or phagocytic morphology, were detected near amyloid deposits, visualized by mAb 3D6. In some cases, phagocytic processes emerging from amoeboid microglial cell bodies were found adjacent to BIN1 immunoreactivity near amyloid deposits. Although there was certain coincidental overlap between strong Iba1 staining and punctate BIN1 staining, the microglial cell body as well as their slender processes showed little resemblance to the overall shape of BIN1+ oligodendrocytes or deposit-associated BIN1 (Fig. 5D). The lack of BIN1 staining of Iba1+ microglia was further validated in brain tissue processed using the CLARITY technique and immunostained using mAb 2F11 (Supplementary Fig. 4). Thus, the accrual of BIN1 in deposits does not represent an upregulation of BIN1 expression in microglia or astrocytes, two key players in the inflammatory response in AD pathology.

In the above experiments, we observed that at the sites of cortical amyloid deposition, BIN1 staining appeared to be closer to the core relative to mAb 3D6 staining (Fig. 4A, 5D, Supplementary Fig. 3), and partially overlapped with ThioS staining at the core of the amyloid deposits (Fig. 5). In hippocampal amyloid deposits, BIN1 accumulated morphologically in various shapes from a central dense mass to multiple smaller irregular or circular accretion within mAb 3D6-immunoreactivity (Supplementary Fig. 2). The quantification of ThioS intensity and BIN1 immunoreactivity in individual amyloid deposits revealed a significant correlation between amyloid fibril deposition and adjacent BIN1 accrual (Fig. 5E). Similarly, we observed a positive correlation between amyloid deposit-associated BIN1 intensity with Aβ (mAb 3D6), BACE1, GFAP, and Iba1 immunoreactivity (Supplementary Fig. 5), indicating that the accumulation of BIN1 near amyloid deposits is an unremitting process that develops over time concomitant with amyloid deposition-associated changes.

As noted above, there was a decrease in the density of BIN1-positive fibers in the area immediately around the amyloid deposits in 5XFAD mice and human patients (Fig. 3B and 4C). Staining with independent antibodies revealed that slender BIN1-positive fibers appear to lead towards, but are detached from, the BIN1 accumulation near and within amyloid deposits (Fig. 6A and B). In light of our previous characterization of predominant BIN1 expression in mature oligodendrocytes and myelinated processes (12, 13), we asked whether the deposit-associated BIN1 accumulation represents debris originated from mature oligodendrocytes. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed no overlap of amyloid deposits with ASPA and TPPP25, two oligodendrocyte cell markers (Fig. 6C). Furthermore, whereas there was considerable overlap between BIN1 and MBP in slender myelinated processes, the irregular-shaped BIN1 accumulation near deposits showed no MBP staining (Fig. 6D). However, based on the presence of weak immunostaining for MBP in brain sections processed by CLARITY (and stained without epitope retrieval) we cannot formally rule out the possibility that the deposit-associated BIN1 could have originated from disintegration of oligodendrocyte processes in the vicinity of amyloid deposits (Supplementary Fig. 3).

Super-resolution and immuno-EM analysis of BIN1 accumulation near amyloid deposits

In order to map the localization of BIN1 with high spatial resolution within the context of amyloid deposits, we performed two-color super-resolution microscopy analysis of BIN1 and Aβ immunostaining using stimulated emission depletion (STED) (31). Fig. 7A shows a lower-resolution overview confocal image of the subiculum of 5XFAD brains section stained with mAb 3D6 and BSH3 acquired with a 20X objective. The region indicated by the boxed area was then imaged at higher resolution with a 100X objective to reveal individual amyloid deposits and associated BIN1. A sub-region indicated by an arrow was then imaged using confocal and STED microscopy settings (Fig. 7B). The gain in resolution becomes readily apparent when the confocal and STED images are compared. Several individual dots are discernible within the diffraction-limited structures when the STED and confocal images are overlaid (Supplementary Fig. 5A). The full-width-half-maximum of isolated small fluorescent spots in BIN1 STED images (analyzed by line scan and Lorentzian curve fit) was 33.03 ± 1.28 nm, confirming that we achieved diffraction-unlimited resolution (Supplementary Fig. 5B and C). Particle analysis of BIN1-immunoreactive spots revealed that individual spots were present in sizes ranging in Feret’s diameter (the maximum distance between two points along the perimeter of an individual spot) between 64 – 684 nm [mean size 104.2 ± 0.62 nm]. Moreover, ®45% of BIN1-positive structures were 2585 nm2 or smaller in area (corresponding to 5 or fewer pixels in the STED image), and circular or small rectangular in shape (aspect ratio 1.5–1.6) (Supplementary Fig. 6). The fluorescence intensity of individual spots showed a high positive correlation with the measured area, but their aspect ratio showed little correlation with the measured area (Supplementary Figs. 6C and D). Higher magnification of the pseudo colored STED images corresponding to Aβ and BIN1 immunostaining and an image overlay are depicted in Fig. 7C. The images show speckles of BIN1-positive spots lining Aβ-positive elongated structures, with very little overlap between them. In addition, a greater density of slightly-larger BIN1-positive spots was found in adjacent regions devoid of Aβ staining. These results confirm the accumulation of BIN1 with a high level of granularity in close proximity of Aβ in deposits.

To confirm the STED analysis, we used pre-embedding immunogold-EM to determine BIN1 ultrastructural distribution near Aβ deposits in the cortex and hippocampus of 6-month old female 5XFAD mice using BSH3 antibody. In ultrathin sections, we observed a high density of BIN1 immunogold particles associated with oligodendrocyte perikaryal and processes in the corpus callosum and the alveus (data not shown), confirming BIN1 expression in mature oligodendrocytes (13). Fig. 8 shows EM analysis of an amyloid deposit in cortical layer VI with several swollen dystrophic neurites surrounding the deposit core (middle panel) revealed a number of BIN1 immunogold particles adjacent to the Aβ deposit (Fig. 8A). In higher magnification images, BIN1-positive immunogold particles were found projected in-between and decorating the tips of, but clearly not within, Aβ fibrils (Fig. 8B and D). Notably, the particles in the proximity of amyloid fibrils were neither associated with oligodendrocyte cell body and their processes nor with membranous organelles of defined size or shape. Moreover, the gold particles were not found within dystrophic neurites containing abundant multilaminar bodies. A similar distribution of immunogold labeling of BIN1 adjacent to amyloid fibrils was found in hippocampal deposits in 5XFAD (Fig. 8D) and 3xTG mice (data not shown). BIN1 ultrastructural localization around the amyloid core of the deposits confirms our confocal microscopy analysis of BIN1 accumulation around ThioS-positive Aβ deposits. Altogether, our results from confocal and STED microscopy combined with immunogold-EM localization demonstrate that BIN1 accumulates around Aβ deposits.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we have presented evidence for disease-associated BIN1 protein insolubility and aberrant localization and accumulation adjoining Aβ deposits in independent transgenic models of AD, including 5XFAD, APP/PS1, PDAPP, and TgF344-AD rat model. Abnormal BIN1 localization was also observed in the proximity of senile plaques in brains of patients with AD. On the basis of observations from high-resolution imaging by confocal and STED microscopy, we determined that BIN1 accumulated in amorphous structures near the amyloid core but not within dystrophic neurites encircling Aβ deposits. Finally, ultrastructure of peri-deposit BIN1 in the 5XFAD model showed shapeless aggregation decorating the edges of the amyloid fibrils. These findings suggest that AD-associated pathological changes trigger BIN1 to coacervate near amyloid deposits. Whereas the previously proposed BIN1 function in limiting Aβ production and Tau propagation predict regulation of neuronal endocytic trafficking by BIN1 as the mechanism that elevates the risk for LOAD (40, 54), our study highlights a perturbation of BIN1 compartmentalization in the proximity of pathogenic lesions containing Aβ.

Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by an accumulation of insoluble proteins over time. Proteomic approaches have characterized changes in protein solubility in brains of humans with AD or animal models of AD pathogenesis (22, 57, 60), and identified several functional classes of proteins that accumulate in the proximity of senile plaques in the human AD (23, 35). Along with Aβ, a set of proteins including APOE, APOJ/Clusterin, complement proteins, α1-antichymotrypsin, histone H1, and amylin are deposited in senile plaques (16, 27, 55). In addition to extracellular protein accumulation, numerous proteins including BACE1, APP, synaptophysin, LAMP1, cathepsin D, progranulin, Rag-C GTPase, kinesin heavy chain, and Dynamitin aberrantly accumulate in neuronal dystrophies surrounding deposits in an age-dependent manner (21, 48). Except for the proximity to presumably growing edges of amyloid fibrils, we found no association of BIN1 immunogold particles with any identifiable cellular structure or membranous organelle. The immunogold-EM data along with the high granularity appearance of BIN1 as observed by STED microscopy lead us to infer that the peri-deposit BIN1 might represent pathology-associated extracellular accumulation.

The identification of several exon-specific BIN1 peptides by proteomics analysis combined with immunoblot analysis indicates that multiple BIN1 isoforms, including the brain-specific isoform 1, become insoluble in mouse models of AD amyloidosis. Antibodies raised against non-overlapping epitopes within the N-terminal BAR domain (N-19, 2F11, 13679) and the C-terminal SH3 domain (BSH3 and 13463) reacted with deposit-associated BIN1. These findings and the lack of breakdown products of BIN1 in SDS-insoluble brain fractions provide evidence that it is full-length BIN1 molecules, and not some cleavage product, accumulate with Aβ in deposits. Consistent with the data reported by Gowrishankar et al (21), we were also unable to visualize peri-deposit BIN1 accumulation in 5XFAD brain stained with mAb 99D using free floating immunohistochemistry. Nevertheless, this antibody, raised against the Myc-binding domain, works well to detect human BIN1 (13) as well as mouse BIN1 in brains processed by paraffin-embedding (not shown). Thus, the previously reported lack of BIN1 staining near amyloid deposits in the 5XDFAD model (21) likely reflects a loss of the epitope due to the sample processing needed to achieve optimal staining. In this regard, BIN1 immunostaining near and within amyloid deposits appears robust in brain sections cleared by the CLARITY method.

Although the reported roles for BIN1 in BACE1 endocytic trafficking and Aβ production (40, 54) predict BIN1 might accumulate in dystrophic neurites, our data from confocal microscopy and immunoEM analysis demonstrate that amyloid deposit-associated BIN1 is spatially separated from dystrophic neurites containing BACE1 and APP. Nevertheless, the positive correlation we observe between BIN1 and ThioS or mAb 3D6 staining intensity suggests a close relationship between amyloid deposition and aberrant BIN1 accrual. If the absence of BIN1 in dystrophic neurites suggests that the deposit-associated BIN1 did not originate from the same subcellular compartment, what then is the cellular origin of this BIN1? BIN1 accumulating in the proximity of Aβ deposits could be stained with mAb 2F11, which is specific for BIN1 isoforms lacking the exon7-encoded residues. In the human and rodent brain, mAb 2F11 prominently immuno-stains mature oligodendrocytes and their processes and the white matter and reacts on immunoblots with multiple low-molecular-weight BIN1 isoforms that are more abundant in the white matter in comparison to the gray matter (13). These results indicate that at least a subset of the Aβ deposit-associated BIN1 originates from dying oligodendrocytes or degenerated oligodendrocyte processes which may have detached from dystrophic neurites surrounding the deposits.

White matter atrophy, the attrition of myelination, a reduction in myelin-specific proteins, and focal demyelination have been well documented in the human AD (5, 39, 47). There is a diminution as well as an abnormal appearance of myelin basic protein staining in the vicinity of amyloid deposits in the 5XFAD brain. This finding is in agreement with previously reported demyelination, defragmentation, and edematous swellings of myelinated fibers reported in the 3xTg-AD, Tg2576, and APP/PS1 mouse models of amyloidosis (14, 39, 50). In addition to MBP, the pernicious influence of Aβ deposition in plaques led to the loss of TPPP25 and ASPA (this study) as well as myelin oligomeric protein MOG (3) in the immediate area surrounding the deposits, consistent with degenerating and decomposing myelin tracts. Thus, the accumulation of BIN1 near amyloid deposits appears to be selective among the proteins expressed by mature oligodendrocytes. Our findings reveal some differences patterns of deposit-associated BIN1 accumulation in the five animal models. Despite similar amyloid deposit characteristics (i.e., congophilic, neuritic, amyloid deposits with a compact core), these models differ in the onset of amyloid deposition and the extent of neuronal loss. Whereas the deposits begin to appear as early as 1–2 month in the 5XFAD and Tg21 models (43), the earliest deposits in the PDAPP and APP/PS1 mice appear only after 6 months of age (19, 28). Similarly, in the rat model only occasional deposits are observed at 6 months of age and profuse deposition is documented at 15 months of age (9). Thus, it is plausible that the onset of the high Aβ concentration needed to initiate amyloid deposition within the animal’s lifespan and the morphology of the amyloid deposit itself influences how BIN1 accumulates near the deposits.

In comparison to BIN1 accumulation near Aβ deposits in rodent models of AD, a somewhat different pattern of BIN1 staining, characterized by the presence of fragmented edematous BIN1-positive punctate structures but not frank accumulation, was observed near senile plaques in the brains of patients with AD. This differential accumulation between the mouse model and human could be the result of non-exclusive independent processes. First, the intensity and efficiency of the inflammatory response between human AD and mouse models could lead to disparate outcomes in the levels of extracellular BIN1 in the proximity of Aβ deposits (7, 41, 51). In comparison to the slower process of senile plaque formation [which occurs over decades], amyloid deposition occurs rapidly in mouse models of AD [in just several weeks (43)]. The temporal difference could account for an optimal inflammatory response in the human AD, which localizes microglia and astrocytes to senile plaques, to efficiently eliminate the accumulation of aggregated proteins without getting overburdened. Second, it is conceivable that the BIN1 enrichment in the mouse models is related to the rapid degeneration of glial cells near amyloid deposits whereas in the human cases such a precipitous glial cell degeneration near senile plaques is not present. Third, mouse models of AD amyloidosis do not recapitulate the entire process of human brain senile plaque formation and the same degree of neurodegeneration (29), which could result in differential accumulation or the retention of pathology-associated proteins near the deposits over time. For example, potential differences could exist in the mouse versus human brain in how efficiently extracellular BIN1 could be cleared from the brain via the glymphatic system, which has been recently recognized as a major efflux pathway for Aβ peptides in the human brain (56). Finally, our immuno-EM analysis suggests the possibility that BIN1 immunogold particles could be present within neuronal intracytoplasmic compartment surrounding amyloid deposits, which has been extensively characterized by EM analysis of deposits in the PDAPP model (37). In comparison to the rodent brain, the human brain gray matter [from individuals without AD] has lower levels of neuronal BIN1 isoforms (Supplementary Fig. 9), which is further reduced in individuals with LOAD (13). Thus, the reduced BIN1 immunostaining near the deposits in the human AD might be related to a paucity of neuronal BIN1 isoform expression in humans and the apparent AD-associated decrease in BIN1:H isoform resulting from profound neuronal loss in the gray matter despite readily-detectable levels of BIN1 in the soma of a subset of neurons in AD cases (13, 20, 25). A more detailed analysis of BIN1 expression and localization during the progression of AD in a large number of cases would be needed to experimentally test the above possibilities.

Our findings on the accrual of BIN1 near the vast majority of amyloid deposits may have implications for understanding the role of BIN1 as a risk factor in AD. Notably, BIN1 accumulation near the deposits commenced in transgenic mice as young as 1-month of age (a stage with only a few deposits) and persisted in older mice at 8-month of age (Fig. 4A and3A, respectively). Thus, the aberrant accumulation is not a stage-specific event in the context of pathogenesis in AD. Elucidating the mechanisms by which BIN1 becomes insoluble and accumulates near amyloid deposits, as well as determining what if any role these BIN1 deposits have in AD pathogenesis, will be a focus of our future investigation.

Supplementary Material

Figure S1 Figure S1. Schematic representation of BIN1 structural domains. The epitopes of the various BIN1 antibodies used in this study are shown. The exons are indicated by numbered boxes, and alternative splicing events are marked. BAR, BIN1/Amphiphysin1/Rvs167 domain; CLAP, Clathrin/Adaptor Protein 2-binding domain; MBP, Myc-binding domain; PI, phosphoinositide-binding domain; SH3, Src homology 3 domain.

Supplemental Table 1

Supplemental Table 2

Supplemental Table 3

Figure S2 Figure S2. BIN1 accumulates in the almost all deposits in the subiculum of 5XFAD mice. (A) Representative image of the subiculum of a 4-month-old 5XFAD mouse was generated by acquiring nine tiled images using 20X objective and automatically stitched using Leica LAS X software. The image shows a high density of Aβ deposits (3D6; magenta) with associated BIN1 accumulation (BSH3; green). CC, corpus callosum; DG, dentate gyrus; Dhc, dorsal hippocampus; Sub, subiculum. (B) ALLEN Brain Atlas schematic map and reference data for Calbindin (green), MBP (red) and Hoechst (blue) staining of the region depicted in panel A.

Figure S3 Figure S3. BIN1 accumulation near extracellular but not intracellular Aβ in the deposits visualized in tissue cleared by CLARITY. (A) 2-month-old 5XFAD mouse brain slices processed with passive CLARITY method were analyzed by immunofluorescence staining to visualize Aβ (3D6), BIN1 (13463) and MBP in the cortex. Arrowheads are underlying a degenerative neuron laden with intracellular Aβ. (B) The image overlay reveals the accumulation of BIN1 (green) adjacent to the Aβ deposit (magenta) but its conspicuous absence within the degenerative neuron (arrowheads). Asterisks indicate BIN1 in oligodendrocyte soma. (C) Two-color overlay of the boxed region in panel B. Note the high-level BIN1 accumulation adjacent to the core of the Aβ deposit (indicated by a white arrow); in comparison, MBP accumulation is at a lower level. The yellow arrowhead indicates the aberrant accumulation of BIN1 before overt Aβ deposition (absence of Aβ staining in magenta) and normal expression of BIN1 in a nearby oligodendrocyte (asterisk).

Figure S4 Figure S4. Clarity imaging confirms the absence of BIN1 in microglia and dystrophic neurites. The images show BIN1, APP, and Iba1 immunostaining in the striatum of 2-month-old 5XFAD brain tissue processed with passive CLARITY method followed. The boxed region in the overlay image is shown at higher magnification at the bottom. BIN1 (green) accumulates near at the core of an amyloid deposit (white arrow) but is absent from intricate microglial processes (Iba1; magenta) and dystrophic neurites (APP staining; blue) surrounding the deposit. In addition, BIN1 was not observed in homeostatic microglia (magenta; yellow arrowhead) or neurons (APP staining in blue; white arrowheads). Asterisks indicate BIN1 staining in oligodendrocyte soma. The partial overlap between BIN1 Iba1 staining appears to be coincidental because the shapes of the individual BIN1 and Iba1 staining are distinct.

Figure S5 Figure S5. BIN1 accumulation in deposits correlates with glial activation and neuronal dystrophy. The scatter plots represent BIN1 staining intensity plotted against Aβ (3D6), BACE1, Iba1, or GFAP intensity in individual amyloid deposits (Aβ, n = 380; BACE1, n = 382; Iba1, n = 680; GFAP, n = 739 deposits from 12 animals at 4-months-old). Immunofluorescence intensity of peri-deposit BIN1 correlates with amyloid deposition, the extent of axonal dystrophy (BACE1), and the accumulation of glial cells at deposit sites.

Figure S6 Figure S6. Super-resolution imaging of BIN1 localization by STED microscopy. (A) Combined diffraction-limited confocal image (red) and subdiffraction-resolution STED image (white) depicts the gain of resolution achieved by STED imaging mode. (B) Illustration of spot analysis performed on STED images using line scans across the smallest spots. (C) Lorentzian curve fit for normalized intensities of BIN1 immunofluorescence spots quantified by line scan analysis. The profile of individual BIN1 fluorescence spots has a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of 33 nm.

Figure S7 Figure S7 Particle analysis around the deposits using STED based imaging. A) A larger area of the STED image of BIN1 accumulation near Aβ deposit depicted in Fig. 7B. (B) Frequency histogram shows a broad size distribution of BIN1-immunoreactive spots adjacent to Aβ deposits. (C) Scatter plot analysis of individual BIN1 immunofluorescence spot intensity with the measured area shows a strong correlation. (D) Scatter plot analysis indicates that BIN1-immunoreactive particles aspect ratio is not correlated with the measured area. Overall, these results suggest BIN1 particles are mainly amorphous, scattered, and tiny.

Figure S8 Figure S8. BIN1 localization in various areas of the brain explored by immunogold-EM. (A) Higher magnification of a subregion of the cortical amyloid deposit depicted in Fig. 8A. BIN1 immunogold particles are not found within the amyloid core (AC) or dystrophic neurites (DN, blue outline). (B) Micrographs of cortical deposits at higher magnification with BIN1 immunogold reactivity decorating the edges of amyloid structures. (C) A larger area micrograph of a hippocampal deposit depicted in Fig. 8D.

Figure S9 Figure S9. A comparison of BIN1 isoform in human and rodent brain. The levels of BIN1 n post-mortem grey matter and white matter samples from normal aged individual was analyzed by immunoblotting along with cortex and corpus callosum samples of rat and mouse. A representative blot probed with BSH3 and 13463 antibodies is shown. Note the weak expression of ® 75kDa neuronal BIN1 isoforms [BIN1:H] and higher levels of BIN1:L isoforms. In comparison, rodent brain samples display strong BIN:H bands suggesting higher levels of neuronal BIN1 expression in mouse and rat brain.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the Histology Core Facility at the University of Chicago Human Tissue Resource Center for immunohistochemistry of human and mouse brain tissue. We thank Dr. Peter Pytel (University of Chicago) and University of Kentucky AD Center Neuropathology Core for providing the human brain specimens. Tg21 brain sections were kindly provided by Dr. Sangram Sisodia. We thank Dr. Charles Glabe for providing the M78 antibody and Dr. Jasvinder Atwal (Genentech) for providing anti-BACE1 human IgG. 3D6 antibody was generously provided by late Dr. Dale Schenk. We thank Dr. Dietmar R. Thal for comments on the manuscript.

FUNDING

This study was supported by Cure Alzheimer’s Fund (GT), National Multiple Sclerosis Society (GT), Alzheimer’s Association (PDR and FD), American Stroke Association (FD), and National Institutes of Health grants AG019070 (GT) and AG056061 (GT and DAN), AG053999 (FD) and AG057290 (FD and GT). PDR and VPB were supported by postdoctoral fellowships from the BrightFocus Foundation. RJA was supported by an AD Research fellowship from the Illinois Department of Public Health. Confocal imaging was performed at the Integrated Microscopy Core Facility at the University of Chicago (supported by S10OD010649). The use of University of Chicago’s Core Facilities was partially supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences Award 5 UL1 TR 000430–09.

Figure 1. BIN1 becomes insoluble in the 5XFAD mouse model of AD.

(A) Brains from 5-month-old 5XFAD mice and NTg littermates were subjected to sequential extraction using PBS, NP-40, sodium deoxycholate (DOC), and SDS and fractions were analyzed by immunoblots. (B) Quantification of ®80 kDa BIN1 isoforms (BIN1:H) extracted in each fraction as a percentage of total BIN1:H. A non-specific immunoreactive species found in the input and NP-40 soluble fraction is indicated by an asterisk. (C and D) Levels of BIN1:H, BACE1, and dynamin in SDS-insoluble fractions of NTg and 5XFAD brain homogenates were quantified by immunoblot analysis (n = 5 NTg, 6 5XFAD for BIN1:H and dynamin, n = 3 for BACE1). (E) Quantification of the proportion of Synaptophysin (SYP), Amphiphysin 1 (Amph1), PSD95, ASPA, and CNPase extracted in each fraction for NTg or 5XFAD mice (n = 3 NTg, 3 5XFAD). *P &lt; 0.05, **P &lt; 0.01, ***P &lt; 0.001.

Figure 2. Aberrant BIN1 immunoreactivity near amyloid deposits in 5XFAD mice.

Brains from 4-month-old 5XFAD mice were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Lower magnification (10X) images of the hippocampal layers are shown on the top and higher magnification (40X) images taken from the cortex are shown at the bottom. Aberrant patchy staining, resembling the distribution of amyloid deposits, is observed in serial sections stained with three BIN1 antibodies (13463, 2F11, BSH3). Adjacent sections were stained with antibodies against fibrillar Aβ (fAβ; M78), Aβ (3D6), and BACE1 to visualize amyloid deposits and dystrophic neurites. The entorhinal cortex (EC) and hippocampal CA1 and CA3 layers are indicated.

Figure 3. BIN1 accumulates in nearly all amyloid deposits in the 5XFAD mouse model.

(A) Representative images of BIN1 (2F11; green) and fAβ (M78; magenta) immunolabeling in the cortex of 8-months-old NTg and 5XFAD mice. (B) Representative high-magnification image (63X) reveals irregular staining and patchy BIN1 accumulation in proximity to amyloid deposits in addition to immunolabeling along the myelinated processes with short barbed branches. (C) Quantification of the percentage of BIN1-positive deposits in the cortex of 5-months-old 5XFAD mice stained with three BIN1 antibodies (n = 6 mice, 756 deposits for 2F11, n = 2 mice, 320 deposits for BSH3, n = 6 mice, 778 deposits for N-19). CC, corpus callosum.

Figure 4: BIN1 accumulates in amyloid deposits at early stages of pathogenesis and in multiple models of amyloidosis.

(A) Immunofluorescence staining for fAβ (M78; Blue) or Aβ (3D6; red) and BIN1 (N-19, green) in the cortex of a 1-month-old 5XFAD mouse. Strong BIN1 immunofluorescence is apparent within amyloid deposits (white arrows) and in oligodendrocytes (yellow asterisks). (B) Representative images (deconvolved projection of z-stacks) of BIN1 (BSH3; green) accumulation near Aβ deposits (3D6 or ThioflavinS, red) in three transgenic mouse models (9-months-old PDAPP, 9-months-old APP/PS1, and 6-months-old Tg21), and 18-months-old TgF344-AD rat model of amyloid deposition. (C) Representative immunohistochemical staining of Aβ (4G8) and BIN1 (2F11 and BSH3) in the cortex of human patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Alignment of serial sections shows BIN1 aberrant localization in proximity to amyloid deposits (yellow arrows).

Figure 5. BIN1 accumulates with an amorphous profile distinct from dystrophic neurites and glial cells.

(A) Representative images of spatial separation of BIN1 immunofluorescence (green) from dystrophic neurites (white arrows) containing APP and BACE1, and from presynaptic Amph1 labeling (magenta) in 4-months-old 5XFAD mice. Strong BIN1 immunofluorescence is observed in proximity to the area of the ThioS-positive amyloid core (T; demarcated by a white outline but the staining is not shown for simplicity). (B) pNF-H (magenta) immunofluorescence observed in axons and bulbous swellings (white arrows) near ThioS stained amyloid deposits (indicated by T) shows no overlap with BIN1 staining (green). (C, D) GFAP and Iba1 immunofluorescence (magenta; white arrows) observed at sites of Aβ deposition, visualized by ThioS staining or Aβ antibody 3D6 (blue), show only coincidental overlap with BIN1 staining (green; white outline). Astrocyte processes are marked by arrowheads. (E) Representative images of BIN1 accumulation (hot green, intensity coded) and ThioS staining (hot blue, intensity coded) in the cortex of 4-months-old 5XFAD mice. Quantification of the correlation between ThioS staining and BIN1 immunofluorescence intensity (n = 12 mice, 739 deposits, R2 = 0.7526). White asterisks in panels A-D indicate BIN1 staining of oligodendrocyte soma.

Figure 6. Peri-deposit, BIN1 positive fibers extend into amyloid deposits but are distinct from oligodendrocyte cell markers.

(A) Immunofluorescence staining of BIN1 (BSH3 top panels and 2F11 bottom panels; green) in the 5-months-old 5XFAD cortex shows BIN1-positive fibers (arrows) adjacent to the core accumulation (asterisks), within Aβ deposits (3D6 top panels and M78 bottom panels; red). (B) The BIN1-positive fibers (arrows) observed by immunostaining with an antibody specific for BIN1-exon7 isoforms (2F11; green) within the area of fibrillar Aβ deposits (M78; red). (C) Representative images show cellular staining of oligodendrocyte markers ASPA or TPPP25 (green; nuclei visualized by Hoechst labeling) and the lack of their accumulation of near Aβ deposits (3D6; red). (D) A representative image shows partial overlap between BIN1-positive fibers and MBP staining (magenta). Note the lack of overlap between MBP staining and deposit-associated BIN1 (asterisks) and an absence of MBP accumulation near Aβ deposits (3D6; red). Three-color overlays (a combination of two antibodies and Hoechst staining of nuclei) are shown for comparison.

Figure 7. Super-resolution microscopy resolution of BIN1 accumulation as distinct puncta adjacent to amyloid fibrils.

(A) Representative confocal images of 4-months-old 5XFAD mouse subiculum (Sub) show BIN1 (BSH3; green) accumulation in almost all Aβ deposits (3D6; magenta). The boxed region in the left panel (20X magnification) is shown at higher magnification (100X) in the right panel. (B) The boxed region indicated by an arrow (right panel) was imaged at diffraction-limited resolution by confocal microscopy (top panels) and diffraction-unlimited super-resolution by STED microscopy (bottom panels). Note the marked increase in resolution by STED imaging and the elimination of out of focus blur artifact caused by high laser intensity. (C) Higher magnification of the boxed region of the subdiffraction image in panel B shows the close juxtaposition of Aβ and BIN1 immunofluorescence. CC, corpus callosum.

Figure 8: Ultrastructural localization of BIN1 in amyloid deposits in the 6-months-old 5XFAD model.

(A) Low magnification micrograph of ultrathin (52 nm) section with an amyloid deposit located in layer VI of the cortex near corpus callosum (CC). View of the amyloid core (A; red mask) with unmyelinated dystrophic neurites (DN; blue masks). Around the deposit, the core-fibers were decorated with gold particles (BSH3 immunostaining of BIN1) and apparent lack of immunogold reactivity in the dystrophic neurites. (B) Representative micrograph from serially stained sections of a cortical deposit imaged at higher magnification shows numerous immunogold particles surrounding the “hairs” of the amyloid core. (C) Higher magnification confirmed the absence of BIN1 immunogold particles within dystrophic neurites. (D) Representative higher magnification image revealing the presence of BIN1 adjacent to amyloid fibrils in a hippocampal deposit.


REFERENCES

1. Adams SL , Tilton K , Kozubek JA , Seshadri S , Delalle I (2016) Subcellular Changes in Bridging Integrator 1 Protein Expression in the Cerebral Cortex During the Progression of Alzheimer Disease Pathology. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 75 (8 ):779–90.27346750
2. Bali J , Gheinani AH , Zurbriggen S , Rajendran L (2012) Role of genes linked to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease risk in the production of beta-amyloid peptides. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 109 (38 ):15307–11.22949636
3. Behrendt G , Baer K , Buffo A , Curtis MA , Faull RL , Rees MI , (2013) Dynamic changes in myelin aberrations and oligodendrocyte generation in chronic amyloidosis in mice and men. Glia. 61 (2 ):273–86.23090919
4. Bennett ML , Bennett FC , Liddelow SA , Ajami B , Zamanian JL , Fernhoff NB , (2016) New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human CNS. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 113 (12 ):E1738–46.26884166
5. Braak H , Braak E (1996) Development of Alzheimer-related neurofibrillary changes in the neocortex inversely recapitulates cortical myelogenesis. Acta Neuropathol. 92 (2 ):197–201.8841666
6. Calafate S , Flavin W , Verstreken P , Moechars D (2016) Loss of Bin1 Promotes the Propagation of Tau Pathology. Cell Rep. 17 (4 ):931–40.27760323
7. Castillo E , Leon J , Mazzei G , Abolhassani N , Haruyama N , Saito T , (2017) Comparative profiling of cortical gene expression in Alzheimer’s disease patients and mouse models demonstrates a link between amyloidosis and neuroinflammation. Sci Rep. 7 (1 ):17762.29259249
8. Chapuis J , Hansmannel F , Gistelinck M , Mounier A , Van Cauwenberghe C , Kolen KV , (2013) Increased expression of BIN1 mediates Alzheimer genetic risk by modulating tau pathology. Mol Psychiatry. 18 (11 ):1225–34.23399914
9. Cohen RM , Rezai-Zadeh K , Weitz TM , Rentsendorj A , Gate D , Spivak I , (2013) A transgenic Alzheimer rat with plaques, tau pathology, behavioral impairment, oligomeric abeta, and frank neuronal loss. J Neurosci. 33 (15 ):6245–56.23575824
10. Cras P , Kawai M , Lowery D , Gonzalez-DeWhitt P , Greenberg B , Perry G (1991) Senile plaque neurites in Alzheimer disease accumulate amyloid precursor protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 88 (17 ):7552–6.1652752
11. David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , de Camilli P (1996) A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 93 (1 ):331–5.8552632
12. De Rossi P , Buggia-Prevot V , Andrew RJ , Krause SV , Woo E , Nelson PT , (2017) BIN1 localization is distinct from Tau tangles in Alzheimer’s disease. Matters (Zur). 2017.
13. De Rossi P , Buggia-Prevot V , Clayton BL , Vasquez JB , van Sanford C , Andrew RJ , (2016) Predominant expression of Alzheimer’s disease-associated BIN1 in mature oligodendrocytes and localization to white matter tracts. Mol Neurodegener. 11 (1 ):59.27488240
14. Desai MK , Sudol KL , Janelsins MC , Mastrangelo MA , Frazer ME , Bowers WJ (2009) Triple-transgenic Alzheimer’s disease mice exhibit region-specific abnormalities in brain myelination patterns prior to appearance of amyloid and tau pathology. Glia. 57 (1 ):54–65.18661556
15. Dougherty KA , Nicholson DA , Diaz L , Buss EW , Neuman KM , Chetkovich DM , (2013) Differential expression of HCN subunits alters voltage-dependent gating of h-channels in CA1 pyramidal neurons from dorsal and ventral hippocampus. J Neurophysiol. 109 (7 ):1940–53.23324324
16. Duce JA , Smith DP , Blake RE , Crouch PJ , Li QX , Masters CL , (2006) Linker histone H1 binds to disease associated amyloid-like fibrils. J Mol Biol. 361 (3 ):493–505.16854430
17. Dugas M , Weninger F , Merk S , Kohlmann A , Haferlach T (2006) A generic concept for large-scale microarray analysis dedicated to medical diagnostics. Methods Inf Med. 45 (2 ):146–52.16538279
18. Efthymiou AG , Goate AM (2017) Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol Neurodegener. 12 (1 ):43.28549481
19. Games D , Adams D , Alessandrini R , Barbour R , Berthelette P , Blackwell C , (1995) Alzheimer-type neuropathology in transgenic mice overexpressing V717F beta-amyloid precursor protein. Nature. 373 (6514 ):523–7.7845465
20. Glennon EB , Whitehouse IJ , Miners JS , Kehoe PG , Love S , Kellett KA , (2013) BIN1 is decreased in sporadic but not familial Alzheimer’s disease or in aging. PLoS One. 8 (10 ):e78806.24205320
21. Gowrishankar S , Yuan P , Wu Y , Schrag M , Paradise S , Grutzendler J , (2015) Massive accumulation of luminal protease-deficient axonal lysosomes at Alzheimer’s disease amyloid plaques. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 112 (28 ):E3699–708.26124111
22. Gozal YM , Duong DM , Gearing M , Cheng D , Hanfelt JJ , Funderburk C , (2009) Proteomics analysis reveals novel components in the detergent-insoluble subproteome in Alzheimer’s disease. J Proteome Res. 8 (11 ):5069–79.19746990
23. Hales CM , Dammer EB , Deng Q , Duong DM , Gearing M , Troncoso JC , (2016) Changes in the detergent-insoluble brain proteome linked to amyloid and tau in Alzheimer’s Disease progression. Proteomics. 16 (23 ):3042–53.27718298
24. Heneka MT , Carson MJ , El Khoury J , Landreth GE , Brosseron F , Feinstein DL , (2015) Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 14 (4 ):388–405.25792098
25. Holler CJ , Davis PR , Beckett TL , Platt TL , Webb RL , Head E , (2014) Bridging integrator 1 (BIN1) protein expression increases in the Alzheimer’s disease brain and correlates with neurofibrillary tangle pathology. J Alzheimers Dis. 42 (4 ):1221–7.25024306
26. Ishii A , Dutta R , Wark GM , Hwang SI , Han DK , Trapp BD , (2009) Human myelin proteome and comparative analysis with mouse myelin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 106 (34 ):14605–10.19706548
27. Jackson K , Barisone GA , Diaz E , Jin LW , DeCarli C , Despa F (2013) Amylin deposition in the brain: A second amyloid in Alzheimer disease? Ann Neurol. 74 (4 ):517–26.23794448
28. Jankowsky JL , Fadale DJ , Anderson J , Xu GM , Gonzales V , Jenkins NA , (2004) Mutant presenilins specifically elevate the levels of the 42 residue beta-amyloid peptide in vivo: evidence for augmentation of a 42-specific gamma secretase. Hum Mol Genet. 13 (2 ):159–70.14645205
29. Jankowsky JL , Zheng H (2017) Practical considerations for choosing a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurodegener. 12 (1 ):89.29273078
30. Karch CM , Jeng AT , Nowotny P , Cady J , Cruchaga C , Goate AM (2012) Expression of novel Alzheimer’s disease risk genes in control and Alzheimer’s disease brains. PLoS One. 7 (11 ):e50976.23226438
31. Klar TA , Jakobs S , Dyba M , Egner A , Hell SW (2000) Fluorescence microscopy with diffraction resolution barrier broken by stimulated emission. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 97 (15 ):8206–10.10899992
32. Lanke V , Moolamalla STR , Roy D , Vinod PK (2018) Integrative Analysis of Hippocampus Gene Expression Profiles Identifies Network Alterations in Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 10 :153.29875655
33. Lee E , Choi J , Jo Y , Kim JY , Jang YJ , Lee HM , (2016) ACT-PRESTO: Rapid and consistent tissue clearing and labeling method for 3-dimensional (3D) imaging. Sci Rep. 6 :18631.26750588
34. Lee JH , Cheng R , Barral S , Reitz C , Medrano M , Lantigua R , (2011) Identification of novel loci for Alzheimer disease and replication of CLU, PICALM, and BIN1 in Caribbean Hispanic individuals. Arch Neurol. 68 (3 ):320–8.21059989
35. Liao L , Cheng D , Wang J , Duong DM , Losik TG , Gearing M , (2004) Proteomic characterization of postmortem amyloid plaques isolated by laser capture microdissection. J Biol Chem. 279 (35 ):37061–8.15220353
36. Martiskainen H , Viswanathan J , Nykanen NP , Kurki M , Helisalmi S , Natunen T , (2015) Transcriptomics and mechanistic elucidation of Alzheimer’s disease risk genes in the brain and in vitro models. Neurobiol Aging. 36 (2 ):1221 e15–28.
37. Masliah E , Sisk A , Mallory M , Mucke L , Schenk D , Games D (1996) Comparison of neurodegenerative pathology in transgenic mice overexpressing V717F beta-amyloid precursor protein and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci. 16 (18 ):5795–811.8795633
38. McKenzie AT , Moyon S , Wang M , Katsyv I , Song WM , Zhou X , (2017) Multiscale network modeling of oligodendrocytes reveals molecular components of myelin dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurodegener. 12 (1 ):82.29110684
39. Mitew S , Kirkcaldie MT , Halliday GM , Shepherd CE , Vickers JC , Dickson TC (2010) Focal demyelination in Alzheimer’s disease and transgenic mouse models. Acta Neuropathol. 119 (5 ):567–77.20198482
40. Miyagawa T , Ebinuma I , Morohashi Y , Hori Y , Young Chang M , Hattori H , (2016) BIN1 regulates BACE1 intracellular trafficking and amyloid-beta production. Hum Mol Genet. 25 (14 ):2948–58.27179792
41. Morrissette DA , Parachikova A , Green KN , LaFerla FM (2009) Relevance of transgenic mouse models to human Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem. 284 (10 ):6033–7.18948253
42. Naj AC , Jun G , Beecham GW , Wang LS , Vardarajan BN , Buros J , (2011) Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet. 43 (5 ):436–41.21460841
43. Oakley H , Cole SL , Logan S , Maus E , Shao P , Craft J , (2006) Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations: potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. J Neurosci. 26 (40 ):10129–40.17021169
44. Prokic I , Cowling BS , Laporte J (2014) Amphiphysin 2 (BIN1) in physiology and diseases. J Mol Med (Berl). 92 (5 ):453–63.24590001
45. Radde R , Bolmont T , Kaeser SA , Coomaraswamy J , Lindau D , Stoltze L , (2006) Abeta42-driven cerebral amyloidosis in transgenic mice reveals early and robust pathology. EMBO Rep. 7 (9 ):940–6.16906128
46. Rasband WS (1997–2015) ImageJ. U. S. National Institutes of Health: Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
47. Roher AE , Weiss N , Kokjohn TA , Kuo YM , Kalback W , Anthony J , (2002) Increased A beta peptides and reduced cholesterol and myelin proteins characterize white matter degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Biochemistry. 41 (37 ):11080–90.12220172
48. Sadleir KR , Kandalepas PC , Buggia-Prevot V , Nicholson DA , Thinakaran G , Vassar R (2016) Presynaptic dystrophic neurites surrounding amyloid plaques are sites of microtubule disruption, BACE1 elevation, and increased Abeta generation in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 132 (2 ):235–56.26993139
49. Schindelin J , Arganda-Carreras I , Frise E , Kaynig V , Longair M , Pietzsch T , (2012) Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat Methods. 9 (7 ):676–82.22743772
50. Schmued LC , Raymick J , Paule MG , Dumas M , Sarkar S (2013) Characterization of myelin pathology in the hippocampal complex of a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer Res. 10 (1 ):30–7.23157338
51. Seok J , Warren HS , Cuenca AG , Mindrinos MN , Baker HV , Xu W , (2013) Genomic responses in mouse models poorly mimic human inflammatory diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 110 (9 ):3507–12.23401516
52. Seshadri S , Fitzpatrick AL , Ikram MA , DeStefano AL , Gudnason V , Boada M , (2010) Genome-wide analysis of genetic loci associated with Alzheimer disease. JAMA. 303 (18 ):1832–40.20460622
53. Su JH , Cummings BJ , Cotman CW (1996) Plaque biogenesis in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease. I. Progressive changes in phosphorylation states of paired helical filaments and neurofilaments. Brain Res. 739 (1–2 ):79–87.8955927
54. Ubelmann F , Burrinha T , Salavessa L , Gomes R , Ferreira C , Moreno N , (2017) Bin1 and CD2AP polarise the endocytic generation of beta-amyloid. EMBO Rep. 18 (1 ):102–22.27895104
55. Verbeek MM , Otte-Holler I , Veerhuis R , Ruiter DJ , De Waal RM (1998) Distribution of A beta-associated proteins in cerebrovascular amyloid of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 96 (6 ):628–36.9845293
56. Verheggen ICM , Van Boxtel MPJ , Verhey FRJ , Jansen JFA , Backes WH (2018) Interaction between blood-brain barrier and glymphatic system in solute clearance. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 90 :26–33.29608988
57. Woltjer RL , Cimino PJ , Boutte AM , Schantz AM , Montine KS , Larson EB , (2005) Proteomic determination of widespread detergent-insolubility including Abeta but not tau early in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J. 19 (13 ):1923–5.16129700
58. Wu XL , Pina-Crespo J , Zhang YW , Chen XC , Xu HX (2017) Tau-mediated Neurodegeneration and Potential Implications in Diagnosis and Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease. Chin Med J (Engl). 130 (24 ):2978–90.29237931
59. Xu G , Ran Y , Fromholt SE , Fu C , Yachnis AT , Golde TE , (2015) Murine Abeta over-production produces diffuse and compact Alzheimer-type amyloid deposits. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 3 :72.26566997
60. Xu G , Stevens SM Jr. , Moore BD , McClung S , Borchelt DR (2013) Cytosolic proteins lose solubility as amyloid deposits in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer-type amyloidosis. Hum Mol Genet. 22 (14 ):2765–74.23512986
61. Zhang Y , Chen K , Sloan SA , Bennett ML , Scholze AR , O’Keeffe S , (2014) An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J Neurosci. 34 (36 ):11929–47.25186741
62. Zhao J , Fu Y , Yasvoina M , Shao P , Hitt B , O’Connor T , (2007) Beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 levels become elevated in neurons around amyloid plaques: implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. J Neurosci. 27 (14 ):3639–49.17409228
