LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100962781
22270
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
Nature reviews. Neuroscience
1471-003X
1471-0048

30643230
6545070
10.1038/s41583-018-0113-1
NIHMS1026772
Article
Beyond the neuron-cellular interactions early in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis
Henstridge Christopher M. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0393-180X
1
Hyman Bradley T. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7959-9401
2
Spires-Jones Tara L. http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2530-0598
1*
1 The University of Edinburgh Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences, UK Dementia Research Institute, Edinburgh, UK.
2 MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.
Author contributions

T.L.S.-J., B.T.H. and C.M.H. made substantial contributions to the discussion of content, writing, review and editing of the manuscript before submission.

* tara.spires-jones@ed.ac.uk
14 5 2019
2 2019
01 6 2019
20 2 94108
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The symptoms of Alzheimer disease reflect a loss of neural circuit integrity in the brain, but neurons do not work in isolation. Emerging evidence suggests that the intricate balance of interactions between neurons, astrocytes, microglia and vascular cells required for healthy brain function becomes perturbed during the disease, with early changes likely protecting neural circuits from damage, followed later by harmful effects when the balance cannot be restored. Moving beyond a neuronal focus to understand the complex cellular interactions in Alzheimer disease and how these change throughout the course of the disease may provide important insight into developing effective therapeutics.


Alzheimer disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia in elderly individuals, poses a growing problem for society as the population ages1. The overwhelming evidence that neuronal damage downstream of key pathological players causes cognitive decline has led to a ‘neurocentric’ view of AD pathogenesis. However, advances in our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of AD approached from this neurocentric perspective have not translated into effective therapies. This failure reflects in part a lack of consideration of the effects of primary pathological changes on all cell types involved in neural system integrity and the consequent perturbations of many key intercellular interactions.

In this Review, we discuss the evidence supporting a role for interactions of multiple cell types in early AD pathogenesis and how this can inform development of therapeutic strategies. Both the advances in the fundamental understanding of disease and the outcomes of clinical trials over the past decade indicate the importance of cellular interactions early in the disease process2.

Early brain changes in AD

AD is pathologically defined by the presence of amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation in amyloid plaques, tau aggregation in neurofibrillary tangles and brain atrophy caused by loss of neurons and synapses (Box 1). In addition to these definitive pathological lesions, the brain undergoes an innate immune response including large changes in the phenotypes of microglia and astrocytes. A substantial amount of evidence supports the amyloid cascade hypothesis of disease pathogenesis, which states that alterations in Aβ initiate the disease and set off a chain of events including accumulation of toxic forms of tau that cause downstream neuron death3,4. This hypothesis is strongly supported both by the genetics of familial AD implicating Aβ production and aggregation in causing disease and by the pathological accumulation of Aβ deposits beginning many years before symptom onset. Along with the changes in Aβ early in disease, there is an early loss of synapses that tracks with disease progression. There are also early changes in non-neuronal cell types, including an inflammatory response of glia around plaques and disruptions to vascular function, including reduced cerebral blood flow and blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruptions (Table 1).

Risk factors point to multiple cells.

The interest in cellular interactions in AD pathogenesis is increasing as both genetic and epidemiological evidence point to a causative role for changes in the innate immune system, metabolism and vasculature. These have initiated a boom of research in the field to understand the non-neuronal contributors and cell-cell interactions in initiating changes in the brain in the early stages of disease2,5–8. Early genetic evidence implicated the apolipoprotein E ε4 allele (APOE4) as a potent risk factor for AD9. APOE is highly expressed in astrocytes and disease-associated microglia (or DAMs) in the brain, implicating a role for these cell types in pathogenesis. However, it was not until the more recent genome-wide association, whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing studies implicating multiple AD risk genes expressed predominantly in non-neuronal cells that the interest in non-neuronal contributors to AD has really taken hold (TABLE 2). In particular, genetic evidence has directly linked micro­glial function to AD. Several genes involved in the innate immune system and inflammation increase AD risk, including those encoding triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), complement receptor 1 (CR1), CD33 (also known as sialic acid binding Ig-like lectin 3; SIGLEC3) and inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase (INPP5D). Astrocytic metabolism gene variants, in addition to APOE4, have also been implicated in AD pathogenesis, including those encoding clusterin (CLU; also known as apolipoprotein J) and sortilin-related receptor 1 (SORL1). Interestingly, several genes that are highly expressed in oligodendrocytes or oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) have also been implicated in AD risk, although the role of these cells in the disease is much less studied than that of neurons, microglia and astrocytes.

Non-genetic risk factors also point to an important role of interactions of multiple cell types in disease pathogenesis. The mantra ‘what is good for your heart is good for your brain’ is central advice for dementia prevention on the basis of a large amount of evidence implicating vascular risk factors such as high blood pressure, obesity, type 2 diabetes and a sedentary lifestyle in substantially increasing AD risk6. More recently, direct interactions of AD pathological proteins with the vasculature have suggested changes in vascular function and stability10,11. All of these risk factors implicate non-neuronal cell types, including vascular cells and glia in disease. Although the mechanisms of neurode­generation initiated by interactions between cell types and the timing of these interactions remain unclear, many recently discovered pathways converge on synapse degeneration, as will be discussed later.

Inflammation and the immune response

The brain’s inflammatory response to toxic stimuli involves multiple cell types and cellular interactions. Both microglia and astrocytes respond to toxic stimuli in the brain by altering their gene expression, morphology and secretomes, which have cascading effects on other cell types, including neurons. The dramatic envelopment of amyloid plaques by glial cells, and the evidence supporting inefficient Aβ clearance as a pathogenic pathway in sporadic AD, have driven much of the work surrounding inflammation to focus on the role of glia in clearing Aβ. Clearing toxic forms of Aβ from the brain should be neuroprotective; however, Aβ also has effects on glial function, which can render them neurotoxic.

Role of glia in amyloid clearance.

Microglia accumulate around plaques in AD and are well known for their ability to phagocytose Aβ. This process begins at the early stages of disease as plaques accumulate in the neocortex. Many mouse models of this early stage of disease exist that express familial-AD-associated mutations in APP and PS1 and develop plaques and associated gliosis in the absence of neurofibrillary tau pathology or overt neuron loss. In one such model, microglia form a barrier around plaques, which prevents accumulation of toxic oligomeric Aβ ‘hot spots’12. However, chronic microglial activation leads to a more damaging pro-inflammatory state13. For example, activated microglia are thought to recruit and activate other microglia through a self-perpetuating loop of cytokine release and receptor expression14. Ablating CX3CL1 (also known as fractalkine)-positive microglia in plaque-bearing mice results in plaque growth, but no change in number, in support of an important role for these cells in limiting plaque expansion15. However, this finding is inconsistent as previous work in the same APP/PS1 model showed that a 90% pharmacological reduction in CD11b-positive microglia had no effect on plaque formation or maintenance16. Furthermore, ablating CSF1R-positive microglia in 5xFAD mice has no effect on amyloid burden but does improve spine loss, neuron death and cognition17,18. Soluble Aβ is thought to be much more neurotoxic than plaque fibrils, and recent evidence also supports a role for microglia in clearing soluble Aβ by secreting Aβ-degrading enzymes in a process regulated by CR3 (Ref19). In contrast to the data showing microglial ablation results in plaque growth, other data indicate that blocking proliferation of microglia may be beneficial to cognition in mice17,18. Thus, despite a clear role for microglia in clearing Aβ, it is not yet known whether microglial activation is protective or harmful or, more likely, whether this depends on the stage of the disease. Further, in many of the studies examining microglia in AD models discussed here, it has not been possible to distinguish between microglia, brain macrophages and infiltrating bone-marrow-derived cells. More detailed investigations will be needed to determine whether the effects observed are due to microglia or other myeloid cells.

Advances in single-cell profiling technology are starting to unravel some of these microglial mysteries both by helping to differentiate the different myeloid cell types and to tease out how these cells change upon activation. Recent data indicate that there are likely not just on or off states but a continuum of glial activation20–23. Single-cell RNA sequencing (RNAseq) in an AD mouse model revealed DAMs, which accumulate around plaques and exhibit reduced expression of homeostatic genes and increased expression of genes involved in phagocytosis23. Interestingly, two of the upregulated genes in DAMs are genetic risk factors for AD — APOE and TREM2 — providing a link between these molecules and micro­glial activation that may explain some of the risk these polymorphisms confer. More detail on the link between TREM2 and APOE recently emerged in a transcriptomic analysis of microglia showing that TREM2 can be activated by APOE signalling in DAMs24. Interestingly, TREM2 binds to APOE and CLU (another known risk factor) and facilitates microglial uptake of Aβ, which is impaired by AD associated variants, at least in cell culture25. A more complex disease-stage-dependent role of TREM2 is becoming evident from in vivo studies. In one model of AD, TREM2 knockout was found to ameliorate amyloid pathology early in disease but exacerbate pathology later in the disease process26, highlighting the variability in effects of microglial phenotypes at different stages of disease. Although the data are not yet all in agreement, several studies suggest a protective role in which upregulation of TREM2 causes microglia to phagocytose Aβ. In support of this idea, genetic reduction in TREM2 levels in mice and the R47H TREM2 mutation in both mice and humans reduced microglial or monocyte association with plaques26–30, implying that reductions in TREM2 reduce the ‘barrier’ of microglia around plaques that may protect surrounding tissue31. Lack of TREM2 appears to reduce the ability of microglia to sense their environment and respond appropriately, resulting in reduced phagocytosis32.

Reactive astrocytes accumulate around plaques and are thought to play a role in Aβ degradation, thus appearing to act in a neuroprotective manner33. This effect may be due to the increased expression of insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), which is observed in vitro in cultured astrocytes and in vivo in astrocytes near amyloid plaques34. Alternatively, astrocytic matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) may be involved in extra­cellular Aβ breakdown. Numerous MMPs are expressed in astrocytes, and their levels increase following Aβ exposure in vitro35 and in the brains of AD mice36. Conversely, astrocytes may contribute to periplaque pathology by releasing pathological factors such as S100β. This protein is enriched in the AD brain, and levels positively correlate with the number of dystrophic neurites within plaques37. APOE is also expressed in astrocytes and is thought to play a role in astrocytic amyloid clearance (as well as initial deposition and remodelling of Aβ into dense core plaques). Expressing human APOE isoforms indicates that APOE4 exacerbates plaque deposition in mouse models of AD compared with APOE2 or APOE3 (REF38). By contrast, complete ablation of APOE in mice reduces plaque deposition39·40. These APOE-null data remain incompletely understood but may have more to do with amyloid production and seeding in neurons than with amyloid clearance by astrocytes. Aβ also induces Ca2+ dysregulation in astrocytes in vitro41·42 and in vivo43, and astrocytes from human post-mortem AD brains show alterations in the expression of genes associated with Ca2+ signalling, contributing to impaired astrocyte function.

Glia and tau pathology.

Tau pathology correlates more strongly with neuron loss and cognitive decline in AD than amyloid pathology, and extensive tau pathology throughout the brain is present only at later stages of the disease process downstream of initial insults. However, tau pathology does accumulate in the entorhinal region early in the disease, and the spread of tau out of the medial temporal lobe is thought to be important for moving from the early stages of the disease, in which brain circuits compensate well for pathology, to the later stages of progressive worsening of symptoms44. There is some evidence that non-neuronal cell types may play a role in tau-induced neuron death and perhaps also in its spread through neural circuits. In addition to their well-known plaque associations, glia accumulate in the vicinity of neurofibrillary tangles, and the burden of glia positively correlates with tangle burden in human AD brain45. Further, gliosis occurs in non-AD tauopathies and tau pathology can accumulate in astrocytes46. In support of interactions of glia with tau-induced neuro­degeneration, transplantation of human neural precursor cells into a mouse model of tauopathy resulted in glial cell differentiation that protected mice from neuron loss47. Both APOE and TREM2 have also recently been linked to inflammation in tau models. TREM2 deficiency in a mouse model of tauopathy reduced inflammation and prevented neurodegeneration at late stages of disease46; however, TREM2 reduction in a different tauopathy model examined at an earlier stage showed an exacerbation of tau phosphorylation48. Furthermore, overexpression of TREM2 in the microglia of P301S mice (a model of tauopathy) reduced tau phosphorylation and suppressed secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines49. These emerging data on TREM2 indicate that it may have different effects on tau pathology at different stages of disease (similar to the emerging story with Aβ), or at least that it has different effects in different mouse models. Although the data examining the relationship between TREM2 and tau are still sparse, they do urge caution in pursuing therapeutic strategies to activate TREM2 before we fully understand the role of this molecule in the disease.

Similarly, most work examining effects of APOE4 on AD have focused on Aβ or synapse loss, but there are now hints that APOE may also affect tau pathology, likely through modulating glial function. In a mouse model overexpressing frontotemporal dementia (FTD)-associated P301S mutant tau, knocking out APOE protected mice from neurodegeneration, while knocking in human APOE exacerbated neurodegeneration in an isoform-specific manner with APOE4 being most toxic50. Furthermore, profiling of gene expression showed an increase in pro-inflammatory and a decrease in homeostatic gene expression in microglia and an increase in inflammatory profiles in astrocytes50.It remains to be seen which cell types are important in mediating these APOE isoform-dependent effects on neurodegeneration, as APOE is largely produced in astrocytes and microglia but its expression is also induced in other cells in the CNS.

Microglia may contribute to tau spreading through the brain. One recent study reported that after tau virus injection into the entorhinal cortex, ablation of microglia reduced phosphorylated tau, reduced tau spread from the entorhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus and lowered pro-inflammatory cytokine levels51. Other studies have increased microglial activity by blocking or genetically removing the fractalkine receptor, which is constitutively activated by neuronally released CX3CL1 to suppress microglial activation. Genetic removal of CX3CL1 results in increased tau phosphorylation in wild-type and tau-overexpressing mice via microglia-derived soluble factors52. In support of this, CX3CL1 overexpression in the rTg4510 model suppressed microglial activation and subsequent tau pathology53. Although interesting, there are caveats to these studies including small animal numbers and the possibility that reducing microgliosis likely reduced levels of inflammatory cytokines, which themselves could contribute to the spread of tauopathy. Further work is necessary to understand the potential role of microglia and astrocytes in the early spread of tau through neural circuits.

Glial phenotypes change during ageing.

In addition to their effects on amyloid and tau pathology, glial changes may be important for other aspects of AD pathogenesis independent of the amyloid cascade. Age is the largest risk factor for AD, yet we do not fully understand why age renders the brain susceptible to neurodegeneration. A recent genome-wide analysis of microglia in mice showed distinct region-dependent transcriptional identities that changed with age54. Similarly, analysis of astrocytes from different regions of mouse brain during ageing showed age-associated and region-specific transcriptional changes55. Interestingly, these age-associated astrocyte changes were reduced in mice lacking micro­glial secreted cytokines, indicating important interactions between microglia and astrocytes during ageing55. In support of the translational relevance of these age-associated changes observed in mice, we observed differences in the distribution of microglia and astrocytes in different brain regions in healthy aged human brain56, suggesting that regional differences in the ageing of glia could contribute to selective vulnerability in age-related neurodegenerative diseases such as AD. In a recent mouse study profiling the translatome of micro­glia, ageing, APP/PS1 overexpression and P301L tau overexpression all induced a similar network of translational changes strongly implicating APOE in driving a network of changes resulting in production of the cytokines CCL3 and CCL4 (REF.57). The effects in this study were more pronounced in microglia from female mice. Although this is a single paper utilizing AD animal models, it points to the intriguing idea that the AD risk factors of age, APOE isoform and female sex may converge on similar inflammatory pathways that are induced by the pathological proteins that accumulate in the disease.

Glial effects on neuron death.

Neurons begin to die early in AD pathogenesis. By the time symptoms are detectable, estimates indicate that over half of neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex are lost58. Microglial phenotypes and their effects on neuron death have recently been shown to change with disease stage. In a mouse model of neurodegeneration downstream of p25 overexpression, microglia appear to proliferate early then later initiate a harmful host of innate immune responses59. Microglia also influence neuron death in a human cell tri-culture system in which neurons and astrocytes expressing mutant APP are cultured in a 3D chamber and microglia are added in a surrounding, connected chamber at later time points60. In this system, infiltrating microglia contribute to neuron death in a pathway involving Toll-like receptor 4 and interferon-γ (IFNγ). This study has several limitations, including overexpression of mutant APP and the use of an immortalized microglial cell line, but it does support a role for microglia in inducing death of human neurons60·61. Although these results from model systems are intriguing, it will be important to examine other models and human brain to fully understand how microglia change with disease stage and which changes may contribute to neurodegeneration. It will also be important moving forward to distinguish microglia from infiltrating microglia-like macrophages, which enter the brain during disease and may have distinct roles compared with resident microglia62–64.

Astrocytes are also able to modulate neuron death via their expression of APOE. In mice, APOE3 expression in neurons or astrocytes and APOE4 expression only in astrocytes protected APOE-null mice from excitotoxicity, whereas neuronal expression of APOE4 was not protective and led to neuron death after excitotoxic challenge65. Although excitotoxicity has not been established as the cause of cell death in AD, this study provides proof of principle that the cellular source of APOE4 influences neuronal susceptibility to neurodegeneration and indicates that glia may affect cell death independently of amyloid.

Cellular crosstalk in inflammation.

Along with their independent roles in neuroinflammation, there is increasing evidence for interactions between microglia and astrocytes in destructive feedforward loops in AD. Work from Ben Barres’ group showed that secretion of cytokines by microglia can activate astrocytes, causing them to lose some of their physiological functions and become toxic to neurons66. In AD models, two studies showing that IL-10 worsens amyloid-related phenotypes in mice also implicate microglial IL-10 in boosting astrocytic expression of APOE, which then looped back to decrease microglial appetite for Aβ67,68. The complement system also plays a role in microglia-astrocyte crosstalk. In a recent study examining both plaque-bearing transgenic mice and cultured astrocytes and microglia, Aβ was found to activate astrocyte expression of NF-κB, which caused extracellular release of complement C3. In turn, this extracellular release caused microglial and neuronal C3a receptor activation, which impaired cognitive function and altered micro­glial Aβ phagocytosis69. Immune-system-related genes including those encoding CLU and complement C3 are differentially expressed in laser-captured astrocytes from human AD brain compared with control brains70, further implicating an inflammatory immune response in multiple cell types in AD.

Microglia and astrocytes both secrete cytokines in the AD brain. Treating cultured microglia with amyloid induces secretion of numerous pro-inflammatory mediators such as IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα as well as reactive oxygen species (ROS)71. All of these factors can be released in differing combinations depending upon the pathological context and have significant detrimental effects on the surrounding milieu. Importantly, some of these molecules can induce the activity of γ-secretase, leading to increased Aβ production72. Exposure of cultured astrocytes to oligomeric Aβ similarly induces astrocyte activation73 and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and TNFα as well as the gaseous synaptic modulator nitric oxide (NO)74. APOE genotype influences the inflammatory response of glia to Aβ exposure. APOE4 expression in a mouse model of AD with plaque deposition resulted in increased microglial and astrocytic reactivity and increased release of inflammatory cytokines, particularly in plaque-associated microglia75. TNFα has received much attention as mice in which TNF receptor 1 has been knocked out have significantly lower levels of amyloid production and deposition in an AD mouse model76. In mouse models of familial AD that develop plaques and in wild-type animals injected with oligomeric Aβ, Aβ is associated with increasing levels of cytokines, confirming that Aβ induces cytokine release in vivo77·78. Although much work focuses on pro-inflammatory cytokines, there is also evidence that the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 worsens amyloid pathology and cognition in mouse models67,68. Understanding the complex role of cytokines will be important, particularly because cytokines may contribute to neuron death79.

Complex cellular responses to systemic infection may also contribute to disease pathogenesis. The controversial idea that pathogens contribute to the initiation of AD has been around for decades80,81 but has received a recent boost from two papers examining herpes infection in human AD and in a mouse model of disease. An extensive analysis of multiple human cohorts found higher levels of herpesvirus 6 and 7 in brain tissue from patients with AD than in controls, and computational analyses indicate that the viruses may regulate known AD genes82. The increase in virus in the brains of people with AD could plausibly be due to the known disruption of the BBB in disease, which allows these very common viruses to enter the brain. More mechanistically convincing is the recent study that showed that herpes simplex virus 1 infection leads quickly to amyloid deposition in an AD mouse model and a human stem-cell-derived neuronal culture model83. This observation builds on work indicating that Aβ has antimicrobial properties84. Whether this is important to AD pathogenesis remains controversial, particularly because plaque deposition is not sufficient to initiate full-blown AD44. However, it is possible that these processes may turn out to play a causative role in disease initiation, and there is no doubt that interactions of multiple cell types from the vasculature through glia and neurons are involved in this type of response to infection.

White matter and oligodendrocytes.

Although there is substantial evidence supporting a role for microglia and astrocytes in AD pathogenesis, there has to date been less investigation of a potential role for oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs). White matter changes, as observed by MRI scans, are frequent in AD, with recent studies showing associations of white matter damage with both amyloid85 and tau pathology86. Intriguingly, neuropathological studies do not generally reflect substantial white matter changes, although post-mortem evidence of volume changes would be difficult to observe.

Early on, Braak observed that the pattern of neurofibrillary tangle deposition in AD parallels the developmental pattern of myelination87, indicating that neurons with late-myelinating axons may be more vulnerable to degeneration, although the molecular link between these observations remains uncertain. Some gene variants that increase AD risk are predominantly expressed in oligodendrocytes or OPCs (TABLE 2) and emerging evidence suggests that myelination is involved in neuronal plasticity88, indicating that changes in these cells may contribute to the disease. Incubation of cultured oligodendrocytes with amyloid peptides leads to apoptotic cell death89, and injection of amyloid into the rat corpus callosum leads to axon damage, oligodendrocyte death and reactive gliosis around the injury90. Inflammatory conditions such as those observed in AD can hinder the remyelination process and prevent OPCs from differentiating to oligodendrocytes91. Although not yet fully substantiated, these potential oligodendrocyte processes provide further support for the importance of interactions between cell types in disease.

Cellular interactions in synapse loss

For almost three decades, it has been known that the strongest neuropathological correlate with cognitive decline in AD is synapse loss92. Synapse loss occurs early in the disease and continues to parallel cognitive decline throughout disease progression92–96. The exact mechanisms driving this loss are yet to be fully elucidated, although it is evident that both amyloid and tau exert harmful effects on synapse integrity97. Strong focus has been placed on the neuronal components of the synapse as excitatory glutamatergic synapses have historically been considered dipartite structures, consisting of a presynaptic terminal and postsynaptic spine. However, detailed imaging studies have revealed that many exist as tripartite or even quadpartite structures, with glial processes found in close proximity to the synapse. These non-neuronal synaptic components play important roles in synapse development, maturation and disease. Before synapse loss in AD, amyloid and tau accumulate in the synapse, leading to disrupted function of glutamate receptors and synaptic kinases, altered calcium dynamics and spine disassembly98. These direct effects on the neuronal components of the synapse are well established and supported by a growing literature describing the presynaptic, postsynaptic and trans-synaptic effects of these pathological factors97. However, the disease-driven disruption of glial function and glia’s subsequent influence on synaptic physiology remain an area of intense research.

Immune cascades and synapse loss in AD.

Over the past few years, data have emerged implicating both astrocytes and microglia in activity-dependent synaptic pruning during development99–103. The classical complement cascade has emerged as a key part of this developmental synaptic pruning104–106. In the developing mouse brain, synapses expressing high levels of complement components C3 and C1q are actively engulfed and phagocytosed by CR3-positive microglia100,104. Recent data indicate interactions between astrocytes and microglia in developmental synaptic elimination as microglial secretion of inflammatory molecules including C1q induces astrocyte activation, which causes neurotoxicity, at least in cultured cells66. Conversely, astrocytes can recruit microglia to eliminate synapses. By releasing transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), astrocytes in the retina increase the expression of complement protein C1q on nearby synapses, thus priming them for complement-dependent phagocytosis by recruited microglial cells107. Intriguingly, the astrocytic elimination of synapses was also recently shown to be modified by APOE isoform. In young mice, APOE2 increased astrocytic phagocytosis of synaptic terminals, whereas APOE4 decreased astrocytic phagocytosis108. Complement C1q was also low in APOE2-expressing mice and high in APOE4-expressing mice, suggesting that APOE4 may prevent astrocytes from performing physiological C1q-dependent synapse clearance, leading to a build-up of senescent synapses108.

Although much of the evidence for the involvement of the complement cascade in synapse elimination comes from studies of developing retinal ganglion cells in rodents, this cascade may also be involved in synapse degeneration in AD. Several genes associated with the complement system have emerged as AD genetic susceptibility factors, including CR1 and CLU109. Furthermore, many components of the complement cascade are significantly upregulated in the AD brain110. Evidence from mouse models suggests that amyloid-induced complement activation leads to microglial phagocytosis of cortical synapses111,112. In mice, soluble amyloid drives the upregulation in C1q levels before the deposition of amyloid in plaques, and C1q knockout significantly reduced the synaptotoxic effect of amyloid111. Genetic removal of complement C3 from APP/PS1 mice (APP/PS1;C3-KO) rescued synapse loss in the hippocampus, and knocking out CR3 resulted in less synaptic engulfment by microglia following amyloid challenge111. APP/PS1;C3-KO mice have revealed some clues as to the roles of glia in amyloid clearance. In 16-month-old APP/PS1;C3-KO mice, plaque burden was increased compared with APP/PS1; however, they showed an altered glial response to amyloid plaques — namely, decreased glial infiltration of plaques and lower levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα and IFNγ112. This altered glial response associated with partial preservation of synapse density in the hippocampus and improved cognitive flexibility, suggesting that C3-mediated synapse loss is a feature in aged and AD brain112. The idea that microglia are phagocytosing synapses in the human AD brain remains controversial. Even in rodent slice culture, there is some debate about whether microglia actively eat postsynaptic dendritic spines, with one study proposing a role for microglia in synaptic circuit remodelling by ‘nibbling’ presynaptic terminals and facilitating postsynaptic filopodia formation113. On balance, the human genetic data and mouse model data strongly support a role for complement and microglia in synapse degeneration, but the details of this remain to be determined, particularly what is happening in human AD brain.

Immunological systems and cytokines beyond the complement system also contribute to synapse degeneration in AD. For example, the major histocompatibility complex 1 (MHC1) immune pathway has been shown to influence synapse function and formation114. MHC1 associates with PSD95 and can interact with a number of immunoreceptors, including paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PirB; also known as LILRB3)114. Neuronal PirB associates with synapses and plays a critical role in ocular dominance plasticity (ODP). When PirB is knocked out, ODP is enhanced115; however, in APP/PS1 models of AD, defective ODP is a very early marker of synaptic dysfunction116. It has since been discovered that PirB acts as a receptor for amyloid oligomers, and this interaction induces synaptic dysfunction and synapse loss by disrupting the synaptic cytoskeleton117. Removal of PirB could rescue synaptic plasticity deficits and behavioural changes in AD mice117. Importantly, amyloid oligomers have a nanomolar affinity for the human orthologue of PirB, leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor B2 (LILRB2; also known as LIR2), and although LILRB2 levels are not altered in AD brain, downstream signalling pathways are significantly upregulated117. This observation suggests that in human AD brain, amyloid activates LILRB2 and increases its downstream signalling, leading to altered neuronal actin organization and ultimately synapse loss. Further support of a microglial role in Aβ-mediated synapse loss comes from a study of the APP/PS1 mouse model with knockout of TDP43 in microglia. TDP43 knockout increased microglial phagocytic activity and led to increased amyloid clearance and concomitant exacerbated synapse loss118. This finding provides an intriguing link between the pathological proteins involved in AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which also exhibits synapse loss associated with cognitive decline119.

Excitotoxicity.

In addition to the potential involvement in innate immune cascades, astrocytic end feet at synapses are likely to play a role in synaptic dysfunction and loss in early AD through modulation of excitotoxicity. Adenosine A2A receptors (A2ARs; also known as ADRA2As) are expressed on astrocytes and respond to synaptic adenosine by inducing a number of cellular changes, including a reduction in glutamate uptake120. Astrocytic A2ARs have a negative role in learning and memory processes in mouse models of AD, and high levels of these receptors are found on human astrocytes in AD121. Therefore, excitotoxicity in AD may be driven by increased astrocytic A2AR expression on astrocytes, leading to decreased glutamate clearance and excessive synaptic activity. Alternatively, genetically lowering glutamate transporter 1 (GLT1; also known as SLC1A2) expression in AD mice results in an earlier onset of cognitive deficits122, and amyloid is known to increase the lifetime of synaptic glutamate by inducing the internalization of GLT1 from astrocytic membranes123. Furthermore, restoring GLT1 expression in an AD mouse model prevented synaptic pathology and cognitive decline124. Therefore, amyloid-induced alterations in GLT1 location and function may increase synaptic and extrasynaptic glutamate, thus driving excitotoxicity in AD. In support of this, it is believed that the beneficial role of memantine in patients with moderate to severe dementia may be due to the blockade of extrasynaptic NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors, which are activated by excess glutamate125.

Risk genes influence synapse loss.

Astrocytes are also likely to influence synapse dysfunction and loss owing to their production of APOE and its effects on synaptic Aβ126. We demonstrated a role for APOE4 protein in targeting oligomeric Aβ to synapses, where it is associated with synapse degeneration in human AD brain127. In mouse models, it is clear that the synaptic effects of APOE4 are not cell autonomous, as we observed that bathing the cortex in APOE4 expressed by viral infection of ependymal cells worsens synaptic phenotypes38. APOE modulates Aβ metabolism and clearance128,129, and APOE4 increases the oligomerization of Aβ130, which is toxic to synapses131,132. Interestingly, the APOE4 effect is not just a feature of neurodegenerative disease but also plays a role in synaptic integrity in non-pathological cognitive ageing. APOE plays a role in dendritic spine maintenance133, presynaptic terminal composition and glutamate synthesis134 and synaptic plasticity135, with APOE4 isoforms having significant detrimental effects in these studies. A recent study utilizing transgenic mice that express human APOE isoforms discovered an isoform-specific change in the phagocytic properties of astrocytes108. Non-demented individuals from the Lothian Birth Cohort in their ninth decade oflife exhibit a faster rate of cognitive decline if they are APOE4 positive than those with APOE2 or APOE3 alleles136. Future work on the well-characterized Lothian Birth Cohort subjects will help to clarify the role of factors such as APOE in cognitive ageing through deep phenotyping of genetic, psychosocial and neuropathological factors56,137,138.

In addition to the clear links between Aβ, glia and synapse loss, there are indications that tau-mediated synapse loss also involves glia. Early studies in the P301S mouse model of tauopathy revealed that microglial activation coincided with the onset of synapse loss139. This occurred before neuron loss and tau tangle formation, placing active microglia at the right place and time to induce synaptic alteration139. The effects of TREM2 modulation of tau-induced synapse degeneration have not yet been fully explored, but one study showed that overexpressing TREM2 in microglia in these mice improves cognition and prevents loss of synaptic proteins49. There are also hints that astrocytes modulate synapse degeneration in tau mice. Cultured astrocytes from the P301S tauopathy model exhibit functional deficiencies that result in a failure to support neurons in culture140. GLT1 is decreased in P301L mice, indicating that astrocytic clearance of glutamate is impaired by tau expression in this model141, which may contribute to excitotoxicity. Extracellular tau oligomers also disrupt astrocytic Ca2+ signalling, reduce astrocytic ATP release and impair neuronal synaptic function in culture142.

Together, these data strongly support the notion that multiple cell types contribute to synaptic changes (FIG. 1). This view opens promising avenues to prevent or reverse synapse degeneration and potentially to prevent the spread of pathological proteins through neural circuits.

Role of the NVU in neurodegeneration

The brain is an energy-hungry organ, dependent upon blood vessels for delivering oxygen and nutrients and for waste removal. An intricate control system has evolved both to protect the brain from components in the blood that are toxic to brain cells (the BBB) and to regulate blood flow to different brain regions with fluctuating energy demands. This neurovascular unit (NVU) contains almost every cell type found in the brain, all working together in a tightly regulated manner. Vascular cells (endothelial cells, pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells) form the walls of the vessels. These are surrounded by astrocyte end feet, the terminal processes of astrocytes. Perivascular microglia and macrophages survey the influx of blood-borne molecules into the brain143.

The different cell types in the NVU communicate and are interdependent. For example, endothelial cells can promote proliferation and differentiation of both neural precursors and OPCs144,145 and, via the release of trophic factors, also protect neurons from injury146.

Strong epidemiological evidence shows associations between vascular risk factors and risk of AD and further that mid-life statin use to control high blood pressure is protective against AD147. Recent studies show reductions in incidence of AD in the United Kingdom148, and although the causes for this remain unknown, scientists speculate that better access to health care and lowered cardiovascular risk factors may be contributing to reduced incidence. Disruptions in the NVU certainly cause vascular dementia7 and likely also contribute to the early stages of AD pathogenesis. It has been proposed that damage to the NVU starts a cascade involving reduced cerebral blood flow and BBB disruption, which when followed by a ‘second hit’ of Aβ pathology leads to AD8. In animal models, vascular changes have been observed very early in the disease process. Reductions in cerebral blood flow and vascular reactivity are the first changes observed in a model overexpressing Swedish mutant APP149,150, and APP/PS1 mice exhibit ultrastructural changes in microvasculature before cognitive impairment is observed151. Tau-overexpressing mice also develop vascular abnormalities, even those expressing wild-type human tau, which do not develop overt neurodegenerative phenotypes11. In humans, using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, decreases in hippocampal vascular volume have been observed in subjects with mild cognitive impairment152, and increased BBB permeability has been observed even at an early stage of AD153. Brain glucose uptake measured by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18FDG-PET) imaging is impaired in patients with AD very early in the disease process154. Although these imaging studies have fairly small sample sizes (6–15 subjects per group), they do point to a link between vascular damage and AD. Large biomarker studies also point to the role of vascular malfunction as an early event in AD. In the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, a data-driven model spanning 30 years of disease progression suggests that vascular dysregulation is one of the earliest events in AD155.

Along with direct effects of oligodendrocytes on myelin integrity discussed earlier, vascular changes can also affect white matter. White matter hyperintensi­ties detected by T2-weighted MRI have emerged as an important biomarker of white matter damage. Although the pathological causes and consequences of these hyperintensities remain to be fully determined, they have been associated with small-vessel disease, glial cell death, microglial and endothelial cell activation, demyelination, axonal loss and tau pathology in the over­lying cortex, linking many aspects of the NVU86,156,157.

A well-powered imaging study from the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) found white matter hyperintensities in people with familial AD mutations that began 6–22 years before symptom onset158.

There are some hints at mechanisms linking vascular changes to AD, with the strongest evidence favouring defective clearance of Aβ from the brain to the periphery and chronic hypoperfusion as two of the contributors to sporadic AD. The routes of clearance of Aβ from the interstitial fluid (ISF), and indeed the routes of brain extracellular fluid drainage in general, are not entirely clear and have been fiercely debated over the past decades159. Although Aβ can be degraded in the parenchyma, a large part of Aβ clearance from the brain appears to be via the vasculature drainage, driven at least in part by para-arterial influx of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that causes convective fluid flux forcing ISF out through paravenous efflux (known as the glymphatic system)10,160–163. Meningeal lymphatics have also been recently implicated in Aβ clearance in rodents164. In this study, impairment of lymphatic drainage affected glymphatic exchange of CSF and ISF164, implying that lymphatic and glymphatic drainage processes may be functionally linked — perhaps via effects on glia. Intriguingly, both production and clearance of Aβ change with the sleep-wake cycle, with higher levels of Aβ in CSF and ISF reported during periods of more brain activity in mice and humans165,166. This observation is doubtless due in part to the increased secretion of Aβ with increasing neuronal activity167, but astrocytes are most likely involved in this process as well because glymphatic clearance is enhanced during sleep168. Several genetic risk factors for AD including APOE, CLU and PICALM have been implicated in the vascular clearance of Aβ169–171. Polymorphisms in aquaporin 4 are associated with modulation of cognitive decline in AD172, which could be important because of the role of aquaporin 4 in the influx of CSF into the brain as part of the glymphatic system163. Similarly, inducing pericyte loss in APP-overexpressing mice by knocking down pericyte-deficient platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β resulted in exacerbated amyloid pathology. Pericyte loss also caused accumulation of tau pathology and neurodegeneration173. However, the role of pericytes in regulating cerebral blood flow and protein clearance from the brain remains controversial174.

The role of the NVU in AD goes beyond protein clearance. Hypoperfusion, hypoxia and breakdown of the BBB are all thought to contribute to pathogenesis, all ofwhich are processes that involve complex interactions of multiple cell types8. For example, in mouse models of early AD, hypertension increases Aβ-induced NVU dysfunction and promotes BACE activity and subsequent Aβ production175. Tau pathology has also recently been linked to changes in brain microvasculature. Mice overexpressing human wild-type tau or FTD-associated mutant tau both develop changes in blood vessel structure that are associated with obstructed blood flow11. These data indicate that changes in neuronal expression of tau affect endothelial cell biology, further supporting an important role for cell-cell interactions in AD.

As observed in parenchymal inflammation, perivascular microglia likely play a protective role early in the disease process by phagocytosing Aβ and potentially also phagocytosing extracellular tau as it propagates from cell to cell. In support of this idea, in Tg2576 mice, decreased microglial perivascular accumulation correlated with increased deposition of cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) and decreased survival of the remaining micro­glia, which developed a pro-inflammatory phenotype and impaired the BBB176.

Hypoperfusion due to vascular changes and neurotoxic changes including glial activation both lead to oxidative stress through generation of ROS, which can contribute to a negative spiral of degeneration. Accumulation of ROS can result from excessive production due to increased activity of superoxide-producing enzymes such as NADPH oxidase or inhibited function of antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD)177. This fine balance of pro-oxidant and anti­oxidant activity is particularly vulnerable in the brain owing to its high abundance of polyunsaturated fatty acids, high metabolic rate and fairly low expression of antioxidant molecules178. However, given the devastation observed in the human AD brain, it is no surprise that oxidative stress is evident; the important question is whether oxidative stress is a cause of AD pathogenesis or a result of it. Animal models suggest that oxidative stress occurs before or in tandem with amyloid plaque formation179,180, and human studies suggest that oxidative stress represents an early pathological event in AD181. Oxidative stress can result in neuronal death; however, ROS can also have detrimental effects on other cell types in the brain.

CAA, the build-up of amyloid on cerebral vasculature, can lead to vascular oxidative stress via the generation of ROS, and this exacerbates vascular dysfunction. Animal models suggest that NADPH oxidase is the major source of toxic free radicals, as genetic removal of NOX2 (a catalytic subunit of NADPH oxidase) counteracts amyloid-induced, ROS-dependent, vascular dys-function182. Furthermore, vascular endothelial cells and perivascular microglia and/or macrophages express the amyloid-binding receptor CD36 (REF183). This receptor increases CAA and is important in the amyloid-induced oxidative stress within the NVU183. Interestingly, genetic removal of this receptor results in reduced CAA, reduced vascular dysfunction and improved cognitive function in Tg2576 mice despite no change in cortical amyloid plaque burden183. More recent animal work has suggested that the source of amyloid-dependent oxidative stress is CD36-positive perivascular macrophages184.Depleting perivascular macrophages in Tg2576 mice with clodronate led to decreased amyloid-dependent vascular dysfunction, and this was dependent on CD36 and NOX2 expression184. This confluence of ROS, loss of bioenergetics and inflammatory responses involving the neurovascular junction, as well as organ-level clearance mechanisms, may lead to an imbalance in Aβ homeostasis or in tau-spreading mechanisms that help ‘tip the balance’ towards progression of disease.

Therapeutic implications

Much of the clinical trial landscape for the past 20 years has been dominated by the amyloid cascade hypothesis, on the assumption that lowering Aβ levels will protect neurons. Although confidence in the validity of the amyloid cascade remains high, all trials targeting Aβ to date have failed to improve cognition, and it is now considered possible that anti-Aβ interventions will need to be carried out at very early stages of the disease, long before symptoms begin, to prevent neural system failure and cognitive impairments. These clinical failures and the emerging evidence of the importance of cellular interactions that affect AD have led to a broadening view of therapeutic targets that may prevent or reverse pathological changes in non-neuronal cell types.

Activation of microglia and astrocytes and the downstream effects on neurons are likely important players early in disease pathogenesis that offer potential therapeutic targets. Increasing APOE secretion by astrocytes could be beneficial owing to increasing clearance of Aβ and potentially enhancing synaptic function185. Bexarotene, a drug in clinical use to treat skin cancer, has generated interest owing to its ability to aid in the formation of APOE lipoprotein particles. A study published in 2012 indicated that bexarotene treatment increased brain APOE concentrations, reduced Aβ levels and reversed cognitive deficits in APP/PS1 mice186. This led quickly to clinical trials; however, subsequent mouse work has failed to replicate the full benefits seen in the original study187–189. The initial outcomes from clinical trials have similarly not shown much benefit, lowering brain Aβ levels only in people who do not have an APOE4 allele and increasing serum triglycerides, which could increase cardiovascular risk190. Despite these lukewarm results with bexarotene, there is promise in the idea of harnessing APOE levels as a therapeutic, and it may be that lowering APOE levels will be more helpful as a preventive strategy than raising them. Mouse work indicates that increasing levels of APOE2, lowering levels of APOE4 or lowering total APOE levels in the brain may be beneficial to reduce amyloid levels, increase synaptic function and prevent tau-mediated toxicity38,50,191.

Another potential therapeutic target based on cellular interactions in AD is inflammation. A large prospective study found that the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is associated with lowered risk of AD192. However, thus far, anti-inflammatory drugs have failed in clinical trials for AD despite protecting against many pheno­types in mouse models193. Human data indicate that anti-inflammatory treatment effects differ at different stages of disease194, consistent with our conclusion that the role of glia likely changes during the disease course. Although it is still in very early stages, the development of C1q antibodies to treat AD will be of interest on the basis of the involvement of the complement system in synapse loss195.

At the interface of vascular risk factors and inflammation, diabetes drugs have gained interest as potential therapeutics for AD196. Promising mouse work indicates that hyperinsulinaemia exacerbates AD pathology and that anti-diabetic drugs improve phenotypes in AD models197,198. However, clinical trials with two agonists of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARy), diabetes drugs used to control blood sugar, did not succeed in either symptomatic or prevention trials199,200.

Despite disappointing clinical trial results, it is not clear whether therapeutics aimed at APOE, anti-inflammatories or lowering insulin levels have been adequately studied in humans to date.

Along with therapeutics that target non-neuronal cells, preventive strategies that address the entire neurovascular-glial unit are a promising approach. Recent population-based studies indicate that the incidence of dementia in many countries is stable or decreasing201. Although the reasons for this are not known, it is likely that improved cardiovascular health — through initiatives such as reducing smoking — is a contributing factor. Epidemiological studies show an association between exercise and reduced risk of cognitive decline and dementia during ageing6,202. However, to date, interventional trials to prevent or treat dementia by improving cardiovascular health via exercise have inconsistent results trending towards no benefit203,204.

Concluding remarks

Healthy brain function relies on intact neural system integrity, which encompasses the intricately choreographed workings of multiple cell types. Here, we have outlined that in AD there are changes in multiple cell types, and we have discussed the interactions between them (FIG. 2). Strong data from genetic and epidemiological risk factors implicate vascular and glial changes in initiating AD. However, a disease that plays out over more than a decade might be expected to have multiple moving parts; the role of glia or vasculature abnormalities in each portion of this cascade may change over time and is likely to change in the context of ageing and other systemic and environmental factors. Although it is tempting to try to arrange ‘cause-and-effect’ arrows in cartoon models of hypotheses, it seems very likely that the complexities involved will be difficult to conclusively model in simple systems. We believe that further evaluation of deeply phenotyped human material from patients at different stages of the disease, and with different genetic risk factors and predispositions, will be critical to advance understanding. Nonetheless, increasing evidence from cell and animal studies implicates the interactions between cell types in damaging synapses and neural circuits and emphasizes the need for further studies. There is hope that with a clearer understanding of the interactions between cells in the brain and the time course of the changes, we will be able to either prevent or treat AD.

Acknowledgements

T.L.S.-J. and C.M.H. gratefully acknowledge funding from the UK Dementia Research Institute, the European Research Council (ALZSYN), Alzheimer’s Research UK, the Alzheimer’s Society, MND Scotland and the Euan MacDonald Centre for Motorneurone Disease Research. T.L.S.-J. is a member of the FENS Kavli Network of Excellence. The authors thank M. Tzioras for excellent critical review of the manuscript.

Amyloid cascade hypothesis Initially proposed in 1992, this hypothesis posits that the accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) is the initiating factor in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis, leading to the formation of amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, neuron loss and clinical dementia

Innate immune system Reactive response that utilizes chemical mediators to fight infection and clear foreign substances from the body by recruiting specialized immune cells. It can also activate a second wave of adaptive immune response by presenting antigens to adaptive immune cells

Secretomes The secretome includes all secretable factors released from a cell

Oligomeric Aβ Single molecules of Aβ are known as monomers. These monomers can aggregate to form oligomeric structures of two or more monomers, which can then accumulate into larger fibrillar forms of aβ and deposit as the hallmark amyloid plaques

Cytokine Small releasable signalling proteins that often have immunomodulatory effects. These include chemokines, interleukins and interferons and they can be released by numerous immune cell types, endothelial cells and fibroblasts

Homeostatic genes Genes encoding a protein involved in a homeostatic mechanism within the cell

Glymphatic system Drainage pathway found in the vertebrate CNS that allows cerebrospinal fluid to enter the brain alongside penetrating arteries and facilitates the removal of interstitial fluid and waste products from the brain

Fig. 1 | Synapse loss occurs early in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis.

Emerging data indicate that microglia, astrocytes and crosstalk between these are involved in synapse degeneration. Ageing, early pathological changes in amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau and chronic hypoperfusion due to vascular impairments all directly and indirectly contribute to synapse loss via effects on microglia and astrocytes. Microglia and astrocytes also have direct effects on synapse degeneration, and there is crosstalk among the glial pathways affecting synapses. APOE, apolipoprotein E; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2.

Fig. 2 | Schematic of the neurovascular unit and early changes in Alzheimer disease.

All of the cell types in the brain interact in a complex web to maintain brain function (left). During the early stages of Alzheimer disease (right), many of these homeostatic processes are impaired, and synapses and neurons are damaged by pathways involving multiple cell types. Vascular integrity is impaired by damage to endothelial cells, astrocytic end feet and pericytes and by the build-up of amyloid-β (Aβ) along vessel walls in cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). These vascular changes cause impairments in the vascular clearance of proteins, hypoperfusion and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Amyloid plaques are surrounded by a halo of oligomeric Aβ, which damages nearby synapses and neuronal processes. Plaques are also surrounded by astrocytes and microglia, which initially serve to clear amyloid protein but after exposure to Aβ become reactive and secrete cytokines. Within neurons, tau accumulates in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which are associated with gliaL accumulation and neuronal dysfunction and death. Synapses become dysfunctional and disappear in a process that likely involves microglia. White matter integrity is compromised owing to the loss of oligodendrocytes and damage to myelin caused by chronic hypoperfusion. OPC, oligodendrocyte precursor cell.

Table 1 | Changes in multiple cell types in the brain early in Alzheimer disease

Cell type	Normal function	Changes in early Alzheimer disease	Refs	
Microglia	Trophic support

Brain surveillance

Phagocytosis of debris

	Microgliosis

Beneficial and impaired clearance of amyloid and tau

Release of neurotoxic and pro-inflammatory factors

Excessive synaptic phagocytosis

	13,220,221	
Astrocytes	Trophic support

Metabolic support

BBB component

Synaptic modulation

	Astrogliosis

Beneficial and impaired clearance of amyloid and tau

Release of neurotoxic and pro-inflammatory factors

Synaptic phagocytosis

Impaired synaptic homeostasis

BBB breakdown

	221–223	
Oligodendrocytes	Trophic support

Myelin production

	Loss of oligodendrocytes

Myelin loss

Disrupted neuronal plasticity

	224,225	
Neurons	Electrical and chemical transmission

Excitatory and inhibitory synaptic activity

Synaptic plasticity , circuit function and cognition

	Intracellular tau aggregation

Synaptic accumulation of amyloid and/or tau

Synaptic dysfunction

Synapse loss

	2,97,226	
Cerebral vascular cellsEndothelial cells

Pericytes and smooth muscle cells

Perivascularmacrophages

	Endothelial cells, pericytes and astrocytic end feet are essential components of the BBB

Smooth muscle cells control blood flow

Perivascular macrophages aid clearance of toxins

	Impaired amyloid clearance

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy

BBB breakdown

Obstructed blood flow

Decreased CNS glucose uptake

Oxidative stress

	2,10,161	
This table highlights the normal functions of several brain cell types and how these change in early Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. BBB, blood-brain barrier.

Table 2 | Cell types expressing genetic risk factors for Alzheimer disease

Risk allele	Cell type(s)	Gene function(s)	Refs	
AP0E4	Astrocytes and microglia	Lipid metabolism	9	
A8CA7	All cell types	Lipid metabolism	227,228	
CLU	Astrocytes and OPCs	Lipid metabolism and endocytosis	109,227,229	
SORL1	Astrocytes	Lipid metabolism and endocytosis	227	
TREM2	Microglia	Immune response	230–232	
PLCG2	Microglia	Immune response	232	
AB13	Microglia	Immune response	232	
CR1	Microglia	Immune response	109,227	
CD33	Microglia	Immune response	227,228	
INPP5D	Microglia	Immune response	227	
BIN1	Microglia, oligodendrocytes and neurons	Endocytosis	227	
P1CALM	Microglia and endothelial cells	Endocytosis	227,229	
ZCWPW1	OPCs, oligodendrocytes and microglia	Epigenetic regulation	227	
NME8	All cell types	Cytoskeleton	227	
EPHA1	Oligodendrocytes	Ephrin receptor	227,228	
HLA-DRB5-HLA-DRB1	Microglia and macrophages	Immune response	227	
For reviews with more exhaustive lists of risk genes and databases where we searched for cell types that express genes, see REFS233–235. OPCs, oligodendrocyte precursor cells.

Box 1 | Alzheimer disease pathology — neurons and beyond

Degenerative changes in the brains of patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) include the accumulation of ‘positive’ lesions such as amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil threads, dystrophic neurites, cerebral amyloid angiopathy and glial responses as well as the ‘negative’ lesions of synapse and neuronal loss205–207. Plaques are extracellular deposits of the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide, which is generated from the sequential cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein by β-secretase and γ -secretase enzymes208,209. Plaque deposition begins in the neocortex years before symptom onset, then progressively spreads to the hippocampus, diencephalon and striatum, brainstem and finally the cerebellum210. Soluble oligomeric forms of Aβ rather than plaque fibrils are toxic to neurons and synapses, but the exact forms of the toxic oligomers and how they confer toxicity remain fiercely debated211.

Neurofibrillary tangles are intracellular lesions composed of misfolded, hyperphosphorylated tau protein212,213. Tangle accumulation occurs early in the trans-entorhinal cortex then spreads to the entorhinal cortex and hippocampal formation and later to the neocortex214,215. Unlike plaque accumulation, the presence of tangles correlates with neuron loss, synapse loss and cognitive decline216,217. Similar to amyloid, it is likely that soluble forms of tau are toxic, but the precise toxic forms remain unknown218,219.

Drastic brain atrophy occurs in AD, particularly in the medial temporal lobes and later in the frontal lobes205. This progressive atrophy can be observed longitudinally in vivo with structural MRI219, which is increasingly used as a biomarker of disease progression.

Reactive astrocytes (GFAP-labelled; top of figure) and activated microglia (Iba1-labelled; bottom of figure) accumulate around plaques (arrowheads) and in the vicinity of tangles (arrows)45,205. Figure adapted with permission from REF45, Elsevier.

DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Reviewer information

Nature Reviews Neuroscience thanks O. Arancio and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.


1. World Health Organization. Dementia, a global health priority. https://www.who.int/mental_health/publications/dementia_report_2012/en/ (WHO, 2017).
2. De Strooper B &amp; Karran E The cellular phase of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 164 , 603–615 (2016).26871627
3. Hardy JA &amp; Higgins GA Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 256 , 184–185 (1992).1566067
4. Karran E &amp; De Strooper B The amyloid cascade hypothesis: are we poised for success or failure? J. Neurochem 139 , 237–252 (2016).27255958
5. Villegas-Llerena C , Phillips A , Garcia-Reitboeck P , Hardy J &amp; Pocock JM Microglial genes regulating neuroinflammation in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 36 , 74–81 (2016).26517285
6. Livingston G Dementia prevention, intervention, and care. Lancet 390 , 2673–2734 (2017).28735855
7. Iadecola C The pathobiology of vascular dementia. Neuron 80 , 844–866 (2013).24267647
8. Kisler K , Nelson AR , Montagne A &amp; Zlokovic BV Cerebral blood flow regulation and neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 18 , 419–434 (2017).28515434
9. Corder EH Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families. Science 261 , 921–923 (1993).8346443
This landmark paper identifies APOE4 as a genetic risk factor for late-onset AD.

10. Zlokovic BV Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 12 , 723–738 (2011).22048062
11. Bennett RE Tau induces blood vessel abnormalities and angiogenesis-related geneexpression in P301L transgenic mice and human Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115 , E1289–E1298 (2018).29358399
12. Condello C , Yuan P , Schain A &amp; Grutzendler J Microglia constitute a barrier that prevents neurotoxic protofibrillar Aβ42 hotspots around plaques. Nat. Commun 6 , 6176 (2015).25630253
13. Heneka MT Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet. Neurol 14 , 388–405 (2015).25792098
14. Lue LF Involvement of microglial receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) in Alzheimer’s disease: identification of a cellular activation mechanism. Exp. Neurol 171 , 29–45 (2001).11520119
15. Zhao R , Hu W , Tsai J , Li W &amp; Gan WB Microglia limit the expansion of beta-amyloid plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 12 , 47 (2017).28606182
16. Grathwohl SA Formation and maintenance of Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid plaques in the absence of microglia. Nat. Neurosci 12 , 1361–1363 (2009).19838177
17. Spangenberg EE Eliminating microglia in Alzheimer’s mice prevents neuronal loss without modulating amyloid-beta pathology. Brain 139 , 1265–1281 (2016).26921617
18. Olmos-Alonso A Pharmacological targeting of CSF1R inhibits microglial proliferation and prevents the progression of Alzheimer’s-like pathology. Brain 139 , 891–907 (2016).26747862
19. Czirr E Microglial complement receptor 3 regulates brain Aβ levels through secreted proteolytic activity. J. Exp. Med 214 , 1081–1092 (2017).28298456
20. Tay TL A new fate mapping system reveals context-dependent random or clonal expansion of microglia. Nat. Neurosci 20 , 793–803 (2017).28414331
21. Korin B High-dimensional, single-cell characterization of the brain’s immune compartment. Nat. Neurosci 20 , 1300–1309 (2017).28758994
22. Korin B , Dubovik T &amp; Rolls A Mass cytometry analysis of immune cells in the brain. Nat. Protoc 13 , 377–391 (2018).29370157
23. Keren-Shaul H A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169 , 1276–1290 (2017).28602351
This study uses single-cell transcriptomics to identify a subset of microglia surrounding plaques in an AD mouse model. Activation of these DAMs requires TREM2.

24. Krasemann S The TREM2-APOE pathway drives the transcriptional phenotype of dysfunctional microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Immunity 47 , 566–581 (2017).28930663
25. Yeh FL , Wang Y , Tom I , Gonzalez LC &amp; Sheng M TREM2 binds to apolipoproteins, including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and thereby facilitates uptake of amyloid-beta by microglia. Neuron 91 , 328–340 (2016).27477018
26. Jay TR Disease progression-dependent effects of TREM2 deficiency in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 37 , 637–647 (2017).28100745
27. Yuan P TREM2 haplodeficiency in mice and humans impairs the microglia barrier function leading to decreased amyloid compaction and severe axonal dystrophy. Neuron 90 , 724–739 (2016).27196974
28. Ulrich JD Altered microglial response to Aβ plaques in APPPS1–21 mice heterozygous for TREM2.Mol. Neurodegener 9 , 20 (2014).24893973
29. Jay TR TREM2 deficiency eliminates TREM2+inflammatory macrophages and ameliorates pathology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. J. Exp. Med 212 , 287–295 (2015).25732305
30. Song WM Humanized TREM2 mice reveal microglia-intrinsic and -extrinsic effects of R47H polymorphism. J. Exp. Med 215 , 745–760 (2018).29321225
31. Wang Y TREM2-mediated early microglial response limits diffusion and toxicity of amyloid plaques. J. Exp. Med 213 , 667–675 (2016).27091843
32. Kim SM TREM2 promotes Aβ phagocytosis by upregulating C/EBPα-dependent CD36 expression in microglia. Sci. Rep 7 , 11118 (2017).28894284
33. Wyss-Coray T Adult mouse astrocytes degrade amyloid-beta in vitro and in situ. Nat. Med 9 , 453–457 (2003).12612547
34. Leal MC Plaque-associated overexpression of insulin-degrading enzyme in the cerebral cortex of aged transgenic tg2576 mice with Alzheimer pathology. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 65 , 976–987 (2006).17021402
35. Deb S , Wenjun Zhang J &amp; Gottschall PE Beta-amyloid induces the production of active, matrix-degrading proteases in cultured rat astrocytes. Brain Res 970 , 205–213 (2003).12706262
36. Yin KJ Matrix metalloproteinases expressed by astrocytes mediate extracellular amyloid-beta peptide catabolism. J. Neurosci 26 , 10939–10948 (2006).17065436
37. Mrak RE , Sheng JG &amp; Griffin WS Correlation of astrocytic S100 beta expression with dystrophic neurites in amyloid plaques of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 55 , 273–279 (1996).8786385
38. Hudry E Gene transfer of human Apoe isoforms results in differential modulation of amyloid deposition and neurotoxicity in mouse brain. Sci. Transl Med 5 , 212ra161 (2013).
39. Bales KR Lack of apolipoprotein Edramatically reduces amyloid beta-peptide deposition. Nat. Genet 17 , 263–264 (1997).9354781
40. Irizarry MC Apolipoprotein E affects the amount, form, and anatomical distribution of amyloid beta-peptide deposition in homozygous APP(V717F) transgenic mice. Acta Neuropathol 100 , 451–458 (2000).11045665
41. Lee L , Kosuri P &amp; Arancio O Picomolar amyloid-beta peptides enhance spontaneous astrocyte calcium transients. J. Alzheimers Dis 38 , 49–62 (2014).23948929
42. Lim D Amyloid beta deregulates astroglial mGluR5-mediated calcium signaling via calcineurin and Nf-kB. Glia 61 , 1134–1145 (2013).23616440
43. Kuchibhotla KV , Lattarulo CR , Hyman BT &amp; Bacskai BJ Synchronous hyperactivity and intercellular calcium waves in astrocytes in Alzheimer mice. Science 323 , 1211–1215 (2009).19251629
44. Spires-Jones TL , Attems J &amp; Thal DR Interactions of pathological proteins in neurodegenerative diseases. Acta Neuropathol. 134 , 187–205 (2017).28401333
45. Serrano-Pozo A Reactive glia not only associates with plaques but also parallels tangles in Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol 179 , 1373–1384 (2011).21777559
46. Leyns CEG TREM2 deficiency attenuates neuroinflammation and protects against neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114 , 11524–11529 (2017).29073081
47. Hampton DW Cell-mediated neuroprotection in a mouse model of human tauopathy. J. Neurosci 30 , 9973–9983 (2010).20668182
48. Bemiller SM TREM2 deficiency exacerbates tau pathology through dysregulated kinase signaling in a mouse model of tauopathy. Mol. Neurodegener 12 , 74 (2017).29037207
49. Jiang T TREM2 modifies microglial phenotype and provides neuroprotection in P301S tau transgenic mice. Neuropharmacology 105 , 196–206 (2016).26802771
50. Shi Y ApoE4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Nature 549 , 523–527 (2017).28959956
51. Asai H Depletion of microglia and inhibition of exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 1584–1593 (2015).26436904
52 Bhaskar K Regulation of tau pathology by the microglial fractalkine receptor. Neuron 68 , 19–31 (2010).20920788
53 Nash KR Fractalkine overexpression suppresses tau pathology in a mouse model of tauopathy. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 1540–1548 (2013).23332170
54 Grabert K Microglial brain region-dependent diversity and selective regional sensitivities to aging. Nat. Neurosci 19 , 504–516 (2016).26780511
55 Clarke LE Normal aging induces A1-like astrocyte reactivity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci 115 , E1896–E1905 (2018).29437957
56 Tzioras M Assessing amyloid-β, tau, and glial features in Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 participants post-mortem. Matters (Zur). 10.19185/matters.201708000003 (2017).
57 Kang SS Microglial translational profiling reveals a convergent APOE pathway from aging, amyloid, and tau. J. Exp. Med 215 , 2235–2245 (2018).30082275
58. Gomez-Isla T Profound loss of layer II entorhinal cortex neurons occurs in very mild Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 16 , 4491–4500 (1996).8699259
59 Mathys H Temporal tracking of microglia activation in neurodegeneration at single-cell resolution. Cell Rep. 21 , 366–380 (2017).29020624
60 Park J A 3D human triculture system modeling neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 941–951 (2018).29950669
61. Henstridge CM &amp; Spires-Jones TL Modeling Alzheimer’s disease brains in vitro. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 899–900 (2018).29950667
62 Simard AR , Soulet D , Gowing G , Julien JP &amp; Rivest S Bone marrow-derived microglia play a critical role in restricting senile plaque formation in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 49 , 489–502 (2006).16476660
63. Stalder AK Invasion of hematopoietic cells into the brain of amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. J. Neurosci 25 , 11125–11132 (2005).16319312
64 Zuroff L , Daley D , Black KL &amp; Koronyo-Hamaoui M Clearance of cerebral Aβ in Alzheimer’s disease: reassessing the role of microglia and monocytes. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 74 , 2167–2201 (2017).28197669
65. Buttini M Cellular source of apolipoprotein E4 determines neuronal susceptibility to excitotoxic injury in transgenic mice. Am. J. Pathol 177 , 563–569 (2010).20595630
66 Liddelow SA Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. Nature 541 , 481–487 (2017).28099414
67. Chakrabarty P IL-10 alters immunoproteostasis in APP mice, increasing plaque burden and worsening cognitive behavior. Neuron 85 , 519–533 (2015).25619653
68 Guillot-Sestier MV Il10 deficiency rebalances innate immunity to mitigate Alzheimer-like pathology. Neuron 85 , 534–548 (2015).25619654
69 Lian H Astrocyte-microglia cross talk through complement activation modulates amyloid pathology in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 36 , 577–589 (2016).26758846
70 Sekar S Alzheimer’s disease is associated with altered expression of genes involved in immune response and mitochondrial processes in astrocytes. Neurobiol. Aging 36 , 583–591 (2015).25448601
71. Mosher KI &amp; Wyss-Coray T Microglial dysfunction in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem. Pharmacol 88 , 594–604 (2014).24445162
72 Liao YF , Wang BJ , Cheng HT , Kuo LH &amp; Wolfe MS Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1beta, and interferon-gamma stimulate gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of amyloid precursor protein through a JNK-dependent MAPK pathway. J. Biol. Chem 279 , 49523–49532 (2004).15347683
73. Diniz LP Astrocyte transforming growth factor beta 1 protects synapses against Aβ oligomers in Alzheimer’s disease model. J. Neurosci 37 , 6797–6809 (2017).28607171
74. White JA , Manelli AM , Holmberg KH , Van Eldik LJ &amp; Ladu MJ Differential effects of oligomeric and fibrillar amyloid-beta 1–42 on astrocyte-mediated inflammation. Neurobiol. Dis 18 , 459–465 (2005).15755672
75. Rodriguez GA , Tai LM &amp; LaDu MJ &amp; Rebeck GW Human APOE4 increases microglia reactivity at Aβ plaques in a mouse model of Aβ deposition. J. Neuroinflammation 11 , 111 (2014).24948358
76. He P Deletion of tumor necrosis factor death receptor inhibits amyloid beta generation and prevents learning and memory deficits in Alzheimer’s mice. J. Cell Biol 178 , 829–841 (2007).17724122
77. Wilkaniec A , Gassowska-Dobrowolska M , Strawski M , Adamczyk A &amp; Czapski GA Inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 affects early neuroinflammatory signalling in murine model of amyloid beta toxicity. J. Neuroinflammation 15 , 1 (2018).29301548
78. Patel NS Inflammatory cytokine levels correlate with amyloid load in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 2 , 9 (2005).15762998
79. Wood LB Identification of neurotoxic cytokines by profiling Alzheimer’s disease tissues and neuron culture viability screening. Sci. Rep 5 , 16622 (2015).26564777
80. Robinson SR , Dobson C &amp; Lyons J Challengesand directions for the pathogen hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 25 , 629–637 (2004).15172741
81. Itzhaki RF Herpes simplex virus type 1 in brain and risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 349 , 241–244 (1997).9014911
82. Readhead B Multiscale analysis of independent Alzheimer’s cohorts finds disruption of molecular, genetic, and clinical networks by human herpesvirus. Neuron 99 , 64–82 (2018).29937276
83. Eimer WA Alzheimer’s disease-associated beta-amyloid is rapidly seeded by herpesviridae to protect against brain infection. Neuron 99 , 56–63 (2018).30001512
84. Kumar DK Amyloid-beta peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse and worm models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Transl Med 8 , 340ra372 (2016).
85. Dean DC 3rd Association of amyloid pathology with myelin alteration in preclinical Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 74 , 41–49 (2017).27842175
86. McAleese KE Cortical tau load is associated with white matter hyperintensities. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 3 , 60 (2015).26419828
87. Braak H &amp; Braak E Development of Alzheimer-related neurofibrillary changes in the neocortex inversely recapitulates cortical myelogenesis. Acta Neuropathol. 92 , 197–201 (1996).8841666
88. de Faria O Neuroglial interactions underpinning myelin plasticity. Dev. Neurobiol 78 , 93–107 (2018).28941015
89. Xu J Amyloid-beta peptides are cytotoxic to oligodendrocytes. J. Neurosci 21 , RC118 (2001).11150354
90. Jantaratnotai N , Ryu JK , Kim SU &amp; McLarnon JG Amyloid beta peptide-induced corpus callosum damage and glial activation in vivo. Neuroreport 14 , 1429–1433 (2003).12960758
91. Miron VE M2 microglia and macrophages drive oligodendrocyte differentiation during CNS remyelination. Nat. Neurosci 16 , 1211–1218 (2013).23872599
92. Terry RD Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment. Ann. Neurol 30 , 572–580 (1991).1789684
93. Akram A Stereologic estimates of total spinophilin-immunoreactive spine number in area 9 and the CA1 field: relationship with the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 29 , 1296–1307 (2008).17420070
94. Mufson EJ Mild cognitive impairment: pathology and mechanisms. Acta Neuropathol. 123 , 13–30 (2012).22101321
95. Scheff SW , DeKosky ST &amp; Price DA Quantitative assessment of cortical synaptic density in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 11 , 29–37 (1990).2325814
96. DeKosky ST &amp; Scheff SW Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in Alzheimer’s disease: correlation with cognitive severity. Ann. Neurol 27 , 457–464 (1990).2360787
This paper presents the first study to demonstrate that loss of synapses correlates with cognitive decline in AD using elegant electron microscopy imaging of frontal cortex biopsy sample tissue.

97. Spires-Jones TL &amp; Hyman BT The intersection of amyloid beta and tau at synapses in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 82 , 756–771 (2014).24853936
98. Henstridge CM , Pickett E &amp; Spires-Jones TL Synaptic pathology: A shared mechanism in neurological disease. Ageing Res. Rev 28 , 72–84 (2016).27108053
99. Chung WS Astrocytes mediate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways. Nature 504 , 394–400 (2013).24270812
100. Salter MW &amp; Stevens B Microglia emerge as central players in brain disease. Nat. Med 23 , 1018–1027 (2017).28886007
101. Schafer DP , Lehrman EK &amp; Stevens B The “quad-partite” synapse: microglia-synapse interactions in the developing and mature CNS. Glia 61 , 24–36 (2013).22829357
102. Tremblay ME , Lowery RL &amp; Majewska AK Microglial interactions with synapses are modulated by visual experience. PLOS Biol. 8 , e1000527 (2010).21072242
103. Paolicelli RC Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain development. Science 333 , 1456–1458 (2011).21778362
104. Schafer DP Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74 , 691–705 (2012).22632727
105. Stevens B The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination. Cell 1 31 , 1164–1178 (2007).
106. Stephan AH , Barres BA &amp; Stevens B The complement system: an unexpected role in synaptic pruning during development and disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 35 , 369–389 (2012).22715882
107. Bialas AR &amp; Stevens B TGF-β signaling regulates neuronal C1q expression and developmental synaptic refinement. Nat. Neurosci 16 , 1773–1782 (2013).24162655
108. Chung WS Novel allele-dependent role for APOE in controlling the rate of synapse pruning by astrocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 10186–10191 (2016).27559087
109. Lambert JC Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 41 , 1094–1099 (2009).19734903
110. Yasojima K , Schwab C , McGeer EG &amp; McGeer PL Up-regulated production and activation of the complement system in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Am. J. Pathol 154 , 927–936 (1999).10079271
111. Hong S Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352 , 712–716 (2016).27033548
This study is the first demonstration of complement-mediated microglial engulfment of synapses in AD mouse models.

112. Shi Q Complement C3 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration in aged plaque-rich APP/PS1 mice. Sci. Transl Med 9 , eaaf6295 (2017).28566429
This paper establishes the first link between APOE and tau-induced neurodegeneration in an FTD model. APOE knockout was protective whereas APOE2&lt;APOE3&lt;APOE4 expression was associated with reduced homeostatic and increased pro-inflammatory gene expression in both microglia and astrocytes.

113. Weinhard L Microglia remodel synapses by presynaptic trogocytosis and spine head filopodia induction. Nat. Commun 9 , 1228 (2018).29581545
114. Boulanger LM Immune proteins in brain development and synaptic plasticity. Neuron 64 , 93–109 (2009).19840552
115. Syken J , Grandpre T , Kanold PO &amp; Shatz CJ PirB restricts ocular-dominance plasticity in visual cortex. Science 313 , 1795–1800 (2006).16917027
116. William CM Synaptic plasticity defect following visual deprivation in Alzheimer’s disease model transgenic mice. J. Neurosci 32 , 8004–8011 (2012).22674275
117. Kim T Human LilrB2 is a beta-amyloid receptor and its murine homolog PirB regulates synaptic plasticity in an Alzheimer’s model. Science 341 , 1399–1404 (2013).24052308
118. Paolicelli RC TDP-43 depletion in microglia promotes amyloid clearance but also induces synapse loss. Neuron 95 , 297–308 (2017).28669544
119. Henstridge CM Synapse loss in the prefrontal cortex is associated with cognitive decline in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol. 135 , 213–226 (2018).29273900
120. Matos M , Augusto E , Agostinho P , Cunha RA &amp; Chen JF Antagonistic interaction between adenosine A2A receptors and Na+/K+-ATPase-α2 controlling glutamate uptake in astrocytes. J. Neurosci 33 , 18492–18502 (2013).24259572
121. Orr AG Astrocytic adenosine receptor A2A and Gs-coupled signaling regulate memory. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 423–434 (2015).25622143
122. Mookherjee P GLT-1 loss accelerates cognitive deficit onset in an Alzheimer’s disease animal model. J. Alzheimers Dis 26 , 447–455 (2011).21677376
123. Scimemi A Amyloid-β 1–42 slows clearance of synaptically released glutamate by mislocalizing astrocytic GlT-1. J. Neurosci 33 , 5312–5318 (2013).23516295
124. Zumkehr J Ceftriaxone ameliorates tau pathology and cognitive decline via restoration of glial glutamate transporter in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 36 , 2260–2271 (2015).25964214
125. Reisberg B Memantine in moderate-to-severe Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med 348 , 1333–1341 (2003).12672860
126. Pitas RE , Boyles JK , Lee SH , Foss D &amp; Mahley, R. W. Astrocytes synthesize apolipoprotein E and metabolize apolipoprotein E-containing lipoproteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 917 , 148–161 (1987).3539206
127. Koffie RM Apolipoprotein E4 effects in Alzheimer’s disease are mediated by synaptotoxic oligomeric amyloid-beta. Brain: J. Neurol 135 , 2155–2168 (2012).
This study applies, for the first time, the high-resolution imaging technique of array tomography to human brain tissue. APOE4 was observed to increase the presence of oligomeric Aβ at synapses in the AD brain.

128. Rebeck GW , Reiter JS , Strickland DK &amp; Hyman, B. T. Apolipoprotein E in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: allelic variation and receptor interactions. Neuron 11 , 575–580 (1993)8398148
129. Castellano JM Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-β peptide clearance. Sci. Transl Med 3 , 89ra57 (2011).
130. Hashimoto T Apolipoprotein E, especially apolipoprotein E4, increases the oligomerization of amyloid β peptide. J. Neurosci 32 , 15181–15192 (2012).23100439
131. Klein W Synaptotoxic amyloid-β oligomers: a molecular basis for the cause, diagnosis, and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease? J. A¡zheimers Dis 33 (Suppl. 1 ), 49–65 (2013).
132. Perez-Nievas BG Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to Alzheimer’s pathology. Brain 136 , 2510–2526 (2013).23824488
133. Dumanis SB ApoE4 decreases spine density and dendritic complexity in cortical neurons in vivo.J. Neurosci 29 , 15317–15322 (2009).19955384
134. Dumanis SB , DiBattista AM , Miessau M , Moussa CE &amp; Rebeck GW APOE genotype affects the pre-synaptic compartment of glutamatergic nerve terminals. J. Neurochem 124 , 4–14 (2013).22862561
135. Korwek KM , Trotter JH , Ladu MJ , Sullivan PM &amp; Weeber EJ ApoE isoform-dependent changes in hippocampal synaptic function. Mol. Neurodegener 4 , 21 (2009).19725929
136. Schiepers OJ APOE E4 status predicts age-related cognitive decline in the ninth decade: longitudinal follow-up of the Lothian Birth Cohort 1921. Mol. Psychiatry 17 , 315–324 (2012).21263443
137 Henstridge CM Post-mortem brain analyses of the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936: extending lifetime cognitive and brain phenotyping to the level of the synapse. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 3 , 53 (2015).26335101
138. Kay KR Studying synapses in human brain with array tomography and electron microscopy. Nat. Protoc 8 , 1366–1380 (2013).23787894
139. Yoshiyama Y Synapse loss and microglial activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy mouse model. Neuron 53 , 337–351 (2007).17270732
140. Sidoryk-Wegrzynowicz M Astrocytes in mouse models of tauopathies acquire early deficits and lose neurosupportive functions. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 5 , 89 (2017).29187256
141. Hunsberger HC , Rudy CC , Batten SR , Gerhardt GA &amp; Reed MN P301L tau expression affects glutamate release and clearance in the hippocampal trisynaptic pathway. J. Neurochem 132 , 169–182 (2015).25319522
142. Piacentini R Reduced gliotransmitter release from astrocytes mediates tau-induced synaptic dysfunction in cultured hippocampal neurons. Glia 65 , 1302–1316 (2017).28519902
143. Dudvarski Stankovic N , Teodorczyk M , Ploen R , Zipp F &amp; Schmidt MHH Microglia-blood vessel interactions: a double-edged sword in brain pathologies. Acta Neuropathol 131 , 347–363 (2016).26711460
144. Shen Q , Goderie SK , Jin L , Karanth N &amp; Sun Y Endothelial cells stimulate self-renewal and expand neurogenesis of neural stem cells. Science 304 , 1338–1340 (2004).15060285
145. Arai K &amp; Lo EH An oligovascular niche: cerebral endothelial cells promote the survival and proliferation, of oligodendrocyte precursor cells. J. Neurosci 29 , 4351–4355 (2009).19357263
146. Guo S , Kim WJ , Lok J &amp; Lee SR Neuroprotection via matrix-trophic coupling between cerebral endothelial cells and neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105 , 7582–7587 (2008).18495934
147. Santos CY Pathophysiologic relationship between Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular disease, and cardiovascular risk: a review and synthesis. Alzheimers Dement. (Amst.) 7 , 69–87 (2017).28275702
148. Matthews FE A two decade dementia incidence comparison from the cognitive function and ageing studies I and II. Nat. Commun 7 , 11398 (2016).27092707
149. Iadecola C SOD1 rescues cerebral endothelial dysfunction in mice overexpressing amyloid precursor protein. Nat. Neurosci 2 , 157–161 (1999).10195200
150. Iadecola C Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 5 , 347–360 (2004).15100718
151. Kelly P Microvascular ultrastructural changes precede cognitive impairment in the murine APPswe/PS1dE9 model of Alzheimer’s disease. Angiogenesis 20 , 567–580 (2017).28741167
152. Wang H , Golob EJ &amp; Su M-YY Vascular volume and blood-brain barrier permeability measured by dynamic contrast enhanced MRI in hippocampus and cerebellum of patients with MCI and normal controls. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 24 , 695–700 (2006).16878309
153. Starr JM , Farrall AJ , Armitage P &amp; McGurn B Blood-brain barrier permeability in Alzheimer’s disease: a case-control MRI study. Psychiatry Res.171 , 232–241 (2009).19211227
154. Jagust WJ Diminished glucose transport in Alzheimer’s disease: dynamic PET studies. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 11 , 323–330 (1991).1997504
155. Iturria-Medina Y Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun 7 , 11934 (2016).27327500
156. Wardlaw JM &amp; Hernandez MCV What are white matter hyperintensities made of? Relevance to vascular cognitive impairment. J. Am. Heart Assoc 4 , e001140 (2015).
157. McAleese KE Parietal white matter lesions in Alzheimer’s disease are associated with cortical neurodegenerative pathology, but not with small vessel disease. Acta Neuropathol. 134 , 459–473 (2017).28638989
158. Lee S White matter hyperintensities are a core feature of Alzheimer’s disease: evidence from the dominantly inherited Alzheimer network. Ann. Neurol 79 , 929–939 (2016).27016429
159 Bakker EN Lymphatic clearance of the brain: perivascular, paravascular and significance for neurodegenerative diseases. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol 36 , 181–194 (2016).26993512
160 Tarasoff-Conway JM Clearance systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 11 , 457–470 (2015).26195256
161. Iadecola C The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey through neurovascular coupling in health and disease. Neuron 96 , 17–42 (2017).28957666
162. Iliff JJ A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid beta. Sci. TranslMed 4 , 147ra111 (2012).
163. Plog BA &amp; Nedergaard M The glymphatic system in central nervous system health and disease: past, present, and future. Annu. Rev. Pathol 13 , 379–394 (2018).29195051
164. Da Mesquita S Functional aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 560 , 185–191 (2018).30046111
165. Lucey BP Associations between beta-amyloid kinetics and the beta-amyloid diurnal pattern in the central nervous system. JAMA Neurol. 74 , 207–215 (2017).27992627
166. Kang JE Amyloid-beta dynamics are regulated 1 91. by orexin and the sleep-wake cycle. Science 326 , 1005–1007 (2009).19779148
167. Bero AW Neuronal activity regulates the regional vulnerability to amyloid-beta deposition. Nat. Neurosci 14 , 750–756 (2011).21532579
168. Xie L Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science 342 , 373–377 (2013).24136970
169. Zhao Z Central role for PICALM in amyloid-beta blood-brain barrier transcytosis and clearance. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 978–987 (2015).26005850
170. Nelson AR , Sagare AP &amp; Zlokovic BV Role of clusterin in the brain vascular clearance of amyloid-beta. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114 , 8681–8682 (2017).28765369
171 Robert J Clearance of beta-amyloid is facilitated by apolipoprotein E and circulating high-density lipoproteins in bioengineered human vessels. eLife 6 , e29595 (2017).28994390
172 Burfeind KG The effects of noncoding aquaporin-4 single-nucleotide polymorphisms on cognition and functional progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. (NY) 3 , 348–359 (2017).
173. Sagare AP Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat. Commun 4 , 2932 (2013).24336108
174. Hill RA Regional blood flow in the normal and ischemic brain is controlled by arteriolar smooth muscle cell contractility and not by capillary pericytes. Neuron 87 , 95–110 (2015).26119027
175. Faraco G Hypertension enhances Aβ-induced neurovascular dysfunction, promotes β-secretase activity, and leads to amyloidogenic processing of APP. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 36 , 241–252 (2016).25920959
176. El Khoury J Ccr2 deficiency impairs microglial accumulation and accelerates progression of Alzheimer-like disease. Nat. Med 13 , 432–438 (2007).17351623
177. Jiang T , Sun Q &amp; Chen S Oxidative stress: a major 201 pathogenesis and potential therapeutic target of antioxidative agents in Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease. Prog. Neurobiol 147 , 1–19 (2016).27769868
178. Pratico D Oxidative stress hypothesis in Alzheimer’s disease: a reappraisal. Trends Pharmacol. Sci 29 , 609–615 (2008).18838179
179. Pratico D , Uryu K , Leight S , Trojanoswki JQ &amp; Lee VM Increased lipid peroxidation precedes amyloid plaque formation in an animal model of Alzheimer amyloidosis. J. Neurosci 21 , 4183–4187 (2001).11404403
180. Matsuoka Y , Picciano M , La Francois J &amp; Duff K Fibrillar beta-amyloid evokes oxidative damage in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 104 , 609–613 (2001).11440793
181. Nunomura A Oxidative damage is the earliest event in Alzheimer disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 60 , 759–767 (2001).11487050
182. Park L Nox2-derived radicals contribute to neurovascular and behavioral dysfunction in mice overexpressing the amyloid precursor protein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105 , 1347–1352 (2008).18202172
183. Park L Innate immunity receptor CD36 promotes cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110 , 3089–3094 (2013).23382216
184. Park L Brain perivascular macrophages initiate the neurovascular dysfunction of Alzheimer Aβ peptides. Circ. Res 121 , 258–269 (2017).28515043
185. Lane-Donovan C &amp; Herz J ApoE, ApoE receptors, and the synapse in Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Endocrinol. Metab 28 , 273–284 (2017).28057414
186. Cramer PE ApoE-directed therapeutics rapidly clear beta-amyloid and reverse deficits in AD mouse models. Science 335 , 1503–1506 (2012).22323736
187. Tesseur I Comment on “ApoE-directed therapeutics rapidly clear beta-amyloid and reverse deficits in AD mouse models”. Science 340 , 924 (2013).
188. LaClair KD Treatment with bexarotene, a compound that increases apolipoprotein-E, provides no cognitive benefit in mutant APP/PS1 mice. Mol. Neurodegener 8 , 18 (2013).23764200
189. O’Hare E Lack of support for bexarotene as a treatment for Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropharmacology 100 , 124–130 (2016).26025659
190. Cummings JL Double-blind, placebo-controlled, proof-of-concept trial of bexarotene Xin moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther 8 , 4 (2016).26822146
191. Huynh TV Age-dependent effects of apoE reduction using antisense oligonucleotides in a model of beta-amyloidosis. Neuron 96 , 1013–1023 (2017).29216448
192. in t’ Veld BA Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J.Med. 345 , 1515–1521 (2001).11794217
193. Masgrau R , Guaza C , Ransohoff RM &amp; Galea E Should we stop saying ‘glia’ and ‘neuroinflammation’? Trends Mol. Med 23 , 486–500 (2017).28499701
194. Breitner JC Extended results of the Alzheimer’s disease anti-inflammatory prevention trial. Alzheimers Dement. 7 , 402–411 (2011).21784351
195. Lansita JA Nonclinical development of ANX005: a humanized anti-C1q antibody for treatment of autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases. Int. J. Toxicol 36 , 449–462 (2017).29202623
196. Femminella GD Antidiabetic drugs in Alzheimer’s disease: mechanisms of action and futureperspectives. J. Diabetes Res 2017 , 7420796 (2017).28656154
197. Infante-Garcia C Antidiabetic polypill improves central pathology and cognitive impairment in a mixed model of Alzheimer’s disease and type 2 diabetes. Mol. Neurobiol 55 , 6130–6144 (2017).29224179
198. Ramos-Rodriguez JJ Progressive neuronal pathology and synaptic loss induced by prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol 54 , 3428–3438 (2017).27177549
199. Harrington C Rosiglitazone does not improve cognition or global function when used as adjunctive therapy to AChE inhibitors in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: two phase 3 studies. Curr. Alzheimer Res 8 , 592–606 (2011).21592048
200. Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. Takeda and Zinfandel pharmaceuticals discontinue TOMMORROW trial following planned futility analysis. Takeda https://www.takeda.com/newsroom/newsreleases/2018/takeda-tommorrow-trial/ (2018).
201. Wu YT The changing prevalence and incidence of dementia over time - current evidence. Nat. Rev. Neurol 13 , 327–339 (2017).28497805
202. Hamer M , Muniz Terrera G &amp; Demakakos P Physical activity and trajectories in cognitive function: English longitudinal study of ageing. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 72 , 477–483 (2018).29434025
203. Forbes D , Forbes SC , Blake CM , Thiessen EJ &amp; Forbes S Exercise programs for people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev 4 , CD006489 (2015).
204. Young J , Angevaren M , Rusted J &amp; Tabet N Aerobic exercise to improve cognitive function in older people without known cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev 4 , CD005381(2015).
205. Serrano-Pozo A , Frosch MP , Masliah E &amp; Hyman BT Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 1 , a006189 (2011).22229116
206 Alzheimer A Ubereine eigenartige Erkrankung der Hirnrinde [German]. Allgemeine Zeitschrift Psychiatrie Psychisch-Gerichtliche Medizin 64 , 146–148 (1907).
207. Hyman BT National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 8 , 1–13 (2012).22265587
208. De Strooper B Deficiency of presenilin-1 inhibits the normal cleavage of amyloid precursor protein. Nature 391 , 387–390 (1998).9450754
209 Vassar R Beta-secretase cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane aspartic protease BaCE. Science 286 , 735–741 (1999).10531052
210. Thal DR , Rüb U , Orantes M &amp; Braak H Phases of Aβ-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD. Neurology 58 , 1791–1800 (2002).12084879
211. Jarosz-Griffiths HH , Noble E , Rushworth JV &amp; Hooper NM Amyloid-β receptors: the good, the bad, and the prion protein. J. Biol. Chem 291 , 3174–3183 (2016).26719327
212. Goedert M , Spillantini MG , Cairns NJ &amp; Crowther RA Tau proteins of Alzheimer paired helical filaments: abnormal phosphorylation of all six brain isoforms. Neuron 8 , 159–168 (1992).1530909
213. Goedert M &amp; Spillantini MG A century of Alzheimer’s disease. Science 314 , 777–781 (2006).17082447
214. Hyman BT , Van Hoesen GW , Damasio AR &amp; Barnes CL Alzheimer’s disease: cell-specific pathology isolates the hippocampal formation. Science 225 , 1168–1170 (1984).6474172
215. Braak H &amp; Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 82 , 239–259 (1991).1759558
216. Ingelsson M Early Aβ accumulation and progressive synaptic loss, gliosis, and tangle formation in AD brain. Neurology 62 , 925–931 (2004).15037694
217. Nelson PT Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 71 , 362–381 (2012).22487856
218. Gomez-Isla T Neuronal loss correlates with but exceeds neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol 41 , 17–24 (1997).9005861
219. Dickerson BC , Stoub TR , Shah RC &amp; Sperling RA Alzheimer-signature MRI biomarker predicts AD dementia in cognitively normal adults. Neurology 76 , 1395–1402 (2011).21490323
220. Hickman S , Izzy S , Sen P , Morsett L &amp; El Khoury J Microglia in neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 1359–1369 (2018).30258234
221. Heppner FL , Ransohoff RM &amp; Becher B Immune attack: the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 16 , 358–372 (2015).25991443
222. Pekny M Astrocytes: a central element in neurological diseases. Acta Neuropathol. 131 , 323–345 (2016).26671410
223. Rodriguez-Arellano JJ , Parpura V , Zorec R &amp; Verkhratsky A Astrocytes in physiological aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 323 , 170–182 (2016).25595973
224. Cai Z &amp; Xiao M Oligodendrocytes and Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Neurosci 126 , 97–104 (2016).26000818
225. Nasrabady SE , Rizvi B , Goldman JE &amp; Brickman AM White matter changes in Alzheimer’s disease: a focus on myelin and oligodendrocytes. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 6 , 22 (2018).29499767
226. Palop JJ &amp; Mucke L Amyloid-beta-induced neuronal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: from synapses toward neural networks. Nat. Neurosci 13 , 812–818 (2010).20581818
227. Lambert JC Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 45 , 1452–1458 (2013).24162737
228. Hollingworth P Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 43 , 429–435 (2011).21460840
229. Harold D Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 41 , 1088–1093 (2009).19734902
230. Guerreiro R TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med 368 , 117–127 (2013).23150934
231. Jonsson T Variant of TREM2 associated with the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med 368 , 107–116 (2013).23150908
232. Sims R Rare coding variants in PLCG2, ABI3, and TREM2 implicate microglial-mediated innate immunity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 49 , 1373–1384 (2017).28714976
233. Robinson M , Lee BY &amp; Hane FT Recent progress in Alzheimer’s disease research, part 2: genetics and epidemiology. J. Alzheimers Dis 57 , 317–330 (2017).28211812
234. Efthymiou AG &amp; Goate AM Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol. Neurodegener 12 , 43 (2017).28549481
235. Zhang Y An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci 34 , 11929–11947 (2014).25186741
