LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8809320
1600
Neuron
Neuron
Neuron
0896-6273
1097-4199

30189209
6240334
10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.039
NIHMS991142
Article
Tau protein disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport in Alzheimer’s disease
Eftekharzadeh Bahareh 1212
Daigle J. Gavin 3412
Kapinos Larisa E. 5
Coyne Alyssa 3
Schiantarelli Julia 1
Carlomagno Yari 6
Cook Casey 6
Miller Sean J. 3
Dujardin Simon 1
Amaral Ana S. 1
Grima Jonathan C. 3
Bennett Rachel E. 1
Tepper Katharina 1
DeTure Michael 7
Vanderburgh Charles R. 1
Corjuc Bianca T. 1
DeVos Sarah L. 1
Gonzalez Jose Antonio 1
Chew Jeannie 3
Vidensky Svetlana 3
Gage Fred H. 8
Mertens Jerome 8
Troncoso Juan 7
Mandelkow Eckhard 9
Salvatella Xavier 11
Lim Roderick Y. H. 5
Petrucelli Leonard 6
Wegmann Susanne 110
Rothstein Jeffrey D. 3131415
Hyman Bradley T. 11314
1 Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
2 Neuromuscular &amp; Movement Disorders, Biogen, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA (current address)
3 Brain Science Institute, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, MA
4 Foundational Neuroscience Center, Abbvie Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA (current address)
5 Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, CH-4056, Switzerland
6 Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
7 Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA
8 Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
9 German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) and CAESAR Research Center, 53175 Bonn, Germany
10 German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 10117 Berlin, Germany (current address)
11 Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Barcelona, 08028, Spain
12 These authors contributed equally
13 These authors contributed equally
14 Senior authors
15 Lead Contact
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Conceptualization, B.E., J.G.D., S.W., J.D.R. and B.T.H.; Design and performance of the majority of the experiments, B.E., J.G.D., and L.E.K.; Methodology, B.E., J.G.D., L.E.K., A.C., C.C., and S.L.D.; Writing (original draft), B.E. and J.G.D.; Writing (review and editing), B.E., J.G.D, S.W., R.Y.H.L., L.P., J.D.R. and B.T.H.; Manuscript discussion, B.E., J.G.D., S.W., L.E.K., R.Y.H.L., E.M., J.D.R. and B.T.H.; Additional experimental work, X.S., J.S., Y.C., C.C., S.J.M., A.C.A., R.E.B., K.T., S.L.D., S.V., J.C.G., M.D., C.R.V., B.T.C., J.A.G, S.W. and J.T.; Construct design and production, J.M. and F.H.G.; Funding acquisition, J.D.R. and B.T.H.; Supervision, J.D.R. and B.T.H.

Correspondence: jrothstein@jhmi.edu (J.D.R.) and bhyman@mgh.harvard.edu
1 10 2018
05 9 2018
05 9 2019
99 5 925940.e7
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Summary

Tau is the major constituent of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), but the mechanism underlying tau-associated neural damage remains unclear. Here we show that tau can directly interact with nucleoporins of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) and affect their structural and functional integrity. Pathological tau impairs nuclear import and export in tauoverexpressing transgenic mice and in human AD brain tissue. Furthermore, the nucleoporin Nup98 accumulates in the cell bodies of some tangle-bearing neurons and can facilitate tau aggregation in vitro. These data support the hypothesis that tau can directly interact with NPC components, leading to their mislocalization and consequent disruption of NPC function. This raises the possibility that NPC dysfunction contributes to tau-induced neurotoxicity in AD and tauopathies.

eTOC

Nuclear pore complexes control trafficking of proteins and RNA in and out of the nucleus. These studies now provide evidence that AD related tau disrupts nuclear pore function in Alzheimer’s disease and that nuclear pore proteins cause tau to aggregate.

Alzheimer’s disease
tauopathies
nuclear pore complex
Nup98
nucleocytoplasmic transport

INTRODUCTION

The intracellular aggregation of tau in neurofibrillary tangles is a neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Ittner et al., 2010; Li et al., 2011; Thies and Mandelkow, 2007; Weingarten et al., 1975). The progressive hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of tau in AD brains correlate well with synapse loss and neurodegeneration and thus may be a key driver of cognitive decline (Gomez-Isla et al., 1996; Gong and Iqbal, 2008). However, the mechanisms underlying tau aggregation and consequent cellular toxicity are unknown.

NPCs are responsible for the macromolecular trafficking of proteins and RNA between the nucleoplasm and the cytoplasm. They are molecular assemblies consisting of multiple copies of 30 different proteins called nucleoporins (Nups), eight of which contain intrinsically disordered domains rich in phenylalanine-glycine repeats (FG) (Denning et al., 2003; Labokha et al., 2013; Lemke, 2016; Milles and Lemke, 2011). Nups are assembled in the NPC with specialized functional and spatial designations (Hinshaw et al., 1992). FG-containing Nups (FGNups) are attached to the nuclear scaffold via coiled-coil motifs in their non-FG domains (Dultz et al., 2008). Their long unstructured polypeptide FG chains extend into the central channel, creating a hydrogel-like polymer brush that acts as a selectively permeable barrier for transport of proteins and other biomolecules (Floch et al., 2014; Frey et al., 2006; Lemke, 2016).

Molecules smaller than ~40 kDa can migrate freely through the NPC via passive transport (Timney et al., 2016; Wente and Rout, 2010), whereas larger molecules require active transport mediated by interactions between nuclear transport receptors and Nups to pass through the central channel of the NPC (Frey and Gorlich, 2007; Frey et al., 2006; Labokha et al., 2013; Petri et al., 2012). During nuclear import, cargo is released into the nucleus when its transport receptor interacts with intra-nuclear RanGTP. Correspondingly, during nuclear export, cargo is released into the cytoplasm upon hydrolysis of RanGTP to generate RanGDP. As illustrated by this cycle, the nucleocytoplasmic gradient of RanGTP and RanGDP is essential for defining the directionality of nucleocytoplasmic transport (Dasso and Pu, 1998; Floch et al., 2014; Moore and Blobel, 1994), and disruption of the Ran gradient can cause toxicity and cell death (Hetzer et al., 2002). Nucleocytoplasmic transport has been shown to be disrupted in neurons in several neurodegenerative diseases, including C9orf72-mediated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia (ALS/FTD) (Freibaum et al., 2015; Jovicic et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015) and Huntington’s disease (Gasset-Rosa et al., 2017; Grima et al., 2017), as well as in normal human aging (D’Angelo et al., 2009; Kelley et al., 2011; Lord et al., 2015; Mertens et al., 2015; Snow et al., 2013). In the case of C9orf72-mediated ALS/FTD, intronic hexanucleotide repeats within C9orf72 produce RNA with expanded GGGGCC (G4C2) repeats that interact directly with RanGap1 (Zhang et al., 2015), whereas in Huntington’s disease, intranuclear huntingtin inclusions interact with both Nup62 and RanGap1 (Grima et al., 2017). Changes in nuclear membrane morphology (Sheffield et al., 2006), mislocalization of some transcription factors from the nucleus to the cytoplasm (Ke et al., 2012; Lu et al., 2014) and Ran reduced expression have also been reported in postmortem tissues from AD cases (Mastroeni et al., 2013), suggesting that analogous defects to those described in C9orf72-mediated ALS/FTD and Huntington’s disease might occur in AD. However, the involvement of tau in these potential defects, as well as its more general role in nucleocytoplasmic transport, have not been studied.

Here we show that phospho-tau-positive cells in human AD and tau transgenic mouse brains, as well as in cellular models of tau-related AD neuropathology, have an impaired nuclear transport. Indeed, we found that tau can interfere with NPC integrity in different ways. Tau directly interacts with the nucleoporin Nup98 in vitro, leads to cytoplasmic mislocalization of Nup98 in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and in neurons with somatic phospho-tau in vivo, and induces a disruption of the nuclear pore complex distribution in the nuclear membrane. Consequently, we observe failure of nuclear pore transport and diffusion-barrier properties, with changes in pore permeability to inert test molecules (dextrans) of various sizes, as well as alterations in active protein import and export including Ran, an endogenous protein whose localization is known to be sensitive to NPC dysfunction. We further show that tau and Nup98 directly interact as assessed by co-immunoprecipitation from human AD brain tissue, and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of recombinant proteins. In addition, in vitro experiments show that Nup98 triggers tau aggregation and accelerates tau fibrillization, and thereby possibly contributes to tau aggregation and tangle formation/stabilization in neuronal somata in AD and tauopathy brains.

In summary, we provide in vivo and in vitro evidence for a pathogenic model in which accumulation of tau in the somatodendritic compartment, as occurs in AD and tauopathies, increases the tau concentration in the perinuclear space and enables abnormal interaction of tau with Nups, which in turn leads to impairment in nucleocytoplasmic transport of biomolecules. These tau:Nup interactions may induce a pathological disruption of NPC function and contribute to tau-induced neurotoxicity. Targeting this pathway could provide a new therapeutic strategy for AD and similar neurodegenerative diseases.

RESULTS

Phospho-tau leads to abnormal distribution of FG-domain nucleoporins in AD brains

To test the hypothesis that tau interacts with components of the nuclear pore and leads to its functional impairment (Figure 1A), we first examined the distribution of tau and NPC components in postmortem hippocampal tissue from control and AD patients using immunofluorescence (Supplemental Table 1). An abnormal, irregular distribution of NPCs in the nuclear membrane has previously been described for AD brain tissue (Sheffield et al., 2006). Using a NPC marker, NPC[414], that recognizes the FXFG repeats (FG domains) in several nucleoporins, including Nup62 but not Nup98, we found a homogeneous rim-like labeling of the nuclear membrane in human control brains (Figure 1B). In AD brains, the nuclear membrane NPC[414] staining was irregular and revealed a disturbed nuclear morphology with a crinkled appearance and invagination of the nuclear membrane, and a strongly reduced membrane staining compared to controls (Figure S1A). Instead, FG-Nups (Figure 1B) and Nup62 (Figure S1A) occurred in the cytoplasm, suggesting a soma mislocalization. In hippocampal neurons without obvious NFTs, phospho-tau (detected with a mix (phospho-tau mix) of antibodies against phospho-tau epitopes pT181, pS199, pT205, pT231, and pS409) frequently colocalized with NPC[414] at the nuclear membrane (Figure 1B). Interestingly, the nucleoporin Nup133, which is an integral part of the NPC scaffold and lacks FG-domains, showed neither cytoplasmic mislocalization nor a decrease in nuclear membrane staining in AD tissue (Figure S1A), suggesting that FG-domains may be relevant for missorting of nucleopore components.

Cytoplasmic phospho-tau drives Nup98 into the cytosol

The aberrant presence of FG-Nups in the neuronal cytosol of AD neurons led us to hypothesize that tau may interact with components of the NPC, presumably Nups with FG-domains (FG-Nups), and induce their release from the nuclear membrane. To test this hypothesis, we focused on Nup98, which is one of the most abundant Nups and has the highest FG-content (Schmidt and Görlich, 2015). Nup98 is normally found on the cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic edges of the NPC (Iwamoto et al., 2010; Powers et al., 1997). In human control hippocampi, Nup98 was distributed evenly in the nuclear membrane of large neuronal nuclei (Figure 2A, Figure S1B), but smaller glia cell nuclei did not show strong Nup98 staining. The typically homogenous distribution of Nup98 in the neuronal nuclear membrane was severely disrupted in AD brains and Nup98 mislocalized to the cytoplasm in neurons having somatic phospho-tau (phospho-tau mix, pT205, pT231, or PHF1; Figure 2A,B,C,D) or misfolded tau (Alz50; Figure S1C). In some NFTs, a substantial amount of Nup98 appeared to be depleted from the nuclear membrane and present in the cytoplasm, often colocalizing with NFTs. Interestingly, another FG-Nup, Nup54, did not show overt missorting into the cytoplasm, nor depletion from the nuclear membrane in AD hippocampal neurons (Figure 2E,S1D). Additionallly, the nuclear Nup Pom121 retained its normal localization in the nucleus. These data argued against a general disassembly of NPCs and release of their constituents in AD neurons with phospho-tau, but rather suggested that the depletion from the nuclear envelope and the mislocalization into the cytosol was specific for a subset of Nups, including Nup98 and Nup62.

Free Nup98 can promote Tau aggregation and filament assembly in vitro

The C-terminal part of Nup98, which is normally located within the NPC scaffold and not accessible to proteins in the cytosol, is highly negatively charged (Figure S2A). Because tau aggregation is triggered by polyanionic macromolecules, for example by heparin and RNA (Kampers et al., 1999; Kampers T, Friedhoff P, Biernat J, Mandelkow EM and E., 1996; Ramachandran and Udgaonkar, 2011), we tested whether the presence of free polyanionic Nup98 C-termini (Nup98-C; aa 645–911, Iso-electric point 4.99) could enhance tau aggregation and fibrilization in vitro. To assess the effect of Nup98 on tau aggregation, we incubated full-length 2N4R wild-type tau (WTtau) or mutant P301Ltau for several days in the presence of Nup-C, then assessed fibril formation by monitoring the fluorescence of the amyloid dye thioflavin S (ThioS) and by electron microscopy (EM) (Figure 3A, S2B, S2C). In the presence of heparin (0.04 mg/ml), recombinant C-terminal Nup98 (2 μM) significantly promoted tau (8 μM) fibril assembly (Figure S2B). Even in the absence of heparin, a condition in which tau does not normally form fibrils, Nup98 strongly catalyzed tau fibrilization in a concentration and time-dependent, heparin-independent manner (Figure 3A, S2D, S3). In the absence of heparin, neither Nup98 nor tau formed fibrils individually (Figure S3). For these experiments, we kept the concentration of recombinant tau (tau-p0; WT or P301L) constant (10 μM or ~0.4 mg/mL) and added Nup98-C at different molar ratios of Nup98-C:tau (1:27 [0.3 μM], 1:8 [1 μM], and 1:4 [2 μM]) (Figure 3A, S3). At higher concentrations (Nup98:tau 1:4; Figure 3A), Nup98 promoted the aggregation of WTtau and P301Ltau, and at lower molar concentrations (Nup98:tau 1:8), Nup98 still effectively induced fibril assembly of P301L tau but not WT tau. We also were interested in examining the interaction of full-length Nup98 with tau in the aggregation assays. However, although we were successful in the recombinant expression and purification of the C- and N-terminal half of Nup98 for the various assays (see also Fig 4 below), we were unable to purify the expressed full-length Nup98 properly, and thus have been unable to gather an appropriate full length Nup98 for the aggregation and other assays.

To analyze if both tau and Nup98 aggregate in this system, or if Nup98 only induces tau aggregation, but stays soluble, we analyzed the insoluble (pellet after centrifugation at 90000 × g for 40 minutes at 4°C) and soluble (supernatant) fractions of the tau:Nup98 aggregation assays by Western blot (Figure 3B). In samples with apparent tau aggregation (ThioS+ and fibrils in EM images), tau and Nup98 were found only in the insoluble fraction, whereby both aggregated Nup98 and tau appeared as HMW smear, indicating that Nup98 also had aggregated in these samples. Under similar conditions, Immuno-EM with gold particle labeled tau (6 nm gold) and Nup98 (12 nm gold) suggested that Nup98 was integrated into the tau fibrils (Figure S2E). Furthermore, when we immunoprecipitated Nup98 from total AD brain lysate (Figure S2F,G) conrtaining aggregated HMW tau, we found that both HMW tau and distinct monomeric full-length and truncated tau species interacted with Nup98. These data indicate that Nup98 can facilitate tau aggregation and also co-aggregates with tau in the cytosol, consistent with the observed tau-induced “sequestration” of Nup98 into the cytosol and the co-localization of Nup98 with intracellular phospho-tau in AD.

Phospho-tau colocalizes with Nup98 and Nup62 at the nuclear membrane

To evaluate if tau also interacts with nucleoporins anchored in intact NPCs in the nuclear membrane, we isolated nuclei from AD and control brain and performed high resolution optical sectioning microscopy (Matevossian and Akbarian, 2008) (Figures 4A, S4A). 3D-rendered Z-projections allowed the colocalization analysis of phospho-tau (phospho-tau mix) with Nup98 and Nup62 (NPC[414]) in the nuclear membrane. Hippocampal nuclei from control brains showed a faint phospho-tau staining at their membrane, which only occasionally colocalized with NPCs (Figure 4B,C). In contrast, hippocampal nuclei from AD brains contained substantially more phospho-tau on the nuclear surface (Figures 4D), where phospho-tau colocalized with Nup98 (Figure 4E). We also found that the number of NPCs distributed in the nuclear membrane was significantly reduced in AD cases compared to controls (Figure 4F). In nuclei from visual cortex, a brain region having less pathologically hyperphosphorylated tau in AD, we still observed a small amount of phospho-tau associated with NPCs (Figure S4B), suggesting that low amounts of cytoplasmic phospho-tau may be sufficient to interact with NPCs. Taken together, these data suggest that, in disease conditions, cytoplasmic phospho-tau could directly interact with Nups in the nuclear membrane.

Phospho-tau interacts directly with the FG-domain of Nup98

Tau and Nup98 both have domains with similar high propensities for disorder as predicted by the DISPROT algorithm (Obradovic et al., 2003; Peng et al., 2005) (Figure S2A). Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) have a propensity to interact with multiple binding partners through their ID domains (Lemke, 2016; Schmidt and Rohatgi, 2016; Wright and Dyson, 2015; Wu et al., 2017). To determine whether tau, which is also intrinsically disordered, directly interacts with Nup98, we employed surface plasmon resonance (SPR; (Kapinos et al., 2014; Wagner et al., 2015). Recombinant phosphorylated human tau (tau-p12; in average 12 phosphorylated sites; produced in Sf9 insect cells; Tepper et al., 2014) or non-phosphorylated tau (tau-p0; produced in E. coli) was flowed in increasing concentrations over surface-tethered N-terminal FG-domains of Nup98 (Nup98-FG; aa 1–498) and Nup62 (Nup62-FG; aa 1–240). An increase in binding response (RU) corresponded to increased tau:FG-domain binding (Figure S5A). Phospho-tau appeared to directly interact with Nup98-FG (Figure 4G), and to a lesser degree with Nup62-FG (Figure S5B). Non-phosphorylated tau-p0 did not bind to Nup98-FG or Nup62-FG under these conditions, emphasizing the importance of phosphorylation or conformation of tau in its interaction with FG-Nups. The phosphorylation of tau-p12 has previously been shown to be similar to tau found in AD brains (Mair et al., 2016). At low concentrations, phospho-tau bound to Nup98-FG and Nup62-FG, but detached from the Nup layer upon reaching a critical concentration of ~250 nM to ~1 μM, accompanied by the return of the FG-domain layer height to its initial value (Figures 4H and S5B). This suggested that phospho-tau either aggregates or transitions to a higher order oligomerization state, which results in the detachment from the FG-Nup layer (Vovk et al., 2016). We next tested whether the binding of tau-p12 was specific to the phenylalanine residues in Nup98 by using mutant Nup98 (Nup98-S), in which all phenylalanines have been replaced by serines. Interestingly, the lack of phenylalanines did not significantly reduce the tau-p12 interaction with Nup98-S (Figures 4G,H). However, the tau-p12 interaction appeared to be specific for the N-terminal FG-domain of Nup98, it did not interact with the highly negatively charged C-terminal domain of Nup98 (Figure 4I); the C-terminal half of Nup98 is normally located within the NPC scaffold and not accessible (Figure S2A). Notably, tau-p12 did not interact with Nup133, a non-FG-Nup (and not cytoplasmically mislocalized in AD, Figure S1A);, in this assay, suggesting that the interaction between tau and Nup98 may to some extend be facilitated by the FG-domains or other features of the N-terminus of Nup98 (Figure S5C).

To test if an interaction between phospho-tau and Nup98 also occurred in AD brain, we performed immunoaffinity purification (using HT7 anti human tau antibody) of soluble tau isolated from a high molecular weight fraction from a size exclusion column (Takeda et al., 2015) of homogenate from AD brains, and probed it for the presence of Nup98 by Western blot. Using this approach, we detected small amounts of Nup98 bound to HMW tau in AD brain (Figure 4J). .

NPC functional loss: Phospho-tau disrupts the NPC diffusion barrier in AD

In AD and tauopathies, the missorting of the otherwise mostly axonal microtubule associated protein tau to the somato-dendritic compartment (Li et al., 2011; Thies and Mandelkow, 2007) enables its interactions with Nups in NPCs of the nuclear membrane. Our model suggest that this could induce the missorting of FG-Nups into the cytosol. We next tested whether the presence of phospho-tau in the somatodendritic compartment also leads to a functional impairment of nuclear pores. Uncompromised NPCs build a diffusion barrier across the nuclear membrane that excludes free passing of molecules larger than ~40 kDa (Alber et al., 2007; Rabut et al., 2004; Timney et al., 2016; Weis, 2003). The integrity of this NPC diffusion barrier can be evaluated using a nuclear dextran size exclusion assay (D’Angelo et al., 2009; Lenart et al., 2003), in which low molecular weight (25 kDa) dextran is expected to freely traverse NPCs and fill the nucleus, whereas higher molecular weight (e.g., 70-kDa and 500-kDa) dextrans should be excluded from the nucleoplasm when the NPCs are intact (Figure S6A). We tested the permeability of whole nuclei isolated from human brains at Braak (Braak and Braak, 1991) stages I (=control), III (=mild AD), and VI (=severe AD) using fluorescent dextrans of different sizes (25-kDa, 70-kDa, and 500-kDa dextran) and compared their diffusion into the nuclei (Figures 5A, 5B). Because it is smaller than the ~40 kDa diffusion barrier threshold of intact NPCs, 25-kDa dextran filled the nucleus in control and AD brain nuclei (Figure S6B). However, hippocampal nuclei of Braak III and advanced Braak VI AD brains showed influx of the 70-kDa dextran and partial filling with 500-kDa dextran, demonstrating that these nuclei had a “leaky” NPC diffusion barrier (Figures 5A). Nuclei isolated from cerebellum, a brain region with minimal to no tau pathology even in advanced AD, excluded 70-kDa and 500-kDa dextran molecules, as did the vast majority of nuclei from control brains. These results suggest that NPC function becomes compromised in AD, and that NPC dysfunction may accompany the progression of tau pathology. Note that the nuclear preparations included both neuronal and glial nuclei and therefore our analysis may underestimate the percent of “leaky” neurons.

Cytosolic phospho-tau disrupts the nucleocytoplasmic Ran distribution in AD

Next, to assess the effect of tau on active nucleocytoplasmic transport of proteins, we examined the nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio of Ran protein, which can be used as an indicator of well-controlled transport of proteins and other biomolecules in and out of the nucleus (Dasso and Pu, 1998; Grima et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2015). To determine whether Ran is abnormally distributed in AD neurons with aberrant cytosolic tau, we immunofluorescently labeled Ran and phospho-tau (phospho-tau mix) in human AD and control hippocampal tissue (Figure 5C). In control hippocampal tissue, Ran showed a predominantly diffuse nuclear staining. In contrast, in AD brains, the nuclear Ran staining intensity was significantly diminished, presumably due to its mislocalization to the cytoplasm (Figure 5D). These Ran disruptions occurred predominately in phospho-tau-positive neurons.

To investigate whether soluble non-aggregated tau in the cytosol was contributing to the observed Ran disruptions in AD, we transfected cortical primary neurons with full-length wildtype tau (wtTau; 441 aa) or mutant P301Ltau, which is a pro-aggregating mutant of tau that is associated with familial frontotemporal dementia (FTDP-17; Figure S6C, S6D). Interestingly, a similar decrease in nuclear:cytoplasmic Ran ratios was observed for both wt-tau and P301Ltau, and we confirmed the presence of phospho-tau in these neurons by Western blot of cell lysates (Figure S6E). It appears that the presence of human pospho-tau in the cytosol is sufficient to initiate the Ran gradient deficits, even in absence of aggregation. This finding is in line with our SPR experiments, in which full-length tau-p12 binds to Nups. However, at this point we cannot clearly distinguish whether high tau levels (due to tau overexpression) or the presence of phospho-tau in the cytosol is driving the NPC functional impairment.

We then tested whether soluble tau could impact NPC function as well. We treated primary cultured murine neurons with a high molecular weight (HMW) protein fraction isolated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC; Superdex 200 column) from human AD brain. This fraction contained soluble, oligomeric, highly phosphorylated tau that can be taken up by neurons in culture and then remains in the soma for days (Takeda et al., 2015). Other tau-containing brain lysate SEC fractions from AD or control brains are not taken up by neurons (Takeda et al., 2015). Remarkably, the addition of AD brain-derived HMW protein caused rapid Ran mislocalization in primary neurons compared to untreated control neurons (Figures S6F,G). These data suggest that soluble non-aggregated tau as well as even small amounts of soluble pathological tau in the cytoplasm might be sufficient to impact nucleocytoplasmic transport in neurons. Interestingly, neurons overexpressing the repeat domain fragment of tau, tauRD, did not show Ran impairments in absence of HMW AD protein (Figure S6F). These data indicated that a part of tau that is missing in tauRD (the N-terminal half or the C-terminal end) are involved in the binding and functional impact of tau on NPCs. The Ran deficit observed in neurons expressing tauRD and treated with HMW AD protein appears to be caused the tau that was taken up.

Tau impairs active nuclear import and export in neurons

To explore the effect of tau on nuclear pore function in more detail, we developed assays to monitor active nuclear import and export of fluorescent reporter proteins in neurons. First, we expressed the fluorescent nuclear import reporter NLS:tdTomato:NES (NLS, nuclear localization signal; NES, nuclear export signal (Zhang et al., 2015)) in neurons and then treated them with the Alexa647-labeled HMW AD protein fraction for 24 h, 48 h, or 72 h. In healthy neurons, active nuclear import causes the NLS-tagged tdTomato to rapidly shuttle into the nucleus (Figure 6A), which leads to a complete fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of tdTomato in the nucleus. However, we found that neurons that had taken up tau into the cell body showed significantly reduced FRAP compared to untreated neurons (Figures 6A, 6B; ~ 50% decrease) after 24 h. However, no further decrease in the FRAP was observed after 48 h and 72 h, suggesting that tau-mediated nuclear import impairments occurred in the first 24 h after the uptake of tau, and persisted for at least 2 days.

We then tested if nuclear protein export was also impacted by tau. Expressing the construct 2xGFP:NES-IRES-2xRFP:NLS in neurons leads to the stoichiometric production of 2xRFP:NLS in the nucleus and 2xGFP:NES in the cytosol (Mertens et al., 2015)Figure 6C). In neurons treated with AD brain-derived HMW protein, we detected RFP and GFP in the nucleus after 24 h (Figure 6D), indicating rapid defects in nuclear protein export. Furthermore, RFP was detected in the cytosol after 48 h, consistent with nuclear protein import defects. These data revealed that uptake of HMW tau from AD brain was sufficient to functionally impair both the protein import and export functions of the NPC.

Tau aggregation causes NPC impairment in tau transgenic mice

To extend these observations in vivo, we next evaluated the nuclear integrity in two tau over-expressing mouse lines. We analyzed the brains of human wild-type tau expressing mice (rTg21221; Hoover et al., 2010; Jackson et al., 2016) that have increased tau phosphorylation but no tangle formation or neuronal loss, even at advanced age, and compared them to mice expressing human FTD-mutant P301Ltau at similar levels (rTg4510; (Santacruz et al., 2005), which develop extensive tau neurofibrillary tangle pathology and severe neuronal loss in the hippocampus and cortex starting at ~9 months.

Using the dextran permeability assay, we found that nuclei isolated from 14-month-old wild-type and rTg21221 mice excluded both 70-kDa and 500-kDa dextran dyes, whereas nuclei from age-matched rTg4510 mice showed influx of the 70-kDa dextran and partially of the 500-kDa dextran, demonstrating nuclear leakage of rTg4510 nuclei similar to hippocampal AD nuclei (Figure S7A, Figure 5A for human nuclei).

Furthermore, in immunolabeled brain sections, rTg4510 (14 month-old) neurons with aggregated phospho-tau in the soma showed Ran depletion from the nucleus; Ran occasionally colocalized with tau in the soma (Figure 7A,7B). rTg21221 mice showed neuronal Ran alterations only in a few neurons, suggesting that nuclear Ran depletion in vivo is not merely linked to the overexpression of human tau, but is specific to the presence of misfolded or aggregated tau in the soma. To test the possibility that the observed nuclear Ran depletion is non-specifically associated with neurodegeneration, we also analyzed transgenic mice that express human APP and develop robust Aβ-plaque pathology and gliosis in hippocampus and cortex (APP/PS1; Radde et al., 2006). APP/PS1 mice showed no alterations in nuclear Ran in hippocampal neurons (Figure 7A,7B).

Interestingly, the observed Ran alterations in rTg4510 mice appeared to correlate with the mislocalization of Nups into the cytoplasm in these mice. In brain sections from the same mice immunolabeled for Nup98 (anti N-terminal Nup98) and phospho-tau, only rTg4510 mice had cytoplasmic Nup98 accumulations and severe irregularities in the nuclear shape, characterized by loss of circularity and nuclear membrane folds (Figure S7B). We were also able to confirm the presence of Nup98 in the cytosol of hippocampal rTg4510 neurons using a C-terminal-specific Nup98 antibody, indicating that full-length Nup98 protein - and not only the FG-domain harboring N-terminal half - was present in the cytosol and in tau aggregates (Figure S7C).

Soluble phospho-tau reduction can restore NPC impairment in mice

Because Nup98 mislocalization to the cytoplasm and colocalization with tau occurred in rTg4510 mice but not in wild-type mice, we reasoned this effect could be due to an interaction of Nup98 with fibrillar tau and/or with a soluble tau present in the soma. We tested if the removal of soluble human P301Ltau and attenuation of tau aggregation in rTg4510 mice could prevent Nup98 mislocalization and Ran gradient deficits in these mice. In both rTg4510 and rTg2122 mice, the expression of the human tau transgene can be suppress by doxycycline (DOX) (Devos et al., 2018; Santacruz et al., 2005). 6 month-old rTg4510 mice, that had pronounced phospho-tau but minor hippocampal tangle pathology, were treated with DOX (food) for 6-months, so that soluble tau was rapidly removed, and relatively few tangles were still present after 6 months of treatment (Santacruz et al., 2005). At 12 months of age, untreated rTg4510 mice showed severe cytoplasmic Ran mislocalization (~25% nuclear Ran intensity compared to WT; Figure 8A, 8B). Strikingly, DOX treatment rescued the nuclear localization of Ran back to control levels, and Nup98 re-appeared in the nuclear membrane, even in the neurons that still contained tangles. Moreover, although Nup98 reappeared in the nuclear membrane after tau suppression, it was still possible to detect Nup98 in neurofibrillary tangles (Figures 8A, 8C), suggesting that this may be a long lived stable complex. These findings suggest that soluble misfolding phospho-tau was mainly responsible for Nup98 displacement from NPCs and nucleocytoplasmic transport deficits observed in rTg4510 mice.

Reduction of Nup98 decreases NPC defects in neurons

We showed that mislocalized Nup98 accumulations in the perinuclear space co-occur with tau pathology in AD. To determine whether Nup98 is directly contributing to tau-induced nucleocytoplasmic transport disruption and Ran mislocalization in a disease-relevant model, we tested whether the knockdown of Nup98 via lenti-viral shRNA can affect the Ran nuclear: cytoplasmic ratio in primary neurons from human tau P301Stau expressing transgenic mice (PS19 line; Figure S8). Prior to Nup98 knock-down with shRNA, the neurons were treated with the soluble fraction of total brain homogenates from control or AD brains to enhance the amount of aggregated tau in the soma. In neurons that received AD lysate, the nuclear:cytoplasmic Ran ratio was significantly reduced by ~50% (Figure S8A,C). Surprisingly, anti-Nup98 shRNA treatment (which reduced Nup98 by ~70%; Figure S8B) of neurons with AD lysate rescued the Ran ratio reduction almost completely to a level observed in neurons treated with control lysate (Figure S8C). This indicated that a reduction of Nup98 could possibly prevent AD tau induced disruption of the Ran gradient in primary neurons.

DISCUSSION

Substantial evidence suggests that alterations in nucleocytoplasmic transport contribute to familial forms of several neurodegenerative diseases (Basel-Vanagaite et al., 2006; Gasset-Rosa et al., 2017; Grima et al., 2017; Kaneb et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). Furthermore, in vitro and in vivo models of these diseases are consistent with age-related deterioration of NPCs and the loss of nuclear integrity (D’Angelo et al., 2009; Kelley et al., 2011; Lord et al., 2015; Mertens et al., 2015; Snow et al., 2013). In AD, observations of irregularities in nuclear morphology have suggested a contribution of nuclear dysfunction to pathophysiology (Sheffield et al., 2006), although the underlying mechanism has remained unexplored. A pathophysiological role of tau in and at the nucleus has been suggested (Fernandez-Nogales et al., 2014; Loomis et al., 1990; Sultan et al., 2011; Violet et al., 2014), although it has remained unknown whether nucleocytoplasmic transport defects are linked to tau pathology in AD.

Our study provides multiple lines of evidence that pathological tau directly interacts with components of the NPC that can accelerate aggregation and fibrilization of tau in the cytoplasm, and disrupts NPC structure and function. We demonstrate that full-length tau can interact with Nup98 and to a lesser extent with other FG-Nups, such as Nup62, in postmortem AD cases, in transgenic mouse models, and in vitro. We also show evidence of NPC structural defects, including Nup98 pathology, and functional impairments, including Ran mislocalization, alterations in fluorescent protein trafficking, and defects in dextran exclusion, in phospho-tau-positive cells from AD patients, rTg4510 transgenic mice, and primary neurons. Since neurons that take up exogenous AD brain derived tau have altered nuclear cytoplasmic ran distribution, our study suggests that the presence of pathophysiological tau directly disturbs NPC function and integrity, consequently altering both nuclear protein export and import. In cells transfected with full-length wild-type or P301L tau, soluble tau also caused disruption in the Ran gradient. Soluble tau appeared to be sufficient to cause this phenotype, as introduction of soluble tau derived from AD cortex caused NPC alterations, and tau transgenic mice treated with DOX to suppress expression of soluble tau were efficiently rescued from tau-induced Ran and Nup98 alterations despite the continued presence of neurofibrillary tangles. The neurons with neurofibrillary tangles remaining after DOX treatment appeared to have Ran restored to the nucleus and Nup98 incorporated into the nuclear membrane, although a portion of Nup98 remained localized to neurofibrillary tangles. Tau and Nup98 co-immunoprecipitated in a complex from concentrated human AD brain fractions, and tau interacted in a phosphorylation-dependent manner with the N-terminal FG-domain of Nup98, and to a lesser extent with FG domains of Nup62. Additionally, using an in vitro tau fibrilization assay, we observed that the negatively charged Nup98 C-terminal domain strongly enhanced tau fibril formation in a heparin-independent manner. The catalytic role of C-terminal Nup98 on tau fibril assembly was independent of tau phosphorylation and was more effective with P301L tau. These results are consistent with a model in which neuronal conditions that bring tau in close proximity to the perinuclear space, such as hyperphosphorylation and missorting of tau in AD, would enable tau interaction with FG-Nups and therefore trigger NPC malfunction.

Although the consequences of morphological alterations in the NPC have not been studied directly in AD, several previous studies support our data. For example, multiple transcription factors, including the aging-related protective RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST), become mislocalized from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in AD, FTD, and Lewy body dementia (Lu et al., 2014). TDP-43, which is also involved in transcription and splicing, mislocalizes to the cytoplasm and aggregates in the neuronal cytosol in ALS, FTD, and AD (Amador-Ortiz et al., 2007; Freeman et al., 2008; Winton et al., 2008). Interestingly, the splicing factor proline and glutamine-rich (SFPQ), which regulates MAPT exon 10 splicing in the nucleus, accumulates in the cytoplasm in the presence of pathological phospho-tau in AD and FTD (Ishigaki et al., 2017; Ke et al., 2012). We previously demonstrated that the mislocalization of TDP-43 in C9orf72-mediated ALS/FTD may be a consequence of defective nuclear import (Zhang et al., 2015). The current study suggest that the mislocalization of these proteins in human AD and tauopathy transgenic mouse model may be a consequence of tau-mediated nucleocytoplasmic transport disruption.

Given that Nup98 is responsible for the GDP/GTP exchange of Ran as well as the termination of nuclear import (Fontoura et al., 2000), Nup98 disruption could precipitate abnormal Ran distribution. Additionally, as Nup98 is directly involved in mRNA export (Blevins et al., 2003), the sequestration of Nup98 may also further link tau aggregation to the growing evidence that several RNA-binding proteins may contribute to tau pathology observed in AD and other tauopathies (Maziuk et al., 2017; Vanderweyde et al., 2016). Indeed, tau aggregation and stress granule formation are closely connected (Vanderweyde et al., 2016). Notably, we recently provided evidence of concomitant dysregulation of stress granule dynamics and nucleocytoplasmic transport (Zhang et al., 2018). Future studies unraveling the interplay between tau-induced NPC malfunction and altered stress granule dynamics in tauopathies (Vanderweyde et al., 2016) may lead to a better understanding of the etiology of nuclear transport defects in AD and other tauopathies.

Data from SPR experiments demonstrate that the FG domains of Nup98 and Nup62 do not interact with non-phosphorylated tau. In contrast, a phosphorylated version of tau, tau-p12, can readily bind and accumulate within FG domain layers formed by either of these proteins. The interaction between Nup98 and tau-p12 is facilitated by the disordered N-terminal FG domains of Nup98, although the exact nature of their interaction remains unclear. Indeed, replacing phenylalanine (Nup98-F) with serine (Nup98-S) did not abrogate their interaction. It is plausible that tau-p12 binds the FG domains in a manner that differs from that of nuclear transport receptors (e.g., importin-beta; (Kapinos et al., 2014)) to promote aggregation at the NPC. Earlier studies showed that in vitro assemblies of the N-terminal Nup98 FG domain can self-assemble into a polymer brush-like layer that exhibits a selectivity similar to intact NPCs (Kowalczyk et al., 2011; Schmidt and Gorlich, 2015) (Ando et al., 2014; Osmanović et al., 2013). Since phospho-tau (which also can form a polyelectrolyte brush (Wegmann et al., 2013)) in the cytosolic vicinity of the nuclear membrane affects the selectivity of the NPC, it is possible that the interaction of tau with the polymer brush formed by Nup98 (and other FG-Nups) impairs its selective transport barrier properties. We speculate that cytosolic phospho-tau might impair cellular NPCs by crosslinking and inducing aggregation of the pore’s FG-Nups. We note that the Nup98 C-terminal domain can promote tau fibrillization, and that the N-terminal FG-domain of Nup98 physically interacts with phosopho-tau. This finding may suggest a model in which the N terminus of Nup98 directly interacts with tau, providing an anchor in which the highly negatively charged C-terminal domain of Nup98 can catalyze even more fibril formation. The N-terminal domain physically tethers the two proteins, allowing the negatively charged C-terminal to neutralize the lysines in tau in a manner similar to heparin (Ramachandran and Udgaonkar, 2011).

Deposits of cytoplasmic protein aggregates may interfere with nuclear import and export (Woerner et al., 2016) and can lead to neuronal death (Woerner et al., 2016). The impairment of nucleocytoplasmic transport in response to stress granule induced cytoplasmic aggregates (Zhang et al., 2018) as well as aberrant cytosolic tau accumulation highlights a potentially common toxic mechanism in protein aggregation diseases, in which protein aggregates disrupt the integrity of NPCs, impair neuronal nucleocytoplasmic transport, and ultimately lead to neurodegeneration. Similar phenomenon has been observed in TDP-43 ALS/FTD models, where mislocalized cytoplasmic aggregates of TDP-43 were found enriched for nuclear pore complex components and nucleocytoplasmic transport. The aggregated protein sequestered and mislocalized nucleoporins and transport factors, which impaired the nuclear import and RNA export in neurons (Chou et al., 2018).

Taken together, our data provide an unconventional mechanism for tau-induced neurodegeneration. Our studies indicate that tau-induced impairments of nucleocytoplasmic transport can occur upon accumulation of soluble phospho-tau in the neuronal soma or by mutant tau misfolding in AD and FTD, possibly even without overt tau aggregation in neurofibrillary tangles. Our study provides new biological understanding of tau fibril formation and also pathophysiological mechanisms that could be targeted for potential therapeutic interventions. These data suggest that strategies that reduce tau, or prevent tau interactions with Nup98, could not only restore nucleocytoplasmic transport but also decrease tau aggregation, and may therefore be promising therapeutic approaches for AD, FTD, and other neurodegenerative diseases.

STAR METHODS

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING

Requests for additional information can be directed to the Lead Contact, Dr. Jeffrey D. Rothstein (jrothstein@jhmi.edu).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Ethics statement

All animal care, housing, and experiments were performed in compliance with guidelines established by the Center for comparative medicine (CCM) at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) and in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Wild-type, rTg4510, rTg21221, APPPS1 mice tissues were and prepared for immunostaining at MGH.

Autopsy tissue from Control, AD and FTD cases from both Johns Hopkins and MGH were collected with informed consent of patients or their relatives and approval of local institutional review boards. Human patient demographic information for control and AD is provided in Table S1.

AD and control human cases

All control and AD human brain samples used in this study are from age and sex matched individuals that were classified into Braak stages (I-VI) based on their pathological tau accumulation. Given that tau accumulation can be observed in the normal aging process, we used Braak I cases without cognitive impairments as controls. Additionally, each patient was pathologically characterized based on their Thal phase for Abeta plaques, and CERAD neuritic plaque score, as previously described (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3268003/).

AD and FTD mouse models

For all experiments, mice from both genders were used, group housed in standard cages under a 12 hr light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to water and food. Center for comparative medicine (CCM) in Mass General Hospital (MGH) was the centralized provider of veterinary medical care and research animal support. RAR ensured that mice are regularly checked for standard pathogens and health status. Health reports can be provided upon request. All mice had a standard specific-pathogen-free (SPF) and immune status.

rTg4510, rTg21221 and APPPS1 mice

rTg4510, rTg21221, and APP/PS1 transgenic mice and their control littermates were obtained from breeding colonies maintained at McLaughlin Research Institute in Montana. All offsprings were genotyped using tail DNA.

rTg4510 mice overexpress human mutant P301Ltau (0N4R) under the CamK2a promotor, which leads to a a brain-wide overexpression (~10-fold) of P301Ltau in excitatory neurons and pronounced tau phosphorylation and NFT formation in the hippocampus and cortex from the age of ~9 months. The tau transgene is inserted in a Tet-repressible operon so that doxycycline treatment (food) dramatically reduces the expression of tau in the forebrain of these animals (SantaCruz, 2005). rTg21221 mice express human wildtype tau (0N4R) under the same promotors and at similar levels as rTg4510s, and also under a Tet-repressible operon (Hoover et al., 2010). These mice develop tau hyperphosphorylation but no tau aggregation from ~12 months of age. APP/PS1 mice contain transgenes for human APP and bearing the “Swedish” mutation (K595N/M596L) and for PSEN1 containing the L166P mutation, both under the control of the Thy1 promoter. In these mice, expression of the human APP transgene is approximately 3-fold higher than endogenous murine APP (Radde et al., 2006). APP/PS1 mice develop amyloid-plaques in the cortex and hippocampus from ~6 months. Non-transgenic littermates were used as controls for APP/PS1 mice, and Tet-operon positive but tau transgene negative mice were used as controls for rTg4510 and rTg21221 mice.

14-month old transgenic mice and their control littermates were used for immunofluorescence studies of Ran and Nup98. 6-month old rTg4510 mice were used for the Dox treatment study and were treated (chow containing 200 mg/kg doxycycline (Harlan Teklad, South Easton, MA) for 6 months and then were used for the immunofluorescence studies. To harvest the brains, all mice were anesthetized and transcardially perfused with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The left half of the brains were post-fixed for ³48 h in 4%-paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Services) in PBS, followed by cryoprotection in 30% (w/v) sucrose/PBS for 2–3 days at 4°C. Coronal brain sections (40 mm) were cut on a freezing microtome and used for immunofluorescence.

METHOD DETAILS

Primary neuron cultures and transfection

Primary cortical mouse neurons were prepared from cerebral cortices of wild-type CD1 or P301Stau transgenic PS19 mouse embryos (E14–15, Charles River Laboratories) using a papain dissociation system (Worthington Biochemical Corporation) as described previously (Takeda et al., 2015). Briefly, cortices were dissected out and mechanically dissociated in Neurobasal medium (Thermofisher) supplemented with B27, 2 mM Glutamax, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 g/ml streptomycin, and plated in the same medium at a density of 0.6*105 cells per well of a poly-D-lysine (50 mg/ml 1, Sigma) treated Nunc™ Lab-Tek™ II Chambered Coverglass or on 35 mm dishes (Corning). Cultures were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO 2 in Neurobasal medium with 2% (v/v) B27 nutrient, 2 mM Glutamax, and antibiotics as above. On day 7, neurons were transfected with 2.5 μg per 6-well of DNA for 3,5 hrs using Lipofectamine 2000 following manufacturer instruction. All the experiments were done 48h after transfection.

Immuno-labeling of cortical primary neurons and mouse brain sections

For immunofluorescent labeling, cells were rinsed once with PBS and immediately fixed in 4%-paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. After washing twice with PBS, cells were permeabilized using 0.1% Triton-X100 in PBS for 20 min. Microtome mouse brain sections were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in TBS (Tris Buffered Saline) for 20 min. Cells and brain sections were then blocked in 3% normal goat serum (NGS) in TBS, and incubated in primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. (for list of antibodies see reagent table; all diluted 1:250 in 3% NGS/TBS). After 3 washes in TBS, secondary antibodies (Invitrogen; for list see reagent table) were applied diluted 1:250 in NGS/TBS for 2 h at room temperature. After washing three times in TBS, brain slices were mounted on microscope slides, and coverslips using DAPI containing mounting medium (Vectashield, Vector Laboratories).

Immunofluorescent and DAB labeling of human paraffin embedded brain sections

Human paraffin embedded brain sections, sections were first de-paraffinated and rehydrated by sequential incubation in Xylene (3× 5 min), 100% ethanol (2× 5 min), 90% ethanol (2× 5 min), 70% ethanol (2× 5 min), and distilled water (3× 5 min). Antigen retrieval was achieved by placing the sections in antigen retrieval solution and steam cooking for 1 h. After cooling at room temperature, sections were rinsed in water and 1X PBS and permeabilized in PBS/0.4% Trito-X100 for 8 min. After blocking in PBS/10% NGS/0.2% Triton for 1 h at room temperature, primary antibodies diluted in PBS/10% NGS were applied overnight at 4 °C. Immunolabeling of tau was done using either a mix of rabbit phospho-tau antibodies (r-tau mix; rabbit anti-pT205, pS409, pT231, pS199, pT181, 1:250; all from Abcam), or PHF1 (mouse IgG1 anti-tau pS396/pS404 (1:250) from Peter Davies), or Alz50 (mouse IgM anti misfolded tau (1:50) from Peter Davies). Nups and Ran were labeled using rat anti-Nup98 (1:250, Abcam), mouse anti-Ran (1:250, BD Biosciences), rat anti-Nup62 (1:50, Millipore), mouse anti-Nup133 (1:250, Novus), rabbit anti-Pom121, Invitrogen PA5–36498, 1:200; rabbit anti-Nup54, Sigma Aldrich HPA-035929, 1:200 and mouse anti- PHF-1, Dr. Peter Davies, 1:250 were diluted to corresponding dilutions with DAKO antibody diluent (Agilent S0809) and slides were incubated with primary antibodies at 4C in humidified chamber. Next day, sections were washed in PBS (3× 5 min) and secondary antibodies were applied as described for mouse brain sections: Alexa488-labeled for tau, Cy3-labeled for Ran, and Alexa647-, Cy5-, Alexa488, or Cy3-labeled for Nup98. After washing in PBS, sections were then incubated for 20 min with 0.1% (w/v) Sudan Black solution to quench autofluorescence. In some cases,vslides were mounted with Prolong Gold Antifade with DAPI (ThermoFisher Scientific P36931).

For DAB detection of primary anti-Nup antibodies in human sections, sections were incubated in DAB secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature, then washed in PBS (3× 5 min). A DAB staining kit (Vector Laboratories) was used for DAB staining according to manufacturer instructions. DAB substrate (Prometheus) was applied for 2–10 minutes. Dehydration of sections was done by sequential incubation in distilled water, 95% ethanol, 100% ethanol (5 min each) followed by xylene for 10 min.

Slides were imaged at 40× magnification using Zeiss Axioimager Z2 fluorescent microscope with apotome2 module. Z-stack images were compressed and processed using imaging software Zen Blue (Zeiss).

Nucleocytoplasmic Ran ratio quantification in cells

The nuclear and cytoplasmic intensities of Ran were determined in immunostained cell cultures as previously shown (Zhang et al., 2015). Using ImageJ, nuclei were outlined using the DAPI signal, and cell bodies using Map2 staining. The integrated nuclear fluorescence signal was subtracted from the total cell body signal to determine the cytoplasmic fraction. All imaging was done with identical microscope settings between all experimental groups. All fluorescent values were normalized to background (outside of cells) fluorescent intensities in each sample. Nuclear/cytoplasmic ratios were quantified for 35–50 cells across multiple wells per group, which was done blinded.

Ran nuclear intensity measurement in brain section

Human and mouse brain sections were immunostained for Ran and imaged using a ApoTome Zeiss. Using ImageJ, nuclei were outlines in the DAPI channel and the integrated Ran fluorescence signal (mean fluorescence intensity) was measured. All nuclear intensities were normalized to background fluorescent (outside of section) for each section. For each sample, 25 nuclei were randomly chosen in the DAPI channel and the analysis was done fully blinded.

Human and mouse brain nuclei preparation

Frozen brain tissue was thawed on ice and 250–400 mg piece of human grey matter tissue, or one whole mouse brain, was dissected and placed into 4 ml of lysis buffer [0.32 M sucrose, 5 mM CaCl2, 3 mM Mg(Acetate)2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, freshly made 1 mM DTT, and 0.1% Triton X-100] in a glass dounce homogenizer (7 mL capacity). The tissue was gently homogenized on ice for ~1 min, or until fully homogenized. 0.5 ml of brain homogenate was placed into a fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube as total homogenate. The remaining 3.5 ml were placed into a pre-chilled ultracentrifuge tube (Beckman Coulter Item No. 344059). 7.5 ml of a sucrose solution (1.8 M sucrose, 3.0 mM Mg(Acetate)2, 1 mM DTT and 10mM Tris-HCl pH8.0) was pipetted at the bottom of the ultracentrifuge tube containing the homogenized sample to create a concentration gradient with the homogenate on top of the sucrose solution. Tube weight balance was adjusted by adding lysis buffer to the top layer. Samples were ultra- centrifuged at 107,000 × g (25,000 rpm) using a SW41 Ti rotor for 2.5 hours at 4°C. After centrifugation, the supernatant was carefully removed, along with the layer of debris. The nuclei pellet remained at the bottom of the tube and was carefully resuspended in 0.5 ml of chilled 1x PBS (Matevossian and Akbarian, 2008).

Nuclei immunofluorescent staining

Nuclei isolated from AD and control brains were spun down on a Tharmac Cellspin Cytocentrifuge, then fixed on microscope slides using 4% PFA/PBS and immunostained for phospho-tau (p-tau mix), NPC (mab414) and Nup98 (Abcam). Nuclei were stained with Hoechst, mounted in mounting media, and imaged on Zeiss LSM 800 with Airyscan.

Imaris image analysis and quantification

Immunofluorescence Punctae Counts:

Bitplane Imaris Spot Detection was used to automatically count punctae in each wavelength imaged, as previously described (Miller and Rothstein, 2016). Briefly, for quantification of the p-tau and NPC punctae, single Z-slice focus images were subjected to Imaris spot detection, and count parameters were set for size and fluorescent strength of voxels to identify punctae primarily on the nuclear envelope. Imaris spot detection uses a Bayesian classifier with spot features such as volume, average intensity, texture, and contrast to detect and classify the segmented spots. In total, the number of p-tau and NPC positive spots were compiled from a 3D-rendering of high-resolution Airyscan z-projections with z-slices through the entire nucleus, and colocalization and quantification of punctae was done for 20 nuclei per sample. Displayed are maximum Z-projections from top of the nuclear membrane to the midline of the nucleus. For tissue samples, Imaris Surface was used to trace cells of interest and apply spot detection and colocalization analysis as discussed above. All data analysis and quantifications were done fully blinded and randomly chosen by the Imaris software.

Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP) of nuclear import reporter

A confocal Zeiss 510 microscope equipped with a 63× 1.2 NA C-APO-plan Neofluo objective (Carl Zeiss) and a live-cell incubation chamber was used for all FRAP experiments. Primary mouse cortical neurons transduced with the fluorescent shuttle reporter Lenti CMV.NES:tdTomato:NLS were treated with fluorescently conjugated HMW AD protein fraction containing tau (Dy647 HMW AD protein). The nucleus was selected as a ROI in the red channel and was bleached using a 594 nm laser with 30% intensity for 50 iterations. Post-bleach time-lapse images were collected (3 s frame rate, for 150 frames). Time-lapse images were analyzed in ImageJ to calculate the mean fluorescence intensities of three regions (ROI-1=photobleached region, ROI-2=unbleached region in same frame to correct for the overall photobleaching, ROI-3=background signal outside of cell was subtracted from both ROI-1 and ROI-2 intensities). The recovery time constant was derived as area under a single exponential fit of the corrected fluorescence intensities plotted versus time using GraphPad Prism7. 4 time points (0, 24, 48 and 72 h) were compared.

Nucleocytoplasmic import/export (NCC) reporter assay

Primary cortical neurons were transduced with Lenti XEP.2GFP:NES-IRES-2RFP:NLS, in order to have GFP-GFP in the cytoplasm, and RFP-RFP in the nucleus. We used the HIV-Rev NES (LQLPPLERLTL), and the SV40 Large-T NLS (PKKKRKV). For live imaging, neurons were plated on 8-well imaging chambers. Confocal images were taken on a Zeiss LSM710 microscope.

Protein expression and purification

Phosphorylated tau protein, tau-p12, was produced by expression of human full-length wildtype tau (2N4R, 441 aa) in Sf9 insect cells and purified as described before (Tepper et al., 2014). Briefly, insect cells were infected with the recombinant viral vector (pVLhtau40) and incubated for 3 days. The cell lysate was heated and the heat-stable tau proteins purified by size exclusion column Superdex G200 (GE Healthcare). Non-phosphorylated wildtype tau-p0 and P301Ltau (2N4R) was produced in E. coli and purified as described previously (Cook et al., 2014). Nup98-FG, Nup98-S, Nup62-FG were expressed and purified as described before (Kapinos et al., 2014). Briefly, Nup98-FG and Nup62-FG represent the C-terminal FG-domains of Nup98 (aa 1–498) and Nup62, respectively, with one additional cysteine at the N-terminus to facilitate covalent binding to the gold surface of the SPR chip. Nup98-S and Nup62-S are full F[barb2right]S mutants of Nup98-FG and Nup62-FG. The plasmid constructs were bought from GenScript, expressed and purified as previously described (Wagner et al., 2015). Nup133 was immobilized to CM5 chip using an amine coupling procedure. All proteins were dialyzed into PBS pH 7.2 prior use. The Nup98 C-terminal half, Nup98-C, and Nup133 proteins were purchased from Mybiosource.

Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) measurements

SPR measurements were performed using a Biocore T200 (GE Healthcare, Life Sciences). The thiol-modified proteins (e.g. Nup98-FG-SH and Nup62-FG-SH) and the inert control polymer PUT (C17H36O4S, hydroxyl-terminated tri-ethylene glycol undecane thiol, HS-(CH2)-(OCH2CH2)3-OH) were immobilized to the gold surface of the sensor chip (SIA kit; GE Healthcare, Life Science). Tau proteins tau-p12 and tau-p0 were then injected in increasing concentrations between 7.6 nM to 4 μM, and differences of the Nup layer height was determined. BSA was injected after each tau injection as described previously (Schoch et al., 2012). The equilibrium binding constants were calculated using one or two-component Langmuir fits.

Tau filament assembly

Recombinant Nup98-C (purchased from Mybiosource) was diluted in 50 mM HEPES, 30 mM NaCl, 500 mM guanidine hydrochloride and mixed recombinant non-phosphorylated tau-p0. The concentration of tau was kept constant at 8 μM (0.33 mg/mL), and different molar ratios of Nup98:tau (1:27, 1:8 and 1:4) were incubated at 37°C in Buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 2.5 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM EDTA). After 5 days, 30 ml of the tau reaction was incubated with 90 ml of 10 mM thioflavin-S (7.5 μM final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature, and tau polymerization was subsequently measured using fluorescence of thioflavin-S in a SpectraMax M5 plate reader (excitation l = 440 nm, emission l = 520 nm).

Electron microscopy

Tau assembly reactions were diluted 1:2 in Buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 2.5 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM EDTA), and 10 ml were absorbed onto carbon/formvar-coated 400 mesh copper grids (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) for 45 s, then washed twice for 15 s in Buffer A to remove remaining guanidine hydrochloride. Tau fibrils were counterstained with 2% uranyl acetate (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) for 45 seconds and examined using a Philips 208S electron microscope (Philips, Hillsboro, OR), with images collected at 5000 × magnification. For Immuno-EM staining, the anti-tau primary antibody was detected with a 6 nm-gold particle coupled secondary antibody, and anti-Nup98 was detected using a secondary antibody conjugated with 12 nm gold particles.

Pelleting analysis

Tau assembly reactions were centrifuged at 90,000 × g for 40 min at 4°C to separate soluble and aggregated proteins. Pellets containing aggregated tau and Nup98 (insoluble fraction) were resuspended in 50 ml 1x SDS-PAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen), and 10 mL 6x SDS-PAGE sample buffer was added to 50 ml of the supernatant (soluble fraction). Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE in Tris-glycine gels (Life Technologies), and transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). Membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat dry milk in TBS/0.1% Triton-X-100, and incubated in primary antibody (mouse anti-human tau tau5 or rabbit anti-Nup98) overnight at 4°C. Membranes were washed and incubated in HRP-con jugated secondary antibodies (anti-mouse or anti-rabbit 1:5000; Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 1 h at room temperature, and detected by ECL (PerkinElmer).

Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) and affinity chromatography of human brain lysates

AD and control brain pieces were homogenized in 5-times (v/w) PBS using a dounce homogenization (30 strokes, GKH motor drive (Glas-Col), 50% speed). Crude extracts were spun at 10,000 × g for 10 min to remove debris, nuclei, and large organelles. After filtering the supernatant through a 0.2 mm pore membrane, 1 ml of brain extract (3–4 mg total protein) was loaded onto a Superdex200 prep grade (GE Healthcare) SEC column and 1.4 ml fractions were collected at a flow rate of 0.125 ml/min. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling Technologies) was added at to all PBS used, and extracts, buffers and columns were kept at 4oC at all times. Low protein binding tubes (Richell) were used whenever tau was present. Collected fractions were frozen immediately at −20oC and later analyzed for protein (BCA assay) and human tau content (Tau-5/HT7 antibody ELISA (DeVos et al., 2017); Tau-5: Calbiochem 5778010; HT7: Invitrogen MN1000B). After discard of the SEC column void volume (4 ml), the tau containing HMW protein SEC fractions 2+3 (Takeda et al., 2015) were pooled and used as “HMW AD protein fraction” to treat neurons.

To isolate HMW tau from this fraction, the HMW AD protein fraction loaded onto an anti-human tau affinity column. This column was prepared by coupling 200 mg of mouse anti-human tau HT7 (Thermo scientific MN1000) to 2 ml of tosyl-activated Separopore 4B-CL matrix (bioWORLD). Following 3 washes with 2 ml TBS/0.05% Tween-20 (TBS-T), HMW tau was eluted using 1 ml of 3 M MgCl at pH 4.5. The eluted sample was dialyzed overnight against PBS in a 3500 kDa MWCO Slide-A-Lyzer cassettes (Thermo 66330) and then concentrated 10-fold using 3000 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter devices (Amicon Ultra, Millipore). The resulting HMW AD tau was separated by SDS-PAGE on 4–12% Bis-Tris gels and analyzed by Western Blot for phospho-tau (PHF1, pS396/pS404, from Peter Davies) and Nup98 (mouse anti-Nup98, Santa Cruz) using near-infrared (IR) dye-labeled secondary anti-mouse 800 antibody (LI-COR) for 1 hours at room temperature. Blots were imaged using a LI-COR IR scanner.

Fluorescent labeling of HMW AD protein

The HMW protein fraction from AD brains was fluorescently labeled using Dylight647-NHS or Alexa647-NHS ester (LifeTechnologies). For highest yield of N-terminal labeling, the amino reactive dyes were dissolved in DMSO and 5 μl were added to 100 μg protein in PBS at pH 7.4 for 1 h at room temperature. For all proteins the excess dye was removed by dialysis (SlideLizer MWCO 3000 Da, Pierce) against PBS at 4°C overnight.

Co-immunoprecipitation of tau with Nup98 from brain lysates

Human brain homogenates were prepared as described for SEC. Nup98 immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed from either the supernatant (soluble Nup98 fraction) or the resuspended pellet (insoluble Nup98 faction) after the 10,000 × g spin. In both cases, Nup98 antibody (rat anti-Nup98, Abcam; concentration 1 mg per 50 ml lysate) was added to the sample and incubated for 1.5 h at 37°C. To pull-down anti-Nup98 antibodies (bound to Nup98), magnetic beads functionalized with anti-rat IgGs (Dynabeads Sheep anti-rat IgG, Thermofisher) were blocked with PBS/0.1% BSA and then added to the [brain lysate+anti-Nup98] incubations for 45 min. After magnetic pull-down, the beads were washed 3-times with PBS/0.1%BSA and resuspended in PBS. Bound proteins were eluted in 50 mM citrate (pH3.0) for 10 min, rebuffered with 1M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), and analyzed by Western Blot for their content in tau using the rabbit anti p-tau mix, or rabbit anti-total tau (DAKO). As a control for unspecific binding to the beads, rat IgG (Sigma) was added to one part of the lysates instead of rat-anti Nup98.

Anti-Nup98 shRNA expression in PS19 primary cortical neurons

Primary cortical PS19 neurons were transduced with AAV8.hSYN1.GFP-U6-mNUP98-shRNA (Vector Biolabs) using a MOI of 200,000 at DIV5. 3 days after transduction, the neurons were treated with HMW protein fraction from either control or AD brains. 8 days after transduction, the neurons were fixed in 4%-PFA/PBS for 15 min and immunostained.

Quantification and Statistical Analysis

Image data were acquired with Axiovison and ZEN Digital Imaging for LSM 800 (Zeiss). Image data were analyzed with ImageJ (https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/), Scion Image Analysis (Scion Corp.), and Volocity 3D Image Analysis (Perkin-Elmer), and Imaris (Bitplane). All quantification of cell and nuclei counts, Ran and Nup98 fluorescence intensities, number of NPCs per nuclei, colocalization of p-tau with NPCs, and FRAP was done while blinded for experimental groups. Further details and special procedures for individual methods are stated in the respective section of STAR Methods.

For Ran and Nup intensities, the dextran assays, and 3D reconstruction of nuclei, cells in culture and tissue and nuclei in enriched fractions were randomly chosen for analysis. The number of independent repeats, experiments, or members of compared groups (for animal genotypes and AD and Control brains) was in any case at least N=3. Statistical Analysis of the data was done using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad). Statistics were assessed based on an assumption of normality with two-tailed unpaired Student’s T tests when comparing two groups, and one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test when comparing multiple goups.

The number of independent repeats (N), the statistical test used for comparison, and the statistical significance (p-value) are stated for each Figure panel in the respective legend. Data are presented as mean±SD or mean±SEM as indicated in the Figure panel.

Supplementary Material

1

ACKNOWLDGEMENTS

We thank Jacek Biernat for phospho-tau protein production, and the Massachusetts ADRC and the Johns Hopkins ADRC for tissue resources. We acknowledge Natalia Nedelski for editing the final version of the manuscript.

This work was supported by NIH grants P01NS099114 (J.D.R.), R01NS094239 (J.D.R.), R01NS099320 (J.D.R.) ADRC 2 P50AG016574 (L.P.), U54NS100693 (L.P., C.C.), R35NS097273 (L.P.), P01NS084974 (L.P.), R01NS089544 (L.P.), R21NS094489 (C.C.)., R01AG056306 (F.H.G.), and the Massachusetts Alzheimer Disease Research Center (P50AG005134, B.T.H.); the JPB Foundation (B.T.H., F.H.G.); the Swiss National Science Foundation (31003A_170041, R.Y.H.L.); the Paul G. Allen Family Foundation (F.H.G.); the Glenn Foundation Center for Aging Research (F.H.G.); the American Federation for Aging Research (F.H.G.); the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust (2012-PG-MED002, F.H.G.); Annette Merle-Smith (F.H.G.); and the Mathers Foundation (F.H.G.).

Figure 1. In AD, tau is found at the nuclear membrane and NPCs mislocalize to the cytosol.

(A) Illustration describing how abnormal phospho-tau that mislocalizes into the soma during AD interfaces with the cytoplasmic side of nuclear pore complexes. At the nuclear pore, pathogenic tau can disrupt nuclear pore complex function.

(B) Human AD (Braak VI) and age/sex matched control brains were immunolabeled for phospho-tau (green; p-tau mix of anti phospho-tau antibodies pT181, pS199, pT205, pT231, pS409), NPCs (red; using mab414), and Dapi (blue). In AD cortex, phospho-tau accumulates in the cytosol and NPCs mislocalize from the nuclear membrane into the cytosol (arrow heads). In neurons with diffuse phospho-tau staining in the cytosol, phospho-tau also localizes to the nuclear membrane (arrows).

Figure 2: The FG-nucleoporin Nup98 mislocalizes to the cytoplasm in AD brains.

(A) Nup98 (green) is evenly distributed in the nuclear membrane (arrow heads) of hippocampal neurons in control brains, but colocalizes aberrantly with phospho-tau (phospho-tau mix; pink) in the neuronal cytosol of AD brains (arrows). The small nuclei (DAPI+) without obviuos Nup98 staining in the nuclear membrane are glia cell nuclei. Scale bars, 10 μm.

(B+C) Pronounced cytosolic Nup98 (red in B, green in C, arrows) accumulation in cortical NFT neurons in AD brains labeled for different pathology associated phospho-tau epitopes (pink; phospho-tau mix in B, pT205 and pT231 in C). Scale bars, 10 μm.

(D) Cytoplasmic mislocalization of Nup98 (DAB) in hippocampal AD neurons (arrows) compared to nuclear membrane localization (arrow head) in control brains. Scale bar, 50 m; scale bar in zoomed images, 10 μm.

(E) Immunofluorescence labeling of hippocampal sections shows that neither FG-Nup Nup54 (green) nor non-FG structural Nup Pom121 (red) overtly mislocalize in the cytoplasm of phospho-tau (PHF1) containing neurons in AD, compared to control brains. Scale bars, 10 μm.

Figure 3: The Nup98 C-terminal domain induces tau fibrilization in vitro.

(A) Recombinant human tau (2N4R; wild-type or P301L; 8 μM; 0.33 mg/ml) was incubated with the C-terminal half of Nup98 (aa645–911) at a final [Nup98:tau] ratio of [1:4], [1:8], or [1:27] in the absence of heparin. Tau aggregation was monitored by thioflavin-S fluorescence and EM (lower panel), Scale bar, 0.2 μm.

(B) SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis of supernatants (soluble fractions) and pellets (insoluble fractions containing aggregated and polymerized tau and Nup98) from in vitro Nup98-tau aggregations. Membranes probed for tau (tau5) and Nup98 show that for P301L tau a tau:Nup98 ratio of 1:8 is sufficient to initiate tau aggregation. Monomeric and HMW species of tau and Nup98 are indicated. HMW tau and Nup98 species in the insoluble fractions indicate that one protein induces the other one to shift to higher molecular weight species, presumably through co-aggregation.

Figure 4: Phospho-tau iteracts with nucleoporins in nuclei from AD brain and in vitro.

(A) Principle of NPCs quantification and co-localization in whole nuclei extracted from brain tissue using high-resolution AiryScan imaging and 3D-rendering.

(B+C) Images of nuclei extracted from control and AD hippocampal tissue after staining for phospho-tau (green) and either NPC (red, mab414 in B) or Nup98 (red in C). Displayed are maximum Z-projections from the midline to the dorsal Z-maximum of the nuclei. Note the accumulation of phospho-tau on the morphologically abnormal AD nuclei. Scale bar, 2 μm.

(D-F) AD nuclei show higher levels of associates phospho-tau (D), colocalization of p-tau with NPC components (E), and a significantly reduced number of NPCs in the nuclear membrane (F). Graphs show quantification of punctae in 3D nuclei images using Imaris (see STAR methods); N=5 cases; N=20 nuclei per sample. All graphs are presented as mean + SEM. *p&lt; 0.5, **p&lt; 0.01 and ***p&lt; 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test.

(G) Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) response curves show that recombinant human phsopho-tau (tau-p12; 2N4R) binds to immobilized Nup98-FG and to Nup98-S. In contrast, nonphosphoryliertes tau (tau-p0) does not bind Nup98-FG and Nup98-S. N=3 experiments.

(H) Nup98 layers height changes corresponding to (G). N=3 experiments, data presented as mean + SD.

(I) SPR of tau-p12 an tau-p0 applied to C-terminal half of Nup98 (C-Nup98) reveals no significant binding. N=3 experiments.

(J) Tau protein was isolated from the HMW protein fraction (size exclusion chromatography) of AD brain homogenate using an anti-human tau affinity column (mab HT7 recognizing human tau aa159–163) contains phopho-tau (PHF-1) and Nup98. The identical sample was run simultaneously in parallel and Western blotted for PHF1 and Nup98.

Figure 5: Tau pathology causes nuclear leakiness and Ran mislocalization in AD.

(A) Dextran size exclusion assay of nuclei extracted from hippocampus (left) and cerebellum (right) of Braak I (control), Braak III (mild AD), and Braak VI (severe AD) brains. Nuclei were isolated with a sucrose gradient and incubated with 70-kDa (green) and 500-kDa (red) fluorescent dextrans. Intranuclear 70-kDa or 500-kDa dextran indicated leakiness of the nuclear membrane. N = 3 brains per Braak stage. Scale bars, 15 μm.

(B) The percent of leaky nuclei (70-kDa dextran intra-nuclear fluorescent signal &gt;20% of the extra-nuclear signal; (D’Angelo et al., 2009)) in hippocampi of AD brains correlates with the AD Braak staging. Nuclei from cerebellum, a region that remains unaffected by tau pathology in AD, show no leakiness. N = 3 patients per Braak stage, N = 100 nuclei/Braak stage.

(C) Immunolabeling of phospho-tau (p-tau mix) and Ran in AD (Braak VI; N = 10) and control (Braak I and II; N = 10) hippocampal CA1 tissue. Controls show diffuse nuclear and cytoplasmic Ran, whereas Ran is cleared from the nucleus in phospho-tau-positive AD neurons. Scale bars, 10 μm.

(D) Quantification of nuclear Ran intensity in hippocampal control and AD neurons. N = 10 control and AD cases; 5 fields per case; 100 neuronal nuclei per case. Data are presented as mean + SEM. **p&lt; 0.01, ***p&lt; 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test.

Figure 6. Cytosolic HMW tau disrupts nuclear import and export of proteins.

(A) The fluorescent reporter NES:tdTomato:NLS was used to monitor the nuclear import capability of neurons treated with fluorescently labeled HMW protein from AD brain. Representative images of untreated and HMW AD protein treated (for 24 h) neurons before (pre-bleach *) and after (bleached **) photo-bleaching and after recovery (post-bleached).

(B) Florescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of nuclei after 24, 48, and 72 h incubation with HMW AD protein. Most FRAP is lost after 24 h, and no further decrease is detected after longer times of HMW AD protein treatment. Data is presented as area under the average curve. N = 15 nuclei for untreated and treated neurons.

(C) The fluorescenct reporter 2xGFP:NES-IRES-2xRFP:NLS is used to monitor nuclear import and export of proteins in neurons. Schematic illustration of nuclear transport disruption after treatment with HMW AD protein.

(D) Confocal images of primary neurons expressing 2xGFP:NES-IRES-2xRFP:NLS and treated with HMW AD protein. Untreated neurons show clear separation of nuclear RFP and cytosolic GFP. GFP:NES occurs the nucleus after 24 h, RFP:NLS diffuses into the cytoplasm at 48 h upon treatment with HMW AD protein fraction containing tau. Scale bars, 10 μm.

Figure 7: Severe Ran mislocalization in transgenic mice with tau aggregation.

(A) 14-month-old WT, rTg21221, rTg4510, and APP/PS1 brains stained for phospho-tau (green) and Ran (pink) reveal Ran mislocalization into the cytoplasm in hippocampal neurons positive for phospho-tau. rTg21221 and APP/PS1 mice have Ran intensities similar to WT, whereas phospho-tau-positive neurons in rTg4510 mice show a substantial depletion of Ran in the nucleus. Scale bars, 40 μm; scale bars in zoomed images, 10 μm.

(B) Quantification of nuclear (white outline) Ran protein intensity in CA1 neuron. N = 3 per group, 100 nuclei per group. Data are presented as mean + SEM. ***p&lt; 0.001.

Figure 8: Reducing tau mitigates Nup98 aggregation and rescues Ran gradient In mice.

(A) Transgenic human tau expression in rTg4510 mice can be repressed by feeding doxicylin (DOX). Comparing hippocampal (CA1) brain sections from age-matched WT and rTg4510 mice with or without DOX treatment from 6 to 12 months of age, we found that Ran (pink) was depleted from most neuronal nuclei (white outlined) in rTg4510. Ran was present in the nucleus in DOX-treated rTg4510 even in presence of remaining aggregated phospho-tau (green) in the soma. Nup98 (red) mislocalized to the somata in rTg4510 and rTg4510+DOX neurons with cytosolic phospho-tau (green). Scale bars in merged images, 40 μm; scale bars in zoomed images, 10 μm.

(B) Quantification shows that the nuclear Ran intensity was fully restored in DOX-treated animals, which have decreased soluble phospho-tau. N = 3 per group, 100 nuclei per group. Data are presented as mean + SEM. **p&lt; 0.01, ***p&lt; 0.001, ****p&lt; 0.0001 by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test.

(C) The colocalization of Nup98 with phospho-tau significantly decreased in DOX-treated animals. N = 3 per group. Data are presented as mean + SEM. **p&lt; 0.01, ***p&lt; 0.001, ****p&lt; 0.0001 by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test.

Highlights

Defects in nuclear pore morphology and function are associated with AD

Nup98 mislocalizes to the neuronal cytoplasm in AD and in tau transgenic mice

Reducing soluble tau rescues nucleocytoplasmic transport and Nup98 defects in mice

Nup98 interacts directly with tau and facilitates tau fibrilization

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests. Dr. Eftekarzadeh is currently an employee of Biogen; Dr. Daigle is currently an employee of Abbvie.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental Information includes eight figures and one table.


REFERENCES

Alber F , Dokudovskaya S , Veenhoff LM , Zhang W , Kipper J , Devos D , Suprapto A , Karni-Schmidt O , Williams R , Chait BT , (2007). The molecular architecture of the nuclear pore complex. Nature 450 , 695–701.18046406
Amador-Ortiz C , Lin WL , Ahmed Z , Personett D , Davies P , Duara R , Graff-Radford NR , Hutton ML , and Dickson DW (2007). TDP-43 immunoreactivity in hippocampal sclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 61 , 435–445.17469117
Basel-Vanagaite L , Muncher L , Straussberg R , Pasmanik-Chor M , Yahav M , Rainshtein L , Walsh CA , Magal N , Taub E , Drasinover V , (2006). Mutated nup62 causes autosomal recessive infantile bilateral striatal necrosis. Ann Neurol 60 , 214–222.16786527
Blevins MB , Smith AM , Phillips EM , and Powers MA (2003). Complex formation among the RNA export proteins Nup98, Rae1/Gle2, and TAP. J Biol Chem 278 , 20979–20988.12637516
D’Angelo MA , Raices M , Panowski SH , and Hetzer MW (2009). Age-dependent deterioration of nuclear pore complexes causes a loss of nuclear integrity in postmitotic cells. Cell 136 , 284–295.19167330
Dasso M , and Pu RT (1998). Nuclear transport: run by Ran? Am J Hum Genet 63 , 311–316.9683621
Denning DP , Patel SS , Uversky V , Fink AL , and Rexach M (2003). Disorder in the nuclear pore complex: the FG repeat regions of nucleoporins are natively unfolded. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 , 2450–2455.12604785
Dultz E , Zanin E , Wurzenberger C , Braun M , Rabut G , Sironi L , and Ellenberg J (2008). Systematic kinetic analysis of mitotic dis- and reassembly of the nuclear pore in living cells. J Cell Biol 180 , 857–865.18316408
Fernandez-Nogales M , Cabrera JR , Santos-Galindo M , Hoozemans JJ , Ferrer I , Rozemuller AJ , Hernandez F , Avila J , and Lucas JJ (2014). Huntington’s disease is a four-repeat tauopathy with tau nuclear rods. Nat Med 20 , 881–885.25038828
Floch AG , Palancade B , and Doye V (2014). Fifty years of nuclear pores and nucleocytoplasmic transport studies: multiple tools revealing complex rules. Methods Cell Biol 122 , 1–40.24857723
Fontoura BM , Blobel G , and Yaseen NR (2000). The nucleoporin Nup98 is a site for GDP/GTP exchange on ran and termination of karyopherin beta 2-mediated nuclear import. J Biol Chem 275 , 31289–31296.10875935
Freeman SH , Spires-Jones T , Hyman BT , Growdon JH , and Frosch MP (2008). TARDNA binding protein 43 in Pick disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 , 62–67.18091558
Freibaum BD , Lu Y , Lopez-Gonzalez R , Kim NC , Almeida S , Lee KH , Badders N , Valentine M , Miller BL , Wong PC , (2015). GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9orf72 compromises nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature 525 , 129–133.26308899
Frey S , and Gorlich D (2007). A saturated FG-repeat hydrogel can reproduce the permeability properties of nuclear pore complexes. Cell 130 , 512–523.17693259
Frey S , Richter RP , and Gorlich D (2006). FG-rich repeats of nuclear pore proteins form a three-dimensional meshwork with hydrogel-like properties. Science 314 , 815–817.17082456
Gasset-Rosa F , Chillon-Marinas C , Goginashvili A , Atwal RS , Artates JW , Tabet R , Wheeler VC , Bang AG , Cleveland DW , and Lagier-Tourenne C (2017). Polyglutamine-Expanded Huntingtin Exacerbates Age-Related Disruption of Nuclear Integrity and Nucleocytoplasmic Transport. Neuron 94 , 48–57 e44.28384474
Gomez-Isla T , Price JL , McKeel DW Jr. , Morris JC , Growdon JH , and Hyman BT (1996). Profound loss of layer II entorhinal cortex neurons occurs in very mild Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 16 , 4491–4500.8699259
Gong CX , and Iqbal K (2008). Hyperphosphorylation of microtubule-associated protein tau: a promising therapeutic target for Alzheimer disease. Curr Med Chem 15 , 2321–2328.18855662
Grima JC , Daigle JG , Arbez N , Cunningham KC , Zhang K , Ochaba J , Geater C , Morozko E , Stocksdale J , Glatzer JC , (2017). Mutant Huntingtin Disrupts the Nuclear Pore Complex. Neuron 94 , 93–107 e106.28384479
Hetzer M , Gruss OJ , and Mattaj IW (2002). The Ran GTPase as a marker of chromosome position in spindle formation and nuclear envelope assembly. Nature cell biology 4 , E177–184.12105431
Hinshaw JE , Carragher BO , and Milligan RA (1992). Architecture and design of the nuclear pore complex. Cell 69 , 1133–1141.1617726
Ishigaki S , Fujioka Y , Okada Y , Riku Y , Udagawa T , Honda D , Yokoi S , Endo K , Ikenaka K , Takagi S , (2017). Altered Tau Isoform Ratio Caused by Loss of FUS and SFPQ Function Leads to FTLD-like Phenotypes. Cell Rep 18 , 1118–1131.28147269
Ittner LM , Ke YD , Delerue F , Bi M , Gladbach A , van Eersel J , Wolfing H , Chieng BC , Christie MJ , Napier IA , (2010). Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Cell 142 , 387–397.20655099
Iwamoto M , Asakawa H , Hiraoka Y , and Haraguchi T (2010). Nucleoporin Nup98: a gatekeeper in the eukaryotic kingdoms. Genes Cells 15 , 661–669.20545767
Jovicic A , Mertens J , Boeynaems S , Bogaert E , Chai N , Yamada SB , Paul JW 3rd , Sun S , Herdy JR , Bieri G , (2015). Modifiers of C9orf72 dipeptide repeat toxicity connect nucleocytoplasmic transport defects to FTD/ALS. Nat Neurosci 18 , 1226–1229.26308983
Kaneb HM , Folkmann AW , Belzil VV , Jao LE , Leblond CS , Girard SL , Daoud H , Noreau A , Rochefort D , Hince P , (2015). Deleterious mutations in the essential mRNA metabolism factor, hGle1, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 24 , 1363–1373.25343993
Kapinos LE , Schoch RL , Wagner RS , Schleicher KD , and Lim RY (2014). Karyopherin-centric control of nuclear pores based on molecular occupancy and kinetic analysis of multivalent binding with FG nucleoporins. Biophys J 106 , 1751–1762.24739174
Ke YD , Dramiga J , Schutz U , Kril JJ , Ittner LM , Schroder H , and Gotz J (2012). Tau-mediated nuclear depletion and cytoplasmic accumulation of SFPQ in Alzheimer’s and Pick’s disease. PLoS One 7 , e35678.22558197
Kelley JB , Datta S , Snow CJ , Chatterjee M , Ni L , Spencer A , Yang CS , Cubenas-Potts C , Matunis MJ , and Paschal BM (2011). The defective nuclear lamina in Hutchinson-gilford progeria syndrome disrupts the nucleocytoplasmic Ran gradient and inhibits nuclear localization of Ubc9. Mol Cell Biol 31 , 3378–3395.21670151
Kowalczyk SW , Kapinos L , Blosser TR , Magalhaes T , van Nies P , Lim RY , and Dekker C (2011). Single-molecule transport across an individual biomimetic nuclear pore complex. Nat Nanotechnol 6 , 433–438.21685911
Labokha AA , Gradmann S , Frey S , Hulsmann BB , Urlaub H , Baldus M , and Gorlich D (2013). Systematic analysis of barrier-forming FG hydrogels from Xenopus nuclear pore complexes. EMBO J 32 , 204–218.23202855
Lemke EA (2016). The Multiple Faces of Disordered Nucleoporins. J Mol Biol 428 , 2011–2024.26791761
Lenart P , Rabut G , Daigle N , Hand AR , Terasaki M , and Ellenberg J (2003). Nuclear envelope breakdown in starfish oocytes proceeds by partial NPC disassembly followed by a rapidly spreading fenestration of nuclear membranes. J Cell Biol 160 , 1055–1068.12654902
Li X , Kumar Y , Zempel H , Mandelkow EM , Biernat J , and Mandelkow E (2011). Novel diffusion barrier for axonal retention of Tau in neurons and its failure in neurodegeneration. EMBO J 30 , 4825–4837.22009197
Loomis PA , Howard TH , Castleberry RP , and Binder LI (1990). Identification of nuclear tau isoforms in human neuroblastoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 , 8422–8426.1700432
Lord CL , Timney BL , Rout MP , and Wente SR (2015). Altering nuclear pore complex function impacts longevity and mitochondrial function in S. cerevisiae. J Cell Biol 208 , 729–744.25778920
Lu T , Aron L , Zullo J , Pan Y , Kim H , Chen Y , Yang TH , Kim HM , Drake D , Liu XS , (2014). REST and stress resistance in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 507 , 448–454.24670762
Matevossian A , and Akbarian S (2008). Neuronal nuclei isolation from human postmortem brain tissue. J Vis Exp.
Maziuk B , Ballance HI , and Wolozin B (2017). Dysregulation of RNA Binding Protein Aggregation in Neurodegenerative Disorders. Front Mol Neurosci 10 , 89.28420962
Mertens J , Paquola ACM , Ku M , Hatch E , Bohnke L , Ladjevardi S , McGrath S , Campbell B , Lee H , Herdy JR , (2015). Directly Reprogrammed Human Neurons Retain Aging-Associated Transcriptomic Signatures and Reveal Age-Related Nucleocytoplasmic Defects. Cell Stem Cell 17 , 705–718.26456686
Milles S , and Lemke EA (2011). Single molecule study of the intrinsically disordered FG-repeat nucleoporin 153. Biophys J 101 , 1710–1719.21961597
Moore MS , and Blobel G (1994). A G protein involved in nucleocytoplasmic transport: the role of Ran. Trends Biochem Sci 19 , 211–216.7519373
Obradovic Z , Peng K , Vucetic S , Radivojac P , Brown CJ , and Dunker AK (2003). Predicting intrinsic disorder from amino acid sequence. Proteins 53 Suppl 6 , 566–572.14579347
Peng K , Vucetic S , Radivojac P , Brown CJ , Dunker AK , and Obradovic Z (2005). Optimizing long intrinsic disorder predictors with protein evolutionary information. J Bioinform Comput Biol 3 , 35–60.15751111
Petri M , Frey S , Menzel A , Gorlich D , and Techert S (2012). Structural characterization of nanoscale meshworks within a nucleoporin FG hydrogel. Biomacromolecules 13 , 1882–1889.22571273
Powers MA , Forbes DJ , Dahlberg JE , and Lund E (1997). The vertebrate GLFG nucleoporin, Nup98, is an essential component of multiple RNA export pathways. J Cell Biol 136 , 241–250.9015297
Rabut G , Doye V , and Ellenberg J (2004). Mapping the dynamic organization of the nuclear pore complex inside single living cells. Nat Cell Biol 6 , 1114–1121.15502822
Santacruz K , Lewis J , Spires T , Paulson J , Kotilinek L , Ingelsson M , Guimaraes A , DeTure M , Ramsden M , McGowan E , (2005). Tau suppression in a neurodegenerative mouse model improves memory function. Science 309 , 476–481.16020737
Schmidt HB , and Gorlich D (2015). Nup98 FG domains from diverse species spontaneously phase-separate into particles with nuclear pore-like permselectivity. Elife 4 .
Sheffield LG , Miskiewicz HB , Tannenbaum LB , and Mirra SS (2006). Nuclear pore complex proteins in Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 65 , 45–54.16410748
Snow CJ , Dar A , Dutta A , Kehlenbach RH , and Paschal BM (2013). Defective nuclear import of Tpr in Progeria reflects the Ran sensitivity of large cargo transport. J Cell Biol 201 , 541–557.23649804
Sultan A , Nesslany F , Violet M , Begard S , Loyens A , Talahari S , Mansuroglu Z , Marzin D , Sergeant N , Humez S , (2011). Nuclear tau, a key player in neuronal DNA protection. J Biol Chem 286 , 4566–4575.21131359
Takeda S , Wegmann S , Cho H , DeVos SL , Commins C , Roe AD , Nicholls SB , Carlson GA , Pitstick R , Nobuhara CK , (2015). Neuronal uptake and propagation of a rare phosphorylated high-molecular-weight tau derived from Alzheimer’s disease brain. Nat Commun 6 , 8490.26458742
Thies E , and Mandelkow EM (2007). Missorting of tau in neurons causes degeneration of synapses that can be rescued by the kinase MARK2/Par-1. J Neurosci 27 , 2896–2907.17360912
Timney BL , Raveh B , Mironska R , Trivedi JM , Kim SJ , Russel D , Wente SR , Sali A , and Rout MP (2016). Simple rules for passive diffusion through the nuclear pore complex. J Cell Biol 215 , 57–76.27697925
Vanderweyde T , Apicco DJ , Youmans-Kidder K , Ash PEA , Cook C , Lummertz da Rocha E , Jansen-West K , Frame AA , Citro A , Leszyk JD , (2016). Interaction of tau with the RNA-Binding Protein TIA1 Regulates tau Pathophysiology and Toxicity. Cell Rep 15 , 1455–1466.27160897
Violet M , Delattre L , Tardivel M , Sultan A , Chauderlier A , Caillierez R , Talahari S , Nesslany F , Lefebvre B , Bonnefoy E , (2014). A major role for Tau in neuronal DNA and RNA protection in vivo under physiological and hyperthermic conditions. Front Cell Neurosci 8 , 84.24672431
Vovk A , Gu C , Opferman MG , Kapinos LE , Lim RY , Coalson RD , Jasnow D , and Zilman A (2016). Simple biophysics underpins collective conformations of the intrinsically disordered proteins of the Nuclear Pore Complex. Elife 5 .
Wagner RS , Kapinos LE , Marshall NJ , Stewart M , and Lim RY (2015). Promiscuous binding of Karyopherinbeta1 modulates FG nucleoporin barrier function and expedites NTF2 transport kinetics. Biophys J 108 , 918–927.25692596
Weingarten MD , Lockwood AH , Hwo SY , and Kirschner MW (1975). A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 72 , 1858–1862.1057175
Weis K (2003). Regulating access to the genome: nucleocytoplasmic transport throughout the cell cycle. Cell 112 , 441–451.12600309
Wente SR , and Rout MP (2010). The nuclear pore complex and nuclear transport. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 , a000562.20630994
Winton MJ , Igaz LM , Wong MM , Kwong LK , Trojanowski JQ , and Lee VM (2008). Disturbance of nuclear and cytoplasmic TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) induces disease-like redistribution, sequestration, and aggregate formation. J Biol Chem 283 , 13302–13309.18305110
Zhang K , Daigle JG , Cunningham KM , Coyne AN , Ruan K , Grima JC , Bowen KE , Wadhwa H , Yang P , Rigo F , (2018). Stress Granule Assembly Disrupts Nucleocytoplasmic Transport. Cell 173 , 958–971 e917.29628143
Zhang K , Donnelly CJ , Haeusler AR , Grima JC , Machamer JB , Steinwald P , Daley EL , Miller SJ , Cunningham KM , Vidensky S , (2015). The C9orf72 repeat expansion disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature 525 , 56–61.26308891
