LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985117R
4816
J Immunol
J. Immunol.
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
0022-1767
1550-6606

31907273
6951444
10.4049/jimmunol.1901068
NIHMS1541517
Article
Complement-mediated events in Alzheimer’s Disease: Mechanisms and Potential Therapeutic Targets
Tenner Andrea J.
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Memory Impairment and Neurological Disorders, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA
Corresponding author: Andrea J. Tenner, Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, 3205 McGaugh Hall, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697. atenner@uci.edu
30 10 2019
15 1 2020
15 1 2021
204 2 306315
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
An estimated 5.7 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer’s disease in the United States with no disease modifying treatments to prevent or treat cognitive deficits associated with the disease. GWAS studies suggest that an enhancement of clearance mechanisms and/or promotion of an anti-inflammatory response may slow or prevent disease progression. Increasing awareness of distinct roles of complement components in normal brain development and function and in neurodegenerative disorders align with complement-mediated responses and thus thorough understanding of these molecular pathways is needed to facilitate successful therapeutic design. Both beneficial and detrimental effects of C1q as well as contributions to local inflammation by C5a-C5aR1 signaling in brain highlight the need for precision of therapeutic design. The potential benefit of ß-amyloid clearance from the circulation via CR1-mediated mechanisms is also reviewed. Therapies that suppress inflammation, while preserving protective effects of complement could be tested now to slow the progression of this debilitating disease.

Alzheimer’s disease
Complement
Brain
Innate Immunity
Neurodegeneration
Neuroprotection
TLR
microglia
macrophage

The complement system is an evolutionarily ancient system contributing to defense from pathogens and injury (1). While the protective effector functions of the complement system in the vasculature were the first to be described, it is now clear that the components of the system have a plethora of roles in immune mechanisms of homeostasis, the development and retraction of the adaptive immune responses, intracellular metabolism and regeneration of injured tissue (reviewed in (2–4)), and that over activation or dysregulation contributes to disease. There has been an explosion of new findings of the role of complement in the nervous system, from contributions to migration of cells and synapse elimination during development (5, 6), to detrimental damage of nerve cells in autoimmunity (7) and stroke (8), and aberrant synapse pruning in neurological disorders (reviewed in (9, 10)). In this brief review, the systems involved will be introduced, followed by discussion of data suggesting modulatory roles of complement in Alzheimer’s disease. Finally, potential approaches to therapies targeting specific elements of the complement system will be presented.

Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most prevalent progressive neurodegenerative disorder of the elderly, and the sixth leading cause of death in the United States (11). Clinical symptoms of the disease include an unrelenting progressive decline of both memory and executive cognitive function. Unfortunately, there are still no treatments that limit the pathology or, more importantly, slow the progressive cognitive loss characteristic of this disorder. Alois Alzheimer first described AD in 1906 as clinically dementia with brain pathology defined by the presence of extracellular plaque deposits and neurofibrillary tangles. The plaques contain aggregated β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) and the tangles are aggregated hyper-phosphorylated tau (a microtubule associated protein) (12). It is now clear that “reactive” microglia and astrocytes indicative of a glial neuroinflammatory response surround the fibrillar plaques (plaques containing multimers of Aß in a ß-sheet fibrillar conformation, fAß). This, in conjunction with measured elevated levels of inflammatory mediators in post-mortem AD brains, suggests a role for inflammation in the progression of the disease ((13, 14) and reviewed in (15, 16)).

Most AD cases (about 95–98%) are diagnosed after the age of 60 and are classified as “sporadic” or, perhaps a better term, “late onset” (LOAD). While age is the greatest risk factor for the disease, large genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified greater than 25 genetic risk loci including two complement associated genes, clusterin (CLU) and complement receptor 1 (CR1) (17–21). While most variants confer low risk, many have relatively high prevalence in the population, and thus can combine to generate significant polygenic risk scores (22, 23). These data strongly suggest that multi-genetic as well as environmental factors contribute to the disease. Concurrently, large unbiased bioinformatics analyses reproducibly point to clusters of genetic risk factors in pathways that suggest overlapping processes contribute to synapse loss, neuronal degeneration and cognitive dysfunction (21). Importantly, complement, microglia, astrocytes and immune response pathways involving inflammation and/or clearance mechanisms align with the genetics and pathological features of LOAD (13). Gene expression studies in mouse models of AD (24–27) support these critical pathways. A somewhat unexpected finding from models that perturb inflammatory pathways via deletion of C5AR1 and TYROBP, was that normalization of gene expression pathways and cognitive deficits occurred in the absence of decreased amyloid plaque deposition (25, 26). However, those data are consistent with reports of cognitively normal individuals with substantial plaque pathology at autopsy (28, 29) and indicate that it is an induced response to plaque that is detrimental in AD, rather than the plaques alone. Thus, these dysregulated “response” pathways can provide potential therapeutic targets to ameliorate or slow the progression of disease.

Current therapeutics thus far have shown limited efficacy (reviewed in (30, 31)) with recent disappointing results from anti-Aβ and BACE1 inhibitor therapies. While steroids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, and anti-oxidants target inflammation, these broad, non-selective drugs have had limited success in AD clinical trials and are accompanied by substantial side effects (32). These negative clinical results may have several possible inadvertent design caveats, but combined with the GWAS studies and more recently gene expression data, have led to new conceptual frameworks suggesting that there are many pathways to the cognitive loss associated with AD pathology. Thus, more consideration is now being given to the development of drugs with highly specific targets that would be disease modifying in subsets of AD patients or that would reduce excessive detrimental inflammation or promote neuronal resilience broadly.

Complement

The complement system, composed of over 40 interacting proteins in blood and other tissues, is a part of the innate immune response that is critically important for quickly recognizing and clearing pathogens, dying cells and misfolded proteins (33). It is also a prominent effector in antibody-mediated pathogen killing and clearance, and contributes to the generation of the pathogen-specific adaptive immune system response (34, 35). The complement system is activated by three different recognition pathways (classical, lectin and alternative), all of which lead to sequential enzyme activation, protein cleavage and conformational change to mediate effector functions (33). The classical complement pathway is activated by binding of C1q, a component of the C1 complex, to the Fc domain of antibody in immune complexes or to nonimmunoglobulin activators such as fibrillar Aß. The interaction-induced conformational change induces activation of the proenzymes Clr and C1s within the C1 complex. C1s then cleaves complement component C4 generating C4a and C4b, the latter of which is covalently deposited on the activator surface by a thioester bond. C4b binds C2 and the C1s protease then cleaves C2 into C2a and C2b. (Here C2b refers to the larger cleaved fragment of C2 that contains the enzymatic activity (36, 37).) The nascently formed C3 convertase, C4b2b, cleaves C3 into C3a and C3b. C3a influences inflammation and cellular responses via C3aR (38–40), and C3b stably associated with the activator is a potent opsonin engaging phagocytic cells, as well as mediating clearance of immune complexes. Some of the cleaved C3b remains associated with C4b2b forming C4b2b3b, the classical pathway C5 convertase. The C5 convertase then cleaves C5 into C5a and C5b. C5a can bind to receptors expressed on myeloid, mast cells, and other cell types (41, 42), inducing chemotaxis, increased vascular permeability and stimulating proinflammatory pathways. C5b initiates the formation of the membranolytic pore-forming C5b-9 complex, capable of lysing pathogens.

The lectin pathway is quite similar to the classical pathway except that the recognition components ficolins, mannan binding lectin (MBL) or other collectins are activated by specific repeating carbohydrate structures and the associated serine proteases are MASP1/2. The alternative pathway of activation is the result of the direct association of C3b with an activating surface (43), which is often a pathogen but can also be fibrillar Aß (44). The serine proteases Factor D and Factor B result in the generation of the C3 cleaving enzyme complex C3bBb and the alternative C5 cleaving enzyme C3bBb3b. The alternative pathway can also amplify the classical pathway activation, and thus could be targeted to decrease excessive downstream complement activation.

Regardless of the activation mechanism, the same major effector functions can result: (1) opsonization, via tagging of activators with cleavage fragments C3b/iC3b (and to a lesser extend C4b and C1q) resulting in more efficient receptor-mediated clearance of pathogens, apoptotic cells, and cellular debris by phagocytes; (2) recruitment of immune cells, including microglia, to the site of injury via production of chemotactic peptides, C3a and C5a, and their subsequent engagement of specific cell membrane receptors; (3) targeted death of pathogens due to the sequential interaction of activation cleavage product C5b with C6, C7, C8, C9 generating the lytic membrane attack complex (MAC); (4) increased vascular permeability; and (5) polarization of cells via induction of specific gene expression patterns (reviewed in (33, 45).

Noncanonical roles of Complement in the Central Nervous System (CNS)

In 2007, Beth Stevens, Ben Barres and colleagues “rocked” the complement and neurodevelopment world using high resolution confocal microscopy to quantify synaptic puncta in mice genetically deficient in the complement proteins C1q and C3 to demonstrate a substantial role for the upstream classical complement pathway in eliminating “inactive” synapses during the refinement of the developing retinogeniculate system (6). Microglia ingested C1q- and iC3b/C3b-tagged, presumably “weak” CD47 low (46), synapses via the complement receptor CR3 (47). At the protein level, C1q was copurified with synaptosomes containing apoptosis markers (48), suggesting that synaptic pruning may involve some of the same molecular triggers as the complement mediated enhanced clearance of apoptotic cells. Thus, while very surprising at first, the nervous system appears to have merely assimilated functions normally provided by complement in the tagging of apoptotic cells and cellular material for “silent” clearance by phagocytic cells in tissue. However, subsequently, excessive complement dependent synaptic pruning and/or localized loss of spine density was demonstrated to occur in multiple mouse models of neurological disorders (49–54), often correlating with deficits in behavioral performance, indicating either aberrant activation or insufficient regulation of the cascade.

In a distinct mechanism of action, interaction of C1q with myeloid cells, including microglia, in the absence of the enzyme complex C1, suppresses proinflammatory cytokine production and enhances clearance of apoptotic cells and neuronal blebs in primary cell cultures (55–58) (Figure 1). C1q interaction with macrophages or microglia in tissue during cell turnover, tissue remodeling, or apoptotic cell death, as may occur in mild sterile injury, is a homeostasis mechanism to enable clearance without inducing an immune response to self antigens (autoimmunity) (59, 60) and as reviewed in (61, 62). This is an area of continuing investigation, as C1q can engage diverse receptors and co-receptors thereby mediating diverse cellular responses (reviewed in (63, 64)).”

C1q has direct protective effects on primary cultured neurons under nutrient stress or amyloid induced toxicity, again without the presence or activation of C1 or any of the downstream complement components (65–67) (Figure 2). Early investigations of the intracellular signaling and induced patterns of gene expression are intriguing (66, 67) and warrant further investigation in the pursuit of potential therapeutic advantage. Thus, although targeting C1q to avoid damaging downstream events due to the activation of the classical pathway may have benefits, inhibition of these other neuroprotective functions may be counterproductive for neurodegenerative diseases in general.

Synthesis of Complement Proteins

The liver had long been recognized as the site of complement protein production (reviewed in (68), both constitutively and in some cases (for example, C3, MBL) as inducible acute phase proteins (69, 70). However, the synthesis of complement proteins is now recognized to be differentially induced in multiple cell types, including myeloid cells throughout the body, and importantly can be transcriptionally regulated in CNS resident neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia with injury or aging (reviewed in (9, 71)). CNS expression of most complement components increases with aging, and further increases in AD patients and animal models of AD consistent with a role for complement in the response to injury and progression of disease (72–75). However, evidence thus far suggests that complement system regulators such as C1 Inhibitor levels in the aging, AD brain are decreased especially relative to the increased activators, such as misfolded proteins, apoptotic cells/damaged neurons, or cell debris (76, 77) and reviewed in (78), leading to a potentially significant imbalance in control of inflammatory activation.

More is known about C1q and C3 synthesis in the brain. An increase in C1q mRNA results in the dramatically increased C1q protein in the normal aging of mouse and human brain (79). During development of the visual system, synthesis of C1q is upregulated in neurons (6). In this case, C1q synthesis by neurons is dependent on TGFß secreted by astrocytes (80). However, in a microglial specific conditional C1q knock out mouse, blood C1q levels remain unchanged while C1q in the adult brain was absent, Implicating microglia as the predominant CNS source of C1q (81). Thus, this complement component is present in aging brain even without a breakdown of the blood brain barrier. In contrast to the dominant expression of C1q by microglia, C3 is largely produced by reactive astrocytes in brain and C4 appears to be synthesized in oligodendrocytes as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (82) and RNA-seq (51, 83, 84). C3 has been used as a marker of A1 activated astrocytes (83).

Over 35 years ago it was demonstrated that C1q, the initiating component of the classical complement cascade, could be synthesized in the absence of the C1 serine proteases C1r and C1s in peripheral myeloid cells (85). In the brain, upregulation of C1q expression at the mRNA and protein level is an early response to injury or disease and in many cases, is robustly produced in the absence of the classical pathway serine proteases (as reviewed in (86) and more recently (67)) supporting C1-independent C1q-mediated functions. C1r, C1s and C3 are upregulated later in models of AD when plaques become more abundant (67). Wu and colleagues report differential synthesis of several complement components in murine astrocytes and microglial as a function of amyloidosis or tauopathy with age (51). The temporal and cellular regulation of individual component cascade proteins in normal, aging and diseased brains is clearly important to define as several components contribute to different disease processes and tissue repair or resilience. How transcriptional and translational control of complement protein availability contributes to disease progression will become more clear as single cell RNA-Seq and proteomic studies assessing complement component genes in regional and temporal dimensions are completed (84).

Complement and Alzheimer’s disease

As early as 1982, complement proteins were found associated with amyloid plaques in human AD brain (87). It was then demonstrated that the complement cascade could be directly activated in vitro by fibrillar Aβ and neurofibrillary tangles (hyperphosphorylated tau) (44, 88–90). C1q, C3b, C4b and properdin were verified as being readily associated with fibrillar Aß plaques in humans and animal models providing in vivo correlates to the activation of both classical and alternative pathway, as reviewed in (91) and in (92), clearly implicating the complement system as a player in the inflammatory scenario.

Clearance of Aβ plaques is either impaired in AD or not sufficient to overcome an accumulation of Aß (or both). While a portion of Aβ is transported out of the brain via LRP-1 and microglia have been shown ingesting amyloid, the mechanisms and relative contributions to clearance of Aβ plaques remains to be clarified (93). While oligomeric Aß directly stresses neurons, the ß-sheet fibrillar amyloid plaque (and likely protofibrils) is the complement activating conformation (94). A beneficial result of complement activation in the case of AD could be opsonization and clearance of misfolded proteins (95, 96). In addition, glutamate containing vesicular blebs generated by damaged neurons and apoptotic cells bind C1q and are cleared by microglia (58) (Figure 1). Both membrane-bound and soluble complement regulators, including, for example, CD55, Factor H and C4 binding protein (C4BP), limit the formation of the downstream C3 and C5 convertases. Factor H is a cofactor for Factor I mediated cleavage of C3b whereas C4BP is a cofactor for cleavage of C4b by factor I, leading to inactivation of C3b and C4b, respectively and thus inhibiting further C3 cleavage activity. Both Factor H and C4BP are colocalized with plaques and dead cells in AD brains, demonstrating that there is some level of inhibition at the C3 convertase level (78, 97–99) that could permit clearance of apoptotic cells, with concomitant attenuation of inflammation, with limited generation of downstream mediators C5a and C5b-9. However, the MAC, C5b-9, has also been found in human AD brain in areas containing fibrillar plaques and tangles (100). While this could result in MAC-induced damage by insertion into cells (adjacent to the plaques) that may not be well protected by host cell CD59 (76), the contribution to AD dysfunction by the C5b-9 complex remains to be established. The presence of the MAC nevertheless demonstrates that complete activation of the cascade does occur within the AD brain, thereby inferring the generation of the generally proinflammatory fragment, C5a. A large body of previous investigations of C5aR1 signaling (reviewed in (101)) indicate that the anaphylatoxin receptor C5aR1 produces a pro-inflammatory environment by acting on MAPKs and leading to generation of inflammatory cytokines many of which are known to be expressed in AD brain. While carboxypeptidase N (CPN) reduces C3a and C5a affinity for their receptors and thus reduces corresponding pro-inflammatory actions by rapidly cleaving their C-terminal Arg, little is known of the expression and role of CPN in the CNS (102). C5aR2, an alternate receptor for C5a, is thought to have C5a scavenger and neuroprotective functions (103). C5aR2 can also heterodimerize with C5aR1, resulting in modulation of that receptor expression/activity (104), again demonstrating multiple potential levels of regulation.

To explore functions and consequences of complement activation in vivo, mouse models of AD were crossed to C3 knockout mice or to a transgenic mouse overexpressing the C3 convertase inhibitor, Crry. Greater amyloid accumulation and greater cognitive deficits were observed in the C3 deficient or Crry-overexpressed mice (95, 105), suggesting a beneficial role for activated C3. In contrast, in the Tg2576 transgenic mouse, genetic ablation of C1q resulted in reduced plaque and glial activation, less loss of synaptaphysin in stratum lucidum of CA3 (where mossy fibers synapse CA3 pyramidal dendrites), less loss of MAP2 in CA3 pyramidal neurons dendrites, and less cognitive decline relative to the C1q sufficient Tg2576 (106). In more recent studies, deletion of C1q or C3 in other AD models was found to be beneficial in cognitive studies (53, 107). This protection was attributed to suppression of excessive synaptic pruning. Similar evidence of the involvement of early complement components in detrimental excessive synapse elimination has been reported in models of frontal temporal dementia (FTD) and West Nile Virus infection (49, 54). However, the complex role of complement in the brain complicates interpretation of the results of either knocking out or inhibiting the early components of complement as that can influence the generation of multiple downstream functions, which must be considered as potential mechanisms for the observed results.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are pattern recognition receptors which are important sensors for innate immune system that can synergize with or antagonize the complement system to initiate and enhance the response to pathogens and misfolded proteins (reviewed in (108)). In the periphery, C5a-C5aR1 signaling was found to synergize with TLR2 and TLR4 stimulation and enhance pro-inflammatory cytokine responses (TNF-α and IL-1β) in mouse models (109, 110), mouse macrophages, and human monocytes all of which can be beneficial in the resolution of infections (reviewed in (108)). Although it remains to be determined if similar synergy occurs in CNS, Aβ binding to microglia has been found to involve TLR4 and TLR2 (111). The early in vitro findings that C5a increased the release of IL-1β and IL-6 in Aβ-primed human monocytes (112) and induced chemotaxis in microglia (113), was consistent with a scenario in which fibrillar amyloid plaque complement activation generates C5a which then recruits microglia to the plaque. Upon interaction of fibrillar plaques with TLR (114) on the recruited microglia would synergistically initiate an inflammatory response leading to a neurotoxic environment (Figure 1). An unbiased integrated systems approach identified immune functions and microglial activation products including complement, TLR and cytokine networks as key nodes correlating with attributes of human late-onset AD (13), and thus as in the periphery, C5a may play a synergistic role with other damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) in the response to perceived danger in the brain.

Role of C5a and Inflammation in AD

Evidence from multiple systems suggests that inflammation due to the complement system is triggered by the activation-induced cleavage product, C5a. C5a is chemotactic for phagocytes (including microglia) and leads to an alteration of their functional states (reviewed in (115)). In AD, the complement system may be continually activated by both fibrillar Aß (89, 116) and extracellular tangles formed by hyperphosphorylated tau (88). This could contribute to a chronic inflammatory state mediated substantially by the complement activation product C5a upon binding to its receptor C5aR1 on microglia (Figure 1 and 2).

Evidence for the concept of microglial priming has long been proposed with proponents advocating peripheral or CNS origin of the priming and/or secondary inflammatory stimuli (117, 118). Many groups have recognized the dichotomous roles of microglia, both detrimental and beneficial, for some time (119). RNA-Seq and immunohistochemical data provide evidence that microglia near fAß plaques adopt different functional states that enable them to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as reactive oxygen species (ROS) while other microglial subsets enhance phagocytosis and generate neuroprotective growth factors (24, 26, 27, 120–122). The functional state of microglia is critical because the location and “balance” of different microglia populations may have significantly different effects on astrocytes and neurotoxicity vs neurons and resiliency during CNS diseases (83, 123). If microglia can be inhibited in their differentiation to the disease activated microglial (DAM) state or “repolarized” to perform a more beneficial role in neurodegenerative and/or neuroinflammatory diseases such as AD (27, 121), it would certainly be a valuable therapeutic treatment target.

Recently, in an additional AD mouse model (Arctic), genetic ablation of C5aR1 prevented spatial specific memory deficits (26) independent of changes in amyloid load. Importantly, Sholl analysis of neurons in the CA1 region of the hippocampus revealed a profound decrease in neuronal complexity temporally aligning with cognitive deficits in the C5aR1-sufficient AD model mice, whereas no such loss of neuronal branching was seen in the AD mice lacking C5aR1. Gene expression data from adult microglia isolated from brain at four different ages was examined to investigate the effect of complement C5a on microglial gene expression. Indeed, a lack of C5aR1 prevents the polarization of microglia to a more inflammatory state seen with age and amyloid accumulation, while expression of genes involved in phagocytosis and lysosomal degradative enzymes were enhanced (26), consistent with induction of clearance and repair functions. Since C5aR1 knock out Arctic mice maintained neuronal integrity and had no behavior deficit as seen in the C5aR1 sufficient Arctic mice, treatment with a C5aR1 antagonist, without blocking C1q or C3 may be an effective treatment for slowing the progression of cognitive loss in AD and AD-related dementias. The data also confirm that amyloid plaques may be necessary (by definition), but not sufficient, to cause the cognitive decline seen in this AD mouse model (26) and in high amyloid pathology cognitively intact patients (29). A potential caveat of all mouse models of AD studied thus far is that they are more closely aligned with the early onset AD, that is the result of mutations in the amyloid precursor protein, APP, or the presenilins that cleave APP to form Aß, overexpress these proteins under a variety of promoters that lack endogenous regulation, and lack genetic diversity seen in the human population (124, 125). New candidate models of late onset AD are currently being generated, with a few currently distributed commercially. Thus, while accumulation of misfolded proteins, complement activation and inflammation are hallmarks of AD dementia pathology, utilization of these models will certainly accelerate the path to effective therapeutic intervention.

C5aR1 as a Therapeutic Target

PMX53 and related PMX205 are cyclic hexapeptide analogs of the C-terminal region of C5a, and function as antagonists of C5aR1. PMX205 has a more lipophilic nature than PMX53, and thus more easily gains access to the brain than PMX53 (126, 127). Treatment with PMX205 led to less fibrillar amyloid accumulation in 2 mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease, less activation of microglia and astrocytes, and reduction of cognitive loss (128) (Figure 2). In the 3xTg model that acquires tangles, PMX205 treatment resulted in a 70% decrease in hyperphosphorylated tau. PMX205 and PMX53 have been protective in other models of neurodegeneration (reviewed in (9)), and prevented neuronal death in vitro (129, 130). Such a therapy would be less immunocompromising than complete inhibition of C1q, C1 or C3, as it leaves opsonization and the ability to form the MAC on pathogens intact in the brain and periphery. Complement activation by fAß leading to C5a generation also produces C5b and in the presence of C6, C7, C8 and C9 would lead to the formation of MAC. Given that the plaque would not be damaged by MAC and that MAC would be susceptible to neutralization by clusterin or vitronectin complexes in solution (20, 131–133), only insertion into membranes of bystander cells could be detrimental. While in the described mouse models of AD C5aR1 receptor antagonist treatment was protective, suggesting a limited consequence of generated MAC, it of course remains to be seen if the protection would also be effective in humans, and at all stages of disease.

PMX53 and another orally available selective antagonist of C5aR1, Avacopan, have been tested in human clinical trials for safety. PMX53 was found to be safe in a human Phase 1 clinical trial for autoimmune diseases (reviewed in (115)). Thus, PMX53 and PMX205 could have an accelerated path to human clinical trials. It is important to note that PMX53 binds to human C5aR1 with much higher affinity than mouse C5aR1 (134), suggesting that beneficial results in murine models may underestimate that in humans. Avacopan (135) is a small molecule specific antagonist for C5aR1 that was effective in mouse models of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) associated vasculitis (136) and is currently in Phase 3 clinical trial for ANCA-associated vasculitis. Brain permeability has not yet been reported. As mentioned above, while a C5a receptor antagonist would block the proinflammatory effects of C5a (and perhaps enhance phagocytosis and clearance pathways), the complement activation fragment, C5b, would still be intact and able to participate in the MAC formation during a bacterial infection. Thus, this protective function of complement as well as opsonization, normal synaptic pruning and neuroprotective effects will not be compromised during systemic treatment with the antagonist. Finally, it should be noted that 16 years of clinical experience with Eculizumab (an anti C5 therapeutic antibody that blocks generation of C5a) have indicated a lack of toxicity/adverse effects resulting from the absence of C5a-C5aR1 signaling. In summary, the mouse and human data together predict that C5aR1 inhibition is safe and may suppress inflammation and enhance homeostatic processes in AD.

CR1, a multi-functional protein

CR1 is a host cell-associated regulatory protein, which binds C3b, and more weakly C4b and C1q (137). A major CR1 function is to promote the dissociation of C3b containing C3 convertases and to act as cofactor for Factor I cleavage of C3b to iC3b (which can no longer participate in C3 or C5 convertase activity), thereby, preventing the accumulation of C3b and formation of cell lytic C5b-9 on host cells (138). In humans, erythrocyte CR1 plays a major role in the clearance of C3b-opsonized immune complexes from the circulation via a mechanism called “immune adherence”. C3b linked to immune complexes via its thioester bond, binds to erythrocyte CR1 which then transports the immune complexes to the liver and spleen for ingestion, degradation and thus clearance (139). Polymorphisms in CR1 have been associated with AD risk although most SNPs are located in non-coding regions of the CR1 gene. Keenan and colleagues identified a SNP that is within the coding region of CR1 (18) resulting in an amino acid change (S1610T) within the protein domain that has been attributed to C1q binding (137). However, interestingly these SNPs often co segregate with another genetic polymorphism that is associated with decreased expression of CR1 on erythrocytes (140–142). As a result, it has been hypothesized that this lower density of CR1 on red cells, lowers peripheral clearance of Aß, and thus may contribute to the phenotype of CR1 risk variants, although a contribution of CR1 as an extrinsic regulator of complement is not excluded. In a small study of 36 individuals, AD patients had significantly lower levels of C3b-opsonized Aβ bound to their erythrocytes than age-matched controls or mild cognitively impaired individuals, consistent with a defect in peripheral amyloid clearance mechanisms (143). In a series of reports, Rogers and colleagues provided further evidence of decreased erythrocyte Aß levels in AD vs cognitively intact individuals, that Aß and erythrocytes were colocalized with Kupffer cells in human liver (indicated of immune adherence mediated clearance), and that anti-Aß in the presence of serum complement enhanced capture of Aß by human erythrocytes in vitro and in vivo (140, 144, 145). Thus, facilitating Aß immune complex association with CR1 (146) may be a part of a therapeutic strategy to enhance peripheral clearance of amyloid, if this leads to lower brain amyloid and cognitive improvement. While in humans CR1 and CR2 are coded for by distinct genes, mice express CR1 and CR2 proteins that result from differential splicing of a single Cr2 gene. In addition, CR1 in the mouse is not expressed on erythrocytes as in humans, making mouse models of the role of red cell CR1 in AD more challenging. However, a transgenic mouse expressing CR1 in mouse erythrocytes has been reported (147) and a new humanized CR1 knockin mouse has been generated by the MODEL-AD consortium. Both mice are available through Jackson Labs, and may enable preclinical testing of this novel therapeutic approach.

Conclusions

Prevalence of AD in the United States is projected to reach 13 million by 2050 creating a great financial as well as emotional burden. With no cure or disease-modifying therapeutics available, there is currently a significant unmet medical need to develop therapies for AD. The relatively recent awareness of the role of the early complement components in synapse pruning in multiple neurological diseases adds another level of complexity and/or opportunity for selective modulation of this process. In addition, colocalization of complement components with both plaques and tangles, and the detection of C5b-9 in brain provide clear evidence of activation of the entire complement cascade by a variety of activators within the AD brain. In animal models, direct and specific inhibition of the function of C5aR1 had beneficial effects on both pathology and cognitive behavior in several murine models of AD. This strategy would leave the beneficial functions of other complement components such as C1q and C3b, and C5b-9 intact. How suppressing C5aR1 would affect synaptic pruning is yet unknown. Quantitative studies on the balance between activators and inhibitors of complement in injured brain and the influence of the complotype (148) on progression of AD could be useful in designing personalized therapies in the future. While much remains to be clarified, targeting specific effector pathways of complement is justified now as a potential therapeutic strategy for this debilitating neurodegenerative disease.

Acknowledgements

The author thanks Karntipa Pisalyaput and Tracy Cole for the design of Figures 1 and 2, and Nicole Schartz and Gema Olivarria for critical reading the manuscript.

This work was supported in part by NIH grants NS 35144, P01 AG 00538, R01 60148, R21 61746 and the Alzheimer’s Association.

Figure 1: Complement-mediated functions change with disease progression.

Early disease (Phase 1): C1q expression is upregulated by “injury” independently of other complement cascade proteins. C1q binds apoptotic neurons and neuronal blebs, thereby enhancing phagocytosis by microglia (pink) while also suppressing inflammatory response in the absence of other PAMPs/DAMPs. Phase 2: The complement cascade is chronically activated as fAß and other activators accumulate. C1r, C1s, C4, and C3 synthesis is induced in response to more local damage, while the complement regulators C1-INH and C4BP are not comparatively upregulated. Generated C3b/iC3b covalently links to fAβ and may lead to phagocytosis. However, in Phase 3, C5a is also generated, diffuses from the plaque, engages C5aR1 on microglia and induces chemotactic activity recruiting microglia to the plaques. fAβ binds to microglial TLR receptors (or others) inducing a synergistic response including pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion and reactive oxygen species production. Since large fAβ plaques are not efficiently cleared, a chronic inflammatory environment develops contributing to greater neuronal damage conducive to more fAβ production and ultimately neuronal dysfunction and death. The contribution of all these events to AD onset and progression in humans remains to be determined.

Figure 2: Beneficial complement-mediated functions in the brain are retained in the presence of C5aR1 antagonists.

A specific C5aR1 antagonist (inhibitor, INH) will prevent induction of detrimental pro-inflammatory responses to chronic fibrillar Aβ via blocking C5a-induced microglia responses (and possibly induction of A1 astrocytes), as well as block C5a-induced neuronal apoptosis. The antagonist will not affect the direct interaction of C1q with neurons that promotes survival and resistance to fAβ induced death (left), nor the enhancement of microglial uptake of apoptotic cells and neuronal blebs with suppression of inflammatory cytokine release (right). CR3 will remain functional mediating phagocytosis by engaging iC3b and C3b bound to Aβ, apoptotic cells or other debris (right). C5aR2 would be unaffected and can act as a scavenger of C5a to contribute to the suppression of pro-inflammatory responses (left and right). Not pictured: Formation of membranolytic C5b-9 on pathogens will not be affected.


1. Lambris JD , Reid KB , and Volanakis JE . 1999 The evolution, structure, biology and pathophysiology of complement. Immunol.Today 20 : 207–211.10322298
2. Elvington M , Liszewski MK , and Atkinson JP . 2016 Evolution of the complement system: from defense of the single cell to guardian of the intravascular space. Immunol Rev 274 : 9–15.27782327
3. West EE , Kolev M , and Kemper C . 2018 Complement and the Regulation of T Cell Responses. Annu Rev Immunol 36 : 309–338.29677470
4. Mastellos DC , DeAngelis RA , and Lambris JD . 2013 Complement-triggered pathways orchestrate regenerative responses throughout phylogenesis. Semin.Immunol 25 : 29–38.23684626
5. Coulthard LG , Hawksworth OA , and Woodruff TM . 2018 Complement: The Emerging Architect of the Developing Brain. Trends Neurosci 41 : 373–384.29606485
6. Stevens B , Allen NJ , Vazquez LE , Howell GR , Christopherson KS , Nouri N , Micheva KD , Mehalow AK , Huberman AD , Stafford B , Sher A , Litke AM , Lambris JD , Smith SJ , John SW , and Barres BA . 2007 The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131 : 1164–1178.18083105
7. Nestor J , Arinuma Y , Huerta TS , Kowal C , Nasiri E , Kello N , Fujieda Y , Bialas A , Hammond T , Sriram U , Stevens B , Huerta PT , Volpe BT , and Diamond B . 2018 Lupus antibodies induce behavioral changes mediated by microglia and blocked by ACE inhibitors. J Exp Med 215 : 2554–2566.30185634
8. Alawieh A , Langley EF , and Tomlinson S . 2018 Targeted complement inhibition salvages stressed neurons and inhibits neuroinflammation after stroke in mice. Sci Transl Med 10 .
9. Tenner AJ , Stevens B , and Woodruff TM . 2018 New tricks for an ancient system: Physiological and pathological roles of complement in the CNS. Mol Immunol 102 : 3–13.29958698
10. Presumey J , Bialas AR , and Carroll MC . 2017 Complement System in Neural Synapse Elimination in Development and Disease. Adv Immunol 135 : 53–79.28826529
11. 2018 2018 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association 14 : 367–429.
12. Selkoe DJ , and Hardy J . 2016 The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years. EMBO Mol.Med.
13. Zhang B , Gaiteri C , Bodea LG , Wang Z , McElwee J , Podtelezhnikov AA , Zhang C , Xie T , Tran L , Dobrin R , Fluder E , Clurman B , Melquist S , Narayanan M , Suver C , Shah H , Mahajan M , Gillis T , Mysore J , Macdonald ME , Lamb JR , Bennett DA , Molony C , Stone DJ , Gudnason V , Myers AJ , Schadt EE , Neumann H , Zhu J , and Emilsson V . 2013 Integrated Systems Approach Identifies Genetic Nodes and Networks in Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 153 : 707–720.23622250
14. Giunta B , Fernandez F , Nikolic WV , Obregon D , Rrapo E , Town T , and Tan J . 2008 Inflammaging as a prodrome to Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinflammation. 5 : 51.19014446
15. Wyss-Coray T , and Rogers J . 2012 Inflammation in Alzheimer disease-a brief review of the basic science and clinical literature. Cold Spring Harb.Perspect.Med 2 : a006346.22315714
16. Labzin LI , Heneka MT , and Latz E . 2018 Innate Immunity and Neurodegeneration. Annu Rev Med 69 : 437–449.29106805
17. Sims R , van der Lee SJ , Naj AC , Bellenguez C , Badarinarayan N , Jakobsdottir J , Kunkle BW , Boland A , Raybould R , Bis JC , Martin ER , Grenier-Boley B , Heilmann-Heimbach S , Chouraki V , Kuzma AB , Sleegers K , Vronskaya M , Ruiz A , Graham RR , Olaso R , Hoffmann P , Grove ML , Vardarajan BN , Hiltunen M , Nothen MM , White CC , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Epelbaum J , Maier W , Choi SH , Beecham GW , Dulary C , Herms S , Smith AV , Funk CC , Derbois C , Forstner AJ , Ahmad S , Li H , Bacq D , Harold D , Satizabal CL , Valladares O , Squassina A , Thomas R , Brody JA , Qu L , Sanchez-Juan P , Morgan T , Wolters FJ , Zhao Y , Garcia FS , Denning N , Fornage M , Malamon J , Naranjo MCD , Majounie E , Mosley TH , Dombroski B , Wallon D , Lupton MK , Dupuis J , Whitehead P , Fratiglioni L , Medway C , Jian X , Mukherjee S , Keller L , Brown K , Lin H , Cantwell LB , Panza F , McGuinness B , Moreno-Grau S , Burgess JD , Solfrizzi V , Proitsi P , Adams HH , Allen M , Seripa D , Pastor P , Cupples LA , Price ND , Hannequin D , Frank-Garcia A , Levy D , Chakrabarty P , Caffarra P , Giegling I , Beiser AS , Giedraitis V , Hampel H , Garcia ME , Wang X , Lannfelt L , Mecocci P , Eiriksdottir G , Crane PK , Pasquier F , Boccardi V , Henandez I , Barber RC , Scherer M , Tarraga L , Adams PM , Leber M , Chen Y , Albert MS , Riedel-Heller S , Emilsson V , Beekly D , Braae A , Schmidt R , Blacker D , Masullo C , Schmidt H , Doody RS , Spalletta G , Longstreth WT Jr. , Fairchild TJ , Bossu P , Lopez OL , Frosch MP , Sacchinelli E , Ghetti B , Yang Q , Huebinger RM , Jessen F , Li S , Kamboh MI , Morris J , Sotolongo-Grau O , Katz MJ , Corcoran C , Dunstan M , Braddel A , Thomas C , Meggy A , Marshall R , Gerrish A , Chapman J , Aguilar M , Taylor S , Hill M , Fairen MD , Hodges A , Vellas B , Soininen H , Kloszewska I , Daniilidou M , Uphill J , Patel Y , Hughes JT , Lord J , Turton J , Hartmann AM , Cecchetti R , Fenoglio C , Serpente M , Arcaro M , Caltagirone C , Orfei MD , Ciaramella A , Pichler S , Mayhaus M , Gu W , Lleo A , Fortea J , Blesa R , Barber IS , Brookes K , Cupidi C , Maletta RG , Carrell D , Sorbi S , Moebus S , Urbano M , Pilotto A , Kornhuber J , Bosco P , Todd S , Craig D , Johnston J , Gill M , Lawlor B , Lynch A , Fox NC , Hardy J , Consortium A , Albin RL , Apostolova LG , Arnold SE , Asthana S , Atwood CS , Baldwin CT , Barnes LL , Barral S , Beach TG , Becker JT , Bigio EH , Bird TD , Boeve BF , Bowen JD , Boxer A , Burke JR , Burns JM , Buxbaum JD , Cairns NJ , Cao C , Carlson CS , Carlsson CM , Carney RM , Carrasquillo MM , Carroll SL , Diaz CC , Chui HC , Clark DG , Cribbs DH , Crocco EA , DeCarli C , Dick M , Duara R , Evans DA , Faber KM , Fallon KB , Fardo DW , Farlow MR , Ferris S , Foroud TM , Galasko DR , Gearing M , Geschwind DH , Gilbert JR , Graff-Radford NR , Green RC , Growdon JH , Hamilton RL , Harrell LE , Honig LS , Huentelman MJ , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Jarvik GP , Abner E , Jin LW , Jun G , Karydas A , Kaye JA , Kim R , Kowall NW , Kramer JH , LaFerla FM , Lah JJ , Leverenz JB , Levey AI , Li G , Lieberman AP , Lunetta KL , Lyketsos CG , Marson DC , Martiniuk F , Mash DC , Masliah E , McCormick WC , McCurry SM , McDavid AN , McKee AC , Mesulam M , Miller BL , Miller CA , Miller JW , Morris JC , Murrell JR , Myers AJ , O’Bryant S , Olichney JM , Pankratz VS , Parisi JE , Paulson HL , Perry W , Peskind E , Pierce A , Poon WW , Potter H , Quinn JF , Raj A , Raskind M , Reisberg B , Reitz C , Ringman JM , Roberson ED , Rogaeva E , Rosen HJ , Rosenberg RN , Sager MA , Saykin AJ , Schneider JA , Schneider LS , Seeley WW , Smith AG , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Swerdlow RH , Tanzi RE , Thornton-Wells TA , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Van Deerlin VM , Van Eldik LJ , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Wilhelmsen KC , Williamson J , Wingo TS , Woltjer RL , Wright CB , Yu CE , Yu L , Garzia F , Golamaully F , Septier G , Engelborghs S , Vandenberghe R , De Deyn PP , Fernadez CM , Benito YA , Thonberg H , Forsell C , Lilius L , Kinhult-Stahlbom A , Kilander L , Brundin R , Concari L , Helisalmi S , Koivisto AM , Haapasalo A , Dermecourt V , Fievet N , Hanon O , Dufouil C , Brice A , Ritchie K , Dubois B , Himali JJ , Keene CD , Tschanz J , Fitzpatrick AL , Kukull WA , Norton M , Aspelund T , Larson EB , Munger R , Rotter JI , Lipton RB , Bullido MJ , Hofman A , Montine TJ , Coto E , Boerwinkle E , Petersen RC , Alvarez V , Rivadeneira F , Reiman EM , Gallo M , O’Donnell CJ , Reisch JS , Bruni AC , Royall DR , Dichgans M , Sano M , Galimberti D , St George-Hyslop P , Scarpini E , Tsuang DW , Mancuso M , Bonuccelli U , Winslow AR , Daniele A , Wu CK , Gerad/Perades CAE , Peters O , Nacmias B , Riemenschneider M , Heun R , Brayne C , Rubinsztein DC , Bras J , Guerreiro R , Al-Chalabi A , Shaw CE , Collinge J , Mann D , Tsolaki M , Clarimon J , Sussams R , Lovestone S , O’Donovan MC , Owen MJ , Behrens TW , Mead S , Goate AM , Uitterlinden AG , Holmes C , Cruchaga C , Ingelsson M , Bennett DA , Powell J , Golde TE , Graff C , De Jager PL , Morgan K , Ertekin-Taner N , Combarros O , Psaty BM , Passmore P , Younkin SG , Berr C , Gudnason V , Rujescu D , Dickson DW , Dartigues JF , DeStefano AL , Ortega-Cubero S , Hakonarson H , Campion D , Boada M , Kauwe JK , Farrer LA , Van Broeckhoven C , Ikram MA , Jones L , Haines JL , Tzourio C , Launer LJ , Escott-Price V , Mayeux R , Deleuze JF , Amin N , Holmans PA , Pericak-Vance MA , Amouyel P , van Duijn CM , Ramirez A , Wang LS , Lambert JC , Seshadri S , Williams J , and Schellenberg GD . 2017 Rare coding variants in PLCG2, ABI3, and TREM2 implicate microglial-mediated innate immunity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 49 : 1373–1384.28714976
18. Keenan BT , Shulman JM , Chibnik LB , Raj T , Tran D , Sabuncu MR , Allen AN , Corneveaux JJ , Hardy JA , Huentelman MJ , Lemere CA , Myers AJ , Nicholson-Weller A , Reiman EM , Evans DA , Bennett DA , and De Jager PL . 2012 A coding variant in CR1 interacts with APOE-epsilon4 to influence cognitive decline. Human Molecular Genetics 21 : 2377–2388.22343410
19. International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Disease, C. 2015 Convergent genetic and expression data implicate immunity in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 11 : 658–671.25533204
20. Lambert JC , Heath S , Even G , Campion D , Sleegers K , Hiltunen M , Combarros O , Zelenika D , Bullido MJ , Tavernier B , Letenneur L , Bettens K , Berr C , Pasquier F , Fievet N , Barberger-Gateau P , Engelborghs S , De DP , Mateo I , Franck A , Helisalmi S , Porcellini E , Hanon O , de Pancorbo MM , Lendon C , Dufouil C , Jaillard C , Leveillard T , Alvarez V , Bosco P , Mancuso M , Panza F , Nacmias B , Bossu P , Piccardi P , Annoni G , Seripa D , Galimberti D , Hannequin D , Licastro F , Soininen H , Ritchie K , Blanche H , Dartigues JF , Tzourio C , Gut I , Van BC , Alperovitch A , Lathrop M , and Amouyel P . 2009 Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet. 41 : 1094–1099.19734903
21. Kunkle BW , Grenier-Boley B , Sims R , Bis JC , Damotte V , Naj AC , Boland A , Vronskaya M , van der Lee SJ , Amlie-Wolf A , Bellenguez C , Frizatti A , Chouraki V , Martin ER , Sleegers K , Badarinarayan N , Jakobsdottir J , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Moreno-Grau S , Olaso R , Raybould R , Chen Y , Kuzma AB , Hiltunen M , Morgan T , Ahmad S , Vardarajan BN , Epelbaum J , Hoffmann P , Boada M , Beecham GW , Garnier JG , Harold D , Fitzpatrick AL , Valladares O , Moutet ML , Gerrish A , Smith AV , Qu L , Bacq D , Denning N , Jian X , Zhao Y , Del Zompo M , Fox NC , Choi SH , Mateo I , Hughes JT , Adams HH , Malamon J , Sanchez-Garcia F , Patel Y , Brody JA , Dombroski BA , Naranjo MCD , Daniilidou M , Eiriksdottir G , Mukherjee S , Wallon D , Uphill J , Aspelund T , Cantwell LB , Garzia F , Galimberti D , Hofer E , Butkiewicz M , Fin B , Scarpini E , Sarnowski C , Bush WS , Meslage S , Kornhuber J , White CC , Song Y , Barber RC , Engelborghs S , Sordon S , Voijnovic D , Adams PM , Vandenberghe R , Mayhaus M , Cupples LA , Albert MS , De Deyn PP , Gu W , Himali JJ , Beekly D , Squassina A , Hartmann AM , Orellana A , Blacker D , Rodriguez-Rodriguez E , Lovestone S , Garcia ME , Doody RS , Munoz-Fernadez C , Sussams R , Lin H , Fairchild TJ , Benito YA , Holmes C , Karamujic-Comic H , Frosch MP , Thonberg H , Maier W , Roschupkin G , Ghetti B , Giedraitis V , Kawalia A , Li S , Huebinger RM , Kilander L , Moebus S , Hernandez I , Kamboh MI , Brundin R , Turton J , Yang Q , Katz MJ , Concari L , Lord J , Beiser AS , Keene CD , Helisalmi S , Kloszewska I , Kukull WA , Koivisto AM , Lynch A , Tarraga L , Larson EB , Haapasalo A , Lawlor B , Mosley TH , Lipton RB , Solfrizzi V , Gill M , Longstreth WT Jr. , Montine TJ , Frisardi V , Diez-Fairen M , Rivadeneira F , Petersen RC , Deramecourt V , Alvarez I , Salani F , Ciaramella A , Boerwinkle E , Reiman EM , Fievet N , Rotter JI , Reisch JS , Hanon O , Cupidi C , Andre Uitterlinden AG , Royall DR , Dufouil C , Maletta RG , de Rojas I , Sano M , Brice A , Cecchetti R , George-Hyslop PS , Ritchie K , Tsolaki M , Tsuang DW , Dubois B , Craig D , Wu CK , Soininen H , Avramidou D , Albin RL , Fratiglioni L , Germanou A , Apostolova LG , Keller L , Koutroumani M , Arnold SE , Panza F , Gkatzima O , Asthana S , Hannequin D , Whitehead P , Atwood CS , Caffarra P , Hampel H , Quintela I , Carracedo A , Lannfelt L , Rubinsztein DC , Barnes LL , Pasquier F , Frolich L , Barral S , McGuinness B , Beach TG , Johnston JA , Becker JT , Passmore P , Bigio EH , Schott JM , Bird TD , Warren JD , Boeve BF , Lupton MK , Bowen JD , Proitsi P , Boxer A , Powell JF , Burke JR , Kauwe JSK , Burns JM , Mancuso M , Buxbaum JD , Bonuccelli U , Cairns NJ , McQuillin A , Cao C , Livingston G , Carlson CS , Bass NJ , Carlsson CM , Hardy J , Carney RM , Bras J , Carrasquillo MM , Guerreiro R , Allen M , Chui HC , Fisher E , Masullo C , Crocco EA , DeCarli C , Bisceglio G , Dick M , Ma L , Duara R , Graff-Radford NR , Evans DA , Hodges A , Faber KM , Scherer M , Fallon KB , Riemenschneider M , Fardo DW , Heun R , Farlow MR , Kolsch H , Ferris S , Leber M , Foroud TM , Heuser I , Galasko DR , Giegling I , Gearing M , Hull M , Geschwind DH , Gilbert JR , Morris J , Green RC , Mayo K , Growdon JH , Feulner T , Hamilton RL , Harrell LE , Drichel D , Honig LS , Cushion TD , Huentelman MJ , Hollingworth P , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Marshall R , Jarvik GP , Meggy A , Abner E , Menzies GE , Jin LW , Leonenko G , Real LM , Jun GR , Baldwin CT , Grozeva D , Karydas A , Russo G , Kaye JA , Kim R , Jessen F , Kowall NW , Vellas B , Kramer JH , Vardy E , LaFerla FM , Jockel KH , Lah JJ , Dichgans M , Leverenz JB , Mann D , Levey AI , Pickering-Brown S , Lieberman AP , Klopp N , Lunetta KL , Wichmann HE , Lyketsos CG , Morgan K , Marson DC , Brown K , Martiniuk F , Medway C , Mash DC , Nothen MM , Masliah E , Hooper NM , McCormick WC , Daniele A , McCurry SM , Bayer A , McDavid AN , Gallacher J , McKee AC , van den Bussche H , Mesulam M , Brayne C , Miller BL , Riedel-Heller S , Miller CA , Miller JW , Al-Chalabi A , Morris JC , Shaw CE , Myers AJ , Wiltfang J , O’Bryant S , Olichney JM , Alvarez V , Parisi JE , Singleton AB , Paulson HL , Collinge J , Perry WR , Mead S , Peskind E , Cribbs DH , Rossor M , Pierce A , Ryan NS , Poon WW , Nacmias B , Potter H , Sorbi S , Quinn JF , Sacchinelli E , Raj A , Spalletta G , Raskind M , Caltagirone C , Bossu P , Orfei MD , Reisberg B , Clarke R , Reitz C , Smith AD , Ringman JM , Warden D , Roberson ED , Wilcock G , Rogaeva E , Bruni AC , Rosen HJ , Gallo M , Rosenberg RN , Ben-Shlomo Y , Sager MA , Mecocci P , Saykin AJ , Pastor P , Cuccaro ML , Vance JM , Schneider JA , Schneider LS , Slifer S , Seeley WW , Smith AG , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Swerdlow RH , Tang M , Tanzi RE , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Van Deerlin VM , Van Eldik LJ , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Wilhelmsen KC , Williamson J , Wingo TS , Woltjer RL , Wright CB , Yu CE , Yu L , Saba Y , C. Alzheimer Disease Genetics, I. European Alzheimer’s Disease, H. Cohorts for, C. Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology, Genetic, P. Environmental Risk in Ad/Defining Genetic, C. Environmental Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease, Pilotto A , Bullido MJ , Peters O , Crane PK , Bennett D , Bosco P , Coto E , Boccardi V , De Jager PL , Lleo A , Warner N , Lopez OL , Ingelsson M , Deloukas P , Cruchaga C , Graff C , Gwilliam R , Fornage M , Goate AM , Sanchez-Juan P , Kehoe PG , Amin N , Ertekin-Taner N , Berr C , Debette S , Love S , Launer LJ , Younkin SG , Dartigues JF , Corcoran C , Ikram MA , Dickson DW , Nicolas G , Campion D , Tschanz J , Schmidt H , Hakonarson H , Clarimon J , Munger R , Schmidt R , Farrer LA , Van Broeckhoven C , C. O. D. M , DeStefano AL , Jones L , Haines JL , Deleuze JF , Owen MJ , Gudnason V , Mayeux R , Escott-Price V , Psaty BM , Ramirez A , Wang LS , Ruiz A , van Duijn CM , Holmans PA , Seshadri S , Williams J , Amouyel P , Schellenberg GD , Lambert JC , and Pericak-Vance MA . 2019 Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Abeta, tau, immunity and lipid processing. Nat Genet 51 : 414–430.30820047
22. Escott-Price V , Sims R , Bannister C , Harold D , Vronskaya M , Majounie E , Badarinarayan N , Morgan K , Passmore P , Holmes C , Powell J , Brayne C , Gill M , Mead S , Goate A , Cruchaga C , Lambert JC , van DC , Maier W , Ramirez A , Holmans P , Jones L , Hardy J , Seshadri S , Schellenberg GD , Amouyel P , and Williams J . 2015 Common polygenic variation enhances risk prediction for Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138 : 3673–3684.26490334
23. Cruchaga C , Del-Aguila JL , Saef B , Black K , Fernandez MV , Budde J , Ibanez L , Deming Y , Kapoor M , Tosto G , Mayeux RP , Holtzman DM , Fagan AM , Morris JC , Bateman RJ , Goate AM , N. Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer, I. Disease Neuroimaging, N.-L. f. study, and Harari O . 2018 Polygenic risk score of sporadic late-onset Alzheimer’s disease reveals a shared architecture with the familial and early-onset forms. Alzheimers Dement 14 : 205–214.28943286
24. Keren-Shaul H , Spinrad A , Weiner A , Matcovitch-Natan O , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Ulland TK , David E , Baruch K , Lara-Astaiso D , Toth B , Itzkovitz S , Colonna M , Schwartz M , and Amit I . 2017 A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 169 : 1276–1290 e1217.28602351
25. Haure-Mirande JV , Wang M , Audrain M , Fanutza T , Kim SH , Heja S , Readhead B , Dudley JT , Blitzer RD , Schadt EE , Zhang B , Gandy S , and Ehrlich ME . 2019 Integrative approach to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: deficiency of TYROBP in cerebral Abeta amyloidosis mouse normalizes clinical phenotype and complement subnetwork molecular pathology without reducing Abeta burden. Mol Psychiatry 24 : 431–446.30283032
26. Hernandez MX , Jiang S , Cole TA , Chu SH , Fonseca MI , Fang MJ , Hohsfield LA , Torres MD , Green KN , Wetsel RA , Mortazavi A , and Tenner AJ . 2017 Prevention of C5aR1 signaling delays microglial inflammatory polarization, favors clearance pathways and suppresses cognitive loss. Mol Neurodegener 12 : 66.28923083
27. Sala Frigerio C , Wolfs L , Fattorelli N , Thrupp N , Voytyuk I , Schmidt I , Mancuso R , Chen WT , Woodbury ME , Srivastava G , Moller T , Hudry E , Das S , Saido T , Karran E , Hyman B , Perry VH , Fiers M , and De Strooper B . 2019 The Major Risk Factors for Alzheimer’s Disease: Age, Sex, and Genes Modulate the Microglia Response to Abeta Plaques. Cell Rep 27 : 1293–1306 e1296.31018141
28. Lue LF , Brachova L , Civin WH , and Rogers J . 1996 Inflammation, A beta deposition, and neurofibrillary tangle formation as correlates of Alzheimer’s disease neurodegeneration. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 55 : 1083–1088.8858005
29. Elobeid A , Rantakomi S , Soininen H , and Alafuzoff I . 2014 Alzheimer’s disease-related plaques in nondemented subjects. Alzheimers.Dement. 10 : 522–529.24742915
30. Mehta D , Jackson R , Paul G , Shi J , and Sabbagh M . 2017 Why do trials for Alzheimer’s disease drugs keep failing? A discontinued drug perspective for 2010–2015. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 26 : 735–739.
31. Cummings J , Lee G , Ritter A , Sabbagh M , and Zhong K . 2019 Alzheimer’s disease drug development pipeline: 2019. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 5 : 272–293.31334330
32. Breitner JC , Baker LD , Montine TJ , Meinert CL , Lyketsos CG , Ashe KH , Brandt J , Craft S , Evans DE , Green RC , Ismail MS , Martin BK , Mullan MJ , Sabbagh M , and Tariot PN . 2011 Extended results of the Alzheimer’s disease anti-inflammatory prevention trial. Alzheimers.Dement. 7 : 402–411.21784351
33. Ricklin D , and Lambris JD . 2013 Complement in immune and inflammatory disorders: pathophysiological mechanisms. J Immunol. 190 : 3831–3838.23564577
34. Carroll MC , and Isenman DE . 2012 Regulation of humoral immunity by complement. Immunity. 37 : 199–207.22921118
35. Arbore G , Kemper C , and Kolev M . 2017 Intracellular complement - the complosome - in immune cell regulation. Mol Immunol 89 : 2–9.28601357
36. Bohlson SS , Garred P , Kemper C , and Tenner AJ . 2019 Complement Nomenclature - Deconvoluted. Frontiers in Immunology 10 .
37. Liszewski MK , and Atkinson JP . 1993 The Complement System In Fundamental Immunology. Paul WE , ed. Raven Press,Ltd, New York, N.Y 917–939.
38. Peterson SL , Nguyen HX , Mendez OA , and Anderson AJ . 2017 Complement Protein C3 Suppresses Axon Growth and Promotes Neuron Loss. Sci Rep 7 : 12904.29018286
39. Verschoor A , Karsten CM , Broadley SP , Laumonnier Y , and Kohl J . 2016 Old dogs-new tricks: immunoregulatory properties of C3 and C5 cleavage fragments. Immunol Rev 274 : 112–126.27782330
40. Quell KM , Karsten CM , Kordowski A , Almeida LN , Briukhovetska D , Wiese AV , Sun J , Ender F , Antoniou K , Schroder T , Schmudde I , Berger JL , Konig P , Vollbrandt T , Laumonnier Y , and Kohl J . 2017 Monitoring C3aR Expression Using a Floxed tdTomato-C3aR Reporter Knock-in Mouse. J Immunol 199 : 688–706.28626064
41. Laumonnier Y , Karsten CM , and Kohl J . 2017 Novel insights into the expression pattern of anaphylatoxin receptors in mice and men. Mol Immunol 89 : 44–58.28600003
42. Karsten CM , Laumonnier Y , Eurich B , Ender F , Broker K , Roy S , Czabanska A , Vollbrandt T , Figge J , and Kohl J . 2015 Monitoring and cell-specific deletion of C5aR1 using a novel floxed GFP-C5aR1 reporter knock-in mouse. Journal of Immunology 194 : 1841–1855.
43. Harrison RA 2018 The properdin pathway: an “alternative activation pathway” or a “critical amplification loop” for C3 and C5 activation? Semin Immunopathol 40 : 15–35.29167939
44. Bradt BM , Kolb WP , and Cooper NR . 1998 Complement-dependent proinflammatory properties of the Alzheimer’s disease beta-peptide. J Exp Med 188 : 431–438.9687521
45. Ricklin D , Hajishengallis G , Yang K , and Lambris JD . 2010 Complement: a key system for immune surveillance and homeostasis. Nat Immunol 11 : 785–797.20720586
46. Lehrman EK , Wilton DK , Litvina EY , Welsh CA , Chang ST , Frouin A , Walker AJ , Heller MD , Umemori H , Chen C , and Stevens B . 2018 CD47 Protects Synapses from Excess Microglia-Mediated Pruning during Development. Neuron 100 : 120–134 e126.30308165
47. Schafer DP , Lehrman EK , Kautzman AG , Koyama R , Mardinly AR , Yamasaki R , Ransohoff RM , Greenberg ME , Barres BA , and Stevens B . 2012 Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74 : 691–705.22632727
48. Gyorffy BA , Kun J , Torok G , Bulyaki E , Borhegyi Z , Gulyassy P , Kis V , Szocsics P , Micsonai A , Matko J , Drahos L , Juhasz G , Kekesi KA , and Kardos J . 2018 Local apoptotic-like mechanisms underlie complement-mediated synaptic pruning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 : 6303–6308.29844190
49. Lui H , Zhang J , Makinson SR , Cahill MK , Kelley KW , Huang HY , Shang Y , Oldham MC , Martens LH , Gao F , Coppola G , Sloan SA , Hsieh CL , Kim CC , Bigio EH , Weintraub S , Mesulam MM , Rademakers R , Mackenzie IR , Seeley WW , Karydas A , Miller BL , Borroni B , Ghidoni R , Farese RV Jr. , Paz JT , Barres BA , and Huang EJ . 2016 Progranulin Deficiency Promotes Circuit-Specific Synaptic Pruning by Microglia via Complement Activation. Cell 165 : 921–935.27114033
50. Williams PA , Tribble JR , Pepper KW , Cross SD , Morgan BP , Morgan JE , John SW , and Howell GR . 2016 Inhibition of the classical pathway of the complement cascade prevents early dendritic and synaptic degeneration in glaucoma. Mol.Neurodegener. 11 : 26.27048300
51. Wu T , Dejanovic B , Gandham VD , Gogineni A , Edmonds R , Schauer S , Srinivasan K , Huntley MA , Wang Y , Wang TM , Hedehus M , Barck KH , Stark M , Ngu H , Foreman O , Meilandt WJ , Elstrott J , Chang MC , Hansen DV , Carano RAD , Sheng M , and Hanson JE . 2019 Complement C3 Is Activated in Human AD Brain and Is Required for Neurodegeneration in Mouse Models of Amyloidosis and Tauopathy. Cell Rep 28 : 2111–2123 e2116.31433986
52. Schartz ND , Wyatt-Johnson SK , Price LR , Colin SA , and Brewster AL . 2018 Status epilepticus triggers long-lasting activation of complement C1q-C3 signaling in the hippocampus that correlates with seizure frequency in experimental epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis 109 : 163–173.29074125
53. Hong S , Beja-Glasser VF , Nfonoyim BM , Frouin A , Li S , Ramakrishnan S , Merry KM , Shi Q , Rosenthal A , Barres BA , Lemere CA , Selkoe DJ , and Stevens B . 2016 Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352 : 712–716.27033548
54. Vasek MJ , Garber C , Dorsey D , Durrant DM , Bollman B , Soung A , Yu J , Perez-Torres C , Frouin A , Wilton DK , Funk K , DeMasters BK , Jiang X , Bowen JR , Mennerick S , Robinson JK , Garbow JR , Tyler KL , Suthar MS , Schmidt RE , Stevens B , and Klein RS . 2016 A complement-microglial axis drives synapse loss during virus-induced memory impairment. Nature 534 : 538–543.27337340
55. Fraser DA , Laust AK , Nelson EL , and Tenner AJ . 2009 C1q differentially modulates phagocytosis and cytokine responses during ingestion of apoptotic cells by human monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. J Immunol 183 : 6175–6185.19864605
56. Colonna L , Parry GC , Panicker S , and Elkon KB . 2016 Uncoupling complement C1s activation from C1q binding in apoptotic cell phagocytosis and immunosuppressive capacity. Clin Immunol 163 : 84–90.26769276
57. Clarke EV , Weist BM , Walsh CM , and Tenner AJ . 2015 Complement protein C1q bound to apoptotic cells suppresses human macrophage and dendritic cell-mediated Th17 and Th1 T cell subset proliferation. J.Leukoc.Biol. 97 : 147–160.25381385
58. Fraser DA , Pisalyaput K , and Tenner AJ . 2010 C1q enhances microglial clearance of apoptotic neurons and neuronal blebs, and modulates subsequent inflammatory cytokine production. J Neurochem 112 : 733–743.19919576
59. Ling GS , Crawford G , Buang N , Bartok I , Tian K , Thielens NM , Bally I , Harker JA , Ashton-Rickardt PG , Rutschmann S , Strid J , and Botto M . 2018 C1q restrains autoimmunity and viral infection by regulating CD8(+) T cell metabolism. Science 360 : 558–563.29724957
60. Hulsebus HJ , O’Conner SD , Smith EM , Jie C , and Bohlson SS . 2016 Complement Component C1q Programs a Pro-Efferocytic Phenotype while Limiting TNFalpha Production in Primary Mouse and Human Macrophages. Front Immunol 7 : 230.27379094
61. Elkon KB , and Santer DM . 2012 Complement, interferon and lupus. Curr.Opin.Immunol 24 : 665–670.22999705
62. Clarke EV , and Tenner AJ . 2014 Complement modulation of T cell immune responses during homeostasis and disease. J.Leukoc.Biol 96 : 745–756.25210145
63. Ghebrehiwet B , Hosszu KH , and Peerschke EI . 2017 C1q as an autocrine and paracrine regulator of cellular functions. Mol Immunol 84 : 26–33.27914690
64. Thielens NM , Tedesco F , Bohlson SS , Gaboriaud C , and Tenner AJ . 2017 C1q: A fresh look upon an old molecule. Mol Immunol 89 : 73–83.28601358
65. Pisalyaput K , and Tenner AJ . 2008 Complement component C1q inhibits beta-amyloid- and serum amyloid P-induced neurotoxicity via caspase- and calpain-independent mechanisms. J. Neurochem 104 : 696–707.17986223
66. Benoit ME , and Tenner AJ . 2011 Complement protein C1q-mediated neuroprotection is correlated with regulation of neuronal gene and microRNA expression. J Neurosci. 31 : 3459–3469.21368058
67. Benoit ME , Hernandez MX , Dinh ML , Benavente F , Vasquez O , and Tenner AJ . 2013 C1q-induced LRP1B and GPR6 Proteins Expressed Early in Alzheimer Disease Mouse Models, Are Essential for the C1q-mediated Protection against Amyloid-beta Neurotoxicity. J Biol.Chem 288 : 654–665.23150673
68. Perlmutter DH , and Colten HR . 1986 Molecular immunobiology of complement biosynthesis: a model of single-cell control of effector-inhibitor balance. Annu Rev Immunol 4 : 231–251.3518744
69. Korkmaz HI , Krijnen PAJ , Ulrich MMW , de Jong E , van Zuijlen PPM , and Niessen HWM . 2017 The role of complement in the acute phase response after burns. Burns 43 : 1390–1399.28410933
70. Romano C , Del Mastro A , Sellitto A , Solaro E , Esposito S , and Cuomo G . 2018 Tocilizumab reduces complement C3 and C4 serum levels in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Clin Rheumatol 37 : 1695–1700.29362962
71. Woodruff TM , Ager RR , Tenner AJ , Noakes PG , and Taylor SM . 2010 The role of the complement system and the activation fragment C5a in the central nervous system. Neuromolecular. Med 12 : 179–192.19763906
72. Reichwald J , Danner S , Wiederhold KH , and Staufenbiel M . 2009 Expression of complement system components during aging and amyloid deposition in APP transgenic mice. Journal of neuroinflammation 6 : 35.19917141
73. Johnson SA , Lampert-Etchells M , Pasinetti GM , Rozovsky I , and Finch C . 1992 Complement mRNA in the mammalian brain: Responses to Alzheimer’s disease and experimental brain lesioning. Neurobiol.Aging 13 : 641–648.1362796
74. Walker DG , and McGeer PL . 1992 Complement gene expression in human brain: comparison between normal and Alzheimer disease cases. Brain Res.Mol.Brain Res. 14 : 109–116.1323007
75. Cribbs DH , Berchtold NC , Perreau V , Coleman PD , Rogers J , Tenner AJ , and Cotman CW . 2012 Extensive innate immune gene activation accompanies brain aging, increasing vulnerability to cognitive decline and neurodegeneration: a microarray study. J.Neuroinflammation. 9 : 179.22824372
76. Yang LB , Li R , Meri S , Rogers J , and Shen Y . 2000 Deficiency of complement defense protein CD59 may contribute to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neurosci 20 : 7505–7509.11027207
77. Veerhuis R , Janssen I , Hoozemans JJM , De Groot CJA , Hack CE , and Eikelenboom P . 1998 Complement c1-inhibitor expression in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathologica 96 : 287–296.9754962
78. Morgan BP 2018 Complement in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Semin Immunopathol 40 : 113–124.29134267
79. Stephan AH , Madison DV , Mateos JM , Fraser DA , Lovelett EA , Coutellier L , Kim L , Tsai HH , Huang EJ , Rowitch DH , Berns DS , Tenner AJ , Shamloo M , and Barres BA . 2013 A Dramatic Increase of C1q Protein in the CNS during Normal Aging. J Neurosci. 33 : 13460–13474.23946404
80. Bialas AR , and Stevens B . 2013 TGF-beta signaling regulates neuronal C1q expression and developmental synaptic refinement. Nat.Neurosci. 16 : 1773–1782.24162655
81. Fonseca MI , Chu SH , Hernandez MX , Fang MJ , Modarresi L , Selvan P , MacGregor GR , and Tenner AJ . 2017 Cell-specific deletion of C1qa identifies microglia as the dominant source of C1q in mouse brain. J Neuroinflammation 14 : 48.28264694
82. Zhou J , Fonseca MI , Pisalyaput K , and Tenner AJ . 2008 Complement C3 and C4 expression in C1q sufficient and deficient mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neurochem 106 : 2080–2092.18624920
83. Liddelow SA , Guttenplan KA , Clarke LE , Bennett FC , Bohlen CJ , Schirmer L , Bennett ML , Munch AE , Chung WS , Peterson TC , Wilton DK , Frouin A , Napier BA , Panicker N , Kumar M , Buckwalter MS , Rowitch DH , Dawson VL , Dawson TM , Stevens B , and Barres BA . 2017 Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. Nature 541 : 481–487.28099414
84. Chen WT , L. A. , Craessaerts K , Pavie B , Frigerio CS , Mancuso R , Qian X , Lalakova J , Kühnemund M , Voytyuk I , Wolfs L , Snellinx A , Munck S , Jurek A , Navarro JF , Saido TC , Lundeberg J , Fiers M , De Strooper B . 2019 Spatial and temporal transcriptomics reveal microglia-astroglia crosstalk in the amyloid-β plaque cell niche of Alzheimer’s disease.. bioRχiv
85. Bensa JC , Reboul A , and Colomb MG . 1983 Biosynthesis in vitro of complement subcomponents C1q, C1s and C1 inhibitor by resting and stimulated human monocytes. Biochem. J 216 : 385–392.6318736
86. Veerhuis R , Nielsen HM , and Tenner AJ . 2011 Complement in the brain. Mol Immunol 48 : 1592–1603.21546088
87. Eikelenboom P , and Stam FC . 1982 Immunoglobulins and complement factors in senile plaques. Acta Neuropathologia 57 : 239–242.
88. Shen Y , Lue L , Yang L , Roher A , Kuo Y , Strohmeyer R , Goux WJ , Lee V , Johnson GV , Webster SD , Cooper NR , Bradt B , and Rogers J . 2001 Complement activation by neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience Letters 305 : 165–168.11403931
89. Jiang H , Burdick D , Glabe CG , Cotman CW , and Tenner AJ . 1994 beta-Amyloid activates complement by binding to a specific region of the collagen-like domain of the C1q A chain. J Immunol. 152 : 5050–5059.8176223
90. Rogers J , Cooper NR , Webster S , Schultz J , McGeer PL , Styren SD , Civin WH , Brachova L , Bradt B , Ward P , and Lieberburg I . 1992 Complement activation by beta-amyloid in Alzheimer disease. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. 89 : 10016–10020.1438191
91. Veerhuis R 2011 Histological and Direct Evidence for the Role of Complement in the Neuroinflammation of AD. Curr Alzheimer Res. 8 : 34–58.21143154
92. Fonseca MI , Chu SH , Berci AM , Benoit ME , Peters DG , Kimura Y , and Tenner AJ . 2011 Contribution of complement activation pathways to neuropathology differs among mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinflammation 8 : 4.21235806
93. Tarasoff-Conway JM , Carare RO , Osorio RS , Glodzik L , Butler T , Fieremans E , Axel L , Rusinek H , Nicholson C , Zlokovic BV , Frangione B , Blennow K , Menard J , Zetterberg H , Wisniewski T , and de Leon MJ . 2015 Clearance systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease. Nat.Rev.Neurol 11 : 457–470.26195256
94. Velazquez P , Cribbs DH , Poulos TL , and Tenner AJ . 1997 Aspartate residue 7 in amyloid beta-protein is critical for classical complement pathway activation: implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Nat Med 3 : 77–79.8986745
95. Maier M , Peng Y , Jiang L , Seabrook TJ , Carroll MC , and Lemere CA . 2008 Complement C3 deficiency leads to accelerated amyloid beta plaque deposition and neurodegeneration and modulation of the microglia/macrophage phenotype in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. J. Neurosci 28 : 6333–6341.18562603
96. Fu H , Liu B , Frost JL , Hong S , Jin M , Ostaszewski B , Shankar GM , Costantino IM , Carroll MC , Mayadas TN , and Lemere CA . 2012 Complement component C3 and complement receptor type 3 contribute to the phagocytosis and clearance of fibrillar Abeta by microglia. Glia 60 : 993–1003.22438044
97. Trouw LA , Nielsen HM , Minthon L , Londos E , Landberg G , Veerhuis R , Janciauskiene S , and Blom AM . 2008 C4b-binding protein in Alzheimer’s disease: binding to Abeta1–42 and to dead cells. Mol Immunol 45 : 3649–3660.18556068
98. Strohmeyer R , Ramirez M , Cole GJ , Mueller K , and Rogers J . 2002 Association of factor H of the alternative pathway of complement with agrin and complement receptor 3 in the Alzheimer’s disease brain. J.Neuroimmunol. 131 : 135–146.12458045
99. Martin M , and Blom AM . 2016 Complement in removal of the dead - balancing inflammation. Immunol Rev 274 : 218–232.27782329
100. Webster S , Lue LF , Brachova L , Tenner AJ , McGeer PL , Terai K , Walker DG , Bradt B , Cooper NR , and Rogers J . 1997 Molecular and cellular characterization of the membrane attack complex, C5b-9, in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 18 : 415–421.9330973
101. Klos A , Tenner AJ , Johswich KO , Ager RR , Reis ES , and Kohl J . 2009 The role of the anaphylatoxins in health and disease. Mol Immunol 46 : 2753–2766.19477527
102. Darley MM , Ramos TN , Wetsel RA , and Barnum SR . 2012 Deletion of carboxypeptidase N delays onset of experimental cerebral malaria. Parasite Immunol 34 : 444–447.22708514
103. Biggins PJC , Brennan FH , Taylor SM , Woodruff TM , and Ruitenberg MJ . 2017 The Alternative Receptor for Complement Component 5a, C5aR2, Conveys Neuroprotection in Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury. J Neurotrauma.
104. Li XX , Lee JD , Kemper C , and Woodruff TM . 2019 The Complement Receptor C5aR2: A Powerful Modulator of Innate and Adaptive Immunity. J Immunol 202 : 3339–3348.31160390
105. Wyss-Coray T , Yan F , Lin AH , Lambris JD , Alexander JJ , Quigg RJ , and Masliah E . 2002 Prominent neurodegeneration and increased plaque formation in complement-inhibited Alzheimer’s mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 99 : 10837–10842.12119423
106. Fonseca MI , Zhou J , Botto M , and Tenner AJ . 2004 Absence of C1q leads to less neuropathology in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci. 24 : 6457–6465.15269255
107. Shi Q , Chowdhury S , Ma R , Le KX , Hong S , Caldarone BJ , Stevens B , and Lemere CA . 2017 Complement C3 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration in aged plaque-rich APP/PS1 mice. Sci Transl Med 9 .
108. Hajishengallis G , and Lambris JD . 2010 Crosstalk pathways between Toll-like receptors and the complement system. Trends Immunol 31 : 154–163.20153254
109. Zhang X , Kimura Y , Fang C , Zhou L , Sfyroera G , Lambris JD , Wetsel RA , Miwa T , and Song WC . 2007 Regulation of Toll-like receptor-mediated inflammatory response by complement in vivo. Blood 110 : 228–236.17363730
110. Pope MR , Hoffman SM , Tomlinson S , and Fleming SD . 2010 Complement regulates TLR4-mediated inflammatory responses during intestinal ischemia reperfusion. Molecular Immunology 48 : 356–364.20800895
111. Reed-Geaghan EG , Savage JC , Hise AG , and Landreth GE . 2009 CD14 and toll-like receptors 2 and 4 are required for fibrillar A{beta}-stimulated microglial activation. J Neurosci 29 : 11982–11992.19776284
112. O’Barr S , and Cooper NR . 2000 The C5a complement activation peptide increases IL-1beta and IL-6 release from amyloid-beta primed human monocytes: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroimmunol 109 : 87–94.10996210
113. Yao J , Harvath L , Gilbert DL , and Colton CA . 1990 Chemotaxis by a CNS macrophage, the microglia. J Neurosci. Res 27 : 36–42.2254955
114. Jin JJ , Kim HD , Maxwell JA , Li L , and Fukuchi K . 2008 Toll-like receptor 4-dependent upregulation of cytokines in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinflammation. 5 : 23.18510752
115. Woodruff TM , Nandakumar KS , and Tedesco F . 2011 Inhibiting the C5-C5a receptor axis. Mol Immunol 48 : 1631–1642.21549429
116. Cribbs DH , Velazquez P , Soreghan B , Glabe CG , and Tenner AJ . 1997 Complement activation by cross-linked truncated and chimeric full-length beta-amyloid. NeuroReport 8 : 3457–3462.9427307
117. Perry VH , and Holmes C . 2014 Microglial priming in neurodegenerative disease. Nat.Rev.Neurol 10 : 217–224.24638131
118. Norden DM , Muccigrosso MM , and Godbout JP . 2015 Microglial priming and enhanced reactivity to secondary insult in aging, and traumatic CNS injury, and neurodegenerative disease. Neuropharmacology 96 : 29–41.25445485
119. Hickman SE , Allison EK , and El KJ . 2008 Microglial dysfunction and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways in aging Alzheimer’s disease mice. J.Neurosci 28 : 8354–8360.18701698
120. Li Q , Cheng Z , Zhou L , Darmanis S , Neff NF , Okamoto J , Gulati G , Bennett ML , Sun LO , Clarke LE , Marschallinger J , Yu G , Quake SR , Wyss-Coray T , and Barres BA . 2019 Developmental Heterogeneity of Microglia and Brain Myeloid Cells Revealed by Deep Single-Cell RNA Sequencing. Neuron 101 : 207–223 e210.30606613
121. Mathys H , Davila-Velderrain J , Peng Z , Gao F , Mohammadi S , Young JZ , Menon M , He L , Abdurrob F , Jiang X , Martorell AJ , Ransohoff RM , Hafler BP , Bennett DA , Kellis M , and Tsai LH . 2019 Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 570 : 332–337.31042697
122. Friedman BA , Srinivasan K , Ayalon G , Meilandt WJ , Lin H , Huntley MA , Cao Y , Lee SH , Haddick PCG , Ngu H , Modrusan Z , Larson JL , Kaminker JS , van der Brug MP , and Hansen DV . 2018 Diverse Brain Myeloid Expression Profiles Reveal Distinct Microglial Activation States and Aspects of Alzheimer’s Disease Not Evident in Mouse Models. Cell Rep 22 : 832–847.29346778
123. Boisvert MM , Erikson GA , Shokhirev MN , and Allen NJ . 2018 The Aging Astrocyte Transcriptome from Multiple Regions of the Mouse Brain. Cell Rep 22 : 269–285.29298427
124. Onos KD , Uyar A , Keezer KJ , Jackson HM , Preuss C , Acklin CJ , O’Rourke R , Buchanan R , Cossette TL , Sukoff Rizzo SJ , Soto I , Carter GW , and Howell GR . 2019 Enhancing face validity of mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease with natural genetic variation. PLoS Genet 15 : e1008155.31150388
125. Sasaguri H , Nilsson P , Hashimoto S , Nagata K , Saito T , De Strooper B , Hardy J , Vassar R , Winblad B , and Saido TC . 2017 APP mouse models for Alzheimer’s disease preclinical studies. EMBO J 36 : 2473–2487.28768718
126. Woodruff TM , Crane JW , Proctor LM , Buller KM , Shek AB , de VK , Pollitt S , Williams HM , Shiels IA , Monk PN , and Taylor SM . 2006 Therapeutic activity of C5a receptor antagonists in a rat model of neurodegeneration. FASEB J 20 : 1407–1417.16816116
127. Kumar V , Lee JD , Clark RJ , and Woodruff TM . 2018 Development and validation of a LC-MS/MS assay for pharmacokinetic studies of complement C5a receptor antagonists PMX53 and PMX205 in mice. Sci Rep 8 : 8101.29802264
128. Fonseca MI , Ager RR , Chu SH , Yazan O , Sanderson SD , LaFerla FM , Taylor SM , Woodruff TM , and Tenner AJ . 2009 Treatment with a C5aR antagonist decreases pathology and enhances behavioral performance in murine models of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Immunology 183 : 1375–1383.
129. Pavlovski D , Thundyil J , Monk PN , Wetsel RA , Taylor SM , and Woodruff TM . 2012 Generation of complement component C5a by ischemic neurons promotes neuronal apoptosis. FASEB J 26 : 3680–3690.22651932
130. Hernandez MX , Namiranian P , Nguyen E , Fonseca MI , and Tenner AJ . 2017 C5a Increases the Injury to Primary Neurons Elicited by Fibrillar Amyloid Beta. ASN Neuro 9 : 1759091416687871.28078911
131. Tschopp J , Chonn A , Hertig S , and French LE . 1993 Clusterin, the human apolipoprotein and complement inhibitor, binds to complement C7, C8 beta, and the b domain of C9. J Immunol 151 : 2159–2165.8345200
132. Preissner KP , Podack ER , and Muller-Eberhard HJ . 1989 SC5b-7, SC5b-8 and SC5b-9 complexes of complement: ultrastructure and localization of the S-protein (vitronectin) within the macromolecules. Eur.J Immunol 19 : 69–75.2465906
133. Calero M , Rostagno A , Matsubara E , Zlokovic B , Frangione B , and Ghiso J . 2000 Apolipoprotein J (clusterin) and Alzheimer’s disease. Microscopy Research and Technique 50 : 305–315.10936885
134. Woodruff TM , Strachan AJ , Sanderson SD , Monk PN , Wong AK , Fairlie DP , and Taylor SM . 2001 Species dependence for binding of small molecule agonist and antagonists to the C5a receptor on polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Inflammation 25 : 171–177.11403208
135. Bekker P , Dairaghi D , Seitz L , Leleti M , Wang Y , Ertl L , Baumgart T , Shugarts S , Lohr L , Dang T , Miao S , Zeng Y , Fan P , Zhang P , Johnson D , Powers J , Jaen J , Charo I , and Schall TJ . 2016 Characterization of Pharmacologic and Pharmacokinetic Properties of CCX168, a Potent and Selective Orally Administered Complement 5a Receptor Inhibitor, Based on Preclinical Evaluation and Randomized Phase 1 Clinical Study. PLoS One 11 : e0164646.27768695
136. Xiao H , Dairaghi DJ , Powers JP , Ertl LS , Baumgart T , Wang Y , Seitz LC , Penfold ME , Gan L , Hu P , Lu B , Gerard NP , Gerard C , Schall TJ , Jaen JC , Falk RJ , and Jennette JC . 2014 C5a receptor (CD88) blockade protects against MPO-ANCA GN. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 25 : 225–231.24179165
137. Klickstein LB , Barbashov SF , Liu T , Jack RM , and Nicholson-Weller A . 1997 Complement receptor type 1 (CR1, CD35) is a receptor for C1q. Immunity 7 : 345–355.9324355
138. Krych-Goldberg M , and Atkinson JP . 2001 Structure-function relationships of complement receptor type 1. Immunol.Rev 180 : 112–122.11414353
139. Nardin A , Lindorfer MA , and Taylor RP . 1999 How are immune complexes bound to the primate erythrocyte complement receptor transferred to acceptor phagocytic cells? Mol Immunol 36 : 827–835.10698336
140. Johansson JU , Brubaker WD , Javitz H , Bergen AW , Nishita D , Trigunaite A , Crane A , Ceballos J , Mastroeni D , Tenner AJ , Sabbagh M , and Rogers J . 2018 Peripheral complement interactions with amyloid beta peptide in Alzheimer’s disease: Polymorphisms, structure, and function of complement receptor 1. Alzheimers Dement.
141. Mahmoudi R , Kisserli A , Novella JL , Donvito B , Drame M , Reveil B , Duret V , Jolly D , Pham BN , and Cohen JH . 2015 Alzheimer’s disease is associated with low density of the long CR1 isoform. Neurobiol.Aging 36 : 1766–1712.
142. Dykman TR , Cole JL , Iida K , and Atkinson JP . 1983 Polymorphism of human erythrocyte C3b/C4b receptor. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 80 : 1698–1702.6572933
143. Rogers J , Li R , Mastroeni D , Grover A , Leonard B , Ahern G , Cao P , Kolody H , Vedders L , Kolb WP , and Sabbagh M . 2006 Peripheral clearance of amyloid beta peptide by complement C3-dependent adherence to erythrocytes. Neurobiology of Aging 27 : 1733–1739.16290270
144. Crane A , Brubaker WD , Johansson JU , Trigunaite A , Ceballos J , Bradt B , Glavis-Bloom C , Wallace TL , Tenner AJ , and Rogers J . 2018 Peripheral complement interactions with amyloid beta peptide in Alzheimer’s disease: 2. Relationship to amyloid beta immunotherapy. Alzheimers Dement 14 : 243–252.28755839
145. Brubaker WD , Crane A , Johansson JU , Yen K , Garfinkel K , Mastroeni D , Asok P , Bradt B , Sabbagh M , Wallace TL , Glavis-Bloom C , Tenner AJ , and Rogers J . 2017 Peripheral complement interactions with amyloid beta peptide: Erythrocyte clearance mechanisms. Alzheimers Dement 13 : 1397–1409.28475854
146. Sharma R , Zhao H , Al-Saleem FH , Ubaid AS , Puligedda RD , Segan AT , Lindorfer MA , Bermudez R , Elias M , Adekar SP , Simpson LL , Taylor RP , and Dessain SK . 2014 Mechanisms of enhanced neutralization of botulinum neurotoxin by monoclonal antibodies conjugated to antibodies specific for the erythrocyte complement receptor. Mol Immunol 57 : 247–254.24184879
147. Li J , Wang JP , Ghiran I , Cerny A , Szalai AJ , Briles DE , and Finberg RW . 2010 Complement receptor 1 expression on mouse erythrocytes mediates clearance of Streptococcus pneumoniae by immune adherence. Infect. Immun 78 : 3129–3135.20439480
148. Harris CL , Heurich M , Rodriguez de CS , and Morgan BP . 2012 The complotype: dictating risk for inflammation and infection. Trends Immunol. 33 : 513–521.22749446
