LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101233170
32527
Cell Metab
Cell Metab.
Cell metabolism
1550-4131
1932-7420

29874566
6039826
10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.011
NIHMS979409
Article
Hallmarks of Brain Aging: Adaptive and Pathological Modification by Metabolic States
Mattson Mark P. 12*
Arumugam Thiruma V. 34
1 Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD, USA
2 Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
3 Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
4 School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea
* Correspondence: mark.mattson@nih.gov
5 7 2018
05 6 2018
11 7 2018
27 6 11761199
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
During aging, the cellular milieu of the brain exhibits tell-tale signs of compromised bioenergetics, impaired adaptive neuroplasticity and resilience, aberrant neuronal network activity, dysregulation of neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis, the accrual of oxidatively modified molecules and organelles, and inflammation. These alterations render the aging brain vulnerable to Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases and stroke. Emerging findings are revealing mechanisms by which sedentary overindulgent lifestyles accelerate brain aging, whereas lifestyles that include intermittent bioenergetic challenges (exercise, fasting, and intellectual challenges) foster healthy brain aging. Here we provide an overview of the cellular and molecular biology of brain aging, how those processes interface with disease-specific neurodegenerative pathways, and how metabolic states influence brain health.


Introduction

As with other organ systems, the functional capabilities of the brain decline progressively during aging, which manifests as decrements in learning and memory, attention, decision-making speed, sensory perception (vision, hearing, touch, smell, and taste), and motor coordination (Alexander et al., 2012; Dykiert et al., 2012; Levin et al., 2014). As we age, cognitive performance generally declines in multiple domains including executive function, working memory (particularly task switching), and episodic memory (Alexander et al., 2012). Older adults often have difficulty understanding rapid speech as a result of cognitive slowing and hearing loss, and they also have reduced comprehension of syntactically complex sentences and impaired word retrieval ability (Alexander et al., 2012). The time course of the age-related decline in brain performance roughly parallels the reduced performance of other organ systems with notable acceleration beyond 50 years of age (Mendonca et al., 2017).

As individuals traverse their sixth, seventh, and eighth decades, they become increasingly prone to the development of a neurodegenerative disorder, with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) being the most common (Mattson, 2004; Kalia and Lang, 2015; Scheltens et al., 2016; Aarsland et al., 2017). Aging is also the major risk factor for stroke (Krishnamurthi et al., 2013). Most industrialized countries are experiencing a rapid increase in the proportion of the population over the age of 65, an age range that can be considered the “danger zone” for AD, PD, and stroke. Within the next 30 years, the number of Americans living with diagnosed AD will more than double from the current number of 5 million to more than 12 million (Alzheimer’s Association, 2016). Between the years 2000 and 2013, the number of deaths from heart disease, cancer, and stroke decreased by more than 10%, whereas the number of deaths attributable to AD increased by 70%. In the United States, there are approximately 1 million individuals living with diagnosed PD. Globally, approximately 12 million people suffer a stroke each year with nearly 3 million of them dying (Bennett et al., 2014).

The human brain shrinks during normal aging, with reductions in both gray and white matter and an associated enlargement of the cerebral ventricles (Drayer, 1988). Longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown that age-related reductions in gray matter are most prominent in the temporal and frontal lobes (Jack et al., 1997). The rate of brain atrophy during aging can predict whether or not someone develops cognitive impairment and dementia (Jack et al., 2005). Cross-sectional histological analyses suggest that the atrophy results from a combination of dendritic regression and neuronal death (Dumitriu et al., 2010). While there is inter-individual variability in the rate of brain atrophy during aging, it has been suggested that brain imaging data can be used to establish a “biological age” of one’s brain (Cole and Franke, 2017). Environmental factors can influence the rate of brain structural changes during aging. For example, aerobic exercise increases hippocampal volume (Erickson et al., 2011), whereas excessive energy intake and obesity accelerate hippocampal atrophy (Cherbuin et al., 2015). Caloric restriction (CR) and intermittent fasting (IF) retard structural and functional decline during aging in laboratory rodents and monkeys (Duan et al., 2003; Willette et al., 2010).

Interrogation of the brain at the cellular and molecular levels reveals many of the hallmarks of aging evident in other tissues (López-Otín et al., 2013). As detailed below, these hallmarks include (1) mitochondrial dysfunction; (2) the intracellular accumulation of oxidatively damaged proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids; (3) dysregulated energy metabolism; (4) impaired cellular “waste disposal” mechanisms (autophagylysosome and proteasome functionality); (5) impaired adaptive stress response signaling; (6) compromised DNA repair; (7) aberrant neuronal network activity; (8) dysregulated neuronal Ca2+ handling; (9) stem cell exhaustion; and (10) inflammation (Figure 1). Cellular senescence and telomere attrition, two hallmarks of aging in proliferative peripheral tissues (López-Otín et al., 2013), may occur in some types of glial cells in the brain, but this remains to be established.

Environmental factors experienced during early and midlife can affect the risk for poor brain function and neurodegenerative disease late in life. For example, similar to joint injuries and the risk of osteoarthritis later in life, traumatic brain injury (TBI) and emotional trauma during early or midlife can increase the risk for late life cognitive impairment and AD and PD (Blennow et al., 2016). In addition, considerable evidence has accumulated demonstrating that the amount, type, and frequency of dietary energy intake, and energy expenditure (exercise), are major determinants of brain health throughout the life course (Mattson et al., 2018). Here we review the current understanding of mechanisms of brain aging with a focus on energy metabolism and its interactions with pathways involved in cellular stress resistance, repair, and growth. We then consider how usual aging processes impact both upstream and downstream of the disease-defining proteopathic lesions in AD (amyloid plaques and Tau tangles) and PD (α-synuclein inclusions). We describe mechanisms by which a chronic positive energy balance accelerates brain aging, and how intermittent metabolic challenges (intermittent energy restriction and exercise) and drugs that target neuronal bioenergetics can protect the brain against age-related dysfunction and disease.

Cellular and Molecular Hallmarks of Brain Aging

Mitochondrial Dysfunction

Mitochondria are distributed throughout the dendrites and axons of neurons, where they generate the ATP required to support electrochemical neurotransmission, and cell maintenance and repair (Mattson et al., 2008). Mitochondria can grow in size and divide (mitochondrial biogenesis) and can be removed by degradation in lysosomes (mitophagy). In addition to their fundamental role in cellular energy metabolism, mitochondria play critical roles in cellular Ca2+ homeostasis and as a source of signals that regulate nuclear gene transcription (Hou et al., 2012; Yun and Finkel, 2014; Raefsky and Mattson, 2017). Moreover, the formation of mitochondrial membrane permeability transition pores (mPTPs) is a pivotal event in apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death that occurs normally during brain development and pathologically in a range of neurodegenerative conditions (Mattson, 2000).

Several technical approaches have been used to determine if and how aging impacts mitochondria in brain cells. They include analysis of mitochondria-specific proteins, functional interrogation of isolated mitochondria or mitochondria in synaptosome preparations, and manipulation of genes that encode mitochondrial proteins (Grimm and Eckert, 2017). Comparisons of mitochondria isolated from brain tissue of animals reveal numerous age-related alterations, including mitochondrial enlargement or fragmentation (Stahon et al., 2016; Morozov et al., 2017), increased oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA (Kim and Chan, 2001; Santos et al., 2013), impaired function of the electron transport chain (ETC) (Yao et al., 2010; Pandya et al., 2015, 2016; Pollard et al., 2016), increased numbers of mitochondria with depolarized membranes (Lores-Arnaiz et al., 2016), impaired Ca2+ handling (Leslie et al., 1985; Pandya et al., 2015), and a reduced threshold for triggering mPTP formation (Brown et al., 2004). The decrement in mitochondrial function during brain aging involves a decline in cellular NAD+ levels and the NAD:NADH ratio (Braidy et al., 2014), which would be expected to compromise the activities of NAD+-dependent enzymes critical for neuronal function and viability, including protein deacetylases of the sirtuin family (Fang et al., 2017). Most cell types in the brain likely experience the accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria during aging as suggested from studies of neurons and astrocytes established from brains of young and old mice, or allowed to “age” in culture (Lin et al., 2007; Ghosh et al., 2012).

CR reduces multiple readouts of brain mitochondrial aging including oxidative damage, ETC function, membrane destabilization, Ca2+ handling, and susceptibility to apoptotic triggers (Gabbita et al., 1997; Sanz et al., 2005; Lin et al., 2014; Amigo et al., 2017). Studies of muscle and liver cells have shown that mitochondrial biogenesis declines during aging and that both CR and exercise can stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis (Martin-Montalvo and de Cabo, 2013; Hood et al., 2016). Emerging evidence suggests that neural signaling pathways activated by exercise and CR can also stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis in neurons in the brain (Cheng et al., 2012; Raefsky and Mattson, 2017; Mattson et al., 2018). Roles of such mitochondrial adaptations to CR and exercise in structural and functional manifestations of brain aging remain to be determined.

Accumulation of Oxidatively Damaged Molecules

During aging, neurons tend to accumulate dysfunctional and aggregated proteins and mitochondria as a result of an oxidative imbalance: increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and/or reduced antioxidant defenses. The major ROS produced in neurons are superoxide anion radical generated during mitochondrial respiration and by various oxidases, hydroxyl radical produced by the reaction of hydrogen peroxide with Fe2+ or Cu+, and nitric oxide (NO) generated in response to elevated intracellular Ca2+ levels (Halliwell, 2001). Diminished olfaction is a common feature of aging, and studies of mice show that levels of carbonylated proteins in neurons and astrocytes, and nitrated proteins in blood vessels, are increased in the olfactory bulb during aging. Aberrant NO-mediated oxidative damage is also implicated in vascular dysfunction in the aging cerebral cortex (Park et al., 2007). Peroxynitrite (formed when superoxide interacts with NO) and hydroxyl radical are highly reactive and can initiate the autocatalytic process of membrane lipid peroxidation (Mattson, 2009). The brains of very old dogs exhibit accumulations of the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), associated with amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary tangles (Papaioannou et al., 2001). Modification of proteins on cysteine, lysine, and histidine residues by HNE, and on tyrosine residues by NO, impairs the function of numerous membrane proteins critical for cell metabolism and survival including glucose transporters, neurotrophic factor receptors, and ion-motive ATPases (Guix et al., 2005; Mattson, 2009; Perluigi et al., 2014).

Evidence that diminished antioxidant defenses and impaired ability to remove oxidatively damaged molecules are sufficient to accelerate aging comes from studies showing that genetic reduction in SOD2 levels in mice and Drosophila results in accelerated onset of neurological phenotypes associated with aging, including motor dysfunction, neuronal DNA damage, and neurodegeneration (Melov et al., 1998; Paul et al., 2007). In C. elegans, oxidative damage increases markedly in the postreproductive period, and interestingly, in long-lived insulin signaling pathway mutants there occurs a burst of oxidative stress in young adults and a subsequent maintenance of low levels of oxidative damage (Labuschagne et al., 2013). Oxidatively modified proteins are often targeted for proteasomal degradation by ubiquitination, while oxidatively damaged membranes and mitochondria are targeted to lysosomes in the process of autophagy (Nixon, 2013). However, excessive oxidative stress can impair of the function of proteasomes and lysosomes (Keller et al., 2002; Butler and Bahr, 2006; Zhang et al., 2017).

Impaired Lysosome and Proteasome Function

Because they are post-mitotic and must maintain their complex structural and function integration into neuronal networks throughout the lifespan of the organism, the ability to remove damaged and dysfunctional molecules and organelles is particularly important for neurons. This is accomplished by molecular machineries that identify damaged cellular constituents and move them to the lysosomes (autophagy) or proteasomes where they are degraded. The current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of autophagy and proteasomal degradation of proteins is reviewed in detail elsewhere (Galluzzi et al., 2017; Ver-Plank and Goldberg, 2017). In autophagy, cargo is enclosed within a membranous phagophore that then fuses with a lysosome and releases its contents into the acidic lysosomal lumen wherein hydrolases degrade the contents of the phagophore. Proteins are targeted for proteasomal degradation by ubiquitination, a process that involves three enzymes (E1, E2, and E3) with the E3 being a ligase that transfers the ubiquitin to a lysine residue of the target protein. Multiple other ubiquitins are then conjugated to each other to form a ubiquitin chain that is recognized by the 19S regulatory subunit of the proteasome, is unfolded, and then enters the barrel of the 20S subunit, where it is degraded. The importance of proteasomal degradation in brain aging is highlighted by the fact that mutations in the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin, or overexpression of the Parkin substrate α-synuclein, are sufficient to cause early-onset PD (Shimura et al., 2001).

Evidence that autophagic and proteasomal degradation is impaired in neurons during aging comes from studies showing age-related intracellular accumulation of autophagosomes with undegraded cargos, dysfunctional mitochondria, and polyubi-quitinated proteins (Nixon, 2013; Graham and Liu, 2017; Kerr et al., 2017). The ability of neuronal lysosomes to maintain a low luminal pH occurs during aging as a consequence of oxidative impairment of membrane vesicular ATPases (Colacurcio and Nixon, 2016). Indeed, HNE can impair lysosome function in cerebral cortical neurons, resulting in the accumulation of undegraded cargos and subsequent cell death (Zhang et al., 2017). Lipids also accumulate in autophagic vesicles (lipofuscin) or lipid-laden vesicles (Sulzer et al., 2008; Shimabukuro et al., 2016) in neurons during aging. Proteasome dysfunction and overload also occur during brain aging, which manifests as accumulations of polyubiquitinated proteins in neurons (Graham and Liu, 2017). Measurements of proteasome activity in different brain regions of aging rats revealed significant decreases in some brain regions (hippocampus and cerebral cortex), but not others (cerebellum and brainstem), suggesting differential vulnerability of neuronal populations to proteasome dysfunction during aging (Keller et al., 2000).

Interventions that stimulate autophagy, including dietary energy restriction (DER), protein restriction, and treatment with rapamycin, can extend lifespan in animal models (Madeo et al., 2015; Xilouri and Stefanis, 2016). Causal roles for impaired autophagy and proteasome function in brain aging come from studies in which autophagy is increased by either genetic or pharmacological manipulations. For example, genetic deletion of cystatin B, an inhibitor of lysosomal hydrolases, enhances autophagy and ameliorates learning and memory deficits in a mouse model of AD (Yang et al., 2011); overexpression of transcription factor EB, a key regulator of autophagy, rescues memory deficits in a mouse model of Tauopathy (Wang et al., 2016); and upregulation of autophagy ameliorates neurodegeneration in a zebrafish model (Lopez et al., 2017). Such findings reveal pivotal roles of lysosomes and autophagy in protecting neurons against the adversities of aging.

Dysregulation of Neuronal Calcium Homeostasis

The calcium ion (Ca2+) regulates neuronal function and structural adaptations of neuronal networks across timescales ranging from seconds to days, and even years in the case of long-term memory (Cohen et al., 2015). Upon release from presynaptic axon terminals, the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate activates Na+-fluxing AMPA receptors on the postsynaptic dendrite, resulting in membrane depolarization and Ca2+ influx through the NMDA glutamate receptor channel and voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels. This results in a transient elevation of the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration as K+ channels and Na+ “pumps” are activated to restore the membrane potential and Ca2+ is removed via the activity of Ca2+ ATPases located in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum membrane. The transient Ca2+ elevation activates cytosolic kinases and phosphatases that alter the phosphorylation of various proteins in the dendrite including those involved in glutamate receptor trafficking to and from the membrane, cytoskeletal remodeling, and local protein synthesis. For example, synaptic activity-dependent Ca2+ influx stimulates the rapid insertion of AMPA glutamate receptors into the postsynaptic membrane while also inducing the translation of mRNA encoding the protein Arc, which mediates endocytosis of AMPA receptors (Kindler and Kreienkamp, 2012). Via activation of kinases, synaptic Ca2+ influx also activates transcription factors including cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and PGC-1α (Cohen et al., 2015; Vaarmann et al., 2016), which then upregulate the expression of genes encoding various proteins involved in neuronal plasticity and cellular stress resistance (Mattson, 2012). Additional fine-tuning of subcellular Ca2+ dynamics is conferred by Ca2+ uptake and release mechanisms operative in the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria.

The ability of neurons to control Ca2+ dynamics within physiological limits is compromised during aging. Studies of hippocampal pyramidal neurons demonstrated that aging impairs Ca2+-induced after-hyperpolarizations, and thereby increases Ca2+ influx through L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels and Ca2+ release from the endoplasmic reticulum (through ryanodine receptor channels), resulting in an aberrant elevation of cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels and consequent dysregulation of protein phosphorylation, cytoskeletal dynamics, and gene expression (Thibault et al., 2001; Toescu et al., 2004; Gant et al., 2006; Porte et al., 2008). The perturbed Ca2+ regulation is causally involved in age-related cognitive deficits because experimental manipulations that restore neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis also ameliorate cognitive deficits in aged rats (Deyo et al., 1989; Fukushima et al., 2008; Gant et al., 2015). Hippocampal neurons in old mice exhibit increased vulnerability to Ca2+-mediated excitotoxic degeneration and death (Camandola and Mattson, 2011). Likely contributing to such neuronal Ca2+ dysregulation during aging are compromised Ca2+ buffering resulting from reduced expression of Ca2+-binding proteins such as calbindin (Iacopino and Christakos, 1990; Mattson et al., 1991; de Jong et al., 1996) and impaired mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ handling (Mattson et al., 2008; Stutzmann and Mattson, 2011). The mechanisms by which sustained elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels can damage and kill neurons include activation of Ca2+-dependent proteases (calpains) and triggering of caspase-mediated apoptosis and PARP1-mediated cell death (Mattson, 2000; Nixon, 2003; Fatokun et al., 2014).

Compromised Adaptive Cellular Stress Responses

Neurons are continually subjected to metabolic, ionic, and oxidative stress arising from their normal electrochemical activity, and from extrinsic factors imposed upon them by systemic bioenergetic challenges, and physical and psychological stress. Numerous signaling pathways have evolved to respond to cellular stresses adaptively so as to alleviate the immediate threat, alert other cells to the stressful situation, and bolster defenses against future stressors. Three major initiators of adaptive cellular stress responses are ATP consumption, Ca2+, and ROS. Action potentials and synaptic activity are mediated by Na+ and Ca2+ influx through plasma membrane channels, followed by their subsequent extrusion by membrane ion-motive ATPases (Na+ and Ca2+ “pumps”); the attendant consumption of ATP increases the AMP/ATP ratio, resulting in the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK then phosphorylates and thereby regulates the activities of proteins involved in energy metabolism (glucose transporters and the mTOR pathway), autophagy, and neuronal excitability (Weisová et al., 2009; Ikematsu et al., 2011; Lin and Hardie, 2018; Shah et al., 2017). Calcium is an important signal mediating cellular stress adaptation; Ca2+ binds to the protein calmodulin, resulting in the activation of kinases that promote the activation of transcription factors including CREB and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) (Cohen et al., 2015; Saura and Cardinaux, 2017; Snow et al., 2014). One of the Ca2+-activated kinases, CamKII, also activates NO synthase. The NO then activates soluble guanylate cyclase to generate cyclic GMP, which engages downstream pathways that protect neurons against excitotoxic and metabolic stress (Knott et al., 2017). Ca2+ is also transported into mitochondria, where it engages mechanisms that increase oxidative phosphorylation and ROS production. Those ROS (superoxide and hydrogen peroxide) function as signaling molecules that can activate redox state-responsive transcription factors including NF-κB and nuclear regulatory factor 2 (NRF2) (Shih et al., 2005; Marosi et al., 2016). CREB, NF-κB, and NRF2 induce the expression of genes encoding proteins that mitigate cellular stress and eliminate or repair damaged molecules. For example, CREB induces the expression of the neurotrophic factor BDNF and the DNA repair enzyme APE1 (Yang et al., 2010, 2014); NF-κB upregulates the antioxidant enzyme SOD2, the Ca2+-binding protein calbindin, and the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (Sullivan et al., 1999; Mattson and Meffert, 2006); and NRF2 upregulates the antioxidant enzymes HO-1 and NQO1 (Son et al., 2010).

Adaptive stress response signaling pathways may become impaired during aging, thereby rendering neurons vulnerable to injury and neurodegenerative disorders (Stranahan and Mattson, 2012). For example, BDNF, NGF, and IGF-1 signaling is compromised during brain aging as a result of decreased expression of the neurotrophic factors and altered receptor expression or downstream signaling (Mattson et al., 2004; Tapia-Arancibia et al., 2008; Schliebs and Arendt, 2011; Neidl et al., 2016). Neurotrophic factor deficits likely contribute to impaired neuronal mitochondrial function, Ca2+ handling, and antioxidant defenses during aging (Mattson et al., 2004). Plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase activity also declines in synaptic terminals in the aging brain (Zaidi et al., 1998), which may be caused by membrane lipid peroxidation (Mark et al., 1997). Dysregulation of Ca2+-CaMKII signaling adversely affects neuronal mitochondrial dynamics, which may contribute to neuronal dysfunction during aging (Jiang et al., 2015). Perturbed NO generation and downstream signaling are impaired in the hippocampus during normal aging, and restoration of NO metabolism and signaling can ameliorate age-related cognitive deficits in mice (Zhang et al., 2017). Finally, chronic uncontrolled stress (psychological or physical) impairs neuronal plasticity and can predispose neurons to degeneration by mechanisms involving hyperactivation of the hypothalamic—pituitary—adrenal axis and elevation of glucocorticoid levels (cortisol in humans and corticosterone in rodents). Sustained elevation of glucocorticoid levels inhibits the expression of BDNF and thereby impairs synaptic plasticity and increases neuronal vulnerability to degeneration (McEwen and Morrison, 2013).

Aberrant Neuronal Network Activity

The general organization of neuronal circuits throughout the brain is based upon excitatory glutamatergic neurons with elaborate dendritic arbors and long axons that form synapses with other glutamatergic neurons and with inhibitory GABAergic interneurons (Figure 2). Synaptic inputs to the dendrites of excitatory neurons are arranged such that glutamatergic synapses are on distal dendrites, GABAergic synapses are on or adjacent to the cell body, and modulatory inputs from brainstem serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons, basal forebrain cholinergic neurons, and midbrain dopaminergic neurons are located proximal to the distal glutamatergic inputs. The structural integrity and proper integration of the synaptic activities of these different neurotransmitter systems are required for normal brain function. During brain aging, the fidelity of neuronal network activity within and between brain regions is perturbed, in some individuals relatively subtly and in others pathologically. Excitatory imbalances occur in the aging brain as a result of impaired GABAergic signaling, particularly reduced signaling via GABA-A receptors (Heise et al., 2013; Richardson et al., 2013; McQuail et al., 2015; Porges et al., 2017). Several hallmarks of brain aging can render neuronal circuits vulnerable to hyperexcitability and excitotoxic damage, including oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired adaptive stress responses, and inflammation (Camandola and Mattson, 2011). Degeneration and dysfunction of G protein-coupled serotonergic, noradrenergic, dopaminergic, and cholinergic neurons that occur during normal aging may predispose to one or more age-related neurodegenerative disorders (Richter-Levin and Segal, 1996; Collier et al., 2011; Schliebs and Arendt, 2011; Mather and Harley, 2016). The latter neurotransmitter systems play key roles in learning and memory, decision making, and the regulation of mood. Their dysregulation can therefore contribute to cognitive impairment and depression in the elderly (Eyre et al., 2015).

Communication between different brain regions occurs primarily via myelinated axonal projections of glutamatergic neurons, with the axons located in white matter tracts for inter-hemispheric communication (corpus callosum) and intra-hemispheric communication (e.g., superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi, and uncinate fasciculus). White matter integrity is compromised during normal human brain aging, and this is exacerbated in subjects with cognitive impairment (Bennett and Madden, 2014; Liu et al., 2017). The mechanism underlying such demyelination involves oxidative DNA damage to oligodendrocytes (Tse and Herrup, 2017).

Functional MRI (fMRI) analyses of brain neuronal network activities in human subjects have revealed alterations associated with normal aging and age-related cognitive impairment. When a person closes their eyes and ceases interactions with their environment, activity is increased in a network that includes the precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, and angular gyrus. This “default mode network” (DMN) is believed to play important roles in remembering the past and thinking about the future and “mind wandering.” Reduced functional connectivity of the DMN occurs during normal aging and is considerably exacerbated in cognitively impaired elderly subjects (Leal and Yassa, 2013; Sala-Llonch et al., 2015). Whereas young adults engage fronto-parietal and salience networks in the resting state, older adults do not; these fMRI differences are associated with reduced gray matter volume and white matter integrity (Marstaller et al., 2015). During a memory task in older adults, the functional connectivity of the DMN and hippocampus is correlated with memory ability (Li et al., 2015). A DMN has also been described in rodents that exhibit disrupted functional connectivity in cognitively impaired compared to unimpaired aged animals (Ash et al., 2016). Future studies in which the effects of genetic and pharmacological manipulations on DMN activity are determined may reveal the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying age-related disruption of functional connectivity of neuronal networks.

Impaired DNA Repair

DNA in the mitochondria and nucleus is regularly damaged by ROS during the normal course of cellular function and aging, and in neurons such DNA damage is increased following excitatory synaptic activity (Chow and Herrup, 2015; Yang et al., 2010). In healthy, young cells, damaged DNA bases are rapidly removed and replaced with undamaged bases by the coordinated activities of proteins in DNA repair pathways that include homologous recombination, mismatch repair, nucleotide excision repair, and base excision repair (BER). In neurons, BER is critical for the repair of oxidative DNA damage; the BER process involves a glycosylase (OGG1, UDG, and NEIL1) that recognize the damaged base, an endonuclease (APE1) that excises the damaged base, and a polymerase (Polβ) that integrates a new undamaged base into the DNA strand (Leandro et al., 2015). Analyses of brain tissue samples from humans and rodents have documented increases in the amount of damaged nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, and reductions in the expression and/or enzymatic activities of some DNA repair proteins, during aging. During human brain aging, certain regions of nuclear DNA are prone to the accumulation of oxidative damage, with promoters of genes involved in synaptic plasticity and mitochondrial function being particularly affected (Lu et al., 2004). Mitochondrial OGG1 and UDG activities (but not their expression levels) are reduced in hippocampus, frontal cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum of old mice compared to young mice (Imam et al., 2006). The expression of Polβ is decreased in the aging brain and this decrease is prevented by DER (Cabelof et al., 2003). While BER is generally considered particularly important for neurons, which are post-mitotic, there is also evidence that nucleotide excision repair and transcription-coupled repair are impaired during brain aging (Jaarsma et al., 2011). These changes may occur primarily in neural stem cells and glial cells, although this remains to be determined.

Impaired DNA repair is sufficient to cause accelerated aging phenotypes. People with Cockayne syndrome, Werner syndrome, and ataxia telangiectasia exhibit the rapid progression of multiple aging phenotypes beginning when they are young (Scheibye-Knudsen, 2016). All three premature aging syndromes are caused by mutations in proteins involved in DNA repair (CSB, Werner, and ATM) and affected individuals exhibit neurological deficits consistent with accelerated brain aging. Cockayne patients exhibit degeneration of cerebellar Purkinje cells and cochlear and retinal neurons (Weidenheim et al., 2009), and CSB-deficient mice exhibit early hearing loss and mitochondrial dysfunction in hippocampal and cortical neurons at an early age (Nagtegaal et al., 2015; Thomsen et al., 2018). Werner syndrome is characterized by AD-like neuropathology and cognitive deficits (Leverenz et al., 1998; Rekik et al., 2017). ATM deficiency results in progressive death of cerebellar Purkinje and granule neurons and consequent impaired control of body movements (Rothblum-Oviatt et al., 2016). Interestingly, DER significantly reduces neurodegeneration and neurological deficits, and increases the lifespan of DNA excision repair-deficient mice (an animal model of accelerated aging) by attenuating the accrual of oxidative DNA lesions (Vermeij et al., 2016). Presumably, by retarding other hallmarks of brain aging, DER can compensate for a genetic defect that causes a dramatic accelerated aging phenotype.

Inflammation

Similar to other organ systems, local inflammation is a common feature of brain aging. Glial cells, particularly microglia, often exhibit an activated state in the aged brain that is characterized by the acquisition of an ameboid morphology and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines including interleukin 1β (IL-1β), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) (Cribbs et al., 2012; Norden and Godbout, 2013). The complement cascade, a sequence of protein-protein interactions that “attacks” and damages cell membranes, may also be activated in the aging brain and is implicated in the pathogenesis of AD and ischemic stroke (Arumugam et al., 2009; Stephan et al., 2013; Hong et al., 2016). Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of the complement cascade can ameliorate synapse loss and neuronal death that occurs during normal aging and in mouse models of AD and stroke (Arumugam et al., 2007; Shi et al., 2015; Hong et al., 2016). In addition, activated microglia express an inducible form of NO synthase and produce large amounts of NO that can cause oxidative damage to neurons. Moreover, toll-like receptors (TLRs), best known for immune cell responses to invading pathogens, are increasingly implicated in neuroinflammation in age-related brain disorders (Okun et al., 2011). Experimental activation of microglial TLR4 receptors can exacerbate neuronal degeneration in models of age-related neurodegenerative conditions, whereas pharmacological inhibition of microglial activation is neuroprotective (Colonna and Butovsky, 2017). Aberrant activation of innate immune responses likely contributes to and results from other hallmarks of brain aging (Figure 1).

While aberrant activation of immune cells contributes to synaptic degeneration and functional impairment in brain aging and neurodegenerative conditions, when properly regulated the same pathways play important roles in neuroplasticity and neuronal stress resistance. For example, (1) TNF-α plays an important role in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and learning and memory (Snow et al., 2014); (2) complement proteins mediate adaptive synaptic remodeling in the healthy developing and adult brain (Schafer et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2007); (3) TLRs are expressed in neurons, where they play roles in regulating developmental and adult neuroplasticity (Okun et al., 2011, 2012); (4) hippocampal neurons in TNF-α receptor-deficient mice exhibit increased vulnerability to dysfunction and degeneration in models of epileptic seizures, TBI, and AD (Bruce et al., 1996; Sullivan et al., 1999; Montgomery et al., 2011); and (5) TLRs 2 and 4 regulate food intake, the parasympathetic nervous system, and body weight (Okun et al., 2014). Astrocytes may also contribute to adaptive responses to age-related neuronal stress. They produce neurotrophic factors, remove glutamate from synapses, and bolster neuronal bioenergetics (Mattson and Rychlik, 1990; Camandola and Mattson, 2017; Rose et al., 2018). These functions of astrocytes may be compromised during aging, thereby exacerbating pathological neuroinflammatory processes.

Impaired Neurogenesis

While the vast majority of neurons in the adult mammalian brain are produced during embryonic or early postnatal development, new hippocampal dentate gyrus granule neurons and olfactory bulb interneurons are generated from neuronal stem cells in the adult brain (Ming and Song, 2011). Dentate granule neurons play critical roles in learning and memory in general, and spatial pattern separation (memory of spatial relationships between objects in the environment) in particular. Reductions in hippocampal and olfactory neurogenesis occur during normal aging and may contribute to cognitive and olfactory deficits (Lazarov et al., 2010). Several other hallmarks of aging may contribute to impaired neurogenesis during aging. Aging neural progenitor cells exhibit reduced mitochondrial oxidative metabolism (Stoll et al., 2011), and genetic compromise of mitochondrial ETC function in hippocampal neuronal progenitor cells in adult mice impairs neurogenesis in a manner similar to that seen in normal aging (Beckervordersandforth et al., 2017). Oxidative stress, impaired DNA repair, and inflammation may also contribute to age-related reductions in neurogenesis (Ekdahl et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2008; Regnell et al., 2012; L’Episcopo et al., 2013).

Cell Senescence and Telomere Attrition?

Mitotic cells throughout the body experience telomere shortening and senescence during aging. With successive rounds of cell division, the ends of chromosomes (telomeres), which are comprised of a repeating hexanucleotide DNA sequence (TTAGGG), can shorten, which can be prevented by the telomerase reverse transcriptase. During interphase, the telomeric DNA is protected by several telomere-associated proteins. Extensive telomere shortening and impaired protection of telomeric DNA can trigger a DNA damage response and either apoptosis or cell senescence (Zhang et al., 2016a). Because neurons are post-mitotic, their telomeres do not shorten (although they can be damaged by oxidative stress) and they do not undergo senescence. However, during the first few days of differentiation from stem cells, newly generated neurons are particularly sensitive to apoptosis triggered by telomere damage (Cheng et al., 2007). Hippocampal neurogenesis is reduced, and hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and memory are impaired, in telomerase-deficient mice (Rolyan et al., 2011). Reactivation of telomerase in late-generation telomerase-deficient mice restores olfactory neurogenesis to normal levels with a consequent amelioration of an olfactory deficit (Jaskelioff et al., 2011).

When cells undergo senescence, they cease dividing and grow in size, express the proteins p21 and p16Ink4a, are resistant to apoptosis, and produce pro-inflammatory cytokines (Childs et al., 2014). Senescence may be the fate of some neural progenitor cells and glial cells during aging as indicated by increased expression of p16Ink4a associated with reduced numbers of proliferating progenitors in the subventricular zone (Molofsky et al., 2006). Moreover, when human neural progenitors are maintained in culture they exhibit a limited number of population doublings and then undergo senescence (Wright et al., 2006). Future studies in which senescent cells are selectively removed from the brain in animal models of aging and age-related neurodegenerative disorders should clarify whether cell senescence is a bona fide hallmark of brain aging.

Dysregulated Energy Metabolism

During aging, the metabolism of glucose and lipids is impaired in cells in peripheral tissues and in the brain. Circulating glucose concentrations generally increase during aging as a result of a compromised ability of cells to increase glucose transport in response to insulin. Insulin resistance is characterized by elevated fasting blood insulin and glucose levels, and is a major risk factor for diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and stroke. Peripheral insulin resistance is also associated with poorer cognitive function during aging (Thambisetty et al., 2013) and may be a risk factor for AD (Neth and Craft, 2017). Neurons may exhibit insulin resistance and impaired glucose transport in aging as suggested by progressive reductions in glucose utilization demonstrated by PET imaging of radiolabeled glucose uptake; this impaired glucose metabolism is particularly prominent in the temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes, and motor cortex (Goyal et al., 2017). Reduced glucose utilization in the temporal and parietal lobes is much more profound in elderly subjects with mild cognitive impairment and AD compared to age-matched neurologically normal subjects (Kato et al., 2016).

When insulin binds to its membrane receptor, the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain of the receptor is activated, resulting in phosphorylation of the insulin receptor-interacting protein IRS-1. Insulin resistance is characterized by reduced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and increased phosphorylation on serine 312 of IRS-1. Analyses of postmortem brain tissue from elderly subjects demonstrate increased serine 312 IRS-1 phosphorylation, suggesting neuronal insulin resistance (Moloney et al., 2010; Yarchoan et al., 2014). Circulating extra-cellular vesicles (EVs) believed to be released from neurons also exhibit an insulin resistance phosphorylation profile in cognitively impaired elderly subjects (Kapogiannis et al., 2015). In addition to insulin resistance, the neuronal glucose transporter GLUT3 is vulnerable to impairment by oxidative stress and HNE (Mark et al., 1997; Mattson, 2009). However, while neuronal glucose metabolism is compromised during aging, the ability of neurons to acquire and utilize the ketone bodies β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) and acetoacetate is maintained, apparently even in neurons in patients with AD (Cunnane et al., 2016). As described below in Metabolic Factors Can Accelerate or Decelerate Brain Aging, interventions that bolster neuronal bioenergetics have considerable potential to mitigate multiple hallmarks of brain aging and may thereby forestall neurodegenerative disorders.

Dyslipidemia (elevated blood concentrations of low-density lipoproteins and triglycerides) is a risk factor for stroke and vascular dementia, and may also increase one’s risk for AD (Appleton et al., 2017). Within the brain, the metabolism of multiple lipid species is altered during aging as indicated by the accumulation of long-chain ceramides (Cutler et al., 2004) and lipid-laden cells (Shimabukuro et al., 2016), and a decline in brain tissue levels of omega-3 fatty acids (Denis et al., 2013). Genetic evidence also links lipid metabolism to poor brain outcomes during aging. Thus, the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset sporadic AD is having an ε4 allele of the gene encoding apolipoprotein E, a protein that transports cholesterol and lipoproteins (Lane-Donovan et al., 2014). Despite considerable investigation, however, the mechanism by which the ε4 APOE isoform endangers neurons is unclear and may not be the result of altered cholesterol metabolism. Two possibilities are that APOE ε4 lacks the antioxidant (HNE-scavenging) ability of APOE ε2 and ε3 (Pedersen et al., 2000), and that APOE ε4 alters trafficking of proteins (including APP) through the endosomal pathway (Lane-Donovan et al., 2014).

Perspective on How Mechanisms of Aging Impact Neurological Disorders

Previous review articles provide comprehensive descriptions of alterations in brain cellular metabolism that occur in aging and their interface with neurodegenerative disorders (Kapogiannis and Mattson, 2011; Ryan et al., 2015; Yin et al., 2016; Swerdlow, 2016; Camandola and Mattson, 2017). PET imaging studies reveal impaired cerebral glucose utilization occurring very early in AD pathogenesis, even before overt clinical symptoms are evident (Friedland et al., 1989; Ceravolo et al., 2008). Findings from postmortem analyses reveal reductions in levels of glucose transporters and decrements in ETC complex activities and glycolytic flux in vulnerable brain regions of AD patients (Simpson et al., 1994; Valla et al., 2001; An et al., 2018). PD patients exhibit reduced glucose utilization in brain regions involved in motor control, and deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus (which alleviates motor symptoms) increases glucose utilization in those brain regions (Fukuda et al., 2001). Neurons affected in PD exhibit reduced mitochondrial respiratory chain function (Bose and Beal, 2016; Grünewald et al., 2016). In stroke, neuronal energy failure results from catastrophic oxygen and glucose deprivation caused by occlusion of a cerebral artery, usually as the result of clot formation at the site of an atherosclerotic lesion in the vessel (Moskowitz et al., 2010). The extent of brain damage is greater and functional recovery poorer in older compared to younger stroke patients (Umarova, 2017).

Aging is the major risk factor for AD, PD, and stroke, but major advances in the genetics of AD and PD have not yet led to effective disease-modifying treatments. In this section we present one view of how hallmarks of brain aging impact and are impacted by specific disease processes in AD, PD, and stroke (Figure 3), recognizing the fact that specific sequences of events remain to be established.

Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias

The diagnosis of probable AD is ascribed to individuals that exhibit age-related cognitive decline that first manifests as mild short-term memory impairment and then progresses inexorably to severe deficits in essentially all cognitive domains. The final diagnosis of AD is established upon histological examination of the brain at autopsy for cases in which levels of Aβ plaques and Tau neurofibrillary tangles exceed diagnostic levels (Geddes et al., 1997). The Aβ precursor protein (APP) has been a major focus of AD research because mutations in APP or the presenilin-1 enzyme (γ-secretase) that cleaves APP to generate Aβ cause rare cases of inherited early-onset AD. APP is processed by three enzyme activities: β- and γ-secretases cleave at the N terminus and C terminus of Aβ to generate amyloidogenic Aβ, while α-secretase cleaves in the middle of the Aβ sequence and so prevents Aβ production. The α-secretase cleavage releases a secreted form of APP (sAPPα) that activates signaling pathways in neurons that enhance synaptic plasticity and cellular stress resistance (Mattson et al., 1993; Nigam et al., 2017). While AD is the most common form of dementia, Tau mutations can cause fronto-temporal dementia, which manifests abundant neurofibrillary tangles with negligible Aβ pathology (Rademakers et al., 2012; Arendt et al., 2016). Moreover, in approximately 25% of patients diagnosed with probable AD, the levels of Aβ plaques and Tau tangles do not reach the AD threshold; instead, these patients often exhibit extensive loss of hippocampal pyramidal neurons with moderate numbers of neurons bearing Tau, α-synuclein, and/or TDP43 aggregates (Mattson, 2015a). In addition, many individuals who live into their eighth and ninth decades with minimal decline in cognitive function exhibit extensive Aβ plaque accumulation at autopsy, but have minimal neuronal loss. The mechanisms by which neurons are able to resist the neurotoxic effects of Aβ in some elderly individuals have not been established, but experimental data suggest potential roles for neurotrophic factor signaling and robust adaptive cellular stress response pathways (Mattson, 2012).

Cell culture and animal models in which one or more of the gene mutations that cause inherited AD are expressed, together with studies in which neurons are exposed directly to Aβ, have provided valuable information as to the molecular and cellular mechanisms of AD pathogenesis both upstream and downstream of the Aβ and Tau pathologies (Figure 3). The gist of the cumulative data is that (1) hallmarks of aging promote amyloidogenic APP processing and Tau pathology, (2) Aβ and Tau accumulations accelerate hallmarks of aging, and (3) there is no common linear pathway to synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death in AD. For indepth information on the roles of different hallmarks of brain aging in AD and related dementias, we refer the reader to the following review articles: oxidative stress (Texel and Mattson, 2011), mitochondrial dysfunction (Mattson et al., 2008; DuBoff et al., 2013), impaired autophagy (Nixon, 2013; Kerr et al., 2017), impaired DNA repair (Madabhushi et al., 2014; Leandro et al., 2015), aberrant neuronal network excitability (Palop and Mucke, 2016; Vossel et al., 2017), impaired adaptive stress response signaling (Stranahan and Mattson, 2012), dysregulated neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis (Bezprozvanny and Mattson, 2008; Stutzmann and Mattson, 2011), impaired energy metabolism (Dauncey, 2014), neuroinflammation (Heppner et al., 2015), and stem cell deficits (Lazarov et al., 2010). Due to space limitations, in this section we describe one specific example of how oxidative damage, impaired autophagy, Ca2+ dyshomeostasis, and aberrant neuronal network activity can interact reciprocally with Aβ pathology to cause synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death in AD.

Proteins modified by the lipid peroxidation product HNE accumulate in the brain during aging and HNE increases the production a particularly neurotoxic form of Aβ (Aβ42) by increasing γ-secretase cleavage of APP; this occurs as a result of covalent modification of the γ-secretase substrate receptor nicastrin by HNE (Gwon et al., 2012). Administration of an HNE-scavenging histidine analog reduces the production of Aβ42 in the brains of 3xTgAD mice, suggesting the possibility of developing therapeutic interventions that suppress HNE accumulation. As Aβ self-aggregates and accumulates on the membrane of neurons, ROS are generated, membrane lipid peroxidation occurs, and HNE is produced (Keller et al., 1997). Data suggest that HNE contributes to the neurotoxicity of Aβ by impairing the function of membrane ion-motive ATPases and glucose and glutamate transporters, resulting in neuronal hyperexcitability and disruption of neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis, thereby rendering neurons vulnerable to excitotoxicity and metabolic failure (Mattson et al., 1992; Mark et al., 1997; Mattson, 2009). Aberrant and sustained elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels can further exacerbate oxidative stress and lysosome dysfunction. HNE also directly impairs lysosome function, and lysosome dysfunction results in the accumulation of Aβ in neurons, which is then expelled from the neurons in EVs. EVs are small vesicles (50–150 nm diameter) released from multivesicular bodies upon their fusion with the plasma membrane or from budding of the plasma membrane (Budnik et al., 2016). EVs may propagate Aβ pathology between, within, and across neuronal networks as AD progresses (Eitan et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). Even moderate deficits in DNA repair, neurotrophic factor signaling, and mitochondrial function can render neurons vulnerable to death when they are concomitantly exposed to Aβ (Sykora et al., 2015; Camandola and Mattson, 2017).

Parkinson’s Disease

The diagnosis of PD is based on the symptoms of postural instability, rigidity, bradykinesia, and tremor resulting in part from the dysfunction and degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) that innervate the striatum (Rodriguez-Oroz et al., 2009). Dopaminergic neurons in PD often manifest “Lewy bodies,” which are large accumulations of α-synuclein in their cytoplasm, an abnormality akin to Tau tangles in neurons affected in AD. While the clinical diagnosis of PD is based on motor symptoms, non-motor symptoms associated with α-synuclein pathology in the autonomic and enteric nervous systems are also evident and may precede SN-striatal pathology (Klingelhoefer and Reichmann, 2015).

Compelling evidence suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction and the accumulation of α-synuclein aggregates in neurons are mechanistically linked pivotal events in the pathogenesis of PD. A historical summary of the evidence includes (1) the discovery that chemicals that selectively inhibit mitochondrial ETC complex I (MPP+, paraquat, 6-hydroxydopamine, and rotenone) can cause dopaminergic neuron degeneration, with clinical symptoms indistinguishable from PD (Langston, 1996); (2) mitochondria in brain cells of PD patients exhibit reduced complex I activity and excessive DNA damage (Di Monte, 1991); and (3) the identification of the genetic abnormalities that cause early-onset familial PD converge on mitochondria and autophagy. The mutations include autosomal dominant mutations in α-synuclein that result in aberrant accumulation of α-synuclein aggregates, which can overload the autophagy pathway and cause mitochondrial dysfunction (Wong and Krainc, 2017), and autosomal recessive mutations in Parkin and PINK1, which impair the ability of neurons to recognize and remove (via autophagy) dysfunctional mitochondria (Pickrell and Youle, 2015), although other studies suggest that mitophagy may not be impaired in some cases of familial PD (Lee et al., 2018). Mutations in the gene encoding LRRK2 that cause early-onset PD impair vesicle trafficking to lysosomes and may thereby promote the accumulation of α-synuclein and dysfunctional mitochondria (Cookson, 2016). LRRK2 mutations may also promote neuronal degeneration by causing aberrant protein synthesis (Martin et al., 2014).

PD provides a remarkable example of a disease underlain by a molecular pathogenesis that involves an exacerbation of hallmarks of aging. Oxidative damage, dysregulated neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis, impaired DNA repair, impaired adaptive cellular stress responses, aberrant neuronal network activity, and neuroinflammation all occur in affected brain regions during the course of PD, and each of these age-related alterations increases the vulnerability of neurons to α-synuclein pathology, and mitochondrial and autophagy dysfunction (Olanow et al., 2015; Ransohoff, 2016; Sepe et al., 2016; Jahanshahi and Rothwell, 2017; Menzies et al., 2017; Surmeier et al., 2017a). Conversely, aggregating α-synuclein and mitochondrial dysfunction exacerbate oxidative stress and DNA damage, destabilize neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis, and promote neuroinflammation (Schapira et al., 2014). Support for the latter two statements comes from studies of cultured neurons and transgenic mice that overexpress mutant or wild-type human α-synuclein. For example, exposure of neurons to agents that induce oxidative stress, inhibit mitochondrial complex I, or impair lysosome function can trigger the accumulation of α-synuclein aggregates (Schildknecht et al., 2013). Such accumulation is sufficient to trigger neuronal degeneration as demonstrated in a study in which suppression of α-synuclein production using RNAi technology prevented degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in a rat rotenone model of PD (Zharikov et al., 2015). On the other hand, overexpression of mutant or wild-type α-synuclein is sufficient to trigger the appearance of hallmarks of aging in young mice, including the accumulation of oxidatively modified proteins, DNA damage, mitochondrial dysfunction, microglial activation, and impaired autophagy (Martin et al., 2006; Lin et al., 2012).

Finally, mechanisms that may explain how α-synuclein pathology is propagated trans-neuronally in a retrograde manner within the CNS are emerging. Similar to prions, aggregating forms of α-synuclein can “seed” the aggregation of monomeric α-synuclein. For example, injection of pathogenic “strains” of α-synuclein into one brain region will trigger the spread of α-synuclein to other brain regions (Brundin and Melki, 2017). However, because α-synuclein is a cytoplasmic protein and pathogenic α-synuclein aggregates accumulate intracellularly, the prion-like mechanism does not readily explain how α-synuclein pathology is transferred from one neuron to adjacent neurons (Surmeier et al., 2017b). One potential mechanism involves extracellular vesicles (EVs). Lysosome dysfunction and oxidative stress can trigger the release of EVs containing aggregating α-synuclein, and those EVs can then be internalized and trigger the accumulation of toxic α-synuclein aggregates in previously healthy neurons (Emmanouilidou et al., 2010; Poehler et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2018). Another potential mechanism for spreading of α-synuclein pathology is suggested by a study showing that misfolded preformed fibrils bind to LAG3 (lymphocyte-activation gene 3) and that LAG3 initiates α-synuclein preformed fibril endocytosis, transmission, and cytotoxicity (Mao et al., 2016).

Stroke

A stroke occurs when blood flow in a cerebral artery is interrupted by the formation of a clot, which is usually followed by dissolution of the clot and reperfusion of the brain tissue supplied by the artery. Depending upon which cerebral vessel is affected, stroke symptoms may include sudden weakness, facial numbness, slurred speech, impaired vision, and paralysis on the side of the body contralateral to the stroke (Yew and Cheng, 2015). Cerebral ischemia results in the development of a core region of brain damage wherein cells die rapidly by necrosis and a surrounding penumbra in which cells experience partial ischemia and neurons may undergo delayed apoptotic cell death (Moskowitz et al., 2010). The cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for the death of neurons in stroke involve many of the same alterations that occur during normal brain aging (Figure 3) including energy deprivation and mitochondrial dysfunction, excitotoxicity, cellular Ca2+overload, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, DNA damage, and inflammation (Weinstein et al., 2004).

Complete cessation of brain tissue perfusion results in rapid catastrophic ATP depletion in neurons in the ischemic core, resulting in sustained membrane depolarization, Na+ influx, cell swelling, and membrane rupture (necrosis). Neurons in the ischemic penumbra experience an incomplete ischemia that may result in an acute membrane depolarization from which they initially recover. However, during reperfusion there occurs dysregulation of Ca2+ homeostasis that can trigger apoptosis mediated by formation of mitochondrial permeability transition pores and activation of cysteine proteases called caspases (Mattson, 2000; Broughton et al., 2009). Caspase 3 cleaves multiple substrate proteins that execute the cell death process in a manner that enables the neuron to die without membrane rupture, enabling microglia to recognize and remove the dead cell. In addition, some neurons in the ischemic penumbra may die by another recently described type of death called pyroptosis, which involves caspase 1 activation, formation of pores in the plasma membrane, and release of IL-1β (Fann et al., 2013; Adamczak et al., 2014). Inflammation plays a particularly prominent role in stroke pathogenesis. Release of damage-associated pattern molecules (DAMPs) such as high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein and interleukin 1α (IL-1 α) from the ischemic core region activates inflammatory cascades in cells in the penumbra (Fann et al., 2013, 2018). DAMPs activate the receptor for advanced glycation end products, TLRs, the C-type lectin mincle, and Notch, all of which contribute to neuronal death in the penumbra (Tang et al., 2007, 2013; Arumugam et al., 2017; Fann et al., 2018). In addition, the complement cascade arm of the innate immune system and the infiltration of circulating leukocytes into the cerebral parenchyma contribute to neuronal degeneration in stroke (Arumugam et al., 2007; Gelderblom et al., 2009).

Interventions that target core mechanisms of aging (metabolic impairment, hyperexcitability, Ca2+ dysregulation, oxidative stress, impaired adaptive stress response signaling, and inflammation) and apoptosis can reduce brain damage and improve functional outcome in animal models of stroke. Examples include glutamate receptor antagonists (Simon and Shiraishi, 1990), K+ channel openers (Liu et al., 2002), neurotrophic factors, and complement inhibitors (Arumugam et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2018). However, clinical trials of such neuroprotective agents have not yet demonstrated efficacy in human stroke patients. Likely contributing to this lack of success in stroke patients are the facts that most preclinical stroke studies are in young animals, whereas stroke patients are mostly elderly; treatment is often initiated prior to the onset of ischemia in animal studies, whereas there is typically a delay of at least several hours in human stroke patients; and stroke site and ischemia duration are uniform in animal studies, but highly variable in human stroke patients (Fisher et al., 2009), making it difficult to discern modest beneficial effects in clinical trials.

Metabolic Factors Can Accelerate or Decelerate Brain Aging

An important feature of brain aging is that there is considerable inter-individual variability. Some individuals in their 90s are “sharp as a tack,” while others exhibit cognitive decline before the age of 60. While there are undoubtedly genetic factors that influence the rate of brain aging, there is also a major environmental component. Indeed, even in inbred strains of mice and rats, some individuals exhibit impaired learning and memory capacity in old age whereas others do not (Gallagher et al., 2006). In this section, we summarize evidence that energy intake and expenditure during the life course have a major impact on the rate of brain aging and the risk for AD, PD, and stroke.

Chronic Metabolic Morbidity Accelerates Brain Aging

There are strong positive associations between metabolic morbidities (obesity, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance) and the risk of all major age-related diseases including diabetes, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, and many types of cancer. In animal models of the latter disorders, the disease processes are accelerated by feeding diets high in saturated fat and simple sugars (Hariri and Thibault, 2010; Koopmans and Schuurman, 2015). Individuals who are sedentary and overindulgent are also prone to impaired brain function and neurodegenerative disorders as they age. On average, the cognitive performance of individuals who are metabolically morbid is poorer than their age-matched healthy counterparts (Kullmann et al., 2016; Stillman et al., 2017). Brain imaging studies have documented reduced gray matter volumes and white matter integrity in multiple brain regions, and reduced functional connectivity between brain regions in obese individuals, particularly those with abdominal obesity and insulin resistance (Debette et al., 2014; Janowitz et al., 2015; Kullmann et al., 2015). Generally similar abnormalities in brain structure and neuronal network connectivity occur in individuals with type 2 diabetes (Macpherson et al., 2017). Even among individuals who are not obese, higher body mass index is associated with perturbed resting state connectivity in the DMN and sensory-motor networks (Beyer et al., 2017; Doucet et al., 2018). In addition, body mass index is inversely associated with glucose utilization in the prefrontal cortex, a brain region that plays critical roles in executive function, attention, memory, and insight (Volkow et al., 2009). Brain function and structure are also adversely affected by obesity and diabetes in animal models. For example, when rats are fed a diet high in saturated fats and sugar, they perform worse on a place recognition task and exhibit elevated markers of oxidative stress and inflammation in their hippocampus (Beilharz et al., 2014). High-fat feeding impairs cognitive flexibility in a delayed matching to position task in rats (McNeilly et al., 2011). Insulin resistance and obesity induced by diet or genetic mutation of the leptin receptor in rats or mice result in a reduction in synaptic spine density on dendrites of hippocampal dentate granule neurons, and impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis (Stranahan et al., 2008a, 2008b). Thus, both correlational data from human studies and controlled trials in animals demonstrate that a chronic positive energy balance adversely affects brain structure and function.

Data suggest that metabolic morbidity accelerates most, if not all, of the hallmarks of brain aging. Impaired cerebral glucose utilization in the prefrontal cortex is inversely associated with body mass index in human subjects (Volkow et al., 2009), suggesting an adverse effect of a chronic positive energy balance on neuronal bioenergetics. Rats or mice maintained on high-fat and/or high-sugar diets, and diabetic animals, exhibit many of the cellular and molecular hallmarks of brain aging including oxidative damage (Elahi et al., 2016), neuroinflammation (Jayaraman et al., 2014), impaired neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis (Thibault et al., 2013), impaired autophagy (Li et al., 2017), and dysregulation of neuronal network activity (Margineanu et al., 1998). Insulin-resistant mice exhibit impaired hippocampal neurogenesis, which is associated with oxidative stress, inflammation, and impaired hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and memory (Lindqvist et al., 2006; Stranahan et al., 2008a; Gurung et al., 2016). Activation of inflammatory microglia may contribute to the loss of synapses on hippocampal dentate granule neuron dendrites caused by obesity and diabetes (Stranahan et al., 2008b; Hao et al., 2016). The ability of neurons to respond adaptively to bioenergetic and oxidative stress is compromised by excessive energy intake as indicated by reduced expression of BDNF (Stranahan et al., 2008b), PGC-1α (Morselli et al., 2014), and SIRT1 (Heyward et al., 2016). Obese and diabetic rodents exhibit elevated glucocorticoid levels, which can suppress BDNF expression and impair hippocampal synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis (Stranahan et al., 2008a; Wosiski-Kuhn et al., 2014). In this regard, the mechanisms by which chronic uncontrolled stress and metabolic morbidity compromise the ability of neurons to respond to stress are similar and involve an acceleration of aging processes (Sapolsky, 1999).

Sedentary and overindulgent lifestyles accelerate pathological processes underlying age-related brain diseases by mechanisms involving hallmarks of brain aging. This is established in the case of ischemic stroke (Lucke-Wold et al., 2012). Findings from both cross-sectional and longitudinal epidemiological studies suggest that obesity, diabetes, and insulin resistance are also risk factors for AD and PD (Luchsinger and Gustafson, 2009). In transgenic mouse models of AD, diet-induced obesity and diabetes exacerbate cognitive deficits by mechanisms involving or in addition to Aβ and Tau pathologies (Takeda et al., 2010; Walker et al., 2017). Obesogenic diets accelerate the development of motor and non-motor phenotypes and associated α-synuclein pathology in transgenic PD mouse models (Griffioen et al., 2013). Such findings suggest that interventions that improve one’s metabolic status may counteract brain aging. Evidence summarized in the next section supports this possibility.

Physiological Bioenergetic Challenges Retard Brain Aging

The evolutionarily pressure to compete successfully for limited food sources resulted in selection for individuals whose brains and bodies functioned well (perhaps optimally) when in a food-deprived (fasted) state (Mattson, 2015b). Fast forward to the present day and the common pattern of meal consumption of three meals plus snacks spaced throughout waking hours. The latter eating pattern is abnormal when viewed in the light of our ancestors prior to the agricultural revolution who ate less frequently. A compelling scientific literature shows that, compared to animals fed ad libitum, those fed intermittently (alternate day fasting or daily time-restricted feeding) exhibit improvements in many health indicators and, as reviewed elsewhere, their lifespan is extended and hallmarks of aging are diminished (Longo and Mattson, 2014; López-Otín et al., 2016; Mattison et al., 2017). Intermittent energy restriction improves cognitive and motor performance, and can protect neurons against dysfunction and degeneration in animal models of epilepsy, stroke, PD, and AD (Bruce-Keller et al., 1999; Duan and Mattson, 1999; Yu and Mattson, 1999; Halagappa et al., 2007; Alirezaei et al., 2010; Fann et al., 2014; Parikh et al., 2016; Prehn et al., 2017). Regular aerobic exercise, which is necessary for the survival of many animals, can also enhance brain health throughout the life course; exercise reduces anxiety and improves cognition in laboratory animals and human subjects (Intlekofer and Cotman, 2013; Boraxbekk et al., 2016; Castellano et al., 2017; Chirles et al., 2017; Raichlen and Alexander, 2017). While fasting and vigorous exercise are different challenges to the body and brain, emerging findings are revealing that they each elicit similar adaptive cellular responses that can enhance neuroplasticity and stress resistance. As reviewed elsewhere (Mattson, 2012; Mattson et al., 2018), these include upregulation of neurotrophic factor signaling, autophagy, and DNA repair; suppression of oxidative stress and inflammation; stabilization of neuronal calcium homeostasis and neuronal network activity; and stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and neurogenesis (Figure 4).

Emerging findings suggest that depletion of liver glycogen stores and mobilization of fatty acids from adipose cells are important metabolic responses to fasting and extended exercise with regard to brain health and neuroprotection (Mattson et al., 2018). The fatty acids are metabolized to the ketone bodies β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) and acetoacetate (AcAc) in the liver. Neurons utilize the ketones to generate acetyl-coenzyme A and thence ATP in their mitochondria. But BHB also functions as a signaling molecule that stimulates Bdnf gene expression by modifying histone acetylation and by activating the transcription factor NF-κB (Marosi et al., 2016; Sleiman et al., 2016). Generally similar to the physiological responses of muscle cells to exercise, it appears that neurons respond to intermittent energy restriction and exercise by enhancing their tolerance of metabolic stress and by growing in size. A picture is emerging in which pathways activated during the metabolic challenges of exercise and fasting prepare the cells to grow during the recovery period (rest, feeding, and sleep) (Mattson et al., 2018). In the case of neurons, such intermittent metabolic switching may stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis to enable neurite outgrowth and the formation of new synapses (Cheng et al., 2012; Vaarmann et al., 2016). In addition, recent findings suggest that intermittent metabolic switching enhances the function, stress resistance, and quality control of mitochondria, in part by inducing the expression of the mitochondrial protein deacetylase SIRT3. The activities of ETC proteins and the mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme SOD2 are enhanced when deacetylated by SIRT3, while deacetylation of cyclophilin D can inhibit formation of mPTPs, thereby preventing neuronal excitotoxicity and apoptosis (Cheng et al., 2016; Shi et al., 2017).

While adaptive cellular stress response pathways are upregulated in brain cells during periods of energy restriction and exercise, a recovery period (eating, resting, and sleeping) is required to enable the structural and functional plasticity of neuronal circuits that are believed to sustain optimal brain function and resilience throughout the life course (Mattson et al., 2018). In this view, the metabolic challenge suppresses mTOR and overall protein synthesis, and autophagy and gene expression pathways involved in cellular stress resistance are upregulated. During the recovery period, mTOR is activated and protein synthesis is increased to provide the new proteins required for cell growth (neurite outgrowth, synapse formation, and neurogenesis) and the increased bioenergetics (mitochondrial biogenesis) required to support the cell growth (Figure 4; Camandola and Mattson, 2017; Mattson et al., 2018).

Neuroprotection with Bioenergetic Challenge-Based Pharmacological Interventions

While brain health can be bolstered by intermittent metabolic switching, pharmacological approaches that tap some of the key adaptive cellular stress response pathways engaged by fasting and exercise are being pursued for the purposes of enhancing cognition and forestalling or treating age-related neurological disorders. A few such pharmacological agents with demonstrated efficacy in animal models of neurodegenerative disorders are listed in Table 1. One approach is to bolster mitochondrial function and SIRT3 activity by administration of ketone esters or the NAD+ precursor nicotinamide riboside, both of which have been demonstrated to be beneficial in AD models (Gong et al., 2013; Kashiwaya et al., 2013; Hou et al., 2018). Another approach is to induce mild intermittent bioenergetic cellular stress by administering mitochondrial uncoupling agents, mitochondrial ATP-dependent K+ channel openers, or 2-deoxyglucose (which impairs cellular glucose utilization). The mitochondrial uncoupler 2, 4-dinitrophenol protects neurons and improves functional outcome in animal models of TBI, AD, and PD (Pandya et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2015a; Geisler et al., 2017). The K+-ATP channel opener diazoxide is very effective in protecting neurons in stroke, PD, and AD models (Liu et al., 2002, 2010; Yang et al., 2005). When administered once daily (which induces a mild transient cellular metabolic stress), 2-deoxyglucose induces adaptive cellular stress responses in neurons and protects them against degeneration in stroke and PD models (Yu and Mattson, 1999; Duan and Mattson, 1999). Similar to what occurs in response to fasting and exercise, administration of rapamycin stimulates autophagy while reducing overall protein synthesis; this results from inhibition of the mTOR pathway. Such pharmacological treatments that impact cellular signaling pathways that are also activated by fasting and exercise can suppress the accrual of hallmarks of brain aging and, indeed, rapamycin and nicotinamide riboside treatment can increase the lifespan of mice (Harrison et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2016b).

Two final examples of therapeutic approaches that target fundamental mechanisms of brain aging focus on the insulin-sensitizing hormone glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) and the small molecule drug metformin. GLP-1 receptors are coupled to cyclic AMP production and CREB activation. GLP-1 receptor agonists increase insulin sensitivity and are neuroprotective in animal models of AD, PD, and stroke (Li et al., 2009, 2010; Liu et al., 2015b). A recent clinical trial revealed a therapeutic benefit of the GLP-1 analog exanatide in PD patients (Athauda et al., 2017). Metformin, which has been prescribed for diabetes for decades, inhibits liver glucose production, but also activates multiple cellular pathways that counteract aging processes, including activation of AMPK and inhibition of mTOR and inflammatory pathways (Barzilai et al., 2016). Metformin treatment ameliorates neurodegenerative and behavioral phenotypes in animal models of PD and AD (Bayliss et al., 2016; Niccoli et al., 2016). Such findings support the potential application of pharmacological agents that target metabolism to counteract brain aging and associated neurodegenerative disorders.

Concluding Remarks

Research in the fields of aging and neuroscience has revealed multiple hallmarks of brain aging at the molecular, cellular, and systems levels. Because they involve highly interdependent and interactive signaling pathways and regulatory systems, none of the hallmarks of brain aging occur in isolation. Given this complexity of the aging process, one might conclude that developing approaches for promoting optimal brain function and disease resistance during aging is a daunting challenge. However, studies of animal models have shown that the amount and frequency of energy intake can have a major impact on brain health span and vulnerability to AD, PD, and stroke. Optimism that prescriptions for healthy brain aging are within our grasp is supported by an emerging understanding of the mechanisms by which energy restriction and exercise enhance neuronal neuroplasticity and resistance of the brain to stress and aging. Recent findings suggest that feeding and exercise regimens that result in intermittent metabolic switching from liver-derived glucose to fat-derived ketones facilitates brain neuroplasticity and resilience (Mattson et al., 2018). As summarized in the preceding section and in Figure 4, accumulating data suggest that regular intermittent metabolic switching can counteract all of the hallmarks of aging. When viewed in the light of evolution, the latter findings are not surprising because success in the competition for scarce and sporadic food availability has been the major determinant of survival and reproductive success during evolution of all mammals, including humans (Mattson, 2015b). Accordingly, brains and the bodies they control evolved to function optimally in the setting of intermittent food deprivation. The evidence now justifies implementation by the medical community of strategies for enhancing the brain health of their patients by the prescription and active facilitation of daily and weekly patterns of meal consumption and exercise that result in intermittent metabolic switching. We would argue that the failure of the pharmaceutical industry to develop drugs that impact outcomes in age-related brain disorders is because of their focus on disease-specific targets. A novel approach grounded in the neurobiology of aging is to develop pharmacological interventions that impose intermittent bioenergetic challenges that activate many of the same adaptive cellular responses engaged by intermittent energy restriction and exercise. Recent findings from studies of animal models of age-related neurological disorders support this approach (Table 1). A new mindset for the design of preclinical studies and clinical trials will be required in which the goal is to develop safe agents with a relatively short halflife and a dosing schedule that imposes a moderate metabolic challenge followed by a recovery period.

This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute on Aging (AG000312-15).

Figure 1 Hallmarks of Brain Aging

There are ten established hallmarks of brain aging. The illustration depicts nine of the hallmarks as colored slices of pie interacting prominently with “dysregulated energy metabolism,” which is shown as an inner ring of the aging wheel. Also shown are two slices (telomere damage and cell senescence) that are considered hallmarks of aging in proliferative peripheral tissues, but have not yet been established as hallmarks of brain aging.

Figure 2 Core Neuronal Circuitry and Glial Cells of the Mammalian Brain

Excitatory neurons deploy the neurotransmitter glutamate and typically elaborate long axons that project relatively long distances within and between brain regions. Ca2+ is the principal second messenger mediating both presynaptic and postsynaptic plasticity at excitatory synapses. The major inhibitory neurons within brain regions are GABAergic and function to constrain excitatory neuronal circuits within physiological limits. Glutamatergic neurons also receive inputs from neuromodulatory transmitters including norepinephrine, serotonin, and acetylcholine. Astrocytes are the most abundant type of glial cell in the brain; they remove glutamate from the extracellular milieu and produce neurotrophic factors, lactate, and ketones to support neuronal growth and bioenergetics. Oligo-dendrocytes are glia that myelinate axons to increase the speed of action potential propagation along the axon. Microglia are the major innate immune cell in the brain; they produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cytokines and remove apoptotic cells and extracellular debris.

Figure 3 Examples of Roles for Aging Processes, Acting Both Upstream and Downstream of Disease-Defining Molecular Lesions, in the Pathogenesis of AD, PD, and Stroke

There is considerable evidence that the indicated hallmarks of brain aging act upstream of the disease-defining Aβ plaques and pTau neurofibrillary tangles. On the other hand, aggregating Aβ and pTau can cause oxidative stress, dysregulation of Ca2+ homeostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and other hallmarks of aging in neurons. In PD, core aging processes result in the intracellular accumulation of neurotoxic forms of α-synuclein, and conversely, the accumulation of α-synuclein exacerbates aging processes resulting in neuronal dysfunction and death. Aging renders the brain vulnerable to stroke by promoting atherosclerosis and by compromising the ability of neurons to withstand and recover from the ischemic stress.

Figure 4 Working Model for How Intermittent Metabolic Challenges Bolster Brain Health during Aging, Whereas a Chronic Positive Energy Balance Hastens Brain Aging and Associated Brain Diseases

Left: eating and lifestyle patterns that result in intermittent depletion of liver glycogen stores and mobilization of fatty acids to generate ketones (fasting and exercise) also typically increase neuronal network activity in many brain regions. Signaling pathways are activated in brain cells that upregulate the expression of trophic factors and activate transcription factors that induce the expression of genes encoding proteins that enhance neural plasticity and resilience during aging. These adaptations to intermittent metabolic switching include mitochondrial biogenesis and stress resistance; adaptive modifications of neurotransmitter signaling pathways; upregulation of autophagy, antioxidant defenses, and DNA repair; stimulation of neurogenesis; and suppression of inflammation. In these ways intermittent metabolic switching counteracts core brain aging mechanisms, thereby slowing age-related declines in neurological function and reducing the risk of AD, PD, and stroke. Right: sedentary overindulgent lifestyles accelerate brain aging and increase the risk of AD, PD, and stroke. A chronic positive energy balance results in metabolic morbidity (insulin resistance and dyslipidemia) and reduced activation of signaling pathways that promote synaptic plasticity and cellular stress resistance. As a consequence, neurons suffer: impaired mitochondrial function, autophagy, and DNA repair; excessive oxidative stress; dysregulated neuronal network activity and Ca2+ homeostasis; the accumulation of potentially toxic protein aggregates; and inflammation. In these ways, metabolic complacency accelerates age-related decrements in brain function and increases the risk of AD, PD, and stroke.

Table 1 Examples of Adaptive Metabolic Cellular Stress Response-Based Pharmacological Strategies to Ameliorate Age-Related Neurological Deficits and Diseases

Agent	Mechanism of Action	Preclinical Findings	References	
Ketone (ester)	energy substrate	improves cognition and endurance	Murray et al., 2016; Kashiwaya et al., 2000, 2013; Marosi et al., 2016	
induces BDNF expression	beneficial in seizure, AD, and PD models	
Nicotinamide riboside	bolsters bioenergetics and sirtuin activity	extends lifespan and beneficial in AD model	Gong et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2016a; Hou et al., 2018	
2,4-dinitrophenol	mild mitochondrial uncoupling	beneficial in TBI, AD, and PD models	Pandya et al., 2007; Geisler et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017	
adaptive cellular stress responses	
Diazoxide	K-ATP channel opener	beneficial in stroke, PD, and AD models	Liu et al., 2002, 2010; Yang et al., 2005	
2-deoxyglucose	induces adaptive cellular stress responses	neuroprotective in stroke and PD models	Duan and Mattson, 1999; Yu and Mattson, 1999	
Rapamycin	mTOR inhibitor and autophagy inducer	beneficial in stroke, AD, and PD models	Buckley et al., 2014; Spilman et al., 2010; Siddiqui et al., 2015	
extends lifespan	
Exendin-4 and liraglutide	GLP-1R agonist and insulin sensitizer	beneficial in stroke, AD, and PD models	Li et al., 2009, 2010	
induces BDNF expression	
Metformin	inhibits liver glucose production, activates AMP, and inhibits mTOR	beneficial in PD and AD models	Martin-Montalvo et al., 2013; Bayliss et al., 2016; Niccoli et al., 2016	
extends lifespan	


Aarsland D Creese B Politis M Chaudhuri KR Ffytche DH Weintraub D Ballard C 2017 Cognitive decline in Parkinson disease Nat Rev Neurol 13 217 231 28257128
Adamczak SE de Rivero Vaccari JP Dale G Brand FJ 3rd Nonner D Bullock MR Dahl GP Dietrich WD Keane RW 2014 Pyroptotic neuronal cell death mediated by the AIM2 inflammasome J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34 621 629 24398937
Alexander GE Ryan L Bowers D Foster TC Bizon JL Geldmacher DS Glisky EL 2012 Characterizing cognitive aging in humans with links to animal models Front Aging Neurosci 4 21 22988439
Alirezaei M Kemball CC Flynn CT Wood MR Whitton JL Kiosses WB 2010 Short-term fasting induces profound neuronal autophagy Autophagy 6 702 710 20534972
Alzheimer’s Association 2016 2016 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures Alzheimers Dement 12 459 509 27570871
Amigo I Menezes-Filho SL Luévano-Martínez LA Chausse B Kowaltowski AJ 2017 Caloric restriction increases brain mitochondrial calcium retention capacity and protects against excitotoxicity Aging Cell 16 73 81 27619151
An Y Varma VR Varma S Casanova R Dammer E Pletnikova O Chia CW Egan JM Ferrucci L Troncoso J 2018 Evidence for brain glucose dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 14 318 329 29055815
Appleton JP Scutt P Sprigg N Bath PM 2017 Hypercholesterolaemia and vascular dementia Clin Sci (Lond) 131 1561 1578 28667059
Arendt T Stieler JT Holzer M 2016 Tau and tauopathies Brain Res Bull 126 238 292 27615390
Arumugam TV Tang SC Lathia JD Cheng A Mughal MR Chigurupati S Magnus T Chan SL Jo DG Ouyang X 2007 Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) protects the brain against experimental stroke by preventing complement-mediated neuronal cell death Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 14104 14109 17715065
Arumugam TV Woodruff TM Lathia JD Selvaraj PK Mattson MP Taylor SM 2009 Neuroprotection in stroke by complement inhibition and immunoglobulin therapy Neuroscience 158 1074 1089 18691639
Arumugam TV Manzanero S Furtado M Biggins PJ Hsieh YH Gelderblom M MacDonald KP Salimova E Li YI Korn O 2017 An atypical role for the myeloid receptor Mincle in central nervous system injury J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 37 2098 2111 27492949
Ash JA Lu H Taxier LR Long JM Yang Y Stein EA Rapp PR 2016 Functional connectivity with the retrosplenial cortex predicts cognitive aging in rats Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 12286 12291 27791017
Athauda D Maclagan K Skene SS Bajwa-Joseph M Letchford D Chowdhury K Hibbert S Budnik N Zampedri L Dickson J 2017 Exenatide once weekly versus placebo in Parkinson’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial Lancet 390 1664 1675 28781108
Barzilai N Crandall JP Kritchevsky SB Espeland MA 2016 Metformin as a tool to target aging Cell Metab 23 1060 1065 27304507
Bayliss JA Lemus MB Santos VV Deo M Davies JS Kemp BE Elsworth JD Andrews ZB 2016 Metformin prevents nigrostriatal dopamine degeneration independent of AMPK activation in dopamine neurons PLoS One 11 e0159381 27467571
Beckervordersandforth R Ebert B Schäffner I Moss J Fiebig C Shin J Moore DL Ghosh L Trinchero MF Stockburger C 2017 Role of mitochondrial metabolism in the control of early lineage progression and aging phenotypes in adult hippocampal neurogenesis Neuron 93 560 573 e6 28111078
Beilharz JE Maniam J Morris MJ 2014 Short exposure to a diet rich in both fat and sugar or sugar alone impairs place, but not object recognition memory in rats Brain Behav Immun 37 134 141 24309633
Bennett IJ Madden DJ 2014 Disconnected aging: cerebral white matter integrity and age-related differences in cognition Neuroscience 276 187 205 24280637
Bennett DA Krishnamurthi RV Barker-Collo S Forouzanfar MH Naghavi M Connor M Lawes CM Moran AE Anderson LM Roth GA Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors 2010 Study Stroke Expert Group 2014 The global burden of ischemic stroke: findings of the GBD 2010 study Glob Heart 9 107 112 25432120
Beyer F Kharabian Masouleh S Huntenburg JM Lampe L Luck T Riedel-Heller SG Loeffler M Schroeter ML Stumvoll M Villringer A Witte AV 2017 Higher body mass index is associated with reduced posterior default mode connectivity in older adults Hum Brain Mapp 2017 11
Bezprozvanny I Mattson MP 2008 Neuronal calcium mishandling and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Trends Neurosci 31 454 463 18675468
Blennow K Brody DL Kochanek PM Levin H McKee A Ribbers GM Yaffe K Zetterberg H 2016 Traumatic brain injuries Nat Rev Dis Primers 2 16084 27853132
Boraxbekk CJ Salami A Wåhlin A Nyberg L 2016 Physical activity over a decade modifies age-related decline in perfusion, gray matter volume, and functional connectivity of the posterior default-mode network-A multimodal approach Neuroimage 131 133 141 26702778
Bose A Beal MF 2016 Mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 139 Suppl 1 216 231 27546335
Braidy N Poljak A Grant R Jayasena T Mansour H Chan-Ling T Guillemin GJ Smythe G Sachdev P 2014 Mapping NAD(+) metabolism in the brain of ageing Wistar rats: potential targets for influencing brain senescence Biogerontology 15 177 198 24337988
Broughton BR Reutens DC Sobey CG 2009 Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia Stroke 40 e331 e339 19182083
Brown MR Geddes JW Sullivan PG 2004 Brain region-specific, age-related, alterations in mitochondrial responses to elevated calcium J Bioenerg Biomembr 36 401 406 15377879
Bruce AJ Boling W Kindy MS Peschon J Kraemer PJ Carpenter MK Holtsberg FW Mattson MP 1996 Altered neuronal and microglial responses to excitotoxic and ischemic brain injury in mice lacking TNF receptors Nat Med 2 788 794 8673925
Bruce-Keller AJ Umberger G McFall R Mattson MP 1999 Food restriction reduces brain damage and improves behavioral outcome following excitotoxic and metabolic insults Ann Neurol 45 8 15 9894871
Brundin P Melki R 2017 Prying into the prion hypothesis for Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci 37 9808 9818 29021298
Buckley KM Hess DL Sazonova IY Periyasamy-Thandavan S Barrett JR Kirks R Grace H Kondrikova G Johnson MH Hess DC 2014 Rapamycin upregulation of autophagy reduces infarct size and improves outcomes in both permanent MCAL, and embolic MCAO, murine models of stroke Exp Transl Stroke Med 6 8 24991402
Budnik V Ruiz-Cañada C Wendler F 2016 Extracellular vesicles round off communication in the nervous system Nat Rev Neurosci 17 160 172 26891626
Butler D Bahr BA 2006 Oxidative stress and lysosomes: CNS-related consequences and implications for lysosomal enhancement strategies and induction of autophagy Antioxid Redox Signal 8 185 196 16487052
Cabelof DC Yanamadala S Raffoul JJ Guo Z Soofi A Heydari AR 2003 Caloric restriction promotes genomic stability by induction of base excision repair and reversal of its age-related decline DNA Repair (Amst) 2 295 307 12547392
Camandola S Mattson MP 2011 Aberrant subcellular neuronal calcium regulation in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 1813 965 973 20950656
Camandola S Mattson MP 2017 Brain metabolism in health, aging, and neurodegeneration EMBO J 36 1474 1492 28438892
Castellano CA Paquet N Dionne IJ Imbeault H Langlois F Croteau E Tremblay S Fortier M Matte JJ Lacombe G 2017 A 3-month aerobic training program improves brain energy metabolism in mild Alzheimer’s disease: preliminary results from a neuroimaging study J Alzheimers Dis 56 1459 1468 28157102
Ceravolo R Borghetti D Kiferle L Tognoni G Giorgetti A Neglia D Sassi N Frosini D Rossi C Petrozzi L 2008 CSF phosporylated TAU protein levels correlate with cerebral glucose metabolism assessed with PET in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res Bull 76 80 84 18395614
Chen X Arumugam TV Cheng YL Lee JH Chigurupati S Mattson MP Basta M 2018 Combination therapy with low-dose IVIG and a C1-esterase inhibitor ameliorates brain damage and functional deficits in experimental ischemic stroke Neuromolecular Med 20 63 72 29299869
Cheng A Shinya K Wan R Tang SC Miura T Tang H Khatri R Gleichman M Ouyang X Liu D 2007 Telomere protection mechanisms change during neurogenesis and neuronal maturation: newly generated neurons are hypersensitive to telomere and DNA damage J Neurosci 27 3722 3733 17409236
Cheng A Wan R Yang JL Kamimura N Son TG Ouyang X Luo Y Okun E Mattson MP 2012 Involvement of PGC-1α in the formation and maintenance of neuronal dendritic spines Nat Commun 3 1250 23212379
Cheng A Yang Y Zhou Y Maharana C Lu D Peng W Liu Y Wan R Marosi K Misiak M 2016 Mitochondrial SIRT3 mediates adaptive responses of neurons to exercise and metabolic and excitatory challenges Cell Metab 23 128 142 26698917
Cherbuin N Sargent-Cox K Fraser M Sachdev P Anstey KJ 2015 Being overweight is associated with hippocampal atrophy: the PATH Through Life Study Int J Obes 39 1509 1514
Childs BG Baker DJ Kirkland JL Campisi J van Deursen JM 2014 Senescence and apoptosis: dueling or complementary cell fates? EMBO Rep 15 1139 1153 25312810
Chirles TJ Reiter K Weiss LR Alfini AJ Nielson KA Smith JC 2017 Exercise training and functional connectivity changes in mild cognitive impairment and healthy elders J Alzheimers Dis 57 845 856 28304298
Chow HM Herrup K 2015 Genomic integrity and the ageing brain Nat Rev Neurosci 16 672 684 26462757
Cohen SM Li B Tsien RW Ma H 2015 Evolutionary and functional perspectives on signaling from neuronal surface to nucleus Biochem Biophys Res Commun 460 88 99 25998737
Colacurcio DJ Nixon RA 2016 Disorders of lysosomal acidification-The emerging role of v-ATPase in aging and neurodegenerative disease Ageing Res Rev 32 75 88 27197071
Cole JH Franke K 2017 Predicting age using neuroimaging: innovative brain ageing biomarkers Trends Neurosci 40 681 690 29074032
Collier TJ Kanaan NM Kordower JH 2011 Ageing as a primary risk factor for Parkinson’s disease: evidence from studies of non-human primates Nat Rev Neurosci 12 359 366 21587290
Colonna M Butovsky O 2017 Microglia function in the central nervous system during health and neurodegeneration Annu Rev Immunol 35 441 468 28226226
Cookson MR 2016 Cellular functions of LRRK2 implicate vesicular trafficking pathways in Parkinson’s disease Biochem Soc Trans 44 1603 1610 27913668
Cribbs DH Berchtold NC Perreau V Coleman PD Rogers J Tenner AJ Cotman CW 2012 Extensive innate immune gene activation accompanies brain aging, increasing vulnerability to cognitive decline and neurodegeneration: a microarray study J Neuroinflammation 9 179 22824372
Cunnane SC Courchesne-Loyer A Vandenberghe C St-Pierre V Fortier M Hennebelle M Croteau E Bocti C Fulop T Castellano CA 2016 Can ketones help rescue brain fuel supply in later life? Implications for cognitive health during aging and the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease Front Mol Neurosci 9 53 27458340
Cutler RG Kelly J Storie K Pedersen WA Tammara A Hatanpaa K Troncoso JC Mattson MP 2004 Involvement of oxidative stress-induced abnormalities in ceramide and cholesterol metabolism in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 2070 2075 14970312
Dauncey MJ 2014 Nutrition, the brain and cognitive decline: insights from epigenetics Eur J Clin Nutr 68 1179 1185 25182020
de Jong GI Naber PA Van der Zee EA Thompson LT Disterhoft JF Luiten PG 1996 Age-related loss of calcium binding proteins in rabbit hippocampus Neurobiol Aging 17 459 465 8725908
Debette S Wolf C Lambert JC Crivello F Soumaré A Zhu YC Schilling S Dufouil C Mazoyer B Amouyel P 2014 Abdominal obesity and lower gray matter volume: a Mendelian randomization study Neurobiol Aging 35 378 386 23998998
Denis I Potier B Vancassel S Heberden C Lavialle M 2013 Omega-3 fatty acids and brain resistance to ageing and stress: body of evidence and possible mechanisms Ageing Res Rev 12 579 594 23395782
Deyo RA Straube KT Disterhoft JF 1989 Nimodipine facilitates associative learning in aging rabbits Science 243 809 811 2916127
Di Monte DA 1991 Mitochondrial DNA and Parkinson’s disease Neurology 41 Suppl 2 38 42 discussion 42–43
Doucet GE Rasgon N McEwen BS Micali N Frangou S 2018 Elevated body mass index is associated with increased integration and reduced cohesion of sensory-driven and internally guided resting-state functional brain networks Cereb Cortex 28 988 997 28119342
Drayer BP 1988 Imaging of the aging brain. Part I Normal findings Radiology 166 785 796 3277247
Duan W Mattson MP 1999 Dietary restriction and 2-deoxyglucose administration improve behavioral outcome and reduce degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in models of Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci Res 57 195 206 10398297
Duan W Guo Z Jiang H Ware M Li XJ Mattson MP 2003 Dietary restriction normalizes glucose metabolism and BDNF levels, slows disease progression, and increases survival in huntingtin mutant mice Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 2911 2916 12589027
DuBoff B Feany M Götz J 2013 Why size matters - balancing mitochondrial dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease Trends Neurosci 36 325 335 23582339
Dumitriu D Hao J Hara Y Kaufmann J Janssen WG Lou W Rapp PR Morrison JH 2010 Selective changes in thin spine density and morphology in monkey prefrontal cortex correlate with aging-related cognitive impairment J Neurosci 30 7507 7515 20519525
Dykiert D Der G Starr JM Deary IJ 2012 Age differences in intra-individual variability in simple and choice reaction time: systematic review and meta-analysis PLoS One 7 e45759 23071524
Eitan E Hutchison ER Marosi K Comotto J Mustapic M Nigam SM Suire C Maharana C Jicha GA Liu D 2016 Extracellular vesicle-associated Aβ mediates trans-neuronal bioenergetic and Ca2+-handling deficits in Alzheimer’s disease models NPJ Aging Mech Dis 2 16019 27928512
Ekdahl CT Claasen JH Bonde S Kokaia Z Lindvall O 2003 Inflammation is detrimental for neurogenesis in adult brain Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 13632 13637 14581618
Elahi M Hasan Z Motoi Y Matsumoto SE Ishiguro K Hattori N 2016 Region-specific vulnerability to oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and tau hyperphosphorylation in experimental diabetes mellitus mice J Alzheimers Dis 51 1209 1224 26923011
Emmanouilidou E Melachroinou K Roumeliotis T Garbis SD Ntzouni M Margaritis LH Stefanis L Vekrellis K 2010 Cell-produced alpha-synuclein is secreted in a calcium-dependent manner by exosomes and impacts neuronal survival J Neurosci 30 6838 6851 20484626
Erickson KI Voss MW Prakash RS Basak C Szabo A Chaddock L Kim JS Heo S Alves H White SM 2011 Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves memory Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 3017 3022 21282661
Eyre H Baune B Lavretsky H 2015 Clinical advances in geriatric psychiatry: a focus on prevention of mood and cognitive disorders Psychiatr Clin North Am 38 495 514 26300035
Fang EF Lautrup S Hou Y Demarest TG Croteau DL Mattson MP Bohr VA 2017 NAD+ in aging: molecular mechanisms and translational implications Trends Mol Med 23 899 916 28899755
Fann DY Lee SY Manzanero S Chunduri P Sobey CG Arumugam TV 2013 Pathogenesis of acute stroke and the role of inflammasomes Ageing Res Rev 12 941 966 24103368
Fann DY Santro T Manzanero S Widiapradja A Cheng YL Lee SY Chunduri P Jo DG Stranahan AM Mattson MP Arumugam TV 2014 Intermittent fasting attenuates inflammasome activity in ischemic stroke Exp Neurol 257 114 119 24805069
Fann DY Lim YA Cheng YL Lok KZ Chunduri P Baik SH Drummond GR Dheen ST Sobey CG Jo DG 2018 Evidence that NF-κB and MAPK signaling promotes NLRP inflammasome activation in neurons following ischemic stroke Mol Neurobiol 55 1082 1096 28092085
Fatokun AA Dawson VL Dawson TM 2014 Parthanatos: mitochondrial-linked mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities Br J Pharmacol 171 2000 2016 24684389
Fisher M Feuerstein G Howells DW Hurn PD Kent TA Savitz SI Lo EH STAIR Group 2009 Update of the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical recommendations Stroke 40 2244 2250 19246690
Friedland RP Jagust WJ Huesman RH Koss E Knittel B Mathis CA Ober BA Mazoyer BM Budinger TF 1989 Regional cerebral glucose transport and utilization in Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 39 1427 1434 2812318
Fukuda M Mentis MJ Ma Y Dhawan V Antonini A Lang AE Lozano AM Hammerstad J Lyons K Koller WC 2001 Networks mediating the clinical effects of pallidal brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease: a PET study of resting-state glucose metabolism Brain 124 1601 1609 11459751
Fukushima H Maeda R Suzuki R Suzuki A Nomoto M Toyoda H Wu LJ Xu H Zhao MG Ueda K 2008 Upregulation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV improves memory formation and rescues memory loss with aging J Neurosci 28 9910 9919 18829949
Gabbita SP Butterfield DA Hensley K Shaw W Carney JM 1997 Aging and caloric restriction affect mitochondrial respiration and lipid membrane status: an electron paramagnetic resonance investigation Free Radic Biol Med 23 191 201 9199881
Gallagher M Colantuoni C Eichenbaum H Haberman RP Rapp PR Tanila H Wilson IA 2006 Individual differences in neurocognitive aging of the medial temporal lobe Age (Dordr) 28 221 233 22253491
Galluzzi L Baehrecke EH Ballabio A Boya P Bravo-San Pedro JM Cecconi F Choi AM Chu CT Codogno P Colombo MI 2017 Molecular definitions of autophagy and related processes EMBO J 36 1811 1836 28596378
Gant JC Sama MM Landfield PW Thibault O 2006 Early and simultaneous emergence of multiple hippocampal biomarkers of aging is mediated by Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release J Neurosci 26 3482 3490 16571755
Gant JC Chen KC Kadish I Blalock EM Thibault O Porter NM Landfield PW 2015 Reversal of aging-related neuronal Ca2+ dysregulation and cognitive impairment by delivery of a transgene encoding FK506-binding protein 12.6/1b to the hippocampus J Neurosci 35 10878 10887 26224869
Geddes JW Tekirian TL Soultanian NS Ashford JW Davis DG Markesbery WR 1997 Comparison of neuropathologic criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 18 Suppl S99 S105 9330997
Geisler JG Marosi K Halpern J Mattson MP 2017 DNP, mitochondrial uncoupling, and neuroprotection: a little dab’ll do ya Alzheimers Dement 13 582 591 27599210
Gelderblom M Leypoldt F Steinbach K Behrens D Choe CU Siler DA Arumugam TV Orthey E Gerloff C Tolosa E Magnus T 2009 Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell accumulation in stroke Stroke 40 1849 1857 19265055
Ghosh D LeVault KR Barnett AJ Brewer GJ 2012 A reversible early oxidized redox state that precedes macromolecular ROS damage in aging nontransgenic and 3xTg-AD mouse neurons J Neurosci 32 5821 5832 22539844
Gong B Pan Y Vempati P Zhao W Knable L Ho L Wang J Sastre M Ono K Sauve AA Pasinetti GM 2013 Nicotinamide riboside restores cognition through an upregulation of proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α regulated β-secretase 1 degradation and mitochondrial gene expression in Alzheimer’s mouse models Neurobiol Aging 34 1581 1588 23312803
Goyal MS Vlassenko AG Blazey TM Su Y Couture LE Durbin TJ Bateman RJ Benzinger TL Morris JC Raichle ME 2017 Loss of brain aerobic glycolysis in normal human aging Cell Metab 26 353 360 e3 28768174
Graham SH Liu H 2017 Life and death in the trash heap: the ubiquitin proteasome pathway and UCHL1 in brain aging, neurodegenerative disease and cerebral ischemia Ageing Res Rev 34 30 38 27702698
Griffioen KJ Rothman SM Ladenheim B Wan R Vranis N Hutchison E Okun E Cadet JL Mattson MP 2013 Dietary energy intake modifies brainstem autonomic dysfunction caused by mutant α-synuclein Neurobiol Aging 34 928 935 22883907
Grimm A Eckert A 2017 Brain aging and neurodegeneration: from a mitochondrial point of view J Neurochem 143 418 431 28397282
Grünewald A Rygiel KA Hepplewhite PD Morris CM Picard M Turnbull DM 2016 Mitochondrial DNA depletion in respiratory chain-deficient Parkinson disease neurons Ann Neurol 79 366 378 26605748
Guix FX Uribesalgo I Coma M Muñoz FJ 2005 The physiology and pathophysiology of nitric oxide in the brain Prog Neurobiol 76 126 152 16115721
Gurung S Agbaga MP Myers DA 2016 Cognitive differences between Sprague-Dawley rats selectively bred for sensitivity or resistance to diet induced obesity Behav Brain Res 311 122 130 27173431
Gwon AR Park JS Arumugam TV Kwon YK Chan SL Kim SH Baik SH Yang S Yun YK Choi Y 2012 Oxidative lipid modification of nicastrin enhances amyloidogenic γ-secretase activity in Alzheimer’s disease Aging Cell 11 559 568 22404891
Halagappa VK Guo Z Pearson M Matsuoka Y Cutler RG Laferla FM Mattson MP 2007 Intermittent fasting and caloric restriction ameliorate age-related behavioral deficits in the triple-transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 26 212 220 17306982
Halliwell B 2001 Role of free radicals in the neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic implications for antioxidant treatment Drugs Aging 18 685 716 11599635
Hao S Dey A Yu X Stranahan AM 2016 Dietary obesity reversibly induces synaptic stripping by microglia and impairs hippocampal plasticity Brain Behav Immun 51 230 239 26336035
Hariri N Thibault L 2010 High-fat diet-induced obesity in animal models Nutr Res Rev 23 270 299 20977819
Harrison DE Strong R Sharp ZD Nelson JF Astle CM Flurkey K Nadon NL Wilkinson JE Frenkel K Carter CS 2009 Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice Nature 460 392 395 19587680
Heise KF Zimerman M Hoppe J Gerloff C Wegscheider K Hummel FC 2013 The aging motor system as a model for plastic changes of GABA-mediated intracortical inhibition and their behavioral relevance J Neurosci 33 9039 9049 23699515
Heppner FL Ransohoff RM Becher B 2015 Immune attack: the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurosci 16 358 372 25991443
Heyward FD Gilliam D Coleman MA Gavin CF Wang J Kaas G Trieu R Lewis J Moulden J Sweatt JD 2016 Obesity weighs down memory through a mechanism involving the neuroepigenetic dysregulation of Sirt1 J Neurosci 36 1324 1335 26818519
Hong S Beja-Glasser VF Nfonoyim BM Frouin A Li S Ramakrishnan S Merry KM Shi Q Rosenthal A Barres BA 2016 Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models Science 352 712 716 27033548
Hood DA Tryon LD Carter HN Kim Y Chen CC 2016 Unravelling the mechanisms regulating muscle mitochondrial biogenesis Biochem J 473 2295 2314 27470593
Hou Y Ouyang X Wan R Cheng H Mattson MP Cheng A 2012 Mitochondrial superoxide production negatively regulates neural progenitor proliferation and cerebral cortical development Stem Cells 30 2535 2547 22949407
Hou Y Lautrup S Cordonnier S Wang Y Croteau DL Zavala E Zhang Y Moritoh K O’Connell JF Baptiste BA 2018 NAD+ supplementation normalizes key Alzheimer’s features and DNA damage responses in a new AD mouse model with introduced DNA repair deficiency Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115 E1876 E1885 29432159
Iacopino AM Christakos S 1990 Specific reduction of calcium-binding protein (28-kilodalton calbindin-D) gene expression in aging and neurodegenerative diseases Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87 4078 4082 2140897
Ikematsu N Dallas ML Ross FA Lewis RW Rafferty JN David JA Suman R Peers C Hardie DG Evans AM 2011 Phosphorylation of the voltage-gated potassium channel Kv2.1 by AMP-activated protein kinase regulates membrane excitability Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 18132 18137 22006306
Imam SZ Karahalil B Hogue BA Souza-Pinto NC Bohr VA 2006 Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA-repair capacity of various brain regions in mouse is altered in an age-dependent manner Neurobiol Aging 27 1129 1136 16005114
Intlekofer KA Cotman CW 2013 Exercise counteracts declining hippocampal function in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 57 47 55 22750524
Jaarsma D van der Pluijm I de Waard MC Haasdijk ED Brandt R Vermeij M Rijksen Y Maas A van Steeg H Hoeijmakers JH van der Horst GT 2011 Age-related neuronal degeneration: complementary roles of nucleotide excision repair and transcription-coupled repair in preventing neuropathology PLoS Genet 7 e1002405 22174697
Jack CR Jr Petersen RC Xu YC Waring SC O’Brien PC Tangalos EG Smith GE Ivnik RJ Kokmen E 1997 Medial temporal atrophy on MRI in normal aging and very mild Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 49 786 794 9305341
Jack CR Jr Shiung MM Weigand SD O’Brien PC Gunter JL Boeve BF Knopman DS Smith GE Ivnik RJ Tangalos EG Petersen RC 2005 Brain atrophy rates predict subsequent clinical conversion in normal elderly and amnestic MCI Neurology 65 1227 1231 16247049
Jahanshahi M Rothwell JC 2017 Inhibitory dysfunction contributes to some of the motor and non-motor symptoms of movement disorders and psychiatric disorders Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 372 1 10
Janowitz D Wittfeld K Terock J Freyberger HJ Hegenscheid K Völzke H Habes M Hosten N Friedrich N Nauck M 2015 Association between waist circumference and gray matter volume in 2344 individuals from two adult community-based samples Neuroimage 122 149 157 26256530
Jaskelioff M Muller FL Paik JH Thomas E Jiang S Adams AC Sahin E Kost-Alimova M Protopopov A Cadiñanos J 2011 Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice Nature 469 102 106 21113150
Jayaraman A Lent-Schochet D Pike CJ 2014 Diet-induced obesity and low testosterone increase neuroinflammation and impair neural function J Neuroinflammation 11 162 25224590
Jiang HC Hsu JM Yen CP Chao CC Chen RH Pan CL 2015 Neural activity and CaMKII protect mitochondria from fragmentation in aging Caenorhabditis elegans neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 8768 8773 26124107
Kalia LV Lang AE 2015 Parkinson’s disease Lancet 386 896 912 25904081
Kapogiannis D Mattson MP 2011 Disrupted energy metabolism and neuronal circuit dysfunction in cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Lancet Neurol 10 187 198 21147038
Kapogiannis D Boxer A Schwartz JB Abner EL Biragyn A Masharani U Frassetto L Petersen RC Miller BL Goetzl EJ 2015 Dysfunctionally phosphorylated type 1 insulin receptor substrate in neural-derived blood exosomes of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 29 589 596 25342129
Kashiwaya Y Takeshima T Mori N Nakashima K Clarke K Veech RL 2000 D-beta-hydroxybutyrate protects neurons in models of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 5440 5444 10805800
Kashiwaya Y Bergman C Lee JH Wan R King MT Mughal MR Okun E Clarke K Mattson MP Veech RL 2013 A ketone ester diet exhibits anxiolytic and cognition-sparing properties, and lessens amyloid and tau pathologies in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 34 1530 1539 23276384
Kato T Inui Y Nakamura A Ito K 2016 Brain fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET in dementia Ageing Res Rev 30 73 84 26876244
Keller JN Pang Z Geddes JW Begley JG Germeyer A Waeg G Mattson MP 1997 Impairment of glucose and glutamate transport and induction of mitochondrial oxidative stress and dysfunction in synaptosomes by amyloid beta-peptide: role of the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal J Neurochem 69 273 284 9202320
Keller JN Hanni KB Markesbery WR 2000 Possible involvement of proteasome inhibition in aging: implications for oxidative stress Mech Ageing Dev 113 61 70 10708250
Keller JN Gee J Ding Q 2002 The proteasome in brain aging Ageing Res Rev 1 279 293 12039443
Kerr JS Adriaanse BA Greig NH Mattson MP Cader MZ Bohr VA Fang EF 2017 Mitophagy and Alzheimer’s disease: cellular and molecular mechanisms Trends Neurosci 40 151 166 28190529
Kim GW Chan PH 2001 Oxidative stress and neuronal DNA fragmentation mediate age-dependent vulnerability to the mitochondrial toxin, 3-nitropropionic acid, in the mouse striatum Neurobiol Dis 8 114 126 11162245
Kim SJ Son TG Park HR Park M Kim MS Kim HS Chung HY Mattson MP Lee J 2008 Curcumin stimulates proliferation of embryonic neural progenitor cells and neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus J Biol Chem 283 14497 14505 18362141
Kindler S Kreienkamp HJ 2012 Dendritic mRNA targeting and translation Adv Exp Med Biol 970 285 305 22351061
Klingelhoefer L Reichmann H 2015 Pathogenesis of Parkinson disease–the gut-brain axis and environmental factors Nat Rev Neurol 11 625 636 26503923
Knott EP Assi M Rao SN Ghosh M Pearse DD 2017 Phospho-diesterase inhibitors as a therapeutic approach to neuroprotection and repair Int J Mol Sci 18 1 10
Koopmans SJ Schuurman T 2015 Considerations on pig models for appetite, metabolic syndrome and obese type 2 diabetes: From food intake to metabolic disease Eur J Pharmacol 759 231 239 25814261
Krishnamurthi RV Feigin VL Forouzanfar MH Mensah GA Connor M Bennett DA Moran AE Sacco RL Anderson LM Truelsen T Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, Risk Factors Study 2010 (GBD 2010); GBD Stroke Experts Group 2013 Global and regional burden of first-ever ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke during 1990–2010: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 Lancet Glob Health 1 e259 e281 25104492
Kullmann S Schweizer F Veit R Fritsche A Preissl H 2015 Compromised white matter integrity in obesity Obes Rev 16 273 281 25676886
Kullmann S Heni M Hallschmid M Fritsche A Preissl H Häring HU 2016 Brain insulin resistance at the crossroads of metabolic and cognitive disorders in humans Physiol Rev 96 1169 1209 27489306
L’Episcopo F Tirolo C Testa N Caniglia S Morale MC Impagnatiello F Pluchino S Marchetti B 2013 Aging-induced Nrf2-ARE pathway disruption in the subventricular zone drives neurogenic impairment in parkinsonian mice via PI3K-Wnt/β-catenin dysregulation J Neurosci 33 1462 1485 23345222
Labuschagne CF Stigter EC Hendriks MM Berger R Rokach J Korswagen HC Brenkman AB 2013 Quantification of in vivo oxidative damage in Caenorhabditis elegans during aging by endogenous F3-isoprostane measurement Aging Cell 12 214 223 23279719
Lane-Donovan C Philips GT Herz J 2014 More than cholesterol transporters: lipoprotein receptors in CNS function and neurodegeneration Neuron 83 771 787 25144875
Langston JW 1996 The etiology of Parkinson’s disease with emphasis on the MPTP story Neurology 47 Suppl 3 S153 S160 8959984
Lazarov O Mattson MP Peterson DA Pimplikar SW van Praag H 2010 When neurogenesis encounters aging and disease Trends Neurosci 33 569 579 20961627
Leal SL Yassa MA 2013 Perturbations of neural circuitry in aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease Ageing Res Rev 12 823 831 23380151
Leandro GS Sykora P Bohr VA 2015 The impact of base excision DNA repair in age-related neurodegenerative diseases Mutat Res 776 31 39 26255938
Lee Y Heo G Lee KM Kim AH Chung KW Im E Chung HY Lee J 2017 Neuroprotective effects of 2,4-dinitrophenol in an acute model of Parkinson’s disease Brain Res 1663 184 193 28322751
Lee JJ Sanchez-Martinez A Zarate AM Benincá C Mayor U Clague MJ Whitworth AJ 2018 Basal mitophagy is widespread in Drosophila but minimally affected by loss of Pink1 or parkin J Cell Biol 217 1613 1622 29500189
Leslie SW Chandler LJ Barr EM Farrar RP 1985 Reduced calcium uptake by rat brain mitochondria and synaptosomes in response to aging Brain Res 329 177 183 3978439
Leverenz JB Yu CE Schellenberg GD 1998 Aging-associated neuropathology in Werner syndrome Acta Neuropathol 96 421 424 9797008
Levin O Fujiyama H Boisgontier MP Swinnen SP Summers JJ 2014 Aging and motor inhibition: a converging perspective provided by brain stimulation and imaging approaches Neurosci Biobehav Rev 43 100 117 24726575
Li Y Perry T Kindy MS Harvey BK Tweedie D Holloway HW Powers K Shen H Egan JM Sambamurti K 2009 GLP-1 receptor stimulation preserves primary cortical and dopaminergic neurons in cellular and rodent models of stroke and Parkinsonism Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 1285 1290 19164583
Li Y Duffy KB Ottinger MA Ray B Bailey JA Holloway HW Tweedie D Perry T Mattson MP Kapogiannis D 2010 GLP-1 receptor stimulation reduces amyloid-beta peptide accumulation and cytotoxicity in cellular and animal models of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 19 1205 1219 20308787
Li X Kehoe EG McGinnity TM Coyle D Bokde AL 2015 Modulation of effective connectivity in the default mode network at rest and during a memory task Brain Connect 5 60 67 25390185
Li Y Zhang Y Wang L Wang P Xue Y Li X Qiao X Zhang X Xu T Liu G 2017 Autophagy impairment mediated by S-nitrosation of ATG4B leads to neurotoxicity in response to hyperglycemia Autophagy 13 1145 1160 28633005
Lin SC Hardie DG 2018 AMPK: sensing glucose as well as cellular energy status Cell Metab 27 299 313 29153408
Lin DT Wu J Holstein D Upadhyay G Rourk W Muller E Lechleiter JD 2007 Ca2+ signaling, mitochondria and sensitivity to oxidative stress in aging astrocytes Neurobiol Aging 28 99 111 16359757
Lin X Parisiadou L Sgobio C Liu G Yu J Sun L Shim H Gu XL Luo J Long CX 2012 Conditional expression of Parkinson’s disease-related mutant α-synuclein in the midbrain dopaminergic neurons causes progressive neurodegeneration and degradation of transcription factor nuclear receptor related 1 J Neurosci 32 9248 9264 22764233
Lin AL Coman D Jiang L Rothman DL Hyder F 2014 Caloric restriction impedes age-related decline of mitochondrial function and neuronal activity J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34 1440 1443 24984898
Lindqvist A Mohapel P Bouter B Frielingsdorf H Pizzo D Brundin P Erlanson-Albertsson C 2006 High-fat diet impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in male rats Eur J Neurol 13 1385 1388 17116226
Liu D Lu C Wan R Auyeung WW Mattson MP 2002 Activation of mitochondrial ATP-dependent potassium channels protects neurons against ischemia-induced death by a mechanism involving suppression of Bax translocation and cytochrome c release J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 22 431 443 11919514
Liu D Pitta M Lee JH Ray B Lahiri DK Furukawa K Mughal M Jiang H Villarreal J Cutler RG 2010 The KATP channel activator diazoxide ameliorates amyloid-β and tau pathologies and improves memory in the 3xTgAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 22 443 457 20847430
Liu D Zhang Y Gharavi R Park HR Lee J Siddiqui S Telljohann R Nassar MR Cutler RG Becker KG Mattson MP 2015a The mitochondrial uncoupler DNP triggers brain cell mTOR signaling network reprogramming and CREB pathway upregulation J Neurochem 134 677 692 26010875
Liu W Jalewa J Sharma M Li G Li L Hölscher C 2015b Neuroprotective effects of lixisenatide and liraglutide in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse model of Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience 303 42 50 26141845
Liu H Yang Y Xia Y Zhu W Leak RK Wei Z Wang J Hu X 2017 Aging of cerebral white matter Ageing Res Rev 34 64 76 27865980
Longo VD Mattson MP 2014 Fasting: molecular mechanisms and clinical applications Cell Metab 19 181 192 24440038
Lopez A Lee SE Wojta K Ramos EM Klein E Chen J Boxer AL Gorno-Tempini ML Geschwind DH Schlotawa L Tauopathy Genetics Consortium 2017 A152T tau allele causes neurodegeneration that can be ameliorated in a zebrafish model by autophagy induction Brain 140 1128 1146 28334843
López-Otín C Blasco MA Partridge L Serrano M Kroemer G 2013 The hallmarks of aging Cell 153 1194 1217 23746838
López-Otín C Galluzzi L Freije JMP Madeo F Kroemer G 2016 Metabolic control of longevity Cell 166 802 821 27518560
Lores-Arnaiz S Lombardi P Karadayian AG Orgambide F Cicerchia D Bustamante J 2016 Brain cortex mitochondrial bioenergetics in synaptosomes and non-synaptic mitochondria during aging Neurochem Res 41 353 363 26818758
Lu T Pan Y Kao SY Li C Kohane I Chan J Yankner BA 2004 Gene regulation and DNA damage in the ageing human brain Nature 429 883 891 15190254
Luchsinger JA Gustafson DR 2009 Adiposity, type 2 diabetes, and Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 16 693 704 19387106
Lucke-Wold BP Turner RC Lucke-Wold AN Rosen CL Huber JD 2012 Age and the metabolic syndrome as risk factors for ischemic stroke: improving preclinical models of ischemic stroke Yale J Biol Med 85 523 539 23239952
Macpherson H Formica M Harris E Daly RM 2017 Brain functional alterations in Type 2 Diabetes - A systematic review of fMRI studies Front Neuroendocrinol 47 34 46 28687473
Madabhushi R Pan L Tsai LH 2014 DNA damage and its links to neurodegeneration Neuron 83 266 282 25033177
Madeo F Zimmermann A Maiuri MC Kroemer G 2015 Essential role for autophagy in life span extension J Clin Invest 125 85 93 25654554
Mao X Ou MT Karuppagounder SS Kam TI Yin X Xiong Y Ge P Umanah GE Brahmachari S Shin JH 2016 Pathological α-synuclein transmission initiated by binding lymphocyte-activation gene 3 Science 353 aah3374 27708076
Margineanu DG Niespodziany I Wülfert E 1998 Hippocampal slices from long-term streptozotocin-injected rats are prone to epileptiform responses Neurosci Lett 252 183 186 9739991
Mark RJ Pang Z Geddes JW Uchida K Mattson MP 1997 Amyloid beta-peptide impairs glucose transport in hippocampal and cortical neurons: involvement of membrane lipid peroxidation J Neurosci 17 1046 1054 8994059
Marosi K Kim SW Moehl K Scheibye-Knudsen M Cheng A Cutler R Camandola S Mattson MP 2016 3-Hydroxybutyrate regulates energy metabolism and induces BDNF expression in cerebral cortical neurons J Neurochem 139 769 781 27739595
Marstaller L Williams M Rich A Savage G Burianová H 2015 Aging and large-scale functional networks: white matter integrity, gray matter volume, and functional connectivity in the resting state Neuroscience 290 369 378 25644420
Martin LJ Pan Y Price AC Sterling W Copeland NG Jenkins NA Price DL Lee MK 2006 Parkinson’s disease alpha-synuclein transgenic mice develop neuronal mitochondrial degeneration and cell death J Neurosci 26 41 50 16399671
Martin I Kim JW Lee BD Kang HC Xu JC Jia H Stankowski J Kim MS Zhong J Kumar M 2014 Ribosomal protein s15 phosphorylation mediates LRRK2 neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease Cell 157 472 485 24725412
Martin-Montalvo A de Cabo R 2013 Mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming induced by calorie restriction Antioxid Redox Signal 19 310 320 22901095
Martin-Montalvo A Mercken EM Mitchell SJ Palacios HH Mote PL Scheibye-Knudsen M Gomes AP Ward TM Minor RK Blouin MJ 2013 Metformin improves healthspan and lifespan in mice Nat Commun 4 2192 23900241
Mather M Harley CW 2016 The locus coeruleus: essential for maintaining cognitive function and the aging brain Trends Cogn Sci 20 214 226 26895736
Mattison JA Colman RJ Beasley TM Allison DB Kemnitz JW Roth GS Ingram DK Weindruch R de Cabo R Anderson RM 2017 Caloric restriction improves health and survival of rhesus monkeys Nat Commun 8 14063 28094793
Mattson MP 2000 Apoptosis in neurodegenerative disorders Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1 120 129 11253364
Mattson MP 2004 Pathways towards and away from Alzheimer’s disease Nature 430 631 639 15295589
Mattson MP 2009 Roles of the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal in obesity, the metabolic syndrome, and associated vascular and neurodegenerative disorders Exp Gerontol 44 625 633 19622391
Mattson MP 2012 Energy intake and exercise as determinants of brain health and vulnerability to injury and disease Cell Metab 16 706 722 23168220
Mattson MP 2015a Late-onset dementia: a mosaic of prototypical pathologies modifiable by diet and lifestyle NPJ Aging Mech Dis 1 15003 28642821
Mattson MP 2015b Lifelong brain health is a lifelong challenge: from evolutionary principles to empirical evidence Ageing Res Rev 20 37 45 25576651
Mattson MP Meffert MK 2006 Roles for NF-kappaB in nerve cell survival, plasticity, and disease Cell Death Differ 13 852 860 16397579
Mattson MP Rychlik B 1990 Glia protect hippocampal neurons against excitatory amino acid-induced degeneration: involvement of fibroblast growth factor Int J Dev Neurosci 8 399 415 2251934
Mattson MP Rychlik B Chu C Christakos S 1991 Evidence for calcium-reducing and excito-protective roles for the calcium-binding protein calbindin-D28k in cultured hippocampal neurons Neuron 6 41 51 1670921
Mattson MP Cheng B Davis D Bryant K Lieberburg I Rydel RE 1992 beta-Amyloid peptides destabilize calcium homeostasis and render human cortical neurons vulnerable to excitotoxicity J Neurosci 12 376 389 1346802
Mattson MP Cheng B Culwell AR Esch FS Lieberburg I Rydel RE 1993 Evidence for excitoprotective and intraneuronal calcium-regulating roles for secreted forms of the beta-amyloid precursor protein Neuron 10 243 254 8094963
Mattson MP Maudsley S Martin B 2004 A neural signaling triumvirate that influences ageing and age-related disease: insulin/IGF-1, BDNF and serotonin Ageing Res Rev 3 445 464 15541711
Mattson MP Gleichmann M Cheng A 2008 Mitochondria in neuroplasticity and neurological disorders Neuron 60 748 766 19081372
Mattson MP Moehl K Ghena N Schmaedick M Cheng A 2018 Intermittent metabolic switching, neuroplasticity and brain health Nat Rev Neurosci 19 63 80
McEwen BS Morrison JH 2013 The brain on stress: vulnerability and plasticity of the prefrontal cortex over the life course Neuron 79 16 29 23849196
McNeilly AD Williamson R Sutherland C Balfour DJ Stewart CA 2011 High fat feeding promotes simultaneous decline in insulin sensitivity and cognitive performance in a delayed matching and non-matching to position task Behav Brain Res 217 134 141 20974195
McQuail JA Frazier CJ Bizon JL 2015 Molecular aspects of age-related cognitive decline: the role of GABA signaling Trends Mol Med 21 450 460 26070271
Melov S Schneider JA Day BJ Hinerfeld D Coskun P Mirra SS Crapo JD Wallace DC 1998 A novel neurological phenotype in mice lacking mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase Nat Genet 18 159 163 9462746
Mendonca GV Pezarat-Correia P Vaz JR Silva L Heffernan KS 2017 Impact of aging on endurance and neuromuscular physical performance: the role of vascular senescence Sports Med 47 583 598 27459861
Menzies FM Fleming A Caricasole A Bento CF Andrews SP Ashkenazi A Füllgrabe J Jackson A Jimenez Sanchez M Karabiyik C 2017 Autophagy and neurodegeneration: pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities Neuron 93 1015 1034 28279350
Ming GL Song H 2011 Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain: significant answers and significant questions Neuron 70 687 702 21609825
Molofsky AV Slutsky SG Joseph NM He S Pardal R Krishnamurthy J Sharpless NE Morrison SJ 2006 Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors and neurogenesis during ageing Nature 443 448 452 16957738
Moloney AM Griffin RJ Timmons S O’Connor R Ravid R O’Neill C 2010 Defects in IGF-1 receptor, insulin receptor and IRS-1/2 in Alzheimer’s disease indicate possible resistance to IGF-1 and insulin signalling Neurobiol Aging 31 224 243 18479783
Montgomery SL Mastrangelo MA Habib D Narrow WC Knowlden SA Wright TW Bowers WJ 2011 Ablation of TNF-RI/RII expression in Alzheimer’s disease mice leads to an unexpected enhancement of pathology: implications for chronic pan-TNF-α suppressive therapeutic strategies in the brain Am J Pathol 179 2053 2070 21835156
Morozov YM Datta D Paspalas CD Arnsten AFT 2017 Ultra-structural evidence for impaired mitochondrial fission in the aged rhesus monkey dorsolateral prefrontal cortex Neurobiol Aging 51 9 18 28027494
Morselli E Fuente-Martin E Finan B Kim M Frank A Garcia-Caceres C Navas CR Gordillo R Neinast M Kalainayakan SP 2014 Hypothalamic PGC-1α protects against high-fat diet exposure by regulating ERα Cell Rep 9 633 645 25373903
Moskowitz MA Lo EH Iadecola C 2010 The science of stroke: mechanisms in search of treatments Neuron 67 181 198 20670828
Murray AJ Knight NS Cole MA Cochlin LE Carter E Tchabanenko K Pichulik T Gulston MK Atherton HJ Schroeder MA 2016 Novel ketone diet enhances physical and cognitive performance FASEB J 30 4021 4032 27528626
Nagtegaal AP Rainey RN van der Pluijm I Brandt RM van der Horst GT Borst JG Segil N 2015 Cockayne syndrome group B (Csb) and group a (Csa) deficiencies predispose to hearing loss and cochlear hair cell degeneration in mice J Neurosci 35 4280 4286 25762674
Neidl R Schneider A Bousiges O Majchrzak M Barbelivien A de Vasconcelos AP Dorgans K Doussau F Loeffler JP Cassel JC Boutillier AL 2016 Late-life environmental enrichment induces acetylation events and nuclear factor κB-dependent regulations in the hippocampus of aged rats showing improved plasticity and learning J Neurosci 36 4351 4361 27076430
Neth BJ Craft S 2017 Insulin resistance and Alzheimer’s disease: bioenergetic linkages Front Aging Neurosci 9 345 29163128
Niccoli T Cabecinha M Tillmann A Kerr F Wong CT Cardenes D Vincent AJ Bettedi L Li L Grönke S 2016 Increased glucose transport into neurons rescues Aβ toxicity in Drosophila Curr Biol 26 2291 2300 27524482
Nigam SM Xu S Kritikou JS Marosi K Brodin L Mattson MP 2017 Exercise and BDNF reduce Aβ production by enhancing α-secretase processing of APP J Neurochem 142 286 296 28382744
Nixon RA 2003 The calpains in aging and aging-related diseases Ageing Res Rev 2 407 418 14522243
Nixon RA 2013 The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease Nat Med 19 983 997 23921753
Norden DM Godbout JP 2013 Review: microglia of the aged brain: primed to be activated and resistant to regulation Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 39 19 34 23039106
Okun E Griffioen KJ Mattson MP 2011 Toll-like receptor signaling in neural plasticity and disease Trends Neurosci 34 269 281 21419501
Okun E Barak B Saada-Madar R Rothman SM Griffioen KJ Roberts N Castro K Mughal MR Pita MA Stranahan AM 2012 Evidence for a developmental role for TLR4 in learning and memory PLoS One 7 e47522 23071817
Okun E Griffioen KJ Rothman S Wan R Cong WN De Cabo R Martin-Montalvo A Levette A Maudsley S Martin B 2014 Toll-like receptors 2 and 4 modulate autonomic control of heart rate and energy metabolism Brain Behav Immun 36 90 100 24145051
Olanow CW Bartus RT Volpicelli-Daley LA Kordower JH 2015 Trophic factors for Parkinson’s disease: To live or let die Mov Disord 30 1715 1724 26769457
Palop JJ Mucke L 2016 Network abnormalities and interneuron dysfunction in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurosci 17 777 792 27829687
Pandya JD Pauly JR Nukala VN Sebastian AH Day KM Korde AS Maragos WF Hall ED Sullivan PG 2007 Post-injury administration of mitochondrial uncouplers increases tissue sparing and improves behavioral outcome following traumatic brain injury in rodents J Neurotrauma 24 798 811 17518535
Pandya JD Grondin R Yonutas HM Haghnazar H Gash DM Zhang Z Sullivan PG 2015 Decreased mitochondrial bioenergetics and calcium buffering capacity in the basal ganglia correlates with motor deficits in a nonhuman primate model of aging Neurobiol Aging 36 1903 1913 25726361
Pandya JD Royland JE MacPhail RC Sullivan PG Kodavanti PR 2016 Age- and brain region-specific differences in mitochondrial bioenergetics in Brown Norway rats Neurobiol Aging 42 25 34 27143418
Papaioannou N Tooten PC van Ederen AM Bohl JR Rofina J Tsangaris T Gruys E 2001 Immunohistochemical investigation of the brain of aged dogs. I Detection of neurofibrillary tangles and of 4-hydroxynonenal protein, an oxidative damage product, in senile plaques Amyloid 8 11 21 11293821
Parikh I Guo J Chuang KH Zhong Y Rempe RG Hoffman JD Armstrong R Bauer B Hartz AM Lin AL 2016 Caloric restriction preserves memory and reduces anxiety of aging mice with early enhancement of neurovascular functions Aging (Albany NY) 8 2814 2826 27829242
Park L Anrather J Girouard H Zhou P Iadecola C 2007 Nox2-derived reactive oxygen species mediate neurovascular dysregulation in the aging mouse brain J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27 1908 1918 17429347
Paul A Belton A Nag S Martin I Grotewiel MS Duttaroy A 2007 Reduced mitochondrial SOD displays mortality characteristics reminiscent of natural aging Mech Ageing Dev 128 706 716 18078670
Pedersen WA Chan SL Mattson MP 2000 A mechanism for the neuroprotective effect of apolipoprotein E: isoform-specific modification by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal J Neurochem 74 1426 1433 10737598
Perluigi M Swomley AM Butterfield DA 2014 Redox proteomics and the dynamic molecular landscape of the aging brain Ageing Res Rev 13 75 89 24374232
Pickrell AM Youle RJ 2015 The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson’s disease Neuron 85 257 273 25611507
Poehler AM Xiang W Spitzer P May VE Meixner H Rockenstein E Chutna O Outeiro TF Winkler J Masliah E Klucken J 2014 Autophagy modulates SNCA/α-synuclein release, thereby generating a hostile microenvironment Autophagy 10 2171 2192 25484190
Pollard AK Craig EL Chakrabarti L 2016 Mitochondrial complex 1 activity measured by spectrophotometry is reduced across all brain regions in ageing and more specifically in neurodegeneration PLoS One 11 e0157405 27333203
Porges EC Woods AJ Edden RA Puts NA Harris AD Chen H Garcia AM Seider TR Lamb DG Williamson JB Cohen RA 2017 Frontal gamma-aminobutyric acid concentrations are associated with cognitive performance in older adults Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging 2 38 44 28217759
Porte Y Buhot MC Mons N 2008 Alteration of CREB phosphorylation and spatial memory deficits in aged 129T2/Sv mice Neurobiol Aging 29 1533 1546 17478013
Prehn K Jumpertz von Schwartzenberg R Mai K Zeitz U Witte AV Hampel D Szela AM Fabian S Grittner U Spranger J Flöel A 2017 Caloric restriction in older adults-differential effects of weight loss and reduced weight on brain structure and function Cereb Cortex 27 1765 1778 26838769
Rademakers R Neumann M Mackenzie IR 2012 Advances in understanding the molecular basis of frontotemporal dementia Nat Rev Neurol 8 423 434 22732773
Raefsky SM Mattson MP 2017 Adaptive responses of neuronal mitochondria to bioenergetic challenges: Roles in neuroplasticity and disease resistance Free Radic Biol Med 102 203 216 27908782
Raichlen DA Alexander GE 2017 Adaptive capacity: an evolutionary neuroscience model linking exercise, cognition, and brain health Trends Neurosci 40 408 421 28610948
Ransohoff RM 2016 How neuroinflammation contributes to neurodegeneration Science 353 777 783 27540165
Regnell CE Hildrestrand GA Sejersted Y Medin T Moldestad O Rolseth V Krokeide SZ Suganthan R Luna L Bjørås M Bergersen LH 2012 Hippocampal adult neurogenesis is maintained by Neil3-dependent repair of oxidative DNA lesions in neural progenitor cells Cell Rep 2 503 510 22959434
Rekik K Francés B Valet P Dray C Florian C 2017 Cognitive deficit in hippocampal-dependent tasks in Werner syndrome mouse model Behav Brain Res 323 68 77 28119126
Richardson BD Ling LL Uteshev VV Caspary DM 2013 Reduced GABA(A) receptor-mediated tonic inhibition in aged rat auditory thalamus J Neurosci 33 1218 1227a 23325258
Richter-Levin G Segal M 1996 Serotonin, aging and cognitive functions of the hippocampus Rev Neurosci 7 103 113 8819205
Rodriguez-Oroz MC Jahanshahi M Krack P Litvan I Macias R Bezard E Obeso JA 2009 Initial clinical manifestations of Parkinson’s disease: features and pathophysiological mechanisms Lancet Neurol 8 1128 1139 19909911
Rolyan H Scheffold A Heinrich A Begus-Nahrmann Y Langkopf BH Hölter SM Vogt-Weisenhorn DM Liss B Wurst W Lie DC 2011 Telomere shortening reduces Alzheimer’s disease amyloid pathology in mice Brain 134 2044 2056 21672962
Rose CR Felix L Zeug A Dietrich D Reiner A Henneberger C 2018 Astroglial glutamate signaling and uptake in the hippocampus Front Mol Neurosci 10 451 29386994
Rothblum-Oviatt C Wright J Lefton-Greif MA McGrath-Morrow SA Crawford TO Lederman HM 2016 Ataxia telangiectasia: a review Orphanet J Rare Dis 11 159 27884168
Ryan BJ Hoek S Fon EA Wade-Martins R 2015 Mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy in Parkinson’s: from familial to sporadic disease Trends Biochem Sci 40 200 210 25757399
Sala-Llonch R Bartrés-Faz D Junqué C 2015 Reorganization of brain networks in aging: a review of functional connectivity studies Front Psychol 6 663 26052298
Santos RX Correia SC Zhu X Smith MA Moreira PI Castellani RJ Nunomura A Perry G 2013 Mitochondrial DNA oxidative damage and repair in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Antioxid Redox Signal 18 2444 2457 23216311
Sanz A Caro P Ibañez J Gómez J Gredilla R Barja G 2005 Dietary restriction at old age lowers mitochondrial oxygen radical production and leak at complex I and oxidative DNA damage in rat brain J Bioenerg Biomembr 37 83 90 15906153
Sapolsky RM 1999 Glucocorticoids, stress, and their adverse neurological effects: relevance to aging Exp Gerontol 34 721 732 10579633
Saura CA Cardinaux JR 2017 Emerging roles of CREB-regulated transcription coactivators in brain physiology and pathology Trends Neurosci 40 720 733 29097017
Schafer DP Lehrman EK Kautzman AG Koyama R Mardinly AR Yamasaki R Ransohoff RM Greenberg ME Barres BA Stevens B 2012 Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner Neuron 74 691 705 22632727
Schapira AH Olanow CW Greenamyre JT Bezard E 2014 Slowing of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease: future therapeutic perspectives Lancet 384 545 555 24954676
Scheibye-Knudsen M 2016 Neurodegeneration in accelerated aging Dan Med J 63 1 10
Scheltens P Blennow K Breteler MM de Strooper B Frisoni GB Salloway S Van der Flier WM 2016 Alzheimer’s disease Lancet 388 505 517 26921134
Schildknecht S Gerding HR Karreman C Drescher M Lashuel HA Outeiro TF Di Monte DA Leist M 2013 Oxidative and nitrative alpha-synuclein modifications and proteostatic stress: implications for disease mechanisms and interventions in synucleinopathies J Neurochem 125 491 511 23452040
Schliebs R Arendt T 2011 The cholinergic system in aging and neuronal degeneration Behav Brain Res 221 555 563 21145918
Sepe S Milanese C Gabriels S Derks KW Payan-Gomez C van IJcken WF Rijksen YM Nigg AL Moreno S Cerri S 2016 Inefficient DNA repair is an aging-related modifier of Parkinson’s disease Cell Rep 15 1866 1875 27210754
Shah SZA Zhao D Hussain T Yang L 2017 Role of the AMPK pathway in promoting autophagic flux via modulating mitochondrial dynamics in neurodegenerative diseases: Insight into prion diseases Ageing Res Rev 40 51 63 28903070
Shi Q Colodner KJ Matousek SB Merry K Hong S Kenison JE Frost JL Le KX Li S Dodart JC 2015 Complement C3-deficient mice fail to display age-related hippocampal decline J Neurosci 35 13029 13042 26400934
Shi H Deng HX Gius D Schumacker PT Surmeier DJ Ma YC 2017 Sirt3 protects dopaminergic neurons from mitochondrial oxidative stress Hum Mol Genet 26 1915 1926 28369333
Shih AY Imbeault S Barakauskas V Erb H Jiang L Li P Murphy TH 2005 Induction of the Nrf2-driven antioxidant response confers neuroprotection during mitochondrial stress in vivo J Biol Chem 280 22925 22936 15840590
Shimabukuro MK Langhi LG Cordeiro I Brito JM Batista CM Mattson MP Mello Coelho Vd 2016 Lipid-laden cells differentially distributed in the aging brain are functionally active and correspond to distinct phenotypes Sci Rep 6 23795 27029648
Shimura H Schlossmacher MG Hattori N Frosch MP Trockenbacher A Schneider R Mizuno Y Kosik KS Selkoe DJ 2001 Ubiquitination of a new form of alpha-synuclein by parkin from human brain: implications for Parkinson’s disease Science 293 263 269 11431533
Siddiqui A Bhaumik D Chinta SJ Rane A Rajagopalan S Lieu CA Lithgow GJ Andersen JK 2015 Mitochondrial quality control via the PGC1α-TFEB signaling pathway is compromised by parkin Q311X mutation but independently restored by rapamycin J Neurosci 35 12833 12844 26377470
Simon R Shiraishi K 1990 N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist reduces stroke size and regional glucose metabolism Ann Neurol 27 606 611 2163236
Simpson IA Chundu KR Davies-Hill T Honer WG Davies P 1994 Decreased concentrations of GLUT1 and GLUT3 glucose transporters in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 35 546 551 8179300
Sleiman SF Henry J Al-Haddad R El Hayek L Abou Haidar E Stringer T Ulja D Karuppagounder SS Holson EB Ratan RR 2016 Exercise promotes the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) through the action of the ketone body β-hydroxybutyrate eLife 5 e15092 27253067
Snow WM Stoesz BM Kelly DM Albensi BC 2014 Roles for NF-κB and gene targets of NF-κB in synaptic plasticity, memory, and navigation Mol Neurobiol 49 757 770 24122352
Son TG Camandola S Arumugam TV Cutler RG Telljohann RS Mughal MR Moore TA Luo W Yu QS Johnson DA 2010 Plumbagin, a novel Nrf2/ARE activator, protects against cerebral ischemia J Neurochem 112 1316 1326 20028456
Spilman P Podlutskaya N Hart MJ Debnath J Gorostiza O Bredesen D Richardson A Strong R Galvan V 2010 Inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin abolishes cognitive deficits and reduces amyloid-beta levels in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 5 e9979 20376313
Stahon KE Bastian C Griffith S Kidd GJ Brunet S Baltan S 2016 Age-related changes in axonal and mitochondrial ultrastructure and function in white matter J Neurosci 36 9990 10001 27683897
Stephan AH Madison DV Mateos JM Fraser DA Lovelett EA Coutellier L Kim L Tsai HH Huang EJ Rowitch DH 2013 A dramatic increase of C1q protein in the CNS during normal aging J Neurosci 33 13460 13474 23946404
Stevens B Allen NJ Vazquez LE Howell GR Christopherson KS Nouri N Micheva KD Mehalow AK Huberman AD Stafford B 2007 The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination Cell 131 1164 1178 18083105
Stillman CM Weinstein AM Marsland AL Gianaros PJ Erickson KI 2017 Body-brain connections: the effects of obesity and behavioral interventions on neurocognitive aging Front Aging Neurosci 9 115 28507516
Stoll EA Cheung W Mikheev AM Sweet IR Bielas JH Zhang J Rostomily RC Horner PJ 2011 Aging neural progenitor cells have decreased mitochondrial content and lower oxidative metabolism J Biol Chem 286 38592 38601 21900249
Stranahan AM Mattson MP 2012 Recruiting adaptive cellular stress responses for successful brain ageing Nat Rev Neurosci 13 209 216 22251954
Stranahan AM Arumugam TV Cutler RG Lee K Egan JM Mattson MP 2008a Diabetes impairs hippocampal function through glucocorticoid-mediated effects on new and mature neurons Nat Neurosci 11 309 317 18278039
Stranahan AM Norman ED Lee K Cutler RG Telljohann RS Egan JM Mattson MP 2008b Diet-induced insulin resistance impairs hippocampal synaptic plasticity and cognition in middle-aged rats Hippocampus 18 1085 1088 18651634
Stutzmann GE Mattson MP 2011 Endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) handling in excitable cells in health and disease Pharmacol Rev 63 700 727 21737534
Sullivan PG Bruce-Keller AJ Rabchevsky AG Christakos S Clair DK Mattson MP Scheff SW 1999 Exacerbation of damage and altered NF-kappaB activation in mice lacking tumor necrosis factor receptors after traumatic brain injury J Neurosci 19 6248 6256 10414954
Sulzer D Mosharov E Talloczy Z Zucca FA Simon JD Zecca L 2008 Neuronal pigmented autophagic vacuoles: lipofuscin, neuromelanin, and ceroid as macroautophagic responses during aging and disease J Neurochem 106 24 36 18384642
Surmeier DJ Schumacker PT Guzman JD Ilijic E Yang B Zampese E 2017a Calcium and Parkinson’s disease Biochem Biophys Res Commun 483 1013 1019 27590583
Surmeier DJ Obeso JA Halliday GM 2017b Parkinson’s disease is not simply a prion disorder J Neurosci 37 9799 9807 29021297
Swerdlow RH 2016 Bioenergetics and metabolism: a bench to bedside perspective J Neurochem 139 Suppl 2 126 135 26968700
Sykora P Misiak M Wang Y Ghosh S Leandro GS Liu D Tian J Baptiste BA Cong WN Brenerman BM 2015 DNA polymerase β deficiency leads to neurodegeneration and exacerbates Alzheimer disease phenotypes Nucleic Acids Res 43 943 959 25552414
Takeda S Sato N Uchio-Yamada K Sawada K Kunieda T Takeuchi D Kurinami H Shinohara M Rakugi H Morishita R 2010 Diabetes-accelerated memory dysfunction via cerebrovascular inflammation and Abeta deposition in an Alzheimer mouse model with diabetes Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 7036 7041 20231468
Tang SC Arumugam TV Xu X Cheng A Mughal MR Jo DG Lathia JD Siler DA Chigurupati S Ouyang X 2007 Pivotal role for neuronal Toll-like receptors in ischemic brain injury and functional deficits Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 13798 13803 17693552
Tang SC Wang YC Li YI Lin HC Manzanero S Hsieh YH Phipps S Hu CJ Chiou HY Huang YS 2013 Functional role of soluble receptor for advanced glycation end products in stroke Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 33 585 594 23288172
Tapia-Arancibia L Aliaga E Silhol M Arancibia S 2008 New insights into brain BDNF function in normal aging and Alzheimer disease Brain Res Brain Res Rev 59 201 220
Texel SJ Mattson MP 2011 Impaired adaptive cellular responses to oxidative stress and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Antioxid Redox Signal 14 1519 1534 20849373
Thambisetty M Beason-Held LL An Y Kraut M Metter J Egan J Ferrucci L O’Brien R Resnick SM 2013 Impaired glucose tolerance in midlife and longitudinal changes in brain function during aging Neurobiol Aging 34 2271 2276 23608110
Thibault O Hadley R Landfield PW 2001 Elevated postsynaptic [Ca2+]i and L-type calcium channel activity in aged hippocampal neurons: relationship to impaired synaptic plasticity J Neurosci 21 9744 9756 11739583
Thibault O Anderson KL DeMoll C Brewer LD Landfield PW Porter NM 2013 Hippocampal calcium dysregulation at the nexus of diabetes and brain aging Eur J Pharmacol 719 34 43 23872402
Thomsen K Yokota T Hasan-Olive MM Sherazi N Fakouri NB Desler C Regnell CE Larsen S Rasmussen LJ Dela F 2018 Initial brain aging: heterogeneity of mitochondrial size is associated with decline in complex I-linked respiration in cortex and hippocampus Neurobiol Aging 61 215 224 29031832
Toescu EC Verkhratsky A Landfield PW 2004 Ca2+ regulation and gene expression in normal brain aging Trends Neurosci 27 614 620 15374673
Tse KH Herrup K 2017 DNA damage in the oligodendrocyte lineage and its role in brain aging Mech Ageing Dev 161 Pt A 37 50 27235538
Umarova RM 2017 Adapting the concepts of brain and cognitive reserve to post-stroke cognitive deficits: Implications for understanding neglect Cortex 97 327 338 28049565
Vaarmann A Mandel M Zeb A Wareski P Liiv J Kuum M Antsov E Liiv M Cagalinec M Choubey V Kaasik A 2016 Mitochondrial biogenesis is required for axonal growth Development 143 1981 1992 27122166
Valla J Berndt JD Gonzalez-Lima F 2001 Energy hypometabolism in posterior cingulate cortex of Alzheimer’s patients: superficial laminar cytochrome oxidase associated with disease duration J Neurosci 21 4923 4930 11425920
Vermeij WP Dollé ME Reiling E Jaarsma D Payan-Gomez C Bombardieri CR Wu H Roks AJ Botter SM van der Eerden BC 2016 Restricted diet delays accelerated ageing and genomic stress in DNA-repair-deficient mice Nature 537 427 431 27556946
VerPlank JJS Goldberg AL 2017 Regulating protein breakdown through proteasome phosphorylation Biochem J 474 3355 3371 28947610
Volkow ND Wang GJ Telang F Fowler JS Goldstein RZ Alia-Klein N Logan J Wong C Thanos PK Ma Y Pradhan K 2009 Inverse association between BMI and prefrontal metabolic activity in healthy adults Obesity (Silver Spring) 17 60 65 18948965
Vossel KA Tartaglia MC Nygaard HB Zeman AZ Miller BL 2017 Epileptic activity in Alzheimer’s disease: causes and clinical relevance Lancet Neurol 16 311 322 28327340
Walker JM Dixit S Saulsberry AC May JM Harrison FE 2017 Reversal of high fat diet-induced obesity improves glucose tolerance, inflammatory response, β-amyloid accumulation and cognitive decline in the APP/PSEN1 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 100 87 98 28108292
Wang H Wang R Carrera I Xu S Lakshmana MK 2016 TFEB overexpression in the P301S model of tauopathy mitigates increased PHF1 levels and lipofuscin puncta and rescues memory deficits eNeuro 3 ENEURO.0042-16.2016
Weidenheim KM Dickson DW Rapin I 2009 Neuropathology of Cockayne syndrome: evidence for impaired development, premature aging, and neurodegeneration Mech Ageing Dev 130 619 636 19647012
Weinstein PR Hong S Sharp FR 2004 Molecular identification of the ischemic penumbra Stroke 35 Suppl 1 2666 2670 15486332
Weisová P Concannon CG Devocelle M Prehn JH Ward MW 2009 Regulation of glucose transporter 3 surface expression by the AMP-activated protein kinase mediates tolerance to glutamate excitation in neurons J Neurosci 29 2997 3008 19261894
Willette AA Bendlin BB McLaren DG Canu E Kastman EK Kosmatka KJ Xu G Field AS Alexander AL Colman RJ 2010 Age-related changes in neural volume and microstructure associated with interleukin-6 are ameliorated by a calorie-restricted diet in old rhesus monkeys Neuroimage 51 987 994 20298794
Wong YC Krainc D 2017 α-synuclein toxicity in neurodegeneration: mechanism and therapeutic strategies Nat Med 23 1 13
Wosiski-Kuhn M Erion JR Gomez-Sanchez EP Gomez-Sanchez CE Stranahan AM 2014 Glucocorticoid receptor activation impairs hippocampal plasticity by suppressing BDNF expression in obese mice Psycho-neuroendocrinology 42 165 177
Wright LS Prowse KR Wallace K Linskens MH Svendsen CN 2006 Human progenitor cells isolated from the developing cortex undergo decreased neurogenesis and eventual senescence following expansion in vitro Exp Cell Res 312 2107 2120 16631163
Xilouri M Stefanis L 2016 Chaperone mediated autophagy in aging: starve to prosper Ageing Res Rev 32 13 21 27484893
Yang Y Liu X Long Y Wang F Ding JH Liu SY Sun YH Yao HH Wang H Wu J Hu G 2005 Systematic administration of iptakalim, an ATP-sensitive potassium channel opener, prevents rotenone-induced motor and neurochemical alterations in rats J Neurosci Res 80 442 449 15795934
Yang JL Tadokoro T Keijzers G Mattson MP Bohr VA 2010 Neurons efficiently repair glutamate-induced oxidative DNA damage by a process involving CREB-mediated upregulation of apurinic endonuclease 1 J Biol Chem 285 28191 28199 20573957
Yang DS Stavrides P Mohan PS Kaushik S Kumar A Ohno M Schmidt SD Wesson D Bandyopadhyay U Jiang Y 2011 Reversal of autophagy dysfunction in the TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease ameliorates amyloid pathologies and memory deficits Brain 134 258 277 21186265
Yang JL Lin YT Chuang PC Bohr VA Mattson MP 2014 BDNF and exercise enhance neuronal DNA repair by stimulating CREB-mediated production of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 Neuromolecular Med 16 161 174 24114393
Yao J Hamilton RT Cadenas E Brinton RD 2010 Decline in mitochondrial bioenergetics and shift to ketogenic profile in brain during reproductive senescence Biochim Biophys Acta 1800 1121 1126 20538040
Yarchoan M Toledo JB Lee EB Arvanitakis Z Kazi H Han LY Louneva N Lee VM Kim SF Trojanowski JQ Arnold SE 2014 Abnormal serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 is associated with tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease and tauopathies Acta Neuropathol 128 679 689 25107476
Yew KS Cheng EM 2015 Diagnosis of acute stroke Am Fam Physician 91 528 536 25884860
Yin F Sancheti H Patil I Cadenas E 2016 Energy metabolism and inflammation in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease Free Radic Biol Med 100 108 122 27154981
Yu ZF Mattson MP 1999 Dietary restriction and 2-deoxyglucose administration reduce focal ischemic brain damage and improve behavioral outcome: evidence for a preconditioning mechanism J Neurosci Res 57 830 839 10467254
Yun J Finkel T 2014 Mitohormesis Cell Metab 19 757 766 24561260
Zaidi A Gao J Squier TC Michaelis ML 1998 Age-related decrease in brain synaptic membrane Ca2+-ATPase in F344/BNF1 rats Neurobiol Aging 19 487 495 9880051
Zhang J Rane G Dai X Shanmugam MK Arfuso F Samy RP Lai MK Kappei D Kumar AP Sethi G 2016a Ageing and the telomere connection: an intimate relationship with inflammation Ageing Res Rev 25 55 69 26616852
Zhang H Ryu D Wu Y Gariani K Wang X Luan P D’Amico D Ropelle ER Lutolf MP Aebersold R 2016b NAD+ repletion improves mitochondrial and stem cell function and enhances life span in mice Science 352 1436 1443 27127236
Zhang S Eitan E Mattson MP 2017 Early involvement of lysosome dysfunction in the degeneration of cerebral cortical neurons caused by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal J Neurochem 140 941 954 28095639
Zhang S Eitan E Wu TY Mattson MP 2018 Intercellular transfer of pathogenic α-synuclein by extracellular vesicles is induced by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal Neurobiol Aging 61 52 65 29035751
Zharikov AD Cannon JR Tapias V Bai Q Horowitz MP Shah V El Ayadi A Hastings TG Greenamyre JT Burton EA 2015 shRNA targeting α-synuclein prevents neurodegeneration in a Parkinson’s disease model J Clin Invest 125 2721 2735 26075822
