LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7605818
1921
Brain Res Bull
Brain Res. Bull.
Brain research bulletin
0361-9230
1873-2747

31054318
6754984
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2019.04.027
NIHMS1050050
Article
Assessing drug response in engineered brain microenvironments
Tate Kinsley M. 1
Munson Jennifer M. 1*
1 Virginia Tech-Wake Forest School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA
* Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Dr. Jennifer M. Munson, 349 Kelly Hall, 325 Stanger Street (MC 0298), Blacksburg, VA 24061, Phone: (540) 231-7896, Fax: (540) 231-9738, jm4kt@vt.edu
12 9 2019
01 5 2019
8 2019
01 8 2020
150 2134
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

1. Introduction

The human brain is a complex organ consisting of multiple cell types, extracellular matrix, proteins, biophysical forces, and architectural cues. Normal interactions between these various physiological units are crucial for homeostasis, movement, learning and memory formation in humans. Adverse neurological conditions disrupt normal brain function leading to often dire physiological consequences. The prevalence of certain neurological conditions including Alzheimer’s disease, neoplasms, epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, Huntington’s disease and cerebral palsy is worldwide (Pringsheim et al., 2014). Not only are these diseases prevalent, but they are difficult to treat, with complex cellular and extracellular interactions often resultant in behavioral responses. While patient observations have provided meaningful insight into these neurological conditions, the underlying cellular mechanisms cannot be directly examined in patients. Research is currently being conducted to better understand and determine potential treatment options for each of these neurological conditions; this research requires models of disease that recreate phenotypes associated with the primary disorder. Mouse models have long been the central mode to study neurological disorders, yet they are costly and require significant expertise. As knowledge of the underlying biological bases of neurological disease has grown, and in vitro cell culture techniques and mathematical modeling have advanced, we are now able to use new preclinical models that increase throughput and approachability.

Engineered neural microenvironments are tissue engineered models comprising neurons, glial cells and other nervous system elements including physiologically relevant structures, forces and dimensions. Using the principles of tissue engineering to create these tissues in cell culture systems, they can model some physiology of either the healthy tissue or the underlying pathology. While engineered models have been designed to mimic the spinal cord (Joung et al., 2018) and peripheral nerve microenvironments (Liao et al., 2016), typically research studies examining conditions related to these portions of the nervous system rely on animal models. The brain microenvironment has been modeled and studied in many in vitro systems. This review will focus specifically on engineered microenvironments of the brain.

Researchers are currently using engineered brain microenvironments to observe specific interactions that occur in the brain, as these models provide the simplicity of tissue culture to examine cell-environment and cell-drug interactions. Engineered brain microenvironments can incorporate various types of technology to model specific aspects of the human brain. We have sorted and quantified engineered brain microenvironments used during the past 10 years to model neurological conditions in Figure 1. Microfluidic devices, microtissue technologies and biomaterial scaffolds have previously been used to model the brain microenvironment for examination of pathology-specific mechanisms and drug discovery and testing. Table 1 provides examples of engineered brain microenvironments used to model neurological conditions for drug testing and discovery. Engineered brain microenvironments produced via the use of microfluidic device technology incorporate the use of physical chambers and fluid flow to create a defined cellular environment. Microtissue models, often referred to as spheroid or organoid models, are produced using embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and rely on the ability of cells to self-secrete their own matrix. Alternatively, using biomaterials provides a matrix in which neural and glial cells can be grown in a 3D environment. Biomaterial scaffolds are often used in conjunction with tissue culture inserts, commonly referred to as transwell inserts. Tissue culture inserts are structures that can be inserted into a well plate to create two compartments via separation by a porous membrane. The various technologies to engineer brain microenvironments can be used individually or in combination to tailor a model to answer a specific question and allow for specific interactions between cells, the extracellular matrix, signaling molecules and drug compounds to be observed in vitro.

One structure in the human brain often studied in central nervous system drug development is the blood brain barrier (BBB). This barrier is responsible for preventing harmful compounds from entering into the brain parenchyma. Historically, BBB studies use to be conducted primarily in animal models, however, engineered microenvironments offer a cheaper alternative for evaluating drug response in the brain before lengthy pre-clinical animal studies are conducted. In vitro models of the BBB are often used to examine permeability of potential neuroactive drugs and vary in design based on the components of the native BBB included and the technology used to produce the model. Examples of in vitro models of the BBB are provided in Table 2. The main cell types associated with the BBB include brain vascular endothelial cells, astrocytes, pericytes and neurons (Maoz et al., 2018). Some engineered BBB models include all of these cell types, while others choose to incorporate a portion of the pre-mentioned cell types or combinations with other cell types found in the brain. The species of animal(s) in which the cells are acquired also varies between BBB models.

The use of brain endothelial cells, astrocytes and pericytes from rodents have been used in many studies to mimic the BBB to observe important BBB characteristics including tight junction formation, permeability and trans-endothelial electrical resistance levels. In rodent models of the BBB, typically tight junction formation between brain endothelial cells is observed, as well as high trans-endothelial electric resistance and low passive permeability (Thomsen et al., 2015). The use of cells derived from animal species other than rodents can be beneficial since a higher number of cells can be acquired from larger animals and also other animal species including pigs better mimic human disease progression (Thomsen et al., 2015). Thomsen and colleagues previously completed a study to evaluate the effects of incorporating porcine versus rat cells into in vitro models of the BBB (Thomsen et al., 2015). Multiple in vitro models were produced using tissue culture inserts with co-cultures of porcine brain endothelial cells combined with either porcine or rat astrocytes and pericytes. The model consisting of solely porcine cells displayed comparable results regarding tight junction formation, trans-endothelial electric resistance and efflux transporter protein expression to the tri-culture with porcine brain endothelial cells and rat astrocytes and microglia, suggesting porcine derived cells could be a good alternative to use in BBB in vitro models (Thomsen et al., 2015).

While BBB related cells derived from animal models can be conveniently acquired, the use of human cells to mimic the BBB microenvironment is ideal as this provides the ability for patient-specific BBB models to be produced. Moaz and colleagues have previously created a microfluidic device composed of three coupled chips with human vascular endothelial cells, pericytes, astrocytes and neurons to model the BBB and examine the role of individual cell types in BBB metabolic function (Maoz et al., 2018). The metabolic contribution of each cell type was observed through the use of distinct compartments to mimic the perivascular space and brain parenchyma. Physiologically-relevant luminal and interstitial fluid flow was also incorporated into this device using cell culture media to mimic both cerebral spinal fluid and blood. Prior to this study, it was unknown how brain vasculature affects neuronal metabolism. Metabolic interactions between the brain vasculature and neurons in the microfluidic BBB model lead to an increase in the synthesis and secretion of glutamate and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), suggesting brain vasculature can contribute to underlying mechanisms in neurological disorders and conditions (Maoz et al., 2018). The variation in design of the BBB models, including the cell types and structures used in each model, displays the ability of engineered brain microenvironments to be customized to meet the needs of a study.

Engineered brain microenvironments are used to create patient-specific models of various neurological conditions including: Alzheimer’s disease (Lee et al., 2016), idiopathic Autism (Mariani et al., 2015; P. Wang et al., 2017), glioblastoma (Dai et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2016; Harris et al., 2018; Kingsmore et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2012; Munson et al., 2013), microcephaly (Lancaster et al., 2013), lissencephaly (Bershteyn et al., 2017) and medulloblastoma (Ivanov et al., 2015). Engineered brain microenvironments designed to be patient-specific can allow for examination of characteristics of a patient’s brain and direct testing of the efficacy of therapeutic drugs for a particular patient. These models have the ability to further the field of personalized medicine. Fan and colleagues, created patient-specific GBM spheroids in a microfluidic device and simultaneously tested the spheroids with various combinations of the anti-cancer drugs Pitavastatin (100 μM) and Irinotecan (100 μM) (Fan et al., 2016). Both Pitavastatin and Irinotecan inhibit cancer cell growth. The created microfluidic device was a high throughput system able to develop 24 GBM spheroids and test multiple combinations and concentrations of the two anti-cancer drugs. This device featured a “Christmas tree” array of microfluidic channels which allowed for various drug concentrations and combinations to be produced. The combined treatment of Pitavastatin (6 μM) and Irinotecan (40 μM) induced the greatest decrease in cell viability, as measured semi-quantitatively through trypan blue staining (Fan et al., 2016). The potential of engineered brain microenvironments to further the field of personalized medicine makes these models appealing for use in drug development and planning of patient treatment regimens. Access to personalized medicine is extremely important for patients with neurological conditions like GBM where patient heterogeneity is common.

There is currently a great need for models that can better replicate the brain microenvironment to be used to test and develop therapeutic treatments for many neurological disease pathologies. While many research studies are being conducted to develop therapeutics for neurological conditions, it is not uncommon for experimental drugs to fail during clinical trials. This problem can especially be seen in the development of therapeutic treatments for Alzheimer’s disease. Between the years of 2002 and 2012, there were 413 Alzheimer’s disease related clinical trials in the United States (Cummings et al., 2014). These trials consisted of 124 Phase 1 trials, 206 Phase 2 trials and 83 Phase 3 trials (Cummings et al., 2014). Out of all of these trials only 0.4% were successful (Cummings et al., 2014). This extremely low success rate suggests a need for different approaches to examine drug response in Alzheimer’s disease. Similarly to Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease does not have a therapeutic approach that can halt progression (Uenaka et al., 2018). While Parkinson’s disease has been studied extensively, current methods of assessing drug response have been insufficient. This review summarizes research related to the use of engineered brain microenvironments to assess drug response in various neurological conditions and will offer perspectives on improving current in vitro drug screening systems.

1.2 Components in an engineered brain microenvironment

To design an engineered brain microenvironment, one must take into account the various elements of the native tissue microenvironment. The native brain microenvironment consists of multiple cell types, the extracellular matrix, specific structures and physical and chemical gradients. This information is summarized in Figure 2. The primary cell types found in the brain include neuronal, glial and endothelial cell types. Neurons are electrically excitable cells which are responsible for transmitting chemical and electrical signals throughout the brain. Signals are passed between neurons through special junctions called synapses, which form on dendritic protrusions. When a neuron becomes depolarized, calcium channels open and allow for an influx of calcium into the pre-synaptic neuron. The influx of calcium causes intracellular synaptic vesicles to merge with the neuronal membrane and release neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. The neurotransmitters bind to ionic channel receptors on the post-synaptic neuron, which causes the channels to open. Ions flow into the post-synaptic neuron to induce either an excitatory or inhibitory response. Disruption of normal synaptic formation has been implicated in multiple neurological conditions including autism, schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease (Penzes et al., 2011). There are many types of neurons that vary in morphology, function and location within the brain. The classification of the various types of neurons is an ongoing process, which recently has been reviewed by Zeng and Sanes (Zeng and Sanes, 2017). The classification of neuron subgroups contributes to identifying vulnerable neuronal populations for neurological disease states (Zeng and Sanes, 2017). Parkinson’s disease is characterized by the loss of dopamine producing neurons in the substantia nigra; therefore, dopaminergic neurons should be included when modeling this disorder in vitro. Surmeier and colleagues recently reviewed Parkinson’s disease-associated neuronal vulnerability in which they discuss common characteristics of the neurons that make them vulnerable to dysfunction and cell death (Surmeier et al., 2017).

Incorporating neurons into engineered microenvironments of neurological conditions is necessary for conditions in which neuronal structure and function is altered. Neurons are sourced from both animal models and from humans. Animal models allow for the direct isolation of neurons and neural stem cells. Direct isolation of human neurons cannot be performed pre-mortem, preventing the direct observation of neuronal characteristics of living patients. An increasingly popular method for obtaining patient-specific neurons is the collection and trans-differentiation of patient skin fibroblasts (Chen et al., 2013). Patient fibroblasts are collected via a biopsy, converted into iPSCs and differentiated into patient-specific neurons. This method is also commonly used in the production of cerebral organoids. The use of iPSCs to generate patient-specific neurons allows for engineered brain microenvironments to be tailored to each patient and for underlying genetic mechanisms in neurological conditions to be observed.

Glial cells contribute to a large portion of the cells found in the brain and have been implicated in many neurological disease states. Glial cells consist of astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes (Jäkel and Dimou, 2017). Astrocytes are star-shaped cells that play a key role in formation and maintenance of the BBB, provide neuronal metabolic and trophic support, maintain water homeostasis, induce synaptogenesis and synaptic transmission, and recycle neurotransmitters (Arranz and De Strooper, 2019). In Alzheimer’s disease astrocytes display altered morphology and play a role in neuroinflammation. Astrocytes sourced from rodents are often used to study the underlying mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease; however, rodent astrocytes vary in morphology and function in comparison to human astrocytes. Similar to neurons, glial cells cannot directly be isolated from humans and must be differentiated from iPSCs to be examined actively. Microglia are histiocyte-type cells that contribute to the immune response in the brain. Microglia and astrocytes are both involved in synaptogenesis, apoptosis and angiogenesis (Bilbo and Schwarz, 2009). Microglia work to remove harmful pathogens from the brain and play a key role in neuroinflammation. Neuroinflammation has been implicated in many neurological disease states including Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease (Stephenson et al., 2018). Stephenson and colleagues recently reviewed neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative diseases of the central nervous system (Stephenson et al., 2018). Other immune cells, such as T-cells, also contribute to the immune response of the brain. To accurately model the immune response in neurological conditions in vitro, immune cells must be included in the engineered brain microenvironment. Oligodendrocytes, the third subpopulation of glial cells, are responsible for producing myelin that encases and insulates neuronal axons, allowing for saltatory conduction of electrical neuronal signals (Jäkel and Dimou, 2017). The incorporation of oligodendrocytes into in vitro models of neurological conditions in which demyelination occurs, like multiple sclerosis, is necessary to examine the impact of the disease on oligodendrocytes.

Another key aspect of the brain microenvironment is the extracellular matrix (ECM), which functions to provide cellular support and contributes to many cellular functions including migration and proliferation. The ECM is a 3D network composed of macromolecules, glycosaminoglycans, proteoglycans and other proteins. One of the main components of the brain ECM is hyaluronan (HA). The extracellular matrix plays a key role in cell survival, organization and plasticity, as previously reviewed by Dityatev and colleagues (Dityatev et al., 2010). Other physical structures of the brain include epithelial layers and white matter tracts. Interactions between the different cell types, the ECM and brain structures are further affected by biophysical forces and biochemical gradients. These gradients include interstitial fluid pressure, ECM stiffness, cytokine and growth factors and other environmental conditions such as oxygen content and pH.

To design an engineered brain microenvironment, it is necessary to have a clear purpose for the use of the model. Though this seems like an obvious statement, defining the design parameters and end uses of such systems can prove difficult. If the engineered model is to test a specific hypothesis, it is crucial to include aspects of the brain microenvironment that are relevant to the proposed hypothesis. For example, if a research group wanted to test the hypothesis that trifluoperazine (an antipsychotic drug) reduces GBM invasion, it would be important to include GBM cells and a physical environment in which the cells have the potential to invade. However, inclusion of other components like oligodendrocytes may be superfluous. In addition, if this model is to act as a patient-specific model, then relevant cell types derived from the patient should be included. Determining the purpose of the model is key to select the appropriate elements to include in an engineered brain microenvironment. Another important consideration is the dimensionality of the model. Previous studies show the dimensionality of a model can impact the efficacy of drugs (Dai et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2018) Two separate studies completed in the context of glioma by Yu and colleagues, and Dai and colleagues compare the ability of a drug to reduce the viability of cancer cells in 2D versus 3D. Yu and colleagues compared the efficacy of chemotherapeutics in GBM spheroids and monolayers (Yu et al., 2018). Dai and colleagues used bioprinting techniques to create 3D cultures of glioma cells and compared the drug response in the resulting model to monolayers of the glioma cells (Dai et al., 2016). Both studies revealed the cancer drugs have a greater effect on cancer cell viability in 2D culture versus 3D. In the context of a specific neurological condition, the relevancy of the individual aspects of the native brain microenvironment should be considered when designing an engineered microenvironment.

2. Strategies for Creating Engineered Brain Microenvironments

2.1 Microfluidic Devices

A popular strategy for creating engineered brain microenvironments is to use microfluidic devices in which neural cell growth can be directed using a specific pattern of channels. A microfluidic chip produced by Taylor and colleagues was used to guide extension of neuronal axons into a separate compartment from the soma (Taylor et al., 2005). The device featured two vertical microfluidic channels connected by 150 horizontal microgrooves. This particular design allowed for the isolation of axons in the horizontal microgrooves by confining the neuronal cell bodies to the vertical microfluidic channels. Isolation was achieved in this microfluidic device through the use of compartmental differences in fluid volume to create a gradient (Taylor et al., 2005). The isolation of neuronal axons allows for the examination of synapse formation along neuronal axons, neurite extension and axonal injury (Taylor et al., 2015, 2010, 2005). Additionally, the role of axon guidance cue netrin-1 on growth cone turning previously has been examined using microfluidic devices (Kothapalli et al., 2011; Taylor et al., 2015). When exposed to the guidance cue netrin-1, growth cones appear to turn towards the gradient, suggesting chemogradients impact axonal extension (Kothapalli et al., 2011; Taylor et al., 2015). While these studies utilized differences in fluid pressure to create passive fluid flow, other microfluidic devices incorporate the use of pumps to achieve tunable flow rates. The cells within a microfluidic device can be kept alive provided nutrients are readily available, waste can be removed and normal gas exchange is achievable.

Microfluidic devices have been used to examine the effects of fluid flow in the brain microenvironment (Park et al., 2015). When exposed to interstitial-like fluid flow in a microfluidic device, neuronal spheroids expressed increased complexity and robustness compared to spheroids not exposed to fluid flow (Park et al., 2015). This suggests interstitial fluid flow increases the transport of nutrients, oxygen, cytokines and waste causing increased spheroid viability. When treated with amyloid-β, the presence of fluid flow decreased spheroid viability, suggesting fluid flow could be implicated in Alzheimer’s disease pathology (Park et al., 2015), paralleling recent in vivo findings (Da Mesquita et al., 2018). The incorporation of fluid flow into microfluidic engineered brain microenvironments may provide insight of flow-mediated mechanisms affecting the efficacy of neurological drugs.

Microfluidic devices provide a method requiring only a small amount of a drug and a small number of cells to be able to evaluate the effect of the drug on the cellular microenvironment. The cytotoxic capabilities of the cancer drugs ifosfamide (IFO) and temozolomide (TMZ) have been examined in a novel GBM-liver microfluidic device (Ma et al., 2012). This device featured a combination of two compartments consisting of poly(latic acid) scaffolds containing glioma or liver cells. TMZ was less effective on glioma cells when metabolized by the liver cells and IFO reduced the viability of the glioma cells only once it was metabolized by the liver cells (Ma et al., 2012). These results suggests the incorporation of other cell types from outside the brain may be important for an accurate evaluation of drugs used to treat neurological conditions.

2.2 Microtissues

To create microtissue models, also referred to as spheroid or organoid models, cells are cultured in 3D to form a simple microtissue or micro-organ made entirely of cells and their self-secreted matrix. Lancaster and Knoblich recently reviewed microtissue models for all organs (Lancaster and Knoblich, 2014). Typically the cell types used to create an organoid are differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) or embryonic stem cells. In some cases skin fibroblasts are taken from patients and reprogrammed into iPSCs, which allows for patient-specific models to be produced, furthering the field of personalized medicine. While microfluidic devices are beneficial for directing cell growth and applying biophysical forces, organoids are beneficial in that they are self-organizing and naturally form an extracellular matrix. By secreting their own matrix and organizing into region specific cellular patterns organoids more closely resemble native tissue architecture. As previously mentioned the dimensionality of an engineered brain microenvironment can alter the drug response (Dai et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2018). This technology is an attractive option for modelling neurological conditions due to the 3D nature of organoids and their ability to formulate patient-specific models (Bian et al., 2018; Lancaster et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2016; Watanabe et al., 2017; H. Xu et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2018). Neurological conditions previously modeled using microtissue technologies include: glioblastoma (GBM) (Bian et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2018), microcephaly (Cugola et al., 2016; Dang et al., 2016; Garcez et al., 2016; Lancaster et al., 2013; Qian et al., 2016; Watanabe et al., 2017), Alzheimer’s disease (Lee et al., 2016; Raja et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2018), autism (Mariani et al., 2015; P. Wang et al., 2017), schizophrenia (P. Wang et al., 2017), bipolar disorder (P. Wang et al., 2017), medulloblastoma (Ivanov et al., 2015) and Parkinson’s disease (Son et al., 2017).

Brain organoids range in complexity based on the types of cell populations used to create the microtissue and the length of the culture period required for the relevant structures to form. Brain organoids require 15–80 days to form the physiologically relevant structures and cell populations desired for testing and analysis (Lancaster et al., 2013; Qian et al., 2016). Typically the longer the organoid models grow in culture, the more complex they become. Throughout the developmental process of brain organoids, neuronal organization will occur to form specific layers of neurons which can mimic various regions of the brain. The extensive time and resource commitment for producing organoid models is one downside of this type of engineered microenvironment. Neverless, these microtissue models are popular for modeling the brain microenvironment for a number of diseases. In 2016 Qian and colleagues developed a method to make organoids that mimic the human forebrain microenvironment using a novel mini-bioreactor system they created (Qian et al., 2016). The resulting organoids displayed physiologically relevant cell organization, gene expression and neurogenesis (Qian et al., 2016). The forebrain organoids were used to examine Zika virus-induced microcephaly. Post-exposure to the African strain of the Zika virus, the organoids showed reduction in size (Qian et al., 2016). This mimics microcephaly pathology as reduced head size is the hallmark of the neurodevelopment disorder. Three additional organoid models have been used to mimic microcephaly caused by the Zika virus (Cugola et al., 2016; Dang et al., 2016; Watanabe et al., 2017). The microcephaly organoid model produced by Watanabe and colleagues also displayed decreased organoid size when exposed to the Zika virus (Watanabe et al., 2017). In this study, antibiotics previously examined as potential treatments for the Zika virus were tested in the organoid model. The antibiotics Duramycin and Ivermectin both caused a reduction in Zika mRNA (Watanabe et al., 2017).

While organoids used to study neurological conditions can be derived from patients with a condition, organoids can also be produced using CRISPR-Cas9-mediated mutagenesis to introduce genetic mutations (Bian et al., 2018). Bian and colleagues recently created an organoid model using this method to introduce oncogenic mutations into cerebral organoids. The mutations result in a model that mimics neoplasms similar to glioblastoma and central nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumors (Bian et al., 2018). Using these organoids the effects of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor afatinib was examined. A reduction in tumor cell viability was observed after forty days of treatment with afatinib. (Bian et al., 2018). This study highlights the strength of organoid models to test target-specific drugs with gene editing opposed to trans-differentiated cells.

2.3 Biomaterial Scaffolds

With similar benefits to organoid technology, biomaterial scaffolds allow for three dimensional cell culture while offering more flexibility and control over incorporated cell types and interactions. The types and sources of scaffolds in tissue engineering are extremely diverse (Cornelison and Munson, 2018; Murphy et al., 2017). Scaffolds can be generated using many techniques including electrospinning (Bischel et al., 2016; Jakobsson et al., 2017), hydrogel formation (Frampton et al., 2011), and bioprinting (Dai et al., 2016). Even within each of these techniques, there is a wide variety of materials. Gong and colleagues previously reviewed materials used to model neural differentiation and neurological diseases (Gong et al., 2018). Biomaterial scaffolds are used extensively to examine neural proliferation, differentiation, migration and cell-matrix interactions (Bosi et al., 2015; Frampton et al., 2011; Hajiali et al., 2018; Irons et al., 2008; Kothapalli and Kamm, 2013; Lozano et al., 2015; Schwartz et al., 2015; Stabenfeldt et al., 2010). Stabenfeldt and colleagues created methylcellulose hydrogel scaffolds functionalized with laminin-1 to study interactions between neural stem cells and this extracellular matrix component (Stabenfeldt et al., 2010). Scaffolds with laminin-1 displayed decreased apoptosis, increased neurite extension and increased levels of neuronal and oligodendrocyte precursor markers compared to scaffolds without functionalized laminin-1 (Stabenfeldt et al., 2010). Biomaterial scaffolds can also be used to assess the signaling capabilities of neurons. Ballerini and colleagues previously used elastomeric scaffolds to examine neuronal calcium signaling and neuronal synchronization in 3D versus 2D (Bosi et al., 2015). The 3D scaffolds increased neuronal synchronization and efficiency (Bosi et al., 2015). The characterization of neural cell activity in an engineered scaffold is important in determining whether the engineered scaffold accurately mimics the native microenvironment. Following the characterization of cell survival, phenotypes and metabolism within a tissue engineered scaffold, modifications to the scaffold can then be performed to better mimic the neurological disease microenvironment.

Biomaterials are used individually or in combination with other structural cell culture elements to recreate the brain microenvironment. Biomaterials used to create 3D tissue engineered microenvironments include hydrogels composed of collagen, gelatin, fibrin, gellan gum, hyaluronan, self-assembling peptides, elastin-like polypeptides, and polyethylene glycol (Potjewyd et al., 2018) or decellularized matrices (Hoshiba, 2017). Previously Alzheimer’s disease has been modelled in vitro using collagen matrixes containing amyloid-β (Labour et al., 2016). Amyloid-β aggregation was examined and then compared to post-mortem samples from patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Similar levels of aggregation were observed in the gels. Change in porosity of the matrix was also examined, and large pore size caused increased cell death (Labour et al., 2016). Other advances in studying neurological conditions using engineered scaffolds include creating an in vitro model of the traumatic brain injury microenvironment (Bar-Kochba et al., 2016). To mimic traumatic brain injury at the cellular level, neurons were embedded in a collagen gel and subsequently exposed to compressive forces. The peak strain rates applied to the gels were 10 s−1 and 75 s−1 which resulted in rate-specific injury-induced morphologies. Upon closer examination of the neurons, it was determined that strain on the cell caused neuronal injury instead of the deformation of the extracellular matrix (Bar-Kochba et al., 2016). Another tunable element of scaffolds with cells is the ability to incorporate different cell types at precise ratios and mixtures. Future applications of this model include incorporating other neural cell types to examine how they influence neuronal injury resulting from compressive forces (Bar-Kochba et al., 2016).

Another method by which gel scaffolds can be produced is through the use of bioprinting. Bioprinting involves the 3D printing of biological materials to form a specific structure. Bioprinting can be used to print materials with or without the addition of cells. Heinrich and colleagues recently bioprinted a ‘mini-brain’ model to examine the polarization of macrophages to glioblastoma-associated macrophages through interactions with glioblastoma cells (Heinrich et al., 2019). This model consisted of a 3D printed, brain-shaped 3% w/v gelatin methacryloyl and 4% w/v gelatin scaffold. Various experiments were conducted using this model with either co-cultures or individual cultures of mouse macrophages and glioblastoma cells to examine glioblastoma-associated gene expression. The anti-cancer drug carmustine (BCNU) (550 μM) was tested in the co-culture model where it reduced tumor growth. Additionally two immunomodulatory agents, AS1517499 (250 nM) and BLZ945 (1 μM) were examined in the co-culture model where they caused a reduction in glioblastoma-associated gene expression in both the glioblastoma and macrophage cell types (Heinrich et al., 2019). Bioprinting is a relatively new approach for producing biomaterial scaffolds, but holds promise for future studies in which a scaffold can be designed to match specific structures in the brain.

Tissue culture inserts have been used to model a number of neurological diseases in vitro with complex cell-cell interactions. These systems offer a simple structure that is easily combined with multiple cell types, extracellular matrices, and delivery of cytokines or drugs. A tissue culture insert with a Matrigel-based scaffold featuring familial Alzheimer’s disease human neural progenitor cells has previously been used to model Alzheimer’s in vitro (Choi et al., 2014). The use of mutated neural progenitor cells in this culture system resulted in Alzheimer’s specific pathologies including the formation of amyloid-β plaques and aggregations of phosphorylated tau and filamentous tau. β-and γ-secretase inhibitors were tested in the in vitro model resulting in decreased expression of Alzheimer’s pathologies (Choi et al., 2014). Previously tissue culture inserts have also been used to examine malaria-induced neuroinflammation by co-culturing BV2 microglia and HT22 neurons (Okorji et al., 2016). The anti-inflammatory drug Artemether was shown to have anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in this system. To better understand the underlying mechanisms of this drug, the microglia were transfected with nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 siRNA. Once the microglia were transfected, Artemether no longer caused anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects suggesting the drug response is mediated by this gene (Okorji et al., 2016). Electrospinning has previously been used to generate a thin layer of gelatin fibers for the co-culture of astrocytes and endothelial cells (Bischel et al., 2016). The purpose of this study was to create a cell culture insert to better mimic the tight junctions observed in the native BBB. Commercially available cell culture inserts usually incorporate polyethylene terephthalate, polycarbonate or polytetrafluoroethylene membranes which may prevent the formation of physiologically relevant tight junctions between cell layers. When compared to commercially available inserts, the BBB model using the electrospun membrane was determined to display better transendothelial electrical resistance and permeability to dextran, suggesting this model better mimics tight junctions formed in the native environment (Bischel et al., 2016). The various applications and types of biomaterial scaffolds provide a promising method to model neurological disease in vitro.

2.4 Computational Models

While there are many ways to engineer brain microenvironments in vitro, it is also possible to design brain microenvironments to assess drug response in silico. These computational models provide an innovative way in which patient-specific data is used to examine therapeutic response. Benquet and colleagues previously created computational models using electroencephalogram (EEG) data from patients with Dravet syndrome, a infantile epilepsy disorder (Wendling et al., 2016). The role of depolarizing GABA on EEG activity was observed through the use of a modified neural mass model. This modified model features additional sub-populations of interneurons with population-specific synaptic kinetics. To recreate patient-specific EEG recordings, the postsynaptic potential of depolarizing GABA was adjusted to match patient interictal and ictal patterns (Wendling et al., 2016). The effect of the antiepileptic drugs stiripentol (30 to 300 μM) and clobazam (1 to 100 μM) on neuronal populations was examined in the computational models. Individually the two drugs reduced seizure-like activity, however, a combination of both drugs prevented the formation of an ictal-like pattern suggesting a combination of the two drugs may work better to treat patients with Dravet syndrome (Wendling et al., 2016). The use of computational models to study the pharmacology of therapeutics at the microenvironment level provides an additional method in which drugs can be screened virtually. These models can provide insightful information regarding drug response that can be used in addition to in vitro models.

Alzheimer’s disease previously was computationally modelled by simulating Alzheimer’s disease-associated microglial inflammation to examine potential drug combinations to treat this disease-associated pathology (Anastasio, 2015). This model was generated based off data from previously published biological studies relating to mechanisms by which microglia become inflamed both from aging and the Alzheimer’s disease state. Various combinations of the small molecule drugs auranofin, bortezomib, dasatinib, glimepiride, ibuprofen, naloxone, nicotine, rosiglitazone, ruxolitinib, and thalidomide were examined in the computational model. The combination of glimepiride and ibuprofen was determined to be the most efficacious at reducing Azheimer’s disease-associated microglia inflammation (Anastasio, 2015). The addition of nicotine to this combination also reduced reactive oxygen species in the model (Anastasio, 2015). Computational models provide a method in which specific interactions between cells and other biological components of the brain microenvironment with drugs to be examined virtually.

In 2014, Carpenter and colleagues produced a computational model that could be used to determine blood-brain barrier permeability of new drug compounds (Carpenter et al., 2014). Molecular dynamic simulations were completed for 12 different compounds to mimic diffusion of the compounds across a lipid bilayer, which was meant to mimic the BBB. The diffusion coefficient for each compound was then calculated based off the molecular dynamics simulations and combined with free energy landscape to determine the effective permeability (Carpenter et al., 2014). The resulting effective permeability values were compared with experimental measurements of BBB permeability and were determined to correlate. This suggests that the use of molecular dynamic simulations is a sufficient method to determine BBB permeability of experimental drug compounds.

Computational models also can be used to visualize the effects of biophysical forces on cells. Using a computer aided design software, in vitro engineered brain microenvironments can be modeled and tested using computational simulations. Computational fluid dynamic simulations have previously been used to understand the local transport of various chemotherapeutic drugs from an implanted polymeric wafer to the surrounding area in the brain for the treatment of a tumor (Arifin et al., 2009). This simulation involved a 3D brain tumor geometry derived from magnetic resonance (MR) images. The role of interstitial fluid-induced convection was taken into account using Darcy’s law. It was determined the tumor receives an uneven distribution of chemotherapeutic drug concentration from the wafers (Arifin et al., 2009). The use of computational models can be a good way to understand the underlying fluid mechanics and other mechanisms in drug transport. This information can be used to design better in vitro models of the brain microenvironment for the development and study of neurological conditions.

When designing an in vitro or in vivo experiment to screen drugs for the treatment of neurological diseases, it can be difficult to determine which drugs are the most beneficial to include in a study. Recently, through the use of publicly available data, multiple research groups have been performing in silico drug-repurposing screens for various neurological conditions. Uenaka and colleagues completed this process using genome-wide association studies to determine potential therapeutic drugs for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease (Uenaka et al., 2018). To perform the in silico drug screening method, information was gleaned from multiple databases to define Parkinson’s disease risk genes, proteins with direct protein-protein interactions with risk gene protein products and drug target genes. A portion of the selected target genes were specifically related to the cells and proteins found in the brain microenvironment. Using this information it was determined that 48 genes were targeted by 57 drugs families that had previously been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of other diseases (Uenaka et al., 2018). The use of in silico drug screening prior to in vivo experimentation helped to reduce the number of potential drugs from thousands to 57 canidates. A similar screening procedure was used by Xu and colleagues to identify small-molecule inhibitors of the Zika virus (M. Xu et al., 2016). In this study results from caspase-3 activity assays for SNB-19 cells were used to screen over 6,000 compounds to identify ones that could suppress Zika induced caspase-3 activity. Post-screening, the initial 6,000 compounds were reduced to 116 compounds that could potentially be used to treat Zika virus disease (M. Xu et al., 2016). Drug repurposing-screening through the use of computational modeling therefore allows for many drug compounds to be simultaneously evaluated for potential efficacy in treating neurological diseases. These models have the potential to limit the screening of ineffective drugs in in vitro and in vivo models of neurological diseases during therapeutic testing.

3. Considerations in assessing drugs in engineered microenvironments

3.1 Implementation Strategies and Drug Screening Complications

Thus far, we have covered three subgroups through which the brain microenvironment can be modeled in vitro to examine drug response in neurological conditions including microfluidic devices, microtissue models and biomaterial scaffolds. Figure 3 provides specific examples of engineered GBM models from each subgroup used for therapeutic screening. When engineering systems to specifically screen or test new drugs, there are a number of challenges that exist in the implementation. The use of multiple cell types can lead to difficulties with co-culture methods, combining different cell culture media can lead to viability issues in certain cells. Beneficially, co-culture itself can help to sustain neurons or microglia, which show better viability with astrocytes, requiring less interventional optimization. Selection of parameters for an engineered microenvironment can also be challenging, including cellular densities and ratios, extracellular matrix components and complexity, time in culture, and application of therapies. Each of these parameters must be optimized, and the best parameters for each outcome may vary. Although viability in a system is often the first outcome determined, the disease phenotype and reproducibility are more important for validation of the system. High throughput handling and outcome screening is moving towards automation with the use of robotic liquid handling systems and high content imaging systems (Li et al., 2016). However, these systems are not readily affordable to all labs and are limited currently by availability of probes and primary compatibility with commercially available reagents (Schneider, 2018).

Application of drugs still mostly occurs via addition to static cell culture medium that bathes the tissue engineered microenvironment in a constant concentration of drug. Microfluidics have been utilized to apply drugs in more physiologically relevant manner, including along BBB models which incorporate luminal flow (Booth and Kim, 2012) or tissue engineered microenvironments which incorporate a vascular-like network (Alonzo et al., 2015). Drug application via interstitial fluid flow allows for transient application of drug to cells in order to better emulate the on-off type drug applications that may occur in vivo (Harris et al., 2018; Logsdon et al., 2017). Drug dosing is also difficult to translate from the in vitro scenario to in vivo as the effective dose could change in vivo based on transport of the drug systemically. Use of computational models can overcome issues of scale-up (Azuaje, 2017). However, cells, extracellular matrix, and transport limitations within the tissue once the drug arrives can also effect therapies in unexpected ways. Most drugs have a higher effective dose in 3D vs. 2D culture, for example. Further complicating this scenario when 3D scaffolds are used is the discrepancy in the literature about which drug response calculation is used and how it is implemented, leading to both difficulties in comparing across the literature and in gaining a full understanding of the therapeutic response as the microenvironment becomes more complex (Brooks et al., 2018).

3.2 In vivo vs in vitro model performance

Pre-clinical testing of neurological disorders has traditionally been conducted in animals. Others have reviewed models for neurodegenerative (Laferla et al., 2013), neurodevelopmental (Shevelkin et al., 2014), neuropsychiatric disorders (Nestler and Hyman, 2010), and brain tumors in rodents (Stylli et al., 2015). It is suggested that complex in vitro models could replace animal models. Besides being cheaper and higher throughput than animal models, in vitro models also offer the ability to use an entirely human cell system, examine dynamic cellular level changes, and include only particular elements thought to be important to disease outcomes (or alternatively, test which elements are important). In vitro models, however, still lack many elements that are beneficial in animal models such as delivery of drugs in a systemic manner, meaning intravenous delivery with known scaling of pharmacokinetics from mouse to human. This allows for both determination of off-target effects and accumulation of drug at relevant doses in the brain. Current advances to overcome these difficulties include incorporation of body-on-a-chip systems in conjunction with brain organoids in microfluidic devices (Esch et al., 2015) and use of computational modeling to predict drug circulation and distribution (Fetterly et al., 2008; Zanoni et al., 2016). Another major deficit of in vitro models is the inability to test complex behavioral outcomes. Many neurological disorders are identified based on cognitive or social behaviors that translate from rodent to human. We currently have no set of tests in vitro that mimic these distinctive performance metrics and although progress is being made to find biomarkers and identifiable cellular or tissue-level phenotypes for psychological disorders, we still do not have these for all cases. This fact is a major challenge moving forward in these systems. Even with cancer, which is arguably a psychological disorder, there are debates as to which cellular behavior is most indicative of the disease (e.g. invasion, proliferation, therapeutic resistance) (Knight and Przyborski, 2015). Thus, behavioral outcomes are impossible at this moment within a dish.

3.3 Design and Validation of Engineered Brain Microenvironments

In the design of systems, there is always a balance between complexity of the system and ease of implementation. It is best if engineered brain microenvironments can be designed such that they address a specific question at hand. However, for therapeutic screening this can often be difficult to determine. A system without glial cells, for example, may not readily capture a disease phenotype in neurons, yet addition of glial cells (or other components) complicates the system. Specifically the addition of each component requires optimization of the overall system for viability of cells, extracellular matrix and stability of phenotype and structural elements. Further, the definition of a “good” model system is difficult to pin down. Multiple models have been validated using a number of strategies. A proposed strategy with cancers is to examine gene expression compared to the original patient (Bartlett et al., 2014). However, this comparison is even difficult with mouse models of disease where it was recently found that tumor models implanted in mice as xenografts lose host transcriptional profiles in as little as four passages (Ben-David et al., 2017; Tentler et al., 2012).

Validation can be more straightforward for models of disease with clearly defined phenotypes. For instance, accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques in models of Alzheimer’s is a phenotypic validation strategy that is indicative of one of the major contributors to disease (Tunesi et al., 2016). BBB models can also be validated by testing the transport of drugs across the membrane that are permeable or impermeable (Y. I. Wang et al., 2017). However, for diseases such as cancer, the phenotype becomes much more complex as there are multiple potential outcomes for tumor cells, and the importance of each is patient specific. Generally for any of these models, the phenotype is being compared to an in vivo model, either mouse or human. This can be indicative of the similarity of an in vitro tissue to the native in vivo tissue and often relies on use of histological techniques. Although structure can be indicative of function of tissues, in vitro models may not need to specifically recreate all elements of the tissue structure. Additionally, this definition can become quite complicated since environmental heterogeneity is patient-specific and likely can only be modeled with current techniques employing 3D bioprinting or complex patterning (Albritton and Miller, 2017).

4. Conclusion

Engineered brain microenvironments are a useful tool for in vitro screening of drugs for potential therapies, offering the throughput of many standard cell culture techniques with patient specificity and physiological relevance of animal models. Currently, three major categories of these models exist including self-forming microtissues, microfluidic based cultures, and cells resuspended in conjunction with a biomaterial matrix. There are also many systems that combine these models to best model disease physiology. Although these models are extremely useful, their design and implementation needs to be carefully planned to best rely on results from the therapeutic screenings. Further, consensus in the field as to the correct metric of success is far from reached and thus should be revisited as these systems become more widely used.

Grant support: NIH R37 CA222563 to JMM

Figure 1. Engineered brain microenvironments designed to test therapeutics for neurological diseases and conditions.

In vitro models used to examine specific interactions between brain cell types, the extracellular matrix, environmental conditions, signaling molecules and drug compounds. Each circle corresponds to a category of engineered brain microenvironments. Microtissue models incorporate 3D cell culture techniques in which cells secrete their native matrix. These models are often referred to as organoid and spheroid models. In the top left circle corresponding to microtissue models spheroids composed of multiple cell types are shown suspended in medium (scale bar 20 μm). Microfluidic devices are used to manipulate the growth of cells through the use of structural components of the device and the application of fluid flow. The top right circle corresponding to microfluidic devices displays a device used to direct the growth of neuronal axons (scale bar 1 cm). This image was rendered based on a device created by Taylor and colleagues (Taylor et al., 2005). Scaffolds are often used to mimic the extracellular matrix and provide a structure in which cells can grow similarly to in vivo. The bottom circle corresponding to scaffolds displays astrocytes (shown in green) and microglia (shown in blue) growing within an engineered scaffold submerged in medium (scale bar 10 μm). The cross-over sections between each of these circles represents models that incorporate aspects of multiple engineered brain microenvironment types. The number of references were quantified from the past 10 years of research in which an engineered brain microenvironment was used to model neurological conditions to examine drug response (displayed as numbers beside the various engineered microenvironment titles). (The scaffolds image was produced using and altering images from Servier Medical Art under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license found here: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode)

Figure 2. Elements of the brain microenvironment.

The brain microenvironment (middle image) consists of complex interactions between neural and glial cells, the extracellular matrix, brain structures, biophysical forces and biochemical gradients. Specific features of these interactions are described for each neural and glial cell type. Additional considerations taken into account when designing an engineered brain microenvironment are listed. (This image was produced using and altering images from Servier Medical Art under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license found here: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode)

Figure 3. Engineered glioblastoma (GBM) tumor microenvironments for therapeutic screening.

Examples of engineered microenvironments used to mimic the GBM tumor microenvironment. Each example features a description of the model, the drugs used and the results of the study. (A) The GBM tumor microenvironment is comprised of complex interactions between neural and glial cells and the surrounding environment (This image was produced using and altering images from Servier Medical Art under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license found here: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode). (B) Microfluidic device created by Fan and colleagues (Fan et al., 2016) (This image is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License found here: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). (C) Microtissue model designed by Bian and colleagues (Bian et al., 2018). (D) Bioprinted scaffold mini-brain GBM model created by Heinrich and colleagues (Heinrich et al., 2019).

Table 1: Examples of in vitro engineered brain microenvironments by disorder.

Neurodegenerative Diseases	
Disease	Purpose	Design	Outcome	Reference	
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)	To design a patient specific in vitro model that mimics AD pathologies and can be used for drug discovery.	Patient and control iPSCs were used to develop AD and control brain organoids.	The AD organoids displayed relevant pathologies including; amyloid aggregation, hyperphosphorylated tau protein, and endosome abnormalities. When treated with β-and γ-secretase inhibitors the organoids display decreased amyloid aggregation and tau protein hyperphosphorylation.	(Raja et al., 2016)	
To design an in vitro model of AD that allows for the observation of the neural degeneration microenvironment and the environmental response to drugs.	Patient and control iPSCs were utilized to create AD and control cortical organoids.	The AD organoid response to neuroinflammation, matrix remodeling and various treatments was evaluated. The organoids displayed increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines, matrix remodeling proteins and amyloid β 42.	(Yan et al., 2018)	
To create an in vitro model of AD that displays amyloid-β peptide accumulation and neurofibrillary tangles consisting of hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates.	Familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD) human neural progenitor cells were seeded into a tissue culture insert containing Matrigel.	The use of the mutated FAD NPCs in this culture system resulted in the formation of amyloid-β plaques and aggregations of phosphorylated tau and filamentous tau. When exposed to β-and γ-secretase inhibitors reduction of the AD pathologies was observed.	(Choi et al., 2014)	
To create a model of blood brain barrier (BBB) disruption caused by AD, examine the permeability of the resulting BBB and using this permeability information to identify potential drug treatments.	This model incorporated a tissue culture insert with a layer of mouse brain endothelial cells.	Lucifer Yellow was used to assess the permeability of the BBB model. The resulting permeability was used to screen 1280 potential drug compounds. Seven FDA approved compounds were identified and test on human endothelial cells. Three drugs (etodolac, granisetron and beclomethasone) were determined to protect BBB integrity.	(Qosa et al., 2016)	
To create a physiologically relevant model of the brain microenvironment that can be used to examine AD pathologies.	This model features a microfluidic device in neurospheres can be produced and exposed to control and amyloid-β treated interstitial fluid flow via the use of an osmotic pump.	The neurospheres treated with amyloid-β either in dynamic or static conditions. Decrease viability and increased destruction of neural networks was observed in the neurospheres exposed to amyloid-β through interstitial fluid flow induced by the osmotic pump.	(Park et al., 2015)	
Parkinson’s Disease (PD)	To develop a model of PD that could be used to understand the signaling pathways of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation that is associated with PD.	Patient-specific neurospheres were generated from iPSCs. Additionally intestinal organoids were also produced for further examination of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation.	Gene otology was used to examine the effects of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation. Dysfunction of synaptic vesicle trafficking was expressed in both the neurospheres and intestinal organoids. Disrupted synaptic vesicle trafficking is associated with PD. Increased understanding of the effects of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation can potentially aid in the discovery of drugs for PD.	(Son et al., 2017)	
To create a high-throughput cell toxicity assay to determine the appropriate concentration of 6-OHDA to be used to mimic PD in vitro.	A microfluidic device featuring PC12 cells was created. Neurotoxin fluid was pumped through the microfluidic channel.	Low concentrations of 6-OHDA primarily caused neuronal cell death via apoptosis. At higher concentrations of 6-OHDA necrosis was primarily seen as the cause of neuronal cell death.	(Seidi et al., 2011)	
Neurodevelopmental Disorders	
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)	To design a model of idiopathic autism that can be used to identify potential drug targets for therapeutic treatment.	Patient-specific iPSCs were used to generate neural organoids. The iPSCs were acquired from patients with severe idiopathic autism.	The neural organoids underwent transcriptome and gene network analysis to gene upregulation. Genes associated with cell proliferation, neuronal differentiation and synaptic assembly were identified. Increased levels of GABAergic inhibitory neurons were observed in the neural organoids which was determined to by cause by the transcription factor FOXG1. FOXG1 was identified as a potential drug target for treatment of Autism.	(Mariani et al., 2015)	
Microcephaly	Microcephaly cannot adequately be examined in mouse models, therefore, the intention of this study was to develop an in vitro model of microcephaly.	Skin fibroblast were acquired from a patient with severe microcephaly and reprogrammed into iPSCs. These iPSCs were used to create cerebral organoids.	Premature neuronal differentiation was observed in the patient-derived organoids. The model incorporated in this study provides a new way to examine underlying mechanisms of microcephaly pathology and can potentially be used to develop therapeutic drugs for this condition.	(Lancaster et al., 2013)	
To create a cost effective model of microcephaly induced by the Zika virus that can be used to better understand the underlying mechanisms and potential drug candidates for Zika-induced microcephaly.	Human iPSCs were used to generate forebrain organoids that were subsequently exposed to the African or Asian strain of the Zika virus. The organoids were created using a novel spinning bioreactor system.	Once exposed to the Zika virus the organoids displayed decreased volume of the neuronal-cell layer, which is characteristic of microcephaly. The decreased volume was a result of decreased proliferation and increased cell death. The model used in this study is intended to be used to identify anti-viral drugs to treat Zika and prevent Zika-induced microcephaly.	(Qian et al., 2016)	
To develop a model of the human brain that can be used to understand implications of Zika infection and to test drug compounds that can potentially rescue Zika pathologies.	Cerebral organoids were created using human embryonic stem cells and exposed to the Zika virus.	Once exposed to the Zika virus increased apoptosis of neural progenitor cells occurred and overall growth of the organoids was reduced. The Zika infected organoids were treated with antibiotics that previously have been studied in the context of the Zika virus including; Duramycin, Ivermectin, and Azithromycin. Duramycin and Ivermectin both caused decreased expression of Zika virus mRNA.	(Watanabe et al., 2017)	
Lissencephaly	To design an in vitro model of lissencephaly associated with Miller-Dieker syndrome to understand mechanisms of lissencephaly pathologies.	An organoid model of Miller-Dieker syndrome was produced using patient derived iPSCs.	The Miller-Dieker organoids displayed increased apoptosis and horizontal divisions of neural stem cells. In addition, radial glial-like cells experienced mitotic delays. In comparison to control organoids, increased levels of deep layer neurons were also observed.	(Bershteyn et al., 2017)	
Neuro-oncological Disease	
Glioblastoma (GBM)	To design an in vitro model for high throughput GBM spheroid generation and drug screening.	A microfluidic device made out of poly(ethylene) glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) hydrogel was used in conjunction with GBM U87 cells. This device features multiple channels with microwells that allow for 24 spheroids to be analyzed at one time with multiple drugs.	In this study the drugs Pitavastatin and Irinotecan were simultaneously applied to the GBM spheroids. After the drugs were added to the microfluidic device, decreased organization of the spheroids and increased autophagic cell death was observed.	(Fan et al., 2016)	
To create an in vitro model that recapitulates interactions between GBM cancer cells and the liver to understand the cytotoxicity of anti-cancer drugs.	This model is a microfluidic device that consists of two separate chambers that consist of liver cells and GBM cells. Both of the chambers also included a PLA scaffold. The cells were cultured both in 2D and 3D.	When both liver cells and GBM were cultured in the device and treated with temozolomide, decrease toxicity to the cancer cells was observed both in 2D and 3D. GBM cells that were cultured in 3D experienced less drug-induced cell death than the cancer cells cultured in 2D.	(Ma et al., 2012)	
Medulloblastoma	To develop an in vitro model of medulloblastoma to examine underlying pathologies and the cytotoxic effect of cancer drugs.	This spheroid model was comprised of two cell types including medulloblastoma cells and neural stem cells.	The spheroids were treated with various concentrations of the drug cytotoxic drug etoposide and then cell viability was analyzed using flow cytometry and multiphoton microscopy. A concentration of 10 μM was determined to maximize the tumor cell toxicity while allowing for 40 % neural stem cell survival.	(Ivanov et al., 2015)	

Table 2: Examples of in vitro engineered blood-brain barrier (BBB) models

Design	Cell Types Incorporated	Outcomes	Reference	
Organoid model of the BBB featuring six cortical cell types both from primary cell lines and derived from iPSCs.	The primary human cell types included brain microvascular endothelial cells, pericytes and astrocytes. The remaining cell types (oligodendrocytes, microglia, and neurons) were derived from iPSCs.	The effect of hypoxic conditions on tight junction and adheren-associated protein expression was examined in the organoid model. The organoids were cultured in hypoxic conditions for 24 hours, fixed and stained for claudin-5, ZO-1, β-catenin, and VE-cadherin. Under hypoxic conditions a reduction in β-catenin, and VE-cadherin was observed. Additionally neurotoxicity induced by inorganic mercury was examined in both neural organoids (missing the BBB) and BBB-containing organoids. Significant levels of cell death were observed in the neural organoids versus the BBB-containing organoids, suggesting this BBB model is charge selective.	(Nzou et al., 2018)	
Three coupled microfluidic chips (BBB influx, brain, and BBB efflux) featuring two compartments in each design were utilized to recapitulate two BBB vessels and the brain parenchyma.	Both the influx and efflux BBB chips included human cortical brain microvascular endothelial cells lining the bottom compartment and human cortical astrocytes and pericytes in the top compartment. The brain chip included human neural stem cells and astrocytes within the bottom compartment.	The psychoactive drug methamphetamine (meth) was administered to this BBB model to display its drug screening capabilities. Meth (1.5 mM) was introduced to the system in the BBB influx vascular channel. Meth caused a breakdown in the BBB in the influx chip, where reduced expression of cell-cell junction proteins like VE-cadherin was observed. The meth did not appear to effect the cell-cell junctions in the efflux BBB. Removing meth from the system and culturing the cells in fresh media reversed the effects of the meth administration.	(Maoz et al., 2018)	
Microfluidic device featuring neuronal chamber with astrocytes on top of microchannels lined with brain microvascular endothelial cells. This device also incorporated electrodes for measurement of trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER).	Brain microvascular endothelial cells were derived from human iPSCs and incorporated into the vascular microchannel. Rat primary astrocytes were utilized within the neuronal chamber.	Three drugs (caffeine at 10 μM, cimetidine at 1 μg/mL; and doxorubicin at 2.5 and 10 μM) were used to examine the permeability of the engineered BBB. The permeability values were determined to be 4.85 ± 1.84 × 10−4 cm/s for caffeine, 1.11 ± 0.09 × 10−6 for cimetidine, and 1.54 ± 0.66 × 10−7 cm/s for doxorubicin, which is similar to what is observed in vivo. Doxorubicin (0 – 10 μM) was shown to disrupt the BBB through the reduction of TEER values from 3500 Ω · cm2 to 800 Ω · cm2	(Wang et al., 2017)	
3D microfluidic chip featuring 16 connected functional units. Each unit contains four BBB regions. Each region has one channel for fluid flow mimicking vasculature and one channel for collagen to mimic the ECM or astrocytes to mimic the brain.	Primary rat brain microvascular endothelial cells were used to line the vascular channel. Primary rat astrocytes were incorporated into the brain channels. Various cancer cell lines including U87 (astrocytoma), A549 (lung cancer), MB-231 (breast cancer), M624 (melanoma) and BEL-7402 (liver cancer) cells were incorporated into this model to examine therapeutics for glioma and cancer cell migration across the BBB in brain metastasis.	To model brain metastasis of cancer breast, lung, melanoma or liver cancer cells were perfused through the vascular channel of the microfluidic device for 72 hours and invasion of each cell type was quantified. Lung, breast and melanoma cells were shown to disrupt the BBB, while the liver cells did not metastasized to the brain. Astrocytoma cells were also incorporated into this microfluidic model to examine the therapeutic response of glioma cells to temozolomide (TMZ). TMZ was selected, because of its ability to cross the BBB. The therapeutic effects of TMZ was tested at various concentrations (50 – 400 μM). TMZ at a concentration of 400 μM caused apoptosis in 77% of the astrocytoma cells.	(Xu et al., 2016)	
Microfluidic device incorporating two crossing channels for endothelial and glial cells separated by a porous membrane. TEER measuring electrodes were also included in this device.	The mouse brain endothelial cell line bEnd.3 and the rat astrocyte cell line C6 were co-cultured within the microfluidic device.	Seven neuroactive drugs were tested in this model including Ethosuximide, Gabapentin, Sertraline Hydrochloride, Sunitinib Malate, Traxoprodil Mesylate, Varenicline Tartrate, PF-3084014. Each of the seven drugs were tested up to a concentration of 1 mM. Below 10 μM none of the drugs induced toxic effects to the brain endothelial cells in the microfluidic model. This information was used to find the optimal testing range for drug permeability and TEER measurements. Drug permeability was determined to be lower and TEER measurements were found to be higher in the dynamic microfluidic model in comparison to transwell co-culture of the same cell types.	(Booth and Kim, 2014)	
Microfluidic device featuring two compartments representing the vascular and neural components of the BBB separated by a porous membrane.	Rat astrocytes, microglia and neurons were included in the neural chamber. The vascular chamber was lined with rat brain microvascular endothelial cells.	Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF- α) was applied to the vascular layer for 6 hours. TNF- α was shown to activate 75% of the astrocytes and microglia in the neural chamber, mimicking neuroinflammation.	(Achyuta et al., 2013)	


References

Albritton JL , Miller JS , 2017 3D bioprinting: improving in vitro models of metastasis with heterogeneous tumor microenvironments. Dis. Model. Mech 10 , 3–14. 10.1242/dmm.025049 28067628
Alonzo LF , Moya ML , Shirure VS , George SC , 2015 Microfluidic device to control interstitial flow-mediated homotypic and heterotypic cellular communication. Lab Chip 15 , 3521–3529. 10.1039/c5lc00507h 26190172
Anastasio TJ , 2015 Computational identification of potential multi-drug combinations for reduction of microglial inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Front. Pharmacol 6 , 1–16. 10.3389/fphar.2015.00116 25805991
Arifin DY , Lee KYT , Wang CH , 2009 Chemotherapeutic drug transport to brain tumor. J. Control. Release 137 , 203–210. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.04.013 19376172
Arranz AM , De Strooper B , 2019 The role of astroglia in Alzheimer’s disease: pathophysiology and clinical implications. Lancet Neurol 4422 , 25–27. 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30490-3
Azuaje F , 2017 Computational models for predicting drug responses in cancer research. Brief. Bioinform 18 , 820–829. 10.1093/bib/bbw065 27444372
Bar-Kochba E , Scimone MT , Estrada JB , Franck C , 2016 Strain and rate-dependent neuronal injury in a 3D in vitro compression model of traumatic brain injury. Sci. Rep 6 , 1–11. 10.1038/srep30550 28442746
Bartlett R , Everett W , Lim S , Natasha G , Loizidou M , Jell G , Tan A , Seifalian AM , 2014 Personalized in vitro cancer modeling — Fantasy or reality? Transl. Oncol 7 , 657–664. 10.1016/j.tranon.2014.10.006 25500073
Ben-David U , Ha G , Tseng Y-Y , Greenwald NF , Oh C , Shih J , McFarland JM , Wong B , Boehm JS , Beroukhim R , Golub TR , 2017 Patient-derived xenografts undergo murine-specific tumor evolution. Nat Genet 49 , 1567–1575. 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62286-8.Liberal 28991255
Bershteyn M , Nowakowski TJ , Pollen AA , Di Lullo E , Nene A , Wynshaw-Boris A , Kriegstein AR , 2017 Human iPSC-Derived Cerebral Organoids Model Cellular Features of Lissencephaly and Reveal Prolonged Mitosis of Outer Radial Glia. Cell Stem Cell 20 , 435–449.e4. 10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.007 28111201
Bian S , Repic M , Guo Z , Kavirayani A , Burkard T , Bagley JA , Krauditsch C , Knoblich JA , 2018 Author Correction: Genetically engineered cerebral organoids model brain tumor formation. Nat. Methods 15 , 748–748. 10.1038/s41592-018-0118-8 30135560
Bilbo SD , Schwarz JM , 2009 Early-life programming of later-life brain and behavior: a critical role for the immune system. Front. Behav. Neurosci 3 , 1–14. 10.3389/neuro.08.014.2009 19194528
Bischel LL , Coneski PN , Lundin JG , Wu PK , Giller CB , Wynne J , Ringeisen BR , Pirlo RK , 2016 Electrospun gelatin biopapers as substrate for in vitro bilayer models of blood-brain barrier tissue. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. - Part A 104 , 901–909. 10.1002/jbm.a.35624
Booth R , Kim H , 2012 Characterization of a microfluidic in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier (μBBB). Lab Chip 12 , 1784–1792. 10.1039/c2lc40094d 22422217
Bosi S , Rauti R , Laishram J , Turco A , Lonardoni D , Nieus T , Prato M , Scaini D , Ballerini L , 2015 From 2D to 3D: Novel nanostructured scaffolds to investigate signalling in reconstructed neuronal networks. Sci. Rep 5 , 1–11. 10.1038/srep09562
Brooks EA , Galarza S , Gencoglu MF , Cornelison RC , Munson JM , Peyton S , 2018 Applicability of Drug Response Metrics for Cancer Studies using Biomaterials. bioRxiv 10.1101/408583
Carpenter TS , Kirshner DA , Lau EY , Wong SE , Nilmeier JP , Lightstone FC , 2014 A Method to Predict Blood-Brain Barrier Permeability of Drug-Like Compounds Using Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Biophys. J 107 , 630–641. 10.1016/j.bpj.2014.06.024 25099802
Chen J , Lin M , Foxe JJ , Pedrosa E , Hrabovsky A , Carroll R , Zheng D , Lachman HM , 2013 Transcriptome Comparison of Human Neurons Generated Using Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Derived from Dental Pulp and Skin Fibroblasts. PLoS One 8 10.1371/journal.pone.0075682
Choi SH , Kim YH , Hebisch M , Sliwinski C , Lee S , D’Avanzo C , Chen H , Hooli B , Asselin C , Muffat J , Klee JB , Zhang C , Wainger BJ , Peitz M , Kovacs DM , Woolf CJ , Wagner SL , Tanzi RE , Kim DY , 2014 A three-dimensional human neural cell culture model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 515 , 274–278. 10.1038/nature13800 25307057
Cornelison RC , Munson JM , 2018 Perspective on Translating Biomaterials Into Glioma Therapy: Lessons From in Vitro Models. Front. Mater 5 , 1–7. 10.3389/fmats.2018.00027
Cugola FR , Fernandes IR , Russo FB , Freitas BC , Dias JLM , Guimarães KP , Benazzato C , Almeida N , Pignatari GC , Romero S , Polonio CM , Cunha I , Freitas CL , Brandaõ WN , Rossato C , Andrade DG , Faria DDP , Garcez AT , Buchpigel CA , Braconi CT , Mendes E , Sall AA , Zanotto PMDA , Peron JPS , Muotri AR , Beltrao-Braga PCBB , 2016 The Brazilian Zika virus strain causes birth defects in experimental models. Nature 534 , 267–271. 10.1038/nature18296 27279226
Cummings JL , Morstorf T , Zhong K , 2014 Alzheimer’s disease drug-development pipeline: Few candidates, frequent failures. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 6 , 1–7. 10.1186/alzrt269 24382028
Da Mesquita S , Louveau A , Vaccari A , Smirnov I , Cornelison RC , Kingsmore KM , Contarino C , Onengut-Gumuscu S , Farber E , Raper D , Viar KE , Powell RD , Baker W , Dabhi N , Bai R , Cao R , Hu S , Rich SS , Munson JM , Lopes MB , Overall CC , Acton ST , Kipnis J , 2018 Functional aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 560 , 185–191. 10.1038/s41586-018-0368-8 30046111
Dai X , Ma C , Lan Q , Xu T , 2016 3D bioprinted glioma stem cells for brain tumor model and applications of drug susceptibility. Biofabrication 8 10.1088/1758-5090/8/4/045005
Dang J , Tiwari SK , Lichinchi G , Qin Y , Patil VS , Eroshkin AM , Rana TM , 2016 Zika Virus Depletes Neural Progenitors in Human Cerebral Organoids through Activation of the Innate Immune Receptor TLR3. Cell Stem Cell 19 , 258–265. 10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.014 27162029
Dityatev A , Schachner M , Sonderegger P , 2010 The dual role of the extracellular matrix in synaptic plasticity and homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 11 , 735–746. 10.1038/nrn2898 20944663
Esch EW , Bahinski A , Huh D , 2015 Organs-on-chips at the frontiers of drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 14 , 248–260. 10.1038/nrd4539 25792263
Fan Y , Nguyen DT , Akay Y , Xu F , Akay M , 2016 Engineering a Brain Cancer Chip for High-throughput Drug Screening. Sci. Rep 6 , 1–12. 10.1038/srep25062 28442746
Fetterly GJ , Grasela TH , Sherman JW , Dul JL , Grahn A , Lecomte D , Fiedler-Kelly J , Damjanov N , Fishman M , Kane MP , Rubin EH , Tan AR , 2008 Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modeling and simulation of neutropenia during phase I development of liposome-entrapped paclitaxel. Clin. Cancer Res 14 , 5856–5863. 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1046 18794097
Frampton JP , Hynd MR , Shuler ML , Shain W , 2011 Fabrication and optimization of alginate hydrogel constructs for use in 3D neural cell culture. Biomed. Mater 6 10.1088/1748-6041/6/1/015002
Garcez PP , Loiola EC , Madeiro da Costa R , Higa LM , Trindade P , Delvecchio R , Nascimento JM , Brindeiro R , Tanuri A , Rehen SK , 2016 Supplementary Materials for: Zika virus impairs growth in human neurospheres and brain organoids. Science 352 , aaf6116 10.1126/science.aaf6116
Gong L , Cao L , Shen Z , Shao L , Gao S , Zhang C , Lu J , Li W , 2018 Materials for Neural Differentiation, Trans-Differentiation, and Modeling of Neurological Disease. Adv. Mater 30 , 1–24. 10.1002/adma.201705684
Hajiali H , Contestabile A , Mele E , Athanassiou A , 2018 Influence of topography of nanofibrous scaffolds on functionality of engineered neural tissue. J. Mater. Chem. B 6 , 930–939. 10.1039/c7tb02969a
Harris AR , Yuan JX , Munson JM , 2018 Assessing multiparametric drug response in tissue engineered tumor microenvironment models. Methods 134–135 , 20–31. 10.1016/j.ymeth.2017.12.010
Heinrich MA , Bansal R , Lammers T , Zhang YS , Michel Schiffelers R , Prakash J , 2019 3D-Bioprinted Mini-Brain: A Glioblastoma Model to Study Cellular Interactions and Therapeutics. Adv. Mater 1806590 , 1–9. 10.1002/adma.201806590
Hoshiba T , 2017 Cultured cell-derived decellularized matrices: A review towards the next decade. J. Mater. Chem. B 5 , 4322–4331. 10.1039/c7tb00074j
Irons HR , Cullen DK , Shapiro NP , Lambert NA , Lee RH , LaPlaca MC , 2008 Three-dimensional neural constructs: A novel platform for neurophysiological investigation. J. Neural Eng 5 , 333–341. 10.1088/1741-2560/5/3/006 18756031
Ivanov DP , Parker TL , Walker DA , Alexander C , Ashford MB , Gellert PR , Garnett MC , 2015 In vitro co-culture model of medulloblastoma and human neural stem cells for drug delivery assessment. J. Biotechnol 205 , 3–13. 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.01.002 25592050
Jäkel S , Dimou L , 2017 Glial Cells and Their Function in the Adult Brain: A Journey through the History of Their Ablation. Front. Cell. Neurosci 11 , 1–17. 10.3389/fncel.2017.00024 28154525
Jakobsson A , Ottosson M , Zalis MC , O’Carroll D , Johansson UE , Johansson F , 2017 Three-dimensional functional human neuronal networks in uncompressed low-density electrospun fiber scaffolds. Nanomedicine Nanotechnology, Biol. Med 13 , 1563–1573. 10.1016/j.nano.2016.12.023
Joung D , Truong V , Neitzke CC , Guo SZ , Walsh PJ , Monat JR , Meng F , Park SH , Dutton JR , Parr AM , McAlpine MC , 2018 3D Printed Stem-Cell Derived Neural Progenitors Generate Spinal Cord Scaffolds. Adv. Funct. Mater 28 , 1–10. 10.1002/adfm.201801850
Kingsmore KM , Logsdon DK , Floyd DH , Peirce SM , Purow BW , Munson JM , 2016 Interstitial flow differentially increases patient-derived glioblastoma stem cell invasion: Via CXCR4, CXCL12, and CD44-mediated mechanisms. Integr. Biol. (United Kingdom) 8 , 1246–1260. 10.1039/c6ib00167j
Knight E , Przyborski S , 2015 Advances in 3D cell culture technologies enabling tissue-like structures to be created in vitro. J. Anat 227 , 746–756. 10.1111/joa.12257 25411113
Kothapalli CR , Kamm RD , 2013 3D matrix microenvironment for targeted differentiation of embryonic stem cells into neural and glial lineages. Biomaterials 34 , 5995–6007. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.04.042 23694902
Kothapalli CR , Van Veen E , De Valence S , Chung S , Zervantonakis IK , Gertler FB , Kamm RD , 2011 A high-throughput microfluidic assay to study neurite response to growth factor gradients. Lab Chip 11 , 497–507. 10.1039/c0lc00240b 21107471
Labour M-N , Vigier S , Lerner D , Marcilhac A , Belamie E , 2016 3D compartmented model to study the neurite-related toxcity of Aβ aggregates included in collagen gels of adaptable porosity. Acta Biomater 37 , 38–49. 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.04.001 27057929
Laferla FM , Green KN , Holtzman DM , Mandelkow E , Selkoe DJ , Tanzi RE , Nixon R , 2013 Animal Models of Alzheimer Disease 1–14. 10.1101/cshperspect.a006320
Lancaster MA , Knoblich JA , 2014 Organogenesisin a dish: Modeling development and disease using organoid technologies. Science (80-.) 345 10.1126/science.1247125
Lancaster MA , Renner M , Martin CA , Wenzel D , Bicknell LS , Hurles ME , Homfray T , Penninger JM , Jackson AP , Knoblich JA , 2013 Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly. Nature 501 , 373–379. 10.1038/nature12517 23995685
Lee HK , Velazquez Sanchez C , Chen M , Morin PJ , Wells JM , Hanlon EB , Xia W , 2016 Three dimensional human neuro-spheroid model of Alzheimer’s disease based on differentiated induced pluripotent stem cells. PLoS One 11 , 1–23. 10.1371/journal.pone.0163072
Li L , Zhou Q , Voss TC , Quick KL , LaBarbera DV , 2016 High-throughput imaging: Focusing in on drug discovery in 3D. Methods 96 , 97–102. 10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.11.013 26608110
Liao C-P , Pradhan S , Chen Z , Patel AJ , Booker RC , Le LQ , Liao C-P , Pradhan S , Chen Z , Patel AJ , Booker RC , Le LQ , 2016 The role of nerve microenvironment for neurofibroma development. Oncotarget 7 , 61500–61508. 10.18632/oncotarget.11133 27517146
Logsdon DK , Beeghly GF , Munson JM , 2017 Chemoprotection Across the Tumor Border: Cancer Cell Response to Doxorubicin Depends on Stromal Fibroblast Ratios and Interstitial Therapeutic Transport. Cell. Mol. Bioeng 10 , 463–481. 10.1007/s12195-017-0498-3
Lozano R , Stevens L , Thompson BC , Gilmore KJ , Gorkin R , Stewart EM , in het Panhuis M , Romero-Ortega M , Wallace GG , 2015 3D printing of layered brain-like structures using peptide modified gellan gum substrates. Biomaterials 67 , 264–273. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.07.022 26231917
Ma L , Barker J , Zhou C , Li W , Zhang J , Lin B , Foltz G , Küblbeck J , Honkakoski P , 2012 Towards personalized medicine with a three-dimensional micro-scale perfusion-based two-chamber tissue model system. Biomaterials 33 , 4353–4361. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.02.054 22429982
Maoz BM , Herland A , Fitzgerald EA , Grevesse T , Vidoudez C , Pacheco AR , Sheehy SP , Park TE , Dauth S , Mannix R , Budnik N , Shores K , Cho A , Nawroth JC , Segrè D , Budnik B , Ingber DE , Parker KK , 2018 A linked organ-on-chip model of the human neurovascular unit reveals the metabolic coupling of endothelial and neuronal cells. Nat. Biotechnol 36 , 865–877. 10.1038/nbt.4226 30125269
Mariani J , Coppola G , Zhang P , Abyzov A , Provini L , Tomasini L , Amenduni M , Szekely A , Palejev D , Wilson M , Gerstein M , Grigorenko EL , Chawarska K , Pelphrey KA , Howe JR , Vaccarino FM , 2015 FOXG1-Dependent Dysregulation of GABA/Glutamate Neuron Differentiation in Autism Spectrum Disorders. Cell 162 , 375–390. 10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.034 26186191
Munson JM , Bellamkonda RV , Swartz MA , 2013 Interstitial flow in a 3d microenvironment increases glioma invasion by a cxcr4-dependent mechanism. Cancer Res 73 , 1536–1546. 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2838 23271726
Murphy AR , Laslett A , O’Brien CM , Cameron NR , 2017 Scaffolds for 3D in vitro culture of neural lineage cells. Acta Biomater 54 , 1–20. 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.02.046 28259835
Nestler EJ , Hyman SE , 2010 Animal models of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nat. Neurosci 13 , 1161–1169. 10.1038/nn.2647 20877280
Okorji UP , Velagapudi R , El-Bakoush A , Fiebich BL , Olajide OA , 2016 Antimalarial Drug Artemether Inhibits Neuroinflammation in BV2 Microglia Through Nrf2-Dependent Mechanisms. Mol. Neurobiol 53 , 6426–6443. 10.1007/s12035-015-9543-1 26607631
Park J , Lee BK , Jeong GS , Hyun JK , Lee CJ , Lee SH , 2015 Three-dimensional brain-on-a-chip with an interstitial level of flow and its application as an in vitro model of Alzheimer’s disease. Lab Chip 15 , 141–150. 10.1039/c4lc00962b 25317977
Penzes P , Cahill ME , Jones KA , Vanleeuwen JE , Woolfrey KM , 2011 Dendritic spine pathology in neuropsychiatric disorders. Nat. Neurosci 14 , 285–293. 10.1038/nn.2741 21346746
Potjewyd G , Moxon S , Wang T , Domingos M , Hooper NM , 2018 Tissue Engineering 3D Neurovascular Units: A Biomaterials and Bioprinting Perspective. Trends Biotechnol 36 , 457–472. 10.1016/j.tibtech.2018.01.003 29422410
Pringsheim T , Fiest K , Jette N , 2014 The International Incidence and Prevalence of Neurolofic Conditions: How Common are they? Am. Acad. Neruology 83 , 1661–1664.
Qian X , Nguyen HN , Song MM , Hadiono C , Ogden SC , Hammack C , Yao B , Hamersky GR , Jacob F , Zhong C , Yoon KJ , Jeang W , Lin L , Li Y , Thakor J , Berg DA , Zhang C , Kang E , Chickering M , Nauen D , Ho CY , Wen Z , Christian KM , Shi PY , Maher BJ , Wu H , Jin P , Tang H , Song H , Ming GL , 2016 Brain-Region-Specific Organoids Using Mini-bioreactors for Modeling ZIKV Exposure. Cell 165 , 1238–1254. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.04.032 27118425
Raja WK , Mungenast AE , Lin YT , Ko T , Abdurrob F , Seo J , Tsai LH , 2016 Self-organizing 3D human neural tissue derived from induced pluripotent stem cells recapitulate Alzheimer’s disease phenotypes. PLoS One 11 , 1–18. 10.1371/journal.pone.0161969
Schneider G , 2018 Automating drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 17 , 97–113. 10.1038/nrd.2017.232 29242609
Schwartz MP , Hou Z , Propson NE , Zhang J , Engstrom CJ , Costa VS , Jiang P , Nguyen BK , Bolin JM , Daly W , Wang Y , Stewart R , Page CD , Murphy WL , Thomson JA , 2015 Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural constructs for predicting neural toxicity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 112 , 12516–12521. 10.1073/pnas.1516645112 26392547
Shevelkin AV , Ihenatu C , Pletnikov MV , 2014 Pre-clinical models of neurodevelopmental disorders: Focus on the cerebellum. Rev. Neurosci 25 , 177–194. 10.1515/revneuro-2013-0049 24523305
Son MY , Sim H , Son YS , Jung KB , Lee MO , Oh JH , Chung SK , Jung CR , Kim J , 2017 Distinctive genomic signature of neural and intestinal organoids from familial Parkinson’s disease patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 43 , 584–603. 10.1111/nan.12396 28235153
Stabenfeldt SE , Munglani G , García AJ , LaPlaca MC , 2010 Biomimetic Microenvironment Modulates Neural Stem Cell Survival, Migration, and Differentiation. Tissue Eng. Part A 16 , 3747–3758. 10.1089/ten.tea.2009.0837 20666608
Stephenson J , Nutma E , van der Valk P , Amor S , 2018 Inflammation in CNS neurodegenerative diseases. Immunology 154 , 204–219. 10.1111/imm.12922 29513402
Stylli SS , Luwor RB , Ware TMB , Tan F , Kaye AH , 2015 Mouse models of glioma. J. Clin. Neurosci 22 , 619–626. 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.10.013 25698543
Surmeier DJ , Obeso JA , Halliday GM , 2017 Selective neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 18 , 101–113. 10.1038/nrn.2016.178 28104909
Taylor AM , Blurton-Jones M , Rhee SW , Cribbs DH , Cotman CW , Jeon NL , 2005 A microfluidic culture platform for CNS axonal injury, regeneration and transport. Nat. Methods 2 , 599–605. 10.1038/nmeth777 16094385
Taylor AM , Dieterich DC , Ito HT , Kim SA , Erin M , 2010 Manipulation of Synapses. NIH Public Access Author Manuscr 66 , 57–68. 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.022.Microfluidic
Taylor AM , Menon S , Gupton SL , 2015 Passive microfluidic chamber for long-term imaging of axon guidance in response to soluble gradients. Lab Chip 15 , 2781–2789. 10.1039/c5lc00503e 26000554
Tentler JJ , Tan AC , Weekes CD , Jimeno A , Leong S , Pitts TM , Arcaroli JJ , Messersmith WA , Eckhardt SG , 2012 Patient-derived tumour xenografts as models for oncology drug development. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol 9 , 338–350. 10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.61 22508028
Thomsen LB , Burkhart A , Moos T , 2015 A triple culture model of the blood-brain barrier using porcine brain endothelial cells, astrocytes and pericytes. PLoS One 10 , 1–16. 10.1371/journal.pone.0134765
Tunesi M , Fusco F , Fiordaliso F , Corbelli A , Biella G , Raimondi MT , 2016 Optimization of a 3D dynamic culturing system for in vitro modeling of Frontotemporal Neurodegeneration-relevant pathologic features. Front. Aging Neurosci 8 , 1–13. 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00146 26858637
Uenaka T , Satake W , Cha PC , Hayakawa H , Baba K , Jiang S , Kobayashi K , Kanagawa M , Okada Y , Mochizuki H , Toda T , 2018 In silico drug screening by using genome-wide association study data repurposed dabrafenib, an anti-melanoma drug, for Parkinson’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 27 , 3974–3985. 10.1093/hmg/ddy279 30137437
Wang P , Mokhtari R , Pedrosa E , Kirschenbaum M , Bayrak C , Zheng D , Lachman HM , 2017 CRISPR/Cas9-mediated heterozygous knockout of the autism gene CHD8 and characterization of its transcriptional networks in cerebral organoids derived from iPS cells. Mol. Autism 8 , 1–17. 10.1186/s13229-017-0124-1 28070266
Wang YI , Abaci HE , Shuler ML , 2017 Microfluidic blood–brain barrier model provides in vivo-like barrier properties for drug permeability screening. Biotechnol. Bioeng 114 , 184–194. 10.1002/bit.26045 27399645
Watanabe M , Buth JE , Vishlaghi N , de la Torre-Ubieta L , Taxidis J , Khakh BS , Coppola G , Pearson CA , Yamauchi K , Gong D , Dai X , Damoiseaux R , Aliyari R , Liebscher S , Schenke-Layland K , Caneda C , Huang EJ , Zhang Y , Cheng G , Geschwind DH , Golshani P , Sun R , Novitch BG , 2017 Self-Organized Cerebral Organoids with Human-Specific Features Predict Effective Drugs to Combat Zika Virus Infection. Cell Rep 21 , 517–532. 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.047 29020636
Wendling F , Kaminska A , Dulac O , Cornu C , Guerrini R , Benquet P , Chiron C , Nabbout R , Rosati A , Kurbatova P , Pons G , Nony P , 2016 Dynamic changes of depolarizing GABA in a computational model of epileptogenic brain: Insight for Dravet syndrome. Exp. Neurol 283 , 57–72. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.05.037 27246997
Xu H , Li Z , Yu Y , Sizdahkhani S , Ho WS , Yin F , Wang L , Zhu G , Zhang M , Jiang L , Zhuang Z , Qin J , 2016 A dynamic in vivo-like organotypic blood-brain barrier model to probe metastatic brain tumors. Sci. Rep 6 , 1–12. 10.1038/srep36670 28442746
Xu M , Lee EM , Wen Z , Cheng Y , Huang WK , Qian X , Tcw J , Kouznetsova J , Ogden SC , Hammack C , Jacob F , Nguyen HN , Itkin M , Hanna C , Shinn P , Allen C , Michael SG , Simeonov A , Huang W , Christian KM , Goate A , Brennand KJ , Huang R , Xia M , Ming GL , Zheng W , Song H , Tang H , 2016 Identification of small-molecule inhibitors of Zika virus infection and induced neural cell death via a drug repurposing screen. Nat. Med 22 , 1101–1107. 10.1038/nm.4184 27571349
Yan Y , Song L , Bejoy J , Zhao J , Kanekiyo T , Bu G , Zhou Y , Li Y , 2018 Modelling Neurodegenerative Microenvironment Using Cortical Organoids Derived from Human Stem Cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 24 , ten.TEA.2017.0423. 10.1089/ten.TEA.2017.0423
Yu KKH , Taylor JT , Pathmanaban ON , Youshani AS , Beyit D , Dutko-Gwozdz J , Benson R , Griffiths G , Peers I , Cueppens P , Telfer BA , Williams KJ , McBain C , Kamaly-Asl ID , Bigger BW , 2018 High content screening of patient-derived cell lines highlights the potential of non-standard chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of glioblastoma. PLoS One 13 , 1–17. 10.1371/journal.pone.0193694
Zanoni M , Piccinini F , Arienti C , Zamagni A , Santi S , Polico R , Bevilacqua A , Tesei A , 2016 3D tumor spheroid models for in vitro therapeutic screening: A systematic approach to enhance the biological relevance of data obtained. Sci. Rep 6 , 1–11. 10.1038/srep19103 28442746
Zeng H , Sanes JR , 2017 Neuronal cell-type classification: Challenges, opportunities and the path forward. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 18 , 530–546. 10.1038/nrn.2017.85 28775344
