LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0416575
7769
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.
Toxicology and applied pharmacology
0041-008X
1096-0333

31323264
6708494
10.1016/j.taap.2019.114674
NIHMS1536299
Article
Determination of chemical-disease risk values to prioritize connections between environmental factors, genetic variants, and human diseases
Kosnik Marissa B. 123
Reif David M. 1234*
1 Toxicology Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7617
2 Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7617
3 Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7617
4 Center for Human Health and the Environment, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7617
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Campus Box 7566, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7617, David M. Reif: dmreif@ncsu.edu
1 8 2019
16 7 2019
15 9 2019
15 9 2020
379 114674114674
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Traditional methods for chemical risk assessment are too time-consuming and resource-intensive to characterize either the diversity of chemicals to which humans are exposed or how that diversity may manifest in population susceptibility differences. The advent of novel toxicological data sources and their integration with bioinformatic databases affords opportunities for modern approaches that consider gene-environment (GxE) interactions in population risk assessment. Here, we present an approach that systematically links multiple data sources to relate chemical risk values to diseases and gene-disease variants. These data sources include high-throughput screening (HTS) results from Tox21/ToxCast, chemical-disease relationships from the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD), hazard data from resources like the Integrated Risk Information System, exposure data from the ExpoCast initiative, and gene-variant-disease information from the DisGeNET database. We use these integrated data to identify variants implicated in chemical-disease enrichments and develop a new value that estimates the risk of these associations toward differential population responses. Finally, we use this value to prioritize chemical-disease associations by exploring the genomic distribution of variants implicated in high-risk diseases. We offer this modular approach, termed DisQGOS (Disease Quotient Genetic Overview Score), for relating overall chemical-disease risk to potential for population variable responses, as a complement to methods aiming to modernize aspects of risk assessment.

data integration
risk assessment
new approach methodologies
gene-environment interactions

INTRODUCTION

The majority of chemicals on the market have not been sufficiently tested to characterize their human health effects, and the traditional methods for human health risk assessment are too time-consuming and resource-intensive to meet the challenges in testing these chemicals for adverse health outcomes (Judson et al., 2009; NRC, 2007; Tice et al., 2013). In 2007, the US National Research Council (NRC) released a report emphasizing the need to take advantage of improved technology to shift the paradigm of toxicity testing away from traditional, animal-based approaches to focus on in vitro methods (NRC, 2007). Numerous initiatives have been established to meet these goals with a focus on high-throughput technology to improve methods in human health risk assessments. The Toxicology in the 21st Century (Tox21) federal research collaboration has been taking a systems-biology approach to toxicology using high-throughput screening (HTS) of thousands of chemicals to evaluate activity (Collins et al., 2008; Tice et al., 2013), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has further contributed to this effort through the Toxicity ForeCaster (ToxCast) program which has screened many of these same chemicals in additional assays to expand biological coverage (Dix et al., 2007; Kavlock et al., 2012). Methods have been developed to predict biologically relevant human doses from these Tox21/ToxCast data, including determining Biological Pathway Altering Doses (BPADs) analogous to in vivo point of departure doses and estimating equivalent human blood concentrations through in vitro to in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) (Adeleye et al., 2015; Judson et al., 2014, 2011; Sipes et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2017). These approaches show promise for meeting the needs outlined in the NRC report, including increased integration of dose-response modeling within the framework of human health risk assessments (Gwinn et al., 2017; NRC, 2007; Thomas et al., 2017).

In addition to suites of in vitro tests to evaluate chemical toxicity, the NRC report highlighted the need for exposure information to translate the toxicity data in risk assessment (NRC, 2007). To address gaps in biologically relevant human exposure data, the U.S. EPA’s ExpoCast initiative generates new tools and methods to aid in high-throughput exposure assessment (Cohen Hubal et al., 2010; Egeghy et al., 2011; Wambaugh et al., 2014, 2013). Together, these complementary dose-response and exposure assessments can be utilized to generate risk values in a high-throughput fashion.

Despite the increasing amount of toxicity and exposure data, aligning these results within the traditional risk assessment framework is a challenge. Risk assessments still rely primarily on animal data for toxicity values (Cote et al., 2016) and continue to focus on a narrow range of chemicals (Grandjean et al., 2011). While initiatives like the HESI-led RISK21 (Embry et al., 2014; Pastoor et al., 2014) and the U.S. EPA’s Next Generation of Risk Assessment (NexGen) (Cote et al., 2016, 2012; Krewski et al., 2014) aim to integrate existing data and put recent high-throughput advancements in risk assessment into practice, a major focus of risk assessments seems to be on reassessing similar chemical domains in different exposure scenarios rather than analyzing chemicals systematically or shifting focus to chemicals with little information available. Chemical prioritization efforts stemming from ToxCast and ExpoCast results and the RISK21 approach could help to identify untested chemicals in need of greater attention (Dix et al., 2007; Doe et al., 2016; Egeghy et al., 2011; Judson et al., 2010; Wolf et al., 2016), but determining the appropriate health endpoint for risk assessment and aligning these results in the context of human health outcomes remains a challenge (Gwinn et al., 2017; Westphal et al., 2017). This is important, as the risk associated with chemicals varies depending on the endpoint of interest. By better identifying the diseases that chemicals are most likely to lead to, more relevant risk assessments can be conducted. We previously demonstrated that integrating Tox21/ToxCast HTS data with literature-curated chemical, gene, and disease data from the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) can align HTS data within a human health framework (Kosnik et al., Accepted/In press). By relating the resulting HTS/CTD chemical-disease enrichment to chemical hazard and exposure data, it is possible that high-throughput risk analysis can be conducted with greater biological relevance to adverse human health outcomes.

As part of the changing risk assessment paradigm outlined in NexGen, additional consideration should be given to data types not commonly considered in risk assessments (e.g. genomics and proteomics data) with focus on contextualizing results from a population health perspective (Cote et al., 2016, 2012; Krewski et al., 2014). While guidelines are being established to integrate transcriptomics and other data into human health risk assessment both within the US and worldwide (Buesen et al., 2017; Farmahin et al., 2017; Sauer et al., 2017), toxicogenomic considerations in risk assessment are underdeveloped (Boverhof and Zacharewski, 2006; Vachon et al., 2017). For example, incorporation of data on genetic polymorphisms resulting in differential population response to environmental exposures is lacking in risk assessments (Cote et al., 2012; Gwinn et al., 2017; Krewski et al., 2014). Efforts to improve risk assessments through consideration of gene-environment (GxE) interactions are often hindered by a lack of available data and high-throughput techniques, as most assessments incorporating the GxE interaction concept are conducted on an individual chemical basis and rely on epidemiological data availability (Cote et al., 2016; Gwinn et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2017). By reconsidering chemical-disease associations with respect to implicated variants at the chemical-disease intersection, we propose that the concept of a polygenic risk score (Chatterjee et al., 2016) can be utilized to quantify GxE interactions for high-throughput risk assessment prioritization. Further, by characterizing how frequently particular variants are implicated in high-risk diseases, we can consider the structure of genetic risk for chemical-disease associations in risk assessment.

To improve chemical prioritization methods and address the need for greater consideration of GxE potential in risk assessment, we propose considering chemical risk from a disease perspective. We have developed a method to generate risk values describing chemical-disease specific risk overall and from a genetic risk perspective and used these values to prioritize chemical-disease associations for future study. In generating these values, we also generated a unique and valuable data source of chemical-disease enrichments, implicated genes and variants, and chemical risk values. Existing risk value data are difficult to find and compare, as the margins of exposure and/or hazard quotient risk values that are commonly the end result of chemical risk assessments are often published locked in multi-page PDFs (U.S. EPA, 2014a). Our analysis combats this issue and integrates HTS/CTD chemical-disease enrichments with new and existing risk data to provide an alternative perspective for chemical risk considerations with respect to specific disease outcomes. These values and methods can be used in parallel with existing risk assessment techniques to aid in chemical prioritization and identify the most relevant disease endpoints for future analysis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The overall data preparation process is shown in Figure 1. In short, the process is as follows: 1) identify chemical-disease enrichment, 2) determine variants associated with each chemical-disease enrichment, 3) develop a genetic overview score for each chemical-disease enrichment, 4) determine hazard quotients for each chemical, and 5) develop a disease quotient for each chemical-disease enrichment. We describe each of these steps in detail, below.

This process involved the development of a new dataset and new approaches to prioritization. We first characterized the utility of our dataset by using the DisQ and GOS (DisQGOS) to analyze chemical risk among use categories and characterized chemical cancer associations for disease enrichments identified. Next, we prioritized the chemical-disease enrichments by using the DisQGOS and characterized the structure of genetic risk by relating DisQs to chemical-variant-disease associations. Finally, we developed an overall prioritized list of the chemical-disease enrichments by relating the DisQGOS and structure of genetic-risk based approaches. Table 1 explicitly defines terms used to describe the dataset preparation and analysis.

Chemical-gene dataset

We previously integrated curated chemical-gene information from the literature with high-throughput screening (HTS) chemical-gene data to form a comprehensive chemical-gene dataset. We integrated the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD), a publicly available resource that curates and forms networks of chemical, gene, and disease information from the literature (Davis et al., 2019; Grondin et al., 2018) with Tox21/ToxCast HTS data (Collins et al., 2008; Dix et al., 2007). In brief, the October 05, 2018 release of CTD chemical-gene interactions was downloaded from the website (http://ctdbase.org/downloads) and integrated with the most recent (October 2015) full release of the invitrodb_v2 collection of ToxCast and Tox21 HTS assay information (U.S. EPA, 2015). Taken together, CTD provides chemical-gene information obtained from in vitro, in vivo animal model, and human response data for chemicals that have been evaluated in the published literature, while the HTS database provides in vitro response data for thousands of chemicals that have been screened across 1,800 assays. As in CTD, the term “gene” refers to any aspect of a gene (e.g., “mRNA,” “protein,” etc.). By identifying new chemical-disease and chemical-pathway associations, we found these data increase the depth of information about chemical-gene associations compared to either dataset alone (Kosnik et al., Accepted/In press).These data are the chemical-gene associations (e.g. C-G1|G2) that are input into Figure 1.

Gene-disease datasets

Four gene-disease datasets were used to identify chemical-disease enrichment: DisGeNET, the Disease Gene Annotations (DGA) database, the Gene, Disease Features Ontology-based Overview System (Gendoo), and the gene2pubmed file. These four datasets use different sources to derive gene-disease associations and provide different genetic information for the same diseases. DisGeNET is a database of gene-disease associations formed from curated data sources like CTD and from text-mining derived associations (Piñero et al., 2017). The DGA database integrated Disease Ontology, Gene Reference Into Function, and molecular interaction network information to derive annotated human-gene disease networks (Peng et al., 2013). Both DisGeNET and DGA can be used for enrichment analysis in the Disease Ontology Semantic and Enrichment analysis (DOSE) R package (version 3.8.2) (Yu et al., 2015). Another R package prepared for disease enrichment analysis is meshes (version 1.8.0) which makes use of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) based gene-disease association data (Yu, 2018). Gendoo generated gene-disease associations by developing feature profiles of Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)-MeSH links with Entrez Gene IDs (Nakazato et al., 2009), while the gene2pubmed data is provided from the PubMed website and contains the gene/PubMed links reported therein (Maglott et al., 2011). By conducting enrichment analysis using these two R packages, we were able to conduct uniform analysis across all four gene-disease databases.

Three different disease vocabularies were used across the databases: the Unified Medical Language System vocabulary (Bodenreider, 2003), MeSH vocabulary (Coletti and Bleich, 2001), and the Disease Ontology (DO) vocabulary (Kibbe et al., 2015). To make disease comparisons across the four resources, all disease outputs were mapped to DOID vocabulary. These mappings were done using the October 05, 2018 release of the CTD disease vocabulary (http://ctdbase.org/downloads) and the most recent, May 25, 2017 release of DisGeNET UMLS disease mappings (http://www.disgenet.org/web/DisGeNET/menu/downloads). To ensure that each chemical had the potential for the same diseases to be enriched in each resource, only diseases that were present in all four resources were kept in the final analysis resulting in 3,162 different diseases mapped to 1,392 DOIDs.

Disease enrichment using chemical-gene and gene-disease associations

For each chemical in the HTS/CTD dataset, the genes associated with that chemical were used to identify potential disease enrichment. Using the hypergeometric model to conduct enrichment analysis, chemical-disease enrichment was classified based on the proportion of genes associated with the chemical and the disease compared to the proportion of genes associated with the disease in the genome. Disease enrichment between the HTS/CTD chemical-gene associations and the four database gene-disease sets was conducted using the DOSE and meshes R packages (Yu, 2018; Yu et al., 2015) with the false discovery rate method used for p-value adjustment. Output from each chemical-disease enrichment included a p-value for the chemical-disease enrichment and the genes implicated in that chemical-disease enrichment. Our goal from this analysis was to obtain four p-values for each chemical-disease enrichment: one from each gene-disease resource. In some cases, multiple diseases mapped to the same DOID resulting in redundant chemical-disease enrichment. After testing multiple methods for p-value selection, we determined that selecting the chemical-disease enrichment with the median p-value from all repeated chemical-disease enrichments was the best method. If a chemical had multiple matches to the same DOID and the number of associations was odd, the median p-value for the chemical-disease enrichment was used. If a chemical had multiple matches to the same DOID and the number of enrichments was even, the higher (less significant) of the middle two p-values was selected. Following this process, we had 20,540,352 chemical-disease enrichments, one for each of the 14,756 chemicals and 1,392 diseases. Each chemical-disease enrichment had four enrichment p-values, one from each gene-disease database, ranging from 2e−308 – 1.

Determination of significant chemical-disease enrichments

To develop one overall chemical-disease enrichment p-value, the four p-values (one from each gene-disease database) were combined using Fisher’s method. This method gave value to chemical-disease enrichments that were identified across all four sources, but not to those enriched in fewer resources. This was advantageous in our analysis because the resulting chemical-disease enrichments sometimes varied across each of the four datasets. Of the chemical-disease enrichments with p-values that did not equal 1, 70% had the same enrichment in all four databases. Of the 2.5 million chemical-disease enrichments that were only enriched in one source, 27% were only identified in DisGeNET, 33% were only identified in DGA, 20% were only identified in Gendoo, and 20% were only identified from the gene2pubmed file.

After combining p-values to get one overall value for each chemical-disease enrichment, we removed chemical-disease instances with enrichments that were not significant at p &lt; 0.001. This threshold reduced our dataset to 2,719,069 significant chemical-disease enrichments across 12,721 chemicals and 1,254 diseases. The resulting data from this step are the chemical-gene-disease associations (e.g. C-G1|G2-D) shown as the output in Figure 1, Step 1.

Gene-variant-disease dataset

In addition to gene-disease information, DisGeNET contains variant-disease associations. Like the gene-disease information, these associations come from curated sources like ClinVar and from text-mining derived associations (Piñero et al., 2017). We used the RCurl package (version v1.95–4.11) (Duncan Temple Lang and the CRAN team, 2018) to link to the DisGeNET database and identify variants associated with the 1,392 diseases used in enrichment analysis. For each variant-disease association identified in DisGeNET, we also extracted the corresponding SNP ID, the Entrez gene ID of the gene the variant is in, the chromosome the variant is in, the coordinates for the variant location on the chromosome, the allele frequency for the variant as identified from the 1000 Genomes Project (Campbell et al., 2015), and the variant-disease evidence index (EI), a DisGeNET derived score for evaluating existing contradictory results for variant-disease associations. Only variant-disease associations without contradictory results (EI= 1) were included in our analysis. As the EI depends on available publications and is only computed for some of the original variant-disease sources in DisGeNET, we also kept associations without an EI computed (EI =NA) to promote hypothesis generation. In total, we identified 48,162 gene-variant-disease combinations across 898 diseases and 5,707 genes. These gene-variant-disease associations are derived from the gene-disease associations used to determine chemical-disease enrichments, but the level of analysis has been refined to individual variants implicated in the gene-disease association.

Determination of chemical-gene-variant-disease associations

To characterize the potential for chemical population variable responses, we integrated the chemical-disease enrichment data with the gene-variant-disease data. These datasets were integrated across common gene-disease connections. For each chemical in the disease enrichment dataset, the genes at the intersection of that chemical-disease enrichment were matched to the same gene-disease associations from the variant-disease dataset. This process follows the Swanson ABC model of knowledge transfer (Swanson and Smalheiser, 1997). If chemical A interacts with a gene and is enriched for a disease (through gene-disease association B) and, independently, gene-disease association B is associated with variant C, then chemical A has an inferred relationship to variant C (inferred via gene-disease association B). This resulted in 3,634,114 unique chemical-gene-variant-disease associations across 9,786 chemicals, 857 diseases, and 4,997 genes. These chemical-gene-variant-disease associations (e.g. C-G2-V4|V5-D) are shown as the output in Figure 1, Step 2.

Chemical genetic overview score development

To quantify a chemical’s potential for GxE interactions, we developed a Genetic Overview Score (GOS) for each chemical-disease enrichment. To calculate these, we used the gene-variant-disease allele frequencies from 1000 Genomes Project that were contained within DisGeNET. We removed associations with allele frequencies that were blank, null, or missing chromosome/coordinate information. Not all allele frequencies within the dataset were calculated as the minor allele frequency. For allele frequencies greater than 0.5, we subtracted the value from 1 so all allele frequencies were the minor allele frequency (MAF).

We developed the GOS by summing the number of variants in each chemical-disease association and scaling each variant by the variant MAF. This resulted in one GOS for each chemical-disease enrichment. For example, the GOS of the chemical-disease association from Figure 1 would have been calculated over the 5 variants (V1-V5) implicated across both genes in the chemical-disease enrichment (Figure 1, step 3).

The median GOS among all chemical-disease enrichments was 0.4 with a range from 2e−4 – 151. This score is intended to approximate the potential for a chemical to lead to differential population responses in disease development. A larger GOS poses a higher risk as there are more frequent variants implicated in the chemical-disease association.

Hazard and exposure datasets

To generate hazard quotients for as many chemicals as possible, we combined chemical toxicity values from six resources. We downloaded chemical oral reference doses (RfDs), inhalation reference concentrations (RfCs), oral slope factors (OSFs), and inhalation unit risk values (IURs) from the Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) (U.S. EPA, 2018a), Provisional Peer-Reviewed Toxicity Values (PPRTVs) (U.S. EPA, 2018b), and the Risk Assessment Information System (RAIS) (U.S. DOE, 2018). Additional RfDs, RfCs, OSFs, and IURs were acquired from the supplemental tables of Wignall et al. 2018 (Wignall et al., 2018). Minimal risk values for oral and inhalation non-cancer risk were downloaded from the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) (U.S. HHS, 2018). Both RAIS and the Wignall data combine hazard values from multiple resources. We removed the IRIS, PPRTV, and ATSDR data from these resources as we had the original data. Original data was acquired for these sources, so the toxicity endpoints used in determining the hazard values could be identified. To expand chemical coverage, in vitro to in vivo extrapolated (IVIVE) chemical toxicity values from Sipes et al. 2017 were included as additional oral, non-cancer RfDs. The maximum hazard values calculated as the “possible dose x 10 safety factor” from the IVIVE data were selected as RfDs and only the best compound matches (efficacy= 0) were included (Sipes et al., 2017). All data were compiled from values available on December 18, 2018.

To prepare hazard data in a uniform fashion, all oral RfDs and OSFs were converted to mg/kg-day. If a unit could not be converted to mg/kg-day (e.g. fibers/kg-day), then the value was excluded. Inhalation RfCs and IURs were converted to mg/m3. If a unit could not be converted to mg/m3 or had a specific condition for the toxicity value (e.g. mg/m3 aerosols), then the value was excluded. Toxicity values that were specified as non-chronic were also excluded. One hazard value for each route was selected from the integrated hazard data following a modified hierarchy outlined in RAIS and Wignall et al. 2018 (U.S. DOE, 2018; Wignall et al., 2018). If more than one toxicity value was available for a chemical, selection occurred in the following order (listed from highest to lowest preference): IRIS, Office of Pesticide Programs (from RAIS or Wignall data), PPRTV, ATSDR, California EPA (from RAIS or Wignall data), U.S. EPA Health Effects Assessment Summary Tables (from RAIS or Wignall data), other sources from RAIS, other sources from the Wignall data, then IVIVE data. Not all sources were available for all exposure routes.

Exposure data were obtained from two ExpoCast data releases: exposure data from the supplemental table of Wambaugh et al. 2013 and 2014 (Wambaugh et al., 2014, 2013). These exposure values were determined for ToxCast/Tox21 chemicals through fate and transport modeling and Bayesian probabilistic modeling. If a chemical had an exposure estimate in both datasets, then we selected the higher exposure value. All exposure values were available in mg/kg-day. This unit was used as the oral exposure value (Eor) and was converted to mg/m3 for inhalation exposure values (EIn) according to EPA guidelines for converting RfCs to RfDs: [Eor (mg/kg-day) * 70 kg] /20 m3/day = EIn (mg/m3) (U.S. EPA, 1995).

Chemical hazard quotient development

To determine which chemicals to develop Hazard Quotients (HQs) for, chemical hazard-exposure data was reduced to the chemicals that overlapped with the chemical-gene-variant-disease associations. Of the 9,786 chemicals with gene-variant-disease data and the 4,033 chemicals with both hazard and exposure data, 2,738 chemicals overlapped. For each chemical, HQs were calculated by relating the chemical toxicity value to the exposure value: HQ= Exposure Concentration/Toxicity Value. These chemical HQs (C-HQ) are the output of Figure 1, step 4. HQs below 1 represent lower risk as the exposure is below the concentration determined to induce toxicity. This resulted in up to four HQs per chemical: one for oral non-cancer endpoints (generated from RfD toxicity value), inhalation non-cancer endpoints (generated from RfC toxicity value), oral cancer endpoints (generated from OSF toxicity value), and/or inhalation cancer endpoints (generated from IUR toxicity value). While HQs are not a typical risk value for cancer endpoints, we chose to use this value to uniformly relate exposure to toxicity across the different chemical-disease enrichments. In total, 2,414 chemicals had an oral non-cancer HQ, 75 chemicals had an inhalation non-cancer HQ, 212 chemicals had an oral cancer HQ, and 129 chemicals had an inhalation cancer HQ. There were significantly more chemicals with oral non-cancer HQs owing to the amount of toxicity data available from the IVIVE resource.

Chemical disease quotient development

To quantify chemical risk in a disease context, we developed a value relating chemical hazard quotients to the chemical-disease enrichment p-values. We have termed these values Disease Quotients (DisQs) and they are calculated as: DisQ= log10(HQ * −log10(Dp)) where Dp is the chemical-disease p-value. These chemical DisQs (C-DisQ) are the output of Figure 1, step 5 and incorporate the p-value from step 1 and the HQ from step 4. This calculation describes the chemical-disease risk in an easily interpretable way with DisQs below 0 representing lower chemical-disease risk and DisQs above 0 representing higher chemical-disease risk. A chemical-disease association with a smaller HQ (lower risk) and larger p-value (less significant chemical-disease association) yields a more negative DisQ while a larger HQ (higher risk) and more significant p-value yields a larger and more positive DisQ. Additionally, significant chemical-disease associations (smaller p-value) can offset a small HQ to result in a positive DisQ, identifying new potential chemical-disease associations. Using this formula, we developed one DisQ for each chemical-disease-HQ association. Disease quotients were developed separately for non-cancer and cancer diseases according to non-cancer and cancer HQs. Diseases were classified as cancer or non-cancer diseases using the DO vocabulary (Kibbe et al., 2015) and these associations were identified through the R/DO.db package (version 2.9) (Li, 2015). Diseases that were clustered within the “disease of cellular proliferation- cancer” branch were classified as cancer diseases and only cancer DisQs were calculated for these chemical-disease enrichments. Similarly, if a disease did not fall in this cancer branch of the DO vocabulary, then a cancer DisQ was not calculated. For each chemical-disease enrichment, oral non-cancer DisQs, inhalation non-cancer DisQs, oral cancer DisQs, and/or inhalation cancer DisQs were developed depending on the HQs available for that chemical and the disease classification. A chemical-disease enrichment can have both an oral and inhalation DisQ, but not both a non-cancer and cancer DisQ. All chemical-disease enrichments in the final dataset have at least one DisQ. Distributions of DisQs for oral non-cancer, inhalation non-cancer, oral cancer, and inhalation cancer are shown in SI Figure 1.

Evaluating the utility of the DisQGOS dataset

To evaluate the DisQGOS method, we used two approaches: 1) we characterized differences in chemical-disease enrichments’ risk in the top and bottom quartiles of DisQGOS for two chemical use categories, and 2) we characterized the DisQGOS method’s ability to capture inhalation cancer chemical-disease enrichments with support in the literature. Use categories were identified using the Chemical Products Categories (CPCat) database (Dionisio et al., 2015). CPCat contains broad CPCat cassettes (e.g. “food additive”) with more specific descriptions nested in each cassette (e.g. “food additive colorant”, “food additive sweetener”). The full database was downloaded from the website on October 05, 2018 (https://actor.epa.gov/cpcat/faces/home.xhtml).

Prioritization techniques

To identify “known” chemical-disease associations, we used the October 05, 2018 release of the CTD chemical-disease associations (http://ctdbase.org/downloads). These data contained both direct chemical-disease associations identified in the literature and inferred associations computed according to the Swanson ABC model of knowledge transfer (Davis et al., 2013). We narrowed down these data to the chemicals and diseases contained in our dataset and only used the direct chemical-disease associations for our analyses. Associations with “therapeutic” direct evidence were excluded. Of the CTD chemical-disease associations involving chemicals and diseases in our initial disease enrichment analysis, 70% were significant with the Fisher’s method combined p &lt; 0.001 and 42% (3,236 chemical-disease associations) were in our final dataset with computable DisQGOS, comprising 503 chemicals and 290 diseases. From here forth, “known” chemical-disease associations are chemical-disease enrichments with CTD direct evidence and “unknown” are those without.

To prioritize chemical-disease enrichments, we anchored unknown chemical-disease associations to known chemical-disease associations. To do this, we compared the known and unknown disease associations for each chemical. We used two techniques for prioritization: 1) a DisQGOS-based approach, and 2) a structure of genetic risk-based approach.

For the DisQGOS approach, for each chemical, we determined the median DisQ and GOS for known disease associations and calculated the difference between these and unknown disease DisQGOS. We then prioritized these unknown chemical-disease enrichments based on which of the chemical-disease enrichments had positive DisQs and the greatest differences between the unknown and known DisQGOS values.

For the structure of genetic risk-based approach, we identified high-risk variants based on the magnitude of DisQs for all chemical-disease associations with each variant implicated. To characterize chemical-disease enrichments based on the structure of genetic risk, we 1) identified all variants implicated in each chemical-disease association, and 2) identified which of these variants had a net positive DisQ sum in both known and unknown chemical-disease associations. These variants are termed “net positive variants.” To prioritize chemical-disease enrichments using the net positive variants, we followed an approach similar to that for the DisQGOS-based prioritization technique. For each chemical, we determined the median number of total variants and net positive variants implicated in all known disease associations for that chemical. Then, we calculated the difference between these known values and the number of total variants and net positive variants for each unknown disease enrichment for that same chemical. Just as with the DisQGOS-based prioritization technique, we used the known chemical-disease associations to anchor the unknown chemical-disease enrichments. We then prioritized these unknown chemical-disease enrichments based on which of the chemical-disease associations had positive DisQs and the greatest differences between these unknown and known variant values.

Finally, we related these two prioritizations together to develop one overall list of ranked chemical-disease associations. For this technique, we selected the top 1000 chemical-disease associations from the DisQGOS-based prioritization list and the structure of genetic risk-based prioritization list. As the basis of each method was to anchor the unknown chemical-disease enrichments to the known chemical-disease associations, this cutoff was imposed as it represented the approximate point that the unknown risk was substantially lower than the known chemical-disease risk, making the associations below this cutoff less informative. Between the top 1000 chemical-disease associations in each set, 16 associations differed. These associations were removed from each prioritized list, but the original ranks of the chemical-disease associations were maintained to create a set of 984 common chemical-disease associations. The highest rank of the removed chemical-disease associations was at 760 with the majority of the removed, not overlapping associations ranked lower than 900. To develop an overall rank based on the two different methods, the average of the two ranks for each chemical-disease association was taken, and the overall list was ordered using this average. If two associations had the same average, they were ordered using the ranking from the DisQGOS-based approach.

Additional R packages

Figures were generated using R/ggplot2 package (version 3.1.0) (Wickham, 2016), R/pheatmap package (version 1.0.12) (Kolde, 2018), and R/CMplot package (version 3.3.3) (LiLin-Yin, 2018). All Analyses were done using R version 3.5.1 (R Core Team, 2018).

RESULTS

Overview of the final DisQGOS dataset

Our final dataset contains 2,361 chemicals, 664 diseases, and 114,682 chemical-disease enrichments. 2,351 chemicals have oral non-cancer DisQs, 73 chemicals have inhalation non-cancer DisQs, 201 chemicals have oral cancer DisQs, and 124 chemicals have inhalation cancer DisQs. All chemical-disease enrichments have a GOS and at least one DisQ. Plots of oral non-cancer, inhalation non-cancer, oral cancer, and inhalation cancer DisQGOS are shown in SI Figure 2. The final dataset has 3,990 genes and 10,330 variants forming 568,434 chemical-gene-variant-disease associations. The oral non-cancer and inhalation cancer chemical-disease enrichment data is available in SI Table 1.

In the overall dataset without respect to exposure routes or cancer/non-cancer endpoints, chemicals were enriched for a median of 30 diseases (range 1–423). Benzo(a)pyrene, Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, Carbon Tetrachloride, and Estradiol were enriched for the most diseases. Breast cancer, diabetes mellitus, ulcerative colitis, and Alzheimer’s disease were the most common diseases enriched for. Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamma (PPARG), Estrogen Receptor 1 (ESR1), Transforming Growth Factor Beta 1 (TGFB1), and tumor protein p53 (TP53) were the most common genes in chemical-disease enrichments, and these genes had the most common variants: rs1801282 on PPARG, rs2234693 on ESR1, and rs1800470 on TGFB1.

To demonstrate the utility of the DisQGOS dataset, we analyze chemical risk among use categories for oral non-cancer chemical-disease enrichments and characterize inhalation cancer chemical-disease associations. Next, we use the DisQGOS dataset to prioritize inhalation cancer chemical-disease enrichments through two techniques: 1) by using the DisQGOS values to prioritize chemical-disease associations, and 2) by using the structure of genetic risk to prioritize chemical-disease associations. Finally, we relate the DisQGOS and structure of genetic risk-based approaches to develop an overall ranked list of inhalation cancer chemical-disease associations.

DisQGOS can be used to analyze chemical risk among use categories

To assess the relationship between chemical-disease DisQGOS, we developed plots of these enrichments. We selected two groups of chemicals from the oral non-cancer DisQ set as a case-study: the “food additives” and the “drinking water contaminants” clusters of chemicals from CPCat.

First, the “food additives” cluster of chemicals from CPCats was matched to chemicals from our database and plotted for oral non-cancer diseases. This category includes chemicals added as preservatives, colorants, sweeteners, or other compounds that are added into food either directly or indirectly. 277 chemicals fell within this group and had oral non-cancer DisQs. To characterize the relationship between the DisQs for these chemicals, we developed a heatmap of the respective chemical-disease enrichments colored by DisQs (Figure 2, right). To determine how GOS are related to these DisQs, we prepared bubble matrices for the chemical-disease enrichments with the bubbles colored by the GOS and the size of the bubble representing the number of variants involved in that enrichment (Figure 2, left). By aligning these two plots next to each other, the relationship between the DisQGOS can be characterized. To assess the contrast between high DisQGOS chemical-disease associations and low DisQGOS chemical-disease associations, we analyzed chemical-disease enrichments in the top and bottom quartile of the oral non-cancer food additives DisQGOS. A subset of chemicals and diseases from these quartiles are shown in Figure 2a.

For the top quartile of oral non-cancer food additives chemical-disease enrichments, we kept chemical-disease enrichments above the DisQ cutoff of 1.30 and the GOS cutoff of 0.96. This reduced our dataset to 65 chemicals and 181 diseases forming 1,239 chemical-disease enrichments. Benzo(a)pyrene had the most disease enrichments (165) followed by trichloroethylene (84), thiram (58), and ascorbic acid (53). Diabetes mellitus was enriched for by the most chemicals (47) followed by Alzheimer’s disease and atherosclerosis (41 each), and benign lung neoplasms (39). These same diseases also had the top DisQGOS among chemicals along with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bilirubin metabolic disorder, and hypertension.

For the bottom quartile of oral non-cancer food additives chemical-disease enrichments, chemical-disease enrichments below the DisQ cutoff of −1.15 and the GOS cutoff of 0.18 were kept. There were 106 chemicals and 266 diseases in this dataset. Vitamin A had the most disease enrichments (60) along with curcumin (59), vitamin D3 (54), and lycopene (34). No chemicals from the bottom quartile were also in the top quartile of chemical-disease enrichments, however 135 diseases overlapped between the two quartiles. Of those diseases that did not overlap with the top quartile, familial hyperlipidemia was enriched for by the most chemicals (20) along with ostoclerosis (20), endemic goiter (18), and fibromyalgia (16).

To assess how different use categories capture chemical-disease enrichments, we repeated the above process for the “drinking water contaminants” cluster of CPCats chemicals and oral non-cancer DisQGOS. We selected this category because it covered a similar number of chemicals as the food additives CPCat category (293 compared to 277), however only 48 of these chemicals overlapped. The drinking water contaminants category had 533 diseases enriched for and 473 were also covered by food additives with 4,051 of the same chemical-disease enrichments shared between the two categories. We prepared a bubble matrix of chemical-disease GOS and a heatmap of chemical-disease oral non-cancer DisQs just as we had for the food additives category and compared the top and bottom quartiles of DisQGOS. A subset of the chemicals and diseases from these quartiles are shown in Figure 2b.

The top quartile of oral non-cancer drinking water contaminants had a lower DisQ cutoff than the food additives CPCat (0.99 compared to 1.30), but a higher GOS (1.13 compared to 0.96). The drinking water contaminants top quartile had 86 chemicals and 170 diseases with tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (141 diseases), endosulfan (103 diseases), carbamazepine (64 diseases), and indomethacin (64 diseases) enriched for the most diseases. Interestingly, diabetes mellitus (63 chemicals), Alzheimer’s disease (62 chemicals), benign lung neoplasms (60 chemicals), and atherosclerosis (52 chemicals) were enriched for by the most chemicals for the drinking water contaminants CPCat as well as food additives. These also shared the greatest DisQGOS along with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ulcerative colitis, and progressive muscular atrophy.

The bottom quartile of oral non-cancer drinking water contaminants was cutoff with DisQs below −1.47 and GOS below 0.20. There were 139 chemicals and 349 diseases in this quartile. Just as with food additives, no chemicals were in both the top and bottom quartile of the drinking water contaminants CPCat. Tamoxifen (74 diseases), dexamethasone (70 diseases), phenobarbital (56 diseases), and medroxyprogesterone acetate (46 diseases) were enriched for the most diseases. There were more differences between the food additives and drinking water contaminants CPCat bottom quartile disease enrichments compared to the top quartiles, but there was still overlap. Crigler-Najjar syndrome (27 chemicals), familial hyperlipidemia and pituitary-dependent Cushing’s disease (21 chemicals each), and thalassemia (19 chemicals) were enriched for by the most chemicals among the bottom quartile of oral non-cancer drinking water contaminants.

DisQGOS can be used to characterize chemical cancer associations

To characterize individual chemical-disease DisQGOS, we selected the inhalation cancer set as a case-study. This set contains 124 chemicals, 102 diseases, and 4,120 chemical-disease enrichments. For inhalation cancer DisQs, we developed a heatmap of the respective chemical-disease enrichments colored by DisQs and bubble matrices for GOS as we did for the oral non-cancer chemical-disease set (Figure 2). By aligning these two plots next to each other, several regions of high DisQGOS overlap are identifiable. To characterize this relationship, we focused on one of these regions of high overlap: the top 15 rows of both inhalation cancer plots (Figure 3, top).

The top 15 chemicals from the region of high inhalation cancer DisQGOS overlap had higher median DisQGOS (2.9 DisQ, 0.9 GOS) than the overall inhalation cancer chemical set (1.9 DisQ, 0.5 GOS). Several of these chemicals are classified as carcinogenic to humans according to the EPA’s Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment (U.S. EPA, 2005), including benzene and 1,3-butadiene. Other chemicals from this cluster are probable human carcinogens with little human data available including carbon tetrachloride and diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP).

Among these chemical-disease enrichments, several of the greatest chemical-DisQ values correspond to chemical-disease associations that have served as the basis for cancer classifications. Benzene has been classified as carcinogenic to humans for decades due to the evidence that it causes leukemia (ATSDR, 2007; IARC, 2012a). In our analysis, the Benzene-leukemia chemical-disease enrichment has the greatest DisQ out of the benzene disease enrichments (inhalation cancer DisQ= 2.95). 1,3-butadiene has a demonstrated association with leukemia (IARC, 2012b) and has the third highest DisQ (inhalation cancer DisQ=2.72), following lymphoma and liver cancer. 1,3-butadiene is suspected to be involved in lymphatic cancers (IARC, 2012b; NTP, 2016), and we found additional evidence to support this association. Both carbon tetrachloride and DEHP have evidence indicating they may lead to liver cancer (ATSDR, 2005, 2002). We found support for this with both liver cancer DisQs the top for that chemical (carbon tetrachloride inhalation cancer DisQ=4.88, DEHP inhalation cancer DisQ=4.03).

The GOS corresponding to these same chemical-disease enrichments give insight into the potential for differential population response in each case. While the benzene DisQ for leukemia is the greatest for that chemical, the GOS is low (1.43) compared to other benzene-disease enrichments with higher DisQs. Liver, lung, and prostate cancer all have DisQs greater than 2.88 and have GOSs greater than 8.25, suggesting they may pose a similar disease risk as leukemia, but with greater variability in the population. Carbon tetrachloride has a high GOS for several diseases. The GOS for liver cancer is 25.14 while carbon tetrachloride-prostate cancer and breast cancer GOSs are 32.54 and 70.92 respectively and both disease enrichments have DisQs equal to that of liver cancer. DEHP has higher GOS scores as well with a GOS of 3.89 for liver cancer and 14.53 for breast cancer, another cancer with a high DisQ for DEHP. These DisQGOS relationships for known chemical-disease associations can give insight into potential chemical-disease associations that are unknown.

DisQGOS can be used to prioritize chemical-disease associations

Through our analyses with inhalation cancer (Figure 3) we identified several well-studied chemical-disease associations (e.g. benzene-leukemia) with high DisQGOS. In addition to these well-studied associations, we also identified other examples of lesser-studied, potential disease associations for these same chemicals that have similarly high DisQGOS (e.g. benzene-liver cancer). To identify these potential chemical-disease associations en masse, we identified chemical-disease enrichments with existing evidence and characterized additional enrichments for the same chemical that had DisQGOS approximately equal to or greater than the DisQGOS for the known association.

Through this approach, we prioritized chemical-disease enrichments for inhalation cancer chemicals. Of the 124 chemicals with at least one inhalation cancer DisQ, 79 had at least one known (existing chemical-disease association in CTD curated from the literature) and one unknown chemical-disease association. For each chemical in this dataset, we plotted the DisQ against the GOS with the known chemical-disease associations highlighted (subset shown in Figure 4). Of the known chemical-disease associations, 60% had DisQs in the top quartile of all DisQs for the respective chemical and 40% had DisQGOS in the top quartiles. To prioritize chemical-disease enrichments, we used the known chemical-disease DisQGOS to anchor the unknown chemical-disease enrichments as described in the Prioritization techniques methods section.

The structure of genetic risk can be used to prioritize chemical-disease associations

We developed a method to prioritize chemical-disease enrichments using the DisQGOS associated with known and unknown associations. As a complementary method for prioritization, we developed another approach utilizing the chemical-variant-disease associations identified during our analyses, termed the “structure of genetic risk” approach. By relating these variants to the corresponding DisQs, we describe the structure of genetic risk involved in these chemical-disease enrichments. For this analysis, we continued examining the inhalation cancer chemical-disease set. Figure 5 consists of two sets of Manhattan plots comparing the chemical-variant-disease associations for the known and unknown chemical-disease associations. Each point is a variant from the chemical-disease associations. These are the same chemical-disease associations in Figures 3 and 4. The top panels in Figure 5a and b corresponds to known associations while the bottom panels correspond to unknown chemical-disease enrichments. The points in 5a are plotted as counts of all chemical-disease associations with a common variant. For example, rs1695 has 43 known chemical-disease associations and 335 unknown chemical disease associations. The plots in 5b sum the DisQs for the chemical-disease associations with a common variant. For example, the 43 known chemical-disease associations for rs1695 summed to 26.11 and the 335 unknown chemical-disease associations summed to 247.43 (labeled on chromosome 11 in Figure 5b). By identifying regions where multiple chemical-disease associations share a common variant, the GOS is high, and the net DisQ is positive, genetic regions at high risk for variable population response can be identified.

As described in the “Prioritization techniques” methods section, we identified which of the 2,671 variants in the inhalation cancer chemical-disease enrichments had net positive DisQs in both the known and unknown chemical-disease associations. In total, there were 381 variants (net positive values in 4b), and these may describe high-risk inhalation cancer genetic regions. These data are presented in SI Table 2. These represent the “net positive variants” used in the structure of genetic risk-based approach to chemical-disease prioritization.

The DisQGOS and structure of genetic risk-based approach can be used to develop an overall ranked list of chemical-disease associations

To improve the chemical-disease prioritization method, we used the ranks from the DisQGOS-based approach and the structure of genetic risk-based approach to develop one overall chemical-disease prioritization as described in the “Prioritization techniques” methods section.

The ranks of the DisQGOS-based and structure of genetic risk-based prioritization techniques are highly correlated (Pearson’s correlation coefficient = 0.93, Wilcoxon signed rank test p-value = 0.89, SI Figure 3). The ranks for these 984 chemical-disease associations are given in SI Table 3.

DISCUSSION

We developed a large and unique dataset of chemical-disease enrichments. These enrichments were discovered using integrated HTS and literature-curated chemical-gene data and four distinct gene-disease datasets, each developed with different methods to identify gene-disease linkages. This set of chemical-disease enrichments is expansive, covering a wide range of cancer and non-cancer diseases and many chemical use categories. We also applied a new concept to align chemical-disease associations in a GxE interaction context. We identified variants associated with the genes and diseases at the intersection of the chemical-disease enrichments to characterize those that could be involved in differential population responses. To our knowledge, no such resource exists to identify candidate chemical-disease associations that could lead to GxE interactions. Further, we utilized the concept of the polygenic risk score to develop a genetic overview score for each chemical-disease enrichment and quantify the GxE interaction potential based on the chemical-disease variant allele frequencies. This concept of quantifying a chemical’s risk for variable population responses is novel and shows promise for capturing important chemical-disease associations and providing further context to chemical mechanisms. For example, we found that DEHP has a high GOS for breast cancer. While existing evidence of an association between DEHP and breast cancer is limited, genetic polymorphisms are well-understood to play a prominent role in breast cancer progression and many phthalates are suspected to contribute to breast cancer development (Chen and Chien, 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2004; Miao et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016). Therefore, our finding that DEHP has a high GOS for breast cancer could highlight an important chemical-disease association, and the variants identified at this intersection could be considered in analyses of this mechanism. This approach could be repeated for other chemical-disease associations identified in our dataset (SI Table 1).

We analyzed the structure of genetic risk and identified several variants that may pose a greater risk in disease progression in inhalation cancer. Of the variants implicated in chemical-disease enrichments, 381 had net positive DisQs in both known and unknown inhalation cancer chemical-disease associations (SI Table 2). We identified six variants that were in the top 5% of the highest known and unknown DisQ sums (subset labeled in Figure 5). These variants are implicated in some of the chemical-disease associations posing the highest risk and therefore may be more important in differential population responses. For example, rs1695 on Glutathione S-transferase P (GSTP1) is implicated in 378 chemical-disease associations across 30 chemicals and 22 diseases. Because the DisQ sum across these associations is so high (273.54 total for known and unknown associations), this variant should be considered higher priority for study of differential population responses as the chemical-disease associations it is implicated in are higher risk. Two other variants on chromosome 1 (rs1805087 and rs1136410) and three on chromosome 19 (rs13181, rs1799793, and rs4803455) should also be considered high-risk variants due to their high total DisQ sums across chemical-disease associations.

Besides the chemical-variant-disease associations, our dataset contains several sources of chemical toxicity and exposure data. These data were joined to calculate oral and/or inhalation cancer and/or non-cancer HQs. To apply the concept of chemical risk in a disease context, we developed a new risk value relating chemical-disease enrichments to chemical HQs. Like HQs, these DisQs describe chemical oral and/or inhalation cancer and/or non-cancer associations. These DisQ values are easily interpretable with DisQs above 0 indicating a potentially high-risk chemical-disease enrichment. We found these DisQs to be of an appropriate magnitude as many instances of known chemical-disease associations (e.g. benzene-leukemia, carbon tetrachloride-liver cancer) had the largest DisQs for that chemical. This suggests that the DisQs for unknown enrichments may be accurate descriptors of actual chemical-disease risk.

We found further evidence that the DisQGOS concept accurately describes chemical-disease risk by comparing the top and bottom quartiles of chemical-disease enrichments for oral non-cancer disease associations with food additives and drinking water contaminants chemical CPCats. For those chemical-disease enrichments in the top quartiles, well-studied chemicals that are considered high-priority owing to known disease risk were the most common, such as benzo(a)pyrene and trichloroethylene (U.S. EPA, 2014b). These chemicals were enriched for diseases that are understood to have environmental influence and also have variable responses in the population, such as Alzheimer’s disease and diabetes mellitus (Desikan et al., 2017; Kaul and Ali, 2015; Malecki, 2005; Yegambaram et al., 2015). In comparison, the chemicals in the bottom quartile of chemical-disease enrichments are generally considered safe, such as curcumin and lycopene (Liu et al., 2010; Stanić, 2017), and the diseases were more likely to be inherited, such as thalassemia, Crigler-Najjar syndrome, and familial hyperlipidemia (Memon et al., 2016; Shoulders, 2004; Thein et al., 1990). Therefore, in addition to capturing chemical-disease enrichments that are considered high-risk and assigning those higher DisQGOS, this method accurately assigns lower risk values to chemical-disease enrichments that are less likely to have an environmental contribution.

We identified several known chemical-disease associations from CTD in our dataset. By determining the variants and DisQGOS for known chemical-disease associations, we developed two methods to prioritize unknown chemical-disease enrichments relative to these known associations. First, we used the DisQGOS of the known chemical-disease associations to anchor unknown enrichments by identifying those that had DisQs and GOS greater than or similar to the known chemical-disease risk values. Secondly, we identified the variants with the greatest DisQ values across all chemical-disease associations to describe the structure of genetic risk. We then identified how many of these variants and all variants were implicated in known associations and which unknown enrichments had more or a similar number of variants. We used these two methods to prioritize inhalation cancer chemical-disease enrichments. These two prioritization methods were highly correlated, and we used the respective lists to develop one overall list of prioritized chemical-disease enrichments. Together, these two methods prioritized chemical-disease associations based on both the structure of the genetic risk and the associated risk values, addressing needs in current risk assessment methodology for greater biological context and consideration of GxE potential (Gwinn et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2017).

Benzo(a)pyrene-colon carcinoma was prioritized as the top chemical-disease association through both prioritization methods. While benzo(a)pyrene is a recognized human carcinogen (U.S. EPA, 2014b), its role in the development of colon carcinomas has not been well investigated. Further, there is evidence of differential metabolism of benzo(a)pyrene in individuals with certain variants, like those on cytochrome P450s (Schwarz and Kisselev, 2001). We identified 281 variants implicated in the benzo(a)pyrene-colon carcinoma association on 184 genes, including several cytochrome P450s. Therefore, we propose that the benzo(a)pyrene-colon carcinoma association should be considered for further study both due to high potential for a disease association and for differential population responses. Other chemical-disease associations identified through our prioritization mechanism should also be considered when assessing chemical risk and differential population disease responses (SI Table 3).

In addition to prioritizing chemical-disease associations, these data can be used to prioritize chemicals overall. Of the 38 chemicals on the high-priority chemical-disease associations list that we developed, chemicals could be prioritized based on the number of disease associations or the average rank, DisQ, and/or GOS for each disease enrichment. For example, to prioritize chemicals based on the number of disease enrichments and DisQGOS, vinyl chloride and 1,3-butadiene had over 40 disease associations with the average rank around 300, the average DisQ over 2, and the average GOS over 1. Therefore, these chemicals could be considered high-priority due to how many high-risk diseases they are enriched for. With greater consideration given to the magnitude of the disease associations rather than the number, carbon tetrachloride had only four disease associations on the final list, but the average rank was 38, the average DisQ was 4.8, and the average GOS was 43.8. Therefore, this chemical could also be considered high priority based on how high-risk its disease associations are.

An additional application of our analysis could be to guide future toxicity testing based on the chemical-disease associations identified. For example, the endpoint used in IRIS when calculating the inhalation cancer toxicity value for benzene was “Leukemia.” Given the known association between benzene and leukemia, this was a logical endpoint for toxicity testing (IARC, 2012a). However, the inhalation cancer toxicity endpoint for carbon tetrachloride was “Pheochromocytoma”, despite the greater DisQs for other carbon tetrachloride cancer associations. Therefore, we propose that identifying the associations between chemicals and diseases could help guide future toxicity testing to develop more relevant toxicity endpoints and further refine DisQs and risk assessments.

Our approach for assessing chemical-disease risk from a population health perspective shows promise as a complementary method to other efforts characterizing chemical risk and genetic susceptibility in risk assessment. The NRC report emphasizes the utilization of toxicity pathways to characterize chemical-disease associations from a mechanistic perspective (NRC, 2007), and the NexGen risk assessment aims to put this approach into practice from a population health perspective (Cote et al., 2016; Krewski et al., 2014). Integration of chemical-gene target data with human polymorphism data is one method to characterize differential population responses in risk assessment, but a challenge in this approach is forming connections between environmental factors and genetic variants contributing to disease (Mortensen and Euling, 2013). Our DisQGOS method and corresponding datasets can help to address these challenges. Some other approaches to combat this challenge have also been proposed, including integration of CTD chemical-gene data with disease-specific Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets (Patel and Butte, 2010), identification of pathways implicated for both genetic and environmental contributions (Gohlke et al., 2009), and environment-wide association studies (EWAS) (Mortensen and Euling, 2013; Patel et al., 2013). Additionally, associations between non-disease traits (e.g. clinical cholesterol levels or smoking) and diseases have been identified by characterizing shared genetic architecture (Li et al., 2014). These approaches can be used alongside our DisQGOS method to incorporate differential population responses into risk assessment. For example, by aligning the chemical-gene-variant-disease associations that we have identified to toxicity pathways as described in Gohlke et al. 2009, the value of the DisQGOS method can be extended to characterize modes of action for human susceptibility genes and polymorphisms. These associations could be extended into networks of toxicity pathways and cooccurring diseases. By characterizing the associations we found from a toxicity pathway perspective, our prioritization methods could also be improved by identifying frequently implicated pathways.

Our prioritization technique highlights several chemical-disease associations that should be considered for future study, but there are some limitations. While our method can aid in prioritization efforts when there is little information available to guide the analysis, diseases with the most genetic information available are consistently the ones with the most chemical hits. For example, Alzheimer’s disease and diabetes mellitus are two diseases with the most chemical associations, and these are also the diseases with the most gene associations resulting from the enrichment analysis. Therefore, more chemicals share genes common to these diseases than other, less well-studied diseases. While the potential associations between chemicals and these diseases should still be considered, it is possible that there are other diseases that chemicals would have greater risk in, but those outcomes do not have enough known gene associations to yield as high of a DisQ as Alzheimer’s disease and diabetes mellitus. These literature biases could also influence the chemical-disease associations we identify as studies of chemicals may be preferential towards known chemical-disease associations (e.g. benzene-leukemia), thus resulting in more chemical-gene associations related to a particular disease. With continued advancements in understanding of less well-studied diseases, the utility of the associations identified through our methods will continue to improve.

Another limitation in our prioritization methods is that all gene-variant-disease associations are given equal weight. As genes and variants contribute differently to diseases, it is possible that the value of some of the associations between chemicals, variants, and diseases are not reflective of the actual strength of associations. While this is an important consideration for analyses of specific chemical-gene-variant-disease associations, a systematic estimate of allelic effect sizes cannot currently be made for the variants in our analysis. However, development of such a method is an active area of research, and future efforts should consider allelic effect sizes in interpretation of the GOS.

Future studies should also determine methods to distinguish between therapeutic and adverse chemical-disease enrichments. The DisQs that we developed include a HQ component, but it is possible that the disease enrichment p-values in our calculations correspond to therapeutic rather than toxic characteristics of the chemical. However, identification of therapeutic associations could be considered as an additional way that this method could be utilized in the future. By identifying chemical-disease enrichments for which the p-value is highly significant, new therapies may be identifiable. Additionally, variants implicated in these connections could aid in personalized medicine study. For example, common chemical-variant-disease associations involved in variable population responses were captured in our methods including warfarin variants like rs2359612 on Vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 (VKORC1) and rs1799853 and rs1057910 on Cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) (Cooper et al., 2008). Atherosclerosis also had the greatest oral non-cancer DisQ (4.76) out of all warfarin disease enrichments. Simvastatin-myopathy associations were also linked to common variants (SEARCH Collaborative Group et al., 2008). By following this same approach to determine chemical-disease enrichments and implicated variants, this method could be used to prioritize drugs for testing new therapeutic mechanisms.

An additional consideration when determining the value of the chemical-disease enrichments identified is that not all enrichments are ranked with respect to the most common route of exposure. Because the ExpoCast data we used are general exposure values and the disease enrichments are calculated without respect to target tissue or exposure route, not all chemical-disease enrichments represent likely exposure scenarios. For example, the second chemical-disease enrichment prioritized for study in both of our inhalation cancer prioritization methods is an association between propylthiouracil, an anti-thyroid agent taken orally (Cooper and Rivkees, 2009), and breast cancer. While there is a possibility that propylthiouracil could either lead to breast cancer or serve as a breast cancer therapy when inhaled, this is not the most common route of exposure for this drug. However, a potential benefit to identifying generalized chemical-disease associations and using non-specific exposure data is that we were able to calculate DisQs for chemicals with unknown target tissues and/or exposure scenarios. This could be beneficial to characterize the disease potential of chemicals for which little data is available. These methods can be improved by characterizing the likelihood of these disease associations with respect to chemical target tissues and modes of action. Additionally, as more relevant exposure data for these chemicals becomes available, HQs can be refined to improve the relevance of the DisQs.

We developed new risk values to aid in risk assessment prioritization techniques. These values describe chemical risk in a disease context and characterize the structure of genetic risk. Additionally, we present these risk values as part of a novel dataset describing chemical-disease enrichments and implicated genes and variants. Together, these risk values match the goals of the shifting risk assessment paradigm and the dataset fills a gap in availability of chemical-disease risk information. These methods can be used alongside more conventional screening and prioritization approaches to continue to improve human health risk assessment.

Supplementary Material

2 SI Figure 1. Distribution of DisQs. Distribution of DisQ values for (Left) Oral, (Right) Inhalation, (Top) Non-cancer, (Bottom) Cancer.

3 SI Figure 2. Chemical-disease DisQGOS. Plots of all DisQs vs log10(GOS). (Left) Oral, (Right) Inhalation, (Top) Non-cancer, (Bottom) Cancer. Colored points are top 200 DisQs for each chemical-disease set. (Green) Oral, (Pink) Inhalation, Blue (Overlapping cancer chemicals between oral and inhalation, no overlap for non-cancer).

4 SI Figure 3. Correlation of DisQGOS and structure of genetic risk-based prioritization techniques. Determined for overlapping 984 chemical-disease associations from the top 1000 chemical-disease associations from each prioritization

5 SI Table 1. Dataset of oral non-cancer and inhalation cancer chemical hazard quotients, chemical-disease enrichments and p-values, implicated genes and variants, and DisQGOS.

6 SI Table 2. Dataset of variants with the number of chemicals in known and unknown diseases and the sum of DisQs for known and unknown diseases. Net positive variants (positive DisQ sum for known and unknown chemical-diseases) and the high-risk variants (DisQ sum in the top 5% for known and unknown chemical-diseases) are given.

7 SI Table 3. Dataset of overall prioritized chemical-disease associations. Overall rank and ranks from the DisQGOS and structure of genetic risk-based approaches are given.

FUNDING INFORMATION

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [ES025128, ES007046, ES030007], the US Environmental Protection Agency [STAR R835802], and in part by the NCSU/RTI Game-Changing Research Initiative Program.

Abbreviations

HTS High-throughput screening

CTD Comparative Toxicogenomics Database

DGA Disease Gene Annotations database

Gendoo Gene, Disease Features Ontology-based Overview System

IRIS Integrated Risk Information System

PPRTV Provisional Peer-Reviewed Toxicity Values

RAIS Risk Assessment Information System

ATSDR Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

CPCat Chemical Products Categories database

IVIVE In vitro to in vivo extrapolation

GxE Gene-environment

RfD Reference dose

RfC Reference concentration

OSF Oral slope factor

IUR Inhalation unit risk value

HQ Hazard quotient

DisQ Disease quotient

MAF Minor allele frequency

GOS Genetic overview score

Figure 1. Overview of data preparation and risk score development.

Grey arrows depict information flow across the 5 steps. A red line connecting variables (e.g. C-G1|G2-D) indicates an association (e.g. Chemical-Disease enrichment across Genes 1 and 2).

Figure 2. Use category subset of top and bottom quartiles of oral non-cancer DisQGOS.

(Left) bubble matrix of GOS, bubble size = number of variants in the chemical-disease association, color= GOS, darker blue= larger GOS. (Right) heatmap of chemical-disease DisQs, color = DisQ, darker blue= more positive DisQ, darker pink= more negative DisQ. (a) drinking water contaminants CPCat, (b) food additives CPCat.

Figure 3. Inhalation cancer DisQGOS.

(Left) bubble matrix of GOS, bubble size = number of variants in the chemical-disease association, color= GOS, darker blue= larger GOS. (Right) heatmap of chemical-disease DisQs, color = DisQ, darker blue= more positive DisQ, darker pink= more negative DisQ. Top panels= subset of top 15 rows of underlying figures.

Figure 4. Chemical-disease prioritization for inhalation cancer associations.

Each plot is one chemical with the respective disease associations plotted by the log10(GOS) and DisQ. Green point= Known chemical-disease associations. Red line= Median log10(GOS) for known chemical-disease associations, blue line= Median DisQ for known chemical-disease associations.

Figure 5. Manhattan plots of known and unknown chemical-disease associations.

(a) Number of chemical-disease associations per variant, (b) Sum of chemical-disease association DisQs per variant. Top panel in a &amp; b= known chemical-disease associations, bottom panel in a &amp; b= unknown chemical-disease associations. Labels= variants with DisQ sums in the top 5% of all known and unknown DisQ sums.

Table 1. Definitions of terminology used throughout manuscript.

Term	Source	Definition	
Chemical-gene association	HTS/CTD integrated dataa	A connection between a chemical and gene from in vitro, in vivo, and human response data	
Gene-disease association	DisGeNET, DGA, Gendoo, gene2pubmedb	A connection between a gene and a disease determined from curated sources, text-mining, etc.	
Chemical-disease association	CTDc, Chemical-gene associations, and gene-disease associations	Any connection between a chemical and a disease	
Chemical-disease enrichment	Chemical-gene associations and gene-disease associations	A chemical-disease association determined through hypergeometric test	
Known chemical-disease association	CTD and chemical-disease enrichments	A chemical-disease association identified through hypergeometric test with CTD direct evidence	
Unknown chemical-disease association	Chemical-disease enrichments	A chemical-disease association identified through hypergeometric test without CTD direct evidence	
Gene-variant-disease association	DisGeNETd	A connection between a gene and a variant and a variant and a disease determined from curated sources and text-mining derived associations	
Chemical-gene-variant-disease association	Chemical-disease enrichments and gene-variant-disease association	A connection between a chemical-disease enrichment and a gene-variant-disease association over an implicated gene-disease connection	
Hazard Quotient (HQ)	IRIS, PPRTV, RAIS, ATSDR, Sipes et al. 2017, Wignall et al. 2018, Wambaugh et al. 2013 &amp; 2014e	A risk value relating exposure to toxicity values. For our purposes, used for both cancer and non-cancer endpoints	
Genetic Overview Score (GOS)	Chemical-gene-variant-disease associations, DisGeNET	A risk value quantifying a chemical’s potential for GxE interactions and/or population variable response in a disease	
Disease Quotient (DisQ)	Chemical-disease enrichments, HQs	A risk value quantifying overall chemical-disease risk	
DisQGOS	Chemical-disease enrichments, DisQs, GOS	A concept relating overall chemical-disease risk (DisQs) to the potential for population variable responses in a chemical-disease association (GOS)	
Structure of genetic risk	Chemical-gene-variant-disease associations, DisGeNET	A concept to characterize high-risk variants in chemical-disease associations	
a. Reference in “Chemical-gene dataset” methods section

b. References in “Gene-disease datasets” methods section

c. http://ctdbase.org

d. http://disgenet.org

e. References in “Hazard and exposure datasets” methods section

HIGHLIGHTS

Chemical-disease data were integrated with variant-disease data

Disease quotient risk values developed to characterize chemical-disease risk

Genetic overview scores developed to describe risk differential population response

New risk values describe known chemical-disease associations

New risk values can be used to prioritize unknown chemical-disease associations

Declarations of competing interests

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Adeleye Y , Andersen M , Clewell R , Davies M , Dent M , Edwards S , Fowler P , Malcomber S , Nicol B , Scott A , Scott S , Sun B , Westmoreland C , White A , Zhang Q , Carmichael PL , 2015 Implementing Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century (TT21C): Making safety decisions using toxicity pathways, and progress in a prototype risk assessment. Toxicology 332 , 102–111. 10.1016/j.tox.2014.02.007 24582757
ATSDR, 2007 Toxicological profile for benzene.. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service 438 .
ATSDR, 2005 Toxicological Profile for Carbon Tetrachloride. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service 10.1201/9781420061888_ch50
ATSDR, 2002 Toxicological Profile For Di(2-Ethylhexyl)Phthalate. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
Bodenreider O , 2003 The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology. Nucleic Acids Res. 32 , 267D–270. 10.1093/nar/gkh061
Boverhof DR , Zacharewski TR , 2006 Toxicogenomics in risk assessment: Applications and needs. Toxicol. Sci. 89 , 352–360. 10.1093/toxsci/kfj018 16221963
Buesen R , Chorley BN , da Silva Lima B , Daston G , Deferme L , Ebbels T , Gant TW , Goetz A , Greally J , Gribaldo L , Hackermüller J , Hubesch B , Jennen D , Johnson K , Kanno J , Kauffmann HM , Laffont M , McMullen P , Meehan R , Pemberton M , Perdichizzi S , Piersma AH , Sauer UG , Schmidt K , Seitz H , Sumida K , Tollefsen KE , Tong W , Tralau T , van Ravenzwaay B , Weber RJM , Worth A , Yauk C , Poole A , 2017 Applying ‘omics technologies in chemicals risk assessment: Report of an ECETOC workshop. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 91 , S3–S13. 10.1016/j.yrtph.2017.09.002 28958911
Campbell CL , Scheller C , Horn H , Kidd JM , Doddapaneni H , Underhill PA , Shao H , Hodgkinson A , Zheng-Bradley X , Zhang J , Sultan M , Cohen R , Poplin RE , Li Z , Kulesha E , Narechania A , Liu S , Hyland FCL , Fritsche L , Reid JG , Tariyal R , Toji LH , Schaffner SF , Ward AN , Liu J , De La Vega FM , McVean GA , Wilson Sayres MA , Lin H , Cooper DN , Walter K , Kanneh L , Chen K , Schneider V , Chew E , Li G , Bodmer W , Cook C , Toneva I , Liu B , Yin Y , Saleheen D , Montgomery SB , Zhang C , Sisay Joof F , Handsaker RE , Chen W , Thormann A , Kenny EE , McLaren WM , Xue Y , Mendez FL , Bafna V , Ritchie GR , Yu F , Beal K , Gibbs RA , Zheng X , Bustamante CD , Gignoux CR , Lage K , Barnes B , Lu J , Jiang H , Durbin RM , Bouk N , Qadri F , Gupta N , Humphray S , LaRocque R , Roa A , Lyons R , Gymrek M , Jallow M , Taliun D , Gerry NP , Malhotra A , Sherry ST , Shakir K , Li Yun , Plewczynski D , Liu Xiaoming ,Lek M , MacArthur DG , Sudbrak R , Mertes F , Browning SR , Nagaswamy U , Chen Y , Zhang D , Hernandez RD , Lu Y , Phan L , Lunter G , Chen T , Borodina TA , Shaw R , Lopez J , Herwig R , Banks E , Smith RE , Rausch T , Han Y , Vaughan B , Ananiev V , Stütz AM , Zhu Y , Ruiz-Linares A , Orfao A , Timmermann B , Paolo Casale F , Bauer M , Hale W , Sinari SA , Kwiatkowski D , Jasmine Mu X , Belaia Z , Blackwell T , Yang F , Clark AG , Romanovitch M , Shekhtman E , Bentley DR , Walker JA , Davies CJ , Xiao C , Liu C , Rasheed A , Zhang Yan , Boerwinkle E , Shriver MD , Katzman SJ , Blackburne B , Kate Wing M , Shringarpure SS , Sebat J , Izatt T , Chu J , Simpson JT , Poletti G , Datta A , Jin M , Habegger L , Zhan Y , Yu C , Leinonen R , Webster T , Stalker J , Jostins L , Byrnes JK , Squire K , Zakharia F , Kong Y , Larson D , Parrish NF , Xiong M , Shi X , Kimelman M , Evani US , Fuchsberger C , Church D , Ritchie GRS , Hartl C , Wang G , Ye Kenny , Hefferon T , e E , Cerezo M , Abyzov A , Kahveci F , Christoforides A , Zhan X , Fung Leong W , Stromberg M , Folarin O , Fang X , Marth GT , Rimmer A , Corrah T , Myers S , Mathieson I , Ma X , Yu H , Mathias RA , Konkel MK , Kovar C , Fulton R , Caron S , Muzny D , Li H , Lee D , Meric P , Desalle R , Yoon SC , Louzada S , Sabeti PC , Li B , Gabriel SB , Lindsay SJ , Gujral M , Coin L , Chen J , Omoniwa O , Ayub Q , Lan T , Mardis ER , Wu H , Balasubramanian S , Stegle O , Peltonen L , Dunstan SJ , Kim D , Li Q , Rodriguez-Flores JL , Luo R , Deng X , Korchina V , Dermitzakis ET , Craig DW , Oleksyk TK , Witherspoon D , Dan X , Schieffelin J , Gil L , Chong Z , Frederick Willems T , Wong B , Cunningham F , Watson H , Bainbridge M , Malig M , Balasubramaniam S , Colonna V , Ning Z , Kolb-Kokocinski A , Lappalainen T , Zhang H , Garcia-Montero A , Jorde L , Zhao M , Xing J , James T , Gollub J , Lam H , Swaroop A , Lander ES , Hormozdiari F , Li J , Cox A , Ball EV , Devine SE , Delaneau O , Feng Q , Lacroute P , Barker J , Yaspo M-L , Wang B , Berg Jespersen J , Vitti J , Meiers S , Radew K , Korbel JO , DeGorter MK , Sisu C , Tịnh Hiêǹ T , Kahn S , Hwang J , Gallo C , Barnes KC , Shlyakhter I , Gao Y , Fu Yao , Zhang Yujun , Ye C , Emery S , Kural D , McCarthy S , Danecek P , Chaisson MJ , Peden J , Sudmant PH , Xu X , Song S , Raeder B , Herrero J , Hennis A , Chen C , Zhang F , Zhu J , Halperin E , DePristo MA , Schmidt JP , Wu R , Degenhardt J , Garner J , Keinan A , McKenzie C , Sliwerska E , Massaia A , Lameijer E-W , Yu J , Hurles ME , Wilson RK , Garrison EP , Grocock R , Kalra D , Tyler-Smith C , O’Sullivan C , Zheng H , Huddleston J , Gerstein MB , Bedoya G , Quitadamo A , Wang J , Li W , Martinez-Cruzado JC , Moses L , Haussler D , Happi C , Clarke L , Asogun D , Sidore C , Baran Y , Awadalla P , Chang Y , Harmanci AO , Xie Y , Altshuler DM , Zhang W , Dunham I , Wu J , Antunes L , Bhatia G , Martin AR , Zhu H , Mills RE , Tang M , Garry R , Daly MJ , Guo X , Ye Kai , Dutil J , Jian M , Sabo A , Banerjee R , Kingsbury Z , Welch R , Gardner EJ , Zerbino D , Noor A , Zhang M , Slotta D , Li Yingrui , Flicek P , Jin X , Keane TM , Burchard EG , Jun G , Mittelman D , Kooner J , Amstislavskiy VS , Grant DS , Rosenfeld JA , Burton J , Fang L , Xifara DK , Tan A , Nemesh JC , Dayama G , Marchini JL , Keira Cheetham R , Fritz MH , Lehrach H , Browning BL , Howie B , Kretzschmar W , Homer N , David Poznik G , Ostapchuk Y , Churchhouse C , Min Kang H , Huang Z , Fonnie R , Ponomarov S , Gravel S , Thuy Hang N , Smirnov D , Gupta-Hinch A , McCarroll SA , del Angel G , Koboldt DC , Alkan C , Fu Yunxin , Menelaou A , Zhao J , Erlich Y , Fulton L , Nelson BJ , Fan X , Carroll AW , Moreno-Estrada A , Kurdoglu AA , Michaelson J , Gottipati S , Abecasis GR , Hall I , Lee C , Kashin S , Auton A , Genovese G , Cai Z , Gharani N , Resch AM , Antaki D , Stremlau M , Khurana E , Hunt SE , Sirotkin K , Lienhard M , Albrecht MW , James Kent W , Batzer MA , Maples BK , Murray L , Makarov V , Rockett K , Streeter I , Marcketta A , Eberle M , Challis D , Lee S , Iqbal Z , Dal E , Coin LJM , Kelman G , Lihm J , Eichler EE , Radhakrishnan R , Beloslyudtsev D , Quail M , Albers CA , Liu Xiao , Stenson PD , Clarke D , Ding L , Lee W-P , Fitzgerald TW , 2015 A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526 , 68–74. 10.1038/nature15393 26432245
Chatterjee N , Shi J , García-Closas M , 2016 Developing and evaluating polygenic risk prediction models for stratified disease prevention. Nat. Rev. Genet 17 , 392–406. 10.1038/nrg.2016.27 27140283
Chen F-P , Chien M-H , 2014 Lower concentrations of phthalates induce proliferation in human breast cancer cells. Climacteric 17 , 377–384. 10.3109/13697137.2013.865720 24228746
Chen FP , Chien MH , Chern IYY , 2016 Impact of low concentrations of phthalates on the effects of 17β-estradiol in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Taiwan. J. Obstet. Gynecol 55 , 826–834. 10.1016/j.tjog.2015.11.003 28040128
Cohen Hubal E. a , Richard A , Aylward L , Edwards S , Gallagher J , Goldsmith M-R , Isukapalli S , Tornero-Velez R , Weber E , Kavlock R , 2010 Advancing exposure characterization for chemical evaluation and risk assessment. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health. B. Crit. Rev 13 , 299–313. 10.1080/10937404.2010.483947 20574904
Coletti MH , Bleich HL , 2001 Medical subject headings used to search the biomedical literature. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc 8 , 317–23.11418538
Collins FS , Gray GM , Bucher JR , 2008 Transforming Environmental Health Protection. Science (80-. ). 319 , 906–7. 10.1126/science.1154619.Transforming
Cooper DS , Rivkees SA , 2009 Putting propylthiouracil in perspective. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 94 , 1881–1882. 10.1210/jc.2009-0850 19401361
Cooper GM , Johnson JA , Langaee TY , Feng H , Stanaway IB , Schwarz UI , Ritchie MD , Stein CM , Roden DM , Smith JD , Veenstra DL , Rettie AE , Rieder MJ , 2008 A genome-wide scan for common genetic variants with a large influence on warfarin maintenance dose. Blood 112 , 1022–1027. 10.1182/blood-2008-01-134247 18535201
Cote I , Anastas PT , Birnbaum LS , Clark RM , Dix DJ , Edwards SW , Preuss PW , 2012 Advancing the Next Generation of Health Risk Assessment. Environ. Health Perspect. 120 , 1499–1502. 10.1289/ehp.1104870 22875311
Cote I , Andersen ME , Ankley GT , Barone S , Birnbaum LS , Boekelheide K , Bois FY , Burgoon LD , Chiu WA , Crawford-Brown D , Crofton KM , Devito M , Devlin RB , Edwards SW , Guyton KZ , Hattis D , Judson RS , Knight D , Krewski D , Lambert J , Maull EA , Mendrick D , Paoli GM , Patel CJ , Perkins EJ , Poje G , Portier CJ , Rusyn I , Schulte PA , Simeonov A , Smith MT , Thayer KA , Thomas RS , Thomas R , Tice RR , Vandenberg JJ , Villeneuve DL , Wesselkamper S , Whelan M , Whittaker C , White R , Xia M , Yauk C , Zeise L , Zhao J , Dewoskin RS , 2016 The next generation of risk assessment multi-year study - highlights of findings, applications to risk assessment, and future directions. Environ. Health Perspect. 124 , 1671–1682. 10.1289/EHP233 27091369
Davis AP , Grondin CJ , Johnson RJ , Sciaky D , McMorran R , Wiegers J , Wiegers TC , Mattingly CJ , 2019 The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database: Update 2019. Nucleic Acids Res. 47 , D948–D954. 10.1093/nar/gky868 30247620
Davis AP , Murphy CG , Johnson R , Lay JM , Lennon-Hopkins K , Saraceni-Richards C , Sciaky D , King BL , Rosenstein MC , Wiegers TC , Mattingly CJ , 2013 The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database: update 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 41 , D1104–D1114. 10.1093/nar/gks994 23093600
Desikan RS , Fan CC , Wang Y , Schork AJ , Cabral HJ , Cupples LA , Thompson WK , Besser L , Kukull WA , Holland D , Chen C-H , Brewer JB , Karow DS , Kauppi K , Witoelar A , Karch CM , Bonham LW , Yokoyama JS , Rosen HJ , Miller BL , Dillon WP , Wilson DM , Hess CP , Pericak-Vance M , Haines JL , Farrer LA , Mayeux R , Hardy J , Goate AM , Hyman BT , Schellenberg GD , McEvoy LK , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , 2017 Genetic assessment of age-associated Alzheimer disease risk: Development and validation of a polygenic hazard score. PLOS Med. 14 , e1002258 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002258 28323831
Dionisio KL , Frame AM , Goldsmith MR , Wambaugh JF , Liddell A , Cathey T , Smith D , Vail J , Ernstoff AS , Fantke P , Jolliet O , Judson RS , 2015 Exploring consumer exposure pathways and patterns of use for chemicals in the environment. Toxicol. Reports 2 , 228–237. 10.1016/j.toxrep.2014.12.009
Dix DJ , Houck KA , Martin MT , Richard AM , Setzer RW , Kavlock RJ , 2007 The toxcast program for prioritizing toxicity testing of environmental chemicals. Toxicol. Sci. 95 , 5–12. 10.1093/toxsci/kfl103 16963515
Doe JE , Lander DR , Doerrer NG , Heard N , Hines RN , Lowit AB , Pastoor T , Phillips RD , Sargent D , Sherman JH , Young Tanir J , Embry MR , 2016 Use of the RISK21 roadmap and matrix: human health risk assessment of the use of a pyrethroid in bed netting. Crit. Rev. Toxicol 46 , 54–73. 10.3109/10408444.2015.1082974 26517449
Duncan Temple Lang and the CRAN team, 2018 RCurl: General network (HTTP/FTP/...) client interface for R. [WWW Document]. R Packag. version 1.95–4.11. URL https://cran.r-project.org/package=RCurl
Egeghy PP , Vallero DA , Cohen Hubal EA , 2011 Exposure-based prioritization of chemicals for risk assessment. Environ. Sci. Policy 14 , 950–964. 10.1016/j.envsci.2011.07.010
Embry MR , Bachman AN , Bell DR , Boobis AR , Cohen SM , Dellarco M , Dewhurst IC , Doerrer NG , Hines RN , Moretto A , Pastoor TP , Phillips RD , Rowlands JC , Tanir JY , Wolf DC , Doe JE , 2014 Risk assessment in the 21st century: Roadmap and matrix. Crit. Rev. Toxicol 44 , 6–16. 10.3109/10408444.2014.931924 25070414
Farmahin R , Williams A , Kuo B , Chepelev NL , Thomas RS , Barton-Maclaren TS , Curran IH , Nong A , Wade MG , Yauk CL , 2017 Recommended approaches in the application of toxicogenomics to derive points of departure for chemical risk assessment. Arch. Toxicol 91 , 2045–2065. 10.1007/s00204-016-1886-5 27928627
Gohlke JM , Thomas R , Zhang Y , Rosenstein MC , Davis AP , Murphy C , Becker KG , Mattingly CJ , Portier CJ , 2009 Genetic and environmental pathways to complex diseases. BMC Syst. Biol 3 , 1–15. 10.1186/1752-0509-3-46 19118495
Grandjean P , Eriksen ML , Ellegaard O , Wallin JA , 2011 The Matthew effect in environmental science publication: A bibliometric analysis of chemical substances in journal articles. Environ. Heal 10 , 96 10.1186/1476-069X-10-96
Grondin CJ , Davis AP , Wiegers TC , Wiegers JA , Mattingly CJ , 2018 Accessing an expanded exposure science module at the comparative toxicogenomics database. Environ. Health Perspect. 126 , 1–5. 10.1289/EHP2873
Gwinn MR , Axelrad DA , Bahadori T , Bussard D , Cascio WE , Deener K , Dix D , Thomas RS , Kavlock RJ , Burke TA , 2017 Chemical risk assessment: Traditional vs public health perspectives. Am. J. Public Health 107 , 1032–1039. 10.2105/AJPH.2017.303771 28520487
IARC, 2012a Benzene, IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans.
IARC, 2012b 1,3 Butadiene, IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans 97.
Judson R , Houck K , Martin M , Knudsen T , Thomas RS , Sipes N , Shah I , Wambaugh J , Crofton K , 2014 In Vitro and Modelling Approaches to Risk Assessment from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ToxCast Programme. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 115 , 69–76. 10.1111/bcpt.12239 24684691
Judson R , Richard A , Dix DJ , Houck K , Martin M , Kavlock R , Dellarco V , Henry T , Holderman T , Sayre P , Tan S , Carpenter T , Smith E , 2009 The toxicity data landscape for environmental chemicals. Environ. Health Perspect. 117 , 685–695. 10.1289/ehp.0800168 19479008
Judson RS , Houck KA , Kavlock RJ , Knudsen TB , Martin MT , Mortensen HM , Reif DM , Rotroff DM , Shah I , Richard AM , Dix DJ , 2010 In vitro screening of environmental chemicals for targeted testing prioritization: The toxcast project. Environ. Health Perspect. 118 , 485–492. 10.1289/ehp.0901392 20368123
Judson RS , Kavlock RJ , Setzer RW , Cohen Hubal EA , Martin MT , Knudsen TB , Houck KA , Thomas RS , Wetmore BA , Dix DJ , 2011 Estimating toxicity-related biological pathway altering doses for high-throughput chemical risk assessment. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 24 , 451–462. 10.1021/tx100428e 21384849
Kaul N , Ali S , 2015 Genes, Genetics, and Environment in Type 2 Diabetes: Implication in Personalized Medicine. DNA Cell Biol. 35 , 1–12. 10.1089/dna.2015.2883 26495765
Kavlock R , Chandler K , Houck K , Hunter S , Judson R , Kleinstreuer N , Knudsen T , Martin M , Padilla S , Reif D , Richard A , Rotroff D , Sipes N , Dix D , 2012 Update on EPA’s ToxCast program: Providing high throughput decision support tools for chemical risk management. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 25 , 1287–1302. 10.1021/tx3000939 22519603
Kibbe WA , Arze C , Felix V , Mitraka E , Bolton E , Fu G , Mungall CJ , Binder JX , Malone J , Vasant D , Parkinson H , Schriml LM , 2015 Disease Ontology 2015 update: An expanded and updated database of Human diseases for linking biomedical knowledge through disease data. Nucleic Acids Res. 43 , D1071–D1078. 10.1093/nar/gku1011 25348409
Kim IY , Han SY , Moon A , 2004 PHTHALATES INHIBIT TAMOXIFEN-INDUCED APOPTOSIS IN MCF-7 HUMAN BREAST CANCER CELLS. J. Toxicol. Environ. Heal. Part A 67 , 2025–2035. 10.1080/15287390490514750
Kolde R , 2018 pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps. R package version 1.0.10.
Kosnik MB , Planchart A , Marvel SW , Reif DM , Mattingly CJ ,. Integration of curated and high-throughput screening data to elucidate environmental influences on disease pathways. Comput. Toxicol. 10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100094
Krewski D , Westphal M , Andersen ME , Paoli GM , Chiu WA , Al-Zoughool M , Croteau MC , Burgoon LD , Cote I , 2014 A framework for the next generation of risk science. Environ. Health Perspect. 122 , 796–805. 10.1289/ehp.1307260 24727499
Li J , 2015 DO.db: A set of annotation maps describing the entire Disease Ontology. R package version 2.9.
Li L , Chen R , Dudley JT , Butte AJ , Patel CJ , Weber SC , Tatonetti NP , Ruau DJ , 2014 Disease risk factors identified through shared genetic architecture and electronic medical records. Sci. Transl. Med 6 , 234ra57.
Li Lin-Yin , 2018 CMplot: Circle Manhattan Plot. R package version 3.3.3 [WWW Document]. URL https://cran.r-project.org/package=CMplot
Liu Yongfeng , Liu J , Chen X , Liu Yewei , Di D , 2010 Preparative separation and purification of lycopene from tomato skins extracts by macroporous adsorption resins. Food Chem. 123 , 1027–1034. 10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.05.055
Maglott D , Ostell J , Pruitt KD , Tatusova T , 2011 Entrez gene: Gene-centered information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res. 39 , 52–57. 10.1093/nar/gkq1237
Malecki MT , 2005 Genetics of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 68 , S10–S21. 10.1016/j.diabres.2005.03.003 15955369
Memon N , Weinberger BI , Hegyi T , Aleksunes LM , 2016 Inherited disorders of bilirubin clearance. Pediatr. Res. 79 , 378–386. 10.1038/pr.2015.247 26595536
Miao Y , Wang R , Lu C , Zhao J , Deng Q , 2017 Lifetime cancer risk assessment for inhalation exposure to di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res 24 , 312–320. 10.1007/s11356-016-7797-4
Mortensen HM , Euling SY , 2013 Integrating mechanistic and polymorphism data to characterize human genetic susceptibility for environmental chemical risk assessment in the 21st century. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 271 , 395–404. 10.1016/j.taap.2011.01.015 21291902
Nakazato T , Bono H , Matsuda H , Takagi T , 2009 Gendoo: Functional profiling of gene and disease features using MeSH vocabulary. Nucleic Acids Res. 37 , 166–169. 10.1093/nar/gkp483
NRC, 2007 Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC 10.17226/11970
NTP, 2016 1,3 Butadiene, Report on Carcinogens, Fourteenth Edition.
Pastoor TP , Bachman AN , Bell DR , Cohen SM , Dellarco M , Dewhurst IC , Doe JE , Doerrer NG , Embry MR , Hines RN , Moretto A , Phillips RD , Rowlands JC , Tanir JY , Wolf DC , Boobis AR , 2014 A 21st century roadmap for human health risk assessment. Crit. Rev. Toxicol 44 , 1–5. 10.3109/10408444.2014.931923
Patel CJ , Butte AJ , 2010 Predicting environmental chemical factors associated with disease-related gene expression data. BMC Med. Genomics 3 10.1186/1755-8794-3-17
Patel CJ , Chen R , Kodama K , Ioannidis JPA , Butte AJ , 2013 Systematic identification of interaction effects between genome- and environment-wide associations in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hum. Genet 132 , 495–508. 10.1007/s00439-012-1258-z 23334806
Peng K , Xu W , Zheng J , Huang K , Wang H , Tong J , Lin Z , Liu J , Cheng W , Fu D , Du P , Kibbe WA , Lin SM , Xia T , 2013 The disease and gene annotations (DGA): An annotation resource for human disease. Nucleic Acids Res. 41 , 553–560. 10.1093/nar/gks1244
Piñero J , Bravo Á , Queralt-Rosinach N , Gutiérrez-Sacristán A , Deu-Pons J , Centeno E , García-García J , Sanz F , Furlong LI , 2017 DisGeNET: A comprehensive platform integrating information on human disease-associated genes and variants. Nucleic Acids Res. 45 , D833–D839. 10.1093/nar/gkw943 27924018
R Core Team, 2018 R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria.
Sauer UG , Deferme L , Gribaldo L , Hackermüller J , Tralau T , van Ravenzwaay B , Yauk C , Poole A , Tong W , Gant TW , 2017 The challenge of the application of ‘omics technologies in chemicals risk assessment: Background and outlook. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 91 , S14–S26. 10.1016/j.yrtph.2017.09.020 28927750
Schwarz D , Kisselev P , 2001 Differential metabolism of benzo[a]pyrene and benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-dihydrodiol by human CYP1A1 variants Ingolf Cascorbi, 2 from B[a]P-7,8-dihydrodiol, which must be considered Wolf-Hagen Schunck 2 and Ivar Roots in the evaluation of individual susceptibilit. Carcinogenesis 22 , 453–459.11238186
SEARCH Collaborative Group, Link E , Parish S , Armitage J , Bowman L , Heath S , Msatsuda F , Gut I , Lathrop M , Collins R , 2008 SLCO1B1 variants and statin-induced myopathy--a genomewide study. N. Engl. J. Med 359 , 789–99. 10.1056/NEJMoa0801936 18650507
Shoulders CC , 2004 Genetics of familial combined hyperlipidemia and risk of coronary heart disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 13 , 149R–160. 10.1093/hmg/ddh069
Sipes NS , Wambaugh JF , Pearce R , Auerbach SS , Wetmore BA , Hsieh J-H , Shapiro AJ , Svoboda D , DeVito MJ , Ferguson SS , 2017 An Intuitive Approach for Predicting Potential Human Health Risk with the Tox21 10k Library. Environ. Sci. Technol. acs.est.7b00650 10.1021/acs.est.7b00650
Stanić Z , 2017 Curcumin, a Compound from Natural Sources, a True Scientific Challenge – A Review. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 72 , 1–12. 10.1007/s11130-016-0590-1 27995378
Swanson DR , Smalheiser NR , 1997 An interactive system for finding complementary literatures: A stimulus to scientific discovery. Artif. Intell. 91 , 183–203. 10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00008-8
Thein SL , Hesketh C , Taylor P , Temperley IJ , Hutchinson RM , Old JM , Wood WG , Clegg JB , Weatherall DJ , 1990 Molecular basis for dominantly inherited inclusion body beta-thalassemia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87 , 3924–3928. 10.1073/pnas.87.10.3924 1971109
Thomas RS , Cheung R , Westphal M , Krewski D , Andersen ME , 2017 Risk science in the 21st century: a data-driven framework for incorporating new technologies into chemical safety assessment. Int. J. Risk Assess. Manag 20 , 88 10.1504/IJRAM.2017.082560
Tice RR , Austin CP , Kavlock RJ , Bucher JR , 2013 Improving the human hazard characterization of chemicals: A Tox21 update. Environ. Health Perspect. 121 , 756–765. 10.1289/ehp.1205784 23603828
U.S. DOE, 2018 Risk Assessment Information System (RAIS) [WWW Document]. URL https://rais.ornl.gov/ (accessed 12.18.18).
U.S. EPA, 2018a Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) [WWW Document]. URL https://www.epa.gov/iris (accessed 12.18.18).
U.S. EPA, 2018b Provisional Peer-Reviewed Toxicity Values (PPRTVs) [WWW Document]. URL https://www.epa.gov/pprtv (accessed 12.18.18).
U.S. EPA, 2015 ToxCast and Tox21 Summary Files from invitrodb_v2.
U.S. EPA, 2014a Framework for Human Health Risk Assessment to Inform Decision Making 63.
U.S. EPA, 2014b TSCA Work Plan for Chemical Assessments : 2014 Update.
U.S. EPA, 2005 Proposed Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment.
U.S. EPA, 1995 Appendix A, Section II: Dose Conversions On Health Effects Assessment Summary Tables.
U.S. HHS, 2018 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Minimal Risk Levels [WWW Document]. URL https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/about/index.html (accessed 12.18.18).
Vachon J , Campagna C , Rodriguez MJ , Sirard M-A , Levallois P , 2017 Barriers to the use of toxicogenomics data in human health risk assessment: A survey of Canadian risk assessors. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol 85 , 119–123. 10.1016/j.yrtph.2017.01.008 28137640
Wambaugh JF , Setzer RW , Reif DM , Gangwal S , Mitchell-Blackwood J , Arnot JA , Joliet O , Frame A , Rabinowitz J , Knudsen TB , Judson RS , Egeghy P , Vallero D , Cohen Hubal EA , 2013 High-Throughput Models for Exposure-Based Chemical Prioritization in the ExpoCast Project. Environ. Sci. Technol 130711145716006. 10.1021/es400482g
Wambaugh JF , Wang A , Dionisio KL , Frame A , Egeghy P , Judson R , Setzer RW , 2014 High Throughput Heuristics for Prioritizing Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals. Environ. Sci. Technol 48 , 12760–12767. 10.1021/es503583j 25343693
Westphal M , Crescent PM , Paoli GM , Andersen ME , Croteau MC , 2017 Future directions in risk science. Int. J. Risk Assess. Manag. 20 , 240–260. 10.1504/IJRAM.2017.082567
Wickham H , 2016 ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag New York.
Wignall JA , Muratov E , Sedykh A , Guyton KZ , Tropsha A , Rusyn I , Chiu WA , 2018 Conditional Toxicity Value (CTV) Predictor: An In Silico Approach for Generating Quantitative Risk Estimates for Chemicals. Environ. Health Perspect 126 , 1–13. 10.1289/EHP2998
Wolf DC , Bachman A , Barrett G , Bellin C , Goodman JI , Jensen E , Moretto A , McMullin T , Pastoor TP , Schoeny R , Slezak B , Wend K , Embry MR , 2016 Illustrative case using the RISK21 roadmap and matrix: prioritization for evaluation of chemicals found in drinking water. Crit. Rev. Toxicol 46 , 43–53. 10.3109/10408444.2015.1082973 26451723
Yegambaram M , Manivannan B , Beach TG , Halden RU , 2015 Environmental Contaminants in the Etiology of Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 12 , 116–146.25654508
Yu G , 2018 Using meshes for MeSH term enrichment and semantic analyses. Bioinformatics 34 , 3766–3767. 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty410 29790928
Yu G , Wang LG , Yan GR , He QY , 2015 DOSE: An R/Bioconductor package for disease ontology semantic and enrichment analysis. Bioinformatics 31 , 608–609. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu684 25677125
Zhang S , Ma J , Fu Z , Zhang Z , Cao J , Huang L , Li W , Xu P , Cao X , 2016 Promotion of breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 invasion by di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate through matrix metalloproteinase-2/−9 overexpression. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res 23 , 9742–9749. 10.1007/s11356-016-6158-7
