LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101718750
47183
Cond Med
Cond Med
Conditioning medicine
2577-3240

30370426
6200356
NIHMS984997
Article
Conditioning Against the Pathology of Parkinson’s disease
Leak Rehana K. ✉Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA 15282, USA

✉ For correspondence please address: Rehana K. Leak, Ph.D., Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Duquesne University, 600 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15282, leakr@duq.edu, 412.396.4734
13 8 2018
28 4 2018
4 2018
24 10 2018
1 3 143162
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Parkinson’s disease is delayed in clinical onset, asymmetric in initial appearance, and slow in progression. One explanation for these characteristics may be a boost in natural defenses after early exposure to mild cellular stress. As the patient ages and resilience recedes, however, stress levels may become sufficiently high that toxic cellular responses can no longer be curbed, culminating in inverted U-shaped stress-response curves as a function of disease duration. If dopaminergic systems are indeed capable of responding to mild stress with effective natural defenses, experimental models of Parkinson’s disease should adhere to the principles of preconditioning, whereby stress exposure fortifies cells and tempers the toxic sequelae of subsequent stressors. Here, I review evidence favoring the efficacy of preconditioning in dopaminergic systems. Recent animal work also raises the possibility that cross-hemispheric preconditioning may arrest the spread of asymmetric Parkinson’s pathology to the other side of the brain. Indeed, compensatory homeostatic systems have long been hypothesized to maintain neurological function until a threshold of cell loss is exceeded and are often displayed as inverted U-shaped curves. However, some stress responses assume an exponential or sigmoidal profile as a function of disease severity, suggesting end-stage deceleration of disease processes. Thus, surviving dopaminergic neurons may become progressively harder to kill, with the dorsal nigral tier dying slower due to superior baseline defenses, inducible conditioning capacity, or delayed dorsomedial nigral spread of disease. In addition, compensatory processes may be useful as biomarkers to distinguish “responder patients” from “nonresponders” before clinical trials. However, another possibility is that defenses are already maximally conditioned in most patients and no further boost is possible. A third alternative is that genuinely diseased human cells cannot be conditioned, in contrast to preclinical models, none of which faithfully recapitulate age-related human conditions. Disease-related “conditioning deficiencies” would then explain how Parkinson’s pathology takes root, progressively shrinks defenses, and eventually kills the patient.

preconditioning
hormesis
dopamine
compensatory
basal ganglia
Lewy
synuclein

I. Introduction

Parkinson’s disease is a chronic neurodegenerative condition characterized by slowly progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, pars compacta, following retrograde degeneration of their efferent projections to the dorsal striatum (Kish et al., 1988; Rinne, 1993; Cheng et al., 2010). There has been a major revision of the traditional view that the loss of neurons in Parkinson’s disease is restricted to the nigrostriatal pathway, and it is now widely appreciated that this is a systemic, proteinopathic disorder with hallmark inclusions known as Lewy bodies deposited in many parts of the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral organs, including the olfactory bulb and gastrointestinal tract (Braak et al., 2002; Braak et al., 2003b; Braak et al., 2003a; Hawkes et al., 2007; Beach et al., 2009b; Beach et al., 2009a; Jucker and Walker, 2013; Fasano et al., 2015; Adler and Beach, 2016; Del Tredici and Braak, 2016). Aside from well-established loss of somata in the substantia nigra, there appears to be additional cell loss in the anterior olfactory nucleus (Pearce et al., 1995), locus coeruleus (German et al., 1992; Zarow et al., 2003), pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus and raphe nuclei (Hirsch et al., 1987; Jellinger, 1988; Halliday et al., 1990a; Halliday et al., 1990b), rostral ventrolateral medulla and dorsomotor nucleus of the vagus (Halliday et al., 1990b), hypothalamic orexin+ neurons (Fronczek et al., 2007; Thannickal et al., 2007), and cholinergic basal forebrain (Candy et al., 1983; Nakano and Hirano, 1984; Hall et al., 2014), among other sites. The widely distributed extranigral cell loss and the gradual expansion of Lewy pathology across the neuraxis likely contribute to nonmotor parkinsonian deficits that were not widely discussed until recently—including anosmia, depression, sleep disturbances, and, at end stages, dementia (Pellicano et al., 2007; Verbaan et al., 2007; Simuni and Sethi, 2008). Nevertheless, the majority of experimental and clinical studies of Parkinson’s disease concentrate on dopaminergic cell death, as loss of the nigrostriatal pathway is clearly associated with some of the movement deficits originally reported by James Parkinson in 1817 (Goetz, 2011; Goedert et al., 2013).

The present review focuses on the concept that endogenous mechanisms are mobilized by disease-related stressors to spur tissue repair and recovery, galvanize defenses, and buttress cells against future challenges in the context of Parkinson’s disease. This topic is significant because functional outcomes are often better associated with neuroplasticity and compensatory mechanisms than classic, histological hallmarks of neurodegenerative disorders (Iacono et al., 2009; Lo, 2010). Furthermore, the insoluble Lewy Lewy pathology in Parkinson’s disease may reflect an adaptive attempt to sequester damaged proteins and shunt toxic oligomeric species away from wreaking havoc in the cytosol (Tanaka et al., 2004; Au and Calne, 2005; Beyer et al., 2009). Compensatory mechanisms may predominate during prodromal stages of Parkinson’s disease, before massive dopaminergic cell loss unfolds (see Sections II–III). Therefore, the likelihood of identifying clinically effective neuroprotectants is higher in earlier disease stages, although robust biomarkers will be needed to identify these largely asymptomatic subjects (Beach, 2017). Indeed, the major distinction between functional responders and nonresponders in a clinical trial may be the compensatory mechanisms (Lo, 2010), and even “nonspecific” biomarkers of compensatory stress responses might serve as bellwethers of the efficacy of therapeutic interventions before the trial commences. An alternative possibility, however, is that natural defenses are already maximally deployed in most patients and may have decelerated disease onset and progression as far as possible until age-related damage became unsurmountable. Therefore, it may not be possible to boost this optimized system with anything other than lifestyle interventions. This alternative is supported by a large body of work showing that the amplitude of beneficial stress responses is usually restricted to 30–60% of control values (discussed further in Section III). A third grim alternative is that genuinely-diseased human brains exhibit from the beginning intractable deficiencies in compensation, repair, and recovery, unlike non-diseased, albeit injured cells in the classic models of dopaminergic cell loss. The third scenario would give the proteinopathic seeds unfettered license to plant themselves and propagate throughout the neuraxis. Although there are many other variables not considered here, the second and third scenarios would impede the translation of preclinically efficacious neuroprotectants into fruitful clinical interventions.

II. What underlies the slow rate of progression of most neurodegenerative disorders?

The proteinopathy that characterizes all neurodegenerative disorders may commence in the form of insoluble protein deposits at surprisingly young ages, extending as far as 25–50 years prior to the manifestation of cardinal symptoms (Claassen et al., 2010; Savica et al., 2010; Braak et al., 2011). In contrast, dopaminergic cell loss per se is thought to extend ~5–6 years before the movement disorder is diagnosed by a clinician and to continue for many additional years, based partly on extrapolation of 18F-Fluorodopa positron emission tomography (PET) of dopaminergic terminal loss in the striatum and histological patterns of nigral cell death in postmortem tissue (Fearnley and Lees, 1991; Morrish et al., 1998; Hilker et al., 2005; Savica et al., 2010). This type of progressive cell loss is fundamentally distinct from the relative abrupt loss of massive cell numbers in stroke or traumatic brain injury. Here I will list three possible explanations of the slow rates of progression of proteinopathy and dopaminergic cell loss in Parkinson’s disease:

Biphasic (nonlinear, non-monotonic) or U-shaped stress responses: Natural compensatory defenses may be upregulated by mild stress in early disease phases and may delay the onset and slow disease progression as a form of “conditioning.” At later disease stages, endogenous defenses may be depleted or overwhelmed by inexorable accrual of cellular damage, age-related decay in resilience, and engagement of senescence programs. These opposing effects would result in biphasic stress-response patterns plotted as inverted U-shaped curves as a function of disease duration or severity.

Exponential or sigmoidal (nonlinear, monotonic) stress responses: Early in the course of the disease, there may be relatively rapid loss of cells, followed by a deceleration as the more resistant, surviving cells become progressively harder to kill and their recalcitrance slows disease progression. Rather than assuming a U-shaped profile, these stress responses would be plotted as negative exponential or sigmoidal curves with rapid early response rates yielding to saturating kinetics at end stages of the disease. Thus, disease progression would decline as it approaches a theoretical asymptote or maximum (e.g., zero remaining dopaminergic cells) while death draws near.

Linear, monotonic stress responses: There might be linear, albeit sluggish (i.e., low-sloped) decreases in endogenous defenses and cell numbers, combined with linear increases in insoluble protein deposits as the disease completes its natural course, with no change in the rate of progression over time after disease onset and until death.

In the vast clinical literature on Parkinson’s disease, all three types of progression have been plotted as a function of years from clinical diagnosis or extrapolated into the prodromal phase of the illness. The most frequently cited example of compensatory changes in early-to-mid Parkinson’s disease is a potential increase in dopaminergic tone in the remaining axon terminals of the mildly denervated striatum (Zigmond, 1997; Nandhagopal et al., 2011). According to this perspective, a clinical syndrome is only manifested once a critical threshold of cell loss is exceeded in the substantia nigra, and the compensatory mechanisms in the striatum are no longer sufficient to maintain normal dopamine equilibrium. Although currently debated, the mechanisms underlying the delay in movement deficits (relative to the onset of dopaminergic cell loss) have been attributed to increases in dopamine release and metabolic turnover, upregulation of dopamine synthesis by the enzymes aromatic L-amino-acid decarboxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase, less removal of synaptic dopamine via downregulation of the membrane-bound dopamine transporter, non-classical volume transmission of dopamine, increased expression of striatal dopamine receptors, and/or favorable shifts in the activation patterns of movement-controlling neural circuitry, including hyperactivity in the motor cortex, subthalamic nucleus, and internal globus pallidus (Zigmond et al., 1990; Zigmond, 1997; Bezard et al., 2001; Bezard et al., 2003; Brotchie and Fitzer-Attas, 2009; Obeso and Schapira, 2009; Appel-Cresswell et al., 2010; Nandhagopal et al., 2011; Navntoft and Dreyer, 2016; Blesa et al., 2017). Some authors have proposed that maintenance of motor function in the face of early cell loss may not be dopamine-mediated after all, as dopaminergic changes (e.g., heightened efflux, synthesis, and turnover) may not unfold sufficiently early and passive dopamine stabilization mechanisms may prevail in early disease stages without any true “plasticity” of release or clearance (Garris et al., 1997; Bezard et al., 2001; Bezard et al., 2003; Navntoft and Dreyer, 2016; Blesa et al., 2017).

Based on a large body of longitudinal and cross-sectional clinical work, Jankovic favored the first two types of disease progression—nonlinear stress responses defined above in A and B—depending on the specific outcome measure (Hilker et al., 2005; Jankovic, 2005). Jankovic’s illustration of disease progression displays early compensatory mechanisms with a characteristic, inverted U-shaped profile, but also accelerated early loss of nigral cell bodies, striatal terminals, and non-dopaminergic neurons, followed by deceleration at late disease stages in negative exponential curves (Figure 1A). In non-dopaminergic circuitry, Wu and Hallett also proposed an inverted U-shaped curve for compensatory cerebellar function in preclinical and early clinical stages of Parkinson’s disease (Figure 1B) (Wu and Hallett, 2013). Hyperactivation of extrastriatal circuitry has long been proposed to compensate against early nigrostriatal pathway loss and to explain why frank loss of motor function does not surface until a threshold of loss of 18Fluorodopa uptake in the putamen of the dorsal striatum is exceeded (Bezard et al., 2003; Moore, 2003; Palmer et al., 2010). For example, Whone and colleagues reported upregulation of 18Fluorodopa uptake in the internal globus pallidus in early Parkinson’s disease, followed by a decrease in the same measure in more advanced disease stages, conforming to a U-shaped profile (Whone et al., 2003). Similar compensatory increases in 18Fluorodopa uptake in early stages of Parkinson’s disease are evident in the anterior cingulate gyrus, pineal gland, and midbrain raphe, some or all of which may oppose the effects of mild striatal denervation (Rakshi et al., 1999; Moore et al., 2008).

A large number of studies have assumed monotonic progression of Parkinson’s disease—usually linear or exponential rates of decline—particularly in variables such as nigral neuron counts as a function of disease duration (Bhattaram et al., 2009; Maetzler et al., 2009; Cheng et al., 2010; Darbin et al., 2013; Reinoso et al., 2015; Venuto et al., 2016). For example, longitudinal multitracer imaging of striatal dopamine terminals and Hoehn and Yahr clinical stages suggest rapid early disease processes followed by deceleration at late stages (Muller et al., 2000; Greffard et al., 2006; Nandhagopal et al., 2009). Holford et al. modelled longitudinal Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) scores and discovered that both exponential and Gompertz (i.e., sigmoidal) asymptotic curves exhibited better goodness-of-fit with disease progression than linear models, with the Gompertz model being superior (Holford et al., 2006). Vu and colleagues similarly favored the Gompertz asymptotic model as a better predictor of cardinal motor symptoms and nonmotor depressive symptoms, but reported that performance on the mini-mental status exam declined in a linear fashion as a function of disease course (Vu et al., 2012). However, other longitudinal studies suggest that the scores on the mini-mental status exam are not a linear function of Parkinson’s disease duration (Aarsland et al., 2011).

In an influential cross-sectional study on postmortem nigral tissue, Fearnley and Lees plotted loss of dopaminergic cells as an exponential function of symptom duration, and reported the earliest and fastest loss of somata in the ventrolateral tier of the substantia nigra, pars compacta (Figure 1C) (Fearnley and Lees, 1991). The authors wrote, “neuronal loss appears to be confined to the lateral ventral tier early in the disease, but by the time symptoms appear it has spread to the other regions and in particular the medial ventral tier,” consistent with the view that a clinical syndrome only emerges after loss of compensatory defenses within resilient subpopulations of cells. Damier and colleagues subsequently reported that loss of nigral somata commences in the calbindin-poor ventrolateral nigrosome of the caudal substantia nigra and advances progressively rostrally, medially, and dorsally across the nigrosomes over time, while sparing the calbindin-rich nigral matrix (Damier et al., 1999). According to longitudinal tracer imaging, Nandhagopal et al. reported that all striatal subregions exhibit similar rates of dopaminergic terminal decline, although the degree of denervation varies across subregions and the posterior putamen is the earliest to lose dopaminergic tone (Nandhagopal et al., 2009). Nevertheless, dopamine axon terminal loss for each striatal subregion assumes a negative exponential profile as a function of disease duration, even if there are no regional variations in the response rate (Nandhagopal et al., 2009).

The diminished loss of striatal 18Fluorodopa uptake compared to other dopaminergic tracers (dopamine transporter/vesicular monoamine transporter) has been viewed as indirect evidence for potential compensatory upregulation of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase per remaining axon terminal, (Cheng et al., 2010; Kaasinen and Vahlberg, 2017). Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase catalyzes the conversion of L-DOPA to dopamine. Furthermore, the contrast between near-complete loss of dopaminergic fibers in histopathological studies and only moderate loss of tracer binding in imaging studies (averaging only ~50% and still detectable after 20 years of disease) also supports the existence of compensatory changes in remaining striatal fibers (Kaasinen and Vahlberg, 2017). Kaasinen and Vahlberg’s recent meta-analysis further suggests that cross-sectional tracer binding studies tend to report linear progression of disease, whereas longitudinal studies favor negative exponential progression (Kaasinen and Vahlberg, 2017). However, there may be exceptions to this rule; for example, cross-sectional studies of dopaminergic fiber density in the putamen as a function of time from diagnosis are not consistent with linear decay, and neither are cross-sectional studies of the pattern of nigral cell loss (Fearnley and Lees, 1991; Kordower et al., 2013). Kaasinen wrote that negative exponential decay in longitudinal studies reflects “the tail-end of a longer, nonlinear process that follows a sigmoid shape,” consistent with the abovementioned superior goodness-of-fit of the sigmoidal Gompertz curve in Holford’s work (Holford et al., 2006; Kaasinen and Vahlberg, 2017). In Gompertz functions, the rate of change is slowest at the start and end of a timed process; in this context, it is important to recognize that the movement disorder cannot be diagnosed until Braak stages III–IV (after nigral cell loss surfaces), which represents roughly mid-stages of the illness on a six-point scale of Lewy pathology (Braak et al., 2003b; Halliday et al., 2006). This implies that data plotted as a function of years from clinical diagnosis will miss the earliest, milder disease stages, when compensatory reactions have greater likelihood of prevailing. Therefore, one key difference between U-shaped, linear, exponential, and sigmoidal stress-response curves may be the range of stimulus doses (or durations) that are assessed. Edward Calabrese’s body of work suggests that linear and sigmoidal responses may be extrapolated when outcomes are not measured over a sufficiently wide range of stimulus intensities (Calabrese and Baldwin, 2001; Calabrese, 2004). A separate concern about graphing disease progression based on cross-sectional histological studies is that “supernormal agers” may harbor greater densities of dopaminergic cells than less-fit individuals dying early (Kubis et al., 2000), which could lead to spurious U-shaped profiles of dopaminergic cell counts or fiber density as a function of disease duration in postmortem studies.

In summary, there is evidence of divergent rates of progression of Parkinson’s disease, depending upon the measurement—curves of dopaminergic cell loss may be monotonic and sigmoidal while activation of extrastriatal circuitry in the same patient may follow a biphasic, U-shaped pattern. Given the heterogeneous natures of human populations and their disease states, the three patterns described above are probably not the only possibilities.

III. The ubiquity of nonlinear stress-response curves

As argued above, mild stressors that only slightly perturb homeostasis may elicit compensatory responses with upregulation of endogenous defenses, but when applied for sufficiently long durations and high intensities, stressful stimuli turn destructive to the same defense systems, and may even be lethal to the cell or organism. This non-monotonic stress response is expressed as an inverted U or J-shaped dose-response curve in the fields of toxicology, pharmacology, agricultural science, radiation, exercise, dietary fasting (Calabrese and Baldwin, 2003; Mattson, 2008; Calabrese, 2010, 2014). The principle of stimulation at low doses but inhibition at high doses is defined as “hormesis,” a word derived from the Greek hormaein—to excite, stimulate, or set in motion (Calabrese and Baldwin, 2002; Calabrese and Mattson, 2017). Hormesis is consistent with the adage, “the dose makes the poison,” by the 15th century physician Philippus Theophrastus von Hohenheim, widely known as Paracelsus or the father of toxicology. The German pharmacologist Hugo Schulz observed biphasic effects of disinfectants on yeast metabolism in the 1800s (Calabrese and Baldwin, 2002; Calabrese and Mattson, 2017). Ehrlich and Southam subsequently defined this nonlinear property as ‘hormesis’ in their own studies of the biphasic effects of red cedar tree extracts on fungal metabolism (Southam and Ehrlich, 1943; Calabrese and Baldwin, 2000; Calabrese, 2004, 2014). Potential mechanisms underlying hormesis have been reported in many recent studies, including the work of Marini and colleagues, who proposed that neuronal hormesis can be elicited by activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors (Marini et al., 2008a; Marini et al., 2008b). According to this view, low concentrations of otherwise excitotoxic glutamate transform neurons into a “conditioned” phenotype that survive high energy demands in an RNA/protein synthesis-dependent manner, perhaps by boosting expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

Similar to the early observers of hormesis, Hans Selye, the father of stress research, described a “general adaptation syndrome” following an initial alarm reaction after stress exposure (Selye, 1950, 1975). Beneficial, mild stressors that stimulate endogenous defenses were defined by Selye as “eustress.” Following chronic, unremitting stress (“distress”), Selye reported a period of exhaustion characterized by immune suppression and eventually death, consistent with a non-monotonic, multiphasic response as a function of stress intensity (i.e., dose). Selye also wrote that “heredity, species differences, previous exposure to stress, and the nutritional state of the organism” serve as “conditioning factors” that underlie “polymorphic” responses to stress (Selye, 1950).

Since the period of Selye’s foresights on conditioning factors, the term “conditioning” has been most gainfully employed in the ischemia literature. When sufficiently mild ischemic attacks are followed by a recovery interval during which compensatory adaptations are engaged, the organism is usually much better prepared to face, tolerate, and survive a severe ischemic challenge. This form of “preconditioning” of the myocardium was described in seminal publications by Murry, Reimer, and colleagues in the 1980s (Murry et al., 1986; Reimer et al., 1986). However, there are earlier reports of mechanical stress-induced tolerance against whole-body trauma and anoxia-induced resistance against subsequent anoxic challenges, and the terms “preconditioning” and “tolerance” were also employed in Janoff’s 1964 publication on lysosome shock (Noell and Chinn, 1948; Dahl and Balfour, 1964; Janoff, 1964; Simon, 2013). However, Murry’s 1986 study was more influential and inspired a slew of work confirming the parallel existence of ischemic preconditioning in the brain (Kitagawa et al., 1990; Perez-Pinzon et al., 1993; Simon et al., 1993; Gidday et al., 1994; Chen et al., 1996; Chen and Simon, 1997; Kitagawa et al., 1997; Roth et al., 1998; Miller et al., 2001; Kitagawa, 2012).

It is important to recognize that preconditioning responses to increasing intensities of ischemic stimuli adhere to the quantitative properties of the U-shaped hormetic curve (Calabrese et al., 2007; Calabrese, 2008, 2016a, b; Mollereau et al., 2016). Calabrese’s has calculated that the typical maximal amplitude of the hormetic curve is 30–60% of control values (Calabrese and Blain, 2005; Calabrese et al., 2007; Calabrese, 2010; Calabrese and Blain, 2011; Calabrese, 2014; Calabrese and Mattson, 2017). Second, the duration of stress exposure is defined as the stimulus “dose” in the ischemic preconditioning literature and in Selye’s original work on stress responses. Similarly, longitudinal studies of Parkinson’s patients assume that disease duration is in proportion to disease severity.

Despite the pervasiveness of inverted U-shaped dose-response curves, stress responses as a function of disease duration are not all plotted in this manner (see Figure 1), although one can make the arguments that disease duration may not be in direct proportion to disease severity (stimulus dose) and that compensatory responses in prodromal phases are readily missed, as argued above. In order to render plots of dopaminergic cell numbers as a function of disease duration U-shaped, nigral cells would have to undergo neurogenesis at early or end stages of the disease, a highly controversial proposition (Gould, 2007; Arias-Carrion et al., 2009). An alternative means of observing a U-shaped profile in dopaminergic cell numbers would be if phenotypically quiescent, melanized nigral cells that do not normally express tyrosine hydroxylase (estimated at ~18% by Kordower and colleagues (Kordower et al., 2013)) abnormally gain a dopaminergic phenotype either early or late in Parkinson’s disease. An old body of experimental work demonstrates compensatory increases in tyrosine hydroxylase activity in response to stress exposure and compensatory sprouting of dopaminergic fibers in the striatum after injury (Zigmond et al., 1984; Bezard et al., 2000; Song and Haber, 2000). However, tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA levels appear to be reduced—not increased—in remaining nigral neurons in Parkinson’s disease (Javoy-Agid et al., 1990), and melanized nigral cells in primates exhibit a loss of tyrosine hydroxylase expression in response to aging (McCormack et al., 2004). Furthermore, the work of Hirsch et al. suggests that 17% of melanized nigral neurons do not express tyrosine hydroxylase in Parkinson’s patients (calculations from their Table 1) (Hirsch et al., 1988), which seems no different from Kordower’s estimate of 18% in subjects without Parkinson’s disease (Kordower et al., 2013). Thus, when postmitotic neuron numbers are plotted as a function of disease duration or stressor dose, the curves will be monotonic if there is no chance of cell proliferation or phenotypic recovery, with deceleration of cell loss over time as the fixed asymptote is approached. More simply put, one cannot plot fewer than zero cells remaining in the brain. Figure 1 also suggests that stress response curves as a function of disease duration may vary according to the clinical outcome measure, be it corticocerebellar/nigropallidal activation (perhaps U-shaped) or loss of nigral cell numbers (perhaps exponential or sigmoidal). Calabrese and Baldwin built a database showing that U-shaped curves predominate over sigmoidal curves, and also graphed multiphasic curves beginning with an inverted U-shape but ending as a negative exponential with increasing stressor dose (Calabrese and Baldwin, 2001). Di Veroli and colleagues similarly argued that pharmacological responses are not adequately modeled by the classic Hill equation, which only predicts monotonic, sigmoidal curves (Di Veroli et al., 2015). Thus, if reliable biomarkers for prodromal Parkinson’s disease could be identified, some, but not all of the longitudinal responses to disease duration may eventually be plotted as multiphasic, with early inverted U-shaped curves yielding to a negative exponential profile as the disease forges into advanced stages (e.g., see Figure 3, panels f, j, t, and u in Calabrese’s report (Calabrese and Baldwin, 2001)).

What might underlie a deceleration of nigral cell loss as the asymptote is approached, instead of linear loss of dopaminergic nigral cells until all have disappeared from the brain or the patient dies? Most patients in Kordower’s report still have some dopaminergic somata remaining in the nigra at the time of death (see Figure 8 in (Kordower et al., 2013)). Our recent mechanistic in vitro work demonstrates that primary cortical astrocytes surviving high concentrations of proteinopathic stressors become progressively harder to kill, either because successive stress exposures enrich the remaining heterogeneous population in resistant survivors with inherently superior endogenous defenses, such as basally higher glutathione levels, or because stress exposure actively stimulates upregulation of defenses, such as a boost in glutathione production capacity (Titler et al., 2013; Gleixner et al., 2016). If these phenomena are applicable to human dopaminergic systems, they might underlie the gradual slowing of nigral cell loss. Indeed, Fearnley and Lees’ data in Figure 1C reveal heterogeneity in the defense capacity of nigral neurons, with ventrolateral cells dying at the fastest rate (Fearnley and Lees, 1991). The caudal ventrolateral nigra projects into the dorsal, lateral, and caudal aspects of the striatum, whereas the rostral dorsomedial nigra projects rostrally, medially, and ventrally (Fallon and Moore, 1978). For this reason, the dorsal posterior (post-commissural) putamen exhibits the greatest loss of dopaminergic signal according to clinical imaging studies (Nandhagopal et al., 2009). These topographic distinctions may reflect a number of mechanisms, perhaps including 1) regionally distinct patterns of activation/upregulation of defense systems in response to injury, such as heterogeneity in stress-inducible heat shock proteins or phase II antioxidant enzymes, 2) regionally distinct differences in basal defenses, such as inherent variability in cytosolic calcium oscillations and calcium-buffering capacity by calbindin (Surmeier et al., 2017), or 3) varying degrees of exposure to a transmissible pathogenic insult that slowly spreads from ventrolateral to dorsomedial nigral cells over time. The current state of Parkinson’s disease research does not distinguish among these and other possibilities.

IV. Can stress-induced conditioning ameliorate oxidative and proteinopathic pathology in experimental Parkinson’s disease?

An enormous body of preclinical and clinical work suggests that dopaminergic cell death in Parkinson’s disease is related to defective redox equilibrium, protein quality control, and mitochondrial integrity (Ganguly et al., 2017). If it is true that the response to the pathology of Parkinson’s disease elicits a functional compensatory reaction, it should be possible to demonstrate preconditioning with low doses of oxidative, proteinopathic, or mitochondrial stress in various experimental models of this condition. Aside from numerous reports of the salutary effects of exercise conditioning in patients with movement disorders, there are relatively few studies of stress-induced conditioning in Parkinson’s disease or models thereof, compared to the vast ischemic preconditioning literature, which boasts 10,815 studies in PubMed with the keywords and Boolean operators “preconditioning AND (ischemia OR ischemic)” (accessed November 24th 2017). Furthermore, most conditioning studies in the field of Parkinson’s disease have been completed in dopaminergic cell lines, including our own in vitro studies, which suffer from a number of obvious drawbacks, such as mutagenesis and oncogenic transformation. Tumor cell lines are specifically selected for their propensities to survive insults and may therefore be more likely to display hormesis than postmitotic dopaminergic neurons in vitro or in vivo. Second, even in primary cells, in vitro studies only capture the behavior of cells hardy enough to survive the culturing process, which might predispose the culture system to display hormetic effects. Third, studies of conditioning in Parkinson’s disease models—including our own in vivo rodent studies—involve relatively acute cell death, which is difficult to translate to the slowly progressive neurodegeneration observed in humans. Fourth, preconditioning is generally thought to wane within a few weeks after a transient exposure, whereas prolonged stress exposure is typically associated with morbidity and mortality; most researchers therefore do not expect conditioning to be a major player in the slow progression of a chronic neurodegenerative disease. The abovementioned caveats or perspectives have contributed to the lack of expansion of the field relative to ischemic preconditioning. Bearing these provisos in mind, below we briefly review the literature summoned on PubMed with the keywords “Parkinson’s disease AND preconditioning” (accessed until November 24th 2017). The term “preconditioning” was more discerning than “conditioning,” given the historical use of the former term in the ischemia literature and use of the latter for Pavlovian and pain behaviors.

Although the number of studies are relatively few, the beneficial impact of exposure to mild stress on the parkinsonian phenotype and its ability to allay dopaminergic cell loss has been reported in experimental models since the late 1990s. Duan and Mattson tackled this question in an early report showing that the mild stress of either dietary restriction or 2-deoxyglucose administration (a glucose analogue that cannot be metabolized) preconditioned mice against loss of dopaminergic neurons and appearance of motor deficits following exposure to the neurotoxicant 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (Duan and Mattson, 1999; Mattson et al., 2004), which rapidly induces a parkinsonian syndrome in humans (Langston et al., 1983). Since these observations, the beneficial effects of dietary restriction have been reproduced in other studies modeling Parkinson’s disease, including in primates (for some examples, see (Maswood et al., 2004; Holmer et al., 2005; Griffioen et al., 2013; Mattson, 2014; Bayliss et al., 2016; Coppens et al., 2017)).

A number of cell culture studies support the view that transformed dopaminergic cell lines can be preconditioned quite effectively against Parkinson’s-related oxidative toxicants. Tai and Truong reported that activation of ATP-sensitive potassium channels or exposure to pro-oxidants protected dopaminergic cells against subsequent exposure to the mitochondrial poison rotenone, and these effects were abolished by protein synthesis inhibitors (Tai and Truong, 2002). Years later, Tai and Truong also reported that green tea polyphenols mitigated dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT)-induced dopaminergic cell loss in a manner dependent upon the concentration and number of exposures (Tai and Truong, 2010). Similarly, the polyphenol resveratrol can precondition cells against dopaminergic neurotoxins, such as the complex I inhibitor 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), the active metabolite of MPTP, perhaps through sirtuin 1 and the antioxidant methionine sulfoxide reductase A (Wu et al., 2012). Resveratrol is also efficacious in vivo as a therapeutic intervention against the dopaminergic oxidative toxicant 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), an established animal model of Parkinson’s disease, in which resveratrol seems to blunt the inflammatory response (Jin et al., 2008). These findings are consistent with the view that dietary polyphenols exert hormetic effects (Mattson and Cheng, 2006; Mattson et al., 2007). For example, low concentrations of the phytochemicals in Panax notoginseng stimulate dopaminergic cell growth at modest rates in vitro (~30%, as is typical for hormetic curves) and prevent the toxicity of 6-OHDA in Zebrafish in vivo, whereas higher concentrations are toxic (Zhang et al., 2017).

In the same year as Tai and Truong’s original paper on in vitro dopaminergic preconditioning, Andoh and colleagues reported that sublethal serum deprivation for two hours preconditioned dopaminergic cells against MPP+, and this was associated with upregulation of nitric oxide synthesis and expression of the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase and the prosurvival protein Bcl2 (Andoh et al., 2002). One year later, Quigney and colleagues demonstrated that exposure of dopaminergic cells to mild heat stress induced thermotolerance and preconditioned against necrotic death elicited by MPP+ (Quigney et al., 2003). The preconditioning effect of heat shock was associated with upregulation of the chaperones heat shock protein 25 (Hsp25) and Hsp70. Similarly, Fan and colleagues subsequently confirmed that exposure to mild heat shock or forced overexpression of HDJ-1 (the homologue of human Hsp40) in dopaminergic cells reduced MPP+ toxicity and oxidative stress and maintained the mitochondrial membrane potential (Fan et al., 2005).

The older studies of preconditioning in experimental Parkinson’s disease typically employed pro-oxidants and mitochondrial toxicants because markers of oxidative stress and complex 1 dysfunction have long been observed in postmortem tissue from Parkinson’s victims and proposed as etiological factors (Dexter et al., 1989; Schapira et al., 1989; Alam et al., 1997; Floor and Wetzel, 1998; Hauser and Hastings, 2013; Blesa et al., 2015). For example, low concentrations of hydrogen peroxide were shown to mitigate the pro-apoptotic effects of subsequent exposures to hydrogen peroxide and the pro-oxidant dopamine (Chen et al., 2005; Xiao-Qing et al., 2005). We demonstrated that pretreatment of dopaminergic cells to 6-OHDA (5–10 μM) prevented cell loss in response to subsequent exposures to higher concentrations of 6-OHDA (50 μM), an effect abolished by co-application of the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine or the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (Leak et al., 2006). In our model, low concentrations of 6-OHDA upregulated expression of Bcl2 and rapidly activated the phosphokinases ERK1/2, Akt, and JNK. Inhibition of activation of all three kinases abolished 6-OHDA preconditioning-mediated protection. Subsequent studies revealed that subtoxic concentrations of methamphetamine also protected dopaminergic cells against 6-OHDA toxicity, whereas exposure to higher concentrations exerted toxicity, conforming to a biphasic concentration-response profile (El Ayadi and Zigmond, 2011). Similarly, royal jelly fatty acid derivatives such as 4-hydroperoxy-2-decenoic acid ethyl ester increased the production of reactive oxygen species and prevented 6-OHDA-induced dopaminergic cell loss, perhaps by activating Nrf2, a master gatekeeper of redox equilibrium (Inoue et al., 2017). Collectively, these studies established that exposure of dopaminergic cells to subtoxic levels of reactive oxygen species is an effective preconditioning stimulus. The beneficial effects of 6-OHDA preconditioning in dopaminergic cells can be further enhanced by the phytochemical triterpenoid oleanolic acid (Ndlovu et al., 2014). Oleanolic acid also blunted L-DOPA-induced abnormal involuntary movements (dyskinesia) in 6-OHDA-treated animals (Ndlovu et al., 2016).

Fewer studies have reported the effects of proteinopathic stress-induced preconditioning in models of Parkinson’s disease, perhaps because the view that Parkinson’s disease originates from protein misfolding is more recent than the concept that nigrostriatal loss is precipitated by oxidative toxicity (Zhou et al., 2008; Hastings, 2009; Jucker, 2010; Jucker and Walker, 2013; Segura-Aguilar et al., 2014). Nevertheless, the protective impact of heat shock in the dopaminergic cell models described above reflect an adaptive response to misfolded proteins, which might stimulate proteasomal and autophagic clearance of damaged proteins, as well as a beneficial endoplasmic reticulum stress response at low concentrations. Mollereau, Hetz, and colleagues recently proposed that mild perturbations in cellular proteostasis—including endoplasmic reticulum stress—show promise as preconditioning stimuli in Parkinson’s disease (Hetz and Mollereau, 2014; Mollereau et al., 2016). For example, the endoplasmic reticulum stress inducers thapsigargin and tunicamycin prevent the cytotoxicity of 6-OHDA in vitro (Hara et al., 2011). Thapsigargin induces heme oxygenase 1 expression by activating the antioxidant response element and mitigating the production of reactive oxygen species by 6-OHDA. Subsequent reports by Fouillet et al. suggested that mild endoplasmic reticulum stress protects neurons by crosstalk with autophagy pathways in vivo, an effect attributed by Matus and colleagues to hormesis (Fouillet et al., 2012; Matus et al., 2012). In the Fouillet studies, tunicamycin pretreatment reduced rotational behavior and dopaminergic cell loss in 6-OHDA-lesioned mice. The unfolded protein response transcription factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) may be critical for the protection of dopaminergic neurons against 6-OHDA toxicity in adult animals, and deletion of this protein in developing animals induces an adaptive endoplasmic reticulum stress response that prevents dopaminergic neurotoxicity (Valdes et al., 2014).

Preconditioning dopaminergic cells with proteotoxic stress has also been achieved by direct exposure to proteasome inhibitors. We observed that weeks to months-long exposure to low levels of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 resulted in structural and functional protection of dopaminergic cells against subsequent exposures to high concentrations of either 6-OHDA or MG132 (Leak et al., 2008). Cells were protected in this model despite the chronic nature of the stimulus because the MG132 concentration was sufficiently low. MG132 exposure reduced the chymotrypsin-like activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system without causing cell loss and increased protein expression as well as enzymatic activity of the antioxidant CuZn superoxide dismutase. Although glutathione plays a major role in many models of preconditioning (Maher, 2005), the glutathione synthesis inhibitor buthionine sulfoximine failed to reduce MG132-induced protection against 6-OHDA, whereas siRNA-mediated knockdown of CuZn superoxide dismutase with two independent sequences abolished protection readily. These findings suggest that exposure to proteinopathic stress elicits “cross-tolerance” against oxidative stress by upregulation of antioxidant defense systems and confirm the existence of divergence in the mechanisms underlying preconditioning (i.e., not unchangingly dependent on glutathione). The results also confirm a link between proteinopathic and oxidative stress, as presumed to be the case in Parkinson’s disease (Ganguly et al., 2017).

Aside from the studies on dopaminergic cells, proteotoxic stress has also been employed as a preconditioning tool in microglia in the context of Parkinson’s pathology. First, exposure to the Lewy body protein α-synuclein primes microglia toward higher cytokine secretion and caspase activation after stimulation of toll-like receptors 2/1 (TLR2/1) with Pam3, but reduces caspase 3 activation after stimulation with TLR7 ligands and shifts microglial polarization status without an effect on phagocytic capacity (Roodveldt et al., 2013). Second, microglial activation and cytokine release in response to rotenone treatment can be mitigated by preconditioning with rifampicin from Streptomyces mediterranei, perhaps by upregulation of autophagic clearance systems, mitigation of oxidative stress, and preservation of the mitochondrial membrane potential, which culminate in neuroprotection in co-cultures of microglia with neuronal cells (Liang et al., 2017).

Other studies have also linked inflammatory stress to conditioning in the context of Parkinson’s pathology. For example, Ding and Li reported that 24 hour-long exposure of organotypic midbrain slices to low concentrations of the archetypal pro-inflammatory endotoxin lipopolysaccharide protected dopaminergic neurons against subsequent 72 hour-long exposure to higher concentrations of the same agent (Ding and Li, 2008). The authors proposed that reductions in the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-α and microglial activation contributed to endotoxin tolerance. Recent in vivo studies confirm that low-dose exposure to lipopolysaccharides induces a state of tolerance against subsequent brain injections of higher doses and alleviates cytokine production, microglial activation, and dopaminergic cell loss (Liu et al., 2017). These studies are consistent with the recent proposal that the response to inflammation in Parkinson’s disease is U-shaped (Calabrese et al., 2017), and with long-standing observations that inflammatory stress can elicit either tolerance or sensitization, depending upon the dose (Schneider, 2011; Quintin et al., 2012; Ifrim et al., 2014; Schmidt et al., 2014).

A series of in vivo studies by Cannon and colleagues demonstrated that infusions of low doses of the serine protease thrombin above the medial forebrain bundle preconditioned against the toxicity of subsequent infusions of 6-OHDA into the medial forebrain bundle (Cannon et al., 2005; Cannon et al., 2006). Although prevention of striatal dopamine depletion was not achieved, thrombin preconditioning mitigated neurological deficits, histological loss of dopaminergic terminals, and ventricular enlargement in 6-OHDA-infused animals. Notably, the protective effects of thrombin preconditioning were prevented by infusions of an antagonist against protease-activated receptors (PARs) and appeared to be mediated by PAR-1 but not PAR-4 activation (Cannon et al., 2006). Subsequent studies on the temporal kinetics of thrombin preconditioning revealed that co-application of thrombin or a PAR1 receptor agonist with 6-OHDA exacerbated behavioral deficits (Cannon et al., 2007). In contrast, delaying thrombin administration until 1 or 7 days after 6-OHDA assuaged the toxic effects of 6-OHDA on neurological function and depletion of dopamine and its metabolites. These experiments provided the first evidence of post-conditioning in an animal model of Parkinson’s disease and are consistent with the view that a recovery interval between sequential insults is critical in determining the direction of the stress response and that synergistic effects may otherwise be elicited.

The findings of Cannon and colleagues are important in light of increases in PAR1, prothrombin, and thrombin in astrocytes and/or the endothelial lining of the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease (Ishida et al., 2006; Sokolova and Reiser, 2008). Furthermore, thrombin exposure has been shown to raise expression of glial cell-derived growth factor and glutathione peroxidase in human astrocytes and to increase their proliferation (Ishida et al., 2006). More recent work in the 6-OHDA animal model suggests that apomorphine-induced rotations and performance on the Rotarod test and the elevated body swing test may also be ameliorated by preconditioning rats with hyperoxia for 24 hours before 6-OHDA application (Hamidi et al., 2012). Collectively, the thrombin and hyperoxia studies in the 6-OHDA model of Parkinson’s disease suggest that cross-tolerance against a different insult can be achieved in dopaminergic neurons in vivo.

The studies described above do not capture the entire complement of natural defenses expressed in Parkinson’s disease models. Additional descriptions of endogenous defenses in neurodegenerative disorders and the underlying mechanisms can be found in recent reviews (Stetler et al., 2014; Golpich et al., 2015; Mollereau et al., 2016). Other than discussions of oxidative stress, the present review also does not address the role of mitochondria in dopaminergic preconditioning; many other groups have already discussed the influence of mitohormesis and the general importance of mitochondrial viability in Parkinson’s disease (Calabrese et al., 2001; Greenamyre and Hastings, 2004; Tapia, 2006; Correia et al., 2011; Van Laar and Berman, 2013; Ristow and Schmeisser, 2014; Carvalho et al., 2015). Recent studies also suggest that mitohormesis might be effective against conditions that are specifically rooted in mitochondrial dysfunction, such as neurodegenerative disorders (Jain et al., 2016).

Fewer studies have examined the intersection of conditioning responses with mutant genes associated with familial Parkinson’s disease. For example, only 22 studies are summoned in PubMed with the Boolean operators “(preconditioning OR conditioning OR pre-conditioning) AND Parkinson’s AND (synuclein OR LRRK2 OR PINK OR Parkin OR DJ-1 OR DJ1)”. Some of those studies are highlighted here. First, three months of exercise conditioning improves cognitive and motor function and reduces the levels of aggregated α-synuclein in transgenic mice overexpressing a mutant form of α-synuclein (Zhou et al., 2017). Second, α-synuclein mutations also hamper the natural increases in neuroplasticity that occur within the limbic system after fear conditioning (Schell et al., 2012). Third, deficiencies in DJ-1 (PARK7) or Parkin (PARK2) render animals resistant to ischemic preconditioning and increase cardiovascular or stroke-related injury (Huang et al., 2011; Lu et al., 2012; Dongworth et al., 2014; Mukherjee et al., 2015). Fourth, low doses of polyphenols and the oxidative toxicant paraquat delay mortality and improve motor output in flies exhibiting loss of the Parkinson’s-related protein parkin (Bonilla-Ramirez et al., 2013). Finally, Mukherjee and colleagues have argued that Parkin, PINK1, DJ-1, LRRK2, and α-synuclein maintain mitochondrial function and mitophagy, reduce free-radical toxicity, and mitigate apoptotic cell death (Mukherjee et al., 2015). Nevertheless, much work remains to be done on the intersection of conditioning pathways with Parkinson’s-related genes. Furthermore, few studies have systematically varied the temporal kinetics of either the experimental inputs (e.g., periodicity and duration of conditioning stimulus) or the measurement outputs (e.g., survival period, time of assay) in studies of conditioning in experimental Parkinson’s disease.

V. Does the slow spread of Parkinson’s pathology to the contralateral side reflect cross-hemispheric conditioning?

The nigrostriatal dopamine depletion in Parkinson’s disease and the resulting motor deficits commence on one side of the body and spread to the contralateral side over the course of years (Djaldetti et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2015). The reason underlying this asymmetric pathology is not known, but may reflect slow spread of a pathogenic insult from one hemisphere to the other side (Hobson, 2012). Exposure of one hemisphere to an ischemic event has been shown to precondition the contralateral side against experimental stroke, and this stress response is associated with bilateral upregulation of superoxide dismutase (Schumacher et al., 2014). These findings raise the possibility that the unilateral onset of Parkinson’s pathology upregulates natural defenses in the contralateral hemisphere, perhaps via diffusible factors or other means of cross-hemispheric communication. In order to test this hypothesis, we recently completed a series of behavioral and histological studies following sequential infusions of 6-OHDA into the right and left mouse caudoputamen (i.e., dorsal striatum) spaced three days apart (Weilnau et al., 2017). The 72-hour interval between the two brain infusions was chosen as sufficient time for adaptive changes in gene expression and is considered an optimal interval between ischemic preconditioning and subsequent challenges (Kirino et al., 1991; Chen and Simon, 1997; Zhang et al., 2008; Lusardi et al., 2010). Therefore, we infused 6-OHDA (4 μg) or an equivalent volume of vehicle in the right striatum, followed three days later by an infusion of vehicle or the same dose of 6-OHDA in the left striatum. We observed that the group receiving two sequential hits of 6-OHDA (6-OHDA R/6-OHDA L; group d in Figure 2) exhibited similar asymmetries in spontaneous turning behavior and dopaminergic axon terminal and cell body loss as the group that only received vehicle as the second hit (6-OHDA R/vehicle L; group c), as if the left hemisphere exposed to the second 6-OHDA hit was less damaged than the right hemisphere exposed to the first 6-OHDA hit. Furthermore, the behavioral and histological patterns in the dual hit group d (6-OHDA R/6-OHDA L) appeared the reverse of group b animals receiving 6-OHDA in the left hemisphere without any previous preconditioning (vehicle R/6-OHDA L; Figure 2). Thus, dual hit mice in group d (6-OHDA R/6-OHDA L) preferred to turn to the right side, consistent with the established view that unilaterally lesioned rodents prefer to turn contralateral to the hemisphere with greater dopaminergic tone (Ungerstedt, 1968; Ungerstedt and Arbuthnott, 1970; Fornaguera et al., 1993; Schwarting and Huston, 1996).

According to repeated measurements by blinded investigators, stressing the right hemisphere with 6-OHDA in the dual hit group d completely prevented contralateral loss of dopaminergic cells in response to the second 6-OHDA hit, as demonstrated by two independent markers of dopaminergic fibers in the striatum (tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine transporter), as well as counts of tyrosine hydroxylase+ somata in the substantia nigra, pars compacta (Weilnau et al., 2017). Our prior work with the retrograde tracer FluoroGold confirmed true loss of nigral neurons and not merely downregulation of the dopaminergic phenotype when the same dose of 6-OHDA (4 μg) was applied to the striata of the same mouse strain (Nouraei et al., 2016). In sum, cross-hemispheric preconditioning ablated the toxic influence of 6-OHDA on the entire contralateral nigrostriatal pathway.

In the cross-hemispheric preconditioning model, measurements of asymmetry in forelimb contacts with a vertical wall and forepaw landing on the floor showed smaller-sized effects and some recovery of function (Weilnau et al., 2017), but were nevertheless significantly correlated with dopaminergic markers, as was spontaneous turning asymmetry (previously unpublished graphs in Figure 3). These correlations suggest that structural protection of the nigrostriatal pathway by cross-hemispheric preconditioning is associated with functional preservation of motor output. Furthermore, the behavioral tests consistently reveal a preference for turning, forelimb use, and floor landing behavior ipsiversive to the side of greater dopamine loss, confirming that the hemisphere with higher dopaminergic tone in the dual hit group d was indeed the left hemisphere (exposed to the second 6-OHDA hit).

Previous studies indicated that dopamine receptor changes might underlie compensatory effects against 6-OHDA (Hornykiewicz and Kish, 1987; Zigmond et al., 1990; Brotchie and Fitzer-Attas, 2009), but our cross-hemispheric preconditioning effect was not associated with changes in expression of the D1 or D2 receptors. Furthermore, the protection could not be explained by activation of astrocytes or upregulation of the growth-associated protein 43, which is expressed in growth cones during axonal sprouting (Harding et al., 1999). However, unilateral 6-OHDA infusions in the striatum elicited significant bilateral upregulation of CuZn superoxide dismutase and phosphorylation of ERK2 three days later, in agreement with our previous mechanistic work showing that siRNA-induced knockdown of CuZn superoxide dismutase expression or pharmacological inhibitors of ERK1/2 abolished preconditioning of dopaminergic cells against 6-OHDA in vitro (Leak et al., 2006; Leak et al., 2008).

Functional recovery in the 6-OHDA animal model has been reported by others when the degree of dopamine depletion fails to exceed ~83% (Fornaguera et al., 1994; Schwarting and Huston, 1996; Yuan et al., 2005). Thus, we do not expect continued, progressive loss of function at longer time points than assessed in our cross-hemispheric preconditioning study (14 days after second hit). On the other hand, Parkinson’s disease in humans progresses ineluctably with age and eventually evolves into a more bilaterally symmetrical pattern (Nandhagopal et al., 2009; Marinus and van Hilten, 2015), suggesting that 1) mice might also lose cross-hemispheric preconditioning capacity with age, and 2) our model does not recapitulate the longitudinal pattern of the progressive human condition. For these reasons, we interpreted our results to support the potential of cross-hemispheric preconditioning only in the early stages of Parkinson’s disease (Weilnau et al., 2017). Furthermore, it is important to emphasize that our studies are correlative and do not establish any causal links, as we have not yet tested whether inhibition or loss of ERK1/2 and CuZn superoxide dismutase abolishes cross-hemispheric preconditioning. Given the limitations of acute nigrostriatal loss in the 6-OHDA model, studies are underway to determine if slowly progressive proteinopathic stress elicits similar cross-hemispheric preconditioning responses in a model of transmission of Lewy pathology from olfactory induction sites recently developed by us (Mason et al., 2016) and other groups (Rey et al., 2016; Rey et al., 2017).

In sum, cross-hemispheric preconditioning in the 6-OHDA model is consistent with the phenomenon of “cross-education,” whereby exercising only one half of the body also results in strength improvements on the non-exercised side (Lee and Carroll, 2007). Furthermore, previous studies show that unilateral 6-OHDA application elicits compensatory adjustments in the non-affected limb (Miklyaeva et al., 1994; Miklyaeva et al., 1997; Woodlee et al., 2008). Similarly, patients with Parkinson’s disease learn to rely on the non-affected side of their bodies (Boonstra et al., 2014; Roemmich et al., 2014) and exhibit a compensatory increase in glucose metabolism in the less-affected hemisphere (Dethy et al., 1998).

VI. Does conditioning delay the onset and slow the progression of Parkinson’s disease or not?

An enormous body of work from the 1950s onwards and out of the scope of this review suggests that increased physical activity mitigates motor deficits in human subjects with Parkinson’s disease, consistent with animal studies (Bilowit, 1956; Clark et al., 1957; Zigmond et al., 2009; Gerecke et al., 2010; Hubble et al., 2017; Mak et al., 2017; Schenkman et al., 2017; Storzer et al., 2017). In addition, dietary protein restriction in Parkinson’s patients has been shown to alleviate motor fluctuations and lack of responsiveness to L-DOPA therapy, but these effects may be mediated by liberating the neutral amino acid transporter for greater L-DOPA delivery across the blood-brain barrier (Pincus and Barry, 1987a; Pincus and Barry, 1987b). Low carbohydrate or fat intake is also associated with a reduced risk of developing Parkinson’s disease, but some of the results are contradictory (Johnson et al., 1999; Abbott et al., 2003; Agim and Cannon, 2015). Potential conditioning effects of dietary restriction and exercise are readily explained in the context of hominid evolution; our ancestors had far less access to calories but nevertheless required sharp cognitive function and vigorous physical activity to solve the problem of scarce resources while hungry (Mattson, 2015).

Few publications other than the exercise literature noted above discuss adaptive conditioning of Parkinson’s patients. In one meta-analysis, a lack of association between welding or manganese exposure and an increased risk of Parkinson’s disease was interpreted as evidence of possible hormetic effects in humans (Mortimer et al., 2012). The term preconditioning has also been employed in the context of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), which are proposed to act as hormetic stimuli and exert favorable effects upon cognition and performance (Giordano et al., 2017). In Parkinson’s patients, stimulation of the primary motor cortex with rTMS increased simple index finger and hand tapping movements and horizontal pointing (Gruner et al., 2010), whereas rTMS applied over the primary motor cortex also improved hypokinetic gait when preceded by anodal tDCS preconditioning (von Papen et al., 2014). These studies typically assess acute conditioning effects on motor output rather than the long-term progression of Parkinson’s disease. However, one study reported that benefits of rTMS in Parkinson’s patients endured for one month after treatment (Lomarev et al., 2006)

Despite the paucity of studies of conditioning in Parkinson’s patients, there are many examples of compensatory reactions in the disorder, as conveyed above. Furthermore, with pro-dopaminergic interventions, there is symptomatic early improvement in UPDRS scores, and the profile of these scores plotted as a function of disease duration conforms remarkably well to a J-shaped curve (Guimaraes et al., 2005; Reinoso et al., 2015). However, these pharmacological responses cannot be viewed as expressions of natural defense mechanisms. Exposure to pro-dopaminergic agents is a prerequisite for the placebo response in humans, and these effects are also sometimes described as “conditioning” (Haour, 2005; Benedetti et al., 2016; Frisaldi et al., 2017), although they are not stress-induced. In contrast, the reduction in Parkinson’s disease risk with tobacco consumption may exemplify genuine stress-induced conditioning (van der Mark et al., 2014).

Measurements of stress responses across disease stages are complicated by regional differences in stress reactivity, tolerance, and vulnerability. For example, the U-shaped changes in 18Fluorodopa uptake in the nigropallidal pathway reported by Whone and colleagues are paralleled by simultaneous decreases of the same measure in the nigrostriatal pathway and motor cortex (Whone et al., 2003). While relatively resistant brain regions exhibit an increase in natural defenses, such as an increase in glutathione levels in the cerebral cortex in Parkinson’s disease, more vulnerable regions such as the substantia nigra show a simultaneous decline in glutathione levels (Perry et al., 1982; Sofic et al., 1992; Sian et al., 1994; Mythri et al., 2011). Calbindin and calcium channel expression differences in ventral versus dorsal tiers and in nigrosomes versus matrix may further contribute to selective vulnerabilities (Surmeier et al., 2011).

Tim Schallert has argued that injured tissue might be particularly sensitive to overstimulation, suggesting that the hormetic “sweet spot” will be tricky to achieve in the clinic, even with physical exercise, which is considered relatively innocuous (Schallert et al., 1997). Furthermore, the biphasic nature of U-shaped stress responses dictates that sufficiently severe stress above a threshold should sensitize cells to even greater injury in response to subsequent challenges, rather than mitigating subsequent injury. Indeed, synergistic effects of multiple exposures to severe stress form the basis of the “two hit” or “dual hit” hypothesis of neurodegeneration (Ling et al., 2004; Zhu et al., 2004; Carvey et al., 2006; Sulzer, 2007; Zhu et al., 2007; Boger et al., 2010; Unnithan et al., 2012; Leak, 2014; Unnithan et al., 2014; Heinemann et al., 2016; Mori, 2017). Stressors that are applied in succession without a sufficient recovery interval might lead to synergistically toxic responses, such as coapplication of 6-OHDA hits in both hemispheres instead of two hits spaced three days apart. Only the latter temporal regimen leads to cross-hemispheric preconditioning (see discussion in Weilnau et al., 2017). Therefore, it is conceivable that sensitization to cumulative, relentless stressors underlies the defeat of natural defense systems in Parkinson’s disease, due to slow accretion of protein deposits, oxidative damage, and cell loss, until only the most resistant, stress-refractory dopaminergic cells remain alive. Self-amplifying, synergistic processes might also explain the acceleration of nigral cell loss in mid disease stages (after Braak stage III, see above and Figure 1). Eventual enrichment of the shrinking nigral cell population in highly resistant neurons of the dorsal nigrosomes might subsequently decelerate the rate of cell loss. As argued above, these features may underlie the exponential or sigmoidal shape of the dopaminergic cell loss curve. Stress-response curves in Parkinson’s disease might also assume a number of multiphasic shapes because of 1) regional differences in vulnerability (e.g., neocortex versus allocortex and substantia nigra, ventral versus dorsal nigral tier), 2) the duration of the illness that is feasible to assess (i.e., early enough to capture compensatory changes versus late enough to reveal the asymptote), and 3) the specific nature of the response (e.g., dopamine cell counts in the nigra versus extracellular dopaminergic tone in the striatum). Age-related failures in stress compensation may also contribute to variability in disease progression according to the age at diagnosis (Collier et al., 2007).

VII. Conclusion

Armed largely with correlative and observational clinical work and preclinical studies on transformed cell lines or acute, toxicant-induced animal models, it is difficult to conclude whether or not Parkinson’s progression in humans is indeed impeded by the kindling of conditioning defenses. This question might be better addressed by measuring viability in response to multiple hits in patient-derived stem cells, blood cells, or fibroblasts collected prior to the appearance of motor deficits, provided specific biomarkers of prodromal disease such as Lewy pathology in the submandibular gland are employed (Beach et al., 2016; Adler et al., 2017). However, researchers may discover that the conditioning achieved readily in experimental models cannot be actualized in authentically diseased human cells. Indeed, it may be the very absence (or diminution) of conditioning capacity that allows the disease to germinate in the first place and spew its shoots throughout the neuraxis. On the other hand, the benefits of conditioning might still be leveraged during transplantation of non-diseased cells into patients with Parkinson’s disease (Pan-Montojo and Funk, 2012). Transplantation of dopaminergic tissue into the brains of Parkinson’s patients was originally attempted with adrenal medulla tissue many decades ago (Kelly et al., 1989). More recently, human embryonic cells (Olanow et al., 2001; Brundin and Kordower, 2012) and induced pluripotent stem cells have been employed (Takahashi, 2017), although there is evidence that the transplanted dopaminergic cells are transformed into diseased cells over time (Kordower et al., 2008; Li et al., 2008; Li et al., 2010). In the stroke literature, it is well established that stem cells can be conditioned for improved survival after transplantation into the brain by mild hypoxia exposure (Bernstock et al., 2017). Notably, exposure of mesencephalic progenitors to low partial pressure of oxygen increases their branching, branch length, and mRNA expression of markers of maturation such as Nurr1, Pitx3, and the dopamine transporter (Liu et al., 2009). Therefore, a hypoxia-conditioned transplant preparation of allogeneic, otherwise healthy cells may have superior chances of surviving 1) the shock of the transplant procedure itself and 2) the initial shock of the hostile environment within severely diseased brains. In the context of transplants, it is important to remember that the brains of patients with Parkinson’s disease teem with free radicals, denatured proteins, dysfunctional mitochondria, and, even in the early stages, suffer from defective complex I activity and depressed glutathione (Schapira et al., 1990; Dexter et al., 1994; Sian et al., 1994; Gu et al., 1998; Zeevalk et al., 2008). The latter two characteristics probably set in motion stress responses early in the disease but may also wear down natural defenses after many years of chronic disease, consistent with the biphasic nature of hormesis and Hans Selye’s classic studies of the temporal kinetics of (acute) eustress and (chronic) distress.

I must apologize to all those whose research I had no space to discuss. I remain immensely grateful to Justin Weilnau for his work on preconditioning in my research laboratory. I have no conflicts to disclose. Supported by NINDS grant R15NS093539.

Figure 1 Nonlinear stress responses as a function of the duration (severity) of Parkinson’s disease

(A) Jankovic noted the existence of inverted U-shaped and negative exponential stress response curves during the progression of Parkinson’s disease. Copied with permission from Jankovic’s editorial (Jankovic, 2005). (B) Wu and Hallet hypothesized a U-shaped compensatory phase in cerebellar function early in the course of Parkinson’s disease. Copied with permission from Wu and Hallet’s review (Wu and Hallett, 2013). (C) Fearnley and Lees reported that overall nigral cell loss assumes a negative exponential profile but that different subregions of the substantia nigra lose cells at varying rates. Phase 1 on the X axis in panel C reflects cases with incidental Lewy body disease (assumed to be prodromal Parkinson’s disease), and the plus signs reflect increasing severity of Parkinson’s disease. Dorsal tier: medial part (DM), lateral part (DL) and pars lateralis (PL). Ventral tier: medial part (VM) and lateral part (Vl-intermediate and VL). Copied legend and graph with permission from Fearnley and Lees’ research report (Fearnley and Lees, 1991). For a graph of the alignment of motor deficits and nigral cell loss as exponential, saturating curves, please also consult Figure 4 in Greffard and colleagues’ work (Greffard et al., 2006).

Figure 2 Cross-hemispheric preconditioning mitigates motor deficits and nigrostriatal somata and terminal loss in an animal model of Parkinson’s disease

(A) Schematized illustration of the experimental design. Mice were infused in the right hemisphere with 4 μg 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) or an equal volume of saline with 0.02% ascorbic acid (preconditioning 1st hit). Three days later, animals were infused in the left hemisphere with 4 μg 6-OHDA or an equal volume of saline with 0.02% ascorbic acid (challenging 2nd hit). One and two weeks later, animals were placed in a transparent cylindrical enclosure and spontaneous behavior was videotaped. (B) A blinded observed measured the number of spontaneous turns to the left or right side one week after the second hit. (C–F) Two weeks following the second hit, coronal brain sections through the forebrain were immunostained for two markers of the dopaminergic phenotype—the rate-limiting enzyme for dopamine biosynthesis, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and the dopamine transporter (DAT). A blinded observer traced the anatomical boundaries of the dorsal striatum and measured the immunofluorescent signal within the region of interest using an ultrasensitive, low-resolution imager. (G–H) Two weeks following the second hit, coronal brain sections through the midbrain were immunostained for the dopaminergic marker TH and viewed by higher-resolution fluorescence microscopy. The numbers of TH+ cells were counted in the substantia nigra by a blinded observer. Panel H contains representative stitched photomontages of the ventral midbrain in all four groups. A second blinded observer confirmed key behavioral and histological data (not shown). Tissue from all groups was stained simultaneously with the same stock solutions and photographed in parallel at equivalent camera settings. Data are presented as the mean and SEM from 5–6 mice per group. * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001 left versus right hemisphere; a p ≤ 0.05, aa p ≤ 0.01, aaa p ≤ 0.001 versus group a; b p ≤ 0.05, bb p ≤ 0.01, bbb p ≤ 0.001 versus group b; two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc correction. Legend and figure copied with permission from main text or supplemental files of our recent report (Weilnau et al., 2017).

Figure 3 Linear correlations between structural and functional outcomes of cross-hemispheric preconditioning in experimental Parkinson’s disease

Mice were preconditioned with 6-OHDA, as described in the legend of Figure 2, and behavioral and histological outcomes were measured, as described in our previous report (Weilnau et al., 2017). Raw striatal TH or DAT measurements (arbitrary fluorescence units) were employed as indicators of the structural integrity of nigrostriatal axon terminals and plotted as a function of the percentage of left versus right forelimb contacts with a vertical wall (A–D), left versus right forelimb landings on the floor (E–H), and left versus right spontaneous turns (I–L), as measured 7 or 14 days after the second hit (data from Weilnau et al., 2017). Two-tailed Pearson correlation analyses were applied to all the data. The Pearson correlation coefficient r and the corresponding p value are shown. Statistically significant results are present in red font. Each animal is represented as one dot and each group is represented by a unique color and symbol. Note that some of the values are so similar that the dots overlap. n = 5–6 mice per group.


Aarsland D Muniz G Matthews F 2011 Nonlinear decline of mini-mental state examination in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 26 334 337 20960482
Abbott RD Ross GW White LR Sanderson WT Burchfiel CM Kashon M Sharp DS Masaki KH Curb JD Petrovitch H 2003 Environmental, life-style, and physical precursors of clinical Parkinson’s disease: recent findings from the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study J Neurol 250 Suppl 3 III30 39 14579122
Adler CH Beach TG 2016 Neuropathological basis of nonmotor manifestations of Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 31 1114 1119 27030013
Adler CH Dugger BN Hentz JG Hinni ML Lott DG Driver-Dunckley E Mehta S Serrano G Sue LI Duffy A Intorcia A Filon J Pullen J Walker DG Beach TG 2017 Peripheral synucleinopathy in early Parkinson’s disease: Submandibular gland needle biopsy findings Mov Disord 32 722 723 28513078
Agim ZS Cannon JR 2015 Dietary factors in the etiology of Parkinson’s disease Biomed Res Int 2015 672838 25688361
Alam ZI Jenner A Daniel SE Lees AJ Cairns N Marsden CD Jenner P Halliwell B 1997 Oxidative DNA damage in the parkinsonian brain: an apparent selective increase in 8-hydroxyguanine levels in substantia nigra Journal of neurochemistry 69 1196 1203 9282943
Andoh T Chock PB Chiueh CC 2002 Preconditioning-mediated neuroprotection: role of nitric oxide, cGMP, and new protein expression Ann N Y Acad Sci 962 1 7
Appel-Cresswell S de la Fuente-Fernandez R Galley S McKeown MJ 2010 Imaging of compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson’s disease Curr Opin Neurol 23 407 412 20610991
Arias-Carrion O Yamada E Freundlieb N Djufri M Maurer L Hermanns G Ipach B Chiu WH Steiner C Oertel WH Hoglinger GU 2009 Neurogenesis in substantia nigra of parkinsonian brains? J Neural Transm Suppl 279 285 20411786
Au WL Calne DB 2005 A reassessment of the Lewy body Acta Neurol Taiwan 14 40 47 16008161
Bayliss JA Lemus MB Stark R Santos VV Thompson A Rees DJ Galic S Elsworth JD Kemp BE Davies JS Andrews ZB 2016 Ghrelin-AMPK Signaling Mediates the Neuroprotective Effects of Calorie Restriction in Parkinson’s Disease J Neurosci 36 3049 3063 26961958
Beach TG 2017 A Review of Biomarkers for Neurodegenerative Disease: Will They Swing Us Across the Valley? Neurol Ther 6 5 13 28733961
Beach TG White CL 3rd Hladik CL Sabbagh MN Connor DJ Shill HA Sue LI Sasse J Bachalakuri J Henry-Watson J Akiyama H Adler CH Arizona Parkinson’s Disease C 2009a Olfactory bulb alpha-synucleinopathy has high specificity and sensitivity for Lewy body disorders Acta Neuropathol 117 169 174 18982334
Beach TG Adler CH Serrano G Sue LI Walker DG Dugger BN Shill HA Driver-Dunckley E Caviness JN Intorcia A Filon J Scott S Garcia A Hoffman B Belden CM Davis KJ Sabbagh MN Arizona Parkinson’s Disease C 2016 Prevalence of Submandibular Gland Synucleinopathy in Parkinson’s Disease, Dementia with Lewy Bodies and other Lewy Body Disorders J Parkinsons Dis 6 153 163 26756744
Beach TG Adler CH Lue L Sue LI Bachalakuri J Henry-Watson J Sasse J Boyer S Shirohi S Brooks R Eschbacher J White CL 3rd Akiyama H Caviness J Shill HA Connor DJ Sabbagh MN Walker DG Arizona Parkinson’s Disease C 2009b Unified staging system for Lewy body disorders: correlation with nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and motor dysfunction Acta Neuropathol 117 613 634 19399512
Benedetti F Frisaldi E Carlino E Giudetti L Pampallona A Zibetti M Lanotte M Lopiano L 2016 Teaching neurons to respond to placebos J Physiol 594 5647 5660 26861164
Bernstock JD Peruzzotti-Jametti L Ye D Gessler FA Maric D Vicario N Lee YJ Pluchino S Hallenbeck JM 2017 Neural stem cell transplantation in ischemic stroke: A role for preconditioning and cellular engineering J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 37 2314 2319 28303738
Beyer K Domingo-Sabat M Ariza A 2009 Molecular pathology of Lewy body diseases Int J Mol Sci 10 724 745 19399218
Bezard E Gross CE Brotchie JM 2003 Presymptomatic compensation in Parkinson’s disease is not dopamine-mediated Trends Neurosci 26 215 221 12689773
Bezard E Dovero S Imbert C Boraud T Gross CE 2000 Spontaneous long-term compensatory dopaminergic sprouting in MPTP-treated mice Synapse 38 363 368 11020240
Bezard E Dovero S Prunier C Ravenscroft P Chalon S Guilloteau D Crossman AR Bioulac B Brotchie JM Gross CE 2001 Relationship between the appearance of symptoms and the level of nigrostriatal degeneration in a progressive 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-lesioned macaque model of Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci 21 6853 6861 11517273
Bhattaram VA Siddiqui O Kapcala LP Gobburu JV 2009 Endpoints and analyses to discern disease-modifying drug effects in early Parkinson’s disease AAPS J 11 456 464 19521783
Bilowit DS 1956 Establishing physical objectives in the rehabilitation of patients with Parkinson’s disease; gymnasium activities Phys Ther Rev 36 176 178 13297544
Blesa J Trigo-Damas I Quiroga-Varela A Jackson-Lewis VR 2015 Oxidative stress and Parkinson’s disease Front Neuroanat 9 91 26217195
Blesa J Trigo-Damas I Dileone M Del Rey NL Hernandez LF Obeso JA 2017 Compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson’s disease: Circuits adaptations and role in disease modification Exp Neurol 298 148 161 28987461
Boger HA Granholm AC McGinty JF Middaugh LD 2010 A dual-hit animal model for age-related parkinsonism Progress in neurobiology 90 217 229 19853012
Bonilla-Ramirez L Jimenez-Del-Rio M Velez-Pardo C 2013 Low doses of paraquat and polyphenols prolong life span and locomotor activity in knock-down parkin Drosophila melanogaster exposed to oxidative stress stimuli: implication in autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism Gene 512 355 363 23046578
Boonstra TA Schouten AC van Vugt JP Bloem BR van der Kooij H 2014 Parkinson’s disease patients compensate for balance control asymmetry J Neurophysiol 112 3227 3239 25253475
Braak H Rub U Gai WP Del Tredici K 2003a Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: possible routes by which vulnerable neuronal types may be subject to neuroinvasion by an unknown pathogen J Neural Transm 110 517 536 12721813
Braak H Thal DR Ghebremedhin E Del Tredici K 2011 Stages of the pathologic process in Alzheimer disease: age categories from 1 to 100 years J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 960 969 22002422
Braak H Del Tredici K Bratzke H Hamm-Clement J Sandmann-Keil D Rub U 2002 Staging of the intracerebral inclusion body pathology associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (preclinical and clinical stages) J Neurol 249 Suppl 3 III/1 5
Braak H Del Tredici K Rub U de Vos RA Jansen Steur EN Braak E 2003b Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Aging 24 197 211 12498954
Brotchie J Fitzer-Attas C 2009 Mechanisms compensating for dopamine loss in early Parkinson disease Neurology 72 S32 38 19221312
Brundin P Kordower JH 2012 Neuropathology in transplants in Parkinson’s disease: implications for disease pathogenesis and the future of cell therapy Prog Brain Res 200 221 241 23195421
Calabrese EJ 2004 Hormesis: a revolution in toxicology, risk assessment and medicine EMBO Rep 5 Spec No S37 40 15459733
Calabrese EJ 2008 Converging concepts: adaptive response, preconditioning, and the Yerkes-Dodson Law are manifestations of hormesis Ageing research reviews 7 8 20 17768095
Calabrese EJ 2010 Hormesis is central to toxicology, pharmacology and risk assessment Human &amp; experimental toxicology 29 249 261 20332169
Calabrese EJ 2014 Hormesis: a fundamental concept in biology Microb Cell 1 145 149 28357236
Calabrese EJ 2016a Preconditioning is hormesis part I: Documentation, dose-response features and mechanistic foundations Pharmacol Res 110 242 264 26757428
Calabrese EJ 2016b Preconditioning is hormesis part II: How the conditioning dose mediates protection: Dose optimization within temporal and mechanistic frameworks Pharmacol Res 110 265 275 26748033
Calabrese EJ Baldwin LA 2000 Chemical hormesis: its historical foundations as a biological hypothesis Hum Exp Toxicol 19 2 31 10745292
Calabrese EJ Baldwin LA 2001 Hormesis: U-shaped dose responses and their centrality in toxicology Trends Pharmacol Sci 22 285 291 11395156
Calabrese EJ Baldwin LA 2002 Defining hormesis Hum Exp Toxicol 21 91 97 12102503
Calabrese EJ Baldwin LA 2003 Hormesis: the dose-response revolution Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 43 175 197 12195028
Calabrese EJ Blain R 2005 The occurrence of hormetic dose responses in the toxicological literature, the hormesis database: an overview Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 202 289 301 15667834
Calabrese EJ Blain RB 2011 The hormesis database: the occurrence of hormetic dose responses in the toxicological literature Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology: RTP 61 73 81 21699952
Calabrese EJ Mattson MP 2017 How does hormesis impact biology, toxicology, and medicine? NPJ Aging Mech Dis 3 13 28944077
Calabrese EJ 2007 Biological stress response terminology: Integrating the concepts of adaptive response and preconditioning stress within a hormetic dose-response framework Toxicology and applied pharmacology 222 122 128 17459441
Calabrese V Scapagnini G Giuffrida Stella AM Bates TE Clark JB 2001 Mitochondrial involvement in brain function and dysfunction: relevance to aging, neurodegenerative disorders and longevity Neurochem Res 26 739 764 11519733
Calabrese V Santoro A Monti D Crupi R Paola RD Latteri S Cuzzocrea S Zappia M Giordano J Calabrese EJ Franceschi C 2017 Aging and Parkinson’s Disease: Inflammaging, Neuroinflammation and Biological Remodelling as Key Factors in Pathogenesis Free Radic Biol Med
Candy JM Perry RH Perry EK Irving D Blessed G Fairbairn AF Tomlinson BE 1983 Pathological changes in the nucleus of Meynert in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases J Neurol Sci 59 277 289 6854353
Cannon JR Keep RF Hua Y Richardson RJ Schallert T Xi G 2005 Thrombin preconditioning provides protection in a 6-hydroxydopamine Parkinson’s disease model Neurosci Lett 373 189 194 15619541
Cannon JR Keep RF Schallert T Hua Y Richardson RJ Xi G 2006 Protease-activated receptor-1 mediates protection elicited by thrombin preconditioning in a rat 6-hydroxydopamine model of Parkinson’s disease Brain Res 1116 177 186 16934779
Cannon JR Hua Y Richardson RJ Xi G Keep RF Schallert T 2007 The effect of thrombin on a 6-hydroxydopamine model of Parkinson’s disease depends on timing Behav Brain Res 183 161 168 17629581
Carvalho C Correia SC Cardoso S Placido AI Candeias E Duarte AI Moreira PI 2015 The role of mitochondrial disturbances in Alzheimer, Parkinson and Huntington diseases Expert Rev Neurother 15 867 884 26092668
Carvey PM Punati A Newman MB 2006 Progressive dopamine neuron loss in Parkinson’s disease: the multiple hit hypothesis Cell Transplant 15 239 250 16719059
Chen J Simon R 1997 Ischemic tolerance in the brain Neurology 48 306 311 9040711
Chen J Graham SH Zhu RL Simon RP 1996 Stress proteins and tolerance to focal cerebral ischemia J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 16 566 577 8964795
Chen ZH Yoshida Y Saito Y Niki E 2005 Adaptation to hydrogen peroxide enhances PC12 cell tolerance against oxidative damage Neurosci Lett 383 256 259 15878237
Cheng HC Ulane CM Burke RE 2010 Clinical progression in Parkinson disease and the neurobiology of axons Ann Neurol 67 715 725 20517933
Claassen DO Josephs KA Ahlskog JE Silber MH Tippmann-Peikert M Boeve BF 2010 REM sleep behavior disorder preceding other aspects of synucleinopathies by up to half a century Neurology 75 494 499 20668263
Clark EC Mulder DW Erickson DJ Clements BG Maccarty CS 1957 Parkinson’s disease: therapeutic exercises in its management Postgrad Med 21 301 308 13408146
Collier TJ Lipton J Daley BF Palfi S Chu Y Sortwell C Bakay RA Sladek JR Jr Kordower JH 2007 Aging-related changes in the nigrostriatal dopamine system and the response to MPTP in nonhuman primates: diminished compensatory mechanisms as a prelude to parkinsonism Neurobiol Dis 26 56 65 17254792
Coppens J Bentea E Bayliss JA Demuyser T Walrave L Albertini G Van Liefferinge J Deneyer L Aourz N Van Eeckhaut A Portelli J Andrews ZB Massie A De Bundel D Smolders I 2017 Caloric Restriction Protects against Lactacystin-Induced Degeneration of Dopamine Neurons Independent of the Ghrelin Receptor Int J Mol Sci 18
Correia SC Cardoso S Santos RX Carvalho C Santos MS Perry G Smith MA Moreira PI 2011 New insights into the mechanisms of mitochondrial preconditioning-triggered neuroprotection Curr Pharm Des 17 3381 3389 21902670
Dahl NA Balfour WM 1964 Prolonged Anoxic Survival Due to Anoxia Pre-Exposure: Brain Atp, Lactate, and Pyruvate Am J Physiol 207 452 456 14205366
Damier P Hirsch EC Agid Y Graybiel AM 1999 The substantia nigra of the human brain. II. Patterns of loss of dopamine-containing neurons in Parkinson’s disease Brain 122 Pt 8 1437 1448 10430830
Darbin O Adams E Martino A Naritoku L Dees D Naritoku D 2013 Non-linear dynamics in parkinsonism Front Neurol 4 211 24399994
Del Tredici K Braak H 2016 Review: Sporadic Parkinson’s disease: development and distribution of alpha-synuclein pathology Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 42 33 50 26662475
Dethy S Van Blercom N Damhaut P Wikler D Hildebrand J Goldman S 1998 Asymmetry of basal ganglia glucose metabolism and dopa responsiveness in parkinsonism Mov Disord 13 275 280 9539341
Dexter DT Carter CJ Wells FR Javoy-Agid F Agid Y Lees A Jenner P Marsden CD 1989 Basal lipid peroxidation in substantia nigra is increased in Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 52 381 389 2911023
Dexter DT Sian J Rose S Hindmarsh JG Mann VM Cooper JM Wells FR Daniel SE Lees AJ Schapira AH 1994 Indices of oxidative stress and mitochondrial function in individuals with incidental Lewy body disease Ann Neurol 35 38 44 8285590
Di Veroli GY Fornari C Goldlust I Mills G Koh SB Bramhall JL Richards FM Jodrell DI 2015 An automated fitting procedure and software for dose-response curves with multiphasic features Sci Rep 5 14701 26424192
Ding Y Li L 2008 Lipopolysaccharide preconditioning induces protection against lipopolysaccharide-induced neurotoxicity in organotypic midbrain slice culture Neurosci Bull 24 209 218 18668149
Djaldetti R Ziv I Melamed E 2006 The mystery of motor asymmetry in Parkinson’s disease Lancet Neurol 5 796 802 16914408
Dongworth RK Mukherjee UA Hall AR Astin R Ong SB Yao Z Dyson A Szabadkai G Davidson SM Yellon DM Hausenloy DJ 2014 DJ-1 protects against cell death following acute cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury Cell Death Dis 5 e1082 24577080
Duan W Mattson MP 1999 Dietary restriction and 2-deoxyglucose administration improve behavioral outcome and reduce degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in models of Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci Res 57 195 206 10398297
El Ayadi A Zigmond MJ 2011 Low concentrations of methamphetamine can protect dopaminergic cells against a larger oxidative stress injury: mechanistic study PLoS One 6 e24722 22022363
Fallon JH Moore RY 1978 Catecholamine innervation of the basal forebrain. IV. Topography of the dopamine projection to the basal forebrain and neostriatum J Comp Neurol 180 545 580 659674
Fan GH Qi C Chen SD 2005 Heat shock proteins reduce toxicity of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion in SK-N-SH cells J Neurosci Res 82 551 562 16235253
Fasano A Visanji NP Liu LW Lang AE Pfeiffer RF 2015 Gastrointestinal dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease Lancet Neurol 14 625 639 25987282
Fearnley JM Lees AJ 1991 Ageing and Parkinson’s disease: substantia nigra regional selectivity Brain 114 Pt 5 2283 2301 1933245
Floor E Wetzel MG 1998 Increased protein oxidation in human substantia nigra pars compacta in comparison with basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex measured with an improved dinitrophenylhydrazine assay J Neurochem 70 268 275 9422371
Fornaguera J Schwarting RK Boix F Huston JP 1993 Behavioral indices of moderate nigro-striatal 6-hydroxydopamine lesion: a preclinical Parkinson’s model Synapse 13 179 185 7680495
Fornaguera J Carey RJ Huston JP Schwarting RK 1994 Behavioral asymmetries and recovery in rats with different degrees of unilateral striatal dopamine depletion Brain Res 664 178 188 7895027
Fouillet A Levet C Virgone A Robin M Dourlen P Rieusset J Belaidi E Ovize M Touret M Nataf S Mollereau B 2012 ER stress inhibits neuronal death by promoting autophagy Autophagy 8 915 926 22660271
Frisaldi E Carlino E Zibetti M Barbiani D Dematteis F Lanotte M Lopiano L Benedetti F 2017 The placebo effect on bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease with and without prior drug conditioning Mov Disord 32 1474 1478 28895186
Fronczek R Overeem S Lee SY Hegeman IM van Pelt J van Duinen SG Lammers GJ Swaab DF 2007 Hypocretin (orexin) loss in Parkinson’s disease Brain 130 1577 1585 17470494
Ganguly G Chakrabarti S Chatterjee U Saso L 2017 Proteinopathy, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction: cross talk in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease Drug Des Devel Ther 11 797 810
Garris PA Walker QD Wightman RM 1997 Dopamine release and uptake rates both decrease in the partially denervated striatum in proportion to the loss of dopamine terminals Brain Res 753 225 234 9125407
Gerecke KM Jiao Y Pani A Pagala V Smeyne RJ 2010 Exercise protects against MPTP-induced neurotoxicity in mice Brain Res Brain Res Protoc 1341 72 83
German DC Manaye KF White CL 3rd Woodward DJ McIntire DD Smith WK Kalaria RN Mann DM 1992 Disease-specific patterns of locus coeruleus cell loss Ann Neurol 32 667 676 1449247
Gidday JM Fitzgibbons JC Shah AR Park TS 1994 Neuroprotection from ischemic brain injury by hypoxic preconditioning in the neonatal rat Neurosci Lett 168 221 224 8028780
Giordano J Bikson M Kappenman ES Clark VP Coslett HB Hamblin MR Hamilton R Jankord R Kozumbo WJ McKinley RA Nitsche MA Reilly JP Richardson J Wurzman R Calabrese E 2017 Mechanisms and Effects of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Dose Response 15 1559325816685467 28210202
Gleixner AM Posimo JM Pant DB Henderson MP Leak RK 2016 Astrocytes Surviving Severe Stress Can Still Protect Neighboring Neurons from Proteotoxic Injury Mol Neurobiol 53 4939 4960 26374549
Goedert M Spillantini MG Del Tredici K Braak H 2013 100 years of Lewy pathology Nat Rev Neurol 9 13 24 23183883
Goetz CG 2011 The history of Parkinson’s disease: early clinical descriptions and neurological therapies Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 1 a008862 22229124
Golpich M Rahmani B Mohamed Ibrahim N Dargahi L Mohamed Z Raymond AA Ahmadiani A 2015 Preconditioning as a potential strategy for the prevention of Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurobiol 51 313 330 24696268
Gould E 2007 How widespread is adult neurogenesis in mammals? Nat Rev Neurosci 8 481 488 17514200
Greenamyre JT Hastings TG 2004 Biomedicine. Parkinson’s--divergent causes, convergent mechanisms Science 304 1120 1122 15155938
Greffard S Verny M Bonnet AM Beinis JY Gallinari C Meaume S Piette F Hauw JJ Duyckaerts C 2006 Motor score of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale as a good predictor of Lewy body-associated neuronal loss in the substantia nigra Arch Neurol 63 584 588 16606773
Griffioen KJ Rothman SM Ladenheim B Wan R Vranis N Hutchison E Okun E Cadet JL Mattson MP 2013 Dietary energy intake modifies brainstem autonomic dysfunction caused by mutant alpha-synuclein Neurobiol Aging 34 928 935 22883907
Gruner U Eggers C Ameli M Sarfeld AS Fink GR Nowak DA 2010 1 Hz rTMS preconditioned by tDCS over the primary motor cortex in Parkinson’s disease: effects on bradykinesia of arm and hand J Neural Transm (Vienna) 117 207 216 20033235
Gu M Owen AD Toffa SE Cooper JM Dexter DT Jenner P Marsden CD Schapira AH 1998 Mitochondrial function, GSH and iron in neurodegeneration and Lewy body diseases J Neurol Sci 158 24 29 9667773
Guimaraes P Kieburtz K Goetz CG Elm JJ Palesch YY Huang P Ravina B Tanner CM Tilley BC 2005 Non-linearity of Parkinson’s disease progression: implications for sample size calculations in clinical trials Clin Trials 2 509 518 16422311
Hall H Reyes S Landeck N Bye C Leanza G Double K Thompson L Halliday G Kirik D 2014 Hippocampal Lewy pathology and cholinergic dysfunction are associated with dementia in Parkinson’s disease Brain 137 2493 2508 25062696
Halliday GM Del Tredici K Braak H 2006 Critical appraisal of brain pathology staging related to presymptomatic and symptomatic cases of sporadic Parkinson’s disease J Neural Transm Suppl 99 103 17017515
Halliday GM Blumbergs PC Cotton RG Blessing WW Geffen LB 1990a Loss of brainstem serotonin- and substance P-containing neurons in Parkinson’s disease Brain Res 510 104 107 1691042
Halliday GM Li YW Blumbergs PC Joh TH Cotton RG Howe PR Blessing WW Geffen LB 1990b Neuropathology of immunohistochemically identified brainstem neurons in Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 27 373 385 1972319
Hamidi GA Faraji A Zarmehri HA Haghdoost-Yazdi H 2012 Prolonged hyperoxia preconditioning attenuates behavioral symptoms of 6-hydroxydopamine-induced Parkinsonism Neurological research 34 636 642 22781835
Haour F 2005 Mechanisms of the placebo effect and of conditioning Neuroimmunomodulation 12 195 200 15990450
Hara H Kamiya T Adachi T 2011 Endoplasmic reticulum stress inducers provide protection against 6-hydroxydopamine-induced cytotoxicity Neurochem Int 58 35 43 20974203
Harding DI Greensmith L Mason M Anderson PN Vrbova G 1999 Overexpression of GAP-43 induces prolonged sprouting and causes death of adult motoneurons Eur J Neurosci 11 2237 2242 10383612
Hastings TG 2009 The role of dopamine oxidation in mitochondrial dysfunction: implications for Parkinson’s disease J Bioenerg Biomembr 41 469 472 19967436
Hauser DN Hastings TG 2013 Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in Parkinson’s disease and monogenic parkinsonism Neurobiol Dis 51 35 42 23064436
Hawkes CH Del Tredici K Braak H 2007 Parkinson’s disease: a dual-hit hypothesis Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 33 599 614 17961138
Heinemann SD Posimo JM Mason DM Hutchison DF Leak RK 2016 Synergistic stress exacerbation in hippocampal neurons: Evidence favoring the dual-hit hypothesis of neurodegeneration Hippocampus 26 980 994 26934478
Hetz C Mollereau B 2014 Disturbance of endoplasmic reticulum proteostasis in neurodegenerative diseases Nat Rev Neurosci 15 233 249 24619348
Hilker R Schweitzer K Coburger S Ghaemi M Weisenbach S Jacobs AH Rudolf J Herholz K Heiss WD 2005 Nonlinear progression of Parkinson disease as determined by serial positron emission tomographic imaging of striatal fluorodopa F 18 activity Arch Neurol 62 378 382 15767502
Hirsch E Graybiel AM Agid YA 1988 Melanized dopaminergic neurons are differentially susceptible to degeneration in Parkinson’s disease Nature 334 345 348 2899295
Hirsch EC Graybiel AM Duyckaerts C Javoy-Agid F 1987 Neuronal loss in the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus in Parkinson disease and in progressive supranuclear palsy Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 84 5976 5980 3475716
Hobson DE 2012 Asymmetry in parkinsonism, spreading pathogens and the nose Parkinsonism Relat Disord 18 1 9 21752693
Holford NH Chan PL Nutt JG Kieburtz K Shoulson I Parkinson Study G 2006 Disease progression and pharmacodynamics in Parkinson disease - evidence for functional protection with levodopa and other treatments J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 33 281 311 16625427
Holmer HK Keyghobadi M Moore C Menashe RA Meshul CK 2005 Dietary restriction affects striatal glutamate in the MPTP-induced mouse model of nigrostriatal degeneration Synapse 57 100 112 15906381
Hornykiewicz O Kish SJ 1987 Biochemical pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease Adv Neurol 45 19 34 2881444
Huang C Andres AM Ratliff EP Hernandez G Lee P Gottlieb RA 2011 Preconditioning involves selective mitophagy mediated by Parkin and p62/SQSTM1 PLoS One 6 e20975 21687634
Hubble RP Naughton G Silburn PA Cole MH 2017 Trunk exercises improve gait symmetry in Parkinson disease: A blind phase II randomised-controlled trial Am J Phys Med Rehabil
Iacono D Markesbery WR Gross M Pletnikova O Rudow G Zandi P Troncoso JC 2009 The Nun study: clinically silent AD, neuronal hypertrophy, and linguistic skills in early life Neurology 73 665 673 19587326
Ifrim DC Quintin J Joosten LA Jacobs C Jansen T Jacobs L Gow NA Williams DL van der Meer JW Netea MG 2014 Trained immunity or tolerance: opposing functional programs induced in human monocytes after engagement of various pattern recognition receptors Clin Vaccine Immunol 21 534 545 24521784
Inoue Y Hara H Mitsugi Y Yamaguchi E Kamiya T Itoh A Adachi T 2017 4-Hydroperoxy-2-decenoic acid ethyl ester protects against 6-hydroxydopamine-induced cell death via activation of Nrf2-ARE and eIF2alpha-ATF4 pathways Neurochem Int
Ishida Y Nagai A Kobayashi S Kim SU 2006 Upregulation of protease-activated receptor-1 in astrocytes in Parkinson disease: astrocyte-mediated neuroprotection through increased levels of glutathione peroxidase J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 65 66 77 16410750
Jain IH Zazzeron L Goli R Alexa K Schatzman-Bone S Dhillon H Goldberger O Peng J Shalem O Sanjana NE Zhang F Goessling W Zapol WM Mootha VK 2016 Hypoxia as a therapy for mitochondrial disease Science 352 54 61 26917594
Jankovic J 2005 Progression of Parkinson disease: are we making progress in charting the course? Arch Neurol 62 351 352 15767498
Janoff A 1964 Alterations in Lysosomes (Intracellular Enzymes) during Shock; Effects of Preconditioning (Tolerance) and Protective Drugs Int Anesthesiol Clin 2 251 269 14125012
Javoy-Agid F Hirsch EC Dumas S Duyckaerts C Mallet J Agid Y 1990 Decreased tyrosine hydroxylase messenger RNA in the surviving dopamine neurons of the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease: an in situ hybridization study Neuroscience 38 245 253 1979431
Jellinger K 1988 The pedunculopontine nucleus in Parkinson’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy and Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 51 540 543 3379428
Jin F Wu Q Lu YF Gong QH Shi JS 2008 Neuroprotective effect of resveratrol on 6-OHDA-induced Parkinson’s disease in rats Eur J Pharmacol 600 78 82 18940189
Johnson CC Gorell JM Rybicki BA Sanders K Peterson EL 1999 Adult nutrient intake as a risk factor for Parkinson’s disease Int J Epidemiol 28 1102 1109 10661654
Jucker M 2010 The benefits and limitations of animal models for translational research in neurodegenerative diseases Nat Med 16 1210 1214 21052075
Jucker M Walker LC 2013 Self-propagation of pathogenic protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases Nature 501 45 51 24005412
Kaasinen V Vahlberg T 2017 Striatal dopamine in Parkinson disease: A meta-analysis of imaging studies Ann Neurol
Kelly PJ Ahlskog JE van Heerden JA Carmichael SW Stoddard SL Bell GN 1989 Adrenal medullary autograft transplantation into the striatum of patients with Parkinson’s disease Mayo Clin Proc 64 282 290 2649748
Kirino T Tsujita Y Tamura A 1991 Induced tolerance to ischemia in gerbil hippocampal neurons Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism: official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 11 299 307
Kish SJ Shannak K Hornykiewicz O 1988 Uneven pattern of dopamine loss in the striatum of patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. Pathophysiologic and clinical implications N Engl J Med 318 876 880 3352672
Kitagawa K 2012 Ischemic tolerance in the brain: endogenous adaptive machinery against ischemic stress Journal of neuroscience research 90 1043 1054 22302606
Kitagawa K Matsumoto M Mabuchi T Yagita Y Mandai K Matsushita K Hori M Yanagihara T 1997 Ischemic tolerance in hippocampal CA1 neurons studied using contralateral controls Neuroscience 81 989 998 9330361
Kitagawa K Matsumoto M Tagaya M Hata R Ueda H Niinobe M Handa N Fukunaga R Kimura K Mikoshiba K 1990 ‘Ischemic tolerance’ phenomenon found in the brain Brain Res 528 21 24 2245337
Kordower JH Chu Y Hauser RA Freeman TB Olanow CW 2008 Lewy body-like pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson’s disease Nat Med 14 504 506 18391962
Kordower JH Olanow CW Dodiya HB Chu Y Beach TG Adler CH Halliday GM Bartus RT 2013 Disease duration and the integrity of the nigrostriatal system in Parkinson’s disease Brain 136 2419 2431 23884810
Kubis N Faucheux BA Ransmayr G Damier P Duyckaerts C Henin D Forette B Le Charpentier Y Hauw JJ Agid Y Hirsch EC 2000 Preservation of midbrain catecholaminergic neurons in very old human subjects Brain 123 Pt 2 366 373 10648443
Langston JW Ballard P Tetrud JW Irwin I 1983 Chronic Parkinsonism in humans due to a product of meperidine-analog synthesis Science 219 979 980 6823561
Leak RK 2014 Adaptation and sensitization to proteotoxic stress Dose-response: a publication of International Hormesis Society 12 24 56 24659932
Leak RK Liou AK Zigmond MJ 2006 Effect of sublethal 6-hydroxydopamine on the response to subsequent oxidative stress in dopaminergic cells: evidence for preconditioning J Neurochem 99 1151 1163 16956375
Leak RK Zigmond MJ Liou AK 2008 Adaptation to chronic MG132 reduces oxidative toxicity by a CuZnSOD-dependent mechanism J Neurochem 106 860 874 18466318
Lee M Carroll TJ 2007 Cross education: possible mechanisms for the contralateral effects of unilateral resistance training Sports Med 37 1 14 17190532
Li JY Englund E Widner H Rehncrona S Bjorklund A Lindvall O Brundin P 2010 Characterization of Lewy body pathology in 12- and 16-year-old intrastriatal mesencephalic grafts surviving in a patient with Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 25 1091 1096 20198645
Li JY Englund E Holton JL Soulet D Hagell P Lees AJ Lashley T Quinn NP Rehncrona S Bjorklund A Widner H Revesz T Lindvall O Brundin P 2008 Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson’s disease suggest host-to-graft disease propagation Nat Med 14 501 503 18391963
Liang Y Zhou T Chen Y Lin D Jing X Peng S Zheng D Zeng Z Lei M Wu X Huang K Yang L Xiao S Liu J Tao E 2017 Rifampicin inhibits rotenone-induced microglial inflammation via enhancement of autophagy Neurotoxicology 63 137 145 28986232
Ling Z Chang QA Tong CW Leurgans SE Lipton JW Carvey PM 2004 Rotenone potentiates dopamine neuron loss in animals exposed to lipopolysaccharide prenatally Experimental neurology 190 373 383 15530876
Liu S Tian Z Yin F Zhao Q Fan M 2009 Generation of dopaminergic neurons from human fetal mesencephalic progenitors after co-culture with striatal-conditioned media and exposure to lowered oxygen Brain Res Bull 80 62 68 19463914
Liu Y Xie X Xia LP Lv H Lou F Ren Y He ZY Luo XG 2017 Peripheral immune tolerance alleviates the intracranial lipopolysaccharide injection-induced neuroinflammation and protects the dopaminergic neurons from neuroinflammation-related neurotoxicity J Neuroinflammation 14 223 29145874
Lo EH 2010 Degeneration and repair in central nervous system disease Nat Med 16 1205 1209 21052074
Lomarev MP Kanchana S Bara-Jimenez W Iyer M Wassermann EM Hallett M 2006 Placebo-controlled study of rTMS for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 21 325 331 16211618
Lu HS Chen HP Wang S Yu HH Huang XS Huang QR He M 2012 Hypoxic preconditioning up-regulates DJ-1 protein expression in rat heart-derived H9c2 cells through the activation of extracellular-regulated kinase 1/2 pathway Mol Cell Biochem 370 231 240 22878563
Lusardi TA Farr CD Faulkner CL Pignataro G Yang T Lan J Simon RP Saugstad JA 2010 Ischemic preconditioning regulates expression of microRNAs and a predicted target, MeCP2, in mouse cortex J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30 744 756 20010955
Maetzler W Liepelt I Berg D 2009 Progression of Parkinson’s disease in the clinical phase: potential markers Lancet Neurol 8 1158 1171 19909914
Maher P 2005 The effects of stress and aging on glutathione metabolism Ageing Res Rev 4 288 314 15936251
Mak MK Wong-Yu IS Shen X Chung CL 2017 Long-term effects of exercise and physical therapy in people with Parkinson disease Nat Rev Neurol 13 689 703 29027544
Marini AM Jiang H Pan H Wu X Lipsky RH 2008a Hormesis: a promising strategy to sustain endogenous neuronal survival pathways against neurodegenerative disorders Ageing Res Rev 7 21 33 17889623
Marini AM Popolo M Pan H Blondeau N Lipsky RH 2008b Brain adaptation to stressful stimuli: a new perspective on potential therapeutic approaches based on BDNF and NMDA receptors CNS &amp; neurological disorders drug targets 7 382 390 18991667
Marinus J van Hilten JJ 2015 The significance of motor (a)symmetry in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 30 379 385 25546239
Mason DM Nouraei N Pant DB Miner KM Hutchison DF Luk KC Stolz JF Leak RK 2016 Transmission of alpha-synucleinopathy from olfactory structures deep into the temporal lobe Mol Neurodegener 11 49 27363576
Maswood N Young J Tilmont E Zhang Z Gash DM Gerhardt GA Grondin R Roth GS Mattison J Lane MA Carson RE Cohen RM Mouton PR Quigley C Mattson MP Ingram DK 2004 Caloric restriction increases neurotrophic factor levels and attenuates neurochemical and behavioral deficits in a primate model of Parkinson’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 18171 18176 15604149
Mattson MP 2008 Awareness of hormesis will enhance future research in basic and applied neuroscience Crit Rev Toxicol 38 633 639 18709572
Mattson MP 2014 Interventions that improve body and brain bioenergetics for Parkinson’s disease risk reduction and therapy J Parkinsons Dis 4 1 13 24473219
Mattson MP 2015 Lifelong brain health is a lifelong challenge: from evolutionary principles to empirical evidence Ageing Res Rev 20 37 45 25576651
Mattson MP Cheng A 2006 Neurohormetic phytochemicals: Low-dose toxins that induce adaptive neuronal stress responses Trends Neurosci 29 632 639 17000014
Mattson MP Son TG Camandola S 2007 Viewpoint: mechanisms of action and therapeutic potential of neurohormetic phytochemicals Dose Response 5 174 186 18648607
Mattson MP Duan W Wan R Guo Z 2004 Prophylactic activation of neuroprotective stress response pathways by dietary and behavioral manipulations NeuroRx: the journal of the American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics 1 111 116 15717011
Matus S Castillo K Hetz C 2012 Hormesis: protecting neurons against cellular stress in Parkinson disease Autophagy 8 997 1001 22858553
McCormack AL Di Monte DA Delfani K Irwin I DeLanney LE Langston WJ Janson AM 2004 Aging of the nigrostriatal system in the squirrel monkey J Comp Neurol 471 387 395 15022260
Miklyaeva EI Castaneda E Whishaw IQ 1994 Skilled reaching deficits in unilateral dopamine-depleted rats: impairments in movement and posture and compensatory adjustments J Neurosci 14 7148 7158 7965105
Miklyaeva EI Woodward NC Nikiforov EG Tompkins GJ Klassen F Ioffe ME Whishaw IQ 1997 The ground reaction forces of postural adjustments during skilled reaching in unilateral dopamine-depleted hemiparkinson rats Behav Brain Res 88 143 152 9404623
Miller BA Perez RS Shah AR Gonzales ER Park TS Gidday JM 2001 Cerebral protection by hypoxic preconditioning in a murine model of focal ischemia-reperfusion Neuroreport 12 1663 1669 11409736
Mollereau B 2016 Adaptive preconditioning in neurological diseases - therapeutic insights from proteostatic perturbations Brain Res 1648 603 616 26923166
Moore RY 2003 Organization of midbrain dopamine systems and the pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 9 Suppl 2 S65 71 12915070
Moore RY Whone AL Brooks DJ 2008 Extrastriatal monoamine neuron function in Parkinson’s disease: an 18F-dopa PET study Neurobiol Dis 29 381 390 18226536
Mori I 2017 Viremic attack explains the dual-hit theory of Parkinson’s disease Med Hypotheses 101 33 36 28351487
Morrish PK Rakshi JS Bailey DL Sawle GV Brooks DJ 1998 Measuring the rate of progression and estimating the preclinical period of Parkinson’s disease with [18F]dopa PET J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 64 314 319 9527140
Mortimer JA Borenstein AR Nelson LM 2012 Associations of welding and manganese exposure with Parkinson disease: review and meta-analysis Neurology 79 1174 1180 22965675
Mukherjee UA Ong SB Ong SG Hausenloy DJ 2015 Parkinson’s disease proteins: Novel mitochondrial targets for cardioprotection Pharmacol Ther 156 34 43 26481155
Muller J Wenning GK Jellinger K McKee A Poewe W Litvan I 2000 Progression of Hoehn and Yahr stages in Parkinsonian disorders: a clinicopathologic study Neurology 55 888 891 10994019
Murry CE Jennings RB Reimer KA 1986 Preconditioning with ischemia: a delay of lethal cell injury in ischemic myocardium Circulation 74 1124 1136 3769170
Mythri RB Venkateshappa C Harish G Mahadevan A Muthane UB Yasha TC Srinivas Bharath MM Shankar SK 2011 Evaluation of markers of oxidative stress, antioxidant function and astrocytic proliferation in the striatum and frontal cortex of Parkinson’s disease brains Neurochemical research 36 1452 1463 21484266
Nakano I Hirano A 1984 Parkinson’s disease: neuron loss in the nucleus basalis without concomitant Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 15 415 418 6732189
Nandhagopal R Kuramoto L Schulzer M Mak E Cragg J McKenzie J McCormick S Ruth TJ Sossi V de la Fuente-Fernandez R Stoessl AJ 2011 Longitudinal evolution of compensatory changes in striatal dopamine processing in Parkinson’s disease Brain 134 3290 3298 22075521
Nandhagopal R Kuramoto L Schulzer M Mak E Cragg J Lee CS McKenzie J McCormick S Samii A Troiano A Ruth TJ Sossi V de la Fuente-Fernandez R Calne DB Stoessl AJ 2009 Longitudinal progression of sporadic Parkinson’s disease: a multi-tracer positron emission tomography study Brain 132 2970 2979 19690093
Navntoft CA Dreyer JK 2016 How compensation breaks down in Parkinson’s disease: Insights from modeling of denervated striatum Mov Disord 31 280 289 26890687
Ndlovu BC Daniels WM Mabandla MV 2014 Oleanolic Acid enhances the beneficial effects of preconditioning on PC12 cells Parkinsons Dis 2014 929854 25478286
Ndlovu BC Daniels WM Mabandla MV 2016 Amelioration of L-Dopa-Associated Dyskinesias with Triterpenoic Acid in a Parkinsonian Rat Model Neurotox Res 29 126 134 26459303
Noell WK Chinn HI 1948 The cerebral survival time of rabbits in anoxia; effects of previous oxygenation Q Res Rep 60
Nouraei N Zarger L Weilnau JN Han J Mason DM Leak RK 2016 Investigation of the therapeutic potential of N-acetyl cysteine and the tools used to define nigrostriatal degeneration in vivo Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 296 19 30 26879220
Obeso JA Schapira AH 2009 Compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 24 153 154 18649387
Olanow CW Freeman T Kordower J 2001 Transplantation of embryonic dopamine neurons for severe Parkinson’s disease N Engl J Med 345 146 author reply 147
Palmer SJ Li J Wang ZJ McKeown MJ 2010 Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience 166 1110 1118 20074617
Pan-Montojo F Funk RH 2012 Implications of Parkinson’s disease pathophysiology for the development of cell replacement strategies and drug discovery in neurodegenerative diseases CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 11 907 920 23131153
Pearce RK Hawkes CH Daniel SE 1995 The anterior olfactory nucleus in Parkinson’s disease Movement disorders: official journal of the Movement Disorder Society 10 283 287 7651444
Pellicano C Benincasa D Pisani V Buttarelli FR Giovannelli M Pontieri FE 2007 Prodromal non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 3 145 152 19300544
Perez-Pinzon MA Lutz PL Sick TJ Rosenthal M 1993 Adenosine, a “retaliatory” metabolite, promotes anoxia tolerance in turtle brain J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 13 728 732 8314926
Perry TL Godin DV Hansen S 1982 Parkinson’s disease: a disorder due to nigral glutathione deficiency? Neurosci Lett 33 305 310 7162692
Pincus JH Barry K 1987a Influence of dietary protein on motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease Arch Neurol 44 270 272 3827678
Pincus JH Barry KM 1987b Dietary method for reducing fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease Yale J Biol Med 60 133 137 3577210
Quigney DJ Gorman AM Samali A 2003 Heat shock protects PC12 cells against MPP+ toxicity Brain Res 993 133 139 14642838
Quintin J Saeed S Martens JHA Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ Ifrim DC Logie C Jacobs L Jansen T Kullberg BJ Wijmenga C Joosten LAB Xavier RJ van der Meer JWM Stunnenberg HG Netea MG 2012 Candida albicans infection affords protection against reinfection via functional reprogramming of monocytes Cell Host Microbe 12 223 232 22901542
Rakshi JS Uema T Ito K Bailey DL Morrish PK Ashburner J Dagher A Jenkins IH Friston KJ Brooks DJ 1999 Frontal, midbrain and striatal dopaminergic function in early and advanced Parkinson’s disease A 3D [(18)F]dopa-PET study Brain 122 Pt 9 1637 1650 10468504
Reimer KA Murry CE Yamasawa I Hill ML Jennings RB 1986 Four brief periods of myocardial ischemia cause no cumulative ATP loss or necrosis Am J Physiol 251 H1306 1315 3789183
Reinoso G Allen JC Jr Au WL Seah SH Tay KY Tan LC 2015 Clinical evolution of Parkinson’s disease and prognostic factors affecting motor progression: 9-year follow-up study Eur J Neurol 22 457 463 24888502
Rey NL Steiner JA Maroof N Luk KC Madaj Z Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Brundin P 2016 Widespread transneuronal propagation of alpha-synucleinopathy triggered in olfactory bulb mimics prodromal Parkinson’s disease J Exp Med
Rey NL George S Steiner JA Madaj Z Luk KC Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Brundin P 2017 Spread of aggregates after olfactory bulb injection of alpha-synuclein fibrils is associated with early neuronal loss and is reduced long term Acta Neuropathol
Rinne JO 1993 Nigral degeneration in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 8 Suppl 1 S31 35 8302305
Ristow M Schmeisser K 2014 Mitohormesis: Promoting Health and Lifespan by Increased Levels of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Dose Response 12 288 341 24910588
Roemmich RT Nocera JR Stegemoller EL Hassan A Okun MS Hass CJ 2014 Locomotor adaptation and locomotor adaptive learning in Parkinson’s disease and normal aging Clin Neurophysiol 125 313 319 23916406
Roodveldt C Labrador-Garrido A Gonzalez-Rey E Lachaud CC Guilliams T Fernandez-Montesinos R Benitez-Rondan A Robledo G Hmadcha A Delgado M Dobson CM Pozo D 2013 Preconditioning of microglia by alpha-synuclein strongly affects the response induced by toll-like receptor (TLR) stimulation PLoS One 8 e79160 24236103
Roth S Li B Rosenbaum PS Gupta H Goldstein IM Maxwell KM Gidday JM 1998 Preconditioning provides complete protection against retinal ischemic injury in rats Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 39 777 785 9538885
Savica R Rocca WA Ahlskog JE 2010 When does Parkinson disease start? Arch Neurol 67 798 801 20625084
Schallert T Kozlowski DA Humm JL Cocke RR 1997 Use-dependent structural events in recovery of function Adv Neurol 73 229 238 8959217
Schapira AH Cooper JM Dexter D Jenner P Clark JB Marsden CD 1989 Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson’s disease Lancet 1 1269 2566813
Schapira AH Cooper JM Dexter D Clark JB Jenner P Marsden CD 1990 Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 54 823 827 2154550
Schell H Boden C Chagas AM Kahle PJ 2012 Impaired c-Fos and polo-like kinase 2 induction in the limbic system of fear-conditioned alpha-synuclein transgenic mice PLoS One 7 e50245 23209687
Schenkman M Moore CG Kohrt WM Hall DA Delitto A Comella CL Josbeno DA Christiansen CL Berman BD Kluger BM Melanson EL Jain S Robichaud JA Poon C Corcos DM 2017 Effect of High-Intensity Treadmill Exercise on Motor Symptoms in Patients With De Novo Parkinson Disease: A Phase 2 Randomized Clinical Trial JAMA Neurol
Schmidt C Schneble N Wetzker R 2014 The fifth dimension of innate immunity J Cell Commun Signal 8 363 367 25278167
Schneider DS 2011 Tracing personalized health curves during infections PLoS Biol 9 e1001158 21957398
Schumacher L Urbach A Lutzenburg M Bidmon HJ Witte OW 2014 Bihemispheric ischemic tolerance induced by a unilateral focal cortical lesion Brain Res 1570 54 60 24835408
Schwarting RK Huston JP 1996 The unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesion model in behavioral brain research. Analysis of functional deficits, recovery and treatments Prog Neurobiol 50 275 331 8971983
Segura-Aguilar J Paris I Munoz P Ferrari E Zecca L Zucca FA 2014 Protective and toxic roles of dopamine in Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 129 898 915 24548101
Selye H 1950 Stress and the general adaptation syndrome Br Med J 1 1383 1392 15426759
Selye H 1975 Stress without distress Philadelphia Signet
Sian J Dexter DT Lees AJ Daniel S Agid Y Javoy-Agid F Jenner P Marsden CD 1994 Alterations in glutathione levels in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders affecting basal ganglia Ann Neurol 36 348 355 8080242
Simon RP 2013 Tolerance, Historical Overview New York Springer
Simon RP Niiro M Gwinn R 1993 Prior ischemic stress protects against experimental stroke Neurosci Lett 163 135 137 8309618
Simuni T Sethi K 2008 Nonmotor manifestations of Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 64 Suppl 2 S65 80 19127582
Sofic E Lange KW Jellinger K Riederer P 1992 Reduced and oxidized glutathione in the substantia nigra of patients with Parkinson’s disease Neurosci Lett 142 128 130 1454205
Sokolova E Reiser G 2008 Prothrombin/thrombin and the thrombin receptors PAR-1 and PAR-4 in the brain: localization, expression and participation in neurodegenerative diseases Thromb Haemost 100 576 581 18841278
Song DD Haber SN 2000 Striatal responses to partial dopaminergic lesion: evidence for compensatory sprouting J Neurosci 20 5102 5114 10864967
Southam CM Ehrlich J 1943 Effects of extracts of western red-cedar heartwood on certain wood-decaying fungi in culture Phytopathology 33 517 524
Stetler RA Leak RK Gan Y Li P Zhang F Hu X Jing Z Chen J Zigmond MJ Gao Y 2014 Preconditioning provides neuroprotection in models of CNS disease: paradigms and clinical significance Prog Neurobiol 114 58 83 24389580
Storzer L Butz M Hirschmann J Abbasi O Gratkowski M Saupe D Vesper J Dalal SS Schnitzler A 2017 Bicycling suppresses abnormal beta synchrony in the Parkinsonian basal ganglia Ann Neurol 82 592 601 28892573
Sulzer D 2007 Multiple hit hypotheses for dopamine neuron loss in Parkinson’s disease Trends in neurosciences 30 244 250 17418429
Surmeier DJ Obeso JA Halliday GM 2017 Selective neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson disease Nat Rev Neurosci 18 101 113 28104909
Surmeier DJ Guzman JN Sanchez-Padilla J Schumacker PT 2011 The role of calcium and mitochondrial oxidant stress in the loss of substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience 198 221 231 21884755
Tai KK Truong DD 2002 Activation of adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels confers protection against rotenone-induced cell death: therapeutic implications for Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci Res 559 566
Tai KK Truong DD 2010 (−)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a green tea polyphenol, reduces dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT)-induced cell death in dopaminergic SHSY-5Y cells Neuroscience letters 482 183 187 20542083
Takahashi J 2017 Strategies for bringing stem cell-derived dopamine neurons to the clinic: The Kyoto trial Prog Brain Res 230 213 226 28552230
Tanaka M Kim YM Lee G Junn E Iwatsubo T Mouradian MM 2004 Aggresomes formed by alpha-synuclein and synphilin-1 are cytoprotective J Biol Chem 279 4625 4631 14627698
Tapia PC 2006 Sublethal mitochondrial stress with an attendant stoichiometric augmentation of reactive oxygen species may precipitate many of the beneficial alterations in cellular physiology produced by caloric restriction, intermittent fasting, exercise and dietary phytonutrients: “Mitohormesis” for health and vitality Med Hypotheses 66 832 843 16242247
Thannickal TC Lai YY Siegel JM 2007 Hypocretin (orexin) cell loss in Parkinson’s disease Brain 130 1586 1595 17491094
Titler AM Posimo JM Leak RK 2013 Astrocyte plasticity revealed by adaptations to severe proteotoxic stress Cell and tissue research 352 427 443 23420451
Ungerstedt U 1968 6-Hydroxy-dopamine induced degeneration of central monoamine neurons Eur J Pharmacol 5 107 110 5718510
Ungerstedt U Arbuthnott GW 1970 Quantitative recording of rotational behavior in rats after 6-hydroxy-dopamine lesions of the nigrostriatal dopamine system Brain Res 24 485 493 5494536
Unnithan AS Choi HJ Titler AM Posimo JM Leak RK 2012 Rescue from a two hit, high-throughput model of neurodegeneration with N-acetyl cysteine Neurochemistry international 61 356 368 22691629
Unnithan AS Jiang Y Rumble JL Pulugulla SH Posimo JM Gleixner AM Leak RK 2014 N-acetyl cysteine prevents synergistic, severe toxicity from two hits of oxidative stress Neurosci Lett 560 71 76 24361774
Valdes P Mercado G Vidal RL Molina C Parsons G Court FA Martinez A Galleguillos D Armentano D Schneider BL Hetz C 2014 Control of dopaminergic neuron survival by the unfolded protein response transcription factor XBP1 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 6804 6809 24753614
van der Mark M Nijssen PC Vlaanderen J Huss A Mulleners WM Sas AM van Laar T Kromhout H Vermeulen R 2014 A case-control study of the protective effect of alcohol, coffee, and cigarette consumption on Parkinson disease risk: time-since-cessation modifies the effect of tobacco smoking PLoS One 9 e95297 24788751
Van Laar VS Berman SB 2013 The interplay of neuronal mitochondrial dynamics and bioenergetics: implications for Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Dis 51 43 55 22668779
Venuto CS Potter NB Dorsey ER Kieburtz K 2016 A review of disease progression models of Parkinson’s disease and applications in clinical trials Mov Disord 31 947 956 27226141
Verbaan D Marinus J Visser M van Rooden SM Stiggelbout AM van Hilten JJ 2007 Patient-reported autonomic symptoms in Parkinson disease Neurology 69 333 341 17646625
von Papen M Fisse M Sarfeld AS Fink GR Nowak DA 2014 The effects of 1 Hz rTMS preconditioned by tDCS on gait kinematics in Parkinson’s disease J Neural Transm (Vienna) 121 743 754 24562404
Vu TC Nutt JG Holford NH 2012 Progression of motor and nonmotor features of Parkinson’s disease and their response to treatment Br J Clin Pharmacol 74 267 283 22283961
Wang J Yang QX Sun X Vesek J Mosher Z Vasavada M Chu J Kanekar S Shivkumar V Venkiteswaran K Subramanian T 2015 MRI evaluation of asymmetry of nigrostriatal damage in the early stage of early-onset Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 21 590 596 25825242
Weilnau JN Carcella MA Miner KM Bhatia TN Hutchison DF Pant DB Nouraei N Leak RK 2017 Evidence for cross-hemispheric preconditioning in experimental Parkinson’s disease Brain Struct Funct
Whone AL Moore RY Piccini PP Brooks DJ 2003 Plasticity of the nigropallidal pathway in Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 53 206 213 12557287
Woodlee MT Kane JR Chang J Cormack LK Schallert T 2008 Enhanced function in the good forelimb of hemi-parkinson rats: compensatory adaptation for contralateral postural instability? Experimental neurology 211 511 517 18417125
Wu PF Xie N Zhang JJ Guan XL Zhou J Long LH Li YL Xiong QJ Zeng JH Wang F Chen JG 2012 Resveratrol preconditioning increases methionine sulfoxide reductases A expression and enhances resistance of human neuroblastoma cells to neurotoxins The Journal of nutritional biochemistry
Wu T Hallett M 2013 The cerebellum in Parkinson’s disease Brain 136 696 709 23404337
Xiao-Qing T Jun-Li Z Yu C Jian-Qiang F Pei-Xi C 2005 Hydrogen peroxide preconditioning protects PC12 cells against apoptosis induced by dopamine Life Sci 78 61 66 16183080
Yuan H Sarre S Ebinger G Michotte Y 2005 Histological, behavioural and neurochemical evaluation of medial forebrain bundle and striatal 6-OHDA lesions as rat models of Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci Methods 144 35 45 15848237
Zarow C Lyness SA Mortimer JA Chui HC 2003 Neuronal loss is greater in the locus coeruleus than nucleus basalis and substantia nigra in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases Arch Neurol 60 337 341 12633144
Zeevalk GD Razmpour R Bernard LP 2008 Glutathione and Parkinson’s disease: is this the elephant in the room? Biomedicine &amp; pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine &amp; pharmacotherapie 62 236 249 18400456
Zhang C Li C Chen S Li Z Ma L Jia X Wang K Bao J Liang Y Chen M Li P Su H Lee SM Liu K Wan JB He C 2017 Hormetic effect of panaxatriol saponins confers neuroprotection in PC12 cells and zebrafish through PI3K/AKT/mTOR and AMPK/SIRT1/FOXO3 pathways Sci Rep 7 41082 28112228
Zhang J Yang ZJ Klaus JA Koehler RC Huang J 2008 Delayed tolerance with repetitive transient focal ischemic preconditioning in the mouse Stroke 39 967 974 18239169
Zhou C Huang Y Przedborski S 2008 Oxidative stress in Parkinson’s disease: a mechanism of pathogenic and therapeutic significance Ann N Y Acad Sci 1147 93 104 19076434
Zhou W Barkow JC Freed CR 2017 Running wheel exercise reduces alpha-synuclein aggregation and improves motor and cognitive function in a transgenic mouse model of Parkinson’s disease PLoS One 12 e0190160 29272304
Zhu X Raina AK Perry G Smith MA 2004 Alzheimer’s disease: the two-hit hypothesis Lancet neurology 3 219 226 15039034
Zhu X Lee HG Perry G Smith MA 2007 Alzheimer disease, the two-hit hypothesis: an update Biochimica et biophysica acta 1772 494 502 17142016
Zigmond MJ 1997 Do compensatory processes underlie the preclinical phase of neurodegenerative disease? Insights from an animal model of parkinsonism Neurobiol Dis 4 247 253 9361301
Zigmond MJ Acheson AL Stachowiak MK Stricker EM 1984 Neurochemical compensation after nigrostriatal bundle injury in an animal model of preclinical parkinsonism Arch Neurol 41 856 861 6147127
Zigmond MJ Abercrombie ED Berger TW Grace AA Stricker EM 1990 Compensations after lesions of central dopaminergic neurons: some clinical and basic implications Trends Neurosci 13 290 296 1695406
Zigmond MJ Cameron JL Leak RK Mirnics K Russell VA Smeyne RJ Smith AD 2009 Triggering endogenous neuroprotective processes through exercise in models of dopamine deficiency Parkinsonism &amp; related disorders 15 Suppl 3 S42 45 20083005
