LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101208441
32337
Curr Alzheimer Res
Curr Alzheimer Res
Current Alzheimer research
1567-2050
1875-5828

29318971
6039273
10.2174/1567205015666180110120026
NIHMS953146
Article
(−)-Phenserine and Inhibiting Apoptosis: In Pursuit of a Novel Intervention for Alzheimer’s Disease
Becker Robert E. M.D., C.M. ab
Greig Nigel H. Ph.D. b
Schneider Lon S. M.D., M.S. e
Ballard Clive MB ChB, MRCPsych, M.D. f
Aarsland Dag M.D., Ph.D. g
Lahiri Debomoy K. Ph.D. h
Flanagan Douglas Ph.D. i
Govindarajan Ramprakash Ph.D. k
Sano Mary Ph.D. j
Kapogiannis Dimitrios M.D. d
Ferrucci Luigi M.D. c
a Aristea Translational Medicine Corporation, Park City, UT 84098
b Drug Design and Development Section, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore MD, 21224, USA
c Longitudinal Study Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore MD, 21224, USA
d laboratory of Neurosciences, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore MD, 21224, USA
e Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology, and Gerontology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA
f Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX1 2LU, UK
g Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, &amp; Neuroscience, King’s College London, London SE5 8AF, UK
h Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
I College of Pharmacy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
j Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
k Department of Psychiatry and Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA
22 3 2018
2018
27 7 2018
15 9 883891
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

1. Introduction

The identification of a nucleus basalis of Meynert lesion in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brains in 1983 provided a target for drug development.1 A series of cholinergic interventions that proved unable to arrest the disease led Zaven Kachaturian to call for a five-years delay in symptom expression or disease onset.2 His goal was a broadly based public health approach to disease prevention and modification. This policy and the time-limited efficacy of cholinesterase inhibitors shifted over 200 subsequent drug developments to pursue a new goal in AD, disease course modification. Unfortunately, to date, no drug intervention has proven successful evidencing clinically significant modifications in AD outcomes for patients. Because of reliabilities of measurements, cognitive symptoms have become the most commonly quantified symptoms associated with AD disease progression.3 An early study by Sano et al. pursued a different strategy using the onset of functional impairments to show statistically significant differences between Vitamin E and selegeline.4 This study confirmed preliminary findings that activities of daily living (ADL) in AD patients over two years of followup show up to one third of all patients losing f six out of seven ADL skills.5 The initially most impaired subjects experience the highest losses.

These data reflect commonsense impressions of the importance of different outcome factors for AD patients. Cognitive losses of abilities to remember names, dates, day of the week are clearly less impairing than inabilities to dress oneself, getting lost outside the home, leaving the stove burners on after being distracted, or inappropriately accusing neighbors of stealing. As a result, along with other modifications to methods of drug evaluation, we find a need to specifically define medicine’s targeted disease modification in terms directly relevant for the wellbeing of AD patients as reflected by ADL.

In this paper, to inform our pending testing of (−)-phenersine tartrate ((−)-phenserine), we address issues of AD clinical trial methods and mechanisms. In large part, we selected (−)-phenserine for possible disease course moderation based on its preclinical ability to protect neurons from self-imposed preprogrammed cell death (apoptosis) evidenced in recent preclinical studies.6

2. Background

AD researchers have long sought to increase the reliability and relevance of AD clinical trials (CT) for clinicians.7–9 Similar to clinical trials that address other disease conditions, AD clinical trials provide only limited guidance to the clinician. For example, the implications of a clinical trial for an individual patient are uncertain, because the trial predicts only a number of patients on average who will need to be treated in order to provide the trial’s benefits to one individual. Errors in methods have plagued AD drug developments, a problem highly prevalent in other areas of medical research and clinical practice.10, 11 Investigators publish but fail to replicate many studies.12 AD clinical trials with primarily cognitive outcomes can have questionable relevance for the everyday wellbeing of patients. The potential for bias is widespread amongst academic, commercial, and not for profit interest groups.13, 14 As a result, with the aim of optimizing our clinical trial methods for testing possible neuroprotection against self-induced preprogrammed (apoptotic) neuronal cell death, we have identified seven issues that may have unnecessarily limited the validity of earlier AD research efforts and the information content of clinical trials for clinicians.

3. Methods

We searched PubMed/Medline and identified articles for background on the neuropathological progression of AD and its implications for drug target identification, for AD clinical trial criteria to assess disease modification outcomes, for plasma biomarkers associated with AD neuropathologies and especially apoptosis, and for methodological critiques of AD CT methods. As a result we identified and addressed seven issues and, in response to these issues, reviewed the Thal-Sano AD Prevention Design4, 5 for possible applications in our proposed CT.

4. Results

1. When does the person become a patient with AD?

Up to three decades have been reported to separate first detectable amyloid accumulations in human brains at 45 years of age and younger from the onset of sporadic AD after age 65.15 In these intervening decades no clinical evidence of AD neuropathology appears until shortly before the onset of AD with mild cognitive impairment. Under these conditions investigational treatment is confounded by the lack of induced cognitive deficit to be remedied as evidence for a drug’s clinical efficacy. This early neuropathology currently limits interventions against AD to diagnosed MCI and AD patients.16 Consequently any intervention against AD must be effective in the presence of possibly well-established and irreversibly active pathologies.

2. Disease prevention, arrest, or disease course modification?

A disease modification aim for AD potentially involves practical interplays amongst interventions able to prevent, arrest, and control AD pathologies. No intervention has slowed or arrested the natural progression of clinical AD. At present, exercise, mental activity, and diet have been proposed as possibly relevant. For example, recent prospective studies have associated higher adherence to a Mediterranean-type diet with slower cognitive decline, reduced risk of progression from MCI to AD, reduced risk of AD and a decreased all-cause mortality in AD patients.17, 18

For the AD patient in their eighth decade with a mean life expectance of five years, a five-year delay in experiencing disabilities from AD could provide a remaining life in which the disease progression has been effectively arrested. For the AD patient in their early seventh decade with a mean life expectance of twenty years, a five-year delay in disabilities from AD would provide only a delay during which hopefully newly developed interventions would further put off the onset of disabilities. It may be the case that only time limited delays in disease progression will be possible for drug interventions with clinically diagnosable patients and that primary prevention will be required to delay clinical onset and render some drugs most useful. We expect that (−)-phenserine, should it effectively inhibit neuronal self-induced preprogrammed cell death, will do so only for a time limited period, and will delay, not prevent, deterioration into increased impairments and disabilities. Its or other drugs similarly successful would only intensify the search for primary preventive interventions.

3. Time to move beyond the Amyloid Hypothesis?

Investigators have increasingly emphasized a loss of utility for the “Amyloid Hypothesis”, which posits the accumulation of potentially toxic amyloid-beta peptide (Aβ) comprising short 40–43 aminio acid (Aβ40, Aβ42). This loss reveals the lack of sufficiently deep understanding of the basic mechanisms of AD that investigators have chosen to target in CTs. Peter Davies puts the matter bluntly: “We’re flogging a dead horse.”19 “There’s no sign of anybody getting better, even for a short period, and that suggests to me that you have the wrong mechanism.” George Perry agrees “The amyloid hypothesis is dead” “It is not a reasonable hypothesis any longer.”19 Even major champions of the amyloid hypothesis, like John Hardy and Bart De Strooper, have modified their views by indicating that “Dementia may not be a direct consequence of amyloid-β toxicity but instead as the result of a decade long disease process called the ‘cellular phase’ of Alzheimer’s disease”20

This pessimism cautions us about the utilities to be expected from (−)-phenerine’s inhibitory effects in animal models on multiple AD neuropathologies at doses equivalent to those that can be achieved in humans.6, 21, 22 Consequently, citing prior drug failures intervening against inflammation, Aβ42, Aβ42 amyloid, and other AD neuropathologies, we conclude that the mechanism of a new drug may well be independent of the Amyloid Hypothesis. In preclinical testing (−)-phenserine inhibited the initiation of neuronal preprogramed cell death, increased anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and BDNF expression, and attenuated rises in GFAP and pro-apoptotic activated caspase-3.21, 22

4. Molecular probes, disease biomarkers, and evidencing drug-induced brain changes in CTs

Two biochemical methodological factors complicate our proposed ascription of any clinical benefits to a (−)-phenserine induced inhibition of neuronal preprogrammed cell death. A lack of readily available biological markers of target engagement has confounded new drug development. Molecular probes of the apoptotic biochemical cascade have not been previously used in AD CTs. Biochemical measurements meant to reflect brain states in humans are limited to blood and CSF samples. As a result we have developed methods for quantifying the contents of plasma extracellular vesicles (exosomes: 30 to 150 nm in spherical diameter extracellular vesicles) enriched for neuronal origin to assay traditionally studied AD neuropathological states and to identify activities in the apoptotic cascade. The isolation of such exosomes enriched for neuronal origin from peripheral blood provides a new diagnostic platform with the potential to time-dependently track neuropathological changes in vivo.23 As a window to follow neuronal apoptosis we plan to assay, obtained from clinical trial subjects’ blood, neuronal marked exosome levels of Bcl-2, BAX, and activated Capsase 3. These same exosome methods have already been used successfully with the AD biomarkers Aβ42, Tau, and others.23–30 Similarly, Bcl-2/BAX ratios and activated Capsase 3 assays have had wide use assessing apoptotic activities in cancer and other disorders31, and are widely evaluated in preclinical drug development models.32

5. For disease course modification, what molecular or clinical outcomes must drug interventions ameliorate? Can neuronal cell death be averted?

Basically, with the limitation of the Amyloid Hypothesis, there is no known pathology that has been identified as a target essential to success of any form of AD disease modification. One potential target with intuitive, if not face validity, is the clinically indicated direct cause of AD symptoms and functional impairments, the death of neurons and loss of synaptic commentions. To modify the disease course of AD, the death rate of neurons must be lowered or the functionality of existing neurons must be at least temporarily prolonged and hopefully increased. Anatomically, neurons mediate all the functional impairments and disabilities associated with AD. Strategies in CTs to date have implicitly assumed that the targeted neuropathology would either result in an improved neuronal functioning or a reduction in the rate of neuronal loss in AD brains. These hopes have not been realized.19, 20

As a consequence of neuronal and synaptic loss being the final common pathway evident in AD and other neurodegenerations, as confirmed with post mortem studies, we proposed to supplement transgenic (tg) mouse models of AD neuropathologies with a weight drop mouse model for concussion and traumatic brain injury (TBI).6 This latter model and an anoxia model also result in significant losses of neurons.21 In weight drop-induced concussion, (−)-phenserine dramatically reduced neuronal death when measured at 72 hours after injury by Fluoro-Jade C; a stain specific for late stage cells committed to degeneration. Likewise, (−)-phenserine mitigated ischemia-induced neuronal death as evaluated by Tunel staining consistent with measures of Bcl-2 and activated caspase-3.21, 22 To document the presence of other AD pathologies and (−)-phenserine acute activities, using specific immunohistochemistry antibodies, we evaluated the development of neuroinflammation by probing for activated microglial cell ionizing calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (IBA1) and then for TNF-alpha; demonstrating their presence following injury and mitigation by (−)-phenserine. Currently we have in process additional studies attempting to disconfirm our evidence that at present is consistent with an anti-preprogrammed cell death mechanism of (−)-phenserine’s activities in animal anoxia and TBI models.

Without claiming anti-preprogrammed cell death activity for (−)-phenserine we regard further studies as useful as guidance for studies of other drugs with such novel mechanistic properties. In earlier studies we have shown that the inactivation of p53, the gatekeeper to apoptosis, fully abated cognitive deficits 7 days or hr ? following injury in a mouse weight drop model.33 This action was reconfirmed in a moderate to severe rodent model of head injury in which p53 inactivation, similar to (−)-phenserine, blocked TBI-induced neuronal cell death, elevations in p53 and down-stream target levels as well as behavioral impairments (all evaluated at 24 hr following TBI).34 Since prominent inflammatory, anti-amyloid, and other drug interventions have each failed in AD clinical trials to date, a method able to protect and preserve neurons functionally in the presence of the harsh if not toxic AD brain environment seems potentially of scientific and possible therapeutic importance.

6. Is there a more economical clinical trial model for use with early human trials?

Many AD clinical trials might have been compromised by human errors. In addition to being vigilant against these errors, we have sought ways to reduce the number of subjects required to assure adequate power in our CTs. Becker et al. found a mean of multiple ratings necessary to overcome unreliability that interferes with the power in clinical trials (CT). 33–37 Five common sources of variance can compromise the validity of an otherwise apparently successful or unsuccessful CT. These include variance among subjects; variance within a research site; variance occurring across different clinical research sites; variance over time, and variance due to random measurement error.36, 37 Investigators must tolerate some variance sources. Investigators cannot practically reduce two sources of variance: variance among subjects due to different levels of disease severity and variance over time as well as genetic variants (SNPs). Other sources of variance affecting CT validities are potentially under the control of investigators.

Consequently, we will statistically intervene in our CT design to reduce measurement variance.36 The standard error of measurement (SEM) benefits investigators by two factors: the use of mean rather than raw data as numerators in data to be analyzed. This increases, with possible effects from systematic error, the likelihood that the numerator value approximates the mean or actual true score. The SEM reduces the denominator standard deviation by the square root of one minus the observed reliability of repeated measurements using the method of assessment. We reduced Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADCS-Cog)38 and Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)39 variance in two CTs33, 34 to 83% of that present without SEM data points obtained by using the mean of three observations. Without this reduction in variance using SEMs from three repeated observations, the study N would have had to be increased by 145% to obtain equivalent power.40 This innovation requires only three separate assessments of each subject at each evaluation used in a statistical comparison. One advantage from this is that, combining consecutive longitudinal assessments made over time, a clinical course can be established for each individual in a CT. Using confidence intervals of measurement (CIm) for the SEMs data analysis identifies individuals as responders and nonresponders.

7. Is it time to move drug development beyond statistical significance of a disease marker modification, i.e., the current clinical research perspective, to clinically significant functional disability reduction, i.e., a more clinically informative public health perspective

Since CTs are tools used by medicine to best achieve its aims of disease treatment and promotion of patient health and wellbeing, we propose to use as outcome measures in our clinical trial, clinical functional impairment and disability measures with significance for the wellbeing of AD patients.

In this overview of AD and clinical trial practices we have identified seven issues that influence assessments of AD in clinical trials. We found in vitro and in vivo evidence of potential (−)-phenserine activities, at concentrations achievable in human brains, against a range of prominent AD pathologies and (−) phenserine neuronal protection in anoxia and traumatic brain injury animal models. Staining for markers of apoptotic cell death 72 hours following weight drop injury to mice and anoxia injury to rats revealed (−)-phenserine protection of neurons compared to drug untreated control injured rodents. As a result we proposed a clinical trial designed to address the problematic issues identified in our overview of current AD research practices.

The Thal-Sano AD Prevention Design

In an effort to assess the possible prevention of AD progression, researchers at the Alzheimer Disease Cooperative Study (ADCS), designed and successfully executed a clinical trial test of Vitamin E and deprenyl.4, 5 A total of 341 patients received the selective monoamine oxidase inhibitor selegiline (10 mg a day), alphatocopherol (vitamin E, 2000 IU a day), both selegiline and alpha-tocopherol, or placebo for two years. Unique to this clinical trial, the primary outcome was the time to the occurrence of any of the following: death, institutionalization, loss of the ability to perform basic activities of daily living, or severe dementia (defined as a Clinical Dementia Rating of 3 for the initially Clinical Dementia Rated 2 subjects). Placebo treated subjects showed a greater than 30% decline in event free survival at one year and greater than 70% at two years. A significant delay in this primary outcome was found with each drug and their combination with estimated increases in median survivals of 145 to 230 days.

In preparations for this clinical trial, the ADCS investigators had analyzed Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD) data on one and two year outcomes, using the above occurrences, for Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale rated 1 and 2 subjects.4 These data showed one and two year progressions for the selected occurrences for both CDR 1 and 2 rated groups of AD patients; however, because of the higher rates of decline for CDR 2 subjects this group was selected for the clinical trial to reduce sample size.

We view these data as demonstrating the utility of selected event occurrences as indicators of disease course progression and possible drug effects on disease course modification. Consequently we propose to index disease decline with time to onset of functional impairments, including cognitive outcomes,3 and disabilities affecting the wellbeing of AD patients. Following the Kachaturian criteria for a fully successful mitigation of disabilities from AD, in our proposed trial, for clinical significance, a 50% reduction in progression into disability would be needed, projected to or measured at five years.

4. Discussion

We propose for efficacy studies a (−)-phenserine clinical trial disease course amelioration design.

Protocol design (See Protocol Design Table 1)

To contextualize the onset of functional impairments both within and across individual subjects, we will adopt a five-year three phase study. During Phase I, to be completed during Year 1, subjects will be recruited, placed on donepezil, and evaluated for baseline and at two-month intervals for the functional impairments to be used as outcome variables.

In Phase 2, initiated with the onset of study Year 2, patients will be randomly and blindly assigned to (−)-phenserine extended release dosing (see Investigational drug dosing below) or continued on donepezil. Following optimization of dosing for subjects assigned to (−)-phenserine extended release dosing, these subjects will be evaluated on three weekly intervals during a one month period and then randomly assigned blindly to either continued optimized (−)-phenserine extended release dosing or “optimized” (blindly randomly ordered for selective subjects on donepezil) on donepezil dosing using placebo tablets. All subjects will continue on the assigned treatment until either leaving the study prior to completion or until the end of Year 4, a potential 2 ½ year double blind duration of treatment. At termination each subject will have three assessments at weekly intervals during the final month. For subjects unwilling or unable to complete the one month of repeated assessments the last three in progress assessments will be used for the outcome analysis. (See Outcome Analysis).

Sample selection

Subjects will be individuals diagnosed with AD and with mild or moderate disease severities.

Recruitment

The study will be conducted at multiple academic medical center sites with faculty and staff who have already completed participation in a federally funded AD CT. Subjects will be patients with diagnosed mild to moderate AD and currently under care at the site such that team support for patient subjects and caregivers will be available to volunteers throughout their participation in the research.

Outcome variables

All subjects will be evaluated at baseline and during the final month of the study at three weekly intervals and at two month intervals throughout the study.

Clinical outcome variables will include the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog), 38 Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study/Activities of Daily Living (ADCS-ADL) Inventory,41 Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE),39 Cambridge Cognition Battery,42 the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI),43 which surveys the severity and frequency of psychological and behavioral problems, the Caregiver Activity Survey (CAS),44 which measures time caregivers spend assisting Alzheimer patients in 6 major areas of daily activities; and the Dependence Scale (DS),45 which assesses 6 levels of a patient’s functional dependence. For overall change we will use the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study Clinical Impression of Gleobal change (ADCS-CGIC CIBIC+).46

An FDA compliant Clinician Rated Treatment Emergent Adverse Events Scale and vital signs will be administered at each visit. Each subject will receive a medical history, physical examination, electrocardiogram, vital signs, CBC, laboratory panel, and urinalysis. At the first and final visits and each intervening contact with the subject, treatment emergent events and serious adverse events will be actively elicited using

Biochemical outcome variables will include probes assessed using samples derived from plasma derived exosomes that are enriched for neuronal origin by cell surface markers.23–33 Primary outcome variables will be key mechanism-based proteins involved in apoptosis (Bcl-2, BAX, activated Capsase 3) and neuronal functionality (synaptophysin, synaptopodin, synaptotagmin).27 Classical markers of AD (specifically, Aβ40, Aβ42, t-tau, p-tau)23–25and neuroinflammation will be assessed with particular regard to possible provocation of these mechanisms by TBI. Since microglia possess the same markers as macrophages, exosomes are not a selective indicator of brain inflammation.

Drug dosing

(−)-Phenserine will be dosed using Extended Controlled Release Tablets (ECRT). Data from animal and in vitro kinetic studies indicate the use of b.i.d. dosing with 15 mg. (−)-phenserine to address immediate release estimates of a 3 ng/ml loss of (−)-phenserine to metabolism per hour at target concentration or 45% erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition from drug and metabolites, and the need for absorption of 3 mg/hr from oral administration. In response, b.i.d. doses will be in an extended release formulation (ECRT) loaded to deliver 1.5 ng/ml/hr and comprised to release drug over 24 hours. Continued use of b.i.d. administration provides the advantage of averaging release that is modified by varied gastrointestinal conditions during 24 hour transits. An initial ECRT dose is increased weekly until, after completion of a week of dosing, the subject exhibits the target 45% +/−10% AChE erythrocyte membrane inhibition. This provides a drug plus metabolite activity in brain within the range Effective Concentration (EC)100+/−50. Subjects then will remain on that dosing for one additional week. If erythrocyte membrane AChE inhibition remains within the confidence range, the subject can then proceed into the double blind.

Data analyses

The analysis and presentation of the trial will be in accordance with CONSORT guidelines. We will compare three baseline and three on treatment ADAS-Cog and MMSE ratings and all other outcome variables to control intra-site variance with the SEM, and exclude other errors with an inter-site analyses, interdisciplinary case management of all subjects, monthly staff visits with subjects, phone availability of staff 24/7, trained raters, and so forth.

5. Implications

What will be accomplished?

We propose that these plans effectively address the seven problem areas we earlier identified as potential compromises to any successful AD CT, and we aim to test this hypothesis with an experimental drug with the potential to impact a target with strong face validity in AD, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and neurodegenerations: preprogrammed apoptotic neuronal death. Specifically, subjects, with mild to moderate AD, will test the investigational drug (−)-phenserine in the presence of well-established and irreversibly active AD pathologies. The investigational drug, (−)-phenserine, will have the opportunity to inhibit neuronal self-induced preprogrammed cell death, to do so for up to a 2 1/2 year time limited period and therefore will demonstrate or not an ability to delay deterioration into increased impairments and disabilities in persons with AD. Prior drug failures intervening against inflammation, Aβ40, Aβ42 amyloid, and other AD neuropathologies, in our view, almost assure that any efficacy demonstrated by (−)-phenserine will be associated with its abilities in preclinical studies to inhibit neuronal self induced preprogrammed cell death. Efficacy will be demonstrated by delays in the onset of clinical functional impairments. The mechanism of (−)-phenserine efficacy inhibiting the initiation of neuronal preprogramed cell death will be supported by the profile of anti-apoptotic, Bcl-2, and pro-apoptotic brain marked exosome BAX and activated Capsase-3. Synaptophysin and other markers of neuronal functionality will indicate improved neuronal functioning compared to measures consistent with a reduced rate of neuronal loss in AD brains. We expect these outcomes to be achieved economically with reduced numbers of subjects without losses of power by use of repeated measure comparisons for outcome variables.

These plans and the problems identified in our review indicate will impact the proposed clinical trial and warrant preliminary studies. Therefore we will conduct selected initial studies to innovate as needed for a successful mechanistic-exploratory clinical trial. For patients meeting diagnostic criteria for concussion or TBI and AD, we will identify the profile of brain marked exosome plasma probes to be proposed as evidence for reduced apoptotic neuronal cell death and changes in the presence of an ECRT of (−)phenserine. Using these subjects we will explore candidate clinical outcomes for evidence of possible clinical significance that would justify the subsequent efficacy focused clinical trial. These steps will explore and develop the utility of brain marked exosome plasma probes as evidence of drug induced changes associated with neuronal apoptosis. As part of these steps we will optimize the formulation of our animal tested ECRT (−)-phenserine to allow b.i.d. dosing individually optimized, using plasma drug concentration indicators, to provide a brain effect within the drug and metabolites predicted effective concentration. Finally, we will explore and develop specific criteria able to define medicine’s often stated but unspecified target in neurodegenerations—disease modification—in terms directly relevant for the wellbeing of TBI and AD patients.

6. Conclusions

This promising test of drug-provoked inhibition of neuronal self-induced preprogrammed cell death offers two opportunities. First we will further study (−)-phenserine and its potential novel mechanism for AD, TBI, and possibly other neurodegenerations, inhibition of neuronal self-induced apoptosis. Second, the feasiblilty of a study of this new approach to AD and TBI will hopefully inspire synthesis by others of other agents with similar anti-apoptotic potentials to interrupt the march of AD and other neuropathologies and their clinical consequences for patients.

REB is a principal in Aristea Translational Medicine Corp. which holds a patent pending on (−)-phenserine. No author received any financial support for his or her participation in the preparation of this manuscript.

TABLE 1 Double-Blind, Donepezil Controlled, Randomized, Proof-of-Disease Modification-Concept (−) Phenserine Clinical Trial Total Trial will be comprised of Two 100 Subject Clinical Trials. One trial will be conducted at a single site in the UK and the second trial will be conducted at multiple sites in the US.

Group	Year 1	Year 2–2.5	Year 2.5–3	Intervening
Analysis	Year 4	Final Analysis **
Outcome Criteria	
Recruit * 200 Patient Subjects***	Blinded Donepezil Treatment’, Replacement ent of dropouts, Dose formulation studies, in twentysubject to select (−)-phenserine, formulation for doubleblind.	100 Pt. Blindly randomized to Active Drug	Blinded Phenserine Induction	Blind Phenerine Optimal Dosing	Safety Committee Interim Analysis	Maintain Double-Blind for Investigators --- Contingent on Interim Analysis	Phenserine Statistically Significantly Better than Donepezil Controls on: Disability Event Avoidance: Cogntive: ADAS-Cog, MMSE, Cambridge Cognition Battery, time to occurrence of death, institutionalized, loss of activities of daily living, or dementia progression (defined as a Clinical Dementia Rating of +1 over baseline.)	
50 Pt. Blindly randomized to Continued Donepezil	Blinded Phenserine Induction	Blind Donepezil Optimal Dosing	
50 Pt. Blindly randomized to Continued Donepezil	Continued Donepezil	Blind Donepezil Optimal Dosings	
* Assessments At baseline (Recruitment, Baseline Assessment and at least one week later at drug prescription prior to taking drug and to be repeated once very two months for four years and for 3 weeks during the last month at three and four years (At each rating investigators will be expected to provide quality Alzheimer’s disease patient care (non-medication) to address any clinical progressions):

Cogntive: ADAS-Cog, MMSE, Cambridge Cognition Battery

Disability Event Avoidance: death, institutionalized, loss of activities of daily living (ADCS-IADL and Blessed Dementia Scale Part 2, Dependence Scale (rate level of care received: 1, limited home care; 2, care equivalent to that received in an adult care facility; and 3, care equivalent to that received in a skilled-nursing facility), Behavior Rating Scale for Dementia, Neuropsychiatric Index, and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale.

** Statistical Analyses will include progressive individual course predictions using as criteria of clinical change a maintained 5% change in predicted course.

*** Subjects will be mild to moderate AD subjects randomized separately.

Authors other than REB have no conflicts of interest.


1 Whitehouse PJ Price DL Struble RG Clark AW Coyle JT Delon MR Alzheimer’s disease and senile dementia: loss of neurons in the basal forebrain Science 1982 215 4537 1237 9 7058341
2 Khachaturian ZS Petersen RC Gauthier S Buckholtz N Corey-Bloom JP Evans B Bain LJ A roadmap for the prevention of dementia: The inaugural Leon Thal Symposium Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association 2008 4 3 156 163 http://doi.org.ezproxy.nihlibrary.nih.gov/10.1016/j.jalz.2008.03.005
3 Vellas B Carrillo MC Sampaio C Brashear HR Siemers E Hampel H Schneider LS Weiner M Doody R Khachaturian Z Cedarbaum J Grundman M Broich K Giacobini E Dubois B Sperling R Wilcock GK Fox N Scheltens P Touchon J Hendrix S Andrieu S Aisen P EU/US/CTAD Task Force Members. Designing drug trials for Alzheimer’s disease: what we have learned from the release of the phase III antibody trials: a report from the EU/US/CTAD Task Force Alzheimers Dement 2013 7 9 4 438 44 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.03.007 23809364
4 Sano M Ernesto C Thomas RG Klauber MR Schafer K Grundman M Woodbury P Growdon J Cotman CW Pfeiffer E Schneider LS Thal L JA controlled trial of selegiline, alpha-tocopherol, or both as treatment for Alzheimer’s disease. The Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study N Engl J Med 1997 4 24 336 17 1216 22 9110909
5 Sano M Ernesto C Klauber MR Schafer K Woodbury P Thomas R Grundman M Growdon J Thal LJ Rationale and design of a multicenter study of selegiline and alphatocopherol in the treatment of Alzheimer disease using novel clinical outcomes. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1996 Fall 10 3 132 40 8876776
6 Tweedie D Fukui K Li Y Yu QS Barak S Tamargo IA Rubovitch V Holloway HW Lehrmann E Wood WH Zhang Y Becker KG Perez E Van Praag H Luo Y Hoffer BJ Becker RE Pick CG Greig NH Cognitive impairments induced by concussive mild traumatic brain injury in mouse are ameliorated by treatment with phenserine via multiple non-cholinergic mechanisms PLoS One 2016 11 6 e0156493 27254111
7 Markou A Chiamulera C Geyer MA Tricklebank M Steckler T Removing obstacles in neuroscience drug discovery: The future path for animal models Neuropsychopharmacology 34 74 89 2009 18830240
8 Pangalos MN Schechter LE Hurko O Drug development for CNS disorders: Strategies for balancing risk and reducing attrition Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 6 521 532 2007 17599084
9 Becker RE Greig NH Neuropsychiatric Clinical Trials: Lost in Translation Sci Transl Med 2010 8 12 2 61 61rv6 10.1126/scitranslmed.3000446
10 Gall T Ioannidis JPA Maniadis Z The credibility crisis in research: Can economics tools help? PLoS Biol 15 4 e2001846 2017 28445470
11 Ioannidis JPA Hijacked evidence-based medicine: stay the course and throw the pirates overboard J Clin Epidemiol 84 11 13 2017 28532611
12 Nature Editorial Replication studies offer much more than technical details. They demonstrate the practice of science at its best Nature 541 259 260 19 1 2017 10.1038/541259b
13 Ahn R Woodbridge A Abraham A Saba S Korenstein D Madden E Boscardin WJ2,5 Keyhani S Financial ties of principal investigators and randomized controlled trial outcomes: cross sectional study BMJ 2017 1 17 356 6770 10.1136/bmj.i6770
14 Rose SL Highland J Karafa MT Joffe S Patient Advocacy Organizations, Industry Funding, and Conflicts of Interest JAMA Intern Med 2017 3 1 177 3 344 350 10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.8443 28114624
15 Rodrigue KM β Amyloid burden in healthy aging: regional distribution and cognitive consequences Neurology 78 387 395 2012 22302550
16 Pike KE Cognition and β-amyloid in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: data from the AIBL study Neuropsychologia 49 2384 2390 2011 21529702
17 Beydoun MA Beydoun HA Wang Y Obesity and central obesity as risk factors for incident dementia and its subtypes: a systematic review and meta-analysis Obesity reviews : an official journal of the International Association for the Study of Obesity 2008 9 204 218 18331422
18 Solfrizzi V Frisardi V Seripa D Logroscino G Imbimbo BP D’Onofrio G Addante F Sancarlo D Cascavilla L Pilotto A Panza F Mediterranean diet in predementia and dementia syndromes Curr Alzheimer Res 8 5 520 42 2011 21605047
19 Abbott A Dolgin E Failed Alzheimer’s trial does not kill leading theory of disease Nature 540 15 16 01 12 2016 10.1038/nature.2016.21045 27905452
20 Hardy J De Strooper B Alzheimer’s disease: where next for anti-amyloid therapies? Brain 2017 4 1 140 4 853 855 10.1093/brain/awx059 28375461
21 Chang C-F Lai J-H Wu JC-C Greig NH Becker RE Luo Y Chen Y-H Kang S-J Chiang Y-H Chen K-Y (−)-Phenserine inhibits neuronal apoptosis following ischemia/reperfusion injury Brain Res 2017 in review (BRES-S-17-00992)
22 Lecca D Bader M Tweedie D Becker RE Pick CG Greig NH (−)-Phenserine mitigates neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in a mouse model of mild traumatic brain injury Brain Res 2017 – ready for submission
23 Mustapic M Eitan E Werner JK Jr Berkowitz ST Lazaropoulos MP Tran J Goetzl EJ Kapogiannis D Plasma Extracellular Vesicles Enriched for Neuronal Origin: A Potential Window into Brain Pathologic Processes Front Neurosci 2017 11 278 28588440
24 Fiandaca MS Kapogiannis D Mapstone M Boxe A Eitan E Schwartz JB Abner EL Petersen RC Federoff HJ Miller BL Goetz EJ Identification of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease by a profile of pathogenic proteins in neurally derived blood exosomes: A case-control study Alzheimers Dement 2015 11 6 600 7 25130657
25 Kapogiannis D Boxer A Schwartz JB Abner EL Petersen RC Miller BL Carlson OD Mustapic M Kapogiannis D Dysfunctionally phosphorylated type 1 insulin receptor substrate in neural-derived blood exosomes of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2015 29 589 96 25342129
26 Goetzl EJ Boxer A Schwartz JB Abner EL Petersen RC Miller BL Carlson OD Mustapic M Kapogiannis D Low neural exosomal levels of cellular survival factors in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2015 2 769 73 26273689
27 Goetzl EJ Kapogiannis D Schwartz JB Lobach IV Goetzl L Abner EL Jicha GA Karydas AM Boxer A Miller BL Decreased synaptic proteins in neuronal exosomes of frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2016 30 4141 4148 27601437
28 Stern RA Tripodis Y Baugh CM Fritts NG Martin BM Chaisson C Cantu RC Joyce JA Shah S Ikezu T Zhang J Gercel-Taylor C Taylor DD Preliminary Study of Plasma Exosomal Tau as a Potential Biomarker for Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy J Alzheimers Dis 2016 51 1099 109 26890775
29 Goetzl EJ Mustapic M Kapogiannis D Eitan E Lobach IV Goetzl L Schwartz JB Miller BL Cargo proteins of plasma astrocyte-derived exosomes in Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2016 30 3853 3859 27511944
30 Nigro A Colombo F Casella G Finardi A Verderio C Furlan R Myeloid Extracellular Vesicles: Messengers from the Demented Brain Front Immunol 2016 7 17 26858720
31 Taylor DD Gercel-Taylor C Exosome platform for diagnosis and monitoring of traumatic brain injury Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2014 369 1652 pii: 20130503
32 Kang MH Reynolds CP. Bcl-2 Inhibitors: Targeting Mitochondrial Apoptotic Pathways in Cancer Therapy Clin Cancer Res 2009 2 15 15 4 1126 1132 19228717
33 Rachmany L Tweedie D Rubovitch V Yu QS Li Y Wang JY Pick CG Greig NH Cognitive impairments accompanying rodent mild traumatic brain injury involve p53-dependent neuronal cell death and are ameliorated by the tetrahydrobenzothiazole PFT-α PLoS One 8 11 e79837 2013 24312187
34 Yang LY Chu YH Tweedie D Yu QS Pick CG Hoffer BJ Greig NH Wang JY Post-trauma administration of the pifithrin-α oxygen analog improves histological and functional outcomes after experimental traumatic brain injury Exp Neurol 269 56 66 2015 25819102
35 Becker RE Colliver JA Markwell SJ Moriearty PL Unni LK Vicari S A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study of Metrifonate, an Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitor, for Alzheimer’s Disease Alzheimer’s Disease and Associated Disorders 10 3 124 131 1996
36 Becker RE Colliver JA Markwell SJ Moriearty P Unni LK Varney A Vicari S A Six Month Study of the Effects of Metrifonate on Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease Alzheimer’s Disease and Associated Disorders 12 1 54 57 1998
37 Becker RE Markwell S Problems arising from the generalizing of treatment efficacy from clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease Clin Drug Invest 19 33 41 2000
38 Becker RE Modifying clinical trial designs to test treatments for clinical significance in individual patients Clin Drug Invest 21 727 733 2001
39 Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADCS-Cog)38

40 Folstein MF Folstein SE McHugh PR 1975 "Mini-mental status". A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician Journal of Psychiatric Research 12 3 189 98 1202204
41 Becker RE Lessons from Darwin: 21st Century designs for clinical trials Curr Alz Res 2007 4 458 467
42 Galasko D Bennett D Sano M Ernesto C Thomas R Grundman M Ferris S An inventory to assess activities of daily living for clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease. The Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1997 11 Suppl 2 S33 9 9236950
43 Cambridge Cognition Battery-Alzheimer’s Disease http://www.cambridgecognition.com/cantab/test-batteries/alzheimers-disease/
44 Cummings JL Mega M Gray K Rosenberg-Thompson S Carusi DA Gornbein J The Neuropsychiatric Inventory Comprehensive Assessment of psychopathology in Dementia Neurology December 1994 44 12 2308 14
45 Davis KL Marin DB Kane R Patrick D Peskind ER Raskind MA Puder KL The Caregiver Activity Survey (CAS): development and validation of a new measure for caregivers of persons with Alzheimer’s disease Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 1997 10 12 10 978 88 9395929
46 Lenderking WR Wyrwich KW Stolar M Howard KA Leibman C Buchanan J Lacey L Kopp Z Stern Y Reliability, validity, and interpretation of the dependence scale in mild to moderately severe Alzheimer’s disease Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 2013 12 28 8 738 49 24363071
47 Schneider LS Raman R Schmitt FA Doody RS Insel P Clark CM Morris JC Reisberg B Petersen RC Ferris SH Characteristics and performance of a modified version of the ADCS-CGIC CIBIC+ for mild cognitive impairment clinical trials Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2009 Jul-Sep 23 3 260 7 19812469
