LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0217513
1037
Biochim Biophys Acta
Biochim. Biophys. Acta
Biochimica et biophysica acta
0006-3002
1878-2434

29410319
6066442
10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.01.026
NIHMS940007
Article
Genetic Cartography of Longevity in Humans and Mice: Current Landscape and Horizons
Hook Michael 1
Roy Suheeta 1
Williams Evan G. 5
Sleiman Maroun Bou 4
Mozhui Khyobeni 2
Nelson James F. 3
Lu Lu 1
Auwerx Johan 4
Williams Robert W. 1
1 Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA
2 Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA
3 Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology and Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA
4 Interfaculty Institute of Bioengineering, Laboratory of Integrative and Systems Physiology, Institute of Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland
5 Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich CH-8093, Switzerland
* Correspondence to rwilliams@uthsc.edu, Robert W. Williams, Ph.D., Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 71 S Manassas St, Room 407, Memphis TN 38163, Telephone 901 448-7050
11 2 2018
02 2 2018
9 2018
01 9 2019
1864 9 Pt A 27182732
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Aging is a complex and highly variable process. Heritability of longevity among humans and other species is low, and this has given rise to the idea that it may be futile to search for gene variants that control rates of aging. We argue that the problem is mainly due to low power and the genetic and environmental complexity of longevity. In this review we highlight progress made in mapping genes and molecular networks associated with longevity, paying special attention to work in mice and humans. We summarize 40 years of linkage studies using murine cohorts and 15 years of studies in human populations that have exploited candidate gene and genome-wide association methods. A small but growing number of gene variants contribute to known longevity mechanisms, but a much larger set have unknown functions. We outline these and other challenges and suggest some possible solutions, including more intense collaboration between research communities that use model organisms and human cohorts. Once hundreds of gene variants have been linked to differences in longevity in mammals, it will become feasible to systematically explore gene-by-environmental interactions, dissect mechanisms with more assurance, and evaluate the roles of epistasis and epigenetics in aging. A deeper understanding of complex networks—genetic, cellular, physiological, and social—should position us well to improve healthspan.

aging
healthspan
heritability
GWAS
QTL analysis

Introduction

Over the past two centuries longevity has increased at an impressive rate, driven by innovations in sanitation, healthcare, nutrition, and social support [1–5]. The proportion of individuals who reach 95 has doubled in the past 25 years, and the peak age of death is now close to 85 worldwide [6]. In some populations there has also been a matched but more gradual increase in age of menopause by one year per decade since 1910 [7–8]. Further improvements in health care and social structure may push lifespan upward, but it is also possible that we are reaching fundamental biological constraints with diminishing prospects of healthy living beyond 100 years [9–10]. The same trends are replicated in laboratory mice—60 years ago, mean lifespan of inbred strains averaged 488 days [11–12]. Genetically identical descendants of these strains now consistently live about 50% longer. This upward shift is almost certainly related to improved husbandry and low rates of infection.

As lifespan increases, causes of death shift from accidents and pathogens to late-onset chronic conditions such as cardiovascular, respiratory, and metabolic diseases, cancer, neurodegeneration, and adverse consequences of pneumonias [6, their Figure 3; 13]. In humans and other species this shift is a result of much weaker selection against heritable factors that reduce post-reproductive longevity—an insight dating back to 1881 [14]. George Williams refined this idea and argued that gene variants may have positive effects on fitness early in life but negative effects later in life: so-called antagonistic pleiotropy [15]. Humans and killer whales seem to defy antagonistic pleiotropy for two decades or more after reproductive senescence [16]. Even the roundworm, C. elegans, manages to extend lifespan at least twofold beyond the age of reproductive senescence [17]. There is countervailing evidence that post-reproductive vigor and lifespan in some species, including humans, is under positive selection and contributes significantly to fitness by enhancing the success of progeny [18–21]. This provides motivation to find factors that modulate the length of post-reproductive healthspan. While we must continue to fight a rearguard action against age-related chronic diseases, we need to focus much more attention on the deeper genetic, molecular, and cellular processes that modulate longevity, the main topics of this review [22–24].

Variation in longevity among species is pronounced and linked to life history and style of reproduction [18, 22, 25–27]. Weismann proposed that heritable differences driven by millions of years of natural selection are the root cause of this variation [14, 28]. He also pointed out that it was not possible for him “to indicate the molecular and chemical properties of the cell upon which the duration of its power of reproduction depends: to ask this is to demand an explanation of the nature of heredity—a problem the solution of which may still occupy many generations of scientists.” And so it has proved. We are still struggling to find and define genetic and molecular causes of aging [29–31]. Since the early 1920s [32], we have known that gene variants influence longevity within species, just as they must between species. But in humans and other mammals, discovering DNA polymorphisms (also known as chromosomal loci or gene variants) responsible for differences in lifespan has resisted standard mapping methods [early work reviewed by 28, 33–34]. One pessimistic view has been that aging is a consequence of nearly random and irremediable process of stochastic decay driven by somatic mutations in both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes [35]. A more optimistic alternative is that differences in aging rates within species are modulated by genetic variants linked to metabolic states, accuracy of DNA repair, protein processing efficiencies, immune surveillance, and life history—what we and others call the deep causes of aging.

The difference is vital. If aging is fundamentally caused by stochastic molecular decay, there may not be good reasons to look beyond the most prevalent diseases to increase lifespan. In contrast, if longevity is largely a tunable genetic process, as the comparative biology of longevity indicates, then there should be room to push lifespan of humans well into a second century, not just by overcoming chronic disease but by more fundamental interventions that improve general health and vigor. Whether longevity is an integrated hazard function of many diseases or the result of deeper causes, it is not unreasonable to have a goal of good quality life to age 100 [36]—the age at which Jeanne Louise Calment finally put aside her bicycle [37]. She lived another 22.5 years.

Getting at the genetic basis of aging has been hard. We have succeeded in defining a small set of rare mutations in several genes such as LMNA, WRN, and SERPINE1 that model some aspects of aging and senescence [38–42], but these variants do not account for normal variability in longevity. Our main aim now is to uncover common sequence variants that influence the kinetics of aging. Many candidate genes have been nominated and tested based on their known roles in DNA repair and cell cycle control, mitochondrial function and metabolism, oxidative stress and proteostasis, and numerous other age-related processes [43–44]. These candidate gene studies often test for enrichment of specific alleles in old cohorts [27, 33]. While this approach may eventually fulfill its promise, hypothesis-driven tests of longevity linked gene variants have generally failed to replicate [45–46]. For example, a large and careful retest of three aged Danish cohorts came up empty-handed after surveying variants in 125 well known genes implicated in aging based on known molecular functions [47]. The conventional excuse for failures of this type is that longevity is a complex, multifactorial phenotype influenced by small contributions from many DNA variants (and of course, many environmental factors), making any one sequence variant exceedingly difficult to validate using simple association studies of this type [48–49]. Compounding this problem, methods are designed to detect only simple additive genetic effects. But there are good reasons to suspect that longevity is modulated by non-linear epistatic interactions, antagonistic pleiotropy [50], and gene-by-environmental interactions (GXE) among multiple loci and gene variants.

Insufficient statistical power is certainly one core problem [51–52], but thanks to rapid growth of elderly populations this should not be a problem much longer. Stepler estimates that there are now ~500,000 centenarians worldwide among a population of ~7.6 billion, and the expectation is that there will be ~3.5 million centenarians by 2050 [53–54]. Eighty-five percent will be female [55]. We will soon have the access to the very large sample sizes needed to understand genetic and environmental control of longevity [56–58].

What is perhaps surprising is that many other traits that are arguably just as complex as longevity—in particular, metabolic and psychiatric diseases and traits such as body weight and height—have been mapped to numerous genes and loci. In these cases, however, mapping did not rely on the evaluation of small numbers of nominated candidate genes, but rather used unbiased genome-wide association studies (GWAS). As shown in Figure 1, these GWAS require unusually large sample sizes. For example, the analysis of height in humans did not relent to genome-wide analysis until cohorts exceeded 10,000 subjects. Schizophrenia is another good case study and a useful contrast to longevity. While the heritability of schizophrenia is high [59], the idea arose that spontaneous copy number variants were the primary cause [60]. The conundrum was solved by a very large GWAS [61]: with 37,000 subjects, a total of 108 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were uncovered. While these SNPs have small effects, they have a significant combinatorial impact. The outcome has been a wealth of leads and unexpected mechanistic insight into the etiology of this complex disease [62].

With aging and lifespan studies, there is the added challenge of defining the most relevant phenotype. There are marked differences in methodology among studies [63], heterogeneity among populations [64–65], and unique genetic effects that may emerge only in extreme age [24, 36, 66]. In some cases, the approach has been to construct a phenotype amalgam based on different health and disease traits such as number of years free of major disease, or psychosocial and emotional functioning [49, 67]. The alternative of using lifespan (i.e., time to all-cause mortality) results in a heterogeneous and noisy phenotype. A complementary approach is to use multisystems measures of frailty [68] or molecular biomarkers. One example is the epigenetic status of specific regions of the genome that can be used as metrics of age in single tissues or cells [69]. Telomere length [42, 70–73], changes in metal isotopes [42, 74], and metabolites such as NAD+ [75–76] are other examples of molecular phenotypes of aging being validated in model systems and humans. These and other complementary assays are yielding interesting GWAS hits on what may be considered genetic roots of aging [77], but as has been emphasized by Birney and colleagues [78] it is sometimes difficulty to sort out genetic and environmental causes of aging from epigenetic, molecular, and cellular consequences.

In this status report on the genetics of longevity, we focus almost exclusively on forward genetic studies in mouse and human extending back to the dark ages of quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping [79] and up to the first waves of GWAS in humans [24, 31, 80]. Our review revisits themes covered well by Yuan and colleagues [81]. A side-to-side comparison of our review with theirs is noteworthy and humbling. To give away the main conclusion, there has been painfully slow progress in defining and validating common or rare variants that modulate longevity in mouse or human. We weigh in favor of the simple explanation: that the paucity of longevity hits is primarily the result of inadequate sample size rather than a fundamental problem related to genetic control (or lack thereof) of lifespan. As shown in Figure 1, samples of hundreds of thousands of cases may be mandatory for high yield analysis of the genetics of longevity in humans. As we will see below, the size of mouse cohorts can be much smaller since almost all studies make use of families of closely related cases or even sets of isogenic strains. GWAS have high mapping precision but low power (hence the need for large sample sizes), while studies using rodents generally have modest mapping precision (1 to 10 Mb) but relatively high power. By combining results from both, we can gain both power and precision to detect gene variants associated with longevity—an approach that has been highly effective in other areas of research [82–84].

Two studies published in 2017 provide an empirical basis for optimism. Both took unusual approaches to the problem: McDaid and colleagues [31] used statistical methods to remove confounds associated with age-related diseases and used very large samples sizes via the UK Biobank; Sebastiani and colleagues [24] accomplished the same goal by studying extremely long-lived humans—so-called supercentenarians—using more modest sample size. Both studies nominated candidate genes and loci that may get at the deep metrics and mechanisms of aging in mammals, and certainly in humans. These variants, in turn, should provide reagents and motivation to dissect molecular controllers and biomarkers of aging, ultimately explaining some of the intrinsic sources of variation in longevity. Genomic methods of mapping and validating DNA variants are becoming so powerful and efficient, and sample sizes so large, that we should soon be able to resolve large numbers of longevity modulators. We should then also be able to move to the opening of Act 2—the analysis of GXE.

Heritability of longevity

Estimates of the heritability of longevity are generally low. Values average about 20% but range widely—from close to 0% to as high as 50% in most natural populations of yeast, nematodes, butterflies, fruit flies, deer, bighorn sheep, and humans [17, 28, 85–89]. Estimates from human cohorts typically hover around 20–30% with heritability increasing among families with exceptional longevity [36, 90–91]. Age at menopause, the best metric of reproductive aging in humans, has a heritability that is significantly higher—about 60–65% [92]. Heritability of traits is often an inverse function of their importance to survival and fitness—the more important a trait, the more it will be scrutinized by natural selection, and the lower its heritability [87; but see counterpoints by 89]. There is an unfortunate tendency to equate heritability with tight genetic control, and to equate genetic control with molecular control. Neither is correct. Traits that are key to survival and fitness are obviously under genetic, molecular, and cellular control—numbers of arms and legs being a silly but useful case in point. But for many key life history traits, the statistical definition of genetic control measured by heritability can be exceedingly low. This finding implies that DNA variants have been sanded smooth by selection and that residual sources of variability in longevity are mainly caused by environmental factors or cellular stochastics. There are exceptions to this rule, mainly in the form of balancing selection, but the low heritability of longevity should probably be interpreted as a sign that selection is actively filtering DNA differences that change rates of growth, reproduction, parental investment, and aging. Again, the dramatic variation in longevity among closely related species leaves little room for argument [22, 25, 93].

Heritability of longevity is not a fixed parameter even within a single species or age cohort. Estimates are sensitive to GXE, sex, and even—almost paradoxically—the age of the cohort. Harsh or volatile environments that increase the range of variation in lifespan will tend to increase heritability estimates. The range of ages over which heritability of longevity or hazard ratios are computed is also an important parameter. Studies of twins demonstrate that the likelihood of survival (or conversely, the risk of death) increases with the age of the cohort, as does the heritability. This makes sense if we consider two extremes. On the one hand, young individuals who have just become sexually mature should have a risk of death that is determined largely by environmental factors or bad luck, not by gene variants. At this stage of maturation, human monozygotic and dizygotic twins do not differ much in their risk or survival concordance [94]. On the other hand, individuals older than 60 will have a risk of death that is determined to a progressively greater degree by genetic influences on rates of senescence and risks of chronic disease. Above 60 years-of-age, hazard ratios of monozygotic twins are much more similar to each other than those of dizygotic twins [94].

Nor is heritability necessarily fixed even with a given set of genomes and environment. Heritability can be boosted by using large families of inbred or isogenic lines and can easily be raised to 30–50% by resampling the same genome many times [79, 95–96]. We have used data from two recent longevity studies of mice—that of Yuan, Bogue, and colleagues [12, 97] and our own ongoing study of the BXD strains [98]—to compute heritabilities of longevity based on strain means. Estimates range from 25 to 45%, extending up to 55% in the case of BXD females placed on a high fat diet. Goodrick [99] and Rikke and colleagues [96] provide an even higher estimate—up to 85% for the effective heritability of strain means [100].

Collectively, these estimates of heritability of longevity in panels of inbred strains of mice are much higher than those for other species—from yeast to human—for three reasons: (1) tight control of the environment and food sources, and negligible pathogen exposure; (2) longevity is computed as a mean, median, or hazard function based on large numbers of genetically identical cases (usually 5 to 20 samples/genome); and (3) families of fully inbred strains collectively incorporate twice the genetic variance of outcrossed populations because they lack heterozygous loci [101]. With sufficiently deep resampling of isogenic cohorts, the effective heritability of longevity can be pushed surprisingly close to 1.0 in a well-controlled environment. The ability to boost heritability in these ways makes families of inbred strains a welcome complement to studies of more complex outcrossed natural populations, including humans. It also means that relatively small sample sizes may be effective in mapping longevity loci.

In addition to achieving high heritability and high power with relatively modest sample sizes, it is also possible to use families of inbred strains or isogenic lines to study biomarkers of aging under many different, but tightly controlled diets, treatments, and stressors [96, 98, 102]. But there are also disadvantages of using inbred strains in longevity studies, the foremost being that individuals are homozygous across their entire genome. While this increases the genetic variance, it may also increase the burden of diseases influenced strongly by recessive alleles. This could in principle compromise average longevity compared to either outbred populations [103] or four-parent F2 intercross progeny of the type used in the Interventions Testing Program [104–107]. However, at least in the case of the LXS family of mice that has been so well characterized in several different environments [96, 102], the family of inbred strains manages to live to an average age of 825 days (44 strains), and some strains live to an average of 1200 days even on a conventional unrestricted diet (e.g., LXS46). This lifespan rivals that of dwarf mice on caloric restriction [108], and is exceeded only by a handful (literally) of Ghr knockout mice [109] and outbred mice. For the record, the current record age reached by any mouse is an individual from the Diversity Outbred population that reached 1730 days (Dr. Steven Munger, personal communication).

What happens to the heritability of longevity after the reproductive phase of life? Antagonistic pleiotropy [15] posits that alleles that have positive effects on growth and reproductive success early in life may accelerate senescence after reproduction [110]. In contrast, alleles that slow growth and reproduction may increase lifespan as well as sensitivity [111] or resilience to stress [112]. Following in the footsteps of Weismann, there is also evidence of direct competition between the germline and somatic tissues that can shorten or extend life [113–115]. In contrast, there is not much direct evidence for antagonistic pleiotropy in humans, although the APOE gene is a reasonable candidate [116–117], and sex hormone genes also may fall into this category—essential for reproductive performance but with deleterious effects when expressed later in life [118]. There may be countervailing pressure that has to do with persistent parental and grandparental investment in the fitness of progeny [18–19, 21]. There are also good reasons to suspect that plasticity of life history traits, such as age of reproduction and peak parental investment, will be under strong balancing selection in a normally volatile world with many ecological niches for single species [119]. Even in the absence of antagonistic pleiotropy, selection will inevitably be relaxed after the main phase of reproduction, and this will contribute to the steep increase in incidence of chronic diseases and the steep rise in mortality described by Gompertz nearly 200 years ago [120]. The good news is that this steep rise in mortality should be accompanied by a steep rise in heritability, implying that conscious attention to both alleles and environments should enable significant enhancement of healthspan.

In conclusion, the heritability of longevity is low compared to that of most chronic diseases, and even traits such as height, body weight, and schizophrenia. This low heritability goes a long way to explaining the comparative difficult of mapping longevity, a finding highlighted well by the longevity points we have added in Figure 1. In humans, very large sample sizes will generally be required (hundreds of thousands of centenarians would be ideal). But as we show in the next section, when working with families of isogenic strains, cohorts of as few of 30–40 have proved effective [79, 96, 102, 121–122] because heritability can be maximized.

Mapping longevity loci in mouse

Mice are the preeminent mammalian model of aging. Reasons are simple—an impressive wealth of genetic and genomic resources and tools [97, 123–124], coupled with small size, fast reproduction, short lifespan, high tolerance for inbreeding, and of course, an impressive set of methods to modify genomes [125–127]. These many advantages enable extensive and detailed investigation into both the genetics and the molecular biology of aging—from the first studies of lifespan by Roderick and Storer [11] to the latest studies from the Interventions Testing Program (ITP) [128]. Mice, like other mammals, share ~95% of protein-coding genes with humans [129], but their much shorter lifespan makes longevity studies practical [e.g., 96, 102]. This latter factor is critical in efficiently mapping loci, and even DNA variants, influencing lifespan and aging as a function of experimental manipulations [81, 104, 107, 130].

A range of murine resource types have been used to map variation in longevity. The first study by Smith and Walford used a panel of congenic strains on a C57BL/10 background that harbored different versions of the major histocompatibility (MHC or H2) locus on chromosome (Chr) 17 [130]. Yunis and colleagues analyzed longevity in a conventional backcross [79] and then followed up with an analysis of longevity across 20 BXD recombinant inbred strains [121]. More recently, an expanded panel of BXD strains (n ~ 75) has been used in a second phase of longevity studies investigating two diets—6% versus 60% calories from fat [131]. Rikke and colleagues have also used the LXS recombinant inbred strains, in their case derived from a cross between ILS and ISS parental strains [96]. They also used matched sets on two diets—a conventional ad libitum diet or an intense dietary restriction. Surprisingly, few studies have used standard F2 intercrosses to map longevity in mice [132–133], the main challenge being able to achieve sufficient power using an intercross in which every case is genetically unique. But sample sizes of more than 1000 intercross progeny, heterogeneous stock, or outbred mice should soon yield results.

By far the largest and most systematic study of lifespan variation in mice is the ITP, a resource that is ideal for mapping QTLs for longevity. The ITP was initiated in 2004 [104, 134–135] and has made use of an intercross between C57BL/6J x BALB/cByJ F1 females and C3H/HeJ x DBA/2J F1 males [136]. Each of the F2 progeny is genetically unique, and this does impose design limitations, but the benefit is excellent consilience with human populations. The F2 mice generated by the ITP have been used primarily for non-genetic studies of the impact of dietary interventions on lifespan [107, 128, 137–138]. For example, smaller F2 progeny tend to live longer than larger siblings, and have lower levels of thyroid hormone T4, growth hormone mediator IGF1, and leptin [139]. A small cohort of these F2 animals was used in an early mapping study of longevity [132], but in an era when marker resources were modest. The ITP cohort is now so large (n ~15,000 cases) that it is now well powered to detect longevity QTLs [98].

How replicable are results from longevity studies using mouse models? Longevity estimates generated by Roderick and Storer [11] correlate well with data generated 48 years later by Yuan and colleagues (r = 0.88), although lifespan increased from 520 to 754 days. Gelman and colleagues [121] studied longevity in 15 strains in common with Lang et al. [140], and again the correlation is high (r = 0.77). In this case, longevity values also replicate (Gelman et al.: 711 days, n = 23 strains, all females; Lang et al.: 704 days, n = 23 strains, all females). Differences in longevity between sexes can be large [141]. The correlation of male-female lifespan in Lang’s study of the BXD strains is 0.40, and males actually outlived females by two months. The ITP has shown that longevity of males is particularly sensitive to housing despite best efforts to standardize husbandry [106, 137–138]. Finally, dietary interventions can completely disrupt patterns of longevity. Correlations across the LXS strains on restricted or unrestricted diet are merely –0.02 and 0.15 for females and males, respectively (n = 41 strains, median longevity). In sum, we should be prepared for potentially strong environmental and sex effects on longevity.

Over the past four decades, 16 studies have been carried out to define QTLs for longevity in mice—a surprisingly modest number given the importance and inherent interest of this topic [79, 96, 121–122, 130, 132–133, 140–148]. The first genetic analysis by Smith and Walford [130] exploited congenic strains and very large sample sizes (n = 120 per congenic strain) to test whether longevity is modulated by sequence variants in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC, H2) on Chr 17. The answer in this study was yes, but as the authors point out, longevity linkage results will depend strongly on the environment. Genotypes in this critical region controlling the adaptive immune response after infection should be a determinant of longevity when pathogen levels are high. Standards of animal care have changed greatly over the past 40 years—in particular, the introduction of specific-pathogen-free colonies. To the best of our knowledge, none of the more recent studies have detected a longevity locus on Chr 17.

In several cases, different cohorts made using the same parental strains have been used repeatedly to refine longevity QTL maps. The best example of a progressive improvement in power and precision is work that has been carried out since 1979 using C57BL/6J (B6) and DBA/2J (D2) parental strains and their progeny. The first analysis of longevity by Yunis and colleagues [79 1984] preceded the introduction of modern genetic mapping resources, and the authors were able to test only three markers in a backcross of 388 cases (Figure 2). Remarkably, two of their markers were highlighted as predictors of differences in longevity. Only one of these would now be considered significant after corrections for multiple tests—that linked to the brown locus, Tyrp1, on Chr 4. Gelman and colleagues [121] replicated this longevity analysis within the same laboratory, but now using BXD recombinant inbred strains also made by crossing B6J to D2. With a more comprehensive set of 101 markers, they linked variation in lifespan to loci on Chrs 1, 2, 7, and 12, but did not confirm linkage to Tyrp1 (Figure 2). de Haan and colleagues [143] revisited Gelman’s data after noticing a curious distribution in the range of lifespan within isogenic strains: high variation in age of death in nine strains, moderate variation in seven strains, and low variation in eight strains. Using this new phenotype they were able to map a locus on Chr 11 that may control variability of longevity within strain (Figure 2). These traits can now be remapped in GeneNetwork (www.genenetwork.org) simply by linking to the appropriate BXD phenotype trait identifier. For example, the longevity variability data is listed in GeneNetwork as BXD phenotype trait 19422, and it is easy to validate the Chr 11 locus. Using the latest genotypes, this trait has a linkage peak with a logarithm of odds (LOD) score of 4.8 between Meis1 (unc-62) to the exportin 1 gene, Xpo1. Both genes are strong biological candidates [149–150]. One caveat: the statistic that they used—range of lifespan within strain—is an unusual and noisier trait than conventional longevity statistics, such as the mean or median lifespan. It will soon be possible to test whether this trait can be replicated in much larger BXD aging cohorts.

Lang and colleagues [140] also generated independent longevity data for 23 BXD strains—17 common to Gelman—and they report a QTL on Chr 7, as well as a locus on Chr 11 for median lifespan (Figure 2). We have not been able to replicate their results at a genome-wide significance level using much higher densities marker maps (see GeneNetwork BXD phenotype traits 12563 and 12564). We suspect that the map method that they used—composite interval mapping—explains this failure. This method is generally not recommended with such small sample size, because it is easy to test too many alternative models.

Finally, Houtkooper and colleagues [122] remapped the Gelman BXD longevity data (GeneNetwork BXD phenotypes 17475, 10148, 10112) but now using 3800 markers and treating outlier data appropriately for mapping. They were able to refine the initial Chr 2 locus to a comparatively short interval of about 5 Mb (see GeneNetwork BXD group trait 17475). Validation studies of genes in this interval using C. elegans and mouse aging transcriptome data sets highlighted the mitochondrial ribosomal protein S5 (Mrps5) as the single best candidate. Inactivating this gene in worm extended lifespan significantly and also triggered a mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt). While linkage between a specific sequence variant in mouse and direct control of lifespan is still not yet established, our working hypothesis is that sequence differences near Mrps5 influence the UPRmt and thereby longevity. The role of this family of mitochondrial genes in human longevity is an open question, but there is evidence that the mitochondrial ribosome—consisting of about 74 protein coding genes in all—is associated with differences in neurocognitive aging in older women [151].

The LXS panel of recombinant inbred strains has also been used effectively and collaboratively to map longevity QTLs. Liao [102] and Rikke and colleagues [96] aged mice at two sites and collectively have defined loci on Chrs 7, 9, and 15 affecting lifespan, fertility, and metabolic efficiency in response to dietary restriction. None of these loci has yet been linked to genes or mechanisms, but the Chr 15 locus has been fine-mapped to a small interval using congenic strains [152]. One concluding note on current mouse longevity QTL data: it is now practical to remap and reanalyze many of the older data sets using GeneNetwork [124]. For example, while the first wave mapping studies used up to 1000 markers [96, 140], it is now possible to remap both BXD and LXS longevity data using far denser and more reliable maps. Remapping was the first step that led to the discovery of Mrps5 by Houtkooper and colleagues [122]. As part of this review, we remapped all longevity traits in Rikke et al. [96] and now detect an apparently new female longevity locus (normal ad libitum diet) on Chr 1 at about 80 Mb (Figure 2, and see GeneNetwork LXS group, trait 10156).

Mapping longevity gene variants in humans

While interest in genetic determinants of longevity in humans has grown significantly as gene mapping methods have become more powerful, there are still comparatively few robustly mapped, replicated natural variants that modulate longevity. Only the TOMM40/APOE/APOC1 gene cluster (19q13.11–19q13.32) and the FOXO3 gene (6q21) can make this claim [46, 91, 153–154]. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) has two isoforms known to influence longevity through their association with disease, APOE ε2 and APOE ε4 [48]. APOE ε2 promotes longevity largely by decreasing risk of cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer disease whereas APOE ε4 does the opposite, limiting longevity [155–158]. Similarly, the ε2 allele is enriched in centenarians whereas the ε4 allele is diminished [159–160]. Inheriting two copies of the APOE ε4 allele reduces the odds of achieving exceptional longevity by 45–65% [161]. The effects of these isoforms are robust and have attained genome-wide significance in at least 10 human GWAS studies of longevity and age-related disease (Table 1). Interestingly, recent work has shown the ε4 isoform may be beneficial in non-industrialized settings [116–117]. The forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) gene has a more modest association with longevity but has also crossed the significance threshold in a recent GWAS [153]. FOXO3 is linked to insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 signaling [162–163] and is a compelling true longevity gene. Other than APOE and FOXO3, there are also a number of candidates that are statistically significant, but not yet validated (Table 1). These include GRIK2 [153], RAD50/IL3 [164], and MINPP1 [80].

A recent study by McDaid and colleagues [31] developed a new approach to discover longevity loci. They took advantage of the many SNPs linked to age-related disease and adjusted for these effects to detect underlying polymorphisms that modulate lifespan. The team was able to use an exceptionally large general population cohort rather than focusing on only the oldest of the old. Sixteen SNPs were highlighted as genome-wide significant and 11 were replicated in five independent cohorts. This study is also one of the first to bridge between mouse and human longevity data. Gene expression in the LXS mice was analyzed to evaluate the three strongest human candidate genes—RMB6, SULT1A1, and CHRNA5. Increased lifespan was associated with lower mRNA levels of RMB6 in mouse prefrontal cortex. A caloric restricted diet known to extend lifespan in mice was associated with increased SULT1A1 expression. These joint approaches using data from several species has promise to define new loci.

The point of mapping gene variants that control longevity is to use them as validated entry points to defining mechanisms of aging—the topic of next section. While mapping is not a necessary prelude to studying mechanism, it has the advantage of being relatively unbiased, and can help find common gene variants that are modulators of lifespan and healthspan. A complementary and powerful approach is to systematically inactivate genes one at a time across the genome [165]. This approach has been most effective in small organisms such as yeast, nematode, and fruit fly. For example, Magwire and colleagues [111] used transposon mutagenesis to define 58 loci that increase longevity (on average about 12%) in Canton-S derived isogenic lines. They defined many non-linear interactions among mutations and significant differences between sexes. There are two minor downsides to this approach. First, most experiments of this type test mutations on one genetic background, which will limit generality of specific gene effects. Second, induced mutations can inactivate genes effectively, but they are unlikely to replicate the effects of natural variants for longevity that are likely to be under intense selection.

From mapping to mechanisms

One of the major goals of aging research is to understand mechanisms well enough to reduce age-related disease burden, improve vigor, and extend healthspan and lifespan. As mentioned above, mapping does not get us there; it just points— we hope—in the right direction. We know a great deal about the molecular and cellular biology of longevity from classical experimental approaches in model organisms that we outline below. But the point of this section is to encourage thought about how to effectively bridge between two major approaches to longevity—the highly effective reductionist paradigm and the more holistic and unbiased systems genetics approach. The reductionist approach looks for large effects of mutations and perturbations using constrained experimental designs (usually one genotype); the systems approach uses a more open-ended discovery design and large genetically complex cohorts. We need to bridge between these approaches, their communities, and most importantly, their key discoveries [166]. QTLs and GWAS hits for longevity need to be combined with everything we know about mechanisms of longevity. Mapping longevity should ideally not be unbiased, but should take advantage of all of the prior information we have on disease process and normal aging in all organisms.

Model organisms have been vital to this goal of identifying and understanding the molecular, cellular, and environmental factors affecting longevity and thereby improving lifespan. Studies in S. cerevisiae [167], C. elegans [168–169], D. melanogaster [111, 170], and most recently killifish [171] have all made major contributions toward understanding mechanisms that modulate longevity. An in-depth discussion of all these evolutionarily conserved biological processes and factors is beyond our scope; instead we refer readers to comprehensive overviews by Kenyon [172], Houtkooper and colleagues [173], López-Otín and colleagues [174], and Riera and colleagues [175].

In the following short sections, we enumerate some of the major intertwined mechanisms of senescence and longevity along with sets of gene variants highlighted in genetic studies.

1. Nutrient-sensing pathways that regulate aging

Insulin/IGF-1 and FOXO pathway

The first and possibly best characterized pathway to influence aging in organisms ranging from yeast to mammals is the insulin/IGF-1pathway [172, 176]. Extensive research has shown that cumulative regulation of many genes through DAF-16, a FOXO transcription factor; HSF-1, the heat-shock transcription factor; and SKN-1, a Nrf-like xenobiotic response factor in the insulin/IGF1 signaling pathway prolongs the lifespan of C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster by as much as two-fold [reviewed by 172]. In mammals, the relation between insulin/IGF1 signaling and longevity becomes more complex owing to the involvement of multiple insulin and IGF receptors, and because of the crucial role for insulin in regulation of glucose homeostasis. The insulin/IGF-1 pathway is a good candidate for mediating longevity through dietary restriction in worms, flies, and mice under specific conditions [177].

While polymorphisms in many core genes in these extended networks have been tested repeatedly [e.g., 47], most do not control normal variation in longevity in human populations. In humans, only variants in the FOXO3 gene have been consistently replicated as associated with longevity across multiple populations, with the minor allele AA genotype being associated with increased lifespan [153, 178].

TOR signaling

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a serine/threonine protein kinase that functions in two distinct complexes regulating different downstream processes—mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) [179]. Under conditions favorable for growth, TOR signaling modulates protein translation, protein homeostasis, and cellular growth and has been implicated as a controller of longevity in diverse species. Interest in understanding the physiological role and molecular targets of the TOR pathway has surged since the discovery that rapamycin treatment extends life in yeast, nematodes, flies, and mice via mTOR inhibition [180]. The TOR network has also been consistently linked to dietary restriction that reduces mTORC activity, which in turn increases lifespan in many organisms ranging from yeast to mice [172]. Sataranatarajan and colleagues report that rapamycin shortened the lifespan of the leptin receptor db mutant mouse—a reminder that genes and the networks they influence are unlikely to be universally beneficial [181]. Selman and colleagues showed increased lifespan in a mouse model of decreased mTOR signaling —ribosomal S6 kinase 1 knockout mice (S6k1−/−) [182]. Similarly, mTOR knockout strains (Mtor+/− and Mlst8+/−) and hypomorphic homozygous MtorΔ/Δ mice have increased lifespans [183–184]. mTORC1 promotes mRNA translation and protein synthesis by activating ribosomal protein S6 kinases (RPS6KA1) and inhibiting eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (EIF4EBP1) [179]. However, no associations have been detected yet for mTOR complex gene variants (MTOR, RPTOR, RICTOR, and RPS6KA1) with extreme human longevity [185].

Sirtuins

Sirtuins, a protein family of metabolic sensors, have gained recognition over the last two decades as crucial regulators of evolutionary conserved pathways related to aging in a wide variety of organisms ranging from yeast to mammals [186]. The role of sirtuins in aging was first identified in yeast [187]. Since then, several research groups have showed that Sir2 overexpression in C. elegans [188] and Drosophila [189] results in extending lifespan in a dose-dependent manner. Mammals have seven homologs of the yeast Sir2 gene (SIRT1 to SIRT7). All homologs contain the highly conserved NAD-dependent sirtuin core domain. This domain targets multiple cellular substrates and influences a broad range of cellular functions, including multiple metabolic and neuronal pathways. Experiments in mouse have shown that sirtuins are modulated by diet; thus, sirtuins could be therapeutic targets to enhance healthspan [190]. SIRT1, the best-characterized mammalian sirtuin, controls mitochondrial function by deacetylation of targets like TRP53, PPARGC1A, and FOXO [191]. There is compelling evidence that enhancing sirtuin activity leads to decreased cancer risk and is protective against metabolic dysfunction associated with aging [191–192]. SIRT3, which localizes to mitochondria, appears to be required for dietary restriction–mediated longevity through deacetylation of mitochondrial proteins [193]. SIRT6 is a key modulator of healthy aging, and mice deficient in SIRT6 have a reduced lifespan. Overexpression promotes genomic stability [194], promotes DNA repair, and suppresses genomic instability [195]. Deficiencies in mice lead to age-associated degenerative abnormalities and early death.

Lack of lifespan extension in Sirt1−/− mice on caloric restriction, as well as the paucity of associations between polymorphisms in SIRT1 and human lifespan, has cast doubts on the relevance of SIRT1 as a key longevity gene [196]. Association studies of of lifespan and SIRT3 are inconsistent [197–199]. In the Iowa cohort of the Established Population for Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly, homozygous minor allele TT genotypes for SIRT5 and SIRT6 were associated with a shorter lifespan, after controlling for age-related risk factors [200].

AMP kinase signaling

SIRT1 and AMPK are co-regulated; they interact and share many common target molecules. AMPK (adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase) is a highly conserved cellular energy sensor that is activated when cellular energy reserves are low, and also maintains metabolic energy balance [201]. AMPK is a key mediator of several signaling networks linked to aging and is activated by a wide array of small molecules, making it a potential therapeutic target for pro-longevity drugs such as metformin, resveratrol, rapamycin, aspirin, as well as a key mediator of several signaling pathways linked to aging [202–203]. However, many of these effects are indirect and are yet to be fully elucidated by work in model organisms. AMPK activity may be an important contributing factor in networks linking autophagy [204], dysregulated intracellular lipid metabolism, and reduced mitochondrial function associated with aging [205]. AMPK activity controls the function of several signaling networks associated with aging: FOXO/daf-16 [172, 206], SIRT1 [207], TOR [179], and CRTCs [208]. AMPK-induced deacetylation by SIRT1 modulates the activity of downstream targets, including the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PPARGC1A) and the forkhead transcription factors, FOXO1 and FOXO3. Treatment of mice with resveratrol, famously linked to cardiovascular benefits and cancer preventive properties of red wine, activates the NAD+–SIRT1 network and induces genes impacting oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial biogenesis [209]. The beneficial effect of S6K1 deficiency on lifespan might involve AMPK activation [182].

2. Mitochondrial function and reactive oxygen species effects

A decline in mitochondrial function contributes to normal aging through multiple distinct processes, including oxidative damage, inflammation, and senescence [210]. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), generated as a by-product of the mitochondrial respiratory system and intracellular metabolism in peroxisomes, were initially implicated as one of the causative factors of aging. Increased ROS levels may be detrimental and lead to cell death and acceleration in aging and age-related diseases; genetic studies in C. elegans, Drosophila, and mice have implicated enhanced stress resistance or reduced free radical production with increased lifespan [211]. Senescent cells are associated with high levels of intracellular ROS and accumulated oxidative damage to DNA and proteins [212]. However, that theory has been largely refuted, and several studies have shown that mitochondria can cope with physiological levels of oxidative damage [213–216]. Such ROS levels are most likely essential for regulation of cell cycle progression, cell signaling, and apoptosis, while increased ROS production over a certain level has a detrimental effect on cell physiology [217–218]. Lifespan extension by mild inhibition of mitochondrial respiration is evolutionarily conserved. Some key factors required to mediate this longevity response include dietary restriction, increased HIF1 activity, induction of homeobox protein CEH-23, and mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR) [219]. Impairment of the mitochondrial translation by a drop in mitochondrial ribosomal protein S5 (MRPS5) level initiates UPRmt activation and results in increased longevity in both worms and mice [122].

Many of the longevity genes, including AKT (glucose uptake), EIF4EBP1, and RPS6KA1 (protein synthesis, autophagy), SIRT (mitochondrial function), and FOXO3 (oxidative stress defense), have multiple effects with intertwined actions in overlapping metabolic networks that often affect mitochondrial function [173]. Associations between mtDNA and longevity differ from the SNP-based associations seen in the nuclear genome. Several small and underpowered studies have associated mtDNA variation with human longevity in Japanese [220], Chinese Uygur [221], Italian [222], French [223], Irish [224] and Finnish [220] populations.

3. DNA damage and genomic instability

Perturbations in genomic stability might have negative outcomes, including cancer, reduced lifespan, and premature aging. Genomic DNA is subjected to incessant chemical, physical, and biological abuse, resulting in tens of thousands of molecular lesions per cell per day [225]. DNA damage can result from endogenous processes, such as hydrolysis, oxidation and alkylation, or exposure to radiation or environmental mutagens. Most DNA lesions are rapidly corrected by a sophisticated network of genome maintenance systems. Unrepaired DNA damage, both nuclear [226] and mitochondrial, leads to mutations, loss and gain of sequence, and aging [227–228]. The RecQ helicase family participates in maintaining genomic stability and is conserved across organisms [229]. In humans, sequencing of genes involved in DNA repair revealed that SNPs in the WRN helicase gene are associated with shorter lifespan. GWAS studies have identified markers associated with longevity at loci involved in genome maintenance, including WRN, LMNA, CDKN2A/CDKN2B, FOXO1, and FOXO3 [41, 230].

4. Proteostasis imbalance

Protein homeostasis is maintained by tightly regulated action of intricate cellular systems that are gradually compromised with age, leading to an increase in accumulation of damaged and misfolded proteins. Loss of proteostasis contributes to many age-related pathologies, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease [231]. Most cellular proteins fold directly after translation in the cytosol while membrane and secreted proteins fold in the endoplasmic reticulum. Presence of misfolded proteins in these cellular compartments is detected by chaperone networks, which initiate a proteostasis response to restore cellular homeostasis. The cytosolic response is initiated by the heat shock response (HSR) regulated by stress-activated heat shock factor1 (HSF1) which induces transcription of chaperones and other protective genes [232]. In worms, reduction of HSF1 induces accelerated aging. In response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, unfolded protein response UPRER is mediated by three signaling cascades modulated by IRE1, PERK, and ATF6, leading to several outcomes including reduced translation rates and transcriptional upregulation of many chaperones [233]. Prolonged stress triggers apoptosis. In mitochondria, both the integrated stress response and UPRmt are activated to protect from proteotoxic stress, initiating a mitonuclear cascade that leads to transcription of protective genes [234–235]. Damaged proteins are degraded by the two principal proteolytic systems: the ubiquitin–proteasome system and the autophagic–lysosomal system. Their efficiency declines with age, supporting the idea that protein clearance mechanisms are directly linked to aging and age-associated diseases [236].

Activation of UPRmt correlates with longevity across organisms in yeast, worms, flies, and mice [237]. A QTL for lifespan on Chr 2 in the BXD family of mice is thought to correspond to polymorphisms in mitochondrial ribosomal protein S5 (Mrps5). Expression correlates inversely with longevity in mouse, as it does in C. elegans [122]. Although no association has yet been found between mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (MRPs) and human lifespan, pathway-level genetic analysis points toward association between the MRP family and cognitive decline in women, independent of the APOE locus [151] and protein aggregation in C. elegans [238].

5. Telomere length

Telomeres are complex nucleoprotein structures at the tips of eukaryotic chromosomes made up of repetitive sequences bound by shelterin complex proteins (TRF1, TRF2, TIN2, POT1, TPP1, RAP1) [239]. The erosion of telomeres during DNA replication can trigger the onset of cellular senescence [240], but linkage between telomere length, aging, and reproductive success are complex and depend on species and life history [e.g., 241]. Common laboratory strains such as B6 mice have a mean telomere length of ~50 kb, whereas the wild-derived CAST/EiJ has shorter (~15 kb) telomeres comparable to that of humans [242]. Telomere length is inherited as a unique genotype, and short telomeres are sufficient on their own to cause degenerative diseases associated with aging even in the presence of normal levels of telomerase [243]. Heritability of telomere length has been demonstrated in human studies, but it is still unclear whether telomere shortening is a risk factor for telomere-mediated disease [244].

The most prevalent genes implicated in monogenic inherited telomere disorders (about 90% of cases) are TERT (telomerase reverse transcriptase) and TERC (telomerase RNA). Rare mutations in these genes cause autosomal dominant disease leading to significant morbidity after maturity [42, 245]. Taking a candidate gene approach, Atzmon and colleagues identified a common TERT haplotype that is associated with both exceptional longevity and telomere length in a cohort of Ashkenazi centenarians and their offspring [246]; a finding that has been replicated with variable success [247, see, http://genomics.senescence.info/longevity/gene.php?id=TERT)..

6. Epigenetics

There is no doubt that the epigenome ages at multiple levels (e.g., histones and heterochromatins, noncoding RNAs, DNA methylation) [248–250]. DNA methylation has received the most attention because this modification can be most readily quantified by existing technology. The most widely used epigenetic clock is calculated using 353 specific CpG sites that are distributed across the human genome, and this age biosignature has been more closely related to “biological age” rather than “chronological age” and is predictive of human health and longevity [251–253]. This powerful approach for predicting the biological aging rate has now been extended to mouse [254].

The mechanistic basis of epigenetic changes as a function of age remain unclear. Genetic variation is causally linked to phenotypes, but interpreting associations with epigenetic markers can be problematic. Unlike GWAS hits, the direction of causality between DNA methylation and aging is ambiguous [78, 255]. Epigenetic data are also more liable to noise and confounding variables; for instance, the increase in cellular heterogeneity with aging could contribute to some of the age-related signal in DNA methylation. An optimal scenario would be when evidence from both genetic and epigenetic studies converge on a common gene variant that modulates the epigenome. A possible example is the enhancer of zest homolog 2 (Ezh2) gene that codes for the core catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex. Polycombs are highly conserved multimeric proteins that control epigenetic status during embryonic development, cell differentiation, and stem cell proliferation, and potentially aging [256]. The Ezh2 locus in the BXD family is highly polymorphic and is associated with cis-acting variation in expression of the Ezh2 transcript. Work by de Haan and colleagues identified Ezh2 as a candidate for hematopoietic stem cell aging, and overexpression of this gene rescues stem cell aging [257–259]. On the epigenetics front, CpG sites that undergo age-dependent changes in DNA methylation, including the 353 age-informative sites used to calculate the human epigenetic age, are enriched in genes targeted by the polycomb complex [251, 260–262]. This is an example in which the integration of genomic and epigenomic data can shed light on some of the mechanistic aspects of an aging epigenome. A multi-omic approach and careful integration of epigenomic and genomic approaches will be a powerful ally to the genetic cartography of aging and longevity.

Future directions

Progress in unraveling the genetics of longevity is on the threshold of a new phase, poised to burst out from the gloom of an infinitesimal model of gene action—thousands of polymorphisms with undetectable effects—to the clarity of a large collection of validated gene variants. The development of powerful genetics, genomics, and bioinformatics tools is enabling a more comprehensive and perhaps even more objective systems analysis of longevity networks. By combining discovery-based methods with mechanistic analyses and systematic studies of GXE, it is highly likely that over the next decade many new genes, networks, and mechanisms will be connected to longevity and aging-related diseases.

We need to make better progress using both huge human cohorts and model organisms, including mouse—our most effective mammalian model. Boosting sample sizes is an obvious and often effective strategy, but this may not be enough. A better strategy at this point is to integrate across species, models, and experiments. Model organisms have already proved their worth in longevity research. However, the lack of more intimate collaboration between human and model organism researchers remains a barrier. We have some seen some strong results from collaboration across species with yeast, mouse, or C. elegans serving as instigators and corroborators of key discoveries [31, 122, 167]. Yeast, C. elegans, Drosophila, naked mole rats, killifish, and mice can help trace networks and mechanisms of longevity, and provide unrivalled access to the next frontier—GXE interactions and aging. Our hope is that the next version of this review will not only summarize a much more numerous set of longevity gene variants, but showcase new mechanisms that explain how genetic, epigenetic, cellular, and hormonal systems interact with environment and lifestyle to modify rates of aging. Finally, mechanisms are not enough. We need to aim, and aim rapidly, at developing and testing interventions that both increase vigor and reduce diseases and functional deficits that accompany aging

We thank NIA support (R01 AG043930); the UT Center for Integrative and Translational Genomics; the UT-ORNL Governor’s Chair; the NIH F32 Ruth Kirchstein Fellowship Program (F32 GM119190 to EGW); the NIA Interventions Testing Program; and the Nathan Shock Center for Excellence in the Biology of Aging (U01 AG022307 and P30 AG013319 to JFN). We thank Kathryn Graehl for discussions and editing.

Abbreviations

B6 C57BL/6J mouse strain

Chr chromosome

D2 DBA/2J mouse strain

ER endoplasmic reticulum

F1 filial 1 generation

F2 filial 2 generation

GWAS genome-wide association study

GXE gene-by-environmental interaction

HDL high-density lipoprotein

HSR heat shock response

ITP Interventions Testing Program

LOD logarithm of odds

Mb megabase

MHC or H2 major histocompatibility complex

mtDNA mitochondrial DNA

NAD nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

QTL quantitative trait locus

ROS reactive oxygen species

SNP single nucleotide polymorphism

UPR unfolded protein response

UPRER unfolded protein response of endoplasmic reticulum

UPRmt unfolded protein response of mitochondria

Figure 1 Illustration of the effect of sample size (x-axis) on the yield of genome-wide association study (GWAS) findings (y-axis). Variation in human height (red dots) is a highly complex trait with moderate heritability that was refractory to GWAS at sample sizes below ~10,000 subjects. Longevity studies (stars) were refractory until sample sizes reached ~20,000. Longevity points: Deelen et al. (D1) [263], Deelen et al. (D2) [264], Tanaka et al. (T) [265], Flachsbart et al. (Fl) [164], Joshi et al. (J) [266], and McDaid et al. (Mc) [31]. Redrawn with additions from Visscher et al. [267].

Figure 2 QTLs for mouse longevity adapted from Yuan and colleagues [81] with added peaks from Houtkooper et al. [122], Yuan et al. [133], and Newell et al. [152]. We have also added a locus on Chr 1 at about 80 Mb detected by remapping data from Rikke et al. [96] via GeneNetwork LXS phenotype 10156 (asterisk to right of Chr 1). Length of colored bars represents the 95% confidence interval or a 40 Mb interval centered on the peak.

Table 1 Selected Genome-Wide Significant Results of Human Longevity GWAS/Linkage Studies

Study	Discovery Cohort	Cohort Size	Chromosome (Linked Loci)	RS or Nearest Marker	LOD	p-value	Linked Longevity Genes	NS	
Puca et al., 2001 [268]	SR	308 (137 Sib)	Chr 4 (4q25)	D4S1564	3.26	–	–	–	
Reed et al., 2004 [269]	NAS-NRC VTR	190 (95 Sib)	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	7	
Beekman et al., 2006 [63]	LLS	379 (164 Sib)	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	–	
Lunetta et al., 2007 [230]	FHS	1,345	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	1	
Boyden &amp; Kunkel, 2010 [270]	NECS	632 (279 Sib)	Chr 3 (3p24.2-22.3)	rs28150	4.02	–	TOP2B	–	
			Chr 9 (9q31.3–34.2)	rs536861	3.89	–	TLR4; DBC1		
			Chr 12 (12q24.31–24.33)	rs1732462	4.05	–	–		
Newmann et al., 2010 [80]	CHARGE	3,791 (2 Rep)	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	136	
Deelen et al., 2011 [263]	LLS	2,073 (3 Rep)	Chr 19 (19q13.32)	rs2075650	–	3.39E-17	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1	0	
Edwards et al., 2011 [64]	CAMP	263	Chr 6	rs1409014	4.49	–	BMP5	–	
			Chr 7	rs517258	3.11	–	–		
			Chr 14	rs764602	4.17	–	BMP4		
Malovini et al., 2011 [271]	SR	963	NGWSF	–	–		–	67	
Nebel et al., 2011 [272]	SR	1,848 (2 Rep)	Chr 19	rs4420638	–	1.80E-10	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1	15	
Walter et al., 2011 [49]	CHARGE	16,995 (4 Rep)	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	101	
Kerber et al., 2012 [273]	UPDB	325	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	1	
Sebastiani et al., 2012 [274]	NECS	5,114 (2 Rep)	Chr 19 (19q13.32)	rs2075650	–	1.03E-08	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1	27	
Beekman et al., 2013 [275]	GEHA	4,445 (2118 Sib)	Chr 14 (14q11.2)	rs10484218 - rs977870	3.47	–	–	–	
			Chr 17 (17q12-q22)	rs2429990 - rs12947910	3.71	–	–		
			Chr 19 (19p13.3 - 13.11)	rs432001 - rs919333	3.76	–	–		
			Chr 19 (19q13.11-q13.32)	rs7250748 - rs10403760	3.57	9.60E-08	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
			Chr 8 (8p11.21-q13.1) M	rs801100 - rs4368961	3.61	–	–		
			Chr 15 (15q12-q14) F	rs1871009 - rs580839	3.16	–	–		
			Chr 19 (19q13.33-q13.41) M	rs1236093 - rs1661965	4.97	–	–		
Edwards et al., 2013 [65]	CAMP	263	Chr 6 (6q25-27)	rs1247322 - rs1247363	3.2	–	PLG/MAP3K4	–	
			Chr 6 (6q25-27)	rs16892673 - rs16892700	3.2	–	PARK2		
Deelen et al., 2014 [264]	MCCa	23,850 (6 Rep)	Chr 5 (5q33.3)	rs2149954	–	1.74E-08	EBF1	6	
			Chr 19 (19q13.32)	rs4420638	–	3.40E-36	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
Broer et al., 2015 [153]	CHARGE	9,793	Chr 6	rs2802292	–	1.85E-10	FOXO3	20	
			Chr 19	rs2075650	–	2.40E-10	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
Minster et al., 2015 [276]	LLFS	3,140 (2 Rep)	Chr 9 (9p24.2–p23) F	–	3.36	–	–	–	
Flachsbart et al., 2016 [164]	1kGP	7,826 (3 Rep)	NGWSF	–	–	–	–	1	
Fortney et al., 2016 [277]	MCCb	25,166 (4 Rep)	Chr 19	rs2075650	–	2.40E-13	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1	10	
Joshi et al., 2016 [266]	UKB	116,425 (3 Rep)	Chr 19 (19q13) F	rs429358	–	4.20E-15	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1	33	
			Chr 15 (15q24) M	rs10519203	–	4.80E-11	CHRNA3/5		
Pilling et al., 2016 [278]	UKB	75,224	Chr 7	rs528161076	–	3.40E-08	AP5Z1	2,913	
			Chr 9	rs75824829	–	4.00E-08	C9orf62		
			Chr 15d	rs1051730	–	3.00E-08	CHRNA3		
			Chr 22	rs62227724	–	3.00E-08	–		
Tanaka et al., 2016 [265]	HRS	5,716 (2 Rep)	Chr 18	rs35715456	–	2.89E-08	SMAD7	–	
Zeng et al., 2016 [279]	CLHLS	4,965 (4 Rep)	Chr 7	rs2069837	–	4.05E-08	IL6	9	
			Chr 13	rs2440012	–	4.89E-08	ANKRD20A9P		
McDaid et al., 2017 [31]	UKB	116,279 (5 Rep)	Chr 6	rs10455872	–	1.60E-08	LPA	12	
			Chr 9	rs1333045	–	1.77E-08	CDKN2BAS		
			Chr 15	rs951266	–	4.33E-10	CHRNA5		
			Chr 19	rs4420638	–	4.33E-08	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
Sebastiani et al., 2017 [24]	MCCc	8,329 (2 Rep)	Chr 7	rs3764814	–	5.00E-15	USP42	44	
			Chr 12	rs7976168	–	4.00E-09	TMTC2		
			Chr 19	rs6857	–	2.00E-27	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
			Chr 19	rs769449	–	1.00E-23	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
			Chr 19	rs59007384	–	5.00E-15	TOMM40/APOE/APOC1		
Singh et al., 2017 [280]	LLFS	3,876 (1 Rep)	Chr 1 (1p13.3)	rs201856309	–	1.67E-09	NBPF6; NBPF5	68	
			Chr 2 (2p22.1)	rs116083259	–	1.17E-08	CAPN9; C1orf198		
			Chr 10 (10p15)	rs61019025	–	4.65E-08	KLF6		
Chr, chromosome; QTL, quantitative trait locus; RS, representative single-nucleotide polymorphism; LOD, logarithm of odds score; NS, number of suggestive findings per study (p &lt; 5E-5) or indiacted by authors; Sib, number of siblings present in study; Rep, number of replication samples in study; NGFSW, no genome-wide significant findings; –, data was not reported or not available; SR, self-recruited cohort; M, found only in male subjects; F, found only in female subjects; LLS, Leiden Longevity Study; NAS-NRC VTR, National Academy of Sciences–National Research Council Veteran Twin Registry; FHS, Framingham Heart Study; NECS, New England Centenarian Study; CHARGE, CHARGE Consortium; CAMP, Collaborative Aging and Memory Project; UPDB, Utah Population Database; GEHA, Genetics of Healthy Aging Study; MCC, Multiple Combined Cohorts; LLFS, Long Life Family Study; 1kGP, 1,000 Genome Project; UKB, UK Biobank; HRS Health and Retirement Study; CLHLS, Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Surveys

a Belfast Elderly Longitudinal Free-living Ageing Study, Calabria cohort, CEPH centenarian cohort, Danish longevity study I &amp; II, deCODE, Estonian Biobank, Genetics of Healthy Aging Study, German longevity study, Leiden 85-plus study, Leiden Longevity Study, Newcastle 85+ Study, PROspective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk, Rotterdam Study, TwinGene

b New England Centenarian Study, 90PLUS Cohort

c Southern Italian Centenarian Study, Long Life Family Study, Longevity Gene Project, New England Centenarian Study

d 35 other variants were of genome-wide significance; rs1051730 deemed most significant due to its previous link smoking fewer cigarettes and lower risk of lung cancer

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Oeppen J Vaupel JW 2002 Broken limits to life expectancy Science 296 1029 1031 12004104
2 Word Health Organization 2016 World health statistics 2016: monitoring health for the sustainable development goals http://www.who.int/gho/publications/worldhealthstatistics/2016/en/ [Online resource]
3 Murray CJ Lopez AD 2017 Measuring global health: motivation and evolution of the Global Burden of Disease Study Lancet 390 1460 1464 28919120
4 Arias E Heron M Xu J 2017 United States Life Tables, 2014 National vital statistics reports: from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System 66 1 64
5 Roser M 2017 Life expectancy OurWorldInData.org https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy [Online resource]
6 GBD 2016 Causes of Death Collaborators 2017 Global, regional, and national age-sex specific mortality for 264 causes of death, 1980–2016: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016 Lancet 390 1151 1210 28919116
7 Rödström K Bengtsson C Milsom I Lissner L Sundh V Bjoürkelund C 2003 Evidence for a secular trend in menopausal age: a population study of women in Gothenburg Menopause 10 538 543 14627863
8 Gold EB 2011 The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 38 425 440 21961711
9 Gavrilov LA Gavrilova NS Nosov VN 1983 Human life span stopped increasing: why? Gerontology 29 176 180 6852544
10 Vijg J Le Bourg E 2017 Aging and the inevitable limit to human lifespan Gerontol 63 432 434
11 Roderick TH Storer JB 1961 Correlation between mean litter size and mean lifespan among 12 inbred strains of mice Science 134 48 49 13742527
12 Yuan R Tsaih SW Petkova SB de Evsikova CM Xing S Marion MA Bogue MA Mills KD Peters LL Bult CJ Rosen CJ Sundberg JP Harrison DE Churchill GA Paigen B 2009 Aging in inbred strains of mice: study design and interim report on median lifespans and circulating IGF1 levels Aging Cell 8 277 287 19627267
13 Ramirez JA Wiemken TL Peyrani P Arnold FW Kelley R Mattingly WA Nakamatsu R Pena S Guinn BE Furmanek SP Persaud AK Raghuram A Fernandez F Beavin L Bosson R Fernandez-Botran R Cavallazzi R Bordon J Valdivieso C Schulte J Carrico RM University of Louisville Pneumonia Study Group 2017 Adults hospitalized with pneumonia in the United States: incidence, epidemiology, and mortality Clin Infect Dis 65 1806 1812 29020164
14 Weismann A 1881 The duration of life Essays upon Heredity and Kindred Problems 1 Chpt 1 2 Poulton EB Schönland S Shipley AE translated and reprinted by Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1891
15 Williams GC 1957 Pleiotropy, natural selection and the evolution of senescence Evolution 11 398 411
16 Croft DP Brent LJ Franks DW Cant MA 2015 The evolution of prolonged life after reproduction Trends Ecol Evol 30 407 416 25982154
17 Johnson TE 1987 Aging can be genetically dissected into components processes using long-lived lines of Caenorhabditis elegans Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84 3777 3781 3473482
18 Lahdenperä M Lummaa V Helle S Tremblay M Russell AF 2004 Fitness benefits of prolonged post-reproductive lifespan in women Nature 428 178 181 15014499
19 Fox M Sear R Beise J Ragsdale G Voland E Knapp LA 2010 Grandma plays favourites: X-chromosome relatedness and sex-specific childhood mortality Proc Biol Sci 277 567 573 19864288
20 Hill K Kaplan H 1999 Life history traits in humans: theory and empirical studies Annu Rev Anthropol 28 397 430 12295622
21 Aimé C André JB Raymond M 2017 Grandmothering and cognitive resources are required for the emergence of menopause and extensive post-reproductive lifespan PLoS Comp Biol 13 e1005631
22 Finch CE 1991 Longevity, senescence, and the genome University of Chicago Press
23 Nelson P Masel J 2017 Intercellular competition and the inevitability of multicellular aging Proc Natl Acad Sci 114 12982 12987 29087299
24 Sebastiani P Gurinovich A Bae H Andersen S Malovini A Atzmon G Villa F Kraja AT Ben-Avraham D Barzilai N Puca A Perls TT 2017 Four genome-wide association studies identify new extreme longevity variants J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 72 1453 1464 28329165
25 Rose M 1991 The evolutionary biology of aging Oxford UP
26 Flatt T Heyland A 2011 Mechanisms of Life History Evolution: The Genetics and Physiology of Life History Traits and Trade-Offs Oxford University Press Oxford
27 Govindaraju DR 2015 Evolutionary genetic bases of longevity and senescence. Longevity Genes - A Blueprint for Aging Atzmon G Adv Exp Med Biol 847 1 44
28 Finch CE Tanzi RE 1997 Genetics of aging Science 278 407 411 9334291
29 Perls TT Wilmoth J Levenson R Drinkwater M Cohen M Bogan H Joyce E Brewster S Kunkel L Puca A 2002 Life-long sustained mortality advantage of siblings of centenarians Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 8442 8447 12060785
30 Glatt SJ Chayavichitsilp P Depp C Schork NJ Jeste DV 2007 Successful aging: from phenotype to genotype Biological Psychiatry 62 282 293 17210144
31 McDaid AF Joshi PK Porcu E Komljenovic A Li H Sorrentino V Litovchenko M Bevers RPJ Rüeger S Reymond A Bochud M Deplancke B Williams RW Robinson-Rechavi M Paccaud F Rousson V Auwerx J Wilson JF Kutalik Z 2017 Bayesian association scan reveals loci associated with human lifespan and linked biomarkers Nat Commun 8 15842 28748955
32 Pearl R Parker SL 1921 Experimental studies on the duration of life: Introductory discussion of the duration of life in Drosophila Am Naturalist 55 481 509
33 Atzmon G 2015 Longevity genes: a blueprint for aging Adv Exp Med Biol 15 Springer New York
34 van den Berg N Beekman M Smith KR Janssens A Slagboom PE 2017 Historical demography and longevity genetics: Back to the future Ageing Res Rev 38 28 39 28689042
35 Khrapko K Turnbull D 2014 Mitochondrial DNA mutations and aging Prog Mol Biol Trans Sci 127 29 62
36 Sebastiani P Perls TT 2012 The genetics of extreme longevity: lessons from the New England Centenarian study Front Genet 3 277 23226160
37 Garoyan G 1990 Cent-quatorze ans de vie ou la longue histoire de Jeanne Calment, doyenné d’âge de France [One Hundred and Fourteen Years of Life or the Long History of Jeanne Calment, the Eldest of France] Marseille Université d’Aix-Marseille II 4 21
38 Yu CE Oshima J Fu YH Wijsman EM Hisama F Alisch R Matthews S Nakura J Miki T Ouais S Martin GM Mulligan J Schellenberg GD 1996 Positional cloning of the Werner’s syndrome gene Science 272 258 262 8602509
39 Cao H Hegele RA 2003 LMNA is mutated in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria (MIM 176670) but not in Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch progeroid syndrome (MIM 264090) J Hum Genet 48 271 274 12768443
40 Scaffidi P Misteli T 2006 Lamin A-dependent nuclear defects in human aging Science 312 1059 1063 16645051
41 Conneely KN Capell BC Erdos MR Sebastiani P Solovieff N Swift AJ Baldwin CT Budagov T Barzilai N Atzmon G Puca AA Perls TT Geesaman BJ Boehnke M Collins FS 2012 Human longevity and common variations in the LMNA gene: a meta-analysis Aging Cell 11 475 481 22340368
42 Khan SS Shah SJ Klyachko E Baldridge AS Eren M Place AT Aviv A Puterman E Lloyd-Jones DM Heiman M Miyata T Gupta S Shapiro AD Vaughan DE 2017 A null mutation in SERPINE1 protects against biological aging in humans Sci Adv 3 eaao1617 29152572
43 Barzilai N Huffman DM Muzumdar RH Bartke A 2012 The critical role of metabolic pathways in aging Diabetes 61 1315 1322 22618766
44 Argon Y Gidalevitz T 2015 Candidate genes that affect aging through protein homeostasis Adv Exp Med Biol 15 45 72
45 Novelli V Viviani Anselmi C Roncarati R Guffanti G Malovini A Piluso G Puca AA 2008 Lack of replication of genetic associations with human longevity Biogerontology 9 85 92 18034366
46 Shadyab AH LaCroix AZ 2015 Genetic factors associated with longevity: a review of recent findings Ageing Res Rev 19 1 7 25446805
47 Soerensen M Nygaard M Debrabant B Mengel-From J Dato S Thinggaard M Christensen K Christiansen L 2016 No association between variation in longevity candidate genes and aging-related phenotypes in oldest-old Danes Exp Gerontol 78 57 61 26946122
48 Christensen K Johnson TE Vaupel JW 2006 The quest for genetic determinants of human longevity: Challenges and insights Nat Rev Genet 7 436 448 16708071
49 Walter S Atzmon G Demerath EW Garcia ME Kaplan RC Kumari M Lunetta KL Milaneschi Y Tanaka T Tranah GJ Völker U Yu L Arnold A Benjamin EJ Biffar R Buchman AS Boerwinkle E Couper D De Jager PL Evans DA Harris TB Hoffmann W Hofman A Karasik D Kiel DP Kocher T Kuningas M Launer LJ Lohman KK Lutsey PL Mackenbach J Marciante K Psaty BM Reiman EM Rotter JI Seshadri S Shardell MD Smith AV van Duijn C Walston J Zillikens MC Bandinelli S Baumeister SE Bennett DA Ferrucci L Gudnason V Kivimaki M Liu Y Murabito JM Newman AB Tiemeier H Franceschini N 2011 A genome-wide association study of aging Neurobiol Aging 32 2109e15 28
50 Partridge L Gems D 2002 Mechanisms of ageing: public or private? Nat Rev Genet 3 165 175 11972154
51 Tan Q Zhao J Iachine I Hjelmborg J Vach W Vaupel J Christensen K Kruse T 2004 Power of non-parametric linkage analysis in mapping genes contributing to human longevity in long-lived sib-pairs Genet Epidemiol 26 245 253 15022210
52 Ferrario A Villa F Malovini A Araniti F Puca AA 2012 The application of genetics approaches to the study of exceptional longevity in humans: potential and limitations Immun Ageing 9 7 22524405
53 Stepler R 2016 World’s centenarian population projected to grow eightfold by 2050 Pew Research Center www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/04/21/worlds-centenarian-population-projected-to-grow-eightfold-by-2050/ [Online resource]
54 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division 2017 World Population Prospects: The 2017 revision, key findings and advance tables Working paper No. ESA/P/WP/248
55 United Nations Population Fund 2012 Ageing in the twenty-first century: a celebration and a challenge Chapter 1, Setting the stage pp. http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Ageing%20report.pdf [Online resource]
56 Franceschi C Bonafè M 2003 Centenarians as a model for healthy aging Biochem Soc Trans 31 457 61 12653662
57 Maier H Gampe J Jeune B Robine JM Vaupel JW 2010 Supercentenarians Berlin Springer, Heidelberg
58 Vaupel JW 2010 Biodemography of human ageing Nature 464 536 542 20336136
59 Hilker R Helenius D Fagerlund B Skytthe A Christensen K Werge TM Nordentoft M Glenthøj B 2018 Heritability of schizophrenia and schizophrenia spectrum based on the nationwide Danish Twin Register Biol Psychiatry pii: S0006-3223(17)31905-4
60 Walsh T McClellan JM McCarthy SE Addington AM Pierce SB Cooper GM Nord AS Kusenda M Malhotra D Bhandari A Stray SM Rippey CF Roccanova P Makarov V Lakshmi B Findling RL Sikich L Stromberg T Merriman B Gogtay N Butler P Eckstrand K Noory L Gochman P Long R Chen Z Davis S Baker C Eichler EE Meltzer PS Nelson SF Singleton AB Lee MK Rapoport JL King MC Sebat J 2008 Rare structural variants disrupt multiple genes in neurodevelopmental pathways in schizophrenia Science 320 539 543 18369103
61 Schizophrena Working Group of the Psychiatric Genetics Consortium 2014 Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci Nature 511 421 427 25056061
62 Sekar A Bialas AR de Rivera H Davis A Hammond TR Kamitaki N Tooley K Presumey J Baum M Van Doren V Genovese G Rose SA Handsaker RE Daly MJ Carroll MC Stevens B McCarroll SA Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium 2016 Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4 Nature 530 177 183 26814963
63 Beekman M Blauw GJ Houwing-Duistermaat JJ Brandt BW Westendorp RG Slagboom PE 2006 Chromosome 4q25, microsomal transfer protein gene, and human longevity: Novel data and a meta-analysis of association studies J Geront A Biol Sci Med Sci 61 355 362
64 Edwards DR Gilbert JR Jiang L Gallins PJ Caywood L Creason M Fuzzell D Knebusch C Jackson CE Pericak-Vance MA 2011 Successful aging shows linkage to chromosomes 6, 7, and 14 in the Amish Ann Hum Genet 75 516 528 21668908
65 Edwards DR Gilbert JR Hicks JE Myers JL Jiang L Cummings AC Guo S Gallins PJ Konidari I Caywood L 2013 Linkage and association of successful aging to the 6q25 region in large Amish kindreds Age 35 1467 1477 22773346
66 Deelen J Beekman M Capri M Franceschi C Slagboom PE 2013 Identifying the genomic determinants of aging and longevity in human population studies: progress and challenges Bioessays 35 386 396 23423909
67 Woods NF Cochrane BB LaCroix AZ Seguin RA Zaslavsky O Liu J Beasley JM Brunner RL Espeland MA Goveas JS Lane DS Manson JE Mouton CP Robinson JG Tinker LF 2012 Toward a positive aging phenotype for older women: observations from the women’s health initiative J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 67 1191 1196 22518819
68 Kim S Myers L Wyckoff J Cherry KE Jazwinski SM 2017 The frailty index outperforms DNA merthylation age and its derivates as an indicator of biological age GeroScience 39 83 92 28299637
69 Horvath S Pirazzini C Bacalini MG Gentilini D Di Blasio AM Delledonne M Mari D Arosio B Monti D Passarino G De Rango F D’Aquila P Giuliani C Marasco E Collino S Descombes P Garagnani P Franceschi C 2015 Aging (Albany NY) 7 1159 1170 26678252
70 Harley CB Futcher AB Greider CW 1990 Telomeres shorten during ageing of human fibroblasts Nature 345 458 460 2342578
71 Codd V Nelson CP Albrecht E Mangino M Deelen J Buxton JL Hottenga JJ Fischer K Esko T Surakka I 2013 Identification of seven loci affecting mean telomere length and their association with disease Nat Genet 45 422 427 23535734
72 Cook DE Zdraljevic S Tanny RE Seo B Riccardi DD Noble LM Rockman MV Alkema MJ Braendle C Kammenga JE 2016 The genetic basis of natural variation in Caenorhabditis elegans telomere length Genetics 204 371 383 27449056
73 Lee JH Cheng R Honig LS Feitosa M Kammerer C Kang MS Schupf N Lin J Sanders JL Bae HT 2014 Genome wide association and linkage analyses identified three loci—4q25, 17q23.2, and 10q11.21—associated with variation in leukocyte telomere length: the Long Life Family Study Front Genet 4 310 24478790
74 Li X Snyder MP 2016 Yeast longevity promoted by reversing aging-associated decline in heavy isotope content NPJ Aging Mech Dis 2 16004 28721263
75 Mouchiroud L Houtkooper RH Moullan N Katsyuba E Ryu D Cantó C Mottis A Jo YS Viswanathan M Schoonjans K Guarente L Auwerx J 2013 The NAD(+)/sirtuin pathway modulates longevity through activation of mitochondrial UPR and FOXO signaling Cell 154 430 44 23870130
76 Zhang H Ryu D Wu Y Gariani K Wang X Luan P D’Amico D Ropelle ER Lutolf MP Aebersold R Schoonjans K Menzies KJ Auwerx J 2016 NAD+ repletion improves mitochondrial and stem cell function and enhances life span in mice Science 352 1436 1443 27127236
77 Lu AT Hannon E Levine ME Hao K Crimmins EM Lunnon K Kozlenkov A Mill J Dracheva S Horvath S 2016 Genetic variants near MLST8 and DHX57 affect the epigenetic age of the cerebellum Nat Commun 7 10561 26830004
78 Birney E Smith GD Greally JM 2016 Epigenome-wide association studies and the interpretation of disease -omics PLoS Genet 12 e1006105 27336614
79 Yunis EJ Watson AL Gelman RS Sylvia SJ Bronson R Dore ME 1984 Traits that influence longevity in mice Genetics 108 999 1011 6510709
80 Newman AB Walter S Lunetta KL Garcia ME Slagboom PE Christensen K Arnold AM Aspelund T Aulchenko YS Benjamin EJ 2010 A meta-analysis of four genome-wide association studies of survival to age 90 years or older: the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Consortium J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 65 478 487 20304771
81 Yuan R Peters LL Paigen B 2011 Mice as a mammalian model for research on the genetics of aging ILAR J 52 4 15 21411853
82 Koutnikova H Markku L Lu L Combe R Paananen J Kuulasmaa T Kuusisto J Häring H Hansen T Pedersen O Smith U Hanefel M Williams RW Auwerx J 2009 Identification of UBP1 as a critical blood pressure determinant PLoS Genet 5 e1000591 19662162
83 Mozhui K Wang X Chen J Mulligan MK Li Z Ingles J Chen X Lu L Williams RW 2011 Genetic regulation of Nrxn1 expression: an integrative cross-species analysis of schizophrenia candidate genes Transl Psychiatry 1 e25 22832527
84 Wang X Pandey AK Mulligan MK Williams EG Mozhui K Li Z Jovaisaite V Quarles LD Xiao Z Huang J Capra JA Chen Z Taylor WL Bastarache L Niu X Pollard KS Ciobanu DC Reznik AO Tishkov AV Zhulin IB Peng J Nelson SF Denny JC Auwerx J Lu L Williams RW 2016 Joint mouse-human phenome-wide association to test gene function and disease risk Nat Commun 7 10464 26833085
85 Brooks A Lithgow GJ Johnson TE 1994 Mortality rates in a genetically heterogeneous population of Caenorhabditis elegans Age 2 789
86 Fukui HH Xiu L Curtsinger JW 1993 Slowing of age-specific mortality rates in Drosophila melanogaster Exp Gerontol 28 585 99 8137895
87 Kruuk LE Clutton-Brock TH Slate J Pemberton JM Brotherstone S Guinness FE 2000 Heritability of fitness in a wild mammalian population Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 698 703 10639142
88 Qin H Lu M 2006 Natural variation in replicative and chronological life spans of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Exp Gerontol 41 448 456 16516427
89 Klemme I Hanski I 2009 Heritability of and strong single gene (Pgi) effect on life-history traits in the Glanville fritillary butterfly J Evol Biol 22 1944 1953 19702890
90 McGue M Vaupel JW Holm N Harvald B 1993 Longevity is moderately heritable in a sample of Danish twins born 1870–1880 J Gerontol 48 B237 244 8227991
91 Murabito JM Yuan R Lunetta KL 2012 The search for longevity and healthy aging genes: insights from epidemiological studies and samples of long-lived individuals J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 67 470 479 22499766
92 Snieder H MacGregor AJ Spector ID 1998 Genes control cessation of a woman’s reproductive life: a twin study of hysterectomy and age at menopause J Clin Endocrinol Met 83 1875 1880
93 Gorbunova V Seluanov A Zhang Z Gladyshev VN Vijg J 2014 Comparative genetics of longevity and cancer: insights from long-lived rodents Nat Rev Genet 15 531 540 24981598
94 Hjelmborg JV Iachine I Skytthe A Vaupel JW McGue M Koskenvuo M Kaprio J Pedersen NL Christensen K 2006 Genetic influence on human lifespan and longevity Hum Genet 119 312 321 16463022
95 Johnson TE Wood WB 1982 Genetic Analysis of Lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans Proc Natl Acad Sci 79 6603 6607 6959141
96 Rikke BA Liao CY McQueen MB Nelson JF Johnson TE 2010 Genetic dissection of dietary restriction in mice supports the metabolic efficiency model of life extension Exp Gerontol 45 691 701 20452416
97 Bogue MA Peters LL Paigen B Korstanje R Yuan R Ackert-Bicknell C Grubb SC Churchill GA Chesler EJ 2016 Accessing data resources in the Mouse Phenome Database for genetic analysis of murine life span and health span J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 71 170 177 25533306
98 Roy S Jha P Williams EG Sleiman Bou Kim H Mulligan MK Mozhui K Ingels J Bohl C McCarty M Huang J Li H Miller RA Nelson JF Strong JR Harrison DE Sen S Lu L Auwerx J Williams RW 2017 Genetic analysis of longevity in diverse cohorts of mice: influence of diet and drugs Complex Trait Community-Rat Genome 2017 abstract 32, http://www.complextrait.org/ctc2017/abstracts.html [Online resource]
99 Goodrick CL 1975 Life-span and the inheritance of longevity of inbred mice Gerontol 21 184 202
100 Belknap JK 1998 Effect of within-strain sample size on QTL detection and mapping using recombinant inbred mouse strains Behav Genet 28 29 38 9573644
101 Hegmann J Possidente B 1981 Estimating genetic correlations from inbred strains Behav Genet 11 103 114 7271677
102 Liao CY Rikke BA Johnson TE Diaz V Nelson JF 2010 Genetic variation in the murine lifespan response to dietary restriction: from life extension to life shortening Aging Cell 9 92 95 19878144
103 Churchill GA Gatti DM Munger SC Svenson KL 2012 The Diversity Outbred mouse population Mamm Genome 23 713 718 22892839
104 Miller RA Harrison DE Astle CM Floyd RA Flurkey K Hensley KL Javors MA Leeuwenburgh C Nelson JF Ongini E Nadon NL Warner HR Strong R 2007 An Aging Interventions Testing Program: study design and interim report Aging Cell 6 565 575 17578509
105 Nadon NL Strong R Miller RA Nelson J Javors M Sharp ZD Peralba JM Harrison DE 2008 Design of aging intervention studies: the NIA interventions testing program Age 30 187 199 19424842
106 Harrison DE Strong R Sharp ZD Nelson JF Astle CM Flurkey K Nadon NL Wilkinson JE Frenkel K Carter CS 2009 Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice Nature 460 392 395 19587680
107 Strong R Miller RA Astle CM Baur JA de Cabo R Fernandez E Guo W Javors M Kirkland JL Nelson JF Sinclair DA Teter B Williams D Zaveri N Nadon NL Harrison DE 2013 Evaluation of resveratrol, green tea extract, curcumin, oxaloacetic acid, and medium-chain triglyceride oil on lifespan of genetically heterogeneous mice J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 68 6 16 22451473
108 Bartke A Wright JC Mattison JA Ingram DK Miller RA Roth GS 2001 Longevity: extending the lifespan of long-lived mice Nature 414 412 412 11719795
109 Fang Y McFadden S Darcy J Hill CM Huber JA Verhulst S Kopchick JJ Miller RA Sun LY Bartke A 2017 Differential effects of early-life nutrient restriction in long-lived GHR-KO and normal mice GeroScience 39 347 356 28523599
110 Gaillard JM Lemaitre JF 2017 The Williams’ legacy: a critical reappraisal of his nine predictions about the evolution of senescence Evolution 71 2768 2785 29053173
111 Magwire MM Yamamoto A Carbone MA Roshina NV Symonenko AV Pasyukova EG Morozova TV Mackay TF 2010 Quantitative and molecular genetic analyses of mutations increasing Drosophila lifespan PLoS Genet 6 e1001037 20686706
112 Partridge L Prowse N Pignatelli P 1999 Another set of responses and correlated responses to selection on age at reproduction in Drosophila melanogaster Proc Biol Sci 266 255 61 10081162
113 Buss LW 1988 The evolution of individuality Princeton University Press
114 Kenyon CJ 2005 The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived mutants Cell 120 449 460 15734678
115 Bohnert KA Kenyon C 2017 A lysosomal switch triggers proteostasis renewal in the immortal germ lineage Nature 551 629 633 29168500
116 van Exel E Koopman JJ van Bodegom D Meij JJ de Knijff P Ziem JB Finch CE Westendorp RG 2017 Effect of APOE ε4 allele on survival and fertility in an adverse environment PloS One 12 e0179497 28683096
117 Trumble BC Stieglitz J Blackwell AD Allayee H Beheim B Finch CE Gurven M Kaplan H 2017 Apolipoprotein E4 is associated with improved cognitive function in Amazonian forager-horticulturalists with a high parasite burden FASEB J 31 1508 1515 28031319
118 Garratt M Bower B Garcia GG Miller RA 2017 Sex differences in lifespan extension with acarbose and 17-α estradiol: gonadal hormones underlie male-specific improvements in glucose tolerance and mTORC2 signaling Aging Cell 16 1256 1266 28834262
119 Barson NJ Aykanat T Hindar K Baranski M Bolstad GH Fiske P Jacq C Jensen AJ Johnston SE Karlsson S Kent M Moen T Niemelä E Nome T Næsje TF Orell P Romakkaniemi A Sægrov H Urdal K Erkinaro J Lien S Primmer CR 2015 Nature 528 405 408 26536110
120 Gompertz B 1825 On the nature of the function expressive of the law of human mortality and on a new mode of determining the value of life contingencies Philos Trans R Soc Lond 115 513 585
121 Gelman R Watson A Bronson R Yunis E 1988 Murine chromosomal regions correlated with longevity Genetics 118 693 704 3163317
122 Houtkooper RH Mouchiroud L Ryu D Moullan N Katsyuba E Knott G Williams RW Auwerx J 2013 Mitonuclear protein imbalance as a conserved longevity mechanism Nature 497 451 457 23698443
123 Eppig JT Richardson JE Kadin JA Ringwald M Blake JA Bult CJ 2015 Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI): Reflecting on 25 years Mamm Genome 26 272 284 26238262
124 Mulligan MK Mozhui K Prins P Williams RW 2017 GeneNetwork: a toolbox for systems genetics Methods Mol Biol 1488 75 120 27933521
125 Auwerx J Avner P Baldock R Ballabio A Balling R Barbacid M Berns A Bradley A Brown S Carmeliet P Chambon P Cox R Davidson D Davies K Duboule D Forejt J Granucci F Hastie N de Angelis MH Jackson I Kioussis D Kollias G Lathrop M Lendahl U Malumbres M von Melchner H Müller W Partanen J Ricciardi-Castagnoli P Rigby P Rosen B Rosenthal N Skarnes B Stewart AF Thornton J Tocchini-Valentini G Wagner E Wahli W Wurst W 2004 The European dimension for the mouse genome mutagenesis program Nat Genet 36 925 927 15340424
126 Jung CJ Zhang J Trenchard E Lloyd KC West DB Rosen B de Jong PJ 2017 Efficient gene targeting in mouse zygotes mediated by CRISPR/Cas9-protein Transgenic Res 26 263 277 27905063
127 Skarnes WC Rosen B West AP Koutsourakis M Bushell W Iyer V Mujica AO Thomas M Harrow J Cox T Jackson D Severin J Biggs P Fu J Nefedov M de Jong PJ Stewart AF Bradley A 2011 A conditional knockout resource for the genome-wide study of mouse gene function Nature 474 337 342 21677750
128 Nadon NL 2017 NIA Interventions Testing Program: investigating putative aging intervention agents in a genetically heterogeneous mouse model (2017) EBioMedicine 21 3 4 27923560
129 Pennacchio LA Rubin EM 2003 Comparative genomic tools and databases: providing insights into the human genome J Clin Invest 111 1099 1106 12697725
130 Smith GW Walford RL 1977 Influence of the major histocompatibility complex on aging in mice Nature 270 727 729 593394
131 Peirce JL Lu L Gu J Silver LM Williams RW 2004 A new set of BXD recombinant inbred lines from advanced intercross populations in mice BMC Genet 5 7 15117419
132 Miller RA Chrisp C Jackson AU Burke D 1998 Marker loci associated with lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 53 M257 M263 18314564
133 Yuan R Flurkey K Meng Q Astle MC Harrison DE 2013 Genetic regulation of lifespan, metabolism, and body weight in Pohn, a new wild-derived mouse strain J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 68 27 35 22570136
134 Warner HR Ingram D Miller RA Nadon NL Richardson AG 2000 Program for testing biological interventions to promote healthy aging Mech Ageing Dev 115 199 207 10906513
135 Warner HR 2015 NIA’s intervention testing program at 10 years of age Age 37 22 25726185
136 Burke DT Kozloff KM Chen S West JL Wilkowski JM Goldstein SA Miller RA Galecki AT 2012 Dissection of complex adult traits in a mouse synthetic population Genome Res 22 1549 1557 22588897
137 Miller RA Harrison DE Astle C Baur JA Boyd AR De Cabo R Fernandez E Flurkey K Javors MA Nelson JF 2011 Rapamycin, but not resveratrol or simvastatin, extends lifespan of genetically heterogeneous mice J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 66 191 201 20974732
138 Miller RA Harrison DE Astle CM Fernandez E Flurkey K Han M Javors MA Li X Nadon NL Nelson JF 2014 Rapamycin-mediated lifespan increase in mice is dose and sex dependent and metabolically distinct from dietary restriction Aging Cell 13 468 477 24341993
139 Miller RA Harper JM Galecki A Burke DT 2002b Big mice die young: early life body weight predicts longevity in genetically heterogeneous mice Aging Cell 1 22 29 12882350
140 Lang DH Gerhard GS Griffith JW Vogler GP Vandenbergh DJ Blizard DA Stout JT Lakoski JM McClearn GE (200810) Quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis of longevity in C57BL/6J by DBA/2J (BXD) recombinant inbred mice Aging Clin Exp Res 22 8 19
141 Jackson AU Galecki AT Burke DT Miller RA 2002 Mouse loci associated with lifespan exhibit sex-specific and epistatic effects J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 57 B9 B15 11773201
142 Williams RM Kraus LJ Lavin PT Steele PT Yunis EJ 1981 Genetics of survival in mice: localization of dominant effects to subregions of the major histocompatibility complex Immunological Aspects of Aging Segre D Smith L Marcel Dekker Inc New York 247 253
143 de Haan G Gelman R Watson A Yunis E Van Zant G 1998 A putative gene causes variability in lifespan among genotypically identical mice Nat Genet 19 114 116 9620762
144 Klebanov S Astle CM Roderick TH Flurkey K Archer JR Chen J 2001 Maximum lifespans in mice are extended by wild strain alleles Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 226 854 859 11568309
145 Miller RA Chrisp C Jackson AU Galecki AT Burke DT 2002a Coordinated genetic control of neoplastic and nonneoplastic diseases in mice J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 57 B3 B8 11773200
146 Leduc MS Hageman RS Meng Q Verdugo RA Tsaih SW Churchill GA Paigen B Yuan R 2010 Identification of genetic determinants of IGF-1 levels and longevity among mouse inbred strains Aging Cell 9 823 836 20735370
147 Sloane LB Stout JT Vandenbergh DJ Vogler GP Gerhard GS McClearn GE 2010 Quantitative trait loci analysis of tail tendon break time in mice of C57BL/6J and DBA/2J lineage J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 66 170 178 21047976
148 Gyekis JP Lang DH Vandenbergh DJ Gerhard GS Griffith JW Dodds JW Shihabi ZK Tilley MK Blizard DA 2016 A chromosome 13 locus is associated with male-specific mortality in mice Aging Clin Exp Res 28 59 67 25995165
149 Van Nostrand EL Sánchez-Blanco A Wu B Nguyen A Kim SK 2013 Roles of the developmental regulator unc-62/Homothorax in limiting longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans PLoS Genet 9 e1003325 23468654
150 Greer EL Brunet A 2005 FOXO transcription factor at the interface between longevity and tumor suppression Oncogene 24 7410 7425 16288288
151 Mozhui K Snively BM Rapp SR Wallace RB Williams RW Johnson KC 2017 Genetic analysis of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and cognitive aging in postmenopausal women Front Genet 8 127 28983317
152 Newell BL Kechris K McQueen MB Johnson TE 2015 Genetic analysis of a murine QTL for diet restriction on chromosome 15 Age 37 9740 25651884
153 Broer L Buchman AS Deelen J Evans DS Faul JD Lunetta KL Sebastiani P Smith JA Smith AV Tanaka T 2015 GWAS of longevity in CHARGE consortium confirms APOE and FOXO3 candidacy J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 70 110 118 25199915
154 Santos-Lozano A Santamarina A Pareja-Galeano H Sanchis-Gomar F Fiuza-Luces C Cristi-Montero C Bernal-Pino A Lucia A Garatachea N 2016 The genetics of exceptional longevity: Insights from centenarians Maturitas 90 49 57 27282794
155 Bennet AM Di Angelantonio E Ye Z Wensley F Dahlin A Ahlbom A Keavney B Collins R Wiman B de Faire U 2007 Association of apolipoprotein E genotypes with lipid levels and coronary risk JAMA 298 1300 1311 17878422
156 Liu CC Kanekiyo T Xu H Bu G 2013 Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy Nat Rev Neurol 9 106 118 23296339
157 Conejero-Goldberg C Gomar J Bobes-Bascaran T Hyde T Kleinman J Herman M Chen S Davies P Goldberg T 2014 APOE2 enhances neuroprotection against Alzheimer’s disease through multiple molecular mechanisms Molec Psy 19 1243 1250
158 Ryu S Atzmon G Barzilai N Raghavachari N Suh Y 2016 Genetic landscape of APOE in human longevity revealed by high-throughput sequencing Mechanisms of ageing and development 155 7 9 26930295
159 Schächter F Cohen D Kirkwood T 1993 Prospects for the genetics of human longevity Hum Genet 91 519 526 8340104
160 Gerdes LU Jeune B Ranberg KA Nybo H Vaupel JW 2000 Estimation of apolipoprotein E genotype-specific relative mortality risks from the distribution of genotypes in centenarians and middle-aged men: Apolipoprotein E gene is a “frailty gene,” not a “longevity gene” Genet Epidemiol 19 202 210 11015124
161 Garatachea N Emanuele E Calero M Fuku N Arai Y Abe Y Murakami H Miyachi M Yvert T Verde Z 2014 ApoE gene and exceptional longevity: insights from three independent cohorts Exp Gerontol 53 16 23 24534555
162 Lee S Dong HH 2017 FoxO integration of insulin signaling with glucose and lipid metabolism J Endocrinol 233 R67 R79 28213398
163 Martins R Lithgow GJ Link W 2016 Long live FOXO: unraveling the role of FOXO proteins in aging and longevity Aging Cell 15 196 207 26643314
164 Flachsbart F Ellinghaus D Gentschew L Heinsen FA Caliebe A Christiansen L Nygaard M Christensen K Blanché H Deleuze JF 2016 Immunochip analysis identifies association of the RAD50/IL13 region with human longevity Aging Cell 15 585 588 27004735
165 Bellen HJ Levis RW Liao G He Y Carlson JW Tsang G Evans-Holm M Hiesinger PR Schulze KL Rubin GM Hoskins RA Spradling AC 2004 The BDGP gene disruption project: single transposon insertions associated with 40% of Drosophila genes Genetics 167 761 781 15238527
166 Williams EG Auwerx J 2013 The convergence of systems and reductionist approaches in complex trait analysis Cell 162 23 32
167 Kaeberlein M 2010 Lessons on longevity from budding yeast Nature 464 513 519 20336133
168 Lapierre LR Hansen M 2012 Lessons from C. elegans: signaling pathways for longevity Trends Endocrinol Metab 23 637 644 22939742
169 Tissenbaum HA 2015 Using C. elegans for aging research Invertebr Reprod Dev 59 59 63 26136622
170 Partridge L Alic N Bjedov I Piper MD 2011 Ageing in Drosophila: the role of the insulin/Igf and TOR signaling network Exp Gerontol 46 376 381 20849947
171 Harel I Benayoun BA Machado B Singh PP Hu CK Pech MF Valenzano DR Zhang E Sharp SC Artandi SE Brunet A 2015 A platform for rapid exploration of aging and diseases in a naturally short-lived vertebrate Cell 160 1013 1026 25684364
172 Kenyon CJ 2010 The genetics of ageing Nature 464 504 512 20336132
173 Houtkooper RH Williams RW Auwerx J 2010 Metabolic networks of longevity Cell 142 9 14 20603007
174 López-Otín C Blasco MA Partridge L Serrano M Kroemer G 2013 The Hallmarks of Aging Cell 153 1194 1217 23746838
175 Riera CE Merkwirth C De Magalhaes Filho CD Dillin A 2016 Signaling networks determining life span Annu Rev Biochem 85 35 64 27294438
176 Parrella E Longo VD 2010 Insulin/IGF-I and related signaling pathways regulate aging in nondividing cells: from yeast to the mammalian brain Sci World J 10 161 177
177 Fontana L Partridge L Longo VD 2010 Dietary restriction, growth factors and aging: from yeast to humans Science 328 321 326 20395504
178 Willcox BJ Donlon TA He Q Chen R Grove JS Yano K Masaki KH Willcox DC Rodriguez B Curb JD 2008 FOXO3A genotype is strongly associated with human longevity Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 13987 13992 18765803
179 Johnson SC Rabinovitch PS Kaeberlein M 2013 mTOR is a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease Nature 493 338 345 23325216
180 Kennedy BK Lamming DW 2016 The mechanistic target of rapamycin: the grand conductor of metabolism and aging Cell Metab 23 990 1003 27304501
181 Sataranatarajan K Ikeno Y Bokov A Feliers D Yalamanchili H Lee HJ Mariappan MM Tabatabai-Mir H Diaz V Prasad S Javors MA Ghosh Choudhury G Hubbard GB Barnes JL Richardson A Kasinath BS 2016 Rapamycin increases mortality in db/db mice, a mouse model of type 2 diabetes J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 7 850 857
182 Selman C Tullet JM Wieser D Irvine E Lingard SJ Choudhury AI Claret M Al-Qassab H Carmignac D Ramadani F 2009 Ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 signaling regulates mammalian lifespan Science 326 140 144 19797661
183 Lamming DW Ye L Katajisto P Goncalves MD Saitoh M Stevens DM Davis JG Salmon AB Richardson A Ahima RS 2012 Rapamycin-induced insulin resistance is mediated by mTORC2 loss and uncoupled from longevity Science 335 1638 1643 22461615
184 Wu JJ Liu J Chen EB Wang JJ Cao L Narayan N Fergusson MM Rovira II Allen M Springer DA 2013 Increased mammalian lifespan and a segmental and tissue-specific slowing of aging after genetic reduction of mTOR expression Cell Rep 4 913 920 23994476
185 Morris BJ Donlon TA He Q Grove JS Masaki KH Elliott A Willcox DC Allsopp R Willcox BJ 2015 Genetic analysis of TOR complex gene variation with human longevity: a nested case–control ctudy of American men of Japanese ancestry J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 70 133 142 24589862
186 Haigis MC Sinclair DA 2010 Mammalian sirtuins: biological insights and disease relevance Annu Rev Pathol 5 253 295 20078221
187 Kaeberlein M McVey M Guarente L 1999 The SIR2/3/4 complex and SIR2 alone promote longevity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms Genes Dev 13 2570 2580 10521401
188 Tissenbaum HA Guarente L 2001 Increased dosage of a sir-2 gene extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans Nature 410 227 230 11242085
189 Whitaker R Faulkner S Miyokawa R Burhenn L Henriksen M Wood JG Helfand SL 2013 Increased expression of Drosophila Sir2 extends life span in a dose-dependent manner Aging 5 682 691 24036492
190 Haigis MC Guarente LP 2006 Mammalian sirtuins—emerging roles in physiology, aging, and calorie restriction Genes Dev 20 2913 2921 17079682
191 Houtkooper RH Pirinen E Auwerx J 2012 Sirtuins as regulators of metabolism and healthspan Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13 225 238 22395773
192 Bonkowski MS Sinclair DA 2016 Slowing ageing by design: the rise of NAD+ and sirtuin-activating compounds Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17 679 690 27552971
193 Someya S Yu W Hallows WC Xu J Vann JM Leeuwenburgh C Tanokura M Denu JM Prolla TA 2010 Sirt3 mediates reduction of oxidative damage and prevention of age-related hearing loss under caloric restriction Cell 143 802 812 21094524
194 Gertler AA Cohen HY 2013 SIRT6, a protein with many faces Biogerontology 14 629 639 24213807
195 Mostoslavsky R Chua KF Lombard DB Pang WW Fischer MR Gellon L Liu P Mostoslavsky G Franco S Murphy MM Mills KD Patel P Hsu JT Hong AL Ford E Cheng H-L Kennedy C Nunez N Bronson R Frendewey D Auerbach W Valenzuela D Karow M Hottiger MO Hursting S Barrett JC Guarente L Mulligan R Demple B Yancopoulos GD Alt FW 2006 Genomic instability and aging-like phenotype in the absence of mammalian SIRT6 Cell 124 315 329 16439206
196 Flachsbart F Croucher PJ Nikolaus S Hampe J Cordes C Schreiber S Nebel A 2006 Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) sequence variation is not associated with exceptional human longevity Exp Gerontol 41 98 102 16257164
197 Albani D Ateri E Mazzuco S Ghilardi A Rodilossi S Biella G Ongaro F Antuono P Boldrini P Di Giorgi E Frigato A Durante E Caberlotto L Zanardo A Siculi M Gallucci M Forloni G 2014 Modulation of human longevity by SIRT3 single nucleotide polymorphisms in the prospective study “Treviso Longeva (TRELONG)” Age 36 469 478 23839864
198 Rose G Dato S Altomare K Bellizzi D Garasto S Greco V Passarino G Feraco E Mari V Barbi C BonaFe M Franceschi C Tan Q Boiko S Yashin AI De Benedictis G 2003 Variability of the SIRT3 gene, human silent information regulator Sir2 homologue, and survivorship in the elderly Exp Gerontol 38 1065 1070 14580859
199 Soerensen M Dato S Tan Q Thinggaard M Kleindorp R Beekman M Suchiman HED Jacobsen R McGue M Stevnsner T Bohr VA de Craen AJM Westendorp RGJ Schreiber S Slagboom PE Nebel A Vaupel JW Christensen K Christiansen L 2013 Evidence from case–control and longitudinal studies supports associations of genetic variation in APOE, CETP, and IL6 with human longevity Age 35 487 500 22234866
200 TenNapel MJ Lynch CF Burns TL Wallace R Smith BJ Button A Domann FE 2014 SIRT6 minor allele genotype is associated with &gt;5-year decrease in lifespan in an aged cohort PLoS One 9 e115616 25541994
201 Hardie DG Ross FA Hawley SA 2012 AMPK: a nutrient and energy sensor that maintains energy homeostasis Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13 251 262 22436748
202 Burkewitz K Zhang Y Mair WB 2014 AMPK at the nexus of energetics and aging Cell Metab 20 10 25 24726383
203 Salminen A Kaarniranta K 2012 AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) controls the aging process via an integrated signaling network Ageing Res Rev 11 230 241 22186033
204 Rubinsztein DC Mariño G Kroemer G 2011 Autophagy and aging Cell 146 682 695 21884931
205 Reznick RM Zong H Li J Morino K Moore IK Yu HJ Liu Z-X Dong J Mustard KJ Hawley SA Befroy D Pypaert M Hardie DG Young LH Shulman GI 2007 Aging-associated reductions in AMP-activated protein kinase activity and mitochondrial biogenesis Cell Metab 5 151 156 17276357
206 Tullet JMA Araiz C Sanders MJ Au C Benedetto A Papatheodorou I Clark E Schmeisser K Jones D Schuster EF Thornton JM Gems D 2014 DAF-16/FoxO directly regulates an atypical AMP-activated protein kinase gamma isoform to mediate the effects of insulin/IGF-1 signaling on aging in Caenorhabditis elegans PLoS Genet 10 e1004109 24516399
207 Cantó C Gerhart-Hines Z Feige JN Lagouge M Noriega L Milne JC Elliott PJ Puigserver P Auwerx J 2009 AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating NAD+ metabolism and SIRT1 activity Nature 458 1056 1060 19262508
208 Mair W Morantte I Rodrigues APC Manning G Montminy M Shaw RJ Dillin A 2011 Lifespan extension induced by AMPK and calcineurin is mediated by CRTC-1 and CREB Nature 470 404 408 21331044
209 Lagouge M Argmann C Gerhart-Hines Z Meziane H Lerin C Daussin F Messadeq N Milne J Lambert P Elliott P Geny B Laakso M Puigserver P Auwerx J 2006 Resveratrol improves mitochondrial function and protects against metabolic disease by activating SIRT1 and PGC-1alpha Cell 127 1109 1122 17112576
210 Bratic A Larsson NG 2013 The role of mitochondria in aging J Clin Invest 123 951 957 23454757
211 Finkel T Holbrook NJ 2000 Oxidants, oxidative stress and the biology of ageing Nature 408 239 247 11089981
212 Passos JF Saretzki G Ahmed S Nelson G Richter T Peters H Wappler I Birket MJ Harold G Schaeuble K Birch-Machin MA Kirkwood TB von Zglinicki T 2007 Mitochondrial dysfunction accounts for the stochastic heterogeneity in telomere-dependent senescence PLoS Biol 5 e110 17472436
213 Doonan R McElwee JJ Matthijssens F Walker GA Houthoofd K Back P Matscheski A Vanfleteren JR Gems D 2008 Against the oxidative damage theory of aging: superoxide dismutases protect against oxidative stress but have little or no effect on life span in Caenorhabditis elegans Genes Dev 22 3236 3241 19056880
214 Lewis KN Andziak B Yang T Buffenstein R 2013 The naked mole-rat response to oxidative stress: just deal with iut Antioxid Redox Signal 19 1388 1399 23025341
215 Schulz TJ Zarse K Voigt A Urban N Birringer M Ristow M 2007 Glucose restriction extends Caenorhabditis elegans life span by inducing mitochondrial respiration and increasing oxidative stress Cell Metab 6 280 293 17908557
216 Zhang Y Ikeno Y Qi W Chaudhuri A Li Y Bokov A Thorpe SR Baynes JW Epstein C Richardson A Van Remmen H 2009 Mice deficient in both Mn superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase-1 have increased oxidative damage and a greater incidence of pathology but no reduction in longevity J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 64A 1212 1220
217 Sohal RS Orr WC 2012 The redox stress hypothesis of aging Free Radic Biol Med 52 539 555 22080087
218 Verbon EH Post JA Boonstra J 2012 The influence of reactive oxygen species on cell cycle progression in mammalian cells Gene 511 1 6 22981713
219 Hwang BA Jeong DE Lee SJ 2012 Mitochondria and organismal longevity Curr Genomics 13 519 532 23633912
220 Niemi A-K Moilanen JS Tanaka M Hervonen A Hurme M Lehtimäki T Arai Y Hirose N Majamaa K 2005 A combination of three common inherited mitochondrial DNA polymorphisms promotes longevity in Finnish and Japanese subjects Eur J Hum Genet 13 166 170 15483642
221 Li L Zheng H-X Liu Z Qin Z Chen F Qian D Xu J Jin L Wang X 2015 Mitochondrial genomes and exceptional longevity in a Chinese population: the Rugao longevity study Age 37 14
222 De Benedictis G Rose G Carrieri G De Luca M Falcone E Passarino G Bonafe M Monti D Baggio G Bertolini S Mari D Mattace R Franceschi C 1999 Mitochondrial DNA inherited variants are associated with successful aging and longevity in humans FASEB J 13 1532 1536 10463944
223 Ivanova R Astrinidis A Lepage V Kouvatsi A Djoulah S Hors J Charron D 1999 Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in the French population Biomed Pharmacother 53 207 212 10392292
224 Ross OA McCormack R Curran MD Duguid RA Barnett YA Rea IM Middleton D 2001 Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism: its role in longevity of the Irish population Exp Gerontol 36 1161 1178 11404057
225 Vijg J Suh Y 2013 Genome instability and aging Annu Rev Physiol 75 645 668 23398157
226 Enge M Arda HE Mignardi M Beausang J Bottino R Kim SK Quake SR 2017 Single-cell analysis of human pancreas reveals transcriptional signatures of aging and somatic mutation patterns Cell 171 321 330 28965763
227 Campisi J Vijg J 2009 Does damage to DNA and other macromolecules play a role in aging? If so, how? J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 64 175 178
228 Maynard S Fang EF Scheibye-Knudsen M Croteau DL Bohr VA 2015 DNA damage, DNA repair, aging, and neurodegeration Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5 a025130 26385091
229 Bernstein KA Gangloff S Rothstein R 2010 The RecQ DNA helicases in DNA Repair Annu Rev Genet 44 393 417 21047263
230 Lunetta KL D’Agostino RB Karasik D Benjamin EJ Guo CY Govindaraju R Kiel DP Kelly-Hayes M Massaro JM Pencina MJ 2007 Genetic correlates of longevity and selected age-related phenotypes: a genome-wide association study in the Framingham Study BMC Med Genet 8 S13 17903295
231 Kaushik S Cuervo AM 2015 Proteostasis and aging Nat Med 21 1406 26646497
232 Morimoto RI 2011 The heat shock response: systems biology of proteotoxic stress in aging and disease Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 76 91 99 22371371
233 Walter P Ron D 2011 The unfolded protein response: from stress pathway to homeostatic regulation Science 334 1081 1086 22116877
234 Jovaisaite V Mouchiroud L Auwerx J 2014 The mitochondrial unfolded protein response, a conserved stress response pathway with implications in health and disease J Exp Biol 217 137 143 24353213
235 Quirós PM Mottis A Auwerx J 2016 Mitonuclear communication in homeostasis and stress Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17 213 226 26956194
236 Vilchez D Saez I Dillin A 2014 The role of protein clearance mechanisms in organismal ageing and age-related diseases Nat Commun 5 5659 25482515
237 Schulz AM Haynes CM 2015 UPRmt-mediated cytoprotection and organismal aging Biochim Biophys Acta 1847 1448 1456 25857997
238 Sorrentino V Romani M Mouchiroud L Beck JS Zhang H D’Amico D Moullan N Potenza F Schmid AW Rietsch S Counts SE Auwerx J 2017 Enhancing mitochondrial proteostasis reduces amyloid-β proteotoxicity Nature 552 187 192 29211722
239 Martínez P Blasco MA 2010 Role of shelterin in cancer and aging Aging cell 9 653 666 20569239
240 Sahin E Depinho RA 2010 Linking functional decline of telomeres, mitochondria and stem cells during ageing Nature 464 520 528 20336134
241 Cerchiara JA Risques RA Prunkard D Smith JR Kane OJ Boersma PD 2017 Magellanic penguin telomeres do not shorten with age with increased reproductive effort, investment, and basal corticosterone Ecol Evol 7 5682 5691 28811878
242 Hemann MT Greider CW 2000 Wild-derived inbred mouse strains have short telomeres Nucleic Acids Res 28 22 4474 4478 11071935
243 Armanios M Alder JK Parry EM Karim B Strong MA Greider CW 2009 Short telomeres are sufficient to cause the degenerative defects associated with aging Am J Hum Genet 85 823 832 19944403
244 Diaz de Leon A Cronkhite JT Katzenstein AL Godwin JD Raghu G Glazer CS Rosenblatt RL Girod CE Garrity ER Xing C Garcia CK 2010 Telomere lengths, pulmonary fibrosis and telomerase (TERT) mutations PLoS One 5 e10680 20502709
245 Armanios M Blackburn EH 2012 The telomere syndromes Nat Rev Genet 13 693 704 22965356
246 Atzmon G Cho M Cawthon RM Budagov T Katz M Yang X Siegel G Bergman A Huffman DM Schechter CB Wright WE Shay JW Barzilai N Govindaraju DR Suh Y 2010 Genetic variation in human telomerase is associated with telomere length in Ashkenazi centenarians Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 1710 1717 19915151
247 Debrabant B Soerensen M Flachsbart F Dato S Mengel-From J Stevnsner T Bohr VA Kruse TA Schreiber S Nebel A Christensen K Tan Q Christiansen L 2014 Human longevity and variation in DNA damage response and repair: study of the contribution of sub-processes using competitive gene-set analysis Eur J Hum Genet 22 1131 1136 24518833
248 Benayoun BA Pollina EA Brunet A 2015 Epigenetic regulation of ageing: linking environmental inputs to genomic stability Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 16 593 610 26373265
249 Pal S Tyler JK 2016 Epigenetics and aging Sci Adv 2 e1600584 27482540
250 Sen P Shah PP Nativio R Berger SL 2016 Epigenetic mechanisms of longevity and aging Cell 166 822 839 27518561
251 Horvath S 2013 DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types Genome Biol 14 R115 24138928
252 Marioni RE Shah S McRae AF Chen BH Colicino E Harris SE Gibson J Henders AK Redmond P Cox SR Pattie A Corley J Murphy L Martin NG Montgomery GW Feinberg AP Fallin MD Multhaup ML Jaffe AE Joehanes R Schwartz J Just AC Lunetta KL Murabito JM Starr JM Horvath S Baccarelli AA Levy D Visscher PM Wray NR Deary IJ 2015 DNA methylation age of blood predicts all-cause mortality in later life Genome Biol 16 25 25633388
253 Marioni RE Shah S McRae AF Ritchie SJ Muniz-Terrera G Harris SE Gibson J Redmond P Cox SR Pattie A Corley J Taylor A Murphy L Starr JM Horvath S Visscher PM Wray NR Deary IJ 2015 The epigenetic clock is correlated with physical and cognitive fitness in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 Int J Epidemiol 44 1388 1396 25617346
254 Stubbs TM Bonder MJ Stark AK Krueger F Team BIAC von Meyenn F Stegle O Reik W 2017 Multi-tissue DNA methylation age predictor in mouse Genome Biol 18 68 28399939
255 Lappalainen T Greally JM 2017 Associating cellular epigenetic models with human phenotypes Nat Rev Genet 18 441 451 28555657
256 Lee TI Jenner RG Boyer LA Guenther MG Levine SS Kumar RM Chevalier B Johnstone SE Cole MF Isono K Koseki H Fuchikami T Abe K Murray HL Zucker JP Yuan B Bell GW Herbolsheimer E Hannett NM Sun K Odom DT Otte AP Volkert TL Bartel DP Melton DA Gifford DK Jaenisch R Young RA 2006 Control of developmental regulators by Polycomb in human embryonic stem cells Cell 125 301 313 16630818
257 Bystrykh L Weersing E Dontje B Sutton S Pletcher MT Wiltshire T Su AI Vellenga E Wang J Manly KF Lu L Chesler E Alberts R Jansen R Williams R Cooke M de Haan G 2005 Uncovering regulatory pathways that affect hematopoietic stem cell function using ‘genetical genomics’ Nat Genet 37 225 232 15711547
258 de Haan G Gerrits A 2007 Epigenetic control of hematopoietic stem cell aging the case of Ezh2 Ann N Y Acad Sci 1106 233 239 17332078
259 Kamminga LM Bystrykh LV de Boer A Houwer S Douma J Weersing E Dontje B de Haan G 2006 The Polycomb group gene Ezh2 prevents hematopoietic stem cell exhaustion Blood 107 2170 2179 16293602
260 Beerman I Bock C Garrison BS Smith ZD Gu H Meissner A Rossi DJ 2013 Proliferation-dependent alterations of the DNA methylation landscape underlie hematopoietic stem cell aging Cell stem cell 12 413 425 23415915
261 Dozmorov MG 2015 Polycomb repressive complex 2 epigenomic signature defines age-associated hypermethylation and gene expression changes Epigenetics 10 484 495 25880792
262 Mozhui K Pandey AK 2017 Conserved effect of aging on DNA methylation and association with EZH2 polycomb protein in mice and humans Mech Age Dev 162 27 37
263 Deelen J Beekman M Uh HW Helmer Q Kuningas M Christiansen L Kremer D van der Breggen R Suchiman HED Lakenberg N 2011 Genome-wide association study identifies a single major locus contributing to survival into old age; the APOE locus revisited Aging Cell 10 686 698 21418511
264 Deelen J Beekman M Uh HW Broer L Ayers KL Tan Q Kamatani Y Bennet AM Tamm R Trompet S 2014 Genome-wide association meta-analysis of human longevity identifies a novel locus conferring survival beyond 90 years of age Hum Mol Genet 23 4420 4432 24688116
265 Tanaka T Dutta A Pilling LC Xue L Lunetta KL Murabito JM Bandinelli S Wallace R Melzer D Ferrucci L 2016 Genome-wide association study of parental lifespan J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 72 1407 1410
266 Joshi PK Fischer K Schraut KE Campbell H Esko T Wilson JF 2016 Variants near CHRNA3/5 and APOE have age-and sex-related effects on human lifespan Nat Commun 7 11174 27029810
267 Visscher PM Brown MA McCarthy MI Yang J 2012 Five years of GWAS discovery Am J Hum Genet 90 7 24 22243964
268 Puca AA Daly MJ Brewster SJ Matise TC Barrett J Shea-Drinkwater M Kang S Joyce E Nicoli J Benson E 2001 A genome-wide scan for linkage to human exceptional longevity identifies a locus on chromosome 4 Proc Natl Acad Sci 98 10505 10508 11526246
269 Reed T Dick DM Uniacke SK Foroud T Nichols WC 2004 Genome-wide scan for a healthy aging phenotype provides support for a locus near D4S1564 promoting healthy aging J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 59 B227 B232
270 Boyden SE Kunkel LM 2010 High-density genomewide linkage analysis of exceptional human longevity identifies multiple novel loci PLoS One 5 e12432 20824210
271 Malovini A Illario M Iaccarino G Villa F Ferrario A Roncarati R Anselmi CV Novelli V Cipolletta E Leggiero E 2011 Association study on long-living individuals from Southern Italy identifies rs10491334 in the CAMKIV gene that regulates survival proteins Rejuv Res 14 283 291
272 Nebel A Kleindorp R Caliebe A Nothnagel M Blanché H Junge O Wittig M Ellinghaus D Flachsbart F Wichmann HE Meitinger T Nikolaus S Franke A Krawczak M Lathrop M Schreiber S 2011 A genome-wide association study confirms APOE as the major gene influencing survival in long-lived individuals Mech Aging Dev 132 324 330 21740922
273 Kerber RA O’Brien E Boucher KM Smith KR Cawthon RM 2012 A genome-wide study replicates linkage of 3p22-24 to extreme longevity in humans and identifies possible additional loci PLoS One 7 e34746 22506048
274 Sebastiani P Solovieff N DeWan AT Walsh KM Puca A Hartley SW Melista E Andersen S Dworkis DA Wilk JB 2012 Genetic signatures of exceptional longevity in humans PLoS One 7 e29848 22279548
275 Beekman M Blanché H Perola M Hervonen A Bezrukov V Sikora E Flachsbart F Christiansen L Craen AJ Kirkwood TB 2013 Genome-wide linkage analysis for human longevity: Genetics of Healthy Aging Study Aging Cell 12 184 193 23286790
276 Minster RL Sanders JL Singh J Kammerer CM Barmada MM Matteini AM Zhang Q Wojczynski MK Daw EW Brody JA 2015 Genome-wide association study and linkage analysis of the healthy aging index J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 70 1003 1008 25758594
277 Fortney K Dobriban E Garagnani P Pirazzini C Monti D Mari D Atzmon G Barzilai N Franceschi C Owen AB 2015 Genome-wide scan informed by age-related disease identifies loci for exceptional human longevity PLoS Genet 11 e1005728 26677855
278 Pilling LC Atkins JL Bowman K Jones SE Tyrrell J Beaumont RN Ruth KS Tuke MA Yaghootkar H Wood AR 2016 Human longevity is influenced by many genetic variants: evidence from 75,000 UK Biobank participants Aging (Albany NY) 8 547 27015805
279 Zeng Y Nie C Min J Liu X Li M Chen H Xu H Wang M Ni T Li Y 2016 Novel loci and pathways significantly associated with longevity Sci Rep 6 21243 26912274
280 Singh J Minster RL Schupf N Kraja A Liu Y Christensen K Newman AB Kammerer CM 2017 Genomewide association scan of a mortality associated endophenotype for a long and healthy life in the Long Life Family Study J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 72 1411 1416 28329217
