LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101500075
35764
Nat Rev Cardiol
Nat Rev Cardiol
Nature reviews. Cardiology
1759-5002
1759-5010

30065258
6146930
10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2
NIHMS987910
Article
Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular disease, and frailty
Ferrucci Luigi 1*
Fabbri Elisa 2
1 Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD, USA.
2 Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Author contributions

Both authors researched data for the article, discussed its content, wrote the manuscript, and reviewed and edited it before submission.

* ferruccilu@mail.nih.gov
7 9 2018
9 2018
20 9 2018
15 9 505522
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Most older individuals develop inflammageing, a condition characterized by elevated levels of blood inflammatory markers that carries high susceptibility to chronic morbidity, disability, frailty, and premature death. Potential mechanisms of inflammageing include genetic susceptibility, central obesity, increased gut permeability, changes to microbiota composition, cellular senescence, NLRP3 inflammasome activation, oxidative stress caused by dysfunctional mitochondria, immune cell dysregulation, and chronic infections. Inflammageing is a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), and clinical trials suggest that this association is causal. Inflammageing is also a risk factor for chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, cancer, depression, dementia, and sarcopenia, but whether modulating inflammation beneficially affects the clinical course of non-CVD health problems is controversial. This uncertainty is an important issue to address because older patients with CVD are often affected by multimorbidity and frailty — which affect clinical manifestations, prognosis, and response to treatment — and are associated with inflammation by mechanisms similar to those in CVD. The hypothesis that inflammation affects CVD, multimorbidity, and frailty by inhibiting growth factors, increasing catabolism, and interfering with homeostatic signalling is supported by mechanistic studies but requires confirmation in humans. Whether early modulation of inflammageing prevents or delays the onset of cardiovascular frailty should be tested in clinical trials.


With the extension of life expectancy and the rising percentage of older individuals in the general population, understanding why ageing results in progressively higher susceptibility to chronic morbidity, disability, and frailty has become a public health priority1. An interesting hypothesis stems from the observation that older organisms tend to develop a pro-inflammatory status that is characterized by high levels of pro-inflammatory markers in cells and tissues, a condition often named inflammageing, a term first coined in 2000 by Claudio Franceschi2. Strong evidence indicates that inflammageing is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD), in addition to many age-associated chronic diseases and other adverse health outcomes. Whether inflammageing contributes causally to CVD and other comorbid conditions or is instead a noncausal marker of some other underlying mechanisms is still debated. Other than calorie restriction and physical activity, treatment options for inflammageing rely on small molecules or antibodies that interfere with inflammatory mediators or their biological targets rather than targeting the underlying causes, resulting in highly heterogeneous efficacy.

In this Review, we summarize the current understanding of inflammageing. We explore risk factors and speculate on potential causes, and we look at possible roles of inflammageing in CVD and other conditions that are highly prevalent and often coexist with CVDs in older individuals. We report on findings from intervention studies aimed at modulating inflammation in different diseases, and in particular whether these interventions prevent or attenuate the clinical course of CVD. We continue by examining the role of inflammation in conditions that are typical of ageing and often comorbid with CVD, such as multimorbidity, sarcopenia, and frailty. Finally, we identify gaps in our knowledge and suggest priorities for future research.

Risk factors and causes of inflammageing

Ageing is associated with immune dysregulation, of which the most evident characteristics are high blood levels of pro-inflammatory immunogenic stimulations3,4. The pro-inflammatory state is characterized by high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory markers, including IL-1, IL-1 receptor antagonist protein (IL-1RN), IL-6, IL-8, IL-13, IL-18, C-reactive protein (CRP), IFNα and IFNβ, transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and its soluble receptors (TNF receptor superfamily members 1A and 1B), and serum amyloid A. At this time, a comprehensive list of pro-inflammatory markers that are associated with ageing has not been compiled owing to the difficulty of applying high-sensitivity discovery proteomics in plasma and serum. High levels of age-associated pro-inflammatory markers are detected in the majority of older individuals, even in the absence of risk factors and clinically active diseases3,5–7. Despite its fundamental physiological role as a defence mechanism against infections or extraneous molecules, when inflammation becomes sustained and prolonged it becomes detrimental to health. According to the antagonistic pleiotropy theory of ageing, inflammation might have been evolutionarily selected because of beneficial effects early in life and in adulthood, although it becomes detrimental in old age when the effect of natural selection is no longer active8. Epidemiological studies have found that inflammageing is a risk factor for CVD, cancer, chronic kidney disease, dementia, and depression as well for global indicators of poor health status, such as multimorbidity, mobility disability and disability in activities of daily living, sarcopenia, frailty, and premature death9–19. On the basis of these findings, many researchers have proposed that inflammageing is a marker of accelerated ageing and should be considered to be one of the pillars of the biology of ageing20. The root causes of inflammageing are poorly understood, as are the mechanisms that connect inflammageing with CVD and with many other health outcomes. A critical question is whether inflammation directly causes the associated pathology or is instead a biomarker for the rate of biological ageing. The answer to this question might depend on the age of the patients and whether we consider CVD by itself or CVD in the context of associated multimorbidity, impairments, and disabilities.

Genetic susceptibility.

Studies in large populations have identified a multitude of genetic variants that affect blood levels of inflammatory mediators21. We focus on associations that have been confirmed by multiple studies and are functionally relevant21–25. Examining common variants of the IL1RN gene revealed that the rs4251961 minor allele is associated with a lowered serum level of IL-1RN and that the rs579543 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is also independently associated with IL-1RN levels, whereas the IL1RN 1018 haplotype correlates with higher concentrations of IL-1β and IFNγ22. These findings have been confirmed in three independent cohorts26, and further research has demonstrated that these factors affect the pathophysiology of human infections27 and the risk of developing insulin resistance28 and knee osteoarthritis29.

A SNP in the promoter region of IL6 at position−174G &gt; C magnifies IL-6 production in response to inflammatory stimuli, but this SNP has been associated inconsistently with baseline IL-6 levels. Carriers of the−174G &gt; C mutation have an increased risk of developing various major diseases, including Alzheimer disease30, CVD31, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus32, bone fragility33, and systemic-onset juvenile chronic arthritis34. A genome-wide association study comparing &gt;2,000 Chinese centenarians to middle-aged controls found that the SNP rs2069837 in IL6 was significantly associated with extreme longevity, confirming the role of IL-6 in conditioning morbidity and mortality, especially in old age35. Confirming the role of IL-6 in health, in a large Mendelian randomization analysis, the IL6R SNP rs7529229, marking a non-synonymous IL6R variant (rs8192284; p.Asp358Ala), was associated with increased circulating IL-6 levels24. Variants in the IL6R gene have been found to be associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease24, rheumatoid arthritis, atrial fibrillation, and abdominal aortic aneurysm, and with increased susceptibility to asthma, type 1 diabetes, and depression36,37. Multiple SNPs in the CRP gene are associated with higher CRP levels and increased risk of myocardial infarction and CVD-related death38.

These data indicate that genetic variability affects the plasma levels of several inflammatory markers and, through this mechanism, increases the risk of many apparently uncorrelated diseases. Therefore, the cumulative effect of these genetic polymorphisms might be a risk factor for multimorbidity and frailty, although this hypothesis has never been fully tested. A gene-expression study conducted on whole-blood RNA samples from a large population cohort in Europe and the USA revealed that immune response and inflammation were the most highly upregulated pathways in association with ageing39. A few gene transcripts mediate the age–IL-6 association, among which the largest affected transcript, SLC4A10 mRNA (encoding the sodium-driven chloride bicarbonate exchanger), explains as much as 19% of this association40. Interestingly, this study did not detect an age-related increase in IL6 mRNA transcript levels, suggesting that the overproduction of circulating proteins occurs in peripheral tissues rather than in blood cells.

Accumulating evidence shows that cellular changes that contribute to inflammageing are mediated by microRNAs (miRNAs), which are non-coding, single-stranded RNAs spanning 17–25 nucleotides that generally modulate protein-expression programmes by interacting with mRNAs that share partial complementarity, thereby reducing mRNA stability and/or translation41. Studies have shown age-related differences in the abundance of specific miRNAs in circulating cells, plasma, and whole blood from older compared with younger individuals42–48. Findings from these studies are inconsistent, possibly owing to differences in sample size, age composition, and health status of the examined individuals, and because miRNA detection methods vary widely in specificity, accuracy, and sensitivity. In addition, given that miRNAs mostly function as intra-cellular modulators of mRNAs, their concentration in whole blood might be a poor indicator of their physiological effects. Nonetheless, miR-25–3p, miR-92a-3p, miR-93–5p, miR-101–3p, miR-106b-5p, miR-142–5p, miR-151a-3p, and miR-181a-5p tend to be under-represented, whereas miR-21–5p and miR-126–3p are over-represented at older ages47,49,50. Age-related changes in miRNAs have been suggested to contribute to inflammageing. For example, miR-126–3p inhibits endothelial inflammation, and low levels of miR-126–3p were found in patients with CVD and diabetes50, whereas miR-21–5p levels are correlated negatively with CRP and fibrinogen levels, and miR-21–5p levels are higher in patients with CVD than in age-matched controls44. Other miRNAs, such as miR-146 and miR-155, might also have a role in inflammageing by affecting cellular senescence or modulating immune responses, although these activities might not be reflected by changes in miRNA concentration or these miRNAs might be detected only in exosomes or other structures carrying miRNAs51. Overall, the contribution of miRNAs to inflammageing is an active area of investigation with high translational potential.

Visceral obesity.

Epidemiological studies provide some information about the origin of inflammageing. Obesity — particularly central obesity — is strongly associated with a pro-inflammatory state52–54. Adipocytes in abdominal, intramuscular, liver, and pericardial fat can produce pro-inflammatory and chemotactic compounds, such as IL-6, IL-1β, TNF, and C-C motif chemokine 2 (CCL2), as well as hormones that modulate inflammation, such as adiponectin and leptin54. The visceral fat tissue of obese individuals is infiltrated by T lymphocytes, macrophages, and monocytes. T lym-phocytes secrete IFNγ, which stimulates the production of several chemokines from adipocytes, including CCL2, CCL5, C-X-C motif chemokine 9 (CXCL9), and CXCL10, which further amplify tissue T cell migration. The number of B lymphocytes and macrophages in visceral adipose tissue from obese individuals is also increased and is correlated with BMI55. Studies with animal models suggest that a specific subset of B cells expressing the TNF ligand superfamily member 9 and producing TNF, IFNγ, and granzyme B is increased in the peritoneal cavity during ageing56. Cytokines released by B cells contribute to the phenotypic switch of adipocytes in the visceral cavity, causing them to release adipokines, other pro-inflammatory markers, and cell debris52. Activated monocytes that give rise to M1 and M2 macrophages produce even more inflammatory compounds that probably appear in the circulation57. Weight loss through reduced dietary intake and possibly bariatric surgery is associated with reductions in primary pro-inflammatory markers, in part owing to normalized expression of inflammation-related genes in white adipose tissue and to downregulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome58–61. In addition, calorie restriction in humans is associated with a substantial reduction in pro-inflammatory markers in the blood62. Weight loss combined with exercise improves functional status and reduces some of the features of frailty in obese older individuals, improves the cardiovascular risk profile, and reduces the risk of CVD, although whether these beneficial effects are caused by reduced inflammation remains unclear63–65.

Microbiota and gut permeability.

A new hypothesis on the origin of inflammation highlights changes that occur in the gut microbiota with ageing as well as age- associated changes in gut permeability. Despite large variability in the gut microbiota found in different populations, geographic regions, and settings, evidence suggests that ageing is associated with a reduction in beneficial commensal microorganisms — such as Coprococcus, Faecalibacterium, and Lactobacillus — as well as a decrease in the Firmicutes: Bacteroidetes ratio66–68. The disappearance of these microorganisms is important because they normally counteract the expansion of pathogenic microbial communities, while also maintaining intestinal barrier integrity by fermenting starches and dietary fibres and producing mucus and lipid metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids (primarily acetate, propionate, and butyrate)66–68. As beneficial intestinal bacteria decrease in abundance with ageing, other bacteria increase in relative abundance, including symbiotic bacteria that can become pathogenic under inflamed conditions, often termed pathobionts69. This category of microorganisms is enriched in the gut of older adults and is primarily dominated by facultative anaerobes — such as Fusobacterium and Staphylococcus — a state that has been associated with increased levels of inflammatory cytokines in plasma8,70.

Increased gut dysbiosis has been postulated to increase mucosal barrier permeability, thereby allowing bacteria and their products — including pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), and microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs)— into the circulatory system. Together, these factors contribute to a chronic pro-inflammatory state71. This theory is supported by studies in animal models, but no definitive evidence exists of increased gut permeability and leakage of pro-inflammatory products in older individuals who are free from overt inflammatory disease72. Dysbiosis seems to be more severe in conditions in which prevalence increases with ageing, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes73. Of note, changes in gut microbiota composition have been shown to be associated with increased frailty74–76, which could be owing to gut dysbiosis-induced inflammation. Centenarians, who can be considered extreme examples of healthy ageing, have an enrichment of Akkermansia, Bifidobacterium, and Christensenellaceae in their intestinal flora67, which promote positive immune function, have anti-inflammatory activity, diminish the effects of obesity, and contribute to metabolic homeostasis77–79.

Consistent with the notion that changes in the gut microbiota composition can affect healthy ageing, calorie restriction — the most powerful strategy to increase longevity in animal models — causes changes in microbiota composition, decreases inflammation, and improves gut barrier integrity80. A healthy intestinal tract flora can theoretically be promoted by the administration of probiotics, prebiotics, or a combination of the two81–83. Some studies have shown that this strategy can reduce systemic inflammation and progression of central obesity, but more research in this area is needed to substantiate this initial evidence and to assess whether the reduction of inflammation owing to microbiota changes has beneficial effects on health84,85.

Cellular senescence.

A number of biological mechanisms that have been identified as hallmarks or pillars of biological ageing might account for inflammageing86,87. Paramount among them is the accumulation of senescent cells in multiple tissues. Cellular senescence is generally considered to be a pre-encoded cancer suppressor mechanism characterized by cell cycle arrest, loss of proliferation capacity, global cell enlargement, characteristic misshaped nuclei, presence of chromatin foci with persistent DNA damage response, increased nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signalling, and resistance to apoptosis88,89. Senescent cells are recognized by specific markers, including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (commonly known as p16INK4A) and increased lysosome β-galactosidase activity, although these markers are neither fully sensitive nor specific and, despite intense research, no gold-standard biomarker of cellular senescence has been established90. Jeck and colleagues hypothesized that genetic variants associated with general susceptibility to multiple diseases are enriched in specific areas of the genome. Interestingly, SNPs located near regulators of senescence and inflammation are particularly associated with diseases of ageing, such as cancer, CVD, and type 2 diabetes, and the strongest association was found with a variant in the CDKN2A gene, which encodes the p16INK4A protein that is over-expressed in many forms of senescence. These findings were replicated in a meta-analysis that included 410 genome-wide association studies91,92. In addition, the variant rs2811712 that is close to the CDKN2A gene was associated with poor physical function in two different cohorts93. Therefore, senescence seems to be associated with ageing, inflammation, CVD, and impaired physical function in older individuals, making cell senescence a strong candidate as a mechanism for inflammageing.

Cell senescence can be triggered by many stimuli, including critical telomere shortening, persistent DNA damage, oncogene activation or inactivation, epigenetic alterations, mitochondrial dysfunction, and exposure to DAMPs that are released by stressed cells, with some evidence that the phenotypic manifestations induced by different triggers are heterogeneous88,89. At the core of the replication arrest is increasing levels of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors that block the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma-associated protein and initiate cell cycle arrest. In adulthood, activation of retinoblastoma-associated protein can occur either through the cellular tumour antigen p53 that activates cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1 (commonly known as p21), or directly through the activation of p16INK4A. Theories suggest that senescence is not an acute switch but instead evolves in stages, from a temporary or reversible status to a chronic irreversible condition94.

Relevant to inflammageing, senescent cells acquire a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) that involves the secretion of a wide range of soluble molecules. The list of these molecules is not comprehensive, and the molecules can vary on the basis of cell type and triggering factors but usually include interleukins (IL-1α, IL-1β, and IL-6), chemokines (IL-8 and growth-regulated-α protein), growth factors (fibroblast growth factor 2 and hepatocyte growth factor), metalloproteinases (interstitial collagenase (also known as MMP1), stromelysin 1 (also known as MMP3), and collagenase 3 (also known as MMP13)), and other insoluble proteins and extracellular matrix components95. These secretory molecules mainly function in a paracrine fashion and can facilitate the development of cellular senescence in neighbouring cells, but some of the soluble mediators are released into the circulation and are likely to contribute to inflammageing96.

Studies have shown that senescent cells accumulate exponentially with ageing in different organs and tissues, both in model organisms and in humans97–100. In humans, the accumulation of senescent markers has been demonstrated in the skin, T lymphocytes, atherosclerotic lesions, insulin-producing β cells, kidney, endothelium, visceral fat, joint cartilage, cardiac muscle, liver, and many others tissues98,101–107. Some tissues are likely to have a greater propensity to developing cellular senescence than others, but research in this area is scarce. Of note, senescent T cell accumulation has been demonstrated in patients with chronic infections such as Cytomegalovirus (CMV) or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which might explain why patients with CMV or HIV infection have chronically elevated levels of pro-inflammatory markers and reduced vaccine efficacy108–110. In mice, the clearance of p16INK4A-positive cells extends lifespan and slows the emergence of ageing phenotypes and age-related functional deterioration of organs and tissues111,112. The extent to which the burden of senescent-cell accumulation in humans is associated with inflammageing and organ damage, and whether a plasma protein signature can be developed that correlates with cell senescence burden, are important areas of investigation.

Impaired recycling and elimination of degraded cellular material.

Despite the apparent stability of the human body, a massive turnover of molecules, microorganelles, cells, and cellular components occurs constantly throughout life. A complex and well-regulated molecular machinery constantly surveys cellular components and handles the repair or elimination of biological debris as well as broken or misplaced fragments. Within cells, worn-out macromolecules and organelles are physiologically recycled by proteasome degradation or autophagy. Extracellular debris is recognized by the immune system through different receptors, including pattern recognition receptors, and is then degraded by engulfment in phagocytic vesicles113. Under pathological conditions, molecules are released by stressed cells undergoing necrosis (such as during ischaemia– reperfusion or severe infection). These molecules, called DAMPs, include reactive oxygen species (ROS) from damaged and unrecycled mitochondria, extra-cellular nucleotides such as ATP, oxidized cardiolipin, free nuclear and mitochondrial DNA fragments or histones, high-mobility group protein B1, oxidized LDL, amyloid-β, islet amyloid polypeptide, and particulates such as monosodium urate and cholesterol crystals, in addition to many others114. If notpromptly removed, these molecules accumulate and possibly contribute to inflammageing115,116. Accordingly, inflammageing is proposed to originate from an imbalance between the production and disposal of cellular debris, misfolded proteins, and/or misplaced self-molecules that develops with age8. For example, accumulation of DAMPs is sensed by the NLRP3 inflammasome and causes NLRP3 oligomerization, resulting in caspase 1-dependent secretion of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. In humans, IL-18 blood levels increase with ageing, and strong evidence from mouse studies indicates that blockade of the NLRP3 inflammasome extends healthspan, attenuating multiple age-related degenerative changes that have been linked to inflammageing, including insulin resistance, thymic involution, T cell senescence, and bone loss as well as physical and cognitive function decline114,117,118. Of note, ROS produced by dysfunctional mitochondria can also trigger an inflammatory response by activating the NF-κB signalling pathway119.

Intrinsic defects in immune cells and chronic infections.

Studies conducted in isolated immune cells, mostly lymphocytes, suggest that an intrinsic defect in immune cells also contributes to inflammageing. For example, gene-expression studies show that CD4+ lymphocytes from older individuals have higher intrinsic activation of the NF-κB pathways than those from younger individuals120. After stimulation with anti-CD3, the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitro is lower in cells from older individuals than in cells from younger individuals120, a phenomenon that might be related to altered metabolic activity121. However, because these studies have been performed only in small populations, their relevance to inflammageing is unknown.

Subclinical and clinically evident chronic infections can chronically stimulate immune function and result in changes in levels of inflammatory markers that are indistinguishable from those of the inflammageing signature. Particularly relevant for inflammageing are human CMV and HIV infections. Human CMV infection is herpesvirus present in a latent state in more than half of the adult population122, where intermittent transcription episodes cause antigen reactivation throughout the life course. This situation might explain why the human CMV-specific memory T cells can comprise up to 50% of the total memory T cell compartment in older individuals123,124 and leads to the hypothesis that persistent human CMV infection has a role in immunosenescence and inflammageing. However, evidence to support this hypothesis remains controversial109. Some studies have found that human CMV infection in older individuals is associated with increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, negative immune risk profile, inflammageing, and lower antibody responses to influenza125–129. However, evidence that the association between CMV infection and CVD and mortality is mediated by inflammageing is scant at best109,130. The theoretical CMV-associated impaired capacity to control heterologous infections in old age and the association with high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines have also been challenged109. Ultimately, whether human CMV infections cause accelerated immune senescence is controversial.

In the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), patients with HIV infection have a life expectancy that is, on average, only slightly lower than in the general population. However, this therapy does not protect patients from the persistent immune activation, chronic inflammation, and excess risk of developing CVD and frailty131–135. Chronic inflammation in HIV is mediated by depletion of memory CD41+ T cells, resulting in increased permeability in the gut epithelium and translocation of microbial products into the circulation, which causes inflammation136. Patients with HIV are also affected by antiretroviral-associated lipodystrophy and visceral obesity that can further contribute to inflammation and cause insulin resistance137.

Finally, chronic infections, such as oral infection, asymptomatic chronic infection in the urinary and biliary tracts, and hidden intestinal infections, are associated with the release of PAMPs into the circulation, which elicits a persistent inflammatory state. Treatment of these infections can reduce inflammageing and potentially has many long-term beneficial effects beyond immediate local resolution of symptoms.

As explained above, the possible causes of inflammageing are numerous and very heterogeneous (Fig. 1). These different mechanisms are likely to be additive and interconnected, acting in different combinations and with different relevance in selected individuals. Therefore, effectively reducing inflammation without weakening the surveillance and defensive functions of the immune system requires individualized approaches as well as an accurate diagnosis of the underlying causes of inflammation.

Consequences of inflammageing for CVD

Although strong epidemiological evidence indicates that inflammation is a powerful risk factor for CVD, non-cardiovascular comorbidities and conditions that are often associated with CVD, as well as with frailty, disability, and mortality in older individuals, and the mechanisms that underlie these associations have only just begun to be elucidated. Controversy exists on whether high levels of pro-inflammatory compounds in the circulation and tissues causally contribute to associated pathological conditions or whether inflammation is a reactive marker of underlying pathology. These two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive; for example, early damage that occurs during vascular endothelial cell inflammation participates in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic plaques, whereas atherosclerosis itself produces antigens that trigger and sustain an inflammatory response, and senescent cells are found often in large quantities in atherosclerotic plaques. Therefore, multiple mechanisms amplify the role of inflammation in atherogenesis.

In this section of the Review, we summarize available evidence to suggest that chronic inflammation is both a risk factor and a pathogenic mechanism in CVD. Moreover, because inflammation also contributes to the pathogenesis of other chronic non-CVDs — such as anaemia, cancer, type 2 diabetes, dementia, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, chronic kidney disease, and depression — CVDs in old age often develop in the context of multimorbidity and frailty3,10,138–143 (Fig. 2). Epidemiological studies have produced insufficient evidence to demonstrate whether inflammation occurs in response to underlying disease pathologies or whether inflammation itself contributes to disease initiation and progression. To address this issue, we combine observational evidence with results from randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) that tested the efficacy of anti-inflammatory drugs in preventing or controlling CVD clinical manifestations (Table 1).

Atherosclerosis.

Atherosclerosis originates from damaged endothelium that allows the accumulation of cholesterol-containing LDL particles in the arterial wall that tend to be oxidized, which triggers an inflammatory response that fails to resolve144. Activation of both innate and adaptive immunity actively contributes to the initiation and progression of atherogenesis, from early endothelial dysfunction to the development of acute thrombotic complications triggered by plaque rupture or erosion 9,145–149. Monocytes that migrate into the intima of the arterial wall differentiate into macrophages and then transform into foam cells in the lipid necrotic core of the atheroma147,149. Cholesterol crystals and other DAMPs present in the atherosclerotic lesion activate the inflammasomes within macrophages, leading to the release of IL-1β, IL-18, and other pro-inflammatory cytokines150 that are chemotactic for other inflammatory cells, including T cells and B cells, which are major drivers ofatherosclerosis151. Late atherosclerosis is characterized by massive cell apoptosis and accumulation of cells with senescent features, which support a pro-inflammatory status and lead to the formation of a necrotic core that ultimately causes fragility and rupture of the plaque, formation of a thrombus, and acute vascular occlusion.

Cells in advanced atherosclerotic plaques often show markers of senescence, such as p16INK4A and tumour suppressor ARF (commonly known as p14ARF in humans and p19ARF in mice), and express a SASP that further fuels inflammation while producing metalloproteinases that degrade the extracellular matrix, further destabilizing the atherosclerotic plaque152. In turn, the degradation of the extracellular matrix induces the proliferation and phenotypic shift of vascular smooth muscle cells that migrate from the medial layer and, by synthesizing new extracellular matrix, build a fibrous cap that stabilizes atherosclerotic lesions. However, in an inflammatory environment, vascular smooth muscle cells undergo extensive DNA damage and excessive telomere shortening, develop markers of senescence, and might undergo loss of proliferative capacity or even apoptosis153. In addition, the production of metalloproteinases from senescent cells can further weaken the fibrous cap. Therefore, major mechanisms of plaque stabilization are impaired, and additional antigens might be uncovered that further amplify the inflammatory response154. Preclinical studies have shown that activated subtypes of T and B lymphocytes in plaques contribute to plaque instability, leading to an increase in the risk of cardiovascular disease155. miRNAs have emerged as important regulators of cellular adhesion, proliferation, lipid homeostasis, and inflammatory cytokine synthesis, potentially affecting the balance between atherosclerotic plaque progression and regression, although their mechanism of action and relationship with inflammageing is not fully clarified156.

Although the detailed mechanisms that affect the genesis and progression of atherosclerosis are far from being fully understood, evidence is accumulating that inflammation is a major contributor, acting through multiple mechanisms, including a vicious cycle that accelerates clinical progression. Consistent with this view, longitudinal studies demonstrate that high blood levels of pro-inflammatory markers, including high-sensitivity CRP assay and IL-6, predict the risk of cardiovascular disease in both middle-aged and older adults, independent of other CVD risk factors157–160. Moreover, statin therapy with rosuvastatin reduces the incidence of major cardiovascular events in healthy individuals who are free from hyperlipidaemia but who have elevated high-sensitivity CRP levels147,161. Although studies in endothelial cells suggest that CRP directly contributes to CVD by increasing oxidative stress162, other mechanistic studies and Mendelian randomization analyses in large populations suggest that CRP is a predictive biomarker that is not causally related to atherothrombosis163,164. By contrast, IL-6 and IL-1 contribute to atherosclerosis and should be considered to be therapeutic targets158,163. Mendelian randomization studies have shown that polymorphisms that affect IL-6 signalling are associated with lower life-time risk of cardiovascular disease23,24. In the MEASURE trial165, the IL-6 receptor blocker tocilizumab increased the concentration of HDL particles in patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared with placebo, despite an increase multicentre ENTRACTE trial166 compared the cardiovascular safety profile of tocilizumab to that of the TNF inhibitor etanercept in &gt;3,000 patients with moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis, but the final results are not yet published.

In addition, because IL-1β production is a secondary effect of NLRP3 inflammasome activation, which is induced by cholesterol crystals and other DAMPs, the IL-1β signalling pathway has been suggested to be a promising target for atherothrombosis protection. New compounds that interfere with IL-1 and IL-6 signalling are under investigation163,167. The CANTOS trial168 has revealed that anti-inflammatory therapy with canakinumab, a human monoclonal anti-IL-1β antibody, significantly reduced recurrent cardiovascular events in &gt;10,000 stable patients who had residual inflammation after myocardial infarction, independent of lowered lipid levels169. The ongoing CIRT trial170 is testing the hypothesis that low-dose methotrexate, a drug that suppresses IL-1β production by mononuclear cells in addition to other functions171, reduces major vascular events in patients with previous myocardial infarction and either type 2 diabetes or metabolic syndrome. In a small pilot study (the LoDoCo trial)172, anti-inflammatory treatment with colchicine seemed to be effective for secondary prevention of CVD. Larger RCTs, such as the ongoing LoDoCo2 trial and COLCOT trials173, are needed to confirm these findings.

Type 2 diabetes.

The focus of this Review is on inflammageing conceptualized as a shared risk factor and pathophysiological mechanism between CVD and frailty. However, it is important to note that inflammation is associated with the risk and clinical evolution of non-CVD related disease and accelerated decline of physical function. This concept is clearly exemplified by the close connection between inflammation, CVD, and type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is a strong risk factor for CVD, and both CVD mortality and the effect of diabetes on the risk of CVD increase sharply with older age and frailty status174–176. Strong evidence indicates that insulin resistance and lipotoxicity cause the production of inflammatory mediators that cause neutrophil infiltration, macrophage proliferation, and smooth muscle and endothelial cell activation, which accelerate atherogenesis177. Excessive oxidative stress causes endothelial dysfunction that enables permeation, trapping, and physicochemical modification of circulating lipoprotein particles in the subendothelial space178. Telomeres are, on average, shorter and the number of cells positive for senescence biomarkers is higher in arteries from patients with diabetes than in individuals without diabetes, and this finding might be one of the mechanisms for the increased inflammation and accelerated atherosclerosis in diabetes179,180. Overproduction of angiotensin II amplifies chronic inflammation and can cause mitochondrial dysfunction181. At the same time, inflammation is a risk factor for the development of diabetes and its complications, and these associations are not accounted for by body composition parameters138.

Treating inflammation in non-CVDs.

Of note, a causal role of inflammation in CVD pathogenesis is also suggested by clinical trials that used an anti-inflammatory intervention as treatment for overt, noncardiovascular inflammatory diseases. For example, treatment with TNF inhibitors in rheumatoid arthritis, an overt inflammatory disease, is associated with a decreased risk of cardiovascular events182–187. Treatment with TNF inhibitors in psoriasis is also associated with decreased incidence of major adverse cardiac events186,188,189. However, anti-inflammatory treatment does not always yield beneficial effects. For example, in patients with congestive heart failure, the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, especially TNF, IL-6, and IL-1, are markedly elevated, and the TNF level is a negative prognostic factor190–192. However, clinical trials with the TNF inhibitor etanercept yielded no beneficial reductions in mortality or hospitalization due to congestive heart failure193, whereas high doses of infliximab, a TNF antagonist, did not improve and even worsened moderate-to-severe congestive heart failure194.

Multimorbidity and frailty.

The important role of inflammation in CVD, in particular in atherosclerosis, together with the observation that the pro-inflammatory state typical of ageing is a strong risk factor for many age-related chronic diseases, explains why CVD in older individuals often precedes, follows, or develops in the context of multimorbidity and frailty. Patients with CVD tend to have greater multimorbidity than individuals who are free from CVD195. Diseases most often associated with multimorbidity are diabetes, chronic kidney disease, anaemia, chronic pulmonary disease, depression, and dementia, which all involve inflammageing as an important risk factor3,138,139,142,143,196. The presence of comorbid diseases is well established to affect both the response to treatment and the prognosis for hard clinical outcomes, such as cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, as well as hospitalization and health-care utilization197. However, limited data are available on whether CVD comorbidities affect non-traditional outcomes that are still very important for geriatric patients, such as symptom burden, functional capacity, and self-rated health197. Whether these important, non-traditional out-comes respond to anti-inflammatory treatment is also unknown because this information is not commonly collected in most RCTs.

The resulting syndromes present clinical challenges whose complexity is often ignored in clinical practice guidelines for single diseases, which are based on randomized clinical trials in which patients with multimorbidity are under-represented, including most of the trials cited above that targeted inflammation195. The degree of clinical complexity is even higher when the comorbid medical condition is frailty. Age-associated frailty is a medical syndrome characterized by morphological and physiological changes across multiple systems and organs, resulting in a progressive loss of internal homeostasis, reduced physiological reserves, loss of function, reduced resilience, and increased vulnerability to internal and external stresses198,199. We address the general pathophysiology of frailty later in this Review. Here, we limit the discussion to the effect of frailty that emerges in patients with CVD. The prevalence of frailty in older individuals with CVD rises progressively from subclinical CVD, to heart failure, to overt acute syndromes, to cardiac surgery when, depending on the procedure, the rate of frailty can be &gt;60%200. Strong evidence from multiple, large, observational studies indicates that the presence of CVD is a risk factor for frailty and that patients with frailty are more likely to develop CVD than those who are not frail201–203. This observation is not surprising because inflammation, insulin resistance, and coagulation problems have been identified as cardinal factors in the pathophysiology of frailty204–207. Therefore, CVD and frailty can be viewed as diseases arising from similar causal mechanisms, mutually accelerating their clinical course by vicious cycles that amplify inflammation, insulin resistance, and other still-unknown mechanisms, thereby synergistically contributing to adverse health outcomes. In accordance with this theory, independent of age and other risk factors, frailty in patients with CVD is associated with a twofold increase in the risk of death208.

We have previously proposed that a pro-inflammatory state might be caused by most of the described putative biological mechanisms of ageing, such as telomere shortening, cell senescence, mitochondrial dysfunction, altered nutrient sensing, and epigenetic alterations1. Therefore, the coexistence of CVD, diabetes, and frailty might be just one example of a general phenomenon that involves multiple diseases, as exemplified by the following observations. Low-grade chronic inflammation is a primary contributor to the onset and progression of chronic kidney disease11,142,209,210. Inflammation is a causal factor for cancer initiation, promotion, malignancy, and metastatic dissemination211,212. Depression is characterized by increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins in both peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid213,214. Inflammatory diseases and high levels of pro-inflammatory biomarkers in the blood increase the risk of depression143,215–217. Inflammation has a central role in age-related neuro-degeneration and in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease218. These studies support the hypothesis that neuroinflammatory changes are important pathological components of Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative diseases, highlighting the potential clinical importance of cytokines in neurogenesis. Interestingly, most genetic variants associated with late-onset Alzheimer disease are within immunity-related genes219.

Inflammation and age-related frailty

The collective evidence suggests that chronic inflammation is a risk factor across multiple diseases, some of which are traditionally viewed as pathophysiologically unrelated, such as CVD157,159,160,220, diabetes138,180,221, chronic kidney disease11,142,209, cancer211,212,222, depression13,143,217, and dementia12,139,223. In addition, higher levels of inflammatory markers in blood are associated with a greater loss of muscle mass and strength, accelerated loss of mobility, lower-extremity performance and physical activity, and depression in older individuals224–228, all of which are essential elements for defining frailty on the basis of the criteria most often used in the literature229. From this perspective, inflammageing could act as a focal point for ageing mechanisms that are associated with increased susceptibility to stressors and impaired functional reserves. Consistent with this observation, both higher baseline levels and increasing accumulation rates of IL-6 predict accelerated longitudinal accumulation of multiple chronic diseases in older individuals14. In addition, inflammation contributes to accelerated ageing in individuals with multimorbidity230, and partially mediates the association between multimorbidity and functional limitations and disability231. Not surprisingly, most patients with frailty have chronic inflammation, especially those who are affected by sarcopenia, which is defined as a reduction in muscle strength and mass that is abnormally severe for an individual’s age207,232,233.

A variety of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the link between inflammation and sarcopenia and frailty; interestingly, some of these mechanisms are shared with the pathogenesis of CVD. Inflammation is associated with reduced synthesis and activity of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1), a growth factor that is essential for muscle regeneration and maintenance of muscle integrity and that is protective against plaque instability in atherosclerosis158,234. In vitro studies have shown that IL-1α, IL-6, and TNF inhibit IGF1-mediated anabolism and that IL-6 reduces the production of IGF1 and IGF-binding protein 3 (reF.235). In observational studies, high levels of IL-6 and low levels of IGF1 synergistically correlate with lower muscle strength and power, effectively predicting progressive disability and death236,237. Inflammation impairs endothelial reactivity and muscle perfusion, interfering with the uptake of long branched-chain amino acids that are essential for muscle energetics and protein anabolism238–240. Dysfunctional mitochondria that are not recycled owing to defective mitophagy produce ROS that stimulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and catabolism via increased NF-κB-dependent protein ubiquitylation and proteasome degradation241. Senescent cells that produce inflammatory mediators might also have a role in the pathogenesis of sarcopenia. One study quantified senescent p16INK4A-expressing cells in thigh intramuscular adipose tissue from older women, revealing that senescent cell burden was associated with grip strength, walking speed, and self-perceived mobility242. Moreover, inflammation impairs satellite cell regenerative function243–245. Of note, the emergence of senescence traits in vascular smooth muscle cells has been implicated in the initiation and progression of CVD, specifically atherosclerosis246, again suggesting that atherosclerosis and the resulting CVD is a syndrome of accelerated ageing.

Both aerobic and resistance exercise — as well as dietary supplementation of amino acids or protein, vitamin D, and polyunsaturated fatty acids — have been associated with protection against age-associated sarcopenia, possibly because of their antiinflammatory and antioxidative properties141. In observational studies, adherence to the Mediterranean diet was the only behavioural factor consistently associated with a lower risk of frailty, which might be a result of the anti-inflammatory properties inherent to the diet247,248. Underlying the relationship between CVD and frailty, the Mediterranean diet is also one of the few behavioural interventions that, in both observational studies and clinical trials, was associated with lower cardiovascular morbidity and mortality249,250. Aspirin, a potent anti-inflammatory molecule, is effective in the treatment of acute myocardial infarction and in secondary prevention of CVD, and some evidence indicates that aspirin might be effective in primary prevention of myocardial infarction, at least in high-risk groups251,252. Interestingly, chronic use of NSAIDs is associated with a lower risk of sarcopenia in community-dwelling individuals aged ≥80 years253.

Metformin, an antidiabetic drug that counteracts inflammation and insulin resistance, has been suggested to prevent frailty and attenuate its progression. In a large, observational study conducted in US veterans with type 2 diabetes and stratified according to baseline risk, treatment with metformin reduced the risk of multiple age-related diseases, including CVDs, cancer, depression, and frailty-related diseases254. An RCT conducted in Indonesia revealed that metformin improves gait speed, but not handgrip strength, in nondiabetic, pre-frail, older individuals255. A trial is currently ongoing at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, TX, USA, aimed at examining whether metformin prevents frailty development in older individuals with impaired glucose tolerance256.

The evidence reported above suggests that CVD, multimorbidity, frailty, and perhaps other chronic diseases have inflammageing as a common root cause. Unfortunately, although strong evidence shows that targeting inflammation can reduce the risk of CVD, no definitive evidence exists that reducing inflammation can prevent or modify the progression of multimorbidity with frailty or sarcopenia. In part, this situation is because of the lack of adequately sized RCTs to test this hypothesis and because RCTs that have tested the effectiveness of anti-inflammatory treatments for cardiovascular prevention did not collect data on multimorbidity, frailty, or disability. These issues should be considered a priority in setting the future research agenda. The ENRGISE trial257 is an ongoing, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized pilot study, enrolling older men and women (aged ≥70 years) who have high levels of IL-6 and impaired physical function, to test whether losartan, omega-3 fish oil, or a combination of the two reduce plasma IL-6 levels compared with placebo. Interestingly, results from the CRATUS trial258,259 demonstrated that administration of allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cells improves measures of lower-extremity performance and reduces inflammatory biomarkers in age-related frailty. By contrast, despite their anti-inflammatory effects, statin use in the Women’s Health Initiative survey had no significant effect on the risk of frailty260.

Inflammageing is a pillar of geroscience

Many interventions that increase longevity in animal models cause a reduction in inflammatory markers. For example, calorie restriction is the most powerful life-extension intervention in most animal models and is associated with reduced inflammatory biomarkers261,262. Mechanisms by which calorie restriction reduces chronic inflammation include diminished ROS production and consequent downregulation of NF-κB-induced transcription of pro-inflammatory genes in multiple tissues263. Of note, dietary restriction significantly reduces the risk of CVD in humans, and in animal models, dietary restriction is associated with numerous beneficial changes in arterial walls264.

Rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling with many effects, including anti-inflammatory activity265, has an important role in longevity regulation266 in both animals and humans267, and improves survival and healthspan in animal models268–272. Aspirin improves lifespan in mice273, whereas metformin, which is known to have direct anti-inflammatory effects beyond its canonical glucose-lowering activity274, improves lifespan and healthspan in animal models275. A meta-analysis revealed that metformin reduces all-cause mortality and diseases associated with ageing independent of diabetic control in humans276. The TAME trial277 is designed to examine the effect of metformin on delaying the onset of age-related conditions and diseases and its potential use in expanding human health span. Finally, the clearance of senescent cells by either genetic engineering or the administration of senolytic drugs has been associated with reduced circulating levels of pro-inflammatory markers, increased lifespan, and delayed frailty-related phenotypes in mice111,112. Clinical trials are needed to test the efficacy of these potential treatments in humans278. These examples suggest that interventions that target some of the fundamental mechanisms of ageing affect the general susceptibility to CVD, as well as other age-related diseases, and prevent frailty and disability in older individuals.

Over the past 3 decades, a wealth of evidence has been gathered that suggests that chronic inflammation is one of these mechanisms. Although this Review on the connection between inflammageing, CVD, and frailty is far from comprehensive, the role of chronic inflammation in health and functional deterioration with ageing is clearly emerging. Of course, conceptual problems remain. Throughout this Review, we have focused on inflammation as posing a threat to human health over the course of ageing. However, inflammation has been evolutionarily selected as a fundamental defensive mechanism that protects organisms from microbial invasion, ensures the integrity of a self-recognized inventory of proteins and other macromolecules, prevents cancer by recognizing and removing cells that present tumour antigens, and has an important role in tissue repair. The benefits of inflammation overcome the risks associated with autoimmune disease and inflammageing. As such, inflammation has a positive influence on health when activated transiently — that is, when inflammation deploys quickly and fully armed in response to an adequate stimulation, successfully eliminates the challenge, and recedes quickly to a baseline resting state. When inflammation becomes chronic, however, problems arise and deleterious effects emerge, as first described by Rudolph Virchow (1821–1902)279. Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as certain chronic infections, cancer, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and HIV, cause syndromes that share many characteristics with accelerated ageing and frailty, including sarcopenia, weight loss, and loss of energy coupled with fatigability. Therefore, chronically elevated levels of circulating pro-inflammatory markers observed with ageing are unsurprisingly also associated with similar signs and symptoms to those of chronic disease, although the age-related symptoms develop progressively and over a longer time frame.

The mechanisms for these actions are not fully understood, but a comprehensive analysis of the literature reveals that inflammation is often associated with a catabolic state (Fig. 3). As described previously in this Review, inflammation is associated with anabolic resistance in muscle, which is caused partly by inhibition of the perfusion adjustment to anabolic stimuli and partly by inhibition of IGF1 production and signalling236–240. Chronic inflammation causes anaemia via direct inhibition of iron absorption and recycling as well as interference with erythropoietin production and signalling3,280. Evidence indicates that inflammation causes insulin resistance. In particular, TNF receptor superfamily member 1A and Toll-like receptor 4 block insulin signalling through Janus kinase activation, which causes serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 and 2, contributing to insulin resistance281–283. Conversely, evidence also indicates that insulin resistance promotes the accumulation of M1 macrophages and fosters inflammation in adipose tissue through the production of CCL2 (reF.284). Pro-inflammatory cytokines — including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-11, IL-15, IL-17, and TNF — stimulate bone resorption and almost certainly contribute to osteoporosis285. For example, bone resorption is increased in patients with inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis286. Studies in cultured cells show that IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF induce mitochondrial dysfunction with reduced ATP synthesis-driven respiration, reduction of the NAD+:NADH ratio, and reduced mRNA levels of PPARGC1A (encoding peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α; PGC1α), suggesting that mitochondrial biogenesis is impaired287. Studies conducted both in vitro and in animal models suggest that inflammation in general, and IL-1β and IFNα in particular, inhibit neurogenesis and reduce the magnitude of neurogenesis that is normally induced by exercise288,289. These data delineate an overall mechanism by which inflammageing affects multiple physiological systems and phenotypes. During an infection that unleashes an inflammatory response, the physiological and metabolic state of the organism is focused on defence, and all other anabolic activities are paused, including nondefensive functions of the immune system, such as surveillance of damage and continuous repair in tissue, which mostly rely on growth factors. If this condition is temporary, turnover and repair of macromolecules, organelles, and cells can be delayed, avoiding irreversible damage. However, in older individuals, inflammation remains chronically activated, either because of continued stress from the inflammation source or because of a primary immune dysregulation. In the absence of macromolecular and organellar recycling, the accumulation of damage can reach a critical threshold, thereby causing severe functional consequences that become difficult or impossible to reverse, conferring the clinical syndrome of frailty.

Conclusions

On the basis of the data and the hypotheses presented in this Review, modulating inflammageing is a promising strategy not only to prevent CVD but also to slow the decline of health that occurs with ageing. Modulating inflammation is likely to be most effective at the early stage of health decline, at a time when the compensatory capacity of the organism is not completely exhausted and might still counteract physiological and functional declines. New pharmacological treatments that selectively affect some of the signalling pathways that regulate inflammation are needed to balance the relationship between risks and benefits. Early treatments will require early diagnosis and availability of a signature biomarker profile that allows for a differential diagnosis between true inflammageing and chronic inflammation sustained by the persistence of an infectious or toxic cause. Ultimately, RCTs are needed to test the hypothesis that modulating inflammation prevents the development of CVD as well as multimorbidity, disability, and frailty.

Acknowledgements

The authors received support from the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD, USA. The authors thank A. Cornish (National Institute on Aging) for help in editing the manuscript and for the many suggestions that greatly improved the quality of this work, in particular the microbiota section.

Fig. 1 | Potential causes of inflammageing.

Several genetic variants associated with high levels of inflammatory markers or increased response to inflammatory stimuli have been identified; the most relevant factors are indicated in parentheses. In central obesity, visceral fat tissue is infiltrated by T cells, macrophages, and monocytes. T cells secrete IFNγ, which stimulates the production of several chemokines by adipocytes, including C-C motif chemokine 2 (CCL2), CCL5, C-X-C motif chemokine 9 (CXCL9), and CXCL10, which further amplify tissue T cell infiltration. The number of B cells and macrophages in visceral adipose tissue from obese individuals is also increased and is correlated with BMI55. A specific subset of B cells expressing the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily ligand superfamily member 9 and producing TNF, IFNγ, and granzyme B accumulates in the abdominal cavity of older individuals56. Cytokines released by B cells contribute to the phenotypic change of adipocytes in the visceral cavity, causing them to release adipokines, other pro-inflammatory factors, and cell debris52. Activated monocytes that give rise to M1 and M2 macrophages produce even more inflammatory compounds57. Damaged mitochondria that cannot be repaired by repeated cycles of fission and fusion and are not recycled owing to defective autophagy release damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that trigger the NLRP3 inflammasome and lead to caspase 1-dependent production of IL-1β and IL-18. Oxidative stress is one of the possible triggers of cell senescence, which can be induced by several other stressors, including epigenetic alterations. Senescent cells, through the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), secrete large quantities of cytokines, chemokines, and other molecules, locally triggering more cell senescence (paracrine senescence) and contributing to inflammageing. Studies have emphasized the role of age-related changes in the microbiome and increases in the gut mucosa permeability that lead to bacterial product release into the blood and stimulate an inflammatory response, in part through the NLRP3 inflammasome. In addition, part of inflammageing is probably caused by chronic infections (for example, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or human Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection) and intrinsic defective mechanisms in immune cells that might involve metabolic stress as well as age-related changes in microRNA transcription. Of note, other important triggers of cell senescence, such as genomic instability, the activation of oncogenes, and the inhibition of tumour-suppressor genes, are not shown in the figure but might be part of the same mechanism.

Fig. 2 | Inflammageing is a risk factor for multiple chronic diseases.

Inflammageing, defined as an age-related increase in the levels of pro-inflammatory markers in blood and tissues, is a strong risk factor for multiple diseases that are highly prevalent and frequent causes of disability in elderly individuals but are pathophysiologically uncorrelated. Mild chronic inflammation is generally considered to be a biomarker of accelerated biological ageing or one of the mechanisms by which the ageing process is associated with increased global susceptibility to all diseases. Cardiovascular diseases, chronic kidney disease, cancer, depression, dementia, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, and anaemia are shown in the figure as examples because extensive evidence indicates that inflammation contributes to the development of these diseases in old age, but the list is far from exhaustive3,138,139,142,143,196. Concordant with this view, elevated blood levels of pro-inflammatory markers (such as IL-6) are a powerful risk factor for multimorbidity (the number of coexisting diseases) and predict future rates of change in multimorbidity. Unsurprisingly, inflammageing is also a strong risk factor for typical geriatric conditions, such as physical and cognitive disability, frailty, and premature death. Although this effect is primarily mediated by multimorbidity, evidence also indicates that inflammation interferes with the maintenance and repair that constantly occur in all tissues, leading to accumulation of damage that contributes to frailty.

Fig. 3 | Inflammageing induces a catabolic state.

Inflammation causes pathological states linked with frailty, cardiovascular disease, and ageing. Sarcopenia: the induction of anabolic resistance in muscle inhibits the perfusion adjustment to anabolic stimuli as well as insulin-like growth factor (IGF1) production and signalling235–240. Anaemia: chronic elevation of IL-6 levels causes anaemia through the production of hepcidin, reduction of the transmembrane iron transporter ferroportin, and inhibition of iron absorption and recycling as well as interference with erythropoietin (EPO) production and signalling3,280. Insulin resistance: tumour necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 1A (TNF-R1) and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) block insulin signalling through Janus kinase (JAK) activation, which causes serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) and IRS2, contributing to insulin resistance283. Osteoporosis: TNF, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF ligand superfamily member 11 (RANKL) contribute to osteoporosis by stimulating osteoclast growth and activity and inhibiting the production of osteocalcin290,291. Mitochondria biogenesis: studies in vitro show that TNF, IL-1β, and IL-6 induce mitochondrial dysfunction with reduced ATP synthesis-driven respiration, a reduced NAD+:NADH ratio, and reduced mRNA levels of PPARGC1A (encoding peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α; PGC1α), suggesting impairment in mitochondrial biogenesis287. Neurogenesis: pro-inflammatory cytokines interfere with the biological activity of neuronal growth factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, thereby affecting neurogenesis and plasticity292. Accordingly, the addition of IFNα to human hippocampal progenitor cells reduces neurogenesis289. These are just few examples of how chronic inflammation promotes a catabolic state, suggesting a possible unifying hypothesis. During an acute bout of inflammation, induced for example by an infection, the surveillance of damage and continuous repair functions in multiple tissues are chronically inhibited, leading to accumulated damage in organelles and macromolecules. Over time, this damage accumulation across different tissues and organs could become so severe that it cannot be compensated for and causes irreversible frailty.

Table 1 | Clinical trials of anti-inflammatory drugs in chronic inflammatory diseases

Trial name	Participants	Design	n	Drug	Dosage	Type of
treatment	Outcome	Result	Refs	
CANTOS	Patients with
previous MI and
hsCRP ≥2mg/l	Randomized	10,061	Canakinumab	150 mg every
3 months	Secondary
prevention	Cardiovascular
events	Beneficial	169,293	
CIRT	Patients with
previous MI and
either T2DM
or metabolic
syndrome	Randomized	7,000	Methotrexate	15–20 mg
weekly	Secondary
prevention	Cardiovascular
events	Ongoing	170	
LoDoCo	Patients with
clinically stable
CAD	Randomized	532	Colchicine	0.5 mg daily	Primary and
Secondary
prevention	Cardiovascular
events	Beneficial	172	
LoDoCo2	Patients with
clinically stable
CAD	Randomized	3,000	Colchicine	0.5 mg daily	Primary and
Secondary
prevention	Cardiovascular
events	Ongoing	294	
COLCOT	Patients with a
Documented
acute MI in the
past 30 days	Randomized	4,500	Colchicine	0.5 mg daily	Secondary
prevention	Cardiovascular
events	Ongoing	173	
ENTRACTE	Patients with
moderate-
to-severe
rheumatoid
arthritis	Randomized	3,080	Tocilizumab	8mg/kg every
4 weeks	Prevention	Cardiovascular
events	Ongoing	166	
PEDRIAN	Patients with
T2DM and stage
3–4 CKD	Randomized	169	Pentoxifylline	1,200 mg daily	Prevention	CKD
progression	Beneficial	295	
NA	Patients aged
≥25 years with
T1DM or T2DMa	Randomized	416	Monoclonal
anti-TGFβ1
antibody	2, 10, or 50 mg
Monthly
(subcutaneous)	Prevention	CKD
progression	Not
beneficial	296	
NA	Patients with a
recent TIA or
minor ischaemic
stroke and no
contraindication
to aspirin	Meta-
analysis
of two
randomized
trialsb	5,139+
2,449	Aspirin	300, 500, or
1,200 mg daily	Primary
prevention	Colorectal
cancer	Beneficial	297	
NA	Patients with a
recent TIA or
minor ischaemic
stroke and no
contraindication
to aspirin	Meta-
analysis
of four
randomized
trialsc	14,033	Aspirin	30, 75, 283,
300, 500, or
1,200 mg daily	Primary
prevention	Colorectal
cancer	Beneficial	298	
CANTOS	Patients with
previous MI and
hsCRP ≥2mg/l	Randomized	10,061	Canakinumab	150 or 300 mg
every 3 months	Primary
prevention	Lung cancer	Beneficial	168	
NA	Patients with
osteoarthritis	Meta-
Analysis
of five
randomized
trialsd	1,497	Ibuprofen,
naproxen, or
celecoxib	800 mg three
times daily,
500 mg twice
daily, or 200 mg
daily	Treatment	Depressive
symptoms	Beneficial	299	
ADAPT	Individuals
aged ≥70 years,
cognitively
healthy , and with
a family history of
AD-like dementia	Randomized	2,528	Celecoxib or
naproxen	200 mg twice
daily or 220 mg
twice daily	Treatment	Depressive
symptoms	Not
beneficial	300	
NA	Outpatients with
major depression	Randomized	60	Infliximab	5mg/kg (three
infusions)	Treatment	Depressive
symptoms	Beneficial in
patients with
high baseline
inflammatory
blood
biomarkers	301	
NA	Patients with
moderate-to-
severe psoriasis	Randomized	96	Adalimumab	40 mg every
other week	Treatment	Depressive
symptoms	Beneficial	302	
NA	Patients with
moderate-
to-severe
psoriasis	Randomized	618	Etanercept	50 mg twice
weekly	Treatment	Depressive
symptoms	Beneficial	303	
NA	Patients with
probable AD	Randomized	40	Nimesulide	100 mg twice
daily	Treatment	AD	Not
beneficial	304	
NSAID study	Patients with
mild-to-moderate
AD	Randomized	351	Rofecoxib
or naproxen
sodium	25 mg once
daily or 220 mg
twice daily	Treatment	AD	Not
beneficial	305	
NA	Patients with mild
or moderate AD
aged ≥50 years	Randomized	692	Rofecoxib	25 mg daily	Treatment	AD	Not
beneficial	306	
NA	Patients with
mild-to-moderate
AD	Randomized	41	Diclofenac	50 mg daily	Treatment	AD	Not
beneficial	307	
ADAPT	Individuals
aged ≥70 years,
cognitively
healthy , and with
a family history
of AD	Randomized	2,117	Celecoxib or
naproxen	200 mg twice
daily or 220 mg
twice daily	Primary
prevention	AD	Not
beneficial	308	
TOMORROW	Cognitively
healthy
participants
at high risk of
developing MCI	Randomized	3,500	Pioglitazone	0.8 mg daily	Prevention	Onset of MI
or MCI owing
to AD	Ongoing	309,310	
Metformin
for
Preventing
Frailty in
High-risk
Older Adults	Older adults with
impaired glucose
tolerance	Randomized	120	Metformin	1,000 mg twice
daily	Prevention	Frailty	Ongoing	256	
TAME	Individuals aged
65–79 years	Randomized	3,000	Metformin	850 mg twice
daily	Prevention	Cardiovascular
events, cancer,
dementia, and
mortality	Ongoing	277	
AD, Alzheimer disease; CAD coronary artery disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; hsCRP, C-reactive protein measured by high-sensitivity assay; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MI, myocardial infarction; NA, not applicable; T1DM, type 1 diabetes mellitus; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; TGFβ1, transforming growth factor-β1; TIA, transient ischaemic attack.

a Patients also had a serum creatinine level of 1.3–3.3 mg/dl for women or 1.5–3.5 mg/dl for men (or estimated glomerular filtration rate of 20–60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and a 24-h urine protein: creatinine ratio ≥800 mg/g.

b British Doctors Aspirin Trial and UK-TIA Aspirin Trial.

c Thrombosis Prevention Trial, British Doctors Aspirin Trial, Swedish Aspirin Low Dose Trial, and UK-TIA Aspirin Trial.

d Five phase IV development trials conducted by Pfizer.

Key points

High levels of pro-inflammatory markers in the blood and other tissues are often detected in older individuals and predict the risk of cardiovascular diseases, frailty, multimorbidity, and decline of physical and cognitive function.

In individuals with obesity, visceral fat produces pro-inflammatory and chemotactic compounds and is infiltrated by macrophages, lymphocytes, and senescent cells with a senescence-associated secretory phenotype that contributes to inflammageing.

Mechanisms potentially underlying inflammageing include genomic instability, cell senescence, mitochondria dysfunction, microbiota composition changes, NLRP3 inflammasome activation, primary dysregulation of immune cells, and chronic infections.

Clinical trials suggest that modulating inflammation prevents cardiovascular diseases, but studies to explore the effects on other chronic diseases, frailty, and disability are scarce and controversial.

Inflammageing can complicate the clinical features of cardiovascular disease in older individuals by causing an energetic imbalance towards catabolism and interfering with homeostatic signalling, leading to frailty.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Review criteria

The information in this Review is based on a search of the scientific literature published since 2008 using the Medline database and the search terms: “inflammaging”, “inflammation and cardiovascular disease and aging”, “inflammation and frailty”, or “cardiovascular disease and frailty”. The authors reviewed all 3,377 relevant abstracts and selected the manu-scripts for which information is reported in this Review. Of note, some articles &gt;10 years old were also cited because their content was considered critical for the topic addressed.


1. Bektas A , Schurman SH , Sen R &amp; Ferrucci L Aging, inflammation and the environment. Exp. Gerontol 10.1016/j.exger.2017.12.015 (2018).
2. Franceschi C Inflamm-aging. An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann. NY Acad. Sci 908 , 244–254 (2000).10911963
3. Ferrucci L Proinflammatory state, hepcidin, and anemia in older persons. Blood 115 , 3810–3816 (2010).20081092
4. Fulop T Immunosenescence and inflamm-aging as two sides of the same coin: friends or foes? Frontiers Immunol 8 , 1960 (2018).
5. Cohen HJ , Pieper CF , Harris T , Rao KM &amp; Currie MS The association of plasma IL-6 levels with functional disability in community-dwelling elderly. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 52 , M201–M208 (1997).9224431
6. Newman AB Trajectories of function and biomarkers with age: the CHS All Stars Study. Int. J. Epidemiol 45 , 1135–1145 (2016).27272182
7. Gerli R Chemokines, sTNF-Rs and sCD30 serum levels in healthy aged people and centenarians. Mech. Ageing Dev 121 , 37–46 (2000).11164458
8. Franceschi C , Garagnani P , Vitale G , Capri M &amp; Salvioli S Inflammaging and ‘garb-aging’. Trends Endocrinol. Metab 28 , 199–212 (2017).27789101
9. Ruparelia N , Chai JT , Fisher EA &amp; Choudhury RP Inflammatory processes in cardiovascular disease: a route to targeted therapies. Nat. Rev. Cardiol 14 , 133–144 (2017).27905474
10. Leonardi GC , Accardi G , Monastero R , Nicoletti F &amp; Libra M Ageing: from inflammation to cancer. Immun. Ageing 15 , 1 (2018).29387133
11. Salimi S Inflammation and trajectory of renal function in community-dwelling older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 66 , 804–811 (2018).29360163
12. Gorelick PB Role of inflammation in cognitive impairment: results of observational epidemiological studies and clinical trials. Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1207 , 155–162 (2010).20955439
13. Miller AH &amp; Raison CL The role of inflammation in depression: From evolutionary imperative to modern treatment target. Nat. Rev. Immunol 16 , 22–34 (2016).26711676
14. Fabbri E Aging and the burden of multimorbidity: associations with inflammatory and anabolic hormonal biomarkers. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 70 , 63–70 (2015).25104822
15. Ferrucci L Serum IL-6 level and the development of disability in older persons. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 47 , 639–646 (1999).10366160
16. Kuo H , Bean JF , Yen C &amp; Leveille SG Linking C-reactive protein to late-life disability in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999–2002. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 61 , 380–387 (2006).16611705
17. Schaap LA Higher inflammatory marker levels in older persons: associations with 5-year change in muscle mass and muscle strength. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 64 , 1183–1189 (2009).19622801
18. Soysal P Inflammation and frailty in the elderly: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing Res. Rev 31 , 1–8 (2016).27592340
19. Volpato S Cardiovascular disease, interleukin-6, and risk of mortality in older women: the women’s health and aging study. Circulation 103 , 947–953 (2001).11181468
20. Hodes RJ Disease drivers of aging. Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1386 , 45–68 (2016).27943360
21. Smith AJP &amp; Humphries SE Cytokine and cytokine receptor gene polymorphisms and their functionality. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 20 , 43–59 (2009).19038572
22. Rafiq S Common genetic variation in the gene encoding interleukin-1-receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) is associated with altered circulating IL-1RA levels. Genes Immun 8 , 344–351 (2007).17443229
23. Sarwar N Interleukin-6 receptor pathways in coronary heart disease: a collaborative meta-analysis of 82 studies. Lancet 379 , 1205–1213 (2012).22421339
24. Swerdlow DI The interleukin-6 receptor as a target for prevention of coronary heart disease: a mendelian randomisation analysis. Lancet 379 , 1214–1224 (2012).22421340
25. Dehghan A Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in &gt;80 000 subjects identifies multiple loci for C-reactive protein levels. Circulation 123 , 731–738 (2011).21300955
26. Reiner AP Polymorphisms of the IL1-receptor antagonist gene (IL1RN) are associated with multiple markers of systemic inflammation. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 28 , 1407–1412 (2008).18451331
27. Carrol ED The IL1RN promoter rs4251961 correlates with IL-1 receptor antagonist concentrations in human infection and is differentially regulated by GATA-1. J. Immunol 186 , 2329–2335 (2011).21248262
28. Herder C Genetic determinants of circulating interleukin-1 receptor antagonist levels and their association with glycemic traits. Diabetes 63 , 4343–4359 (2014).24969107
29. Wu X IL-1 receptor antagonist gene as a predictive biomarker of progression of knee osteoarthritis in a population cohort. Osteoarthr. Cartil 21 , 930–938 (2013).23602982
30. Dai L , Liu D , Guo H , Wang Y &amp; Bai Y Association between polymorphism in the promoter region of interleukin 6 (−174 G/C) and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis. Neurol. J 259 , 414–419 (2012).
31. Hou H Association of interleukin-6 gene polymorphism with coronary artery disease: an updated systematic review and cumulative meta-analysis. Inflamm. Res 64 , 707–720 (2015).26174156
32. Testa R Interleukin-6–174 G &gt; C polymorphism affects the association between IL-6 plasma levels and insulin resistance in type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract 71 , 299–305 (2006).16140413
33. Moffett SP Association of the G-174C variant in the interleukin-6 promoter region with bone loss and fracture risk in older women. J. Bone Miner. Res 19 , 1612–1618 (2004).15355555
34. Fishman D The effect of novel polymorphisms in the interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene on IL-6 transcription and plasma IL-6 levels, and an association with systemic-onset juvenile chronic arthritis. J. Clin. Invest 102 , 1369–1376 (1998).9769329
35. Zeng Y Novel loci and pathways significantly associated with longevity. Sci. Rep 6 , 21243 (2016).26912274
36. Khandaker GM , Zammit S , Burgess S , Lewis G &amp; Jones PB Association between a functional interleukin 6 receptor genetic variant and risk of depression and psychosis in a population-based birth cohort. Brain. Behav. Immun 69 , 264–272 (2017).29197507
37. Ferreira RC Functional IL6R 358Ala allele impairs classical IL-6 receptor signaling and influences risk of diverse inflammatory diseases. PLoS Genet 9 , e1003444 (2013).23593036
38. Lange LA Association of polymorphisms in the CRP gene with circulating C-reactive protein levels and cardiovascular events. JAMA 296 , 2703 (2006).17164456
39. Peters MJ The transcriptional landscape of age in human peripheral blood. Nat. Commun 6 , 8570 (2015).26490707
40. Pilling LC Gene expression markers of age-related inflammation in two human cohorts. Exp. Gerontol 70 , 37–45 (2015).26087330
41. Fabian MR , Sonenberg N &amp; Filipowicz W Regulation of mRNA translation and stability by microRNAs. Annu. Rev. Biochem 79 , 351–379 (2010).20533884
42. Noren Hooten N microRNA expression patterns reveal differential expression of target genes with age. PLoS ONE 5 , e10724 (2010).20505758
43. Lai C-Y Modulated expression of human peripheral blood microRNAs from infancy to adulthood and its role in aging. Aging Cell 13 , 679–689 (2014).24803090
44. Olivieri F Age-related differences in the expression of circulating microRNAs: miR-21 as a new circulating marker of inflammaging. Mech. Ageing Dev 133 , 675–685 (2012).23041385
45. Freedman JE Diverse human extracellular RNAs are widely detected in human plasma. Nat. Commun 7 , 11106 (2016).27112789
46. Noren Hooten N Age-related changes in microRNA levels in serum. Aging 5 , 725–740 (2013).24088671
47. Ameling S Associations of circulating plasma microRNAs with age, body mass index and sex in a population-based study. BMC Med. Genomics 8 , 61 (2015).26462558
48. Zhang H Investigation of microRNA expression in human serum during the aging process. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 70 , 102–109 (2015).25165030
49. Dluzen DF , Noren Hooten N &amp; Evans MK Extracellular. RNA in aging. WIREs RNA 10.1002/wrna.1385 (2017).
50. Olivieri F Age- and glycemia-related miR-126–3p levels in plasma and endothelial cells. Aging (Albany. NY) 6 , 771–787 (2014).25324472
51. Olivieri F DNA damage response (DDR) and senescence: shuttled inflamma-miRNAs on the stage of inflamm-aging. Oncotarget 6 , 35509–35521 (2015).26431329
52. Frasca D , Blomberg BB &amp; Paganelli R Aging, obesity, and inflammatory age-related diseases. Front. Immunol 8 , 1–10 (2017).28149297
53. Rocha VZ &amp; Libby P Obesity, inflammation, and atherosclerosis. Nat. Rev. Cardiol 6 , 399–409 (2009).19399028
54. Vandanmagsar B The NLRP3 inflammasome instigates obesity-induced inflammation and insulin resistance. Nat. Med 17 , 179–189 (2011).21217695
55. Frasca D &amp; Blomberg BB Adipose tissue inflammation induces B cell inflammation and decreases B cell function in aging. Front. Immunol 8 , 1003 (2017).28894445
56. Lee-Chang C Accumulation of 4–1BBL+ B cells in the elderly induces the generation of granzyme-B+ CD8+ T cells with potential antitumor activity. Blood 124 , 1450–1459 (2014).25037628
57. Weisberg SP Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. J. Clin. Invest 112 , 1796–1808 (2003).14679176
58. Panagiotakos DB , Pitsavos C , Yannakoulia M , Chrysohoou C &amp; Stefanadis C The implication of obesity and central fat on markers of chronic inflammation: The ATTICA study. Atherosclerosis 183 , 308–315 (2005).16285994
59. Clément K Weight loss regulates inflammation-related genes in white adipose tissue of obese subjects. FASEB J 18 , 1657–1669 (2004).15522911
60. Nicklas BJ , You T &amp; Pahor M Behavioural treatments for chronic systemic inflammation: effects of dietary weight loss and exercise training. Can. Med. Assoc. J 172 , 1199–1209 (2005).15851714
61. Illán-Gómez F Obesity and inflammation: change in adiponectin, C-reactive protein, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 after bariatric surgery. Obes. Surg 22 , 950–955 (2012).22527592
62. Meydani SN Long-term moderate calorie restriction inhibits inflammation without impairing cell-mediated immunity: a randomized controlled trial in non-obese humans. Aging 8 , 1416–1431 (2016).27410480
63. Zomer E Interventions that cause weight loss and the impact on cardiovascular risk factors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes. Rev 17 , 1001–1011 (2016).27324830
64. Ma C Effects of weight loss interventions for adults who are obese on mortality, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 359 , j4849 (2017).29138133
65. Villareal DT Aerobic or resistance exercise, or both, in dieting obese older adults. N. Engl. J. Med 376 , 1943–1955 (2017).28514618
66. Mariat D The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human microbiota changes with age. BMC Microbiol 9 , 123 (2009).19508720
67. Biagi E Gut microbiota and extreme longevity. Curr. Biol 26 , 1480–1485 (2016).27185560
68. Shapiro H , Thaiss CA , Levy M &amp; Elinav E The cross talk between microbiota and the immune system: metabolites take center stage. Curr. Opin. Immunol 30 , 54–62 (2014).25064714
69. Rampelli S Functional metagenomic profiling of intestinal microbiome in extreme ageing. Aging 5 , 902–912 (2013).24334635
70. Biagi E Through ageing, and beyond: gut microbiota and inflammatory status in seniors and centenarians. PLoS ONE 5 , e10667 (2010).20498852
71. Zapata HJ &amp; Quagliarello VJ The microbiota and microbiome in aging: potential implications in health and age-related diseases. Am. J. Geriatr. Soc 63 , 776–781 (2015).
72. Thevaranjan N Age-associated microbial dysbiosis promotes intestinal permeability, systemic inflammation, and macrophage dysfunction. Cell Host Microbe 21 , 455–466.e4 (2017).28407483
73. Picca A Gut dysbiosis and muscle aging: searching for novel targets against sarcopenia. Mediators Inflamm 2018 , 7026198 (2018).29686533
74. van Tongeren SP , Slaets JPJ , Harmsen HJM &amp; Welling GW Fecal microbiota composition and frailty. Appl. Environ. Microbiol 71 , 6438–6442 (2005).16204576
75. O’Toole PW &amp; Jeffery IB Gut microbiota and aging. Science 350 , 1214–1215 (2015).26785481
76. Mello AM , Paroni G , Daragjati J &amp; Pilotto A Gastrointestinal microbiota and their contribution to healthy aging. Dig. Dis 34 , 194–201 (2016).27028130
77. Barrios C Gut-microbiota-metabolite axis in early renal function decline. PLoS ONE 10 , e0134311 (2015).26241311
78. Everard A Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium controls diet-induced obesity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110 , 9066–9071 (2013).23671105
79. Turroni F Molecular dialogue between the human gut microbiota and the host: a Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium perspective. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 71 , 183–203 (2014).23516017
80. Ott B Effect of caloric restriction on gut permeability, inflammation markers, and fecal microbiota in obese women. Sci. Rep 7 , 11955 (2017).28931850
81. Westfall S Microbiome, probiotics and neurodegenerative diseases: deciphering the gut brain axis. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 74 , 3769–3787 (2017).28643167
82. Kim YA , Keogh JB &amp; Clifton PM Probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and insulin sensitivity. Nutr. Res. Rev 31 , 35–51 (2018).29037268
83. Liu Y , Gibson GR &amp; Walton GE An in vitro approach to study effects of prebiotics and probiotics on the faecal microbiota and selected immune parameters relevant to the elderly. PLoS ONE 11 , e0162604 (2016).27612304
84. Nagpal R Gut microbiota in health and disease: an overview focused on metabolic inflammation. Benef. Microbes 7 , 181–194 (2016).26645350
85. Turchet P , Laurenzano M , Auboiron S &amp; Antoine JM Effect of fermented milk containing the probiotic Lactobacillus casei DN-114001 on winter infections in free-living elderly subjects: a randomised, controlled pilot study. J. Nutr. Health Aging 7 , 75–77 (2003).12679825
86. López-Otín C , Blasco MA , Partridge L , Serrano M &amp; Kroemer G The hallmarks of aging. Cell 153 , 1194–1217 (2013).23746838
87. Kennedy BK Geroscience: linking aging to chronic disease. Cell 159 , 709–713 (2014).25417146
88. Campisi J &amp; D’Adda Di Fagagna F Cellular senescence: when bad things happen to good cells. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol 8 , 729–740 (2007).17667954
89. Sharpless NE &amp; Sherr CJ Forging a signature of in vivo senescence. Nat. Rev. Cancer 15 , 397–408 (2015).26105537
90. Bernardes de Jesus B &amp; Blasco MA Assessing cell and organ senescence biomarkers. Circ. Res 111 , 97–109 (2012).22723221
91. Jeck WR , Siebold AP &amp; Sharpless NE Review: a meta-analysis of GWAS and age-associated diseases. Aging Cell 11 , 727–731 (2012).22888763
92. Johnson SC , Dong X , Vijg J &amp; Suh Y Genetic evidence for common pathways in human age-related diseases. Aging Cell 14 , 809–817 (2015).26077337
93. Melzer D A common variant of the p16INK4a genetic region is associated with physical function in older people. Mech. Ageing Dev 128 , 370–377 (2007).17459456
94. van Deursen JM The role of senescent cells in ageing. Nature 509 , 439–446 (2014).24848057
95. Hernandez-Segura A Unmasking transcriptional heterogeneity in senescent cells. Curr. Biol 27 , 2652–2660.e4 (2017).28844647
96. Borodkina AV , Deryabin PI , Giukova AA &amp; Nikolsky NN ‘Social life’ of senescent sells: what is SASP and why study it? Acta Naturae 10 , 4–14 (2018).
97. Herbig U , Ferreira M , Condel L , Carey D &amp; Sedivy JM Cellular senescence in aging primates. Science 311 , 1257 (2006).16456035
98. Waaijer MEC The number of p16INK4a positive cells in human skin reflects biological age. Aging Cell 11 , 722–725 (2012).22612594
99. Liu Y Expression of p16INK4a in peripheral blood T-cells is a biomarker of human aging. Aging Cell 8 , 439–448 (2009).19485966
100. Koppelstaetter C Markers of cellular senescence in zero hour biopsies predict outcome in renal transplantation. Aging Cell 7 , 491–497 (2008).18462273
101. Helman A p16Ink4a-induced senescence of pancreatic beta cells enhances insulin secretion. Nat. Med 22 , 412–420 (2016).26950362
102. Rossman MJ Endothelial cell senescence with aging in healthy humans: prevention by habitual exercise and relation to vascular endothelial function. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol 313 , H890–H895 (2017).28971843
103. Diekman BO Expression of p16INK4a is a biomarker of chondrocyte aging but does not cause osteoarthritis. Aging Cell 10.1111/acel.12771 (2018).
104. Chimenti C Senescence and death of primitive cells and myocytes lead to premature cardiac aging and heart failure. Circ. Res 93 , 604–613 (2003).12958145
105. Kajstura J Myocyte turnover in the aging human heart. Circ. Res 107 , 1374–1386 (2010).21088285
106. Gregor MF &amp; Hotamisligil GS Inflammatory mechanisms in obesity. Annu. Rev. Immunol 29 , 415–445 (2011).21219177
107. Ogrodnik M Cellular senescence drives age-dependent hepatic steatosis. Nat. Commun 8 , 15691 (2017).28608850
108. Klenerman P &amp; Oxenius A T cell responses to cytomegalovirus. Nat. Rev. Immunol 16 , 367–377 (2016).27108521
109. Sansoni P New advances in CMV and immunosenescence. Exp. Gerontol 55 , 54–62 (2014).24703889
110. Fulop T , Larbi A &amp; Pawelec G Human T cell aging and the impact of persistent viral infections. Front. Immunol 4 , 271 (2013).24062739
111. Baker DJ Clearance of p16 Ink4a-positive senescent cells delays ageing-associated disorders. Nature 479 , 232–236 (2011).22048312
112. Baker DJ Naturally occurring p16 Ink4a-positive cells shorten healthy lifespan. Nature 530 , 184–189 (2016).26840489
113. Medina CB &amp; Ravichandran KS Do not let death do us part: ‘find-me’ signals in communication between dying cells and the phagocytes. Cell Death Differ 23 , 979–989 (2016).26891690
114. Youm YH Canonical Nlrp3 inflammasome links systemic low-grade inflammation to functional decline in aging. Cell Metab 18 , 519–532 (2013).24093676
115. Goldberg EL &amp; Dixit VD Drivers of age-related inflammation and strategies for healthspan extension. Immunol. Rev 265 , 63–74 (2015).25879284
116. Medzhitov R &amp; Janeway CAJ Decoding the patterns of self and nonself by the innate immune system. Science 296 , 298–300 (2002).11951031
117. Kepp O , Galluzzi L &amp; Kroemer G Mitochondrial control of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Nat. Immunol 12 , 199–200 (2011).21321591
118. Ferrucci L The origins of age-related proinflammatory state. Blood 105 , 2294–2299 (2005).15572589
119. Sies H , Berndt C &amp; Jones DP Oxidative stress. Annu. Rev. Biochem 86 , 715–748 (2017).28441057
120. Bektas A Age-associated alterations in inducible gene transcription in human CD4+ T lymphocytes. Aging 5 , 18–36 (2013).23385138
121. Bektas A Age-associated changes in basal NF-κB function in human CD4+ T lymphocytes via dysregulation of PI3 kinase. Aging 6 , 957–974 (2014).25553802
122. Cannon MJ , Schmid DS &amp; Hyde TB Review of cytomegalovirus seroprevalence and demographic characteristics associated with infection. Rev. Med. Virol 20 , 202–213 (2010).20564615
123. Vescovini R Massive load of functional effector CD4+ and CD8+ T cells against cytomegalovirus in very old subjects. J. Immunol 179 , 4283–4291 (2007).17785869
124. Simon CO CD8 T cells control cytomegalovirus latency by epitope-specific sensing of transcriptional reactivation. J. Virol 80 , 10436–10456 (2006).16928768
125. Roberts ET , Haan MN , Dowd JB &amp; Aiello AE Cytomegalovirus antibody levels, inflammation, and mortality among elderly Latinos over 9 years of follow-up. Am. J. Epidemiol 172 , 363–371 (2010).20660122
126. Spyridopoulos I CMV seropositivity and T-cell senescence predict increased cardiovascular mortality in octogenarians: results from the Newcastle 85+ study. Aging Cell 15 , 389–392 (2016).26696322
127. Adriaensen W CD4:8 ratio above 5 is associated with all-cause mortality in CMV-seronegative very old women: results from the BELFRAIL study. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 72 , 1155–1162 (2017).27927759
128. Brodin P Variation in the human immune system is largely driven by non-heritable influences. Cell 160 , 37–47 (2015).25594173
129. Aiello AE , Chiu Y-L &amp; Frasca D How does cytomegalovirus factor into diseases of aging and vaccine responses, and by what mechanisms? GeroScience 39 , 261–271 (2017).28624868
130. Goldeck D No strong correlations between serum cytokine levels, CMV serostatus and hand-grip strength in older subjects in the Berlin BASE-II cohort. Biogerontology 17 , 189–198 (2016).25906063
131. Nasi M Ageing and inflammation in patients with HIV infection. Clin. Exp. Immunol 187 , 44–52 (2017).27198731
132. Neuhaus J Markers of inflammation, coagulation, and renal function are elevated in adults with HIV infection. J. Infect. Dis 201 , 1788–1795 (2010).20446848
133. Losina E Projecting 10-year, 20-year, and lifetime risks of cardiovascular disease in persons living with human immunodeficiency virus in the United States. Clin. Infect. Dis 65 , 1266–1271 (2017).28605504
134. Brothers TD Frailty in people aging with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. J. Infect. Dis 210 , 1170–1179 (2014).24903667
135. Stein JH &amp; Hsue PY Inflammation, immune activation, and CVD risk in individuals with HIV infection. JAMA 308 , 405–406 (2012).22820794
136. Brenchley JM Microbial translocation is a cause of systemic immune activation in chronic HIV infection. Nat. Med 12 , 1365–1371 (2006).17115046
137. Grunfeld C Association of upper trunk and visceral adipose tissue volume with insulin resistance in control and HIV-infected subjects in the FRAM study. J. Acquir. Immune Def. Syndr 46 , 283–290 (2007).
138. Odegaard AO Oxidative stress, inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and incidence of type 2 diabetes. Cardiovasc. Diabetol 15 , 51 (2016).27013319
139. Lai KSP Peripheral inflammatory markers in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 175 studies. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 88 , 876–882 (2017).28794151
140. Iseme RA Is osteoporosis an autoimmune mediated disorder? Bone Rep 7 , 121–131 (2017).29124082
141. Dalle S , Rossmeislova L &amp; Koppo K The role of inflammation in age-related sarcopenia. Front. Physiol 8 , 1045 (2017).29311975
142. Amdur RL Inflammation and progression of CKD: the CRIC study. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 11 , 1546–1556 (2016).27340285
143. Kohler O , Krogh J , Mors O &amp; Eriksen Benros M Inflammation in depression and the potential for anti-inflammatory treatment. Curr. Neuropharmacol 14 , 732–742 (2016).27640518
144. Libby P , Ridker PM &amp; Hansson GK Progress and challenges in translating the biology of atherosclerosis. Nature 473 , 317–325 (2011).21593864
145. Andreou DE &amp; Andreadou I Atherosclerosis:an inflammatory disease. Pharmakeftiki 22 , 83–96 (2009).
146. Hansson GK Inflammation, atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. N. Engl. J. Med 352 , 1685–1695 (2005).15843671
147. Libby P , Ridker PM &amp; Hansson GK Inflammation in atherosclerosis. from pathophysiology to practice. Am. J. Coll. Cardiol 54 , 2129–2138 (2009).
148. De Caterina R , D’Ugo E &amp; Libby P Inflammation and thrombosis – Testing the hypothesis with anti-inflammatory drug trials. Thromb. Haemost 116 , 1012–1021 (2016).27535617
149. Libby P , Okamoto Y , Rocha VZ &amp; Folco E Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Circ. J 74 , 213–220 (2010).20065609
150. Duewell P NLRP3 inflammasomes are required for atherogenesis and activated by cholesterol crystals. Nature 464 , 1357–1361 (2010).20428172
151. Warnatsch A , Ioannou M , Wang Q &amp; Papayannopoulos V Neutrophil extracellular traps license macrophages for cytokine production in atherosclerosis. Science 349 , 316–320 (2015).26185250
152. Wang M , Kim SH , Monticone RE &amp; Lakatta EG Matrix metalloproteinases promote arterial remodeling in aging, hypertension, and atherosclerosis. Hypertension 65 , 698–703 (2015).25667214
153. Matthews C Vascular smooth muscle cells undergo telomere-based senescence in human atherosclerosis: effects of telomerase and oxidative stress. Circ. Res 99 , 156–164 (2006).16794190
154. Grootaert MOJ Vascular smooth muscle cell death, autophagy and senescence in atherosclerosis. Cardiovasc. Res 114 , 622–634 (2018).29360955
155. Ketelhuth DFJ &amp; Hansson GK Adaptive response of T and B cells in atherosclerosis. Circ. Res 118 , 668–678 (2016).26892965
156. Feinberg MW &amp; Moore KJ MicroRNA regulation of atherosclerosis. Circ. Res 118 , 703–720 (2016).26892968
157. Ridker PM , Cushman M , Stampfer MJ , Tracy RP &amp; Hennekens CH Inflammation, aspirin, and the risk of cardiovascular disease in apparently healthy men. N. Engl. J. Med 336 , 973–979 (1997).9077376
158. Ridker PM , Hennekens CH , Buring JE &amp; Rifai N C-reactive protein and other markers of inflammation in the prediction of cardiovascular disease in women. N. Engl. J. Med 342 , 836–843 (2000).10733371
159. Cushman M C-reactive protein and the 10-year incidence of coronary heart disease in older men and women: the cardiovascular health study. Circulation 112 , 25–31 (2005).15983251
160. Cesari M Inflammatory markers and onset of cardiovascular events: results from the Health ABC study. Circulation 108 , 2317–2322 (2003).14568895
161. Levinson SS Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular events in men and women with elevated C.-reactive protein – an analysis. Clin. J. Ligand Assay 31 , 25–28 (2008).
162. Noren Hooten N , Ejiogu N , Zonderman AB &amp; Evans MK Association of oxidative DNA damage and C-reactive protein in women at risk for cardiovascular disease. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 32 , 2776–2784 (2012).22982460
163. Ridker PM From C-reactive protein to interleukin-6 to interleukin-1: moving upstream to identify novel targets for atheroprotection. Circ. Res 118 , 145–156 (2016).26837745
164. Elliott P Genetic loci associated with C-reactive protein levels and risk of coronary heart disease. JAMA - J. Am. Med. Assoc 302 , 37–48 (2009).
165. McInnes IB Effect of interleukin-6 receptor blockade on surrogates of vascular risk in rheumatoid arthritis: MEASURE, a randomised, placebo-controlled study. Ann. Rheum. Dis 74 , 694–702 (2015).24368514
166. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01331837 (2011).
167. Libby P Interleukin-1 β as a target for atherosclerosis therapy: biological basis of CANTOS and beyond. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 70 , 2278–2289 (2017).29073957
168. Ridker PM Antiinflammatory therapy with canakinumab for atherosclerotic disease. N. Engl. J. Med 377 , 1119–1131 (2017).28845751
169. Ridker PM Effects of interleukin-1β inhibition with canakinumab on hemoglobin A1c, lipids, C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and fibrinogen. Circulation 126 , 2739–2748 (2012).23129601
170. Everett BM Rationale and design of the cardiovascular inflammation reduction trial: a test of the inflammatory hypothesis of atherothrombosis. Am. Heart J 166 , 199–207.e15 (2013).23895801
171. Daniels LB Pretenders and contenders: inflammation, C-reactive protein and interleukin-6. Am. J. Heart Assoc 6 , e007490 (2017).
172. Nidorf SM , Mbbs JWE , Hons CAB &amp; Thompson PL Low-dose colchicine for secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Am. J. Coll. Cardiol 61 , 404–410 (2013).
173. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02551094 (2015).
174. Cigolle CT , Blaum CS &amp; Halter JB Diabetes and cardiovascular disease prevention in older adults. Clin. Geriatr. Med 25 , 607–641 (2009).19944264
175. Stout MB , Justice JN , Nicklas BJ &amp; Kirkland JL Physiological aging: Links among adipose tissue dysfunction, diabetes, and frailty. Physiology 32 , 9–19 (2017).27927801
176. Halter JB Diabetes and cardiovascular disease in older adults: current status and future directions. Diabetes 63 , 2578–2589 (2014).25060886
177. Nahrendorf M &amp; Swirski FK Immunology. Neutrophil-macrophage communication in inflammation and atherosclerosis. Science 349 , 237–238 (2015).26185231
178. Gimbrone MAJ &amp; Garcia-Cardena G Endothelial cell dysfunction and the pathobiology of atherosclerosis. Circ. Res 118 , 620–636 (2016).26892962
179. Shakeri H , Lemmens K , Gevaert AB , De Meyer GRY &amp; Segers V Cellular senescence links aging and diabetes in cardiovascular disease. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol 10.1152/ajpheart.00287.2018 (2018).
180. Aryan Z Baseline high-sensitivity C-reactive protein predicts macrovascular and microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes: a population-pased study. Ann. Nutr. Metab 72 , 287–295 (2018).29694948
181. Eguchi S , Kawai T , Scalia R &amp; Rizzo V Understanding Angiotensin II type 1 receptor signaling in vascular pathophysiology. Hypertension 71 , 804–810 (2018).29581215
182. Jacobsson LT Treatment with tumor necrosis factor blockers is associated with a lower incidence of first cardiovascular events in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J. Rheumatol 32 , 1213–1218 (2005).15996054
183. Greenberg JD Tumour necrosis factor antagonist use and associated risk reduction of cardiovascular events among patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis 70 , 576–582 (2011).21109516
184. Solomon DH Cardiovascular risk in rheumatoid arthritis: comparing TNF-α blockade with nonbiologic DMARDs. Am. J. Med 126 , 730 e9–730.e17 (2013).
185. Bili A Tumor necrosis factor α inhibitor use and decreased risk for incident coronary events in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res 66 , 355–363 (2014).
186. Roubille C The effects of tumour necrosis factor inhibitors, methotrexate, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids on cardiovascular events in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann. Rheum. Dis 74 , 480–489 (2015).25561362
187. Low ASL Relationship between exposure to tumour necrosis factor inhibitor therapy and incidence and severity of myocardial infarction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis 76 , 654–660 (2017).28073800
188. Shaaban D &amp; Al-Mutairi N The effect of tumor necrosis factor inhibitor therapy on the incidence of myocardial infarction in patients with psoriasis: a retrospective study. J. Dermatolog. Treat 29 , 3–7 (2018).27881030
189. Yang Z , Lin N , Li L &amp; Li Y The effect of TNF inhibitors on cardiovascular events in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: an updated meta-analysis. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol 51 , 240–247 (2016).27300248
190. Anker SD Inflammatory mediators in chronic heart failure: an overview. Heart 90 , 464–470 (2004).15020532
191. Levine B , Kalman J , Mayer L , Fillit HM &amp; Packer M Elevated circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor in severe chronic heart failure. N. Engl. J. Med 323 , 236–241 (1990).2195340
192. Torre-Amione G Proinflammatory cytokine levels in patients with depressed left ventricular ejection fraction: A report from the studies of left ventricular dysfunction (SOLVD). J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 27 , 1201–1206 (1996).8609343
193. Mann DL Targeted anticytokine therapy in patients with chronic heart failure: results of the randomized etanercept worldwide evaluation (RENEWAL). Circulation 109 , 1594–1602 (2004).15023878
194. Chung ES Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, pilot trial of infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody to tumor necrosis factor-α, in patients with moderate-to-severe heart failure: results of the anti-TNF therapy against congestive heart failure. Circulation 107 , 3133–3140 (2003).12796126
195. Forman DE Multimorbidity in older adults with cardiovascular disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 71 , 2149–2161 (2018).29747836
196. Brandenberger C &amp; Muhlfeld C Mechanisms of lung aging. Cell Tissue Res 367 , 469–480 (2017).27743206
197. Tisminetzky M , Goldberg R &amp; Gurwitz JH Magnitude and impact of multimorbidity on clinical outcomes in older adults with cardiovascular aisease: a literature review. Clin. Geriatr. Med 32 , 227–246 (2016).27113143
198. Fried LP Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 56 , M146–M156 (2001).11253156
199. Bergman H Frailty: An emerging research and clinical paradigm — issues and controversies. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 62 , 731–737 (2007).17634320
200. Afilalo J Frailty assessment in the cardiovascular care of older adults. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 63 , 747–762 (2014).24291279
201. Woods NF Frailty: emergence and consequences in women aged 65 and older in the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 53 , 1321–1330 (2005).16078957
202. Corti MC , Salive ME &amp; Guralnik JM Serum albumin and physical function as predictors of coronary heart disease mortality and incidence in older persons. Clin. J. Epidemiol 49 , 519–526 (1996).
203. McDermott MM Decline in functional performance predicts later increased mobility loss and mortality in peripheral arterial disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 57 , 962–970 (2011).21329843
204. Walker KA Midlife systemic inflammation is associated with frailty in later life: the ARIC Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 10.1093/gerona/gly045 (2018).
205. Abbatecola AM &amp; Paolisso G Is there a relationship between insulin resistance and frailty syndrome? Curr. Pharm. Des 14 , 405–410 (2008).18289066
206. Barzilay JI Insulin resistance and inflammation as precursors of frailty: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Arch. Intern. Med 167 , 635–641 (2007).17420420
207. Walston J Frailty and activation of the inflammation and coagulation systems with and without clinical comorbidities: results from the Cardiovascular Health Study. Arch. Intern. Med 162 , 2333–2341 (2002).12418947
208. Afilalo J , Karunananthan S , Eisenberg MJ , Alexander KP &amp; Bergman H Role of frailty in patients with cardiovascular disease. Am. J. Cardiol 103 , 1616–1621 (2009).19463525
209. Gupta J Association between albuminuria, kidney function, and inflammatory biomarker profile in CKD in CRIC. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 7 , 1938–1946 (2012).23024164
210. Mc Causland FR C-reactive protein and risk of ESRD: results from the trial to reduce cardiovascular events with aranesp therapy (TREAT). Am. J. Kidney Dis 68 , 873–881 (2016).27646425
211. Grivennikov SI , Greten FR &amp; Karin M Immunity. inflammation, and cancer. Cell 140 , 883–899 (2010).20303878
212. Todoric J , Antonucci L &amp; Karin M Targeting inflammation in cancer prevention and therapy. Cancer Prev. Res 9 , 895–905 (2016).
213. Howren MB , Lamkin DM &amp; Suls J Associations of depression with C-reactive protein, IL-1, and IL-6: a meta-analysis. Psychosom. Med 71 , 171–186 (2009).19188531
214. Miller AH , Maletic V &amp; Raison CL Inflammation and its discontents: the role of cytokines in the pathophysiology of major depression. Biol. Psychiatry 65 , 732–741 (2009).19150053
215. Matthews KA Are there bi-directional associations between depressive symptoms and C-reactive protein in mid-life women? Brain. Behav. Immun 24 , 96–101 (2010).19683568
216. Zalli A , Jovanova O , Hoogendijk WJG , Tiemeier H &amp; Carvalho LA Low-grade inflammation predicts persistence of depressive symptoms. Psychopharmacology 233 , 1669–1678 (2016).25877654
217. Lamers F , Milaneschi Y , de Jonge P , Giltay EJ &amp; Penninx BWJH Metabolic and inflammatory markers: associations with individual depressive symptoms. Psychol. Med 48 , 1102–1110 (2018).28889804
218. Heneka MT Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol 14 , 388–405 (2015).25792098
219. Eikelenboom P Innate immunity and the etiology of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Neurodegener. Dis 10 , 271–273 (2012).22261470
220. Hansen PR Chronic inflammatory diseases and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: Innocent bystanders or partners in crime? Curr. Pharm. Des 24 , 281–290 (2018).29318966
221. Goldfine AB &amp; Shoelson SE Therapeutic approaches targeting inflammation for diabetes and associated cardiovascular risk. J. Clin. Invest 127 , 83–93 (2017).28045401
222. Zitvogel L , Pietrocola F &amp; Kroemer G Nutrition, inflammation and cancer. Nat. Immunol 18 , 843–850 (2017).28722707
223. Morgan AR The correlation between inflammatory biomarkers and polygenic risk score in Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimers. Dis 56 , 25–36 (2017).27911318
224. Schlegel TF , Hawkins RJ , Lewis CW , Motta T &amp; Turner AS The effects of augmentation with swine small intestine submucosa on tendon healing under tension: histologic and mechanical evaluations in sheep. Am. J. Sports Med 34 , 275–280 (2006).16210577
225. Ferrucci L Change in muscle strength explains accelerated decline of physical function in older women with high interleukin-6 serum levels. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 50 , 1947–1954 (2002).12473005
226. Visser M Relationship of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α with muscle nass and muscle strength in elderly men and women: the Health ABC Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 57 , M326–M332 (2002).11983728
227. Cesari M Inflammatory markers and physical performance in older persons: the InCHIANTI Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 59 , M242–M248 (2004).
228. Santos-Eggimann B , Cuénoud P , Spagnoli J &amp; Junod J Prevalence of frailty in middle-aged and older community-dwelling Europeans living in 10 countries. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 64 , 675–681 (2009).19276189
229. Walston J Research agenda for frailty in older adults: toward a better understanding of physiology and etiology: summary from the American Geriatrics Society/National Institute on Aging research conference on frailty in older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 54 , 991–1001 (2006).16776798
230. Stepanova M , Rodriguez E , Birerdinc A &amp; Baranova A Age-independent rise of inflammatory scores may contribute to accelerated aging in multi-morbidity. Oncotarget 6 , 1414–1421 (2015).25638154
231. Friedman EM , Montez JK , Sheehan CMD , Guenewald TL &amp; Seeman TE Childhood adversities and adult cardiometabolic health: does the quantity, timing, and type of adversity matter? J. Aging Health 27 , 1311–1338 (2015).25903978
232. Hubbard RE , O’Mahony MS , Savva GM , Calver BL &amp; Woodhouse KW Inflammation and frailty measures in older people. J. Cell Mol. Med 13 , 3103–3109 (2009).19438806
233. Newman AB Weight change in old age and its association with mortality. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 49 , 1309–1318 (2001).11890489
234. Higashi Y Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor deficiency in macrophages accelerates atherosclerosis and induces an unstable plaque phenotype in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. Circulation 133 , 2263–2278 (2016).27154724
235. Lazarus DD , Moldawer LL &amp; Lowry SF Insulin-like growth factor-1 activity is inhibited by interleukin-1α, tumor necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-6. Lymphokine Cytokine Res 12 , 219–223 (1993).8218594
236. Barbieri M Chronic inflammation and the effect of IGF-I on muscle strength and power in older persons. Am. J. Physiol. Metab 284 , E481–E487 (2003).
237. Cappola AR Insulin-like growth factor I and interleukin-6 contribute synergistically to disability and mortality in older women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 88 , 2019–2025 (2003).12727948
238. Timmerman KL Pharmacological vasodilation improves insulin-stimulated muscle protein anabolism but not glucose utilization in older adults. Diabetes 59 , 2764–2771 (2010).20724580
239. Moaddel R Plasma biomarkers of poor muscle quality in older men and women from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 71 , 1266–1272 (2016).27029859
240. Fichtlscherer S Elevated C-reactive protein levels and impaired endothelial vasoreactivity in patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation 102 , 1000–1006 (2000).10961964
241. Bar-Shai M , Carmeli E &amp; Reznick AZ The role of NF-κB in protein breakdown in immobilization, aging, and exercise: From basic processes to promotion of health. Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1057 , 431–447 (2005).16399911
242. Justice JN Cellular senescence biomarker p16INK4a+ cell burden in thigh adipose is associated with poor physical function in older women. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 73 , 939–945 (2017).
243. Roth SM , Metter EJ , Ling S &amp; Ferrucci L Inflammatory factors in age-related muscle wasting. Curr. Opin. Rheumatol 18 , 625–630 (2006).17053510
244. Jo E , Lee S-R , Park B-S &amp; Kim J-S Potential mechanisms underlying the role of chronic inflammation in age-related muscle wasting. Aging Clin. Exp. Res 24 , 412–422 (2012).22717404
245. Walston JD Connecting age-related biological decline to frailty and late-life vulnerability. Nestle Nutr. Inst. Workshop Ser 83 , 1–10 (2015).26485518
246. Wang J Vascular smooth muscle cell senescence promotes atherosclerosis and features of plaque vulnerability. Circulation 132 , 1909–1919 (2015).26416809
247. Ntanasi E Adherence to mediterranean diet and frailty. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc 19 , 315–322.e2 (2017).29289542
248. Talegawkar SA A higher adherence to a mediterranean-style diet is inversely associated with the development of frailty in community-dwelling elderly men and women. J. Nutr 142 , 2161–2166 (2012).23096005
249. Rosato V Mediterranean diet and cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Eur. J. Nutr 10.1007/s00394-017-1582-0 (2017).
250. Dinu M , Pagliai G , Casini A &amp; Sofi F Mediterranean diet and multiple health outcomes: an umbrella review of meta-analyses of observational studies and randomized trials. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis 27 , e21 (2017).
251. Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ 324 , 71–86 (2002).11786451
252. De Caterina R [Aspirin for primary cardiovascular disease prevention - an update]. G. Ital. Cardiol 18 , 1–6 (2017).
253. Landi F Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use and sarcopenia in older people: results from the ilsirente study. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc 14 , 626 e9–626.e13 (2013).
254. Wang C-P , Lorenzo C , Habib SL , Jo B &amp; Espinoza SE Differential effects of metformin on age related comorbidities in older men with type 2 diabetes. J. Diabetes Complications 31 , 679–686 (2017).28190681
255. Laksmi PW , Setiati S , Tamin TZ &amp; Soewondo P Effect of metformin on handgrip strength, gait speed, myostatin serum level, and health-related quality of life: a double blind randomized controlled trial among non-diabetic pre-frail elderly patients. Acta Med. Indones 49 , 118–127 (2017).28790226
256. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02570672 (2017).
257. Manini TM ENabling reduction of low-grade inflammation in SEniors pilot study: concept, rationale, and design. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 65 , 1961–1968 (2017).28734043
258. Golpanian S Allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cell infusions for aging frailty. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 72 , 1505–1512 (2017).28444181
259. Tompkins BA Allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate aging frailty: a phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 72 , 1513–1522 (2017).28977399
260. LaCroix AZ Statin use and incident frailty in women aged 65 years or older: prospective findings from the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 63 , 369–375 (2008).18426960
261. Barzilai N , Huffman DM , Muzumdar RH &amp; Bartke A The critical role of metabolic pathways in aging. Diabetes 61 , 1315–1322 (2012).22618766
262. Fontana L Neuroendocrine factors in the regulation of inflammation: excessive adiposity and calorie restriction. Exp. Gerontol 44 , 41–45 (2009).18502597
263. Kim HJ Modulation of redox-sensitive transcription factors by calorie restriction during aging. Mech. Ageing Dev 123 , 1589–1595 (2002).12470896
264. LaRocca TJ , Martens CR &amp; Seals DR Nutrition and other lifestyle influences on arterial aging. Ageing Res. Rev 39 , 106–119 (2017).27693830
265. Johnson SC , Rabinovitch PS &amp; Kaeberlein M MTOR is a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease. Nature 493 , 338–345 (2013).23325216
266. Li J , Kim SG &amp; Blenis J Rapamycin: one drug, many effects. Cell Metab 19 , 373–379 (2014).24508508
267. Harries LW Advancing age is associated with gene expression changes resembling mTOR inhibition: evidence from two human populations. Mech. Ageing Dev 133 , 556–562 (2012).22813852
268. Blagosklonny MV From rapalogs to anti-aging formula. Oncotarget 8 , 35492–35507 (2017).28548953
269. Halloran J Chronic inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin by rapamycin modulates cognitive and non-cognitive components of behavior throughout lifespan in mice. Neuroscience 223 , 102–113 (2012).22750207
270. Zhang Y Rapamycin extends life and health in C57BL/6 mice. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 69A , 119–130 (2014).
271. Harrison DE Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice. Nature 460 , 392–395 (2009).19587680
272. Liao CY Rapamycin reverses metabolic deficits in lamin A/C-deficient mice. Cell Rep 17 , 2542–2552 (2016).27926859
273. Strong R Nordihydroguaiaretic acid and aspirin increase lifespan of genetically heterogeneous male mice. Aging Cell 7 , 641–650 (2008).18631321
274. Saisho Y Metformin and inflammation: Its potential beyond glucose-lowering effect. Endocr. Metab. Immune Disord. Drug Targets 15 , 196–205 (2015).25772174
275. Martin-Montalvo A Metformin improves healthspan and lifespan in mice. Nat. Commun 4 , 2192 (2013).23900241
276. Campbell JM , Bellman SM , Stephenson MD &amp; Lisy K Metformin reduces all-cause mortality and diseases of ageing independent of its effect on diabetes control: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing Res. Rev 40 , 31–44 (2017).28802803
277. Barzilai N , Crandall JP , Kritchevsky SB &amp; Espeland MA Metformin as a tool to target aging. Cell Metab 23 , 1060–1065 (2016).27304507
278. Robbins PD &amp; Niedernhofer LJ Advances in therapeutic approaches to extend healthspan: a perspective from the 2nd Scripps symposium on the biology of aging. Aging Cell 16 , 610–614 (2017).28585366
279. Walter E &amp; Scott M The life &amp; work of Rudolf Virchow 1821–1902: ‘Cell theory, thrombosis and the sausage duel’. J. Intensive Care Soc 18 , 234–235 (2017).29118836
280. Ferrucci L Proinflammatory state and circulating erythropoietin in persons with and without anemia. Am. J. Med 118 , 1288 e11–1288.e19 (2005).
281. de Luca C &amp; Olefsky JM Inflammation and insulin resistance. FEBS Lett 582 , 97–105 (2008).18053812
282. Abbatecola AM Diverse effect of inflammatory markers on insulin resistance and insulin-resistance syndrome in the elderly. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 52 , 399–404 (2004).14962155
283. Hotamisligil GS The role of TNFα and TNF receptors in obesity and insulin resistance. J. Intern. Med 245 , 621–625 (1999).10395191
284. Shimobayashi M Insulin resistance causes inflammation in adipose tissue. J. Clin. Invest 128 , 1538–1550 (2018).29528335
285. Abdelmagid SM , Barbe MF &amp; Safadi FF Role of inflammation in the aging bones. Life Sci 123 , 25–34 (2015).25510309
286. Goldring SR Pathogenesis of bone erosions in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr. Opin. Rheumatol 14 , 406–410 (2002).12118176
287. Hahn WS Proinflammatory cytokines differentially regulate adipocyte mitochondrial metabolism, oxidative stress, and dynamics. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 306 , E1033–E1045 (2014).24595304
288. Lezi E , Burns JM &amp; Swerdlow RH Effect of high-intensity exercise on aged mouse brain mitochondria, neurogenesis, and inflammation. Neurobiol. Aging 35 , 2574–2583 (2014).25002036
289. Borsini A Interferon-α reduces human hippocampal neurogenesis and increases apoptosis via activation of distinct STAT1-dependent mechanisms. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol 21 , 187–200 (2018).29040650
290. Li YP &amp; Stashenko P Proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α and IL-6, but not IL-1, down-regulate the osteocalcin gene promoter. J. Immunol 148 , 788–794 (1992).1309841
291. Ginaldi L , Di Benedetto MC &amp; De Martinis M Osteoporosis, inflammation and ageing. Immun. Ageing 2 , 14 (2005).16271143
292. Audet M-C &amp; Anisman H Interplay between pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors in depressive illnesses. Front. Cell. Neurosci 7 , 68 (2013).23675319
293. Ridker PM Relationship of C-reactive protein reduction to cardiovascular event reduction following treatment with canakinumab: a secondary analysis from the CANTOS randomised controlled trial. Lancet 391 , 319–328 (2017).29146124
294. EU Clinical Trial Register. ClinicalTrialsRegister.eu https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/search?query=LoDoCo2 (2016).
295. Navarro-Gonzalez JF Effect of pentoxifylline on renal function and urinary albumin excretion in patients with diabetic kidney disease: the PREDIAN trial. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 26 , 220–229 (2015).24970885
296. Voelker J Anti–TGF-β 1 antibody therapy in patients with diabetic nephropathy. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 28 , 953–962 (2017).27647855
297. Flossmann E &amp; Rothwell PM Effect of aspirin on long-term risk of colorectal cancer: consistent evidence from randomised and observational studies. Lancet 369 , 1603–1613 (2007).17499602
298. Rothwell PM Long-term effect of aspirin on colorectal cancer incidence and mortality: 20-year follow-up of five randomised trials. Lancet 376 , 1741–1750 (2010).20970847
299. Iyengar RL NSAIDs are associated with lower depression scores in patients with osteoarthritis. Am. J. Med 126 , 1017 e11–1017.e18 (2013).
300. Fields C , Drye L , Vaidya V &amp; Lyketsos C Celecoxib or naproxen treatment does not benefit depressive symptoms in persons age 70 and older: findings from a randomized controlled trial. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 20 , 505–513 (2012).21775876
301. Raison CL A randomized controlled trial of the tumor necrosis factor antagonist infliximab for treatment-resistant depression: the role of baseline inflammatory biomarkers. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 70 , 31–41 (2013).
302. Menter A The effect of adalimumab on reducing depression symptoms in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis: a randomized clinical trial. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol 62 , 812–818 (2010).20219265
303. Tyring S Etanercept and clinical outcomes, fatigue, and depression in psoriasis: double-blind placebo-controlled randomised phase III trial. Lancet 367 , 29–35 (2006).16399150
304. Aisen PS , Schmeidler J &amp; Pasinetti GM Randomized pilot study of nimesulide treatment in alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 58 , 1050–1054 (2002).11940691
305. Aisen PS Effects of rofecoxib or naproxen vs placebo on Alzheimer disease progression. JAMA 289 , 2819 (2003).12783912
306. Reines SA Rofecoxib: No effect on Alzheimer’s disease in a 1-year, randomized, blinded, controlled study. Neurology 62 , 66–71 (2004).14718699
307. Scharf S , Mander A , Ugoni A , Vajda F &amp; Christophidis N A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of diclofenac/misoprostol in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 53 , 197–197 (1999).10408559
308. Martin BK Cognitive function over time in the Alzheimer’s disease anti-inflammatory prevention trial (ADAPT): results of a randomized, controlled trial of naproxen and celecoxib. Arch. Neurol 65 , 896–905 (2008).18474729
309. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02284906 (2014).
310. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01931566 (2013).
