LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J. Alzheimers Dis.
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

29562524
6008221
10.3233/JAD-179932
NIHMS958679
Article
Revolution of Alzheimer Precision Neurology: Passageway of Systems Biology and Neurophysiology
Hampel Harald abcd*
Toschi Nicola efg
Babiloni Claudio hi
Baldacci Filippo abcdj
Black Keith L. k
Bokde Arun L.W. l
Bun René S. abcd
Cacciola Francesco m
Cavedo Enrica abcdn
Chiesa Patrizia A. abcd
Colliot Olivier o
Coman Cristina-Maria abcd
Dubois Bruno p
Duggento Andrea e
Durrleman Stanley q
Ferretti Maria-Teresa rs
George Nathalie t
Genthon Remy p
Habert Marie-Odile uv
Herholz Karl wx
Koronyo Yosef k
Koronyo-Hamaoui Maya ky
Lamari Foudil z
Langevin Todd aa
Lehéricy Stéphane abac
Lorenceau Jean ad
Neri Christian ae
Nisticò Robert af
Nyasse-Messene Francis p
Ritchie Craig ag
Rossi Simone ahai
Santarnecchi Emiliano ahaj
Sporns Olaf akal
Verdooner Steven R. am
Vergallo Andrea abcd
Villain Nicolas bcd
Younesi Erfan an
Garaci Francesco eao
Lista Simone abcd*
for the Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative (APMI)
a AXA Research Fund &amp; Sorbonne Université Chair, Paris, France
b Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, GRC n° 21, Alzheimer Precision Medicine (APM), Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Boulevard de l’hôpital, F-75013, Paris, France
c Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière (ICM), INSERM U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Boulevard de l’hôpital, F-75013, Paris, France
d Institut de la Mémoire et de la Maladie d’Alzheimer (IM2A), Département de Neurologie, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Boulevard de l’hôpital, F-75013, Paris, France
e Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy
f Department of Radiology, “Athinoula A. Martinos” Center for Biomedical Imaging, Boston, MA, USA
g Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
h Department of Physiology and Pharmacology “Vittorio Erspamer”, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy
i Institute for Research and Medical Care, IRCCS “San Raffaele Pisana”, Rome, Italy
j Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
k Department of Neurosurgery, Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA
l Discipline of Psychiatry, School of Medicine and Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience (TCIN), Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
m Unit of Neurosurgery, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy
n IRCCS “San Giovanni di Dio-Fatebenefratelli”, Brescia, Italy
o Inserm, U1127, Paris, France; CNRS, UMR 7225 ICM, Paris, France; Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR S 1127, Paris, France; Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière (ICM) Paris, France; Inria, Aramis project-team, Centre de Recherche de Paris, France; Department of Neuroradiology, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France; Department of Neurology, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Institut de la Mémoire et de la Maladie d’Alzheimer (IM2A), Paris, France
p Sorbonne Université, Inserm, CNRS, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière (ICM), Département de Neurologie, Institut de la Mémoire et de la Maladie d’Alzheimer (IM2A), Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Boulevard de l’hôpital, F-75013, Paris, France
q Inserm, U1127, Paris, France; CNRS, UMR 7225 ICM, Paris, France; Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR S 1127, Paris, France; Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière (ICM) Paris, France; Inria, Aramis project-team, Centre de Recherche de Paris, France
r IREM, Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
s ZNZ Neuroscience Center Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
t Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, ICM, Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS, Centre MEG-EEG, F-75013, Paris, France
u Département de Médecine Nucléaire, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France
v Laboratoire d’Imagerie Biomédicale, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm U 1146, CNRS UMR 7371, Paris, France
w Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
x Division of Informatics, Imaging and Data Sciences, University of Manchester, Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, Manchester, UK
y Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA
z AP-HP, UF Biochimie des Maladies Neuro-métaboliques, Service de Biochimie Métabolique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France
aa Functional Neuromodulation, Ltd Boston, MA, USA
ab Centre de NeuroImagerie de Recherche - CENIR, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière - ICM, F-75013, Paris, France
ac Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013, Paris, France
ad Institut de la Vision, INSERM, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S968, CNRS UMR7210, Paris, France
ae Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC) Paris 06, CNRS UMR 8256, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine (IBPS), Place Jussieu, F-75005, Paris, France
af Department of Biology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata” &amp; Pharmacology of Synaptic Disease Lab, European Brain Research Institute (E.B.R.I.), Rome, Italy
ag Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
ah Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, Unit of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Brain Investigation &amp; Neuromodulation Lab. (Si-BIN Lab.), University of Siena, Siena, Italy
ai Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, Section of Human Physiology University of Siena, Siena, Italy
aj Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
ak Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
al IU Network Science Institute, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
am NeuroVision Imaging LLC, Sacramento, California, USA
an ITTM Solutions, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
ao Casa di Cura “San Raffaele Cassino”, Cassino, Italy
* Correspondence to: Harald Hampel, MD, PhD, MA, MSc, Simone Lista, PhD, AXA Research Fund &amp; Sorbonne Université Chair, Sorbonne Université, Département de Neurologie, Institut de la Mémoire et de la Maladie d’Alzheimer, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière (ICM), Pavillon François Lhermitte, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47 Boulevard de l’hôpital, 75651 Paris CEDEX 13, France, Phone: +33 1 42 16 75 15, Fax: +33 1 42 16 75 16, harald.hampel@icm-institute.org, simone.lista@icm-institute.org
12 4 2018
2018
19 6 2018
64 Suppl 1 S47S105
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The Precision Neurology development process implements systems theory with system biology and neurophysiology in a parallel, bidirectional research path: a combined hypothesis-driven investigation of systems dysfunction within distinct molecular, cellular and large-scale neural network systems in both animal models as well as through tests for the usefulness of these candidate dynamic systems biomarkers in different diseases and subgroups at different stages of pathophysiological progression. This translational research path is paralleled by an “omics”-based, hypothesis-free, exploratory research pathway, which will collect multimodal data from progressing asymptomatic, preclinical and clinical neurodegenerative disease (ND) populations, within the wide continuous biological and clinical spectrum of ND, applying high-throughput and high-content technologies combined with powerful computational and statistical modeling tools, aimed at identifying novel dysfunctional systems and predictive marker signatures associated with ND. The goals are to identify common biological denominators or differentiating classifiers across the continuum of ND during detectable stages of pathophysiological progression, characterize systems-based intermediate endophenotypes, validate multi-modal novel diagnostic systems biomarkers, and advance clinical intervention trial designs by utilizing systems-based intermediate endophenotypes and candidate surrogate markers. Achieving these goals is key to the ultimate development of early and effective individualized treatment of ND, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD).

The Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative (APMI) and cohort program (APMI-CP), as well as the Paris based core of the Sorbonne University Clinical Research Group “Alzheimer Precision Medicine” (GRC-APM) were recently launched to facilitate the passageway from conventional clinical diagnostic and drug development towards breakthrough innovation based on the investigation of the comprehensive biological nature of aging individuals. The APMI movement is gaining momentum to systematically apply both systems neurophysiology and systems biology in exploratory translational neuroscience research on ND.


INTRODUCTION

A dementia syndrome is caused by a range of neurological disorders; Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common disease causing dementia, accounting for 50–70% of cases. Increasing age is the most important risk factor for AD and other dementias, and as life expectancy increases and demographic ageing occurs in populations around the world, the number of people with dementia is expected to continue to exponentially grow. In 2015, almost 47 million people worldwide were estimated to be affected by dementia, and the numbers are expected to reach 75 million by 2030, and 131 million by 2050, with the greatest increase expected in low-income and middle-income countries [1].

On May 29, 2017, at the 70th session of the World Health Assembly in Geneva, the World Health Organization (WHO) has unanimously adopted a global plan on dementia – the Global Plan of Action on the Public Health Response to Dementia 2017–2025 – that includes targets for the advancement of dementia awareness, risk reduction, diagnosis, care and treatment, support for care partners and research (available at https://www.alz.co.uk/news/global-plan-on-dementia-adopted-by-who).

Recent years have witnessed an increasing understanding of the molecular mechanisms related to AD. The pathogenesis of this complex polygenic neurodegenerative disease (ND) involves sequentially interacting pathophysiological cascades, including both core events – i.e., accumulation of the forty-two-amino acid-long amyloid beta (Aβ42) peptide into amyloid plaques and self-aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau protein to form intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles – and downstream processes, such as generalized neuroinflammation [2, 3]. These events induce axonal degeneration [4–6] and disruption of synaptic integrity [7, 8], thus leading to synaptic dysfunction and, ultimately, deterioration of physiological neural connectivity [9].

In spite of such advancements in understanding the disease, AD is characterized by a high degree of heterogeneity in its manifestation, progression, response to treatment, as well as susceptibility to risk factors. Phenotypic variability is currently considered one of the biggest challenges in clinical science and clinical trial design [10]. On the one hand, the same syndrome can be caused by substantially different pathophysiological mechanisms. In order to ensure more precise and definitive AD diagnosis, biomarkers are crucially needed to detect and track disease processes in the brain. On the other hand, similar pathophysiology can present itself with distinct symptomatology across patients, suggesting that additional factors can influence disease manifestation and progression. The identity and impact of such additional factors (including genetic, epigenetic, life-style, and phenotypic traits) deserve further investigation. Particularly, a growing body of evidence demonstrated that a factor such as an individual’s sex can modulate disease phenotype and drug response [11], thus substantially contributing to clinical heterogeneity. In AD patients, sex differences have been reported in the rate of cognitive deterioration [12, 13] and brain atrophy [14], in the absence of clear differences in amyloid or tau burden [15]. In addition, sex-genotype interaction in AD have been shown to affect both risk of onset and conversion [16] as well as response to pharmacological treatment [17, 18]. The socio-economic construct associated with the female and male position in the society (i.e. gender) can also influence disease onset and progression, as it affects education, salary, pension plans, and caregiving burden [19]. Therefore, sex and gender appear to be central drivers of phenotypic variability in AD and their role should be carefully considered when designing strategies for prevention, detection and treatment of the disease. Analysis of sex and gender effects – both alone and in combination with a variety of genetic, epigenetic, and phenotypic traits – should be the first step towards a more personalized and patient-centered approach to AD.

THE PRECISION NEUROLOGY PARADIGM IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

Breakthrough conceptual shifts have recently commenced to emerge in the field of AD and other ND, highlighting the presence of risk and protection factors and the non-linear dynamic continuum of complex pathophysiologies along a wide spectrum of multi-factorial brain proteinopathies. Substantial advancements in detecting, treating, and preventing AD are expected to evolve through the generation and the systematic implementation of a strategy based on the precision medicine (PM) paradigm [20, 21], whose establishment requires the implementation of an array of integrated disciplines and technological developments such as the “omics” approaches, neuroimaging modalities, cognitive assessment tests, and clinical characteristics. These converge to several domains that need to be analyzed according to the systems theory paradigm [22]. This allows for the conceptualization of novel and original models to elucidate all systems levels – assessed by systems biology and systems neurophysiology (Figure 1) – and the different types of spatiotemporal data characterizing the genetically, biologically, pathologically, and clinically heterogeneous construct of “AD” [21]. Thus, systems biology and systems neurophysiology permit to delineate the multivariate and combinatorial profiles of genetic, biological, pathophysiological, and clinical markers reflecting the heterogeneity of this condition. Thanks to fundamental advances in research technology, we got new and better performing analysis tools to register and create comprehensive brains maps and record dynamic patterns across different systems: from molecules, neurons to brain areas. Particularly, systems neurophysiology will aim at showing how computational network models can elucidate the relationship between structure and dynamic function in brain networks, as demonstrated by recent findings in time-dependent functional connectivity measured with non-invasive neuroimaging techniques.

The transition to PM from the traditional model does not occur overnight. But the more we build innovative and interdisciplinary networks with partners, the faster and more effectively we can see the changes happening. To fulfill on the promise of PM, there needs to be a new ecosystem with partnerships of multiple stakeholders who collaborate to find creative and novel solutions. Such a new ecosystem – comprised of academic and community providers, industry, professional societies, government, consumers, and patient advocacy groups — could advance the following pilot initiatives on a local, national and potentially international scale.

In order to advance the development of the PM paradigm in AD, the international Alzheimer PM Initiative (APMI) and its planned Cohort Program (APMI-CP) (Figure 2) have been recently launched by our consortium and thematically linked to the U.S. Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) (available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/precision-medicine) and the U.S. “All of Us Research Program” – evolved from the U.S. PMI Cohort Program (available at https://www.nih.gov/research-training/allofus-research-program) (Table 1). Four pioneering translational neuroscience research programs – “MIDAS”, “PHOENIX”, “POSEIDON”, and “VISION” – have been developed and launched in an interdisciplinary local network by our group at the APMI and APMI-CP initiation site Paris, France, at the Sorbonne University (Sorbonne Université) and at the Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Institute for Memory and Alzheimer’s Disease (Institut de la Mémoire et de la Maladie d’Alzheimer, IM2A) and the Brain and Spine Institute (Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, ICM) in Paris to organize, combine, and integrate the components of systems biology and neurophysiology in order to facilitate the development of PM in AD, a model approach for other proteinopathies/ND of the brain. In this regard, following the APMI conceptual framework, mono-center pilot APMI subcohorts spanning from early asymptomatic preclinical populations to prodromal to dementia late stage populations – namely INSIGHT-preAD, Predict-MA PHRC, RESPIR, and SOCRATES – have been established at our central clinical recruitment site, the IM2A. These pilot APMI cohorts allow for the standardized academic university-based expert center inclusion of both cognitively intact individuals at risk for AD and patients with a full range of ND and provide an assortment of unique heterogeneous and multidimensional data. The research using these pilot AMPI cohorts is performed under the structural framework of the newly established Sorbonne University – “Clinical Research Group in Alzheimer Precision Medicine” (GRC n° 21), Sorbonne Université – “Groupe de Recherche Clinique - Alzheimer Precision Medicine”) (GRC-APM). The major objective of the Sorbonne Université GRC-APM is to accelerate the reformation of traditional Neurology, Psychiatry, and Neuroscience embracing the PM paradigm, based on complex systems theory, using systems biology and systems neurophysiology, big data science, and biomarker-guided integrative disease modeling (IDM) to improve detection, classification, and therapy development in AD and other ND.

The implementation of PM in AD is expected to result into a novel, original scientific taxonomy and a distinguished working lexicon and terminology (see Table 2) for reality-based medicine, which detects evidence from real-life scenarios.

An appropriately integrative understanding of AD will be propelled by advances in molecular technology and data processing that will allow generating, analyzing, interpreting, and storing huge amounts of heterogeneous and multidimensional data, termed big data. Big data in AD can be used to improve our current mechanistic understanding of the disease through the application of different computational and data science methods, under the theoretical framework of IDM [23]. Multimodal big data integration is essential to understand the link between elements from large-scale neurobiological systems such as protein interaction and genetic regulatory networks, synaptic connections and anatomical projections among brain areas. Usually, these data come from multiple levels of organizations or involve different domains of biology and data types (Figure 3).

To be effective, PM needs to exploit advanced tools for collecting/managing/examining big data. Particularly, thanks to outstanding progresses in information technology, the development and implementation of electronic health records (EHRs) enable gathering/preserving longitudinal health-care records and clinical data at highly limited costs. Furthermore, the adoption of personal mobile technologies – namely phones, apps, wearables, in-home devices – as innovative ways to collect health information (mobile health or “m-health”) is becoming a common practice. These devices allow the accumulation of clinically relevant information in a more ecological/natural environment and the improvement of patient care. High-volume and dense data generated from progressively more sophisticated software applications can enrich self-reported information on both lifestyle and environment, thus providing researchers with a well-defined vision of these factors, previously difficult to obtain.

Being rooted in a multidimensional data-driven approach, PM is expected to upgrade the prevention and treatment of AD to a higher level of individualization, promoting a shift towards every single preclinical participant at risk rather than late stage patients and disease in general. This goal will be achieved mainly through the identification and validation of reliable biomarkers, which will allow better classifying patients by their probable disease risk, prognosis and/or response to preventive measures and treatment [20, 21]. To date, PM (in general) and biomarker-guided therapeutic strategies (in particular) have witnessed their broadest applications in the field of oncology. The Food and Drug Administration has recently approved for the first time a cancer treatment based on the presence of specific molecular aberrations rather than on the tumor’s anatomical origin. Pembrolizumab (a humanized antibody used in cancer immunotherapy) has been granted approval for adult and pediatric patients with metastatic or unresectable, microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) solid tumors [24]. The implementation of PM in ND currently impels researchers to envision a cross-trans-fertilization from such more advanced fields of medicine. In this setting, the repurposing of some previously approved mechanistic anticancer drugs for ND may offer the potential to reduce both the cost and time to achieve licensed approval status. For instance, tyrosine kinase inhibitors like bosutinib [25] and masitinib [26] (which represent a standard approach for anticancer treatment) have shown promising clinical results in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and can also exert neuroprotective actions in other ND through the activation of autophagy. The search basin for anticancer drugs repositionable for neurodegeneration will ultimately require data-driven approaches grounded on specific biomarker data; such a strategy is aimed at identifying pathophysiological commonalities, potentially common molecular alterations between cancer and ND [26].

Apart from treatment, another important aim of PM in AD will be the preclinical detection of pathophysiology at its earliest stage and related early disease initiation and the implementation of preventive interventions at the individual level. This goal may be achieved through an integrated analysis of genetic, biomarker, imaging, and clinical characteristics that distinguish one individual from others. To achieve this goal, the availability of reliable multimodal biological indicators – biomarkers – will be required [27–34]. In this regard, several potential biological markers have been identified across the full spectrum of AD, from preclinical to prodromal to clinical stages [35–41]. This includes different categories, as follows: 1) neurogenetics/neuroepigenetics markers [42–45], 2) neurochemistry markers [4, 46–48], including both cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [49–55] and blood (plasma/serum) markers [56–63], 3) markers derived from structural/functional/metabolic neuroimaging [64–68], and 4) neurophysiology/neurodynamic markers [69]. Moreover, opinions of regulatory agencies and industry stakeholders in AD biomarker discovery area are regularly in discussion and development [70, 71]. The integration and recomposition of the experimental information obtained from biomarker studies through the systems biology and systems neurophysiology paradigms will ultimately allow to improve patient care and clinical outcomes through the PM paradigm [72] in line with the Institute of Medicine (IOM) Committee Recommendations for Advancing Appropriate Use of Biomarker Tests (companion diagnostics) for Molecularly Targeted Therapies [73].

Starting from these premises, PM can be conceptualized as a biomarker-guided medicine. According to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the NIH Biomarkers, Endpoints, and other Tools (BEST) Resource, biomarker categories can be categorized as follows: 1) susceptibility/risk biomarker, 2) diagnostic biomarker, 3) monitoring biomarker, 4) prognostic biomarker, 5) predictive biomarker, 6) pharmacodynamic/response biomarker, and 7) safety biomarker [74]. Unfortunately, any attempt to provide such a clear-cut classification in the AD field remains problematic. For example, “amyloid positivity” is widely considered both a diagnostic and predictive biomarker; however, this may not be the case at an individual level [74]. To target “individual variability” will ultimately require analyzing multiple biological pathways inexpensively, quickly, and sensitively. The increasing adoption of next generation sequencing in clinical practice has been recently driven by reducing costs and high-throughput analytical methods. In this setting, unbiased whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and whole-exome sequencing (WES) represent major milestones in the area of genomic medicine since they allow the complete elucidation of the genomic determinants of a specific AD patient’s heritable make-up, and thus are among the most comprehensive tools for future clinical applications [74, 75]. Moreover, upcoming commercially available genetic tests, e.g. gene-based assays, implementing polygenic risk scoring for assessing AD onset risk, are currently in late stage clinical development. In particular, a 90% maximum prediction accuracy via polygenic risk scoring can be accomplished by predictors of genetic risk based on genomic profiles [76].

It is generally acknowledged that an individual’s health, response to environmental and lifestyle factors, susceptibility to pathophysiology/syndromes/diseases and tolerability/response to treatments are indeed impacted to a varying degree by their own unique biological (genetic/genomic/molecular) profile. Thanks to progress in the area of personal genomics, it is possible to identify the genetic/genomic predisposition of an individual for some common diseases, carrier status for inherited diseases, and adverse reactions to common drugs. Personal genomics provides support in predicting the likelihood that an individual will be affected by a disease and may help personalize drug selection and treatment delivery to get the best possible care, thus playing a key role in predictive and personalized medicine, in the framework of the PM paradigm [77]. In this regard, the 23andMe Personal Genome Service (PGS) Test (available at https://www.23andme.com/en-gb/) uses a qualitative in vitro molecular diagnostic system used for detecting variants in genomic DNA isolated from human adults specimens (saliva) that will provide information – i.e. delivering and interpreting genetic health risk (GHR) reports – to users about their genetic risk of developing a disease to inform lifestyle choices and/or conversations with a healthcare professional. Specifically, GHR reports have already been authorized by the FDA for Late-onset AD and Parkinson’s disease and the following diseases: hereditary thrombophilia, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, Gaucher disease, Factor XI deficiency, Celiac disease, G6PD deficiency, hereditary hemochromatosis, Early-Onset primary dystonia (available at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf16/DEN160026.pdf). Based on the gene expression profiles generated by GenomeDx Biosciences Decipher Genomics Resource Information Database (Decipher GRID®), a recent analysis showed that the genomic signature PAM50, normally applied to breast cancer patients to determine their risk of reappearance, can be used in prostate cancer as well for predicting which individual may take advantage from early initiation of post-operative androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), thus delivering a potential clinical tool to customize the treatment of prostate cancer. This personalized selection of patients will ameliorate treatment outcomes and prevent many patients from unnecessary risks of toxicity [78].

Differently from the invariable genetic/genomic information, an individual’s proteomics/peptidomics and metabolomics/lipidomics profile may be modified and vary over time. Figure 4 provides an up-to-date summary of currently available “omics” technologies – genomics, transcriptomics, miRNomics, proteomics, metabolomics – and how they can be used to disentangle different systems biomarker categories [79]. At present, the majority of the documented candidate biomarkers originate from genomic and proteomic disciplines. This might be due to the higher stability of the signal and standardization achieved by using genomic and proteomic tools compared to other available “omic” methodologies. In addition, the better stability of proteins versus mRNAs might account for the greater availability and progress in discovery and validation of proteomic markers compared to e.g. transcriptomic approaches [79]. The appropriate interpretation of the obtained high-throughput data in the context of the disease molecular pathophysiology and its specific treatment is considered the rate-limiting step in the biomarker discovery and validation process. As a result, “omics” data sets need to be rigorously identified, extracted, and interpreted in order to deliver valuable biological information [79].

Within the PM framework, it has been proposed to screen and detect unsuspected age-related neurodegenerative diseases as early as possible in cognitively healthy potentially preclinical affected adults. As far as AD is concerned, it has been hypothesized that such a screening program – based on WGS combined with whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (WB-MRI), metabolomics screening, constant heart monitoring, pedigree analysis, microbiome sequencing, and standard laboratory tests – could identify people at risk of developing clinical AD decades in advance. Controversies still exist, however, regarding both the high costs inherent to this approach and the potential risks of false-positive results and overdiagnosis [80].

Very recently, a pilot study has been conducted to investigate the impact of WGS in healthy subjects examined within a primary care context. Although several potentially pathogenetic variants were identified, only a fraction of the carriers demonstrated overt clinical signs or symptoms, indicating that the expected clinical phenotype would develop later during progression of pathophysiology. Although integrating genome sequencing and other sequencing methods into the day-to-day practice will undoubtedly provide unprecedented preventive opportunities, a careful sample size determination will be necessary for achieving a sufficient statistical power to detect a clinically meaningful effect size [81].

To aid PM fully coming to life in the field of ND, the interplay of “omics”-based techniques and sequencing methods is paramount, since the availability and increasing standardization of high-throughput big data will, through adequate IDM supported by advances in data science, allow creating new biomarker-guided targeted preventive and therapeutic opportunities [20, 21]. Therefore, the use of advanced sequencing methods and of “omics”-based screening of pathophysiological disease states is anticipated to result in enhanced personalized and precise – both preventive and therapeutic – interventions by disclosing accurate patterns of pathophysiological biomarkers and molecular signatures underlying the biological mechanisms progressing non-linear dynamic in specific disease states in individual patients [82]. Extensive efforts are presently performed to explicate gene-protein links, key molecular pathways functions, protein-protein and signaling network organization, and organism-level responses via high-throughput biological data at different time points (e.g. global gene expression and comprehensive proteomic data) [83].

In this context, it is important to note that, so far, a major obstacle to our understanding and to the development of possibly novel stratification approaches for AD is, as mentioned, the fragmentation of previous research (single-center, single-method studies). Neuroscience has been highly productive, but its progress can also be somewhat unsystematic and remote to clinical practice. That said, so far conventional “big data” analytics techniques have failed to provide the qualitative change which is indispensable to provide a mechanistic (and not only statistical) understanding of AD pathophysiology, which in turn is instrumental to formulating personalized treatment strategies. A first step, as mentioned above, is the integration of complex and high-dimensional information from hundreds or thousands of patients contained in “big data” repositories. However, this alone is not sufficient; “big data” need to be turned into “smart data” by injecting not only novel methodologies but also expert knowledge and targeted clinical hypotheses. This poses a major analytics challenge, as neither single national-level studies nor single biomedical or technical disciplines can tackle the problem on their own. A number of potentially disease-modifying clinical development programs in AD have failed so far [84], and in addition we are in serious need of novel out-of-the box preclinical models that can generate actionable knowledge, either in research or, eventually, therapy. This is why, while computational and statistical modeling are increasingly invaluable in AD research, it is necessary to go beyond purely descriptive data-analysis techniques (e.g., techniques that identify associations between certain data and phenotypes). Additional efforts are needed to inject specific domain competencies which can be formalized mathematically into predictive models that can disclose how specific components of pathogenic pathways interact within complex brain networks, across molecular to cellular and systems scales. Such predictive models should, as far as possible, include realistic representations of neurobiological processes and mechanisms that allow direct comparison to experimental settings and, ultimately, pave the way to discover new strategies for targeted control and intervention. In this respect, it is also essential to form additional private-public partnerships with a strong focus on data sharing and pathway-based analysis. With this type of integrative approach, successful real-world examples of advanced simulation have already generated tangible support for clinical trials in AD.

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

The polygenic multifactorial nature of AD and other complex proteinopathies of the brain with progression to ND is widely recognized. Although several mechanisms have been identified that may have a role in the pathogenesis of AD and other ND, the molecular and temporal dynamics of the biological processes that lead to onset and progression of diseases such as AD remain to be well-understood on a system level. Complex chronic diseases such as AD are thought to result from an interplay between environmental, genetic, and epigenetic factors. State-of-the-art “omics” techniques such as genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics offer remarkable promise as research tools to decipher the dynamics and biological nature of the pathogenesis ultimately leading to neurodegeneration and a spectrum of clinical neurological phenotypes for which predictive markers and selective therapeutic tools are needed. Breakthrough advances in genetic and genomic technologies are making global genome sequencing possible, affordable and clinically practical through advanced NGS technologies. New genetic technologies, however, provide a crucial basis to the understanding of the complex pathophysiological pathways involved in proteinopathies/ND.

The concept of complex multiscale systems (consisting of macromolecules that reciprocally interact with each other in dynamic modular complexes and networks) as the underlying foundations of life has been first proposed more than 50 years ago [85]. Over the past decades, we have gained detailed insights into the structure, regulation, and function of different molecular and cellular systems, which are currently viewed as building blocks or inventories of working parts. However, the main challenge ahead is to clarify how these single agents are reciprocally associated by multiple interactions across distinct system levels and networks of structural and functional organization (e.g., DNA-protein; RNA-protein; protein-protein; protein-metabolite networks, interactomics). Major challenges exist for the development of reliable holistic models that are based on unbiased data-integration workflows and that could highlight the properties of complex biological structures, for which the whole is often greater than the sum of their parts. In this context, the main goals of systems biology in the field of ND research are as follows: 1) to characterize complex systems and/or networks in a straightforward, viable manner, by probing key layers of molecular regulation and expression on a genome-wide level and 2) to integrate different genome-wide data sets in a multidimensional manner – that is, across different layers of molecular regulation, timescales, cell types and so on – in order to generate comprehensive in silico models of ND that show the best balance between coverage and selectivity, reduce model space down to manageable numbers of highly-prioritized testable hypotheses, and are biologically precise. This will shed more light on how complex diseases may be conceptualized as a result of altered networks states [86] caused by multifactorial perturbations, which is expected to foster marker and target discovery. Under this theoretical framework, the dynamics and biology of ND processes scrutinized by systems modeling and systems biology can be more comprehensively understood. This may be achieved via a two-step approach consisting of initial animal studies followed by confirmation and validation in clinical cohort programs [87] or via an approach consisting of molecular and clinical studies in cohorts, for example the search for predictive marker signatures, followed by studies in experimental models of ND of biological and therapeutical significance associated to such marker signatures. Numerous disease conditions in humans (including proteinopathies/ND, cardiovascular disorders, malignancies, the metabolic syndrome, and diabetes) have a highly complex biological nature that cannot be entirely and adequately captured through the investigation of single linear molecular alterations. Besides being multifactorial, such diseases are primarily caused by altered essential networks required for the correct functioning of basic physiological pathways. Such disease processes are fundamentally nonlinear dynamic, being the results of an evolving interplay between homeostatic defense mechanisms and impaired physiological networks through space and time [88]. Since cell survival mechanisms under the control of stress response factors may also be those that trigger cell death depending on the pathophysiological context in which they operate [89] identifying the critical phases that, at the molecular, cellular, or system levels, are associated with the dynamics of ND processes and could modify the capacity of individuals to maintain function and resist ND is essential for clinical discovery and therapeutic developments, especially in the context of the growing needs for PM.

Recent years have witnessed significant advances in our understanding of how human diseases are routed in altered molecular and cellular networks. Several genetic alterations and pathophysiological mechanisms – mainly involving the amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing and tau related networks – are considered to be significant aspects in the pathogenesis of AD [90]. Such network derangements can cause either loss or gain of specific molecular functions and an increased formation of neurotoxic molecular species (e.g., toxic amyloid or protein aggregates) that can in turn adversely affect supra-cellular levels. Another important factor that should not be overlooked in the conceptualization of complex diseases is the crucial counteracting role of homeostatic networks. In this regard, the interest into the potential protective role of resilience factors against neurodegeneration (e.g., autophagy, proteostasis, endolysosomal networks, protein folding chaperone networks, disaggregates, and other stress-protective and clearance networks) is currently gaining momentum [90].

The causative pathways that lead to the onset of AD and its clinical phenotypes at the individual level are thought to consist of genetic/epigenetic susceptibility and/or protection coupled with a continuing dynamic interplay between altered brain networks and counteracting neural mechanisms of resilience. Integrative systems biology-based approaches are crucial to disentangling this intricate interplay. First, simple model organisms mimicking the main features of AD need to be developed in order to extensively apply different “omics” techniques. This approach may offer invaluable data to shed more light on the conserved pathways that modulate the onset and progression of AD, being ultimately useful for testing potential strategies that could delay and/or modify the natural course of disease [90]. However, the regulation of gene expression and pathway activity might differ between simple model organisms and humans, which calls for integrated use of simple model organisms and higher-order models such as mouse models and human cell models, e.g. induced-pluripotent-stem-cells coaxed into neurons or neurons obtained by direct conversion of fibroblasts [91].

New evidence from preclinical models needs to be duly replicated, with a special focus on subtle initial network alterations that can be visualized by neuroimaging, which could potentially become the targets of early therapeutic interventions [92–95]. Neuroimaging and biomarker data should be fully integrated and analyzed in a longitudinal manner through computational and integrative network biology tools within a systems biology-based framework. The increasing trend towards high-throughput techniques in AD research will generate multifactorial data that will require integration in a standardized, efficient, cost-effective, and secure manner. The vast amount of data generated will cause new challenges for data science – mainly in terms of data storage, processing, and mining. As we are entering into the “era of big and deep data” in AD, computational systems biology approaches are continuously being optimized in order to support the approximate modeling of biological systems [90].

A holistic systems biology-based research strategy in AD research will likely rely on generating large and rich data sets, applying multi-layer network approaches for integration and comparative assessments of different datasets, and reckoning on the information generated for discovery of novel disease markers and targets. A translational approach from preclinical studies to bedside (complemented by reverse translational approaches) will be required to integrate and implement fundamental aspects of the systems theory and the systems biology concept into clinical practice – i.e., translational systems medicine – in the upcoming future [96–99]. Key to the success of these approaches is the use of robust data integration methods. There is a large array of methods that enable complex data sets collected in experimental models of ND or human cohorts to be analyzed and integrated on a system level [100, 101]. Methods based on graph theory (that is network approaches) such as spectral decomposition of the signal [102] weighted gene co-expression network analysis [103] and Bayesian causal inference [104] and those based on formal concept analysis [105] and tree induction [106, 107] likely hold strong promises for generating comprehensive in silico models that accurately select for biological rules, disease targets, and risk factors with potential for clinical exploitation.

Application of systems biology in AD cohorts. The example of the European Prevention of Alzheimer’s Dementia (EPAD) Consortium

Implementation of systems biology into clinical and research practice requires a number of steps. First, molecular tests and biomarkers for matching individuals/patients to clinical trials and/or targeted therapies will require continuous refinements and validation of high-throughput techniques, systems-level approaches, and computational tools. Second, all molecular tests to be used for AD, as well as all patient care-related molecular analyses, need to be performed using assays that are highly reproducible, accurate, and satisfy the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) clinical trials guidelines, with adherence to principles of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) (available at http://www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm122046.htm), the European Medicines Agency (EMA) (http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/), and the European Clinical Trials Database (EudraCT) (https://eudract.ema.europa.eu/). In this scenario, the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) and the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) will provide collaborative large-scale longitudinal data on AD associated autosomal dominant mutation carriers that will be invaluable to systematize and make explicit the translation of neuroimaging and biochemical markers into clinical guidelines. Third, the era of big and deep data generation and the availability of comprehensive repositories has brought the need for collaboration, sharing, integration, normalization, and analysis of both data and metadata, with the ultimate goal to make effective translational use of this new knowledge. In this scenario, several clinical trials may benefit from the holistic approach provided by systems biology. Among them, interest in the European Prevention of Alzheimer’s Dementia (EPAD) program is gaining momentum.

The EPAD program [108] is a pan-European initiative that will establish a shared platform to design and conduct phase 2 Proof-of-Concept (PoC) clinical trials specifically aimed at developing new treatments for the secondary prevention of AD. To investigate different agents in the pre-AD population in the most efficient manner, a Bayesian adaptive design that learns from data accrued as the trial progresses will be used. Clearly disappointing results of recently completed phase 3 AD therapy trials may be explained by their exploratory (rather than confirmatory) nature, mostly caused by an incomplete exploration phase throughout phase 2 [109]. Hopefully, the EPAD program will be helpful to overcome previous pitfalls in the field by assuming that a correctly designed phase 2 trial can take several years to be completed. Other common issues that the EPAD Longitudinal Cohort Study (LCS) (available at https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02804789) will address include: 1) the high screen failure rates, 2) the unwillingness or inability to implement an adequate patient stratification, and 3) the lack of a pre-randomization run-in period. The EPAD LCS is expected to provide reliable disease models of the preclinical and prodromal periods of AD before the final implementation of a clinical trial. The EPAD LCS will be conducted in a large cohort of 5,000 subjects who had undergone a thorough assessment in terms of cognition [110, 111], neuroimaging, core CSF biomarkers (Aβ42, total tau [t-tau], and hyperphosphorylated tau [p-tau]), clinical outcomes, and genotyping. Annual assessments will be performed with the goal of identifying different disease trajectories to provide an optimal stratification for trial inclusion. Risk stratification groups with similar biological underpinnings will be helpful to identify specific classes of subjects to be included (or excluded) from the clinical trial according to the PM paradigm.

The development of an EPAD site network across the European Trial Delivery Centers will be critical to the initiative success. Site certifications, continuing training, and commitment to the EPAD program is expected to reduce study site heterogeneity and will hopefully provide highly accurate estimates of treatment effects. Each TDC will assess approximately 200 research participants, of whom 100 will be included in the clinical trial. This effort is unprecedented, as previous clinical trials involved numerous centers (up to 200), each enrolling a handful of patients. Conversely, the traditional methodology will be overturned by EPAD, inasmuch as a few centers will enroll numerous patients.

In general, the correct implementation of phase 3 trials preliminary requires more robust phase 2 outcomes. The EPAD program will improve the study methodology, ultimately favoring an optimal disease modelling and a better patient stratification before embarking on phase 3 confirmatory trials. The EPAD LCS was started in May 2016 at six sites, with a total of 400 participants having already been recruited. Disease modelling work is expected to be introduced as soon as an enrolment goal of 500 subjects will be achieved. It is anticipated that the EPAD PoC Study Platform trial will begin in 2018.

SYSTEMS NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: UNDERSTANDING NEUROPHYSIOLOGY AND NEURODYNAMICS BEHIND AETIOLOGY

During the last two decades, the neuroscience field has entered a rapid phase of expansion characterized by the development of a large proportion of methodologies allowing the recording of neural data obtained from a wide range of modalities, from metabolic pathways to optical imaging to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). These data are collected through different spatiotemporal domains (Figure 5). Most of these techniques have been so far used one at a time [112, 113]. Recently, there is an attempt towards data integration in order to create comprehensive maps and record dynamic patterns across multiple levels of organization (neurons, circuits, systems, whole brain) and involving different domains of biology and data types (such as anatomical and functional connectivity, genetic/genomic patterns [112, 114]). This effort is in line with the new paradigm of systems neurophysiology aiming at integrating “big neuroscience data” recorded in a multimodal fashion to understand the role of the complex web of interconnections among several elements of large-scale neurobiological systems [115–118]. The ultimate goal of systems neurophysiology is to clarify how signals are represented within neocortical networks and the specific roles played by the multitude of the heterogeneous neuronal components. The new interdisciplinary field of network neuroscience proposes to overcome these enduring challenges by approaching brain structures and functions via an explicitly integrative perspective [112]. Here, we will present scientific advancements related to single methodologies utilized by system neurophysiology, within wider context of the PM paradigm in AD.

An increasingly important integrative component in this endeavor is connectomics the emerging science of brain networks, which comprises studies of both anatomical and functional brain connectivity, across modalities and methodologies. The rise of connectomics has triggered several national and international consortia devoted to mapping patterns of brain connectivity across large subject cohorts, including the Human Connectome Project funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health [119]. These projects have pushed the boundaries of data sharing, neuroinformatics and computational analysis. Similar connectomics efforts are underway to track lifespan development [120] as well as address patient populations, including people with ND. To deal with the mounting volume of connectome data, the field is developing basic network science tools and methodology that can be applied to brain data [121]. So far, broad exploratory analysis has revealed a number of architectural principles that underpin macro- and meso-scale maps of brain connectivity, including modular organization and the existence of prominent hub regions. Much is still to be learned about the contributions of connectome architecture to human brain function and its role in pathophysiological processes. Systems neurophysiology in combination with connectomics and computational network models has great promise to illuminate the relation of structure to dynamics in brain networks as shown, for example, in recent findings on time-dependent functional connectivity as measured with non-invasive neuroimaging techniques.

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF STRUCTURAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely, non-invasive, relatively non-expensive and versatile technology. Among MRI modalities, structural or anatomical MRI, using three-dimensional T1-weighted sequences, is the most widely used [122, 123] and validated [124, 125]. Structural MRI allows visualization and measurement of atrophy which is a macroscopic correlate of neurodegeneration, in particular of neuronal and dendritic loss. The progression of atrophy in AD approximately follows that of neurofibrillary tangles found in post-mortem AD cases and described by Braak and colleagues [126] and Delacourte and colleagues [127]. Moreover, previous studies showed that structural MRI alterations correlate with tau deposition, as described by Braak stages, and CSF tau biomarkers [128]. On the contrary, not all structural MRI measures are well correlated to measures of beta-amyloid deposition, and atrophy patterns do not follow those of amyloid deposition [129, 130]. Due to these reasons, it should be noted that brain atrophy in AD is descriptive of brain structural changes but not specific for underlying AD pathophysiology. Indeed, a given atrophy pattern can be associated with different pathophysiological processes. However, MRI atrophy measures are well correlated with cognitive and clinical functions [131, 132], and highly correlated with the concurrent rate of clinical decline [133–135]. Therefore, they constitute attractive tools to track disease progression and to monitor the effect of treatment.

Automated image analysis approaches allow measuring distributed patterns of atrophy across the whole brain, using either region-of-interest measurements, voxel-based maps of gray-matter or cortical thickness measurements [136, 137]. Machine learning algorithms applied to whole-brain atrophy maps can automatically identify patients with AD and thereby support diagnosis [138–141].

The most widely studied and accepted structural MRI marker of AD is atrophy of the medial temporal lobe [142, 143]. Assessment of medial temporal atrophy can be performed in clinical routine using visual scales [144]. However, such approach is observer-dependent and only semi-quantitative. On the other hand, fully-automated segmentation approaches provide objective, quantitative, volumetric measurement of hippocampal atrophy [145–149]. Hippocampal volumetry can discriminate AD patients from controls with high sensitivity and specificity [150]. Moreover, numerous studies have shown that patients with higher hippocampal atrophy are at higher risk of rapid cognitive decline [151–155]. However, atrophy of the hippocampus was found in other types of dementia, suggesting low specificity of this marker for the identification of AD [156, 157]. Recent developments of ultra-high field MRI (7 Tesla and higher) allow the study of anatomical alterations with an unprecedented level of detail. In particular, using 7T MRI, it is possible to distinguish between different cellular layers and anatomical subregions within the hippocampus. Its application in AD has demonstrated that hippocampal subregions and layers are differentially affected by atrophy [158, 159]. These advanced techniques have the potential to provide more sensitive measures than global hippocampal volumetry.

Another region of interest for AD is the basal forebrain cholinergic system (BFCS) since it represents the region with the majority of cholinergic nuclei efferent to the cerebral cortex [160, 161]. The measurement of BFCS nuclei has been developed and validated as a highly relevant and robust region of interest for automatic structural MRI assessment of atrophy rate of change from the preclinical to the clinical AD stages [160, 162–167]. Evidence indicates that the BFCS may even degenerate before medio-temporal lobe structures, as early as at the preclinical stage [163, 168]. In contrast to the hippocampal volume, the atrophy of BFCS was significantly correlated to in vivo brain amyloid load in AD and non-demented elderly individuals [169, 170].

Machine learning approaches based on whole brain atrophy patterns have been developed to predict the evolution of patients, in particular the progression to dementia of individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) [171–173]. Nevertheless, most of these approaches have been validated on a single research dataset, most often provided by the ADNI. Therefore, their ability to generalize across datasets as well as their performance in a clinical routine context remain unclear and larger-scale validation studies are needed.

Its ability to track progression makes structural MRI also attractive to monitor the effect of treatment [29]. Of all outcome measures (including clinical, cognitive and fluid biomarkers), structural MRI measures seem to have the highest measurement precision [135]. They are thus an attractive outcome measure for clinical trials, as well as to monitor the effect of treatment in a clinical context. It should be noted that different types of treatment seem to result in different effects on atrophy measures. In a randomized placebo-controlled trial, patients treated with donepezil, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, have a significantly lower rate of annual hippocampal atrophy and cortical thickness compared to those receiving placebo [174, 175]. Moreover, the treatment group demonstrated a significantly decreased annual rate of atrophy of the BFCS compared to MCI individuals that received placebo [176]. The BFCS complements hippocampal volumetry in assessing structural progression in AD and provides a promising outcome measure for clinical trials [161] Anti-amyloid therapies, however, seem to result in increased rate of atrophy [177]. Nevertheless, it may be hypothesized that such accelerated atrophy only occurs at the beginning of treatment, perhaps caused by a reduction in microglial activation associated with plaques, and that a reduction of atrophy may occur in the longer term. Overall, structural MRI remains an attractive tool to study the morphological effects of treatment, in particular if new molecules targeting other aspects of AD pathophysiology (e.g. anti-tau or neuroprotective treatments) become available. Furthermore, structural MRI plays an important role in monitoring safety of treatments. Indeed, microbleeds and transient cerebral edema (respectively called ARIAH and ARIAE) occur in some patients treated with active Aβ immunization [178].

In summary, structural MRI is an attractive marker for tailoring therapeutic interventions. Its most attractive features are its ability to precisely track cognitive decline, its potential for monitory the effect of treatment and to predict the evolution of patients. For prediction, the most promising avenue is that of machine learning approaches from whole-brain measurements. Such approaches require larger scale validation using multiple clinical routine cohorts. The integration of structural MRI analysis tools with other techniques such as those from functional MRI, electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG) or diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), in a multimodal fashion, will enable the investigation of temporal and topographical relationships between numerous pathological alterations and neurobiological systems related to AD. Such big data integration, will improve our understanding of the in vivo interacting pathophysiological mechanisms across brain related systems characterizing AD, as envisioned by the PM concept.

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING (DTI)

Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which employs a Gaussian approximation to model the MR signal attenuation due to net water molecule displacements in a de facto restricted cellular environment. This technique has become the mainstream strategy for examining white matter microarchitecture, connectivity as well as integrity both in an investigative and in a clinical setting, and it has been widely employed in studies focused on AD, MCI [179–181] as well as several other pathologies [182–185]. The apparent water diffusion tensor (which is termed apparent precisely because intracellular water diffusion is not truly free) can be estimated in brain parenchyma based on relatively fast echo planar imaging (EPI) techniques [186] which only pose moderate demand in terms of in-scanner subject time. From these tensor estimates, white matter tract-specific orientation information can be obtained through deterministic (based on the orientation of the main DT eigenvector) or probabilistic approaches [187]. Also, model free tractography approaches exist, a promising development of which is constrained spherical deconvolution [188–191], which has lately been extended to incorporate multi-tissue models anatomically based filtering [188, 189] (Figure 6). Further, scalar indices derived from the diffusion tensor are rotationally invariant and are well known to be sensitive, albeit not specific, indicators of microstructural alterations. The single tensor eigenvalues as well as Mean Diffusivity (MD – mean of eigenvalues) and Fractional Anisotropy (FA – normalized variance of eigenvalues [192]) can aid in quantifying fiber integrity through region of interest (ROI), voxel- or Tract-Based Spatial Statistics based approaches [180]. A decrease in FA (possibly accompanied by an increase of MD or other directional diffusivities) is typically the hallmark of unspecific bundle degeneration, as seen in AD and MCI [193, 194]. Importantly, correlations between DTI-derived indices in white matter (WM) and AD disease severity have been reported [195, 196], suggesting that DTI measures may be used as indexes of disease progression. DTI may therefore provide unique information about WM integrity [66] in AD patients and MCI subjects. Indeed, several studies have demonstrated early WM changes within the parahippocampus, hippocampus, posterior cingulum, and splenium already at the MCI stage [197–200]. However, the majority of DTI studies indicate that the uncinate fasciculus, the entire corpus callosum and the cingulum tract are most involved in pathogenesis in both MCI and AD. In a recent study on AD and MCI subjects [201] the interpretation of a selective increase in FA in the MCI group was aided by the introduction tensor mode (MO) [202], a third invariant which distinguishes the type of anisotropy (planar, e.g. in regions of crossing or kissing fibers versus linear, in regions which exhibit one predominant orientation). This, in turn, led to the detection of a relative preservation of motor-related projection fibers crossing the association fibers of the superior longitudinal fasciculus in the early-stage MCI subjects before they degenerated to AD. Also, recent DTI data seems to point towards a reconstruction of the trajectory of progressive white matter degeneration in AD as it spreads with aging. In agreement with this so called retrogenesis model (cortical regions that mature earliest in infancy tend to degenerate last in AD) it has been shown that white matter abnormalities in specific brain regions such as prefrontal cortex white matter, inferior longitudinal fasciculus and temporo-parietal areas [180, 197, 203, 204] appear earlier. Also, DTI has been able to offer insight into asymptomatic “preclinical” at risk stages such as subjective cognitive decline, where DTI based scalar markers of diffusion properties were significantly associated with rates of cognitive decline and hippocampus atrophy at clinical follow up, with odds ratios up to 3 [205], and DTI indexes invariants were seen to be more sensitive than CSF biomarkers in predicting cognitive decline and medial temporal atrophy in subjective cognitive decline and MCI subjects [205].

Nevertheless, a recent meta-analysis indicates high variability in both the anatomy of regions studied and DTI-derived metrics [206] – a partial contribution to which may be the intrinsic limits of the DTI techniques. Determining the most robust acquisition parameters and processing strategies for DTI for a multicenter setting is still an active area of research, and initial clinical and physical phantom data, i.e. scans obtained from a volunteer as well as a physical object with defined diffusion properties, suggest that the variability of DTI-based diffusion metrics across a range of MRI scanners is at least 50% higher than that of volumetric measures [207]. For prediction of conversion from MCI into AD dementia, DTI reached an accuracy of about 77% – 95% at 2 to 3 years follow up [205, 208, 209] in monocenter studies, prediction accuracy for multicenter studies still needs to be studied. Also, all diffusion weighted imaging protocols suffer from the relatively low signal-to-noise ratio inherent in the necessarily fast EPI techniques. In this respect, the increase in signal-to-noise ratio afforded by moving to ultra-high field imaging (at e.g. 7T) is somewhat counteracted by the rapid shortening of transverse (T2) relaxation times with increasing field strength and consequent signal loss. Nevertheless, while ultra-high field diffusion weighted imaging therefore poses significant challenges, improved distortion correction techniques [210] coupled with monopolar acquisition schemes which allow a significant (about 30%) shortening of echo times, and the additional use of simultaneous multislice excitation strategies [211] may allow in vivo diffusion-weighted imaging to finally advance towards sub-millimeter imaging at ultra-high field. Accordingly, ex-vivo studies have already defined white matter lesions in aging and AD at 11.4T [212], and 7T imaging has been helpful in discriminating Parkinson’s disease [213] and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [214]. Finally, it is well known that the assumption of a Gaussian propagator (which is at the root of DTI) is insufficient in regions with more intricate fiber architecture such as mixed tissue types and/or kissing or crossing fibers [215]. To this end, more advanced protocols such as Diffusion Spectrum Imaging [216], Diffusional Kurtosis Imaging [217–221], higher order tensor models [222], compartment models [223–225] and anomalous diffusion [226, 227], which can be optimized in order to enhance their suitability in a clinical setting [228], have been already been successfully employed in augmenting information about tissue degeneration in several ND, including AD [229–232].

Another avenue for DTI-based methodology is the construction and subsequent analysis of brain-wide maps of anatomical connections that can be summarized as structural networks or graphs [115]. Basically, these efforts proceed by first dividing the brain into a set of internally coherent gray matter parcels or regions (the nodes of the network) and then estimating the strengths of anatomical projections between these nodes (the edges of the network). While the reconstruction of such maps faces significant methodological issues, the resulting structural networks have been validated against classical histological techniques in non-human species. Human structural networks capture individual differences that relate to genetics [233] and various phenotypic variables, including indices of cognitive performance [234]. They also exhibit characteristic changes across the life span [120], during normal aging [235] and in the course of brain disorders [236]. For example, the loss of connectivity associated with the progression of AD results a loss of links between dense clusters of functionally-related regions and hence a decreased capacity for integration [237, 238].

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (fMRI)

Using fMRI in a PM-based paradigm to tailoring therapeutics for patient treatment would be a very innovative approach from current methods to developing therapeutics for patients. The diagnosis and classification of patients would be based on clinical criteria, where a patient would be classified according to predetermined criteria. Implementation of a PM paradigm would use fMRI as a biomarker of functional brain changes that would be part of defining the patient’s phenotype in combination with the other modalities. Thus, it would seek to integrate fMRI-based biomarkers within a systems neurophysiology context to provide an integrated picture of the patient’s status [21]. The biomarkers within a systems neurophysiology approach would inform the treatment approach that a patient would receive. Given the complexity of AD and the other ND, the fMRI-based biomarkers would be integrated within a systems biology and neurophysiology approach with the other modalities (genetic, clinical, behavioral, cognitive, etc.) where the different biomarkers would reflect disease mechanisms, pathophysiology, clinical history and permit patient stratification for treatment [20, 21].

fMRI can be used to measure the vascular response to local neuronal activation due to stimuli or a cognitive task [239]. There are two broad approaches that may be utilized with fMRI data in defining PM-based biomarkers for AD detection and diagnosis – one would examine brain activation data in response to a stimulus or cognitive paradigm whereas another approach would examine the intrinsic connectivity networks measured using resting state fMRI. The first approach would lead to biomarkers that would be associated with the cognitive paradigm or stimulus class whereas examination of the intrinsic connectivity networks would provide a search for biomarkers over all brain networks.

In terms of a PM approach with tailoring therapeutics, the use of a cognitive task or stimulus would be a form of ‘stress test’ to a specific network, for example in asymptomatic at risk stages for preclinical and clinical AD, a memory task would typically activate the hippocampus, ventral- and dorsal-prefrontal regions, posterior cingulate regions [240–249], and a working memory task would primarily activate dorsal and ventral frontal regions and inferior and superior parietal regions [250–255]. A limitation of the cognitive paradigm approach is that the patient must be able to perform the task, and variability in task performance would alter the activation pattern [256–261]. An alternative approach in AD would be to implement cognitive paradigms outside of the memory domain that individuals may still be able to perform such as visual perception, attentional tasks or passive stimuli [262–273]. The changes found using this approach would be applicable to patients that may be clinically more advanced, but also provides an approach to measure the ‘downstream’ effects of the pattern of disease-related neuropathology. Current studies examined the differences between patients and healthy controls or among different risk groups by quantifying the average difference between the groups, where the groups are defined by clinical-descriptive phenotypes or risk groups based on genetics or family history. The proposed PM paradigm would instead examine the variability among the subjects to define phenotypes that are data-driven and may not necessarily reflect the underlying pathophysiology and clinical phenotypes. There is evidence of significant variability in brain activation from healthy status to MCI to mild AD stage, for example a using a face-name association paradigm, there was a nonlinear response in hippocampus, with higher activation in MCI subjects compared to healthy controls and AD dementia patients [242, 249, 274]. Similarly with the visual perception task the activation levels varied along the dorsal visual pathway as disease severity increased [262].

In addition to measuring brain function one would need to integrate the above biomarkers with results from fMRI studies of the mechanisms of action of the potential therapeutics – most studies have examined cholinergic drugs over an extended treatment period in either MCI subjects or mild AD patients (see for example [273, 275–278]). Another potential approach to be used within a PM paradigm is to measure the effects of a single dose [279–282] and investigate the predictive power of the single dose over the effectiveness of the therapeutic strategy for the biomarkers-characterized patient. The single dose approach has the potential to inform the tailoring of the therapeutic intervention by providing information about potential medium to long term effects of any treatment.

The various fMRI-based paradigms described above would provide information about a specific brain network or set of brain regions and any data-driven approach would be limited to data from the brain network or regions activated during the task. An alternative approach utilizing fMRI would be to use whole-brain resting state fMRI to measure so-called resting-state networks or intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) [283–286]. These ICNs have been shown to be highly reproducible across individuals [287], exhibit characteristic dynamic fluctuations [288] as well as patterns of change across development, life span and in the course of brain disorders [236]. The topography of ICNs resembles other networks, such as those engaged during human behavior and cognition (for example, see [289–293]), derived from gene co-expression [294, 295], disease phenotypes and disease progression (for example [246, 296–303]), as well as brain activation level and cognitive performance (for example [293, 304–306]. The structure of ICN networks can be probed with a variety of network tools to reveal individual differences in their internal coherence and their mutual interactions. In combination with these advanced analytics, ICNs can potentially provide a rich set of biomarkers of brain function, including insights into which ICNs are specifically disturbed as a result of pathophysiology, and thus yield a more integrated perspective on system-wide changes within a patient. The tailoring of therapeutics could benefit from associations between biomarkers and the presence of the disease pathophysiology. Given the variability that is present in AD patients and MCI subjects, the ICN-based biomarkers and their relation to genetic profiles [68] may be able to provide an improved systems biology characterization of brain function. The use of ICNs for tailoring therapeutics still needs considerable development work, and there is currently only limited work on the effects of an AD-related drug on ICNs [307]. It should be noted that while the task-free design of resting fMRI lends itself to application in clinical cohorts, the sensitivity to motion artifacts and ongoing temporal fluctuations in the network structure of ICNs entail greater reproducibility as scan lengths are increased (for example, see [308]).

The potential of fMRI to assist in the PM-oriented targeting of therapeutics for AD patients is strong but also will require very significant development work. The integration of fMRI with the other domains such as genetics, cognition, clinical measures has so far mostly been attempted within a group analysis context, and a PM paradigm would need development of new statistical models to define potential therapeutic strategy on a single individuals basis [309].

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG)

Candidate topographic neurophysiological (neurodynamic) biomarkers of AD can be derived from resting state eyes-closed electroencephalographic (rsEEG) rhythms recorded in subjects relaxed in quiet wakefulness (eyes closed, no sleep) with their mind freely wandering [310]. These rsEEG markers are non-invasive, cost-effective, available worldwide, and repeatable even in severe dementia. They may probe the neurophysiological “reserve” in AD patients, as one of the dimensions of the brain reserve [311]. This neurophysiological “reserve” may reflect residual mechanisms for 1) “synchronization” of neural activity in a given cortical region and 2) the coupling of activity between nodes of a given brain neural networks as a sign of functional cortical “connectivity” [310, 312].

RsEEG markers in AD at the group level reflect the neurophysiological reserve of the disease over time and after cholinergic therapy

Previous rsEEG studies using “synchronization” markers showed that compared with groups of normal elderly (Nold) subjects, AD groups with dementia (ADD) exhibited lower power density in posterior cortical alpha (8–12 Hz) and beta (13–30 Hz) rhythms [313–319]. There was also higher power density in widespread delta (&lt;4 Hz) and theta (4–7 Hz) rhythms [320–325]. Finally, ADD, dementia due to Parkinson’s (PDD), and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) groups were characterized by abnormally lower posterior alpha source activities [326]. The effect was dramatic in the ADD, marked in the DLB, and moderate in the PDD [326]. There were also abnormally higher occipital delta source activities with dramatic effects in the PDD group, marked in the DLB group, and moderate in the ADD group [326].

Concerning “connectivity” markers, ADD groups were characterized by abnormally lower spectral coherence in alpha and beta (13–20 Hz) rhythms between posterior electrode pairs [316, 327–339]. These effects were observed in temporo-parieto-occipital electrode pairs in some studies [316, 327, 333, 337] and in frontocentral electrode pairs in others [329, 332, 340]. Other studies reported either a global decrease [327, 334] or increase [337, 341] of delta and theta coherences between electrode pairs in ADD groups. Another investigation pointed to a complex topographical pattern of coherence increase and a decrease in those groups [342]. Alternative techniques of “connectivity” unveiled a decrement of synchronization likelihood between electrode pairs in frontoparietal alpha rhythms in ADD and its prodromal stage of amnesic MCI [319, 343]. Finally, there were reduced cortical connectivity and “small-worldness” in ADD groups as revealed by graph theory indexes [344–347].

RsEEG rhythms deteriorate across time (e.g. about 12–24 months) in groups of aMCI subjects and ADD patients (see for a review [348]): 1) increased delta-theta and increased alpha-beta power density at parieto-occipital electrodes [349]; 2) increased theta power density, decreased beta power density, and decreased mean frequency at the temporal and temporo-occipital electrodes [316, 350, 351]; 3) increased delta and increased alpha 1 in parieto-occipital sources [352, 353]; and 4) reduced cortical connectivity as revealed by graph theory indexes [347].

In groups of ADD patients, Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor drugs (i.e. enhancing the cholinergic tone) showed beneficial or protective effects in delta [320, 354–356], theta [321, 356, 357], and alpha rhythms [355, 358]. When observed at short-term, these effects predicted longer-term therapy efficacy [357, 359, 360](for a review see [352]). However, some contradictory findings suggest future more controlled cross-validation studies [361, 362].

Abnormal posterior cortical delta rhythms in ADD patients might reflect an upregulation of their generation mechanisms in quiet wakefulness, possibly due to cortical blood hypoperfusion and synaptic dysfunction in the same regions [363–366] and atrophy in the posterior cortex [312, 352, 367–369]. Furthermore, reduced posterior cortical alpha rhythms in ADD subjects might be due to an unselective tonic cortical excitation in populations of cortical pyramidal, thalamo-cortical, and reticular thalamic neurons generating those rhythms [370–372]. Such cortical over excitation might induce a background noise in the neural information processing interfering with vigilance and cognition [310].

RsEEG markers in AD at the individual level: classification accuracy and predictions

RsEEG markers allowed the discrimination of ADD patients from Nold individuals and others with neurodegenerative dementing disorders such as PDD and DLB persons. Global delta and alpha coherences between electrode pairs successfully classified ADD compared with DLB people with 0.75–0.80 (e.g. 1 = 100%; [373]). Furthermore, twenty discriminant scalp rsEEG power density and coherence variables showed a classification accuracy of 0.90 in the discrimination of ADD versus Nold and ADD versus PDD subjects [374]. Another study in small populations of ADD, PDD/DLB, and frontotemporal dementia patients reached a classification accuracy of 1.0 using 25 discriminant scalp rsEEG power density and functional cortical connectivity (i.e. Granger causality) variables [375]. In another study, combining quantitative rsEEG variables (including those of functional cortical connectivity) with neuropsychological, clinical, neuroimaging, cerebrospinal fluid, and visual EEG data reached “only” a classification accuracy of 0.87 in the discrimination between ADD, PDD, and DLB persons [376]. Concerning cortical source space, resting state delta and alpha sources classified Nold subjects versus ADD/DLB/PDD patients and ADD versus PDD patients with 0.85–0.90 [326]. Milder classification effects were observed in PDD and ADD individuals with MCI [377].

RsEEG markers predicted cognitive decline in aMCI individuals at about 6–24 months (see [348] for a review). The main effects are summarized as follows: 1) combined alpha-theta power density and mean frequency from left temporal-occipital regions [316]; 2) anterior localization of alpha sources [315]; 3) high temporal delta sources [378]; 4) high theta power density [379]; and 5) low posterior alpha power density [380].

Concluding remarks on EEG implementation

Overall, it is suggested that resting state cortical delta and alpha rhythms might unveil more compromised neurophysiological reserve in AD, at the group and the individual level. These rsEEG markers predicted and tracked the AD progression as neurophysiological endpoints for therapeutic interventions. Future multi-centric longitudinal studies should provide a large open access database for a systematic comparison of rsEEG markers of “synchronization” and “connectivity” markers for a better definition of “neurophysiological reserve” for clinical applications and research.

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG)

Magnetoencephalography (MEG) allows recording the magnetic signals of the order of 10−12 Teslas, which are produced at the scalp surface by the activity of neuronal assemblies. It may provide information complementary to EEG for uncovering new neurodynamic biomarkers of AD, particularly in its very early asymptomatic at risk and preclinical stages, therefore before the prodromal and clinical stages..

MEG can be used to investigate cognitive functions in a way very similar to EEG. With this approach, impaired brain functional activities were characterized in AD and MCI stages during memory tasks for instance. Walla and colleagues [381] used a recognition memory task in which they manipulated the depth of encoding of verbal information. They showed alteration of temporo-parietal event-related responses to old—previously encoded—versus new items in AD patients relative to controls, after deep encoding. The mismatch negativity (MMN) was also shown to be a potential AD marker. The mismatch negativity is a well-known component of the event-related potential response, which is associated with the detection of deviant stimuli in a stream of standard, repeated stimuli—classically in the auditory modality, hence allowing the assessment of the quality of sensory processing, memory, and predictive coding [382, 383]. Its magnetic counterpart, the MMNm, was shown to be delayed in latency in AD compared to healthy elderly controls [384] (see also [385]). Most interestingly, using memory tasks in pre-clinical stages of AD, e.g., in APOE ε4 carriers, some studies pointed to the capacity of MEG for revealing neurophysiological markers of subjects’ decline, potentially predictive of pathology emergence [386, 387]. In sum, MEG can be used in the same way as EEG to investigate cognitive functions during various task performance; both these methods provide highly convergent and temporally detailed data on information processing and cognitive functions in normal and pathological aging.

However, the most unique potential of MEG for uncovering pathophysiological mechanisms and providing new neurodynamic biomarkers in the field of AD may lie in the study of functional brain networks, particularly of resting state networks (for review, [388]). As mentioned above, fMRI studies have shown that, in the absence of task demand, the resting brain exhibits spontaneous and highly structured, often oscillatory, fluctuations in activity [389]. MEG and EEG provide a richer view of these networks in the time and frequency domains [390–395]. Resting state networks are usually studied using time-frequency decomposition of MEG (or EEG) signals. This allows identifying a rich set of resting state networks in distinct frequency bands (e.g. [390, 392, 393, 396]). It was shown that AD patients show altered resting state network activity. This was revealed at the level of oscillatory activity characteristics, pointing to an overall slowing of brain rhythms with particular abnormalities in the delta (&lt;4Hz) and beta (~20Hz) frequency ranges [397–402]. Moreover, alteration of resting state networks, correlated with memory impairment, was recently shown using a graph-theoretical approach applied to neuromagnetic data [403]. Important questions are: When do these changes emerge in the course of the disease and which changes are predictive of or specific for the development of molecular and clinical AD? There is particular potential in EEG and MEG methods to provide such a surrogate biomarker for clinical outcome. Moreover, there is evidence that some MEG markers of functional brain networks may be predictive of the conversion from MCI to AD dementia [397, 400, 404].

On a practical note, it is important to underline that resting state studies have the advantage to be particularly adapted for elderly patients, because they require no cognitive effort and require relatively modest data acquisition time. It is worth mentioning that MEG – in comparison to most EEG systems – requires only a short time of subject’s preparation for recording. The whole-head MEG systems that are available at present comprise about 300 sensors that are fixed in a rigid helmet. After head shape numeration and the installation of a few reference sensors, individuals are comfortably seated with their head placed in the helmet. The installation time takes as little as 20 minutes. Moreover, the total “innocuity” of MEG allows close follow-up and detailed longitudinal assessment of disease progression.

The recent development and promising results of neuromagnetic imaging methods has led to the Magnetoencephalography International Consortium of Alzheimer’s Disease (MAGIC-AD) initiative. This initiative aims at advancing the use of MEG for AD and pre-AD research, combining data from resting state and simple memory and MMN tasks, in a multi-centric study [405]. While still in its burgeoning with regard to clinical applications, MEG has the potential to provide new tools for patient stratification – in order to better target patient population for clinical trials – and for treatment evaluation [406, 407], and to shed new light on the neurodynamic pathophysiological mechanisms of AD. It allows to foresee the identification of individualized signatures of disease progression in the form of temporal profiles of early adaptive, compensatory and decompensatory brain network changes. Moreover, it is clear that the full power of MEG will come from its combination with other methods to allow multimodal assessment of individuals and IDM of multi-modal big data. For example, the combination of genetic data, such as the APOE polymorphism characterization with MEG resting state analysis has revealed promising in identifying MCI subjects at high risk of conversion to AD dementia as well as asymptomatic subjects at high risk of developing significant cognitive deterioration [408]. Multifactorial characterization of MCI subjects, including neuropsychological assessment, structural and functional brain measures, APOE genotyping, demonstrated very high sensitivity and specificity for predicting conversion to AD [409].

In conclusion, the advances in the characterization of the dynamics of functional brain networks based on MEG stands the chance to provide new insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms of AD. In doing so, it shall constitute a powerful tool to bridge the gap between what is known from the cellular and molecular pathways of the disease – its start and its progression – and the cognitive dysfunctions constituting its clinical and behavioral hallmark. This is likely to be key for developing new biomarker-guided targeted treatments and PM, based on the characterization of the individual genetic patterns and pathophysiological pathways towards neurodegeneration and dementia.

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF NEUROMODULATION

Neuromodulation refers to forms of more or less invasive targeted and reversible electrical stimulation of discrete brain regions; it usually assists – but not replaces – traditional pharmacological treatments, with the aim to induce long-lasting changes of firing neural properties, both in the target region and connected networks, thereby modifying behavior or diseases’ symptoms. Therefore, neuromodulation fits well with the broad paradigm of PM that is the customization of healthcare tailored on the individual patients’ demands and disease’s pathophysiology.

Invasive neuromodulation in AD

Neuromodulation through deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an emerging opportunity in AD, being already an established therapy for advanced neurological and psychiatric diseases [410]. Several subcortical and cortical targets of stimulation have experimentally shown improvements in learning and memory, reinforcement of synaptic strength and restoring of physiological patterns of oscillatory brain activity, especially in the theta band, a rhythm that is functional to memorization [411]. DBS of the entorhinal cortex [412] enhanced memory of spatial information when applied during learning. DBS of the nucleus basalis of Meynert was studied in six patients with mild to moderate AD in a 12-month pilot study [413]. DBS was well tolerated and 4 of 6 patients were considered stable or improved at 12 months based on cognitive scores. The fornix – a deep white matter tract interconnecting hippocampus with mammillary bodies, and a central node of the Papez circuitry which is integral to memory function [411] – has been the most investigated, human DBS target for AD [414–417].

A 12-month follow-up of the first implanted 6 patients in the bilateral fornix showed a possible slowing of cognitive decline in some of them, accompanied by increase of metabolism in memory-related neural network structures [418], and by a reversal of the usual hippocampal atrophy found in AD [416]. These promising results prompted the first multicenter, 12-month, double-blind, randomized, controlled study of bilateral DBS of bilateral fornix in 42 patients with mild probable AD [419, 420]. The study showed no differences between those patients who received stimulation compared to controls who were not stimulated in cognitive measures. However, patients who received stimulation showed an increase in glucose metabolism in pre-selected brain regions at 6 and 12 months whereas those who were not stimulated showed decreased metabolism as expected. In a post-hoc regression analysis age was associated with outcome. Patients with late onset disease (≥65 years old) receiving stimulation showed a slowing of decline in cognitive measures when compared to those not stimulated. Improvement in glucose metabolism in this subgroup was greater in magnitude compared to the group as a whole. Stimulation of the fornix appeared to be safe. The overall perioperative adverse effects of the procedure, despite the cortical atrophy and the trans-ventricular trajectories of the electrodes towards the deep target, were comparable in DBS in other ND and there was no evidence of mortality or neurological morbidity at three months from the implant [419].

Non-invasive neuromodulation in AD

A different, non-invasive yet still experimental in AD, research approach for neuromodulation is the targeting of neocortical regions relevant to AD pathophysiology-through the scalp by applying repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) or weak currents via transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), in repeated daily sessions of stimulation [421]. Mechanisms of action are different, as rTMS makes cortical neurons to fire trans-synaptically [422], while tDCS shifts the level of their firing probability in a polarity-dependent manner [423]. Both stimulation techniques induce controllable excitatory or inhibitory after effects: high-frequency rTMS and anodal tDCS generally increase cortical excitability, while low-frequency rTMS and cathodal tDCS do the opposite [424, 425]; these effects are either local or involve the cortico-subcortical network to which the targeted region belongs [426]. In case of AD, the mere “stimulation” of a cortical target, even if prolonged for several daily sessions, does not help so much in preventing the decline of memory and other cognitive functions [421]. However, there are few controlled studies for rTMS in AD and even less for tDCS, for a total of a few dozens of patients treated so far [421]. What is emerging as a possible role for non-invasive neuromodulation is the coupling of stimulation with cognitive therapy, with the aim to promote plastic associative learning mechanisms to synergically improve the effects of cognitive rehabilitation only [427–429]. This approach, while still in need of quantitative characterization [430–432] seems promising only in mild AD, when the severity of neurodegeneration makes still available a residual neural substrate to possibly intervene on [433].

From the bench to the patient: a future way of non-invasive neuromodulation?

Physiological cerebral activity is composed of oscillatory activity across a wide range of frequencies, ranging from 0.05 up to 500–600 Hz: oscillations in the 30–80 Hz range are known as “gamma” activity. A relative attenuation of gamma activity is a consistent finding in patients with AD [315]. Moreover, dysregulation of hippocampal theta/gamma coupling may precede amyloid deposit activity in animal models of AD [434]. A seminal recent study in pre-symptomatic and amyloid pre-depositing AD mice, showed that exogenously-induced flickering lights oscillating at 40 Hz reduce Aβ concentrations and amyloid plaques, as well as tau concentrations, in a mouse model of AD [435], preventing subsequent neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits, thus suggesting that gamma induction may represent a novel therapeutic approach for AD. This opens translational perspectives, as the possibility of modulating gamma activity in humans, potentially leading to the same beneficial effects observed in mouse models. The possibility of modulating brain oscillatory patterns in AD patients has been recently shown, with EEG changes in brain connectivity in the gamma band following the administration of antiepileptic drugs [436].

A viable way to interact with brain oscillations is transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS), where low intensity (max 2 mA) alternating sinusoidal currents are applied via scalp electrodes. Due to the safety [437] and controllability (in terms of stimulation frequency and the possibility to target almost any cortical region) of the procedure, tACS has gained consensus as one of the most promising techniques to modulate brain oscillations in the healthy and pathological brains. Empirical evidence using neurophysiological markers, demonstrate that tACS modulates brain oscillatory activity via network resonance, suggesting that a weak stimulation at a resonant frequency could cause large-scale modulation of network activity and amplify endogenous network oscillations in a frequency-specific manner [438–441]. The application of tACS in the gamma band (specifically 40Hz) has been shown effective in transiently modulating various abilities in humans, including those related to higher-order cognition [442, 443] and sensorimotor performance [444]. The repeated administration of tACS in AD patients, if individually tailored on cortical regions with higher concentration of Aβ, might constitute a timely, disease-transforming, personalized therapeutic application worth to be tested in patient populations.

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)

Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has the potential to make a major contribution to selection for treatment in AD. This is of particular interest at very early asymptomatic stages of the disease, when clinical symptoms are still absent. In addition, it may also turn out as important at later stages as it is increasingly being recognized that several distinct pathophysiological processes can contribute to the development and manifestation of first symptoms and dementia. They vary considerably among patients, and one would therefore want to target the leading cause in individual patients.

At preclinical or prodromal disease stages identification of fibrillary amyloid deposits by PET currently is of obvious importance as an approved imaging biomarker for clinical trials. Use of a conservative cut-point has been suggested to minimize inclusion of elderly subjects with beginning amyloid deposition but without subsequent worsening [445]. Depending on a positive outcome of trials, amyloid PET might become a theragnostic procedure to select patients for anti-amyloid treatment.

In individuals with manifest dementia, differential diagnosis between AD and other diseases, such as FTD and vascular dementia, is important for selecting symptomatic treatment. 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose PET (18F-FDG-PET) has repeatedly been demonstrated to provide reliable differentiation between AD and FTD [446]. Beyond its relevance in the differential diagnosis, 18F-FDG-PET is a topographic marker of AD that can be used to measure disease progression and help identifying clinical subtypes [447]. Thus, it has a mediational effect between the neuropathological hallmarks of the disease (NFT and Aβ) and the cognitive symptoms [448]. It has also been used successfully to study mechanisms underlying cognitive reserve, which delays the onset of dementia [449]. Identification of in vivo AD pathology has also proven to be relevant in disease identification. Indeed, some AD clinical phenotypes can be underlain by several neurodegenerative disorders (e.g. primary progressive aphasia, corticobasal syndrome), including the classical amnestic AD [450]. In such cases amyloid PET can identify fibrillary amyloid as an indicator of AD. Fibrillary amyloid can also coexist with other pathologies, which is frequently the case in patients with DLB and vascular dementia (which might be termed mixed dementia), but is also possible with FTD and may possibly contribute to more rapid progression [451, 452]. Thus, if anti-amyloid therapy did eventually show clinical benefit in AD patients, patients with non-AD dementia and positive amyloid PET might also benefit.

Amongst the large variety of possible pathophysiological contributors to AD, many are accessible by specific PET tracers. The most prominent are fibrillary tau deposits. The current generation of PET tau tracers has been demonstrated to reflect the pathological staging of tau deposits in AD, but there is also evidence of some off-target binding that complicates the interpretation of scans. Next generation tracers are being developed to overcome these limitations [453].

Neuroinflammation is another major factor which has been shown to accelerate disease progression. It is associated with activation of microglia, which can be imaged by PET using the translocator protein (TSPO) tracers. 11C-(R)-PK11195 has been the first of those, and in spite of some limitations due to a relatively high level of non-specific binding is still widely used. A large number of second generation tracers with higher specificity has been developed but their binding is subject to a genetic polymorphisms that blurs the advantage of these tracers [454]. Nonetheless, beyond these limitations, the development of these tracers could provide relevant biomarkers and offer new insights in the variability of evolution of AD [455]. There are also tracers for imaging of astrogliosis, and markers for cytokines and inflammatory endothelial changes are being developed. Further translational research will investigate the molecular characteristics and the effects of targeted interventions on microglial and astrocytic activation.

Deficits in cholinergic transmission play a major role for deficits in memory and attention in patients with dementia. Tracers have been developed for nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, for vesicular transporters and acetylcholinesterase. Clinical studies have provided preliminary evidence that such tracers could be used to identify responders to acetylcholinesterase inhibitor therapy, and further research into this issue is required [456].

There are well established Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) and PET tracers for identification in dopaminergic transmission, which is most severely affected in DLB. This is providing a useful diagnostic tool for differentiation between AD and DLB, while research is ongoing to identify the cognitive deficits associated with that deficit and potential targeted therapeutic interventions [457].

There is also current research into PET imaging of glucose energy metabolism, mitochondrial damage, glutamatergic and GABAergic dysfunction, blood-brain barrier damage and defects in transcriptional regulation and protein synthesis. They may play an important role in AD pathophysiology and offer windows for targeted intervention.

In conclusion, there is a huge potential of PET to contribute development of the PM paradigm in AD. Currently, amyloid imaging has been progressed most as a biomarker in clinical trials towards that goal. 18F-FDG-PET and tau-PET imaging are also involved in multiple trials, while a large variety of other tracer for specific targets in AD pathophysiology are still at earlier stages of translational research.

CONTRIBUTION AND ROLE OF RETINAL IMAGING

Over the past three decades, growing evidence indicates that AD is not confined to the brain but also affects the eye. Patients with AD and subjects with MCI experience a wide spectrum of visual deficits [458–464], sleep disturbances [465–471], and ocular abnormalities [472] [466, 472–489]. Historically, these visual and circadian rhythm disturbances were attributed to pathology in the brain yet are now being revisited and explored as a potential direct outcome of ocular pathologies. Among ocular tissues, studies have shown that the retina is massively impacted by AD [466, 472, 474–479, 482, 484, 486, 487, 490–507]. The retina of MCI subjects and AD patients displays a host of abnormalities including nerve fiber layer (NFL) thinning, optic nerve and retinal ganglion cell (RGC) degeneration, macular volume changes, retinal angiopathy involving reduced blood flow and vascular structural alterations, astrogliosis, and abnormal electroretinogram patterns [472]. Given these findings, it is no surprise that attention has begun shifting towards the neuro-retina as a site of AD manifestation.

As a CNS tissue derived from the embryonic diencephalon, the retina shares many structural and functional features with the brain [508], including the presence of neurons, astroglia, microglia, pericytes, microvasculature with similar morphological and physiological properties, and a blood barrier [509–511]. Axons of the optic nerve directly connect the retina and brain, facilitating vesicular transportation of APP synthesized in RGCs [512]. Further, retinal neurons and glia secrete proteins associated with the amyloid cascade including γ-secretase, BACE1, Apolipoprotein E, and clusterin [511, 513, 514]. However, the skull-encased brain is shielded by bone, whereas the retina is accessible for direct, non-invasive high-resolution imaging.

The converging evidence denoting retinal abnormalities related to nerve degeneration and vascular changes, common to various neurological and ocular diseases, have long been described in MCI subjects and AD patients. Yet, the AD-specific pathophysiological hallmark, Aβ plaques, was only recently identified in post-mortem retinas of AD patients and early-stage cases [490]. Subsequent studies corroborated these findings of retinal Aβ deposits and further indicated the presence of p-tau in retinas of AD patients [466, 485, 489, 515, 516]. These studies provided evidence for elevated retinal Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides using biochemical assays on whole retinal extracts and revealed diverse retinal Aβ plaque morphology in flatmounts, often associated with blood vessels or co-localized with sites of cell degeneration (Figure 7A–H) [466, 485, 489, 490, 515, 516]. Recent data showed that retinal Aβ deposits were found in clusters and frequently mapped to peripheral regions in the superior quadrant in AD patients (Figure 7C and 7F). The load of Aβ42-containg retinal plaques in the superior quadrant was substantially elevated by 4.7-fold in patients compared to age- and gender-matched controls (Figure 7C–D) [485]. While two groups were unable to detect Aβ or p-tau in the human AD retina [489, 517], they relied on analysis of cross sections prepared from narrow strips spanning horizontally from nasal to temporal quadrants - regions scarce in Aβ pathology. In contrast, a recent study provided in-depth characterization of retinal Aβ deposits in larger cohorts of definite AD patients via scans of large retinal areas in flatmounts and in cross sections derived from geometrical regions abundant with Aβ pathology [485]. The discovery of classical, dense-core (compact), and neuritic-like plaques in these patients, albeit smaller in average size compared to plaques in the brain, along with neurofibrillary tangles, Aβ42 fibrils, protofibrils, and structures resembling oligomers, suggests that the specific signs of AD are shared between the retina and the brain (Figure 7G). A correlation analysis in a subset of patients has validated positive relationships between retinal and respective cerebral Aβ plaque burden, with a tighter association to plaques in the primary visual cortex (Figure 7H) [485]. Notably, retinal regions in AD patients where abundant Aβ pathology was detected – the periphery of the superior quadrant and the innermost retinal layers – also showed a significant decrease in retinal neuronal cells (Figure 7E–F), in agreement with previous studies showing a marked RGC loss and NFL thinning in the superior quadrants [466, 476, 484, 491, 498, 502, 518, 519]. A recent clinical study identified circadian abnormalities in AD patients along with a significant loss of melanopsin RGCs (mRGCs), photoreceptors known to drive circadian photoentrainment [520], and discovered Aβ accumulation within and around these degenerating cells. The loss of mRGCs may therefore result from their increased susceptibility to toxic Aβ forms and offers a plausible retina-based explanation for sleep disturbances in AD [466].

In line with the above findings, numerous studies examining the retina of transgenic and sporadic animal models of AD have reported Aβ deposits, vascular Aβ, p-tau, and paired helical filament-tau (PHF-tau), often in association with RGC degeneration, local inflammation (i.e. microglial activation), and impairments in retinal structure and function [472] [485, 490, 515, 516, 520–537]. These investigations, which included a variety of transgenic rat and mouse models (ADtg) as well as the sporadic rodent model of AD, O. degus, demonstrated abundant Aβ deposits, mainly in the GCL and NFL [490, 516, 521, 525, 528, 530, 533]. Furthermore, several publications have described positive responses to therapies in reducing retinal Aβ plaque burden in ADtg mice, often reflecting the reactions observed in the respective brains [490, 524, 527, 528, 532, 536].

To visualize retinal Aβ pathology in live subjects, a non-invasive retinal amyloid imaging approach was initially developed in ADtg mice, utilizing curcumin as a fluorescent probe [490, 527]. Curcumin is a natural and safe fluorochrome that crosses the blood-brain and -retinal barriers and binds to Aβ fibrils and oligomers with high affinity [490, 527, 538–551], with the ability for ex vivo and in vivo visualization when specifically bound to retinal Aβ plaques (Figure 7A–B) [485, 490, 527]. This approach enabled non-invasive detection and monitoring of desecrate retinal Aβ deposits in live animal models of AD [490], including the capability to track the dynamic appearance and clearance of individual plaques and their substantial reduction after glatiramer acetate (GA) immunotherapy [527, 552, 553].

In a proof-of-concept clinical trial, the safety and feasibility to non-invasively detect and quantify retinal amyloid deposits in live human patients was demonstrated using a modified scanning laser ophthalmoscope and a proprietary oral curcumin formulation (Longvida®) with increased bioavailability (Figure 7I–M) [485]. Corresponding to the pattern reported in histological examinations, retinal amyloid deposits in living AD patients were frequently concentrated in the mid- and far-periphery of the superior hemisphere (Figure 7K). A significant 2.1-fold increase in retinal amyloid index (RAI), a quantitative measure developed to assess numerical value of amyloid burden in the retina of living patients, was revealed in AD patients versus matched controls (Figure 7L–M) [485]. Recent studies applying non-invasive retinal imaging in live AD patients, which detected NFL thinning [466, 477], increased inclusion bodies [554, 555], reduced blood flow, microvasculature alterations, and oxygen saturation in arterioles and venules [479, 556, 557], and importantly, hallmark Aβ deposits [485], are encouraging first steps towards the development of practical tools for predicting disease risk and progression. Since the retina in other ND such as multiple sclerosis, ischemic stroke, and Parkinson’s disease also exhibits pathophysiological processes similar to those detected in the brain [501, 558–561], retinal imaging may also facilitate differential diagnosis for different proteinopathies, neurodegenerative and neurological diseases.

As research exploring AD in the brain, the possibility that the easily accessible retina may faithfully reflect AD neuropathology warrants further investigation. The preliminary evidence of retinal Aβ accumulation in early-stage cases together with the indication of amyloid-related neurodegeneration in the AD retina [466, 485, 490] suggests that AD is both a cerebral and an ocular disease, and may support retinal imaging as a screening tool even during the asymptomatic at risk stage. Future studies are needed to assess the nature of the relationship between cerebral and retinal amyloid burden in larger cohorts and in specific anatomical regions, and perhaps also to determine the potential link among cerebral amyloid angiopathy and retinal vascular amyloid. Given that retinal amyloid pathology could foretell brain disease and cognitive decline, it may prove essential for early detection of AD, predicting disease progression, and monitoring response to therapy.

In addition, non-invasive functional tests of pupil reactivity to light may complement the characterization of retinal abnormalities with imaging techniques [562]. Indeed, pupil responses to light stimulations are abnormal in AD patients [563], who show hypersensitive pupil-dilation to tropicamide, an acetylcholine receptor antagonist, as well as a diminished pupil light reflex [564, 565]. Although the retinal abnormalities mentioned above could account for these pupillary effects, the Edinger-Westphal nucleus, a major relay involved in pupil control where early signs of AD (cell loss and amyloid plaques) have also been observed, could also contribute to pupillary abnormalities. Conducting focal tests in different regions of the visual field to probe the pupil response can help identifying the functional consequences of the retinal amyloid imaging results. If the results of retinal imaging and functional tests were strongly correlated, pupil reactivity could be used as a proxy for AD severity, with the advantage that functional tests of pupil reactivity are easy, cheap and fast to perform, do not require a strong involvement of the patients, and can routinely be conducted to detect and track the evolution of AD, as well as the response to therapy.

In this regard, the “VISION” pilot translational neuroscience research program – belonging to the previously mentioned Sorbonne Université GRC-APM (GRC n° 21) – has been developed and launched in an early asymptomatic preclinical population to assess retinal amyloid imaging for 1) screening of amyloid and tracking its progression as well as 2) predicting pathophysiological disease progression, cognitive decline, and conversion to prodromal AD. The non-invasive nature, easy accessibility and generalizability are appealing features regarding a potential context of use.

SPATIOTEMPORAL MODELING OF MULTIMODAL LONGITUDINAL DATA ANALYSIS

Nowadays, deepening our understanding of AD pathophysiology is made possible by the following biomarkers that can be derived in-vivo from the subject: “fluid” from blood (e.g., genetic risk factors) and CSF (e.g., abnormal Aβ42 and p-tau dosing); “structural” (e.g., brain atrophy as a sign of neurodegeneration) and “functional” (e.g., brain disconnection syndrome) from MRI, “molecular” (e.g., brain hypometabolism and deposition of Aβ42 and p-tau) from PET, and “neurophysiological” (e.g., abnormal cortical neural synchronization and coupling). Furthermore, fine neuropsychological and clinical scales allow a detailed measurement of cognitive impairment, self-care, independence in living in a community, and mental disorders (e.g. anxiety, mood, psychosis, and behavior). All these measurements allow a personalized evaluation of cerebral residual capacity and function over time by the repetition of the recording sessions.

Keeping in mind this premises, a major issue is the identification of the best statistical and mathematical procedures, from computational neurosciences, weighting the information value of the above biomarkers and clinical indices for early diagnosis (even in preclinical or prodromal stages preceding dementia), monitoring, therapy response, and prediction of the disease evolution.

To this aim, digital brain models have been developed in recent years, as a way to synthetize a 3D geometrical model summarizing the anatomical invariants in a group of subjects [566–569]. This model has been extended recently to functional data [570, 571]. The main interest of such models is that they do not only illustrate the effects of the AD on brain structure and function at the group level but also include information about individual variability allowing the computation of the difference between a given patient and the reference groups of healthy subjects and patients with other dementing disorders to provide diagnostic information as sensitivity (detection of AD patients), specificity (detection of healthy subjects or patients with other diseases), and global classification accuracy.

These diagnostic models are based on the Bayesian inference of non-linear mixed-effects models, which complement the usual linear mixed-effects models typically used in biostatistics [569, 572]. This combination of statistical and geometric approaches accounts for the inherent structure in the data such as the specific organization of the brain anatomy as prior knowledge. It allows the rendering of the inter-individual variability as a realistic and interpretable change of the 3D model. Individual characteristics are summarized by a multivariate descriptor, which may be used in turn to explore the distribution of the individuals in different clusters, to correlate it with external factors, or to use as input in machine learning algorithms to make individual predictions [568].

Ideally, such a static model should be adapted to account for the disease progression over time and provide prognosis of clinical evolution in individual AD patients. Digital models of brain ageing are constructed as dynamical models showing the complex spatiotemporal patterns of changes in the above biomarkers while the disease progresses. Inter-individual variability is expressed in terms of changes in individual spatiotemporal trajectories. The construction of such models of disease progression results from several key components [570, 571, 573–576]: 1) artificial intelligence approaches that are used to combine several short-term data sequences in longitudinal data sets to synthetize a long-term scenario of disease progression; 2) different data modalities that are integrated in the model by converting them into a common abstract mathematical space – called a Riemannian manifold – where statistical distributions of spatiotemporal trajectories may be rigorously defined; 3) variability in trajectories accounting for the direction of the trajectories and the dynamics at which these trajectories are followed.

Each individual disease trajectory is now positioned in a spatiotemporal coordinate system, where a multivariate descriptor encodes the variability in the direction of the trajectory, and dynamical parameters encode for the variability in age at disease onset and pace of disease progression. Given the observation of a new subject at one or few time-points, one may personalize the scenario of disease progression by adjusting model parameters, thus transferring the knowledge gained from the automatic analysis of a longitudinal data set to this new individual. This personalized model may be utilized then to predict the future state of the subject, for instance the time to the onset of a specific symptom. We have employed such an approach to predict the time-to-diagnosis in mild cognitive impaired subjects using a model of cognitive decline from neuropsychological assessments [577], and to predict the future map of cortical thickness for the same subjects using structural imaging [571]. This approach opens up the way to build efficient decision support systems for monitoring disease progression and selecting patients in clinical trials with a specific biomarker-based diagnosis of AD, at a specific disease stage (e.g. preclinical, prodromal or manifest dementia) and with an expected pattern of progression.

In addition, such a personalized scenario may offer a new way to assess treatment efficacy by evaluating to which extend it changes the disease trajectory, that is the complex non-linear spatiotemporal patterns of changes. This approach evolves the standard procedure based on annual percentage rate of an outcome measure since: 1) it does not assume a linear variation of the outcome at all disease stage but account for the non-linear dynamics of changes across disease stages, and 2) it makes use of a multivariate descriptor of disease trajectory and not only a univariate outcome measure.

THE EMERGING FIELD OF SYSTEMS PHARMACOLOGY IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

The consequences of the highly complexity of AD pathophysiology can be clearly observed in the results of drug development pipeline for the disease: out of 413 clinical trials conducted during the 2002 to 2012 period, 99.6% failed [578]. Moreover, a review of AD drug development pipeline in 2016 showed that although the pipeline has increased in size, it is significantly smaller compared to the cancer field, and that the most common target (76%) is still amyloid, reflecting the urgent need for deeper understanding the pathophysiology of the disease [579]. In fact, disappointing results of anti-amyloid drug candidates can be attributed to three major factors relating to drug discovery and development, namely 1) inter-species mechanistic differences between animal models and human, 2) complex biology of amyloid-beta in relation to disease staging, and 3) ignorance of non-amyloid pathways. Thus, it is imperative to delineate the complexity of AD pathophysiology using systems biology-based approaches, which take advantage of computational analysis and modeling of both quantitative (e.g. “omics”-based) and qualitative (e.g. literature-based) data. The goal of systems biology methods is to aid researchers develop hypotheses regarding the disease system and gain better mechanistic insights into the pathophysiology and progression of disease across multiple biological scales and time. Mechanistic systems models are either mathematical representations of pathophysiologic processes or computable cellular networks but the latter has gained more attention for analysis of drug action [580]. Since these models use networks instead of single transduction pathways, complex patterns of drug action within the target biological context can be studied in more details, a field that has emerged as systems pharmacology.

According to the American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists (AAPS), systems pharmacology is “the science of advancing knowledge about drug action at the molecular, cellular, tissue, organ, organism, and population levels” (available at http://www.aaps.org/Systems_Pharmacology/). To obtain full understanding of drug action at the systems level, we need to combine disease mechanism, pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetic data into a single model. However, incorporation of quantitative parameters and measurements increases the model complexity so that special mathematical techniques are required to reduce the number of parameters without affecting the behavior of the system; thus, disease mechanistic models are considered as the first substrate for building full-fledged systems pharmacology models [581]. Disease mechanistic models are molecular and cellular networks that aim to elucidate the impact of therapeutics or new drug candidates on impaired biological functions under disease conditions. The key to usefulness of disease models is context-sensitivity, meaning that disease network models should represent the real-world context in terms of cell and tissue type (spatial dimension), disease sub-type (functional dimension), and progression stages (temporal dimension). It is only in the right context that correct inferences, interpretations, and predictions can be made out of the model. The focus of earlier models was to relate drugs to proteins in the form of drug-target networks where protein-protein interaction networks were used as the fundamental model for interpretation of drug mode-of-action [582]. Interestingly, these models also revealed an important aspect of systems pharmacology paradigm, which was conceptualized and coined as “polypharmacology” [583]. This concept changed the single-target approach to designing new drugs in the discovery phase because topological analysis of drug targets in network models demonstrated that a compound binds to multiple targets. As a consequence, a drug hits additional targets, known as off-targets, which leads to side effects. Campillos and colleagues (2008) used drug-drug and drug-target networks enriched with side-effect phenotype information for all approved drugs across many disease indications and based on side-effect similarities predicted and experimentally validated novel drug-target relations [584]. This approach enables researchers to predict off-targets and thereby probable side effects for candidate drugs in preclinical settings. The so-called structural systems pharmacology aims at modeling energetic and dynamic modifications of genomic macromolecules including proteins, DNA, and RNA by drug candidates [585]. This strategy has been implemented by Nikolic and colleagues (2016) to predict both primary target and off-target profiles of several anti-neurodegenerative compounds based on their chemical structures [586]. Their analysis resulted in identification of novel compounds that hit multiple targets and inhibited acetylcholinesterase, butyrylcholinesterase, monoamine oxidases A and B in the context of AD pathophysiology. Moreover, knowing which drug properties distinguishes Central Nervous System drugs from others can help drug designers select those properties in the new drug candidates that confer the least side effects and the best efficacy. To this end, Shahid and colleagues (2013) developed a computational method that identified and classified neurodegenerative drugs from non-neurodegenerative drugs with 80% accuracy [587]. DrugGenEx-Net is a computational platform that predicts disease-specific drug polypharmacology based on multi-tiered network analysis of drug-target, disease-target, pathway-target and target-target interactions [588]; the model revealed that Sunitinib, an approved drug for renal cell carcinoma, hits multiple targets associated with AD pathways and thus can be considered for repurposing.

With advancements in systems biology modeling languages – such as Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) and Open Biological Expression Language (OpenBEL) – drug-mode-of-action can now be investigated in a context-sensitive, rich environment that goes beyond simple representation of protein-protein interactions by including various types of biological entities covering genotype to phenotype scales. For instance, Fujita and colleagues (2014) developed a comprehensive molecular interaction map of Parkinson’s disease that included major signaling pathways in Parkinson’s disease, modeled and presented in SBML format; however, they did not include drug information in their model [589]. AlzPathway is the result of an early initiative that attempted to systematically collect AD-related signaling pathways from literature and bring them together within the first map of cellular AD signaling pathways, represented in SBML [590]. Recently, Iyappan and colleagues (2016) identified all signaling pathways reportedly involved in the human ND, mapped them back onto their corresponding anatomic sites on the human brain, and used these pathways for explaining the mode-of-action of the AD approved drug, Rasagiline [591].

In the past years, with the availability of increasing amount of data and knowledge on the one hand, and emergence of new computational biology methods on the other, the IDM framework has increasingly drawn more attention by academic and pharmaceutical research groups. The models generated by this approach combine data-driven and knowledge-driven models into a single integrative model and represent signaling pathways with cause and effect relations [23]. However, a major challenge for this approach is integration of heterogeneous datasets and information that come from various data sources. For instance, the ADNI provides big neuroimaging data along with genetic and biomarker data from AD and MCI subjects [592]. If integrated into predictive models, ADNI data will have maximal impact on the AD drug research. But, the first step towards IDM is standardization and harmonization of different datasets so that they are semantically compatible. Ontologies are semantic frameworks that provide a reference for standardization and harmonization of diverse datasets. For instance, AD ontology (ADO) has been developed to provide such a reference for AD knowledge domain [593]. ADO was used by Kodamullil and colleagues (2015) to represent scientific findings in a computable, cause-and-effect model of AD pathology, which was designed and coded in Open Biological Expression Language (available at http://openbel.org/) [594]. This model contains causal and correlative relationships between biomolecules, pathways, and clinical readouts and was used for model-guided interpretation of genetic variation data for a comorbidity analysis between AD and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Similarly, drug-target interactions and drug mode-of-action can be investigated and predicted using these models. Indeed, integrative models that encompass data from genome to phenome across biological scales from cells to clinical outcomes, enable us to predict the mode-of-action of candidate drugs within the right pathophysiological context and in a multidimensional space of human biology. Perhaps one of the most fundamental works in this area is the study by Emon and colleagues (2017) who systematically analyzed the brain chemical space and identified drug candidates for repositioning in AD [595]. They first generated a large model in BEL containing genes, proteins, drugs and chemicals, biological processes, and disease concepts in the context of neurodegeneration. Then, by mechanistic analysis of this model, they not only suggested Donepezil as repurposing candidate for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but also found a mechanism of action by which Riluzole, a drug used in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, could be predicted to interfere with several pathophysiological pathways in AD. Moreover, the mode-of-action analysis of other drugs in the context of AD using this model predicted that Cyclosporine, a drug used for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, which shares common targets with 5 approved drugs for AD, can exert neuroprotective effects. Several lines of evidence that experimentally proved its anti-AD effects supported this prediction.

Currently, several initiatives have undertaken the effort to facilitate systems pharmacology studies in the field of ND in general and AD in particular. The AETIONOMY project, funded by the Innovative Medicine Initiative (see http://www.imi.europa.eu/), has already set up a specialized knowledgebase for ND with focus on AD and Parkinson’s diseases, and takes an integrative modeling approach to computationally predict and clinically validate mechanistic signatures that stratify AD and Parkinson’s patients (see http://www.aetionomy.eu/). The mission of this project is to lay foundation for development of new drugs targeting patient subgroups and thus promoting personalized medicine. The Brain Health Modeling Initiative (BHMI) is another project that takes advantage of integrative mechanism-based computational models and simulations using big data with the aim of matching right targets and biomarkers for optimal drug design in AD [596]. The European commission-funded project SysPharmAD proposes a systems pharmacology approach to the discovery of novel therapeutics in AD using an integrative network model that combines “omics” data with stage-specific clinical data. The aim of this project is to design and validate a systems pharmacology strategy based on AD staging that helps researchers identify synergistic multi-targeting compounds modifying the disease path (available at http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/185567_en.html).

CONCLUSIONS

The multidimensional nature of all ND, AD included, is well established to-date, along with the fact that their onset and progression arise from dysregulation processes which evolve at both intracellular and extracellular levels. At the cellular level, ND are characterized by dystrophic neuronal structural changes leading to loss of function and, eventually, cell death. These phenomena spread in a “cell-to-cell” fashion in which intraneuronal protein misfolding affects structural plasticity in a nearby neuron by self-propagation of pathogenic protein aggregates. This, in turn, leads to decreased dendritic spines and synaptic sites density, and, eventually, loss of brain connections.

At the subcellular and molecular level, the core pathophysiological phenomenon is represented by failure of proteostasis cellular pathways [597, 598], from protein misfolding and aggregation to decreased clearance, mitochondrial dysfunction, loss of cell homeostasis, and, consequently, enhanced cell signaling pathways related to apoptosis. Therefore, ND are initially characterized by several alterations of subcellular frameworks, mostly concerning proteostasis, on which both the anatomy and physiology of neurons and glial cells are founded.

The genome, through mutual interactions with endogenous and exogenous factors, leads to a wide spectrum of variations at the level of proteome and metabolome that, incontrovertibly, account for both intracellular and extracellular integrity. As a result, the systems biology and systems neurophysiology paradigms can provide a conceptual model where structural and functional networks are dynamically interconnected across different dimensional levels into accounting a multiscale dynamical system which has already been seen to manifest also into peripheral branches like the autonomic nervous system in health and disease [599, 600].

At present, there is an urgent need to identify a large array of reliable biomarkers to in vivo identify the above mentioned interacting multidimensional levels which characterize ND. Such biomarkers need to be able to chart the spatio-temporal trajectories of complex brain pathophysiological mechanisms, at the same time taking into account interindividual variables. Complex, time varying higher order statistics as well as structural model should also be considered within the systems neurophysiology modeling approach [601–604]. Pathophysiological biomarkers are required to track the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying ND (Figure 8). For instance, cerebral amyloid-PET is commonly considered as a molecular proxy of the Aβ metabolism impairment rather than a conventional biomarker of neocortical deposition of neuritis plaques. In this context, biomarkers are the appropriate tools for developing receptor-tailored drugs, as already demonstrated and currently practiced in the field of oncology. Both structural and functional brain markers are expected to elucidate the link between clinical phenotypes and molecular pathophysiological mechanisms.

Notably, cerebral 18F-FDG-PET is commonly used as prognostic indicator in several clinical trials on AD and other ND. Indeed, the early recovery of specific brain functions or networks is crucial to identify downstream effects of disease therapies, even before measuring the clinical benefit. As another example – in the context of identifying brain biomarkers from non-invasive imaging within a more individually tailored, PM-based approach – recent developments have pointed out the concept and added value of “dense sampling of individual brains” [605–607]. This interesting development is based on the realization that, while a large body of research is accustomed to averaging neuroimaging data across individuals and, hence, implicitly assuming a high degree of functional homology, by definition there must be a finer scale at which this homology breaks down - possibly the scale which encodes the individual idiosyncrasies at the base of a unique individual’s disease trajectory and/or therapy response. By sampling relatively few brains for several hours, the authors demonstrate how individual differences in well-known networks, e.g. the default mode and the salience network, are clearly visible. Therefore, it is possible that future developments in neuroimaging will shift more toward longer (several hours/days) sampling of individual brains/patients, thus providing more solid bases for the implementation of the “precision neuroscience” paradigm that will likely be needed to understand ND.

Interestingly, functional and topographic biomarkers could also be employed in identifying the adequate target. In particular, they could be valuable in detecting specific brain areas for potential trials of targeted neuromodulation, thus providing comprehensive information on regional atrophy, impaired connectivity, metabolic alterations, and regional decrease of cerebral blood flow. Finally, both clinical examination and full psychometric evaluation still remain the first-line approach in identifying pathological phenotypes supporting the whole diagnostic workout. For instance, to date, the identification of hippocampal-like amnestic impairment supports the clinical diagnosis of AD, thus justifying an anticholinesterase inhibitor-based treatment. Notably, in the context of a systems biology- and systems neurophysiology-based interpretation of ND phenotype, clinical markers should be considered the highest level “descriptors” of the disease and represent the ultimate measures to identify effective therapies.

In summary, the future implementation of the systems biology and systems neurophysiology paradigms – based on the integrated analysis of big and deep heterogeneous data sources – will be crucial to reach a deeper understanding of the pathophysiology of AD and other ND. The main challenges ahead will certainly lie in the development of analytical applications capable of processing massive quantities of stored laboratory and clinical data. Against this backdrop, the big data approach should be leveraged to maximize the information that can be extracted from preclinical and clinical records, ultimately augmenting our knowledge regarding the molecular, cellular, and systems processes underlying AD development. As we unravel the dynamic and longitudinal changes of the biomarker landscape in AD, we will make a further step towards a holistic understanding of the natural course of the disease. Integrating different sources of information will enable researchers to obtain a new integrated picture of the pathophysiological process of the disease that will span from molecular alterations to cognitive manifestations. In this scenario, the Big Data Research and Development Initiative (available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2012/03/29/big-data-big-deal), promoted by the previous Obama Administration under the “Big Data is a Big Deal” motto, is expected to accelerate progress towards a new era of PM in AD. This ultimate mission will be accomplished by assembling, linking, and harmonizing big data to facilitate high-impact, multidisciplinary, and collaborative research efforts. After a decade of failed clinical trials in AD, the adoption of “big data science” within an IDM theoretical framework by the international APMI allowed us to enter into a transformative research scenario. It is currently expected that PM will underpin most, if not all, of the prevention and treatment advances yet to come. Significant breakthroughs in our understanding of the early phases of AD and other ND and the rapid advent of new laboratory technologies are providing unprecedented opportunities to make a major impact on the natural history of AD at the earliest preclinical asymptomatic stage [608]. We are currently standing at the edge of a new frontier that will thoroughly explore the molecular and cellular events that drive the development of the disease before cognitive symptoms are evident. New preventive approaches and therapies developed through PM may improve compliance and increased level of trust and confidence among all stakeholders and reduce the number of failures. In this context, we are expected to move swiftly from the traditional “one-size-fits-all – magic bullet therapies” scenario to a personalized PM-based approach. The unprecedented effort promoted by the APMI is ultimately tailored to implement a paradigm shift in AD research which will be backboned by large, international, and interdisciplinary collaborative academic, private and industry networks.

The field of PM does not lack for enthusiastic, dedicated pioneers who are moving forward expeditiously to clinical adoption. As the evidence base supported by the APMI expands, much more can and should be done to accelerate the process for the benefit of individual patients, the healthcare system, and society overall.

Dr Harald Hampel is supported by the AXA Research Fund, the “Fondation partenariale Sorbonne Université” and the “Fondation pour la Recherche sur Alzheimer”, Paris, France. Ce travail a bénéficié d’une aide de l’Etat “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06. The research leading to these results has received funding from the program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06 (Agence Nationale de la Recherche-10-IA Agence Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire-6).

Dr Arun L.W. Bokde received funding from the Meath Foundation, Ireland.

Dr Olivier Colliot received funding from the program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06 (Agence Nationale de la Recherche-10-IA Agence Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire-6), from the European Union H2020 Program (project EuroPOND, grant number No 666992), and from the joint NSF/NIH/ANR program “Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience” (project HIPLAY7, grant number ANR-16-NEUC-0001-01). He supported by a “Contrat d’Interface Local” from Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP).

Dr Stanley Durrleman is funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under grant agreement No 678304, the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under grant agreement No 666992, and the program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06.

Dr Maria-Teresa Ferretti is the President of Women’s Brain Project and is supported by a research fellowship by the Synapsis Foundation - Alzheimer Research Switzerland (ARS).

Dr Nathalie George is supported by the French program “Investissements d’avenir” under Grant numbers ANR-10-IAIHU-06 (IHU-A-ICM) and ANR-11-INBS-0006 (France Life Imaging).

Dr Maya Koronyo-Hamaoui is supported by NIH/NIA AG044897 and AG056478 Awards and by The Saban and The Marciano Private Foundations.

Dr Karl Herholz is supported by research grants from GE Healthcare (GEHC) and GlaxoSmithKline (GSK).

Dr Olaf Sporns acknowledges support from the U.S. National Institutes of Health (R01-AT009036).

Dr Andrea Vergallo is supported by Rotary Club Livorno “Mascagni”/The Rotary Foundation (Global Grant No GG1758249).

Abbreviations

18F-FDG-PET 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose PET

Aβ42 42-amino acid-long amyloid beta peptide

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ADD Alzheimer’s disease dementia

ADNI Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative

ADO Alzheimer’s disease ontology

APMI Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative

APMI-CP Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort Program

APP amyloid precursor protein

BFCS basal forebrain cholinergic system

CSF cerebrospinal fluid

DBS deep brain stimulation

DLB Dementia with Lewy bodies

DTI diffusion tensor imaging

EEG electroencephalography

EHRs electronic health records

EPAD European Prevention of Alzheimer’s Dementia consortium;

EPAD LCS EPAD Longitudinal Cohort Study

EPI echo planar imaging

FA fractional anisotropy

FMRI functional magnetic resonance imaging

FTD frontotemporal dementia

ICNs intrinsic coherent networks

IDM integrative disease modeling

MCI mild cognitive impairment

MD mean diffusivity

MEG magnetoencephalography

MMN mismatch negativity

MRI magnetic resonance imaging

ND neurodegenerative diseases

NFL nerve fiber layer

p-tau hyperphosphorylated tau

Nold normal elderly subjects

PDD dementia due to Parkinson’s

PET Positron Emission Tomography

PM Precision medicine

PMI Precision Medicine Initiative

PoC Proof-of-Concept

RGC retinal ganglion cell

ROI region of interest

RTMS repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation

SBML Systems Biology Markup Language

SPECT Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography

t-tau total tau

TACS transcranial alternating current stimulation

TDCS transcranial direct current stimulation

WB-MRI whole-body magnetic resonance imaging

WES whole-exome sequencing

WGS whole-genome sequencing

WM white matter.

Sorbonne Université Groupe de Recherche Clinique (GRC n° 21)

“Alzheimer Precision Medicine (APM)”

Établissements Publics à caractère Scientifique et Technologique (E.P.S.T.)

Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative (APMI)

CONTRIBUTORS TO THE ALZHEIMER PRECISION MEDICINE INITIATIVE – WORKING GROUP (APMI-WG)

Principal Investigator and Speaker: Harald Hampel.

Aguilar LF (Montréal), Babiloni C (Rome), Baldacci F (Pisa), Benda N (Bonn), Black KL (Los Angeles), Bokde ALW (Dublin), Bonuccelli U (Pisa), Broich K (Bonn), Bun RS (Paris), Cacciola F (Siena), Castrillo J† (Derio), Cavedo E (Paris), Ceravolo R (Pisa), Chiesa PA (Par-is), Colliot O (Paris), Coman CM (Paris), Corvol JC (Paris), Cuello AC (Montréal), Cummings JL (Las Vegas), Dubois B (Paris), Duggento A (Rome), Durrleman S (Paris), Escott-Price V (Cardiff), Federoff H (Irvine), Ferretti MT (Zürich), Fiandaca M (Irvine), Frank RA (Malvern), Garaci F (Rome), Genthon R (Paris), George N (Paris), Giorgi FS (Pisa), Graziani M (Roma), Haberkamp M (Bonn), Habert MO (Paris), Hampel H (Paris), Herholz K (Manches-ter), Karran E (Cambridge), Kim SH (Seoul), Koronyo Y (Los Angeles), Koronyo-Hamaoui M (Los Angeles), Lamari F (Paris), Langevin T (Minneapolis-Saint Paul), Lehéricy S (Paris), Lista S (Paris), Lorenceau J (Paris), Mapstone M (Irvine), Neri C (Paris), Nisticò R (Rome), Nyasse-Messene F (Paris), O’Bryant SE (Fort Worth), Perry G (San Antonio), Ritchie C (Ed-inburgh), Rojkova K (Paris), Rossi S (Siena), Santarnecchi E (Siena), Schneider LS (Los Angeles), Sporns O (Bloomington), Toschi N (Rome), Verdooner SR (Sacramento), Vergallo A (Paris), Villain N (Paris), Welikovitch L (Montréal), Woodcock J (Silver Spring), Younesi E (Esch-sur-Alzette).

DISCLOSURES

Dr Harald Hampel serves as Senior Associate Editor for the Journal Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia; he received lecture fees from Biogen and Roche, research grants from Pfizer, Avid, and MSD Avenir (paid to the institution), travel funding from Axovant, Eli Lilly and company, Takeda and Zinfandel, GE-Healthcare and Oryzon Genomics, consultancy fees from Jung Diagnostics, Cytox Ltd., Axo-vant, Anavex, Takeda and Zinfandel, GE Healthcare and Oryzon Genomics, and participated in scientific advisory boards of Axovant, Eli Lilly and company, Cytox Ltd., GE Healthcare, Takeda and Zinfandel, Oryzon Genomics and Roche Diagnostics; and he has patents, but receives no royalties.

Dr Keith L. Black, Yosef Koronyo, Dr Maya Koronyo-Hamaoui, and Steven R. Verdooner are founding members of NeuroVision Imaging (NVI).

Dr Olivier Colliot declares no conflicts of interest related to the present article. During the past 2 years: he has received lecture fees from Roche. His laboratory has received funding from Air Liquide Medical Systems, Qynapse SAS and MyBrainTechnologies SAS (paid to the institution). Prior to 2 years ago: he has received lecture fees from Lundbeck and consulting fees from Guerbet. His laboratory has received funding from EISAI (paid to the institution).

Dr Bruno Dubois reports personal fees from Eli Lilly and company.

Dr Marie-Odile Habert has received consultant’s honoraria from GE Healthcare, AVID-LILLY and PIRAMAL.

Dr Karl Herholz reports consultancy for PMOD Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland.

Dr Simone Lista received lecture honoraria from Roche.

Dr Nicola Toschi, Dr Claudio Babiloni, Dr Filippo Baldacci, René S. Bun, Dr Francesco Cacciola, Dr Enrica Cavedo, Dr Patrizia A. Chiesa, Cristina-Maria Coman, Dr Andrea Duggento, Dr Stanley Durrleman, Dr Maria-Teresa Ferretti, Dr Remy Genthon, Dr Foudil Lamari, Dr Todd Langevin, Dr Stephane Lehéricy, Dr Jean Lorenceau, Dr Christian Neri, Dr Robert Nisticò, Dr Francis Nyasse-Messene, Dr Olaf Sporns, Dr Craig Ritchie, Dr Simone Rossi, Dr Emiliano Santarnecchi, Dr Andrea Vergallo, Dr Nicolas Villain, Dr Erfan Younesi, and Dr Francesco Garaci declare no conflicts of interest.

Figure 1 Cohorts stratified according to different neuroimaging modalities and methods are integrated in the disease modeling for classification and prediction of subsets of AD and other ND patients

The paradigm of systems neurophysiology aims at studying the fundamental principles of integrated neural systems functioning by integrating and analyzing neural information recorded in multimodal fashion through computational modeling and combining data-mining methods. This paradigm may be used to decode the information contained in experimentally-recorded neural activity using analysis methods that are able to integrate the recordings of simultaneous, single-modality brain cell activity such as fMRI or EEG to generate synergistic insight and possibly infer hidden neurophysiological variables. The ultimate goal of systems neurophysiology is to clarify how signals are represented within neocortical networks and the specific roles played by the multitude of different neuronal components.

Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; EEG, electroencephalography; MEG, magnetoencephalography; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging, sMRI, structural magnetic resonance imaging; ND, neurodegenerative diseases; PET, positron emission tomography; TMS, transcranial magnetic stimulation

Figure 2 Translational bench-to-bedside data flow within the conceptual framework of the Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative (APMI)

The IDM-based “Data Sciences Lifecycle” takes advantage of both data-driven and knowledge-driven approaches so that both quantitative data (biomolecular, neuroimaging/neurophysiological, and clinical data) and qualitative data (collected from scientific literature and on-line media) – generated through the application of systems biology and systems neurophysiology paradigms – are represented in a harmonized, standardized format to be prepared for proper management within an integrative computational infrastructure. Indeed, the resulting heterogeneous, multidimensional big and deep data are harmonized, standardized, and integrated via computational and data science methods in the form of mechanistic disease models, according to the IDM conception.

Disease-specific integrative computational models play a key role in the IDM paradigm and represent the foundations for “actionable” P4M measures in the area of AD and other ND. As a result, the integrative disease models are anticipated to support decision making for: 1) early diagnosis of brain disease progression with mechanistic biomarkers (predictive), 2) screening populations and stratifying individuals at high risk of developing ND based on mechanistic co-morbidities in order to reduce the likelihood of disease and disability (preventive), 3) tailoring treatment to the right patient population at the right time (personalized), and 4) optimizing “actionable” plans for the benefit of patients based on patient-oriented information gathered in EHRs and on patients’ feedback reported in social media. Internet has greatly enabled the participation of individual patients in the healthcare through sharing their experiences in various social media and other online resources (participatory). The output is anticipated to be an “actionable” model that permits the prediction of the trajectory of individual patient-centric detection or treatment within the implementation of the P4M paradigm.

Abbreviations: APMI, Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative; EHRs, electronic health records; IDM, integrative disease modeling; ND, neurodegenerative diseases; P4M, Predictive, Preventive, Personalized, Participatory Medicine. Modified from [21].

Figure 3 Model of non-linear dynamic temporo-spatial progression of neural network disintegration and complex brain systems failure in relation to pathophysiology of AD. Four dimensions of pathophysiological processes in AD

Dimension 1 occurs at the level of neuronal networks (coded green to red). Dimension 1 can begin extremely early in form of synaptic dysfunction and/or synaptotoxic molecular agents, thus altering the balance of the neuronal network.

Dimension 2 &amp; 3 can be regarded as the temporal and spatial spreading from almost exclusively default mode to episodic memory networks to temporal, parietal and frontal neocortical associative areas responsible for working memory, language and/or visual processes. Every one of these complex systems can experience a variable degree of decompensation (see Dimension 1), from adaptation to compensation to massive decompensation and widespread dysorganisation.

Dimension 4 is essentially the integration of Dimensions 1 and 2 and 3 into late-stage clinically symptomatic and syndromatic cognitive and later behavioral and psychopathological dysfunction and decline. It is therefore clear how this complex, multi-scale and multilayer association of networks can be partially robust to “insults” if sufficient compensatory mechanisms are in place, but also extremely and randomly fragile if adaptation and compensation fails at any level. Sufficient decompensation in Dimension 1 will turn into a malfunction in Dimension 2 and 3 and, in turn, substantial decompensation in Dimension 2 and 3 will turn into malfunction in Dimension 4 (i.e. mild cognitive impairment, clinical dementia syndrome).

Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease.

Figure 4 Overview of the currently available technologies and the resulting biological marker categories used for biomarker discovery in preclinical and clinical research

Abbreviations: CNV, copy number variations; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; GCMS, gas chromatography mass spectrometry; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; LCMS, liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms; SVs, structural variations. Reproduced with permission from [79].

Figure 5 Systems neurophysiology and network neuroscience: schematic representation of how structural levels within the nervous system integrate over multiple spatial and temporal scales

Network neuroscience encompasses the study of very different networks encountered across many spatial and temporal scales; however, the network ideas clearly extend down to the level of neuronal circuits and populations, individual neurons and synapses, as well as genetic regulatory and protein interaction networks. In network neuroscience and systems neurophysiology in general, the overall aim is to bridge information encoded in the relationships between genes and biomolecules to the information shared between neurons across to the brain level while integrating the additional information provided from the time dimension. This could eventually allow access to mechanistic understanding and models which faithfully reproduce and possibly predict both brain structure and function. Interestingly, above the single brain level, the social network level should still be considered a network neuroscience domain and, albeit with different measurement techniques, can be studied with the same paradigms with the aim to understand the larger “brain” that interacting brains give rise to (i.e. economies and cultures).

Adapted from [112] and [609].

Figure 6 Sagittal slab visualisation of a fibre tractogram obtained from WM fODFs estimated with SSST-CSD (left) and MSMT-CSD (right) with different fODF amplitude thresholds (top, bottom).

Abbreviations: fODF, fibre orientation distribution function; MSMT-CSD, multi-shell, multi-tissue constrained spherical deconvolution; SSST-CSD, state-of-the-art single-shell, single-tissue constrained spherical deconvolution; WM, white matter. Reproduced with permission from [188].

Figure 7 Retinal amyloid imaging: from histological examination to clinical trials

A. Spectral analysis of Aβ plaque in AD human flatmount retina via specific curcumin labeling. Representative image and spectra curves of retinal Aβ plaque double-labeled with curcumin [region of interest (ROI) 1; orange line] and anti-Aβ40 antibody-Cy5 conjugate (ROI2; purple line) and corresponding background areas (ROI3 and ROI4; dashed lines) at excitation wavelengths of 550nm (for curcumin spectra) and 640nm (for Ab-Cy5 conjugate). Sudan black B (SBB) was applied to quench autofluorescence. Peak emission wavelengths captured for the same individual Aβ plaque (605nm for curcumin when bound to Aβ plaque and 675nm for anti-Aβ Ab conjugated Cy5) are distinct, indicating specific fluorescent signals for each fluorochrome and signifying the detection of Aβ plaque by curcumin. B. Representative z-axis projection images of flatmount retinas from AD patients. Retinal Aβ plaques (yellow spots) co-labeled with curcumin (green) and anti-Aβ40 monoclonal antibody (11A50-B10; red) are detected. Analysis included definite AD (n=8), probable/possible AD (n=5), and age-matched controls (n=5). High-magnification image (right) showing an extracellular Aβ plaque. Images A–B are adopted from [490]. C. Representative microscopic images from flatmount retinas of a healthy control individual (CTRL; 71 years) and a definite AD patient (74 years) stained with anti-Aβ42 C-terminal-specific antibody (12F4) and visualized with peroxidase-based labeling. High-magnification image showing different Aβ42 plaques including classical morphology. Analysis included definite AD patients (n=5) and matched controls (n=5). Images reproduced from [466] and [472]. D. Quantitative analysis of retinal Aβ42-containing plaques (12F4-immunoreactive area) in the superior quadrant shows a significant increase in AD patients versus matched controls. E. Quantitative Nissl+ neuronal area in retinal cross sections indicated a significant reduction in AD patients compared to CTRLs, which is associated with retinal neuronal loss. D–E. Data reprinted from [485](n=23 AD patients and n=14 controls). F. Retinal flatmount illustration demonstrating the geometric distribution of pathology in AD retina by quadrant, with more consistent findings of nerve fiber layer thinning, neuronal degeneration and retinal Aβ deposits mapped to peripheral regions of the superior quadrant. Adopted from [472]. G. Representative images of a frontal cortex section and a flatmount retina from AD patients stained with 12F4 monoclonal antibody (brown) showing different Aβ42 plaque morphology including classical plaques (inserts). Clusters of Aβ42-containing plaques are often associated with blood vessels (bv; right image). H. Correlation analyses using Pearson’s coefficient (r) test between retinal 12F4+-plaque burden in the superior-temporal (ST) quadrant and cerebral plaque burden (Thioflavin-S staining) in a total of seven brain regions (Brain; black) and in the primary visual cortex alone (PV Ctx.; green) in a subset of AD patients and matched CTRLs. I–J. Illustration displaying non-invasive retinal amyloid imaging using Longvida® curcumin and a modified scanning laser ophthalmoscope in human trials. K–M. In vivo retinal imaging in AD patients and age-matched controls. K–L. Increased curcumin fluorescent signal (red dots) in superior hemisphere in AD patient vs. CTRL. Color-coded spot overlay images: red spots are above threshold and considered curcumin-positive amyloid deposits; green spots exceed 1:1 reference but not threshold; blue spots fall below reference. Heat map images with red spot centroids (lower panel) showing regions of interest with more amyloid plaques in the retina. L. Automated calculation of retinal amyloid index (RAI). Blue line is 1:1 reference; green line represents the threshold level, determined at 500 counts and above; red spots are above the threshold. The same automated image processing and analysis was applied on all human subjects (n=16). M. RAI scores showing significant increase in AD patients compared to age-matched CTRLs. G–M. Republished with permission of American Society for Clinical Investigation from [485]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. Group means and SEMs are shown. **p &lt; 0.01, unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test.

Figure 8 Evolving spectrum of biomarkers and modalities

A. The ideal biomarker should be minimally-invasive, unexpansive, practical, rapid and reliable with low level of expertise required. Therefore, in the clinical-setting, biomarkers should be assessed in a multi-stage diagnostic workout carried-out along four steps (blood biomarkers, structural MRI, lumbar puncture, PET scans) according to the overall balance among the following factors: cost-effectiveness, time-effectiveness, invasiveness and accessibility. B. Biomarkers represent one strategy to tailor therapy. The idealistic markers for ND would enable their implementation in screening, diagnosis, progression of the disease, and monitoring of the response to therapy. Therefore, in clinical trials, biomarkers can be used for several purposes:

1) to identify people eligible for the trial, i.e. those considered at high risk for ND (screening biomarkers),

2) to guide clinical diagnosis (diagnostic markers),

3) to optimize treatment decisions, providing information on the likelihood of response to a given drug (predictive biomarkers),

4) to detect and quantify the response rate to treatment (response markers).

Abbreviations: MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, Positron Emission Tomography; ND, neurodegenerative diseases.

Table 1 The five pillars of the Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative (APMI)

The mission of APMI is to transform Neurology and Neuroscience embracing Precision Medicine (or Precision Neurology) based on complex systems theory using integrative disease modeling (IDM) to facilitate health care solutions for brain proteinopathies, protein misfolding disorders and neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD). This is facilitated through five breakthrough theoretical scientific advances, as follows:

Concept	Comment	
(1) The emergence of the “precision medicine” paradigm	Discovery and development of treatments targeted to the needs of individuals on the basis of systems biology technology using genomic biomarker, phenotypic, or psychosocial characteristics that distinguish a given individual from others. Inherent in this definition is the goal of impacting pathophysiological progression at early disease stages and clinical outcomes at later stages and minimizing unnecessary side effects for those less likely to have a response to a particular treatment supported by pharmacogenomics. The convergence of genetics/genomics/transcriptomics, bioinformatics, neurodynamics, neuroimaging and connectomics along with other technologies such as cell sorting, epigenetics, proteomics, lipidomics and metabolomics, is rapidly expanding the scope of precision medicine by refining the staging and classification of disease, often with important prognostic and treatment implications. Among these new technologies, genetics and next-generation DNA sequencing methods are having the greatest effect.	
(2) The emergence of the “systems biology” paradigm	Systems biology represents an integrated and deeper investigation of interacting biomolecules within cells or organisms. This approach has only recently become feasible as high-throughput technologies including cDNA microarrays, mass spectrometric analyses of proteins and lipids together with rigorous bioinformatics have evolved. High-content data point to convergent pathways among diseases, which transcend descriptive studies to reach a more integrated understanding of neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis and, in some instances, highlighting ‘druggable’ network nodes.	
(3) The emergence of the “systems neurophysiology and complex network” paradigm	This is due in large part to advances in mathematics, computer science and statistical methods applied to neuroimaging and neurophysiology; instead of thinking of the brain as a set of modules (i.e., individual brain regions) that perform specific cognitive functions, the network paradigm argues that cognitive functions are performed by dynamic interactions among different brain areas - i.e., by dynamically formed complex structural and functional networks of brain regions.	
(4) the emergence of “neural modeling” paradigm	This paradigm is required by the complex network paradigm, since, in order to deal with the large complexity of the dynamic interactions among multiple brain regions, one must employ advanced mathematical and computational methods.	
(5) The emergence of “integrative disease modeling” (IDM) paradigm	This is an evolving knowledge-based paradigm in translational research that exploits the power of advanced computational methods to collect, store, integrate, model, and interpret accumulated disease information across different biological scales, i.e. from molecules to phenotypes. IDM is a new paradigm at the core of translational research, which prepares the ground for transitioning from descriptive to mechanistic representation of disease processes. Given the tremendous potential of IDM in supporting translation of biomarker and drug research into clinically applicable diagnostic, preventive, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies, it is anticipated that computer-readable disease models will be an indispensable part of future efforts in the P4 medicine research area.	

Table 2 Evolving lexicon and terminology within the Alzheimer Precision Medicine Initiative (APMI) framework.

Concept	Abbreviation	Definition	
Big Data		A repository of large amounts of data sets generated by data mining tools. Big Data includes information obtained through systems theory- and, knowledge-based approaches and clinical records.	
Biomarkers	BMs	A defined characteristic that is measured as an indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic process, or response to an exposure or intervention, including therapeutic interventions. Molecular, histologic, radiographic, or physiological characteristics are types of biomarkers. A biomarker is not an assessment of how an individual feels, functions or survives. Categories of biomarkers include: susceptibility/risk biomarker, diagnostic biomarker, monitoring biomarker, prognostic biomarker, predictive biomarker, pharmacodynamics/response biomarker and safety biomarker.	
Data Science		Interdisciplinary field about processes and systems to extract knowledge from data in different forms – either structured or unstructured – which is a continuation of some of the data analysis fields including statistics, artificial intelligence, machine learning, data mining, and predictive analytics.	
e-Health		Term indicating healthcare practice supported by electronic processes and communication. It can also include health applications and links on mobile phones, referred to as mobile health (“m-health”: smart personal mobile devices, such as phones, wearables, in-home devices and Apps, collecting health information aimed at improving patient care).
The term can also encompass a range of services or systems that are at the edge of medicine/healthcare and information technology, including: electronic health records (EHRs). These indicate a systematized gathering of population electronically-stored health information and clinical data in a digital format. These registries can be shared across different health care settings through network systems.	
European Prevention of Alzheimer’s Dementia Consortium	EPAD	Pan-European initiative whose objective is to establish a shared platform to design and conduct phase 2 Proof-of-Concept (PoC) clinical trials specifically aimed at developing novel treatments for the secondary prevention of AD.	
Genomic Medicine		Discipline utilizing personal genomic information (see also the definition of “Personal Genomics”) for diagnostic characterization and the development of therapeutic plans.	
Integrative Disease Modeling	IDM	Multidisciplinary approach to standardize, manage, integrate, and interpret multiple sources of structured and unstructured quantitative and qualitative data across biological scales using computational models that assist decision making for translation of patient-specific molecular mechanisms into tailored clinical applications.	
“Omics” or “Omic” disciplines		High-throughput screening tools aimed at fully collecting, characterizing and quantifying pools of biological molecules (DNA sequences, transcripts, miRNAs, proteins/peptides, metabolites/lipids) that translate into the structure, function, and dynamics of an organism and/or whole organisms.	
“One-size-fits-all” approach		Traditional approach used for the development of early detection, intervention, and prevention options, where biomarker candidates are being validated against the plethora of heterogeneous clinical operationalized syndromes, rather than against genetically (risk profile) and biologically (i.e., based on molecular mechanisms and cellular pathways) determined entities.	
Ontology		Formal naming and designation of the types, properties, and interactions of the entities that really or fundamentally exist for a specific domain of discourse.	
P4 (Predictive, Preventive, Personalized, and Participatory) Medicine	P4M	Translational medicine component of the Precision Medicine paradigm. It is a clinical practice model aimed at applying knowledge, tools, and strategies of systems medicine. It involves generation, mining, and integration of enormous amounts of data on individual patients to produce predictive and “actionable” models of wellness and disease.	
Personal Genomics		Branch of genomics that provides support in predicting the likelihood that an individual will be affected by a disease. It helps personalize drug selection and treatment delivery to get the best care, thus playing a crucial role both in predictive and personalized medicine, according to the PM paradigm.	
Personalized Medicine		Component of the P4M aiming at tailoring treatment for individual patients in contrast with “one-size-fits-all” or traditional “magic bullet drug” approach.	
Precision Medicine	PM	Translational science paradigm related to both health and disease. PM is a biomarker-guided medicine on systems-levels taking into account methodological advancements and discoveries of the comprehensive pathophysiological profiles of complex polygenic, multi-factorial neurodegenerative diseases (proteinopathies of the brain). It aims at optimizing the effectiveness of disease prevention and therapy, by considering (customized) an individual’s specific “biological make-up” (e.g. genetic, biochemical, phenotypic, lifestyle, and psychosocial characteristics) for targeted interventions through P4M implementation.	
Systems Biology	SB	Evolving hypothesis-free, exploratory, holistic (non-reductionistic), global, integrative, and interdisciplinary paradigm using advances in multimodal high-throughput technological platforms that enable the examination of networks of biological pathways where elevated amounts of structurally and functionally different molecules are simultaneously explored over time at a system level (i.e., at the level of cells, group of cells, tissues, organs, apparatuses, or even whole organisms).	
Systems Medicine	SM	Holistic paradigm applying systems biology-based strategies to medical research. It aims at integrating a variety of considerable biomedical data at all levels of the cellular organization (by employing global, integrative, and statistical/mathematical/computational modeling) to explicate the pathophysiological mechanisms, prognosis, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases.	
Systems Neurophysiology	SN	Paradigm aimed at studying the fundamental principles of integrated neural systems functioning by integrating and analyzing neural information recorded in multimodal fashion through computational modeling and combining data-mining methods. This paradigm may be used to decode the information contained in experimentally-recorded neural activity using analysis methods that are able to integrate the recordings of simultaneous, single-modality brain cell activity such as functional magnetic resonance imaging or electroencephalography to generate synergistic insight and possibly infer hidden neurophysiological variables. The ultimate goal of systems neurophysiology is to clarify how signals are represented within neocortical networks and the specific roles played by the multitude of different neuronal components.	
Systems Pharmacology	SP	Science of advancing knowledge about drug action at the molecular, cellular, tissue, organ, organism, and population levels” (http://www.aaps.org/Systems_Pharmacology/).	
Systems Theory	ST	Translational research theory of the Precision Medicine paradigm. It is an interdisciplinary conceptual framework allowing for the conceptualization of novel/original models to extract and explicate all systems levels and different spatiotemporal data types of complex polygenic diseases.	
Modified from [21].


BIBLIOGRAPHY

1 Prince M Wimo A Guerchet M Ali G Wu Y Prina M 2015 World Alzheimer Report 2015. The global impact of dementia An analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost &amp; trends Alzheimer’s Disease International London Available at:https://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf
2 Baldacci F Lista S Cavedo E Bonuccelli U Hampel H 2017 Diagnostic function of the neuroinflammatory biomarker YKL-40 in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases Expert Rev Proteomics 14 285 299 28281838
3 Baldacci F Toschi N Lista S Zetterberg H Blennow K Kilimann I Teipel S Cavedo E dos Santos AM Epelbaum S Lamari F Dubois B Floris R Garaci F Bonuccelli U Hampel H 2017 Two-level diagnostic classification using cerebrospinal fluid YKL-40 in Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 993 1003
4 Olsson B Lautner R Andreasson U Öhrfelt A Portelius E Bjerke M Hölttä M Rosén C Olsson C Strobel G Wu E Dakin K Petzold M Blennow K Zetterberg H 2016 CSF and blood biomarkers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis The Lancet Neurology 15 673 684 27068280
5 Zetterberg H Skillbäck T Mattsson N Trojanowski JQ Portelius E Shaw LM Weiner MW Blennow K 2016 Association of Cerebrospinal Fluid Neurofilament Light Concentration With Alzheimer Disease Progression JAMA Neurology 73 60 26524180
6 Lista S Toschi N Baldacci F Zetterberg H Blennow K Kilimann I Teipel SJ Cavedo E dos Santos AM Epelbaum S Lamari F Dubois B Floris R Garaci F Hampel H 2017 Diagnostic accuracy of CSF neurofilament light chain protein in the biomarker-guided classification system for Alzheimer’s disease Neurochem Int 108 355 360 28527630
7 Lista S Hampel H 2016 Synaptic degeneration and neurogranin in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease Expert Rev Neurother 17 47 57 27332958
8 Lista S Toschi N Baldacci F Zetterberg H Blennow K Kilimann I Teipel SJ Cavedo E dos Santos AM Epelbaum S Lamari F Dubois B Nisticò R Floris R Garaci F Hampel H 2017 Cerebrospinal Fluid Neurogranin as a Biomarker of Neurodegenerative Diseases: A Cross-Sectional Study J Alzheimers Dis 59 1327 1334 28731449
9 Spires-Jones Tara L Hyman Bradley T 2014 The Intersection of Amyloid Beta and Tau at Synapses in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuron 82 756 771 24853936
10 Husain M 2017 Alzheimer’s disease: time to focus on the brain, not just molecules Brain 140 251 253 28137952
11 Legato MJ Johnson PA Manson JE 2016 Consideration of Sex Differences in Medicine to Improve Health Care and Patient Outcomes JAMA 316 1865 27802499
12 Irvine K Laws KR Gale TM Kondel TK 2012 Greater cognitive deterioration in women than men with Alzheimer’s disease: A meta analysis J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 34 989 998 22913619
13 Lin KA Choudhury KR Rathakrishnan BG Marks DM Petrella JR Doraiswamy PM Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I 2015 Marked gender differences in progression of mild cognitive impairment over 8 years Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 1 103 110 26451386
14 Hua X Hibar DP Lee S Toga AW Jack CR Weiner MW Thompson PM 2010 Sex and age differences in atrophic rates: an ADNI study with n=1368 MRI scans Neurobiol Aging 31 1463 1480 20620666
15 Mattsson N Lönneborg A Boccardi M Blennow K Hansson O 2017 Clinical validity of cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42, tau, and phospho-tau as biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease in the context of a structured 5-phase development framework Neurobiol Aging 52 196 213 28317649
16 Altmann A Tian L Henderson VW Greicius MD 2014 Sex modifies theAPOE-related risk of developing Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 75 563 573 24623176
17 Depypere H Vierin A Weyers S Sieben A 2016 Alzheimer’s disease, apolipoprotein E and hormone replacement therapy Maturitas 94 98 105 27823753
18 Scacchi R Gambina G Broggio E Corbo RM 2013 Sex and ESR1 genotype may influence the response to treatment with donepezil and rivastigmine in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 29 610 615 24150894
19 2014 2014 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 e47 e92
20 Hampel H O’Bryant SE Castrillo JI Ritchie C Rojkova K Broich K Benda N Nistico R Frank RA Dubois B Escott-Price V Lista S 2016 PRECISION MEDICINE - The Golden Gate for Detection, Treatment and Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease J Prev Alzheimers Dis 3 243 259 28344933
21 Hampel H O’Bryant SE Durrleman S Younesi E Rojkova K Escott-Price V Corvol JC Broich K Dubois B Lista S 2017 A Precision Medicine Initiative for Alzheimer’s disease: the road ahead to biomarker-guided integrative disease modeling Climacteric 20 107 118 28286989
22 Lista S Khachaturian ZS Rujescu D Garaci F Dubois B Hampel H 2016 Application of Systems Theory in Longitudinal Studies on the Origin and Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease Methods Mol Biol 1303 49 67 26235059
23 Younesi E Hofmann-Apitius M 2013 From integrative disease modeling to predictive, preventive, personalized and participatory (P4) medicine EPMA Journal 4 23356351
24 FDA approves first cancer treatment for any solid tumor with a specific genetic feature https://www.fda.gov/newsevents/newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm560167.htm 5 23 2017
25 Imamura K Izumi Y Watanabe A Tsukita K Woltjen K Yamamoto T Hotta A Kondo T Kitaoka S Ohta A Tanaka A Watanabe D Morita M Takuma H Tamaoka A Kunath T Wray S Furuya H Era T Makioka K Okamoto K Fujisawa T Nishitoh H Homma K Ichijo H Julien J-P Obata N Hosokawa M Akiyama H Kaneko S Ayaki T Ito H Kaji R Takahashi R Yamanaka S Inoue H 2017 The Src/c-Abl pathway is a potential therapeutic target in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Sci Transl Med 9 eaaf3962 28539470
26 Certain Cancer Drugs Held Out as Prospects for ALS Therapy http://www.alzforum.org/news/research-news/certain-cancer-drugs-held-out-prospects-als-therapy May 26, 2017
27 Hampel H Lista S Teipel SJ Garaci F Nisticò R Blennow K Zetterberg H Bertram L Duyckaerts C Bakardjian H Drzezga A Colliot O Epelbaum S Broich K Lehéricy S Brice A Khachaturian ZS Aisen PS Dubois B 2014 Perspective on future role of biological markers in clinical therapy trials of Alzheimer’s disease: A long-range point of view beyond 2020 Biochem Pharmacol 88 426 449 24275164
28 Lista S Garaci FG Ewers M Teipel S Zetterberg H Blennow K Hampel H 2014 CSF Aβ1-42 combined with neuroimaging biomarkers in the early detection, diagnosis and prediction of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 381 392
29 Cavedo E Lista S Khachaturian Z Aisen P Amouyel P Herholz K Jack CR Jr Sperling R Cummings J Blennow K O’Bryant S Frisoni GB Khachaturian A Kivipelto M Klunk W Broich K Andrieu S de Schotten MT Mangin JF Lammertsma AA Johnson K Teipel S Drzezga A Bokde A Colliot O Bakardjian H Zetterberg H Dubois B Vellas B Schneider LS Hampel H 2014 The Road Ahead to Cure Alzheimer’s Disease: Development of Biological Markers and Neuroimaging Methods for Prevention Trials Across all Stages and Target Populations J Prev Alzheimers Dis 1 181 202 26478889
30 Hampel H Lista S 2013 Use of biomarkers and imaging to assess pathophysiology, mechanisms of action and target engagement J Nutr Health Aging 17 54 63 23299381
31 Lista S Garaci F Toschi N Hampel H 2013 Biochemical and imaging markers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease: an overview Eur J Neurodegener Dis 2 143 158
32 Teipel SJ Sabri O Grothe M Barthel H Prvulovic D Buerger K Bokde ALW Ewers M Hoffmann W Hampel H 2013 Perspectives for Multimodal Neurochemical and Imaging Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s Disease Journal of Alzheimers Disease 33 S329 S347
33 Hampel H Lista S Khachaturian ZS 2012 Development of biomarkers to chart all Alzheimer’s disease stages: The royal road to cutting the therapeutic Gordian Knot Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 8 312 336
34 Lista S Emanuele E 2011 Role of amyloid β1–42 and neuroimaging biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease Biomark Med 5 411 413 21861661
35 Hampel H Lista S 2016 Dementia: The rising global tide of cognitive impairment Nature Reviews Neurology 12 131 132
36 Toledo JB Zetterberg H van Harten AC Glodzik L Martinez-Lage P Bocchio-Chiavetto L Rami L Hansson O Sperling R Engelborghs S Osorio RS Vanderstichele H Vandijck M Hampel H Teipl S Moghekar A Albert M Hu WT Monge Argilés JA Gorostidi A Teunissen CE De Deyn PP Hyman BT Molinuevo JL Frisoni GB Linazasoro G de Leon MJ van der Flier WM Scheltens P Blennow K Shaw LM Trojanowski JQ 2015 Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid biomarker in cognitively normal subjects Brain 138 2701 2715 26220940
37 van Harten AC Visser PJ Pijnenburg YAL Teunissen CE Blankenstein MA Scheltens P van der Flier WM 2013 Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42 is the best predictor of clinical progression in patients with subjective complaints Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 9 481 487
38 Lista S Molinuevo JL Cavedo E Rami L Amouyel P Teipel SJ Garaci F Toschi N Habert M-O Blennow K Zetterberg H O’Bryant SE Johnson L Galluzzi S Bokde ALW Broich K Herholz K Bakardjian H Dubois B Jessen F Carrillo MC Aisen PS Hampel H 2015 Evolving Evidence for the Value of Neuroimaging Methods and Biological Markers in Subjects Categorized with Subjective Cognitive Decline J Alzheimers Dis 48 S171 S191 26402088
39 Wolfsgruber S Polcher A Koppara A Kleineidam L Frölich L Peters O Hüll M Rüther E Wiltfang J Maier W Kornhuber J Lewczuk P Jessen F Wagner M 2017 Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers and Clinical Progression in Patients with Subjective Cognitive Decline and Mild Cognitive Impairment J Alzheimers Dis 58 939 950 28527210
40 Herukka S-K Simonsen AH Andreasen N Baldeiras I Bjerke M Blennow K Engelborghs S Frisoni GB Gabryelewicz T Galluzzi S Handels R Kramberger MG Kulczyńska A Molinuevo JL Mroczko B Nordberg A Oliveira CR Otto M Rinne JO Rot U Saka E Soininen H Struyfs H Suardi S Visser PJ Winblad B Zetterberg H Waldemar G 2017 Recommendations for cerebrospinal fluid Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in the diagnostic evaluation of mild cognitive impairment Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 285 295
41 Simonsen AH Herukka S-K Andreasen N Baldeiras I Bjerke M Blennow K Engelborghs S Frisoni GB Gabryelewicz T Galluzzi S Handels R Kramberger MG Kulczyńska A Molinuevo JL Mroczko B Nordberg A Oliveira CR Otto M Rinne JO Rot U Saka E Soininen H Struyfs H Suardi S Visser PJ Winblad B Zetterberg H Waldemar G 2017 Recommendations for CSF AD biomarkers in the diagnostic evaluation of dementia Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 274 284
42 Lista S Garaci F Toschi N Hampel H 2013 Imaging Epigenetics in Alzheimer’s Disease Curr Pharm Des 19 6393 6415 23432717
43 Hampel H Lista S 2012 Alzheimer disease: From inherited to sporadic AD—crossing the biomarker bridge Nature Reviews Neurology 8 598 600
44 Faltraco F Lista S Garaci FG Hampel H 2012 Epigenetic mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease: state-of-the-art Eur J Neurodegener Dis 1 1 19
45 Zetzsche T Rujescu D Hardy J Hampel H 2010 Advances and perspectives from genetic research: development of biological markers in Alzheimer’s disease Expert Review of Molecular Diagnostics 10 667 690 20629514
46 Lista S O’Bryant SE Blennow K Dubois B Hugon J Zetterberg H Hampel H 2015 Biomarkers in Sporadic and Familial Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 47 291 317 26401553
47 Rosén C Hansson O Blennow K Zetterberg H 2013 Fluid biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease–current concepts Mol Neurodegener 8 20 23800368
48 Blennow K Zetterberg H Fagan AM 2012 Fluid Biomarkers in Alzheimer Disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 a006221 a006221 22951438
49 Blennow K Dubois B Fagan AM Lewczuk P de Leon MJ Hampel H 2015 Clinical utility of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in the diagnosis of early Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 11 58 69
50 Zetterberg H Lautner R Skillbäck T Rosén C Shahim P Mattsson N Blennow K 2014 Adv Clin Chem Elsevier 143 172
51 Ghidoni R Benussi L Paterlini A Albertini V Binetti G Emanuele E 2011 Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s Disease: The Present and the Future Neurodegenerative Diseases 8 413 420 21709402
52 Blennow K Hampel H Weiner M Zetterberg H 2010 Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma biomarkers in Alzheimer disease Nature Reviews Neurology 6 131 144 20157306
53 Hampel H Frank R Broich K Teipel SJ Katz RG Hardy J Herholz K Bokde ALW Jessen F Hoessler YC Sanhai WR Zetterberg H Woodcock J Blennow K 2010 Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease: academic, industry and regulatory perspectives Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 9 560 574 20592748
54 Hampel H Shen Y Walsh DM Aisen P Shaw LM Zetterberg H Trojanowski JQ Blennow K 2010 Biological markers of amyloid β-related mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 223 334 346 19815015
55 Hampel H Blennow K Shaw LM Hoessler YC Zetterberg H Trojanowski JQ 2010 Total and phosphorylated tau protein as biological markers of Alzheimer’s disease Exp Gerontol 45 30 40 19853650
56 O’Bryant SE Mielke MM Rissman RA Lista S Vanderstichele H Zetterberg H Lewczuk P Posner H Hall J Johnson L Fong Y-L Luthman J Jeromin A Batrla-Utermann R Villarreal A Britton G Snyder PJ Henriksen K Grammas P Gupta V Martins R Hampel H 2017 Blood-based biomarkers in Alzheimer disease: Current state of the science and a novel collaborative paradigm for advancing from discovery to clinic Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 45 58
57 O’Bryant SE Lista S Rissman RA Edwards M Zhang F Hall J Zetterberg H Lovestone S Gupta V Graff-Radford N Martins R Jeromin A Waring S Oh E Kling M Baker LD Hampel H 2016 Comparing biological markers of Alzheimer’s disease across blood fraction and platforms: Comparing apples to oranges Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring 3 27 34
58 O’Bryant SE Gupta V Henriksen K Edwards M Jeromin A Lista S Bazenet C Soares H Lovestone S Hampel H Montine T Blennow K Foroud T Carrillo M Graff-Radford N Laske C Breteler M Shaw L Trojanowski JQ Schupf N Rissman RA Fagan AM Oberoi P Umek R Weiner MW Grammas P Posner H Martins R 2015 Guidelines for the standardization of preanalytic variables for blood-based biomarker studies in Alzheimer’s disease research Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 11 549 560
59 Henriksen K O’Bryant SE Hampel H Trojanowski JQ Montine TJ Jeromin A Blennow K Lönneborg A Wyss-Coray T Soares H Bazenet C Sjögren M Hu W Lovestone S Karsdal MA Weiner MW 2014 The future of blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 115 131
60 Snyder HM Carrillo MC Grodstein F Henriksen K Jeromin A Lovestone S Mielke MM O’Bryant S Sarasa M Sjøgren M Soares H Teeling J Trushina E Ward M West T Bain LJ Shineman DW Weiner M Fillit HM 2014 Developing novel blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 109 114
61 Gupta V Sundaram R Martins RN 2013 Multiplex biomarkers in blood Alzheimers Res Ther 5 31 23795953
62 Lista S Faltraco F Prvulovic D Hampel H 2013 Blood and plasma-based proteomic biomarker research in Alzheimer’s disease Prog Neurobiol 101–102 1 17
63 Lista S Faltraco F Hampel H 2013 Biological and methodical challenges of blood-based proteomics in the field of neurological research Prog Neurobiol 101–102 18 34
64 Teipel SJ Grothe M Lista S Toschi N Garaci FG Hampel H 2013 Relevance of Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Early Detection and Diagnosis of Alzheimer Disease Med Clin North Am 97 399 424 23642578
65 Ewers M Sperling RA Klunk WE Weiner MW Hampel H 2011 Neuroimaging markers for the prediction and early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease dementia Trends Neurosci 34 430 442 21696834
66 Ewers M Frisoni GB Teipel SJ Grinberg LT Amaro E Jr Heinsen H Thompson PM Hampel H 2011 Staging Alzheimer’s disease progression with multimodality neuroimaging Prog Neurobiol 95 535 546 21718750
67 Hampel H Prvulovic D Teipel SJ Bokde ALW 2011 Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer’s disease Prog Neurobiol 95 570 578 21777651
68 Chiesa PA Cavedo E Lista S Thompson PM Hampel H Initiative APM 2017 Revolution of Resting-State Functional Neuroimaging Genetics in Alzheimer’s Disease Trends Neurosci 40 469 480 28684173
69 Engels MMA van der Flier WM Stam CJ Hillebrand A Scheltens P van Straaten ECW 2017 Alzheimer’s disease: The state of the art in resting-state magnetoencephalography Clin Neurophysiol 128 1426 1437 28622527
70 Broich K Weiergräber M Hampel H 2011 Biomarkers in clinical trials for neurodegenerative diseases: Regulatory perspectives and requirements Prog Neurobiol 95 498 500 21945642
71 Nistico G Broich K Hampel H 2013 Need for new guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials Eur J Neurodegener Dis 2 181 186
72 Jørgensen JT 2015 Companion diagnostics: the key to personalized medicine Expert Review of Molecular Diagnostics 15 153 156 25597758
73 Lyman GH Moses HL 2016 Biomarker Tests for Molecularly Targeted Therapies — The Key to Unlocking Precision Medicine N Engl J Med 375 4 6 27353537
74 Daly AK 2010 Pharmacogenetics and human genetic polymorphisms Biochem J 429 435 449 20626352
75 Guerreiro R Wojtas A Bras J Carrasquillo M Rogaeva E Majounie E Cruchaga C Sassi C Kauwe JSK Younkin S Hazrati L Collinge J Pocock J Lashley T Williams J Lambert J-C Amouyel P Goate A Rademakers R Morgan K Powell J St George-Hyslop P Singleton A Hardy J 2013 TREM2 Variants in Alzheimer’s Disease N Engl J Med 368 117 127 23150934
76 Escott-Price V Shoai M Pither R Williams J Hardy J 2017 Polygenic score prediction captures nearly all common genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 49 214.e217 214. e211
77 Rehm HL 2017 Evolving health care through personal genomics Nature Reviews Genetics 18 259 267
78 Zhao SG Chang SL Erho N Yu M Lehrer J Alshalalfa M Speers C Cooperberg MR Kim W Ryan CJ Den RB Freedland SJ Posadas E Sandler H Klein EA Black P Seiler R Tomlins SA Chinnaiyan AM Jenkins RB Davicioni E Ross AE Schaeffer EM Nguyen PL Carroll PR Karnes RJ Spratt DE Feng FY 2017 Associations of Luminal and Basal Subtyping of Prostate Cancer With Prognosis and Response to Androgen Deprivation Therapy JAMA Oncology
79 Deyati A Younesi E Hofmann-Apitius M Novac N 2013 Challenges and opportunities for oncology biomarker discovery Drug Discovery Today 18 614 624 23280501
80 Cross R 2017 This $25,000 physical has found some ‘serious’ health problems. Others say it has serious problems Science
81 Vassy JL Christensen KD Schonman EF Blout CL Robinson JO Krier JB Diamond PM Lebo M Machini K Azzariti DR Dukhovny D Bates DW MacRae CA Murray MF Rehm HL McGuire AL Green RC 2017 The Impact of Whole-Genome Sequencing on the Primary Care and Outcomes of Healthy Adult Patients Ann Intern Med 167 159
82 Weston AD Hood L 2004 Systems Biology, Proteomics, and the Future of Health Care: Toward Predictive, Preventative, and Personalized Medicine J Proteome Res 3 179 196 15113093
83 FDA-NIH Biomarker Working Group 2016 BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource Available at:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK326791/ Silver Spring (MD); Food and Drug Administration (US); National Institutes of Health (US) Bethesda (MD)
84 Haas M Stephenson D Romero K Gordon MF Zach N Geerts H Initiative BHM 2016 Big data to smart data in Alzheimer’s disease: Real-world examples of advanced modeling and simulation Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 12 1022 1030
85 Vidal M 2009 A unifying view of 21st century systems biology FEBS Lett 583 3891 3894 19913537
86 Friend SH 2010 The Need for Precompetitive Integrative Bionetwork Disease Model Building Clin Pharmacol Ther 87 536 539 20407459
87 Kitano H 2002 Systems biology: A brief overview Science 295 1662 1664 11872829
88 Vidal M Cusick ME Barabasi AL 2011 Interactome Networks and Human Disease Cell 144 986 998 21414488
89 Martins R Lithgow GJ Link W 2016 Long live FOXO: unraveling the role of FOXO proteins in aging and longevity Aging cell 15 196 207 26643314
90 Castrillo JI Oliver SG 2016 Alzheimer’s as a Systems-Level Disease Involving the Interplay of Multiple Cellular Networks Methods Mol Biol 1303 3 48 26235058
91 Jiang H Xu Z Zhong P Ren Y Liang G Schilling HA Hu Z Zhang Y Wang X Chen S 2015 Cell cycle and p53 gate the direct conversion of human fibroblasts to dopaminergic neurons Nature communications 6 10100
92 Masdeu JC Kreisl WC Berman KF 2012 The neurobiology of Alzheimer disease defined by neuroimaging Curr Opin Neurol 25 410 420 22766722
93 Sepulcre J Sabuncu MR Becker A Sperling R Johnson KA 2013 In vivo characterization of the early states of the amyloid-beta network Brain 136 2239 2252 23801740
94 Leuzy A Zimmer ER Heurling K Rosa-Neto P Gauthier S 2014 Use of amyloid PET across the spectrum of Alzheimer’s disease: clinical utility and associated ethical issues Amyloid-Journal of Protein Folding Disorders 21 143 148
95 Zimmer ER Leuzy A Bhat V Gauthier S Rosa-Neto P 2014 In vivo tracking of tau pathology using positron emission tomography (PET) molecular imaging in small animals Translational neurodegeneration 3 6 24628994
96 Hood L Flores M 2012 A personal view on systems medicine and the emergence of proactive P4 medicine: predictive, preventive, personalized and participatory N Biotechnol 29 613 624 22450380
97 Lausted C Lee I Zhou Y Qin S Sung J Price ND Hood L Wang K 2014 Systems approach to neurodegenerative disease biomarker discovery Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 54 457 481 24160693
98 Hood L Tian Q 2012 Systems approaches to biology and disease enable translational systems medicine Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 10 181 185 23084773
99 Hood L Auffray C 2013 Participatory medicine: a driving force for revolutionizing healthcare Genome Med 5 110 24360023
100 Yan J Risacher SL Shen L Saykin AJ 2017 Network approaches to systems biology analysis of complex disease: integrative methods for multi-omics data Briefings in Bioinformatics
101 Gligorijević V Pržulj N 2015 Methods for biological data integration: perspectives and challenges Journal of the Royal Society Interface 12 20150571
102 Tourette C Farina F Vazquez-Manrique RP Orfila A-M Voisin J Hernandez S Offner N Parker JA Menet S Kim J 2014 The Wnt receptor Ryk reduces neuronal and cell survival capacity by repressing FOXO activity during the early phases of mutant huntingtin pathogenicity PLoS Biol 12 e1001895 24960609
103 Miller JA Guillozet-Bongaarts A Gibbons LE Postupna N Renz A Beller AE Sunkin SM Ng L Rose SE Smith KA 2017 Neuropathological and transcriptomic characteristics of the aged brain eLife 6
104 Bielza C Larrañaga P 2014 Bayesian networks in neuroscience: a survey Front Comput Neurosci 8 24550817
105 Hristoskova A Boeva V Tsiporkova E 2014 A formal concept analysis approach to consensus clustering of multi-experiment expression data BMC Bioinformatics 15 151 24885407
106 Farhan S Fahiem MA Tauseef H 2014 An ensemble-of-classifiers based approach for early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: classification using structural features of brain images Comput Math Methods Med 2014
107 Zhang Q Abel H Wells A Lenzini P Gomez F Province MA Templeton AA Weinstock GM Salzman NH Borecki IB 2015 Selection of models for the analysis of risk-factor trees: leveraging biological knowledge to mine large sets of risk factors with application to microbiome data Bioinformatics 31 1607 1613 25568281
108 Ritchie CW Molinuevo JL Truyen L Satlin A Van der Geyten S Lovestone S 2016 Development of interventions for the secondary prevention of Alzheimer’s dementia: the European Prevention of Alzheimer’s Dementia (EPAD) project The Lancet Psychiatry 3 179 186 26683239
109 Schneider LS Mangialasche F Andreasen N Feldman H Giacobini E Jones R Mantua V Mecocci P Pani L Winblad B Kivipelto M 2014 Clinical trials and late-stage drug development for Alzheimer’s disease: an appraisal from 1984 to 2014 J Intern Med 275 251 283 24605808
110 Ritchie K Ropacki M Albala B Harrison J Kaye J Kramer J Randolph C Ritchie CW 2017 Recommended cognitive outcomes in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: Consensus statement from the European Prevention of Alzheimer’s Dementia project Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 186 195
111 Mortamais M Ash JA Harrison J Kaye J Kramer J Randolph C Pose C Albala B Ropacki M Ritchie CW Ritchie K 2017 Detecting cognitive changes in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: A review of its feasibility Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 468 492
112 Bassett DS Sporns O 2017 Network neuroscience Nat Neurosci 20 353 364 28230844
113 Sejnowski TJ Churchland PS Movshon JA 2014 Putting big data to good use in neuroscience Nat Neurosci 17 1440 1441 25349909
114 Teipel S Drzezga A Grothe MJ Barthel H Chételat G Schuff N Skudlarski P Cavedo E Frisoni GB Hoffmann W 2015 Multimodal imaging in Alzheimer’s disease: validity and usefulness for early detection The Lancet Neurology 14 1037 1053 26318837
115 Bullmore E Sporns O 2009 Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10 186 198 19190637
116 Sporns O 2014 Contributions and challenges for network models in cognitive neuroscience Nat Neurosci 17 652 660 24686784
117 Medaglia JD Lynall M-E Bassett DS 2015 Cognitive network neuroscience J Cogn Neurosci
118 Sporns O 2010 Networks of the Brain MIT press
119 Van Essen DC Smith SM Barch DM Behrens TE Yacoub E Ugurbil K Consortium W-MH 2013 The WU-Minn human connectome project: an overview Neuroimage 80 62 79 23684880
120 Zuo X-N He Y Betzel RF Colcombe S Sporns O Milham MP 2017 Human connectomics across the life span Trends in cognitive sciences 21 32 45 27865786
121 Fornito A Zalesky A Bullmore E 2016 Fundamentals of brain network analysis Academic Press
122 Pini L Pievani M Bocchetta M Altomare D Bosco P Cavedo E Galluzzi S Marizzoni M Frisoni GB 2016 Brain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease and aging Ageing research reviews 30 25 48 26827786
123 Cavedo E Frisoni G 2011 The dynamic marker hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease and its implications for clinical imaging The quarterly journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging: official publication of the Italian Association of Nuclear Medicine (AIMN) [and] the International Association of Radiopharmacology (IAR), [and] Section of the Society of 55 237 249
124 Cavedo E Redolfi A Angeloni F Babiloni C Lizio R Chiapparini L Bruzzone MG Aquino D Sabatini U Alesiani M 2014 The Italian Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (I-ADNI): validation of structural MR imaging J Alzheimers Dis 40 941 952 24577455
125 Jack CR Bernstein MA Borowski BJ Gunter JL Fox NC Thompson PM Schuff N Krueger G Killiany RJ DeCarli CS 2010 Update on the magnetic resonance imaging core of the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 6 212 220
126 Braak H Braak E 1995 Staging of alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes Neurobiol Aging 16 271 278 7566337
127 Delacourte A David JP Sergeant N Buee L Wattez A Vermersch P Ghozali F Fallet-Bianco C Pasquier F Lebert F Petit H Di Menza C 1999 The biochemical pathway of neurofibrillary degeneration in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 52 1158 1158 10214737
128 de Souza LC Chupin M Lamari F Jardel C Leclercq D Colliot O Lehéricy S Dubois B Sarazin M 2012 CSF tau markers are correlated with hippocampal volume in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 33 1253 1257 21489655
129 Jack CR Lowe VJ Senjem ML Weigand SD Kemp BJ Shiung MM Knopman DS Boeve BF Klunk WE Mathis CA Petersen RC 2008 11C PiB and structural MRI provide complementary information in imaging of Alzheimer’s disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment Brain 131 665 680 18263627
130 Josephs KA Whitwell JL Ahmed Z Shiung MM Weigand SD Knopman DS Boeve BF Parisi JE Petersen RC Dickson DW Jack CR 2008 β-amyloid burden is not associated with rates of brain atrophy Ann Neurol 63 204 212 17894374
131 Ferrarini L Palm WM Olofsen H van der Landen R Jan Blauw G Westendorp RGJ Bollen ELEM Middelkoop HAM Reiber JHC van Buchem MA Admiraal-Behloul F 2008 MMSE scores correlate with local ventricular enlargement in the spectrum from cognitively normal to Alzheimer disease Neuroimage 39 1832 1838 18160312
132 Sarazin M Chauviré V Gerardin E Colliot O Kinkingnéhun S de Souza LC Hugonot-Diener L Garnero L Lehéricy S Chupin M Dubois B 2010 The Amnestic Syndrome of Hippocampal type in Alzheimer’s Disease: An MRI Study J Alzheimers Dis 22 285 294 20847406
133 Fox NC Cousens S Scahill R Harvey RJ Rossor MN 2000 Using Serial Registered Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging to Measure Disease Progression in Alzheimer Disease Arch Neurol 57 339 10714659
134 Fox NC Scahill RI Crum WR Rossor MN 1999 Correlation between rates of brain atrophy and cognitive decline in AD Neurology 52 1687 1687 10331700
135 Jack CR Petersen RC Grundman M Jin S Gamst A Ward CP Sencakova D Doody RS Thal LJ 2008 Longitudinal MRI findings from the vitamin E and donepezil treatment study for MCI Neurobiol Aging 29 1285 1295 17452062
136 Baron JC Chételat G Desgranges B Perchey G Landeau B de la Sayette V Eustache F 2001 In Vivo Mapping of Gray Matter Loss with Voxel-Based Morphometry in Mild Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimage 14 298 309 11467904
137 Singh V Chertkow H Lerch JP Evans AC Dorr AE Kabani NJ 2006 Spatial patterns of cortical thinning in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Brain 129 2885 2893 17008332
138 Cuingnet R Glaunes JA Chupin M Benali H Colliot O 2013 Spatial and Anatomical Regularization of SVM: A General Framework for Neuroimaging Data IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35 682 696 22732664
139 Davatzikos C Fan Y Wu X Shen D Resnick SM 2008 Detection of prodromal Alzheimer’s disease via pattern classification of magnetic resonance imaging Neurobiol Aging 29 514 523 17174012
140 Kloppel S Stonnington CM Chu C Draganski B Scahill RI Rohrer JD Fox NC Jack CR Ashburner J Frackowiak RSJ 2008 Automatic classification of MR scans in Alzheimer’s disease Brain 131 681 689 18202106
141 Plant C Teipel SJ Oswald A Böhm C Meindl T Mourao-Miranda J Bokde AW Hampel H Ewers M 2010 Automated detection of brain atrophy patterns based on MRI for the prediction of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 50 162 174 19961938
142 Cavedo E Boccardi M Ganzola R Canu E Beltramello A Caltagirone C Thompson P Frisoni G 2011 Local amygdala structural differences with 3T MRI in patients with Alzheimer disease Neurology 76 727 733 21339500
143 Frisoni GB Jack CR Bocchetta M Bauer C Frederiksen KS Liu Y Preboske G Swihart T Blair M Cavedo E 2015 The EADC-ADNI Harmonized Protocol for manual hippocampal segmentation on magnetic resonance: evidence of validity Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 11 111 125
144 Scheltens P Launer LJ Barkhof F Weinstein HC Gool WA 1995 Visual assessment of medial temporal lobe atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging: Interobserver reliability J Neurol 242 557 560 8551316
145 Cavedo E Suppa P Lange C Opfer R Lista S Galluzzi S Schwarz AJ Spies L Buchert R Hampel H 2017 Fully Automatic MRI-Based Hippocampus Volumetry Using FSL-FIRST: Intra-Scanner Test-Retest Stability, Inter-Field Strength Variability, and Performance as Enrichment Biomarker for Clinical Trials Using Prodromal Target Populations at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 60 151 164 28777748
146 Ritter K Lange C Weygandt M Mäurer A Roberts A Estrella M Suppa P Spies L Prasad V Steffen I 2016 Combination of Structural MRI and FDG-PET of the Brain Improves Diagnostic Accuracy in Newly Manifested Cognitive Impairment in Geriatric Inpatients J Alzheimers Dis 54 1319 1331 27567842
147 Suppa P Hampel H Kepp T Lange C Spies L Fiebach JB Dubois B Buchert R 2016 Performance of hippocampus volumetry with FSL-first for prediction of Alzheimer’s disease dementia in at risk subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment J Alzheimers Dis 51 867 873 26923010
148 Suppa P Anker U Spies L Bopp I Rüegger-Frey B Klaghofer R Gocke C Hampel H Beck S Buchert R 2015 Fully automated atlas-based hippocampal volumetry for detection of Alzheimer’s disease in a memory clinic setting J Alzheimers Dis 44 183 193 25201782
149 Boutet C Chupin M Colliot O Sarazin M Mutlu G Drier A Pellot A Dormont D Lehéricy S 2012 Is radiological evaluation as good as computer-based volumetry to assess hippocampal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease? Neuroradiology 54 1321 1330 22782577
150 Colliot O Chételat G Chupin M Desgranges B Magnin B Benali H Dubois B Garnero L Eustache F Lehéricy S 2008 Discrimination between Alzheimer Disease, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Normal Aging by Using Automated Segmentation of the Hippocampus Radiology 248 194 201 18458242
151 Bakkour A Morris JC Dickerson BC 2008 The cortical signature of prodromal AD: Regional thinning predicts mild AD dementia Neurology 72 1048 1055 19109536
152 Desikan RS Cabral HJ Hess CP Dillon WP Glastonbury CM Weiner MW Schmansky NJ Greve DN Salat DH Buckner RL Fischl B 2009 Automated MRI measures identify individuals with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Brain 132 2048 2057 19460794
153 Jack CR Petersen RC Xu YC O’Brien PC Smith GE Ivnik RJ Boeve BF Waring SC Tangalos EG Kokmen E 1999 Prediction of AD with MRI-based hippocampal volume in mild cognitive impairment Neurology 52 1397 1397 10227624
154 Landau SM Harvey D Madison CM Reiman EM Foster NL Aisen PS Petersen RC Shaw LM Trojanowski JQ Jack CR Weiner MW Jagust WJ 2010 Comparing predictors of conversion and decline in mild cognitive impairment Neurology 75 230 238 20592257
155 Visser P Verhey F Hofman P Scheltens P Jolles J 2002 Medial temporal lobe atrophy predicts Alzheimer9s disease in patients with minor cognitive impairment J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 72 491 497 11909909
156 de Souza L Chupin M Bertoux M Lehéricy S Dubois B Lamari F Le Ber I Bottlaender M Colliot O Sarazin M 2013 Is hippocampal volume a good marker to differentiate Alzheimer’s disease from frontotemporal dementia? Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 9 P380 P381
157 Hashimoto M Kitagaki H Imamura T Hirono N Shimomura T Kazui H Tanimukai S Hanihara T Mori E 1998 Medial temporal and whole-brain atrophy in dementia with Lewy bodies: A volumetric MRI study Neurology 51 357 362 9710003
158 Boutet C Chupin M Lehéricy S Marrakchi-Kacem L Epelbaum S Poupon C Wiggins C Vignaud A Hasboun D Defontaines B Hanon O Dubois B Sarazin M Hertz-Pannier L Colliot O 2014 Detection of volume loss in hippocampal layers in Alzheimer’s disease using 7 T MRI: A feasibility study NeuroImage: Clinical 5 341 348 25161900
159 Wisse LEM Biessels GJ Heringa SM Kuijf HJ Koek DL Luijten PR Geerlings MI 2014 Hippocampal subfield volumes at 7T in early Alzheimer’s disease and normal aging Neurobiol Aging 35 2039 2045 24684788
160 Kilimann I Grothe M Heinsen H Alho EJL Grinberg L Amaro E Jr Dos Santos GAB Da Silva RE Mitchell AJ Frisoni GB 2014 Subregional basal forebrain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease: a multicenter study J Alzheimers Dis 40 687 700 24503619
161 Hampel H Mesulam MM Cuello AC Khachaturian AS Farlow MR Snyder PJ Giacobini E Khachaturian ZS 2017 Revisiting the cholinergic hypothesis in Alzheimer’s disease: Emerging evidence from translational and clinical research Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association
162 Brüggen K Dyrba M Barkhof F Hausner L Filippi M Nestor PJ Hauenstein K Klöppel S Grothe MJ Kasper E 2015 Basal forebrain and hippocampus as predictors of conversion to Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive impairment–A multicenter DTI and volumetry study J Alzheimers Dis 48 197 204 26401940
163 Grothe M Heinsen H Teipel SJ 2012 Atrophy of the cholinergic basal forebrain over the adult age range and in early stages of Alzheimer’s disease Biol Psychiatry 71 805 813 21816388
164 Zhang H Trollor JN Wen W Zhu W Crawford JD Kochan NA Slavin MJ Brodaty H Reppermund S Kang K 2011 Grey matter atrophy of basal forebrain and hippocampus in mild cognitive impairment J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 82 487 493 21047881
165 Grothe MJ Heinsen H Amaro E Jr Grinberg LT Teipel SJ 2015 Cognitive correlates of basal forebrain atrophy and associated cortical hypometabolism in mild cognitive impairment Cereb Cortex 26 2411 2426 25840425
166 Teipel SJ Meindl T Grinberg L Grothe M Cantero JL Reiser MF Möller HJ Heinsen H Hampel H 2011 The cholinergic system in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: an in vivo MRI and DTI study Hum Brain Mapp 32 1349 1362 20672311
167 Teipel SJ Flatz WH Heinsen H Bokde AL Schoenberg SO Stöckel S Dietrich O Reiser MF Möller H-J Hampel H 2005 Measurement of basal forebrain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease using MRI Brain 128 2626 2644 16014654
168 Schmitz TW Spreng RN Initiative AsDN 2016 Basal forebrain degeneration precedes and predicts the cortical spread of Alzheimer’s pathology Nature communications 7
169 Grothe MJ Ewers M Krause B Heinsen H Teipel SJ Initiative AsDN 2014 Basal forebrain atrophy and cortical amyloid deposition in nondemented elderly subjects Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 S344 S353
170 Kerbler GM Fripp J Rowe CC Villemagne VL Salvado O Rose S Coulson EJ Initiative AsDN 2015 Basal forebrain atrophy correlates with amyloid β burden in Alzheimer’s disease NeuroImage: Clinical 7 105 113 25610772
171 Cuingnet R Gerardin E Tessieras J Auzias G Lehéricy S Habert M-O Chupin M Benali H Colliot O 2011 Automatic classification of patients with Alzheimer’s disease from structural MRI: A comparison of ten methods using the ADNI database Neuroimage 56 766 781 20542124
172 Davatzikos C Bhatt P Shaw LM Batmanghelich KN Trojanowski JQ 2011 Prediction of MCI to AD conversion, via MRI, CSF biomarkers, and pattern classification Neurobiol Aging 32 2322. e2319 2322.e2327
173 Sun Z van de Giessen M Lelieveldt BPF Staring M 2017 Detection of Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer’s Disease Using Longitudinal Brain MRI Front Neuroinform 11 28270761
174 Cavedo E Dubois B Colliot O Lista S Croisile B Tisserand GL Touchon J Bonafe A Ousset PJ Rouaud O Ricolfi F Vighetto A Pasquier F Galluzzi S Delmaire C Ceccaldi M Girard N Lehericy S Duveau F Chupin M Sarazin M Dormont D Hampel H 2016 Reduced Regional Cortical Thickness Rate of Change in Donepezil-Treated Subjects With Suspected Prodromal Alzheimer’s Disease The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 77 e1631 e1638 27780331
175 Dubois B Chupin M Hampel H Lista S Cavedo E Croisile B Tisserand GL Touchon J Bonafe A Ousset PJ 2015 Donepezil decreases annual rate of hippocampal atrophy in suspected prodromal Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 11 1041 1049
176 Cavedo E Grothe MJ Colliot O Lista S Chupin M Dormont D Houot M Lehéricy S Teipel S Dubois B 2017 Reduced basal forebrain atrophy progression in a randomized Donepezil trial in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease Sci Rep 7 11706 28916821
177 Fox NC Black RS Gilman S Rossor MN Griffith SG Jenkins L Koller M 2005 Effects of A immunization (AN1792) on MRI measures of cerebral volume in Alzheimer disease Neurology 64 1563 1572 15883317
178 Sperling R Salloway S Brooks DJ Tampieri D Barakos J Fox NC Raskind M Sabbagh M Honig LS Porsteinsson AP Lieberburg I Arrighi HM Morris KA Lu Y Liu E Gregg KM Brashear HR Kinney GG Black R Grundman M 2012 Amyloid-related imaging abnormalities in patients with Alzheimer’s disease treated with bapineuzumab: a retrospective analysis The Lancet Neurology 11 241 249 22305802
179 Bozzali M Cherubini A 2007 Diffusion tensor MRI to investigate dementias: a brief review Magn Reson Imaging 25 969 977 17451903
180 Chua TC Wen W Slavin MJ Sachdev PS 2008 Diffusion tensor imaging in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: a review Curr Opin Neurol 21 83 92 18180656
181 Hess CP 2009 Update on diffusion tensor imaging in Alzheimer’s disease Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 17 215 224 19406355
182 Nucifora PG Verma R Lee SK Melhem ER 2007 Diffusion-tensor MR imaging and tractography: exploring brain microstructure and connectivity Radiology 245 367 384 17940300
183 Garaci FG Bolacchi F Cerulli A Melis M Spano A Cedrone C Floris R Simonetti G Nucci C 2009 Optic nerve and optic radiation neurodegeneration in patients with glaucoma: in vivo analysis with 3-T diffusion-tensor MR imaging Radiology 252 496 501 19435941
184 Pardini M Elia M Garaci FG Guida S Coniglione F Krueger F Benassi F Emberti Gialloreti L 2012 Long-term cognitive and behavioral therapies, combined with augmentative communication, are related to uncinate fasciculus integrity in autism J Autism Dev Disord 42 585 592 21573693
185 Pardini M Garaci FG Bonzano L Roccatagliata L Palmieri MG Pompili E Coniglione F Krueger F Ludovici A Floris R Benassi F Emberti Gialloreti L 2009 White matter reduced streamline coherence in young men with autism and mental retardation Eur J Neurol 16 1185 1190 19538216
186 Jones DK Leemans A 2011 Diffusion tensor imaging Methods Mol Biol 711 127 144 21279600
187 Jones DK 2008 Studying connections in the living human brain with diffusion MRI Cortex 44 936 952 18635164
188 Jeurissen B Tournier JD Dhollander T Connelly A Sijbers J 2014 Multi-tissue constrained spherical deconvolution for improved analysis of multi-shell diffusion MRI data Neuroimage 103 411 426 25109526
189 Smith RE Tournier JD Calamante F Connelly A 2013 SIFT: Spherical-deconvolution informed filtering of tractograms Neuroimage 67 298 312 23238430
190 Jeurissen B Leemans A Jones DK Tournier JD Sijbers J 2011 Probabilistic fiber tracking using the residual bootstrap with constrained spherical deconvolution Hum Brain Mapp 32 461 479 21319270
191 Tournier JD Yeh CH Calamante F Cho KH Connelly A Lin CP 2008 Resolving crossing fibres using constrained spherical deconvolution: validation using diffusion-weighted imaging phantom data Neuroimage 42 617 625 18583153
192 Giannelli M Belmonte G Toschi N Pesaresi I Ghedin P Traino AC Bartolozzi C Cosottini M 2011 Technical note: DTI measurements of fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity at 1.5 T: comparison of two radiofrequency head coils with different functional designs and sensitivities Med Phys 38 3205 3211 21815395
193 Medina D DeToledo-Morrell L Urresta F Gabrieli JD Moseley M Fleischman D Bennett DA Leurgans S Turner DA Stebbins GT 2006 White matter changes in mild cognitive impairment and AD: A diffusion tensor imaging study Neurobiol Aging 27 663 672 16005548
194 Liu Y Spulber G Lehtimaki KK Kononen M Hallikainen I Grohn H Kivipelto M Hallikainen M Vanninen R Soininen H 2011 Diffusion tensor imaging and tract-based spatial statistics in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 32 1558 1571 19913331
195 Fjell AM Amlien IK Westlye LT Walhovd KB 2009 Mini-mental state examination is sensitive to brain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 28 252 258 19786777
196 Heo JH Lee ST Kon C Park HJ Shim JY Kim M 2009 White matter hyperintensities and cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer disease J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 22 207 212 19433863
197 Chua TC Wen W Chen X Kochan N Slavin MJ Trollor JN Brodaty H Sachdev PS 2009 Diffusion tensor imaging of the posterior cingulate is a useful biomarker of mild cognitive impairment Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 17 602 613 19546655
198 Takahashi S Yonezawa H Takahashi J Kudo M Inoue T Tohgi H 2002 Selective reduction of diffusion anisotropy in white matter of Alzheimer disease brains measured by 3.0 Tesla magnetic resonance imaging Neurosci Lett 332 45 48 12377381
199 Zhang Y Schuff N Jahng GH Bayne W Mori S Schad L Mueller S Du AT Kramer JH Yaffe K Chui H Jagust WJ Miller BL Weiner MW 2007 Diffusion tensor imaging of cingulum fibers in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease Neurology 68 13 19 17200485
200 Zhuang L Wen W Zhu W Trollor J Kochan N Crawford J Reppermund S Brodaty H Sachdev P 2010 White matter integrity in mild cognitive impairment: a tract-based spatial statistics study Neuroimage 53 16 25 20595067
201 Douaud G Jbabdi S Behrens TE Menke RA Gass A Monsch AU Rao A Whitcher B Kindlmann G Matthews PM Smith S 2011 DTI measures in crossing-fibre areas: increased diffusion anisotropy reveals early white matter alteration in MCI and mild Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 55 880 890 21182970
202 Ennis DB Kindlmann G 2006 Orthogonal tensor invariants and the analysis of diffusion tensor magnetic resonance images Magn Reson Med 55 136 146 16342267
203 Stricker NH Schweinsburg BC Delano-Wood L Wierenga CE Bangen KJ Haaland KY Frank LR Salmon DP Bondi MW 2009 Decreased white matter integrity in late-myelinating fiber pathways in Alzheimer’s disease supports retrogenesis Neuroimage 45 10 16 19100839
204 Teipel SJ Stahl R Dietrich O Schoenberg SO Perneczky R Bokde AL Reiser MF Moller HJ Hampel H 2007 Multivariate network analysis of fiber tract integrity in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 34 985 995 17166745
205 Selnes P Aarsland D Bjornerud A Gjerstad L Wallin A Hessen E Reinvang I Grambaite R Auning E Kjaervik VK Due-Tonnessen P Stenset V Fladby T 2013 Diffusion tensor imaging surpasses cerebrospinal fluid as predictor of cognitive decline and medial temporal lobe atrophy in subjective cognitive impairment and mild cognitive impairment J Alzheimers Dis 33 723 736 23186987
206 Sexton CE Kalu UG Filippini N Mackay CE Ebmeier KP 2011 A meta-analysis of diffusion tensor imaging in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 32 2322 e2325 2318
207 Teipel SJ Reuter S Stieltjes B Acosta-Cabronero J Ernemann U Fellgiebel A Filippi M Frisoni G Hentschel F Jessen F Kloppel S Meindl T Pouwels PJ Hauenstein KH Hampel H 2011 Multicenter stability of diffusion tensor imaging measures: A European clinical and physical phantom study Psychiatry Res 194 363 371 22078796
208 Mielke MM Okonkwo OC Oishi K Mori S Tighe S Miller MI Ceritoglu C Brown T Albert M Lyketsos CG 2012 Fornix integrity and hippocampal volume predict memory decline and progression to Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 8 105 113 22404852
209 Douaud G Menke RA Gass A Monsch AU Rao A Whitcher B Zamboni G Matthews PM Sollberger M Smith S 2013 Brain Microstructure Reveals Early Abnormalities more than Two Years prior to Clinical Progression from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer’s Disease J Neurosci 33 2147 2155 23365250
210 Andersson JL Skare S Ashburner J 2003 How to correct susceptibility distortions in spin-echo echo-planar images: application to diffusion tensor imaging Neuroimage 20 870 888 14568458
211 Eichner C Setsompop K Koopmans PJ Lutzkendorf R Norris DG Turner R Wald LL Heidemann RM 2014 Slice accelerated diffusion-weighted imaging at ultra-high field strength Magn Reson Med 71 1518 1525 23798017
212 Back SA Kroenke CD Sherman LS Lawrence G Gong X Taber EN Sonnen JA Larson EB Montine TJ 2011 White matter lesions defined by diffusion tensor imaging in older adults Ann Neurol 70 465 476 21905080
213 Cosottini M Frosini D Pesaresi I Costagli M Biagi L Ceravolo R Bonuccelli U Tosetti M 2014 MR Imaging of the Substantia Nigra at 7 T Enables Diagnosis of Parkinson Disease Radiology 271 831 838 24601752
214 Verstraete E Polders DL Mandl RC Van Den Heuvel MP Veldink JH Luijten P Van Den Berg LH Hoogduin J 2014 Multimodal tract-based analysis in ALS patients at 7T: a specific white matter profile? Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 15 84 92 24325276
215 Alexander AL Hasan KM Lazar M Tsuruda JS Parker DL 2001 Analysis of partial volume effects in diffusion-tensor MRI Magn Reson Med 45 770 780 11323803
216 Wedeen VJ Wang RP Schmahmann JD Benner T Tseng WY Dai G Pandya DN Hagmann P D’Arceuil H de Crespigny AJ 2008 Diffusion spectrum magnetic resonance imaging (DSI) tractography of crossing fibers Neuroimage 41 1267 1277 18495497
217 Fieremans E Jensen JH Helpern JA 2011 White matter characterization with diffusional kurtosis imaging Neuroimage 58 177 188 21699989
218 Hui ES Cheung MM Qi L Wu EX 2008 Advanced MR diffusion characterization of neural tissue using directional diffusion kurtosis analysis Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2008 3941 3944 19163575
219 Jensen JH Helpern JA 2010 Progress in diffusion-weighted imaging: concepts, techniques and applications to the central nervous system NMR Biomed 23 659 660 20886561
220 Lanzafame S Giannelli M Garaci F Floris R Duggento A Guerrisi M Toschi N 2016 Differences in Gaussian diffusion tensor imaging and non-Gaussian diffusion kurtosis imaging model-based estimates of diffusion tensor invariants in the human brain Med Phys 43 2464 27147357
221 Giannelli M Toschi N 2016 On the use of trace-weighted images in body diffusional kurtosis imaging Magn Reson Imaging 34 502 507 26706136
222 Alexander DC 2005 Multiple-fiber reconstruction algorithms for diffusion MRI Ann N Y Acad Sci 1064 113 133 16394152
223 Assaf Y Blumenfeld-Katzir T Yovel Y Basser PJ 2008 AxCaliber: a method for measuring axon diameter distribution from diffusion MRI Magn Reson Med 59 1347 1354 18506799
224 Assaf Y Basser PJ 2005 Composite hindered and restricted model of diffusion (CHARMED) MR imaging of the human brain Neuroimage 27 48 58 15979342
225 Santis SD Granberg T Ouellette R Treaba CA Fan Q Herranz E Mainero C Toschi N 2017 2017 39th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) 3024 3027
226 Alexander DC Hubbard PL Hall MG Moore EA Ptito M Parker GJ Dyrby TB 2010 Orientationally invariant indices of axon diameter and density from diffusion MRI Neuroimage 52 1374 1389 20580932
227 De Santis S Gabrielli A Bozzali M Maraviglia B Macaluso E Capuani S 2011 Anisotropic anomalous diffusion assessed in the human brain by scalar invariant indices Magn Reson Med 65 1043 1052 21413068
228 De Santis S Gabrielli A Palombo M Maraviglia B Capuani S 2011 Non-Gaussian diffusion imaging: a brief practical review Magn Reson Imaging 29 1410 1416 21601404
229 Mintun MA Larossa GN Sheline YI Dence CS Lee SY Mach RH Klunk WE Mathis CA DeKosky ST Morris JC 2006 [11C]PIB in a nondemented population: potential antecedent marker of Alzheimer disease Neurology 67 446 452 16894106
230 Iraji A Davoodi-Bojd E Soltanian-Zadeh H Hossein-Zadeh GA Jiang Q 2011 Diffusion kurtosis imaging discriminates patients with white matter lesions from healthy subjects Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2011 2796 2799 22254922
231 Falangola MF Jensen JH Babb JS Hu C Castellanos FX Di Martino A Ferris SH Helpern JA 2008 Age-related non-Gaussian diffusion patterns in the prefrontal brain J Magn Reson Imaging 28 1345 1350 19025941
232 Wang JJ Lin WY Lu CS Weng YH Ng SH Wang CH Liu HL Hsieh RH Wan YL Wai YY 2011 Parkinson disease: diagnostic utility of diffusion kurtosis imaging Radiology 261 210 217 21771952
233 Thompson PM Ge T Glahn DC Jahanshad N Nichols TE 2013 Genetics of the connectome Neuroimage 80 475 488 23707675
234 Baggio HC Segura B Junque C de Reus MA Sala-Llonch R Van den Heuvel MP 2015 Rich club organization and cognitive performance in healthy older participants J Cogn Neurosci
235 Nakagawa TT Jirsa VK Spiegler A McIntosh AR Deco G 2013 Bottom up modeling of the connectome: linking structure and function in the resting brain and their changes in aging Neuroimage 80 318 329 23629050
236 Fornito A Zalesky A Breakspear M 2015 The connectomics of brain disorders Nature Reviews Neuroscience 16 159 172 25697159
237 Fischer FU Wolf D Scheurich A Fellgiebel A Initiative AsDN 2015 Altered whole-brain white matter networks in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease NeuroImage: Clinical 8 660 666 26288751
238 Daianu M Jahanshad N Nir TM Toga AW Jack CR Jr Weiner MW Thompson Paul M ftAsDNI 2013 Breakdown of brain connectivity between normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease: a structural k-core network analysis Brain connectivity 3 407 422 23701292
239 Logothetis NK Pauls J Augath M Trinath T Oeltermann A 2001 Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal Nature 412 150 157 11449264
240 Machulda MM Senjem ML Weigand SD Smith GE Ivnik RJ Boeve BF Knopman DS Petersen RC Jack CR 2009 Functional magnetic resonance imaging changes in amnestic and nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment during encoding and recognition tasks J Int Neuropsychol Soc 15 372 19402923
241 Machulda MM Ward HA Borowski B Gunter JL Cha RH O’Brien PC Petersen RC Boeve BF Knopman D Tang-Wai DF Ivnik RJ Smith GE Tangalos EG Jack CR 2003 Comparison of memory fMRI response among normal, MCI, and Alzheimer’s patients Neurology 61 500 506 12939424
242 Sperling RA 2003 fMRI studies of associative encoding in young and elderly controls and mild Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 74 44 50 12486265
243 Chhatwal JP Sperling RA 2012 Functional MRI of Mnemonic Networks Across the Spectrum of Normal Aging, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer’s Disease Journal of Alzheimers Disease 31 S155 S167
244 Dickerson BC Miller SL Greve DN Dale AM Albert MS Schacter DL Sperling RA 2007 Prefrontal-hippocampal-fusiform activity during encoding predicts intraindividual differences in free recall ability: An event-related functional-anatomic MRI study Hippocampus 17 1060 1070 17604356
245 Papp KV Amariglio RE Mormino EC Hedden T Dekhytar M Johnson KA Sperling RA Rentz DM 2015 Free and cued memory in relation to biomarker-defined abnormalities in clinically normal older adults and those at risk for Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychologia 73 169 175 26002757
246 Sperling RA Dickerson BC Pihlajamaki M Vannini P LaViolette PS Vitolo OV Hedden T Becker JA Rentz DM Selkoe DJ Johnson KA 2010 Functional Alterations in Memory Networks in Early Alzheimer’s Disease Neuromolecular Med 12 27 43 20069392
247 Pihlajamäki M O’Keefe K Bertram L Tanzi RE Dickerson BC Blacker D Albert MS Sperling RA 2010 Evidence of Altered Posteromedial Cortical fMRI Activity in Subjects at Risk for Alzheimer Disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 24 28 36 19571734
248 Rombouts SARB Goekoop R Stam CJ Barkhof F Scheltens P 2005 Delayed rather than decreased BOLD response as a marker for early Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 26 1078 1085 15961047
249 Celone KA Calhoun VD Dickerson BC Atri A Chua EF Miller SL DePeau K Rentz DM Selkoe DJ Blacker D Albert MS Sperling RA 2006 Alterations in Memory Networks in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease: An Independent Component Analysis J Neurosci 26 10222 10231 17021177
250 Bokde ALW Karmann M Born C Teipel SJ Omerovic M Ewers M Frodl T Meisenzahl E Reiser M Möller H-J Hampel H 2010 Altered Brain Activation During a Verbal Working Memory Task in Subjects with Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment J Alzheimers Dis 21 103 118 20413893
251 Veltman DJ Rombouts SARB Dolan RJ 2003 Maintenance versus manipulation in verbal working memory revisited: an fMRI study Neuroimage 18 247 256 12595179
252 Kochan NA Breakspear M Valenzuela M Slavin MJ Brodaty H Wen W Trollor JN Turner A Crawford JD Sachdev PS 2011 Cortical Responses to a Graded Working Memory Challenge Predict Functional Decline in Mild Cognitive Impairment Biol Psychiatry 70 123 130 21546002
253 Teipel S Ehlers I Erbe A Holzmann C Lau E Hauenstein K Berger C 2014 Structural Connectivity Changes Underlying Altered Working Memory Networks in Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Three-Way Image Fusion Analysis J Neuroimaging 25 634 642 25354135
254 Veltman DJ De Ruiter MB Rombouts SARB Lazeron RHC Barkhof F Van Dyck R Dolan RJ Hans Phaf R 2005 Neurophysiological correlates of increased verbal working memory in high-dissociative participants: a functional MRI study Psychol Med 35 175 185 15841675
255 Kochan NA Breakspear M Slavin MJ Valenzuela M McCraw S Brodaty H Sachdev PS 2010 Functional Alterations in Brain Activation and Deactivation in Mild Cognitive Impairment in Response to a Graded Working Memory Challenge Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 30 553 568 21252551
256 Bokde ALW Dong W Born C Leinsinger G Meindl T Teipel SJ Reiser M Hampel H 2005 Task difficulty in a simultaneous face matching task modulates activity in face fusiform area Cognitive Brain Research 25 701 710 16325382
257 Bokde ALW Teipel SJ Drzezga A Thissen J Bartenstein P Dong W Leinsinger G Born C Schwaiger M Moeller HJ Hampel H 2005 Association between Cognitive Performance and Cortical Glucose Metabolism in Patients with Mild Alzheimer’s Disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 20 352 357 16192725
258 Barch DM Braver TS Nystrom LE Forman SD Noll DC Cohen JD 1997 Dissociating working memory from task difficulty in human prefrontal cortex Neuropsychologia 35 1373 1380 9347483
259 Gould RL Brown RG Owen AM ffytche DH Howard RJ 2003 FMRI BOLD response to increasing task difficulty during successful paired associates learning Neuroimage 20 1006 1019 14568470
260 Grady CL Horwitz B Pietrini P Mentis MJ Ungerleider LG Rapoport SI Haxby JV 1996 Effect of task difficulty on cerebral blood flow during perceptual matching of faces Hum Brain Mapp 4 227 239 20408201
261 Gur RC Gur RE Skolnick BE Resnick SM Silver FL Chawluk J Muenz L Obrist WD Reivich M 1988 Effects of Task Difficulty on Regional Cerebral Blood Flow: Relationships with Anxiety and Performance Psychophysiology 25 392 399 3174905
262 Bokde ALW Lopez-Bayo P Born C Ewers M Meindl T Teipel SJ Faltraco F Reiser MF Möller H-J Hampel H 2010 Alzheimer Disease: Functional Abnormalities in the Dorsal Visual Pathway Radiology 254 219 226 20032154
263 Bokde ALW Lopez-Bayo P Born C Dong W Meindl T Leinsinger G Teipel SJ Faltraco F Reiser M Möller H-J Hampel H 2008 Functional abnormalities of the visual processing system in subjects with mild cognitive impairment: An fMRI study Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 163 248 259
264 Hao J Li K Li K Zhang D Wang W Yang Y Yan B Shan B Zhou X 2005 Visual attention deficits in Alzheimer’s disease: an fMRI study Neurosci Lett 385 18 23 15970381
265 Keightley ML Winocur G Graham SJ Mayberg HS Hevenor SJ Grady CL 2003 An fMRI study investigating cognitive modulation of brain regions associated with emotional processing of visual stimuli Neuropsychologia 41 585 596 12559151
266 Matsumoto E Ohigashi Y Fujimori M Mori E 2000 The Processing of Global and Local Visual Information in Alzheimer’s Disease Behav Neurol 12 119 125 11455049
267 Mentis MJ Alexander GE Krasuski J Pietrini P Furey ML Schapiro MB Rapoport SI 1998 Increasing required neural response to expose abnormal brain function in mild versus moderate or severe Alzheimer’s disease: PET study using parametric visual stimulation Am J Psychiatry 155 785 794 9619151
268 Mentis MJ Horwitz B Grady CL Alexander GE VanMeter JW Maisog JM Pietrini P Schapiro MB Rapoport SI 1996 Visual cortical dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease evaluated with a temporally graded “stress test” during PET Am J Psychiatry 153 32 40 8540589
269 Pietrini P Alexander GE Furey ML Dani A Mentis MJ Horwitz B Guazzelli M Shapiro MB Rapoport SI 2000 Cerebral metabolic response to passive audiovisual stimulation in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and healthy volunteers assessed by PET J Nucl Med 41 575 583 10768555
270 McIntosh AR Grady CL Ungerleider LG Haxby JV Rapoport SI Horwitz B 1994 Network analysis of cortical visual pathways mapped with PET J Neurosci 14 655 666 8301356
271 Pietrini P Furey ML Graff-Radford N Freo U Alexander GE Grady CL Dani A Mentis MJ Schapiro MB 1996 Preferential metabolic involvement of visual cortical areas in a subtype of Alzheimer’s disease: clinical implications Am J Psychiatry 153 1261 1268 8831432
272 Prvulovic D Hubl D Sack AT Melillo L Maurer K Frölich L Lanfermann H Zanella FE Goebel R Linden DEJ Dierks T 2002 Functional Imaging of Visuospatial Processing in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimage 17 1403 1414 12414280
273 Bokde ALW Cavedo E Lopez-Bayo P Lista S Meindl T Born C Galluzzi S Faltraco F Dubois B Teipel SJ Reiser M Möller H-J Hampel H 2016 Effects of rivastigmine on visual attention in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment: A serial functional MRI activation pilot-study Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 249 84 90 26851974
274 Hämäläinen A Pihlajamäki M Tanila H Hänninen T Niskanen E Tervo S Karjalainen PA Vanninen RL Soininen H 2007 Increased fMRI responses during encoding in mild cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 28 1889 1903 16997428
275 Bentley P Driver J Dolan RJ 2008 Cholinesterase inhibition modulates visual and attentional brain responses in Alzheimer’s disease and health Brain 131 409 424 18077465
276 Bentley P Driver J Dolan RJ 2009 Modulation of fusiform cortex activity by cholinesterase inhibition predicts effects on subsequent memory Brain 132 2356 2371 19605530
277 Bentley P Husain M Dolan RJ 2004 Effects of Cholinergic Enhancement on Visual Stimulation, Spatial Attention, and Spatial Working Memory Neuron 41 969 982 15046728
278 Bokde ALW Karmann M Teipel SJ Born C Lieb M Reiser MF Möller H-J Hampel H 2009 Decreased Activation Along the Dorsal Visual Pathway After a 3-Month Treatment With Galantamine in Mild Alzheimer Disease J Clin Psychopharmacol 29 147 156 19512976
279 Balsters JH O’Connell RG Martin MP Galli A Cassidy SM Kilcullen SM Delmonte S Brennan S Meaney JF Fagan AJ Bokde ALW Upton N Lai R Laruelle M Lawlor B Robertson IH 2011 Donepezil Impairs Memory in Healthy Older Subjects: Behavioural, EEG and Simultaneous EEG/fMRI Biomarkers PLoS One 6 e24126 21931653
280 Bentley P Vuilleumier P Thiel CM Driver J Dolan RJ 2003 Cholinergic enhancement modulates neural correlates of selective attention and emotional processing Neuroimage 20 58 70 14527570
281 Handjaras G Ricciardi E Szczepanik J Pietrini P Furey ML 2013 Cholinergic enhancement differentially modulates neural response to encoding during face identity and face location working memory tasks Exp Biol Med 238 999 1008
282 Ricciardi E Handjaras G Bernardi G Pietrini P Furey ML 2013 Cholinergic enhancement reduces functional connectivity and BOLD variability in visual extrastriate cortex during selective attention Neuropharmacology 64 305 313 22906685
283 Pizoli CE Shah MN Snyder AZ Shimony JS Limbrick DD Raichle ME Schlaggar BL Smyth MD 2011 Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 11638 11643
284 Chen S Ross TJ Zhan W Myers CS Chuang K-S Heishman SJ Stein EA Yang Y 2008 Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions Brain Res 1239 141 151 18789314
285 Greicius MD Krasnow B Reiss AL Menon V 2002 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: A network analysis of the default mode hypothesis Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100 253 258
286 Greicius MD Supekar K Menon V Dougherty RF 2008 Resting-State Functional Connectivity Reflects Structural Connectivity in the Default Mode Network Cereb Cortex 19 72 78 18403396
287 Shah LM Cramer JA Ferguson MA Birn RM Anderson JS 2016 Reliability and reproducibility of individual differences in functional connectivity acquired during task and resting state Brain and behavior 6
288 Hutchison RM Womelsdorf T Allen EA Bandettini PA Calhoun VD Corbetta M Della Penna S Duyn JH Glover GH Gonzalez-Castillo J 2013 Dynamic functional connectivity: promise, issues, and interpretations Neuroimage 80 360 378 23707587
289 Power Jonathan D Cohen Alexander L Nelson Steven M Wig Gagan S Barnes Kelly A Church Jessica A Vogel Alecia C Laumann Timothy O Miezin Fran M Schlaggar Bradley L Petersen Steven E 2011 Functional Network Organization of the Human Brain Neuron 72 665 678 22099467
290 Wen W Zhu W He Y Kochan NA Reppermund S Slavin MJ Brodaty H Crawford J Xia A Sachdev P 2011 Discrete Neuroanatomical Networks Are Associated with Specific Cognitive Abilities in Old Age J Neurosci 31 1204 1212 21273405
291 Cole MW Bassett DS Power JD Braver TS Petersen SE 2014 Intrinsic and task-evoked network architectures of the human brain Neuron 83 238 251 24991964
292 Connolly J McNulty JP Boran L Roche RAP Delany D Bokde ALW 2016 Identification of Resting State Networks Involved in Executive Function Brain Connectivity 6 365 374 26935902
293 Sala-Llonch R Peña-Gómez C Arenaza-Urquijo EM Vidal-Piñeiro D Bargalló N Junqué C Bartrés-Faz D 2012 Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance Cortex 48 1187 1196 21872853
294 Wang G-Z Belgard TG Mao D Chen L Berto S Preuss Todd M Lu H Geschwind Daniel H Konopka G 2015 Correspondence between Resting-State Activity and Brain Gene Expression Neuron 88 659 666 26590343
295 Richiardi J Altmann A Milazzo AC Chang C Chakravarty MM Banaschewski T Barker GJ Bokde ALW Bromberg U Buchel C Conrod P Fauth-Buhler M Flor H Frouin V Gallinat J Garavan H Gowland P Heinz A Lemaitre H Mann KF Martinot JL Nees F Paus T Pausova Z Rietschel M Robbins TW Smolka MN Spanagel R Strohle A Schumann G Hawrylycz M Poline JB Greicius MD Consortium I 2015 Correlated gene expression supports synchronous activity in brain networks Science 348 1241 1244 26068849
296 Craddock RC Holtzheimer PE Hu XP Mayberg HS 2009 Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity Magn Reson Med 62 1619 1628 19859933
297 Greicius MD Srivastava G Reiss AL Menon V 2004 Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging: Evidence from functional MRI Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 4637 4642
298 Seeley WW Crawford RK Zhou J Miller BL Greicius MD 2009 Neurodegenerative Diseases Target Large-Scale Human Brain Networks Neuron 62 42 52 19376066
299 Seeley WW Menon V Schatzberg AF Keller J Glover GH Kenna H Reiss AL Greicius MD 2007 Dissociable Intrinsic Connectivity Networks for Salience Processing and Executive Control J Neurosci 27 2349 2356 17329432
300 Zhou J Greicius MD Gennatas ED Growdon ME Jang JY Rabinovici GD Kramer JH Weiner M Miller BL Seeley WW 2010 Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Brain 133 1352 1367 20410145
301 Dopper EG Rombouts SA Jiskoot LC den Heijer T de Graaf JR de Koning I Hammerschlag AR Seelaar H Seeley WW Veer IM van Buchem MA Rizzu P van Swieten JC Structural and functional brain connectivity in presymptomatic familial frontotemporal dementia
302 Thomas JB Brier MR Bateman RJ Snyder AZ Benzinger TL Xiong C Raichle M Holtzman DM Sperling RA Mayeux R Ghetti B Ringman JM Salloway S McDade E Rossor MN Ourselin S Schofield PR Masters CL Martins RN Weiner MW Thompson PM Fox NC Koeppe RA Jack CR Mathis CA Oliver A Blazey TM Moulder K Buckles V Hornbeck R Chhatwal J Schultz AP Goate AM Fagan AM Cairns NJ Marcus DS Morris JC Ances BM 2014 Functional Connectivity in Autosomal Dominant and Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease JAMA Neurology 71 1111 25069482
303 Ward AM Mormino EC Huijbers W Schultz AP Hedden T Sperling RA 2015 Relationships between default-mode network connectivity, medial temporal lobe structure, and age-related memory deficits Neurobiol Aging 36 265 272 25113793
304 Cole MW Ito T Bassett DS Schultz DH 2016 Activity flow over resting-state networks shapes cognitive task activations Nat Neurosci 19 1718 1726 27723746
305 Mennes M Kelly C Zuo XN Di Martino A Biswal BB Castellanos FX Milham MP 2010 Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity Neuroimage 50 1690 1701 20079856
306 Mennes M Zuo X-N Kelly C Di Martino A Zang Y-F Biswal B Castellanos FX Milham MP 2011 Linking inter-individual differences in neural activation and behavior to intrinsic brain dynamics Neuroimage 54 2950 2959 20974260
307 Lorenzi M Beltramello A Mercuri NB Canu E Zoccatelli G Pizzini FB Alessandrini F Cotelli M Rosini S Costardi D Caltagirone C Frisoni GB 2011 Effect of Memantine on Resting State Default Mode Network Activity in Alzheimer’s Disease Drugs Aging 28 205 217 21250762
308 Laumann TO Gordon EM Adeyemo B Snyder AZ Joo SJ Chen M-Y Gilmore AW McDermott KB Nelson SM Dosenbach NU 2015 Functional system and areal organization of a highly sampled individual human brain Neuron 87 657 670 26212711
309 Dubois J Adolphs R 2016 Building a Science of Individual Differences from fMRI Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20 425 443 27138646
310 Babiloni C Lizio R Marzano N Capotosto P Soricelli A Triggiani AI Cordone S Gesualdo L Del Percio C 2016 Brain neural synchronization and functional coupling in Alzheimer’s disease as revealed by resting state EEG rhythms Int J Psychophysiol 103 88 102 25660305
311 Stern Y 2017 An approach to studying the neural correlates of reserve Brain Imaging Behav 11 410 416 27450378
312 Babiloni C Del Percio C Boccardi M Lizio R Lopez S Carducci F Marzano N Soricelli A Ferri R Triggiani AI Prestia A Salinari S Rasser PE Basar E Famà F Nobili F Yener G Emek-Savaş DD Gesualdo L Mundi C Thompson PM Rossini PM Frisoni GB 2015 Occipital sources of resting-state alpha rhythms are related to local gray matter density in subjects with amnesic mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 36 556 570 25442118
313 Dierks T Ihl R Frölich L Maurer K 1993 Dementia of the alzheimer type: Effects on the spontaneous EEG described by dipole sources Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 50 151 162
314 Dierks T Jelic V Pascual-Marqui RD Wahlund L-O Julin P Linden DEJ Maurer K Winblad B Nordberg A 2000 Spatial pattern of cerebral glucose metabolism (PET) correlates with localization of intracerebral EEG-generators in Alzheimer’s disease Clin Neurophysiol 111 1817 1824 11018498
315 Huang C Wahlund LO Dierks T Julin P Winblad B Jelic V 2000 Discrimination of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment by equivalent EEG sources: a cross-sectional and longitudinal study Clin Neurophysiol 111 1961 1967 11068230
316 Jelic V Johansson SE Almkvist O Shigeta M Julin P Nordberg A Winblad B Wahlund LO 2000 Quantitative electroencephalography in mild cognitive impairment: longitudinal changes and possible prediction of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 21 533 540 10924766
317 Ponomareva NV Selesneva ND Jarikov GA 2003 EEG Alterations in Subjects at High Familial Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropsychobiology 48 152 159 14586166
318 Jeong J 2004 EEG dynamics in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Clin Neurophysiol 115 1490 1505 15203050
319 Babiloni C Binetti G Cassetta E Forno GD Percio CD Ferreri F Ferri R Frisoni G Hirata K Lanuzza B Miniussi C Moretti DV Nobili F Rodriguez G Romani GL Salinari S Rossini PM 2006 Sources of cortical rhythms change as a function of cognitive impairment in pathological aging: a multicenter study Clin Neurophysiol 117 252 268 16377238
320 Reeves RR Struve FA Patrick G 2002 The Effects of Donepezil on Quantitative EEG in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease Clin Electroencephalogr 33 93 96 12025738
321 Brassen S Adler G 2003 Short-term effects of acetylcholinesterase inhibitor treatment on EEG and memory performance in Alzheimer patients: an open, controlled trial Pharmacopsychiatry 36 304 308 14663655
322 Onofrj M Thomas A Iacono D Luciano AL Di Iorio A 2003 The Effects of a Cholinesterase Inhibitor Are Prominent in Patients With Fluctuating Cognition: A Part 3 Study of the Main Mechanism of Cholinesterase Inhibitors in Dementia Clin Neuropharmacol 26 239 251 14520164
323 Kogan EA Korczyn AD Virchovsky RG Klimovizky SS Treves TA Neufeld MY 2001 EEG changes during long-term treatment with donepezil in Alzheimer’s disease patients J Neural Transm 108 1167 1173 11725819
324 Rodriguez G Vitali P de Leo C De Carli F Girtler N Nobili F 2002 Quantitative EEG Changes in Alzheimer Patients during Long-Term Donepezil Therapy Neuropsychobiology 46 49 56 12207147
325 Valladares-Neto DC Buchsbaum MS Evans WJ Nguyen D Nguyen P Siegel BV Stanley J Starr A Guich S Rice D 1995 EEG delta, positron emission tomography, and memory deficit in Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychobiology 31 173 181 7659198
326 Babiloni C Del Percio C Lizio R Noce G Cordone S Lopez S Soricelli A Ferri R Pascarelli MT Nobili F Arnaldi D Aarsland D Orzi F Buttinelli C Giubilei F Onofrj M Stocchi F Stirpe P Fuhr P Gschwandtner U Ransmayr G Caravias G Garn H Sorpresi F Pievani M Frisoni GB D’Antonio F De Lena C Güntekin B Hanoğlu L Başar E Yener G Emek-Savaş DD Triggiani AI Franciotti R De Pandis MF Bonanni L 2017 Abnormalities of cortical neural synchronization mechanisms in patients with dementia due to Alzheimer’s and Lewy body diseases: an EEG study Neurobiol Aging 55 143 158 28454845
327 Adler G Brassen S Jajcevic A 2003 EEG coherence in Alzheimer’s dementia J Neural Transm 110 1051 1058 12928837
328 Anghinah R Kanda PAM Jorge MS Lima EEPD Pascuzzi L Melo ACDEP 2000 Estudo da coerência do eletrencefalograma para a banda de frequência alfa em indivíduos adultos normais e com provável demência do tipo Alzheimer Arq Neuropsiquiatr 58 272 275 10849626
329 Besthorn C Förstl H Geiger-Kabisch C Sattel H Gasser T Schreiter-Gasser U 1994 EEG coherence in Alzheimer disease Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 90 242 245 7511505
330 Dunkin JJ Leuchter AF Newton TF Cook IA 1994 Reduced EEG coherence in dementia: State or trait marker? Biol Psychiatry 35 870 879 8054410
331 Fonseca LC Tedrus GMAS Prandi LR Almeida AM Furlanetto DS 2011 Alzheimer’s disease: relationship between cognitive aspects and power and coherence EEG measures Arq Neuropsiquiatr 69 875 881 22297871
332 Fonseca LC Tedrus GMAS Carvas PN Machado ECFA 2013 Comparison of quantitative EEG between patients with Alzheimer’s disease and those with Parkinson’s disease dementia Clin Neurophysiol 124 1970 1974 23746496
333 Jelic V Julin P Shigeta M Nordberg A Lannfelt L Winblad B Wahlund LO 1997 Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele decreases functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease as measured by EEG coherence J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 63 59 65 9221969
334 Knott V Engeland C Mohr E Mahoney C Ilivitsky V 2000 Acute Nicotine Administration in Alzheimer’s Disease: An Exploratory EEG Study Neuropsychobiology 41 210 220 10828731
335 Leuchter AF 1987 Electroencephalographic Spectra and Coherence in the Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s-Type and Multi-infarct Dementia Arch Gen Psychiatry 44 993 3314770
336 Leuchter AF Newton TF Cook IA Walter DO Rosenberg-Thompson S Lachenbruch PA 1992 CHANGES IN BRAIN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN ALZHEIMER-TYPE AND MULTI-INFARCT DEMENTIA Brain 115 1543 1561 1422803
337 Locatelli T Cursi M Liberati D Franceschi M Comi G 1998 EEG coherence in Alzheimer’s disease Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 106 229 237 9743281
338 Pogarell O 2005 EEG coherence reflects regional corpus callosum area in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 76 109 111 15608007
339 Sloan EP Fenton GW Kennedy NSJ MacLennan JM 1994 Neurophysiology and SPECT cerebral blood flow patterns in dementia Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 91 163 170 7522145
340 Leuchter AF Dunkin JJ Lufkin RB Anzai Y Cook IA Newton TF 1994 Effect of white matter disease on functional connections in the aging brain J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 57 1347 1354 7964810
341 Babiloni C Frisoni GB Vecchio F Pievani M Geroldi C De Carli C Ferri R Vernieri F Lizio R Rossini PM 2010 Global Functional Coupling of Resting EEG Rhythms is Related to White-Matter Lesions Along the Cholinergic Tracts in Subjects with Amnesic Mild Cognitive Impairment J Alzheimers Dis 19 859 871 20157242
342 Sankari Z Adeli H Adeli A 2011 Intrahemispheric, interhemispheric, and distal EEG coherence in Alzheimer’s disease Clin Neurophysiol 122 897 906 21056936
343 Babiloni C Babiloni F Carducci F Cincotti F Vecchio F Cola B Rossi S Miniussi C Rossini PM 2004 Functional Frontoparietal Connectivity During Short-Term Memory as Revealed by High-Resolution EEG Coherence Analysis Behav Neurosci 118 687 697 15301596
344 Stam CJ Nolte G Daffertshofer A 2007 Phase lag index: Assessment of functional connectivity from multi channel EEG and MEG with diminished bias from common sources Hum Brain Mapp 28 1178 1193 17266107
345 de Haan W van der Flier WM Wang H Van Mieghem PFA Scheltens P Stam CJ 2012 Disruption of Functional Brain Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease: What Can We Learn from Graph Spectral Analysis of Resting-State Magnetoencephalography? Brain Connectivity 2 45 55 22480296
346 Vecchio F Miraglia F Marra C Quaranta D Vita MG Bramanti P Rossini PM 2014 Human Brain Networks in Cognitive Decline: A Graph Theoretical Analysis of Cortical Connectivity from EEG Data Journal of Alzheimers Disease 41 113 127
347 Morabito FC Campolo M Labate D Morabito G Bonanno L Bramanti A de Salvo S Marra A Bramanti P 2015 A Longitudinal EEG Study of Alzheimer’s Disease Progression Based on A Complex Network Approach Int J Neural Syst 25 1550005 25655033
348 Drago V Babiloni C Bartres-Faz D Caroli A Bosch B Hensch T Didic M Klafki HW Pievani M Jovicich J Venturi L Spitzer P Vecchio F Schoenknecht P Wiltfang J Redolfi A Forloni G Blin O Irving E Davis C Hardemark HG Frisoni GB 2011 Disease Tracking Markers for Alzheimer’s Disease at the Prodromal (MCI) Stage Journal of Alzheimers Disease 26 159 199
349 Coben LA Danziger W Storandt M 1985 A longitudinal EEG study of mild senile dementia of Alzheimer type: changes at 1 year and at 2.5 years Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 61 101 112 2410219
350 Soininen H Partanen J Laulumaa V Helkala EL Laakso M Riekkinen PJ 1989 Longitudinal EEG spectral analysis in early stage of Alzheimer’s disease Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 72 290 297 2467794
351 Soininen H Partanen J Laulumaa V Pääkkönen A Helkala EL Riekkinen PJ 1991 Serial EEG in Alzheimer’s disease: 3 year follow-up and clinical outcome Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 79 342 348 1718706
352 Babiloni C Bartrés-Faz D Didic M Forloni G Jovicich J Nobili F Payoux P Schönknecht P Wiltfang J Blin O Frisoni G 2013 Cross-sectional clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging, neurophysiological and biochemical characterization of people with mild cognitive impairment in the WP5 PharmaCog/E-ADNI study Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 9 P48
353 Babiloni C Del Percio C Lizio R Marzano N Infarinato F Soricelli A Salvatore E Ferri R Bonforte C Tedeschi G Montella P Baglieri A Rodriguez G Famà F Nobili F Vernieri F Ursini F Mundi C Frisoni GB Rossini PM 2014 Cortical sources of resting state electroencephalographic alpha rhythms deteriorate across time in subjects with amnesic mild cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 35 130 142 23906617
354 Adler G Brassen S 2001 Short-Term Rivastigmine Treatment Reduces EEG Slow-Wave Power in Alzheimer Patients Neuropsychobiology 43 273 276 11340368
355 Balkan S Yaras N Mihci E Dora B Agar A Yargicoglu P 2003 Effect of donepezil on EEG spectral analysis in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neurol Belg 103 164 169 14626697
356 Gianotti LRR Künig G Faber PL Lehmann D Pascual-Marqui RD Kochi K Schreiter-Gasser U 2008 Rivastigmine effects on EEG spectra and three-dimensional LORETA functional imaging in Alzheimer’s disease Psychopharmacology (Berl) 198 323 332 18446328
357 Adler G Brassen S Chwalek K Dieter B Teufel M 2004 Prediction of treatment response to rivastigmine in Alzheimer’s dementia Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 75 292 294
358 Agnoli A Martucci N Manna V Conti L Fioravanti M 1983 Effect of Cholinergic and Anticholinergic Drugs on Short-Term Memory in Alzheimer’s Dementia Clin Neuropharmacol 6 311 324 6661730
359 Alhainen K Partanen J Reinikainen K Laulumaa V Soininen H Airaksinen M Riekkinen P 1991 Discrimination of tetrahydroaminoacridine responders by a single dose pharmaco-EEG in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 127 113 116 1881606
360 Alhainen K Riekkinen PJ 1993 Discrimination of Alzheimer Patients Responding to Cholinesterase Inhibitor Therapy Acta Neurol Scand 88 16 21 8372623
361 Rodriguez G Vitali P Canfora M Calvini P Girtler N De Leo C Piccardo A Nobili F 2004 Quantitative EEG and perfusional single photon emission computed tomography correlation during long-term donepezil therapy in Alzheimer’s disease Clin Neurophysiol 115 39 49 14706467
362 Kai T Asai Y Sakuma K Koeda T Nakashima K 2005 Quantitative electroencephalogram analysis in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Sci 237 89 95 16019033
363 Passero S Rocchi R Vatti G Burgalassi L Battistini N 1995 Quantitative EEG Mapping, Regional Cerebral Blood Flow, and Neuropsychological Function in Alzheimer’s Disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 6 148 156
364 Valladares-Neto DC Buchsbaum MS Evans J Nguyen D Nguyen P Siegel BV Stanley J Starr A Guich S Rice D 2008 EEG Delta, Positron Emission Tomography, and Memory Deficit in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropsychobiology 31 173 181
365 Niedermeyer E 1997 Alpha rhythms as physiological and abnormal phenomena Int J Psychophysiol 26 31 49 9202993
366 Rodriguez G Nobili F Copello F Vitali P Gianelli MV Taddei G Catsafados E Mariani G 1999 99mTc-HMPAO regional cerebral blood flow and quantitative electroencephalography in Alzheimer’s disease: a correlative study J Nucl Med 40 522 529 10210209
367 Fernandez A Arrazola J Maestu F Amo C Gil-Gregorio P Wienbruch C Ortiz T 2003 Correlations of hippocampal atrophy and focal low-frequency magnetic activity in Alzheimer disease: volumetric MR imaging-magnetoencephalographic study AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 24 481 487 12637301
368 Graff-Radford NR Besser LM Crook JE Kukull WA Dickson DW 2016 Neuropathologic differences by race from the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 12 669 677
369 Sarro L Senjem ML Lundt ES Przybelski SA Lesnick TG Graff-Radford J Boeve BF Lowe VJ Ferman TJ Knopman DS Comi G Filippi M Petersen RC Jack CR Kantarci K 2016 Amyloid-β deposition and regional grey matter atrophy rates in dementia with Lewy bodies Brain 139 2740 2750 27452602
370 Hughes SW Crunelli V 2005 Thalamic Mechanisms of EEG Alpha Rhythms and Their Pathological Implications The Neuroscientist 11 357 372 16061522
371 Lorincz ML Crunelli V Hughes SW 2008 Cellular Dynamics of Cholinergically Induced (8 13 Hz) Rhythms in Sensory Thalamic Nuclei In Vitro J Neurosci 28 660 671 18199766
372 Lőrincz ML Kékesi KA Juhász G Crunelli V Hughes SW 2009 Temporal Framing of Thalamic Relay-Mode Firing by Phasic Inhibition during the Alpha Rhythm Neuron 63 683 696 19755110
373 Andersson M Hansson O Minthon L Rosén I Londos E 2008 Electroencephalogram Variability in Dementia with Lewy Bodies, Alzheimer’s Disease and Controls Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 26 284 290 18841014
374 Engedal K Snaedal J Hoegh P Jelic V Bo Andersen B Naik M Wahlund L-O Oeksengaard AR 2015 Quantitative EEG Applying the Statistical Recognition Pattern Method: A Useful Tool in Dementia Diagnostic Workup Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 40 1 12 25895831
375 Garn H Coronel C Waser M Caravias G Ransmayr G 2017 Differential diagnosis between patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease dementia, or dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal dementia, behavioral variant, using quantitative electroencephalographic features J Neural Transm 124 569 581 28243755
376 Dauwan M van der Zande JJ van Dellen E Sommer IEC Scheltens P Lemstra AW Stam CJ 2016 Random forest to differentiate dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring 4 99 106
377 Babiloni C Del Percio C Lizio R Noce G Cordone S Lopez S Soricelli A Ferri R Pascarelli MT Nobili F Arnaldi D Famà F Aarsland D Orzi F Buttinelli C Giubilei F Onofrj M Stocchi F Stirpe P Fuhr P Gschwandtner U Ransmayr G Caravias G Garn H Sorpresi F Pievani M D’Antonio F De Lena C Güntekin B Hanoğlu L Başar E Yener G Emek-Savaş DD Triggiani AI Franciotti R Frisoni GB Bonanni L De Pandis MF 2017 Abnormalities of Cortical Neural Synchronization Mechanisms in Subjects with Mild Cognitive Impairment due to Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases: An EEG Study J Alzheimers Dis 59 339 358 28621693
378 Rossini PM Del Percio C Pasqualetti P Cassetta E Binetti G Dal Forno G Ferreri F Frisoni G Chiovenda P Miniussi C Parisi L Tombini M Vecchio F Babiloni C 2006 Conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s disease is predicted by sources and coherence of brain electroencephalography rhythms Neuroscience 143 793 803 17049178
379 van der Hiele K Bollen ELEM Vein AA Reijntjes RHAM Westendorp RGJ van Buchem MA Middelkoop HAM van Dijk JG 2008 EEG Markers of Future Cognitive Performance in the Elderly J Clin Neurophysiol 25 83 89 18340274
380 Luckhaus C Grass-Kapanke B Blaeser I Ihl R Supprian T Winterer G Zielasek J Brinkmeyer J 2008 Quantitative EEG in progressingvsstable mild cognitive impairment (MCI): results of a 1-year follow-up study Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 23 1148 1155 18537220
381 Walla P Püregger E Lehrner J Mayer D Deecke L Dal Bianco P 2004 Depth of word processing in Alzheimer patients and normal controls: a magnetoencephalographic (MEG) study J Neural Transm 112 713 730 15480853
382 Garrido MI Kilner JM Stephan KE Friston KJ 2009 The mismatch negativity: A review of underlying mechanisms Clin Neurophysiol 120 453 463 19181570
383 Näätänen R Paavilainen P Rinne T Alho K 2007 The mismatch negativity (MMN) in basic research of central auditory processing: A review Clin Neurophysiol 118 2544 2590 17931964
384 Cheng C-H Wang P-N Hsu W-Y Lin Y-Y 2012 Inadequate inhibition of redundant auditory inputs in Alzheimer’s disease: An MEG study Biol Psychol 89 365 373 22155475
385 Pekkonen E 2000 Mismatch Negativity in Aging and in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases Audiology and Neurotology 5 216 224 10859416
386 Deeny SP Poeppel D Zimmerman JB Roth SM Brandauer J Witkowski S Hearn JW Ludlow AT Contreras-Vidal JL Brandt J Hatfield BD 2008 Exercise, APOE, and working memory: MEG and behavioral evidence for benefit of exercise in epsilon4 carriers Biol Psychol 78 179 187 18395955
387 Maestú F Campo P Gil-Gregorio P Fernández S Fernández A Ortiz T 2006 Medial temporal lobe neuromagnetic hypoactivation and risk for developing cognitive decline in elderly population: A 2-year follow-up study Neurobiol Aging 27 32 37 16298238
388 Stam CJ 2010 Use of magnetoencephalography (MEG) to study functional brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders J Neurol Sci 289 128 134 19729174
389 Raichle ME MacLeod AM Snyder AZ Powers WJ Gusnard DA Shulman GL 2001 A default mode of brain function Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98 676 682
390 Brookes MJ Hale JR Zumer JM Stevenson CM Francis ST Barnes GR Owen JP Morris PG Nagarajan SS 2011 Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: Methodology and comparison with fcMRI Neuroimage 56 1082 1104 21352925
391 Brookes MJ Tewarie PK Hunt BAE Robson SE Gascoyne LE Liddle EB Liddle PF Morris PG 2016 A multi-layer network approach to MEG connectivity analysis Neuroimage 132 425 438 26908313
392 Marzetti L Della Penna S Snyder AZ Pizzella V Nolte G de Pasquale F Romani GL Corbetta M 2013 Frequency specific interactions of MEG resting state activity within and across brain networks as revealed by the multivariate interaction measure Neuroimage 79 172 183 23631996
393 de Pasquale F Della Penna S Snyder AZ Lewis C Mantini D Marzetti L Belardinelli P Ciancetta L Pizzella V Romani GL Corbetta M 2010 Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 6040 6045
394 de Pasquale F Della Penna S Sporns O Romani GL Corbetta M 2015 A Dynamic Core Network and Global Efficiency in the Resting Human Brain Cereb Cortex 26 4015 4033 26347485
395 Tewarie P Hillebrand A van Dijk BW Stam CJ O’Neill GC Van Mieghem P Meier JM Woolrich MW Morris PG Brookes MJ 2016 Integrating cross-frequency and within band functional networks in resting-state MEG: A multi-layer network approach Neuroimage 142 324 336 27498371
396 Sockeel S Schwartz D Pélégrini-Issac M Benali H 2016 Large-Scale Functional Networks Identified from Resting-State EEG Using Spatial ICA PLoS One 11 e0146845 26785116
397 Besga A Ortiz L Fernández A Maestu F Arrazola J Gil-Gregorio P Fuentes M Ortiz T 2010 Structural and Functional Patterns in Healthy Aging, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer Disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 24 1 10 19571730
398 Fernández A Hornero R Mayo A Poza J Gil-Gregorio P Ortiz T 2006 MEG spectral profile in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment Clin Neurophysiol 117 306 314 16386951
399 Fernández A Turrero An Zuluaga P Gil-Gregorio P Maestu F Campo P Ortiz T 2006 IC-P-046 Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 2 S673
400 Fernandez A Turrero A Zuluaga P Gil-Gregorio P del Pozo F Maestu F Moratti S 2013 MEG Delta Mapping Along the Healthy Aging-Alzheimer’s Disease Continuum: Diagnostic Implications Journal of Alzheimers Disease 35 495 507
401 de Haan W Stam CJ Jones BF Zuiderwijk I van Dijk BW Scheltens P 2008 P1-388: Resting-state oscillatory brain dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 4 T332 T333
402 Osipova D Rantanen K Ahveninen J Ylikoski R Häppölä O Strandberg T Pekkonen E 2006 Source estimation of spontaneous MEG oscillations in mild cognitive impairment Neurosci Lett 405 57 61 16854528
403 Guillon J Attal Y Colliot O La Corte V Dubois B Schwartz D Chavez M De Vico Fallani F 2017 Loss of brain inter-frequency hubs in Alzheimer’s disease Sci Rep 7 28127057
404 López ME Cuesta P Garcés P Castellanos PN Aurtenetxe S Bajo R Marcos A Delgado ML Montejo P López-Pantoja JL Maestú F Fernandez A 2014 MEG spectral analysis in subtypes of mild cognitive impairment AGE 36
405 Zamrini E Maestu F Pekkonen E Funke M Makela J Riley M Bajo R Sudre G Fernandez A Castellanos N del Pozo F Stam CJ van Dijk BW Bagic A Becker JT 2011 Magnetoencephalography as a Putative Biomarker for Alzheimer’s Disease Int J Alzheimers Dis 2011 1 10
406 Hall SD Barnes GR Furlong PL Seri S Hillebrand A 2010 Neuronal network pharmacodynamics of GABAergic modulation in the human cortex determined using pharmaco-magnetoencephalography Hum Brain Mapp 31 581 594 19937723
407 Muthukumaraswamy SD 2014 The use of magnetoencephalography in the study of psychopharmacology (pharmaco-MEG) Journal of Psychopharmacology 28 815 829 24920134
408 Cuesta P Barabash A Aurtenetxe S Garces P Lopez ME Bajo R Llanero-Luque M Ancin I Cabranes JA Marcos A Sancho M Nakamura A Maestu F Fernandez A 2015 Source Analysis of Spontaneous Magnetoencephalograpic Activity in Healthy Aging and Mild Cognitive Impairment: Influence of Apolipoprotein E Polymorphism Journal of Alzheimers Disease 43 259 273
409 López ME Turrero A Cuesta P López-Sanz D Bruña R Marcos A Gil P Yus M Barabash A Cabranes JA Maestú F Fernández A 2016 Searching for Primary Predictors of Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer’s Disease: A Multivariate Follow-Up Study J Alzheimers Dis 52 133 143 27060953
410 Deeb W Giordano JJ Rossi PJ Mogilner AY Gunduz A Judy JW Klassen BT Butson CR Van Horne C Deny D Dougherty DD Rowell D Gerhardt GA Smith GS Ponce FA Walker HC Bronte-Stewart HM Mayberg HS Chizeck HJ Langevin J-P Volkmann J Ostrem JL Shute JB Jimenez-Shahed J Foote KD Wagle Shukla A Rossi MA Oh M Pourfar M Rosenberg PB Silburn PA de Hemptine C Starr PA Denison T Akbar U Grill WM Okun MS 2016 Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Deep Brain Stimulation Think Tank: A Review of Emerging Issues and Technologies Front Integr Neurosci 10 26973477
411 Bick SKB Eskandar EN 2016 Neuromodulation for restoring memory Neurosurg Focus 40 E5
412 Suthana N Haneef Z Stern J Mukamel R Behnke E Knowlton B Fried I 2012 Memory Enhancement and Deep-Brain Stimulation of the Entorhinal Area N Engl J Med 366 502 510 22316444
413 Kuhn J Hardenacke K Lenartz D Gruendler T Ullsperger M Bartsch C Mai J Zilles K Bauer A Matusch A 2015 Deep brain stimulation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Alzheimer’s dementia Mol Psychiatry 20 353 360 24798585
414 Laxton AW Tang-Wai DF McAndrews MP Zumsteg D Wennberg R Keren R Wherrett J Naglie G Hamani C Smith GS Lozano AM 2010 A phase I trial of deep brain stimulation of memory circuits in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 68 521 534 20687206
415 Fontaine D Deudon A Lemaire JJ Darcourt J Paquis P Robert P 2012 Traitement symptomatique des troubles mnésiques de la maladie d’Alzheimer par stimulation électrique chronique du fornix dans l’hypothalamus Neurochirurgie 58 411
416 Sankar T Chakravarty MM Bescos A Lara M Obuchi T Laxton AW McAndrews MP Tang-Wai DF Workman CI Smith GS Lozano AM 2015 Deep Brain Stimulation Influences Brain Structure in Alzheimer’s Disease Brain Stimulation 8 645 654 25814404
417 Ponce FA Asaad W Foote KD Anderson WS Cosgrove R Baltuch GH Beasley KD Reymers DE Oh ES Targum SD Smith G lyketsos CG Lozano AM 2015 130 Bilateral Fornix Deep Brain Stimulation for Alzheimer Disease Neurosurgery 62 207
418 Smith GS Laxton AW Tang-Wai DF McAndrews MP Diaconescu AO Workman CI Lozano AM 2012 Increased Cerebral Metabolism After 1 Year of Deep Brain Stimulation in Alzheimer Disease Arch Neurol 69
419 Ponce FA Asaad WF Foote KD Anderson WS Rees Cosgrove G Baltuch GH Beasley K Reymers DE Oh ES Targum SD Smith GS Lyketsos CG Lozano AM for The ARG 2016 Bilateral deep brain stimulation of the fornix for Alzheimer’s disease: surgical safety in the ADvance trial J Neurosurg 125 75 84 26684775
420 Lozano AM Fosdick L Chakravarty MM Leoutsakos J-M Munro C Oh E Drake KE Lyman CH Rosenberg PB Anderson WS 2016 A phase II study of fornix deep brain stimulation in mild Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 54 777 787 27567810
421 Gonsalvez I Baror R Fried P Santarnecchi E Pascual-Leone A 2017 Therapeutic noninvasive brain stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease Current Alzheimer research 14 362 376 27697061
422 Caliandro P Padua L Rossi A Rossini PM Stalberg E Feurra M Ulivelli M Bartalini S Giannini F Rossi S 2014 Jitter of Corticospinal Neurons During Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation. Method and Possible Clinical Implications Brain Stimulation 7 580 586 25047827
423 Wagner T Fregni F Fecteau S Grodzinsky A Zahn M Pascual-Leone A 2007 Transcranial direct current stimulation: A computer-based human model study Neuroimage 35 1113 1124 17337213
424 Lefaucheur J-P André-Obadia N Antal A Ayache SS Baeken C Benninger DH Cantello RM Cincotta M de Carvalho M De Ridder D Devanne H Di Lazzaro V Filipović SR Hummel FC Jääskeläinen SK Kimiskidis VK Koch G Langguth B Nyffeler T Oliviero A Padberg F Poulet E Rossi S Rossini PM Rothwell JC Schönfeldt-Lecuona C Siebner HR Slotema CW Stagg CJ Valls-Sole J Ziemann U Paulus W Garcia-Larrea L 2014 Evidence-based guidelines on the therapeutic use of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) Clin Neurophysiol 125 2150 2206 25034472
425 Lefaucheur J-P Antal A Ayache SS Benninger DH Brunelin J Cogiamanian F Cotelli M De Ridder D Ferrucci R Langguth B Marangolo P Mylius V Nitsche MA Padberg F Palm U Poulet E Priori A Rossi S Schecklmann M Vanneste S Ziemann U Garcia-Larrea L Paulus W 2017 Evidence-based guidelines on the therapeutic use of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) Clin Neurophysiol 128 56 92 27866120
426 Ridding MC Rothwell JC 2007 Is there a future for therapeutic use of transcranial magnetic stimulation? Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8 559 567 17565358
427 Ahmed MA Darwish ES Khedr EM El serogy YM Ali AM 2011 Effects of low versus high frequencies of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on cognitive function and cortical excitability in Alzheimer’s dementia J Neurol 259 83 92 21671144
428 Rabey JM Dobronevsky E Aichenbaum S Gonen O Marton RG Khaigrekht M 2013 Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with cognitive training is a safe and effective modality for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized, double-blind study J Neural Transm (Vienna) 120 813 819 23076723
429 Rabey JM Dobronevsky E 2016 Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) combined with cognitive training is a safe and effective modality for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: clinical experience J Neural Transm 123 1449 1455 27631152
430 Toschi N Keck ME Welt T Guerrisi M 2012 Quantifying uncertainty in Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation - A high resolution simulation study in ICBM space Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2012 1218 1221 23366117
431 Toschi N Welt T Guerrisi M Keck ME 2009 Transcranial magnetic stimulation in heterogeneous brain tissue: clinical impact on focality, reproducibility and true sham stimulation J Psychiatr Res 43 255 264 18514227
432 Toschi N Welt T Guerrisi M Keck ME 2008 A reconstruction of the conductive phenomena elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation in heterogeneous brain tissue Phys Med 24 80 86 18296093
433 Tatti E Rossi S Innocenti I Rossi A Santarnecchi E 2016 Non-invasive brain stimulation of the aging brain: State of the art and future perspectives Ageing Research Reviews 29 66 89 27221544
434 Goutagny R Gu N Cavanagh C Jackson J Chabot J-G Quirion R Krantic S Williams S 2013 Alterations in hippocampal network oscillations and theta-gamma coupling arise before Aβ overproduction in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Eur J Neurosci 37 1896 1902 23773058
435 Iaccarino HF Singer AC Martorell AJ Rudenko A Gao F Gillingham TZ Mathys H Seo J Kritskiy O Abdurrob F Adaikkan C Canter RG Rueda R Brown EN Boyden ES Tsai L-H 2016 Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and modifies microglia Nature 540 230 235 27929004
436 Musaeus CS Shafi MM Santarnecchi E Herman ST Press DZ 2017 Levetiracetam Alters Oscillatory Connectivity in Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 58 1065 1076 28527204
437 Antal A Alekseichuk I Bikson M Brockmöller J Brunoni AR Chen R Cohen LG Dowthwaite G Ellrich J Flöel A Fregni F George MS Hamilton R Haueisen J Herrmann CS Hummel FC Lefaucheur JP Liebetanz D Loo CK McCaig CD Miniussi C Miranda PC Moliadze V Nitsche MA Nowak R Padberg F Pascual-Leone A Poppendieck W Priori A Rossi S Rossini PM Rothwell J Rueger MA Ruffini G Schellhorn K Siebner HR Ugawa Y Wexler A Ziemann U Hallett M Paulus W 2017 Low intensity transcranial electric stimulation: Safety, ethical, legal regulatory and application guidelines Clin Neurophysiol 128 1774 1809 28709880
438 Fröhlich F McCormick DA 2010 Endogenous Electric Fields May Guide Neocortical Network Activity Neuron 67 129 143 20624597
439 Reato D Rahman A Bikson M Parra LC 2010 Low-Intensity Electrical Stimulation Affects Network Dynamics by Modulating Population Rate and Spike Timing J Neurosci 30 15067 15079 21068312
440 Feurra M Bianco G Del Testa M Santarnecchi E Rossi A Rossi S 2011 P14.21 Frequency-dependent tuning of human motor system induced by transcranial oscillatory potentials Clin Neurophysiol 122 S126
441 Feurra M Pasqualetti P Bianco G Santarnecchi E Rossi A Rossi S 2013 State-Dependent Effects of Transcranial Oscillatory Currents on the Motor System: What You Think Matters J Neurosci 33 17483 17489 24174681
442 Santarnecchi E Polizzotto Nicola R Godone M Giovannelli F Feurra M Matzen L Rossi A Rossi S 2013 Frequency-Dependent Enhancement of Fluid Intelligence Induced by Transcranial Oscillatory Potentials Curr Biol 23 1449 1453 23891115
443 Santarnecchi E Muller T Rossi S Sarkar A Polizzotto NR Rossi A Cohen Kadosh R 2016 Individual differences and specificity of prefrontal gamma frequency-tACS on fluid intelligence capabilities Cortex 75 33 43 26707084
444 Santarnecchi E Biasella A Tatti E Rossi A Prattichizzo D Rossi S 2017 High-gamma oscillations in the motor cortex during visuo-motor coordination: A tACS interferential study Brain Res Bull 131 47 54 28322886
445 Jack CR Wiste HJ Weigand SD Therneau TM Lowe VJ Knopman DS Gunter JL Senjem ML Jones DT Kantarci K Machulda MM Mielke MM Roberts RO Vemuri P Reyes DA Petersen RC 2017 Defining imaging biomarker cut points for brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 205 216
446 Foster NL Heidebrink JL Clark CM Jagust WJ Arnold SE Barbas NR DeCarli CS Scott Turner R Koeppe RA Higdon R Minoshima S 2007 FDG-PET improves accuracy in distinguishing frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Brain 130 2616 2635 17704526
447 Lehmann M Ghosh PM Madison C Laforce R Jr Corbetta-Rastelli C Weiner MW Greicius MD Seeley WW Gorno-Tempini ML Rosen HJ 2013 Diverging patterns of amyloid deposition and hypometabolism in clinical variants of probable Alzheimer’s disease Brain 136 844 858 23358601
448 Dowling NM Johnson SC Gleason CE Jagust WJ Initiative AsDN 2015 The mediational effects of FDG hypometabolism on the association between cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and neurocognitive function Neuroimage 105 357 368 25450107
449 Morbelli S Perneczky R Drzezga A Frisoni GB Caroli A van Berckel BNM Ossenkoppele R Guedj E Didic M Brugnolo A Naseri M Sambuceti G Pagani M Nobili F 2013 Metabolic Networks Underlying Cognitive Reserve in Prodromal Alzheimer Disease: A European Alzheimer Disease Consortium Project J Nucl Med 54 894 902 23591639
450 Chételat G Ossenkoppele R Villemagne VL Perrotin A Landeau B Mézenge F Jagust WJ Dore V Miller BL Egret S 2016 Atrophy, hypometabolism and clinical trajectories in patients with amyloid-negative Alzheimer’s disease Brain 139 2528 2539 27357349
451 Tan RH Kril JJ Yang Y Tom N Hodges JR Villemagne VL Rowe CC Leyton CE Kwok JBJ Ittner LM Halliday GM 2017 Assessment of amyloid β in pathologically confirmed frontotemporal dementia syndromes Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring 9 10 20
452 Ossenkoppele R Jansen WJ Rabinovici GD Knol DL van der Flier WM van Berckel BNM Scheltens P Visser PJ Verfaillie SCJ Zwan MD Adriaanse SM Lammertsma AA Barkhof F Jagust WJ Miller BL Rosen HJ Landau SM Villemagne VL Rowe CC Lee DY Na DL Seo SW Sarazin M Roe CM Sabri O Barthel H Koglin N Hodges J Leyton CE Vandenberghe R van Laere K Drzezga A Forster S Grimmer T Sánchez-Juan P Carril JM Mok V Camus V Klunk WE Cohen AD Meyer PT Hellwig S Newberg A Frederiksen KS Fleisher AS Mintun MA Wolk DA Nordberg A Rinne JO Chételat G Lleo A Blesa R Fortea J Madsen K Rodrigue KM Brooks DJ 2015 Prevalence of Amyloid PET Positivity in Dementia Syndromes JAMA 313 1939 25988463
453 Brosch JR Farlow MR Risacher SL Apostolova LG 2016 Tau Imaging in Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnosis and Clinical Trials Neurotherapeutics 14 62 68
454 Janssen B Vugts DJ Funke U Molenaar GT Kruijer PS van Berckel BNM Lammertsma AA Windhorst AD 2016 Imaging of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease, multiple sclerosis and stroke: Recent developments in positron emission tomography Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease 1862 425 441 26643549
455 Hamelin L Lagarde J Dorothée G Leroy C Labit M Comley RA De Souza LC Corne H Dauphinot L Bertoux M 2016 Early and protective microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease: a prospective study using 18 F-DPA-714 PET imaging Brain 139 1252 1264 26984188
456 Hiraoka K Okamura N Funaki Y Hayashi A Tashiro M Hisanaga K Fujii T Takeda A Yanai K Iwata R Mori E 2012 Cholinergic Deficit and Response to Donepezil Therapy in Parkinson’s Disease with Dementia Eur Neurol 68 137 143 22832236
457 Ziebell M Andersen BB Pinborg LH Knudsen GM Stokholm J Thomsen G Karlsborg M Hogh P Mork ML Hasselbalch SG 2013 Striatal Dopamine Transporter Binding Does Not Correlate with Clinical Severity in Dementia with Lewy Bodies J Nucl Med 54 1072 1076 23637201
458 Chang LYL Lowe J Ardiles A Lim J Grey AC Robertson K Danesh-Meyer H Palacios AG Acosta ML 2014 Alzheimer’s disease in the human eye. Clinical tests that identify ocular and visual information processing deficit as biomarkers Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 251 261
459 Sadun AA Borchert M DeVita E Hinton DR Bassi CJ 1987 Assessment of Visual Impairment in Patients With Alzheimer’s Disease Am J Ophthalmol 104 113 120 3618708
460 Gilmore GC Wenk HE Naylor LA Koss E 1994 Motion Perception and Alzheimer’s Disease J Gerontol 49 P52 P57 8126359
461 Trick GL Trick LR Morris P Wolf M 1995 Visual field loss in senile dementia of the Alzheimer’s type Neurology 45 68 74 7824139
462 Risacher SL WuDunn D Pepin SM MaGee TR McDonald BC Flashman LA Wishart HA Pixley HS Rabin LA Pare N Englert JJ Schwartz E Curtain JR West JD O’Neill DP Santulli RB Newman RW Saykin AJ 2013 Visual contrast sensitivity in Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment, and older adults with cognitive complaints Neurobiol Aging 34 1133 1144 23084085
463 Bambo MP Garcia-Martin E Otin S Pinilla J Larrosa JM Polo V Pablo LE 2015 Visual function and retinal nerve fibre layer degeneration in patients with Alzheimer disease: correlations with severity of dementia Acta Ophthalmol 93 e507 508
464 Tzekov R Mullan M 2014 Vision function abnormalities in Alzheimer disease Surv Ophthalmol 59 414 433 24309127
465 Ju Y-ES McLeland JS Toedebusch CD Xiong C Fagan AM Duntley SP Morris JC Holtzman DM 2013 Sleep Quality and Preclinical Alzheimer Disease JAMA Neurology 70 587 23479184
466 La Morgia C Ross-Cisneros FN Koronyo Y Hannibal J Gallassi R Cantalupo G Sambati L Pan BX Tozer KR Barboni P Provini F Avanzini P Carbonelli M Pelosi A Chui H Liguori R Baruzzi A Koronyo-Hamaoui M Sadun AA Carelli V 2016 Melanopsin retinal ganglion cell loss in Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 79 90 109 26505992
467 Chen J-C Espeland MA Brunner RL Lovato LC Wallace RB Leng X Phillips LS Robinson JG Kotchen JM Johnson KC Manson JE Stefanick ML Sarto GE Mysiw WJ 2016 Sleep duration, cognitive decline, and dementia risk in older women Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 12 21 33
468 Chwiszczuk L Breitve M Hynninen M Gjerstad MD Aarsland D Rongve A 2015 Higher Frequency and Complexity of Sleep Disturbances in Dementia with Lewy Bodies as Compared to Alzheimer’s Disease Neurodegenerative Diseases 16 152 160 26551998
469 Emamian F Khazaie H Tahmasian M Leschziner GD Morrell MJ Hsiung G-YR Rosenzweig I Sepehry AA 2016 The Association Between Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Meta-Analysis Perspective Front Aging Neurosci 8 26858639
470 Katsunuma H Shimizu T Ogawa K Kubo H Ishida H Yoshihama A 1998 Treatment of insomnia by concomitant therapy with Zopiclone and Aniracetam in patients with cerebral infarction, cerebroatrophy, Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 52 198 200 9628149
471 Vitiello MV Borson S 2001 Sleep disturbances in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: epidemiology, pathophysiology and treatment CNS Drugs 15 777 796 11602004
472 Hart NJ Koronyo Y Black KL Koronyo-Hamaoui M 2016 Ocular indicators of Alzheimer’s: exploring disease in the retina Acta Neuropathol 132 767 787 27645291
473 Armstrong R Kergoat H 2015 Oculo-visual changes and clinical considerations affecting older patients with dementia Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 35 352 376 26094831
474 Bayhan HA Aslan Bayhan S Celikbilek A Tanik N Gurdal C 2015 Evaluation of the chorioretinal thickness changes in Alzheimer’s disease using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography Clin Exp Ophthalmol 43 145 151 24995484
475 Blanks JC Hinton DR Sadun AA Miller CA 1989 Retinal ganglion cell degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res 501 364 372 2819446
476 Blanks JC Schmidt SY Torigoe Y Porrello KV Hinton DR Blanks RHI 1996 Retinal pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. II. Regional neuron loss and glial changes in GCL Neurobiol Aging 17 385 395 8725900
477 Coppola G Di Renzo A Ziccardi L Martelli F Fadda A Manni G Barboni P Pierelli F Sadun AA Parisi V 2015 Optical Coherence Tomography in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Meta-Analysis PLoS One 10 e0134750 26252902
478 Feke GT Hyman BT Stern RA Pasquale LR 2015 Retinal blood flow in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring 1 144 151
479 Frost S Kanagasingam Y Sohrabi H Vignarajan J Bourgeat P Salvado O Villemagne V Rowe CC Lance Macaulay S Szoeke C Ellis KA Ames D Masters CL Rainey-Smith S Martins RN 2013 Retinal vascular biomarkers for early detection and monitoring of Alzheimer’s disease Translational Psychiatry 3 e233 23443359
480 Gharbiya M Trebbastoni A Parisi F Manganiello S Cruciani F D’Antonio F De Vico U Imbriano L Campanelli A De Lena C 2014 Choroidal thinning as a new finding in Alzheimer’s disease: evidence from enhanced depth imaging spectral domain optical coherence tomography J Alzheimers Dis 40 907 917 24577467
481 Goldstein LE Muffat JA Cherny RA Moir RD Ericsson MH Huang X Mavros C Coccia JA Faget KY Fitch KA Masters CL Tanzi RE Chylack LT Bush AI 2003 Cytosolic β-amyloid deposition and supranuclear cataracts in lenses from people with Alzheimer’s disease The Lancet 361 1258 1265
482 Hinton DR Sadun AA Blanks JC Miller CA 1986 Optic-Nerve Degeneration in Alzheimer’s Disease N Engl J Med 315 485 487 3736630
483 Kergoat H Kergoat M-J Justino L Chertkow H Robillard A Bergman H 2001 An evaluation of the retinal nerve fiber layer thickness by scanning laser polarimetry in individuals with dementia of the Alzheimer type Acta Ophthalmol Scand 79 187 191 11284761
484 Kirbas S Turkyilmaz K Anlar O Tufekci A Durmus M 2013 Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer Thickness in Patients With Alzheimer Disease J Neuroophthalmol 33 58 61 22918296
485 Koronyo Y Biggs D Barron E Boyer DS Pearlman JA Au WJ Kile SJ Blanco A Fuchs D-T Ashfaq A Frautschy S Cole GM Miller CA Hinton DR Verdooner SR Black KL Koronyo-Hamaoui M 2017 Retinal amyloid pathology and proof-of-concept imaging trial in Alzheimer’s disease JCI Insight 2
486 Paquet C Boissonnot M Roger F Dighiero P Gil R Hugon J 2007 Abnormal retinal thickness in patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 420 97 99 17543991
487 Patton N Aslam T MacGillivray T Pattie A Deary IJ Dhillon B 2005 Retinal vascular image analysis as a potential screening tool for cerebrovascular disease: a rationale based on homology between cerebral and retinal microvasculatures J Anat 206 319 348 15817102
488 Sadun AA Bassi CJ 1990 Optic Nerve Damage in Alzheimer’s Disease Ophthalmology 97 9 17 2314849
489 Schön C Hoffmann NA Ochs SM Burgold S Filser S Steinbach S Seeliger MW Arzberger T Goedert M Kretzschmar HA Schmidt B Herms J 2012 Long-Term In Vivo Imaging of Fibrillar Tau in the Retina of P301S Transgenic Mice PLoS One 7 e53547 23300938
490 Koronyo-Hamaoui M Koronyo Y Ljubimov AV Miller CA Ko MK Black KL Schwartz M Farkas DL 2011 Identification of amyloid plaques in retinas from Alzheimer’s patients and noninvasive in vivo optical imaging of retinal plaques in a mouse model Neuroimage 54 S204 S217 20550967
491 Berisha F Feke GT Trempe CL McMeel JW Schepens CL 2007 Retinal Abnormalities in Early Alzheimer’s Disease Investigative Opthalmology &amp; Visual Science 48 2285
492 Cheung CY-l Ong YT Ikram MK Ong SY Li X Hilal S Catindig J-AS Venketasubramanian N Yap P Seow D Chen CP Wong TY 2014 Microvascular network alterations in the retina of patients with Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 135 142
493 Curcio CA Drucker DN 2004 Retinal ganglion cells in Alzheimer’s disease and aging Ann Neurol 33 248 257
494 Frost S Martins RN Kanagasingam Y 2010 Ocular Biomarkers for Early Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 22 1 16
495 Gao L Liu Y Li X Bai Q Liu P 2015 Abnormal retinal nerve fiber layer thickness and macula lutea in patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Arch Gerontol Geriatr 60 162 167 25459918
496 Guo L Duggan J Cordeiro M 2010 Alzheimers Disease and Retinal Neurodegeneration Current Alzheimer Research 7 3 14 20205667
497 Kapasi A Schneider JA 2016 Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment, clinical Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia in older persons Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease 1862 878 886 26769363
498 Kromer R Serbecic N Hausner L Froelich L Aboul-Enein F Beutelspacher SC 2014 Detection of Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer Defects in Alzheimer’s Disease Using SD-OCT Frontiers in Psychiatry 5 24478733
499 Liu D Zhang L Li Z Zhang X Wu Y Yang H Min B Zhang X Ma D Lu Y 2015 Thinner changes of the retinal nerve fiber layer in patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease BMC Neurol 15 25879483
500 Marziani E Pomati S Ramolfo P Cigada M Giani A Mariani C Staurenghi G 2013 Evaluation of Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer and Ganglion Cell Layer Thickness in Alzheimer’s Disease Using Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence Tomography Investigative Opthalmology &amp; Visual Science 54 5953
501 Moreno-Ramos T Benito-Leon J Villarejo A Bermejo-Pareja F 2013 Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer Thinning in Dementia Associated with Parkinson’s Disease, Dementia with Lewy Bodies, and Alzheimer’s Disease Journal of Alzheimers Disease 34 659 664
502 Moschos MM Markopoulos I Chatziralli I Rouvas A Papageorgiou SG Ladas I Vassilopoulos D 2012 Structural and Functional Impairment of the Retina and Optic Nerve in Alzheimer’s Disease Current Alzheimer Research 9 782 788 22698074
503 Nolan JM Loskutova E Howard AN Moran R Mulcahy R Stack J Bolger M Dennison J Akuffo KO Owens N Thurnham DI Beatty S 2014 Macular Pigment, Visual Function, and Macular Disease among Subjects with Alzheimer’s Disease: An Exploratory Study Journal of Alzheimers Disease 42 1191 1202
504 Parisi V Restuccia R Fattapposta F Mina C Bucci MG Pierelli F 2001 Morphological and functional retinal impairment in Alzheimer’s disease patients Clin Neurophysiol 112 1860 1867 11595144
505 Shi ZY Wu YJ Wang MJ Cao J Feng W Cheng Y Li CB Shen Y 2014 Greater Attenuation of Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer Thickness in Alzheimer’s Disease Patients Journal of Alzheimers Disease 40 277 283
506 Trick GL Barris MC Bickler-Bluth M 1989 Abnormal pattern electroretinograms in patients with senile dementia of the alzheimer type Ann Neurol 26 226 231 2774510
507 Williams MA McGowan AJ Cardwell CR Cheung CY Craig D Passmore P Silvestri G Maxwell AP McKay GJ 2015 Retinal microvascular network attenuation in Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring 1 229 235
508 Purves D Augustine GJ Fitzpatrick D Katz LC LaMantia A-S McNamara JO Williams SM 2001 The Retina Sinauer Associates Sunderland (MA)
509 Byerly MS Blackshaw S 2009 Vertebrate retina and hypothalamus development Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 1 380 389 20836003
510 Trost A Lange S Schroedl F Bruckner D Motloch KA Bogner B Kaser-Eichberger A Strohmaier C Runge C Aigner L Rivera FJ Reitsamer HA 2016 Brain and Retinal Pericytes: Origin, Function and Role Front Cell Neurosci 10 26869882
511 Vecino E Rodriguez FD Ruzafa N Pereiro X Sharma SC 2016 Glia–neuron interactions in the mammalian retina Prog Retin Eye Res 51 1 40 26113209
512 Morin PJ Abraham CR Amaratunga A Johnson RJ Huber G Sandell JH Fine RE 2006 Amyloid Precursor Protein Is Synthesized by Retinal Ganglion Cells, Rapidly Transported to the Optic Nerve Plasma Membrane and Nerve Terminals, and Metabolized J Neurochem 61 464 473
513 Cai J Qi X Kociok N Skosyrski S Emilio A Ruan Q Han S Liu L Chen Z Bowes Rickman C Golde T Grant MB Saftig P Serneels L de Strooper B Joussen AM Boulton ME 2012 β-Secretase (BACE1) inhibition causes retinal pathology by vascular dysregulation and accumulation of age pigment EMBO Mol Med 4 980 991 22903875
514 Li L Luo J Chen D Tong JB Zeng LP Cao YQ Xiang J Luo XG Shi JM Wang H Huang JF 2016 BACE1 in the retina: a sensitive biomarker for monitoring early pathological changes in Alzheimer’s disease Neural Regeneration Research 11 447 453 27127484
515 Alexandrov PN Pogue A Bhattacharjee S Lukiw WJ 2011 Retinal amyloid peptides and complement factor H in transgenic models of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroreport 22 623 627 21734608
516 Tsai Y Lu B Ljubimov AV Girman S Ross-Cisneros FN Sadun AA Svendsen CN Cohen RM Wang S 2014 Ocular Changes in TgF344-AD Rat Model of Alzheimer’s Disease Investigative Opthalmology &amp; Visual Science 55 523
517 Ho CY Troncoso JC Knox D Stark W Eberhart CG 2014 Beta-Amyloid, Phospho-Tau and Alpha-Synuclein Deposits Similar to Those in the Brain Are Not Identified in the Eyes of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Disease Patients Brain Pathol 24 25 32 23714377
518 Kesler A Vakhapova V Korczyn AD Naftaliev E Neudorfer M 2011 Retinal thickness in patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Clin Neurol Neurosurg 113 523 526 21454010
519 Lu Y Li Z Zhang X Ming B Jia J Wang R Ma D 2010 Retinal nerve fiber layer structure abnormalities in early Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence in optical coherence tomography Neurosci Lett 480 69 72 20609426
520 Cordeiro MF Guo L Luong V Harding G Wang W Jones HE Moss SE Sillito AM Fitzke FW 2004 Real-time imaging of single nerve cell apoptosis in retinal neurodegeneration Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 13352 13356
521 Du LY Chang LYL Ardiles AO Tapia-Rojas C Araya J Inestrosa NC Palacios AG Acosta ML 2015 Alzheimer’s Disease-Related Protein Expression in the Retina of Octodon degus PLoS One 10 e0135499 26267479
522 Dutescu RM Li Q-X Crowston J Masters CL Baird PN Culvenor JG 2009 Amyloid precursor protein processing and retinal pathology in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology 247 1213 1221
523 Edwards MM Rodríguez JJ Gutierrez-Lanza R Yates J Verkhratsky A Lutty GA 2014 Retinal macroglia changes in a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Exp Eye Res 127 252 260 25149907
524 Gao L Chen X Tang Y Zhao J Li Q Fan X Xu H Yin ZQ 2015 Neuroprotective effect of memantine on the retinal ganglion cells of APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice and its immunomodulatory mechanisms Exp Eye Res 135 47 58 25912193
525 Gupta VK Chitranshi N Gupta VB Golzan M Dheer Y Wall RV Georgevsky D King AE Vickers JC Chung R Graham S 2016 Amyloid β accumulation and inner retinal degenerative changes in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mouse Neurosci Lett 623 52 56 27133194
526 He Y Zhao H Su G 2013 Ginsenoside Rg1 Decreases Neurofibrillary Tangles Accumulation in Retina by Regulating Activities of Neprilysin and PKA in Retinal Cells of AD Mice Model J Mol Neurosci 52 101 106 24287922
527 Koronyo Y Salumbides BC Black KL Koronyo-Hamaoui M 2012 Alzheimer’s Disease in the Retina: Imaging Retinal Aβ Plaques for Early Diagnosis and Therapy Assessment Neurodegenerative Diseases 10 285 293 22343730
528 Liu B Rasool S Yang Z Glabe CG Schreiber SS Ge J Tan Z 2009 Amyloid-peptide vaccinations reduce {beta}-amyloid plaques but exacerbate vascular deposition and inflammation in the retina of Alzheimer’s transgenic mice Am J Pathol 175 2099 2110 19834067
529 More SS Vince R 2015 Hyperspectral Imaging Signatures Detect Amyloidopathy in Alzheimer’s Mouse Retina Well before Onset of Cognitive Decline ACS Chem Neurosci 6 306 315 25354367
530 Ning A Cui J To E Ashe KH Matsubara J 2008 Amyloid-β Deposits Lead to Retinal Degeneration in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer Disease Investigative Opthalmology &amp; Visual Science 49 5136
531 Park SW Kim JH Mook-Jung I Kim K-W Park WJ Park KH Kim JH 2014 Intracellular amyloid beta alters the tight junction of retinal pigment epithelium in 5XFAD mice Neurobiol Aging 35 2013 2020 24709310
532 Parthasarathy R Chow KM Derafshi Z Fautsch MP Hetling JR Rodgers DW Hersh LB Pepperberg DR 2015 Reduction of amyloid-beta levels in mouse eye tissues by intra-vitreally delivered neprilysin Exp Eye Res 138 134 144 26142956
533 Perez SE Lumayag S Kovacs B Mufson EJ Xu S 2009 β-Amyloid Deposition and Functional Impairment in the Retina of the APPswe/PS1ΔE9 Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease Investigative Opthalmology &amp; Visual Science 50 793
534 Pogue AI Dua P Hill JM Lukiw WJ 2015 Progressive inflammatory pathology in the retina of aluminum-fed 5xFAD transgenic mice J Inorg Biochem 152 206 209 26213226
535 Williams PA Thirgood RA Oliphant H Frizzati A Littlewood E Votruba M Good MA Williams J Morgan JE 2013 Retinal ganglion cell dendritic degeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 34 1799 1806 23465714
536 Yang Y Shiao C Hemingway JF Jorstad NL Shalloway BR Chang R Keene CD 2013 Suppressed Retinal Degeneration in Aged Wild Type and APPswe/PS1ΔE9 Mice by Bone Marrow Transplantation PLoS One 8 e64246 23750207
537 Zhao H Chang R Che H Wang J Yang L Fang W Xia Y Li N Ma Q Wang X 2013 Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein by calpain regulation in retina of Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mouse Neurosci Lett 551 12 16 23810804
538 Begum AN Jones MR Lim GP Morihara T Kim P Heath DD Rock CL Pruitt MA Yang F Hudspeth B Hu S Faull KF Teter B Cole GM Frautschy SA 2008 Curcumin Structure-Function, Bioavailability, and Efficacy in Models of Neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s Disease J Pharmacol Exp Ther 326 196 208 18417733
539 Dadhaniya P Patel C Muchhara J Bhadja N Mathuria N Vachhani K Soni MG 2011 Safety assessment of a solid lipid curcumin particle preparation: Acute and subchronic toxicity studies Food Chem Toxicol 49 1834 1842 21571027
540 Garcia-Alloza M Borrelli LA Rozkalne A Hyman BT Bacskai BJ 2007 Curcumin labels amyloid pathologyin vivo, disrupts existing plaques, and partially restores distorted neurites in an Alzheimer mouse model J Neurochem 102 1095 1104 17472706
541 Goozee KG Shah TM Sohrabi HR Rainey-Smith SR Brown B Verdile G Martins RN 2015 Examining the potential clinical value of curcumin in the prevention and diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease Br J Nutr 115 449 465 26652155
542 Gota VS Maru GB Soni TG Gandhi TR Kochar N Agarwal MG 2010 Safety and Pharmacokinetics of a Solid Lipid Curcumin Particle Formulation in Osteosarcoma Patients and Healthy Volunteers J Agric Food Chem 58 2095 2099 20092313
543 Kumaraswamy P Sethuraman S Krishnan UM 2013 Mechanistic Insights of Curcumin Interactions with the Core-Recognition Motif of β-Amyloid Peptide J Agric Food Chem 61 3278 3285 23480634
544 Masuda Y Fukuchi M Yatagawa T Tada M Takeda K Irie K Akagi K-i Monobe Y Imazawa T Takegoshi K 2011 Solid-state NMR analysis of interaction sites of curcumin and 42-residue amyloid β-protein fibrils Bioorg Med Chem 19 5967 5974 21924918
545 Mutsuga M Chambers JK Uchida K Tei M Makibuchi T Mizorogi T Takashima A Nakayama H 2012 Binding of Curcumin to Senile Plaques and Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy in the Aged Brain of Various Animals and to Neurofibrillary Tangles in Alzheimer’s Brain J Vet Med Sci 74 51 57 21891973
546 Yang F Lim GP Begum AN Ubeda OJ Simmons MR Ambegaokar SS Chen PP Kayed R Glabe CG Frautschy SA Cole GM 2005 Curcumin inhibits formation of amyloid beta oligomers and fibrils, binds plaques, and reduces amyloid in vivo J Biol Chem 280 5892 5901 15590663
547 Ryu EK Choe YS Lee K-H Choi Y Kim B-T 2006 Curcumin and Dehydrozingerone Derivatives: Synthesis, Radiolabeling, and Evaluation for β-Amyloid Plaque Imaging† J Med Chem 49 6111 6119 17004725
548 Tei M Uchida K Mutsuga M Chambers JK Nakayama H 2012 The Binding of Curcumin to Various Types of Canine Amyloid Proteins J Vet Med Sci 74 481 483 22083083
549 Yanagisawa D Amatsubo T Morikawa S Taguchi H Urushitani M Shirai N Hirao K Shiino A Inubushi T Tooyama I 2011 In vivo detection of amyloid β deposition using 19F magnetic resonance imaging with a 19F-containing curcumin derivative in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 184 120 127 21497641
550 Yanagisawa D Shirai N Amatsubo T Taguchi H Hirao K Urushitani M Morikawa S Inubushi T Kato M Kato F Morino K Kimura H Nakano I Yoshida C Okada T Sano M Wada Y Wada K-n Yamamoto A Tooyama I 2010 Relationship between the tautomeric structures of curcumin derivatives and their Aβ-binding activities in the context of therapies for Alzheimer’s disease Biomaterials 31 4179 4185 20181392
551 Yanagisawa D Taguchi H Yamamoto A Shirai N Hirao K Tooyama I 2011 Curcumin has binding activity to β-amyloid oligomer Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 7 S476 S477
552 Butovsky O Koronyo-Hamaoui M Kunis G Ophir E Landa G Cohen H Schwartz M 2006 Glatiramer acetate fights against Alzheimer’s disease by inducing dendritic-like microglia expressing insulin-like growth factor 1 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 11784 11789
553 Koronyo Y Salumbides BC Sheyn J Pelissier L Li S Ljubimov V Moyseyev M Daley D Fuchs D-T Pham M Black KL Rentsendorj A Koronyo-Hamaoui M 2015 Therapeutic effects of glatiramer acetate and grafted CD115+monocytes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Brain 138 2399 2422 26049087
554 Kayabasi U 2014 Retinal Examination for the Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease International Journal of Ophthalmic &amp; Pathology 03
555 Snyder PJ Johnson LN Lim YY Santos CY Alber J Maruff P Fernández B 2016 Nonvascular retinal imaging markers of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring 4 169 178
556 Einarsdottir AB Hardarson SH Kristjansdottir JV Bragason DT Snaedal J Stefánsson E 2015 Retinal Oximetry Imaging in Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 49 79 83
557 Stefánsson E Olafsdottir OB Einarsdottir AB Eliasdottir TS Eysteinsson T Vehmeijer W Vandewalle E Bek T Hardarson SH 2017 Retinal Oximetry Discovers Novel Biomarkers in Retinal and Brain Diseases Investigative Opthalmology &amp; Visual Science 58 BIO227
558 Archibald NK Clarke MP Mosimann UP Burn DJ 2009 The retina in Parkinson’s disease Brain 132 1128 1145 19336464
559 Bodis-Wollner I Kozlowski PB Glazman S Miri S 2014 α-synuclein in the inner retina in parkinson disease Ann Neurol 75 964 966 24816946
560 Calabresi PA Balcer LJ Frohman EM 2010 Retinal pathology in multiple sclerosis: insight into the mechanisms of neuronal pathology Brain 133 1575 1577 20511281
561 Ong YT De Silva DA Cheung CY Chang HM Chen CP Wong MC Wong TY Ikram MK 2013 Microvascular Structure and Network in the Retina of Patients With Ischemic Stroke Stroke 44 2121 2127 23715958
562 Scinto LF Daffner KR Dressler D Ransil BI Rentz D Weintraub S Mesulam M Potter H 1994 A potential noninvasive neurobiological test for Alzheimer’s disease SCIENCE-NEW YORK THEN WASHINGTON- 1051 1051
563 Scinto L Wu C Firla K Daffner K Saroff D Geula C 1999 Focal pathology in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus explains pupillary hypersensitivity in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 97 557 564 10378374
564 Nowak W Pieniazek M Nakayama M Hachol A 2016 Frontiers of Signal Processing (ICFSP), International Conference on IEEE 58 62
565 Granholm E Morris S Galasko D Shults C Rogers E Vukov B 2003 Tropicamide effects on pupil size and pupillary light reflexes in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease Int J Psychophysiol 47 95 115 12568941
566 Durrleman S Pennec X Trouvé A Ayache N 2009 Statistical models of sets of curves and surfaces based on currents Med Image Anal 13 793 808 19679507
567 Durrleman S Prastawa M Charon N Korenberg JR Joshi S Gerig G Trouvé A 2014 Morphometry of anatomical shape complexes with dense deformations and sparse parameters Neuroimage 101 35 49 24973601
568 Gori P Colliot O Marrakchi-Kacem L Worbe Y Routier A Poupon C Hartmann A Ayache N Durrleman S 2015 Lecture Notes in Computer Science Springer International Publishing 275 287
569 Gori P Colliot O Marrakchi-Kacem L Worbe Y Poupon C Hartmann A Ayache N Durrleman S 2017 A Bayesian framework for joint morphometry of surface and curve meshes in multi-object complexes Med Image Anal 35 458 474 27607468
570 Schiratti J-B Allassonniere S Colliot O Durrleman S 2015 Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2404 2412
571 Koval I Schiratti JB Routier A Bacci M Colliot O Allassonnière S Durrleman S 2017 Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2017 Springer International Publishing 451 459
572 Allassonnière S Durrleman S Kuhn E 2015 Bayesian Mixed Effect Atlas Estimation with a Diffeomorphic Deformation Model SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences 8 1367 1395
573 Durrleman S Pennec X Trouvé A Gerig G Ayache N 2009 Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2009 Springer Berlin Heidelberg 297 304
574 Durrleman S Pennec X Trouve A Braga J Gerig G Ayache N 2013 Toward a comprehensive framework for the spatiotemporal statistical analysis of longitudinal shape data Int J Comput Vis 103 22 59 23956495
575 Fishbaugh J Prastawa M Durrleman S Piven J Gerig G 2012 Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2012 Springer Berlin Heidelberg 731 738
576 Fishbaugh J Prastawa M Gerig G Durrleman S 2013 Lecture Notes in Computer Science Springer Berlin Heidelberg 718 729
577 Schiratti JB Allassonnière S Colliot O Durrleman S 2017 A Bayesian mixed-effects model to learn trajectories of changes from repeated manifold-valued observations J Mach Learn Res 3 1 48
578 Cummings JL Morstorf T Zhong K 2014 Alzheimer’s disease drug-development pipeline: few candidates, frequent failures Alzheimers Res Ther 6 37 25024750
579 Cummings J Morstorf T Lee G 2016 Alzheimer’s drug-development pipeline: 2016 Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions 2 222 232
580 Berger SI Iyengar R 2009 Network analyses in systems pharmacology Bioinformatics 25 2466 2472 19648136
581 Danhof M 2016 Systems pharmacology – Towards the modeling of network interactions Eur J Pharm Sci 94 4 14 27131606
582 Rask-Andersen M Almén MS Schiöth HB 2011 Trends in the exploitation of novel drug targets Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 10 579 590 21804595
583 Hopkins AL 2008 Network pharmacology: the next paradigm in drug discovery Nat Chem Biol 4 682 690 18936753
584 Campillos M Kuhn M Gavin AC Jensen LJ Bork P 2008 Drug Target Identification Using Side-Effect Similarity Science 321 263 266 18621671
585 Xie L Ge X Tan H Xie L Zhang Y Hart T Yang X Bourne PE 2014 Towards Structural Systems Pharmacology to Study Complex Diseases and Personalized Medicine PLoS Comput Biol 10 e1003554 24830652
586 Nikolic K Mavridis L Djikic T Vucicevic J Agbaba D Yelekci K Mitchell JBO 2016 Drug Design for CNS Diseases: Polypharmacological Profiling of Compounds Using Cheminformatic, 3D-QSAR and Virtual Screening Methodologies Front Neurosci 10 26858590
587 Shahid M Shahzad Cheema M Klenner A Younesi E Hofmann-Apitius M 2013 SVM Based Descriptor Selection and Classification of Neurodegenerative Disease Drugs for Pharmacological Modeling Molecular Informatics 32 241 249 27481519
588 Issa NT Kruger J Wathieu H Raja R Byers SW Dakshanamurthy S 2016 DrugGenEx-Net: a novel computational platform for systems pharmacology and gene expression-based drug repurposing BMC Bioinformatics 17 26729273
589 Fujita KA Ostaszewski M Matsuoka Y Ghosh S Glaab E Trefois C Crespo I Perumal TM Jurkowski W Antony PMA Diederich N Buttini M Kodama A Satagopam VP Eifes S del Sol A Schneider R Kitano H Balling R 2013 Integrating Pathways of Parkinson’s Disease in a Molecular Interaction Map Mol Neurobiol 49 88 102 23832570
590 Mizuno S Iijima R Ogishima S Kikuchi M Matsuoka Y Ghosh S Miyamoto T Miyashita A Kuwano R Tanaka H 2012 AlzPathway: a comprehensive map of signaling pathways of Alzheimer’s disease BMC Syst Biol 6 52 22647208
591 Iyappan A Gündel M Shahid M Wang J Li H Mevissen H-T Müller B Fluck J Jirsa V Domide L Younesi E Hofmann-Apitius M 2016 Towards a Pathway Inventory of the Human Brain for Modeling Disease Mechanisms Underlying Neurodegeneration J Alzheimers Dis 52 1343 1360 27079715
592 Mueller SG Weiner MW Thal LJ Petersen RC Jack C Jagust W Trojanowski JQ Toga AW Beckett L 2005 The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Neuroimaging Clin N Am 15 869 877 16443497
593 Malhotra A Younesi E Gündel M Müller B Heneka MT Hofmann-Apitius M 2014 ADO: A disease ontology representing the domain knowledge specific to Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 238 246
594 Kodamullil AT Younesi E Naz M Bagewadi S Hofmann-Apitius M 2015 Computable cause-and-effect models of healthy and Alzheimer’s disease states and their mechanistic differential analysis Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 11 1329 1339
595 Emon MAEK Kodamullil AT Karki R Younesi E Hofmann-Apitius M 2017 Using Drugs as Molecular Probes: A Computational Chemical Biology Approach in Neurodegenerative Diseases J Alzheimers Dis 56 677 686 28035920
596 Geerts H Dacks PA Devanarayan V Haas M Khachaturian ZS Gordon MF Maudsley S Romero K Stephenson D 2016 Big data to smart data in Alzheimer’s disease: The brain health modeling initiative to foster actionable knowledge Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 12 1014 1021
597 Balch WE Morimoto RI Dillin A Kelly JW 2008 Adapting proteostasis for disease intervention Science 319 916 919 18276881
598 Lim J Yue ZY 2015 Neuronal Aggregates: Formation, Clearance, and Spreading Dev Cell 32 491 501 25710535
599 Calandra-Buonaura G Toschi N Provini F Corazza I Bisulli F Barletta G Vandi S Montagna P Guerrisi M Tinuper P Cortelli P 2012 Physiologic autonomic arousal heralds motor manifestations of seizures in nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: Implications for pathophysiology Sleep Med 13 252 262 22341903
600 Valenza G Orsolini S Diciotti S Citi L Scilingo EP Guerrisi M Danti S Lucetti C Tessa C Barbieri R 2016 Assessment of spontaneous cardiovascular oscillations in Parkinson’s disease Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 26 80 89
601 Valenza G Citi L Garcia RG Taylor JN Toschi N Barbieri R 2017 Complexity Variability Assessment of Nonlinear Time-Varying Cardiovascular Control Sci Rep 7 42779 28218249
602 Duggento A Bianciardi M Passamonti L Wald LL Guerrisi M Barbieri R Toschi N 2016 Globally conditioned Granger causality in brain-brain and brain-heart interactions: a combined heart rate variability/ultra-high-field (7 T) functional magnetic resonance imaging study Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci 374
603 Toschi N Duggento A Canichella A Coniglione F Dauri M Sabato AF Guerrisi M 2011 Intra- and inter-beat modeling of cardiovascular dynamics and control: assessing haemodynamic stability and responsiveness Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2011 8440 8443 22256306
604 Duggento A Toschi N Guerrisi M 2012 Modeling of Human Baroreflex: Considerations on the Seidel-Herzel Model Fluctuation and Noise Letters 11 1240017
605 Poldrack RA 2017 Precision Neuroscience: Dense Sampling of Individual Brains Neuron 95 727 729 28817793
606 Gordon EM Laumann TO Gilmore AW Newbold DJ Greene DJ Berg JJ Ortega M Hoyt-Drazen C Gratton C Sun H Hampton JM Coalson RS Nguyen AL McDermott KB Shimony JS Snyder AZ Schlaggar BL Petersen SE Nelson SM Dosenbach NUF 2017 Precision Functional Mapping of Individual Human Brains Neuron 95 791 28757305
607 Braga RM Buckner RL 2017 Parallel Interdigitated Distributed Networks within the Individual Estimated by Intrinsic Functional Connectivity Neuron 95 457 28728026
608 Dubois B Hampel H Feldman HH Scheltens P Aisen P Andrieu S Bakardjian H Benali H Bertram L Blennow K 2016 Preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: definition, natural history, and diagnostic criteria Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 12 292 323
609 Petersen SE Sporns O 2015 Brain networks and cognitive architectures Neuron 88 207 219 26447582
