LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8900963
1466
Mol Neurobiol
Mol. Neurobiol.
Molecular neurobiology
0893-7648
1559-1182

29488135
6388721
10.1007/s12035-018-0917-z
NIHMS957013
Article
Thioredoxin-Interacting Protein (TXNIP) in Cerebrovascular and Neurodegenerative Diseases: Regulation and Implication
Nasoohi Sanaz 12
Ismael Saifudeen 1
Ishrat Tauheed 123
1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 855 Monroe Avenue, Wittenborg Bldg, Room-231, Memphis, TN 38163, USA
2 Neuroscience Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
3 Neuroscience Institute, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA
Sanaz Nasoohi and Saifudeen Ismael contributed equally to this work.

5 4 2018
27 2 2018
10 2018
25 2 2019
55 10 79007920
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurological diseases, including acute attacks (e.g., ischemic stroke) and chronic neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), have always been one of the leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. These debilitating diseases represent an enormous disease burden, not only in terms of health suffering but also in economic costs. Although the clinical presentations differ for these diseases, a growing body of evidence suggests that oxidative stress and inflammatory responses in brain tissue significantly contribute to their pathology. However, therapies attempting to prevent oxidative damage or inhibiting inflammation have shown little success. Identification and targeting endogenous “upstream” mediators that normalize such processes will lead to improve therapeutic strategy of these diseases. Thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) is an endogenous inhibitor of the thioredoxin (TRX) system, a major cellular thiol-reducing and antioxidant system. TXNIP regulating redox/glucose-induced stress and inflammation, now is known to get upregulated in stroke and other brain diseases, and represents a promising therapeutic target. In particular, there is growing evidence that glucose strongly induces TXNIP in multiple cell types, suggesting possible physiological roles of TXNIP in glucose metabolism. Recently, a significant body of literature has supported an essential role of TXNIP in the activation of the NOD-like receptor protein (NLRP3)-inflammasome, a well-established multi-molecular protein complex and a pivotal mediator of sterile inflammation. Accordingly, TXNIP has been postulated to reside centrally in detecting cellular damage and mediating inflammatory responses to tissue injury. The majority of recent studies have shown that pharmacological inhibition orgenetic deletion of TXNIP is neuroprotective and able to reduce detrimental aspects of pathology following cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. Conspicuously, the mainstream of the emerging evidences is highlighting TXNIP link to damaging signals in endothelial cells. Thereby, here, we keep the trend to present the accumulative data on CNS diseases dealing with vascular integrity. This review aims to summarize evidence supporting the significant contribution of regulatory mechanisms of TXNIP with the development of brain diseases, explore pharmacological strategies of targeting TXNIP, and outline obstacles to be considered for efficient clinical translation.

Alzheimer’s disease
Inflammation
Neurological diseases
NLRP3-inflammasome
Oxidative stress
Stroke
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Thioredoxin-interacting protein
Thioredoxin

Introduction

Cerebrovascular and neurological diseases including cerebral stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are among the most serious health problems faced by the modern society [1–5]. The burden of these diseases is growing inexorably with enormous economic and human costs. Although the clinical presentations differ for these diseases, a growing body of evidence suggests that oxidative stress [6–8], mitochondrial dysfunction [9, 10], and altered calcium homeostasis [11, 12] as well as inflammatory responses [8, 13] in brain tissue significantly contribute in their pathology [14–17]. Nevertheless, many have demonstrated that the reactive oxygen species (ROS) overproduction is a common pivotal mediator in different deteriorating cascades. Above that, high relative oxygen consumption (20% of total body consumption), abundance of easily oxidizable substrates [18, 19], and relatively low availability of ROS scavengers compared to other organs [20, 21] render the brain particularly sensitive to oxidative damage. As such, there is a strong postulation that oxidative damage is laid upstream to many of the abovementioned perilous signals. Despite overwhelming evidence of the damaging consequences of redox imbalance, large-scale clinical trials with classic antioxidants (e.g., NXY-059) failed to demonstrate benefit for stroke [22, 23] or other age-related CNS diseases [24, 25]. However, there are not enough mature evidences to reach a definitive conclusion on this issue. There is still a gap in understanding how early redox changes affect the neurovascular unit to sustain neuronal injury. We believe an alternative strategy—activation of endogenous defense mechanisms—can provide better protection in these diseases.

Several antioxidant systems including the two major thiol-reductase systems, glutathione and thioredoxin (TRX), can protect cells from oxidative damage. The TRX system detoxifies ROS by thiol-reducing mechanism [26]. In addition to its antioxidant properties, thiol-disulfide exchange reactions serve as control mechanisms for signal transduction. This system consists of TRX, TRX reductase (TRX-R), TXNIP, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reduced form (NADPH). TRX activity and function are regulated by an intracellular endogenous inhibitor, thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) [27], or vitamin D3 upregulated protein 1 (VDUP1) which was first discovered to overexpress in HL-60 cells treated with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [28]. Forced overexpression of TXNIP decreases TRX activity, increases oxidative stress, and inhibits cell growth [29, 30]. In addition, glucose strongly induces TXNIP in multiple cell types including retinal neurovascular tissue [31], endothelial cells [29], and pancreatic beta cells [32], highlighting the physiological roles of TXNIP in glucose metabolism [33]. TXNIP also acts as a redox-sensitive signaling protein by interacting with apoptosis signal [34], which in turn is involved in a variety of biological [35] and pathological events [36]. TXNIP is a central signaling hub that links oxidative/glucose stress and inflammation to cellular injury, making it a “multiple pathway” target and thus a promising new approach for brain therapy [37, 38]. In this connection, there is growing body of evidences suggesting TRX system modulation may provide promising therapeutic approaches in acute and chronic brain injuries. The primary aim of the current review is to provide the existing evidences supporting a role of TXNIP in pathology of neurological diseases like Alzheimer’s disease and stroke. As there are much more available findings, TXNIP involvement in ischemic stroke and associated endothelial dysfunction would be of specific interest to explore the potential efficacy of TXNIP modulation as a promising therapeutic target in pathology of CNS diseases. We also outline obstacles that need to be overcome for successful translation of these therapies to effective clinical practice.

Thioredoxin System

As a highly conserved protein from prokaryotes to mammals, TRX was initially identified as a hydrogen donor to ribonucleotide reductase, the essential enzyme for DNA synthesis in Escherichia coli [39]. Then, recognized as a part of cellular disulfide oxidoreductase complex, TRX was known to be regenerated by TRX-R at the expense of reducing equivalents (NADPH), playing a critical role in maintaining the cellular redox homeostasis.

That is, the oxidized thioredoxin (Trx-S2) is reduced by NADPH through a reaction catalyzed by TRX-R activity. The reduced Trx-(SH)2 may then directly reduce the disulfide in the substrate proteins [40]. Encoded by two different genes, cytosolic (TRX1) and mitochondrial (TRX2) isoforms have few distinctions [41]. While TRX1 and TRX2 are widely expressed in rat brain, TXR1 specifically shows a high expression level in regions of high metabolic activity and oxidative burden (e.g., substantia nigra and subthalamic nucleus) [42, 43].

Often known as the main TRX isoform, TRX1 is localized in the cytosol, plasma membrane (PM), and nucleus as well as the extra-cellular space, in contrast to TRX2 which is only specific to mitochondria. For its redox regulation function, TRX system and, in particular, TXR1 have been empirically shown to provide enormous protective effects [44]. Mice with TRX overexpression are more resistant to oxidative stress with longer life span, suggesting its role in cellular survival. Conspicuously, either overexpression [45] or intravenous administration of TRX [46] has been reported to provide neuro-protection against ischemic stroke insult and improve life span [47]. TRX2 as the mitochondrial isoform may also directly block cytochrome-c release and protects cells from ROS-induced apoptosis [48–50]. Besides its primary role in ROS scavenging system, TRX reduces cystine moieties in the DNA-binding sites of several transcription factors [51, 52] and has established transcriptional and post-transcriptional roles to adjust biological functions, e.g., through HIF-α and VEGF modulation [53, 54].

Thioredoxin-Interacting Protein

TRX-interacting protein (TXNIP) is the endogenous negative regulator in TRX system belonging to α-arrestin protein family. TXNIP is widely expressed almost in all normal tissue cells [55]. In subcellular fractions, TXNIP has reserved a conserved expression patterns in Drosophila and rat nervous systems demonstrating cytoplasmic enrichment in neurons and nuclear expression in glial cells [56]. The redox-related protein complex TRX/TXNIP, named as “Redoxisome,” is a critical regulator for ROS signaling and is involved in the pathogenesis of various diseases autoimmune disease and degenerative diseases [44]. Genetic silencing of TXNIP in human aortic endothelial cells under high glucose condition produced less reactive oxygen species than wild-type control cells, supporting the inhibitory effect of TXNIP on redox activity of TRX [29]. Beside its governing role in ROS signaling, TXNIP is central to glucose hemostasis [33] and regulates the transcription of several genes [51, 52, 57] each of which is opening new venues to explain TXNIP implication in several disorders.

TXNIP Structure and Intracellular Localization

Human TXNIP is a 46-kDa ubiquitously expressed protein that contains 391 amino acid residues [28] and is encoded on chromosome 1q21.1 [58, 59]. Initially thought to be a cytoplasmic protein [60, 61], TXNIP was later found by Saxena et al., to primarily reside in the nucleus under normal condition. However, TXNIP translocates to the mitochondria in response to oxidative stress, where it oxidizes the TRX2 and induces the activation of ASK1 resulting in induction of apoptotic signal cascade, cytochrome-c release, and caspase-3 cleavage [62]. Following rigorous investigations by Wu et al. on rat primary hepatocytes, they conclude shuttling of TXNIP to plasma membrane is of significance in acute suppression of glucose transport. This was supposed to take place via a model in which TXNIP augments GLUT-1 endocytosis through recruiting it into clathrin-coated pits in the plasma membrane. Furthermore, TXNIP shRNA was also found to reduce GLUT-1 protein level and re-localization of TXNIP to nucleus was suggested to mediate a lasting suppression of glucose uptake [63]. Through inhibiting the activity of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), TXNIP has been also described to regulate expression of microRNA-204 at nuclear level and thereby controlling insulin expression [57]. Additionally, TXNIP shuttling to the plasma membrane contributes to TRX1 shuttling to VEGFR2 receptor where it mediates VEGF signaling [64]. TXNIP is expressed in many organs; however, the expression in the healthy brain is prominently rather lower in others [56]. In vitro TXNIP is induced by a variety of stress stimuli, including heat shock and H2O2 in human embryonic kidney cells [60], UV light and ROS in cultured Bosc cells [65], and high glucose in human aortic smooth muscle cells [66]. Interestingly, some of these instigating stimuli may regulate TRX independent of TXNIP. Instantly, hydrogen peroxide in cardiomyocytes [67] or SAH in rat brains [67] has been shown to directly reduce TRX reductase activity, suggesting its role in redox regulation.

TXNIP Downstream Effectors

In addition to cellular redox regulation, TXNIP has been documented to modulate several effectors either laid downstream to TRX or the TXNIP molecule itself. Given that almost all damaging stimuli may improve ROS generation and instigate on TXNIP, this molecule provides an exceptional link between the cells’ metabolic and redox status to the pathological inflammation and programmed cell death or dysfunction. Being extensively interconnected particularly through ROS signaling, several detrimental signals have been shown to get induced by TXNIP for which the available data is briefed as follows.

a) TXNIP and apoptotic pathways

TXNIP, well characterized for mediating glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in stress conditions [34], may provoke apoptotic signals mainly via antagonizing TRX anti-apoptotic effect. TRX has been long discovered to provide anti-apoptotic effects by binding and inhibiting the pro-apoptotic protein and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK-1). In response to various stress types, TXNIP translocates to mitochondria where it prevents the inhibitory association of TRX2 on ASK-1, leading to activation of ASK-1 and apoptotic kinase pathway. ASK1 is usually bound to TRX2 under basal conditions. Unbound ASK1 is phosphorylated and instigates cytochrome C release and caspase-3 cleavage [68]. Progressive beta cell apoptosis is a hallmark in pathophysiology of types 1 and 2 diabetes. TXNIP overexpressing beta cells are more susceptible to apoptosis suggesting that TXNIP as a therapeutic target to protect against apoptosis [32]. Genetic deletion of TXNIP protects beta cell from glucotoxicity-induced apoptosis by modulating mitochondrial death pathway [69]. It has been reported that TXNIP has a pro-apoptotic role in some acute brain injuries. In our recent study, we detected a remarkable attenuation in apoptotic effectors caspase-1, caspase-3, and PARP following embolic stroke in TXNIP −/− mice [70]. The more recent findings by Zhau et al. demonstrated that enhanced TXNIP expression is associated with escalated brain cell apoptosis in early brain injury (EBI) following subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in rats and resveratrol (60 mg/kg) or TXNIP small interfering RNA (siRNA) improve apoptotic cell death leading to better prognosis for SAH [71]. In fact, TXNIP contribution to apoptosis has been also shown in various in vitro models including thrombin exposed to microglia [72], endothelial cells stressed with palmitate [73], and retinal pericytes exposed to high glucose [74]. While counting for detrimental effects in diabetes and thromboembolic disease, the TXNIP-associated apoptosis is still regarded as a promising target in oncology medicine. In this line, several in vitro examinations have demonstrated TXNIP pro-apoptotic role in prostate cancer [75], hepatocellular carcinoma [76], and in vitro acute myeloid leukemia [77].

b) TXNIP and oxidative phosphorylation

Mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration may be disrupted in a variety of CNS disorders. Supported by concrete evidences, TXNIP reduces uptake of glucose working as the main energy source in many organs. Instantly, TXNIP over-expression in cultured adipocytes has been shown to reduce glucose uptake and TXNIP silencing with siRNA enhances glucose uptake in adipocytes and in skeletal muscle [33]. Importantly, thioredoxin-protein that is induced in response to glucose rise, e.g., in diabetes, provides a negative feedback loop to regulate glucose uptake. In the meticulous study by Wu and colleagues on primary rat hepatocytes, the reduced glucose uptake was found to rely on two distinct mechanisms by TXNIP. Firstly, in a direct approach, TXNIP may bind to the glucose transporter GLUT1 and induce GLUT1 internalization. Secondly, through an indirect influence on transcription, TXNIP abolishes the level of GLUT1 messenger RNA. Furthermore, they showed that energy stress in hepatocytes results the phosphorylation of TXNIP by AMP-dependent protein kinase (AMPK) and subsequent rapid degradation of TXNIP [63].

On the other side, TXNIP may hypothetically elevate mitochondrial oxygen consumption. In fact, there are empirical evidences indicating TXNIP may enhance mitochondrial respiration through blocking hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIFs) or inducing peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor (PPAR)α. HIF-1α is long known to repress mitochondrial oxygen consumption by inhibiting pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex and interfering with tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle [78, 79] which ends with reduced ROS in mitochondria [80]. In both in vivo and in vitro models of gastric cancer, Shin et al. showed TXNIP may assemble with the beta-domain of byprolyl-hydroxylases and von Hippel–Lindau protein (pVHL) and improve its interaction with HIF-1α to augment the ubiquitin-induced degradation of HIF-1α concluding TXNIP mediates nuclear export of HIF-1α, resulting in HIF-1α degradation [81]. PPARα is a transcription factor required for activation of the mitochondrial biogenic response [82] and might be inhibited by TRX interaction. Nuclear translocation of TRX has been shown to directly attenuate PPARα transcriptional activity in Hela cancer cell lines [83]. Through an alternative indirect and less documented pathway, cytosolic TRX may bind to ASK1 and inhibits its downstream p38MAP kinase [84] which has been shown may activate PPARα in cardiomyocytes [85]. Therefore, cytosolic and nuclear TXNIP both work to improve PPARα transcriptional activity, thus enhancing mitochondrial biogenesis, oxygen consumption, and ROS generation.

c) TXNIP and NLRP3 inflammasomes

Formation of large multi-protein complexes “inflammasomes” is an early event in the primary immune responses. TXNIP regulates inflammatory responses by modulating different switch points along inflammatory cascades in different cell populations. Retinal endothelial cells exposed to high glucose (HG) or agonist of advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) found remarkable overexpression of TXNIP in parallel with some inflammatory genes like VEGF-A and ICAM1. Interestingly, they found that TXNIP silencing by siRNA blocks RAGE and HG inflammatory effects. According to their findings, TXNIP is supposed to produce its anti-inflammatory effects through p38 MAPK-NF-kappaB signaling pathway and modifications in histone H3 lysine (K) nine regions [86]. The intriguing study by Wang et al. further revealed that TXNIP inhibits the expression of Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF2), a key anti-inflammatory transcription factor in endothelial cells, a finding which well describes TXNIP-induced inflammation in endothelial cells exposed to ex vivo disturbed blood flow modeling [87]. Above all, however, there is accumulating evidence suggesting that the all-inclusive mechanism describing TXNIP pro-inflammatory role is the direct activation of NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasomes in several cell types (Fig. 1).

NLRP3 inflammasome is a key component in sterile inflammation and is involved in several diseases. Typically classified as cytosolic receptors sensing damage associated molecules (i.e., cell debris, urate crystals, ATP), NLRPs are of critical damage sensing molecules which form NLRP inflammasome upon priming, activation, and oligomerization. NLRP3 biology is described elsewhere in full details [88]. In brief, NLRP3 inflammasome is the assembly of NLRP3 oligomers and apoptosis-associated speck-like (ASC) adapter protein. In the priming step, the transcripts of all NLRP3 inflammasome constituents including ASC, NLRP3, and pro-caspase-1 are produced to sufficient levels to contribute to inflammasome assembly. Upon activation, NLRP3 triggers caspase-1 activation and subsequent maturation of IL-1β and IL-18, a critical step in inflammatory responses. NLRP3 is activated by a variety “danger” signals including whole RNA, RNA/DNA hybrids [89], and proteins from gram-positive [90] and gram-negative bacteria [91], viruses [92], and protozoa [93] as well as monosodium urate crystals [94] and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals [95] which might be classified as disease-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). This posits NLRP3 inflammasome in an almost all-existing place in any pathological process dealing with inflammation independent of the initiating source.

Noteworthy, much of NLRP3-activating stimuli converge on TXNIP followed by TXNIP dissociation from TRX and its direct association with NLRP3 inflammasome. The phenomena were first identified by Zhou et al. in cultured macrophages [96]. According to their observations, a variety of NLRP3-inflammasome activators including ATP, monosodium urate crystals, and silica was shown to result in TXNIP dissociation from TRX and binding to the NLRP3 inflammasome. In fact, they showed TXNIP binding is an essential step for NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Pursued by other scientists, it was further understood that TXNIP/NLRP3 activation is centrally involved in several disease models. Instantly, inhibition of TXNIP produces profound amelioration as it has been documented in high fat-exposed human retinal endothelial cells (subjected to TXNIP silencing) [97], non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (treated with quercetin) (NAFLD) [98], and diabetic cardiomyopathy (treated with rosuvastatin) [99] as well as in high glucose-exposed human retinal microvasculature (subjected to TXNIP silencing) [100] and thrombin-exposed BV2 cells (treated with N-acetyl-l-cysteine) [72].

There are extensive investigations suggesting TXNIP may work as a main mediator to link a vast variety of deteriorating stimuli, e.g., oxidative stress [101], inflammation [102], and even senescence [103] to reach to NLRP3 inflammasome. Direct TXNIP/NLRP3 interaction, yet not fully characterized though, has been established based on the empirical evidences produced ever. As is detailed later in this review, ROS-induced activation of NLRP3-inflammasome in macrophages is reported to be associated with increased localization of TXNIP into the mitochondria [104] resulting in oxidation of TRX, liberation of TXNIP, and increased interaction with NLRP3 [105]. As predicted based on molecular modeling, the enhanced TXNIP/NLRP3 association appears to bring a conformational change in the NLRP3 protein pyrin domain [106]. On the contrary side, in macrophages of TXNIP knockout mice, it has been shown that NLRP3 carry more S-nitrosylated sites compared to wild-type controls. This modification might be responsible for less IL-1β maturation in response to LPS stimulation in TXNIP knockout cells [107].

d) TXNIP and oxidative stress

Conspicuously, activation of NLRP3 inflammasome through distinct upstream signals is associated with increased ROS levels [96, 108]. Noteworthy, ROS-generating stimuli may potentiate TXNIP/NLRP3 pathway through enhancing TXNIP transcription and expression. Instantly, the typical hepatic inflammation following high fructose diet has been shown to mediate both ROS and TXNIP overexpression either in vivo or in vitro which is followed by NLRP3 inflammasome activation [109]. Paclitaxel and lentinan as anticancer medications have been also shown to increase TXNIP expression as well as TXNIP-NLRP3 interaction, in parallel with ROS generation [110]. Such transcriptional augmentation may efficiently explain how ROS enhances TXNIP protein levels which in turn may bind to NLRP3 inflammasome to instigate inflammatory responses.

TXNIP shuttling to the mitochondria is the other well-known event following ROS creating stimuli. Soon after their first investigations [96], using T helper cells and NLRP3 −/− mice, Zhou et al. described more details on NLRP3 and its adaptor ASC re-localization in different states of activity. Accordingly, resting NLRP3 localizes to endoplasmic reticulum structures and upon sensing activating stimuli, both NLRP3 and ASC redistribute to the perinuclear space and co-localize with endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. Then, they showed nigericin as an established NLRP3 stimulator causes TXNIP to redistribute to mitochondria in a ROS-dependent manner [104]. This was in consistent with similar findings reported by others on pancreatic beta cells [62]. By blocking mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel, Zhou and colleagues showed the inhibition of all the pertinent changes in NLRP3 and TXNIP, indicating the prominent role of NLRP3 inflammasome in sensing mitochondrial dysfunction and explaining association of mitochondrial damage with inflammatory diseases [104]. Mitochondrial shuttling of TXNIP initiates downstream apoptotic signaling through ASK1 release from mitochondrial TRX2. The subsequent cleavage of caspase-3 leads to apoptosis which besides the cytosolic activation of caspase-1-induced pyroptosis ends with substantial DAMP release serving as a secondary signal for NLRP3 activation. A schematic diagram of TXNIP role in different subcellular compartments is represented in Fig. 2.

TXNIP Regulation

Various endogenous and exogenous stimuli control TXNIP expression. Metabolic status of the cells is closely reflected at TXNIP transcription instantly depending on glucose and oxygen availability. TXNIP also relies downstream to many deteriorating signals triggering inflammation, oxidative stress, and excitotoxicity which are common grounds in a variety of CNS diseases. However, such stimuli intricately interact with each other; each may independently instigate TXNIP expression as follows.

A) Glucose

The expression of TXNIP is inducible by high glucose concentration through the carbohydrate response element-binding protein (ChREBP) located in the upstream region of the TXNIP prompter [111]. Glucose stress is a well-known feature following acute brain injury contributing to TXNIP activation [61]. Human pancreatic islet gene expression microarray study demonstrated that TXNIP is the most strongly upregulated gene in response to glucose [112]. Cardiac TXNIP and cleaved caspase-3 are overexpressed in streptozotocin- and obesity-induced diabetic mice [113]. Furthermore, poor prognosis in diabetic patients is associated with hypomethylation of TXNIP gene addressing still less investigated aspects of TXNIP-diabetes connection [114]. Elevated expression of TXNIP has been observed in the muscle of pre-diabetic and diabetic patients [33]. Consistently, TXNIP is strongly induced in human and mice pancreatic beta cells by glucocorticoids in a p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) manner [115]. While high glucose inhibits TXNIP, palmitate, a 16 carbon fatty acid, was shown to reserve TXNIP expression in rat islet cells [116].

B) AMP-activated protein kinase

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is of cellular energy sensing molecules to control metabolic homeostasis which is involved in glucose-mediated TXNIP overexpression. The accurate inspection of TXNIP biochemistry by Wu et al. described AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of TXNIP following energy stress, e.g., low glucose levels in various cancerous cell lines, i.e., HepG2, MCF7, and T47D. This TXNIP phosphorylation leads to its rapid degradation and explains how high glucose may reserve TXNIP lasting activity [63]. In addition to TXNIP post-translational modifications, AMPK may also affect TXNIP transcription. In rats’ beta cell line and islets, high glucose-induced ChREBP nuclear entry and recruitment to the TXNIP promoter were inhibited by pharmacologic activation of AMPK but reversed in AMPK −/− cells. Accordingly, AMPK is an important regulator of TXNIP through modulation of ChREBP activity [116]. Either of these ways, TXNIP suppression increase in GLUT1 function and expression may compensate for long-term adaptation.

C) Oxidative stress

As described earlier in this review, ROS is a common pathway for many deteriorating signals to stimulate TXNIP. However, there is not enough information to conclude an established mechanism by which ROS may govern TXNIP. In 2011, Fang et al. reported that high glucose exposure in rat mesangial cells modulates TXNIP expression at mRNA and protein levels. Using a p38 MAPK, inhibitor abolished TXNIP expression, suggesting MAPK signaling involvement in ROS-TXNIP pathway [117]. Soon after, Kim et al. showed oxidative stress without glucose can induce TXNIP expression, as they detected remarkable TXNIP in both in vivo and in vitro models of ischemic reperfusion injury. Inhibition Ca2+ channels by verapamil partially prevented expression of TXNIP in vivo [61]. In this connection, the transcription factor Forkhead box, class O (FOXO) may link ROS to TXNIP expression. FOXO1 and FOXO3 are the predominant forms of the four existing FOXOs in neural cells. Active FOXO is a direct enhancer of TXNIP transcription in neural cells in which the high synaptic activity has been shown to suppress FOXO1 expression [118]. Insulin signaling through Akt activation works as a significant regulator of FOXO so that Akt-induced FOXO phosphorylation ends with its dissociation from the TXNIP promoter and redistribution to the cytosol [119]. Nevertheless, for the existing controversies, it seems FOXO-TXNIP pathway is rather complex and context sensitive to define a single FOXO-TXNIP connection. Interestingly, in liver cells, FOXO1 works as a repressor and downregulates TXNIP [120]. In pancreatic beta cells, FOXO1 still works as a TXNIP suppressor with more known mechanisms. Kibbe et al. showed FOXO1 and ChREBP bind to the same region in the TXNIP promoter and FOXO1 inhibit ChREBP-induced TXNIP expression [121].

D) Calcium and ER Stress

Elevated calcium influx is a common feature in a variety of brain diseases ranging from acute ischemic stroke to Alzheimer’s associated degeneration. Shalev team started to discover calcium role in TXNIP biology when in their in vivo and in vitro experiments, they indicated calcium channel blockers dose dependently reduce TXNIP transcription and protein levels in cardiomyocytes even in face to severe diabetes [113]. They also found calcium channel blockers may efficiently inhibit TXNIP expression in INS-1 cells and oral verapamil reduces TXNIP expression and β-cell apoptosis and eventually enhances endogenous insulin levels [122]. In continuation of their investigations in cardiomyocytes and in vivo in diabetic mice, they proposed a mechanism suggesting verapamil inhibits the calcineurin signaling which in turn increases the binding and repression activity of the transcription nuclear factor Y (NFY) on its target genes including TXNIP [123]. In a parallel study by Kim et al., it was suggested that the elevated intracellular calcium ions may also contribute to TXNIP expression during ischemic injury as calcium channel blockers, diltiazem, and verapamil could inhibit induction of TXNIP after OGD and re-oxygenation [61]. Intracellular calcium overload may take place downstream to excitotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The accumulation of unfolded proteins during ER stress leading to the induction of progressive cascade termed as unfolded protein response (UPR) may induce TXNIP expression in beta cells in a Ca2+-independent manner. According to the existing data, UPR leads to TXNIP expression via two of its apoptotic effectors PERK and IRE1α in beta cells [124, 125]. IRE1α has been shown to increase TXNIP mRNA stability through its kinase/RNase function that reduces the levels of miR-17, a TXNIP-destabilizing microRNA [124]. Alternatively, PERK signaling may boost TXNIP transcription through enhanced expression and nuclear translocation of ChREBP. In the transcription factor ATF5, a ATF/cAMP response element may also mediate this ER stress effect [125].

TXNIP in Central Nervous System Diseases

Decades of extensive research have established the role of TRX/TXNIP signaling in pathogenesis of several disorders associated with oxidative stress, including diabetes [126] and endothelial dysfunction [127]. Numerous emerging reports are also pointing to increased TXNIP expression in neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular diseases including AD [128] and stroke [70]. Reportedly, TXNIP molecule is overexpressed in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice at the first appearance of cognitive decline [128]. This is associated with augmented hippocampus expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). The contributory function of beta amyloid to upregulate TXNIP was demonstrated in RBE4 cells, rat cerebral capillary endothelial cells lines exposed to beta amyloid (Aβ) which was suggested to enhance TXNIP expression through “receptor for glycation end-products” (RAGE) [86]. Augmented expression of TXNIP and downregulation of TRX have been also reported in D-galactose-induced rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. In this study, treatment with salidroside, a herbal phenylpropanoid glycoside, enhanced the cognitive performances by regulating the expressions of TRX, TXNIP, and NF-kB proteins [129].

According to several reports, increased mRNA expression of TXNIP has been also detected in brains affected with sub-arachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) [130, 131]. In a rabbit model of SAH, the brain stem levels of TRX1 and TRX reductase (TRXR) decreased in parallel with a rise in the expression of TXNIP [130]. Telmisartan treatment was then shown to ameliorate morphological changes of cerebral vasospasm in parallel with restoring the reduced levels of Trx1 and TRXR and decreasing TXNIP expression [131]. Recently, Zhao et al. showed that TXNIP is highly expressed in neurons of the SAH rat brain and inhibition of TXNIP by pharmacological or siRNA attenuated apoptosis and early brain injury after SAH. Given pharmacological inhibition of PERK was associated with decreased expression of TXNIP, they concluded the increased SAH-induced TXNIP expression mediated RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum (ER) kinase (PERK) a trans-membrane protein in the ER [71]. TXNIP also acts as mediator of inflammation and apoptosis in intravitreal NMDA injection. TXNIP knockout mice demonstrated less glial activation and NLRP3 inflammasome-induced inflammation I parallel with ameliorated microvascular degeneration compared to wild-type animals [132]. This was in consistent with earlier reports indicating genetic deletion or pharmacological inhibition of TXNIP prevented neuronal cell death and inflammation and preserved retinal NMDA-induced retinal neurotoxicity [133]. Similarly, increased expression of TXNIP associated with high-fructose diet has been shown to induce hypothalamic inflammation and insulin signaling dysfunction in rats. In this study, pharmacological treatment with quercetin, a natural flavonoid prevented fructose reduced hypothalamic inflammatory lesion by modulating AMPK/TXNIP signaling [134]. Thrombin exposure is an established notorious feature in SAH. In a study on thrombin-exposed microglia, ROS mediated TXNIP expression leading to NLRP3 inflammasome activation and microglial apoptosis [72]. Looking for solid evidences in TXNIP implication in CNS disease, recent investigations are increasingly addressing TXNIP modulation approaches to provide protection against CNS diseases. A concise view on the published reports in this field is provided in Table 1.

TXNIP in Endothelial Dysfunction

Microvascular complications have a critical causative role in several organ system diseases including diabetes [37] and migraine attacks [144]. Figure 3 represents the putative molecular pathways may explain the involvement of TXNIP in signals affecting vascular dysfunction. In fact, cerebrovascular dysfunction may play a causative role or work as a predictor for poor prognosis in some CNS disorders like dementia or Alzheimer’s disease which are not typically classified in cerebrovascular diseases [145, 146]. According to the existing strong evidence, many of TXNIP abrogating roles in the CNS diseases might hypothetically root from the associated vascular pathology. This might be supported by evidences indicating TXNIP modulation may confer protection in experimental models of endothelial dysfunction (Table 2). In fact, TXVIP may play a central role in endothelial oxidative stress and inflammation [158], alignment [159], and proliferation [160] all of which contribute to atherosclerotic and angiopathies. Interestingly, as confirmed by modulating TXNIP by siRNA in vascular endothelia cells [161] or HUVECs [103], there are empirical evidences indicating that endothelial senescence as a major contributing factor to vascular complications depends on sufficient TXNIP/NLRP3 activation and pro-atherogenic ECs’ inflammation. TXNIP involvement in endothelial dysfunction is not confined but grossly might be classified to three categories as follows.

TXNIP and Endothelial Inflammation and Oxidative Stress

TXNIP-associated vasculopathy can be best exemplified by diabetes-induced EC dysfunction leading to the very irreversible nephropathy and retinopathy. As supporting evidence for this role, TXNIP shows significantly higher levels in kidneys from patients with diabetic nephropathy as well as HG-exposed mesangial cells [162]. Rat retinal EC treated with S100B (RAGE ligand) or HG represent high expression of TXNIP and inflammatory markers Cox2, VEGF-A, and ICAM1 [86]. TXNIP ablation in vitro has been also shown to prevent ROS generation and inflammation in HG-exposed rat Muller cell lines [158]. Interestingly, there are emerging evidences indicating diabetes induced pro-atherosclerotic events might be ascribed to TXNIP. Recent comprehensive investigation by Byon et al. showed in vitro ablation of TXNIP provides protection against oxidative stress and dramatically reduces macrophage adhesion in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) exposed oxidized phospholipids hydrogen peroxide. Intriguingly, by in vivo examinations, they reported TXNIP ablation led to 49 to 71% reduction in atherosclerotic lesions in TXNIP-ApoE double knockout mice, compared to control ApoE knockout mice [163]. In clinics, plasma levels of TXNIP have been also shown to work as a reliable predictor of subclinical atherosclerosis in type 2 diabetic patients [164].

Given the high prevalence of dyslipidemia in diabetic subjects, it might be of note that either in vivo or in vitro models of high-fat diet (HFD) fed spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and Palmitate-BSA-exposed human retinal show higher endothelial expression of TXNIP and NLRP3 interaction and IL-1β production. Importantly, HFD fed animals acquire more acellular capillaries, a hallmark of retinal ischemic lesions [97].

As an early event in atherosclerosis, ECs’ inflammation, growth, and monocyte adhesion might arise from turbulent shear stress commonly known as disturbed stress (DS). As of the earliest investigators, Yamawaki et al. described decreased TXNIP expression in response to chronic EC exposure to normal flow. They concluded the associated mitigation of cytokine and the JNK-p38 pathway inhibits proinflammatory effectors such as vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1) expression [127]. On the other side, the intriguing data obtained by Obikane et al. implied that DS may induce TXNIP and VCAM-1 overexpression which was reversed with p21-overexpression [165]. Later in vivo examinations by Wang and colleagues indicated the increased TXNIP was found to be required for DS-induced endothelial inflammation as EC-specific TXNIP knockout mice showed significant decreases in aortal VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 mRNA expression and less EC-monocyte rolling in animal retina. Their obtained in vitro data provided first evidence for TXNIP link with a key anti-inflammatory transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF-2) in ECs. KLF-2 was shown to get repressed by TXNIP in HUVECs in flow chamber model, explaining much of detrimental TXNIP effects [87].

TXNIP and Stress Fiber Malformation

Integrating biophysics to endothelial cell morphology and intracellular signaling implies that laminar shear stress of blood flow contributes to stress fiber (short basal actin filaments) formation and alignment in the longitudinal direction of the vessel [166]. Interestingly, as demonstrated in response to uniaxial stretch on bovine aortic endothelial cells, such alignment has been shown to minimize JNK signaling and EC dysfunction [167]. Recent findings are indicating TXNIP is involved in the mechanotransduction effect of shear stress through indirect regulation of Src tyrosine 527 dephosphorylation and inactivation [159]. Some Src family members have established key role in ECs’ stress fiber formation [168]. As such, the pro-atherogenic effect of TXNIP might be presumably attributed to interfering with stress fiber formation and alignment. This hypothesis might be more confirmed based on evidences supporting TXNIP-KLF2 link to stress fiber formation.

Besides its anti-inflammatory function, on in vitro examinations by Boon et al, KLF2 has been shown to work as an essential component to direct the formation of stress fibers and thereby the ECs’ alignment and morphology. Accordingly, KLF2-induced JNK inhibition is partly mediated through stress fiber formation and alignment [169]. Not surprisingly, the described established TXNIP-NLRP3 inflammasomes link is an alternative well-characterized pathway which may mediate TXNIP-induced dysfunction in HUVECs [170].

TXNIP and Aberrant Endothelial Proliferation

The pathological development of atherosclerotic lesions roots from diverse events including anomalous angiogenesis subsequent to aberrant endothelial cell proliferation, migration, or tube formation [171, 172]. Increase EC division rate may contribute to increased endothelial permeability [173] and enhanced EC proliferation presumably contributes to atherosclerosis development [165]. Interestingly, ECs’ proliferation together with monocytes’ adhesion has been shown to increase at branch orifices which are prone to atherosclerotic plaques and exposed to disturbed shear stress [172]. Involvement of TRX system in angiogenesis has been extensively studied and referred in previous reviews [174]. However, according to the contradicting data, there is not enough compelling evidence to conclude about TXNIP role.

As of earliest works in this field, forced expression of TXNIP was reported to increase ROS production and proliferation and tube formation in ECs [175]. HUVEC examinations later showed TXNIP knockdown abolishes VEGFR2 internalization and phosphorylation and abrogates VEGF-induced EC proliferation and tube formation [160], consistent with other reports indicating VEGF is not efficient to stimulate vascular sprouting from aortic rings in hypoxia [176]. According to mechanistic studies on HUVECs, physiological levels of ROS cause TXNIP to translocate to the plasma membrane as an essential carrier for TRX1 to activate vascular VEGFR2 signaling [64]. As augmented by PARP1 siRNA treatment, TXNIP translocation and VEGFR2 activation in cell membrane are probably under PPAR1 control [177].

On the contrary side, there are several evidences indicating TXNIP suppress angiogenic events in ECs exposed to diabetic-like environment. In this line, high glucose exposure to endothelial progenitor cells is reported to impair EC proliferation, migration, and tube formation which is efficiently ameliorated by TXNIP silencing by siRNA [178, 179]. According to further in vitro experimentations, TXNIP has been suggested to mediate HG-induced impairment by abolishing VEGF production and angiogenic effects in diabetic conditions, which requires adequate TRX1 activity [180]. Such findings support the recent report on the antioxidant teneligliptin to antagonize TXNIP overexpression and reverse the reduced EC proliferation in HUVECs exposed to HG. Teneligliptin effects have been suggested to involve cell cycle inhibitors like P21 [150].

The unraveled information suggesting an anti-proliferative effect of TXNIP on endothelial cells and angiogenesis is well in agreement with the established effect of TXNIP (VDUP1) on cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 [181] and may partly explain vitamin D benefits to combat cancerous proliferation [182, 183]. However, co-localization of TXNIP overexpression with enhanced EC proliferation in vascular branch orifices with disturbed sheer stress supports the hypothesis that TXNIP contribute to EC proliferation and angiogenesis [172, 184]. Undoubtedly, taking all the existing controversies together, it seems TXNIP role in EC proliferation highly depends on experimental settings and needs to be precisely addressed in translational context. Interestingly, as a vivid example, according to the most recent report using moderately high glucose (MHG) levels instead of HG, human retinal microvascular endothelial cells’ proliferation in vitro is not affected by MHG level. Alternatively, MHG remarkably stimulated EC migration and tube formation well resembling proliferative diabetic retinopathy leading to visual disturbance. HMG-induced ROS and uncontrolled angiogenesis were shown to disappear in TXNIP knockout cells supporting the hypotheses that TXNIP contribute to pathologic angiogenesis [152].

TXNIP as an Experimental Target for Ischemic Stroke

Ischemic/reperfusion injury is exceptionally associated with oxidative stress given the profound oxygen rebound flow after spontaneous thrombolysis or therapeutic revascularization [185]. Regarding the governing role of TXNIP in TRX system and thereby in oxidative stress injury, it is rather reasonable that TXNIP stands among promising targets in stroke therapy. Several studies have demonstrated a correlation between increased TXNIP expression and stress-related diseases including ischemic stroke in mice [70], in vivo NMDA neurotoxicity [132, 136], and metabolic stress in high-fat animals [134]. TXNIP expression has been empirically shown to rise in experimental ischemic–reperfusion injury in eMCAO mice [70], intraluminal MCAO in rats [186] and mice, and in vitro OGD model [61]. TXNIP overexpression might be expected based on the described stimuli like oxidative stress and excitotoxicity following stroke, although recent findings in ischemic human pancreatic cancer tissues imply TXNIP transcription is dependent to HIF-1α and highly affected by putative hypoxia-regulated element-binding sequence in its promoter region [187]. Interestingly, mice with overexpression of TRX [45] or primary neurons treated with TXNIP siRNA silencing appear more resistant against ischemic reperfusion damage [61]. Resveratrol as a TXNIP antagonist has also been previously reported to provide protection in hepatic ischemic injury in rats [137]. Recently, we reported that genetic ablation of TXNIP (TXNIP−/−) as well as pharmacological inhibition of TXNIP by resveratrol protects against brain infarction and neurological outcome in mouse model of embolic stroke [70]. According to our obtained data, TXNIP−/− mice showed higher expression of TRX with reciprocal decrease in the makers of oxidative stress including nitrotyrosine (NT) in parallel with inflammatory quiescence. We concluded that protective effect of TXNIP inhibition is partly due to inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome components including cleaved caspase and IL-1β. The existing knowledge supports the multiple deteriorating TXNIP effectors that can contribute to acute ischemic stroke injury through redox imbalance and inflammasome activation. In Fig. 4, the potential implication of TXNIP in neural injury is illustrated including those involved in the typical cerebrovascular disease stroke or degenerative disorders. However, little has been unraveled in this context; much more triggering pathways may be posited to explain stroke-induced TXNIP pathological role.

Briefing some of existing evidences might help to understand the significance of TXNIP role in stroke pathology. In investigations performed by Wang et al., increased expression of TXNIP has been reported in rat model of cerebral ischemia [186]. In their experimentations, 7 days pretreatment with umbelliferon, a natural antioxidant ameliorated neurological deficit as well as brain infarction and edema in MCAO rats. They ascribed the beneficial effects of umbelliferone to inhibition of TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation and upregulation of PPAR-γ with maintenance of redox status. These findings were supported with later reports showing ischemic stroke-induced BBB dysfunction is associated with increased expression of TXNIP and activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in MCAO mice and OGD injured mouse brain microvascular ECs. Such alterations were reversed by ruscogenin, a bioactive steroid sapogenin either in vivo or in vitro. In vivo, ruscogenin also improved cerebral brain flow and upregulated the expression of tight junctions while in cerebrovascular ECs, reduced production of ROS, p38 MAPK, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation [138].

Ischemic neuronal injury is associated with increased ER stress and activation of inflammatory response which might arise from ER-induced TXNIP/NLRP3 activation. The data obtained by Li et al. (2015) in vitro excitotoxicity modeling showed remarkable ER stress in hippocampus or SH-SY5Y cells associates a remarkable ER stress and TXNIP/NLRP3 activation. Curcumin could reduce NLRP3 activation in hippocampal CA1 region in MCAO rats while it attenuated ER stress through AMPK activation in vitro in parallel with TXNIP repression suggesting the role of ER stress in the induction of TXNIP expression [139]. Hua and colleagues also demonstrated increased TXNIP expression, elevated oxidative stress markers and reciprocal decrease in the expression TRX in rat ischemic stroke model [135]. In their study on compound 10b, a novel free radical scavenger, they found a significant decrease in the expression of TXNIP concurrent with Bax, caspase 3, and caspase 9 attenuation implicative of TXNIP activation by stroke-induced oxidative stress. In a recent work examining hyperglycemic ischemic stroke in mice, Guo et al. provided first evidences implying TXNIP is also involved in preconditioning against ischemic stroke, showing animals receiving intracerebral TXNIP siRNA did not gain protection against ischemic stroke after hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning [188]. The most recent additions on TXNIP suggest that nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) has a pivotal role in regulating TRX/TXNIP in cerebral ischemia. Accordingly, Nrf2 upregulation by systemic tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ) has been shown to enhance cytosolic TXNIP expression leading to NLRP3 inflammasome activation in MCAO animals, the effects which vanished with either Nrf2 or TRX siRNA treatment in vivo [140]. All together, these evidences are highlighting activation of TXNIP as a key event associated with inflammation and cell death in response to ischemic brain injury. Evidences showing transfection with TXNIP siRNA prevent cellular damage in model of cerebral ischemia [61, 189], supporting the idea of TXNIP inhibition as a therapeutic approach to prevent the detrimental consequences of hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke.

Summary and Future Directions

In recent decades, prevention of neurological diseases has received intensive attention due to the increasing global economic burden for growing elderly population. However, owing to the complexity of the underlying molecular mechanisms, the treatment options for ischemic stroke still have several limitations. Accumulating evidences demonstrate that activation of TXNIP plays a prominent role in the pathogenesis and progression of several CNS diseases inducing degenerative and acute brain injury. Hence, efficient inhibition of TXNIP function or expression at the molecular level may provide an insight into development of new therapeutics. Although a number of neuroprotective agents including resveratrol, curcumin, and umbellifereone could modulate the expression of TXNIP and ameliorate injury in animal models of CNS diseases particularly in ischemic stroke, none have passed clinical trials with effects comparable to animal findings. Noteworthy, increasing evidences are suggesting TXNIP deteriorating role is intimately linked to the brain microvasculature. This comes to high significance in ischemic stroke as a typical cerebrovascular disease which vastly engages all TXNIP regulators in different stages of ischemia and reperfusion. The current lack of specific inhibitors however limits TXNIP use as a direct therapeutic target for stroke and other cerebrovascular diseases. As such, further investigation to develop specific TXNIP inhibitor and their validation appears to shed light on better management of neurological diseases. Nonetheless, restraining TXNIP to induce cell cycle arrest and drive apoptotic events and the potential consequent neoplastic risk is a major concern in therapeutic application of TXNIP inhibitors [141, 190]. Therefore, applicable TXNIP partial agonists may provide appropriate therapeutic tools to avoid potential side effect due to intensive TXNIP ablation. This may also suggest TXNIP inhibitors might be better candidates in acute brain injury like that occurs in ischemic stroke and brain trauma requiring less chronic medications.

Authors would like to thank Ms. Colby Polonsky, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia, for her assistance with Fig. 1.

Funding This work was supported by the National Institute of Health [R01-NS097800 (TI)].

Abbreviations

AD Alzheimer’s disease

AIM2 Absence in melanoma

AMPK AMP-activated protein kinase

ASC Apoptosis-associated speck-like

ASK-1 Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase

BBB Blood-brain barrier

Cyt-c Cytochrome C

ChREBP Carbohydrate response element-binding protein

DAMP Damage-associated molecular patterns

DSS Disturbed shear stress

ECs Endothelial cells

ER Endoplasmic reticulum

eMCAO Embolic MCAO

FOXO Forkhead box transcription factor, class O

GFAP Glial fibrillary acidic protein

GLUT Glucose transporter

HFD High-fat diet

HGD High-glucose diet

HUVECs Human umbilical vein endothelial cells

HRE Human retinal endothelial cells

ICH Intracerebral hemorrhage

IL-1β Interleukin-1-beta

IRE1α Serine/threonine-protein kinase/endoribonuclease

JNK c-Jun-N-terminal kinase

KO Knockout

KLF-2 Kruppel-like factor 2

LPS Lipopolysaccharide

LRR Leucine-rich repeat domain

MAP Mitogen-activated protein

MCAO Middle cerebral artery occlusion

MI Myocardial infarction

MAPK Mitogen-activated protein kinase

miRNA Microribonucleic acid

MMP-9 Matrix metalloproteinase 9

MyD-88 Myeloid differentiation primary response 88

NADPH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphateoxidase

NAD Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

NADH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

NBD Nucleotide-binding domain

NF-κB Nuclear factor kappa-B

NLR Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor

NLRP NOD-like receptor proteins

NMDA N-Methyl-D-aspartate

NOD Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain

NOX Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase

OGD Oxygen glucose deprivation

PAMP Pathogen-associated molecular patterns

PERK Protein kinase R-like ER kinase

PRR Pattern recognition receptor

PTP Phospho-tyrosine phosphatases

pVHL von Hippel–Lindau protein

RAGE Advanced glycation end-products

stz Streptozotocin

SAH Subarachnoid hemorrhage

SUR1 Sulfonylurea receptor 1

TLR Toll-like receptor

tMCAO Transient MCAO

TNF-α Tumor necrotizing factor-α

TRX Thioredoxin

TXNIP Thioredoxin-interacting protein

UPR Unfolded protein response

VDUP1 Vitamin D3 upregulated protein 1

VCAM Vascular cell adhesion protein

VEGF Vascular endothelial growth factor

WT Wild type

ZDF Zucker diabetic fatty

Fig. 1 Schematic representation of TXNIP as a direct NLRP3 activator. ROS generation is a common feature in several types of acute and chronic brain tissue injuries. ROS is well characterized to dissociate TXNIP from its endogenous ligand TRX. This leads to direct TXNIP attachment to NLRP3-inflammasome resulting in activation of caspase-1 that in turn causes maturation and cleavage of pro-IL-1β to IL-1β. This further ends with increased inflammation and impaired recovery after brain injury in mice. ROS, reactive oxygen species; TXNIP, thioredoxin-interacting protein; NLRP3, Nod-like receptor protein 3; IL-1β, interleukin-1-beta

Fig. 2 Schematic representation of ROS/TXNIP interplay in NLRP3 activation in different cell compartments. TXNIP might affect both priming and activation steps in NLRP3 metabolism. Typically in cytosolic milieu, TXNIP directly stimulates NLRP3 inflammasome’s cleavage activity on caspase-1 and subsequent IL-1β maturation. Nuclear TXNIP works as a transcription factor for several genes, contributing to the NLRP3 priming step through amplifying the required transcripts of NLRP3 inflammasome components namely pro-caspase-3 and pro-IL-1β. Mitochondrial TXNIP levels which increase subsequent to TXNIP shuttling in stress conditions release the pro-apoptotic ASK-1 from TRX inhibition. The consequent apoptotic cell death besides the pyroptosis induced by caspase-1 activation ends with release of cell debris and intracellular ions. The induced sterile inflammation produces a positive feedback to amplify NLRP3 inflammasome activation either by ROS-induced TXNIP attachment to NLRP3 inflammasome or through TXNIP-independent pathways. TXNIP, thioredoxin-interacting protein; NLRP3, Nod-like receptor protein 3; ASK-1, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1

Fig. 3 Simplified illustration of TXNIP role in presumptive pathways involved in endothelial dysfunction. Endothelial dysfunction and pro-atherogenic phenotypes may rise from pro-inflammatory or aberrant proliferating signals. EC dysfunctions are more likely in vascular curvatures with disturbed laminar blood flow with high risk for atherosclerotic plaques development. TXNIP expression elevates in response to high glucose, oxidative stress, and also in sites of DSS in vascular tree and might directly contribute to pro-inflammatory signals and atherogenic changes through different pathways. TXNIP basically is well known to instigate NLRP3/IL-1β signaling as a pivotal inflammatory signal. Such locally inflammatory triggers might be amplified by DSS-induced VCAM-1 overexpression and subsequent monocyte adhesion which are dependent on TXNIP activity. Actin stress fibers and the linked intracellular signals may also be affected by TXNIP. ECs’ stress fibers are essential components to determine EC phenotype which in turn would affect major apoptotic and inflammatory pathways. Laminar shear stress in straight blood vessels makes ECs and their stress fibers align in the longitudinal direction of the vessels in a quiescence state. Appropriate formation and alignment of stress fibers are associated with the least JNK signaling and apoptosis in ECs. KLF-2 a well characterized anti-inflammatory checkpoint in ECs may also contribute to stress fiber formation and alignment. DSS-associated TXNIP overexpression may release pro-inflammatory effectors from KLF-2 and aggravate the appropriately designed actin fibers which in turn may escalate the inflammation through JNK activation. This might be augmented by TXNIP-induced Src phosphorylation and inhibition which correlates with less actin stress fiber formation. TXNIP may play different roles in EC abnormal proliferation and angiogenesis which besides its key pro-inflammatory roles may provide other prominent pathway to form atherosclerotic plaques along the vessels. Basically, TXNIP activity may result in suppression of VEGF transcripts through association with TRX which contributes to elevated endothelial VEGF levels. On the other side, it has been well documented that TXNIP is required for VEGF-R2 activation by VEGF and the consequent angiogenesis and EC proliferation. Nevertheless, concluding proliferative effects for TXNIP is hard to conclude, given TXNIP is extensively addressed as a component of combating against cancerous proliferation by inducing G0/G1 cell cycle arrest through different effectors like cycline-A. DSS, disturbed shear stress; TXNIP, thioredoxin-interacting protein; NLRP3, Nod-like receptor protein 3; IL-1β, interleukin-1-beta; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinases; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion protein 1; KLF-2, Kruppel-like factor 2

Fig. 4 Putative pathways of TXNIP activation in neural damage associated with cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. A few molecules are assumed to augment TXNIP expression following acute or chronic brain diseases; however, little is established in details. Boxes with black outline are immediate disease consequences to stimulate TXNIP in steps which might be simplified as follows. As illustrated in the top orange background, as the specific feature in stroke and cerebrovascular complications, (1) hypoxia is thought to engage TXNIP promoter region to enhance TXNIP transcription and HIF-1α likewise. (2) The likely ATP shortage following severe O2 deficiency may lead to deregulation of ion homeostasis and partial membrane hyperpolarization. This would be a progressive cascade of excitotoxicity, Ca2+ overload, and ER stress leading to intracellular accumulation of ROS. On the other side, as described in the top pink background as a common feature in neurodegenerative disorders, (1′) the long-lasting excitotoxicity leads to ER stress together which may lead to intracellular Ca2+ overload. (2′) The persisting oxidative stress fueled by continuous excitotoxicity complicated with other multiple aggravating signals strongly contributes to keep ROS in high levels. (3) The accumulated ROS either in vascular injuries or degenerative disorders is known to induce TXNIP expression probably through its suppressor FOXO modulation. ROS with different sources within the cell may also induce intracellular shuttling of TXNIP to mitochondria and partly to cytosol and plasma membrane. (4) TXNIP still residing in nucleus may substantially affect mitochondrial biogenesis by modulating transcription of HIF-1α or PPAR-α inhibiting and enhancing mitochondrial oxygen consumption respectively. This way, TXNIP plays a pivotal role in cell death and ROS generation in neural injury. (5) Within mitochondria, TXNIP assembles with TRX-2 to prevent its function as a ROS scavenger leaving the ROS distributes to exacerbate TXNIP expression and shuttering. (6) Binding to TXR-2 simultaneously leads to ASK-1 release and activation to induce Cyt-c-dependent apoptosis. (7) The parallel similar cytosolic event leads to p38 MAP production which amplifies nuclear PPAR-α transcripts. (8) Intracytosolic TXNIP when exposed to ROS overload undergoes some structural changes improving its affinity for NLRP3 inflammasome leading to NLRP3 oligomerization and activation to produce mature cytokines. (9) Concurrent with the vast damaging signals, TXNIP may instigate in several cellular compartments, and while translocated to plasma membrane, TXNIP abolishes GLUT-1 transporter function and less glucose uptake abrogating cellular metabolism danger. ROS, reactive oxygen species; TXNIP, thioredoxin-interacting protein; TXR, thioredoxin; HIF-1α, hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha; PPAR-1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 1-alpha; GLUT, glucose transporter; ASK-1, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; NLRP3, Nod-like receptor protein 3; IL-1, interleukin-1; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinases; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinases; FOXO, Forkhead box transcription factor, class O; Cyt C, cytochrome C

Table 1 Summary of studies on TXNIP modulation in cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative diseases

Disease model		TXNIP modulation	Main findings	Reference	
	
Pharmacological	Genetic	
Stroke	tMCAO
Hyperglycemic rats		TXNIP siRNA
72 h prior to I/R (500 pmol, i.c.v.)	Reverse the effect of hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning on hyperglycemic rats	[135]	
tMCAO
Mice	Ruscogenin
1 h prior to I/R (10 mg/kg, p.o.)		Decreased brain infarction, edema, improved neurological outcome by suppressing a TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation and MAPK pathway	[70]	
tMCAO
Rats	Umbelliferone
7 days prior to I/R (15, 30 mg/kg, i.p.)		Protected against cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury by suppressing TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation	[136]	
eMCAO
Mice	Resveratrol
3 h after I/R (5 mg/Kg, i.v.)	TXNIP
Knockout	Protected from ischemic injury characterized by decreased infarct size, improved neurological score suppressing a TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation and apoptosis	[137]	
OGD
Ex vivo hippocampus	Curcumin
1 h prior to I/R (50 mg/kg, i.p.)		Attenuated ischemic brain injury.
Modulation of TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation by suppression of ER stress	[138]	
tMCAO
Rats	Compound 10b
I/R onset (3 mg/kg)		Attenuated cerebral ischemia by upregulating endogenous antioxidant system and downregulation of markers of oxidative stress	[139]	
OGD
Primary neuron		TXNIP siRNA
2 h prior to OGD (25 nM)	Reduced lactate dehydrogenase release	[61]	
Subarachnoid hemorrhage	Rat	Resveratrol (60 mg/kg)	TXNIP siRNA	Reduction in inflammatory and apoptotic factors, as well as attenuation of the prognostic indices	[140]	
Rat	Resveratrol (60 mg/kg)
GSK2656157
PERK inhibitor	TXNIP siRNA	Attenuation of apoptosis and prognostic indicators, including SAH grade, neurological deficits, brain water content, and BBB permeability	[69]	
Rabbit	Telmisartan
72 h prior to I/R (5 mg/kg, i.p.)		Reduced morphological changes of cerebral vasospasm and attenuated endothelial apoptosis significantly	[129]	
Dementia and Alzheimer’s disease	Okadaic acid (OA) induced SH-SY5Y cells	Quercetin		Attenuated tau phosphorylation, suppressed ER stress with decreased phosphorylation of IRE1α and PERK, thereby inhibited TXNIP and NLRP3 inflammasome activation	[141]	
D-galactose-induced rats	Salidroside (20, 40 mg/kg) for 28 days		Significantly attenuated cognitive impairment and neuroinflammation in hippocampus	[127]	
Aβ-induced excitotoxicity	Nobiletin		Reversed the inhibition of glutamate-induced increases in CREB. Phosphorylation, TXNIP, and NMDA receptor subunits	[142]	
ZDF rats	Ac-Cys-Pro-Cys-amide (CB3)
(Thioredoxin agonist)		Diminished apoptotic markers, most likely acting via the MAPK-AMPK-mTOR pathway	[143]	

Table 2 Evidences addressing alleviating impact of TXNIP modulation in endothelial dysfunction

Endothelial complication	Model	TXNIP inhibition	Main findings	Reference	
		
Subject	Stimuli	Pharmacological	Genetic	
Diabetic endothelial dysfunction	Human aortic endothelial cells	High glucose	Metformin		Reduced nuclear entry of ChREBP and FOXO1 as well as their recruitment on the TXNIP promoter, partially through AMPK	[147]	
In vitro
HUVECs	High glucose	Mangiferin		Attenuate IRE1α phosphorylation
Reduce ROS/TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation	[148]	
In vitro
HUVECs
In vivo	High glucose
HGD rats	Rutin		Reduced Nox4 and ROS
Inhibited TXNIP/NLRP3/Caspase-1
Restored phenylephrine-mediated contractions and acetylcholine-induced relaxations in aortic tissue	[149]	
In vitro
HUVECs	High glucose	Teneligliptin		Reduced TXNIP
And ER stress, apoptosis, and cell cycle inhibitors
As well as EC proliferation	[150]	
Diabetic retinopathy	In vitro
Rat retina ECs
Ex vivo
Rat retia	High glucose
STZ rats	Azaserine (inhibitor of HBP pathway)	siRNAs	Reduced sclerotic fibronectin and COX-II (in vitro)
Abolishes diabetes-induced retinal gliosis and ganglion injury (ex vivo)	[126]	
In vivo	STZ rats	Curcumin		Reduced leukocyte-endothelium interaction, and inhibiting ICAM-1 and NOX2 expression.	[151]	
In vitro
human retinal microvascular ECs	High glucose	Minocycline	siRNA	Attenuated ROS/TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation
Decrease cell permeability and apoptosis	[100]	
In vitro
human retinal microvascular ECs	Moderately high glucose		siRNA	Reduced ROS and uncontrolled angiogenesis
By blocking VEGFR2 and the downstream Akt/mTOR	[152]	
Endothelial ER stress	In vitro
Rat aortic ECs	Palmitate	Salicylate
AICAR	siRNA	Activate AMPK
Suppressed ROS-associated ER stress
Reduced TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation	[153]	
In vitro
HUVECs	Palmitate	Astragaloside IV
Cycloastragenol		Ameliorated endothelial dysfunction by inhibiting inflammation and reducing cell apoptosis, through AMPK regulation	[154]	
In vitro
Rat aortic EC
In vivo	palmitate
HFD rats	Ilexgenin A		Enhance AMPK activity
Suppressed ROS-associated TXNIP/NLRP3 induction, through AMPK activation
Reduced EC inflammation and apoptosis	[155]	
HUVECs	Palmitate	Quercetin
Luteolin
EGCG		Suppressed ROS-associated TXNIP/NLRP3 induction, partly through AMPK activation
Reduced EC inflammation and apoptosis	[73]	
In vitro
HUVECs	Thapsigargin	Mangiferin		Prevents TG-induced loss of NO production
inhibited TG-induced TXNIP/IL-1β secretion	[148]	
In vivo	HFD rats	Mangiferin		Prevented ER stress-associated TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome through AMPK activity
Improved endothelium-dependent vasodilation in response to insulin/insulin resistance	[156]	
Endothelial aging	In vivo	Natural/diet-induced aged mice	Resveratrol	KO mice	Prevent rise in NADPH oxidase by diet-induced aging
Decrease collagen accumulation
Decrease nuclear TXNIP	[157]	

Compliance with Ethical Standards

Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


1 Global Burden of Disease Study C 2015 Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Lancet 386 743 800 26063472
2 Kowal SL Dall TM Chakrabarti R 2013 The current and projected economic burden of Parkinson’s disease in the United States Mov Disord 28 311 318 23436720
3 Murray CJ Atkinson C Bhalla K 2013 The state of US health, 1990–2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors JAMA 310 591 608 23842577
4 Bennett DA Krishnamurthi RV Barker-Collo S 2014 The global burden of ischemic stroke: findings of the GBD 2010 study Glob Heart 9 107 112 25432120
5 Rubiano AM Carney N Chesnut R 2015 Global neurotrauma research challenges and opportunities Nature 527 S193 S197 26580327
6 Fischer R Maier O 2015 Interrelation of oxidative stress and inflammation in neurodegenerative disease: role of TNF Oxidative Med Cell Longev 2015
7 Kim GH Kim JE Rhie SJ 2015 The role of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases Exp Neurobiol 24 325 340 26713080
8 Chamorro Á Dirnagl U Urra X 2016 Neuroprotection in acute stroke: targeting excitotoxicity, oxidative and nitrosative stress, and inflammation Lancet Neurol 15 869 881 27180033
9 Witte ME Geurts JJ de Vries HE 2010 Mitochondrial dysfunction: a potential link between neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration? Mitochondrion 10 411 418 20573557
10 Chan PH 2005 Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress as determinants of cell death/survival in stroke Ann N YAcad Sci 1042 203 209
11 Rothwell PM Howard SC Dolan E 2010 Effects of β blockers and calcium-channel blockers on within-individual variability in blood pressure and risk of stroke Lancet Neurol 9 469 480 20227347
12 Girouard H Iadecola C 2006 Neurovascular coupling in the normal brain and in hypertension, stroke, and Alzheimer disease J Appl Physiol 100 328 335 16357086
13 Heppner FL Ransohoff RM Becher B 2015 Immune attack: the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurosci 16 358 25991443
14 Grotta JC Albers GW Broderick JP 2015 Stroke: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management Elsevier Health Sciences
15 Kristián T Siesjö BK 1998 Calcium in ischemic cell death Stroke 29 705 718 9506616
16 Chan PH 1996 Role of oxidants in ischemic brain damage Stroke 27 1124 1129 8650725
17 Xia W Han J Huang G 2010 Inflammation in ischaemic brain injury: current advances and future perspectives Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 37 253 258 19719754
18 Clarke D 1999 Circulation and energy metabolism of the brain Basic Neurochem: Mol Cell Med Asp 637 669
19 Gerlach M Ben-Shachar D Riederer P 1994 Altered brain metabolism of iron as a cause of neurodegenerative diseases? J Neurochem 63 793 807 7519659
20 Cooper AJ Meister A 1997 Glutathione in the brain: disorders of glutathione metabolism Mol Genet Basis Neurol Dis 35
21 Drechsel DA Patel M 2010 Respiration-dependent H2O2 removal in brain mitochondria via the thioredoxin/peroxiredoxin system J Biol Chem 285 27850 27858 20558743
22 Bereczki D Fekete I 2008 Vinpocetine for acute ischaemic stroke The Cochrane Library
23 Geeganage C Beavan J Ellender S 2012 Interventions for dysphagia and nutritional support in acute and subacute stroke The Cochrane Library
24 Farina N Isaac M Clark AR 2012 Vitamin E for Alzheimer’s dementia and mild cognitive impairment Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11
25 Evans JR Henshaw K 2008 Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for preventing age-related macular degeneration Cochrane Database Syst Rev CD000253 18253971
26 Holmgren A Johansson C Berndt C 2005 Thiol redox control via thioredoxin and glutaredoxin systems Portland Press Limited
27 Schulze PC De Keulenaer GW Yoshioka J 2002 Vitamin D3-upregulated protein-1 (VDUP-1) regulates redox-dependent vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation through interaction with thioredoxin Circ Res 91 689 695 12386145
28 Chen K-S DeLuca HF 1994 Isolation and characterization of a novel cDNA from HL-60 cells treated with 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D-3 Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) Gene Struct Expr 1219 26 32
29 Li X Rong Y Zhang M 2009 Up-regulation of thioredoxin interacting protein (Txnip) by p38 MAPK and FOXO1 contributes to the impaired thioredoxin activity and increased ROS in glucose-treated endothelial cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 381 660 665 19254690
30 Morrison JA Pike LA Sams SB 2014 Thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) is a novel tumor suppressor in thyroid cancer Mol Cancer 13 62 24645981
31 Singh LP 2013 Thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) and pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy J Clin Exp Ophthalmol 4
32 Shalev A 2008 Lack of TXNIP protects β-cells against glucotoxicity Portland Press Limited
33 Parikh H Carlsson E Chutkow WA 2007 TXNIP regulates peripheral glucose metabolism in humans PLoS Med 4 e158 17472435
34 Wang Z Rong Y Malone M 2006 Thioredoxin-interacting protein (txnip) is a glucocorticoid-regulated primary response gene involved in mediating glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis Oncogene 25 1903 1913 16301999
35 Bellamy CO Malcolmson RD Harrison DJ 1995 Cell death in health and disease: the biology and regulation of apoptosis Seminars in cancer biology Elsevier
36 Zhou J Chng W-J 2013 Roles of thioredoxin binding protein (TXNIP) in oxidative stress, apoptosis and cancer Mitochondrion 13 163 169 22750447
37 Abais JM Xia M Zhang Y 2015 Redox regulation of NLRP3 inflammasomes: ROS as trigger or effector? Antioxid Redox Signal 22 1111 1129 25330206
38 Yoshihara E Masaki S Matsuo Y 2014 Thioredoxin/Txnip: redoxisome, as a redox switch for the pathogenesis of diseases Front Immunol 4 514 24409188
39 Nordlund P Reichard P 2006 Ribonucleotide reductases Annu Rev Biochem 75 681 706 16756507
40 Luthman M Holmgren A 1982 Rat liver thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase: purification and characterization Biochemistry 21 6628 6633 7159551
41 Sabens EA Mieyal JJ 2009 Glutaredoxin and thioredoxin enzyme systems: catalytic mechanisms and physiological functions Glutathione and sulfur amino acids in human health and disease Masella R Massa G Hoboken, NJ John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc 121 156
42 Lippoldt A Padilla C Gerst H 1995 Localization of thioredoxin in the rat brain and functional implications J Neurosci 15 6747 6756 7472433
43 Rybnikova E Damdimopoulos AE Gustafsson JÅ 2000 Expression of novel antioxidant thioredoxin-2 in the rat brain Eur J Neurosci 12 1669 1678 10792444
44 Yoshihara E Masaki S Matsuo Y 2013 Thioredoxin/Txnip: redoxisome, as a redox switch for the pathogenesis of diseases Front Immunol 4 23386848
45 Takagi Y Mitsui A Nishiyama A 1999 Overexpression of thioredoxin in transgenic mice attenuates focal ischemic brain damage Proc Natl Acad Sci 96 4131 4136 10097175
46 Hattori I Takagi Y Nakamura H 2004 Intravenous administration of thioredoxin decreases brain damage following transient focal cerebral ischemia in mice Antioxid Redox Signal 6 81 87 14713338
47 Mitsui A Hamuro J Nakamura H 2002 Overexpression of human thioredoxin in transgenic mice controls oxidative stress and life span Antioxid Redox Signal 4 693 696 12230882
48 Tanaka T Hosoi F Yamaguchi-Iwai Y 2002 Thioredoxin-2 (TRX-2) is an essential gene regulating mitochondria-dependent apoptosis EMBO J 21 1695 1703 11927553
49 Wang D Masutani H S-i O 2006 Control of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization and Bcl-xL levels by thioredoxin 2 in DT40 cells J Biol Chem 281 7384 7391 16407224
50 Chen Y Cai J Murphy T 2002 Overexpressed human mitochondrial thioredoxin confers resistance to oxidant-induced apoptosis in human osteosarcoma cells J Biol Chem 277 33242 33248 12032145
51 Matthews JR Wakasugi N Virelizier J-L 1992 Thiordoxin regulates the DNA binding activity of NF-κB by reduction of a disulphid bond involving cysteine 62 Nucleic Acids Res 20 3821 3830 1508666
52 Okamoto T Ogiwara H Hayashi T 1992 Human thioredoxin/adult T cell leukemia-derived factor activates the enhancer binding protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 by thiol redox control mechanism Int Immunol 4 811 819 1498089
53 Welsh SJ Bellamy WT Briehl MM 2002 The redox protein thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) increases hypoxia-inducible factor 1α protein expression Cancer Res 62 5089 5095 12208766
54 Baker AF Dragovich T Tate WR 2006 The antitumor thioredoxin-1 inhibitor PX-12 (1-methylpropyl 2-imidazolyl di-sulfide) decreases thioredoxin-1 and VEGF levels in cancer patient plasma J Lab Clin Med 147 83 90 16459166
55 Bodnar JS Chatterjee A Castellani LW 2002 Positional cloning of the combined hyperlipidemia gene Hyplip1 Nat Genet 30 110 11753387
56 Levendusky MC Basle J Chang S 2009 Expression and regulation of vitamin D3 upregulated protein 1 (VDUP1) is conserved in mammalian and insect brain J Comp Neurol 517 581 600 19824090
57 Xu G Chen J Jing G 2013 Thioredoxin-interacting protein regulates insulin transcription through microRNA-204 Nat Med 19 1141 1146 23975026
58 Elbein SC Hoffman MD Teng K 1999 A genome-wide search for type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in Utah Caucasians Diabetes 48 1175 1182 10331426
59 Vionnet N Dupont S Gallina S 2000 Genomewide search for type 2 diabetes–susceptibility genes in French Whites: evidence for a novel susceptibility locus for early-onset diabetes on chromosome 3q27-qter and independent replication of a type 2–diabetes locus on chromosome 1q21–q24 Am J Hum Genet 67 1470 1480 11067779
60 Junn E Han SH Im JY 2000 Vitamin D3 up-regulated protein 1 mediates oxidative stress via suppressing the thioredoxin function J Immunol 164 6287 6295 10843682
61 Kim GS Jung JE Narasimhan P 2012 Induction of thioredoxin-interacting protein is mediated by oxidative stress, calcium, and glucose after brain injury in mice Neurobiol Dis 46 440 449 22366181
62 Saxena G Chen J Shalev A 2010 Intracellular shuttling and mitochondrial function of thioredoxin-interacting protein J Biol Chem 285 3997 4005 19959470
63 Wu N Zheng B Shaywitz A 2013 AMPK-dependent degradation of TXNIP upon energy stress leads to enhanced glucose uptake via GLUT1 Mol Cell 49 1167 1175 23453806
64 Spindel ON Berk BC 2011 Thioredoxin-interacting protein mediates TRX1 translocation to the plasma membrane in response to tumor necrosis factor-α Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 31 1890 1897 21636804
65 K-y K Shin SM Kim JK 2004 Heat shock factor regulates VDUP1 gene expression Biochem Biophys Res Commun 315 369 375 14766217
66 Schulze PC Yoshioka J Takahashi T 2004 Hyperglycemia promotes oxidative stress through inhibition of thioredoxin function by thioredoxin-interacting protein J Biol Chem 279 30369 30374 15128745
67 Wang Y De Keulenaer GW Lee RT 2002 Vitamin D3-up-regulated protein-1 is a stress-responsive gene that regulates cardiomyocyte viability through interaction with thioredoxin J Biol Chem 277 26496 26500 12011048
68 Saitoh M Nishitoh H Fujii M 1998 Mammalian thioredoxin is a direct inhibitor of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 1 EMBO J 17 2596 2606 9564042
69 Chen J Fontes G Saxena G 2010 Lack of TXNIP protects against mitochondria-mediated apoptosis but not against fatty acid–induced ER stress–mediated β-cell death Diabetes 59 440 447 19875615
70 Ishrat T Mohamed IN Pillai B 2015 Thioredoxin-interacting protein: a novel target for neuroprotection in experimental thromboembolic stroke in mice Mol Neurobiol 51 766 778 24939693
71 Zhao Q Che X Zhang H 2017 Thioredoxin-interacting protein mediates apoptosis in early brain injury after subarachnoid haemorrhage Int J Mol Sci 18 854
72 Ye X Zuo D Yu L 2017 ROS/TXNIP pathway contributes to thrombin induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation and cell apoptosis in microglia Biochem Biophys Res Commun 485 499 505 28202418
73 Wu J Xu X Li Y 2014 Quercetin, luteolin and epigallocatechin gallate alleviate TXNIP and NLRP3-mediated inflammation and apoptosis with regulation of AMPK in endothelial cells Eur J Pharmacol 745 59 68 25446924
74 Devi TS Hosoya K-I Terasaki T 2013 Critical role of TXNIP in oxidative stress, DNA damage and retinal pericyte apoptosis under high glucose: implications for diabetic retinopathy Exp Cell Res 319 1001 1012 23353834
75 Wei M Jiao D Han D 2017 Knockdown of RNF2 induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in prostate cancer cells through the upregulation of TXNIP Oncotarget 8 5323 28029659
76 Li J Yue Z Xiong W 2017 TXNIP overexpression suppresses proliferation and induces apoptosis in SMMC7221 cells through ROS generation and MAPK pathway activation Oncol Rep 37 3369 3376 28440491
77 Zhou J Bi C Cheong L-L 2011 The histone methyltransferase inhibitor, DZNep, up-regulates TXNIP, increases ROS production, and targets leukemia cells in AML Blood 118 2830 2839 21734239
78 Zhang H Gao P Fukuda R 2007 HIF-1 inhibits mitochondrial biogenesis and cellular respiration in VHL-deficient renal cell carcinoma by repression of C-MYC activity Cancer Cell 11 407 420 17482131
79 Goda N Kanai M 2012 Hypoxia-inducible factors and their roles in energy metabolism Int J Hematol 95 457 463 22535382
80 Kelly DP 2008 Hypoxic reprogramming Nat Genet 40 132 134 18227870
81 Shin D Jeon J-H Jeong M 2008 VDUP1 mediates nuclear export of HIF1α via CRM1-dependent pathway Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Cell Res 1783 838 848
82 Duncan JG Fong JL Medeiros DM 2007 Insulin-resistant heart exhibits a mitochondrial biogenic response driven by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α/PGC-1α gene regulatory pathway Circulation 115 909 917 17261654
83 Liu G-H Qu J Shen X 2006 Thioredoxin-mediated negative autoregulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α transcriptional activity Mol Biol Cell 17 1822 1833 16492688
84 Zarubin T Jiahuai H 2005 Activation and signaling of the p38 MAP kinase pathway Cell Res 15 11 18 15686620
85 Barger PM Browning AC Garner AN 2001 p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α a potential role in the cardiac metabolic stress response J Biol Chem 276 44495 44501 11577087
86 Perrone L Devi TS Ki H 2009 Thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) induces inflammation through chromatin modification in retinal capillary endothelial cells under diabetic conditions J Cell Physiol 221 262 272 19562690
87 Wang X-Q Nigro P Fujiwara K 2012 Thioredoxin interacting protein promotes endothelial cell inflammation in response to disturbed flow by increasing leukocyte adhesion and repressing Kruppel-like factor 2Novelty and significance Circ Res 110 560 568 22267843
88 Ishrat T Nasoohi S 2018 The NLRP3 inflammasome: a possible therapeutic target for treatment of stroke, in cellular and molecular approaches to regeneration and repair Springer 427 480
89 Gupta R Ghosh S Monks B 2014 RNA and β-hemolysin of group B Streptococcus induce interleukin-1β (IL-1β) by activating NLRP3 inflammasomes in mouse macrophages J Biol Chem 289 13701 13705 24692555
90 Costa A Gupta R Signorino G 2012 Activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome by group B streptococci J Immunol 188 1953 1960 22250086
91 Rathinam VA Vanaja SK Waggoner L 2012 TRIF licenses caspase-11-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation by gram-negative bacteria Cell 150 606 619 22819539
92 Allen IC Scull MA Moore CB 2009 The NLRP3 inflammasome mediates in vivo innate immunity to influenza A virus through recognition of viral RNA Immunity 30 556 565 19362020
93 Gonçalves VM Matteucci KC Buzzo CL 2013 NLRP3 controls Trypanosoma cruzi infection through a caspase-1-dependent IL-1R-independent NO production PLoS Negl Trop Dis 7 e2469 24098823
94 Duewell P Kono H Rayner KJ 2010 NLRP3 inflammasomes are required for atherogenesis and activated by cholesterol crystals Nature 464 1357 1361 20428172
95 Pazár B Ea H-K Narayan S 2011 Basic calcium phosphate crystals induce monocyte/macrophage IL-1β secretion through the NLRP3 inflammasome in vitro J Immunol 186 2495 2502 21239716
96 Zhou R Tardivel A Thorens B 2010 Thioredoxin-interacting protein links oxidative stress to inflammasome activation Nat Immunol 11 136 140 20023662
97 Mohamed IN Hafez SS Fairaq A 2014 Thioredoxin-interacting protein is required for endothelial NLRP3 inflammasome activation and cell death in a rat model of high-fat diet Diabetologia 57 413 423 24201577
98 Wang W Wang C Ding XQ 2013 Quercetin and allopurinol reduce liver thioredoxin-interacting protein to alleviate inflammation and lipid accumulation in diabetic rats Br J Pharmacol 169 1352 1371 23647015
99 Luo B Li B Wang W 2014 Rosuvastatin alleviates diabetic cardiomyopathy by inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome and MAPK pathways in a type 2 diabetes rat model Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 28 33 43 24254031
100 Chen W Zhao M Zhao S 2017 Activation of the TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome pathway contributes to inflammation in diabetic retinopathy: a novel inhibitory effect of minocycline Inflamm Res 66 157 166 27785530
101 Gao P He F-F Tang H 2015 NADPH oxidase-induced NALP3 inflammasome activation is driven by thioredoxin-interacting protein which contributes to podocyte injury in hyperglycemia Journal of Diabetes Research 2015
102 Lv H Liu Q Wen Z 2017 Xanthohumol ameliorates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury via induction of AMPK/GSK3β-Nrf2 signal axis Redox Biol 12 311 324 28285192
103 Yin Y Zhou Z Liu W 2017 Vascular endothelial cells senescence is associated with NOD-like receptor family pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation via reactive oxygen species (ROS)/thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) pathway Int J Biochem Cell Biol 84 22 34 28064010
104 Zhou R Yazdi AS Menu P 2011 A role for mitochondria in NLRP3 inflammasome activation Nature 469 221 225 21124315
105 van Hooijdonk D 2013 Theoredoxin oxidation mediated by mitochondrial ROS is a key event in NLRP3 inflammasome activation
106 Lunov O Syrovets T Loos C 2011 Amino-functionalized polystyrene nanoparticles activate the NLRP3 inflammasome in human macrophages ACS Nano 5 9648 9657 22111911
107 Park YJ Yoon SJ Suh HW 2013 TXNIP deficiency exacerbates endotoxic shock via the induction of excessive nitric oxide synthesis PLoS Pathog 9 e1003646 24098117
108 Joshi S Wang W Peck AB 2015 Activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in association with calcium oxalate crystal induced reactive oxygen species in kidneys J Urol 193 1684 1691 25437532
109 Zhang X Zhang J-H Chen X-Y 2015 Reactive oxygen species-induced TXNIP drives fructose-mediated hepatic inflammation and lipid accumulation through NLRP3 inflammasome activation Antioxid Redox Signal 22 848 870 25602171
110 Liu W Gu J Qi J 2015 Lentinan exerts synergistic apoptotic effects with paclitaxel in A549 cells via activating ROS-TXNIP-NLRP3 inflammasome J Cell Mol Med 19 1949 1955 25858687
111 Minn AH Hafele C Shalev A 2005 Thioredoxin-interacting protein is stimulated by glucose through a carbohydrate response element and induces β-cell apoptosis Endocrinology 146 2397 2405 15705778
112 Shalev A Pise-Masison CA Radonovich M 2002 Oligonucleotide microarray analysis of intact human pancreatic islets: identification of glucose-responsive genes and a highly regulated TGFβ signaling pathway Endocrinology 143 3695 3698 12193586
113 Chen J Cha-Molstad H Szabo A 2009 Diabetes induces and calcium channel blockers prevent cardiac expression of proapoptotic thioredoxin-interacting protein Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 296 E1133 E1139 19258488
114 Soriano-Tárraga C Jiménez-Conde J Giralt-Steinhauer E 2015 Epigenome-wide association study identifies TXNIP gene associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and sustained hyperglycemia Hum Mol Genet 25 609 619 26643952
115 Reich E Tamary A Sionov RV 2012 Involvement of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) in glucocorticoid-mediated beta cell death Diabetologia 55 1048 1057 22246375
116 Shaked M Ketzinel-Gilad M Cerasi E 2011 AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) mediates nutrient regulation of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) in pancreatic beta-cells PLoS One 6 e28804 22194917
117 Fang S Jin Y Zheng H 2011 High glucose condition up-regulated Txnip expression level in rat mesangial cells through ROS/MEK/MAPK pathway Mol Cell Biochem 347 175 182 20953987
118 Mubarak B Soriano FX Hardingham GE 2009 Synaptic NMDAR activity suppresses FOXO1 expression via a cis-acting FOXO binding site: FOXO1 is a FOXO target gene Channels 3 233 239 19690465
119 Brunet A Bonni A Zigmond MJ 1999 Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor Cell 96 857 868 10102273
120 de Candia P Blekhman R Chabot AE 2008 A combination of genomic approaches reveals the role of FOXO1a in regulating an oxidative stress response pathway PLoS One 3 e1670 18301748
121 Kibbe C Chen J Xu G 2013 FOXO1 competes with carbohydrate response element-binding protein (ChREBP) and inhibits thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) transcription in pancreatic beta cells J Biol Chem 288 23194 23202 23803610
122 Xu G Chen J Jing G 2012 Preventing β-cell loss and diabetes with calcium channel blockers Diabetes 61 848 856 22442301
123 Cha-Molstad H Xu G Chen J 2012 Calcium channel blockers act through nuclear factor Y to control transcription of key cardiac genes Mol Pharmacol 82 541 549 22734068
124 Lerner AG Upton J-P Praveen P 2012 IRE1α induces thioredoxin-interacting protein to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome and promote programmed cell death under irremediable ER stress Cell Metab 16 250 264 22883233
125 Oslowski CM Hara T O’Sullivan-Murphy B 2012 Thioredoxin-interacting protein mediates ER stress-induced β cell death through initiation of the inflammasome Cell Metab 16 265 273 22883234
126 Perrone L Devi T Hosoya K 2010 Inhibition of TXNIP expression in vivo blocks early pathologies of diabetic retinopathy Cell Death Dis 1 e65 21364670
127 Yamawaki H Pan S Lee RT 2005 Fluid shear stress inhibits vascular inflammation by decreasing thioredoxin-interacting protein in endothelial cells J Clin Investig 115 733 15696199
128 Gouget T Djelloul M Boucraut J 2011 TXNIP, the major player in insulin resistance, is early over-expressed in the brain of the 5XFAD Alzheimer’s mice model and is induced by Aβ in vitro: emerging role of TXNIP and inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease progression Alzheimers Dement: J Alzheimers Assoc 7 S684
129 Gao J He H Jiang W 2015 Salidroside ameliorates cognitive impairment in a d-galactose-induced rat model of Alzheimer’s disease Behav Brain Res 293 27 33 26192909
130 Kaya B Erdi F Kilinc I 2015 Alterations of the thioredoxin system during subarachnoid hemorrhage-induced cerebral vasospasm Acta Neurochir 157 793 25782582
131 Erdi F Keskin F Esen H 2016 Telmisartan ameliorates oxidative stress and subarachnoid haemorrhage-induced cerebral vasospasm Neurol Res 38 224 231 27078703
132 El-Azab M Baldowski B Mysona B 2014 Deletion of thioredoxin-interacting protein preserves retinal neuronal function by preventing inflammation and vascular injury Br J Pharmacol 171 1299 1313 24283717
133 Al-Gayyar MM Abdelsaid MA Matragoon S 2011 Thioredoxin interacting protein is a novel mediator of retinal inflammation and neurotoxicity Br J Pharmacol 164 170 180 21434880
134 Zhang Q-Y Pan Y Wang R 2014 Quercetin inhibits AMPK/TXNIP activation and reduces inflammatory lesions to improve insulin signaling defect in the hypothalamus of high fructose-fed rats J Nutr Biochem 25 420 428 24491314
135 Hua K Sheng X T-t L 2015 The edaravone and 3-n-butylphthalide ring-opening derivative 10b effectively attenuates cerebral ischemia injury in rats Acta Pharmacol Sin 36 917 927 26073328
136 Matragoon S Al-Gayyar MM Abdelsaid MA 2011 Thioredoxin interacting protein is a novel mediator of retinal inflammation and neurotoxicity Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 52 1006 1006
137 Nivet-Antoine V Cottart C-H Lemaréchal H 2010 Trans-resveratrol downregulates Txnip overexpression occurring during liver ischemia-reperfusion Biochimie 92 1766 1771 20709139
138 Cao G Jiang N Hu Y 2016 Ruscogenin attenuates cerebral ischemia-induced blood-brain barrier dysfunction by suppressing TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation and the MAPK pathway Int J Mol Sci 17 1418
139 Li Y Li J Li S 2015 Curcumin attenuates glutamate neurotoxicity in the hippocampus by suppression of ER stress-associated TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation in a manner dependent on AMPK Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 286 53 63 25791922
140 Hou Y Wang Y He Q 2018 Nrf2 inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome activation through regulating Trx1/TXNIP complex in cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury Behav Brain Res 336 32 39 28851669
141 Yamaguchi F Takata M Kamitori K 2008 Rare sugar D-allose induces specific up-regulation of TXNIP and subsequent G1 cell cycle arrest in hepatocellular carcinoma cells by stabilization of p27kip1 Int J Oncol 32 377 385 18202760
142 Chen J Deng X Liu N 2016 Quercetin attenuates tau hyperphosphorylation and improves cognitive disorder via suppression of ER stress in a manner dependent on AMPK pathway J Funct Foods 22 463 476
143 Ohizumi Y 2015 A new strategy for preventive and functional therapeutic methods for dementia—approach using natural products Yakugaku Zasshi: J Pharm Soc Jpn 135 449 464
144 Hoon JN Willigers JM Troost J 2000 Vascular effects of 5-HT1B/1D-receptor agonists in patients with migraine headaches Clin Pharmacol Ther 68 418 426 11061582
145 Gao Y Li W Liu Y 2017 Effect of telmisartan on preventing learning and memory deficits via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ in vascular dementia spontaneously hypertensive rats Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases
146 Varma A Adams W Lloyd J 2002 Diagnostic patterns of regional atrophy on MRI and regional cerebral blood flow change on SPECT in young onset patients with Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia and vascular dementia Acta Neurol Scand 105 261 269 11939938
147 Li X Kover KL Heruth DP 2015 New insight into metformin action: regulation of ChREBP and FoXO1 activities in endothelial cells Mol Endocrinol 29 1184 1194 26147751
148 Song J Li J Hou F 2015 Mangiferin inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated thioredoxin-interacting protein/NLRP3 inflammasome activation with regulation of AMPK in endothelial cells Metabolism 64 428 437 25499441
149 Wang W Wu Q-h Sui Y 2017 Rutin protects endothelial dysfunction by disturbing Nox4 and ROS-sensitive NLRP3 inflammasome Biomed Pharmacother 86 32 40 27936392
150 Pujadas G De Nigris V Prattichizzo F 2017 The dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor teneligliptin functions as antioxidant on human endothelial cells exposed to chronic hyperglycemia and metabolic high-glucose memory Endocrine 56 509 520 27530507
151 Wongeakin N Bhattarakosol P Patumraj S 2014 Molecular mechanisms of curcumin on diabetes-induced endothelial dysfunctions: Txnip, ICAM-1, and NOX2 expressions Biomed Res Int 2014
152 Duan J Du C Shi Y 2017 Thioredoxin-interacting protein deficiency ameliorates diabetic retinal angiogenesis Int J Biochem Cell Biol
153 Li J Wang Y Wang Y 2015 Pharmacological activation of AMPK prevents Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission and alleviates endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated endothelial dysfunction J Mol Cell Cardiol 86 62 74 26196303
154 Zhao Y Li Q Zhao W 2015 Astragaloside IV and cycloastragenol are equally effective in inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation in the endothelium J Ethnopharmacol 169 210 218 25922268
155 Li Y Yang J Chen M-H 2015 Ilexgenin A inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress and ameliorates endothelial dysfunction via suppression of TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome activation in an AMPK dependent manner Pharmacol Res 99 101 115 26054569
156 Xu X Chen Y Song J 2017 Mangiferin suppresses endoplasmic reticulum stress in perivascular adipose tissue and prevents insulin resistance in the endothelium Eur J Nutr 1 13
157 Bedarida T Baron S Vibert F 2015 Resveratrol decreases TXNIP mRNA and protein nuclear expressions with an arterial function improvement in old mice J Gerontol A: Biomed Sci Med Sci 71 720 729
158 Devi TS Lee I Hüttemann M 2012 TXNIP links innate host defense mechanisms to oxidative stress and inflammation in retinal Muller glia under chronic hyperglycemia: implications for diabetic retinopathy Exp Diabetes Res 2012
159 Spindel ON Burke RM Yan C 2014 Thioredoxin-interacting protein is a biomechanical regulator of Src activity novelty and significance Circ Res 114 1125 1132 24515523
160 Park S-Y Shi X Pang J 2013 Thioredoxin-interacting protein mediates sustained VEGFR2 signaling in endothelial cells required for angiogenesis significance Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 33 737 743 23393387
161 Riahi Y Kaiser N Cohen G 2015 Foam cell-derived 4-hydroxynonenal induces endothelial cell senescence in a TXNIP-dependent manner J Cell Mol Med 19 1887 1899 25754218
162 Advani A Gilbert RE Thai K 2009 Expression, localization, and function of the thioredoxin system in diabetic nephropathy J Am Soc Nephrol 20 730 741 19211714
163 Byon CH Han T Wu J 2015 Txnip ablation reduces vascular smooth muscle cell inflammation and ameliorates atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E knockout mice Atherosclerosis 241 313 321 26062991
164 Zhao Y Li X Tang S 2015 Retrospective analysis of the relationship between elevated plasma levels of TXNIP and carotid intima-media thickness in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance and early type 2 diabetes mellitus Diabetes Res Clin Pract 109 372 377 26026780
165 Obikane H Abiko Y Ueno H 2010 Effect of endothelial cell proliferation on atherogenesis: a role of p21 Sdi/Cip/Waf1 in monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells Atherosclerosis 212 116 122 20598695
166 Malek AM Izumo S 1996 Mechanism of endothelial cell shape change and cytoskeletal remodeling in response to fluid shear stress J Cell Sci 109 713 726 8718663
167 Kaunas R Usami S Chien S 2006 Regulation of stretch-induced JNK activation by stress fiber orientation Cell Signal 18 1924 1931 16581230
168 Xu D Kishi H Kawamichi H 2007 Involvement of Fyn tyrosine kinase in actin stress fiber formation in fibroblasts FEBS Lett 581 5227 5233 17950286
169 Boon RA Leyen TA Fontijn RD 2010 KLF2-induced actin shear fibers control both alignment to flow and JNK signaling in vascular endothelium Blood 115 2533 2542 20032497
170 Sun X Jiao X Ma Y 2016 Trimethylamine N-oxide induces inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in human umbilical vein endothelial cells via activating ROS-TXNIP-NLRP3 inflammasome Biochem Biophys Res Commun 481 63 70 27833015
171 Park H-Y Kwon HM Lim HJ 2001 Potential role of leptin in angiogenesis: leptin induces endothelial cell proliferation and expression of matrix metalloproteinases in vivo and in vitro Exp Mol Med 33 95 102 11460888
172 Azuma K Watada H Niihashi M 2003 A new En face method is useful to quantitate endothelial damage in vivo Biochem Biophys Res Commun 309 384 390 12951061
173 Caplan BA Schwartz CJ 1973 Increased endothelial cell turnover in areas of in vivo Evans Blue uptake in the pig aorta Atherosclerosis 17 401 417 4123526
174 Dunn LL Buckle AM Cooke JP 2010 The emerging role of the thioredoxin system in angiogenesis Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 30 2089 2098 20798378
175 Piao Z Yoon S Kim M 2009 VDUP1 potentiates Ras-mediated angiogenesis via ROS production in endothelial cells Cellular and molecular biology (Noisy-le-Grand, France) 55 OL1096 103
176 Abdelsaid MA Matragoon S El-Remessy AB 2013 Thioredoxin-interacting protein expression is required for VEGF-mediated angiogenic signal in endothelial cells Antioxid Redox Signal 19 2199 2212 23718729
177 Spindel ON Yan C Berk BC 2012 Thioredoxin-interacting protein mediates nuclear–to–plasma membrane communication Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 32 1264 1270 22345166
178 Dunn L Simpson P Lecce L 2012 TXNIP knockdown rescues diabetes-related impairment in endothelial progenitor cell-mediated angiogenesis Am Heart Assoc
179 Buckle A Dunn L Ng MK 2007 Hyperglycaemia inhibits thioredoxin-mediated angiogenesis: implications for impairment of neovascularisation in diabetes mellitus Heart Lung Circ 16 S214 S215
180 Dunn LL Simpson PJ Prosser HC 2014 A critical role for thioredoxin-interacting protein in diabetes-related impairment of angiogenesis Diabetes 63 675 687 24198286
181 Han SH Jeon JH Ju HR 2003 VDUP1 upregulated by TGF-[beta] 1 and 1, 25-dihydorxyvitamin D3 inhibits tumor cell growth by blocking cell-cycle progression Oncogene 22 4035 12821938
182 Kallay E Pietschmann P Toyokuni S 2001 Characterization of a vitamin D receptor knockout mouse as a model of colorectal hyperproliferation and DNA damage Carcinogenesis 22 1429 1435 11532865
183 Zinser GM Suckow M Welsh J 2005 Vitamin D receptor (VDR) ablation alters carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis in mammary gland, epidermis and lymphoid tissues J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 97 153 164 16111884
184 Maleszewska M Vanchin B Harmsen MC 2016 The decrease in histone methyltransferase EZH2 in response to fluid shear stress alters endothelial gene expression and promotes quiescence Angiogenesis 19 9 24 26416763
185 Candelario-Jalil E Mhadu NH Al-Dalain SM 2001 Time course of oxidative damage in different brain regions following transient cerebral ischemia in gerbils Neurosci Res 41 233 241 11672836
186 Wang X Li R Wang X 2015 Umbelliferone ameliorates cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury via upregulating the PPAR gamma expression and suppressing TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome Neurosci Lett 600 182 187 26071904
187 Baker AF Koh MY Williams RR 2008 Identification of thioredoxin-interacting protein 1 as a hypoxia-inducible factor 1α-induced gene in pancreatic cancer Pancreas 36 178 186 18376310
188 Guo Z-N Xu L Hu Q 2016 Hyperbaric oxygen preconditioning attenuates hemorrhagic transformation through reactive oxygen species/thioredoxin-interacting protein/Nod-like receptor protein 3 pathway in hyperglycemic middle cerebral artery occlusion rats Crit Care Med 44 e403 e411 26646457
189 Zhao Q Che X Zhang H 2017 Thioredoxin-interacting protein links endoplasmic reticulum stress to inflammatory brain injury and apoptosis after subarachnoid haemorrhage J Neuroinflammation 14 104 28490373
190 Sheth SS Bodnar JS Ghazalpour A 2006 Hepatocellular carcinoma in Txnip-deficient mice Oncogene 25 3528 3536 16607285
