LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9508166
8761
Neurobiol Learn Mem
Neurobiol Learn Mem
Neurobiology of learning and memory
1074-7427
1095-9564

29574082
6150846
10.1016/j.nlm.2018.03.017
NIHMS958175
Article
Impact of sex steroids and reproductive stage on sleep-dependent memory consolidation in women
Baker Fiona C. 14
Sattari Negin 2
de Zambotti Massimiliano 1
Goldstone Aimee 1
Alaynick William A. 3
Mednick Sara C. 2*
1 Center for Health Sciences, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA-94025 , USA
2 UC Irvine, Department of Cognitive Sciences. Irvine, CA, 92697
3 ScholarNexus, 7770 Regents Rd, San Diego, CA, 92122
4 Brain Function Research Group, School of Physiology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
* Corresponding author: Sara C. Mednick, PhD, Address: UC Irvine, Department of Cognitive Sciences, Irvine, CA, 92697, Telephone: (949) 824-4607, saramednick@gmail.com
8 4 2018
21 3 2018
4 2019
01 4 2020
160 118131
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Age and sex are two of the three major risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease (ApoE-e4 allele is the third), with women having a two-fold greater risk for Alzheimer’s disease after the age of 75 years. Sex differences have been shown across a wide range of cognitive skills in young and older adults, and evidence supports a role for sex steroids, especially estradiol, in protecting against the development of cognitive decline in women. Sleep may also be a protective factor against age-related cognitive decline, since specific electrophysiological sleep events (e.g. sleep spindle/slow oscillation coupling) are critical for offline memory consolidation. Furthermore, studies in young women have shown fluctuations in sleep events and sleep-dependent memory consolidation during different phases of the menstrual cycle that are associated with the levels of sex steroids. An under-appreciated possibility is that there may be an important interaction between these two protective factors (sex steroids and sleep) that may play a role in daily fluctuations in cognitive processing, in particular memory, across a woman’s lifespan. Here, we summarize the current knowledge of sex steroid-dependent influences on sleep and cognition across the lifespan in women, with special emphasis on sleep-dependent memory processing. We further indicate gaps in knowledge that require further experimental examination in order to fully appreciate the complex and changing landscape of sex steroids and cognition. Lastly, we propose a series of testable predictions for how sex steroids impact sleep events and sleep-dependent cognition across the three major reproductive stages in women (reproductive years, menopause transition, and post-menopause).

Key terms

Sleep spindles
Progesterone
Polysomnography
Menopause
Menstrual cycle

Introduction

Behavior and brain function are sexually dimorphic across a range of cognitive domains including memory, emotion, visual perception and spatial navigation (Voyer et al. 1995, Astur et al. 1998, Lewin et al. 2001, Canli et al. 2002, Cahill 2006, McDevitt et al. 2014, Diekelmann et al. 2016, Voyer et al. 2016). Generally, women outperform men in verbal memory tasks including word recall and recognition, name recognition, as well as memory for emotional stimuli, while men outperform women in visual-spatial tasks and with certain mathematical abilities (Voyer et al. 1995, Lewin et al. 2001, Voyer et al. 2016). There is also a marked sex difference in risk for neurodegenerative conditions associated with memory and learning problems, like Alzheimer’s disease. In fact, women have a 2-fold greater risk for Alzheimer’s disease after 75 years, a difference not fully accounted for by longevity or level of education (Hamson et al. 2016). Although the underlying mechanisms for these sex differences are still unclear, sex steroids likely play a role, particularly in the context of aging (Henderson 2009, Brinton et al. 2015, Engler-Chiurazzi et al. 2017, Merlo et al. 2017, Pike 2017).

Decades of preclinical and human research have established the substantial effects of sex steroids on hippocampal-dependent memory (Luine 2014, Duarte-Guterman et al. 2015, Hamson et al. 2016). Natural fluctuations in sex steroids across the menstrual cycle and the gradual diminishing levels in women approaching menopause (menopausal transition) provide two experimentally tractable windows into their impact on cognition. Studies in reproductive age women have shown changes in cognition across the difference phases of the menstrual cycle, yet the results are inconsistent and studies are frequently underpowered (See (Sundstrom Poromaa and Gingnell 2014) for review). On the other hand, the menopausal transition combines endocrine and chronological aging with unique mechanistic impacts on memory function that may make the female brain vulnerable to development of dementia (Yin et al. 2015). For example, the menopausal transition is associated with altered hippocampal activity and connectivity, poorer memory performance (Jacobs et al. 2016), and more memory complaints and difficulties (Gold et al. 2000). Thus, the menopausal transition has been introduced as an important critical window for the early detection of cognitive vulnerability, and for implementation of preventive interventions. Importantly, the influence of sex steroids on memory may be mediated by their effect on other modifiable, protective biological factors that influence memory, such as sleep. A growing body of evidence shows that sleep is critical for the long-term formation of memories, with several electrophysiological events, including slow oscillations (SO) and sleep spindles, linked with memory consolidation (Walker and Stickgold 2004, Diekelmann and Born 2010, Abel et al. 2013, Rasch and Born 2013).

The age-related diminishment in these sleep electrophysiological features is thought to contribute to age-related decline in memory (Mander et al. 2013, Helfrich et al. 2018), and new research points to the possibility of modifying sleep in older adults to mitigate age-related cognitive decline (Westerberg et al. 2015, Bubu et al. 2017). Independent lines of research show that the same electrophysiological features critical for sleep-dependent memory differ between men and women and are also influenced by sex steroids: women have more slow wave sleep (SWS) and more slow wave activity (SWA, 0–4Hz) (Dijk et al. 1989, Armitage and Hoffmann 2001, Carrier et al. 2001, Redline et al. 2004), higher sigma activity, reflecting activity in the spindle frequency range (Carrier et al. 2001), and more spindles (Gaillard and Blois 1981) during sleep, than men. Further, sleep spindles are modified by sex hormone changes across the menstrual cycle (Driver et al. 1996). These data raise the possibility that sleep-dependent memory consolidation may differ between men and women and also according to changes in sex steroid levels in women, such as across the menstrual cycle and the menopausal transition, when sex steroid levels decline. However, to date, only an handful of studies have investigated of the intersection of sex steroids, sleep, sleep-dependent memory (Genzel et al. 2012), and none have examined this intersection in the context of aging.

The purpose of this review is to focus attention on the impact of sex steroids on the formation of long-term memories in women across reproductive stages. Broadly, we discuss the effects of sex steroid hormones on sleep and memory and on sleep-dependent memory consolidation, in particular, considering the key role of electrophysiological events such as sleep spindles and slow oscillations. We also consider the potential effect of exogenous hormones, such as in the form of oral contraceptives or hormone therapy, on memory. We integrate the findings within the context of current understanding of the development of Alzheimer’s disease in women, positing that sleep is an important, modifiable factor that may protect against cognitive decline and progression to Alzheimer’s disease. Lastly, we call attention to the need for further research about sex steroids, sleep, and memory consolidation, integrating these diverse research fields (also see Gervais et al. (2017) for discussion), to work towards promoting understanding of, and protecting against, memory decline in aging women.

Although sex differences in sleep and sleep-dependent memory consolidation is not the main focus of the current work, given the stark sex difference in the prevalence of insomnia across the lifespan, we have discussed how sex differences in insomnia could contribute to sex differences in cognitive decline in the Sidebar.

Memory Overview: Focus on the Hippocampus

Memory has traditionally been divided into two distinct categories by the types of memories that are processed and the neural mechanisms underlying them, (although see alternative theoretical frameworks (Eichenbaum 2004, Henke 2010). Non-declarative memories comprise implicit memories such as sensorimotor skills, perceptual skills, habits, priming, and processing of these types of information are not dependent on the hippocampus (Squire 1992). Declarative memories comprise explicit memories of events, places, and general knowledge, and processing of these types of memories are initially dependent on the hippocampus (Squire 1992). A simple, yet revealing, distinction can be made between the retrieval performance profiles of these two memory systems. Non-declarative memories are enhanced after a period of consolidation such that performance increases from the end of training (Mednick et al. 2003). In contrast, the facilitation of declarative memories usually consists of decreased forgetting after a post-encoding consolidation period (Jenkins and Dallenbach 1924, Plihal and Born 1997, Wixted 2004, Payne et al. 2008). Importantly, sleep plays a role in both of these consolidation processes, such that for declarative memories, less forgetting is shown after a period of sleep, compared with an equal period of wake, while for non-declarative memories, performance increases are shown after a period of sleep, compared to a period of wake. These opposing performance outcomes (i.e. enhanced memory performance versus decreased forgetting) raise the possibility that the consolidation of declarative and non-declarative memories relies on distinct mechanisms. Interestingly, aging is associated with greater decrements in declarative memory, compared with non-declarative memory (Figure 1, top panel). Therefore, in the next section, we will cover recent discoveries that shed light on potential mechanisms in non-rapid eye movement sleep that have been strongly implicated in hippocampal-dependent, declarative memory consolidation.

Sleep-dependent memory consolidation

Sleep is not monolithic, but can be divided into stages of rapid eye movement (REM) and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, with NREM sleep further divided into Stages N1–3 (also termed Stages 1, 2 and slow wave sleep (SWS)) in which EEG brain activity becomes progressively slower and with greater synchrony of large amplitude slow waves throughout the cortex. Research has consistently shown that a period of NREM sleep yields greater memory retention in declarative memory than a comparable period of REM sleep or waking activity (Yaroush et al. 1971, Barrett and Ekstrand 1972, Plihal and Born 1997, Plihal and Born 1999). Several electrophysiological features of NREM sleep have been linked with memory consolidation, with the majority of these studies focusing on the role of Slow Oscillations (SOs, &lt;1Hz) (Rasch and Born 2013, Genzel et al. 2014).

The breakthrough discovery in rodents that the spatio-temporal firing patterns of hippocampal place cells during waking got replayed during sleep, and that the replay was associated with hippocampal sharp wave ripples temporally coupled with NREM SOs (Buzsaki 2015), established a connection between cognitive processes during wake and specific offline electrophysiological NREM sleep events (Genzel et al. 2014). Although the exact nature of the NREM sleep mechanisms that contribute to memory consolidation are not understood, several theoretical models have been proposed, all of which posit the importance of coordination between some combination of cortical, hippocampal and thalamic brain areas via the coupling of neural oscillations associated with each area (Tononi and Cirelli 2006, Diekelmann and Born 2010, Mednick et al. 2011, Genzel et al. 2014). In particular, studies support a role of NREM SOs in memory consolidation (Diekelmann and Born 2010). SOs are cortically-driven &lt;1Hz waveforms with high voltage up and down states, which reflect global periods of neuronal spiking and neuronal silence, respectively. Multiple different causal interventions have been used to enhance SOs during post-training sleep and subsequent memory, including transcranial direct current stimulation within the SO frequency range (Marshall et al. 2006) and closed-loop triggering of an auditory click during the down to up transition of an SO (Ngo et al. 2013).

Recent studies have shown that declarative memory performance in humans can be enhanced by reactivating memories during NREM, but not REM sleep. Specifically, during targeted memory reactivation (TMR), information is encoded with an associated cue (e.g., odor or sound) and then the cues are delivered during NREM, which enhances memory for the cued stimuli, suggesting a causal role of NREM in the memory consolidation process. A recent combined approach delivering the associated auditory cues during the down-to-up transition of the SO has also shown enhanced post-sleep, declarative memory, narrowing the effect of TMR to a specific phase of the NREM SO (Shimizu et al. 2018). Together, these developments demonstrate a critical role of NREM SOs for memory consolidation, as well as the potential to utilize these interventions to treat age-related deterioration in memory. However, further work is needed given that study outcomes using TMR are conflicting and small variations in the experimental manipulation may lead to different memory outcomes (e.g. enhanced, decreased or unaltered, see Schouten et al. (2017) for a review).

Sleep spindles are another electrophysiological feature of NREM sleep that play a role in memory consolidation. Sleep spindles are bursts of oscillatory activity generated by γ-amininobutyric acid (GABA) ergic neurons in the thalamus and the local circuit between thalamocortical and thalamic reticular nucleus cells. Repetitive spike-bursts cause rhythmic inhibitory post-synaptic potentials in thalamocortical pathways (Steriade et al. 1987, Wang and Rinzel 1993). These oscillations are then relayed to the cortex (Steriade et al. 1993, von Krosigk et al. 1993) and appear morphologically as spindles in the sleep EEG. Spindles are defined as groups of waves in the 9–16 Hz sigma range in NREM sleep, lasting at least 0.5 s (De Gennaro et al. 2005, Bodizs et al. 2009). Two kinds of spindles can be differentiated by distinct spatiotemporal dynamics. “Slow” spindles (&lt;12 Hz, with a spectral peak ~ 10.2 Hz) predominate over frontal sites and are more pronounced during SWS than Stage 2 sleep, whereas “fast” spindles (&gt; 12 Hz, with a peak spectral frequency ~ 13.4 Hz) are more densely distributed over parietal and central sites (Mölle, Bergmann, Marshall, &amp; Born, 2011). However the functional difference between these spindle types is unclear (Andrillon et al., 2011; Timofeev &amp; Bazhenov, 2005).

Regarding their role in memory consolidation, the number of sleep spindles: 1) increases following hippocampal-dependent learning (Eschenko et al. 2006); 2) is temporally coupled with hippocampal sharp wave ripples after spatial navigation in rodents (Siapas and Wilson 1998); 3) facilitates the integration of newly learned information with existing knowledge in humans (Tamminen et al. 2010); and, 4) correlates with better retention of declarative memories (Gais et al. 2002, Schabus et al. 2004, Clemens et al. 2005, Schmidt et al. 2006). In addition, pharmacologically enhancing sleep spindles in humans with zolpidem enhanced verbal memory performance compared with placebo or sodium oxybate (Mednick et al. 2013). Also, reactivation of hippocampal-neocortical representations during sleep is coupled with sleep spindles (Bergmann et al. 2012). As mentioned above, a potential mechanism for consolidation may involve temporal coupling between brain areas associated with replay, and SO up and down states may provide a temporal framework for synchronized communication between these areas (Molle et al. 2011). For example, following learning in a hippocampal-dependent task, sigma activity during the up-state of the slow oscillations was increased (Molle et al. 2009). Further, memory-boosting interventions such as auditory and electrical stimulation during sleep increased SO-coupled sigma activity (Marshall et al. 2006, Ngo et al. 2013). Also, pharmacologically increasing spindle density with zolpidem increased the temporal consistency of spindle occurrences during the down-to-up phase of SOs, with performance improvement correlating with this spindle/SO timing (Niknazar et al. 2015). Together, these findings suggest that declarative memory consolidation is facilitated when thalamic spindles coincide with the down-to-up phase of cortical SOs.

Replay studies in animals report consistent evidence of coupling between hippocampal sharp wave ripples and cortical SOs. Indeed, this temporal coupling is proposed to be a key mechanism underlying “the hippocampal-neocortical dialogue characteristic of systems consolidation, whereby SOs provide a top-down temporal frame for hippocampal oscillatory events (Crunelli and Hughes 2010, Lemieux et al. 2014). Further, it is hypothesized that temporal coupling between the thalamus, hippocampus and cortex occurs via the nesting of individual sharp wave ripple events in the trough of succeeding spindles (Timofeev and Bazhenov 2005, Staresina et al. 2015), and that these “spindle-ripple” events may represent a bottom-up mechanism where reactivated hippocampal memory information (coded in ripples) is passed to spindles, which then reach neocortical networks via the SO temporal framework (Latchoumane et al., 2017). In summary, both human and rodent studies demonstrate a relation between NREM sleep events (SOs, sharp wave ripples, and sleep spindles) and hippocampal memory consolidation, although further research is needed to elucidate exact mechanisms. In the next sections, we will investigate how these sleep features, and consequently memory consolidation, vary in concert with hormonal changes in women, such as across the menstrual cycle and in the menopausal transition.

The reproductive years: Sex steroids, sleep, and memory

Changes in sex steroids across the menstrual cycle and their effects on the brain

Across their lifespan, from puberty to post-menopause, women experience fluctuations in reproductive hormones (Figure 1, top panel). During the reproductive phase, hormones fluctuate across the menstrual cycle, which typically lasts 28 days (Rousseau 1998).In a normal ovulatory menstrual cycle there are cyclical changes in four principal reproductive hormones, namely luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), released from the anterior pituitary gland, and estrogen and progesterone, released from the ovaries and corpus luteum (Figure 1, middle panel) . Estrogens are synthesized from cholesterol in the ovary in fertile women; there are several forms of estrogen, including estradiol, estrone, and estriol (Farage et al. 2009). Estradiol (E2) is the most potent estrogen and is commonly measured in research studies. The first half of the cycle (i.e., follicular phase; days 1–14) begins with menstruation (menses, day 1 – 6) with low levels of E2 and progesterone, followed by a rise in E2 that peaks on days 12–14, stimulating a surge in LH, which triggers ovulation (~day 14). An oocyte is released from the follicle and the corpus luteum then evolves from the ruptured follicle and secretes progesterone and E2 during the second part of the cycle (i.e., luteal phase; days 15–28) If there is no implantation, hormone levels decline during the last week of the luteal phase and menstruation occurs. Sex steroids not only are critical for reproductive function but also impact biology in other ways through their effects on the brain.

Sex steroid hormones released from the gonads during development permanently organize the neural substrate (organizational effects). Later, during puberty and across adulthood, they exert activational effects in the brain, acting through nuclear estrogen and androgen receptors to activate functional sex differences in physiology and behavior and exert influence on many biological systems (McCarthy and Arnold 2011). Estrogen and progesterone receptors are present in sleep/wake-regulatory nuclei, including the basal forebrain, hypothalamus, dorsal raphe nucleus, and locus coeruleus (Shughrue et al. 1997, Curran-Rauhut and Petersen 2002), and E2 inhibits activation of sleep-promoting neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus (Hadjimarkou et al. 2008). Sex steroids can also induce rapid changes through membrane receptors to activate cell-signaling pathways and, adding further complexity, they influence brain function through their interactions with other hormonal systems and neurotransmitters. For example, estrogens increase the production rate and receptor concentration of neuroamines like serotonin and norepinephrine (Arpels 1996) and increase GABA levels in certain brain areas (Mortola, 1996). Therefore, there is the potential for sex steroids to influence sleep through many pathways. Indeed, rodent studies that have tracked sleep-wake behavior across the reproductive cycle or administered E2 and progesterone to ovariectomized rodents, have confirmed that sex steroids modulate sleep-wake patterns (reviewed in Mong et al. (2011) and Mong and Cusmano (2016)).

Effects of the menstrual cycle on sleep

Studies in humans have taken advantage of menstrual-cycle related variation in sex steroids to explore their effects on sleep (reviewed in (Baker et al. 2016)). Most studies have found that latency to sleep and sleep efficiency remain stable across the menstrual cycle in young women (Driver et al. 1996, Baker and Driver 2007, Driver et al. 2008, Shechter and Boivin 2010). There is a small effect on REM sleep (decreased in the luteal phase (Driver et al. 2008, Mong et al. 2011), but percentage of SWS and SWA in NREM sleep, averaged across the night, do not change in young women (Ishizuka et al. 1994, Driver et al. 1996, Baker and Driver 2007), although one study found that SWA is significantly higher in the first NREM sleep episode of the luteal phase compared with the follicular phase (Driver et al. 2008).

The most dramatic change in sleep in association with the menstrual cycle is an increase in EEG activity in sigma (spindle) frequency (Ishizuka et al. 1994, Driver et al. 1996, Baker et al. 2007, Baker et al. 2012) in the luteal phase, when progesterone and E2 are high, compared with the follicular phase (Figure 2). This increase in EEG activity in sigma activity likely reflects an increase in spindle density (Dijk 1995). While the mechanism for this increase in sleep spindles in the luteal phase is not fully understood, it is hypothesized to involve modulation of GABA-A receptors by progesterone metabolites (Driver et al. 1996), such as allopregnanolone, a potent positive allosteric modulator of the action of GABA at GABAA receptors (Harrison et al. 1987, Morrow et al. 1987). Allopregnanolone facilitates the occurrence of sleep spindles and exerts a similar effect on the high frequency EEG in rats, although it also attenuates power in the lower frequencies (Lancel et al. 1997, Damianisch et al. 2001), an effect not apparent in the luteal phase in young women. On the other hand, we previously failed to find a correlation between high progesterone and increased spindles in young women (Baker et al. 2012), and it remains to be determined what drives this menstrual phase-related increase in spindles. Given the dual presence of E2 and progesterone in the luteal phase, an effect of E2 and/or an interaction between progesterone and E2 on sleep spindles cannot be discounted. Further, other physiological changes that occur in the luteal phase, in association with the hormone milieu, such as raised body temperature (Deboer 1998) may be linked with increased spindling. In sum, the occurence and magnitude of memory-related sleep spindle activity (density and sigma) fluctuates with changes in sex steroids across the menstrual cycle in young, reproductive-age women. Given the importance of sleep spindles for memory consolidation, as described above, it is feasible that sleep-related memory consolidation may change across the menstrual cycle. The next section will review the effect on sleep of artificially altering the hormonal mileu with contraceptives.

Effects of hormonal contraceptives on sleep

Combined oral contraceptives (OCs), used by millions of women around the world, typically contain ethinyl E2 and a synthetic progestin taken for 21 days and a placebo, taken for 7 days (when withdrawal bleeding occurs). Women taking OCs have high levels of synthetic hormones but low levels of endogenous E2 and progesterone, similar to levels in the follicular phase of non-users (Mordecai et al. 2008, Gogos et al. 2014). During the 7-day placebo interval, although the hypothalamic pituitary ovarian axis slowly regains activity, E2 levels remain suppressed until Day 7 (Mordecai et al. 2008). OCs are effective at preventing pregnancy through their multiple effects on the hypothalamic pituitary ovarian axis, leading to suppression of LH and FSH levels, a reduction in endogenous ovarian steroid levels, and thus inhibition of follicular development and ovulation (Cedars 2002). Ethinyl E2 has a high affinity for estrogen receptors and is more potent than endogenous E2 (Gogos et al. 2014). The type of progestin varies depending on the generation of OC, with second generation progestins (e.g. norgesterel) being more androgenic (the extent to which they can activate androgen receptors, a characteristic of progestins structurally related to testosterone), and third generation progestins being anti-androgenic (Gogos et al. 2014). OC brands also differ in the hormonal dose delivered in an attempt to optimize the balance between good cycle control and unwanted side effects like break through bleeding (Cedars 2002). Not only can the total hormonal dose differ across OC brands, with newer brands containing lower levels, but also the dose can vary across the 21 day period, with monphasic pills containing a constant dose of progestin and ethinyl E2, and triphasic pills containing a varying dose designed to mimic the production of progesterone across the natural menstrual cycle. Given the heterogeneous mix of OC combinations, even within studies, it is challenging to interpret different study effects.

Few studies have investigated the effects on sleep of OCs in women. Baker and colleagues (Baker et al. 2001) found that women had approximately 12% more Stage 2 (N2) sleep in the active phase (synthetic progestin + estrogen, monophasic OCs) versus the placebo phase of the oral contraceptive pack. Studies also show women taking OCs have more Stage 2 sleep and less SWS than naturally-cycling women in the luteal phase (Baker et al. 2001, Baker et al. 2001, Shine-Burdick et al. 2002). Given that Stage 2 sleep is a spindle-rich stage of sleep, it is tempting to speculate that OCs increase the number of sleep spindles, possibly to a greater extent than is evident in the natural luteal phase, however, none of these studies investigated the sleep EEG, and further studies are therefore needed to investigate whether OCs increase sleep spindles specifically. It should be noted that one study reported that use of medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), a synthetic form of human progesterone depot-injected and used as a contraceptive, was associated with greater activity in the sigma frequency band in addition to greater sleep spindle density and peak amplitude during NREM sleep in women (Plante and Goldstein 2013). This effect could be mediated through allopregnanolone acting on GABA-A receptors, since animal models have demonstrated that MPA increases central allopregnanolone (Bernardi et al. 2006).

Overall, few studies have investigated sleep architecture in women taking OCs, and only one has investigated the sleep EEG, finding increased spindle activity in users of MPA. However, MPA has negative effects on cognition (Braden et al. 2017), illustrating the complexity in interpreting how sex steroids could influence sleep on the one hand, and cognition, on the other, and this complexity extends to understanding effects of sex steroids on sleep-dependent memory consolidation.

Effects of sex steroids on hippocampus-dependent memory

Several studies have investigated the effects sex steroids (endogenous changes across the menstrual cycle, and exogenous in the form of OCs) on cognitive function, including memory, in women. As for sleep regulation, sex steroid hormones can influence cognitive function through nuclear estrogen and androgen receptors, distributed throughout the brain, including the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. They can also act via membrane receptors to activate cell-signaling pathways, thought to be critical for mediating the cognitive effects of estradiol (Korol and Pisani 2015), and through their interactions with other hormonal systems and neurotransmitters (Barth et al. 2015, Nguyen et al. 2016). While sex steroids can cross the blood-brain barrier to exert their effects, they are also synthesized de novo in the brain, and specifically in the hippocampus (Frick et al. 2015). In fact, recent work in rodents suggests that the hippocampus is an important source of estrogen in both male and female animals, which may be necessary for hippocampal memory formation (Frick et al., 2015).

E2 affects a diverse range of cognitive processes, with the preponderance of studies reporting enhancements of learning and memory. The reader is referred to detailed reviews about the effects of E2 across a range of cognitive domains that are out of the scope of the current review (Luine 2014, Duarte-Guterman et al. 2015, Hamson et al. 2016). Regarding memory in particular, E2 exerts its effects at sites in the cerebral cortex, basal forebrain, hippocampus, and striatum, with the medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus being the most studied in this context (Luine 2014). Several mechanisms have been proposed for E2’s effect on memory, including increasing hippocampal dendritic spine density (Wnuk et al. 2012), modifying cell morphology, signaling and excitability in the hippocampal formation (McEwen 2002, Romeo et al. 2004, Spencer et al. 2008), and protecting against oxidative damage to brain tissue (Pourganji et al. 2014). Less is known about the effects of progesterone on memory, although estradiol and progesterone appear to interact to influence performance on hippocampal-dependent memory tasks in female rodents (Hamson et al. 2016). Progesterone administered alone has positive effects on some tasks but, in combination with E2, it abolished the positive effects of E2 on a non-spatial memory task (Bimonte-Nelson et al. 2006). Progesterone may also have an indirect memory effect via allopregnanolone, a neurosteroid converted de novo in the brain from peripheral produced progesterone (Reddy and Kulkarni 1998) (Silvers et al. 2003).

Studies of variability in cognitive function, including memory, across the menstrual cycle have generally shown that women perform better on cognitive tests favoring females (e.g., verbal fluency) during the late-follicular (E2 surge) or mid-luteal (high E2/progesterone) phase of the cycle, compared with the early follicular (menstruation) phase (when E2 is low), and they perform better on cognitive skills favoring males (e.g., spatial ability) during the low-hormone early follicular phase (Hampson 1990, Sherwin 2012, Hampson and Morley 2013). E2 levels correlated positively with verbal fluency and negatively with scores on a test of spatial ability in young, cycling women (Maki et al. 2002). Recent work has examined whether strategies used by women to solve a spatial navigation task vary with menstrual cycle phase: women in the early luteal phase (progesterone + E2) showed greater engagement of hippocampal spatial strategies, whereas women in the early and late follicular phase (low E2 and high E2, respectively) relied on striatal response strategies (no group differences were found in overall navigation) (Hussain et al. 2016).

Overall, the picture of how sex hormones influence hippocampal processing is still emerging, and research in this area has been hampered by small sample sizes, underpowered to detect modest effect sizes across menstrual cycle phases, and a lack of thorough within-subject comparisons across all phases of the menstrual cycle (See (Sundstrom Poromaa and Gingnell 2014) for review). Studies have also investigated the effects of OCs on memory, although the same caveats described earlier, such as different brands and doses, apply here too. Several studies show improved hippocampal memory in women using OCs (reviewed in (Gogos et al. 2014)). For example, Mordecai and colleagues found that women taking OCs had better verbal memory during the 21-day active phase, compared to their placebo phase (Mordecai et al. 2008). Importantly, the majority of studies investigating the effects of sex steroid hormones on memory performance have only examined general ability in simplistic laboratory tasks such as dot memory or word pair learning. Examination of more complex cognitive processes such as hippocampal-dependent long-term memory formation are crucial next steps in full characterization of sex steroid effects on cognition.

Sex steroid effects on sleep-dependent memory consolidation

The effect of sex steroids on aspects of cognition susceptible to experience-dependent change, which primarily occur during sleep (such as memory consolidation) has received little attention in the literature. In a study of 15 young women (18–30 years old), recorded both in the early follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle, Genzel and colleagues investigated changes in declarative memory and motor performance between a learning phase and retesting following either a nap or wake condition (Genzel et al. 2012). Women had a greater increase in performance on the declarative task after a nap compared to wake in the luteal phase but not in the follicular phase, suggesting that sleep-related memory consolidation depends on menstrual cycle phase in women. The authors ran correlational analyses to explore links between sex steroids, memory performance, and sleep spindles. In contrast to overnight studies (summarized above), women did not have a noticeable increase in spindle activity in the luteal phase relative to the follicular phase, possibly because of the short duration of stage 2 sleep in the nap (&lt; 30 min, on average). However, they had more spindle activity (mean spindle amplitude × mean spindle duration) during a nap following learning compared with a control nap condition, in the luteal phase only, and E2 levels correlated with spindle density and frequency, suggesting that the menstrual cycle effect on declarative memory may be mediated by an interaction between E2 and sleep spindles (Genzel et al. 2012).

In our recent investigation, we considered the effect of self-reported menstrual cycle phase in addition to sex on memory consolidation of face-name associations following a daytime nap (Figure 3 (Sattari et al. 2017)). Replicating prior findings, women had superior memory at the pre-nap test compared with men. However, considering sleep-dependent improvement, we found that women had poorer post-nap memory consolidation during their menses phase compared with other times of the cycle and compared to men, similar to Genzel et al., (2012). Additionally, we found that men showed the typical associations between electrophysiological events during sleep (i.e., slow oscillations, spindles, and temporal coupling of spindles/SOs) and memory performance enhancements, whereas in women, the associations differed according to menstrual phase (Sattari et al. 2017). Specifically, sleep-dependent improvement correlated with slow oscillations when women were outside their menses, while sigma (spindle) activity correlated with improvement during menses.

Together, these studies suggest that the effect of sex hormones on sleep-dependent memory consolidation may be mediated by modulation of electrophysiological events critical for thalamocortical replay (Figure 1, bottom left panel).

In a second study, Genzel and colleagues investigated the effect of exogenous sex steroids in the form of OCs on sleep-related memory consolidation in women (Genzel et al. 2014). Interestingly, they found that this group of women had a robust increase in declarative memory performance during retest compared to the learning phase but there was no additional benefit of a nap. The lack of benefit of a nap on memory consolidation in women taking OCs is similar to findings for women in the follicular phase (Genzel et al. 2012). Endogenous levels of E2 and progesterone were low in the women taking OCs (Genzel et al. 2014), a hormonal state that may not facilitate an extra boost to sleep-related memory consolidation that would otherwise occur from additional sleep (i.e. the nap), and suggesting that the exogenous hormones in OCs may not enhance sleep-dependent memory consolidation. However, comparison of data from both studies indicates that women taking OCs appeared to increase their performance during retest to a greater extent (~ 7 word pairs) than women in the follicular phase (~4 word pairs), regardless of a nap, suggesting that exogenous hormones might have an overall positive effect on memory consolidation (Genzel et al., 2014). Further studies are needed to investigate the effect of exogenous hormones on sleep-dependent memory consolidation, compared to endogenous hormones, and these studies need to carefully consider additional methodological issues, especially the heterogeneous mix of oral contraceptive combinations typically taken since different progestins may exert different effects (Gogos et al. 2014, Beltz et al. 2015).

As women progress from their reproductive years towards menopause, changes in the hormone environment occur, notably with a decline in E2. Given the above-mentioned influence of hormones on sleep, learning and memory, this change in hormonal environment could result in alterations in cognitive function, including poorer sleep-dependent memory consolidation, although this possibility has not yet been investigated, to our knowledge. In the following sections, we discuss literature that has considered changes in sleep as well as memory in the context of the menopausal transition to set the stage for future work.

The menopausal transition: Sex steroids, sleep, and memory

Changes in sex steroids across the menopausal transition

The menopausal transition, defined according to the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) criteria (Soules et al. 2001, Harlow et al. 2012), describes the years leading up to menopause, or final menstrual period (occurs at a median age of 51.4 years) (Burger et al. 2008). This transition period is a gradual process occurring over about 4 years, associated with changes in menstrual cycle lengths (early transition), progressing to increased variability in cycle lengths and skipping cycles (late transition), and finally, menopause. Overall, there is an increase in FSH and decline in E2 from early to late transition. But, within any ovulatory menstrual cycle, follicular phase E2 levels tend to be lower, luteal phase E2 levels higher, and progesterone levels lower, than in younger women (Hale et al. 2007). Early post-menopause (1–6 years after final menses) is characterized by a continued rise in FSH and decline in E2 particularly over the first two years (Harlow et al. 2012) after which levels gradually stabilize. Perimenopause is a common term to describe the menopausal transition and first year post-menopause.

For midlife women, the menopausal transition combines endocrine and chronological aging with unique mechanistic impacts on memory function that could make the female brain vulnerable to development of dementia (Yin et al. 2015). Perceived and objective memory problems emerge in the menopausal transition (Woods et al. 2000), with many women reporting increased forgetfulness and memory problems (Greendale et al. 2011). Thus, the menopausal transition may represent a critical window for the early detection of cognitive vulnerability, and for implementation of preventive interventions.

Changes in sleep across the menopausal transition

Midlife women transitioning to menopause and post-menopause are more likely to report sleep difficulties, with sleep difficulties due to frequent awakenings the most common problem (Joffe et al. 2010, Baker et al. 2018). Prevalence rates of self-report sleep difficulties range between 40–56%, compared to pre-menopausal women in the late-reproductive stage, who have rates of 31%. This greater prevalence of sleep difficulties in association with the menopausal transition, even after controlling for age, is evident across cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. PSG studies of women without severe sleep complaints (insomnia) and/or severe hot flashes have generally not found poorer PSG-defined sleep in peri-menopausal or post-menopausal women compared to premenopausal women (Young et al. 2003). However, in the presence of insomnia and hot flashes, PSG sleep disturbances, including increased wakefulness, are apparent and match the subjective experience of sleep (Baker et al. 2015).

A limited number of studies has investigated the association between sex steroids and EEG sleep features, particularly those implicated in sleep-dependent memory consolidation, in women in the menopausal transition. Higher levels of FSH correlated with more PSG-defined wakefulness in women in the menopausal transition similarly to findings in reproductive-age women (de Zambotti et al. 2015). On the other hand, another study reported that increasing FSH over time, reflecting more advancement through the menopausal transition, was associated with an increasing proportion of SWS (although not with slow wave EEG activity) (Lampio et al. 2017). In an analysis of PSG changes across the menstrual cycle in women in the menopausal transition who were still cycling, we found that the luteal phase was characterized by more awakenings and arousals and less N3 sleep percentage (de Zambotti et al., 2015). This finding is in contrast to findings described above for young women, who typically do not show PSG disturbances in the luteal phase, and suggests that sleep in midlife women may be more vulnerable to the physiological changes associated with the luteal phase.

Consistent with findings in young women, the luteal phase was associated with elevated EEG activity in the 14–17 Hz range, which encompasses the upper frequency range of spindles, as well as greater spindle density compared with the follicular phase (de Zambotti et al., 2015). These menstrual cycle phase effects were evident in women with and without insomnia disorder developed in the context of the menopause transition, although the increase in sigma frequency activity was blunted in women with insomnia (de Zambotti et al. 2015). Potentially, these weaker sleep spindles could impact memory consolidation in this group of women, although no studies have yet investigated this possibility (Figure 1, bottom middle panel).

A critical factor for sleep disruption in the context of the menopausal transition is the presence of hot flashes. Hot flashes are experienced by up to 80% of women, peaking in the late menopausal transition and first 2 years after menopause and declining in late menopause (&gt; 6 years after final menstrual period) (Bacon 2017). Hot flashes are strongly associated with disturbed sleep architecture and quality (Ohayon 2006, Joffe et al. 2010, Baker et al. 2015), and are also linked with poor memory function (Drogos et al. 2013). Recent studies have reported an association between physiologically recorded hot flashes during sleep and altered brain functional connectivity (Thurston et al. 2015) and white matter hyperintensities (Thurston et al. 2016), but to date no study has thoroughly investigated the intersection between sleep, hot flashes, brain function and memory during menopause.

In summary, women report more sleep difficulties as they go through the menopausal transition. While not all women show PSG sleep disturbances, groups of women who are symptomatic (with insomnia and hot flashes) have more PSG-defined wakefulness, showing the importance of considering the presence and severity of menopausal symptoms. Importantly for the consideration of sleep-dependent memory consolidation, women in the menopausal transition with insomnia showed a less robust increase in spindle frequency activity during the luteal phase. In the context of the menopausal transition, multiple factors could disrupt sleep, including hormone changes and symptoms like hot flashes, and ultimately impact memory consolidation. Studies are needed to investigate this possibility.

Changes in memory across the menopausal transition

Complaints of memory difficulties are common during the menopausal transition (Mitchell and Woods 2001, Maki 2013). Women in the menopausal transition in clinical samples and in samples representative of the general population report increased forgetfulness (Gold et al. 2000). Subjective memory complaints are associated not only with menopausal stage, but also with advancing age, low education, lack of full-time employment, low physical activity, hot flashes, and concentration difficulties. In addition, considerable inter-individual variation in subjective complaints and objective memory outcomes exist, but subjective complaints nevertheless correlate significantly with memory performance (Drogos et al. 2013). Studies about memory performance have been inconsistent, with some studies finding a decline in verbal memory across the menopausal transition (Berent-Spillson et al. 2012, Epperson et al. 2013, Karlamangla et al. 2017), while others report no or only subtle effects of menopause on memory (Henderson and Popat (2011), (Henderson et al. 2003, Luetters et al. 2007, Greendale et al. 2010, Unkenstein et al. 2016). Investigations of relationships between memory and E2 levels also been mixed in cohort studies of women in the menopausal transition, with no relationship found between E2 levels and memory performance in adjusted models (Luetters et al. 2007, Ryan et al. 2012, Epperson et al. 2013) although higher levels of free E2 were related to better semantic memory (naming) in one cohort (Ryan et al. 2012) and with better recall in another (Rentz et al. 2017). As shown in rodent models (Koebele and Bimonte-Nelson 2017), task complexity may be a critical factor, and performance decrements may not be evident for simple tasks. However, even when using sensitive tasks of executive ability and incidental memory tasks, no difference in performance was found according to menopausal stage; although subjective perception of memory varied, with perimenopausal women feeling less content with their memory and reporting more memory lapses than pre- and post-menopausal women (Unkenstein et al. 2016). In summary, although memory complaints and memory difficulties are not universal, women in the menopausal transition who report memory problems do perform lower on memory tests (Maki 2015).

Given the potentially subtle behavioral changes in memory across the menopausal transition, recent studies have applied functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate neural activity during cognitive processing - which could change in advance of measureable behavioral changes - in groups of women at different reproductive stages (Berent-Spillson et al. 2012, Jacobs et al. 2016). In a large study of women in a narrow age range (45–55) years, designed to minimize the potential confounding effect of age, Jacobs et al (2016) found that premenopausal and perimenopausal women recruited left hippocampus during a verbal encoding paradigm more strongly than postmenopausal women, whereas postmenopausal women had greater bilateral hippocampal connectivity relative to the other two groups, independent of chronological age. Better retrieval on the task was related to the magnitude of encoding-related activity within memory circuitry. Further, lower E2 was related to greater left-right hippocampal connectivity and less left hippocampal activity, implicating sex steroids in the regulation of this circuitry (Jacobs et al. 2016).

Taken together, studies show subtle declines in verbal learning and memory across the menopausal transition, with some of these changes correlating with declining E2 levels, and recent evidence relating differences in behavior with differences in neural activity in the hippocampus.

Effects of hormone therapy on memory

Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) consists of estrogen alone (in women who have had a hysterectomy), or estrogen plus continuous or cyclical progestin. The formulations differ from those used for OCs and have lower potency (Gomes and Deitcher 2004). The two types of estrogen commonly used in MHT are conjugated equine estrogens and micronized E2 (Gomes and Deitcher 2004). MHT has shown mixed effects on cognitive function in post-menopausal women (Koebele and Bimonte-Nelson 2015, McCarrey and Resnick 2015). Notably, preclinical and clinical studies show that formulations containing medroxyprogesterone acetate have a negative effect on memory (Shumaker et al. 2003, Braden et al. 2016) and recent results from the KEEPS study found that even if initiated in recently postmenopausal women, according to the critical window hypothesis (Resnick and Henderson 2002, Sherwin 2012, Maki 2013, Singh et al. 2013) cognitive function was not improved with hormone therapy (E2/micronized progesterone (Gleason et al. 2015). Similarly, the Early vs Late Intervention Trial with Estradiol (ELITE), a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial designed to test the critical window hypothesis, found no clinically-meaningful effect of oral 17β-estradiol on verbal memory, executive functions, or global cognition regardless of whether therapy was initiated within 6 years versus 10+ years after menopause (Henderson et al. 2016). Despite this evidence, results in animals continue to support the critical window for estrogen therapy, showing differential responses to E2 treatment depending on proximity to menopause onset and age (Galea et al. 2017).

Even though an effect on behavioral measures may not always be apparent in clinical studies, brain imaging studies have indicated that MHT influences the structure and function of regions important for memory such as the hippocampus (see Wnuk et al. (2012) and Comasco et al. (2014) for review). In a recent prospective study in post-menopausal women aged 52–60, posterior hippocampal gray matter volume was greater in women who received 2mg E2 for three months, compared to those who receive 1mg or placebo (Albert et al. 2017). However, other studies evoking placebo designs have not always found an association between E2 and greater hippocampal volumes (Resnick et al. 2009). These null results could be due to the typically short duration of such trials, relative to ‘real’ E2 therapy or due to the fact that E2 was administered outside of the potential ‘critical window’ for treatment (i.e. many years after the onset of menopause). Studies have also investigated how brain responses during cognitive tasks may be altered as a function of MHT. Overall, fMRI and PET studies have found that E2 therapy enhances fronto-cingulate brain regions during cognitive tasks (Comasco et al. (2014). Progestogen may counteract effects of E2, as although some studies identified increases in prefrontal cortical activation compared to placebo, effects were smaller compared to E2 only treatment (Smith et al. 2006, Persad et al. 2009). In addition, the majority of fMRI studies have revealed that menopausal women that began E2 therapy before or close to the onset of menopause had greater activation in the medial temporal lobe during verbal memory tasks, compared to those that did not undergo E2 therapy.

To date, only one study has attempted to include measures of sleep quality, hot flashes and brain function alongside E2 therapy. Joffe et al. (2006) identified greater inferior frontal and parietal response during verbal memory and working memory tasks for E2-treated participants compared to placebo-treated participants with marginally better memory performance for E2-treated participants. Performance or fMRI response were not correlated with self-reported sleep quality, however, those in the E2 group who reported hot flashes at baseline were more likely to show improvement in memory performance, suggesting that E2’s interaction with hot flashes, brain function and memory warrants further investigation.

In summary, studies of women in the menopausal transition show increased prevalence of memory complaints, which could be linked with declining E2 levels as well as with the emergence of symptoms such as hot flashes. While it would thus be expected that replacing E2 would improve memory, findings from clinical studies are controversial and conflict with the findings of preclinical studies in animal models. Brain imaging studies, however, show greater sensitivity to the effects of MHT on the brain and may reveal complex interactions between hormones, symptoms, and memory in the menopausal transition. To our knowledge, studies have not yet considered the intersection between the hormone changes of the menopausal transition and sleep-dependent memory consolidation.

Beyond menopause: sleep and cognitive decline in aging women

After menopause, FSH continues to increase and E2 continues to decrease until levels stabilize, over a period of about 5–8 years. At this point, further changes in reproductive endocrine function are limited and processes of somatic aging are more critical (Harlow et al. 2012). Given the co-occurrence of sleep and cognitive decline with aging, these factors may be linked (Nebes et al. 2009, Pace-Schott and Spencer 2011, Lim et al. 2012, Wilckens et al. 2012), although few studies have directly investigated whether sleep spindles and slow waves are as effective at consolidating memory in older men and women. Certainly, older adults do not appear to benefit from sleep-dependent consolidation as much as younger adults (Backhaus et al. 2007, Spencer et al. 2007, Siengsukon and Boyd 2008, Siengsukon and Boyd 2009). Another study found that in older women (61–74), declarative memory correlated with spindle density (Seeck-Hirschner et al. 2012). Additionally, Peters and colleagues reported that sleep spindles were enhanced after a motor learning task in young adults but not older adults (Peters et al. 2008). Helfrich and colleagues recently examined thalamocortical coupling of spindles and SO in older adults in relation to fMRI brain activity and memory performance (Helfrich et al. 2018). Compared with younger adults, older adults showed different spindle/SO alignment and lower coupling over the frontal pole, and alignment in both groups predicted post-sleep declarative memory improvement. In addition, grey matter atrophy within the medial prefrontal cortex predicted inter-individual differences in the temporal phase coupling between SOs and spindles.

Sleep disturbance is not just a symptom of Alzheimer’s disease (Mander et al. 2016, Cedernaes et al. 2017). Chronic sleep disruption seems to increase Alzheimer’s disease risk (Yaffe et al. 2014); sleep is disrupted in subjective cognitive decline, a preclinical condition that may led to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (Lauriola et al. 2016); better sleep quality in older adults is associated with lower Alzheimer’s disease risk (Lim et al. 2013); and treatment of sleep disturbance associated with sleep apnea delays MCI (Osorio et al. 2015). Other work links sleep deficits directly to Alzheimer’s disease pathology (Aβ and tau) and shows a bidirectional relationship: sleep disruption in rodents and drosophila leads to Aβ and tau accumulation in the brain (Kang et al. 2009, Roh et al. 2012, Xie et al. 2013, Tabuchi et al. 2015, Cedernaes et al. 2017); conversely, increasing cortical Aβ fragments sleep(Kang et al. 2009, Roh et al. 2012). In patients with Alzheimer’s disease, MCI, as well as in cognitively normal older adults, poor sleep correlates with severity of Aβ and tau pathology (Spira et al. 2013, Liguori et al. 2014, Mander et al. 2015, Sprecher et al. 2015, Branger et al. 2016), with recent studies showing selective associations between SOs and spindles and Alzheimer’s disease pathology (Mander et al. 2015, Sharma et al. 2017). Aβ clearance through the glymphatic system occurs during sleep (Xie et al. 2013), providing one mechanism linking sleep disturbance and accumulation of Aβ in the brain.

Sleep is a potentially modifiable factor that could be enhanced to counteract memory decline and progression to Alzheimer’s disease, however, it may be more effective before the onset of disease when increased Aβ and tau accumulation in the brain may lead to insurmountable damage to areas supporting SOs and spindles. Importantly, it is unknown if there are sex differences in sleep-dependent memory consolidation in older men and women. Furthermore, the gradual minimization of sex hormones and their cycles during the menopausal transition and post-menopause has not been investigated as a possible contributor to decreased spindles, spindle/SO coupling, and the associated memory deficits in older age (Figure 1, bottom right panel).

Conclusion

Sex hormones impact women’s sleep and cognitive function, including memory, across the lifespan. During reproductive years, consistent cognitive profiles have emerged that link fluctuations in sex hormones to specific changes in sleep features that are critical for memory consolidation. During midlife - which coincides with the transition to menopause - these same sleep features decline, along with memory. However, the link between changes in hormones, sleep, and memory has not been addressed, and there are many theoretical and practical research challenges that need to be considered (See Table 1). Furthermore, the cognitive hallmark of aging is a progressive deterioration of declarative memory, whilst considerable changes to sleep also occur. Understanding the implication of hormones in sleep-dependent memory processes may inform new line of treatments to prevent the most severe manifestation of cognitive decline, i.e. Alzheimer’s disease. Further, the menopause transition can offer a unique time-window in which relations among hormones, neurophysiological sleep process and sleep-dependent memory processes can be investigated by isolating single factors known to affect distinct domains.

Grants:

FCB: HL103688

SCM: R01AG046646

Figure 1 The top panel depicts changes in sex hormones (black line) and declarative memory (red line) across the lifespan. The middle panel demonstrates fluctuations in ovarian hormones across the menstrual cycle, as well as changes in spindle activity (sigma EEG activity and spindle density) during the follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle. We hypothesize that spindle/slow oscillation (SO) phase coupling may also fluctuate across the menstrual cycle. The bottom panel shows predictions for how memory-related sleep events (spindle activity and SO, and their phase coupling) may change across the reproductive stages. The left panel shows the reproductive years with monthly cycles of high hormone periods (luteal phase) containing high spindle activity, SO and spindle/SO phase coupling, as well as increased sleep-dependent declarative memory, compared with low hormone periods (follicular phase) characterized by less spindle activity and phase coupling and poorer sleep-dependent declarative memory. The middle panel depicts the menopause transition (midlife) when spindle activity begins to decline and there is the potential for impaired phase coupling and sleep-dependent declarative memory. During post-menopause (right panel, older age), women show lower spindle activity and SO, and potentially lower phase coupling, which may contribute to deficits in declarative memory. Overall, sleep is also more disturbed, associated with accumulation of Aβ in the brain, increasing risk for progression to Alzheimer’s disease. Links between sex hormone decline, less effective sleep-memory events and increased sleep disturbance, with Alzheimer disease risk in women remains to be determined.

Figure 2 EEG spectral power during NREM sleep in 11 young women in the mid- and late-luteal phases (Progesterone &gt;3 ng.ml1), relative to mid-follicular phase, showing the specific increase in sigma frequency activity (14–16 Hz), in the range of sleep spindles, in the luteal phase. Data taken from (Baker et al. 2012).

Figure 3 Memory performance before and after a nap in men and in women studied twice: (1) during perimenses (−5 days to + 6 days from first day of menstruation), when sex steroid hormones are expected to be low, and (2) at another time during the menstrual cycle, outside of perimenses (non-perimenses), when sex steroid hormones are expected to be higher. * significantly (p&lt;0.05) poorer performance before the nap compared to women (non-perimenses). # significantly better performance after the nap compared to perimenses and men. Women in their perimenses recording showed significant forgetting after the nap. Data taken from (Sattari et al. 2017).

Table 1 Research challenges and proposed research agenda for understanding links between sex steroids, sleep, and memory in women

Research challenges	
- The menstrual cycle is a useful means of examining how a particular behavior like sleep or memory varies in relation to reproductive hormones. However, studies have mostly considered only two time points in the menstrual cycle, which limits the ability of isolating effects to a particular hormone (e.g. in the luteal phase, both E2 and progesterone are high). Further, studies have focused mainly on sex steroids, yet, the gonadotropins (FSH and LH) potentially also influence behaviors like sleep and cognition.

- While there is a pronounced increase in sleep spindles in the luteal phase, the mechanism for this increase is unclear, and it remains to be proven whether these spindles share the same circuitry and functionality as sleep spindles outside of the luteal phase.

- Sex steroids may have multiple and sometimes opposing influences on different aspects of memory. It remains to be determined if the positive effects can be selectively harnessed to benefit women.

- Effects of exogenous steroids (in the form of OCs or MHT) on memory are varied and sometimes negative. Only one study investigated sleep dependent memory consolidation, and found no effect of OCs, although encoding was higher in the experimental group than naturally-cycling (control) women, raising the question of whether there is a ceiling effect in women taking OCs. There is also a lack of studies about the effects of OCs on sleep spindles. Overall, studies about OCs are hampered by the heterogeneous mix of compounds and doses used and the potential effects of simultaneous suppression of endogenous sex steroids.

- So far only three studies have examined the effect of sex hormones on sleep-dependent memory consolidation, all of which have been in naps, not nighttime sleep, and probed limited phases of the menstrual cycle. A more systematic analysis tracking fluctuations in sex hormones across the phases of the menstrual cycle and the impact on nighttime sleep is warranted.

- Recent approaches have been successful in enhancing the process of memory reactivation during sleep, including targeted memory reactivation (TMR), which matches a sensory stimulus (e.g., odor or sound cue) with target information (e.g., pairs of words, objects, motor sequences), and then re-presents the cue alone during sleep, and closed-loop auditory stimulation (e.g. 50-ms bursts of pink noise) during the SO down-to-up-state. These methods i) increase SO power; ii) boost phase-locked spindle activity during the SO down-to-up-state; iii) enhance declarative memory performance. However, study outcomes are conflicting, the neural mechanisms underlying these interventions are not yet fully elucidated, potential side effects are still unknown and most importantly, minor variations in experimental design may lead to completely different outcomes (e.g., enhanced, decreased, or unaltered memories).

- Studies have not yet considered whether boosting memory function during sleep should be tailored differently for men and women. Furthermore, it may be more critical in women to initiate memory consolidation ‘protection’/boosting methods at an earlier life stage than men - when the hormone circuitry in the brain is still responsive, due to the critical loss of hormone protection for memory after menopause.

	
Research agenda	
- Limited research in small samples indicates that sleep-dependent memory consolidation varies in association with the hormonal changes of the menstrual cycle in young women, potentially mediated via modulation of electrophysiological events. Further work is needed to confirm these findings. Also, it is unknown whether this menstrual-related variation persists in older, reproductive-age women and whether the decline in E2 (and/or rise in FSH) across the menopausal transition is associated with altered sleep-dependent memory consolidation.

- Further work is needed to investigate potential sex-age and reproductive stage-age interaction effects in sleep-dependent memory consolidation.

- Translational work is needed to determine if sleep-dependent memory consolidation can be improved using sleep interventions at hormone sensitiveftime points (e.g. luteal phase; menopausal transition).

- Work is needed to determine if there are specific vulnerable groups of women in the menopausal transition who should be targeted for intervention (e.g. women with severe hot flashes and insomnia).

- Not only is the menopausal transition a critical time period in reproductive aging in women when sleep and aspects of cognition may be perturbed but it also offers a major advantage in the study of the roles played by hormones in memory consolidation, since it becomes possible to disassociate factors known to be implicated in sleep-dependent memory consolidation: all women experience a change in the hormone environment as they approach menopause but the rate of change in FSH and E2 across the transition and into post-menopause varies between women. Further, there is a mix of ovulatory and non-ovulatory cycles allowing the investigation of the functional importance of monthly cycling in sleep spindles. There is also variability in hormones within ovulatory cycles (in the early menopausal transition), such that luteal phase progesterone levels vary. Thus, differences in rate of change in the reproductive hormone environment allow the opportunity to use longitudinal and cross-sectional designs to study changes and differences in memory function, including sleep-dependent memory consolidation, in relation to sex steroid levels as well as menopausal symptoms like hot flashes.

- More research is needed in basic models to investigate effects of more gradual changes in ovarian hormones, such as occurs across the menopausal transition, on brain function including sleep and cognition, as opposed to ovariectomy, which results in an abrupt loss of hormones. Recently, a rodent model of transitional menopause has been developed (Koebele and Bimonte-Nelson 2016) with first results showing interesting interactions between age and menopausal transition (Koebele et al. 2017), which may be applied to inform future studies in women.

- Understanding the potential interactive mediating role of sex steroids on clearance of the glymphatic system during sleep may provide an overarching mechanism of age-related cognitive decline, as well as an understanding of the increased risk for women to develop Alzheimer’s disease.

- Future longitudinal studies are required to firmly establish the link between E2 and brain volume and whether any increases in volume are associated with preserved memory ability during menopause and later in life. Furthermore, such studies should ascertain the optimal treatment methods (e.g. cyclic vs. continuous schedule, E2 vs combination-MHT, when to administer in relation to menopause onset) in order to fully utilize the potentially neuroprotective effects of E2 on hippocampal integrity.

	

Highlights

Sleep electrophysiological events are critical for memory consolidation.

Menstrual and menopausal variations in sex steroids modify sleep and memory.

Sleep-dependent memory consolidation is enhanced during high-hormone menstrual phases, compared with low-hormone phases.

Impact of menopausal decline in sex steroids on sleep-memory consolidation is unknown.

Sidebar: Sleep-dependent memory consolidation and insomnia disorder: a sex-specific path to cognitive decline?

Insomnia is the most common sleep disorder, affecting about 10% of the general population. Although studies about sex-age interaction effects on polysomnographic (PSG) measures of sleep are conflicting, there is a clear sex by age interaction in the development of insomnia disorder, which is diagnosed based on self-report rather than PSG. There is a 2.75-fold increase in the risk for insomnia after the onset of menses in girls, with no sex differences in the risk of insomnia in the pre-pubertal stage (Johnson et al. 2006, de Zambotti et al. 2017). These differences are evident even after accounting for depression and pubertal stage. Increased risk for insomnia in women compared with men persists across life (Zhang and Wing 2006), even after accounting for the higher prevalence of anxiety and depression in women, making female sex one of the strongest predictors of insomnia risk. Reproductive stages impact insomnia prevalence in women- new-onset insomnia may manifest in women transitioning to menopause, with menopause-related changes in the hormone environment and menopausal symptoms, like hot flashes, considered key factors implicated in the etiology of the disorder (Baker et al. 2015, Baker et al. 2018).

Insomnia, diagnosed based on self-report, also shows objective alterations in sleep macro (Baglioni et al. 2014) and micro (Feige et al. 2013) structure. Elevated activity in electroencephalographic (EEG) high frequencies (e.g., EEG beta power), considered a sign of cortical hyperarousal, is a common finding in insomnia patients (reviews: Buysse et al. (2008); Riemann et al. (2015)). Other alterations in insomnia are evident in EEG features traditionally thought to be implicated in sleep-dependent memory consolidation, such as a suppression of SWS (slow wave sleep) and SWA (slow wave activity). However, few studies have evaluated whether there are underlying sex differences in EEG markers of insomnia. Buysse et al. (2008) found that women but not men with insomnia disorder had increased high frequency EEG activity (along with increased low frequency EEG activity, reflecting increased homeostatic sleep drive, and thus a dual state of ‘tired but wired’) compared to controls, suggesting sex-specific differences in insomnia. Our group showed elevated high frequency EEG activity during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep in women who develop insomnia in the context of menopause (Baker et al. 2015), and interestingly, they also did not show a robust increase in EEG activity in the spindle frequency band in the luteal phase relative to the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (de Zambotti et al. 2015), differently from women without insomnia, and young women (Baker and Driver 2007).

Regardless of sex, insomnia disorder is associated with alterations in memory consolidation processes (particularly for declarative memories) (for a review, see Cellini (2017)). Insomnia patients, compared to controls, lack an increase in number of correct word-pairs recalled at retrieval compared to the pre-sleep learning phase in a declarative memory word-pair association task (Backhaus et al. 2006); reduced sleep-dependent improvements (less procedural memory consolidation) in a mirror-tracing task (Nissen et al. 2006); reduced improvement in mirror tracing draw time on a mirror-tracing task and a non-significantly attenuated verbal retention rate on a declarative verbal memory task (Nissen et al. 2011); greater susceptibility to interference in a declarative word-pair association task (Griessenberger et al. 2013); and lack of a sleep-related enhancement in performance at a sequential finger tapping task (Cellini et al. 2014). In these studies, several sleep-specific features (e.g., amount of REM sleep, REM density, amount of SWS, activity in the spindle frequency band) were related to memory performance.

In summary, insomnia disorder and sleep-specific features characterizing insomnia seem to be implicated in the alteration of sleep-dependent memory processes. The long-term consequences of insomnia on sleep-dependent memory processes are still unknown, although it has been hypothesized that insomnia may be a factor implicated in the development of dementia. In an 8-year longitudinal study, normal older adults with insomnia showed a faster progression to Alzheimer’s disease compared to non-insomnia participants (Osorio et al. 2011). Whether changes in reproductive hormones (such as those occurring during menopause), and/or sex-specific factors can account for or interact with the link between insomnia disorder and dementia, needs to be determined.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Abel T Havekes R Saletin JM Walker MP 2013 Sleep, plasticity and memory from molecules to whole-brain networks Curr Biol 23 17 R774 788 24028961
2 Albert K Hiscox J Boyd B Dumas J Taylor W Newhouse P 2017 Estrogen enhances hippocampal gray-matter volume in young and older postmenopausal women: a prospective dose-response study Neurobiol Aging 56 1 6 28478324
3 Armitage R Hoffmann RF 2001 Sleep EEG, depression and gender Sleep Med Rev 5 3 237 246 12530989
4 Arpels JC 1996 The female brain hypoestrogenic continuum from the premenstrual syndrome to menopause. A hypothesis and review of supporting data J Reprod Med 41 9 633 639 8887186
5 Astur RS Ortiz ML Sutherland RJ 1998 A characterization of performance by men and women in a virtual Morris water task: a large and reliable sex difference Behav Brain Res 93 1–2 185 190 9659999
6 Backhaus J Born J Hoeckesfeld R Fokuhl S Hohagen F Junghanns K 2007 Midlife decline in declarative memory consolidation is correlated with a decline in slow wave sleep Learn Mem 14 5 336 341 17522024
7 Backhaus J Junghanns K Born J Hohaus K Faasch F Hohagen F 2006 Impaired declarative memory consolidation during sleep in patients with primary insomnia: Influence of sleep architecture and nocturnal cortisol release Biol Psychiatry 60 12 1324 1330 16876140
8 Bacon JL 2017 The Menopausal Transition Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 44 2 285 296 28499537
9 Baglioni C Regen W Teghen A Spiegelhalder K Feige B Nissen C Riemann D 2014 Sleep changes in the disorder of insomnia: a meta-analysis of polysomnographic studies Sleep Med Rev 18 3 195 213 23809904
10 Baker FC de Zambotti M Colrain IM Bei B 2018 Sleep problems during the menopausal transition: prevalence, impact, and management challenges Nature and Science of Sleep 10 1 23
11 Baker FC Driver HS 2007 Circadian rhythms, sleep, and the menstrual cycle Sleep Med 8 6 613 622 17383933
12 Baker FC Joffe H Lee K 2016 Sleep and Menopause Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine Dement R Kryger Elsevier
13 Baker FC Kahan TL Trinder J Colrain IM 2007 Sleep quality and the sleep electroencephalogram in women with severe premenstrual syndrome Sleep 30 10 1283 1291 17969462
14 Baker FC Mitchell D Driver HS 2001 Oral contraceptives alter sleep and raise body temperature in young women Pflugers Arch 442 5 729 737 11512029
15 Baker FC Sassoon SA Kahan T Palaniappan L Nicholas CL Trinder J Colrain IM 2012 Perceived poor sleep quality in the absence of polysomnographic sleep disturbance in women with severe premenstrual syndrome J Sleep Res 21 5 535 545 22417163
16 Baker FC Sattari N de Zambotti M Goldstone A Alaynick W Mednick S 2018 Impact of sex steroids and reproductive stage on sleep-dependent memory consolidation in women Neurobiology of Learning and Memory (under revision)
17 Baker FC Waner JI Vieira EF Taylor SR Driver HS Mitchell D 2001 Sleep and 24 hour body temperatures: a comparison in young men, naturally cycling women and women taking hormonal contraceptives J Physiol 530 (Pt 3) 565 574 11158285
18 Baker FC Willoughby AR Sassoon SA Colrain IM de Zambotti M 2015 Insomnia in women approaching menopause: beyond perception Psychoneuroendocrinology 60 96 104 26142241
19 Barrett TR Ekstrand BR 1972 Effect of sleep on memory. 3. Controlling for time-of-day effects J Exp Psychol 96 2 321 327 4345763
20 Barth C Villringer A Sacher J 2015 Sex hormones affect neurotransmitters and shape the adult female brain during hormonal transition periods Frontiers in Neuroscience 9 37
21 Beltz AM Hampson E Berenbaum SA 2015 Oral contraceptives and cognition: A role for ethinyl estradiol Horm Behav 74 209 217 26122296
22 Berent-Spillson A Persad CC Love T Sowers M Randolph JF Zubieta JK Smith YR 2012 Hormonal environment affects cognition independent of age during the menopause transition J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97 9 E1686 1694 22730514
23 Bergmann TO Molle M Diedrichs J Born J Siebner HR 2012 Sleep spindle-related reactivation of category-specific cortical regions after learning face-scene associations Neuroimage 59 3 2733 2742 22037418
24 Bernardi F Pluchino N Pieri M Begliuomini S Lenzi E Puccetti S Casarosa E Luisi M Genazzani AR 2006 Progesterone and medroxyprogesterone acetate effects on central and peripheral allopregnanolone and beta-endorphin levels Neuroendocrinology 83 5–6 348 359 16931878
25 Bimonte-Nelson HA Francis KR Umphlet CD Granholm AC 2006 Progesterone reverses the spatial memory enhancements initiated by tonic and cyclic oestrogen therapy in middle-aged ovariectomized female rats Eur J Neurosci 24 1 229 242 16882019
26 Bodizs R Kormendi J Rigo P Lazar AS 2009 The individual adjustment method of sleep spindle analysis: methodological improvements and roots in the fingerprint paradigm J Neurosci Methods 178 1 205 213 19061915
27 Braden BB Andrews MG Acosta JI Mennenga SE Lavery C Bimonte-Nelson HA 2016 A comparison of progestins within three classes: Differential effects on learning and memory in the aging surgically menopausal rat Behav Brain Res
28 Braden BB Andrews MG Acosta JI Mennenga SE Lavery C Bimonte-Nelson HA 2017 A comparison of progestins within three classes: Differential effects on learning and memory in the aging surgically menopausal rat Behav Brain Res 322 (Pt B) 258 268 27368418
29 Branger P Arenaza-Urquijo EM Tomadesso C Mezenge F Andre C de Flores R Mutlu J de La Sayette V Eustache F Chetelat G Rauchs G 2016 Relationships between sleep quality and brain volume, metabolism, and amyloid deposition in late adulthood Neurobiol Aging 41 107 114 27103523
30 Brinton RD Yao J Yin F Mack WJ Cadenas E 2015 Perimenopause as a neurological transition state Nat Rev Endocrinol 11 7 393 405 26007613
31 Bubu OM Brannick M Mortimer J Umasabor-Bubu O Sebastiao YV Wen Y Schwartz S Borenstein AR Wu Y Morgan D Anderson WM 2017 Sleep, Cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Sleep 40 1
32 Burger HG Hale GE Dennerstein L Robertson DM 2008 Cycle and hormone changes during perimenopause: the key role of ovarian function Menopause 15 (4 Pt 1) 603 612 18574431
33 Buysse DJ Germain A Hall ML Moul DE Nofzinger EA Begley A Ehlers CL Thompson W Kupfer DJ 2008 EEG spectral analysis in primary insomnia: NREM period effects and sex differences Sleep 31 12 1673 1682 19090323
34 Buzsaki G 2015 Hippocampal sharp wave-ripple: A cognitive biomarker for episodic memory and planning Hippocampus 25 10 1073 1188 26135716
35 Cahill L 2006 Why sex matters for neuroscience Nat Rev Neurosci 7 6 477 484 16688123
36 Canli T Desmond JE Zhao Z Gabrieli JD 2002 Sex differences in the neural basis of emotional memories Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 16 10789 10794 12145327
37 Carrier J Land S Buysse DJ Kupfer DJ Monk TH 2001 The effects of age and gender on sleep EEG power spectral density in the middle years of life (ages 20–60 years old) Psychophysiology 38 2 232 242 11347869
38 Cedars MI 2002 Triphasic oral contraceptives: review and comparison of various regimens Fertil Steril 77 1 1 14 11779584
39 Cedernaes J Osorio RS Varga AW Kam K Schioth HB Benedict C 2017 Candidate mechanisms underlying the association between sleep-wake disruptions and Alzheimer’s disease Sleep Med Rev 31 102 111 26996255
40 Cellini N 2017 Memory consolidation in sleep disorders Sleep Med Rev 35 101 112 27765468
41 Cellini N de Zambotti M Covassin N Sarlo M Stegagno L 2014 Impaired off-line motor skills consolidation in young primary insomniacs Neurobiol Learn Mem 114 141 147 24954844
42 Clemens Z Fabo D Halasz P 2005 Overnight verbal memory retention correlates with the number of sleep spindles Neuroscience 132 2 529 535 15802203
43 Comasco E Frokjaer VG Sundstrom-Poromaa I 2014 Functional and molecular neuroimaging of menopause and hormone replacement therapy Front Neurosci 8 388 25538545
44 Crunelli V Hughes SW 2010 The slow (&lt;1 Hz) rhythm of non-REM sleep: a dialogue between three cardinal oscillators Nat Neurosci 13 1 9 17 19966841
45 Curran-Rauhut MA Petersen SL 2002 The distribution of progestin receptor mRNA in rat brainstem Brain Res Gene Expr Patterns 1 3–4 151 157 12638125
46 Damianisch K Rupprecht R Lancel M 2001 The influence of subchronic administration of the neurosteroid allopregnanolone on sleep in the rat Neuropsychopharmacology 25 4 576 584 11557171
47 De Gennaro L Ferrara M Vecchio F Curcio G Bertini M 2005 An electroencephalographic fingerprint of human sleep Neuroimage 26 1 114 122 15862211
48 de Zambotti M Goldstone A Colrain IM Baker FC 2017 Insomnia disorder in adolescence: Diagnosis, impact, and treatment Sleep Med Rev
49 de Zambotti M Willoughby AR Sassoon SA Colrain IM Baker FC 2015 Menstrual Cycle-Related Variation in Physiological Sleep in Women in the Early Menopausal Transition J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100 8 2918 2926 26079775
50 Deboer T 1998 Brain temperature dependent changes in the electroencephalogram power spectrum of humans and animals J Sleep Res 7 4 254 262 9844852
51 Diekelmann S Born J 2010 The memory function of sleep Nat Rev Neurosci 11 2 114 126 20046194
52 Diekelmann S Born J Rasch B 2016 Increasing Explicit Sequence Knowledge by Odor Cueing during Sleep in Men but not Women Front Behav Neurosci 10 74 27147995
53 Dijk DJ 1995 EEG slow waves and sleep spindles: windows on the sleeping brain Behav Brain Res 69 1–2 109 116 7546301
54 Dijk DJ Beersma DG Bloem GM 1989 Sex differences in the sleep EEG of young adults: visual scoring and spectral analysis Sleep 12 6 500 507 2595173
55 Driver HS Dijk DJ Werth E Biedermann K Borbely AA 1996 Sleep and the sleep electroencephalogram across the menstrual cycle in young healthy women J Clin Endocrinol Metab 81 2 728 735 8636295
56 Driver HS Werth E Dijk D-J Borbely A 2008 The menstrual cycle effects on sleep Sleep Med Clin 3 1 11
57 Driver HS Werth E Dijk D Borbely AA 2008 The menstrual cycle effects on sleep Sleep medicine clinics 3 1 11
58 Drogos LL Rubin LH Geller SE Banuvar S Shulman LP Maki PM 2013 Objective cognitive performance is related to subjective memory complaints in midlife women with moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms Menopause 20 12 1236 1242 23676633
59 Duarte-Guterman P Yagi S Chow C Galea LA 2015 Hippocampal learning, memory, and neurogenesis: Effects of sex and estrogens across the lifespan in adults Horm Behav 74 37 52 26122299
60 Eichenbaum H 2004 Hippocampus: Cognitive Processes and Neural Representations that Underlie Declarative Memory Neuron 44 1 109 120 15450164
61 Engler-Chiurazzi EB Brown CM Povroznik JM Simpkins JW 2017 Estrogens as neuroprotectants: Estrogenic actions in the context of cognitive aging and brain injury Prog Neurobiol 157 188 211 26891883
62 Epperson CN Sammel MD Freeman EW 2013 Menopause effects on verbal memory: findings from a longitudinal community cohort J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98 9 3829 3838 23836935
63 Eschenko O Molle M Born J Sara SJ 2006 Elevated sleep spindle density after learning or after retrieval in rats J Neurosci 26 50 12914 12920 17167082
64 Farage MA Neill S MacLean AB 2009 Physiological changes associated with the menstrual cycle: a review Obstet Gynecol Surv 64 1 58 72 19099613
65 Feige B Baglioni C Spiegelhalder K Hirscher V Nissen C Riemann D 2013 The microstructure of sleep in primary insomnia: an overview and extension Int J Psychophysiol 89 2 171 180 23583625
66 Frick KM Kim J Tuscher JJ Fortress AM 2015 Sex steroid hormones matter for learning and memory: estrogenic regulation of hippocampal function in male and female rodents Learn Mem 22 9 472 493 26286657
67 Gaillard JM Blois R 1981 Spindle density in sleep of normal subjects Sleep 4 4 385 391 7313391
68 Gais S Molle M Helms K Born J 2002 Learning-dependent increases in sleep spindle density J Neurosci 22 15 6830 6834 12151563
69 Galea LAM Frick KM Hampson E Sohrabji F Choleris E 2017 Why estrogens matter for behavior and brain health Neurosci Biobehav Rev 76 (Pt B) 363 379 27039345
70 Genzel L Baurle A Potyka A Wehrle R Adamczyk M Friess E Steiger A Dresler M 2014 Diminished nap effects on memory consolidation are seen under oral contraceptive use Neuropsychobiology 70 4 253 261 25720656
71 Genzel L Kiefer T Renner L Wehrle R Kluge M Grozinger M Steiger A Dresler M 2012 Sex and modulatory menstrual cycle effects on sleep related memory consolidation Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 7 987 998 22153362
72 Genzel L Kroes MC Dresler M Battaglia FP 2014 Light sleep versus slow wave sleep in memory consolidation: a question of global versus local processes? Trends Neurosci 37 1 10 19 24210928
73 Gervais NJ Mong JA Lacreuse A 2017 Ovarian hormones, sleep and cognition across the adult female lifespan: An integrated perspective Front Neuroendocrinol 47 134 153 28803147
74 Gleason CE Dowling NM Wharton W Manson JE Miller VM Atwood CS Brinton EA Cedars MI Lobo RA Merriam GR Neal-Perry G Santoro NF Taylor HS Black DM Budoff MJ Hodis HN Naftolin F Harman SM Asthana S 2015 Effects of Hormone Therapy on Cognition and Mood in Recently Postmenopausal Women: Findings from the Randomized, Controlled KEEPS-Cognitive and Affective Study PLoS Med 12 6 e1001833 discussion e1001833 26035291
75 Gogos A Wu YC Williams AS Byrne LK 2014 The effects of ethinylestradiol and progestins (the pill) on cognitive function in pre-menopausal women Neurochem Res 39 12 2288 2300 25266552
76 Gold EB Sternfeld B Kelsey JL Brown C Mouton C Reame N Salamone L Stellato R 2000 Relation of demographic and lifestyle factors to symptoms in a multiracial/ethnic population of women 40–55 years of age Am J Epidemiol 152 5 463 473 10981461
77 Gomes MP Deitcher SR 2004 Risk of venous thromboembolic disease associated with hormonal contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy: a clinical review Arch Intern Med 164 18 1965 1976 15477430
78 Greendale GA Derby CA Maki PM 2011 Perimenopause and cognition Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 38 3 519 535 21961718
79 Greendale GA Wight RG Huang MH Avis N Gold EB Joffe H Seeman T Vuge M Karlamangla AS 2010 Menopause-associated symptoms and cognitive performance: results from the study of women’s health across the nation Am J Epidemiol 171 11 1214 1224 20442205
80 Griessenberger H Heib DP Lechinger J Luketina N Petzka M Moeckel T Hoedlmoser K Schabus M 2013 Susceptibility to declarative memory interference is pronounced in primary insomnia PLoS One 8 2 e57394 23451218
81 Hadjimarkou MM Benham R Schwarz JM Holder MK Mong JA 2008 Estradiol suppresses rapid eye movement sleep and activation of sleep-active neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic area Eur J Neurosci 27 7 1780 1792 18371078
82 Hale GE Zhao X Hughes CL Burger HG Robertson DM Fraser IS 2007 Endocrine features of menstrual cycles in middle and late reproductive age and the menopausal transition classified according to the Staging of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) staging system J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92 8 3060 3067 17550960
83 Hampson E 1990 Estrogen-related variations in human spatial and articulatory-motor skills Psychoneuroendocrinology 15 2 97 111 2359813
84 Hampson E Morley EE 2013 Estradiol concentrations and working memory performance in women of reproductive age Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 12 2897 2904 24011502
85 Hamson DK Roes MM Galea LA 2016 Sex Hormones and Cognition: Neuroendocrine Influences on Memory and Learning Compr Physiol 6 3 1295 1337 27347894
86 Harlow SD Gass M Hall JE Lobo R Maki P Rebar RW Sherman S Sluss PM de Villiers TJ 2012 Executive summary of the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop + 10: addressing the unfinished agenda of staging reproductive aging J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97 4 1159 1168 22344196
87 Harrison NL Majewska MD Harrington JW Barker JL 1987 Structure-activity relationships for steroid interaction with the gamma-aminobutyric acidA receptor complex J Pharmacol Exp Ther 241 1 346 353 3033209
88 Helfrich RF Mander BA Jagust WJ Knight RT Walker MT 2018 Old Brains Come Uncoupled in Sleep: Slow Wave-Spindle Synchrony, Brain Atrophy, and Forgetting Neuron 97 1 221 230 29249289
89 Henderson VW 2009 Aging, estrogens, and episodic memory in women Cogn Behav Neurol 22 4 205 214 19996872
90 Henderson VW Guthrie JR Dudley EC Burger HG Dennerstein L 2003 Estrogen exposures and memory at midlife: a population-based study of women Neurology 60 8 1369 1371 12707448
91 Henderson VW Popat RA 2011 Effects of endogenous and exogenous estrogen exposures in midlife and late-life women on episodic memory and executive functions Neuroscience 191 129 138 21664950
92 Henderson VW St John JA Hodis HN McCleary CA Stanczyk FZ Shoupe D Kono N Dustin L Allayee H Mack WJ 2016 Cognitive effects of estradiol after menopause: A randomized trial of the timing hypothesis Neurology 87 7 699 708 27421538
93 Henke K 2010 A model for memory systems based on processing modes rather than consciousness Nat Rev Neurosci 11 7 523 532 20531422
94 Hussain D Hanafi S Konishi K Brake WG Bohbot VD 2016 Modulation of spatial and response strategies by phase of the menstrual cycle in women tested in a virtual navigation task Psychoneuroendocrinology 70 108 117 27213559
95 Ishizuka Y Pollak CP Shirakawa S Kakuma T Azumi K Usui A Shiraishi K Fukuzawa H Kariya T 1994 Sleep spindle frequency changes during the menstrual cycle J Sleep Res 3 1 26 29 10607105
96 Jacobs EG Weiss BK Makris N Whitfield-Gabrieli S Buka SL Klibanski A Goldstein JM 2016 Impact of Sex and Menopausal Status on Episodic Memory Circuitry in Early Midlife J Neurosci 36 39 10163 10173 27683911
97 Jenkins JG Dallenbach KM 1924 Obliviscence during sleep and waking The American Journal of Psychology 35 4 605 612
98 Joffe H Hall JE Gruber S Sarmiento IA Cohen LS Yurgelun-Todd D Martin KA 2006 Estrogen therapy selectively enhances prefrontal cognitive processes: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study with functional magnetic resonance imaging in perimenopausal and recently postmenopausal women Menopause 13 3 411 422 16735938
99 Joffe H Massler A Sharkey KM 2010 Evaluation and management of sleep disturbance during the menopause transition Semin Reprod Med 28 5 404 421 20845239
100 Johnson E Roth T Schultz L Breslau N 2006 Epidemiology of DSM-IV insomnia in adolescence: lifetime prevalence, chronicity, and an emergent gender difference Pediatrics 117 2 e247 e256 16452333
101 Kang JE Lim MM Bateman RJ Lee JJ Smyth LP Cirrito JR Fujiki N Nishino S Holtzman DM 2009 Amyloid-beta dynamics are regulated by orexin and the sleep-wake cycle Science 326 5955 1005 1007 19779148
102 Karlamangla AS Lachman ME Han W Huang M Greendale GA 2017 Evidence for Cognitive Aging in Midlife Women: Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation PLoS One 12 1 e0169008 28045986
103 Koebele SV Bimonte-Nelson HA 2015 Trajectories and phenotypes with estrogen exposures across the lifespan: What does Goldilocks have to do with it? Horm Behav 74 86 104 26122297
104 Koebele SV Bimonte-Nelson HA 2016 Modeling menopause: The utility of rodents in translational behavioral endocrinology research Maturitas 87 5 17 27013283
105 Koebele SV Bimonte-Nelson HA 2017 The endocrine-brain-aging triad where many paths meet: female reproductive hormone changes at midlife and their influence on circuits important for learning and memory Exp Gerontol 94 14 23 27979770
106 Koebele SV Mennenga SE Hiroi R Quihuis AM Hewitt LT Poisson ML George C Mayer LP Dyer CA Aiken LS Demers LM Carson C Bimonte-Nelson HA 2017 Cognitive changes across the menopause transition: A longitudinal evaluation of the impact of age and ovarian status on spatial memory Horm Behav 87 96 114 27793768
107 Korol DL Pisani SL 2015 Estrogens and cognition: Friends or foes?: An evaluation of the opposing effects of estrogens on learning and memory Horm Behav 74 105 115 26149525
108 Lampio L Polo-Kantola P L Himanen S Kurki S Huupponen E Engblom J Heinonen OJ Polo O Saaresranta T 2017 Sleep During Menopausal Transition: A 6-Year Follow-Up Sleep 40 7
109 Lancel M Faulhaber J Schiffelholz T Romeo E Di Michele F Holsboer F Rupprecht R 1997 Allopregnanolone affects sleep in a benzodiazepine-like fashion J Pharmacol Exp Ther 282 3 1213 1218 9316828
110 Lauriola M Esposito R Delli Pizzi S de Zambotti M Londrillo F Kramer JH Rabinovici GD Tartaro A 2016 Sleep changes without medial temporal lobe or brain cortical changes in community-dwelling individuals with subjective cognitive decline Alzheimers Dement
111 Lemieux M Chen JY Lonjers P Bazhenov M Timofeev I 2014 The impact of cortical deafferentation on the neocortical slow oscillation J Neurosci 34 16 5689 5703 24741059
112 Lewin C Wolgers G Herlitz A 2001 Sex differences favoring women in verbal but not in visuospatial episodic memory Neuropsychology 15 2 165 173 11324860
113 Liguori C Romigi A Nuccetelli M Zannino S Sancesario G Martorana A Albanese M Mercuri NB Izzi F Bernardini S Nitti A Sancesario GM Sica F Marciani MG Placidi F 2014 Orexinergic system dysregulation, sleep impairment, and cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease JAMA Neurol 71 12 1498 1505 25322206
114 Lim AS Kowgier M Yu L Buchman AS Bennett DA 2013 Sleep Fragmentation and the Risk of Incident Alzheimer’s Disease and Cognitive Decline in Older Persons Sleep 36 7 1027 1032 23814339
115 Lim AS Yu L Costa MD Leurgans SE Buchman AS Bennett DA Saper CB 2012 Increased fragmentation of rest-activity patterns is associated with a characteristic pattern of cognitive impairment in older individuals Sleep 35 5 633 640B 22547889
116 Luetters C Huang MH Seeman T Buckwalter G Meyer PM Avis NE Sternfeld B Johnston JM Greendale GA 2007 Menopause transition stage and endogenous estradiol and follicle-stimulating hormone levels are not related to cognitive performance: cross-sectional results from the study of women’s health across the nation (SWAN) J Womens Health (Larchmt) 16 3 331 344 17439378
117 Luine VN 2014 Estradiol and cognitive function: past, present and future Horm Behav 66 4 602 618 25205317
118 Maki PM 2013 Critical window hypothesis of hormone therapy and cognition: a scientific update on clinical studies Menopause 20 6 695 709 23715379
119 Maki PM 2015 Verbal memory and menopause Maturitas 82 3 288 290 26433715
120 Maki PM Rich JB Rosenbaum RS 2002 Implicit memory varies across the menstrual cycle: estrogen effects in young women Neuropsychologia 40 5 518 529 11749982
121 Mander BA Marks SM Vogel JW Rao V Lu B Saletin JM Ancoli-Israel S Jagust WJ Walker MP 2015 beta-amyloid disrupts human NREM slow waves and related hippocampus-dependent memory consolidation Nat Neurosci 18 7 1051 1057 26030850
122 Mander BA Rao V Lu B Saletin JM Lindquist JR Ancoli-Israel S Jagust W Walker MP 2013 Prefrontal atrophy, disrupted NREM slow waves and impaired hippocampal-dependent memory in aging Nat Neurosci 16 3 357 364 23354332
123 Mander BA Winer JR Jagust WJ Walker MP 2016 Sleep: A Novel Mechanistic Pathway, Biomarker, and Treatment Target in the Pathology of Alzheimer’s Disease? Trends Neurosci 39 8 552 566 27325209
124 Marshall L Helgadottir H Molle M Born J 2006 Boosting slow oscillations during sleep potentiates memory Nature 444 7119 610 613 17086200
125 McCarrey AC Resnick SM 2015 Postmenopausal hormone therapy and cognition Horm Behav 74 167 172 25935728
126 McCarthy MM Arnold AP 2011 Reframing sexual differentiation of the brain Nature neuroscience 14 6 677 683 21613996
127 McDevitt EA Rokem A Silver MA Mednick SC 2014 Sex differences in sleep-dependent perceptual learning Vision Res 99 172 179 24141074
128 McEwen B 2002 Estrogen actions throughout the brain Recent Prog Horm Res 57 357 384 12017552
129 Mednick S Nakayama K Stickgold R 2003 Sleep-dependent learning: a nap is as good as a night Nat Neurosci 6 7 697 698 12819785
130 Mednick SC Cai DJ Shuman T Anagnostaras S Wixted JT 2011 An opportunistic theory of cellular and systems consolidation Trends Neurosci 34 10 504 514 21742389
131 Mednick SC McDevitt EA Walsh JK Wamsley E Paulus M Kanady JC Drummond SP 2013 The critical role of sleep spindles in hippocampal-dependent memory: a pharmacology study J Neurosci 33 10 4494 4504 23467365
132 Merlo S Spampinato SF Sortino MA 2017 Estrogen and Alzheimer’s disease: Still an attractive topic despite disappointment from early clinical results Eur J Pharmacol 817 51 58 28577965
133 Mitchell ES Woods NF 2001 Midlife women’s attributions about perceived memory changes: observations from the Seattle Midlife Women’s Health Study J Womens Health Gend Based Med 10 4 351 362 11445026
134 Molle M Bergmann TO Marshall L Born J 2011 Fast and slow spindles during the sleep slow oscillation: disparate coalescence and engagement in memory processing Sleep 34 10 1411 1421 21966073
135 Molle M Eschenko O Gais S Sara SJ Born J 2009 The influence of learning on sleep slow oscillations and associated spindles and ripples in humans and rats Eur J Neurosci 29 5 1071 1081 19245368
136 Mong JA Baker FC Mahoney MM Paul KN Schwartz MD Semba K Silver R 2011 Sleep, rhythms, and the endocrine brain: influence of sex and gonadal hormones J Neurosci 31 45 16107 16116 22072663
137 Mong JA Cusmano DM 2016 Sex differences in sleep: impact of biological sex and sex steroids Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371 1688 20150110 26833831
138 Mordecai KL Rubin LH Maki PM 2008 Effects of menstrual cycle phase and oral contraceptive use on verbal memory Horm Behav 54 2 286 293 18455727
139 Morrow AL Suzdak PD Paul SM 1987 Benzodiazepine, barbiturate, ethanol and hypnotic steroid hormone modulation of GABA-mediated chloride ion transport in rat brain synaptoneurosomes Advances in biochemical psychopharmacology 45 247 261 3035889
140 Nebes RD Buysse DJ Halligan EM Houck PR Monk TH 2009 Self-reported sleep quality predicts poor cognitive performance in healthy older adults J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 64 2 180 187 19204069
141 Ngo HV Martinetz T Born J Molle M 2013 Auditory closed-loop stimulation of the sleep slow oscillation enhances memory Neuron 78 3 545 553 23583623
142 Nguyen TV Ducharme S Karama S 2016 Effects of Sex Steroids in the Human Brain Mol Neurobiol
143 Niknazar M Krishnan GP Bazhenov M Mednick SC 2015 Coupling of Thalamocortical Sleep Oscillations Are Important for Memory Consolidation in Humans PLoS One 10 12 e0144720 26671283
144 Nissen C Kloepfer C Feige B Piosczyk H Spiegelhalder K Voderholzer U Riemann D 2011 Sleep-related memory consolidation in primary insomnia J Sleep Res 20 (1 Pt 2) 129 136 20673291
145 Nissen C Kloepfer C Nofzinger EA Feige B Voderholzer U Riemann D 2006 Impaired sleep-related memory consolidation in primary insomnia--a pilot study Sleep 29 8 1068 1073 16944676
146 Ohayon MM 2006 Severe hot flashes are associated with chronic insomnia Arch Intern Med 166 12 1262 1268 16801508
147 Osorio RS Gumb T Pirraglia E Varga AW Lu SE Lim J Wohlleber ME Ducca EL Koushyk V Glodzik L Mosconi L Ayappa I Rapoport DM de Leon MJ I. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 2015 Sleep-disordered breathing advances cognitive decline in the elderly Neurology 84 19 1964 1971 25878183
148 Osorio RS Pirraglia E Aguera-Ortiz LF During EH Sacks H Ayappa I Walsleben J Mooney A Hussain A Glodzik L Frangione B Martinez-Martin P de Leon MJ 2011 Greater risk of Alzheimer’s disease in older adults with insomnia J Am Geriatr Soc 59 3 559 562 21391952
149 Pace-Schott EF Spencer RM 2011 Age-related changes in the cognitive function of sleep Prog Brain Res 191 75 89 21741545
150 Payne JD Stickgold R Swanberg K Kensinger EA 2008 Sleep preferentially enhances memory for emotional components of scenes Psychol Sci 19 8 781 788 18816285
151 Persad CC Zubieta JK Love T Wang H Tkaczyk A Smith YR 2009 Enhanced neuroactivation during verbal memory processing in postmenopausal women receiving short-term hormone therapy Fertil Steril 92 1 197 204 18692790
152 Peters KR Ray L Smith V Smith C 2008 Changes in the density of stage 2 sleep spindles following motor learning in young and older adults J Sleep Res 17 1 23 33 18275552
153 Pike CJ 2017 Sex and the development of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci Res 95 1–2 671 680 27870425
154 Plante DT Goldstein MR 2013 Medroxyprogesterone acetate is associated with increased sleep spindles during non-rapid eye movement sleep in women referred for polysomnography Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 12 3160 3166 24054762
155 Plihal W Born J 1997 Effects of early and late nocturnal sleep on declarative and procedural memory J Cogn Neurosci 9 4 534 547 23968216
156 Plihal W Born J 1999 Effects of early and late nocturnal sleep on priming and spatial memory Psychophysiology 36 5 571 582 10442025
157 Pourganji M Hosseini M Soukhtanloo M Zabihi H Hadjzadeh MA 2014 Protective role of endogenous ovarian hormones against learning and memory impairments and brain tissues oxidative damage induced by lipopolysaccharide Iran Red Crescent Med J 16 3 e13954 24829769
158 Rasch B Born J 2013 About sleep’s role in memory Physiol Rev 93 2 681 766 23589831
159 Reddy DS Kulkarni SK 1998 The effects of neurosteroids on acquisition and retention of a modified passive-avoidance learning task in mice Brain research 791 1–2 108 116 9593848
160 Redline S L Kirchner H Quan SF Gottlieb DJ Kapur V Newman A 2004 The effects of age, sex, ethnicity, and sleep-disordered breathing on sleep architecture Arch Intern Med 164 4 406 418 14980992
161 Rentz DM Weiss BK Jacobs EG Cherkerzian S Klibanski A Remington A Aizley H Goldstein JM 2017 Sex differences in episodic memory in early midlife: impact of reproductive aging Menopause 24 4 400 408 27824681
162 Resnick SM Espeland MA Jaramillo SA Hirsch C Stefanick ML Murray AM Ockene J Davatzikos C 2009 Postmenopausal hormone therapy and regional brain volumes: the WHIMS-MRI Study Neurology 72 2 135 142 19139364
163 Resnick SM Henderson VW 2002 Hormone therapy and risk of Alzheimer disease: a critical time JAMA 288 17 2170 2172 12413378
164 Riemann D Nissen C Palagini L Otte A L Perlis M Spiegelhalder K 2015 The neurobiology, investigation, and treatment of chronic insomnia Lancet Neurol 14 5 547 558 25895933
165 Roh JH Huang Y Bero AW Kasten T Stewart FR Bateman RJ Holtzman DM 2012 Disruption of the sleep-wake cycle and diurnal fluctuation of beta-amyloid in mice with Alzheimer’s disease pathology Sci Transl Med 4 150 150ra122
166 Romeo RD Waters EM McEwen BS 2004 Steroid-induced hippocampal synaptic plasticity: sex differences and similarities Neuron Glia Biol 1 3 219 229 18634599
167 Rousseau ME 1998 Women’s midlife health. Reframing menopause J Nurse Midwifery 43 3 208 223 9674351
168 Ryan J Stanczyk FZ Dennerstein L Mack WJ Clark MS Szoeke C Kildea D Henderson VW 2012 Hormone levels and cognitive function in postmenopausal midlife women Neurobiol Aging 33 7 1138 1147 22607736
169 Sattari N McDevitt EA Panas D Niknazar M Ahmadi M Naji M Baker FC Mednick SC 2017 The effect of sex and menstrual phase on memory formation during a nap Neurobiol Learn Mem 145 119 128 28927742
170 Schabus M Gruber G Parapatics S Sauter C Klosch G Anderer P Klimesch W Saletu B Zeitlhofer J 2004 Sleep spindles and their significance for declarative memory consolidation Sleep 27 8 1479 1485 15683137
171 Schmidt C Peigneux P Muto V Schenkel M Knoblauch V Munch M de Quervain DJ Wirz-Justice A Cajochen C 2006 Encoding difficulty promotes postlearning changes in sleep spindle activity during napping J Neurosci 26 35 8976 8982 16943553
172 Schouten DI Pereira SI Tops M Louzada FM 2017 State of the art on targeted memory reactivation: Sleep your way to enhanced cognition Sleep Med Rev 32 123 131 27296303
173 Seeck-Hirschner M Baier PC Weinhold SL Dittmar M Heiermann S Aldenhoff JB Goder R 2012 Declarative memory performance is associated with the number of sleep spindles in elderly women Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 20 9 782 788 21997601
174 Sharma RA Kam K Parekh A Uribe-Cano S Tweardy S Bubu OM Ayappa I Rapoport DM Varga AW Osorio RS 2017 Reduced spindle frequency and density in stage 2 NREM sleep in association with increased CSF P-TAU in cognitively normal elderly Sleep 40 A281
175 Shechter A Boivin DB 2010 Sleep, Hormones, and Circadian Rhythms throughout the Menstrual Cycle in Healthy Women and Women with Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder Int J Endocrinol 2010 259345 20145718
176 Sherwin BB 2012 Estrogen and cognitive functioning in women: lessons we have learned Behav Neurosci 126 1 123 127 22004260
177 Shimizu RE Connolly PM Cellini N Armstrong D Hernandez L Estrada R Aguilar M Weisend MP Mednick SC Simons SB 2018 Closed-loop targeted memory reactivation during sleep improves spatial navigation Fontiers in Human Neuroscience (in press)
178 Shine-Burdick R Hoffmann R Armitage R 2002 Short note: oral contraceptives and sleep in depressed and healthy women Sleep 25 3 347 349 12003166
179 Shughrue PJ Lane MV Merchenthaler I 1997 Comparative distribution of estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta mRNA in the rat central nervous system J Comp Neurol 388 4 507 525 9388012
180 Shumaker SA Legault C Rapp SR Thal L Wallace RB Ockene JK Hendrix SL Jones BN 3rd Assaf AR Jackson RD Kotchen JM Wassertheil-Smoller S Wactawski-Wende J Investigators W 2003 Estrogen plus progestin and the incidence of dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study: a randomized controlled trial JAMA 289 20 2651 2662 12771112
181 Siapas AG Wilson MA 1998 Coordinated interactions between hippocampal ripples and cortical spindles during slow-wave sleep Neuron 21 5 1123 1128 9856467
182 Siengsukon C Boyd LA 2009 Sleep enhances off-line spatial and temporal motor learning after stroke Neurorehabil Neural Repair 23 4 327 335 19171948
183 Siengsukon CF Boyd LA 2008 Sleep enhances implicit motor skill learning in individuals poststroke Top Stroke Rehabil 15 1 1 12 18250068
184 Silvers JM Tokunaga S Berry RB White AM Matthews DB 2003 Impairments in spatial learning and memory: ethanol, allopregnanolone, and the hippocampus Brain Res Brain Res Rev 43 3 275 284 14629930
185 Singh M Simpkins JW Simpkins JW Bimonte-Nelson HA Bimonte-Nelson HA Brinton RD Brinton RD 2013 Window of opportunity for estrogen and progestin intervention in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res 1514 1 2 23726132
186 Smith YR Love T Persad CC Tkaczyk A Nichols TE Zubieta JK 2006 Impact of combined estradiol and norethindrone therapy on visuospatial working memory assessed by functional magnetic resonance imaging J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91 11 4476 4481 16912129
187 Soules MR Sherman S Parrott E Rebar R Santoro N Utian W Woods N 2001 Executive summary: Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) Fertil Steril 76 5 874 878 11704104
188 Spencer JL Waters EM Romeo RD Wood GE Milner TA McEwen BS 2008 Uncovering the mechanisms of estrogen effects on hippocampal function Front Neuroendocrinol 29 2 219 237 18078984
189 Spencer RM Gouw AM Ivry RB 2007 Age-related decline of sleep-dependent consolidation Learn Mem 14 7 480 484 17622650
190 Spira AP Gamaldo AA An Y Wu MN Simonsick EM Bilgel M Zhou Y Wong DF Ferrucci L Resnick SM 2013 Self-reported sleep and beta-amyloid deposition in community-dwelling older adults JAMA Neurol 70 12 1537 1543 24145859
191 Sprecher KE Bendlin BB Racine AM Okonkwo OC Christian BT Koscik RL Sager MA Asthana S Johnson SC Benca RM 2015 Amyloid burden is associated with self-reported sleep in nondemented late middle-aged adults Neurobiol Aging 36 9 2568 2576 26059712
192 Squire LR 1992 Declarative and nondeclarative memory: Multiple brain systems supporting learning and memory Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 4 231 243
193 Staresina BP Bergmann TO Bonnefond M van der Meij R Jensen O Deuker L Elger CE Axmacher N Fell J 2015 Hierarchical nesting of slow oscillations, spindles and ripples in the human hippocampus during sleep Nat Neurosci 18 11 1679 1686 26389842
194 Steriade M Domich L Oakson G Deschenes M 1987 The deafferented reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity J Neurophysiol 57 1 260 273 3559675
195 Steriade M McCormick DA Sejnowski TJ 1993 Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain Science 262 5134 679 685 8235588
196 Sundstrom Poromaa I Gingnell M 2014 Menstrual cycle influence on cognitive function and emotion processing-from a reproductive perspective Front Neurosci 8 380 25505380
197 Tabuchi M Lone SR Liu S Liu Q Zhang J Spira AP Wu MN 2015 Sleep interacts with abeta to modulate intrinsic neuronal excitability Curr Biol 25 6 702 712 25754641
198 Tamminen J Payne JD Stickgold R Wamsley EJ Gaskell MG 2010 Sleep spindle activity is associated with the integration of new memories and existing knowledge J Neurosci 30 43 14356 14360 20980591
199 Thurston RC Aizenstein HJ Derby CA Sejdic E Maki PM 2016 Menopausal hot flashes and white matter hyperintensities Menopause 23 1 27 32 26057822
200 Thurston RC Maki PM Derby CA Sejdic E Aizenstein HJ 2015 Menopausal hot flashes and the default mode network Fertil Steril 103 6 1572 1578 e1571 25910572
201 Timofeev I Bazhenov M 2005 Mechanisms and biological role of thalamocortical oscillations Trends in Chronobiology Research F. Columbus 1 47
202 Tononi G Cirelli C 2006 Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis Sleep Med Rev 10 1 49 62 16376591
203 Unkenstein AE Bryant CA Judd FK Ong B Kinsella GJ 2016 Understanding women’s experience of memory over the menopausal transition: subjective and objective memory in pre-, peri-, and postmenopausal women Menopause 23 12 1319 1329 27483039
204 von Krosigk M Bal T McCormick DA 1993 Cellular mechanisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus Science 261 5119 361 364 8392750
205 Voyer D Voyer S Bryden MP 1995 Magnitude of sex differences in spatial abilities: a meta-analysis and consideration of critical variables Psychol Bull 117 2 250 270 7724690
206 Voyer D Voyer SD Saint-Aubin J 2016 Sex differences in visual-spatial working memory: A meta-analysis Psychon Bull Rev
207 Walker MP Stickgold R 2004 Sleep-dependent learning and memory consolidation Neuron 44 1 121 133 15450165
208 Wang XJ Rinzel J 1993 Spindle rhythmicity in the reticularis thalami nucleus: synchronization among mutually inhibitory neurons Neuroscience 53 4 899 904 8389430
209 Westerberg CE Florczak SM Weintraub S Mesulam MM Marshall L Zee PC Paller KA 2015 Memory improvement via slow-oscillatory stimulation during sleep in older adults Neurobiology of Aging 36 9 2577 2586 26116933
210 Wilckens KA Erickson KI Wheeler ME 2012 Age-related decline in controlled retrieval: the role of the PFC and sleep Neural Plast 2012 624795 22970389
211 Wixted JT 2004 The psychology and neuroscience of forgetting Annu Rev Psychol 55 235 269 14744216
212 Wnuk A Korol DL Erickson KI 2012 Estrogens, hormone therapy, and hippocampal volume in postmenopausal women Maturitas 73 3 186 190 22858056
213 Woods NF Mitchell ES Adams C 2000 Memory functioning among midlife women: observations from the Seattle Midlife Women’s Health Study Menopause 7 4 257 265 10914619
214 Xie L Kang H Xu Q Chen MJ Liao Y Thiyagarajan M O’Donnell J Christensen DJ Nicholson C Iliff JJ Takano T Deane R Nedergaard M 2013 Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain Science 342 6156 373 377 24136970
215 Yaffe K Falvey CM Hoang T 2014 Connections between sleep and cognition in older adults Lancet Neurol 13 10 1017 1028 25231524
216 Yaroush R Sullivan MJ Ekstrand BR 1971 Effect of sleep on memory. II. Differential effect of the first and second half of the night J Exp Psychol 88 3 361 366 4326302
217 Yin F Yao J Sancheti H Feng T Melcangi RC Morgan TE Finch CE Pike CJ Mack WJ Cadenas E Brinton RD 2015 The perimenopausal aging transition in the female rat brain: decline in bioenergetic systems and synaptic plasticity Neurobiol Aging 36 7 2282 2295 25921624
218 Young T Rabago D Zgierska A Austin D Laurel F 2003 Objective and subjective sleep quality in premenopausal, perimenopausal, and postmenopausal women in the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort Study Sleep 26 6 667 672 14572118
219 Zhang B Wing YK 2006 Sex differences in insomnia: a meta-analysis Sleep 29 1 85 93 16453985
