LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101223548
32340
Expert Rev Proteomics
Expert Rev Proteomics
Expert review of proteomics
1478-9450
1744-8387

30380947
6647030
10.1080/14789450.2018.1543594
NIHMS1520146
Article
Clinical application of quantitative glycomics
Peng Wenjing 1
Zhao Jingfu 1
Dong Xue 1
Banazadeh Alireza 1
Huang Yifan 1
Hussien Ahmed 12
Mechref Yehia 1
1 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, 79409, United States.
2 Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Graduate Studies and Research, University of Alexandria, Alexandria, 21526, Egypt.
Correspondence: Yehia Mechref, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409-1061, yehia.mechref@ttu.edu, Tel: 806-742-3059, Fax: 806-742-1289
18 7 2019
14 11 2018
12 2018
01 12 2019
15 12 10071031
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Introduction:

Aberrant glycosylation has been associated with many diseases. Decades of research activities have reported many reliable glycan biomarkers of different diseases which enable effective disease diagnostics and prognostics. However, none of the glycan markers have been approved for clinical diagnosis. Thus, a review of these studies is needed to guide the successful clinical translation.

Area covered:

In this review, we describe and discuss advances in analytical methods enabling clinical glycan biomarker discovery, focusing only on studies of released glycans. This review also summarizes the different glycobiomarkers identified for cancers, Alzheimer’s disease, diabetes, hepatitis B and C, and other diseases.

Expert commentary:

Along with the development of techniques in quantitative glycomics, more glycans or glycan patterns have been reported as better potential biomarkers of different diseases and proved to have greater diagnostic/diagnostic sensitivity and specificity than existing markers. However, to successfully apply glycan markers in clinical diagnosis, more studies and verifications on large biological cohorts need to be performed. In addition, faster and more efficient glycomic strategies need to be developed to shorten the turnaround time. Thus, glycan biomarkers have an immense chance to be used in clinical prognosis and diagnosis of many diseases in the near future.

Biomarker
Cancer and other diseases
Clinical application
Diagnosis
Prognosis
Glycomics

1. Introduction

Glycosylation is an important post-translational modification of proteins. More than half of proteins in humans are glycoproteins [1-3]. Nearly all membrane proteins, secreted proteins and intracellular proteins are modified by oligosaccharides [4,5]. Glycosylation is a dynamic process in cells that determines cell-cell interaction, cell-extracellular communication and cellular metabolism [6-9]. Glycans that are covalently attached to proteins play key roles in determining the structures and functions of proteins. The biofunctions of glycans can be broadly classified into structural and modulatory roles, intrinsic and extrinsic recognition, and molecular mimicry of host glycans [10]. If the biological system is an analogy to a switchboard, glycans are “on” and “off” switches in modulating glycoproteins [11].

Although more than 700 monosaccharides are found in nature [12], human glycans are mainly built using eight monosaccharide units, including glucose (Glc), galactose (Gal), mannose (Man), N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), L-fucose (Fuc), sialic Acid (Sia, Neu5Ac), and glucuronic Acid (GlcA). However, glycan structures are far more complex than the configuration of proteins and nucleic acids, largely because the biosynthesis of glycans is a template-free process controlled by metabolic enzymes, such as glycosyltransferases, exoglycosidases, and glycan modifying enzymes [13,14]. Unlike amino acids in proteins or nucleotides in nucleic acids connected in linear sequences, monosaccharides are linked by either α or β configuration, at multiple possible hydroxyl groups and in linear or branched patterns. The anomers, positional and linkage isomers diversify and complicated glycan structures [12,15,16]. According to the attachment to different amino acid residues, glycans are mainly categorized as N-linked or O-linked glycans. N-glycans are attached to an asparagine amino acid residue while O-glycans are commonly linked to a serine or threonine residue of proteins [17].

The initial study, revealing the association of glycosylation change to cancer, dates back to 1969, which reported for the first time a distinct difference between the membrane glycoproteins of healthy and transformed mouse fibroblasts [18]. Since then, many studies have shown both overexpression and/or underexpression of glycans as well as size increase, branching and modifications in the core structure of N-linked and O-linked glycans [19,20]. More cancer-associated glycans and their effects on transformation, metastasis and tumor progression were studied [21-23]. Currently, most of the FDA approved disease biomarkers are glycoproteins [6]. Glycan targeted therapeutics is becoming prevalent in recent years but have not been extensively explored yet. The discovery of glycan biomarkers would facilitate the understanding of disease pathology and prompt more selective treatment and diagnosis. However, for this to happen, reliable analytical methods are needed.

Advancement in mass spectrometry (MS) and separation techniques facilitate the identification of glycan structures and quantitative analysis of glycans derived from biological samples. Electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)-MS are the most widely used ionization techniques for glycan analysis. However, MS technique alone is not adequate to characterize glycan isomers. Thus, separation techniques such as liquid chromatography (LC) and capillary electrophoresis (CE) are often coupled with MS to achieve high throughput and comprehensive quantitative glycomic analysis.

Glyco-science can be classified into several categories, including the studies of glycogene, glycoprotein, glycopeptide, released glycan, glycolipid, free oligosaccharide, etc. In this review, we are focusing on the clinical glycan biomarker discovery through glycomic studies, which only analyze the released glycans. we will describe and discuss MS methods with and without separation which are employed in glycome profiling to discover and validate potential glycobiomarkers of several diseases. The potential glycobiomarkers of different cancers and diseases would be summarized and discussed.

2. Quantitative glycomics techniques

Absolute quantitation often refers to the precise amounts of the analytes from a calibration curve constructed using known amount of standards. On the other hand, relative quantitation is usually acquired through dividing individual glycan abundance by total glycome abundance (or by the abundance of the most intense glycan). However, glycan standards are not easily acquired, which inhibits the use of absolute quantitation in disease glycomic studies. Therefore, almost all clinical glycomics studies are presented in relative quantitation, which can readily exhibit the up- or down- regulation of glycans between diseased and healthy cohorts. Quantitation methods in glycomics field have been previously reviewed by Packer and coworkers [24]. This section will introduce the techniques that are currently being used in clinical glycomic research.

2.1. Lectin microarray-based techniques

Lectin binding was widely used to analyze different glycan compositional moieties in biological systems. A variety of specific lectins have been used to facilitate clinical diagnosis or prognosis of different cancers. Lens culinaris agglutinin has been employed to target α1,6 core fucosylation level of α-fetoprotein (AFP) to diagnose hepatocellular carcinoma [25]. By immobilizing different lectins on a solid surface, lectin microarrays prompt high-throughput characterization of the glycosylation pattern of target analytes, including intact glycoproteins or even whole cells [26]. With less sample preparation steps, binding patterns of glycans to the lectin array prompts the differentiation between glycan profiles [27]. The lectin-glycan conjugates can be targeted either through fluorescence labeling of analytes before applying to the microarray, or by applying a fluorescence-labeled antibody interacting specifically with a certain analyte. Details of glycomics studies using lectin microarrays were previously discussed [27,28]. However, lectin-based methods could not acquire the intact glycan structural information while MS-based analyses could.

2.2. MALDI-MS-based techniques

MALDI-MS is the most commonly used MS analysis method in clinical glycomics, MALDI-MS has advantages in its simple sample preparation procedure and fast analysis as well as sufficient glycan structural information [29]. Numerous studies of MALDI matrix have been conducted to increase ionization efficiency and decrease background noise, among which, 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) is the most popular matrix used in MALDI-MS of glycans. However, MALDI can easily fragment labile glycans such as sialic acid [30]. Therefore, derivatization techniques such as methylamidation/esterification or permethylation are commonly performed to avoid such loss in ionization. Additionally, methylamidation/esterification of sialic acid permits the identification of linkage isomers [31].

Normalization to the total intensity or most abundant structure is usually utilized to quantitatively assess the abundance of glycans since MALDI intensity cannot be used to interpret the abundance difference between each sample. Nevertheless, a direct comparison of peak intensities in multiplexed samples has also been previously demonstrated to be efficient in investigating the changes of single glycan structure [32]. Additionally, taking advantages of the capability to spatially resolve sample spots, MALDI imaging has been used to reveal glycan distribution changes in tissue sections [33,34]. Details in recent MALDI imaging of glycomics studies have been reviewed by Drake et al. [35]. However, MALDI-based glycomics is performed without separation, which makes the spectra complex when analyzing biological samples. Also, the competitive ionization of analytes decreases the sensitivity, demanding the combination of other efficient separation techniques with MS.

2.3. MS coupled with separation techniques

Separation of glycans prior to MS analysis is a commonly used method to reduce ion suppression during the ESI process. Benefiting from the compatibility with MS and high separation resolution, LC-MS is widely used in clinical glycomic profiling [29]. A variety of LC techniques have been employed to characterize glycosylation patterns, including hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) [36-43], reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) [44-47], high-pH anion exchange chromatography (HPAEC) [48,49] and liquid chromatography using porous graphitic carbon (PGC) [15,45,50-55] have been previously demonstrated and elaborated reviewed [56,57].

Different derivatization methods have also been employed to enhance glycan stability and ionization efficiency. Among these methods, fluorescence labeling of glycans through reductive amination using different labeling reagents, such as 2-aminobenzamide (2-AB) [58,59] and 2-aminobenzoic acid (2-AA) [60], enables simultaneous spectroscopy quantitation and identification of glycans. Permethylation can significantly enhance MS signals, stablize labile glycan residues such as sialic acids and fucoses, thus ensuring accurate structural information by tandem MS experiments [15]. Esterification distinctly modifies sialic acids and form intramolecular lactone and ester of α2,3 linked and α2,6 linked sialic acids, respectively, thus distinguishing sialic acid linkage isomers [61].

Capillary electrophoresis (CE) is also widely used in glycan separation and provides a mean to resolve isomeric structures. Glycans are often derivatized with a charged chromophore or fluorophore tag to be efficiently separated by CE. Despite the instability of ESI caused by the low flow rate of CE which is commonly amended by a sheath liquid, CE-MS facilitates glycomics with isomeric separation [62,63]. Also, the high-resolution of CE makes it suitable to analyze low sample amounts.

Quantitation in MS based glycomics is usually attained by defining the peak areas of extracted ion chromatograms (EIC). Relative quantitation is achieved by comparing the peak areas of the glycans to the sum of EIC peak areas of the entire glycome [52,64] or peak area of the most intense glycan [65]. Fluorescence response has also been used for quantitation in the case of reducing end labeled glycans. Another commonly used technique in glycomics quantitation is multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) tandem MS. Since the quantitation is based on the intensities of selected transitions, MRM analyses are less influenced by the coeluting contaminates relative to MS quantitation methods, thus resulting in high sensitivity and wide dynamic range. Glycomics analysis by MRM has been previously reviewed by Lebrilla and coworkers [66]. Using these aforementioned quantitative glycomic techniques, many promising glycan biomarkers have been discovered in different diseases. Some of the most potential glycan biomarkers in different diseases are summarized in Table 1 for N-glycobiomarkers, Table 2 O-glycobiomarkers, and Table 3 isomeric glycobiomarkers.

3. Glycans as potential biomarkers in cancer

Cancer is the leading cause of death in developed countries and even more serious in less developed countries [67,68]. The incidences of cancer are increasing due to the growth and aging of the population [67]. As discussed above, along with the development of glycomics technologies, glycomics has become more essential and significant in cancer studies. Glycosylation has been proved to be associated with carcinogenesis such as tumor adhesion [8,69,70], malignant transformation [71,72] and metastasis [73-75]. Advanced glycomics methods have facilitated glycobiomarker discovery in cancers. The ultimate goal of such studies is to quantitatively identify unique N- and O-glycans and glycan patterns in cancer samples relative to healthy samples, thus facilitating the use of glycans as biomarkers in clinical prognosis, diagnosis or therapy.

3.1. Potential N-glycobiomarkers of different cancers

3.1.1 Breast cancer

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in females, which accounts for 25% of all cancer cases [76]. Breast cancer represents the major cause of death in women [76]. Breast cancer is also considered as the second metastatic cancer following lung cancer [76]. It is estimated that 10-16% of breast cancer patients are suffering from malignant brain metastasis [77]. Also, the numbers of breast cancer brain metastasis is increasing because of the longer survival period of primary breast cancer patients and the improvement of diagnostics methods [78].

Rudd and coworkers [79] investigated the glycome expressions in breast cancer sera relative to healthy subjects. After 2D gel electrophoresis, N-glycans were released by in-gel PNGase F digestion and labeled with 2-AB. Labeled glycans were then identified and quantified using weak anion exchange liquid chromatography (WAX-HPLC), then amide-normal phase (NP)-LC-MS/MS. Tri- and tetra-sialylation of glycans were higher in breast cancer sera, as well as the branch fucosylation level. The linkages of observed glycans were studied using an array of exoglycosidases digestion. N5H4F1 glycan (N, N-acetylhexosamine; H, hexoase; F, fucose; and S, sialic acid; F listed before N, core fucosylation; F listed after N, branch fucosylation; *F, the position of fucose is not defined; see Table 1 for more details) exhbited a significant increase (&gt;2 folds) in advanced breast cancer patients. The levels of N5H4F1 glycan was assessed in a longitudinal study involving 10 breast cancer patients from early stage to late metastatic stage to define the potential of using the level of N5H4F1 as a breast cancer indicator. The increasing levels of N5H4F1 in most late-stage breast cancer patient suggested that such glycan structure was a useful and reliable indicator of breast cancer progression and metastasis than cancer antigen (CA) 15-3 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CAE) (which are the most commonly used biomarker for breast cancer).

Also, similar glycomics was performed on circulating tumor cells (CTCs) derived from 27 advanced breast cancer patient sera (16 with CTCs &lt; 5/7.5 mL, 11 ≥ 5/7.5 mL) relative to 13 healthy women [80]. CTCs were separated through CellSearch™ System (Veridex, LLC), and N-glycans were released by PNGase F, followed by 2-AB labeling. NP-HPLC coupled to serial exoglycosidases digestion were applied to separate and identify glycan structures. Sial Lewis × (SLex) contained bi-, tri- and tetra-antennary N-glycans were separated after treating with different enzymes, which resulted in only SLex branch left (without sialic acid). Total SLex abundance increased along with other three SLex glycans (N5H4F1, N6H4F1, and N5H5F2) in CTCs ≥ 5/7.5 mL group, which suggested a potential indicator for breast cancer metastasis. Moreover, 4 N-glycan structures, especially Man9 were found elevated during breast cancer progression using MALDI-FTICR [81].

Glycan sialylation and fucosylation of sera from 82 breast cancer patients with different stages and 27 cancer-free people was defined using MALDI-MS [82]. The patient sera glycomics was compared to that of seven different breast cancer cell lines, including MCF10A (normal breast cell line), MCF-7(non-invasive) and MDA-MB-231 (invasive) [83]. The increase of sialylation and fucosylation observed in breast cancer sera is an indicative glycobiomarkers for breast cancer progression. Also, significant alterations in the expressions of 8 glycan structures were observed in breast cancer sera, and 6 of them were consistent with what observed in cell lines [82].

Recently, Ju et al. [84] reported five bifucosylated N-glycan as potential biomarkers in initial breast cancer and recurrent breast cancer patients. The authors investigated 134 serum samples including 91 breast cancer sera and 43 healthy controls using LTQ-ESI-MS. The identification of reduced and permethylated glycans released from 50 μL serum sample was achieved using MSn (n was up to 7) technique. Overall, 11 N-glycans demonstrated significant expression changes in breast cancer patients while 5 bifucosylated glycans, which exhibited higher increase, were selected for receiver operation characteristic (ROC) curve analysis and the area under the curve (AUC) calculation to estimate their diagnostic capacity. The bifucosylation degree and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level had a combined AUC of 0.963 while CEA alone has an AUC of only 0.794, suggesting an increase of breast cancer diagnostic capacity by measuring bifucosylation degree and CEA together. Also, increased bifucosylation degree level could be utilized as an indicator for recurrent breast cancer since it was proved to outperform commonly used breast cancer biomarkers, such CEA, CA 15-3 and CA 125.

More recently, Terkelsen et al. [85] have reported N-glycan signatures from tumor interstitial fluid and serum of breast cancer patients and their association with clinical outcomes. The authors investigated 85 tumor interstitial fluids (TIFs) (luminal A = 43, luminal B = 12, luminal B HER2-enriched = 8, HER2 = 9, and TNBC = 13) and 54 normal interstitial fluids (NIF) samples, as well as their paired serum samples. There were 54 TIF-NIF paired samples (108 samples in total). N-glycans from TIF and NIF samples were released using the high-throughput automated method by a liquid-handling robot, labeled with 2-AB, and analyzed using HILIC-UPLC with fluorescent detection, calibrated by 2-AB labeled dextran ladder and identified by their glucose units (GU). Then the peaks were assigned to glycan structures based on the in-house database established before. The N-glycan analysis strategy allowed 165 N-glycans assigned to 46 glycan peaks. The glycan peaks were then associated with clinical outcomes such as breast cancer phenotypes, clinical variables, and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). The increase in the expression levels of nine bisection N-glycans (N5H3, N5H4, F1N5H4, F1N5H5, N5H5S1, F1N5H5S1, F1N4H5S2, N5H6F1S3, and F1N5H5S2) were found to contribute to tumor suppression in NIF. Correlations between several glycan patterns and proportion/composition of infiltrating lymphocyte populations were observed. Five N-glycans (F1N4H4, F1N4H4 (branch isomer), F1N4H5, F1N5H5S1, and F1N2H3) levels in TIF correlated with that in paired serum. Importantly, F1N5H5S1 and F1N2H3 were shown to have the prognostics potential through validation using an independent serum cohort.

3.1.2. Liver cancer

Liver cancer is not only one of the most common cancer, but also has the second highest cancer death cases [86]. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) counts for more than 80% of malignancies of liver cancer, and the survival rate of HCC is only 2-7% [87]. Such a low survival rate is caused by the lack of early diagnosis [88]. Most serum glycoproteins are of hepatic origin, suggesting the importance of glycomic studies in liver diseases [89].

In the early stages of liver diseases, high-mannose glycan levels have been exclusively associated with HCC condition [90]. Goldman et al. [91] investigated 202 serum samples representing 73 HCC cases, 77 cancer-free, and 52 with chronic liver disease using MALDI-TOF. A total of 83 N-glycans were identified while 57 glycan expression alterations were found in HCC cases. The combination of the levels of 3 glycans (N5H6S2, N6H7S3 and bisecting N5H4S1) effectively predicted HCC with 90% accuracy. Moreover, the investigation of salivary glycomics in liver diseases were performed [92]. Although, several glycans were observed the expression alterations in different liver diseases, the increase of total fucosylation level and decrease of total sialylation level were more promising to be considered as the HCC indicators in this study.

Recently, Kamiyama et al. [93] investigate N-glycan profiles from 369 patients who underwent a hepatectomy procedure for HCC and 26 healthy people. Released N-glycans were purified by glycoblotting using BlotGlyco H beads (Sumitomo Bakelite, Tokyo, Japan) coupled to on beads methyl esterification and then analyzed using MALDI-TOF. With this fast sample preparation and analysis strategy, 67 N-glycans were identified and quantified. The correlation between identified N-glycans and different clinical indexes of HCC patients was measured. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analysis between HCC samples and disease-free samples revealed 14 N-glycans with a definite increase in HCC (AUC&gt;0.8). Among the observed strcutures, F1N5H6S2 and F1N6H7S3 were elevated in more than 70% of HCC patients. Additional correction analyses of these two glycans identified F1N5H6S2 as a significant HCC recurrent indicator and F1N6H7S3 as a significant prognosis indicator.

Lubman and coworkers [94] investigatied the alterations in fucosylation degree of serum haptoglobin from a cohort containing 104 individuals representing 14 healthy controls, 40 cirrhosis and 50 HCC patients using MALDI-QIT-TOF. The total fucosylation degree significantly increased in HBV- and ALC-related HCC, suggesting the diagnostic potential of the total fucosylation degree for distinguishing HBV-and ALC-related HCC from their corresponding cirrhosis. In addition, the significant elevation of bifucosylation degrees of different cohorts were also observed. High AUC value in ROC analysis (more than 0.82 with specificity and sensitivity more than 70%) indicated that bifucosylation degree could be a promising biomarker in liver cancer progression of patients suffering from cirrhosis. Combining bifucosylation degree and clinical marker AFP facilitated a significant improvement in the ability to discriminate HCC from cirrhosis patients. The fact that bifucosylation degree increased in all early stage HCC cases indicated that it could be a potential indicator for early stage HCC patient with cirrhosis.

MALDI imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS) for tissue N-glycan profiling was initially developed by Drake and coworkers [34]. They recently utilized this technique to assess the glycome of liver cancer tissue microarray (TMA) [95]. Tissues of TMA blocks were initially sectioned at 5 μm and mounted on a positively charged slides, followed by thermo fix, deparaffinization, and rehydration. N-glycans were then released by PNGase F spray and analyzed using MALDI-FTICR. Figure 1 depicts the TMA tissue position and two N-glycans which could distinguish liver tumors from normal tissues [95]. These two glycans were selected out from 26 identified glycans because of the high AUC (&gt;0.8 with p &lt;0.05) in ROC analysis. The authors reported that up-regulation of N6H7 and down-regulation of Man8 might be promising indicators for liver cancer. The expression changes of these two glycans were also observed in another study using similar MALDI-IMS strategy [96].

In a recent study, Kim et al. [97] introduced a MALDI-MS based quantitative targeted glycomics (MALDI-QTaG) strategy to analyze α-fetoprotein (AFP) glycans from normal human serum and HCC cell line Huh7. Sialic acids of released glycans were neutralized using acetohydrazide. Then glycans were labeled by Girard’s reagent P and analyzed by MALDI-TOF-MS. The comparison of AFP glycans from normal serum and HCC cells revealed a significant increase of core-fucosylated glycans in HCC cells (including an obvious increase of F1N4H5S2 and F1N4H5S1). Although the sources were different specimens, the comparison exhibited the different glycan expressions in different sources, which might also need to pay attention to.

3.1.3. Ovarian cancer

Ovarian cancer is another major cancer in females, which is the fifth leading cause of death in women [98]. Usually, ovarian cancer was diagnosed in a late stage, after metastasis occurred, which left only few treatment options and a short survival period [99]. Although prognostic indicators for early-stage ovarian cancer has been reported, such as CA125 [100], searching for more promising biomarkers in addition to CA125 is essential. Recently, more glycome expression changes in ovarian cancer have been investigated and considered as potential biomarkers.

When considering different glycan types, core-fucosylation was observed to increase in ovarian cancer side population cells [101]. The increase of ovarian cancer core-fucosylation was also reported in patient serum, along with the increase of agalactosyl biantennary glycans and SLex [102]. A similar increase of agalactosyl biantennary glycan expression level was reported through investigating glycome from 30 ovarian cancer patient sera [103]. Meanwhile, a decrease of bisecting structure and increase of tri- and tetra-antennary structure were observed, and particularly, N6H7S4 and N6H7F1S4 were found significantly increased in ovarian cancer [103].

Biskup et al. [104] compared the serum glycome from 63 preoperative epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patient with 33 healthy subjects. Released and permethylated N-glycans were analyzed using MALDI-TOF/TOF. Totally 47 glycans were identified and quantified, among which 11 glycans were found significantly up- or down-regulated. GLYCOV value (the ratio between average abundance of up-regulated glycans and average abundance of down-regulated glycans) was used for ROC analysis, resulting in a better sensitivity (97%) and specificity (98.4%) than the widely used CA125 biomarker. Miyamoto et al. [99] investigated glycan expressions in ascites fluid of ovarian cancer and normal serum samples. N-glycans N5H6, *F1N5H6S1, *F2N5H6S3, and *F1N6H7S1 were significantly over-expressed in ovarian samples. However, the reported data were based on only one patient ascites fluid.

Recently, Blanchard and coworkers [105] compared the N-glycome derived from five ovarian cancer patients with that of healthy subjects. Glycoproteins were purified by 2D gel electrophoresis and then N-glycans were released by on-gel PNGase F digestion. After desialylation and APTS labeling, glycans were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis with laser-induced fluorescence detection (CE-LIF) and mapped to pre-established database. The increase of branching and Lewisx were observed in EOC patients on tri- or tetra-antennary glycan structures. The overexpression of core-fucosylated bi-antennary structure (F1N4H5) on alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (A1AG) could be a promising indicator for EOC. In a more recent study, Blanchard and coworkers [106] investigated for the first-time ascites and matched serum glycome from 20 EOC patients and 20 healthy women using MALDI-TOF/TOF. A total of 47 glycans were identified, among which seven glycans exhibited significant expression differences in all three cohorts (ascites EOC, EOC and healthy). The significant decrease of high-mannose and bisecting structures and increase of sialylation, branching, branch fucosylation were observed in ascites EOC when compared with serum. The discrepancy suggested that glycan biomarkers might be different in ascites relative to serum and additional investigations are warranted.

MALDI-TOF/TOF was also applied for N-glycan imaging of ovarian tumor tissue sections [107]. N-glycomics was initially performed using PGC-LC-MS/MS from three ovarian cancer patients, allowing the identification of 40 N-glycans. In situ released N-glycans of tissue section were analyzed by MALDI-TOF. Four N-glycans (N4H3, F1N5H6, Man8 and N2H3) were found to have significant capacities to distinguish tumor, stromal, adipose, and necrotic tissue regions. In ROC analysis, all these glycans exhibited high AUC values (0.84 to 0.99), especially the over-expressed Man8 which could be designated as a tumor marker. However, the up-regulation of Man8 was not consistent with another independent research of serum glycomics [104], which highlighted the different glycan expressions in different biological specimens.

3.1.4. Colorectal cancer

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third prevalent cancers in both men and women [98]. With a poor prognosis, nearly half of CRC patients are diagnosed when the disease in its metastatic state [108]. A new generation of screen test, including molecular biomarkers in biological samples, is necessary. However, despite the increasing efforts of biomarker searching, reliable biomarkers in clinical diagnosis has not been identified yet. The most widely used biomarker for CRC is CEA but lacks sensitivity for early-stage CRC [109]. Therefore, glycans as potential biomarkers were investigated in colorectal cancers.

Early studies revealed that glycan branching and sialylation were associated with colon cancer metastasis [110]. GlcNAc-caped N-glycans were also found up-regulated in colon cancer cell line HT-29 [111]. Bisecting structures were shown to exhibit up-regulation in metastatic colorectal cancer cell line LIM1215 [112]. Increased levels in colorectal carcinoma were also reported for high-mannose structures [113] and α2,6-sialylation [114]. In contrast, a decrease of core-fucosylation was observed in CRC patients [115].

The use of DNA Sequencer in clinical glycomics analysis was reported by Callewaert et al. [116]. In a more recent work, Zhao et al. [115] studied serum N-glycan profiles from 347 individuals, including 219 CRC patients (before surgery) and 128 age- and sex-matched healthy people. N-glycans were released, fluorescently labeled and desialylated before analysis by DNA sequencer-assisted/fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis (DSA-FACE). A total of 9 common structures were identified in all types of samples, among which N4H5 and N5H6F1 were significantly up-regulated in CRC samples, while F1N4H4 and F1N4H5 were down-regulated. Logistic regression analysis was applied to correlate N-glycan alterations with CRC, thus permitting the construction of a mathematical model (CRCglycoA = 8.017 + 0.286 × (F1N4H3 abundance) - 1.594 × (F1N4H4 abundance)) with an AUC value of 0.92 in ROC analysis. The same strategy was used to establish the mathematical model CRCglycoB (CRCglycoB = 6.523 + 0.298 × (F1N4H3 abundance) - 2.252 × (F1N5H3 abundance) - 0.257 × (F1N4H5 abundance)), which could differentiate CRC from adenoma with an AUC value of 0.81. The two N-glycan expression-based mathematical models exhibited better diagnostic capacities than the widely used biomarker CEA (AUC 0.81 and 0.73, respectively). In a follow-up studies after CRC patient surgery, the CRCglycoA values were significantly decrease in nearly half of patients (21 of 46), which verified the potential of CRCglycoA value as a better biomarker for CRC diagnosis.

Novotny and coworkers [117] analyzed serum glycome from 42 CRC patients and 20 controls using both MALDI-TOF and microchip electrophoresis. MALDI-TOF permitted the identification of 45 glycans. The increase of bisecting glycans N5H3 and F1N5H4S1 might be a unique feature of CRC. Microchip electrophoresis allowed the identification of 16 significantly differential glycan expressions, 9 of which agreed with MALDI-TOF. Several changes of isomers were also observed in microchip electrophoresis. The reported microchip electrophoresis results are complementary to the MALDI-MS data.

Recently, Kaprio et al. [118] investigated tissue N-glycome from 18 rectal carcinoma patients with different stages and five rectal adenoma patients using MALDI-TOF/TOF. Relative abundance of Man5, N3H4, sialylated glycans and paucimannose (F1N2H2, N2H3, F1N2H3, and N2H4) were increased in carcinoma samples when compared with adenoma samples. Paucimannose and sial lewis-a epitopes were further analyzed by Immunohistochemistry on 220 patient samples. The increase of paucimannose and SLeA were associated with poor prognosis of advanced colorectal cancer.

Rudd and coworker [119] investigated plasma glycome from 633 CRC patients, and 478 age and gender-matched healthy people. N-glycans were 2-AB labeled and analyzed using HILIC-LC. Glycan structures were mapped to the database established using exoglycosidases digestion and MS characterization. In a total of 42 glycan peaks were detected and identified, among which 11 glycans showed a significant increase while seven were decreased in CRC (Figure 2). F1N4H5 and N6H7S4 (all sialic acids are α2,3 linked) had the most significant decrease and increase in CRC, respectively. When considering the cancer stages, the decrease of F1N4H5 and F1N4H5S1 (sialic acid is α2,6 linked) could be a consistent biomarker across all CRC stages. Discrimination models were trained and tuned (based on 625 CRC vs. 468 control data sets) to distinguish CRC from healthy cases. The combination of all peaks and clinical features achieved a 95% of specificity and 0.3649 sensitivity in discriminating CRC. Also, this model could discriminate different colon cancer stages from healthy cases. The model was then validated using another 18 individuals (8 CRC and 10 healthy) set and achieved a 77.8% accuracy with 100% specificity and 50% sensitivity.

Glycans of specific glycoproteins such as IgG in CRC were also analyzed [120]. IgG was purified from healthy (N=19), benign colorectal patient (N=23) and CRC patient (N=36). N-glycans were released from IgG, methylamidated and analyzed using MALDI-TOF. Totally 28 glycans from IgG were identified and verified by PGC-LC-MS/MS, among which 9 glycan expressions were showed significant alterations in CRC and benign samples. The decrease of 5 glycan expressions (Man5, N4H5, F1N3H4S1, N4H5S1, and F1N4H5S2) were considered as the potential biomarkers in CRC through ROC analysis and further validated on 19 cancer patients and 20 healthy people. Compositional saccharides of CEA glycan from CRC patients were also studied using lectin microarray [121]. The increase of fucose, mannose and Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen, and a decrease of N-acetylgalactosamine, N-acetylglucosamine, galactose, branched and bisecting N-glycans were observed on CRC CEA. Also, a 9-lectin assessment could be used to discriminate CRC tissues with 83% sensitivity and around 90% specificity.

3.1.5. Lung cancer

Lung cancer is one of the most common cancer worldwide and the leading cause of cancer death [76,98]. There are two groups of lung cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) which accounts to 80% of the reported cases and small cell lung cancer (SCLC) which accounts to 20% of the reported cases [122]. Also, lung cancer has the highest frequency of brain metastasis [123]. To date, imaging is still the major diagnostic technique for lung cancer. Although there are some biomarkers such as CEA or CA125, the lack of specificity and sensitivity inhibits their broad uses, thus demanding the need for better biomarkers [124].

In the early studies, the overexpression of SLex was found to be a biomarker in both serum or tissue samples of lung cancer [125,126]. However, SLex could be a prognosis indicator for lymph node metastasis (71% sensitivity) but not a reliable diagnosis factor for NSCLC (24% sensitivity) [126]. Therefore, SLex might be considered as a biomarker for lung cancer progression, but not for diagnosis, suggesting more glycan markers should be uncovered.

Rudd and coworkers [38] studied serum N-glycomes from 100 lung cancer patients and 84 healthy subjects using HILIC and WAX-HPLC. Meanwhile, the glycomes of haptoglobin purified from the same serum samples were also investigated [38]. N-glycans were released from sera or haptoglobin, labeled by 2-AB and then analyzed by HPLC. HILIC permitted 17 peaks containing more than 30 glycan structures. The analysis was based on the peak areas, among which N4H5F1S2, N6H6S2, N6H7, N5H6S2 (coeluted), F1N6H6S3, N6H7S3, N6H7S2, F1N5H6S3, N5H6F1S3 (coeluted), N7H4S4, N6H7F2S4 (coeluted) were significantly increased while N3H5S1, F1N4H4S1, F1N4H5, F1N5H4S1 (coeluted), F1N4H5S1, N5H5S1, N5H6, N3H6S1, F1N5H5S1 (coeluted) were significantly decreased in lung cancer patients. Also, the significant increase of N4H5F1S2, N6H6S2, N6H7, N5H6S2 and F1N6H6S3, N6H7S3, N6H7S2, F1N5H6S3, N5H6F1S3 were observed in all cancer stages. Therefore, these 9 glycans (identified in only two chromatographic peaks) could be lung cancer biomarker enabling effective early detection of the disease. Coupled with WAX-HPLC, the significant increase of SLex, mono-antennary glycans and tri-sialylated glycans were also observed in lung cancer. ROC analysis was performed based on the alteration of glycan abundances (peak areas) and provided an AUC value of 0.938 with an 85% of sensitivity and 86% of specificity for distinguishing lung cancer patients from healthy subjects. These values were even higher when glycomic expressions were combined with C-reactive protein (CRP) expression.

Recently, Ruhaak et al. [127] analyzed blinded pre-diagnostic serum N-glycome from 100 NSCLC patients and 199 healthy controls using nano HPLC-PGC-chip-TOF-MS. A total of 74 glycans were identified in 75% of the samples. Through ROC analysis of each glycan, four glycans were selected with AUC &gt; 0.6 and FDR &lt; 0.05, among which N4H3 and *F1N4H3 were overexpressed in NSCLC while *F1N4H5 and *F1N5H6 were decreased. Also, a set of 18 glycans were picked up to represent 8 different glycan compositional features (e.g., galactose number and sialic acid number). These 4 glycans and 8 features were then validated in a blind set that consisted of 108 NSCLC patients and 216 healthy cases. Among them, 4 glycan variables exhibited an AUC &gt; 0.6. The combination of these 4 features (*F1N5H4, *F1N6H5, bi-sialylation, and tetra-galactosylation) achieved a better diagnostic result (AUC of 0.74). Glycosylation changes could be combined with other known lung cancer biomarkers such as pro-SFTPB to be the indicators for NSCLC risk assessment and progression tracking. The decrease in F1N4H5 was also observed in a previous study when analyzing lung adenocarcinoma plasma glycome [128].

Besides serum or plasma samples, glycomes derived from lung cancer tissue sections were also investigated by Wang et al. [129]. They analyzed released and permethylated N-glycome from 29 lung cancer tissue sections and 14 normal samples (discovery set) using MALDI-TOF. Total 58 N-glycans were identified using MSn (n=3), among which 6 glycans (including 5 high-mannose glycans) showed significant up-regulation in lung cancer while 8 (6 were sialylated) showed down-regulation. All these 14 glycans received AUC values &gt; 0.7, except Man9 (AUC of 0.686). The expressions of these glycans were validated using another sample set which consisted of 50 cancer tissues and 24 normal controls (validation set). Combining the increase of high-mannose glycans (5 glycans) and a decrease of sialylated glycans (6 glycans) exhibited AUC value of 1 in both the discovery and validation sets.

3.1.6. Pancreatic cancer

The survival rates of most cancers are increasing; however, the 5-year relative survival for pancreatic cancer remains low (8%) [98]. Pancreatic cancer has the lowest 5-year relative survival rates because the survival rate for distance stage is only 3% and over 50% of the cases are diagnosed at a distant stage [130]. The clinical management of pancreatic cancer is hampered by the rapid progression and large portion of asymptomatic individuals at an early stage of the disease [131]. Therefore, biomarkers promising accurate prognosis and early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer are needed. Currently, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) is a widely utilized biomarker in clinical practice for diagnosis, monitoring treatment and recurrence of pancreatic cancer [89,132]. However, CA 19-9 suffered from the lack of sensitivity and specificity [133].

Many studies have revealed N-glycan profile alterations in blood serum proteins of pancreatic cancer sample sets relative to the healthy control sets. Lubman and coworkers [134,135] developed lectin enrichment, and mass spectrometry-based analysis approaches for understanding glycosylation sites and N-glycome. In one of the studies, increased branching, fucosylation and sialylation of N-linked glycans were observed in the serum of pancreatic cancer [134]. A similar trend was observed in a more recent analysis of glycome on haptoglobin isolated from human serum [135]. Both core and antennary fucosylated glycans of haptoglobin increased in pancreatic cancer samples compared to benign conditions. However, these studies were conducted as proof-of-principle studies, and only small sample sizes were employed. Additionally, the increased fucosylation on the β chain of haptoglobin was also reported by Miyoshi and coworkers in other studies where larger sample sizes were employed [136,137].

Although blood serum samples are used for the majority of biomarker discovery studies [138], analysis of other specimens such as pancreatic cyst fluids [139] and cell lines [140] were also explored. Novotny and coworkers [139] have performed N-glycomics study on 20 pancreatic cyst fluid samples, from which complex N-linked glycans containing two to six fucose residues were observed. This study aided in the development of test system for early detection of pancreatic cancer. Wuhrer and coworkers [140] thoroughly characterized four pancreatic cell lines with different metastatic behaviors and one healthy control cell line. They evaluated glycan profile features including sialylation, fucosylation, Lewis antigens N-acetylhexosamine content and antennary. Discrepancies between the results obtained from different cell lines highlighted the importance of avoiding generalizing conclusions for the biology of cancer based on one or few cell lines.

MALDI imaging technique was also used for the pancreatic cancer biomarker discovery [95]. The intensities of on-tissue released N-glycans were determined by MALDI-MS at discrete tissue locations and used to construct images representing the distribution of glycans. This method was further applied in tissue slices including a human pancreas tissue [95]. The tissue block contained tumor tissue, non-tumor tissue, fibroconnective tissue representing desmoplasia surrounding the tumor tissue, and necrotic tissue. Glycan F1N6H3 was found in the non-tumor region of the pancreas, while glycan Man8 was predominant in the tumor region of the tissue. Desmoplasia is represented by F1N4H5. Additionally, in the region where necrosis was identified, N4H5 was found to elevate. In this study, glycan Man8 was also determined to be able to distinguish tumor hepatocellular carcinoma tissue from non-tumor tissue. This workflow enabled a high throughput spatial screening of the N-glycan biomarkers associated with cancers.

3.1.7. Prostate cancer

Prostate cancer is a major cancer diagnosed in man, accounting for approximately 20% of the new diagnoses and it is also one of the top 3 causes of cancer death [98]. As prostate cancer usually causes increased prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentrate in the blood, the serum PSA level was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a marker for treatment monitoring of prostate cancer in 1986, and as a marker for diagnosis in 1994 [141]. However, the use of serum PSA concentration as a biomarker for prostate cancer is controversial because over-diagnosis and over-treatment remain as problems associated with the PSA test [141-143]. Many of the PSA-derived or other biomarkers combined with the conventional PSA test were proved to be valuable in improving the accuracy and specificity of the testing for prostate cancer [141,142].

Most of the prostate cancer biomarkers, including PSA, are glycosylated, herein the potential of aberrant PSA glycosylation patterns used as a diagnostic tool for prostate cancer is warranted. The profiling of PSA N-glycans using oligosaccharide sequencing and mass spectrometry has revealed distinct glycan patterns of PSA derived from normal and tumor origins [144]. Unlike normal PSA glycans, which were sialylated, the glycans derived from prostate cancer cells were all neutral and fucosylated.

The alterations of glycan profiles were observed not only in PSA but also in sera. The N-glycome of 24 prostate cancer patients and 10 healthy males was also depicted using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and compared using statistical tools [145]. This approach allowed the detection of over 50 N-glycans, of which 12 glycans were significantly different between cancer and healthy sample sets. The comparison of intensities according to glycan types suggested an increase in the fucosylated complex biantennary, complex tri- and tetra-antennary N-glycans associated with prostate cancer. Similarly, Lebrilla and coworkers [146] observed a decrease in the levels of high-mannose and acidic glycans, and an increase in the levels of fucosylated bi-antennary complex N-glycans in prostate cancer serum samples when comparing serum glycome between 10 patients with prostate cancer and 10 with removed prostate. A more recent study analyzed the N-glycome of 650 patients with different stages of prostate diseases [147]. The overexpression of serum tri- and tetra- antennary N-glycans in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) was observed. As a result, the tri- and tetra-antennary glycans were proposed as potential biomarkers for CRPC [147].

3.1.8. Other Cancers

Quantitative N-glycomics using multiple techniques has been utilized for uncovering better cancer biomarkers and proved to be efficient in many cancers as discussed above. Besides the aforementioned cancers, the use of glycomics as a biomarker discovery tool was also reported in other types of cancers, such as kidney cancer [148], esophageal cancer [149,150], gastric cancer [151] and brain cancer [152,153]. A significant elevation of high-mannose structures and highly sialylated structure were observed in kidney cancer [148]. The decrease of two core fucosylated glycans, F1N4H5 and F1N4H4, was considered as potential biomarkers for esophageal cancer with more than 90% sensitivity and 85% specificity [149]. The decrease of core fucosylation could be a satisfactory biomarker for early gastric cancer detection (AUC 0.923) [151]. The increase of larger, sialylated structures were observed in neuroblastoma cell line [152].

3.2. Potential O-glycobiomarkers in different cancers

The value of O-glycans as biomarkers is less studied than that of N-glycans due to the lack of an efficient method for O-glycans release. Also, the common chemical release methods employed to cleave O-glycans are time-consuming and/or prompt glycan peeling. On the other hand, the use of O-glycans as potential biomarkers for cancers is important for two reasons. First, the mucin type (GalNAc-type) O-glycans are frequently found in transmembrane and secreted portions which are altered as a result of cancer development and progression. Second, one of the most common occurring alterations associated with cancer is truncated O-glycans as a consequence of changing in the environment and transferases expression [154]. All potential O-glycobiomarkers that thus far have been reported in the literature are summarized in Table 2.

3.2.1. Breast cancer

The well-characterized mucin 1, a biomarker approved for the diagnosis of breast cancer [155], is heavily O-glycosylated. It has been known that the alterations of mucin O-glycans occur in the mammary gland during malignancy [156]. Therefore, developing comprehensive O-glycan profiling workflows is an alternative strategy for the biomarker discovery for breast cancer. As a proof-of-concept study, Miyamoto and coworkers [157] employed a MALDI-FTICR-MS-based approach to analyze O-glycans extracted from breast cancer cell line supernatant and serum samples. Similar glycan patterns were observed in the spectra of the three cell lines (MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-468, and MDA-MB-453), which were also similar with the glycans identified in ovarian cancer serum [158]. However, some glycans identified in these three MDA-MB cell lines were not observed in the more precancerous cell line BT 474 or the normal breast cell line MCF10A. Also, they further investigated serum O-glycome obtained from a mouse model of metastatic breast cancer, as well as a small set of serum samples obtained from patients with breast cancer (n=4) and healthy individuals (n=4) [157]. Mice used in this study were transplanted at 5 weeks of age with small pieces of mammary tumors that originated from the PyMT mouse model of breast cancer. Indicated by the analysis of sera (from week 4 to 8), 21 glycan structures were detected in mice sera at all time points, while 11 more glycan structures were only detected after the tumor implantation. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the differences in O-glycan profiles were sufficient to distinguish the patients with breast cancer from those without cancer by PCA analysis, although the findings were tentative due to the small number of samples involved in the study.

3.2.2. Ovarian cancer

Lebrilla and coworkers [158] analyzed O-glycome of shed glycoproteins in 4 ovarian cancer cell cultures (including OVCAR-3, Caov-3, SK-OV-3 and ES-2) using MALDI-FTICR. Although many identified oligosaccharides were common among 4 cell lines, each cell line possessed some unique structures. In addition, they further investigated the O-glycome on a set of cancer (n=5) and normal serum samples to determine potential oligosaccharide markers for ovarian cancer (n-5). It was demonstrated that there were at least 15 unique glycans observed in all cancer patients but being absent in healthy individuals.

O-glycans of ovarian cyst fluid and tissues from patients with serous and mucinous ovarian tumor were profiled by Vitiazeva et al. [159]. The mass spectrometry average composition (MSAC) of oligosaccharides was used as a parameter to describe glycan profile characteristics in each sample. To calculate MSAC, all structures identified by LC-ESI-MSn were first reduced to monosaccharide compositions (the number of hexose, N-acetylhexosamine, fucose, sialic acid residues and sulfate groups). The intensities of corresponding structures were multiplied by the monosaccharide compositions and summed over the entire sample. Then, the ratio between summed intensity of a monosaccharide residue and the total intensity of all oligosaccharides over the sample was defined as the MSAC. Based on the MSAC, fucosylation, sialylation and sulfation of O-glycans appeared to be important features in differentiating the type of tumors.

Karlsson, N. G., McGuckin, M. A., O-Linked glycome and proteome of high-molecular-mass proteins in hu- man ovarian cancer ascites: identification of sulfation, disialic acid and O-linked fucose. Glycobiology 2012, 22, 918–929.

3.2.3. Other Cancers

Attempts in searching for O-glycan biomarkers were also made for many other cancers. He et al. [160] analyzed the released and 1-phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone (PMP) labeled O-glycans derived from 157 gastric cancer and 144 healthy control serum samples using an LC-MS-based approach. The MS spectra (average of retention time ranging from 19.14 to 20.88 min) of O-glycans derived from serum of gastric cancer patients and controls are shown in Figure 3a. A partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) model was used to evaluate the O-glycans alterations in patients with gastric cancer and healthy individuals (Figure 3b). Also, an unpaired Student’s t-test and ROC of the significantly altered O-glycans were performed. The AUC value of the ROC analysis was 0.97 (Figure 3c). Several structures, including core1, core2, ST antigen, and core2 complex O-glycans were determined to be up-regulated in gastric cancer sera over the healthy control sera, whereas the expression level of m/z 529.75 (H1N2F2, which was a novel O-glycan extended from core 1) and diST-antigen were significantly decreased in the serum of gastric cancer compared with controls samples. Moreover, Miyamoto and coworkers [161] identified 14 sulfated O-glycans as potential biomarkers by comparing sulfated O-glycans profiles of 11 gastric and 9 pancreatic adenocarcinoma serum samples with those of 20 disease-free serum samples. Furthermore, Miyamoto and coworkers [162] adopted the selected reaction monitoring (SRM) analysis, showing the potential of core 1 sial Lewis A, whose correlation with CA19-9 varies from poor to weak depending on the type of cancer, to be considered as a diagnostic marker for cancer. Recently, Packer and coworkers [163] profiled the N- and O-glycans of serous ovarian and peritoneal cancer tissues, suggesting that 3 O-glycans among many altered glycosylations enabled discrimination of tumor-sampling sites. Moreover, Packer and coworkers [64] also performed glycomic comparison between colon cancer cell cultures and tumor tissue. The study revealed differences of N- and O-glycome existing between different cancer cell lines and the epithelial cells from tumor tissue, hence, the discrepancies need to be considered regarding choosing cell line models for glycan biomarker discovery.

3.3. Isomeric N-glycans as potential cancer biomarkers

With the development of separation techniques, glycan isomers have been resolved, and their distribution were found to be different among different diseases. Different separation techniques have been used to analyze isomeric glycans, including ion mobility mass spectrometry [164], MALDI [165], porous graphitized carbon chromatography (PGC) [166], hydrophilic liquid interaction chromatography (HILIC) [167], and reverse phase chromatography [168]. Different glycan isomers have been considered as potential biomarkers for several types of cancer and diseases. Potential glycan isomer biomarkers that have been reported are listed in Table 3.

In the early study, the importance of glycan isomeric characterization was demonstrated by Clemmer and co-workers [169], who used ion mobility mass spectrometry to analyze derivatized serum glycans from patients with liver cancer (n=19), cirrhosis (n=20), and healthy individuals. Although the partial separation of glycan isomers or conformers were observed, distributions for individual ions were found sufficient to distinguish patients with liver cancer or cirrhosis.

Recently, Clemmer and co-workers [170] analyzed N-glycan isomers derived from serum samples related to three disease phenotypes, Barrett’s esophagus, high-grade dysplasia, and esophageal adenocarcinoma, as well as a normal control group. IM-MS allowed the identification of 46 isomeric structures originating from the 11-glycan composites, which could distinguish esophageal adenocarcinoma samples from normal control group samples by principal component analysis (PCA). Also, for N4H5S1 and F1N4H5S1, the intensity ratio of high-mobility to low mobility isomers were significantly higher in esophageal adenocarcinoma patients. Although the IM-MS demonstrated an efficient separation of small glycan isomers, the separation of larger isomers or closely related isomeric structures were still limited due to the low resolution of this technique.

MALDI-MS techniques have also been used to analyze glycan isomers without separation, in which derivatization of different isomers is needed. After derivatization, different sialic acid linkage isomers can be distinguished. Alley and Novotny [171] investigated sialic acid linkage isomers in breast cancer patients using MALDI-MS. Isomeric glycans with α2,3- or α2,6-linked were distinguished through the amidation before permethylation. Only α2,6-linked sialic acids could be amidated, resulting in the separation of two isomers with 13 m/z unit per sialic acid residue. Accordingly, amidated and permethylated tri-antennary tri-sialylated structure (N5H6S3) showed four peaks of different structural isomers. With the mass differences of different sialic acid linkage isomers, a higher level of α2,6-linked sialic acid residues was observed in cancer patients. Although the number of samples employed in this study (10 cancer-free and 10 late-stage breast cancer) was not large enough, the increase of α2,6 sialylation might be a potential biomarker for breast cancer diagnosis.

Recently Wuhrer and coworkers [172] investigated the distribution of α2,3- and α2,6-sialylated N-glycan isomers in colon carcinoma tissues using MALDI imaging coupled to in situ derivatization technique. During the derivatization, α2,6-linked sialic acid formed a stable dimethylamide, whereas α2,3-linked sialic acid converted to a lactone. Then, lactone was hydrolyzed, forming stable amide, which resulted in 28.03 Da mass difference between α2,6- and α2,3-linked sialic acids. Histology images acquired the clearly different distributions between α2,6- and α2,3-sialylated glycans across the tissue regions. The increase of α2,6-sialylated glycan isomers in necrotic tissue, collagen-rich (tumor) areas and red blood cells suggested the association between α2,6-sialylation and colon cancer.

A comprehensive characterization of isomeric glycan structures is achieved using MS in conjunction with highly efficient separation techniques, such as LC or CE. As discussed above, different LC techniques such as HILIC, RPLC, and PGC chromatography have been used for this purpose. Tousi et al. [61] used 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium chloride (DMT-MM)/methanol derivatization method in conjunction with nano-HILIC-Orbitrap-MS, to identify the sialic acid linkages of haptoglobin derived from patients with different types of cancers (n=4). Among different cancers (lung, breast, ovarian, pancreatic, gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer), differential expression analysis of glycan isomers showed that high level of α2,6-linked F1N5H6S3 could be a potential marker in discrimination of pancreatic cancer from other cancers (p &lt; 0.05).

PGC has been used as an efficient material in the isomeric separation of glycans due to its hydrophobic and polar interactions with glycan species and the planer morphology of PGC [57,166,173], which make it an efficient tool for glycan isomeric marker discovery in diseases. Lebrilla and coworkers [50] analyzed isomeric profiles of native glycans in serum samples from two groups of prostate cancer patients with different prognoses using PGC-chip-HPLC-TOF-MS. A total of more than 300 N-glycan species (including isomers) corresponding with over 100 N-glycan compositions were identified. Overall, 38 isomers related to 19 N-glycan compositions showed significant differences between the two groups. Both isomers of N5H3 increased in the poor prognoses group when compared with good prognoses group. For Man9, three isomers were detected, one of which showed significantly higher abundance in poor prognoses group. These increased isomers in poor prognoses group might be considered as biomarkers. A similar technique was used by Leiserowitz and coworkers [174] to analyze isomeric glycans derived from epithelial ovarian cancer. PGC-chip-HPLC-TOF-MS permitted the identification of 26 differentially expressed glycans between epithelial ovarian cancer and healthy control samples. Two isomers of N4H5F1S1 showed significantly higher abundances in cancer over the healthy samples, which might be considered as ovarian cancer biomarkers.

In a recent work, Liu et al. [175] explored isomeric glycans in pancreatic cancer patient group and healthy control group using PGC-nanoLC-ESI-MS system. A total of 280 glycan isomers corresponding to 72 glycan compositions were identified, of which 25 glycan isomers with different significant expressions were considered as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. Among these 25 isomers, 16 isomers (mostly fucosylated and sialylated) showed higher abundances in patients with pancreatic cancer. As an example, while two of the four detected isomers of F1N4H5 showed lower relative intensities in cancer patients, one of them obtained with higher relative intensity.

Human skin N- and O-glycome and their expression changes associated with two skin cancers, basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), were investigated by Möginger et al [176]. PGC-nanoLC-ESI-MS and capillary gel electrophoresis with laser induced fluorescence detection were performed to reveal the over-expression of high-mannose N-glycans and core 2 type O-glycans in BCC and SCC. Moreover, the decrease of α2,3 sialylation level was observed in SCC. Hinneburg et al [177] investigated N- and O-glycans released from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients using PGC-nanoLC-ESI-MS. A significant decrease of α2,6 sialylation was observed in tumor tissues, while core fucosylated N-glycans and core 2 type O-glycans were increased.

Takahashi et al [178] studied isomeric fucosylated N-glycans derived from haptoglobin in the sera of patients with five types of gastroenterological cancers (esophageal, gastric, colon, gallbladder, pancreatic), a non-gastroenterological cancer (prostate cancer) and normal controls using PGC-LC-ESI-MS. Both core- and antennary-fucosylated glycans were detected with significantly higher abundances in gastroenterological cancers over the healthy controls, while only core-type fucosylated N-glycans were relatively increased in prostate cancer samples. The differential expressions of core- and antennary-fucosylated glycans enabled the distinction between gastroenterological and prostate cancers. PGC-nanoLC-ESI-MS was also employed to analyze the membrane glycosylation of non-cancerous ovarian surface epithelial and serous ovarian cancer cell lines, which revealed a higher level of α 2,6 sialylated glycans on ovarian cancer membrane proteins [179].

Recently, an efficient separation of permethylated glycans on PGC at high-temperature (75 °C) was reported by Mechref group [15]. The method was successfully used for the isomeric characterization of N-glycan isomers derived from normal breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and brain seeking cell line MDA-MB-231BR [15]. A total of 106 glycan isomers and 21 non-isomeric glycans were identified, among which 37 structures exhibited significant differences of isomeric distributions between the two cell lines. The increase of α2,6 sialylations was observed in most highly sialylated structures. Glycan isomer N4H5S2(6,6) was significantly increased in brain seeking cell line 231BR, suggesting this isomer could be a possible indicator for breast cancer brain metastasis. Similar results were shown for trisialylated glycans, confirming that α2,6 sialylation might contribute to breast cancer brain metastasis. Significant changes of isomeric distributions for some non-sialylated structures were also observed.

More recently, Mechref and coworkers [52] investigated isomeric glycosylation patterns of haptoglobin glycoproteins derived from 10 cirrhotic and 10 HCC patients. PGC-LC-MS/MS allowed the identification of 34 glycan isomers, among which 8 isomers expressions were significantly altered. Figure 4 depicts the isomeric alterations of N4H5F1S1 in different HCC and cirrhosis samples. A significant increase of N4H5F1S1(6) and N4H5S1(6) can be observed in HCC patients. ROC analysis of 6 most significant isomers showed AUC more than 0.79, suggesting these isomers could be potential biomarkers for HCC. A higher level of α2,6-linked sialic acid residues was observed in HCC over cirrhotic patients, which allowed distinguishing early-stage HCC from cirrhosis.

4. Glycans as potential biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the primary cause of dementia and one of the most common neurodegenerative disorder [180]. It is known that glycans play significant roles in AD development and studies confirmed variation in protein sialylation and N-glycosylation in the brain of AD patients [181]. Alterations in protein sialylation between AD (n=16) and healthy individuals (n=7) were studied by using lectin blotting analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins [182]. Wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) and concanavalin A (Con A), were used to analyze the sialylation pattern between AD, and non-AD patients. The decrease of sialylation in CSF was observed in AD patients.

Recently, a comprehensive analysis of N-, O-, and O-GlcNAc–glycomes in various brain regions and the serum of AD patients (n=10) has been reported by Segal and coworkers [183]. A 45-lectin microarray was used to analyze serum glycan patterns between AD patients and healthy controls. Nine lectins which bound to fucose (lotus tetragonolobus lectin (LTL)), acetyllactosamine (lycopersicon esculentum lectin (LEL), solanum tuberosum lectin (STL), and phytolacca americana lectin), and GalNAc (Jacalin, helix pomatia agglutinin (HPA), vicia villosa lectin (VVA), dolichos biflorus agglutinin (DBA), maackia amurensis hemagglutinin (MAH), and griffonia simplicifolia lectin I (GSL-I B4)), showed statistically higher signals in AD serum, and two lectins which bound to the sialic acid motif (maackia amurensis lectin (MAL) and phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)), showed significantly lower signals in AD patients. In addition, different brain regions, namely, frontal cortex, hippocampus, temporal cortex, and parietal cortex showed higher level of O-GlcNAc in membrane proteins for AD patients. Although lectin microarray provided a valuable approach for AD glycan biomarker discovery, other techniques such as MS-based glycomics which can acquire higher sensitivity and more structural information are necessary to reveal different AD biomarkers.

5. Glycans as potential biomarkers in diabetes

Diabetes is a disease in which the levels of glucose in the blood and urine elevated, resulting in abnormal metabolism of carbohydrates [184,185]. Individuals suffering from diabetic are subjected to develop neurological, retinal, renal and macrovascular complications. German and coworkers [186] studied the effect of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) on free oligosaccharides and protein-conjugated glycan profiles in woman breast milk. GDM develops during the pregnancy and identified by elevated blood glucose, affects 7% of pregnancies in the United States. Milk was analyzed for free oligosaccharides abundances, protein concentrations, and N-glycan derived from lactoferrin (the major milk glycoprotein) and secretory immunoglobulin A (sIgA, the predominant Ig in human milk). Although no significant difference in free oligosaccharides between milk from women with GDM (n=8) and without GDM (n=16) was obtained, significant differences were shown between two groups for N-glycans derived from lactoferrin and sIgA. Abundances of mannose, fucose, and sialylated sIgA glycans were decreased in the milk samples from GDM women, while higher abundances of lactoferrin fucosylated and sialylated N-glycans (36–72%) were observed. The differential glycan expressions in milk could be potential indicators for immune functionality.

Significant changes in N-glycan composition in the sera of diabetic patients were reported by Testa et al [187]. N-glycomic changes was investigated among serum samples from 562 patients with type 2 diabetes and 599 healthy control subjects. The level of F1N4H4 were found significantly reduced in both male and female diabetic patients. In addition, N4H5 glycans were found significantly increased only in male diabetic patients. The decrease of biantennary N-glycans and increase of tri-/tetra-antennary structures were observed in sera of type 1 [188] and type 2 [189] diabetic patients, represented promising diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. More recently, Packer and co-workers [190] studied N-and O-linked protein glycosylation in diabetic mouse ovarian tissues. In comparison with nondiabetic mouse ovaries, sialylated and fucosylated glycans were detected with significantly lower relative abundances, where high-mannose structures showed higher relative abundances. Moreover, O-linked released glycans from control and diabetic mice ovaries, exhibited an increase in the NeuGc:NeuAc ratio in diabetic ovarian tissues.

6. Glycans as potential biomarkers in other diseases

Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) can cause cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in humans. Blomme et al. [191] reported that hyper fucosylation, increase in branching and bisecting N-acetylglucosamine of glycans were observed in liver diseases. Complex N-glycan expression in sera from chronic hepatitis B virus (CHB) and C virus (CHC) infected patients compared to healthy individuals were investigated. Kang et al. and Kuno et al. demonstrated a significantly increased level of high mannose, core fucose and sialylated glycans in CHC patients than in CHB patients [192,193]. N-glycans profiles by MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS have shown that glycans F1N5H4 (bisecting), N5H5 (bisecting) and F1N6H3F1 are overexpressed in CHB patients. In contrast, glycans F1N5H4 (bisecting), N3H5, N6H5 and F1N5H6 are overexpressed in CHC patients, compared to healthy individuals [194]. The over-expression of bisecting glycan F1N5H4 was also observed in liver cancer. The correlation of glycosylation to other diseases, including but not limited to arthritis [195], psoriasis [196], and asthma [197], Huntington’s disease[198], amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) [199], chronic pain [200], etc. were also investigated. However, most studies of these diseases were focused on intact glycoproteins while glycans were rarely reported.

7. Conclusions and future perspectives

Glycosylation is a common post-translational modification of proteins in human cells and organisms. Association of glycans with the cell surface is a ubiquitous phenomenon. The onset of cancers and diseases cause the change of glycan structures. Therefore, cracking the glycan code would reveal the cellular physiology and characteristics of disease conditions. Advances in MS and separation techniques are powerful tools, which provide highly sensitive and reproducible methods in the comparative glycomic analysis for the discovery of potential glycan biomarker candidates. Most potential glycan biomarkers discovered in cancers and diseases are summarized in Tables 1-3.

Although there are more glycans reported in different diseases, only those glycans that were observed the outstandingly unique expressions in diseases are listed in the table. Most of the listed glycans were achieved the ROC analysis with higher AUC values than existing biomarkers, suggesting the high potential of these glycans to be indicators of corresponding diseases. Therefore, the summarized glycans should be paid more attention to in future studies. Table 1 summarizes potential N-glycan biomarkers reported in recent years. Many glycan structures, such as *F2N5H6S3 and F1N5H6S2, were observed the same up-/down-regulation in different diseases. In contrast, several glycans, such as Man5 and F1N4H5S1, exhibited opposite alterations in different diseases. The alterations of the same glycan structure in different diseases provide the hint of the role glycans played in the biological processes, which could facilitate the use of glycan biomarkers in clinical research. Compare to N-glycans, there are less cohort-based studies for O-glycans due to the lack of efficient release method and the high microheterogeneity of O-glycans. However, many effects have been made to get a deeper insight of O-glycan biomarker discovery. Table 2 summarizes potential O-glycan biomarkers, which were reported to have significant alterations in diseases and most possible to be exploited as biomarkers. Nevertheless, the work for O-glycomics in clinical cohort is not enough. More studies of O-glycomics should be performed to reveal the O-glycan biomarkers. Like O-glycan biomarker, glycan isomer study is also a challenge. With the improvement of glycan isomeric separation, more glycan isomers were observed the significant expression changes in different diseases, as shown in Table 3. However, the challenge of glycan isomer biomarker discovery is still the lack of cohort studies and the effective way of glycan isomer characterization.

Many of the overlapping glycans in different cancers should be validated prior to apply those glycans as reliable glycobiomarkers. The common trends of the increases of glycan fucosylation, sialylation, bisecting and branching in diseases (Table 1 and 2) and the increase of α2,6 sialylation in cancers (Table 3) may provide some important glycan features in clinical biomarker studies. Figure 5 depicts Venn diagrams comparing the N- and O-glycobiomarkers reported for the most common cancers. A total of 78 N-glycan biomarkers were compared in the top six cancers (Figure 5a) while 20 O-glycans in two cancers (Figure 5b). The overlap of glycobiomarkers among different cancers indicates the need to focus on specific structures and biosynthetic pathways that appear to be highly influenced by disease development and progression. Although glycan profiles provide biological information about glycan structures, isomeric glycan structure analysis is not adequately studied or considered because of the lack of reliable analytical methods. However, this is recently been addressed. In addition, glycan biomarker discovery studies were mainly focused on cancers. There are much more researches associated with cancers than other diseases. Although aberrant glycosylation was also reported in other diseases, only limited studies were made to reveal the potential glycan biomarkers for these diseases. Therefore, a large number of glycan biomarkers are still uncovered out of cancer field, and more works are needed.

Despite of the increasing report of potential glycan biomarkers which have the better prediction ability in prognosis and diagnosis of diseases, the clinical use of glycan biomarkers in practice is quite limited. The reasons to prevent the wide use of glycan biomarkers in clinical analysis are their relatively high cost and long turnaround time. In addition, the interpretation of glycomics data is also unfriendly to clinical chemists who have little glycomics experience. Glycan focused therapeutics would improve the selectivity to diseased cells from healthy cells and amplify therapeutic opportunities. However, to widely apply glycan markers in clinical analysis and prompt diagnosis in the future, more efficient and readily conducted sample preparation procedures and faster data processing methods must be developed to satisfy large numbers of biological sample analysis. In addition, large cohort studies of glycomis is still not sufficient to have a definite conclusion of glycan biomarkers. More investigations on different diseases and clinical cohorts should be performed to verify the potential glycan biomarkers, especially for O-glycans and glycan isomers. Moreover, most of glycomic studies are focusing on cancers, leaving a large number of glycan biomarkers in other diseases uncovered. With more and more glycan structures and glycan biomarkers discovered, glycan database would facilitate automatic data processing and ultimately benefit the application of glycan biomarker in diagnosis and development of glycan targeted therapeutic and diagnostic strategies in the future.

Expert commentary

Quantitative glycomics has been applied in glycan biomarker discoveries to improve clinical prognosis and diagnosis of many diseases. Several glycan or glycan pattern markers have a better predictive or diagnostic capacity than already widely used biomarkers (such as CA125 and CEA). The glycan patterns offer higher diagnostic accuracy when combined with the existing biomarkers. Thus, glycans have a great potential to be exploited as biomarkers of disease, thus prompting the development of glycomic techniques. With the improving of glycomic strategies, glycan biomarker screening has become more sensitive and accurate, facilitating the clinical use of glycan markers.

Different glycan analysis techniques, such as LC-MS/MS or MALDI-IMS, and different labeling reagents, allow the identification of more low-abundant glycans and more reliable quantitation. These improvements provide the easier and more efficient ways to compare glycome expression among large cohorts, which can reveal more glycan alteration in diseases. Thus, glycan biomarker discovery has become possible and attracted more interest of scientists. However, to date, glycomics studies are more focused on cancers. Only a few reports have evaluated glycome changes in other diseases as discussed here. Glycan biomarkers for diseases other than cancers are starting to appear in the literature. Also, the fact that non-of these reported glycan markers are widely used in clinical diagnosis suggested that we still need more accessible, faster and more efficient techniques in glycomics.

This review is not intent to cover exhaustive glycan structures associated with all diseases, but to provide some important cases which represent the efforts of glycan biomarker discovery and their possibilities to be developed as biomarkers in clinical prognosis and diagnosis. However, there is an unbalanced distribution of glycomic study across diseases. More works were focused on cancers while only limited reports were about other diseases. Also, most of large cohort glycomic studies were associated with different cancers. The lack of systematic glycomics for other diseases, such as arthritis or psoriasis, needs to be addressed. Large number of glycan biomarkers for these diseases were still uncovered, providing a wider direction to glycomic scientists.

Another challenge in this field is the number of samples. Although some researches of large patient cohorts have been made, glycomic studies of different diseases for a large number of biological samples (such as patient sera or tissues) are still not enough. More investigations based on big cohorts need to be performed so that sufficient clinical data can be collected to facilitate and verify the use of potential glycan biomarkers. This also requires the faster speed from sample preparation to glycan quantitation, thus decreasing the turnaround time. MALDI-IMS may provide a solution, which could be the complimentary of LC-MS/MS in high-throughput glycan biomarker discovery.

Due to aforementioned limitations, the fact that glycan biomarkers have not yet applied in clinical prognosis and diagnosis demands a wider and deeper investigation of glycan expression in different diseases, which can be screened out and verified based on a large number of clinical cases. Fortunately, more glycomic researchers are participating in the field, better glycomic technologies are introduced, and more glycan biomarker candidates are detected, which make the use of glycan biomarkers possible in the near future.

Five-year view

In the last decades, the development of glycomic technologies guarantee the screening of potential glycan biomarkers. Lectin-based technique has been applied for a long time and is still being used in medical labs due to its fast analysis speed and simple protocol. MALDI-MS has attracted much interest recently, because it can provide more structural information with a high sensitivity. In recent years, more and more potential glycan markers have been revealed using LC/CE-MS/MS, which has the highest sensitivity and is rich in structural information. The wide use of mass spectrometry in glycan biomarker discovery studies facilitate the understanding of roles glycans played in diseases. However, the relative long analysis time, high cost and complex data processing limited the use of MS-based techniques for large clinical cohorts. The technology will keep developing to overcome these issues and lead the boom of MS-based glycan marker discovery.

In the near future, more sensitive, faster and easier-to-use method for quantitative glycomic study will be developed, thus facilitating the discovery of more glycan biomarkers. Automated glycomic analysis robot, which can take over the glycan sample preparations from human, has been reported and will be improved to achieve a high throughput glycan analysis. These developments will benefit the large cohort analysis. Another challenge besides the development of glycomic techniques is the interpretation of glycomic data. Glycomic data processing is not friendly with unexperienced people, which may hinder the use of MS-based glycomic analysis in hospitals. This demands the development of the efficient data processing software to simplify glycomic data interpretation. With many efforts, better databases and automated data process software will be established, as well as the bioinformatics tools. These databases, softwares and bioinformatics tools will enable more research efforts in glyco-biomarkers discovery.

As discussed in the manuscript, many glycan markers have been demonstrated the higher prediction accuracy than original biomarkers for several diseases. Moreover, the combination of these glycan markers and existing glycoprotein marker even can be the better indicators for clinical prognosis. Although the investigation is still needed to be performed on more clinical cases. with the increasing studies of these potential glycan markers, the combination of new glycan marker and original glycoprotein markers will be used for a better clinical diagnosis in the future.

To date, the glycan biomarker discovery is more focusing on cancer field. There are limited researches have been made for other diseases. Thus, large number of glycan biomarkers are still untouched out of the cancer field. Nevertheless, the important role that glycans plays in disease progress has been notified and attracted more interest of glycomic scientists. The studies about glycan biomarkers in other diseases will be made by more researchers, revealing more potential glycan markers in other diseases. The use of glycan as biomarkers in the prognosis of other diseases will also become possible in the future as well as cancers.

Funding

This work was supported by grants from National Institutes of Health, NIH (1R01GM112490-04 and 1U01CA225753-01) and Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas, CPRIT (RP130624).

Figure 1. N-glycan profiling of tissue microarray (TMA) distinguished liver cancer from normal tissues using MALDI imaging.

A liver TMA purchased by BioChain consisting of 2 tumor tissue cores and one normal tissue core from 16 patients was imaged (200 μm raster). The H&amp;E (a) provides the TMA location (red letters and numbers) and classifies whether the row is tumor (green bar) or non-tumor (red bar). M/z = 2393.95 (c) and m/z 1743.64 (d) were able to distinguish between hepatocellular carcinoma and uninvolved liver tissue. An overlay of these ion demonstrates that m/z = 2393.95 is elevated in tumor tissue and m/z = 1743.64 is elevated in normal tissue (b). Reproduced with permission from [95].

Figure 2. N-glycan profiling of a large cohort revealed the differential glycan expressions between CRC patients and healthy people using HILIC-UPLC.

(a) A representative chromatogram from human plasma N-glycome and peak assignments from the CRC cohort. Significant peaks (found on training set of 625 patients vs. 468 control) are colored in red (increased in CRC) and blue (decreased in CRC). ‘*’ indicates one of the top five peak abundance changes (i.e. lowest p-value). (b) Significant peaks are marked decreased (blue) or increased (red) in all CRC and four stages of CRC. Reproduced with permission from [119].

Figure 3. Differentiation of gastric cancer and healthy control groups using O-glycan profiles.

(a) MS spectra (average of retention time ranging from 19.14–20.88 min) of O-glycans from serum of normal controls (upper panel) and gastric cancer patients (lower panel). Proposed O-glycan structures were based on LC-MS/MS and the biosynthesis pathway of glycobiology. (Red triangle, fucose; yellow circle, galactose; yellow square, N-acetylgalactosamine; blue square, N-acetylglucosamine; purple diamond, N-acetylneuraminic acid; PMP, 1-phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone; 2× and 3× indicate the number of fucose.) (b) PLS-DA score plot based on LC-MS data of O-glycans derived from gastric cancer (red circles) and healthy control (black squares) serum samples. (c) ROC analysis of the significantly altered O-glycans in the patient serum samples (AUC = 0.97). Reproduced with permission from [160].

Figure 4. Profiling of isomeric glycans derived from the blood serum of HCC and cirrhotic patients.

Extracted ion chromatograms of biantennary monosialylated branch-fucosylated glycan linkage isomers derived from (a) cirrhotic and (b) hepatocellular carcinoma patients. (c) MS/MS interpretation of biantennary monosialylated branch-fucosylated glycan. Reproduced with permission from [52].

Figure 5. Venn diagram of N- and O-glycan biomarkers summarized from cancers that have most potential N-glycan biomarkers reported.

(a) Potential N-glycan biomarkers of top 6 cancers. (b) Potential O-glycan biomarkers

Table 1. All potential N-glycan biomarkers reported in recent years.

Glycans	Breast
cancer	Liver
cancer	Ovarian
cancer	Colorectal
cancer	Lung
cancer	Kidney
cancer	Esophageal
cancer	Pancreatic
cancer	Prostate
cancer	Brain
cancer	Chronic
Hepatitis
B
virus
(HBV)	Chronic
Hepatitis
C
virus
(HCV)	
F1N4H6S1	up [82]												
F1N5H5F1S2	up [82]												
F1N6H7S2	up [82]								up [145]	up [152]			
*F2N5H6S3	up [82]	up [93]	up [99,104]										
N6H7S4	up [82]		up [103]	up [119]		up [148]							
N5H6S2	down [82]	down [91]			up [38]				up [145]				
N3H5S1	down [82]	up [91,93]						up [134]					
N5H4F1 (SLex)	up [79,80]												
Man3				up [118]									
Man4				up [118]									
Man5	up [83,84]	up [93]	down [104]	up [118] down (IgG) [120]									
Man6	up [83]		down [104]		up [129]	up [148]			down [146]				
Man7			down [104]		up [129]				down [146]				
Man8		down [95,96]	down [104] up [107]		up [129]				down [146]				
Man9	up [81]				up [129]	up [148]		up [134]	down [146]				
F1N4H4F1	up [84]												
F1N4H5F1	up [84]												
F1N5H5F1	up [84]	up [92]											
F1N4H5F1S1	up [84]	up [97]											
F1N5H6F1	up [84]		up [99]										
F1N4H5S1(3)	down [85]												
F1N2H3	down [85]												
N6H4F1	up [80]												
N6H5F2	up [80]												
N4H3	down [81]				up [127]			up [134]					
F1N5H6S2		up [93]			up [128]			up [134,136]	up [145]				
F1N6H7S3		up [93]							up [145]				
N3H6S1		up [93]			down [129]								
N5H4S1 (bisecting)		up [91,93]											
F1N5H3 (bisecting)		up [93]											
N3H4S1		up [91,93]											
F1N5H4 (bisecting)		up [93]							up [145]		up [194]	up [194]	
N5H4 (bisecting)		up [93]											
F1N4H3	down [81]	up [93]			up [127] up (IgG) [128]				up [145]				
F1N6H7S4		up [93]	up [103]										
N5H6 F1S3		up [93]	up [104]		up [38]								
F1N4H5S2		up [97]		down (IgG) [120]				up [136]					
F1N4H5S1		up [97]		down [119]	down [129]			up [136]					
N4H5		down [91]		up [115] down (IgG) [120]					up [145]				
N6H7S3		down [91]	up [104]		up [38]				up [145]				
*F2N4H5S2			up [99]										
N5H6			up [99]										
F1N5H6S1			up [99]					up [136]	up [145]				
F1N6H3F1											up [194]		
N6H5												up [194]	
F1N6H7S1			up [99]					up [134]					
N6H7F1S3			up [104]										
N6H7F1S4			up [103,104]										
N6H7F2S4			up [104]										
N6H7F3S4			up [104]										
F1N4H5	up [81]		up [106]	down [115,119]	down [127,128]		down [149]						
N3H4				up [118]									
F1N2H2				up [118]									
F1N2H3				up [118]	up [129]								
N5H6F1				up [115]									
F1N4H4				down [115]			down [149]		down [146]				
F1N3H4S1				down (IgG) [120]				up [134]					
N4H5S1				down (IgG) [120]	down [129]				up [146]				
N5H3 (bisecting)				up [117]									
F1N5H4S1 (bisecting)				up [117]									
N4H5F1S2					up [38]								
N6H6S2 (bisecting)					up [38]								
N6H7		up [95,96]			up [38]								
F1N6H6S3 (bisecting)					up [38]								
N6H7S2					up [38]				up [145]				
F1N5H6S3					up [38]			up [134,136]					
*F1N5H6					down [127]							up [194]	
N5H5 (bisecting)					down [128]						up [194]		
F1N5H5 (bisecting)					down [128]								
N4H4S1					down [129]								
N4H5S2					down [129]				down [145]				
N3H5								up [134]				up [194]	
N4H4								up [134]					
*F1N3H6								up [134]					
N3H7								up [134]					
N3H6S1								up [134]					
F1N3H7								up [134]					
F1N4H4S1								up [134]					
*F1N4H4F2								up [134]					
*F1N5H3S1								up [134]					
*F1N5H4F1								up [134]					
*F1N5H4F1S1								up [134]					
*F1N5H5S2								up [134]					
N5H7S2								up [134]					
F1N5H8S1								up [134]					
N5H4S1								up [134]					
N6H6S3								up [134]					
N5H5S1 (bisecting)									down [145]				
*F2N4H7S1									down [146]				
N5H6S3										up [152]			
N5H6S4										up [152]			
Note: Nomenclature of glycans: N, N-acetylhexosamine; H, hexoase; F, fucose; and S, sialic acid; numbers denote the number of relative sugar. When F is before N, it is core fucosylation; when F is after N, it is branch fucosylation; *F denotes that the position of fucose was not designated in the corresponding paper. e.g. F1N6H7F2S4 represents the tetra-antennary, tetra-sialylated, tri-fucosylated N-glycan HexNAc6Hex7DeoxyHex3NeuAc4, which has a core fucose and two branch fucoses.

N-glycan biomarker selection criteria: we only summarized N-glycans which had been proved to be the possible biomarkers of diseases through ROC analysis in a big cohort or N-glycans with most significant alterations discussed in the paper (for those glycans without ROC analysis in small cohort such as cell lines).

Table 2. All potential O-glycan biomarkers reported in recent years.

Glycans	Pancreatic cancer	gastric cancer	
H1N2F2		down [160]	
H1N3		up [160]	
H1N1		up [160]	
H3N3		up [160]	
H2N3S1F1		up [160]	
H5N3		up [160]	
H1N2		up [160]	
H3N4F3		up [160]	
H1N1S1		up [160]	
H1N1S2		down [160]	
H2N1F1S1 (SLeA)	up [162]	up [162]	
H2N1 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H2N1F1 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H1N2 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H3N2 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H3N2F1 + SO3−	up [161]	up [161]	
H3N2F2 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H2N2F1 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H2N2F2 + SO3−	up [161]	up [161]	
H3N2dF1 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
H3N2F2 + SO3	up [161]	up [161]	
Note: Nomenclature of glycans: N, N-acetylhexosamine; H, hexoase; F, fucose; and S, sialic acid; numbers denote the number of relative sugar. e.g. H2N3S1F1 represents the O-glycan HexNAc3Hex2DeoxyHex1NeuAc1.

O-glycan biomarker selection criteria: we only summarized O-glycans which had been proved to be the possible biomarkers of diseases through ROC analysis in a big cohort or O-glycans with most significant alterations discussed in the paper (for those glycans without ROC analysis in small cohort such as cell lines).

Table 3. All potential glycan isomer biomarkers reported in recent years.

Glycans	Breast cancer	Liver cancer	
N4HS1(3)	down [171]		
N4HS1(6)	up [171]		
N4H5S2(3,3)	down [171]		
N4H5S2(3,6)	up [15]		
N4H5S2(6,6)	up [171]		
N5H5S1(3)	down [171]		
N5H5S1(6)	up [171]		
F1N4H5S2(3,3)	down [171]		
F1N4H5S2(3,6)	up [171]		
F1N4H5S2(6,6)	up [15]		
F1N5H5S1(3)	down [171]		
F1N5H5S1(6)	up [171]		
N5H6S2(3,3)	down [171]		
N5H6S2(6,6)	up [171]		
F1N5H6S2(3,6)	up [171]		
N5H6S3(3,3,3)	down [171]		
N5H6S3(3,3,6)	down [171]		
N5H6S3(6,6,6)	up [171]		
F1N5H6S3(3,3,3)	down [171]		
F1N5H6S3(3,6,6)	up [171]		
N6H7S3(3,3,6)	down [171]		
N6H7S3(3,6,6)	up [171]		
N6H7S3(6,6,6)	up [171]		
F1N6H7S3(3,3,3)	down [171]		
F1N6H7S3(3,3,6)	up [171]		
F1N6H7S3(3,6,6)	up [171]		
F1N6H7S3(6,6,6)	up [171]		
N4H5F1S1(6)		up [52]	
N4H5S1(6)		up [52]	
Note: Nomenclature of glycans: N, N-acetylhexosamine; H, hexoase; F, fucose; and S, sialic acid; (number) denotes the linkage; other numbers denote the number of relative sugar. In N-glycan nomenclature, when F is before N, it is core fucosylation; when F is after N, it is branch fucosylation. e.g. F1N6H7F2S4(3,6,6,6) represents the tetra-antennary, tetra-sialylated, tri-fucosylated N-glycan HexNAc6Hex7DeoxyHex3NeuAc4, which has a core fucose and two branch fucoses, and the sialic acid linkages are α2,3, α2,6, α2,6 and α2,6, respectively.

Glycan isomer biomarker selection criteria: we only summarized glycan isomers with structural assignments and significant alterations discussed in the references. Isomers without assignments (e.g. isomer peak 1 and peak 2) are not included.

Key issues

Different techniques for quantitative glycomics were developed and utilized for glycan marker discovery.

Utilizing different techniques, many glycan expressions or glycan patterns are proved to be better biomarkers for the prognosis and diagnosis of different cancers.

Not only glycan compositions, but also glycan isomers could be efficient indicators for diseases development and progression.

O-glycomics studies also revealed possible O-glycans as biomarkers in clinical application.

Although several glycan markers have been reported in several diseases other than cancer, the number of studies in this field is rather limited.

Declaration of interest

The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

Reviewer disclosures

Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.


References

Papers of special note have been highlighted as:

* of interest

** of considerable interest

1. Kristic J , Lauc G . Ubiquitous Importance of Protein Glycosylation. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1503 :1–12.27743354
2. Clerc F , Reiding KR , Jansen BC Human plasma protein N-glycosylation. Glycoconj J. 2016;33 (3 ):309–343.26555091
3. Kailemia MJ , Park D , Lebrilla CB . Glycans and glycoproteins as specific biomarkers for cancer. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2017;409 (2 ):395–410.27590322
4. Moremen KW , Tiemeyer M , Nairn AV . Vertebrate protein glycosylation: diversity, synthesis and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13 (7 ):448–462.22722607
5. Christiansen MN , Chik J , Lee L Cell surface protein glycosylation in cancer. Proteomics. 2014;14 (4-5 ):525–546.24339177
6. Kailemia MJ , Xu G , Wong M Recent Advances in the Mass Spectrometry Methods for Glycomics and Cancer. Anal Chem. 2018;90 (1 ):208–224.29049885
7. Munkley J , Elliott DJ . Hallmarks of glycosylation in cancer. Oncotarget. 2016;7 (23 ):35478–35489.27007155
8. Vajaria BN , Patel PS . Glycosylation: a hallmark of cancer? Glycoconj J. 2017;34 (2 ):147–156.27975160
9. Wooding KM , Peng W , Mechref Y . Characterization of Pharmaceutical IgG and Biosimilars Using Miniaturized Platforms and LC-MS/MS. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2016;17 (9 ):788–801.27033511
10. Varki A Biological roles of glycans. Glycobiology. 2017;27 (1 ):3–49.27558841
11. Walt D , Aoki-Kinoshita KF , Bendiak B In: Transforming Glycoscience: A Roadmap for the Future. (National Academies Press, Washington (DC), 2012)
12. Dube DH , Bertozzi CR . Glycans in cancer and inflammation--potential for therapeutics and diagnostics. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2005;4 (6 ):477–488.15931257
13. Schnaar RL . Glycobiology simplified: diverse roles of glycan recognition in inflammation. J Leukoc Biol. 2016;99 (6 ):825–838.27004978
14. Schmaltz RM , Hanson SR , Wong C-H . Enzymes in the Synthesis of Glycoconjugates. Chem Rev. 2011;111 (7 ):4259–4307.21749134
15. Zhou S , Dong X , Veillon L LC-MS/MS analysis of permethylated N-glycans facilitating isomeric characterization. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2017;409 (2 ):453–466.27796453
16. Zhou S , Huang Y , Dong X Isomeric separation of permethylated glycans by porous graphitic carbon (PGC)-LC-MS/MS at high temperatures. Anal Chem. 2017;89 (12 ):6590–6597.28475308

* Mechref group introduced an efficient glycan isomeric separation method in this study. Although their biological sample number was limited, the method they presented contributed much to the glycan isomer biomarker discovery development.

17. Mechref Y , Hu Y , Garcia A Defining putative glycan cancer biomarkers by MS. Bioanalysis. 2012;4 (20 ):2457–2469.23157355
18. Meezan E , Wu HC , Black PH Comparative Studies on the Carbohydrate-containing membrane components of normal and virus-transformed mouse fibroblasts. II. Separation of glycoproteins and glycopeptides by Sephadex chromatography. Biochemistry. 1969;8 (6 ):2518–2524.4307997
19. Dennis JW , Laferte S , Waghorne C Beta 1-6 branching of Asn-linked oligosaccharides is directly associated with metastasis. Science. 1987;236 (4801 ):582–585.2953071
20. Kim YJ , Varki A . Perspectives on the significance of altered glycosylation of glycoproteins in cancer. Glycoconj J. 1997;14 (5 ):569–576.9298689
21. Shriver Z , Raguram S , Sasisekharan R . Glycomics: a pathway to a class of new and improved therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004;3 (10 ):863–873.15459677
22. Matsushita Y , Cleary KR , Ota DM Sialyl-dimeric Lewis-X antigen expressed on mucin-like glycoproteins in colorectal cancer metastases. Lab Invest. 1990;63 (6 ):780–791.1979361
23. Sell S Cancer-associated carbohydrates identified by monoclonal antibodies. Hum Pathol. 1990;21 (10 ):1003–1019.2210723
24. Moh ES , Thaysen-Andersen M , Packer NH . Relative versus absolute quantitation in disease glycomics. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2015;9 (3-4 ):368–382.25684231
25. Taketa K , Endo Y , Sekiya C A collaborative study for the evaluation of lectin-reactive alpha-fetoproteins in early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res. 1993;53 (22 ):5419–5423.7693340
26. Zheng T , Peelen D , Smith LM . Lectin arrays for profiling cell surface carbohydrate expression. J Am Chem Soc. 2005;127 (28 ):9982–9983.16011345
27. Syed P , Gidwani K , Kekki H Role of lectin microarrays in cancer diagnosis. Proteomics. 2016;16 (8 ):1257–1265.26841254
28. Hirabayashi J , Yamada M , Kuno A Lectin microarrays: concept, principle and applications. Chem Soc Rev. 2013;42 (10 ):4443–4458.23443201
29. Everest-Dass AV , Moh ESX , Ashwood C Human disease glycomics: technology advances enabling protein glycosylation analysis - part 1. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2018;15 (2 ):165–182.29285957
30. O’Connor PB , Mirgorodskaya E , Costello CE . High pressure matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization Fourier transform mass spectrometry for minimization of ganglioside fragmentation. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2002;13 (4 ):402–407.11951978
31. Reiding KR , Blank D , Kuijper DM High-throughput profiling of protein N-glycosylation by MALDI-TOF-MS employing linkage-specific sialic acid esterification. Anal Chem. 2014;86 (12 ):5784–5793.24831253
32. Alvarez-Manilla G , Warren NL , Abney T Tools for glycomics: relative quantitation of glycans by isotopic permethylation using 13CH3I. Glycobiology. 2007;17 (7 ):677–687.17384119
33. Toghi Eshghi S , Yang S , Wang X Imaging of N-linked glycans from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections using MALDI mass spectrometry. ACS Chem Biol. 2014;9 (9 ):2149–2156.25029481
34. Powers TW , Jones EE , Betesh LR Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization imaging mass spectrometry workflow for spatial profiling analysis of N-linked glycan expression in tissues. Anal Chem. 2013;85 (20 ):9799–9806.24050758
35. Drake RR , Powers TW , Jones EE MALDI Mass Spectrometry Imaging of N-Linked Glycans in Cancer Tissues. Adv Cancer Res. 2017;134 :85–116.28110657
36. Ahn J , Bones J , Yu YQ Separation of 2-aminobenzamide labeled glycans using hydrophilic interaction chromatography columns packed with 1.7 microm sorbent. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2010;878 (3-4 ):403–408.
37. Ruhaak LR , Huhn C , Waterreus WJ Hydrophilic interaction chromatography-based high-throughput sample preparation method for N-glycan analysis from total human plasma glycoproteins. Anal Chem. 2008;80 (15 ):6119–6126.18593198
38. Arnold JN , Saldova R , Galligan MC Novel glycan biomarkers for the detection of lung cancer. J Proteome Res. 2011;10 (4 ):1755–1764.21214223
39. Bones J , Mittermayr S , O’Donoghue N Ultra performance liquid chromatographic profiling of serum N-glycans for fast and efficient identification of cancer associated alterations in glycosylation. Anal Chem. 2010;82 (24 ):10208–10215.21073175
40. Alpert AJ . Hydrophilic-interaction chromatography for the separation of peptides, nucleic acids and other polar compounds. J Chromatogr. 1990;499 :177–196.2324207
41. Ruhaak LR , Deelder AM , Wuhrer M . Oligosaccharide analysis by graphitized carbon liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2009;394 (1 ):163–174.19247642
42. Yoshida T Peptide separation by Hydrophilic-Interaction Chromatography: a review. J Biochem Biophys Methods. 2004;60 (3 ):265–280.15345295
43. Marino K , Bones J , Kattla JJ A systematic approach to protein glycosylation analysis: a path through the maze. Nat Chem Biol. 2010;6 (10 ):713–723.20852609
44. Zhou S , Hu Y , Mechref Y . High-temperature LC-MS/MS of permethylated glycans derived from glycoproteins. Electrophoresis. 2016;37 (11 ):1506–1513.26914157
45. Melmer M , Stangler T , Premstaller A Comparison of hydrophilic-interaction, reversed-phase and porous graphitic carbon chromatography for glycan analysis. J Chromatogr A. 2011;1218 (1 ):118–123.21122866
46. Tsai TH , Wang M , Di Poto C LC-MS profiling of N-Glycans derived from human serum samples for biomarker discovery in hepatocellular carcinoma. J Proteome Res. 2014;13 (11 ):4859–4868.25077556
47. Zhu R , Zhou S , Peng W Enhanced Quantitative LC-MS/MS Analysis of N-linked Glycans Derived from Glycoproteins Using Sodium Deoxycholate Detergent. J Proteome Res. 2018:doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1028b00127 .
48. Szabo Z , Thayer JR , Agroskin Y In-depth analyses of native N-linked glycans facilitated by high-performance anion exchange chromatography-pulsed amperometric detection coupled to mass spectrometry. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2017;409 (12 ):3089–3101.28280844
49. Szabo Z , Thayer JR , Reusch D High Performance Anion Exchange and Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography Approaches for Comprehensive Mass Spectrometry-Based Characterization of the N-Glycome of a Recombinant Human Erythropoietin. J Proteome Res. 2018;17 (4 ):1559–1574.29451981
50. Hua S , An HJ , Ozcan S Comprehensive native glycan profiling with isomer separation and quantitation for the discovery of cancer biomarkers. Analyst. 2011;136 (18 ):3663–3671.21776491
51. Chu CS , Ninonuevo MR , Clowers BH Profile of native N-linked glycan structures from human serum using high performance liquid chromatography on a microfluidic chip and time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Proteomics. 2009;9 (7 ):1939–1951.19288519
52. Huang Y , Zhou S , Zhu J LC‐MS/MS isomeric profiling of permethylated N‐glycans derived from serum haptoglobin of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cirrhotic patients. Electrophoresis. 2017;38 (17 ):2160–2167.28543513
53. Hounsell EF . Characterization of the glycosylation status of proteins. Mol Biotechnol. 1994;2 (1 ):45–60.7866868
54. Pabst M , Altmann F . Influence of electrosorption, solvent, temperature, and ion polarity on the performance of LC-ESI-MS using graphitic carbon for acidic oligosaccharides. Anal Chem. 2008;80 (19 ):7534–7542.18778038
55. Stadlmann J , Pabst M , Kolarich D Analysis of immunoglobulin glycosylation by LC-ESI-MS of glycopeptides and oligosaccharides. Proteomics. 2008;8 (14 ):2858–2871.18655055
56. Ruhaak LR , Miyamoto S , Lebrilla CB . Developments in the identification of glycan biomarkers for the detection of cancer. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013;12 (4 ):846–855.23365456
57. Veillon L , Huang Y , Peng W Characterization of isomeric glycan structures by LC-MS/MS. Electrophoresis. 2017;38 (17 ):2100–2114.28370073
58. Muller S , Hanisch FG . Recombinant MUC1 probe authentically reflects cell-specific O-glycosylation profiles of endogenous breast cancer mucin. High density and prevalent core 2-based glycosylation. J Biol Chem. 2002;277 (29 ):26103–26112.12000758
59. Royle L , Radcliffe CM , Dwek RA Detailed structural analysis of N-glycans released from glycoproteins in SDS-PAGE gel bands using HPLC combined with exoglycosidase array digestions. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;347 :125–143.17072008
60. Balog CI , Stavenhagen K , Fung WL N-glycosylation of colorectal cancer tissues: a liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry-based investigation. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11 (9 ):571–585.22573871
61. Tousi F , Bones J , Hancock WS Differential chemical derivatization integrated with chromatographic separation for analysis of isomeric sialylated N-glycans: a nano-hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-MS platform. Anal Chem. 2013;85 (17 ):8421–8428.23901877
62. Khatri K , Klein JA , Haserick JR Microfluidic Capillary Electrophoresis-Mass Spectrometry for Analysis of Monosaccharides, Oligosaccharides, and Glycopeptides. Anal Chem. 2017;89 (12 ):6645–6655.28530388
63. Szabo Z , Guttman A , Rejtar T Improved sample preparation method for glycan analysis of glycoproteins by CE-LIF and CE-MS. Electrophoresis. 2010;31 (8 ):1389–1395.20309892
64. Chik JH , Zhou J , Moh ES Comprehensive glycomics comparison between colon cancer cell cultures and tumours: implications for biomarker studies. J Proteomics. 2014;108 :146–162.24840470
65. Pang PC , Chiu PC , Lee CL Human sperm binding is mediated by the sialyl-Lewis(x) oligosaccharide on the zona pellucida. Science. 2011;333 (6050 ):1761–1764.21852454
66. Ruhaak LR , Lebrilla CB . Applications of Multiple Reaction Monitoring to Clinical Glycomics. Chromatographia. 2015;78 (5-6 ):335–342.25892741
67. Torre LA , Bray F , Siegel RL Global cancer statistics, 2012. CA Cancer J Clin. 2015;65 (2 ):87–108.25651787
68. Ferlay J , Shin HR , Bray F Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008: GLOBOCAN 2008. Int J Cancer. 2010;127 (12 ):2893–2917.21351269
69. Zhao Y , Sato Y , Isaji T Branched N-glycans regulate the biological functions of integrins and cadherins. Febs j. 2008;275 (9 ):1939–1948.18384383
70. Partridge EA , Le Roy C , Di Guglielmo GM Regulation of cytokine receptors by Golgi N-glycan processing and endocytosis. Science. 2004;306 (5693 ):120–124.15459394
71. Potapenko IO , Luders T , Russnes HG Glycan-related gene expression signatures in breast cancer subtypes; relation to survival. Mol Oncol. 2015;9 (4 ):861–876.25655580
72. Baenziger JU . Not so sweet malignant transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111 (39 ):14009–14010.25228771
73. Bos PD , Zhang XH , Nadal C Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to the brain. Nature. 2009;459 (7249 ):1005–1009.19421193
74. Park HM , Hwang MP , Kim YW Mass spectrometry-based N-linked glycomic profiling as a means for tracking pancreatic cancer metastasis. Carbohydr Res. 2015;413 :5–11.26057990
75. Shah MH , Sainger RN , Telang SD E-Cadherin truncation and sialyl Lewis-X overexpression in oral squamous cell carcinoma and oral precancerous conditions. Neoplasma. 2009;56 (1 ):40–47.19152244
76. Forman D , Ferlay J . The global and regional burden of cancer In: World Cancer Report 2014. Stewart BW , Wi CP (Eds.) (International Agency for Research on Cancer, 150 cours Albert Thomas, 69372 Lyon Cedex 08, France, 2014) 16–53.
77. Leone JP , Leone BA . Breast cancer brain metastases: the last frontier. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2015;4 (33 ):doi: 10.1186/s40164-40015-40028-40168 .
78. Rostami R , Mittal S , Rostami P Brain metastasis in breast cancer: a comprehensive literature review. J Neurooncol. 2016;127 (3 ):407–414.26909695
79. Abd Hamid UM , Royle L , Saldova R A strategy to reveal potential glycan markers from serum glycoproteins associated with breast cancer progression. Glycobiology. 2008;18 (12 ):1105–1118.18818422

* The combination of 2D-gel electrophoresis, WAX-HPLC and HILIC provided the way for native or reducing end labeled glycan study. The database established based on enzymatic digestion enhanced the glycomic data processing, which benefited the glycan marker discovery.

80. Saldova R , Reuben JM , Abd Hamid UM Levels of specific serum N-glycans identify breast cancer patients with higher circulating tumor cell counts. Ann Oncol. 2011;22 (5 ):1113–1119.21127012
81. de Leoz ML , Young LJ , An HJ High-mannose glycans are elevated during breast cancer progression. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011;10 (1 ):M110.002717.
82. Kyselova Z , Mechref Y , Kang P Breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis through quantitative measurements of serum glycan profiles. Clin Chem. 2008;54 (7 ):1166–1175.18487288
83. Goetz JA , Mechref Y , Kang P Glycomic profiling of invasive and non-invasive breast cancer cells. Glycoconj J. 2009;26 (2 ):117–131.18752066
84. Ju L , Wang Y , Xie Q Elevated level of serum glycoprotein bifucosylation and prognostic value in Chinese breast cancer. Glycobiology. 2016;26 (5 ):460–471.26646445
85. Terkelsen T , Haakensen VD , Saldova R N-glycan signatures identified in tumor interstitial fluid and serum of breast cancer patients: association with tumor biology and clinical outcome. Mol Oncol. 2018;12 (6 ):972–990.29698574
86. Mehta A , Herrera H , Block T . Glycosylation and liver cancer. Adv Cancer Res. 2015;126 :257–279.25727150
87. Ringelhan M , Pfister D , O’Connor T The immunology of hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Immunol. 2018;19 (3 ):222–232.29379119
88. Balogh J , Victor D 3rd , Asham EH Hepatocellular carcinoma: a review. J Hepatocell Carcinoma. 2016;3 :41–53.27785449
89. Adamczyk B , Tharmalingam T , Rudd PM . Glycans as cancer biomarkers. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012;1820 (9 ):1347–1353.22178561
90. Yamashita K , Totani K , Iwaki Y Comparative study of the sugar chains of gamma-glutamyltranspeptidases purified from human hepatocellular carcinoma and from human liver. J Biochem. 1989;105 (5 ):728–735.2568988
91. Goldman R , Ressom HW , Varghese RS Detection of hepatocellular carcinoma using glycomic analysis. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15 (5 ):1808–1813.19223512
92. Qin Y , Zhong Y , Ma T A pilot study of salivary N-glycome in HBV-induced chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Glycoconj J. 2017;34 (4 ):523–535.28389847
93. Kamiyama T , Yokoo H , Furukawa J Identification of novel serum biomarkers of hepatocellular carcinoma using glycomic analysis. Hepatology. 2013;57 (6 ):2314–2325.23322672
94. Zhu J , Lin Z , Wu J Analysis of serum haptoglobin fucosylation in hepatocellular carcinoma and liver cirrhosis of different etiologies. J Proteome Res. 2014;13 (6 ):2986–2997.24807840
95. Powers TW , Neely BA , Shao Y MALDI imaging mass spectrometry profiling of N-glycans in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded clinical tissue blocks and tissue microarrays. PLoS One. 2014;9 (9 ):e106255.25184632

* Drake group introduced the use of MALDI-IMS for tissue glycomics. The study in this reference was the tempt to employ MALDI-IMS for glycan biomarker discovery, which could provide a faster and sensitive way in the field.

96. Powers TW , Holst S , Wuhrer M Two-Dimensional N-Glycan Distribution Mapping of Hepatocellular Carcinoma Tissues by MALDI-Imaging Mass Spectrometry. Biomolecules. 2015;5 (4 ):2554–2572.26501333
97. Kim KJ , Kim YW , Hwang CH A MALDI-MS-based quantitative targeted glycomics (MALDI-QTaG) for total N-glycan analysis. Biotechnol Lett. 2015;37 (10 ):2019–2025.26063621
98. Siegel RL , Miller KD , Jemal A . Cancer statistics, 2018. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018;68 (1 ):7–30.29313949
99. Miyamoto S , Ruhaak LR , Stroble C Glycoproteomic Analysis of Malignant Ovarian Cancer Ascites Fluid Identifies Unusual Glycopeptides. J Proteome Res. 2016;15 (9 ):3358–3376.27500424
100. Felder M , Kapur A , Gonzalez-Bosquet J MUC16 (CA125): tumor biomarker to cancer therapy, a work in progress. Mol Cancer. 2014;13 :129.24886523
101. Zhao R , Liu X , Wang Y Integrated glycomic analysis of ovarian cancer side population cells. Clin Proteomics. 2016;13 :32.27833472
102. Saldova R , Royle L , Radcliffe CM Ovarian cancer is associated with changes in glycosylation in both acute-phase proteins and IgG. Glycobiology. 2007;17 (12 ):1344–1356.17884841
103. Alley WR Jr. , Vasseur JA , Goetz JA N-linked glycan structures and their expressions change in the blood sera of ovarian cancer patients. J Proteome Res. 2012;11 (4 ):2282–2300.22304416
104. Biskup K , Braicu EI , Sehouli J Serum glycome profiling: a biomarker for diagnosis of ovarian cancer. J Proteome Res. 2013;12 (9 ):4056–4063.23889230
105. Weiz S , Wieczorek M , Schwedler C Acute-phase glycoprotein N-glycome of ovarian cancer patients analyzed by CE-LIF. Electrophoresis. 2016;37 (11 ):1461–1467.26763099
106. Biskup K , Braicu EI , Sehouli J The ascites N-glycome of epithelial ovarian cancer patients. J Proteomics. 2017;157 :33–39.28188862
107. Everest-Dass AV , Briggs MT , Kaur G N-glycan MALDI Imaging Mass Spectrometry on Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded Tissue Enables the Delineation of Ovarian Cancer Tissues. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016;15 (9 ):3003–3016.27412689
108. Sethi MK , Fanayan S . Mass Spectrometry-Based N-Glycomics of Colorectal Cancer. Int J Mol Sci. 2015;16 (12 ):29278–29304.26690136
109. Tanaka T , Tanaka M , Tanaka T Biomarkers for colorectal cancer. Int J Mol Sci. 2010;11 (9 ):3209–3225.20957089
110. Saitoh O , Wang WC , Lotan R Differential glycosylation and cell surface expression of lysosomal membrane glycoproteins in sublines of a human colon cancer exhibiting distinct metastatic potentials. J Biol Chem. 1992;267 (8 ):5700–5711.1544942
111. Vercoutter-Edouart AS , Slomianny MC , Dekeyzer-Beseme O Glycoproteomics and glycomics investigation of membrane N-glycosylproteins from human colon carcinoma cells. Proteomics. 2008;8 (16 ):3236–3256.18651673
112. Sethi MK , Thaysen-Andersen M , Smith JT Comparative N-glycan profiling of colorectal cancer cell lines reveals unique bisecting GlcNAc and alpha-2,3-linked sialic acid determinants are associated with membrane proteins of the more metastatic/aggressive cell lines. J Proteome Res. 2014;13 (1 ):277–288.24295106
113. Sethi MK , Hancock WS , Fanayan S . Identifying N-Glycan Biomarkers in Colorectal Cancer by Mass Spectrometry. Acc Chem Res. 2016;49 (10 ):2099–2106.27653471
114. Fernandez-Rodriguez J , Feijoo-Carnero C , Merino-Trigo A Immunohistochemical analysis of sialic acid and fucose composition in human colorectal adenocarcinoma. Tumour Biol. 2000;21 (3 ):153–164.10754466
115. Zhao YP , Ruan CP , Wang H Identification and assessment of new biomarkers for colorectal cancer with serum N-glycan profiling. Cancer. 2012;118 (3 ):639–650.21853445
116. Callewaert N , Van Vlierberghe H , Van Hecke A Noninvasive diagnosis of liver cirrhosis using DNA sequencer-based total serum protein glycomics. Nat Med. 2004;10 (4 ):429–434.15152612
117. Snyder CM , Alley WR Jr. , Campos MI Complementary Glycomic Analyses of Sera Derived from Colorectal Cancer Patients by MALDI-TOF-MS and Microchip Electrophoresis. Anal Chem. 2016;88 (19 ):9597–9605.27575585
118. Kaprio T , Satomaa T , Heiskanen A N-glycomic profiling as a tool to separate rectal adenomas from carcinomas. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015;14 (2 ):277–288.25452313
119. Doherty M , Theodoratou E , Walsh I Plasma N-glycans in colorectal cancer risk. Sci Rep. 2018;8 (1 ):8655.29872119

* In this study, Rudd group achieved the effort of glycan marker discovery on a large cohort, which contained more than 1000 serum samples. The outcome based on this large number of observations was more promising, which could encourage the glycomic study for larger cohorts.

120. Liu S , Cheng L , Fu Y Characterization of IgG N-glycome profile in colorectal cancer progression by MALDI-TOF-MS. J Proteomics. 2018;181 :225–237.29698801
121. Zhao Q , Zhan T , Deng Z Glycan analysis of colorectal cancer samples reveals stage-dependent changes in CEA glycosylation patterns. Clin Proteomics. 2018;15 :9.29507546
122. Zhang Y , Yang Q , Wang S . MicroRNAs: a new key in lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014;74 (6 ):1105–1111.25135624
123. Franchino F , Ruda R , Soffietti R . Mechanisms and Therapy for Cancer Metastasis to the Brain. Front Oncol. 2018;8 :161.29881714
124. Lerner L , Winn R , Hulbert A . Lung cancer early detection and health disparities: the intersection of epigenetics and ethnicity. J Thorac Dis. 2018;10 (4 ):2498–2507.29850158
125. Ogawa J , Tsurumi T , Yamada S Blood vessel invasion and expression of sialyl Lewisx and proliferating cell nuclear antigen in stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Relation to postoperative recurrence. Cancer. 1994;73 (4 ):1177–1183.7906193
126. Mizuguchi S , Inoue K , Iwata T High serum concentrations of Sialyl Lewisx predict multilevel N2 disease in non-small-cell lung cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13 (7 ):1010–1018.16788764
127. Ruhaak LR , Stroble C , Dai J Serum Glycans as Risk Markers for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2016;9 (4 ):317–323.26813970
128. Ruhaak LR , Nguyen UT , Stroble C Enrichment strategies in glycomics-based lung cancer biomarker development. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2013;7 (9-10 ):664–676.23640812
129. Wang X , Deng Z , Huang C Differential N-glycan patterns identified in lung adenocarcinoma by N-glycan profiling of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections. J Proteomics. 2018;172 :1–10.29157724
130. Siegel RL , Miller KD , Jemal A . Cancer Statistics, 2017. CA Cancer J Clin. 2017;67 (1 ):7–30.28055103
131. Kenner BJ , Go VLW , Chari ST Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer The Role of Industry in the Development of Biomarkers. Pancreas. 2017;46 (10 ):1238–1241.28953187
132. Orntoft TF , Vestergaard EM . Clinical aspects of altered glycosylation of glycoproteins in cancer. Electrophoresis. 1999;20 (2 ):362–371.10197444
133. Rosty C , Goggins M . Early detection of pancreatic carcinoma. Hematology-Oncology Clinics of North America. 2002;16 (1 ):37–52.
134. Zhao J , Qiu W , Simeone DM N-linked glycosylation profiling of pancreatic cancer serum using capillary liquid phase separation coupled with mass spectrometric analysis. J Proteome Res. 2007;6 (3 ):1126–1138.17249709
135. Lin Z , Simeone DM , Anderson MA Mass spectrometric assay for analysis of haptoglobin fucosylation in pancreatic cancer. J Proteome Res. 2011;10 (5 ):2602–2611.21417406
136. Okuyama N , Ide Y , Nakano M Fucosylated haptoglobin is a novel marker for pancreatic cancer: a detailed analysis of the oligosaccharide structure and a possible mechanism for fucosylation. Int J Cancer. 2006;118 (11 ):2803–2808.16385567
137. Miyoshi E , Nakano M . Fucosylated haptoglobin is a novel marker for pancreatic cancer: detailed analyses of oligosaccharide structures. Proteomics. 2008;8 (16 ):3257–3262.18646007
138. Drake PM , Cho W , Li B Sweetening the pot: adding glycosylation to the biomarker discovery equation. Clin Chem. 2010;56 (2 ):223–236.19959616
139. Mann BF , Goetz JA , House MG Glycomic and proteomic profiling of pancreatic cyst fluids identifies hyperfucosylated lactosamines on the N-linked glycans of overexpressed glycoproteins. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11 (7 ):M111 015792.
140. Holst S , Belo AI , Giovannetti E Profiling of different pancreatic cancer cells used as models for metastatic behaviour shows large variation in their N-glycosylation. Sci Rep. 2017;7 (1 ):16623.29192278
141. Lilja H , Ulmert D , Vickers AJ . Prostate-specific antigen and prostate cancer: prediction, detection and monitoring. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;8 (4 ):268–278.18337732
142. Filella X , Fernandez-Galan E , Fernandez Bonifacio R Emerging biomarkers in the diagnosis of prostate cancer. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2018;11 :83–94.29844697
143. Gilgunn S , Conroy PJ , Saldova R Aberrant PSA glycosylation--a sweet predictor of prostate cancer. Nat Rev Urol. 2013;10 (2 ):99–107.23318363
144. Peracaula R , Tabares G , Royle L Altered glycosylation pattern allows the distinction between prostate-specific antigen (PSA) from normal and tumor origins. Glycobiology. 2003;13 (6 ):457–470.12626390
145. Kyselova Z , Mechref Y , Al Bataineh MM Alterations in the serum glycome due to metastatic prostate cancer. J Proteome Res. 2007;6 (5 ):1822–1832.17432893
146. de Leoz ML , An HJ , Kronewitter S Glycomic approach for potential biomarkers on prostate cancer: profiling of N-linked glycans in human sera and pRNS cell lines. Dis Markers. 2008;25 (4-5 ):243–258.19126968
147. Ishibashi Y , Tobisawa Y , Hatakeyama S Serum tri- and tetra-antennary N-glycan is a potential predictive biomarker for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Prostate. 2014;74 (15 ):1521–1529.25154914

* So far, no validated predictive biomarker for castration-resistant pancreatic cancer (CRPC) has been reported. In this study, N-glycans in 738 serum samples of health volunteer and patients with different type of pancreatic diseases were investigated, which was another effort of glycan biomarker discovery based on large cohorts.

148. Gbormittah FO , Lee LY , Taylor K Comparative studies of the proteome, glycoproteome, and N-glycome of clear cell renal cell carcinoma plasma before and after curative nephrectomy. J Proteome Res. 2014;13 (11 ):4889–4900.25184692
149. Mechref Y , Hussein A , Bekesova S Quantitative serum glycomics of esophageal adenocarcinoma and other esophageal disease onsets. J Proteome Res. 2009;8 (6 ):2656–2666.19441788
150. Mitra I , Zhuang Z , Zhang Y N-glycan profiling by microchip electrophoresis to differentiate disease states related to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Anal Chem. 2012;84 (8 ):3621–3627.22397697
151. Qin R , Zhao J , Qin W Discovery of Non-invasive Glycan Biomarkers for Detection and Surveillance of Gastric Cancer. J Cancer. 2017;8 (10 ):1908–1916.28819389
152. Hu Y , Mayampurath A , Khan S N-linked glycan profiling in neuroblastoma cell lines. J Proteome Res. 2015;14 (5 ):2074–2081.25730103
153. Wildburger NC , Zhou S , Zacharias LG Integrated Transcriptomic and Glycomic Profiling of Glioma Stem Cell Xenografts. J Proteome Res. 2015;14 (9 ):3932–3939.26185906
154. Pinho SS , Reis CA . Glycosylation in cancer: mechanisms and clinical implications. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015;15 (9 ):540–555.26289314
155. Stowell SR , Ju T , Cummings RD . Protein glycosylation in cancer. Annu Rev Pathol. 2015;10 :473–510.25621663
156. Burchell JM , Mungul A , Taylor-Papadimitriou J . O-linked glycosylation in the mammary gland: changes that occur during malignancy. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2001;6 (3 ):355–364.11547903
157. Kirmiz C , Li B , An HJ A serum glycomics approach to breast cancer biomarkers. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2007;6 (1 ):43–55.16847285
158. An HJ , Miyamoto S , Lancaster KS Profiling of glycans in serum for the discovery of potential biomarkers for ovarian cancer. J Proteome Res. 2006;5 (7 ):1626–1635.16823970
159. Vitiazeva V , Kattla JJ , Flowers SA The O-Linked Glycome and Blood Group Antigens ABO on Mucin-Type Glycoproteins in Mucinous and Serous Epithelial Ovarian Tumors. PLoS One. 2015;10 (6 ):e0130197.26075384
160. He Y , Xie Q , Wang Y Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry-based O-glycomics to evaluate glycosylation alterations in gastric cancer. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2016;10 (2 ):206–215.26255982

* O-glycan biomarker discovery studies are limited. This study included a relatively large sample size (sera from 157 gastric cancer patients and 144 healthy individuals). The outcome of this study provided potential O-glycan biomarker for gastric cancer and enhanced the studies of O-glycan biomarker discovery.

161. Tanaka-Okamoto M , Mukai M , Takahashi H Various sulfated carbohydrate tumor marker candidates identified by focused glycomic analyses. Glycobiology. 2017;27 (5 ):400–415.28025252
162. Tanaka-Okamoto M , Yabu M , Mukai M Elevation of CA19-9-Related Novel Marker, Core 1 Sialyl Lewis A, in Sera of Adenocarcinoma Patients Verified by a SRM-Based Method. J Proteome Res. 2016;15 (1 ):152–165.26641888
163. Anugraham M , Jacob F , Everest-Dass AV Tissue glycomics distinguish tumour sites in women with advanced serous adenocarcinoma. Mol Oncol. 2017;11 (11 ):1595–1615.28853212
164. Hofmann J , Pagel K . Glycan Analysis by Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2017;56 (29 ):8342–8349.28436597
165. Harvey DJ . Analysis of carbohydrates and glycoconjugates by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry: An update for 2013-2014. Mass Spectrom Rev. 2018;37 (4 ):353–491.29687922
166. West C , Elfakir C , Lafosse M . Porous graphitic carbon: a versatile stationary phase for liquid chromatography. J Chromatogr A. 2010;1217 (19 ):3201–3216.19811787
167. Wuhrer M , de Boer AR , Deelder AM . Structural glycomics using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) with mass spectrometry. Mass Spectrom Rev. 2009;28 (2 ):192–206.18979527
168. Vreeker GC , Wuhrer M . Reversed-phase separation methods for glycan analysis. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2017;409 (2 ):359–378.27888305
169. Isailovic D , Kurulugama R , Plasencia M Profiling of human serum glycans associated with liver cancer and cirrhosis by IMS− MS. J Proteome Res. 2008;7 (3 ):1109–1117.18237112
170. Gaye MM , Valentine SJ , Hu Y Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Serum N-linked Glycans from Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Phenotypes. J Proteome Res. 2012;11 (12 ):6102–6110.23126309
171. Alley WR Jr , Novotny MV . Glycomic analysis of sialic acid linkages in glycans derived from blood serum glycoproteins. J Proteome Res. 2010;9 (6 ):3062–3072.20345175
172. Holst S , Heijs B , de Haan N Linkage-Specific in Situ Sialic Acid Derivatization for N-Glycan Mass Spectrometry Imaging of Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded Tissues. Anal Chem. 2016;88 (11 ):5904–5913.27145236
173. Stavenhagen K , Kolarich D , Wuhrer M . Clinical Glycomics Employing Graphitized Carbon Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry. Chromatographia. 2015;78 (5-6 ):307–320.25750456
174. Hua S , Williams CC , Dimapasoc LM Isomer-specific chromatographic profiling yields highly sensitive and specific potential N-glycan biomarkers for epithelial ovarian cancer. J Chromatogr A. 2013;1279 :58–67.23380366
175. Liu Y , Wang C , Wang R Isomer-specific profiling of N-glycans derived from human serum for potential biomarker discovery in pancreatic cancer. J Proteomics. 2018;181 :160–169.29674015
176. Moginger U , Grunewald S , Hennig R Alterations of the Human Skin N- and O-Glycome in Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma. Front Oncol. 2018;8 :70.29619343
177. Hinneburg H , Korac P , Schirmeister F Unlocking Cancer Glycomes from Histopathological Formalin-fixed and Paraffin-embedded (FFPE) Tissue Microdissections. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2017;16 (4 ):524–536.28122943
178. Takahashi S , Sugiyama T , Shimomura M Site-specific and linkage analyses of fucosylated N-glycans on haptoglobin in sera of patients with various types of cancer: possible implication for the differential diagnosis of cancer. Glycoconj J. 2016;33 (3 ):471–482.26869352
179. Anugraham M , Jacob F , Nixdorf S Specific glycosylation of membrane proteins in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines: glycan structures reflect gene expression and DNA methylation status. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014;13 (9 ):2213–2232.24855066
180. Kizuka Y , Kitazume S , Taniguchi N . N-glycan and Alzheimer’s disease. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2017;1861 (10 ):2447–2454.
181. Schedin‐Weiss S , Winblad B , Tjernberg LO . The role of protein glycosylation in Alzheimer disease. FEBS J. 2014;281 (1 ):46–62.24279329
182. Fodero LR , Sáez‐Valero J , Barquero MS Wheat germ agglutinin‐binding glycoproteins are decreased in Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid. J Neurochem. 2001;79 (5 ):1022–1026.11739614
183. Frenkel-Pinter M , Shmueli MD , Raz C Interplay between protein glycosylation pathways in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Adv. 2017;3 (9 ):e1601576.28929132
184. Miura Y , Endo T . Glycomics and glycoproteomics focused on aging and age-related diseases--Glycans as a potential biomarker for physiological alterations. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016;1860 (8 ):1608–1614.26801879
185. Shao S , Guo T , Aebersold R . Mass spectrometry-based proteomic quest for diabetes biomarkers. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;1854 (6 ):519–527.25556002
186. Smilowitz JT , Totten SM , Huang J Human Milk Secretory Immunoglobulin A and Lactoferrin N-Glycans Are Altered in Women with Gestational Diabetes Mellitus–3. J Nutr. 2013;143 (12 ):1906–1912.24047700
187. Testa R , Vanhooren V , Bonfigli AR N-glycomic changes in serum proteins in type 2 diabetes mellitus correlate with complications and with metabolic syndrome parameters. PLoS One. 2015;10 (3 ):e0119983.25793407

* The glycan markers for diabetes were more promising due to its large number of samples. 562 patients and 599 healthy people were involved in this study, thus facilitating the glycan biomarker discovery in those diseases other than cancers.

188. Bermingham ML , Colombo M , McGurnaghan SJ N-Glycan Profile and Kidney Disease in Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2018;41 (1 ):79–87.29146600
189. Keser T , Gornik I , Vuckovic F Increased plasma N-glycome complexity is associated with higher risk of type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia. 2017;60 (12 ):2352–2360.28905229
190. Shathili AM , Brown HM , Everest-Dass AV The effect of streptozotocin-induced hyperglycemia on N-and O-linked protein glycosylation in mouse ovary. Glycobiology. 2018.
191. Blomme B , Van Steenkiste C , Callewaert N Alteration of protein glycosylation in liver diseases. J Hepatol. 2009;50 (3 ):592–603.19157620
192. Kang SK , Chung TW , Lee JY The hepatitis B virus X protein inhibits secretion of apolipoprotein B by enhancing the expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III. J Biol Chem. 2004;279 (27 ):28106–28112.15123606
193. Kuno A , Ikehara Y , Tanaka Y Multilectin assay for detecting fibrosis-specific glyco-alteration by means of lectin microarray. Clin Chem. 2011;57 (1 ):48–56.21047982
194. Qin X , Guo Y , Du H Comparative Analysis for Glycopatterns and Complex-Type N-Glycans of Glycoprotein in Sera from Chronic Hepatitis B- and C-Infected Patients. Front Physiol. 2017;8 :596.28871230
195. Albrecht S , Unwin L , Muniyappa M Glycosylation as a marker for inflammatory arthritis. Cancer Biomark. 2014;14 (1 ):17–28.24643039
196. Dabelsteen E , Broby-Johansen U , Jeppe-Jensen D Cell surface glycosylation patterns in psoriasis. Apmis. 1990;98 (3 ):221–228.2180441
197. Epp A , Sullivan KC , Herr AB Immunoglobulin Glycosylation Effects in Allergy and Immunity. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2016;16 (11 ):79.27796794
198. Gizaw ST , Koda T , Amano M A comprehensive glycome profiling of Huntington’s disease transgenic mice. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;9 (18 ):20.
199. Edri-Brami M , Rosental B , Hayoun D Glycans in sera of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients and their role in killing neuronal cells. PLoS One. 2012;7 (5 ):30.
200. Freidin MB , Keser T , Gudelj I The Association Between Low Back Pain and Composition of IgG Glycome. Sci Rep. 2016;6 (26815 ).
