LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101526291
37883
BMJ Case Rep
BMJ Case Rep
BMJ case reports
1757-790X

31133550
6536219
10.1136/bcr-2018-228938
NIHMS1039039
Article
Sleep talking and primary progressive aphasia: case study and autopsy findings in a patient with logopenic primary progressive aphasia and dementia with Lewy bodies
Apple Alexandra Clemans 12
Mao Qinwen 34
Bigio Eileen 34
Bonakdarpour Borna 35
1 Department of Neurology, University of California, san Francisco, Ca, USA
2 Department of psychiatry and Behavioral sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg school of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
3 Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer Disease, Northwestern University Feinberg school of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
4 Department of pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg school of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
5 Ken and Ruth Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg school of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
Contributors ACA contributed to case conceptualisation and writing of the manuscript. QM provided pathology diagnosis and figure preparation. EB contributed to the manuscript review and revision. BB contributed to case conceptualisation, clinical care of the patient in the case study and writing of the manuscript.

Correspondence to Alexandra Clemans Apple, alexandra.c.apple@gmail.com
30 9 2019
27 5 2019
27 5 2019
04 10 2019
12 5 e228938This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
SUMMARY

This case study highlights the parasomnia behaviours of an individual with primary progressive aphasia, a type of dementia known for decline in language abilities. Despite a paucity of speech during the day, this individual had concurrent sleep talking at night; a combination which, to our knowledge, has never been reported before. Postmortem pathology confirmed clinical suspicion of both Alzheimer and Lewy body diseases, both asymmetric to the left side. Given this rare left-sided asymmetrical pathology, we hypothesise that the relatively preserved right hemisphere may have allowed for access to intact overlearned phrases which usually originate from the right hemisphere to appear while asleep. A second hypothesis is also presented which postulates that bottom-up processing may have overridden top-down apathy during sleep and allowed for speech output in this case.


BACKGROUND

This case study describes an interesting clinical and pathological presentation of an individual who presented with logopenic primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and later developed sleep talking despite being essentially non-vocal during the day. He was found to have both Alzheimer disease (AD) and Lewy body disease (LBD) pathologies on brain autopsy, with both pathologies significantly affecting the left hemisphere. To our knowledge, the presence of sleep talking in a severely aphasic patient together with left-lateralised dual pathology of AD and LBD has never been reported before in the literature.

CASE PRESENTATION

This case report is about a 76-year-old left-handed man who presented with a 4-year history of progressive language impairment. Specifically, he had difficulty with word finding, reading, writing, sentence repetition and calculations consistent with logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia (lv-PPA) and Gerstmann syndrome. He had a past medical and surgical history including coronary angioplasty, coronary stent, prostate cancer, hypertension and hyperlipidaemia. His family history was unremarkable. Brain MRI demonstrated mild atrophy in the left perisylvian and middle temporal gyrus, also suggesting left hemispheric language dominance. In addition, MRI demonstrated left lateral ventricle enlargement (including posterior horn) secondary to left hemisphere atrophy; no atrophy in the hippocampi was noted. Generally, this pattern of atrophy in the left temporoparietal junction and left perisylvian enlargement is most consistent with lv-PPA (see figure 1A). The patient’s family reported difficulty sleeping, without dream enactment, which within 2 years from presentation progressed to limb movements, dream enactment and daytime hypersomnia consistent with probable Rapid Eye Movement sleep Behavioural Disorder (RBD). Although he was unable to effectively communicate later in the disease, his partner reported sleep talking. The content of the sleep talking was typical work-related sentences (eg, ‘I’ll call you tomorrow’ or ‘I’ll get back to you on that’).

This individual had neuropsychological testing in 2012 and follow-up testing in 2014. Neuropsychological results from testing in 2014 demonstrated impaired confrontation naming (Boston Naming Test: T = 22, severely impaired, and significantly declined from 2012 testing: T=42, average range). Verbal and semantic fluency were both decreased from prior testing, and semantic fluency was in the severely impaired range (T = 11). Given his stable performance in other cognitive domains and decline in language abilities, the results of 2014 testing were in line with PPA, although a variant was not specified. Three months later in July 2014, he was seen by a neurologist (co-author BB), and found to have intact word recognition and simple comprehension on a screener. The patient had difficulty naming parts of an object (eg, spring in a stapler). Language output was dysfluent with word finding pauses and positive for phonemic paraphasias as well as impaired repetition for longer sentences (eg, ‘no ifs and or buts’). Self-initiated writing had good syntax, spelling and content on screening. Reading was intact on simple screening. A diagnosis of lv-PPA may be made when a patient has impaired single word-retrieval in spontaneous speech and naming and impaired repetition of sentences and phrases as well as three of the following: speech (phonological) errors in spontaneous speech and naming, spared single-word comprehension and object knowledge, spared motor speech and absence of frank agrammatism; therefore, he was given a diagnosis of lv-PPA.3

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Although he originally presented with symptoms consistent with an lv-PPA syndrome, during the next 2 years after presentation, he also developed Parkinsonian features of bradykinesia and limb rigidity, reduced sense of smell, constipation, and later, drop in orthostatic pressure. In addition to these features, he became withdrawn and had no drive to initiate tasks, suggesting development of apathy. According to the newly outlined criteria for Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), the patient met criteria due to his multidomain dementia diagnosis and that he exhibited at least one core features of DLB (Parkinsonian features), and probable RBD (a polysomnogram was not obtained so as to avoid inconveniencing the patient and his family as he was already displaying symptoms of RBD) as well as supportive features (constipation, depression, apathy and drop in orthostatic blood pressure).4 These symptoms were consistent with the diagnosis of DLB, which in this case, seemed to be concurrent with lv-PPA.

OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP

Near the end of his life, he developed severe episodes of agitation. He was admitted to the hospital, and even with administration of antipsychotics his symptoms were not well controlled. He subsequently passed away due to lack of oral intake. On autopsy, he was found to have both AD and LBD pathologies. Interestingly, Lewy bodies and AD pathology were both more concentrated in the left hemisphere compared with the right. Specifically, amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles were present in left entorhinal cortex, left CA1, bilateral superior temporal gyrus (left &gt; right) and bilateral parietal cortex (left &gt; right). Lewy bodies were observed in nucleus basalis, locus coeruleus and substantia nigra, neocortex (left &gt;right) and hippocampus (figure 1B). Lewy body pathology was compatible with the diagnosis of neocortical-stage Lewy body dementia (diffuse Lewy body disease). In addition, a high Alzheimer disease neuropatho-logical change (ADNC) was observed: amyloid deposition in the CA4 region of the hippocampus indicated Thal amyloid phase 4, compatible with an amyloid deposits score of A3. Neurofibrillary tangle estimates were compatible with Braak stage V, and tangle score of B3.5 Neocortical plaque estimates of frequent were compatible with a CERAD neuritic plaque score of C3. Combination of A3 +B3 + C3 was consistent with high ADNC. The combination of these two autopsy findings aligns with an ‘intermediate’ likelihood that the pathological findings are associated with a typical, DLBs, clinical syndrome.4

DISCUSSION

This case demonstrates preserved language abilities that appear during sleep but are somehow inaccessible during wakefulness. To our knowledge, this is the first report of an individual with PPA who, despite language deficits during the day, was able to produce words and partial sentences while asleep. Previous studies have found an increase in sleep talking in different forms of dementia (eg, DLB),6 but to our knowledge no study has outlined sleep talking concurrent with PPA (figure 1B). Studies have found comorbid AD and Lewy body pathology in lv-PPA.7 For example, studies of lv-PPA found underlying AD neuropathology in 55%–83% of their participants.89 Research has demonstrated that often times, clinical phenotype and underlying pathology do not fit together as expected. Giannini and colleagues found that 65% of likely lv-PPA patients with underlying AD neuropathology could not be classified by PPA consensus criteria.9 Previous studies have also found that AD neuropathology accounted for 40%–60% of patients who could not be successfully classified.810 This case is significant in that it demonstrates LBD pathology as well as clear lv-PPA which has been historically difficult to classify by its core features.3 Furthermore, although pathological asymmetry in clinical PPA has been reported as AD, the combination of left-sided AD and left-sided Lewy body pathology is less common.11

In this case, two mechanisms may explain the emergence of speech during sleep. The first is related to hemispheric asymmetry in pathology. Although he was left-handed, it is reasonable to believe that language was lateralised to his left hemisphere as studies suggest up to 78% of left-handers are likely to have left language dominance. In this case, pathological examination demonstrated a smaller burden of disease within the right hemisphere compared with the left as well as more severe atrophy on the left side per MRI and on autopsy. In this case, both Lewy body pathology and tangles were more prevalent in the left hemisphere compared with the right (see bilateral superior temporal and inferior parietal cortex sections in figure 1B). Previous studies have observed asymmetry in proteinopathy in the language-dominated hemisphere in PPA; however, there has been less attention to the role of the right hemisphere. The fact that this individual had a relatively spared right hemisphere may have allowed for access to intact overlearned phrases, like the work-related phrases he was uttering which usually originate from the right hemisphere. Studies have found that the content of sleep talk tends to be grammatically correct, typically in present tense, often times is directed towards a third person and similar to commonly uttered phrases during waking speech.

The second mechanism that may explain speech output during sleep is related to apathy. The patient had very limited speech output later in his course. However, part of his decreased output was due to speech apathy, or abulia. During sleep, excitation related to RBD most likely overcame the effect of apathy, enabling access to language areas. Apathy, a consistent feature of PPA, may influence the limited speech output that is observed in this patient. Apathy may be thought of a top-down process as individuals express a lack of interest despite external stimuli that would usually garner a response. Sleep and activities associated with sleep (eg, dreaming and sleep talking) have been considered as bottom-up processes. Different sensory stimulations that are experienced during dreaming such as visual, auditory, sensory experiences are thought to be made possible through ascending cholinergic projections beginning with the pedunculopontine nucleus and then ascending to the thalamus and the cortex. Therefore, one theory as to why non-verbal patients are able to speak during sleep is that apathy may be overridden by bottom-up processing during sleep. In support of this idea, researchers have found some aspects of improved speech (improved articulation and louder volume) in patients with multiple systems atrophy and Parkinson’s disease during REM-sleep behaviour disorder.

In summary, this report has highlighted clinical and pathological findings of a rare case of a patient meeting criteria for lv-PPA with sleep talking behaviours as well as asymmetric involvement of AD and LBD pathologies. This case also demonstrates the importance of working towards a better understanding of para-somnias in different dementia populations.

Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

Figure 1 (A) Axial structural MRI images demonstrating areas of volume loss (atrophy) within the left language zone (red arrows). Images are in radiological orientation with the left side depicting the right side of brain. (B) Top panel: alpha-synuclein stains reveal severe Lewy bodies (indicated by red arrows) in the left superior temporal and inferior parietal cortex, and moderate Lewy bodies in the right superior temporal and inferior parietal cortex. Bottom panel: thioflavin stains reveal moderate tangles (red arrows) in the left superior temporal and inferior parietal cortex, and sparse tangles in the right superior temporal and inferior parietal cortex. IPC, inferior parietal cortex; STG, superior temporal gyrus.

Learning points

▸ This case highlighted a person with logopenic primary progressive aphasia (PPA), and therefore little to no speech output during the day with concurrent sleep talking.

▸ Post-mortem pathology confirmed clinical suspicion of both Alzheimer and Lewy body diseases (LBDs), both asymmetric to the left side.

▸ We hypothesise that a more preserved right hemisphere may have allowed overlearned phrases to be spoken while asleep and/or that bottom-up processing may have overridden apathy while the patient was asleep allowing for speech output.

▸ Although many previous studies have found pathological LBD concurrent with logopenic variant PPA (lv-PPA) to be difficult to diagnose, this study demonstrated a patient who met the diagnostic criteria for lv-PPA and diagnosed with LBD.

Competing interests None declared.

patient consent for publication Obtained.

provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.


REFERENCES

1 Gorno-Tempini ML , Dronkers NF , Rankin KP , Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol 2004;55 :335–46.14991811
2 Mesulam M , Wieneke C , Rogalski E , Quantitative template for subtyping primary progressive aphasia. Arch Neurol 2009;66 :1545–51.20008661
3 Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology 2011;76 :1006–14.21325651
4 McKeith IG , Boeve BF , Dickson DW , Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: Fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium. Neurology 2017;89 :88–100.28592453
5 Braak H , Alafuzoff I , Arzberger T , Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry. Acta Neuropathol 2006;112 :389–404.16906426
6 Honda K , Hashimoto M , Yatabe Y , The usefulness of monitoring sleep talking for the diagnosis of Dementia with Lewy bodies. Int Psychogeriatr 2013;25 :851–8.23425512
7 Caselli RJ , Beach TG , Sue LI , Progressive aphasia with Lewy bodies. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2002;14 :55–8.12145451
8 Harris JM , Gall C , Thompson JC , Classification and pathology of primary progressive aphasia. Neurology 2013;81 :1832–9.24142474
9 Giannini LAA , Irwin DJ , McMillan CT , Clinical marker for Alzheimer disease pathology in logopenic primary progressive aphasia. Neurology 2017;88 :2276–84.28515265
10 Teichmann M , Kas A , Boutet C , Deciphering logopenic primary progressive aphasia: a clinical, imaging and biomarker investigation. Brain 2013;136 (Pt 11 ):3474–88.24108322
11 Mesulam MM , Weintraub S , Rogalski EJ , Asymmetry and heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s and frontotemporal pathology in primaiy progressive aphasia. Brain 2014;137 (Pt 4 ):1176–92.24574501
