LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7605818
1921
Brain Res Bull
Brain Res. Bull.
Brain research bulletin
0361-9230
1873-2747

29807146
6252289
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.05.018
NIHMS973596
Article
Stroke, Cerebrovascular Diseases and Vascular Cognitive Impairment in Africa
Akinyemi Rufus O 12
Owolabi Mayowa O 2
Ihara Masafumi 3
Damasceno Albertino 4
Ogunniyi Adesola 2
Dotchin Catherine 5
Paddick Stella-Maria 6
Ogeng’o Julius 7
Walker Richard 5
Kalaria Raj N 6*
1 Institute for Advanced Medical Research and Training, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Nigeria
2 Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Nigeria
3 Department of Neurology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, 5-7-1 Fujishiro-dai, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan
4 Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, Maputo, Moçambique
5 Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4AX, United Kingdom
6 Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing &amp; Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 5PL, United Kingdom
7 Department of Human Anatomy, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya
* Correspondence: Professor RN Kalaria, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing &amp; Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, United Kingdom, Tel: 0191 208 1352; Fax: 0191 208 1301, raj.kalaria@ncl.ac.uk
22 6 2018
25 5 2018
2 2019
01 2 2020
145 97108
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
With increased numbers of older people a higher burden of neurological disorders worldwide is predicted. Stroke and other cerebrovascular diseases do not necessarily present with different phenotypes in Africa but their incidence is rising in tandem with the demographic change in the population. Age remains the strongest irreversible risk factor for stroke and cognitive impairment. Modifiable factors relating to vascular disease risk, diet, lifestyle, physical activity and psychosocial status play a key role in shaping the current spate of stroke related diseases in Africa. Hypertension is the strongest modifiable risk factor for stroke but is also likely associated with co-inheritance of genetic traits among Africans. Somewhat different from high-income countries, strokes attributed to cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) are higher &gt;30% among sub-Saharan Africans. Raised blood pressure may explain most of the incidence of SVD-related strokes but there are likely other contributing factors including dyslipidaemia and diabetes in some sectors of Africa. However, atherosclerotic and cardioembolic diseases combined also appear to be common subtypes as causes of strokes. Significant proportions of cerebrovascular diseases are ascribed to various forms of infectious disease including complications of human immunodeficiency virus. Cerebral SVD leads to several clinical manifestations including gait disturbance, autonomic dysfunction and depression. Pathological processes are characterized by arteriolosclerosis, lacunar infarcts, perivascular spaces, microinfarcts and diffuse white matter changes, which can now all be detected on neuroimaging. Except for isolated cases of cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy or CADASIL, hereditary arteriopathies have so far not been reported in Africa. Prevalence estimates of vascular dementia (2–3%), delayed dementia after stroke (10–20%) and vascular cognitive impairment (30–40%) do not appear to be vastly different from those in other parts of the world. However, given the current demographic transition in both urban and rural settings these figures will likely rise. Wider application of neuroimaging modalities and implementation of stroke care in Africa will enable better estimates of SVD and other subtypes of stroke. Stroke survivors with SVD type pathology are likely to have low mortality and therefore portend increased incidence of dementia.

Africa
Alzheimer’s disease
cerebrovascular disease
small vessel disease
stroke
vascular cognitive impairment

Introduction

Worldwide neurological disorders are an important cause of disability and mortality. The global burden of neurological disorders has increased substantially over the past 25 years because of increases in the general population as well as in proportions of older people [36, 40]. Life expectancy at age 65 years has increased in almost all countries from 1970 to 2016. The increases occurred across successive decades suggesting implications for lower mortality and improved health care. Despite these positives, however, among all the common neurological disorders worldwide, cerebrovascular disease (CVD) and in particular stroke account for the largest proportions (47–67%) of total disability-adjusted life-years and deaths [54]. Low-and-middle income countries (LMICs) bear a high global burden of not only neurological but also cardiovascular disorders [89, 137], which until recently used to include stroke. With the recently revised ICD-11 classification [134], stroke is now finally considered a brain disease or a neurological disorder. While there are considerable geographical variations, the prevalence of stroke in a large number of sub-Saharan African countries is reported to be the highest with an estimated overall Africa rate of 981 per 100,000 [54, 106]. These accord with previously measured yearly stroke incidence rates age-standardised to the WHO world population of 109/100 000 in rural (Hai District) and 316/100,000 in urban (Dar-es-Salaam) Tanzania [149] and estimated rates of 258/100,000 in rural South Africa [83]. Current prevalence and incidence figures may actually be underestimates given there has been an incremental increase of stroke cases of about 10% every 4 years in the last decade [3]. Africa has also experienced a steady increase in stroke admissions to hospital and mortality over the past three decades. In a recent Ghanaian study, comprising over 12,000 stroke admissions with equal gender distribution, the rate of stroke admissions had increased from 5/1000 in 1983 to 14/1000 in 2010 corresponding to a 260% rise over the period. Stroke mortality rates increased from 3/1000 to 7/1000 deaths over the same period [132]. In rural Tanzania, both mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia particularly vascular dementia (VaD) were associated with excess mortality relative to those without cognitive impairment [110].

Vascular risk factors (VRFs) impact on brain health to produce clinically silent disease or overt stroke, all of which lead to cognitive dysfunction,[9, 53] depression [141, 142] and frailty [63, 124]. It is estimated by 2025, three in four persons will be living with hypertension with increasing clustering of other risks including diabetes, obesity and metabolic syndrome [102]. These constitute a heightened but less recognized threat to brain health, mental capital and socioeconomic progress in Africa. Hypertensive small-vessel disease (SVD) is thought to be the main risk factor for these infarcts, which may be associated with subtle deficits in physical and cognitive function that often go unnoticed, particularly in older age. In recent years, SVD has taken precedence as a radiological concept [151] and refers to an intracranial disorder which involves pathological changes within and at the surfaces of brain microvessels including perforating arteries and arterioles, capillaries and venules. SVD comprises tissue injury in both the cortical and subcortical grey and white matter. However, SVD may often coexist with atherosclerosis involving large extracranial vessels and cardioembolic (CE) disease [78].

Apart from depressive illness, an important consequence of CVD in the survivors is cognitive impairment. In recent years, vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) has been implemented as an umbrella term to encompass all conditions and causes of CVD including hereditary forms that lead to early and severe forms of dementia syndromes [56]. Degrees of impairment with the VCI concept remains challenging to define in the clinic. Thus, developments within the guises of DSM V defined neurocognitive disorder, mild and severe forms of VCI have been proposed as minor and major neurocognitive disorders. The latter being consistent with VaD, which is widely regarded as the second most common cause of dementia. VaD may culminate from global or focal effects of vascular disease. It incorporates behavioural symptoms and locomotor abnormalities e.g. Parkinsonian-like gait disorder, dysarthria and autonomic dysfunction. Within the spectrum of CVD and VaD, the most common vascular contributor to dementia appears to be cerebral SVD [151]. As people worldwide survive longer [39, 127] including in Africa and stroke management improves, the incidence of SVD type of VaD is likely to rise.

In this review, we focus on stroke and cerebrovascular diseases in Africa. We also review current trends in vascular risk factors associated with stroke subtypes. The recognition of subtypes of strokes was an important step forward towards current pathological classification based on vascular aetiology. We further appraise the vascular causes of cognitive impairment and their contribution to neurodegenerative processes. The incidence of hypertension is increasing in Africa suggesting that the incidence of cognitive impairment associated with subcortical ischemic lesions or Binswanger’s disease involving subcortical structures and the WM resulting from changes in intracranial small vessels will rise.

Search Methods

We searched PubMed, Science Direct and Web of Science databases between 1970 and 2017 to identify reports of CVD and stroke published from Africa over the last 45 years. For this systematic review, we searched for studies on stroke prevalence, incidence, morbidity, mortality, TOAST, risk factors, cerebrovascular accident in all Africa. Both hospital and non-hospital cases as well as population-based studies were included. We searched for cognitive impairment, mild cognitive impairment, VCI, dementia and VaD. All of the countries in Africa were systematically used as search items in segments. Thus, each segment included countries in North, West, Central, East and Southern African countries. We also specifically looked at all abstracts from sub-Saharan countries. In total, we initially found 2,350 titles or abstracts. These were pruned to 523 and finally we selected 120 abstracts to pursue further. Only abstracts in English were included. Case or study details were not available for all and in the final analysis, 65 key papers were included. The INTERSTROKE, SIREN and Tanzanian Stroke Incidence Study (TSIP) or Hai District projects outputs were identified to be the mainstay of this systematic review.

Age, Gender and Ethnicity

In high-income countries (HICs), old age remains as one of the strongest risk factors for ischaemic strokes and other types of CVD. It involves arteriosclerotic changes in the cerebral vasculature and cardiovascular system and often both, that may begin in middle age considerably prior to the manifestation of an overt or clinically evident event. Early or subtle changes may not necessarily be recognised clinically but are evident radiologically as white matter (WM) changes or silent lesions, most often in the form of subcortical ischaemic changes. For example, in developed countries typically 20–22% of healthy elderly people will exhibit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-defined silent brain infarcts and up to 50% of these are detected in selected patient cohorts [148]. We do not have similar statistics for Africa.

As in HICs, increasing age is the strongest non-modifiable risk factor for stroke in Africa as demonstrated in different cohort and population studies including the TSIP [149], INTERSTROKE [96] and SIREN [109]. Background and ethnicity also contribute to differences in the age at which strokes occur [38]. For first ever strokes, black patients were younger by a decade (mean age 51) than white patients. While stroke severity was similar; more black compared to white patients exhibited cerebral haemorrhage (27% vs 15%). This was also evident in the SIREN case-control study, which recorded baseline odds ratios for age &gt; 50 years was 5.5 vs 3.9 for haemorrhagic and ischemic strokes respectively, [109]. Population-attributable risk for ischemic stroke was 61% second to hypertension at 87%.

As above, lacunar strokes (28% vs 22%) and total anterior circulation infarcts (28% vs 22%) tend to be more common in black Africans. Interestingly, large vessel atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease were very uncommon (1%) as a cause in black patients with stroke. This is consistent with the lack of carotid artery stenosis as a significant cause of stroke in an incident cohort in Tanzania [68] but may not be universal in Africa (see below). Hypertension (70% vs 68%) and diabetes (14 vs 15%) were as common in black as in white stroke patients, but mean cholesterol levels were lower (4.6 vs 5.3 mmol/L) and cigarette smoking less frequent in black patients (23 vs 54%) [109].

Stroke Subtypes in Africa

Compared to the HICs, the overall proportions of haemorrhagic strokes in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) are phenomenally high [75]. Whereas this figure is ~12% in HICs, in SSA it ranged from 15% in Kenya [67], 41% in Ethiopia [47] and an incredible 50% recorded to have intracerebral haemorrhages with 16% sub-arachnoid haemorrhages [132] in hospital-based samples. Patients with ischemic stroke were significantly older compared to those with intracerebral haemorrhages. Among these 16% had sub-arachnoid haemorrhage [132]. In an earlier study from Ethiopia [156], haemorrhagic strokes were reported to be even higher at 57% of all patients and 59% among those who had a CT scan during the reported period from 2000 to 2001. Hypertension (&gt;140/90 mmHg) and lack of adherence to medication were cited as the main risk factors for the haemorrhagic strokes, which also included subarachnoid haemorrhage. However, the proportions of haemorrhagic strokes in the community may actually be closer to that in developed countries at 17% indicated by a Tanzania study involving urban and rural populations [150].

In recent years, the classification systems for stroke have enabled better understanding of the pathophysiology of CVD, particularly with a view to identifying precise substrates of motor and cognitive function outcomes and designing trials to reduce recurrent stroke injury. These systems have provided knowledge on the frequencies of ischaemic strokes in hospital and community based settings. While none of the subtype classification systems is flawless [15, 86], the Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) has been recently widely utilised for evaluating the pathophysiology of clinical stroke. With regard to the developed countries, the TOAST classification [1] suggests atherosclerotic or large artery disease (LAD) and cerebral embolism (CE) are the main causes of infarctions associated with major arterial territories, which may be admixed in cortical and subcortical regions (Figure 1). Thromboembolic events are responsible for up to 50% of all ischaemic strokes whereas intracranial SVD causes 20–25% of the infarcts (Figure 1). Strokes of undetermined causes are identified most frequently but this category may contain several cases admixed with small artery occlusion [27, 84]. This analysis also suggested that SVD rather than LAD is more common in non-white populations [55, 144].

The meagre available data on TOAST classification in Africa over the last 20 years from 2000–2017 indicates that in the hospital based populations frequency of LAD is more or less similar to that in HICs at 15% [60, 79, 97, 109]. Whereas CE strokes were a less common cause of strokes in Africa, small vessel disease (SVD) at nearly 30% was much higher than in white populations of HICs (Figure 1). Strokes from other causes also tend to be higher in Africa. The higher SVD frequencies among Africans was also noted in the South London Ethnicity and Stroke Study which reported SVD at 29% per TOAST classification in black people of African origin [55]. It is plausible that certain genetic factors predispose to more SVD among Africans [2]. In this respect, we have recently reported an association between a risk locus on the apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) gene, SNP rs73885319, and SVD ischaemic stroke in a cohort of indigenous West African stroke patients [5].

The lacunar subtype of ischaemic strokes was common followed by large-artery atherosclerosis and CE strokes. Eighty seven percent of haemorrhagic strokes were attributed to hypertension on the basis of the SMASH-U classification [109] providing further impetus to address this risk factor at the population level to mitigate the occurrence of this fatal stroke type among Africans. Indeed, although hypertension and current alcohol use were significantly associated with haemorrhagic stroke compared with ischaemic stroke, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, and cardiac disease were conversely more associated with ischaemic than haemorrhagic strokes. Small vessel alterations are very common and mostly involve arteriolosclerosis. They are associated with lacunar infarcts predominantly occurring in the WM, basal ganglia and thalamus. WM disease or subcortical leukoencephalopathy with incomplete infarction is a common pathological change associated with dementia [41]. Others features include borderzone (watershed) infarctions, laminar necrosis and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA).

While it is possible that CAA is contributory as a cause of haemorrhagic strokes mainly cortical in many Africans [109], there appear no established reports of familial CAA. There are now more than 10 different hereditary CAAs caused by mutations in different genes [123, 155] but none have been yet described in Africa. CAA most often occurs in Alzheimer’s disease [99] but it can be found in CVD in the absence of Alzheimer pathology [35]. This association may be attributable to the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, as Africans tend to have a high frequency of the allele.

The undetermined and other causes of stroke reported in Africa may include whole spectrum of vasculopathies and angiopathies, which either lead to stenosis or alter the haemodynamics of flow (Table 1). Many of them related to prevalent infectious diseases and several reported in younger and paediatric patients [60, 100]. However, these include cerebral amyloid angiopathy, aneurysms, fibromuscular dysplasia, arterial dissections and collagen vascular disease [59]. Furthermore, CVD involving haematological and metabolic disorders have also been reported that include sickle cell anaemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, prothrombotic states, antiphospholipid syndrome, hyper-homocysteinemia and mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes have also been reported. A recently described large vessel vasculopathy involving the aorta and femoral and carotid arteries, resulting in either multiple aneurysm formation or occlusive disease was reported in younger subjects. An infective agent was not identified but aetiologically these lesions might be the result of a leucocytoclastic vasculitis of the vasa vasorum or periadventitial vessels [34]. Hospital-based retrospective studies have reported strokes due to direct cardiac or systemic large vessel abnormalities include mitral stenosis, cardiac-arrhythmias cardio-myopathy, left ventricular hypertrophy, and infective endocarditis, and atrial septal aneurysm, carotid plaques with or without stenosis.

Among the secondary causes of stroke or cerebral ischaemia, many sectors of Africa are afflicted with various vasculitides associated with infections. Both primary CNS vasculitis and systemic vasculitis with CNS manifestations occur but their frequencies are not known. Primary angiitis of the CNS or cerebral vasculitis per se appear to be rare. However, the most important rapidly emerging cause of ischaemic strokes is related to HIV infection [23, 24]. Several mechanisms may be involved including opportunistic infections, vasculopathy, CE and coagulopathy. While the occurrence of stroke and HIV infection might often be co-incidental, HIV-associated vasculopathy describes various cerebrovascular changes. These include stenosis or aneurysms, vasculitis, and accelerated atherosclerosis caused directly or indirectly by HIV infection. A range of vasculitides with CNS involvement particularly in relation to HIV has been reported [25, 34, 61]. These non-specific vasculitides do not fit into any of the characteristic patterns of systemic vasculitis. As part of the immunocompromise caused by HIV, a granulomatous inflammation may involve the leptomeninges, small arteries and veins as a primary angiitis of the CNS associated with high mortality. Cerebral vasculitis could also occur in later stages of the Schistosomiasis mansoni infection in endemic areas that causes severe vascular damage in cerebral vessels to produce stroke-like episodes [32].

Systemic vasculitides with CNS manifestations occur with almost the same frequency as in developed countries [49]. Systemic large vessel vasculitides include Takayasu arteritis (age &lt;50 years) and giant cell arteritis (GCA) or cranial arteritis (age &gt;50 years). In GCA, the involvement of CNS arteries is very rare (&lt;2%). In one retrospective study, 20% of the patients identified with Takayasu disease had a primarily cerebrovascular presentation [61]. Neuroimaging revealed increased velocities in the anterior circulation with turbulence and multiple areas of hypoperfusion in the 7 cases investigated. Other vasculitides included Bechet’s disease with 13% of the patients having CNS involvement [4]. Medium-sized vessels are affected in classical polyarteritis nodosa. In classical polyarteritis nodosa, CNS involvement with headaches and encephalopathy is known in up to 20%. Small vessel vasculitides are separated into immune complex-mediated e.g. cryoglobulinaemic, immunoglobulin (Ig)A-associated, hypocomplementaemic anti-C1q and ANCA-associated variants including microscopic polyangiitis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis Wegener and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis Churg–Strauss. In these small vessel vasculitides, CNS involvement is rare recorded to be ~10% in granulomatosis with polyangiitis Wegener and ~15% in eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis Churg–Strauss. Hypersensitivity vasculitis resulting in several patterns of vasculitis and angiocentric immunoproliferative vasculitis are also recognised in Africa [34].

Cerebral small vessel diseases in Africa

Several familial stroke disorders also appear to cause cognitive impairment or dementia. Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is the most common form of hereditary SVDs [33]. CADASIL is caused by over 250 distinct mutations in the NOTCH3 gene. Recent extensive exome analysis suggested that the frequency of distinctive epidermal growth factor region cysteine altering NOTCH3 mutations appear to be 100-fold greater than simply based on CADASIL prevalence [126]. The frequencies of NOTCH3 mutations are not known among North or sub-Saharan Africans but these frequencies among African Americans are estimated to be 0.7/1000 compared to 1.6/1000 in the European population and a phenomenal 11.4/1000 in the South Asians. However, genotyping confirmed mutations in NOTH3 or appropriate morphological evidence inn skin biopsies have been reported in peoples of Tunisia, Sudan, Tanzania and South Africa [28, 122]. In most of these cases, the relevant clinical and laboratory features of CADASIL are indicated by the characteristic radiological WM disease and family history, ischaemic events, migraine or cognitive impairment. All of the skin biopsies were positive, and the onset of migraine in our patients was considerably earlier. In two of the South African cases, a new finding was the normality of visual, somatosensory and auditory evoked potentials. Other familial forms of cerebral arteriopathies such as cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy or CARASIL [58] or the cerebroretinal vasculopathies [155] have not been reported. In the latter, retinal microvessels undergo severe distortions and become tortuous predictive of the SVD type of pathology with multilaminated vascular basement membranes in the brain [65]. There is also not doubt that some rarer and less characterised hereditary SVDs including the recently characterised collagen IV (COL4) disorders [136, 147] also exist in Africa.

Vascular and Other Risk Factors for Stroke

Key vascular disease risk factors for stroke include hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidaemia and cardiac disease (Table 2). There is a high burden of these cardiometabolic disorders in SSA that may also be modified by different genetic traits [2]. Lifestyle factors including lack of a healthy diet e.g. regular meat but low consumption of leafy vegetables, physical inactivity as well as psychosocial factors e.g. exposure to stressful situations are listed has high risk in both men and women as well as for both stroke types. Both urban and rural Africa are also not spared from emerging risk factors of air pollution (indoor household air pollution from solid fuels and outdoor ambient particulate matter pollution) and stress, which likely contribute to the current trends in stroke incidence [48].

Hypertension

Africans have a higher burden of hypertension with resultant cardiovascular mortality and end-organ damage than Caucasians [83, 88]. As a matter of fact, individuals of African ancestry have been shown to be more susceptible to elevations in blood pressure compared to Caucasians, with the increase in stroke risk being 3-times greater in individuals of African ancestry compared to Caucasians [62]. Individuals of African ancestry have greater burden of vascular risk factors (e.g., early age of onset, greater severity, worse control of BP) and may also have more brain injury from high BP and other vascular risk factors [30, 82]. In the INTERSTROKE study the adjusted OR for hypertension among Africans was reported to be of 4.0 (99% CI 2.6–6.2). This was the highest within different regions included in the survey. However, in the recent SIREN study, an even higher estimate of 19 (95% CI 12–31) for stroke overall was reported with a higher effect size for haemorrhagic strokes compared to ischaemic types [109]. Hypertension [91] in LMICs is exacerbated by a lack of or ineffective population campaigns (i.e. salt reduction), obesity [37, 94, 120] or weak health care systems [42, 72].

The high prevalence of hypertension among Africans may be attributed to decreased production and increased degradation of nitric oxide (NO) resulting in endothelial dysfunction [88] Effective interventions are needed to minimize the projected cardiovascular disease trends. Inorganic nitrate supplementation was shown to reduce systolic blood pressure, improve endothelial function and cerebral blood flow in young and older healthy participants [17, 29, 76, 87, 118, 152]. Inorganic nitrate supplementation may be associated with improved executive function and motor skills [51, 69, 152]. The mechanisms linking dietary nitrate to improved cardiovascular health appear to be mediated by an increased NO generation via the non-enzymatic (nitrate) NO pathway [81].

Diabetes

It is projected that by 2030, SSA will have 18.7 million people with type 2 diabetes representing 1.6 times greater numbers since the year 2000 [153]. As elsewhere, diabetes in Africa is attributable to both genetic and lifestyle factors. Self-reported diabetes or measured values of more than 6.5% HbA1c was considered a relatively strong factor for stroke [96] and among the top 11 modifiable factors associated with stroke [109]. Diabetes was more associated with ischaemic strokes than haemorrhagic strokes. In the SIREN study, there was nearly three times greater frequency of diabetes among stroke patients than controls and stronger risk for stroke in those under 50 years compared to those older than 50 years (OR 5.8 vs 2.4). While it is not clear whether this affects cerebral SVD, it is plausible that high numbers of diabetics will eventually contribute to the burden of cognitive impairment.

Dyslipidaemia

Dyslipidaemia is mainly characterized by increases in triglycerides, apolioprotein B and low-density lipoprotein and decreased high-density lipoprotein. In general, the proportions of these lipids are similarly between HICs and Africa. In the INTERSTROKE study, the prevalence of apoliopoprotein B/A1 in stroke controls was nearly 2 fold higher in Africans compared to Western Europeans, North Americans and Australians with ORs for stroke as 2.5 vs 1.8, and PARs 45 vs 24, respectively [96]. As with diabetes, dyslipidaemia was among the top 11 modifiable risk factors associated with stroke [109]. Moreover, younger patients (&lt;50 years) are at greater at risk for stroke than those above 50 years of age (ORs 2.8 vs 1.7). In addition to lifestyle habits, genetic factors likely play a significant role in determining the variability in blood lipid concentrations among Africans [2].

Carotid Artery Disease

The TOAST classification suggests there the frequency of LAD strokes is similar between SSA and HICs (Figure 1). While LAD may incorporate other systemic vessels including the aorta and coronary arteries, carotid artery stenosis or disease (CAD) is a key substrate of strokes. The true prevalence of carotid artery stenosis or disease (CAD) in Africa is unknown. The prevalence and severity of CAD was significantly higher in a post-mortem sample of Nigerians compared to similar examination undertaken four decades ago.[46, 154]. Our previous Tanzanian Stroke Incidence study indicated there was no significant CAD in the Hai District [68]. However, recent studies suggest carotid artery stenosis or disease (CAD) by assessing carotid intima-medial thickness (CIMT) in a hospital-based cohort of hypertensive Nigerian Africans appears a sensitive indicator for the stratification of cardiovascular phenotype and risk [105]. It also better predicts stroke than other cardiovascular risk calculators of Western origin [108]. Similarly, in a multiracial North American study, racial disparities showed that blacks had more severe arteriolar sclerosis and atherosclerosis [20] whereas significant racial disparities were reported in stroke among blacks showing more severe disease, [125] worse cognitive outcomes,[43] and higher mortality.[106]

Smoking

Consistent data from the INTERSTROKE and SIREN studies suggest former or current smokers are at high risk of any stroke. In a South African study of young patients (mean 44, range 15–49 years) hypertension (31%) and smoking (19%) were the most commonly encountered risk factors (Hoffmann M, 1998). Similarly, in the SIREN cohort tobacco smoking was the second strongest factor after hypertension as a risk for all strokes. ORs were 76&gt; 7.5 &gt;5.5 in order of hypertension &gt; smoking &gt; age for haemorrhagic strokes with similar order for ischaemic strokes. However, the population attributable risk was much less at 1.5% below the order hypertension (87%) &gt; age (61%) &gt; dyslipidaemia (38%) &gt; raised waist hip ratio (30%) &gt; &gt; regular meat consumption (28%) &gt; diabetes (26%) [109]..

Neuroimaging of stroke in Africa

Neuroimaging is an important tool to document in vivo the impact of vascular damage to the brain. Neuroimaging also complements histopathology to decipher the pathophysiology of VCI, and is a crucial technique for the identification of such damage in patients with cognitive decline. While large city hospitals and private practice-based institutions may have computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the overall availability of neuroimaging services in Africa is insufficient. In a recent Ghanaian survey of hospital services for acute stroke care, 64% of 11 surveyed hospitals had a functional CT scan but only 18 % offered 24 hours services. Functional MRI and carotid Doppler ultrasonography services were available in 27% and 21% respectively of the surveyed hospitals [19]. In places where imaging services are available their affordability and accessibility when maintained and functioning are also of concern. Thus, to provide evidence-based stroke services and improve stroke care in resource poor settings, public health policy campaigns are necessary to not only reduce stroke-related morbidity and mortality [19] but also enhance stroke diagnosis. In one study, clinical accuracy for stroke diagnosis was ~66% while diagnostic errors were apparent in 35%, particularly in those patients at older age [103]. This underscores significant misdiagnosis despite use of current diagnostic criteria and scoring systems and the potential for providing inadequate care of patients. However, research studies have reported that WMHs were consistently more severe in patients with stroke than in patients without [98]. This finding was independent of age and gender [7]. Similarly, global and medial temporal lobe atrophy determined by MRI were associated with cognitive decline after stroke [8]. Prospective studies in large cohorts are necessary to determine the patterns of WM changes and brain atrophy in predicting stroke and its recurrence as well as other CVDs independent of other known risk factors. Wider use of neuroimaging would also allow detection of subclinical vascular brain disease and SVD associated with hypertension, other vascular disease risk factors or frailty.

Vascular Cognitive Impairment, Vascular Cognitive Disorders and VaD in Africa

Increasing evidence shows that higher cumulative vascular risk factor load worsens cognition [13]. The mechanisms by which individuals of African ancestry within studies including African-Americans [31] are more prone to VCI and vascular cognitive disorders (VCD) [43, 115] are not fully understood but hypertension is likely to be a significant one. Cognitive impairment resulting from brain vascular changes or injury is likely to be the most prevalent worldwide. There are sparse data on VCI and VCD in Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa, cognitive impairment from all causes was estimated to range from 6.3% to 25% in adults over 50 years of age [85]. Given these estimates, the true prevalence of VCI is likely high in Africa.

The concept of VCI [53, 56, 95] has been very useful but it continually challenges the correlation between the pathophysiology and degree of impaired cognition in the continuum of VCI. Recently, the VCI diagnostic concept was refined in a Delphi type of analysis [139, 140]. The consensus adopted use of ‘Mild’ and ‘Major’ forms of VCI. The use of ‘Mild’ and ‘Major’ subdivisions for the severity of impairment accords with the revised terminology in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-5 (DSM-5) and with the introduction of categories of mild and major VCD [18]. The major neurocognitive disorder classification, meant to describe frank dementia as a substitute for VaD appears to fit better with patients, and more adapted to neurodegenerative cognitive disorders for which memory impairment is not predominant but comprises prominent frontal lobe change [128]. However, the Major form of VCI is proposed to have four main subtypes including subcortical ischaemic vascular dementia or SIVaD, multi-infarct dementia, post-stroke dementia (PSD) and mixed dementias, which could be determined by significant co-existing neurodegenerative pathology.

Cognitive impairment or dementia following stroke is relatively common [77, 93, 115]. Incident dementia after stroke or PSD may develop within three months or after a stabilisation period of one year or more after the stroke [13, 21, 117]. However, PSD may have a complex aetiology with varying combinations of LAD as well as VaD and neurodegenerative pathology. Stroke injury could unmask other pre-existing disease processes such as Alzheimer’s disease. Majority of PSD in the absence of significant neurodegenerative pathology appears to be VaD [13, 92] fulfilling relevant clinical guidelines for VCI [56]. Furthermore, the presence of any age-related hippocampal Alzheimer type of lesions did not differentiate demented from non-demented post-stroke subjects [6].

There are few prospective studies on VCI or VaD in Africa (Table 3). Consistent with the previous studies on VCI and PSD, our Nigerian study in older stroke survivors [7] found that ~40% had VCI while 8% developed dementia three months after the event. Multiple regression analysis revealed that older age, low education, pre-stroke cognitive decline and medial temporal lobe atrophy were independently associated with cognitive dysfunction whereas pre-stroke daily intake of fish was protective. In a recent Ghanaian study [131], 34% of stroke survivors developed VCI whereas 14% had VaD. Increasing age, lack of formal education and worse functional disability on the modified Rankin scale were again identified as strong risk factors. Survivors diagnosed with VaD had the poorest health-related quality of life. These reports suggest that nearly 50% of older West African stroke survivors develop cognitive impairment or dementia. More than 30% of stroke survivors may develop delirium within days after the stroke majority 66% of which is hypoactive [101]. Those with severe stroke injury and developing were more prone to succumb to dementia or early death. These observations are further consistent with a study on mild cognitive impairment [121], where the presence of vascular risk factors ranging from hypertension (64%) to stroke (14%) were contributed to MCI (27%) and dementia (8%) in South Africans. In accord with previous conclusions on modifiable risk factors, all these studies collectively emphasize the vital role of education and healthy nutrition in building reserves to improve or sustain cognitive function after stroke or CVD.

Previous systematic analyses suggested the prevalence of dementia in LMICs is relatively lower than that in HICs [71, 119]. A more recent analysis involving 10 studies estimated an overall prevalence of ~2.4% in adults over 50 years. This converts to nearly a million people with dementia in Africa [50]. Dementia prevalence was higher in women with little variation between regions. Only few African studies have determined rates of dementia subtypes. In general, the prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease is greater than VaD. VaD varies between 17 and 41% for all causes of dementia depending on the type of study sample (Table 3). This is in accord with the previous systematic analysis, which reported Alzheimer disease was 57% whereas VaD was 27%. The main risk factors for dementia even in Africa were older age, female gender and presence of cardiovascular disease. In the Egyptian study [44], the prevalence of VaD in over 60 year olds was estimated as 1.4%. In our Tanzanian study [111], while there was a greater proportion of VaD, the overall prevalence was estimated to be 2.6%. A previous diagnosis of diabetes mellitus was independently associated with greater odds of having VaD than Alzheimer’s disease in the Hai District.

As with all other dementias, confirmation of VaD diagnosis in all these studies is only definitive after post-mortem examination. Autopsies are rarely performed in Africa but much needed to reflect true prevalence and incidence rates of VaD that may also be influenced by inconsistencies in diagnostic criteria, sampling methods and variations in subject or country demographics, morbidity and mortality trends.

Treatment and Interventions

While it is important to uncover new knowledge, particularly from genetically different African populations with wide allelic diversity and low linkage disequilibrium [10, 12, 104, 143], it is imperative to design effective lifestyle, dietary and pharmacological interventional and translational strategies for the best health impact [26]. Model stroke services in Africa are varied and currently sparse in respect of focused systems of care delivery including pre-hospital, hyperacute, acute, subacute and rehabilitative phases of care [114]. There is paucity of data on the organization of prehospital stroke services while only three African countries (South Africa, Egypt and Morocco) have reported experiences on thrombolysis. The uptake of dedicated stroke units also appears limited but slowly growing across the continent.

Thrombolytic therapy (thrombolysis) using recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) for acute ischemic stroke care was not available in any of recently surveyed hospitals. Aspirin therapy is often administered in study hospitals. Although only a fraction of stroke patients receive rtPA even in the developed countries (e.g. &lt;10% in the US) despite efforts to increase use of such reperfusion therapies [66], 25–30% of those who undergo the reperfusion treatment experience successful arterial recanalization. In Africa, the most frequent subtype of ischaemic stroke was cerebral SVD, which may further benefit from rtPA because of the low risk of haemorrhagic transformation [135] in this TOAST subtype.

In addition, endovascular thrombectomy has become available in the developed countries, which can achieve considerably higher recanalization rates approaching 90% in acute ischemic stroke patients [52]. Availability of several new devices such as a stent retriever has opened a new era in management of large vessel occlusion caused by large artery disease and CE stroke. In Africa, the sparse number of stroke units as well as the high cost of such reperfusion treatments, limited resources, pre-hospital delay, and insufficient post-hospital infrastructures may deter against their widespread use. However, implementation of rtPA and endovascular thrombectomy hold promise in acute stroke management. There are several economic and regulatory hurdles to overcome this issue but health care professionals and policy makers should cooperate to improve stroke care delivery with the aid of scientific organizations. The World Stroke Organization (WSO) has produced the global stroke services guidelines and action plan as a template [80], which may be adapted to guide development of protocols for developing stroke care services in all regions of the world, but particularly LMICs such as those of Africa where stroke care services are currently poorly organised. Task shifting and task sharing approaches to effective stroke care are therefore very important in Africa given the low availability of competent stroke clinicians [11, 90].

Prevention

Risk factor control is important to prevent stroke worldwide [48]. For instance, Japan had the highest stroke mortality in the world in 1965 [145]. However, it rapidly declined by ~80% during the period from 1965 to 1990. In parallel, the prevalence of hypertension declined substantially from 1965 to 1990 [145]. Salt consumption in the northern part of Japan was more than 25 g/day in the 1950s but now it is decreased to ~13 g/day partially due to population and community campaigns, although this figure is still higher than that of the WHO recommended intake of 5g/day to prevent cardiovascular disease [146]. (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/43685/9789241547178_eng.pdf;jsessionid=E128B9F03597B7D6B189EA6AE2C532B1?sequence=1). In Africa, primitive, primary and secondary prevention models exist mostly within the context of clinical research with promising results [107, 138]. However, salt reduction by population or regional campaigns need to be vigorously undertaken in Africa to reduce the burden and cognitive sequelae of stroke incidence. The prevalence of obesity is also increasing, which will inevitably increase the prevalence of diabetes mellitus and metabolic disorders. The time for management of these modifiable risk factors is ripe for prevention of stroke in African countries.

Summary

Stroke and other CVDs are increasing in Africa. Hypertension is the strongest modifiable risk factor for stroke in Africa. Other modifiable factors include diabetes, dyslipidaemia, physical inactivity and unhealthy diet. In contrast to HICs, strokes attributed to cerebral SVD appear high among sub-Saharan Africans. Raised blood pressure may explain most of the incidence of SVD-related strokes but there are likely other contributing vascular risk factors including dietary constituents which influence vascular disease. High burdens of disease will contribute higher incidence of cognitive impairment and dementia. Despite incomplete data, it is apparent that controlling risk factors and prevention strategies will be beneficial for reducing the morbidity and mortality as well as lessen the burden of dementia.

We are thankful to Arthur Oakley and Janet Slade as loyal members of the Neurovascular Research Group for providing continued technical support.

Funding Sources

RNK’s research on elderly stroke survivors has been supported by the Medical Research Council, RCUK Newcastle Centre for Brain Ageing and Vitality, Medical Research Council (UK), Alzheimer’s Research UK, the Dunhill Medical Trust, UK and the Newcastle National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre in Ageing and Age Related Diseases, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals National Health Service Foundation Trust. MOO and ROA are supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) U54 HG007479 and Grant CTR16A012 from the College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Nigeria. ROA is also supported by the International Brain Research Organization (IBRO) Return Home Fellowship. MI is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 17H04670.

Figure 1 Stroke subtypes by the TOAST criteria in Africa

1A and 1B, Pathophysiology of stroke subtypes according to TOAST [1]. Figures show proportions (mean percent) of strokes resulting from large artery disease (LAD), CE, cardioembolic (CE), lacunar infarction or small vessel disease (SVD), other (Other) and undermined (Und) causes. 1A, In HICs, CE is the most common cause of strokes with SVD a little less frequent. Patients with CE having small infarcts commonly develop VaD. The frequency of ICH in these cohorts was a mean of 15% (range 9.6–14%). Chart was constructed from 13 different studies involving 12,931 patients from both hospital and non-hospital or community based cohorts in Western Europe and USA [14, 22, 27, 55, 57, 64, 74, 84, 113, 116, 130, 133, 144]. 1B, In SSA, SVD is the most frequent cause of stroke. All types of primary insults causing stroke or cerebrovascular disease can lead to cognitive impairment. Chart shows proportions of stroke pathophysiology collated from 5 different studies involving 2,843 patients from both hospital and community based cohorts in Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Mozambique, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda [59, 67, 79, 96, 109] The risk factors associated with particularly SVD include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidaemia, hyperhomocysteinaemia, chronic kidney disease, infection and obstructive sleep aponea. Lifestyle factors such as smoking, obesity, alcohol abuse and regular meat consumption are other factors. Abbreviations: CE, cardioembolic; HIC, high-income countries; LVD, large vessel disease; SSA, sub-Saharan Africa; SVD, small vessel disease; TOAST, Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment; Und, undetermined. Chart 1A was adapted from [70].

Table 1 Common and rare causes of stroke pathophysiology in Africa

Primary or
Secondary
Vascular
Disorder(s)*	Common conditions	Predominant Tissue
changes	Frequencies
in Africa
(rare/low+,
medium ++,
high+++)	
Atherosclerotic disease	Cardiac and carotid atherosclerosis	Cortical and territorial infarcts; WML	++	
Infarcts, laminar necrosis, rarefaction	++	
Embolic disease	Cardioembolism	Large and small infarcts	+++	
Arteriolosclerosis	Cerebral small vessel disease	Cortical infarcts, lacunar infarcts/lacunes, microinfarcts, WML	+++	
Hypertensive vasculopathy	+++	
Non-atherosclerotic non-inflammatory vasculopathies	Arterial dissections (carotid, vertebral and intracranial), fibromuscular dysplasia, dolichoectatic basilar artery, large artery kinking and coiling, radiation induced angiopathy, moyamoya disease	No pattern of brain infarctions: haemodynamic, thromboembolic, or due to occlusion of a perforating artery. Subarachnoid haemorrhage; lacunar infarcts, PVS	+	
	Aneurysms- sacular, berry, fusifom, cerebral	Haemorrhagic infarcts, herniation	++	
Vascular malformations: cavernous hemiangioma, arteriovenous, capillary	Rarefaction, WML		
Cerebral venous thrombosis	Subcortical infarcts(thalamus), lobar haemorrhages		
Amyloid angiopathies	Hereditary CAAs (Amyloid β, prion protein, cystatin C, transthyretin, gelsolin)	Cortical microinfarcts, lacunar infarcts, WML	+	
Monogenic stroke disorders	CADASIL, CARASIL, retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophies (RVCLs), Moyamoya disease, Hereditary angiopathy, nephropathy, aneurysm and muscle cramps(HANAC), COL4 disorders	Lacunar infarcts/lacunes, microinfarcts, WML	+	
Monogenic disorders involving stroke	Fabry disease, familial hemiplegic migraine, hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia, Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Psuedoxanthoma elasticum, Arterial tortuosity syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, polycystic kidney disease; Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Ricklinghausen disease), Carney syndrome (Faciallentiginosis and myxoma)	Cortical and subcortical infarcts, haemorraghic infarcts	+	
Metabolic disorders	Mitochondrial disorders (MELAS, MERRF, Leigh’s disease, MIRAS), Fibromuscular dysplasia, Menkes disease, Homocystinuria, Tangier’s disease	Cortical and subcortical stroke-like lesions, microcystic cavitation, cortical petechial haemorrahges, gliosis, WML	++	
Haematological disorders	Paraproteinaemia, coagulopathies (antiphospholipid antibodies, SLE, nephrotic syndrome, Sneddon syndrome, deficiencies in clotting cascade factors e.g. protein S, C, Z, antithrombin III, plasminogen)	Cortical and subcortical infarcts, ICH and subarachnoid haemorrhages	++	
Vasospastic disorders	Subarachnoid haemorrahge, Migraine related strokes, paroxysmal hypertension, drug induced vasconstriction	Cortical and subcortical small infarcts	+	
Data summarised and updated from several source references. Africa also has proportionally large numbers of young strokes and cerebrovascular disorders [60, 100]. Countries reporting were: included: Benin, Botswana, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia, Uganda, South Africa, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Several disorders may also occur with other co-morbidities such as coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidaemia, hypercoagulability, renal disease, atrial fibrillation and valvular heart disease.

* Other miscellaneous causes of stroke including mechanical, invention induced or rare genetic syndromes such as trauma, iatrogenic, decompression sickness, air or fat embolism, transplantation and Werner’s syndrome can lead to cognitive impairment.

Abbreviations: CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL; cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; ICH, intracerebral haemorrhage; MCA, middle cerebral artery; MELAS, Mitochondrial Myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Stroke-like Episodes; MERRF, Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres; MIRAS; PCA, posterior cerebral artery; PVS, perivascular spaces; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; WML, white matter lesion.

Table 2 Unmodifiable and Modifiable Risk Factors for All Strokes in Africa

Factor	Parameter
definition	INTERSTROKE†
OR and PAR	SIREN†
OR and PAR	
Age	&gt;50 years	-	4.5	
Education	Some vs none	-	1.4	
Family history of CVD	Self- reported CVD or stroke	-	1.3	
Hypertension	&gt;140/90 mm Hg	4.0	19.4	
Diabetes	Glucose &gt;7 mmol/L; HbA1c 6.5%	1.5	2.6	
Dyslipidemia	Total cholesterol &gt;5.2 mmol/L	2.5	1.9	
Smoking (tobacco)	Current or former smoker	1.6	4.4	
Cardiac disease††	Any cardiac problem‡	3.6	1.7	
Waist-to-Hip ratio	Measured in cm	1.6	1.5	
Low Physical Activity	Moderate activity, &gt;4hr per week	0.95	2.1¶	
Psychosocial Factors	Stress, life events, depression	N/A	1.9	
Alcohol intake	&gt;14–21 drinks per week	5.9	-	
Diet	Healthy diet	0.78‖	-	
Meat intake	Daily or weekly	-	1.6	
Salt intake	Added salt	-	2.1	
Sugar intake	Daily or weekly	-	1.2	
Low Vegetable intake	Not daily or weekly	-	2.4	
Data summarised from two major studies assessing risk factors in Africa [96, 109]. The countries represented in Africa were Ghana, Mozambique, Nigeria, Tanzania, South Africa, Sudan and Uganda.

† Sample sizes for the stroke cases were 973 and 2118, respectively.

†† For atrial fibrillation or flutter associated with ischaemic strokes in INTERSTROKE study OR value was 4.4.

‡ cardiomyopathy, heart failure, ishaemic heart disease and valvular heart diseases.

¶ OR for regular physical inactivity.

‖ OR for healthy cardiovascular diet intake.

Abbreviations: INTERSTROKE, International case-control study in stroke ; N/A, not available; OR, odds ratio; PAR, population attributable risk; SIREN, Stroke Investigative Research and Educational Network.

Table 3 Proportions of VaD estimated from Dementia prevalence estimates in various countries in Africa

Country, Location;
Type of sample	Sample
size,
Age
(yrs)*	Dementia
Prevalence
(%)	Alzheimer’s
Disease (%)	VaD (%)	Reference	
Africa, 10 countries; Community		2.4%	57%	27%	[50]	
SSA, 5 countries (Benin, Botswana, CAR, Congo, Nigeria); Community/clinic¶	10,413; &gt;65 yrs	0–10%	54–83%	8–31%	[85]	
Nigeria, Abeokuta/Ibadan; Hospital/ Clinic	240,294;	0.05%	57%	17%	[16]	
Egypt, Al Kharga District; Community	8173, &gt;50 yrs	2.3%	51%	29%	[45]	
South Africa, Durban; Hospital	140; &gt;60 yrs‡	8%	-	40%	[121]	
Egypt, Al-Quseir city,	2,222; &gt;60 yrs†	3.8%	48%	37% (1.4%)†	[44]	
Tanzania, Hai District; Community	1198; &gt;60 yrs	6.4%	48%	41% (2.6%)††	[112],[111]	
Egypt, Quena/Aswan; Community	691; &gt;60 yrs†	5.1%	-	-	[73]	
Congo, Brazzaville, Bangui, CAR; Community	910;	6.1%	69,%, 83%	31%, 18%	[129]	
Data summarised from several references as shown. VaD cases in prospective stroke survivors studies not included [7, 131].

* Age in years (yrs) shows youngest age from which sample was screened.

¶ Range shown from studies in 4 SSA countries included in the analysis [85].

† Dementia was 2.0% in &gt;50 year olds, 3.8% &gt;60 years and 13.5%–100% in individuals over age 80 years [44].

†† Crude prevalence rate [111].

‡ Vascular risk factors were strongly associated with 80% of dementia cases.

Abbreviations: CAR, Central African Republic, SSA, sub-Saharan Africa.

Highlights

Hypertension is the strongest modifiable risk factor for stroke in Africa.

Cerebral SVD appears high among sub-Saharan Africans.

Prevalence estimates of VaD is 2–3% and delayed dementia after stroke is 10–20%.

Demographic transition in both urban and rural settings will likely increase strokes.

It timely control vascular risk to reduce stroke and cognitive impairment in Africa.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Competing interests

We declare no competing interests.


1 Adams HP Jr Bendixen BH Kappelle LJ Biller J Love BB Gordon DL Marsh EE 3rd Classification of subtype of acute ischemic stroke. Definitions for use in a multicenter clinical trial. TOAST. Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment Stroke 24 1993 35 41 7678184
2 Adebamowo SN Tekola-Ayele F Adeyemo AA Rotimi CN Genomics of Cardiometabolic Disorders in Sub-Saharan Africa Public Health Genomics 20 2017 9 26 28482349
3 Adeloye D An estimate of the incidence and prevalence of stroke in Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis PLoS One 9 2014 e100724 24967899
4 Ajose FO Adelowo O Oderinlo O Clinical presentations of Behcet's disease among Nigerians: a 4-year prospective study Int J Dermatol 54 2015 889 897 25494839
5 Akinyemi R Tiwari HK Arnett DK Ovbiagele B Irvin MR Wahab K Sarfo F Srinivasasainagendra V Adeoye A Perry RT Akpalu A Jenkins C Arulogun O Gebregziabher M Owolabi L Obiako R Sanya E Komolafe M Fawale M Adebayo P Osaigbovo G Sunmonu T Olowoyo P Chukwuonye I Obiabo Y Onoja A Akinyemi J Ogbole G Melikam S Saulson R Owolabi M S. Investigators APOL1, CDKN2A/CDKN2B, and HDAC9 polymorphisms and small vessel ischemic stroke Acta Neurol Scand 137 2018 133 141 28975602
6 Akinyemi RO Allan L Oakley A Kalaria R Hippocampal Neurodegenerative Pathology in Post-stroke Dementia Compared to Other Dementias and Ageing Controls Front Neurosci 11 2017 717 29311794
7 Akinyemi RO Allan L Owolabi MO Akinyemi JO Ogbole G Ajani A Firbank M Ogunniyi A Kalaria RN Profile and determinants of vascular cognitive impairment in African stroke survivors: the CogFAST Nigeria Study J Neurol Sci 346 2014 241 249 25238666
8 Akinyemi RO Firbank M Ogbole GI Allan LM Owolabi MO Akinyemi JO Yusuf BP Ogunseyinde O Ogunniyi A Kalaria RN Medial temporal lobe atrophy, white matter hyperintensities and cognitive impairment among Nigerian African stroke survivors BMC Res Notes 8 2015 625 26519155
9 Akinyemi RO Mukaetova-Ladinska EB Attems J Ihara M Kalaria RN Vascular risk factors and neurodegeneration in ageing related dementias: Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia Curr Alzheimer Res 10 2013 642 653 23627757
10 Akinyemi RO Ovbiagele B Akpalu A Jenkins C Sagoe K Owolabi L Sarfo F Obiako R Gebreziabher M Melikam E Warth S Arulogun O Lackland D Ogunniyi A Tiwari H Kalaria RN Arnett D Owolabi MO S.I.a.M.o.t.H.A. Consortium Stroke genomics in people of African ancestry: charting new paths Cardiovasc J Afr 26 2015 S39 49
11 Akinyemi RO Owolabi MO Adebayo PB Akinyemi JO Otubogun FM Uvere E Adeniji O Adeleye O Aridegbe O Taiwo FT Ogun SA Ogunniyi A Task-shifting training improves stroke knowledge among Nigerian non-neurologist health workers J Neurol Sci 359 2015 112 116 26671098
12 Akinyemi RO Owolabi MO Oyeniyi T Ovbiagele B Arnett DK Tiwari HK Walker R Ogunniyi A Kalaria RN S.g.o.H.A. Consortium Neurogenomics in Africa: Perspectives, progress, possibilities and priorities J Neurol Sci 366 2016 213 223 27288810
13 Allan LM Rowan EN Firbank MJ Thomas AJ Parry SW Polvikoski TM O'Brien JT Kalaria RN Long term incidence of dementia, predictors of mortality and pathological diagnosis in older stroke survivors Brain 134 2011 3716 3727 22171356
14 Alzamora MT Sorribes M Heras A Vila N Vicheto M Fores R Sanchez-Ojanguren J Sancho A Group IS Pera G Ischemic stroke incidence in Santa Coloma de Gramenet (ISISCOG), Spain. A community-based study BMC Neurol 8 2008 5 18371212
15 Amarenco P Bogousslavsky J Caplan LR Donnan GA Hennerici MG Classification of stroke subtypes Cerebrovasc Dis 27 2009 493 501 19342825
16 Amoo G Akinyemi RO Onofa LU Akinyemi JO Baiyewu O Ogunlesi AO Ogunniyi A Profile of clinically-diagnosed dementias in a neuropsychiatric practice in Abeokuta, South-Western Nigeria African Journal of Psychiatry 14 2011 377 382 22183468
17 Ashor AW Lara J Siervo M Medium-term effects of dietary nitrate supplementation on systolic and diastolic blood pressure in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis J Hypertens 35 2017 1353 1359 28319596
18 A.P. Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders APA United States 2013
19 Baatiema L Otim M Mnatzaganian G Aikins AD Coombes J Somerset S Towards best practice in acute stroke care in Ghana: a survey of hospital services Bmc Health Services Research 17 2017
20 Barnes LL Leurgans S Aggarwal NT Shah RC Arvanitakis Z James BD Buchman AS Bennett DA Schneider JA Mixed pathology is more likely in black than white decedents with Alzheimer dementia Neurology 85 2015 528 534 26180136
21 Bejot Y Aboa-Eboule C Durier J Rouaud O Jacquin A Ponavoy E Richard D Moreau T Giroud M Prevalence of early dementia after first-ever stroke: a 24-year population-based study Stroke 42 2011 607 612 21233464
22 Bejot Y Caillier M Ben Salem D Couvreur G Rouaud O Osseby GV Durier J Marie C Moreau T Giroud M Ischaemic stroke subtypes and associated risk factors: a French population based study J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 79 2008 1344 1348 18586864
23 Benjamin LA Allain TJ Mzinganjira H Connor MD Smith C Lucas S Joekes E Kampondeni S Chetcuti K Turnbull I Hopkins M Kamiza S Corbett EL Heyderman RS Solomon T The Role of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Associated Vasculopathy in the Etiology of Stroke J Infect Dis 216 2017 545 553 28931222
24 Benjamin LA Bryer A Emsley HC Khoo S Solomon T Connor MD HIV infection and stroke: current perspectives and future directions Lancet Neurol 11 2012 878 890 22995692
25 Benjamin LA Bryer A Lucas S Stanley A Allain TJ Joekes E Emsley H Turnbull I Downey C Toh CH Brown K Brown D Ison C Smith C Corbett EL Nath A Heyderman RS Connor MD Solomon T Arterial ischemic stroke in HIV: Defining and classifying etiology for research studies Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 3 2016 e254 27386505
26 Birbeck GL Meyer AC Ogunniyi A Nervous system disorders across the life course in resource-limited settings Nature 527 2015 S167 171 26580323
27 Bogiatzi C Wannarong T McLeod AI Heisel M Hackam D Spence JD SPARKLE (Subtypes of Ischaemic Stroke Classification System), incorporating measurement of carotid plaque burden: a new validated tool for the classification of ischemic stroke subtypes Neuroepidemiology 42 2014 243 251 24862944
28 Bohlega S Al Shubili A Edris A Alreshaid A Alkhairallah T AlSous MW Farah S Abu-Amero KK CADASIL in Arabs: clinical and genetic findings BMC Med Genet 8 2007 67 17996090
29 Bond V Jr Curry BH Adams RG Asadi MS Millis RM Haddad GE Effects of dietary nitrates on systemic and cerebrovascular hemodynamics Cardiol Res Pract 2013 2013 435629 24455404
30 Brickman AM Schupf N Manly JJ Luchsinger JA Andrews H Tang MX Reitz C Small SA Mayeux R DeCarli C Brown TR Brain morphology in older African Americans, Caribbean Hispanics, and whites from northern Manhattan Arch Neurol 65 2008 1053 1061 18695055
31 Bryan RN Cai J Burke G Hutchinson RG Liao D Toole JF Dagher AP Cooper L Prevalence and anatomic characteristics of infarct-like lesions on MR images of middle-aged adults: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20 1999 1273 1280 10472985
32 Camuset G Wolff V Marescaux C Abou-Bacar A Candolfi E Lefebvre N Christmann D Hansmann Y Cerebral vasculitis associated with Schistosoma mansoni infection BMC Infect Dis 12 2012 220 22978371
33 Chabriat H Joutel A Dichgans M Tournier-Lasserve E Bousser MG CADASIL Lancet Neurol 8 2009 643 653 19539236
34 Chetty R Vasculitides associated with HIV infection J Clin Pathol 54 2001 275 278 11304843
35 Cohen DL Hedera P Premkumar DR Friedland RP Kalaria RN Amyloid-beta protein angiopathies masquerading as Alzheimer's disease? Ann N Y Acad Sci 826 1997 390 395 9329710
36 G.B.D.M. Collaborators Global, regional, and national under-5 mortality, adult mortality, age-specific mortality, and life expectancy, 1970–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016 Lancet 390 2017 1084 1150 28919115
37 G.B.D.O. Collaborators Afshin A Forouzanfar MH Reitsma MB Sur P Estep K Lee A Marczak L Mokdad AH Moradi-Lakeh M Naghavi M Salama JS Vos T Abate KH Abbafati C Ahmed MB Al-Aly Z Alkerwi A Al-Raddadi R Amare AT Amberbir A Amegah AK Amini E Amrock SM Anjana RM Arnlov J Asayesh H Banerjee A Barac A Baye E Bennett DA Beyene AS Biadgilign S Biryukov S Bjertness E Boneya DJ Campos-Nonato I Carrero JJ Cecilio P Cercy K Ciobanu LG Cornaby L Damtew SA Dandona L Dandona R Dharmaratne SD Duncan BB Eshrati B Esteghamati A Feigin VL Fernandes JC Furst T Gebrehiwot TT Gold A Gona PN Goto A Habtewold TD Hadush KT Hafezi-Nejad N Hay SI Horino M Islami F Kamal R Kasaeian A Katikireddi SV Kengne AP Kesavachandran CN Khader YS Khang YH Khubchandani J Kim D Kim YJ Kinfu Y Kosen S Ku T Defo BK Kumar GA Larson HJ Leinsalu M Liang X Lim SS Liu P Lopez AD Lozano R Majeed A Malekzadeh R Malta DC Mazidi M McAlinden C McGarvey ST Mengistu DT Mensah GA Mensink GBM Mezgebe HB Mirrakhimov EM Mueller UO Noubiap JJ Obermeyer CM Ogbo FA Owolabi MO Patton GC Pourmalek F Qorbani M Rafay A Rai RK Ranabhat CL Reinig N Safiri S Salomon JA Sanabria JR Santos IS Sartorius B Sawhney M Schmidhuber J Schutte AE Schmidt MI Sepanlou SG Shamsizadeh M Sheikhbahaei S Shin MJ Shiri R Shiue I Roba HS Silva DAS Silverberg JI Singh JA Stranges S Swaminathan S Tabares-Seisdedos R Tadese F Tedla BA Tegegne BS Terkawi AS Thakur JS Tonelli M Topor-Madry R Tyrovolas S Ukwaja KN Uthman OA Vaezghasemi M Vasankari T Vlassov VV Vollset SE Weiderpass E Werdecker A Wesana J Westerman R Yano Y Yonemoto N Yonga G Zaidi Z Zenebe ZM Zipkin B Murray CJL Health Effects of Overweight and Obesity in 195 Countries over 25 Years N Engl J Med 377 2017 13 27 28604169
38 Connor MD Modi G Warlow CP Differences in the nature of stroke in a multiethnic urban South African population: the Johannesburg hospital stroke register Stroke 40 2009 355 362 19095967
39 Corraini P Henderson VW Ording AG Pedersen L Horvath-Puho E Sorensen HT Long-Term Risk of Dementia Among Survivors of Ischemic or Hemorrhagic Stroke Stroke 48 2017 180 186 27899749
40 G.B.D. DALYs, H. Collaborators Murray CJ Barber RM Foreman KJ Abbasoglu Ozgoren A Abd-Allah F Abera SF Aboyans V Abraham JP Abubakar I Abu-Raddad LJ Abu-Rmeileh NM Achoki T Ackerman IN Ademi Z Adou AK Adsuar JC Afshin A Agardh EE Alam SS Alasfoor D Albittar MI Alegretti MA Alemu ZA Alfonso-Cristancho R Alhabib S Ali R Alla F Allebeck P Almazroa MA Alsharif U Alvarez E Alvis-Guzman N Amare AT Ameh EA Amini H Ammar W Anderson HR Anderson BO Antonio CA Anwari P Arnlov J Arsic Arsenijevic VS Artaman A Asghar RJ Assadi R Atkins LS Avila MA Awuah B Bachman VF Badawi A Bahit MC Balakrishnan K Banerjee A Barker-Collo SL Barquera S Barregard L Barrero LH Basu A Basu S Basulaiman MO Beardsley J Bedi N Beghi E Bekele T Bell ML Benjet C Bennett DA Bensenor IM Benzian H Bernabe E Bertozzi-Villa A Beyene TJ Bhala N Bhalla A Bhutta ZA Bienhoff K Bikbov B Biryukov S Blore JD Blosser CD Blyth FM Bohensky MA Bolliger IW Bora Basara B Bornstein NM Bose D Boufous S Bourne RR Boyers LN Brainin M Brayne CE Brazinova A Breitborde NJ Brenner H Briggs AD Brooks PM Brown JC Brugha TS Buchbinder R Buckle GC Budke CM Bulchis A Bulloch AG Campos-Nonato IR Carabin H Carapetis JR Cardenas R Carpenter DO Caso V Castaneda-Orjuela CA Castro RE Catala-Lopez F Cavalleri F Cavlin A Chadha VK Chang JC Charlson FJ Chen H Chen W Chiang PP Chimed-Ochir O Chowdhury R Christensen H Christophi CA Cirillo M Coates MM Coffeng LE Coggeshall MS Colistro V Colquhoun SM Cooke GS Cooper C Cooper LT Coppola LM Cortinovis M Criqui MH Crump JA Cuevas-Nasu L Danawi H Dandona L Dandona R Dansereau E Dargan PI Davey G Davis A Davitoiu DV Dayama A De Leo D Degenhardt L Del Pozo-Cruz B Dellavalle RP Deribe K Derrett S Des Jarlais DC Dessalegn M Dharmaratne SD Dherani MK Diaz-Torne C Dicker D Ding EL Dokova K Dorsey ER Driscoll TR Duan L Duber HC Ebel BE Edmond KM Elshrek YM Endres M Ermakov SP Erskine HE Eshrati B Esteghamati A Estep K Faraon EJ Farzadfar F Fay DF Feigin VL Felson DT Fereshtehnejad SM Fernandes JG Ferrari AJ Fitzmaurice C Flaxman AD Fleming TD Foigt N Forouzanfar MH Fowkes FG Paleo UF Franklin RC Furst T Gabbe B Gaffikin L Gankpe FG Geleijnse JM Gessner BD Gething P Gibney KB Giroud M Giussani G Gomez Dantes H Gona P Gonzalez-Medina D Gosselin RA Gotay CC Goto A Gouda HN Graetz N Gugnani HC Gupta R Gupta R Gutierrez RA Haagsma J Hafezi-Nejad N Hagan H Halasa YA Hamadeh RR Hamavid H Hammami M Hancock J Hankey GJ Hansen GM Hao Y Harb HL Haro JM Havmoeller R Hay SI Hay RJ Heredia-Pi IB Heuton KR Heydarpour P Higashi H Hijar M Hoek HW Hoffman HJ Hosgood HD Hossain M Hotez PJ Hoy DG Hsairi M Hu G Huang C Huang JJ Husseini A Huynh C Iannarone ML Iburg KM Innos K Inoue M Islami F Jacobsen KH Jarvis DL Jassal SK Jee SH Jeemon P Jensen PN Jha V Jiang G Jiang Y Jonas JB Juel K Kan H Karch A Karema CK Karimkhani C Karthikeyan G Kassebaum NJ Kaul A Kawakami N Kazanjan K Kemp AH Kengne AP Keren A Khader YS Khalifa SE Khan EA Khan G Khang YH Kieling C Kim D Kim S Kim Y Kinfu Y Kinge JM Kivipelto M Knibbs LD Knudsen AK Kokubo Y Kosen S Krishnaswami S Kuate Defo B Kucuk Bicer B Kuipers EJ Kulkarni C Kulkarni VS Kumar GA Kyu HH Lai T Lalloo R Lallukka T Lam H Lan Q Lansingh VC Larsson A Lawrynowicz AE Leasher JL Leigh J Leung R Levitz CE Li B Li Y Li Y Lim SS Lind M Lipshultz SE Liu S Liu Y Lloyd BK Lofgren KT Logroscino G Looker KJ Lortet-Tieulent J Lotufo PA Lozano R Lucas RM Lunevicius R Lyons RA Ma S Macintyre MF Mackay MT Majdan M Malekzadeh R Marcenes W Margolis DJ Margono C Marzan MB Masci JR Mashal MT Matzopoulos R Mayosi BM Mazorodze TT McGill NW McGrath JJ McKee M McLain A Meaney PA Medina C Mehndiratta MM Mekonnen W Melaku YA Meltzer M Memish ZA Mensah GA Meretoja A Mhimbira FA Micha R Miller TR Mills EJ Mitchell PB Mock CN Mohamed Ibrahim N Mohammad KA Mokdad AH Mola GL Monasta L Montanez Hernandez JC Montico M Montine TJ Mooney MD Moore AR Moradi-Lakeh M Moran AE Mori R Moschandreas J Moturi WN Moyer ML Mozaffarian D Msemburi WT Mueller UO Mukaigawara M Mullany EC Murdoch ME Murray J Murthy KS Naghavi M Naheed A Naidoo KS Naldi L Nand D Nangia V Narayan KM Nejjari C Neupane SP Newton CR Ng M Ngalesoni FN Nguyen G Nisar MI Nolte S Norheim OF Norman RE Norrving B Nyakarahuka L Oh IH Ohkubo T Ohno SL Olusanya BO Opio JN Ortblad K Ortiz A Pain AW Pandian JD Panelo CI Papachristou C Park EK Park JH Patten SB Patton GC Paul VK Pavlin BI Pearce N Pereira DM Perez-Padilla R Perez-Ruiz F Perico N Pervaiz A Pesudovs K Peterson CB Petzold M Phillips MR Phillips BK Phillips DE Piel FB Plass D Poenaru D Polinder S Pope D Popova S Poulton RG Pourmalek F Prabhakaran D Prasad NM Pullan RL Qato DM Quistberg DA Rafay A Rahimi K Rahman SU Raju M Rana SM Razavi H Reddy KS Refaat A Remuzzi G Resnikoff S Ribeiro AL Richardson L Richardus JH Roberts DA Rojas-Rueda D Ronfani L Roth GA Rothenbacher D Rothstein DH Rowley JT Roy N Ruhago GM Saeedi MY Saha S Sahraian MA Sampson UK Sanabria JR Sandar L Santos IS Satpathy M Sawhney M Scarborough P Schneider IJ Schottker B Schumacher AE Schwebel DC Scott JG Seedat S Sepanlou SG Serina PT Servan-Mori EE Shackelford KA Shaheen A Shahraz S Shamah Levy T Shangguan S She J Sheikhbahaei S Shi P Shibuya K Shinohara Y Shiri R Shishani K Shiue I Shrime MG Sigfusdottir ID Silberberg DH Simard EP Sindi S Singh A Singh JA Singh L Skirbekk V Slepak EL Sliwa K Soneji S Soreide K Soshnikov S Sposato LA Sreeramareddy CT Stanaway JD Stathopoulou V Stein DJ Stein MB Steiner C Steiner TJ Stevens A Stewart A Stovner LJ Stroumpoulis K Sunguya BF Swaminathan S Swaroop M Sykes BL Tabb KM Takahashi K Tandon N Tanne D Tanner M Tavakkoli M Taylor HR Te Ao BJ Tediosi F Temesgen AM Templin T Ten Have M Tenkorang EY Terkawi AS Thomson B Thorne-Lyman AL Thrift AG Thurston GD Tillmann T Tonelli M Topouzis F Toyoshima H Traebert J Tran BX Trillini M Truelsen T Tsilimbaris M Tuzcu EM Uchendu US Ukwaja KN Undurraga EA Uzun SB Van Brakel WH Van De Vijver S van Gool CH Van Os J Vasankari TJ Venketasubramanian N Violante FS Vlassov VV Vollset SE Wagner GR Wagner J Waller SG Wan X Wang H Wang J Wang L Warouw TS Weichenthal S Weiderpass E Weintraub RG Wenzhi W Werdecker A Westerman R Whiteford HA Wilkinson JD Williams TN Wolfe CD Wolock TM Woolf AD Wulf S Wurtz B Xu G Yan LL Yano Y Ye P Yentur GK Yip P Yonemoto N Yoon SJ Younis MZ Yu C Zaki ME Zhao Y Zheng Y Zonies D Zou X Salomon JA Lopez AD Vos T Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 188 countries, 1990–2013: quantifying the epidemiological transition Lancet 386 2015 2145 2191 26321261
41 Deramecourt V Slade JY Oakley AE Perry RH Ince PG Maurage CA Kalaria RN Staging and natural history of cerebrovascular pathology in dementia Neurology 78 2012 1043 1050 22377814
42 Dewhurst MJ Walker RW Hypertension in Sub-Saharan Africa; prevalence, prescriptions, pitfalls and paradigms J Hum Hypertens 30 2016 221 222 26377356
43 Douiri A Rudd AG Wolfe CD Prevalence of poststroke cognitive impairment: South London Stroke Register 1995–2010 Stroke 44 2013 138 145 23150656
44 El Tallawy HN Farghly WM Badry R Rageh TA Shehata GA Hakeem MN Abd El Hamed M Sayd MA Hamed Y Kandil MR Prevalence of dementia in Al-Quseir city, Red Sea Governorate, Egypt Clin Interv Aging 9 2014 9 14 24353410
45 El Tallawy HN Farghly WM Shehata GA Rageh TA Hakeem NA Abo-Elfetoh N Hegazy AM Rayan I El-Moselhy EA Prevalence of dementia in Al Kharga District, New Valley Governorate, Egypt Neuroepidemiology 38 2012 130 137 22433971
46 Erete EI Ogun OG Oladapo OO Akang EE Prevalence and severity of atherosclerosis in extra cranial carotid arteries in Nigeria: an autopsy study BMC Cardiovasc Disord 12 2012 106 23153371
47 Erkabu SG Agedie Y Mihretu DD Semere A Alemu YM Ischemic and Hemorrhagic Stroke in Bahir Dar, Ethiopia: A Retrospective Hospital-Based Study J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2018
48 Feigin VL Roth GA Naghavi M Parmar P Krishnamurthi R Chugh S Mensah GA Norrving B Shiue I Ng M Estep K Cercy K Murray CJ Forouzanfar MH I. Global Burden of Diseases, S. Risk Factors, G Stroke Experts Writing, Global burden of stroke and risk factors in 188 countries, during 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Lancet Neurol 15 2016 913 924 27291521
49 Genga E Oyoo O Adebajo A Vasculitis in Africa Curr Rheumatol Rep 20 2018 4 29464351
50 George-Carey R Adeloye D Chan KY Paul A Kolcic I Campbell H Rudan I An estimate of the prevalence of dementia in Africa: A systematic analysis J Glob Health 2 2012 020401 23289076
51 Gilchrist M Winyard PG Fulford J Anning C Shore AC Benjamin N Dietary nitrate supplementation improves reaction time in type 2 diabetes: development and application of a novel nitrate-depleted beetroot juice placebo Nitric Oxide 40 2014 67 74 24858657
52 Gomis M Davalos A Recanalization and Reperfusion Therapies of Acute Ischemic Stroke: What have We Learned, What are the Major Research Questions, and Where are We Headed? Front Neurol 5 2014 226 25477857
53 Gorelick PB Scuteri A Black SE Decarli C Greenberg SM Iadecola C Launer LJ Laurent S Lopez OL Nyenhuis D Petersen RC Schneider JA Tzourio C Arnett DK Bennett DA Chui HC Higashida RT Lindquist R Nilsson PM Roman GC Sellke FW Seshadri S C.o.E. American Heart Association Stroke Council, C.o. C.N.C.o.C.R. Prevention, Intervention, S Council on Cardiovascular, Anesthesia, Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/american stroke association Stroke 42 2011 2672 2713 21778438
54 G.B.D.N.D.C. Group Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders during 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015 Lancet Neurol 16 2017 877 897 28931491
55 Gulli G Rutten-Jacobs LC Kalra L Rudd AG Wolfe CD Markus HS Differences in the distribution of stroke subtypes in a UK black stroke population - final results from the South London Ethnicity and Stroke Study BMC Med 14 2016 77 27197724
56 Hachinski V Iadecola C Petersen RC Breteler MM Nyenhuis DL Black SE Powers WJ DeCarli C Merino JG Kalaria RN Vinters HV Holtzman DM Rosenberg GA Dichgans M Marler JR Leblanc GG National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-Canadian Stroke Network vascular cognitive impairment harmonization standards Stroke 37 2006 2220 2241 16917086
57 Hajat C Heuschmann PU Coshall C Padayachee S Chambers J Rudd AG Wolfe CD Incidence of aetiological subtypes of stroke in a multi-ethnic population based study: the South London Stroke Register J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 82 2011 527 533 20974649
58 Hara K Shiga A Fukutake T Nozaki H Miyashita A Yokoseki A Kawata H Koyama A Arima K Takahashi T Ikeda M Shiota H Tamura M Shimoe Y Hirayama M Arisato T Yanagawa S Tanaka A Nakano I Ikeda S Yoshida Y Yamamoto T Ikeuchi T Kuwano R Nishizawa M Tsuji S Onodera O Association of HTRA1 mutations and familial ischemic cerebral small-vessel disease N Engl J Med 360 2009 1729 1739 19387015
59 Hoffmann M Stroke in the young: The multiethnic prospective durban stroke data bank results J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 7 1998 404 413 17895119
60 Hoffmann M Stroke in the young in South Africa--an analysis of 320 patients S Afr Med J 90 2000 1226 1237 11234655
61 Hoffmann M Corr P Robbs J Cerebrovascular findings in Takayasu disease J Neuroimaging 10 2000 84 90 10800261
62 Howard G Cushman M Kissela BM Kleindorfer DO McClure LA Safford MM Rhodes JD Soliman EZ Moy CS Judd SE Howard VJ R.E.f. Geographic, I. Racial Differences in Stroke Traditional risk factors as the underlying cause of racial disparities in stroke: lessons from the half-full (empty?) glass Stroke 42 2011 3369 3375 21960581
63 Howlett SE Rockwood K Ageing: Develop models of frailty Nature 512 2014 253
64 Ihle-Hansen H Thommessen B Wyller TB Engedal K Fure B Risk factors for and incidence of subtypes of ischemic stroke Funct Neurol 27 2012 35 40 22687165
65 Jen J Cohen AH Yue Q Stout JT Vinters HV Nelson S Baloh RW Hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy, and stroke (HERNS) Neurology 49 1997 1322 1330 9371916
66 Joo H Wang G George MG Use of intravenous tissue plasminogen activator and hospital costs for patients with acute ischaemic stroke aged 18–64 years in the USA Stroke Vasc Neurol 1 2016 8 15 27547449
67 Jowi JO Mativo PM Pathological sub-types, risk factors and outcome of stroke at the Nairobi Hospital, Kenya East Afr Med J 85 2008 572 581 19413212
68 Jusabani A Gray WK Swai M Walker R Post-stroke carotid ultrasound findings from an incident Tanzanian population Neuroepidemiology 37 2011 245 248 22156625
69 Justice JN Johnson LC DeVan AE Cruickshank-Quinn C Reisdorph N Bassett CJ Evans TD Brooks FA Bryan NS Chonchol MB Giordano T McQueen MB Seals DR Improved motor and cognitive performance with sodium nitrite supplementation is related to small metabolite signatures: a pilot trial in middle-aged and older adults Aging (Albany NY) 7 2015 1004 1021 26626856
70 Kalaria RN The pathology and pathophysiology of vascular dementia Neuropharmacology 2017
71 Kalaria RN Maestre GE Arizaga R Friedland RP Galasko D Hall K Luchsinger JA Ogunniyi A Perry EK Potocnik F Prince M Stewart R Wimo A Zhang ZX Antuono P G. World Federation of Neurology Dementia Research Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia in developing countries: prevalence, management, and risk factors Lancet Neurol 7 2008 812 826 18667359
72 Kayima J Wanyenze RK Katamba A Leontsini E Nuwaha F Hypertension awareness, treatment and control in Africa: a systematic review BMC Cardiovasc Disord 13 2013 54 23915151
73 Khedr E Fawi G Abbas MA Mohammed TA El-Fetoh NA Al Attar G Noaman M Zaki AF Prevalence of mild cognitive impairment and dementia among the elderly population of Qena Governorate, Upper Egypt: a community-based study J Alzheimers Dis 45 2015 117 126 25471192
74 Kolominsky-Rabas PL Weber M Gefeller O Neundoerfer B Heuschmann PU Epidemiology of ischemic stroke subtypes according to TOAST criteria: incidence, recurrence, and long-term survival in ischemic stroke subtypes: a population-based study Stroke 32 2001 2735 2740 11739965
75 Krishnamurthi RV Moran AE Forouzanfar MH Bennett DA Mensah GA Lawes CM Barker-Collo S Connor M Roth GA Sacco R Ezzati M Naghavi M Murray CJ Feigin VL I. Global Burden of Diseases, G Risk Factors Study Stroke Expert, The global burden of hemorrhagic stroke: a summary of findings from the GBD 2010 study Glob Heart 9 2014 101 106 25432119
76 Lara J Ashor AW Oggioni C Ahluwalia A Mathers JC Siervo M Effects of inorganic nitrate and beetroot supplementation on endothelial function: a systematic review and meta-analysis Eur J Nutr 55 2016 451 459 25764393
77 Leys D Henon H Mackowiak-Cordoliani MA Pasquier F Poststroke dementia Lancet Neurol 4 2005 752 759 16239182
78 Li L Yiin GS Geraghty OC Schulz UG Kuker W Mehta Z Rothwell PM S. Oxford Vascular, Incidence, outcome, risk factors, and long-term prognosis of cryptogenic transient ischaemic attack and ischaemic stroke: a population-based study Lancet Neurol 14 2015 903 913 26227434
79 Limbole EB Magne J Lacroix P Stroke characterization in Sun Saharan Africa: Congolese population Int J Cardiol 240 2017 392 397 28461020
80 Lindsay P Furie KL Davis SM Donnan GA Norrving B World Stroke Organization global stroke services guidelines and action plan Int J Stroke 9 Suppl A100 2014 4 13 25250836
81 Lundberg JO Weitzberg E Gladwin MT The nitrate-nitrite-nitric oxide pathway in physiology and therapeutics Nat Rev Drug Discov 7 2008 156 167 18167491
82 Marcus J Gardener H Rundek T Elkind MS Sacco RL Decarli C Wright CB Baseline and longitudinal increases in diastolic blood pressure are associated with greater white matter hyperintensity volume: the northern Manhattan study Stroke 42 2011 2639 2641 21836088
83 Maredza M Bertram MY Tollman SM Disease burden of stroke in rural South Africa: an estimate of incidence, mortality and disability adjusted life years BMC Neurol 15 2015 54 25880843
84 Marnane M Duggan CA Sheehan OC Merwick A Hannon N Curtin D Harris D Williams EB Horgan G Kyne L McCormack PM Duggan J Moore A Crispino-O'Connell G Kelly PJ Stroke subtype classification to mechanism-specific and undetermined categories by TOAST, A-S-C-O, and causative classification system: direct comparison in the North Dublin population stroke study Stroke 41 2010 1579 1586 20595675
85 Mavrodaris A Powell J Thorogood M Prevalences of dementia and cognitive impairment among older people in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review Bull World Health Organ 91 2013 773 783 24115801
86 McArdle PF Kittner SJ Ay H Brown RD Jr Meschia JF Rundek T Wassertheil-Smoller S Woo D Andsberg G Biffi A Brenner DA Cole JW Corriveau R de Bakker PI Delavaran H Dichgans M Grewal RP Gwinn K Huq M Jern C Jimenez-Conde J Jood K Kaplan RC Katschnig P Katsnelson M Labovitz DL Lemmens R Li L Lindgren A Markus HS Peddareddygari LR Pedersen A Pera J Redfors P Roquer J Rosand J Rost NS Rothwell PM Sacco RL Sharma P Slowik A Sudlow C Thijs V Tiedt S Valenti R Worrall BB Study NS Agreement between TOAST and CCS ischemic stroke classification: the NINDS SiGN study Neurology 83 2014 1653 1660 25261504
87 McRae MP High-dose folic acid supplementation effects on endothelial function and blood pressure in hypertensive patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials J Chiropr Med 8 2009 15 24 19646382
88 Mensah GA Mokdad AH Ford ES Greenlund KJ Croft JB State of disparities in cardiovascular health in the United States Circulation 111 2005 1233 1241 15769763
89 Mensah GA Roth GA Sampson UK Moran AE Feigin VL Forouzanfar MH Naghavi M Murray CJ Mortality GBD C. Causes of Death, Mortality from cardiovascular diseases in sub-Saharan Africa, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis of data from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Cardiovasc J Afr 26 2015 S6 10 25962950
90 Meretoja A Acciarresi M Akinyemi RO Campbell B Dowlatshahi D English C Henninger N Poppe A Putaala J Saini M Sato S Wu B Brainin M Norrving B Davis S Stroke doctors: Who are we? A World Stroke Organization survey Int J Stroke 12 2017 858 868 28350278
91 Mills KT Bundy JD Kelly TN Reed JE Kearney PM Reynolds K Chen J He J Global Disparities of Hypertension Prevalence and Control: A Systematic Analysis of Population-Based Studies From 90 Countries Circulation 134 2016 441 450 27502908
92 Mok V Leung EY Chu W Chen S Wong A Xiong Y Lam W Ho CL Wong KS Pittsburgh compound B binding in poststroke dementia J Neurol Sci 290 2010 135 137 20056250
93 Mok VC Lam BY Wong A Ko H Markus HS Wong LK Early-onset and delayed-onset poststroke dementia - revisiting the mechanisms Nat Rev Neurol 13 2017 148 159 28211452
94 Ng M Fleming T Robinson M Thomson B Graetz N Margono C Mullany EC Biryukov S Abbafati C Abera SF Abraham JP Abu-Rmeileh NM Achoki T AlBuhairan FS Alemu ZA Alfonso R Ali MK Ali R Guzman NA Ammar W Anwari P Banerjee A Barquera S Basu S Bennett DA Bhutta Z Blore J Cabral N Nonato IC Chang JC Chowdhury R Courville KJ Criqui MH Cundiff DK Dabhadkar KC Dandona L Davis A Dayama A Dharmaratne SD Ding EL Durrani AM Esteghamati A Farzadfar F Fay DF Feigin VL Flaxman A Forouzanfar MH Goto A Green MA Gupta R Hafezi-Nejad N Hankey GJ Harewood HC Havmoeller R Hay S Hernandez L Husseini A Idrisov BT Ikeda N Islami F Jahangir E Jassal SK Jee SH Jeffreys M Jonas JB Kabagambe EK Khalifa SE Kengne AP Khader YS Khang YH Kim D Kimokoti RW Kinge JM Kokubo Y Kosen S Kwan G Lai T Leinsalu M Li Y Liang X Liu S Logroscino G Lotufo PA Lu Y Ma J Mainoo NK Mensah GA Merriman TR Mokdad AH Moschandreas J Naghavi M Naheed A Nand D Narayan KM Nelson EL Neuhouser ML Nisar MI Ohkubo T Oti SO Pedroza A Prabhakaran D Roy N Sampson U Seo H Sepanlou SG Shibuya K Shiri R Shiue I Singh GM Singh JA Skirbekk V Stapelberg NJ Sturua L Sykes BL Tobias M Tran BX Trasande L Toyoshima H van de Vijver S Vasankari TJ Veerman JL Velasquez-Melendez G Vlassov VV Vollset SE Vos T Wang C Wang X Weiderpass E Werdecker A Wright JL Yang YC Yatsuya H Yoon J Yoon SJ Zhao Y Zhou M Zhu S Lopez AD Murray CJ Gakidou E Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity in children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Lancet 384 2014 766 781 24880830
95 O'Brien JT Erkinjuntti T Reisberg B Roman G Sawada T Pantoni L Bowler JV Ballard C DeCarli C Gorelick PB Rockwood K Burns A Gauthier S DeKosky ST Vascular cognitive impairment Lancet Neurol 2 2003 89 98 12849265
96 O'Donnell MJ Chin SL Rangarajan S Xavier D Liu L Zhang H Rao-Melacini P Zhang X Pais P Agapay S Lopez-Jaramillo P Damasceno A Langhorne P McQueen MJ Rosengren A Dehghan M Hankey GJ Dans AL Elsayed A Avezum A Mondo C Diener HC Ryglewicz D Czlonkowska A Pogosova N Weimar C Iqbal R Diaz R Yusoff K Yusufali A Oguz A Wang X Penaherrera E Lanas F Ogah OS Ogunniyi A Iversen HK Malaga G Rumboldt Z Oveisgharan S Al Hussain F Magazi D Nilanont Y Ferguson J Pare G Yusuf S I. investigators Global and regional effects of potentially modifiable risk factors associated with acute stroke in 32 countries (INTERSTROKE): a case-control study Lancet 388 2016 761 775 27431356
97 O'Donnell MJ Xavier D Liu L Zhang H Chin SL Rao-Melacini P Rangarajan S Islam S Pais P McQueen MJ Mondo C Damasceno A Lopez-Jaramillo P Hankey GJ Dans AL Yusoff K Truelsen T Diener HC Sacco RL Ryglewicz D Czlonkowska A Weimar C Wang X Yusuf S I. investigators Risk factors for ischaemic and intracerebral haemorrhagic stroke in 22 countries (the INTERSTROKE study): a case-control study Lancet 376 2010 112 123 20561675
98 Ogbole GI Owolabi MO Yusuf BP White Matter Changes on Magnetic Resonance Imaging: A Risk Factor for Stroke in an African Population? Journal of Stroke &amp; Cerebrovascular Diseases 22 2013 E227 E233 23375720
99 Ogeng'o JA Cohen DL Sayi JG Matuja WB Chande HM Kitinya JN Kimani JK Friedland RP Mori H Kalaria RN Cerebral amyloid beta protein deposits and other Alzheimer lesions in non-demented elderly east Africans Brain Pathol 6 1996 101 107 8737923
100 Ogeng'o JA Olabu BO Mburu AN Sinkeet SR Pediatric stroke in an African country J Pediatr Neurosci 5 2010 22 24 21042501
101 Ojagbemi A Owolabi M Bello T Baiyewu O Stroke severity predicts poststroke delirium and its association with dementia: Longitudinal observation from a low income setting Journal of the Neurological Sciences 375 2017 376 381 28320171
102 Oluyombo R Akinwusi PO Olamoyegun MA Ayodele OE Fawale MB Okunola OO Olanrewaju TO Akinsola A Clustering of cardiovascular risk factors in semiurban communities in south-western Nigeria Cardiovasc J Afr 27 2016 1 6
103 Onwuekwe IO Ezeala-Adikaibe BA Ohaegbulam SC Chikani MC Amuta J Uloh HN Stroke mimics - A study of CT images in Nigerian African stroke patients Journal of Neurological Sciences-Turkish 25 2008 143 149
104 Owolabi M Peprah E Xu H Akinyemi R Tiwari HK Irvin MR Wahab KW Arnett DK Ovbiagele B Advancing stroke genomic research in the age of Trans-Omics big data science: Emerging priorities and opportunities J Neurol Sci 382 2017 18 28 29111012
105 Owolabi MO Agunloye AM Umeh EO Akpa OM Can common carotid intima media thickness serve as an indicator of both cardiovascular phenotype and risk among black Africans? Eur J Prev Cardiol 22 2015 1442 1451 25150098
106 Owolabi MO Akarolo-Anthony S Akinyemi R Arnett D Gebregziabher M Jenkins C Tiwari H Arulogun O Akpalu A Sarfo FS Obiako R Owolabi L Sagoe K Melikam S Adeoye AM Lackland D Ovbiagele B H.A.C. Members of the, The burden of stroke in Africa: a glance at the present and a glimpse into the future Cardiovasc J Afr 26 2015 S27 38 25962945
107 Owolabi MO Akinyemi RO Hurst S Arulogun O Olaniyan O Gebregziabher M Salako BL Ovbiagele B Tailored Hospital-based Risk Reduction to Impede Vascular Events After Stroke (THRIVES) study: qualitative phase protocol Crit Pathw Cardiol 13 2014 29 35 24526149
108 Owolabi MO Akpa OM Agunloye AM Carotid IMT is more associated with stroke than risk calculators Acta Neurol Scand 133 2016 442 450 27045896
109 Owolabi MO Sarfo F Akinyemi R Gebregziabher M Akpa O Akpalu A Wahab K Obiako R Owolabi L Ovbiagele B S. Team H.A.C. as part of, Dominant modifiable risk factors for stroke in Ghana and Nigeria (SIREN): a case-control study Lancet Glob Health 2018
110 Paddick SM Kisoli A Dotchin CL Gray WK Chaote P Longdon A Walker RW Mortality rates in community-dwelling Tanzanians with dementia and mild cognitive impairment: a 4-year follow-up study Age Ageing 44 2015 636 641 25918185
111 Paddick SM Longdon A Kisoli A Gray WK Dotchin CL Jusabani A Iqbal A Hughes J Teodorczuk A Chaote P Walker RW The prevalence of dementia subtypes in rural Tanzania Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 22 2014 1613 1622 25134968
112 Paddick SM Longdon AR Kisoli A Dotchin C Gray WK Dewhurst F Chaote P Kalaria R Jusabani AM Walker R Dementia prevalence estimates in sub-Saharan Africa: comparison of two diagnostic criteria Glob Health Action 6 2013 19646 23561025
113 Palm F Urbanek C Wolf J Buggle F Kleemann T Hennerici MG Inselmann G Hagar M Safer A Becher H Grau AJ Etiology, risk factors and sex differences in ischemic stroke in the Ludwigshafen Stroke Study, a population-based stroke registry Cerebrovasc Dis 33 2012 69 75 22133999
114 Pandian JD William AG Kate MP Norrving B Mensah GA Davis S Roth GA Thrift AG Kengne AP Kissela BM Yu C Kim D Rojas-Rueda D Tirschwell DL Abd-Allah F Gankpe F deVeber G Hankey GJ Jonas JB Sheth KN Dokova K Mehndiratta MM Geleijnse JM Giroud M Bejot Y Sacco R Sahathevan R Hamadeh RR Gillum R Westerman R Akinyemi RO Barker-Collo S Truelsen T Caso V Rajagopalan V Venketasubramanian N Vlassovi VV Feigin VL Strategies to Improve Stroke Care Services in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review Neuroepidemiology 49 2017 45 61 28848165
115 Pendlebury ST Rothwell PM Prevalence, incidence, and factors associated with prestroke and post-stroke dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis Lancet Neurol 8 2009 1006 1018 19782001
116 Petty GW Brown RD Jr Whisnant JP Sicks JD O'Fallon WM Wiebers DO Ischemic stroke subtypes: a population-based study of incidence and risk factors Stroke 30 1999 2513 2516 10582970
117 Pohjasvaara T Erkinjuntti T Vataja R Kaste M Dementia three months after stroke. Baseline frequency and effect of different definitions of dementia in the Helsinki Stroke Aging Memory Study (SAM) cohort Stroke 28 1997 785 792 9099197
118 Presley TD Morgan AR Bechtold E Clodfelter W Dove RW Jennings JM Kraft RA King SB Laurienti PJ Rejeski WJ Burdette JH Kim-Shapiro DB Miller GD Acute effect of a high nitrate diet on brain perfusion in older adults Nitric Oxide 24 2011 34 42 20951824
119 Prince M Bryce R Albanese E Wimo A Ribeiro W Ferri CP The global prevalence of dementia: a systematic review and metaanalysis Alzheimers Dement 9 2013 63 75 e62 23305823
120 Rahmouni K Correia ML Haynes WG Mark AL Obesity-associated hypertension: new insights into mechanisms Hypertension 45 2005 9 14 15583075
121 Ramlall S Chipps J Pillay BJ Bhigjee AL Mild cognitive impairment and dementia in a heterogeneous elderly population: prevalence and risk profile Afr J Psychiatry (Johannesbg) 16 2013
122 Retief C Schutte CM Baker MK Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leucoencephalopathy (CADASIL) S Afr Med J 99 2009 461 465 19736850
123 Revesz T Holton JL Lashley T Plant G Frangione B Rostagno A Ghiso J Genetics and molecular pathogenesis of sporadic and hereditary cerebral amyloid angiopathies Acta Neuropathol 118 2009 115 130 19225789
124 Rockwood K Theou O Mitnitski A What are frailty instruments for? Age Ageing 44 2015 545 547 25824236
125 Ruland S Gorelick PB Stroke in Black Americans Curr Cardiol Rep 7 2005 29 33 15610644
126 Rutten JW Dauwerse HG Gravesteijn G van Belzen MJ van der Grond J Polke JM Bernal-Quiros M Lesnik Oberstein SA Archetypal NOTCH3 mutations frequent in public exome: implications for CADASIL Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3 2016 844 853 27844030
127 Sacco RL Dong C Declining stroke incidence and improving survival in US communities: evidence for success and future challenges JAMA 312 2014 237 238 25027138
128 Sachdev P Kalaria R O'Brien J Skoog I Alladi S Black SE Blacker D Blazer DG Chen C Chui H Ganguli M Jellinger K Jeste DV Pasquier F Paulsen J Prins N Rockwood K Roman G Scheltens P B. Internationlal Society for Vascular, D. Cognitive Diagnostic criteria for vascular cognitive disorders: a VASCOG statement Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 28 2014 206 218 24632990
129 Samba H Guerchet M Ndamba-Bandzouzi B Mbelesso P Lacroix P Dartigues JF Preux PM Dementia-associated mortality and its predictors among older adults in sub-Saharan Africa: results from a 2-year follow-up in Congo (the EPIDEMCA-FU study) Age Ageing 45 2016 681 687 27230914
130 Saposnik G Caplan LR Gonzalez LA Baird A Dashe J Luraschi A Llinas R Lepera S Linfante I Chaves C Kanis K Sica RE Rey RC Differences in stroke subtypes among natives and caucasians in Boston and Buenos Aires Stroke 31 2000 2385 2389 11022068
131 Sarfo FS Akassi J Adamu S Obese V Ovbiagele B Burden and Predictors of Poststroke Cognitive Impairment in a Sample of Ghanaian Stroke Survivors Journal of Stroke &amp; Cerebrovascular Diseases 26 2017 2553 2562 28652059
132 Sarfo FS Akassi J Awuah D Adamu S Nkyi C Owolabi M Ovbiagele B Trends in stroke admission and mortality rates from 1983 to 2013 in central Ghana Journal of the Neurological Sciences 357 2015 240 245 26293417
133 Schulz UG Rothwell PM Differences in vascular risk factors between etiological subtypes of ischemic stroke: importance of population-based studies Stroke 34 2003 2050 2059 12829866
134 Shakir R Davis S Norrving B Grisold W Carroll WM Feigin V Hachinski V Revising the ICD: stroke is a brain disease Lancet 388 2016 2475 2476
135 Shobha N Fang J Hill MD Do lacunar strokes benefit from thrombolysis? Evidence from the Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network Int J Stroke 8 Suppl A100 2013 45 49 23231478
136 Siitonen M Borjesson-Hanson A Poyhonen M Ora A Pasanen P Bras J Kern S Kern J Andersen O Stanescu H Kleta R Baumann M Kalaria R Kalimo H Singleton A Hardy J Viitanen M Myllykangas L Guerreiro R Multi-infarct dementia of Swedish type is caused by a 3'UTR mutation of COL4A1 Brain 2017
137 Silberberg D Anand NP Michels K Kalaria RN Brain and other nervous system disorders across the lifespan - global challenges and opportunities Nature 527 2015 S151 154 26580320
138 Singh A Jenkins C Calys-Tagoe B Arulogun OS Sarfo S Ovbiagele B Akpalu A Melikam S Uvere E Owolabi MO Stroke Investigative Research and Education Network: Public Outreach and Engagement J Community Med Health Educ 7 2017
139 Skrobot OA Black SE Chen C DeCarli C Erkinjuntti T Ford GA Kalaria RN O'Brien J Pantoni L Pasquier F Roman GC Wallin A Sachdev P Skoog I group V Ben-Shlomo Y Passmore AP Love S Kehoe PG Progress toward standardized diagnosis of vascular cognitive impairment: Guidelines from the Vascular Impairment of Cognition Classification Consensus Study Alzheimers Dement 2017
140 Skrobot OA O'Brien J Black S Chen C DeCarli C Erkinjuntti T Ford GA Kalaria RN Pantoni L Pasquier F Roman GC Wallin A Sachdev P Skoog I group V Ben-Shlomo Y Passmore AP Love S Kehoe PG The Vascular Impairment of Cognition Classification Consensus Study Alzheimers Dement 13 2017 624 633 27960092
141 Sneed JR Culang-Reinlieb ME The vascular depression hypothesis: an update Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 19 2011 99 103 21328801
142 Thomas AJ Kalaria RN O'Brien JT Depression and vascular disease: what is the relationship? J Affect Disord 79 2004 81 95 15023483
143 Tishkoff SA Reed FA Friedlaender FR Ehret C Ranciaro A Froment A Hirbo JB Awomoyi AA Bodo JM Doumbo O Ibrahim M Juma AT Kotze MJ Lema G Moore JH Mortensen H Nyambo TB Omar SA Powell K Pretorius GS Smith MW Thera MA Wambebe C Weber JL Williams SM The genetic structure and history of Africans and African Americans Science 324 2009 1035 1044 19407144
144 Tsai CF Thomas B Sudlow CL Epidemiology of stroke and its subtypes in Chinese vs white populations: a systematic review Neurology 81 2013 264 272 23858408
145 Ueshima H Explanation for the Japanese paradox: prevention of increase in coronary heart disease and reduction in stroke J Atheroscler Thromb 14 2007 278 286 18174657
146 Ueshima H Sekikawa A Miura K Turin TC Takashima N Kita Y Watanabe M Kadota A Okuda N Kadowaki T Nakamura Y Okamura T Cardiovascular disease and risk factors in Asia: a selected review Circulation 118 2008 2702 2709 19106393
147 Verdura E Herve D Bergametti F Jacquet C Morvan T Prieto-Morin C Mackowiak A Manchon E Hosseini H Cordonnier C Girard-Buttaz I Rosenstingl S Hagel C Kuhlenbaumer G Leca-Radu E Goux D Fleming L Van Agtmael T Chabriat H Chapon F Tournier-Lasserve E Disruption of a miR-29 binding site leading to COL4A1 upregulation causes pontine autosomal dominant microangiopathy with leukoencephalopathy Ann Neurol 80 2016 741 753 27666438
148 Vermeer SE Longstreth WT Jr Koudstaal PJ Silent brain infarcts: a systematic review Lancet Neurol 6 2007 611 619 17582361
149 Walker R Whiting D Unwin N Mugusi F Swai M Aris E Jusabani A Kabadi G Gray WK Lewanga M Alberti G Stroke incidence in rural and urban Tanzania: a prospective, community-based study Lancet Neurol 9 2010 786 792 20609629
150 Walker RW Jusabani A Aris E Gray WK Mitra D Swai M A prospective study of stroke sub-type from within an incident population in Tanzania S Afr Med J 101 2011 338 344 21837879
151 Wardlaw JM Smith C Dichgans M Mechanisms of sporadic cerebral small vessel disease: insights from neuroimaging Lancet Neurol 12 2013 483 497 23602162
152 Wightman EL Haskell-Ramsay CF Thompson KG Blackwell JR Winyard PG Forster J Jones AM Kennedy DO Dietary nitrate modulates cerebral blood flow parameters and cognitive performance in humans: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover investigation Physiol Behav 149 2015 149 158 26037632
153 Wild S Roglic G Green A Sicree R King H Global prevalence of diabetes: estimates for the year 2000 and projections for 2030 Diabetes Care 27 2004 1047 1053 15111519
154 Williams AO Loewenson RB Lippert DM Resch JA Cerebral atherosclerosis and its relationship to selected diseases in Nigerians: a pathological study Stroke 6 1975 395 401 125475
155 Yamamoto Y Craggs L Baumann M Kalimo H Kalaria RN Molecular genetics and pathology of hereditary small vessel diseases of the brain Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 37 2011 94 113 21062344
156 Zenebe G Alemayehu M Asmera J Characteristics and outcomes of stroke at Tikur Anbessa Teaching Hospital, Ethiopia Ethiop Med J 43 2005 251 259 16523645
