LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101707633
46647
Digit Biomark
Digit Biomark
Digital biomarkers
2504-110X

30272048
6157915
10.1159/000488132
NIHMS954020
Article
Harnessing the Digital Exhaust: Incorporating wellness into the pharma model
Wright Justin M. 1
Jones Graham B. 2*
1 Technical Research and Development, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, 1 Health Plaza, East Hanover, NJ 07936 USA
2 Clinical &amp; Translational Science Institute, Tufts University Medical Center, 800 Washington St, Boston MA 02111 USA
* Corresponding author: Graham Barry Jones, Clinical &amp; Translational Science Institute, Tufts University Medical Center, 800 Washington St, Boston MA 02111, USA, Tel: 857-275-7045, Fax: 617-636-7757, graham.jones@tufts.edu
25 3 2018
11 4 2018
Jan-Apr 2018
11 4 2019
2 1 3146
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

The increasing availability of devices capable of tracking biomarkers presents major opportunities in contemporary healthcare. Herein we advocate a new role for the pharmaceutical industry to capitalize on these opportunities and in doing so incorporate wellness and patient engagement programs into their standard business models. Medical grade decision making using diagnostic, prognostic, and monitoring biomarkers will require coordinated approaches between the pharmaceutical and technology industries and the careful design of longitudinal clinical studies to validate their efficacy. These studies will also require data capture, archiving, curating and sharing on a previously unprecedented scale, and raise additional concerns with regard to data security and ownership. Concurrently, systems-based approaches to the capture and interpretation of a new class of digital biomarkers are emerging, and hold promise for heightened levels of patient engagement and remote sensing. Collectively, if these new opportunities are approached within the context of the patient-provider ecosystem, major repositioning of the pharmaceutical industry may be possible in the near term.

Digital biomarkers
wellness
diagnostics
closed loop
patient engagement

Introduction

The pharmaceutical sector remains one of the largest components of the US and global economy with sales exceeding $450B domestically and $900B worldwide. Historically the industry has relied on the ‘blockbuster’ model for drug entry, where drugs with &gt;$1B+ annual sales allow investments to be made in early stage projects and smaller markets. Estimates of the cost of launching a new drug range upwards of $2B, a model which has been described as unsustainable.[1] The industry is also undergoing a transformation as traditional small molecule drugs are supplanted by next generation protein based biotechnology products manufactured from cell cultures.[2] This is the fastest growing component of the pharmaceutical sector, and has led to a number of mergers and acquisitions between pharmaceutical and biotechnology corporations. Additional pressures on the sector have emerged with the introduction of regulatory approval pathways for biosimilar versions of these drugs (a counterpart to the Hatch-Waxman inspired process for small molecule generics)[3] and it is estimated that some $50B of innovator products will be subject to competition by 2020.[4] With this backdrop the pharmaceutical business model is evolving rapidly, with many organizations seeking niche markets within which to develop new products. One example is in the area of orphan/rare diseases, where accelerated regulatory pathways are offered in markets with &lt;200,000 patients.[5] A natural consequence of this has been to use genomic and proteomic profiling methods to identify sub-categories of diseases and develop selective therapeutics therein – an example being triple negative breast cancer.[6] These activities have spurred a rapid growth in the emergence of ‘companion’ diagnostics where a drug (Rx) is prescribed based on positive indication in patients with a defined diagnostic (Dx).[7] Comprehensive regulatory guidance has recently been developed by the FDA for these and related forms of biomarkers which can now be classified into one of seven categories viz: (a) susceptibility/risk biomarkers, (b) diagnostic biomarkers, (c) monitoring biomarkers, (d) prognostic biomarkers, (e) predictive biomarkers, (f) pharmacodynamic/response biomarkers and (g) safety biomarkers.[8] Collectively, they are responsive to a broader agenda often referred to as the ‘precision medicine’ initiative,[9] and in some cases digital versions of these biomarkers have been identified, defined as “consumer-generated physiological and behavioral measures collected through connected digital tools”.[10] Given these classifications, it has become clear that the regulatory agencies view biomarkers contextually, and this will prompt and encourage the pharmaceutical industry to consider additional approaches and products.

The Closed-Loop Approach to Disease Management

While existing activities are likely to continue to fuel growth of the pharmaceutical industry there are other developments proceeding at a rapid pace which could cause the sector to re-examine its business model.[11] In essence the pharmaceutical industry is responsive to a treatment market driven by diseases afflicting its patients. In contrast, vaccine programs, developed by a smaller sub-set of pharmaceutical companies, function by disease prevention. Though having a profound impact on global health, unfortunately vaccines are not currently available for a large number of acute and chronic diseases.[12] A third pathway, and which has now been demonstrated in closed loop systems, is disease management. The strategy involves release of a therapeutic agent on demand, stimulated by response to a biomarker. Though examples of patient activated responses are legion – e.g. self-administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug at fist sign of fever, epinephrine administration at onset of anaphylaxis, the ability to automate the process is noteworthy. The first example of this in the form of a device which has been approved by the FDA is in the diabetes mellitus space.[13] Specifically, the MiniMed 670G developed by Medtronic, delivers a bolus of insulin from a reservoir in response to a signal from a controller which monitors circulating glucose levels – a primary biomarker for type 1 diabetes. The ability to achieve homeostasis without patient interaction (or even knowledge of) is significant, and applications of the strategy in other therapeutic areas is inviting. In the case of the MiniMed 670G, the biomarker sensor is an embedded device. While effective, the needle of the device is certainly invasive, and its embedded sensor subject to interactions with the dermal and subcutaneous layers collectively inducing what is referred to as the ‘foreign body reaction’ which includes an inflammatory response.[14] Accordingly, a number strategies are being investigated for non invasive glucose monitoring, including saliva assay,[15] colorimetric assays,[16] and tear sensors, one example being a smart contact lens, complete with integrated circuitry to transmit data wirelessly to a controller.[17] It will be interesting to watch the market mature in this and other sectors, with current estimates suggesting the US diabetes market alone is &gt;$20B. This notwithstanding, based on rapid advances in digital technologies, a large number of consumer devices (both regulated and unregulated) have recently been developed which are capable of monitoring select biomarkers. Harnessing this data to track patients health indicators longitudinally offers myriad opportunities, both in disease diagnosis and management, but perhaps more powerfully by monitoring wellness and detecting prodromal stages of disease. Herein, we advocate that if deployed appropriately in an integrated manner, they offer the potential for pharmaceutical companies to extend their footprint and rebrand themselves as wellness organizations to supplement or even supplant their traditionally perceived role. The range of sensors and biomarkers they are capable of tracking is ever increasing, and, coupled with potential changes in healthcare reimbursement models, represents an important juncture and opportunity for the industry to consider.[18]

The Digital Signature and Exhaust

Augmenting progress in devices that measure traditional (liquid) biomarkers, the emergence of wrist based and handheld devices capable of recording and tracking biomarkers digitally has been dramatic. Smartphones routinely possess basic step counters to allow owners to track physical activity, and a number of smart watches contain sophisticated sensors including photoplesymograms (PPG’s) and other circuitry to allow estimates of blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and body temperature, and customized accelerometers that can examine both mobility and gait.[19] Recent reports suggest that over 300,000 health related apps have been developed together with over 340 patient worn devices.[20] Translating these opportunities (which will involve recording of patients’ so-called ‘digital signatures’) into FDA approved devices which can provide clinical grade data will be a major objective over the coming years and initial guidance documents have started to emerge.[21] How such systems are deployed and cross communicate with other devices represents a systems engineering challenge that may on first examination, be perplexing for the medical software and device industries which typically are grounded in very different business cultures. It is instructive in this regard to examine comparisons with industries which have been transformed by use of sensor and systems technologies, and both the aircraft and automotive industries fit into this category. A typical automobile is equipped with over 100 sensors, which monitor myriad functions connected with performance, safety, emissions and speed. These sensors are deployed in systems based categories, and are connected via an engine management system (EMS, Figure 1). Subsets of curated data from these sensors are presented visually to the driver in the form of warnings. In some vehicles the display dashboard is capable of highlighting more than 60 sensors, and provision also exists for transmission of certain data to the service department of the manufacturer/dealer (Figure 2). Detailed data can be downloaded in digital format through the vehicles OBDII (onboard diagnostics port), in what is tantamount to a digital health signature of the vehicle.[22]

Possible extensions of such approaches to humans and human disease are inviting to make. Medicine has been typically taught and practiced on the basis of the major systems of the body (Figure 3). The counterpart to the vehicle EMS would be the brain, and the automotive service department a physician or health provider.

The opportunity to derive meaningful health related biomarkers from individual systems is considerable and provides impetus for the design and development of new sensors which capitalize on these information-rich and near limitless data sources (Table 1). If captured digitally and longitudinally, such outputs would constitute the ‘digital exhaust’ of a person, the ‘digital emissions’ providing information on degree of wellness, a composite and wide ranging equivalent of annual vehicle inspection and emissions tests.

Similar correlations exist with regard to aircraft systems, where data is typically recorded and transmitted in real time during the progress of a flight, enabling potential problems to be identified early and maintenance schedules adjusted to prevent the problem from becoming a safety concern. The live streaming of health indicators to a monitoring center will likely become a reality within this century, provided reliable sensors can be developed in vital areas. The aircraft industry, by its very nature, has also pioneered another development with potential to inform human health management – flight data recorders. Commonly known as the ‘black boxes’ these devices record complex flight data streams through a flight data recorder (FDR) and cockpit conversations through a cockpit voice recorder (CVR). Captured in real time in a continuous loop they are designed to provide critical information following a catastrophic event. The closest human analogy would be at post mortem, where a coroner follows specific procedures to determine cause of death.[23] These are typically conducted from a forensic standpoint as opposed to providing medical grade information than can be used for subsequent research (an exception being post mortem diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and chronic traumatic encephalopathy on examination of brain tissue).[24] One of the principal uses of the aircraft FDR is to apply knowledge gained to correct potential problems on other aircraft, in many cases resulting in re-engineering of entire fleets of specific models (Figure 4).

The human analogy could in principle involve phenotype level alerts being issued to the medical community based on combinations of deceased patient genetics, lifestyle factors and triggering events. For example, longitudinal data from subjects prescribed certain medications over an extended period may highlight potential contraindications and also contributing factors related to specific diets or sleep patterns.[25] To achieve this level of insight would require a comprehensive rethink of the requirements for post-mortem examinations possibly to include broad omic level liquid biopsy, a microbiome (16S rRNA) screen,[26] multimodal systems imaging, and upload of sensor data at time of death. This would be referenced against the digital exhaust of the subject over a specific time period, to help identify risk factors. Current autopsy data records organ mass, a toxicology and hematology panel, and highlights any obvious abnormalities.[27] Thus a considerable re-engineering would be required in addition to the obviously complex legal, ethical, and financial considerations. In the automotive sector, crash sensors which trigger deployment of passenger safety devices (airbags, air pillows) record information which can be retrieved for diagnostics e.g. ambient temperature, vehicle location, and speed at time of impact (Figure 4). The intersection of automotive systems management and consumer health tracking may be closer than we anticipate. A new generation of digital savvy consumers is already using smartphones and computers to diagnose problems with their vehicles. By connecting to the OBD-II port of the vehicle, apps are available to provide systems level information on problems and errors, and to even reset instrument panel warning lights. This same information is also capable of being transmitted wirelessly from the vehicle to a service center. This touches on a key consideration for the illness/wellness conundrum in healthcare. The consumer seeks such vehicle data in a reactive manner, to diagnose a fault. The automotive dealer may also use the same information to recommend provision of services for the vehicle, in a direct marketing approach. This has overtures of the direct-to-consumer marketing of pharmaceuticals, which has now become ubiquitous. A third consideration would be from an automotive service center assigned to a leased/rented vehicle, where maintenance forms part of the contract terms. It is in the owner’s interest to take proactive measures to ensure the vehicle is repaired/serviced at the first sign of a problem, which will a) reduce subsequent repair costs and b) help retain the residual market value of the vehicle at lease/rental term end. The correlations with human health decision-making are obvious, the latter example embodying the role of the insurers and end payers. Mechanisms to encourage patients to take proactive measures with regard to individual healthcare are varied, but there are encouraging signs that Generation X and Millennials will adopt such measures.[28] The deployment for example of a blood pressure sensor which is recorded by a smartphone and data uploaded to a provider is both proactive on the part of the subject and health provider, and the partnerships should ultimately translate to more effective outcomes and lower costs. Harnessing and promoting these types of activities en masse represents a major opportunity for the pharmaceutical industry to become more patient engaged, integrate wellness into its repertoire, and in the process redefine its image.

A New Model for Pharma?

Given the inherent commercial risks associated with bringing new drugs to market it makes ultimate sense for the pharmaceutical industry to consider diversification strategies. Furthermore, general association of the industry with illness/disease and widespread belief that drug costs are artificially high has resulted in a degree of skepticism and negativity surrounding the sector, particularly among the Generation X and Millennials. These groups however, would seem ideally positioned to embrace a revamped pharmaceutical industry that focused on wellness and health, responsive to their individual needs through new digital medicine platforms. This requires a rethinking of lifestyle management akin to lifecycle management in the case of a vehicle. By way of illustration, a purchaser of a vehicle will usually enjoy free service through at least the first 10k miles of its life. Some manufacturers offer this service through to 50k miles, at which time basic warranties often expire. The owner typically has the option to purchase additional warranty/insurance through to 80k miles, following which the vehicle will have depreciated significantly. Depending on the costs of annual maintenance and repair, which would be expected to increase dramatically as the vehicle passes the 100k mile mark, the owner will often take the decision to trade the vehicle in against a newer model (Figure 5). In terms of human health, the categories that apply to development of pharmaceutical drugs are pediatric, adult, and geriatric. In similar age related analysis, the elderly population necessarily consumes higher quantities of prescription drugs than adults and pediatrics, and the vehicle warranty analogy correlates to health premium costs, which typically advance significantly with age (supplementing those of Medicare and Medicaid in the USA).[29]

Given the likelihood that many chronic diseases can be detected earlier in life, the pharmaceutical industry is necessarily motivated to investigate diagnostic tools and screening procedures, many of which are currently reimbursed through healthcare programs. The more comprehensive opportunity however is to extend reach across the entire lifespan. Tracking through life stages, a new pharmaceutical industry model would offer a series of diagnostic tests (DX) in the form of both general screens and disease specific screens. These would involve a combination of conventional liquid biopsy and digital monitoring biomarkers (Figure 6). Many corporations have a portfolio of vaccines in their repertoire, and this is likely to continue apace as witnessed in the oncology sector. Genomic panels (at birth) may point to the need for additional vaccines based on genetic risk and other factors. Interventions to detected disease states would involve requisite medications (RX) which in theory could be provided either by the corporation providing the Dx or a third party affiliate, similar to the code-share and partnership models employed in the airline industry. As life stages are reached, an increasing number of general and disease specific DX tests would be applied, to allow very early detection of prodromal stages of disease, which would then be managed (RX) conventionally, presumably with improved outcomes. Developing corporate brand affinity/loyalty could logically commence at pre-natal stage, and at neonatal stage the first set of comprehensive biomarkers could be captured. Currently, the traditional heel stick test on a neonate examines for metabolic disorders and a limited battery of genetic disorders. More comprehensive omic tests and epigenetic analyses could be required, together with a microbiome baseline and cyTOF immunophenotyping.[30]

Subsequent analyses (akin to service intervals in the automotive sector) could be through a combination of digital biomarkers (onboard diagnostics) and ex vivo biopsies. Analysis of blood, breath, saliva, and tears can already be conducted on peripherals linked to a smartphone,[31] and this composite data could be used to track wellness and provide information on relevant materials as the subject transitions through juvenile and post pubescent stages e.g. advice on dietary factors, environmental hazards. In the case of certain cardiovascular and neurological diseases for example, there is growing evidence that digital biomarkers can provide actionable diagnoses.[32] When sensors alert the health provider on the potential need for therapeutics, the consumer may have the right to use either the diagnostic provider/sponsor or a third party/independent supplier as dictated by applicable state and federal laws/statutes.[33] The potential for reciprocal agreements between pharmaceutical companies could become a reality in this model, which might in turn stratify which classes of therapeutics individual corporations invested in. In both early and later stages of life, the tracking technology could be monitored by a family member or care provider who would be responsible for taking interventive action. Examples could range from adjusting dietary components to control a child’s blood sugar, to clarifying that an elderly patient had taken their required medication – a situation exacerbated in diseases where memory is impaired e.g. Alzheimer’s. In addition to alerting patients with options for therapeutic interventions, digitally captured data might prompt patient coaching – e.g. recommending changes in exercise/diet/sleep regimens in response to biomarker changes.[34] Critically, in the case of currently incurable diseases such as Alzheimer’s, it might recommend follow up analysis, e.g. a confirmative positron emission tomography scan from which to engage the patient in clinical trials. Managing the patient interface between conventional and digital biopsies will require considerable thought. However, such approaches have the potential to expand and improve patient interfaces with pharmaceutical companies, which is likely to become pivotal in the years ahead.

Early Innovators

Given the rapidly evolving healthcare landscape, a number of pharmaceutical companies have begun exploring the use of digital tools in earnest. Key drivers identified involve increasing patient engagement, improving health outcome measures and the desire for deep data analytics.35 Patient engagement is defined by the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) as “actions people take for their health and to benefit from care”.36 Numerous additional strategy documents point to the need for the industry to focus on well-being and optimal management of illness,35 and this is supported by patient expectations. One study reported that &gt;60% of diabetes, &gt;70% of asthma, and &gt;80% of schizophrenia patients expected the drug company to provide assistance beyond the medication.37 Accordingly, a number of partnerships between pharmaceutical and health technology companies have recently been formed. For example, Biogen has deployed Fitbit devices to monitor walking activities of its multiple sclerosis patients38 and Sanofi are now working with Verily Life Sciences on patient support for diabetics.39 In terms of drug delivery, GlaxoSmithKline are collaborating with Propeller Health on a digital respiratory health management system for use with inhalers.37 Pfizer has initiated a collaborative venture with Akili Interactive Laboratories to develop a digital biomarker assessment tool for Alzheimer’s patients.40 Boehringer Ingelheim have even established a dedicated new start up (BI X) as platform for digital transformation in data science, software development and user experience design.41 Johnson and Johnson, through its LifeScan subsidiary is partnering with WellDoc on use of its Blue Star app for management of various conditions.42 With the prospect of reimbursement moving towards outcomes based models, there is natural concern within the pharmaceutical sector regarding patient compliance with medications. Among efforts to address this, Novo Nordisk have partnered with Glooko Inc. to develop apps which allow continuous glucose monitoring among diabetes patients.39 Novartis established a partnership with Qualcomm using the Proteus ‘chip-in-a-pill’ technology to track medication adherence to patients taking the drug Diovan post organ transplant.38 Deployment of this technology reportedly increased compliance from 30% to 80% within six months.38

Under an entirely different model, rather than purchasing medications, some insurers and employers are signaling interest in provision of overall solutions. In one case, Livongo Health now provides a digital monitoring service (for type II diabetic patients) coupled with a coach, who help people live medication free in return for subscription to its program.39 A key over-arching theme is development of digital health technology which can increase patient activation and engagement.36 Patient engagement platforms (PEP’s) have been outlined, and will likely form a major component of strategy for the pharmaceutical industry in the years ahead.

Challenges and Opportunities

The convergence of the pharmaceutical and digital technology sectors promises to have a defining impact on healthcare. However, numerous challenges will be experienced not the least of which will be clash of cultures from the two sectors. For digital technology companies, it will become a learning experience working with pharmaceutical corporations, in what is a highly regulated business where innovation typically proceeds at a more measured pace.43 Additionally, typical margins for digital health products are less than for blockbuster drugs and realistic expectations will need to be set.39 The stark contrast in business models can be observed in the products both sectors develop. On the one hand, technology devices and apps require near constant upgrades and innovations, typically unconstrained by regulatory burdens, in contrast to a drug product that, once approved and introduced to the market is rarely modified in any form as mandated by the regulatory agencies.43 There may also be concerns regarding brand affinity among patients. Most early stage digital technology companies have developed deep ties to their patient and physician networks, and the introduction of a partner from the pharmaceutical sector may temper enthusiasm or even prompt a degree of skepticism. These early innovators often cherish their roles as technology pioneers, holding highly positive perceptions regarding the industry and its contributions to advancing society.

A major, perhaps defining issue relates to the actual data captured through these technologies – both in volume and complexity. It is reasonable to conclude that future leaders in the pharmaceutical sector will be those with access to large quantities of highly granular patient data. Signaling its intent in the field, IBM has recently acquired a number of companies (Truven, Explorys, Merge and Phytel), which collectively own substantial collections of such data, which can be used for analytics.39 One such application is a joint program between IBM Watson and Pfizer on data analytics for immuno-oncology.39 The role of artificial intelligence (AI) in data interrogation is likely to be an area of future focus, and companies such as Google, Baidu and Yahoo have announced investment in this and machine learning to study patient behavior and response to disease.39 A natural concern as digital health evolved was the need for adequate data security and storage solutions. However, a number of products have now been developed for comprehensive patient medical data storage and access, a prominent example being Microsoft’s HealthVault.36 As health related apps evolve there will also be merit in approaches which reduce the need for enormous data sets. Among leaders in this approach is Cardiogram e.g. through its DeepHeart product, a semi-supervised neural network that accurately predicts cardiovascular risk, but requires 10× less labeled data than conventional techniques.44 Interesting developments can also be expected with regard to access to patients omic information by the pharmaceutical industry. For example, through the personalized genomics sequencing services recently outlined by Nebula45 and Luna,46 patients can grant pharmaceutical companies access to data in return for provision of services, using a blockchain type financing model. As these relationships evolve, they will help reposition the pharmaceutical industry in the eyes of the consumer, prior to the onset of any disease, consistent with the notion of becoming wellness oriented. Ultimately, financial pressure on the industry and providers will likely drive a number of measures and innovations. For example, on patient prescription medication compliance alone, the Congressional Budget Office has estimated that a 1% improvement could translate to nearly $2 Billion in savings for the Medicare budget.36

Over the Horizon: The Closed-Loop Autopharmacy?

The impact of digital technologies in medicine looks certain to help evolve managed healthcare, with patient experiences and patient outcomes front and center. Technology can also be expected to alter the methods which we actually employ to detect and treat the symptoms of disease. An ultimate expression of a disease detection-intervention tool would be in the form of an integrated closed-loop disease management system (Figure 7). In this approach, various positioned sensors (Dx) would track key biomarkers and communicate to a wireless hub. When prompted, the hub would intervene, e.g. in the deployment of a drug (RX) from a closed loop delivery device, akin to an automated pharmacy on demand. Such possibilities, originally confined to the realm of science fiction, have now been reduced to practice, as evidenced by the MiniMed 670G closed loop glucose detector/insulin injector.

There are myriad additional applications, which are currently only limited by the availability of appropriate miniaturized sensors which might be deployed (Table 2). For example, a patient suffering from depression and with a history of non-compliance with medications might benefit from release of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) when neurotransmitter levels fell below a pre-determined threshold. Likewise a patient suffering from high stress levels might benefit from automated delivery of a medicament when cortisol (or other biomarker) levels peak.[47] Such devices could become highly miniaturized and incorporate patient-inspired form factors –e.g. using transdermal patches for drug release.[48] An even more time sensitive application could be detection of food based allergens, necessitating immediate release of antidote to combat anaphylaxis– e.g. epinephrine on detection of peanut allergen or rapid release of anti-toxins for at-risk workers. Other biomarkers might be physical and not chemical. For example, a major concern following concussion is the subsequent formation of blood clots. A sensor able to detect such an event – e.g. blunt force impact, could trigger release of a PAF antagonist or anti-coagulant. Similar considerations apply to stroke and micro-stroke victims, and precision monitors could presumably be engineered to pinpoint the onset of ischemic events. Sensors can also be designed which monitor multiple digital biomarkers. A recent study correlated temperature and heart rate fluctuations with GPS data to indicate patient contraction of Lyme disease. [49] Rapid introduction of antibiotic from a closed loop system could presumably improve outcome. Sometimes the sensors would detect a disease condition where no medication is available, but an intervention is needed –e.g. border quarantine in response to detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) or other pandemics. These automated actions may appear visionary, but could be implemented with sufficient demand and progress in miniaturized sensor design. Using the vehicle analogy, we now take for granted myriad automated actions in response to stimuli. Some we visually see – e.g. rain sensors triggering windshield wipers, automatic headlights, parking warning devices, some we only feel e.g. traction control devices and antilock brakes, and others we are entirely oblivious to, yet are essential e.g. a thermostat opening the engine cooling system. Accordingly, it can be expected that our perceptions of managed healthcare and wellness will alter as new developments and systems are introduced.

Conclusions and Outlook

We have now entered a period where advances in our understanding of disease, coupled with new diagnostic technologies (both conventional and digital) have the potential for revolutionary impact on patient care. A related set of technologies which focus on health maintenance and wellness have also emerged, in some cases traversing the illness/wellness boundary. Viewed holistically, using technology to track the wellness-illness continuum over a subject’s lifespan represents a logical approach to managed healthcare, allowing among other things early diagnosis. Given their current and expanding portfolio of conventional therapeutic and diagnostic products, such represents a timely and opportune juncture for the pharmaceutical industry to rebrand itself in the wellness/illness continuum, as patient-centric lifestyle corporations. This will require deep collaboration between the industry and technology corporations. In the design of new model care systems, it is instructive to learn from other regulated industries with experience in event sensing/monitoring and user-data interfaces. It is also an opportune moment to evaluate potential changes in standard medical practice, and the benefits of patient screening from neonatal stage through autopsy if the full benefits of digital medicine are to be realized. Exciting developments in disease management are also on the horizon, including closed-loop systems which function akin to an automated pharmacy. The first example of a designed device capable of adapting itself to its environment was the Homeostat, developed by W Ross Ashby in 1948.[50] In the following seven decades we have witnessed tremendous progress in disease management and he would surely be enlightened by the repertoire of options we have available at our disposal to achieve patient homeostasis.[51] The strategy of playing late-stage disease ‘whack-a-mole’ using combination chemotherapeutics is being supplanted by methods which offer digital and molecular level precision, and promise to transform medicine in ways previously unimaginable to us.[52] Warning signs on the need for the pharmaceutical industry to entertain new business models are legion.[53] Proposed mergers of point of delivery pharmacies with managed healthcare organizations will serve to increase pressures on the marketplace, [54] as will potential changes in reimbursement models. This said, there is growing acceptance on the part of patients willingness to share medical data records,[55,45–46] coupled with compelling evidence that early diagnosis, in the prodromal stages of disease, can translate to improved outcome and intervention strategies.[56–57] Together, this sets the stage for the dynamic growth of digitally informed medicine as a backbone of contemporary healthcare. It is a field which the pharmaceutical industry can help define, and may lead to new business models within the industry, as witnesses in the codeshare and partnership alliances seen in the airline sector. The need for this engagement is becoming acute, driven by both ethical and financial considerations. While the focus on wellness is a central tenet for extending life expectancy, as longevity has steadily increased globally, considerations on later stage quality of life have now become of heightened importance. This is particularly relevant with the debilitating neurological disorders increasingly afflicting senior populations, where early diagnosis offers promise for intervention. There exists hope and growing optimism that digital technologies can play a lead role in the battle against these diseases, and in the process show the medical community how wellness screening based on digital medicine can help drive tangible solutions. It will thus be interesting to observe how the pharmaceutical industry responds to these opportunities over the coming decades.

The authors thank William A. Jones for creating Figures 1–7.

Funding Sources

GBJ acknowledges funding from the NIH National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences through grant UL1 TR001064.

Figure 1 Automotive systems map

Figure 2 Visual sensor warning dashboard

Figure 3 Human physiological systems

Figure 4 Forensic Data Capture in Adverse Event Management

Figure 5 Defining points in lifecycle management of automobiles and health

Figure 6 Recasting pharma as wellness &amp; health maintenance organizations

Figure 7 Sample components of a multi-sensor closed loop drug delivery system

Table 1 Opportunities for human biomarker sensing

• &gt;20 million nerve endings	
• 206 bones, 78 organs, 650 skeletal muscles	
• &gt;50,000 discrete proteins	
• Circulatory system stretches 60,000 miles	
• 5 l blood &amp; 7.5 l breath pumped/minute	
• ~ 10,000 unique molecules in diet	
• ~ 0.7 kg fecal, 2 l urine, 6 l sweat, 2 ml tears, 2 l saliva/day	

Table 2 Applications of closed-loop disease management

Sensor	Biomarker	Presentation	Intervention	
Serotonin	Chemical	Depression	SSRI	
Cortisol	Chemical	Stress	Ketoconazole	
Peanut allergens	Chemical	Anaphylaxis	Epinephrine	
Snake venom	Chemical	Thrombosis	Antivenom Ig	
Concussion	Physical	Blood clot	Coumadin	
Temp/HR/GPS	Digital	Lyme disease	Doxycycline	
Temp/viral/GPS	Digital	SARS, avian flu	Quarantine	

Statement of Ethics

The authors have no ethical conflicts to disclose.

Disclosure Statement

The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Author Contributions

JMW and GBJ developed and wrote the entire article and assembled for submission.


1 Mullard A New drugs cost US$2.6 billion to develop Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2014 13 877
2 Wager K Jones GB The Forward Path for Biopharmaceuticals and Biosimilars: Emerging Options in the Selection of Host Cell Systems Current Biotechnology 2012 1 4 297 317
3 Berkowitz SA Engen JR Mazzeo JR Jones GB Analytical tools for characterizing biopharmaceuticals and the implications for biosimilars Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2012 11 527 540 22743980
4 Brinckerhoff CC Schorr K Patent Watch: Have The Biosimilar Floodgates Been Opened in the United States? Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2015 14 303
5 Haffner ME Adopting orphan drugs—two dozen years of treating rare diseases N Engl J Med 2006 354 5 445 447 16452556
6 Guo J Gong G Zhang B Screening and identification of potential biomarkers in triple-negative breast cancer by integrated analysis Oncol Rep 2017 38 4 2219 2228 28849078
7 Jørgensen JT Hersom M Companion diagnostics—a tool to improve pharmacotherapy Ann Transl Med 2016 4 24 482 28149844
8 FDA-NIH Biomarker Working Group BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource [Internet] Silver Spring (MD) Food and Drug Administration (US) 2016 Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK326791/ Co-published by National Institutes of Health (US), Bethesda (MD). [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
9 Collins FS Varmus H A New Initiative on Precision Medicine N Engl J Med 2015 372 793 795 25635347
10 Wang T Azad T Rajan R The emerging influence of digital biomarkers on healthcare 2016 https://rockhealth.com/reports/ [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
11 Franz C Innovation for Health: Success Factors for the Research-Based Pharmaceutical Industry Franz C Bieger T Herrmann A Evolving Business Models Management for Professionals Springer 2017 93 112 10.1007/978-3-319-48938-4_7
12 Moyle PM Progress in vaccine development Curr Protoc Microbiol 2015 36 18 1 26 25641099
13 Bergenstal RM Garg S Weinzimer SA Buckingham BA Bode BW Tamborlane WV Safety of a Hybrid Closed-Loop Insulin Delivery System in Patients With Type 1 Diabetes JAMA 2016 316 13 1407 1408 27629148
14 Klopfleisch R Jung F The pathology of the foreign body reaction against biomaterials J Biomed Mater Res Part A 2017 105A 927 940
15 Zhang W Du Y Wang ML Noninvasive glucose monitoring using saliva nano-biosensor Sensing and Biosensing Res 2015 4 23 29
16 Srinivasan V Pamula VK Fair RB An integrated digital microfluidic lab-on-a-chip for clinical diagnostics on human physiological fluids Lab Chip 2004 4 310 315 15269796
17 https://verily.com/projects/sensors/smart-lens-program/ [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

18 Rodarte C Pharmaceutical Perspective: How Digital Biomarkers and Contextual Data Will Enable Therapeutic Environments Digit Biomark 2017 1 73 81
19 Maron J Jones GB How Sensors, Devices and Biomarkers can Transform Precision Medicine: Perspectives from a Clinical and Translational Science Institute Clin Ther 2018 40 345 348 29371003
20 Aitken M Clancy B Nass D The Growing Value of Digital Health Evidence and Impact on Human Health and the Healthcare System Iqvia Institute 11 7 2017 https://www.iqvia.com/institute/reports/the-growing-value-of-digital-health
21 https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DigitalHealth/UCM567265 [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

22 Pan Y-J Yu T-C Cheng RS Using OBD-II data to explore driving behavior model 2017 International Conference on Applied System Innovation (ICASI) 10.1109/ICASI.2017.7988297 [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
23 Foroudi F Cheung K Duflou J A comparison of the needle biopsy post mortem with the conventional autopsy Pathology 1995 27 1 79 82 7603760
24 Landau SM Thomas BA Thurfjell L Schmidt M Margolin R Mintun M Amyloid PET imaging in Alzheimer’s disease: A comparison of three radiotracers Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2014 41 7 1398 1407 24647577
25 Launiainen T Ojanperä I Drug concentrations in post-mortem femoral blood compared with therapeutic concentrations in plasma Drug Test Anal 2014 6 4 308 316 23881890
26 Huse SM Ye Y Zhou Y Fodor AA A Core Human Microbiome as Viewed through 16S rRNA Sequence Clusters PLoS ONE 2012 7 6 e34242 22719824
27 Madea B Rothschild M The post mortem examination—determination of the cause and manner of death Dtsch Arztebl Int 2010 107 33 575 588 20830284
28 Torous J Rodriguez J Powell A The New Digital Divide For Digital Biomarkers Digit Biomark 2017 1 87 91 29104959
29 Alemayehu B Warner K The lifetime distribution of health care costs Health Serv Res 2004 39 3 627 642 15149482
30 Bjornson ZB Nolan GP Fantl WJ Single Cell Mass Cytometry for Analysis of Immune System Functional States Curr Opin Immunol 2013 25 4 484 94 23999316
31 Kühnemund M Wei Q Darai E Wang Y Hernández-Neuta I Yang Z Targeted DNA sequencing and in situ mutation analysis using mobile phone microscopy Nat Comm 2017 8 13913
32 Vashist SK Schneider EM Luong JHT Commercial Smartphone-Based Devices and Smart Applications for Personalized Healthcare Monitoring and Management Diagnostics 2014 4 3 104 128 26852680
33 http://www.autonews.com/article/20140125/RETAIL05/301279936/automakers-agree-to-right-to-repair-deal [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

34 Price ND Magis AT Earls JC A wellness study of 108 individuals using personal, dense, dynamic data clouds Nat Biotechnol 2017 35 747 756 28714965
35 Mentesana M Rotz G Strang D Swanick M Pharmaceuticals and Life Sciences Trends https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/trend/2017-life-sciences-trends, [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
36 Digital Health: A way for pharma companies to be more relevant in healthcare https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/file/Strategyand_Digital-Health.pdf [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
37 Saddler B Arnold M Beyond the pill – moving past the hype to driving outcomes http://www.drgdigital.com/drg-digital-innovation-blog/beyond-the-pill-moving-past-the-hype-to-driving-outcomes [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
38 Bates A The Time is Now to Move Far Beyond the Pill https://social.eyeforpharma.com/column/time-now-move-far-beyond-pill, [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
39 Neville S Digital disrupters take big pharma beyond the pill FT series artificial intelligence in real workplaces 2017 4 24 https://www.ft.com/content/d7a60642-0361-11e7-ace0-1ce02ef0def9 [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
40 Akili and Pfizer Release Positive Data from Digital Biomarker Study libraries.state.ma.us/login?gwurl=http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?p=ITOF&amp;sw=w&amp;u=mlin_m_tufts&amp;v=2.1&amp;id=GALE%7CA474118135&amp;it=r&amp;asid=cda738b812304a537cc1ee94d07daa82. [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
41 https://www.bix-digital.com [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

42 https://www.lifescan.com/about-us [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

43 Grootendorst P Hollis A Levine DK New approaches to rewarding pharmaceutical innovation CMAJ 2011 183 681 5 21149519
44 https://cardiogr.am/about/[last [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

45 https://www.nebulagenomics.io [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

46 https://www.lunadna.com [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]

47 Cohen H Benjamin J Kaplan Z Kotler M Administration of high-dose ketoconazole, an inhibitor of steroid synthesis, prevents posttraumatic anxiety in an animal model Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2000 10 6 429 35 11115731
48 Alkilani AZ McCrudden MT Donnelly RF Transdermal drug delivery: Innovative pharmaceutical developments based on disruption of the barrier properties of the stratum corneum Pharmaceutics 2015 7 438 470 26506371
49 Li X Dunn J Salins D Zhou G Zhou W Schüssler-Fiorenza Rose SM Digital Health: Tracking Physiomes and Activity Using Wearable Biosensors Reveals Useful Health-Related Information PLoS Biol 2017 15 1 e2001402 28081144
50 Peter A Cariani PA The homeostat as embodiment of adaptive control Int J Gen Systems 2009 38 2 139 154
51 Meister S Deitersand W Becker S Digital health and digital biomarkers–enabling value chains on health data Current Directions in Biomedical Engineering 2016 2 1 577 581
52 Steinberg D Horwitz G Zohar D Building a business model in digital medicine Nature Biotech 2015 33 910 920
53 Stott K Pharma’s broken business model: An industry on the brink of terminal decline Endpoints News 11/28/17 available at: https://endpts.com/pharmas-broken-business-model-an-industry-on-the-brink-of-terminal-decline/ [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
54 de la Merced MJ Abelson R CVS to Buy Aetna for $69 Billion in a Deal That May Reshape the Health Industry New York Times 12/3/17 available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/03/business/dealbook/cvs-is-said-to-agree-to-buy-aetna-reshaping-health-care-industry.html [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
55 Patient engagement: Pharma’s strategy for success in the New Health Economy PWC 2016, report available at: https://www.pwc.com/us/en/health-industries/health-research-institute/publications/new-patient-engagement.html [last accessed Feb 23, 2018]
56 Giggins OM Clay I Walsh L Physical Activity Monitoring in Patients with Neurological Disorders: A Review of Novel Body-Worn Devices Digit Biomark 2017 1 14 42
57 Burbulla LF Song P Mazzulli JR Zampese E Wong YC Jeon S Santos DP Dopamine oxidation mediates mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease Science 2017 357 1255 61 28882997
