LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0020713
6083
Neuropsychologia
Neuropsychologia
Neuropsychologia
0028-3932
1873-3514

29746820
6086740
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.05.001
NIHMS968056
Article
Electrophysiological repetition effects in persons with mild cognitive impairment depend upon working memory demand
Broster Lucas S. ab
Jenkins Shonna L. ac
Holmes Sarah D. ad
Edwards Matthew G. a
Jicha Gregory A. ef
Jiang Yang af
a Department of Behavioral Science, University of Kentucky, USA
b Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, USA
c Movement Disorders Program, Medical University of South Carolina, USA
d Department of Gerontology, University of Maryland, USA
e Department of Neurology, University of Kentucky, USA
f Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, USA
17 5 2018
07 5 2018
8 2018
01 8 2019
117 1325
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Forms of implicit memory, including repetition effects, are preserved relative to explicit memory in clinical Alzheimer’s disease. Consequently, cognitive interventions for persons with Alzheimer’s disease have been developed that leverage this fact. However, despite the clinical robustness of behavioral repetition effects, altered neural mechanisms of repetition effects are studied as biomarkers of both clinical Alzheimer’s disease and pre-morbid Alzheimer’s changes in the brain. We hypothesized that the clinical preservation of behavioral repetition effects results in part from concurrent operation of discrete memory systems. We developed two experiments that included probes of emotional repetition effects differing in that one included an embedded working memory task. We found that neural repetition effects manifested in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment, the earliest form of clinical Alzheimer’s disease, during emotional working memory tasks, but they did not manifest during the task that lacked the embedded working memory manipulation. Specifically, the working memory task evoked neural repetition effects in the P600 time-window, but the same neural mechanism was only minimally implicated in the task without a working memory component. We also found that group differences in behavioral repetition effects were smaller in the experiment with a working memory task. We suggest that cross-domain cognitive challenge can expose “defunct” neural capabilities of individuals with amnestic mild cognitive impairment.

cognitive rehabilitation
event-related potential
Alzheimer’s disease
mild cognitive impairment
IAPS
repetition effect
working memory

Introduction

Repetition effects, unconscious alterations in behavior, memory, or cognitive processing of a phenomenon upon repeated exposure, are typically found to be preserved in the context of clinical Alzheimer’s disease1 (Fleischman, 2007; Fleischman et al., 2005). More than merely preserved, these effects are sometimes even enhanced. For example, in the weather prediction task, which requires that individuals unconsciously learn associations between symbols and a “weather” outcome by repetition, people with moderate to severe AD show enhanced performance relative to older adults without impairment (Klimkowicz-Mrowiec, Slowik, Krzywoszanski, Herzog-Krzywoszanska, &amp; Szczudlik, 2008). Many studies of implicit memory reflect this preservation, whereas explicit memory capacities such as working memory are impaired (Carlesimo, Mauri, Fadda, Turriziani, &amp; Caltagirone, 2001; Carlesimo et al., 1998; Friedman, Hamberger, Stern, &amp; Marder, 1992; Kessels, Remmerswaal, &amp; Wilson, 2011; Klimkowicz-Mrowiec et al., 2008; Mitchell &amp; Schmitt, 2006). The visual delayed-match-to-sample task is among the tasks that show this pattern (Broster et al., 2013; Kazmerski &amp; Friedman, 1997; Schnyer, Allen, Kaszniak, &amp; Forster, 1999), and sparing in this context has been linked to plasticity at posterior cortex (Broster et al., 2015).

Sparing of repetition effects has been linked to salutary cognitive rehabilitation interventions (Jean et al., 2010; Kessels &amp; de Haan, 2003a, 2003b; Lubinsky, Rich, &amp; Anderson, 2009; Mimura &amp; Komatsu, 2010; van Halteren-van Tilborg, Scherder, &amp; Hulstijn, 2007; White, Ford, Brown, Peel, &amp; Triebel, 2014; Zanetti et al., 1997). For example, implicit memory-based paradigms such as errorless learning and procedural memory stimulation show promise as cognitive rehabilitation targets (Mimura &amp; Komatsu, 2010). Hence, repetition effects have clinical relevance for persons with AD (Hopper, 2003).

Some evidence runs counter to this narrative. In fact, absence of late time-window electrophysiological repetition effects has been proposed as a biomarker of AD (Olichney et al., 2006; Olichney et al., 2002); a biomarker of its earliest clinical stage, amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (Olichney et al., 2008); and even as a biomarker of its preceding stage, sometimes called pre-Alzheimer’s disease (pre-AD), characterized by biomarkers of AD without clinical impairment (Olichney et al., 2013). In these studies, participants without signs or symptoms of AD showed repetition effects in late event-related potentials (ERPs), but individuals with either AD or pre-AD (i.e., individuals with either clinical AD or biomarkers of AD without clinical symptoms) did not. In these experiments, word stimuli were displayed to participants, participants made a judgment about the content of each word, and individual stimuli were re-tested after a delay ranging from several seconds to about 2 minutes. The effect has proven reliable through multiple experiments and cohorts and has been reported to discriminate between pre-AD and individuals without disease with 84% accuracy (Olichney et al., 2006; Olichney et al., 2002; Olichney et al., 2013; Olichney et al., 2008).

Both the status of behavioral and neural repetition effects in AD and their reliability as biomarkers are important clinical and experimental questions. If such effects are reliably intact in early AD, they represent an unappreciated clinical opportunity (Hopper, 2003). On the other hand, if the reports of spared or enhanced effects are unreliable for whatever reason (e.g., being apparent only in cohorts with idiosyncratic characteristics), characterizing the source of the sparing to identify the scope of the effect would be clinically valuable and direct future experimentation probing the effect.

We suggest that the discrepancy between repetition effect manifestation in these experiments may result from extraneous task characteristics. For example, studies that found a lack of repetition effects often tested repetition effects concurrent with a task that required participants to make fact-based content judgments about the current stimulus (Fleischman, 2007). By contrast, the repetition effects elicited by paradigms like the weather prediction and delayed-match-to-sample tasks were concurrent with explicit tasks requiring participants to either speculate about an outcome or recall items held in working memory, respectively (Broster et al., 2011; Broster et al., 2013; Klimkowicz-Mrowiec et al., 2008). In other words, cognitive challenge appears to be common to circumstances where repetition effects appear spared, but this possibility has not been experimentally demonstrated.

We conducted two experiments to assess this possibility while recording event-related potentials to measure neural mechanisms of behavioral repetition effects. In the first experiment, participants with and without MCI evaluated the content of images, and each image was evaluated multiple times (Borg, Leroy, Favre, Laurent, &amp; Thomas-Anterion, 2011; Kazui, Mori, Hashimoto, &amp; Hirono, 2003; May, Manning, Einstein, Becker, &amp; Owens, 2015; Zhang, Lawson, Guo, &amp; Jiang, 2006). In requiring content evaluation, this task is similar to studies that have shown impairment in repetition effects for persons with AD. In the second experiment, the same participants performed a repeated working memory task (i.e., delayed-match-to-sample) with similar images (Guo, Lawson, &amp; Jiang, 2007; Lawson, Guo, &amp; Jiang, 2007; J. Li et al., 2017; Q. Li, Guo, &amp; Jiang, 2008). We anticipated that repetition effects would manifest in persons with MCI only in the context of the concurrent working memory task (Lawson et al., 2007).

Methods

Power Analysis

We performed an a priori power analysis to estimate number of participants necessary to detect a moderate group × condition interaction using G*Power 3.0.10 (Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, &amp; Lang, 2009; Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, &amp; Buchner, 2007). We anticipated that all groups and conditions would have two levels, so MANOVA was used to estimate needed sample size. The analysis indicated that 30 participants would be necessary for 80% power to detect significant effects (α = 0.05).

In addition, we recruited participants as dyads, such that error attributable to within-dyad variance could be reduced (cf., below). This attribution generally improves power provided that degrees of freedom are sufficiently high, where the sufficient number of degrees of freedom depends on effect size (Cohen, 1988).

Participants

32 older adult participants – 16 with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 16 with normal cognitive status (NC) – participated in experimental protocols. All NC participants were the spouse or long-term partner of an individual with amnestic mild cognitive impairment; hence, individual MCI participants were matched with their unaffected spouse for purposes of analysis. Of the participants, 22 were members of the University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Center (UK-ADC) longitudinal clinical cohort while 10 were recruited from the Kentucky Neuroscience Institute (KNI) at the University of Kentucky. Recruiting directly from tertiary care memory clinics reduces the risk that cognitive effects observed result from non-AD memory impairment conditions such as thyroid or vitamin B12 deficiency (Jicha et al., 2008; Luck et al., 2007). Individuals in the UK-ADC cohort are assessed every year (prior to clinical change) or every 6 months (subsequent to clinical change) with a battery of neuropsychological tests including the Uniform Data Set (UDS) and the Geriatric Depression Scale, Short Form (GDS15). For participants who were part of the UK-ADC cohort, the UDS scores collected most proximal in time to research participation were consulted as descriptors of the cognitive status of participants; for participants who were recruited directly from KNI, research personnel trained in the administration of the UDS collected the UDS and GDS15 data on-site. One spousal dyad elected not to perform the on-site neuropsychological testing. Because other missing data were sparse, missing neuropsychological data was handled using the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. Summarized neuropsychological findings and associations are included as part of Table 1. Additional neuropsychological details beyond the scope of this manuscript are included in Broster et al., (2017).

In keeping with contemporary clinical criteria (Albert et al., 2011; Arsenault-Lapierre et al., 2011; Lekeu et al., 2010; Reid &amp; Maclullich, 2006), MCI was indicated by A) absence of dementia, B) absence of cognitive, clinical, or behavioral symptoms consistent with sources of non-amnestic cognitive impairment, and C) objective memory impairment evidenced by performance more than 1.5 standard deviations below age-standardized normal values on at least one of several memory measures including Wechsler Memory Scale Logical Memory (WMS-R), the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT-II), and the Benton Visual Retention Test (BVRT-5, Forms C &amp; D). AD was diagnosed using Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia Workgroup criteria, which hold, briefly, that insidious-onset dementia is present in the absence of another psychiatric or neurological condition (McKhann et al., 2011). All participants were recruited directly from the tertiary care setting and had received comprehensive work-up to rule-out other psychiatric or neurological causes of cognitive impairment. Individuals with MCI had been diagnosed within 12 months of data collection, all research participants had been evaluated clinically within 12 months of data collection, and all research participants were evaluated clinically on an annual basis to check for conversion to MCI. After conversion to MCI, cohort participants were evaluated at least every 6 months. In other words, all participants were clinically evaluated both prior to and subsequent to research participation to confirm their clinical status. All participants were between age 65 and 92 with visual acuity better than 20/50 with corrective lenses in at least one eye. Exclusion criteria included history of stroke; epilepsy; head trauma; CNS infection, chronic infectious disease; psychiatric illness including substance abuse, major depression, or other mood disorder; or other neurological disease (Robert et al., 2006). Participants taking medications known to negatively affect cognitive function, such as sedatives or opiates, were similarly excluded; however, participants taking cholinergic and similar medication to treat Alzheimer’s disease were included in the study.

During initial screening for recruitment, individuals who reported themselves to be left-handed were excluded to reduce the influence of any associated electrophysiological sequelae on the data. However, during subsequent on-site re-screening, it was determined that two participants were born left-handed, but had been forced to learn to write right-handed early in life. Because these individuals were balanced in terms of their cognitive status (i.e., one NC, one MCI), we decided not to exclude their data from the analyses.

Measures and Procedures

All participants performed two experiments: an affective repetition task (Figure 1), and an emotional delayed-match-to-sample task (Figure 2). Additionally, all but two participants either made the neuropsychological data from their most proximal UK-ADC visits available to research personnel or agreed to undergo equivalent neuropsychological testing on-site, as actionable.

For Experiment 1, participants performed an affective repetition task while electroencephalography was performed (Figure 1). Participants observed images from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) and performed a distractor task of judging whether images contained human or human parts (hereafter, “HHP”), and individual emotional images were tested multiple times with variable jitter (Figure 1). Participants pressed the “A” and “L” keys on a keyboard to indicate each response. To reduce the difficulty of the task for participants less familiar with use of keyboards, all other keys on the keyboard had been removed. Incorporating multiple memory faculties into a single paradigm, as in the emotional enhancement effect-repetition paradigm used in this study, facilitates the interpretation of resultant interaction effects (Kennedy, Rodrigue, Head, Gunning-Dixon, &amp; Raz, 2009; Voss &amp; Paller, 2008, 2009).

360 trials were performed altogether in 3 blocks of 120 trials each. Each block lasted approximately 7 minutes and included periodic “rest” periods of approximately 10s. Each trial consisted of the presentation of a single image, and each image in the study was tested exactly 3 times. Images were presented pseudorandomly with respect to stimulus type. The response key (i.e., “A” or “L”) used to indicate each HHP response was balanced within-participants, within-dyads, and between-dyads. That is, the hand that participants would use to indicate whether HHP were included in each image was switched between blocks (e.g., if it was “A” during block 1, it would become “L” during block 2); for each dyad of participants, the initial key used to indicate HHP being present was counterbalanced (e.g., if the participant with MCI used “A” during block 1, his or her spouse sued “L” during block 1); and for each alternating dyad of participants, the initial key used by the MCI participant in the dyad was counterbalanced (e.g., if the participant with MCI in the first dyad used “A” during block 1, the participant with MCI in the second dyad used “L” during block 1). During each block staff monitored participant behavior and performance using a video camera and real-time NeuroScan behavioral performance feedback, respectively. Participants took a short, self-paced break between blocks that typically lasted about 60 seconds. During this time researchers confirmed the comfort of participants and provided encouragement to participants that included reassurance about the ambiguity of the task for some stimuli. In this experiment, the ongoing task was intended primarily to ensure that participants remained focused on the content of the images to ensure their affective impact, and the ongoing task was not correlated with the implicit emotional manipulation employed. Due to previous experience that accuracy feedback disproportionately impacts participants with MCI, participants did not receive accuracy feedback (J. Li et al., 2017).

Because of the relative simplicity of the task and in the interest of participants’ time, participants were not required to perform a practice session before participating in this task unless they elected to. No participants elected to participate in a practice session for this task.

For Experiment 2, participants performed an affective delayed-match-to-sample task with repetition while electroencephalography was performed (Figure 2). During each trial, participants were first shown two sample images surrounded by a green border and asked to commit this image to memory. Then, they were directed to indicate whether sequentially-presented images matched a sample image. Participants pressed the “A” and “L” keys on a keyboard to indicate matching or non-matching responses. To reduce the difficulty of the task for participants less familiar with use of keyboards, all other keys on the keyboard had been removed. Incorporating multiple memory faculties into a single paradigm, as in the emotional enhancement effect-repetition paradigm used in the current study, permits a relatively naturalistic observation of cognition (Kennedy et al., 2009; Voss &amp; Paller, 2008, 2009).

384 trials were performed altogether in 4 blocks of 96 trials each. Each block lasted approximately 5.5 minutes and included periodic “rest” periods of approximately 10s. Each image in the study was tested 2–4 times, and images were presented with a pseudorandom presentation sequence. The hand used to indicate a “match” response was balanced within-participants, within-dyads, and between-dyads. That is, the hand that participants would use to indicate a match was switched between blocks (e.g., if it was “A” during block 1, it would become “L” during block 2); for each dyad of participants, the initial key used to indicate a match was counterbalanced (e.g., if the participant with MCI used “A” during block 1, his or her spouse sued “L” during block 1); and for each alternating dyad of participants, the initial key used by the MCI participant to indicate a match in the dyad was counterbalanced (e.g., if the participant with MCI in the first dyad used “A” during block 1, the participant with MCI in the second dyad used “L” during block 1). Participants took a short, self-paced break between blocks that typically lasted about 60 seconds. During this time researchers confirmed the comfort of participants and provided encouragement to participants that included reassurance about the difficulty of the task. Because of previous experience suggesting that negative accuracy feedback was disruptive to individuals with MCI’s subsequent performance, participants did not receive accuracy feedback (Broster et al., 2013).

A 5-minute practice period preceded Experiment 2 to ensure that participants were comfortable with the cognitive and motor components of the task. This practice period was also designed to reduce or eliminate the influence of motor learning confounds on any repetition effects. During the practice period research personnel remained in the experimental chamber with the participant and provided oral feedback related to performance. As in the 2 blocks of formal experimentation, computerized feedback was not provided.

For all but one dyad, both the participant with MCI and the unaffected spouse or partner came to the laboratory at the same time. In such events, the participant with MCI participated in research protocols first, and the unaffected participant participated subsequently. While the spouse was participating in the task protocol, the participant was rescreened for eligibility and known confounds, and the UDS battery was administered if applicable. One dyad preferred to come to the laboratory separately due to scheduling conflicts, and they were the only exception to this aspect of the protocol.

Visual Stimuli

Stimuli were 120 re-sized two-dimensional 8.3 cm × 5.8 cm IAPS images. All stimuli were presented on a high-resolution color monitor using E-prime software. Sample images were presented with a thick green outline for 3s, and each test stimulus was presented for 1.5s. Both individual images and individual trials were separated by a 1.1–1.4s jitter interval, which was employed to prevent bias in RT measures due to participants anticipating stimulus onset. Stimuli were presented at a 65 cm visual distance at a visual angle of approximately 7°.

IAPS images have been extensively tested and validated for numerous features including hedonic valence and arousal ratings in younger adults (Lang, Bradley, &amp; Cuthbert, 1998; Libkuman, Otani, Kern, Viger, &amp; Novak, 2007). However, the validation of IAPS images in older adults and adults with cognitive impairment is relatively limited (Gruhn &amp; Scheibe, 2008). In particular, in older adults the hedonic valence and arousal dimensions of emotional judgments, which are largely independent in younger adults, become coupled such that high arousal is associated with negative hedonic valence and low arousal is associated with positive hedonic valence (Gruhn &amp; Scheibe, 2008; Keil &amp; Freund, 2009; Porto, Bertolucci, &amp; Bueno, 2011). To account for this association, we used a multiple polynomial regression imputation algorithm to estimate the hedonic valence and arousal of IAPS images of older adults based on 4 unpublished rating sessions of various subsets of the IAPS images in older adults. Details of this process have been published elsewhere (Broster et al., 2017).

Because of the correlation between valence and arousal, IAPS image content was interpreted in a unidimensional fashion to ensure validity with our older adult cohort. Initially, we had planned for 3 levels along this single dimension – low arousal positive (LAP), high arousal negative (HAN), and neutral. To identify images belonging to each group, we collected images that scored within 2 points of the most extreme relevant values for LAP or HAN (i.e., images scored 1–3 or 7–9, as applicable) or that scored within 2 points of the middle value on both dimensions for neutral images (i.e., images scoring 4–6). However, upon examination of the exemplars of each class, we determined subjectively that the neutral stimulus set showed poor face validity in terms of the types of content it encompassed, so we elected to use only 2 levels: LAP and HAN, as previously formalized.

Having selected the LAP and HAN images via the empirical methodology previously described, we next worked to ensure that our distractor task was not confounded with the emotional enhancement effect categories. Initially, we had planned to use a classical “man-made/not man-made” image content decision paradigm as the distractor task in this experiment. However, a Χ2 test suggested that such a task would be correlated with emotional enhancement effects for our LAP and HAN image sets. The HHP task was selected for its lack of association with the hedonic valence/arousal category of stimuli.

Electrophysiological Data Preprocessing

ERP recordings were obtained from 62 scalp sites using Ag/AgCl electrodes embedded in an elastic cap at locations from the extended international 10–20 system. These electrodes were referenced to a midline reference electrode during recording and re-referenced to the average of the right and left mastoid potentials offline. Four additional channels were used for monitoring horizontal and vertical eye movements. Impedance was maintained below 5 kΩ. NeuroScan hardware was used for data collection.

First, electrophysiological data were averaged according to normative protocols. Specifically, they were partially preprocessed using SCAN 4.5. This preprocessing consisted of manual artifact rejection, a finite impulse response filter with a band-pass of 0.05 to 40 Hz at 12 dB/octave, and epoching at −200 to 1000 ms relative to participant exposure to each stimulus. Epoched data were then processed further using the ERP PCA Toolkit (EP Toolkit). These steps included ocular artifact reduction using independent components analysis (ICA), motor artifact reduction, bad channel imputation, baseline-correction, and re-referencing to the average of the mastoid electrodes. These steps of analysis used default processing settings of EP Toolkit, with the exception that individuals epochs were permitted to vary within ± 75 μV of baseline rather than the default setting of ± 50 μV of baseline. This change is normative in older adult and/or clinical populations. Such epochs were then averaged for each of the 8 experimental conditions: whether a stimulus was a working memory match or non-match, whether an image was LAP or HAN, and whether an image was being tested for the first time or for an additional time.

Next, temporal principal components analysis (tPCA) was applied to the data to dissociate overlapping components present in the conventionally-averaged ERPs. In our opinion, this step was necessary in the current experiment and preferable to conventional difference waves on the grounds that individual stimuli varied on more than only psychological conditions (e.g., the LAP and HAN stimuli were not identical to one another; the images themselves differed). Promax rotation was used to permit limited correlation between temporal components, following the recommendation of Dien (2010). Retained temporal components were identified using the protocol recommended by the EP Toolkit: the averaged data were compared to a random dataset, and components that explained both greater variance than the random dataset and at least 0.5% of variance in the data were retained. Principle components reflecting classical ERP signatures were identified using topographical maps of each component, each component’s temporal course, and the effect of the experimental manipulations on each component.

Data Analysis

Data were analyzed as 2 × (2 × 2) mixed robust ANOVAs on cognitive status (NC or MCI), emotional enhancement effect stimulus type (LAP or HAN), or repetition effect stimulus type (initial or repeated) or as 2 × (2 × 2 × 2) mixed robust ANOVAs for Experiments 1 and 2, respectively, using the EP Toolkit’s robust ANOVA plug-in. Effects relevant to a priori hypotheses were first evaluated, and then post-hoc robust ANOVAs were performed for all principle components using similarly-structured robust ANOVAs. To limit the effect of multiple comparisons on these tests, each ANOVA was conducted only at the peak electrode of the corresponding component, and these tests were supplemented with Bonferroni correction on the number of components tested, where the components to be tested were the components retained as described in Data Processing. Simple-effects models were used to interpret interaction effects. All significance values listed are based on two-tailed p values except for directional a priori hypotheses, for which one-tailed p values were used. For the sake of brevity, results failing to reach one-tailed significance (i.e., p &gt; 0.1) have been omitted from the report

Additionally, to improve power to detect lower-order effects involving clinical group, data were analyzed as 16 dyad pairs to take advantage of shared variance attributable to similarities correlated with spousehood. Hence, behavioral data and processed ERP data were analyzed as 2 × 2 × 2 within-dyad robust ANOVAs on cognitive status (NC or MCI), emotional enhancement effect stimulus type (LAP or HAN), or repetition effect stimulus type (initial or repeated) or as 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 within-dyad robust ANOVAs (i.e., including a factor for stimulus working memory status in the relevant experiment) using the EP Toolkit’s robust ANOVA plug-in. Ultimately, while this analysis did increase the ability to detect certain effects, the analysis was not associated with any categorical changes in the significance of lower-order effects in these experiments, so the analysis will not be discussed further.

Results

Behavioral Analysis

For both experiments, ANOVAs on reaction time (RT) identified significant Group × Repetition interactions, F (1, 28) = 7.70, p = 0.010, ηp2 = 0.22, F (1, 28) = 5.79 p = 0.023, ηp2 = 0.17, for respective experiments. For both experiments, this interaction resulted from a larger decrease in RT with repetition in NC than in persons with MCI (80 ms vs. 40 ms for Experiment 1, 120 ms vs. 80 ms for Experiment 2). Both clinical groups showed decreased RT with repetition.

Behavioral accuracy results for Experiment 1 were not interpreted as accuracy was near ceiling and errors appeared stimulus-specific. Behavioral accuracy results for Experiment 2 were not associated with significant effects or interactions involving repetition (ps &gt; 0.2). Behavioral results are summarized in Table 2. Behavioral results of Experiment 2 were previously included in part in Broster et al. (2017).

Conventionally-Averaged Waveforms

The conventionally-averaged waveforms showed classical components including a P3, frontal N400, posterior P2, and late positive component (LPC) (Figure 3). The experiments differed considerably in the apparent evoked potentials, particularly at the posterior P3 and frontal LPC. Respective components in the emotional delayed-match-to-sample task were shifted somewhat earlier in time, perhaps owing to more stringent time-pressure in that task. Individuals with MCI appeared to have smaller-amplitude ERPs, especially at frontal electrodes.

Difference waves of repetition effects (2nd – 1st) indicated that the simple emotional repetition task (Experiment 1) was associated mainly with a single repetition effect in the late time-window whereas the emotional task that involved repeated working memory retrieval (Experiment 2) was associated with both a later repetition effect and one earlier effect (Figure 4). However, even when observing difference waves, the independence of components was unclear. Further, neural repetition effects are theorized to be multiple and independent in manifestation, so overlapping components could produce a misleading impression of how individual components manifest (Grill-Spector, Henson, &amp; Martin, 2006). Consequently, to identify independent electrophysiological components and to disentangle effects of adjacent components, tPCA was applied to the data.

Temporal Principal Components Analysis

The primary principal components associated with the experiments corresponded to classical ERP components, including the P2, P3, frontal N400, P600, and late positive potential (LPP) (Figure 5A). One clear contrast between experiments was that the P600 was severely attenuated in the pure emotional repetition paradigm, but it was the largest temporal component in the emotional repeated retrieval paradigm. Further, the PCA solution suggested that the apparently-monolithic late repetition effect apparent in both experiments was actually composed of discrete overlapping phenomena: one peaking near 600 ms, and one peaking near the end of the epoched time-window. Because of the evidence that the late repetition effects might represent discrete effects rather than a monolith, statistical evaluation of the experimental data was restricted to analysis of the individual temporal components of the PCA solution. A detailed summary of the tPCA solution is included in Table 3.

A Priori Analysis

For Experiment 1, the LPP was associated with a Group × Repetition interaction, TWJt/c (1.0,22.4) = 3.18, p = 0.10, resulting from a repetition effect being present for individuals without impairment, F (1,30) = 10.21, p = 0.003, but no such effect being present for individuals with MCI (Figure 5B, first column). For Experiment 2, the P600 was associated with a Group × Repetition interaction TWJt/c (1.0,26.2) = 5.78, p = 0.025, resulting from the repetition effect being larger in persons without impairment TWJt/c (1.0,15.0) = 22.32, p = 0.0029, than in persons with MCI, TWJt/c (1.0,15.0) = 7.47, p = 0.031, despite being present in both groups (Figure 5B, second column).

Post-Hoc Electrophysiological Analyses

In this analysis, post-hoc analyses were focused on effects related to repetition effects (i.e., main effects of repetition or statistical interactions in which repetition was implicated), so other effects will not be discussed here. After Bonferroni correction, no such effects reached significance for either experiment.

Integrated Analyses

The behavioral and electrophysiological repetition effects previously identified were compared to the Uniform Data Set (UDS) and GDS neuropsychological scores associated with each participant. Data were organized into spousal dyads. First, the difference between the 2nd and 1st instance of an RT or mean ERP component voltage value was computed for each participant (2nd – 1st). Then, the difference in those resultant values between the dyad member with MCI and the member without impairment was computed. These values were correlated with the difference in neuropsychological scores between dyad members. For the sake of ease of interpretation, individual difference scores were subtracted such that larger degrees of relative impairment were associated with larger difference values (e.g., for neuropsychological tests where low raw scores were associated with superior performance, scores of the spouse without impairment were subtracted from those of the spouse with MCI; the opposite was performed for neuropsychological tests where high raw scores indicated superior performance). For the sake of parsimony, only the largest component associated with a significant repetition effect for each experiment was tested in this way (i.e., only the LPP for Experiment 1, and only the P600 for Experiment 2).

Noteworthy results included that larger MMSE score differences within a dyad (i.e., caused mostly by the degree of impairment of the individual with MCI) indicated larger differences in behavioral RT repetition effects in the simple emotional repetition task (Experiment 1), but to smaller differences in behavioral RT repetition effects in the emotional working memory task (Experiment 2) (Tables 1 &amp; 2). Additionally, the LPP repetition effect in the simple emotional repetition task was associated with many of the same neuropsychological scores as its associated behavioral RT repetition effects, but the P600 repetition effect was not associated with any neuropsychological scores other than the geriatric depression scale, short-form, an effect which appeared to be driven by a small number of participants with non-floor scores on this test.

Owing to the observation that the behavioral and electrophysiological repetition effects of the simple emotional repetition task appeared to uniquely have a similar correlational profile with regard to the neuropsychological scores of participants, the behavioral and primary electrophysiological repetition effects were similarly correlated. The respective scores for the simple emotional repetition task were correlated, Spearman’s ϱ = 0.68, p = 0.004, but the scores for the emotional working memory task were non-significantly correlated, Spearman’s ϱ = −0.32, p = 0.23.

Discussion

We found that persons with MCI and persons without impairment showed a late positive potential (LPP) repetition effect difference that mirrored the findings of Olichney and colleagues for Experiment 1, the task involving content evaluation (Olichney et al., 2006); however, for Experiment 2, a task that required patients to engage working memory, a repetition effect persisted during a distinct but temporally-overlapping component (P600). Interestingly, the P600 component was of very small magnitude in Experiment 1, and the P600 and LPP were difficult to distinguish visually without the benefit of PCA in both experiments. In our opinion, these findings indicate that a neural mechanism evoked by working memory is sensitive to repetition effects and maintains relatively intact repetition effects in MCI. This finding may account for why experimental repetition effects have manifested disparately in AD.

Behaviorally, both tasks were actually associated with more improvement in RT for individuals without impairment. This departed from a previous study that showed that individuals with AD showed more RT improvement than persons with MCI or those without impairment in the context of a non-emotional delayed-match-to-sample working memory task (Broster et al., 2013). These two experiments differed methodologically in a few ways that may account for this discrepancy. First, the stimuli in the two experiments differed dramatically in complexity, luminance, coloration, and emotional content. Additional resources needed to process the characteristics of these stimuli may have revealed relative impairment in the MCI group that was not apparent in the previous experiment (Chakor, Bertone, McKerral, Faubert, &amp; Lachapelle, 2005; Hansen, Johnson, &amp; Ellemberg, 2012). Second, the current experiments did not include a cohort that had received an AD diagnosis, so the clinical group that showed RT enhancement in the previous experiment (i.e., persons with mild dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease) was not present in the current experiment. Since behavioral enhancement has been linked to only individuals with more advanced disease, it may be that such effects manifest only in more disordered cohorts (Klimkowicz-Mrowiec et al., 2008).

Of note, in the current delayed-match-to-sample task, individuals with MCI did show a smaller repetition effect at the P600 than individuals without impairment, though both groups showed an effect that was larger than zero. This similarly departed from the previous study, which did not show such a contrast. In that study, the magnitude of repetition effects in MCI was similar to those of persons without impairment. Similar to our discussion of the behavioral results, this discrepancy may have resulted in differences in the experimental stimuli or the patient population. In our opinion, the remaining presence of a repetition effect in persons with MCI in the presence of working memory, even if attenuated, should be appreciated as a cognitive rehabilitation target (Boller, Jennings, Dieudonne, Verny, &amp; Ergis, 2012).

Additionally, we suggest that the current results emphasize the importance of ecological validity in psychological experiments, especially in the context of characterizing the cognitive capabilities of patient populations. In the current experiments, the residual late repetition effect capacity was visible only when evoked by cognitive challenge associated with working memory, and it was almost completely masked in the experiment with a simpler content-evaluation task.

The current experiments also included a replication and partial extension of Olichney and colleagues’ extensive work on the use of repetition effects of late ERP components, which we have identified with the LPP component in the current experiments, as biomarkers for AD, MCI, or pre-AD (Olichney et al., 2006; Olichney et al., 2002; Olichney et al., 2013; Olichney et al., 2008). In a repeated visual content-evaluation task similar to Olichney’s repeated word content-evaluation task, we found that the LPP repetition effect was attenuated to the point of extinction in persons with MCI, similar to his related findings. The current results extend Olichney’s observations of the phenomenon in lexical items to complex visual stimuli and to emotional stimuli. These findings suggest that Olichney’s candidate biomarker may be more robust than previously appreciated. Consistent with this possibility, a milder form of the late repetition effect reduction observed in this study and in Olichney and colleagues’ work has been identified in comparing repetition effects linked to content evaluation in healthy older relative to younger adults, and passive viewing of images without evaluation has been linked to an absence of repetition effects at the LPP in younger adults (Schupp et al., 2006; Zhou, Li, Broster, Niu, &amp; Wang, 2015). However, we would like to emphasize that the existence of a candidate repetition effect biomarker does not preclude functional maintenance of behavioral repetition effects in this context.

The current study used emotional stimuli because of a hypothesis explored in another manuscript related to the relationship between working memory and emotional enhancement effects (Broster et al., 2017). Although emotional valence was not related to the hypothesis explored in this study, the valenced stimuli certainly affected the ERPs evoked by the experiment. Most saliently, both studies evoked prominent LPPs, which are classically evoked by emotional stimuli (Hajcak, MacNamara, &amp; Olvet, 2010). It is likely that LPP would be less prominent in a version of this paradigm that did not include emotionally valenced stimuli, which might make signal-to-noise less favorable in the relevant time-window and consequently reduce power to detect the current effects. However, it may be that some other late repetition effect potential obscured in the current context would plays an important role in mild cognitive impairment during that time-window. This is particularly likely given that repetition effect extinction in MCI has been identified in non-emotional paradigms (Olichney et al., 2013).

Control participants in this study were uniformly the long-term partner of a participant with MCI. This recruitment choice likely improved power to detect significant effects, but it also means that the current control group systematically differs from control groups used in some similar experiments. While by definition persons with MCI do not yet experience functional consequences of clinical AD, the partners nonetheless likely fill a burgeoning caregiver role for their loved one. This role produces systematic effects on caregiver physical and mental health that should be considered in interpretation of the current results (Connell &amp; Gibson, 1997; Daley, Sugarman, Shirk, &amp; O’Connor, 2017; Llanque, Savage, Rosenburg, &amp; Caserta, 2016; Sorensen, Pinquart, &amp; Duberstein, 2002; Terum et al., 2017; Vinas-Diez et al., 2017). More generally, because of the choice to use dyads to study AD in the current study, persons with AD without spouses or partners were not able to participate, limiting the external validity of the current study for such persons. However, because concerned family members often help persons with dementia to present for both tertiary clinical care and for research participation, this external validity limitation may reflect systemic health disparities present in both clinical and experimental contexts. Future work should endeavor to reach persons with dementia who present outside such settings.

In these experiments, ERPs associated with emotional repeated retrieval were not correlated with neuropsychological or behavioral outcomes, but ERPs associated with simple emotional repetition were correlated with both neuropsychological and behavioral outcomes. This finding replicates previous findings that the traditional correlation between particular later ERP components and behavioral outcomes, such as reaction time, breaks down when coupled with cognitive tasks that engage multiple memory systems (Kutas, McCarthy, &amp; Donchin, 1977; McCarthy &amp; Donchin, 1981).

Owing to the limited spatial resolution of pure ERP/EEG methods, we did not attempt source localization using the current data. However, studies of working memory, emotion, and repetition have been employed in fMRI experiments (Bentley, Vuilleumier, Thiel, Driver, &amp; Dolan, 2003; Migo et al., 2015; Narumoto, Okada, Sadato, Fukui, &amp; Yonekura, 2001). These results generally support a spatial narrative characterized by complex interactions between cognitive-emotional systems that modulate one another’s behavior including regions such as temporal and intraparietal sulci, inferior frontal gyri, inferior occipital gyri, lateral fusiform gyri, cingulate cortex, and the amygdala (Pessoa, 2008). However, because those studies have tended to involve only individual subsets of the concepts explored in this manuscript (e.g., repetition in the context of emotion, but not working memory; or repetition outside the context of Alzheimer’s disease), the connection between any individual region and a particular ERP component requires further investigation. In our opinion, the current results, which identify discrete repetition effects at latencies differences unable to be discriminated with fMRI alone, indicate that simultaneous fMRI and ERP/EEG paradigms could be employed to link the phenomena in the current study to the neuroanatomic literature.

This experiment excluded individuals taking certain categories of psychoactive drugs, but individuals with mild cognitive impairment were uniformly taking donepezil or rivastigmine to treat cognitive change (Kumar, Singh, &amp; Ekavali, 2015). These medications have known effects on ERP waveforms, so a subset of group differences identified in this study could be attributable to such differences (Guillem et al., 2006; Reeves, Struve, &amp; Patrick, 2002). Because the differences in ERPs in this experiment were associated with interactions between experimental conditions and groups, the relevance of this issue to the main findings of this manuscript is limited. However, care should be exercised in the interpretation of apparent simple group differences in the conventionally-averaged data.

The current experiments identified two discrete late repetition effects, one of which was only evoked to an appreciable degree by a concurrent working memory task. In the absence of a working memory task, we replicated Olichney’s candidate AD biomarker, which was an absence of repetition effects at a late ERP component in persons with MCI. In the presence of the task, another late repetition effect manifested that was present in both groups, though it was attenuated in persons with MCI. These results suggest that persons with MCI maintain some typical repetition effects, but that they can only be observed in task-specific contexts (Grill-Spector et al., 2006).

We would like to thank P Lang and A Keil for providing advice related to potential considerations in stimulus selection and categorization and J Dien for ongoing assistance in appropriate use of the ERP PCA Toolkit. We would like to thank R Kryscio, E Abner, and the University of Kentucky Alzheimer Disease Center (UK-ADC) for their help with the compilation of the neuropsychological test results. We would like to thank D Bridges for assistance in manuscript revision. This work was supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health (5 T32 AG 242-18; UL1RR033173; UL1TR000117, R25MH060482). We have no financial or material conflicts of interest to report.

Figure 1 Experiment 1 Schematic. This schematic summarizes the course of the affective repetition paradigm. Participants indicate whether the content of each image includes humans or human parts, and individual images are all repeated exactly twice after variable lag. Individual images differed in their hedonic valence and arousal levels (i.e., low arousal positive, LAP, or high arousal negative, HAN). The non-occluded image has been graphically blurred in keeping with publication standards for IAPS images; the blurring is not intended to imply that IAPS images were blurred during experimentation.

Figure 2 Experiment 2 Schematic. This figure summarizes a typical trial in the current experiment. First, two sample images are displayed with a green border, and participants are directed to commit these images to memory. Then, text images are displayed one-by-one, and participants indicate whether each image was among the sample images from that trial by keyboard press. The non-occluded images have been graphically blurred in keeping with publication standards for IAPS images; the blurring is not intended to imply that IAPS images were blurred during experimentation.

Figure 3 Conventional ERPs separated by clinical group for Experiments 2 &amp; 3. The grand average waveforms of all experimental conditions and participants by group have been displayed at 6 electrodes for each experiment. Waveforms relevant to Experiments 1 &amp; 2 are depicted in sections A and B, respectively. Note that the latency of Experiment 2 is shifted 100 ms earlier than that of Experiment 1, consistent with the similarly increased reaction time in that experiment (Table 2).

Figure 4 Repetition Effect Difference Waves separated by clinical group for Experiments 2 &amp; 3. Difference waves suggested that the simple emotional repetition paradigm (A) was associated with a repetition effect in the late time-window whereas the emotional repeated retrieval paradigm (B) was potentially associated with discrete earlier and later effects.

Figure 5 Components in Experiments 1 &amp; 2 and repetition effect difference waves. A) These graphs depict the temporal PCA solution of Experiment 1 (first column) and Experiment 2 (second column) at a frontal (first row) and posterior (second row) electrode. Notable is the stark contrast in the size of the P600 between experiments; the component is prominent for the working memory task, but almost negligible in the simple repetition task. Note that although the waveforms have been colored to highlight correspondence between experiments, the components’ differed in ordinal variance contribution between experiments. These discrepancies can be scrutinized in the Appendix. B) These graphs show difference waves between the 1st and 2nd presentations of stimuli (2nd minus 1st; positive values indicate larger amplitudes with repetition). Individuals with MCI did not show a repetition effect at the LPP (first column), but at the large P600 that was only apparent in the working memory study, persons with MCI showed a repetition effect, albeit an attenuated one (second column). The first and second rows show the effect at a frontal (Fz) and posterior (Pz) electrode, respectively. LPP = late positive potential

Table 1 Neuropsychological summary and associated correlations. NC = normal control, MCI = amnestic mild cognitive impairment, AD = Alzheimer’s disease; N = number of participants, Females = number of female participants, Age = age of participant in years, Education = formal education of participants in years; MMSE = mini-mental status examination, LOGIMEMI = Logical Memory Story A, Immediate Recall, LOGIMEMII = Logical Memory Story A, Delayed Recall, DIGIF = Digit Span Forward, DIGIFLEN = Digit Span Forward Length, DIGIB = Digit Span Backward, DIGIBLEN = Digit Span Backward Length, ANIMALS = Category Fluency (Animals), VEG = Category Fluency (Vegetables), TRAILA = Trailmaking A, TRAILB = Trailmaking B, DSYM = Digit Symbol, BOSTON = Boston Naming Task, GDS15 = Geriatric Depression Scale, short-form; df, F/χ2, p, and ϱ indicate statistical summaries for the omnibus tests of group differences for each column. Welch’s robust test of means was used for measures showing heterogeneity of variance. Variance displayed is the standard error of the mean (SEM) for each group. Because behavioral and electrophysiological repetition effects were empirically associated with interactions of clinical group, correlations depicted compare within-dyad differences in neuropsychological test scores with within-dyad differences in individual repetition effects. To reduce the impact of differential violations of normality assumptions, Spearman’s ϱ was used to assess correlations of each neuropsychological test with the behavioral and primary electrophysiological repetition effect in each experiment. For all neuropsychological tests except for TRAILA, TRAILB, and the GDS15, a larger score indicates better performance, whereas the opposite is true for TRIALA/B and the GDS15. Hence, the signs of correlations of TRAILA/B and GDS15 have been reversed in this chart for ease of interpretation. Positive ϱ values indicate that large differences in the neuropsychological status of individuals in a dyad were related to large differences in the size of the relevant repetition effect; negative ϱ values indicate that large differences in the neuropsychological status of individuals in a dyad were related to small differences in the size of the relevant repetition effect. Because missingness was relatively rare in this dataset, the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm was used to impute missing variables using existing behavioral and neuropsychological data where actionable. Two individuals (one MCI, one NC) did not participate in neuropsychological testing, so they were excluded from that process and from those analyses. For the analogous correlations with the main behavioral and electrophysiological repetition effect in Experiment 2, all correlations were non-significant (ps &gt; 0.1) apart from a spurious association with GDS15 scores due to zero-inflation in that sample; consequently, for the sake of readability, those correlations have been omitted from this table. A modified subset of these data are included in a companion publication (Broster et al., 2017).

	N	Fe
mal
es	A
ge	Edu
catio
n	M
MS
E	LOGI
MEM
I	LOGI
MEM
II	DI
GI
F	DIGI
FLE
N	DI
GI
B	DIGI
BLE
N	ANI
MAL
S	V
E
G	TR
AIL
A	TR
AI
LB	DS
Y
M	BOS
TO
N	G
D
S
15	
NC	16	9	76.7 ± 1.47	16.7 ± 0.7	28.8 ± 0.3	14.1 ± 1.0	12.7 ± 1.1	8.0 ± 0.7	6.3 ± 0.3	6.1 ± 0.6	4.7 ± 0.3	19.6 ± 1.2	14.8 ± 0.9	37.5 ± 3.0	82.3 ± 5.5	40.9 ± 2.6	27.0 ± 1.6	1.0 ± 0.4	
MCI	16	7	7.2 ± 1.5	17.1 ± 0.9	26.2 ± 0.7	7.4 ± 0.8	6.4 ± 1.0	8.7 ± 0.5	6.9 ± 0.2	5.9 ± 0.5	4.6 ± 0.2	13.6 ± 1.5	9.1 ± 0.8	54.4 ± 6.5	181.2 ± 21.9	32.9 ± 4.1	23.6 ± 1.1	2.0 ± 0.9	
df		1	1,30	1,30	1,18.3	1,28	1,28	1,28	1,28	1,28	1,28	1,28	1,28	1,20.6	1,17.0	1,28	1,28	1,28	
F/χ2		0.5	0.06	0.14	7.76	20.98	20.75	0.94	2.39	0.03	0.10	8.75	18.53	3.45	11.80	0.0003	5.94	2.66	
p		0.72	0.81	0.71	0.01	&lt; 0.001	&lt; 0.001	0.34	0.13	0.87	0.76	0.006	&lt; 0.001	0.08	0.003	0.99	0.02	0.11	
Correlation: Behavioral Repetition Group Difference Experiment 1	ϱ		.591	.507	.560	.052	.113	.063	−.030	.735	.405	.580	.658	.576	.764	−.004	
p		.016*	.045*	.024*	.849	.677	.816	.913	.001**	.120	.019*	.006**	.019*	.001**	.987	
Correlation: LPP Repetition Effect Group Difference	ϱ		.454	.611	.523	.254	.278	.396	.266	.257	−.065	.424	.497	.371	.359	.121	
p		.077	.012*	.038*	.343	.297	.128	.319	.337	.810	.102	.050*	.158	.172	.656	

Table 2 Behavioral Results for Experiments 1 and 2. Group-averaged reaction time and performance accuracy and standard error values for each empirical condition have been summarized. Reaction time values are reaction times associated with accurate responses only. Accuracy values are the proportion of total trials of each type to which an accurate response was given. Both experiments were associated with group differences in the manifestation of repetition effects. Match and Nonmatch refer to respective working memory retrieval status conditions. NC = normal control; MCI = mild cognitive impairment; LAP = low arousal positive stimuli; HAN = high arousal negative stimuli; 1st = initial presentation; 2nd = subsequent presentations. A modified subset of these data are included in a companion publication (Broster et al., 2017).

Clinical Group	Presentation	Emotional Repetition (Experiment 1)	Emotional Repeated Retrieval (Experiment 2)	
	
Reaction Time (ms)	Accuracy (%)	Reaction Time (ms)	
	
Match	Nonmatch	Match	Nonmatch	
	
LA	HA	LA	HA	LA	HA	LA	HA	LA	HA	
P	N	P	N	P	N	P	N	P	N	
NC	1st	985 ± 21	1072 ± 19	88 ± 2	87 ± 2	92 ± 1	91 ± 2	829 ± 22	859 ± 23	839 ± 21	890 ± 20	
2nd	890 ± 19	960 ± 19	91 ± 2	92 ± 2	94 ± 1	91 ± 2	713 ± 19	746 ± 17	735 ± 19	760 ± 16	
MCI	1st	993 ± 29	1074 ± 29	64 ± 6	60 ± 7	64 ± 7	66 ± 7	918 ± 45	918 ± 38	924 ± 35	963 ± 39	
2nd	917 ± 30	1000 ± 32	70 ± 5	65 ± 6	66 ± 7	65 ± 7	814 ± 35	848 ± 41	849 ± 39	881 ± 34	

Table 3 Principal Components Analysis Summary for Event-Related Potential Data. The approximate temporal peak of the temporal components in each experiment and, if applicable, the classical ERP component it most resembles have been listed for each experiment. The vertical line separates the components that were retained for post-hoc analyses. Exp 1 = Experiment 1; Exp 2 = Experiment 2; TF = temporal factor; ms = milliseconds; LPP = late positive potential

	TF 1	TF 2	TF 3	TF 4	TF 5	TF 6	TF7	TF 8	TF 9	TF 10	TF 11	TF 12	TF 13	TF 14	TF 15	TF 16	TF 17	TF 18	TF 19	
Exp 1																				
Approximate Temporal Peak (ms)	800	434	268	314	604	220	1000	142	504	−12	−202									
Classical Approximant	LPP	N400	P2	P3	P600															
Exp 2																				
Approximate Temporal Peak (ms)	550	998	328	226	174	440	714	116	142	276	382	980	38	198	−194	738	−90	−58	−62	
Classical Approximant	P600	LPP	N400	P3	P2															

Highlights

Persons with MCI show repetition effects during concurrent working memory task

Persons with MCI show no repetition effects without concurrent working memory task

Discrete neural mechanisms underlie task-dependence of neural repetition effects

1 Clinical Alzheimer’s disease (AD) encompasses both dementia of the Alzheimer’s type (DAT) and its clinical prodrome, amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (Fleischman, 2007; Fleischman &amp; Gabrieli, 1998).

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D Dubois B Feldman HH Fox NC … Phelps CH 2011 The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 3 270 279 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.008 21514249
Arsenault-Lapierre G Whitehead V Belleville S Massoud F Bergman H Chertkow H 2011 Mild cognitive impairment subcategories depend on the source of norms Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 33 5 596 603 10.1080/13803395.2010.547459 21302169
Bentley P Vuilleumier P Thiel CM Driver J Dolan RJ 2003 Effects of attention and emotion on repetition priming and their modulation by cholinergic enhancement J Neurophysiol 90 2 1171 1181 10.1152/jn.00776.2002 12649315
Boller B Jennings JM Dieudonne B Verny M Ergis AM 2012 Recollection training and transfer effects in Alzheimer’s disease: effectiveness of the repetition-lag procedure Brain and Cognition 78 2 169 177 10.1016/j.bandc.2011.10.011 22122949
Borg C Leroy N Favre E Laurent B Thomas-Anterion C 2011 How emotional pictures influence visuospatial binding in short-term memory in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease? Brain and Cognition 76 1 20 25 10.1016/j.bandc.2011.03.008 21481999
Broster LS Jenkins SL Holmes SD Jicha GA Jiang Y 2017 Low Arousal Positive Emotional Stimuli Attenuate Aberrant Working Memory Processing in Persons with Mild Cognitive Impairment Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 60 4 1333 1349 10.3233/JAD-170233
Broster LS Li J Jenkins SL Tarrant SD Jicha GA Jiang Y 2015 Altered Neural Responses to Affective Repetition in Persons with Mild Cognitive Impairment Paper presented at the Association for Clinical and Translational Science Washington, D.C
Broster LS Li J Smith C Jicha GA Munro N Hively L Jiang Y 2011 Left frontal potentials differentiate mild cognitive impairment from normal aging during a working memory task Washington, DC
Broster LS Li J Smith CD Jicha GA Schmitt FA Jiang Y 2013 Repeated retrieval during working memory is sensitive to amnestic mild cognitive impairment Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 35 9 946 959 10.1080/13803395.2013.838942 24074205
Carlesimo GA Mauri M Fadda L Turriziani P Caltagirone C 2001 Intact cross-modality text-specific repetition priming in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 23 5 569 580 10.1076/jcen.23.5.569.1244 11778634
Carlesimo GA Mauri M Graceffa AM Fadda L Loasses A Lorusso S Caltagirone C 1998 Memory performances in young, elderly, and very old healthy individuals versus patients with Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for discontinuity between normal and pathological aging Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 20 1 14 29 10.1076/jcen.20.1.14.1482 9672816
Chakor H Bertone A McKerral M Faubert J Lachapelle P 2005 Visual evoked potentials and reaction time measurements to motion-reversal luminance- and texture-defined stimuli Documenta Ophthalmologica 110 2–3 163 172 10.1007/s10633-005-3694-8 16328924
Cohen JD 1988 Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences 2 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Connell CM Gibson GD 1997 Racial, ethnic, and cultural differences in dementia caregiving: review and analysis Gerontologist 37 3 355 364 9203759
Daley RT Sugarman MA Shirk SD O’Connor MK 2017 Spared emotional perception in patients with Alzheimer’s disease is associated with negative caregiver outcomes Aging Ment Health 1 8 10.1080/13607863.2017.1286457
Dien J 2010 Evaluating two-step PCA of ERP data with Geomin, Infomax, Oblimin, Promax, and Varimax rotations Psychophysiology 47 1 170 183 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00885.x 19761521
Faul F Erdfelder E Buchner A Lang AG 2009 Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: tests for correlation and regression analyses Behavior Research Methods 41 4 1149 1160 10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149 19897823
Faul F Erdfelder E Lang AG Buchner A 2007 G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences Behavior Research Methods 39 2 175 191 17695343
Fleischman DA 2007 Repetition priming in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: an integrative review and future directions Cortex 43 7 889 897 17941347
Fleischman DA Gabrieli JD 1998 Repetition priming in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease: a review of findings and theories Psychology and Aging 13 1 88 119 9533193
Fleischman DA Wilson RS Gabrieli JD Schneider JA Bienias JL Bennett DA 2005 Implicit memory and Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology Brain 128 Pt 9 2006 2015 10.1093/brain/awh559 15975947
Friedman D Hamberger M Stern Y Marder K 1992 Event-related potentials (ERPs) during repetition priming in Alzheimer’s patients and young and older controls Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 14 4 448 462 10.1080/01688639208402837 1400911
Grill-Spector K Henson R Martin A 2006 Repetition and the brain: neural models of stimulus-specific effects Trends in Cognitive Sciences 10 1 14 23 10.1016/j.tics.2005.11.006 16321563
Gruhn D Scheibe S 2008 Age-related differences in valence and arousal ratings of pictures from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS): do ratings become more extreme with age? Behavior Research Methods 40 2 512 521 18522062
Guillem F Chouinard S Poulin J Godbout R Lalonde P Melun P … Stip E 2006 Are cholinergic enhancers beneficial for memory in schizophrenia? An event-related potentials (ERPs) study of rivastigmine add-on therapy in a crossover trial Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 30 5 934 945 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.02.009 16580765
Guo C Lawson AL Jiang Y 2007 Distinct neural mechanisms for repetition effects of visual objects Neuroscience 149 4 747 759 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.07.060 17949920
Hajcak G MacNamara A Olvet DM 2010 Event-related potentials, emotion, and emotion regulation: an integrative review Developmental Neuropsychology 35 2 129 155 10.1080/87565640903526504 20390599
Hansen BC Johnson AP Ellemberg D 2012 Different spatial frequency bands selectively signal for natural image statistics in the early visual system Journal of Neurophysiology 108 8 2160 2172 10.1152/jn.00288.2012 22832562
Hopper TL 2003 “They’re just going to get worse anyway”: perspectives on rehabilitation for nursing home residents with dementia Journal of Communication Disorders 36 5 345 359 12927943
Jean L Simard M Wiederkehr S Bergeron ME Turgeon Y Hudon C … van Reekum R 2010 Efficacy of a cognitive training programme for mild cognitive impairment: results of a randomised controlled study Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 20 3 377 405 10.1080/09602010903343012 20029715
Jicha GA Abner E Schmitt FA Cooper GE Stiles N Hamon R … Markesbery WR 2008 Clinical features of mild cognitive impairment differ in the research and tertiary clinic settings Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 26 2 187 192 10.1159/000151635 18724049
Kazmerski VA Friedman D 1997 Effect of multiple presentations of words on event-related potential and reaction time repetition effects in Alzheimer’s patients and young and older controls Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology 10 1 32 47
Kazui H Mori E Hashimoto M Hirono N 2003 Enhancement of declarative memory by emotional arousal and visual memory function in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 15 2 221 226 12724465
Keil A Freund AM 2009 Changes in the sensitivity to appetitive and aversive arousal across adulthood Psychology and Aging 24 3 668 680 10.1037/a0016969 19739923
Kennedy KM Rodrigue KM Head D Gunning-Dixon F Raz N 2009 Neuroanatomical and cognitive mediators of age-related differences in perceptual priming and learning Neuropsychology 23 4 475 491 10.1037/a0015377 19586211
Kessels RP de Haan EH 2003a Implicit learning in memory rehabilitation: a meta-analysis on errorless learning and vanishing cues methods Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 25 6 805 814 10.1076/jcen.25.6.805.16474 13680458
Kessels RP de Haan EH 2003b Mnemonic strategies in older people: a comparison of errorless and errorful learning Age and Ageing 32 5 529 533 12958003
Kessels RP Remmerswaal M Wilson BA 2011 Assessment of nondeclarative learning in severe Alzheimer dementia: the Implicit Memory Test (IMT) Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders 25 2 179 183 10.1097/WAD.0b013e318203f3ab 21192238
Klimkowicz-Mrowiec A Slowik A Krzywoszanski L Herzog-Krzywoszanska R Szczudlik A 2008 Severity of explicit memory impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease improves effectiveness of implicit learning Journal of Neurology 255 4 502 509 10.1007/s00415-008-0717-x 18350358
Kumar A Singh A Ekavali 2015 A review on Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology and its management: an update Pharmacol Rep 67 2 195 203 10.1016/j.pharep.2014.09.004 25712639
Kutas M McCarthy G Donchin E 1977 Augmenting mental chronometry: the P300 as a measure of stimulus evaluation time Science 197 4305 792 795 887923
Lang PJ Bradley MM Cuthbert BN 1998 Emotion, motivation, and anxiety: brain mechanisms and psychophysiology Biological Psychiatry 44 12 1248 1263 9861468
Lawson AL Guo C Jiang Y 2007 Age effects on brain activity during repetition priming of targets and distracters Neuropsychologia 45 6 1223 1231 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.10.014 17140610
Lekeu F Magis D Marique P Delbeuck X Bechet S Guillaume B … Salmon E 2010 The California Verbal Learning Test and other standard clinical neuropsychological tests to predict conversion from mild memory impairment to dementia Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 32 2 164 173 10.1080/13803390902889606 19459119
Li J Broster LS Jicha GA Munro NB Schmitt FA Abner E … Jiang Y 2017 A cognitive electrophysiological signature differentiates amnestic mild cognitive impairment from normal aging Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy 9 1 3 10.1186/s13195-016-0229-3
Li Q Guo C Jiang Y 2008 Brain potentials and repetition effects during encoding and retrieval of words Neuroreport 19 14 1365 1368 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32830c8dda 18766012
Libkuman TM Otani H Kern R Viger SG Novak N 2007 Multidimensional normative ratings for the International Affective Picture System Behavior Research Methods 39 2 326 334 17695361
Llanque S Savage L Rosenburg N Caserta M 2016 Concept Analysis: Alzheimer’s Caregiver Stress Nursing Forum 51 1 21 31 10.1111/nuf.12090 24787468
Lubinsky T Rich JB Anderson ND 2009 Errorless learning and elaborative self-generation in healthy older adults and individuals with amnestic mild cognitive impairment: mnemonic benefits and mechanisms Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 15 5 704 716 10.1017/S1355617709990270 19631023
Luck T Riedel-Heller SG Kaduszkiewicz H Bickel H Jessen F Pentzek M … AgeCoDe g 2007 Mild cognitive impairment in general practice: age-specific prevalence and correlate results from the German study on ageing, cognition and dementia in primary care patients (AgeCoDe) Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 24 4 307 316 10.1159/000108099 17848793
May CP Manning M Einstein GO Becker L Owens M 2015 The best of both worlds: emotional cues improve prospective memory execution and reduce repetition errors Neuropsychol Dev Cogn B Aging Neuropsychol Cogn 22 3 357 375 10.1080/13825585.2014.952263 25175608
McCarthy G Donchin E 1981 A metric for thought: a comparison of P300 latency and reaction time Science 211 4477 77 80 7444452
McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H Hyman BT Jack CR Jr Kawas CH … Phelps CH 2011 The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 3 263 269 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005 21514250
Migo EM Mitterschiffthaler M O’Daly O Dawson GR Dourish CT Craig KJ … Morris RG 2015 Alterations in working memory networks in amnestic mild cognitive impairment Neuropsychol Dev Cogn B Aging Neuropsychol Cogn 22 1 106 127 10.1080/13825585.2014.894958 24617815
Mimura M Komatsu S 2010 Factors of error and effort in memory intervention for patients with Alzheimer’s disease and amnesic syndrome Psychogeriatrics 10 4 179 186 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2010.00339.x 21159052
Mitchell DB Schmitt FA 2006 Short- and long-term implicit memory in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology, Development, and Cognition. Section B: Aging, Neuropsychology and Cognition 13 3–4 611 635 10.1080/13825580600697616
Narumoto J Okada T Sadato N Fukui K Yonekura Y 2001 Attention to emotion modulates fMRI activity in human right superior temporal sulcus Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 12 2 225 231 11587892
Olichney JM Iragui VJ Salmon DP Riggins BR Morris SK Kutas M 2006 Absent event-related potential (ERP) word repetition effects in mild Alzheimer’s disease Clinical Neurophysiology 117 6 1319 1330 10.1016/j.clinph.2006.02.022 16644278
Olichney JM Morris SK Ochoa C Salmon DP Thal LJ Kutas M Iragui VJ 2002 Abnormal verbal event related potentials in mild cognitive impairment and incipient Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 73 4 377 384
Olichney JM Pak J Salmon DP Yang JC Gahagan T Nowacki R … Iragui-Madoz VJ 2013 Abnormal P600 word repetition effect in elderly persons with preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Cognitive Neuroscience 4 3–4 143 151 10.1080/17588928.2013.838945 24090465
Olichney JM Taylor JR Gatherwright J Salmon DP Bressler AJ Kutas M Iragui-Madoz VJ 2008 Patients with MCI and N400 or P600 abnormalities are at very high risk for conversion to dementia Neurology 70 19 Pt 2 1763 1770 10.1212/01.wnl.0000281689.28759.ab 18077800
Pessoa L 2008 On the relationship between emotion and cognition Nature Reviews: Neuroscience 9 2 148 158 10.1038/nrn2317 18209732
Porto WG Bertolucci PH Bueno OF 2011 The paradox of age: an analysis of responses by aging Brazilians to International Affective Picture System (IAPS) Rev Bras Psiquiatr 33 1 10 15 20585743
Reeves RR Struve FA Patrick G 2002 The effects of donepezil on quantitative EEG in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Clin Electroencephalogr 33 2 93 96 12025738
Reid LM Maclullich AM 2006 Subjective memory complaints and cognitive impairment in older people Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 22 5–6 471 485 10.1159/000096295 17047326
Robert PH Berr C Volteau M Bertogliati C Benoit M Mahieux F … Pre ALS 2006 Neuropsychological performance in mild cognitive impairment with and without apathy Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 21 3 192 197 10.1159/000090766 16424666
Schnyer DM Allen JJ Kaszniak AW Forster KI 1999 An event-related potential examination of masked and unmasked repetition priming in Alzheimer’s disease: implications for theories of implicit memory Neuropsychology 13 3 323 337 10447295
Schupp HT Stockburger J Codispoti M Junghofer M Weike AI Hamm AO 2006 Stimulus novelty and emotion perception: the near absence of habituation in the visual cortex Neuroreport 17 4 365 369 10.1097/01.wnr.0000203355.88061.c6 16514360
Sorensen S Pinquart M Duberstein P 2002 How effective are interventions with caregivers? An updated meta-analysis Gerontologist 42 3 356 372 12040138
Terum TM Andersen JR Rongve A Aarsland D Svendsboe EJ Testad I 2017 The relationship of specific items on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory to caregiver burden in dementia: a systematic review International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 32 7 703 717 10.1002/gps.4704 28317166
van Halteren-van Tilborg IA Scherder EJ Hulstijn W 2007 Motor-skill learning in Alzheimer’s disease: a review with an eye to the clinical practice Neuropsychology Review 17 3 203 212 10.1007/s11065-007-9030-1 17680369
Vinas-Diez V Turro-Garriga O Portellano-Ortiz C Gascon-Bayarri J Rene-Ramirez R Garre-Olmo J Conde-Sala JL 2017 Kinship and cohabitation in relation to caregiver burden in the context of Alzheimer’s disease: a 24-month longitudinal study International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 10.1002/gps.4656
Voss JL Paller KA 2008 Brain substrates of implicit and explicit memory: the importance of concurrently acquired neural signals of both memory types Neuropsychologia 46 13 3021 3029 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.07.010 18691605
Voss JL Paller KA 2009 An electrophysiological signature of unconscious recognition memory Nature Neuroscience 12 3 349 355 10.1038/nn.2260 19198606
White L Ford MP Brown CJ Peel C Triebel KL 2014 Facilitating the use of implicit memory and learning in the physical therapy management of individuals with Alzheimer disease: a case series Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy 37 1 35 44 10.1519/JPT.0b013e3182862d2c 23459238
Zanetti O Binetti G Magni E Rozzini L Bianchetti A Trabucchi M 1997 Procedural memory stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease: impact of a training programme Acta Neurologica Scandinavica 95 3 152 157 9088383
Zhang Q Lawson A Guo C Jiang Y 2006 Electrophysiological correlates of visual affective priming Brain Research Bulletin 71 1–3 316 323 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.09.023 17113962
Zhou T Li J Broster LS Niu Y Wang P 2015 Reduced late positivity in younger adults, but not older adults, during short-term repetition Brain Res 1594 223 232 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.10.042 25451125
