LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7503062
4443
J Am Geriatr Soc
J Am Geriatr Soc
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
0002-8614
1532-5415

32589282
7393801
10.1111/jgs.16618
NIHMS1608372
Article
Building a national program for pilot studies of embedded pragmatic clinical trials in dementia care
Brody Abraham A. PhD, RN 1
Barnes Deborah E. PhD, MPH 2
Chodosh Joshua MD, MSHS 3
Galvin James E. MD, MPH 4
Hepburn Kenneth W. PhD 5
Troxel Andrea B. ScD 6
Hom Kimberly BA 1
McCarthy Ellen P. PhD, MPH 7
Unroe Kathleen T. MD, MHA 8
1 Hartford Institute for Geriatric Nursing, NYU Rory Meyers College of Nursing
2 Departments of Psychiatry and Epidemiology &amp; Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Health Care System
3 Division of Geriatric Medicine and Palliative Care, NYU Grossman School of Medicine
4 Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine
5 Nell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing, NYU Grossman School of Medicine
6 Division of Biostatistics, NYU Grossman School of Medicine
7 Hinda and Arthur Marcus Institute for Aging Research, Hebrew Senior Life Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School
8 Indiana University School of Medicine, Center for Aging Research, Regenstrief Institute
Author Contributions: All authors’ were involved in the conceptual development and drafting of this manuscript.

Corresponding Author: Abraham A. Brody, PhD, RN, 433 First Avenue, Room 504, New York, NY 10010, (212) 992-7341, Ab.Brody@nyu.edu, @abbrody
4 7 2020
7 2020
31 7 2020
68 Suppl 2 S14S20
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
16 million caregivers currently provide care to over 5 million persons living with dementia (PLWD) in the United States. While this population is growing and highly complex, evidence-based management remains poorly integrated within healthcare systems. Therefore, the National Institute on Aging IMPACT Collaboratory was formed to build the nation’s ability to conduct embedded pragmatic clinical trials (ePCTs) for PLWD and their caregivers. The Pilot Core of the IMPACT Collaboratory seeks to provide funds for upwards of 40 pilots for ePCTs to accelerate the testing of non-pharmacologic interventions with the goal that these pilots lead to full-scale ePCTs and eventually, the embedding of evidence-based care into healthcare systems. The first two challenges for the Pilot Core in building the pilot study program were 1) to develop a transparent, ethical, and open nationwide process for soliciting, reviewing, and selecting pilot studies; and 2) to begin the process of describing the necessary components of a pilot study for an ePCT. During our initial funding cycle, we received 35 letters of intent, of which 17 were accepted for full proposal, and 14 submitted. From this process we learned that investigators lack knowledge in ePCTs, many interventions lack readiness for an ePCT pilot study, and many proposed studies lacked key pragmatic design elements. We therefore have set three key criteria that future pilot studies must meet at a minimum to be considered viable. We additionally discuss key design decisions investigators should consider in designing a pilot study for an ePCT.

Alzheimer’s Disease
dementia
non-pharmacologic interventions
pragmatic trials
pilot study

INTRODUCTION

There are over 5 million individuals with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and AD- Related Dementias (AD/ADRD) and over 16 million informal caregivers in the U.S.1. Although research has demonstrated the efficacy of many interventions to improve care2–4, evidence-based management of people living with dementia (PLWD) and their caregivers remains poorly integrated into the routine clinical practice of health care systems (HCS) and community-based organizations. Consequences of suboptimal care include missed or delayed diagnoses of dementia5, and provision of ineffective or sometimes harmful medical treatments or procedures that can increase morbidity and mortality3, reduce PLWD’s quality of life6–8, and increase caregiver burden9. Negative outcomes are further magnified among minority and under-represented PLWD10–12.

Research is needed to identify effective interventions that improve care of PLWD within HCS and optimize implementation. Because the aim is to implement interventions in the real-world rather than in a heavily controlled fashion, this research must be conducted in a pragmatic fashion rather than more traditional, tightly controlled and implemented, randomized clinical trial methodologies13,14. One primary model is the embedded pragmatic clinical trial (ePCT), which seeks to test effectiveness of efficacious interventions in real-world settings. An ePCT is characterized as an intervention designed to be sustained with minimal supporting research infrastructure. In ePCTs, the unit of analysis is generally at the organizational rather than individual level, risk is generally minimal in nature, informed consent is usually altered or waived altogether, and the data collected is generally from existing, routinely collected, sources. While there are non-pharmacologic interventions with demonstrated efficacy data, there is limited uptake of these interventions in the real-world. ePCTs are ideally suited to bridge the gap between research and clinical care by testing the effectiveness of promising interventions within HCS (see introduction to this special issue for additional context regarding ePCTs)15.

Rigorous execution of an ePCT is highly complex and requires that investigators possess a unique set of research skills 16. Pilot studies are particularly essential prior to embarking on full ePCTs to test fundamental modifications that must occur when advancing from a traditional efficacy trial to a effectiveness trial within a HCS. For example, pilot work can help optimize strategies for implementation, participant identification, pragmatic collection of outcomes, intervention fidelity procedures, training protocols, and data management. In some cases they can also be used to test trial designs, such as a stepped wedge model, or to generate data, such as intraclass correlation. Optimization of these features in a pilot study will translate into a greater chance of successfully conducting the full-scale ePCT.

Over the past several years, investigators in the field of aging research have begun to acquire experience conducting ePCTs, including trials involving PLWD and their caregivers. This research has largely been funded through National Institute on Aging (NIA) ePCTs in PLWD in Long-term Services and Support Settings grants. These grants shared a common structure involving a pilot phase, which if successful would lead to a full ePCT (e.g. UH2/UH3, R21/R33, R66/R33). This shared experience reinforced that the pilot phase was indispensable to inform the successful conduct of a full ePCT but lacked a coordinated effort to help identify what the key elements of a pilot ePCTs should be.

NIA IMPACT Pilot Studies Core

The NIA IMbedded Pragmatic AD/ADRD Clinical Trials (IMPACT) Collaboratory was established with the overall mission of building the nation’s capacity to conduct pragmatic clinical trials of interventions embedded within HCS for PLWD and their caregivers. A cornerstone of the IMPACT Collaboratory’s activities is its Pilot Award Program, which plans to fund upwards of 40 1-year pilot awards for ePCTs for AD/ADRD in the next five years. The IMPACT Collaboratory’s pilot core will leverage the experience of emerging experts conducting ePCTs across the nation and the exceptional resources of the Collaboratory to lead the solicitation, selection, and funding of pilot studies. The Core has a leader, associate leader and 5 executive committee members and interacts closely with the Administration’s Core Investigator Navigator Team. The Pilot Core’s coordinated and supportive approach will help maximize the pilot projects’ rigor and accelerate their transformation into high quality ePCTs.

The Pilot Core has four key aims. First, we will solicit, rigorously review, select, and fund projects with the goal that they lead to future full-scale ePCTs focused on PLWD and their caregivers supported by other grant mechanisms at the NIA or other agencies (e.g., Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute). Second, we will provide the monitoring, mentorship, and resources to ensure rigorous, timely completion of pilot milestones, and effective sharing of pilot data and results. Third, we will promote the expertise of pilot project investigators in conducting ePCTs with PLWD and their caregivers by integrating project investigators into the broader IMPACT Collaboratory. Fourth, we will assist investigators in transforming completed pilot projects into successfully funded full-scale ePCTs.

The objectives of this report are to: 1. Review what is known about conducting pilot studies for ePCTs; 2. Describe the IMPACT Collaboratory Pilot Core’s initial experience in implementing the infrastructure to solicit, fund and guide pilot studies; and 3. Present specific challenges related to the design and conduct of pilot projects for ePCTs from multiple perspectives to help identify key attributes of an “ideal” pilot studies for an ePCT.

Pilots Studies for ePCTs

A first step in developing a successful Pilot Award Program requires an understanding what a pilot study for a full-scale ePCT should include. However, there has been very little work focused on this issue.

While both the ePCTs supported by the NIH HCS Collaboratory demonstration projects and NIA had a built-in pilot phase, the activities that should occur in that phase were not uniformly stipulated and thus were highly variable. Some of these pilot studies focused on particular aspects of the full-scale ePCT design, for example: testing clinical decision support tools and education components embedded in electronic health record, evaluating methods to extract administrative or electronic health record data to identify subjects or ascertain outcomes, comparing measures from secondary data sources with gold standard measures ascertained through primary data collection, or refining approaches to implementation. Other pilot ePCTs focused on testing randomization schemes and generated intraclass correlations, which are arguably more difficult to achieve in a 1-year pilot period.

The Readiness Assessment for Pragmatic Trials (RAPT) model17 provides a framework for assessing the readiness of an intervention for testing under the rubric of an ePCT by examining 9 domains: efficacy, evidence, risk of the intervention, feasibility to implement in real-world environments, outcomes measurement feasibility, economic viability of the intervention, acceptability to real-world HCS and clinicians, alignment with external stakeholder priorities, impact if found effective, and degree of development of the implementation protocol. While these can be used to determine when an intervention is ready for a large-scale ePCT, some inference and additional consideration is needed to “walk backwards” to evaluate the attributes of an “ideal” pilot study.

Within RAPT, at a minimum, to move forward to pilot study, high stakeholder alignment, minimal risk, and identification of a feasibly collectable pragmatic primary outcome should be present. High stakeholder alignment and minimal risk are attributes of ePCTs that are generally not alterable during a pilot study. A meaningful primary outcome that can be feasibly attained from existing data sources should be present before embarking on a pilot study, although it is reasonable to use the pilot phase to validate that measure against gold standard measures ascertained through primary data collection. In addition to testing a primary outcome, the pilot study presents an opportunity to test the viability of secondary clinical outcomes, and implementation outcomes. Solid implementation outcomes are critical to capture variability in intervention fidelity and interpreting the findings of a full ePCT (e.g., potential reasons underlying a null outcome).

The level of evidence supporting the efficacy of the intervention required to move forward to a pilot ePCT, as delineated in the RAPT domains, is an ongoing area of debate. The NIH Stage Model for Behavioral Intervention Development18 can provide some insight. This Model was developed to provide a framework for advancement of behavioral interventions from basic, exploratory science to real-world implementation (further information about its application within the IMPACT Collaboratory can be found in the introductory article to this special issue)15. In this model, efficacy trials (Stage III in this model) precede ePCTs (Stage IV). However, it does recognize that the trajectory of intervention development and testing is not necessarily linear. Because interventions used in efficacy trials are often not optimized for use in real-world settings, they may need to be adapted prior to implementation in a full-scale ePCT. This alteration may take the investigators back to intervention generation/refinement stage (Stage I). Traditionally, this would lead back to an efficacy trial (Stage III) based on the typical, step-wise Stage Model utilization. However, when refining an intervention in preparation for an ePCT, requiring a return to a stage III efficacy trial before performing an ePCT is antithetical as the whole purpose of the refinement is for testing the intervention for real-world use. Thus, a pilot study for an ePCT may be the ideal place to evaluate aspects of efficacious interventions that need to be adapted for an ePCT. This adaptation may be more limited in a simple intervention such as a clinical decision support nudge, or more significant in a complex protocolized intervention.

The remaining RAPT domains, feasibility to implement in real-world environments, economic viability of the intervention, acceptability to real-world HCS and clinicians, and degree of development of the implementation protocol, should at least a medium level utilizing RAPT scoring guidance prior to embarking on a pilot ePCT, but can be optimized to some extent during the pilot phase. At the conclusion of the pilot study, the investigators should have enough data to show full readiness in all RAPT domains to move towards an ePCT.

In addition to using RAPT, investigators within a pilot study for an ePCTs can seek to address domains of the PRECIS-2 model.14 For instance, PLWD/caregiver/clinicians/HCS recruitment strategies and intervention flexibility and adherence measures can all be optimized during a pilot study.

Pilot Studies Core Processes

All Pilot Core process are accomplished by robust online grant submission and review platforms, as well as electronic project management and tracking systems created specifically for our purposes. These processes are described below.

Request for Applications

The pilot core begins by developing a request for application (RFA) in coordination with the IMPACT Collaboratory’s leadership and Administration Core (see Figure 1). The RFA takes into account both the overall state of the science of pilots for ePCTs, as well as priority areas identified by the Collaboratory. In addition, because of the documented health disparities in care of PLWD and their caregivers, the RFA places a priority on those applications that address issues of health equity. The RFA is disseminated widely throughout research institutions and HCS in the U.S. Investigators at all levels are encouraged, although either a principal investigator experienced with ePCTs or strong mentorship by such an individual is needed. Once disseminated, the pilot core hosts open webinars to share information and answer questions, which are archived and viewable online. The first step towards grant submission is a competitive letter of intent which is reviewed for congruence with the RFA and the mission of the Collaboratory, alignment with stakeholders, and minimal risk design that has the potential to develop and implement a pilot study for an ePCT and progress to an extramurally funded full-scale ePCT.

Navigation Process

The field of ePCTs is fairly nascent, particularly in AD/ADRD. Because of this, the Pilot Core and IMPACT Collaboratory leadership recognize that applicants may require significant guidance to maximize the quality of their proposals, especially insofar as they reflect a pragmatic study design. Thus, upon acceptance of a letter of intent, the principal investigator and key members of their team (e.g., statistician) are connected to expert consultants from the various IMPACT Collaboratory Cores through a process coordinated by the Investigator-Navigator Team which is part of the Administration Core. The primary goal of this process is to help guide the investigator team in making the pilot study as pragmatic as possible while addressing key needs to assist in readiness to move to a full-scale ePCT. Ultimately, the incorporation of this guidance into the final proposal is up to the applicant.

Application Review and Selection

Applications are reviewed using a rigorous process following NIH conflict of interest policies (NOT-OD-14-069). Applications are ultimately selected to move forward based upon the strength of the science, alignment with the mission of the IMPACT Collaboratory, whether it falls within any specific RFA priority area(s) and the level of pragmatism of the pilot. Those selected will undergo the following additional administrative processes: 1. Approval by NIA; 2. Submission of a Just-in-Time packet; 3. Single Institutional Review Board approval; 4. Data Safety Monitoring Board approval. The Collaboratory utilizes a contracted Single Institutional Review Board and omnibus Data Safety Monitoring Board to provide streamlined regulatory oversight.

Executing and Guiding Pilots

Once selected, the Pilot Core takes an activist role towards guiding pilot studies through the transition to award and throughout the pilot year to maximize success and ultimate translation to a full-scale ePCT by: 1. Assigning a core executive committee mentor; 2. Performing an initial team consultation with relevant cores to address issues raised in the review and just-in-time process; 3. Scheduling monthly check-ins where progress towards measurable quarterly milestones are reviewed; 4. Addressing any barriers or concerns that arise; 5. Advising in the development of applications for a full-scale ePCT or other next steps as appropriate.

First Application Cycle

Summary

The first RFA on the NIA IMPACT Collaboratory was released on September 10, 2019. 35 letters of intent were received, of which 17 were invited for full proposal, 14 received, and 2 ultimately approved for funding. Proposals represented a wide range of interventions care settings and target populations. Figure 2 illustrates the range of interventions by intervention target, frequency and whether accepted for full proposal. Figure 3 presents a breakdown of the target(s) of the target populations and settings of care of the proposed studies. Of note, many applications included both PLWD and/or their caregivers AND clinicians as subjects which allows for checking of both scientific outcomes and measures of acceptability, usability and fidelity of the intervention. All 17 applications availed themselves of the navigation system, and 16 of 17 met with liaisons from specific cores and teams. 43 total consultation tasks were assigned to cores and teams.

Key Lessons Learned from Cycle 1

There were 4 key lessons learned from the first pilot award cycle:

Lack of knowledge about ePCTs by investigators: Amongst both experienced and newer investigators alike, we found that there was a limited understanding of the difference between Stage III efficacy trials and ePCTs, as well as what needs to occur in a pilot study to move towards readiness for a full-scale ePCT

Lack of “readiness” of intervention: While there is a lack of consensus amongst experts about all the qualities of an intervention that is ready, particularly related to underlying efficacy, we did learn that there are certain clearly delineated thresholds as noted above, including alignment, minimal risk and outcome measurement. We will therefore require completion of a worksheet that includes RAPT and selected PRECIS-2 domains in future RFAs. We will also identify HCS, PLWD and caregiver stakeholder priorities to create targeted areas in future RFAs.

Lack of pragmatic approach to research design: many of the designs at all stages aligned more with an efficacy trial, such as including primary data collection and person-level randomization. In future cycles we will require potential investigators to receive training prior to submission of the letter of intent, require a statistician on all proposals, and require completion of a revised RAPT/PRECIS-2 worksheet in the full proposal.

Siloed approach to navigation: In our original navigation approach, investigators talked individually with members of cores to receive advice on their proposal. However, because many factors of ePCT design are intertwined (e.g. obtaining consent and approach to recruitment) a more holistic navigation process is required. In future cycles we will use a team approach to assist applicants to ensure clear communication and better potential to address the complicated design issues associated with a pilot study for an ePCT.

Some of these changes will assist investigators to propose more pragmatic designs that have potential to be successful. However, given the fluid nature of the current discussion around what should be included within a pilot study for an ePCT, one of the most substantial needs is to develop consensus on what an “ideal” pilot study for an ePCT is.

Future Priorities for IMPACT Pilot Core

This article provides an overview of the structure of the IMPACT Collaboratory Pilot Core, a discussion of the state of the science, and preliminary discussion regarding what a pilot for a full-scale ePCT should be designed to address. In moving forward, this discussion presents a clear picture for the future priorities of the Pilot Core. First, we will guide our funded pilots through successful completion and assist them in developing applications for full-scale ePCTs. Second, we will seek to develop an interdisciplinary consensus framework on what is included within an “ideal” pilot for a full-scale ePCT. Third, once consensus is reached, we will continue to refine our pilot program in terms of: Content (what are we looking for);

Who should we fund (Investigator/research team experience, HCS);

Process (how to best help applicants in developing viable pilot studies and progressing to full-scale ePCTs).

We have already begun to address each of these issues based on our experience with pilot cycle 1. Having a consensus framework will help us to further iterate and serve investigators and teams as we seek to meet the Collaboratory vision of transforming the delivery, quality, and outcomes of care provided to PLWD and their caregivers by accelerating the testing and adoption of evidence-based interventions within HCS.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank and acknowledge the Administration Core members who helped to operationalize the Pilot Studies Core; Rosa Baier, Elaine Bergman, Laura Bridge, Elaine Bergman, Faye Dvorchak, Jill Harrison, Laurie Herndon, Julie Lima, Erin Luers, and Cindy Williams. This work would not have been possible without their support.

Sponsor’s Role: This work was supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number U54AG063546, which funds NIA Imbedded Pragmatic Alzheimer’s Disease and AD-Related Dementias Clinical Trials Collaboratory (NIA IMPACT Collaboratory). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Abbreviations

RFA Request For Applications

LOI Letter Of Intent

NIA National Institute on Aging

IMPACT IMbedded Pragmatic Alzheimers disease related dementias Clinical Trials

EC Executive Committee

JIT Just In Time

PI Principal Investigator

Figure 1. Pilot Processes EC, Executive Committee; IMPACT, IMbedded Pragmatic Alzheimers disease related dementias Clinical Trials; JIT, just in time; LOI, letter of intent; NIA, National Institute on Aging; PI, principal investigator; RFA, request for application.

Figure 2 Large circles indicate broad intervention categories (n=7) proposed in letters of intent (LOIs) invited to submit full proposals. Small circles indicate specific interventions proposed by category in invited full proposals (n=17).

Figure 3. Setting of care target population. PLWD, people living with dementia; SNF, skilled nursing facility.

Conflict of Interest: The investigators have no real or perceived conflicts of interest related to this manuscript.


REFERENCES

1. Alzheimer’s Association. 2018 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association. 2018;14 (3 ):367–429. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.02.001
2. Gilhooly KJ , Gilhooly ML , Sullivan MP , A meta-review of stress, coping and interventions in dementia and dementia caregiving. BMC Geriatr. 5 18 2016;16 :106 DOI: 10.1186/s12877-016-0280-8 27193287
3. Anguish I , Locca JF , Bula C , Zumbach S , Bugnon O . Pharmacologic Treatment of Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia in Nursing Homes: Update of the 2008 JAMDA Recommendations. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 6 1 2015;16 (6 ):527–532. DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2015.03.014
4. Gitlin LN , Kales HC , Lyketsos CG . Nonpharmacologic management of behavioral symptoms in dementia. JAMA. 11 21 2012;308 (19 ):2020–2029. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2012.36918 23168825
5. Amjad H , Roth DL , Sheehan OC , Lyketsos CG , Wolff JL , Samus QM . Underdiagnosis of Dementia: an Observational Study of Patterns in Diagnosis and Awareness in US Older Adults. J. Gen. Intern. Med 7 2018;33 (7 ):1131–1138. DOI: 10.1007/s11606-018-4377-y 29508259
6. Albrecht JS , Gruber-Baldini AL , Fromme EK , McGregor JC , Lee DS , Furuno JP . Quality of hospice care for individuals with dementia. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 7 2013;61 (7 ):1060–1065. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.12316 23710597
7. Cadigan RO , Grabowski DC , Givens JL , Mitchell SL . The quality of advanced dementia care in the nursing home: the role of special care units. Med. Care 10 2012;50 (10 ):856–862. DOI: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e31825dd713 22982735
8. Crespo M , Bernaldo de Quiros M , Gomez MM , Hornillos C . Quality of Life of Nursing Home Residents With Dementia: A Comparison of Perspectives of Residents, Family, and Staff. The Gerontologist. 9 7, 2011 2011 DOI: 10.1093/geront/gnr080
9. Raggi A , Tasca D , Panerai S , Neri W , Ferri R . The burden of distress and related coping processes in family caregivers of patients with Alzheimer’s disease living in the community. J. Neurol. Sci 8 17 2015 DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2015.08.024
10. Gupta VK , Winter M , Cabral H , Disparities in Age-Associated Cognitive Decline Between African-American and Caucasian Populations: The Roles of Health Literacy and Education. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 8 2016;64 (8 ):1716–1723. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.14257 27310494
11. Chin AL , Negash S , Hamilton R . Diversity and disparity in dementia: the impact of ethnoracial differences in Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 7-9 2011;25 (3 ):187–195. DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e318211c6c9 21399486
12. Cooper C , Tandy AR , Balamurali TB , Livingston G . A systematic review and meta-analysis of ethnic differences in use of dementia treatment, care, and research. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 3 2010;18 (3 ):193–203. DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181bf9caf 20224516
13. Zwarenstein M , Treweek S , Gagnier JJ , Improving the reporting of pragmatic trials: an extension of the CONSORT statement. BMJ. 11 11 2008;337 :a2390 DOI: 10.1136/bmj.a2390 19001484
14. Loudon K , Treweek S , Sullivan F , Donnan P , Thorpe KE , Zwarenstein M . The PRECIS-2 tool: designing trials that are fit for purpose. BMJ. 5 8 2015;350 :h2147 DOI: 10.1136/bmj.h2147 25956159
15. Mitchell SL , Mor V , Harrison J , McCarthy EP . Embedded Pragmatic Trials in Dementia Care: Realizing the Vision of the NIA IMPACT Collaboratory J. Am. Geriatr. Soc In Press.
16. Baier RR , Mitchell SL , Jutkowitz E , Mor V . Identifying and Supporting Nonpharmacological Dementia Interventions Ready for Pragmatic Trials: Results From an Expert Workshop. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 7 2018;19 (7 ):560–562. DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2018.02.011 29656839
17. Baier RR , Jutkowitz E , Mitchell SL , McCreedy E , Mor V . Readiness assessment for pragmatic trials (RAPT): a model to assess the readiness of an intervention for testing in a pragmatic trial. BMC Med Res Methodol. 7 18 2019;19 (1 ):156 DOI: 10.1186/s12874-019-0794-9 31319789
18. Onken LS , Carroll KM , Shoham V , Cuthbert BN , Riddle M . Reenvisioning Clinical Science: Unifying the Discipline to Improve the Public Health. Clin Psychol Sci. 1 1 2014;2 (1 ):22–34. DOI: 10.1177/2167702613497932 25821658
