LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7513292
3336
Front Neuroendocrinol
Front Neuroendocrinol
Frontiers in neuroendocrinology
0091-3022
1095-6808

31987814
7225072
10.1016/j.yfrne.2020.100820
NIHMS1558003
Article
Pregnancy, Postpartum and Parity: Resilience and Vulnerability in Brain Health and Disease
Deems Nicholas a
Leuner Benedetta a
a The Ohio State University, Department of Psychology, Columbus, OH, USA
Send correspondence to: Benedetta Leuner, PhD; Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210; Phone: 614-292-5218; leuner.1@osu.edu
29 2 2020
24 1 2020
4 2020
01 4 2021
57 100820100820
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Risk and resilience in brain health and disease can be influenced by a variety of factors. While there is a growing appreciation to consider sex as one of these factors, far less attention has been paid to sex-specific variables that may differentially impact females such as pregnancy and reproductive history. In this review, we focus on nervous system disorders which show a female bias and for which there is data from basic research and clinical studies pointing to modification in disease risk and progression during pregnancy, postpartum and/or as a result of parity: multiple sclerosis (MS), depression, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In doing so, we join others (Shors, 2016; Galea et al., 2018) in aiming to illustrate the importance of looking beyond sex in neuroscience research.

allogregnanolone
Alzheimer’s disease
postpartum depression
estrogen
fetal microchimerism
immune
maternal
multiple sclerosis
progesterone
prolactin
stroke

1. Introduction

Females have long been overlooked in neuroscience and other areas of biomedical research, but in recent years, the appreciation to consider sex as a biological variable has grown, a shift driven in part by the policy changes enacted by the NIH (Miller et al., 2017; Clayton, 2018; Shansky, 2019). While the greater focus on sex differences represents a major step forward, it is also important to take into account how sex-specific variables may affect women’s brain health and disease, both in the short term and over the long term across the female lifespan (Duarte-Guterman et al., 2019). Pregnancy and motherhood are among the uniquely female experiences that warrant further attention in preclinical and clinical studies which tend to use virgin animals or not consider reproductive status (Shors, 2016; Galea et al., 2018). It could be argued that studying pregnant, postpartum and/or parous females with one or more reproductive experiences may better reflect the female population since most women (&gt;80%) have undergone pregnancy and had offspring at least once (Martinez et al., 2012).

Pregnancy and the postpartum period are characterized by extensive physiological changes. These include drastic hormonal fluctuations that are vital for the maintenance of pregnancy, many of which are unparalleled by any other neuroendocrine events (e.g., menstruation, puberty, menopause) in a healthy female’s lifetime (Brett &amp; Baxendale, 2001; Brunton &amp; Russell, 2010). The hormonal events of human pregnancy can be largely attributed to the placenta (Napso et al., 2018) which contributes to the 20-fold rise in progesterone as well as the basal secretion of glucocorticoids at 2–3X above non-pregnant levels. Estrogens rise even more with estradiol (E2) levels increasing up to 300X by the end of pregnancy and estriol (E3), which is nearly undetectable outside of pregnancy, soaring 1000-fold (Brett &amp; Baxendale, 2001). Shortly after delivery, levels of these steroid hormones plummet with the expulsion of the placenta, although glucocorticoid levels remain raised relative to non-pregnant levels. The placenta is also the source of numerous hormones, such as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), that are unique to pregnancy. Additional hormones, although primarily produced by sources other than the placenta, also fluctuate during these periods. For example, the pituitary hormone prolactin is elevated during pregnancy as well as postpartum to support milk production (Larsen &amp; Grattan, 2012; Marano &amp; Ben-Jonathan, 2014) while oxytocin from the hypothalamus increases at parturition to stimulate uterine contractions and remains high postpartum as a result of nursing (Gimpl &amp; Fahrenholz et al., 2001). Similar hormonal changes occur in other mammals including rodents albeit with some differences in pattern and timing (Duarte-Guterman et al., 2019).

A multitude of dramatic changes are also evident in cardiovascular, hematological, pulmonary, metabolic, immune and neurobiological systems during pregnancy (Hillerer et al., 2014; Sanghavi &amp; Rutherford, 2014; Leuner &amp; Sabihi, 2016; Soma-Pillay et al., 2016; Napso et al., 2018; Barba-Müller et al., 2019). Many of these are mediated by hormones and collectively function to ensure a successful pregnancy and fetal growth and development as well as promote caregiving behaviors after delivery. While some aspects of maternal physiology recover following pregnancy, others can be long-lasting. For example, persistent changes in circulating hormone levels and hormone receptor expression resulting from reproductive experience have been reported in women and rodents (Bernstein et al., 1985; Dorgan et al., 1995; Musey et al., 1987; Bridges &amp; Byrnes, 2006; Pawluski et al., 2009; Barrett et al., 2014; Bridges, 2016). Parity has also been associated with a differential peripheral immune profile during aging (Barrat et al., 1997; Eid et al., 2019a). Enduring modifications in the brain and behavior following motherhood have been shown as well (Love et al., 2005; Lemaire et al., 2006; Pawluski et al., 2006; Pawluksi and Galea, 2007; Kinsley et al., 2010; Macbeth &amp; Luine, 2010; Barha et al., 2015; Hoekzema et al., 2017; Duarte-Guterman et al., 2019; Eid et al., 2019a).

The hormonal and other physiological changes that females experience as a result of pregnancy can have important implications for health and disease. For example, in both rodents and humans, susceptibility to infection is greater during late pregnancy which is also a time when the severity of infectious diseases is increased and the risk of maternal mortality is heightened (Spencer et al., 2008a; Robinson &amp; Klein, 2012; Sherer et al., 2018). Pregnancy may also influence women’s health well past the reproductive event. Consistent with this possibility are studies showing that parity can positively or negatively modulate later risk for a wide range of conditions such as periodontal disease (Morelli et al., 2018), osteoporotic hip fracture (Wang et al., 2016), cardiovascular disease (Lv et al., 2015), type 2 diabetes (Li et al., 2016), and various cancers (Troisi et al., 2018), to name a few. Here we focus on multiple sclerosis (MS), depression, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) as examples of central nervous system (CNS) disorders which show a female bias and for which there is data from human work and animal models pointing to modification in disease risk and progression during pregnancy, postpartum, and/or as a result of parity. We also discuss the mechanisms by which these effects might arise including hormonal and immune mediators. Ultimately, we aim to show that a comprehensive understanding of brain health and disease in females requires greater consideration of experiences such as pregnancy, parturition and lactation.

2. Multiple Sclerosis

2.1 Sex differences in MS

MS is a chronic disease that is characterized by aberrant immune targeting of the myelin sheaths surrounding axons in the brain and spinal cord causing demyelinating lesions that can lead to neuroaxonal damage and ultimately neurodegeneration as evidenced by brain tissue loss and atrophy. Clinically, episodes of the disease typically start out as intermittent, and in some cases will seem to enter a temporary remission, but as the disease progresses it can worsen and cause irreversible neurological impairment and disability (Houtchens, 2013). Like other autoimmune diseases, MS disproportionately affects women and does so at three times the rate that it affects men (Koch-Henriksen &amp; Sørensen, 2010; Voskuhl &amp; Gold, 2012). Women also often experience more frequent relapses, tend to develop more inflammatory lesions, and usually present an earlier onset of the disease compared to men with MS (Pozzilli et al., 2003; Confavreux &amp; Vukusic, 2006; Kalincik et al., 2013). The sex difference is thought to arise because females have a more robust immune system than males (Nalbandian &amp; Kovats, 2005; Natri et al., 2019) and the female preponderance in MS suggests a role for hormones (Avila et al., 2018).

2.2 MS during pregnancy and postpartum

For women with MS, the disease can take hold during formative reproductive years with diagnosis typically occurring between 20 and 40 years of age (Houtchens, 2013). Pregnancy was long thought to have a negative effect on disease progression and consequently women with MS were often discouraged from having children (Houtchens, 2013; McCombe, 2018). Even though medical management of MS during pregnancy remains challenging given the potential risk of medication exposure to the fetus, it is now understood that women with MS aren’t at increased risk for pregnancy-related complications (Giesser, 2002; Voskuhl &amp; Momtazee, 2017). In fact, pregnancy is considered beneficial for MS symptoms as MS typically undergoes remission during mid to late pregnancy (Confavreux et al., 1998; Finkelsztejn et al., 2011). Likewise, in animal models of MS, such as experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), significant symptomatic improvements are seen during pregnancy across a range of species (Langer-Gould et al., 2002; Haddady et al., 2010). In contrast to pregnancy, however, symptom relapse often occurs in women at accelerated rates after delivery during the first 3–6 months postpartum (Confavreux et al., 1998; Vukusic et al., 2004; Finklesztejin et al., 2011).

2.3 Immune-alterations in pregnancy and MS pathophysiology

Early in pregnancy, the immune system is forced to adopt an immunosuppressive state to shield the developing fetus from maternal immune attack (Sherer et al., 2018). This immune state is largely characterized by a phenotypic shift from a pro-inflammatory Th1-profile to an anti-inflammatory Th2-profile (Marzi et al., 1996; Ysrraelit &amp; Correale, 2019). Other immune modifications characteristic of this time include increased numbers of regulatory T cells (TRegs) (Steinborn et al., 2012), elevated expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-10 (IL-10), and lowered production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNFα) (Marzi et al., 1996; Elenkov et al., 2001). In addition, levels of the chemokine receptor, CXCR3, an important mediator involved in leukocyte recruitment and immune cell activation, is also reduced during pregnancy (Shuster, 2008). How this immune suppression is achieved during pregnancy is still not completely clear, but estrogens, via the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα), are among the factors known to play a major role (Robison &amp; Klein, 2012; Airas, 2015; Ysrraelit &amp; Correale, 2019). The rise in glucocorticoids during pregnancy also contributes to shaping the maternal immune system through the suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokine production and inflammatory gene transcription (Schweingruber et al., 2011).

MS, like many other autoimmune diseases, is dominated by a Th1, pro-inflammatory state. As such, the hormonally-driven shift to an anti-inflammatory Th2 immune state during pregnancy is regarded as a key factor underlying reductions in MS symptoms during this time (Patas et al., 2013). With hormone withdrawal following delivery, the immunosuppressive state is lost and as a consequence, MS disease activity rebounds postpartum (Ysrraelit &amp; Correale, 2019). More recently, a role for fetal microchimerism has been suggested in the immune-related postpartum exacerbation of MS symptoms. In microchimerism, fetal cells gain access to the mother’s circulatory system and thereafter reside in maternal organs, even for decades after pregnancy (Bianchi et al., 1996). It has been proposed that when maternal tolerance to the fetus (and, therefore, also fetal cells) is lifted postpartum, an abundance of fetal cells may lead to an intense maternal immune response, possibly increasing MS symptoms. While fetal cells have been found more frequently in blood/tissue samples from women with some autoimmune conditions (Boddy et al., 2016), their contribution to MS has not been tested and thus remains speculative at this point.

2.4 Remyelination and MS remission in pregnancy

Numerous studies also suggest that along with immunosuppression, other processes may be involved in remission during pregnancy including remyelination of the CNS (Avila et al., 2018). Remyelination in healthy individuals is typically achieved through the generation of new, myelinating oligodendrocytes (Blakemore &amp; Keirstead, 1999; Polito &amp; Reynolds, 2005). While patients with MS are still capable of remyelination, the process is grossly inadequate (Franklin &amp; French-Constant, 2008). However, during pregnancy, increased proliferation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and generation of mature oligodendrocytes, along with higher numbers of myelinated axons, have been shown to occur in the maternal CNS of rodents (Gregg et al., 2007; Haddady et al., 2010; Kalakh &amp; Mouihate, 2019). Remarkably, pregnant mice and rats also exhibit an enhanced ability to remyelinate white matter lesions following demyelinating insult (Gregg et al., 2007; Kalakh &amp; Mouihate, 2019). Pregnancy-related hormones have been implicated in remyelination (see 2.5). This process may, at least in part, explain remission in pregnancy and the accompanying decrease in the number and size of active white matter lesions (van Walderveen et al., 1994).

In addition to oligodendrocytes, microglia, the brain’s resident innate immune cells, may also aid in remyelinating efforts. Although not examined within the context of pregnancy, microglia have been shown to play an essential role in various aspects of the remyelination process such as clearing myelin debris (Lampron et al., 2015) and releasing mediators (i.e., TNFα, IGF-1, FGF-2) which are instrumental in inducing OPC differentiation (Kuhlmann et al. 2008). Thus, while microglia are traditionally regarded as detrimental in MS and EAE (Heppner et al., 2005), they can also be beneficial. Microglial alterations have been reported in pregnant and postpartum rats (Posillico &amp; Schwarz, 2016; Haim et al. 2016) but the extent to which these cells contribute to remission and relapse during these times is unknown.

2.5 Pregnancy-related hormones and MS

Prolactin

An extensive literature has documented that prolactin has immune-stimulating properties and thus, it has been classically considered detrimental to MS and in EAE (Dijkstra et al., 1994; De Bellis et al., 2005; Costanza &amp; Pedotti, 2016). Attenuating the pro-inflammatory effect of prolactin with concomitant administration of the immunomodulator interferon-β (IFN-β), however, has been shown to improve the clinical signs and histological scores of EAE (Johnson et al., 2009). Additional work highlights important remyelinating properties of prolactin and has thus further encouraged a reinterpretation of the involvement of this hormone in MS. Indeed, prolactin was found to be necessary for the pregnancy-induced increase in OPC proliferation within the mouse CNS (Gregg et al., 2007). Moreover, prolactin treatment was able to mimic the regenerative effects of pregnancy and promote white matter regeneration and remyelination in virgin females (Gregg et al., 2007). These data raise the possibility that a similar prolactin-mediated regeneration process may occur in humans and contribute to the remission of MS during late pregnancy (Gregg, 2009).

In contrast to pregnancy, the risk for relapse increases postpartum, as noted above. Although still a matter of debate (Hutchinson, 2013; Langer-Gould &amp; Hellwig, 2013; Vukusic &amp; Confavreux, 2013), some evidence suggests that women with MS who exclusively breastfeed are less likely to experience a postpartum relapse compared to women who do not (Langer-Gould et al., 2009; Pakpoor et al., 2012; Hellwig et al., 2015 but see Airas et al., 2010; Portaccio et al., 2011). It could be argued that such data are biased as women with less severe MS may be able to breastfeed while those facing a more severe disease state may be forced to forego breastfeeding for the continuation of disease-modifying drug regiments (Airas et al., 2010; Yssraelit &amp; Correlae, 2019). Alternatively, because breastfeeding maintains high prolactin levels, these data could suggest that prolactin may too protect against relapse postpartum although the extent to which this may be due to reduced inflammation and/or remyelination is unknown.

Estrogens

As discussed, elevated estrogen levels during pregnancy have anti-inflammatory effects (Ysrraelit &amp; Correale, 2019). In non-pregnant animals, exogenous estrogens can decrease the severity of EAE by depressing Th1 activity via an ERα dependent mechanism (Jansson et al., 1994; Kim et al., 1999; Polanczyk et al., 2003; Spence et al., 2013; Laffont et al., 2015). Interestingly, E3 (the main estrogen of pregnancy) was shown to be more effective than E2 in EAE. Indeed, pre-treatment with E3 (at doses similar to physiological levels seen in murine pregnancy) before disease onset postponed disease onset for longer than administration of E2, which also required five times the amount to reach the same effect as E3 (Jansson et al., 1994). Furthermore, compared to controls, E3 treated EAE-mice showed a reduction in disease severity and less pathology (Kim et al., 1999). Synthetic ER ligands also have a role in remyelinating the CNS (Avila et al., 2018). Agonists of estrogen receptor beta (ERβ) result in increased functional remyelination and protection of existing axons in EAE models (Crawford et al., 2010). In addition, treatment with ERβ agonists has been shown to increase the number of mature oligodendrocytes (Kim et al., 2018) and to have several other neuroprotective effects (Itoh et al., 2017). Clinical trials have aimed to simulate the benefits of pregnancy with several promising effects of E3 reported to date including reduced relapse rates, improved cognitive functioning, and attenuated cortical atrophy (Sicotte et al., 2002; Soldan et al., 2003; Voskuhl et al., 2016; Makenzie-Graham et al., 2018).

Progesterone

Progesterone also seems to confer protective benefits as evidenced in studies employing EAE models (Yssraelit &amp; Correlae, 2019). For instance, pre-administration of progesterone before disease onset has been associated with reduced neurological damage, enhanced axonal density, and decreased axonal damage in female mice (Hoffmann et al., 2001). Moreover, progesterone administration after disease onset in EAE was effective in obviating neurological damage and cultivating regeneration (Yu et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010; Yates et al., 2010). These effects may be attributable in part to progesterone’s anti-inflammatory properties (Yates et al., 2010; Labombarda et al., 2011). In addition, progesterone is capable of enhancing myelin repair through the proliferation and maturation of oligodendrocytes (Labombarda et al., 2011; Ramien et al., 2016). Interestingly, pretreating ovarectomized EAE animals with progesterone alone resulted in amplified neuroinflammation and worsened symptoms which suggests that progesterone works in tandem with other gonadal factors to induce protection (Hughes, 2012).

Allopregnanolone, a derivative of progesterone, has also been implicated in MS. Like progesterone, allopregnanolone levels rise across pregnancy and drop abruptly in the postpartum (Magure, 2019). Dysregulation in allopregnanolone biosynthesis pathways has been reported in brain tissue from MS patients as well as in CNS tissue derived from MS animal models (Noorbakhsh et al., 2011). Allopregnanolone bestows numerous neuroprotective benefits in the context of MS such as minimizing axonal damage and promoting myelin gene expression in oligodendrocytes (Noorbakhsh et al., 2014). A potential role of allopregnanolone in enhancing OPC proliferation following a demyelination insult during pregnancy was also recently demonstrated in rats (Kalakh &amp; Mouihate, 2019).

Taken together, these data suggest that higher levels of progesterone or allopregnanolone during pregnancy may enhance the ability of the CNS to repair demyelinated axons as well as preserve axonal integrity. However, a clinical trial employing high doses of progestin and estradiol immediately following delivery was not successful in reducing relapse-rate during the postpartum and thus was terminated early (Vukusic et al., 2012; Durand-Dubief et al., 2014). Future trials could be designed to assess whether progesterone treatment improves remyelination or other outcome measures more aligned with known effects of progesterone rather than assessment of its effect on relapse (Voskuhl &amp; Momtazee, 2017).

2.6 Role of parity in MS risk and progression

A number of epidemiological studies have found no association between number of pregnancies and subsequent MS risk (Weinshenker et al., 1989; Thorogood et al., 1998; Alonso et al., 2005). In contrast, other work suggests that parity may reduce MS risk with increased numbers of pregnancies being associated with lower risk of developing the first demyelinating event (Runmarker et al., 1995; Ponsonby et al., 2012; Magyari et al., 2013). To date, nothing is known about the biological factors that may mediate the link between multiparity and MS risk.

Since MS is a chronic disease that can render a patient disabled over time, it is important to consider the extent to which one or more pregnancies may influence the trajectory of long-term MS outcomes. One metric to quantify long-term outcomes is disability progression, most often assessed with the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) which provides a measure of ambulatory and other neurological impairments. The role of parity on the development of future MS disability is another matter of continued debate as studies examining this issue have yielded conflicting results (D’Hooghe &amp; De Keyser, 2014; Hutchinson, 2014, McCombe &amp; Callaway, 2014). For example, several retrospective and prospective longitudinal studies have found no effect of pregnancy on MS disability (Weinshenker et al., 1989; Roullet et al., 1993; Confavreux et al., 1998; Vukusic et al., 2004; D’Amico et al., 2016). In contrast, a recent prospective study reported that pregnant women with MS tended to have worse disability outcomes after delivery (Lai et al., 2018), although the follow-up period was short (i.e., one-year after delivery). Yet other long-term studies have produced results which suggest a beneficial effect of parity. For example, Verdru et al., (1994) showed that wheelchair dependence occurred after 18.6 years in those women with MS who experienced at least one pregnancy after onset versus 12.5 years for non-parous women. Similarly, it has been shown that women with one or more children have less disability and/or reach a given disability after a longer period of time (Runmarker &amp; Andersen, 1995; D’Hooghe et al. 2010; Masrea et al., 2015). In other work, pregnancy was found to be 4.5X more effective than first-line disease modifying therapies in preventing long-term disability accrual. Interestingly, anytime spent pregnant, including induced or spontaneous abortions, was beneficial in minimizing future disability from MS (Jokubaitis et al., 2016). It should be acknowledged that most of these studies are prone to selection bias as young women with more severe disease onset are less likely to become pregnant. In contrast, women with MS who are able to become pregnant may reflect a disease course that is less severe. Thus, the results of these studies may be skewed toward interpretations that reflect a lessened disease course.

There has been little attempt to understand how changes that occur during pregnancy might mechanistically engender long-term protective changes for mothers with MS. If parity does beneficially influence long-term MS outcomes, then lasting changes on immune function (Eid et al., 2019a) or CNS mechanisms including remyelination would be expected. One way these could arise is through epigenetic effects. A recent gene-wide association study of differentially expressed genes in parous versus non-parous women with MS identified over 500 genes that changed with parity (Mehta et al., 2019). Many of these genes were pertinent to axonal guidance, developmental biology, and cell-to-cell communication pathways and were significantly upregulated in parous women with MS as compared with nulliparous women with MS (Mehta et al., 2019). This suggests that parity may alter the epigenome to enhance the repair of damaged axons in MS.

3. Depression

3.1 Sex differences in depression

Major depression is an affective disorder characterized by symptoms including sad mood, anhedonia, restlessness and/or agitation, sleep disturbances, and impaired concentration, among others. Major depression affects 300 million people worldwide (WHO, 2017) but is twice as prevalent in women as men (Kessler, 2003). In addition to incidence, various clinical manifestations of depression also vary by sex. Compared to men, women with depression experience higher symptom severity and are more likely to present with atypical symptoms such as hypersomnia, weight gain, and excessive fatigue as well as somatic complaints (Halbreich &amp; Kahn, 2007; Marcus et al., 2008; Schuch et al., 2014). Sex differences in comorbidity are also seen in depression such that women show higher rates of anxiety whereas men show more substance use disorders (Marcus et al., 2008, Schuch et al., 2014). The sex differences in depression points to a role for hormones in the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms (Eid et al., 2019b; Rainville &amp; Hodes, 2019; Rubinow &amp; Schmidt, 2019).

3.2 Depression during the peripartum period

The peripartum period is a time of elevated susceptibility to mood disorders with an estimated 15–20% of women developing depression during this time (O’Hara et al., 1990; Vesga-Lopez et al., 2008). While the DSM-V recognizes peripartum depression as major depression with onset during pregnancy or within the first four weeks postpartum (American Psychological Association, 2013), this definition has been challenged by many clinicians, researchers, and major health organizations (WHO, CDC) who consider postpartum depression to occur within the first 12 months after birth (DiFlorio et al., 2013). Further, the DSM-V definition is considered problematic because it disregards timing of depression onset during pregnancy vs. postpartum which likely represents different subtypes with different underlying mechanisms (Altemus et al., 2012; Putnam et al, 2017). Some have also argued that peripartum depression should be a unique syndrome distinct from major depression as it presents differently (e.g., greater comorbid anxiety) than depression in women outside of the peripartum period (Fox et al., 2018a) and because of its timing which coincides with unprecedented hormonal change.

Postpartum depression is detrimental for maternal well-being and is the leading cause of maternal mortality resulting from suicide (Lindahl et al., 2005; Chesney et al, 2014). Moreover, postpartum depression is often associated with impaired mother-infant interactions which can have a long-lasting, negative impact on offspring development (Grace et al., 2003; Field, 2010). Thus, despite ongoing controversies, postpartum depression is considered to be a major public health concern due to its prevalence and the risk it poses to mothers and their children (Wisner et al., 2006; Meaney, 2018).

3.3 Pregnancy-related physiological changes and postpartum depression

As with other neuropsychiatric disorders, the etiology of depression during the peripartum period is likely multifactorial. While psychological, social, genetic, and environmental factors have all been implicated in maternal depression (reviewed by Brummelte &amp; Galea, 2010; Yim et al., 2015; Meltzer-Brody et al., 2018a; Elwood et al., 2019; Payne &amp; Maguire, 2019), here we will briefly consider some of the main pregnancy-related hormonal and immune factors which have been studied. Where discrepancies are reported, it is important to consider that there is often significant methodological heterogeneity across studies which could impact results, such as timepoint during pregnancy/postpartum in which women were studied, the demographics of the sample population, the severity of depression and various others.

Hormones

Given the timing of symptom onset, hormones have long been thought to contribute to postpartum depression but this has proven difficult demonstrate (Brummelte &amp; Galea, 2010; Schiller et al., 2015). In the majority of studies, there are no consistent changes in estrogen or progesterone levels associated with postpartum depression (reviewed by Yim et al., 2015; Payne &amp; Maguire, 2019). Yet, a role for these hormones in postpartum depression cannot be ruled out given a landmark study by Bloch et al. (2000) which found that estrogen and progesterone withdrawal increased depression in some women, particularly those with a prior history of postpartum depression. Thus, absolute levels of estrogen and progesterone may not differ in women with maternal depression but rather, the brains of women who develop postpartum depression may be differentially sensitive to fluctuations in these hormones. Several studies also suggest that estrogen treatment reduces risk for developing postpartum depression and decreases depression symptoms during the postpartum period (Sichel et al., 1995; Gregoire et al., 1996) although studies on progesterone are more mixed (Buckwalter et al., 1999; Lawrie et al., 2000; Dennis et al., 2008). Further evidence for a role of estrogen and progesterone comes from animal experiments showing that estradiol and progesterone withdrawal can provoke depression-like behavior postpartum (Galea et al., 2001; Stoffel &amp; Craft, 2004; Suda et al., 2008; Green et al., 2009).

Alterations in progesterone metabolites, including allopregnanolone, have also been suggested to play a role in postpartum depression (Maguire, 2019; McEvoy et al., 2018). Like progesterone, levels of allopregnanolone were not found to significantly differ in women with postpartum depression (Epperson et al., 2006; Deligiannidis et al., 2013). However, conflicting results have been reported (reviewed by McEvoy et al., 2018). For example, Osborne et al. (2017) found that low allopregnanolone levels during pregnancy predicted subsequent postpartum depression while Deligiannidis et al. (2019) showed higher peripartum plasma allopregnanolone concentrations in women who developed postpartum depression. Although differences in allopregnanolone levels have not been consistently associated with postpartum depression, some have proposed that postpartum depression be the result of abnormalities in the ability of allopregnanolone to modulate GABA receptors in the brain. In support of this, an elegant study by Maguire and Mody (2008) showed that knockout mice who lacked the ability to regulate the GABAA subtype of the GABA receptor during peripartum period developed depressive and anxiety-like behaviors in the postpartum. In a subsequent study, a novel synthetic neuroactive steroid (SGE-516) was also effective in alleviating depression-like behaviors in this mouse model of postpartum depression (Melón et al., 2018a). These animal findings have translational relevance to humans as the drug brexanolone, a synthetic formulation of allopregnanolone, was recently approved by the FDA to treat postpartum depression after successful clinical trials (Meltzer-Brody et al., 2018b; Wisner et al., 2019).

Oxytocin regulates many functions of relevance to postpartum depression including emotion, stress, affiliation, and maternal care (Post &amp; Leuner, 2019). Therefore, it is perhaps not surprising that oxytocin has been implicated in postpartum depression. Oxytocin has also received attention in postpartum depression because of its role in nursing and breastfeeding difficulties often seen in depressed mothers (Steube et al., 2013). While a number studies suggest that low levels of oxytocin in pregnancy or postpartum may be a risk factor for postpartum depression (Skrundz et al., 2011; Apter-Levy et al., 2013; Stuebe et al., 2013, Eapen et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2015; Jobst et al., 2016) there are conflicting findings as well (Garfield et al., 2015; Zelkowitz et al., 2014; Massey et al., 2016). Furthermore, the limited number of studies which have examined oxytocin administration in postpartum women indicate that it may worsen mood and increase risk of postpartum depression and may or may not be beneficial in alleviating maternal care deficits often seen in depressed mothers (Kim et al., 2014; Mah 2016; Moura et al., 2016; Mah et al., 2017; Kroll-Desrosiers et al., 2017). Like oxytocin, prolactin also has a well-known role in maternal care and lactation (Larsen &amp; Grattan, 2012) but fewer studies have examined the role of prolactin in postpartum depression. Nonetheless, available evidence points to a link between low prolactin, postpartum depression, and early cessation or absence of breastfeeding (Abou-Saleh et al., 1998; Groer and Morgan, 2007; Stuebe et al., 2012).

In addition to reproductive and lactogenic hormones, cortisol and other hormones (ACTH, CRH) of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis have been proposed to be involved in postpartum depression. This is in part because of the multiple changes that occur in the HPA axis during pregnancy and postpartum but also because stress is one of the greatest risk factors for postpartum depression (Yim et al., 2015; Brummelte &amp; Galea, 2010; Payne &amp; Maguire, 2019). While the HPA axis has been implicated in depression at other times in life (Pariante &amp; Lightman, 2008), the link between perinatal changes in HPA axis hormones and postpartum depression is less clear (Okano &amp; Nomura, 1992; Corwin et al., 2005; Groer &amp; Morgan, 2007; Yim et al., 2009; Meltzer-Body et al., 2011; de Rezende et al., 2016). Studies that have found a relationship actually report lower cortisol levels in women with postpartum depression (Seth et al., 2016; Dickens &amp; Pawluski, 2018; Szpunar &amp; Parry, 2018). Moreover, other work employing reactivity tests (e.g., dexamethasone suppression or stressors) in depressed mothers points to decreased responsiveness of the HPA axis (Bloch et al., 2003; Nierop et al., 2006; Jolley et al., 2007). Notably, rodent models have also been used to understand the contribution of the HPA axis to postpartum depression and these support a role for glucocorticoids and HPA axis dysfunction in inducing depressive-like behaviors in postpartum females (Brummelte &amp; Galea, 2010; Melón et al., 2018b). Thus, there is some indication that HPA dysregulation occurs in postpartum depression, but more work is needed (Garcia-Leal et al., 2017; Dickens &amp; Pawluski, 2018).

Immune factors

Late pregnancy and the postpartum period are characterized by a pro-inflammatory state (see 2.3) and heightened inflammation has been associated with depression outside of the postpartum period (Rainville &amp; Hodes, 2019). Because of these parallels, immune mechanisms have been hypothesized to contribute to the development of peripartum depression (Corwin &amp; Pajer, 2008; Anderson &amp; Maes, 2013; Osborne &amp; Monk, 2013; Leff-Gelman et al., 2016). Several lines of evidence support this possibility. For example, peripheral immune cells were shown to have different gene expression signatures in women with postpartum depression than those without (Segman et al., 2010; Pan et al., 2018). In addition, several studies assessing circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines in blood or urine samples found an association between postpartum depression and increased levels of IL-6 (Maes et al., 2000; Boufidou et al., 2009; Christian et al., 2009; Cassidy-Bushrow et al., 2012; Simpson et al., 2016) as well as higher levels of levels of IL-β in association with depression scores during the postpartum period (Corwin et al., 2008; Cassidy-Bushrow et al., 2012). Although such findings suggest an exaggerated inflammatory response with maternal depression, others have found no link between postpartum depression and these pro-inflammatory cytokines (Blackmore et al., 2014; Skalkidou et al. 2009; Corwin et al., 2015). Moreover, one study reported lower levels of inflammatory markers (TNF-α) for the first days postpartum among women that later developed depression (Corwin et al., 2015). Further adding to the complexity, a recent wide-scale exploratory examination of inflammatory gene expression in blood during late pregnancy found a host of immune-related genes that were downregulated in women who later developed depressive symptoms eight weeks postpartum, irrespective of their pro- or anti-inflammatory properties (Bränn et al., 2017). Thus, at this stage, studies have been somewhat contradictory. One potential caveat is that peripheral immune changes may not necessarily reflect what is happening in the brain and therefore may not be a good marker (Setiawan et al., 2015). Only one study to date has looked at central immune changes in CSF samples from women undergoing epidural anesthesia and found an association between elevated IL-6 and depressed mood postpartum (Boufidou et al. 2009). There is also recent evidence from animal models showing central immune dysregulation in postpartum females exhibiting depressive-like behavior (Posillico &amp; Schwarz, 2016; Leuner et al., 2019). Given the limited number of studies, additional work assessing neuroimmune disruption as a contributor to postpartum depression is needed.

Critically, although we have discussed the various hormonal and immune factors separately, they do not operate in isolation but in complex, interconnected ways. For instance, a study by Bloch et al. (2005) demonstrated an exaggerated cortisol response and increased depression symptoms upon withdrawal of estrogen and progesterone in women with a history of postpartum depression suggesting hormonal crosstalk. As another example, GABAA receptor deficient postpartum mice have been shown to exhibit increased HPA axis responsiveness which points to an interplay among allopregnanolone, GABA receptors, and HPA axis function in the pathophysiology of postpartum depression (Maguire &amp; Mody, 2008). Various endocrine-immune interactions have also been proposed (Corwin &amp; Pajer, 2008). These and other relationships (Brummelte &amp; Galea, 2010; Payne &amp; Maguire, 2019) have yet to be fully understood in the context of postpartum depression but it is critical we do so in order to gain better insights into the causes of, and potential treatments, for this condition.

4. Stroke

4.1 Sex differences in stroke

Stroke affects nearly 17 million individuals every year and accounts for approximately six million deaths globally (Benjamin et al., 2017). There are two main types of stroke, ischemic and hemorrhagic. About 85% of strokes are ischemic which occurs when there is obstruction of a blood vessel supplying the brain. The remaining 15% of strokes are hemorrhagic and result when one or more blood vessels rupture causing blood to leak into the brain. Although less common, hemorrhagic stroke is more likely to result in death. Among individuals that survive a stroke, many experience permanent physical and neurological disability including sensory and motor impairment as well as mood disorders such as depression (Carod-Artal, 2012; Cai et al., 2019). Another major debilitating consequence of stroke is cognitive dysfunction or post-stroke dementia which affects almost one third of survivors shortly after stroke (Leys et al., 2005; Mok et al., 2017). Those individuals who survive a stroke without acute onset cognitive decline are nonetheless at much greater risk of developing dementia at a later stage (Ivan et al., 2004; Mijajlović et al., 2017; Mok et al., 2017).

Stroke is a sexually dimorphic disease (Girijala et al., 2017). Although men have a higher incidence of stroke throughout most of the lifespan, women have higher stroke prevalence overall because of the increase in stroke risk with aging, particularly after menopause, and a longer average lifespan in females (Appelros et al., 2010; Roy-O’Reilly &amp; McCullough, 2018; Robison et al., 2019). In addition, stroke severity is greater in women who often suffer more intense, debilitating strokes than men and as a result have poorer post stroke outcomes including a higher mortality risk (Niewada et al., 2005; Appelros et al., 2009; Choleris et al., 2018).

Sex differences in stroke pathology are also evident in animal models and map on well to what has been reported in humans (Roy-O’Reilly &amp; McCullough, 2018). Neonate and young-adult male animals are typically more susceptible to stroke pathology while younger female animals typically show resiliency as evidenced by decreased infarct size and less tissue damage in response to an equivalent insult (Banerjee et al., 2013; Herson et al., 2013). In vitro studies using oxygen glucose deprivation as a model of deoxygenated conditions during an ischemic stroke have revealed that male-derived neurons, astrocytes, and endothelial cells all suffer greater damage than female-derived cells (Sharma et al., 2011; Fairbanks et al., 2012). Furthermore, there are sex differences in the post-ischemic inflammatory response such that microglia from male animals display heightened ischemia-induced activation as compared to female microglia and thus underscoring sex-differences in stroke pathology (Bodhankar et al., 2015; Dotson et al., 2015; Rahimian et al., 2019). During middle age or following ovariectomy, however, female animals tend to demonstrate exacerbated stroke pathology in a manner similar to what is observed in humans following menopause (Kim et al., 2019).

4.2 Pregnancy-associated stroke

For females, a variety of sex-specific factors, including pregnancy, have been shown to influence stroke risk (Demel et al., 2018; Gannon et al., 2018; Roy-O’Reilly &amp; McCullough, 2018). Indeed, the peripartum period represents a window of susceptibility during which the risk of enduring a stroke is acutely increased, especially for those with pre-existing cardiovascular problems, blood vessel abnormalities and coagulation disorders, or that develop hypertension or preeclampsia-eclampsia during pregnancy (Jaigobin &amp; Silver, 2000; Sanders et al., 2018). A recent meta-analysis estimated that stroke affects 30 pregnancies out of 100,000 with most taking place in the third trimester or early postpartum, within the first 12 weeks (Swartz et al., 2017). While the incidence of pregnancy-related stroke may seem low, stroke poses a serious risk to the mother – 15% of pregnant women who experience a stroke die as a result making it the 8th leading cause of pregnancy-associated deaths in the United States (Kochanek et al., 2014). The women that survive can go on to experience residual fatigue, loss of mobility or speech, and cognitive impairments (Lanska &amp; Kryscio, 2000). In addition, maternal stroke in pregnancy can affect fetal and neonatal health and well-being (Sanders et al., 2018). Although a direct comparison of stroke outcomes in pregnant versus non-pregnant women hasn’t been done, a study in rats found that neuronal injury following global cerebral ischemia was enhanced in pregnancy (Spencer et al., 2008b).

4.3 Pregnancy-related physiological changes and stroke risk

Strokes that happen during the peripartum period are evenly divided between both types. A variety of pregnancy-related physiological changes have been suggested to enhance vulnerability to both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke and to potentially impact stroke outcomes (Kittner et al., 1996; Treadwell et al., 2008).

Hemodynamic and Cardiovascular Changes

Vast hemodynamic changes take place during pregnancy to meet the increased circulatory needs of the uterus, placenta, developing fetus, and the demands of delivery (Sells &amp; Feske, 2017; Sanders et al., 2018; Camargo et al., 2019). One of the initial changes is an increase in blood volume, which is as much as 50% greater than pre-pregnancy values by delivery. There are also substantial increases in cardiac output and heart rate which are elevated as much as 30–50% during pregnancy and even further during labor and birth. In addition, early pregnancy is accompanied by a drop in systemic vascular resistance. With this, there is a drop in blood pressure until mid-pregnancy which can promote venous stasis or slow blood return from the lower extremities. These various changes can persist for weeks after birth and may contribute to greater stroke incidence by increasing the risk of clot formation or by straining vessel walls making them more susceptible to rupture.

Pregnancy also causes remodeling of the heart and all blood vessels resulting in increased vascular distensability during early pregnancy (Mackey et al., 1992). By late pregnancy, however, the walls of systemic arteries show a reduction in collagen and elastin content and a loss of distensibility. It has been suggested that the hemodynamic changes of pregnancy, when combined with structural changes of blood vessels, may result in a state in which more vulnerable vascular walls experience greater hemodynamic stress, possibly contributing to the risk of hemorrhagic stroke (Sells &amp; Feske, 2017).

Changes in the Coagulation System

Changes in the coagulation system take place during pregnancy to produce a state of hypercoagulation, likely an adaptive mechanism to reduce the risk of hemorrhage during and after delivery (Struble et al., 2015). However, the hypercoagulable state, which persists for at least six weeks postpartum, also makes it more likely for women to form and retain clots that lead to stroke. Increased hypercolaguability in pregnancy is due to elevations in clotting factors VIII, IX, X, fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor along with decreases in factors that inhibit clot formation such as antithrombin and protein S (Sanders et al., 2018; Carmgo et al., 2019). Fibrinolysis, factors involved in the breakdown of clots, also decrease which makes it more likely that clots will circulate throughout the body (Sanders et al., 2018). Together, these changes alter the balance within the coagulation system in favor of clotting, predisposing pregnant and postpartum woman to venous thrombosis. The potential for pathological clotting is further exacerbated by venous stasis and other factors such as caesarean birth or injuries during delivery that may synergize with hypercoagulability to increase risk of pregnancy-related stroke (Carmago et al., 2019).

Hormonal Changes

The hormones of pregnancy may also predispose peripartum women to higher risk of stroke risk by regulating one or more of the mechanisms above. For example, elevated levels of estrogen affect blood clotting by upregulating several coagulating factors while simultaneously downregulating inhibitors of coagulation. Thus, the pregnancy-related elevation in estrogen may increase the likelihood of experiencing a blood clot leading to stroke (Howie, 1979). Notably, however Spencer et al. (2008b) found that enhanced neuronal damage in pregnant female rats following stroke was independent of changes in estrogen. Further, exogenous estrogen and other pregnancy-related hormones such as progesterone have been shown in some cases to be beneficial for mitigating stroke damage and some of the underlying pathological processes although such hormonal effects are modified by numerous variables such as route of administration, type of ligand used, experimental model of stroke, age, and timing of treatment (Azcoita et al., 1998; Ginson et al., 2009; Suzuki et al., 2009; Andrabi et al., 2017; Guennoun et al., 2019; Rahimian et al., 2019; Sohrabji et al., 2019). Taken together, these data highlight the complex relationship between hormones and stroke in females.

Although the risk of stroke remains elevated postpartum, evidence from animal models suggest nursing may be protective. Work using intracerebral injections of kainic acid, which results in an excitotoxic insult much like ischemic stroke, has shown that lactation offers neuroprotection against excitotoxity (Cabrera et al., 2009). Prolactin was specifically shown to mediate this effect as hippocampal neurons treated with prolactin before a glutamate-induced excitotoxicity demonstrated increased cell viability. Furthermore, the neuroprotective effect was lost when prolactin receptor expression was diminished further suggesting that prolactin mediates neuroprotection in response to excitotoxic insult through prolactin receptor signaling (Vergara-Castañeda et al., 2016). A recent study also found that nursing protected postpartum mice from injury after stroke, an effect attributed to anti-inflammatory effects of oxytocin (Stary et al., 2019) which is consistent with previous evidence for a neuroprotective role of oxytocin in ischemia outside of pregnancy (Karelina et al., 2011; Kaneko et al., 2016; Etehadi Moghadam et al., 2018)

4.4 Reproductive experience: stroke risk and outcome

The association between parity and risk of stroke remains to be clarified. A number of studies have reported a link between greater number of pregnancies and stroke risk (Qureshi et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2009; Jung et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2015). This may be related to findings showing that increasing parity is also associated with obesity, a major risk factor for stroke (Harris et al., 1997; Zoet et al. 2019). Conversely, several studies have reported a protective effect of parity on stroke risk (Gaist et al 2004; Yang et al., 2009; Yao et al., 2018) or no consistent relationship (Jacobsen et al., 2011). The inconsistencies may be related to emerging research reporting an association between breastfeeding history and decreased risk of stroke later in life. Using data collected from the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study, Jacobson et al. (2018) found that postmenopausal women with a history of breastfeeding had an approximately 20% lower risk of stroke — an effect that remained even after controlling for various confounding variables such as age, smoking history and body mass index.

Available evidence in rodent models also suggests that pregnancy and reproductive experience may have differential effects on stroke outcome. In contrast to the negative impact of pregnancy on ischemia outcome in rats (Spencer et al., 2008b), recent results from a stroke model in mice suggest that reproductive history may lead to better outcomes. Specifically, Ritzel et al. (2017) found several acute and long-term protective effects of parity after stroke with multiparous mice exhibiting smaller infarct sizes, reduced numbers of microglia and astrocytes near the infarct, decreased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6) and chemokines (e.g., CCL-2) as well as increased concentrations of growth factors (e.g., bFGF, VEGF) when compared to nulliparous controls. Further, multiparous mice demonstrated greater post-stroke angiogenesis which correlated with improved performance on sensorimotor and cognitive tasks. Importantly, parity-associated neuroprotection occurred despite greater sedentary behavior, weight gain, and other indictors of metabovascular risk (e.g., upregulated triglyceride and cholesterol levels, suppressed immune activity, and increased muscle fatigue). Other work has similarly demonstrated greater recovery in multiparous female rats after excitotoxic insult as compared to virgin females even though both groups suffered a similar degree of initial damage (Franssen et al., 2012). Together, these data indicate that parity may confer some degree of protection against stroke-related pathology in rodents. The underlying mechanism is unknown but some evidence points to a role for fetal microchimerism. Studies on animals and humans have found that fetal microchimeric cells are recruited to sites of injury in the body to aid in recovery processes (Wang et al., 2004; Khosrotehrani et al., 2007; Kara et al., 2012; Nassar et al., 2012; Mahmood &amp; O’Donoghue, 2014). This was shown to occur in brains of multiparous female mice following stroke — fetal cells migrated to the areas of brain tissue injury where they adopted endothelial morphology (Ritzel et al., 2017).

5. Alzheimer’s Disease

5.1 Sex Differences in AD

In the U.S alone, 5.5 million people over the age of 65 have AD. Among them, women are disproportionally afflicted with nearly 2/3 of the cases (Snyder et al., 2016; Alzheimer’s Association, 2018). Moreover, by the age of 45, one in five women are at a risk of developing AD in the future as compared to a life time risk of one in ten for men (Nebel et al., 2018). Women are not only more susceptible to AD, but are also more likely than men to progress into clinical dementia (Barnes et al., 2005). Female sex as a risk factor for AD is also supported by studies using transgenic mouse models of AD which too show that females are more vulnerable to AD neuropathology (Vest &amp; Pike, 2013).

Various reasons have been proposed for the greater vulnerability of females to AD. Notably, on average, women live longer than men; therefore, it is more likely that men are to die of other causes, such as cardiovascular events, before the AD dementia is fully realized (Chêne et al., 2015). Consequently, collected sex-related data may suffer from an intrinsic survival bias—those men that do live into older age are likely healthier, and therefore, are less likely to succumb to dementias related to AD pathology. Others argue that the basis for the discrepancy is largely biological with evidence highlighting the depletion of estrogens during menopause as a risk factor partially accounting for the different outcomes (Paganini-Hill &amp; Henderson, 1994; Tang et al., 1996; Nebel et al., 2018). Indeed, a longer reproductive span (i.e., earlier menarche and later menopause), and consequently greater lifetime estrogen exposure, has been associated with a lower incidence of dementia (Fox et al., 2013a). Taken together, these studies underscore the interplay between estrogen and AD and suggest that sex-specific variables like pregnancy, which drastically affect levels of estrogen and other hormones, could affect AD.

5.2 Parity and AD

Multiple groups have suggested that having children may increase the likelihood of developing AD and experiencing symptom onset at an earlier age (Geerlings et al., 2001; Ptok et al., 2002; Sobow &amp; Kloszewska, 2004; Colucci et al., 2006; Jang et al., 2018). Of these studies, one found parity to a better predictor of future AD development above and beyond smoking status, reproductive years, and age at menopause (Sobow &amp; Kloszewska, 2004). Furthermore, a recent retrospective analysis found that women with five or more completed pregnancies had an approximately two-fold increase in AD risk compared to nulliparous women and women with four or less completed pregnancies (Jang et al., 2018). These findings remained even after controlling for demographical information, hypertension, hormone replacement therapy, reproductive period, and age at menopause. In addition to risk, amount of parity has been positively associated with greater AD neuropathology (Beeri et al., 2009). One possible explanation for the link between parity and AD is fetal microchimerism. However, when comparing women with and without AD, women with AD were unexpectedly shown to have a lower prevalence of microchimerism in the brain and lower concentrations in regions most affected by AD (Chan et al., 2012). Given the modest number of subjects tested and the incomplete pregnancy histories, replication of these results is needed.

Not all studies examining the relationship between parity and AD show a detrimental effect. In rats, multiparity has been shown to mitigate age-related cognitive decline and brain aging as indicated by reduced amyloid precursor protein (APP), a central player in AD (Gatewood et al., 2005). In humans, Fox et al. (2013a; 2018b) found that a higher number of cumulative months spent pregnant had protective effects against AD risk. Likewise, a recent epidemiological investigation reported that women with three or more children had a 12% lower risk of dementia later in life compared to mothers with only one child (Gilsanz, 2018). The reason for the inconsistencies across studies require further investigation but could be due to differential accounting for such factors such as age at first pregnancy, miscarriages, and breastfeeding (Fox et al., 2013a; 2013b). Genetic factors might also play a role as suggested by work showing that the effect of parity on AD onset may be influenced by apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype. Specifically, parity is associated with lower age of AD onset in women carrying the e*3/e*3 genotype while e*4 carriers did not show this effect (Corbo et al., 2007). Genotype has also been shown to interact with parity in a mouse model of AD (APP23) with parity having a detrimental effect on cognitive function and neuropathology in APP23, but not wild type, mice (Cui et al., 2014).

5.3 Parity, AD and pregnancy-related hormones

Various pregnancy-related hormones affect pathological hallmarks of AD such as amyloid-beta plaques (Aβ) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) both of which can perturb local cellular function thereby contributing to diffuse disruptions across the brain and cognitive decline (Wenk, 2003).

Estrogens

As noted above, estrogen deprivation has been implicated as a risk factor for AD (Paganini-Hill &amp; Henderson, 1994; Tang et al., 1996; Nebel et al., 2018). Despite the high levels of estrogen during pregnancy, pregnancy appears to reduce lifetime estrogen exposure relative to nulliparity. Circulating estrogen levels are ~20% lower in parous women compared to nulliparous women (Bernstein et al., 1985), a difference which persists through menopause (Chubak et al., 2004). Because estrogens are neuroprotective, parity could be associated with AD through a longer-term reduction in estrogens. The neuroprotective effects of estrogens are numerous. For instance, estrogens can obviate the synthesis of Aβ peptides by altering the processing pathway of amyloid precursor protein (Xu et al., 2006). In addition, estrogens protect and promote neuronal health through multiple pathways including the regulation of apoptotic factors, which become activated under pathological conditions such as Aβ accumulation (Garcia-Segura et al., 1998; Pike, 1999; Nilsen &amp; Diaz Brinton, 2003; Koski et al., 2004); the restoration of calcium homeostasis under Aβ-induced excitotoxic conditions (Goodman et al.,1996); and the recruitment of microglia in Aβ plaque clearance (Li et al., 2000; Yue et al. 2005; Xu et al., 2006). Furthermore, estrogens are capable of combatting inflammation (Uchoa et al., 2016), a hallmark of AD, through the scavenging of free radicals (Sugioka et al., 1987; Subbiah et al., 1993) complemented by the inhibition of microglial activation (Vegeto et al., 2001). Lastly, other enzymes involved in Aβ metabolism, such as neprilysin and insulin-degrading enzymes are also upregulated by estrogens (Liang et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2011). In conjunction with the effects on Aβ pathology, estrogens also exerts direct and indirect effects that contribute to the amelioration of NFT that form as a result of the hyperphosphorylation of tau—a protein involved in microtubule formation. Directly, estrogens can inhibit GSK3-β, a kinase involved in the hyperphosphorylation of tau, which consequently minimizes the potential to form NFT. Indirectly, estrogens can activate other intracellular proteins, such as Akt, that act as a brake on GSK3-β activity which in turn also circumvents the aggregation of NFT (Muñoz-Mayorga et al., 2018). The influence of parity on these various neuroprotective effects of estrogens are unknown.

In addition to estrogen levels, parity could alter risk for AD by impacting the brain’s long-term sensitivity to estrogens via effects on ER expression or functioning. While a number of rodent and human studies have explored the influence of aging and AD on ERα and ERβ in the female brain (Savaskan et al., 2001; Ishunina et al., 2007; Foster, 2012), parity hasn’t been examined as a factor. In the only study to our knowledge to do so, reproductively experienced middle-age female rats were found to have higher numbers of ERα positive cells in the striatum when compared to age-matched, nulliparous controls (Byrnes et al., 2009).

In women, the use of hormonal replacement therapies (HRT) following menopause has been demonstrated in some studies to be a potentially efficacious preventative measure against AD pathology although there are inconsistencies in the literature. These have generally been attributed to variations across studies in timing, dosage, and type of estrogen used (Depypere et al., 2016; Nebel et al., 2018) but it is likely that reproductive history, which is often not included in the analyses, may also play a role. Studies in rats support this possibility and show that HRT therapy cam have differential cellular and behavioral effects in middle-age rats with reproductive experience compared to those without (Barha &amp; Galea, 2011; Galea et al., 2018).

Progesterone

Although less studied than estrogens, progesterone has also been associated with neuroprotection. For example, progesterone reduces neuronal vulnerability to glutamate and Aβ toxicity (Goodman et al., 1996). In addition, ovarectomized female rats administered progesterone show upregulated mRNA expression of several enzymes involved in Aβ clearance, and lowered Aβ in the brain following treatment with an estrogen-progesterone cocktail (Jayaraman et al., 2012). In contrast, other work has shown that progesterone may actually attenuate the ameliorative effects of estrogen on Aβ (Carroll et al., 2007). Notably, progesterone treatment alone has been shown to have no effect on Aβ accumulation (Carroll et al., 2007; Jayaraman et al., 2012). In regards to tau pathology, both cyclic and continuous administration of progesterone have yielded significantly less hyperphosphorylated-tau (p-tau) immunoreactive neurons in a transgenic model of AD (Carroll et al., 2010). Moreover, OVX female transgenic-AD mice treated with progesterone and estrogen demonstrated significantly less p-tau in the hippocampus — an effect that could be mediated by the regulation of GSK3-β by progesterone (Guerra-Araiza et al., 2007; Muñoz-Mayorga et al., 2018).

Prolactin

Fox et al. (2013b) found that women who reported greater durations of breastfeeding also experienced a reduced risk of AD later in life. Given that prolactin is a hormone that plays a central role in lactation, it likely has some involvement in mediating this association. In support of this possibility, prolactin is able to indirectly inhibit GSK3-β (Domínguez-Cáceres et al., 2004) which suggests it may play a neuroprotective role against hyperphosphorylated tau (Steinmetz et al., 2015).

hCG

hCG is another pregnancy related hormone that has been linked to AD (Barron et al., 2010). hCG activity can have a negative effect on cognition and can accelerate AD pathology (Berry et al., 2008; Barron et al., 2010), through the upregulation of amyloidogenic processing (Saberi et al., 2013) and accumulation of Aβ (Berry et al., 2008; Barron et al., 2010). Considering that this hormone only reaches detectable concentrations during pregnancy and having more children (i.e., more exposure to hCG) has been associated with greater risk for AD (Sobow &amp; Kloszewska, 2004; Beeri et al., 2009; Jang et al., 2018), the role of hCG in AD warrants further investigation.

5.4 Parity, AD and immune factors

Some studies suggest that there is a protective effect of parity on AD risk (Fox et al., 2013a; 2018b) possibility due to the shift from a Th1 dominant state towards a Th2 immunosuppressive state during pregnancy (Fox et al., 2018b). This immunosuppressive state is associated with an upregulation of TRegs, which dramatically rise during the first trimester and continue to gradually increase for at least a year postpartum (Heikkinen et al., 2004; Somerset et al., 2004). Like other neurodegenerative disorders, AD pathology is characterized by a dysregulated immune system. As such, enduring elevated levels of TRegs may supply mothers with protective immunosuppression during critical periods when AD pathology, and ensuing inflammation, might flourish otherwise. Results from Fox et al. (2018b) do suggest that TRegs may be accounting for protection against AD more so than estrogen. Specifically, they found not only a positive correlation between total months pregnant and lower risk of AD, even when controlling for reproductive span, but that the cumulative number of first trimesters reduced the risk of AD while the cumulative number of third trimesters did not significantly reduce risk of AD. The drastic upregulation of TRegs during the first trimester suggests that this may be the mechanism by which AD protection is conferred, and since third trimester, when estrogen levels peak, had no bearing on risk reduction, estrogen exposure during pregnancy may not account for AD risk reduction. However, when interpreting the results, it is important to consider that hormones and the immune system are not independent operators, but are rather integrated systems that engage in extensive cross-talk. For example, estrogen meditates the induction and generation of regulatory T-cells (Tai et al., 2008) as well as reduces the activation of effector T cells (Polanczyk et al., 2006). Progesterone also contributes to the protective immune environment during pregnancy by promoting T-helper cells that produce Th2-type cytokines (Piccinni et al., 1995; Arck et al., 2007). Thus, there is likely a complex interaction between immune and hormonal factors in regulating the effects of parity on AD.

6. Parity, Lifespan and Telomeres

By modulating disease risk and resilience, parity may ultimately affect mortality. Some evidence suggests higher parity is associated with shortened lifespan (Penn and Smith, 2007; Sun et al., 2015) and that telomere attrition may play a role. Telomeres are repetitive nucleotide sequences located at the ends of chromosomes that protect chromosomes from degradation, fusion and recombination (Blackburn, 1991). Over time, with each cell division, telomere length decreases due to incomplete end replication; although, telomere shortening may be also influenced by a variety of endogenous and environmental factors. Telomere length can be used as an index of cellular aging with longer telomeres being correlated with longevity (Barrett et al., 2013) and shorter telomeres being associated with accelerated aging, a variety of chronic diseases (e.g., cancer, Alzheimer’s) and mortality (Cawthon et al., 2003; Sanders &amp; Newman, 2013). Consistent with the shorter life expectancy as a result of parity, having at least one child has been associated with shortened telomeres (Kresovich et al., 2018; Pollack et al., 2018). Strikingly, one study estimated the difference in telomere length between parous and non-parous women to be equivalent to 11 years of cellular aging — an effect observed to be larger than the effect smoking or obesity had on telomere length (Pollack et al., 2018). Conversely, longer telomere lengths have been observed in women who had their last child at a later age (Fagan et al., 2017) which has been linked to greater longevity (Perls et al., 1997; McArdle et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2015) and a resistance to dementia later in life (Gilsanz et al., 2018). Interestingly, longer telomeres have also been associated with greater breastfeeding duration (Kresovich et al., 2018) as well as greater endogenous estrogens which is typically associated with lower parity (Lin et al., 2011).

7. Conclusion

Risk and resilience in CNS health and disease can be influenced by a variety of factors. While there is a growing appreciation to consider sex one of these factors, far less attention has been paid to sex-specific variables that may differentially impact females such as pregnancy and reproductive history. As noted by Ritzel et al. (2017), data from the CDC estimates that 85% of women in the United States have given birth by age 40. Given that child-bearing women represent such a significant proportion of the female population, a better understanding of whether pregnancy, motherhood and parity influence brain health and disease is needed, and if they do, how such effects arise. Ultimately, a greater of consideration of these and other female-specific variables may lead to more-informed treatments for women suffering from a variety of CNS disorders.

Acknowledgements

BL was supported by NIH Grant R21 MH117482.

Highlights

The physiological changes of pregnancy/motherhood can affect brain health and disease

Multiple sclerosis, depression, stroke and Alzheimer’s are among those impacted

A full understanding of the female brain requires consideration of female-specific experiences

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Abou-Saleh MT , Ghubash R , Karim L , Krymski M , Bhai I (1998) Hormonal aspects of postpartum depression. Psychoneuroendocrinology 23 (5 ):465–475.9802121
Aggarwal R , Medhi B , Pathak A , Dhawan V , Chakrabarti A (2008) Neuroprotective effect of progesterone on acute phase changes induced by partial global cerebral ischaemia in mice. J Pharm Pharmacol. 60 (6 ):731–737. doi: 10.1211/jpp.60.6.0008.18498709
Airas L (2015) Hormonal and gender-related immune changes in multiple sclerosis. Acta Neurol Scand 132 (199 ):62–70. doi: 10.1111/ane.12433.26046561
Airas L , Jalkanen A , Alanen A , Pirttilä T , Marttila RJ (2010) Breast-feeding, postpartum and prepregnancy disease activity in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 75 (5 ):474–476. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181eb5860.20679640
Altemus M , Neeb CC , Davis A , Occhiogrosso M , Nguyen T , Bleiberg KL (2012) Phenotypic differences between pregnancy-onset and postpartum-onset major depressive disorder.J Clin Psychiatry 73 (12 ):e1485–91. doi: 10.4088/JCP.12m07693.23290332
Alonso A , Jick SS , Olek MJ , Ascherio A , Jick H , Hernán MA (2005) Recent use of oral contraceptives and the risk of multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol 62 (9 ):1362–1365. doi: 10.1001/archneur.62.9.1362.16157743
Alzheimer’s Association (2018). 2018 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 14 (3 ):367–429. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.02.001.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC.
Anderson G , Maes M (2013) Postpartum depression: psychoneuroimmunological underpinnings and treatment. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 9 :277–287. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S25320.23459664
Andrabi SS , Parvez S , Tabassum H (2017) Progesterone induces neuroprotection following reperfusion-promoted mitochondrial dysfunction after focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Dis Model Mech. 10 (6 ):787–796. doi: 10.1242/dmm.025692.28363987
Appelros P , Stegmayr B , Terént A (2010) A review on sex differences in stroke treatment and outcome. Acta Neurol Scand. 121 (6 ):359–369. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2009.01258.x.20002005
Appelros P , Stegmayr B , Terént A (2009) Sex differences in stroke epidemiology: a systematic review. Stroke 40 (4 ):1082–1090. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.19211488
Apter-Levy Y , Feldman M , Vakart A , Ebstein RP , Feldman R (2013) Impact of maternal depression across the first 6 years of life on the child’s mental health, social engagement, and empathy: the moderating role of oxytocin. Am J Psychiatry 170 (10 ):1161–1168. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.12121597.23846912
Arck P , Hansen PJ , Mulac Jericevic B , Piccinni MP , Szekeres-Bartho J (2007) Progesterone during pregnancy: endocrine-immune cross talk in mammalian species and the role of stress. Am J Reprod Immunol 58 (3 ):268–279.17681043
Avila M , Bansal A , Culberson J , Peiris (2018) The role of sex hormones in multiple sclerosis. Eur Neurol 80 (1–2 ):93–99. doi: 10.1159/000494262.30343306
Azcoitia I , Sierra A , Garcia-Segura L (1998) Estradiol prevents kainic acid-induced neuronal loss in the rat dentate gyrus. Neuroreport 9 (13 ):3075–3079.9804319
Banerjee A , Wang J , Bodhankar S , Vandenbark AA , Murphy SJ , Offner H (2013) Phenotypic changes in immune cell subsets reflect increased infarct volume in male vs. female mice. Transl Stroke Res 4 (5 ):554–563. doi: 10.1007/s12975-013-0268-z.24187596
Barba-Müller E , Craddock S , Carmona S , Hoekzema E (2019) Brain plasticity in pregnancy and the postpartum period: links to maternal caregiving and mental health. Arch Womens Ment Health 22 (2 ):289–299. doi: 10.1007/s00737-018-0889-z.30008085
Barha CK , Lieblich SE , Chow C , Galea LA (2015) Multiparity-induced enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis and spatial memory depends on ovarian hormone status in middle age. Neurobiol Aging 36 (8 ):2391–2405. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.04.007.25998101
Barha CK , Galea LA (2011) Motherhood alters the cellular response to estrogens in the hippocampus later in life. Neurobiol Aging 32 (11 ):2091–2095. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.12.004.20034703
Barnes LL , Wilson RS , Bienias JL , Schneider JA , Evans DA , Bennett DA (2005) Sex differences in the clinical manifestations of Alzheimer disease pathology. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62 (6 ):685–691. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.685.15939846
Barrat F , Lesourd BM , Louise A , Boulouis HJ , Vincent-Naulleau S , Thibault D , Sanaa M , Neway T , Pilet CH (1997) Surface antigen expression in spleen cells of C57B1/6 mice during ageing: influence of sex and parity. Clin Exp Immunol 107 (3 ):593–600.9067539
Barrett ES , Parlett LE , Windham GC , Swan SH (2014) Differences in ovarian hormones in relation to parity and time since last birth. Fertil Steril 101 (6 ):1773–1780. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.02.047.24684956
Barrett EL , Burke TA , Hammers M , Komdeur J , Richardson DS (2013) Telomere length and dynamics predict mortality in a wild longitudinal study. Mol Ecol 22 (1 ):249–59. doi: 10.1111/mec.12110 23167566
Barron AM , Verdile G , Taddei K , Bates KA , Martins RN (2010) Effect of chronic hCG administration on Alzheimer’s-related cognition and A beta accumulation in PS1KI mice. Endocrinology 151 (11 ):5380–5388. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1168.20844010
Beeri MS , Rapp M , Schmeidler J , Reichenberg A , Purohit DP , Perl DP Grossman HT , Prohovnik I , Haroutunian V , Silverman JM (2009) Number of children is associated with neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease in women. Neurobiol Aging 30 (8 ):1184–1191. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.11.011.18079025
Benjamin EJ , Blaha MJ , Chiuve SE , Cushman M , Das SR , Deo R , de Ferranti SD , Floyd J , Fornage M , Gillespie C , Isasi CR , Jiménez MC , Jordan LC , Judd SE , Lackland D , Lichtman JH , Lisabeth L , Liu S , Longenecker CT , Mackey RH , Matsushita K , Mozaffarian D , Mussolino ME , Nasir K , Neumar RW , Palaniappan L , Pandey DK , Thiagarajan RR , Reeves MJ , Ritchey M , Rodriguez CJ , Roth GA , Rosamond WD , Sasson C , Towfighi A , Tsao CW , Turner MB , Virani SS , Voeks JH , Willey JZ , Wilkins JT , Wu JH , Alger HM , Wong SS , Muntner P ; American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee (2017) Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2017 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation 135 (10 ):e146–e603. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000485.28122885
Bernstein L , Pike MC , Ross RK , Judd HL , Brown JB , Henderson BE (1985) Estrogen and sex hormone-binding globulin levels in nulliparous and parous women. J Natl Cancer Inst 74 (4 ):741–745. doi: 10.1093/jnci/74.4.741.3857369
Berry A , Tomidokoro Y , Ghiso J , Thornton J (2008) Human chorionic gonadotropin (a luteinizing hormone homologue) decreases spatial memory and increases brain amyloid-beta levels in female rats. Horm Behav 54 (1 ):143–152. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2008.02.006.18413150
Bianchi DW , Zickwolf GK , Weil GJ , Sylvester S , DeMaria MA (1996) Male fetal progenitor cells persist in maternal blood for as long as 27 years postpartum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 :705–708. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.2.705.8570620
Blackburn EH (1991) Structure and function of telomeres. Nature 250 (6319 ):569–573. doi: 10.1038/350569a0.
Boddy AM , Fortunato A , Wilson Sayres M , Aktipis (2015) A Fetal microchimerism and maternal health: a review and evolutionary analysis of cooperation and conflict beyond the womb. Bioessays 37 (10 ):1106–18. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500059.26316378
Blackmore ER , Groth SW , Chen DG , Gilchrist MA , O’Connor TG , Moynihan JA (2014) Depressive symptoms and proinflammatory cytokines across the perinatal period in African American women. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 35 (1 ):8–15. doi: 10.3109/0167482X.2013.868879.24350831
Blakemore WF , Keirstead HS (1999) The origin of remyelinating cells in the central nervous system. J Neuroimmunol 98 (1 ):69–76. doi: 10.1016/S0165-5728(99)00083-1.10426364
Bloch M , Rubinow DR , Schmidt PJ , Lotsikas A , Chrousos GP , Cizza G (2005) Cortisol response to ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone in a model of pregnancy and parturition in euthymic women with and without a history of postpartum depression. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90 (2 ):695–699.15546899
Bloch M , Daly RC , Rubinow DR (2003) Endocrine factors in the etiology of postpartum depression. Compr Psychiatry 44 (3 ):234–246.12764712
Bloch M , Schmidt PJ , Danaceau M , Murphy J , Nieman L , Rubinow DR (2000) Effects of gonadal steroids in women with a history of postpartum depression. Am J Psychiatry 157 (6 ):924–930.10831472
Bodhankar S , Lapato A , Chen Y , Vandenbark AA , Saugstad JA , Offner H (2015) Role for microglia in sex differences after ischemic stroke: importance of M2. Metab Brain Dis 30 (6 ):1515–29. doi: 10.1007/s11011-015-9714-9.26246072
Boufidou F , Lambrinoudaki I , Argeitis J , Zervas IM , Pliatsika P , Leonardou AA , Petropoulos G , Hasiakos D , Papadias K , Nikolaou C (2009) CSF and plasma cytokines at delivery and postpartum mood disturbances. J Affect Disord 115 (1–2 ):287–292. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2008.07.008.18708264
Bränn E , Fransson E , White RA , Papadopoulos FC , Edvinsson Å , Kamali-Moghaddam M , Cunningham JL , Sundström-Poromaa I , Skalkidou A (2018) Inflammatory markers in women with postpartum depressive symptoms. J Neurosci Res, in press. doi: 10.1002/jnr.24312.
Brett M , Braxendale S (2001) Motherhood and memory: a review. Psychoneuroendocrinology 26 (4 ):339–362. doi: 10.1016/S0306-4530(01)00003-8.11259856
Bridges RS , Byrnes EM (2006) Reproductive experience reduces circulating 17beta-estradiol and prolactin levels during proestrus and alters estrogen sensitivity in female rats. 147 (5 ):2575–2582. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-0917.
Bridges RS (2016) Long-term alterations in neural and endocrine processes induced by motherhood in mammals. Horm Behav 77 :193–203. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.09.001.26388065
Brummelte S , Galea LA (2010) Depression during pregnancy and postpartum: contribution of stress and ovarian hormones. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 34 (5 ):766–776. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.09.006.19751794
Buckwalter JG , Stanczyk FZ , McCleary CA , Bluestein BW , Buckwalter DK , Rankin KP , Chang L , Goodwin TM (1999) Pregnancy, the postpartum, and steroid hormones: effects on cognition and mood. Psychoneuroendocrinology 24 (1 ):69–84.10098220
Byrnes EM , Babb JA , Bridges RS (2009) Differential Expression of Oestrogen Receptor Alpha following Reproductive Experience in Young and Middle-Aged Female Rats. J Neuroendcocrinol 21 (6 ):550–557. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2009.01874x.
Cabrera V , Cantú D , Ramos E , Vanoye-Carlo A , Cerbón M , Morales T (2009) Lactation is a natural model of hippocampus neuroprotection against excitotoxicity. Neurosci Lett 461 (2 ):136–139. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.06.017.19539698
Cai W , Mueller C , Li YJ , Shen WD , Stewart R (2019) Post stroke depression and risk of stroke recurrence and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing Res Rev 50 :102–109. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2019.01.013.30711712
Camargo EC , Feske SK , Singhal AB (2019) Stroke in Pregnancy: An Update. Neurol Clin. 37 (1 ):131–148. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2018.09.010.30470272
Carod-Artal FJ (2012) Determining quality of life in stroke survivors. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 12 (2 ):199–211. doi: 10.1586/erp.11.104.22458621
Carroll JC , Rosario ER , Villamagna A , Pike CJ (2010) Continuous and cyclic progesterone differentially interact with estradiol in the regulation of Alzheimer-like pathology in female 3xTransgenic-Alzheimer’s disease mice. Endocrinology 151 (6 ):2713–2722. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1487.20410196
Carroll JC , Rosario ER , Chang L , Stanczyk FZ , Oddo S , LaFerla FM , Pike CJ (2007) Progesterone and estrogen regulate Alzheimer-like neuropathology in female 3xTg-AD mice. J Neurosci 27 (48 ):13357–13365.18045930
Cassidy-Bushrow AE , Peters RM , Johnson DA , Templin TN (2012) Association of depressive symptoms with inflammatory biomarkers among pregnant African-American women. J Reprod Immunol 94 (2 ):202–9. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2012.01.007.22386525
Cawthon RM , Smith KR , O’Brien E , Sivatchenko A , Kerber RA (2003) Association between telomere length in blood and mortality in people aged 60 years or older. Lancet 361 (9355 ):393–395. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12384-7.12573379
Chan WF , Gurnot C , Montine TJ , Sonnen JA , Guthrie KA , Nelson JL (2012) Male microchimerism in the human female brain. PLoS One 7 (9 ):e45592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045592 23049819
Chêne G , Beiser A , Au R , Preis SR , Wolf PA , Dufouil C , Seshadri S (2015) Gender and incidence of dementia in the Framingham Heart Study from mid-adult life. Alzheimers Dement 11 (3 ):310–320. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.10.005.24418058
Chesney E , Goodwin GM , Fazel S (2014) Risks of all-cause and suicide mortality in mental disorders: ameta-review. World Psychiatry 13 (2 ):153–160. doi: 10.1002/wps.20128.24890068
Choleris E , Galea LAM , Sohrabji F , Frick KM (2018) Sex differences in the brain: Implications for behavioral and biomedical research. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 85 :126–145. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.07.005.29287628
Christian LM , Franco A , Glaser R , Iams JD (2009) Depressive symptoms are associated with elevated serum proinflammatory cytokines among pregnant women. Brain Behav Immun 23 (6 ):750–754. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2009.02.012.19258033
Chubak J , Tworoger SS , Yasui Y , Ulrich CM , Stanczyk FZ , McTiernan A (2004) Associations between reproductive and menstrual factors and postmenopausal sex hormone concentrations. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 13 :1296–1301.15298949
Clayton JA (2018) Applying the new SABV (sex as a biological variable) policy to research and clinical care. Physiol Behav 187 :2–5. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2017.08.012.28823546
Colucci M , Cammarata S , Assini A , Croce R , Clerici F , Novello C , Mazzella L , Dagnino N , Mariani C , Tanganelli P (2006) The number of pregnancies is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Neurol 13 (12 ):1374–1377. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01520.x.17116223
Confavreux C , Vukusic S (2006) Age at disability milestones in multiple sclerosis. Brain 129 :595–605. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh714.16415309
Confavreux C , Vukusic S , Adeleine P (2003) Early clinical predictors and progression of irreversible disability in multiple sclerosis: an amnesic process. Brain 126 (Pt 4 ):770–782. doi: 10.1093/brain/awg081.12615637
Confavreux C , Hutchinson M , Hours MM , Cortinovis-Tourniaire P , Moreau T (1998) Rate of pregnancy-related relapse in multiple sclerosis. Pregnancy in Multiple Sclerosis Group. N Engl J Med 339 (5 ):285–291. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199807303390501.9682040
Corbo RM , Gambina G , Ulizzi L , Monini P , Broggio E , Rosano A , Scacchi R (2007) Combined effect of apolipoprotein e genotype and past fertility on age at onset of Alzheimer’s disease in women. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 24 (2 ):82–85.17565217
Corwin EJ , Pajer K , Paul S , Lowe N , Weber M , McCarthy DO (2015) Bidirectional psychoneuroimmune interactions in the early postpartum period influence risk of postpartum depression. Brain Behav Immun 49 :86–93. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.04.012.25937051
Corwin EJ , Johnston N , Pugh L (2008) Symptoms of postpartum depression associated with elevated levels of interleukin-1 beta during the first month postpartum. Biol Res Nurs 10 (2 ):128–133. doi: 10.1177/1099800408323220.18829596
Corwin EJ , Pajer K (2008) The psychoneuroimmunology of postpartum depression. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 17 (9 ):1529–1534. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2007.0725.18710365
Corwin EJ , Brownstead J , Barton N , Heckard S , Morin K (2005) The impact of fatigue on the development of postpartum depression. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 34 (5 ):577–586.
Costanza M , Pedotti R (2016) Prolactin: Friend or Foe in Central Nervous System Autoimmune Inflammation. Int J Mol Sci. 17 (12 ):2026. doi: 10.3390/ijms17122026.
Cox EQ , Stuebe A , Pearson B , Grewen K , Rubinow D , Meltzer-Brody S (2015) Oxytocin and HPA stress axis reactivity in postpartum women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 55 :164–172. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.02.009.25768266
Crawford DK , Mangiardi M , Song B , Patel R , Du S , Sofroniew MV , Voskuhl RR ,Tiwari-Woodruff SK (2010) Oestrogen receptor beta ligand: a novel treatment to enhance endogenous functional remyelination. Brain 133 (10 ):2999–3016. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq237.20858739
Cui J , Jothishankar B , He P , Staufenbiel M , Shen Y , Li R (2014) Amyloid precursor protein mutation disrupts reproductive experience-enhanced normal cognitive development in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurobiol 49 (1 ):103–112. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8503-x.23853041
D’Amico E , Leone C , Patti F (2016) Offspring Number Does Not Influence Reaching the Disability’s Milestones in Multiple Sclerosis: A Seven-Year Follow-Up Study. Int J Mol Sci 17 (2 ):234. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020234.26907250
De Bellis A , Bizzarro A , Pivonello R , Lombardi G , Bellastella A (2005) Prolactin and autoimmunity. Pituitary 8 (1 ):25–30. doi: 10.1007/s11102-005-5082-5.16411065
Deligiannidis KM , Fales CL , Kroll-Desrosiers AR , Shaffer SA , Villamarin V , Tan Y , Hall JE , Frederick BB , Sikoglu EM , Edden RA , Rothschild AJ , Moore CM (2019) Resting-state functional connectivity, cortical GABA, and neuroactive steroids in peripartum and peripartum depressed women: a functional magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy study. Neuropsychopharmacology 44 (3 ):546–554. doi: 10.1038/s41386-018-0242-2.30327498
Deligiannidis KM , Sikoglu EM , Shaffer SA , Frederick B , Svenson AE , Kopoyan A , Kosma CA , Rothschild AJ , Moore CM (2013) GABAergic neuroactive steroids and resting-state functional connectivity in postpartum depression: a preliminary study. J Psychiatr Res 47 (6 ):816–828. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.02.010.23499388
Demel SL , Kittner S , Ley SH , McDermott M , Rexrode KM (2018) Stroke Risk Factors Unique to Women. Stroke 49 (3 ):518–523. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.117.018415.29438077
Dennis CL , Ross LE , Herxheimer A (2008) Oestrogens and progestins for preventing and treating postpartum depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (4 ):CD001690. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001690.pub2.
de Rezende MG , Garcia-Leal C , de Figueiredo FP , Cavalli Rde C , Spanghero MS , Barbieri MA , Bettiol H , de Castro M , Del-Ben CM (2016) Altered functioning of the HPA axis in depressed postpartum women. J Affect Disord 193 :249–56. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.12.065.26773916
Depypere H , Vierin A , Weyers S , Sieben A (2016) Alzheimer’s disease, apoliprotein E and hormone replacement therapy. Maturitas 94 :98–105. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2016.09.009.27823753
D’Hooghe MB , De Keyser J (2014) Multiparity in women with multiple sclerosis causes less long-term disability:yes. Mult Scler 20 (11 ):1432–1434. doi: 10.1177/1352458514534105.25344546
D’Hooghe MB , Nagels G , Uitdehaag BM (2010) Long-term effects of childbirth in MS. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 81 (1 ):38–41. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.163816.19939856
Dickens MJ , Pawluski J (2018) The HPA Axis During the Perinatal Period: Implications for Perinatal Depression. Endocrinology 159 (11 ):3737–3746. doi: 10.1210/en.2018-00677.30256957
Di Florio A , Forty L , Gordon-Smith K , Heron J , Jones L , Craddock N , Jones I (2013) Perinatal episodes across the mood disorder spectrum. JAMA Psychiatry 70 (2 ):168–175. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.279.23247604
Dijkstra CD , van der Voort ER , De Groot CJ , Huitinga I , Uitdehaag BM , Polman CH , Berkenbosch F (1994) Therapeutic effect of the D2-dopamine agonist bromocriptine on acute and relapsing experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 19 (2 ):135–142. doi: 10.1016/0306-4530(94)90003-5.8190833
Domínguez-Cáceres MA , García-Martínez JM , Calcabrini A , González L , Porque P , León J , Martίn-Pérez (2004) Prolactin induces c-Myc expression and cell survival through activation of Src/Akt pathway in lymphoid cells. Oncogene 23 (44 ):7378–7390. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208002.15286700
Dorgan JF , Reichman ME , Judd JT , Brown C , Longcope C , Schatzkin A , Campbell WS , Franz C , Kahle L , Taylor PR (1995) Relationships of age and reproductive characteristics with plasma estrogens and androgens in premenopausal women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4 (4 ):381–386.7655334
Dotson AL , Wang J , Saugstad J , Murphy SJ , Offner H (2015) Splenectomy reduces infarct volume and neuroinflammation in male but not female mice in experimental stroke. J Neuroimmunol. 278 :289–298. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.11.020.25434281
Duarte-Guterman P , Leuner B , Galea L (2019) The long and short term effects of motherhood on the brain. Front Neuroendocrinol 53 :100740. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2019.02.004.30826374
Durand-Dubief F , Ionescu I , Bracoud L , Cotton F , Merle H , Cornu C (2014) The POPARTMUS French-Italian multicentric trial of postpartum progestin and estradiol in multiple sclerosis: MRI findings. Mult Scler 20 :95.
Eapen V , Dadds M , Barnett B , Kohlhoff J , Khan F , Radom N , Silove DM (2014) Separation anxiety, attachment and inter-personal representations: disentangling the role of oxytocin in the perinatal period. PLoS One 9 (9 ):e107745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107745.25229827
Eid RS , Chaiton JA , Lieblich SE , Bodnar TS , Weinberg J , Galea LAM (2019a) Early and late effects of maternal experience on hippocampal neurogenesis, microglia, and the circulating cytokine milieu. Neurobiol Aging 78 :1–17. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.01.021.30825663
Eid RS , Gobinath AR , Galea LAM (2019b) Sex differences in depression: Insights from clinical and preclinical studies. Prog Neurobiol 176 :86–102. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2019.01.006.30721749
Elenkov IJ , Wilder RL , Bakalov VK , Link AA , Dimitrov MA , Fisher S , Crane M , Kanik KS , Chrousos GP (2001) IL-12, TNF-alpha, and hormonal changes during late pregnancy and early postpartum: implications for autoimmune disease activity during these times. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 86 (10 ):4933–4938. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.10.7905.11600565
Elwood J , Murray E , Bell A , Sinclair M , Kernohan WG , Stockdale J (2019) A systematic review investigating if genetic or epigenetic markers are associated with postnatal depression. J Affect Disord 253 :51–62. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.04.059.31029013
Epperson CN , Gueorguieva R , Czarkowski KA , Stiklus S , Sellers E , Krystal JH , Rothman DL , Mason GF (2006) Preliminary evidence of reduced occipital GABA concentrations in puerperal women: a 1H-MRS study. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 186 (3 ):425–433.16724188
Etehadi Moghadam S , Azami Tameh A , Vahidinia Z , Atlasi MA , Hassani Bafrani H , Naderian H (2018) Neuroprotective Effects of Oxytocin Hormone after an Experimental Stroke Model and the Possible Role of Calpain-1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 27 (3 ):724–732. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2017.10.020 Epub 2017 Dec 14. 29249590
Fairbanks SL , Young JM , Nelson JW , Davis CM , Koerner IP , Alkayed NJ (2012) Mechanism of the sex difference in neuronal ischemic cell death. Neuroscience 219 :183–191. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.05.048.22641086
Fagan E , Sun F , Bae H , Elo I , Andersen SL , Lee J , Christensen K , Thyagarajan B , Sebastiani P , Perls T , Honig LS , Schupf N ; Long Life Family Study (2017) Telomere length is longer in women with late maternal age. Menopause 24 (5 ):497–501. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000000795.27922939
Field T (2010) Postpartum depression effects on early interactions, parenting, and safety practices: a review.Infant Behav Dev 33 (1 ):1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.infbeh.2009.10.005.19962196
Finkelsztejn A , Brooks JB , Paschoal FM Jr , Fragoso YD (2011) What can we really tell women with multiple sclerosis regarding pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. BJOG 118 (7 ):790–797. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2011.02931.x.21401856
Franssen RA , Rzucidlo AM , Franssen CL , Hampton JE , Benkovic SA Jr , Bardi M , Kinsley CH , Lambert KG (2012) Reproductive experience facilitates recovery from kainic acid-induced neural insult in female Long-Evans rats. Brain Res 1454 :80–89. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.028.22483962
Foster TC (2012) Role of estrogen receptor alpha and beta expression and signaling on cognitive function during aging. Hippocampus 22 (4 ):656–669. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20935 Hippocampus 22(4):656–669. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20935. 21538657
Fox M , Sandman CA , Davis EP , Glynn LM (2018a) A longitudinal study of women’s depression symptom profiles during and after the postpartum phase. Depress Anxiety 35 (4 ):292–304. doi: 10.1002/da.22719 29394510
Fox M , Berzuini C , Knapp LA , Glynn LM (2018b) Women’s Pregnancy Life History and Alzheimer’s Risk: Can Immunoregulation Explain the Link? Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 33 (8 ):516–526. doi: 10.1177/1533317518786447.30060670
Fox M , Berzuini C , Knapp LA (2013a). Cumulative estrogen exposure, number of menstrual cycles, and Alzheimer’s risk in a cohort of British women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 (12 ):2973–82. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.08.005 24064221
Fox M , Berzuini C , Knapp LA (2013b) Maternal breastfeeding history and Alzheimer’s disease risk. J Alzheimers Dis 37 (4 ):809–821. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130152.23948914
Franklin RJ , French-Constant C (2008) Remyelination in the CNS: from biology to therapy. Nat Rev Neurosci 9 (11 ):839–855. doi: 10.1038/nrn2480.18931697
Gaist D , Pedersen L , Cnattingius S , Sørensen HT (2004) Parity and risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage in women: a nested case-control study based on national Swedish registries. Stroke 35 (1 ):28–32. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000105933.16654.B4.14657450
Galea L , Qiu W , Duarte-Guterman P (2018) Beyond sex differences: short and long-term implications of motherhood on women’s health. Curr Opin Phys 6 :82–88. doi: 10.1016/j.cophys.2018.06.003.
Galea LAM , Roes MM , Dimech CJ , Chow C , Mahmoud R , Lieblich SE , Duarte-Guterman P (2018) Premarin has opposing effects on spatial learning, neural activation, and serum cytokine levels in middle-aged female rats depending on reproductive history. Neurobiol Aging 70 :291–307. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.06.030.30056312
Galea LA , Wide JK , Barr AM (2001) Estradiol alleviates depressive-like symptoms in a novel animal model of post-partum depression. Behav Brain Res 122 (1 ):1–9.11287071
Gannon OJ , Robison LS , Custozzo AJ , Zuloaga KL (2018) Sex Differences in risk factors for vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia. Neurochem Int. S0197–0186 (18 )30511–4. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2018.11.014.
Garcia-Leal C , De Rezende MG , Corsi-Zuelli FMDG , De Castro M , Del-Ben CM (2017) The functioning of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in postpartum depressive states: a systematic review. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab 12 (5 ):341–353. doi: 10.1080/17446651.2017.1347500.30058891
Garcia-Ovejero D , González S , Paniagua-Torija B , Lima A , Molina-Holgado E , De Nicola AF , Labombarda F (2014) Progesterone reduces secondary damage, preserves white matter, and improves locomotor outcome after spinal cord contusion. J Neurotrauma 31 (9 ):857–871. doi: 10.1089/neu.2013.3162.24460450
Garcia-Segura LM , Cardona-Gomez P , Naftolin F , Chowen JA (1998) Estradiol upregulates Bcl-2 expression in adult brain neurons. Neuroreport 9 (4 ):593–597. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199803090-00006.9559922
Garfield L , Giurgescu C , Carter CS , Holditch-Davis D , McFarlin BL , Schwertz D , Seng JS , White-Traut R (2015) Depressive symptoms in the second trimester relate to low oxytocin levels in African American women: a pilot. Arch Womens Ment Health 18 (1 ):123–129. doi: 10.1007/s00737-014-0437-4.24952070
Gatewood JD , Morgan MD , Eaton M , McNamara IM , Stevens LF , Macbeth AH , Meyer EA , Lomas LM , Kozub FJ , Lambert KG , Kinsley CH (2005) Motherhood mitigates aging-related decrements in learning and memory and positively affects brain aging in the rat. Brain Res Bull 66 (2 ):91–98. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.03.016.15982524
Geerlings MI , Ruitenberg A , Witteman JC , van Swieten JC , Hofman A , van Duijn CM , Breteler MM , Launer LJ (2001) Reproductive period and risk of dementia in postmenopausal women. JAMA 2285 (11 ):1475–1481.
Gibson CL , Coomber B , Rathbone J (2009) Is progesterone a candidate neuroprotective factor for treatment following ischemic stroke? Neuroscientist 15 (4 ):324–332. doi: 10.1177/1073858409333069.19359672
Giesser BS (2002) Gender issues in multiple sclerosis. Neurologist 8 (6 ):351–356. doi: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000031013.85777.b8.12801436
Gilsanz P Women’s Reproductive History and Dementia Risk. Presented at the Alzheimer’s Association International Conference, Chicago, IL, USA, 23 July 2018; Whitmer, R., Ed.; Alzheimers’ Association: Chicago, IL, USA, 2018.
Gimpl G , Fahrenholz F (2001) The oxytocin receptor system: structure, function, and regulation. Physiol Rev 81 (2 ):629–683.11274341
Girijala RL , Sohrabji F , Bush RL (2017) Sex differences in stroke: Review of current knowledge and evidence. Vasc Med 22 (2 ):135–145. doi: 10.1177/1358863X16668263.27815349
Goodman Y , Bruce AJ , Cheng B , Mattson MP (1996). Estrogens attenuate and corticosterone exacerbates excitotoxicity, oxidative injury, and amyloid beta-peptide toxicity in hippocampal neurons. J. Neurochem 66 (5 ):1836–1844. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.66051836.x.8780008
Grace SL , Evindar A , Steward DE (2003) The effect of postpartum depression on child cognitived evelopment and behavior: a review and critical analysis of the literature. Arch Womens Ment Health 6 (4 ):263–274.14628179
Green AD , Barr AM , Galea LA (2009) Role of estradiol withdrawal in ‘anhedonic’ sucrose consumption: a model of postpartum depression. Physiol Behav 97 (2 ):259–265. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.02.020.19258020
Gregg C (2009) Pregnancy, prolactin and white matter regeneration. J Neurol Sci. 285 (1–2 ):22–27. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.06.040.19608204
Gregg C , Shikar V , Larsen P , Mak G , Chojnacki A , Yong VW , Weiss S (2007) White matter plasticity and enhanced remyelination in the maternal CNS. J Neurosci 27 (8 ):1812–1823. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4441-06.2007.17314279
Gregoire AJ , Kumar R , Everitt B , Henderson AF , Studd JW (1996) Transdermal oestrogen for treatment of severe postnatal depression. Lancet 347 (9006 ):930–933.8598756
Groer MW , Morgan K (2007) Immune, health and endocrine characteristics of depressed postpartum mothers. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32 (2 ):133–139.17207585
Guennoun R , Zhu X , Fréchou M , Gaignard P , Slama A , Liere P , Schumacher M (2019) Steroids in Stroke with Special Reference to Progesterone. Cell Mol Neurobiol 39 (4 ):551–568. doi: 10.1007/s10571-018-0627-0 30302630
Guerra-Araiza C , Amorim MA , Camacho-Arroyo I , Garcia-Segura LM (2007) Effects of progesterone and its reduced metabolites, dihydroprogesterone and tetrahydroprogesterone, on the expression and phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 and the microtubule-associated protein tau in the rat cerebellum. Dev Neurobiol 67 (4 ):510–520.17443805
Haddady S , Low HP , Billings-Gagliardi S , Riskind PN , Schwartz WJ (2010) Pregnancy modulates precursor cell proliferation in a murine model of focal demyelination. Neuroscience 167 (3 ):656–664. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.02.061.20197083
Haim A , Julian D , Albin-Brooks C , Brothers HM , Lenz KM , Leuner B (2017) A survey of neuroimmune changes in pregnant and postpartum female rats. Brain Behav Immun 59 :67–78. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.09.026.27686844
Halbreich U , Kahn LS (2007) Atypical depression, somatic depression and anxious depression in women: are they gender-preferred phenotypes? J Affect Disord 102 (1–3 ):245–258.17092565
Harris HE , Ellison GT , Holliday M , Lucassen E (1997) The impact of pregnancy on the long-term weight gain of primiparous women in England. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 21 (9 ):747–55.9376886
Heikkinen J , Möttönen M , Alanen A , Lassila O (2004) Phenotypic characterization of regulatory T cells in the human decidua. Clin Exp Immunol 136 (2 ):373–378. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2004.02441.x.15086404
Hellwig K , Rockhoff M , Herbstritt S , Borisow N , Haghikia A , Elias-Hamp B , Menck S , Gold R , Langer-Gould A (2015) Exclusive Breastfeeding and the Effect on Postpartum Multiple Sclerosis Relapses. JAMA Neurol 72 (10 ):1132–1138. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.1806.26322399
Heppner FL , Greter M , Marino D , Falsig J , Raivich G , Hövelmeyer N , Waisman A , Rülicke T , Prinz M , Priller J , Becher B , Aguzzi A (2005) Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis repressed by microglial paralysis. Nat Med 2005 11 (2 ):146–52.15665833
Herson PS , Palmateer J , Hurn PD (2013) Biological sex and mechanisms of ischemic brain injury. Transl Stroke Res 4 (4 ):413–419. doi: 10.1007/s12975-012-0238-x.23930140
Hillerer KM , Jacobs VR , Fischer T , Aigner L (2014) The maternal brain: an organ with peripartal plasticity. Neural Plast 2014 :574159. doi: 10.1155/2014/574159.24883213
Hoekzema E , Barba-Muller E , Pozzobon C , Picado M , Lucco F , Garcia-Garcia D , Soliva JC , Tobena A , Tobeña A , Desco M , Crone EA , Ballesteros A , Carmona S , Vilarroya O (2017) Pregnancy leads to long-lasting changes in human brain structure. Nat Neurosci 20 (2 ):287–296. doi: 10.1038/nn.4458.27991897
Hoffmann GE , Le WW , Murphy AZ , Koski CL (2001) Divergent effects of ovarian steroids on neuronal survival during experimental allergic encephalitis in Lewis rats. Exp Neurol 171 (2 ):272–284. doi: 10.1006/exnr.2001.7783.11573979
Houtchens M (2013) Multiple sclerosis and pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 56 (2 ):342–349. doi: 10.1097/GRF.0b013e31828f272b.23632642
Howie PW (1979) Blood clotting and fibrinolysis in pregnancy. Postgrad Med J 55 (643 ):362–363. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.55.643.362 382169
Hughes GC (2012) Progesterone and autoimmune disease. Autoimmun Rev 11 (6–7 ):A502–514. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.12.003.22193289
Hutchinson M (2014) Multiparity in women with multiple sclerosis causes less long-term disability: commentary. Mult Scler. 20 (11 ):1437–1438. doi: 10.1177/1352458514547731.25344548
Hutchinson M (2013) One can prevent post-partum MS relapses by exclusive breast feeding: commentary. Mult Scler. 19 (12 ):1569–1570. doi: 10.1177/1352458513504329.24132003
Ishunina TA , Fischer DF , Swaab DF (2007) Estrogen receptor alpha and its splice variants in the hippocampus in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 28 (11 ):1670–1681.17010478
Itoh N , Kim R , Peng M , DiFilippo E , Johnsonbaugh H , MacKenzie-Graham A , Voskuhl RR (2017) Bedside to bench to bedside research: Estrogen receptor beta ligand as a candidate neuroprotective treatment for multiple sclerosis. J Neuroimmunol 304 :63–71. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.09.017.27771018
Ivan CS , Seshadri S , Beiser A , Au R , Kase CS , Kelly-Hayes M , Wolf PA (2004) Dementia after stroke: the Framingham Study. Stroke 35 (6 ):1264–1268. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000127810.92616.78.15118167
Jacobsen BK , Knutsen SF , Oda K , Fraser GE (2011) Parity and total, ischemic heart disease and stroke mortality. The Adventist Health Study, 1976–1988. Eur J Epidemiol 26 (9 ):711–718. doi: 10.1007/s10654-011-9598-x.21701914
Jacobson LT , Hade EM , Collins TC , Margolis KL , Waring ME , Van Horn LV Silver B , Sattari M , Bird CE , Kimminau K , Wambach K , Stefanick ML (2018) Breastfeeding History and Risk of Stroke Among Parous Postmenopausal Women in the Women’s Health Initiative. J Am Heart Assoc 7 (17 ):e008739. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.118.008739.30371157
Jaigobin C , Silver FL (2000) Stroke and pregnancy. Stroke 31 (12 ):2948–2951. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.31.12.2948.11108754
Jang H , Bae JB , Dardiotis E , Scarmeas N , Sachdev PS , Lipnicki DM , Han JW , Kim TH , Kwak KP , Kim BJ , Kim SG , Kim JL , Moon SW , Park JH , Ryu SH , Youn JC , Lee DY , Lee DW , Lee SB , Lee JJ , Jhoo JH , Yannakoulia M , Kosmidis MH , Hadjigeorgiou GM , Sakka P , Kim KW (2018) Differential effects of completed and incomplete pregnancies on the risk of Alzheimer disease. Neurology 91 (7 ):e643–e651. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006000.30021919
Jayaraman A , Carroll JC , Morgan TE , Lin S , Zhao L , Arimoto JM , Murphy MP , Beckett TL , Finch CE , Brinton RD , Pike CJ (2012) 17β-estradiol and progesterone regulate expression of β-amyloid clearance factors in primary neuron cultures and female rat brain. Endocrinology 153 (11 ):5467–5479. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1464 Epub 2012 Sep 7. 22962256
Jansson L , Olsson T , Holmdahl R (1994) Estrogen induces a potent suppression of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and collagen-induced arthritis in mice. J Neuroimmunol 53 (2 ):203–207. doi: 10.1016/0165-5728(94)90030-2.8071434
Jobst A , Krause D , Maiwald C , Härtl K , Myint AM , Kästner R , Obermeier M , Padberg F , Brücklmeier B , Weidinger E , Kieper S , Schwarz M , Zill P , Müller N (2016) Oxytocin course over pregnancy and postpartum period and the association with postpartum depressive symptoms. Arch Womens Ment Health 19 (4 ):571–579. doi: 10.1007/s00737-016-0644-2.27320943
Johnson T , Mowbray H , Verhaeghe B (2009) Assessing the safety and efficacy of prolactin in EAE: A step towards a clinical trial of prolactin in multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 15 :S151–S269.
Jokubaitis VG , Spelman T , Kalincik T , Lorscheider J , Havrdova E , Horakova D , Duquette P , Girard M , Prat A , Izquierdo G , Grammond P , Van Pesch V , Pucci E , Grand’Maison F , Hupperts R , Granella F , Sola P , Bergamaschi R , Iuliano G , Spitaleri D , Boz C , Hodgkinson S , Olascoaga J , Verheul F , McCombe P , Petersen T , Rozsa C , Lechner-Scott J , Saladino ML , Farina D , Iaffaldano P , Paolicelli D , Butzkueven H , Lugaresi A , Trojano M ; MSBase Study Group (2016) Predictors of long-term disability accrual in relapse-onset multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 80 (1 ):89–100. doi: 10.1002/ana.24682.27145331
Jolley SN , Elmore S , Barnard KE , Carr DB (2007) Dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in postpartum depression. Biol Res Nurs 8 (3 ):210–222.17172320
Jung SY , Bae HJ , Park BJ , Yoon BW (2010) Parity and risk of hemorrhagic strokes. Neurology 74 (18 ):1424–1429. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dc13a5.20335561
Kessler RC (2003) Epidemiology of women and depression. J Affect Disord 74 (1 ):5–13.12646294
Kalakh S , Mouihate A (2019) Enhanced remyelination during late pregnancy: involvement of the GABAergic system. Sci Rep 9 (1 ):7728. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44050-4.31118452
Kalincik T , Vivek V , Jokubaitis V , Lechner-Scott J , Trojano M , Izquierdo G , Lugaresi A , Grand’maison F , Hupperts R , Oreja-Guevara C , Bergamaschi R , Iuliano G , Alroughani R , Van Pesch V , Amato MP , Slee M , Verheul F , Fernandez-Bolanos R , Fiol M , Spitaleri DL , Cristiano E , Gray O , Cabrera-Gomez JA , Shaygannejad V , Herbert J , Vucic S , Needham M , Petkovska-Boskova T , Sirbu CA , Duquette P , Girard M , Grammond P , Boz C , Giuliani G , Rio ME , Barnett M , Flechter S , Moore F , Singhal B , Bacile EA , Saladino ML , Shaw C , Skromne E , Poehlau D , Vella N , Spelman T , Liew D , Kilpatrick TJ , Butzkueven H ; MSBase Study Group (2013) Sex as a determinant of relapse incidence and progressive course of multiple sclerosis. Brain 136 (Pt 12 ):3609–3617. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt281.24142147
Kaneko Y , Pappas C , Tajiri N , Borlongan CV (2016) Oxytocin modulates GABAAR subunits to confer neuroprotection in stroke in vitro. Sci Rep 6 :35659. doi: 10.1038/srep35659.27767042
Kara RJ , Bolli P , Karakikes I , Matsunaga I , Tripodi J , Tanweer O , Altman P , Chaudhry HW (2012) Fetal cells traffic to injured maternal myocardium and undergo cardiac differentiation. Circ Res 110 (1 ):82–93. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.249037.22082491
Karelina K , Stuller KA , Jarrett B , Zhang N , Wells J , Norman GJ , DeVries AC (2011) Oxytocin mediates social neuroprotection after cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2011 12;42 (12 ):3606–11. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.628008.21960564
Kim T , Chelluboina B , Chokkalla AK , Vemuganti R (2019) Age and sex differences in the pathophysiology of acute CNS injury. Neurochem Int. pii: S0197–0186(18)30636–3. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2019.01.012.
Kim RY , Mangu D , Hoffman AS , Kavosh R , Jung E , Itoh N , Voskuhl R (2018) Oestrogen receptor β ligand acts on CD11c+ cells to mediate protection in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Brain 141 (1 ):132–147. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx315.29228214
Kim S , Soeken TA , Cromer SJ , Martinez SR , Hardy LR , Strathearn L (2014) Oxytocin and postpartum depression: delivering on what’s known and what’s not. Brain Res 1580 :219–232. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.11.009.24239932
Kim S , Liva SM , Dalal MA , Verity MA , Voskuhl RR (1999) Estriol ameliorates autoimmune demyelinating disease: implications for multiple sclerosis. Neurology 52 (6 ):1230–1238. doi: 10.1212/WNL.52.6.1230 10214749
Kinsley CH , Franssen RA , Meyer EA (2010) Reproductive experience may positively adjust the trajectory of senescence. Curr Top Behav Neurosci 10 :317–345. doi: 10.1007/7854_2011_123.
Kirkwood TBL (2005) Understanding the Odd Science of Aging. Cell 120 (4 ):437–447. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.027.15734677
Kittner SJ , Stern BJ , Feeser BR , Hebel R , Nagey DA , Buchholz DW , Earley CJ , Johnson CJ , Macko RF , Sloan MA , Wityk RJ , Wozniak MA (1996) Pregnancy and the risk of stroke. N Engl J Med 335 (11 ):768–774. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199609123351102.8703181
Khosrotehrani K , Reyes RR , Johnson KL , Freeman RB , Salomon RN , Peter I , Stroh H , Guégan S , Bianchi DW (2007) Fetal cells participate over time in the response to specific types of murine maternal hepatic injury. Hum Reprod 22 (3 ):654–661. doi: 10.1093/humrep/del426.17074776
Kroll-Desrosiers AR , Nephew BC , Babb JA , Guilarte-Walker Y , Moore Simas TA , Deligiannidis KM (2017) Association of peripartum synthetic oxytocin administration and depressive and anxiety disorders within the first postpartum year. Depress Anxiety 34 (2 ):137–146. doi: 10.1002/da.22599.28133901
Koch-Henriksen N , Sørensen PS (2010) The changing demographic pattern of multiple sclerosis epidemiology. Lancet Neurol 9 (5 ):520–532. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70064-8.20398859
Kochanek KD , Murphy SL , Xu J , Arias E (2014) Mortality in the United States, 2013. NCHS Data Brief (178 ):1–8.
Koski CL , Hila S , Hoffman GE (2004) Regulation of cytokine-induced neuron death by ovarian hormones: involvement of antiapoptotic protein expression and c-JUN N-terminal kinase-mediated proapoptotic signaling. Endocrinology 145 (1 ):95–103. doi: 10.1210/en.2003-0803.14512437
Kresovich JK , Parks CG , Sandler DP , Taylor JA (2018) Reproductive history and blood cell telomere length. Aging (Albany NY) 10 (9 ):2383–2393. doi: 10.18632/aging.101558.30243019
Kuhlmann T , Miron V , Cui Q , Wegner C , Antel J , Brück W (2008) Differentiation block of oligodendroglial progenitor cells as a cause for remyelination failure in chronic multiple sclerosis. Brain 131 (Pt 7 ):1749–1758. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn096.18515322
Labombarda F , González S , Lima A , Roig P , Guennoun R , Schumacher M , De Nicola AF (2011) Progesterone attenuates astro- and microgliosis and enhances oligodendrocyte differentiation following spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 231 (1 ):135–146. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.06.001.21704617
Laffont S , Garnier L , Lélu K , Guéry JC (2015) Estrogen-mediated protection of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis: Lessons from the dissection of estrogen receptor-signaling in vivo. Biomed J 38 (3 ):194–205. doi: 10.4103/2319-4170.158509.26068028
Lai W , Kinoshita M , Peng A , Li W , Qiu X , Zhu X , He S , Zhang L , Chen L (2018) Does pregnancy affect women with multiple sclerosis? A prospective study in Western China. J Neuroimmunol 321 :24–28. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2018.05.012.29957384
Lampron A , Larochelle A , Laflamme N , Préfontaine P , Plante MM , Sánchez MG , Yong VW , Stys PK , Tremblay MÈ , Rivest S (2015) Inefficient clearance of myelin debris by microglia impairs remyelinating processes. J Exp Med 212 (4 ):481–495. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141656.25779633
Langer-Gould A , Hellwig K (2013) One can prevent post-partum MS relapses by exclusive breast feeding: yes. Mult Scler. 19 (12 ):1567–1568. doi: 10.1177/1352458513505161.24132002
Langer-Gould A , Huang SM , Gupta R , Leimpeter AD , Greenwood E , Albers KB , Van Den Eeden SK , Nelson LM (2009) Exclusive breastfeeding and the risk of postpartum relapses in women with multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol 66 (8 ):958–963. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.132.19506118
Langer-Gould A , Garren H , Slansky A , Ruiz PJ , Steinman L (2002) Late pregnancy suppresses relapses in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis: evidence for a suppressive pregnancy-related serum factor. J Immunol. 169 (2 ):1084–1091. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.2.1084 12097417
Lanska DJ , Kryscio RJ (2000) Risk factors for peripartum and postpartum stroke and intracranial venous thrombosis. Stroke 31 (6 ):1274–1282. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.31.6.1274 10835444
Larsen CM , Grattan DR (2012) Prolactin, neurogenesis, and maternal behaviors. Brain Behav Immun 26 (2 ):201–209. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.07.233.21820505
Lawrie TA , Herxheimer A , Dalton K (2000) Oestrogens and progestogens for preventing and treating postnatal depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2 ):CD001690.
Leff-Gelman P , Mancilla-Herrera I , Flores-Ramos M , Cruz-Fuentes C , Reyes-Grajeda JP , García-Cuétara Mdel P , Bugnot-Pérez MD , Pulido-Ascencio DE (2016) The Immune System and the Role of Inflammation in Perinatal Depression. Neurosci Bull 32 (4 ):398–420. doi: 10.1007/s12264-016-0048-3.27432060
Lemaire V , Billard JM , Dutar P , George O , Piazza PV , Epelbaum J , Le Moal M , Mayo W (2006) Motherhood-induced memory improvement persists across lifespan in rats but is abolished by a gestational stress. Eur J Neurosci 23 (12 ):3368–3374.16820026
Leuner B , Sabihi S (2016) The birth of new neurons in the maternal brain: Hormonal regulation and functional implications. Front Neuroendocrinol 41 :99–113. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2016.02.004 26969795
Leuner B , Goodpaster C , Deems N , Gilfarb R , Lenz K (2019) Central immune alterations in a gestational stress model of postpartum depression. Program No. 070.10. 2019 Neuroscience Meeting Planner Chicago, IL: Society for Neuroscience, Online.
Leys D , Hénon H , Mackowiak-Cordoliani MA , Pasquier F (2005) Poststroke dementia. Lancet Neurol 4 (11 ):752–759. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70221-0.16239182
Li P , Shan Z , Zhou L , Xie M , Bao W , Zhang Y , Rong Y , Yang W , Liu L (2016) MECHANISMS IN ENDOCRINOLOGY: Parity and risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. Eur J Endocrinol 175 (5 ):R231–45. doi: 10.1530/EJE-16-0321.27334332
Li R , Shen Y , Yang LB , Lue LF , Finch C , Rogers J (2000) Estrogen enhances uptake of amyloid beta-protein by microglia derived from the human cortex. J Neurochem 75 :1447–1454.10987824
Liang K , Yang L , Yin C , Xiao Z , Zhang J , Liu Y , Huang J (2010) Estrogen stimulates degradation of beta-amyloid peptide by up-regulating neprilysin. J Biol Chem 285 (2 ):935–42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.051664.19897485
Lin J , Kroenke CH , Epel E , Kenna HA , Wolkowitz OM , Blackburn E , Rasgon NL (2011) Greater endogenous estrogen exposure is associated with longer telomeres in postmenopausal women at risk for cognitive decline. Brain Res 1379 :224–231. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.10.033.20965155
Lindahl V , Pearson JL , Colpe L (2005) Prevalence of suicidality during pregnancy and the postpartum. ArchWomens Ment Health 8 (2 ):77–87.
Liu M , Kelley MH , Herson PS , Hurn PD (2010) Neuroprotection of sex steroids. Minerva Endocrinol 35 (2 ):127–143.20595940
Love G , Torrey N , McNamara I , Morgan M , Banks M , Hester NW , Glasper ER , Devries AC , Kinsley CH , Lambert KG (2005) Maternal experience produces long-lasting behavioral modifications in the rat. Behav Neurosci 119 (4 ):1084–1096.16187836
Lv H , Wu H , Yin J , Qian J , Ge J (2015) Parity and Cardiovascular Disease Mortality: a Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies. Sci Rep 5 :13411. doi: 10.1038/srep13411.26299306
Macbeth AH , Luine VN (2010) Changes in anxiety and cognition due to reproductive experience: a review of data from rodent and human mothers. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34 (3 ):452–467. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.08.011.19761791
MacKenzie-Graham A , Brook J , Kurth F , Itoh Y , Meyer C , Montag MJ , Wang HJ , Elashoff R , Voskuhl RR (2018) Estriol-mediated neuroprotection in multiple sclerosis localized by voxel-based morphometry. Brain Behav 8 (9 ):e01086. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1086 30144306
Mackey K , Meyer MC , Stirewalt WS , Starcher BC , McLaughlin MK (1992) Composition and mechanics of mesenteric resistance arteries from pregnant rats. Am J Physiol. 263 ( 1 Pt 2 ):R2–8. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1992.263.1.R2.1636788
Maes M , Lin AH , Ombelet W , Stevens K , Kenis G , De Jongh R , Cox J , Bosmans E (2000) Immune activation in the early puerperium is related to postpartum anxiety and depressive symptoms. Psychoneuroendocrinology 25 (2 ):121–37.10674277
Maguire J (2019) Neuroactive Steroids and GABAergic Involvement in the Neuroendocrine Dysfunction Associated With Major Depressive Disorder and Postpartum Depression. Front Cell Neurosci 8;13 :83. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00083.
Maguire J , Mody I (2008) GABA(A)R plasticity during pregnancy: relevance to postpartum depression.Neuron 59 (2 ):207–213. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.06.019.18667149
Magyari M , Koch-Henriksen N , Pfleger CC , Sørensen PS (2013) Reproduction and the risk of multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 19 (12 ):1604–1609. doi: 10.1177/1352458513481397.23508651
Mah BL , Van Ijzendoorn MH , Out D , Smith R , Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ (2017) The Effects of Intranasal Oxytocin Administration on Sensitive Caregiving in Mothers with Postnatal Depression. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev 48 (2 ):308–315. doi: 10.1007/s10578-016-0642-7.27100724
Mah BL (2016) Oxytocin, postnatal depression, and parenting: a systematic review. Harv Rev Psychiatry 24 (1 ):1–13. doi: 10.1097/HRP.0000000000000093.26735320
Mahmood U , O’Donoghue K (2014) Microchimeric fetal cells play a role in maternal wound healing after pregnancy. Chimerism 5 (2 ):40–52. doi: 10.4161/chim.28746 24717775
Marano RJ , Ben-Jonathan N (2014) Minireview: Extrapituitary prolactin: an update on the distribution, regulation, and functions. Mol Endocrinol 28 (5 ):622–633. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1349.24694306
Marcus SM , Kerber KB , Rush AJ , Wisniewski SR , Nierenberg A , Balasubramani GK , Ritz L , Kornstein S , Young EA , Trivedi MH (2008) Sex differences in depression symptoms in treatment-seeking adults: confirmatory analyses from the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression study.Compr Psychiatry 49 (3 ):238–46. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2007.06.012 18396182
Martinez GM , Daniels K , Febo-Vazquez I (2018) Fertility of men and women aged 15–44 in the United States: National Survey of Family Growth, 2011–2015 National Health Statistics Reports; no 113. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Marzi M , Vigano A , Trabattoni D , Villa ML , Salvaggio A , Clerici E , Clerici M (1996) Characterization of type 1 and type 2 cytokine production profile in physiologic and pathologic human pregnancy. Clin Exp Immunol 106 (1 ):127–33. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1996.d01-809.x 8870710
Masera S , Cavalla P , Prosperini L , Mattioda A , Mancinelli CR , Superti G , Chiavazza C , Vercellino M , Pinessi L , Pozzilli C (2015) P arity is associated with a longer time to reach irreversible disability milestones in women with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 21 (10 ):1291–1297. doi: 10.1177/1352458514561907.25533293
Massey SH , Backes KA , Schuette SA (2016) Plasma oxytocin concentration and depressive symptoms: a review of current evidence and directions for future research. Depress Anxiety 33 (4 ):316–322. doi: 10.1002/da.22467.26756305
Mathur MB , Epel E , Kind S , Desai M , Parks CG , Sandler DP , Khazeni N (2016) Perceived stress and telomere length: A systematic review, meta-analysis and methodologic considerations for advancing the field. Brain Behav Immun 54 :158–169. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.02.002.26853993
McEvoy K , Payne JL , Osborne LM (2018) Neuroactive Steroids and Perinatal Depression: a Review of Recent Literature.Curr Psychiatry Rep 20 (9 ):78. doi: 10.1007/s11920-018-0937-4.30094520
Meaney MJ (2018) Perinatal Maternal Depressive Symptoms as an Issue for Population Health.Am J Psychiatry 175 (11 ):1084–1093. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.17091031.30068258
McArdle PF , Pollin TI , O’Connell JR , Sorkin JD , Agarwala R , Schäffer AA , Streeten EA , King TM , Shuldiner AR , Mitchell BD (2006) Does having children extend life span? A genealogical study of parity and longevity in the Amish. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 61 (2 ):190–195.16510865
McCombe PA (2018) The Short and Long-Term Effects of Pregnancy on Multiple Sclerosis and Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis. J Clin Med 7 (12 ). pii: E494. doi: 10.3390/jcm7120494.30486504
McCombe PA , Callaway LK (2014) Multiparity in women with multiple sclerosis causes less long-term disability: no. Mult Scler. 20 (11 ):1435–1436. doi: 10.1177/1352458514541979.25344547
Mehta D , Wani S , Wallace L , Henders AK , Wray NR , McCombe PA (2019) Cumulative influence of parity-related genomic changes in multiple sclerosis. J Neuroimmunol 328 :38–49. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2018.12.004.30579155
Melón L , Hammond R , Lewis M , Maguire J (2018a) A Novel, Synthetic, Neuroactive Steroid Is Effective at Decreasing Depression-Like Behaviors and Improving Maternal Care in Preclinical Models of Postpartum Depression. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 9 :703. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2018.00703.30532739
Melón LC , Hooper A , Yang X , Moss SJ , Maguire J (2018b)Inability to suppress the stress-induced activation of the HPA axis during the peripartum period engenders deficits in postpartum behaviors in mice.Psychoneuroendocrinology 90 :182–193. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2017.12.003.29274662
Meltzer-Brody S , Howard LM , Bergink V , Vigod S , Jones I , Munk-Olsen T , Honikman S , Milgrom J (2018a) Postpartum psychiatric disorders. Nat Rev Dis Primers 4 :18022. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2018.22.29695824
Meltzer-Brody S , Colquhoun H , Riesenberg R , Epperson CN , Deligiannidis KM , Rubinow DR , Li H , Sankoh AJ , Clemson C , Schacterle A , Jonas J , Kanes S (2018b) Brexanolone injection in post-partum depression: two multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trials. Lancet 392 (10152 ):1058–1070. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31551-4.30177236
Meltzer-Brody S , Stuebe A , Dole N , Savitz D , Rubinow D , Thorp J (2011) Elevated corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) during pregnancy and risk of postpartum depression (PPD). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96 (1 ):E40–7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0978 Epub 2010 Oct 13. 20943787
Mijajlović MD , Pavlović A , Brainin M , Heiss WD , Quinn TJ , Ihle-Hansen HB , Hermann DM , Assayag EB , Richard E , Thiel A , Kliper E , Shin YI , Kim YH , Choi S , Jung S , Lee YB , Sinanović O , Levine DA , Schlesinger I , Mead G , Milošević V , Leys D , Hagberg G , Ursin MH , Teuschl Y , Prokopenko S , Mozheyko E , Bezdenezhnykh A , Matz K , Aleksić V , Muresanu D , Korczyn AD , Bornstein NM (2017) Post-stroke dementia – a comprehensive review. BMC Med 15 (1 ):11. doi: 10.1186/s12916-017-0779-7.28095900
Miller LR , Marks C , Becker JB , Hurn PD , Chen WJ , Woodruff T , McCarthy MM , Sohrabji F , Schiebinger L , Wetherington CL , Makris S , Arnold AP , Einstein G , Miller VM , Sandberg K , Maier S , Cornelison TL , Clayton JA (2017) Considering sex as a biological variable in preclinical research. FASEB J 31 (1 ):29–34. doi: 10.1096/fj.201600781R 27682203
Mok VC , Lam BY , Wong A , Ko H , Markus HS , Wong LK (2017) Early-onset and delayed-onset poststroke dementia - revisiting the mechanisms. Nat Rev Neurol 13 (3 ):148–159. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.16.28211452
Morelli EL , Broadbent JM , Leichter JW , Thomson WM (2018) Pregnancy, parity and periodontal disease.Aust Dent J. May 16 . doi: 10.1111/adj.12623.
Moura D , Canavarro MC , Figueiredo-Braga M (2016) Oxytocin and depression in the perinatal period-a systematic review. Arch Womens Ment Health 19 (4 ):561–570. doi: 10.1007/s00737-016-0643-3.27295067
Muñoz-Mayorga D , Guerra-Araiza C , Torner L , Morales T (2018) Tau Phosphorylation in Female Neurodegeneration: Role of Estrogens, Progesterone, and Prolactin. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 9 :133. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2018.00133.29643836
Musey VC , Collins DC , Musey PI , Martino-Saltzman D , Preedy JR (1987) Long-term effect of a first pregnancy on the secretion of prolactin. N Engl J Med 316 (5 ):229–234.3099198
Nalbandian G , Kovats S (2005) Understanding sex biases in immunity: effects of estrogen on the differentiation and function of antigen-presenting cells. Immunol Res 31 (2 ):91–106.15778508
Napso T , Yong HEJ , Lopez-Tello J , Sferruzzi-Perri AN (2018) The Role of Placental Hormones in Mediating Maternal Adaptations to Support Pregnancy and Lactation. Front Physiol 9 :1091. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.01091.30174608
Nassar D , Khosrotehrani K , Aractingi S (2012) Fetal microchimerism in skin wound healing. Chimerism 3 (2 ):45–47. doi: 10.4161/chim.20739.22627845
Natri H , Garcia AR , Buetow KH , Trumble BC , Wilson MA (2019) The Pregnancy Pickle: Evolved Immune Compensation Due to Pregnancy Underlies Sex Differences in Human Diseases. Trends Genet 35 (7 ):478–488. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2019.04.008.31200807
Nebel RA , Aggarwal NT , Barnes LL , Gallagher A , Goldstein JM , Kantarci K , Mallampalli MP , Mormino EC , Scott L , Yu WH , Maki PM , Mielke MM (2018) Understanding the impact of sex and gender in Alzheimer’s disease: A call to action. Alzheimers Dement 14 (9 ):1171–1183. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.04.008.29907423
Nierop A , Bratsikas A , Zimmermann R , Ehlert U (2006) Are stress-induced cortisol changes during pregnancy associated with postpartum depressive symptoms? Psychosom Med 68 (6 ):931–937.17132840
Niewada M , Kobayashi A , Sandercock PA , Kamiński B , Członkowska A (2005) Influence of gender on baseline features and clinical outcomes among 17,370 patients with confirmed ischemic stroke in the international stroke trial. Neuroepidemiology 24 (3 ):123–128. doi: 10.1159/000082999.15637449
Nilsen J , Diaz Brinton R (2003) Mechanism of estrogen-mediated neuroprotection: regulation of mitochondrial calcium and Bcl-2 expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 (5 ):2842–2847. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0438041100.12604781
Noorbakhsh F , Baker GB , Power C (2014) Allopregnanolone and neuroinflammation: a focus on multiple sclerosis. Front Cell Neurosci 8 :134. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00134.24917787
Noorbakhsh F , Ellestad KK , Maingat F , Warren KG , Han MH , Steinman L , Baker GB , Power C (2011) Impaired neurosteroid synthesis in multiple sclerosis. Brain 134 (Pt 9 ):2703–2721. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr200.21908875
O’Hara MW1 , Zekoski EM , Philipps LH , Wright EJ (1990) Controlled prospective study of postpartum mood disorders: comparison of childbearing and nonchildbearing women. Abnorm Psychol 99 (1 ):3–15.
Okano T , Nomura J (1992) Endocrine study of the maternity blues. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 16 (6 ):921–32.1513931
Osborne LM , Gispen F , Sanyal A , Yenokyan G , Meilman S , Payne JL (2017) Lower allopregnanolone during pregnancy predicts postpartum depression: An exploratory study. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 79 :116–121. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2017.02.012.28278440
Osborne LM , Monk C (2013) Perinatal depression--the fourth inflammatory morbidity of pregnancy?: Theory and literature review. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 (10 ):1929–1952. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.03.019 Epub 2013 Apr 20. 23608136
Paganini-Hill A , Henderson VW (1994) Estrogen Deficiency and Risk of Alzheimer’s disease in Women. Am J Epidemiol 140 (3 ):256–261. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117244.8030628
Pakpoor J , Disanto G , Lacey MV , Hellwig K , Giovannoni G , Ramagopalan SV (2012) Breastfeeding and multiple sclerosis relapses: a meta-analysis. J Neurol 259 (10 ):2246–2248. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6553z.22619059
Pan D , Xu Y , Zhang L , Su Q , Chen M , Li B , Xiao Q , Gao Q , Peng X , Jiang B , Gu Y , Du Y , Gao P (2018) Gene expression profile in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of postpartum depression patients. Sci Rep 8 (1 ):10139. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-28509-4.29973662
Pariante CM1 , Lightman SL (2008) The HPA axis in major depression: classical theories and new developments. Trends Neurosci 31 (9 ):464–468. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.06.006.18675469
Patas K , Engler JB , Friese MA , Gold SM (2013) Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis: feto-maternal immune cross talk and its implications for disease activity. J Reprod Immunol 97 (1 ):140–6. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2012.10.005.23432880
Pawluski JL , Charlier TD , Lieblich SE , Hammond GL , Galea LA (2009) Reproductive experience alters corticosterone and CBG levels in the rat dam. Physiol Behav 96 (1 ):108–114. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2008.09.004.18817795
Pawluski JL , Galea LA (2007) Reproductive experience alters hippocampal neurogenesis during the postpartum period in the dam. Neuroscience 149 (1 ):53–67. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.07.031.17869008
Pawluski JL , Walker SK , Galea LA (2006) Reproductive experience differentially affects spatial reference and working memory performance in the mother. Horm Behav 49 (2 ):143–149. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2005.05.016 15992800
Payne JL , Maguire J (2019) Pathophysiological mechanisms implicated in postpartum depression.Front Neuroendocrinol 52 :165–180. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2018.12.001.30552910
Penn DJ , Smith KR (2007) Differential fitness costs of reproduction between the sexes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 (2 ):553–558.17192400
Perls TT , Alpert L , Fretts RC (1997) Middle-aged mothers live longer. Nature 389 (6647 ):133.
Piccinni MP , Giudizi MG , Biagiotti R , Beloni L , Giannarini L , Sampognaro S , Parronchi P , Manetti R , Annunziato F , Livi C , (1995) Progesterone favors the development of human T helper cells producing Th2-type cytokines and promotes both IL-4 production and membrane CD30 expression in established Th1 cell clones. J Immunol 155 (1 ):128–133.7541410
Pike CJ (1999) Estrogen modulates neuronal Bcl-xL expression and beta-amyloid-induced apoptosis: relevance to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurochem 72 (4 ):1552–1563. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1999.721552.x.10098861
Polanczyk MJ , Hopke C , Vandenbark AA , Offner H (2006) Estrogen-mediated immunomodulation involves reduced activation of effector T cells, potentiation of Treg cells, and enhanced expression of the PD-1 costimulatory pathway. J Neurosci Res 84 (2 ):370–378.16676326
Polanczyk M , Zamora A , Subramanian S , Matejuk A , Hess DL , Blankenhorn EP , Teuscher C , Vandenbark AA , Offner H (2003) The protective effect of 17beta-estradiol on experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis is mediated through estrogen receptor-alpha. Am J Pathol 163 (4 ):1599–1605. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63516-X.14507666
Polito A , Reynolds R (2005) NG2-expressing cells as oligodendrocyte progenitors in the normal and demyelinated adult central nervous system. J Anat. 207 (6 ):707–716. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2005.00454.x.16367798
Pollack AZ , Rivers K , Ahrens KA (2018) Parity associated with telomere length among US reproductive age women. Hum Reprod 33 (4 ):736–744. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dey024.29452389
Ponsonby AL , Lucas RM , van der Mei IA , Dear K , Valery PC , Pender MP , Taylor BV , Kilpatrick TJ , Coulthard A , Chapman C , Williams D , McMichael AJ , Dwyer T (2012) Offspring number, pregnancy, and risk of a first clinical demyelinating event The AusImmune Study. Neurology 78 (12 ):867–874. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31824c4648.22402857
Portaccio E , Ghezzi A , Hakiki B , Martinelli V , Moiola L , Patti F , La Mantia L , Mancardi GL , Solaro C , Tola MR , Pozzilli C , De Giglio L , Totaro R , Lugaresi A , De Luca G , Paolicelli D , Marrosu MG , Comi G , Trojano M , Amato MP (2011) Breastfeeding is not related to postpartum relapses in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 77 (2 ):145–150. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318224afc9.21734184
Posillico CK , Schwarz JM (2016) An investigation into the effects of antenatal stressors on the postpartum neuroimmune profile and depressive-like behaviors. Behav Brain Res 298 (Pt B ):218–28. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.11.011.26589802
Post C , Leuner B (2019) The maternal reward system in postpartum depression. Arch Womens Ment Health 22 (3 ):417–429. doi: 10.1007/s00737-018-0926-y.30554286
Pozzilli C , Tomassini V , Marinelli F , Paolillo A , Gasperini C , Bastianello S (2003) ‘Gender gap’ in multiple sclerosis: magnetic resonance imaging evidence. Eur J Neurol 10 (1 ):95–97. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2003.00519.x.12535003
Ptok U , Barkow K , Heun R (2002) Fertility and number of children in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Arch Womens Ment Health 5 (2 ):83–86. doi: 10.1007/s00737-002-0142-6.12510204
Putnam KT , Wilcox M , Robertson-Blackmore E , Sharkey K , Bergink V , Munk-Olsen T , Deligiannidis KM , Payne J , Altemus M , Newport J , Apter G , Devouche E , Viktorin A , Magnusson P , Penninx B , Buist A , Bilszta J , O’Hara M , Stuart S , Brock R , Roza S , Tiemeier H , Guille C , Epperson CN , Kim D , Schmidt P , Martinez P , Di Florio A , Wisner KL , Stowe Z , Jones I , Sullivan PF , Rubinow D , Wildenhaus K , Meltzer-Brody S ; Postpartum Depression: Action Towards Causes and Treatment (PACT) Consortium (2017) Clinical phenotypes of perinatal depression and time of symptom onset: analysis of data from an international consortium. Lancet Psychiatry 4 (6 ):477–485. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30136-0.28476427
Qureshi AI , Giles WH , Croft JB , Stern BJ (1997) Number of Pregnancies and Risk for Stroke and Stroke Subtypes. Arch Neurol 54 (2 ):206–206. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550140073015.
Rahimian R , Cordeau P Jr , Kriz J (2019) Brain Response to Injuries: When Microglia Go Sexist.Neuroscience. 2019 5 1;405 :14–23.29526689
Rainville JR , Hodes GE (2019) Inflaming sex differences in mood disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 44 (1 ):184–199. doi: 10.1038/s41386-018-0124-7.29955150
Ramien C , Taenzer A , Lupu A , Heckmann N , Engler JB , Patas K , Friese MA , Gold SM (2016) Sex effects on inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes in multiple sclerosis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 67 :137–146. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.12.015.26773723
Ritzel RM , Patel AR , Spychala M , Verma R , Crapser J , Koellhoffer EC , Schrecengost A , Jellison ER , Zhu L , Venna VR , McCullough LD (2017) Multiparity improves outcomes after cerebral ischemia in female mice despite features of increased metabovascular risk. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 (28 ):E5673–E5682. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1607002114.28645895
Robinson DP , Klein SL (2012) Pregnancy and pregnancy-associated hormones alter immune responses and disease pathogenesis. Horm Behav 62 (3 ):263–271. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.02.023.22406114
Robison LS , Gannon OJ , Salinero AE , Zuloaga KL (2019) Contributions of sex to cerebrovascular function and pathology. Brain Res (1710 ):43–60. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2018.12.030.
Roullet E , Verdier-Taillefer MH , Amarenco P , Gharbi G , Alperovitch A , Marteau R (1993) Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis: a longitudinal study of 125 remittent patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 56 (10 ):1062–1065. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.56.10.1062.8410003
Roy-O’Reilly M , McCullough LD (2018) Age and Sex Are Critical Factors in Ischemic Stroke Pathology. Endocrinology 159 (8 ):3120–3131. doi: 10.1210/en.2018-00465.30010821
Rubinow DR , Schmidt PJ (2019) Sex differences and the neurobiology of affective disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 44 (1 ):111–128. doi: 10.1038/s41386-018-0148-z.30061743
Runmarker B , Andersen O (1995) Pregnancy is associated with a lower risk of onset and a better prognosis in multiple sclerosis. Brain 118 (Pt 1 ):253–261. doi: 10.1093/brain/118.1.253.7895009
Saberi S , Du YP , Christie M , Goldsbury C (2013) Human chorionic gonadotropin increases β-cleavage of amyloid precursor protein in SH-SY5Y cells. Cell Mol Neurobiol 33 (6 ):747–751. doi: 10.1007/s10571-013-9954-3.23812658
Sanders BD , Davis MG , Holley SL , Phillippi JC (2018) Pregnancy-Associated Stroke. J Midwifery Womens Health 63 (1 ):23–32. doi: 10.1111/jmwh.12720.29369478
Sanders JL , Newman AB (2013) Telomere length in epidemiology: a biomarker of aging, age-related disease, both, or neither? Epidemiol Rev 35 :112–131. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxs008.23302541
Sanghavi M , Rutherford JD (2014) Cardiovascular physiology of pregnancy. Circulation 130 (12 ):1003–1008. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.009029.25223771
Savaskan E , Olivieri G , Meier F , Ravid R , Müller-Spahn F (2001) Hippocampal estrogen beta-receptor immunoreactivity is increased in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res 908 (2 ):113–119.11454321
Schuch JJ , Roest AM , Nolen WA , Penninx BW , de Jonge P (2014) Gender differences in major depressive disorder: results from the Netherlands study of depression and anxiety. J Affect Disord 156 :156–163. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.12.01 24388685
Schweingruber N , Reichardt SD , Lühder F , Reichardt HM (2011) Mechanisms of Glucocorticoids in the Control of Neuroinflammation. J Neuroendocrinol 24 (1 ):174–182. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2011.02161.x.
Segman RH , Goltser-Dubner T , Weiner I , Canetti L , Galili-Weisstub E , Milwidsky A , Pablov V , Friedman N , Hochner-Celnikier D (2010) Blood mononuclear cell gene expression signature of postpartum depression. Mol Psychiatry 15 (1 ):93–100. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.65.19581911
Sells CM , Feske SK (2017) Stroke in Pregnancy. Semin Neurol 37 (6 ):669–678. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1608940.29270940
Seth S , Lewis AJ , Galbally M (2016) Perinatal maternal depression and cortisol function in pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic literature review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 16 (1 ):124. doi: 10.1186/s12884-016-0915-y.27245670
Setiawan E , Wilson AA , Mizrahi R , Rusjan PM , Miler L , Rajkowska G , Suridjan I , Kennedy JL , Rekkas PV , Houle S , Meyer JH (2015) Role of translocator protein density, a marker of neuroinflammation, in the brain during major depressive episodes. JAMA Psychiatry 72 (3 ):268–275. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2427 25629589
Schiller CE , Meltzer-Brody S , Rubinow DR (2015) The role of reproductive hormones in postpartum depression. CNS Spectr 20 (1 ):48–59. doi: 10.1017/S1092852914000480.25263255
Shansky RM (2019) Are hormones a “female problem” for animal research? Science 364 (6443 ):825–826. doi: 10.1126/science.aaw7570.31147505
Sharma J , Nelluru G , Wilson MA , Johnston MV , Hossain MA (2011) Sex-specific activation of cell death signalling pathways in cerebellar granule neurons exposed to oxygen glucose deprivation followed by reoxygenation. ASN Neuro 3 (2 ):e00056. doi: 10.1042/AN20100032.21382016
Sherer ML , Posillico CK , Schwarz JM (2018) The psychoneuroimmunology of pregnancy. Front Neuroendocrinol 51 :25–35. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2017.10.006.29110974
Shors TJ (2016) A trip down memory lane about sex differences in the brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371 (1688 ):20150124. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0124.26833842
Shuster EA (2008) Hormonal Influences in Multiple Sclerosis. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 318 :267–311.18219822
Sichel DA , Cohen LS , Robertson LM , Ruttenberg A , Rosenbaum JF (1995) Prophylactic estrogen in recurrent postpartum affective disorder. Biol Psychiatry 38 (12 ):814–818.8750040
Sicotte NL , Liva SM , Klutch R , Pfeiffer P , Bouvier S , Odesa S , Wu TC , Voskuhl RR (2002) Treatment of multiple sclerosis with the pregnancy hormone estriol. Ann Neurol 52 (4 ):421–428. doi: 10.1002/ana.10301.12325070
Simpson W , Steiner M , Coote M , Frey BN (2016) Relationship between inflammatory biomarkers and depressive symptoms during late pregnancy and the early postpartum period: a longitudinal study. Braz J Psychiatry 38 (3 ):190–196. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2015-1899.27579595
Skalkidou A , Sylvén SM , Papadopoulos FC , Olovsson M , Larsson A , Sundström-Poromaa I (2009) Risk of postpartum depression in association with serum leptin and interleukin-6 levels at delivery: a nested case-control study within the UPPSAT cohort. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009 10;34 (9 ):1329–1337. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.04.003.19427131
Skrundz M , Bolten M , Nast I , Hellhammer DH , Meinlschmidt G (2011) Plasma oxytocin concentration during pregnancy is associated with development of postpartum depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 36 (9 ):1886–1893. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.74.21562482
Snyder HM , Asthana S , Bain L , Brinton R , Craft S , Dubal DB , Espeland MA , Gatz M , Mielke MM , Raber J , Rapp PR , Yaffe K , Carrillo MC (2016) Sex biology contributions to vulnerability to Alzheimer’s disease: A think tank convened by the Women’s Alzheimer’s Research Initiative. Alzheimers Dement 12 (11 ):1186–1196. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.08.004.27692800
Sobow T , Kloszewska I (2004) Parity, number of pregnancies, and the age of onset of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 16 (1 ):120–121. doi: 10.1176/jnp.16.1.120-a.
Sohrabji F , Okoreeh A , Panta A (2019) Sex hormones and stroke: Beyond estrogens. Horm Behav 111 :87–95. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2018.10.010 30713101
Soldan SS , Alvarez Retuerto AI , Sicotte NL , Voskuhl RR (2003) Immune modulation in multiple sclerosis patients treated with the pregnancy hormone estriol. J Immunol 171 (11 ):6267–6274. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.11.6267.14634144
Soma-Pillay P , Nelson-Piercy C , Tolppanen H , Mebazaa A (2016) Physiological changes in pregnancy. Cardiovasc J Afr 27 (2 ):89–94. doi: 10.5830/CVJA-2016-021.27213856
Somerset DA , Zheng Y , Kilby MD , Sansom DM , Drayson MT (2004) Normal human pregnancy is associated with an elevation in the immune suppressive CD25+ CD4+ regulatory T-cell subset. Immunology 112 (1 ):38–43. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.01869.x.15096182
Spence RD , Wisdom AJ , Cao Y , Hill HM , Mongerson CR , Stapornkul B , Itoh N , Sofroniew MV , Voskuhl RR (2013) Estrogen mediates neuroprotection and anti-inflammatory effects during EAE through ERα signaling on astrocytes but not through ERβ signaling on astrocytes or neurons. J Neurosci 33 (26 ):10924–10933. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0886-13.2013.23804112
Spencer SJ , Mouihate A , Galic MA , Pittman QJ (2008a). Central and peripheral neuroimmune responses: hyporesponsiveness during pregnancy. J Physiol 586 (2 ):399–406.17947311
Spencer SJ , Galic MA , Tsutsui M , Pittman QJ , Mouihate A (2008b) Effects of global cerebral ischemia in the pregnant rat. Stroke 39 (3 ):975–982. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.497016.18239170
Stary CM , XU L , Voloboueva L , Hernandez M , Idoyaga JI , Giffard RG (2019) Nursing Markedly Protects Postpartum Mice from Stroke: Associated Central and Peripheral Neuroimmune Changes and a Role for Oxytocin. Front Neurosci 13 :609. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00609.31354401
Steinborn A , Schmitt E , Kisielewicz A , Rechenberg S , Seissler N , Mahnke K , Schaier M , Zeier M , Sohn C (2012) Pregnancy-associated diseases are characterized by the composition of the systemic regulatory T cell (Treg) pool with distinct subsets of Tregs. Clin Exp Immunol. 167 (1 ):84–98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04493.x.22132888
Steinmetz D , Ramos E , Campbell SN , Morales T , Rissman RA (2015) Reproductive Stage and Modulation of Stress-Induced Tau Phosphorylation in Female Rats. J Neuroendocrinol 27 (11 ):827–834. doi: 10.1111/jne.12323.26510116
Struble E , Harrouk W , DeFelice A , Tesfamariam B (2015) Nonclinical aspects of venous thrombosis in pregnancy. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 105 (3 ):190–200. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.21111.26404176
Stuebe AM , Grewen K , Meltzer-Brody S (2013) Association between maternal mood and oxytocin response to breastfeeding. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 22 (4 ):352–61. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2012.3768.23586800
Stuebe AM , Grewen K , Pedersen CA , Propper C , Meltzer-Brody S (2012) Failed lactation and perinatal depression: common problems with shared neuroendocrine mechanisms? J Womens Health (Larchmt) 21 (3 ):264–272. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2011.3083.22204416
Subbiah MT , Kessel B , Agrawal M , Rajan R , Abplanalp W , Rymaszewski Z (1993) Antioxidant potential of specific estrogens on lipid peroxidation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 77 (4 ):1095–1097. doi: 10.1210/jc.77.4.1095.8408459
Stoffel EC , Craft RM (2004) Ovarian hormone withdrawal-induced “depression” in female rats. Physiol Behav 83 (3 ):505–513.15581673
Suda S , Segi-Nishida E , Newton SS , Duman RS (2008) A postpartum model in rat: behavioral and gene expression changes induced by ovarian steroid deprivation. Biol Psychiatry 64 (4 ):311–319. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.03.029.18471802
Sugioka K , Shimosegawa Y , Nakano M (1987) Estrogens as natural antioxidants of membrane phospholipid peroxidation. FEBS Letters 210 (1 ):37–39. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(87)81293-0.3803578
Sun F , Sebastiani P , Schupf N , Bae H , Andersen SL , McIntosh A , Abel H , Elo IT , Perls TT (2015) Extended maternal age at birth of last child and women’s longevity in the Long Life Family Study. Menopause 22 (1 ):26–31. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000000276.24977462
Suzuki S , Brown CM , Wise PM (2009) Neuroprotective effects of estrogens following ischemic stroke. Front Neuroendocrinol 30 (2 ):201–211. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2009.04.007.19401209
Swartz RH , Cayley ML , Foley N , Ladhani NNN , Leffert L , Bushnell C , McClure JA , Lindsay MP (2017) The incidence of pregnancy-related stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Stroke 12 (7 ):687–697. doi: 10.1177/1747493017723271.28884652
Szpunar MJ , Parry BL (2018) A systematic review of cortisol, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and prolactin in peripartum women with major depression. Arch Womens Ment Health 21 (2 ):149–161. doi: 10.1007/s00737-017-0787-9 29022126
Tai P , Wang J , Jin H , Song X , Yan J , Kang Y , Zhao L , An X , Du X , Chen X , Wang S , Xia G , Wang B (2008) Induction of regulatory T cells by physiological level estrogen. J Cell Physiol 214 (2 ):456–464.17654501
Tang MX , Jacobs D , Stern Y , Marder K , Schofield P , Gurland B , Andrews H , Mayeux R (1996) Effect of oestrogen during menopause on risk and age at onset of Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 348 (9025 ):429–432. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(96)03356-9.8709781
Thorogood M , Hannaford PC (1998) The influence of oral contraceptives on the risk of multiple sclerosis. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 105 (12 ):1296–1299. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.1998.tb10008.x.9883921
Treadwell SD , Thanvi B , Robinson TG (2008) Stroke in pregnancy and the puerperium. Postgrad Med J 84 (991 ):238–245. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2007.066167.18508980
Troisi R , Bjørge T , Gissler M , Grotmol T , Kitahara CM , Myrtveit Saether SM , Ording AG , Sköld C , Sørensen HT , Trabert B , Glimelius I (2018) The role of pregnancy, perinatal factors and hormones in maternal cancer risk: a review of the evidence. J Intern Med 283 (5 ):430–445. doi: 10.1111/joim.12747 29476569
Uchoa MF , Moser VA , Pike CJ (2016) Interactions between inflammation, sex steroids, and Alzheimer’s disease risk factors. Front Neuroendocrinol 43 :60–82. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2016.09.001.27651175
van Walderveen MA , Tas MW , Barkhof F , Polman CH , Frequin ST , Hommes OR , Valk J (1994) Magnetic resonance evaluation of disease activity during pregnancy in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 44 (2 ):327–329. doi: 10.1212/WNL.44.2.327.8309584
Vegeto E , Bonincontro C , Pollio G , Sala A , Viappiani S , Nardi F , Brusadelli A , Viviani B , Ciana P , Maggi A (2001) Estrogen prevents the lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory response in microglia. J Neurosci 21 (6 ):1809–1818. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-06-01809.2001.11245665
Verdru P , Theys P , D’Hooghe MB , Carton H (1994) Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis: the influence on long term disability. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 96 (1 ):38–41. doi: 10.1016/0303-8467(94)90027-2.8187380
Vergara-Castañeda E , Grattan DR , Pasantes-Morales H , Pérez-Domínguez M , Cabrera-Reyes EA , Morales T , Cerbón M (2016) Prolactin mediates neuroprotection against excitotoxicity in primary cell cultures of hippocampal neurons via its receptor. Brain Res 1636 :193–199. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2016.02.011.26874070
Vesga-López O , Blanco C , Keyes K , Olfson M , Grant BF , Hasin DS (2008) Psychiatric disorders in pregnant and postpartum women in the United States. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65 (7 ):805–815. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.65.7.805.18606953
Vest RS , Pike CJ (2013) Gender, sex steroid hormones, and Alzheimer’s disease. Horm Behav 63 (2 ):301–307. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.04.006.22554955
Voskuhl R , Momtazee C (2017) Pregnancy: Effect on Multiple Sclerosis, Treatment Considerations, and Breastfeeding. Neurotherapeutics 14 (4 ):974–984. doi: 10.1007/s13311-017-0562-7.28766273
Voskuhl RR , Wang H , Wu TC , Sicotte NL , Nakamura K , Kurth F , Itoh N , Bardens J , Bernard JT , Corboy JR , Cross AH , Dhib-Jalbut S , Ford CC , Frohman EM , Giesser B , Jacobs D , Kasper LH , Lynch S , Parry G , Racke MK , Reder AT , Rose J , Wingerchuk DM , MacKenzie-Graham AJ , Arnold DL , Tseng CH , Elashoff R (2016) Estriol combined with glatiramer acetate for women with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Neurol 15 (1 ):35–46. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00322-1.26621682
Voskuhl RR , Gold SM (2012) Sex-related factors in multiple sclerosis susceptibility and progression. Nat Rev Neurol 8 (5 ):255–263. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.43.22450508
Vukusic C , Confavreux C (2013) One can prevent post-partum MS relapses by exclusive breast feeding: no. Mult Scler. 19 (12 ):1565–1566. doi: 10.1177/1352458513503054.24132001
Vukusic S , El-Etr M , Ionescu I , Cotton F , Merle H , Cornu C (2012) The POPARTMUS French-Italian multicentric trial of postpartum progestin and estriol in multiple sclerosis: final results. Mult Scler 18 (S4 ):45 21865412
Vukusic S , Hutchinson M , Hours M , Moreau T , Cortinovis-Tourniaire P , Adeleine P , Confavreux C (2004) Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis (the PRIMS study): clinical predictors of post-partum relapse. Brain 127 (Pt 6 ):1353–1360. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh152.15130950
Wisner KL , Stika CS , Ciolino JD (2019) The First Food and Drug Administration-Indicated Drug for Postpartum Depression-Brexanolone. JAMA Psychiatry, in press. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.1546.
Wisner KL , Chambers C , Sit DK (2006) Postpartum depression: a major public health problem. JAMA 296 (21 ):2616–2618.17148727
Wang Q , Huang Q , Zeng Y , Liang JJ , Liu SY , Gu X , Liu JA (2016) Parity and osteoporotic fracture risk in postmenopausal women: a dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Osteoporos Int 27 (1 ):319–330. doi: 10.1007/s00198-015-3351-3.26439242
Wang Y , Iwatani H , Ito T , Horimoto N , Yamato M , Matsui I , Imai E , Hori M (2004) Fetal cells in mother rats contribute to the remodeling of liver and kidney after injury. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 325 (6 ):961–970. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.10.105.15541383
Weinshenker BG , Hader W , Carriere W , Baskerville J , Ebers GC (1989) The influence of pregnancy on disability from multiple sclerosis: a population-based study in Middlesex County, Ontario. Neurology 39 (11 ):1438–1440. doi: 10.1212/WNL.39.11.1438.2812319
Wenk GL (2003) Neuropathologic changes in Alzheimer’s disease. J Clin Psychiatry 64 Suppl 9 :7–10.
World Health Organization (2017) Geneva: Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders: Global Health Estimates. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
Xu H , Wang R , Zhang YW , Zhang X (2006) Estrogen, beta-amyloid metabolism/trafficking, and Alzheimer’s disease. Ann NY Acad Sci 1089 :324–342.17261779
Yang L , Kuper H , Sandin S , Margolis KL , Chen Z , Adami HO , Weiderpass E (2009) Reproductive history, oral contraceptive use, and the risk of ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke in a cohort study of middle-aged Swedish women. Stroke 40 (4 ):1050–1058. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.531913.19211494
Yao H , Fukuda K , Araki Y , Takashima Y , Uchino A , Yuzuriha T , Hashimoto M (2018) Parity as a protective biomarker against silent brain infarction in community-dwelling older adults: The Sefuri Study. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis S1052–3057 (18 )30643–8. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.11.005.
Yates MA , Li Y , Chlebeck P , Proctor T , Vandenbark AA , Offner H (2010) Progesterone treatment reduces disease severity and increases IL-10 in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Neuroimmunol 220 (1–2 ):136–139. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.01.013.20153059
Yim IS , Tanner Stapleton LR , Guardino CM , Hahn-Holbrook J , Dunkel Schetter C (2015) Biological and psychosocial predictors of postpartum depression: systematic review and call for integration. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 11 :99–137. doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-101414-020426.25822344
Yim IS , Glynn LM , Dunkel-Schetter C , Hobel CJ , Chicz-DeMet A , Sandman CA (2009) Risk of postpartum depressive symptoms with elevated corticotropin-releasing hormone in human pregnancy.Arch Gen Psychiatry 66 (2 ):162–9. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2008.533.19188538
Ysrraelit MS , Correale J (2019) Impact of sex hormones on immune function and multiple sclerosis development. Immunology 156 (1 ):9–22. doi: 10.1111/imm.13004.30222193
Yu HJ , Fei J , Chen XS , Cai QY , Liu HL , Liu GD , Yao ZX (2010) Progesterone attenuates neurological behavioral deficits of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis through remyelination with nucleus-sublocalized Olig1 protein. Neurosci Lett 476 (1 ):42–45. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.03.079.20381586
Yue X , Lu M , Lancaster T , Cao P , Honda S , Staufenbiel M , Harada N , Zhong Z , Shen Y , Li R (2005) Brain estrogen deficiency accelerates Abeta plaque formation in an Alzheimer’s disease animal model.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 (52 ):19198–19203.16365303
Zelkowitz P , Gold I , Feeley N , Hayton B , Carter CS , Tulandi T , Abenhaim HA , Levin P (2014) Psychosocial stress moderates the relationships between oxytocin, perinatal depression, and maternal behavior. Horm Behav 66 (2 ):351–360. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2014.06.014.24956026
Zhang Y , Shen L , Wu J , Xu G , Song L , Yang S , Tian Y , Yuan J , Liang Y , Wang Y (2015) Parity and Risk of Stroke among Chinese Women: Cross Sectional Evidence from the Dongfeng-Tongji Cohort Study. Sci Rep 5 :16992. doi: 10.1038/srep16992.26607966
Zhang X , Shu XO , Gao YT , Yang G , Li H , Zheng W (2009) Pregnancy, childrearing, and risk of stroke in Chinese women. Stroke 40 (8 ):2680–2684. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.547554.19461027
Zhao TZ , Ding Q , Hu J , He SM , Shi F , Ma LT (2016) GPER expressed on microglia mediates the anti-inflammatory effect of estradiol in ischemic stroke. Brain Behav. 6 (4 ):e00449. doi: 10.1002/brb3.449.27127723
Zhao L , Yao J , Mao Z , Chen S , Wang Y , Brinton RD (2011) 17β-Estradiol regulates insulin-degrading enzyme expression via an ERβ/PI3-K pathway in hippocampus: relevance to Alzheimer’s prevention. Neurobiol Aging 32 (11 ):1949–1963. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.12.010.20053478
Zoet GA , Paauw ND , Groenhof K , Franx A , Gansevoort RT , Groen H , Van Rijn B , Lely T (2019) Association between parity and persistent weight gain at age 40–60 years: a longitudinal prospective cohort study. BMJ Open 9 (5 ):e024279. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-024279.
