LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101282001
33781
Brain Struct Funct
Brain Struct Funct
Brain structure &amp; function
1863-2653
1863-2661

31250157
7371412
10.1007/s00429-019-01915-8
NIHMS1533040
Article
Localization of Amyloid Beta Peptides to Locus Coeruleus and Medial Prefrontal Cortex in Corticotropin Releasing Factor Overexpressing Male and Female Mice
Ross Jennifer A. 1
Alexis Rody 1
Reyes Beverly A.S. 1
Risbrough Victoria 2
Van Bockstaele Elisabeth J. 1
1 Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, College of Medicine, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19102
2 Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093; Center of Excellence for Stress and Mental Health San Diego VA Health Services, La Jolla CA
Corresponding Author: Jennifer A. Ross, Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, College of Medicine, Drexel University, 245 S. 15th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19102, Voice: (908) 770-7802, jar485@drexel.edu
4 10 2019
27 6 2019
9 2019
01 9 2020
224 7 23852405
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
A culmination of evidence from the literature points to the Locus Coeruleus (LC)-Norepinephrine (NE) system as an underappreciated and understudied area of research in the context of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Stress is a risk factor for developing AD, and is supported by multiple clinical and preclinical studies demonstrating that amplification of the stress system disrupts cellular and molecular processes at the synapse, promoting the production and accumulation of the amyloid beta (Aβ42) peptide. Stress-induced activation of the LC is mediated by corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) and CRF receptors exhibit sex-biased stress signaling. Sex differences are evident in the neurochemical, morphological and molecular regulation of LC neurons by CRF, providing a compelling basis for the higher prevalence of stress-related disorders such as AD in females. In the present study, we examined the cellular substrates for interactions between Aβ and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) a marker of noradrenergic somatodendritic processes in the LC, and Dopamine- β-Hydroxylase (DβH) in the infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex (ILmPFC) in mice conditionally overexpressing CRF in the forebrain (CRFOE) under a Doxycycline (DOX) regulated tetO promoter. CRFOE was sufficient to elicit a redistribution of Aβ peptides in the somatodendritic processes of the LC of male and female transgenic mice, without altering total Aβ42 protein expression levels. DOX treated groups exhibited lysosomal compartments with apparent lipofuscin and abnormal morphology, indicating potential dysfunction of these Aβ42-clearing compartments. In female DOX treated groups, swollen microvessels with lipid-laden vacuoles were also observed, a sign of blood-brain-barrier dysfunction. Finally, sex differences were observed in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), as females responded to DOX treatment with increased frequency of co-localization of Aβ42 and DβH in noradrenergic axon terminals compared to vehicle treated controls, while male groups showed no significant changes. We hypothesize that the observed sex differences in Aβ42 distribution in this model of CRF hypersignaling is based on increased responsivity of female rodent CRFR1 in the LC. Aβ42 production is enhanced during increased neuronal activation therefore the excitation of DOX treated female CRFOE LC neurons projecting to the mPFC may exhibit more frequent co-localization with Aβ due to increased neuronal activity of noradrenergic neurons.

amyloid
norepinephrine
dopamine-β-hydroxylase
adrenergic receptors
stress

INTRODUCTION

The Locus Coeruleus (LC) is a cluster of noradrenergic neurons in the midbrain that is the predominant provider of norepinephrine (NE) to the forebrain (Berridge and Waterhouse 2003, Valentino and Van Bockstaele 2008, Benarroch 2009). The LC-NE system is critically involved in memory and other cognitive processes (Tully and Bolshakov 2010), highly responsive to stress-related stimuli, and via its global projections, facilitates large-scale changes in the brain microenvironment (Valentino and Van Bockstaele 2008). Dysregulation of NE has been implicated in mood disorders and psychiatric disease (Moret and Briley 2011), hyper-arousal and chronic stress (Gold 1988, Leonard 2002, Hermans, van Marle et al. 2011), and cognitive impairment and dementia (Bondareff, Mountjoy et al. 1987, Bondareff, Mountjoy et al. 1987, Chan-Palay and Asan 1989, Matthews, Chen et al. 2002, Szot, White et al. 2006, Hermans, van Marle et al. 2011).

Interestingly, several multi-center clinical studies, and large-scale meta-analyses have identified a link between psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and depression, and the development of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) later in life. While the mechanisms of this interaction are not well understood, a fascinating link between these two disparate disease states is chronic stress, as it is a well-established risk factor for both neuropsychiatric disease, and AD. A known structural feature contributing to the symptoms seen in AD is the accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ42) peptides (Green, Billings et al. 2006). Preclinical studies suggest a link between stress and increased production of amyloid beta (Aβ42) peptides (Kang, Cirrito et al. 2007, Espana, Gimenez-Llort et al. 2010, Dong, Murphy et al. 2012, Dore, Villemagne et al. 2013). Corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) is the neurohormone that mediates the activation of peripheral and central responses to stressful stimuli, in parallel, when released from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN). Many investigators have explored the link between neurodegenerative and psychiatric disease further, identifying CRF signaling via the CRF receptor 1 (CRFR1), the primary receptor that mediates responses to stress, as a contributing factor to tau-hyperphosphorylation and Aβ42 peptide accumulation. Interestingly, CRFR1 has also been the subject of several studies investigating the differences in incidence rates for stress-related psychiatric disorders between males and females. Many findings have shown that females are twice as likely to suffer from psychiatric disorders than men (Bangasser, Eck et al. 2018).

The cognitive limb of the stress response is engaged when CRF afferents from the PVN terminate onto the LC, stimulating the production and secretion of NE throughout the entire neuraxis via its highly-collateralized projections. Noradrenergic transmission throughout the brain initiates global effects on cognition by promoting attention, wakefulness, and directing behavioral output initiated by an environmental stimulus. Additionally, converging evidence from clinical and preclinical studies highlights the importance of NE in the behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), and the progression of AD. Neuronal cell death in the LC is a well-defined characteristic of AD pathology, and LC neuronal loss correlates significantly with duration of illness (Zarow, Lyness et al. 2003). Degeneration of the rostral LC, the region that receives CRF input from regions involved in the emotional limb of the stress response, results in a 31% reduction in cortical NE levels, an effect that correlates significantly with cognitive impairment (Matthews, Chen et al. 2002). Thus, the LC-NE system may contribute not only to cognitive symptoms, but also to the wide array of non-cognitive symptoms of dementia such as agitation and aggression (Herrmann, Lanctot et al. 2004).

Recent studies from our lab localized the endogenous Aβ42 peptide monomers to the neuronal cell bodies of the LC and to noradrenergic axon terminals of the infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex (ILmPFC) in the naive rat. We also confirmed the findings of other studies, that endogenous Aβ42 is present in low picomolar concentrations in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) as well as the LC. These results revealed a significant positive correlation between baseline NE levels and endogenous Aβ42. To investigate if there may be a functional link between NE and Aβ42, we used two models of noradrenergic depletion; knockout of the NE synthesizing enzyme Dopamine-β-Hydroxylase (DβH), and separately, administration of the LC selective neurotoxin, N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine (DSP-4). The results of these noradrenergic depletion studies indicate that decreased NE resulted in decreased levels of endogenous levels of Aβ42, likely mediated by decreased stimulation of γ-secretase, whose activity has been shown to be modulated by β-adrenergic receptors(Ni, Zhao et al. 2006, Thathiah, Horre et al. 2013).

In the present study, we have utilized a genetic model of chronic stress with mice that conditionally overexpress CRF in the forebrain (CRFOE), to assess the frequency and distribution of Aβ peptides in somatodendritic profiles of the LC and in NE terminals of the ILmPFC under basal conditions and conditions of high CRF signaling in male and female mice. This genetic model enables overexpression of CRF throughout the forebrain (hippocampus, cortex and striatum) in addition to weaker increases in the midbrain and LC that is limited to adulthood (Toth et al. 2014). Because the overexpression of CRF is limited to forebrain and adulthood they do not show the Cushingoid effects and secondary peripheral symptoms reported in models that induce hypothalamic CRFOE (Toth et al. 2014, Stenzel-Poore et al.). We hypothesize that CRFOE mice will have elevated Aβ peptides distributed within LC somatodendritic profiles and terminals of the ILmPFC in male and female mice. We hypothesize further, that CRFOE females will have an exaggerated response, reflected in overall increased localization of Aβ peptides to LC somatodendritic processes and ILmPFC terminals compared to their male counterparts. We hypothesized that chronic CRFOE would result in aberrant-LC activation that may promote network hyperactivity in the coeruleo-cortical pathway, and therefore increases in Aβ42 production and accumulation. We hypothesized further, that based on sex-biased signaling of the CRFR1 receptor in the LC, that females would be more vulnerable to Aβ accumulation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Generation of Mice with Inducible Forebrain-Specific CRF Overexpression

The generation and characterization of inducible forebrain-specific CRFOE mice has previously been published (Toth et al. 2014). Briefly, to achieve temporal control of CRF expression in the forebrain, two genetically modified mouse lines (backcrossed on C57BL/6J background to N&gt;15 generations) carrying a CaMKIIα promoter-driven rtTA2 transgene (Michalon et al, 2005) and a doxycycline (DOX)-regulated tetO promoter fused to the CRF gene (Vicentini et al, 2009) were crossed to produce double mutant mice. Genotyping was carried out by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) (Transnetyx, Memphis Tennessee, USA). CRFOE was induced by DOX administration in common mouse chow (Harlan Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN) in 6 mg DOX/g dose which corresponds to 3.5 mg DOX/g body weight/day. This dose was shown to induce a neuron-specific expression of different reporter genes in the forebrain with detectable levels after four days and reaching its maximum level after a week. DOX treatment was applied at approximately postnatal day (PD)60 (+/− 10 days) and was applied for 3-4 weeks before sacrificing to induce CRFOE in adulthood. Because previous studies showed that DOX alone does not affect functional outcomes in wild-type animals (Toth et al. 2014), double mutant littermates without DOX treatment (vehicle) were used as control subjects in all experiments. A total of 40 mice were used in the present study; approximately 20 for immunohistochemistry to be used in confocal and electron microscopy, and 20 for biochemical analyses.

Tissue Preparation

CRFOE (n=10; 5 male and 5 female) and control mice (n=10; 5 male and 5 female) used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) were deeply anesthetized using isoflurane (Vedco, Inc. St. Joseph, MO) and subsequently transcardially perfused through the ascending aorta with the following fixatives shown to be optimal for the antisera used and yielding optimal tissue preservation for ultrastructural analysis: 10 ml of 1000 units/ml heparinized saline, 4% formaldehyde solution in 0.1M PB. The brains were removed, cut into 4-5 mm coronal blocks, stored in aldehyde fixative for an additional 30 min, and then sectioned (30-40 um) on a vibrating microtome (Vibratome; Pelco EasiSlicer, Ted Pella, Inc. Redding, CA) for electron microscopy, or on a cryostat (Microm HM 50, Microm International GmbH, Waldorf, Germany) for fluorescence microscopy. Brains were cut in 40μm coronal sections based on the rat brain atlas of Paxinos and Watson (Paxinos 1998).

Immunocytochemical Labeling

Primary Antisera

Tissues were blocked for non-specific labeling in 0.5% BSA in 0.1M Tris-buffered saline (TBS). Tissue sections were incubated for 48 hours at 4°C in primary antibody in 0.1% BSA in 0.1M TBS. The primary antibody utilized for the recognition of Aβ42 peptides in these experiments, MOAB2 (Kerafast, Boston, MA), is a pan-specific antibody directed to amino acids 1-4 of the monomeric Aβ42 peptide, that can detect intraneuronal Aβ42 and does not recognize Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP); for characterization see (Youmans, Tai et al. 2012). Dual-labeled tissues were incubated in a cocktail of mouse anti-MOAB2 (Kerafast, Boston, MA 1:1,000) plus either rabbit anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (Immunostar, Hudson, WI; 1:1000) or rabbit anti-dopamine-β-hydroxylase (DβH) (Immunostar; 1:400) (for specificity and characterization, see (Van Bockstaele, Biswas et al. 1993).

Secondary Antisera and Visualization

Detection of antigens for immunofluorescence utilized secondary antibodies that were tetramethylrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate (TRITC) conjugated donkey-anti rabbit IgG for TH or DβH detection, and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated donkey-anti mouse for Aβ peptide detection (MOAB2) at 1:200 dilutions (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA). Tissue sections underwent serial dehydration, were mounted on slides, and cover-slipped using DPX (Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Slides were then viewed using an Olympus IX81 inverted microscope (Olympus, Hatagaya, Shibuya-Ku, Tokyo, Japan), with helium and argon laser excitation wavelengths of 488, 543 and 635. The microscope is also equipped with filters (DM 405-44, BA505-605, and BA 560-660) and with Olympus Fluoview ASW FV1000 program (Olympus, Hatayaga, Shibuya-Ku, Tokyo Japan). Fluorescent confocal images were assembled and adjusted for brightness and contrast in Adobe Photoshop.

The secondary antibody cocktail used for electron microscopy was comprised of one biotinylated antibody, visualized by immunoperoxidase, and one antibody conjugated to a 1nm gold particle, subsequently silver enhanced and visualized under the electron microscope. Detection of TH or DβH for electron microscopy was visualized using immunoperoxidase labeling via biotinylated donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:400, Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA). Following a 30 min incubation, an avidin-biotin complex was applied for 30 min (ABC kit, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and the peroxidase reaction product was then visualized using 0.02% Diaminobenzidine (DAB) plus 10 μl of 30% H2O2 in 0.1M TBS. MOAB-2 immunolabeling for Aβ peptides were visualized using 1nm gold particle conjugated goat-anti mouse IgG (Electron Microscopy Science, Hatfield, PA) at 1:50 dilution. Electron dense labeling of MOAB2 was detected via silver intensification of immunogold MOAB2 particles using a silver enhancement kit (Aurion R-GENT SE-EM Kit, Electron Microscopy Science). Tissues were prepared for visualization under the electron microscope as previously described, with osmification, serial dehydration, flat-embedding, and tissue sectioning at 74 nm on an ultramicrotome (Commons, Beck et al. 2001). Sections were collected on copper mesh grids and examined using an electron microscope (Morgani, Fei Company, Hillsboro, OR). Digital images were viewed and captured using the AMT advantage HR HR-B CCD camera system (Advance Microscopy Techniques Corp., Danvers, MA). Immunofluorescence and electron micrograph images were prepared using Adobe Photoshop to adjust the brightness and contrast.

Controls

Prior to dual and triple immunohistochemical experiments, antibodies were optimized using immunoperoxidase staining and light microscopy under a variety of experimental conditions including perfusion reagents (paraformaldehyde or acrolein), a series of antibody dilutions, and incubation period (overnight at room temperature or 48 hours at 4°C). In addition to negative control groups that do not contain primary antibody, positive control groups containing primary but no secondary are used to reveal any endogenous reactivity to primary antibodies. For characterization studies including experiments run with liver tissue sections, known to be devoid of APP, and APP KO mice, as additional controls for antibody specificity, see (Ross, Reyes et al. 2017). Common pitfalls of IHC have been well described (Fritschy 2008), and have been addressed in these optimization studies. Following fixation and primary antibody incubation under the optimal conditions determined for each antibody, the tissues subject to immunoperoxidase labeling techniques previously described (Van Bockstaele, Colago et al. 1996).

Quantitative Analysis of Co-localization in Confocal Microscopy

Quantification of the frequency of colocalization for confocal microscopy was conducted using CellProfiler software. A pixel-based method of quantification was applied to 3-5 randomly selected micrographs per group for each dual labeling experiment. The pixel based method takes into account all the pixels in an image to determine regions of colocalization between two channels, a process that is completed in the CellProfiler program. The Cellprofiler pipeline provides the ability to analyze each image by uploading raw data, converting the images to gray scale, and correcting for illumination before measuring co-localization. Signal intensity values were minimally 1 and maximally 255 for each image, with the threshold for co-localization set to 15% of the maximum signal intensity. The Pearson Correlation Coefficient (rP) was extracted from the CellProfiler program into excel, where all data values across groups were collected and organized before running statistical analyses in GraphPad Prism. Two way-ANOVA was used to determine if there were significant differences between groups, with alpha set to 0.05. GraphPad calculations and statistical significance were reported in the results section for confocal microscopy experiments.

Ultrastructural Analysis

Quantification and analysis of Aβ peptide localization at the electron microscopy level was conducted as previously reported (Commons, Beck et al. 2001, Oropeza, Mackie et al. 2007). The region selected for analysis included the infralimbic region of the frontal cortex and the LC. Adequate preservation of ultrastructural morphology was one of the criteria imposed when selecting tissue sections to be used for ultrastructural analysis. Nine sections from three animals were used for the analysis. Grids containing 5–10 thin sections each were collected from plastic-embedded sections of the frontal cortex from each animal. Quantitative evaluation of immunoreactive elements was applied only to the outer 1– 3 μm of the epon-tissue interface where penetration of antisera is optimal. To prevent the inclusion of spurious labeling in quantification, only profiles with a minimum of two gold particles were considered immunoreactive and used for quantification. For dual labeling, only micrographs containing both peroxidase and gold-silver markers were used for the tissue analysis to ensure that the absence of one marker did not result from uneven penetration of markers (Leranth 1989). Examination of serial sections was used to determine synaptic associations of axon terminals not always apparent in single sections.

Cellular elements were isolated and classified based on Fine Structure of the Nervous System (Peters 1991). Somata were identified by the presence of a nucleus, Golgi apparatus, and smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Proximal dendrites contained endoplasmic reticulum, were apposed to axon terminals, and were larger than 0.7 μm in diameter. Lysosomes were identified as membrane-bound structures between 0.3-0.5 μm in diameter and may have various contents ranging from electron dense material to vacuole compartments. Lipofuscin granules, or heterogeneous lipofuscin-like lysosomes, were considered distinctive and unusual, as lipofuscin is generally considered a wear and tear pigment that is a product of aging. Lipofuscin granules are derived from lysosomes and are bounded by a single membrane and have one or two peripherally located vacuoles with the rest of the granule being filled with a heterogeneous mixture of dense particles and bands (Peters 1991).

Synapses were verified by the presence of a junctional complex, a restricted zone of parallel membranes with slight enlargement of the intercellular space, and/or associated postsynaptic thickening. A synaptic specialization was only designated to the profiles that form clear morphological characteristics of either Type I or Type II (Gray 1959). Asymmetric synapses were identified by thick post synaptic densities (Gray’s Type I; Gray 1959), while symmetric synapses had thin densities both pre- and post synaptically (Gray’s Type II; Gray 1959). An undefined synapse was characterized as an axon terminal plasma membrane juxtaposed to a dendrite or soma devoid of recognizable membrane specializations and no intervening glial processes. Axon terminals were distinguished from unmyelinated axons based on synaptic vesicle presence and a diameter of greater than 0.1 μm.

Data from three animals per group were used in the characterization of the anatomical substrate for Aβ-NE interactions. For each animal, comparable levels of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and LC were selected for ultra-thin sectioning. For each animal, dendritic and axon terminal profiles were sampled from at least five copper grids of ultrathin tissue sections near the tissue-plastic interface. Approximately 500 profiles from each animal were scanned, and approximately 300 of these fit all below criteria and were included in the data analysis. Dendrites with a maximal cross-sectional diameter between 0.7μm and 5μm met the criteria for analysis, and a mix of dendrites of sizes from across this range were included in the analysis. Large profiles were excluded to avoid the bias towards positive-labeling of larger structures. Extremely small, large, longitudinal and irregularly shaped profiles were excluded from the data analysis due to possibly higher perimeter/surface ratios and risk of biasing the silver grain counts towards the membrane. Any profiles containing large, irregularly shaped silver grains of more than 0.25μm were excluded from the analysis. Cellular profiles that failed to meet any of the described criteria were excluded from data analysis. Once profiles were determined to be adequate for data analysis, the data was uploaded to GraphPad Prism and two way-ANOVA was used to determine if there were significant differences between groups, with alpha set to 0.05.

Protein Extraction

CRFOE (n=10; 5 male and 5 female) and control mice (n=10; 5 male and 5 female) used for western blotting and ELISA analyses were briefly exposed to isoflurane and then euthanized by decapitation via guillotine. Brain tissue was rapidly removed on ice from each animal and using a trephine and razor blades and the medial prefrontal cortex and LC brain regions were micro-dissected from each. The brain regions of each animal were homogenized with a pestle and extracted in RadioImmunoPrecipitation Assay (RIPA) lysis buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) on ice for 20 min. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 12 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations of the supernatants were quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL).

Western Blotting

Cell lysates derived from mPFC- or LC-micropunched brain tissue from five male and five female control mice and five male and five female CRFOE mice, containing equal amounts of protein (20 lg) were diluted with Novex 29 Tris-Glycine Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate sample buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) containing dithiothreitol (Sigma) and separated on 4–20% Tris–Gly- cine polyacrylamide gels and then electrophoretically transferred to immobilon-P PVDF membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Membranes were incubated in antibodies directed against the C-terminus of APPβ derived (1:200; ThermoFisher Scientific, Fredrick, MD), and N-terminus of APP overnight and then secondary antibodies conjugated to IR dye680 goat anti-mouse IgG (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE; 1:20,000) or IR dye800 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (LI-COR; 1:15,000) for 60 min to probe for the presence of proteins. Following incubation in secondary antibody, membranes were washed and exposed for various lengths of time up to 2 min in the Odyssey (LI-COR) to optimize exposures. APPβ and a protein expression were readily detected by immunoblotting in frontal cortex and LC extracts. APPa and APPβ immunoreactivity (-ir) was visualized as a band that migrates between approximately 125 and 90 kDa. Blots were incubated in stripping buffer (Restore Stripping Buffer, Pierce) to disrupt previous antibody-antigen interactions and then re-probed with GAPDH (1:2000; ProteinTech Rosemont, IL) to ensure proper protein loading. To ensure the accuracy of the LC microdissection, membranes were probed with antibodies directed against tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (1:500; Immunostar, Hudson, WI). Prior to quantification, blots were pseudocolored to black and white in separate files for analysis. The density of each band was quantified using the Image J software. Raw values for each band were normalized to GAPDH loading control bands. Subsequently, normalized values from blots run in triplicate were averaged for the final quantification. Values were imported to GraphPad Prism and analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons.

Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)

Sandwich ELISA was conducted in accordance with the instructions provided in the High-Sensitivity Aβ42, kit (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) and NE kit (Eagle, Nashua, NH). Cell lysates from five male and five female CRFOE and five male and five female vehicle treated controls containing equal amounts of protein (20 lg) were used for Aβ42, or NE ELISA kits. Each sample was run in technical triplicate. A standard curve was run for each replicate and was used to estimate the concentration of Aβ42 or NE in each sample. Optical density values from the microplate reader were converted converted to approximate pg/mg concentrations of each protein based the standard curve for each. The concentration values for each animal were averaged, and then pooled with data from other animals in the same group. The data were then imported to GraphPad Prism and analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons.

RESULTS

Aβ42 immunoreactive puncta co-localize with TH in LC of CRFOE Mice

Our previous immunofluorescence studies in naïve male and female rats indicated co-localization of TH, the first and rate limiting enzyme of catecholamine biosynthesis, with MOAB2 in the LC (Ross, Reyes et al. 2017). We hypothesized that under conditions of CRFOE, mice would exhibit a greater frequency of co-localization based on the premise that LC neurons would respond to increased CRF input with increased neuronal activity, and consequent increases in production or recruitment of Aβ42 peptides to LC synapses. Dual immunocytochemical labeling of Aβ peptides and markers of noradrenergic neurons were used to determine the frequency and distribution of Aβ peptides within the coeruleo-cortical pathway under conditions of CRFOE and controls. Tissue sections taken from the LC were immunolabeled for TH and MOAB2. Dual IHC was carried out in CRFOE and control male and female mice using immunofluorescence detection and visualized using confocal microscopy (Figure 1). In vehicle treated controls and DOX-treated CRFOE, tissue sections taken from the LC exhibited intense, and highly abundant labeling for TH. Vehicle treated control male (Figure 1 A–C) and female mice (Figure 1 D–F) exhibited moderate intensity staining for MOAB, with many occurrences of dual labeled somatodendritic processes of LC neurons indicated by yellow puncta in higher magnification panels of the merged image for each group (prime and double prime to the right of panel C for vehicle males, and prime through triple prime to the right of panel F for vehicle females). MOAB2 was also present in regions between the TH- (ir) somata of LC neurons, possibly in glial processes surrounding LC neurons (Figure 1, indicated by arrow heads). In DOXtreated CRFOE mice, there appeared to be a qualitative difference in MOAB2 immunolabeling in the LC of male (Figure 1 a–c) and female mice (Figure 1 d–f). Male CRFOE mice treated with DOX (Figure 1 a–c) exhibited similar intensity immunolabeling compared to vehicle treated male controls (Figure 1 A–C), whereas female CRFOE mice treated with DOX (Figure 1d–f) exhibited immunolabeling of MOAB of greater intensity compared to female vehicle treated controls (Figure 1 D–F). While there appeared to be qualitative differences in the overall intensity of MOAB-ir between the sexes, there was also an apparent increase in regions of co-localization in both sexes that was greater in DOX-treated mice (Figure 1a–f) compared to vehicle treated mice (Figure 1 A–F), which may be observed in each of the higher magnification panels for each group (colocalization indicated by arrows). These qualitative assessments are supported by unbiased quantitative colocalization image analysis of TH- and MOAB-ir in the LC by measuring and averaging Pearson’s correlation coefficient (rP) in 3-5 randomly selected images per group. Male vehicle treated mice had an average rP of 0.29 ± 0.19 (SEM), while male DOX treated mice had an average rP of 0.74 ± 0.08 (SEM). Female vehicle treated mice had an average rP of 0.32 ± 0.07 (SEM), while female DOX treated mice had an average of 0.57 ± 0.02 (SEM). Two-way ANOVA (alpha set to 0.05) indicated that while sex [F(1,8)=0.37; p=0.55] and interaction [F (1,8)=0.68; p=0.43] did not contribute to significant differences between groups, there was a significant effect of treatment [F(1,8)=9.7; p=0.014] between groups.

GFAP immunoreactive processes surround TH immunoreactive LC neurons that are also Aβ immunoreactive

To investigate the possibility that MOAB2 was also present in glial processes surrounding LC neurons, we used triple immunocytochemical labeling of vehicle treated and DOX-treated CRFOE mice for Aβ peptides, TH, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the primary filament of astrocytes that is also considered a marker of astrocytic activation. Confocal fluorescence micrographs (Figure 2) show TH (green) co-localized with Aβ42 (cyan) and GFAP (red) in the LC of vehicle or DOX treated CRFOE male and female mice. A qualitative difference in GFAP-ir was observed in male (Figure 2 a–d) and female DOX (Figure 2e–h) treated animals compared to vehicle controls (Figure 2A–H), indicating signs of astrogliosis, or astrocyte activation. GFAP expression appeared as filaments surrounding LC neurons, and can be observed in panels D,d,H and h, with corresponding higher magnification panels for each group. GFAP-ir appeared more intense between TH immunolabeled cell bodies, but also co-localized with TH, indicated by yellow in merged and higher magnification panels. Particularly in male (Figure 2d) and female DOX (Figure 2h) treated groups, GFAP immunoreactivity was observed engulfing TH immunoreactive soma that were also immunolabeled for Aβ42, indicated by blue puncta (arrows). An abundance of TH-ir co-localization with Aβ42-ir is apparent in all higher magnification panels for each group, surrounded by varying degrees of intensity of GFAP-ir. While there are few occurrences of triple labeling (indicated by fuscia-colored filaments/puncta) across the groups, this was not surprising to us given the cellular localization of TH in LC-cell bodies, GFAP in surrounding astrocytes, and Aβ42 in both TH+ cell bodies, the surrounding unlabeled areas, and GFAP-ir regions.

DOX Treated Mice show significant increases in co-localization in TH and Aβ monomers in LC

Using high resolution immunoelectron microscopy, semi-quantitative analysis (Figure 3) revealed that 41.31% (214/518) of TH-containing somatodendritic processes also exhibited Aβ-immunogold silver particles in DOX treated males (Figure 3B,C), compared to 27.62% (137/496) in male vehicle treated transgenic controls (Figure 3A) and 54.71% (267/488) TH-containing somatodendritic processes also exhibited Aβ-immunogold silver particles in DOX treated females compared to 36.67% (95/259) in female transgenic littermate vehicle treated controls. Two-way ANOVA analysis indicated that sex [F (1, 8) =5.4; p=0.04) and treatment [F (1, 8) =30; p=0.006] contributed significantly to differences between groups, while an interaction between the two variables did not [F(1,8)=0.87; p=0.38). Thus, the semi-quantitative results of immunoelectron microscopy experiments in male and female CRFOE mice indicate increased Aβ in TH labeled somatodendritic processes of the LC, and that these increases are statistically significant (alpha set to p&lt;0.05) in CRFOE male (Tukey’s adj p=0.04) and female (Tukey’s adj p=0.008) mice compared to vehicle treated controls (Figure 3H). Interestingly, compared to vehicle treated controls (Figure 3D), in CRFOE mice early signs of neuronal injury, including the presence of lipofuscin and abnormal morphology of lysosomal compartments that were Aβ42-ir were observed (Figure 3E), indicating potential dysfunction of these Aβ-clearing compartments. In female CRFOE groups we also observed swollen microvessels with lipid-laden vacuoles (Figure 3G), a sign of blood-brain-barrier dysfunction that was absent in female vehicle treated controls (Figure 3F).

CRFOE results in complex alterations in noradrenergic and APP-associated protein expression in the LC

Western blot analysis (Figure 4) revealed no significant differences in the expression of APP-α (p=0.84) (Figure 4B), β Secretase-1 (BACE-1) (p=0.83) (Figure 4D)or TH (p=0.677) (Figure 4H) expression in the LC. However, there was a significant difference in APP-β (p=0.0364) (Figure 4C), indicating a significant difference between male and female DOX-treated CRFOE groups. Mean expression of APP-β in the LC of vehicle treated control mice was 0.3 ±0.07 in males and 0.27±0.06 in females. Mean expression of APP-β in CRFOE mice was 0.16 ±0.03 in males and 0.45 ± 0.08 in females (Tukey’s post hoc adj p=0.02). Interestingly, a trend towards increased GFAP expression in the LC of DOX treated groups compared to controls was observed (p=0.1287; Figure 4E). There were no significant differences in CRFR1 expression in the LC detected across all groups (p=0.45) (Figure 4G). The average expression of NE, as measured by ELISA (Figure 5A), in the LC of vehicle treated males was 0.42 pg/mg ±0.2 and in females was 0.62 pg/mg ± 0.12, while CRFOE males was 0.43 pg/mg ± 0.05 and CRFOE females was 0.45 pg/mg ± 0.1. Statistical analysis revealed no significant differences between gender or treatment groups in the LC (p=0.65; Figure 5A). Measured by ELISA, the average expression of Aβ42 (Figure 5B) in vehicle treated males was 6.4 pg/mg ± 2.5 and in females was 9.0 pg/mg ± 1.7, while CRFOE males was 8.14 pg/mg ±1.1 and CRFOE females was 9.6 pg/mg ± 2.5. Aβ ELISA analysis revealed no significant differences between gender or treatment groups in the LC (p=0.86; Figure 5B).

While we were surprised that CRFOE and sex did not have statistically significant effects across groups in many of the indices we probed, we sought to determine if there were meaningful correlations that exist in the sample as a whole (Figure 5, panels C–H). Thus, we took measurements taken from each of the animals in the entire sample and plotted them against each other on an X-Y scatterplot. We then conducted a Pearson correlation analysis to determine if there was a relationship between the variables, and subsequently a linear regression analysis to determine how predictive each of the variables were of each other. We examined if there was a relationship between CRFR1 and BACE1 levels and found there was a positive correlation (rP=0.677), that was statistically significant (p=0.0001), as shown in figure 5C. To determine if CRFR1 expression levels were predictive of BACE1, we ran a linear regression analysis and found that a line with a slope of 0.54 and r2 value of 0.45 was statistically significant (p=0.0001). We then went on to determine the relationship between CRFR1 expression and Aβ42 levels in the LC and found no significant correlation (rP=0.189; p=0.467), as shown in figure 5D. While this finding was surprising, we had previously demonstrated in naïve rats that NE levels were positively correlated with endogenous Aβ42 levels, and hypothesized that NE could modulate Aβ levels at the level of the γ-secretase. To further test this hypothesis, we used a Pearson correlation analysis to determine that there was a positive correlation (rP= 0.69), that was statistically significant (p=0.002). To determine if NE levels could predict Aβ42 levels in this population, we conducted linear regression analysis and determined that a line with a slope of 3.84 and r2 value of 0.47 fit the data, and was statistically significant (p=0.002), as shown in figure 5E. Finally, we sought to determine if levels of endogenous Aβ42 in the LC could be correlated with GFAP expression, but found that there was no direct relationship (rP=0.22, p=0.51), as shown in figure 5F.

We then went on to determine if there was a relationship between CRFR1 levels and phosphorylation of tau at the serine 396 site (Tau p396). The Pearson correlation analysis revealed a positive correlation (rP=0.78), that was statistically significant (p&lt;0.0001), as shown in figure 5G. To determine if CRFR1 expression levels were predictive of Tau p396, we ran a linear regression analysis and found that a line with a slope of 0.93 and r2 value of 0.61 was statistically significant (p&lt;0.0001). Because GFAP is indicative of an activated state of astroglia and potentially an inflammatory state, and because tau phosphorylation at the serine 396 site is associated with pre-Alzheimer pathology, we sought to determine if tau p396 in our sample correlated with GFAP expression. The Pearson correlation analysis revealed a positive correlation (rP=0.91), that was statistically significant (p&lt;0.0001). To further determine if tau p396 could predict GFAP expression, a regression analysis was run and determined that a line with a slope of 0.72 and r2 value of 0.82 fit the data and was statistically significant (p&lt;0.0001), as shown in figure 5H.

Aβ42 immunoreactive puncta are co-localized with DβH in the ILmPFC of CRF OE Mice

Next, we sought to determine if CRFOE effects observed in the LC also have effects on the NE axon terminals in major afferents involved in the integration of the stress response, such as the ILmPFC. Dual immunofluorescence experiments were designed to test the hypothesis that Aβ42 peptides co-localize with the NE synthesizing enzyme, DβH, found in synaptic vesicles of NE terminals. Further, we hypothesized that co-localization may be exaggerated in female CRFOE mice, due to sex differences in the signaling of the CRFR1 receptor in the LC, rendering females more vulnerable to stress-related disorders. Tissue sections taken from the ILmPFC were immunolabeled for DβH and MOAB2 in the ILmPFC (Figure 6). Localization of DβH revealed abundant, punctate expression in the ILmPFC across all groups (Figure 6A, a, E, e). While overall expression of MOAB did not appear significantly altered between vehicle controls and CRFOE (Figure 6B, b, F, f), in female CRFOE, there appeared to be a greater frequency of co-localization, indicated by yellow puncta (Figure 6g, h). Thus, immunofluorescence data shows a trend in which Aβ is preferentially localized to DβH containing terminals (Figure 6) in female DOX treated CRFOE mice, though we sought to confirm this qualitative observation quantitatively first using correlation analysis of co-localization and subsequently, high resolution electron microscopy. As conducted for LC sections, 3-5 randomly selected ILmPFC confocal micrographs per group were selected for correlation analysis, averaged and statistically analyzed using two-way ANOVA. The average rP in male CRFOE mice was 0.37 ± 0.1, compared to vehicle treated males that had an average rP of 0.26 ± 0.003. Female CRF OE mice had an average rP of 0.70 ± 0.06, while vehicle treated females exhibited an average rP of 0.369 ± 0.01. Our qualitative observations were supported by the quantitative findings that both sex [F (1, 9)= 11; p=0.008] and treatment [F (1,9)=12; p=0.007) significantly contributed to differences between groups, while an interaction [F (1, 9)=0.12; p=0.12] between those variables did not. Tukey’s post hoc analysis indicated significant differences between male and female DOX-treated CRFOE groups (Tukey’s adj. p=0.02), and significant differences between female DOX-treated CRFOE groups and female vehicle treated controls (Tukey’s adj. p=0.019).

DOX treated females show significantly greater co-localization with DβH in noradrenergic axon terminals

Using high resolution immunoelectron microscopy semi-quantitative analysis revealed that 9.31% (58/628) in female transgenic littermate vehicle treated controls (Figure 7A) compared to CRFOE females that exhibited 21.7% (130/599) DβH-containing axon terminals also exhibited Aβ-immunogold silver particles in CRFOE females (Figure 7B). In male vehicle treated controls (Figure 7C) 18.5% (99/533) of DβH-containing axon terminals also exhibited Aβ-immunogold silver particles, compared to 21.52% (93/436) in DOX treated CRFOE males (Figure 7D–E). Two-way ANOVA (Figure 7F; alpha set to 0.05) determined that there were significant differences across groups, to which sex [F (1, 8) =20; p=0.002] and treatment [F (1, 8)= 7.7; p=0.024] contributed significantly to the observed differences, but not interaction [F (1, 8)=3.9; p=0.08], (ANOVA p= 0.0036) (Figure 7F). Tukey’s post-hoc analysis revealed significant differences between female control and CRFOE groups, such that CRFOE females exhibited increased Aβ in DβH-containing axons of the PFC. There were also differences between vehicle treated male and female control groups (p=0.007), such that the female vehicle treated controls exhibited lower frequency of co-localization compared to male vehicle treated controls. Given the physiological importance of Aβ distribution in pre- and post-synaptic sites, we next quantified the percentage of MOAB2 particles present in pre- and post-synaptic compartments of the PFC (Figure 7G). In control males, 73.33% (99/135) of total MOAB2 particles examined were localized pre-synaptically, while 22.96% (31/135) were localized post-synaptically, of which 25.80% (8/31) were directly apposed to DβH-containing axon terminals. In control females, 34.82% (39/112) of total MOAB2 particles examined were localized pre-synaptically, while 65.18% (73/112) were localized post-synaptically, of which 36.99% (27/73) were directly apposed to DβH-containing axon terminals. In CRFOE males, 62.42% (93/149) of total MOAB2 particles examined were localized pre-synaptically, while 37.58% (56/149) were localized post-synaptically, of which 14.29% (8/56) were directly apposed to DβH-containing axon terminals. In CRFOE females, 43.15% (85/197) of total MOAB2 particles examined were localized pre-synaptically, while 55.84% (110/197) were localized post-synaptically, of which 25.45% (28/110) were directly apposed to DβH-containing axon terminals.

CRFOE does not significantly alter expression of noradrenergic or APP-associated proteins in the PFC

Preliminary western blot analysis (Figure 8A) revealed no significant differences in the expression of APP-α (ANOVA p=0.59) (Figure 8B), APP-β (ANOVA p=0.611) (Figure 8C), BACE-1 (ANOVA p=0.44) (Fig 8D), or DβH (ANOVA p=0.63) in the PFC (Figure 8F). A trend towards increased expression of norepinephrine transporter (NET) (ANOVA p=0.14) indicates that female CRFOE mice exhibit higher expression levels of NET compared to vehicle treated controls, as shown in figure 8E. These results are further supported by NE ELISA (Figure 9A) and Aβ ELISA (Figure 9B) analysis that reveal no significant differences between gender or treatment groups in NE levels (ANOVA, p=0.82) or Aβ levels (ANOVA p=0.55) in the PFC. Average expression of NE in the PFC of vehicle treated control males was 0.24 pg/mg ±0.11 and in females was 0.15 pg/mg ± 0.04, while CRFOE males was 0.059 pg/mg ± 0.02 and CRFOE females was 0.66 pg/mg ± 0.3. Average expression of Aβ42 in vehicle treated males was 2.3 pg/mg +0.07 and in females was 5.2 pg/mg ± 2.8, while CRFOE males was 2.1 pg/mg ± 0.44 and CRFOE females was 2.3 pg/mg ± 0.3. As would be expected, there was a significant positive correlation between APP-β expression and BACE-1 expression (p&lt;0.0001, rP=0.95) (Fig 9C). To further confirm that BACE-1 expression could predict APP-β levels, a linear regression analysis was completed and demonstrated a significant (p&lt;0.0001) line of prediction with an r2 value of 0.9 and slope of 0.84 (Figure 9C). Interestingly, in the PFC, Aβ levels were also significantly positively correlated to NE levels (Figure 9D), determined by ELISA (p=0.03, rP=0.49). To determine if NE was predictive of Aβ levels, we used a linear regression analysis that showed a significant non-zero slope (p=0.03) (Figure 9D).

DISCUSSION

We sought to examine the intersection between chronic stress and neuronal injury that may render certain neuronal populations, specifically the NE producing LC neurons, more susceptible to degeneration over time. The present study examined how excess forebrain CRF signaling effects Aβ42 peptide levels and distribution in the LC and PFC. We also examined a marker of glial activation, GFAP, and neurodegeneration marker p-tau396, as indices of neuronal injury in response to CRF hypersignaling. In the present model we determined that conditional overexpression of CRF in the forebrain of mice during adulthood was sufficient to elicit a redistribution of Aβ42 peptides in the somatodendritic processes in the LC of male and female transgenic mice treated with DOX. Additionally, in both male and female DOX treated groups, we identified lysosomal compartments with apparent lipofuscin and abnormal morphology, indicating potential dysfunction of these Aβ42-clearing compartments. This finding is significant, as early endolysosomal abnormalities have been observed in mice that overexpress APP (Choi, Kaur et al. 2013), and ultrastructural studies conducted on human AD brain confirm lysosomal dysfunction that is thought to arise from an inability of autophagic vacuoles to mature and fuse with lysosomes, therefore hindering the protective effects of macroautophagy in clearing Aβ and other cellular components (Nixon, Wegiel et al. 2005).

In female CRFOE mice we also observed swollen perivascular pericytes with lipid-laden vacuoles, a sign of blood-brain-barrier (BBB) dysfunction that has also been observed at the ultrastructural level in AD transgenic mouse lines and in humans with AD (Aliev, Seyidova et al. 2002). These observations are particularly interesting, given that NE released from LC neurons has been demonstrated to control BBB permeability through β2-AR that are localized to the abluminal side of capillaries (Kalaria, Stockmeier et al. 1989). Interestingly, a study of rats exposed to a behavioral paradigm of chronic stress revealed that stress impaired neurovascular coupling in the amygdala, and that during and after stress neurons have higher energy demands than those in non-stressed conditions, but the delivery of substrates critical for energy production is decreased, creating a “metabolic imbalance”. Investigators hypothesize that if the stress is persistent, it could have detrimental effects on neuronal function over time (Longden et al 2014). Based on the present findings, we hypothesize that persistent CRF signaling likely increases the metabolic demands of LC neurons and that abnormalities in neurovascular coupling should be further investigated, however further investigation of this observation is required.

While overall protein expression levels were not altered between groups, in the LC we observed a positive correlation between CRFR1 expression and tau-p at the serine 396 site. CRFR1 expression levels also showed a positive correlation with the expression of the APP cleaving enzyme, BACE1. This result supports previous studies indicating that CRFR1 is upstream of the signaling cascade responsible for controlling tau-p and APP processing (Rissman, Lee et al. 2007, Rissman 2009, Rissman, Staup et al. 2012, Campbell, Zhang et al. 2015, Campbell, Zhang et al. 2015, Zhang, Kuo et al. 2015, Le, Weissmiller et al. 2016, Zhang, Kuo et al. 2016). We found a significant positive correlation between Aβ42 expression and NE expression, which is supported by previous studies demonstrating that NE can modulate APP processing at the level of the γ-secretase by binding to β-arrestin 2 resulting in increased enzymatic activity of its catalytic domain (Thathiah, Horre et al. 2013). Thus, while CRFR1 may be able to dictate the availability of BACE1 to cleave APP to form APP-β, ultimately, NE may be required to facilitate γ-secretase cleavage of APP-β to the final product, Aβ42.

Sex differences were observed in the PFC, as females responded to DOX treatment with increased frequency of co-localization of Aβ42 and DβH in noradrenergic axon terminals compared to vehicle treated controls, while male groups showed no significant changes. This is especially relevant considering sex-biased signaling exhibited by CRFR1 in the LC neurons in response to stress. There are several sex differences in CRF signaling within the LC that may impact the responsivity of women to stressful stimuli, promoting hyper-arousal. For example, it has been demonstrated pre-clinically that female rats respond to lower doses of CRF than male counterparts, reflected in a left-ward shift of the dose response curve of female mice compared to males. Following periods of persistent activation, male rodent CRFR1 becomes internalized following biased binding and signaling to β-arrestin 2, thereby reducing output responses, as an adaptive mechanism to stress. However, female rodents do not respond with this adaptive mechanism, but rather CRFR1 remains on the surface of the cell, allowing for continued stimulation and heightened responses to stress (Bangasser, Curtis et al. 2010). Thus, female mice treated with DOX may have had an exaggerated output response to CRF input in the LC compared to DOX treated male groups, and this is reflected in both the increased NET expression in the PFC of female mice as well as the redistribution of the Aβ42 peptide in the PFC of female DOX treated animals (Figure 10). Future immunoelectron microscopy experiments could be undertaken to determine the subcellular localization of CRFR1, with a focus on its internalization or presence on the plasma membrane, under conditions of CRFOE.

NE as a Regulator of Aβ42 Peptides

Previous preclinical studies examining the influence of NE on Aβ42 production have indicated that NE may facilitate the production of Aβ42, and its clearance. Aβ42 is derived from APP, which undergoes sequential proteolytic cleavage by BACE1 to form APP-β and C-terminal fragment, C99 (Vassar, Bennett et al. 1999); the C99 fragment is then cleaved by the γ-secretase to release the Aβ42 peptide (Haass, Kaether et al. 2012). NE modulates APP processing at the level of the γ-secretase by binding to and activating the β2- adrenergic receptor (AR) (Thathiah and De Strooper 2011). β2AR has been shown to associate with β-arrestin 2, which physically interacts with the alA subunit of the γ-secretase complex, resulting in increased catalytic activity, yielding increased Aβ42 (Thathiah, Horre et al. 2013). Additionally, it has been demonstrated that chronic treatment with β2 antagonists results in diminished levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42 in a transgenic animal model of AD (Ni, Zhao et al. 2006). The alpha 2a-adrenergic receptor (α2aAR) has also been implicated in promoting Aβ42 synthesis through an interaction with SorLA, a sorting-related protein known to retrogradely transport APP from the endosome to the Golgi, preventing its processing from β- and γ-secretases (Chen, Peng et al. 2014).

One mechanism by which NE can influence Aβ42 clearance is by communicating with glial cells in the microenvironment via β2AR on microglial cells, that enable NE to control the transcription of inflammatory cytokines and other mediators of the homeostatic processes (Feinstein, Heneka et al. 2002, Feinstein, Kalinin et al. 2016). It has been demonstrated that NE or isoproterenol, via activation of the β2AR on microglial cells, up-regulates insulin degrading enzyme (IDE), an enzyme responsible for degrading Aβ42 peptides (Kong, Ruan et al. 2010).

These findings support a role for NE as a regulator of Aβ42, as there are cellular mechanisms by which NE can influence the production, degradation and clearance of Aβ42 peptides. Recent evidence has revealed that aberrant network activity is a driving force in the progression of amyloid pathology (Palop, Chin et al. 2007, Palop and Mucke 2010, Palop and Mucke 2010), and that the attenuation of chronic hyperactivity of vulnerable circuits results in reduced amyloid plaque formation, axonal dystrophy, and synaptic loss around plaques (Yuan and Grutzendler 2016). While this concept has been studied extensively in the context of major inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmitter systems (Palop, Chin et al. 2007, Palop and Mucke 2010), it has not been explored in the context of LC-NE circuitry. This line of rationale suggests that the stress-signaling axis, a source of LC-NE dysregulation, should be closely monitored in parallel with Aβ peptides to further investigate the link between psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders.

Methodological Considerations

The CRFOE mice utilized in this study have previously been qualitatively characterized for regional CRFOE using in situ hybridization. In general, CRFOE in adulthood resulted in robust CRF-ir in basal ganglia-related structures including the striatum, ventral pallidum, and substantia nigra. Compared to no DOX controls, CRFOE have higher CRF RNA levels in the cortex, CA3 and dentate regions of the hippocampus, and is mildly increased in the LC (Toth et al. 2014).

While we aimed to increase consistency amongst groups by using a model of conditional CRFOE over the frequently used behavioral models of stress. However, the period of stimulation, and the efficiency of stimulation may have been supra-physiological based on cortical NE responses. Previous studies using optogenetic stimulation of LC neurons to describe the multi-faceted nature of arousal determined that sustained high frequency (&gt;5 Hz) stimulation of the LC caused a decrease in cortical NE, suggesting that high-frequency, non-physiological levels of stimulation depleted NE from LC axon terminals, which was reversed when a NE reuptake inhibitor was employed. Further, because this model is limited to CRFOE alone and does not reproduce the multifaceted nature of a chronic stress, we may not have observed some of the stronger effects of chronic stress. These are important factors to consider while interpreting the data reported here, as behavioral models of chronic stress may better recapitulate the adaptations to chronic stress observed in the human.

Thus, the possibility exists that Aβ distribution would not be altered, or that neuronal injury of LC neurons would not be evident in behavioral paradigms of chronic stress. Under such conditions, LC neurons may undergo adaptations that protect functioning and viability. Thus, while severe conditions of LC stimulation via the CRF axis yielded potentially more extreme outcomes than would be expected under other chronic stress conditions, it may also shed light on an understudied area of research, the involvement of endogenous Aβ42 peptides in stress-related psychiatric disorders. In the next section, we describe the functional implications of Aβ42 peptide influence in stress neurocircuitry and broader consequences for psychiatric disorders.

While our vehicle treated transgenic mice served as internal controls for the applied genetic manipulations, we sought to identify possible independent effects of DOX treatment by conducting a broad literature search on the effect of DOX and related tetracyclines on the brain. Tetracyclines in general have been found to have neuroprotective effects, especially in the microvasculature (Sapadin and Fleischmajer 2006). For example, DOX has been reported to inhibit the expression of numerous matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and reduce infarction volume following ischemia, decrease vascular hyperpermeability and the expression of nitric oxide synthase, protect reduce caspase 3 and microglial activation (Burggraf et al 2007, Amin et al 1996, Jantzie et al 2005). While we did not find any direct evidence that the DOX alone may have mediated the abnormal structure of pericytes surrounding the microvasculature reported in this study, the possibility exists that DOX may have an effect on the structure and function of the microvasculature milieu.

Functional Implications

These observations are especially important considering the proposed physiological role of Aβ42 as a regulator of neuronal excitability. At low levels of neuronal activity, endogenous Aβ42 is produced at the synapse to facilitate presynaptic release by altering intracellular calcium levels. When Aβ42 is abundant, it acts post synaptically to induce mechanisms of post-synaptic depression and reduce neuronal excitability (Palop and Mucke 2010). The evidence presented here indicate that Aβ42 is active within the coeruleo-cortical pathway, and therefore may have consequences for the neurocircuitry downstream of NE cortical signaling. For example, aberrant increases in Aβ42 in the cortex may result in post-synaptic inhibition of GABAergic projections to the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) or glutamatergic intemeurons that project to GABAergic interneurons connecting the basolateral nucleus of the amygdala (BLA) to the CeA that control the emotional limb of the stress response, thereby resulting in net increased responsivity to stress.

Studies have been conducted that show enhanced dendritic spine density in the amygdala is enhanced by prolonged behavioral stress (Vyas, Jadhav et al. 2006), and that in an AD mouse model, intraneuronal Aβ accumulation enhanced fear and anxiety, potentially downstream of ERK1/2 (MAPK) signaling, which was also shown to be upregulated in these animals (Espana, Gimenez-Llort et al. 2010). Human MRI and PET studies of humans with depression and anxiety show decreased activity of prefrontal cortical areas, and hyperactivation of the amygdala (Drevets 2001). These studies are complimented by preclinical animal work, demonstrating that models of chronic stress reduce dendritic spine density in the prefrontal cortex while increasing dendritic spine density in the amygdala (Vyas, Mitra et al. 2002, Cook and Wellman 2004, Banasr, Valentine et al. 2007, Cerqueira, Mailliet et al. 2007, Bondi, Rodriguez et al. 2008, Shansky, Hamo et al. 2009).

The findings of this study and its projected functional implications suggest that continued research efforts on the role of endogenous Aβ in stress related psychiatric disorders is warranted. In doing so, we may elucidate novel mechanisms of neuronal alterations induced by chronic stress that render some individuals more vulnerable to psychiatric disease. Moreover, additional research is necessary to better understand the link between psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases and the putative role of chronic stress.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was funded by NIH grants DA09082 and AG058263 to E. J. V.

Figure 1. Co-localization of Amyloid and TH in LC of CRFOE Mice.

Confocal fluorescence micrographs showing TH (green) co-localized with Aβ42 (red) in the LC of vehicle or DOX treated CRFOE male and female mice. TH was visualized using tetramethyrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate (TRITC)-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit while MOAB2 was visualized using fluorescein-isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated donkey anti-mouse. Arrow heads point to individually labeled antigens while arrows indicate co-localization. Panels A-C show representative images of each fluorphore (A,B) and merged (C) for male vehicle treated mice, while areas of colocalization (yellow) are displayed on the prime and double prime panels to the right of panel C. Panels a-c show representative images of DOX-treated male mice, with two additional panels showing a higher magnification of regions of colocalization (yellow). Panels D-F show representative images of female vehicle treated mice, with three higher magnification panels of the merged image (F). The corresponding lower case panels (d-f) show representative images of DOX-treated female mice, with two higher magnification panels of the merged image (f). Scale bar 25 μm.

Figure 2. Co-localization of Amyloid, TH and GFAP in the LC of CRFOE mice.

Confocal fluorescence micrographs showing TH (green) co-localized with Aβ42 (cyan) and GFAP (red) in the LC of vehicle or DOX treated CRFOE male and female mice. Arrows and arrow heads point to individually labeled antigens while asterisks indicate co-localization. Yellow represents the colocalization of GFAP and TH, while dark blue shows colocalization of Aβ42 and TH, fiiscia indicates colocalization of TH, Aβ42 and GFAP. Panels A-D show the labeling of individual fluorophores (A-C) and a merged image taken from male vehicle treated mice, with additional higher magnification images of co-localization labeled prime through triple prime. Representative images of TH-immunoreactivity (ir), Aβ42-ir and GFAP-ir and merged from DOX treated male mice are shown in panels a-d. Higher magnification shown in the prime and double prime panels show areas of co-localization. Panels E-H show representative micrographs taken from vehicle treated mice, and are shown at higher magnification in the prime and double prime panels. Panels e-h show representative micrographs of TH-ir, GFAP-ir and Aβ42-ir taken from female DOX treated mice. Higher magnification images from the merged panel (prime and double prime) show regions of colocalization. Scale bar 25 μm.

Figure 3. DOX Treated Mice show significant increases in co-localization in TH and Aβ in LC.

A. Representative electron micrographs of LC sections taken from vehicle treated male mice showing TH-ir peroxidase labeling co-localized with Aβ-ir gold conjugated, silver enhanced puncta. B-C. Representative electron micrographs of LC sections taken from DOX treated male mice showing TH-ir peroxidase labeling co-localized with high intensity Aβ-ir. D. Electron micrograph taken from vehicle treated female of TH-ir soma (TH-s) that is Aβ-ir. Interestingly, Aβ is localized to lysosomal compartments that are morphologically intact and with typical shaped vacuole (v) and mitochondria (m). In contrast, the micrograph shown in panel E. is taken from a DOX treated female that shows a TH-ir soma visualized with lysosomal compartments that are both Aβ-ir and morphologically distinguished by the presence of lipofuscin. F. Electron micrograph showing a blood vessel in a vehicle treated female CRFOE mice that is Aβ-ir and shows normal morphology of endothelium (end), basal lamina (B) and pericyte (p). G. Electron micrograph showing a blood vessel in DOX treated female CRFOE mice that is Aβ-ir and shows normal morphology of endothelium (end), but with abnormal morphology of a pericyte (p) enclosed by the basal lamina (B), that is Aβ-ir and dense with lipid-laden vacuoules. Arrow heads point to Aβ labeled with gold-conjugated anti-mouse that has been intensified with silver, visualized as dense punctate deposits. Arrows point to synaptic specializations. H. Semi-quantitative analysis of frequency of co-localization of TH and Aβ in the LC of vehicle and DOX treated male and female mice. Significant increases in frequency of co-localization were observed in male and female DOX treated groups (p&lt;0.05). Scale bar 0.5 μm.

Figure 4. Complex Alterations in Protein Expression in the LC.

A. Similar intensity bands migrated between 125-90kDa for APPα detection and 68kDa for BACE-1 under vehicle and DOX treated CRFOE mice. Significant differences in signal intensity of APP-β were detected between male and female DOX treated groups. Similar intensity bands migrated to 62, 79, and 50kDa for TH, p-Tau 396 and CRFR1, respectively. Quantification of western blot APPα (B) and BACE1 (D) bands revealed no significant differences. Similarly, there were no significant differences between gender or treatment (vehicle or DOX) for TH (H), p-Tau396 (F) and CRFRI (G). There were significant differences in the intensity of the APP-β (C) bands between DOX treated males and DOX treated females.

Figure 5. CRFR1 positively correlates to BACE1 and Tau-p at 396 Site, while NE positively correlates to Aβ42 levels in the LC.

A. Quantification of ELISA directed against NE or B. Aβ42 showed no overall changes in protein expression levels detected by the respective ELISAs. In line with previous findings, there was a significant positive correlation between Aβ42 expression and NE expression (E). C. Correlation and linear regression analyses revealed a significant relationship between BACE-1 expression and APP-β. Surprisingly, no significant relationships were observed between CRFR1 and Aβ42 expression (D), or between Aβ42 expression and GFAP (F). However, GFAP was strongly positively correlated to both CRFR1 (G), as well as phosphorylation of tau at serine 396 site (H). **, ***, **** denote p&lt;0.01, p&lt;0.001, and p&lt;0.0001, respectively.

Figure 6. DOX treatment increases co-localization of Amyloid and DβH in CRF OE female mice.

Confocal fluorescence micrographs showing DβH (green) co-localized with Aβ42 (red) in the ILmPFC of vehicle or DOX treated CRFOE male and female mice. DβH was visualized using tetramethyrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate (TRITC)-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit while MOAB2 was visualized using fluorescein-isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated donkey anti-mouse. Arrows and arrow heads point to individually labeled antigens while asterisks indicate co-localization. Panels A-D show individually labeled fluorophores (A,B), merged (C) and higher magnification (D) micrographs taken from male vehicle treated mice. Panels a-d show DβH-ir and Aβ42 (a,b), merged (c), and high magnification micrographs of male DOX treated mice. Panels E-H are representative micrographs taken from vehicle treated female mice, while panels e-h were taken from DOX treated female mice. Panels D and d show higher magnification of regions of colocalization for vehicle and DOX treated female mice, respectively. Scale bar 25 μm.

Figure 7. DOX treated female mice show significant increases in co-localization in DβH and Aβ in PFC.

A. Representative electron micrograph of ILmPFC sections taken from vehicle treated female mice showing DβH-ir peroxidase labeling co-localized with Aβ-ir gold conjugated, silver enhanced puncta. B. Representative electron micrograph of ILmPFC sections taken from DOX treated female mice showing DβH-ir peroxidase labeling co-localized with high intensity Aβ-ir. C. Representative electron micrograph of ILmPFC sections taken from vehicle treated male mice showing DβH-ir peroxidase labeling co-localized with Aβ-ir. D-E. Representative electron micrographs of ILmPFC sections taken from DOX treated male mice showing DβH-ir peroxidase labeling co-localized with high intensity Aβ-ir. F. Semi-quantitative analysis of frequency of co-localization of DβH and Aβ in the ILmPFC of vehicle and DOX treated male and female mice. Significant increases in frequency of co-localization were observed in female DOX treated groups (p&lt;0.05). G. Semi-quantitative analysis of distribution of the Aβ peptide in pre- and post- synaptic compartments of the ILmPFC. Arrow heads point to Aβ labeled with gold-conjugated anti-mouse that has been intensified with silver, visualized as dense punctate deposits. Scale bar 0.5 μm.

Figure 8. DOX treatment in CRFOE mice does not significantly alter expression of noradrenergic or APP-associated Proteins in the PFC.

A. Similar intensity bands migrated between 125-90kDa for APPα, APPβ cleavage products and 68kDa for BACE-1 under vehicle and DOX treated CRFOE mice. B. Quantification of western blot APP-α, C. APP-β, D. BACE1, E. NET and F. DβH bands revealed no significant differences between groups.

Figure 9. NE positively correlates with Aβ42 in the PFC of Mice.

Panels A and B show the quantification of ELISA directed against NE (A) or Aβ42 (B). There were no overall changes in protein expression levels detected by the ELISA directed against NE, or Aβ42 As expected, we confirmed a strong positive correlation between BACE-1 expression and APP-β fragments, shown in panel C. While NE and Aβ42 levels did not change between groups, there was a significant positive correlation between NE and Aβ42 expression levels in the PFC, shown in panel D. **** denotes p&lt;0.001

Figure 10. Sex differences in mPFC of DOX treated CRFOE may be explained by Sex biased signaling of the CRFR1.

A. CRFOE results in increased frequency of co-localization of Aβ peptides and TH in male and female mice treated with DOX, likely through mechanisms related to the activation of CRFR1 B. CRFR1 exhibits sex-biased signaling, likely rendering female mice treated with DOX more vulnerable to stress-related dysfunction. Male rodent CRFR1 preferentially binds β-arrestin, resulting in the internalization of receptors from the cell surface, effectively terminating responsivity to stress during periods of prolonged exposure. Female rodent CRFR1 is more likely to bind the stimulatory G-protein subunit alpha (Gαs), resulting in downstream signaling cascades that promote the excitation of LC neurons. Thus, female rodent LC neurons expressing CRFR1 have enhanced responsivity to stress, potentiating responses during prolonged stress exposure, potentially rendering them more vulnerable to stress-related dysfunction (Bangasser, Curtis et al. 2010, Valentino, Bangasser et al. 2013, Reyes, Bangasser et al. 2014, Bangasser, Wiersielis et al. 2016). C. Previous studies from our lab localized Aβ peptides to DβH immunoreactive terminals of the ILmPFC, findings that were further confirmed in the present study utilizing CRFOE mice. DβH is the NE synthesizing enzyme that resides in the synaptic vesicles of NE axon terminals. D. We observed increased frequency of co-localization between DβH and Aβ peptides in the mPFC in female CRFOE mice treated with DOX, but not in male CRFOE treated with DOX. Based on the increased responsivity of female rodent CRFR1 in the LC, it is possible that neuronal activation of projections to the mPFC exhibit increased co-localization of these peptides due to alterations in activity on a circuit-level. This notion is supported by the concept that Aβ42 production is enhanced during increased neuronal activation (Cirrito, Yamada et al. 2005, Bero, Yan et al. 2011), therefore the excitation of DOX treated female CRFOE LC neurons projecting to the mPFC may exhibit more frequent co-localization with Aβ due to increased neuronal activity of noradrenergic neurons.

This Author Accepted Manuscript is a PDF file of an unedited peer-reviewed manuscript that has been accepted for publication but has not been copyedited or corrected. The official version of record that is published in the journal is kept up to date and so may therefore differ from this version.

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the authors.

All procedures performed in studies involving animals were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institution or practice at which the studies were conducted.


References

Abbott NJ , Patabendige AA , Dolman DE , Yusof SR and Begley DJ (2010). “Structure and function of the blood-brain barrier.” Neurobiol Dis 37 (1 ): 13–25.19664713
Aliev G , Seyidova D , Neal ML , Shi J , Lamb BT , Siedlak SL , Vinters HV , Head E , Perry G , Lamanna JC , Friedland RP and Cotman CW (2002). “Atherosclerotic lesions and mitochondria DNA deletions in brain microvessels as a central target for the development of human AD and AD-like pathology in aged transgenic mice.” Ann N Y Acad Sci 977 : 45–64.12480733
Amin AR , Attur MG , Thakker GD , Patel PD , Vyas PR , Patel RN , Patel IR and Abramson SB (1996). “A novel mechanism of action of tetracyclines: effects on nitric oxide synthases.” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 (24 ): 14014–14019.8943052
Banasr M , Valentine GW , Li XY , Gourley SL , Taylor JR and Duman RS (2007). “Chronic unpredictable stress decreases cell proliferation in the cerebral cortex of the adult rat.” Biol Psychiatry 62 (5 ): 496–504.17585885
Bangasser DA , Curtis A , Reyes BA , Bethea TT , Parastatidis I , Ischiropoulos H , Van Bockstaele EJ and Valentino RJ (2010). “Sex differences in corticotropin-releasing factor receptor signaling and trafficking: potential role in female vulnerability to stress-related psychopathology.” Mol Psychiatry 15 (9 ): 877, 896–904.20548297
Bangasser DA , Eck SR , Telenson AM and Salvatore M (2018). “Sex differences in stress regulation of arousal and cognition.” Physiol Behav 187 : 42–50.28974457
Bangasser DA , Wiersielis KR and Khantsis S (2016). “Sex differences in the locus coeruleus-norepinephrine system and its regulation by stress.” Brain Res 1641 (Pt B ): 177–188.26607253
Benarroch EE (2009). “The locus ceruleus norepinephrine system: functional organization and potential clinical significance.” Neurology 73 (20 ): 1699–1704.19917994
Bero AW , Yan P , Roh JH , Cirrito JR , Stewart FR , Raichle ME , Lee JM and Holtzman DM (2011). “Neuronal activity regulates the regional vulnerability to amyloid-beta deposition.” Nat Neurosci 14 (6 ): 750–756.21532579
Berridge CW and Waterhouse BD (2003). “The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic system: modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive processes.” Brain Res Brain Res Rev 42 (1 ): 33–84.12668290
Bradbury MW (1993). “The blood-brain barrier.” Exp Physiol 78 (4 ): 453–472.8398100
Bondareff W , Mountjoy CQ , Roth M , Rossor MN , Iversen LL and Reynolds GP (1987). “Age and histopathologic heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s disease. Evidence for subtypes.” Arch Gen Psychiatry 44 (5 ): 412–417.2883954
Bondareff W , Mountjoy CQ , Roth M , Rossor MN , Iversen LL , Reynolds GP and Hauser DL (1987). “Neuronal degeneration in locus ceruleus and cortical correlates of Alzheimer disease.” Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1 (4 ): 256–262.3453748
Bondi CO , Rodriguez G , Gould GG , Frazer A and Morilak DA (2008). “Chronic unpredictable stress induces a cognitive deficit and anxiety-like behavior in rats that is prevented by chronic antidepressant drug treatment.” Neuropsychopharmacology 33 (2 ): 320–331.17406647
Burggraf D , Trinkl A , Dichgans M and Hamann GF (2007). “Doxycycline inhibits MMPs via modulation of plasminogen activators in focal cerebral ischemia.” Neurobiol Dis 25 (3 ): 506–513.17166729
Campbell SN , Zhang C , Monte L , Roe AD , Rice KC , Tache Y , Masliah E and Rissman RA (2015). “Increased tau phosphorylation and aggregation in the hippocampus of mice overexpressing corticotropin-releasing factor.” J Alzheimers Dis 43 (3 ): 967–976.25125464
Campbell SN , Zhang C , Roe AD , Lee N , Lao KU , Monte L , Donohue MC and Rissman RA (2015). “Impact of CRFR1 Ablation on Amyloid-beta Production and Accumulation in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease.” J Alzheimers Dis 45 (4 ): 1175–1184.25697705
Cerqueira JJ , Mailliet F , Almeida OF , Jay TM and Sousa N (2007). “The prefrontal cortex as a key target of the maladaptive response to stress.” J Neurosci 27 (11 ): 2781–2787.17360899
Chan-Palay V and Asan E (1989). “Alterations in catecholamine neurons of the locus coeruleus in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type and in Parkinson’s disease with and without dementia and depression.” J Comp Neurol 287 (3 ): 373–392.2570794
Chen Y , Peng Y , Che P , Gannon M , Liu Y , Li L , Bu G , van Groen T , Jiao K and Wang Q (2014). “alpha(2A) adrenergic receptor promotes amyloidogenesis through disrupting APP-SorLA interaction.” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 (48 ): 17296–17301.25404298
Choi JH , Kaur G , Mazzella MJ , Morales-Corraliza J , Levy E and Mathews PM (2013). “Early endosomal abnormalities and cholinergic neuron degeneration in amyloid-beta protein precursor transgenic mice.” J Alzheimers Dis 34 (3 ): 691–700.23254640
Cirrito JR , Yamada KA , Finn MB , Sloviter RS , Bales KR , May PC , Schoepp DD , Paul SM , Mennerick S and Holtzman DM (2005). “Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid amyloid-beta levels in vivo.” Neuron 48 (6 ): 913–922.16364896
Commons KG , Beck SG , Rudoy C and Van Bockstaele EJ (2001). “Anatomical evidence for presynaptic modulation by the delta opioid receptor in the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray of the rat.” J Comp Neurol 430 (2 ): 200–208.11135256
Cook SC and Wellman CL (2004). “Chronic stress alters dendritic morphology in rat medial prefrontal cortex.” J Neurobiol 60 (2 ): 236–248.15266654
Di Marco LY , Venneri A , Farkas E , Evans PC , Marzo A and Frangi AF (2015). “Vascular dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease--A review of endothelium-mediated mechanisms and ensuing vicious circles.” Neurobiol Dis 82 : 593–606.26311408
Dong H , Murphy KM , Meng L , Montalvo-Ortiz J , Zeng Z , Kolber BJ , Zhang S , Muglia LJ and Csernansky JG (2012). “Corticotrophin releasing factor accelerates neuropathology and cognitive decline in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.” J Alzheimers Dis 28 (3 ): 579–592.22045495
Dore V , Villemagne VL , Bourgeat P , Fripp J , Acosta O , Chetelat G , Zhou L , Martins R , Ellis KA , Masters CL , Ames D , Salvado O and Rowe CC (2013). “Cross-sectional and longitudinal analysis of the relationship between Abeta deposition, cortical thickness, and memory in cognitively unimpaired individuals and in Alzheimer disease.” JAMA Neurol 70 (7 ): 903–911.23712469
Drevets WC (2001). “Neuroimaging and neuropathological studies of depression: implications for the cognitive-emotional features of mood disorders.” Curr Opin Neurobiol 11 (2 ): 240–249.11301246
Espana J , Gimenez-Llort L , Valero J , Minano A , Rabano A , Rodriguez-Alvarez J , LaFerla FM and Saura CA (2010). “Intraneuronal beta-amyloid accumulation in the amygdala enhances fear and anxiety in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mice.” Biol Psychiatry 67 (6 ): 513–521.19664757
Feinstein DL , Heneka MT , Gavrilyuk V , Dello Russo C , Weinberg G and Galea E (2002). “Noradrenergic regulation of inflammatory gene expression in brain.” Neurochem Int 41 (5 ): 357–365.12176079
Feinstein DL , Kalinin S and Braun D (2016). “Causes, consequences, and cures for neuroinflammation mediated via the locus coeruleus: noradrenergic signaling system.” J Neurochem 139 Suppl 2 : 154–178.26968403
Fritschy JM (2008). “Is my antibody-staining specific? How to deal with pitfalls of immunohistochemistry.” Eur J Neurosci 28 (12 ): 2365–2370.19087167
Gold PW (1988). “Stress-responsive neuromodulators.” Biol Psychiatry 24 (4 ): 371–374.3044453
Gray EG (1959). “Electron microscopy of synaptic contacts on dendrite spines of the cerebral cortex.” Nature 183 (4675 ): 1592–1593.13666826
Green KN , Billings LM , Roozendaal B , McGaugh JL and LaFerla FM (2006). “Glucocorticoids increase amyloid-beta and tau pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.” J Neurosci 26 (35 ): 9047–9056.16943563
Haass C , Kaether C , Thinakaran G and Sisodia S (2012). “Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP.” Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 (5 ): a006270.22553493
Hermans EJ , van Marle HJ , Ossewaarde L , Henckens MJ , Qin S , van Kesteren MT , Schoots VC , Cousijn H , Rijpkema M , Oostenveld R and Fernandez G (2011). “Stress-related noradrenergic activity prompts large-scale neural network reconfiguration.” Science 334 (6059 ): 1151–1153.22116887
Herrmann N , Lanctot KL and Khan LR (2004). “The role of norepinephrine in the behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia.” J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 16 (3 ): 261–276.15377733
Jantzie LL , Cheung PY and Todd KG (2005). “Doxycycline reduces cleaved caspase-3 and microglial activation in an animal model of neonatal hypoxia-ischemia.” J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25 (3 ): 314–324.15647741
Jeynes B and Provias J (2008). “Evidence for altered LRP/RAGE expression in Alzheimer lesion pathogenesis.” Curr Alzheimer Res 5 (5 ): 432–437.18855584
Kalaria RN , Stockmeier CA and Harik SI (1989). “Brain microvessels are innervated by locus ceruleus noradrenergic neurons.” Neurosci Lett 97 (1-2 ): 203–208.2537480
Kalaria RN (1997). “Arteriosclerosis, apolipoprotein E, and Alzheimer’s disease.” Lancet 349 (9059 ): 1174.
Kang JE , Cirrito JR , Dong H , Csernansky JG and Holtzman DM (2007). “Acute stress increases interstitial fluid amyloid-beta via corticotropin-releasing factor and neuronal activity.” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 (25 ): 10673–10678.17551018
Kong Y , Ruan L , Qian L , Liu X and Le Y (2010). “Norepinephrine promotes microglia to uptake and degrade amyloid beta peptide through upregulation of mouse formyl peptide receptor 2 and induction of insulin-degrading enzyme.” J Neurosci 30 (35 ): 11848–11857.20810904
Le MH , Weissmiller AM , Monte L , Lin PH , Hexom TC , Natera O , Wu C and Rissman RA (2016). “Functional Impact of Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Exposure on Tau Phosphorylation and Axon Transport.” PLoS One 11 (1 ): e0147250.26790099
Leonard BE (2002). “Stress, norepinephrine and depression.” Acta Neuropsychiatr 14 (4 ): 173–180.26984329
Leranth C , Pickel VM (1989). Electron Microscopic Preembedding Double-Immunostaining Methods Neuroanatomical Tract-Tacring Methods 2. Heimer L , Zaborsky L . Boston, MA, Springer.
Longden TA , Dabertrand F , Hill-Eubanks DC , Hammack SE and Nelson MT (2014). “Stress-induced glucocorticoid signaling remodels neurovascular coupling through impairment of cerebrovascular inwardly rectifying K+channel function.” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 (20 ): 7462–7467.24808139
Matthews KL , Chen CP , Esiri MM , Keene J , Minger SL and Francis PT (2002). “Noradrenergic changes, aggressive behavior, and cognition in patients with dementia.” Biol Psychiatry 51 (5 ): 407–416.11904135
Moret C and Briley M (2011). “The importance of norepinephrine in depression.” Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 7 (Suppl 1 ): 9–13.21750623
Ni Y , Zhao X , Bao G , Zou L , Teng L , Wang Z , Song M , Xiong J , Bai Y and Pei G (2006). “Activation of beta2-adrenergic receptor stimulates gamma-secretase activity and accelerates amyloid plaque formation.” Nat Med 12 (12 ): 1390–1396.17115048
Nixon RA , Wegiel J , Kumar A , Yu WH , Peterhoff C , Cataldo A and Cuervo AM (2005). “Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study.” J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64 (2 ): 113–122.15751225
Oropeza VC , Mackie K and Van Bockstaele EJ (2007). “Cannabinoid receptors are localized to noradrenergic axon terminals in the rat frontal cortex.” Brain Res 1127 (1 ): 36–44.17113043
Palop JJ , Chin J , Roberson ED , Wang J , Thwin MT , Bien-Ly N , Yoo J , Ho KO , Yu GQ , Kreitzer A , Finkbeiner S , Noebels JL and Mucke L (2007). “Aberrant excitatory neuronal activity and compensatory remodeling of inhibitory hippocampal circuits in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease.” Neuron 55 (5 ): 697–711.17785178
Palop JJ and Mucke L (2010). “Amyloid-beta-induced neuronal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: from synapses toward neural networks.” Nat Neurosci 13 (7 ): 812–818.20581818
Palop JJ and Mucke L (2010). “Synaptic depression and aberrant excitatory network activity in Alzheimer’s disease: two faces of the same coin?” Neuromolecular Med 12 (1 ): 48–55.19838821
Paxinos G , Watson C (1998). The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, Academic Press.
Peters A , Palay SL (1991). The fine structure of the nervous system: neurons and their supporting cells, Oxford University Press.
Reyes BA , Bangasser DA , Valentino RJ and Van Bockstaele EJ (2014). “Using high resolution imaging to determine trafficking of corticotropin-releasing factor receptors in noradrenergic neurons of the rat locus coeruleus.” Life Sci 112 (1-2 ): 2–9.25058917
Rissman RA (2009). “Stress-induced tau phosphorylation: functional neuroplasticity or neuronal vulnerability?” J Alzheimers Dis 18 (2 ): 453–457.19584431
Rissman RA , Lee KF , Vale W and Sawchenko PE (2007). “Corticotropin-releasing factor receptors differentially regulate stress-induced tau phosphorylation.” J Neurosci 27 (24 ): 6552–6562.17567816
Rissman RA , Staup MA , Lee AR , Justice NJ , Rice KC , Vale W and Sawchenko PE (2012). “Corticotropin-releasing factor receptor-dependent effects of repeated stress on tau phosphorylation, solubility, and aggregation.” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 (16 ): 6277–6282.22451915
Ross JA , Reyes BAS , Thomas SA and Van Bockstaele EJ (2017). “Localization of endogenous amyloid-beta to the coeruleo-cortical pathway: consequences of noradrenergic depletion.” Brain Struct Funct.
Sapadin AN and Fleischmajer R (2006). “Tetracyclines: nonantibiotic properties and their clinical implications.” J Am Acad. Dermatol 54 (2 ): 258–265.16443056
Shansky RM , Hamo C , Hof PR , McEwen BS and Morrison JH (2009). “Stress-induced dendritic remodeling in the prefrontal cortex is circuit specific.” Cereb Cortex 19 (10 ): 2479–2484.19193712
Szot P , White SS , Greenup JL , Leverenz JB , Peskind ER and Raskind MA (2006). “Compensatory changes in the noradrenergic nervous system in the locus ceruleus and hippocampus of postmortem subjects with Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.” J Neurosci 26 (2 ): 467–478.16407544
Thathiah A and De Strooper B (2011). “The role of G protein-coupled receptors in the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease.” Nat Rev Neurosci 12 (2 ): 73–87.21248787
Thathiah A , Horre K , Snellinx A , Vandewyer E , Huang Y , Ciesielska M , De Kloe G , Munck S and De Strooper B (2013). “beta-arrestin 2 regulates Abeta generation and gamma-secretase activity in Alzheimer’s disease.” Nat Med 19 (1 ): 43–49.23202293
Toth M , Gresack JE , Bangasser DA , Plona Z , Valentino RJ , Flandreau EI , Mansuy IM , Merlo-Pich E , Geyer MA and Risbrough VB (2014). “Forebrain-specific CRF overproduction during development is sufficient to induce enduring anxiety and startle abnormalities in adult mice.” Neuropsychopharmacology 39 (6 ): 1409–1419.24326400
Tully K and Bolshakov VY (2010). “Emotional enhancement of memory: how norepinephrine enables synaptic plasticity.” Mol Brain 3 : 15.20465834
Valentino RJ , Bangasser D and Van Bockstaele EJ (2013). “Sex-biased stress signaling: the corticotropin-releasing factor receptor as a model.” Mol Pharmacol 83 (4 ): 737–745.23239826
Valentino RJ and Van Bockstaele E (2008). “Convergent regulation of locus coeruleus activity as an adaptive response to stress.” Eur J Pharmacol 583 (2–3 ): 194–203.18255055
Van Bockstaele EJ , Biswas A and Pickel VM (1993). “Topography of serotonin neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus that send axon collaterals to the rat prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens.” Brain Res 624 (1-2 ): 188–198.8252391
Van Bockstaele EJ , Colago EE , Cheng P , Moriwaki A , Uhl GR and Pickel VM (1996). “Ultrastructural evidence for prominent distribution of the mu-opioid receptor at extrasynaptic sites on noradrenergic dendrites in the rat nucleus locus coeruleus.” J Neurosci 16 (16 ): 5037–5048.8756434
Vassar R , Bennett BD , Babu-Khan S , Kahn S , Mendiaz EA , Denis P , Teplow DB , Ross S , Amarante P , Loeloff R , Luo Y , Fisher S , Fuller J , Edenson S , Lile J , Jarosinski MA , Biere AL , Curran E , Burgess T , Louis JC , Collins F , Treanor J , Rogers G and Citron M (1999). “Beta-secretase cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane aspartic protease BACE.” Science 286 (5440 ): 735–741.10531052
Vyas A , Jadhav S and Chattarji S (2006). “Prolonged behavioral stress enhances synaptic connectivity in the basolateral amygdala.” Neuroscience 143 (2 ): 387–393.16962717
Vyas A , Mitra R , Shankaranarayana Rao BS and Chattarji S (2002). “Chronic stress induces contrasting patterns of dendritic remodeling in hippocampal and amygdaloid neurons.” J Neurosci 22 (15 ): 6810–6818.12151561
Youmans KL , Tai LM , Kanekiyo T , Stine WB Jr. , Michon SC , Nwabuisi-Heath E , Manelli AM , Fu Y , Riordan S , Eimer WA , Binder L , Bu G , Yu C , Hartley DM and LaDu MJ (2012). “Intraneuronal Abeta detection in 5xFAD mice by a new Abeta-specific antibody.” Mol Neurodegener 7 : 8.22423893
Yuan P and Grutzendler J (2016). “Attenuation of beta-Amyloid Deposition and Neurotoxicity by Chemogenetic Modulation of Neural Activity.” J Neurosci 36 (2 ): 632–641.26758850
Zarow C , Lyness SA , Mortimer JA and Chui HC (2003). “Neuronal loss is greater in the locus coeruleus than nucleus basalis and substantia nigra in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases.” Arch Neurol 60 (3 ): 337–341.12633144
Zhang C , Kuo CC , Moghadam SH , Monte L , Campbell SN , Rice KC , Sawchenko PE , Masliah E and Rissman RA (2016). “Corticotropin-releasing factor receptor-1 antagonism mitigates beta amyloid pathology and cognitive and synaptic deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.” Alzheimers Dement 12 (5 ): 527–537.26555315
Zhang C , Kuo CC , Moghadam SH , Monte L , Rice KC and Rissman RA (2015). “Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Receptor-1 Antagonism Reduces Oxidative Damage in an Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mouse Model.” J Alzheimers Dis 45 (2 ): 639–650.25649650
