LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9509333
40073
Continuum (Minneap Minn)
Continuum (Minneap Minn)
Continuum (Minneapolis, Minn.)
1080-2371
1538-6899

29851876
7988735
10.1212/CON.0000000000000618
NIHMS1681237
Article
PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA AND STROKE APHASIA
Grossman Murray
Irwin David J.
Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center and Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania
Please address correspondence to: Murray Grossman or David J. Irwin, 2 Gibson, Department of Neurology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA, 19104-4283, voice: 215-662-3361; mgrossma@pennmedicine.upenn.edu or dirwin@pennmedicine.upenn.edu; fax:215-349-8464
11 3 2021
6 2018
24 3 2021
24 3 BEHAVIORAL NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 745767
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Purpose of review:

We summarize the clinical and anatomic features of the three named variants of primary progressive aphasia (PPA), including semantic variant PPA (svPPA), non-fluent/agrammatic variant PPA (naPPA), and logopenic variant PPA (lvPPA). We also present three stroke aphasia syndromes that resemble the PPA variants, including Broca’s aphasia, Wernicke’s aphasia, and conduction aphasia, respectively. svPPA and Wernicke’s aphasia are characterized by fluent speech with naming and comprehension difficulty; these syndromes are associated with disease in different portions of the left temporal lobe.

Recent findings:

naPPA and Broca’s aphasia feature non-fluent speech with grammatical difficulty; these syndromes are associated with disease centered in the left inferior frontal lobe. lvPPA and conduction aphasia have difficulty with repetition and word-finding in conversational speech; these syndromes are associated with disease in the left inferior parietal lobe. While PPA and stroke aphasias resemble each other, we also present their distinguishing features.

Summary:

Progressive and stroke aphasia syndromes thus interrupt the left peri-Sylvian language network in relatively distinct ways that result in identifiable aphasic syndromes.

OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this review is to summarize the major features of progressive aphasic and stroke syndromes that are associated with disease interrupting the peri-Sylvian language network in the left hemisphere.


Introduction

Aphasia is a central disorder of language comprehension and expression that cannot be attributed to a peripheral sensory deficit such as reduced auditory acuity, and is not due to peripheral motor disorder such as weakness of the muscles of articulation that may mimic aphasia. Aphasia is associated with disease that affects the language network in the brain. Many different kinds of impairments can result in aphasia. Here we focus on primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and stroke. We do not consider systemic disorders or psychiatric disorders. We also do not consider conditions such as head trauma or surgical interventions (e.g. for neoplasms or hemorrhage following ruptured aneurysms), or transient changes in neurological functioning that can disturb language functioning (e.g. seizures or inflammation).

PPA refers to a group of focal neurodegenerative syndromes primarily affecting language. “Primary” refers to the absence of obvious structural abnormalities, including the absence of stroke, space-occupying lesion, or head trauma; “progressive” refers to the gradual worsening of the language deficit over several years. Arnold Pick described a woman in 1892 with a social disorder involving disinhibition and poor insight1. Her speech gradually worsened and she eventually became mute. Serieux described a patient in 1893 with isolated language decline consisting of worsening speech fluency but relatively preserved memory, social and visuospatial functioning2. Mesulam reported a series of patients whom he characterized as having slowly progressive aphasia3. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan of brain functioning in one of these cases revealed reduced glucose metabolism in the left hemisphere4.

PPA requires that the language impairment is the primary cognitive deficit, and that it should be progressive in nature5,6. Language difficulty should be the primary impairment for one to two years, with minimal memory, visuospatial, executive or social difficulty during the early course of the disease, thereby eliminating other neurodegenerative conditions such as typical amnestic Alzheimer disease (AD), where memory difficulty can be accompanied at times by disproportionate impairment of language. The average age of onset tends to be in the late 50’s, although a wide range of onset age is reported, and we are only beginning to learn about the factors contributing to this substantial variability7. Survival is about 7 years, although there are widely varying estimates of prognosis8,9. The underlying neuropathology of PPA is heterogeneous and largely corresponds to forms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration; however, at least 20% of all PPA patients may have a non-amnestic clinical presentation of AD due to plaque and tangle pathology at autopsy10. Specific clinical syndromes of PPA have some predictive value for underlying molecular pathology (see below), but these associations are not absolute, posing a significant impediment for the development of disease modifying therapies based only on clinical presentation11.

Stroke is another major cause of aphasia. The manifestations of aphasia due to stroke appear suddenly, not gradually as in PPA. Like PPA, there are several different forms of stroke aphasia, and these are determined in large part by damage to a portion of the language network where perfusion has been interrupted. The specific language deficits that are seen in stroke aphasia overlap only in part with those associated with PPA. This may be due partially to the fact that stroke aphasia and PPA often may affect different portions of the language network. Moreover, a stroke indiscriminately damages both gray matter (GM) regions of the brain that contain neurons as well as nearby white matter (WM) regions that contain projections that integrate several GM regions into a functional unit. Unlike PPA, where WM disease is typically the result of Wallerian degeneration associated with disease in GM portions of the language network, the WM tracts damaged in stroke may be en passant fibers that happen to be near the area of ischemia but are connecting brain regions unrelated to the language network. Because of the indiscriminant damage caused by a stroke, it can be difficult to parcel out the relative contribution of GM processing regions and WM projections in a stroke-induced language disorder. Defining the GM regions and WM regions contributing to a language disorder in a neurodegenerative condition causing a progressive aphasia is relatively easier because the physical damage is more selective compared to that seen following a stroke and involves a GM and WM network more specifically related to language.

This review focuses on the three subtypes of PPA, one with fluent speech, one with non-fluent speech, and one with a mixed form of aphasic speech. We compare this with three similar forms of stroke aphasia, one fluent, one non-fluent, and one with mixed fluency. These are summarized in Table 1. The first form of PPA is known as semantic variant PPA (svPPA), also called semantic dementia or PPA-S. This is a fluent form of aphasia associated with a disorder of naming and a deficit of word and object meaning. A somewhat similar form of stroke aphasia is known as Wernicke’s aphasia. This is also a fluent form of aphasia with impaired naming and word meaning. Despite superficial similarities, there are several notable differences in the language characteristics of svPPA and Wernicke’s aphasia. For example, Wernicke’s aphasia tends to affect word meaning much more than object meaning and is associated with a repetition deficit, while patients with svPPA often display a distinctive impairment in reading known as surface dyslexia. The second variant of progressive aphasia we address is known as non-fluent/agrammatic variant PPA (naPPA), also called progressive non-fluent aphasia or PPA-G. This non-fluent form of PPA is associated with slowed, effortful speech and an impairment of grammatical processing. Although there are several forms of non-fluent stroke aphasia, we focus here on Broca’s aphasia, where there are also disorders of effortful speech and grammatical processing. While the stroke and progressive forms of non-fluent aphasia are both most notable for their non-fluent speech, we note below that there are also some subtle distinctions: naPPA may include a deficit of speech sound articulation known as apraxia of speech, while Broca’s aphasia is associated with impaired repetition. Finally, it has been recognized that many patients with PPA are not easily classified into the svPPA and naPPA variants. The logopenic variant of PPA, also known as lvPPA or PPA-L, has been added recently to the PPAs. This syndrome is characterized by significant word-finding difficulty in conversational speech and an impairment of audio-verbal short term memory resulting in profound repetition difficulty. The analogous syndrome in classic stroke aphasia is conduction aphasia, resulting in relatively isolated repetition difficulties. Again, while lvPPA and conduction aphasia display mixed fluency associated with impaired repetition, there are subtle distinctions between these syndromes: lvPPA has more prominent lexical retrieval difficulties, while the quality of repetition impairment in conduction aphasia can have distinct characteristics depending on the precise location of the stroke. From a clinical perspective, it is important to distinguish between the progressive and stroke forms of aphasia. Moreover, it is valuable to recognize each of PPA syndromes since they may be markers of a statistically increased risk of a specific form of FTLD pathology12–14; and it is valuable clinically to recognize these forms of stroke aphasia since they are often associated with an embolic stroke that may have its origins in the heart.

Fluent Aphasias: Semantic Variant Primary Progressive Aphasia and Wernicke’s Aphasia

Clinical Features of svPPA and Wernicke’s Aphasia

Long-term memory for concepts, such as knowledge of objects, actions, and ideas, is represented in semantic memory, and this appears to be compromised in svPPA, also known as semantic dementia. The syndrome of svPPA was first described by Elizabeth Warrington15 and Julie Snowden16. Clinical research consensus criteria for svPPA focus on two essential features17, with reliable and widely accepted recognition of this syndrome5,18,19. As illustrated in Case Report 1, one major clinical feature is profound confrontation naming difficulty20,21. Patients are severely impaired at naming pictured objects or using these words in spontaneous speech. Analyses of naming errors suggest that patients with svPPA may substitute the name of a prototype (e.g. calling a camel “horse”) or a more frequent and familiar object that shares many of the same features as the target object (e.g. calling a pelican “robin”)22. They may also substitute a more general, superordinate term when a basic level name of a specific object is difficult (e.g. calling a pelican “bird” or “animal”)23,24. Even superordinate terms become difficult for these patients over time, and the meaningfulness words become increasingly vague as the disease progresses. This interferes substantially with meaningful communication because all objects eventually are called “that” and “thing.”

A second major clinical feature is impaired comprehension of single words21. Patients with svPPA are impaired at understanding basic object level names like “camel” or “pelican.” Over time, this may involve difficulty understanding superordinate terms like “animal,” paralleling their difficulty in language expression. Due to these impairments, patients with svPPA also may be impaired in sentence comprehension25 and sentence expression26.

Since the problem in svPPA appears to affect both comprehension and expression of single words, the core deficit in svPPA is thought to involve semantic memory21. One hypothesis is that these patients have a deficit for all knowledge represented in semantic memory. This account is consistent with Tulving’s proposed theory of human memory, where he characterized semantic memory as a single, amodal system in which all semantic knowledge is stored27. Another possibility involves a distributed model of sensory-motor feature knowledge. This is called the “hub-and-spoke” model21, where most object concepts consist of several features taken from several different modalities. Thus, the concept of a camel might involve activation of associated color knowledge, activation of shape information associated the humps of a camel, and activation of general world knowledge that a camel lives in a desert. The pattern of activation across these independent and distributed reservoirs of knowledge then would be interpreted as “camel.” From this perspective, it is the coordinating hub, rather than representations of knowledge, that is compromised in svPPA.

However, there is mounting evidence against a universal semantic memory deficit in svPPA. This comes from experimental observations emphasizing that deficits in svPPA overwhelmingly involve object concepts and the associated visual feature knowledge28. Many of these patients in fact show the phenomenon of “reversal of the concreteness effect.” Here, patients have greater difficulty with concrete objects than abstract concepts15,29–32. Relative deficits with concrete object concepts compared to abstract concepts are found in large series of svPPA patients both in comprehension using word stimuli and in narrative expression24,33–35. For example, the vocabulary of svPPA patients loses high imageability words and consists of significantly more abstract words24,34,35. svPPA patients also appear to have relatively preserved appreciation of musical meaning36, although others have noted difficulty with musical knowledge in music-picture matching tasks37. Finally, svPPA patients appear to have relatively preserved knowledge of number concepts38–40, and the class of words that depend on numbers like “most” “less than half,” and “few,” known as quantifiers41,42, although others also have noted difficulty with number knowledge in svPPA patients who are very impaired43. In sum, it appears that patients with svPPA are disproportionately impaired in their ability to understand and name object concepts.

This pattern of impairment in svPPA differs in some notable ways from patients with fluent stroke aphasia who have Wernicke’s aphasia. Wernicke’s aphasics also have fluent speech with considerable confrontation naming difficulty. While this form of stroke aphasia is notable for difficulty with both comprehension and expression, the deficit seems to be largely restricted to words. Content words such as nouns and verbs are very difficult for these patients, and thus their speech contains many non-specific words such as “this” and is often empty of content. Word comprehension in Wernicke’s aphasia can be approximate for all types of words, but unlike svPPA, there is rare evidence that patients with Wernicke’s aphasics have relative difficulty understanding or expressing a particular category of knowledge such as concrete object concepts. Thus, even though they cannot access the name of the clear container used to hold water, Wernicke’s aphasics rarely have difficulty knowing a glass is a container from which one drinks water. Despite their approximate comprehension of single words, these patients tend to have relatively preserved comprehension of objects.

Second, Wernicke’s aphasics typically have difficulty with repetition, although this is rarely evident in svPPA until the patient becomes quite impaired. This has been attributed to the fact that the bundle of fibers critical for repetition known as the arcuate fasciculus is compromised in Wernicke’s aphasia but not svPPA.

Third, patients with Wernicke’s aphasia have relatively preserved oral reading, although svPPA is associated with a specific disorder of reading known as surface dyslexia21. In this condition, letter-sound correspondence rules are preserved but sight vocabulary is lost, resulting in mispronunciation of sight vocabulary words through the use of letter-sound correspondence rules. The word choir may be pronounced “chore” and dough may be pronounced “dog.” Nevertheless, patients with Wernicke’s aphasia may have difficulty understanding what they are reading.

Anatomic features of svPPA and Wernicke’s Aphasia

svPPA has a distinctive anatomic distribution of disease. Imaging studies associate svPPA with atrophy of left anterior and ventral gray matter regions of the temporal lobe as well as the anterior hippocampus and the amygdala44,45. There are also changes in the white matter projections from this area to other brain regions, including middle longitudinal fasciculus, inferior longitudinal fasciculus, and uncinate fasciculus46,47. Using a functional imaging technique known as arterial spin labeling, it appears that the disease progresses over time from areas of established disease in the anterior temporal lobe to adjacent regions48. Longitudinal imaging shows atrophy extending posteriorly and superiorly into gray matter of the ipsilateral temporal lobe, and dorsally into the insula and the ventral frontal lobe. While disease associated with svPPA may begin in the left hemisphere, pathology often spreads to involve the contralateral temporal lobe48,49. Some investigators emphasize the role of the left anterior temporal lobe in the semantic memory deficit of patients with svPPA50, but functional anatomy studies also implicate atrophic homologous regions of the right hemisphere in the semantic deficits of svPPA patients51,52. Right anterior temporal lobe disease in FTLD is associated with behavioral abnormalities and the behavioral-variant FTD syndrome53, and svPPA patients often develop additional right temporal and frontal disease along with a social disorder clinically consistent with bvFTD during the natural history of disease.

Imaging studies have related difficulty with semantically-mediated tasks directly to left anterior and ventral temporal gray matter disease in svPPA28,33,34,54–56. A critical feature of the semantic deficit in svPPA is difficulty with object concepts that depend on visual feature knowledge. Disease in ventral regions of the anterior temporal lobe encompasses visual association cortex57,58. These structures have been linked with high-level aspects of visual perception59, mental imagery60, and high-level visual-object representation61. A functional anatomic gradient through the visual processing stream implicates processing of elementary visual-perceptual features such as color and shape in posterior regions of the temporal lobe, and the association of visual-perceptual features with semantic value occurring in more anterior portions of the visual stream including the anterior fusiform and parahippocampal gyri. Difficulty with meaning for words and pictures of objects that depend on visual feature knowledge are directly associated with disease in the anterior fusiform gyrus55 and the adjacent parahippocampal gyrus28,33,34,56 in anterior portions of the ventral temporal lobe.

These findings are consistent in part with a sensory-motor approach to semantic memory, also known as embodied cognition, where the neural representation of knowledge in semantic memory is linked to areas of the brain that are important for sensory-motor processing62,63. In svPPA, this is focused on the representation of visual feature knowledge that is crucial for representing the meaning of object concepts. Other examples relating sensory-motor features to concepts include activation of motor cortex for actions involving specific body parts64, activation of auditory association cortex for auditory feature knowledge65, gustatory cortex for appetizing foods66, and olfactory cortex for feature knowledge associated with smell67.

Patients with svPPA also have white matter disease. This includes reduced fractional anisotropy (FA) in white matter projections of the anterior temporal lobe46,47,49. Connectivity with other brain regions becomes compromised over time46,48,49, and this too may contribute to a semantic memory deficit in svPPA. These observations emphasize that the semantic memory deficit in svPPA is due in part to the disruption of a large-scale neural network involving multiple gray matter regions and white matter projections68.

Patients with svPPA frequently have pathology that is associated with the accumulation of transactive response DNA-binding protein of ~43 kD (TDP-43), an RNA binding protein that functions normally in the nucleus to help regulate DNA and RNA processing20,69,70. svPPA patients with TDP-43 pathology often have additional right temporal and frontal TDP-43 pathology along with a social disorder clinically consistent with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). Although up to 40% of all forms of FTLD have a family history and roughly 20% have a pathogenic mutation in the main genes associated with FTLD-TDP (i.e. progranulin (GRN) or C9orf72 (C9)) or with FTLD-Tau tauopathies (MAPT)71, the form of FTLD-TDP found in association with svPPA is most often sporadic without a strong family history or pathogenic mutation72. Less common neurodegenerative pathologies associated with svPPA include Pick’s disease as well as AD pathology12. Other causes of a pattern of semantic memory difficulty resembling svPPA can be encountered, such as herpes encephalitis50,73,74, but these are often subacute in onset and do not have the slow evolution of svPPA. Some forms of closed head trauma may resemble svPPA, but these are easily distinguished by their sudden onset and non-progressive course.

Consider in this context Wernicke’s aphasia. Many of the language features distinguishing Wernicke’s aphasia from svPPA are due to the fact that these two conditions affect different areas of the left hemisphere. In contrast to anterior and ventral temporal anatomic distribution of disease in svPPA, more posterior and superior areas of the temporal lobe are compromised in Wernicke’s aphasia. This tends to be associated with the portion of the comprehension network important for lexical access, and disease in this area particularly compromises lexical comprehension and lexical retrieval75,76. Since the visual association network is relatively intact in Wernicke’s aphasia, object comprehension is correspondingly well preserved in Wernicke’s aphasia. The repetition deficit found in Wernicke’s aphasia, but not svPPA, is also related the anatomic distribution of disease. Thus, Wernicke’s aphasia includes insult to the arcuate fasciculus. This fiber tract is critical for repetition, projecting between the posterior-superior temporal lobe and the inferior frontal lobe.

Non-fluent Forms of Aphasia: Non-fluent/Agrammatic Primary Progressive Aphasia and Broca’s Aphasia

Clinical Features of naPPA and Broca’s Aphasia

The clinical hallmark of naPPA is slowed, effortful, non-fluent speech. The effortful nature of speech in PPA was first described by Mesulam as Slowly Progressive Aphasia3. The linguistic characteristics of this disorder were described several years later with the designation Progressive Non-fluent Aphasia77. While effortful speech has long been recognized clinically77,78, quantification of slowed speech rate has been documented only more recently79–81. Speech is produced at an average rate of about 45 words per minute (WPM) by naPPA patients. By comparison, speech rate is about 140 WPM in healthy, age-matched adults. While there are many lengthy pauses in their effortful speech, speech remains significantly slowed in naPPA even when pauses &gt;2 sec duration are taken into consideration82.

Careful analyses have allowed investigators to test several hypotheses about the basis for the slowed, effortful speech found in naPPA. As illustrated in Case Report 2, one essential characteristic of naPPA speech is its impoverished grammatical features79–81. Grammatical deficits in speech are highly correlated with effortfulness and slowed WPM. In semi-structured speech samples that involve describing a single picture26 or a lengthier, wordless picture story79,82, analyses reveal that the variety of grammatical forms is impoverished, and grammatical forms are simplified with fewer utterances containing features like a subordinate clause or the passive voice. Grammatical simplifications also result in a shortened mean length of utterance (MLU). When syntactic features are produced, they are more likely to contain errors. Grammatical morphemes may be omitted, including inflections such as the past tense “–ed” and free-standing morphemes such as “was” and articles like “a,” and inappropriate grammatical inflections may be used. It is important to distinguish the non-fluent speech associated with grammatical simplifications and errors seen in naPPA from the pattern of reduced speech output seen in fluent forms of aphasia where searching for words can slow speech output in the absence of grammatical deficits.

Some naPPA patients appear to have a motor disorder that may contribute to their effortful speech. Patients with an extrapyramidal disorder such as progressive supranuclear palsy or corticobasal syndrome have poor control of the motor apparatus, and this can affect their speech just as it affects use of their hands for motor tasks and compromises their gait83. This is known as apraxia of speech (AoS). The combination of these linguistic and speech characteristics has led to clinical research consensus criteria for the syndrome known as naPPA17. There is reliable and widely accepted recognition of this syndrome5,18,19.

AoS involves impaired coordination and planning of the motor articulators. Clinical characteristics of AoS are said to include the production of incorrect speech sounds and sequences of sounds that do not occur in the speaker’s native language, groping for the correct sound although not necessarily producing the intended target after several attempts, and oddly-placed pauses in the speech stream. These speech disorders are said to occur independently of oral apraxia, or the demonstration of non-linguistic oral gestures such as “blowing out a match.” However, the association between AoS and oral apraxia is inconsistent. While these clinical features of PSP and CBS have been incorporated into naPPA84–86, AoS can occur without any other observable motor disorder10,87.

It is crucial to quantify apractic speech disorders objectively so that these observations can be reproduced reliably in other laboratories. In one attempt to quantify speech errors consistent with AoS in naPPA88, phonetic errors involving misarticulated speech sounds that are not part of the English speech sound system were used as markers of misplaced articulators related to an impaired motor coordination system. naPPA patients were found to produce significantly more speech errors than controls, consistent with other observations84,87. However, only 21% of speech errors in naPPA could be attributed to a motor speech planning disorder because they were distortions that are not part of the English speech sound system. In another study, duration of syllable production was lengthened and stress of initial versus subsequent syllable was disordered in AoS compared to controls and other PPA patient groups89. Two classes of speech sound errors have been identified – one consisting of speech sound errors, distortions and substitutions, and a second consisting of syllabically segmented prosodic speech patterns; the former type of error was said to be seen more commonly in naPPA, while the latter was found in individuals with AoS90.

Patients with naPPA also are impaired in their oral grammatical comprehension5,77. Likewise, they exhibit grammatical errors in their reading comprehension of written material and their writing. This provides additional evidence that effortful speech in naPPA is not determined entirely by an apractic motor disorder. In a sentence like “Boys that girls hug are friendly,” for example, naPPA patients often err when asked: “Who did the hugging?”91. These patients also have difficulty pointing to one of two pictures based on a sentence, where selecting the correct picture depends on appreciating the sentence’s grammatical structure25,92. Another study used an anagram task to show that naPPA patients have difficulty ordering words printed on cards into a grammatically complex question about a picture93. Grammatical difficulties such as these may help distinguish naPPA from other PPA variants5,25,91. However, care must be taken since comprehension of center-embedded subordinate clause constructions and complex anagram tasks are impaired across all PPA variants: Sentences such as “The dog that the cat chased is friendly” are lengthy and involve multiple propositions, and anagram tasks involve planning and organizing. Thus, difficulty with these tasks may be sensitive, but they appear to be less specific. This may be due in part to the fact that they are vulnerable to processing resource limitations. One example is limited working memory that may be needed to temporarily retain a lengthy sentence until its message can be interpreted by manipulating many propositions. Likewise, substantial executive resources underlying planning and organizing are needed for an anagram task. Patients with naPPA have some working memory and executive deficits on non-linguistic measures such as reverse digit span and category naming fluency94,95. Thus, deficits in working memory and executive functioning may confound the ability to detect a grammatical impairment. Shorter grammatical sentences such as “It was the dog that the cat chased” are more likely to be selectively impaired in naPPA, and are not significantly impaired in other patient groups25. It does not appear that non-specific cognitive difficulty contributes substantially to comprehension impairments, as a correlation between non-specific measures of dementia such as the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) and comprehension performance typically is not found in naPPA. Finally, it should be emphasized that naPPA is a progressive disorder of language, and several studies have shown progressive decline of grammatical comprehension in naPPA96,97.

Consider in this context Broca’s aphasia due to stroke. Patients with Broca’s aphasia have been shown to have slowed, effortful speech98. There is a disorder of grammatical expression and grammatical comprehension, although the precise basis for this deficit remains to be worked out99. There is also a disorder of prosody, with distortion or absence of the typical declination of pitch found in statements and distortion or absence of the terminal rise in pitch for a yes-no question. Thus, there is considerable overlap in the language and speech characteristics of these patients and patients with naPPA.

There are some features that appear to distinguish Broca’s aphasia from naPPA as well. For example, naPPA may include AoS, while this appears to occur much less often in Broca’s aphasia. An impairment of repetition is less common in naPPA, while Broca’s aphasia is often associated with impaired repetition. Indeed, a qualitative analysis of the repetition deficit in Broca’s aphasia often reveals grammatical errors. naPPA patients also appear to be more vulnerable to anagram tasks and the executive resource demands of sentences with many propositions.

Anatomic Features of naPPA and Broca’s Aphasia

There is extensive imaging evidence to suggest that a clinical marker for naPPA is focal disease centered in the left frontal lobe. Structural MRI studies emphasize GM atrophy in the inferior frontal region of the left hemisphere45,77,91,100. This typically extends beyond the pars opercularis and pars triangularis, regions in the inferior frontal lobe colloquially known as “Broca’s area,” to involve frontal operculum and anterior insula, left prefrontal regions that are more dorsal and anterior, and superior portions of the left anterior temporal lobe79,81. Functional imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET) confirm structural imaging observations. PET also shows deficits in the left inferior frontal lobe, including the frontal operculum and the anterior insula, as well as the anterior-superior temporal lobe77,101. GM atrophy and reduced PET glucose metabolism is said to be centered in superior lateral premotor cortex and supplementary motor area. Associated WM disease involves premotor components of the superior longitudinal fasciculus and extends into the body of the corpus callosum85.

Regression analyses have been used to link the slowed, effortful characteristic of speech in naPPA directly to these left frontal regions79–81. Grammatical simplifications observed in semi-structured speech samples have been related to GM atrophy in inferior frontal and anterior-superior temporal regions of the left hemisphere79–81. Motor speech abnormalities in patients with movement disorders such as progressive supranuclear palsy are associated with atrophy of deep GM structures such as the striatum and supplementary motor areas involved in motor planning86.

Sentence comprehension appears to be related to regional GM atrophy in naPPA as well. In a study of simple, dichotomous (yes/no) probes of simpler and more complex sentences, impaired grammatical comprehension was associated with posterior-inferior frontal and anterior-superior temporal regions of the left hemisphere91. In a two-alternative, forced-choice, sentence-picture matching task, comprehension of grammatically complex sentences in naPPA was related to left inferior frontal and anterior-superior temporal GM atrophy25. Grammatical comprehension was related to left inferior frontal atrophy in a heterogeneous group of progressive aphasics that included individuals with naPPA92.

It is important to point out that neurodegenerative disease such as that found in naPPA interrupts large-scale neural networks, and this is emphasized by the white matter (WM) disease that is also found in naPPA. This disease implicates pathways containing reciprocal projections involving the left inferior frontal lobe. Interrupted pathways important for language and speech include the anterior corpus callosum that integrates left and right inferior frontal regions, the arcuate/superior longitudinal fasciculus complex that constitutes the so-called dorsal stream projecting between frontal and posterior-superior temporal regions, and the inferior frontal-occipital fasciculus and the inferior longitudinal fasciculus that are part of the so-called ventral stream between frontal and posterior temporal regions102–105. WM disease in naPPA also appears to involve the uncinate fasciculus that contains projections between the inferior frontal lobe and the anterior temporal lobe. This is consistent with observations of patients with autopsy-confirmed naPPA who have imaging evidence of WM disease in superior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior frontal-occipital fasciculus, as well as uncinate fasciculus103,106.

Regression analyses have linked large-scale networks of disturbed anatomy directly to language deficits in naPPA. Three gray matter-white matter networks for language expression have been identified106. In the first network, disease in left inferior frontal cortex and white matter disease in anterior corpus callosum projections to the right inferior frontal lobe appear to be related to slowed, effortful speech rate. Speech errors also may be related to this network. In a second network, GM disease in the left frontal lobe and tracts in the arcuate/superior longitudinal fasciculus projecting to posterior peri-Sylvian cortical regions – the so-called dorsal stream - is disrupted in naPPA. The dorsal stream is thought to mediate in part long-distance syntactic dependencies in sentences107, and disease in this network may contribute in part to deficits in sentence-level grammatical expression and comprehension in naPPA. The third large-scale neural network that is disrupted in naPPA includes left inferior frontal lobe and the inferior frontal-occipital fasciculus projecting through the external capsule to posterior-superior temporal regions. This is the so-called ventral stream that may support lexical representations important for grammatical processing such as the major grammatical category of words108. Interruption of this network by GM disease in left inferior frontal lobe and WM disease in left inferior frontal-occipital fasciculus is associated with difficulty understanding center-embedded sentences25.

Functional MRI also has been used to assess the neuroanatomic basis for grammatical processing in naPPA. In one study, naPPA patients did not appear to recruit left inferior frontal cortex during comprehension of grammatically complex sentences, although they recruited dorsal portions of the left frontal lobe associated with working memory and left posterior-superior temporal regions associated with comprehension of non-grammatical language material109. Another fMRI study showed greater left inferior frontal activation during grammatically complex sentences compared to simple sentences in controls, while naPPA patients did not show a difference in left inferior frontal activation for these two types of sentences92. In a recent study, activation of an extensive, left hemisphere language network was disrupted in patients with grammatical comprehension difficulty due to naPPA110. Thus, language deficits in naPPA appear to be attributable in part to interruption of large-scale neural networks centered in left peri-Sylvian regions that support language processing.

naPPA is most often associated with forms of FTLD involving the accumulation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (FTLD-tau) at autopsy10,12–14. Less commonly, AD pathology or FTLD-TDP can present with language features consistent with naPPA12. naPPA with TDP-43 pathology may be associated with GRN mutations111–113, while C9 mutations are rarely associated with PPA114.

Broca’s aphasia due to stroke is often associated with ischemia centered in the left inferior frontal lobe115,116. The ischemic area typically extends into more dorsal regions of the frontal lobe as well as the anterior superior temporal lobe, and into the white matter deep to the frontal lobe. In addition to effortful, agrammatic speech, this lesion is also associated with impairment of grammatical comprehension117. Thus, there is considerable overlap between the progressive and stroke forms of non-fluent aphasia associated with left anterior peri-Sylvian disease. The impairment of repetition found in Broca’s aphasia more often than naPPA has been attributed to ischemia that also involves the arcuate fasciculus. Smaller ischemic lesions restricted to the frontal operculum tend to manifest clinically as aphemia. This is a disorder of slowed speech expression but without the sound distortions found in AoS, and aphemia is associated with minimal comprehension difficulty116.

Aphasias with Mixed Fluency: Logopenic Variant Primary Progressive Aphasia and Conduction Aphasia

With increased clinical recognition of PPA, it has become clear that many patients have a language disturbance that does not clearly fit into the dichotomy of naPPA and svPPA syndromes. More specifically, patients with periods of slowed, hesitant speech due to prominent lexical retrieval difficulties in conversational speech (ie. “logopenia”) and phonological loop disturbance were first described by Gorno-Tempini and colleagues45,118. Lexical retrieval difficulty is ubiquitous to some extent in all variants of PPA. However, the distinguishing feature of the logopenic variant of PPA (lvPPA) is the disturbance of the phonological loop. The phonological loop is a component of auditory-verbal short-term memory that contributes to the processing of verbally coded information such as a lengthy sentence119. Thus, the hallmark of lvPPA is impaired repetition. The current clinical criteria for lvPPA include core elements of lexical retrieval difficulties in spontaneous speech and impaired repetition, with supportive features of phonologic paraphasic errors or speech-sound substitutions, and the absence of motor speech and single-word/object comprehension difficulties17.

Some refer to lvPPA as “mixed” because many of these patients have some language features that can resemble both naPPA and svPPA120. Patients with lvPPA resemble naPPA in that lvPPA patients may also have slowed, hesitant speech due to circumlocutions and lexical retrieval difficulties that can superficially resemble naPPA. However, the quantitative rate of speech production is about 90 words per minute, or about twice the rate of naPPA26. Grammatical expression and comprehension can be limited for lengthy sentences due to the short-term memory deficit, although these patients tend to have better comprehension for shorter sentences and written material that does not depend on short-term memory25,118. Moreover, there is a relative absence of motor speech difficulties in lvPPA as compared to naPPA.

lvPPA patients also may superficially resemble patients with svPPA because of some overlapping characteristics. The often severe word-finding difficulty with circumlocutory speech in lvPPA may be difficult to distinguish from the single-word expression difficulties found in svPPA. lvPPA patients also may demonstrate some word comprehension difficulty that is seen in svPPA. However, successful responses following prompts (e.g. “it’s used for cutting, it’s a wood…”) or gestures demonstrated by the lvPPA patient during confrontation naming (e.g. demonstrating “cutting motion” for the use of a saw despite the inability to retrieve the word “saw”) distinguishes these patients from svPPA. Likewise, lvPPA patients have preserved knowledge of objects.

Patients with conduction aphasia following stroke resemble those with lvPPA. The key feature of conduction aphasia is a profound repetition deficit121,122. Qualitative analysis of repetition errors reveals that some patients have grammatical errors in their repetition, while others may have limited repetition based solely on length. Conduction aphasics also can have some word-finding difficulty occasionally display circumlocutory speech, and can have mild comprehension limitations for lengthy sentences. Conduction aphasics also often display some ideomotor apraxia.

Anatomy of Mixed Aphasias

The phonological loop, the component of auditory-verbal short-term memory responsible for the processing of verbally coded information, is often associated with inferior parietal and superior temporal regions119. MRI studies show that lvPPA patients have atrophy in the inferior parietal lobe45,123. Studies using in vivo PET imaging of amyloid pathology find a high rate of AD pathology in these patients124,125.

Since introduced into modern PPA clinical criteria, lvPPA diagnostic criteria have been examined in autopsy cohorts113,126. We and others find that published lvPPA diagnostic criteria are relatively specific for underlying AD pathology, but are less sensitive since many PPA patients with AD pathology do not meet criteria for lvPPA due either to the absence of core clinical criteria of difficulty in repetition or by the presence of additional motor speech or semantic features. Indeed, the current criteria for lvPPA are largely unreliable for lvPPA5,18,19, as lexical retrieval difficulty is common for all forms of PPA and other supporting features of lvPPA are largely based on the absence of core features of naPPA and svPPA, rather than the presence of a specific features of language. Further, it has been challenging to implement an operational definition of impaired repetition using traditional measures. Phonological loop impairment results in length-dependent repetition difficulty, where increasing difficulty is encountered with multi-syllabic words or increased length of phrases118. Data from our autopsy series associated AD pathology with reduced performance on a quantitative measure of phonological loop functioning – forward digit span, and this impairment was related to pathology in superior temporal and inferior parietal regions that is more commonly diseased in AD than in forms of FTLD111. Finally, there are some PPA patients without prominent phonological loop dysfunction but instead display mixed features of single word and object comprehension difficulties and expressive speech disturbance that are not classifiable113. The underlying neuropathology of these mixed PPA patients is varied and includes AD, FTLD-Tau and FTLD-TDP.

Conduction aphasia following stroke, from the classical connectionist perspective, is associated with damage to the arcuate fasciculus, the white matter that carries projections between the inferior parietal and superior temporal region known as Wernicke’s area and the inferior frontal region known as Broca’s area122,127,128. This fiber bundle is though to be crucial in the lateralization of language since it is much thicker in the left hemisphere than the right hemisphere129. However, others have argued instead that repetition deficits are due in part to a limitation in auditory-verbal short-term memory119,130, and this difficulty is associated with disease in the inferior parietal lobule131.

Summary

Progressive aphasia and stroke aphasia result in relatively discrete disorders of language. There are fluent and non-fluent forms of aphasia that are progressive or associated with an acute stroke. svPPA is a fluent form of PPA that interferes with word meaning and object knowledge, and thus also interferes with lexical retrieval. Wernicke’s aphasia, while a fluent form of aphasia, is largely limited to difficulty with comprehension and expression of content words; object knowledge is relatively preserved. Distinctions between progressive and stroke forms of aphasia may be due in part to the anatomic locus of disease. The aphasia syndrome associated with svPPA is centered in anterior and ventral portions of the left temporal lobe, while Wernicke’s aphasia follows stroke to the posterior peri-Sylvian regions of the left hemisphere. The non-fluent forms of progressive and stroke aphasia tend to have more overlap in the locus of disease, and thus the syndromes associated with these non-fluent aphasias ten to be similar. naPPA compromises the ability to understand and express the grammatical characteristics of language. These are needed to link together the words composing a sentence. Without these structural features of a sentence, speech tends to be slow and effortful, and comprehension and expression of grammatically complex sentences is compromised. lvPPA is a syndrome of impaired phonological loop functioning due to disease in the inferior parietal lobe that accounts for some, but not all, PPA patients whom do not meet clinical criteria for svPPA or naPPA. Future work in prospectively assessed patients with antemortem biomarkers for molecular pathology and postmortem autopsy confirmation will improve diagnostic criteria for PPA to predict specific proteinopathies. These semantic and grammatical aspects of communication are essential aspects of language, and the association linguistic features with specific cerebral networks honors these components of a theory of language.

This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health (AG017586, AG038490, AG052943, NS053488, NS088341), Brightfocus Foundation (A2016244S), the Newhouse Foundation, the Wyncote Foundation, and the Arking Family Foundation.

TABLE 1 CHARACTERISTICS OF PROGRESSIVE AND STROKE FORMS OF APHASIA

	FLUENT	NON-FLUENT	MIXED	
	Semantic variant PPA	Wernicke’s aphasia	Non-fluent/agrammatic variant PPA	Broca’s aphasia	Logopenic variant PPA	Conduction aphasia	
SPEECH FEATURES	
Fluent speech	Y	Y	N	N	Y/N*	Y/N*	
Speech errors	Lexical	lexical	phonemic	phonemic	Phonemic&gt; lexical	Phonemic	
Apraxia of speech	N	N	Y	N	N	N	
Naming deficits	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	
	
COMPREHENSION FEATURES	
single word deficits	Y	Y	N	N	Y	N	
Object deficits	Y	N	N	N	N	N	
Grammar deficits	N	N	Y	Y	N	N	
	
OTHER	
Oral reading deficits	Surface dyslexia	N	agrammatic	agrammatic	N	N	
Repetition deficits	N	N	agrammatic	agrammatic	Y	Y	
	
CORE ANATOMY	
	Anterior and ventral left temporal	Posterior-superior left temporal	Left inferior frontal	Left inferior frontal	Left inferior parietal	Left inferior parietal	
CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS	
	FTLD-TDP&gt;FTLD-Tau&gt;AD	Vascular	FTLD-Tau&gt;AD&gt; FTLD-TDP	Vascular	AD&gt; FTLD-Tau&gt;FTLD-TDP	Vascular	
* lvPPA and conduction aphasia have relatively fluent speech that can by slowed by word-finding difficulty and circumlocutions, but lack motor speech or grammatical impairments.

CASE REPORT 1

A 54 year old right-handed woman came to medical attention because of difficulty at work. She worked as a lawyer, but her supervising partner told her of increasing complaints from clients about clear communication. During phone conversations, she used incorrect or imprecise words when discussing facts to her clients. Her assistant also noted difficulty when orally reading and reviewing certain words in transcripts that she had recently dictated. These findings progressed over time. More recently, her assistant was noticing some comprehension difficulty as well. There did not seem to be significant difficulty with memory for recent events, and she had no problems with driving. There were no complaints of elementary neurological deficits such as difficulty with strength or abnormal involuntary movements. On exam, the patient was alert and fully oriented to person, place and time. Her speech was fluent but at times was circumlocutory. She used somewhat imprecise nouns in her speech, but there were no grammatical errors. There was significant confrontation naming difficulty; this was most notable for low frequency words, and she substituted the names of more frequent words such as naming a camel “horse” and a pelican “duck.” Repetition of phrases and sentences was intact. There was difficulty reading sight vocabulary words, pronouncing CHOIR as “chore” and DOUGH as “dog.” There appeared to be similar errors in a written sentence describing the weather outside (writing WEATHER as “wether”). Grammatical comprehension and expression were preserved. She was able to demonstrate the use of familiar objects such as a hammer and a saw, but did not know how to demonstrate the use of scissors. While there was mild difficulty with verbal memory, her visual memory for recall of a complex visual geometric design after several minutes was intact. There was no difficulty with visuospatial tasks such as copying a complex geometric design or judging whether two lines are parallel. Executive functioning was preserved, such as orally reciting a list of alternating letters and numbers. The remainder of the neurological exam was unremarkable.

COMMENT

This patient has semantic variant primary progressive aphasia. This is characterized by progressive difficulty with confrontation naming, and the classic substitution of high frequency prototypes for the lower frequency targets. There was some difficulty with object comprehension. There was also surface dyslexia, pronouncing words during oral reading in a manner that makes use of letter-sound correspondence rules. There was no evidence of agrammatism or repetition difficulty.

CASE REPORT 2

A 62 year old right-handed man complained of progressive difficulty with his speech. He was a salesman for smart phones, but was experiencing increasing difficulty expressing himself during sales to clients. His speech had become progressively slowed, although he typically used the correct words. At times he sounded like an old-fashioned telegram. Comprehension otherwise was preserved. He had been experiencing more falls recently when walking, and these did not appear to be associated with tripping or weakness. On exam, he was alert and fully oriented. His speech was slowed and effortful. There were no speech sound errors including speech sounds not heard in English or no unusual locations of pauses in his speech. He omitted small grammatical morphemes like “was” and “the” from his speech, and did not inflect verbs for past tense. His writing and oral reading similarly omitted small grammatical morphemes, but the content otherwise seemed preserved. He was able to repeat phrases and sentences. His comprehension of single words, objects and grammatically simple sentenced seemed good. However, he had some difficulty when required to demonstrate understanding of sentences that depend on grammatical information (e.g. “Point to the window after you point to the door”). Memory and visuospatial processing seemed preserved. He was slow at performing measures of executive functioning. The remainder of the neurologic exam was significant for difficulty with the fast phase of ocular movements in an assessment of optico-kinetic nystagmus. There was some mild neck rigidity.

COMMENT

This patient has non-fluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasia. He has agrammatic speech and comparable changes in writing and oral reading. Comprehension of single words and grammatically simple sentences was preserved, but there was difficulty with grammatical comprehension. Repetition also was preserved. There was mild difficulty with executive functioning, although he did well in other aspects of cognitive functioning. There was a question of falls, and he had mild difficulty with saccades in the vertical axis, raising a question of progressive supranuclear palsy.


REFERENCES

1. Pick A Über die Beziehungen der senilen Hirnatrophie zur Aphasie. Prager Med Wochenschr; 1892.
2. Serieux P Sur un cas de surdite verbale pure. Rev Med; 1893.
3. Mesulam MM . Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia. Ann Neurol. 1982;11 :592–598.7114808
4. Chawluk JB , Mesulam MM , Hurtig H , Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia: studies with positron emission tomography. Ann Neurol. 1986;19 :68–74.3484931
5. Mesulam MM , Wieneke C , Thompson C , Rogalski E , Weintraub S . Quantitative classification of primary progressive aphasia at early and mild impairment stages. Brain. 2012;135 :1537–1553.22525158
6. Mesulam MM . Primary Progressive Aphasia — A Language-Based Dementia. N Engl J Med. 2003;349 :1535–1542.14561797
7. Massimo L , Zee J , Xie SX , Occupational attainment influences survival in autopsy-confirmed frontotemporal degeneration. Neurology. Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins; 2015;84 :2070–2075.25904687
8. Xie SX , Forman MS , Farmer J , Factors associated with survival probability in autopsy-proven frontotemporal lobar degeneration. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79 :126–129.17615171
9. Hodges JR , Davies R , Xuereb J , Kril J , Halliday G . Survival in frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins; 2003;61 :349–354.12913196
10. Grossman M The non-fluent/agrammatic variant of primary progressive aphasia. Lancet neurology. 2012;11 :545–555.22608668
11. Irwin D , Cairns N , Grossman M , Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: defining phenotypic diversity through personalized medicine. Acta Neuropathol. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2015;129 :1–23.25287911
12. Grossman M Primary progressive aphasia: clinicopathological correlations. Nature Reviews Neurology. Nature Publishing Group; 2010;6 :88–97.20139998
13. Josephs KA , Hodges JR , Snowden JS , Neuropathological background of phenotypical variability in frontotemporal dementia. Acta Neuropathol. 2011;122 :137–153.21614463
14. Snowden JS , Thompson JC , Stopford CL , The clinical diagnosis of early-onset dementias: diagnostic accuracy and clinicopathological relationships. Brain. Oxford University Press; 2011;134 :2478–2492.21840888
15. Warrington EK . The selective impairment of semantic memory. QJExpPsychol. Nature Publishing Group; 1975;27 :635–657.
16. Snowden JS , Goulding PJ , Neary D . Semantic dementia: a form of circumscribed cerebral atrophy. Behav Neurol. Epub 1989.
17. Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology. 2011. p. 1006–1014.21325651
18. Sajjadi SA , Patterson K , Arnold R , Watson PC , Nestor PJ . Primary progressive aphasia: a tale of two syndromes and the rest. Neurology. 2012;78 :1670–1677.22573633
19. Wicklund MR , Duffy JR , Strand EA , Machulda MM , Whitwell JL , Josephs KA . Quantitative application of the primary progressive aphasia consensus criteria. Neurology. 2014;82 :1119–1126.24598709
20. Hodges JR , Patterson K . Semantic dementia: a unique clinicopathological syndrome. The Lancet Neurology. 2007;6 :1004–1014.17945154
21. Patterson K , Nestor PJ , Rogers TT . Where do you know what you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2007;8 :976–987.18026167
22. Patterson K The reign of typicality in semantic memory. philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. Nature Publishing Group; 2007;362 :813–821.17400539
23. Hodges JR , Graham N , Patterson K . Charting the progression in semantic dementia: implications for the organisation of semantic memory. Memory. Nature Publishing Group; 1995;3 :463–495.8574874
24. Hoffman P , Meteyard L , Patterson K . Broadly speaking: Vocabulary in semantic dementia shifts towards general, semantically diverse words. 2013;in press:30–42.
25. Charles D , Olm C , Powers J , Grammatical comprehension deficits in non-fluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasia. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry. 2014;85 :249–256.
26. Ash SP , Evans E , O’Shea J , Differentiating primary progressive aphasias in a brief sample of connected speech. Neurology. 2013;81 :329–336.23794681
27. Tulving E Organisation of Memory. Nature Publishing Group; Epub 1972.:381–403.
28. Bonner MF , Peelle JE , Price AR , Grossman M . Individual variabiity in a cortical semantic hub. Journal of Cogitive Neuroscience. Epub 2015.
29. Bonner MF , VESELY L , Price C , Reversal of the concreteness effect in semantic dementia. Cognitive Neuropsychology. 2009;26 :568–579.20183015
30. Breedin SD , Saffran EM , Coslett HB . Reversal of the concreteness effect in a patient with semantic dementia. Cognitive Neuropsychology. 1994;11 :617–660.
31. Macoir J Is a plum a memory problem?: Longitudinal study of the reversal of concreteness effect in a patient with semantic dementia. 2009;47 :518–535.
32. Papagno C , Capasso R , Miceli G . Reversed concreteness effect for nouns in a subject with semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia. 2009;47 :1138–1148.19350708
33. Cousins KAQ , York C , Bauer L , Grossman M . Cognitive and anatomic double dissociation in the representation of concrete and abstract words in semantic variant and behavioral variant frontotemporal degeneration. Neuropsychologia. 2016;84 :244–251.26944874
34. Cousins KAQ , Ash SP , Irwin DJ , Grossman M . Dissociable substrates underlie the production of abstract and concrete nouns. Brain Lang. 2017;165 :45–54.27912073
35. Bird H , Lambon Ralph MA , Patterson K , Hodges JR . The Rise and Fall of Frequency and Imageability: Noun and Verb Production in Semantic Dementia. 2000;73 :17–49.
36. Weinstein J , Koenig P , Gunawardena D , McMillan C , Bonner M , Grossman M . Preserved musical semantic memory in semantic dementia. Arch Neurol. 2011;68 :248–250.21320991
37. Goll JC , Crutch SJ , Loo JHY , Non-verbal sound processing in the primary progressive aphasias. Brain. 2009;133 :272–285.19797352
38. Halpern CH , Glosser G , Clark R , Dissociation of numbers and objects in corticobasal degeneration and semantic dementia. Neurology. 2004;62 :1163–1169.15079017
39. Cappelletti M , Butterworth B , Kopelman M . Spared numerical abilities in a case of semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia. 2001;39 :1224–1239.11527560
40. Crutch SJ , Warrington EK . Preserved Calculation Skills in a Case of Semantic Dementia. Cortex. 2002;38 :389–399.12146663
41. Cappelletti M , Butterworth B , Kopelman M . The understanding of quantifiers in semantic dementia: a single-case study. Neurocase. Taylor &amp; Francis Group; 2006;12 :136–145.16801149
42. Ash SP , Ternes K , Bisbing T , Dissociation of quantifiers and object nouns in speech in focal neurodegenerative disease. Neuropsychologia. 2016;89 :141–152.27301638
43. Jefferies E , Bateman D , Lambon Ralph MA . The role of the temporal lobe semantic system in number knowledge: evidence from late-stage semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia. 2005;43 :887–905.15716160
44. Grossman M , McMillan C , Moore P , What“s in a name: voxel-based morphometric analyses of MRI and naming difficulty in Alzheimer”s disease, frontotemporal dementia and corticobasal degeneration. Brain. 2004;127 :628–649.14761903
45. Gorno-Tempini ML , Dronkers NF , Rankin KP , Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol. Wiley Subscription Services, Inc., A Wiley Company; 2004;55 :335–346.14991811
46. Agosta F , Henry RG , Migliaccio R , Language networks in semantic dementia. Brain. 2010;133 :286–299.19759202
47. Acosta-Cabronero J , Patterson K , Fryer TD , Atrophy, hypometabolism and white matter abnormalities in semantic dementia tell a coherent story. Brain. Oxford University Press; 2011;134 :2025–2035.21646331
48. Olm CA , Kandel BM , Avants BB , Arterial spin labeling perfusion predicts longitudinal decline in semantic variant primary progressive aphasia. J Neurol. 2016;263 :1927–1938.27379517
49. Brambati SM , Rankin KP , Narvid J , Atrophy progression in semantic dementia with asymmetric temporal involvement: a tensor-based morphometry study. Neurobiology of Aging. 2009;30 :103–111.17604879
50. Patterson K , Kopelman MD , Woollams AM , Brownsett SLE , Geranmayeh F , Wise RJS . Semantic memory: Which side are you on? Neuropsychologia. 2015;76 :182–191.25451042
51. Lambon Ralph MA , Cipolotti L , Manes F , Patterson K . Taking both sides: do unilateral anterior temporal lobe lesions disrupt semantic memory? Brain. 2010;133 :3243–3255.20952378
52. Pobric G , Jefferies E , Ralph MAL . Anterior temporal lobes mediate semantic representation: mimicking semantic dementia by using rTMS in normal participants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104 :20137–20141.18056637
53. Seeley WW . The natural history of temporal variant frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. Nature Publishing Group; 2005;64 :1384–1390.15851728
54. Lambon Ralph MA , Sage K , Jones RW , Mayberry EJ . Coherent concepts are computed in the anterior temporal lobes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2010;107 :2717–2722.
55. Mion M , Patterson K , Acosta-Cabronero J , What the left and right anterior fusiform gyri tell us about semantic memory. Brain. 2010;133 :3256–3268.20952377
56. Libon DJ , Libon DJP , Rascovsky K , Comparative semantic profiles in semantic dementia and Alzheimer‚Äôs disease. Brain. 2013;136 :2497–2509.23824492
57. Gloor P The Temporal Lobe and Limbic System. Nature Publishing Group; Epub 1997.
58. Olson IR , Plotzker A , Ezzyat Y . The Enigmatic temporal pole: a review of findings on social and emotional processing. Brain. 2007;130 :1718–1731.17392317
59. Mundy ME , Downing PE , Dwyer DM , Honey RC , Graham KS . A Critical Role for the Hippocampus and Perirhinal Cortex in Perceptual Learning of Scenes and Faces: Complementary Findings from Amnesia and fMRI. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2013;33 :10490–10502.23785161
60. Zeidman P , Maguire EA . Anterior hippocampus: the anatomy of perception, imagination and episodic memory. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2016;17 :173–182.26865022
61. Kravitz DJ , Saleem KS , Baker CI , Ungerleider LG , Mishkin M . The ventral visual pathway: an expanded neural framework for the processing of object quality. 2013;17 :26–49.
62. Martin A The Representation of Object Concepts in the Brain. Annu Rev Psychol. 2007;58 :25–45.16968210
63. Barsalou LW . Simulation, situated conceptualization, and prediction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2009;364 :1281–1289.19528009
64. Hauk O , Johnsrude I , Pulvermüller F . Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor and premotor cortex. Neuron. 2004;41 :301–307.14741110
65. Kiefer M , Trumpp N , Herrnberger B , Sim E-J , Hoenig K , Pulvermüller F . Dissociating the representation of action- and sound-related concepts in middle temporal cortex. Brain Lang. 2012;122 :120–125.22726721
66. Simmons WK , Martin A , Barsalou LW . Pictures of appetizing foods activate gustatory cortices for taste and reward. 2005;15 :1602.
67. González J , Barros-Loscertales A , Pulvermüller F , Reading cinnamon activates olfactory brain regions. NeuroImage. 2006;32 :906–912.16651007
68. Collins JA , Montal V , Hochberg D , Focal temporal pole atrophy and network degeneration in semantic variant primary progressive aphasia. Brain. 2017;140 :457–471.28040670
69. Snowden JS , Neary D , Mann D . Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: clinical and pathological relationships. Acta Neuropathol. 2007;114 :31–38.17569065
70. Lee EB , Lee VMY , Trojanowski JQ . Gains or losses: molecular mechanisms of TDP43-mediated neurodegeneration. Nat Rev Neurosci. Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved; 2012;13 :38–50.
71. Wood EM , Falcone D , Suh E , Development and validation of pedigree classification criteria for frontotemporal lobar degeneration. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70 :1411–1417.24081456
72. Mackenzie IRA , Neumann M , Baborie A , A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 2011;122 :111–113.21644037
73. Lambon Ralph MA , Lowe C , Rogers TT . Neural basis of category-specific deficits for living things: evidence from semantic dementia, HSVE and a neural network model. Brain. Nature Publishing Group; 2007;130 :1127–1137.17438021
74. Noppeney U , Patterson K , Tyler LK , Temporal lobe lesions and semantic impairment: a comparison of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and semantic dementia. Brain. Oxford University Press; 2007;130 :1138–1147.17251241
75. Hillis AE , Tuffiash E , Wityk RJ , Barker PB . Regions of neural dysfunction associated with impaired naming of actions and objects in acute stroke. Cognitive Neuropsychology. 2002;19 :523–534.20957552
76. Hillis AE , Rorden C , Fridriksson J . Brain regions essential for word comprehension: Drawing inferences from patients. Ann Neurol. 2017;81 :759–768.28445916
77. Grossman M , Mickanin J , Onishi K , Progressive Nonfluent Aphasia: Language, Cognitive, and PET Measures Contrasted with Probable Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 1996;8 :135–154.23971420
78. Snowden JS , Neary D , Mann DM , Goulding PJ , Testa HJ . Progressive language disorder due to lobar atrophy. Ann Neurol. 1992;31 :174–183.1575456
79. Gunawardena D , Ash SP , McMillan C , Avants BB , Gee J , Grossman M . Why are patients with progressive nonfluent aphasia nonfluent? Neurology. 2010;75 :588–594.20713947
80. Wilson SM , Henry ML , Besbris M , Connected speech production in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Brain. 2010;133 :2069–2088.20542982
81. Rogalski E , Cobia D , Harrison TM , Anatomy of language impairments in primary progressive aphasia. J Neurosci. 2011;31 :3344–3350.21368046
82. Ash SP , Moore P , VESELY L , Non-Fluent Speech in Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. J Neurolinguistics. 2009;22 :370–383.22180700
83. Josephs KA , Duffy JR , Strand EA , The evolution of primary progressive apraxia of speech. Brain. 2014;137 :2783–2795.25113789
84. Josephs KA , Duffy JR , Strand EA , Clinicopathological and imaging correlates of progressive aphasia and apraxia of speech. Brain. 2006;129 :1385–1398.16613895
85. Josephs KA , Duffy JR , Strand EA , Characterizing a neurodegenerative syndrome: primary progressive apraxia of speech. Brain. 2012;135 :1522–1536.22382356
86. Santos-Santos MA , Mandelli ML , Binney RJ , Features of Patients With Nonfluent/Agrammatic Primary Progressive Aphasia With Underlying Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Pathology or Corticobasal Degeneration. JAMA Neurol. 2016;73 :733–742.27111692
87. Rohrer JD , Rossor MN , Warren JD . Apraxia in progressive nonfluent aphasia. J Neurol. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg; 2010;257 :569–574.19908082
88. Ash SP , McMillan C , Gunawardena D , Speech errors in progressive non-fluent aphasia. Brain Lang. 2010;113 :13–20.20074786
89. Duffy JR , Hanley H , Utianski R , Temporal acoustic measures distinguish primary progressive apraxia of speech from primary progressive aphasia. Brain Lang. 2017;168 :84–94.28187331
90. Josephs KA , Duffy JR , Strand EA , Syndromes dominated by apraxia of speech show distinct characteristics from agrammatic PPA. Neurology. 2013;81 :337–345.23803320
91. Peelle JE , Troiani V , Gee JC , Sentence comprehension and voxel-based morphometry in progressive nonfluent aphasia, semantic dementia, and nonaphasic frontotemporal dementia. 2008;21 :418–432.
92. Wilson SM , Dronkers NF , Ogar JM , Neural correlates of syntactic processing in the nonfluent variant of primary progressive aphasia. J Neurosci. 2010;30 :16845–16854.21159955
93. Weintraub S , Mesulam MM , Wieneke C , Rademaker A , Rogalski EJ , Thompson CK . The northwestern anagram test: measuring sentence production in primary progressive aphasia. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias. 2009;24 :408–416.
94. Libon DJ , Xie SX , Moore P , Patterns of neuropsychological impairment in frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. 2007;68 :369–375.17261685
95. Libon DJ , Xie SX , WANG X , Neuropsychological decline in frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a longitudinal analysis. Neuropsychology. 2009;23 :337–346.19413447
96. Grossman M , Moore P . A longitudinal study of sentence comprehension difficulty in primary progressive aphasia. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry. 2005;76 :644–649.
97. Rogalski E , Cobia D , Harrison TM , Wieneke C , Weintraub S , Mesulam MM . Progression of language decline and cortical atrophy in subtypes of primary progressive aphasia. Neurology. 2011;76 :1804–1810.21606451
98. Aphasia Benson D. , Alexia and Agraphia: Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery Monographs. Churchill Livingstone; 1979.
99. Agrammatism Goodglass H. . Studies in neurolinguistics; 1976.
100. Rohrer JD , Lashley T , Schott JM , Clinical and neuroanatomical signatures of tissue pathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Brain. 2011;134 :2565–2581.21908872
101. Nestor PJ , Graham NL , Fryer TD , Williams GB , Patterson K , Hodges JR . Progressive non-fluent aphasia is associated with hypometabolism centred on the left anterior insula. Brain. 2003;126 :2406–2418.12902311
102. Galantucci S , Tartaglia MC , Wilson SM , White matter damage in primary progressive aphasias: a diffusion tensor tractography study. Brain. 2011;134 :3011–3029.21666264
103. Agosta F , Scola E , Canu E , White matter damage in frontotemporal lobar degeneration spectrum. Cereb Cortex. 2012;22 :2705–2714.21988828
104. Schwindt GC , Graham NL , Rochon E , Whole-brain white matter disruption in semantic and nonfluent variants of primary progressive aphasia. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013;34 :973–984.22109837
105. Catani M , Mesulam MM , Jakobsen E , A novel frontal pathway underlies verbal fluency in primary progressive aphasia. Brain. 2013;136 :2619–2628.23820597
106. Grossman M , Powers JM , Ash SP , Disruption of large-scale neural networks in non-fluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia associated with frontotemporal degeneration pathology. 2013;127 :106–120.
107. Friederici AD . The brain basis of language processing: from structure to function. Physiological Reviews. 2011;91 :1357–1392.22013214
108. Hickok G , Poeppel D . The cortical organization of speech processing. Nature Rev Neurosci. Nature Publishing Group; 2007;8 :393–402.17431404
109. Cooke A , Devita C , Gee J , Neural basis for sentence comprehension deficits in frontotemporal dementia. Brain and Language. 2003;85 :211–221.12735939
110. Wilson SM , DeMarco AT , Henry ML , Variable disruption of a syntactic processing network in primary progressive aphasia. Brain. 2016;139 :2994–3006.27554388
111. Giannini LAA , Irwin DJ , McMillan CT , Clinical marker for Alzheimer’s disease pathology in logopenic primary progressive aphasia. Neurology. 2017;in press.
112. Kim G , Ahmadian SS , Peterson M , Asymmetric pathology in primary progressive aphasia with progranulin mutations and TDP inclusions. Neurology. 2016;86 :627–636.26791154
113. Mesulam MM , Weintraub S , Rogalski EJ , Wieneke C , Geula C , Bigio EH . Asymmetry and heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s and frontotemporal pathology in primary progressive aphasia. Brain. 2014;137 :1176–1192.24574501
114. Irwin DJ , McMillan CT , Brettschneider J , Cognitive decline and reduced survival in C9orf72 expansion frontotemporal degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry. 2013;84 :163–169.
115. Mohr JP , PESSIN MS , FINKELSTEIN S , FUNKENSTEIN HH . Broca aphasia Pathologic and clinical. Neurology. 1978;28 :311–311.565019
116. Alexander MP , Naeser MA , Palumbo C . Broca’s area aphasias Aphasia after lesions including the frontal operculum. Neurology. 1990;40 :353–353.2300260
117. Naeser MA , Hayward RW . Lesion localization in aphasia with cranial computed tomography and the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Exam. Neurology. 1978;28 :545–545.565884
118. Gorno-Tempini ML , Brambati SM , Ginex V , The logopenic/phonological variant of primary progressive aphasia. Neurology. 2008;71 :1227–1234.18633132
119. Baddeley A Working memory: looking back and looking forward. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2003;4 :829.14523382
120. Teichmann M , Kas A , Boutet C , Deciphering logopenic primary progressive aphasia: a clinical, imaging and biomarker investigation. Brain. 2013;136 :3474–3488.24108322
121. Ardila A A review of conduction aphasia. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2010;10 :499–503.20711691
122. Benson DF , Sheremata WA , Bouchard R , Segarra JM , Price D , Geschwind N . Conduction aphasia. A clinicopathological study. Arch Neurol. 1973;28 :339–346.4696016
123. Bonner MF , Grossman M . Gray matter density of auditory association cortex relates to knowledge of sound concepts in primary progressive aphasia. J Neurosci. 2012;32 :7986–7991.22674273
124. Rabinovici GD , Jagust WJ , Furst AJ , Abeta amyloid and glucose metabolism in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol. 2008;64 :388–401.18991338
125. Lehmann M , Ghosh PM , Madison C , Diverging patterns of amyloid deposition and hypometabolism in clinical variants of probable Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2013;136 :844–858.23358601
126. Giannini LAA , Irwin DJ , McMillan CT , Clinical marker for Alzheimer disease pathology in logopenic primary progressive aphasia. Neurology. 2017;88 :2276–2284.28515265
127. Bernal B , Ardila A . The role of the arcuate fasciculus in conduction aphasia. Brain. 2009;132 :2309–2316.19690094
128. Geschwind N Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man. I. Brain 1965;88 :237–294.5318481
129. Catani M , Mesulam M . The arcuate fasciculus and the disconnection theme in language and aphasia: history and current state. Cortex. 2008;44 :953–961.18614162
130. Warrington EK , Shallice T . The selective impairment of auditory verbal short-term memory. Brain. 1969;92 :885–896.5364015
131. Warrington EK , Logue V , Pratt RT . The anatomical localisation of selective impairment of auditory verbal short-term memory. Neuropsychologia. 1971;9 :377–387.5164373
