LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101587185
40726
Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener
Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis &amp; frontotemporal degeneration
2167-8421
2167-9223

28054827
7409990
10.1080/21678421.2016.1267768
NIHMS1609215
Article
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - frontotemporal spectrum disorder (ALS-FTSD): Revised diagnostic criteria
Strong Michael J. 1
Abrahams Sharon 2
Goldstein Laura H. 3
Woolley Susan 4
Mclaughlin Paula 5
Snowden Julie 6
Mioshi Eneida 7
Roberts-South Angie 8
Benatar Michael 9
Hortobágyi Tibor 10
Rosenfeld Jeffrey 11
Silani Vincenzo 12
Ince Paul G 13
Turner Martin R. 14
1 Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, Schulich School of Medicine &amp; Dentistry, London, Ontario, Canada
2 Department of Psychology, School of Philosophy, Psychology &amp; Language Sciences, Euan MacDonald Centre for Motor Neurone Disease Research, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
3 King’s College London, Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, London, UK
4 Forbes Norris MDA/ALS Research Centre, California Pacific Medical Centre, San Francisco, CA, USA
5 Western University, Schulich School of Medicine &amp; Dentistry, London, ON, Canada
6 Greater Manchester Neuroscience Centre, Salford Royal NHS Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
7 Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
8 Northwestern University, Roxelyn and Richard Pepper Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Evanston, IL, USA
9 Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA
10 Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
11 Department of Neurology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA, USA
12 Department of Neurology and Laboratory Neuroscience - IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, ‘Dino Ferrari’ Centre, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
13 Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
14 Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Listing of conference attendees

Michael Strong (conference organiser and chair), Sharon Abrahams, Thomas Bak, Emma Beeldman, Steve Bell, Michael Benatar, Mervin Blair, Robert Bowser, Emanuele Buratti, Danae Campos-Melos, Marvin Chum, Kristy Coleman, Chris Crockford, Karen Dunkerley, Marwa Elamin, Sali Farhan, Elizabeth Finger, Claire Flaherty, Tania Gendron, Laura Goldstein, Rosanne Govaarts, Francois Gros-Louis, Murray Grossman, Tibor Hortobagyi, Sarah Jesso, Kalyani Kansal, Yasumasa Kokubo, Suzee Lee, Julia MacKinley, Paula McLaughlin, Eneida Mioshi, Hiroshi Mitsumoto, Jennifer Murphy, Catherine Lomen-Hoerth, Lindsay Oliver, Chiadi Onyike, JB Orange, Markus Otto, Erik Pioro, Joost Raaphorst, Angela Roberts, Janice Robertson, Jonathon Rohrer, Jeffrey Rosenfeld, Vincenzo Silani, Julie Snowden, Carmela Tartaglia, Tamara Tavares, Christine Vande Velde, Kathryn Volkening, Susan Woolley.

10 7 2020
05 1 2017
5 2017
06 8 2020
18 3-4 153174
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
This article presents the revised consensus criteria for the diagnosis of frontotemporal dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) based on an international research workshop on frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and ALS held in London, Canada in June 2015. Since the publication of the Strong criteria, there have been considerable advances in the understanding of the neuropsychological profile of patients with ALS. Not only is the breadth and depth of neuropsychological findings broader than previously recognised – – including deficits in social cognition and language – but mixed deficits may also occur. Evidence now shows that the neuropsychological deficits in ALS are extremely heterogeneous, affecting over 50% of persons with ALS. When present, these deficits significantly and adversely impact patient survival. It is the recognition of this clinical heterogeneity in association with neuroimaging, genetic and neuropathological advances that has led to the current re-conceptualisation that neuropsychological deficits in ALS fall along a spectrum. These revised consensus criteria expand upon those of 2009 and embrace the concept of the frontotemporal spectrum disorder of ALS (ALS-FTSD).

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
frontotemporal dementia
neuropsychology
cognition
behaviour
genetics

Introduction

While the core feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a relentless loss of motor function leading to paralysis and ultimately death, the awareness that it can be associated with one or more features of frontotemporal dysfunction has gained increasing acceptance (1). This in part can be traced to the development of international criteria for the diagnosis of frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS in 2009 (Strong criteria) (2,3). These criteria, which incorporated clinical, electrophysiological, neuropsychological, genetic and neuropathological characteristics, recognised that ALS could exist as a pure motor syndrome but that it can coexist with a frontotemporal dementia (ALS-FTD) as defined by the Neary or Hodges criteria (4,5). The criteria further recognised that both behaviour and/or cognitive features, not sufficient to meet criteria for the diagnosis of dementia but sufficient to be detected and/or give rise to impairment, could exist (termed ALS behavioural impairment [ALSbi] and ALS cognitive impairment [ALSci], respectively). The criteria also acknowledged that a small population of patients could develop dementia not typical of FTD (ALS-Dementia).

Since the introduction of the Strong criteria, our understanding of the breadth and impact of frontotemporal dysfunction has grown considerably. With this has come the realisation that the Strong criteria do not adequately recognise impairments in social cognition, language or memory, or the presence of neuropsychiatric symptoms and that these deficits are manifestations of the spectrum of deficits resulting from frontotemporal dysfunction. It is for this reason that we believe that the term frontotemporal spectrum disorder (ALS-FTSD) is most appropriate to characterise the breadth and severity of frontotemporal dysfunction that can be encountered in association with ALS. Moreover, the Strong criteria were not readily adapted to languages other than English and were insufficiently operationalised for easy use in everyday clinical practice or in clinical trials. Equally important, there have been significant advances in the genetics of ALS which have provided novel insights into the pathobiology of ALS-FTSD. Given this, a consensus conference was convened in the summer of 2015 to revisit the 2009 Strong criteria. A consensus development panel approach was utilised, which consisted of a group of content experts (manuscript authors) who identified key topic areas of relevance to developing these revised international guidelines. The expert panel then identified key international content experts who attended and/or presented at the international consensus conference in the summer of 2015. At the end of day 3 of the consensus conference, a round table discussion was held in which all attendees provided input into the key parameters of the revised criteria. Members of the consensus panel formulated the revised criteria, following which the criteria were provided to the conference attendees for commentary and/or revisions.

To that end, this article presents the revised Strong criteria. In doing so, we have addressed several key issues, including the recognition that any criteria must be sufficiently broad to be adequate for research purposes while at the same time be nimble enough to be of utility clinically. As such, beyond expanding the nature of neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric deficits that characterise ALS- FTSD, a key advance in this revision is the inclusion of three levels of complexity or depth of assessment: criteria which can be applied in everyday clinical use (Level I), those which can be utilised for prognostic stratification in clinical trials (Level II), and those which are considered as research intensive with the goal of better defining the nature and extent of FTSD in ALS (Level III) (Figure 1). The criteria are intentionally hierarchical. Level I incorporates tools that can be easily applied at the bedside and are of low statistical complexity, require the least amount of effort to implement, rely upon well-validated tools that have already been applied in the ALS population, and while not requiring neuropsychological support for implementation, would benefit from neuropsychological support for interpretation. Level III are the most advanced criteria and contain the core elements of the Level I testing but are of high statistical complexity, require a maximum amount of time and effort to complete, include research tools not yet validated in a broader ALS population, and would be considered research grade. Level II criteria are anticipated to be applicable to clinical trials where a moderate amount of effort could be expended. Level II criteria also would consist of a minimum dataset for inclusion in case publications. In contrast to Level I, Level II criteria require the engagement of either neuropsychologists or speech-language pathologists to evaluate the testing paradigms, to oversee or manage test administration and to interpret results.

Participants at the consensus conference also agreed that the core features of the diagnostic algorithm, and most specifically the use of the diagnostic axis model, should remain while recognising that specific components would need either modification or expansion. Given this, the revised criteria continue to use the three primary ‘diagnostic axes’, including: Axis I – defining the motor neuron disease variant; Axis II – defining the cognitive and behavioural dysfunction; and, Axis III – additional non-motor disease manifestations. It was felt that the use of Axis IV which previously was included in order to define the presence of disease modifiers, did not contribute to the characterisation of the FTSD of ALS and thus it has been omitted in the revised criteria presented here.

Axis I. Defining the motor neuron disease variant

The phenotypic variability within ALS is significant and includes variability in age of onset, site of onset, the degree of upper verses lower motor involvement, the rate of disease progression and survival. Until such time as the basis for this heterogeneity is elucidated, it is helpful to recognise distinct clinical syndromes that may be characterised by the predominance of upper motor neuron degeneration (e.g. primary lateral sclerosis [PLS]), lower motor neuron neurodegeneration (e.g. progressive muscular atrophy [PMA]), or a combination of both UMN and LMN degeneration which typifies the most frequent phenotype, namely ALS; by the neuroanatomical region primarily affected (e.g. progressive bulbar palsy [PBP]); or by the absence (e.g. monomelic amyotrophy) or presence of left-right symmetry (e.g. brachial amyotrophic diplegia, also known as flail arm, or leg amyotrophic diplegia).

Axis I diagnostic criteria

Since the publication of the original Strong criteria, there has been considerable debate with respect to the minimal criteria necessary to diagnose ALS, particularly with respect to the presence or absence of active denervation as diagnostic of LMN dysfunction. In the original Strong criteria, it was recommended that the El Escorial criteria (revised) be used for the diagnosis of ALS (6–8). In doing so, a multimodality approach toward identification of both UMN and LMN dysfunction using both clinical and electrodiagnostic studies was recommended, along with incorporation of genetic studies as appropriate. Neuroimaging studies were felt to be contributory when structural pathology was considered a diagnostic possibility but were otherwise relegated to being a research tool. The criteria further required the absence of any disease process that might account for the findings. In this context, the diagnosis of ALS required the presence of multisegmental LMN degeneration by either clinical or electrophysiological criteria combined with evidence of UMN dysfunction, with progression. Progressive upper or lower motor neuron dysfunction in a single segment, even if isolated, was considered sufficient for the diagnosis in the presence of a mutation in a known ALS causative gene.

There has since been considerable debate about the genesis of the delay in diagnosing ALS and whether such delays may hamper not only enrolment in therapeutic trials but the ability to impact on the earliest stages of the disease process. This has led to the introduction of alternative diagnostic algorithms, the intent of which are to include greater numbers of patients in clinical studies or trials who may have the potential of developing ALS while not yet fully manifesting the complete syndrome. The Awaji criteria, which emerged from a consensus conference held in 2006, proposed two fundamental changes to the revised El Escorial (9). The first proposed change was to use both electromyography and clinical data simultaneously to determine the presence of LMN dysfunction. For example, atrophy in an ulnar innervated C8 muscle along with evidence of LMN pathology in the deltoid muscle, would be sufficient to declare the limb/region affected. The second proposed change was to consider fasciculation potentials as evidence of ongoing denervation, equivalent in importance to fibrillation potentials. While controversy has arisen over the notion that fasciculations represent ongoing denervation, there is greater agreement that unstable and complex fasciculations should be accorded greater significance. The Awaji criteria have been shown to have a higher sensitivity than the El Escorial criteria (revised) while maintaining the same specificity, with the diagnostic benefits being most apparent in the bulbar-onset and limb-onset patients (10–12). This increased sensitivity, however, is gained in large part by the combination of two El Escorial criteria (probable and laboratory supported probable) into a single category. The introduction of a ‘possible’ diagnostic category to the Awaji criteria was of particular benefit in enhancing the early diagnosis of ALS and more specifically in the limb-onset subgroup (13).

More recently, the El Escorial criteria have been revisited in an effort to accommodate a postulated broader ALS phenotype (14). The revised iteration of the criteria proposed that the diagnosis of ALS would require, at minimum, progressive UMN and LMN deficits in at least one limb or region (previous possible ALS) or lower motor neuron deficits as defined by clinical examination (one region) and/or by EMG in two body regions (defined as bulbar, cervical, thoracic, lumbosacral). The EMG findings needed to include neurogenic potentials and fibrillation potentials and/or sharp waves. In this scheme, restricted phenotypes of ALS would now be considered as including progressive bulbar palsy, flail arm and flail leg syndrome, progressive muscular atrophy and primary lateral sclerosis. In the context of the flail arm and flail leg syndromes, as well as progressive muscular atrophy, the diagnosis of ALS could be rendered in the absence of evidence of UMN dysfunction. It was noted, however that the modifications of the El Escorial criteria as proposed by Ludolph et al. (2015) were as yet to be validated in longitudinal studies, and in particular the inclusion of pure LMN syndromes, as being equivalent to a diagnosis of ALS.

The role of biomarkers in the diagnosis and monitoring of progression in ALS continues to evolve, although to date, no markers specific to the presence of frontotemporal dysfunction have been validated. Thus, while there is evidence to suggest that a number of biomarkers within either cerebrospinal fluid or blood may prove to be of value in the diagnostic work-up of ALS patients with or without frontotemporal dysfunction, including high molecular weight neurofilament, phospho-tau (including measures of total tau), TDP-43, APOE ε2 and beta-amyloid are not yet ready to be included in Level I diagnostic work-up (15–21). Furthermore, while it is increasingly likely that proteomic profiling of CSF will enhance the sensitivity and specificity of biomarker utilisation in the diagnosis when used either independently or within a broader array of investigations including MR imaging (22,23), such testing should remain within the Level III work-up although a restricted number (e.g. pNFH, phospho-tau, TDP-43, APOE ε2) could be considered in Level II.

Axis I genetic diagnosis

Since the publication of the original consensus criteria, significant advances have been made in our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of ALS; there are now over 17 Mendelian variants known to be associated with ALS that are considered causative (Table 1). In addition to these genes, an ever-expanding list of disease-associated or disease-modifying genes are being discovered (Supplemental Table 1). While these discoveries are helping to advance our understanding of ALS, they also add substantial complexity in the clinical realm. While genetic characterisation of patients with ALS and ALS-FTSD is encouraged, it is critical to remember that the identification of a pathogenic variant in an ALS-causing gene does not imply the presence of disease. Moreover, while the term ‘familial’ remains useful in describing the presence of a family history (i.e. at least two affected biological relatives) and as a surrogate for the likelihood of identifying a genetic cause of disease, it is important to remember that all genes implicated in familial forms of ALS also have been found to harbour mutations in a small subset of patients with apparently sporadic ALS. Moreover, by virtue of factors such as recessive inheritance, compound heterozygosity, de novo mutations, misdiagnosis, small sibship size, reduced penetrance, lack of family information, including paternity, etc., a family history may frequently be lacking in genetic forms of disease. The term ‘familial’ therefore should not be used interchangeably with ‘genetic’(24). Conversely, given a lifetime risk of ALS, which approximates 1:350 for males and 1:400 for females, coincidental familial clustering is a realistic consideration among pedigrees with only two affected individuals which might otherwise be considered to be clinical examples of Mendelian inheritance (24).

Among ALS-disease causing genes, there are several that bear specific mention because their presence is disproportionately associated with frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS, sufficient to warrant genetic testing among those individuals with frontotemporal dysfunction regardless of the presence or absence of a family history. The prototypic gene amongst these is represented by the pathological hexanucleotide repeat (GGGGCC) expansions of C9orf72, which is the most common genetic modification affecting FALS (60–70%) as well as those afflicted with familial FTD (approximately 18% of cases). The presence of cognitive impairment in patients carrying a C9orf72 expansion is several-fold greater than those without (40–50% vs. 8–9%, respectively) (25). In rare instances in which ALS patients present with psychosis and marked lack of insight, there is also a higher likelihood of harbouring the pathological C9orf72 expansion (26).

Axis I recommendation

The classification of frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS should be hierarchical and begin with a description of the motor neuron disorder/syndrome.

While consensus has not yet been achieved with respect to the use of clinical syndromic terms, we perceive value in the use of terms such as progressive muscular atrophy, upper motor neuron predominant ALS and progressive bulbar palsy, for example, and recognise that the clinical syndrome may evolve over time. Such terminology is appropriately used in the clinic (Level I), in clinical trials (Level II) and as part of the broader research endeavour (Level III). Quite distinct from this syndromic nomenclature, however, is the use of diagnostic criteria such as the revised El Escorial and Awaji criteria for clinical trials (Level II) and research purposes (Level III). It is recommended that patients diagnosed with ALS should fulfil either the El Escorial criteria (revised) or the Awaji criteria (revised).

Genetic testing is recommended when a family history is present (by which we mean that at least one other biological relative has been diagnosed with ALS or FTD), as the El Escorial criteria require only progressive upper or lower motor neuron dysfunction in the presence of a mutation in a gene known to cause ALS. We recommend that the term ‘genetic ALS’ be used instead of ‘familial ALS’, especially when a genetic cause of disease is identified despite the absence of a family history. Appropriate genetic counselling should always be provided. For clinical trials (level II) and for research purposes (level III), a full genetic analysis (either a panel of genes established to cause ALS (Table 1)), or whole exome/genome sequencing) is encouraged, and genetic counselling provided whenever genetic test results will be shared with the patient.

Axis II. Defining the neuropsychological deficits

The Strong criteria recognised the potential presence of FTD in ALS and for those patients not reaching threshold for a full FTD diagnosis, also provided a means of classifying the presence of cognitive or behavioural involvement – ALSci and ALSbi, respectively. Since the publication of the consensus criteria in 2009, however, developments in the field have necessitated the revision of these definitions. First, increasing evidence has accrued as to the heterogeneity of cognitive impairment in ALS. Thus, while previous emphasis had been placed on executive dysfunction, there is now evidence that language dysfunction may be as, if not more, common and can occur in patients without executive dysfunction (27,28). Deficits in social cognition also have been highlighted, although it is not entirely clear whether social cognition deficits are completely independent of executive dysfunction in ALS (29–36). Additionally, while the original ALSci and ALSbi classifications have been borne out by cluster analysis, it has been suggested that other cognitively-impaired patients cannot be classified according to the original criteria (36). There is also some controversy (to be considered below) about the role of memory dysfunction in the classification of cognitive impairment in people with ALS. Secondly, revised consensus criteria for the diagnosis of behavioural variant FTD (bvFTD) highlight the need for revising the current consensus criteria (37).

Our aim, therefore, is to revise the previous classifications of cognitive and behavioural involvement in ALS to take into account the extended evidence base of potential deficits that may need to be considered in arriving at a classification of impairment and to account for the increased knowledge and heterogeneity of impairment profiles. First, we examine the developments below in specific cognitive domains that have given rise to this need for revision; then we consider revisions to the classification of behavioural and neuropsychiatric symptoms and provide recommendations regarding testing paradigms (Supplemental Table 2).

Neuropsychological domains

a) Executive dysfunction and Social Cognition

Executive dysfunction is characteristic of the profile of cognitive deficits in ALS (38), a finding that has been confirmed through population based studies (39) and meta-analyses (40). The signature executive functions deficit is demonstrated through assessment of verbal fluency (41–44). This is a commonly used clinical instrument, involving the generation of lists of words beginning with a specified letter (letter fluency) or semantic category (e.g. animal fluency), the former being the more widely recognised marker of impairment in ALS. Letter fluency involves the interaction of a number of cognitive processes, specifically executive processes of initiation, strategy formation, set-shifting, sustained attention and inhibition, but in addition language functions involved in word retrieval. It has been shown that poor letter fluency in ALS is related to executive dysfunction (41). Deficits on letter fluency tasks occur early in the course of the disease (45), correlate with ocular movement abnormalities (46), and are more prominent in but not restricted to patients with pseudobulbar palsy (42). Based on limited published literature, impaired verbal fluency does not appear to be a feature of SOD1-ALS (47).

Verbal fluency deficits in ALS also have been shown to be a marker of frontal lobe dysfunction, in particular the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and inferior frontal gyrus, as demonstrated with functional and structural neuroimaging (48–51). Performance in verbal fluency can be affected by motor disability with difficulties in writing or in speaking, which magnify deficits. This has necessitated the development of the Verbal Fluency Index that controls for physical motor impairments by incorporating a timed condition in which the person either reads or copies previously generated words and from which an estimate of the average time taken to think of each word is calculated. Using the Verbal Fluency Index, deficits have been repeatedly demonstrated that are independent of motor disability (41).

Executive dysfunction in ALS has been revealed across a range of tests including readily available clinical measures and experimental procedures. Deficits have been reliably shown on standard assessments measuring attention monitoring and switching, rule deduction, and cognitive flexibility, such as the Trail Making Test or the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (52,53). A recent meta-analysis of studies using the latter revealed that patients with ALS made more errors (continuing to choose the previously correct rule) and took longer to learn new rules (54). Similar impairments have been shown on other card sorting concept formation tasks such as from the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System Sorting Test (34,55). Furthermore, deficits have been revealed on tests highly reliant on manipulating concepts in working memory such as reverse digit span or the N-Back task and most recently on tests of divided attention in which two tasks are undertaken concurrently, such as visual processing speed task and digit recall (51).

Performance on standard neuropsychological tests of executive function are mostly mediated by functions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, but studies have also revealed deficits using experimental measures more dependent on orbitomedial prefrontal functions. ALS patients have shown abnormal risk taking on the Iowa Gambling Task (29). Deficits have been shown using two more ecologically valid measures of executive functions where patients demonstrate difficulties in reasoning, coordinating rules and mental heuristics – the Medication Scheduling Task (56) and the Holiday Apartment Task (57).

Social cognition has recently become a focus of investigation in ALS, having been a notable feature of the FTD profile for some time. A recently updated meta-analysis noted the new addition of social cognition deficits as integral to the cognitive profile in ALS (40). Nevertheless, there remains some debate as to the source of the deficits in social cognition with some studies showing an independence of executive dysfunction and others not (34,57). Patients with ALS show deficits across a range of social cognitive processes including altered emotional processing and reduced capacity to recognise emotional (particularly negative) facial expressions although this is more likely in those with ALS-FTD (29,58–60). ALS patients also have difficulty on tests specific to Theory of Mind, in which the thoughts or beliefs of another are inferred. One-third of patients have been shown to be impaired at detecting a faux pas (57) and such difficulties have been related to specific problems with understanding social situations (30).

A fundamental process in social cognition is the interpretation of the direction of eye gaze as assessed through the Judgement of Preference Task (29). The finding of a deficit on this task was extended to reveal impaired affective and to a lesser extent cognitive Theory of Mind (35).

In patients meeting criteria for ALS-FTD, executive/social cognition deficits are a virtually ubiquitous feature and cover the range of difficulties described above.

b) Language dysfunction

The last two decades have seen a rising interest in defining the prevalence and the nature of the language impairment in ALS (27,39,61–64). The extent to which impairments in word retrieval, sentence processing, spoken language, and pragmatic language are ‘pure’ language deficits versus downstream manifestations of other disrupted cognitive domains (e.g. executive function) continues to be debated. Not all patients with ALSci present with obvious language impairments (65). Moreover, language deficits in ALSci can be challenging to disentangle from motor speech deficits and also from ALS-FTD, which can present similarly to semantic and non-fluent variants of primary progressive aphasia. Notwithstanding these diagnostic challenges, an estimated 35-40% of individuals with ALS but no dementia may demonstrate language impairments (27). These language impairments are dissociable from motor and executive function impairments (28,62,66–69), raising the possibility that impairments in language may both contribute to the profile of ALS and also occur as part of a mixed cognitive profile that includes executive function impairments or social cognition impairments (27,36).

In ALS, word retrieval for nouns and object knowledge are often reported as mildly impaired compared with controls (28,49,62,70,71). In contrast to nouns, verb naming and action verb processing deficits are a more consistent finding in ALS (27,28,62,69,71–73). Verb deficits in ALS are often associated with atrophy in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and motor cortices (69,71,72). As such, they may be an important marker of cognitive impairment in ALS. While the theoretical underpinning of the object-action (i.e. noun-action verb) dissociation observed in ALSci remains unclear (73), these findings suggest that the assessment of word retrieval impairments may benefit from including tests that measure the retrieval and comprehension of both nouns and action verbs.

Sentence processing difficulties also have emerged as a prominent feature in the language profile of ALS (27,28,72,74,75). Recent work suggests that syntax and sentence processing deficits in ALS probably exist on a spectrum with modest impairments emerging in ALS that progress in severity for patients with ALS-FTD (75). While more research is needed, deficits in syntax processing have been dissociated from both executive function and motor speech impairments (28), suggesting that syntax processing impairments may contribute uniquely to the language profile of ALS.

There is emerging evidence that, in addition to sentence processing deficits, individuals with ALS also produce sentences with a greater number of grammar and morphology errors compared to healthy adults (28,62,66). Grammatical errors reported from studies of spoken language in ALS include incomplete utterances (28,66,68), missing determiners (66), and verb phrase errors (66). Productivity deficits also characterise the spoken language of individuals with ALS including reduced utterance length and lower total word output, features that are probably related to the motor speech and respiratory challenges in ALS (28,67,68). Beyond grammar and productivity impairments, other linguistic and pragmatic aspects of spoken language are affected in ALS including informativeness (e.g. fewer content or information words in proportion to the total words produced) (68,76); semantic and verbal paraphasias (28,68); poor narrative coherence and cohesion (66); and impaired topic management (76). While it remains an evolving area of research, investigators have reported impaired pragmatic language in ALS including figurative and non-literal language processing, findings that are often attributed to frontal lobe dysfunction (76).

Collectively, the research over the last decade underscores the importance of considering language impairments in the profile of ALSci. Although analysis of spoken language tasks may be more challenging for typical clinical environments, due to their more labour intensive analyses, clinicians and researchers can glean much about the profile of language impairments in ALS using a number of available standardised instruments (Supplemental Table 2).

The relationship between language impairment and ALS-FTD also is incompletely understood. Progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA) and semantic dementia (SD) are clinical forms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration incorporated within previous diagnostic criteria (5). Both PNFA and SD have been reported in association with ALS (77–80). On the other hand, specific language problems, such as in syntactic comprehension, are reported to be common in patients meeting behavioural criteria for ALS-FTD (75). Criteria for ALS-FTD need to recognise that language problems play a contributory role.

c) Memory

Memory deficits in ALS have been studied extensively. However, in the current recommendations, isolated memory impairment does not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of ALSci. The exclusion of memory dysfunction from the current criteria relates in part to the lack of consensus about the characterisation of memory deficits in ALS. Study results are wide ranging and have identified impairments in encoding (81–83), immediate or delayed recall (39,78,81,83–85), recognition (86), or the involvement of a combination of memory processes. Other studies suggest intact recognition memory (39,83,87).

An updated meta-analysis in ALS showed a small effect size for delayed verbal memory as well as executive dysfunction, with larger effect sizes for other domains (fluency, language and social cognition) (40). Although delayed verbal memory recall was associated with a greater effect size than visual memory (40), visual memory deficits have been detected (78). Memory deficits are detected in ALS patients without dementia that correlate with grey matter hippocampal volumes (85) and memory scores may differ significantly from controls even in cognitively-normal ALS patients (78). ALS patients with baseline cognitive impairment demonstrate decline in verbal delayed recall when studied longitudinally (84).

Of importance for further understanding why isolated memory involvement should not be used to classify ALSci, memory impairment in ALS rarely occurs in isolation (4%), which is a comparable rate to that seen in controls (39). The association between executive dysfunction and memory impairment in ALS is asserted repeatedly (78,81– 83,86,87). Variables such as selective attention and mental control explain substantial variance in memory scores. Interestingly, memory deficits are the least common comorbidity in ALSci patients who present with executive dysfunction (39).

With respect to the broader implications of detecting memory impairment in people with ALS, a population based study detected Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in 1.9% of ALS patients, compared to 13.8% of the sample who had FTD (39). In a study of 279 ALS patients (78), &lt;2% met diagnostic criteria for AD, a frequency lower than the national rate of AD in 4% of the US population of adults below age 64 years (88). In the ALS study, similarities in cognitive performance across cognitive diagnostic subgroups suggested different levels of severity within the same progressive disease subsumed by executive dysfunction. The results did not support the presence of discrete subtypes (i.e. an amnestic subtype). Qualitative differences in memory distinguish ALS patients from patients with AD (83) and those with the AD prodrome of mild cognitive impairment-amnestic type (86).

Although isolated memory impairment does not qualify for the diagnosis of ALSci, memory impairment may nonetheless be problematic for patients, particularly for those in the older age segment of its distribution. To better understand its nature, assessment of memory in ALS should also analyse domains of attention, language, and executive functioning and age-related changes in the speed of processing. Ideally, research studies investigating memory should analyse multiple variables such as encoding, storage, recall, processing speed, and recognition rather than summarising a single memory composite score, which may obscure the understanding of the specific memory deficit (86). As with any clinical evaluation, memory assessment in ALS should consider alternative conditions that result in memory impairment and factors such as respiratory muscle weakness that may give rise to nocturnal hypoxaemia. Supplemental Table 2 provides a list of screening measures and comprehensive memory tests that can be used in the ALS population.

d) Behavioural changes and neuropsychiatric symptoms

Apathy is the most frequently identified behaviour symptom in ALS, detected in up to 70% of patients (89–95). There is not a clear link to specific ALS phenotypes, apathy being pervasive, and severe apathy being linked to poorer prognosis in ALS (96). ALS patients may present with other types of behaviour change including disinhibition, loss of sympathy/egocentric behaviour, perseverative and stereotyped behaviour and a change in dietary habits, although not as commonly as apathy (91,97,98).

When assessing behavioural change in ALS, it is important to consider potential confounds of respiratory insufficiency, physical disability and psychological reactions to the disease including mood. Reports from family members or friends are essential, especially in light of the patient’s lack of insight. Baseline/premorbid psychological and behavioural status must be determined in order to assess whether behavioural abnormalities are 1) new; 2) associated with the time of onset of ALS (recognising as stated earlier that a proportion of FTD patients will develop either clinical or electrophysiological features consistent with either ALS or a motor neuron disease); and 3) disabling or causing clear impairment. Individuals assessing these patients also need to be knowledgeable about pseudobulbar affect, which may be misinterpreted by some as behavioural disinhibition, inappropriateness, or depression. In turn, the distinction between apathy and depression is of great relevance not only for the diagnosis of ALSbi, but also for the clinical management of depression (when present) and provision of family support.

It is important to acknowledge that these behavioural symptoms often coexist with deficits in cognitive domains (see ALScbi; see Table 2). In addition, ALSbi and ALSci can coexist with different levels of severity (99–101). In some patients the combination of behavioural and cognitive changes are sufficient to meet criteria for ALS-FTD.

Behavioural changes and neuropsychiatric symptoms have been merged into one category to align bvFTD current criteria with current research findings, as indicated in Supplementary Table 3.

Axis II recommendations

Since the introduction of the Strong criteria, several reliable screening and assessment tools have been developed with which to describe the cognitive, behavioural and language profile of an ALS patient. These tools have been validated and are readily applied in the clinical setting, allowing for brief screening or testing that can be introduced efficiently into the clinic as an indicator of those ALS patients who may require more intensive study (Supplemental Table 2). As such, therefore, it is recommended that each patient receive a screening assessment as a component of a Level I evaluation and, if impaired, that further testing is warranted.

Screening and brief assessments.

Screening assessments are designed first to identify those individuals who have evidence of frontotemporal dysfunction, and secondly, to provide some degree of differentiation as to the type of dysfunction. Where ALS screening tests are administered, ALSci is identified on the basis of the published cut-off scores. The advantage of using ALS screening tests such as the ECAS and ALS Cognitive Behavioural Screen (ALS-CBS) is that the identification of ALSci may otherwise be based on individual tests of variable levels of complexity, thereby contributing to the heterogeneity of identified samples. While both of these tools allow for the identification of ALSci, where further description of the extent of frontotemporal dysfunction is desirable, patients can then be assessed in greater detail using the tests proposed in Supplemental Table 2. To that end, it is recommended that either the ECAS or the ALS-CBS be administered to all patients.

The Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS).

ECAS is a multidomain brief assessment developed for use within the clinic or home visits by non-neuropsychology health professionals (102,103). It assesses a range of functions typically affected in ALS (ALS-Specific: Fluency, Executive Functions, Language Functions) including newly recognised deficits in language and social cognition. In addition, it assesses functions that are not typically affected in ALS but are common in disorders of older adults (ALS Non-specific: Memory, Visuospatial Functions). The ECAS also includes a separate semi-structured behaviour interview that should be undertaken with an informant/caregiver separately from the patient and is based on the five key behavioural domains for diagnosing FTD (see above) using the most recent diagnostic criteria (37) and can therefore be used to aid in the diagnosis of behavioural variant FTD.

The cognitive tests were specifically designed to allow for verbal and motor disability, incorporating the Verbal Fluency Index, and the whole assessment can be undertaken in either spoken or written format. The screen has been validated against extensive neuropsychological assessment and shows good sensitivity (85%) and specificity (85%) to cognitive impairment in ALS patients without dementia (104). In the English versions, abnormality cut-off scores were 105/136 for ECAS-Total Score and 77/100 for ALS-Specific Score. A five-point borderline range (105–110) and (77–82) produced optimal values maximising sensitivity without a significant reduction of specificity and is recommended particularly for highly educated patients. Additionally, the ECAS has been validated in German (104), Italian (105) and Chinese (106) and shows convergent validity with other general cognitive screening tools, including the Frontal Assessment Battery and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment. The ECAS has been translated into a number of other languages and adapted for a North American population.

ALS Cognitive Behavioural Screen (ALS-CBS).

The ALS-CBS (107) was developed as a quick, practical tool to aid in the identification of ALSci, ALSbi, and FTD in the clinical setting. It includes a cognitive section and a caregiver questionnaire. It has high concurrent validity with other ALS-specific measures (44) and has excellent accuracy (107). High inter-rater reliability and ease of use was demonstrated in a large, multicentre study (44). The ALS CBS has been translated into six languages and it has been validated in Portuguese (108) and Spanish (109). It is freely available and non-copyrighted, as is ECAS.

The ALS-CBS was developed to minimise motor or speech production involvement so patients can be tested during later stages of the disease. Responses can be provided verbally or in writing and can be generated with speech output devices or communicated with eye movements or mouthing. It can be administered by any clinical staff member, and requires approximately 5 min to complete. The cognitive section measures attention, concentration, working memory, fluency and tracking. Only the verbal fluency item is timed. Certain cognitive items were chosen based on research that identified an association between errors made on specific items and the severity of cognitive impairment in ALS. Scoring combines correct responses minus deductions for errors, with a total possible score of 20. Lower scores reflect greater impairment. Optimal cut-off scores were determined in the initial validation study (107). A cut-off of ≤10 for the cognitive section achieved 100% accuracy for identifying FTD in the study of ALS patients diagnosed with dementia based on a comprehensive neuropsychological battery. Scores at or below this cut-off raise strong suspicion of FTD and should prompt further assessment to confirm the diagnosis. A cut-off score of ≤16 suggests any cognitive impairment (either ALSci or ALS-FTD), and a score of ≥17 is recommended to exclude cognitive impairment.

The behavioural section comprises a 15-item Likert scale questionnaire completed by an inform- ant and assesses change since disease onset. Behavioural domains were selected to assess a variety of abnormalities known to occur in ALS and FTD, including alterations in empathy, personality, judgment, language, and insight. Total scores range from 0 to 45; lower scores indicate more pathology. For the behavioural section, a cut-off of ≤32 achieved 86% accuracy for correctly classifying ALS patients with FTD and a score of ≤36 best detects any behavioural impairment (ALSbi or ALS-FTD). Scores above ≥37 are suggestive of normal behaviour.

Domain-specific recommendations

ALS with cognitive impairment (ALSci)

A diagnosis of ALSci depends on evidence of either executive dysfunction (including social cognition) or language dysfunction or a combination of the two.

Executive impairment is defined as: Impaired verbal fluency (letter). Verbal fluency deficits must control for motor and/or speech impairments (41) to be valid.

OR

Impairment on two other non-overlapping measures (see below) of executive functions (which may include social cognition).

Language impairment is defined as: Impairment on two non-overlapping tests (which could include pragmatic function).

As the investigator or clinician elects to move to a higher level of complexity or depth of assessment (i.e. Level II and III; see Supplemental Table 2), impairment on individual measures (not screening tests) is defined as a score falling at or below the 5th percentile, compared to age- and education- matched norms. Deficits should not be better accounted for by the person’s premorbid intellectual level or native language, although this comparison might be best interpreted within a specialist clinical neuropsychological assessment. At both Level II and III studies, carefully matched control groups will help inform detection of impairment. In addition, at both Level II and III studies, a neuropsychologist and a speech language pathologist are considered mandatory to assist with the administration and interpretation of the test results. Where individual assessment tools (rather than a screening or brief assessment battery) are used, the identification deficits on non-overlapping measures should be guided by the following considerations: measures of impairment should not be derived from the same test; and, tests on which impairment is identified should not involve a similar format (e.g. investigators would not include impairment on two tests of attention-inhibition, or concept formation or two tests of naming, see Supplemental Table 2).

Although the above criteria will potentially exclude people who have a selective breakdown on only one executive function (other than verbal fluency) or language test, we are concerned not to over-diagnose ALSci.

Clinical assessments and research studies should rule out confounding factors that may or not may be associated with ALS. A comprehensive assessment should rule out other cognitive presentations. Assessment procedures should control for bulbar speech production impairments (dysarthria) and motor deficits wherever possible so that deficits are not primarily identified on the basis of timed tests. Where serial measurements are available, a decline from baseline of at least 1.5 sd on a measure might also be considered to indicate (new) impairment, although caution also has to be taken to evaluate the likely effect of repeated testing on performance where no new deficits are elicited, especially where parallel versions of tests are not available. For this reason, control groups are vitally important in clinical trials and longitudinal research studies.

ALS with behavioural impairment (ALSbi)

While both the ECAS and ALS-CBS contain behavioural measures, the delineation of the behavioural characteristics can be further gained through either the Motor Neuron Disease Behaviour Scale (MiND-B) (110), the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Frontotemporal Dementia-Questionnaire (ALSFTD-Q) (111) or the Frontal Behavioural Inventory – ALS Version (FBI-ALS) (44,112). In each, the diagnosis of ALSbi is dependent on evidence from informant interviews and clinical observation of alterations in behaviour that cannot be accounted for by disease-related limitations, psychological reaction to the ALS diagnosis, a premorbid personality disorder, the presence of a comorbid psychiatric disorder (e.g. anxiety or depression) or pseudobulbar affect.

MiND-B is a brief assessment (nine items) completed by a proxy informant who knows well the person diagnosed by ALS. It includes three domains: disinhibition, stereotypical behaviour and apathy. It is derived from the Cambridge Behavioural Inventory Revised, which was originally developed to be sensitive for FTD. The MiND-B was validated in ALS with a data driven approach. Two cut-offs to distinguish ALS from ALS plus (defined in MiND-B as patients with either ALSci or ALSbi) or FTD are available: 35/36: 90% sensitivity and 50% specificity and 33/36: 81% sensitivity and 75% specificity.

The ALSFTD-Q is a caregiver questionnaire that was developed to measure abnormal behavior change in ALS and avoid response bias due to physical disability. The 25 items were selected on the basis of a systematic review of the ALS literature and cover apathy, irritability, disinhibition, emotional lability and altered food preference. It shows good construct validity against other measures of behaviour change (Frontal Systems Behaviour Scale and Frontal Behaviour Inventory) and discriminates well ALS-FTD from ALS and controls. The cut-offs for this scale provide distinctions between mild behavioural symptoms (ALSbi) and more severe symptoms, although not for a particular behaviour.

Loss of insight must be established by comparing patients’ and informants’ accounts of behavioural change and this may require clinical opinion. One means of operationalising insight is to analyse standardised score discrepancies between patient self-reports and caregiver reports of patient behaviour. One study determined that ALS-FTD patients report significantly less behavioural change over time compared to their caregivers, and report fewer behavioural abnormalities overall (113). The extent of patient-caregiver discrepancy was not documented in ALS patients without dementia.

On the basis of information gained from a knowledgeable informant, a diagnosis of ALSbi is defined by: The identification of apathy with or without other behaviour change.

OR

The presence of two or more of the following behavioural symptoms: a) disinhibition, b) loss of sympathy and empathy, c) perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive behaviour, d) hyperorality/dietary change, e) loss of insight (see above), f) psychotic symptoms (e.g. somatic delusions, hallucinations, irrational beliefs). The behavioural features a–d, together with apathy, are drawn from current criteria for behavioural variant FTD (37).

The ECAS behaviour screen provides a checklist of symptoms from the diagnostic criteria that are marked as present or not. Other ALS-specific behavioural screens like the ALS-CBS and MiND-B provide published cut-off scores which are used to define ALSbi.

ALS with combined cognitive and behavioural impairment (ALS-cbi)

This new classification captures patients who fulfil criteria for both ALSci and ALSbi.

ALS with frontotemporal dementia (ALS-FTD)

A diagnosis of ALS-FTD is made when patients with ALS also show behavioural/cognitive changes in keeping with FTD.

A diagnosis of ALS-FTD is defined by: Evidence of progressive deterioration of behaviour and/or cognition by observation or history

AND

The presence of at least three of the behavioural/cognitive symptoms outlined by Rascovsky et al. (37).

OR

The presence of at least two of those behavioural/cognitive symptoms, together with loss of insight and/or psychotic symptoms

OR

The presence of language impairment meeting criteria for semantic dementia/semantic variant PPA or non-fluent variant PPA, as defined by Neary et al. (5) or Gorno-Tempini et al. (114). This may coexist with behavioural/cognitive symptoms as outlined above.

Neuroimaging studies in the diagnosis of a frontotemporal spectrum disorder in ALS

Neuroimaging continues to provide unique in vivo pathological insights into the expanding clinical and molecular syndrome of ALS (115). While frontotemporal cerebral atrophy may be noted during CT or MRI performed as part of the routine clinical work-up of ALS patients, both are insensitive and in the clinical setting a subjective assessment must take into account normal age-related atrophy. SPECT, long-recognised to be capable of demonstrating reduced frontal uptake in cases of ALS associated with dementia (116), also lacks essential sensitivity for ALS cases with less marked cognitive or behavioural impairment. Automated assessment tools for detecting more subtle grey matter volume changes on high-resolution T1-weighted MRI (voxel-based morphometry), or frontotemporal white matter tract projections (diffusion tensor imaging), are not yet applicable to the individual patient. However, these more advanced structural MRI sequences continue to advance toward this ultimate aim (117), perhaps through combination with functional MRI connectivity measures (118).

More marked patterns of basal ganglia and cerebellar structural MRI change have been noted in ALS patients carrying pathological hexanucleotide expansions in C9orf72 compared to apparently sporadic ALS cases (119,120). Furthermore, widespread structural MRI changes have been reported in studies involving pre-symptomatic C9orf72 mutation carriers (121,122), offering the potential to study the evolution of broader cerebral pathology in ALS at a much earlier stage.

Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging continues to provide substantial knowledge regarding the anatomic and cellular topography of neuronal dysfunction in ALS and, increasingly, markers of non-neuronal involvement as critical mediators of the disease process. Advances in neuroimaging and the attendant increase in our understanding of the neural networks or connectome are beginning to provide greater clarity as to the nature of FTSD, and in particular the concept of FTSD as a disconnection syndrome with individual clinical phenotypes predicated on the nature of the neural network damage. Providing crisp clinical correlates to such neuroimaging advances underlies a significant proportion of the impetus to revising the criteria.

Axis III. Additional non-motor disease manifestations

As with the 2009 Strong criteria (2), it is recommended that note be made of the presence or absence of non-motor manifestations, including extrapyramidal signs (bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor), cerebellar degeneration, autonomic dysfunction, sensory impairment disproportionate to age or ocular movement abnormalities.

Axis III recommendation

Members of the Consensus Committee made no changes to this recommendation. As such, it is recommended that observations should be made of specific non-motor manifestations that are distinct from the neuropsychiatric and neuropsychological manifestations of frontotemporal dysfunction.

Axis IV. Presence of disease modifiers

In reviewing this recommendation, members recognised that the majority of modifiers of the neuropsychological features of ALS would be captured within Axis I studies of the molecular genetics or within the specific tests of neuropsychology. All studies will contain the key variables of site of disease onset, gender and age. Hence, the view of the members of the consensus conference was that Axis IV was no longer required within the diagnostic algorithm of the frontotemporal spectrum disorders of ALS.

Axis IV recommendation

As noted above, members recommend that Axis IV is no longer required and be supplanted by information gained through the assessment of Axis I and II.

Neuropathology recommendations

The fundamental recommendations of the Strong criteria with respect to neuropathological diagnosis of ALS-FTSD remain unchanged. However, in keeping with the consideration of levels of complexity, it is recognised that not all cases will be examined as extensively as was proposed, although this remains the goal. As such, a complete neuropathological examination should be considered to be integral to the diagnosis, including examination of the brain and complete spinal cord given the high degree of regional variability of the disease and recent work suggesting a focal onset followed by spread (123–125). Spinal cord sections should continue to include cervical, thoracic and lumbar regions. Due to the pathognomonic involvement by p62 and dipeptide repeat (DPR) pathology in C9FTD/ALS, the cerebellum must be included in the analysis (126,127). In all cases, the degree of involvement of both the UMN and LMN should be ascertained and, for the former, when not clearly evident on routine haematoxylin/eosin staining, identified using immunohistochemical evidence for a microglial neuroinflammatory response (e.g. HLA-DR3, CD68 or Iba1) and astrogliosis (GFAP), and special stain (e.g. Luxol-fast blue/Nissl) for secondary myelin loss. With the increasing recognition that neuronal cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions within degenerating motor neurons in ALS can be composed of a broad range of cytoskeletal proteins and RNA binding proteins, often with multiple proteins depositing within the same degenerating motor neuron (128), there is now an extensive array of antibodies with which to confirm the presence of ALS. Most commonly, however, immunostaining with antibodies directed towards protein ubiquitination (ubiquitin, p62), TDP-43 and FUS and demonstrating neuronal or glial inclusions would suffice for the diagnosis of LMN involvement in ALS. When full autopsy is possible, peripheral nerves and muscles should be part of the neuropathological work-up. Sampling frozen tissue for future biochemical and genetic analysis also is recommended.

The neuropathological correlate of FTD is frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). There are three major FTLD types depending on the hallmark pathological protein: FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP and FTLD-FUS. A small minority of FTD cases are not expressing any of these proteins; those reacting with markers of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) represent FTLD-UPS whereas the rare, completely immunonegative cases fall into the group of FTLD-NOS (not otherwise specified). The large majority of cases of ALS with frontotemporal dysfunction belong to the FTLD-TDP type and exhibit TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusions within a range of neocortical and subcortical structures (the remaining cases are FTLD-FUS). They are predominantly in neurons in forms of neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs), dystrophic neurites (DNs) and neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NIIs). The harmonised classification system for FTLD-TDP recognises four subtypes (A, B, C and D) depending on the morphological forms and their frequency, characteristic neuroanatomical localisation and presence or absence of other features like hippocampal sclerosis (129). There is good correlation with clinical phenotypes and genetic alterations (for example, the most frequent subtype A often presents with bvFTD and FTD-ALS, with 50% of cases harbouring GRN mutation or c9orf72 expansion).

For neuropathological analysis, due to regional specificity, representative sections should include (among others) the anterior cingulate gyrus, pre-central gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia and cerebellum. Immunostaining should include antibodies against TDP-43, FUS, p62, tau (e.g. AT8, pThr175) (130,131), α-synuclein and in specific disease subtypes against neurofilament (in neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease - NIFID), SOD-1, and various dipeptide repeats (DPRs) (in C9FTD/ ALS) (132). Assessment of the presence of amyloid beta (Aβ) pathology (e.g. amyloid plaques, cerebral amyloid angiopathy) with or without Alzheimer’s disease type tau pathology also is mandatory. As discussed in the original Strong criteria, neuropathological studies should describe, by region, the extent of neuropathological changes, including the presence or absence of superficial linear spongiosis, the degree of neuronal loss, the presence or absence of hippocampal sclerosis (including subtle focal loss of CA1 neurons), and the nature of inclusions present (including dystrophic neurites, neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions, and neuronal intranuclear inclusions). The presence or absence of glial pathology, whether astrocytic or oligodendroglial, should be delineated. A stepwise approach is recommended for neuropathological work-up with special stains and immunohistochemistry of the relevant brain and spinal cord regions (132). A diagnostic algorithm has been proposed recently for neuropathological diagnosis of ALS, FTD and overlapping syndromes (132). More details about the principles and practice of neuropathological analysis and key morphological features are described in reference textbooks (132–134).

Since the publication of the original Strong criteria, the concept of staging of the frontotemporal degeneration of the neocortical and subcortical involvement in ALS has become increasingly of value in understanding the degree to which ALS-FTD may be a distinct entity from ALSci, ALS bi (and thus potentially ALScbi). Level III studies are thus recommended to include a full staging analysis as delineated by Halliday et al. (135).

Discussion

In contrast to the milieu in which the Strong criteria for the diagnosis of frontotemporal dysfunction were crafted, there is now a clearer appreciation of the significant proportion of ALS patients who will have evidence of multidimensional dysfunction. When the Strong criteria were applied to ALS patients prospectively, more than 50% of ALS patients were found to have some form of frontotemporal disruptions or dementia, including probable Alzheimer’s disease (39,136–139). There is remarkable consistency across virtually all studies. The importance of recognising these deficits lies in their impact on survival for a large proportion of ALS patients, an impact which is not yet integrated into the design of drug trials in ALS. However, executive dysfunction alone is a significant predictor of reduced survival from symptom onset (137). Behavioural dysfunction appears also to have an equal contribution to survival (p&lt;0.001), seemingly in isolation from other variables (140). By increasing the rigor of defining the deficits in ALS, this should be clarified and, ultimately, become a defined variable in the design and analysis of clinical trials in ALS.

Advances in our understanding of the spectrum of frontotemporal dysfunction that can occur in concert with the motor degeneration of ALS mandated a revision of the Strong criteria. Underpinning this is the realisation that there exists a spectrum of deficits which have a degree of overlap, and hence the adoption of the term ALS frontotemporal spectrum disorders (ALS-FTSD). This is not meant to imply that the spectrum is a continuum, and indeed it is less clear that ALS-FTD is the natural endpoint of ALSci, ALSbi or ALS(cbi).

These revised criteria (Table 2) have addressed the issue of genetic testing more critically, in part driven by the explosion in knowledge of genetic mutations that are either causally associated with ALS, or identified as modifiers of the disease process. The discovery that many of these genetic mutations can be observed in ALS patients in whom there is no evidence for inheritance underscores the importance of using the term ‘genetic’ rather than ‘familial ALS’ to describe such cases. To that extent, we have proposed that all ALS can be stratified into those cases for which a genetic aetiology is known, versus those for which one is not. Clearly, there remain cases for which the designation of familial is warranted based on a conventional analysis of the patient pedigree; we recommend that these cases also be subsumed under the terminology ‘genetic ALS’. We are recommending further that all patients who are diagnosed as ALS-FTSD be offered the opportunity for genetic testing, and in the cases of research protocols, that this be mandatory. While ideally an individual should be tested for all genes identified as being causally linked (Table 1), this is impractical and beyond the resources of many clinics or individuals. Genetic testing should, therefore, be modified according not only to the geography of origin of the patient, but to the nature of the deficit (for instance, a patient presenting with marked behavioural impairment, with or without psychosis, should first be tested for pathological hexanucleotide expansions of C9orf72).

Since the introduction of the Strong criteria, there also has been an increasing awareness that the neuropsychological deficits are pervasive across the spectrum of motor neuron diseases. The issue arises that even within the motor manifestations of ALS, it is increasingly recognised that there is considerable clinical phenotypic heterogeneity. This observation has driven controversy as to the degree to which defining this heterogeneity serves any clinical purpose, as opposed to considering all disorders of the motor neuron to simply be, on aggregate, a single disorder (i.e. lumping vs. splitting). Recent attempts at revising the diagnostic criteria for ALS have leaned towards the latter. However, in developing these revised Strong criteria, it is hoped that a clearer and more consistent set of criteria by which to define the specific variants of frontotemporal dysfunction will provide a clearer understanding of distinct pathophysiology of frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS and, potentially, selective treatment responses. While it remains unresolved whether clinically divergent presentations are due to disparate aetiologies, it is prudent to maintain careful documentation of the clinical phenotype and encourage investigations that may link or associate specific presentations with unique biomarkers or aetiologies. The absence of maintaining awareness of such clinically divergent motor neuron phenotypes, given our current understanding, raises the probability of obscuring a valuable treatment effect or a clinical association (perhaps with FTD spectrum) that could highlight a critical aetiology. Hence, we have elected to maintain Axis I with a focus on defining the motor neuron disease succinctly.

Finally, as with the original Strong criteria, it is recognised that our understanding of the frontotemporal dysfunction which may occur in ALS will continue to evolve rapidly. Even now, the place of memory and language impairments in ALS are works in progress, as is defining the true breadth of behavioural and neuropsychiatric dysfunction which may occur. Moreover, recent investigations have begun to elucidate the influence of gender in ALS disease manifestation, including ALSci and ALSbi (141). At this point in time, however, it is our intention that these revised criteria will provide a greater level of diagnostic certainty.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental Table 3

Supplemental Table 1

Supplemental Table 2

Acknowledgements

The consensus conference at which these criteria were formulated was generously supported by the ALS Society of Canada, the Michael Halls Endowment, and the Windsor-Essex County ALS Society. This paper also represents independent work part-funded (LHG) by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Dementia Biomedical Research Unit at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health. MB is supported by CReATe (U54 NS092091), which is funded through collaboration between NCATS and NINDS.

Figure 1. Schematic of levels of investigation. The revised criteria are designed to address the need for rapid, easily applied tools that can be used in the clinical setting (Level I) through to assessment tools that are more appropriate to research studies (Level III). Levels II and III require formal neuropsychological and speech and language expertise to implement, reflect higher statistical complexity, and include tests that may require further validation in the ALS population. Level II is an intermediary level which can be applied in clinical trials and would be appropriate to be included in clinical case reports as minimum datasets.

Table 1. ALS- causative genes and their association with ALS, FTD or ALS-FTSD (adapted from (142,143)).

					Clinical Phenotype		
Locus	Gene ID	Chromosome	Protein; functional changes	Inheritance	FTD	ALS	ALS-FTSD	other	Reference	
ALS1	SOD1	21q22.11	Superoxide dismutase 1; Oxidative stress	AD, AR		+		PLS, PMA	(144)	
ALS2	ALS2	2q33.2	ALSin/Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors	AR		+		PLS, HSP	(145,146)	
ALS4	SETX	9q34.13	Senataxin; DNA/RNA processing	AD		+		AOA2	(147)	
ALS5	SPG11	15q21.1	Spatacsin; transmembrane protein	AR		+		HSP	(148,149)	
ALS6	FUS	16p11.2	Fused in Sarcoma; RNA binding protein, DNA repair, exon splicing	AD	+ (#)	+	+		(150–152)	
ALS7	Unknown	20p13	Unknown	AD		+			(153)	
ALS8	VAPB	20q13.33	Vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B and C; Altered axonal transport	AD		+		SMA	(154)	
ALS10	TARDBP	1p36.22	TAR DNA binding protein (TDP-43); DNA/RNA processing	AD	+	+	+		(155–157)	
ALS12	OPTN	10p13	Optineurin; membrane and vesicle trafficking, Protein degradation	AD, AR		+		+ (PDB)	(158)	
ALS14	VCP	9q13.3	Valosin-containing protein; ATP-binding protein, vesicle transport and fusion	AD	+	+	+	MSP	(159–161)	
ALS15	UBQLN2	X11p.21	Ubiquilin 2; ubiquitination, protein degradation	X-linked	+	+	+		(162–164)	
	PFN1	17p13.2	Profilin 1; actin binding protein, actin polymerisation	AD	+	+			(165–167)	
	HnRNPA2B1/A1	7p15.2/12q13.3	Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein; mRNA processing	AD		+		MSP	(168,169)	
ALS-FTD1	Unknown	9q21-q22	Unknown	AD	+	+	+		(170)	
ALS-FTD2	C9orf72	9p21.2	*Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72; unknown	AD	+	+	+		(171–178)	
	TBK1	12q154.2	TANK-binding kinase 1; multifunctional kinase active in autophagosome-mediated degradation of ubiquitinated proteins; also role in inflammatory signalling	AD, sporadic	+	+			(179–184)	
AD, autosomal dominant; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; AOA2, ataxia-ocular apraxia 2;AR, autosomal recessive; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; MSP, multisystem proteinopathy (previously referred to as IBMFTD or inclusion body myopathy with Paget’s disease and frontotemporal dementia); PMA, progressive muscular atrophy; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; TANK, TRAF family member-associated NF-kappa-B activator; TBK1, TANK-binding kinase 1

Table 2. Application of Axis I and Axis II diagnostic classification for ALS and ALS-FTSD (modified from Strong et al., 2009) (2).

Heading	Subheadings	Existing, synonymous terms within the literature	Characteristics	
Axis I. Motor neuron disease variant				
ALS	Sporadic ALS	sALS, classic ALS, Charcot disease, motor neuron disease	A progressive motor system disorder with both UMN and LMN involvement, with the degree of diagnostic certainty further defined by either the El Escorial criteria (revised) (6) or the Awaji criteria (9).	
	genetic ALS	gALS; familial ALS (fALS)	As indicated for sporadic ALS with the additional components:
Confirmed ALS associated genetic mutation, or

Clinical evidence of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked inheritance

	
	Western Pacific ALS	Lytico bodig	ALS arising within a hyper-endemic region of the western Pacific (e.g., Kii Peninsula, Guam, Rota)	
Axis II. Neuropsychological characterisation				
ALSbi			A diagnosis of ALSbi requires:
The identification of apathy with or without other behaviour change

OR

meeting at least two non-overlapping supportive diagnostic features from the Rascovsky criteria (37)

	
ALSci			A diagnosis of ALSci depends on evidence of either executive dysfunction (including social cognition) or language dysfunction or a combination of the two.	
			Executive impairment is defined as:
Impaired verbal fluency (letter).

OR

Impairment on two other non-overlapping measures of executive functions (which may include social cognition)

	
			Language impairment is defined as:
Impairment on two non-overlapping tests and in which language impairment is not solely explained by verbal fluency deficits.

	
ALScbi			Patients who meet the criteria for both ALSci and ALSbi	
ALS-FTD		ALS-dementia (ALS-D)*, FTD- MND	A diagnosis of ALS-FTD requires:
Evidence of progressive deterioration of behaviour and/or cognition by observation or history

AND

The presence of at least 3 of the behavioural/cognitive symptoms outlined by Rascovsky, Hodges et al 2011 (37)

OR

The presence of at least 2 of those behavioural/cognitive symptoms, together with loss of insight and/or psychotic symptoms

OR

The presence of language impairment meeting criteria for semantic dementia/semantic variant PPA or non-fluent variant PPA. This may co-exist with behavioural/cognitive symptoms as outlined above.

	
ALS-dementia		ALS-D*	ALS with dementia, not typical of FTD	
	ALS-AD		ALS in association with Alzheimer’s disease	
	ALS-vascular dementia		ALS in association with vascular dementia (185)	
	ALS-mixed dementia		ALS in association with a mixed dementia (e.g., AD-vascular dementia)	
FTD-MND-like			A neuropathological diagnosis in which FTLD is the primary diagnosis but in which there is neuropathological evidence of motor neuron degeneration, but insufficient to be classified as ALS	
ALS-Parkinsonism-dementia-complex		Western Pacific variant of ALS; lytico Bodig	ALS concurrent with dementia and/or Parkinsonism occurring in hyperendemic foci of the western Pacific	
* Although less common than in 2009, the term ‘ALS-dementia’ continues to be used generically within the literature to describe any clinical or neuropathological evidence of neuropsychological impairment. Its use does not differentiate between the individual entities and as such appears in more than one category. Its use also is not recommended.

AD, Alzheimer’s disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; ALSbi, ALS with behavioural impairment; ALSci, ALS with cognitive impairment; FTLD, frontotemporal lobar degeneration; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; LMN, lower motor neuron; PNFA, progressive non-fluent aphasia; SD, semantic dementia; UMN, upper motor neuron

Declaration of interest

The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of this article.


References

1. Strong MJ . The syndromes of frontotemporal dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2008;9 :323–38.18752088
2. Strong MJ , Grace GM , Freedman M , Lomen-Hoerth C , Woolley S , Goldstein LH , Consensus criteria for the diagnosis of frontotemporal cognitive and behavioural syndromes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2009;10 :131–46.19462523
3. Woolley SC , Strong MJ . Frontotemporal dysfunction and dementia in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurol Clin. 2015;33 :787–805.26515622
4. Hodges JR , Miller B . The classification, genetics and neuropathology of frontotemporal dementia. Introduction to the special topic papers: part 1. Neurocase. 2001;7 :31–5.11239074
5. Neary D , Snowden JS , Gustafson L , Passant U , Stuss D , Black S , Frontotemporal lobar degeneration. A consensus on clinical diagnostic criteria. Neurology. 1998;51 :1546–54.9855500
6. World Federation of Neurology Research Group on Neuromuscular Disease. El Escorial World Federation of Neurology criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 1994;124 (suppl ):96–107.7807156
7. Brooks BR , Miller RG , Swash M , Munsat TL . For the World Federation of Neurology Research Group on Motor Neuron Diseases. El Escorial revisited: revised criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord. 2000;1 :293–9.11464847
8. Chaudhari KR , Crump S , Al-Sarraj S , Anderson V , Cavanagh J , Leigh PN . The validation of El Escorial criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a clinicopathological study. J Neurol Sci. 1995;129 :11–12.7595600
9. de CM , Dengler R , Eisen A , England JD , Kaji R , Kimura J , Electrodiagnostic criteria for diagnosis of ALS. Clin Neurophysiol. 2008;119 :497–503.18164242
10. de Carvalho M , Swash M . Awaji diagnostic algorithm increases sensitivity of El Escorial criteria for ALS diagnosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2009;10 :53–7.18985466
11. Costa J , Swash M , de CM . Awaji criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:a systematic review. Arch Neurol. 2012;69 :1410–16.22892641
12. Geevasinga N , Menon P , Scherman DB , Simon N , Yiannikas C , Henderson RD , Diagnostic criteria in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a multicenter prospective study. Neurology. 2016;87 :684–90.27440148
13. Geevasinga N , Loy CT , Menon P , de CM , Swash M , Schrooten M , Awaji criteria improves the diagnostic sensitivity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review using individual patient data. Clin Neurophysiol. 2016;127 :2684–91.27212114
14. Ludolph A , Drory V , Hardiman O , Nakano I , Ravits J , Robberecht W , A revision of the El Escorial criteria- 2015. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16 :291–2.26121170
15. Xu Z , Henderson RD , David M , McCombe PA . Neurofilaments as biomarkers for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2016;11 :e0164625.27732645
16. Pijnenburg YA , Verwey NA , van der Flier WM , Scheltens P , Teunissen CE . Discriminative and prognostic potential of cerebrospinal fluid phosphoTau/tau ratio and neurofilaments for frontotemporal dementia subtypes. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2015;1 :505–12.27239528
17. Junttila A , Kuvaja M , Hartikainen P , Siloaho M , Helisalmi S , Moilanen V , Cerebrospinal fluid TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with and without the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2016;6 :142–9.27195002
18. Wilke C , Deuschle C , Rattay TW , Maetzler W , Synofzik M . Total tau is increased, but phosphorylated tau not decreased, in cerebrospinal fluid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiol Aging. 2015;36 :1072–4.25453560
19. Gaiottino J , Norgren N , Dobson R , Topping J , Nissim A , Malaspina A , Increased neurofilament light chain blood levels in neurodegenerative neurological diseases. PLoS One. 2013;8 :e75091.24073237
20. Steinacker P , Fang L , Kuhle J , Petzold A , Tumani H , Ludolph AC , Soluble beta-amyloid precursor protein is related to disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PLoS One. 2011;6 :e23600.21858182
21. Chio A , Brunetti M , Barberis M , Iazzolino B , Montuschi A , Ilardi A , The role of APOE in the occurrence of frontotemporal dementia in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. JAMA Neurol. 2016;73 :425–30.26903389
22. Collins MA , An J , Hood BL , Conrads TP , Bowser RP . Label-free LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid identifies protein/pathway alterations and candidate biomarkers for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Proteome Res. 2015;14 :4486–501.26401960
23. Turner MR , Bowser R , Bruijn L , Dupuis L , Ludolph A , McGrath M , Mechanisms, models and biomarkers in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2013;14 (Suppl 1 ):19–32.23678877
24. Al-Chalabi A , Hardiman O . The epidemiology of ALS: a conspiracy of genes, environment and time. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013;9 :617–28.24126629
25. Sabatelli M , Marangi G , Conte A , Tasca G , Zollino M , Lattante S . New ALS-related genes expand the spectrum paradigm of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain Pathol. 2016;26 :266–75.26780671
26. Khan BK , Yokoyama JS , Takada LT , Sha SJ , Rutherford NJ , Fong JC , Atypical, slowly progressive behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia associated with C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83 :358–64.22399793
27. Taylor LJ , Brown RG , Tsermentseli S , Al-Chalabi A , Shaw CE , Ellis CM , Is language impairment more common than executive dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84 :494–8.23033353
28. Tsermentseli S , Leigh PN , Taylor LJ , Radunovic A , Catani M , Goldstein LH . Syntactic processing as a marker for cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;17 :69–76.26312952
29. Girardi A , Macpherson SE , Abrahams S . Deficits in emotional and social cognition in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuropsychology. 2011;25 :53–65.20919762
30. Cavallo M , Adenzato M , Macpherson SE , Karwig G , Enrici I , Abrahams S . Evidence of social understanding impairment in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PLoS One. 2011;6 :e25948.21998727
31. Cerami C , Dodich A , Canessa N , Crespi C , Iannaccone S , Corbo M , Emotional empathy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a behavioural and voxel-based morphometry study. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2014;15 :21–9.23586919
32. Carluer L , Mondou A , Buhour MS , Laisney M , Pelerin A , Eustache F , Neural substrate of cognitive theory of mind impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Cortex. 2015;65 :19–30.25618325
33. Staios M , Fisher F , Lindell AK , Ong B , Howe J , Reardon K . Exploring sarcasm detection in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using ecologically valid measures. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7 :178.23734113
34. Watermeyer TJ , Brown RG , Sidle KC , Oliver DJ , Allen C , Karlsson J , Executive dysfunction predicts social cognition impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol. 2015;262 :1681–90.25957636
35. van der Hulst EJ , Bak TH , Abrahams S . Impaired affective and cognitive theory of mind and behavioural change in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015;86 :1208–15.25476003
36. Consonni M , Catricala E , Dalla BE , Gessa VC , Lauria G , Cappa SF . Beyond the consensus criteria: multiple cognitive profiles in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis? Cortex. 2016;81 :162–7.27236371
37. Rascovsky K , Hodges JR , Knopman D , Mendez MF , Kramer JH , Neuhaus J , Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain. 2011;134 :2456–77.21810890
38. Goldstein LH , Abrahams S . Changes in cognition and behaviour in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: nature of impairment and implications for assessment. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12 :368–80.23518330
39. Phukan J , Elamin M , Bede P , Jordan N , Gallagher L , Byrne S , The syndrome of cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a population-based study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83 :102–8.21836033
40. Beeldman E , Raaphorst J , Klein TM , de VM , Schmand BA , de Haan RJ . The cognitive profile of ALS: a systematic review and meta-analysis update. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2016;87 :611–19.26283685
41. Abrahams S , Leigh PN , Harvey A , Vythelingum GN , Grise D , Goldstein LH . Verbal fluency and executive dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Neuropsychologia. 2000;38 :734–47.10689049
42. Abrahams S , Goldstein LH , Al-Chalabi A , Pickering A , Morris RG , Passingham RE , Relation between cognitive dysfunction and pseudobulbar palsy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiat. 1997;62 :464–72.9153602
43. Massman PJ , Sims J , Cooke N , Haverkamp LJ , Appel V , Appel SH . Prevalence and correlates of neuropsychological deficits in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiat. 1996;61 :450–5.8937336
44. Murphy J , Factor-Litvak P , Goetz R , Lomen-Hoerth C , Nagy PL , Hupf J , Cognitive-behavioral screening reveals prevalent impairment in a large multicenter ALS cohort. Neurology. 2016;86 :813–20.26802094
45. Abrahams S , Leigh PN , Goldstein LH . Cognitive change in ALS: a prospective study. Neurology. 2005;64 :1222–6.15824350
46. Donaghy C , Pinnock R , Abrahams S , Cardwell C , Hardiman O , Patterson V , Ocular fixation instabilities in motor neurone disease. A marker of frontal lobe dysfunction? J Neurol. 2009;256 :420–6.19306041
47. Wicks P , Abrahams S , Papps B , Al-Chalabi A , Shaw CE , Leigh PN , SOD1 and cognitive dysfunction in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol. 2009;256 :234–41.19252762
48. Abrahams S , Goldstein LH , Kew JJM , Brooks DJ , Lloyd CM , Frith CD , Frontal lobe dysfunction in amytrophic lateral sclerosis. A PET study. Brain. 1996;119 :2105–20.9010014
49. Abrahams S , Goldstein LH , Simmons A , Brammer M , Williams SCR , Giampietro V , Word retrieval in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Brain. 2004;127 :1507–17.15163610
50. Abrahams S , Goldstein LH , Suckling J , Ng V , Simmons A , Chitnis X , Frontotemporal white matter changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol. 2005;252 :321–31.15739047
51. Pettit LD , Bastin ME , Smith C , Bak TH , Gillingwater TH , Abrahams S . Executive deficits, not processing speed relates to abnormalities in distinct prefrontal tracts in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain. 2013;136 :3290–304.24056536
52. Reitan RM , Wolfson D . A selective and critical review of neuropsychological deficits and the frontal lobes. Neuropsychol Rev. 1994;4 :161–98.7881456
53. Grant DA , Berg ED . Wisconsin card sorting test. Odessa: Psychological Assessment Resources; 1990.
54. Lange F , Vogts MB , Seer C , Furkotter S , Abdulla S , Dengler R , Impaired set-shifting in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: An event-related potential study of executive function. Neuropsychology. 2016;30 :120–34.26167710
55. Libon DJ , McMillan C , Avants B , Boller A , Morgan B , Burkholder L , Deficits in concept formation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuropsychology. 2012;26 :422–9.22612577
56. Stukovnik V , Zidar J , Podnar S , Repovs G . Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients show executive impairments on standard neuropsychological measures and an ecologically valid motor-free test of executive functions. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2010;32 :1095–109.20582796
57. Meier SL , Charleston AJ , Tippett LJ . Cognitive and behavioural deficits associated with the orbitomedial prefrontal cortex in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain. 2010;133 :3444–57.20889583
58. Crespi C , Cerami C , Dodich A , Canessa N , Arpone M , Iannaccone S , Microstructural white matter correlates of emotion recognition impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Cortex. 2014;53 :1–8.24534360
59. Palmieri A , Naccarato M , Abrahams S , Bonato M , D’Ascenzo C , Balestreri S , Right hemisphere dysfunction and emotional processing in ALS: an fMRI study. J Neurol. 2010;257 :1970–8.20593194
60. Savage SA , Lillo P , Kumfor F , Kiernan MC , Piguet O , Hodges JR . Emotion processing deficits distinguish pure amyotrophic lateral sclerosis from frontotemporal dementia. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2014;15 :39–46.23889548
61. Strong MJ , Grace GM , Cognitive changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis In: Kertesz A , Munoz DA , eds. Pick’s disease and pick complex. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc; 1998;159–168.
62. Bak TH , Hodges JR . The effects of motor neurone disease on language: further evidence. Brain Lang. 2004;89 :354–61.15068918
63. Cobble M Language impairment in motor neurone disease. J Neurol Sci. 1998;160 (Suppl 1 ):S47–S52.9851649
64. Moretti R , Torre P , Antonello RM , Carraro N , Cazzato G , Bava A . Complex cognitive disruption in motor neuron disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2002; 14 :141–50.12218257
65. Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DM . Cognitive change in motor neurone disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS). J Neurol Sci. 2000;180 :15–20.11090859
66. Ash S , Olm C , McMillan CT , Boller A , Irwin DJ , McCluskey L , Deficits in sentence expression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16 :31–9.25482157
67. Ash S , Menaged A , Olm C , McMillan CT , Boller A , Irwin DJ , Narrative discourse deficits in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology. 2014;83 :520–8.24991038
68. Roberts-South A , Findlater K , Strong MJ , Orange JB . Longitudinal changes in discourse production in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Semin Speech Lang. 2012;33 :79–94.22362326
69. York C , Olm C , Boller A , McCluskey L , Elman L , Haley J , Action verb comprehension in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol. 2014; 261 :1073–9.24676939
70. Rippon GA , Goldstein S , Scarmeas M , Gordon PH , Murphy PL , Albert SA , An observational study of cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol. 2006;63 :345–52.16533961
71. Grossman M , Anderson C , Khan A , Avants B , Elman L , McCluskey L . Impaired action knowledge in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology. 2008;71 :1396–401.18784377
72. Bak TH , O’Donovan DG , Xuereb JH , Boniface S , Hodges JR . Selective impairment of verb processing associated with pathological changes in Brodmann areas 44 and 45 in the motor neurone disease-dementia-aphasia syndrome. Brain. 2001;124 :103–20.11133791
73. Papeo L , Cecchetto C , Mazzon G , Granello G , Cattaruzza T , Verriello L , The processing of actions and action-words in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Cortex. 2015;64 :136–47.25461714
74. Yoshizawa K , Yasuda N , Fukuda M , Yukimoto Y , Ogino M , Hata W , Syntactic comprehension in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Behav Neurol. 2014;2014 : 230578.25161339
75. Kamminga J , Leslie FV , Hsieh S , Caga J , Mioshi E , Hornberger M , Syntactic comprehension deficits across the FTD-ALS continuum. Neurobiol Aging. 2016;41 :11–18.27103514
76. Bambini V , Arcara G , Martinelli I , Bernini S , Alvisi E , Moro A , Communication and pragmatic breakdowns in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Brain Lang. 2016;153–154:1–12.
77. Caselli RJ , Windebank AJ , Petersen RC , Komori T , Parisi JE , Okazaki E , Rapidly progressive aphasic dementia and motor neuron disease. Ann Neurol. 1993;33 :200–7.8257465
78. Ringholz GM , Appel SH , Bradshaw M , Cooke NA , Mosnik DM , Schulz PE . Prevalence and patterns of cognitive impairment in sporadic ALS. Neurology. 2005;65 :586–90.16116120
79. da Rocha AJ , Valerio BC , Buainain RP , Ferraz ME , da Silva CJ , Maia AC Jr , Motor neuron disease associated with non-fluent rapidly progressive aphasia: case report and review of the literature. Eur J Neurol. 2007;14 :971–5.17718687
80. Östberg P , Bogdanovic N . Semantic dementia with lower motor neuron disease showing FTLD type 3 pathology (sensu Mackenzie). Neuropathology. 2016;31 :271–9.
81. Christidi F , Zalonis I , Smyrnis N , Evdokimidis I . Selective attention and the three-process memory model for the interpretation of verbal free recall in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2012;18 :809–18.22676844
82. Mantovan MC , Baggio L , Dalla BG , Smith P , Pegoraro E , Soraru’ G , Memory deficits and retrieval processes in ALS. Eur J Neurol. 2003;10 :221–7.12752394
83. Hanagasi HA , Gurvit IH , Ermutlu N , Kaptanoglu G , Karamursel S , Idrisoglu HA , Cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: evidence from neuropsychological investigation and event-related potentials. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2002;14 :234–44.12067696
84. Elamin M , Bede P , Byrne S , Jordan N , Gallagher L , Wynne B , Cognitive changes predict functional decline in ALS: a population-based longitudinal study. Neurology. 2013;80 :1590–7.23553481
85. Raaphorst J , van Tol MJ , de VM , van der Kooi AJ , Majoie CB , Van den Berg LH , Prose memory impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients is related to hippocampus volume. Eur J Neurol. 2015;22 :547–54.25557180
86. Machts J , Bittner V , Kasper E , Schuster C , Prudlo J , Abdulla S , Memory deficits in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are not exclusively caused by executive dysfunction: a comparative neuropsychological study of amnestic mild cognitive impairment. BMC Neurosci. 2014;15 :83.24981872
87. Massman PJ , Sims J , Cooke N , Haverkamp LJ , Appel V , Appel SH . Prevalence and correlates of neuropsychological deficits in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1996;61 :450–5.8937336
88. Hebert LE , Scherr PA , Bienias JL , Bennett DA , Evans DA . Alzheimer disease in the US population: prevalence estimates using the 2000 census. Arch Neurol. 2003; 60 :1119–22.12925369
89. Grossman AB , Woolley-Levine S , Bradley WG , Miller RG . Detecting neurobehavioural changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2007;8 :56–61.17364437
90. Tsujimoto M , Senda J , Ishihara T , Niimi Y , Kawai Y , Atsuta N , Behavioral changes in early ALS correlate with voxel-based morphometry and diffusion tensor imaging. J Neurol Sci. 2011;307 :34–40 21641004
91. Witgert M , Salamone AR , Strutt AM , Jawaid A , Massman PJ , Bradshaw M , Frontal-lobe mediated behavioral dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Eur J Neurol. 2010;17 :103–10.19874396
92. Woolley SC , Zhang Y , Schuff N , Weiner MW , Katz JS . Neuroanatomical correlates of apathy in ALS using 4 Tesla diffusion tensor MRI. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2011;12 :52–8.21271791
93. Terada T , Obi T , Yoshizumi M , Murai T , Miyajima H , Mizoguchi K . Frontal lobe-mediated behavioral changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: are they independent of physical disabilities? J Neurol Sci. 2011;309 :136–40.21782199
94. Lillo P , Mioshi E , Zoing MC , Kiernan MC , Hodges JR . How common are behavioural changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis? Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2011;12 :45–51.20849323
95. Radakovic R , Stephenson L , Colville S , Swingler R , Chandran S , Abrahams S . Multidimensional apathy in ALS: validation of the Dimensional Apathy Scale. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2016;87 :663–9.26203157
96. Caga J , Turner MR , Hsieh S , Ahmed RM , Devenney E , Ramsey E , Apathy is associated with poor prognosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Eur J Neurol. 2016;23 :891–7.26822417
97. Gibbons ZC , Richardson A , Neary D , Snowden JS . Behaviour in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2008;9 :67–74.18427998
98. Ahmed RM , Caga J , Devenney E , Hsieh S , Bartley L , Highton-Williamson E , Cognition and eating behavior in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: effect on survival. J Neurol. 2016;263 :1593–603.27260291
99. Murphy J , Henry R , Lomen-Hoerth C . Establishing subtypes of the continuum of frontal lobe impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol. 2007;64 :330–4.17353375
100. Lillo P , Savage S , Mioshi E , Kiernan MC , Hodges JR . Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: A behavioural and cognitive continuum. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2012;13 :102–9.22214356
101. Hsieh S , Caga J , Leslie FV , Shibata M , Daveson N , Foxe D , Cognitive and behavioral symptoms in ALSFTD: detection, differentiation, and progression. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2016;29 :3–10.26251110
102. Abrahams S , Newton J , Niven E , Foley J , Bak TH . Screening for cognition and behaviour changes in ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2014; 15 :9–14.23781974
103. Niven E , Newton J , Foley J , Colville S , Swingler R , Chandran S , Validation of the Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Screen (ECAS): a cognitive tool for motor disorders. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16 :172–9.25967542
104. Lule D , Burkhardt C , Abdulla S , Bohm S , Kollewe K , Uttner I , The Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Screen: a cross-sectional comparison of established screening tools in a German-Swiss population. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16 :16–23.25292386
105. Poletti B , Solca F , Carelli L , Madotto F , Lafronza A , Faini A , The validation of the Italian Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS). Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2016;17 :489–98.27219526
106. Ye S , Ji Y , Li C , He J , Liu X , Fan D . The Edinburgh cognitive and behavioural ALS screen in a Chinese amyotrophic lateral sclerosis population. PLoS One. 2016;11 :e0155496.27195772
107. Woolley SC , York MK , Moore DH , Strutt AM , Murphy J , Schulz PE , Detecting frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS: utility of the ALS Cognitive Behavioral Screen (ALS-CBS). Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2010;11 :303–11.20433413
108. Branco LM , Zanao T , De Rezende TJ , Casseb RF , Balthazar MF , Woolley SC , Transcultural validation of the ALS-CBS Cognitive Section for the Brazilian population. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2016;1–8.
109. Turon-Sans J , Gascon-Bayarri J , Rene R , Rico I , Gamez C , Paipa A , Cognitive impairment in ALS patients and validation of the Spanish version of the ALS-CBS test. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2016;17 :221–7.26726932
110. Mioshi E , Hsieh S , Caga J , Ramsey E , Chen K , Lillo P , A novel tool to detect behavioural symptoms in ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2014;15 :298–304.24863641
111. Raaphorst J , Beeldman E , Schmand B , Berkhout J , Linssen WH , Van den Berg LH , The ALS-FTD-Q: a new screening tool for behavioral disturbances in ALS. Neurology. 2012;79 :1377–83.22972650
112. Murphy J , Ahmed F , Lomen-Hoerth C . The UCSF screening exam effectively screens cognitive and behavioral impairment in patients with ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16 :24–30.25301548
113. Woolley SC , Moore DH , Katz JS . Insight in ALS: Awareness of behavioral change in patients with and without FTD. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2010;11 :52–6.19714539
114. Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Kertesz A , Mendez M , Cappa SF , Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology. 2011;76 :1006–14.21325651
115. Turner MR , Verstraete E . What does imaging reveal about the pathology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis? Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2015;15 :45.26008817
116. Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DMA , Northern B , Goulding PJ , MacDermott N . Frontal lobe dementia and motor neuron disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 1990;53 :23–32.
117. Agosta F , Ferraro PM , Riva N , Spinelli EG , Chio A , Canu E , Structural brain correlates of cognitive and behavioral impairment in MND. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016;37 :1614–26.26833930
118. Douaud G , Filippini N , Knight S , Talbot K , Turner MR . Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain. 2011;134 :3470–9.22075069
119. Mahoney CJ , Downey LE , Ridgway GR , Beck J , Clegg S , Blair M , Longitudinal neuroimaging and neuropsychological profiles of frontotemporal dementia with C9ORF72 expansions. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2012;4 :41.23006986
120. Bede P , Bokde AL , Byrne S , Elamin M , McLaughlin RL , Kenna K , Multiparametric MRI study of ALS stratified for the C9orf72 genotype. Neurology. 2013;81 :361–9.23771489
121. Walhout R , Schmidt R , Westeneng HJ , Verstraete E , Seelen M , van RW , Brain morphologic changes in asymptomatic C9orf72 repeat expansion carriers. Neurology. 2015;85 :1780–8.26497991
122. Rohrer JD , Nicholas JM , Cash DM , van SJ , Dopper E , Jiskoot L , Presymptomatic cognitive and neuroanatomical changes in genetic frontotemporal dementia in the Genetic Frontotemporal dementia Initiative (GENFI) study: a cross-sectional analysis. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14 :253–62.25662776
123. Brettschneider J , Del TK , Irwin DJ , Grossman M , Robinson JL , Toledo JB , Sequential distribution of pTDP-43 pathology in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). Acta Neuropathol. 2014;127 :423–39.24407427
124. Brettschneider J , Del TK , Irwin DJ , Grossman M , Robinson JL , Toledo JB , Erratum to: Sequential distribution of pTDP-43 pathology in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). Acta Neuropathol. 2015;129 :929.25931052
125. Brettschneider J , Del TK , Toledo JB , Robinson JL , Irwin DJ , Grossman M , Stages of pTDP-43 pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 2013;74 :20–38.23686809
126. Al-Sarraj S , King A , Troakes C , Smith B , Maekawa S , Bodi I , p62 positive, TDP-43 negative, neuronal cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions in the cerebellum and hippocampus define the pathology of C9orf72-linked FTLD and MND/ALS. Acta Neuropathol. 2011; 122 :691–702.22101323
127. Mori K , Arzberger T , Grasser FA , Gijselinck I , May S , Rentzsch K , Bidirectional transcripts of the expanded C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat are translated into aggregating dipeptide repeat proteins. Acta Neuropathol. 2013;126 :881–93.24132570
128. Keller BA , Volkening K , Droppelmann CA , Ang LC , Rademakers R , Strong MJ . Co-aggregation of RNA binding proteins in ALS spinal motor neurons: evidence of a common pathogenic mechanism. Acta Neuropathol. 2012; 124 :733–47.22941224
129. Mackenzie IR , Neumann M , Baborie A , Sampathu DM , Du PD , Jaros E , A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 2011; 122 :111–13.21644037
130. Yang W , Strong MJ . Widespread neuronal and glial hyperphosphorylated tau deposition in ALS with cognitive impairment. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2012;13 :178–93.22214313
131. Behrouzi R , Liu X , Wu D , Robinson AC , Tanaguchi-Watanabe S , Rollinson S , Pathological tau deposition in motor neurone disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with TDP-43 proteinopathy. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2016;4 :33.27036121
132. Hortobagyi T , Cairns NJ , Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. In: Kovacs GG , ed. Neuropathology of neurodegenerative diseases: a practical guide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2015:209–248.
133. Ince PG , Highley JR , Wharton SB , Motor neuron disorders In: Love S , Perry A , Ironside J , Budka H , eds. Greenfield’s Neuropathology. 9th ed. Abingdon, UK: CRC Press, Taylor 7 Francis Group; 2015:817–848.
134. Strong MJ , Hortobagyi T , Okamoto K , Kato S , Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, primary lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy. In: Weller R , Nixon D , eds. Neurodegeneration. The molecular pathology of dementia and movement disorders. Toronto, Canada: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011;418–435.
135. Fatima M , Tan R , Halliday GM , Kril JJ . Spread of pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: assessment of phosphorylated TDP-43 along axonal pathways. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2015;3 :47.26216351
136. Consonni M , Iannaccone S , Cerami C , Frasson P , Lacerenza M , Lunetta C , The cognitive and behavioural profile of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: application of the consensus criteria. Behav Neurol. 2013;27 :143–53.23001631
137. Elamin M , Phukan J , Bede P , Jordan N , Byrne S , Pender N , Executive dysfunction is a negative prognostic indicator in patients with ALS without dementia. Neurology. 2011;76 :1263–9.21464431
138. Montuschi A , Iazzolino B , Calvo A , Moglia C , Lopiano L , Restagno G , Cognitive correlates in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a population-based study in Italy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015;86 :168–73.24769471
139. Oh SI , Park A , Kim HJ , Oh KW , Choi H , Kwon MJ , Spectrum of cognitive impairment in Korean ALS patients without known genetic mutations. PLoS One. 2014;9 : e87163.24498297
140. Hu WT , Shelnutt M , Wilson A , Yarab N , Kelly C , Grossman M , Behavior matters-cognitive predictors of survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PLoS One. 2013;8 :e57584.23460879
141. Bede P , Elamin M , Byrne S , Hardiman O . Sexual dimorphism in ALS: exploring gender-specific neuroimaging signatures. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2014;15 :235–43.24344910
142. Moszczynski AJ , Strong MJ , Cortical manifestations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis In: Cechetto DF , Weishaupt N , eds. The Cerebral Cortex in Neurodegeneration and Neuropsychiatric Disorders. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Press; 2017:223–242.
143. Leblond CS , Kaneb HM , Dion PA , Rouleau GA . Dissection of genetic factors associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp Neurol. 2014;262 Pt B :91–101.24780888
144. Rosen DR , Siddique T , Patterson D , Figlewicz DA , Sapp P , Hentati A , Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature. 1993;362 :59–62.8446170
145. Hadano S , Hand CK , Osuga H , Yanagisawa Y , Otomo A , Devon RS , A gene encoding a putative GTPase regulator is mutated in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 2. Nat Genet. 2001;29 :166–73.11586298
146. Yang Y , Hentati A , Deng H-X , Dabbagh O , Sasaki T , Hirano M , The gene encoding alsin, a protein with three guanine-nucleotide exchange factor domains, is mutated in a form of recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet. 2001;29 :160–5.11586297
147. Chen Y-Z , Bennett CL , Huynh HM , Blair IP , Puls I , Irobi J , DNA/RNA helicase gene mutations in a form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS4). Am J Hum Genet. 2004;74 :1128–35.15106121
148. Hentati A , Ouahchi K , Pericak-Vance MA , Nijhawan D , Ahmad A , Yang Y , Linkage of a commoner form of recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 15q15-q22 markers. Neurogenetics. 1998;2 :55–60.9933301
149. Orlacchio A , Babalini C , Borreca A , Patrono C , Massa R , Basaran S , SPATACSIN mutations cause autosomal recessive juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain. 2010;133 :591–8.20110243
150. Mackenzie IR , Rademakers R , Neumann M . TDP-43 and FUS in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9 :995–1007.20864052
151. Vance C , Rogelj B , Hortobágyi T , De Vos KJ , Nishimura AL , Sreedharan J , Mutations in FUS, an RNA processing protein, cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6. Science. 2009;323 :1208–11.19251628
152. Kwiatkowski TJ Jr , Bosco DA , Leclerc AL , Tamrazian E , Vanderburg CR , Russ C , Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science. 2009;323 :1205–8.19251627
153. Sapp PC , Hosler BA , McKenna-Yasek D , Chin W , Gann A , Genise H , Identification of two novel loci for dominantly inherited familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2003;73 :397–403.12858291
154. Nishimura AL , Mitne-Neto M , Silva HCA , Richieri-Costa A , Middleton S , Cascio D , A mutation in the vesicle-trafficking protein VAPB causes late-onset spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2004;75 :822–31.15372378
155. Kabashi E , Valdmanis PN , Dion P , Spiegelman D , McConkey BJ , Vande Velde C , TARDBP mutations in individuals with sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet. 2008;40 :572–4.18372902
156. Davidson Y , Kelley T , Mackenzie IRA , Pickering-Brown S , Du Plessis D , Neary D , Ubiquitinated pathological lesions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration contain the TAR DNA-binding protein, TDP-43. Acta Neuropathol. 2007;113 :521–33.17219193
157. Sreedharan J , Blair IP , Tripathi VB , Hu X , Vance C , Rogelj B , TDP-43 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science. 2008;319 :1668–72.18309045
158. Maruyama H , Morino H , Ito H , Izumi Y , Kato H , Watanabe Y , Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature. 2010;465 :223–6.20428114
159. Forman MS , Mackenzie IR , Cairns NJ , Swanson E , Boyer PJ , Drachman DA , Novel ubiquitin neuropathology in frontotemporal dementia with valosin-containing protein gene mutations. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006;65 :571–81.16783167
160. Johnson JO , Mandrioli J , Benatar M , Abramzon Y , Van Deerlin VM , Trojanowski JQ , Exome sequencing reveals VCP mutations as a cause of familial ALS. Neuron. 2010;68 :857–64.21145000
161. Weihl CC , Pestronk A , Kimonis VE . Valosin-containing protein disease: inclusion body myopathy with Paget’s disease of the bone and fronto-temporal dementia. Neuromuscul Disord. 2009;19 :308–15.19380227
162. Gellera C , Tiloca C , Del BR , Corrado L , Pensato V , Agostini J , Ubiquilin 2 mutations in Italian patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84 :183–7.23138764
163. Ugwu F , Rollinson S , Harris J , Gerhard A , Richardson A , Jones M , A UBQLN2 variant of unknown significance in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurobiol Aging. 2015;36 :546.
164. Deng HX , Chen W , Hong ST , Boycott KM , Gorrie GH , Siddique N , Mutations in UBQLN2 cause dominant X-linked juvenile and adult-onset ALS and ALS/dementia. Nature. 2011;477 :211–15.21857683
165. Smith BN , Vance C , Scotter EL , Troakes C , Wong CH , Topp S , Novel mutations support a role for Profilin 1 in the pathogenesis of ALS. Neurobiol Aging. 2015;36 :1602–27.
166. van BM , Baker MC , Bieniek KF , Knopman DS , Josephs KA , Boeve B , Profilin-1 mutations are rare in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2013;14 :463–9.23634771
167. Wu CH , Fallini C , Ticozzi N , Keagle PJ , Sapp PC , Piotrowska K , Mutations in the profilin 1 gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature. 2012;488 :499–503.22801503
168. Kim HJ , Kim NC , Wang YD , Scarborough EA , Moore J , Diaz Z , Mutations in prion-like domains in hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 cause multisystem proteinopathy and ALS. Nature. 2013;495 :467–73.23455423
169. Benatar M , Wuu J , Fernandez C , Weihl CC , Katzen H , Steele J , Motor neuron involvement in multisystem proteinopathy: implications for ALS. Neurology. 2013;80 :1874–80.23635965
170. Hosler BA , Siddique T , Sapp PC , Sailor W , Huang MC , Daube JR , Linkage of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia to chromosome 9q21-q22. JAMA. 2000;284 :1664–9.11015796
171. Renton AE , Majounie E , Waite A , Simon-Sanchez J , Rollinson S , Gibbs JR , A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron. 2011;72 :257–68.21944779
172. Dejesus-Hernandez M , Mackenzie IR , Boeve BF , Boxer AL , Baker M , Rutherford NJ , Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. Neuron. 2011;72 :245–56.21944778
173. Morita M , Al-Chalabi A , Andersen PM , Hosler B , Sapp P , Englund E , A locus on chromosome 9p confers susceptibility to ALS and frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. 2006;66 :839–44.16421333
174. Shatunov A , Mok K , Newhouse S , Weale ME , Smith B , Vance C , Chromosome 9p21 in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the UK and seven other countries: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9 :986–94.20801717
175. Valdmanis PN , Dupre N , Bouchard J-P , Camu W , Meininger V , Strong MJ , Three families with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia have evidence of linkage to chromosome 9p. Arch Neurol. 2007;64 :240–5.17296840
176. van Es MA , Veldink JH , Saris CG , Blauw HM , van Vught PW , Birve A , Genome-wide association study identifies 19p13.3 (UNC13A) and 9p21.2 as susceptibility loci for sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet. 2009;41 :1083–7.19734901
177. Vance C , Al-Chalabi A , Ruddy D , Smith BN , Hu X , Sreedharan J , Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia is linked to a locus on chromosome 9p13.2-21.3. Brain. 2006;129 :868–76.16495328
178. Gijselinck I , Van LT , van der Zee J , Sleegers K , Philtjens S , Kleinberger G , A C9orf72 promoter repeat expansion in a Flanders-Belgian cohort with disorders of the frontotemporal lobar degeneration-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spectrum: a gene identification study. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11 :54–65.22154785
179. Cirulli ET , Lasseigne BN , Petrovski S , Sapp PC , Dion PA , Leblond CS , Exome sequencing in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis identifies risk genes and pathways. Science. 2015;347 :1436–41.25700176
180. Caroppo P , Camuzat A , De SA , Couratier P , Lacomblez L , Auriacombe S , Semantic and nonfluent aphasic variants, secondarily associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, are predominant frontotemporal lobar degeneration phenotypes in TBK1 carriers. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2015;1 :481–6.27239526
181. Freischmidt A , Wieland T , Richter B , Ruf W , Schaeffer V , Muller K , Haploinsufficiency of TBK1 causes familial ALS and fronto-temporal dementia. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18 :631–6.25803835
182. Le B,I , De SA , Millecamps S , Camuzat A , Caroppo P , Cosuratier P , TBK1 mutation frequencies in French frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cohorts. Neurobiol Aging. 2015;36 :3116–18.
183. Tsai PC , Liu YC , Lin KP , Liu YT , Liao YC , Hsiao CT , Mutational analysis of TBK1 in Taiwanese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiol Aging. 2016;40 :6–191.
184. Borghero G , Pugliatti M , Marrosu F , Marrosu MG , Murru MR , Floris G , TBK1 is associated with ALS and ALS-FTD in Sardinian patients. Neurobiol Aging. 2016;43 :180–5.
185. Hachinski V , Iadecola C , Petersen RC , Breteler MM , Nyenhuis DL , Black SE , National Institute for neurological Disorders and Stroke-Canadian Stroke Network vascular cognitive impairment harmonization standards. Stroke. 2006;37 :2220–41.16917086
