LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0374740
4354
Int Rev Neurobiol
Int Rev Neurobiol
International review of neurobiology
0074-7742
2162-5514

32854856
7687300
10.1016/bs.irn.2020.03.020
NIHMS1647579
Article
Harnessing neurogenesis in the adult brain—A role in type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease
Lazarov Orly a*
Minshall Richard D. bc
Bonini Marcelo G. d
a Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
b Department of Pharmacology, The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
c Department of Anesthesiology, The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
d Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), Feinberg School of Medicine of Northwestern University and Basic Sciences Research, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Chicago, IL, United States
* Corresponding author: olazarov@uic.edu
18 11 2020
2020
25 11 2020
155 235269
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Some metabolic disorders, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are risk factors for the development of cognitive deficits and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Epidemiological studies suggest that in people with T2DM, the risk of developing dementia is 2.5 times higher than that in the non-diabetic population. The signaling pathways that underlie the increased risk and facilitate cognitive deficits are not fully understood. In fact, the cause of memory deficits in AD is not fully elucidated. The dentate gyrus of the hippocampus plays an important role in memory formation. Hippocampal neurogenesis is the generation of new neurons and glia in the adult brain throughout life. New neurons incorporate in the granular cell layer of the dentate gyrus and play a role in learning and memory and hippocampal plasticity. A large body of studies suggests that hippocampal neurogenesis is impaired in mouse models of AD and T2DM. Recent evidence shows that hippocampal neurogenesis is also impaired in human patients exhibiting mild cognitive impairment or AD. This review discusses the role of hippocampal neurogenesis in the development of cognitive deficits and AD, and considers inflammatory and endothelial signaling pathways in T2DM that may compromise hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive function, leading to AD.


1. Introduction

How memories are formed is an area of intensive research. The hippocampus is thought to play a major role in memory acquisition and consolidation, and may participate, at least in part, in memory retrieval. The dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus is thought to be the gateway to information arriving from the association cortices. Uniquely, the DG is characterized by the presence of a neural stem niche in its subgranular cell layer (SGL) and the constant addition of newly formed neurons into its granular cell layer, throughout life. This process is termed adult hippocampal neurogenesis. New neurons are thought to participate in learning and memory, and their role is particularly apparent in DG-dependent tasks, such as pattern separation. Hippocampal neurogenesis declines during adulthood and aging in the mammalian brain.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by memory loss and cognitive deterioration. More than 95% of the AD patients have the sporadic, late onset form of the disease, for which aging is the greatest risk factor. The most vulnerable neurons that degenerate early in the disease are neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex that project to the outer molecular layer of the DG. Evidence from mouse models of AD and postmortem brains suggests that hippocampal neurogenesis is impaired at early stages of the disease. It is not clear whether neuronal vulnerability precedes or follows impairments in neurogenesis. Likewise, it is not known whether impairments in neurogenesis play a role in the development of cognitive deficits.

Interestingly, hippocampal neurogenesis is deficient in mouse models of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), a risk factor of late onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD). In addition, a significant portion of T2DM patients develop cognitive deficits and their odds of deteriorating and converting to AD is greater than the rest of the population. Recent studies suggest that pro-inflammatory cytokines and endothelial factors may be shared in T2DM and AD. Hippocampal neurogenesis depends heavily on the vasculature and endothelial function. In fact, the extent of neurogenesis in the healthy brain can be modulated by numerous environmental, genetic and molecular factors. The availability of many of these factors depends on the endovasculature. In addition, neural stem and progenitor cells actively cross-talk with microglia and inflammatory signals. This review outlines the evidence concerning shared mechanisms in T2DM and AD, and discusses the possibility that these pathways compromise hippocampal neurogenesis, contributing to cognitive dysfunction.

2. Hippocampal neurogenesis: Role in brain plasticity, learning and memory

Neural stem cells (NSCs) reside in the SGL of the adult mammalian DG and give rise to new neurons and glia throughout life (Gage, 2019). Neural stem cells entering the cell cycle give rise to fast proliferating neural progenitor cells (NPCs), which migrate out of the SGL into the granular cell layer (GCL) of the DG. There, they mature into dentate granule neurons and incorporate in the hippocampal circuitry. Thus, the GCL of the DG consists of younger and older excitatory neurons. This unique and dynamic set of processes distinguishes the DG from most brain regions, implies of higher level of plasticity and suggests a role for newly incorporated neurons in DG function.

Neurons in the GCL receive input from the entorhinal cortex (EC) via the lateral and medial perforant pathway and send their axons via the mossy fiber pathway to the CA3 region of the hippocampus (Ming and Song, 2005; Toni et al., 2007; van Praag et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2006). Dendritic synapses of new neurons exhibit enhanced plasticity 4–6 weeks after birth (Ge et al., 2007), characterized by lower activation threshold and enhanced excitability (Fig. 1) (Marin-Burgin et al., 2012; Schmidt-Hieber et al., 2004). Increasing evidence suggests that it is during this period that new neurons are recruited into memory circuits (Kee et al., 2007; Nakashiba et al., 2012; Tashiro et al., 2007). Likewise, output synapses formed with the CA3 region exhibit enhanced plasticity at 4 weeks of age (Gu et al., 2012). This evidence suggests that new neurons play a role in hippocampus-dependent memory circuits at their peak plasticity.

The DG is a main gateway to the hippocampal circuitry, and is strategically located to consolidate information arriving from different areas of the neocortex. Indeed, increasing evidence suggests that neurogenesis plays an active role in hippocampal memory circuit (Fig. 2). New neurons are preferentially recruited into hippocampal memory circuits (Kee et al., 2007). Beyond 4 weeks of age, new neurons are more likely than mature neurons to be recruited into DG circuits supporting spatial memory (Kee et al., 2007). New neurons play a role in the formation of new episodic memories by transforming similar events into discrete, nonoverlapping representations, a process known as “pattern separation” (Treves et al., 2008). Enhancement of neurogenesis by the deletion of the pro-apoptotic gene Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) in NPCs in adult mice led to a significant increase in the survival of NPCs, manifested by improved performance in the pattern separation test (Sahay et al., 2011). Computational models suggest that new neurons may provide protection against memory interference when similar items are presented (Becker, 2005; Wiskott et al., 2006). An alternative theory suggests that due to the increased excitability of newly-formed neurons and their tendency to more readily undergo long-term potentiation, they may be a means by which memories are temporally organized (Aimone et al., 2006). Interestingly, when an increase in neurogenesis is induced following a behavioral task in adult mice, it results in enhanced forgetting, suggesting a role for new neurons in memory clearance (Akers et al., 2014).

Studies in mammals using different strains of mice (Kempermann and Gage, 2002), environmental enrichment (Kempermann et al., 1997), running (van Praag et al., 1999), and genetic manipulation (Saxe et al., 2006; Shimazu et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2003) have each shown a correlation between increase in neurogenesis and enhanced performance on learning and memory tasks. Conversely, experiments using aged rats (for review, see Bizon and Gallagher, 2005), stress paradigms (Lemaire et al., 2000), irradiation (Madsen et al., 2003; Raber et al., 2004; Rola et al., 2004) and DNA methylating agents (Imayoshi et al., 2008; Shors et al., 2002) have shown correlations between a decrease in neurogenesis and impairment in hippocampus-dependent memory tasks. Taken together, these studies suggest that hippocampal neurogenesis plays a role in several aspects of hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. Furthermore, these studies imply that neurogenesis is highly sensitive to biochemical homeostasis and environmental factors. In that regard, numerous studies suggest that the rate of neurogenesis in the mammalian DG declines with age (Kempermann et al., 1998, 2002; Kuhn et al., 1996; Seki, 1995; Tropepe et al., 1997), raising the possibility that reduced neurogenesis may contribute to cognitive deterioration in the elderly, at least in part, as discussed below.

3. Hippocampal neurogenesis in familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked mouse models

Hippocampal neurogenesis has been extensively studied in mouse models harboring mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP), and presenilin 1, 2 (PS1, 2). Mutations in APP and PS1 cause rare autosomal dominant familial forms of Alzheimer’s disease (FAD). Interestingly, hippocampal neurogenesis is impaired early in life in FAD mice, preceding hallmarks and cognitive deficits (Demars et al., 2010). Specifically, a dramatic decline in both proliferative capacity of NPC and in early neuronal differentiation takes place in the SGL of FAD-linked APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice as early as two months of age (Demars et al., 2010). Early neurogenic impairments were detected in other models of FAD, such as 3XTg-AD mice (Hamilton et al., 2010; Kuttner-Hirshler et al., 2017; Rodriguez et al., 2008), PS1M146V mice (Wang et al., 2004), PS1P117L (Wen et al., 2004), APP23 mice (Hartl et al., 2008) and PS2APP (Poirier et al., 2010), preceding the hallmarks of the disease and cognitive deficits, as well as following neurodegeneration in conditional PS1/PS2KO (Chen et al., 2008), later in life in APP/PS1KI (Zhang et al., 2007), APPswe/PS1ΔE9 (Taniuchi et al., 2007; Verret et al., 2007), 3XTg-AD (Blanchard et al., 2010), APPswe/PS1L166P and APP23 mutant (Ermini et al., 2008) and at multiple time points in Tg2576 (APPswe) mice (Dong et al., 2004; Krezymon et al., 2013). Impairments were also found in conditional PS1KO (Feng et al., 2001), PS1ΔE9 and PS1M146L mutant following environmental enrichment (Choi et al., 2008). These observations strongly suggest a role for PS1,2 and APP in adult hippocampal neurogenesis, and that the dysfunction of their mutant forms compromise this process.

In support of this, previous studies have established a role for PS1 and APP in the regulation of neurogenesis. Specifically, PS1 was shown to regulate the differentiation of adult NPC in a γ-secretase dependent manner (Gadadhar et al., 2011). Another study suggests that FAD-linked mutant PS1 impair self-renewal and differentiation of NPCs via cell autonomous mechanisms involving notch signaling (Imayoshi and Kageyama, 2011; Veeraraghavalu et al., 2010). However, other studies find no alterations in neurogenesis in the absence of presenilins (Dhaliwal et al., 2018). Additional controversy exists concerning the fate of neurogenesis in mutant APP mice with some studies reporting increased (Gan et al., 2008; Jin et al., 2004; Lopez-Toledano and Shelanski, 2007; Mirochnic et al., 2009) or decreased (Dong et al., 2004; Donovan et al., 2006; Haughey et al., 2002) proliferation and survival of bromodeoxyuridine-positive (BrdU+) cells in the SGL of these mice (Lazarov and Marr, 2010). This might be explained by the differential level of soluble APPα,β (sAPPα,β) produced in these models. The soluble cleavage products of APP, APPα,β, regulate NPC proliferation (Demars et al., 2011) and injection of recombinant sAPPα, but not sAPPβ, into the subventricular zone (SVZ) of adult mice upregulates NPC proliferation (Demars et al., 2013). Thus, overexpression of APP in mutant forms may lead to increased production of sAPPα,β. Importantly, these studies were performed at different ages, representing different stages of disease pathology. Notably, not all animal models used in these studies equally exhibit the same course of AD pathology and this controversy calls for further investigation of the role of APP in neurogenesis in relation to the progression of pathology.

Intriguingly, two of the APP cleaving enzymes have been implicated in neurogenesis. Specifically, mutations in the Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase Domain-Containing Protein 10 (ADAM10) compromise neurogenesis (Suh et al., 2013). The ADAM10 enzyme is thought to function as α-secretase and cleave APP in the Aβ region, on the cell membrane (Sisodia, 1992). In addition, BACE-1, that cleaves APP in the amyloidogenic processing pathway, plays a role in regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis (Chatila et al., 2018).

Numerous studies suggest that FAD-linked transgenic mice exhibit impairments in learning and memory paradigms (Ashe, 2001), including acquisition of long-term spatial memory (Arendash et al., 2001; Chapman et al., 1999; Chishti et al., 2001; Dewachter et al., 2002; Dineley et al., 2002; Janus et al., 2000; Morgan et al., 2000; Trinchese et al., 2004), spatial reversal learning, utilization of spatial working memory (Arendash et al., 2001; Chapman et al., 1999; Jankowsky et al., 2005; Morgan et al., 2000; Trinchese et al., 2004), acquisition of social recognition memory (Ohno et al., 2004), object recognition memory (Dewachter et al., 2002), and contextual fear conditioning (Dineley et al., 2002). On the other hand, experience of APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice in an enriched environment rescues impairments in neurogenesis, reduces neuropathology and restores memory impairments in these mice (Hu et al., 2010, 2013; Jankowsky et al., 2005; Lazarov et al., 2005). This suggests a potential role for impaired neurogenesis in learning and memory deficits in these mice. In addition, enhancing neurogenesis by Wnt3 expression in combination with brain derived neurotrophic factor rescues learning and memory deficits in the 5XFAD mouse model (Choi et al., 2018). Interestingly, transplantation of NPC into the hippocampus rescues learning and memory deficits in 3XTg-AD mice (Blurton-Jones et al., 2009).

Nevertheless, most of the studies cited above describe a correlation between impaired hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive deficits in FAD.

Some of the interventions leading to enhanced neurogenesis have additional effects that may contribute to the performance of mice in behavioral tests. A recent study suggests that genetic depletion of neurogenesis in an FAD mouse model exacerbates learning and memory deficits. Specifically, the APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model was bred with a nestin-driven thymidine kinase-expressing mouse (Nestin-TK;APPswe/PS1ΔE9). Feeding this mouse with the drug valganciclovir, results in the depletion of nestin + cells leading to reduced neurogenesis. Valganciclovir is phosphorylated to the cytotoxic ganciclovir monophosphate by thymidine kinase. Since thymidine kinase expression is driven by the nestin promoter, treatment with valganciclovir will preferentially kill neural stem and progenitor cells. Valganciclovir-treated Nestin-TK;APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice performed significantly poorer in learning and memory tests compared to the vehicle-treated Nestin-TK;APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice (Hollands et al., 2017). This evidence suggests that hippocampal neurogenesis plays a role in cognitive deficits in FAD. This begs the question of whether specific elevation of hippocampal neurogenesis can rescue memory deficits in AD.

4. Hippocampal neurogenesis in the human aging and Alzheimer’s brain

The first evidence of the existence of neurogenesis in the adult human brain was described in Eriksson et al. (1998). New neurons were identified in postmortem brain sections of patients treated with the thymidine analog bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). Cells identified as new neurons were located in the DG, similarly to previous observations in rodents (Eriksson et al., 1998). Shortly thereafter, NPCs were isolated from the postmortem human brain (Palmer et al., 2001). These cells proliferated in culture and exhibited multipotency (Palmer et al., 2001). In a later study, measuring the concentration of 14C in genomic DNA allowed the assessment of the generation of hippocampal cells. This analysis revealed that 700 new neurons are added in each hippocampus per day, suggesting that neurogenesis persists in the human hippocampus throughout life with a modest decline during aging (Spalding et al., 2013). Many follow-up studies used neurogenic proxies, such as doublecortin (DCX) and polysialylated isoforms of the Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (PSA-NCAM), to detect and quantify NPCs and new neurons in human brain sections by immunohistochemistry (Boldrini et al., 2018; Curtis et al., 2003; Mathews et al., 2017; Tartt et al., 2018). Using the same proxies, another study reported that neurogenesis does not exist in the human hippocampus after the age of 13 (Sorrells et al., 2018). A detailed discussion about this debate can be found elsewhere (Bergmann et al., 2015; Kempermann et al., 2018; Lucassen et al., 2019; Paredes et al., 2018; Tartt et al., 2018).

Two recent studies examined the state of neurogenesis in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. Intriguingly, both studies observed a reduction in levels of neurogenesis in the AD brains (Moreno-Jimenez et al., 2019; Tobin et al., 2019). Both studies revealed that hippocampal neurogenesis persists in the human brain until the 10th decade of life. Tobin and colleagues found that neurogenesis drops as early as the stage of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and that a higher number of neuroblasts is associated with better cognitive outcome. In addition, this study observed a correlation between the number of neuroblasts and functional interaction between presynaptic proteins (Tobin et al., 2019). Moreno-Jimenez and colleagues (2019) observed a dramatic reduction in neurogenesis in the Alzheimer’s brain. This study reports a decline in the number of new neurons in the DG with the progression of Braak stage (Moreno-Jimenez et al., 2019). It is yet to be determined whether new neurons are functional in the aging and AD brains, and further validation and characterization of new neurons using additional experimental techniques would clarify the state of neurogenesis in the adult human brain.

5. Molecular signals linking type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease is the most prevalent form of cognitive impairment in the elderly. More than 95% of the AD cases are sporadic late onset. The signals underlying the development of LOAD are largely unknown. Notably, the cause of memory deficits and cognitive deterioration in LOAD is not fully understood. Several disorders increase the risk of developing LOAD, for example, T2DM. Type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the risk of developing LOAD by two-fold. Thus, patients with T2DM have considerably higher incidence of cognitive decline and LOAD compared to the general population. Meta-analysis of epidemiological studies shows that the combined overall relative risk for dementia (including clinical diagnoses of both AD and vascular dementia) is 73% higher in people with T2DM than in those without T2DM (Biessels et al., 2014; Gudala et al., 2013). Aging and T2DM combined double the overall risk of AD (Ohara et al., 2011).

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder that results in compromised responsiveness to insulin signaling. In recent decades, the number of individuals diagnosed with T2DM has reached records of an epidemic. It is estimated that over 30 million people in the USA have T2DM, compared to 0.5 million in 1990 (CDC, 2014). Some of this population may battle cognitive deterioration. In turn, more than 80% of AD cases presented with either T2DM or an impaired glucose metabolism disorder (Janson et al., 2004). These data suggest that T2DM independently confers risk in populations regardless of age and thereby may promote LOAD. Interestingly, the Cardiovascular Health Study revealed a marked increase in relative LOAD risk when stratified by both T2DM and a variant of apolipoprotein E (ApoEε4) known to be the greatest genetic risk factor for LOAD (Irie et al., 2008). Taken together, epidemiological data indicate that T2DM and other cardiovascular disease risk factors increase the incidence and reduce the age of onset of LOAD.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease characterized by a state of persistent hyperglycemia and reduced responsiveness to insulin (i.e., insulin resistance). Type 2 diabetes mellitus is preceded by a phase of hyperinsulinemia and normal plasma glucose levels, which indicates that there is a compensatory response by the pancreas to increase insulin levels in order to enhance glucose uptake by target organs. Eventually, pancreatic beta-cells fail to meet the body’s need for increased insulin levels to maintain glucose within the normal range, which leads to a gradual and sustained increase in plasma glucose levels. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with a number of pathologies. These include renal failure, blindness, coagulopathies, impaired wound healing, enhanced cardiovascular disease risk, and neurodegeneration. Insulin resistance is the most significant prognostic indicator of T2DM. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is typically diagnosed based upon plasma glucose criteria obtained during fasting or oral glucose tolerance test. Levels of hemoglobin A1C (A1C) are another diagnostic factor.

Once it develops, T2DM has a dramatic impact on body metabolism that extends beyond glucose processing. It also affects lipid processing, protein synthesis, and modifies hormonal and cytokine balance that impact every tissue in the body. Most commonly, T2DM presents as numerous associated pathologies that can vary in severity, including hypertension, nephropathy, ocular and retinal diseases, and increased risk of stroke. Importantly, T2DM has been shown to increase morbidity due to complications from cardiovascular disease and diabetic neuropathy in large part because of its adverse effects on the vasculature (CDC, 2014). Data collected from the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer Disease Patient Registry observed a significant correlation between the duration of diabetes and the density of amyloid plaques adjusted for age (Janson et al., 2004). One contributing factor for this observation is the presence of hyperglycemia, a common complication in T2DM. Hyperglycemia also leads to increased expression of the Receptor for Advanced Glycation End products (RAGE) and RAGE ligands either by exposure to elevated levels of blood glucose, or through increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production (Smith et al., 1996; Yan et al., 1997; Yao and Brownlee, 2010). These, as well as other advanced glycation end products are also observed in Aβ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles present in AD.

Diabetes-induced hyperglycemia causes severe deficits in cerebrovascular structure and function. For example, increased vascular tone or rigidity, decreased cerebral blood flow, and increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and dysfunction of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) (Ergul et al., 2009). These symptoms are accompanied by degeneration of endothelial cells and pericytes, as well as increased aggregation and adhesion of platelets to the endothelium (Cheng et al., 2014; Lorenzi et al., 1985; Vinik et al., 2001; Williams et al., 1998). As a result of compromised vascular function, hyperglycemia is a major contributor to neurodegeneration and to loss of brain function (Capes et al., 2001; Ergul et al., 2012; Sasaki et al., 2001; Seners et al., 2014a, 2014b). Together, these cerebrovascular complications compromise brain function and contribute to the increased risk of developing AD in T2DM.

Reduced glucose uptake by insulin-regulated organs, as well as compromised fatty acid metabolism in T2DM, lead to chronic inflammation. Chronic inflammation in T2DM includes elevated acute-phase protein production and pro-inflammatory cytokines (Pickup and Crook, 1998; Spranger et al., 2003). Specifically, increased levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 1-beta (IL-1β) are associated with T2DM pathogenesis (Herder et al., 2005; Luchsinger et al., 2001; Spranger et al., 2003). Hyperglycemia promotes the glycation of many proteins resulting in enhanced antigenic responses. Associated with hyperinsulinemia and dyslipidemia, glycation also potentiates inflammatory responses by enhancing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and TNF-α, and repressing the production of anti-inflammatory signals, such as interleukin 10 (IL-10) and adiponectin by adipose tissue and macrophages. Chronic or aggravated systemic inflammation eventually activates microglia, the resident macrophages of the brain, either directly by crossing via a compromised BBB or indirectly by activating pro-inflammatory signaling pathways across the BBB. Once activated, the pro-inflammatory phenotype of microglia may persist for prolonged periods of time. Studies examining this mechanism have shown that while peripheral inflammation resolves within days, microgliosis takes weeks to months to fully resolve, thus enforcing lasting modifications to the neuronal, glial and endothelial populations. Indirectly, inflammation is associated with enhanced oxidative stress via increased production of ROS and diminishing antioxidant responses. Reactive oxygen species are important participants in the regulation of cell signaling and cell communication; however, when produced chronically at high levels, they alter the chemical composition of proteins, lipids, and DNA resulting in their dysfunction. In spite of this wealth of information about molecular pathways that play a role in T2DM, the mechanism(s) underlying the development of cognitive deficits and AD are not known.

6. Vascular and inflammatory pathways in type 2 diabetes mellitus

Endothelial cell dysfunction, in concert with elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, compromise the expression of endothelial adhesion molecules leading to increased influx of inflammatory cells across the endothelium and vessel wall hardening (Blake and Ridker, 2001; Davies et al., 1993; De Vriese et al., 2000). Interleukin-6 and TNF-α activate endothelial cells to synthesize cellular adhesion molecules (Etter et al., 1998). The initial rolling of inflammatory cells along endothelial cells is mediated by selectins. E-selectin is expressed by endothelial cells while P-selectin is expressed by platelets and endothelial cells. The upregulation of both selectins is described in T2DM. Interestingly, increased serum levels of soluble E-selectin are predictive of ischemia (Matsumoto et al., 2010; Neubauer et al., 2010). The immunoglobulin family of cellular adhesion molecules (CAMs) mediates the attachment and transendothelial migration of leukocytes. These include the intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular adhesion molecule (VCAM-1) (Davies et al., 1993). The formation of atherosclerotic plaques and impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation is common in T2DM. Increased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), a prototypic marker of inflammation, as well as the modified lipoproteins within these plaques, potentiate the release and activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-6, interferon gamma (IFN-γ), and TNF-α. Previous studies show that treatment of endothelial cells with CRP decreased the expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and disrupted nitric oxide (NO) signaling, and as a result interfered with endothelial cell response to changes in blood flow (Venugopal et al., 2002; Verma et al., 2002). As the plaque continues to build within the vessel wall, monocytes attach and differentiate into macrophages. Micropinocytosis of modified low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) by macrophages induces formation of foam cells. Formation of these cells increases ROS production and macrophage recruitment contributing further to the impairment of NO signaling and endothelial dysfunction (Rajagopalan et al., 1996; Yorek, 2003).

Following inflammatory cell recruitment, proliferation of smooth muscle cells takes place as a repair attempt of the vessel wall. These cells surround the foam cells, thereby creating a fibrous cap, which further contributes to impaired blood flow. The plaques within the cap become destabilized through the production of ROS and activation of MMPs (Galis et al., 1994; Rajagopalan et al., 1996; Shah et al., 1995). The presence of IFN-γ inhibits the production of collagen thereby contributing to weakening of the fibrous cap. Formations of cholesterol crystals erode the endothelium causing encroachment of the plaque into the vessel lumen leading to obstructed blood flow. Rupture of the plaque releases the hardened lipids into the blood stream whereby they can travel to smaller arterioles to potentially induce an ischemic event and neurovascular uncoupling. Impairments in cerebral blood flow cause major distress to the cellular residents of the parenchyma (Marchant et al., 2012).

Several studies suggest that the cognitive decline observed in cerebrovascular disease and AD may share common pathways such as altered endothelial regulation of cerebral blood flow, pathological changes in BBB integrity and function, and neurovascular uncoupling (Girouard and Iadecola, 2006; Girouard et al., 2007; Marchant et al., 2012; Mooradian, 1988). Nevertheless, studies report that cerebrovascular disease and Aβ aggregation were independent contributors to cognitive impairments (Marchant et al., 2013).

7. From type 2 diabetes mellitus to Alzheimer’s disease: The role of Caveolin-1

Sustained inflammation affects the capacity of endothelium to transport peptides from the circulation to the tissues. The endothelium plays a critical role in actively transporting a number of macromolecular compounds through the blood vessel wall. This transport, termed transcytosis, is mediated by endocytic structures called caveolae that reside on the plasma membrane and internalize macromolecules, such as insulin and albumin via c-Src and dynamin-dependent vesicle fission (Sverdlov et al., 2007). These nutrients then propagate across the cell body where they fuse with the basal membrane and exocytose stored contents. Formation of caveolae is dependent on the expression of Caveolin-1 (Cav-1), a 22 kDa protein that assembles into oligomeric membrane-associated chains, which promote the invagination of cholesterol-enriched domains (Fig. 3) (John et al., 2003; Minshall et al., 2000; Vogel et al., 2001). Caveolae also contain receptors, for example for insulin, which upon activation promote the transcytosis of bound and fluid phase macromolecules from the circulation to the underlying cells (Wang et al., 2011, 2015). Recently, it was demonstrated that Cav-1 is susceptible to NO and oxidative stress with the chemical modification of a specific cysteine residue (Cys 156) being sufficient to trigger protein degradation and depletion (Bakhshi et al., 2013). Oxidative stress accompanies inflammation and is significantly enhanced in T2DM patients (Brouwers et al., 2010; Giacco and Brownlee, 2010; Kohen Avramoglu et al., 2013; Pi et al., 2009; Stadler, 2012), providing a link between chronic inflammation and alterations to the endothelium that impact cerebrovascular homeostasis.

Depletion of Cav-1 disrupts caveolae formation and caveolae-dependent transport. Since this mechanism is largely responsible for the uptake and transport of insulin, a 51-amino acid polypeptide (~5.8 kDa), impairment of caveolae formation at the level of the endothelium is likely to negatively impact the access of insulin to the brain (Wang et al., 2006, 2011, 2015). In the brain, a variety of glucose transporters (GLUT1-5 and GLUT-8) are expressed, although at different levels in the various cells of the brain (McEwen and Reagan, 2004). The glucose transporter GLUT5, for instance, is prevalent in microglia, whereas GLUT-1 predominates in astrocytes. In the cerebellum, neural subpopulations in the cortex, and the hippocampus which largely controls memory formation, the insulin-activated transporter GLUT-4 is particularly important as it controls a large fraction of the glucose uptake by the neurons in these regions. It is, therefore, not only possible but likely that diminished access of insulin to these areas will produce significant deficits in the ability of these cells to nourish themselves, function normally, and survive stress. The role of Cav-1 and the ability of the neurovascular endothelium to maintain insulin signaling in these areas of the brain is an active area of research that will likely provide a clearer picture regarding the link between T2DM and risk of developing AD.

As a scaffold protein, Cav-1 is present in cholesterol-enriched micro-domains (lipid rafts) of the plasma membrane. It is particularly enriched in endothelial cells. As discussed above, Cav-1 is required for formation of caveolae, the small plasmalemmal vesicles produced upon invagination of lipid rafts. Caveolae are responsible for the transcellular transport (transcytosis) of macromolecules from the plasma through the endothelium. By directly associating with many proteins, Cav-1 regulates their function and maintains endothelial cell homeostasis. For example, a decrease in Cav-1 expression results in dysregulated (uncoupled) eNOS in that it becomes a primary source of oxidative stress.

Recent work has revealed that Cav-1 levels are reduced in the brains of T2DM patients and mouse models of T2DM. Levels of Cav-1 were inversely correlated with levels of APP, its cleaving enzyme at its β site BACE1 and the ratio of Aβ42/40, suggesting enhanced amyloidogenesis. Importantly, restoration of Cav-1 rescued impairments in learning and memory exhibited by the db/db mice, and reduced levels of Aβ42/40, APP and BACE1 (Bonds et al., 2019). These studies suggest that reduced levels of Cav-1 in T2DM compromises APP metabolism and facilitate its processing in the amyloidogenic pathway, ultimately leading to AD pathology (Fig. 4). Nevertheless, while restoring Cav-1 levels rescues this phenotype, the mechanism by which reduction in Cav-1 underlies cognitive deficits and amyloidosis is not fully understood. While highly enriched in endothelial cells, Cav-1 is also expressed in neurons, astrocytes and NPCs. Previous studies described that compromised neuronal Cav-1 leads to accelerated aging and neurodegeneration (Head et al., 2010). Other studies have described that in AD, Cav-1 levels are high in astrocytes in close proximity to amyloid deposits (Thomas et al., 2011).

Endothelial Cav-1 plays a role in the neurovascular unit and BBB-mediated nutrient transport and homeostasis. Interestingly, recent studies suggest a protective role of Cav-1 shortly after ischemia by promoting neovascularization, astrogliosis and scar formation (Blochet et al., 2020). Future studies will determine the role of cell specific Cav-1 in the different pathological aspects promoting AD in T2DM.

8. Hippocampal neurogenesis in mouse models of diabetes

Both type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and T2DM are associated with increased risk of developing cognitive impairments and AD, suggesting that molecular and cellular factors contributing to learning and memory are compromised. It should be noted that deficits in neurogenesis in diabetes are accompanied by other pathological processes in the brains of diabetic mouse models, and in the hippocampus specifically, such as neuronal loss and reduced synaptic plasticity (Kamal et al., 1999). A significant and progressive reduction in brain weight was observed in db/db mice, while no such effect was observed in mice that were fed a high-fat diet. The db/db mouse harbors a spontaneous mutation in the leptin receptor gene resulting in excessive food consumption, precocious and progressive increase in body weight, hyperglycaemia and hyperinsulinemia. Likewise, reduced cortical thickness and hippocampal thinning were observed as a function of disease progression in db/db mice. This was accompanied by reduced number of proliferating cells in the SGL of the DG (Morin et al., 2017; Ramos-Rodriguez et al., 2014).

Several reports suggest that hippocampal neurogenesis is impaired in mouse models of T1DM and T2DM, particularly in diet-induced obesity (DIO) mouse models of T1DM (streptozotocin-induced) and T2DM (high-fat diet-induced) (Stranahan et al., 2008). Specifically, a marked reduction in the rate of cell proliferation was observed in the SGZ and SVZ of streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice (Saravia et al., 2004). These deficits were reversed by treatment with estrogen (Saravia et al., 2004). Nevertheless, streptozotocin has multiple peripheral and central targets. For example, streptozotocin can exert its effect by reducing plasma insulin levels or by promoting oxidative stress in the brain. Thus, whether its effect on neurogenesis is direct or indirect is yet to be determined. Interestingly, another study suggests that treatment with 17β-Estradiol rescued memory impairments of high fat diet-induced diabetes in ICR mice in the Morris water maze and Y-maze tests and restored deficits in the proliferation of cells in the SGZ of these mice (Tang et al., 2019). Additional interventions were reported to ameliorate neurogenic deficits in the streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice mouse model. Specifically, treatment with fluoxetine rescued the relative amount of neuroblasts in the streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice (Beauquis et al., 2006). Likewise, a ten-day experience in environmental enrichment conditions restored cell proliferation, survival and dendritic arborization of new neurons in the SGZ (Beauquis et al., 2010b). Chronic treatment (3 months) of rats with streptozotocin significantly reduced the number of new neurons in their hippocampus (Sun et al., 2015). In the spontaneous T1DM model, the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse, the number of proliferating cells in the SGZ was markedly reduced, but not the number of new neurons (Beauquis et al., 2008). In the context of obesity-related T2DM, a high-fat diet was reported to impair the number of proliferating cells in the SGZ of the hippocampus in male, but not female rats (Lindqvist et al., 2006).

Several studies suggest that metformin, a drug used to manage T2DM, has pro-neurogenic characteristics (Potts and Lim, 2012). For example, Wang and colleagues observed that metformin enhances the differentiation of embryonic cortical NPCs, as well as of adult-born NPCs in the SVZ and the SGZ in mice (Wang et al., 2012). Chronic administration of metformin facilitates cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation and inhibits diabetes-related neuroinflammation in the brains of DIO mice (Tanokashira et al., 2018). Treatment of the neonatal mice with metformin following hypoxia-induced brain injury facilitated neurogenesis and led to functional recovery (Dadwal et al., 2015). This effect has been proposed to be mediated via insulin receptor substrate 1 (Tanokashira et al., 2018), while another study suggests that the effect on self-renewal and proliferation occurs via the p53 family member and transcription factor TAp73, and it promotes neuronal differentiation of these cells by activating the 5’ adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase/protein kinase C/transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein pathway AMPK-aPKC-CBP pathway (Fatt et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2012).

Poorly controlled diabetes is manifested by hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia is likely to affect neurogenesis, known to be responsive to energy intake and nutrient availability (Kirschen et al., 2018; Rafalski and Brunet, 2011). Hyperglycemia is accompanied by an accelerated rate of advanced glycation end product (AGE) formation and accumulation. The level of AGEs in various tissues progresses during normal aging and at an accelerated rate in individuals with diabetes (Yamagishi et al., 2003). Recent reports support the notion that AGEs play important roles in the development of AD and dementia in diabetes (Yamagishi and Imaizumi, 2005). In culture, AGEs downregulated the proliferation of NPCs and their differentiation (Wang et al., 2009a, 2009b). In vivo, elevated AGE levels contribute to the impairment of cell proliferation and survival in the hippocampus and to behavioral deficits in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats with depressive behaviors (Wang et al., 2009a, 2009b).

Increasing attention has been given to the cross-talk between peripheral metabolic alterations and brain function. For example, adiponectin, a secreted product of adipose tissue, can cross the BBB. Its receptors, AdipoR1,2 are expressed in the brain (Qi et al., 2004; Yamauchi et al., 2003). Recent studies suggest that adiponectin promotes the proliferation of NSCs and enhances neurogenesis (Song et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2011). Various inflammatory factors, such as the nuclear factor κB (NFκB), Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), TNF-α, Lymphotoxin (LT), IL-β, IL-6, and interferon-γ (IFNγ), are implicated in the regulation of neurogenesis. The chronic inflammation and altered expression of cytokines in the brain is thought to have major implications for neurogenic homeostasis (Ho et al., 2013; Xiao et al., 2018).

9. Caveolin-1, endothelial and vascular dysfunction in type 2 diabetes mellitus: Implications for neurogenesis

How does Cav-1 may affect neurogenesis in T2DM? Several scenarios are possible. Microvessels support their surrounding environment by providing oxygen, nutrients and trophic factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which induces endothelial cell proliferation, stimulates brain plasticity and remodeling, and maintains neuronal viability. Previous studies have shown that there is an increase in cerebral neovascularization in T2DM (Li et al., 2010; Prakash et al., 2013; Silvestre and Levy, 2006). Nevertheless, new vessels are characterized by malmaturation, resulting in an increase of unperfusable vasculature and altered permeability of the BBB (Prakash et al., 2012). This leads to lack of oxygen and imbalanced availability of nutrients, a hypoxic environment that is unable to meet the metabolic demands of the parenchyma. New and mature neurons are particularly vulnerable.

Existing and newly formed vessels encompass the neurogenic niche that supports the proliferation, migration and neuronal differentiation of neuroblasts (Palmer et al., 2000). In turn, neuroblasts induce angiogenesis via release of VEGF (Johansson, 2007). Under hypoxic conditions, there is an upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF-1α), which promotes the formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis) via activation of other pro-angiogenic factors, e.g., VEGF, angiopoietins, and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Ergul et al., 2014). Endothelial cells form the linings of the blood vessels that most organs and tissues in the body depend on. Endothelial cells are highly adaptable to the organ and tissue needs and play a major role in vascular structure and function. The endothelium is greatly compromised following increased inflammation, oxidative stress, accumulation of oxidized and modified lipids and proteins in the blood plasma, and reactive organic compounds.

Recent evidence suggests that the endothelial-enriched protein Cav-1 is compromised in T2DM, leading to alterations in the expression and metabolism of critical membrane-bound receptors, including APP, ultimately facilitating the development of AD (Bonds et al., 2019). In addition, Cav-1 is a critical player in the transport of proteins from the plasma into the brain, via BBB-dependent, active transport. Lastly, Cav-1 plays an important role in cell signaling. Thus, alterations to Cav-1 structure and function in T2DM could be detrimental to the vasculature and particularly, cerebrovasculature and the BBB, leading to brain dysfunction. More about endothelial dysfunction in T2DM can be found elsewhere (Kaur et al., 2018).

10. The neurovascular unit in the neurogenic niche of the hippocampus

The neurogenic niche in the SGL of the hippocampus is highly dependent on the vasculature (Fig. 5) (Licht and Keshet, 2015; Palmer et al., 2000). In fact, neurogenesis is closely associated with active vascular recruitment and subsequent remodeling. Hippocampal neurogenesis occurs within an angiogenic niche. This environment comprised of endothelial cells and circulating factors regulates plasticity, including neurogenesis, in the adult central nervous system (Palmer et al., 2000). It is thought that following stimuli, such as learning or running, endothelial proliferation in the SGL leads to the formation of new microvessels, which in turn, support the self-renewal and proliferation of new NPCs by facilitating their interaction with factors from the blood and peripheral organs (for review, see Cooper et al., 2018).

The majority of the NPCs in the SGZ proliferate in novel “hot spots” where neuronal, glial, and endothelial precursors divide in tight clusters. These clusters are commonly found at a branch or terminus of fine capillaries, suggesting an active site of angiogenesis. It seems likely that neurogenic hot spots grow and shrink in response to discrete local signals, but the exact nature of these local cues are not known. The unique interface between endothelium and NSC/NPCs may provide instructive cues that modulate neurogenesis, such as proliferative cues. The NSCs are intimately associated with vascular endothelial cells within the niches and their self-renewal, proliferation and early differentiation tightly depend on homeostatic endothelial functions (Eichmann and Thomas, 2013). In the SGZ, neurogenesis is closely associated with a process of active vascular recruitment and subsequent remodeling (Palmer et al., 2000). A portion of the cells proliferating in the SGZ are endothelial precursors (Abrous et al., 2005). Furthermore, NPCs and angioblasts proliferate together in clusters associated with the microvasculature of the SGZ, and cells within these clusters express the VEGF-receptor Flk-1 (Palmer et al., 2000). The clustering of neural and endothelial precursors suggests that neurogenesis involves cross-talk with endothelial precursors. Beauquis et al. (2010a, b) reported that vascularization of the hippocampus is significantly decreased in a mouse model of T1DM—along with compromised survival of NPCs, suggesting that NPC survival depends on the ability of the brain to provide functional vasculature (Beauquis et al., 2010a).

11. Conclusion

Hippocampal neurogenesis plays a role in memory formation, hippocampal plasticity and function. Substantial evidence from mice and humans suggest that hippocampal neurogenesis is deficient in AD. However, the mechanism by which deficits in neurogenesis contribute to late onset of the disease (LOAD) is not fully elucidated. Likewise, the cause for the development of cognitive deficits and the mechanisms leading to LOAD are poorly understood. Thus, understanding risk factors of LOAD, such as T2DM, may provide some clues in that regard.

Recent evidence suggests that Cav-1, an endothelial-enriched protein that is also expressed in neurons, neural progenitor cells and glia, is compromised in T2DM. Interestingly, compromised levels of Cav-1 lead to increased amyloidogenesis and learning and memory impairments. Intriguingly, Cav-1 seems to contribute to deficits in neurogenesis in T2DM.

This review has summarized this recent exciting evidence, and discusses the possible mechanisms by which Cav-1 can contribute to compromised neurogenesis and the development of AD in T2DM. The contribution of Cav-1 to endothelial dysfunction aligns with an increasing number of studies suggesting that vascular factors contribute to the development of cognitive deficits and LOAD, focusing the spotlight on endothelial function. Metabolic disorders, such as T2DM, are characterized by increased and chronic systemic inflammation that damages the endothelium, depletes Cav-1 and leads to vascular dysfunction. As the disease progresses, these pathological processes affect the BBB, allowing increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and other factors that are normally restricted into the brain, thereby compromising vascular and cerebrovascular function and affecting mature and newly-formed neurons, as well as glia.

The mechanisms described in this review not only reinforce the epidemiologic connection between T2DM, vascular dysfunction, and AD, but also reiterate the fact that effective treatments for LOAD will consider the state of hippocampal neurogenesis.

Abbreviations

Aβ β-amyloid peptide

A1C hemoglobin A1C

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ADAM10 disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10

AGE advanced glycation end product

AMPK-aPKC-CBP pathway 5’ adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase/protein kinase C/transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein pathway

ApoEε4 apolipoprotein E

APP amyloid precursor protein

APPswe/PS1ΔE9 amyloid precursor protein harboring the Swedish mutation and presenilin-1 harboring a deletion of exon 9

BACE-1 β-secretase 1

Bax Bcl-2-associated X protein

BBB blood-brain barrier

BDNF brain derived neurotrophic factor

bFGF basic fibroblast growth factor

BrdU bromodeoxyuridine

BrdU+ bromodeoxyuridine positive cells

CAMs cellular adhesion molecules

Cav-1 Caveolin-1

CRP C-reactive protein

c-Src proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Sr

DCX doublecortin

DG dentate gyrus

EC entorhinal cortex

EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor

eNOS endothelial nitric oxide synthase

FAD familial Alzheimer’s disease

FL-APP full length amyloid precursor protein

GCL granular cell layer

GLUT glucose transporter, subtypes 1-5, 8

GPCR G protein coupled receptor

HIF-1α hypoxia-inducible factor alpha

ICAM-1 intracellular adhesion molecule-1

IFNγ interferon-γ

IGFR insulin growth factor receptor

IL-1β interleukin 1-beta

IL-1 interleukin 1

IL-10 interleukin 10

IL-6 interleukin 6

LDLs low-density lipoproteins

LOAD late onset Alzheimer’s disease

LT lymphotoxin

LTP long-term potentiation

MAPK mitogen activated protein kinase

MCI mild cognitive impairment

MMPs matrix metalloproteinases

Nestin-TK nestin-driven thymidine kinase

NFκB nuclear factor κB

NO nitric oxide

NOD non-obese diabetic

NPCs neural progenitor cells

NSCs neural stem cells

PDGFR platelet derived growth factor receptor

PKA/C protein kinase A/C

PP perforant pathway

PS1,2 presenilin 1,2

PSA-NCAM polysialylated isoforms of the neural cell adhesion molecule

p-tau phosphorylated tau

RAGE receptor for advanced glycation end products

ROS reactive oxygen species

RTK receptor tyrosine kinase

sAPPα,β soluble APPα,β

SFK Src family kinase

SGL subgranular layer of the dentate gyrus

SGZ subgranular zone

SVZ subventricular zone

T1DM type 1 diabetes mellitus

T2DM type 2 diabetes mellitus

TLR2 toll-like receptor 2

TNF-α tumor necrosis factor alpha

TP73 tumor protein 73

VCAM-1 vascular adhesion molecule

VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor

VEGFR vascular endothelial growth factor receptor

Wnt3 proto-oncogene protein encoded by WNT3

3XTg-AD a transgenic mouse model harboring mutant forms of APP, PS1 and tau

5XFAD a transgenic mouse model harboring 5 mutations linked to familial Alzheimer’s disease

Fig. 1 Neurogenesis in the adult mammalian hippocampus. A scheme describing the main neural residents of the hippocampal neurogenic niche. The process of neural stem cell differentiation into neurons that incorporate in the granular cell layer (GCL) of the dentate gyrus is demonstrated. SGL, subgranular layer of the dentate gyrus; LTP, long-term potentiation.

Fig. 2 Neurogenesis is part of the hippocampal circuitry. New neurons incorporate into the dentate gyrus, an important part of the hippocampal circuitry that receives input from the neocortex. Circles in light green represent neural stem cells that reside in the subgranular layer. As they differentiate into granular neurons they will migrate into the granular cell layer (GCL) and incorporate next to mature neurons (dark green circles), send their axon to the CA3 region of the dentate gyrus, and their dendritic tree will form synapses with neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex (ECII).

Fig. 3 A scheme of the Caveolin-1 and Caveolae. (A) Schematic structure of Caveolin-1. (B) Caveolin-1 plays a major role in caveolae and regulates the transport and signaling of numerous proteins in endothelial cells. eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; SFK, Src family kinase; MAPK, mitogen activated protein kinase; PKA/C, protein kinase A/C; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; IGFR, insulin growth factor receptor; PDGFR, platelet derived growth factor receptor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factors receptor; GPCR, G protein coupled receptor.

Fig. 4 Caveolin-1 as a potential molecular trigger of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). A proposed model by which pro-inflammatory factors in T2DM compromise endothelial Caveolin-1 leading to vascular dysfunction, affecting neurogenesis and neuronal viability, and subsequently leading to AD. Cav-1, Caveolin-1; p-tau, phosphorylated tau; FL-APP, full length amyloid precursor protein; Aβ, β amyloid peptide.

Fig. 5 The vascular neurogenic niche of the hippocampus. (A) A scheme of neural stem cells (blue radial glial cells) and neural progenitor cells (round blue) in contact with blood vessels (red). Transport of oxygen, nutrients and cross-talk of signaling pathways between endothelial cells and neurogenic cells regulate their viability, self-renewal and proliferation. (B) The vasculature is an integral and important component of the neurogenic niche. GCL, granular cell layer; SGL, subgranular layer of the dentate gyrus.


References

Abrous DN , Koehl M , &amp; Le Moal M (2005). Adult neurogenesis: From precursors to network and physiology. Physiological Reviews, 85 (2 ), 523–569.15788705
Aimone JB , Wiles J , &amp; Gage FH (2006). Potential role for adult neurogenesis in the encoding of time in new memories. Nature Neuroscience, 9 (6 ), 723–727.16732202
Akers KG , Martinez-Canabal A , Restivo L , Yiu AP , De Cristofaro A , Hsiang HL , (2014). Hippocampal neurogenesis regulates forgetting during adulthood and infancy. Science, 344 (6184 ), 598–602.24812394
Arendash GW , King DL , Gordon MN , Morgan D , Hatcher JM , Hope CE , (2001). Progressive, age-related behavioral impairments in transgenic mice carrying both mutant amyloid precursor protein and presenilin-1 transgenes. Brain Research, 891 (1-2 ), 42–53.11164808
Ashe KH (2001). Learning and memory in transgenic mice modeling Alzheimer’s disease. Learning &amp; Memory, 8 (6 ), 301–308.11773429
Bakhshi FR , Mao M , Shajahan AN , Piegeler T , Chen Z , Chernaya O , (2013). Nitrosation-dependent caveolin 1 phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation and its association with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. Pulmonary Circulation, 3 (4 ), 816–830.25006397
Beauquis J , Homo-Delarche F , Giroix MH , Ehses J , Coulaud J , Roig P , (2010a). Hippocampal neurovascular and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis alterations in spontaneously type 2 diabetic GK rats. Experimental Neurology, 222 (1 ), 125–134.20045412
Beauquis J , Roig P , De Nicola AF , &amp; Saravia F (2010b). Short-term environmental enrichment enhances adult neurogenesis, vascular network and dendritic complexity in the hippocampus of type 1 diabetic mice. PLoS One, 5 (11 ), e13993.21085588
Beauquis J , Roig P , Homo-Delarche F , De Nicola A , &amp; Saravia F (2006). Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis and number of hilar neurones in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice: Reversion by antidepressant treatment. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 23 (6 ), 1539–1546.16553617
Beauquis J , Saravia F , Coulaud J , Roig P , Dardenne M , Homo-Delarche F , (2008). Prominently decreased hippocampal neurogenesis in a spontaneous model of type 1 diabetes, the nonobese diabetic mouse. Experimental Neurology, 210 (2 ), 359–367.18190910
Becker S (2005). A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis. Hippocampus, 15 (6 ), 722–738.15986407
Bergmann O , Spalding KL , &amp; Frisen J (2015). Adult neurogenesis in humans. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 7 (7 ), a018994.26134318
Biessels GJ , Strachan MW , Visseren FL , Kappelle LJ , &amp; Whitmer RA (2014). Dementia and cognitive decline in type 2 diabetes and prediabetic stages: Towards targeted interventions. The Lancet Diabetes and Endocrinology, 2 (3 ), 246–255.24622755
Bizon JL , &amp; Gallagher M (2005). More is less: neurogenesis and age-related cognitive decline in Long-Evans rats. Science of Aging Knowledge Environment, 2005 (7 ), re2.15716513
Blake GJ , &amp; Ridker PM (2001). Novel clinical markers of vascular wall inflammation. Circulation Research, 89 (9 ), 763–771.11679405
Blanchard J , Wanka L , Tung YC , Cardenas-Aguayo Mdel C , LaFerla FM , Iqbal K , (2010). Pharmacologic reversal of neurogenic and neuroplastic abnormalities and cognitive impairments without affecting Abeta and tau pathologies in 3xTg-AD mice. Acta Neuropathologica, 120 (5 ), 605–621.20697724
Blochet C , Buscemi L , Clement T , Gehri S , Badaut J , &amp; Hirt L (2020). Involvement of caveolin-1 in neurovascular unit remodeling after stroke: Effects on neovascularization and astrogliosis. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 40 (1 ), 163–176.30354902
Blurton-Jones M , Kitazawa M , Martinez-Coria H , Castello NA , Muller FJ , Loring JF , (2009). Neural stem cells improve cognition via BDNF in a transgenic model of Alzheimer disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106 (32 ), 13594–13599.19633196
Boldrini M , Fulmore CA , Tartt AN , Simeon LR , Pavlova I , Poposka V , (2018). Human hippocampal neurogenesis persists throughout aging. Cell Stem Cell, 22 (4 ), 589–599, e585.29625071
Bonds JA , Shetti A , Bheri A , Chen Z , Disouky A , Tai L , (2019). Depletion of caveolin-1 in Type 2 diabetes model induces Alzheimer’s disease pathology precursors. The Journal of Neuroscience, 39 (43 ), 8576–8583.31527120
Brouwers O , Niessen PM , Haenen G , Miyata T , Brownlee M , Stehouwer CD , (2010). Hyperglycaemia-induced impairment of endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation in rat mesenteric arteries is mediated by intracellular methylglyoxal levels in a pathway dependent on oxidative stress. Diabetologia, 53 (5 ), 989–1000.20186387
Capes SE , Hunt D , Malmberg K , Pathak P , &amp; Gerstein HC (2001). Stress hyperglycemia and prognosis of stroke in nondiabetic and diabetic patients: A systematic overview. Stroke, 32 (10 ), 2426–2432.11588337
CDC. (2014). National diabetes statistics report: Estimates of diabetes and its burden in the United States. Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Chapman PF , White GL , Jones MW , Cooper-Blacketer D , Marshall VJ , Irizarry M , (1999). Impaired synaptic plasticity and learning in aged amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. Nature Neuroscience, 2 (3 ), 271–276.10195221
Chatila ZK , Kim E , Berle C , Bylykbashi E , Rompala A , Oram MK , (2018). BACE1 regulates proliferation and neuronal differentiation of newborn cells in the adult hippocampus in mice. eNeuro, 5 (4 ).
Chen Q , Nakajima A , Choi SH , Xiong X , Sisodia SS , &amp; Tang YP (2008). Adult neurogenesis is functionally associated with AD-like neurodegeneration. Neurobiology of Disease, 29 (2 ), 316–326.17980611
Cheng Z , Jiang X , Pansuria M , Fang P , Mai J , Mallilankaraman K , (2014). Hyperhomocysteinemia and hyperglycemia induce and potentiate endothelial dysfunction via mu-calpain activation. Diabetes, 64 (3 ), 947–959. 10.2337/db14-0784 . 25352635
Chishti MA , Yang DS , Janus C , Phinney AL , Horne P , Pearson J , (2001). Early-onset amyloid deposition and cognitive deficits in transgenic mice expressing a double mutant form of amyloid precursor protein 695. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 276 (24 ), 21562–21570.11279122
Choi SH , Bylykbashi E , Chatila ZK , Lee SW , Pulli B , Clemenson GD , (2018). Combined adult neurogenesis and BDNF mimic exercise effects on cognition in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. Science, 361 (6406 ).
Choi SH , Veeraraghavalu K , Lazarov O , Marler S , Ransohoff RM , Ramirez JM , (2008). Non-cell-autonomous effects of presenilin 1 variants on enrichment-mediated hippocampal progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation. Neuron, 59 (4 ), 568–580.18760694
Cooper C , Moon HY , &amp; van Praag H (2018). On the run for hippocampal plasticity. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 8 (4 ). 10.1101/cshperspect.a029736, pii: a029736.
Curtis MA , Connor B , &amp; Faull RL (2003). Neurogenesis in the diseased adult human brain–new therapeutic strategies forneurodegenerative diseases. Cell Cycle, 2 (5 ), 428–430.12963834
Dadwal P , Mahmud N , Sinai L , Azimi A , Fatt M , Wondisford FE , (2015). Activating endogenous neural precursor cells using metformin leads to neural repair and functional recovery in a model of childhood brain injury. Stem Cell Reports, 5 (2 ), 166–173.26235894
Davies MJ , Gordon JL , Gearing AJ , Pigott R , Woolf N , Katz D , (1993). The expression of the adhesion molecules ICAM-1, VCAM-1, PECAM, and E-selectin in human atherosclerosis. The Journal of Pathology, 171 (3 ), 223–229.7506307
De Vriese AS , Verbeuren TJ , Van de Voorde J , Lameire NH , &amp; Vanhoutte PM (2000). Endothelial dysfunction in diabetes. British Journal of Pharmacology, 130 (5 ), 963–974.10882379
Demars MP , Bartholomew A , Strakova Z , &amp; Lazarov O (2011). Soluble amyloid precursor protein: a novel proliferation factor of adult progenitor cells of ectodermal and mesodermal origin. Stem Cell Research &amp; Therapy, 2 (4 ), 36.21878106
Demars MP , Hollands C , Zhao KD , &amp; Lazarov O (2013). Soluble amyloid precursor protein-alpha rescues age-linked decline in neural progenitor cell proliferation. Neurobiology of Aging, 34 , 2431–2440.23683827
Demars M , Hu YS , Gadadhar A , &amp; Lazarov O (2010). Impaired neurogenesis is an early event in the etiology of familial Alzheimer’s disease in transgenic mice. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 88 (10 ), 2103–2117.20209626
Dewachter I , Reverse D , Caluwaerts N , Ris L , Kuiperi C , Van den Haute C , (2002). Neuronal deficiency of presenilin 1 inhibits amyloid plaque formation and corrects hippocampal long-term potentiation but not a cognitive defect of amyloid precursor protein [V717I] transgenic mice. The Journal of Neuroscience, 22 (9 ), 3445–3453.11978821
Dhaliwal J , Kannangara TS , Vaculik M , Xue Y , Kumar KL , Maione A , (2018). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis occurs in the absence of Presenilin 1 and Presenilin 2. Scientific Reports, 8 (1 ), 17931.30560948
Dineley KT , Xia X , Bui D , Sweatt JD , &amp; Zheng H (2002). Accelerated plaque accumulation, associative learning deficits, and up-regulation of alpha 7 nicotinic receptor protein in transgenic mice co-expressing mutant human presenilin 1 and amyloid precursor proteins. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 277 (25 ), 22768–22780.11912199
Dong H , Goico B , Martin M , Csernansky CA , Bertchume A , &amp; Csernansky JG (2004). Modulation of hippocampal cell proliferation, memory, and amyloid plaque deposition in APPsw (Tg2576) mutant mice by isolation stress. Neuroscience, 127 (3 ), 601–609.15283960
Donovan MH , Yazdani U , Norris RD , Games D , German DC , &amp; Eisch AJ (2006). Decreased adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the PDAPP mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 495 (1 ), 70–83.16432899
Eichmann A , &amp; Thomas JL (2013). Molecular parallels between neural and vascular development. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 3 (1 ), a006551.23024177
Ergul A , Abdelsaid M , Fouda AY , &amp; Fagan SC (2014). Cerebral neovascularization in diabetes: Implications for stroke recovery and beyond. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 34 (4 ), 553–563.24496174
Ergul A , Kelly-Cobbs A , Abdalla M , &amp; Fagan SC (2012). Cerebrovascular complications of diabetes: Focus on stroke. Endocrine, Metabolic &amp; Immune Disorders Drug Targets, 12 (2 ), 148–158.
Ergul A , Li W , Elgebaly MM , Bruno A , &amp; Fagan SC (2009). Hyperglycemia, diabetes and stroke: Focus on the cerebrovasculature. Vascular Pharmacology, 51 (1 ), 44–49.19258053
Eriksson PS , Perfilieva E , Bjork-Eriksson T , Alborn AM , Nordborg C , Peterson DA , (1998). Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. Nature Medicine, 4 (11 ), 1313–1317.
Ermini FV , Grathwohl S , Radde R , Yamaguchi M , Staufenbiel M , Palmer TD , (2008). Neurogenesis and alterations of neural stem cells in mouse models of cerebral amyloidosis. The American Journal of Pathology, 172 (6 ), 1520–1528.18467698
Etter H , Althaus R , Eugster HP , Santamaria-Babi LF , Weber L , &amp; Moser R (1998). IL-4 and IL-13 downregulate rolling adhesion of leukocytes to IL-1 or TNF-alpha-activated endothelial cells by limiting the interval of E-selectin expression. Cytokine, 10 (6 ), 395–403.9632524
Fatt M , Hsu K , He L , Wondisford F , Miller FD , Kaplan DR , (2015). Metformin acts on two different molecular pathways to enhance adult neural precursor proliferation/self-renewal and differentiation. Stem Cell Reports, 5 (6 ), 988–995.26677765
Feng R , Rampon C , Tang YP , Shrom D , Jin J , Kyin M , (2001). Deficient neurogenesis in forebrain-specific presenilin-1 knockout mice is associated with reduced clearance of hippocampal memory traces. Neuron, 32 (5 ), 911–926.11738035
Gadadhar A , Marr RA , &amp; Lazarov O (2011). Presenilin-1 regulates neural progenitor cell differentiation in the adult brain. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31 (7 ), 2615–2623.21325529
Gage FH (2019). Adult neurogenesis in mammals. Science, 364 (6443 ), 827–828.31147506
Galis ZS , Sukhova GK , Lark MW , &amp; Libby P (1994). Increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases and matrix degrading activity in vulnerable regions of human atherosclerotic plaques. The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 94 (6 ), 2493–2503.7989608
Gan L , Qiao S , Lan X , Chi L , Luo C , Lien L , (2008). Neurogenic responses to amyloid-beta plaques in the brain of Alzheimer’s disease-like transgenic (pPDGF-APPSw, Ind) mice. Neurobiology of Disease, 29 (1 ), 71–80.17916429
Ge S , Yang CH , Hsu KS , Ming GL , &amp; Song H (2007). A critical period for enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated neurons of the adult brain. Neuron, 54 (4 ), 559–566.17521569
Giacco F , &amp; Brownlee M (2010). Oxidative stress and diabetic complications. Circulation Research, 107 (9 ), 1058–1070.21030723
Girouard H , &amp; Iadecola C (2006). Neurovascular coupling in the normal brain and in hypertension, stroke, and Alzheimer disease. Journal of Applied Physiology (Bethesda, MD: 1985), 100 (1 ), 328–335.
Girouard H , Park L , Anrather J , Zhou P , &amp; Iadecola C (2007). Cerebrovascular nitrosative stress mediates neurovascular and endothelial dysfunction induced by angiotensin II. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology, 27 (2 ), 303–309.
Gu Y , Arruda-Carvalho M , Wang J , Janoschka SR , Josselyn SA , Frankland PW , (2012). Optical controlling reveals time-dependent roles for adult-born dentate granule cells. Nature Neuroscience, 15 (12 ), 1700–1706.23143513
Gudala K , Bansal D , Schifano F , &amp; Bhansali A (2013). Diabetes mellitus and risk of dementia: A meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Journal of Diabetes Investigation, 4 (6 ), 640–650.24843720
Hamilton LK , Aumont A , Julien C , Vadnais A , Calon F , &amp; Fernandes KJ (2010). Widespread deficits in adult neurogenesis precede plaque and tangle formation in the 3xTg mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 32 (6 ), 905–920.20726889
Hartl D , Rohe M , Mao L , Staufenbiel M , Zabel C , &amp; Klose J (2008). Impairment of adolescent hippocampal plasticity in a mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease precedes disease phenotype. PLoS One, 3 (7 ), e2759.18648492
Haughey NJ , Nath A , Chan SL , Borchard AC , Rao MS , &amp; Mattson MP (2002). Disruption of neurogenesis by amyloid beta-peptide, and perturbed neural progenitor cell homeostasis, in models of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neurochemistry, 83 (6 ), 1509–1524.12472904
Head BP , Peart JN , Panneerselvam M , Yokoyama T , Pearn ML , Niesman IR , (2010). Loss of caveolin-1 accelerates neurodegeneration and aging. PLoS One, 5 (12 ), e15697.21203469
Herder C , Illig T , Rathmann W , Martin S , Haastert B , Muller-Scholze S , (2005). Inflammation and type 2 diabetes: Results from KORA Augsburg. Gesundheitswesen, 67 (Suppl 1 ), S115–S121.16032528
Ho N , Sommers MS , &amp; Lucki I (2013). Effects of diabetes on hippocampal neurogenesis: Links to cognition and depression. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 37 (8 ), 1346–1362.23680701
Hollands C , Tobin MK , Hsu M , Musaraca K , Yu TS , Mishra R , (2017). Depletion of adult neurogenesis exacerbates cognitive deficits in Alzheimer’s disease by compromising hippocampal inhibition. Molecular Neurodegeneration, 12 (1 ), 64.28886753
Hu YS , Long N , Pigino G , Brady ST , &amp; Lazarov O (2013). Molecular mechanisms of environmental enrichment: Impairments in Akt/GSK3beta, neurotrophin-3 and CREB signaling. PLoS One, 8 (5 ), e64460.23700479
Hu YS , Xu P , Pigino G , Brady ST , Larson J , &amp; Lazarov O (2010). Complex environment experience rescues impaired neurogenesis, enhances synaptic plasticity, and attenuates neuropathology in familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked APPswe/PS1{Delta} E9 mice. The FASEB Journal, 24 (6 ), 1667–1681.20086049
Imayoshi I , &amp; Kageyama R (2011). The role of notch signaling in adult neurogenesis. Molecular Neurobiology, 44 (1 ), 7–12.21541768
Imayoshi I , Sakamoto M , Ohtsuka T , Takao K , Miyakawa T , Yamaguchi M , (2008). Roles of continuous neurogenesis in the structural and functional integrity of the adult forebrain. Nature Neuroscience, 11 (10 ), 1153–1161.18758458
Irie F , Fitzpatrick AL , Lopez OL , Kuller LH , Peila R , Newman AB , (2008). Enhanced risk for Alzheimer disease in persons with type 2 diabetes and APOE epsilon4: The Cardiovascular Health Study Cognition Study. Archives of Neurology, 65 (1 ), 89–93.18195144
Jankowsky JL , Melnikova T , Fadale DJ , Xu GM , Slunt HH , Gonzales V , (2005). Environmental enrichment mitigates cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. The Journal of Neuroscience, 25 (21 ), 5217–5224.15917461
Janson J , Laedtke T , Parisi JE , O’Brien P , Petersen RC , &amp; Butler PC (2004). Increased risk of type 2 diabetes in Alzheimer disease. Diabetes, 53 (2 ), 474–481.14747300
Janus C , D’Amelio S , Amitay O , Chishti MA , Strome R , Fraser P , (2000). Spatial learning in transgenic mice expressing human presenilin 1 (PS1) transgenes. Neurobiology of Aging, 21 (4 ), 541–549.10924767
Jin K , Galvan V , Xie L , Mao XO , Gorostiza OF , Bredesen DE , (2004). Enhanced neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic (PDGF-APPSw,Ind) mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101 (36 ), 13363–13367.15340159
Johansson BB (2007). Regeneration and plasticity in the brain and spinal cord. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 27 (8 ), 1417–1430.17392690
John TA , Vogel SM , Tiruppathi C , Malik AB , &amp; Minshall RD (2003). Quantitative analysis of albumin uptake and transport in the rat microvessel endothelial monolayer. American Journal of Physiology Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology, 284 (1 ), L187–L196.12471015
Kamal A , Biessels GJ , Urban IJ , &amp; Gispen WH (1999). Hippocampal synaptic plasticity in streptozotocin-diabetic rats: Impairment of long-term potentiation and facilitation of long-term depression. Neuroscience, 90 (3 ), 737–745.10218775
Kaur R , Kaur M , &amp; Singh J (2018). Endothelial dysfunction and platelet hyperactivity in type 2 diabetes mellitus: Molecular insights and therapeutic strategies. Cardiovascular Diabetology, 17 (1 ), 121.30170601
Kee N , Teixeira CM , Wang AH , &amp; Frankland PW (2007). Preferential incorporation of adult-generated granule cells into spatial memory networks in the dentate gyrus. Nature Neuroscience, 10 (3 ), 355–362.17277773
Kempermann G , &amp; Gage FH (2002). Genetic determinants of adult hippocampal neurogenesis correlate with acquisition, but not probe trial performance, in the water maze task. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 16 (1 ), 129–136.12153537
Kempermann G , Gage FH , Aigner L , Song H , Curtis MA , Thuret S , (2018). Human adult neurogenesis: Evidence and remaining questions. Cell Stem Cell, 23 (1 ), 25–30.29681514
Kempermann G , Gast D , &amp; Gage FH (2002). Neuroplasticity in old age: Sustained five-fold induction of hippocampal neurogenesis by long-term environmental enrichment. Annals of Neurology, 52 (2 ), 135–143.12210782
Kempermann G , Kuhn HG , &amp; Gage FH (1997). More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an enriched environment. Nature, 386 (6624 ), 493–495.9087407
Kempermann G , Kuhn HG , &amp; Gage FH (1998). Experience-induced neurogenesis in the senescent dentate gyrus. The Journal of Neuroscience, 18 (9 ), 3206–3212.9547229
Kirschen GW , Kery R , &amp; Ge S (2018). The hippocampal neuro-glio-vascular network: Metabolic vulnerability and potential neurogenic regeneration in disease. Brain Plast, 3 (2 ), 129–144.30151338
Kohen Avramoglu R , Laplante MA , Le Quang K , Deshaies Y , Despres JP , Larose E , (2013). The genetic and metabolic determinants of cardiovascular complications in type 2 diabetes: Recent insights from animal models and clinical investigations. Canadian Journal of Diabetes, 37 (5 ), 351–358.24500564
Krezymon A , Richetin K , Halley H , Roybon L , Lassalle JM , Frances B , (2013). Modifications of hippocampal circuits and early disruption of adult neurogenesis in the tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One, 8 (9 ), e76497.24086745
Kuhn HG , Dickinson-Anson H , &amp; Gage FH (1996). Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult rat: Age-related decrease of neuronal progenitor proliferation. The Journal of Neuroscience, 16 (6 ), 2027–2033.8604047
Kuttner-Hirshler Y , Venkatasubramanian PN , Apolinario J , Bonds J , Wyrwicz AM , &amp; Lazarov O (2017). Brain biomarkers in familial Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 60 (3 ), 949–958. 10.3233/JAD-170269 .
Lazarov O , &amp; Marr RA (2010). Neurogenesis and Alzheimer’s disease: At the crossroads. Experimental Neurology, 223 (2 ), 267–281.19699201
Lazarov O , Robinson J , Tang YP , Hairston IS , Korade-Mirnics Z , Lee VM , (2005). Environmental enrichment reduces Abeta levels and amyloid deposition in transgenic mice. Cell, 120 (5 ), 701–713.15766532
Lemaire V , Koehl M , Le Moal M , &amp; Abrous DN (2000). Prenatal stress produces learning deficits associated with an inhibition of neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97 (20 ), 11032–11037.11005874
Li W , Prakash R , Kelly-Cobbs AI , Ogbi S , Kozak A , El-Remessy AB , (2010). Adaptive cerebral neovascularization in a model of type 2 diabetes: Relevance to focal cerebral ischemia. Diabetes, 59 (1 ), 228–235.19808897
Licht T , &amp; Keshet E (2015). The vascular niche in adult neurogenesis. Mechanisms of Development, 138 (Pt 1 ), 56–62.26103548
Lindqvist A , Mohapel P , Bouter B , Frielingsdorf H , Pizzo D , Brundin P , (2006). High-fat diet impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in male rats. European Journal of Neurology, 13 (12 ), 1385–1388.17116226
Lopez-Toledano MA , &amp; Shelanski ML (2007). Increased neurogenesis in young transgenic mice overexpressing human APP(Sw, Ind). Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 12 (3 ), 229–240.
Lorenzi M , Cagliero E , &amp; Toledo S (1985). Glucose toxicity for human endothelial cells in culture. Delayed replication, disturbed cell cycle, and accelerated death. Diabetes, 34 (7 ), 621–627.3924693
Lucassen PJ , Toni N , Kempermann G , Frisen J , Gage FH , &amp; Swaab DF (2019). Limits to human neurogenesis-really? Molecular Psychiatry. 10.1038/s41380-018-0337-5 (epub ahead of print).
Luchsinger JA , Tang MX , Stern Y , Shea S , &amp; Mayeux R (2001). Diabetes mellitus and risk of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with stroke in a multiethnic cohort. American Journal of Epidemiology, 154 (7 ), 635–641.11581097
Madsen TM , Kristjansen PE , Bolwig TG , &amp; Wortwein G (2003). Arrested neuronal proliferation and impaired hippocampal function following fractionated brain irradiation in the adult rat. Neuroscience, 119 (3 ), 635–642.12809684
Marchant NL , Reed BR , DeCarli CS , Madison CM , Weiner MW , Chui HC , (2012). Cerebrovascular disease, beta-amyloid, and cognition in aging. Neurobiology of Aging, 33 (5 ), 1006, e1025–1036.
Marchant NL , Reed BR , Sanossian N , Madison CM , Kriger S , Dhada R , (2013). The aging brain and cognition: contribution of vascular injury and abeta to mild cognitive dysfunction. JAMA Neurology, 70 (4 ), 488–495.23400560
Marin-Burgin A , Mongiat LA , Pardi MB , &amp; Schinder AF (2012). Unique processing during a period of high excitation/inhibition balance in adult-born neurons. Science, 335 (6073 ), 1238–1242.22282476
Mathews KJ , Allen KM , Boerrigter D , Ball H , Shannon Weickert C , &amp; Double KL (2017). Evidence for reduced neurogenesis in the aging human hippocampus despite stable stem cell markers. Aging Cell, 16 (5 ), 1195–1199.28766905
Matsumoto K , Fujishima K , Moriuchi A , Saishoji H , &amp; Ueki Y (2010). Soluble adhesion molecule E-selectin predicts cardiovascular events in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metabolism, 59 (3 ), 320–324.20004427
McEwen BS , &amp; Reagan LP (2004). Glucose transporter expression in the central nervous system: relationship to synaptic function. European Journal of Pharmacology, 490 (1-3 ), 13–24.15094070
Ming GL , &amp; Song H (2005). Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 28 , 223–250.
Minshall RD , Tiruppathi C , Vogel SM , Niles WD , Gilchrist A , Hamm HE , (2000). Endothelial cell-surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafficking via G(i)-coupled Src kinase signaling pathway. The Journal of Cell Biology, 150 (5 ), 1057–1070.10973995
Mirochnic S , Wolf S , Staufenbiel M , &amp; Kempermann G (2009). Age effects on the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis by physical activity and environmental enrichment in the APP23 mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Hippocampus, 19 (10 ), 1008–1018.19219917
Mooradian AD (1988). Diabetic complications of the central nervous system. Endocrine Reviews, 9 (3 ), 346–356.3061786
Moreno-Jimenez EP , Flor-Garcia M , Terreros-Roncal J , Rabano A , Cafini F , Pallas-Bazarra N , (2019). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is abundant in neurologically healthy subjects and drops sharply in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Medicine, 25 (4 ), 554–560.
Morgan D , Diamond DM , Gottschall PE , Ugen KE , Dickey C , Hardy J , (2000). A beta peptide vaccination prevents memory loss in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature, 408 (6815 ), 982–985.11140686
Morin JP , Rodriguez-Duran LF , Guzman-Ramos K , Perez-Cruz C , Ferreira G , Diaz-Cintra S , (2017). Palatable hyper-caloric foods impact on neuronal plasticity. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 11 , 19.28261067
Nakashiba T , Cushman JD , Pelkey KA , Renaudineau S , Buhl DL , McHugh TJ , (2012). Young dentate granule cells mediate pattern separation, whereas old granule cells facilitate pattern completion. Cell, 149 (1 ), 188–201.22365813
Neubauer H , Setiadi P , Gunesdogan B , Pinto A , Borgel J , &amp; Mugge A (2010). Influence of glycaemic control on platelet bound CD40-CD40L system, P-selectin and soluble CD40 ligand in Type 2 diabetes. Diabetic Medicine, 27 (4 ), 384–390.20536508
Ohara T , Doi Y , Ninomiya T , Hirakawa Y , Hata J , Iwaki T , (2011). Glucose tolerance status and risk of dementia in the community: The Hisayama study. Neurology, 77 (12 ), 1126–1134.21931106
Ohno M , Sametsky EA , Younkin LH , Oakley H , Younkin SG , Citron M , (2004). BACE1 deficiency rescues memory deficits and cholinergic dysfunction in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron, 41 (1 ), 27–33.14715132
Palmer TD , Schwartz PH , Taupin P , Kaspar B , Stein SA , &amp; Gage FH (2001). Cell culture. Progenitor cells from human brain after death. Nature, 411 (6833 ), 42–43.11333968
Palmer TD , Willhoite AR , &amp; Gage FH (2000). Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 425 (4 ), 479–494.10975875
Paredes MF , Sorrells SF , Cebrian-Silla A , Sandoval K , Qi D , Kelley KW , (2018). Does adult neurogenesis persist in the human hippocampus? Cell Stem Cell, 23 (6 ), 780–781.30526879
Pi J , Bai Y , Daniel KW , Liu D , Lyght O , Edelstein D , (2009). Persistent oxidative stress due to absence of uncoupling protein 2 associated with impaired pancreatic beta-cell function. Endocrinology, 150 (7 ), 3040–3048.19246534
Pickup JC , &amp; Crook MA (1998). Is type II diabetes mellitus a disease of the innate immune system? Diabetologia, 41 (10 ), 1241–1248.9794114
Poirier R , Veltman I , Pflimlin MC , Knoflach F , &amp; Metzger F (2010). Enhanced dentate gyrus synaptic plasticity but reduced neurogenesis in a mouse model of amyloidosis. Neurobiology of Disease, 40 (2 ), 386–393.20615468
Potts MB , &amp; Lim DA (2012). An old drug for new ideas: metformin promotes adult neurogenesis and spatial memory formation. Cell Stem Cell, 11 (1 ), 5–6.22770236
Prakash R , Johnson M , Fagan SC , &amp; Ergul A (2013). Cerebral neovascularization and remodeling patterns in two different models of type 2 diabetes. PLoS One, 8 (2 ), e56264.23441170
Prakash R , Somanath PR , El-Remessy AB , Kelly-Cobbs A , Stern JE , Dore-Duffy P , (2012). Enhanced cerebral but not peripheral angiogenesis in the Goto-Kakizaki model of type 2 diabetes involves VEGF and peroxynitrite signaling. Diabetes, 61 (6 ), 1533–1542.22403298
Qi Y , Takahashi N , Hileman SM , Patel HR , Berg AH , Pajvani UB , (2004). Adiponectin acts in the brain to decrease body weight. Nature Medicine, 10 (5 ), 524–529.
Raber J , Rola R , LeFevour A , Morhardt D , Curley J , Mizumatsu S , (2004). Radiation-induced cognitive impairments are associated with changes in indicators of hippocampal neurogenesis. Radiation Research, 162 (1 ), 39–47.15222778
Rafalski VA , &amp; Brunet A (2011). Energy metabolism in adult neural stem cell fate. Progress in Neurobiology, 93 (2 ), 182–203.21056618
Rajagopalan S , Meng XP , Ramasamy S , Harrison DG , &amp; Galis ZS (1996). Reactive oxygen species produced by macrophage-derived foam cells regulate the activity of vascular matrix metalloproteinases in vitro. Implications for atherosclerotic plaque stability. The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 98 (11 ), 2572–2579.8958220
Ramos-Rodriguez JJ , Molina-Gil S , Ortiz-Barajas O , Jimenez-Palomares M , Perdomo G , Cozar-Castellano I , (2014). Central proliferation and neurogenesis is impaired in type 2 diabetes and prediabetes animal models. PLoS One, 9 (2 ), e89229.24586614
Rodriguez JJ , Jones VC , Tabuchi M , Allan SM , Knight EM , LaFerla FM , (2008). Impaired adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One, 3 (8 ), e2935.18698410
Rola R , Raber J , Rizk A , Otsuka S , VandenBerg SR , Morhardt DR , (2004). Radiation-induced impairment of hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with cognitive deficits in young mice. Experimental Neurology, 188 (2 ), 316–330.15246832
Sahay A , Scobie KN , Hill AS , O’Carroll CM , Kheirbek MA , Burghardt NS , (2011). Increasing adult hippocampal neurogenesis is sufficient to improve pattern separation. Nature, 472 (7344 ), 466–470.21460835
Saravia F , Revsin Y , Lux-Lantos V , Beauquis J , Homo-Delarche F , &amp; De Nicola AF (2004). Oestradiol restores cell proliferation in dentate gyrus and subventricular zone of streptozotocin-diabetic mice. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 16 (8 ), 704–710.15271063
Sasaki N , Toki S , Chowei H , Saito T , Nakano N , Hayashi Y , (2001). Immunohistochemical distribution of the receptor for advanced glycation end products in neurons and astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Research, 888 (2 ), 256–262.11150482
Saxe MD , Battaglia F , Wang JW , Malleret G , David DJ , Monckton JE , (2006). Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis impairs contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103 (46 ), 17501–17506.17088541
Schmidt-Hieber C , Jonas P , &amp; Bischofberger J (2004). Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature, 429 (6988 ), 184–187.15107864
Seki T , &amp; Arai Y (1995). Age-related production of new granule cells in the adult dentate gyrus. NeuroReport, 6 (18 ), 2479–2482.8741746
Seners P , Turc G , Oppenheim C , &amp; Baron JC (2014a). Incidence, causes and predictors of neurological deterioration occurring within 24 h following acute ischaemic stroke: A systematic review with pathophysiological implications. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry.
Seners P , Turc G , Tisserand M , Legrand L , Labeyrie MA , Calvet D , (2014b). Unexplained early neurological deterioration after intravenous thrombolysis: Incidence, predictors, and associated factors. Stroke, 45 (7 ), 2004–2009.24876087
Shah PK , Falk E , Badimon JJ , Fernandez-Ortiz A , Mailhac A , Villareal-Levy G , (1995). Human monocyte-derived macrophages induce collagen breakdown in fibrous caps of atherosclerotic plaques. Potential role of matrix-degrading metalloproteinases and implications for plaque rupture. Circulation, 92 (6 ), 1565–1569.7664441
Shimazu K , Zhao M , Sakata K , Akbarian S , Bates B , Jaenisch R , (2006). NT-3 facilitates hippocampal plasticity and learning and memory by regulating neurogenesis. Learning &amp; Memory, 13 (3 ), 307–315.16705139
Shors TJ , Townsend DA , Zhao M , Kozorovitskiy Y , &amp; Gould E (2002). Neurogenesis may relate to some but not all types of hippocampal-dependent learning. Hippocampus, 12 (5 ), 578–584.12440573
Silvestre JS , &amp; Levy BI (2006). Molecular basis of angiopathy in diabetes mellitus. Circulation Research, 98 (1 ), 4–6.16397150
Sisodia SS (1992). Beta-amyloid precursor protein cleavage by a membrane-bound protease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 89 (13 ), 6075–6079.1631093
Smith MA , Sayre LM , &amp; Perry G (1996). Diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease: Glycation as a biochemical link. Diabetologia, 39 (2 ), 247.8635681
Song J , Kang SM , Kim E , Kim CH , Song HT , &amp; Lee JE (2015). Adiponectin receptor-mediated signaling ameliorates cerebral cell damage and regulates the neurogenesis of neural stem cells at high glucose concentrations: An in vivo and in vitro study. Cell Death &amp; Disease, 6 , e1844.26247729
Sorrells SF , Paredes MF , Cebrian-Silla A , Sandoval K , Qi D , Kelley KW , (2018). Human hippocampal neurogenesis drops sharply in children to undetectable levels in adults. Nature, 555 (7696 ), 377–381.29513649
Spalding KL , Bergmann O , Alkass K , Bernard S , Salehpour M , Huttner HB , (2013). Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult humans. Cell, 153 (6 ), 1219–1227.23746839
Spranger J , Kroke A , Mohlig M , Hoffmann K , Bergmann MM , Ristow M , (2003). Inflammatory cytokines and the risk to develop type 2 diabetes: results of the prospective population-based European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam Study. Diabetes, 52 (3 ), 812–817.12606524
Stadler K (2012). Oxidative stress in diabetes. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 771 , 272–287.23393685
Stranahan AM , Arumugam TV , Cutler RG , Lee K , Egan JM , &amp; Mattson MP (2008). Diabetes impairs hippocampal function through glucocorticoid-mediated effects on new and mature neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 11 (3 ), 309–317.18278039
Suh J , Choi SH , Romano DM , Gannon MA , Lesinski AN , Kim DY , (2013). ADAM10 missense mutations potentiate beta-amyloid accumulation by impairing prodomain chaperone function. Neuron, 80 (2 ), 385–401.24055016
Sun P , Knezovic A , Parlak M , Cuber J , Karabeg MM , Deckert J , (2015). Long-term effects of intracerebroventricular streptozotocin treatment on adult neurogenesis in the rat hippocampus. Current Alzheimer Research, 12 (8 ), 772–784.26159196
Sverdlov M , Shajahan AN , &amp; Minshall RD (2007). Tyrosine phosphorylation-dependence of caveolae-mediated endocytosis. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 11 (6 ), 1239–1250.18205698
Tang SS , Ren Y , Ren XQ , Cao JR , Hong H , Ji H , (2019). ERalpha and/or ERbeta activation ameliorates cognitive impairment, neurogenesis and apoptosis in type 2 diabetes mellitus mice. Experimental Neurology, 311 , 33–43.30201537
Taniuchi N , Niidome T , Goto Y , Akaike A , Kihara T , &amp; Sugimoto H (2007). Decreased proliferation of hippocampal progenitor cells in APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice. NeuroReport, 18 (17 ), 1801–1805.18090315
Tanokashira D , Kurata E , Fukuokaya W , Kawabe K , Kashiwada M , Takeuchi H , (2018). Metformin treatment ameliorates diabetes-associated decline in hippocampal neurogenesis and memory via phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1. FEBS Open Bio, 8 (7 ), 1104–1118.
Tartt AN , Fulmore CA , Liu Y , Rosoklija GB , Dwork AJ , Arango V , (2018). Considerations for assessing the extent of hippocampal neurogenesis in the adult and aging human brain. Cell Stem Cell, 23 (6 ), 782–783.30526880
Tashiro A , Makino H , &amp; Gage FH (2007). Experience-specific functional modification of the dentate gyrus through adult neurogenesis: A critical period during an immature stage. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27 (12 ), 3252–3259.17376985
Thomas RS , Lelos MJ , Good MA , &amp; Kidd EJ (2011). Clathrin-mediated endocytic proteins are upregulated in the cortex of the Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease-like amyloid pathology. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 415 (4 ), 656–661.22079091
Tobin MK , Musaraca K , Disouky A , Shetti A , Bheri A , Honer WG , (2019). Human hippocampal neurogenesis persists in aged adults and Alzheimer’s disease patients. Cell Stem Cell, 24 (6 ), 974–982, e973.31130513
Toni N , Teng EM , Bushong EA , Aimone JB , Zhao C , Consiglio A , (2007). Synapse formation on neurons born in the adult hippocampus. Nature Neuroscience, 10 (6 ), 727–734.17486101
Treves A , Tashiro A , Witter MP , &amp; Moser EI (2008). What is the mammalian dentate gyrus good for? Neuroscience, 154 (4 ), 1155–1172.18554812
Trinchese F , Liu S , Battaglia F , Walter S , Mathews PM , &amp; Arancio O (2004). Progressive age-related development of Alzheimer-like pathology in APP/PS1 mice. Annals of Neurology, 55 (6 ), 801–814.15174014
Tropepe V , Craig CG , Morshead CM , &amp; van der Kooy D (1997). Transforming growth factor-alpha null and senescent mice show decreased neural progenitor cell proliferation in the forebrain subependyma. The Journal of Neuroscience, 17 (20 ), 7850–7859.9315905
van Praag H , Christie BR , Sejnowski TJ , &amp; Gage FH (1999). Running enhances neurogenesis, learning, and long-term potentiation in mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 96 (23 ), 13427–13431.10557337
van Praag H , Schinder AF , Christie BR , Toni N , Palmer TD , &amp; Gage FH (2002). Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature, 415 (6875 ), 1030–1034.11875571
Veeraraghavalu K , Choi SH , Zhang X , &amp; Sisodia SS (2010). Presenilin 1 mutants impair the self-renewal and differentiation of adult murine subventricular zone-neuronal progenitors via cell-autonomous mechanisms involving notch signaling. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30 (20 ), 6903–6915.20484632
Venugopal SK , Devaraj S , Yuhanna I , Shaul P , &amp; Jialal I (2002). Demonstration that C-reactive protein decreases eNOS expression and bioactivity in human aortic endothelial cells. Circulation, 106 (12 ), 1439–1441.12234944
Verma S , Wang CH , Li SH , Dumont AS , Fedak PW , Badiwala MV , (2002). A self-fulfilling prophecy: C-reactive protein attenuates nitric oxide production and inhibits angiogenesis. Circulation, 106 (8 ), 913–919.12186793
Verret L , Jankowsky JL , Xu GM , Borchelt DR , &amp; Rampon C (2007). Alzheimer’s-type amyloidosis in transgenic mice impairs survival of newborn neurons derived from adult hippocampal neurogenesis. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27 (25 ), 6771–6780.17581964
Vinik AI , Erbas T , Park TS , Nolan R , &amp; Pittenger GL (2001). Platelet dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care, 24 (8 ), 1476–1485.11473089
Vogel SM , Easington CR , Minshall RD , Niles WD , Tiruppathi C , Hollenberg SM , (2001). Evidence of transcellular permeability pathway in microvessels. Microvascular Research, 61 (1 ), 87–101.11162199
Wang R , Dineley KT , Sweatt JD , &amp; Zheng H (2004). Presenilin 1 familial Alzheimer’s disease mutation leads to defective associative learning and impaired adult neurogenesis. Neuroscience, 126 (2 ), 305–312.15207348
Wang J , Gallagher D , DeVito LM , Cancino GI , Tsui D , He L , (2012). Metformin activates an atypical PKC-CBP pathway to promote neurogenesis and enhance spatial memory formation. Cell Stem Cell, 11 (1 ), 23–35.22770240
Wang H , Liu Z , Li G , &amp; Barrett EJ (2006). The vascular endothelial cell mediates insulin transport into skeletal muscle. American Journal of Physiology Endocrinology and Metabolism, 291 (2 ), E323–E332.16569759
Wang SH , Sun ZL , Guo YJ , Yuan Y , &amp; Li L (2009a). PPARgamma-mediated advanced glycation end products regulation of neural stem cells. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, 307 (1-2 ), 176–184.19524138
Wang SH , Sun ZL , Guo YJ , Yuan Y , &amp; Yang BQ (2009b). Diabetes impairs hippocampal function via advanced glycation end product mediated new neuron generation in animals with diabetes-related depression. Toxicological Sciences, 111 (1 ), 72–79.19502549
Wang H , Wang AX , Aylor K , &amp; Barrett EJ (2015). Caveolin-1 phosphorylation regulates vascular endothelial insulin uptake and is impaired by insulin resistance in rats. Diabetologia, 58 (6 ), 1344–1353.25748795
Wang H , Wang AX , &amp; Barrett EJ (2011). Caveolin-1 is required for vascular endothelial insulin uptake. American Journal of Physiology Endocrinology and Metabolism, 300 (1 ), E134–E144.20959538
Wen PH , Hof PR , Chen X , Gluck K , Austin G , Younkin SG , (2004). The presenilin-1 familial Alzheimer disease mutant P117L impairs neurogenesis in the hippocampus of adult mice. Experimental Neurology, 188 (2 ), 224–237.15246822
Williams SB , Goldfine AB , Timimi FK , Ting HH , Roddy MA , Simonson DC , (1998). Acute hyperglycemia attenuates endothelium-dependent vasodilation in humans in vivo. Circulation, 97 (17 ), 1695–1701.9591763
Wiskott L , Rasch MJ , &amp; Kempermann G (2006). A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal neurogenesis: avoidance of catastrophic interference in the dentate gyrus. Hippocampus, 16 (3 ), 329–343.16435309
Xiao X , Putatunda R , Zhang Y , Soni PV , Li F , Zhang T , (2018). Lymphotoxin beta receptor-mediated NFkappaB signaling promotes glial lineage differentiation and inhibits neuronal lineage differentiation in mouse brain neural stem/progenitor cells. Journal of Neuroinflammation, 15 (1 ), 49.29463313
Yamagishi S , &amp; Imaizumi T (2005). Diabetic vascular complications: Pathophysiology, biochemical basis and potential therapeutic strategy. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 11 (18 ), 2279–2299.16022668
Yamagishi S , Takeuchi M , Inagaki Y , Nakamura K , &amp; Imaizumi T (2003). Role of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) and their receptor (RAGE) in the pathogenesis of diabetic microangiopathy. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology Research, 23 (4 ), 129–134.15224502
Yamauchi T , Kamon J , Ito Y , Tsuchida A , Yokomizo T , Kita S , (2003). Cloning of adiponectin receptors that mediate antidiabetic metabolic effects. Nature, 423 (6941 ), 762–769.12802337
Yan SD , Stern D , &amp; Schmidt AM (1997). What’s the RAGE? The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and the dark side of glucose. European Journal of Clinical Investigation, 27 (3 ), 179–181.9088851
Yao D , &amp; Brownlee M (2010). Hyperglycemia-induced reactive oxygen species increase expression of the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and RAGE ligands. Diabetes, 59 (1 ), 249–255.19833897
Yorek MA (2003). The role of oxidative stress in diabetic vascular and neural disease. Free Radical Research, 37 (5 ), 471–480.12797466
Zhang D , Guo M , Zhang W , &amp; Lu XY (2011). Adiponectin stimulates proliferation of adult hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells through activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK)/glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta)/beta-catenin signaling cascade. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 286 (52 ), 44913–44920.22039048
Zhang C , McNeil E , Dressler L , &amp; Siman R (2007). Long-lasting impairment in hippocampal neurogenesis associated with amyloid deposition in a knock-in mouse model of familial Alzheimer’s disease. Experimental Neurology, 204 (1 ), 77–87.17070803
Zhang CL , Zou Y , He W , Gage FH , &amp; Evans RM (2008). A role for adult TLX-positive neural stem cells in learning and behaviour. Nature, 451 (7181 ), 1004–1007.18235445
Zhao C , Teng EM , Summers RG Jr. , Ming GL , &amp; Gage FH (2006). Distinct morphological stages of dentate granule neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26 (1 ), 3–11.16399667
Zhao X , Ueba T , Christie BR , Barkho B , McConnell MJ , Nakashima K , (2003). Mice lacking methyl-CpG binding protein 1 have deficits in adult neurogenesis and hippocampal function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 100 (11 ), 6777–6782.12748381
