LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8006959
2310
Neurochem Int
Neurochem Int
Neurochemistry international
0197-0186
1872-9754

30986503
7728575
10.1016/j.neuint.2019.04.005
NIHMS1650806
Article
Astrocyte dysfunction and neurovascular impairment in neurological disorders: correlation or causation?
McConnell Heather L. a
Li Zhenzhou ab
Woltjer Randall L. c
Mishra Anusha a†
a Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health &amp; Science University, Portland, OR
b Department of Anesthesiology, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan City, China
c Department of Neuropathology, Oregon Health &amp; Science University, Portland, OR
† Corresponding Author: Anusha Mishra, PhD, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health &amp; Science University1, 3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Rd, Portland, OR. mishraa@ohsu.edu
5 12 2020
13 4 2019
9 2019
11 12 2020
128 7084
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The neurovascular unit, consisting of neurons, astrocytes, and vascular cells, has become the focus of much discussion in the last two decades and emerging literature now suggests an association between neurovascular dysfunction and neurological disorders. In this review, we synthesize the known and suspected contributions of astrocytes to neurovascular dysfunction in disease. Throughout the brain, astrocytes are centrally positioned to dynamically mediate interactions between neurons and the cerebral vasculature, and play key roles in blood-brain barrier maintenance and neurovascular coupling. It is increasingly apparent that the changes in astrocytes in response to a variety of insults to brain tissue – commonly referred to as “reactive astrogliosis” – are not just an epiphenomenon restricted to morphological alterations, but comprise functional changes in astrocytes that also contribute to the phenotype of neurological diseases with both beneficial and detrimental effects. In the context of the neurovascular unit, astrocyte dysfunction accompanies, and may contribute to, blood-brain barrier impairment and neurovascular dysregulation, highlighting the need to determine the exact nature of the relationship between astrocyte dysfunction and neurovascular impairments. Targeting astrocytes may represent a new strategy in combinatorial therapeutics for preventing the mismatch of energy supply and demand that often accompanies neurological disorders.

astrocytes
neurovascular unit
blood-brain barrier
neurovascular coupling
astrogliosis
neurodegeneration

1. Introduction

Astrocytes play a pivotal role in the generation, maturation, and regulation of the neurovascular unit (NVU). Astrocytes are also extremely well-tuned to their microenvironment and respond to any disruptions therein, as occurs in disease and injury, with morphological and functional changes referred to as reactive astrogliosis. The question then arises: does reactive astrogliosis functionally alter the NVU in disease? A summary review of the literature suggests a close relationship between astrogliosis, changes in blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability, and neurovascular dysfunction in several disorders. Indeed, astrogliosis is often prominent around blood vessels, and numerous disorders of the central nervous system (CNS) that exhibit astrogliosis – e.g. traumatic brain injury (TBI), ischemic stroke, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related dementias, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), etc. – are also accompanied by neurovascular dysregulation. Such dysregulation can include impaired autoregulation, loss of resting tone, neurovascular uncoupling and/or BBB dysfunction: all processes that are regulated, to some extent, by astrocytes. From a purely economic viewpoint, when there is a decrease in blood flow to the brain, particularly under pathological stress when cells need even more energy to repair and recover, not all neurons and/or glial cells are likely to survive, or survive undamaged. Further, the extremely limited neurogenic capacity of the adult brain would then ensure that such degeneration will have a lasting impact on brain function. In other words, impairment of neurovascular regulation could cause neurodegeneration by producing a state of malnourishment of the brain (Fig. 1). This is the basic premise of the ‘vascular’ hypothesis of AD (Zlokovic, 2002), but might such dysregulation also contribute to a broader range of neuropathologies? Here, we attempt to summarize evidence gleaned from animal and human studies to put forth the hypothesis that reactive astrogliosis may be the causative factor producing neurovascular dysfunction, which then exacerbates or perhaps, in some instances, even initiates neurodegeneration. This understudied topic has remarkable potential to help us understand the basic biology of neurological disorders and suggest new therapeutic interventions in the treatment and care of such conditions.

1.1 Astrocytes

Astrocytes were first identified in the mid-nineteenth century as a population of non-neuronal cells in the CNS that lacked axons and dendrites but bore short, highly ramified processes. They were initially identified as neuroglia by the pathologist Andriezen (Andriezen, 1893), but later named astrocytes – the star cells – by Cajal (Cajal, 1995). Historically, astrocytes were divided into two subtypes: protoplasmic astrocytes, which are found in the gray matter and possess a dense cloud of fine processes that fill the interstitial space in the neuropil, and fibrous astrocytes, which are found in the white matter and possess fewer but thicker, longer processes. This basic nomenclature maintains a stronghold in the glial literature even today, despite accumulating evidence suggesting there are numerous subpopulations with striking heterogeneity, both between and within brain regions (Bayraktar et al., 2015; Farmer and Murai, 2017). Most of what we know about astrocyte functions today are based on investigations of grey matter protoplasmic astrocytes, and our understanding of white matter astrocytes, especially as it pertains to vascular regulation, is relatively limited. White matter astrocytes contact axons at the nodes of Ranvier (Butt et al., 1994), express excitatory neurotransmitter transporters and may function to protect both oligodendroglia and axons from excitotoxicity (Baltan et al., 2011). They also facilitate myelination in the developing and mature brain via secretion of enzymes and other soluble factors, ion buffering, and metabolic substrate delivery (Lundgaard et al., 2014). Therefore, although the hypotheses forwarded in this review are largely based on findings from protoplasmic astrocytes of the grey matter, they are likely also relevant to gliovascular structure and function in white matter.

In the grey matter, the fine processes of astrocytes permeate the neuropil to contact neuronal cell bodies, dendrites, synapses, nodes of Ranvier, ependymal cells, and the pia mater. A single astrocyte can interact with several neurons and &gt;100,000 synapses (Ventura and Harris, 1999; Bushong et al., 2004), forming the morphological basis of the tripartite synapse. At the other end, the endfoot processes of astrocytes almost completely encapsulate the parenchymal microvasculature (Simard et al., 2003; Mathiisen et al., 2010). Astrocytes express several ion channels, transporters and receptors, which contribute to their critical roles in modulating synaptic activity via potassium buffering, pH regulation, neurotransmitter uptake and gliotransmitter release, and general maintenance of neuronal homeostasis (Verkhratsky and Nedergaard, 2018). Mature astrocytes form a highly organized, gap junctionally-coupled network that tiles the brain, with each astrocyte occupying a unique spatial domain (Bushong et al., 2002). This spatially segregated yet intercellularly connected astrocyte syncytium allows astrocytes to discriminate and integrate neuronal signals, earning them recognition as partners in information processing (Araque et al., 2014). This syncytium may also enable astrocytes to supply energy substrates to neurons (Pellerin and Magistretti, 1994) and oligodendrocytes (Niu et al., 2016), although this is debated (DiNuzzo et al., 2010; Diaz-Garcia et al., 2017; Dienel, 2017). Central to the argument presented in this review, astrocytes are also key players in cerebral blood flow (CBF) regulation. Based on their morphological characteristics, the visionary Cajal first hypothesized that astrocytes might control vascular diameter, and much evidence now supports their integral role in maintaining resting vascular tone as well as regulating NVC (Zonta et al., 2003; Mulligan and Macvicar, 2004; Metea and Newman, 2006; Takano et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2015; Rosenegger et al., 2015; Mishra et al., 2016).

1.2 Cerebral Blood Flow

The enhanced cognitive power with which the brain endows mammals and especially humans comes at a high price – both the size (Aiello, 1995) and metabolic rate (Karbowski, 2007) of the mammalian brain have evolved to be larger than that predicted by body size alone. Indeed, increased cerebral metabolic rate is considered one of the main factors driving higher cognitive development. This increase in metabolic activity results in a correspondingly large energy demand (Howarth et al., 2012), which is supplied by the extensive cerebrovascular network originating largely from the internal carotid arteries. Evolutionary changes in skull structure show that the carotid foramen, through which the internal carotid artery passes into the skull, is enlarged in the human skull compared to other hominids and may have been the initial evolutionary step that permitted the human brain to attain its current complexity (Seymour et al., 2016), stressing the importance of cerebral blood supply for higher cognitive function.

CBF is regulated via several mechanisms. Autoregulation ensures that the brain receives a relatively constant supply of blood and nutrients despite changes in systemic blood pressure (Tzeng and Ainslie, 2014; Filosa et al., 2016). Neurogenic signals from the basal forebrain and brain stem nuclei on penetrating arterioles as well as from peripheral trigeminal ganglionic innervation of pial blood vessels also contribute to the tone of cerebral vasculature and, therefore, CBF (Hamel, 2006; Cauli and Hamel, 2010). However, as the brain lacks energy stores and is reliant upon blood glucose-dependent aerobic respiration (Holmes and Holmes, 1926), CBF is also regulated locally in response to increased neuronal activity via NVC, thereby giving rise to functional hyperemia. NVC is regulated by signaling between neurons, astrocytes, and vascular cells (endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and pericytes), which collectively make up the NVU (Iadecola, 2017; McConnell et al., 2017) (Fig. 2). The NVU is thus the epicenter of several tightly controlled, dynamic intercellular interactions orchestrated to maintain optimal global and local CBF (Filosa et al., 2016; Mishra, 2016). It is also the structural basis of the BBB, which isolates the brain from most circulating factors, antigens and, under healthy conditions, immune cells (Daneman and Barres, 2005; Iadecola, 2017).

1.3. Astrocytes as Mediators of Neurovascular Coupling

Historically, NVC was believed to be a feedback system produced by metabolic demand: active neurons produce an energy deficit that triggers an increase in blood supply. When neuronal activity returns to normal, the energy deficit is no longer present and so blood supply returns to resting levels (Koehler et al., 2006; Attwell et al., 2010). Evidence from the past couple of decades, however, suggests that NVC is instead a feed-forward mechanism (Vaucher et al., 1997; Koehler et al., 2006; Attwell et al., 2010): neuronal activity stimulates a complex intercellular signaling cascade, resulting in the production and release of several vasoactive compounds that produce vascular dilation and an increase in blood flow. This feed-forward signaling is triggered regardless of local oxygen level (Lindauer et al., 2010). An emerging hypothesis suggests that a combination of both of these scenarios may be at play: the feed-forward system may regulate the rapid phase of the neurovascular response, whereas the feedback signaling may contribute to the slower, tonic phase (Baslow, 2017).

The role of astrocytes in conveying neurovascular signals to parenchymal arterioles has been extensively studied and reviewed (Howarth, 2014; Mishra, 2016; Iadecola, 2017). Astrocytes respond to neurotransmitters released during synaptic activity, such as glutamate (Alkayed et al., 1997; Zonta et al., 2003; Takano et al., 2006; Gordon et al., 2008) and ATP (Wells et al., 2015; Mishra et al., 2016), with an increase in their intracellular Ca2+ concentration (Mishra et al., 2016). This increased Ca2+ prompts astrocytes to synthesize and release an assortment of vasoactive substances that act on vascular smooth muscle cells to elicit vessel dilation and increase blood flow. Such vasoactive substances include ions such as K+ (Filosa et al., 2006), metabolites of arachidonic acid such as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) (Zonta et al., 2003; Takano et al., 2006; Gordon et al., 2008; Mishra et al., 2011; Hall et al., 2014) and epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) (Alkayed et al., 1997; Metea and Newman, 2006), metabolic by-products such as lactate (Gordon et al., 2008), and products of ATP breakdown such as adenosine (Xu and Pelligrino, 2007; Vetri et al., 2011). Astrocyte-derived arachidonic acid can also be metabolized downstream in vascular smooth muscle cells to produce 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE) to induce vessel constriction (Mulligan and Macvicar, 2004; Metea and Newman, 2006; Mishra et al., 2011; Hall et al., 2014). Interestingly, astrocytic Ca2+-dependent NVC is bidirectional – moderate increases in Ca2+ produce dilations, while large increases produce constrictions (Girouard et al., 2010). It must also be noted that NVC can also be triggered by direct signaling from neurons (Attwell et al., 2010; Cauli and Hamel, 2010) and is not dependent on any single signaling mechanism; rather, it appears to be product of several parallel and redundant pathways (Liu et al., 2012; Hosford and Gourine, 2019), underscoring the significance of NVC in maintaining healthy brain function. Further, not all factors involved in this parallel signaling have yet been identified: simultaneous blockade of almost all the above-described pathways is not enough to completely inhibit NVC.

Astrocytes have been shown to play an essential role in NVC at the microvascular capillary level (Biesecker et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2016). In the cortex, ATP released by active neurons causes a Ca2+ influx in astrocytes via the ionotropic P2X1 channels, which stimulates arachidonic acid production and its downstream metabolism to vasodilatory PGE2. PGE2 then acts on EP4 receptors on pericytes, the contractile cells on capillaries, thereby dilating capillaries (Mishra et al., 2016). In contrast to previous findings, these and other studies also reported that interfering with astrocyte Ca2+ is not sufficient to block arteriolar NVC, calling the importance of Ca2+-dependent astrocyte mechanisms in arteriole regulation into question (Nizar et al., 2013; Takata et al., 2013; Bonder and McCarthy, 2014; Jego et al., 2014; Biesecker et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2016). Some of these studies only evaluated the role of astrocytic Ca2+ signals within the soma or inositol trisphosphate (IP3) dependent release of Ca2+ from internal stores in mediating vascular responses, and thus may not be representative of the role that IP3-independent astrocyte Ca2+ signals (Srinivasan et al., 2015), particularly in process microdomains or vascular endfeet, which are shown to play a role in NVC (Otsu et al., 2015). In a recent report (Mishra et al., 2016), we showed that chelating fast astrocyte Ca2+ does not change arteriole NVC but significantly reduces capillary NVC. It has also been proposed that astrocytes may only regulate arteriole NVC under conditions of high or persistent neuronal activity (Institoris et al., 2015). Taken together, these data support the notion that astrocytes regulate NVC at the microvascular capillary level and, under some circumstances, also at the arteriole level (Iadecola, 2017).

1.4 Astrocytes as Modulators of Cerebral Blood Flow

Recent evidence highlights the role of the local NVU and astrocytes in maintaining resting vascular tone (Filosa et al., 2016) via the release of both constrictive and dilatory factors. Though pressure-evoked vascular constriction of parenchymal arterioles is initiated by myogenic factors, it is now demonstrably maintained by astrocyte-dependent signaling (Kim et al., 2015). Specifically, an increase in intravascular pressure activates mechanosensitive, Ca2+-permeable TRPV4 channels on astrocytes, resulting in a rise in astrocyte Ca2+. This in turn causes astrocytes to release purinergic signals that are necessary to maintain the pressure-evoked constriction (Kim et al., 2015). Similarly, the resting vascular tone of retinal arterioles is dependent on purinergic signaling from Muller glial cells (Kur and Newman, 2014), the retinal approximate of astrocytes. Another study reported that Ca2+-dependent cyclooxygenase metabolites released from astrocytes dilates cortical arterioles at rest, and that arresting astrocyte Ca2+ results in arteriole constriction (Rosenegger et al., 2015). Further, cortical vasodilation induced by basal forebrain stimulation, a response previously thought to be entirely neurogenic, was recently shown to be, in part, dependent on astrocytic release of epoxyeicosanoids (Lecrux et al., 2012). A healthy balance between such dilatory and constrictive signals is likely important in regulating vascular tone and maintaining resting blood flow at physiologically desirable levels.

1.5. Astrocytes and the Blood-Brain Barrier

The microvasculature in most organ systems is fenestrated, lacks endothelial tight junctions and is readily permeable to substances in the blood. The brain vasculature, in contrast, is endowed with the BBB, which regulates permeability across the vascular wall in order to maintain homeostasis of the CNS microenvironment and, under healthy conditions, to protect the brain from the peripheral immune system. Tight junctions form a physical barrier at the BBB: they exist between overlapping processes of endothelial cells and prevent substances in the blood from leaking into the CNS extracellular space (Reese and Karnovsky, 1967; Coomber and Stewart, 1985). Thus, passage of substances from the blood to the brain requires either a transporter-mediated or a transcytosis-dependent pathway.

Intricate crosstalk between NVU components, including astrocytes, pericytes and endothelial cells, generates and maintains the BBB. During development, pericytes help establish the BBB by inhibiting the expression of endothelial genes that enhance vascular permeability (Daneman et al., 2010) and inducing polarization of the astrocyte endfeet abutting the vasculature (Armulik et al., 2010). The BBB is often impaired in neurologic disease, suggesting that continued maintenance is required during adult life to preserve normal barrier function (Daneman and Barres, 2005; Abbott et al., 2006). Astrocytes play a key role in this maintenance by secreting trophic factors such as transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ1), glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and angiopoietin-1 that preserve the BBB phenotype in endothelial cells (Abbott et al., 2006; Daneman and Prat, 2015).

2. Reactive Astrogliosis and Astrocyte Dysfunction

Astrocytes respond to CNS disease and injury via an overt process known as reactive astrogliosis. Astrogliosis encompasses a host of morphological, transcriptomic, epigenetic, and proliferative changes in astrocytes (Anderson et al., 2014) and often occurs in a graded manner (Sofroniew, 2009). Mild to moderate astrogliosis (e.g. mild trauma, diffuse immune activation), comprises a small and reversible increase in astrocytic expression of cytoskeletal intermediate filament (IF) proteins such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and vimentin (Brenner, 2014) (Fig. 3A–C) together with cellular hypertrophy. Severe astrogliosis (e.g. major infection, chronic neurodegeneration) produces an irreversible, lasting change in the cytoarchitecture and functional properties of astrocytes. In extreme cases, this leads to the formation of a glial scar wherein astrocytes proliferate and form dense intertwined webs to fill in and wall off the empty spaces left by dead or dying cells (Fig. 3D), thereby protecting normal CNS tissue by suppressing the spread of infectious agents, inflammatory cells and the cytokines and metabolites, and cell death. Chronic glial scarring from this kind of astrogliosis was, until recently, thought to detrimentally and physically prevent axon regrowth and thus functional recovery in spinal cord injury (Davies et al., 1999). This prevailing dogma is challenged by a recent study demonstrating that molecular signals expressed by the glial scar tissue supports axon growth and, indeed, allows nerve fibers to regrow across spinal lesions (Anderson et al., 2016). Importantly, the exact cellular changes underlying astrogliosis are likely context-dependent (Zamanian et al., 2012), defined by the specific disease and/or injury (Sofroniew, 2014; Liddelow and Barres, 2017), and perhaps even the stage of the disease. Notably, the increase in IF proteins and astrogliosis are not only induced by injury, but also in aging (Sabbatini et al., 1999; Clarke et al., 2018). An emerging area of research centers on the question of whether senescence or degenerative changes that affect astrocytes, rather than neurons, promote aging and age-related disease in humans.

Transcriptomic analysis of reactive astrocytes has highlighted the striking heterogeneity of these cells and led to the idea of ‘good’ verses ‘bad’ astrogliosis (Liddelow and Barres, 2017). Insults that mimic infection, such as injections of the bacterial toxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in vivo or treatment with inflammatory cytokines ex vivo, induce expression of cytokines that are likely to aggravate pathology, while insults that induce ischemia induce the expression of proteins involved in tissue repair and neuroprotection (Zamanian et al., 2012). These indications are partly borne out by mechanistic studies: astrocytes responding to LPS stimulation actively phagocytose neurons and negatively impact recovery (Liddelow et al., 2017), while astrocytes responding to ischemia (Liu et al., 2014; Becerra-Calixto and Cardona-Gomez, 2017; Tachibana et al., 2017), spinal cord injury (Faulkner et al., 2004; Anderson et al., 2016) or TBI (Shinozaki et al., 2017) can enhance recovery. This is not entirely unexpected as astrocytes are very adaptable cells that continuously tune in to their environment and respond to it accordingly to establish and maintain homeostasis. In this sense, reactive astrogliosis is a response that aims to re-establish homeostasis after injury and attenuate damage to the nervous tissue. However, similar to peripheral inflammatory responses, astrogliosis may itself become injurious under specific conditions and exacerbate damage (Barres, 2008; Anderson et al., 2014). It is also likely that a spatial and temporal heterogeneity of astrocyte reactivity exists relative to the site of injury. Future research should focus on identifying and categorizing the disease-ameliorating and disease-exacerbating aspects of astrocyte reactivity. Results from such studies may facilitate therapeutic fine-tuning of astrogliosis to skew the process towards neuroprotection and functional recovery.

Features that characterize astrogliosis include decreased expression of inwardly rectifying K+ (Kir) channels (Ji et al., 2012), the glutamate transporters GLT-1 and GLAST (Piao et al., 2015; Hubbard et al., 2016), the purinergic receptor P2Y1 (Shinozaki et al., 2017) and adenosine kinase (Gouder et al., 2004; Aronica et al., 2013). Loss of perivascular localization of the water transporter AQP4 (Eid et al., 2005; Alvestad et al., 2013) and an increase in the expression or activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors (Aronica et al., 2000; Anneser et al., 2004; Zamanian et al., 2012; Rusnakova et al., 2013) have also been reported. Such changes can produce glutamate and potassium imbalances in the neuropil, leading to excitotoxicity or epileptiform activity. However, they do not always occur concurrently and, instead, are remarkably context-dependent. It is also important to note that overt astrogliosis, as defined by upregulation of IF proteins and/or hypertrophy, is not obligatory for astrocytes to dysfunction and disrupt neuronal function. For example, in Huntington’s disease, dysregulation of astrocytic Kir channels and Ca2+ signaling occur in the absence of IF protein upregulation (Jiang et al., 2016), and in diabetic retinopathy, glial-dependent neurovascular uncoupling can occur before gliosis is pronounced (Mishra and Newman, 2010). Another example is presented by multiple sulfatase deficiency, a lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the sulfatase modifying factor 1 gene – transgenic mice with this mutation only in astrocytes display no overt astrogliosis, despite exhibiting degeneration of cortical neurons and anxiety behavior (Di Malta et al., 2012). These findings stress the need for a more nuanced sub-classification of astrocyte dysfunction states. For the purposes of this review, we use the terms ‘astrogliosis’ and ‘reactive astrocytes’ to encompass both morphologically overt astrogliosis and astrocyte dysfunction.

3. Astrocyte-mediated neuropathologies

Defects that primarily affect astrocytes are relatively rare but highlight some important aspects of the roles of astrocytes in health and disease. These tend to fall into two categories: young-onset inherited disease due to mutations in genes that are expressed in astrocytes and contribute to important astrocyte functions, and older-onset disease with morphologic or biochemical features that implicate astrocytes more than other cells as contributors to disease etiology.

Of the inherited diseases, Alexander disease is a clear example, caused by mutations in the GFAP gene. It features not only morphological changes and functional losses in astrocytes, but prominent secondary effects on other glial cells (e.g. microglial activation and oligodendrocyte loss that produce noticeable demyelination), BBB disruption, and variable neuronal loss (Mignot et al., 2004; Sosunov et al., 2018). Another example is hereditary spastic paraplegia, in which mutations in EAAT2 (GLT-1), the astrocyte glutamate transporter, produce loss of upper motor neurons (Meyer et al., 1998; Parodi et al., 2017). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is yet another case, where SOD1 mutations are thought to produce motor neuron degeneration through a non-cell autonomous mechanism that involves astrocyte stimulation of neuronal excitability (Papadeas et al., 2011; Fritz et al., 2013; Hayashi et al., 2016).

Some diseases produce neuronal or axonal loss through an acquired immune-mediated attack that targets astrocytes. Immune-mediated attacks on astrocyte AQP4 was recently shown to be the basis of most cases of neuromyelitis optica (Jarius and Wildemann, 2010), with astrocyte dysfunction leading to NVU disruption, oligodendroglial death, and demyelination (Ratelade and Verkman, 2012). Another similar autoimmune condition, GFAP astrocytopathy, was described in 2016, whereby patients’ immune systems generate antibodies against GFAP that is associated with subventricular and perivascular damage (Fang et al., 2016), ultimately resulting in encephalopathy, inflammatory myelitis, tremor, and ataxia. The primary astrocyte insult appears to begin around the pial, ventricular, or perivascular regions, perhaps because these are regions where the peripheral immune system can first interact with brain tissue. The pathophysiology underlying this condition is not fully understood but it is suggested that antigen-specific cytotoxic T-cells (rather than the anti-GFAP antibody itself) may play a role in some cases, or that an immune attack triggered by occult neoplasm expressing astrocyte antigens may be responsible in others (Zekeridou et al., 2018). It could also be downstream of other astrocyte dysfunctions, a question currently under investigation (Zekeridou et al., 2018).

Several late-onset conditions associated with astrocyte dysfunction have also recently gained scientific attention. Age-related neuropathologies associated with protein aggregation within astrocytes, especially hyperphosphorylated tau, have been described in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), Pick’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, cortico-basal degeneration, and aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) (Komori, 1999; Kovacs et al., 2017). Astrocytic tauopathy tends to be the dominant pathologic feature in some tau mutation-associated FTLD as well as the pathologic lesion of ARTAG (Kovacs et al., 2017). All of these diseases feature prominent neuronal loss and/or demyelination. Key roles for astrocytes have been proposed in additional diseases that feature neuronal loss, including epilepsy, Huntington’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease, and often involve blood-brain barrier dysfunction and altered astrocyte metabolism (Weissberg et al., 2015; Booth et al., 2017; Khakh et al., 2017; Boison and Steinhauser, 2018; Skotte et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018).

The distinction between astrogliosis and astrocytopathy in disease is noteworthy: astrogliosis is defined as the active response of astrocytes to an injury (neuronal death, ischemia or TBI etc.) and involves aberrant loss or gain of astrocyte function, while astrocytopathy is defined as astrocyte degeneration characterized by swollen cell bodies, retracted short processes, and loss of fine processes and endfeet (Pekny et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017). Particularly in conditions where astrocytopathy is observed, the disease is likely to be secondary to unhealthy astrocytes. Is astrocytopathy a separate independent phenomenon, or is it the end-product of prolonged astrogliosis and functional disruption? We do not know. However, evidence provided above supports the concept of astrocytopathy or ‘astrodegeneration’ as another important contributor to the pathogenesis of disease, including those that have been considered primarily or exclusively neuronal in nature and should be considered a possible etiological factor in neurodegenerative diseases.

4. Astrogliosis and neurovascular unit impairment in neurodegenerative disorders

Many CNS diseases feature NVU abnormalities. Some are readily attributable to NVU abnormalities, such as stroke and vasculitis. In many others – including AD, TBI, chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), etc. – NVU abnormalities are rampant, but the reason for these abnormalities and their contribution to disease etiology is unclear (reviewed in (McConnell et al., 2017) and (Liebner et al., 2018). Given the central positioning of astrocytes between neurons and vascular cells within the NVU, it is plausible that they aberrantly influence the NVU, thus disrupting the BBB and NVC, and contributing to neurological disorders. Here we focus our attention on three disorders - AD, TBI, and stroke – and discuss the evidence implying a possible causal relationship between astrogliosis and NVU dysfunction. Although TBI and stroke are acute-onset conditions, they have chronic impacts on neurological health, including increased incidence and rate of cognitive decline (Savva et al., 2010; Levine et al., 2015; Ozen et al., 2015). Further, accumulating evidence that AD patients have a history of evident or silent infarcts further stresses the interaction of such acute injuries with chronic conditions (Vermeer et al., 2003; Yang et al., 2015). These chronic consequences of acute injuries may partially originate from impairments in astrocyte-vascular signaling. We also briefly discuss the association between astrogliosis and vascular dysfunction in white matter diseases.

4.1 Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias

AD is the leading neurodegenerative cause of cognitive decline and dementia. AD diagnosis is based on neurological evaluation and neuroimaging data, and is confirmed port-mortem by histological presence of extracellular plaques of amyloid β protein (Aβ) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau protein within neurons. In many cases, Aβ deposition also occurs around the vasculature in the form of cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). However, aside from a few mutations responsible for familial cases, the actual cause of AD remains unknown. While much of the past work on AD has predominantly focused on neurogenic mechanisms and neuroprotection (Kuruva and Reddy, 2017), epidemiological data suggest that vascular pathology is also a key contributing factor. Although the vascular hypothesis of AD and dementia was proposed over two decades ago (de la Torre and Mussivand, 1993; de la Torre, 1997; Farkas and Luiten, 2001; Zlokovic, 2002), only recently has it become the focus of renewed attention (Kalaria, 2010; Snyder et al., 2015; Montagne et al., 2016). Indeed, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has focused a new research framework for investigations specifically into vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia (Corriveau et al., 2016).

BBB dysfunction and cerebral hypoperfusion both occur early in AD (Kelleher and Soiza, 2013; Iturria-Medina et al., 2016), and decreased tissue oxygenation is observed even in patients with mild cognitive impairment (Tarumi et al., 2014), suggesting disruption of CBF. Indeed, impairment of NVC occurs in AD patients (Rosengarten et al., 2009; Nicolakakis and Hamel, 2011; Kotliar et al., 2017), with regions of amyloid deposition being characterized by large reductions in CBF (Mattsson et al., 2014). A recent analysis of the patient data deposited in the multicenter AD Neuroimaging Initiative showed that cerebrovascular dysregulation was not only the strongest and earliest detectable event during the development of cognitive impairment, but was correlated with disease progression even before amyloid β (Aβ) accumulation and functional/metabolic changes (Iturria-Medina et al., 2016). Animal models of AD are also characterized by impaired NVC (Rancillac et al., 2012; Kimbrough et al., 2015; Joo et al., 2017; Tarantini et al., 2017; Gutierrez-Jimenez et al., 2018), lower resting CBF (Niwa et al., 2002) and lower oxygen extraction fraction (Gutierrez-Jimenez et al., 2018), often preceding plaque deposition (Niwa et al., 2002). In an animal model of CAA, cerebral hypoperfusion accelerated the rate of CAA burden and the appearance of cortical microinfarcts (Okamoto et al., 2012). CAA can interrupt NVC signals (Kimbrough et al., 2015), likely producing local hypoxia, which can, in turn, induce Aβ generation (Zhang et al., 2007). Thus, a vicious feedback loop is initiated wherein Aβ and hypoxia exacerbate each other. Consistent with this, a study of demented patients experiencing hypoperfusion due to a unilateral carotid artery stenosis were found to have a much higher Aβ load preferentially in the stenosed hemisphere (Huang et al., 2012). These findings extend strong support for the hypothesis that neurovascular dysfunction may be causative in AD rather than purely correlative.

What, if any, is the role of astrocytes in this dysfunction? Reactive astrogliosis is a common and widespread histologic feature of AD (Rodriguez-Arellano et al., 2015; Taipa et al., 2017). In both patients and animals models, reactive astrocytes associate strongly with senile plaques (Mandybur and Chuirazzi, 1990; Cullen, 1997; Rodriguez-Arellano et al., 2015) where they play an important role in Aβ degradation and clearance (Wyss-Coray et al., 2003). These astrocytes exhibit not only local, but global, network-wide increases in Ca2+ signaling (Kuchibhotla et al., 2009) and clear presynaptic dystrophic neurites by engulfing and degrading them (Gomez-Arboledas et al., 2018). Thus, generally speaking, astrocytes appear to take on a phagocytic role in AD, conferring neuroprotection. However, there is also ample evidence for detrimental roles of astrocytes; they exhibit decreased expression and activity of glutamine synthetase (Olabarria et al., 2011), overexpress inducible nitric oxide synthase (Akama and Van Eldik, 2000), and can inhibit neuronal function by synthesizing and releasing GABA (Jo et al., 2014). At the NVU, astrocytes exhibit several changes that may alter their ability to maintain the BBB and regulate NVC. Reactive astrocytes surrounding Aβ plaques exhibit Ca2+ hyperactivity driven by metabotropic purinergic signaling (Delekate et al., 2014) and, in models of CAA, the vascular coverage by astrocyte endfeet is reduced with concurrent downregulation of K+ and AQP4 channels (Wilcock et al., 2009). As Ca2+-dependent K+ release from astrocytes is one of the established pathways regulating NVC, dysfunction of these signals in reactive astrocytes could have an immediate and strong effect on local blood flow. Further, dysfunction of the glymphatic clearance system, which relies of astrocytic AQP4 channels, was also recently suggested to increase Aβ accumulation in an AD model (Peng et al., 2016). Further research needs to directly address whether reactive astrogliosis, via these or other mechanisms (AA metabolites, adenosine, lactate etc.), attenuates NVC or alters perivascular Aβ clearance in AD.

Astrocyte dysfunction has been demonstrated to directly induce AD-like vascular and amyloid pathology in one interesting case. In mice overexpressing astrocyte-specific TGFβ1, astrogliosis develops at a young age and is followed by a reduction in CBF, an increase in perivascular Aβ accumulation (even in the absence of an Aβ-overexpressing mutant genotype), and finally cerebral hemorrhage – similar to the progression of AD pathology in human disease (Wyss-Coray et al., 2000a; Wyss-Coray et al., 2000b; Gaertner et al., 2005). TGFβ receptor-dependent signaling produces astrogliosis in response to blood-borne proteins that leak into the brain in the event of a BBB failure (Heinemann et al., 2012). It is therefore possible to imagine a scenario whereby an early disruption of the BBB (perhaps induced by peripheral inflammation (Cattaneo et al., 2017)) and induction of astrogliosis initiates a molecular and cellular domino effect that, under repeated stress or in the right genetic background, dysregulates the NVU and overwhelms Aβ clearance systems, thus leading to AD pathology. Indeed, loss of BBB integrity is common in animal models of AD (Montagne et al., 2017), and blood constituents such as albumin, fibrinogen and immunoglobulins accumulate in aging human brains (Goodall et al., 2017), particularly in astrocytes. Even more compellingly, TGFβ1 levels are increased in the brains (Wyss-Coray et al., 1997) and cerebrospinal fluid of AD patients (Zetterberg et al., 2004). These findings lend credence to the general hypothesis that an initial BBB failure event leads to astrogliosis (and also microglial activation (Heppner et al., 2015; Sarlus and Heneka, 2017), not discussed in this review), which induces neurovascular dysregulation and hypoperfusion, which then increase microinfarcts and Aβ formation. Upon prolonged and repeated insults, or within the right genetic background, such astrocyte-directed NVU dysregulation could lead to increased Aβ deposition, reduced Aβ clearance and, ultimately, increased neuronal injury to result in the typical “sporadic” cases of AD. Now that we are beginning to understand the connections between astrocytes, neurovascular regulation, and BBB maintenance in physiology and their impairment in AD pathology, it is time to revise our strategy to one that aims to preserve not only neurons but also astrocytes, other glial cells and vascular cells: indeed, the whole community must survive for cognitive function to be saved (Barres, 2008).

4.2 Traumatic Brain Injury

TBI occurs when the brain sustains physical trauma due to impact, penetration, or rapid movement (vibrations) within the skull. Because TBI can result from multiple injury paradigms, and affect all genders and ages, the exact pathophysiology underlying the disorder is unique to each patient in both region and extent. Age and injury severity can both strongly influence pathological outcomes (Reuler and Gardner, 1987). In general, pathophysiological changes are characterized as either primary (occurring immediately as a result of the trauma) or secondary (occurring later as a result of neuroinflammation and altered cellular signaling). Among these changes, disequilibrated ionic flux and glucose metabolism are neurochemical hallmarks of the disorder. The latter causes what is referred to as a post-TBI energy crisis: vulnerable brain cells need a relatively increased glucose supply to repair and recover, but a pathological decrease in glucose uptake into the brain due to decreased CBF (Golding et al., 1999; Selwyn et al., 2013), impaired glucose transport (Cornford et al., 1996) and/or metabolic processing (Bartnik et al., 2005) results in an energy mismatch between the energy demands and supply. Further, hypoperfusion and reduced autoregulation are observed in both TBI patients (Soustiel and Sviri, 2007; Newsome et al., 2012; Hinzman et al., 2014; Sours et al., 2015) and animal models (Yuan et al., 1988) with attendant astrogliosis (Burda et al., 2015).

TBI can initiate a host of secondary injury cascades that lead to widespread dysfunction of the NVU, neurovascular uncoupling, and changes in microvascular ultrastructure (Logsdon et al., 2015; Kenney et al., 2016; Toth et al., 2016). Specifically, trauma can result in vascular endothelial cell injury, leading to vasospasm, vasoconstriction, micro-thrombosis and oxidative stress, all of which exacerbate the inflammatory response (Lenzlinger et al., 2002; Veenith et al., 2016). TBI is also strongly associated with induction of cortical spreading depolarizations (CSD), which produce severe alterations in resting and reactive CBF, including NVC (Hartings et al., 2009; Lauritzen et al., 2011; Hinzman et al., 2014) (see section 4.3 on Stroke for further discussion of CSD and cerebrovascular dysregulation). Mechanical vascular injury can also directly result in ischemia and, in some cases, hemorrhage, allowing iron and blood components to be released into the parenchyma where they produce neuronal toxicity (Wagner et al., 2003) and may also produce neurovascular uncoupling and vasospasm (Balbi et al., 2017). Microvascular injury is also a feature of CTE, which has become the topic of intense study in recent years (Kenney et al., 2016). A NINDS/NIBIB consensus group recently defined CTE to be neuropathologically identified by tau accumulation in neurons and astrocytes specifically in perivascular locations (McKee et al., 2016). The relationship between this perivascular location of tau accumulation and vascular dysfunction is particularly interesting and future studies are required to address whether perivascular astrogliosis produces or hastens the later cognitive manifestations of both TBI and CTE.

Both immediate and long-term loss of BBB properties have been reported following experimental TBI (Baskaya et al., 1997). BBB loss causes edema and increased expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (Suehiro et al., 2004), which results in a positive feedback cycle inducing further damage to blood vessels (Underly et al., 2017). Post-mortem studies in humans show that BBB loss persists for decades after a traumatic incident (Hay et al., 2015). Given that TBI can mechanically impair the BBB and that blood-borne substances like albumin, thrombin and fibrinogen can activate astrogliosis via TGFβ receptors (Schachtrup et al., 2010; Heinemann et al., 2012; Piao et al., 2017), this chronic loss of BBB may contribute to lasting astrocyte dysfunction and alter the neuronal environment. There is contrasting evidence for the downstream effects of astrogliosis and astrocyte dysfunction – while some studies find that astrogliosis exacerbates tissue loss and behavioral deficits after TBI (Chen et al., 2017; Menzel et al., 2017), others have found that astrogliosis enhances neuroprotection (Shinozaki et al., 2017) and helps stabilize the NVU and normalizes CBF after TBI (Villapol et al., 2014). Such divergent findings suggest that the consequences of astrogliosis after TBI are multifaceted and complex (Burda et al., 2015). How does the long-lasting failure of the BBB affect the evolution of astrogliosis over time? And how do these two events together impact the NVU, blood flow regulation and neuronal survival? These are questions that have yet to be answered (Fig. 4).

4.3 Stroke

Stroke is a common presentation of cerebrovascular disease in the brain. Ischemic stroke results from a thrombus or embolus blocking an artery supplying the brain, causing an immediate infarct in that artery’s territory. In contrast, hemorrhagic stroke results from a ruptured vascular defect such as an aneurysm, often in the sub-arachnoid space, and has a very high rate of mortality; among surviving patients, delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI) is the leading cause of poor outcome (Xiao et al., 2017). Focal neurological deficits due to the insult are an initial physiological hallmark of stroke and vary based on the severity, duration and location of the injury. Pathological and cellular changes also develop in the surrounding brain regions, where neuronal, glial, and cerebrovascular injury all co-occur. Following ischemic stroke, the most pronounced among these is the glial response: phagocytic microglia within and around the infarct engulf debris from dying cells, proliferating reactive astrocytes generate a protective glial scar around the perimeter of the infarct, and astrocytes in the non-ischemic regions beyond the infarct perimeter become reactive in a spatial gradient.

The current standard of care for ischemic stroke is removal of the clot, achieved chemically by administering tissue plasminogen activator or mechanically by thrombectomy. Despite recanalization of the culprit artery, a state of microvascular hypoperfusion often continues to exist – the so-called ‘no-reflow’ phenomenon. Indeed, the level of capillary perfusion is more predictive of functional recovery in patients (Al-Ali et al., 2016) than recanalization of the blocked artery alone (Cho et al., 2015). This microvascular block was believed to be the result of platelet or leukocyte adhesion in small vessels (Abumiya et al., 2000), but evidence now suggests that active capillary constriction (Leffler et al., 1989; Hauck et al., 2004) due to pericyte contraction (Hall et al., 2014) also plays a significant role. Capillary hypoperfusion produced by pericyte contraction is also a feature of DCI following SAH (Johshita et al., 1990; Li et al., 2016). As astrocytes play a central role in regulating capillary level blood flow (Biesecker et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2016), the possibility that astrocyte dysfunction is contributing to this hypoperfusion warrants further investigation.

Several studies also suggest a significant loss of NVC in stroke patients in the asymptomatic, non-ischemic brain tissue surrounding the infarct, either unilaterally within the stroke hemisphere (Krainik et al., 2005; Salinet et al., 2015) or bilaterally in both hemispheres (Lin et al., 2011; Salinet et al., 2018). This loss of local blood flow regulation, which likely results in hypoperfusion, is proposed to underlie the increased rate and incidence of dementia in stroke patients (Savva et al., 2010; Levine et al., 2015). However, mechanistic studies investigating the cause of NVC loss are still lacking (El Amki and Wegener, 2017). An even worse case occurs following SAH, where NVC is inverted - neuronal activity gives rise to vascular constriction and CBF reduction both in vitro (Koide et al., 2013; Pappas et al., 2015) and in vivo (Balbi et al., 2017). This extreme and evidently detrimental response likely contributes to the development of DCI after SAH.

Ischemia and injury can also trigger a continuum of CSDs, a phenomenon that is characterized by failure of neuronal ion homeostasis, mass depolarization of neurons and astrocytes, excitotoxicity and edema (Lauritzen et al., 2011; Dreier et al., 2018). After a stroke, CSDs in the ischemic region are often terminal and contribute to the neuronal damage and death in the infarct core. In the peri-infarct region, CSDs are shorter in duration and spread across the cortex at the rate of approximately 2-5 mm (Lauritzen et al., 2011). Importantly, CSDs are associated with large changes in CBF. In otherwise healthy tissue, CSDs evoke a large hyperemic response (Dreier, 2011) that does not cause tissue dysfunction or damage (Nedergaard and Hansen, 1988). However, in pathological contexts such as after ischemic stroke, SAH or TBI, CSDs induce an inverse neurovascular coupling response, resulting in vasoconstriction and decreased CBF (Dreier et al., 1998; Dreier, 2011; Hinzman et al., 2014). CSD can further induce a lack of vascular reactivity and loss of evoked NVC (Lauritzen et al., 2011). The combined effect of low CBF, lack of cerebrovascular reactivity and neurovascular uncoupling, in the face of the increased energy metabolism during pathological CSD, produces a condition of cortical spreading ischemia and results in widespread neuron death (Dreier et al., 2000). This is one of the rare cases where inverse neurovascular coupling has been directly associated with tissue damage (Dreier et al., 2018).

A breakdown of the BBB occurs in patients with ischemic stroke (Merali et al., 2017; Villringer et al., 2017) and SAH (Lampl et al., 2005), as well as in animal models (Cipolla et al., 2004; Pan et al., 2017). This breakdown results from the loss of tight junction proteins such as occludin (Pan et al., 2017) and an increase in pinocytic transcytosis across the endothelium (Cipolla et al., 2004). Loss of BBB precedes the reduction in CBF (Tamaki et al., 1984) and predicts long-term functional outcome in patients (Jiang et al., 2018), and thus, appears to be an early event after stroke.

Reactive astrogliosis is also prominent after stroke (Hayakawa et al., 2012; Abeysinghe et al., 2016; Becerra-Calixto and Cardona-Gomez, 2017; Sims and Yew, 2017). The transcriptomic profile of astrocytes after ischemic injury shows that they take on a beneficial anti-inflammatory phenotype (Zamanian et al., 2012; Rusnakova et al., 2013), which may function to stabilize and resolve the injury. Astrogliosis is correlated with CNS remodeling and motor recovery (Liu et al., 2014), and with enhanced survival of neuronal and vascular cells following early reperfusion (Tachibana et al., 2017). However, not all aspects of the astrocyte response are positive: morphologically, swelling of astrocyte endfeet can compress brain microvessels and thereby decreases microvascular perfusion (Ito et al., 2011). As cerebral vessels lose BBB properties after stroke, this vessel compression may be an astrocytic response to limit the extravasation of blood-borne solutes into the brain or a response to blood-borne solutes that have already extravasated (Xiang et al., 2016). Further, although astrogliosis and BBB breakdown are concurrently observed even in brain regions far from the site of ischemia (Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013), the temporal relationship between them is still an open question. Does astrogliosis cause BBB breakdown, or is BBB breakdown (via leakage of blood proteins such as albumin, thrombin and fibrinogen) producing astrogliosis? It is likely that these factors feed into each other bidirectionally, hence exacerbating the damage caused by ischemia.

Post-stroke astrogliosis is particularly noticeable in astrocyte endfeet around cerebral vessels (Fig. 5), indicating that CBF reduction and NVC impairment after stroke may be due to astrocyte dysfunction. After SAH, astrocytes display large amplitude Ca2+ oscillations, which result in K+ efflux from their endfeet onto the vasculature, raising the extracellular K+ concentration high enough to constrict vessels and resulting in NVC inversion (Koide et al., 2012). Similarly large astrocyte Ca2+ signals are observed immediately following ischemic stroke (Ding et al., 2009; Rakers and Petzold, 2017) with a negative impact on neuronal recovery. Large astrocytic Ca2+ waves also occur during CSD (Chuquet et al., 2007), which are common after stroke, and both the vasoconstriction and NVC inversion observed following CSD depend on astrocyte Ca2+ (Chuquet et al., 2007; Major et al., 2017) and, to some extent, the vasoconstrictive arachidonic acid metabolite 20-HETE (Fordsmann et al., 2013). In addition, a recent study reported that the decrease in CBF associated with ischemic stroke was mitigated when astrogliosis was attenuated (Begum et al., 2018). These findings suggest a causal role for astrogliosis in blood flow impairment after stroke; however, more work is required before this relationship is sufficiently experimentally corroborated.

Although it is certain that early astrogliosis is an adaptive, neuroprotective response following ischemia (Zamanian et al., 2012), could it evolve past a threshold beyond which, perhaps depending on the extent and duration of injury, it becomes a detrimental process? Or perhaps the vascular effects of astrogliosis are maladaptive ‘side effects’. Resolving the temporal dynamics and the nature of the relationship between BBB failure, astrogliosis and vascular regulation following stroke might provide insights into this evolution and suggest new targeted therapies aimed at modulating astrogliosis and/or restoring cerebral microvascular flow in a temporally fine-tuned manner to protect the stroke penumbra.

5. Possible Roles of Astrogliosis in White Matter Disorders

With advancing age, an increasing burden of cognitive impairment appears to be related to cerebral small vessel disease, the later stages of which are characterized by demyelination and axonal loss observed as regions of white matter hyperintensities (WMH) on T2-weighted MRI images (Hase et al., 2017). WMH are observed in 90-95% of people over the age of 60 (de Leeuw et al., 2001) and are also prominent in younger patients with depression (Thomas et al., 2002) and post-stroke dementia (Chen et al., 2016). Despite their high incidence in the general population, very little is known about their underlying cause. Could astrogliosis or astrocytopathy of white matter astrocytes and the resultant cerebrovascular insufficiency be producing these WMH? Post mortem analyses show that regions of WMH often display enlarged perivascular spaces, lacunar infarcts, and changes in the NVU compartments. In particular, drastic reductions in astrocyte numbers (Zambenedetti et al., 2002) as well as structural changes and loss of perivascular endfeet are observed (Chen et al., 2016). Further, astrocytes in regions of WMH undergo clasmatodendrosis, a phenomenon that looks very much like an explosive astrocyte degeneration (Hulse et al., 2001). Whether, and how, astrogliosis, astrocytopathy and/or astrodegeneration contribute to white matter disease is not easily answered by clinical studies or a single-time point post-mortem analysis of human tissue. Therefore, there is an urgent need develop reliable animal models of WMH and other white matter pathologies to address these questions.

6. Conclusions

Essentially every approach to therapy for brain diseases due to any cause is focused on prevention or reversal of pathologic alterations in neurons – witness the common use of the term “neuro-protection” to summarize these therapeutic strategies as a whole. Certainly, there is likely to be utility in this approach for many diseases. However, despite years of dedicated effort aimed at these approaches, successes have been limited for most diseases and thoroughly disappointing in others. With this in mind, we consider whether it might be helpful to modify the current paradigm for understanding brain disease to incorporate approaches that ask whether susceptibility to major brain diseases might not lie entirely or even primarily in neurons, but rather in astrocytes, the quintessential “neuroprotectant” cells, with effects on neurons as a secondary consequence (Fig. 6). If a castle is under siege, the survival of the royal family is best assured if the fort is strengthened, the front-line soldiers are well-armed, and the food and water supply are protected. Ultimately, the development of strategies for glio-protection and vasculo-protection may prove the most effective ways to achieve neuroprotection by harnessing the ability of astrocytes to support neuronal function and by providing the energy supply to fuel recovery and function. We anticipate that future research exploring these possibilities will open the door to new combinatorial therapeutics that have a renewed chance of success in human patients.

Acknowledgments

Funding: This work was supported by a National Institutes of Health (NIH) Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award T32 [T32HL094294] to H.M.; a Western Light Talent Training Fellowship to Z.L.; National NIH Grants [R01AG056712 and P30AG008017] to R.W.; a Collins Medical Trust grant to A.M.; and NIH [P30NS061800] (PI: Aicher), which supports the OHSU Advanced Light Microscopy Core.

Abbreviations:

20-HETE 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ARTAG aging-related tau astrogliopathy

BBB blood-brain barrier

CBF cerebral blood flow

CSD cortical spreading depolarization

CTE chronic traumatic encephalopathy

DCI delayed cerebral ischemia

EETs epoxyeicosatrienoic acids

FGF fibroblast growth factor

FTLD frontotemporal lobar degeneration

GDNF glial-derived neurotrophic factor

GFAP fibrillary acidic protein

IF intermediate filament

LPS lipopolysaccharide

NVC neurovascular coupling

NVU neurovascular unit

PGE2 prostaglandin E2

SAH subarachnoid hemorrhage

TBI traumatic brain injury

TGFβ1 transforming growth factor β1

Figure 1. Pathological implications of an imbalance in energy supply and demand.

Under healthy physiological conditions, the energy demands of an active brain are supplied by nutrients delivered by the cerebral vasculature. The flow of blood and nutrients within this vasculature is fine-tuned by astrocytes via resting tone regulation and neurovascular coupling pathways. Under pathological conditions, neurons and glial cells still require energy and this requirement may even be increased to allow the cells to cope with, and recover from, the pathological environment. However, during pathology, cerebral blood flow is often reduced and neurovascular coupling is disrupted, which we hypothesize is due to altered signaling from reactive astrocytes. The resulting energy mismatch leads to the gradual development of a hypoxic condition, which is expected to contribute to progressive neuronal and astrocyte degeneration over time.

Figure 2. Organization of the neurovascular unit.

Pial arteries give rise to penetrating arterioles that dive into the brain parenchyma where they branch into smaller arterioles and capillaries. These arterioles receive intrinsic and extrinsic innervation perivascularly to facilitate resting tone regulation via their smooth muscle cell layer. The capillary microvessels lose this smooth muscle cell layer completely and are instead ensconced by astrocyte endfeet and contractile pericytes, which contact the capillary basement membrane directly. These capillary microvessels are further distinguished by their endothelial cells, which are held together by tight junction proteins that form the innermost component of the blood-brain barrier. The endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes, along with the neurons and microglia within a particular vascular domain, together comprise the neurovascular unit. These neuronal and vascular cellular components interact with each other to ensure precise spatiotemporal delivery of blood oxygen and nutrients to metabolically active regions of the brain via neurovascular coupling. Astrocytes are particularly important for this interaction, as they are centrally located between the metabolically active neurons and the cerebral vessels that are poised to respond to such activity.

Figure 3. Conventional immunohistochemical markers demonstrate astrogliosis grading in tissue from epilepsy patients.

Cytoskeletal changes in reactive astrocytes as manifested in intermediate filament expression. All subjects were patients with epilepsy who underwent temporal lobectomy for resection of seizure focus. Images of hematoxylin- and eosin-stained sections are depicted in the first column, and corresponding brain regions immunostained for the intermediate filament proteins GFAP and vimentin are shown in the second and third columns, respectively. A: A relatively normal-appearing cortex. GFAP is minimally expressed and vimentin expression is restricted to vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells. B: A subacute, moderate phase of relatively moderate astrogliosis with increased astrocyte GFAP in proximal cell processes and a similar pattern of more striking vimentin expression. C: A moderate astrogliosis that is more long-standing, with GFAP and vimentin expression distributed widely throughout the dense cloud of astrocyte fine processes. With moderate gliosis, morphologic changes detected by histologic assessment of hematoxylin- and eosin-stained sections are subtle. Neuronal loss may be inconspicuous. Vimentin expression is still more pronounced in the vascular cells than astrocytes. D: A severe chronic gliosis associated with a cortical penetrating injury that was the cause of epilepsy. Hematoxylin- and eosin-staining shows complete loss of neurons and dense eosinophilic astrocyte cytoplasm. Astrocyte GFAP and vimentin are highly expressed to the degree that vascular structures are present but obscured on vimentin immunohistochemistry; this tissue appears to have completely converted to a glial scar.

Figure 4. Interrelationship between astrogliosis and cerebrovascular dysfunction.

Do reactive astrocytes contribute to pathological cerebrovascular dysfunction in disease? With their central positioning between neurons and cerebral vessels and their multifaceted roles in homeostatic blood-brain barrier (BBB) maintenance, cerebral blood flow (CBF) regulation, and neurovascular coupling (NVC), astrocytes have the potential to adversely affect all of these processes when they are reactive and in a morphologically and functionally altered state. Although astrogliosis almost certainly contributes to and exacerbates the dysfunction of these processes, it is unclear whether it precedes them or results from them.

Figure 5. Stroke-induced astrogliosis is prominent at astrocyte endfeet in rat cortex.

A: GFAP immunolabeled astrocyte endfeet (red) terminating on a cortical vessel in the control hemisphere of a rat that underwent transient experimental stroke. B: Astrocyte endfeet terminating on a vessel in the peri-infarct intact cortical tissue of the stroke hemisphere. Note the increased expression of GFAP and hypertrophy of the endfeet processes, suggesting astrogliosis. DAPI is shown in blue and the rat endothelial cell marker (RECA-1) is shown in green. Images were obtained on a Zeiss LSM 780 (Objective Plan-Apochromat 63x/1.40 Oil) 3 days after middle cerebral artery occlusion in 6 week-old Long Evans rat.

Figure 6. A proposed model of astrogliosis progression and pathological manifestation.

Biological insults such as peripheral infection or systemic inflammation and physical insults such as concussion, TBI, and stroke may result in BBB failure, allowing (normally blood-restricted) substances such as albumin and thrombin to leak into the brain. The presence of these blood-borne proteins in the neuronal microenvironment is detected by astrocytes and reactive astrogliosis ensues. This response is likely initiated in order to contain the damage and re-establish homeostasis. When the attempt is successful, the insult is resolved and healthy physiology prevails. Occasionally, this gliotic response might be too exaggerated and surpasses an as-yet unidentified threshold when it becomes damaging instead, resulting in excitotoxicity (lack of neurotransmitter uptake and/or K+ buffering), synapse loss, and reduction of cerebral blood flow (CBF) and neurovascular coupling (NVC). Interactions between these neurotoxic end-effects may also occur; for example, a decrease in CBF and NVC might precede and cause synapse loss. Together, these effects of astrogliosis synergize to trigger degeneration of neurons and glia, ultimately precipitating the symptoms of many neurological disorders, including dementia, cognitive disorder, and ataxia.

Conflict of Interest

None.


References

Abbott NJ , Ronnback L , Hansson E , 2006 Astrocyte-endothelial interactions at the blood-brain barrier. Nat Rev Neurosci 7 , 41–53. doi:10.1038/nrn1824 16371949
Abeysinghe HC , Phillips EL , Chin-Cheng H , Beart PM , Roulston CL , 2016 Modulating Astrocyte Transition after Stroke to Promote Brain Rescue and Functional Recovery: Emerging Targets Include Rho Kinase. Int J Mol Sci 17 , 288. doi:10.3390/ijms17030288 26927079
Abumiya T , Fitridge R , Mazur C , Copeland BR , Koziol JA , Tschopp JF , Pierschbacher MD , del Zoppo GJ , 2000 Integrin alpha(IIb)beta(3) inhibitor preserves microvascular patency in experimental acute focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 31 , 1402–1409; discussion 1409-1410 10835463
Aiello LCWP , 1995 The Expensive-Tissue Hypothesis: The Brain and the Digestive System in Human and Primate Evolution. Current Anthropology 36 199–221
Akama KT , Van Eldik LJ , 2000 Beta-amyloid stimulation of inducible nitric-oxide synthase in astrocytes is interleukin-1beta- and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha)-dependent, and involves a TNFalpha receptor-associated factor- and NFkappaB-inducing kinase-dependent signaling mechanism. J Biol Chem 275 , 7918–7924 10713108
Al-Ali F , Berkhemer OA , Yousman WP , Elias JJ , Bender EN , Lingsma HF , van der Lugt A , Dippel DW , Roos YB , van Oostenbrugge RJ , van Zwam WH , Dillon WP , Majoie CB , 2016 The Capillary Index Score as a Marker of Viable Cerebral Tissue: Proof of Concept-The Capillary Index Score in the MR CLEAN (Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial of Endovascular Treatment for Acute Ischemic Stroke in the Netherlands) Trial. Stroke 47 , 2286–2291. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.013513 27491736
Alkayed NJ , Birks EK , Narayanan J , Petrie KA , Kohler-Cabot AE , Harder DR , 1997 Role of P-450 arachidonic acid epoxygenase in the response of cerebral blood flow to glutamate in rats. Stroke 28 , 1066–1072 9158651
Alvestad S , Hammer J , Hoddevik EH , Skare O , Sonnewald U , Amiry-Moghaddam M , Ottersen OP , 2013 Mislocalization of AQP4 precedes chronic seizures in the kainate model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 105 , 30–41. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2013.01.006 23357720
Anderson MA , Ao Y , Sofroniew MV , 2014 Heterogeneity of reactive astrocytes. Neurosci.Lett 565 , 23–29. doi:S0304-3940(13)01111-7 [pii]; 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.12.030 [doi] 24361547
Anderson MA , Burda JE , Ren Y , Ao Y , O’Shea TM , Kawaguchi R , Coppola G , Khakh BS , Deming TJ , Sofroniew MV , 2016 Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon regeneration. Nature 532 , 195–200. doi:10.1038/nature17623 27027288
Andriezen WL , 1893 The neuroglia elements of the brain. British Medical Journal 2 , 227–230
Anneser JM , Chahli C , Ince PG , Borasio GD , Shaw PJ , 2004 Glial proliferation and metabotropic glutamate receptor expression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63 , 831–840 15330338
Araque A , Carmignoto G , Haydon PG , Oliet SH , Robitaille R , Volterra A , 2014 Gliotransmitters travel in time and space. Neuron 81 , 728–739. doi:S0896-6273(14)00105-6 [pii]; 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.02.007 [doi] 24559669
Armulik A , Genove G , Mae M , Nisancioglu MH , Wallgard E , Niaudet C , He L , Norlin J , Lindblom R , Strittmatter K , Johansson BR , Betsholtz C , 2010 Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature 468 , 557–561. doi:10.1038/nature09522 20944627
Aronica E , Sandau US , Iyer A , Boison D , 2013 Glial adenosine kinase--a neuropathological marker of the epileptic brain. Neurochem Int 63 , 688–695. doi:10.1016/j.neuint.2013.01.028 23385089
Aronica E , van Vliet EA , Mayboroda OA , Troost D , da Silva FH , Gorter JA , 2000 Upregulation of metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype mGluR3 and mGluR5 in reactive astrocytes in a rat model of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Eur.J.Neurosci 12 , 2333–2344. doi:ejn131 [pii] 10947812
Attwell D , Buchan AM , Charpak S , Lauritzen M , Macvicar BA , Newman EA , 2010 Glial and neuronal control of brain blood flow. Nature 468 , 232–243. doi:nature09613 [pii]; 10.1038/nature09613 [doi] 21068832
Balbi M , Koide M , Wellman GC , Plesnila N , 2017 Inversion of neurovascular coupling after subarachnoid hemorrhage in vivo. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 37 , 3625–3634. doi:10.1177/0271678X16686595 28112024
Baltan S , Murphy SP , Danilov CA , Bachleda A , Morrison RS , 2011 Histone deacetylase inhibitors preserve white matter structure and function during ischemia by conserving ATP and reducing excitotoxicity. J Neurosci 31 , 3990–3999. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5379-10.2011 21411642
Barres BA , 2008 The mystery and magic of glia: a perspective on their roles in health and disease. Neuron 60 , 430–440. doi:S0896-6273(08)00886-6 [pii]; 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.013 [doi] 18995817
Bartnik BL , Sutton RL , Fukushima M , Harris NG , Hovda DA , Lee SM , 2005 Upregulation of pentose phosphate pathway and preservation of tricarboxylic acid cycle flux after experimental brain injury. J Neurotrauma 22 , 1052–1065. doi:10.1089/neu.2005.22.1052 16238483
Baskaya MK , Rao AM , Dogan A , Donaldson D , Dempsey RJ , 1997 The biphasic opening of the blood-brain barrier in the cortex and hippocampus after traumatic brain injury in rats. Neurosci Lett 226 , 33–36 9153635
Baslow MH , and Guilfoyle DN , 2017 The Bimodal Nature of Neurovascular Coupling: Slow Tonic and Rapid Phasic Responses are Separately Controlled by Specific Astrocyte Metabotropic and Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors. Journal of Molecular and Genetic Medicine 11. doi:10.4172/1747-0862.1000266
Bayraktar OA , Fuentealba LC , Alvarez-Buylla A , Rowitch DH , 2015 Astrocyte development and heterogeneity. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 , a020362. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a020362
Becerra-Calixto A , Cardona-Gomez GP , 2017 The Role of Astrocytes in Neuroprotection after Brain Stroke: Potential in Cell Therapy. Front Mol Neurosci 10 , 88. doi:10.3389/fnmol.2017.00088 28420961
Begum G , Song S , Wang S , Zhao H , Bhuiyan MIH , Li E , Nepomuceno R , Ye Q , Sun M , Calderon MJ , Stolz DB , St Croix C , Watkins SC , Chen Y , He R , Shull GE , Sun D , 2018 Selective knockout of astrocytic Na(+) /H(+) exchanger isoform 1 reduces astrogliosis, BBB damage, infarction, and improves neurological function after ischemic stroke. Glia 66 , 126–144. doi:10.1002/glia.23232 28925083
Biesecker KR , Srienc AI , Shimoda AM , Agarwal A , Bergles DE , Kofuji P , Newman EA , 2016 Glial Cell Calcium Signaling Mediates Capillary Regulation of Blood Flow in the Retina. J Neurosci 36 , 9435–9445. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1782-16.2016 27605617
Boison D , Steinhauser C , 2018 Epilepsy and astrocyte energy metabolism. Glia 66 , 1235–1243. doi:10.1002/glia.23247 29044647
Bonder DE , McCarthy KD , 2014 Astrocytic Gq-GPCR-linked IP3R-dependent Ca2+ signaling does not mediate neurovascular coupling in mouse visual cortex in vivo. J.Neurosci 34 , 13139–13150. doi:34/39/13139 [pii]; 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2591-14.2014 [doi] 25253859
Booth HDE , Hirst WD , Wade-Martins R , 2017 The Role of Astrocyte Dysfunction in Parkinson’s Disease Pathogenesis. Trends Neurosci 40 , 358–370. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2017.04.001 28527591
Brenner M , 2014 Role of GFAP in CNS injuries. Neurosci Lett 565 , 7–13. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2014.01.055 24508671
Burda JE , Bernstein AM , Sofroniew MV , 2015 Astrocyte roles in traumatic brain injury. Exp.Neurol doi:S0014-4886(15)00089-8 [pii]; 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.03.020 [doi]
Bushong EA , Martone ME , Ellisman MH , 2004 Maturation of astrocyte morphology and the establishment of astrocyte domains during postnatal hippocampal development. Int J Dev Neurosci 22 , 73–86. doi:10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2003.12.008 15036382
Bushong EA , Martone ME , Jones YZ , Ellisman MH , 2002 Protoplasmic astrocytes in CA1 stratum radiatum occupy separate anatomical domains. J Neurosci 22 , 183–192 11756501
Butt AM , Duncan A , Berry M , 1994 Astrocyte associations with nodes of Ranvier: ultrastructural analysis of HRP-filled astrocytes in the mouse optic nerve. J Neurocytol 23 , 486–499 7983475
Cajal S.R.y. , 1995 Histology of the Nervous System of Man and Vertebrates. Oxford University Press, New York.
Cattaneo A , Cattane N , Galluzzi S , Provasi S , Lopizzo N , Festari C , Ferrari C , Guerra UP , Paghera B , Muscio C , Bianchetti A , Volta GD , Turla M , Cotelli MS , Gennuso M , Prelle A , Zanetti O , Lussignoli G , Mirabile D , Bellandi D , Gentile S , Belotti G , Villani D , Harach T , Bolmont T , Padovani A , Boccardi M , Frisoni GB , Group, I.-F., 2017 Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-inflammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral inflammation markers in cognitively impaired elderly. Neurobiol Aging 49 , 60–68. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.08.019 27776263
Cauli B , Hamel E , 2010 Revisiting the role of neurons in neurovascular coupling. Front Neuroenergetics 2 , 9. doi:10.3389/fnene.2010.00009 20616884
Chen A , Akinyemi RO , Hase Y , Firbank MJ , Ndung’u MN , Foster V , Craggs LJ , Washida K , Okamoto Y , Thomas AJ , Polvikoski TM , Allan LM , Oakley AE , O’Brien JT , Horsburgh K , Ihara M , Kalaria RN , 2016 Frontal white matter hyperintensities, clasmatodendrosis and gliovascular abnormalities in ageing and post-stroke dementia. Brain 139 , 242–258. doi:10.1093/brain/awv328 26667280
Chen C , Zhong X , Smith DK , Tai W , Yang J , Zou Y , Wang LL , Sun J , Qin S , Zhang CL , 2017 Astrocyte-Specific Deletion of Sox2 Promotes Functional Recovery After Traumatic Brain Injury. Cereb Cortex, 1–16. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhx303 28365777
Cho TH , Nighoghossian N , Mikkelsen IK , Derex L , Hermier M , Pedraza S , Fiehler J , Ostergaard L , Berthezene Y , Baron JC , 2015 Reperfusion within 6 hours outperforms recanalization in predicting penumbra salvage, lesion growth, final infarct, and clinical outcome. Stroke 46 , 1582–1589. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007964 25908463
Chuquet J , Hollender L , Nimchinsky EA , 2007 High-resolution in vivo imaging of the neurovascular unit during spreading depression. J Neurosci 27 , 4036–4044. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0721-07.2007 17428981
Cipolla MJ , Crete R , Vitullo L , Rix RD , 2004 Transcellular transport as a mechanism of blood-brain barrier disruption during stroke. Front Biosci 9 , 777–785 14766407
Clarke LE , Liddelow SA , Chakraborty C , Munch AE , Heiman M , Barres BA , 2018 Normal aging induces A1-like astrocyte reactivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U SA 115 , E1896–E1905. doi:10.1073/pnas.1800165115
Coomber BL , Stewart PA , 1985 Morphometric analysis of CNS microvascular endothelium. Microvasc Res 30 , 99–115 4021842
Cornford EM , Hyman S , Cornford ME , Caron MJ , 1996 Glutl glucose transporter activity in human brain injury. J Neurotrauma 13 , 523–536. doi:10.1089/neu.1996.13.523 8913969
Corriveau RA , Bosetti F , Emr M , Gladman JT , Koenig JI , Moy CS , Pahigiannis K , Waddy SP , Koroshetz W , 2016 The Science of Vascular Contributions to Cognitive Impairment and Dementia (VCID): A Framework for Advancing Research Priorities in the Cerebrovascular Biology of Cognitive Decline. Cell Mol Neurobiol 36 , 281–288. doi:10.1007/s10571-016-0334-7 27095366
Cullen KM , 1997 Perivascular astrocytes within Alzheimer’s disease plaques. Neuroreport 8 , 1961–1966 9223085
Daneman R , Barres BA , 2005 The blood-brain barrier-lessons from moody flies. Cell 123 , 9–12. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.017 16213208
Daneman R , Prat A , 2015 The blood-brain barrier. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 , a020412. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a020412 25561720
Daneman R , Zhou L , Kebede AA , Barres BA , 2010 Pericytes are required for blood-brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Nature 468 , 562–566. doi:10.1038/nature09513 20944625
Davies SJ , Goucher DR , Doller C , Silver J , 1999 Robust regeneration of adult sensory axons in degenerating white matter of the adult rat spinal cord. J Neurosci 19 , 5810–5822 10407022
de la Torre JC , 1997 Hemodynamic consequences of deformed microvessels in the brain in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 826 , 75–91 9329682
de la Torre JC , Mussivand T , 1993 Can disturbed brain microcirculation cause Alzheimer’s disease? Neurol Res 15 , 146–153 8103579
de Leeuw FE , de Groot JC , Achten E , Oudkerk M , Ramos LM , Heijboer R , Hofman A , Jolles J , van Gijn J , Breteler MM , 2001 Prevalence of cerebral white matter lesions in elderly people: a population based magnetic resonance imaging study. The Rotterdam Scan Study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 70 , 9–14 11118240
Delekate A , Fuchtemeier M , Schumacher T , Ulbrich C , Foddis M , Petzold GC , 2014 Metabotropic P2Y1 receptor signalling mediates astrocytic hyperactivity in vivo in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Nat Commun 5 , 5422. doi:10.1038/ncomms6422 25406732
Di Malta C , Fryer JD , Settembre C , Ballabio A , 2012 Astrocyte dysfunction triggers neurodegeneration in a lysosomal storage disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci U SA 109 , E2334–2342. doi:10.1073/pnas.1209577109
Diaz-Garcia CM , Mongeon R , Lahmann C , Koveal D , Zucker H , Yellen G , 2017 Neuronal Stimulation Triggers Neuronal Glycolysis and Not Lactate Uptake. Cell Metab 26 , 361–374 e364. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2017.06.021 28768175
Dienel GA , 2017 Lack of appropriate stoichiometry: Strong evidence against an energetically important astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle in brain. J Neurosci Res 95 , 2103–2125. doi:10.1002/jnr.24015 28151548
Ding S , Wang T , Cui W , Haydon PG , 2009 Photothrombosis ischemia stimulates a sustained astrocytic Ca2+ signaling in vivo. Glia 57 , 767–776. doi:10.1002/glia.20804 [doi] 18985731
DiNuzzo M , Mangia S , Maraviglia B , Giove F , 2010 Glycogenolysis in astrocytes supports blood-borne glucose channeling not glycogen-derived lactate shuttling to neurons: evidence from mathematical modeling. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30 , 1895–1904. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2010.151 20827264
Dreier JP , 2011 The role of spreading depression, spreading depolarization and spreading ischemia in neurological disease. Nat Med 17 , 439–447. doi:10.1038/nm.2333 21475241
Dreier JP , Ebert N , Priller J , Megow D , Lindauer U , Klee R , Reuter U , Imai Y , Einhaupl KM , Victorov I , Dirnagl U , 2000 Products of hemolysis in the subarachnoid space inducing spreading ischemia in the cortex and focal necrosis in rats: a model for delayed ischemic neurological deficits after subarachnoid hemorrhage? J Neurosurg 93 , 658–666. doi:10.3171/jns.2000.93.4.0658 11014545
Dreier JP , Korner K , Ebert N , Gorner A , Rubin I , Back T , Lindauer U , Wolf T , Villringer A , Einhaupl KM , Lauritzen M , Dirnagl U , 1998 Nitric oxide scavenging by hemoglobin or nitric oxide synthase inhibition by N-nitro-L-arginine induces cortical spreading ischemia when K+ is increased in the subarachnoid space. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 18 , 978–990. doi:10.1097/00004647-199809000-00007 9740101
Dreier JP , Lemale CL , Kola V , Friedman A , Schoknecht K , 2018 Spreading depolarization is not an epiphenomenon but the principal mechanism of the cytotoxic edema in various gray matter structures of the brain during stroke. Neuropharmacology 134 , 189–207. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.09.027 28941738
Eid T , Lee TS , Thomas MJ , Amiry-Moghaddam M , Bjornsen LP , Spencer DD , Agre P , Ottersen OP , de Lanerolle NC , 2005 Loss of perivascular aquaporin 4 may underlie deficient water and K+ homeostasis in the human epileptogenic hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 , 1193–1198. doi:10.1073/pnas.0409308102 15657133
El Amki M , Wegener S , 2017 Improving Cerebral Blood Flow after Arterial Recanalization: A Novel Therapeutic Strategy in Stroke. Int J Mol Sci 18. doi:10.3390/ijms18122669
Fang B , McKeon A , Hinson SR , Kryzer TJ , Pittock SJ , Aksamit AJ , Lennon VA , 2016 Autoimmune Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein Astrocytopathy: A Novel Meningoencephalomyelitis. JAMA Neurol 73 , 1297–1307. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.2549 27618707
Farkas E , Luiten PG , 2001 Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Prog Neurobiol 64 , 575–611 11311463
Farmer WT , Murai K , 2017 Resolving Astrocyte Heterogeneity in the CNS. Front Cell Neurosci 11 , 300. doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00300 29021743
Faulkner JR , Herrmann JE , Woo MJ , Tansey KE , Doan NB , Sofroniew MV , 2004 Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury. J.Neurosci. 24 , 2143–2155. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3547-03.2004 [doi];24/9/2143 [pii] 14999065
Filosa JA , Bonev AD , Straub SV , Meredith AL , Wilkerson MK , Aldrich RW , Nelson MT , 2006 Local potassium signaling couples neuronal activity to vasodilation in the brain. Nat.Neurosci. 9 , 1397–1403. doi:1779 [pii]; 10.1038/nn1779 [doi] 17013381
Filosa JA , Morrison HW , Iddings JA , Du W , Kim KJ , 2016 Beyond neurovascular coupling, role of astrocytes in the regulation of vascular tone. Neuroscience 323 , 96–109. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.03.064 25843438
Fordsmann JC , Ko RW , Choi HB , Thomsen K , Witgen BM , Mathiesen C , Lonstrup M , Piilgaard H , MacVicar BA , Lauritzen M , 2013 Increased 20-HETE synthesis explains reduced cerebral blood flow but not impaired neurovascular coupling after cortical spreading depression in rat cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 33 , 2562–2570. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2308-12.2013 23392684
Fritz E , Izaurieta P , Weiss A , Mir FR , Rojas P , Gonzalez D , Rojas E , Brown RH Jr. , Madrid R , van Zundert B , 2013 Mutant SOD1-expressing astrocytes release toxic factors that trigger motoneuron death by inducing hyperexcitability. J Neurophysiol 109 , 2803–2814. doi:10.1152/jn.00500.2012 23486205
Gaertner RF , Wyss-Coray T , Von Euw D , Lesne S , Vivien D , Lacombe P , 2005 Reduced brain tissue perfusion in TGF-beta 1 transgenic mice showing Alzheimer’s disease-like cerebrovascular abnormalities. Neurobiol Dis 19 , 38–46. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2004.11.008 15837559
Garbuzova-Davis S , Rodrigues MC , Hernandez-Ontiveros DG , Tajiri N , Frisina-Deyo A , Boffeli SM , Abraham JV , Pabon M , Wagner A , Ishikawa H , Shinozuka K , Haller E , Sanberg PR , Kaneko Y , Borlongan CV , 2013 Blood-brain barrier alterations provide evidence of subacute diaschisis in an ischemic stroke rat model. PLoS One 8 , e63553. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0063553 23675488
Girouard H , Bonev AD , Hannah RM , Meredith A , Aldrich RW , Nelson MT , 2010 Astrocytic endfoot Ca2+ and BK channels determine both arteriolar dilation and constriction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U SA 107 , 3811–3816. doi:10.1073/pnas.0914722107
Golding EM , Robertson CS , Bryan RM Jr. , 1999 The consequences of traumatic brain injury on cerebral blood flow and autoregulation: a review. Clin Exp Hypertens 21 ,299–332 10369378
Gomez-Arboledas A , Davila JC , Sanchez-Mejias E , Navarro V , Nunez-Diaz C , Sanchez-Varo R , Sanchez-Mico MV , Trujillo-Estrada L , Fernandez-Valenzuela JJ , Vizuete M , Cornelia JX , Galea E , Vitorica J , Gutierrez A , 2018 Phagocytic clearance of presynaptic dystrophies by reactive astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease. Glia 66 , 637–653. doi:10.1002/glia.23270 29178139
Goodall EF , Wang C , Simpson JE , Baker DJ , Drew DR , Heath PR , Saffrey MJ , Romero IA , Wharton SB , 2017 Age-associated changes in the blood-brain barrier: comparative studies in human and mouse. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. doi:10.1111/nan.12408
Gordon GR , Choi HB , Rungta RL , Ellis-Davies GC , Macvicar BA , 2008 Brain metabolism dictates the polarity of astrocyte control over arterioles. Nature 456 , 745–749. doi:nature07525 [pii]; 10.1038/nature07525 [doi] 18971930
Gouder N , Scheurer L , Fritschy JM , Boison D , 2004 Overexpression of adenosine kinase in epileptic hippocampus contributes to epileptogenesis. J Neurosci 24 , 692–701. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4781-03.2004 14736855
Gutierrez-Jimenez E , Angleys H , Rasmussen PM , West MJ , Catalini L , Iversen NK , Jensen MS , Frische S , Ostergaard L , 2018 Disturbances in the control of capillary flow in an aged APP(swe)/PS1DeltaE9 model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 62 , 82–94. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.10.006 29131981
Hall CN , Reynell C , Gesslein B , Hamilton NB , Mishra A , Sutherland BA , O’Farrell FM , Buchan AM , Lauritzen M , Attwell D , 2014 Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease. Nature 508 , 55–60. doi:nature13165 [pii]; 10.1038/nature13165 [doi] 24670647
Hamel E , 2006 Perivascular nerves and the regulation of cerebrovascular tone. J.Appl.Physiol 100 , 1059–1064. doi:100/3/1059 [pii]; 10.1152/japplphysiol.00954.2005 [doi] 16467392
Hartings JA , Strong AJ , Fabricius M , Manning A , Bhatia R , Dreier JP , Mazzeo AT , Tortella FC , Bullock MR , Co-Operative Study of Brain Injury, D., 2009 Spreading depolarizations and late secondary insults after traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma 26 , 1857–1866. doi:10.1089/neu.2009-0961 10.1089/neu.2009-0961 10.1089/neu.2009.0961 10.1089/neu.2009.0961 19508156
Hase Y , Horsburgh K , Ihara M , Kalaria RN , 2017 White Matter Degeneration in Vascular and Other Ageing-Related Dementias. J Neurochem. doi:10.1111/jnc.14271
Hauck EF , Apostel S , Hoffmann JF , Heimann A , Kempski O , 2004 Capillary flow and diameter changes during reperfusion after global cerebral ischemia studied by intravital video microscopy. J.Cereb.Blood Flow Metab 24 , 383–391. doi:00004647-200404000-00003 [pii]; 10.1097/00004647-200404000-00003 [doi] 15087707
Hay JR , Johnson VE , Young AM , Smith DH , Stewart W , 2015 Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption Is an Early Event That May Persist for Many Years After Traumatic Brain Injury in Humans. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 74 , 1147–1157. doi:10.1097/NEN.0000000000000261 26574669
Hayakawa K , Pham LD , Katusic ZS , Arai K , Lo EH , 2012 Astrocytic high-mobility group box 1 promotes endothelial progenitor cell-mediated neurovascular remodeling during stroke recovery. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 7505–7510. doi:10.1073/pnas.1121146109 22529378
Hayashi Y , Homma K , Ichijo H , 2016 SOD1 in neurotoxicity and its controversial roles in SOD1 mutation-negative ALS. Adv Biol Regul 60 , 95–104. doi:10.1016/j.jbior.2015.10.006 26563614
Heinemann U , Kaufer D , Friedman A , 2012 Blood-brain barrier dysfunction, TGFbeta signaling, and astrocyte dysfunction in epilepsy. Glia 60 , 1251–1257. doi:10.1002/glia.22311 22378298
Heppner FL , Ransohoff RM , Becher B , 2015 Immune attack: the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 16 , 358–372. doi:10.1038/nrn3880 25991443
Hinzman JM , Andaluz N , Shutter LA , Okonkwo DO , Pahl C , Strong AJ , Dreier JR , Hartings JA , 2014 Inverse neurovascular coupling to cortical spreading depolarizations in severe brain trauma. Brain 137 , 2960–2972. doi:10.1093/brain/awu241 25154387
Holmes EG , Holmes BE , 1926 Contributions to the Study of Brain Metabolism: Carbohydrate Metabolism Relationship of Glycogen and Lactic Acid. Biochem J 20 , 1196–1203 16743771
Hosford PS , Gourine AV , 2019 What is the key mediator of the neurovascular coupling response? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 96 , 174–181. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.11.011 30481531
Howarth C , 2014 The contribution of astrocytes to the regulation of cerebral blood flow. Front Neurosci 8 , 103. doi:10.3389/fnins.2014.00103 24847203
Howarth C , Gleeson P , Attwell D , 2012 Updated energy budgets for neural computation in the neocortex and cerebellum. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 32 , 1222–1232. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2012.35 22434069
Huang KL , Lin KJ , Ho MY , Chang YJ , Chang CH , Wey SP , Hsieh CJ , Yen TC , Hsiao IT , Lee TH , 2012 Amyloid deposition after cerebral hypoperfusion: evidenced on [(18)F]AV-45 positron emission tomography. J Neurol Sci 319 , 124–129. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2012.04.014 22572706
Hubbard JA , Szu JI , Yonan JM , Binder DK , 2016 Regulation of astrocyte glutamate transporter-1 (GLT1) and aquaporin-4 (AQP4) expression in a model of epilepsy. Exp Neurol 283 , 85–96. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.05.003 27155358
Hulse RE , Winterfield J , Kunkler PE , Kraig RP , 2001 Astrocytic clasmatodendrosis in hippocampal organ culture. Glia 33 , 169–179 11180514
Iadecola C , 2017 The Neurovascular Unit Coming of Age: A Journey through Neurovascular Coupling in Health and Disease. Neuron 96 , 17–42. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.030 28957666
Institoris A , Rosenegger DG , Gordon GR , 2015 Arteriole dilation to synaptic activation that is sub-threshold to astrocyte endfoot Ca2+ transients. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 35 , 1411–1415. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2015.141 26126870
Ito U , Hakamata Y , Kawakami E , Oyanagi K , 2011 Temporary [corrected] cerebral ischemia results in swollen astrocytic end-feet that compress microvessels and lead to delayed [corrected] focal cortical infarction. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31 , 328–338. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2010.97 20588315
Iturria-Medina Y , Sotero RC , Toussaint PJ , Mateos-Perez JM , Evans AC , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, I., 2016 Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat Commun 7 , 11934. doi:10.1038/ncomms11934 27327500
Jarius S , Wildemann B , 2010 AQP4 antibodies in neuromyelitis optica: diagnostic and pathogenetic relevance. Nat Rev Neurol 6 , 383–392. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2010.72 20639914
Jego P , Pacheco-Torres J , Araque A , Canals S , 2014 Functional MRI in mice lacking IP3-dependent calcium signaling in astrocytes. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34 , 1599–1603. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.144 25099754
Ji M , Miao Y , Dong LD , Chen J , Mo XF , Jiang SX , Sun XH , Yang XL , Wang Z , 2012 Group I mGluR-mediated inhibition of Kir channels contributes to retinal Muller cell gliosis in a rat chronic ocular hypertension model. J Neurosci 32 , 12744–12755. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1291-12.2012 22972998
Jiang R , Diaz-Castro B , Looger LL , Khakh BS , 2016 Dysfunctional Calcium and Glutamate Signaling in Striatal Astrocytes from Huntington’s Disease Model Mice. J Neurosci 36 , 3453–3470. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3693-15.2016 27013675
Jiang X , Andjelkovic AV , Zhu L , Yang T , Bennett MVL , Chen J , Keep RF , Shi Y , 2018 Blood-brain barrier dysfunction and recovery after ischemic stroke. Prog Neurobiol 163-164 , 144–171. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.10.001 28987927
Jo S , Yarishkin O , Hwang YJ , Chun YE , Park M , Woo DH , Bae JY , Kim T , Lee J , Chun H , Park HJ , Lee DY , Hong J , Kim HY , Oh SJ , Park SJ , Lee H , Yoon BE , Kim Y , Jeong Y , Shim I , Bae YC , Cho J , Kowall NW , Ryu H , Hwang E , Kim D , Lee CJ , 2014 GABA from reactive astrocytes impairs memory in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Med 20 , 886–896. doi:10.1038/nm.3639 24973918
Johshita H , Kassell NF , Sasaki T , Ogawa H , 1990 Impaired capillary perfusion and brain edema following experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage: a morphometric study. J Neurosurg 73 , 410–417. doi:10.3171/jns.1990.73.3.0410 2384780
Joo IL , Lai AY , Bazzigaluppi P , Koletar MM , Dorr A , Brown ME , Thomason LA , Sled JG , McLaurin J , Stefanovic B , 2017 Early neurovascular dysfunction in a transgenic rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep 7 , 46427. doi:10.1038/srep46427 28401931
Kalaria RN , 2010 Vascular basis for brain degeneration: faltering controls and risk factors for dementia. Nutr Rev 68 Suppl 2 , S74–87. doi:10.1111/j.1753-4887.2010.00352.x 21091952
Karbowski J , 2007 Global and regional brain metabolic scaling and its functional consequences. BMC Biol 5 , 18. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-5-18 17488526
Kelleher RJ , Soiza RL , 2013 Evidence of endothelial dysfunction in the development of Alzheimer’s disease: Is Alzheimer’s a vascular disorder? Am J Cardiovasc Dis 3 , 197–226 24224133
Kenney K , Amyot E , Haber M , Pronger A , Bogoslovsky T , Moore C , Diaz-Arrastia R , 2016 Cerebral Vascular Injury in Traumatic Brain Injury. Exp Neurol 275 Pt 3 , 353–366. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.05.019 26048614
Khakh BS , Beaumont V , Cachope R , Munoz-Sanjuan I , Goldman SA , Grantyn R , 2017 Unravelling and Exploiting Astrocyte Dysfunction in Huntington’s Disease. Trends Neurosci 40 , 422–437. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2017.05.002 28578789
Kim KJ , Iddings JA , Stern JE , Blanco VM , Croom D , Kirov SA , Filosa JA , 2015 Astrocyte contributions to flow/pressure-evoked parenchymal arteriole vasoconstriction. J Neurosci 35 , 8245–8257. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4486-14.2015 26019339
Kim R , Healey KL , Sepulveda-Orengo MT , Reissner KJ , 2017 Astroglial correlates of neuropsychiatric disease: From astrocytopathy to astrogliosis. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2017.10.002
Kimbrough IF , Robel S , Roberson ED , Sontheimer H , 2015 Vascular amyloidosis impairs the gliovascular unit in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138 , 3716–3733. doi:10.1093/brain/awv327 26598495
Koehler RC , Gebremedhin D , Harder DR , 2006 Role of astrocytes in cerebrovascular regulation. J Appl Physiol (1985) 100 , 307–317. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00938.2005 16357084
Koide M , Bonev AD , Nelson MT , Wellman GC , 2012 Inversion of neurovascular coupling by subarachnoid blood depends on large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (BK) channels. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 109 , E1387–E1395. doi:1121359109 [pii]; 10.1073/pnas.1121359109 [doi] 22547803
Koide M , Bonev AD , Nelson MT , Wellman GC , 2013 Subarachnoid blood converts neurally evoked vasodilation to vasoconstriction in rat brain cortex. Acta Neurochir.Suppl 115 , 167–171. doi:10.1007/978-3-7091-1192-5_32 [doi] 22890664
Komori T , 1999 Tau-positive glial inclusions in progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration and Pick’s disease. Brain Pathol 9 , 663–679 10517506
Kotliar K , Hauser C , Ortner M , Muggenthaler C , Diehl-Schmid J , Angermann S , Hapfelmeier A , Schmaderer C , Grimmer T , 2017 Altered neurovascular coupling as measured by optical imaging: a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep 7 , 12906. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-13349-5 29018233
Kovacs GG , Lee VM , Trojanowski JQ , 2017 Protein astrogliopathies in human neurodegenerative diseases and aging. Brain Pathol 27 , 675–690. doi:10.1111/bpa.12536 28805003
Krainik A , Hund-Georgiadis M , Zysset S , von Cramon DY , 2005 Regional impairment of cerebrovascular reactivity and BOLD signal in adults after stroke. Stroke 36 , 1146–1152. doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000166178.40973.a7 15879326
Kuchibhotla KV , Lattarulo CR , Hyman BT , Bacskai BJ , 2009 Synchronous hyperactivity and intercellular calcium waves in astrocytes in Alzheimer mice. Science 323 , 1211–1215. doi:10.1126/science.1169096 19251629
Kur J , Newman EA , 2014 Purinergic control of vascular tone in the retina. J Physiol 592 , 491–504. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2013.267294 24277867
Kuruva CS , Reddy PH , 2017 Amyloid beta modulators and neuroprotection in Alzheimer’s disease: a critical appraisal. Drug Discov Today 22 , 223–233. doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2016.10.010 27794478
Lampl Y , Shmuilovich O , Lockman J , Sadeh M , Lorberboym M , 2005 Prognostic significance of blood brain barrier permeability in acute hemorrhagic stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis 20 , 433–437. doi:10.1159/000088981 16230847
Lauritzen M , Dreier JP , Fabricius M , Hartings JA , Graf R , Strong AJ , 2011 Clinical relevance of cortical spreading depression in neurological disorders: migraine, malignant stroke, subarachnoid and intracranial hemorrhage, and traumatic brain injury. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31 , 17–35. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2010.191 21045864
Lecrux C , Kocharyan A , Sandoe CH , Tong XK , Hamel E , 2012 Pyramidal cells and cytochrome P450 epoxygenase products in the neurovascular coupling response to basal forebrain cholinergic input. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 32 , 896–906. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2012.4 22293985
Leffler CW , Beasley DG , Busija DW , 1989 Cerebral ischemia alters cerebral microvascular reactivity in newborn pigs. Am.J.Physiol 257 , H266–H271 2750942
Lenzlinger PM , Marx A , Trentz O , Kossmann T , Morganti-Kossmann MC , 2002 Prolonged intrathecal release of soluble Fas following severe traumatic brain injury in humans. J Neuroimmunol 122 , 167–174 11777556
Levine DA , Galecki AT , Langa KM , Unverzagt FW , Kabeto MU , Giordani B , Wadley VG , 2015 Trajectory of Cognitive Decline After Incident Stroke. JAMA 314 , 41–51. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.6968 26151265
Li Q , Chen Y , Li B , Luo C , Zuo S , Liu X , Zhang JH , Ruan H , Feng H , 2016 Hemoglobin induced NO/cGMP suppression Deteriorate Microcirculation via Pericyte Phenotype Transformation after Subarachnoid Hemorrhage in Rats. Sci Rep 6 , 22070. doi:10.1038/srep22070 26911739
Liddelow SA , Barres BA , 2017 Reactive Astrocytes: Production, Function, and Therapeutic Potential. Immunity 46 , 957–967. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2017.06.006 28636962
Liddelow SA , Guttenplan KA , Clarke LE , Bennett FC , Bohlen CJ , Schirmer L , Bennett ML , Munch AE , Chung WS , Peterson TC , Wilton DK , Frouin A , Napier BA , Panicker N , Kumar M , Buckwalter MS , Rowitch DH , Dawson VL , Dawson TM , Stevens B , Barres BA , 2017 Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. Nature 541 , 481–487. doi:10.1038/nature21029 28099414
Liebner S , Dijkhuizen RM , Reiss Y , Plate KH , Agalliu D , Constantin G , 2018 Functional morphology of the blood-brain barrier in health and disease. Acta Neuropathol 135 , 311–336. doi:10.1007/s00401-018-1815-1 29411111
Lin WH , Hao Q , Rosengarten B , Leung WH , Wong KS , 2011 Impaired neurovascular coupling in ischaemic stroke patients with large or small vessel disease. Eur J Neurol 18 , 731–736. doi:10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03262.x 21118330
Lindauer U , Leithner C , Kaasch H , Rohrer B , Foddis M , Fuchtemeier M , Offenhauser N , Steinbrink J , Royl G , Kohl-Bareis M , Dirnagl U , 2010 Neurovascular coupling in rat brain operates independent of hemoglobin deoxygenation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30 , 757–768. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2009.259 20040927
Liu X , Li C , Falck JR , Harder DR , Koehler RC , 2012 Relative contribution of cyclooxygenases, epoxyeicosatrienoic acids, and pH to the cerebral blood flow response to vibrissal stimulation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 302 , H1075–1085. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00794.2011 22198176
Liu Z , Li Y , Cui Y , Roberts C , Lu M , Wilhelmsson U , Pekny M , Chopp M , 2014 Beneficial effects of gfap/vimentin reactive astrocytes for axonal remodeling and motor behavioral recovery in mice after stroke. Glia 62 , 2022–2033. doi:10.1002/glia.22723 [doi] 25043249
Logsdon AE , Lucke-Wold BP , Turner RC , Huber JD , Rosen CL , Simpkins JW , 2015 Role of Microvascular Disruption in Brain Damage from Traumatic Brain Injury. Compr Physiol 5 , 1147–1160. doi:10.1002/cphy.c140057 26140712
Lundgaard I , Osorio MJ , Kress BT , Sanggaard S , Nedergaard M , 2014 White matter astrocytes in health and disease. Neuroscience 276 , 161–173. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.10.050 24231735
Major S , Petzold GC , Reiffurth C , Windmuller O , Foddis M , Lindauer U , Kang EJ , Dreier JR , 2017 A role of the sodium pump in spreading ischemia in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 37 , 1687–1705. doi:10.1177/0271678X16639059 26994042
Mandybur TI , Chuirazzi CC , 1990 Astrocytes and the plaques of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 40 , 635–639 1690867
Mathiisen TM , Lehre KR , Danbolt NC , Ottersen OP , 2010 The perivascular astroglial sheath provides a complete covering of the brain microvessels: an electron microscopic 3D reconstruction. Glia 58 , 1094–1103. doi:10.1002/glia.20990 20468051
Mattsson N , Tosun D , Insel PS , Simonson A , Jack CR Jr. , Beckett LA , Donohue M , Jagust W , Schuff N , Weiner MW , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, I., 2014 Association of brain amyloid-beta with cerebral perfusion and structure in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Brain 137 , 1550–1561. doi:10.1093/brain/awu043 24625697
McConnell HL , Kersch CN , Woltjer RL , Neuwelt EA , 2017 The Translational Significance of the Neurovascular Unit. J Biol Chem 292 , 762–770. doi:10.1074/jbc.R116.760215 27920202
McKee AC , Cairns NJ , Dickson DW , Folkerth RD , Keene CD , Litvan I , Perl DP , Stein TD , Vonsattel JP , Stewart W , Tripodis Y , Crary JF , Bieniek KF , Dams-O’Connor K , Alvarez VE , Gordon WA , group TC , 2016 The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Acta Neuropathol 131 , 75–86. doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1515-z 26667418
Menzel L , Kleber L , Friedrich C , Hummel R , Dangel L , Winter J , Schmitz K , Tegeder I , Schafer MK , 2017 Progranulin protects against exaggerated axonal injury and astrogliosis following traumatic brain injury. Glia 65 , 278–292. doi:10.1002/glia.23091 27778404
Merali Z , Huang K , Mikulis D , Silver E , Kassner A , 2017 Evolution of blood-brain-barrier permeability after acute ischemic stroke. PLoS One 12 , e0171558. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0171558 28207745
Metea MR , Newman EA , 2006 Glial cells dilate and constrict blood vessels: a mechanism of neurovascular coupling. J.Neurosci. 26 , 2862–2870. doi:26/11/2862 [pii]; 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4048-05.2006 [doi] 16540563
Meyer T , Munch C , Volkel H , Booms R , Ludolph AC , 1998 The EAAT2 (GLT-1) gene in motor neuron disease: absence of mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and a point mutation in patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 65 , 594–596 9771796
Mignot C , Boespflug-Tanguy O , Gelot A , Dautigny A , Pham-Dinh D , Rodriguez D , 2004 Alexander disease: putative mechanisms of an astrocytic encephalopathy. Cell Mol Life Sci 61 , 369–385. doi:10.1007/s00018-003-3143-3 14770299
Mishra A , 2016 Binaural blood flow control by astrocytes: listening to synapses and the vasculature. J Physiol. doi:10.1113/JP270979
Mishra A , Hamid A , Newman EA , 2011 Oxygen modulation of neurovascular coupling in the retina. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 108 , 17827–17831. doi:1110533108 [pii]; 10.1073/pnas.1110533108 [doi] 22006332
Mishra A , Newman EA , 2010 Inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase reverses the loss of functional hyperemia in diabetic retinopathy. Glia 58 , 1996–2004. doi:10.1002/glia.21068 [doi] 20830810
Mishra A , Reynolds JR , Chen Y , Gourine AV , Rusakov DA , Attwell D , 2016 Astrocytes mediate neurovascular signaling to capillary pericytes but not to arterioles. Nat Neurosci. doi:10.1038/nn.4428
Montagne A , Nation DA , Pa J , Sweeney MD , Toga AW , Zlokovic BV , 2016 Brain imaging of neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol 131 , 687–707. doi:10.1007/s00401-016-1570-0 27038189
Montagne A , Zhao Z , Zlokovic BV , 2017 Alzheimer’s disease: A matter of blood-brain barrier dysfunction? J Exp Med 214 , 3151–3169. doi:10.1084/jem.20171406 29061693
Mulligan SJ , Macvicar BA , 2004 Calcium transients in astrocyte endfeet cause cerebrovascular constrictions. Nature 431 , 195–199. doi:10.1038/nature02827 [doi];nature02827 [pii] 15356633
Nedergaard M , Hansen AJ , 1988 Spreading depression is not associated with neuronal injury in the normal brain. Brain Res 449 , 395–398 3395856
Newsome MR , Scheibel RS , Chu Z , Hunter JV , Li X , Wilde EA , Lu H , Wang ZJ , Lin X , Steinberg JL , Vasquez AC , Cook L , Levin HS , 2012 The relationship of resting cerebral blood flow and brain activation during a social cognition task in adolescents with chronic moderate to severe traumatic brain injury: a preliminary investigation. Int J Dev Neurosci 30 , 255–266. doi:10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2011.10.008 22120754
Nicolakakis N , Hamel E , 2011 Neurovascular function in Alzheimer’s disease patients and experimental models. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31 , 1354–1370. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2011.43 21468088
Niu J , Li T , Yi C , Huang N , Koulakoff A , Weng C , Li C , Zhao CJ , Giaume C , Xiao L , 2016 Connexin-based channels contribute to metabolic pathways in the oligodendroglial lineage. J Cell Sci 129 , 1902–1914. doi:10.1242/jcs.178731 27006115
Niwa K , Kazama K , Younkin SG , Carlson GA , ladecola C , 2002 Alterations in cerebral blood flow and glucose utilization in mice overexpressing the amyloid precursor protein. Neurobiol Dis 9 , 61–68. doi:10.1006/nbdi.2001.0460 11848685
Nizar K , Uhlirova H , Tian R , Saisan PA , Cheng Q , Reznichenko L , Weldy KL , Steed TC , Sridhar VB , MacDonald CL , Cui J , Gratiy SL , Sakadzic S , Boas DA , Beka TI , Einevoll GT , Chen J , Masliah E , Dale AM , Silva GA , Devor A , 2013 In vivo stimulus-induced vasodilation occurs without IP3 receptor activation and may precede astrocytic calcium increase. J. Neurosci. 33 , 8411–8422. doi:33/19/8411 [pii]; 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3285-12.2013 [doi] 23658179
Okamoto Y , Yamamoto T , Kalaria RN , Senzaki H , Maki T , Hase Y , Kitamura A , Washida K , Yamada M , Ito H , Tomimoto H , Takahashi R , Ihara M , 2012 Cerebral hypoperfusion accelerates cerebral amyloid angiopathy and promotes cortical microinfarcts. Acta Neuropathol 123 , 381–394. doi:10.1007/s00401-011-0925-9 22170742
Olabarria M , Noristani HN , Verkhratsky A , Rodriguez JJ , 2011 Age-dependent decrease in glutamine synthetase expression in the hippocampal astroglia of the triple transgenic Alzheimer’s disease mouse model: mechanism for deficient glutamatergic transmission? Mol Neurodegener 6 , 55. doi:10.1186/1750-1326-6-55 21801442
Otsu Y , Couchman K , Lyons DG , Collot M , Agarwal A , Mallet JM , Pfrieger FW , Bergles DE , Charpak S , 2015 Calcium dynamics in astrocyte processes during neurovascular coupling. Nat Neurosci 18 , 210–218. doi:10.1038/nn.3906 25531572
Ozen LJ , Fernandes MA , Clark AJ , Roy EA , 2015 Evidence of cognitive decline in older adults after remote traumatic brain injury: an exploratory study. Neuropsychol Dev Cogn B Aging Neuropsychol Cogn 22 , 517–533. doi:10.1080/13825585.2014.993584 25532692
Pan R , Yu K , Weatherwax T , Zheng H , Liu W , Liu KJ , 2017 Blood Occludin Level as a Potential Biomarker for Early Blood Brain Barrier Damage Following Ischemic Stroke. Sci Rep 7 , 40331. doi:10.1038/srep40331 28079139
Papadeas ST , Kraig SE , O’Banion C , Lepore AC , Maragakis NJ , 2011 Astrocytes carrying the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1G93A) mutation induce wild-type motor neuron degeneration in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 , 17803–17808. doi:10.1073/pnas.1103141108 21969586
Pappas AC , Koide M , Wellman GC , 2015 Astrocyte Ca2+ Signaling Drives Inversion of Neurovascular Coupling after Subarachnoid Hemorrhage. J Neurosci 35 , 13375–13384. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1551-15.2015 26424885
Parodi L , Fenu S , Stevanin G , Durr A , 2017 Hereditary spastic paraplegia: More than an upper motor neuron disease. Rev Neurol (Paris) 173 , 352–360. doi:10.1016/j.neurol.2017.03.034 28449883
Pekny M , Pekna M , Messing A , Steinhauser C , Lee JM , Parpura V , Hoi EM , Sofroniew MV , Verkhratsky A , 2016 Astrocytes: a central element in neurological diseases. Acta Neuropathol 131 , 323–345. doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1513-1 26671410
Pellerin L , Magistretti PJ , 1994 Glutamate uptake into astrocytes stimulates aerobic glycolysis: a mechanism coupling neuronal activity to glucose utilization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 , 10625–10629 7938003
Peng W , Achariyar TM , Li B , Liao Y , Mestre H , Hitomi E , Regan S , Kasper T , Peng S , Ding E , Benveniste H , Nedergaard M , Deane R , 2016 Suppression of glymphatic fluid transport in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 93 , 215–225. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2016.05.015 27234656
Piao C , Ralay Ranaivo H , Rusie A , Wadhwani N , Koh S , Wainwright MS , 2015 Thrombin decreases expression of the glutamate transporter GLAST and inhibits glutamate uptake in primary cortical astrocytes via the Rho kinase pathway. Exp Neurol 273 , 288–300. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.09.009 26391563
Piao CS , Holloway AL , Hong-Routson S , Wainwright MS , 2017 Depression following traumatic brain injury in mice is associated with down-regulation of hippocampal astrocyte glutamate transporters by thrombin. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab, 271678X17742792. doi:10.1177/0271678X17742792
Rakers C , Petzold GC , 2017 Astrocytic calcium release mediates peri-infarct depolarizations in a rodent stroke model. J Clin Invest 127 , 511–516. doi:10.1172/JCI89354 27991861
Rancillac A , Geoffroy H , Rossier J , 2012 Impaired neurovascular coupling in the APPxPSI mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer Res 9 , 1221–1230 22799606
Ratelade J , Verkman AS , 2012 Neuromyelitis optica: aquaporin-4 based pathogenesis mechanisms and new therapies. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 44 , 1519–1530. doi:10.1016/j.biocel.2012.06.013 22713791
Reese TS , Karnovsky MJ , 1967 Fine structural localization of a blood-brain barrier to exogenous peroxidase. J Cell Biol 34 , 207–217 6033532
Reuler JB , Gardner EM , 1987 An inner-city clinic and house call experience for medical students. J Med Educ 62 , 183–185 3820255
Rodriguez-Arellano JJ , Parpura V , Zorec R , Verkhratsky A , 2015 Astrocytes in physiological aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience. doi:S0306-4522(15)00031-7 [pii]; 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.01.007 [doi]
Rosenegger DG , Tran CH , Wamsteeker Cusulin JI , Gordon GR , 2015 Tonic Local Brain Blood Flow Control by Astrocytes Independent of Phasic Neurovascular Coupling. J Neurosci 35 , 13463–13474. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1780-15.2015 26424891
Rosengarten B , Paulsen S , Burr O , Kaps M , 2009 Neurovascular coupling in Alzheimer patients: effect of acetylcholine-esterase inhibitors. Neurobiol Aging 30 , 1918–1923. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.02.017 18395940
Rusnakova V , Honsa P , Dzamba D , Stahlberg A , Kubista M , Anderova M , 2013 Heterogeneity of astrocytes: from development to injury - single cell gene expression. PLoS One 8 , e69734. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0069734 23940528
Sabbatini M , Barili P , Bronzetti E , Zaccheo D , Amenta E , 1999 Age-related changes of glial fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactive astrocytes in the rat cerebellar cortex. Mech Ageing Dev 108 , 165–172 10400309
Salinet AS , Robinson TG , Panerai RB , 2015 Effects of cerebral ischemia on human neurovascular coupling, CO2 reactivity, and dynamic cerebral autoregulation. J Appl Physiol (1985) 118 , 170–177. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00620.2014 25593216
Salinet AS , Silva NC , Caldas J , deAzevedo DS , de-Lima-Oliveira M , Nogueira RC , Conforto AB , Texeira MJ , Robinson TG , Panerai RB , Bor-Seng-Shu E , 2018 Impaired cerebral autoregulation and neurovascular coupling in middle cerebral artery stroke: Influence of severity? J Cereb Blood Flow Metab, 271678X18794835. doi:10.1177/0271678X18794835
Sarlus H , Heneka MT , 2017 Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. J Clin Invest 127 , 3240–3249. doi:10.1172/JCI90606 28862638
Savva GM , Stephan BC , Alzheimer’s Society Vascular Dementia Systematic Review, G., 2010 Epidemiological studies of the effect of stroke on incident dementia: a systematic review. Stroke 41 , e41–46. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.559880 19910553
Schachtrup C , Ryu JK , Helmrick MJ , Vagena E , Galanakis DK , Degen JL , Margolis RU , Akassoglou K , 2010 Fibrinogen triggers astrocyte scar formation by promoting the availability of active TGF-beta after vascular damage. J Neurosci 30 , 5843–5854. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0137-10.2010 20427645
Selwyn R , Hockenbury N , Jaiswal S , Mathur S , Armstrong RC , Byrnes KR , 2013 Mild traumatic brain injury results in depressed cerebral glucose uptake: An (18)FDG PET study. J Neurotrauma 30 , 1943–1953. doi:10.1089/neu.2013.2928 23829400
Seymour RS , Bosiocic V , Snelling EP , 2016 Fossil skulls reveal that blood flow rate to the brain increased faster than brain volume during human evolution. R Soc Open Sci 3 , 160305. doi:10.1098/rsos.160305 27853608
Shinozaki Y , Shibata K , Yoshida K , Shigetomi E , Gachet C , Ikenaka K , Tanaka KF , Koizumi S , 2017 Transformation of Astrocytes to a Neuroprotective Phenotype by Microglia via P2Y1 Receptor Downregulation. Cell Rep 19 , 1151–1164. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.04.047 28494865
Simard M , Arcuino G , Takano T , Liu QS , Nedergaard M , 2003 Signaling at the gliovascular interface. J.Neurosci. 23 , 9254–9262. doi:23/27/9254 [pii] 14534260
Sims NR , Yew WP , 2017 Reactive astrogliosis in stroke: Contributions of astrocytes to recovery of neurological function. Neurochem Int 107 , 88–103. doi:10.1016/j.neuint.2016.12.016 28057555
Skotte NH , Andersen JV , Santos A , Aldana BI , Willert CW , Norremolle A , Waagepetersen HS , Nielsen ML , 2018 Integrative Characterization of the R6/2 Mouse Model of Huntington’s Disease Reveals Dysfunctional Astrocyte Metabolism. Cell Rep 23 , 2211–2224. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.052 29768217
Snyder HM , Corriveau RA , Craft S , Faber JE , Greenberg SM , Knopman D , Lamb BT , Montine TJ , Nedergaard M , Schaffer CB , Schneider JA , Wellington C , Wilcock DM , Zipfel GJ , Zlokovic B , Bain LJ , Bosetti E , Galis ZS , Koroshetz W , Carrillo MC , 2015 Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia including Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 11 , 710–717. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2014.10.008 25510382
Sofroniew MV , 2009 Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation. Trends Neurosci. 32 , 638–647. doi:S0166-2236(09)00153-2 [pii]; 10.1016/j.tins.2009.08.002 [doi] 19782411
Sofroniew MV , 2014 Astrogliosis. Cold Spring Harb.Perspect.Biol. doi:cshperspect.a020420 [pii]; 10.1101/cshperspect.a020420 [doi]
Sosunov A , Olabarria M , Goldman JE , 2018 Alexander disease: an astrocytopathy that produces a leukodystrophy. Brain Pathol 28 , 388–398. doi:10.1111/bpa.12601 29740945
Sours C , Zhuo J , Roys S , Shanmuganathan K , Gullapalli RP , 2015 Disruptions in Resting State Functional Connectivity and Cerebral Blood Flow in Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Patients. PLoS One 10 , e0134019. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0134019 26241476
Soustiel JF , Sviri GE , 2007 Monitoring of cerebral metabolism: non-ischemic impairment of oxidative metabolism following severe traumatic brain injury. Neurol Res 29 , 654–660. doi:10.1179/016164107X240017 18173902
Srinivasan R , Huang BS , Venugopal S , Johnston AD , Chai H , Zeng H , Golshani P , Khakh BS , 2015 Ca(2+) signaling in astrocytes from Ip3r2(−/−) mice in brain slices and during startle responses in vivo. Nat.Neurosci. 18 , 708–717. doi:nn.4001 [pii]; 10.1038/nn.4001 [doi] 25894291
Suehiro E , Fujisawa H , Akimura T , Ishihara H , Kajiwara K , Kato S , Fujii M , Yamashita S , Maekawa T , Suzuki M , 2004 Increased matrix metalloproteinase-9 in blood in association with activation of interleukin-6 after traumatic brain injury: influence of hypothermic therapy. J Neurotrauma 21 , 1706–1711. doi:10.1089/neu.2004.21.1706 15684762
Tachibana M , Ago T , Wakisaka Y , Kuroda J , Shijo M , Yoshikawa Y , Komori M , Nishimura A , Makihara N , Nakamura K , Kitazono T , 2017 Early Reperfusion After Brain Ischemia Has Beneficial Effects Beyond Rescuing Neurons. Stroke 48 , 2222–2230. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.117.016689 28626056
Taipa R , Ferreira V , Brochado R , Robinson A , Reis I , Marques E , Mann DM , Melo-Pires M , Sousa N , 2017 Inflammatory pathology markers (activated microglia and reactive astrocytes) in early and late onset Alzheimer disease: a post mortem study. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. doi:10.1111/nan.12445
Takano T , Tian GF , Peng W , Lou N , Libionka W , Han X , Nedergaard M , 2006 Astrocyte-mediated control of cerebral blood flow. Nat.Neurosci 9 , 260–267. doi:nn1623 [pii]; 10.1038/nn1623 [doi] 16388306
Takata N , Nagai T , Ozawa K , Oe Y , Mikoshiba K , Hirase H , 2013 Cerebral blood flow modulation by Basal forebrain or whisker stimulation can occur independently of large cytosolic Ca2+ signaling in astrocytes. PLoS One 8 , e66525. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0066525 23785506
Tamaki K , Sadoshima S , Baumbach GL , ladecola C , Reis DJ , Heistad DD , 1984 Evidence that disruption of the blood-brain barrier precedes reduction in cerebral blood flow in hypertensive encephalopathy. Hypertension 6 , 175–81 6563013
Tarantini S , Fulop GA , Kiss T , Farkas E , Zolei-Szenasi D , Galvan V , Toth P , Csiszar A , Ungvari Z , Yabluchanskiy A , 2017 Demonstration of impaired neurovascular coupling responses in TG2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease using functional laser speckle contrast imaging. Geroscience. doi:10.1007/s11357-017-9980-z
Tarumi T , Dunsky DI , Khan MA , Liu J , Hill C , Armstrong K , Martin-Cook K , Cullum CM , Zhang R , 2014 Dynamic cerebral autoregulation and tissue oxygenation in amnestic mild cognitive impairment. J Alzheimers Dis 41 , 765–778. doi:10.3233/JAD-132018 24670396
Thomas AJ , Perry R , Barber R , Kalaria RN , O’Brien JT , 2002 Pathologies and pathological mechanisms for white matter hyperintensities in depression. Ann N Y Acad Sci 977 , 333–339 12480770
Toth P , Szarka N , Farkas E , Ezer E , Czeiter E , Amrein K , Ungvari Z , Hartings JA , Buki A , Koller A , 2016 Traumatic brain injury-induced autoregulatory dysfunction and spreading depression-related neurovascular uncoupling: Pathomechanisms, perspectives, and therapeutic implications. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 311 , H1118–H1131. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00267.2016 27614225
Tzeng YC , Ainslie PN , 2014 Blood pressure regulation IX: cerebral autoregulation under blood pressure challenges. Eur JAppI Physiol 114 , 545–559. doi:10.1007/s00421-013-2667-y
Underly RG , Levy M , Hartmann DA , Grant RI , Watson AN , Shih AY , 2017 Pericytes as Inducers of Rapid, Matrix Metalloproteinase-9-Dependent Capillary Damage during Ischemia. J Neurosci 37 , 129–140. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2891-16.2016 28053036
Vaucher E , Borredon J , Bonvento G , Seylaz J , Lacombe P , 1997 Autoradiographic evidence for flow-metabolism uncoupling during stimulation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert in the conscious rat. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 17 , 686–694. doi:10.1097/00004647-199706000-00010 9236725
Veenith TV , Carter EL , Geeraerts T , Grossac J , Newcombe VF , Outtrim J , Gee GS , Lupson V , Smith R , Aigbirhio FI , Fryer TD , Hong YT , Menon DK , Coles JR , 2016 Pathophysiologic Mechanisms of Cerebral Ischemia and Diffusion Hypoxia in Traumatic Brain Injury. JAMA Neurol 73 , 542–550. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0091 27019039
Ventura R , Harris KM , 1999 Three-dimensional relationships between hippocampal synapses and astrocytes. J.Neurosci 19 , 6897–6906 10436047
Verkhratsky A , Nedergaard M , 2018 Physiology of Astroglia. Physiol Rev 98 , 239–389. doi:10.1152/physrev.00042.2016 29351512
Vermeer SE , Den Heijer T , Koudstaal PJ , Oudkerk M , Hofman A , Breteler MM , Rotterdam Scan S , 2003 Incidence and risk factors of silent brain infarcts in the population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke 34 , 392–396 12574548
Vetri E , Xu H , Mao L , Paisansathan C , Pelligrino DA , 2011 ATP hydrolysis pathways and their contributions to pial arteriolar dilation in rats. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 301 , H1369–1377. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00556.2011 21803949
Villapol S , Byrnes KR , Symes AJ , 2014 Temporal dynamics of cerebral blood flow, cortical damage, apoptosis, astrocyte-vasculature interaction and astrogliosis in the pericontusional region after traumatic brain injury. Front Neurol 5 , 82. doi:10.3389/fneur.2014.00082 24926283
Villringer K , Sanz Cuesta BE , Ostwaldt AC , Grittner U , Brunecker P , Khalil AA , Schindler K , Eisenblatter O , Audebert H , Fiebach JB , 2017 DCE-MRI blood-brain barrier assessment in acute ischemic stroke. Neurology 88 , 433–440. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000003566 28031392
Wagner KR , Sharp FR , Ardizzone TD , Lu A , Clark JF , 2003 Heme and iron metabolism: role in cerebral hemorrhage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23 , 629–652. doi:10.1097/01.WCB.0000073905.87928.6D 12796711
Weissberg I , Wood L , Kamintsky L , Vazquez O , Milikovsky DZ , Alexander A , Oppenheim H , Ardizzone C , Becker A , Frigerio F , Vezzani A , Buckwalter MS , Huguenard JR , Friedman A , Kaufer D , 2015 Albumin induces excitatory synaptogenesis through astrocytic TGF-beta/ALK5 signaling in a model of acquired epilepsy following blood-brain barrier dysfunction. Neurobiol Dis 78 , 115–125. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2015.02.029 25836421
Wells JA , Christie IN , Hosford PS , Huckstepp RT , Angelova PR , Vihko P , Cork SC , Abramov AY , Teschemacher AG , Kasparov S , Lythgoe MF , Gourine AV , 2015 A critical role for purinergic signalling in the mechanisms underlying generation of BOLD fMRI responses. J Neurosci 35 , 5284–5292. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3787-14.2015 25834053
Wilcock DM , Vitek MP , Colton CA , 2009 Vascular amyloid alters astrocytic water and potassium channels in mouse models and humans with Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 159 , 1055–1069. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.01.023 19356689
Wyss-Coray T , Lin C , Sanan DA , Mucke L , Masliah E , 2000a Chronic overproduction of transforming growth factor-betal by astrocytes promotes Alzheimer’s disease-like microvascular degeneration in transgenic mice. Am J Pathol 156 , 139–150 10623661
Wyss-Coray T , Lin C , von Euw D , Masliah E , Mucke L , Lacombe P , 2000b Alzheimer’s disease-like cerebrovascular pathology in transforming growth factor-beta 1 transgenic mice and functional metabolic correlates. Ann N Y Acad Sci 903 , 317–323 10818521
Wyss-Coray T , Loike JD , Brionne TC , Lu E , Anankov R , Yan E , Silverstein SC , Husemann J , 2003 Adult mouse astrocytes degrade amyloid-beta in vitro and in situ. Nat Med 9 , 453–457. doi:10.1038/nm838 12612547
Wyss-Coray T , Masliah E , Mallory M , McConlogue L , Johnson-Wood K , Lin C , Mucke L , 1997 Amyloidogenic role of cytokine TGF-beta1 in transgenic mice and in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 389 , 603–606. doi:10.1038/39321 9335500
Xiang J , Tang Y , Li C , Su EJ , Lawrence DA , Keep RF , 2016 Mechanisms Underlying Astrocyte Endfeet Swelling in Stroke. Acta Neurochir Suppl 121 , 19–22. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-18497-5_4 26463917
Xiao M , Li Q , Feng H , Zhang L , Chen Y , 2017 Neural Vascular Mechanism for the Cerebral Blood Flow Autoregulation after Hemorrhagic Stroke. Neural Plast 2017 , 5819514. doi:10.1155/2017/5819514 29104807
Xu HL , Pelligrino DA , 2007 ATP release and hydrolysis contribute to rat pial arteriolar dilatation elicited by neuronal activation. Exp Physiol 92 , 647–651. doi:10.1113/expphysiol.2006.036863 17468204
Yan BC , Xu R , Gao M , Wang J , Jiang D , Zhu X , Won MH , Su PQ , 2018 Changes in the Blood-Brain Barrier Function Are Associated With Hippocampal Neuron Death in a KainicAcid Mouse Model of Epilepsy. Front Neurol 9 , 775. doi:10.3389/fneur.2018.00775 30258402
Yang J , Wong A , Wang Z , Liu W , Au L , Xiong Y , Chu WW , Leung EY , Chen S , Lau C , Chan AY , Lau AY , Fan F , Ip V , Soo Y , Leung T , Ho CL , Wong LK , Mok VC , 2015 Risk factors for incident dementia after stroke and transient ischemic attack. Alzheimers Dement 11 , 16–23. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2014.01.003 24603162
Yuan XQ , Prough DS , Smith TL , Dewitt DS , 1988 The effects of traumatic brain injury on regional cerebral blood flow in rats. J Neurotrauma 5 , 289–301. doi:10.1089/neu.1988.5.289 3249308
Zamanian JL , Xu L , Foo LC , Nouri N , Zhou L , Giffard RG , Barres BA , 2012 Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis. J.Neurosci 32 , 6391–6410. doi:32/18/6391 [pii]; 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6221-11.2012 [doi] 22553043
Zambenedetti R , Schmitt HP , Zatta R , 2002 Metallothionein I-II immunocytochemical reactivity in Binswanger’s encephalopathy. J Alzheimers Dis 4 , 459–466 12515897
Zekeridou A , McKeon A , Flanagan EP , 2018 A path to understanding autoimmune GFAP astrocytopathy. Eur J Neurol 25 , 421–422. doi:10.1111/ene.13527 29193488
Zetterberg H , Andreasen N , Blennow K , 2004 Increased cerebrospinal fluid levels of transforming growth factor-betal in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett 367 , 194–196. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2004.06.001 15331151
Zhang X , Zhou K , Wang R , Cui J , Lipton SA , Liao FF , Xu H , Zhang YW , 2007 Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha)-mediated hypoxia increases BACE1 expression and beta-amyloid generation. J Biol Chem 282 , 10873–10880. doi:10.1074/jbc.M608856200 17303576
Zlokovic BV , 2002 Vascular disorder in Alzheimer’s disease: role in pathogenesis of dementia and therapeutic targets. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 54 , 1553–1559 12453672
Zonta M , Angulo MC , Gobbo S , Rosengarten B , Hossmann KA , Pozzan T , Carmignoto G , 2003 Neuron-to-astrocyte signaling is central to the dynamic control of brain microcirculation Nat. Neurosci. 6 , 43–50. doi:10.1038/nn980 [doi];nn980 [pii]
