LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9208369
22236
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf
Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety
1053-8569
1099-1557

32602137
7818889
10.1002/pds.5068
NIHMS1662205
Article
Leveraging neuropathological data in pharmacoepidemiology: A promising approach for dementia prevention?
Marcum Zachary A. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4690-2304
1
Keene C. Dirk 2
Larson Eric B. 3
1 University of Washington, School of Pharmacy, Seattle, WA
2 University of Washington, School of Medicine, Seattle, WA
3 Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle, WA
Correspondence Zachary A. Marcum, Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Washington, 1959 NE Pacific St, Box 357630, Seattle, WA 98102, USA. zmarcum@uw.edu
14 1 2021
29 6 2020
1 2021
21 1 2021
30 1 13
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

In the absence of a cure or disease-modifying treatment for late-life dementia, much of the focus is on prevention.1 One intriguing approach to dementia prevention is repurposing approved medications to prevent or slow neurodegeneration.2 For example, there is growing interest in evaluating whether specific antihypertensives can improve brain health via mechanisms separate from their blood pressure-lowering effects.2 Given the impracticalities of decades-long randomized controlled trials for dementia prevention, linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes is a promising approach to advance the understanding of repurposing.3 This Commentary discusses the benefits of and challenges to conducting this research in the context of discovering new strategies for dementia prevention.

Autopsy analyses have revolutionized our understanding of neuropathologic changes in neurodegenerative disorders over the past several decades.4 Coordinated efforts from National Institutes of Health-sponsored initiatives have significantly contributed to the number of brain donations for research on neurodegenerative disorders. In addition, select population-based longitudinal studies of aging and cognition have conducted autopsies and neuropathological assessments over several years, and researchers have worked toward harmonizing common data elements to increase sample size and generalizability. Much of this work has focused on diagnosis and staging of neurodegeneration. This important work has led to the creation of consensus guidelines for the neuropathological evaluation of various neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD).5 However, current staging criteria have limitations due to their ordinal nature. To truly understand the origins and progression of AD and related dementias, more quantitative neuropathological measures are needed, directed to more than pathological peptides, including neuroinflammation, glioneuronal interactions, and discovery approaches such as transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, and metabolomics directed at the cell type.

Moreover, limited research exists on the associations between life-course exposures, such as medication use, and neuropathological outcomes. The Lancet Commission’s landmark report on dementia highlights the importance of viewing dementia through the lens of a life-course model of modifiable risk factors.6 Linkage of autopsy data with longitudinal medication exposure data are consistent with such a model and holds considerable promise for discovery.

We see two primary benefits of linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes in the context of dementia treatment and prevention. First, results from analyses can be used to inform hypotheses. Several pharmaceuticals have been investigated for their effects on the brain. When a promising hypothesis arises—usually originating from animal studies—this approach can be used to examine whether there is concordance between clinical phenotypes (eg, AD) and neuropathological outcomes in humans. Second, these analyses can expedite the drug repurposing pipeline and minimize the risk of wasting time on futile research lines. Historically, evidence from animal studies combined with epidemiologic (observational) studies has been the impetus for testing candidate therapeutic and preventive approaches in clinical trials (eg, NSAIDs). Evidence of any associations between a candidate drug and AD-related neuropathology would complement other evidence to inform the critical decision whether to continue pursuing repurposing for a given drug.

Despite these potential benefits, linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes has many challenges. First, although there is growing recognition of the importance of brain donation among the public, analytic samples from longitudinally well-characterized cohorts that include aging controls and that use common methodologies remain relatively small after applying reasonable inclusion/exclusion criteria. Small sample sizes limit the statistical power to detect any associations between candidate drugs and AD-related neuropathology, which can be heterogeneous. One solution is to reemphasize harmonizing protocols and data across autopsy cohorts. Harmonization requires cohorts to have collected data using similar procedures. Because of the national efforts to standardize neuropathological assessments, these outcomes are easier to harmonize across cohorts than pharmacological exposures, which are often limited. While certain countries have national medication databases, others (including the US) have disparate medication databases. In these countries, extensive efforts will be required to extract longitudinal pharmacological exposure data—including dosage, duration, and adherence, if possible—from medical charts and healthcare databases for individuals receiving care outside of integrated healthcare delivery systems. The field of pharmacoepidemiology has a long history of collecting medication data in this way. Second, similar to other observational analyses, it is often challenging to isolate the effect on the brain of individual drugs from the multitude of other exposures and risk factors across a lifespan (ie, confounding). However, this should not be a reason to avoid conducting such analyses. One option to explore the upper bounds of the potential effects of unmeasured confounding is to calculate an E-value. According to Haneuse et al, calculating an E-value answers the question, “how strong would the unmeasured confounding have to be to negate the observed results?”7 Third, many autopsy cohorts have limited access to healthy and untreated disease tissue for comparison. Increasing the number of healthy brain donations will improve the ability to answer these important research questions. Fourth, enrollment into autopsy-based studies of dementia is usually not random, leading to risk of selection bias. This impedes the generalizability of the findings. One solution is to use inverse-probability weighting to adjust for this bias.8 Finally, the ultimate goal of any treatment is to beneficially impact cognitive function. Thus, such analyses should strive to include non-neuropathological outcomes, such as cognition, from the ante-mortem period to assess concordance between neuropathology and cognitive function. Taken together, many of these challenges to internal and external validity have identified solutions currently available, but much work remains.

As an example of this approach being applied to dementia prevention, Hajjar et al reported on the association between angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and AD-related neuropathology using the National Alzheimer Coordinating Center (NACC) database.9 Pooling data from 29 AD centers across the United States, the researchers amassed a total of 890 brain autopsies in their analytic sample. Briefly, ARB use (n = 133) in individuals with hypertension was associated with less AD-related pathology compared to treatment with other antihypertensive medications or with no antihypertensive medications. This study was important because it provided the first autopsy evidence supporting a comparative advantage of an antihypertensive subclass for its association with less AD-related pathology. Whether the treatment of hypertension with neuroprotective antihypertensives can modify dementia risk remains unknown.

While the study by Hajjar et al was an important contribution to the field of repurposing, it is important to note the limitations of pharmacological exposure data collected by NACC; these data are only able to identify a participant as a current medication user or non-user with no data on dosage or duration of medication use. As such, there remains a need for additional studies among antihypertensives as well as other drug classes for dementia prevention using robust longitudinal pharmacological exposure data.

In sum, linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes is a promising approach for discovering medication-brain associations that can be used to inform promising hypotheses, leading to mechanistic studies and ultimately therapeutic and preventive strategies, including potential repurposing of any of the thousands of existing medications. Such evidence complementing associations found between candidate brain protectants and valid neuropathological outcomes in animal and observational studies would enhance the strength of causality and expedite future clinical trial planning. If successful, this approach stands to help generate evidence that could ultimately guide prescribing of medications for common chronic conditions, such as hypertension, to protect from cognitive decline and dementia.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Zachary Marcum is supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number K76AG059929. Eric Larson is supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number U01AG008671. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Keene and Larson receive author royalties from UpToDate, Inc.

Funding information

National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health, Grant/Award Numbers: K76AG059929, U01AG008671

KEY POINTS

Given the impracticalities of decades-long randomized controlled trials for dementia prevention, linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes is a promising approach to advance the understanding of drug repurposing.

We see two primary benefits of linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes in the context of dementia treatment and prevention: (a) results from analyses can be used to inform hypotheses and (b) these analyses can expedite the drug repurposing pipeline and minimize the risk of wasting time on futile research lines.

Despite potential benefits, linking pharmacoepidemiologic data with neuropathological outcomes has many challenges.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


REFERENCES

1. Larson EB . Prevention of late-life dementia: no magic bullet. Ann Intern Med. 2018;168 :77–79.29255884
2. Dacks PA , Armstrong JJ , Brannan SK , A call for comparative effectiveness research to learn whether routine clinical care decisions can protect from dementia and cognitive decline. Alzh Res Ther. 2016;8 :33.
3. Larson EB . Population-based neuropathology: the best of times. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;18 :643–644.19625745
4. Montine TJ , Larson EB . Late-life dementia: does this unyielding global challenge require a broader view. JAMA. 2009;302 :2593–2594.20009062
5. Montine TJ , Phelps CH , Beach TG , National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach. Acta Neuropathol. 2012;123 :1–11.22101365
6. Livingston G , Sommerlad A , Orgeta V , Dementia prevention, intervention, and care. Lancet. 2017;390 :2673–2734.28735855
7. Haneuse S , VanderWeele TJ , Arterburn D . Using the E-value to assess the potential effect of unmeasured confounding in observational studies. JAMA. 2019;321 :602–603.30676631
8. Haneuse S , Schildcrout J , Crane P , Sonnen J , Breitner J , Larson E . Adjustment for selection bias in observational studies with application to the analysis of autopsy data. Neuroepidemiology. 2009;32 :229–239.19176974
9. Hajjar I , Brown L , Mack WJ , Chui H . Impact of angiotensin receptor blockers on Alzheimer disease neuropathology in a large brain autopsy series. Arch Neurol. 2012;69 :1632–1638.22964777
