LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9309609
20556
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
The American journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry
1064-7481
1545-7214

31350161
7079206
10.1016/j.jagp.2019.06.016
NIHMS1573459
Article
Digging deeper into delusion circuitry in Alzheimer’s disease
Prasad Konasale MD
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Department of Bioengineering, Swanson School of Engineering, University of Pittsburgh Investigator, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System 3811 O’Hara St, Pittsburgh PA 15213
7 3 2020
03 7 2019
10 2019
01 10 2020
27 10 10691071
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Clinical neurobiological significance of delusions in Alzheimer’s disease

Clinical significance of psychotic symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is emphasized by its association with rapid progression of AD, higher risk of death and greater caregiver burden. Likewise, pathophysiological significance is underscored by their potential to be the endophenotypes for rapid progression of AD. Despite clinical challenges in phenomenologically characterizing delusions in individuals with global cognitive decline, investigation of AD with psychotic symptoms (AD+P) has made significant progress. However, there is still a long way to go before clinical interventions can be designed to address this public health problem. For these reasons, the need for systematic investigation of neurobiology of delusions in AD cannot be overemphasized.

Approaches to investigate delusions

Psychotic symptoms are protean in manifestation and in their underlying neurobiology. Focusing on each symptom can be more fruitful in elucidating the neural circuitry. Particularly, investigation of in vivo neurobiology of these symptoms provides unique advantages in elucidating early neural circuitry changes associated with risk for AD+P, track the trajectory of such changes and in monitoring clinical response compared to in vitro studies. Among the in vivo approaches, studies employing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be especially useful. Structural MRI studies have reported morphometric alterations in the prefrontal and superior temporal cortices, and subcortical regions such as parahippocampal gyrus associated with delusions in AD1. These structural changes have been correlated with selected alterations in cognitive and clinical measures related to delusions. Directly examining the functional alterations, e.g. by using functional MRI (fMRI) can provide greater insight into the underlying neurobiology and can minimize the limitations of interpreting correlations with clinical and cognitive dimensions of delusions.

Two major approaches included in the fMRI studies are to examine hemodynamic changes that are task-related using blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signals or low frequency oscillations of BOLD signals during “resting” when subjects are not actively processing a cognitive task. There are several challenges in conducting task-related fMRI in AD patients including getting reliable behavioral responses within the scanner, which are critical to interpret the BOLD response alterations. In addition, linking a specific cognitive process to delusions could raise circular causality problem, if the study is not conducted rigorously.

Intrinsic functional architecture underlying delusions

However, it is relatively easier to acquire resting state functional MRI data of reasonable quality barring head motion artifacts that can be corrected during post-processing in many cases. Low frequency oscillations of BOLD signals in resting state fMRI can provide data on intrinsic brain activity in a task negative state that may index the brain’s functional architecture and its influence on task-related activation when coupled with task fMRI. Such data can provide valuable information on well-defined functional networks unperturbed by task performance underlying delusions, such as default mode network, salience network and others. Despite the relative ease in obtaining this data, there are not many resting state fMRI studies investigating psychotic symptoms in AD. A prior resting state fMRI study on AD patients with neuropsychiatric symptoms reported no alterations in the default mode network associated with psychotic symptoms compared to controls2. The latter study included many psychotic symptoms, e.g. hallucinations, delusions and nocturnal behavior disturbances. Metabolism and perfusion-based imaging have also been used to assess the resting state brain activity. A single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) study reported hyperperfusion in frontal regions including dorsolateral and dorsal medial frontal cortices in Lewy body dementia patients with delusions3. Medial prefrontal cortex also showed increased activation in schizophrenia patients with self-referential delusions4. These regions were also associated with increased salience attached to self-referential cues5. All these data point toward involvement of prefrontal regions in delusion formation, maintenance and, possibly, its severity.

Qian et al6 compared AD patients with and without delusions, and made an interesting observations that the inferior parietal lobe showed decreased connectivity within the default mode network, and greater severity of delusion was associated with weaker connectivity in the left superior temporal, left inferior orbitofrontal and right medial orbitofrontal cortex. These findings suggest that the intrinsic functional architecture within these networks are altered in AD patients with delusions compared AD patients without delusions. Authors did not include other psychotic symptoms; thus, the findings appear to be specific to delusions. Since both groups were diagnosed with AD, the confound of severity of AD is also addressed. Limitation of the study is that it was descriptive but still an important step in identifying and characterizing the default mode network further. As authors point out, the significance of parietal lobe needs to be further investigated.

Beyond neural circuitry – digging deeper

These findings also bring up important questions for the neurobiology of delusion, in general, and in AD in particular. As pointed out earlier, frontal cortex was associated with hyperperfusion in AD with psychotic symptoms and increased activation in younger patients with schizophrenia. The relationship of BOLD signal changes to underlying neural activations in AD patients require closer examination since groupwise BOLD response differences may not reflect alterations in functional connectivity. Interpretations of BOLD response changes at rest or during task performance in AD are extrapolated from studies on younger healthy subjects, or in comparison with age-matched healthy subjects. Physiological responses among AD patients at rest as well as during task performance may be affected by AD-related global pathophysiological processes affecting neuronal viability and accompanying attempts of neurons in adapting to the disease. Examination of deeper processes related to BOLD response changes in AD and AD+P is required to understand the neurobiological processes at greater degrees of granularity. Further understanding of the cerebral metabolic rate, cerebral bioenergetics, total blood perfusion, oxygen extraction and other processes involved in neurovascular coupling is warranted to make these findings more specific to AD. In this regard, it is interesting to note the association of small vessel disease associated with delusions in AD7 that can alter the hemodynamic response at rest and during task performance. Thus, examination of microvasculature is also warranted in addition to other components mentioned earlier. Taken together, a comprehensive investigation of in vivo neurobiology integrating multiple components could move the field forward.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health MH115026 and MH112584.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


REFERENCES

1 Ismail Z , Nguyen MQ , Fischer CE , Schweizer TA &amp; Mulsant BH Neuroimaging of delusions in Alzheimer’s disease. Psychiatry Res 202 , 89–95, doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.01.008 (2012).22703622
2 Balthazar ML , Pereira FR , Lopes TM , da Silva EL , Coan AC , Campos BM , Duncan NW , Stella F , Northoff G , Damasceno BP &amp; Cendes F Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease are related to functional connectivity alterations in the salience network. Hum Brain Mapp 35 , 1237–1246, doi:10.1002/hbm.22248 (2014).23418130
3 Nagahama Y , Okina T , Suzuki N &amp; Matsuda M Neural correlates of psychotic symptoms in dementia with Lewy bodies. Brain 133 , 557–567, doi:10.1093/brain/awp295 (2010).19920063
4 Menon M , Schmitz TW , Anderson AK , Graff A , Korostil M , Mamo D , Gerretsen P , Addington J , Remington G &amp; Kapur S Exploring the neural correlates of delusions of reference. Biol Psychiatry 70 , 1127–1133, doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.05.037 (2011).21831358
5 Girard TA , Lakatos L &amp; Menon M Aberrant modulation of brain activation by emotional valence during self-referential processing among patients with delusions of reference. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 56 , 21–26, doi:10.1016/j.jbtep.2016.11.007 (2017).27887704
6 Qian W , Fischer CE , Churchill NW , Kumar S , Rajji T &amp; Schweizer TA Delusions in Alzheimer Disease are Associated With Decreased Default Mode Network Functional Connectivity. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry, doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2019.03.020 (2019).
7 Ogawa Y , Hashimoto M , Yatabe Y , Kaneda K , Honda K , Yuuki S , Hirai T &amp; Ikeda M Association of cerebral small vessel disease with delusions in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 28 , 18–25, doi:10.1002/gps.3781 (2013).22396307
