LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7806090
6166
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews
0149-7634
1873-7528

32461080
7483955
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.05.010
NIHMS1599405
Article
Stress and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Senescence Link?
Lyons Carey E 12*
Bartolomucci Alessandro 1*
1 Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of Minnesota.
2 Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Minnesota.
* Correspondence: Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455. abartolo@umn.edu, lyons293@umn.edu.
10 6 2020
24 5 2020
8 2020
01 8 2021
115 285298
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Chronic stress has been shown to promote numerous aging-related diseases, and to accelerate the aging process itself. Of particular interest is the impact of stress on Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), the most prevalent form of dementia. The vast majority of AD cases have no known genetic cause, making it vital to identify the environmental factors involved in the onset and progression of the disease. Age is the greatest risk factor for AD, and measures of biological aging such as shorter telomere length, significantly increase likelihood for developing AD. Stress is also considered a crucial contributor to AD, as indicated by a formidable body of research although the mechanisms underlying this association remain unclear. Here we review human and animal literature on the impact of stress on AD and discuss the mechanisms implicated in the interaction. In particular we will focus on the burgeoning body of research demonstrating that senescent cells, which accumulate with age and actively drive a number of aging-related diseases, may be a key mechanism through which stress drives AD.

Neurodegeneration
neuroinflammation
Tau
Amyloid β
APP
Cortisol
Corticosterone
Corticotropin Releasing Hormone
Telomere

Introduction

Chronic stress is a risk factor for a number of aging-related diseases, including Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), the most prevalent form of dementia. The vast majority of AD cases have no known genetic cause, indicating an important role for environmental factors. In humans, high stress levels increase risk for developing AD (Moceri et al., 2001; Wilson et al., 2003). High stress levels both accelerate the age of onset for familial early-onset AD, and increase likelihood of progressing to advanced stages of the disease in late-onset AD (Moceri et al., 2001; Peavy et al., 2012). In addition to chronological age, measures of biological aging, such as shorter telomere length, significantly increase likelihood for developing AD (Honig et al., 2012; Zhan et al., 2015). Here, we will survey the current literature on the impact of stress on AD and discuss the mechanisms implicated in the interaction, particularly a role for cellular senescence as mediator.

The stress response

Since its first descriptions, the phenomenon known as stress has been intimately linked to disease and aging (Selye, 1950, 1936). While its definition has been, and continues to be debated and updated overtime (Kagan, 2016; Koolhaas et al., 2011; McEwen, 1998; Nederhof and Schmidt, 2012; Pacák and Palkovits, 2001; Romero et al., 2009; Sapolsky et al., 2000; Selye, 1936), this association has endured. The stress nomenclature has been revised to restrict it to conditions characterized by uncontrollability and unpredictability that exceed the regulatory range and adaptive capacity of an individual (Koolhaas et al., 2011). Challenges to homeostasis and the body’s associated physiological responses are a constant feature of living organisms. Stressors are distinguished from these challenges by having physiological demands outside the natural regulatory capacity for an organism. Activation of the acute stress response is a normal part of homeostatic regulation of the body, but under some conditions this response becomes sustained. This persistent activation is associated with a number of maladies, can lead to sudden death in vulnerable individuals, and can significantly shorten individual lifespan (Razzoli et al., 2020, 2018; Snyder-Mackler N, et al. 2020; Stringhini et al., 2017; Tung et al., 2016; Zipple et al., 2019).

The neuroendocrine stress response is classically defined as having two major components: the sympathetic-adrenal medullary (SAM) system and the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis (for review, see Charmandari et al., 2005 and Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009). In response to a stressor, the SAM system, commonly referred to as the “fight or flight response”, (Cannon, 1915) is rapidly activated. Preganglionic neurons in the sympathetic nervous system activate chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla resulting the release of epinephrine (and to a lesser extent, norepinephrine) into general circulation. These chemicals act on via adrenergic receptors in a wide range of tissue types, resulting in increased heart rate, respiratory rate, glycolysis, glycogenolysis and lipolysis.

In the second component, the HPA axis, activated neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus release corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) into the hypophysial portal system. CRH reaches the anterior pituitary gland, causing it to release adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) into general circulation. ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce glucocorticoids (GCs) which act on a number of targets. GCs also exert negative feedback on the hypothalamus, halting the release of CRH, and on the pituitary, halting the release of ACTH. However, in cases of sustained stress or aging, GC hypersecretion can persist (Sapolsky et al., 1986; Spiga et al., 2014). Additionally, this negative feedback system is impaired with age, largely through the downregulation of glucocorticoid receptors (GR) in the hippocampus (Sapolsky et al., 1986). HPA axis hyperactivity is associated with numerous negative outcomes, including major depression (Pariante and Lightman, 2008), immune suppression (Oppong and Cato, 2015) and memory impairment (Tatomir et al., 2014).

In addition to the canonical “stress axes” described above, several additional neural and neuroendocrine system have been shown to regulate the acute stress response (Sapolsky 2000 and Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009 for review) including a newly identified role for osteocalcin (Berger et al., 2019).

Stress and Alzheimer’s Disease

In humans, stress has been associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) (Yuede et al., 2018), other dementias (Bonanni et al., 2018; Johnston, 2000), and Parkinson’s Disease (Hemmerle et al., 2012). AD is the most common form of dementia and results in a debilitating loss of memory and cognitive function. Early on, the disease primarily manifests in the form of impaired memory, reflecting the location of initial neural degeneration in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. Subsequently, neural atrophy spreads to other limbic and neocortical regions and symptoms progress to severely alter cognitive and behavioral domains (Braak et al., 2006; Braak and Braak, 1991). The pathophysiological process begins years, and even decades before the onset of clinical symptoms (Morris, 2005). Since its identification by Alois Alzheimer in 1910, AD neuropathology has been characterized by profound neuron loss as well as two hallmarks: neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and amyloid β (Aβ) plaques. NFTs appear intracellularly and are comprised of aggregated hyperphosphorylated tau protein (Alonso et al., 1996). Neurotoxic Aβ plaques occur extracellularly and are composed of clumped Aβ peptide (Selkoe, 2001). While these are considered markers of the disease and their presence in postmortem analysis is required for a definitive AD diagnosis, neuron and synapse loss are believed to underlie the declines in memory and cognition. Indeed, studies have shown that one of the best pathological correlate to early disease progression is synapse loss (Davies et al., 1987; Masliah et al., 2001; Scheff et al., 2007).

With the exception of rare early onset forms, symptoms typically first appear in patients over age 65, making AD primarily a disease of aging. Though the cause(s) of AD remain poorly understood (over 90% of cases have no known genetic cause (Bertram and Tanzi, 2004), it is clear that biological aging plays a role in its etiology. Multiple studies show a correlation between shorter telomere length in circulating immune cells and increased risk for AD (Blasco, 2005; Honig et al., 2012). A more sophisticated analysis established a causal link between shorter telomeres and AD risk, concluding that for each standard deviation above average telomere attrition rate, risk for AD increases by 36% (Zhan et al., 2015). Additionally, it is widely believed that environmental factors such as air pollution (Killin et al., 2016), nutrition (Morris, 2009) and stress (Yuede et al., 2018) play a role in disease onset and progression, along with biological factors such as aging (Prather et al., 2015). Interactions between such environmental elements with aging processes like telomere length, oxidative stress and cellular senescence may play a critical role in their effect on AD risk.

In humans, there is strong epidemiological evidence linking chronic stress and dementia. For example, in the Religious Orders study, individuals who scored in the 90th percentile for “proneness to psychological distress” were twice as likely to develop AD as those with scores in the 10th percentile. In particular, distress proneness was associated with a decline in episodic memory, though not with other cognitive domains (Wilson et al., 2003). Thus, individuals who experienced a higher degree of perceived stress were at much higher risk for developing AD. A similar result was found in a broader population as well (Crowe et al., 2007). In this study, higher reactivity to stress was associated with a dementia diagnosis 30 years later, even within twins. Furthermore, veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder have a 2-fold higher risk for developing dementia than veterans without the condition (Yaffe et al., 2010).

Several measures of socioeconomic status predict risk for AD. Low socioeconomic status can confer an immense burden of stress involving economic insecurity, uncertainty about future stability, and feelings of exclusion or marginalization due to occupational or economic status (Marmot, 2020; Marmot et al., 1991; Stringhini et al., 2017). It has been observed that low education and occupational attainment increase risk of AD (Räihä et al., 1998; Stern et al., 1994). In particular, low socioeconomic status in childhood increases an individual’s risk of AD by 1.8 times. This increase in risk is even greater if the individual also has the apolipoprotein (APOE) E4 allele, a variant associated with late onset AD. People with this gene variant who grew up in a low socioeconomic household were 2.35 times more likely to develop AD than carriers who grew up in higher socioeconomic status households, and 7.44 times more likely than non-carriers who grew up in higher socioeconomic status households (Moceri et al., 2001). Since this effect is greater than additive, it suggests an interaction between genes and environment (Moceri et al., 2001). Some reports suggest that APOE function may influence circulating glucocorticoid levels, as carriers of the APOE E4 allele tend to have higher cortisol concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid, irrespective of AD diagnosis (Peskind et al., 2001). This report, along with several others, further observes that stress can accelerate the age of onset in familial AD (Mejfa et al., 2003). High job strain (high demands combined with low control) increases risk for developing AD later in life, but is not affected by APOE genotype (Wang et al., 2012).

Additionally, stress later in life can also precipitate transition to late onset AD. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is sometimes classified as preclinical or early stage dementia (Morris et al., 2001). Occurrence of highly stressful events is associated with accelerated cognitive decline in MCI patients resulting in full dementia over a 2-3-year period (Peavy et al., 2012). In these patients, the level of salivary cortisol, one of the classical endocrine markers of chronic stress, was not correlated with disease progression (Peavy et al., 2012). However, AD patients frequently exhibit elevated cortisol levels (salivary, plasma, cerebrospinal fluid) compared with cognitively normal individuals (Vyas et al., 2016) and higher cortisol levels are associated with accelerated progression and increased severity of dementia (Csernansky et al., 2006; Davis et al., 1986). This suggests a differential effect of cortisol depending on the extent of neuropathology and underlines the complexity of the relationship between neuroendocrine pathways implicated in stress and AD.

Though it will not be the focus of this review, it is notable that stress has also been linked to a number of other neurodegenerative disorders, including vascular dementia (Gerritsen et al., 2017) Parkinson’s Disease (Hemmerle et al., 2012) and Huntington’s Disease (Mo et al., 2014). This indicates that stress can more broadly promote degeneration in multiple neural systems.

Insights into stress and neurodegenerative pathology from rodent research

Studies in animals mirror the stress-induced association and exacerbation of AD-related pathology observed in humans (Carroll et al., 2011). They furthermore contribute insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying this association. Evidence exists for interactions between stress and neuropathology in animal models that carry human AD-associated mutations, as well as molecular and behavioral changes in wildtype animals. Although age-related cognitive decline is common across species, no animals aside from humans (and arguably non-human primates (Kalinin et al., 2013; Latimer et al., 2019; Uchihara et al., 2016)) spontaneously develop AD (Gallagher and Nicolle, 1993; Herndon et al., 1997). Though wildtype rodents do not develop AD, studying neural alterations associated with cognitive decline in wildtype rodents can help to identify the preclinical molecular changes that facilitate or appear prior to plaques and tangles. These earlier stages of pathology are key in understanding how and why AD develops and may be the point at which intervention is possible. A key turning point in AD research was the development of transgenic rodent models of AD that carry human copies of genes mutations known to cause familial AD in humans (Games et al., 1995; Hsiao et al., 1996). These AD mouse models have allowed profound insights into the pathophysiology of tau and Aβ inclusions and serve central roles in preclinical testing. Thus, much has been learned from studies in rodents, both wildtype and transgenic, about the interaction between stress and AD-related outcomes.

Stress effects on neurofibrillary tangles and tau

NFTs, one of the hallmarks of AD, are comprised of aggregates of the microtubule binding protein tau. The incidence of NFTs is correlated with cognitive deficits and neuronal loss in AD (Arriagada et al., 1992). Tau is abundant in neurons, where it binds and stabilizes microtubules in the cytoskeleton, but is less common in other cell types. Tau structure, encoded by the MAPT gene, is largely conserved among mammals, with differences largely confined to the N-terminal domain (Hernández et al., 2019). Mouse tau specifically differs from human tau in its lack of 11 amino acid residues in the N-terminal region. Mouse tau also exists primarily in only 3 isoforms, while in humans it occurs in 6. All of these isoforms are generated by alternative splicing and have a number of potential phosphorylation sites, which when occupied disrupt the protein’s capacity for microtubule binding and stabilization (Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2012). Additionally, hyperphosphorylated tau can self-aggregate to form insoluble paired helical filaments which can then aggregate further to form NFTs (Alonso et al., 1996; Gustke et al., 1992). Although NFTs appear later in disease progression, and correlate with disease stage, many researchers now believe that soluble, non-aggregated tau can also drive cognitive decline (Kopeikina et al., 2012). Thus, the abundance of phosphorylated tau, both aggregated and not, appears to play an important role in AD pathogenesis.

In wildtype rodents, it is well established that stress can increase phosphorylation of tau (Table 1). Over 20 years ago, it was first shown that acute cold water stress exposure increases tau phosphorylation in rat and mouse brain (Korneyev et al., 1995). This result has since been replicated in numerous experiments (Feng et al., 2005; Korneyev, 1998; Okawa et al., 2003) and acute immobilization stress and restraint stress have also been demonstrated to increase tau phosphorylation (Filipcik et al., 2012; Kvetnansky et al., 2016). Acute stress-induced tau phosphorylation extends to many brain areas, including not only subregions of the hippocampus, but also frontal cortex, nucleus basalis of Meynert and the locus coeruleus (Filipcik et al., 2012).

Additionally, several different rodent models of chronic stress have been shown to increase tau phosphorylation. Chronic restraint stress has been reported to increase levels of both soluble hyperphosphorylated tau and insoluble tau (Rissman et al., 2007; Yan et al., 2010). It also decreases levels of the microtubule assembly-promoting protein MAP2 (Yan et al., 2010). This decrease in MAP2 may reflect additional neuronal destabilization. Chronic restraint stress additionally changes the distribution of tau, with more tau in areas of the hippocampus that also exhibit decreased MAP2 expression (Yan et al., 2010). Three weeks of chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) in young adult rats is sufficient to increase tau phosphorylation (Yang et al., 2014). Furthermore, vulnerable rats that develop anhedonia in the sucrose preference test, indicative of a depression-like state, after 6 weeks of CUMS, have increased tau hyperphosphorylation as well as increased levels of Aβ40 (Briones et al., 2012). 4 weeks of CUMS in aged rats (15 months), in addition to increasing tau hyperphosphorylation, also upregulates angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and downregulates structural proteins, such as MAP2 and synuclein-gamma (AbdAlla et al., 2015).

Stress-induced tau hyperphosphorylation appears to occur very rapidly, with just 4 minutes of cold water exposure sufficient to induce an effect (Korneyev et al., 1995). The reversibility of this effect seems to scale with the chronicity of stressor exposure. With a single stressor exposure, phosphorylated tau levels return to amounts indistinguishable from those of unstressed controls 2 hours after cessation of immobilization stress (Filipcik et al., 2012; Rissman et al., 2007), Reversal of tau hyperphosphorylation remains possible 24-hours post final stressor exposure following 6 (Kvetnansky et al., 2016), but not 14 days (Rissman et al., 2007) of daily stressor exposure. In keeping with this pattern, after 6 weeks of CUMS, increased tau phosphorylation is still detectable 7 days after the final stress exposure (Briones et al., 2012). Thus, it appears that recovery from stress-induced tau hyperphosphorylation is possible but becomes increasingly impaired the longer stress exposure continues.

Although the evidence is compelling that chronic stress can cause changes in the brain and behavior in wildtype rodents associated with neurodegeneration, the limitation remains that these animals have not been shown under any condition to develop AD. However, by employing the use of transgenic humanized mouse models of AD, it is possible to study the interaction between stress and the proteins most closely tied to AD.

Unlike work in transgenic lines that model Aβ pathophysiology, few stress studies have been performed in mouse lines that model the tauopathy component of AD. However, it has been demonstrated that in mice that carry mutant copies of the tau gene that mimic those found in human disease, chronic stress further exacerbates tau-related pathologies. In the PS19 mouse model, which is characterized by hyperphosphorylated tau that forms neurofibrillary tangles, 4 weeks of restraint stress promotes tau hyperphosphorylation, accumulation of insoluble tau, and worsened fear memory (Carroll et al., 2011). Additionally, chronic restraint stress in the Tg2576 mouse line, which models Aβ pathology, also increases phosphorylation of tau (Lee et al., 2009). Another study treated 3xTg-AD mice, which harbor knock-in mutations of presenilin 1, APP and tau, with the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone for 7 days. This treatment increased mislocalization of tau to the somatodendritic region of neurons in the hippocampus, cortex and amygdala, but did not increase levels of phosphorylation (Green et al., 2006). However, this same treatment regimen in rTg4510 mice, which express the same tau and presenilin 1 mutations as the 3xTg-AD model, but not the APP mutation, did not alter levels of tau, suggesting that elevated glucocorticoid signaling may not play a direct role in this tau mislocalization; rather it occurs downstream of an interaction between the glucocorticoids and APP (Green et al., 2006).

Overall, the evidence is compelling that stress can both acutely and chronically alter tau expression and hyperphosphorylation. These changes are highly relevant to AD, as decreasing levels of tau, even without disrupting NFTs can improve cognitive function (Oddo et al., 2006).

Stress effects on Aβ plaques

The other main marker of AD is the accumulation of Aβ plaques. Much research focus has been put into their ontology, based on the “amyloid hypothesis”, which postulates that the buildup of Aβ, particularly the longer, more hydrophobic Aβ42 isoform, is the root cause of AD (Selkoe and Hardy, 2016). The Aβ peptide is derived from the longer amyloid precursor protein (APP) through two cleavage events, the first executed by BACE1 (β site APP cleavage enzyme 1), and the second by a γ secretase complex. APP can alternatively be processed by sequential cleavage by α secretase and γ secretase, which does not produce Aβ (O’brien and Wong, 2011). Familial early onset forms of AD are caused by mutations in the precursor protein APP, or in the γ-secretase components, presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 (PSEN1, PSEN2), which result in an increased ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40(Scheuner et al., 1996). Given this causal relationship between Aβ-related genetic mutations and AD, the amyloid hypothesis has been compelling and widely accepted. The theory posits that an increase in Aβ42 results in oligomerization and the formation of Aβ plaques. The plaques accumulate, impairing synaptic activity and causing reactive inflammation in surrounding cells and setting off a cascade of reactions, including tau tangle formation, synapse loss and neuron death, which together lead to the cognitive deficits that constitute dementia (for review, see Selkoe and Hardy, 2016). However, recent findings have called into question the precise role of plaques in AD. In particular, the failure of clinical trials targeting Aβ plaques (Egan et al., 2018; Mullane and Williams, 2013) and the observation that there is a very weak correlation between the abundance of Aβ plaques and degree of cognitive impairment (Nelson et al., 2012) have put the original amyloid hypothesis into question, underlining the need for further research. Regardless of their precise role in the genesis of AD, it is clear that Aβ cleavage and buildup are core processes in the disease. Additionally, there is a compelling body of research on the effect of stress on Aβ (Table 1) which will be discussed below.

Similar to its effect on tau phosphorylation, stress in wildtype rats and mice increases levels of APP mRNA and protein and Aβ (Ray et al., 2011; Rosa et al., 2005; Sayer et al., 2008; Solas et al., 2010). Daily maternal separation during the first 3 weeks of life increases levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42 in adulthood and increases expression of the BACE1 (Martisova et al., 2013). It also results in decreased hippocampal cell number, lower brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels and diminished synaptophysin and postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95) (Martisova et al., 2013). 4 weeks of CUMS in aged (15 month old) rats increases levels of ACE and 6 weeks of CUMS in young adult rats increases levels of Aβ40(AbdAlla et al., 2015; Briones et al., 2012).

Chronic stress also aggravates amyloid pathology in numerous transgenic mouse models of AD. In mice that express APP with a mutation known to cause familial early onset AD (Tg2576; Hsiao et al., 1996), several stress procedures intensify pathology. 3 months of social isolation stress not only elevates levels of Aβ, but also increases plaque deposition and worsens cognitive impairment (Kang et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2009). The extent of the impact of stress on AD-related pathology depends on, among other factors, the duration of stress exposure. In Tg2576 mice, elevated Aβ is measurable after just 1 hour of restraint stress, and peaks 10 hours after cessation of the restraint (Kang et al., 2007). Long-term social isolation stress (from weaning onward) anticipated age of onset for Aβ plaque deposition from 9 months to 6 months of age. It also reduced neurogenesis in hippocampus, which was associated with impaired contextual memory (Dong et al., 2004).

In the 3xTg-AD mouse model, which carries 3 genes associated with familial AD in humans (to the APP, MAPT and PSEN1 genes), a single instance of 5 hour intense “modern life-like” stress (restraint stress on rotating platform accompanied by loud noise) increased Aß levels and reduced the number of synapse-bearing dendritic spines (Baglietto-Vargas et al., 2015). 6 weeks of mild social stress (randomized cage composition for 6 hours, 2-3 times weekly) in the same mouse line increased both Aβ and decreases BDNF (Rothman et al., 2012). 7 day treatment with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) agonist dexamethasone (5mg/kg) in this model increased levels of APP, Aβ40 and Aβ42 and increased activity of BACE (Green et al., 2006).

Similarly, 5 days of restraint stress increased levels of Aβ42 and plaque deposition in the hippocampus of female but not male 5XFAD mice, which carry 5 familial AD mutations in APP and PSEN1 genes (Devi et al., 2010; Oakley et al., 2006). This is an interesting finding given that women are much more likely to develop AD than men (Alzheimer’s Association, 2014). However after 4 weeks of restraint stress, both male and female 5XFAD mice had increased levels of Aβ along with impaired spatial and fear memory, compared with unstressed littermates (Carroll et al., 2011). Together these studies indicate that females harboring these genetic mutations may be more vulnerable to stress than males, but that long term chronic stress will ultimately exacerbate pathology in both sexes.

In most of the experiments discussed above, stress protocols were applied during the young adult period. Early-life stress can also result in worsened Aβ pathology later in life. Postnatal stress increases Aβ plaque burden and inflammatory markers and compromises survival later in life in APP/PS1 mice (Hoeijmakers et al., 2017; Lesuis et al., 2016). These results mirror the epidemiological findings in humans discussed earlier, which demonstrate that early life stress can particularly increase likelihood of developing AD.

Stress-induced changes to synapses and neuronal survival

Although NFTs and Aβ plaques are regarded as the primary markers of AD pathology, synapse and neuron loss are thought to be the net result of their presence and directly cause the cognitive and memory impairments associated with AD. Indeed, studies show that neuronal degeneration is a better predictor of dementia than tau or Aβ inclusions (Price et al., 2001). Synaptic loss has the strongest correlation with the staging of dementia and with early stage AD (Nelson et al., 2012; Scheff et al., 2007). It has been proposed that synapse loss underlies the cognitive impairments in early stage AD and that this disruption of plasticity impairs neuronal viability, resulting in the neuron loss that characterizes later stages of the disease (Shankar and Walsh, 2009). Numerous lines of research indicate that chronic stress can directly lead to synapse loss and impaired neurogenesis. In this way, stress may promote the advent and accelerate the progression of AD.

The hippocampus, the origin point of AD pathology, is particularly stress-sensitive possibly because of its robust expression of GR and CRH receptor 1 (CRHR1) receptors (Braak et al., 2006; Braak and Braak, 1991). It is a major target of stress-associated hormones (McEwen et al., 1968), and stress-induced degeneration in the hippocampus is well documented (McEwen, 1998; McEwen et al., 1968). In particular, chronic stress shrinks apical dendrites in area CA3 of the hippocampus. Numerous studies have demonstrated that chronic restraint stress induces atrophy of apical dendrites (shorter length, fewer branch points) in hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons (Magariños and McEwen, 1995; Watanabe et al., 1992). While much of this work has been done in rats, it has been shown that this effect is preserved across species (Bartolomucci et al., 2002; Czeh et al., 2001; Magariños et al., 1996). Acute, as well as chronic stress can alter CA3 dendrites: a single exposure to a 5-hour stressor reduces CA3 dendritic spine density and long-term potentiation. Moreover, these effects correlate with stress-induced deficits in selected learning and memory processes (A. Bartolomucci et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2010).

The vast majority of dendritic spines have synapses, and thus their loss has profound functional consequences (Arellano et al., 2007; Harris, 1999). Studies that examine specific synaptic markers find similar results to those that examine dendritic structure. Both chronic stress and GC exposure reduce the number of synapses between mossy fibers from dentate gyrus granule cells onto CA3 pyramidal cells (Sousa et al., 2000). Additionally, multimodal stress – restraint combined with loud music, has a greater effect than either manipulation alone as measured by memory performance and reduction in synapse number in CA3 (Maras et al., 2014).

Prolonged exposure to either chronic psychosocial stress or GCs does not impact cell number but does reduce CA3 and hippocampal volume, which may be accounted for through a loss of synapses (Czeh et al., 2001; Tata et al., 2006). In humans, hippocampal volume begins to decrease concomitantly with the onset of memory decline (Reiman et al., 1998), suggesting that this is a highly relevant parameter.

While abundant evidence supports stress-induced deterioration in area CA3, there are fewer reports of changes in other areas of the hippocampus. Some studies have found that stress or GC induced dendritic decline in CA1 pyramidal neurons (Sousa et al., 2000), but others have not (Alfarez et al., 2008; Woolley et al., 1990). Interestingly, one study did find that while 3 weeks of unpredictable stress did not affect CA1 dendritic length, if brain slices from these animals were subsequently exposed to elevated GC levels, there was a significant reduction in apical dendritic length, compared with slices from control animals (Alfarez et al., 2008). This suggests that some sensitization may occur in CA1 neurons in response to chronic stress that renders them more sensitive to future stress. Another study found that multimodal stress but not a single stressor (either restraint or loud noise) can reduce synapse number in CA1. It also induced a reduction in connectivity (as measured by c-fos) with the septum and thalamus and an increase in connectivity with the amygdala and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (Maras et al., 2014). These results suggest that while CA1 may be less vulnerable to a single bout of chronic stress, repeated stressor exposure and/or facing multiple stressors simultaneously may lead to CA1 deterioration. This is particularly pertinent to the role of stress in neurodegeneration, as AD pathology particularly affects CA1 (Masurkar, 2018; Padurariu et al., 2012).

Chronic stress has profound influence on other brain regions, in addition to the hippocampus. The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is involved in the processing of emotional stimuli as well as complex cognitive tasks (Cerqueira et al., 2007). Prenatal stress impairs connectivity between the hippocampus and PFC and disrupts synaptic plasticity within the PFC (Mychasiuk et al., 2012), which is similar to the reduced connectivity observed in humans after stressful experiences (Admon et al., 2013). Furthermore, chronic subordination stress decreases serotonin turnover in the PFC in susceptible mice (Bartolomucci et al., 2010). As in the hippocampus, chronic stress (both chronic social defeat stress or chronic variable stress) reduces dendritic spine density in the prefrontal cortex in a CRHR1-dependent manner (Chen et al., 2008; Radley et al., 2013; Shu and Xu, 2017). In wildtype rodents, chronic stress promotes Aβ accumulation and tau phosphorylation in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), as well as the hippocampus (Ray et al., 2011; Sotiropoulos et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2014).

Stress also inhibits adult neurogenesis and impairs survival of newly born neurons in the dentate gyrus (Czeh et al., 2001; Krugers et al., 2010) A decline in neurogenesis occurs with aging and is thought to contribute to age-related cognitive impairment by reducing capacity for plasticity (Apple et al., 2017). Thus, by impairing the formation and survival of new neurons, stress may further promote the decline in cognitive performance associated with AD. Acute stressor exposure reduces proliferation and increases the number of apoptotic granule cells in the dentate gyrus (Gould et al., 1998; Heine et al., 2005) while chronic stressor exposure additionally increases the expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p27Kip1 in the dentate gyrus (Heine et al., 2004). GCs alone can impair neurogenesis by inhibiting cell proliferation and survival (Wong and Herbert, 2006). This is another mechanism by which chronic stress can aggravate age-related decline in brain having significant implication for neurodegenerative disorders.

Stress-induced promotion of neuroinflammation

Neuroinflammation is a common pathological feature in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases (Cribbs et al., 2012; Crotti and Glass, 2015; Griffin et al., 1989; Herrero et al., 2015; Sudduth et al., 2013). In response to insults, microglia and astrocytes secrete inflammatory factors which facilitate immune cell recruitment and clearance of infection and tissue damage. In AD, it is believed that neuroinflammation results as a reaction to accumulation of Aβ, and is one of the earliest features of the disease. Microglia respond to Aβ by phagocytosing the abnormal protein and secreting proinflammatory cytokines to recruit additional microglia to the plaques (Bhaskar et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2012). Astrocytes to a lesser degree can degrade Aβ and also secrete inflammatory mediators in response to Aβ (Carrero et al., 2012).

This immune response appears to be initially beneficial, increasing clearance of Aβ (Chakrabarty et al., 2010; Shaftel et al., 2007). However, prolonged inflammation can be detrimental to neurons and synapses (Leszek et al., 2016) and can ultimately impair microglial phagocytosis of Aβ (Hickman et al., 2008), while simultaneously promoting Aβ production (Chong, 1997; Liaoi et al., 2004) and tau hyperphosphorylation (Quintanilla et al., 2004). Overall, neuroinflammation has a complex and multifaceted role in AD. While it can have beneficial effects by promoting Aβ clearance, it can also directly promote other aspects of AD neuropathology, increasing both Aβ burden and tau hyperphosphorylation and impairing synapse maintenance and neuronal survival.

Increased inflammation is a common phenotype of normal brain aging across species (Frank et al., 2006), and may represent one mechanism by which age increases risk of AD. Additionally, it is well established that chronic or traumatic stressors increase neuroinflammation. Thus, by promoting inflammation, stress may facilitate the development of AD in a similar way to natural aging. A number of stressors promote microglial activation, as measured by Iba1 activity (Calcia et al., 2016). In particular, a very strong effect has been found in area CA1 of the hippocampus, which is particularly impaired in AD (Bian et al., 2012; Kojo et al., 2010). This increase in microglial activation has been demonstrated to lead to the secretion of cytokines and chemokines, which facilitate development of anxiety-like behavior (Tynan et al., 2010; Wohleb et al., 2013, 2012, 2011). Stress exposure also promotes production of proinflammatory monocytes in the bone marrow, which are released into general circulation and can migrate and localize in the brain (Heidt et al., 2014; Powell et al., 2013; Wohleb et al., 2011).

Additionally, in recent studies it was demonstrated that activation of the C3aR1 receptor by TLQP-21 or C3a (Sahu et al., 2019), which was previously linked with to both the stress response (Razzoli et al., 2012) and microglial function (Doolen et al., 2017), increases microglial phagocytosis of Aβ (Cho et al., 2020; El Gaamouch et al., 2020) and improves amyloid pathology in the 5XFAD mouse model of AD (El Gaamouch et al., 2020). However, activation of C3aR1 has also been shown to promote early synapse loss (Hong et al., 2016), cognitive decline (Shi et al., 2017) and tau pathology (Litvinchuk et al., 2018). This biphasic contribution is consistent with the dual role that microglial activation plays in AD pathology, and the C3aR1-mediated signaling pathway may represent an important mediator of stress-induced microglial activation and inflammation in AD.

Furthermore, prior stressor exposure can potentiate the CNS inflammatory response to subsequent immune challenges (Frank et al., 2007; Giovanoli et al., 2013; Wohleb et al., 2012; Yoo et al., 2011). This mechanism could be particularly relevant to the contribution of early life and middle life stress to AD risk in old age.

Potential Mechanisms of stress-induced exacerbation of neurodegeneration and AD

There are multiple potential mediators of stress-induced effects on neurodenegeration and AD. At this point, the best researched mediators are two of the primary HPA axis hormones: CRH and GCs.

Glucocorticoids

GCs are the main output of the HPA axis. Under normal circumstances, GCs exert negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary, returning GC levels to baseline, but in some instances of repeated stress exposure, GC hypersecretion can persist. The seminal Glucocorticoid Cascade Hypothesis suggested that age-related GR loss results in GC hypersecretion, and that subsequent stress-induced GCs both directly damage hippocampal neurons and impair their ability to withstand any additional damage or insult, resulting in accelerated neuron degeneration and death (Sapolsky et al., 1986). It furthermore proposes that this is the major mechanism by which hippocampal degeneration occurs with age and promotes AD.

An extensive body of research indicates that aging increases basal HPA axis function and stress responsiveness (Sapolsky, 1992). Aged rats have fewer GR receptors in the hippocampus and to a smaller extent, in the amygdala (Sapolsky et al., 1983). Given that much of the GC negative feedback on the paraventricular nucleus is mediated by neurons in the hippocampus, this may be responsible for the impaired termination of the stress response observed in aged individuals. In rats, 3 months of corticosterone injections that replicate the high physiological range resulted in depleted GR in the hippocampus, which did not change after 4 months of recovery. This also resulted in a reduced number of cells in area CA3 and the appearance of “dark microglia” (Sapolsky et al., 1985). Exogenous glucocorticoids also potentiate the capacity for Aβ infusion to promote tau hyperphosphorylation and intracellular accumulation (Sotiropoulos et al., 2011). In humans, several case studies indicate that high dose corticosteroids can induce long-lasting impairments in learning and memory, similar to those observed in patients with dementia (Arndt et al., 2004; Sacks and Shulman, 2005). Similarly, patients with Cushing’s Syndrome frequently manifest with psychiatric and cognitive dysfunction termed “steroid dementia” (Bernini and Tricò, 2016). However, while some aspects of the glucocorticoid cascade hypothesis, have been substantiated, it has become clear that GC action alone cannot account for aging and AD-related hippocampal degeneration.

Further experiments have demonstrated that the stress/GC-induced decrease in hippocampal volume is now primarily attributed to dendritic loss rather than neural death (Czeh et al., 2001; Tata et al., 2006) and several stress-induced effects on AD pathology have been shown to be glucocorticoid independent (Chen et al., 2010, 2008; Radley et al., 2013; Shu and Xu, 2017).

Corticotropin Releasing Hormone.

CRH has also been shown to be a primary mediator of stress effects on several neurodegenerative phenomena. Direct injection of CRH into the brain results in increased Aβ in the interstitial fluid (Kang et al., 2007). Repeated administration of a CRHR1 agonist into the basolateral amygdala is sufficient to increase APP and Aβ in prefrontal cortex (Ray et al., 2011).

Additionally, pharmacological blockage of CRHR1 receptors prevents an increase in Aβ induced by acute restraint stress. 2 weeks of restraint stress in adrenalectomized wildtype mice increases levels of phosphorylated tau but can be prevented by administering a CRHR1 antagonist (Rissman et al., 2007). Phosphorylated tau is also blocked in CRHR1 knock-out mice but not in CRHR2 knock-out mice, suggesting a specific role for CRHR1 mediated signaling (Rissman et al., 2007). In this case, it is possible that GCs and CRH have redundant effects on tau phosphorylation. Exacerbations in pathology produced by restraint stress in a mouse model that expresses mutant human tau can similarly be prevented by a CRHR1 antagonist (Carroll et al., 2011).

It is clear that both GCs and CRH are important mediators of both the stress response, and stress-effects on neurodegeneration. Less clear however is the precise roles they play. A single exposure to a 5-hour stressor reduces CA3 dendritic spine density and long-term potentiation and these effects correlate with stress-induced memory deficits (Chen et al., 2010). Both GR and CRHR1 are implicated in this effect. Chronic exposure to GCs similarly reduces CA3 apical dendritic complexity (Woolley et al., 1990). However, direct infusion of a CRHR1 antagonist into the brain prevented the spine loss and memory impairments caused by a 5-hour stress exposure (Chen et al., 2010). Thus, both mechanisms may be at play but with different timescales, with CRHR1 mediating acute spine loss and GR mediating chronic stress induced dendritic shortening.

Catecholamines.

Though it has been less well studied in the context of neurodegeneration, the actions of the SAM axis and sympathetic nervous system in AD pathogenesis must be considered. Epinephrine and norepinephrine, the major effectors of these systems respectively, do not cross the blood brain barrier, and thus circulating levels released from the adrenal glands and sympathetic nerves do not directly act on the CNS (Weil-Malherbe et al., 1959). However, the catecholamines-mediated actions, such as increasing blood pressure may indirectly contribute to the development of AD. Hypertension, particularly in midlife, is a risk factor for AD (Luchsinger et al., 2005) and antihypertensive medications have been associated lower incidence of AD diagnosis and better cognitive function (Hajjar et al., 2005; Hoffman et al., 2009; Khachaturian, 2006). Additionally, norepinephrine released by sympathetic nerves promotes the production and release of myeloid cells, which are trafficked throughout the body and release pro-inflammatory cytokines (Dhabhar et al., 2012; Hanke et al., 2012; Heidt et al., 2014). This can lead directly to increased neuroinflammation, which is associated with AD, and also to the promotion of other diseases such as atherosclerosis, which increases risk for AD (Kalback et al., 2004).

Norepinephrine is also secreted by catecholaminergic neurons in the brain, whose activity is particularly increased in response to acute stress and facilitate a number of anxiety-like behavioral responses (for review, see Morilak et al., 2005). The locus coeruleus (LC) is the main source of norepinephrine in the brain, and has widespread projections to the cortex, hippocampus and amygdala, among many other brain regions. LC neurons degenerate early in AD, and evidence indicates that this promotes further disease progression (Grudzien et al., 2007; Kelly et al., 2017; Zarow et al., 2003). However, the role of noradrenergic signaling in AD pathogenesis is complicated and seemingly contradictory. Selective ablation of noradrenergic neurons increases Aβ deposition in the APP23 model (Heneka et al., 2006), the APP717 model (Kalinin et al., 2007) and the APP/PS1 model (Jardanhazi-Kurutz et al., 2010) and increases levels of phosphorylated tau in female APP/SL mice (Oikawa et al., 2010).The β2 adrenergic receptor (AR) agonist terbutaline prevents LTP inhibition induced by exogenous application of Aβ to rat hippocampal sections (Wang et al., 2009) and an antagonism of β2AR with ICI 118,551 in the 3xTg model was found to increase Aβ levels and further impaired cognitive function (Branca et al., 2014). The above evidence suggests that noradrenergic signaling may play a protective role in AD, but is contradicted by several other studies, which indicate that it may exacerbate AD pathogenesis. Stimulating α2 adrenergic receptor disrupts APP interaction with Golgi sorting receptors, altering the outcome of its proteolytic processing to promote Aβ generation and subsequent neuropathology (Chen et al., 2014). In APP/PS1 mice, administration of a selective α2 receptor antagonist ameliorates AD-related cognitive deficits (Chen et al., 2014; Scullion et al., 2011). Activation of β2AR enhances γ secretase activity, and thus Aβ production in both transgenic AD mouse models and wildtype mice (Ni et al., 2006; Yu et al., 2010). Antagonism of either or both β1 and β2ARs can reduce Aβ production in amyloidosis mouse models of AD (Ni et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2013). Blockade of β2AR receptors also reduces stress-induced Aβ generation in nontransgenic mice (Yu et al., 2010). Inhibition of both β1 and β2ARs with propanalol improves cognitive function both in the amyloidosis Tg2576 mouse model and in the accelerated aging SAMP8 model (Dobarro et al., 2013a, 2013b). Thus, it is clear that norepinephrine and the neurons in the LC that produce it, have an intimate association with AD pathogenesis. While ablation of neurons in the LC clearly is detrimental to health and cognition, the outcome of noradrenergic signaling may be highly dependent on contextual factors including stage of disease progression, the receptors it interacts with and the outcome being measured. The specificity of noradrenergic signaling may be key, with LC neurons participating in circuits that cannot be recapitulated by CNS-wide α or β adrenergic receptor stimulation. Glutamate. Acute restraint stress elevates glutamate levels in the hippocampus in a glucocorticoid-dependent manner (Lowy et al., 1993). GC induced glutamate secretion likely plays a role in stress-induced dendritic remodeling, as blocking NMDA receptors blocks this effect (Magariños and McEwen, 1995). Excess glutamatergic activity is also associated with neuron loss following trauma and is implicated in neurodegeneration and aging. Aged rats treated with riluzole, which increases glutamate uptake through glial transporters, were protected against age-related cognitive decline and dendritic spine loss (Pereira et al., 2014). Riluzole also prevented many age-related hippocampal gene expression changes. In particular, it prevented gene expression changes associated with AD in humans (Pereira et al., 2017). This suggests that excess glutamate signaling is a key modulator of stress or GC induced dendritic retraction and cognitive decline. Cellular senescence. A core tenant of the stress concept originally described by Hans Selye was that stress, like aging, was the “results of life’s wear and tear” (Selye, 1959). The field’s understanding of stress has been refined since then, but the link between stress and aging has endured. In addition to AD, stress is observed to increase risk for a number of conditions and diseases associated with aging, including hypertension, atherosclerosis, diabetes and dementia (Dimsdale, 2008; Murdock et al., 2016; Razzoli et al., 2018; Yuede et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020). Given its contribution to a number of aging-related diseases as well as to biological aging itself, is it possible that stress promotes these diseases at least in part by impacting a fundamental aging mechanism?

One potential mediator of this interaction has gained momentum recently: the process known as cellular senescence. Cellular senescence, the phenomenon by which cells cease to divide and undergo other distinctive phenotypic changes, reflects a deterioration of function with age on a cellular level, and is believed to contribute to aging at an organismal level (Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961; McHugh and Gil, 2018). After entering senescence, cells do not necessarily die; on the contrary they become resistant to apoptosis (Campisi and d’Adda di Fagagna, 2007; Childs et al., 2014; Gorgoulis et al., 2019; Kirkland et al., 2017). Though viable, senescent cells undergo major gene expression changes, secreting a number of pro-inflammatory factors collectively termed the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) (Coppé et al., 2010). In this way, senescent cells can alter their tissue microenvironment and detrimentally affect the function of neighboring cells. Thus, just a few senescent cells could alter the activity of a far greater number of other cells either increasing the number of senescent cells or affecting the functions of neighboring cells. Increasing evidence suggests that senescent cells, which accumulate throughout the lifetime, may be major drivers of functional decline associated with aging. Thus far, senescent cells have been shown to actively drive a number of diseases, including atherosclerosis (Childs et al., 2016), cancer (Campisi and d’Adda di Fagagna, 2007) and AD (Bussian et al., 2018; Musi et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). Specifically, NFT bearing neurons extracted from post-mortem human tissue and the rTg4510 tauopathy mouse model tissues have transcriptomic profiles consistent with that of senescent cells (Musi et al., 2018). Oligodendrocyte precursor cells associated with Aβ plaques in brain tissue from AD patients or APP/PS1 mice also express senescence markers (Zhang et al., 2019). Additionally, pharmacological or pharmacogenetic elimination of senescent cells in two different tauopathy mouse models (rTg4510 and PS19) reduced NFT burden, attenuated brain volume loss and improved cognition and memory (Bussian et al., 2018; Musi et al., 2018). Pharmacological removal of senescent cells in a mouse model characterized by Aβ deposits also lessened Aβ plaque load and improved cognition (Zhang et al., 2019). These studies provide strong evidence that senescent cells play an important, but as yet understudied role in AD.

Evidence in humans suggests that chronic stress might accelerate aging by promoting cellular senescence. Women who report higher levels of stress have shorter telomeres in circulating immune cells and less telomerase activity than those with low reported levels of stress (Epel et al., 2004). Shortened telomeres are the classical trigger for cellular senescence (Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961), and higher stress levels are also associated with greater oxidative stress – an independent senescence promoter (Aschbacher et al., 2013). Low socioeconomic status and life stress have been associated with lower telomere length in some (Cherkas et al., 2006) but not all studies (Adams et al., 2007; Rentscher et al., 2019), and increased p16INK4 expression (Rentscher et al., 2019). Finally, a recent study demonstrated that lifelong psychosocial stress in mice shortened lifespan and increased expression of senescence markers such as p16 and p53 in several organs in subordinate individuals (Razzoli et al., 2018). These findings are particularly relevant in the context of human literature demonstrating that shorter telomeres increases risk for AD (Zhan et al., 2015). Together, these findings indicate that senescent cells may be key mediators in stress-induced promotion of AD, possibly through their secretion of proinflammatory factors and dysregulation of local tissue homeostasis.

Conclusion

Strong evidence indicates that stress contributes to the onset and progression of AD, one of the most common and devastating diseases associated with aging. Human literature indicates that high levels of stress increase risk for developing AD, and that stress can accelerate the age of onset in individuals genetically predisposed to develop the disease. We have gained important insights into the mechanisms that might underlie this association through rodent research, in which stress also consistently increases AD-related measures. In wildtype rodents, stress promotes expression of molecular markers implicated in the disease, including hyperphosphorylated tau, and APP and Aβ. It also reduces synapse number in key areas related to early stage AD. Stress in rodent models of AD results in exacerbated molecular and behavioral pathologies and can advance the age at which animals begin to show signs of decline. The molecular underpinnings of these effects have yet to be fully understood. Both glucocorticoids and CRH have been shown to play important, and connected roles in producing these AD-related changes (Figure 1).

An emerging mechanism to consider is the impact of stress on the aging and senescence process per se. Senescent cells can secrete pro-inflammatory factors, which have been shown to exacerbate pathological features of AD. They may be an important mediator of stress-induced neuroinflammation, which is appears to be an active driver of AD pathology. Age is the greatest risk factor for AD, and a long history of research supports the theory that stress impacts and accelerates the aging process. However, the aging aspect of AD is particularly challenging to study mechanistically, given the vast difference in lifespan between humans and rodent models as well as the resource burden of waiting for animals to age naturally before performing experiments. Most transgenic AD rodent models have shorter lifespans than their wildtype counterparts which is perhaps a double-edged sword for understanding the connection between aging and AD. On the one hand, the accelerated timeline towards frailty and death in these transgenic models of AD is an opportunity to study the relationship between AD pathophysiology and aging mechanisms. On the other, these interactions may not reflect mechanisms of normal aging and the dramatic phenotype of these models may obfuscate the roles of other physiological mechanisms. An important task for the future will be to identify if and how stress-induced cellular senescence in the brain and stress-induced AD neuropathology, and to develop interventions to ameliorate the current burden of AD on our society.

Acknowledgements

Supported by Minnesota Partnership for Biotechnology and Medical Genomics 2019 #18.04 and NIH/NIDDK R01DK117504 to A.B. C.L. received support from NIH/NIA T32 AG029796.

Abbreviations:

ACE angiotensin converting enzyme

ACTH Adrenocorticotropin hormone

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

APOE Apolipoprotein E

APP amyloid precursor protein

Aβ Amyloid β

BACE β site APP cleavage enzyme

BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor

CRH Corticotropin releasing hormone

CRHR1 corticotropin releasing hormone receptor 1

CUMS chronic unpredictable mild stress

GC Glucocorticoid

GR Glucocorticoid receptor

HPA hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis

MAP2 microtubule assembling protein 2

MAPT Microtubule associated protein tau

MCI Mild Cognitive Impairment

NFT Neurofibrillary tangle

PFC prefrontal cortex

PSD-95 postsynaptic density protein 95

PSEN presenilin

SAM Sympathetic-adrenal medullary

Figure 1. Diagram of stress-induced and aging-associated changes in Alzheimer`s disease (AD) neuropathological changes.

Table 1: Rodent studies on impact of stress on AD-related markers tau and Aβ.

Stress paradigm	Duration	Animal
model	Effect on tau
pathology	Effect on Aβ
pathology	Reference(s)	
Acute cold water	(4-10 min)	Wildtype rat	↑ phosphorylation	---	Korneyev et al., 1995 Korneyev, 1998 Okawa et al., 2003 Feng et al., 2005	
Acute multimodal stress	5h	3xTg-AD mouse	No change	↑ Aβ, ↑ACE	Baglietto-Vargas et al., 2015	
	30 min	Wildtype mouse, CRHR2 KO mouse	↑ phosphorylation (soluble and insoluble) up until 90min after acute stress	---	Rissman et al., 2007	
Restraint Stress	3h	Wildtype rat	---	↑ APP, ↑ Aβ	Ray et al., 2011	
chronic 30min/day; 14 days	Wildtype mouse, CRHR2 KO mice	↑ phosphorylation (soluble and insoluble) 24h after final stressor	---	Rissman et al., 2007	
1h/day; 14 days	Wildtype rat	↑ phosphorylation (soluble and insoluble); changes distribution	---	Yan et al., 2010	
2h/day; 16 days	Tg2576 mouse	↑ phosphorylation	↑ Aβ, ↑ plaque deposition	Lee et al., 2009	
2h/day; 7 days or 6h/day; 21 days	Wildtype rat	---	↑ APP	Rosa et al., 2005	
(6h/day; 5 days)	5XFAD mouse	---	↑ Aβ, ↑ APP, ↑ BACE1, ↑ plaque deposition in females but not males	Devi et al., 2010	
	(6h/day; 6 days/week; 4 weeks)	PS19 mouse	↑ phosphorylation, ↑ insoluble forms, ↑ aggregation	---	Carroll et al., 2011	
(6h/day; 6 days/week; 4 weeks)	Tg2576 mouse	---	↑ ACE	Carroll et al., 2011	
Chronic unpredictable mild stress	(3 weeks)	Wildtype rat	↑ phosphorylation	---	Yang et al., 2014	
(4 weeks)	Aged wildtype rat (14-15 months old)	↑ phosphorylation	⇑↑ ACE	AbdAlla et al., 2015 Sotiropoulos et al., 2011	
(6 weeks)	Wildtype rat	↑ phosphorylation	↑ Aβ40, ↑ BACE1	Briones et al., 2012	
Elevated open platform	10-20 days	Wildtype rat	---	↑ APP	Sayer et al., 2008	
Chronic isolation	3 months	Tg2576 mouse	---	↑ Aβ, ↑ plaque deposition, earlier age of onset for plaques	Kang et al., 2007	
5-8 months	Tg2576 mouse	---	↑ Aβ, ↑ plaque deposition	Dong et al., 2004	
Chronic mild social stress (random cage composition)	6h/day; 2-3 days / week; 6 weeks	3xTg-AD mouse	No change	↑ Aβ	Rothman et al., 2012	
Maternal separation	3h/day; PND 2-21	Wildtype rat	↑ phosphorylation	↑ Aβ,↑ Aβ40, ↑ Aβ42, ↑ BACE1	Solas et al., 2010 Martisova et al., 2013	
Postnatal reduced bedding material	PND2-9	APP/PS1 mouse	---	↑ Aβ, ↑ plaque deposition	Hoeijimakers et al., 2017	
PND2-P9	APP-V717I x Tau-P301L mouse	No change	↑ Aβ	Lesuis et al., 2016	
Immobilization Stress	10, 30, 60, 90 or 120 minutes	Wildtype mouse	↑ phosphorylation at 30 min; no change after other durations	—	FIlipicik et al., 2012	
10, 30, 60, 90 or 120 minutes	CRH KO mouse	No change	—	FIlipicik et al., 2012	
2h/day; 7 days	Wildtype mouse; CRH KO mouse	↑ phosphorylation	—	Kvetnansky et al., 2016	

Highlights

High stress levels increase risk of late-onset AD and accelerates age of onset for familial AD

Stress causes synaptic loss and neuroinflammation in brain regions affected by AD

In wildtype rodents, chronic stress promotes accumulation of tau and Aβ

In mouse models of AD, chronic stress intensifies molecular and cognitive pathology

Chronic stress increases markers of cellular senescence

Cellular senescence has been linked to AD

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

AbdAlla S , el Hakim A , Abdelbaset A , Elfaramawy Y , Quitterer U , 2015 Inhibition of ACE Retards Tau Hyperphosphorylation and Signs of Neuronal Degeneration in Aged Rats Subjected to Chronic Mild Stress. Biomed Res. Int 2015 , 1–10. https://doi.Org/10.1155/2015/917156
Adams J , Martin-Ruiz C , Pearce MS , White M , Parker L , von Zglinicki T , 2007 No association between socio-economic status and white blood cell telomere length. Aging Cell 6 , 125–128. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1474-9726.2006.00258.x 17156082
Admon R , Leykin D , Lubin G , Engert V , Andrews J , Pruessner J , Hendler T , 2013 Stress-induced reduction in hippocampal volume and connectivity with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex are related to maladaptive responses to stressful military service. Hum. Brain Mapp 34 , 2808–2816. 10.1002/hbm.22100 22807242
Alfarez DN , Karst H , Velzing EH , Joëls M , Krugers HJ , 2008 Opposite effects of glucocorticoid receptor activation on hippocampal CA1 dendritic complexity in chronically stressed and handled animals. Hippocampus 18 , 20–28. https://doi.Org/10.1002/hipo.20360 17708551
del C. Alonso A , Grundke-lqbal I , Iqbal K , 1996 Alzheimer’s disease hyperphosphorylated tau sequesters normal tau into tangles of filaments and disassembles microtubules. Nat. Med 2 , 783–787. 10.1038/nm0796-783 8673924
Alzheimer’s, A., 2014 2014 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s Dement. J. Alzheimer’s Assoc 10 , e47–e92.
Apple DM , Solano-Fonseca R , Kokovay E , 2017 Neurogenesis in the aging brain. Biochem. Pharmacol 141 , 77–85. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.BCP.2017.06.116 28625813
Arellano JI , Espinosa A , Fairén A , Yuste R , DeFelipe J , 2007 Non-synaptic dendritic spines in neocortex. Neuroscience 145 , 464–469. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.12.015 17240073
Arndt M , Kunert HJ , Saß H , Norra C , 2004 Kognitive storungen nach aksidenteller hoch dosierter kortisontherapie. Nervenarzt 75 , 904–907. 10.1007/s00115-003-1638-7 15378250
Arriagada PV , Growdon JH , Hedley-Whyte ET , Hyman BT , 1992 Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 42 , 631–9. https://doi.Org/10.1212/wnl.42.3.631 1549228
Aschbacher K , O’Donovan A , Wolkowitz OM , Dhabhar FS , Su Y , Epel E , 2013 Good stress, bad stress and oxidative stress: insights from anticipatory cortisol reactivity. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 , 1698–708. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.02.004 23490070
Baglietto-Vargas D , Chen Y , Suh D , Ager RR , Rodriguez-Ortiz CJ , Medeiros R , Myczek K , Green KN , Baram TZ , LaFerla FM , 2015 Short-term modern life-like stress exacerbates Aβ-pathology and synapse loss in 3xTg-AD mice. J. Neurochem 134 , 915–26. 10.1111/jnc.13195 26077803
Bartolomucci A , Carola V , Pascucci T , Puglisi-Allegra S , Cabib S , Lesch K-P , Parmigiani S , Palenza P , Gross C , 2010 Increased vulnerability to psychosocial stress in heterozygous serotonin transporter knockout mice. Dis. Model. Mech 4 , 459–470. https://doi.Org/10.1242/dmm.004614
Bartolomucci A , De Biurrun G , Czéh B , Van Kampen M , Fuchs E , 2002 Selective enhancement of spatial learning under chronic psychosocial stress. Eur. J. Neurosci 15 https://doi.Org/10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.02043.x
Bartolomucci Alessandro , De Biurrun G , Czéh B , Van Kampen M , Fuchs E , 2002 Selective enhancement of spatial learning under chronic psychosocial stress. Eur. J. Neurosci 15 , 1863–1866. https://doi.Org/10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.02043.x 12081667
Berger JM , Singh P , Khrimian L , Morgan DA , Chowdhury S , Arteaga-Solis E , Horvath TL , Domingos AI , Marsland AL , Kumar Yadav V , Rahmouni K , Gao X-B , Karsenty G , 2019 Mediation of the Acute Stress Response by the Skeleton. Cell Metab. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.012
Bernini G , Tricò D , 2016 Cushing’s Syndrome and Steroid Dementia. Recent Pat. Endocr. Metab. Immune Drug Discov 10 , 50–55. 10.2174/1872214810666160809113021 27515536
Bertram L , Tanzi RE , 2004 Alzheimer’s disease: one disorder, too many genes? Hum. Mol. Genet 13 , 135R–141. 10.1093/hmg/ddh077
Bhaskar K , Maphis N , Xu G , Varvel NH , Kokiko-Cochran ON , Weick JP , Staugaitis SM , Cardona A , Ransohoff RM , Herrup K , Lamb BT , 2014 Microglial derived tumor necrosis factor-α drives Alzheimer’s disease-related neuronal cell cycle events. Neurobiol. Dis 62 , 273–285. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.007 24141019
Bian Y , Pan Z , Hou Z , Huang C , Li W , Zhao B , 2012 Learning, memory, and glial cell changes following recovery from chronic unpredictable stress. Brain Res. Bull 88 , 471–476. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.04.008 22537595
Blasco MA , 2005 Telomeres and human disease: ageing, cancer and beyond. Nat. Rev. Genet 6 , 611–622. 10.1038/nrg1656 16136653
Bonanni L , Franciotti R , Martinotti G , Vellante F , Flacco ME , Di Giannantonio M , Thomas A , Onofrj M , 2018 Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Heralding the Onset of Semantic Frontotemporal Dementia. J. Alzheimers. Dis 63 , 203–215. https://doi.Org/10.3233/JAD-171134 29614666
Braak H , Alafuzoff I , Arzberger T , Kretzschmar H , Del Tredici K , 2006 Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry. Acta Neuropathol. 112 , 389–404. 10.1007/s00401-006-0127-z 16906426
Braak H , Braak E , 1991 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 82 , 239–259. 10.1007/BF00308809 1759558
Branca C , Wisely EV , Hartman LK , Caccamo A , Oddo S , 2014 Administration of a selective β2 adrenergic receptor antagonist exacerbates neuropathology and cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 35 , 2726–2735. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.06.011 25034342
Briones A , Gagno S , Martisova E , Dobarro M , Aisa B , Solas M , Tordera R , Ramírez M , 2012 Stress-induced anhedonia is associated with an increase in Alzheimer’s disease-related markers. Br. J. Pharmacol 165 , 897–907. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01602.x 21797840
Bussian TJ , Aziz A , Meyer CF , Swenson BL , van Deursen JM , Baker DJ , 2018 Clearance of senescent glial cells prevents tau-dependent pathology and cognitive decline. Nature 562 , 578–582. 10.1038/s41586-018-0543-y 30232451
Calcia MA , Bonsall DR , Bloomfield PS , Selvaraj S , Barichello T , Howes OD , 2016 Stress and neuroinflammation: A systematic review of the effects of stress on microglia and the implications for mental illness. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 10.1007/s00213-016-4218-9
Campisi J , d’Adda di Fagagna F , 2007 Cellular senescence: when bad things happen to good cells. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 8 , 729–740. 10.1038/nrm2233 17667954
Cannon WB , 1915 Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage: An account of recent researches into the function of emotional excitement. D Appleton &amp; Company, New York https://doi.Org/10.1037/10013-000
Carrero I , Gonzalo MR , Martin B , Sanz-Anquela JM , Arévalo-Serrano J , Gonzalo-Ruiz A , 2012 Oligomers of beta-amyloid protein (Aβ1-42) induce the activation of cyclooxygenase-2 in astrocytes via an interaction with interleukin-1beta, tumour necrosis factor-alpha, and a nuclear factor kappa-B mechanism in the rat brain. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.05.004
Carroll JC , Iba M , Bangasser DA , Valentino RJ , James MJ , Brunden KR , Lee VM-Y , Trojanowski JQ , 2011 Chronic stress exacerbates tau pathology, neurodegeneration, and cognitive performance through a corticotropin-releasing factor receptor-dependent mechanism in a transgenic mouse model of tauopathy. J. Neurosci 31 , 14436–49. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3836-11.2011 21976528
Cerqueira JJ , Mailliet F , Almeida OFX , Jay TM , Sousa N , 2007 The prefrontal cortex as a key target of the maladaptive response to stress. J. Neurosci 27 , 2781–7. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4372-06.2007 17360899
Chakrabarty P , Jansen-West K , Beccard A , Ceballos-Diaz C , Levites Y , Verbeeck C , Zubair AC , Dickson D , Golde TE , Das P , 2010 Massive gliosis induced by interleukin-6 suppresses Aβ deposition in vivo: evidence against inflammation as a driving force for amyloid deposition. FASEB J. 24 , 548–559. 10.1096/fj.09-141754 19825975
Charmandari E , Tsigos C , Chrousos G , 2005 Endocrinology of the stress response. Annu. Rev. Physiol 67 , 259–284. 10.1146/annurev.physiol.67.040403.120816 15709959
Chen Y , Dubé CM , Rice CJ , Baram TZ , 2008 Rapid Loss of Dendritic Spines after Stress Involves Derangement of Spine Dynamics by Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone. J. Neurosci 28 , 2903–2911. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0225-08.2008 18337421
Chen Y , Peng Y , Che P , Gannon M , Liu Y , Li L , Bu G , van Groen T , Jiao K , Wang Q , 2014 alpha(2A) adrenergic receptor promotes amyloidogenesis through disrupting APP-SorLA interaction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 111 , 17296–17301. https://doi.Org/10.1073/pnas.1409513111 [doi]25404298
Chen Y , Rex CS , Rice CJ , Dubé CM , Gall CM , Lynch G , Baram TZ , 2010 Correlated memory defects and hippocampal dendritic spine loss after acute stress involve corticotropin-releasing hormone signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 107 , 13123–8. 10.1073/pnas.1003825107 20615973
Cherkas LF , Aviv A , Valdes AM , Hunkin JL , Gardner JP , Surdulescu GL , Kimura M , Spector TD , 2006 The effects of social status on biological aging as measured by white-blood-cell telomere length. Aging Cell 5 , 361–365. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1474-9726.2006.00222.x 16856882
Childs BG , Baker DJ , Kirkland JL , Campisi J , van Deursen JM , 2014 Senescence and apoptosis: dueling or complementary cell fates? EMBO Rep. 15 , 1139–53. https://doi.Org/10.15252/embr.201439245 25312810
Childs BG , Baker DJ , Wijshake T , Conover CA , Campisi J , van Deursen JM , 2016 Senescent intimal foam cells are deleterious at all stages of atherosclerosis. Science 354 , 472–477. https://doi.Org/10.1126/science.aaf6659 27789842
Cho K , Jang YJ , Lee SJ , Jeon YN , Shim YL , Lee JY , Lim DS , Kim DH , Yoon SY , 2020 TLQP-21 mediated activation of microglial BV2 cells promotes clearance of extracellular fibril amyloid-β. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 524 , 764–771. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.111 32037089
Chong Y , 1997 Effect of a carboxy-terminal fragment of the Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein on expression of proinflammatory cytokines in rat glial cells. Life Sci. 61 , 2323–33. https://doi.Org/10.1016/s0024-3205(97)00936-3 9408055
Coppé J-P , Desprez P-Y , Krtolica A , Campisi J , 2010 The senescence-associated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. Annu. Rev. Pathol 5 , 99–118. https://doi.Org/10.1146/annurev-pathol-121808-102144 20078217
Cribbs DH , Berchtold NC , Perreau V , Coleman PD , Rogers J , Tenner AJ , Cotman CW , 2012 Extensive innate immune gene activation accompanies brain aging, increasing vulnerability to cognitive decline and neurodegeneration: A microarray study. J. Neuroinflammation 9 , 179 10.1186/1742-2094-9-179 22824372
Crotti A , Glass CK , 2015 The choreography of neuroinflammation in Huntington’s disease. Trends Immunol. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.it.2015.04.007
Crowe M , Andel R , Pedersen NL , Gatz M , 2007 Do Work-related Stress and Reactivity to Stress Predict Dementia More Than 30 Years Later? Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 21 , 205–209. https://doi.Org/10.1097/WAD.0b013e31811ec10a 17804952
Csernansky JG , Dong H , Fagan AM , Wang L , Xiong C , Holtzman DM , Morris JC , 2006 Plasma Cortisol and Progression of Dementia in Subjects With Alzheimer-Type Dementia. Am. J. Psychiatry 163 , 2164–2169. https://doi.Org/10.1176/ajp.2006.163.12.2164 17151169
Czeh B , Michaelis T , Watanabe T , Frahm J , de Biurrun G , van Kampen M , Bartolomucci A , Fuchs E , 2001 Stress-induced changes in cerebral metabolites, hippocampal volume, and cell proliferation are prevented by antidepressant treatment with tianeptine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 98 , 12796–12801. 10.1073/pnas.211427898 11675510
Davies CA , Mann DM , Sumpter PQ , Yates PO , 1987 A quantitative morphometric analysis of the neuronal and synaptic content of the frontal and temporal cortex in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurol. Sci 78 , 151–64. 10.1016/0022-510x(87)90057-8 3572454
Davis KL , Davis BM , Greenwald BS , Mohs RC , Mathé AA , Johns CA , Horvath TB , 1986 Cortisol and Alzheimer’s disease, I: Basal studies. Am. J. Psychiatry 143 , 300–305. https://doi.Org/10.1176/ajp.143.3.300 3953862
Devi L , Alldred MJ , Ginsberg SD , Ohno M , 2010 Sex- and brain region-specific acceleration of β-amyloidogenesis following behavioral stress in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Brain 3 , 34 10.1186/1756-6606-3-34 21059265
Dhabhar FS , Malarkey WB , Neri E , McEwen BS , 2012 Stress-induced redistribution of immune cells-From barracks to boulevards to battlefields: A tale of three hormones - Curt Richter Award Winner. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 , 1345–1368. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.05.008 22727761
Dimsdale JE , 2008 Psychological stress and cardiovascular disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 51 , 1237–46. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.jacc.2007.12.024 18371552
Dobarro M , Gerenu G , Ramírez MJ , 2013a Propranolol reduces cognitive deficits, amyloid and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol 16 , 2245–2257. 10.1017/S1461145713000631 23768694
Dobarro M , Orejana L , Aguirre N , Ramírez MJ , 2013b Propranolol restores cognitive deficits and improves amyloid and Tau pathologies in a senescence-accelerated mouse model. Neuropharmacology 64 , 137–144. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.06.047 22824191
Dong H , Goico B , Martin M , Csernansky CA , Bertchume A , Csernansky JG , 2004 Modulation of hippocampal cell proliferation, memory, and amyloid plaque deposition in APPsw (Tg2576) mutant mice by isolation stress. Neuroscience 127 , 601–609. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.05.040 15283960
Doolen S , Cook J , Riedl M , Kitto K , Kohsaka S , Honda CN , Fairbanks CA , Taylor BK , Vulchanova L , 2017 Complement 3a receptor in dorsal horn microglia mediates pronociceptive neuropeptide signaling. Glia 65 , 1976–1989. https://doi.Org/10.1002/glia.23208 28850719
Egan MF , Kost J , Tariot PN , Aisen PS , Cummings JL , Vellas B , Sur C , Mukai Y , Voss T , Furtek C , Mahoney E , Harper Mozley L , Vandenberghe R , Mo Y , Michelson D , 2018 Randomized Trial of Verubecestat for Mild-to-Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med 378 , 1691–1703. 10.1056/NEJMoa1706441 29719179
El Gaamouch F , Audrain M , Lin WJ , Beckmann N , Jiang C , Hariharan S , Heeger PS , Schadt EE , Gandy S , Ehrlich ME , Salton SR , 2020 VGF-derived peptide TLQP-21 modulates microglial function through C3aR1 signaling pathways and reduces neuropathology in 5xFAD mice. Mol. Neurodegener 15 , 1–19. https://doi.Org/10.1186/s13024-020-0357-x 31964406
Epel ES , Blackburn EH , Lin J , Dhabhar FS , Adler NE , Morrow JD , Cawthon RM , 2004 Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 101 , 17312–5. 10.1073/pnas.0407162101 15574496
Feng Q , Cheng B , Yang R , Sun F-Y , Zhu C-Q , 2005 Dynamic changes of phosphorylated tau in mouse hippocampus after cold water stress. Neurosci. Lett 388 , 13–16. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neulet.2005.06.022 16005567
Filipcik P , Novak P , Mravec B , Ondicova K , Krajciova G , Novak M , Kvetnansky R , 2012 Tau protein phosphorylation in diverse brain areas of normal and CRH deficient mice: Up-regulation by stress. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol 32 , 837–845. https://doi.Org/10.1007/s10571-011-9788-9 22222439
Frank MG , Baratta MV , Sprunger DB , Watkins LR , Maier SF , 2007 Microglia serve as a neuroimmune substrate for stress-induced potentiation of CNS pro-inflammatory cytokine responses. Brain. Behav. Immun 21 , 47–59. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbi.2006.03.005 16647243
Frank MG , Barrientos RM , Biedenkapp JC , Rudy JW , Watkins LR , Maier SF , 2006 mRNA up-regulation of MHC II and pivotal pro-inflammatory genes in normal brain aging. Neurobiol. Aging 27 , 717–722. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.03.013 15890435
Gallagher M , Nicolle MM , 1993 Animal models of normal aging: Relationship between cognitive decline and markers in hippocampal circuitry. Behav. Brain Res 57 , 155–162. https://doi.Org/10.1016/0166-4328(93)90131-9 7906946
Games D , Adams D , Alessandrini R , Barbour R , Borthelette P , Blackwell C , Carr T , Clemens J , Donaldson T , Gillespie F , Guido T , Hagopian S , Johnson-Wood K , Khan K , Lee M , Leibowitz P , Lieberburg I , Little S , Masliah E , McConlogue L , Montoya-Zavala M , Mucke L , Paganini L , Penniman E , Power M , Schenk D , Seubert P , Snyder B , Soriano F , Tan H , Vitale J , Wadsworth S , Wolozin B , Zhao J , 1995 Alzheimer-type neuropathology in transgenic mice overexpressing V717F β-amyloid precursor protein. Nature 373 , 523–527. 10.1038/373523a0 7845465
Gerritsen L , Wang HX , Reynolds CA , Fratiglioni L , Gatz M , Pedersen NL , 2017 Influence of Negative Life Events and Widowhood on Risk for Dementia. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 25 , 766–778. 10.1016/j.jagp.2017.02.009 28433549
Giovanoli S , Engler H , Engler A , Richetto J , Voget M , Willi R , Winter C , Riva MA , Mortensen PB , Schedlowski M , Meyer U , 2013 Stress in puberty unmasks latent neuropathological consequences of prenatal immune activation in mice. Science (80-.). https://doi.Org/10.1126/science.1228261
Gorgoulis V , Adams PD , Alimonti A , Bennett DC , Bischof O , Bishop C , Campisi J , Collado M , Evangelou K , Ferbeyre G , Gil J , Hara E , Krizhanovsky V , Jurk D , Maier AB , Narita M , Niedernhofer L , Passos JF , Robbins PD , Schmitt CA , Sedivy J , Vougas K , von Zglinicki T , Zhou D , Serrano M , Demaria M , 2019 Cellular Senescence: Defining a Path Forward. Cell. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005
Gould E , Tanapat P , McEwen BS , Flugge G , Fuchs E , 1998 Proliferation of granule cell precursors in the dentate gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 95 , 3168–3171. https://doi.Org/10.1073/pnas.95.6.3168 9501234
Green KN , Billings LM , Roozendaal B , McGaugh JL , LaFerla FM , 2006 Glucocorticoids increase amyloid-β and tau pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 26 , 9047–9056. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2797-06.2006 16943563
Griffin WST , Stanley LC , Ling C , White L , MacLeod V , Perrot LJ , White CL , Araoz C , 1989 Brain interleukin 1 and S-100 immunoreactivity are elevated in Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 86 , 7611–7615. 10.1073/pnas.86.19.7611 2529544
Grudzien A , Shaw P , Weintraub S , Bigio E , Mash DC , Mesulam MM , 2007 Locus coeruleus neurofibrillary degeneration in aging, mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 28 , 327–335. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.02.007 16574280
Gustke N , Steiner B , Mandelkow EM , Biernat J , Meyer HE , Goedert M , Mandelkow E , 1992 The Alzheimer-like phosphorylation of tau protein reduces microtubule binding and involves Ser-Pro and Thr-Pro motifs. FEBS Lett. 307 , 199–205.1644173
Hajjar I , Keown M , Frost B , 2005 Antihypertensive Agents for Aging Patients Who Are at Risk for Cognitive Dysfunction.
Hanke ML , Powell ND , Stiner LM , Bailey MT , Sheridan JF , 2012 Beta adrenergic blockade decreases the immunomodulatory effects of social disruption stress. Brain. Behav. Immun 26 , 1150–1159. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbi.2012.07.011 22841997
Harris KM , 1999 Structure, development, and plasticity of dendritic spines. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 9 , 343–8.10395574
Hayflick L , Moorhead PS , 1961 The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains. Exp. Cell Res 25 , 585–621. 10.1016/0014-4827(61)90192-6 13905658
Heidt T , Sager HB , Courties G , Dutta P , Iwamoto Y , Zaltsman A , Von Zur Muhlen C , Bode C , Fricchione GL , Denninger J , Lin CP , Vinegoni C , Libby P , Swirski FK , Weissleder R , Nahrendorf M , 2014 Chronic variable stress activates hematopoietic stem cells. Nat. Med 20 , 754–758. 10.1038/nm.3589 24952646
Heine VM , Maslam S , Joëls M , Lucassen PJ , 2004 Increased P27KIP1 protein expression in the dentate gyrus of chronically stressed rats indicates G1 arrest involvement. Neuroscience 129 , 593–601. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.NEUROSCIENCE.2004.07.048 15541881
Heine VM , Zareno J , Maslam S , Joëls M , Lucassen PJ , 2005 Chronic stress in the adult dentate gyrus reduces cell proliferation near the vasculature and VEGF and Flk-1 protein expression. Eur. J. Neurosci 21 , 1304–1314. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.03951.x 15813940
Hemmerle AM , Herman JP , Seroogy KB , 2012 Stress, depression and Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol 233 , 79–86. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.EXPNEUROL.2011.09.035 22001159
Heneka MT , Ramanathan M , Jacobs AH , Dumitrescu-Ozimek L , Bilkei-Gorzo A , Debeir T , Sastre M , Galldiks N , Zimmer A , Hoehn M , Heiss WD , Klockgether T , Staufenbiel M , 2006 Locus ceruleus degeneration promotes Alzheimer pathogenesis in amyloid precursor protein 23 transgenic mice. J. Neurosci 26 , 1343–1354. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4236-05.2006 16452658
Hernández F , Cuadros R , Ollá I , García C , Ferrer I , Perry G , Avila J , 2019 Differences in structure and function between human and murine tau. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Mol. Basis Dis 1865 , 2024–2030. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.BBADIS.2018.08.010 31189515
Herndon JG , Moss MB , Rosene DL , Killiany RJ , 1997 Patterns of cognitive decline in aged rhesus monkeys. Behav. Brain Res 87 , 25–34. 10.1016/S0166-4328(96)02256-5 9331471
Herrero MT , Estrada C , Maatouk L , Vyas S , 2015 Inflammation in Parkinson’s disease: Role of glucocorticoids. Front. Neuroanat 10.3389/fnana.2015.00032
Hickman SE , Allison EK , El Khoury J , 2008 Microglial dysfunction and defective β-amyloid clearance pathways in aging alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Neurosci 28 , 8354–8360. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0616-08.2008 18701698
Hoeijmakers L , Ruigrok SR , Amelianchik A , Ivan D , van Dam A-M , Lucassen PJ , Korosi A , 2017 Early-life stress lastingly alters the neuroinflammatory response to amyloid pathology in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Brain. Behav. Immun 63 , 160–175. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbi.2016.12.023 28027926
Hoffman LB , Schmeidler J , Lesser GT , Beeri MS , Purohit DP , Grossman HT , Haroutunian V , 2009 Less Alzheimer disease neuropathology in medicated hypertensive than nonhypertensive persons. Neurology 72 , 1720–1726. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000345881.82856.d5 19228583
Hong S , Beja-Glasser VF , Nfonoyim BM , Frouin A , Li S , Ramakrishnan S , Merry KM , Shi Q , Rosenthal A , Barres BA , Lemere CA , Selkoe DJ , Stevens B , 2016 Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science (80-.). 352 , 712–716. 10.1126/science.aad8373
Honig LS , Kang MS , Schupf N , Lee JH , Mayeux R , 2012 Association of Shorter Leukocyte Telomere Repeat Length With Dementia and Mortality. Arch. Neurol 69 , 1332 https://doi.Org/10.1001/archneurol.2012.1541 22825311
Hsiao K , Chapman P , Nilsen S , Eckman C , Harigaya Y , Younkin S , Yang F , Cole G , 1996 Correlative memory deficits, Abeta elevation, and amyloid plaques in transgenic mice. Science 274 , 99–102. 10.1126/science.274.5284.99 8810256
Jardanhazi-Kurutz D , Kummer MP , Terwel D , Vogel K , Dyrks T , Thiele A , Heneka MT , 2010 Induced LC degeneration in APP/PS1 transgenic mice accelerates early cerebral amyloidosis and cognitive deficits. Neurochem. Int 57 , 375–382. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuint.2010.02.001 20144675
Johnston D , 2000 A Series of Cases of Dementia Presenting with PTSD Symptoms in World War II Combat Veterans. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 48 , 70–72. 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.tb03032.x 10642025
Kagan J , 2016 An Overly Permissive Extension. Perspect. Psychol. Sci 11 , 442–450. https://doi.Org/10.1177/1745691616635593 27474132
Kalback W , Esh C , Castaño EM , Rahman A , Kokjohn T , Luehrs DC , Sue L , Cisneros R , Gerber F , Richardson C , Bohrmann B , Walker DG , Beach TG , Roher AE , 2004 Atherosclerosis, vascular amyloidosis and brain hypoperfusion in the pathogenesis of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol. Res 26 , 525–539. https://doi.Org/10.1179/016164104225017668 15265270
Kalinin S , Gavrilyuk V , Polak PE , Vasser R , Zhao J , Heneka MT , Feinstein DL , 2007 Noradrenaline deficiency in brain increases β-amyloid plaque burden in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 28 , 1206–1214. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.06.003 16837104
Kalinin S , Wllard SL , Shively CA , Kaplan JR , Register TC , Jorgensen MJ , Polak PE , Rubinstein I , Feinstein DL , 2013 Development of amyloid burden in African Green monkeys. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 2361–9. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.03.023 23601810
Kang J-E , Cirrito JR , Dong H , Csernansky JG , Holtzman DM , 2007 Acute stress increases interstitial fluid amyloid-beta via corticotropin-releasing factor and neuronal activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 104 , 10673–8. https://doi.Org/10.1073/pnas.0700148104 17551018
Kelly SC , He B , Perez SE , Ginsberg SD , Mufson EJ , Counts SE , 2017 Locus coeruleus cellular and molecular pathology during the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 5 , 8 10.1186/s40478-017-0411-2 28109312
Khachaturian AS , 2006 Antihypertensive Medication Use and Incident Alzheimer Disease. Arch. Neurol 63 , 686 https://doi.Org/10.1001/archneur.63.5.noc60013 16533956
Killin LOJ , Starr JM , Shiue IJ , Russ TC , 2016 Environmental risk factors for dementia: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr. 16 , 175 10.1186/s12877-016-0342-y 27729011
Kirkland JL , Tchkonia T , Zhu Y , Niedernhofer LJ , Robbins PD , 2017 The Clinical Potential of Senolytic Drugs. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 65 , 2297–2301. 10.1111/jgs.14969 28869295
Kojo A , Yamada K , Kubo K. ya , Yamashita A , Yamamoto T , 2010 Occlusal disharmony in mice transiently activates microglia in hippocampal CA1 region but not in dentate gyrus. Tohoku J. Exp. Med 221 , 237–243. 10.1620/tjem.221.237 20581431
Koolhaas JM , Bartolomucci A , Buwalda B , de Boer SF , Flügge G , Korte SM , Meerlo P , Murison R , Olivier B , Palanza P , Richter-Levin G , Sgoifo A , Steimer T , Stiedl O , van Dijk G , Wohr M , Fuchs E , 2011 Stress revisited: A critical evaluation of the stress concept. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 35 , 1291–1301. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2011.02.003 21316391
Kopeikina KJ , Hyman BT , Spires-Jones TL , 2012 Soluble forms of tau are toxic in Alzheimer’s disease. Transl. Neurosci 3 , 223–233. 10.2478/s13380-012-0032-y 23029602
Korneyev A , Binder L , Bernardis J , 1995 Rapid reversible phosphorylation of rat brain tau proteins in response to cold water stress. Neurosci. Lett 191 , 19–22.7659281
Korneyev AY , 1998 Stress-Induced Tau Phosphorylation in Mouse Strains with Different Brain Erk 1 + 2 Immunoreactivity. Neurochem. Res 23 , 1539–1543. https://doi.Org/10.1023/A:1020980004539 9821159
Krugers HJ , Lucassen P , Karst H , Joels M , 2010 Chronic stress effects on hippocampal structure and synaptic function: relevance for depression and normalization by antiglucocorticoid treatment. Front. Synaptic Neurosci 2 , 24 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00024 21423510
Kvetnansky R , Novak P , Vargovic P , Lejavova K , Horvathova L , Ondicova K , Manz G , Filipcik P , Novak M , Mravec B , 2016 Exaggerated phosphorylation of brain tau protein in CRH KO mice exposed to repeated immobilization stress. Stress 19 , 395–405. https://doi.Org/10.1080/10253890.2016.1183119 27484105
Latimer CS , Shively CA , Keene CD , Jorgensen MJ , Andrews RN , Register TC , Montine TJ , Wilson AM , Neth BJ , Mintz A , Maldjian JA , Whitlow CT , Kaplan JR , Craft S , 2019 A nonhuman primate model of early Alzheimer’s disease pathologic change: Implications for disease pathogenesis. Alzheimers. Dement 15 , 93–105. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.jalz.2018.06.3057 30467082
Lee K-W , Kim J-B , Seo J-S , Kim T-K , Im J-Y , Baek I-S , Kim K-S , Lee J-K , Han P-L , 2009 Behavioral stress accelerates plaque pathogenesis in the brain of Tg2576 mice via generation of metabolic oxidative stress. J. Neurochem 108 , 165–175. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05769.x 19012747
Lesuis SL , Maurin H , Borghgraef P , Lucassen PJ , Van Leuven F , Krugers HJ , 2016 Positive and negative early life experiences differentially modulate long term survival and amyloid protein levels in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Oncotarget 7 , 39118–39135. https://doi.Org/10.18632/oncotarget.9776 27259247
Leszek J , Barreto G,E , G∣siorowski K , Koutsouraki E , Ávila-Rodrigues M , Aliev G , 2016 Inflammatory Mechanisms and Oxidative Stress as Key Factors Responsible for Progression of Neurodegeneration: Role of Brain Innate Immune System. CNS Neurol. Disord. - Drug Targets 15 , 329–336. 10.2174/1871527315666160202125914 26831258
Liaoi YF , Wang BJ , Cheng HT , Kuo LH , Wolfe MS , 2004 Tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-1β, and interferon-γ stimulate γ-secretase-mediated cleavage of amyloid precursor protein through a JNK-dependent MAPK pathway. J. Biol. Chem 279 , 49523–49532. https://doi.Org/10.1074/jbc.M402034200 15347683
Litvinchuk A , Wan YW , Swartzlander DB , Chen F , Cole A , Propson NE , Wang Q , Zhang B , Liu Z , Zheng H , 2018 Complement C3aR Inactivation Attenuates Tau Pathology and Reverses an Immune Network Deregulated in Tauopathy Models and Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron 100 , 1337–1353.e5. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.031 30415998
Lowy MT , Gault L , Yamamoto BK , 1993 Rapid Communication: Adrenalectomy Attenuates Stress-Induced Elevations in Extracellular Glutamate Concentrations in the Hippocampus. J. Neurochem 61 , 1957–1960. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.1993.tb09839.x 7901339
Luchsinger JA , Reitz C , Honig LS , Tang MX , Shea S , Mayeux R , 2005 Aggregation of vascular risk factors and risk of incident Alzheimer disease. Neurology 65 , 545–551. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000172914.08967.dc 16116114
Magariños AM , McEwen BS , 1995 Stress-induced atrophy of apical dendrites of hippocampal CA3c neurons: involvement of glucocorticoid secretion and excitatory amino acid receptors. Neuroscience 69 , 89–98. 10.1016/0306-4522(95)00259-l 8637636
Magariños AM , McEwen BS , Flügge G , Fuchs E , 1996 Chronic psychosocial stress causes apical dendritic atrophy of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons in subordinate tree shrews. J. Neurosci 16 , 3534–40.8627386
Mandelkow E-M , Mandelkow E , 2012 Biochemistry and cell biology of tau protein in neurofibrillary degeneration. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 , a006247 https://doi.Org/10.1101/cshperspect.a006247 22762014
Maras PM , Molet J , Chen Y , Rice C , Ji SG , Solodkin A , Baram TZ , 2014 Preferential loss of dorsal-hippocampus synapses underlies memory impairments provoked by short, multimodal stress. Mol. Psychiatry 19 , 811–822. 10.1038/mp.2014.12 24589888
Marmot M , 2020 Health equity in England: The Marmot review 10 years on. BMJ 368 https://doi.Org/10.1136/bmj.m693
Marmot MG , Stansfeld S , Patel C , North F , Head J , White I , Brunner E , Feeney A , Marmot MG , Smith GD , 1991 Health inequalities among British civil servants: the Whitehall II study. Lancet 337 , 1387–1393. 10.1016/0140-6736(91)93068-K 1674771
Martisova E , Aisa B , Guerenu G , Ramírez MJ , 2013 Effects of early maternal separation on biobehavioral and neuropathological markers of Alzheimer’s disease in adult male rats. Curr. Alzheimer Res 10 , 420–32.23305081
Masliah E , Mallory M , Alford M , DeTeresa R , Hansen LA , McKeel DW , Morris JC , 2001 Altered expression of synaptic proteins occurs early during progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 56 , 127–9. https://doi.Org/10.1212/wnl.56.1.127 11148253
Masurkar AV , 2018 Towards a circuit-level understanding of hippocampal CA1 dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease across anatomical axes. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. Park 8 .
McEwen BS , 1998 Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress Mediators. N. Engl. J. Med 338 , 171–179. 10.1056/NEJM199801153380307 9428819
McEwen BS , Weiss JM , Schwartz LS , 1968 Selective retention of corticosterone by limbic structures in rat brain [18]. Nature. 10.1038/220911a0
McHugh D , Gil J , 2018 Senescence and aging: Causes, consequences, and therapeutic avenues. J. Cell Biol 217 , 65–77. 10.1083/jcb.201708092 29114066
Mejfa S , Giraldo M ,; Pineda D , Ardila A , Lopera Francisco , Mejia S , Giraldo M , Pineda D , Lopera F , 2003 Nongenetic Factors as Modifiers of the Age of Onset of Familial Alzheimer’s Disease, International Psychogeriah-ics.
Mo C , Renoir T , Hannan AJ , 2014 Effects of chronic stress on the onset and progression of Huntington’s disease in transgenic mice. Neurobiol. Dis 71 , 81–94. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.07.008 25088714
Moceri VM , Kukull WA , Emanual I , Van Belle G , Starr JR , Schellenberg GD , McCormick WC , Bowen JD , Teri L , Larson EB , 2001 Using census data and birth certificates to reconstruct the early-life socioeconomic environment and the relation to the development of Alzheimer’s disease. Epidemiology 12 , 383–389. https://doi.Org/10.1097/00001648-200107000-00007 11416775
Morilak DA , Barrera G , Echevarria DJ , Garcia AS , Hernandez A , Ma S , Petre CO , 2005 Role of brain norepinephrine in the behavioral response to stress. Prog. NeuroPsychopharmacology Biol. Psychiatry https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2005.08.007
Morris JC , 2005 Early-stage and preclinical Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 19 , 163–5.16118535
Morris JC , Storandt M , Miller JP , McKeel DW , Price JL , Rubin EH , Berg L , 2001 Mild Cognitive Impairment Represents Early-Stage Alzheimer Disease. Arch. Neurol 58 https://doi.Org/10.1001/archneur.58.3.397
Morris MC , 2009 The role of nutrition in Alzheimer’s disease: epidemiological evidence. Eur. J. Neurol 16 Suppl 1 , 1–7. https://doi.Org/10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02735.x
Mullane K , Williams M , 2013 Alzheimer’s therapeutics: Continued clinical failures question the validity of the amyloid hypothesis—but what lies beyond? Biochem. Pharmacol 85 , 289–305. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.BCP.2012.11.014 23178653
Murdock KW , LeRoy AS , Lacourt TE , Duke DC , Heijnen CJ , Fagundes CP , 2016 Executive functioning and diabetes: The role of anxious arousal and inflammation. Psychoneuroendocrinology 71 , 102–9. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2016.05.006 27261922
Musi N , Valentine JM , Sickora KR , Baeuerle E , Thompson CS , Shen Q , Orr ME , 2018 Tau protein aggregation is associated with cellular senescence in the brain. Aging Cell e12840 10.1111/acel.12840 30126037
Mychasiuk R , Gibb R , Kolb B , 2012 Prenatal stress alters dendritic morphology and synaptic connectivity in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of developing offspring. Synapse 66 , 308–314. 10.1002/syn.21512 22121047
Nederhof E , Schmidt MV , 2012 Mismatch or cumulative stress: Toward an integrated hypothesis of programming effects. Physiol. Behav 106 , 691–700. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.12.008 22210393
Nelson PT , Alafuzoff I , Bigio EH , Bouras C , Braak H , Cairns NJ , Castellani RJ , Crain BJ , Davies P , Del Tredici K , Duyckaerts C , Frosch MP , Haroutunian V , Hof PR , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Iwatsubo T , Jellinger KA , Jicha GA , Kövari E , Kukull WA , Leverenz JB , Love S , Mackenzie IR , Mann DM , Masliah E , McKee AC , Montine TJ , Morris JC , Schneider JA , Sonnen JA , Thal DR , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Wisniewski T , Woltjer RL , Beach TG , 2012 Correlation of Alzheimer Disease Neuropathologic Changes With Cognitive Status: A Review of the Literature. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 71 , 362–381. https://doi.Org/10.1097/NEN.0b013e31825018f7 22487856
Ni Y , Zhao X , Bao G , Zou L , Teng L , Wang Z , Song M , Xiong J , Bai Y , Pei G , 2006 Activation of β2-adrenergic receptor stimulates γ-secretase activity and accelerates amyloid plaque formation. Nat. Med 12 , 1390–1396. 10.1038/nm1485 17115048
O’brien RJ , Wong PC , 2011 Amyloid Precursor Protein Processing and Alzheimer’s Disease. https://doi.Org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613
Oakley H , Cole SL , Logan S , Maus E , Shao P , Craft J , Guillozet-Bongaarts A , Ohno M , Disterhoft J , Van Eldik L , Berry R , Vassar R , 2006 Intraneuronal beta-Amyloid Aggregates, Neurodegeneration, and Neuron Loss in Transgenic Mice with Five Familial Alzheimer’s Disease Mutations: Potential Factors in Amyloid Plaque Formation. J. Neurosci 26 , 10129–10140. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006 17021169
Oddo S , Vasilevko V , Caccamo A , Kitazawa M , Cribbs DH , LaFerla FM , 2006 Reduction of soluble Abeta and tau, but not soluble Abeta alone, ameliorates cognitive decline in transgenic mice with plaques and tangles. J. Biol. Chem 281 , 39413–23. 10.1074/jbc.M608485200 17056594
Oikawa N , Ogino K , Masumoto T , Yamaguchi H , Yanagisawa K , 2010 Gender effect on the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain of locus-ceruleus-injured APP-transgenic mouse. Neurosci. Lett 468 , 243–247. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neulet.2009.11.005 19900506
Okawa Y , Ishiguro K , Fujita SC , 2003 Stress-induced hyperphosphorylation of tau in the mouse brain. FEBS Lett. 535 , 183–9.12560101
Oppong E , Cato ACB , 2015 Effects of Glucocorticoids in the Immune System. Springer, New York, NY, pp. 217–233. 10.1007/978-1-4939-2895-8_9
Pacák K , Palkovits M , 2001 Stressor Specificity of Central Neuroendocrine Responses: Implications for Stress-Related Disorders. Endocr. Rev 22 , 502–548. https://doi.Org/10.1210/edrv.22.4.0436 11493581
Padurariu M , Ciobica A , Mavroudis I , Fotiou D , Baloyannis S , 2012 Hippocampal neuronal loss in the CA1 and CA3 areas of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Psychiatr. Danub 24 , 152–8.22706413
Pariante CM , Lightman SL , 2008 The HPA axis in major depression: classical theories and new developments. Trends Neurosci. 31 , 464–468. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.TINS.2008.06.006 18675469
Peavy GM , Jacobson MW , Salmon DP , Gamst AC , Patterson TL , Goldman S , Mills PJ , Khandrika S , Galasko D , 2012 The influence of chronic stress on dementia-related diagnostic change in older adults. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 26 , 260–6. https://doi.Org/10.1097/WAD.0b013e3182389a9c 22037597
Pereira AC , Gray JD , Kogan JF , Davidson RL , Rubin TG , Okamoto M , Morrison JH , McEwen BS , 2017 Age and Alzheimer’s disease gene expression profiles reversed by the glutamate modulator riluzole. Mol. Psychiatry 22 , 296–305. https://doi.Org/10.1038/mp.2016.33 27021815
Pereira AC , Lambert HK , Grossman YS , Dumitriu D , Waldman R , Jannetty SK , Calakos K , Janssen WG , McEwen BS , Morrison JH , 2014 Glutamatergic regulation prevents hippocampal-dependent age-related cognitive decline through dendritic spine clustering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 111 , 18733–18738. 10.1073/pnas.1421285111 25512503
Peskind ER , Wilkinson CW , Petrie EC , Schellenberg GD , Raskind MA , 2001 Increased CSF cortisol in AD is a function of APOE genotype. Neurology 56 , 1094–1098. https://doi.Org/10.1212/WNL.56.8.1094 11320185
Powell ND , Sloan EK , Bailey MT , Arevalo JMG , Miller GE , Chen E , Kobor MS , Reader BF , Sheridan JF , Cole SW , 2013 Social stress up-regulates inflammatory gene expression in the leukocyte transcriptome via β-adrenergic induction of myelopoiesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 110 , 16574–9. 10.1073/pnas.1310655110 24062448
Prather AA , Gurfein B , Moran P , Daubenmier J , Acree M , Bacchetti P , Sinclair E , Lin J , Blackburn E , Hecht FM , Epel ES , 2015 Tired telomeres: Poor global sleep quality, perceived stress, and telomere length in immune cell subsets in obese men and women. Brain. Behav. Immun 47 , 155–162. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbi.2014.12.011 25535858
Price JL , Ko AI , Wade MJ , Tsou SK , McKeel DW , Morris JC , 2001 Neuron Number in the Entorhinal Cortex and CA1 in Preclinical Alzheimer Disease. Arch. Neurol 58 , 1395 10.1001/archneur.58.9.1395 11559310
Quintanilla RA , Orellana DI , González-Billault C , Maccioni RB , 2004 Interleukin-6 induces Alzheimer-type phosphorylation of tau protein by deregulating the cdk5/p35 pathway. Exp. Cell Res 295 , 245–257. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.01.002 15051507
Radley JJ , Anderson RM , Hamilton BA , Alcock JA , Romig-Martin SA , 2013 Chronic stress-induced alterations of dendritic spine subtypes predict functional decrements in an hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal-inhibitory prefrontal circuit. J. Neurosci 33 , 14379–91. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0287-13.2013 24005291
Räihä I , Kaprio J , Koskenvuo M , Rajala T , Sourander L , 1998 Environmental differences in twin pairs discordant for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 65 , 785–787. https://doi.Org/10.1136/jnnp.65.5.785 9810959
Ray B , Gaskins DL , Sajdyk TJ , Spence JP , Fitz SD , Shekhar A , Lahiri DK , 2011 Restraint stress and repeated corticotrophin-releasing factor receptor activation in the amygdala both increase amyloid-β precursor protein and amyloid-β peptide but have divergent effects on brain-derived neurotrophic factor and pre-synaptic proteins in the prefrontal cortex of rats. Neuroscience 184 , 139–50. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.03.067 21477639
Razzoli M , Bo E , Pascucci T , Pavone F , D’Amato FR , Cero C , Sanghez V , Dadomo H , Palanza P , Parmigiani S , Ceresini G , Puglisi-Allegra S , Porta M , Panzica GC , Moles A , Possenti R , Bartolomucci A , 2012 Implication of the VGF-derived peptide TLQP-21 in mouse acute and chronic stress responses. Behav. Brain Res 229 , 333–339. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbr.2012.01.038 22289198
Razzoli M , Lindsay A , Law ML , Chamberlain CM , Southern WM , Berg M , Osborn J , Engeland WC , Metzger JM , Ervasti JM , Bartolomucci A , 2020 Social stress is lethal in the mdx model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. EBioMedicine 0 , 102700 https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102700
Razzoli M , Nyuyki-Dufe K , Gurney A , Erickson C , McCallum J , Spielman N , Marzullo M , Patricelli J , Kurata M , Pope EA , Touma C , Palme R , Largaespada DA , Allison DB , Bartolomucci A , 2018 Social stress shortens lifespan in mice. Aging Cell 17 , e12778 https://doi.Org/10.1111/acel.12778 29806171
Reiman EM , Uecker A , Caselli RJ , Lewis S , Bandy D , De Leon MJ , De Santi S , Convit A , Osborne D , Weaver A , Thibodeau SN , 1998 Hippocampal volumes in cognitively normal persons at genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol 44 , 288–291. https://doi.Org/10.1002/ana.410440226 9708558
Rentscher KE , Carroll JE , Repetti RL , Cole SW , Reynolds BM , Robles TF , 2019 Chronic stress exposure and daily stress appraisals relate to biological aging marker p16 INK4a. Psychoneuroendocrinology 102 , 139–148. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2018.12.006 30557761
Rissman RA , Lee K-F , Vale W , Sawchenko PE , 2007 Neurobiology of Disease Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Receptors Differentially Regulate Stress-Induced Tau Phosphorylation. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5173-06.2007
Romero LM , Dickens MJ , Cyr NE , 2009 The reactive scope model — A new model integrating homeostasis, allostasis, and stress. Horm. Behav 55 , 375–389. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2008.12.009 19470371
Rosa MLNM , Guimaraes FS , de Oliveira RMW , Padovan CM , Pearson RCA , Del Bel EA , 2005 Restraint stress induces β-amyloid precursor protein mRNA expression in the rat basolateral amygdala. Brain Res. Bull 65 , 69–75. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2004.11.011 15680546
Rothman SM , Herdener N , Camandola S , Texel SJ , Mughal MR , Cong W-N , Martin B , Mattson MP , 2012 3xTgAD mice exhibit altered behavior and elevated Aβ after chronic mild social stress. Neurobiol. Aging 33 , 830.e1–12. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.07.005
Sacks O , Shulman M , 2005 Steroid dementia: An overlooked diagnosis? Neurology 64 , 707–709. 10.1212/01.WNL.0000151977.18440.C3 15728296
Sahu BS , Rodriguez P , Nguyen ME , Han R , Cero C , Razzoli M , Piaggi P , Laskowski LJ , Pavlicev M , Muglia L , Mahata SK , O’Grady S , McCorvy JD , Baier LJ , Sham YY , Bartolomucci A , 2019 Peptide/Receptor Co-evolution Explains the Lipolytic Function of the Neuropeptide TLQP-21. Cell Rep. 28 , 2567–2580.e6. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.07.101 31484069
Sapolsky RM , 1992 Do glucocorticoid concentrations rise with age in the rat? Neurobiol. Aging 13 , 171–174. 10.1016/0197-4580(92)90025-S 1542376
Sapolsky RM , Krey LC , McEwen BS , 1986 The Neuroendocrinology of Stress and Aging: The Glucocorticoid Cascade Hypothesis*. Endocr. Rev 7 , 284–301. 10.1210/edrv-7-3-284 3527687
Sapolsky RM , Krey LC , McEwen BS , 1985 Prolonged glucocorticoid exposure reduces hippocampal neuron number: implications for aging. J. Neurosci 5 , 1222–7.3998818
Sapolsky RM , Krey LC , McEwen BS , 1983 Corticosterone receptors decline in a site-specific manner in the aged rat brain. Brain Res. 289 , 235–240. https://doi.Org/10.1016/0006-8993(83)90024-0 6661643
Sapolsky RM , Romero LM , Munck AU , 2000 How Do Glucocorticoids Influence Stress Responses? Integrating Permissive, Suppressive, Stimulatory, and Preparative Actions*. Endocr. Rev 21 , 55–89. https://doi.Org/10.1210/edrv.21.1.0389 10696570
Sayer R , Robertson D , Balfour DJK , Breen KC , Stewart CA , 2008 The effect of stress on the expression of the amyloid precursor protein in rat brain. Neurosci. Lett 431 , 197–200. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neulet.2007.11.032 18178006
Scheff SW , Price DA , Schmitt FA , DeKosky ST , Mufson EJ , 2007 Synaptic alterations in CA1 in mild Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neurology 68 , 1501–1508. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000260698.46517.8f 17470753
Scheuner D , Eckman C , Jensen M , Song X , Citron M , Suzuki N , Bird TD , Hardy J , Hutton M , Kukull W , Larson E , Levy-Lahad L , Viitanen M , Peskind E , Poorkaj P , Schellenberg G , Tanzi R , Wasco W , Lannfelt L , Selkoe D , Younkin S , 1996 Secreted amyloid β–protein similar to that in the senile plaques of Alzheimer’s disease is increased in vivo by the presenilin 1 and 2 and APP mutations linked to familial Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med 2 , 864–870. 10.1038/nm0896-864 8705854
Scullion GA , Kendall DA , Marsden CA , Sunter D , Pardon MC , 2011 Chronic treatment with the α 2-adrenoceptor antagonist fluparoxan prevents age-related deficits in spatial working memory in APP × PS1 transgenic mice without altering β-amyloid plaque load or astrocytosis. Neuropharmacology 60 , 223–234. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.09.002 20850464
Selkoe DJ , 2001 Alzheimer’s Disease: Genes, Proteins, and Therapy. Physiol. Rev 81 , 741–766. https://doi.Org/10.1152/physrev.2001.81.2.741 11274343
Selkoe DJ , Hardy J , 2016 The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years. EMBO Mol. Med 8 , 595–608. 10.15252/emmm.201606210 27025652
Selye H , 1959 Perspectives in stress research. Perspect. Biol. Med 2 , 403–416.13667390
Selye H , 1950 Stress and the general adaptation syndrome. Br. Med. J 1 , 1383–92. https://doi.Org/10.1136/bmj.1.4667.1383 15426759
Selye H , 1936 A Syndrome Produced by Diverse Nocuous Agents. Nature 138 .
Shaftel SS , Kyrkanides S , Olschowka JA , Miller JNH , Johnson RE , O’Banion MK , 2007 Sustained hippocampal IL-1β overexpression mediates chronic neuroinflammation and ameliorates Alzheimer plaque pathology. J. Clin. Invest 117 , 1595–1604. https://doi.Org/10.1172/JCI31450 17549256
Shankar GM , Walsh DM , 2009 Alzheimer’s disease: synaptic dysfunction and Aβ. Mol. Neurodegener 4 , 48 10.1186/1750-1326-4-48 19930651
Shi Q , Chowdhury S , Ma R , Le KX , Hong S , Caldarone BJ , Stevens B , Lemere CA , 2017 Complement C3 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration in aged plaque-rich APP/PS1 mice. Sci. Transl. Med 9 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf6295
Shu Y , Xu T , 2017 Chronic Social Defeat Stress Modulates Dendritic Spines Structural Plasticity in Adult Mouse Frontal Association Cortex. Neural Plast. 2017 , 6207873 https://doi.Org/10.1155/2017/6207873 28197343
Smith JA , Das A , Ray SK , Banik NL , 2012 Role of pro-inflammatory cytokines released from microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Brain Res. Bull https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.10.004
Snyder-Mackler N , Burger JR , Gaydosh L , Belsky D , Noppert G , Campos FA , Bartolomucci A , Yang C , Aiello A , O’Rand A , Harris KM , Shively C , Alberts SC , T.J. , 2020 Social determinants of health and survival in humans and other animals. Science (80-.). in press.
Solas M , Aisa B , Mugueta MC , Del Rio J , Tordera RM , Ramírez MJ , 2010 Interactions between age, stress and insulin on cognition: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychopharmacology 35 , 1664–73. 10.1038/npp.2010.13 20182419
Sotiropoulos I , Catania C , Pinto LG , Silva R , Pollerberg GE , Takashima A , Sousa N , Almeida OFX , 2011 Stress Acts Cumulatively To Precipitate Alzheimer’s Disease-Like Tau Pathology and Cognitive Deficits. J. Neurosci 31 , 7840–7847. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0730-11.2011 21613497
Sousa N , Lukoyanov NV , Madeira MD , Almeida OF , Paula-Barbosa MM , 2000 Reorganization of the morphology of hippocampal neurites and synapses after stress-induced damage correlates with behavioral improvement. Neuroscience 97 , 253–66. https://doi.Org/10.1016/s0306-4522(00)00050-6 10799757
Spiga F , Walker JJ , Terry JR , Lightman SL , 2014 HPA Axis-Rhythms, in: Comprehensive Physiology. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, pp. 1273–1298. https://doi.Org/10.1002/cphy.c140003
Stern Y , Gurland B , Tatemichi TK , Tang MX , Wilder D , Mayeux R , 1994 Influence of Education and Occupation on the Incidence of Alzheimer’s Disease. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc 271 , 1004 10.1001/jama.1994.03510370056032
Stringhini S , Carmeli C , Jokela M , Avendaño M , Muennig P , Guida F , Ricceri F , d’Errico A , Barros H , Bochud M , Chadeau-Hyam M , Clavel-Chapelon F , Costa G , Delpierre C , Fraga S , Goldberg M , Giles GG , Krogh V , Kelly-Irving M , Layte R , Lasserre AM , Marmot MG , Preisig M , Shipley MJ , Vollenweider P , Zins M , Kawachi I , Steptoe A , Mackenbach JP , Vineis P , Kivimäki M , Alenius H , Avendano M , Barros H , Bochud M , Carmeli C , Carra L , Castagné R , Chadeau-Hyam M , Clavel-Chapelon F , Costa G , Courtin E , Delpierre C , D’Errico A , Dugué P-A , Elliott P , Fraga S , Gares V , Giles G , Goldberg M , Greco D , Hodge A , Irving MK , Karisola P , Kivimäki M , Krogh V , Lang T , Layte R , Lepage B , Mackenbach J , Marmot M , McCrory C , Milne R , Muennig P , Nusselder W , Panico S , Petrovic D , Polidoro S , Preisig M , Raitakari O , Ribeiro AI , Ribeiro AI , Ricceri F , Robinson O , Valverde JR , Sacerdote C , Satolli R , Severi G , Shipley MJ , Stringhini S , Tumino R , Vineis P , Vollenweider P , Zins M , 2017 Socioeconomic status and the 25 × 25 risk factors as determinants of premature mortality: a multicohort study and meta-analysis of 1·7 million men and women. Lancet 389 , 1229–1237. 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32380-7 28159391
Sudduth TL , Schmitt FA , Nelson PT , Wilcock DM , 2013 Neuroinflammatory phenotype in early Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 1051–1059. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.012 23062700
Tata DA , Marciano VA , Anderson BJ , 2006 Synapse loss from chronically elevated glucocorticoids: Relationship to neuropil volume and cell number in hippocampal area CA3. J. Comp. Neurol 498 , 363–374. 10.1002/cne.21071 16871536
Tatomir A , Micu C , Crivii C , 2014 The impact of stress and glucocorticoids on memory. Clujul Med. 87 , 3 10.15386/CJM.2014.8872.871.AT1CM2 26527987
Tung J , Archie EA , Altmann J , Alberts SC , 2016 Cumulative early life adversity predicts longevity in wild baboons. Nat. Commun 7 , 11181 10.1038/ncomms11181 27091302
Tynan RJ , Naicker S , Hinwood M , Nalivaiko E , Buller KM , Pow DV , Day TA , Walker FR , 2010 Chronic stress alters the density and morphology of microglia in a subset of stress-responsive brain regions. Brain. Behav. Immun 24 , 1058–1068. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.bbi.2010.02.001 20153418
Uchihara T , Endo K , Kondo H , Okabayashi S , Shimozawa N , Yasutomi Y , Adachi E , Kimura N , 2016 Tau pathology in aged cynomolgus monkeys is progressive supranuclear palsy/corticobasal degeneration- but not Alzheimer disease-like -Ultrastructural mapping of tau by EDX-. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 4 , 118 10.1186/s40478-016-0385-5 27842611
Ulrich-Lai YM , Herman JP , 2009 Neural regulation of endocrine and autonomic stress responses. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 397–409. 10.1038/nrn2647 19469025
Vyas S , Rodrigues AJ , Silva JM , Tronche F , Almeida OFX , Sousa N , Sotiropoulos I , 2016 Chronic Stress and Glucocorticoids: From Neuronal Plasticity to Neurodegeneration. Neural Plast. 2016 , 6391686 10.1155/2016/6391686 27034847
Wang HX , Wahlberg M , Karp A , Winblad B , Fratiglioni L , 2012 Psychosocial stress at work is associated with increased dementia risk in late life. Alzheimer’s Dement. 8 , 114–120. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.001 22404853
Wang J , Wright HM , Vempati P , Li H , Wangsa J , Dzhuan A , Habbu K , Knable LA , Ho L , Pasinetti GM , 2013 Investigation of nebivolol as a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 33 , 1147–1156. 10.3233/JAD-2012-120904 23128558
wen Wang Q , Rowan MJ , Anwyl R , 2009 Inhibition of LTP by beta-amyloid is prevented by activation of β2 adrenoceptors and stimulation of the cAMP/PKA signalling pathway. Neurobiol. Aging 30 , 1608–1613. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.12.004 18272254
Watanabe Y , Gould E , McEwen BS , 1992 Stress induces atrophy of apical dendrites of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons. Brain Res. 588 , 341–5.1393587
Weil-Malherbe H , Axelrod J , Tomchick R , 1959 Blood-brain barrier for adrenaline. Science (80-.) 129 , 1226–1227. 10.1126/science.129.3357.1226
Wilson RS , Evans DA , Bienias JL , de Leon CFM , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , 2003 Proneness to psychological distress is associated with risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 61 , 1479–1485. 10.1212/01.WNL.0000096167.56734.59 14663028
Wohleb ES , Fenn AM , Pacenta AM , Powell ND , Sheridan JF , Godbout JP , 2012 Peripheral innate immune challenge exaggerated microglia activation, increased the number of inflammatory CNS macrophages, and prolonged social withdrawal in socially defeated mice. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 , 1491–1505. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.02.003 22386198
Wohleb ES , Hanke ML , Corona AW , Powell ND , Stiner LM , Bailey MT , Nelson RJ Godbout JP , Sheridan JF , 2011 β-Adrenergic receptor antagonism prevents anxiety-like behavior and microglial reactivity induced by repeated social defeat. J. Neurosci 31 , 6277–6288. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0450-11.2011 21525267
Wohleb ES , Powell ND , Godbout JP , Sheridan JF , 2013 Stress-induced recruitment of bone marrow-derived monocytes to the brain promotes anxiety-like behavior. J. Neurosci 33 , 13820–13833. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1671-13.2013 23966702
Wong EYH , Herbert J , 2006 Raised circulating corticosterone inhibits neuronal differentiation of progenitor cells in the adult hippocampus. Neuroscience 137 , 83–92. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.08.073 16289354
Woolley CS , Gould E , McEwen BS , 1990 Exposure to excess glucocorticoids alters dendritic morphology of adult hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Brain Res. 531 , 225–231. https://doi.Org/10.1016/0006-8993(90)90778-A 1705153
Yaffe K , Vittinghoff E , Lindquist K , Barnes D , Covinsky KE , Neylan T , Kluse M , Marmar C , 2010 Posttraumatic stress disorder and risk of dementia among US veterans Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 67 , 608–613. 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.61 20530010
Yan J , Sun X-B , Wang H-Q , Zhao H , Zhao X-Y , Xu Y-X , Guo J-C , Zhu C-Q , 2010 Chronic restraint stress alters the expression and distribution of phosphorylated tau and MAP2 in cortex and hippocampus of rat brain. Brain Res. 1347 , 132–141. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.BRAINRES.2010.05.074 20513368
Yang C , Guo X , Wang GH , Wang HL , Liu ZC , Liu H , Zhu ZX , Li Y , 2014 Changes in tau phosphorylation levels in the hippocampus and frontal cortex following chronic stress. Brazilian J. Med. Biol. Res. = Rev. Bras. Pesqui. medicas e Biol 47 , 237–44. https://doi.Org/10.1590/1414-431X20133275
Yoo KY , Lee CH , Park JH , Hwang IK , Park OK , Kwon SH , Choi JH , Kim DJ , Kwon YG , Kim YM , Won MH , 2011 Antioxidant enzymes are differently changed in experimental ischemic hippocampal CA1 region following repeated restraint stress. J. Neurol. Sci 302 , 33–42. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.jns.2010.12.006 21215418
Yu NN , Wang XX , Yu JT , Wang ND , Lu RC , Miao D , Tian Y , Tan L , 2010 Blocking β2-adrenergic receptor attenuates acute stress-induced amyloid β peptides production. Brain Res. 1317 , 305–310. https://doi.Org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.087 20059989
Yuede CM , Timson BF , Hettinger JC , Yuede KM , Edwards HM , Lawson JE , Zimmerman SD , Cirrito JR , 2018 Interactions between stress and physical activity on Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Neurobiol. Stress 8 , 158–171. https://doi.Org/10.1016/J.YNSTR.2018.02.004 29888311
Zarow C , Lyness SA , Mortimer JA , Chui HC , 2003 Neuronal loss is greater in the locus coeruleus than nucleus basalis and substantia nigra in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. Arch. Neurol 60 , 337–341. https://doi.Org/10.1001/archneur.60.3.337 12633144
Zhan Y , Song C , Karlsson R , Tillander A , Reynolds CA , Pedersen NL , Hagg S , 2015 Telomere Length Shortening and Alzheimer Disease—A Mendelian Randomization Study. JAMA Neurol. 72 , 1202 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.1513 26457630
Zhang B , Ma S , Rachmin I , He M , Baral P , Choi S , Gonçalves WA , Shwartz Y , Fast EM , Su Y , Zon LI , Regev A , Buenrostro JD , Cunha TM , Chiu IM , Fisher DE , Hsu YC , 2020 Hyperactivation of sympathetic nerves drives depletion of melanocyte stem cells. Nature 577 , 676–681. 10.1038/s41586-020-1935-3 31969699
Zhang P , Kishimoto Y , Grammatikakis I , Gottimukkala K , Cutler RG , Zhang S , Abdelmohsen K , Bohr VA , Misra Sen J , Gorospe M , Mattson MP , 2019 Senolytic therapy alleviates Aβ-associated oligodendrocyte progenitor cell senescence and cognitive deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Nat. Neurosci 22 , 719–728. https://doi.Org/10.1038/S41593-019-0372-9 30936558
Zipple MN , Archie EA , Tung J , Altmann J , Alberts SC , 2019 Intergenerational effects of early adversity on survival in wild baboons. Elife 8 10.7554/eLife.47433
