LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0410447
3960
Hastings Cent Rep
Hastings Cent Rep
The Hastings Center report
0093-0334
1552-146X

31813188
7086376
10.1002/hast.1069
NIHMS1554058
Article
Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The Collective Good at a Time of Medical Narcissism
Sabatello Maya LLB, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Bioethics and Co-Director, Precision Medicine: Ethics, Politics, and Culture Project, Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Medical Center.
Address correspondence to Dr. Sabatello at: NY State Psychiatric Institute, 1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 122, New York, NY 10032. Phone: work - 646-774-8616, fax - 212-543-6752. ms4075@columbia.edu
7 2 2020
11 2019
01 11 2020
49 6 4142
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Not a single day goes by without some news about personalized medicine, especially in its genomic context (also called: precision medicine). A study that identifies a new gene that is associated with an increased risk for cancer, a new gene therapy being tested for clinical trial, and newly calculated polygenic risk scores that may impact the development of common disorders or other future trajectories such as educational attainment have all recently been in the spotlight. Shortly following the scientific excitement, however, are the cautionary notes. These include worries about big brother surveillance and individual’s privacy, concerns about the impact of genomic results on the psychosocial wellbeing of patients and research subjects and their family members, and a growing number of issues surrounding social and distributive justice. With much hope to accelerate scientific knowledge and improve individual’s health, what weigh should the myriad accompanying concerns have in the process?

The co-edited book “Personalized Medicine, Individual Choice and the Common Good” falls squarely into this discourse with an aim to “fuel and stimulate the debate about personalised medicine and enable its participants to come to a more balanced understanding of the interests and values at stake” (p. 16). It builds on co-editor Donna Dickenson’s earlier and thought-provoking work on “Me Medicine” and “We Medicine”. The first, “Me Medicine,” refers to the growing emphasis on tailored, personalized treatment based on genetic profiling and individual-based benefit. The latter, “We Medicine,” reflects on the seemingly waning approach to healthcare that is based on notions of solidarity and mobilized by communal actions directed at promoting the collective good (e.g., universal access and vaccinations as part of public health initiatives). With scholars arriving at the discourse from diverse disciplines (e.g., law, bioethics, philosophy, sociology, anthropology and technology), each chapter in the book explores the tension between the two and offers case studies to critically examine the meaning and possible implications thereof.

At its core, the book laments the shift from We Medicine to Me Medicine, with ostensibly all authors highlighting that, on balance, the costs associated with Me Medicine far outweigh the benefits. This is both a strength and a weakness. While a chapter making the case for Me Medicine could have perhaps responded to some of the criticism raised by supporters of We Medicine, the comprehensive exploration of the downsides of Me Medicine and the causes for its rise demonstrate the wide ranging impacts of this shift on medical practice and society. As has been intensely discussed in scholarship on the genomic-based aspect of personalized (precision) medicine, these impacts include a loss of public trust, inequitable access to the benefits of scientific progress, and allocation of public funding in ways that fail to promote community health and collective benefits, especially among racial, ethnic and other minority groups.

Uniquely, the collection of essays takes this discourse into a journey across continents (see e.g., an interesting discussion about the gendered genomic citizenship in the context of umbilical cord banking in India (Chapter 4)) and, more significantly, expands it to medical terrains that, to date, have received far less attention in debates about the pros and cons of personalized medicine. Thus, in addition to the “usual suspects” of genetic testing, stem cell research, the molecularized self, and reproductive ethics, chapters in the book illuminate how the moral framework of Me Medicine vs. We Medicine may apply to other medical contexts such as uterus and other organ transplantation (Chapters 3 and 5), health and fitness apps as well as wearable devices (Chapters 11 and 12) and data sourcing in healthcare research (Chapters 7 and 8). The sheer volume of possible harms across medical contexts highlights the danger of the individualization of health research going too far, pervading human relations and exacerbating already unequal societal structures. (See, for example, discussion in Chapter 2 about the possible impacts of mitochondrial transfer on women’s reproductive choices, especially poor women and women of color, and in Chapter 4, about narratives in umbilical cord banking that force a “choice” between good motherhood and good citizenship.) Indeed, a worrying reaffirmation that emerges from the authors’ explorations of the shift to Me Medicine is that this phenomenon is a mere microcosm of the troubling dynamics in contemporary societies: the widening of socio-economic divides between the haves and haves nots, the insatiable appetite for wealth and power of the private market, and the use of rhetoric to circumvent the truth and to hype messages that benefit the interests of the powerful few. The question is therefore whether and how We Medicine can reclaim its place in policy and medical practice.

Several chapters in the book do an excellent job in demonstrating how “We Medicine” could work but they also challenge us to revisit some well-entrenched values in bioethics and society more broadly. Chapter 6 by Robin Pierce, for example, provides an interesting discussion on the increasing centrality of ‘early detection’ of Alzheimer’s disease for which there is neither cure nor real hope for the emergence of tailored treatment that will be applicable for (at best) most of those who will need it. It touches upon long-standing questions regarding the fair allocation of resources but sharpens the question of how do we balance between the potential future prospect for the good health of the few and the present needs for supports and services of existing patients across racial, ethnic and other socio-politically constructed groups? What does the chosen rationing say about us as individuals and as a collective? As her chapter beautifully concludes, transparent deliberations to determine research priorities and allocation of resources is urgently needed, allowing for celebration of scientific progress (e.g., efforts in the future to test new tailored drugs for early stage of Alzheimer disease) without losing the long-term goals for health and wellbeing for everyone.

Another fascinating example is Klaus Hoeyer’s discussion in Chapter 7 on the Danish digital infrastructure for health data. Denmark is well known for its first-rate national healthcare services and its population-based research is translated into ongoing efforts to improve healthcare provision and treatment. In exchange, users of Denmark’s healthcare services cannot opt out of participating in health research, allowing researchers to have access to an extensive scope of personal health data that can also be combined with data on socioeconomic and educational status from employers and tax authorities. Put differently, Denmark has elevated participation in health research into a civic duty that, similar to tax collection, requires all service users to contribute to the collective pie. There is no doubt that such a system requires trust in a governance that does not exist in many other countries, especially the U.S., and unfortunately, its appeal to altruism and solidarity can be misused (see, e.g., the discussion in Chapter 8 on the 100,000 Genome Project in the UK). But Denmark’s policy calls for engagement in some fundamental questions about human rights—i.e., who needs rights if everyone’s interests and wellbeing are taken care of?—and about the emphasis in bioethics on personal choice, autonomy and personal empowerment. As Hoeyer asks: “Rather than insisting on informed consent, would it not be more adequate to focus on the responsibilities that authorities and companies incur through mandatory data sourcing”? (p. 152) It will be difficult to replace the conventional framework of individual’s freedoms and personal autonomy in health research, and the U.S. healthcare system, marked by deep health disparities and controlled by private corporations, provides no incentive for doing so. But something’s got to give. And, the continued focus on individual informed consent and rhetoric of patients’ empowerment—notwithstanding extensive research demonstrating their illusory nature in practice—is unlikely to yield investment in better healthcare for all. Other context-specific strategies for a just balancing between the investment in individual and collective health are needed and should be discussed bearing in mind the alternative that the Danish example provides.

Personalized Medicine, Individual Choice and the Common Good raises interesting questions about contemporary trends in medicine—and society more broadly. It raises more questions about how we prioritize certain values, whether this prioritization makes sense for the common good, and why we seem to view as unavoidable the forces that are not invested in promoting the latter. The multidisciplinary perspectives offered in this book will make it of interest to a variety of audiences, especially bioethics, law and philosophy students and scholars. It would also be of interest to other scholars studying the intersection of medicine, society and politics, such as political scientists and communications. Sharing the co-editors’ goal, I hope that this book will inspire continued debate about the nature and promise of personalized medicine as well as a conversation about what can we do to reverse (or at least somewhat balance) the trend of medical narcissism.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grant funding from the National Human Genome Research Institute (K01HG008653).

Conflict of Interest Statement

Maya Sabatello is a member of the All of Us Research Program’s Institutional Review Board.

