LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7908221
6911
Res Aging
Res Aging
Research on aging
0164-0275
1552-7573

32195637
7785029
10.1177/0164027520911284
NIHMS1628022
Article
Terms and Measures of Cognitive Health Associated with Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Scoping Review
Quinn Kelly *Department of Communication, University of Illinois at Chicago

Miyawaki Christina E. University of Houston

Croff Raina Oregon Health &amp; Science University

Vogel Mia T. Washington University in St. Louis

Belza Basia University of Washington

Souza Anita M. University of Washington

Liu Minhui Johns Hopkins University

Edwards Valerie J. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Friedman Daniela B. University of South Carolina, Arnold School of Public Health

* Corresponding author Kelly Quinn, PhD, Department of Communication, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1007 W Harrison St, BSB 1140, MC132, Chicago, IL 60607, (312) 996-3187, kquinn8@uic.edu
14 9 2020
20 3 2020
Jun-Jul 2020
05 1 2021
42 5-6 174185
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The Healthy Brain Initiative: National Public Health Road Map to Maintaining Cognitive Health (2007) called on the research community to disseminate its work on cognitive aging and cognitive health. The purpose of this scoping review was to (1) identify terminology that cognitive, social, and behavioral scientists use to describe cognitive aging and cognitive health, in association with dementia and Alzheimer’s disease, among older adults; (2) demonstrate how such terms are defined; and (3) illustrate how these constructs are measured in research settings. Empirical studies published 2007–2018 were examined for terminology, definitions, disciplinary orientation, and measurement mechanisms. Analysis of the corpus and a detailed review of the terms “cognitive impairment” and “mild cognitive impairment” reveal that formal definitions are provided infrequently and measurement of constructs ranges widely. Overall, the variability in terminology, definitions, and measures reflects a need for greater specificity in research communication, such that cross-disciplinary collaboration can be facilitated.

research communication
mild cognitive impairment
cognitive impairment
terminology

Two important calls for enhancing communication about cognitive aging and cognitive health have been issued in recent years. In 2007, The Healthy Brain Initiative: National Public Health Road Map to Maintaining Cognitive Health (“The Road Map,”, 2007) was issued jointly by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Alzheimer’s Association, and called on researchers to disseminate critical findings about cognitive health. More recently, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) issued its report, Cognitive Aging: Progress in Understanding and Opportunities for Action (2015), and included recommendations for improving communication around the concept of cognitive health, especially with respect to the public. To fulfill the mandates of these efforts, research on cognitive aging is being shared across disciplines, put into clinical practice, and used in public health messaging. However, this widespread dissemination has increased the opportunity for ambiguity and misinterpretation of terminology.

Disciplinary assumptions, whether epistemological, ethical, ideological, theoretical, or methodological, exist and influence terminology used to describe phenomena of study (Szostak, 2014). When terms are employed across disciplinary boundaries or translated into clinical practice, confusion, misunderstanding, and misinterpretation can occur (Koskan, Friedman, &amp; Messias, 2010). Often, terminology does not translate easily. In cross-disciplinary contexts, researchers from various disciplines may attach different meaning to the same terms due to the inherent ambiguity in language. Though such ambiguity can be a positive force, by stimulating curiosity and leading to new research directions, it can also be negative, masking logical or theoretical inconsistencies (Griffiths &amp; Stotz, 2014; Szostak, 2011). Scholarly attention to the use of terminology in the study of cognitive science is limited, despite its relevance to interdisciplinary research efforts on cognitive aging and cognitive health.

In an effort to highlight ways in which further clarification of terminology might be relevant to research dissemination efforts, this review aims to: 1) identify the shared terminology found in medical, nursing, and social science research literature to describe cognitive aging and cognitive health specifically in conjunction with dementia and Alzheimer’s disease among older adults; 2) demonstrate how such terms may be defined; and 3) illustrate the range of construct measurement practices being employed in research settings. We conclude with a practical call to provide evidence to support the adoption of common data elements and to develop interdisciplinary consensus around application of terms both clinically and in research, along with recommendations for future research.

Background

Prior to 2007, the burden of cognitive decline, in terms of care-related costs and health disparities, was rapidly rising, despite growing scientific evidence that healthy behaviors may reduce risk and the rate of decline. In response, CDC and the Alzheimer’s Association released the Road Map (CDC, 2007), the first nationally-coordinated effort to promote cognitive health as a public health issue. Recommendations contained in the Road Map placed emphasis on research dissemination, translation into clinical practice, and policy implementation, among other factors. It set the goal of developing strategies to increase cognitive health awareness among providers, public health professionals, and service providers. While it did not provide a formal definition for the term, “cognitive health,” the Road Map called for standardized mechanisms for the measurement of neurological and behavioral health.

The National Alzheimer’s Project Act of 2011 prompted the development of a federal coordination strategy to address the burden of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. The National Plan to Address Alzheimer’s Disease (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS), 2012), first published in 2012 and updated annually through 2017, focused on prevention and research, but also on building public awareness and monitoring progress to drive improvement, prioritizing the role of communication as key for success, especially to enhance awareness of cognitive aging to healthcare practitioners, public health professionals, service providers, and the public. Little attention has been given, however, to the ways in which concepts of cognitive health are communicated among researchers, despite the inherent interdisciplinary nature of this work.

Interdisciplinary communication

Interdisciplinary approaches are growing more common as a heuristic mechanism for scientific progress (Porter &amp; Rafols, 2009). Interdisciplinary research promotes innovation by developing new lines of questioning and expanding problem definitions (Frost &amp; Jean, 2003). Linking fields of study enables researchers to more fully address critical questions (Aboelela et al., 2007) and builds common knowledge and methodologies to solve complex problems (Newhouse &amp; Spring, 2010). However, communication beyond individual disciplines is complicated, as each relies on methodologies and terminology used within its boundaries (Frost &amp; Jean, 2003). Although scholars tend to agree that there is no formal definition of “interdisciplinary communication,” it is a practice aimed at achieving some kind of reciprocal comprehension, or shared knowledge, among researchers from different disciplines (Holbrook, 2013).

Researchers use dialects that are specialized to their discipline (Wear, 1999). This creates translational difficulty between natural science fields, between natural and social science fields, and between qualitative and quantitative social and behavioral scientists (Bruce, Lyall, Tait, &amp; Williams, 2004). Different disciplines can use the same word to mean different things (Szostak, 2014), and words that are used in everyday discourse by non-experts, particularly contributes to misunderstanding (Bracken &amp; Oughton, 2006). An example of this may be found in terms such as “memory” and “recall,” which may seem to suggest equivalent concepts. The former often refers to a passive ability to retain information and the latter often refers to an active ability to retrieve information, yet these terms are frequently used interchangeably. Translation of terminology into clinical practice presents additional opportunities for misinterpretation. Groups of differing socioeconomic status or geographic proximity attach meaning to convey concepts commonly encountered by the group (Hebert, Brandt, Armstead, Adams, &amp; Steck, 2009), and these meanings may differ or conflict with meaning attached by other groups and/or researchers.

In healthcare, members of various disciplines may use the same words; however, subtle conceptual interpretations can lead to misunderstanding (Bonis, 2013). As an ideal, terminology enables a common understanding of concepts. In practice, however, this ideal often fails because a) in a scientific context, not every term is defined and assumptions are made about existing knowledge, or b) terms, even when clearly defined, pick up connotations in usage that “gradually separate its fine-grained meaning into potentially incompatible submeanings” (Wray, 2017, p. 82).

Further complications to achieving a common understanding arise in cross-language and/or cross-cultural research settings. Cross-translations of research instruments and research reports may not adequately capture subtle nuance and cultural connotation with precise equivalency across languages (Shklarov, 2007). Moreover, cultural contexts shape the semantic meaning of terminology (Goddard, 2014), even among a shared, common language. For example, though English is common to both the U.S. and England, the equivalency of patient-supplied terms and responses can vary between these contexts; differing healthcare systems, private and socialized, may influence the readiness of patients to admit to health problems, patient satisfaction, or compliance with medical regimens (Hunt &amp; Bhopal, 2004). Thus, even comparability of datasets across languages and cultures is not always achievable, as concepts around health often are influenced by disparate expectations and cultural values (Hunt &amp; Bhopal, 2004).

Terminology related to cognitive aging, specifically, presents challenges to interdisciplinary work, as the presentation of symptoms related to cognitive aging are highly variable. For example, the terms “dementia” and “mild cognitive impairment” are often used to represent a syndrome of maladaptive behaviors related to cognitive health, that vary both in the type of behavior (e.g., memory loss, sleep disturbance), as well as in the behaviors that occur together. Clinical practitioners may use a variety of measures in practice to render diagnosis of these conditions, as such variety helps to illuminate and differentiate gradation and progression. In scientific research settings, however, such variability is far less desirable, as its presence diminishes the ability to reproduce and compare findings. Inconsistent definitions and measurement mechanisms can limit the interpretability of research results and impede the potential for interdisciplinary research progression.

Given the emphasis placed on communication in both the Road Map (2007) and the IOM Report (2015), identification of basic concepts, terminology, and measurement practices related to cognitive aging may serve to overcome potential cross-disciplinary communication challenges and foster greater research collaboration. To assist in this process, we examined the terminology used by researchers in reporting their work on cognitive aging and cognitive health that specifically related to dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. We address the questions, “What are the basic concepts relied on by cognitive, social, and behavioral scientists to describe cognitive aging and cognitive health in their work on dementia and Alzheimer’s among older adults?”; “How are such terms being defined, if at all?”; and “How are these constructs being measured?” By demonstrating how such terms are defined by researchers, and by illustrating the range of construct measurement practices being employed in research settings, we aim to highlight potential research terminology that might benefit by greater definitional clarity, and thereby enhance the potential for its use in interdisciplinary research settings.

Method

Scoping reviews enhance conceptual clarity about a specific topic or field of evidence (Davis, Drey, &amp; Gould, 2009). They differ from systematic reviews in their emphasis on mapping a field of study, and do not evaluate the quality of the underlying literature (Levac, Colquhoun, &amp; O’Brien, 2010); yet, by utilizing the techniques of systematic reviews, scoping reviews offer rigorous and transparent methods to identify and analyze relevant literature pertaining to a research question (Pham et al., 2014). This review examines peer-reviewed literature published between January 2007 and July 2018 to scope research nomenclature relating to cognitive aging and cognitive health and specifically concerning dementia and Alzheimer’s disease among older adults. This selected period coincides with the publication of The Road Map (2007), which called for greater critical research dissemination on cognitive health.

Conceptual criteria

Search terms and targeted databases were determined by consensus and developed with the assistance of a health sciences librarian. The research team consisted of experts in nursing, social work, communication, psychology, gerontology, and public health. Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, and MEDLINE were searched, using the parameters summarized in Appendix 1 to search title, abstract, subject terms, and keywords. In addition to terms related to cognitive aging and health, supplementary terms related to public health were included to maintain a focus on research aligned with disease prevention and early diagnosis, consistent with The Road Map’s aim of promoting cognitive health as a public health issue. This concentrated the dataset on studies that focused on the health of populations, outside of clinical settings, to capture the broad range of ways in which dementia occurs in the community.

Inclusion/exclusion screening

After reviewing for duplicates, 3,714 articles were selected for further screening of abstract and title information to ensure that articles met inclusion and exclusion criteria. To be included in the database, articles covered primary research, included terminology used by researchers and others related to dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, cognitive aging, and cognitive health, and were published between January 2007 and July 2018. Reasons for exclusion included, for example, case studies, study protocols, and pharmaceutical studies. Studies performed outside of the U.S. were excluded in an effort to enhance the conceptual clarity of terminology being used in the research, and eliminate challenges associated with cross-language and cross-cultural contexts (Hunt &amp; Bhopal, 2004). In an effort to maintain a focus on public health research, studies on basic science (e.g., biological studies) were excluded, along with studies that did not align with the focus of this review, such as cost of care studies and study proposals and study protocols. An illustration of the screening processes is provided in Figure 1, and the full list of inclusion/exclusion criteria are detailed in Table 1.

Screening was conducted using the Covidence platform (www.covidence.org), a web-based tool developed for systematic reviews that enables a blind, random assignment of articles to the reviewer team. To ensure accuracy and consistency among reviewers, every article was screened by at least two team members, and all reviewers formally revisited inclusion/exclusion criteria after screening approximately every 50 articles. Two designated team members resolved conflicts in the screening process. In all, 3,034 studies were excluded in the abstract/title screening phase, leaving 680 articles available for data extraction.

Data charting

Once the initial screening process was completed, each article was obtained and distributed to team member dyads, or pairs of research team members, for data charting. Data were collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools (Harris et al., 2009). Each dyad reviewed the full text of between 50 and 120 articles, with each member of the dyad charting information independently. Members of each dyad reconciled the charted data with one another after completing approximately 25 to 50 articles, with reconciliation events varying between one and four per dyad in total. Another 471 articles were excluded in this phase: 341 reported on international study populations; 33 reported on basic science (animal studies, neuroimaging, etc.); 21 articles were considered gray literature; 26 articles related to instrument testing; 14 articles were letters to the editor or opinion essays; and 36 articles were excluded for miscellaneous reasons (e.g., case studies, cost of care studies, focus on delirium; one unobtainable article and one duplicate). The following information was charted from the remaining 209 articles: study type; study purpose; descriptive sample data; specific use of the terms dementia, cognitive impairment, mild cognitive impairment, cognitive decline, and cognitive change; definitions for specified terms, applicable citations for specified terms, measurement of specified terms; other relevant terms related to cognitive health and/or cognitive aging, along with definitions, citations, and measurement processes; measurement instruments used in the study; and any other relevant conclusions, citations, and research recommendations related to terminology.

As a final step, the disciplinary orientation for each of the remaining 209 articles was assigned by examining the National Library of Medicine catalog entry for the Broad Subject Terms assigned to the publishing journal of each article.

Results

The following analysis provides descriptive information about the 209 articles in the dataset. We then offer a more detailed analysis of two specific terms, “cognitive impairment” and “mild cognitive impairment,” as these were commonly employed throughout the literature. Descriptive information on the dataset is summarized in Table 2.

We first note the significant acceleration in published literature regarding cognitive health over the period of review. Ten articles were included in the dataset for 2007 (a partial year), and 13 articles for 2008. By comparison, 25 articles were published in 2017 (the latest complete year), with another 17 articles published in the first seven months of 2018. This significant rise in published literature demonstrates the increased attention to this field, likely in response to the calls of The Road Map and the IOM report.

Types of studies

The majority of studies in the dataset were observational in nature (n=134, 64.1%), and included longitudinal studies on neuropsychological measures and cognitive performance, and studies of the predictive power of performance on these types of measures (e.g., tests of executive function, visuospatial tests) and cognitive condition. A number of studies examined the relationship between physical behaviors and characteristics (e.g., sleep patterns, physical activity levels, body mass index, lower extremity function), psychological factors (e.g., apathy, pain reports, agitation, anxiety), or other health conditions (e.g., kidney or cardiovascular disease, anemia, presence of dental care) and cognitive health. The role of caregiving for persons with cognitive impairment also received attention, with several observational studies examining caregiver burden and the role of patient behaviors, the prevalence of anticipatory grief, and the reliability of caregiver reports on patients’ cognitive state.

Experimental research (n=33, 15.8%) included studies on the efficacy of a variety of psychosocial interventions, such as interaction strategies, hypnosis, and support groups on memory and recall. Some studies also examined interventions aimed at preserving cognitive function, such as caregiver-supported in-home cognitive and mindfulness training. A third line of research encompassed the role of physical activity to cognitive health, comparing groups with and without structured physical activity programs.

The prevalence of qualitative protocols (n=21, 10.0%) was much more limited, and centered on the ways in which narratives arise around cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease, how partners navigate intimate relationships in the face of cognitive loss, and the experiences of caregivers and their quality of life. A few qualitative studies examined the ways in which diagnoses are obtained, from both the perspectives of the caregiver and primary care provider. Mixed methods research (n=14, 7.0%) examined differences in mechanisms for reporting health information, the characteristics of caregivers, and cultural differences in common beliefs about memory loss and Alzheimer’s disease.

Sample data

The majority of articles (n=181, 86.6%) centered on older community-dwelling adults as the subject of study. About 15.3% (n=32) of the articles concerned caregivers, including family members, spouses, and clinicians. Two studies examined document content, such as death certificates and advertisements. Somewhat surprisingly, over 12% (n=25) of the studies did not report age and/or gender information about the study sample and 35.4% (n=74) failed to report race and/or ethnicity information. Only twelve studies (6.0%) reported information about the duration or onset of cognitive decline and/or impairment.

Disciplinary representation

Disciplinary analysis was conducted on the dataset by examining “broad subject terms” listed in the National Library of Medicine catalog record for each article’s publication. In all, the dataset represented research in 31 disciplines, as noted in Table 3. Many journal titles are cross-disciplinary in nature: two disciplines were listed for about half of the articles in the dataset (n=101); one discipline was listed for 74 articles; three disciplines were listed for 15 of the articles; and eleven articles had no disciplinary information listed. Despite the interdisciplinarity of the underlying research, the majority of the articles in the dataset were published in journals circulated among geriatrics (n=95), neurology (n=81), psychiatry (n=65), and to a lesser degree, psychology (n=30). Other disciplines that might be expected to contribute, such as nursing and public health (n=6 and n=4, respectively), had substantially lower levels of research reporting on the topics. Fewer than six articles were represented by any other field. The majority of the articles appeared in journals devoted to geriatrics, neurology, and psychiatry is perhaps unsurprising. More notable is the absence of work in other relevant areas such as social work and sociology.

Measurement tools

By far, the most frequently used measurement tool for assessing cognitive status was the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (Folstein, Folstein &amp; McHugh, 1975). In its various forms (modified, revised, the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease adaptation), the MMSE was used in n=120 (57.4%) of the 209 studies in the dataset. Other tools used to assess cognitive function included the Clinical Dementia Rating scale (CDR) and its variants (n=35, 16.7%), and a variety of phone or practitioner assessments. Tests of executive function included the Trail Making test (n=39, 18.7%), the digit span forward and backward test (n=26, 12.4%), and a variety of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale subtests (n=22, 10.5%).

Terminology

A variety of terminology was used to describe cognitive health and cognitive aging, though most of the terms extracted from the articles reflected cognitive deficiency. The full list of terms is catalogued in Appendix 2 and includes 1,160 references to cognitive function and cognitive health. For analysis purposes, the terms were loosely grouped by topic; these centered on terms describing Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders, dementia, cognitive impairment, mild cognitive impairment, cognitive change and decline, cognition and cognitive function, memory, executive function, and cognitive aging. There were few references to cognitive health or cognitive improvement.

Within each of these categories, terms that described related concepts were grouped. For example, the group surrounding “memory” also included phrases such as “memory complaint,” “memory loss,” and “subjective memory impairment.” Frequently, definitions of such terms were not included in the research report. For example, of the 158 (75.6% of the dataset) articles that mentioned “dementia” only twelve (8.0% of the dementia articles) articles defined the term. Measurement of constructs, similarly, were poorly outlined and, if a measurement mechanism was offered, varied widely among articles. Again, using the term “dementia” as an example, measurement was described in a scant 33 articles (20.9% of the dementia articles), and varied widely between use of the MMSE, the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Diseases and Stroke/Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) criteria, a participant’s “prior diagnosis of dementia,” the CDR, or by a participant’s “subjective memory complaint in the absence of functional impairment” (Koppel, et al., 2012).

To offer a more nuanced perspective on this wide-ranging nomenclature and the ways in which terms are defined and measured, the terms “cognitive impairment” and “mild cognitive impairment” are offered as detailed examples, as these were two frequently used terms.

“Cognitive impairment”

The term, “cognitive impairment” was used in a majority (n=132, 63.2%) of the articles. However, out of these, only one article defined the term as, “a spectrum of conditions ranging from mild cognitive impairment to full dementia” (Gurgel &amp; Ward, 2014). Frequently, researchers used measurement instrument scale readings to define “cognitive impairment” within their studies, but these more quantitatively-oriented definitions varied widely in both the instruments that were used, as well as the cut points that were employed to determine an impaired cognitive status.

The measurement tools used as proxies for definitions of cognitive impairment included more widely employed instruments, such as the MMSE, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, the Blessed Orientation Memory and Concentration Test (BOMC) (Katzman, et al., 1983), the CDR, and Cumulative Illness Rating Scale for Geriatrics (CIRS-G) (Miller, et al., 1992), as well as researcher-improvised mechanisms. These improvised mechanisms ranged widely. Researchers used interviews (Rovner, Casten, Arenson, Salzman, &amp; Kornsey, 2012), devised their own batteries of neuropsychological measures such as language, executive function, praxis, and reading ability to assess participant’s cognitive impairment (e.g., Lee &amp; Wu, 2015), or considered participants cognitively impaired when they “failed” a screening test (Bailey &amp; Arab, 2015). One study used performance difficulty on items such as tracking current events, paying attention, and remembering people and addresses (Bass, et al., 2012) to determine cognitive impairment. Researcher-improvised assessments, while likely providing valid indication of impairment, may be unhelpful for cross-disciplinary use, as the outcomes of study may necessarily be tied to levels of impairment which cannot be reliably assessed in other settings.

Some studies attempted to employ more universal mechanisms, such as by defining cognitive impairment as falling at least 1.5 standard deviations below available age-corrected normative data in a standard neuropsychological test battery (Eggermont, et al., 2010). Yet these too can make comparison more challenging because of varying assessment mechanisms, despite such comparison’s importance to cross-disciplinary work.

Even when more conventional tools were used, relevant cut points to demonstrate cognitive impairment deviated broadly between studies. For example, as shown in Table 4, the MMSE was frequently employed as an instrument to measure cognitive function, but scores to designate cognitive impairment ranged widely. One study defined cognitive impairment as participant scores of between 20 and 30 (Beard, Sakhtah, Imse, &amp; Galvin, 2012), while other studies considered participants to have significant cognitive impairment with MMSE scores of less than or equal to 23 (Clarke, Ko, Lyketsos, Rebok, &amp; Eaton, 2010) or less than 19 (Morrow, Snitz, Rodriquez, Huber, &amp; Saxton, 2009). Other, widely available tools, such as the CDR and the BOMC, evidenced similar discrepancies.

“Mild cognitive impairment”

A total of 131 articles (62.7%) used the term, “mild cognitive impairment.” Definitions for this term were more prevalent in these articles than in those that used the term “cognitive impairment,” but still meager, with only 33 articles (25.1%) providing any kind of definition. Similar to cognitive impairment, there was a wide variety in definitions provided. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is well-established as a precursor to dementia (Petersen, 2004), and is seen as a clinical syndrome that may intercede in the neuropathological progression between normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease (Pertersen et al., 1999).

Citation analyses of terms revealed many (n=15, 45.5%) of these definitions were based on Petersen and colleagues’ work (1999, 2001, 2004, 2009), which evolved from the work of Braak and Braak (1991, 1995). Other definitions included MCI as “an initial state of [Alzheimer’s disease] or prodromal [Alzheimer’s disease]” (Tappen &amp; Hain, 2014) and “a transition state between normal aging and dementia and predicts progression to dementia, particularly [Alzheimer’s disease]” (e.g., Lingler, Terhorst, Schulz, Gentry, &amp; Lopez, 2016), or a disorder often thought to be a transitional phase between cognitive health and Alzheimer’s disease (e.g., Kirchberg, et al., 2012). People with MCI have subjective concerns about cognition and perform poorly on cognitive tests (Winblad et al., 2004) and/or experience impaired test performance (Plassman, et al., 2011). Mild difficulties in complex everyday tasks can commonly be seen among people with MCI (Giovannetti, et al., 2008); however, they are able to perform and preserve their normal activities of daily living skills, and therefore, do not meet the criteria for dementia disorders (Petersen, et al., 2001).

Measurement of MCI, like that of cognitive impairment, varied among a number of instruments, both singly and in combination. The MMSE was the most frequently used instrument (n=14, 16.0%), and was often used in tandem with the CDR (e.g., Kirschberg &amp; Cohen, 2012) or Dementia Rating Scale-2 (CDR-2, Jurica, Leitten, &amp; Mattis, 2001) (e.g., Seidenberg, et al., 2009; Tremont &amp; Alosco, 2011). While the CDR was used as a stand-alone assessment in some studies (e.g., Albert, Moss, Blacker, Tanzi &amp; McArdle, 2007), others used a standard battery of neuropsychological tests, such as tests of memory and executive function (Hall, Pennington, Swicegood, &amp; Winter, 2012), or the presence of subjective memory complaint (Koppel, et al., 2012).

Cut points to define MCI again varied widely, and are shown in Table 4. For example, two studies defined participants with MCI as having MMSE scores between 21 and 30 (Dawson, et al., 2008; Rose, et al., 2011), while others used cut points of a score of 20 or higher (Lingler, et al., 2008), 24 or higher (Kirchberg, et al., 2012), and 25 and higher (Giovannetti, et al., 2008). In some cases, the MMSE was used to assign gradations of cognitive impairment, such as for making distinctions between MCI and moderate or severe cognitive impairment (Rose, et al., 2011). When using the CDR, researchers were similarly inconsistent in their determinations: some used a defining score of 0 to 0.5 (Hall, et al., 2012) and others a score of greater than 0.5 (Albert, Moss, Blacker, Tanzi, &amp; McArdle, 2007). Comparison to normed data was also employed, consistent with the Petersen definitions, using 1.5 standard deviation units below that of individuals with comparative age and education (e.g., Kirchberg, et al., 2012).

Discussion

Multiple specific clinical diagnoses fall under the umbrella of dementia, but all clinical representations indicate maladaptive behaviors and deficits in cognition. A challenge of dementia and cognitive decline is the insidious nature of its onset. Its early stages are where researchers and clinicians frequently grapple to define terminology and employ measurement tools to capture the variability of symptoms present in patients. Under such circumstances, it is understandable that variation in expression arises. Terminology changes over time as well, perhaps in response to more nuanced grappling. Yet, the deliberate development of common vocabulary and corresponding operationalization is essential to interdisciplinary research efforts, and even efforts within disciplines, to solve the complex problems presented by dementia and cognitive decline.

Our review of terminology used to describe cognitive aging and cognitive health among older adults (see Appendix 2) demonstrates wide variation in what is employed in a research reporting context. To date, studies which examine these discrepancies have been limited, despite the importance of language to advancing interdisciplinary research efforts. Research on dementia and MCI is extensive and ongoing, and yet many studies offer limited opportunity for comparability or interpretation in the collective, because of the ways in which terminology and measurement tools are utilized. This review highlights some ways in which further clarification of language might be relevant to enhancing research endeavors.

Six terms stand out as most frequently used: dementia (n=158); cognitive impairment (n=132); mild cognitive impairment (n=131); Alzheimer’s disease (n=57); cognitive decline (n=55) and cognitive deficit(s)(n=55). The prominence of these terms signals not only their significance to research efforts, but also that a shared, common understanding of these terms is imperative. Other scoping reviews research indicate similar findings and recommendations. Friedman and colleagues (2015) examined risk and protective factors for Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders and found several definitions; however, there was a lack of common definitions, measures, and instruments across studies. Given that work in this area is so vast in nature, it is recommended that a next step could be establishing an interdisciplinary task force of investigators in key areas where this work is being published (geriatrics, neurology, psychiatry, and psychology) to discuss how to proceed with the study of these key areas through a common lens. The field would benefit from clear specification of these terms to better communicate within and across disciplines.

Closer examination of the terms “cognitive impairment” and “mild cognitive impairment” reveals that such common understanding does not yet exist. Our review uncovered that when using these terms, few authors offered definitions. When definitions appeared, there was no consistent application across studies or, more surprisingly, within disciplines. Furthermore, it was common for researchers from various disciplines to have technically distinct definitions of terms, especially when the terms were used in the vernacular. In the articles we reviewed, there was more clear and consistent terminology used, once a specific etiology was confirmed.

In addition, there was substantial variation in the measurement tools used to quantify participants’ level of cognitive impairment and MCI, and inconsistency in interpreting results of these tools, especially with respect to various stages of cognitive decline. For example, the MMSE was the most used measurement tool to identify cognitive impairment. Yet, the MMSE is a screening tool and not intended for diagnosis (Monroe &amp; Carter, 2012). The widespread, individualized interpretation of MMSE scores by researchers highlights the limited utility of this tool to capture the early spectrum cognitive impairment.

Part of our assessment of methodological rigor in this review was to determine whether standard demographic information was reported in the articles in our dataset. We found inconsistent reporting on race and ethnicity, gender, income level, and time since diagnosis. When data were collected about ethnicity and race, the datasets revealed a lack of ethnic and racial diversity in the samples. Because not all studies included this information, it is unclear whether they indeed lacked diversity; however, such information is essential to understanding the broader patterns of social determinants of health as they relate to cognitive aging. Moreover, universally collecting and reporting demographic information is critical to producing credible research and drawing appropriate conclusions.

Finally, based on journal classifications, research from a variety of disciplines was represented in our dataset, with geriatrics, neurology, and psychiatry featured prominently. Less represented were journals specific to the disciplines of social work, nursing, and sociology. Because of the significance of cognitive aging and cognitive health as key public health issues, readers of all health-related professional journals would benefit from articles on these topics.

Suggestions going forward

Findings from this scoping review have important research and practice implications, and indicate the importance of moving toward agreed upon definitions and measurement for cognitive disorders impacting older adults. First, researchers should include a definition and citation for the term(s) used for cognitive health description (Petersen, et al., 2014), as such precision will aid in the ability to compare, reproduce, and interpret results. Moreover, more research is needed to uncover whether consistency in terminology exists within disciplines such as geriatrics, neurology and psychiatry, as inconsistent use of terminology can hinder communication within disciplines as well. If such consistency is present, researchers should state the disciplinary-specific definition and its measurement for the benefit of those working in other disciplines. Second, journals should consider promoting consistent usage and definitions of cognitive health terms. This scoping literature review highlights the need for future research, such as use of the Delphi method, to establish definitions of these terms. Third, well-established and psychometrically strong measurement tools should be developed and used in ways that enable consistent interpretation of results across studies. As noted in our findings, screening tools such as the MMSE have limited utility for capturing the spectrum of cognitive impairment, especially in its early stages. Finally, it is also important for the field to identify common data elements to be reported in all research studies about these topics, including demographic information of samples. Such standards would help ensure scientific rigor and transparency as multiple disciplines join together to improve the cognitive health of older adults.

Governmental funding research mechanisms, professional associations, and publishers can play a key role in this effort by providing authorship guidance that aims for greater consistency in research language and reporting requirements. Substantial efforts have been made in this direction with the 2011 update of clinical guidelines for diagnosis, which have more clearly delineated the clinical differences that exist on the cognitive continuum (e.g., Albert, DeKosky, Dickson, et al., 2011; McKhann, Knopman, &amp; Chertkow, 2011). In clinical practice, having clearer and agreed upon definitions of cognitive impairment and MCI may help facilitate diagnosis and treatment. Additionally, discussing terms with consistency might serve to legitimize the subjective experiences of individuals in the early stages of cognitive change.

There were several limitations of this scoping review. Due to the nature of the search strategy, the dataset may have inadvertently excluded some articles due to the specific nature of the search terms and inclusion/exclusion criteria. The review was limited to studies conducted in the United States due to an effort to preserve conceptual clarity. We anticipate that an analysis incorporating international research reporting might surface additional deviations in language and terminology, due to the introduction of translational and cultural influences. In addition, basic science articles were excluded from the dataset because of a focus on public health, yet extensive research on dementia and Alzheimer’s disease is being conducted in this area, along with research in areas related to cognitive training and intervention. Future studies might expand inquiry into each of these directions. Our search was reliant on the indexing of the four databases employed, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, and MEDLINE. Also, our approach did not include a review of author disciplines, only the discipline of the journal in which a study was published, thereby limiting the view of the disciplinary representation of research.

We found few terms describing research on healthy cognitive status; rather, most of the terminology focused on cognitive decline and many of the identified terms had negative valence. This absence of terminology surrounding positive cognitive outcomes of aging suggests an important area for future research. Further work could also include additional analytical strategies, such as semantic network analysis or automated forms of topic modelling of the corpus of articles, to further expand on the variety of terminology and themes used in describing research on these topics. Likewise, an analysis of how terminology has changed over time may be a fruitful avenue for exposing the nuanced and positive changes that have occurred in response to more detailed studies of cognitive aging. In addition, researchers could examine other terms related to cognitive health and cognitive aging (see Appendix 2), beyond that of cognitive impairment and MCI, as well as terminology employed in other settings, such as clinical and caregiving settings.

Conclusion

In sum, with society’s aging population, work on understanding and improving cognitive health is of utmost importance, and researchers from across disciplines have joined this mission. Though some ambiguity can be helpful to research innovation, the disparities in definitions of cognitive impairment and MCI ultimately hinder cross-disciplinary communication. This limits opportunities for broader research collaboration to meet the challenges of cognitive aging and impedes dissemination of research on a wider scope. If researchers aim to make progress toward improving cognitive health among all older adults, it would be helpful to have more specificity and clarity around definitions, along with greater consistency in the use of measurement tools to assess the conditions of study.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Gwen Moni, BA, University of Washington; Inthira Roopsawang, APN, University of Washington; Yan Su, MS, RN, University of Washington; David X. Marquez, PhD, University of Illinois at Chicago; Karen Joseph, BS, University of Illinois at Chicago; Kate Olscamp, MPH, University of South Carolina; Kristie Kannaley, MA, MSP, University of South Carolina; Weizhou Tang, MSW, University of South Carolina; Benjamin S. Olivari, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Andrea Fitzroy, PhD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and Joanna Taliano, MA, MLS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Funding

This work was supported by a Prevention Research Center, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Alzheimer’s Disease and Healthy Aging Program, under Cooperative Agreement Number U48DP005013, the Aljoya Endowed Professorship in Aging, the Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Center of Oregon Health Sciences University [NIA grant #AG08017], and the South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services [A20190088]. The manuscript is the result of research conducted by the Healthy Brain Research Network, a thematic network of CDC’s Prevention Research Centers Program, under cooperative agreements [U48 DP 005006, 005010, 005053, 005000, 005013]. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the CDC.

Study data were collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) electronic data capture tools hosted at the Institute of Translational Health Sciences (ITHS). REDCap is a secure, web-based application designed to support data capture for research studies, providing: 1) an intuitive interface for validated data entry; 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for importing data from external sources. REDCap at ITHS is supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number UL1 TR002319.

Appendix 1 Search parameters

Term	Public Health Focus Term	
Alzheimer*	Physician patient relations	
Dementia*	Public health	
Cognitive impairment	Health promotion	
 AND Alzheimer*	Health education	
 AND dementia	Health information	
Cognitive disorder*	Consumer information	
 AND Alzheimer*	Intervention*	
 AND dementia	Prevention	
Cognitive change*	Patient communication*	
 AND Alzheimer*	Patient education	
 AND dementia	Community health	
Cognitive decline	Health messsag*	
 AND Alzheimer*	Public awareness	
 AND dementia	Health communication*	
Cognitive health	Campaign	
 AND Alzheimer*	Public service	
 AND dementia	Attitude*	
Cognitive aging	Knowledge	
 AND Alzheimer*	Belief*	
 AND dementia	Perception*	
Cognitive status		
 AND Alzheimer*		
 AND dementia		
Brain health		
 AND Alzheimer*		
 AND dementia		
Healthy brain		
 AND Alzheimer*		
 AND dementia		
Memory loss		
 AND Alzheimer*		
 AND dementia		
Senile		
 AND Alzheimer*		
 AND dementia		
Senility		
 AND Alzheimer*		
 AND dementia		
(*) Note. The asterisk refers to the use of a wildcard, or a placeholder for one or more characters; it is used in searching for related terms such that messag* would return items that include message, messages, and messaging.

Appendix 2 List of Abstracted Terms

Terms	Frequency	
AD continuum	1	
advanced dementia	1	
age-related cognitive decline	1	
age-related cognitive deficits	1	
alcoholic dementia	1	
alcohol-related dementia (ARD)	1	
Alzheimer Disease/Alzheimer’s/Alzheimer’s disease (AD)	57	
Alzheimer’s dementia	3	
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias	2	
Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders (ADRD)/Alzheimer’s disease or related cognitive disorders (ADRDs)	2	
Alzheimer’s disease or related dementia	1	
amnestic mild cognitive impairment/amnestic MCI	12	
Anosognosia	2	
anticipatory grief	1	
brain aging	2	
brain health	3	
caregiver burden	1	
cognitive complaint(s)	3	
Cognition	10	
cognitive ability	1	
cognitive aging	1	
cognitive change	390	
cognitive competence	1	
cognitive decline	55	
cognitive deficit(s)	8	
cognitive deterioration	1	
cognitive difficulties	1	
cognitive disorder(s)	3	
cognitive dysfunction	8	
cognitive factors	1	
cognitive flexibility	2	
cognitive function(ing)	5	
cognitive health	4	
cognitive illness	1	
cognitive impairment	132	
cognitive impairment no dementia (CIND)/cognitive impairment no dementia (CIND)/cognitive impairment without dementia (CIND)/cognitive impairment, not dementia (CIND)	7	
cognitive loss	4	
cognitive mastery	1	
cognitive performance	1	
cognitive problems	2	
cognitive reserve	1	
cognitive status	3	
cognitively intact	1	
cognitively normal	4	
concept formation	1	
declining cognitive function	1	
delirium superimposed on dementia	1	
Dementia	158	
dementia of the Alzheimer’s type	2	
dementing illness	1	
early stage cognitive difficulties	1	
early stage memory loss	1	
early-stage dementia	3	
executive dysfunction	1	
executive function	1	
executive function deficits	1	
familiarity impairment	1	
five domains of cognitive function	1	
frontotemporal dementia	1	
functional ability	1	
functional decline	2	
functional deficit	1	
global cognitive function(ing)	2	
impaired cognition	1	
improved cognitive function	1	
incipient dementia	1	
Korsakoff syndrome or Korsakoff amnesic syndrome	1	
Lewy body dementia	1	
loss of cognitive and functional abilities	1	
loss of functional capacity	1	
MCI executive	1	
MCI nonexecutive	1	
memory complaints	1	
memory decline	1	
memory disorder	1	
memory impairment	5	
memory loss	8	
memory problems	2	
mental stimulation	1	
mild AD	2	
mild AD dementia	1	
mild Alzheimer’s disease	2	
mild Alzheimer’s disease dementia	1	
mild cognitive change(s)	2	
mild cognitive decline	1	
mild cognitive deficit(s)	4	
mild cognitive disorder	1	
mild cognitive dysfunction	1	
mild cognitive impairment (MCI)	131	
mild cognitive symptoms	1	
mild dementia	2	
mild impairment	2	
mild memory impairment	1	
mild neurocognitive disorder	1	
mild neurocognitive impairment (MNCI)	1	
mild to moderate cognitive impairment	1	
mild/moderate dementia	2	
minor cognitive impairment	1	
moderate AD	1	
moderate AD dementia	1	
moderate cognitive impairment	1	
moderate to severe dementia/moderate/severe dementia	2	
multidomain MCI	1	
neurocognitive degeneration	1	
neurocognitive disorder	1	
nonamnestic MCI	1	
nondemented but mildly impaired	1	
normal aging	1	
normal cognition	3	
normal cognitive aging	2	
normal cognitive function	1	
normal memory loss	1	
objective cognitive impairment	1	
pre-dementia cognitive changes	1	
probable AD	2	
probable dementia	2	
processing speed	1	
prodromal AD	1	
psychometric MCI	2	
quality of life	1	
recollection impairment	1	
semantic dementia	2	
staying sharp	1	
subjective cognitive complaints	2	
subjective cognitive decline	3	
subjective cognitive impairment	1	
subjective memory concerns	1	
subjective memory impairment	1	
transient cognitive impairments	1	
vascular dementia	7	
very mild AD	1	
visual spatial skills	1	
Wernicke-Korsakoff	1	
Wernicke’s encephalopathy	1	
	
Total	1,163	

Appendix 3 Complete List of Articles Included in the Dataset

Albert, M., Moss, M. B., Blacker, D., Tanzi, R., &amp; McArdle, J. J. (2007). Longitudinal change in cognitive performance among individuals with mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychology, 21(2), 158–169.

Ally, B. A., Gold, C. A., &amp; Budson, A. E. (2009). An evaluation of recollection and familiarity in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment using receiver operating characteristics. Brain &amp; Cognition, 69(3), 504–513.

Amjad, H., Wong, S. K., Roth, D. L., Huang, J., Willink, A., Black, B. S., . . . Samus, Q. M. (2016). Health Services Utilization in Older Adults with Dementia Receiving Care Coordination: The MIND at Home Trial. Health Services Research.

Anderson-Hanley, C., Arciero, P. J., Barcelos, N., Nimon, J., Rocha, T., Thurin, M., &amp; Maloney, M. (2014). Executive function and self-regulated exergaming adherence among older adults. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8 (DEC) (no pagination)(999).

Anderson-Hanley, C., Barcelos, N. M., Zimmerman, E. A., Gillen, R. W., Dunnam, M., Cohen, B. D., . . . Kramer, A. F. (2018). The Aerobic and Cognitive Exercise Study (ACES) for community-dwelling older adults with or at-risk for mild cognitive impairment (MCI): Neuropsychological, neurobiological and neuroimaging outcomes of a randomized clinical trial. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 10 (MAY) (no pagination)(76).

Apostolova, L. G., Di, L. J., Duffy, E. L., Brook, J., Elashoff, D., Tseng, C. H., . . . Cummings, J. L. (2014). Risk factors for behavioral abnormalities in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 37(5–6), 315–326.

Arkin, S. (2007). Language-enriched exercise plus socialization slows cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 22(1), 62–77.

Ascher-Svanum, H., Chen, Y. F., Hake, A., Kahle-Wrobleski, K., Schuster, D., Kendall, D., &amp; Heine, R. J. (2015). Cognitive and Functional Decline in Patients With Mild Alzheimer Dementia With or Without Comorbid Diabetes. Clinical Therapeutics, 37(6), 1195–1205.

Atchison, T. B., Massman, P. J., &amp; Doody, R. S. (2007). Baseline cognitive function predicts rate of decline in basic-care abilities of individuals with dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 22(1), 99–107.

Baker, L. D., Frank, L. L., Foster-Schubert, K., Green, P. S., Wilkinson, C. W., McTiernan, A., . . . Craft, S. (2010). Effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive impairment: a controlled trial. Archives of Neurology, 67(1), 71–79.

Balota, D. A., Tse, C. S., Hutchison, K. A., Spieler, D. H., Duchek, J. M., &amp; Morris, J. C. (2010). Predicting conversion to dementia of the Alzheimer’s type in a healthy control sample: the power of errors in Stroop color naming. Psychology &amp; Aging, 25(1), 208–218.

Bangen, K. J., Delano-Wood, L., Wierenga, C. E., McCauley, A., Jeste, D. V., Salmon, D. P., &amp; Bondi, M. W. (2010). Associations between stroke risk and cognition in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease with and without depression. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 25(2), 175–182.

Barnes, D. E., Santos-Modesitt, W., Poelke, G., Kramer, A. F., Castro, C., Middleton, L. E., &amp; Yaffe, K. (2013). The Mental Activity and eXercise (MAX) trial: a randomized controlled trial to enhance cognitive function in older adults. JAMA Internal Medicine, 173(9), 797–804.

Barnes, J., Bartlett, J. W., Wolk, D. A., Van Der Flier, W. M., &amp; Frost, C. (2018). Disease Course Varies According to Age and Symptom Length in Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 64(2), 631–642.

Bass, D. M., Judge, K. S., Snow, A. L., Wilson, N. L., Looman, W. J., McCarthy, C., . . . Kunik, M. E. (2012). Negative caregiving effects among caregivers of veterans with dementia. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20(3), 239–247.

Bayley, P. J., Kong, J. Y., Mendiondo, M., Lazzeroni, L. C., Borson, S., Buschke, H., . . . Ashford, J. W. (2015). Findings from the National Memory Screening Day program. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 63(2), 309–314.

Beard, R. L., Fetterman, D. J., Wu, B., &amp; Bryant, L. (2009). The two voices of Alzheimer’s: attitudes toward brain health by diagnosed individuals and support persons. Gerontologist, 49 Suppl 1, S40–49.

Beard, R. L., Sakhtah, S., Imse, V., &amp; Galvin, J. E. (2012). Negotiating the joint career: Couples adapting to Alzheimer’s and aging in place. Journal of Aging Research, 2012 (no pagination)(797023).

Beaudreau, S. A., Spira, A. P., Gray, H. L., Depp, C. A., Long, J., Rothkopf, M., &amp; Gallagher-Thompson, D. (2008). The relationship between objectively measured sleep disturbance and dementia family caregiver distress and burden. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry &amp; Neurology, 21(3), 159–165.

Bejjani, C., Snow, A., Judge, K. S., Bass, D. M., Morgan, R. O., Wilson, N., . . . Kunik, M. E. (2015). Characteristics of depressed caregivers of veterans with dementia. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and other Dementias, 30(7), 672–678.

Belmin, J., Min, L., Roth, C., Reuben, D., &amp; Wenger, N. (2012). Assessment and management of patients with cognitive impairment and dementia in primary care. Journal of Nutrition, Health &amp; Aging, 16(5), 462–467.

Besser, L. M., Gill, D. P., Monsell, S. E., Brenowitz, W., Meranus, D. H., Kukull, W., &amp; Gustafson, D. R. (2014). Body mass index, weight change, and clinical progression in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders, 28(1), 36–43.

Beydoun, M. A., Beason-Held, L. L., Kitner-Triolo, M. H., Beydoun, H. A., Ferrucci, L., Resnick, S. M., &amp; Zonderman, A. B. (2011). Statins and serum cholesterol’s associations with incident dementia and mild cognitive impairment. Journal of Epidemiology &amp; Community Health, 65(11), 949–957.

Boustani, M. A., Sachs, G. A., Alder, C. A., Munger, S., Schubert, C. C., Guerriero Austrom, M., . . . Callahan, C. M. (2011). Implementing innovative models of dementia care: The Healthy Aging Brain Center. Aging &amp; mental health, 15(1), 13–22.

Braddock, B. A., &amp; Phipps, E. (2011). The effects of student home visits on activity engagement in persons with Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. American Journal of Recreation Therapy, 10(4), 9–16 18p. doi:10.5055/ajrt.2011.0006

Bruno, D., Koscik, R. L., Woodard, J. L., Pomara, N., &amp; Johnson, S. C. (2018). The recency ratio as predictor of early MCI. International Psychogeriatrics, 1–6.

Buettner, L. L., Fitzsimmons, S., Atav, S., &amp; Sink, K. (2011). Cognitive stimulation for apathy in probable early-stage Alzheimer’s. Journal of Aging Research, 2011 (no pagination)(480890).

Burke, S. L., Maramaldi, P., Cadet, T., &amp; Kukull, W. (2016). Associations between depression, sleep disturbance, and apolipoprotein E in the development of Alzheimer’s disease: Dementia. International Psychogeriatrics, 28(9), 1409–1424.

Burns, J. M., Mayo, M. S., Anderson, H. S., Smith, H. J., &amp; Donnelly, J. E. (2008). Cardiorespiratory fitness in early-stage Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders, 22(1), 39–46.

Campbell, K. H., Stocking, C. B., Hougham, G. W., Whitehouse, P. J., Danner, D. D., &amp; Sachs, G. A. (2008). Dementia, diagnostic disclosure, and self-reported health status. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 56(2), 296–300.

Capruso, D. X., &amp; Hamsher, K. (2012). Retrograde memory in cerebrovascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Stroke &amp; Cerebrovascular Diseases, 21(4), 265–274.

Caselli, R. J., Langlais, B. T., Dueck, A. C., Henslin, B. R., Johnson, T. A., Woodruff, B. K., . . . Locke, D. E. C. (2018). Personality Changes During the Transition from Cognitive Health to Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 66(4), 671–678.

Chaufan, C., Hollister, B., Nazareno, J., &amp; Fox, P. (2012). Medical ideology as a double-edged sword: the politics of cure and care in the making of Alzheimer’s disease. Social Science &amp; Medicine, 74(5), 788–795.

Chen, C. K., Clayton, K., &amp; Chodosh, J. (2017). The Relationship Between “What We Believe” and “How We Care” Among Daughters Caring for a Parent With Dementia. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 32(2), 90–95.

Chen, S. T., Siddarth, P., Ercoli, L. M., Merrill, D. A., Torres-Gil, F., &amp; Small, G. W. (2014). Modifiable risk factors for Alzheimer disease and subjective memory impairment across age groups. PLoS ONE [Electronic Resource], 9(6), e98630.

Choi, S. S. W., Budhathoki, C., &amp; Gitlin, L. N. (2017). Co-Occurrence and Predictors of Three Commonly Occurring Behavioral Symptoms in Dementia: Agitation, Aggression, and Rejection of Care. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 25(5), 459–468.

Clarke, D. E., Ko, J. Y., Lyketsos, C., Rebok, G. W., &amp; Eaton, W. W. (2010). Apathy and cognitive and functional decline in community-dwelling older adults: Results from the Baltimore ECA longitudinal study. International Psychogeriatrics, 22(5), 819–829.

Clionsky, M., &amp; Clionsky, E. (2011). Identifying cognitive impairment during the Annual Wellness Visit: who can you trust? Journal of Family Practice, 60(11), 653–659.

Cosentino, S., Devanand, D., &amp; Gurland, B. (2018). A link between subjective perceptions of memory and physical function: Implications for subjective cognitive decline. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 61(4), 1387–1398.

Cruz-Oliver, D. M., Malmstrom, T. K., Roegner, M., Tumosa, N., &amp; Grossberg, G. T. (2014). Cognitive deficit reversal as shown by changes in the Veterans Affairs Saint Louis University Mental Status (SLUMS) examination scores 7.5 years later. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 15(9), 687.e685–610.

Daley, R. T., O’Connor, M. K., Shirk, S. D., &amp; Beard, R. L. (2017). ‘In this together’ or ‘Going it alone’: Spousal dyad approaches to Alzheimer’s. Journal of Aging Studies, 40, 57–63.

Daley, R. T., Sugarman, M. A., Shirk, S. D., &amp; O’Connor, M. K. (2018). Spared emotional perception in patients with Alzheimer’s disease is associated with negative caregiver outcomes. Aging &amp; mental health, 22(5), 595–602.

Damianakis, T., Crete-Nishihata, M., Smith, K. L., Baecker, R. M., &amp; Marziali, E. (2010). The psychosocial impacts of multimedia biographies on persons with cognitive impairments. The Gerontologist, 50(1), 23–35.

Darby, R. R., Brickhouse, M., Wolk, D. A., &amp; Dickerson, B. C. (2017). Effects of cognitive reserve depend on executive and semantic demands of the task. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 88(9), 794–802.

Darlak, L., Bass, D. M., Judge, K. S., Wilson, N., Looman, W., McCarthy, C., . . . Kunik, M. E. (2017). Engagement of veterans with dementia in Partners in Dementia Care: An evidence-based care coordination program. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 36(5), 570–591.

Dassel, K. B., Carr, D. C., &amp; Vitaliano, P. (2017). Does Caring for a Spouse With Dementia Accelerate Cognitive Decline? Findings From the Health and Retirement Study. The Gerontologist, 57(2), 319–328.

Davey, A., Elias, M. F., Robbins, M. A., Seliger, S. L., &amp; Dore, G. A. (2013). Decline in renal functioning is associated with longitudinal decline in global cognitive functioning, abstract reasoning and verbal memory. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 28(7), 1810–1819.

Davies, H. D., Newkirk, L. A., Pitts, C. B., Coughlin, C. A., Sridhar, S. B., Zeiss, L. M., &amp; Zeiss, A. M. (2010). The impact of dementia and mild memory impairment (MMI) on intimacy and sexuality in spousal relationships. International Psychogeriatrics, 22(4), 618–628.

Davydow, D. S., Levine, D. A., Zivin, K., Katon, W. J., &amp; Langa, K. M. (2015). The association of depression, cognitive impairment without dementia, and dementia with risk of ischemic stroke: a cohort study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 77(2), 200–208.

Davydow, D. S., Zivin, K., Katon, W. J., Pontone, G. M., Chwastiak, L., Langa, K. M., &amp; Iwashyna, T. J. (2014). Neuropsychiatric disorders and potentially preventable hospitalizations in a prospective cohort study of older Americans. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 29(10), 1362–1371.

Dawson, N. T., Powers, S. M., Krestar, M., Yarry, S. J., &amp; Judge, K. S. (2013). Predictors of self-reported psychosocial outcomes in individuals with dementia. Gerontologist, 53(5), 748–759.

Dawson, N. V., Singer, M. E., Lenert, L., Patterson, M. B., Sami, S. A., Gonsenhouser, I., . . . Whitehouse, P. J. (2008). Health state valuation in mild to moderate cognitive impairment: feasibility of computer-based, direct patient utility assessment. Medical Decision Making, 28(2), 220–232.

DeFries, E. L., McGuire, L. C., Andresen, E. M., Brumback, B. A., &amp; Anderson, L. A. (2009). Caregivers of older adults with cognitive impairment. Preventing Chronic Disease, 6(2), A46.

Devanand, D. P., Lee, S., Manly, J., Andrews, H., Schupf, N., Doty, R. L., . . . Mayeux, R. (2015). Olfactory deficits predict cognitive decline and Alzheimer dementia in an urban community. Neurology, 84(2), 182–189.

Dodge, H. H., Mattek, N., Gregor, M., Bowman, M., Seelye, A., Ybarra, O., . . . Kaye, J. A. (2015). Social markers of mild cognitive impairment: Proportion of word counts in free conversational speech. Current Alzheimer Research, 12(6), 513–519.

Donix, M., Ercoli, L. M., Siddarth, P., Brown, J. A., Martin-Harris, L., Burggren, A. C., . . . Bookheimer, S. Y. (2012). Influence of Alzheimer disease family history and genetic risk on cognitive performance in healthy middle-aged and older people. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20(7), 565–573.

Edwards, D. F., &amp; Morris, J. C. (2007). Alone and confused: community-residing older African Americans with dementia. Dementia (14713012), 6(4), 489–506 418p.

Eggermont, L. H., Gavett, B. E., Volkers, K. M., Blankevoort, C. G., Scherder, E. J., Jefferson, A. L., . . . Stern, R. A. (2010). Lower-extremity function in cognitively healthy aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. Archives of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation, 91(4), 584–588.

Feil, D. G., Lukman, R., Simon, B., Walston, A., &amp; Vickrey, B. (2011). Impact of dementia on caring for patients’ diabetes. Aging &amp; mental health, 15(7), 894–903.

Fisher, G. G., Franks, M. M., Plassman, B. L., Brown, S. L., Potter, G. G., Llewellyn, D., . . . Langa, K. M. (2011). Caring for individuals with dementia and cognitive impairment, not dementia: findings from the aging, demographics, and memory study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 59(3), 488–494.

Flatt, J. D., Liptak, A., Oakley, M. A., Gogan, J., Varner, T., &amp; Lingler, J. H. (2015). Subjective experiences of an art museum engagement activity for persons with early-stage Alzheimer’s disease and their family caregivers. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 30(4), 380–389.

Fletcher, T. S., &amp; Eckberg, J. D. (2014). The Effects of Creative Reminiscing on Individuals with Dementia and Their Caregivers: A Pilot Study. Physical &amp; Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 32(1), 68–84 17p. doi:10.3109/02703181.2014.880863

Fortinsky, R. H., Delaney, C., Harel, O., Pasquale, K., Schjavland, E., Lynch, J., . . . Crumb, S. (2014). Results and lessons learned from a nurse practitioner-guided dementia care intervention for primary care patients and their family caregivers. Research in Gerontological Nursing, 7(3), 126–137.

Galvin, J. E., Fu, Q., Nguyen, J. T., Glasheen, C., &amp; Scharff, D. P. (2008). Psychosocial determinants of intention to screen for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 4(5), 353–360.

Gan, J. J., Lin, A., Samimi, M. S., &amp; Mendez, M. F. (2016). Somatic symptom disorder in semantic dementia: The role of alexisomia. Psychosomatics: Journal of Consultation and Liaison Psychiatry, 57(6), 598–604.

Garand, L., Lingler, J. H., Deardorf, K. E., DeKosky, S. T., Schulz, R., Reynolds, C. F., 3rd, &amp; Dew, M. A. (2012). Anticipatory grief in new family caregivers of persons with mild cognitive impairment and dementia. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders, 26(2), 159–165.

Garand, L., Rinaldo, D. E., Alberth, M. M., Delany, J., Beasock, S. L., Lopez, O. L., . . . Dew, M. A. (2014). Effects of problem solving therapy on mental health outcomes in family caregivers of persons with a new diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment or early dementia: a randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(8), 771–781.

Gaugler, J. E., Gallagher-Winker, K., Kehrberg, K., Lunde, A. M., Marsolek, C. M., Ringham, K., . . . Barclay, M. (2011). The Memory Club: Providing support to persons with early-stage dementia and their care partners. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 26(3), 218–226.

George, N. R., &amp; Steffen, A. M. (2017). Predicting perceived medication-related hassles in dementia family caregivers. Dementia: The International Journal of Social Research and Practice, 16(6), 797–810.

Gerstenecker, A., Triebel, K., Eakin, A., Martin, R., &amp; Marson, D. (2018). Exploring the factor structure of financial capacity in cognitively normal and impaired older adults. Clinical Gerontologist: The Journal of Aging and Mental Health, 41(1), 33–41.

Giovannetti, T., Bettcher, B. M., Brennan, L., Libon, D. J., Burke, M., Duey, K., . . . Wambach, D. (2008). Characterization of everyday functioning in mild cognitive impairment: a direct assessment approach. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 25(4), 359–365.

Gleason, C. E., Gangnon, R. E., Fischer, B. L., &amp; Mahoney, J. E. (2009). Increased risk for falling associated with subtle cognitive impairment: Secondary analysis of a randomized clinical trial. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 27(6), 557–563.

Gottesman, R. F., Albert, M. S., Alonso, A., Coker, L. H., Coresh, J., Davis, S. M., . . . Knopman, D. S. (2017). Associations Between Midlife Vascular Risk Factors and 25-Year Incident Dementia in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Cohort. JAMA Neurology, 74(10), 1246–1254.

Guan, Y., Roter, D. L., Erby, L. H., Wolff, J. L., Gitlin, L. N., Roberts, J. S., . . . Christensen, K. D. (2017). Disclosing genetic risk of Alzheimer’s disease to cognitively impaired patients and visit companions: Findings from the REVEAL Study. Patient Education &amp; Counseling, 100(5), 927–935. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2016.12.005

Gurgel, R. K., Ward, P. D., Schwartz, S., Norton, M. C., Foster, N. L., &amp; Tschanz, J. T. (2014). Relationship of hearing loss and dementia: a prospective, population-based study. Otology &amp; Neurotology, 35(5), 775–781.

Hall, J. R., Pennington, M., Swicegood, E., &amp; Winter, A. (2012). The relationship of cognitive impairment to hypnotic susceptibility in a sample of elderly: A pilot study. Psychology, 3(1), 62–64.

Halpern, A. R., Ly, J., Elkin-Frankston, S., &amp; O’Connor, M. G. (2008). “I know what I like”: stability of aesthetic preference in Alzheimer’s patients. Brain &amp; Cognition, 66(1), 65–72.

Halpin, S. N., Dillard, R. L., &amp; Puentes, W. J. (2017). Socio-emotional adaptation theory: Charting the emotional process of Alzheimer’s disease. The Gerontologist, 57(4), 696–706.

Haring, B., Leng, X., Robinson, J., Johnson, K. C., Jackson, R. D., Beyth, R., . . . Wassertheil-Smoller, S. (2013). Cardiovascular disease and cognitive decline in postmenopausal women: results from the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study. Journal of the American Heart Association, 2(6), e000369.

Hebert, L. E., Bienias, J. L., McCann, J. J., Scherr, P. A., Wilson, R. S., &amp; Evans, D. A. (2010). Upper and lower extremity motor performance and functional impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 25(5), 425–431.

Hill, N. L., Kolanowski, A. M., Fick, D., Chinchilli, V. M., &amp; Jablonski, R. A. (2014). Personality as a moderator of cognitive stimulation in older adults at high risk for cognitive decline. Research in Gerontological Nursing, 7(4), 159–170.

Hochhalter, A. K., Bryant, L. L., Hunter, R., Liu, R., Friedman, D. B., Price, A. E., . . . McCrystle, S. (2012). Multisite qualitative study of primary care physicians’ and midlevel providers’ self-reported practices and perceptions about maintaining cognitive health. Preventing Chronic Disease, 9, E169.

Hodgson, N., Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., &amp; Hauck, W. W. (2014). Caregiver’s perceptions of the relationship of pain to behavioral and psychiatric symptoms in older community-residing adults with dementia. Clinical Journal of Pain, 30(5), 421–427.

Hodgson, N. A., Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., &amp; Czekanski, K. (2011). Undiagnosed illness and neuropsychiatric behaviors in community residing older adults with dementia. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders, 25(2), 109–115.

Hong, C. H., Falvey, C., Harris, T. B., Simonsick, E. M., Satterfield, S., Ferrucci, L., . . . Yaffe, K. (2013). Anemia and risk of dementia in older adults: Findings from the Health ABC study. Neurology, 81(6), 528–533.

Horning, S. M., Melrose, R., &amp; Sultzer, D. (2014). Insight in Alzheimer’s disease and its relation to psychiatric and behavioral disturbances. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 29(1), 77–84.

Hughes, T., Tyler, K., Danner, D., &amp; Carter, A. (2009). African American caregivers: an exploration of pathways and barriers to a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease for a family member with dementia. Dementia (14713012), 8(1), 95–116 122p.

Hurd, M. D., Martorell, P., Delavande, A., Mullen, K. J., &amp; Langa, K. M. (2013). Monetary costs of dementia in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine, 368(14), 1326–1334.

Innes, K. E., Selfe, T. K., Khalsa, D. S., &amp; Kandati, S. (2016). Effects of meditation versus music listening on perceived stress, mood, sleep, and quality of life in adults with early memory loss: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 52(4), 1277–1298.

Iris, M., &amp; Schrauf, R. W. (2017). Aging, memory loss, and Alzheimer’s disease: What do refugees from the former Soviet Union think? Journal of Religion, Spirituality &amp; Aging, 29(2–3), 130–146.

Ismail, M. S., Dagerman, K., Tariot, P. N., Abbott, S., Kavanagh, S., &amp; Schneider, L. S. (2007). National Institute of Mental Health Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness- Alzheimer’s Disease (CATIE-AD): baseline characteristics. Current Alzheimer Research, 4(3), 325–335.

Ivey, S. L., Laditka, S. B., Price, A. E., Tseng, W., Beard, R. L., Liu, R., . . . Logsdon, R. G. (2013). Experiences and concerns of family caregivers providing support to people with dementia: a cross-cultural perspective. Dementia, 12(6), 806–820.

James, R. N., III, &amp; Sweaney, A. L. (2010). Housing dissatisfaction and cognitive decline in older adults. Journal of Housing for the Elderly, 24(1), 93–106 114p. doi:10.1080/02763890903547104

Jedrziewski, M. K., Ewbank, D. C., Wang, H., &amp; Trojanowski, J. Q. (2010). Exercise and cognition: results from the National Long Term Care Survey. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 6(6), 448–455.

Jefferson, A. L., Gifford, K. A., Acosta, L. M. Y., Bell, S. P., Donahue, M. J., Davis, L., . . . Liu, D. (2016). The Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project: Study design and baseline cohort overview. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 52(2), 539–559.

Jonaitis, E. M., Koscik, R. L., La Rue, A., Johnson, S. C., Hermann, B. P., &amp; Sager, M. A. (2015). Aging, Practice Effects, and Genetic Risk in the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s Prevention. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 29(4), 426–441.

Jones, G., Tabassum, V., Zarow, G. J., &amp; Ala, T. A. (2015). The inability of older adults to recall their drugs and medical conditions. Drugs &amp; Aging, 32(4), 329–336.

Judge, K. S., Yarry, S. J., Looman, W. J., &amp; Bass, D. M. (2013). Improved Strain and Psychosocial Outcomes for Caregivers of Individuals with Dementia: Findings from Project ANSWERS. Gerontologist, 53(2), 280–292.

Judge, K. S., Yarry, S. J., &amp; Orsulic-Jeras, S. (2010). Acceptability and feasibility results of a strength-based skills training program for dementia caregiving dyads. Gerontologist, 50(3), 408–417.

Karlawish, J., Barg, F. K., Augsburger, D., Beaver, J., Ferguson, A., &amp; Nunez, J. (2011). What Latino Puerto Ricans and non-Latinos say when they talk about Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7(2), 161–170.

Katz, M. J., Lipton, R. B., Hall, C. B., Zimmerman, M. E., Sanders, A. E., Verghese, J., . . . Derby, C. A. (2012). Age-specific and sex-specific prevalence and incidence of mild cognitive impairment, dementia, and Alzheimer dementia in Blacks and Whites: A report from the Einstein aging study. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 26(4), 335–343.

Kelley, B. J., Boeve, B. F., &amp; Josephs, K. A. (2008). Young-onset dementia: demographic and etiologic characteristics of 235 patients.[Erratum appears in Arch Neurol. 2009 Mar;66(3):312]. Archives of Neurology, 65(11), 1502–1508.

Kim, S. S., Oh, K. M., &amp; Richards, K. (2014). Sleep disturbance, nocturnal agitation behaviors, and medical comorbidity in older adults with dementia: relationship to reported caregiver burden. Research in Gerontological Nursing, 7(5), 206–214.

Kirchberg, B. C., Cohen, J. R., Adelsky, M. B., Buthorn, J. J., Gomar, J. J., Gordon, M., . . . Goldberg, T. E. (2012). Semantic distance abnormalities in mild cognitive impairment: Their nature and relationship to function. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(12), 1275–1283.

Kirson, N. Y., Scott Andrews, J., Desai, U., King, S. B., Schonfeld, S., Birnbaum, H. G., . . . Kahle-Wrobleski, K. (2018). Patient Characteristics and Outcomes Associated with Receiving an Earlier Versus Later Diagnosis of Probable Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 61(1), 295–307.

Koppel, J., Goldberg, T. E., Gordon, M. L., Huey, E., Davies, P., Keehlisen, L., . . . Greenwald, B. S. (2012). Relationships between behavioral syndromes and cognitive domains in Alzheimer disease: the impact of mood and psychosis. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20(11), 994–1000.

Koscik, R. L., La Rue, A., Jonaitis, E. M., Okonkwo, O. C., Johnson, S. C., Bendlin, B. B., . . . Sager, M. A. (2014). Emergence of mild cognitive impairment in late middle-aged adults in the wisconsin registry for Alzheimer’s prevention. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 38(1–2), 16–30.

Kotwal, A. A., Kim, J., Waite, L., &amp; Dale, W. (2016). Social Function and Cognitive Status: Results from a US Nationally Representative Survey of Older Adults. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 31(8), 854–862.

Laditka, S. B., Tseng, W., Price, A. E., Ivey, S. L., Friedman, D. B., Liu, R., . . . Beard, R. L. (2012). Beliefs about promoting cognitive health among Filipino Americans who care for persons with dementia. International Journal of Aging &amp; Human Development, 75(3), 273–296.

Lapid, M. I., Rummans, T. A., Boeve, B. F., McCormick, J. K., Pankratz, V., Cha, R. H., . . . Petersen, R. C. (2011). What is the quality of life in the oldest old? International Psychogeriatrics, 23(6), 1003–1010.

Law, L. L., Schultz, S. A., Boots, E. A., Einerson, J. A., Dougherty, R. J., Oh, J. M., . . . Okonkwo, O. C. (2017). Chronotropic Response and Cognitive Function in a Cohort at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 56(1), 351–359.

Lee, H. B., Han, H. R., Huh, B. Y., Kim, K. B., &amp; Kim, M. T. (2014). Mental health service utilization among Korean elders in Korean churches: preliminary findings from the Memory and Aging Study of Koreans in Maryland (MASK-MD). Aging &amp; mental health, 18(1), 102–109.

Lee, J. H., Bliwise, D. L., Ansari, F. P., Goldstein, F. C., Cellar, J. S., Lah, J. J., &amp; Levey, A. I. (2007). Daytime sleepiness and functional impairment in Alzheimer disease. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(7), 620–626.

Lee, J. H., Shelton, J. T., Scullin, M. K., &amp; McDaniel, M. A. (2016). An implementation intention strategy can improve prospective memory in older adults with very mild Alzheimer’s disease. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55(2), 154–166.

Lee, K. H., Wu, B., &amp; Plassman, B. L. (2015). Dental care utilization among older adults with cognitive impairment in the USA. Geriatrics &amp; gerontology international, 15(3), 255–260.

Lee, S. E., Lee, H. Y., &amp; Diwan, S. (2010). What do Korean American immigrants know about Alzheimer’s disease (AD)? The impact of acculturation and exposure to the disease on AD knowledge. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 25(1), 66–73.

Lin, M., Gong, P., Yang, T., Ye, J., Albin, R. L., &amp; Dodge, H. H. (2018). Big Data Analytical Approaches to the NACC Dataset: Aiding Preclinical Trial Enrichment. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 32(1), 18–27.

Lingler, J. H., Hirschman, K. B., Garand, L., Dew, M. A., Becker, J. T., Schulz, R., &amp; Dekosky, S. T. (2008). Frequency and correlates of advance planning among cognitively impaired older adults. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(8), 643–649.

Lingler, J. H., Terhorst, L., Schulz, R., Gentry, A., &amp; Lopez, O. (2016). Dyadic analysis of illness perceptions among persons with mild cognitive impairment and their family members. The Gerontologist, 56(5), 886–895.

Liu-Seifert, H., Siemers, E., Price, K., Han, B., Selzler, K. J., Henley, D., . . . Mohs, R. (2015). Cognitive impairment precedes and predicts functional impairment in mild Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 47(1), 205–214.

Logsdon, R. G., Pike, K. C., McCurry, S. M., Hunter, P., Maher, J., Snyder, L., &amp; Teri, L. (2010). Early-stage memory loss support groups: Outcomes from a randomized controlled clinical trial. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 65B(6), 691–697.

MacAulay, R. K., Calamia, M. R., Cohen, A. S., Daigle, K., Foil, H., Brouillette, R., . . . Keller, J. N. (2018). Understanding heterogeneity in older adults: Latent growth curve modeling of cognitive functioning. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 40(3), 292–302.

Mantella, R. C., Butters, M. A., Dew, M. A., Mulsant, B. H., Begley, A. E., Tracey, B., . . . Lenze, E. J. (2007). Cognitive impairment in late-life generalized anxiety disorder. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(8), 673–679.

Marquine, M. J., Segawa, E., Wilson, R. S., Bennett, D. A., &amp; Barnes, L. L. (2012). Association between cognitive activity and cognitive function in older Hispanics. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 18(6), 1041–1051.

Marshall, G. A., Rentz, D. M., Frey, M. T., Locascio, J. J., Johnson, K. A., Sperling, R. A., &amp; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, I. (2011). Executive function and instrumental activities of daily living in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7(3), 300–308.

Marson, D. C., Martin, R. C., Wadley, V., Griffith, H. R., Snyder, S., Goode, P. S., . . . Harrell, L. E. (2009). Clinical interview assessment of financial capacity in older adults with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 57(5), 806–814.

McCurry, S. M., Pike, K. C., Vitiello, M. V., Logsdon, R. G., &amp; Teri, L. (2008). Factors associated with concordance and variability of sleep quality in persons with Alzheimer’s disease and their caregivers. Sleep, 31(5), 741–748.

McEwen, S. C., Siddarth, P., Abedelsater, B., Kim, Y., Mui, W., Wu, P., . . . Merrill, D. A. (2018). Simultaneous Aerobic Exercise and Memory Training Program in Older Adults with Subjective Memory Impairments. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 62(2), 795–806.

Mendez, M. F., &amp; Shapira, J. S. (2013). Hypersexual behavior in frontotemporal dementia: a comparison with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42(3), 501–509.

Miller, E. A., Schneider, L. S., Zbrozek, A., &amp; Rosenheck, R. A. (2008). Sociodemographic and clinical correlates of utility scores in Alzheimer’s disease. Value in Health, 11(7), 1120–1130.

Mohamed, S., Rosenheck, R., Lyketsos, C. G., &amp; Schneider, L. S. (2010). Caregiver burden in Alzheimer disease: cross-sectional and longitudinal patient correlates. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18(10), 917–927.

Morrow, L. A., Snitz, B. E., Rodriquez, E. G., Huber, K. A., &amp; Saxton, J. A. (2009). High medical co-morbidity and family history of dementia is associated with lower cognitive function in older patients. Family Practice, 26(5), 339–343.

Moschetti, K., Cummings, P. L., Sorvillo, F., &amp; Kuo, T. (2012). Burden of Alzheimer’s disease-related mortality in the United States, 1999–2008. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 60(8), 1509–1514.

Mueller, K. D., Koscik, R. L., Hermann, B. P., Johnson, S. C., &amp; Turkstra, L. S. (2018). Declines in connected language are associated with very early mild cognitive impairment: Results from the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s Prevention. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 9 (JAN) (no pagination)(437).

Mueller, K. D., Koscik, R. L., LaRue, A., Clark, L. R., Hermann, B., Johnson, S. C., &amp; Sager, M. A. (2015). Verbal Fluency and Early Memory Decline: Results from the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s Prevention. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 30(5), 448–457.

Mueller, K. D., Koscik, R. L., Turkstra, L. S., Riedeman, S. K., Larue, A., Clark, L. R., . . . Johnson, S. C. (2016). Connected Language in Late Middle-Aged Adults at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 54(4), 1539–1550.

Neugroschl, J., Sewell, M., De La Fuente, A., Umpierre, M., Luo, X., &amp; Sano, M. (2016). Attitudes and Perceptions of Research in Aging and Dementia in an Urban Minority Population. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 53(1), 69–72.

Nicholas, C. R., Dowling, N. M., Racine, A. M., Clark, L. R., Berman, S. E., Koscik, R. L., . . . Johnson, S. C. (2017). Longitudinal Assessment of Self- and Informant-Subjective Cognitive Complaints in a Sample of Healthy Late-Middle Aged Adults Enriched with a Family History of Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 23(8), 617–626.

Nichols, L. O., Martindale-Adams, J., Greene, W. A., Burns, R., Graney, M. J., &amp; Lummus, A. (2009). Dementia caregivers’ most pressing concerns. Clinical Gerontologist, 32(1), 1–14 14p.

Norton, M. C., Clark, C., Fauth, E. B., Piercy, K. W., Pfister, R., Green, R. C., . . . Tschanz, J. T. (2013). Caregiver personality predicts rate of cognitive decline in a community sample of persons with Alzheimer’s disease. The Cache County Dementia Progression Study. International Psychogeriatrics, 25(10), 1629–1637.

Norton, M. C., Piercy, K. W., Rabins, P. V., Green, R. C., Breitner, J. C., Ostbye, T., . . . Tschanz, J. T. (2009). Caregiver-recipient closeness and symptom progression in Alzheimer disease. The Cache County Dementia Progression Study. Journals of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences &amp; Social Sciences, 64(5), 560–568.

Nuno, M. M., Gillen, D. L., Dosanjh, K. K., Brook, J., Elashoff, D., Ringman, J. M., &amp; Grill, J. D. (2017). Attitudes toward clinical trials across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy, 9(1), 81.

Nutter-Upham, K. E., Saykin, A. J., Rabin, L. A., Roth, R. M., Wishart, H. A., Pare, N., &amp; Flashman, L. A. (2008). Verbal fluency performance in amnestic MCI and older adults with cognitive complaints. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 23(3), 229–241.

O’Connor, M. K., &amp; Ally, B. A. (2010). Using stimulus form change to understand memorial familiarity for pictures and words in patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychologia, 48(7), 2068–2074.

Okonkwo, O., Griffith, H. R., Belue, K., Lanza, S., Zamrini, E. Y., Harrell, L. E., . . . Marson, D. C. (2007). Medical decision-making capacity in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Neurology, 69(15), 1528–1535.

Okura, T., &amp; Langa, K. M. (2011). Caregiver burden and neuropsychiatric symptoms in older adults with cognitive impairment: The Aging, Demographics, and Memory Study (ADAMS). Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 25(2), 116–121.

O’Shea, D. M., De Wit, L., Yutsis, M., Castro, M., &amp; Smith, G. E. (2018). Repetition priming in mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia: Impact of educational attainment. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 40(4), 338–346.

Ott, B. R., Heindel, W. C., Papandonatos, G. D., Festa, E. K., Davis, J. D., Daiello, L. A., &amp; Morris, J. C. (2008). A longitudinal study of drivers with Alzheimer disease. Neurology, 70(14), 1171–1178.

Paller, K. A., Creery, J. D., Florczak, S. M., Weintraub, S., Mesulam, M. M., Reber, P. J., . . . Maslar, M. (2015). Benefits of mindfulness training for patients with progressive cognitive decline and their caregivers. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 30(3), 257–267.

Pandya, S. Y., Lacritz, L. H., Weiner, M. F., Deschner, M., &amp; Woon, F. L. (2017). Predictors of Reversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Normal Cognition. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 43(3–4), 204–214.

Parikh, M., Hynan, L. S., Weiner, M. F., Lacritz, L., Ringe, W., &amp; Cullum, C. M. (2014). Single neuropsychological test scores associated with rate of cognitive decline in early Alzheimer disease. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 28(6), 926–940.

Parisi, J. M., Roberts, L., Szanton, S. L., Hodgson, N. A., &amp; Gitlin, L. N. (2017). Valued activities among individuals with and without cognitive impairments: Findings from the National Health and Aging Trends Study. The Gerontologist, 57(2), 309–318.

Peavy, G. M., Jacobson, M. W., Salmon, D. P., Gamst, A. C., Patterson, T. L., Goldman, S., . . . Galasko, D. (2012). The influence of chronic stress on dementia-related diagnostic change in older adults. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders, 26(3), 260–266.

Peavy, G. M., Salmon, D. P., Edland, S. D., Tam, S., Hansen, L. A., Masliah, E., . . . Hamilton, J. M. (2013). Neuropsychiatric features of frontal lobe dysfunction in autopsy-confirmed patients with lewy bodies and “pure” Alzheimer disease. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(6), 509–519.

Pillai, J. A., Bonner-Jackson, A., Floden, D., Fernandez, H., &amp; Leverenz, J. B. (2018). Lack of Accurate Self-appraisal is Equally Likely in MCI from Parkinson’s Disease and Alzheimer’s Disease. Movement Disorders Clinical Practice.

Pillai, J. A., Bonner-Jackson, A., Walker, E., Mourany, L., &amp; Cummings, J. L. (2014). Higher working memory predicts slower functional decline in autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 38(3–4), 224–233.

Plassman, B. L., Langa, K. M., McCammon, R. J., Fisher, G. G., Potter, G. G., Burke, J. R., . . . Wallace, R. B. (2011). Incidence of dementia and cognitive impairment, not dementia in the United States. Annals of Neurology, 70(3), 418–426.

Powers, S. M., Dawson, N. T., Krestar, M. L., Yarry, S. J., &amp; Judge, K. S. (2016). ‘I wish they would remember that I forget:’ The effects of memory loss on the lives of individuals with mild-to-moderate dementia. Dementia: The International Journal of Social Research and Practice, 15(5), 1053–1067.

Qualls, S. H., Klebe, K. J., Berryman, K., Williams, A., Phillips, L., Layton, H., . . . Rogers, M. (2015). Motivational and cognitive pathways to medical help-seeking for Alzheimer’s disease: a cognitive impairment response model. Journals of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences &amp; Social Sciences, 70(1), 57–66.

Racine, A. M., Clark, L. R., Berman, S. E., Koscik, R. L., Mueller, K. D., Norton, D., . . . Johnson, S. C. (2016). Associations between Performance on an Abbreviated CogState Battery, Other Measures of Cognitive Function, and Biomarkers in People at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 54(4), 1395–1408.

Reisberg, B., Shulman, M. B., Torossian, C., Leng, L., &amp; Zhu, W. (2010). Outcome over seven years of healthy adults with and without subjective cognitive impairment. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association, 6(1), 11–24.

Roberts, R. O., Knopman, D. S., Geda, Y. E., Cha, R. H., Pankratz, V., Baertlein, L., . . . Petersen, R. C. (2014). Association of diabetes with amnestic and nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association, 10(1), 18–26.

Rose, I. D., Friedman, D. B., Marquez, D. X., &amp; Fernandez, K. (2013). What are older Latinos told about physical activity and cognition? A content analysis of a top-circulating magazine. Journal of Aging &amp; Health, 25(7), 1143–1158.

Rose, K. M., Beck, C., Tsai, P. F., Liem, P. H., Davila, D. G., Kleban, M., . . . Richards, K. C. (2011). Sleep disturbances and nocturnal agitation behaviors in older adults with dementia. Sleep, 34(6), 779–786.

Rovner, B. W., Casten, R. J., Arenson, C., Salzman, B., &amp; Kornsey, E. B. (2012). Racial differences in the recognition of cognitive dysfunction in older persons. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 26(1), 44–49.

Rovner, B. W., Casten, R. J., Hegel, M. T., &amp; Leiby, B. E. (2012). Preventing cognitive decline in older African Americans with mild cognitive impairment: design and methods of a randomized clinical trial. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 33(4), 712–720.

Roy, S., Ficarro, S., Duberstein, P., Chapman, B. P., Dubovsky, S., Paroski, M., . . . Benedict, R. H. B. (2016). Executive Function and Personality Predict Instrumental Activities of Daily Living in Alzheimer Disease. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 24(11), 1074–1083.

Russell, R. (2007). Men doing “women’s work:” Elderly men caregivers and the gendered construction of care work. The Journal of Men’s Studies, 15(1), 1–18.

Ryan, J. J., Glass Umfleet, L., Kreiner, D. S., Fuller, A. M., &amp; Paolo, A. M. (2018). Neuropsychological differences between men and women with Alzheimer’s disease. International Journal of Neuroscience, 128(4), 342–348.

Ryan, K. A., Weldon, A., Persad, C., Heidebrink, J. L., Barbas, N., &amp; Giordani, B. (2012). Neuropsychiatric symptoms and executive functioning in patients with mild cognitive impairment: relationship to caregiver burden. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 34(3–4), 206–215.

Salazar, R., Dwivedi, A. K., &amp; Royall, D. R. (2017). Cross-ethnic differences in the severity of neuropsychiatric symptoms in persons with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 29(1), 13–21.

Samus, Q. M., Johnston, D., Black, B. S., Hess, E., Lyman, C., Vavilikolanu, A., . . . Lyketsos, C. G. (2014). A multidimensional home-based care coordination intervention for elders with memory disorders: the maximizing independence at home (MIND) pilot randomized trial. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(4), 398–414.

Sanders, C., Behrens, S., Schwartz, S., Wengreen, H., Corcoran, C. D., Lyketsos, C. G., &amp; Tschanz, J. T. (2016). Nutritional Status is Associated with Faster Cognitive Decline and Worse Functional Impairment in the Progression of Dementia: The Cache County Dementia Progression Study. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 52(1), 33–42.

Savla, J., Wang, Z., Roberto, K. A., &amp; Blieszner, R. (2016). Deficits awareness in persons with mild cognitive impairment and family care partners. Families, Systems, &amp; Health, 34(4), 429–434.

Scherrer, K. S., Ingersoll-Dayton, B., &amp; Spencer, B. (2014). Constructing couples’ stories: Narrative practice insights from a dyadic dementia intervention. Clinical Social Work Journal, 42(1), 90–100.

Schrauf, R. W., &amp; Iris, M. (2011). A direct comparison of popular models of normal memory loss and Alzheimer’s disease in samples of African Americans, Mexican Americans, and refugees and immigrants from the former Soviet Union. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 59(4), 628–636.

Seidenberg, M., Guidotti, L., Nielson, K. A., Woodard, J. L., Durgerian, S., Zhang, Q., . . . Rao, S. M. (2009). Semantic knowledge for famous names in mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 15(1), 9–18.

Seligman, S. C., Kamath, V., Giovannetti, T., Arnold, S. E., &amp; Moberg, P. J. (2013). Olfaction and apathy in Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment, and healthy older adults. Aging &amp; mental health, 17(5), 564–570.

Sharma, R. A., Varga, A. W., Bubu, O. M., Pirraglia, E., Kam, K., Parekh, A., . . . Osorio, R. S. (2018). Obstructive sleep apnea severity affects amyloid burden in cognitively normal elderly: A longitudinal study. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 197(7), 933–943.

Sink, K. M., Espeland, M. A., Castro, C. M., Church, T., Cohen, R., Dodson, J. A., . . . Life Study, I. (2015). Effect of a 24-Month Physical Activity Intervention vs Health Education on Cognitive Outcomes in Sedentary Older Adults: The LIFE Randomized Trial. JAMA, 314(8), 781–790.

Stites, S. D., Harkins, K., Rubright, J. D., &amp; Karlawish, J. (2018). Relationships Between Cognitive Complaints and Quality of Life in Older Adults With Mild Cognitive Impairment, Mild Alzheimer Disease Dementia, and Normal Cognition. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders., 25.

Stites, S. D., Karlawish, J., Harkins, K., Rubright, J. D., &amp; Wolk, D. (2017). Awareness of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Mild Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia Diagnoses Associated With Lower Self-Ratings of Quality of Life in Older Adults. Journals of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences &amp; Social Sciences, 72(6), 974–985.

Sundermann, E. E., Biegon, A., Rubin, L. H., Lipton, R. B., Landau, S., Maki, P. M., &amp; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, I. (2017). Does the Female Advantage in Verbal Memory Contribute to Underestimating Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology in Women versus Men? Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 56(3), 947–957.

Tan, J. E., Springate, B. A., &amp; Tremont, G. (2012). Neuropsychologists’ beliefs about alcohol and dementia. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 26(6), 879–893.

Tang, W., Kannaley, K., Friedman, D. B., Edwards, V. J., Wilcox, S., Levkoff, S. E., . . . Belza, B. (2017). Concern about developing Alzheimer’s disease or dementia and intention to be screened: An analysis of national survey data. Archives of Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics, 71, 43–49.

Tappen, R. M., &amp; Hain, D. (2014). The effect of in-home cognitive training on functional performance of individuals with mild cognitive impairment and early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. Research in Gerontological Nursing, 7(1), 14–24.

Teng, E., Tassniyom, K., &amp; Lu, P. H. (2012). Reduced quality-of-life ratings in mild cognitive impairment: analyses of subject and informant responses. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20(12), 1016–1025.

Terracciano, A., Stephan, Y., Luchetti, M., &amp; Sutin, A. R. (2018). Cognitive impairment, dementia, and personality stability among older adults. Assessment, 25(3), 336–347.

Tolea, M. I., Morris, J. C., &amp; Galvin, J. E. (2015). Longitudinal associations between physical and cognitive performance among community-dwelling older adults. PLoS ONE [Electronic Resource], 10(4), e0122878.

Tolea, M. I., Morris, J. C., &amp; Galvin, J. E. (2016). Trajectory of mobility decline by type of dementia. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 30(1), 60–66.

Tomaszewski Farias, S., Cahn-Weiner, D. A., Harvey, D. J., Reed, B. R., Mungas, D., Kramer, J. H., &amp; Chui, H. (2009). Longitudinal changes in memory and executive functioning are associated with longitudinal change in instrumental activities of daily living in older adults. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 23(3), 446–461.

Tranah, G. J., Blackwell, T., Stone, K. L., Ancoli-Israel, S., Paudel, M. L., Ensrud, K. E., . . . Group, S. O. F. R. (2011). Circadian activity rhythms and risk of incident dementia and mild cognitive impairment in older women. Annals of Neurology, 70(5), 722–732.

Treiber, K. A., Carlson, M. C., Corcoran, C., Norton, M. C., Breitner, J. C., Piercy, K. W., . . . Tschanz, J. T. (2011). Cognitive stimulation and cognitive and functional decline in Alzheimer’s disease: the cache county dementia progression study. Journals of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences &amp; Social Sciences, 66(4), 416–425.

Tremont, G., &amp; Alosco, M. L. (2011). Relationship between cognition and awareness of deficit in mild cognitive impairment. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 26(3), 299–306.

Triebel, K. L., Martin, R., Griffith, H. R., Marceaux, J., Okonkwo, O. C., Harrell, L., . . . Marson, D. C. (2009). Declining financial capacity in mild cognitive impairment: A 1-year longitudinal study. Neurology, 73(12), 928–934.

van Liew, C., &amp; Cronan, T. A. (2012). Caring for a loved one with Alzheimer’s disease: views from the population about hiring a health care advocate. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 27(8), 579–583.

Varma, V. R., &amp; Watts, A. (2017). Daily Physical Activity Patterns during the Early Stage of Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 55(2), 659–667.

Vaughan, L., Hogan, P. E., Rapp, S. R., Dugan, E., Marottoli, R. A., Snively, B. M., . . . Sink, K. M. (2015). Driving with Mild Cognitive Impairment or Dementia: Cognitive Test Performance and Proxy Report of Daily Life Function in Older Women. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 63(9), 1774–1782.

Vemuri, P., Lesnick, T. G., Przybelski, S. A., Machulda, M., Knopman, D. S., Mielke, M. M., . . . Jack, C. R., Jr. (2014). Association of lifetime intellectual enrichment with cognitive decline in the older population. JAMA Neurology, 71(8), 1017–1024.

Vidoni, E. D., Watts, A. S., Burns, J. M., Greer, C. S., Graves, R. S., Van Sciver, A., . . . Bieberle, N. A. (2016). Feasibility of a Memory Clinic-Based Physical Activity Prescription Program. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 53(1), 161–170.

Wang, S., Luo, X., Barnes, D., Sano, M., &amp; Yaffe, K. (2014). Physical activity and risk of cognitive impairment among oldest-old women. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(11), 1149–1157.

Wardlow, L., Ivanova, I., &amp; Gollan, T. H. (2014). The cognitive mechanisms underlying perspective taking between conversational partners: evidence from speakers with Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychologia, 56, 184–195.

Weamer, E. A., DeMichele-Sweet, M. A., Cloonan, Y. K., Lopez, O. L., &amp; Sweet, R. A. (2016). Incident Psychosis in Subjects With Mild Cognitive Impairment or Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 77(12), e1564-e1569.

Wennberg, A. M. V., Hagen, C. E., Gottesman, R. F., Zipunnikov, V., Kaufmann, C. N., Albert, M. S., . . . Spira, A. P. (2017). Longitudinal association between diabetes and cognitive decline: The National Health and Aging Trends Study. Archives of Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics, 72, 39–44.

Wilkins, C. H., Wilkins, K. L., Meisel, M., Depke, M., Williams, J., &amp; Edwards, D. F. (2007). Dementia undiagnosed in poor older adults with functional impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 55(11), 1771–1776.

Williams, B. R., Blizard, T. I., Goode, P. S., Harada, C. N., Woodby, L. L., Burgio, K. L., &amp; Sims, R. V. (2014). Exploring the affective dimension of the life review process: Facilitators’ interactional strategies for fostering personhood and social value among older adults with early dementia. Dementia: The International Journal of Social Research and Practice, 13(4), 498–524.

Williams, C. (2011). Marriage and mental health: when a spouse has Alzheimer’s disease. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 25(3), 220–222.

Winchester, J., Dick, M. B., Gillen, D., Reed, B., Miller, B., Tinklenberg, J., . . . Cotman, C. W. (2013). Walking stabilizes cognitive functioning in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) across one year. Archives of Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics, 56(1), 96–103.

Zhou, H., Sabbagh, M., Wyman, R., Liebsack, C., Kunik, M. E., &amp; Najafi, B. (2017). Instrumented Trail-Making Task to Differentiate Persons with No Cognitive Impairment, Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer Disease: A Proof of Concept Study. Gerontology, 63(2), 189–200.

Figure 1. Screening process flow chart

Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Inclusion criteria	
Article type	Primary research	
Data including terminology used by researchers, participants, or others for concepts related to dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, cognitive aging and brain health	
Publication information	Studies with a public health focus	
Published in English	
Published from January 2007 through July 2018	
Study conducted in the United States	
Exclusion criteria	
Article type	Focuses on perceptions in general (not specific to dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, cognitive aging, and brain health)	
Basic science study
Focuses on delirium, developmental disorders or other
Gray literature or review
Pertains to cost of care/cost of treatment study	
Proposed studies, study protocols	
Setting	Studies conducted in clinical settings (don’t have a public health focus)†	
Studies/data collection conducted outside the U.S. (international studies)	
Participants	Less than 10 participants	
Younger than 18 years old	
† Clinical settings was defined for the purposes of this study as those which included hospital inpatients and/or residents of skilled nursing facilities as participants.

Table 2. Descriptive summary of dataset

	Articles	
	n	%	
Individuals studied †			
Individuals	181	86.6	
Caregivers	32	15.3	
Other	2		
	
Types of studies			
Observational	134	64.1	
Experimental	33	15.8	
Qualitative (interviews, focus groups)	21	10.0	
Mixed methods	14	7.0	
Other	7	3.5	
	
Publication year			
2007*−2009	35	16.7	
2010–2012	61	29.2	
2013–2015	55	26.3	
2016–2018*	58	27.8	
† Totals may not add up to 100% because of multiple samples within a given study.

* Indicates partial year.

Table 3. Disciplinary representation

Discipline	Number of articles	
Brain	3	
Drug Therapy	3	
Geriatrics	95	
Health Services	2	
Health Services Research	2	
Internal Medicine	4	
Medicine	5	
Neurology	81	
Nursing	6	
Primary Health Care	3	
Psychiatry	65	
Psychology	30	
Psychophysiology	4	
Public Health	4	
Science	3	
Social Sciences	5	
Therapeutics	2	
Vascular Diseases	2	
Disciplines appearing only once: Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome; Behavioral Sciences; Cardiology; Critical Care; Epidemiology; Medical Informatics; Nephrology; Neurosurgery; Nutritional Sciences; Otolaryngology; Physical/Rehabilitation Medicine; Pulmonary Medicine; and Transplantation.

Table 4. Assessment tools used to define terms

Term: Cognitive Impairment (CI)	
	MMSE	CDR (subscale, if stated)	
Beard &amp; Sakhtah (2012)	20–30		
Clarke &amp; Ko (2010)	≤ 23		
Lee &amp; Bliwise (2007)	16 = moderate CI		
Morrow &amp; Snitz (2009)	≤ 18 = significant CI		
Tolea, Morris &amp; Galvin (2015)		≥.5	
Term: Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)	
	MMSE	CDR (version, if stated)	
Albert, Moss, Blacker, et al. (2007)		&gt;.5	
Dawson &amp; Singer (2008)	21–30		
Darby, Brickhouse, Wolk, &amp; Dickerson (2017)	24–30	=.5 and =.5 (memory box)	
Dodge, Mattek, Gregor, et al., (2015)		=.5	
Giovannetti, Magouirk, &amp; Bettcher (2008)	≥ 25		
Hall, Pennington, Swicegood, et al. (2012)		≤.5	
Jefferson, Gifford, Acosta, et al., (2016)		≤.5	
Kirchberg &amp; Cohen (2012)	≥ 24	=.5 (global)	
Lingler &amp; Hirschman (2008)	≥ 20		
Marshall &amp; Rentz (2011)	24–30	=.5 and ≥.5 (memory box)	
Rose &amp; Beck (2011)	21–30		
Rovner, Casten &amp; Hegel (2012)	&gt;24		
Seidenberg et al. (2009)	&gt;23		
Sundermann, Biegon, Rubin, et al. (2017)	24–30	=.5	
Tolea, Morris &amp; Galvin (2016)		=.5	


References

Aboelela SW , Larson E , Bakken S , Carrasquillo O , Formicola A , Glied SA , (2007). Defining interdisciplinary research: Conclusions from a critical review of the literature. Health Services Research, 42 , 329–346.17355595
Albert M , DeKosky S , Dickson D , Dubois B , Feldman H , Fox N , (2011). The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7 , 270–279.
Albert M , Moss M , Blacker D , Tanzi R , &amp; McArdle J (2007). Longitudinal change in cognitive performance among individuals with mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychology, 21 , 158–169.17402816
Bailey R &amp; Arab L (2012). Nutritional prevention of cognitive decline. Advances in Nutrition, 3 .
Bass DM , Judge KS , Snow AL , Wilson NL , Looman WJ , McCarthy C , (2012). Negative caregiving effects among caregivers of veterans with dementia. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20 , 239–247.
Beard RL , Sakhtah S , Imse V &amp; Galvin JE (2012). Negotiating the joint career: Couples adapting to Alzheimer’s and aging in place. Journal of Aging Research, 2012.
Bonis SA (2013). Concept analysis: Method to enhance interdisciplinary conceptual understanding. Advances in Nursing Science, 36 , 80–93.23644261
Braak H , &amp; Braak E (1991). Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathologica, 82 , 239–259.1759558
Braak H &amp; Braak E (1995). Staging of Alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes. Neurobiology of Aging, 16 , 271–284.7566337
Bracken LJ , &amp; Oughton EA (2006). “What do you mean?” The importance of language in developing interdisciplinary research. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 31 , 371–382.
Bruce A , Lyall C , Tait J , &amp; Williams R (2004). Interdisciplinary integration in Europe: The case of the Fifth Framework programme. Futures, 36 , 457–470.
Centers for Disease Control &amp; Prevention and Alzheimer’s Association. (2007). The Healthy Brain Initiative: A national public health road map to maintaining cognitive health. Chicago, IL: Alzheimer’s Association Available at: www.cdc.gov/aging.
Clarke D , Ko J , Lyketsos C , Rebok G , &amp; Eaton W (2010). Apathy and cognitive and functional decline in community-dwelling older adults: Results from the Baltimore ECA longitudinal study. International Psychogeriatrics, 22 , 819–829.20478091
Davis K , Drey N , &amp; Gould D (2009). What are scoping studies? A review of the nursing literature. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 46 (10 ), 1386–1400.19328488
Dawson N , Singer M , Lenert L , Patterson M , Sami S , Gonsenhouser I , (2008). Health state valuation in mild to moderate cognitive impairment: Feasibility of computer-based, direct patient utility assessment. Medical Decision Making, 28 , 220–232.18349434
Eggermont L , Gavett B , Volkers K , Blankevoort C , Scherder E , Jefferson A , (2010). Lower-extremity function in cognitively healthy aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. Archives of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation, 91 , 584.20382291
Folstein M , Folstein S &amp; McHugh PR (1975). Mini-mental state: A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12 189.1202204
Friedman D , Becofsky K , Anderson L , Bryant L , Hunter R Ivey, S., (2015). Public perceptions about risk and protective factors for cognitive health and impairment: A review of the literature. International Psychogeriatrics, 27 , 1263–1275.25592720
Frost SH , &amp; Jean PM (2003). Bridging the disciplines: Interdisciplinary discourse and faculty scholarship. Journal of Higher Education, 74 , 119–149.
Giovannetti T , Bettcher BM , Brennan L , Libon DJ , Burke M , Duey K , (2008). Characterization of everyday functioning in mild cognitive impairment: A direct assessment approach. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 25 , 359–365.
Goddard C (2014). Words as carriers of cultural meaning In Taylor JR (Ed.), Oxford handbook of the word (pp. 380–398). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Griffiths BPE , &amp; Stotz K (2014). Conceptual barriers to interdisciplinary communication: When does ambiguity matter? In O’Rourke M , , (Eds.), Enhancing communication &amp; collaboration in interdisciplinary research (pp. 195–215). Thousand Oaks: SAGE.
Gurgel R , Ward P , Schwartz S , Norton M , Foster N , &amp; Tschanz J (2014). Relationship of hearing loss and dementia: A prospective, population-based study. Otology &amp; Neurotology, 35 , 775–781.
Hall J , Pennington M , Swicegood E , &amp; Winter A (2012). The relationship of cognitive impairment to hypnotic susceptibility in a sample of elderly. Psychology, 3 , 62–64.
Harris PA , Taylor R , Thielke R , Payne J , Gonzalez N , &amp; Conde JG (2009). Research electronic data capture (REDCap)—a metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42 , 377–381.18929686
Hebert JR , Brandt HM , Armstead CA , Adams SA , &amp; Steck SE (2009). Interdisciplinary, translational, and community-based participatory research: Finding a common language to improve cancer research. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention, 18 , 1213–1217.
Holbrook JB (2013). What is interdisciplinary communication? Reflections on the very idea of disciplinary integration. Synthese, 190 , 1865–1879.
Hunt SM , &amp; Bhopal R (2004). Self report in clinical and epidemiological studies with non-English speakers: The challenge of language and culture. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 58 (7 ), 618–622.15194728
Institute of Medicine. (2015). Cognitive aging: Progress in understanding and opportunities for action. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Jurica PJ , Leitten CL , &amp; Mattis S (2001). Dementia rating scale-2. Psychological Assessment Resources: Lutz, FL
Katzman R , Brown T , Fuld P , Peck A , Schechter R , &amp; Schimmel H (1983). Validation of a short orientation-memory-concentration test of cognitive impairment. American Journal of Psychiatry,140 , 734–739.
Kirchberg BC , Cohen JR , Adelsky MB , Buthorn JJ , Gomar JJ , Gordon M , (2012). Semantic distance abnormalities in mild cognitive impairment: Their nature and relationship to function. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169 , 1275–1283.
Koppel J , Goldberg T , Gordon M , Huey E , Davies P , Keehlisen L , (2012). Relationships between behavioral syndromes and cognitive domains in Alzheimer disease: The impact of mood and psychosis. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20 , 994–1000.
Koskan A , Friedman D , &amp; Messias D (2010). Health literacy among Hispanics: A systematic research review (1992–2008). Hispanic Health Care International, 8 , 65–76.
Lee J , Bliwise D , Ansari F , Goldstein F , Cellar J , Lah J , (2007). Daytime sleepiness and functional impairment in Alzheimer disease. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15 , 620–626.
Levac D , Colquhoun H , &amp; O’Brien KK (2010). Scoping studies: Advancing the methodology. Implementation Science, 5 , 1–9.20047652
Lee KH , Wu B , &amp; Plassman BL (2015). Dental care utilization among older adults with cognitive impairment in the USA. Geriatrics &amp; Gerontology International, 15 , 255.24612371
Lingler JH , Hirschman KB , Garand L , Dew MA , Becker JT , Schulz R , (2008). Frequency and correlates of advance planning among cognitively impaired older adults. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16 , 643–649.
Marshall GA , Rentz DM , Frey MT , Locascio JJ , Johnson KA , Sperling RA , (2011). Executive function and instrumental activities of daily living in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7 (3 ), 300–308.
McKhann GM , Knopman DS , Chertkow H , Hyman BT , Jack CR Jr , Kawas CH , (2011). The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7 (3 ), 263–269.
Miller MD , Paradis CF , Houck PR , Mazumdar S , Stack JA , Rifai AH , (1992). Rating chronic medical illness burden in geropsychiatric practice and research: Application of the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale. Psychiatry Research, 41 (3 ), 237–248.1594710
Monroe T , Carter M . (2012). Using the Folstein Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) to explore methodological issues in cognitive aging research. European Journal of Ageing. 9 , 265–274.28804426
Morrow LA , Snitz BE , Rodriquez EG , Huber KA , &amp; Saxton JA (2009). High medical co-morbidity and family history of dementia is associated with lower cognitive function in older patients. Family Practice, 26 (5 ), 339–343.19584123
National Alzheimer’s Project Act. 42 USC §11225 (2011).
Newhouse RP , &amp; Spring B (2010). Interdisciplinary evidence-based practice: Moving from silos to synergy. Nursing Outlook, 58 (6 ), 309–317.21074648
Petersen RC (2004). Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity. Journal of Internal Medicine, 256 (3 ), 183–194.15324362
Petersen R , Caracciolo B , Brayne C , Gauthier S , Jelic V , &amp; Fratiglioni L (2014). Mild cognitive impairment: A concept in evolution. Journal of Internal Medicine, 275 , 214–228.24605806
Petersen R , Doody R , Kurz A , Mohs R , Morris J , Rabins P , (2001). Current concepts in mild cognitive impairment. Archives of Neurology, 58 , 1985–1992.11735772
Petersen RC , Roberts RO , Knopman DS , Boeve BF , Geda YE , Ivnik RJ , (2009). Mild cognitive impairment: Ten years later. Archives of Neurology, 66 , 1447–1455.20008648
Petersen R , Smith G , Waring S , Ivnik RJ , Tangalos E &amp; Kokmen E (1999). Mild cognitive impairment: Clinical characterization and outcome. Archives of Neurology, 56 , 303–308.10190820
Pham MT , Rajić A , Greig JD , Sargeant JM , Papadopoulos A , &amp; McEwen SA (2014). A scoping review of scoping reviews: Advancing the approach and enhancing the consistency. Research Synthesis Methods, 5 , 371–385.26052958
Plassman B , Langa K , McCammon R , Fisher G , Potter G , Burke J , (2011). Incidence of dementia and cognitive impairment, not dementia in the United States. Annals of Neurology, 70 , 418–426.21425187
Porter AL , &amp; Rafols I (2009). Is science becoming more interdisciplinary? Measuring and mapping six research fields over time. Scientometrics, 81 , 719–745.
Rose K , Beck C , Tsai P , Liem P , Davila D , Kleban M , (2011). Sleep disturbances and nocturnal agitation behaviors in older adults with dementia. Sleep, 34 , 779–786.21629366
Rovner B , Casten R , Arenson C , Salzman B , &amp; Kornsey E (2012). Racial differences in the recognition of cognitive dysfunction in older persons. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 26 , 44–49.21399482
Ryan K , Weldon A , Persad C , Heidebrink J , Barbas N &amp; Giordani B (2012). Neuropsychiatric symptoms and executive functioning in patients with mild cognitive impairment: Relationship to caregiver burden. Dementia &amp; Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 34 , 206–215.23128102
Seidenberg M , Guidotti L , Nielson K , Woodard J , Durgerian S , Zhang Q , (2009). Semantic knowledge for famous names in mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 15 , 9–18.19128524
Shklarov S (2007). Double vision uncertainty. Qualitative Health Research, 17 , 529–538.17416706
Szostak R (2011). Complex concepts into basic concepts. JASIST, 62 , 2247–2265.
Szostak R (2014). Communicating complex concepts In O’Rourke M , Crowley S , Eigenbrode S , &amp; Wulfhorst J (Eds.), Enhancing communication &amp; collaboration in interdisciplinary research (pp. 34–55). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Tappen RM , &amp; Hain D (2014). The effect of in-home cognitive training on functional performance of individuals with mild cognitive impairment and early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. Research in Gerontological Nursing, 7 (1 ), 14–24.24131045
Tremont G &amp; Alosco ML (2011). Relationship between cognition and awareness of deficit in mild cognitive impairment. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 26 , 299.20623477
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2012). National plan to address Alzheimer’s disease. Available at: www.aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/napa/NatlPlan.shtml
Wear DN (1999). Challenges to interdisciplinary discourse. Ecosystems, 2 , 299–301.
Winblad B , Palmer K , Kivipelto M , Jelic V , Fratiglioni L , Wahlund L-O (2004). Mild cognitive impairment–beyond controversies, towards a consensus: Report of the International Working Group on Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of Internal Medicine, 256 , 240–246.15324367
Wray A (2017). The language of dementia science and the science of dementia language: Linguistic interpretations of an interdisciplinary research field. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 36 , 80–95.
