LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7600111
5310
J Neurosci Res
J Neurosci Res
Journal of neuroscience research
0360-4012
1097-4547

32170790
7487003
10.1002/jnr.24615
NIHMS1569713
Article
The application of in vitro-derived human neurons in neurodegenerative disease modeling
D’Souza Gary X. 1*
Rose Shannon E. 2*
Knupp Allison 2
Nicholson Daniel A. 1
Keene C. Dirk 2
Young Jessica E. 23#
1 Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
2 Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
3 Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine (ISCRM), University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
* These authors contributed equally to this work

Author Contributions

GD conceived the idea of the manuscript. GD and SER wrote the manuscript with support and critical feedback from JEY. AK, DN, and CDK edited and helped shape the manuscript.

# Correspondence: Corresponding Author, jeyoung@uw.edu
7 3 2020
13 3 2020
1 2021
01 7 2021
99 1 124140
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The development of safe and effective treatments for age-associated neurodegenerative disorders is an on-going challenge faced by the scientific field. Key to the development of such therapies is the appropriate selection of modeling systems in which to investigate disease mechanisms and to test candidate interventions. There are unique challenges in the development of representative laboratory models of neurodegenerative diseases, including the complexity of the human brain, the cumulative and variable contributions of genetic and environmental factors over the course of a lifetime, inability to culture human primary neurons, and critical central nervous system differences between small animal models and humans. While traditional rodent models have advanced our understanding of neurodegenerative disease mechanisms, key divergences such as the species-specific genetic background, can limit the application of animal models in many cases. Here we review in vitro human neuronal systems that employ stem cell and reprogramming technology and their application to a range of neurodegenerative diseases. Specifically, we compare human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons (hiPSC-Ns) to directly converted, or transdifferentiated, induced neurons (iNs), as both model systems can take advantage of patient-derived human tissue to produce neurons in culture. We present recent technical developments using these two modeling systems, as well as current limitations to these systems, with the aim of advancing investigation of neuropathogenic mechanisms using these models.

direct conversion
induced neuron
iNs
neurodegenerative disease
stem cells
induced pluripotent stem cells
iPSCs
Alzheimer’s disease
aging

1 Introduction

As the population ages, neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), pose an increasingly greater threat to human health and burden on the health care system (Heemels, 2016). As an example, nearly 6 million Americans suffer from AD, with estimated costs nearing $290 billion annually (“Alzheimer’s Association Report: 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures,” 2019). A study looking at AD clinical trials involving 244 candidate compounds between 2002 and 2012 reported that only one of the 244 compounds was approved, resulting in a failure rate of 99.6% (for comparison, cancer had a failure rate of 81%)(Cummings, Morstorf, &amp; Zhong, 2014). Thus, there is a substantial need for safe and effective therapeutic interventions to improve patient outcomes.

Lack of effective therapeutics is due, in part, to the complex underlying etiology of many neurodegenerative disorders. For ADRD and other age-related neurodegenerative disorders, the complete cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying neuronal dysfunction and degeneration have not been fully elucidated, despite the ongoing identification of disease-associated genes and variants.

Animal models, particularly rodents, have significantly advanced our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases. However, inherent differences between laboratory rodents and human subjects, such as genetic background, brain anatomy, and pathological processes associated with aging can make it difficult to predict drug efficacy in humans based on success in rodent models. In the case of AD, many transgenic mouse models only show neuropathologic and behavioral phenotypes when multiple combinations of genetic mutations that lead to autosomal-dominant disease are expressed at extremely high levels (Drummond &amp; Wisniewski, 2017). Even then, AD mouse models do not consistently replicate many pathological hallmarks, such as the extensive neuronal loss observed in human patients(LaFerla &amp; Green, 2012).

The selection of appropriate models in which to study the mechanisms underlying early disease pathogenesis is key to successful identification of therapeutic targets. Thus, models that have the ability to incorporate 1) the complexity of human genetics, 2) include cellular phenotypes that resemble the pathology of the disease, and 3) can be deployed in therapeutic screening paradigms, and that include cellular phenotypes that resemble the pathology of the disease, represent powerful tools in understanding and treating age-related neurodegenerative disorders.

Recent technological advances have made cell culture platforms, such as human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons (hiPSC-Ns), induced neural stem cells (iNSCs) and induced neurons (iNs), a promising complement to rodent models of neurodegenerative diseases. These human neuronal models have rapidly become critical tools for the investigation of specific genes, proteins and molecular pathways involved in disease pathology. In particular, over the last ten years there has been increasing interest in the use of post-mortem tissue to generate hiPSCs and iNs (Bliss et al., 2012; Iovino et al., 2014; Rose et al., 2018; Sproul et al., 2014). Use of post-mortem tissue allows researchers to perform mechanistic experiments in living cells with a genetic background unique to each individual, while also allowing for correlative insights stemming from each research subject’s clinical and neuropathologic data.

Here, we will review and compare methods used to generate human neurons in vitro, specifically neurons derived from pluripotent stem cells versus those generated through direct conversion of somatic cells. We will highlight some of the recent findings emerging from this field, as they apply to a range of neurodegenerative diseases, and discuss current limitations and future applications of these technologies.

2 Induced pluripotent stem cells

Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), including embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) allow for the generation of human neurons in vitro in a scalable manner. The basic principle behind the generation of hiPSCs involves the introduction of exogenous transcription factors into fully differentiated cells, thus reverting the cells back to an embryonic-like state (Mahmoudi &amp; Brunet, 2012). This technology was pioneered by Takahashi and Yamanaka who demonstrated that expression of four transcription factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC, termed the “Yamanaka factors”) could successfully reprogram mouse and human fibroblasts into pluripotent cells with a gene expression profile, morphology and growth profile similar to that of embryonic stem cells(Takahashi et al., 2007; Takahashi &amp; Yamanaka, 2006). Ensuing protocols included the addition of NANOG and LIN28(Yu et al., 2007). Current protocols for generating hiPSCs largely use non-integrating methods to ensure that the reprogramming factors are not permanently established in the host genome. hiPSC technology has rapidly progressed with hiPSCs being derived from somatic cell sources as diverse as keratinocytes from hair(Linta et al., 2012), CD34+ cells from peripheral blood(Loh et al., 2009) and renal proximal epithelial cells from urine(Zhou et al., 2011). hiPSCs lines have also been established from postmortem tissue including dura mater(Bliss et al., 2012; Sproul et al., 2014)) and leptomeninges(Rose et al., 2018). As the field has expanded, multiple differentiation protocols have been developed to generate central nervous system cell types, including various neuron subtypes, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia, from hiPSCs using small molecule-based methods and transcription factor-based methods, as shown in Table 1 (Abud et al., 2017; Ehrlich et al., 2017; Ladewig et al., 2012; Perriot et al., 2018), and this remains a very active area of ongoing research.

hiPSCs are an attractive in vitro model for neurodegenerative diseases because of their human patient-specific origin, expandability, ability to differentiate into diverse human cell types, and potential to provide personalized medicine therapeutic solutions all while avoiding ethical issues associated with embryonic stem cells(Shi, Inoue, Wu, &amp; Yamanaka, 2017). This approach is invaluable for studies exploring the mechanistic aspects of human neurons, as it is challenging to isolate and expand human primary neurons from the brain. hiPSC-derived neurons have been used to study disease processes involved in multiple neurodegenerative diseases, as reviewed in several recent publications(Berry, Smith, Young, &amp; Mack, 2018; Penney, Ralvenius, &amp; Tsai, 2020; X. Zhang, Hu, Shang, &amp; Qi, 2019). Such hiPSC models have enabled significant scientific progress, especially in elucidating the pathogenesis of sporadic forms of neurodegenerative diseases and in drug discovery, with compounds identified using iPSC-derived neuronal models of AD(Bright et al., 2015) and ALS(Wainger et al., 2014) progressing to Phase II clinical trials.

An ongoing challenge in neurodegenerative disease modeling is the ability to understand selective vulnerability, where for a particular disorder a specific neuronal subtype is more affected than others. Refinements in neuronal differentiation protocols have made significant advances in producing distinct neuronal subtypes such as CA3 hippocampal neurons(Sarkar et al., 2018), cortical interneurons(Nestor et al., 2015), medium spiny neurons(Stanslowsky et al., 2016), dopaminergic neurons(Mahajani, Raina, Fokken, Kugler, &amp; Bahr, 2019; Theka et al., 2013; P. Zhang, Xia, &amp; Reijo Pera, 2014) motor neurons(Hester et al., 2011; Shimojo et al., 2015), and Purkinje neurons(Watson, Wong, Vowles, Cowley, &amp; Becker, 2018). Furthermore, studies that transplant hiPSC-derived neurons into slice cultures show that the transplanted cells take on the specific properties of the region where they were transplanted, such as CA1 or the dentate gyrus(Hiragi et al., 2017). Large scale single cell transcriptome studies of the human brain, such as those done by Hodge and colleagues(Hodge et al., 2019) provide a wealth of data about specific neuronal subtypes and will certainly influence hiPSC differentiation protocols to further refine in vitro cell types.

hiPSCs have great utility as a tool to generate neurons to model neurodegenerative diseases, however as with any model there are important limitations to consider. The generation of hiPSCs can be costly and labor intensive(Nicholas et al., 2013; Schlachetzki, Saliba, &amp; Oliveira, 2013); hiPSCs also have potential for tumorigenicity(Miura et al., 2009) and aberrant genetic and epigenetic modifications(Gore et al., 2011; Lister et al., 2011). While many cell types of the CNS can be differentiated from hiPSCs, such as neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia (Table 1), protocols vary widely in their ease and efficiency; many differentiation protocols can take weeks to months to generate the cell type of interest(Espuny-Camacho et al., 2013; Krencik, Weick, Liu, Zhang, &amp; Zhang, 2011; Nicholas et al., 2013; S. Wang et al., 2013). For neurons, this can be circumvented to some extent by expressing the neural transcription factor NGN2 in hiPSCs, generating excitatory neurons in under one month(Y. Zhang et al., 2013).

The strongest risk factor for most neurodegenerative diseases is age(Niccoli &amp; Partridge, 2012). Modeling age-related neurodegenerative disorders using hiPSCs presents a unique set of challenges, since hiPSC-derived neurons are fetal in nature and gene expression profiles are characteristic of an early embryonic stage(Israel et al., 2012). Despite this, however, phenotypes classically associated with age-related neurodegenerative disease have been consistently reported in experiments using hiPSC-derived neurons. For example, recent work demonstrates that hiPSC-derived neural cells show APOE genotype-dependent phenotypes consistent with AD pathophysiological changes, including tau phosphorylation, endosome enlargement, and impaired Aβ clearance in hiPSC-derived neurons, astrocytes, and microglia(Lin et al., 2018; C. Wang et al., 2018). This work highlights the utility of using hiPSC-derived cells to understand cell-type specific mechanisms, especially those that may have a genetic driver. Aging is a multifactorial process driven by genetics and environment and affects diverse cellular pathways(Lopez-Otin, Blasco, Partridge, Serrano, &amp; Kroemer, 2013; Rodriguez-Rodero et al., 2011). The progressive dysfunction and degeneration of neurons in age-associated neurodegenerative diseases is also multifactorial and takes decades to develop; therefore using hiPSCs to model neurodegenerative diseases may not adequately address these processes, because the reprogramming protocols for these cells appear to reverse many of the cellular and molecular hallmarks of aging(Lo Sardo et al., 2017; Mertens et al., 2015b; Studer, Vera, &amp; Cornacchia, 2015). If and how cells age in vitro is not well understood and has prompted an intriguing line of research to introduce the effects of aging into hiPSC-derived cellular models of neurodegenerative disease.

Progerin overexpression has been studied as a potential way to create an aged phenotype in hiPSC-derived neurons. Progerin is a pathogenic protein that results in the human premature aging disorder Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) (Ashapkin, Kutueva, Kurchashova, &amp; Kireev, 2019). When progerin was overexpressed in hiPSC-derived midbrain dopaminergic neurons, these cells displayed a phenotype that resembled late-onset PD(Miller et al., 2013), including progressive loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells, Lewy body-precursor inclusions, dendrite degeneration, neuromelanin accumulation and mitochondrial function defects. However, because progerin represents a specific type of premature aging disorder, the molecular mechanism of how age-related phenotypes are induced may not recapitulate all aspects of normal aging. The need exists to identify molecular drivers of non-syndromic aging as well. Furthermore, the brain is relatively spared in HGPS patients due to low expression of endogenous progerin protein levels(Frost, 2016; J. Zhang et al., 2011). It remains unclear if progerin overexpression can be used to accurately model other age-related neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD. Recently, overexpression of the SCNA gene that encodes α-synuclein was also reported to induce nuclear aging phenotypes in iPSC-derived neurons, including age-related changes in nuclear architecture and global DNA-methylation(Tagliafierro, Zamora, &amp; Chiba-Falek, 2019). Interestingly, aging phenotypes in neurons derived from higher passage neural progenitor cells were also reported to display aging phenotypes, indicating that non-genetic methods of inducing aging in vitro may be possible(Tagliafierro et al., 2019).

3 Induced Neurons (iNs)

Human neurons can also be generated in vitro through a process called direct conversion, or transdifferentiation, effectively bypassing the reprogrammed, pluripotent stage and directly converting one somatic cell type into another (Figure 1). These directly converted neurons are known as induced neurons, or iNs. iNs are distinct from neurons differentiated from iPSCs, neurons differentiated from other pluripotent stem cells, such as ES cells, or somatic cells programmed into a neural progenitors, which then undergo further differentiation into a more mature neuron(Drouin-Ouellet et al., 2017; Mollinari et al., 2018). This is a rapidly evolving field and various methods for generating iNs have been recently reviewed(Traxler, Edenhofer, &amp; Mertens, 2019). Diverse cell types have been used to generate iNs, including fibroblasts, blood cells, glial cells and pericytes (summarized in(Traxler et al., 2019)). We recently demonstrated that cells cultured from post-mortem derived leptomeningeal tissue will also successfully convert to iNs(Rose et al., 2018).

The first directly converted neurons were created by Vierbuchen and colleagues in 2010 from mouse fibroblasts. Starting with 19 neural-lineage-specific transcription factors, they found that a combination of three factors: ASCL1 (the master gene for inducing neuronal fate) as well as BRN2 and MYT1L (both of which enhance neuronal conversion), were able to rapidly and efficiently transform mouse embryonic fibroblasts and perinatal tail tip fibroblasts into induced neuronal cells(Vierbuchen et al., 2010). Now commonly referred to as “BAM reprogramming factors” it has been shown by single-cell and genome-wide expression analyses that these factors not only induced transcription of neuronal genes, but also silenced the starting cell-type transcriptome over time. Thus, reprogramming with the BAM factors led to a binary lineage switch rather than an induction of a hybrid phenotype(Marro et al., 2011). The BAM factors were also used to directly convert human fibroblasts into iNs(Pang et al., 2011; Pfisterer et al., 2011). Since this seminal work by Vierbuchen and colleagues in 2010, iNs have been generated through a number of strategies involving the use of various combinations of transcription factors, miRNAs and small molecule cocktails (SMCs) (Table 2), also reviewed in(Traxler et al., 2019). Subsequent additions of other transcription factors, including NEUROD1 and SOX2 has improved the conversion efficiency resulted in complex neuronal morphologies and expression of neuron-specific proteins, for example β-III tubulin and MAP2(Karow et al., 2012; Pang et al., 2011; P. Wang et al., 2014). Nanopattern topography has also been shown to improve direct conversion efficiency in mouse and human fibroblast cells, in which the cells are plated on defined nanoscale grooved patterns during the direct conversion process(H. Kim et al., 2017), and combinations of miRNAs can also directly convert fibroblasts(Yoo et al., 2011). Finally, knock-down of human polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTBP), an RNA-binding protein that can block neuronal differentiation, has also been shown to directly convert fibroblasts to iNs(Y. Liu et al., 2014).

Since iN reprogramming methods bypass the pluripotent state, iNs may not undergo the rejuvenation reported in hiPSC-Ns. Indeed, several studies have shown that iNs appear to retain transcriptomic and epigenetic characteristics similar to the aged donor somatic cells(Huh et al., 2016; Mertens et al., 2015a). This makes iNs an intriguing model of aged, patient/disease-specific neurons in culture, which may provide unique opportunities to study the neuropathological mechanisms underlying neurodegenerative diseases in the context of aging. However, recent work shows extensive de novo DNA methylation occurs in mouse fibroblasts directly converted to neurons using BAM factors(Luo et al., 2019). While this study suggests that this epigenetic remodeling promotes a neuronal epigenetic landscape, more detailed analysis of epigenome remodeling that may occur in directly converted human neurons in aged or disease states is warranted.

In the following sections we focus on current applications of iN technology in neurological disease modeling research. iNs have been used to research mechanisms involved in many neurodegenerative diseases, outlined in greater detail in Table 2. iNs have also been used to model other nervous system disorders, including autism spectrum disorder(Yoshimizu et al., 2015), schizophrenia(Passeri et al., 2015; Siegert et al., 2015), Dravet syndrome and mild febrile seizures(Jiao et al., 2013), and glaucoma(Meng, Wang, Gu, Wang, &amp; Guo, 2013). The wide range of research fields utilizing iNs to study neurologic disease suggests a promising and lasting role for this technology in the study of human neuronal function and dysfunction, particularly in age-associated diseases. Here we highlight some of the interesting findings coming out of studies of neurodegenerative disease mechanism using iN culture models.

3.1 Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects memory as well as other cognitive abilities. AD is characterized neuropathologically by the presence of neurofibrillary tangles containing hyperphosphorylated tau (pTau) and amyloid beta plaques(Montine et al., 2012). Hu and colleagues developed a protocol to robustly convert human fibroblasts derived from patients with familial AD (fAD) into functional iNs using a SMC and a neural maturation media (Table 2)(Hu et al., 2015). In this study, iNs derived from fAD patients displayed increased extracellular Aβ42 and an elevated Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, compared to iNs derived from control subjects. In addition, levels of phosphorylated tau (pTau) and total tau were higher in iNs from fAD patients with an APP mutation relative to controls, but this difference was not observed in iNs from fAD patients with the presenilin 1 mutation(Hu et al., 2015), suggesting this important pathologic characteristic may be influenced differently in neurons harboring different fAD mutations. In a separate study, iNs generated from sporadic and familial AD patients were used to study the effects of the APOE 3/4 versus 3/3 genotype on neuron health and pathophysiology when mutant APP (670/M671 Swedish mutation) was overexpressed in these lines. APOE 3/4 iNs faithfully replicated the disease features seen in APOE 3/4 AD patients such as altered APP processing, increased levels of Aβ42 and tau hyperphosphorylation. Furthermore, gene expression profiling and network analysis of these iNs indicated dysregulation of desmoglein 2 (DSG2), a putative AD risk gene(Karch &amp; Goate, 2015). Functional studies of DSG2 knock-down demonstrated that inhibition of DSG2 reduced Aβ aggregation induced by overexpression of APP in APOE 3/4 iNs.(H. Kim et al., 2017). There are fewer studies using iNs from sporadic AD subjects than familial genetic AD subjects, in part due to immense genetic and phenotypic variability between sporadic AD subjects. Recent genetic studies highlight major cell biological pathways that are implicated in AD such as lipids, endocytosis, and inflammation(Karch &amp; Goate, 2015). Therefore, one strategy to mitigate some variability would be to stratify patient-derived cell lines based on polygenic AD risk in specific cellular pathways, and to focus on relevant in vitro assays to assess phenotypic presentation of the identified risk variants in neurons.

3.2 Parkinson’s disease

Several researchers have also developed iN-based models of Parkinson’s disease (PD), a disorder involving both motor and non-motor symptoms. PD is characterized neuropathologically by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra as well as the aggregation of pathological forms of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites(Kalia &amp; Lang, 2015). Pfisterer and colleagues used BAM transcription factors together with two genes involved in dopaminergic neuron generation, LMX1A and FOXA2, to convert human fibroblasts into iNs comparable to dopaminergic neurons (Pfisterer et al., 2011). Caiazzo and colleagues also used transcription factors to generate functional dopaminergic iNs from the fibroblasts of patients with genetic forms of PD and healthy donors. Fibroblasts from PD patients and normal controls both showed a similar ability to transform into dopaminergic iNs(Caiazzo et al., 2011). In another study, dopaminergic iNs, generated from IMR90 human fibroblasts, were injected into the striatum of a PD rat model. These iNs demonstrated functional properties of dopaminergic neurons such as dopamine release and re-uptake and proper electrophysiologic profiles. When these iNs were injected into a rat model of PD, the authors documented improved motor symptoms in the animals along with evidence of long-term engraftment and the retention of dopaminergic properties of the iNs. (X. Liu et al., 2012). iN models have also been used to investigate ubiquitin phosphorylation in PD(Fiesel et al., 2015)) and to assess the PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) p.G411S mutation as a risk factor for PD(Puschmann et al., 2017). Currently, much of the literature relevant to the use of iNs in modeling PD has been focused on methodological development and validation of dopaminergic iNs. Investigation of disease specific mechanisms in dopaminergic iNs from PD patients is needed, including idiopathic, or sporadic, PD and more broadly in Lewy body disease, to see if dopaminergic and cortical iNs recapitulate disease phenotype(s) seen in human disease, such as pathological post-translational alterations to α–synuclein.

3.3 Huntington’s disease

iNs have also been used to model Huntington’s disease (HD), a neurodegenerative disease caused by a genetic mutation, a CAG repeat, in the Htt gene that results in expanded polyglutamine repeats in the N-terminus of the huntingtin protein (Htt)(Y. Liu et al., 2014). Pathological hallmarks of HD include Htt protein inclusions, as well as neuron loss in defined regions of the cortex and in the neostriatum affecting medium spiny neurons (MSNs)(Y. Liu et al., 2014). Fibroblasts derived from HD patients showed a similar capacity for iN conversion compared to healthy controls, using knock-down of PTBP. HD patient-derived iNs display abnormal neuritic branching and degeneration, shrunken soma and increased cell death compared to iNs derived from normal individuals, as well as mutant huntingtin protein inclusions in their soma and neuropils(Y. Liu et al., 2014). Victor and colleagues used a combination of transcription factors and miRNAs to create a population of iNs analogous to MSNs. Upon transplantation into the brains of mice, the MSN-like iNs survived for over six months, displayed similar membrane properties as MSNs and formed axonal projections to the anatomical targets of MSNs(Victor et al., 2014). Based on the studies reviewed above, iNs may be a promising in vitro model of HD, given the presence of Htt pathological protein inclusions similar to those found in HD patients, among other similarities in disease phenotype. In contrast, the hallmark pathological protein aggregates in AD and PD (amyloid plaques/neurofibrillary tangles, and Lewy bodies, respectively) have not been observed in iN models of these diseases. As a future research direction, it may be interesting to generate both iNs and iPSC-Ns from the same HD individuals to identify possible epigenetic contributors involved in disease progression or initiation, as HD is an age-associated disease in which symptom onset occurs during adulthood, even though mutant Htt protein is expressed ubiquitously throughout life(Li &amp; Li, 2015)

3.4 Motor neuron diseases

Several iN models of motor neurons have been applied to studies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Lim and colleagues created iNs from the fibroblasts of ALS patients with different FUS mutations using a combination of shRNAs against PTB and neurotrophic factors. In ALS patient-derived iNs, FUS was located predominantly in cytoplasmic regions, with oxidative stress leading to the accumulation of cytoplasmic FUS into cytoplasmic granules, consistent with observations in ALS patients(Lim, Choi, Oh, Xue, et al., 2016). One ALS patient line generated in this study was contained a novel FUS variant, demonstrating the value of these iN models in furthering our understanding of the mechanisms involved in newly identified gene mutations. In a different study using ALS patient-derived iNs, researchers found that ALS patient-derived iNs displayed significantly higher FUS protein aberrantly localized in the cytoplasm, decreased soma size, deficits in action potential firing, and an increased susceptibility to death compared to controls(M. L. Liu, Zang, &amp; Zhang, 2016). In this study a chemical screen of small molecules showed that a 1 μM concentration of kenpaullone was the most effective at promoting the survival of ALS iNs(M. L. Liu et al., 2016). It is worth noting that FUS mutations only comprise of 4% of familial and 1% of sporadic ALS cases(Lim, Choi, Oh, Xue, et al., 2016), thus it will be important to generate iN models of ALS that represent a broader proportion of ALS cases. One such study has used shRNA inhibition of PTBP to develop iNs from a frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (c9FTD/ALS) subjects, an important addition to the field, as mutations in C9ORF72 are the most common genetic cause of ALS and FTD(Su et al., 2014).

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder leading to full or partial loss of the SMN1 gene. This disorder results in loss of anterior horn or α motor neurons. SMA iNs were created by using BAM and other transcription factors, including NEUROD1, ISL1 and HB9, to reprogram fibroblasts from SMA patients and controls into motor iNs. The SMA iNs had a similar conversion efficiency as control iNs, but displayed reduced neurite outgrowth, neurite fracturing and overt degeneration after 60 days in vitro. While treatment with a histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA unfortunately did not rescue the neurodegeneration, the recapitulation of neurodegeneration makes it a promising model for other drug screening(Q. J. Zhang et al., 2017).

3.5 Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration

Mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene can cause frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17T)(Boeve &amp; Hutton, 2008). In a pioneering study, Iovino and colleagues used autopsy-derived dermal fibroblasts from a FTDP-17T subject with a 2-hour post-mortem interval (PMI), and cultured the tissue explant for two weeks until fibroblasts started to appear. The resultant fibroblasts were then exposed to the BAM, LMX1A and FOXA2 transcription factors. The FTPD-17T iNs expressed 3R and 4R isoforms of tau with expression levels comparable to human adult fibroblast-derived iNs, while human embryonic fibroblast-derived iNs only expressed 3R tau(Iovino et al., 2014).

FTLDs are a diverse and varied group of neurodegenerative diseases, including tau, TDP-43, and FUS proteinopathies. As a relatively large proportion of FTLDs are hereditary (20–30%)(Iovino et al., 2014) but are also aging-related diseases, using iNs to model these diseases in vitro could provide the combination of genetic and epigenetic factors representative of the conditions present in the human disease.

3.6 Other neurodegenerative diseases

Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by high iron accumulation in the brain. Fibroblasts taken from PKAN patients displayed altered iron homeostasis, as evidenced by significantly elevated toxic free iron in the mitochondrial compartment, increased levels of carbonylated protein and significant reductions in glutathione and heme content (Santambrogio et al., 2015). These PKAN patient fibroblasts were exposed to MASH1, NURR1 and LMX1A transcription factors in order to generate PKAN iNs. These iNs contained higher levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), lower levels of glutathione and significantly lower membrane potentials, compared to control iNs(Santambrogio et al., 2015). Although mitochondrial iron was not measured in the iNs, the authors concluded that the altered oxidative status and mitochondrial dysfunction seen in PKAN iNs was likely due to iron mishandling.

Krabbe disease (KD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by defective β-galactosylceramidase, a lysosomal enzyme responsible for cleavage of several substrates including psychosine. Fibroblasts from KD patients and healthy controls were exposed to shRNAs against human PTBP and then treated with neurotrophic factors to generate iNs. Relative to controls, KD patient-derived iNs displayed significantly reduced β-galactosylceramidase enzymatic activity, increased psychosine levels, enlarged and irregularly shaped lysosomal vesicles, neurite fragmentation, abnormal neuritic branching, disorganized actin filaments and defective axonal outgrowth(Lim, Choi, Oh, Choi, et al., 2016).

Taken together, the studies summarized above use iNs in the context of specific neurodegenerative diseases. Recent work is beginning to incorporate a greater number of specific patient derived lines, although to date much of the research has focused on the development of direct conversion protocols, for example to create neuronal sub-types and to improve conversion efficiency(Caiazzo et al., 2011; Pfisterer et al., 2011; Son et al., 2011; Victor et al., 2014). Currently, studies of neurodegenerative diseases have included use of iNs in a limited capacity, primarily as proof-of-concept, to show that patient-derived somatic cells can be successfully converted to iNs, and that the resultant iNs display important disease-specific phenotypes. Several studies have begun to use iN disease models to test novel compounds that may be able to rescue such disease phenotypes(M. L. Liu et al., 2016; Su et al., 2014; Q. J. Zhang et al., 2017). Currently, at most only 2–3 diseased lines per study have been included, providing important and promising examples of how iNs can be applied to research on human neurodegenerative disease mechanisms and drug development. It will be critical in future studies to expand the number of different patient-derived lines when testing such compounds, to demonstrate that these potential therapeutic targets are effective across a broader disease population. There is vast potential in this field for expansion, to use iNs as a physiologically relevant in vitro neuronal model of genetic, epigenetic and molecular contributors to neurodegenerative disease mechanisms, especially as larger patient iN cohorts become economically and technologically feasible, especially in order to overcome inherent variability present in human sporadic aging-related neurodegenerative diseases.

4 Discussion

Developing effective therapies or preventive strategies for ADRD and other neurodegenerative diseases is the principle goal of research in these areas, yet most interventions fail to reach the market due to safety or efficacy issues. A major hurdle in effective therapeutic development is limitations in the models used to identify potential drug targets and test candidate therapies, which in some cases have not accurately predicted efficacy in patients(Young W, 2012). Genetically modified animal models (which are often based on Mendelian forms of the disease) and immortalized human cell lines have long been utilized in neurodegenerative disease research; both hiPSC-N and iN models have significant advantages when compared to animal models or immortalized cells. Each method provides access to human neurons that may not otherwise be feasible to grow in primary culture. Both hiPSC-Ns and iNs can be directed into distinct neuronal subtypes, although hiPSCs also have added benefit of being differentiated into non-neuronal central nervous system cell types, including astrocytes and microglia (Table 1). Direct conversion of human somatic cells to CNS cell types other than neurons has not been as successful(Traxler et al., 2019). Both hiPSC-Ns and iNs capture human genetic background in a dish, which is essential in understanding unique human aspects of disease. However, in the case of hiPSCs much of the epigenome, which contains important environmental and aging information, is erased. Thus, iNs, which do not undergo full reprogramming, may be a useful tool to study mechanisms involved in cellular aging and which are integrally associated with the cellular epigenome. Indeed, iNs may retain more epigenetic characteristics of the donor cell, which can affect several aspects of cellular function including mitochondrial function, cell senescence, DNA damage, nuclear pore permeability and protein localization(Huh et al., 2016; Mertens et al., 2015b; Mertens, Reid, Lau, Kim, &amp; Gage, 2018). As such, iNs not only capture the genome in a dish but some level of the epigenome in the dish as well, and may therefore have tremendous potential for investigating how age affects neuronal function and toxicity in age-associated neurodegenerative diseases.

In terms of disease modeling, human iNs have been shown to display many of the neuropathologic phenotypes present in the patients from which the cells were derived. For example, abnormalities in iron homeostasis and energetic dysfunction seen in PKAN patient-derived iNs and fibroblasts were not observed in animal models(Santambrogio et al., 2015). Similarly, in ALS patient-derived iNs, the mutant FUS protein was located in the cytoplasm, rather than the nucleus - a disease phenotype that was not observed in primary rat neurons, HEK-293 cells, or fibroblasts with the same mutation(Lim, Choi, Oh, Xue, et al., 2016). iNs derived from fAD patients had higher levels of Aβ42 and phosphorylated tau, a disease phenotype not observed the corresponding patient fibroblasts (Hu et al., 2015). Lastly, while both fibroblasts and iNs from patients with Krabbe disease displayed lysosomal abnormalities, additional phenotypic changes including neuronal branching were also observed in Krabbe iNs, a phenotype that cannot be assessed in fibroblasts (Lim, Choi, Oh, Choi, et al., 2016). For future studies, availability of in vitro models for mechanistic studies that can be related back to matched neuropathologic tissue will yield great insights into both early and late stages of the disease process. We have published a method to freeze and cryoprotect the leptomeningeal samples taken at autopsy from subjects that will undergo a comprehensive neuropathologic work up. Using these cells, we can simultaneously reprogram the leptomeningeal cells to hiPSC and differentiate neurons as well as directly convert the cells to iNs. This model gives us two forms of in vitro derived neurons from which we can compare phenotypes in living cells to the pathology of the subject’s brain(Rose et al., 2018). (Figure 1). However, this protocol requires access to high-quality post-mortem tissue, may be sensitive to PMI, and could require specific informed consent. Patient specific iNs with comprehensive clinical and pathologic characterization of the donors and their tissue will likely play an important role in the identification of candidate drug targets and drug screening, contributing to a precision medicine approach for novel neurodegenerative disease therapeutics.

In this review we have highlighted several key advantages of iNs, focusing on epigenome integrity and the retention of cellular age. However, there are cautionary aspects to this technology as well. Since iNs are newer and less commonly used compared to hiPSCs, some aspects of the technology are not as well-developed as with hiPSCs. For example, a greater number of neuronal and neural cell types have been established using hiPSCs (Table 1) compared to iNs. Indeed, many protocols for differentiating hiPSCs are well-standardized and often the reagents are commercially available. For iNs, however the efficiency of conversion is reduced and the cocktails of necessary transcription factors are less standardized. An additional consideration is the epigenetic state of the starting cell type, which may have a large effect on the efficiency of conversion(Wapinski et al., 2013) thus presenting an additional challenge depending on available patient material. Further, somatic cells have not been directly converted to other neural cell types, such as microglia. While iNs may be a less tumorigenic cell source for development of therapeutic transplantation technology compared to hiPSC-derived cells, there is still some risk of genomic integration and potential disruption of endogenous genes, including tumor suppressor genes, by the lentivirus used in many iN protocols(X. Liu et al., 2012). Significant work has been done to minimize retro- and lentiviral reprogramming-associated integrations of DNA sequences into the genome in hiPSC reprogramming, and the use of commercially-available, non-integrating Sendai viruses is becoming common practice in the field(Mertens et al., 2018). However, integration-free iN generation has received far less attention, with Sendai viruses for iN factors such as the BAM factors or NEUROD1 not yet commercially available(Mertens et al., 2018). While some studies suggest that the epigenome of iNs may be similar to that of the parental somatic cell, recent work shows that the BAM factors can induce global de novo DNA methylation(Luo et al., 2019). There are also limitations to the application of gene editing technologies using iNs, such as CRISPR/Cas9, which has not to our knowledge been successfully carried out in an iN model system even though it has been used extensively in hiPSC experiments. Mature iNs are not an expandable cell population and require a new induction process for every experiment, which places limitations on the starting material since primary fibroblasts cannot be expanded indefinitely. In contrast, hiPSCs and progenitor populations are renewable and can be banked for future applications, which can decrease labor and material costs overtime. Several groups have reported low fibroblast-to-neuron efficiency rates and limitations due to neuronal purity, with only 1–6% of the starting somatic cell population converting successfully to iNs expressing mature neuronal markers(X. Liu et al., 2012; Santambrogio et al., 2015; Q. J. Zhang et al., 2017). The variability in conversion efficient appears to be both cell line-dependent and protocol-dependent, thus there is a great amount of method optimization that is warranted in the use of iNs to study neurodegenerative diseases.

A clear advantage of both iNs and hiPSC-derived neural cells is the ability to generate patient-specific cell lines, effectively capturing the unique genetic background in vitro. However, this strategy also lends itself to the inherent phenotypic variability present in human samples. Indeed, we and others have reported phenotypes from hiPSCs that are present in some, but not all, cell lines studied(Israel et al., 2012; Kondo et al., 2013; Young et al., 2015). Therefore, the number of unique patient cell lines needed for in vitro experiments in order to ascertain signal from noise is an important factor in experimental design. In studies where the expected phenotypic result is not yet known, estimates of the expected effect size from similar studies in the literature in order to determine power and ideal sample size. However, the effect of a particular gene mutation or variant may also be subtle at the level of the cell but quite detrimental for development of disease. For example, only a single copy duplication of the amyloid precursor protein, which results in only 1.5X the expression of APP in the cell, is enough to cause aggressive, early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. A survey of recent papers modeling Alzheimer’s disease (Flamier et al., 2018; Foveau et al., 2019; Meyer et al., 2019; Ochalek et al., 2017) shows that most studies are using cell lines derived from 3–5 patients and 3–6 controls. Experimental cost and the labor-intensive methods for this type of work currently limit the number of cell lines from different individuals that can be studied. The use of isogenic cell lines where variant or mutations of interest are introduced or corrected using gene editing techniques can mitigate intrinsic variability, and in these studies typically between 2–4 clones of isogenic cell lines are used(Lin et al., 2018; C. Wang et al., 2018; Woodruff et al., 2013). In general, these studies use sample sizes that correspond to recent work analyzing the technical and biological variability in hiPSCs(Germain &amp; Testa, 2017). Most of the work in neurodegenerative disease modeling has been performed using hiPSC-derived cells; in the iN studies summarized in this manuscript, typically only 2–3 patient cell lines are used, therefore a more careful analysis of the variability in iN studies is warranted.

Finally, while simple monogenetic diseases can often be modeled using a single cell with a defined phenotype, modelling more complex, multifactorial neurodegenerative diseases is more challenging since multiple factors contribute to development of the phenotype and pathology over time and space that are impossible to model in a single cell type. Thus, to more closely replicate the complex environment in the brain, there may be value in co-culturing patient-derived iNs with other cell types in the brain. With the development of protocols to generate patient-specific microglia(Abud et al., 2017) and patient-specific astrocytes(Caiazzo et al., 2015), these cells could be co-cultured together with patient-specific iNs, as well as culturing these cells in a 3-dimensional culture to capture the spatiotemporal context of the brain environment. This 3D culture system could either be an engineered system, whereby cells are cultured on a supporting material (such as a biodegradable scaffold or gel)(Y. H. Kim et al., 2015; Soman et al., 2012; D. Zhang et al., 2014) or a structure-free system, whereby the different cell types form self-organizing, discrete structures e.g. spheroids or organoids(Lancaster et al., 2013; Qian et al., 2016; Raja et al., 2016).

5 Conclusion

Both hiPSC-derived neurons and iNs are valuable and relevant human in vitro cell culture modeling systems that can be used to help elucidate disease mechanisms, improving our understanding of genetic risk factors in neurodegenerative diseases and screen for therapeutic targets. iNs in particular hold promise in the study of diseases in which advanced age is a primary risk factor, such as the neurodegenerative diseases discussed in this paper, as they retain more of the epigenetic “aging” signature than neurons differentiated from hiPSCs. iN protocols continue to be developed and refined and the different protocols used in neural reprogramming including the vast array of different factors, each with their own function, serves to confirm previous research showing that neuronal identity is highly specific and closely controlled by a unique combination of intrinsic and extrinsic signals(M. L. Liu et al., 2013). Further studies investigating mechanisms of direct reprogramming are needed to elucidate the relationship between reprogramming factors and the final cell product in order to optimize the methodology (e.g. reprogramming efficiency, purity, cell yield, cell type specificity), which will help drive the study of neuron function in the context of brain aging and neurodegeneration.

Acknowledgements:

This work was supported by the BrightFocus Foundation (A2018656S to JEY), the NIH (K01AG054841 and R01AG062148 to JEY; P50AG005136 to CDK), and the Nancy and Buster Alvord endowment (to CDK).

Figure 1. Schematic depicting conceptual steps involved in the generation of in vitro models for human neurodegenerative disease research.

(A) Human induced pluripotent-derived neurons (hiPSC-Ns) and (B) induced neurons (iNs). (A) Human primary fibroblasts, or other somatic primary cell source from living or deceased subjects, are (1) reprogrammed back to the fetal state into hiPSCs through the introduction of defined transcription factors, (2) induction of the neural fate is achieved through dual SMAD signaling inhibition, resulting in neural stem cells (NSCs) and (3) neurons are differentiated with the aid of neurotrophic factors in addition to other small molecules. hiPSC-Ns capture a unique patient’s genome in a dish and can recapitulate many factors in neurodegenerative disease processes, especially those with a genetic driver. Other CNS cell types can be generated this in-vitro technology as well; hiPSCs can be differentiated into microglia by driving towards a hematopoietic lineage with small molecules, and NSCs can give rise to astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. (B) The same starting fibroblast cells can be directly converted to iNs by the introduction of neuronal-specific transcription factors and small molecule cocktails that include SMAD pathway inhibitors and cell cycle blockers. Cells undergoing direct conversion to iNs bypass the pluripotent fetal state and may retain more of the epigenetic signature of the starting donor cells, rendering them to more likely represent phenotypes which may occur with cellular age.

Table 1: Methods overview for differentiation of major CNS cell types from hiPSCs

Cell Type	Differentiation Method	Key Protocol Steps	References	
Neurons	Small molecules in step-wise defined media (NPCs: N2, B27, Noggin, SB431542, FGF; Neurons: N2, B27, BDNF, GDNF, cAMP)	iPSCs → neural stem cells → neuroprogenitor cells (NPCs) → neurons	Chambers et al., 2009; Shi, Kirwan, Smith, Robinson, &amp; Livesey, 2012	
	Forced transcription factor expression of NGN2 using lentivirus + defined media (BDNF, NT3, B27, NT3, Ara-C, laminin)	iPSCs → iNs	Y. Zhang et al., 2013	
Astrocytes	Small molecules in step-wise defined media (GPCs: AM, Noggin, PDGF-AA; Astrocytes: N2, B27, FBS, LIF)	iPSCs → embryoid bodies → glial progenitor cells (GPCs) → astrocytes	Santos et al., 2017; methods reviewed in Suga, Kondo, &amp; Inoue, 2019	
Oligodendrocytes	Small molecules in step-wise defined media (NSCs: SB431542, LDN193189, RA; OPCs: RA, smoothened agonist, PDGF, IGF-1, HGF, NT3, Insulin, T3, Biotin, cAMP; Oligodendrocytes: Insulin, T3, Biotin, cAMP, ascorbic acid)	iPSCs → neural stem cells (NSCs) → oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) → oligodendrocytes	Douvaras et al., 2014; Douvaras &amp; Fossati, 2015	
Microglia	Small molecules in step-wise defined media (iHPCs: FGF2, BMP4, Activin A, LiCl, VEGF, TPO, SCF, IL-3, IL-6; Microglia differentiation: CSF-1, IL-34, TGFβ1, insulin; Microglia maturation: CX3CL1, CD200)	iPSCs → hematopoietic progenitor cells (iHPCs) → microglia, differentiation step → microglia, maturation step	Abud et al., 2017; McQuade et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2012	

Table 2: Application of iNs in neurodegenerative disease research

Disease	Donor cell type (human)	Specific conversion components	iN characteristics	Disease phenotype(s) observed	Reference	
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)	Dermal fibroblasts, fAD subjects with APP or PSEN1 mutations	Induction media: VPA, CHIR99021, Repsox, forskolin, SP600625, GO6983, Y-27632

Maturation media: CHIR99021, forskolin, dorsomorphin, BDNF, GDNF, NT3

	NeuN, tau, synapsin expression

Action potentials, electrophysiological response to exogenous L-glutamic acid and GABA

Active neuronal network formation

	APP mutation line: Increased extracellular Aβ42

Increased extracellular ratio Aβ42/Aβ40

Increased pTau and total tau

PSEN1 mutation lines: Variable Aβ production results

No change in pTau or total tau

	Hu et al., 2015	
	Fibroblasts, AD and control subjects (with in-vitro mutant APP overexpression)	Transcription Factors: BRN2, ASCL1, MYTLl (“BAM” TFs), NEUROD1

Media: bFGF, BDNF.

Plated on nanopatterned topography surface

	β-III tubulin, MAP2, VGLUT1 expression

Action potentials, sodium and potassium currents

	Reported changes in gene expression related to APP processing (BACE2, CLU, DSG2, PLAU, MME) in APOE 3/4 sAD line compared to APOE 3/3 healthy control line

Increased Aβ peptides and Aβ oligomers

Increased pTau levels

	H. Kim et al., 2017	
Parkinson’s disease (PD)	Embryo-derived fibroblasts	Transcription factors: BAM TFs, LMX1A and FOXA2 (two genes involved in dopaminergic neuron generation)

	Dopaminergic neuron-typical morphology

Spontaneous and rebound action potentials

Expression of β-III tubulin

Dopaminergic marker expression: tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), Nurr1, aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC)

	No disease-specific findings presented

	Pfisterer et al., 2011	
	Fibroblasts, genetic forms PD and control subjects	Transcription factors: ASCL1, LMX1A, NURR1

	Dopaminergic neuron-like morphology

Secrete dopamine

Dopaminergic markers AADC, TH, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1a1 (ALDH1A1), vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) and dopamine transporter (DAT)

Enriched expression of genes associated with dopaminergic neurons

Electrophysiological activity consistent with dopaminergic neurons

Decreased firing upon addition of dopaminergic receptor agonist

	No disease phenotype reported in genetic PD iNs compared to control iNs

	Caiazzo et al., 2011	
	Fetal lung-derived fibroblasts	Transcription factors: ASCL1, SOX2, NGN2, NURR1, PITX3

	Dopaminergic neuron-like morphology

Neuronal electrophysiologic properties

Dopamine release/uptake

Expression of β-III tubulin

Expression of dopaminergic markers TH, DAT and dopa decarboxylase (DDC)

Expression of genes specific to dopaminergic neurons (EN1, TH, DAT, VMAT2)

	Injection of dopaminergic iNs into striatum of PD rat model improved movement abnormalities

Human iNs were shown to survive in rat brain at 16 week time point after injection, and were positive for TH, DDC and DAT

	X. Liu et al., 2012	
	Dermal fibroblasts, early on-set PD subject with genetic mutation in PINK1 gene, and healthy controls	shRNAs against human polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTBP)

Differentiation media: bFGF, insulin, putrescine, transferrin, sodium selenite, B27, BDNF, NT3, GDNF and CNTF

	β-III tubulin, MAP2A/B and MAP2D expression

	Utilized iNs from PD subjects to validate newly developed antibodies to pS65- Ubiquitin and pS65-Parkin, substrates of PINK1

iNs from PD subject showed no pS65-Ub using western blot; staining was present in control iN line

iNs from PD subject did not increase pS65-Ub after induction of mitochondrial stress, whereas p65-Ub increased in control iN line

	Fiesel et al., 2015	
	Dermal fibroblasts, PD subjects with homozygous and heterozygous PINK1 mutations, compared to healthy controls with WT PINK1	shRNAs against human PTBP

Differentiation media: bFGF, insulin, putrescine, transferrin, sodium selenite, B27 supplement, BDNF, NT3, GDNF and CNTF

	β-III tubulin expression

	p65-Ub levels decreased in all heterozygous mutant iNs lines compared to controls, and not detected in homozygous mutant iN lines

Genotype-specific differences observed between PINK1 mutations in heterozygous lines when p65-Ub levels measured over longer durations of mitochondrial stress

	Puschmann et al., 2017	
Huntington’s disease (HD)	Fibroblasts, two HD subjects, compared to healthy control	shRNAs against human PTB1

Differentiation media: insulin, transferrin, sodium selenite, progesterone, putrescine, FGF2, BDNF, GDNF, NT3 and CNTF

	β-III tubulin, NeuN, DARPP-32, GABA expression

	Increased cell death during iN reprogramming in HD lines

Morphology alternations in HD lines, including abnormal neurite outgrowth and branching, and increased fragmentation

Htt inclusions (nuclear and non-nuclear) identified in iNs from HD subjects, not observed in control subject

	Y. Liu et al., 2014	
	Dermal fibroblasts	Transcription factors: CTIP2, DLX1, DLX2, MYT1L

miR-9/9*, miR-124 microRNAs

	MAP2, β-III tubulin, GABA and DARPP-32, FOXP1, DLX5 expression

Similar gene expression profile when compared to medium spiny neurons dissected from human autopsy neostriatum tissue

Dense dendritic spines

Action potentials

	No disease-specific findings presented

	Victor et al., 2014	
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)	Fibroblasts, ALS subjects with 3 different FUS mutations	shRNAs against human PTBP

Differentiation media: BDNF, NT3, GDNF and CNTF

	β-III tubulin, MAP2, NeuN, synapsin expression

	Observed mutant FUS pathology in iNs generated from ALS-FUS subjects, with increased cytoplasmic FUS accumulation and colocalization of FUS to stress granules upon cellular stress induction

	Lim, Choi, Oh, Xue, et al., 2016	
	Dermal fibroblasts, c9FTD/ALS subjects with C9ORF72 mutation and controls	shRNA against PTB1

	MAP2, β-III tubulin, PSD95, synapsin I, drebrin expression

	RNA nuclear foci present in iNs with C9ORF72 mutation, which were attenuated by designer small molecule- mediated disruption of the formation of c9RAN proteins

Poly(GP) and poly(PR) inclusions observed in iNs with C9ORF72 mutation

	Su et al., 2014	
	Dermal fibroblasts, 3 ALS subjects with FUS mutations, and controls	Transcription factors: NGN2, SOX11, ISL1, LHX3 (ISL1 and LHX3 involved in motor neuron development)

Neuron induction media: Forskolin, dorsomorphin, bFGF2

	Motor neuron-like morphology

Electrophysiological properties of mature neurons

MAP2, β-III tubulin, NF200 SYT1 expression

HB9, ChAT, VACHT (spinal motor neuron markers)

HOX gene expression indicates similarity to cervical and/or thoracic spinal motor neurons

Formation of neuromuscular junctions in vitro with mouse skeletal myotubes

	ALS motor iNs displayed abnormal FUS accumulation in cytoplasm

ALS motor iNs had decreased cell body size compared to healthy controls, a phenotype also observed in ALS post-mortem brain tissue

ALS motor iNs had increased rates of cell death

ALS motor iNs had abnormal action potential firing, decreased formation of neuromuscular junctions

	M. L. Liu et al., 2016	
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)	Embryonic fibroblasts	Transcription factors: BAM TFs, NEUROD1, NGN2, ISL1, HB9, LHX3

	ChAT expression

Motor neuron-like electrophysiological properties

	No disease-specific findings presented

	Son et al., 2011	
	Fibroblasts, SMA and control subjects	Transcription factors: BAM TFs, NEUROD1, NGN2, ISL1, HB9, LHX3

	β-III tubulin and motor neuron markers ISL1, ChAT, HB9 expression

Increased expression of SMN protein compared to fibroblasts

	Decreased rate of neurite growth and increased degradation of neurites, in SMA iNs

Decreased iN survival at late time point (61 days post-induction) in SMA iNs

Increased caspase 3 expression and LDH activity in SMA iNs

	Q. J. Zhang et al., 2017	
Frontotempo ral dementia with parkinsonism −17 (FTDP- 17T)	Dermal fibroblasts, FTDP-17T subject (PMI 2 hours), and control subjects	Transcription factors: BAM TFs, LMX1A, FOXA2

	β-III tubulin expression

3R and 4R tau expression

	Limited phenotype analysis, due to low fibroblast and iN yield

	Iovino et al., 2014	
Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegener ation (PKAN)	Dermal fibroblasts, 3 PKAN and 3 control subjects	Transcription factors: MASH1, NURR1, LMX1A

Neuronal induction media: insulin, transferrin, sodium selenite, progesterone, putrescine

	β-III tubulin, MAP2, N- CAM, TH expression

	PKAN iNs showed elevated reactive oxygen species and decreased reduced- glutathione, relative to controls

PKAN iNs showed abnormal mitochondrial membrane potential

	Santambrogio et al., 2015	
Krabbe disease (KD)	Dermal fibroblasts, KD subjects with mutations in GALC gene, and control subjects	shRNAs against human PTB1

Media: Insulin, apo- transferrin, sodium selenite, bFGF, BDNF, CNTF, GDNF, NT3

	β-III tubulin, MAP2, synapsin, vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (vGLUT1) expression

	Decreased GALC activity and increased psychosine levels in KD iNs compared to controls

Abnormal lysosomal morphology and accumulation in KD iNs

Altered neurite morphology in KD iNs

KD iNs displayed defects in mitochondrial transport and mitochondrial membrane potential

	Lim, Choi, Oh, Choi, et al., 2016	

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


References

Abud EM , Ramirez RN , Martinez ES , Healy LM , Nguyen CHH , Newman SA , … Blurton-Jones M (2017). iPSC-Derived Human Microglia-like Cells to Study Neurological Diseases. Neuron, 94 (2 ), 278–293 e279. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.03.042 28426964
Alzheimer’s Association Report: 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. (2019). Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 15 , 321–387.
Ashapkin VV , Kutueva LI , Kurchashova SY , &amp; Kireev II . (2019). Are There Common Mechanisms Between the Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome and Natural Aging? Front Genet, 10 , 455. doi:10.3389/fgene.2019.00455 31156709
Berry BJ , Smith AST , Young JE , &amp; Mack DL (2018). Advances and Current Challenges Associated with the Use of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells in Modeling Neurodegenerative Disease. Cells Tissues Organs, 205 (5–6 ), 331–349. doi:10.1159/000493018 30300891
Bliss LA , Sams MR , Deep-Soboslay A , Ren-Patterson R , Jaffe AE , Chenoweth JG , … Hyde TM (2012). Use of postmortem human dura mater and scalp for deriving human fibroblast cultures. PLoS One, 7 (9 ), e45282. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045282 23028905
Boeve BF , &amp; Hutton M (2008). Refining frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17: introducing FTDP-17 (MAPT) and FTDP-17 (PGRN). Arch Neurol, 65 (4 ), 460–464. doi:10.1001/archneur.65.4.460 18413467
Bright J , Hussain S , Dang V , Wright S , Cooper B , Byun T , … Griswold-Prenner I (2015). Human secreted tau increases amyloid-beta production. Neurobiol Aging, 36 (2 ), 693–709. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.09.007 25442111
Caiazzo M , Dell’Anno MT , Dvoretskova E , Lazarevic D , Taverna S , Leo D , … Broccoli V (2011). Direct generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from mouse and human fibroblasts. Nature, 476 (7359 ), 224–227. doi:10.1038/nature10284 21725324
Caiazzo M , Giannelli S , Valente P , Lignani G , Carissimo A , Sessa A , … Broccoli V (2015). Direct conversion of fibroblasts into functional astrocytes by defined transcription factors. Stem Cell Reports, 4 (1 ), 25–36. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.002 25556566
Chambers SM , Fasano CA , Papapetrou EP , Tomishima M , Sadelain M , &amp; Studer L (2009). Highly efficient neural conversion of human ES and iPS cells by dual inhibition of SMAD signaling. Nat Biotechnol, 27 (3 ), 275–280. doi:nbt.1529 [pii] 10.1038/nbt.1529 19252484
Cummings JL , Morstorf T , &amp; Zhong K (2014). Alzheimer’s disease drug-development pipeline: few candidates, frequent failures. Alzheimers Res Ther, 6 (4 ), 37. doi:10.1186/alzrt269 25024750
Douvaras P , &amp; Fossati V (2015). Generation and isolation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat Protoc, 10 (8 ), 1143–1154. doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.075 26134954
Douvaras P , Wang J , Zimmer M , Hanchuk S , O’Bara MA , Sadiq S , … Fossati V (2014). Efficient generation of myelinating oligodendrocytes from primary progressive multiple sclerosis patients by induced pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell Reports, 3 (2 ), 250–259. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.06.012 25254339
Drouin-Ouellet J , Lau S , Brattas PL , Rylander Ottosson D , Pircs K , Grassi DA , … Parmar M (2017). REST suppression mediates neural conversion of adult human fibroblasts via microRNA-dependent and -independent pathways. EMBO Mol Med, 9 (8 ), 1117–1131. doi:10.15252/emmm.201607471 28646119
Drummond E , &amp; Wisniewski T (2017). Alzheimer’s disease: experimental models and reality. Acta Neuropathol, 133 (2 ), 155–175. doi:10.1007/s00401-016-1662-x 28025715
Ehrlich M , Mozafari S , Glatza M , Starost L , Velychko S , Hallmann AL , … Kuhlmann T (2017). Rapid and efficient generation of oligodendrocytes from human induced pluripotent stem cells using transcription factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 114 (11 ), E2243–E2252. doi:10.1073/pnas.1614412114 28246330
Espuny-Camacho I , Michelsen KA , Gall D , Linaro D , Hasche A , Bonnefont J , … Vanderhaeghen P (2013). Pyramidal neurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells integrate efficiently into mouse brain circuits in vivo. Neuron, 77 (3 ), 440–456. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.12.011 23395372
Fiesel FC , Ando M , Hudec R , Hill AR , Castanedes-Casey M , Caulfield TR , … Springer W (2015). (Patho-)physiological relevance of PINK1-dependent ubiquitin phosphorylation. EMBO Rep, 16 (9 ), 1114–1130. doi:10.15252/embr.201540514 26162776
Flamier A , El Hajjar J , Adjaye J , Fernandes KJ , Abdouh M , &amp; Bernier G (2018). Modeling Late-Onset Sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease through BMI1 Deficiency. Cell Rep, 23 (9 ), 2653–2666. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.097 29847796
Foveau B , Correia AS , Hebert SS , Rainone S , Potvin O , Kergoat MJ , … the, C.-Q. C. f. t. e. i. o. A. s. d.-Q. (2019). Stem Cell-Derived Neurons as Cellular Models of Sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis, 67 (3 ), 893–910. doi:10.3233/JAD-180833 30689579
Frost B (2016). Alzheimer’s disease: An acquired neurodegenerative laminopathy. Nucleus, 7 (3 ), 275–283. doi:10.1080/19491034.2016.1183859 27167528
Germain PL , &amp; Testa G (2017). Taming Human Genetic Variability: Transcriptomic Meta-Analysis Guides the Experimental Design and Interpretation of iPSC-Based Disease Modeling. Stem Cell Reports, 8 (6 ), 1784–1796. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.05.012 28591656
Gore A , Li Z , Fung HL , Young JE , Agarwal S , Antosiewicz-Bourget J , … Zhang K (2011). Somatic coding mutations in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 471 (7336 ), 63–67. doi:nature09805 [pii] 10.1038/nature09805 21368825
Heemels MT (2016). Neurodegenerative diseases. Nature, 539 (7628 ), 179. doi:10.1038/539179a 27830810
Hester ME , Murtha MJ , Song S , Rao M , Miranda CJ , Meyer K , … Kaspar BK (2011). Rapid and efficient generation of functional motor neurons from human pluripotent stem cells using gene delivered transcription factor codes. Mol Ther, 19 (10 ), 1905–1912. doi:10.1038/mt.2011.135 21772256
Hiragi T , Andoh M , Araki T , Shirakawa T , Ono T , Koyama R , &amp; Ikegaya Y (2017). Differentiation of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (hiPSC)-Derived Neurons in Mouse Hippocampal Slice Cultures. Front Cell Neurosci, 11 , 143. doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00143 28567004
Hodge RD , Bakken TE , Miller JA , Smith KA , Barkan ER , Graybuck LT , … Lein ES (2019). Conserved cell types with divergent features in human versus mouse cortex. Nature, 573 (7772 ), 61–68. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1506-7 31435019
Hu W , Qiu B , Guan W , Wang Q , Wang M , Li W , … Pei G (2015). Direct Conversion of Normal and Alzheimer’s Disease Human Fibroblasts into Neuronal Cells by Small Molecules. Cell Stem Cell, 17 (2 ), 204–212. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.006 26253202
Huh CJ , Zhang B , Victor MB , Dahiya S , Batista LF , Horvath S , &amp; Yoo AS (2016). Maintenance of age in human neurons generated by microRNA-based neuronal conversion of fibroblasts. Elife, 5 . doi:10.7554/eLife.18648
Iovino M , Pfisterer U , Holton JL , Lashley T , Swingler RJ , Calo L , … Spillantini MG (2014). The novel MAPT mutation K298E: mechanisms of mutant tau toxicity, brain pathology and tau expression in induced fibroblast-derived neurons. Acta Neuropathol, 127 (2 ), 283–295. doi:10.1007/s00401-013-1219-1 24292008
Israel MA , Yuan SH , Bardy C , Reyna SM , Mu Y , Herrera C , … Goldstein LS (2012). Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 482 (7384 ), 216–220. doi:nature10821 [pii] 10.1038/nature10821 22278060
Jiao J , Yang Y , Shi Y , Chen J , Gao R , Fan Y , … Gao S (2013). Modeling Dravet syndrome using induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and directly converted neurons. Hum Mol Genet, 22 (21 ), 4241–4252. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddt275 23773995
Kalia LV , &amp; Lang AE (2015). Parkinson’s disease. Lancet, 386 (9996 ), 896–912. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61393-3 25904081
Karch CM , &amp; Goate AM (2015). Alzheimer’s disease risk genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. Biol Psychiatry, 77 (1 ), 43–51. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.05.006 24951455
Karow M , Sanchez R , Schichor C , Masserdotti G , Ortega F , Heinrich C , … Berninger B (2012). Reprogramming of pericyte-derived cells of the adult human brain into induced neuronal cells. Cell Stem Cell, 11 (4 ), 471–476. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2012.07.007 23040476
Kim H , Yoo J , Shin J , Chang Y , Jung J , Jo DG , … Kim J (2017). Modelling APOE varepsilon3/4 allele-associated sporadic Alzheimer’s disease in an induced neuron. Brain, 140 (8 ), 2193–2209. doi:10.1093/brain/awx144 28899010
Kim YH , Choi SH , D’Avanzo C , Hebisch M , Sliwinski C , Bylykbashi E , … Kim DY (2015). A 3D human neural cell culture system for modeling Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Protoc, 10 (7 ), 985–1006. doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.065 26068894
Kondo T , Asai M , Tsukita K , Kutoku Y , Ohsawa Y , Sunada Y , … Inoue H (2013). Modeling Alzheimer’s Disease with iPSCs Reveals Stress Phenotypes Associated with Intracellular Abeta and Differential Drug Responsiveness. Cell Stem Cell, 12 (4 ), 487–496. doi:S1934–5909(13)00012-X [pii] 10.1016/j.stem.2013.01.009 23434393
Krencik R , Weick JP , Liu Y , Zhang ZJ , &amp; Zhang SC (2011). Specification of transplantable astroglial subtypes from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat Biotechnol, 29 (6 ), 528–534. doi:10.1038/nbt.1877 21602806
Ladewig J , Mertens J , Kesavan J , Doerr J , Poppe D , Glaue F , … Brustle O (2012). Small molecules enable highly efficient neuronal conversion of human fibroblasts. Nat Methods, 9 (6 ), 575–578. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1972 22484851
LaFerla FM , &amp; Green KN (2012). Animal models of Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med, 2 (11 ). doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a006320
Lancaster MA , Renner M , Martin CA , Wenzel D , Bicknell LS , Hurles ME , … Knoblich JA (2013). Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly. Nature, 501 (7467 ), 373–379. doi:10.1038/nature12517 23995685
Li XJ , &amp; Li S (2015). Large Animal Models of Huntington’s Disease. Curr Top Behav Neurosci, 22 , 149–160. doi:10.1007/7854_2013_246 24048953
Lim SM , Choi BO , Oh SI , Choi WJ , Oh KW , Nahm M , … Kim SH (2016). Patient fibroblasts-derived induced neurons demonstrate autonomous neuronal defects in adult-onset Krabbe disease. Oncotarget, 7 (46 ), 74496–74509. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.12812 27780934
Lim SM , Choi WJ , Oh KW , Xue Y , Choi JY , Kim SH , … Kim SH (2016). Directly converted patient-specific induced neurons mirror the neuropathology of FUS with disrupted nuclear localization in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Mol Neurodegener, 11 , 8. doi:10.1186/s13024-016-0075-6 26795035
Lin YT , Seo J , Gao F , Feldman HM , Wen HL , Penney J , … Tsai LH (2018). APOE4 Causes Widespread Molecular and Cellular Alterations Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease Phenotypes in Human iPSC-Derived Brain Cell Types. Neuron. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.05.008
Linta L , Stockmann M , Kleinhans KN , Bockers A , Storch A , Zaehres H , … Liebau S (2012). Rat embryonic fibroblasts improve reprogramming of human keratinocytes into induced pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cells Dev, 21 (6 ), 965–976. doi:10.1089/scd.2011.0026 21699413
Lister R , Pelizzola M , Kida YS , Hawkins RD , Nery JR , Hon G , … Ecker JR (2011). Hotspots of aberrant epigenomic reprogramming in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 471 (7336 ), 68–73. doi:nature09798 [pii] 10.1038/nature09798 21289626
Liu ML , Zang T , &amp; Zhang CL (2016). Direct Lineage Reprogramming Reveals Disease-Specific Phenotypes of Motor Neurons from Human ALS Patients. Cell Rep, 14 (1 ), 115–128. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.018 26725112
Liu ML , Zang T , Zou Y , Chang JC , Gibson JR , Huber KM , &amp; Zhang CL (2013). Small molecules enable neurogenin 2 to efficiently convert human fibroblasts into cholinergic neurons. Nat Commun, 4 , 2183. doi:10.1038/ncomms3183 23873306
Liu X , Li F , Stubblefield EA , Blanchard B , Richards TL , Larson GA , … Li CY (2012). Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts into dopaminergic neuron-like cells. Cell Res, 22 (2 ), 321–332. doi:10.1038/cr.2011.181 22105488
Liu Y , Xue Y , Ridley S , Zhang D , Rezvani K , Fu XD , &amp; Wang H (2014). Direct reprogramming of Huntington’s disease patient fibroblasts into neuron-like cells leads to abnormal neurite outgrowth, increased cell death, and aggregate formation. PLoS One, 9 (10 ), e109621. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0109621 25275533
Lo Sardo V , Ferguson W , Erikson GA , Topol EJ , Baldwin KK , &amp; Torkamani A (2017). Influence of donor age on induced pluripotent stem cells. Nat Biotechnol, 35 (1 ), 69–74. doi:10.1038/nbt.3749 27941802
Loh YH , Agarwal S , Park IH , Urbach A , Huo H , Heffner GC , … Daley GQ (2009). Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from human blood. Blood, 113 (22 ), 5476–5479. doi:10.1182/blood-2009-02-204800 19299331
Lopez-Otin C , Blasco MA , Partridge L , Serrano M , &amp; Kroemer G (2013). The hallmarks of aging. Cell, 153 (6 ), 1194–1217. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039 23746838
Luo C , Lee QY , Wapinski O , Castanon R , Nery JR , Mall M , … Ecker JR (2019). Global DNA methylation remodeling during direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to neurons. Elife, 8 . doi:10.7554/eLife.40197
Mahajani S , Raina A , Fokken C , Kugler S , &amp; Bahr M (2019). Homogenous generation of dopaminergic neurons from multiple hiPSC lines by transient expression of transcription factors. Cell Death Dis, 10 (12 ), 898. doi:10.1038/s41419-019-2133-9 31776327
Mahmoudi S , &amp; Brunet A (2012). Aging and reprogramming: a two-way street. Curr Opin Cell Biol, 24 (6 ), 744–756. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2012.10.004 23146768
Marro S , Pang ZP , Yang N , Tsai MC , Qu K , Chang HY , … Wernig M (2011). Direct lineage conversion of terminally differentiated hepatocytes to functional neurons. Cell Stem Cell, 9 (4 ), 374–382. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2011.09.002 21962918
McQuade A , Coburn M , Tu CH , Hasselmann J , Davtyan H , &amp; Blurton-Jones M (2018). Development and validation of a simplified method to generate human microglia from pluripotent stem cells. Mol Neurodegener, 13 (1 ), 67. doi:10.1186/s13024-018-0297-x 30577865
Meng F , Wang X , Gu P , Wang Z , &amp; Guo W (2013). Induction of retinal ganglion-like cells from fibroblasts by adenoviral gene delivery. Neuroscience, 250 , 381–393. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.07.001 23856066
Mertens J , Paquola AC , Ku M , Hatch E , Bohnke L , Ladjevardi S , … Gage FH (2015a). Directly Reprogrammed Human Neurons Retain Aging-Associated Transcriptomic Signatures and Reveal Age-Related Nucleocytoplasmic Defects. Cell Stem Cell, 17 (6 ), 705–718. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.001 26456686
Mertens J , Paquola ACM , Ku M , Hatch E , Bohnke L , Ladjevardi S , … Gage FH (2015b). Directly Reprogrammed Human Neurons Retain Aging-Associated Transcriptomic Signatures and Reveal Age-Related Nucleocytoplasmic Defects. Cell Stem Cell, 17 (6 ), 705–718. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.001 26456686
Mertens J , Reid D , Lau S , Kim Y , &amp; Gage FH (2018). Aging in a Dish: iPSC-Derived and Directly Induced Neurons for Studying Brain Aging and Age-Related Neurodegenerative Diseases. Annu Rev Genet, 52 , 271–293. doi:10.1146/annurevgenet-120417-031534 30208291
Meyer K , Feldman HM , Lu T , Drake D , Lim ET , Ling KH , … Yankner BA (2019). REST and Neural Gene Network Dysregulation in iPSC Models of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell Rep, 26 (5 ), 1112–1127 e1119. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.023 30699343
Miller JD , Ganat YM , Kishinevsky S , Bowman RL , Liu B , Tu EY , … Studer L (2013). Human iPSC-based modeling of late-onset disease via progerin-induced aging. Cell Stem Cell, 13 (6 ), 691–705. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2013.11.006 24315443
Miura K , Okada Y , Aoi T , Okada A , Takahashi K , Okita K , … Yamanaka S (2009). Variation in the safety of induced pluripotent stem cell lines. Nat Biotechnol, 27 (8 ), 743–745. doi:10.1038/nbt.1554 19590502
Mollinari C , Zhao J , Lupacchini L , Garaci E , Merlo D , &amp; Pei G (2018). Transdifferentiation: a new promise for neurodegenerative diseases. Cell Death Dis, 9 (8 ), 830. doi:10.1038/s41419-018-0891-4 30082779
Montine TJ , Phelps CH , Beach TG , Bigio EH , Cairns NJ , Dickson DW , … Alzheimer’s A (2012). National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach. Acta Neuropathol, 123 (1 ), 1–11. doi:10.1007/s00401-011-0910-3 22101365
Nestor MW , Jacob S , Sun B , Pre D , Sproul AA , Hong SI , … Noggle SA (2015). Characterization of a subpopulation of developing cortical interneurons from human iPSCs within serum-free embryoid bodies. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol, 308 (3 ), C209–219. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00263.2014 25394470
Niccoli T , &amp; Partridge L (2012). Ageing as a risk factor for disease. Curr Biol, 22 (17 ), R741–752. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.07.024 22975005
Nicholas CR , Chen J , Tang Y , Southwell DG , Chalmers N , Vogt D , … Kriegstein AR (2013). Functional maturation of hPSC-derived forebrain interneurons requires an extended timeline and mimics human neural development. Cell Stem Cell, 12 (5 ), 573–586. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2013.04.005 23642366
Ochalek A , Mihalik B , Avci HX , Chandrasekaran A , Teglasi A , Bock I , … Dinnyes A (2017). Neurons derived from sporadic Alzheimer’s disease iPSCs reveal elevated TAU hyperphosphorylation, increased amyloid levels, and GSK3B activation. Alzheimers Res Ther, 9 (1 ), 90. doi:10.1186/s13195-017-0317-z 29191219
Pang ZP , Yang N , Vierbuchen T , Ostermeier A , Fuentes DR , Yang TQ , … Wernig M (2011). Induction of human neuronal cells by defined transcription factors. Nature, 476 (7359 ), 220–223. doi:10.1038/nature10202 21617644
Passeri E , Wilson AM , Primerano A , Kondo MA , Sengupta S , Srivastava R , … Ishizuka K (2015). Enhanced conversion of induced neuronal cells (iN cells) from human fibroblasts: Utility in uncovering cellular deficits in mental illness-associated chromosomal abnormalities. Neurosci Res, 101 , 57–61. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2015.07.011 26260244
Penney J , Ralvenius WT , &amp; Tsai LH (2020). Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with iPSC-derived brain cells. Mol Psychiatry, 25 (1 ), 148–167. doi:10.1038/s41380-019-0468-3 31391546
Perriot S , Mathias A , Perriard G , Canales M , Jonkmans N , Merienne N , … Du Pasquier R (2018). Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Astrocytes Are Differentially Activated by Multiple Sclerosis-Associated Cytokines. Stem Cell Reports, 11 (5 ), 1199–1210. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2018.09.015 30409508
Pfisterer U , Kirkeby A , Torper O , Wood J , Nelander J , Dufour A , … Parmar M (2011). Direct conversion of human fibroblasts to dopaminergic neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 108 (25 ), 10343–10348. doi:10.1073/pnas.1105135108 21646515
Puschmann A , Fiesel FC , Caulfield TR , Hudec R , Ando M , Truban D , … Springer W (2017). Heterozygous PINK1 p.G411S increases risk of Parkinson’s disease via a dominant-negative mechanism. Brain, 140 (1 ), 98–117. doi:10.1093/brain/aww261 27807026
Qian X , Nguyen HN , Song MM , Hadiono C , Ogden SC , Hammack C , … Ming GL (2016). Brain-Region-Specific Organoids Using Mini-bioreactors for Modeling ZIKV Exposure. Cell, 165 (5 ), 1238–1254. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.04.032 27118425
Raja WK , Mungenast AE , Lin YT , Ko T , Abdurrob F , Seo J , &amp; Tsai LH (2016). Self-Organizing 3D Human Neural Tissue Derived from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Recapitulate Alzheimer’s Disease Phenotypes. PLoS One, 11 (9 ), e0161969. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0161969 27622770
Rodriguez-Rodero S , Fernandez-Morera JL , Menendez-Torre E , Calvanese V , Fernandez AF , &amp; Fraga MF (2011). Aging genetics and aging. Aging Dis, 2 (3 ), 186–195.22396873
Rose SE , Frankowski H , Knupp A , Berry BJ , Martinez R , Dinh SQ , … Young JE (2018). Leptomeninges-Derived Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells and Directly Converted Neurons From Autopsy Cases With Varying Neuropathologic Backgrounds. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 77 (5 ), 353–360. doi:10.1093/jnen/nly013 29474672
Santambrogio P , Dusi S , Guaraldo M , Rotundo LI , Broccoli V , Garavaglia B , … Levi S (2015). Mitochondrial iron and energetic dysfunction distinguish fibroblasts and induced neurons from pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration patients. Neurobiol Dis, 81 , 144–153. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2015.02.030 25836419
Santos R , Vadodaria KC , Jaeger BN , Mei A , Lefcochilos-Fogelquist S , Mendes APD , … Gage FH (2017). Differentiation of Inflammation-Responsive Astrocytes from Glial Progenitors Generated from Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells. Stem Cell Reports, 8 (6 ), 1757–1769. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.05.011 28591655
Sarkar A , Mei A , Paquola ACM , Stern S , Bardy C , Klug JR , … Gage FH (2018). Efficient Generation of CA3 Neurons from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Enables Modeling of Hippocampal Connectivity In Vitro. Cell Stem Cell, 22 (5 ), 684–697 e689. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.009 29727680
Schlachetzki JC , Saliba SW , &amp; Oliveira AC (2013). Studying neurodegenerative diseases in culture models. Braz J Psychiatry, 35 Suppl 2 , S92–100. doi:10.1590/1516-4446-2013-1159 24271231
Shi Y , Inoue H , Wu JC , &amp; Yamanaka S (2017). Induced pluripotent stem cell technology: a decade of progress. Nat Rev Drug Discov, 16 (2 ), 115–130. doi:10.1038/nrd.2016.245 27980341
Shi Y , Kirwan P , Smith J , Robinson HP , &amp; Livesey FJ (2012). Human cerebral cortex development from pluripotent stem cells to functional excitatory synapses. Nat Neurosci, 15 (3 ), 477–486, S471. doi:nn.3041 [pii] 10.1038/nn.3041 22306606
Shimojo D , Onodera K , Doi-Torii Y , Ishihara Y , Hattori C , Miwa Y , … Okada Y (2015). Rapid, efficient, and simple motor neuron differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells. Mol Brain, 8 (1 ), 79. doi:10.1186/s13041-015-0172-4 26626025
Siegert S , Seo J , Kwon EJ , Rudenko A , Cho S , Wang W , … Tsai LH (2015). The schizophrenia risk gene product miR-137 alters presynaptic plasticity. Nat Neurosci, 18 (7 ), 1008–1016. doi:10.1038/nn.4023 26005852
Soman P , Tobe BTD , Lee JW , Winquist AM , Singec I , Vecchio KS , … Chen S (2012). Three-dimensional scaffolding to investigate neuronal derivatives of human embryonic stem cells. Biomed Microdevices, 14 (5 ), 829–838. doi:10.1007/s10544-012-9662-7 22767243
Son EY , Ichida JK , Wainger BJ , Toma JS , Rafuse VF , Woolf CJ , &amp; Eggan K (2011). Conversion of mouse and human fibroblasts into functional spinal motor neurons. Cell Stem Cell, 9 (3 ), 205–218. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2011.07.014 21852222
Sproul AA , Vensand LB , Dusenberry CR , Jacob S , Vonsattel JP , Paull DJ , … Noggle SA (2014). Generation of iPSC lines from archived non-cryoprotected biobanked dura mater. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2 , 4. doi:10.1186/2051-5960-2-4 24398250
Stanslowsky N , Reinhardt P , Glass H , Kalmbach N , Naujock M , Hensel N , … Wegner F (2016). Neuronal Dysfunction in iPSC-Derived Medium Spiny Neurons from Chorea-Acanthocytosis Patients Is Reversed by Src Kinase Inhibition and FActin Stabilization. J Neurosci, 36 (47 ), 12027–12043. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0456-16.2016 27881786
Studer L , Vera E , &amp; Cornacchia D (2015). Programming and Reprogramming Cellular Age in the Era of Induced Pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell, 16 (6 ), 591–600. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.05.004 26046759
Su Z , Zhang Y , Gendron TF , Bauer PO , Chew J , Yang WY , … Disney MD (2014). Discovery of a biomarker and lead small molecules to target r(GGGGCC)-associated defects in c9FTD/ALS. Neuron, 83 (5 ), 1043–1050. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.07.041 25132468
Suga M , Kondo T , &amp; Inoue H (2019). Modeling Neurological Disorders with Human Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Astrocytes. Int J Mol Sci, 20 (16 ). doi:10.3390/ijms20163862
Tagliafierro L , Zamora ME , &amp; Chiba-Falek O (2019). Multiplication of the SNCA locus exacerbates neuronal nuclear aging. Hum Mol Genet, 28 (3 ), 407–421. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddy355 30304516
Takahashi K , Tanabe K , Ohnuki M , Narita M , Ichisaka T , Tomoda K , &amp; Yamanaka S (2007). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell, 131 (5 ), 861–872. doi:S0092–8674(07)01471–7 [pii] 10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.019 18035408
Takahashi K , &amp; Yamanaka S (2006). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell, 126 (4 ), 663–676. doi:S0092–8674(06)00976–7 [pii] 10.1016/j.cell.2006.07.024 16904174
Theka I , Caiazzo M , Dvoretskova E , Leo D , Ungaro F , Curreli S , … Broccoli V (2013). Rapid generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from human induced pluripotent stem cells through a single-step procedure using cell lineage transcription factors. Stem Cells Transl Med, 2 (6 ), 473–479. doi:10.5966/sctm.2012-0133 23658252
Traxler L , Edenhofer F , &amp; Mertens J (2019). Next-generation disease modeling with direct conversion: a new path to old neurons. FEBS Lett, 593 (23 ), 3316–3337. doi:10.1002/1873-3468.13678 31715002
Victor MB , Richner M , Hermanstyne TO , Ransdell JL , Sobieski C , Deng PY , … Yoo AS (2014). Generation of human striatal neurons by microRNA-dependent direct conversion of fibroblasts. Neuron, 84 (2 ), 311–323. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.10.016 25374357
Vierbuchen T , Ostermeier A , Pang ZP , Kokubu Y , Sudhof TC , &amp; Wernig M (2010). Direct conversion of fibroblasts to functional neurons by defined factors. Nature, 463 (7284 ), 1035–1041. doi:nature08797 [pii] 10.1038/nature08797 20107439
Wainger BJ , Kiskinis E , Mellin C , Wiskow O , Han SS , Sandoe J , … Woolf CJ (2014). Intrinsic membrane hyperexcitability of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient-derived motor neurons. Cell Rep, 7 (1 ), 1–11. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.019 24703839
Wang C , Najm R , Xu Q , Jeong DE , Walker D , Balestra ME , … Huang Y (2018). Gain of toxic apolipoprotein E4 effects in human iPSC-derived neurons is ameliorated by a small-molecule structure corrector. Nat Med, 24 (5 ), 647–657. doi:10.1038/s41591-018-0004-z 29632371
Wang P , Zhang HL , Li W , Sha H , Xu C , Yao L , … Zhu J (2014). Generation of patient-specific induced neuronal cells using a direct reprogramming strategy. Stem Cells Dev, 23 (1 ), 16–23. doi:10.1089/scd.2013.0131 23947933
Wang S , Bates J , Li X , Schanz S , Chandler-Militello D , Levine C , … Goldman SA (2013). Human iPSC-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cells can myelinate and rescue a mouse model of congenital hypomyelination. Cell Stem Cell, 12 (2 ), 252–264. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2012.12.002 23395447
Wapinski OL , Vierbuchen T , Qu K , Lee QY , Chanda S , Fuentes DR , … Wernig M (2013). Hierarchical mechanisms for direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to neurons. Cell, 155 (3 ), 621–635. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.028 24243019
Watson LM , Wong MMK , Vowles J , Cowley SA , &amp; Becker EBE (2018). A Simplified Method for Generating Purkinje Cells from Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells. Cerebellum, 17 (4 ), 419–427. doi:10.1007/s12311-017-0913-2 29397531
Woodruff G , Young JE , Martinez FJ , Buen F , Gore A , Kinaga J , … Goldstein LS (2013). The presenilin-1 DeltaE9 mutation results in reduced gamma-secretase activity, but not total loss of PS1 function, in isogenic human stem cells. Cell Rep, 5 (4 ), 974–985. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.018 24239350
Yoo AS , Sun AX , Li L , Shcheglovitov A , Portmann T , Li Y , … Crabtree GR (2011). MicroRNA-mediated conversion of human fibroblasts to neurons. Nature, 476 (7359 ), 228–231. doi:10.1038/nature10323 21753754
Yoshimizu T , Pan JQ , Mungenast AE , Madison JM , Su S , Ketterman J , … Tsai LH (2015). Functional implications of a psychiatric risk variant within CACNA1C in induced human neurons. Mol Psychiatry, 20 (2 ), 284. doi:10.1038/mp.2014.181 25623946
Young JE , Boulanger-Weill J , Williams DA , Woodruff G , Buen F , Revilla AC , … Goldstein LS (2015). Elucidating Molecular Phenotypes Caused by the SORL1 Alzheimer’s Disease Genetic Risk Factor Using Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells. Cell Stem Cell, 16 (4 ), 373–385. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.004 25772071
Young WDSS , Lemischka IR , Schaniel C (2012). Patient-specific Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells as a Platform for Disease Modeling, Drug Discovery and Precision Personalized Medicine. J Stem Cell Res Ther, S10 (010 ), 1–14.
Yu J , Vodyanik MA , Smuga-Otto K , Antosiewicz-Bourget J , Frane JL , Tian S , … Thomson JA (2007). Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells. Science, 318 (5858 ), 1917–1920. doi:10.1126/science.1151526 18029452
Zhang D , Pekkanen-Mattila M , Shahsavani M , Falk A , Teixeira AI , &amp; Herland A (2014). A 3D Alzheimer’s disease culture model and the induction of P21-activated kinase mediated sensing in iPSC derived neurons. Biomaterials, 35 (5 ), 1420–1428. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.11.028 24290439
Zhang J , Lian Q , Zhu G , Zhou F , Sui L , Tan C , … Colman A (2011). A human iPSC model of Hutchinson Gilford Progeria reveals vascular smooth muscle and mesenchymal stem cell defects. Cell Stem Cell, 8 (1 ), 31–45. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2010.12.002 21185252
Zhang P , Xia N , &amp; Reijo Pera RA (2014). Directed dopaminergic neuron differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells. J Vis Exp(91 ), 51737. doi:10.3791/51737 25285746
Zhang QJ , Li JJ , Lin X , Lu YQ , Guo XX , Dong EL , … Chen WJ (2017). Modeling the phenotype of spinal muscular atrophy by the direct conversion of human fibroblasts to motor neurons. Oncotarget, 8 (7 ), 10945–10953. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.14641 28099929
Zhang X , Hu D , Shang Y , &amp; Qi X (2019). Using induced pluripotent stem cell neuronal models to study neurodegenerative diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis, 165431. doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.03.004 30898538
Zhang Y , Pak C , Han Y , Ahlenius H , Zhang Z , Chanda S , … Sudhof TC (2013). Rapid single-step induction of functional neurons from human pluripotent stem cells. Neuron, 78 (5 ), 785–798. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.029 23764284
Zhou T , Benda C , Duzinger S , Huang Y , Li X , Li Y , … Esteban MA (2011). Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from urine. J Am Soc Nephrol, 22 (7 ), 1221–1228. doi:10.1681/ASN.2011010106 21636641
