LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7501160
5346
JAMA
JAMA
JAMA
0098-7484
1538-3598

31688886
7455009
10.1001/jama.2019.11653
NIHMS1622651
Article
What Is Dementia?
Arvanitakis Zoe MD, MS 12
Bennett David A. MD 12
1 Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
2 Dept of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
Corresponding author: Zoe Arvanitakis, MD, MS, Medical Director, Rush Memory Clinic, Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Acting Chairperson and Professor, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Rush University System for Health (RUSH), 1750 W. Harrison St, Suite 1000, Chicago, Il 60612
25 8 2020
05 11 2019
28 8 2020
322 17 17281728
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

The brain is a complex organ important for thinking and behavior. Diseases that affect the brain often cause the inability to process or retain new information. Dementia is one example.

Dementia is a medical condition in which there is a worsening in a person’s cognitive abilities compared to several months or years before. The person with dementia has difficulty with several types of cognitive abilities, most often with memory but also with other abilities such as language, attention, orientation, judgement, and planning.

Causes

Dementia is caused by brain disease or injury. The disorder can be from medical conditions that start in other parts of the body. For example, an abnormal heart rhythm can let a clot form in the heart, travel to the brain, and block blood flow to a brain region, and affect a persons’ thinking. Some diseases that cause dementia start in the brain itself. One of the most common brain diseases that causes dementia is brain degeneration called Alzheimer’s disease. In the USA today, Alzheimer’s disease affects about five million persons, and this number is expected to markedly increase in the coming years. The chance of getting dementia from Alzheimer’s disease increases as a person gets older. Most often, dementia develops when the brain is affected by two or more common diseases in aging, such as Alzheimer disease and stroke (injury to the brain from blockage or rupture of a blood vessel).

Symptoms

Although most people will not get dementia, growing older substantially increases the risk of developing dementia. Dementia usually begins in older people (in the 7th or 8th decade of life) and typically worsens over time. The most common problem noticed first, by either the affected person or family or others, is problems with short-term memory. Examples include forgetting where one places things around the home and forgetting recent conversations. In dementia, these problems happen frequently (several times in a day and over many months or years) and affect the ability to properly function in day-to-day life (for example, having a utility service cancelled by the business provider because the patient repeatedly forgets to pay the bills). Other problems include withdrawing from participation in hobbies or social events, anxiety or depression, difficulty with daily tasks such as remembering to take medications, and difficulty with directions such as when driving.

Diagnostic Evaluation

The diagnosis of dementia requires a clinician take a medical history which identifies that cognitive abilities have worsened over time, and that this worsening is associated with functional problems such as with carrying out day-to-day tasks (shopping, paying bills, driving). A close family member or friend should confirm the presence of cognitive decline and functional problems. The clinician needs to do a short cognitive (memory) test and physical examination to evaluate strength, reflexes, and other neurologic signs. And, typically, a few blood tests and a brain scan are also done (CT or MRI). Only rarely are other tests needed.

Treatment

The treatment of dementia varies for different people. A clinician, such as a doctor, will consider the medical history and specific situation, before recommending a patient and family-centered care plan. For many patients with dementia, medications may help with thinking abilities or help with changes in mood or behaviors, but benefits are modest. Two classes of drugs are available that can often provide some symptomatic relief for memory problems from Alzheimer disease, though these do not prevent the advancement of the disease. It is also important to treat factors that increase risk for stroke (brain attack), such as high blood pressure and diabetes. Safety measures include procedures to prevent falls, getting lost, and other accidents. Advanced directives should be put in place regarding medical and financial decisions, as persons with dementia often lose decision making abilities. Other recommendations for good brain health include keeping mentally, physically, and socially active, eating nutritionally-balanced meals and drinking alcohol only in moderation (not more than one alcoholic drink a day), and getting enough high quality sleep. Clinical providers can provide important family and caregiver education about dementia, and can also help with long-term care planning.

For more information:

https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/about-adear-center

https://www.nia.nih.gov/health

http://www.alz.org

