LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101135941
32136
Macromol Biosci
Macromol Biosci
Macromolecular bioscience
1616-5187
1616-5195

32065736
7292623
10.1002/mabi.202000004
NIHMS1596272
Article
A Long-Living Bioengineered Neural Tissue Platform to Study Neurodegeneration
Rouleau Nicolas 123
Cantley William L. 12
Liaudanskaya Volha 12
Berk Alexander 1
Du Chuang 12
Rusk William 1
Peirent Emily 1
Koester Cole 1
Nieland Thomas J.F. 12
Kaplan David L. 123*
1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University
2 Initiative for Neural Science, Disease &amp; Engineering, Tufts University
3 The Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University
Author contributions: N.R., W.L.C., and D.L.K. conceptualized the study; N.R. performed all data analysis, and visualization; N.R., W.L.C., V.L., A.B., C.D., W.R., E.P., and C.K. performed the investigation; N.R. curated the data; N.R., W.L.C., V.L., T.N., and D.L.K. developed methodology, performed validation, and wrote the original draft; D.L.K. and T.N. acquired funding, provided resources, and performed project administration; D.L.K. and T.N. supervised the study; N.R., W.L.C., V.L., T.N., and D.L.K. reviewed and edited the final manuscript.

* Corresponding author
23 5 2020
17 2 2020
3 2020
01 3 2021
20 3 e2000004e2000004
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The prevalence of dementia and other neurodegenerative diseases continues to rise as age demographics in the population shift, inspiring the development of long-term tissue culture systems with which to study chronic brain disease. Here we investigate whether a 3D bioengineered neural tissue model derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) can remain stable and functional for multiple years in culture. Silk-based scaffolds were seeded with neurons and glial cells derived from hiPSCs supplied by human donors who were either healthy or had been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. Cell retention and markers of stress remained stable for over 2 years. Diseased samples displayed decreased spontaneous electrical activity and a subset displayed sporadic-like indicators of increased pathological β-amyloid and tau markers characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease with concomitant increases in oxidative stress. We conclude that the long-term stability of the platform is suited to study chronic brain disease including neurodegeneration.


1. Introduction

Human brains develop over an unusually protracted period of time compared to other organs. Their rapid gestational expansions are contrasted by decades of maturation and several more of gradual decline and deterioration (1–6). With the exception of significant early cell pruning during the perinatal period, it is estimated that approximately 85,000 neurons are lost every day (3) without significant replacement, contributing to normal, age-dependent decreases in brain weight, cortical thickness, and neuronal density (7,8). A 10% total reduction in neocortical neurons over a lifetime is typical (3), however, greater decrements in cerebral volume are characteristic of neurodegenerative diseases (9). Those who are afflicted by neurogenerative diseases such as dementias develop insidious cognitive, behavioral, and affective disorders earlier in life – contributing to tremendous personal hardship and societal burden (10).

Our understanding of how neurodegenerative diseases manifest at a mechanistic level is unfortunately limited by experimental bottlenecks including the non-generalizability of animal models and the absence of physiological relevance associated with traditional cell culture systems which lack key features of the brain’s 3D microenvironment (11). To address these limitations, we designed and built a bioengineered brain model which combined a porous scaffold composed of silk fibroin with an intercalated hydrogel to allow seeded neurons and glia to form complex, functional 3D networks (12–14). The model’s gross structure reflects a separation of two distinct regions, simulating gray and white matter respectively. Each component of the tissue construct was designed to be customized – from the pore size of the scaffold biomaterial (15,16), to the hydrogel composition (17), and incorporated cell types. We hypothesized that if we could design a 3D human-derived neural culture system that could be maintained for years or decades, we could begin to study chronic diseases of the nervous system under physiological conditions in controlled settings. Without functionally viable long-term cultures, studies of neurodegeneration and senescence would continue to lack the physiological relevance that could only be recapitulated by the passage of time.

Building upon our existing tissue model system, we demonstrated that human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) differentiated to neurons and glia could be incorporated into the scaffolds and remain functionally active for up to 9 months (18). As it was unclear whether the tissues would remain viable and active indefinitely, we continued to generate batches of samples (Fig. 1A) at irregular intervals over time (Fig. S1) using hiPSCs from donors who were healthy controls (CON) or diagnosed with a sporadic form of Alzheimer’s disease (ALZ). The model system would be determined stable and suitable for neurodegeneration research if, as we had predicted, networks would remain structurally and functionally stable over years.

2. Results and Discussion

2.1 Structural Stability and Characterization

Twenty-six time points ranging from 3 months to 2.3 years were assessed in search of time-dependent decrements associated with the structure and function of the model system. Both short-term and long-term cultures displayed similar hydrogel quality (p&gt;0.05, chi-square test, Fig. S2), suggesting the materials used provided a robust medium within which to maintain network formations. To determine whether neural networks remained alive and intact over long periods of time, a subset (n=3) of the oldest (2.3 years old) CON samples were stained for cell viability and subsequently imaged, revealing diffuse populations of live cells intermixed with sparse dead cells (Fig. 1B–E). Cells that had migrated into the collagen-based hydrogel window at the center of the tissue construct remained alive and connected to the broader, scaffold-bound network (Fig. 1E). Immunocytochemistry was then performed on CON samples (n=18) that had remained in culture for periods between 94 and 855 days, revealing a reliable maintenance of network structure containing both neural and glial cells (Fig. 2A), with image quantification revealing structural stability (Fig. 2B–D) and a trend toward increased glial marker expression in long-term samples. ALZ samples (Total n=29) were not stained or imaged as their availability was limited relative to CON samples (Total n=92); however, our previous report confirmed the presence of similar structures in ALZ samples at 10 months (18). Instead, our limited ALZ samples were subjected to molecular and functional assays and compared to healthy controls (CON).

2.2 DNA Quantification

To quantitatively assess the stability of cell retention within both CON and ALZ samples over time, we measured the concentration of DNA within tissue constructs. Decrements of cell content over time were not observed for either donor source (Fig. 3A; p&gt;0.05); however, ALZ samples did contain more cells on average relative to CON samples (Fig. 3B; t(78)=4.22, p&lt;0.001) regardless of time. Because the groups were seeded with the same number of cells (5 ×105 cells/scaffold), these results could indicate that there were initial, cell-donor-dependent differences in early cell attachment or proliferation rather than time-dependent decrements. When pooling the groups together, a very weak relationship between DNA concentration and time was identified (rho= −0.25, p&lt;0.05); however, this amounted to a decrement of approximately 100 ng/mL or 7% of total DNA per year. Overall, it was concluded that cell retention was stable over time. Subsequent measurements were normalized to DNA concentration to account for and normalize to cell content.

2.3 Markers of Stress and Cell Toxicity

Molecular assays were then performed to determine if cellular homeostasis was impacted by long-term culture conditions. Cell toxicity and stress were assessed by measuring lactic acid dehydrogenase (LDH) activity and the concentration of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) within the media associated with aged tissue constructs. A significant interaction between donor source and time spent in culture was identified for cell toxicity (ANOVA, F(1,77)=11.37, p&lt;0.001). Though both donor sources displayed decreased cell toxicity over time (Fig. 3C), these differences were less pronounced for ALZ samples (p&lt;0.05) relative to CON samples (p&lt;0.001). ROS/RNS activity remained stable over time for both CON and ALZ samples (Fig. 3D); however, CON samples displayed increased markers of cell stress relative to ALZ samples (Fig. 3E; t(78)=8.14, p&lt;0.001). These differences were apparent at all time points. Notably, there was an inverse relationship between DNA concentration and ROS/RNS activity for ALZ samples (rho= −0.51, p=0.005) that was not apparent for CON samples (Fig. 3F). Together, the results indicated that cell toxicity decreased over time with differences between donor sources and that cell stress was time-independent while moderately associated with cell content in ALZ samples only.

2.4 Neurodegenerative Markers

Next, as we had not observed β-amyloid plaques within the 10-month time frame of our previous study (18), we sought to evaluate the possibility that long-term culture conditions would widen the observational window during which we might detect Alzheimer’s markers such as an increased ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 (19,20) within media samples as detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). Additionally, we examined the ratio of phosphorylated Tau protein (p-tau) to total Tau (t-tau) within the media – another clinically-relevant biomarker associated with Alzheimer’s disease (21,22). Statistically significant effects of time and donor source (Fig. 4A) on normalized β-amyloid isoforms were not observed; however, we noticed that the three highest Aβ42 to Aβ40 ratios were associated with the ALZ group (IDs 18, 21, and 32) and each had spent more than 1 year in culture (Sp circle, Fig. 4B). In other words, only among older ALZ samples did we begin to observe sporadic-like cases expressing a pathological β-amyloid hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease; however, the major source of variance was a decrease in Aβ40 relative to Aβ42 for the Sp-ALZ subset (Table S1; p&lt;0.05). Due to the limited subgroup of sporadic-like samples, a linear relationship between Sp-like phenotypes and time could not be discerned. Normalized Aβ40 was observed to decrease over time for both ALZ (p&lt;0.05) and CON (p=0.05) conditions. A similar effect was not observed for Aβ42 (p&gt;0.05).

Examining measures of Tau, it was evident that CON samples displayed more normalized t-tau (p&lt;0.01) and p-tau (p&lt;0.05) relative to ALZ samples. However, ALZ samples displayed increased p-tau to t-tau ratio relative to CON samples (Fig. 4C; t(65)=2.96, p&lt;0.005). The major contributor to ratio differences was a decrease in t-tau relative to p-tau (Table S1). Plotting p-tau to t-tau ratio over time spent in culture revealed the same Sp-ALZ subgroup that was identified when examining the ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 (Fig. 4D). We then compared samples with sporadic-like phenotypes (Sp-ALZ; n=3) of increased neurodegenerative markers and all other ALZ samples (n=11) to determine whether the two groups could be distinguished on the basis of other measures. Indeed, we found that media associated with Sp-ALZ samples displayed a 68% increased concentration of normalized ROS/RNS relative to other ALZ samples (Figure 4E; t(12)= 2.71, p &lt; 0.05), suggesting the two samples belonged to distinct populations. Differences of DNA concentration, LDH, or LFPs were not evident (p&gt;0.05). These data suggested that neurodegenerative markers of Alzheimer’s disease did not vary linearly over time; however, donor source may have potentially impacted the number of sporadic-like cases which emerged after 1 year in culture where extreme values were only apparent for a subset of the ALZ group (Sp-ALZ) which also displayed increased cell stress. This latter relationship between ROS/RNS and neurodegenerative markers may be particularly relevant since the role of oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease has been highlighted in the literature (23).

2.5 Electrophysiological Characterization

Finally, to determine whether network activity was impacted by time spent in culture, we measured spontaneous local field potentials (LFPs) from single electrodes inserted into the superficial layers of the hydrogel next to silk fibers (Fig. 5A). Each sample was measured once for a particular timepoint and subsequently processed for use in other assays (i.e., DNA quantification or immunostaining). LFP spike potentials, which are indicative of cellular electrical activations, were quantified and compared across conditions. Effects of time were not detected (Fig. 5B), with 3 month and 2.3 year old tissues displaying similar levels of spontaneous activity (p&gt;0.05). However, it was evident that despite there being more cells in ALZ samples, spontaneous LFP spikes per minute were decreased in ALZ samples relative to CON samples (Fig. 5C,D; t(77)=2.34, p&lt;0.05). Sp-ALZ samples displayed similarly decreased activity relative to CON samples (p&lt;0.05); however, no significant difference could be discerned when comparing ALZ and Sp-ALZ groups (p&gt;0.05). This finding suggested that tissue constructs seeded with hiPSC-derived neurons from a donor diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease were functionally suppressed relative to healthy controls, displaying less electrical activity on average.

3. Conclusion

In summary, our data show that the current neural tissue model derived from hiPSCs can remain structurally and functionally stable in culture for over 2 years. Based upon the observed rate of decrement of cell retention (~100 ng/mL per year) and assuming linearity, we project that our long-term culture system could be extended for up to a decade; however, it may be unnecessary and is likely impractical to maintain the cultures for more than 5 years. Indeed, multi-year experiments could be designed with many points of observation over time for robust within-subject designs.

Differences between donor sources were evident. Most notable among them, we observed decreased electrical activity in ALZ samples which, in vivo, is characteristic of dementia (24,25); however, these effects were not time-dependent. Similarly, concentrations of LDH were markedly different between cell donor sources; however, these too were not time-dependent and followed similar trends (i.e., as time increased, LDH decreased). One potential explanation is that an initial period of toxicity was followed by an eventual steady-state after sufficient maturation.

That we observed sporadic cases of older ALZ samples expressing increased pathological β-amyloid and Tau markers relative to CON samples was interesting and potentially indicative of the experimental time-frame that is necessary to observe degenerative processes in vitro that are not explicitly induced by genetic manipulation. Most saliently, the concomitant increases of pathological β-amyloid, Tau, and oxidative stress markers in a subset of ALZ samples reveals the potential to study sporadic emergence of disease phenomena in the laboratory. We interpret these results with caution, as conclusions cannot be drawn from a single donor. However, we maintain that as culture time increases for tissues composed of cells from donors with a diagnosed history of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, the likelihood that subsets of samples will express classic markers of Alzheimer’s disease should increase.

To experimentally address neurodegeneration, investigators require tools that address and transcend existing model systems. While animal models offer complete, well-defined, patterned tissues, it can be challenging to isolate the underlying mechanisms amid a multitude of confounding factors inherent to the function of a complex organism with the well-documented differences between rodent and human brain networks and their functions (26–28). Likewise, the ease of interrogation associated with in vitro or two-dimensional, cell-based model systems is contrasted by poor predictive validity due in part to an absence of a suitable microenvironment. To increase physiological relevance and the propensity to translate results from bench to bedside, 3D model systems were quickly adopted by the scientific community. Neural organoids in particular, which express the nascent morphology of the developing brain, have become increasingly valuable as model systems. Their complex morphology – which includes ventricles, cortices, discretized domains, choroid plexuses, meninges, and retina – offer a unique substrate with which to model disease (26, 29). However, their lack of a circulatory system limits their growth to ~4mm and generates necrotic cores – extensive regions of cell death within the center of the organoids. The model system we have characterized here is not developmentally restricted and represents a more flexible platform which is suitable to conduct long-term research on neurodegenerative processes. Though we did not incorporate a laminated cortical structure into the present system, the 3D model can be constructed using concentric toroidal silk-based scaffold to more closely approximate other gross features of the six-layered neocortex (13). Indeed, fewer rings could be used to instead simulate the three-layered structure of the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus (i.e., archicortex), areas which are well-known to be affected in Alzheimer’s Disease (30).

In the present study, an existing bank of tissues that had been maintained in culture for years was sub-sampled for the purposes of demonstrating model longevity and its potential relevance to neurodegeneration research. One clear limitation of this approach was a low sample size without the practical possibility of generating more tissues. As such, prioritization of certain experiments over others was necessary where we sought to demonstrate structural and functional longevity over all else. For example, ELISAs were performed using cell media rather than cell lysates to multiplex each sample. Whereas we had previously reported that hiPSC source (donor) influenced gene expression (18), we did not pursue a similar characterization here; an increased sample size would have permitted a thorough genetic characterization over time within each hiPSC source group. Implementations of any long-term culture system, including the present model, would benefit from the foresight of a specific, hypothesis-driven experimental design which would dictate the number of generated samples a priori.

Future work should aim to harness the long-term capabilities of the present model system to explore questions related to Alzheimer’s Disease as well as other neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Parkinson’s Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, etc.) using embedded electrodes for continuous, long-term recordings of electrophysiological activity (31,32). The long-term model system presented here is highly tunable and can be modified to contain combinations of cell donor types, selectively mutated or otherwise, and exposed to environmental conditions which are hypothesized to drive or exacerbate neurodegeneration including chronic vascular insufficiency or toxic exposures.

4. Materials and Methods

4.1 Long-term cultures

Our existing tissue model system was originally described by Cantley et al. (18). hiPSC lines derived from a healthy male donor (ND41866*C or CON) and a male donor that was diagnosed with sporadic, non-familial Alzheimer’s Disease (GM24666*A or ALZ) were generated as described by Almeida et al. (33) and Israel et al., (34), respectively. As originally described, the ALZ donor, identified as sAD2, experienced disease onset at 78 years old and underwent the biopsy at 83. The iPSC-derived neurons exhibited significantly higher pathological Aβ markers and phosphor-tau(Thr 231). To describe our methods in brief, the stem cell maintenance media (mTeSR1) was aspirated from the culture plates, ReLeSR™ (Stem Cell Technologies) was added and then immediately aspirated. Plates were briefly incubated at 37°C, 0.5% CO2, 95% relative humidity for approximately 2 to 4 minutes, removed from the incubator, and 5 mL of media was added. After adding media, the plates were gently tapped to dislodge clusters of undifferentiated stem cells. The cell-cluster suspension was collected in a conical tube. A small portion of this suspension (0.5mL) was then centrifuged, the supernatant removed, and then treated with trypsin to create a single-cell suspension. Cells were then counted, and the resulting cell number was used as the concentration for the remaining cell-cluster suspension (~4.5mL). This solution was then diluted to 5·106 cells/mL and a volume of 100μL (5×105 cells) was added to the PLO/Laminin coated silk scaffolds in 96-well plates. The cylindrical silk scaffolds (6mm diameter, 2mm height) were prepared using a protocol which was discussed by Chwalek et al. (12). Media (mTeSR1) was changed daily via gentle aspiration, and with each media change the scaffolds were moved to fresh wells. After repeating the media change procedure for 5 days, the scaffolds were filled with a collagen I (rat tail, 3mg/mL) hydrogel, transferred to 24-well plates and immersed in 1mL of Final Neuro Medium (FNM: Neurobasal Medium (Gibco) with 1% (v/v) penicillin-streptomycin (Corning) and 1% L-glutamine (GlutaMAX, Thermo Fisher); 2% (v/v) B27 supplement was added fresh before each media change) to support growth and differentiation. The media was changed every 3–4 days and 3D samples were otherwise left undisturbed in darkened incubators.

Samples were prepared in batches as described above at irregular intervals over 2.3 years. One hundred and twenty eight (n=128) long-term 3D neural culture samples were isolated from a larger heterogeneous sample pool which included different stem cells, scaffold parameters, and hydrogel conditions. The inclusion criteria were defined to homogenize the sample including donor origin or cell type (CON or ALZ), silk scaffold pore size (500 – 600 μm), and collagen concentration (3 mg/mL). The only differences between samples were the cell donor types seeded and the total time elapsed in culture which consisted of the number of days between the day of seeding (start time) and the date of their terminal experimental assay or measurement (end time). Samples that shared start dates were terminated on the same days to maintain group size. Fig. S1 demonstrates the range of time that samples remained in culture before functional testing began.

CON samples, containing cells from a healthy male donor (n= 92), were assigned to one of two categories of measurement: imaging (n=28) and non-imaging (n=62). Samples that were imaged were fixed and/or stained such that DNA quantification was not possible, limiting our capacity to normalize other measures. All non-imaged samples were subjected to several other assays which were normalized to DNA concentration as a measure of cell content. ALZ samples, containing cells derived from a male, Alzheimer’s Disease patient (n=29), were not imaged as there were fewer available to test and we prioritized DNA-normalized measures.

4.2 DNA quantification

As a measure of cell retention and means of normalization, we quantified the amount of DNA extracted from each sample using previous methods (33). DNA concentration (ng/mL) was quantified for a subset of samples (total n=91) using a Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay Kit according to the manufacturers’ protocol. Briefly, samples were immersed in 200 μL of 0.05% Triton-X 100 to permeabilize cell membranes and extract DNA; conical tubes containing samples were maintained at −80°C until assayed. Samples were then shredded, diluted once with 200 μL of 1x TE buffer, and 100 μL of solution transferred to a 96-well black-bottom plate. Samples were then incubated with 100 μL of a 1:200 dilution of PicoGreen® reagent and fluorescent intensity measured using a SpectraMax M3 Microplate Reader (ex/em: 485/538) which was recorded in SoftMax Pro (v.7.0.2). A standard curve was generated using steps between 0 and 2000 ng/mL DNA concentrations. Data were normalized to the standard curve and exported to IBM SPSSv20 for further analysis.

4.3 LDH activity

A cell toxicity assay was performed to determine if and when the long-term cultures would become non-viable. A lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol to quantify LDH activity associated with each sample as a function of time spent in culture. Samples (200 μL) of media were collected from each sample well in duplicate and frozen at 80°C until the assay was performed. Samples were thawed, a 50 μL aliquot was withdrawn from both sample vials and loaded into flat-bottom, clear 96-well plates. Standard curves (NADH) were generated at concentrations (nmole/well) as per the kit instructions: 0 (blank), 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, and 12.5. The final volume of each sample was 50 μL (including buffer). Absorbance (450 nm) was measured by a SpectraMax M3 Microplate Reader and recorded in SoftMax Pro. The time elapsed between the initial (Tinitial) measurement (absorbance, 450 nm) and the final (Tfinal) measurement was 15 minutes with intermediate recordings every 5 minutes. Data were exported from SoftMax Pro and processed in a spreadsheet. Using the absorbance values, the amount of generated NADH was calculated based upon the standard curve and divided by the product of reaction time (Tfinal – Tinitial) and sample volume to give LDH activity (milliunits/mL). Values representing statistical outliers (z&gt;2.5) were excluded from the final analysis. New LDH activity values were imported to SPSS and normalized to DNA concentration.

4.4 ROS/RNS quantification

Markers of cell stress were assayed to quantify time-dependent differences where stability would indicate culture longevity. The presence of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species within the supernatant of culture media was measured using the OxiSelect In Vitro ROS/RNS Assay Kit (STA-347, Biolabs, INC.) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, cell supernatant was collected and treated with a catalyst to accelerate the oxidative reaction, and samples were then incubated with the prepared dichlorodihydrofluorescin (DCFH) probe. Samples were then measured fluorometrically against a 2’,7’-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCF) standard using a SpectraMax M3 Microplate Reader at 480 nm excitation and 530 nm emission. Values were recorded in SoftMax Pro, exported, imported to SPSS, and normalized to DNA concentration.

4.5 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs)

As reported in the literature, the ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 (19,20) as well as the ratio of p-tau to t-tau (21,22) are predictive of Alzheimer’s Disease in human clinical patients and serves as an important marker of pathology. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (Invitrogen, ThermoFisher) were acquired to detect Human Aβ40 (&lt;6 pg/mL), Aβ42 (&lt;1pg/mL), Total Tau (&lt;10 pg/mL), and phosphor-Tau (pS199; &lt;2 pg/mL) in media supernatant harvested from 3D cultures after 4 days of incubation. Media supernatant samples were frozen at −80°C until the assay was performed. To maximize detection, the dilution buffer was substituted for media to match the samples. We confirmed that the standards could develop in the presence of media alone by performing simultaneous measurements of standard in media and dilution buffer. The correlation coefficient between the standard curves was always &gt;r=.98, indicating no dilution was necessary. The protocol provided with the kit was followed; however, the Detection Antibodies were incubated for 24 hours at 4°C instead of the recommended 3 hours as we achieved greater sensitivity with extended incubation periods. A SpectraMax M3 Microplate Reader was used to measure absorbance at 450 nm. Data were exported, background readings were subtracted from sample measurements, and values were standardized as outlined in the kit. Ratios were computed for β-amyloid (Aβ42/Aβ40) and Tau (p-tau/t-tau) markers. If a sample did not express detectable levels of both components, the ratio was not computed. All values were normalized to DNA concentration.

4.6 Electrophysiological recordings: Local field potentials (LFPs)

A functional characterization of the long-term samples was achieved by measuring the electrical activity of the neural cultures in 3D. The electrophysiological protocol described here was adapted from Du et al., (35). Samples were transferred to 35 mm plastic petri dishes (Corning) containing 2 mL of artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) which served as the extracellular solution. The solution was prepared as follows (mM): 130 NaCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 1.8 MgSO4, 1.6 CaCl2, 3 KCl, 10 HEPES-NaOH, 5.5 glucose, pH 7.4. Extracellular solution was pre-warmed to 37°C before transferring the scaffolds using micro-forceps. Immediately after transferring the sample, a reference electrode was inserted into the extracellular solution. A stabilizing rod served as an anchor to gently press the scaffold against the base of the petri dish to prevent scaffold displacement and reduce movement artifacts during the electrophysiological recordings.

Borosilicate glass pipettes (5cm length, 0.86mm inner diameter, 1.5mm outer diameter) were pulled using a Sutter P-97 (Novato, CA USA) to the following specifications: &lt;1 μm tip diameter, 5–8 mm taper, 40–80 MΩ resistance. After inserting the filament electrode into the glass pipette tip, the assembled probe was fitted to the recording head stage and lowered into the lumen of the central window of the scaffold. Five minute baseline recordings of local field potentials (LFPs) were obtained on a single day of measurement. Longitudinal recordings were not obtained to maintain sample sterility and to avoid excess disturbance of the collagen matrices. Each recording was achieved using an Axon instrument analog-to-digital converter which received signals from an Intan digital amplifier. Traces were obtained in Clampex 10.7 (Axon instruments) and exported to Clampfit 10.7 for signal processing. A threshold of ±0.4 mV was set to isolate positive- and negative-going spike potentials indicative of spontaneous electrical activity in the scaffold. LFP spike counts were z-scored and values &gt;3 were considered outliers and excluded from the analysis. Extracted spikes were converted to LFP/min format and normalized to DNA concentration.

4.7 Live-dead imaging

To corroborate DNA quantification as well as visualize live and dead cells in long-term culture, a separate subset of only the most mature (855 days) samples (n=3) derived from the CON hiPSC cell line (ND41866*C) were immersed in a 1.5 mL solution of the cell-permeant dye Calcein AM (8 μM; Thermo Fisher, ex/em 495/515) as well as propidium iodide (10 μM; Thermo Fisher ex/em 535/617) in assay buffer and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. The dyes are used as markers for live and dead cells respectively. Images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 Inverted Microscope System with fluorescence capabilities. Z-stacks were acquired with 1 μm slice increments, focused, and background subtracted using the constant method in NIS-Elements. Images for each channel were converted to 8-bit greyscale images, merged, and re-converted to RGB in ImageJ (1.47v). Other samples were not measured using this confirmatory technique as we had access to a limited set of samples, and we prioritized quantitative methods of assessment which could be normalized to DNA concentration.

4.8 Immunohistochemistry

CON samples were immersed in 1.5 mL of 4% PFA fixative and incubated at 4°C for 24 hours. Once fixed, samples were transferred to Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) for short-term storage before processing and staining. A blocking solution was prepared (DPBS with 20 mg/mL bovine serum albumin, 2% (v/v) donkey serum, and 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100). Each sample was immersed in blocking solution for 1 hour prior to staining. A 1:1000 dilution of mouse anti-βIII Tubulin antibody (TUJ1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and rabbit anti-glial fibrillary protein, (GFAP, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was prepared in blocking solution. Samples were incubated in the primary antibody solutions for 24 hours at 4°C. Once permeated with primary antibodies, the cell-containing scaffolds were washed several times with DPBS to remove unbound antibody. Secondary antibodies were prepared with a 1:250 dilution factor conjugated to AlexaFluor 488 (anti-mouse) and 647 (anti-rabbit) respectively. Samples were immersed in secondary antibody for 24 hours at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, samples were washed several times with DPBS before staining with 300 nM DAPI for 5 min (on an orbital shaker, 200rpm) followed by a final wash in DPBS. Samples were stored at in DPBS 4°C until imaging was performed.

Fluorescence imaging was performed on a Leica TCS SP8 Confocal Microscope equipped with tunable-bandwidth (400 – 800 nm) photomultiplier tubes (PMTs). Samples were imaged in glass-bottom, 35mm dishes (Corning) under 25x (objective), water immersion. For central window imaging, a 200μm z-stack was acquired with 4μm steps to capture axonal and cell body retention in long-term cultures. Silk fibers were somewhat auto-fluorescent under shorter wavelength (&lt;500 nm) laser light conditions, contributing to elevated background light intensity.

Images were processed in ImageJ 1.47v (NIH, USA). To qualitatively demonstrate the structural features of fluorescing structures, it was necessary to adjust brightness and contrast; however, adjustments were applied equally across conditions to eliminate spurious sources of variance to quantify differences. Mean grey value (MGV) was computed for TUJ1- and GFAP-positive z-stacks after converting original images to 16-bit gray scale. DAPI particle size was also calculated for regions not containing silk fibers (which are auto-fluorescent under 405nm wavelengths) by first thresholding each image and converting them to black and white binary format. Next, images were de-speckled to remove noise and processed using the watershed function to reduce extreme particle size values caused by overlap of nuclear bodies across the z-axis. Once processed, images were subjected to a particle size analysis where the size exclusion was set to 0-infinity and the circularity was set to 0.00–1.00. Outputs were transferred to statistical analysis software to discern between-group differences.

4.9 Collagen quality assessment

As samples remained in culture for long periods of time (up to 2 years), it was determined that collagen quality within the central window should be assessed to evaluate the intrinsic reliability of the hydrogel and its impact on the culture system. A three-point scale was used to assess general collagen quality where 0=absent, 1=broken, and 2=complete. A score of 0, representing an absence of collagen, was assigned to samples that did not contain any collagen in the central window of the scaffold. A score of 1, representing broken or partial collagen, was assigned to samples in which some of the central window contained collagen. A score of 2, representing complete collagen, was assigned to samples in which the entire central window was filled with collagen.

4.10 Statistical analysis

Data were imported to IBM SPSS v20 and organized by assigned ID. As described previously, data were normalized to DNA concentration. Z-transformations were performed on each variable to identify potential outliers (extreme cases, z&gt;3) which were subsequently excluded from the analysis. ANOVAS and t-tests were performed to assess the effects of time and cell donor type where we used two-tailed hypothesis testing. Correlational analyses were performed to assess linear relationships that might exist between the variables with or without the factor of time.

Supplementary Material

1

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr. Mattia Bonzanni, Dr. Josh Erndt-Marino, and Dr. Nirosha J. Murugan for their suggestions.

Funding: This work was supported by the NIH (R01NS092847, P41EB002520, NIHS10 OD021624.

Fig. 1. Long-term 3D bioengineered neural tissues derived from hiPSCs from healthy donors remained viable and contained structured networks of cells for over 2 years in culture.

(A) Silk fibroin was extracted from silk worm cocoons (Bombyx mori) to generate scaffolds, sculpted into toroidal sponges (6mm diameter, 2mm height) with a silk-free central window region (cw), and seeded with neural progenitors sourced from human iPSCs derived from a healthy donor. Once seeded, cells were embedded in a collagen (type-I) hydrogel and maintained in neural media to promote differentiation and growth. Fluorescent imaging of live and dead cells within 3D CON samples that remained in culture for 855 days (2.3 years) was performed to determine long-term viability. (B) Both the silk-scaffold (blue) and hydrogel (black, right side of each panel) remained populated with living cells with sparse dead cell staining (lumen separating both regions indicated by a dashed line). (C) In some cases, larger clusters (100–500 μm) of dead cells affixed to silk fibers (arrow) were observed embedded within living neural networks whose viability was apparently unaffected. (D) Fine-scale connections indicative of axons and dendrites were observed throughout the porous scaffolds. (E) Cells were not confined to any one compartment or region of the tissue construct; rather, live cell populations permeated the entirety of the sample, forming both short- and long-range connections with neighboring structures (dashed line indicates the lumen of the hydrogel-only region). A scaled reference scaffold is provided (ref.) with imaging regions B-E, and the central window (cw) indicated for spatial orientation.

Fig. 2. Immunocytochemistry of long-term samples revealed a maintenance of neuronal and glial cell markers over time.

(A) Fluorescent imaging revealed positive nuclear (DAPI), β-III tubulin (neuronal marker, TUJ1), and glial fibrillary protein (glial cell marker, GFAP) staining, revealing stable network morphology over time. A 200 μm scale bar is provided for reference. Only CON samples were stained due to the limited availability of ALZ samples. (B) Nuclei remained of fixed size over the 2 year period (particle size, p&gt;0.05). (C) Neurons formed dense network-structures spanning hundreds of micrometers to millimeters in length which were not affected by time in culture as indicated by stable mean grey values (MGV), a measure of fluorescent intensity (p&gt;0.05). (D) Glial structures remained stable over time (MGV, p&gt;0.05) with a potential trend toward more expression as a function of time. Means are plotted with standard error of the mean (SEMs). Images were not quantified for the 530 day group due to limited sample size (n &lt;3).

Fig. 3. DNA content, LDH activity, and ROS/RNS concentration within samples as a function of hiPSC donor source and time.

(A) DNA concentration within both ALZ (red circles) and CON (blue triangles) groups did not correlate with time spent in culture; (B) however, ALZ (red) samples displayed increased DNA concentration relative to CON (blue) samples on average. (C) Decreased cell toxicity over time as inferred by LDH activity (z-scores) was observed for both CON and ALZ samples. (D) Markers of cell stress as indicated by ROS/RNS concentration did not change over time for either group; (E) however, CON samples displayed increased cell stress on average. (F) DNA in ALZ samples (but not CON samples) was found to correlate with ROS/RNS concentration. Means and standard error of the mean (SEM) are presented and significant differences are displayed within each panel (N.S. = p&gt;0.05; *p&lt;0.05; ***p&lt;0.001). Red bars and circles indicate ALZ samples, Blue bars and triangles indicate CON samples.

Fig. 4. Neurodegenerative markers of Alzheimer’s Disease and increased reactive oxygen species concentrations were expressed within a subset of ALZ samples.

(A) AB42 to AB40 ratios for CON and ALZ samples were equivalent (p&gt;0.05); however, (B), a sporadic-like (Sp) phenotype was observed in a subset of ALZ samples that were cultured for over 1 year. (C) The ratio of p-tau to t-tau was greater for ALZ samples relative to CON samples (p&lt;0.05). (D) The same samples (ID18, 21, and 32) expressed an Sp phenotype relative to other ALZ samples. (E) Sp-ALZ samples (n=3) displayed grater reactive oxygen species (ROS/RNS) concentrations relative to the remaining ALZ samples.

Fig. 5. Assessments of spontaneous electrical activity revealed long-term samples remained.

(A) Extracellular recordings of local field potentials (LFPs) were obtained from CON and ALZ samples by positioning an electrode alongside silk fibers along the lumen of the central window. A reference electrode was placed into the extracellular solution surrounding the tissue construct. (B) No time-dependent changes in spontaneous activity were noted. (C) ALZ and Sp-ALZ samples displayed similarly decreased activity relative to CON samples. (D, E) Representative traces are provided for LFP recordings from CON and ALZ samples. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean (SEM) and significant differences are indicated (N.S. = p&gt;0.05; *p&lt;0.05).

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Data and materials availability: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


References and Notes

1. Gogtay N , Giedd JN , Lusk L , Hayashi KM , Greenstein D , Vaituzis AC , Nugent TF III , Herman DH , Clasen LS , Toga AW , Rapoport JL . Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during childhood through early adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101 , 8174–8179 (2004).
2. Lebel C , Walker L , Leemans A , Phillips L , Beaulieu C . Microstructural maturation of the human brain from childhood to adulthood. Neuroimage, 40 , 1044–1055 (2008).18295509
3. Pakkenberg B , Gundersen HJG . Neocortical neuron number in humans: effect of sex and age. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 384 , 312–320 (1997).9215725
4. Sowell ER , Thompson PM , Holmes CJ , Jernigan TL , Toga AW . In vivo evidence for post-adolescent brain maturation in frontal and striatal regions. Nature Neuroscience, 2 , 859 (1999).10491602
5. Thatcher RW . Maturation of the human frontal lobes: Physiological evidence for staging. Developmental Neuropsychology, 7 , 397–419 (1991).
6. Watson RE , DeSesso JM , Hurtt ME , Cappon GD . Postnatal growth and morphological development of the brain: a species comparison. Birth Defects Research Part B: Developmental and Reproductive Toxicology, 77 , 471–484 (2006).17066419
7. Pakkenberg B , Pelvig D , Marner L , Bundgaard MJ , Gundersen HJG , Nyengaard JR , Regeur L . Aging and the human neocortex. Experimental gerontology, 38 , 95–99 (2003).12543266
8. Terry RD , DeTeresa R , Hansen LA . Neocortical cell counts in normal human adult aging. Annals of Neurology: Official Journal of the American Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society, 21 , 530–539 (1987).
9. Schuff N , Woerner N , Boreta L , Kornfield T , Shaw LM , Trojanowski JQ , Thompson PM , Jack CR Jr. , M.W. Weiner , Alzheimer’s; Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. MRI of hippocampal volume loss in early Alzheimer’s disease in relation to ApoE genotype and biomarkers. Brain, 132 , 1067–1077 (2009).19251758
10. Shah H , Albanese E , Duggan C , Rudan I , Langa KM , Carrillo MC , Chan KY , Joanette Y , Prince M , Rossor M , Saxena S , Snyder HM , Sperling R , Varghese M , Wang H , Wortmann M , Dua T . Research priorities to reduce the global burden of dementia by 2025. The Lancet Neurology, 15 , 1285–1294 (2016).27751558
11. Hopkins AM , DeSimone E , Chwalek K , Kaplan DL . 3D in vitro modeling of the central nervous system. Progress in Neurobiology, 125 , 1–25 (2015).25461688
12. Chwalek K , Tang-Schomer MD , Omenetto FG , Kaplan DL . In vitro bioengineered model of cortical brain tissue. Nature Protocols, 10 , 1362 (2015).26270395
13. Tang-Schomer MD , White JD , Tien LW , Schmitt LI , Valentin TM , Graziano DJ , Hopkins AM , Omenetto FG , Haydon PG , Kaplan DL . Bioengineered functional brain-like cortical tissue. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111 , 13811–13816 (2014).
14. Cairns DM , Chwalek K , K. , Moore YE , Kelley MR , Abbott RD , Moss S , Kaplan DL . Expandable and rapidly differentiating human induced neural stem cell lines for multiple tissue engineering applications. Stem Cell Reports, 7 , 557–570 (2016).27569063
15. Nazarov R , Jin HJ , Kaplan DL . Porous 3-D scaffolds from regenerated silk fibroin. Biomacromolecules, 5 , 718–726 (2004).15132652
16. Vepari C , Kaplan DL . Silk as a biomaterial. Progress in polymer science, 32 , 991–1007 (2007).19543442
17. Sood D , Chwalek K , Stuntz E , Pouli D , Du C , Tang-Schomer M , Georgakoudi I , Black III LD , Kaplan DL . Fetal brain extracellular matrix boosts neuronal network formation in 3D bioengineered model of cortical brain tissue. ACS biomaterials science &amp; engineering, 2 , 131–140 (2015).29034320
18. Cantley W , Du C , Lomoio S , DePalma T , Peirent E , Kleinknecht D , Hunter M , Tang-Schomer MD , Tesco G , Kaplan DL . Functional and Sustainable 3D Human Neural Network Models from Pluripotent Stem Cells. ACS Biomaterials Science &amp; Engineering 4 , 4278–4288 (2018).
19. Graff-Radford NR , Crook JE , Lucas J , Boeve BF , Knopman DS , Ivnik RJ , Smith GE , Younkin LH , Petersen RC , Younkin SG . Association of low plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios with increased imminent risk for mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease. Archives of Neurology, 64 , 354–362 (2007).17353377
20. Hansson O , Zetterberg H , Buchhave P , Andreasson U , Londos E , Minthon L , Blennow K . Prediction of Alzheimer’s disease using the CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders, 23 , 316–320 (2007).17374949
21. Riemenschneider M , Wagenpfeil S , Vanderstichele H , Otto M , Wiltfang J , Kretzschmar H , Vanmechelen E , Förstl H , Kurz A . Phospho-tau/total tau ratio in cerebrospinal fluid discriminates Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease from other dementias. Molecular Psychiatry, 8 , 343–347 (2003).12660807
22. Ballatore C , Lee VM , Trojanowski JQ . Tau-mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8 , 663 (2007).17684513
23. Huang WJ , Zhang XIA , Chen WW . Role of oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease. Biomedical reports, 4 , 519–522 (2016).27123241
24. Duffy FH , Albert MS , McAnulty G , Brain G electrical activity in patients with presenile and senile dementia of the Alzheimer type. Annals of Neurology: Official Journal of the American Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society, 16 , 439–448 (1984).
25. Prichep LS . Quantitative EEG and electromagnetic brain imaging in aging and in the evolution of dementia. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1097 , 156–167 (2007).17413018
26. Lancaster MA , Renner M , Martin CA , Wenzel D , Bicknell LS , Hurles ME , Homfray T , Penninger JM , Jackson AP , Knoblich JA . Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly. Nature, 501 , 373 (2013).23995685
27. Miller JA , Horvath S , Geschwind DH . Divergence of human and mouse brain transcriptome highlights Alzheimer disease pathways. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107 , 12698–12703 (2010).
28. Oberheim NA , Takano T , Han X , He W , Lin JH , Wang F , Xu Q , Wyatt JD , Pilcher W , Ojemann JG , Ransom BR , Goldman SA , Nedergaard M . Uniquely hominid features of adult human astrocytes. Journal of Neuroscience, 29 , 3276–3287 (2009).19279265
29. Quadrato G , Brown J , Arlotta P . The promises and challenges of human brain organoids as models of neuropsychiatric disease. Nature Medicine, 22 , 1220 (2016).
30. Du AT , Schuff N , Amend D , Laakso MP , Hsu YY , Jagust WJ , Yaffe K , Kramer JH , Reed B , Norman D , Chui HC , Weiner MW . Magnetic resonance imaging of the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry, 71 , 441–447 (2001).
31. Hronik-Tupaj M , Raja WK , Tang-Schomer M , Omenetto FG , Kaplan DL . Neural responses to electrical stimulation on patterned silk films. Journal of biomedical materials research Part A, 101 , 2559–2572 (2013).23401351
32. Tang-Schomer MD , Hu X , Hronik-Tupaj M , Tien LW , Whalen MJ , Omenetto FG , Kaplan DL . Film-Based Implants for Supporting Neuron–Electrode Integrated Interfaces for The Brain. Advanced functional materials, 24 , 1938–1948 (2014).25386113
33. Almeida S , Zhang Z , Coppola G , Mao W , Futai K , Karydas A , Geschwind MD , Tartaglia MC , Gao F , Gianni D , Sena-Esteves M , Geschwind DH , Miller BL Farsee RV , Gao FB . Induced pluripotent stem cell models of progranulin-deficient frontotemporal dementia uncover specific reversible neuronal defects. Cell Reports, 2 , 789–798 (2012).23063362
34. Israel MA , Yuan SH , Bardy C , Reyna SM , Mu Y , Herrera C , Hefferan MP , Van Gorp S , Nazor KL , Boscolo FS , Carson CT , Laurent LC , Marsala M , Gage FH , Remes AM , Koo EH , Goldstein LS . Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature, 482 , 216 (2012).22278060
35. Du C , Collins W , Cantley W , Sood D , Kaplan DL . Tutorials for electrophysiological recordings in neuronal tissue engineering. ACS Biomaterials Science &amp; Engineering, 3 , 2235–2246 (2017).
