LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

32971233
7686098
10.1016/j.nbd.2020.105089
NIHMS1635305
Article
Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonism is proinflammatory and exacerbates neuroinflammation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Evans Andrew K.
Ardestani Pooneh
Yi Bitna
Park Heui Hye
Lam Rachel
Shamloo Mehrdad *
Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery, 1050 Arastradero Road, Building A, Palo Alto, CA 94304
Credit Author Statement

Andrew K. Evans: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Data curation, Analysis, Visualization, Supervision, Writing - original draft, review &amp; editing; Pooneh Ardestani: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Analysis, Visualization, and Data curation; Bitna Yi: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Analysis; Heui Hye Park: Investigation, Analysis; Rachel Lam: Investigation and Analysis; Mehrdad Shamloo: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Resources, Supervision, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - review &amp; editing.

* Corresponding author. Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery, 1050 Arastradero Road, Building A, Palo Alto, CA 94304 mshamloo@stanford.edu
7 10 2020
22 9 2020
12 2020
01 12 2021
146 105089105089
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Adrenergic systems regulate both cognitive function and immune function. The primary source of adrenergic signaling in the brain is norepinephrine (NE) neurons of the locus coeruleus (LC), which are vulnerable to age-related degeneration and are one of the earliest sites of pathology and degeneration in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Loss of adrenergic tone may potentiate neuroinflammation both in aging and neurodegenerative conditions. Importantly, beta-blockers (beta-adrenergic antagonists) are a common treatment for hypertension, co-morbid with aging, and may further exacerbate neuroinflammation associated with loss of adrenergic tone in the central nervous system (CNS). The present studies were designed to both examine proinflammatory consequences of beta-blocker administration in an acute lipopolysaccharide (LPS) model as well as to examine chronic effects of beta-blocker administration on neuroinflammation and behavior in an amyloid-beta protein precursor (APP) mouse model of AD. We provide evidence for robust potentiation of peripheral inflammation with 4 different beta-blockers in an acute model of LPS. However, beta-blockers did not potentiate CNS inflammation in this model. Notably, in this same model, the genetic knockdown of either beta1- or beta2-adrenergic receptors in microglia did potentiate CNS inflammation. Furthermore, in an APP mouse model of amyloid pathology, chronic beta-blocker administration did potentiate CNS inflammation. The beta-blocker, metoprolol, also induced markers of phagocytosis and impaired cognitive behavior in both wild-type and APP mice. Given the induction of markers of phagocytosis in vivo, we examined phagocytosis of synaptosomes in an in vitro primary microglia culture and showed that beta-blockers enhanced whereas beta-adrenergic agonists inhibited phagocytosis of synaptosomes. In conclusion, beta-blockers potentiated inflammation peripherally in a systemic model of inflammation and centrally in an amyloidosis model of neuroinflammation. Additionally, beta-blockers impaired learning and memory and modulated synaptic phagocytosis with implications for synaptic degeneration. These findings warrant further consideration of the proinflammatory consequences of chronic beta-blocker administration, which are not restricted to the periphery in patients with neurodegenerative disorders.

Alzheimer’s Disease
noradrenergic
norepinephrine
locus coeruleus
beta-adrenergic receptor
beta-blocker
neuroinflammation
lipopolysaccharide
behavior

Introduction

Adrenergic systems coordinate central and peripheral physiological responses to arousal and stress. In the periphery, adrenergic signaling coordinates sympathetic nervous system activation, including regulation of inflammation (Elenkov et al., 2000). In the central nervous system (CNS), norepinephrine (NE, noradrenaline), primarily derived from the midbrain locus coeruleus (LC), regulates arousal and attention and is essential for learning and memory. Importantly, NE is also a key anti-inflammatory regulator of neuroinflammation. In Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), LC is one of the first sites of degeneration, and subsequent loss of noradrenergic tone is thought to potentiate ongoing neuroinflammation and disease progression (Feinstein et al., 2016; Heneka et al., 2010; Weinshenker, 2008).

Given the important anti-inflammatory role for NE, and the age-related decline in noradrenergic tone, consequences of widespread clinical use of beta-blockers for indications such as hypertension need further examination. Recent evidence from 2 large epidemiological studies, the first one in a population of 4 million Norwegians and another in a larger population of 117 million people, have demonstrated that clinical use of beta-blockers is associated with worsening of clinical outcome in neurodegenerative disorders (Cepeda et al., 2019; Mittal et al., 2017). These findings are not surprising given the evidence for an important role for adrenergic systems and specifically beta-adrenergic signaling in reducing neuroinflammation. Convergent evidence from pharmacological and lesion experiments in transgenic mouse models of AD have indicated that reduction in NE tone exacerbates both AD-related pathology and cognitive deficits. Pharmacological lesion of NE neurons in the LC of transgenic mice overexpressing human amyloid-beta protein precursor (APP) results in elevated amyloid-beta plaque load, increased neuronal loss, elevated markers of inflammation, impaired migration of microglia to plaque sites, impaired microglial phagocytosis of amyloid-beta, and deficits in social and spatial memory (Heneka et al., 2010; Heneka et al., 2006; Kalinin et al., 2007). Likewise, lesion of NE neurons of the LC in the PS19 mouse model of tauopathy exacerbates tau pathology (Chalermpalanupap et al., 2018). Only a few studies have examined the effects of beta-blockers in mouse models of AD with mixed results. The pharmacological blockade specifically of beta2-adrenergic receptors (Adrb2; ICI-118551) in a 5XFAD mouse model of AD has been shown to exacerbate cognitive deficits and neuroinflammation and to increase amyloid-beta and plaque loads (Branca et al., 2014). On the other hand, a non-selective beta-adrenergic antagonist, carvedilol, has been shown to attenuate oligomeric beta-amyloid accumulation (Wang et al., 2011). It is important to note that the beneficial effects of carvedilol could be attributed to its partial, biased agonist activity at the beta-adrenergic receptor as it is not classified as a simple beta-adrenergic antagonist (Wang et al., 2017; Wisler et al., 2007).

We have previously shown that chronic administration of the beta1-adrenergic receptor (Adrb1) partial agonist, xamoterol, attenuates neuroinflammation in the 5XFAD mouse model of AD, and acute administration can restore behavioral deficits in another transgenic mouse model of AD (Coutellier et al., 2014) as well as in the Ts65Dn mouse model of Down’s Syndrome (Faizi et al., 2011). Adrb1 agonists also have anti-inflammatory effects in an LPS model of neuroinflammation (Ardestani et al., 2017; Yi et al., 2017). The present studies were designed to examine the potential for proinflammatory consequences of beta-blocker administration. We examined the effects of beta-blocker administration in 2 distinct models of inflammation, a systemic LPS model in which peripheral inflammation leads to CNS inflammation, and a mouse model of amyloid pathology, in which amyloid-beta pathology induces CNS inflammation. Here we show robust potentiation of peripheral inflammation with beta-blockers in the LPS model and potentiation of CNS inflammation in the APP model, which was accompanied by impairment in learning and memory.

Methods

Mice

LPS Studies

Male C57BL/6J male mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories for the LPS studies (Jackson, 000664). For conditional gene deletion studies in the LPS model, mice with a floxed Adrb1 sequence (gift of Steven Thomas, University of Pennsylvania; C57BL/6J background) or floxed Adrb2 sequence (gift of Gerard Karsenty, Columbia; C57BL/6J background) were crossed with mice in which an estrogen receptor-ligand binding dependent expression of Cre recombinase (CreER) was linked to the expression of the chemokine (C-X3-C) receptor 1 (Cx3cr1) gene (Jackson 021160; B6.129P2(Cg)-Cx3cr1tm2.1(Cre/ERT2)Litt/WganJ) to generate transgenic mouse models (Adrb1-flox+/+/Cx3cr1-CreER+/− or Adrb2-flox+/+/Cx3cr1-CreER+/−) with tamoxifen-inducible genetic deletion of Adrb1 or Adrb2 specifically in myeloid lineage cells (e.g., microglia and macrophages). Male and female mice were used for conditional knockdown studies. Tamoxifen-mediated knockdown of gene expression was confirmed in each line with both demonstration of knockdown of protein in plasma membrane fractions from forebrain homogenates with Western Blot (see Figure S2) as well as knockdown of mRNA expression with a quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. For all studies, mice were between 12–16 weeks old at the time of experiment and group-housed prior to each experiment under a reversed light-dark cycle with lights off at 8:30 AM and on at 8:30 PM. Mice were handled prior to all experimentation for obtaining body weight. On the day of LPS challenge, mice were moved to a holding area adjacent to separate dosing and tissue collection rooms. The dosing room and holding area were under red light. Food and water were freely available.

APP Studies

Transgenic mice overexpressing a human mutant APP gene (APP 751) containing the London (V717I) and Swedish (K670N/M671L) mutations under the control of the Thy1 promoter (APP mice) were maintained on a C57BL/6J background and housed under a 12-h reverse light/dark schedule with ad libitum access to food and water. These APP mice are a model of AD-related amyloidosis with behavioral deficits and widespread intracellular amyloid-beta and amyloid-beta plaques appearing between 5–7 months (Faizi et al., 2012). A cohort of 40 male mice and a cohort of 40 female mice (APP and wild-type littermate controls) were used in experiments described here. Individual genotypes were determined by PCR after weaning prior to the experiments. Male mice were single-housed (due to fighting in males), and female mice were group-housed at the start of the experiment between 2–3 months of age under a reversed light-dark cycle with lights off at 8:30 AM and on at 8:30 PM. Mice were handled weekly for weight monitoring and daily prior to behavioral experiments.

All procedures related to animal maintenance and experimentation were approved by the Stanford University Administrative Panel for Laboratory Animal Care and conformed to the U.S. National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Efforts were made to minimize the number of mice used and their suffering.

Drug and LPS administration

LPS Studies

A series of initial experiments were designed to establish the dose- and time-dependency of LPS-induced increases in plasma cytokine concentrations and CNS gene expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (Tnfa protein, Tnfa gene), interleukin-1β (Il1b, Il1b), and interleukin-6 (Il6, Il6). Male mice were injected with LPS (50 μg/kg, intraperitoneal; Sigma Aldrich L4391) or saline vehicle and then single-housed until tissue collection at a designated time post-LPS (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, or 24 hours; n=5), or were injected with LPS or vehicle across a dose-response to LPS (50–1000 μg/kg; n=5) and single-housed until tissue collection at 90 minutes or 24 hours. Terminal samples were collected at each time point or dose; individual mice were not repeat sampled. LPS was batch aliquoted and stored at −80° C for consistency across experiments. The effect of adrenergic pharmacology on LPS-induced inflammation was then examined using compounds with known agonistic or antagonistic action at beta-adrenergic receptors (See Table 1) (Ardestani et al., 2017; Baker, 2005; Baker, 2010). The general design was the administration of a beta-adrenergic agonist or antagonist 15–30 minutes prior to a low effective dose of LPS (50–100 μg/kg, intraperitoneal). See Results and Figures for sample sizes for each study with beta-adrenergic pharmacology. Any variation from this design is noted within the Results section. Adrenergic pharmacology included an ADRB1 agonist, xamoterol (Santai Pharmaceuticals, 0.1–10 mg/kg, subcutaneous), and ADRB1 antagonist, CGP 20712A (Tocris 1024, 1 mg/kg, subcutaneous), beta-adrenergic antagonists, metoprolol (tartrate, Pharmaca Integrative Pharmacy, 5 mg/kg, subcutaneous), propranolol (hydrochloride; Sigma P0884; 10 mg/kg) and atenolol (Tocris 0393, 1 mg/kg, subcutaneous), and beta-adrenergic agonist mabuterol (synthesized in synthetic chemistry lab, 0.3 mg/kg subcutaneous). Mice were single-housed following the first injection on the day of the LPS challenge, until tissue collection.

In order to examine the effect of genetic deletion of Adrb1 or Adrb2 in myeloid lineage cells on the immune response to LPS, Adrb1-flox+/+/Cx3cr1-CreER+/− mice (Adrb1 myeloid conditional knockout mice) or Adrb2-flox+/+/Cx3cr1-CreER+/− mice (Adrb2 myeloid conditional knockout mice) were dosed with tamoxifen (Cayman Chemical 13258; 400 mg/kg; peroral) or corn oil vehicle (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; sc-214761) using a 3-dose regimen leading up to LPS challenge. Studies with Cre-recombinase-linked fluorescent reporter mice reveal the induction of Cre-recombinase in the CNS with even a single administration of tamoxifen in this dose range (Allen et al., 2017). Adrb1 myeloid conditional knockout mice were administered tamoxifen daily for 3 consecutive days prior to LPS challenge on the fourth day. Adrb2 myeloid conditional knockout mice were also administered 3 doses of tamoxifen but with a slightly different protocol, spread across 1 week prior to LPS challenge with the first dose administered 8 days prior to LPS, the second dose at 6 days prior, and a final dose 1 day prior to LPS challenge. Both of these tamoxifen dosing regimens, with LPS challenge within 18–24 hours of the final of 3 tamoxifen doses, were designed to maximize Cre-recombinase expression and genetic deletion across all myeloid lineage cells, including microglia. Mice were administered LPS (50 μg/kg, intraperitoneal) or saline vehicle on the day of the experiment, and tissue was collected 120 minutes later. The knockdown of adrb1 or adrb2 protein and gene expression was confirmed via Western Blot (see Figure S2; and Methods) and qrtPCR.

APP mouse studies

Pre-drug administration body weight was used as a pseudorandomization parameter for assigning mice to drug treatment groups. In the first APP study, male mice were administered metoprolol (tartrate, Pharmaca Integrative Pharmacy, 5 mg/kg/day, single daily subcutaneous injection) or vehicle for 3 months from 3.5 to 6.5 months of age. In the second APP study, female mice were administered metoprolol (5 mg/kg/day, via subcutaneous pump) or vehicle for 2 months from 6 to 8 months of age. Importantly, direct comparison of effects in males relative to females was not an objective of these studies and is not relevant given important key differences in age and routes of drug administration. For pump administration, pumps (model 1004, Alzet, Cupertino, CA) were inserted subcutaneously in the back of each mouse under anesthesia and replaced once after 4 weeks. The metoprolol dose was selected based on evidence that metoprolol crosses the blood-brain barrier following peripheral administration at this dose. Metoprolol is a beta-adrenergic antagonist with 2.3-fold selectivity for Adrb1 (55 nM KD) over Adrb2 (129 nM KD). In mice, metoprolol readily crosses the blood-brain barrier. At the time of sacrifice, plasma and brains of a subset of mice in each study were analyzed for drug concentrations.

Behavioral Testing for APP Studies

Male mice were tested in Morris Water Maze (MWM) at 5.5 months and Fear Conditioning (FC) at 6.5 months of age, prior to tissue collection. Female mice were tested in MWM at 7.5 months and FC at 8 months of age, prior to tissue collection. All behavioral tests were run during the dark phase of a 12-hour reverse light-dark cycle.

Morris Water Maze (MWM)

Effects of metoprolol on spatial learning in APP mice were assessed using a modified version of the MWM as previously reported (Ardestani et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2014). Mice were tested in a large water tank (178 cm in diameter; 22.0 ± 1.5°C) with a submerged 17 cm diameter circular platform (~1 cm below the water surface and ~50 cm away from the wall). Non-toxic tempera paint (Elmers) was used to make the water opaque. Privacy blinds with visual cues surrounded the tank and were located ~150 cm from the center of the tank. Testing was performed under dim white light (40 Lux at the water surface). The activity was monitored with Ethovision via an overhead video system. A Reference Memory MWM (RM-MWM) protocol was administered. Mice completed 4 days of hidden platform training (60 seconds to locate the platform when released from a pseudorandomized drop location). Each day consisted of 4 trials (30–60 minute inter-trial-intervals), and each trial ended when the mice rested on the platform for 10 seconds or when the trial duration expired. If the trial duration expired, mice were guided to the platform. After completion of 4 days of hidden platform training, approximately 24 hours after the last training session, a 60 second probe trial was conducted in the absence of the platform. Successful learning of MWM was determined by reduced escape latency during training and discriminative quadrant exploration during the probe trial. After the probe trial, the platform was moved to a new location and mice were administered 2–5 days of reversal training. Following reversal training, a second probe trial was performed for the new platform location. Finally, a visible platform test was performed to ensure that no gross sensorimotor or visual deficits were present. During the visible platform training, the platform was marked with a black-and-white Ping-Pong ball attached to a 10 cm wooden stick.

Fear Conditioning

Effects of metoprolol on conditioned fear-based learning and memory were assessed in APP mice based on a previously described protocol (Faizi et al., 2012) with modifications. Conditioning and testing were performed using Coulbourn Instruments fear conditioning chambers (Whitehall, PA). A trace fear conditioning protocol was used for the training day, followed by tone-cued and contextual memory retrieval tests. On the first day (conditioning), mice were placed in the chamber for a 3-min baseline recording followed by 5 tone-shock pairings with inter-trial-intervals (ITIs) of 100 sec. The shocks (0.5 mA, 2 sec) were delivered 18 sec following the end of a tone (70 dB, 2 kHz, 20 sec). The 18 second period following the tone and preceding the shock was defined as the TRACE period for analysis of freezing in expectation of the shock. Increased freezing in consecutive TRACE periods was used as an indication of learning. On the second day (cued recall), a novel context was used for tone-cued testing (new olfactory environment, different shape of the chamber, the new texture of the floor, blue plastic inserts for walls, an extra source of blue light, and visual cues). After 3 minutes of baseline recording, 3 tones without shocks with ITIs of 100 sec were presented to the mice. Freezing during a TRACE period of 20 seconds following the tone was used as an indication of cued recall. On the third day of the experiment (contextual recall), mice were placed in the same context as the first day for 5 minutes with no shocks or tones to test contextual memory retrieval (modified from the method described by (Saxe et al., 2006)). The chambers were cleaned with 1% Virkon on days 1 and 3. On day 2, chambers were first cleaned by 70% ethanol and then wiped with wet paper towels. Freezing was defined as the complete lack of motion for a minimum of 0.75 sec, as assessed by FreezeFrame software (Actimetrics, Evanston, IL).

Tissue collection

For terminal collection in all studies, mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane. Prior to perfusion, whole blood was collected from the right ventricle via cardiac puncture (23 g needle) into lithium heparin-containing vials (BD microtainer plasma tubes, Becton Dickinson 365958) for plasma collection, or in some cases also EDTA-containing vials (Minicollect tube, Greiner Bio-One 450480) for whole blood for peripheral blood mononuclear cell isolation. Blood and plasma tubes were stored on ice prior to centrifugation within 60 minutes of collection. For perfusion, the right atrium was opened, and mice were transcardially perfused with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 11.47 g sodium phosphate dibasic and 2.30 g sodium phosphate monobasic per 1 L deionized water; pH 7.4) through a 25 g needle. Brains were collected and dissected midsagittal into the left and right hemispheres. The right hemisphere was immediately dropped into ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde for post-fixation (48 hours 4 degrees C). Left hemispheres were either flash-frozen intact on dry ice for later frozen dissection or immediately dissected into the hippocampus, frontal cortex, hypothalamus, and cortex with each dissection flash-frozen on liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 for later analysis of protein and gene expression (specific dissections analyzed for each study and endpoint are indicated within respective Results sections). Following post-fixation, right hemispheres were rinsed 2 × 12 hours in phosphate buffer (PB) and cryoprotected for at least 72 hours (until sunk) in 30% sucrose in PB. Fixed brains were then rapidly frozen in isopentane on dry ice. All frozen tissue was stored at −80 C.

Whole blood was centrifuged (11K rpm for 2 minutes) for plasma separation, and plasma was aliquoted and frozen on dry ice. For peripheral blood mononuclear cell collection from whole blood, 300–500 μL of whole blood was added to Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (Biolegend 420301; 100 μL whole blood per 2 mL lysis buffer) and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes, protected from the light. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 350 g for 5 minutes, the supernatant was removed, and the pellet was washed with 5 mL phosphate-buffered saline. Peripheral blood mononuclear cell pellet was spun down again 350 g for 5 minutes and transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube with a 1 mL phosphate-buffered saline wash. After final centrifugation at 350 g for 5 minutes, the supernatant was removed, and the peripheral blood mononuclear cell pellet was frozen on dry ice prior to later RNA extraction. All brain, plasma, and peripheral blood mononuclear cell samples were stored at −80 C prior to RNA extraction, ELISA, or multiplex assay.

Amyloid-beta ELISA

To determine the amount of amyloid-beta isoforms, soluble and insoluble amyloid-beta(1–40) (Aβ40) and amyloid-beta(1–42) (Aβ42) present in cortical tissue from APP studies, samples of cortical tissues were processed as described previously (Ardestani et al., 2017). In brief, tissue dissections (coronal section 1 mm thick through rostral hippocampus) were weighed and homogenized in 10 volumes of tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing protease inhibitor cocktail. The samples were then centrifuged at 175,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant (TBS-soluble homogenate) was collected and kept at −20 °C. The pellets were re-homogenized in the same volume of TBS-T (TBS/1% Triton X-100 with protease inhibitor cocktail) at 4 °C, centrifuged at 175,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C, and resultant supernatant (TBS T-soluble homogenate), containing membrane-bound Aβ, was collected and kept at −20 °C. Subsequently, the pellets were homogenized in ice-cold 5M guanidine-HCl in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0). The homogenates were then mixed for 4 hours at room temperature and used for measurement of insoluble Aβ40 and Aβ42. Finally, amounts of TBS-soluble and guanidine-soluble forms of Aβ were quantified using ELISA kits specific for human Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Invitrogen; #KHB3481 for Aβ40; #KHB3441 for Aβ42) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction. The final values were normalized to the amount of loaded wet tissue.

Quantitative RT-PCR

Total RNA was isolated from brain tissue dissections (either coronal slices or regional dissections as indicated in respective Results sections) using the RNeasy Lipid Tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen). One microgram of total RNA was transcribed into cDNA (Superscript III, Invitrogen). PCR was performed in triplicate using TaqMan gene expression master mix (Applied Biosystems) and validated TaqMan gene expression assays, Tnfa (Mm00443258_m1), Il1β (Mm00434228_m1), Il6 (Mm00446190_m1), Lamp1 (Mm00495262_m1), Cd68 (Mm03047340_m1), Il18 (Mm00434226_m1), beta1-adrenergic receptor (Adrb1; Mm00431701_s1), beta2-adrenergic receptor (Adrb2; Mm02524224_s1), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh; Mm99999915_g1). Amplification was performed using a StepOnePlus system (Applied Biosystems). Fold changes of expression relative to control were determined after normalization to Gapdh. Relative quantification and fold change were calculated by the comparative CT method (Schmittgen and Livak, 2008).

Western Blot for adrb1 or adrb2 protein

Tissue from the left forebrain was homogenized in 2–5 mL of S buffer (0.32M sucrose, 1mM EDTA, and 5mM Tris, pH 7.4) using Potter-ELV tissue grinder at 800 rpm (8 strokes). The homogenate was spun at 1000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and spun at 10000g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in T-PER (Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent; Life Technologies, Cat: 78510 Carlsbad, CA) with Protease Inhibitor (Life Technologies, Cat: 78430, Carlsbad, CA) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails (Abcam, Cat: ab201113, ab201112, ab201114, Cambridge, UK). Samples were homogenized on ice by sonication using an Ultrasonic Probe Homogenizer (Omni International, Kennesaw, GA) and centrifuged at 12000g for 10 minutes at 4°C to obtain the soluble fraction containing the plasma membrane. The protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Cat: 23227 Rockford, IL). Samples were boiled, loaded (20 μg/well), and resolved by T-PER electrophoresis under reducing conditions using 10% Bis-Tris, 1.0mm, Mini Protein Gel, 17-well (Life Technologies, Cat: NW00107BOX Carlsbad, CA). The protein was transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Abcam, Cat: ab133411, Cambridge, UK) and incubated in Intercept® (TBS) Blocking Buffer (Li-cor, Cat: 927–60001, Lincoln, NE) for 1 hour at room temperature. The membranes were incubated at 4°C overnight with anti-Adrb1 (1:1000, Alomone Labs, Cat: AAR-016 Jerusalem, Israel), or anti-adrb2 (1:1000, Alomone Labs, Cat: AAR-023 Jerusalem, Israel), and anti-tubulin (1:10000, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat: T5168–100UL, St. Louis, MO) primary antibodies. The following day, membranes were washed (3 × 5 min) with 0.01% Tween-20 in 1x TBS and incubated for 1h at room temperature with IRDye® IgG Secondary Antibody (goat anti-mouse Cat: 926–68070, goat anti-rabbit Cat: 926–32211; 1:10000, Li-cor, Lincoln, NE). Following secondary antibody incubation, membranes were washed (3 × 5 min) with 0.01% Tween-20 in 1x TBS. Membranes were then scanned with the Sapphire Biomolecular Imager (Azure Biosystems, Dublin, CA) in the appropriate wavelengths. ImageJ software (NIH) was used for densitometry analysis of target protein levels and normalized to the internal level of tubulin for each sample as a control.

Plasma ELISA

Tnfa, Il6, and Il1b in plasma were quantified using ELISA kits (Thermofisher KMC3011 and KMC0061 and KMC0011) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction. Plasma samples were diluted (Tnfa, 10- to 30-fold; Il6, 100- to 500-fold; Il1b, 1.5- to 2-fold) for individual assays to place all values within the standard curves of each respective assay.

Multiplex mouse cytokine assay

Multiplex tissue cytokines were analyzed in plasma or brain homogenate from hippocampal dissections using a Luminex 38-plex (Affymetrix) mouse cytokine assay. The Luminex assay was performed in the Human Immune Monitoring Center at Stanford University, following manufacturer instructions. Briefly, hippocampal tissue was homogenized in RIPA buffer containing proteinase inhibitor (1:100) by pulling tissue through a 23 g needle (15x) and then sonicated for 3×3 second pulses. Homogenate was spun at 14,000 g for 10 minutes, and protein concentrations were determined by Pierce BCA assay. Samples were diluted to a common concentration of 6 μg/uL. Plasma samples were diluted 1:3. Plasma and brain homogenate samples were run in duplicate on a 96 well plate alongside standard curve and quality control calibration samples.

Primary microglia culture

Mixed glial cells were obtained from the cerebral cortex of Sprague Dawley rat pups at postnatal days 1–3 and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. After 9 days in vitro, microglia were harvested by gentle shaking of the growth flask, plated in a 96 well plate at a density of 25,000 cells/well, and incubated at 37°C overnight. Microglia were pretreated with the beta-adrenergic agonists xamoterol (300 nM), or isoproterenol (300 nM), or beta-adrenergic antagonist, metoprolol (1 nM), or vehicle for 30 min. Following the pretreatment, pHrodo-conjugated synaptosomes were added to the wells, and phagocytosis function was assessed by live-cell imaging as below.

Synaptosome purification

Synaptosomes were purified from the adult rat brains. After isolating the rat brain and removing the cerebellum and olfactory bulb, the rest of the brain was homogenized in 10 ml of S buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 1mM EDTA, and 5mMTris, pH 7.4) using a Potter-ELV tissue grinder at 800 rpm (8 strokes). The homogenate was spun at 1000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and spin at 10000g for 20 minutes at 4°C. Then the pellet was resuspended in buffer S and spin at 8000g for 4min at 4°C. Then the pellet was resuspended in 2 ml of PBS and filtered by Ultrafree-CL 5 um PVDF membrane (Millipore) at 1000g for 4 min. To obtain pHrodo-conjugated synaptosomes, synaptosomes were incubated with pHrodo™ Red, succinimidyl ester (Invitrogen) in 0.1 M sodium carbonate (pH 9.0) at room temperature with gentle agitation. After 2-hour incubation, unbounded pHrodo was washed-out by multiple washes/centrifugation, and pHrodo-conjugated synaptosomes were resuspended with isotonic buffer containing 5% DMSO and frozen for further use.

Live-cell analysis of the phagocytic function

After pHrodo-conjugated synaptosomes were added to microglia cells, phase and fluorescent images were acquired every 15 minutes for 7 hours at 20x magnification using an IncuCyte® S3 Neuroscience instrument. Synaptosomes labeled with the pH-sensitive fluorophore undergoes fluorescence enhancement upon engulfment due to the acidic microenvironment of the endosome. Phagocytosis was quantified using IncuCyte® software. Data were expressed as the fluorescent integrated intensity and the area under the curve after selected time points.

Statistics

Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 7.0. Repeated measures, one-way or two-way analyses of variance, were followed by posthoc comparison of select treatment groups with appropriate tests correcting for multiple comparisons. Significance was reported relative to p &lt; .05, but results with effects approaching this threshold are also discussed as relevant trends (Amrhein et al., 2019; Wasserstein et al., 2019).

Results

Beta-adrenergic receptors modulated inflammation following systemic LPS challenge

The effects of beta-adrenergic signaling on inflammation were first assessed with an acute systemic LPS challenge in mice. Systemic LPS injections resulted in time- and concentration-dependent induction of systemic inflammation (as measured in plasma) and neuroinflammation (as measured from 1 mm thick full coronal slices at the level of the rostral hippocampus ~−2.0 mm Bregma) as represented by Tnfa, Il1b, and Il6 gene and protein expression (Figure S1). Importantly, we demonstrate that within 3 hours, gene and protein expression of these 3 cytokines are highly correlated in the brain, and therefore either gene or protein expression of these cytokines can be assessed as an index of acute CNS inflammation (Figure 1), and we look at either or both in the following studies. In the periphery, following the experimental design indicated in Figure 2A, acute increases in plasma Tnfa protein (at 90 minutes) following a low dose of LPS (50 μg/kg, intraperitoneal) were attenuated by pretreatment with the highly selective Adrb1 partial agonist xamoterol, administered 15 minutes prior to LPS. Attenuation of plasma Tnfa protein with xamoterol was concentration-dependent with significant attenuation at both 3 and 10 mg/kg doses (one-way ANOVA, F(5, 35) = 4.474, p = .003; Figure 2B). Effects of xamoterol on attenuation of plasma Tnfa were reversible with a selective ADRB1 antagonist, CGP 20712A (1 mg/kg), and CGP 20712A alone potentiated the systemic LPS response (ANOVA, F(4, 68) = 31.52, p &lt; .001; Figure 2C). In the CNS, no effects of xamoterol or Adrb1 antagonism with CGP 20712A were observed on Tnfa, Il1b, or Il6 gene expression (Figure 2D) at 90 minutes, a time when CNS gene expression for all 3 cytokines was elevated by LPS alone (Figure 2D). Similar to effects of CGP 20712A, systemic administration of 2 other beta-blockers (metoprolol and atenolol; 5 and 1 mg/kg respectively), 15 minutes prior to LPS (Figure 3A for design), also each potentiated LPS-induced plasma Tnfa (ANOVA, F(3, 31) = 19.15, p &lt; .001; Figure 3B). Again, no effects of either metoprolol or atenolol were observed in the CNS (hippocampal dissection) on measures of Tnfa, Il1b, or Il6 gene expression at 90 minutes post-LPS (Figure 3C). In order to examine the possibility that acute effects of beta-blockers on central inflammation following systemic LPS challenge may be delayed or may be dependent on the timing of the beta-blocker administration relative to the LPS challenge, 2 additional experiments examined a 24-hour post-LPS time point with either the same 15-minute pretreatment with metoprolol or atenolol or post-treatment with metoprolol at 3 or 6 hours post-LPS. These 2 experiments both revealed no effects of beta-blocker pretreatment or post-treatment on the LPS-induced CNS (hippocampal dissection) inflammatory response at 24 hours post LPS challenge (Figure S3). Notably, Tnfa, Il1b, and Il10, but not Il6 gene expression remained elevated by LPS alone at 24 hours, with no effect of beta-adrenergic pharmacology on this CNS inflammation.

To further address a CNS role for beta-adrenergic receptor function in neuroinflammation in response to systemic LPS, mice were generated for conditional deletion of Adrb1 or Adrb2 specific to myeloid lineage cells (including microglia in the CNS) prior to systemic LPS challenge (Figure 3D for design). In these conditional deletion studies, CNS inflammation was evaluated in homogenate from 1 mm thick coronal slices at the level of the rostral hippocampus ~−2.0 mm Bregma. Deletion of either Adrb1 or Adrb2 in myeloid lineage cells resulted in potentiation of CNS inflammation, but only the deletion of Adrb2 resulted in potentiation of plasma inflammation. In the Adrb1 conditional knockout mouse model, deletion of Adrb1 in myeloid lineage cells had no effect on plasma Tnfa (Figure 3E), but potentiated LPS-induced Tnfa, Il1b, and Il6 expression in the CNS (two-way ANOVA; Tnfa, Finteraction(1,10) = 5.881, p=.036; Il1b, Finteraction(1,10) = 4.628, p=.057; IL6, Finteraction(1,10) = 5.328, p=.044; Figure 3F). In the Adrb2 conditional knockout model, deletion of Adrb2 in myeloid lineage cells potentiated plasma Tnfa (Finteraction(1,51) = 5.007, p=.030; Figure 3G) but also potentiated LPS-induced Tnfa, Il1b, and Il6 gene expression in the CNS (two-way ANOVA; Tnfa, Finteraction(1,50) = 13.58, p&lt;.001; Il1b, Finteraction(1,37) = 5.798, p=.021; IL6, Finteraction(1,28) = 6.025, p=.021; Figure 3H). Western blot analysis of adrb1 or adrb2 protein in plasma membrane fractions of forebrain homogenate from the same animals revealed tamoxifen-mediated knockdown of Adrb1 (t-test(vehicle versus tamoxifen), t(17) = 4.274, p = .0005) and a strong trend for knockdown of Adrb2 (t-test(vehicle versus tamoxifen), t(10) = 1.938, p = .081) with tamoxifen treatment in each respective model (Figure S2). Importantly, using Western Blot with whole tissue brain homogenate, we only show around 12–25% reduction in Adrb1 and Adrb2 protein, which was expected as these proteins were only deleted in myeloid lineage cells in this model but remain intact in other cell types such as neurons and astrocytes, where they are also expressed (Zhang et al., 2014). In wild-type control mice not expressing the estrogen-inducible Cre recombinase (Cx3cr1-CreER−/−) transgene, tamoxifen had no effect on CNS Tnfa, Il1b, or Il6 gene expression.

In order to assess the possibility that chronic versus acute exposure to beta-blockers may potentiate central inflammation in response to acute systemic inflammation, we implanted mice with a pump to deliver metoprolol at 5 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks prior to the LPS challenge, with an additional daily bolus of metoprolol (5 mg/kg, subcutaneous), including a bolus 15 minutes prior to LPS challenge (see Figure 4A for design). Inflammatory protein expression from the hippocampus was analyzed using a multiplex immune-related panel (Figure 4) alongside gene expression for a subset of cytokines (Figure 1 and S3). Robust induction of multiple immune-related proteins was observed in the hippocampus at 3 hours following systemic LPS challenge (Figure 4B). No significant effects of metoprolol were observed on CNS protein induction (Figure 4C). No effects of chronic metoprolol administration were observed on LPS-induced Tnfa, Il1b, Il6, Il10, or Il18 gene expression, and we demonstrate that expression of Tnfa, Il1b, and Il6 was strongly correlated to the expression of their respective proteins in the hippocampus at 3 hours post-LPS challenge (refer back to Figure 1), whereas Il10 had a very weak correlation, and Il18 gene expression was not correlated to its protein (Figure S4).

Given the robust potentiating effects of beta-blockers on peripheral inflammation as measured from plasma following acute LPS challenge, and the surprising lack of effect of beta-blockers with known CNS permeability (metoprolol and CGP-2017A) on CNS inflammation following systemic inflammation, we examined the effects of repeated daily dosing with a beta-adrenergic agonist, mabuterol, or another potent beta-adrenergic antagonist, propranolol, both of which have good CNS permeability, on LPS-induced inflammation (see Figures 5A and 6A for design). These studies were designed to confirm previous reports of agonistic modulation of CNS inflammation and to determine the effects of a widely used clinically relevant beta-blocker, propranolol on inflammation. Indeed, mabuterol attenuated LPS-induced expression of multiple inflammation-related proteins in both plasma (Figure 5C) and the hippocampus (Figure 6C) and robustly induced the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in plasma (Figure 5C). Propranolol had opposite effects in the plasma, particularly potentiating MIP1a and suppressing IL-10 (see Figure 5D). Propranolol had little effect on LPS-induced CNS inflammation in the hippocampus (Figure 6D).

Metoprolol potentiated neuroinflammation and impaired cognitive behavior in a mouse model of AD

Neuroinflammation following systemic inflammation is indirect, due to transmission of the signal for inflammation from the periphery to the CNS. In order to assess the effects of beta-blockers in a more direct model of neuroinflammation, transgenic mice expressing a mutated form of human APP (APP mice) and wild-type littermates were dosed with either a beta-adrenergic antagonist, metoprolol, or vehicle for 2–3 months with assessment in a variety of motor and cognitive tasks with a terminal assessment of indices of neuroinflammation.

Cohorts of male and female APP mice differ in baseline amyloid pathology

The effects of chronic metoprolol administration were assessed in 2 distinct cohorts of APP mice. Important differences to note between these 2 cohorts are age, sex, and route of administration. In the first cohort, male mice were administered metoprolol via daily bolus dose (5 mg/kg, subcutaneous) from 3.5 months to 6.5 months old at terminal collection. In the second cohort, female mice were administered metoprolol via a subcutaneous pump (5 mg/kg/day, subcutaneous) from 6 to 8 months old at terminal collection. Analysis of amyloid-beta pathology (in vehicle-treated mice, irrespective of differences in routes of metoprolol administration) from cortical CNS dissections at terminal collection revealed substantially higher amyloid-beta concentrations (soluble and insoluble, AB40 and AB42) in the older females relative to younger males; Figure S5). Amyloid pathology increases with age, and females are known to have more pathology at a younger age than males in this model. This difference in baseline amyloid-beta pathology between these 2 different cohorts is an important factor to consider when examining the effects of metoprolol on inflammation in each respective cohort.

Metoprolol has proinflammatory effects in both male and female APP mice

In male APP and wild-type mice (terminal at 6.5 months of age), analysis of effects of metoprolol or genotype on CNS gene expression (in homogenates from 1 mm thick coronal slices at the level of the rostral hippocampus ~−2.0 mm Bregma) revealed a main effect of metoprolol on Il6, Il18 and Lamp1 expression, inducing Il6 and Lamp1 expression and suppressing Il18 expression (two-way ANOVA; Il6, Fmetoprolol(1,33) = 4.406, p=.043; Il18, Fmetoprolol(1,24) = 6.187, p=.020; Lamp1, Fmetoprolol(1,28) = 9.907, p=.004; Figure 7). However, there was a lack of effect of genotype on expression of any of the following genes: Tnfa, Il1b, Il6, Il18, Lamp1, Cd68, Adrb1, or Adrb2 (e.g., lack of evidence for upregulation of any of these inflammatory markers in male APP mice at 6.5 months of age relative to wild-type mice). In female APP and wild-type mice (terminal at 8 months of age), two-way ANOVA revealed a main effect of genotype on Tnfa, Il18, Cd68 and Adrb2 gene expression, and significant interactions with further potentiation of each of these 4 genes in APP mice treated with metoprolol (two-way ANOVA; Tnfa, Fgenotype(1,33) = 9.444, p=.004; Il18, Finteraction(1,32) = 5.982, p=.020; Cd68, Finteraction(1,32) = 9.347, p=.004; Adrb2, Finteraction(1,33) = 3.98, p=.054; Figure 8).

Evidence for behavioral effects of metoprolol in APP mice

In male APP and wild-type mice (terminal at 6.5 months of age), metoprolol impaired performance in both Morris Water Maze and Fear Conditioning (contextual recall of conditioned fear) (Figure 9). Conversely, no behavioral effects of metoprolol were observed in the older female cohort of APP and wild-type mice (terminal at 8 months of age; Figure 10).

The most pronounced behavioral effects of chronic dosing with metoprolol in male APP mice were impairments in spatial recall in MWM probe testing and impairments in the contextual recall of conditioned fear. APP mice showed overall impairment during the initial 4 days of learning, with no effect of metoprolol in either wild-type or APP groups (Figure 9A). Two-way ANOVA for average escape latency across the first 4 days of training revealed a main effect of genotype (Fgenotype(1,34) = 8.954; p = .005) but no effect of drug or drug x genotype interaction. APP mice also showed overall impairment during reversal learning (Fgenotype(1,34) = 5.087; p = .031), and while metoprolol treatment tended to impair reversal learning in both wild-type and APP mice (see Figure 9A), there was not a significant main effect of drug or a significant drug x genotype interaction. Probe testing of platform location after 4 days of training and again after 5 days of Reversal Training revealed a slight impairment in APP mice relative to wild-type mice with metoprolol treatment in APP mice, further impairing discrimination between target and non-target quadrants (Figure 9B). Statistical analyses revealed a significant target/non-target discrimination in both wild-type groups during the initial probe testing and only a trend (p=.07) for discrimination after the reversal training only in the wild-type vehicle group, but not the wild-type metoprolol or either APP group (Figure 9B). Metoprolol impaired recall of contextual fear in male APP mice (Figure 9C, 9D). Two-way ANOVA revealed a genotype x drug interaction (F(1,34) = 4.297; p = .046) in which APP mice dosed with metoprolol had impaired recall of contextual fear relative to wild-type mice dosed with metoprolol.

No effects of chronic dosing with metoprolol were observed in female APP mice in either MWM or Fear Conditioning (Figure 10). However, female APP mice showed impairment in the recall of platform location during the first probe trial but showed no deficits in either learning or recall of the platform location during the reversal phase. No deficits in female APP mice nor the effects of metoprolol were observed in Fear Conditioning.

Beta-adrenergic receptor activation modulates phagocytosis of synaptosomes in in vitro microglia cultures

Given the observed effects of metoprolol on Cd68 and Lamp1 gene expression (refer back to Figures 7 and 8), we examined the effects of beta-adrenergic pharmacology in an in vitro synaptosomal phagocytosis assay using primary microglia cultures (model depicted in Figure 11 A–C). Beta-adrenergic agonists, xamoterol and isoproterenol, attenuated synaptosomal phagocytosis (Figure 11D); effects of xamoterol were reversed with adrb1-selective antagonist CGP-20712A (data not shown). The beta-blocker metoprolol exacerbated synaptosomal phagocytosis (see Figure 11E).

Discussion

The noradrenergic system modulates both neuroinflammation and cognition. Data presented here provide evidence that antagonism of beta-adrenergic receptors with beta-blockers has important proinflammatory consequences in both the periphery and the central nervous system, depending on the context of the immune challenge. We provide evidence that beta-blockers potentiate peripheral inflammation in a systemic LPS model of inflammation and potentiate indices of neuroinflammation in an APP mouse model of amyloidosis. We also provide evidence that beta-blockers impair learning and memory in both wild-type and APP mice. Beta-blockers consistently upregulated markers of phagocytosis in APP mice, and we demonstrated that beta-blockers potentiated, whereas agonists attenuated, microglial phagocytosis of synaptosomes in an in vitro phagocytosis assay. The results presented here highlight an integral role for beta-adrenergic receptor signaling in multiple components of disease-related pathophysiology, with implications for treatment and progression of neurodegenerative disorders such as AD.

Beta-blockers potentiated systemic inflammation in an LPS model

LPS has been used extensively to examine mechanisms of systemic and central inflammation (Goujon et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 2002; Wohleb et al., 2012). Low doses (10–1000 μg/kg) of systemic LPS induce a peripheral immune response involving a cascade of cytokine signaling molecules that then triggers a neuroinflammatory cascade in the CNS (Dantzer et al., 2008). We identified parameters for a robust model of acute peripheral and central inflammation within hours following a low dose of LPS (50–100 μg/kg). Four separate beta-blockers robustly potentiated peripheral inflammation in response to acute inflammatory challenge, and conversely, a beta-adrenergic agonist attenuated LPS-induced inflammation in both plasma and brain. These findings support and elaborate on earlier findings in which anti-inflammatory effects of NE following systemic LPS challenge were shown to be mediated via beta-adrenergic receptor signaling (Elenkov et al., 1995) or where beta-blockers were shown to block anti-inflammatory effects of NE in ex vivo human blood assays (Papandreou et al., 2016; van der Poll et al., 1994). In rats, peripheral administration of nadolol, a beta-adrenergic antagonist that does not cross the BBB, has been shown to potentiate both peripheral and central inflammation after systemic immune challenge with E. coli (Johnson et al., 2008). Here we demonstrate robust proinflammatory effects of beta-adrenergic receptor blockade in a systemic LPS model, alongside an expected anti-inflammatory role for activation of beta-adrenergic receptors, previously described by us and others (Ardestani et al., 2017; Feinstein et al., 2002; Heneka et al., 2010; Yi et al., 2017).

While beta-blockers did not potentiate LPS-induced CNS inflammation, as measured in this study, agonism of beta-adrenergic receptors attenuated numerous indices of LPS-induced inflammation both in the periphery and CNS. Agonism of beta-adrenergic receptors with either mabuterol or xamoterol attenuated systemic inflammation induced by LPS. Mabuterol, which is highly brain-permeable, in contrast to xamoterol, also showed a robust attenuation of several indices of LPS-induced inflammation in the brain. It is important to note that despite low brain permeability of xamoterol, we have previously shown that chronic treatment with xamoterol in the 5XFAD model of AD leads to a reduction in the CNS inflammatory response, and xamoterol was detectable at low concentrations in the brain, either due to chronic exposure or increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier in 5XFAD mice (Ardestani et al., 2017). One of the most robust anti-inflammatory effects of beta-adrenergic agonism in the periphery is the upregulation of the anti-inflammatory factor, IL-10. This has previously been demonstrated with the beta-adrenergic agonist, clenbuterol in the CNS (McNamee et al., 2010; Ryan et al., 2016). And indeed, we here show that the beta-adrenergic antagonist, propranolol, conversely downregulates IL-10 in the periphery, showing bidirectional modulation of this key cytokine in the periphery with beta-adrenergic agonism versus antagonism. Upregulation of IL-10 in the CNS with mabuterol was not observed in this study (and neither downregulation in the CNS with propranolol), at least not at the same time point at which we see upregulation in the periphery (2 hours post LPS). However, anti-inflammatory effects of mabuterol in the CNS were observed in terms of the attenuation of proinflammatory cytokines such as MIP1a, MIP1b, IP10, and IL-27, and are expected to be dynamic and changing across a time course. Anti-inflammatory effects of beta-adrenergic receptor agonism are diverse, with both attenuation of multiple proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., Tnfa, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, MCP-1), as well as upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokine signaling pathways (e.g., IL-10). Previous reports have also demonstrated complex anti-inflammatory effects attributed to Adrb2 receptor activation with both attenuations of proinflammatory signaling pathways and upregulation of multiple anti-inflammatory pathways (Ryan et al., 2011; Ryan et al., 2016). Future studies are needed to explore the mechanistic regulation of the pro- and anti-inflammatory phenotypes modulated by beta-adrenergic receptor subtypes.

Genetic deletion of either beta1- or beta2-adrenergic receptor subtypes directly in the brain, in microglia, had proinflammatory effects that were not observed by pharmacological antagonism of beta-adrenergic receptors. Myeloid lineage genetic deletion of either Adrb1 or Adrb2 receptors had robust proinflammatory effects in the brain. Additionally, as knocking out either receptor, while leaving the other intact, potentiates neuroinflammation, these two receptors may not have a redundant role in the brain. Importantly, the CNS immune response is thought to be primarily driven by myeloid lineage microglia, and correspondingly we see robust potentiation of inflammation in the brain with myeloid lineage deletion of either Adrb1 or Adrb2. However, as our model targets myeloid lineage cells, including both microglia and peripheral macrophages, we cannot discount a role for infiltrating macrophages in these studies in addition to effects mediated via microglia. LPS has been shown to impair the blood-brain barrier and increase the likelihood of infiltration of peripheral macrophages to the CNS. Beta-adrenergic receptors are known to modulate inflammatory responses in both microglia and peripheral macrophages (Ardestani et al., 2017; Heneka et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2012). Genetic deletion of beta-adrenergic receptors on either microglia or infiltrating macrophages may impact signaling through toll-like receptor 4 (pathogen ligand binding site) expression or function as there are a conspicuous physical interaction and potential crosstalk between Adrb2 and TLR4 (Kizaki et al., 2008). Functional interaction between Adrb2 gene expression or receptor activity on toll-like receptor 4 expression and function deserves further study.

Additionally, while the focus of the current LPS studies on the effects of beta-blockers was within the acute phase of peripheral and central inflammation, where the peripheral inflammatory response peaks and resolves within 6–8 hours, the CNS inflammation, once triggered, persists beyond that of the peripheral inflammation, for at least 24 hours and longer. This persistence of CNS inflammation beyond the transitory bout of peripheral inflammation has been observed in our lab (reported here with 24-hour post-LPS time point, but also observed days and weeks beyond) and previously reported using single high doses of LPS (exceeding dosage used in the experiments described here) in which CNS cytokines persists for up to 10 months with consequences including neurodegeneration (Qin et al., 2007; Song et al., 2018). As chronic neuroinflammation is related to chronic neurodegenerative disorders, these findings have important implications for understanding mechanisms through which peripheral inflammation can transition to and persist as chronic neuroinflammation (Perry et al., 2007). Furthermore, the effect of chronic beta-blocker administration in patients and the impact on persistent peripheral and central inflammation is an important topic that needs further investigation.

Beta-blockers potentiated indices of CNS inflammation in an APP mouse model

Antagonism of beta-adrenergic receptors with the beta-blocker, metoprolol, had proinflammatory effects in female APP mice at 8 months of age, but not in either male or female wild-type mice or male APP mice at 6 months of age. The more robust effect of metoprolol in female APP mice is likely due to the presence of robust amyloid pathology in female APP mice at 8 months and the lack of substantial amyloid pathology in male APP mice at 6 months. Female APP mice are regularly observed to have more pathology than male mice in this model, and indeed plaque pathology is mild in males at this early time point (6 months). In addition, we detected far less soluble and insoluble amyloid-beta in vehicle-treated 6-month-old males in this study relative to vehicle-treated 8-month-old females. An important implication of the observation that beta-blockers only potentiate CNS inflammation in the female APP model, but not substantially in the male APP model or the LPS model (neuroinflammation induced by systemic inflammation) is that beta-blockers may potentiate inflammation locally at the site of inflammatory stimulus by inhibiting the beta-adrenergic receptor modulation of pathogen activated receptors such as LPS activation of TLR4 in the periphery and amyloid-beta fibril activation of toll-like receptors in the CNS. Importantly, CNS inflammation following systemic inflammation is secondary to peripheral inflammation and does not involve local pathogen signaling in the CNS. Indeed, brain glial cells are thought to express very low levels of LPS receptors.

Beta-blockers upregulated markers of phagocytosis in APP mice and potentiated synaptosomal phagocytosis in vitro

Despite the lack of advanced pathology or potentiation of pathology in the male APP cohort, metoprolol upregulated Il6 and a marker of phagocytosis, Lamp1, in male wild-type and APP mice. Furthermore, in the female mice, with more severe pathology, in addition to potentiation of multiple factors of inflammation, metoprolol also induced CD68, a robust marker of phagocytosis. In an in vitro assay of synaptosomal phagocytosis, we show an inhibitory role for beta-adrenergic signaling in modulating microglial engulfment of synaptosomes. Beta-blockers potentiated phagocytosis of synaptosomes in this in vitro model, while beta-adrenergic receptor agonists suppressed phagocytosis. This has important implications for synaptic degeneration as overactive synaptic pruning is thought to contribute to synaptic degeneration in neurodegenerative disorders. Chronic beta-blocker use, through altered synaptic phagocytosis, may potentiate synaptic degeneration and acceleration of neurodegeneration in CNS disorders.

Chronic metoprolol impaired indices of cognitive function in male APP mice

Adrenergic systems have a fundamental role in normal cognitive function (Mather and Harley, 2016; Sara, 2009). Beta-adrenergic receptor activation is essential for learning and memory. Here we provide evidence for impairment of cognitive function in Morris Water Maze and Fear Conditioning with a beta-blocker in male APP mice. These data support previous evidence that beta-blockers such as metoprolol may impair cognition in humans (O’Carroll et al., 1999; Paran et al., 2010). Effects of beta-blockers on cognition and inflammation may have clinical relevance as this class of drug is administered to patients chronically to manage hypertension. However, confounding this issue is the fact that hypertension is a major risk factor for dementia and cognitive impairment. Epidemiological studies examining beta-blockers as a risk factor for development or progression of neurodegenerative disorders can be challenging to interpret due to a confound with potential beneficial effects of lowering blood pressure on cognition and disease progression (Duron and Hanon, 2010; Hajjar et al., 2005) in contrast to potential detrimental effects on cognition (Gliebus and Lippa, 2007; O’Carroll et al., 1999) or inflammation. However, the strong associations revealed between chronic beta-blocker use and worsening of clinical outcomes in neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s Disease underscore the importance of this research (Cepeda et al., 2019; Mittal et al., 2017).

Conclusions

In summary, our data support proinflammatory roles for beta-blockers in the periphery under conditions of systemic inflammation and in the CNS under conditions of existing neuroinflammation. Beta-blockers have complex immunomodulatory effects, with both upregulation of proinflammatory signaling and attenuation of anti-inflammatory signaling. While proinflammatory effects of acute beta-blocker administration were only observed in the CNS in the amyloidosis model, chronic effects of beta-blockers, which are not restricted to the periphery, on neuroinflammation, proinflammatory tissue responses, and pathological progression of neurodegenerative disorders, in the presence of systemic inflammation require further investigation with high relevance for human health. The impact of brain permeable beta-blockers in patients with neurodegenerative diseases warrants further investigation.

Supplementary Material

1 Figure S1. Time- and dose-dependent effects of LPS on Tnfa, Il1b, and IL-6 protein and gene expression in plasma and brain. A) Plasma time course data following a low dose of LPS (50 μg/kg), peak plasma concentrations of Tnfa and IL-6 occur within 4 hours (n=5-7 per time point, except 1 hour, n=3). B) In a dose-response to LPS (100-1000 μg/kg; logarithmic axis) at 90 minutes, plasma Tnfa showed a dose-dependent response (n=4-7 per dose). C) Following a dose-response to LPS at 24 hours (50-1000 μg/kg), plasma concentrations of Tnfa, Il6 and Il1b were all back at baseline (n=4 per dose). D) CNS time course data following a low dose of LPS (50 μg/kg), mRNA expression for Tnfa, Il6, and Il1b are elevated with peak expression of all 3 cytokines around 3 hours post-LPS (n=5-8 except Il1b n=4 at 1 hour). E) CNS dose-response data to LPS (100-1000 μg/kg) at 90 minutes, mRNA expression for Tnfa, Il6, and Il1b were all elevated without a clear dose-dependent response (n=4-5 per dose). F) At 24 hours, CNS mRNA expression revealed dose-dependent elevations of Tnfa and Il1b (n=4-5 per dose). Significance indicated for Tnfa/Tnfa (*), Il1b/Il1b (&amp;), Il6/Il6 (#); *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001 indicates posthoc comparison of means with Dunnett’s or Bonferroni’s corrections.

Figure S2. Evidence for knockdown of Adrb1 and Adrb2 protein in membrane fraction of adrb1 and adrb2 conditional knockdown models following 3 doses of tamoxifen (400 mg/kg; p.o) administered within 1 week of tissue collection, with the last administration within 24 hours of tissue collection. A,B) In the Adrb1 myeloid condition knockout model, knockdown of Adrb1 protein with tamoxifen was confirmed with Western blot in plasma membrane fraction from CNS homogenate. Blots for Adrb1 and tubulin are shown A) with quantification B). C,D) In the Adrb2 myeloid condition knockout model, knockdown of Adrb2 protein with tamoxifen was confirmed with Western blot in plasma membrane fraction from CNS homogenate. Blots for Adrb2 and tubulin are shown C) with quantification D).

Figure S3. Pre or post- treatment with ADRB1 antagonists metoprolol and/or atenolol had no effect on central responses to systemic LPS at 24 hours. A,C) Experimental Designs. Scatter plot bar graphs depict B,D) CNS Tnfa, Il1b, Il6, and Il10 gene expression (n=7-8 per treatment). *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s or Sidak’s corrections for relevant comparison of means.

Figure S4. Protein and gene expression in the brain are correlated for several cytokines at 3 hours following LPS administration. A) Experimental design illustrates pump administration of metoprolol or vehicle followed by LPS or vehicle challenge. B-C) Scatter graphs depict correlation analyses of hippocampal protein relative to hippocampal gene expression for select cytokines, Il10, and Il18. Additional correlations from this analysis are depicted for Tnfa, Il1b and Il6 in Figure 1. p-values and r2 values are indicated at the lower right of each graph.

Figure S5. Male APP mice at 6 months have less amyloid beta pathology than female APP mice at 8 months. Scatter graphs depict tissue concentrations of soluble and insoluble amyloid beta(1–40) (Ab40) or amyloid beta(1–42) (Ab42) in A-D) male (n=6-8) and E-H) female APP mice (n=6). * indicates p&lt;.05, t-test.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH R21 NS097945) (NIH R01 AG054533) and (NINDS P30 NS069375) awarded to MS. We are grateful to Steven Thomas at the University of Pennsylvania and Gerard Karsenty at Columbia University for the generous gift of beta1- and beta2-adrenergic receptor-floxed mice. We thank Nay Lui Saw, Jackie Ernest, and Christine Xu for excellent technical assistance.

Declaration of Interest

CuraSen Therapeutics has licensed patents (by AE BY PA and MS) for xamoterol and related technology from Stanford University. However, this work was initiated and carried out independently from CuraSen Therapeutics and was not designed, initiated, or funded by CuraSen Therapeutics.

Abbreviations

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

Adrb1 beta1-adrenergic receptor

Adrb2 beta2-adrenergic receptor

APP amyloid-beta protein precursor

CNS central nervous system

Gapdh glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase

Il1b interleukin-1beta

Il6 interleukin-6

ITI inter-trial intervals

FC fear conditioning

LC locus coeruleus

LPS lipopolysaccharide

MWM Morris water maze

NE norepinephrine, noradrenaline

Tnfa tumor necrosis factor-alpha

Figure 1. Hippocampal protein and gene expression in the brain are correlated for several cytokines at 3 hours following LPS administration. A-C) Scatter graphs depict correlation analyses of hippocampal protein relative to hippocampal gene expression for select cytokines, Tnfa, Il1b, and Il6. p-values and r2 values are indicated at the lower right of each graph. Correlation data comes from metoprolol pump study, same study as Figure S4.

Figure 2. Beta-adrenergic agonism (Adrb1 agonist, xamoterol; purple) versus antagonism (Adrb1 antagonist, CGP-20712A; blue) attenuated versus potentiated Tnfa plasma protein induction in response to peripheral LPS challenge in mice. A) Experimental Design. B) Xamoterol, dose-dependently attenuated LPS-induced plasma Tnfa (n=5–11). C) Attenuation of plasma Tnfa by xamoterol was reversed by a selective Adrb1 antagonist, CGP-20712A, which alone potentiated plasma Tnfa (n=11–18). D) Neither adrb1 agonist nor antagonist modulated CNS forebrain Tnfa Il1b or Il6 gene expression (n=11–18). *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s or Sidak’s post-hoc comparison of means for relevant comparisons.

Figure 3. ADRB1 antagonists metoprolol and atenolol potentiate indices of the peripheral but not central immune response to systemic LPS, whereas conditional knockdown of the Adrb1 or Adrb2 receptor genes in microglia prior to LPS challenge results in potentiation of the central response to systemic LPS. A) Experimental design for adrenergic beta-blocker study. Scatter bar graphs depicts B) plasma Tnfa following systemic LPS challenge (n=6–10) and C) CNS forebrain Tnfa, Il1b, and Il6 gene expression following systemic LPS challenge. D) Experimental design for conditional microglial adrb1 and adrb2 knockdown study. Scatter bar graphs (E-H) depict plasma Tnfa and CNS forebrain Tnfa, Il1b and Il6 gene expression following systemic LPS challenge in mice with vehicle or tamoxifen-induced deletion of E,F) Adrb1 (n=3–4) or G,H) Adrb2 (n=13–16) in microglia. *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001; one- or two-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s or Sidak’s post-hoc comparison of means.

Figure 4. Pump administration of ADRB1 antagonist metoprolol for two weeks does not alter the central response to systemic LPS at a 3 hour timepoint. A) Experimental design. Log2-(fold change) bar graphs depict relative change in CNS protein concentrations in B) LPS-challenged mice relative to vehicle-treated mice (n=16), and C) metoprolol-treated LPS-challenged mice relative to vehicle-treated LPS-challenged mice (n=15). * indicates p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001; one-way ANOVA for treatment effects on each protein with Sidak’s post-hoc comparison of means.

Figure 5. Effects of beta-adrenergic agonist and antagonist, mabuterol and propranolol, on plasma inflammation-related proteins following systemic LPS challenge. A) Experimental design. Log2-(fold change) bar graphs depict relative change in proteins for B) vehicle-LPS relative to vehicle-vehicle (n=8); C) mabuterol-LPS relative to vehicle-LPS (n=8); and D) propranolol-LPS relative to vehicle-LPS (n=7). * indicates p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001; one-way ANOVA for treatment effects on each protein with Sidak’s post-hoc comparison of means.

Figure 6. Effects of beta-adrenergic agonist and antagonist, mabuterol and propranolol, on CNS inflammation-related proteins following systemic LPS challenge. A) Experimental design. Log2-(fold change) bar graphs depict relative change in proteins for B) vehicle-LPS relative to vehicle-vehicle (n=8); C) mabuterol-LPS relative to vehicle-LPS (n=8); and D) propranolol-LPS relative to vehicle-LPS (n=7). * indicates p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001; one-way ANOVA for treatment effects on each protein with Sidak’s post-hoc comparison of means.

Figure 7. Chronic daily metoprolol injection in male transgenic mice overexpressing human mutated amyloid precursor protein (APP) or wildtype littermate controls resulted in changes in inflammation-related gene expression in the CNS. Scatter graphs depict CNS gene expression from a coronal brain dissection at the level of the dorsal hippocampus for metoprolol- or vehicle-treated wildtype and APP mice (n=8–10). Grouped brackets indicate main effects of metoprolol. * indicates p&lt;.05; ** p&lt;.01; two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s correction for post-hoc comparison of means.

Figure 8. Chronic metoprolol treatment in female transgenic mice overexpressing human mutated amyloid precursor protein (APP) or wildtype littermate controls resulted in induction of inflammation-related gene expression in the CNS. Scatter graphs depict CNS gene expression from a coronal brain dissection at the level of the dorsal hippocampus for metoprolol- or vehicle-treated wildtype and APP mice (n=6–12). Grouped brackets indicate main effects of genotype. * indicates p&lt;.05; ** p&lt;.01; *** p&lt;.001; two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s correction for post-hoc comparison of means.

Figure 9. Behavioral effects of chronic treatment with metoprolol in male transgenic mice overexpressing human mutated amyloid precursor protein (APP) or wildtype littermate controls (n=8–10 for all graphs). A) Line graphs depict impaired spatial learning (days 1–4) and reversal learning (days 5–9) in male APP mice in Morris Water Maze. B) Bar graphs depict impairments in recall of platform location in APP mice (time spent in platform location during first 15 seconds of probe trial) during probe trials following initial training and again following reversal training. Metoprolol further exacerbates the impaired recall in APP mice. C) Line graph demonstrates equivalent association of shock-tone pairing (learning) in all groups in fear conditioning paradigm. However, D) scatter graph depicts deficits in recall of conditioned fear in male APP mice receiving chronic metoprolol. * indicates p&lt;.05; ** p&lt;.01.

Figure 10. Effects of chronic metoprolol on Morris water maze and fear conditioning behavior in female transgenic mice overexpressing human mutated amyloid precursor protein (APP, n=7) or wildtype littermate controls (n=11–12). A) Line graphs depict an impairment in spatial learning (days 1–4) in vehicle-treated female APP mice but normal reversal learning (days 5–6) in all groups. B) Bar graphs depict impairments in recall of platform location in both APP groups during Probe 1 (time spent in platform location during 60 seconds of probe trial). Metoprolol-treated female APP mice showed deficits in recall of platform location in Probe 1, despite demonstration of equivalent learning relative to WT controls. C) Line graph demonstrates equivalent association of shock-tone pairing in all groups in fear conditioning paradigm. D) Scatter graph depicts equivalent recall of conditioned fear in all groups. * indicates p&lt;.05; ** indicates p&lt;.01; *** indicates p&lt;.001.

Figure 11. Beta adrenergic agonists (xamoterol and isoproterenol) attenuate and a beta-adrenergic antagonist (metoprolol) exacerbates phagocytosis of synaptosomes in primary microglial cultures. A) In a synaptosomal phagocytosis assay, rat synaptosomal preparations were labelled with a pH-sensitive dye and incubated with rat pup primary microglia. Phagocytosis of labelled synaptosomes by microglia leads to changes in pH-sensitive dye expression that can be tracked over time with pHrodo fluorescent intensity. B) Photomicrograph depicts synaptosomes expressing pHrodo (red) inside microglia (iba1, green). Cell nuclei labelled with DAPI (blue). C) Photomicrograph depicts colocalization of pHrodo (red) with synaptophysin (green), a marker of synaptosomes. D,E) Rat primary microglia cells were treated with D) xamoterol (300 nM), isoproterenol (300 nM) or vehicle (n=6), or E) metoprolol (1 nM) or vehicle and incubated with pHrodo-labeled synaptosomes. Sample size for each data point is n=6 wells per treatment. Phagocytosis of synaptosomes was tracked for 3 hours with quantification of pHrodo signal represented as area under the curve (AUC). F,G) Representative images of pHrodo-containing microglia cultures at 3 hours after treatment. * indicates p&lt;.05; ** indicates p&lt;.01; *** indicates p&lt;.001; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posthoc comparison of means.

Table 1. Beta-adrenergic pharmacology.

Compound	General Classification	EC50/IC50 ADRB1 (nM)*	EC50/IC50 ADRB2 (nM)*	
xamoterol	highly selective ADRB1 partial agonist	2.2	&gt;100,000	
mabuterol	ADRB agonist	7	0.17	
isoproterenol	ADRB agonist	871	229	
CGP 20712A	selective ADRB1 antagonist	1.6	776	
metoprolol	ADRB antagonist	55	129	
propranolol	ADRB antagonist	7	0.83	
atenolol	selective ADRB1 antagonist	219	1023	
	
norepinephrine	endogenous full agonist	1820	3890	
epinephrine	endogenous full agonist	7080	741	
* reference values obtained from (Ardestani et al., 2017; Baker, 2005; Baker, 2010)

Highlights

Beta-blockers potentiate peripheral inflammation following systemic LPS

Beta-blockers potentiate neuroinflammation in a mouse model of amyloidosis

Beta-blockers potentiate microglial phagocytosis of synaptosomes in vitro

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Allen WE , , 2017 Thirst-associated preoptic neurons encode an aversive motivational drive. Science. 357 , 1149–1155.28912243
Amrhein V , , 2019 Scientists rise up against statistical significance. Nature. 567 , 305–307.30894741
Ardestani PM , , 2017 Modulation of neuroinflammation and pathology in the 5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease using a biased and selective beta-1 adrenergic receptor partial agonist. Neuropharmacology. 116 , 371–386.28089846
Baker JG , 2005 The selectivity of beta-adrenoceptor antagonists at the human beta1, beta2 and beta3 adrenoceptors. Br. J. Pharmacol 144 , 317–322.15655528
Baker JG , 2010 The selectivity of beta-adrenoceptor agonists at human beta1-, beta2- and beta3-adrenoceptors. Br. J. Pharmacol 160 , 1048–1061.20590599
Branca C , , 2014 Administration of a selective beta2 adrenergic receptor antagonist exacerbates neuropathology and cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging. 35 , 2726–2735.25034342
Cepeda MS , , 2019 Comprehensive Real-World Assessment of Marketed Medications to Guide Parkinson’s Drug Discovery. Clin Drug Investig.
Chalermpalanupap T , , 2018 Locus Coeruleus Ablation Exacerbates Cognitive Deficits, Neuropathology, and Lethality in P301S Tau Transgenic Mice. J Neurosci 38 , 74–92.29133432
Coutellier L , , 2014 beta1-adrenergic receptor activation enhances memory in Alzheimer’s disease model. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 1 , 348–360.24883337
Dantzer R , , 2008 From inflammation to sickness and depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 9 , 46–56.18073775
Duron E , Hanon O , 2010 Antihypertensive treatments, cognitive decline, and dementia. J Alzheimers Dis. 20 , 903–14.20182022
Elenkov IJ , , 1995 Modulation of lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha production by selective alpha- and beta-adrenergic drugs in mice. J Neuroimmunol 61 , 123–31.7593548
Elenkov IJ , , 2000 The sympathetic nerve--an integrative interface between two supersystems: the brain and the immune system. Pharmacol Rev. 52 , 595–638.11121511
Faizi M , , 2012 Thy1-hAPP(Lond/Swe+) mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease displays broad behavioral deficits in sensorimotor, cognitive and social function. Brain Behav. 2 , 142–154.22574282
Faizi M , , 2011 Comprehensive behavioral phenotyping of Ts65Dn mouse model of Down syndrome: activation of beta1-adrenergic receptor by xamoterol as a potential cognitive enhancer. Neurobiol. Dis 43 , 397–413.21527343
Feinstein DL , , 2002 Noradrenergic regulation of inflammatory gene expression in brain. Neurochem Int. 41 , 357–65.12176079
Feinstein DL , , 2016 Causes, consequences, and cures for neuroinflammation mediated via the locus coeruleus: noradrenergic signaling system. J Neurochem 139 Suppl 2 , 154–178.26968403
Gliebus G , Lippa CF , 2007 The influence of beta-blockers on delayed memory function in people with cognitive impairment. Am. J. Alzheimers. Dis. Other Demen 22 , 57–61.17534003
Goujon E , , 1996 Adrenalectomy enhances pro-inflammatory cytokines gene expression, in the spleen, pituitary and brain of mice in response to lipopolysaccharide. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res 36 , 53–62.9011765
Hajjar I , , 2005 Cross-sectional and longitudinal association between antihypertensive medications and cognitive impairment in an elderly population. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 60 , 67–73.15741285
Heneka MT , , 2010 Locus ceruleus controls Alzheimer’s disease pathology by modulating microglial functions through norepinephrine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 107 , 6058–6063.20231476
Heneka MT , , 2006 Locus ceruleus degeneration promotes Alzheimer pathogenesis in amyloid precursor protein 23 transgenic mice. J. Neurosci 26 , 1343–1354.16452658
Johnson JD , , 2008 Role of central beta-adrenergic receptors in regulating proinflammatory cytokine responses to a peripheral bacterial challenge. Brain Behav. Immun 22 , 1078–1086.18468841
Johnson JD , , 2002 Prior stressor exposure sensitizes LPS-induced cytokine production. Brain Behav. Immun 16 , 461–476.12096891
Kalinin S , , 2007 Noradrenaline deficiency in brain increases beta-amyloid plaque burden in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging. 28 , 1206–1214.16837104
Kizaki T , , 2008 Beta2-adrenergic receptor regulates Toll-like receptor-4-induced nuclear factor-kappaB activation through beta-arrestin 2. Immunology. 124 , 348–56.18194271
Mather M , Harley CW , 2016 The Locus Coeruleus: Essential for Maintaining Cognitive Function and the Aging Brain. Trends Cogn Sci. 20 , 214–226.26895736
McNamee EN , , 2010 Noradrenaline acting at central beta-adrenoceptors induces interleukin-10 and suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 expression in rat brain: implications for neurodegeneration. Brain Behav. Immun 24 , 660–671.20193756
Mittal S , , 2017 beta2-Adrenoreceptor is a regulator of the alpha-synuclein gene driving risk of Parkinson’s disease. Science. 357 , 891–898.28860381
Nguyen TV , , 2014 Small Molecule p75NTR Ligands Reduce Pathological Phosphorylation and Misfolding of Tau, Inflammatory Changes, Cholinergic Degeneration, and Cognitive Deficits in AbetaPPL/S Transgenic Mice. J. Alzheimers. Dis
O’Carroll RE , , 1999 Stimulation of the noradrenergic system enhances and blockade reduces memory for emotional material in man. Psychol. Med 29 , 1083–1088.10576300
Papandreou V , , 2016 Adrenergic Effect on Cytokine Release After Ex Vivo Healthy Volunteers’ Whole Blood LPS Stimulation. Inflammation. 39 , 1069–75.27037808
Paran E , , 2010 Cognitive function and antihypertensive treatment in the elderly: a 6-year follow-up study. Am. J. Ther 17 , 358–364.20019592
Ryan KJ , , 2011 Complementary anti-inflammatory actions of the beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist clenbuterol and the glucocorticoid dexamethasone in rat brain. J. Neuroimmunol 232 , 209–216.21035874
Ryan KM , , 2016 Clenbuterol activates the central IL-1 system via the beta2-adrenoceptor without provoking inflammatory response related behaviours in rats. Brain Behav Immun. 56 , 114–29.26928198
Sara SJ , 2009 The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 211–223.19190638
Saxe MD , , 2006 Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis impairs contextual fear conditioning and synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 103 , 17501–17506.17088541
Schmittgen TD , Livak KJ , 2008 Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative C(T ) method. Nat. Protoc 3 , 1101–1108.18546601
van der Poll T , , 1994 Noradrenaline inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 6 production in human whole blood. Infect Immun. 62 , 2046–50.8168970
Wang J , , 2017 Galphai is required for carvedilol-induced beta1 adrenergic receptor beta-arrestin biased signaling. Nat Commun. 8 , 1706.29167435
Wang J , , 2011 Carvedilol as a potential novel agent for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging. 32 , 2321–12.
Wasserstein RL , , 2019 Moving to a World Beyond “p &lt; 0.05”. American Statistician. 73 , 1–19.
Weinshenker D , 2008 Functional consequences of locus coeruleus degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 5 , 342–345.18537547
Wisler JW , , 2007 A unique mechanism of beta-blocker action: carvedilol stimulates beta-arrestin signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 104 , 16657–16662.17925438
Wohleb ES , , 2012 Peripheral innate immune challenge exaggerated microglia activation, increased the number of inflammatory CNS macrophages, and prolonged social withdrawal in socially defeated mice. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 37 , 1491–1505.22386198
Yang JH , , 2012 Norepinephrine differentially modulates the innate inflammatory response provoked by amyloid-beta peptide via action at beta-adrenoceptors and activation of cAMP/PKA pathway in human THP-1 macrophages. Exp. Neurol 236 , 199–206.22609331
Yi B , , 2017 Discovery of novel brain permeable and G protein-biased beta-1 adrenergic receptor partial agonists for the treatment of neurocognitive disorders. PLoS One. 12 , e0180319.28746336
Zhang Y , , 2014 An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci 34 , 11929–11947.25186741
