LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9431220
22443
CNS Drugs
CNS Drugs
CNS drugs
1172-7047
1179-1934

33515429
7893831
10.1007/s40263-020-00787-5
NIHMS1668824
Article
Inhibitors of Src family kinases, inducible nitric oxide synthase, and NADPH oxidase as potential CNS drug targets for neurological diseases
Gage Meghan C. 1
Thippeswamy Thimmasettappa http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9326-1896
12
1 Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, United States of America
Author contribution

M. Gage drafted the manuscript. T. Thippeswamy edited the manuscript. Both have approved the revised version of the manuscript and agree to publish. We would also like to acknowledge Mica Post (Medical Illustrators, Department of Biomedical Sciences) who drew the figure 1.

2 Corresponding author: tswamy@iastate.edu
6 2 2021
30 1 2021
1 2021
30 1 2022
35 1 120
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurological diseases share common neuroinflammatory and oxidative stress pathways. Both phenotypic and molecular changes in microglia, astrocytes, and neurons contribute to the progression of disease and present potential targets for disease modification. Src family kinases (SFKs) are present in both neurons and glial cells and are upregulated following neurological insults in both human and animal models. In neurons, SFKs interact with post synaptic protein domains to mediate hyperexcitability and neurotoxicity. SFKs are upstream of signaling cascades that lead to the modulation of neurotransmitter receptors and the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as producers of free radicals through the activation of glia. Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS/NOS-II) and NADPH Oxidase 2 (NOX2), the major mediators of reactive nitrogen/oxygen species (RNS/ROS) production in the brain, are also upregulated along with the pro-inflammatory cytokines following neurological insult and contribute to disease progression. Persistent neuronal hyperexcitability, RNS/ROS, and cytokines can exacerbate neurodegeneration, a common pathognomonic feature of the most prevalent neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and epilepsy. Using a wide variety of preclinical disease models, inhibitors of the SFK-iNOS-NOX2 signaling axis have been tested to cure or modify disease progression. In this review, we discuss the SFK-iNOS-NOX2 signaling pathway and their inhibitors as potential CNS targets for major neurological diseases.

Plain language summary

Nerve cell death, oxidative stress, and inflammation of the brain are the most common pathological processes of many neurological diseases. These processes are mediated through changes in glial cells, the supporting cells in the brain, via several molecular pathways. Some of these pathways are potential drug targets for the mitigation of brain pathology. In this review, we focus on pathways involving Src family kinases, inducible nitric oxide synthase and NADPH oxidase, and their inhibitors, which are promising agents for modifying neurological diseases.


1. Introduction

Neurological disorders, though often very different in their symptoms and deficits, have underlying common hallmarks, including neurodegeneration, inflammation, and oxidative stress [1–6]. Glia make up approximately 30–60% of the total brain mass and primarily include microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes [7]. Microglia play an essential physiological role as the brain’s macrophages and regulate synaptic modulation, neuronal support, and phagocytosis of dying neurons through natural processes [8]. In neurological disease, however, these cells, along with astrocytes, often become dysregulated and can contribute to disease progression [8–10]. Using a wide variety of model systems, pro-inflammatory pathways have been identified for glial activation and suggest, with some success, that some signaling molecules could be potential therapeutic targets for neurological diseases. Our lab and others have explored the role of Src family kinases (SFKs) in neurological disease models, and shown the upregulation of Fyn and Src following neurological insult [11–17]. SFKs generally play a role in microglia proliferation, differentiation, and migration, as well as in neuronal plasticity [18,19]. Upregulation of SFKs, particularly in microglia, can lead to over activation of downstream signaling. For example, Src phosphorylates PKCδ (protein kinase C delta), which results in NFκB (nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) mediated transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) [20,21]. iNOS and NADPH (nictinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) oxidase 2 (NOX2) are the primary mediators of reactive nitrogen and oxygen species (RNS/ROS), which in large quantities can lead to neurotoxicity [22–25]. In this review, we outline the current research on SFKs and the promoters of nitrooxidative stress (iNOS and NOX2) in neurological diseases. A summary of the Fyn/SFK-iNOS-NOX2 signaling pathways is illustrated in Figure 1. Many inhibitors of this pathway have been developed with various specificities and potential off-target effects. We discuss the most widely used SFK, iNOS, and NOX2 inhibitors, as well as their disease-modifying effects in the most common neurological diseases.

2. Glia in neurological disease- a brief review

Microglia are the resident phagocytic macrophages that are distributed throughout the central nervous system [26–28]. Microglia have been implicated in a variety of roles in adulthood and have more recently been implicated to be crucial during development for processes like synaptic pruning [29–31]. In the adult nervous system, microglia aide in maintaining central nervous system (CNS) homeostasis through the removal of dead or dying cells and pathogens, thus acting as the brain’s immune regulators [32,33]. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) effectively blocks the transport of peripheral immune cells into the CNS under physiological conditions; thus, microglia fulfill the role of “resident macrophage” in the brain [34]. Notably, during disease states, the BBB can become “leaky” and allow for some peripheral circulating cells and molecules to cross over from the blood vessels [35–37]. Persistent leaky BBB reportedly follows traumatic brain injury and post epileptic insult [38–41]. Additionally, astrocytes are integral components of the BBB and, like microglia, are also affected in neurological diseases [42–44]. Astrocytes are also significant players in defense and CNS homeostasis through the transportation of ions and neurotransmitters as well as the synthesis of precursors for metabolic processes [45–47].

Although glia have important and necessary physiological functions, during pathological states, they can often become contributors to neurological diseases such as epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease (PD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic sclerosis (ALS), traumatic brain injury (TBI), stroke and several other CNS conditions [8,10,48–50]. Microglia and astrocytes are generally categorized into functional and morphological phenotypes. In the most basic categorization, microglia are classified into reactive state microglia (M1) associated with the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and RNS/ROS, and resting-state microglia (M2) associated with anti-inflammatory responses and tissue repair [10,51–53]. Similarly, astrocytes are classified as reactive (A1), associated with the destruction of synapses and nonreactive astrocytes (A2), associated with the upregulation of neurotrophic factors and the promotion of neuronal survival [54]. It is generally thought that reactive microglia can promote the transformation of A2 to A1 astrocytes [55], and inhibiting A1 astrocyte conversion by microglia is neuroprotective in PD models [56]. Conversely, astrocytes also play an important role in mediating microglial function such as chemotaxis by producing chemokines in response to brain insult, highlighting the complex interplay between glia and neurons [57]. The activation state of these cells is usually morphologically different where M1 and A1 glia have large cell bodies and retracted processes while M2 and A2 glia have small cell bodies and elongated processes. Some researchers further classify glia into even more subtypes though morphological classification can often be subject to observer bias [58,59]. The activation state of glia might also be determined through various markers though no sole marker of activation is currently accepted [60,61]. For example, we measured the colocalization of microglia with a complement signaling cascade molecule, CD68 (cluster of differentiation 68), which is generally accepted as a macrophage marker due to its localization in the lysosome [62–65]. Generally, protein makers, as well as morphological analysis, can be used in combination to fully assess the activation state of microglia.

In addition to activation of preexisting glia, many neurological disease models show an upregulation in the number of astrocytes and microglia [66,67]. The activation state and migration of glia to neuronal dense areas seems to determine the functional outcome or the maintenance of disease state. For example, an experimental model of prion disease suggests that blocking colony stimulating factor receptor (CSFR1), which expression signals microglial proliferation, decreased the progression of disease [66]. Identification of the mediators of microglia proliferation, migration, and chemotaxis could yield new mechanistic targets to alter neurological disease onset or its progression [68,69]. In this review, we focus on a signaling axis involving SFKs, iNOS, and NOX2, which are highly expressed in glial cells following CNS injury as they are involved in the activation, proliferation, and migration of these cells (depicted in Fig. 1)

3. The Src family kinases: role in the pathophysiology of the nervous system and pharmacological inhibitors

The Src family kinases (SFKs) comprise a wide spectrum of non-receptor binding proteins: src, fyn, lck, hck, yes, lyn, blk, fgr, and yrk [70,71]. They consist of an N-terminal segment, SH2, SH3, tyrosine kinase domain (SH1) followed by a c-terminal segment (Fig. 2.) [71]. At rest, SFKs are autoinhibited due to phosphorylation at Tyr527 in the c-terminal tail, which binds to the SH2 domain. Dephosphorylation of Tyr527 leads to a conformational shift resulting in autophosphorylation at Tyr416 and opening of the catalytic domain [72]. SFKs phosphorylate many downstream molecules to elicit a variety of signaling pathways involved in fundamental processes, including cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, migration, and invasiveness [19].

3.1 Neuronal SFKs

SFKs, more specifically Src and Fyn, are expressed in both neurons and glia and are known to be associated with disease phenotypes and glial activation. In neurons, Fyn/Src is associated with both excitatory and inhibitory ion channels and can modulate both N-methyl d-aspartate (NMDA) and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABAA) receptors. SFKs are important both in development and in adulthood, and have roles in the pathophysiology of proliferation, synaptic transmission, plasticity, neurogenesis, cell migration, neural modulation and brain injury [73–80]. Fyn phosphorylates mGluR1a (metabotropic glutamate receptor) at Tyr937 in vitro and in cerebellar neurons [79]. Phosphorylated Fyn regulates the surface expression of mGluR1a and modulates glutamatergic signaling [81]. Fyn also phosphorylates both GluN2A and GluN2B units of NMDARs via the formation of a complex with the anchoring post synaptic density protein (PSD95); this complex is important in long-term potentiation (LTP) and synaptic plasticity [82,83]. In fact, early work showed that fyn knockout mice had spatial impairments, which is dependent on glutamatergic signaling and LTP [84]. Further research indicated that Fyn also phosphorylates tau, a protein highly associated with AD [85]. Fyn is coupled to tau, and the complex translocates to the postsynaptic density where it phosphorylates NMDARs; studies indicate that this interaction is necessary for the regulation of glutamatergic-mediated toxicity [12,86,87]. Recently, our laboratory demonstrated the role of both Fyn and tau in seizures and in early epileptogenesis in a mouse model [87].

Glutamate is a primary excitatory neurotransmitter, and thus fine-tuning this neurotransmitter system is important to a wide variety of neurological processes. Glutamate toxicity is implicated in many neurological disorders [88]. For example, one study showed a decrease in the rate of amygdala kindling in fyn KO (knock-out) mice, which suggests its potential role in seizure onset [89]. The experiments in our laboratory using fyn KO mice also showed their resistance to kainic acid/kainate (KA)-induced status epilepticus [12]. Studies have also shown an increased SFK mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of NMDAR complexes after experimentally induced seizures in rodent models [73,77,90,91]. One study used transgenic mice with a mutant fyn (constitutively active) and showed that these mutants were more prone to higher seizure activity and spontaneous death than wild-type control mice following intravenous administration of pentratetrazol [73]. Additionally, in a study using a brain slice model of AD, neurons from fyn KO mice were protected from neurodegeneration compared to controls [92]. Therefore, Fyn is a potential therapeutic target for dampening hyperexcitability of neurons to prevent neurodegeneration.

Though less studied, there is some evidence that SFKs could also modulate GABAergic (an essential inhibitory neurotransmitter system) signaling [74]. One study tested the sensitivity of fyn mutants to various GABAA receptor agonists and found differing susceptibility depending on subunit specificity of the agonist [93]. This may implicate direct or indirect modulation of GABA-receptor subunits. Another study determined that Fyn and Src have the ability to bind to the γ subunit of the GABAA receptor, which may influence receptor trafficking to the membrane [94]. Interestingly, in our laboratory, though, the Fyn KO mice had reduced seizure severity in response to KA (kainic acid), the mortality after administering diazepam (a GABA agonist) was higher than wild-type mice, which implicates the interaction between Fyn and GABAR [12].

3.2 Glial SFKs

The role of neuronal Fyn in modulating GABAA and NMDA receptor function is well known [73–75,89]. However, the role of Fyn/Src in neuroinflammation was unknown until a study using a mouse microglia cell line (BV2) showed upregulation of Fyn following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) treatment, and in a PD mouse model [20]. Using Fyn KOs, it was further shown that Fyn kinase is required for the phosphorylation of PKCδ, which can activate the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway leading to transcription of pro-inflammatory factors by NFκB. Our laboratory was the first to demonstrate the upregulation Fyn in microglia in the mouse KA (kainic acid) model of epilepsy [12]. This would suggest that Fyn kinase is important in microglia activation and neuroinflammation. Another study in RBA-1 cells (rat astrocyte) suggested a similar mechanism in which lipoteichoic acid activates toll-like receptors (TLRs), leading to phosphorylation of c-Src. C-Src, in turn, activates platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), leading to MAPK signaling that contributes to NFκB-mediated transcription [95]. NFκB regulates the transcription of over 500 genes, including pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα and interleukin 1β, as well as iNOS and gp91phox (a membrane associated NOX2 subunit; phox refers to phagocytic oxidase) [96–99]. Another study on retinal inflammation determined that c-Src was necessary and sufficient for microglia activation via LPS, and shRNA mediated knockdown led to a higher prevalence of microglia with resting morphology [100]. A mouse microglia cell line (BV2) treated with αβ fibrils and showed increased TNFα (tumor necrosis factor) levels that were attenuated by a Src kinase inhibitor (dasatinib) [101]. Together, these studies suggest that SFKs play a role in neuroinflammation and the polarization of microglia.

In addition to microglia activation, SFKs have also been implicated microglial migration or chemotaxis, which is crucial for their ability to interact with neurons and other pathogens. Following neuronal injury, neurons and other injured cells can release nucleotides and adenosine into the extracellular space, which can be detected by glia and activate migratory mechanisms [102]. It has been suggested that upstream interactions lead to activation of Fyn, which then phosphorylates p130Cas and recruits the Pyk2 and paxillin complex, essential for migration [103]. C-Src mediates paxillin phosphorylation at Try31, also leading to microglia migration [104]. In addition to microglia, Src has also been implicated in peripheral macrophage migration following activation of TLRs via the phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) in an iNOS dependent mechanism [48].

3.3 SFKs inhibitors

Due to the emerging roles of SFKs in neuroinflammation, cell proliferation, cell migration, and neuronal modulation, SFK inhibitors have been developed and tested in animal models as well as clinical trials for cancer and AD patients. SFK inhibitors were initially tested in cancer therapies and are being evaluated in several clinical trials ranging from ovarian cancer to leukemia [15,105]. In addition to the treatment of brain metastases, recent tests in animal models enabled repurposing of some of the SFK inhibitors such as dasatinib, saracatinib, bositinib, and pyrazolopyrimidines (PP1 and PP2) for the treatment of neurological diseases [16]. Many of these inhibitors also have affinity for other non-receptor tyrosine kinases, such as abl, which is implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival [106]. Due to the wide range of involvement of SFKs in signaling pathways, off-target toxicity, and BBB permeability of some SFKs inhibitors are also of concern for the drug development. Although it needs further studying, cell specific inhibition of SFKs might lead to an effective modulation of neurological disease without or with limited off-target toxicity. This might be achieved by the introduction of viral vectors which allow cell-specific knock-down of genes under cell specific promoters.

Regulation of SFK activation is controlled by the endogenous C-terminal Src kinase (SH1 kinase domain, Fig. 2) and CSK-homologous kinase, which phosphorylates SFKs in the c-terminal domain and locks the protein in an inactive conformation [107,108]. There is some evidence that CSK is downregulated in certain cancer cells, but this has not been explored in the context of neurological disease [72]. Generally, synthetic inhibitors function by either inhibition of the kinase domain (ATP competitive inhibition) or substrate inhibition by blocking the interaction with enzymes (usually small molecule inhibitors), of which the former has been the most common approach [109,110]. It is possible that some combination of the two mechanisms might be useful for specific and potent SFK inhibition. PP1 and PP2, competitive ATP binding site inhibitors, are some of the most widely used SFK inhibitors in preclinical studies. They are potent (IC50 in the nano molar range) but also have affinity for other protein tyrosine kinases such as protein-tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6), which, though not highly expressed in the brain, could result in other off-target effects throughout the body [111].

Dasaitnib, saracatinib, imatinib, and bositinib are also ATP binding competitive inhibitors that have been explored in many animal studies as well as clinical trials. Dasatinib shows an affinity for a large number of protein kinases including, c-KIT (CD117), PDGFR, and Abl [112]. Dasatnib and imatinib are approved by the food and drug administration for the treatment of some cancers but have failed in clinical trials for glioma due to poor BBB permeability [105,113–117]. Importantly, saracatinib inhibits the function of ATP-binding cassette transporter, ABCG2, which normally limits the efficacy of other drugs crossing the BBB [118–120]. In a recent study, our laboratory was able to detect orally administered saracatinib in the mouse hippocampus even 8 hours after administration [12]. Most SFK inhibitors can be administered orally, which makes them translationally valuable. Notably, other studies utilize knockout models to evaluate the role of SFKs in disease [12,121]. Although useful, it should be noted these models also are subject to developmental deficits caused by early SFK gene KO, which could alter the disease model in the adult animal [122,123].

3.4 SFK inhibitors in preclinical neurological disease

SFKs have been widely implicated in animal models of neurological disease. In an amyloid precursor protein/ presenilin 1 (APP/PS1) transgenic AD model, dasatinib administration attenuated activated microglia, TNFα levels, and performance in the T-maze (measures spatial cognition motivated by reward) [101]. In a similar study with AD transgenic mice, long term saracatinib treatment rescued spatial memory, as assayed by the Morris Water Maze (MWM), reduced pyk2 activation, and microgliosis, but not the accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ) [124]. Additionally, a recent study by Yang [2020] showed reduction of microglia activation in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model of PD and improved motor function in response to PP2 treatment [125]. Our lab has studied Fyn KO animals in the KA model of epilepsy. In this study, fyn KO mice had decreased SE severity following a repeated low dose of KA and in the wildtype mice pretreated with saracatinib [12]. The Fyn KO mice also showed reduced epileptiform discharges during epileptogenesis though this may be due to lack of initial severity of status epilepticus. Upon further investigation, saracatinib treatment after status epilepticus reduced spiking activity in &gt;50% of rats challenged with kainic acid. This would suggest that SFKs, specifically Fyn, play a role in seizure susceptibility, and epileptogenesis; modulation could potentially alter the disease. These studies demonstrate the protective potential of saracatinib in neurological disease.

3.5 SFK inhibitors in clinical trials

There are several clinical studies on SFK inhibitors both in cancers and neurological diseases. The trials using SFK inhibitors discussed in this paper are summarized in table 1. Some SFK inhibitors are approved for use in some cancers. For example, in phase I/II trial (NCT00892177) of 145 subjects with progressive high-grade glioma or glioblastoma multiform were given dasatinib (orally twice a day) in combination with bevacizumab (an inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors). The study compared treated subjects to those with placebo and found no difference in the progression-free survival at 6 months [126]. Another phase II study (NCT00290771) with 231 participants administered imatinib in combination with hydroxyurea (an inhibitor of ribonucleotide diphosphates). Using various dosing regimens, this study found only 3–3.8% of participants with complete or partial response to treatment as assessed by MRI.

Dasatinib and imatinib have been utilized in clinical trials for the treatment of cancers like chronic phase myeloid leukemia [127,128]. Due to poor BBB permeability, treatment has failed in glioma but there are some ongoing trials (NCT04063124) investigating whether any concentration of dasatinib, co-treated with quercetin, can be detected in the brain in AD patients [129]. This could allow for further evaluation of dasatinib in disease modification though it may require higher doses that could cause toxicity. Studies show that long term use of dasatinib is tolerable in patients with somewhat high doses (usually 100 mg once a day) with pleural effusion being the common adverse effects [128]. One study did observe mild cognitive deficits during the treatment regimen, though this is reversible once treatment is withdrawn [130].

Saracatinib was developed to target Fyn/Src kinase and has been evaluated for safety and pharmacokinetics and proven clinical bioavailability [131,132]. An initial phase I trial (Astra Zeneca trial number: D8180C00004) assessed escalating doses in patients with advanced solid malignancies. The maximum tolerated dose was established to be 175 mg with a half-life of 40 hours; accumulation of saracatinib reaches a steady state after about 2 weeks [131]. In phase II trial (NCT00704366], 12 patients with advanced solid tumors were administered with saracatinib once daily for 16–65 days and the drug was well tolerated [132]. Due to its increased BBB permeability, saracatnib has been evaluated in AD. In one phase I clinical trial (NCT1864655) using subjects with probable AD dementia, participants took several doses of saracainib daily for four weeks; the drug was deemed safe and tolerable though patients did experience a wide variety of mild adverse effects [133]. In this randomized, double-blind study, 24 subjects had Mini-Mental State Examination scores from 16–26 and were given various doses of saracatinib. The most common side effects were diarrhea, fatigue, headaches, and nausea. It is likely that saracatinib’s potency (IC50 of 2.7–11nM for Fyn and Src) allows it to be more clinically efficient without as much off-target toxicity. Though the group was able to detect saracatinib in the cerebral spinal fluid, there was no statistically significant improvement on any measure of clinical efficacy (various cognitive assessments) perhaps due to the advanced stage of the disease. Another randomized clinical trial (phase IIa, NCT02167256) used a slightly higher dose of saracatinib in participants with mild AD dementia (daily for 52 weeks) but those patients with adverse effects were removed from the trials [17]. The trial included 159 patients with a diagnosis of mild AD. Subjects receiving saracatnib, compared to placebo, experienced increased significant gastrointestinal disorders, problems with metabolism and nutrition, and trending increases with other adverse effects. Again, no significant improvement in clinical efficacy (cerebral metabolic rate for glucose and secondary clinical outcomes) was detected. It is important to note that all of these trials were done when the disease was already established rather than starting the treatment trials at an early stage of the disease. There may be a critical window in which these agents could exert the most clinical efficacy. For example, in animal studies, saracatinib treatment for a short duration in an early period of epileptogenesis demonstrated significant disease modifying effects [12]. Therefore, clinical trials in patients at an early stage of a disease with shorter treatment duration might be beneficial.

4.0 iNOS and NOX2: role in the pathophysiology of the nervous system and pharmacological inhibitors

Neurological insult or disease is characterized by neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. As discussed previously (Section 2), SFK activation can lead to the translocation of NFκB to the nucleus which then transcribes a plethora of genes including iNOS and NOX2 subunits. This translocation is stimulated by a wide variety of insults and signaling cascades (a few relevant examples are illustrated in Fig.1). NFκB, consisting of several subunits including p50, p65, and IκBα is expressed in both neurons and glial cells [134]. NFκB, a well-studied transcription factor is highly implicated in both the development of the central nervous system as well as in plasticity [20,134,135]. Its role in neurological disease as well as oncogenesis has been well reviewed as well as its potential as a therapeutic target [134,136,137] Importantly, it promotes the transcription of many genes including pro-inflammatory cytokines and producers of RNS/ROS such as iNOS/NOS-II [20,135] and gp91phox, the membrane associated NOX2 subunit [99].

4.1 NOS

Along with NFκB, transcription of iNOS can also be driven through other regulators including hypoxia-inducing factor 1 (HIF-1), and interferon gamma (INF-γ) [138,139]. iNOS is one of three NOS isoforms; the others include neuronal NOS (nNOS/NOS-I, expressed in neurons), and endothelial NOS (eNOS/NOS-III, expressed in endothelial cells) [140]. Though less known, a fourth NOS, mtNOS, is located in the inner mitochondrial membrane [141]. All of these isoforms are calmodulin dependent and oxidize L-arginine to NOHA (N(G)-hydroxy-L-arginine), which is further oxidized to nitric oxide (NO) [141,142]. NOS isoforms require the cofactors NADPH (nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate), FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide), FMN (flavin mononucleotide), and BH4 (6R-)5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (Fig. 3) [143]. eNOS and nNOS are calcium dependent, constitutively active, and produce low concentrations of NO, while iNOS is independent of calcium signaling and produces high concentrations in short pulses due to its short half-life [144,145]. Following injury, iNOS, which is primarily expressed in microglia and in some astrocytes, is upregulated, thus, resulting in high concentrations of NO production [146]. Excess NO can lead to neuronal damage, a common consequence in many neurological diseases thus making iNOS, a desirable target in the treatment of such diseases. The studies highlighting therapeutic interventions are discussed later in this review (Section 4.6, 4.7).

4.2 NOX2

NADPH oxidases (NOXs) are membrane and cytosolic proteins that consist of membrane associated subunits gp91phox (the catalytic subunit) and p22phox which following activation, forms an active oxidase when the other cytosolic regulatory domains (p67phox, p40phox, p47phox) move to the membrane post-insult (Fig. 3) [147,148]. There is some evidence that phosphorylation of gp91phox is regulated by PKC (protein kinase C) [149]. Following interaction with the GTPase, Rac, NOXs transfer an electron from NADPH to oxygen to form peroxide (O2−) [150]. Of the NOX isoforms, NOX2 (commonly referred to as GP91phox), NOX3, and NOX4 are highly expressed in neurons and glia in the brain; NOX2 was found to be highly responsive to neuronal injury [151]. Temporal changes in NOX2 expression have been implicated and reviewed in ischemic stroke, AD, epilepsy, PD, TBI, and many other neurological conditions [151–156]. This well-established role of NOX2 in the brain makes it a promising target for the modification of neurological diseases; some studies highlighting therapeutic interventions are discussed later in this review (section 4.9, 4.10).

4.3 A glimpse into the neuronal antioxidant systems

Although this review primarily focuses on therapeutic interventions to prevent the excessive production of reactive species, it is useful to briefly review the endogenous antioxidant systems that balance the levels of ROS and RNS in a physiological state. Further, therapies that boost endogenous antioxidant levels can be useful. For example, O2− can be transformed into another ROS, H2O2, which can then be reduced to water through glutathione S-transferase and glutathione peroxidase, which uses glutathione as a substrate [157]. The proportion of glutathione and glutathione disulfide is often used to measure oxidative stress levels [158]. Glutathione synthesis, metabolism, and function are highly implicated in neurological disease due to its ability to maintain homeostasis [159–161]. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) transcriptionally regulates glutathione S-transferase, along with several other antioxidant proteins [162,163]. NRf2 binds to an antioxidant response element to promote its protective effects, and NRF2 KO is associated with acceleration of neurological disease [164,165]. Interestingly, Fyn functions as a negative regulator of NRF2 by phosphorylating its tyrosine568, resulting in the nuclear export and degradation [166]. Therefore, Fyn inhibitors or NRF2 activators are useful to boost endogenous antioxidant pathways to regulate ROS/RNS levels. Balance of ROS/RNS is critical for physiological functions and once overwhelmed in response to insult, these can promote disease progression.

4.4 RNS and ROS roles in neurological diseases

The RNS/ROS include, NO, O2−, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxy radical (HO) and can be the products of mitochondrial metabolism. ROS/RNS function in cellular homeostasis and regulation of pathways involving cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival [167,168]. Importantly, NO can play a protective role both in disease and in neurological function by regulation of cerebral blood flow in response to neuronal injury [169,170]. Oversaturation of ROS/RNS can occur with an increased expression of iNOS or NOX2 in diseases leading to nitrooxidative stress. The antioxidant mechanisms are, therefore, overwhelmed, leading to cellular damage. Excess ROS and RNS can lead to direct or indirect DNA damage as well as ATP depletion via inhibition of mitochondrial respiration [171,172]. ROS/RNS can easily cross membranes, and thus the potential for modulation of various signal pathways in pathological conditions is high. The protective or harmful nature of NO in pathological conditions is cell specific, temporal, and concentration dependent.

Importantly, NO and O2−, direct products from iNOS and NOX2 enzymatic activation, can combine to form peroxynitrite (ONOO−), which is known to have neurotoxic effects [145]. Excess ONOO− can also lead to nitrosylation and nitrotyrosylation of proteins, which involves the covalent bonding of a NO group to cysteine and tyrosine amino acids, respectively. Nitrosylation and nitrotyroslyation can greatly alter the function of proteins and can cause neurodegeneration, which is a key feature in many neurological diseases. For example, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is involved in the dephosphorylation of PIP3 to PIP2, upstream of a signaling cascade leading to Akt activation promoting the survival of neurons [173]. One study found increased nitrosylation of PTEN in autopsy samples from patients with mild cognitive impairment compared to controls; further work in culture found reduced levels of PTEN following nitrosylation, which implies the role of nitrosylation in neurodegeneration [174]. Others have found that nitrosylation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), a cell cycle regulating protein, leads to changes in its activity which, could potentially impact neuronal survival and synaptogenesis [175]. There are many more examples of aberrant nitrosylation of proteins that could potentially contribute to their ability to enhance neurological dysfunction; these have been well reviewed by Nakamura and others [176].

4.5 NOS inhibitors

NOS inhibitors have been developed with variable specificity and success in many experimental models of neurological disease and include, but are not limited to L-NAME (L-nitroarginine methyl ester), aminoguanidine, S,S-1,4-phenylene-bis(1,2-ethanediyl)bis-isothiourea, SC51, 7-Nitroindazole [7-NI), and 1400W [177]. Many inhibitors have been used in cancer studies and are now being extended to neurological diseases [178]. NOS inhibitors generally function by interaction with the arginine biding site, mimicking cofactors, or binding to the heme molecule [179]. Some inhibitors are more specific to iNOS rather than to all NOSs, which might prevent off-target effects.

Of the NOS inhibitors, L-NAME is the most widely used and is a non-selective, reversible inhibitor of NOS and has affinity for all three major NOSs; nNOS, eNOS, and iNOS. Being structurally similar to arginine, L-NAME acts as a competitive inhibitor. L-NAME is the esterfied form of another NOS inhibitor, L-NA, which increases its water solubility [180]. Notably, L-NAME also has some degree of potency with other heme containing proteins [181]. Using radio-labeled L-NAME, it has been shown that NO could be produced from the inhibitor itself from its guanadino nitro group [182]. The greatest disadvantage of L-NAME is its impact on the cardiovascular system; vasoconstriction could lead to tissue ischemia and hypoxia [180]. These arginine mimickers, as well as cofactor mimickers, have very low specificity to iNOS, a major limitation of the inhibitor. In contrast, aminoguanidine (also known as pimagedine) is over 50-fold specific to iNOS over eNOS or nNOS [183]. Although aminoguanidine is also an arginine analog, it has an additional hydrazine group that contributes to its specificity to iNOS. Aminoguanidine was first utilized to inhibit the development of advanced glycation end products but was later found to inhibit iNOS as well [183,184]. 1400W (N-([3-(Aminomethyl)phenyl]methyl) ethanimidamide dihydrochloride), a small molecule inhibitor, is &gt;500 to 200 fold more selective to iNOS than nNOS and eNOS [185]. 1400W is commercially available as a pure (&gt;99%) water-soluble compound and has been tested in healthy human volunteers and patients with heart failure [186], and liver cirrhosis [187]. One study found that 1400W irreversibly inactivates iNOS similar to another amindine containing inhibitor, L-NIO, by degradation of the heme factor to biliverdin [188]. Compounds with similar mechanisms are being developed to more specifically target each NOS isoform [189].

4.6 NOS inhibitors in preclinical models

NOS inhibitors have been tested in several animal models such as ischemia and reperfusion, peripheral neuropathy, PD, and epilepsy. In a focal ischemia, induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), post-treatment with 1400W resulted in delayed ATP depletion and reduction in extracellular glutamate, the indicators of an early better outcome in stroke treatment [172]. An earlier study used the selective iNOS inhibitor, aminoguanidine, in a similar model (MCAO) and found reduced levels of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which suggests that the activity of iNOS may mediate cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and modulate neuroinflammation [190]. Following brain injury induced by deoxycorticosterone acetate in a rodent model, NOS inhibition by aminoguanidine significantly reduced learning and memory deficits [191]. In a PD model, using 6-OHDA (6-hydroxydopamine), which induces motor impairments by selectively destroying catecholaminergic neurons, NOS inhibition reduced the number of reactive microglia following injury [192]. Interestingly, this study showed that there were no neuroprotective effects after a week of iNOS inhibitor withdrawal, which suggests that the dosing regimen dictates drug efficacy in certain models that may be related to the dynamics of iNOS levels during disease onset and its progression.

Our laboratory has extensively evaluated the neuroprotective effects of NOS inhibition in epilepsy models. We demonstrated the upregulation of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) and increased neurogenesis in response to L-NAME and 7-nitroindazole (nNOS specific) in a rat KA model of epilepsy [193]. Similar effects were also observed with soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) inhibition using 1H-[1,2,4] oxadiazolo [4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ) [193]. In another study, a nNOS-specific inhibitor, Nw-Propyl-l-arginine (L-NPA), reduced c-Fos induction, epileptiform discharge, reactive gliosis, and activity-dependent synaptogenesis in a mouse KA model [194]. These results suggest that depletion of NOS-mediated RNS production is neuroprotective. It has been known that nNOS upregulation is transient, while iNOS upregulation coincides with reactive gliosis and persists in the chronic phase of epileptogenesis. To test the efficacy of iNOS more specifically, we administered 1400W, a highly selective iNOS inhibitor for three days following status epilepticus induction in both the KA model and an organophosphate toxicity model induced by diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) [62,64]. We found that administration of 1400W, compared to the vehicle, led to decreased occurrence of spontaneous recurrent seizures as well as region-specific reduction in reactive gliosis and neurodegeneration. A similar protective effect against the development of spontaneous recurrent seizures was reported for aminoguanidine (selective for iNOS) in a mouse model using pilocarpine [195]. This suggests that iNOS inhibitors might play a protective role in modulation of seizures and epilepsy. Notably, in female rats (DFP model), the true effects of 1400W could not be ascertained since the initial SE severity was inadequate in both the vehicle and drug treated groups [63]. In our recent proteomics study in the mouse KA model, treatment with Tat-NR2B9c or 1400W reduced the abundance of a SE-induced Src substrate, cortactin [196]. 1400W also effectively suppressed inflammatory mediators in human cartilage derived from osteoarthritic patients [197] and in the rat neuropathic pain model [198]. Although 1400W has not been tested in human neurological diseases, considering the persistent upregulation of iNOS in microglia post-injury [199], iNOS can be a potential therapeutic target than nNOS or eNOS.

4.7 NOS inhibitors or NOS-targeted drugs in human diseases

Currently, there is little use of NOS inhibitors in clinical trials for neurological diseases, which could be partly due to the dual role of nNOS and eNOS- mediated NO in ischemic injury and preconditioning of the brain and heart following insult [200–202]. The trials discussed in this paper concerning the inhibition of iNOS are summarized in table 2. There is only one study (NCT00845169) as of yet using 1400W in humans exposed to diesel exhaust or filtered air to determine the effect blood flow in the forearm. No adverse effects have yet been reported in the 16 subjects given the drug.

VAS203 (Ronopterin) has been tested in phase III clinical trials (NCT02794168) for traumatic brain injury and showed neuroprotection but at high doses, there is a risk of kidney injury [203–205]. This study included patients with TBI who received an intravenous administration of VAS203 and adverse effects included hepatic, hematologic and cardiac toxicity. An indirect approach to target nNOS-mediated NO production was achieved by disengaging the nNOS from PSD95-NR2B complex using a PSD95 blocking peptide, NA-1 (Tat-NR2B9c) [206]. As discussed (Section 3.1), and illustrated earlier (Fig. 1), Src/Fyn interacts with PSD95-nNOS; thus, inhibiting one of the partners of these complexes can modify disease. NA-1 was tested in a double-blind randomized phase II clinical trial (NCT00728182) in patients with aneurysms; treated patients sustained less ischemic infarcts compared to placebo treated patients [207]. This drug is now in phase III clinical trials for stroke patients [208].

Although iNOS inhibitors have not been tested in neurological disease, discussion from other diseases provides important information about PK/PD and tolerability. Several NOS inhibitors have been utilized in clinical studies for asthma [209]. Aminoguanidine (nebulized) administration to subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and healthy smokers resulted in reduction, but not total reduction of RNS (NCT00180635) [210]. This study was double-blind with randomized treatment to 30 subjects. Authors suggest that, in this disease, other NOS isoforms might contribute to the disease state as well. L-NIL-TA (referred to as SC-51 in the literature) lead to a reduction in exhaled NO and did not have any effect on heart rate or blood pressure [211]. In this double-blind randomized study, 24 healthy adults and 24 adults with mild asthma were administered SC-51 or placebo. Reduced exhaled NO was observed following the administration of SC-51. Another randomized, double blind clinical trial (NCT00273013) used GW27410 (a selective potent iNOS inhibitor) in asthmatics with AMP challenge and found a reduction in NO but no change in airway inflammatory markers [212]. Minimal adverse effects such as headache and throat irritation were reported.

4.8 NOX2 inhibitors

Based on the results of iNOS inhibition in the studies discussed above, it is reasonable to assume that reduction in oxidative stress via inhibition of NADPH oxidase is also neuroprotective. Due to their similarity in structure, NOX inhibitors are often modulators of several NOX isoforms. NOX inhibitors have been previously reviewed and include diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), plant derived molecules such as apocynin, honokiol, and plumbagin, peptide inhibitors such as Tat-Nox2; and other synthetically made inhibitors [213,214]. These inhibitors generally function via redox of NOX subunits or by preventing the assembly of the fully functional NOX complex.

Of the NOX inhibitors, apocynin, a naturally occurring compound from a vanilla flavored herb, is the most widely used and has been used as an anti-inflammatory medicine for years [215]. Importantly, apocynin is dependent on myeloperoxidase (MPO) for dimerization, which enhances its antioxidant properties [215–217]. Apocynin alone has been shown in docking studies to associate with residues essential to p47phox activation and does have antioxidant properties when administered on its own [218]. To increase efficacy, diapocynin (made of two apocynin monomers) is active and can be synthesized to exert NOX more potently and selectively than apocynin. Importantly, due to their lipophilic nature, both apocynin and diapocynin are able to cross the BBB [219]. Early studies administered apocynin intraperitoneally and found about half of apocynin was glycosylated in the brain, one hour after administration, but did not convert to diapocynin [216]. Furthermore, mitoapocynin was developed to increase efficacy by conjugation of apocynin the triphenylphosphonium cation moiety, triphenylphosphonium (TPP), making it more cell-permeable and targeted to the mitochondria [220,221]. One study demonstrated that mitoapocynin was able to reach brain tissues at a very low dose of 10mg/kg in a mouse PD model [222]. Mitoapocynin, due to its mitochondrial specificity, requires a lower dose compared to apocynin and diapocynin, which is beneficial for long term administration. All together, these studies suggest that NOX2 is a potential target for developing therapies for neurological diseases, and apocynin-derivatives can be exploited to achieve neuroprotection.

DPI (IC50&lt;10μM) binds to reduced flavin groups, which might allow it to block the production of other reactive species (via NOS and mitochondrial complexes) but also increases potential off-target effects [223,224]. NOX inhibition via DPI is useful for in vitro studies, but in vivo toxicity is likely, and the drug is generally used in low doses [214]. Though less explored, peptide inhibitors like Tat-Nox2 are more specific to NOX isoforms but lacks bioactivity in vivo; therefore, not suitable for drug development for human use [214].

4.9 NOX/NOX2 inhibitors in preclinical models

NOX inhibitors have been widely investigated in many animal models of neurological diseases. Diapocynin administered in the MPTP mouse model of PD as both a pretreatment and a posttreatment and resulted in decreased activation of glial cells as well as improved locomotor function [219]. The same group utilized chronic oral administration of mitoapocynin in both the MPTP and MitoPark models of PD and found improved locomotor activity and reduced neurodegeneration [221,222]. In an acute seizure model, LPS-primed mice challenged with pentylenetetrazole to induce seizures showed decreased seizure latency due to the upregulation of inflammatory factors [225]. A delayed latency to seizure onset was observed when mice were administered with a NOX inhibitor, DPI, 30 minutes after LPS. However, it did alter the severity of the seizures in response to PTZ challenge. Our lab has also evaluated the effects of NOX2 inhibition post status epilepticus in an epilepsy model. Using DFP induced neurotoxicity in a rat model, we orally administered diapocynin 2 hours after the termination of status epilepticus [65]. We were able to demonstrate reduced astrogliosis and epileptiform discharges though, interestingly, no modulation of microgliosis were observed. Further dose-dependent studies will allow us to determine the potential of this disease modifier more effectively. Another recent study showed that administration of 4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl fluoride (AEBSF), a NOX and serine protease inhibitor, following SE by KA led to less spontaneous seizures [226]. Interestingly, this group also used RTA408, which binds to Keap1 and prevents the degradation of NRF2 promoting antioxidant mechanisms. Authors showed that cotreatment led to increased prevention of the epilepsy phenotype, which overall supports the idea that prevention of ROS is indeed disease-modifying in the development of epilepsy.

4.10 NOX/NOX2 inhibitors in human diseases

As of now, there are no clinical trials of NOX/NOX2 inhibitors for CNS disorders. In humans, apocynin, when inhaled, has shown antiinflammatory and antioxidant effects in asthma patients by reduction of RNS (NCT00992667) [227]. Apocynin treatment did not cause any significant changes in lung or cardiovascular function and the other parameters such as blood pressure, heart rate, and coughing scale. Another double-blind placebo controlled study with 7 subjects used asthmatics exposed to ozone and found that apocyanin led to reduced airway narrowing; this study also did not find any adverse effects of apocynin administration though this was only a short-term administration [228]. Apocyanin has also been tested in patients with stage 3 and 4 chronic kidney disease via intradermal microdialysis [229]. The lack of adverse effects in these studies suggest that apocynin might be tested in human neurological diseases though none have yet been tested. Due to apocynin’s dependence on MPO for dimerization, diapocynin or mitoapocynin can be a better therapeutic agent though they are not yet tested in clinical trials. Genkyotex has developed a series of molecules with NOX inhibitory properties [224]. For example, GKT831 (setanaxib), was administered to humans with primary biliary cholangitis (bile duct inflammation) with some disease alleviation [230]. There is currently a phase I clinical trial recruiting with the goal of studying the PK/PD properties of setanaxib in healthy adults (NCT04327089). Another synthetically developed organoselenium compound, ebselen, mimics glutathione peroxidase activity is indeed an inhibitor of NOX as well as PKC, NOS isoforms and liopoxygenases. Ebselen has been tested in phase III clinical trials for stroke and effective if administered soon after injury [231–233]. In one placebo controlled, double-blind study, 302 patients were administered ebselen or placebo within 48 hours of an acute ischemic stroke [233]. Notably, ebselen’s affinity for several molecules could cause a greater cellular toxicity which may be a disadvantage for using in humans [234]. The clinical trials of NOX inhibitors are summarized in Table 3 [224].

5.0 Conclusions

Neurological diseases affect hundreds of millions of people annually worldwide, and, for many, they are the underlying cause of death [235]. Here in this review, we have highlighted the role of SFKs in neurological diseases and their regulation of inflammatory phenotypes [12,17,20,100]. Many models of neurological diseases have demonstrated the upregulation of iNOS and NOX2 and their acceleration of disease through the production of RNS/ROS [156,236,237]. We have highlighted the current inhibitors of the potential targets in the SFK-iNOS-NOX2 axis that can be developed as CNS drugs, some of which are being tested in clinical trials of neurological disease and other conditions such as cancer and respiratory illnesses. It should be noted that there are many inhibitors that we have not discussed in detail; the most widely tested are discussed in this review to demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of each such as lack of affinity and potential for off-target effects. We have also discussed the success of these drugs in animal models of disease, and overall, the results are promising for some. When administered prior to or following neurological insult, many of these drugs have proven to be able to reduce markers of neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. More importantly, many animal studies also study behavioral aspects and have shown the efficacy of the pathway inhibitors in mitigating cognitive and motor deficits specific to the disease model. As many of these inhibitors have wide reach in terms of physiological consequences, rigorous ADME/toxicity assays and dose escalation studies are warranted to determine appropriate dosing regimens and possible side effects in clinical trials. The PK-PD properties of these drugs also need to be fully delineated to determine optimum dose needed to exert its neuroprotective effects with minimum or no side effects.

Funding

Support to TT is from the National Institute of Health, NINDS/CounterACT program (NS099007, NS110648, and NS112779)

Fig. 1: A brief and general overview of the Fyn-iNOS-NOX2 mediated mechanisms in a neurological disease. Following an insult, Fyn kinase phosphorylates PKCδ which then leads to NFκB mediated transcription of proinflammatory cytokines, iNOS and gp91phox in microglia. Fyn also phosphorylated p130cas which recruits Pyk2/paxillin complex to mediate microglial migration, often to the site of neuronal injury and interact via the appropriate receptors expressed by neurons in response to an insult. In neurons, phosphorylated Fyn and tau interact and move to the postsynaptic site to engage with PSD95 and can also phosphorylate glutamatergic receptors. This can lead to excessive calcium influx and activation of nNOS to produce RNS/ROS leading to hyperexcitability and neurotoxicity. AMPAR, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor; Ca, calcium; IkB, inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NFkB, nuclear factor kappa light chain enhancer; NMDAR, N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid or N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptor; ; nNOS, neuronal nitric oxide synthase; NOX2, NADPH oxidase 2; PKCδ, protein kinase C delta; PSD, post synaptic density; RNS, reactive nitrogen species; ROS, reactive oxygen species; *Yellow stars indicate phosphorylation.

Fig. 2 Major protein domains of Src family kinases. SH, Src homology

Fig. 3 Major protein domains of iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase) and NOX (NADPH oxidase). CaM, calmodulin binding domain; FAD, Flavin adenine dinucleotide; FE III, Iron III; FMN, Flavin mononucleotide; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

Table 1. Clinical trials: Src family kinase inhibitors (bolded)

Study	Phase	Test substance	Population	# Subjects	Study design	Outcome	
NCT00892177	I/II	Dasatinib + bevacizumab	Glioblastoma	145	Randomized, double blind	No difference in the progressive-free survival at 6 months	
NCT0020771	II	Imatinib + hydroxyurea	Recurrent glioblastoma multiform	231	Non-randomized, open label	Lower portion of patients with complete or partial response to treatment (MRI)	
D8180C00004	I	Saracatinib	Solid malignancies	81	Randomized, open label	Established tolerability and bioavailability	
NCT00704366	II	Saracatinib	Solid malignancies	12	Single treatment, open label	Demonstration of tolerability	
NCT04063124	I/II	Dasatinib + quercetin	Alzheimer’s Disease	5	Single treatment, open label	No results posted (investigating if drug can be detected in the brain)	
NCT01864655	I	Saractinib	Alzheimer’s disease	24	Single treatment, quadruple blinded	Determined safety and tolerability but no clinical efficacy	
NCT02167256	II	Saractinib	Alzheimer’s disease	159	Randomized, quadruple blinded	No improvement in clinical scores or cerebral metabolic rate	

Table 2. Clinical trials: Inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitors

Study	Phase	Test substance	Population	#Subjects	Study design	Outcome	
NCT02794168	III	VAS203	Traumatic brain injury	224	Randomized, double blind	Neuroprotection at high doses	
NCT00728182	II	NA-1	Stroke	185	Randomized, quadruple blind	Patients sustained less ischemic infarcts	
NCT00845169	NA	1400W	Endothelial dysfunction	16	Randomized, triple blind	No adverse effects reported	
NCT00180635	NA	Aminoguanidine	Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease	30	Randomized, double blind	Some reduction in reactive nitrogen species	
Hansel et. al 2003	NA	S-51	Healthy and asthmatics	48	Randomized, double blind	Reduced exhaled nitric oxide	
NCT00273013	I	GW274150	Asthmatics	28	Randomized	Reduction in nitric oxide but no change in inflammatory markers	

Table 3. Clinical trials: NADPH oxidase inhibitors

Study	Phase	Test substance	Population	#Subjects	Study design	Outcome	
NCT00992667	I	Apocynin	Bronchial asthmatic	10	Randomized, quadruple blind	No significant change in lung or cardiovascular function	
Peters, et al. 2001	NA	Apocynin	Asthmatics	7	Randomized, quadruple blind	Reduction in airway narrowing	
NCT04327089	I	Setanaxib	Healthy adults	64	Non-randomized, open label	No results published, goal to determine pharmacokinetics and drug interactions	
Takenori et al. 1998	II	Ebselen	Stroke	302	Randomized, double-blind	Improvement in the Glasgow outcome scale at one month	

Key points

Neuroinflammation, nitoroxidative stress, and neurodegeneration are common features of many neurological diseases.

Src family kinases (SFKs) and producers of oxidative stress, iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase) and NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate), share common inflammatory pathways that contribute to disease.

Several inhibitors have been developed to target these signaling pathways and are promising both in animal models and human neurological disease.

Conflicts of Interest

The authors report no conflicts of interest

Digital features

To view digital features for this article go to https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13393826.


References.

1. Skaper SD , Facci L , Zusso M , Giusti P . An inflammation-centric view of neurological disease: Beyond the neuron. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018;12 :72. doi:10.3389/fncel.2018.00072 29618972
2. Tang Y , Li X , Mao X . Editorial: Linking Neuroinflammation and Glial Phenotypic Changes in Neurological Diseases. Front Cell Neurosci. 2019;13 :542. doi:10.3389/fncel.2019.00542 31920547
3. Guzman-Martinez L , Maccioni RB , Andrade V , Navarrete LP , Pastor MG , Ramos-Escobar N . Neuroinflammation as a common feature of neurodegenerative disorders. Front Pharmacol. 2019;10 (SEP ):1008. doi:10.3389/fphar.2019.01008 31572186
4. Ransohoff RM . How neuroinflammation contributes to neurodegeneration. Science (80- ). 2016;353 (6301 ):777–783. doi:10.1126/science.aag2590
5. Gilhus NE , Deuschl G . Neuroinflammation — a common thread in neurological disorders. Nat Rev Neurol. 2019;15 (8 ):429–430. doi:10.1038/s41582-019-0227-8 31263256
6. Degan D , Ornello R , Tiseo C , Carolei A , Sacco S , Pistoia F . The Role of Inflammation in Neurological Disorders. Curr Pharm Des. 2018;24 (14 ):1485–1501. doi:10.2174/1381612824666180327170632 29589534
7. Jäkel S , Dimou L . Glial cells and their function in the adult brain: A journey through the history of their ablation. Front Cell Neurosci. 2017;11 . doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00024
8. Bachiller S , Jiménez-Ferrer I , Paulus A , Microglia in neurological diseases: A road map to brain-disease dependent-inflammatory response. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018;12 :488. doi:10.3389/fncel.2018.00488 30618635
9. Von Bernhardi R , Eugenín-von Bernhardi L , Eugenín J . Microglial cell dysregulation in brain aging and neurodegeneration. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015;7 (JUN ):124. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2015.00124 26257642
10. Block ML . Neuroinflammation: modulating mighty microglia. Nat Chem Biol. 2014;10 (12 ):988–989. doi:10.1038/nchembio.1691 25393492
11. Kaufman AC , Salazar SV ., Haas LT , Fyn inhibition rescues established memory and synapse loss in Alzheimer mice. Ann Neurol. 2015;77 (6 ):953–971. doi:10.1002/ana.24394 25707991
12. Sharma S , Carlson S , Puttachary S , Role of the Fyn-PKCδ signaling in SE-induced neuroinflammation and epileptogenesis in experimental models of temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis. 2018;110 :102–121. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2017.11.008 29197620
13. Nygaard HB . Targeting Fyn Kinase in Alzheimer’s Disease. Biol Psychiatry. 2018;83 (4 ):369–376. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.06.004 28709498
14. Sanz-Blasco S , Bordone MP , Damianich A , The Kinase Fyn As a Novel Intermediate in l-DOPA-Induced Dyskinesia in Parkinson’s Disease. Mol Neurobiol. 2018;55 (6 ):5125–5136. doi:10.1007/s12035-017-0748-3 28840468
15. Liu D , Zhang X , Hu B , Ander BP . Src family kinases in brain edema after acute brain injury In: Acta Neurochirurgica, Supplementum. Vol 121 Springer-Verlag Wien; 2016:185–190. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-18497-5_33
16. Liu DZ . Repurposing cancer drugs to treat neurological diseases - Src inhibitors as examples. Neural Regen Res. 2017;12 (6 ):910–911. doi:10.4103/1673-5374.208569 28761420
17. Van Dyck CH , Nygaard HB , Chen K , Effect of AZD0530 on Cerebral Metabolic Decline in Alzheimer Disease: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol. 2019;76 (10 ):1219–1229. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2050
18. Purcell AL , Carew TJ . Tyrosine kinases, synaptic plasticity and memory: Insights from vertebrates and invertebrates. Trends Neurosci. 2003;26 (11 ):625–630. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2003.09.005 14585603
19. Parsons SJ , Parsons JT . Src family kinases, key regulators of signal transduction. Oncogene. 2004;23 (48 REV. ISS. 7 ):7906–7909. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1208160 15489908
20. Panicker N , Saminathan H , Jin H , Fyn kinase regulates microglial neuroinflammatory responses in cell culture and animal models of parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci. 2015;35 (27 ):10058–10077. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0302-15.2015 26157004
21. Arias-Salvatierra D , Silbergeld EK , Acosta-Saavedra LC , Calderon-Aranda ES . Role of nitric oxide produced by iNOS through NF-κB pathway in migration of cerebellar granule neurons induced by Lipopolysaccharide. Cell Signal. 2011;23 (2 ):425–435. doi:10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.10.017 20955790
22. Dawson VL , Dawson TM . Nitric oxide neurotoxicity In: Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy. Vol 10 Elsevier B.V.; 1996:179–190. doi:10.1016/0891-0618(96)00148-2 8811421
23. Boje KMK . Nitric oxide neurotoxicity in neurodegenerative diseases. Front Biosci. 2004;9 :763–776. doi:10.2741/1268 14766406
24. Lafon-Cazal M , Pietri S , Culcasi M , Bockaert J . NMDA-dependent superoxide production and neurotoxicity. Nature. 1993;364 (6437 ):535–537. doi:10.1038/364535a0 7687749
25. Drechsel DA , Patel M . Role of reactive oxygen species in the neurotoxicity of environmental agents implicated in Parkinson’s disease. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008;44 (11 ):1873–1886. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2008.02.008 18342017
26. Ginhoux F , Lim S , Hoeffel G , Low D , Huber T . Origin and differentiation of microglia. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013;7 (MAR ):45. doi:10.3389/fncel.2013.00045 23616747
27. Perry VH , Hume DA , Gordon S . Immunohistochemical localization of macrophages and microglia in the adult and developing mouse brain. Neuroscience. 1985;15 (2 ):313–326. doi:10.1016/0306-4522(85)90215-5 3895031
28. Graeber MB . Changing face of microglia. Science (80- ). 2010;330 (6005 ):783–788. doi:10.1126/science.1190929
29. Lenz KM , Nelson LH . Microglia and beyond: Innate immune cells as regulators of brain development and behavioral function. Front Immunol. 2018;9 (APR ):698. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00698 29706957
30. Paolicelli RC , Bolasco G , Pagani F , Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain development. Science (80- ). 2011;333 (6048 ):1456–1458. doi:10.1126/science.1202529
31. Sierra A , Paolicelli RC , Kettenmann H . Cien Años de Microglía: Milestones in a Century of Microglial Research. Trends Neurosci. 2019;42 (11 ):778–792. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2019.09.004 31635851
32. Ehlers Mana R. , Todd Rebecca M. . Genesis and Maintenance of Attentional Biases: The Role of the Locus Coeruleus-Noradrenaline System. Neural Plast. 2017;1 (1 ):2–3. doi:10.1155/2017
33. Eyo UB , Wu LJ . Microglia: Lifelong patrolling immune cells of the brain. Prog Neurobiol. 2019;179 :101614. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2019.04.003 31075285
34. Engelhardt B . T cell migration into the central nervous system during health and disease: Different molecular keys allow access to different central nervous system compartments. Clin Exp Neuroimmunol. 2010;1 (2 ):79–93. doi:10.1111/j.1759-1961.2010.009.x
35. da Fonseca ACC , Matias D , Garcia C , The impact of microglial activation on blood-brain barrier in brain diseases. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014;8 (November ):1–13. doi:10.3389/fncel.2014.00362 24478626
36. Zenaro E , Piacentino G , Constantin G . The blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2017;107 :41–56. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2016.07.007 27425887
37. Maiuolo J , Gliozzi M , Musolino V , The “frail” brain blood barrier in neurodegenerative diseases: Role of early disruption of endothelial cell-to-cell connections. Int J Mol Sci. 2018;19 (9 ). doi:10.3390/ijms19092693
38. Mendes NF , Pansani AP , Carmanhães ERF , The Blood-Brain Barrier Breakdown During Acute Phase of the Pilocarpine Model of Epilepsy Is Dynamic and Time-Dependent. Front Neurol. 2019;10 :382. doi:10.3389/fneur.2019.00382 31040818
39. Abbott NJ , Friedman A . Overview and introduction: The blood-brain barrier in health and disease. Epilepsia. 2012;53 :1–6. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03696.x
40. Cunningham C , Wilcockson DC , Campion S , Lunnon K , Perry VH . Central and systemic endotoxin challenges exacerbate the local inflammatory response and increase neuronal death during chronic neurodegeneration. J Neurosci. 2005;25 (40 ):9275–9284. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2614-05.2005 16207887
41. Rosenberg GA . Neurological diseases in relation to the blood-brain barrier. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32 (7 ):1139–1151. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2011.197 22252235
42. Cabezas R , Ávila M , Gonzalez J , Astrocytic modulation of blood brain barrier: Perspectives on Parkinson’s disease. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014;8 (AUG ). doi:10.3389/fncel.2014.00211
43. Abbott NJ , Rönnbäck L , Hansson E . Astrocyte-endothelial interactions at the blood-brain barrier. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7 (1 ):41–53. doi:10.1038/nrn1824 16371949
44. Liu CY , Yang Y , Ju WN , Wang X , Zhang HL . Emerging roles of astrocytes in neurovascular unit and the tripartite synapse with emphasis on reactive gliosis in the context of alzheimer’s disease. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018;12 :193. doi:10.3389/fncel.2018.00193 30042661
45. Verkhratsky A , Nedergaard M . Physiology of astroglia. Physiol Rev. 2018;98 (1 ):239–389. doi:10.1152/physrev.00042.2016 29351512
46. Olsen ML , Khakh BS , Skatchkov SN , Zhou M , Lee CJ , Rouach N . New insights on astrocyte ion channels: Critical for homeostasis and neuron-glia signaling. J Neurosci. 2015;35 (41 ):13827–13835. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2603-15.2015 26468182
47. Prebil M , Jensen J , Zorec R , Kreft M . Astrocytes and energy metabolism. Arch Physiol Biochem. 2011;117 (2 ):64–69. doi:10.3109/13813455.2010.539616 21214428
48. Gao HM , Hong JS . Why neurodegenerative diseases are progressive: uncontrolled inflammation drives disease progression. Trends Immunol. 2008;29 (8 ):357–365. doi:10.1016/j.it.2008.05.002 18599350
49. Phatnani H , Maniatis T . Astrocytes in neurodegenerative disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015;7 (6 ):1–18. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a020628
50. Almad A , Maragakis NJ . A stocked toolbox for understanding the role of astrocytes in disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2018;14 (6 ):351–362. doi:10.1038/s41582-018-0010-2 29769699
51. Tang Y , Le W . Differential Roles of M1 and M2 Microglia in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Mol Neurobiol. 2016;53 (2 ):1181–1194. doi:10.1007/s12035-014-9070-5 25598354
52. Zhou T , Huang Z , Sun X , Microglia Polarization with M1/M2 Phenotype Changes in rd1 Mouse Model of Retinal Degeneration. Front Neuroanat. 2017;11 :77. doi:10.3389/fnana.2017.00077 28928639
53. Lull ME , Block ML . Microglial Activation and Chronic Neurodegeneration. Neurotherapeutics. 2010;7 (4 ):354–365. doi:10.1016/j.nurt.2010.05.014 20880500
54. Liddelow SA , Barres BA . Review Reactive Astrocytes: Production, Function, and Therapeutic Potential. 2017. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2017.06.006
55. Liddelow SA , Guttenplan KA , Clarke LE , Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. Nature. 2017;541 (7638 ):481–487. doi:10.1038/nature21029 28099414
56. Yun SP , Kam TI , Panicker N , Block of A1 astrocyte conversion by microglia is neuroprotective in models of Parkinson’s disease. Nat Med. 2018;24 (7 ):931–938. doi:10.1038/s41591-018-0051-5 29892066
57. Putra M , Gage M , Sharma S , Diapocynin, an NADPH oxidase inhibitor, counteracts diisopropylfluorophosphate- induced long- term neurotoxicity in the rat model. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2 2020:nyas.14314. doi:10.1111/nyas.14314
58. Fernández-Arjona M del M , Grondona JM , Granados-Durán P , Fernández-Llebrez P , López-Ávalos MD . Microglia Morphological Categorization in a Rat Model of Neuroinflammation by Hierarchical Cluster and Principal Components Analysis. Front Cell Neurosci. 2017;11 :235. doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00235 28848398
59. Franco R , Fernández-Suárez D . Alternatively activated microglia and macrophages in the central nervous system. Prog Neurobiol. 2015;131 :65–86. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.05.003 26067058
60. Davis BM , Salinas-Navarro M , Cordeiro MF , Moons L , Groef L De. Characterizing microglia activation: A spatial statistics approach to maximize information extraction. Sci Rep. 2017;7 (1 ):1–12. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-01747-8 28127051
61. DePaula-Silva AB , Gorbea C , Doty DJ , Differential transcriptional profiles identify microglial- and macrophage-specific gene markers expressed during virus-induced neuroinflammation. J Neuroinflammation. 2019;16 (1 ):152. doi:10.1186/s12974-019-1545-x 31325960
62. Puttachary S , Sharma S , Verma S , 1400W, a highly selective inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitor is a potential disease modifier in the rat kainate model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis. 2016;93 :184–200. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2016.05.013 27208748
63. Gage M , Golden M , Putra M , Sharma S , Thippeswamy T . Sex as a biological variable in the rat model of diisopropylfluorophosphate- induced long- term neurotoxicity. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2 2020:nyas.14315. doi:10.1111/nyas.14315
64. Putra M , Sharma S , Gage M , Inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, 1400W, mitigates DFP-induced long-term neurotoxicity in the rat model. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;133. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2019.03.031
65. Putra M , Gage M , Sharma S , Diapocynin, an NADPH oxidase inhibitor, counteracts diisopropylfluorophosphate- induced long- term neurotoxicity in the rat model. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2 2020:nyas.14314. doi:10.1111/nyas.14314
66. Gómez-Nicola D , Fransen NL , Suzzi S , Hugh Perry V . Regulation of microglial proliferation during chronic neurodegeneration. J Neurosci. 2013;33 (6 ):2481–2493. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4440-12.2013 23392676
67. Burda JE , Bernstein AM , Sofroniew MV . Astrocyte roles in traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol. 2016;275 (0 3 ):305–315. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.03.020 25828533
68. McLarnon JG . Microglial chemotactic signaling factors in Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Neurodegener Dis. 2012;1 (3 ):199–204.23383392
69. Szepesi Z , Manouchehrian O , Bachiller S , Deierborg T . Bidirectional Microglia–Neuron Communication in Health and Disease. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018;12 :323. doi:10.3389/fncel.2018.00323 30319362
70. Lieu C , Kopetz S . The Src family of protein tyrosine kinases: A new and promising target for colorectal cancer therapy. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2010;9 (2 ):89–94. doi:10.3816/CCC.2010.n.012 20378502
71. Boggon TJ , Eck MJ . Structure and regulation of Src family kinases. Oncogene. 2004;23 (48 REV. ISS. 7 ):7918–7927. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1208081 15489910
72. Okada M Regulation of the Src family kinases by Csk. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8 (10 ):1385–1397. doi:10.7150/ijbs.5141 23139636
73. Kojima N , Ishibashi H , Obata K , Kandel ER . Higher seizure susceptibility and enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2B in fyn transgenic mice. Learn Mem. 1998;5 (6 ):429–445. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10489260. Accessed April 15, 2020.10489260
74. Knox R , Jiang X . Fyn in Neurodevelopment and Ischemic Brain Injury. Dev Neurosci. 2015;37 (4–5 ):311–320. doi:10.1159/000369995 25720756
75. Lu YF , Kojima N , Tomizawa K , Enhanced synaptic transmission and reduced threshold for LTP induction in fyn-transgenic mice. Eur J Neurosci. 1999;11 (1 ):75–82. doi:10.1046/j.1460-9568.1999.00407.x 9987012
76. Nygaard HB , Van Dyck CH , Strittmatter SM . Fyn kinase inhibition as a novel therapy for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Res Ther. 2014;6 (1 ). doi:10.1186/alzrt238
77. Salter MW , Kalia LV . SRC kinases: A hub for NMDA receptor regulation. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5 (4 ):317–328. doi:10.1038/nrn1368 15034556
78. Arnaud L , Ballif BA , Förster E , Cooper JA . Fyn tyrosine kinase is a critical regulator of Disabled-1 during brain development. Curr Biol. 2003;13 (1 ):9–17. doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(02)01397-0 12526739
79. Jin DZ , Mao LM , Wang JQ . An essential role of fyn in the modulation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 in neurons. eNeuro. 2017;4 (4 ). doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0096-17.2017
80. Lu X , Hu X , Song L , The SH2 domain is crucial for function of Fyn in neuronal migration and cortical lamination. BMB Rep. 2015;48 (2 ):97–102. doi:10.5483/BMBRep.2015.48.2.067 24912779
81. Suh YH , Chang K , Roche KW . Metabotropic glutamate receptor trafficking. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2018;91 :10–24. doi:10.1016/j.mcn.2018.03.014 29604330
82. Trepanier CH , Jackson MF , MacDonald JF . Regulation of NMDA receptors by the tyrosine kinase Fyn. FEBS J. 2012;279 (1 ):12–19. doi:10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08391.x 21985328
83. Tezuka T , Umemori H , Akiyama T , Nakanishi S , Yamamoto T . PSD-95 promotes Fyn-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit NR2A. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96 (2 ):435–440. doi:10.1073/pnas.96.2.435 9892651
84. Grant SGN , O’Dell TJ , Karl KA , Stein PL , Soriano P , Kandel ER . Impaired long-term potentiation, spatial learning, and hippocampal development in fyn mutant mice. Science (80- ). 1992;258 (5090 ):1903–1910. doi:10.1126/science.1361685
85. Lee G , Thangavel R , Sharma VM , Phosphorylation of Tau by Fyn: Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease. J Neurosci. 2004;24 (9 ):2304–2312. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4162-03.2004 14999081
86. Ittner LM , Ke YD , Delerue F , Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-β toxicity in alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Cell. 2010;142 (3 ):387–397. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.036 20655099
87. Putra M , Puttachary S , Liu G , Lee G , Thippeswamy T . Fyn-tau Ablation Modifies PTZ-Induced Seizures and Post-seizure Hallmarks of Early Epileptogenesis. Front Cell Neurosci. 2020;14 :592374. doi:10.3389/fncel.2020.592374 33363455
88. Lewerenz J , Maher P . Chronic glutamate toxicity in neurodegenerative diseases-What is the evidence? Front Neurosci. 2015;9 (DEC ):469. doi:10.3389/fnins.2015.00469 26733784
89. Cain DP , Grant SGN , Saucier D , Hargreaves EL , Kandel ER . Fyn tyrosine kinase is required for normal amygdala kindling. Epilepsy Res. 1995;22 (2 ):107–114. doi:10.1016/0920-1211(95)00029-1 8777897
90. Moussa RC , Ikeda-Douglas CJ , Thakur V , Milgram NW , Gurd JW . Seizure activity results in increased tyrosine phosphorylation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor in the hippocampus. Mol Brain Res. 2001;95 (1–2 ):36–47. doi:10.1016/S0169-328X(01)00231-5 11687275
91. Nakazawa T , Komai S , Tezuka T , Characterization of Fyn-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation sites on GluRε2 (NR2B) subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor. J Biol Chem. 2001;276 (1 ):693–699. doi:10.1074/jbc.M008085200 11024032
92. Lambert MP , Barlow AK , Chromy BA , Diffusible, nonfibrillar ligands derived from Aβ1–42 are potent central nervous system neurotoxins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95 (11 ):6448–6453. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.11.6448 9600986
93. Boehm SL , Peden L , Harris RA , Blednov YA . Deletion of the fyn-kinase gene alters sensitivity to GABAergic drugs: Dependence on β2/β3 GABAA receptor subunits. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004;309 (3 ):1154–1159. doi:10.1124/jpet.103.064444 14764659
94. Jurd R , Tretter V , Walker J , Brandon NJ , Moss SJ . Fyn kinase contributes to tyrosine phosphorylation of the GABAA receptor γ2 subunit. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010;44 (2 ):129–134. doi:10.1016/j.mcn.2010.03.002 20233604
95. Hsieh HL , Wang HH , Wu CY , Tung WH , Yang CM . Lipoteichoic acid induces matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression via transactivation of PDGF receptors and NF-kappaB activation in rat brain astrocytes. Neurotox Res. 2010;17 (4 ):344–359. doi:10.1007/s12640-009-9111-4 19763735
96. Kaltschmidt B , Kaltschmidt C . NF-kappaB in the nervous system. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2009;1 (3 ). doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001271
97. Liu T , Zhang L , Joo D , Sun SC . NF-κB signaling in inflammation. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2017;2 :17023. doi:10.1038/sigtrans.2017.23 29158945
98. Shih RH , Wang CY , Yang CM . NF-kappaB signaling pathways in neurological inflammation: A mini review. Front Mol Neurosci. 2015;8 (DEC ). doi:10.3389/fnmol.2015.00077
99. Anrather J , Racchumi G , Iadecola C . NF-κB regulates phagocytic NADPH oxidase by inducing the expression of gp91phox. J Biol Chem. 2006;281 (9 ):5657–5667. doi:10.1074/jbc.M506172200 16407283
100. Socodato R-S , Portugal CC , Domith I , rc function is necessary and sufficient for triggering microglial cell activation. Glia. 2015;63 (3 ):497–511. doi:10.1002/glia.22767 25421817
101. Dhawan G , Combs CK . Inhibition of Src kinase activity attenuates amyloid associated microgliosis in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2012;9 (1 ):563. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-9-117
102. Li Z , Li W , Li Q , Tang M . Extracellular nucleotides and adenosine regulate microglial motility and their role in cerebral ischemia. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2013;3 (4 ):205–212. doi:10.1016/j.apsb.2013.06.003
103. Fan Y , Xie L , Chung CY . Signaling pathways controlling microglia chemotaxis. Mol Cells. 2017;40 (3 ):163–168. doi:10.14348/molcells.2017.0011 28301917
104. Lee SH , Hollingsworth R , Kwon HY , Lee N , Chung CY . β-arrestin 2-dependent activation of ERK1/2 is required for ADP-induced paxillin phosphorylation at Ser83 and microglia chemotaxis. Glia. 2012;60 (9 ):1366–1377. doi:10.1002/glia.22355 22638989
105. Ahluwalia MS , Groot J de , Liu WM , Gladson CL . Targeting SRC in glioblastoma tumors and brain metastases: Rationale and preclinical studies. Cancer Lett. 2010;298 (2 ):139–149. doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2010.08.014 20947248
106. Wang JYJ . The capable ABL: what is its biological function? Mol Cell Biol. 2014;34 (7 ):1188–1197. doi:10.1128/MCB.01454-13 24421390
107. Chong YP , Chan AS , Chan KC , C-terminal Src kinase-homologous kinase (CHK), a unique inhibitor inactivating multiple active conformations of Src family tyrosine kinases. J Biol Chem. 2006;281 (44 ):32988–32999. doi:10.1074/jbc.M602951200 16959780
108. Chong YP , Mulhern TD , Cheng HC . C-terminal Src kinase (CSK) and CSK-homologous kinase (CHK) - Endogenous negative regulators of Src-family protein kinases. Growth Factors. 2005;23 (3 ):233–244. doi:10.1080/08977190500178877 16243715
109. Ölgen S , Isgör YG , Çoban T . Synthesis and activity of novel 5-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine analogues as pp60c-Src tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Arch Pharm (Weinheim). 2008;341 (2 ):113–120. doi:10.1002/ardp.200700141 18214841
110. Breen ME , Steffey ME , Lachacz EJ , Kwarcinski FE , Fox CC , Soellner MB . Substrate activity screening with kinases: Discovery of small-molecule substrate-competitive c-Src inhibitors. Angew Chemie - Int Ed. 2014;53 (27 ):7010–7013. doi:10.1002/anie.201311096
111. Shim HJ , Kim HI , Lee ST . The associated pyrazolopyrimidines PP1 and PP2 inhibit protein tyrosine kinase 6 activity and suppress breast cancer cell proliferation. Oncol Lett. 2017;13 (3 ):1463–1469. doi:10.3892/ol.2017.5564 28454278
112. Araujo J , Logothetis C . Dasatinib: A potent SRC inhibitor in clinical development for the treatment of solid tumors. Cancer Treat Rev. 2010;36 (6 ):492–500. doi:10.1016/j.ctrv.2010.02.015 20226597
113. Kantarjian H , O’Brien S , Cortes J , Analysis of the impact of imatinib mesylate therapy on the prognosis of patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia treated with interferon-alpha regimens for early chronic phase. Cancer. 2003;98 (7 ):1430–1437. doi:10.1002/cncr.11665 14508830
114. Lindauer M , Hochhaus A . Dasatinib. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2015;201 :27–65. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-54490-3_2
115. Schiff D . Jann S . Dasatinib in recurrent glioblastoma: failure as a teacher. Neuro Oncol. 2015;17 (7 ):910–911. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5762007/. Accessed May 27, 2020.25964312
116. Shah NP , Wallis N , Farber HW , Clinical features of pulmonary arterial hypertension in patients receiving dasatinib. Am J Hematol. 2015;90 (11 ):1060–1064. doi:10.1002/ajh.24174 26284693
117. Waller CF . Imatinib Mesylate. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2010;184 :3–20. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-01222-8_1 20072827
118. Mittapalli RK , Chung AH , Parrish KE , ABCG2 and ABCB1 limit the efficacy of dasatinib in a PDGF-B-driven brainstem glioma model. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016;15 (5 ):819–829. doi:10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0093 26883271
119. Kast RE , Focosi D . Three paths to better tyrosine kinase inhibition behind the blood-brain barrier in treating chronic myelogenous leukemia and glioblastoma with imatinib. Transl Oncol. 2010;3 (1 ):13–15. doi:10.1593/tlo.09280 20165690
120. Tyryshkin A , Bhattacharya A , Eissa NT . Src kinase is a novel therapeutic target in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Cancer Res. 2014;74 (7 ):1996–2005. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1256 24691995
121. Minami SS , Clifford TG , Hoe HS , Matsuoka Y , Rebeck GW . Fyn knock-down increases Aβ, decreases phospho-tau, and worsens spatial learning in 3×Tg-AD mice. Neurobiol Aging. 2012;33 (4 ):825.e15–825.e24. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.05.014
122. Stein PL , Vogel H , Soriano P . Combined deficiencies of src, fyn, and yes tyrosine kinases in mutant mice. Genes Dev. 1994;8 (17 ):1999–2007. doi:10.1101/gad.8.17.1999 7958873
123. Huerta PT , Scearce KA , Farris SM , Empson RM , Prusky GT . Preservation of spatial learning in fyn tyrosine kinase knockout mice. Neuroreport. 1996;7 (10 ):1685–1689. doi:10.1097/00001756-199607080-00032 8904782
124. Kaufman AC , Salazar SV ., Haas LT , Fyn inhibition rescues established memory and synapse loss in Alzheimer mice. Ann Neurol. 2015;77 (6 ):953–971. doi:10.1002/ana.24394 25707991
125. Yang H , Wang L , Zang C , Src Inhibition Attenuates Neuroinflammation and Protects Dopaminergic Neurons in Parkinson’s Disease Models. Front Neurosci. 2020;14 :45. doi:10.3389/fnins.2020.00045 32132891
126. Galanis E , Anderson SK , Twohy EL , A phase 1 and randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2 trial of bevacizumab plus dasatinib in patients with recurrent glioblastoma: Alliance/North Central Cancer Treatment Group N0872. Cancer. 2019;125 (21 ):3790–3800. doi:10.1002/cncr.32340 31290996
127. Cortes JE , Jiang Q , Wang J , Dasatinib vs. imatinib in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase (CML-CP) who have not achieved an optimal response to 3 months of imatinib therapy: the DASCERN randomized study. Leukemia. 4 2020:1–10. doi:10.1038/s41375-020-0805-1
128. Huang X , Jiang Q , Hu J , Long-Term Safety of Dasatinib in Chinese Chronic Phase Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Patients with Imatinib-Resistance or -Intolerance: Results from a 6-Year Follow-up of a Multicenter Phase II Study. Blood. 2016;128 (22 ):1928–1928. doi:10.1182/blood.v128.22.1928.1928 27554085
129. Lassman AB , Pugh SL , Gilbert MR , Aldape KD , Geinoz S , Buemer JH , Christner SM , Ritsuko R , DeAngelis LM , Gaur R , Yossef E , Wagner H , Won M , Mehta M Phase 2 trial of dasatinib in target-selected patients with recurrent glioblastoma (RTOG 0627). Neuro Oncol. 2015;17 (7 ):992–998.25758746
130. Chamoun K , Rabinovich E , Baer L , Fastenau P , Lima M de . A case of neurocognitive deficit strongly related to dasatinib therapy. Hematol Transfus Cell Ther. 2020;42 (1 ):80–82. doi:10.1016/j.htct.2019.01.003 31053490
131. Baselga J , Cervantes A , Martinelli E , Phase I safety, pharmacokinetics, and inhibition of src activity study of saracatinib in patients with solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16 (19 ):4876–4883. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0748 20805299
132. Fujisaka Y , Onozawa Y , Kurata T , First report of the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of the Src kinase inhibitor saracatinib (AZD0530) in Japanese patients with advanced solid tumours. Invest New Drugs. 2013;31 (1 ):108–114. doi:10.1007/s10637-012-9809-7 22415795
133. Nygaard HB , Wagner AF , Bowen GS , A phase Ib multiple ascending dose study of the safety, tolerability, and central nervous system availability of AZD0530 (saracatinib) in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Res Ther. 2015;7 (1 ). doi:10.1186/s13195-015-0119-0
134. Mattson MP , Camandola S . NF-κB in neuronal plasticity and neurodegenerative disorders. J Clin Invest. 2001;107 (3 ):247–254. doi:10.1172/JCI11916 11160145
135. Hatano E , Bennett BL , Manning AM , Qian T , Lemasters JJ , Brenner DA . NF-kappaB stimulates inducible nitric oxide synthase to protect mouse hepatocytes from TNF-a. Gastroenterology. 120 (5 ):1251–1262.
136. Srinivasan M , Lahiri DK . Significance of NF-κB as a pivotal therapeutic target in the neurodegenerative pathologies of Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2015;19 (4 ):471–487. doi:10.1517/14728222.2014.989834 25652642
137. Mattson MP , Meffert MK . Roles for NF-κB in nerve cell survival, plasticity, and disease. Cell Death Differ. 2006;13 (5 ):852–860. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4401837 16397579
138. Sonar SA , Lal G . The iNOS Activity During an Immune Response Controls the CNS Pathology in Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis. Front Immunol. 2019;10 (APR ):710. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00710 31019516
139. Matrone C , Pignataro G , Molinaro P , HIF-1α reveals a binding activity to the promoter of iNOS gene after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. J Neurochem. 2004;90 (2 ):368–378. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02483.x 15228594
140. Beest V . Statin users risk heart attacks by dropping treatment or taking l ow doses Doctors must emphasise importance of compl ying with treatment say researchers. Heart. 2006;91 (December ):250–256. doi:10.1093/eurheartj
141. Ghafourifar P , Richter C . Nitric oxide synthase activity in mitochondria. FEBS Lett. 1997;418 (3 ):291–296. doi:10.1016/s0014-5793(97)01397-5 9428730
142. Xian M , Fujiwara N , Wen Z , Novel substrates for nitric oxide synthases. Bioorg Med Chem. 2002;10 (9 ):3049–3055. doi:10.1016/s0968-0896(02)00155-4 12110328
143. Forstermann U , Sessa W Nitric Oxide Synthases: Regulation and Function. Eur Heart J. 2012;33 (7 ):829–837. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehr304 21890489
144. Walker G , Pfeilschifter J , Kunz D . Mechanisms of suppression of inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS) expression in interferon (IFN)-γ-stimulated RAW 264.7 cells by dexamethasone. Evidence for glucocorticoid-induced degradation of iNOS protein by calpain as a key step in post-transcriptional regulation. J Biol Chem. 1997;272 (26 ):16679–16687. doi:10.1074/jbc.272.26.16679 9195984
145. Knott AB , Bossy-Wetzel E . Nitric oxide in health and disease of the nervous system. Antioxidants Redox Signal. 2009;11 (3 ):541–553. doi:10.1089/ars.2008.2234
146. Sharma S , Puttachary S , Thippeswamy T . Glial source of nitric oxide in epileptogenesis: A target for disease modification in epilepsy. J Neurosci Res. 12 2017. doi:10.1002/jnr.24205
147. Fuentes E , Gibbins JM , Holbrook LM , Palomo I . NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2): A key target of oxidative stress-mediated platelet activation and thrombosis. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2018;28 (7 ):429–434. doi:10.1016/j.tcm.2018.03.001 29661712
148. Sharma S , Puttachary S , Thippeswamy T . Glial source of nitric oxide in epileptogenesis: A target for disease modification in epilepsy. J Neurosci Res. 2019;97 (11 ):1363–1377. doi:10.1002/jnr.24205 29230865
149. Raad H , Paclet MH , Boussetta T , Regulation of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase activity: Phosphorylation of gp91phox/NOX2 by protein kinase C enhances its diaphorase activity and binding to Rac2, p67phox, and p47phox. FASEB J. 2009;23 (4 ):1011–1022. doi:10.1096/fj.08-114553 19028840
150. Panday A , Sahoo MK , Osorio D , Batra S . NADPH oxidases: An overview from structure to innate immunity-associated pathologies. Cell Mol Immunol. 2015;12 (1 ):5–23. doi:10.1038/cmi.2014.89 25263488
151. Cooney SJ , Bermudez-Sabogal SL , Byrnes KR . Cellular and temporal expression of NADPH oxidase (NOX) isotypes after brain injury. J Neuroinflammation. 2013;10 (1 ):155. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-10-155 24344836
152. Zhang L , Wu J , Duan X , NADPH Oxidase: A Potential Target for Treatment of Stroke. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2016;2016 . doi:10.1155/2016/5026984
153. Ansari MA , Scheff SW . NADPH-oxidase activation and cognition in Alzheimer disease progression. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011;51 (1 ):171–178. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.03.025 21457777
154. Tannich F , Tlili A , Pintard C , Activation of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase/NOX2 and myeloperoxidase in the mouse brain during pilocarpine-induced temporal lobe epilepsy and inhibition by ketamine. Inflammopharmacology. 2020;28 (2 ):487–497. doi:10.1007/s10787-019-00655-9 31667656
155. Belarbi K , Cuvelier E , Destée A , Gressier B , Chartier-Harlin MC . NADPH oxidases in Parkinson’s disease: A systematic review. Mol Neurodegener. 2017;12 (1 ):1–18. doi:10.1186/s13024-017-0225-5 28049533
156. Ma MW , Wang J , Dhandapani KM , Wang R , Brann DW . NADPH oxidases in traumatic brain injury – Promising therapeutic targets? Redox Biol. 2018;16 :285–293. doi:10.1016/j.redox.2018.03.005 29571125
157. Lubos E , Loscalzo J , Handy DE . Glutathione peroxidase-1 in health and disease: From molecular mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Antioxidants Redox Signal. 2011;15 (7 ):1957–1997. doi:10.1089/ars.2010.3586
158. Zitka O , Skalickova S , Gumulec J , Redox status expressed as GSH:GSSG ratio as a marker for oxidative stress in paediatric tumour patients. Oncol Lett. 2012;4 (6 ):1247–1253. doi:10.3892/ol.2012.931 23205122
159. Aoyama K , Nakaki T . Impaired glutathione synthesis in neurodegeneration. Int J Mol Sci. 2013;14 (10 ):21021–21044. doi:10.3390/ijms141021021 24145751
160. Schulz JB , Lindenau J , Seyfried J , Dichgans J . Glutathione, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. Eur J Biochem. 2000;267 (16 ):4904–4911. doi:10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01595.x 10931172
161. Johnson WM , Wilson-Delfosse AL , Mieyal JJ . Dysregulation of glutathione homeostasis in neurodegenerative diseases. Nutrients. 2012;4 (10 ):1399–1440. doi:10.3390/nu4101399 23201762
162. Tonelli C , Chio IIC , Tuveson DA . Transcriptional Regulation by Nrf2. Antioxidants Redox Signal. 2018;29 (17 ):1727–1745. doi:10.1089/ars.2017.7342
163. Mcwalter G Higgins L , Mclellan LI , Henderson CJ , Song L , Thornalley PJ , Itoh K , Yamamoto M , Hayes JD . Transcription Factor Nrf2 Is Essential for Induction of NAD(P)H:Quinone Oxidoreductase 1, Glutathione S-Transferases, and Glutamate Cysteine Ligase by Broccoli Seeds and Isothiocyanates. J Nutr. 2004;134 (12 ):3499S–3506S. doi:10.1093/jn/134.12.3499S 15570060
164. Branca C , Ferreira E , Nguyen T-V , Doyle K , Caccamo A , Oddo S . Genetic reduction of Nrf2 exacerbates cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Hum Mol Genet. 2017;26 (24 ):4823–4835. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddx361 29036636
165. Ma Q . Role of Nrf2 in Oxidative Stress and Toxicity. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2013;53 (1 ):401–426. doi:10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-011112-140320 23294312
166. Kaspar JW , Jaiswal AK . Tyrosine phosphorylation controls nuclear export of Fyn, allowing Nrf2 activation of cytoprotective gene expression. FASEB J. 2011;25 (3 ):1076–1087. doi:10.1096/fj.10-171553 21097520
167. Ray PD , Huang BW , Tsuji Y . Reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis and redox regulation in cellular signaling. Cell Signal. 2012;24 (5 ):981–990. doi:10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.01.008 22286106
168. Mittler R . ROS Are Good. Trends Plant Sci. 2017;22 (1 ):11–19. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2016.08.002 27666517
169. Lind M , Hayes A , Caprnda M , Inducible nitric oxide synthase: Good or bad? Biomed Pharmacother. 2017;93 :370–375. doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2017.06.036 28651238
170. Garry PS , Ezra M , Rowland MJ , Westbrook J , Pattinson KTS . The role of the nitric oxide pathway in brain injury and its treatment - From bench to bedside. Exp Neurol. 2015;263 :235–243. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.10.017 25447937
171. Burney S , Caulfield JL , Niles JC , Wishnok JS , Tannenbaum SR . The chemistry of DNA damage from nitric oxide and peroxynitrite. Mutat Res. 1999;424 (1–2 ):37–49. doi:10.1016/s0027-5107(99)00006-8 10064848
172. Pérez-Asensio FJ , Hurtado O , Burguete MC , Inhibition of iNOS activity by 1400W decreases glutamate release and ameliorates stroke outcome after experimental ischemia. Neurobiol Dis. 2005;18 (2 ):375–384. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2004.10.018 15686966
173. Ahn J-Y . Neuroprotection Signaling of Nuclear Akt in Neuronal Cells. Exp Neurobiol. 2014;23 (3 ):200–206. doi:10.5607/en.2014.23.3.200 25258566
174. Kwak YD , Ma T , Diao S , NO signaling and S-nitrosylation regulate PTEN inhibition in neurodegeneration. Mol Neurodegener. 2010;5 (1 ):49. doi:10.1186/1750-1326-5-49 21067594
175. Qu J , Nakamura T , Holland EA , McKercher SR , Lipton SA . S-nitrosylation of Cdk5: Potential implications in amyloid-β-related neurotoxicity in Alzheimer disease. Prion. 2012;6 (4 ):364–370. doi:10.4161/pri.21250 22874667
176. Nakamura T , Tu S , Akhtar MW , Sunico CR , Okamoto S ichi, Lipton SA. Aberrant Protein S-nitrosylation in neurodegenerative diseases. Neuron. 2013;78 (4 ):596–614. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.005 23719160
177. Mukherjee P , Cinelli MA , Kang S , Silverman RB . Development of nitric oxide synthase inhibitors for neurodegeneration and neuropathic pain. Chem Soc Rev. 2014;43 (19 ):6814–6838. doi:10.1039/c3cs60467e 24549364
178. Janakiram NB , Rao CV . INOS-selective inhibitors for cancer prevention: Promise and progress. Future Med Chem. 2012;4 (17 ):2193–2204. doi:10.4155/fmc.12.168 23190107
179. Víteček J , Lojek A , Valacchi G , Kubala L . Arginine-based inhibitors of nitric oxide synthase: therapeutic potential and challenges. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012 :318087. doi:10.1155/2012/318087 22988346
180. Kopincová J , Púzserová A , Bernátová I . L-NAME in the cardiovascular system - Nitric oxide synthase activator? Pharmacol Reports. 2012;64 (3 ):511–520. doi:10.1016/S1734-1140(12)70846-0
181. Peterson DA , Peterson DC , Archer S , Weir EK . The non specificity of specific nitric oxide synthase inhibitors. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992;187 (2 ):797–801. doi:10.1016/0006-291X(92)91266-S 1382421
182. Liu T , Zhang M , Mukosera GT , L-NAME releases nitric oxide and potentiates subsequent nitroglycerin-mediated vasodilation. Redox Biol. 2019;26 . doi:10.1016/j.redox.2019.101238
183. Corbett JA , McDaniel ML . The use of aminoguanidine, a selective iNOS inhibitor, to evaluate the role of nitric oxide in the development of autoimmune diabetes. Methods A Companion to Methods Enzymol. 1996;10 (1 ):21–30. doi:10.1006/meth.1996.0074
184. Hou FF , Boyce J , Chertow GM , Kay J , Owen WF . Aminoguanidine inhibits advanced glycation end products formation on β2-microglobulin. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1998;9 (2 ):277–283.9527404
185. Garvey EP , Oplinger JA , Furfine ES , 1400W is a slow, tight binding, and highly selective inhibitor of inducible nitric-oxide synthase in vitro and in vivo. J Biol Chem. 1997;272 (8 ):4959–4963. doi:10.1074/JBC.272.8.4959 9030556
186. Dover AR , Chia S , Ferguson JW , Inducible nitric oxide synthase activity does not contribute to the maintenance of peripheral vascular tone in patients with heart failure. Clin Sci. 2006;111 (4 ):275–280. doi:10.1042/CS20060104
187. Ferguson JW , Dover AR , Chia S , Cruden NLM , Hayes PC , Newby DE . Inducible nitric oxide synthase activity contributes to the regulation of peripheral vascular tone in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Gut. 2006;55 (4 ):542–546. doi:10.1136/gut.2005.076562 16299035
188. Zhu Y , Nikolic D , Van Breemen RB , Silverman RB . Mechanism of inactivation of inducible nitric oxide synthase by amidines. Irreversible enzyme inactivation without inactivator modification. J Am Chem Soc. 2005;127 (3 ):858–868. doi:10.1021/ja0445645 15656623
189. Bretscher LE , Li H , Poulos TL , Griffith OW . Structural Characterization and Kinetics of Nitric-oxide Synthase Inhibition by Novel N5-(Iminoalkyl)- and N 5-(Iminoalkenyl)-ornithines. J Biol Chem. 2003;278 (47 ):46789–46797. doi:10.1074/jbc.M306787200 12960153
190. Nogawa S , Forster C , Zhang F , Nagayama M , Ross ME , Iadecola C . Interaction between inducible nitric oxide synthase and cyclooxygenase-2 after cerebral ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95 (18 ):10966–10971. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.18.10966 9724813
191. Sharma B , Singh N . Pharmacological inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase, convalesce behavior and biochemistry of hypertension induced vascular dementia in rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2013;103 (4 ):821–830. doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2012.11.011 23201648
192. Broom L , Marinova-Mutafchieva L , Sadeghian M , Davis JB , Medhurst AD , Dexter DT . Neuroprotection by the selective iNOS inhibitor GW274150 in a model of Parkinson disease. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011;50 (5 ):633–640. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.12.026 21185368
193. Cosgrave AS , McKay JS , Bubb V , Morris R , Quinn JP , Thippeswamy T . Regulation of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) by the NO-cGMP pathway in the hippocampus during kainic acid-induced seizure. Neurobiol Dis. 2008;30 (3 ):281–292. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2008.02.005 18375135
194. Beamer E , Otahal J , Sills GJ , Thippeswamy T . N w-Propyl-l-arginine (L-NPA) reduces status epilepticus and early epileptogenic events in a mouse model of epilepsy: behavioural, EEG and immunohistochemical analyses. Eur J Neurosci. 2012;36 (9 ):3194–3203. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08234.x 22943535
195. Rehni AK , Singh TG , Kalra R , Singh N . Pharmacological inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase attenuates the development of seizures in mice. Nitric Oxide - Biol Chem. 2009;21 (2 ):120–125. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2009.06.001
196. Tse K , Hammond D , Simpson D , The impact of postsynaptic density 95 blocking peptide (Tat-NR2B9c) and an iNOS inhibitor (1400W) on proteomic profile of the hippocampus in C57BL/6J mouse model of kainate-induced epileptogenesis. J Neurosci Res. 2019;97 (11 ):1378–1392. doi:10.1002/jnr.24441 31090233
197. Jarvinen K . Vuolteenaho K ., Nieminen R . Moilanen T . Knowles RGME . Selective iNOS inhibitor 1400W enhances anti-catabolic IL-10 and reduces destructive MMP-10 in OA cartilage. Survey of the effects of 1400W on inflammatory mediators produced by OA cartilage as detected by protein antibody arra. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2008;26 (2 ):275–282.18565249
198. Staunton CA , Barrett-Jolley R , Djouhri L , Thippeswamy T . Inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibition by 1400W limits pain hypersensitivity in a neuropathic pain rat model. Exp Physiol. 2018;103 (4 ):535–544. doi:10.1113/EP086764 29441689
199. Putra M , Sharma S , Gage M , Inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, 1400W, mitigates DFP-induced long-term neurotoxicity in the rat model. Neurobiol Dis. 3 2019. doi:10.1016/J.NBD.2019.03.031
200. Barua A , Standen NB , Galĩanes M . Dual role of nNOS in ischemic injury and preconditioning. BMC Physiol. 2010;10 (1 ):15. doi:10.1186/1472-6793-10-15 20707900
201. Talukder MAH , Yang F , Shimokawa H , Zweier JL . eNOS is required for acute in vivo ischemic preconditioning of the heart: effects of ischemic duration and sex. Am J Physiol Circ Physiol. 2010;299 (2 ):H437–H445. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00384.2010
202. Murillo D , Kamga C , Mo L , Shiva S . Nitrite as a mediator of ischemic preconditioning and cytoprotection In: Nitric Oxide - Biology and Chemistry. Vol 25 Nitric Oxide; 2011:70–80. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2011.01.003 21277988
203. Tegtmeier F , Schinzel R , Beer R , Efficacy of Ronopterin (VAS203) in Patients with Moderate and Severe Traumatic Brain Injury (NOSTRA phase III trial): study protocol of a confirmatory, placebo-controlled, randomised, double blind, multi-centre study. Trials. 2020;21 (1 ):80. doi:10.1186/s13063-019-3965-4 31937347
204. Stover JF , Belli A , Boret H , Nitric oxide synthase inhibition with the antipterin VAS203 improves outcome in moderate and severe traumatic brain injury: A placebo-controlled randomized phase iia trial (NOSTRA). J Neurotrauma. 2014;31 (19 ):1599–1606. doi:10.1089/neu.2014.3344 24831445
205. Levin J . Vasopharm Reports Endorsement of Phase III Trial Design in Traumatic Brain Injury by European Medicines Agency. FierceBiotech. 2013.
206. Chen Y , Brennan-Minnella AM , Sheth S , El-Benna J , Swanson RA . Tat-NR2B9c prevents excitotoxic neuronal superoxide production. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015;35 (5 ):739–742. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2015.16 25669908
207. Hill MD , Martin RH , Mikulis D , Safety and efficacy of NA-1 in patients with iatrogenic stroke after endovascular aneurysm repair (ENACT): A phase 2, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11 (11 ):942–950. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70225-9 23051991
208. Ballarin B , Tymianski M . Discovery and development of NA-1 for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2018;39 (5 ):661–668. doi:10.1038/aps.2018.5 29565039
209. Prado CM , Martins MA , Tibério IFLC . Nitric Oxide in Asthma Physiopathology. ISRN Allergy. 2011;2011 . doi:10.5402/2011/832560
210. Brindicci C , Ito K , Torre O , Barnes PJ , Kharitonov SA . Effects of aminoguanidine, an inhibitor of inducible nitric oxide synthase, on nitric oxide production and its metabolites in healthy control subjects, healthy smokers, and COPD patients. Chest. 2009;135 (2 ):353–367. doi:10.1378/chest.08-0964 18719059
211. Hansel TT , Kharitonov SA , Donnelly LE , A selective inhibitor of inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibits exhaled breath nitric oxide in healthy volunteers and asthmatics. FASEB J. 2003;17 (10 ):1298–1300. doi:10.1096/fj.02-0633fje 12738811
212. Singh D , Richards D , Knowles RG , Selective inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibition has no effect on allergen challenge in asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;176 (10 ):988–993. doi:10.1164/rccm.200704-588OC 17717202
213. Barua S , Kim JY , Yenari MA , Lee JE . The role of NOX inhibitors in neurodegenerative diseases. IBRO Reports. 2019;7 :59–69. doi:10.1016/j.ibror.2019.07.1721 31463415
214. Diebold BA , Smith SME , Li Y , Lambeth JD . NOX2 as a target for drug development: Indications, possible complications, and progress. Antioxidants Redox Signal. 2015;23 (5 ):375–405. doi:10.1089/ars.2014.5862
215. Beukelman CJ , van den Worm E , Henriette C , van Ufford Q , Kroes , van den BAJJ BH . Discovery of new anti-inflammatory drugs from plant origins. Ann gastroenterolgy. 2002;15 (4 ):320–323.
216. Wang Q , Smith RE , Luchtefeld R , Bioavailability of apocynin through its conversion to glycoconjugate but not to diapocynin. Phytomedicine. 2008;15 (6–7 ):496–503. doi:10.1016/j.phymed.2007.09.019 17977702
217. Marín M , Gimeno C , Giner RM , Ríos JL , Máñez S , Recio MC . Influence of Dimerization of Apocynin on Its Effects in Experimental Colitis. J Agric Food Chem. 2017;65 (20 ):4083–4091. doi:10.1021/acs.jafc.7b00872 28485605
218. Macías-Pérez ME , Martínez-Ramos F , Padilla-Martínez II , Ethers and esters derived from apocynin avoid the interaction between p47phox and p22phox subunits of NADPH oxidase: Evaluation in vitro and in silico. Biosci Rep. 2013;33 (4 ):605–616. doi:10.1042/BSR20130029
219. Ghosh A , Kanthasamy A , Joseph J , Anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects of an orally active apocynin derivative in pre-clinical models of Parkinson’s disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2012;9 (1 ):711. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-9-241
220. Jin H , Kanthasamy A , Ghosh A , Anantharam V , Kalyanaraman B , Kanthasamy AG . Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants for treatment of Parkinson’s disease: Preclinical and clinical outcomes. Biochim Biophys Acta - Mol Basis Dis. 2014;1842 (8 ):1282–1294. doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.09.007
221. Ghosh A , Langley MR , Harischandra DS , Mitoapocynin Treatment Protects Against Neuroinflammation and Dopaminergic Neurodegeneration in a Preclinical Animal Model of Parkinson’s Disease. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2016;11 (2 ):259–278. doi:10.1007/s11481-016-9650-4 26838361
222. Langley M , Ghosh A , Charli A , Mito-Apocynin Prevents Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Microglial Activation, Oxidative Damage, and Progressive Neurodegeneration in MitoPark Transgenic Mice. Antioxidants Redox Signal. 2017;27 (14 ):1048–1066. doi:10.1089/ars.2016.6905
223. Lambert AJ , Buckingham JA , Boysen HM , Brand MD . Diphenyleneiodonium acutely inhibits reactive oxygen species production by mitochondrial complex I during reverse, but not forward electron transport. Biochim Biophys Acta - Bioenerg. 2008;1777 (5 ):397–403. doi:10.1016/j.bbabio.2008.03.005
224. Augsburger F , Filippova A , Rasti D , Pharmacological characterization of the seven human NOX isoforms and their inhibitors. Redox Biol. 2019;26 . doi:10.1016/j.redox.2019.101272
225. Huang WY , Lin S , Chen HY , NADPH oxidases as potential pharmacological targets against increased seizure susceptibility after systemic inflammation. J Neuroinflammation. 2018;15 (1 ). doi:10.1186/s12974-018-1186-5
226. Shekh-Ahmad T , Lieb A , Kovac S , Combination antioxidant therapy prevents epileptogenesis and modifies chronic epilepsy. Redox Biol. 2019;26 :101278. doi:10.1016/j.redox.2019.101278 31382215
227. Stefanska J , Sarniak A , Wlodarczyk A , Apocynin reduces reactive oxygen species concentrations in exhaled breath condensate in asthmatics. Exp Lung Res. 2012;38 (2 ):90–99. doi:10.3109/01902148.2011.649823 22296407
228. Peters EA , Hiltermann JTN , Stolk J . Effect of apocynin on ozone-induced airway hyperresponsiveness to methacholine in asthmatics. Free Radic Biol Med. 2001;31 (11 ):1442–1447. doi:10.1016/S0891-5849(01)00725-0 11728816
229. DuPont JJ , Ramick MG , Farquhar WB , Townsend RR , Edwards DG . NADPH oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species contribute to impaired cutaneous microvascular function in chronic kidney disease. Am J Physiol - Ren Physiol. 2014;306 (12 ):F1499. doi:10.1152/ajprenal.00058.2014
230. Dalekos G , Invernizzi P , Nevens F , GS-02-Efficacy of GKT831 in patients with primary biliary cholangitis and inadequate response to ursodeoxycholic acid: Interim efficacy results of a phase 2 clinical trial. J Hepatol. 2019;70 (1 ):e1–e2. doi:10.1016/s0618-8278(19)30002-7
231. Kim JY , Park J , Lee JE , Yenari MA . NOX inhibitors - A promising avenue for ischemic stroke. Exp Neurobiol. 2017;26 (4 ):195–205. doi:10.5607/en.2017.26.4.195 28912642
232. Cotgreave IA , Duddy SK , Kass GEN , Thompson D , Moldéus P . Studies on the anti-inflammatory activity of ebselen. Ebselen interferes with granulocyte oxidative burst by dual inhibition of nadph oxidase and protein kinase C? Biochem Pharmacol. 1989;38 (4 ):649–656. doi:10.1016/0006-2952(89)90211-6 2537084
233. Yamaguchi T , Sano K , Takakura K , Ebselen in Acute Ischemic Stroke. Stroke. 1998;29 (1 ):12–17. doi:10.1161/01.STR.29.1.12 9445321
234. Azad GK , Tomar RS . Ebselen, a promising antioxidant drug: Mechanisms of action and targets of biological pathways. Mol Biol Rep. 2014;41 (8 ):4865–4879. doi:10.1007/s11033-014-3417-x 24867080
235. Feigin VL , Nichols E , Alam T , Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Neurol. 2019;18 (5 ):459–480. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30499-X 30879893
236. Dagdeviren M . Role of Nitric Oxide Synthase in Normal Brain Function and Pathophysiology of Neural Diseases. In: Nitric Oxide Synthase - Simple Enzyme-Complex Roles. InTech; 2017. doi:10.5772/67267
237. Thippeswamy T , McKay JS , Quinn JP , Morris R . Nitric oxide, a biological double-faced janus- Is this good or bad? Histol Histopathol. 2006;21 (4–6 ):445–458. doi:10.14670/HH-21.445 16437390
