LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8100437
6047
Neurobiol Aging
Neurobiol Aging
Neurobiology of aging
0197-4580
1558-1497

31948671
7961845
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.12.014
NIHMS1569487
Article
Impact of BDNF and sex on maintaining intact memory function in early midlife
Konishi Kyoko 1
Cherkerzian Sara 2
Aroner Sarah 1
Jacobs Emily G. 3
Rentz Dorene M. 45
Remington Anne 1
Aizley Harlyn 1
Hornig Mady 6
Klibanski Anne 7
Goldstein Jill M. 189
1 Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School
2 Department of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital*
3 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara*
4 Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
5 Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School
6 Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health
7 Neuroendocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School
8 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School
9 Division of Women’s Health, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Corresponding Author: Jill M. Goldstein, Ph.D., Innovation Center on Sex Differences in Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Simches Suite 2000 Rm 2.298, Boston, MA, 02114, jill_goldstein@hms.harvard.edu
* Work was conducted when Drs. Cherkerzian and Jacobs were in Department of Medicine, Division of Women’s Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital

7 3 2020
24 12 2019
4 2020
01 4 2021
88 137149
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Sex steroid hormones and neurotrophic factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), play a significant neuroprotective role in memory circuitry aging. Here, we present findings characterizing the neuroprotective effects of BDNF on memory performance, as a function of sex and reproductive status in women. Participants (N=191; mean age=50.03±2.10) underwent clinical and cognitive testing, fMRI scanning, and hormonal assessments of menopausal staging. Memory performance was assessed with the 6-Trial Selective Reminding Test and the Face-Name Associative Memory Exam. Participants also performed a working memory (WM) N-back task during fMRI scanning. Results revealed significant interactions between menopausal status and BDNF levels. Only in postmenopausal women, lower plasma BDNF levels were associated with significantly worse memory performance and altered function in the WM circuitry. BDNF had no significant impact on memory performance or WM function in pre/perimenopausal women or men. These results suggest that in postmenopausal women, BDNF is associated with memory performance and memory circuitry function, thus providing evidence of potential sex-dependent factors of risk and resilience for early intervention.

BDNF
Memory
Menopause
Aging
Sex differences
Hormones

1. Introduction

Faced with a rapidly aging population, cognitive deficits will become increasingly prevalent. Understanding factors contributing to memory impairment is crucial for the early prevention of memory decline. Men and women undergo different aging processes, especially in early midlife. In addition to chronological aging, women undergo reproductive aging, during which they experience a depletion of sex steroid hormones such as estradiol, which we previously demonstrated is directly related to decreased memory performance and reorganization of functional memory circuitries (Jacobs et al., 2016a; Jacobs et al., 2016b; Rentz et al., 2016). The hippocampus (HIPP), a key region in the memory circuitry, is highly sexually dimorphic (Goldstein et al., 2001; Persson et al., 2014; Woolley and McEwen, 1993) and one of the few brain regions that continue to undergo neurogenesis with aging (Eriksson et al., 1998), albeit at a reduced rate (Kempermann et al., 1998). Sex steroid hormones and neurotrophic factors, such as the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), play a significant neuroprotective role in memory circuitry aging through mechanisms of neurogenesis, cellular survival, axonal growth, dendritic growth, and synaptic plasticity (Brinton, 2009; Figurov et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2008; Ormerod et al., 2004; Scharfman et al., 2005; Tanapat et al., 1999; Tyler and Pozzo-Miller, 2003; Warren et al., 1995; Woolley and McEwen, 1994). However, despite growing evidence of this neuroprotective role, little is known about the sex-dependent role that BDNF plays on memory circuitry aging in the face of reproductive aging and ovarian function decline.

There is a long history of preclinical evidence demonstrating the role of estradiol in HIPP structure and function. For example, in rodents, HIPP CA1 neurons show excitatory synaptic density changes that are modulated by estradiol levels (McEwen et al., 1995; Woolley, Catherine S et al., 1996). Further, ovariectomization in rodents leads to degeneration in the HIPP, an effect which can be reversed with estrogen replacement (Dumitriu et al., 2010; Woolley, C. S. et al., 1996). Estrogen replacement also enhances spatial memory in rodents (Daniel et al., 1997; Korol, 2004; Korol and Kolo, 2002; Luine et al., 1998; Packard and Teather, 1997), a function highly dependent on the HIPP. In rhesus monkeys, reproductive age, over chronological age, is associated with lower recognition memory and synaptic density in the HIPP dentate gyrus (Hara et al., 2012). In population-level studies, fluctuating levels of estradiol across the menstrual cycle correlate with verbal memory performance (Hussain et al., 2016; Protopopescu et al., 2008; Rosenberg and Park, 2002), HIPP volume (Lisofsky et al., 2015; Protopopescu et al., 2008), and HIPP fractional anisotropy (Barth et al., 2016). Further, neuroimaging studies have demonstrated direct associations between sex steroid hormone levels and functional activity and connectivity in the memory circuitry (Jacobs et al., 2015; Lisofsky et al., 2015). Inconsistent with the preclinical literature, recent findings from hormone replacement therapy trials have found no treatment-related benefits to cognitive function compared to the placebo groups. However, there are several methodological considerations, such as sample selection and cognitive measures, which need to be further explored. In women APOE4-carriers, hormone replacement therapy decreased Aβ levels in the brain (Kantarci et al., 2016), suggesting that certain high-risk populations may benefit more from hormone replacement therapy than others.

Modulatory effects of estradiol are also seen across the menopausal transition (Epperson et al., 2013; Jacobs et al., 2016a; Jacobs et al., 2016b; Morrison et al., 2006; Mosconi et al., 2017a; Mosconi et al., 2017b; Rentz et al., 2016; Ryan et al., 2012; Shanmugan and Epperson, 2014; Wroolie et al., 2015). In a series of analyses comparing men and women in early midlife, we replicated the finding that women outperform men on verbal and associative memory tasks (Rentz et al., 2016). Further, we demonstrated that female advantage was attenuated postmenopause due, in part, to estradiol decline, underscoring the impact of ovarian decline in shaping memory function in women. Reproductive age also had a pronounced regional and network level impact on task-evoked HIPP response, independent of chronological age (Jacobs et al., 2016a; Jacobs et al., 2016b). During episodic memory encoding, we demonstrated that task-evoked HIPP responses decreased over the menopausal transition and correlated with decreasing levels of 17β-estradiol (Jacobs et al., 2016b). Postmenopausal women showed enhanced bilateral HIPP connectivity. Further, while performing a working memory (WM) task (n-back task), reproductive aging was associated with a failure to disengage the HIPP (Jacobs et al., 2016a), consistent with other studies of WM (Egan et al., 2003). Over the menopausal transition, neural pathways for maintenance of WM performance shifted in reliance from connectivity between the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the inferior parietal cortex (iPAR) to the DLPFC and HIPP pathways. Together, these findings demonstrated that sex steroid hormones alter memory circuity function and that menopause has a significant impact on aging of memory circuitry in women. In the current analyses, we tested the role of BDNF in memory circuitry function by sex and across reproductive age in the same sample.

Similar to estradiol, there is an abundance of preclinical and clinical evidence for the role of BDNF in memory circuitry function. Estradiol and BDNF activate similar signaling pathways in the rodent HIPP (Scharfman and MacLusky, 2006). Further, estradiol also directly regulates BDNF transcription by binding to an estrogen response element on the BDNF gene (Scharfman and MacLusky, 2006). Although the cellular source of plasma BDNF is not clearly defined, BDNF is primarily produced in the brain and readily crosses the blood brain barrier (Pan et al., 1998). It is also found in vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells as well as activated macrophages, lymphocytes, and dendritic cells. In the central nervous system, BDNF is most highly expressed in the HIPP and PFC (Murer et al., 2001). The genetic deletion of BDNF in mice leads to disruption of long-term potentiation (LTP) in the HIPP (Poo, 2001). Similarly, rats injected with BDNF antibodies are severely impaired at learning and recalling HIPP-dependent spatial information (Mu et al., 1999). BDNF mRNA levels also change during memory formation and play an essential role in the acquisition, retention, and recall of spatial memory (Mizuno et al., 2000). Further, brain region-specific, epigenetic effects of estrogens may play a role in regulating BDNF, as direct administration of estradiol into HIPP has been reported to increase histone acetylation at BDNF promoters, thereby upregulating BDNF gene expression in association with improved memory consolidation (Fortress et al., 2014). In clinical studies, lower levels of BDNF in older adults was associated with poor memory performance (Erickson et al., 2010; Gunstad et al., 2008; Komulainen et al., 2008; Li et al., 2009), decreased HIPP volume (Erickson et al., 2010), steeper frontal white matter decline (Driscoll et al., 2012), and increased amyloid burden (Hwang et al., 2015). Some of these effects were sex-dependent, with significant findings only in women (Driscoll et al., 2012; Komulainen et al., 2008). BDNF levels can be highly variable and modulated by various factors such as physical exercise, circadian rhythm, and certain medications such as anti-depressants. Alterations in plasma levels of BDNF have also been found in numerous neurological and psychiatric diseases such as depression (Bus et al., 2015; Molendijk et al., 2014), schizophrenia (Chen et al., 2009; Toyooka et al., 2002), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Holsinger et al., 2000; Phillips et al., 1991). Thus, there is sufficient preclinical and clinical evidence suggesting a role for BDNF in learning and memory and HIPP structure and function. Furthermore, these effects closely parallel those of estradiol both through mechanisms of convergence and induction.

Given the role that sex steroid hormones and BDNF play in memory formation and HIPP function, we investigated whether higher plasma levels of BDNF in postmenopausal women were neuroprotective against memory decline and functional changes in the memory circuitry. We hypothesized that in the face of reproductive aging and the depletion of sex steroid hormones, higher production of BDNF will be associated with better memory performance and memory circuitry function. Here, we present new findings characterizing the impact of BDNF on memory circuitry aging across the menopausal transition.

2. Material and Methods

2.1. Participants

Adult participants were selected from 17,741 pregnancies in the New England Family Study (NEFS; subsidiary of the National Collaborative Perinatal Project), a representative sample of those receiving prenatal care in Boston - Providence from 1959 to1966. In a series of studies over 20 years, we followed subsets of NEFS offspring to investigate the fetal programming of adult psychiatric and general medical disorders and sex differences therein. We recently completed a study investigating the impact of prenatal maternal immune dysregulation on sex differences in memory circuitry in early midlife (NIMH R01 MH090291, Goldstein, PI). To insure variability in prenatal immune exposure, same-sex siblings from NEFS discordant for prenatal inflammation were recruited, whereby one sibling was exposed to preeclampsia or fetal growth restriction and the other was not. When no sibling was available for an exposed offspring, an unexposed offspring was individually matched based on maternal age, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, offspring sex, and gestational age.

212 offspring (equally divided by sex) were recruited at 45-55 years of age and underwent clinical, cognitive, and neuropsychological assessments, of whom 201 completed functional and structural magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI/sMRI). The community-based sample was 88.6% White, 8.5% African American, 2.8% Other (primarily Hispanic). Exclusionary criteria included any history of neurological disease, CNS damage, head injury with loss of consciousness, endocrine disorders, heart disease, alcohol-related diseases, current or history of psychosis, other medical illnesses that may significantly alter CNS function, or any MRI contraindication. Demographic information, including BMI, marital status, race/ethnicity, psychiatric history, and alcohol and substance abuse dependence, were collected as part of the clinical interview via self-report using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID). The Partners Human Research Committee and Brown University’s Institutional Review Board granted Human Studies participants’ approval. All volunteers gave written informed consent and were paid for their participation.

2.2. Study design and procedures

Participants were seen at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Outpatient Clinical Research Center. Subjects were asked to refrain from taking pain medication and recreational drugs and drinking alcohol 24 hours prior to their visit. Women who were still menstruating were scheduled within the early follicular menstrual cycle phase (days 3-5). Participants fasted for ≥8 hours prior to morning baseline blood draw. They were offered a light standardized breakfast (excluding caffeine) before MRI scanning. MRI scanning was followed by neuropsychological testing and structured clinical interviews administered by an experienced clinical interviewer/clinician. Clinical interviews assessed history of alcohol or substance disorders, family medical history, and reproductive history.

2.3. Menopausal staging

Timing of menopause between the first clinical appearance of decreased ovarian function (i.e., shorter inter-menstrual time periods) to menstrual irregularity and final amenorrhea is highly variable and can occur over several years. Women in this sample were between the ages of 45-55 years and were expected to be in various states of ovarian decline, ranging from oligoamenorrhea to permanent amenorrhea as well as normal cycling. Reproductive histories and hormonal evaluations (see Endocrine assessments below) were used to determine reproductive stage following the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW)-10 guidelines (Harlow et al., 2012). Women were categorized into late reproductive (“premenopause”), menopausal transition (“perimenopause”), and early postmenopausal (“postmenopause”). Eight women reported current use of hormone therapy and were excluded from analyses.

2.4. Sample collection.

Trained nurses inserted a saline-lock IV line in the non-dominant forearm of participants to acquire serum and plasma samples. Approximately 18.5 ml of blood were collected at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) Center for Clinical Investigation. Fasting morning blood was drawn at approximately 0800h for optimal evaluation of hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis hormone concentrations, including sex steroids (estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone) and gonadotropins (leutinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)). For endocrine assessments (see below), blood was collected into SST tubes. Serum samples were allowed to clot for 30-45 minutes, after which blood was centrifuged (1500 x g for 10 minutes) and sera aliquoted into 2-mL microtubes. Serum aliquots were stored at −80°C for later evaluations. For BDNF assays, blood was collected into BD PST[™] tubes with lithium heparin anticoagulant, processed to separate plasma by centrifugation at 1500 g at 4 deg C x 10 min, and aliquoted in 2-ml cryopreservation tubes. Serum and plasma aliquots were stored at −80 deg C for up to 4.5 years before use in assays. Serum samples were analyzed at BWH Research Assay Core (BRAC) for sex steroid determinations. Plasma samples were shipped frozen on dry ice to Columbia and stored at −80 °C until processing.

2.5. Endocrine assessments

17β-estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone concentrations were determined via LC-mass spectrometry at BRAC. Assay sensitivities, dynamic range and intra-assay coefficients of variation were as follows (respectively): Estradiol (1 pg/mL, 1-500 pg/mL, &lt;5% RSD); Progesterone (0.05 ng/mL, 0.05-10ng/mL, 5.75% RSD); Testosterone (1.0 ng/dL, 1-2000 ng/dL, &lt;2% RSD). FSH levels were determined via chemoluminescent assay (Beckman Coulter), with assay sensitivity of 0.2 mIU/mL, dynamic range 0.2-200 mIU/mL, and intra-assay coefficient of variation 3.1-4.3%.

2.6. BDNF assessment

To conserve sample volume, the concentration of BDNF was determined as part of an expanded set of analyses using a volume-sparing, magnetic bead-based, 60-plex immunoassay (customized Procarta immunoassay, Affymetrix/eBioscience, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Coded plasma samples from all participants were run in randomized fashion on assay plates manufactured in a single lot. Samples were thawed slowly on wet ice prior to use in immunoassays to protect protein integrity, and then spun to clear precipitate. All samples were run in duplicate along with an expanded set of serial standards (eight instead of seven), buffer controls (background) and the same in-house pooled human control plasma samples on each 96-well plate (Martins, 2002), following manufacturer’s protocols. Median fluorescence intensities (MFI) of the analyte-specific immunoassay bead set were detected by the flow- and fluorescence-based Luminex 200™ detection platform (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX, USA) (Marques-Vidal et al., 2011; Vignali, 2000). BDNF concentrations were calculated by xPONENT™ build 4.0.846.0 and Milliplex Analyst™ software (v.3.5.5.0, Millipore) using a standard curve derived from the known reference concentrations supplied by the manufacturer. A five-parameter model based on weighted logistic regression curves was used to calculate final concentrations by interpolation, with values expressed in pg/ml. Data were processed in a custom-built quality control (QC) algorithm that calibrates performance of the expanded set of serial standard curves and the in-house plasma controls run on every assay plate, monitoring intra- and inter-plate covariance (CV), bead counts and proportion of values falling below the lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ) and above the upper limit of quantitation (ULOQ), incorporating both raw (MFI/xPONENT™) and interpolated (Milliplex Analyst™) data. Samples failing to meet QC criteria or falling above the ULOQ were designated for re-run (CVs &gt;30%, bead counts &lt;50, values &gt;ULOQ). Values falling at or below the averaged MFI for buffer-only wells (background) were recoded to zero. Values below the LLOQ but exceeding background were recoded to the mid-point between zero and the LLOQ (LLOQ/2) for statistical comparisons (Marques-Vidal et al., 2011; Uh et al., 2008). Samples generating values exceeding the ULOQ were diluted to bring them into the linear (detectable) range, and analyte concentrations were calculated accordingly.

2.7. Working Memory fMRI Paradigm

180 participants performed a verbal working memory N-back task during fMRI scanning. The task consisted of two conditions, 0-back and 2-back. In each condition, participants were presented with a sequence of white upper-case letters on a black background presented centrally (200msec duration, 1800msec interstimulus interval) in a pseudo-random order. Participants performed two experimental runs of the task, with each run lasting 5min44sec. Each run contained six 32sec blocks. Each block was preceded by a 20sec fixation period and a 4sec instruction screen. During 0-back blocks, participants responded to every letter using one of two buttons to indicate whether or not the target letter (X) appeared. During 2-back blocks, participants responded to every letter using one of two buttons to indicate whether it matched or did not match the letter seen two previously. Response times and accuracy (d’ 2back) were recorded. Response time (RT) values &lt;100msec were considered null and not included in the computation of participants’ average RT. The sensitivity index d’ 2back was calculated (Wickens, 2001) as d’ 2back = z[probability(hits) - z[probability(false alarms)].

2.8. fMRI Data Acquisition

MRI data were acquired with a Siemens 3T Tim Trio scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), equipped with a 12-channel head coil. Functional data were obtained using a T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging sequence sensitive to blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast (repetition time, 2000msec; echo time, 30msec; field of view, 200mm; flip angle, 90°; voxel size, 3.1 × 3.1 × 3.0). Each functional volume consisted of 33 (3mm) oblique axial slices. A T1-weighted image was collected using a high-resolution 3D Multi-Echo (ME) MPRAGE sagittal sequence with an isotropic resolution of 1mm3. Following acquisition, MRI data were converted to Nifti format and preprocessed in SPM8 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). Preprocessing included realignment and geometric unwarping of echo-planar imaging images using magnetic field maps, correction for head motion, nonlinear volume-based spatial normalization (Montreal Neurological Institute template MNI-152), and spatial smoothing with a Gaussian filter (6mm [full width at half maximum]). Additional software (http://web.mit.edu/swg/software.htm) was used to identify and exclude outliers in the global mean image time series (threshold 3.0 standard deviation (SD) from the mean) and movement (threshold 1.0mm; measured as scan-to-scan movement, separately for translation and rotation) parameters. Statistical parametric maps of BOLD activation were calculated in SPM8 using the general linear model approach (Worsley and Friston 1995).

2.9. fMRI Data Analyses

Hemodynamic responses were modeled using a gamma function and convolved with onset times of 2-back and 0-back blocks to form the general linear model (GLM) at the single subject level. Outlier time points and the 6 rigid-body movement parameters were included in the GLM as covariates of no interest. To test a priori hypotheses targeting the HIPP and DLPFC, anatomically-defined masks of the HIPP and bilateral DLPFC (BA9/46; MNI coordinates, left: - 42,26,30; right: 44,32,28) (10-mm spheres around peak loci) were used. Functional regions of interest (ROIs) in the DLPFC were defined from “supergroup” whole-brain analyses in the larger sample (N = 180; Fig. 4) based on peak task-evoked activity generated at P &lt; 10−10, T = 7.16, df = 179.The left and right HIPP ROIs was anatomically defined using a manually segmented MNI-152 brain (based on methods previously published by the Center for Morphometric Analysis at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School; see Makris et al. (Makris et al., 2013)). ROIs were created with the Wake Forest University PickAtlas ROI toolbox for SPM (Maldjian et al., 2003). β weights from the right and left HIPP were extracted for each participant as a function of WM load (2-back &gt; 0-back) using the REX toolbox (Whitfield-Gabrieli, 2009) and were used for subsequent analyses. For each participant and ROI, β estimates were entered into a linear mixed model analysis with sex or reproductive status and plasma BDNF levels as independent variables.

2.10. Neuropsychological assessments

Participants were administered a neuropsychological battery to assess episodic memory and estimated verbal intelligence (IQ). Measures of episodic memory included the 12-item Face-Name Associative Memory Exam (FNAME) (Papp et al., 2014; Rentz et al., 2011) and the 6-trial Selective Reminding Test (SRT) (Buschke, 1984; Masur et al., 1989). These tests were chosen because they are particularly challenging and sensitive to memory and learning deficits associated with early aging. The FNAME is a paired-associative face-name task that is sensitive to temporolimbic integrity. Using associative learning paradigms, in contrast to list learning procedures, has the benefit of controlling attention within the learning process by pairing items together, thus requiring the participant to make associations between them. Memory impairments on associative learning paradigms are often consistent with temporolimbic amnestic dysfunction (Grober et al., 2000; Sarazin et al., 2010).

As reported by Papp et al.,(2014) the FNAME asks the participant to study 12 unfamiliar face-name-occupation groupings. The test consists of two learning exposures, followed by the presentation of the face and the request to recall the name and occupation associated with that face. After a 10-minute delay during which participants are shown 12 generationally-specific celebrity faces and asked to provide their name and occupation as an interference trial, participants are shown the face and asked to recall the name and occupation. A multiple-choice format was presented that asked the participants to choose the name and occupation from three choices of names and three choices of occupations. While forming face-name associations is particularly difficult, pairing the face with an occupation is an inherently easier task because of its association with previously stored semantic knowledge (Rentz et al., 2011). Performance on the FNAME was previously found to decline with age (Grober et al., 2000) and other factors that impact memory performance, such as depression (Lockwood et al., 2002). Furthermore, FNAME is thought to isolate medial temporal lobe memory function capacities apart from frontal executive mechanisms involved in memory processing and is thus a good choice to elucidate memory vulnerabilities associated with menopausal transition.

The SRT, on the other hand, is a selective reminding procedure that relies on feedback tailored to the individual, i.e., individuals are only reminded of words they failed to recall in the previous trial. This procedure taps into executive processing because it requires the individual to hold information online, within working memory, as only a portion of the list that was not immediately recalled is presented for learning. More specifically, once the individual is exposed to all the words in trial 1, they are reminded only of the words that were not immediately recalled in the previous trial. While more challenging than a traditional list learning test, the SRT was chosen because it taps into executive compromise (Loring and Papanicolaou, 1987), an important component to learning and memory and potentially relevant to menopausal vulnerabilities. Thus, our rationale for utilizing these two specific episodic memory tests was to determine whether menopausal memory changes were related to frontal executive retrieval deficits common in aging (i.e., as detected on the SRT) or HIPP dysfunction (i.e., as detected on the FNAME).

Z-score composites were created for FNAME including: 1) Initial learning of names and occupations; 2) Cued recall of names and occupations and; 3) FNAME summary score combining both initial learning and cued recall of names and occupations. Finally, we explored SRT performance that included list learning over 6 trials (Total Recall), delayed recall at 30 minutes (Masur et al., 1989), and an SRT summary z-score combining both list learning and delayed recall. The American National Adult Reading Test (AMNART) (Nelson, 1982) was used to assess estimated verbal intelligence (IQ).

2.11. Statistical Analyses

Descriptive statistics of study sample characteristics - age, BMI, education (above v. below a 4-year college level of attainment), ethnicity (Caucasian v. not Caucasian), substance or alcohol abuse or dependence (history of or current, yes v. no), current smoking status (yes v. no), marital status (married, yes v. no), and BDNF plasma level – were reported by sex (male v. female) and reproductive status (pre- and peri-menopausal, post-menopausal). BDNF was examined both as a continuous and categorical measure, the latter indicating what has been referred to as a deviant subgroup analysis. The binary measure of high plasma BDNF v. not high was operationalized as BDNF levels in the highest third (above the 67th percentile) of the total sample versus in those below: pre/perimenopause (High BDNF: n = 21 v. low BDNF: n = 41), postmenopause (High BDNF: n = 10 v. low BDNF: n = 19), and men (High BDNF: n = 32 v. low BDNF: n = 68). We found no significant association comparing the first and second tertiles (there instead appeared to be a threshold effect at tertile 3), and thus the two groups were combined to double the sample size of the reference group and increase power. Comparisons by group status were calculated using nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum or chi-square test, for continuous and categorical data, respectively.

The associations between BDNF levels (as a continuous and binary variable) and measures of adult memory performance (FNAME, SRT) and fMRI BOLD activity were assessed overall and by individual group status using linear mixed models adjusted for intrafamilial correlation among siblings, along with age, ethnicity, and substance or alcohol abuse or dependence. fMRI BOLD activity models additionally controlled for task performance. We tested education, SES, marital status, BMI, substance and alcohol abuse or dependence, and ethnicity as potential confounding variables. Potential confounding was determined if a covariate was associated with both the outcome and exposure with a p &lt; 0.2. To examine whether estradiol modified the association between BDNF and cognitive performance and brain activity, we included estradiol as a covariate in the model to observe whether effects were attenuated. Analysis of the right DLPLC was performed on the natural log (ln) transformation of the measure (plus a constant of 1 to address negative values) to normalize the model residuals. In models where BDNF was assessed as a continuous variable, BDNF was natural log (ln) transformed (plus a constant of 1 to address values below the limit of detection coded as 0) to normalize model residuals. Normality was formally assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Group differences in the association between BDNF and adult memory performance, along with fMRI BOLD activity, were assessed with the inclusion of an interaction term between group status and BDNF. Wald chi-square tests were used to assess interactions. All analyses were performed using SAS 9.4 software (SAS institute, Cary, NC).

3. Results

3.1. Participant demographics

The sample included 212 participants (106 women and 106 men). Three participants did not complete the cognitive tests (two men and one woman). In addition, eight women reported current use of hormone replacement therapy and four women reported past hormone use. Estradiol levels in postmenopausal women currently on hormone replacement therapy did not significantly differ from pre/peri menopausal women (z = −1.08, p = 0.28) and thus these women were removed from subsequent analyses. Estradiol levels in postmenopausal women with a past history of hormone use were significantly lower than pre/perimenopausal women (z = −2.39, p = 0.02) and thus these women were included in subsequent analyses. In postmenopausal women, past hormone use was not associated with significantly higher or lower plasma levels of BDNF (z = −1.71, p = 0.24). Plasma BDNF measures were missing for five participants (two men and three women) and BDNF data were lost for an additional five participants (two men and three women) due to coding and data transfer errors and as such, a final sample of 191 participants (91 women and 100 men; Fig. 1) were included in the final analyses.

All participants were in early midlife (mean age = 50.03 ± 2.10), with an average verbal IQ of 116.54 ± 10.50. 76% of the participants had a high school diploma/GED or higher. Among women, some were already in menopause with permanent amenorrhea, low estradiol levels, and elevated gonadotropins; some exhibited signs of follicular failure (elevated FSH and oligoamenorrhea); and some showed normal cycling. Thirty-five women (38.5%) were premenopausal, 27 (29.7%) were perimenopausal, and 29 (31.9%) were postmenopausal. Given the small sample sizes, we combined the premenopausal and perimenopausal women into one pre/perimenopausal group to achieve sufficient power for assessing associations. In previous studies with this cohort (Jacobs et al., 2016a; Jacobs et al., 2016b; Rentz et al., 2016), pre- and perimenopausal women had similar performances on memory tests. In the current study, we found no significant differences in the relationship between BDNF and memory between the two groups (pchsq &gt; 0.05 for all outcome measures) and thus, we combined the two groups to achieve adequate power for subsequent analyses.

Table 1 reports demographic characteristics of the sample and group comparisons. Groups were comparable on plasma levels of BDNF, body mass index, education, and estimated verbal IQ. Groups differed in ethnicity, substance and alcohol abuse, and there was a slight difference in age. Pre/perimenopausal women were slightly younger in age than postmenopausal women and men. There was a higher percentage of African American women in postmenopausal women and a higher percentage of substance and alcohol abuse/dependence in men compared to women, specifically pre/perimenopausal women. In the current sample, there was a high rate of history of alcohol and substance abuse/dependence, especially in men (64%). This was primarily due to one of the criteria in the DSM-IV for alcohol or substance abuse, which is “recurrent substance use in a situation in which it is physically hazardous”. This means that any individual who had repeatedly engaged in driving under the influence, at any point in their life, would be categorized as having a history of alcohol or substance abuse. Many of our participants, and presumably the general population for this age group, have a history of such behavior, especially when they were younger and regulations were different. This classification changed in the new DSM V and will presumably result in a significantly lower number of diagnoses. Although asked to refrain, nine subjects reported taking pain medication prior to the scan. However, pain medication did not impact plasma levels of BDNF (z = −0.96, p = 0.34).

BDNF val66met and APOE genotypes did not differ between men and women (BDNF val66met: men (27% met-carrier) v. women (28% met-carrier), X2 = 0.08, p = 0.78; APOE: men (26% APOE4) v. women (22% APOE4), X2 = 0.97, p = 0.62) or between menopause groups (BDNF val66met: pre/peri (28% met-carrier) v. post (29% met-carrier), X2 = 0.02, p = 0.89; APOE: pre/peri (24% APOE4) v. post (17% APOE4), X2 = 2.44, p = 0.30). We found no significant difference in plasma levels of BDNF between APOE (E2: mean = 2.45 (1.32), E3: 2.36 (1.60), E4: 2.13 (1.65); F(1, 186) = 0.43, p = 0.65) and BDNF genotype groups (met-carrier: mean = 2.27 (1.56), val/val: 2.33 (1.60); F(1, 186) = 0.05, p = 0.83).

3.2. Hormonal evaluations

Not surprising, postmenopausal women (estradiol: median = 12.10 pg/mL; progesterone: median = 0.07 ng/mL; FSH: median = 67.09 mlU/mL) had significantly lower levels of serum estradiol (z = −5.34, p &lt; 0.001) and progesterone (z = −3.89, p &lt; 0.001) and significantly higher levels of FSH (z = −5.76, p &lt; 0.001) compared to premenopausal (estradiol: median = 86.00 pg/mL; progesterone: median = 1.46 ng/mL; FSH: median = 5.70 mlU/mL) and perimenopausal women (estradiol: median = 29.50 pg/mL; progesterone: median = 0.13 ng/mL; FSH: median = 28.82 mlU/mL). Premenopausal women had significantly higher levels of estradiol (z = −4.12 p &lt; 0.001) and progesterone (z = −3.51, p &lt; 0.001) and lower levels of FSH (z = −6.50, p &lt; 0.001) compared to perimenopausal women.

Overall in women, estradiol levels did not correlate with plasma levels of BDNF (r = 0.15, p = 0.15). Stratified by menopausal staging, there was no association in pre/perimenopausal women (r = 0.18, p = 0.18). However, in postmenopausal women, there was a non-significant positive correlation between the estradiol levels and BDNF (r = 0.35, p = 0.07).

3.3. Adult memory performance

In our previous work with the same cohort presented here (Rentz et al., 2016), we demonstrated that women performed significantly better than men on tasks of associative and verbal memory. This female advantage was attenuated over the menopausal transition. Postmenopausal women performed worse than pre/perimenopausal women on the FNAME test and SRT and performed similar to men (Rentz et al., 2016). In the current study, we extended these findings to examine adult memory performance in the context of BDNF.

Overall, and within men and women separately, plasma BDNF levels were not associated with memory performance on the FNAME and SRT (Table 2: all pchsq &gt; 0.1). Further, there was no interaction between sex and BDNF on memory performance (Table 2: all pchsq &gt; 0.1). When women were divided based on menopausal staging, we found BDNF was significantly associated with memory performance, specifically in postmenopausal women (FNAME: initial learning: β = 0.80, SE = 0.34, χ2 = 5.64, pchsq &lt; 0.05; cued recall: β = 0.90, SE = 0.36, χ2 = 6.21, pchsq &lt; 0.05; and summary score: β = 0.85, SE = 0.32, χ2 = 6.98, pchsq &lt; 0.01; SRT: 30min delayed recall: β = 2.13, SE = 1.01, χ2 = 4.44, pchsq &lt; 0.05), whereby higher levels of BDNF were associated with better memory performance. There was no significant relationship between plasma levels of BDNF and memory performance in pre/perimenopausal women (Table 2: all pchsq &gt; 0.1).

To examine whether postmenopausal women differed significantly from pre/perimenopausal women, we conducted interaction analyses between menopausal staging (pre/peri v. post) and BDNF on memory performance, controlling for age, ethnicity, substance and alcohol abuse, and sibship. We found significant interactions in measures of associative memory (FNAME summary: χ2 = 5.44, pchsq &lt; 0.05; FNAME initial learning: χ2 = 3.51, pchsq = 0.06; FNAME cued recall: χ2 = 6.55, pchsq &lt; 0.05; Fig. 2) and verbal memory (SRT summary: χ2 = 3.30, pchsq = 0.07; χ2 = 7.02, pchsq &lt; 0.01; Fig. 3), suggesting that the relationship between BDNF and memory was significantly different between postmenopausal women v. pre/perimenopausal women. Controlling for estradiol levels, effects in postmenopausal were slightly attenuated but remained significant (FNAME initial learning: β = 0.70, SE = 0.36, χ2 = 3.81, pchsq = 0.05; FNAME cued recall: β = 0.88, SE = 0.39, χ2 = 5.09, pchsq &lt; 0.05; and FNAME summary: β = 0.79, SE = 0.35, χ2 = 5.22, pchsq &lt; 0.01; SRT 30min delayed recall: β = 2.08, SE = 1.10, χ2 = 3.61, pchsq = 0.06), suggesting that the impact of BDNF was not wholly dependent on estradiol, despite the correlation between BDNF and estradiol levels.

3.4. Regional BOLD response in WM circuitry

In our previous work on working memory circuitry activity in our cohort (Jacobs et al., 2016a), we demonstrated that the N-back paradigm evoked robust responses throughout the working memory circuitry. We demonstrated that task-evoked activity in DLPFC increased over the menopausal transition, with postmenopausal women exhibiting greater activity relative to pre/perimenopausal women. Similarly, pronounced deactivation in the HIPP was observed in pre/perimenopausal women, with attenuated deactivation (failure to disengage) in postmenopausal women. In the current study, we extended these findings to examine working memory function in the context of BDNF.

Behavioral performances on the WM task (d’ 2back) were comparable across sex/menopausal staging groups (Table 1). There was no association between performance on the WM task and BDNF levels in the total sample (r = −0.03, p = 0.71) as well as within each sex/menopausal staging group (Men: r = 0.09, p = 0.40; Women: r = −0.14, p = 0.17; Pre/Peri: r = −0.18, p = 0.18; Post: r = −0.10, p = 0.61).

β weights from the HIPP and DLPFC ROIs were extracted for each participant as a function of WM load (2-back &gt; 0-back) and used for subsequent analyses of fMRI BOLD activity. Overall, higher levels of BDNF, as a continuous measure, were significantly associated with lower fMRI BOLD activity in the left HIPP (β = −0.04, SE = 0.02, χ2 = 4.08, pchsq &lt; 0.05). Within men and women separately, plasma BDNF levels were not associated with fMRI BOLD activity in the HIPP or DLPFC (Table 2: all pchsq &gt; 0.1). There was also no interaction between sex and BDNF on fMRI activity for any of the ROIs (Table 2: all pchsq &gt; 0.1).

However, when women were divided based on menopausal staging, we found BDNF was significantly associated with activity in the left HIPP and right DLPFC, specifically in postmenopausal women (left HIPP: β = −0.11, SE = 0.04, χ2 = 6.58, pchsq &lt; 0.05; right DLPFC: β = −0.08, SE = 0.03, χ2 = 8.43, pchsq &lt; 0.005), whereby higher levels of BDNF were associated with lower fMRI BOLD activity. Typically, the HIPP is systematically deactivated during the n-back task. Here we found dysfunction in the HIPP in postmenopausal women with lower plasma levels of BDNF. There was no significant relationship between plasma levels of BDNF and BOLD activity in HIPP or DLPFC in pre/perimenopausal women (Table 2: all pchsq &gt; 0.1). To examine whether postmenopausal women differed significantly from pre/perimenopausal women, we conducted interaction analyses between menopausal staging (pre/peri v. post) and BDNF on BOLD activity in HIPP or DLPFC, controlling for age, ethnicity, substance and alcohol abuse, sibship, and task performance. We found significant interactions in left HIPP (χ2 = 3.91, pchsq &lt; 0.05; Fig. 5a) and right DLPFC (χ2 = 6.12, pchsq &lt; 0.05; Fig. 5b), suggesting that the relationship between BDNF and memory circuitry function was significantly different between postmenopausal women v. pre/perimenopausal women. Controlling for estradiol levels, effects in postmenopausal remained significant (left HIPP: β = −0.11, SE = 0.05, χ2 = 5.10, pchsq &lt; 0.05; right DLPFC: β = −0.09, SE = 0.03, χ2 = 9.2, pchsq &lt; 0.005), again signifying that these effects were not wholly dependent on estradiol, despite the correlation between BDNF and estradiol levels.

4. Discussion

In this population-based study, we identified the impact of BDNF on memory performance in early midlife as a function of sex and reproductive status in women. Specifically, in postmenopausal women, memory performance and functional BOLD activity in the WM circuitry were related to plasma levels of BDNF. Higher plasma levels of BDNF were associated with better associative and verbal memory performance. In early midlife, these effects were particularly strong for associative memory. Further, in postmenopausal women, lower BDNF levels were associated with failure to disengage the HIPP and higher BOLD activity in DLPFC during the WM task. In contrast, BDNF levels did not significantly impact memory performance or memory circuitry function in early middle-aged pre/perimenopausal women and men.

Reproductive aging in women presents a critical period for neurological changes that have long-term implications for the risk of cognitive impairment and AD. Over the menopausal transition, some women experience a decline in memory performance (Bleecker et al., 1988; Kerschbaum et al., 2017; Rentz et al., 2016), functional changes in episodic and working memory networks (Jacobs et al., 2016a; Jacobs et al., 2016b), reduced cerebral glucose metabolism (Mosconi et al., 2017a), increased amyloid beta deposition (Mosconi et al., 2017b), and reduced volumes of grey and white matter in regions vulnerable in AD (Mosconi et al., 2017b). These studies suggest that pathological changes occur in women over menopause, which chronologically aligns with the emergence of early AD-related pathology. A major contributor to neuronal changes over menopause is the depletion of ovarian steroid hormones. Our group (Jacobs et al., 2016b) and others (Kerschbaum et al., 2017; Wolf et al., 1999) have demonstrated that there is a direct association between decline in 17β-estradiol and memory performance. Further, early surgical menopause is significantly associated with increased risk of AD (Bove et al., 2014; Phung et al., 2010; Rocca et al., 2007; Rocca et al., 2011). Given the neuroprotective properties of estradiol on HIPP neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, and learning and memory (Brinton, 2009; Liu et al., 2008; McEwen et al., 1995; Ormerod et al., 2004; Tanapat et al., 1999; Warren et al., 1995; Woolley and McEwen, 1994; Woolley, Catherine S et al., 1996), the depletion of estradiol may be a critical period for revealing which women are at higher risk for AD later in life, contributing to our broader understanding of AD risk in women.

Despite strong preclinical evidence for the neuroprotective effects of estradiol, there is considerable debate in the clinical literature regarding the effects of estradiol on cognitive performance, especially based on evidence from recent hormone replacement therapy randomized control trials (RCTs) (Espeland et al., 2013; Gleason et al., 2015; Henderson et al., 2016). Overall, these RCTs found that hormone therapy did not improve cognitive performance. This is not surprising given that hormone therapy may help maintain intact memory function with aging but not necessarily improve cognitive function. Interestingly, the placebo groups in these studies did not decline in cognitive performance, suggesting either a selection bias of healthy women who were not symptomatic or vulnerable to cognitive decline over menopause or that the cognitive tests administered were not sensitive to cognitive changes over menopause. As noted above, we and others have demonstrated that some women experience a decline in memory function, especially verbal memory, with reproductive aging. These RCTs were primarily conducted in healthy women and little is known about the impact of hormone therapy in women with chronic diseases, such diabetes, depression, and hypertension, three diseases that are independent risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease. It is important to understand factors that contribute to memory decline over menopause and which women may benefit most from hormone therapy. Long-term follow-up studies of these cohorts are necessary to determine whether hormone therapy decreases dementia risk, as recently demonstrated in the WHI cohort of women ≤ 65 years of age. As such, it is critical to continue work on the impact of hormone therapy on maintaining intact memory function, including the most effective form, route, and duration of administration.

Although all women undergo menopause, whether naturally or surgically, not all women experience cognitive decline. Like all aging processes, there is heterogeneity in outcomes, suggesting mechanisms for risk and resilience. In the current study, we demonstrated that higher levels of BDNF may be a nerve growth pathway through which resilience against memory decline could be targeted. Higher levels of BDNF in postmenopausal women were associated with better memory performance and functional patterns in the working memory network that were similar to pre/perimenopausal women (i.e., lower HIPP and DLPFC activity). Interestingly, the neuroprotective effects of BDNF were only evident in postmenopausal women. Memory performance was not related to BDNF levels in pre/perimenopausal women. In the absence of estradiol, higher levels of BDNF (downstream from estradiol) may have a greater impact on memory function, whereas in premenopausal women, regulation of memory function by estradiol itself may reduce the impact of BDNF. In postmenopausal women, when we controlled for estradiol levels, effects remained significant, suggesting that BDNF effects were not wholly dependent on estradiol. Rodent studies suggest that estradiol and BDNF activate similar signaling pathways that are involved in axonal and dendritic growth, cellular survival, synaptic plasticity, and learning (for a review, see Scharfman and MacLusky, 2006). Given that women experience depletion of ovarian hormones, while men experience a more gradual decline with age, these results suggest that certain neuroprotective factors may play a more crucial role early in midlife in women.

Consistent with our findings, others have found that higher levels of BDNF were positively associated with memory performance (Erickson et al., 2010; Komulainen et al., 2008; Li et al., 2009), executive function (Li et al., 2009), general cognitive function (Gunstad et al., 2008; Komulainen et al., 2008), and HIPP volume (Erickson et al., 2010) in older adults. These results were consistent across methods of BDNF assessment (plasma, serum, and CSF) (Erickson et al., 2010; Gunstad et al., 2008; Komulainen et al., 2008; Li et al., 2009) and in some cases were specific to postmenopausal women. However, some population-level studies in older adults found no significant association between BDNF and memory or HIPP volume or found effects only specific to patients with AD (Driscoll et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2015; O'Bryant et al., 2011).

Many factors can contribute to discrepancies between studies including the consideration of sex or reproductive age, as we demonstrated in the present study. It is important to note that although in the current study we did not find differences in plasma levels of BDNF between sex and menopause groups (i.e. postmenopausal women did not have lower plasma levels of BDNF than pre/perimenopausal women), BDNF expression is highly regulated by gonadal hormones (Sohrabji et al., 1995). The BDNF gene has an estrogen response element to which estrogen hormone-receptor complexes bind to stimulate transcription (Sohrabji et al., 1995). Studies have found that BDNF expression changes across the estrous cycle, mirroring levels of estradiol (Scharfman et al., 2003; Spencer-Segal et al., 2011; Spencer et al., 2008). Further, in ovariectomized rats, there is a decrease in BDNF expression that is restored following the administration of estradiol (Singh et al., 1995). In contrast, depletion of testosterone in rodents is associated with upregulation of BDNF immunoreactivity in the HIPP mossy fiber pathway (Skucas et al., 2013). Studies have also found that women tend to have higher levels of BDNF compared to men (Driscoll et al., 2012; Li et al., 2009). These investigations emphasize the importance of taking into consideration sex and reproductive age when examining the relationship between BDNF and memory. Findings in the current study emerged only when sex and reproductive age were incorporated into the analyses.

Past studies have found alterations in HIPP and DLPFC fMRI BOLD activity on working memory tasks in a number of different conditions (Chen et al., 2017; Fernandez-Corcuera et al., 2013; Miskowiak et al., 2016; Smith et al., 2017). Notably, our team showed that on a group level, postmenopausal women have increased fMRI BOLD activity in the HIPP and DLPFC compared to pre/perimenopausal women (Jacobs et al., 2016a). Egan et al. (2003) found that carriers of the BDNF met allele, the allelic isoform associated with decreased activity-dependent release of BDNF, also have increased fMRI BOLD activity in the HIPP on the n-back working memory task. Consistent with this, in the study presented here, we found that low plasma BDNF levels in postmenopausal women were associated with higher BOLD activity in the HIPP and DLPFC. On the n-back task, activation of the DLPFC is normally accompanied by a robust deactivation of the HIPP (Egan et al., 2003; Jacobs et al., 2016a; Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2001; Wei et al., 2018). Thus, we would argue that increased BOLD activity in the HIPP suggests a failure to disengage. Some studies have hypothesized that failure to disengage is related to a failure to suppress the default mode network (DMN) during the task (Fernandez-Corcuera et al., 2013; Miskowiak et al., 2016). Thus, reproductive age and BDNF may potentially have an impact on overall DMN and not only the HIPP. Dysregulation in HIPP and DMN are often observed before the onset of cognitive symptoms in AD (Drzezga et al., 2011; O'Brien et al., 2010; Sheline et al., 2010), suggesting that functional brain changes may be an early indicator of future cognitive impairment for some individuals.

Alternatively, increased activity in the HIPP and DLPFC may be a compensatory mechanism to help maintain task performance in postmenopausal women. The relationship between task performance and fMRI BOLD activity was extensively reported and discussed in Jacobs et al. (2016a) in the same cohort. We found that the magnitude of regional activity and connectivity within WM circuitry were strongly related to task performance. Specifically, in postmenopausal women, task performance positively correlated with activity in the DLPFC and DLPFC-HIPP connectivity. In the current study, we extended these findings and examined this relationship in the context of BDNF. Interestingly, we found no significant associations between task performance and BDNF in the total sample and within each sex and reproductive group. Given the negative association between BDNF and DLPFC activity, these results suggest that higher fMRI activity in postmenopausal women with low levels of BDNF may help maintain task performance in a compensatory manner.

The current results should be viewed in light of certain limitations. The first is that the sample sizes when broken down by menopausal status were relatively small and thus future studies should aim to replicate these findings in larger populations. The study design is also a cross-sectional design, and as such, causality cannot be determined. We are unable, as yet, to establish whether maintaining high levels of BDNF over reproductive aging contributes to intact memory function postmenopause. In our future longitudinal study with this cohort, we will prospectively assess the neuroprotective effects of BDNF levels in individuals as they transition through menopause. Lastly, BDNF levels were assessed from plasma, presenting limitations for the relationship with neuronal levels of BDNF. The cellular source of plasma BDNF is not clearly defined. Possible contributors are vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells as well as activated macrophages, lymphocytes, and dendritic cells. BDNF is also produced in the brain and readily crosses the blood brain barrier (Pan et al., 1998). A possible contributor of plasma BDNF is hypothesized to be from neurons and glial cells. Several preclinical and clinical studies have shown direct correlations between cerebral and plasma levels of BDNF (Klein et al., 2011; Pillai et al., 2010; Rasmussen et al., 2009).

5. Conclusion

At a human population-level, these findings suggest that higher levels of BDNF in postmenopausal women is associated with better memory performance. BDNF is involved in many downstream cellular processes such as neuronal survival (Scharfman et al., 2005; Yoshii and Constantine-Paton, 2010), synaptic plasticity (Tyler and Pozzo-Miller, 2003), glutamate release (Zhang et al., 2013), and axonal and dendritic growth (Gonzalez et al., 2016). BDNF and its TrkB receptor are also synthesized in the heart and expressed in the endothelial cell lining of coronary arteries and are present in muscle (Donovan et al., 2000; Nakahashi et al., 2000). Disruptions in BDNF/TrkB signaling affect the physiology of cardiac muscles and are related to cardiovascular diseases (CVD) such as hypertension and myocardial infarction (Pius-Sadowska and Machalinski, 2017), well-known risk factors of AD (Justin et al., 2013). Given its widespread downstream effects, BDNF plays a major role in numerous psychiatric and neurological disorders and comorbidity with CVD. Examining the upstream regulation of BDNF expression in different disorders may help us understand the pathophysiological mechanisms that result in lower levels of BDNF. For example, given that glucocorticoids suppress BDNF expression (Kumamaru et al., 2011) and HPG function, dysfunction in the HPA axis may modulate BDNF levels and impact cognitive function. Further, major depressive disorder is associated with lower BDNF levels, an effect that is reversed with antidepressant treatment (Aydemir et al., 2005; Gonul et al., 2005; Piccinni et al., 2008; Tadic et al., 2011). Thus, understanding the mediating role of major depression on memory decline over the menopausal transition may be important for understanding the trajectory that leads to memory decline in some women. The current results provide evidence for potential sex-dependent avenues for and timing of attenuating risk of memory decline in early midlife.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by NIMH RO1 MH090291 (J.M.G.). Additional support for K.K was provided by the Harvard Translational Research in Aging Training Program T32AG023480 and for E.G.J. was provided by ORWH-NICHD (BIRCWH) K12HD051959. The Harvard Clinical and Translational Science Center (NIH UL1 RR025758) provided support for serological acquisition and evaluations. We are also grateful for the support of the BrightFocus Foundation and the Henry and Allison McCance Center for Brain Health, with whom we are partnering on studies identifying sex differences in early midlife biomarkers for the risk for Alzheimer's disease later in life.

Figure 1. Flow chart of subject recruitment and selection.

Figure 2. Performance on the Face-Name Associative Memory Exam (FNAME) by reproductive stage/sex and plasma BDNF levels. Z-scores are reported by group and BDNF status for FNAME a) summary score, b) Initial learning of names and occupations, and c) Cued recall of names and occupations. The FNAME summary score combines both initial learning and cued recall of names and occupations. Error bars represent SEM.

Figure 3. Performance on the -trial Selective Reminding Test (SRT) by reproductive stage/sex and plasma BDNF levels. a) Z-scores are reported by group and BDNF status for SRT summary score. b) Scores are reported by group and BDNF status for SRT 30min delayed recall. The SRT summary score combines both list learning and delayed recall. Error bars represent SEM.

Figure 4. Task-evoked BOLD responses throughout working memory circuitry, 2-back &gt; 0-back, of total sample N = 180.

Figure 5. Modulation of working memory-related HIPP and DLPFC activity by reproductive stage/sex and plasma BDNF levels. a) Surface location of functionally defined mask of HIPP on a rendered brain. Task-related HIPP deactivations diminished with increasing levels of plasma BDNF in postmenopausal women. b) Surface location of functionally defined masks of DLPFC on a rendered brain. Functional ROI was generated from a supergroup activity map in a larger sample (2-back &gt; 0-back; N = 180). Task-evoked activity in right DLPFC increased with increasing levels of BDNF in postmenopausal women.

Table 1. Demographic and clinical characteristics of a sample of N = 191, men and women assessed at ages 45 −55

					Comparisons	
	Men
(n = 100)	Women
(n = 91)	Pre/Peri
(n = 62)	Post
(n = 29)	Men v.
Women	Men v.
Pre/Peri Post	Men v.
Post	Pre/Peri v.
Post	
		
	Mean (SD)	Mean (SD)	Mean (SD)	Mean (SD)	p	p	p	p	
	
Age	50.21 (2.19)	49.82 (1.99)	49.52 (1.81)	50.48 (2.21)	0.24	0.05 *	0.54	0.05 *	
BMI	29.29 (5.57)	28.09 (5.96)a	28.29 (5.96)	27.68 (6.05)	0.08	0.13	0.20	0.71	
Verbal IQ	116.29 (10.9)	116.74 (9.9)	117.34 (9.3)	115.45 (11.2)	0.96	0.85	0.69	0.61	
d’ 2back performance	2.00 (0.69)b	1.96 (0.66)c	1.96 (0.65)c	1.97 (0.69)	0.54	0.65	0.80	0.87	
	Median (p25,p75)	Median (p25,p75)	Median (p25,p75)	Median (p25,p75)					
BDNF plasma levels (pg/ml)	8.84 (1.6,27.7)	11.54 (1.4,34.8)	10.92 (2.0,43.9)	14.30 (1.2,24.6)	0.58	0.48	0.95	0.61	
	n (%)	n (%)	n (%)	n (%)					
Education (% &gt; 4Yr College)	68 (68%)a	54 (59%)b	38 (61%)	16 (55%)b	0.25	0.34	0.36	0.86	
Ethnicity (Caucasian)	89 (89%)	79 (87%)	56 (90%)	23 (79%)	0.12	0.49	0.03 *	0.19	
Current smoking status (Yes)	14 (14%)	16 (18%)	11 (18%)	5 (17%)	0.50	0.52	0.67	0.95	
Marital status (Married)	63 (63%)a	53 (58%)	37 (60%)	16 (55%)	0.45	0.61	0.41	0.69	
Substance or alcohol abuse/dependence (Yes) 1	64 (64%)	40 (44%)	26 (42%)	14 (48%)	0.005 *	0.006 *	0.13	0.57	
BDNF categorical (High)	32 (32%)	31 (34%)	21 (34%)	10 (34%)					
a Missing n=1

b Missing n=2

c Missing n=6

1 History of or current

* p ≤ 0.05

p25,p75 : 25th and 75th quartiles

Table 2. Interaction between BDNF and sex/reproductive status on adult memory performance

	Comparisons	
	TOTAL
(N=191)	Men
(n = 100)	Women
(n = 91)	Pre-/Peri-Menopause
(n = 62)	Post-Menopause
(n = 29)	Men v.
Women	Men v.
Pre/Peri-	Men v.
Post-	Pre-/Peri- v.
Post-	
		
	β	SE	χ2	pchsq	β	SE	χ2	pchsq	β	SE	χ2	pchsq	β	SE	χ2	pchsq	β	SE	χ2	pchsq	χ2	p	χ2	pchsq	χ2	p	χ2	pchsq	
		
Face-Name Association Test																													
 Summary score	0.15	0.15	1.11	0.29	0.12	0.20	0.37	0.54	0.22	0.21	1.16	0.28	−0.05	0.26	0.04	0.84	0.85	0.32	6.98	0.01 *	0.01	0.91	0.74	0.39	3.35	0.07 †	5.44	0.02 *	
 Initial recall	0.12	0.16	0.54	0.46	0.10	0.20	0.23	0.63	0.16	0.24	0.45	0.50	−0.16	0.31	0.28	0.60	0.80	0.34	5.64	0.02 *	0.01	0.90	0.45	0.50	2.97	0.08 †	3.51	0.06 †	
 Cued recall	0.19	0.15	1.60	0.21	0.15	0.22	0.45	0.50	0.30	0.20	2.33	0.13	−0.03	0.23	0.02	0.90	0.90	0.36	6.21	0.01 *	0.01	0.92	0.80	0.37	2.83	0.09 †	6.55	0.01 *	
Buschke Selective Reminding Test																													
 Summary score	0.07	0.14	0.23	0.63	0.10	0.20	0.24	0.62	0.03	0.19	0.03	0.87	−0.20	0.24	0.72	0.40	0.48	0.35	1.92	0.17	0.34	0.56	1.19	0.28	0.25	0.62	3.30	0.07 †	
 Total recall	0.18	1.37	0.02	0.89	0.33	1.96	0.03	0.87	−0.06	1.87	0.00	0.97	−0.75	2.27	0.11	0.74	1.67	3.50	0.23	0.63	0.16	0.69	0.30	0.58	0.01	0.92	0.58	0.45	
 30min Delayed recall	0.35	0.43	0.65	0.42	0.45	0.61	0.54	0.46	0.22	0.58	0.14	0.71	−0.91	0.72	1.60	0.21	2.13	1.01	4.44	0.04 *	0.22	0.64	2.14	0.14	0.95	0.33	7.02	0.01 *	
N-back Task fMRI BOLD activity		
 Hippocampus		
Right	0.00	0.02	0.01	0.92	−0.01	0.04	0.02	0.89	0.00	0.03	0.03	0.87	0.05	0.03	2.21	0.14	−0.08	0.05	2.71	0.10	0.12	0.73	1.63	0.20	1.33	0.25	3.33	0.07 †	
Left	−0.04	0.02	4.08	0.04 *	−0.04	0.03	2.18	0.14	−0.04	0.02	0.05	0.83	0.00	0.03	0.00	0.99	−0.11	0.04	6.58	0.01 *	0.02	0.88	1.04	0.31	1.11	0.29	3.91	0.05 *	
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex		
1 Right	−0.01	0.01	1.03	0.31	−0.02	0.02	0.83	0.36	−0.01	0.02	0.19	0.66	0.02	0.02	0.86	0.35	−0.08	0.03	8.43	0.004 *	0.56	0.45	2.19	0.14	1.02	0.31	6.12	0.01 *	
Left	0.04	0.03	1.08	0.30	0.04	0.04	1.50	0.22	0.05	0.05	1.17	0.28	0.08	0.06	1.98	0.16	−0.01	0.08	0.01	0.92	0.24	0.62	0.43	0.51	0.03	0.85	0.72	0.40	
Linear mixed model adjusted for age, ethnicity, current substance dependence, and intrafamilial correlation between siblings

1 Analysis of the right DLPLC was performed on the natural log (ln) transformation of the measure (plus a constant of 1 to address negative values) to normalize the model residuals

† p ≤ 0.1

* p ≤ 0.05

Highlights:

Steroid hormones regulate memory circuitry regions, which are sexually dimorphic

BDNF was associated with memory performance and function in postmenopausal women

BDNF may modulate the impact of ovarian function decline on memory in early midlife

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Disclosures

Authors have no conflicts of interest. JG is a consultant/on the scientific advisory board for Cala Health, but this has no relation to the content in this study.


References

Aydemir O , Deveci A , Taneli F , 2005. The effect of chronic antidepressant treatment on serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in depressed patients: a preliminary study. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 29 (2 ), 261–265.15694233
Barth C , Steele CJ , Mueller K , Rekkas VP , Arelin K , Pampel A , Burmann I , Kratzsch J , Villringer A , Sacher J , 2016. In-vivo Dynamics of the Human Hippocampus across the Menstrual Cycle. Sci Rep 6 , 32833.27713470
Bleecker ML , Bolla-Wilson K , Agnew J , Meyers DA , 1988. Age-related sex differences in verbal memory. J Clin Psychol 44 (3 ), 403–411.3384968
Bove R , Secor E , Chibnik LB , Barnes LL , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , 2014. Age at surgical menopause influences cognitive decline and Alzheimer pathology in older women. Neurology 82 (3 ), 222–229.24336141
Brinton RD , 2009. Estrogen-induced plasticity from cells to circuits: predictions for cognitive function. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 30 (4 ), 212–222.19299024
Bus BA , Molendijk ML , Tendolkar I , Penninx BW , Prickaerts J , Elzinga BM , Voshaar RC , 2015. Chronic depression is associated with a pronounced decrease in serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor over time. Mol Psychiatry 20 (5 ), 602–608.25155878
Buschke H , 1984. Cued recall in amnesia. Journal of Clinical Neuropsychology 6 (4 ), 433–440.6501581
Chen DC , Wang J , Wang B , Yang SC , Zhang CX , Zheng YL , Li YL , Wang N , Yang KB , Xiu MH , Kosten TR , Zhang XY , 2009. Decreased levels of serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia: relationship to clinical phenotypes. Psychopharmacology 207 (3 ), 375–380.19787338
Chen X , He X , Tao L , Li J , Wu J , Zhu C , Yu F , Zhang L , Zhang J , Qiu B , Yu Y , Wang K , 2017. The Working Memory and Dorsolateral Prefrontal-Hippocampal Functional Connectivity Changes in Long-Term Survival Breast Cancer Patients Treated with Tamoxifen. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology 20 (5 ), 374–382.28177081
Daniel JM , Fader AJ , Spencer AL , Dohanich GP , 1997. Estrogen enhances performance of female rats during acquisition of a radial arm maze. Hormones and behavior 32 (3 ), 217–225.9454673
Donovan MJ , Lin MI , Wiegn P , Ringstedt T , Kraemer R , Hahn R , Wang S , Ibanez CF , Rafii S , Hempstead BL , 2000. Brain derived neurotrophic factor is an endothelial cell survival factor required for intramyocardial vessel stabilization. Development 127 (21 ), 4531–4540.11023857
Driscoll I , Martin B , An Y , Maudsley S , Ferrucci L , Mattson MP , Resnick SM , 2012. Plasma BDNF is associated with age-related white matter atrophy but not with cognitive function in older, non-demented adults. PloS one 7 (4 ), e35217.22523577
Drzezga A , Becker JA , Van Dijk KR , Sreenivasan A , Talukdar T , Sullivan C , Schultz AP , Sepulcre J , Putcha D , Greve D , Johnson KA , Sperling RA , 2011. Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden. Brain 134 (Pt 6 ), 1635–1646.21490054
Dumitriu D , Rapp PR , McEwen BS , Morrison JH , 2010. Estrogen and the aging brain: an elixir for the weary cortical network. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1204 , 104–112.20738280
Egan MF , Kojima M , Callicott JH , Goldberg TE , Kolachana BS , Bertolino A , Zaitsev E , Gold B , Goldman D , Dean M , Lu B , Weinberger DR , 2003. The BDNF val66met polymorphism affects activity-dependent secretion of BDNF and human memory and hippocampal function. Cell 112 (2 ), 257–269.12553913
Epperson CN , Sammel MD , Freeman EW , 2013. Menopause effects on verbal memory: findings from a longitudinal community cohort. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98 (9 ), 3829–3838.23836935
Erickson KI , Prakash RS , Voss MW , Chaddock L , Heo S , McLaren M , Pence BD , Martin SA , Vieira VJ , Woods JA , McAuley E , Kramer AF , 2010. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor is associated with age-related decline in hippocampal volume. J Neurosci 30 (15 ), 5368–5375.20392958
Eriksson PS , Perfilieva E , Bjork-Eriksson T , Alborn AM , Nordborg C , Peterson DA , Gage FH , 1998. Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. Nature medicine 4 (11 ), 1313–1317.
Espeland MA , Shumaker SA , Leng I , Manson JE , Brown CM , LeBlanc ES , Vaughan L , Robinson J , Rapp SR , Goveas JS , Wactawski-Wende J , Stefanick ML , Li W , Resnick SM , Group WS , 2013. Long-term effects on cognitive function of postmenopausal hormone therapy prescribed to women aged 50 to 55 years. JAMA Intern Med 173 (15 ), 1429–1436.23797469
Fernandez-Corcuera P , Salvador R , Monte GC , Salvador Sarro S , Goikolea JM , Amann B , Moro N , Sans-Sansa B , Ortiz-Gil J , Vieta E , Maristany T , McKenna PJ , Pomarol-Clotet E , 2013. Bipolar depressed patients show both failure to activate and failure to deactivate during performance of a working memory task. J Affect Disord 148 (2-3 ), 170–178.22854099
Figurov A , Pozzo-Miller LD , Olafsson P , Wang T , Lu B , 1996. Regulation of synaptic responses to high-frequency stimulation and LTP by neurotrophins in the hippocampus. Nature 381 (6584 ), 706–709.8649517
Fortress AM , Kim J , Poole RL , Gould TJ , Frick KM , 2014. 17beta-Estradiol regulates histone alterations associated with memory consolidation and increases Bdnf promoter acetylation in middle-aged female mice. Learn. Mem 21 (9 ), 457–467.25128537
Gleason CE , Dowling NM , Wharton W , Manson JE , Miller VM , Atwood CS , Brinton EA , Cedars MI , Lobo RA , Merriam GR , Neal-Perry G , Santoro NF , Taylor HS , Black DM , Budoff MJ , Hodis HN , Naftolin F , Harman SM , Asthana S , 2015. Effects of Hormone Therapy on Cognition and Mood in Recently Postmenopausal Women: Findings from the Randomized, Controlled KEEPS-Cognitive and Affective Study. PLoS medicine 12 (6 ), e1001833; discussion e1001833.26035291
Goldstein JM , Seidman LJ , Horton NJ , Makris N , Kennedy DN , Caviness VS Jr. , Faraone SV , Tsuang MT , 2001. Normal sexual dimorphism of the adult human brain assessed by in vivo magnetic resonance imaging. Cereb Cortex 11 (6 ), 490–497.11375910
Gonul AS , Akdeniz F , Taneli F , Donat O , Eker C , Vahip S , 2005. Effect of treatment on serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in depressed patients. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 255 (6 ), 381–386.15809771
Gonzalez A , Moya-Alvarado G , Gonzalez-Billaut C , Bronfman FC , 2016. Cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating neuronal growth by brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken) 73 (10 ), 612–628.27223597
Grober E , Lipton RB , Hall C , Crystal H , 2000. Memory impairment on free and cued selective reminding predicts dementia. Neurology 54 (4 ), 827–832.10690971
Gunstad J , Benitez A , Smith J , Glickman E , Spitznagel MB , Alexander T , Juvancic-Heltzel J , Murray L , 2008. Serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor is associated with cognitive function in healthy older adults. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 21 (3 ), 166–170.18503034
Hara Y , Park CS , Janssen WG , Roberts MT , Morrison JH , Rapp PR , 2012. Synaptic correlates of memory and menopause in the hippocampal dentate gyrus in rhesus monkeys. Neurobiol Aging 33 (2 ), 421 e417–428.
Harlow SD , Gass M , Hall JE , Lobo R , Maki P , Rebar RW , Sherman S , Sluss PM , de Villiers TJ , 2012. Executive summary of the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop +10: addressing the unfinished agenda of staging reproductive aging. Climacteric: The Journal of the International Menopause Society 15 (2 ), 105–114.22338612
Henderson VW , St John JA , Hodis HN , McCleary CA , Stanczyk FZ , Shoupe D , Kono N , Dustin L , Allayee H , Mack WJ , 2016. Cognitive effects of estradiol after menopause: A randomized trial of the timing hypothesis. Neurology 87 (7 ), 699–708.27421538
Holsinger RM , Schnarr J , Henry P , Castelo VT , Fahnestock M , 2000. Quantitation of BDNF mRNA in human parietal cortex by competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction: decreased levels in Alzheimer's disease. Brain research. Molecular brain research 76 (2 ), 347–354.10762711
Hussain D , Hanafi S , Konishi K , Brake WG , Bohbot VD , 2016. Modulation of spatial and response strategies by phase of the menstrual cycle in women tested in a virtual navigation task. Psychoneuroendocrinology 70 , 108–117.27213559
Hwang KS , Lazaris AS , Eastman JA , Teng E , Thompson PM , Gylys KH , Cole GM , Apostolova LG , 2015. Plasma BDNF levels associate with Pittsburgh compound B binding in the brain. Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 1 (2 ), 187–193.26207261
Jacobs EG , Holsen LM , Lancaster K , Makris N , Whitfield-Gabrieli S , Remington A , Weiss B , Buka S , Klibanski A , Goldstein JM , 2015. 17beta-estradiol differentially regulates stress circuitry activity in healthy and depressed women. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 40 (3 ), 566–576.25113601
Jacobs EG , Weiss B , Makris N , Whitfield-Gabrieli S , Buka SL , Klibanski A , Goldstein JM , 2016a. Reorganization of Functional Networks in Verbal Working Memory Circuitry in Early Midlife: The Impact of Sex and Menopausal Status. Cereb Cortex.
Jacobs EG , Weiss BK , Makris N , Whitfield-Gabrieli S , Buka SL , Klibanski A , Goldstein JM , 2016b. Impact of Sex and Menopausal Status on Episodic Memory Circuitry in Early Midlife. J Neurosci 36 (39 ), 10163–10173.27683911
Justin BN , Turek M , Hakim AM , 2013. Heart disease as a risk factor for dementia. Clin Epidemiol 5 , 135–145.23658499
Kantarci K , Lowe VJ , Lesnick TG , Tosakulwong N , Bailey KR , Fields JA , Shuster LT , Zuk SM , Senjem ML , Mielke MM , Gleason C , Jack CR , Rocca WA , Miller VM , 2016. Early Postmenopausal Transdermal 17beta-Estradiol Therapy and Amyloid-beta Deposition. J Alzheimers Dis 53 (2 ), 547–556.27163830
Kempermann G , Kuhn HG , Gage FH , 1998. Experience-induced neurogenesis in the senescent dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 18 (9 ), 3206–3212.9547229
Kerschbaum HH , Hofbauer I , Gfollner A , Ebner B , Bresgen N , Bauml KT , 2017. Sex, age, and sex hormones affect recall of words in a directed forgetting paradigm. Journal of neuroscience research 95 (1-2 ), 251–259.27870411
Kim A , Fagan AM , Goate AM , Benzinger TL , Morris JC , Head D , 2015. Lack of an association of BDNF Val66Met polymorphism and plasma BDNF with hippocampal volume and memory. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 15 (3 ), 625–643.25784293
Klein AB , Williamson R , Santini MA , Clemmensen C , Ettrup A , Rios M , Knudsen GM , Aznar S , 2011. Blood BDNF concentrations reflect brain-tissue BDNF levels across species. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology 14 (3 ), 347–353.20604989
Komulainen P , Pedersen M , Hanninen T , Bruunsgaard H , Lakka TA , Kivipelto M , Hassinen M , Rauramaa TH , Pedersen BK , Rauramaa R , 2008. BDNF is a novel marker of cognitive function in ageing women: the DR's EXTRA Study. Neurobiol Learn Mem 90 (4 ), 596–603.18707012
Korol DL , 2004. Role of estrogen in balancing contributions from multiple memory systems. Neurobiol Learn Mem 82 (3 ), 309–323.15464412
Korol DL , Kolo LL , 2002. Estrogen-induced changes in place and response learning in young adult female rats. Behav Neurosci 116 (3 ), 411–420.12049322
Kumamaru E , Numakawa T , Adachi N , Kunugi H , 2011. Glucocorticoid suppresses BDNF-stimulated MAPK/ERK pathway via inhibiting interaction of Shp2 with TrkB. FEBS Lett 585 (20 ), 3224–3228.21946312
Li G , Peskind ER , Millard SP , Chi P , Sokal I , Yu CE , Bekris LM , Raskind MA , Galasko DR , Montine TJ , 2009. Cerebrospinal fluid concentration of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and cognitive function in non-demented subjects. PloS one 4 (5 ), e5424.19412541
Lisofsky N , Martensson J , Eckert A , Lindenberger U , Gallinat J , Kuhn S , 2015. Hippocampal volume and functional connectivity changes during the female menstrual cycle. Neuroimage 118 , 154–162.26057590
Liu F , Day M , Muniz LC , Bitran D , Arias R , Revilla-Sanchez R , Grauer S , Zhang G , Kelley C , Pulito V , Sung A , Mervis RF , Navarra R , Hirst WD , Reinhart PH , Marquis KL , Moss SJ , Pangalos MN , Brandon NJ , 2008. Activation of estrogen receptor-beta regulates hippocampal synaptic plasticity and improves memory. Nat. Neurosci 11 (3 ), 334–343.18297067
Lockwood KA , Alexopoulos GS , van Gorp WG , 2002. Executive dysfunction in geriatric depression. Am J Psychiatry 159 (7 ), 1119–1126.12091189
Loring DW , Papanicolaou AC , 1987. Memory assessment in neuropsychology: Theoretical considerations and practical utility. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol 9 , 340–358.3597727
Luine VN , Richards ST , Wu VY , Beck KD , 1998. Estradiol enhances learning and memory in a spatial memory task and effects levels of monoaminergic neurotransmitters. Hormones and behavior 34 (2 ), 149–162.9799625
Makris N , Swaab DF , van der Kouwe A , Abbs B , Boriel D , Handa RJ , Tobet S , Goldstein JM , 2013. Volumetric parcellation methodology of the human hypothalamus in neuroimaging: normative data and sex differences. Neuroimage 69 , 1–10.23247186
Maldjian JA , Laurienti PJ , Kraft RA , Burdette JH , 2003. An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitecture atlas-based interrogation of fmri data sets. Neuroimage 19 , 1233–1239.12880848
Marques-Vidal P , Bochud M , Bastardot F , Luscher T , Ferrero F , Gaspoz JM , Paccaud F , Urwyler A , von Kanel R , Hock C , Waeber G , Preisig M , Vollenweider P , 2011. Levels and determinants of inflammatory biomarkers in a Swiss population-based sample (CoLaus study). PLoS One 6 (6 ), e21002.21695270
Martins TB , 2002. Development of internal controls for the Luminex instrument as part of a multiplex seven-analyte viral respiratory antibody profile. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 9 (1 ), 41–45.11777827
Masur DM , Fuld PA , Blau AD , Thal LJ , Levin HS , Aronson MK , 1989. Distinguishing normal and demented elderly with the selective reminding test. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol 11 , 615–630.2808653
McEwen BS , Gould E , Orchinik M , Weiland NG , Woolley CS , 1995. Oestrogens and the structural and functional plasticity of neurons: Implications for memory, ageing, and neurodegenerative processes. Ciba Foundation Symposium 191 , 52–66; discussion 66-73.8582205
Meyer-Lindenberg A , Poline JB , Kohn PD , Holt JL , Egan MF , Weinberger DR , Berman KF , 2001. Evidence for abnormal cortical functional connectivity during working memory in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 158 (11 ), 1809–1817.11691686
Miskowiak KW , Vinberg M , Glerup L , Paulson OB , Knudsen GM , Ehrenreich H , Harmer CJ , Kessing LV , Siebner HR , Macoveanu J , 2016. Neural correlates of improved executive function following erythropoietin treatment in mood disorders. Psychol Med 46 (8 ), 1679–1691.26996196
Mizuno M , Yamada K , Olariu A , Nawa H , Nabeshima T , 2000. Involvement of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in spatial memory formation and maintenance in a radial arm maze test in rats. J Neurosci 20 (18 ), 7116–7121.10995859
Molendijk ML , Spinhoven P , Polak M , Bus BA , Penninx BW , Elzinga BM , 2014. Serum BDNF concentrations as peripheral manifestations of depression: evidence from a systematic review and meta-analyses on 179 associations (N=9484). Mol Psychiatry 19 (7 ), 791–800.23958957
Morrison JH , Brinton RD , Schmidt PJ , Gore AC , 2006. Estrogen, menopause, and the aging brain: how basic neuroscience can inform hormone therapy in women. J Neurosci 26 (41 ), 10332–10348.17035515
Mosconi L , Berti V , Guyara-Quinn C , McHugh P , Petrongolo G , Osorio RS , Connaughty C , Pupi A , Vallabhajosula S , Isaacson RS , de Leon MJ , Swerdlow RH , Brinton RD , 2017a. Perimenopause and emergence of an Alzheimer's bioenergetic phenotype in brain and periphery. PloS one 12 (10 ), e0185926.29016679
Mosconi L , Berti V , Quinn C , McHugh P , Petrongolo G , Varsavsky I , Osorio RS , Pupi A , Vallabhajosula S , Isaacson RS , de Leon MJ , Brinton RD , 2017b. Sex differences in Alzheimer risk: Brain imaging of endocrine vs chronologic aging. Neurology 89 (13 ), 1382–1390.28855400
Mu JS , Li WP , Yao ZB , Zhou XF , 1999. Deprivation of endogenous brain-derived neurotrophic factor results in impairment of spatial learning and memory in adult rats. Brain Res 835 (2 ), 259–265.10415381
Murer MG , Yan Q , Raisman-Vozari R , 2001. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the control human brain, and in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. Progress in neurobiology 63 (1 ), 71–124.11040419
Nakahashi T , Fujimura H , Altar CA , Li J , Kambayashi J , Tandon NN , Sun B , 2000. Vascular endothelial cells synthesize and secrete brain-derived neurotrophic factor. FEBS Lett 470 (2 ), 113–117.10734218
Nelson HE , 1982. National Adult Reading Test (NART): Test Manual. NFER-Nelson, Windsor, England.
O'Brien JL , O'Keefe KM , LaViolette PS , DeLuca AN , Blacker D , Dickerson BC , Sperling RA , 2010. Longitudinal fMRI in elderly reveals loss of hippocampal activation with clinical decline. Neurology 74 (24 ), 1969–1976.20463288
O'Bryant SE , Hobson VL , Hall JR , Barber RC , Zhang S , Johnson L , Diaz-Arrastia R , 2011. Serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels are specifically associated with memory performance among Alzheimer's disease cases. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders 31 (1 ), 31–36.21135555
Ormerod BK , Lee TT , Galea LA , 2004. Estradiol enhances neurogenesis in the dentate gyri of adult male meadow voles by increasing the survival of young granule neurons. Neuroscience 128 (3 ), 645–654.15381292
Packard MG , Teather LA , 1997. Intra-hippocampal estradiol infusion enhances memory in ovariectomized rats. Neuroreport 8 (14 ), 3009–3013.9331907
Pan W , Banks WA , Fasold MB , Bluth J , Kastin AJ , 1998. Transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor across the blood-brain barrier. Neuropharmacology 37 (12 ), 1553–1561.9886678
Papp KV , Amariglio RE , Dekhtyar M , Roy K , Wigman S , Bamfo R , Sherman J , Sperling RA , Rentz DM , 2014. Development of a psychometrically equivalent short form of the Face-Name Associative Memory Exam for use along the early Alzheimer's disease trajectory. Clin Neuropsychol 28 (5 ), 771–785.24815535
Persson J , Spreng RN , Turner G , Herlitz A , Morell A , Stening E , Wahlund LO , Wikstrom J , Soderlund H , 2014. Sex differences in volume and structural covariance of the anterior and posterior hippocampus. Neuroimage 99 , 215–225.24857714
Phillips HS , Hains JM , Armanini M , Laramee GR , Johnson SA , Winslow JW , 1991. BDNF mRNA is decreased in the hippocampus of individuals with Alzheimer's disease. Neuron 7 (5 ), 695–702.1742020
Phung TK , Waltoft BL , Laursen TM , Settnes A , Kessing LV , Mortensen PB , Waldemar G , 2010. Hysterectomy, oophorectomy and risk of dementia: a nationwide historical cohort study. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders 30 (1 ), 43–50.20689282
Piccinni A , Marazziti D , Catena M , Domenici L , Del Debbio A , Bianchi C , Mannari C , Martini C , Da Pozzo E , Schiavi E , Mariotti A , Roncaglia I , Palla A , Consoli G , Giovannini L , Massimetti G , Dell'Osso L , 2008. Plasma and serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in depressed patients during 1 year of antidepressant treatments. J Affect Disord 105 (1-3 ), 279–283.17553570
Pillai A , Kale A , Joshi S , Naphade N , Raju MS , Nasrallah H , Mahadik SP , 2010. Decreased BDNF levels in CSF of drug-naive first-episode psychotic subjects: correlation with plasma BDNF and psychopathology. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology 13 (4 ), 535–539.19941699
Pius-Sadowska E , Machalinski B , 2017. BDNF - A key player in cardiovascular system. J Mol Cell Cardiol 110 , 54–60.28736262
Poo MM , 2001. Neurotrophins as synaptic modulators. Nat Rev Neurosci 2 (1 ), 24–32.11253356
Protopopescu X , Butler T , Pan H , Root J , Altemus M , Polanecsky M , McEwen B , Silbersweig D , Stern E , 2008. Hippocampal structural changes across the menstrual cycle. Hippocampus 18 (10 ), 985–988.18767068
Rasmussen P , Brassard P , Adser H , Pedersen MV , Leick L , Hart E , Secher NH , Pedersen BK , Pilegaard H , 2009. Evidence for a release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor from the brain during exercise. Experimental physiology 94 (10 ), 1062–1069.19666694
Rentz DM , Amariglio RE , Becker JA , Frey M , Olson LE , Frishe K , Carmasin J , Maye JE , Johnson KA , Sperling RA , 2011. Face-name associative memory performance is related to amyloid burden in normal elderly. Neuropsychologia 49 (9 ), 2776–2783.21689670
Rentz DM , Weiss BK , Jacobs EG , Cherkerzian S , Klibanski A , Remington A , Aizley H , Goldstein JM , 2016. Sex differences in episodic memory in early midlife: impact of reproductive aging. Menopause.
Rocca WA , Bower JH , Maraganore DM , Ahlskog JE , Grossardt BR , de Andrade M , Melton LJ 3rd , 2007. Increased risk of cognitive impairment or dementia in women who underwent oophorectomy before menopause. Neurology 69 (11 ), 1074–1083.17761551
Rocca WA , Grossardt BR , Shuster LT , 2011. Oophorectomy, menopause, estrogen treatment, and cognitive aging: clinical evidence for a window of opportunity. Brain Res 1379 , 188–198.20965156
Rosenberg L , Park S , 2002. Verbal and spatial functions across the menstrual cycle in healthy young women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 27 (7 ), 835–841.12183218
Ryan J , Stanczyk FZ , Dennerstein L , Mack WJ , Clark MS , Szoeke C , Kildea D , Henderson VW , 2012. Hormone levels and cognitive function in postmenopausal midlife women. Neurobiol Aging 33 (7 ), 1138–1147.22607736
Sarazin M , Chauvire V , Gerardin E , Colliot O , Kinkingnehun S , de Souza LC , Hugonot-Diener L , Garnero L , Lehericy S , Chupin M , Dubois B , 2010. The amnestic syndrome of hippocampal type in Alzheimer's disease: an MRI study. J Alzheimers Dis 22 (1 ), 285–294.20847406
Scharfman H , Goodman J , Macleod A , Phani S , Antonelli C , Croll S , 2005. Increased neurogenesis and the ectopic granule cells after intrahippocampal BDNF infusion in adult rats. Exp Neurol 192 (2 ), 348–356.15755552
Scharfman HE , MacLusky NJ , 2006. Estrogen and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in hippocampus: complexity of steroid hormone-growth factor interactions in the adult CNS. Frontiers in neuroendocrinology 27 (4 ), 415–435.17055560
Scharfman HE , Mercurio TC , Goodman JH , Wilson MA , MacLusky NJ , 2003. Hippocampal excitability increases during the estrous cycle in the rat: a potential role for brain-derived neurotrophic factor. J Neurosci 23 (37 ), 11641–11652.14684866
Shanmugan S , Epperson CN , 2014. Estrogen and the prefrontal cortex: towards a new understanding of estrogen's effects on executive functions in the menopause transition. Human brain mapping 35 (3 ), 847–865.23238908
Sheline YI , Raichle ME , Snyder AZ , Morris JC , Head D , Wang S , Mintun MA , 2010. Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly. Biol Psychiatry 67 (6 ), 584–587.19833321
Singh M , Meyer EM , Simpkins JW , 1995. The effect of ovariectomy and estradiol replacement on brain-derived neurotrophic factor messenger ribonucleic acid expression in cortical and hippocampal brain regions of female Sprague-Dawley rats. Endocrinology 136 (5 ), 2320–2324.7720680
Skucas VA , Duffy AM , Harte-Hargrove LC , Magagna-Poveda A , Radman T , Chakraborty G , Schroeder CE , MacLusky NJ , Scharfman HE , 2013. Testosterone depletion in adult male rats increases mossy fiber transmission, LTP, and sprouting in area CA3 of hippocampus. J Neurosci 33 (6 ), 2338–2355.23392664
Smith J , Browning M , Conen S , Smallman R , Buchbjerg J , Larsen KG , Olsen CK , Christensen SR , Dawson GR , Deakin JF , Hawkins P , Morris R , Goodwin G , Harmer CJ , 2017. Vortioxetine reduces BOLD signal during performance of the N-back working memory task: a randomised neuroimaging trial in remitted depressed patients and healthy controls. Mol Psychiatry.
Sohrabji F , Miranda RC , Toran-Allerand CD , 1995. Identification of a putative estrogen response element in the gene encoding brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 (24 ), 11110–11114.7479947
Spencer-Segal JL , Waters EM , Bath KG , Chao MV , McEwen BS , Milner TA , 2011. Distribution of phosphorylated TrkB receptor in the mouse hippocampal formation depends on sex and estrous cycle stage. J Neurosci 31 (18 ), 6780–6790.21543608
Spencer JL , Waters EM , Milner TA , McEwen BS , 2008. Estrous cycle regulates activation of hippocampal Akt, LIM kinase, and neurotrophin receptors in C57BL/6 mice. Neuroscience 155 (4 ), 1106–1119.18601981
Tadic A , Wagner S , Schlicht KF , Peetz D , Borysenko L , Dreimuller N , Hiemke C , Lieb K , 2011. The early non-increase of serum BDNF predicts failure of antidepressant treatment in patients with major depression: a pilot study. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 35 (2 ), 415–420.20732374
Tanapat P , Hastings NB , Reeves AJ , Gould E , 1999. Estrogen stimulates a transient increase in the number of new neurons in the dentate gyrus of the adult female rat. J Neurosci 19 (14 ), 5792–5801.10407020
Toyooka K , Asama K , Watanabe Y , Muratake T , Takahashi M , Someya T , Nawa H , 2002. Decreased levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in serum of chronic schizophrenic patients. Psychiatry Res 110 (3 ), 249–257.12127475
Tyler WJ , Pozzo-Miller L , 2003. Miniature synaptic transmission and BDNF modulate dendritic spine growth and form in rat CA1 neurones. J Physiol 553 (Pt 2 ), 497–509.14500767
Uh HW , Hartgers FC , Yazdanbakhsh M , Houwing-Duistermaat JJ , 2008. Evaluation of regression methods when immunological measurements are constrained by detection limits. BMC Immunol 9 , 59.18928527
Vignali DA , 2000. Multiplexed particle-based flow cytometric assays. J Immunol Methods 243 (1-2 ), 243–255.10986418
Warren SG , Humphreys AG , Juraska JM , Greenough WT , 1995. LTP varies across the estrous cycle: enhanced synaptic plasticity in proestrus rats. Brain Res. 703 (1-2 ), 26–30.8719612
Wei SM , Baller EB , Kohn PD , Kippenhan JS , Kolachana B , Soldin SJ , Rubinow DR , Schmidt PJ , Berman KF , 2018. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val(66)Met genotype and ovarian steroids interactively modulate working memory-related hippocampal function in women: a multimodal neuroimaging study. Mol Psychiatry 23 (4 ), 1066–1075.28416813
Whitfield-Gabrieli S , 2009. Region of Interest Extraction (REX) Toolbox. Boston, MA.
Wickens TD , 2001. Elementary Signal Detection Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wolf OT , Kudielka BM , Hellhammer DH , Torber S , McEwen BS , Kirschbaum C , 1999. Two weeks of transdermal estradiol treatment in postmenopausal elderly women and its effect on memory and mood: verbal memory changes are associated with the treatment induced estradiol levels. Psychoneuroendocrinology 24 (7 ), 727–741.10451908
Woolley CS , McEwen BS , 1993. Roles of estradiol and progesterone in regulation of hippocampal dendritic spine density during the estrous cycle in the rat. The Journal of comparative neurology 336 (2 ), 293–306.8245220
Woolley CS , McEwen BS , 1994. Estradiol regulates hippocampal dendritic spine density via an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanism. J. Neurosci 14 (12 ), 7680–7687.7996203
Woolley CS , Wenzel HJ , Schwartzkroin PA , 1996. Estradiol increases the frequency of multiple synapse boutons in the hippocampal CA1 region of the adult female rat. The Journal of comparative neurology 373 (1 ), 108–117.8876466
Woolley CS , Wenzel HJ , Schwartzkroin PA , 1996. Estradiol increases the frequency of multiple synapse boutons in the hippocampal CA1 region of the adult female rat. J. Comp. Neurol 373 (1 ), 108–117.8876466
Wroolie TE , Kenna HA , Williams KE , Rasgon NL , 2015. Cognitive Effects of Hormone Therapy Continuation or Discontinuation in a Sample of Women at Risk for Alzheimer Disease. The American journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry 23 (11 ), 1117–1126.26209223
Yoshii A , Constantine-Paton M , 2010. Postsynaptic BDNF-TrkB signaling in synapse maturation, plasticity, and disease. Dev Neurobiol 70 (5 ), 304–322.20186705
Zhang Z , Fan J , Ren Y , Zhou W , Yin G , 2013. The release of glutamate from cortical neurons regulated by BDNF via the TrkB/Src/PLC-gamma1 pathway. J Cell Biochem 114 (1 ), 144–151.22886995
