LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9713490
21159
Med Image Anal
Med Image Anal
Medical image analysis
1361-8415
1361-8423

33166772
7725891
10.1016/j.media.2020.101877
NIHMS1639535
Article
Developing univariate neurodegeneration biomarkers with low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition*
Wang Gang a*
Dong Qunxi b
Wu Jianfeng b
Su Yi c
Chen Kewei c
Su Qingtang d
Zhang Xiaofeng d
Hao Jinguang d
Yao Tao d
Liu Li d
Zhang Caiming e
Caselli Richard J. f
Reiman Eric M. c
Wang Yalin b*
for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
a Ulsan Ship and Ocean College, Ludong University, Yantai, China
b School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, P.O. Box 878809 Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
c Banner Alzheimer’s Institute and Banner Good Samaritan Pet Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA
d School of Information and Electrical Engineering, Ludong University, Yantai, China
e Shandong Province Key Lab of Digital Media Technology, Shandong University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, China
f Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ, USA
CRediT authorship contribution statement

Gang Wang: Methodology, Writing - review &amp; editing. Qunxi Dong: Methodology, Writing - review &amp; editing. Jianfeng Wu: Methodology. Yi Su: Methodology. Kewei Chen: Validation, Writing review &amp; editing. Qingtang Su: Methodology. Xiaofeng Zhang: Methodology. Jinguang Hao: Methodology. Tao Yao: Methodology. Li Liu: Methodology. Caiming Zhang: Methodology. Richard J. Caselli: Validation, Writing - review &amp; editing. Eric M. Reiman: Validation, Writing - review &amp; editing. Yalin Wang: Methodology, Writing - review &amp; editing.

* Corresponding authors: gangwang1970@ldu.edu.cn (G. Wang), ylwang@asu.edu (Y. Wang).
6 11 2020
21 10 2020
1 2021
01 1 2022
67 101877101877
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Cognitive decline due to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is closely associated with brain structure alterations captured by structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI). It supports the validity to develop sMRI-based univariate neurodegeneration biomarkers (UNB). However, existing UNB work either fails to model large group variances or does not capture AD dementia (ADD) induced changes. We propose a novel low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition method capable of stably quantifying the morphological changes induced by ADD. Specifically, we propose a numerically efficient rank minimization mechanism to extract group common structure and impose regularization constraints to encode the original 3D morphometry connectivity. Further, we generate regions-of-interest (ROI) with group difference study between common subspaces of Aβ+ AD and Aβ− cognitively unimpaired (CU) groups. A univariate morphometry index (UMI) is constructed from these ROIs by summarizing individual morphological characteristics weighted by normalized difference between Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU groups. We use hippocampal surface radial distance feature to compute the UMIs and validate our work in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. With hippocampal UMIs, the estimated minimum sample sizes needed to detect a 25% reduction in the mean annual change with 80% power and two-tailed P = 0.05 are 116, 279 and 387 for the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Aβ+ CU groups, respectively. Additionally, for MCI patients, UMIs well correlate with hazard ratio of conversion to AD (4.3, 95% CI = 2.3–8.2) within 18 months. Our experimental results outperform traditional hippocampal volume measures and suggest the application of UMI as a potential UNB.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Alzheimer’s disease
Subspace decomposition
Univariate morphometry index
Minimum sample size
Cox proportional hazard model

1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease and also the most common type of dementia. Its prevalence is predicted to triple to 13.8 million by 2050. It is generally agreed that effective diagnosis and treatment of AD could have enormous public health benefits. Prior research on structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) supported its validity as a potential noninvasive neurodegeneration biomarker of AD (Frisoni et al., 2010; Sperling et al., 2011; Jack et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2017). Such sMRI-based imaging biomarkers will facilitate the development of effective interventions that may postpone (or prevent) symptomatic AD (Caselli and Reiman, 2013; Langbaum et al., 2013).

Structural MRI-based measures of atrophy including whole brain (Fox et al., 1999; Chen et al., 2007; Stonnington et al., 2010), entorhinal cortex (Cardenas et al., 2011), hippocampus (Jack et al., 2003; Thompson et al., 2004; den Heijer et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011; Dong et al., 2019) and temporal lobe volumes (Hua et al., 2010), as well as ventricular enlargement (Jack et al., 2003; Thompson et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2011; Dong et al., 2020), correlate closely with changes in cognitive performance, inspiring various neuroimaging biomarker approaches. Among them, hippocampal atrophy measures from sMRI are widely used, as hippocampal morphometry changes are apparent in the early stages of memory decline and may anticipate progression to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD (Jack et al., 2003).

While much AD imaging biomarker research has been devoted to group difference-based analyses, a univariate neurodegeneration biomarker (UNB) based on an individual patient’s brain scans with high diagnostic accuracy would be highly desirable for clinical use (Sabuncu et al., 2016). Such a personalized measure may overcome inflated Type I error due to multivariate comparisons. For example, for randomized clinical trials (RCT), regulatory agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), requires conventional univariate hypothesis testing and its associated statistical power analysis (Langbaum et al., 2013). Meanwhile, a single MRI-based measure of cerebral atrophy was used as a neurodegeneration biomarker in the recently proposed AD amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration (A/T/N) framework (Jack et al., 2016). It is a descriptive system for categorizing multidomain biomarker findings at the individualized level in a format that is easy to understand and use. Rather than conceptualizing AD primarily as a clinicopathological entity, in this system AD is diagnosed using biomarkers such as brain imaging or by measuring substances in the cerebral spinal fluid. This change may allow preclinical AD diagnosis on presymptomatic patients (Knopman et al., 2018). However, a recent work (Illan-Gala et al., 2018) reported that the currently available neurodegeneration biomarkers, including hippocampal volume and cortical signature of AD (Dickerson et al., 2009), were poorly correlated both in their whole dataset and along the AD continuum. Therefore, to advance computational neuroanatomy to clinical usage, developing a robust method to quantify brain sMRI difference using a statistically powerful UNB will be highly advantageous for clinical diagnosis and prognosis.

In the past decade, a variety of univariate morphological MRI biomarker algorithms have been developed (e.g. Racine et al., 2018; Cardenas et al., 2011; Cortechs Labs, 2020; Vemuri et al., 2008; Tu et al., 2020). Meanwhile, a few multivariate analysis frameworks (Hua et al., 2011; Gutman et al., 2013) took statistical or machine learning approaches to optimize the minimum sample size estimation for clinical trials. Among them, most are based on regions-of-interest (ROI) analyses and obtain a UNB by summarizing image information from these ROIs. Such methods enjoy good biological interpretability and excellent computational efficiency. However, there are a number of issues: (1) In their modeling, such approaches do not take into account the strong noise and the large within-group variance on the obtained sMR images; (2) When setting up training data, they usually use the clinical symptom-based AD diagnosis without the confirmation of imaging or fluid Aβ information. These difficulties have largely limited the statistical power and generalibility of their UNB due to excessive imaging noise, strong individual morphological differences and the inhomogeneity of dementia.

To address these challenges, it is important to generate reliable and robust sMRI ROIs that reflect intrinsic structural differences caused by AD dementia (ADD). Recently, research on low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition by rank minimization and sparse constraint has attracted strong interest (Cao et al., 2017; Jang et al., 2016; Javed et al., 2016). In particular, robust principal component analysis (RPCA) (Candès et al., 2011) through principal component pursuit (PCP) decomposes a data matrix into two subspaces which include a low-rank component and a sparse component. The low-rank subspace may mine the common structure belonging to a specific group, and the sparse component can detect salient features belonging to a specific individual (Hastie et al., 2015). When individual brain image measurements of the same group subjects are stacked into columns to generate the group observation matrix, we may expect its low-rank components correspond to the group common structure. Except for this group common structure, individual image differences correspond to the sparse component. Furthermore, one of the hallmarks of AD is the accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques (Aβ) in human brains and a positive Aβ reading is now accepted as ‘dementia due to AD’ together with the presence of clinical symptoms. In this paper, we propose a novel subspace decomposition-based method to generate the ROIs based on the group difference from extracted low-rank components of Aβ positive AD and Aβ negative cognitively unimpaired (CU) groups and later define a univariate neurodegeneration biomarker, univariate morphometry index (UMI), which may reflect intrinsic morphological changes induced by ADD and also have strong generalization ability on new subjects. Previous research (e.g. Thompson et al., 2004; Apostolova et al., 2010; Qiu et al., 2010; Costafreda et al., 2011; Dong et al., 2019) has demonstrated that surface-based hippocampal morphometry analysis offers advantages over volume measures. Therefore, we apply our subspace decomposition method to hippocampal measures obtained with our prior hippocampal morphometry study (Shi et al., 2013) to construct UMIs. We hypothesize that our low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition framework together with surface-based measures may be used to compute robust and efficient UNBs and improve their statistical power compared with the traditional univariate biomarker, such as hippocampal volumes (Jack et al., 2003; Cortechs Labs, 2020). Here, we set out to validate our hypothesis on brain sMR images from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort.

2. Material and methods

2.1. Subjects

Data is downloaded from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database ((Mueller et al., 2005), adni.loni.usc.edu). ADNI is the result of efforts of many co-investigators from a broad range of academic institutions and private corporations. Subjects have been recruited from over 50 sites across the U.S. and Canada. The primary goal of ADNI is to test whether biological markers, such as serial MRI and positron emission tomography (PET), combined with clinical and neuropsychological assessments, can measure the progression of MCI and early AD. Subjects originally recruited for ADNI-1 and ADNI-GO had the option to be followed in ADNI-2. For up-to-date information, see www.adniinfo.org.

In this study, we use brain structural MRI data from 151 Aβ positive (Aβ+) AD patients and 271 Aβ negative (Aβ−) CU to identify the ROIs which are further used to define UMI. To validate our algorithm, we study (1) longitudinal brain imaging changes via group difference and minimum sample size estimation; and (2) future clinical decline prediction for MCI patients via survival analysis. In the first experiment, we use structural MRI data from 165 longitudinal Aβ+ subjects, including 46 AD, 55 MCI and 64 CU subjects. All subjects of each longitudinal group underwent two tests, including the baseline test and a 24-months test. In the second experiment, we use 155 MCI patients including 59 MCI subjects who have converted to probable AD and 96 non-converter MCI subjects within 18-months period.

2.2. System pipeline overview

Here we briefly overview the processing pipeline in our univariate morphometry index (UMI) system. Following sections are detailed explanations of each step. The pipeline code is publicly available at http://gsl.lab.asu.edu/software/univariate-neurodegeneration-biomarkers.

Fig. 1 summarizes the overall sequence of steps in the system. First, we reconstruct hippocampal surfaces after we segment hippocampi from T1-weighted MR images. We register hippocampal surfaces across subjects and compute surface morphometry features, radial distance (RD) (Pizer et al., 1999; Styner et al., 2006; Thompson et al., 2004) (the first row, Fig. 1). Second, we build group morphometry (i.e., radial distance - RD) observation matrices, i.e., the observation matrix of Aβ positive (Aβ+) AD group and the observation matrix of Aβ negative (Aβ−) CU group, where each individual RD features are concatenated as a column vector. Due to the morphological similarity within the same group, we further decompose each group RD matrix into low-rank component and sparse component based on the matrix factorization with orthogonal constraint and sparsity shrinkage strategy (the second row, Fig. 1). Third, with group difference study, we identify significantly different areas between the low rank components of two groups, Aβ+ AD group and Aβ− CU group, as the regions-of-interest (ROI) and use them as the significant morphological change regions induced by ADD (the third row, Fig. 1). Finally, based on the registration result of an individual hippocampal surface, the UMI of the individual subject is computed through the voxel-wise AD atrophy degrees and the individual atrophy degrees defined on the ROIs (Section 2.5). As applications of the computed UMIs, we apply them to three different studies, including longitudinal analysis, sample size estimation, and progression rate predictions from MCI to probable AD (the fourth row, Fig. 1)

2.3. Image acquisition and hippocampal morphometry surface feature computation

High-resolution brain structural MRI scans are acquired at multiple ADNI sites using 1.5 Tesla MRI scanners manufactured by General Electric Healthcare, Siemens Medical Solutions, and Philips Medical Systems. For each subject, the T1-weighted MRI scan is collected with a sagittal 3D MP-RAGE sequence. Typical 1.5 T acquisition parameters are repetition time (TR) of 2400 ms, minimum full excitation time (TE), inversion time (TI) of 1000 ms, flip angle of 8°, 24 cm field of view. The acquisition matrix is 192 × 192 × 166 in the x, y, and z dimensions and the voxel size is 1.25 × 1.25 × 1.2 mm3. In-plane, zero-filled reconstruction (i.e., sinc interpolation) generate a 256 × 256 matrix for a reconstructed voxel size of 0.9375 × 0.9375 × 1.2 mm3.

The hippocampal substructures are segmented with FIRST (Patenaude et al., 2011) based on the T1-weighted MRI scans, and hippocampal surfaces are automatically reconstructed based on the segmentations (Han et al., 2003; Lorensen and Cline, 1987). To overcome the noise caused by the image scanning and the partial volume effects, a smoothing process consisted of two steps, i.e., progressive meshes (Hoppe, 1996) and loop subdivision(Loop, 1987), is applied to the reconstructed hippocampal surfaces. A nonlinear surface registration method, inverse consistent fluid registration method (Shi et al., 2013), is applied to register individual hippocampal surfaces to a standard template surface by constrained harmonic maps. After the registration, surface deformation statistics are computed to obtain the radial distance (RD) (Pizer et al., 1999; Styner et al., 2006; Thompson et al., 2004) represented as the shortest distance from each surface vertex to the medical axis of a tube-shape surface. For the following subspace decomposition analysis, we represent an individual’s RD features as a column vector and concatenate them to construct group morphometry observation matrices.

2.4. Low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition algorithm

Based on the robust principal component analysis (RPCA) (Candès et al., 2011), the low-rank component L and the sparse component S in a morphological observation matrix A∈ℜm×n (m is the dimension of the biomarker and n is the number of the subjects) can be extracted through a convex optimization procedure. The low-rank component L is the group common structure contributed by all the individuals in the same group, and the sparse component S is the sparse characteristics which belong to specific individual subjects. In practice, the observation matrix is usually corrupted by noise N which can affect every data matrix entry and lead to analysis errors. To solve this problem and achieve a stable separation, a convex model called stable principal component pursuit (SPCP) (Zhou et al., 2010) has been proposed. This model may guarantee a stable recovery of L and S with an error bound proportional to the overall noise magnitude ‖N‖F. The solution to SPCP can be formulated by the following equation, (1) minL,S‖L‖*+λ‖S‖1 s.t.:‖L+S−A‖F≤ϵ

In Eq. (1), ‖⋅‖* is the nuclear norm and ‖⋅‖1 is the l1-norm, given by ‖L‖*=Σiσi(L), ‖S‖1=Σi,j|si,j| respectively, where σi(L) is the vector of singular values of L, the λ controls the relative importance of the low-rank component L vs. the sparse component S. The noise N is implicit in the equation, i.e., L + S + N = A. Since SPCP algorithm involves minimizing a combination of l1-norm and nuclear norm, the singular value decomposition (SVD) step included in the nuclear norm makes the convergence of SPCP optimization problem very slow, especially for large-scale observation matrices (Tseng, 2008; Lin et al., 2009). To reduce the SVD computation cost for a large-scale matrix, we adopt a low-rank matrix factorization mechanism (Liu and Yan, 2012) to factorize a large-sized matrix into the product of two small-sized matrices. Because the group common structure L is of low-rank, L can be factorized into the product of two small-sized matrices, i.e., L = UV, U∈ℜm×r, V∈ℜr×n, r≪m, r≪n. Then we obtain ‖L‖*=‖UV‖*=‖V‖* by enforcing U to be column orthonormal, i.e., UTU = I, I is the identity matrix. Thus, Eq. (1) can be transformed into an optimization problem constrained on a small-scale matrix, (2) minU,V,S‖V‖*+λ‖S‖1 s.t.: ‖UV+S−A‖F≤ϵ, L=UV, UTU=I.

Since any low-rank matrix L can be factorized into a product of two small-sized matrices L = UV with UTU = I, this transformation significantly speeds up the SPCP optimization for large-scale matrices.

To extract the sparse component S without loss of the original spatial information, we define S as continuous patches in local regions. We further propose a novel formulation which considers the original spatial distribution of the sparse morphological component S. Supposing we have an observation data matrix A∈ℜm×n and A = {a1, …, ai, …, an} where ai denotes the column vector of the original morphological measurements of ith subject. In order to detect the local continuous characteristics, we enforce a local sparse measure ‖S‖Ω,1 for every column in the observation matrix, defined as follows: (3) {A(p,i)→Xqi, X¯qi=(∑Ωq(Xqi)2)12, X¯qi→A¯(p,i)‖S‖Ω,1=A(p,i)⊙Tμ|A¯(p,i)|

where p is the number of the row in the observation matrix and q is the vertex sequence number in the triangular mesh of the specific subject. And Ωq denotes the one-ring area centered on the vertex q, ⊙is the Hadamard product, Tμ is the shrinking function and μ is the threshold. By using ‖S‖Ω,1 to replace the l1-norm constraint in Eq. (2), and representing the local spatial continuous characteristics of the salient features, Eq. (2) can be modified as, (4) minU,V,S‖V‖*+λ‖S‖Ω,1 s.t.: ‖UV+S−A‖F≤ϵ, L=UV, UTU=I

Given the well-known alternating direction method and the Douglas-Rachford operator splitting (DR) method (Douglas and Rachford, 1956), the minimization task of the Eq. (4) can be decomposed into three simpler tasks which solve the variables L, S, N separately in a consecutive order. Let Y be the Lagrange multiplier associated with the linear constraint in Eq. (4), the augmented Lagrangian function of Eq. (4) is: (5) LA(V,S,N):=‖V‖*+λ‖S‖Ω,1−&lt;Y, UV+S+N−A&gt;+β2‖UV+S+N−A‖F2

Based on the DR method, let βk &gt; 0, the according iteration procedure for Eq. (5) is described as follows: (6) {Nk+1=argminN∈Bβk2‖N+UkVk+Sk−1βkYk−A‖F2Sk+1=argminN∈ℜm×nλ‖S‖Ω,1+βk2‖S+UkVk+Nk+1−1βkYk−A‖F2Lk+1=argminV∈ℜr×n‖V‖*+βk2‖UV+Sk+1+Nk+1−1βkYk−A‖F2Yk+1=Yk−βk(Uk+1Vk+1+Sk+1+Nk+1−A)

The generated subproblems in Eq. (6) admit analytic solutions. The first subproblem involving Nk+1 can be solved explicitly via: (7) Nk+1=min{‖Nk‖F,ϵ}‖Nk‖FNk

where Nk=1βkYk+A−UkVk−Sk. Note that the computation complexity for this subproblem is O(mn). For the second subproblem involving Sk+1 in Eq. (6), it is equivalent to solve the following equation.

(8) minSλ‖S‖Ω,1+βk2‖1βkYk+A−UkVk−Nk+1−S‖F2

Denoting GSk=1βkYk+A−UkVk−Nk+1, and substituting GSk(p,i) for A(p, i) in Eq. (3). The following formulation gives a closed-form solution of the minimization with respect to (9) Sk+1(p,i)=GSk(p,i)max(0,1−λ/βkG¯Sk(p,i))

Here G¯Sk(p,i) is the result matrix which is the A¯(p,i) in Eq. (3). Therefore, Eq. (9) sets the pixels of S(p, i) to be zero value if the corresponding G¯Sk(p,i) is less than λ/βk, or shrinks the corresponding pixel by a factor 1−λ/βkG¯Sk(p,i). After an iteration of S update, we obtain Sk+1, Nk+1 terms. Denote GLk=1βkYk+A−Ek+1−Nk+1, and the known condition (Uk)TUk = I, Lk = UkVk. To acquire the Uk+1 with column orthonormal and V k+1 with a small scale, we chose two-steps. First, we fix the V k and compute the Uk+1. According to Higham and Papadimitriou (1995), the update of Uk is given by the following equation, (10) Uk+1=P(GLk(Vk)T)

For a given matrix Z=GLk(Vk)T, SVD can be applied to Z and the result is Z = PΣQ. Therefore the operator P can be defined as P(Z)=PQT. It can be verified that P(Z) is always column orthonormal (i.e.,(P(Z))TP(Z)=I). Through Eq. (10), we can get the Uk+1 by satisfying the condition (i.e.,‖Lk+1‖*=‖Uk+1Vk+1‖*=‖Vk+1‖*). Second, fixing Uk+1 and computing the Vk+1, the update of Vk is as follows, (11) Vk+1=Qμ((Uk+1)TGLk)

For a given matrix T=(Uk+1)TGLk, μ &gt; 0, the solution of minimizing of the nuclear norm of T is given by Qμ(T), defined by (12) Qμ(T):=Jdiag(Sμ(Σ))K

where J, K and Σ are obtained by the singular value decomposition (SVD) of T, and Sμ(Σ):=sign(Σi,i)⋅max(0,abs(Σi,i)−μ) (Cai et al., 2008). Here μ = 1/βk+1. Thus, according to Eqs. (10) and (11), the solution of Lk+1 in Eq. (6) can also be solved by (13) Lk+1=Uk+1Vk+1

With Eqs. (10) and (11), the SVD computation complexity is reduced from O (mn min (mn)) to O (mnr). In addition, we set the parameters in Eq. (5) as λ=1max{m,n}, where m and n represent the numbers of rows and columns in the observation data matrix. The parameter β0=1.25σL, βk+1 = α · βk. The σL is the largest singular value of the observation data matirx and α ∈ (1, 2). And the parameter ϵ in Eq. (1) is set as (min(m,n)+8⋅min(m,n)). δ (Tao and Yuan, 2011), δ is the standard deviation of the observation data matrix. Finally, the algorithm is terminated when ‖(Uk+1Vk+1,Sk+1)−(UkVk,Sk)‖F‖(UkVk,Sk)‖F+1≤τ⋅δ. Based on the above description, we can use the proposed method to efficiently and accurately recover the low-rank component and the sparse component with a local continuous constraint from the large-scale data matrix in a complicated environment. In particular, we can use the low-rank component, i.e., where L denotes the group common structure, to study the group differences without considering the individual specific diversities in S.

2.5. Univariate morphometry index (UMI)

Taking the morphological RD measures on the hippocampal surfaces as features, we apply the subspace decomposition algorithm to analyze data from both Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU groups and obtain the essential group common morphological structures from the individuals of the same group, i.e., Ls of Aβ+ AD group and Aβ− CU group, while discarding the within-group morphological differences and the noise. Using the two group common morphological structures, the ROIs are generated through group difference analysis. This means that the generated ROIs reflect the hippocampal morphological structure changes from CU to AD. Next, we obtain the voxel-wise AD atrophy degrees by normalizing the mean differences between the L of Aβ+ AD group and the L of Aβ− CU group in the predefined ROIs. The individual atrophy degree can be computed in the predefined ROIs by normalizing the differences between the RD vector of an individual subject and the low-rank component mean of the Aβ− CU group. Last, the UMIs can be obtained through the voxel-wise summation across all the voxels on the predefined ROIs with the production of AD atrophy degrees and the individual atrophy degree: (14) UMI=∑i=1r(DTi⋅DWi)100

where r is the total number of voxels in the predefined ROI, DTi denotes the atrophy degree at voxel i of the testing individual T (defined as the mean of the Aβ negative CU group subtracted by the individual RD on the predefined ROI), and DWi is the atrophy degree at voxel i (defined as the difference of the mean of Aβ+ AD group and the mean of Aβ− CU group on the predefined ROI). From Eq. (14), we see that the UMIs measure how similar the individual atrophy degree is when compared to the AD atrophy degree in the selected ROIs, similar to our previous work (Chen et al., 2011). In other words, the greater the UMIs, the closer the individual atrophy degree from the AD morphological characteristics.

2.6. Assessments of univariate morphometry index

2.6.1. Group comparisons

We compare the group mean differences for the UMI results of different longitudinal Aβ+ groups based on the paired t-test, including longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU groups. All subjects of each longitudinal group underwent two tests, including the baseline test and a 24-months test. We use Cohen’s d test to evaluate the effect size. Cohen’s d test takes the difference in means between two groups and is devided by the pooled standard deviation of the groups. For MCI converters and non-converters within 18-months period, we analyze the group differences of the UMI measures, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (Folstein et al., 1975) scores, Auditory Verbal Learning Test Total (AVLT-Total) (Rey, 1964) scores and hippocampal volume measurements by using analysis of variance (ANOVA) method to compare their statistical discrimination abilities.

2.6.2. Minimum sample size estimation for longitudinal study

To assess the statistical power of the defined UMI, we study the minimum sample size estimation, i.e., with 80% power and a 25% reduction in the mean annual change, using a two-sided test and standard significance level α – 0.05 for a hypothetical two-arm study (treatment vs. placebo, as advocated by the ADNI Biostatistics Core) (Beckett et al., 2010) for longitudinal (baseline and 24-months follow-up) studies. The minimum sample size is computed from the below formula: (15) minimum sample size=Cσ2(m1−m2)2

where σ denotes the standard deviation of the biomarkers’ changes, m1 and m2 refer to the mean value of the biomarkers at the time t1 and t2 of the longitudinal data. C is a constant. If the minimum sample size derived from a biomarker B1 was smaller than that of another biomarker B2, we may conclude that biomarker B1 has more differentiation ability than biomarker B2. It suggests that minimum sample size is an indicator for characterizing the statistical power of biomarkers.

2.6.3. Prediction rates of progression from MCI to probable AD

We compare UMIs, hippocampal volume measurements and AVLT-Total scores in their abilities to predict rates of conversion from MCI to AD within the 18-months period after baseline. We initially use Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analyses to determine the measurement cut-offs with optimal sensitivity and specificity for distinguishing between the MCI converters and those who are stable. The nearest point method is used to find the cut-offs on the ROC curve closest to (0,1), that is, the point with optimal sensitivity and specificity. The cut-offs are used to compare the MCI patients with or without a positive test score (i.e., those with or without a higher UMI, lower hippocampal volume or lower AVLT-Total score) in the hazard ratio of converting from MCI to AD within 18-months period. We also report area under the curve (AUC), which is an effective and combined measure of sensitivity and specificity that describe the inherent validity of a classification test. Thus, for each biomarker of interest, univariate Cox proportional hazard model is constructed to determine the hazard ratio for progression to AD within the 18-months period in MCI patients who are classified into subjects with scores above the cut-off value (positive biomarker) in comparison with those with scores below (negative biomarker). And Kaplan-Meier plots are used to describe the ability of each biomarker of interest to distinguish between those MCI patients with and without a positive biomarker.

3. Experimental results

3.1. Computing univariate morphometric index (UMI) with hippocampal surface features

To extract the significant morphological changes induced by AD, we apply the subspace decomposition to a cohort consisting of patients with dementia due to AD (defined Aβ+ AD) and Aβ− CU subjects. In the ADNI dataset, there are 422 subjects including 151 Aβ+ AD patients and 271 Aβ− CU subjects (Table 1). Demographic and clinical data are compared using a one-way analysis of variance, and the gender data are analyzed by a χ2 test (Crivello et al., 2014). Table 1 indicates that the factors of age and gender of the two groups are matched, while the MMSE is significantly different between these two groups.

When the individual RD features belonging to the same group are stacked into columns to generate a morphological observation matrix, the observation matrix is low-rank, and the low-rank components correspond to the group common morphological structure. We use the generated common morphological structures of Aβ+ AD group and Aβ− CU group to form ROIs which represent the regions significantly affected by ADD. To validate if generated ROIs are consistent each time, we randomly divide the subjects of each group into 10 folds and chose 9 folds from each group as the training sets. This process is repeated 10 times. We apply our subspace decomposition algorithm to extract the low-rank component L of Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU groups. The total performance indicators for left hippocampus (LH) and right hippocampus (RH) of the two groups based on our algorithm are shown in Table 2. Here we set the parameter λ as 0.0082.

As shown in Table 2, the computed β0, δ, rank(V) and ‖L+S−D‖/‖D‖ parameters of the same group are similar whether on the LH or the RH. The rank of L is obtained by counting the number of the eigenvalues of L whose values are greater than three times the δ. After extracting the L and S from the training data each time, we define the ROIs by permutation tests (Gill, 2007) between two groups based on the low-rank component L. The permutation t-test is a type of statistical significance test. The distribution of the test statistics under the null hypothesis is obtained by calculating all possible values under rearrangements of the labels on the observed data points. As the training samples are taken randomly each time (the changing rate is about 10%), each obtained ROI will be inconsistent if the extracted L components are not robust. We compare the extracted ROIs based on the L components with the RD data. The generated ROIs are the vertices whose permutation t-test p-values represent the group differences smaller than 0.00001. The results of the generated ROIs are shown in Fig. 2, where (a) and (b) are the statistical ROI results for the LH, (c) and (d) are the statistical ROI results for the RH. Fig. 2(a) and (c) are the statistical ROI results based on the low-rank components. (b) and (d) are the statistical ROIs based on the raw RD data. Non-blue colors indicate the number of times a vertex is selected. The red color denotes that the vertex is selected for 10 times after 10 ROI generation processes. From the results, we can see that the selected ROIs based on the low-rank components are more robust than the ones based on the raw RD data. For the left hippocampus, the vertices selected for 10 times account for 73% of the total number of ROI vertices based on the low-rank components, while it is 51% based on the raw RD data. It suggests that the low-rank components may represent the essential common structure from the subjects without the interference of the unique individual structure and the noise.

All the experiments are performed with an Intel Core i7 personal computer, with 3.40 GHz CPU, 16GB RAM and MATLAB 2016 installed in the Win 7 operating system. The execution time for extracting low-rank components of right hippocampus (RH) and left hippocampus (LH) from 151 Aβ+ patients and 271 Aβ− subjects is approximately 170.24 s. The execution time for generating ROIs of RH and LH by permutation t-tests between these two groups is approximately 7441.64 s when the number of random permutation processes is set as 5000 based on the Monte Carlo method. Based on the obtained low-rank components and ROIs, the execution time to compute UMI of a new subject by using Eq. (14) is approximately 0.12 s on average. Since the ROI generation is usually done once during the training state, our relatively short UMI computation time on a new subject (0.12 s) demonstrates the feasibility of our algorithm for online UMI computation.

In order to verify whether the generated UMI results based on the low-rank components have reasonable statistical power for distinguishing different clinical groups, we introduce the UMI based on raw RD measures (UMI-RD) and the volume measures to compare the discrimination powers with the UMIs. The UMIs of the longitudinal Aβ+ subjects are computed according to the Eq. (14) based on the obtained ROIs shown in Fig. 2(a) and (c). The UMIs-RDs of the longitudinal Aβ+ subjects are computed according to Eq. (14) based on the obtained ROIs shown in Fig. 2(b) and (d). For the clarity of the content in the following sections, if not stated, UMIs refer to those generated based on subspace decomposition and UMI-RDs refer to those generated based on raw RD measures. The volumetric MRI measurements of the hippocampus are generally accepted as one of the best established biomarkers for clinical AD progression research (Jack et al., 1999). Similar to prior approaches that used hippocampal volume for AD diagnosis, (e.g. Pennanen et al., 2004; Chupin et al., 2007; 2009), the hippocampal volume is computed on our smoothed surfaces after they are linearly registered to the MNI imaging space (Patenaude et al., 2011; Shi et al., 2013; Dong et al., 2019).

3.2. Longitudinal data analysis

Based on the predefined ROIs and the AD atrophy degrees, we study the statistical differentiation ability of the low-rank components for the longitudinal subjects. In this study, we use 165 longitudinal Aβ+ subjects, including 46 AD, 55 MCI and 64 CU subjects. The demographic characteristic statistics information for the study samples is shown in Table 3. All subjects undergo two tests, including the baseline test and a 24-months test.

3.2.1. Group difference study

The obtained UMI, UMI-RD and volume results show that the mean values of the UMIs and UMI-RDs have a upward trend while the mean value of the volume measures have a downward trend from baseline to the 24-months follow-up, among CU to MCI to AD stage. The statistical comparison results of different longitudinal groups based on the UMI, UMI-RD and volume measures are shown in Table 4. The p-value results of different longitudinal groups are computed by two-sided paired t-tests. The effect sizes of different longitudinal groups are computed by paired Cohen’s d measure.

For the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU, the p-values and effect sizes for UMIs mean differences are 7.74e – 15 and 1.39, 3.54e – 10 and 0.92, 1.28e – 09 and 0.85, respectively. For UMI-RDs, the p-values and effect sizes of the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU are 1.52e – 03 and 0.79, 3.70e – 03 and 0.65, 1.29e – 02 and 0.56, respectively. For hippocampal volume measures, the p-values and effect sizes of the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU are 1.48e – 13 and 1.31, 9.72e – 09 and 0.90, 1.19e – 08 and 0.74, respectively. The results indicate that the UMIs may have a stronger discrimination ability to distinguish the longitudinal groups than both the UMI-RDs and the hippocampal volume measures.

3.2.2. Minimum sample size estimation

Next we will demonstrate the reduction of minimum sample size by using UMI as a biomarker in clinical studies. With Eq. (15), we estimate the minimum sample sizes of UMIs, UMI-RDs and volume measures. As shown in Fig. 3, the minimum sample sizes of the UMIs of the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU groups are 116, 279 and 387, respectively. For UMI-RDs, the minimum sample sizes of the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU groups are 402, 590 and 787, respectively. For volume measures, the minimum sample sizes of the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU groups are 136, 352 and 451, respectively. Regardless of whether it is based on the UMIs or the volume measures, the minimum sample sizes of longitudinal Aβ+ AD group is smallest, followed by the longitudinal Aβ+ MCI group, and the minimum sample sizes of longitudinal Aβ+ CU group is largest. It indicates that the morphological changes in the Aβ+ AD group are relatively largest, followed by Aβ+ MCI group, and the morphological changes in Aβ+ CU group are relatively smallest between the baseline and the 24-months follow-up. Meanwhile, the results show that the minimum sample sizes from the volume measures and UMI-RDs are all larger than our UMIs, indicating that the subspace decomposition-based UMIs may have detected the essential morphological changes induced by ADD better than the volume measures and UMI-RD measures.

3.3. Predicting clinical decline in MCI patients

In our experiments, we use 155 MCI patients (Table 5) containing 59 MCI subjects who have converted to probable AD and 96 MCI non-converters within 18-months period. Based on the two kinds of predefined ROIs from the low-rank components and raw RD measures of the Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU groups in Section 3.1, we compute the UMIs and UMI-RDs of MCI converters and MCI non-converters, respectively. The MCI converters are distinguished from the non-converters by the UMIs (p-value &lt; 0.0001), the UMI-RDs (p-value = 0.076), the hippocampal volume measures (p-value = 0.0015) and the AVLT-Total scores (p-value = 0.0002). We choose the UMIs, UMI-RDs, hippocampal volume measures and AVLT-Total scores to predict the conversion rates from MCI to AD within 18 months after baseline, respectively.

Then we determine the measurement cut-offs with optimal sensitivity and specificity for distinguishing between the MCI converters and those who are stable based on Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis. As shown in Fig. 4. The AUC, 95% confidence interval (CI) of AUC and optimal criterion are 0.749, [0.673, 0.815] and 6.27 for the UMIs, 0.596, [0.514, 0.673] and 1.87 for the UMI-RDs, 0.659, 0.662, [0.581, 0.763] and 7897.50 for volume measures and [0.579, 0.733] and 29 for AVLT-Total scores, respectively.

Based on the optimal criteria of the UMIs, UMI-RDs, volume measures and AVLT-Total scores, four additional labels are added to the MCI-converter and MCI-nonconverter subjects, i.e., High/Low UMI (HU/LU), High/Low UMI-RD (HU-RD/LU-RD), High/Low volume (HV/LV) and High/Low AVLT-Total (HA/LA). In the view of the effects of AD, it may increase the UMI and UMI-RD and decrease the hippocampal volume and AVLT-Total scores. We call HU, HU-RD, LV and LA as positive biomarkers, and LU, LU-RD, HV and HA as negative biomarkers. After separately fitting the Cox regression model (Hosmer et al., 2008) using the four labels above, we compute hazard ratios of 18-months conversion to AD in MCI patients with positive biomarkers versus negative biomarkers. The results in Table 6 show the regression beta coefficients (β), the hazard ratios (HRs) and statistical significance (p-value) for UMIs, UMI-RDs, volume measures and AVLT-Total scores within the 18-months observation period. The UMIs, UMI-RDs, hippocampal volume measures, and AVLT-Total scores remain significant for predicting conversion from MCI to AD. In particular, when the MCI patients with LU, LU-RD, HA and HV negative biomarkers are chosen as the reference groups, the MCI patients with HU positive biomarkers had the highest HRs of conversion to AD (4.3 95% CI = 2.3–8.2), followed by LV (2.7 95% CI = 1.5–4.7), HU-RD (2.1 95% CI = 1.2–3.7) and LA (2 95% CI = 1.2–3.3).

In addition, we compute survival probabilities for progression to AD in MCI patients who are classified into positive or negative biomarkers by fitting the Kaplan-Meier curves. The survival probablities of the MCI patients based on UMIs, UMI-RDs, hippocampus volume measures and AVLT-Total scores are shown in Fig. 5. In each plot, the two lines represent survival curves of the two groups with positive and negative biomarkers, i.e., HU vs. LU, HU-RD vs. LU-RD, HV vs. Lv and HA vs. LA. The vertical lines in each plot indicate the censored data, their corresponding x values indicate the time at which censoring occurred. Here the log-rank test is used to compare the survival group differences based on χ2 test. A result with p-value &lt; 0.05 indicates that the two groups are significantly different in terms of survival time. From the results in Fig. 5, we can conclude that the two group survival differences based on the four labels are significant, that is, the patients with LU, LU-RD, HV and HA have a significantly better prognosis compared to patients with HU, HU-RD, LV and LA. Moreover, the largest survival group difference is found in UMIs, followed by hippocampal volume measures UMI-RDs and AVLT-Total scores. For example, at the time point of 18-months, the probability of survival is approximately 0.45, 95% CI [0.35, 0.57] for HU group and 0.83, 95% CI [0.75, 0.92] for LU group, 0.54, 95% CI [0.45, 0.65] for HU-RD group and 0.74, 95% CI [0.64, 0.86] for LU-RD group, 0.49, 95% CI [0.40, 0.62] for LV group and 0.76, 95% CI [0.67, 0.87] for HV group, 0.52, 95% CI [0.41, 0.65] for LA group and 0.72, 95% CI [0.63, 0.82] for HA group. This may also indicate that the UMIs based on subspace decomposition have stronger discrimination power for survival analysis.

4. Discussion

Our current work has two main findings. First, it is possible to develop and apply a low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition approach to solve UNB problems. To develop a robust and effective UNB, an important question is how to accurately extract group common structures with the consideration of recovering sparse components within a feature space corrupted by strong group variances and noise. In this work, we propose to take a subspace decomposition approach and improve the RPCA method (Candès et al., 2011) by adopting a low-rank matrix factorization mechanism (Liu and Yan, 2012), imposing regularization constraints into the sparse component to encode spatial connectivity in the original 3D morphometry features and proposing an efficient numerical scheme to solve the formulated optimization problem. We identify the ROIs by studying the group differences between common structures of pathology-confirmed AD group (Aβ+ AD) and Aβ− CU groups. Based on the ROIs, we further define our UMI by summarizing an individual morphological structure information in these ROIs. The resulted UMI may sensitively identify abnormal degrees induced by neurodegenerative diseases without the interference of individual morphological discrepancies and noise. Second, although low-rankness and sparsity techniques (Hastie et al., 2015; Vidal et al., 2016; Lin and Zhang, 2017) are widely adopted in computer vision and medical imaging research (e.g. Wang et al., 2012; 2018), to our knowledge, it is the first work that apply them to surface morphometry features for UNB generations. Our current experimental results in longitudinal data analysis and survival analysis show that surface hippocampal morphometry features, i.e., radial distance (Pizer et al., 1999; Thompson et al., 2004; Styner et al., 2006), lead to superior results than the traditional hippocampal volume measures (Jack et al., 1999; Cortechs Labs, 2020). Similar to previous work (Thompson et al., 2004; Apostolova et al., 2010; Qiu et al., 2010; Costafreda et al., 2011; Dong et al., 2019), it also verifies that surface-based brain subcortical analysis may be useful to capture AD-induced morphological changes.

4.1. Influence of subspace decomposition parameters

In Eq. (4), we see that the parameter λ which controls the relative importance of the low-rank term L vs. the sparse term S was set as 1max{m,n}, where m and n represent the numbers of rows and columns in the observation data matrix. To understand the relationships between the L, S with the different values of the parameter λ, we chose the Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU group as the research objects. We find that the rank(V) and ‖S‖Ω,1 tend to decrease with an increase of the λ, as shown in Fig. 6. Because the threshold of the sparse component constraint is increasing with the increase of the λ in the Eq. (9), the immediate result is the decrease of the ‖S‖Ω,1. In addition, although the change of λ is not directly related to the change of rank(V), results indicate that the rank(V) decrease due to gradually increasing removal of the noise and the sparse term S with the increase of λ. And the rank(V) is stable when λ was greater than 0.006. However, when the λ become too large, it results in homogeneous structures, reducing the discriminatory power for classifying the Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU groups. To validate the distinguishing power of the UMIs generated under different λ, we randomly use 90% of the Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU group as the training data to extract the common structures of these two groups with each λ. The generated UMIs from remaining 10% of these two groups are classified using ROC analysis. This process is repeated 10 times. The average classification error rates with the different λ are shown in Table 7. The results show that both high or low λ will lead to an increase in classification error rate. This indicates that a low λ introduces excessive noise and residual information of individuals and a high λ makes the common structures of the two groups tend to be consistent. In both cases, the generated ROI cannot correctly reflect the morphological changes caused by AD, resulting in a decrease in UMI classification results. Based on the above discussion, λ is empirically set as 0.0082 throughout this paper.

4.2. Effect size comparison between Aβ+ and Aβ− subjects in the longitudinal study

To further validate the subspace decomposition-based UMIs have strong discrimination power for detecting the morphological changes induced by ADD, we analyze additional longitudinal Aβ− subjects from ADNI database comparable to the Aβ+ group, which includes 32 AD, 54 MCI and 74 CTL subjects. The demographic characteristic statistics information and the obtained UMIs for these Aβ− samples are shown in Table 8. Similar to Aβ+ data, after the registration, surface deformation statistics are computed to obtain the raw RDs of all the longitudinal Aβ− subjects. Based on the predefined ROIs (Fig. 2(a) and (c) in Section 3.1) and the AD atrophy degrees, we compute the UMIs of different longitudinal Aβ− groups.

Then we use Cohen’s d as effect size measure to test the differences between the univariate biomarkers (UMI vs. volume measure) changes of the longitudinal Aβ+ group and those of Aβ− group in same clinical groups (AD, MCI and CU). The effect size comparison results are shown in Table 9. The results show that the differences between UMI changes of the longitudinal Aβ+ group and those of the longitudinal Aβ− group are more significant than the differences between volume changes of the longitudinal Aβ+ group and those of the longitudinal Aβ− group. Since the UMIs are defined on the ROIs induced by ADD, it leads to larger changes in UMIs of longitudinal Aβ+ group, and smaller changes in UMIs of longitudinal Aβ− group. The results may also justify that the subspace decomposition-based UMIs have strong discrimination power for detecting the morphological changes induced by ADD.

4.3. Correlation analysis with cognitive outcomes in different clinical groups

In this section, we investigate whether changes of UMI results are correlated with changes of clinical rating scores within 24 months, such as Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes CDR-SB (Morris, 1993), AD Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog11) (Rosen et al., 1984) and MMSE scores. CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog11 scores are used to help track the progression of cognitive impairment, where a higher score indicates more severe dementia. Here we use the same Aβ+ longitudinal subjects (46 AD, 55 MCI and 64 CU in Section 3.2) and with the Pearson parametric test (Lemasson et al., 2012), we explore the correlation between the UMI changes and the clinical outcome changes within 24 months, including CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog11 and MMSE scores. The correlation analysis results, i.e., correlation coefficients (R), 95% confidential intervals of R and correlation significance of t-test for R between the UMI changes and the changes of CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog11 and MMSE scores for different Aβ+ longitudinal groups are shown in Table 10.

Results show that the UMIs of Aβ+ longitudinal AD and MCI groups have moderate correlations with the CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog11 and MMSE scores. This is likely due to that the proposed UMIs well correlate with clinical outcomes within Aβ+ longitudinal AD and MCI groups. However, the correlations between the UMIs and the CDR-SB and MMSE scores of Aβ+ longitudinal CU group are not so significant as that of Aβ+ AD and MCI groups. From the perspective of data distribution, it is due to the fact that the distribution trend of the morphological changes depicted by UMIs differs from the distribution trend of the cognitive changes depicted by CDR-SB and MMSE scores within Aβ+ longitudinal CU group. A plausible reason may be that the morphological changes caused by AD occurred before the cognitive decline in the stage of unimpaired cognition, as proposed in the hypothetical model of AD biomarkers (Jack et al., 2013) and validated in a number of prior work (Sperling et al., 2011; Jack et al., 2018; Weston et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2017), including our own study (Dong et al., 2019).

4.4. Assessment of enrichment performance

To evaluate the enrichment performance of UMIs, we use a cut-point based enrichment strategy (Yu et al., 2014) in Aβ+ longitudinal MCI group (the same MCI group in Section 3.2 denoted as unenriched group) to select the MCI subgroup (enriched group) and calculate the three clinical characteristics (CDR-SB, MMSE and ADAS-Cog11) of the selected MCI subgroup. The enrichment strategy is implemented as follows. First, a range of cutoff values are determined as the 60th, 75th and 90th percentiles of UMIs in the Aβ− CU cohort (271 Aβ− CU subjects in Section 3.1), which serve as a normative reference population. Secondly, for each cut-off value, we extract the clinical characteristics of the selected MCI subgroup and derive implications for clinical trials where only this subgroup will be enrolled. We calculate the effect size of the 24-months change in each of the three clinical measures. Denoting the effect size of the enriched group by ES′ and the unenriched group by ES, we then calculate the sample size N′ = (ES/ES′)2N required to achieve a statistical power equivalent to an unenriched group of size N (Yu et al., 2014). The comparison results of effect sizes and sample sizes of different clinical measures for the specific cut-points, i.e., 60th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the UMIs distribution of CU cohort, are shown in Fig. 7.

In the upper plot of Fig. 7, the results show that the effect sizes of all three clinical measures increase in all enriched group according to the specific cutoff values, comparing to the unenriched group. In general, more stringent cutoff values (higher UMI thresholds) lead to greater effect size. Cut-points corresponding to the 60th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the Aβ− CU cohort distribution yield effect sizes of 14.9% – 31.3% (CDR-SB), 15.3% – 44.4% (ADAS-Cog11) and 14.3% – 34.3% (MMSE) greater than the unenriched group. The sample size results are shown in the lower plot of Fig. 7. Reduced sample sizes are obtained across the three cut-points for the three clinical measures. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals of the estimated sample sizes. For cut-points corresponding to 60th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the UMIs distribution of CU cohort, sample sizes corresponding to 57.8% – 74.5% (CDR-SB), 47.8% – 74.0% (ADAS-Cog11) and 54.6% – 75.9% (MMSE) of the unenriched case (100%) are estimated. This indicates that subspace decomposition-based UMIs provides an enrichment biomarker to select a fraction of the screening group that is likely to imminently progress most rapidly.

4.5. Comparison with heat kernel smoothing

The motivation of our subspace decomposition work is to increase the signal-to-noise (SNR) and improve the sensitivity of statistical analysis. Surface smoothing work, especially heat kernel smoothing algorithm (Chung et al., 2005), has been adopted in our prior work (e.g. Shi et al., 2015; Paquette et al., 2017) to increase the SNR of surface tensor-based morphometry (TBM) features and boost the sensitivity of statistical analysis. Here we use the heat kernel smoothing results to generate UMIs and compare its performance with the one of our subspace decomposition-based UMIs. First, we use heat kernel smoothing (the kernel width = 1 and the number of iteration = 100) to generate the smoothed hippocampal RD measures of the same subjects in Section 3.1, i.e., 151 Aβ+ AD patients and 271 Aβ− CU subjects. Second, following the content of Section 3.1, we randomly select 90% of the subjects in each group to generate ROIs. This process is repeated 10 times. At each time, the regions of significant smoothed RD difference (ROIs) between Aβ+ AD group and Aβ− CU group are assessed via the two-sample t-test with random field theory based p-value correction. Here, we use p-value correction method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) to controlling the false discovery rate (FDR). The desired false discovery rate (q) is set as 0.0001 and the generated ROIs are the vertices whose t-test corrected p-values represent the group differences smaller than q. The results of the generated ROIs are shown in Fig. 8. Non-blue colors indicate the number of times a vertex is selected. The red color denotes that the vertex is selected for 10 times after 10 ROI generation processes. From the results, we can see that the selected ROIs based on the smoothed RD measures have a certain degree of similarity with the ROIs based on low-rank components. This indicated that heat kernel smoothing and subspace decomposition have similar effects in improving the stability of the ROI generation.

Using AD atrophy degrees and individual atrophy degrees on the generated ROIs based on the smoothed RD measures, we compute the UMIs of the longitudinal Aβ+ subjects according to the Eq. (14). With Eq. (15), we estimate the minimum sample sizes of UMIs based on the smoothed RD measures. The minimum sample sizes of the longitudinal Aβ+ AD, Aβ+ MCI and Aβ+ CU groups are 261, 374 and 546, respectively. The results show that the minimum sample sizes from the UMIs based on smoothed RD measures are all smaller than those based on raw RD measures. This indicates that heat kernel smoothing may increase the SNR and the sensitivity of statistical analysis. On the other hand, the results show that the minimum sample sizes from the heat kernel smoothing-based UMIs are all larger than low-rank decomposition-based UMIs, indicating that the low-rank decomposition-based UMIs gain more statistical power than those of the heat kernel smoothing-based UMIs. Part of the reason may be due to the fact that the decomposed low rank and subspace better characterizes group level morphometry features.

4.6. Limitations

The proposed low-rank and sparse subspace decomposition-based UMI represents our initial efforts to develop robust ROI-based UNB. Nonetheless, there are several limitations of this study to consider. First, a relatively small number of subjects are included as the research objects, e.g. the ROIs are extracted from 151 Aβ+ AD patients and 271 Aβ− CU subjects, which are certainly not enough to fully characterize the general morphological change patterns caused by ADD. Consequently, the range of morphological characteristics of individuals identified by the computed UMIs are likely incomplete. Besides, we have not tested our UMI framework together with the discovered ROIs in a cohort other than ADNI. Even so, our current results demonstrate the proposed approach may improve statistical power in a variety of UNB applications. Effect size comparison results also show that this proposed UMI measure is more sensitive to detect the hippocampal morphological changes than hippocampal volume measure. Second, we choose the RD as the hippocampal morphological feature because RD has been applied in several subcortical studies and served as an ideal description of the hippocampal structural changes induced by ADD. However, tensor-based morphometry (Chung et al., 2008) and multivariate TBM (Wang et al., 2011) may be sensitive to deformations such as rotation, dilation, and shear along the surface tangent direction, and theorefore the TBM or mTBM may effectively capture hippocampal structural alterations (e.g. atrophy and enlargement) in tensor fields. The ability to describe the morphological features of the hippocampus will be enhanced if we combine the TBM or mTBM measures and the RD measure. Third, in this study, we are using UMIs alone to predict rates of progression from MCI to probable AD without combining other types of biomarkers, such as amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration (A/T/N) measurement framework (Jack et al., 2016), fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) measurements of the regional cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (CMRgl) decline (Landau et al., 2010) as a marker of clinical AD progression, fibrillar amyloid-β PET measurements using Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) (Ikonomovic et al., 2008) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid β1–42 levels (Fagan et al., 2007) as biomarkers of AD pathology. If we combine these biomarkers with UMIs and carry out multivariate Cox analyses, the correctness of survival probabilities would likely be improved.

5. Conclusion

In this paper, we present a univariate neurodegeneration biomarker generation framework based on subspace decomposition to correctly and effectively depict the morphological changes induced by ADD. Applying the matrix decomposition and the local sparse constraints on the RD observation matrices, we obtain the ROIs closely associated with ADD which are robust to image noise. We then generate the UMIs to improve the statistical power for in vivo MRI morphological analyses. Our empirical results demonstrate the potential that the UMIs may capture the ADD-induced brain morphometry abnormalities of the longitudinal groups at high risk for AD. Based on the optimal classification criterion, the UMIs have strong discrimination power for predicting the conversion rates from MCI subjects (converter and non-converter) to AD. The proposed framework is general and may be generalized to process other 3D brain imaging data, such as PET imaging data (Chen et al., 2011). In future studies, we will also evaluate our method in other brain imaging cohorts, such as Arizona APOE cohort (Caselli et al., 2004; 2009) and OASIS cohort (LaMontagne et al., 2019).

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61772253, 61771231, 61873117, 61872170, 61903172); NSFC Joint Fund with Zhejiang Integration of Informatization and Industrialization under Key Project (U1609218); Key Research and Development Program of Shandong Province (2019JZZY010125); Shandong Province Higher Educational Science and Technology Program (J17KA050); National Institute on Aging (RF1AG051710, R21AG065942, R01AG031581, P30AG19610); National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (R01EB025032); and Arizona Alzheimer’s Consortium.

Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen Idec Inc.; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; Eisai Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research &amp; Development, LLC.; Johnson &amp; Johnson Pharmaceutical Research &amp; Development LLC.; Medpace, Inc.; Merck &amp; Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Synarc Inc.; and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. The Canadian Institutes of Rev December 5, 2013 Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (http://www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California.

Fig. 1. The proposed univariate morphometry index (UMI) generation system pipeline, illustrated by the intermediate results.

Fig. 2. The extracted ROI results for the Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU group differences based on the low-rank data and the radial distance (RD) data. (a) and (b) are the statistical ROI results for the left hippocampus (LH). (c) and (d) are the statistical ROI results for the right hippocampus (RH). And (a) and (c) are the statistical ROI results based on the low-rank components. (b) and (d) are the statistical ROI based on the raw RD data. All statistical ROI results are obtained by the permutation t-test (p-value &lt; 0.00001). Non-blue colors indicate the number of times a vertex is selected. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 3. The minimum sample size comparisons between UMIs, UMI-RDs and volume measures for AD, MCI and CU longitudinal Aβ groups.

Fig. 4. The ROC analysis results of UMIs, UMI-RDs, volume measures and AVLT-total scores.

Fig. 5. The survival probability analysis for progression to AD in MCI patients based on UMI, UMI-RD, hippocampal volume and AVLT-total measures.

Fig. 6. The rank(V ) and ‖S‖Ω,1 comparisons between Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU groups with the different λ.

Fig. 7. Effect of UMI-based enrichment on effect sizes and sample sizes, as a function of cut-point (60th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the distribution of UMIs in the Aβ− CU cohort) for CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog11 and MMSE measures. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals of the estimated sample sizes.

Fig. 8. The extracted ROI results for the Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU group differences based on the smoothed RD measures. All statistical ROI results were obtained by the two-sample t-test (corrected p-value &lt; 0.0001). Non-blue colors indicate the number of times a vertex is selected. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 1 Demographic information of Aβ+ AD subjects and Aβ− CU subjects.

	Aβ+ AD	Aβ− CU	Inferential statistics	
Sample Size	151	271		
Gender (M/F)	79/72	132/139	χ2 = 0.51; p = 0.48	
Age	74.58 ± 7.88	74.02 ± 6.68	F = 0.60; p = 0.44	
MMSE	22.60 ± 3.09	28.94 ± 2.18	F = 602.03; p &lt; 0.0001	

Table 2 Performance indicators of the subspace decomposition algorithm for the Aβ+ AD group and the Aβ− CU groups. LH and RH indicate left hippocampus and right hippocampus, respectively.

		β 0	δ	rank(L)	‖S‖Ω,1	‖L+S−A‖/‖A‖	
LH	Aβ− CU	0.08	0.06 ∼ 0.08	11∼12	267 ∼ 280	0.080	
Aβ+ AD	0.11	0.05 ∼ 0.07	9∼10	365 ∼ 388	0.084	
RH	Aβ− CU	0.08	0.06 ∼ 0.09	11∼12	285 ∼ 301	0.081	
Aβ+ AD	0.11	0.05 ∼ 0.07	9∼10	411 ∼ 425	0.089	

Table 3 Demographic information of Aβ+ subjects in three clinical groups.

	Gender (M/F)	Education	Age	MMSE	
AD baseline	21/25	14.33 ± 2.13	75.09 ± 8.60	22.24 ± 1.80	
AD m24			77.18 ± 8.65	17.88 ± 4.46	
MCI baseline	29/26	15.73 ± 2.31	72.49 ± 6.67	27.51 ± 1.88	
MCI m24			74.52 ± 6.46	25.50 ± 2.76	
CU baseline	28/36	15.87 ± 2.25	75.27 ± 5.33	29.09 ± 0.92	
CU m24			77.96 ± 5.68	28.06 ± 1.21	

Table 4 The statistical comparison results, including group difference p-value and effect size, of different longitudinal groups based on the UMI, UMI-RD and volume measures.

Longitudinal group (bl vs. m24)	AD	MCI	CU	
p-value of UMI	7.74e – 15	3.54e – 10	1.28e – 09	
Effect Size of UMI	1.39	0.92	0.85	
p-value of UMI-RD	1.52e – 03	3.70e – 03	1.29e – 02	
Effect Size of UMI-RD	0.79	0.65	0.56	
p-value of Volume	1.48e – 13	9.72e – 09	1.19e – 08	
Effect Size of Volume	1.31	0.90	0.74	

Table 5 Demographic information of MCI converters and MCI non-converters.

	Converter	Non-converter	Inferential statistics	
Sample Size	59	96		
Gender(M/F)	35/24	64/32	χ2 = 0.85; p = 0.36	
Age	75.46 ± 6.65	75.28 ± 7.29	F = 0.03; p = 0.87	
MMSE	26.79 ± 1.81	27.29 ± 1.62	F = 3.17; p = 0.078	

Table 6 Estimated hazards ratios (HRs) of 18-months conversion to AD in MCI patients with positive versus negative biomarkers using univariate Cox analyses.

	β	HR (95% CI)	p-value	
UMI	1.5	4.3 (2.3–8.2)	5.8e – 06	
UMI-RD	0.73	2.1 (1.2–3.7)	1.1e – 02	
Volume	0.99	2.7 (1.5–4.7)	4.5e – 04	
AVLT-total	0.69	2 (1.2–3.3)	9.1e – 03	

Table 7 The classification error rates for the UMIs of Aβ+ AD and Aβ− CU group with the different λ. The values of UMI mean are followed by standard deviations.

λ	UMI-AD	UMI-CU	Classification error	
0.003	11.57 ± 6.09	0.30 ± 7.35	0.1833	
0.004	11.17 ± 6.26	0.3364 ± 7.18	0.1839	
0.005	10.17 ± 6.07	0.7550 ± 7.54	0.1667	
0.006	13.08 ± 5.95	0.28 ± 7.83	0.1439	
0.007	13.77 ± 5.87	0.59 ± 7.97	0.1311	
0.008	13.87 ± 4.08	0.59 ± 6.50	0.1191	
0.009	13.91 ± 4.12	0.90 ± 6.34	0.1194	
0.01	13.37 ± 5.36	0.95 ± 6.79	0.1244	
0.011	12.61 ± 6.26	0.99 ± 7.09	0.1451	
0.012	12.54 ± 5.97	0.76 ± 7.65	0.1661	
0.013	10.79 ± 6.32	0.02 ± 7.10	0.1900	
0.014	11.36 ± 6.77	0.68 ± 7.06	0.1933	

Table 8 Demographic information of Aβ− subjects in three clinical groups.

	Gender (M/F)	Education	Age	MMSE	UMI	
AD baseline	18/14	15.86 ± 2.53	76.56 ± 6.34	22.86 ± 1.93	11.97 ± 7.15	
AD m24			78.71 ± 6.56	18.87 ± 3.78	15.62 ± 7.01	
MCI baseline	25/29	15.61 ± 2.44	69.72 ± 8.21	28.48 ± 1.62	5.74 ± 8.93	
MCI m24			71.86 ± 8.21	27.01 ± 2.05	8.77 ± 8.79	
CU baseline	32/42	15.89 ± 2.60	72.96 ± 6.08	29.15 ± 1.13	1.45 ± 8.03	
CU m24			75.06 ± 6.04	28.66 ± 1.15	4.36 ± 7.59	

Table 9 The effect sizes from the differences between univariate biomarker measure (UMI and volume measure) changes of Aβ+ group and those of Aβ− group in the same stage (AD, MCI, CU).

	UMIs	Volume measures	
AD	0.98	0.72	
MCI	0.73	0.41	
CTL	0.52	0.27	

Table 10 The correlation analysis results between UMI and CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog11 and MMSE for different Aβ+ longitudinal groups.

Group	variables	R	95% CI of R	p-value of R	
AD	UMI vs. CDR-SB	0.44	[0.26 0.59]	9.26e – 06	
UMI vs. ADAS-Cog11	0.49	[0.32 0.63]	6.74e – 07	
UMI vs. MMSE	−0.50	[−0.64 − 0.33]	3.41e – 07	
MCI	UMI vs. CDR-SB	0.40	[0.14 0.61]	3.35e – 03	
UMI vs. ADAS-Cog11	0.52	[0.28 0.69]	8.79e – 05	
UMI vs. MMSE	−0.42	[−0.62 − 0.16]	2.16e – 03	
CU	UMI vs. CDR-SB	0.19	[−0.06 0.41]	0.14	
UMI vs. ADAS-Cog11	0.35	[0.11 0.55]	5.15e – 03	
UMI vs. MMSE	−0.05	[−0.29 0.19]	0.68	

* Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: https://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_pdf.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


References

Apostolova LG , Mosconi L , Thompson PM , Green AE , Hwang KS , Ramirez A , Mistur R , Tsui WH , de Leon MJ , 2010 Subregional hippocampal atrophy predicts Alzheimer’s dementia in the cognitively normal. Neurobiol. Aging 31 (7 ), 1077–1088.18814937
Beckett LA , Harvey DJ , Gamst A , Donohue M , Kornak J , Zhang H , Kuo JH , 2010 The Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative: annual change in biomarkers and clinical outcomes. Alzheimers Dement 6 (3 ), 257–264.20451874
Benjamini Y , Hochberg Y , 1995 Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Methodological) 57 (1 ), 289–300.
Cai JF , Cands EJ , Shen Z , 2008 A singular value thresholding algorithm for matrix completion. Siam J. Optim 20 (4 ), 1956–1982.
Candès E , Li X , Ma Y , Wright J , 2011 Robust principal component analysis? J. ACM 58 (3 ).
Cao F , Chen J , Ye H , Zhao J , Zhou Z , 2017 Recovering low-rank and sparse matrix based on the truncated nuclear norm. Neural Netw 85 , 10–20.27814461
Cardenas VA , Chao LL , Studholme C , Yaffe K , Miller BL , Madison C , Buckley ST , Mungas D , Schuff N , Weiner MW , 2011 Brain atrophy associated with baseline and longitudinal measures of cognition. Neurobiol. Aging 32 (4 ), 572–580.19446370
Caselli RJ , Dueck AC , Osborne D , Sabbagh MN , Connor DJ , Ahern GL , Baxter LC , Rapcsak SZ , Shi J , Woodruff BK , Locke DE , Snyder CH , Alexander GE , Rademakers R , Reiman EM , 2009 Longitudinal modeling of age-related memory decline and the APOE epsilon4 effect. N. Engl. J. Med 361 (3 ), 255–263.19605830
Caselli RJ , Reiman EM , 2013 Characterizing the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease and the prospect of presymptomatic intervention. J. Alzheimers Dis 33 (Suppl 1 ), S405–416.22695623
Caselli RJ , Reiman EM , Osborne D , Hentz JG , Baxter LC , Hernandez JL , Alexander GG , 2004 Longitudinal changes in cognition and behavior in asymptomatic carriers of the APOE e4 allele. Neurology 62 (11 ), 1990–1995.15184602
Chen K , Ayutyanont N , Langbaum JB , Fleisher AS , Reschke C , Lee W , Liu X , Bandy D , Alexander GE , Thompson PM , Shaw L , Trojanowski JQ , Jack CR , Landau SM , Foster NL , Harvey DJ , Weiner MW , Koeppe RA , Jagust WJ , Reiman EM , 2011 Characterizing Alzheimer’s disease using a hypometabolic convergence index. Neuroimage 56 (1 ), 52–60.21276856
Chen K , Reiman EM , Alexander GE , Caselli RJ , Gerkin R , Bandy D , Domb A , Osborne D , Fox N , Crum WR , Saunders AM , Hardy J , 2007 Correlations between apolipoprotein E epsilon4 gene dose and whole brain atrophy rates. Am. J. Psychiatry 164 (6 ), 916–921.17541051
Chung MK , Dalton KM , Davidson RJ , 2008 Tensor-based cortical surface morphometry via weighted spherical harmonic representation. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 27 (8 ), 1143–1151.18672431
Chung MK , Robbins SM , Dalton KM , Davidson RJ , Alexander AL , Evans AC , 2005 Cortical thickness analysis in autism with heat kernel smoothing. NeuroImage 25 (4 ), 1256–1265.15850743
Chupin M , Gerardin E , Cuingnet R , Boutet C , Lemieux L , Lehericy S , Benali H , Garnero L , Colliot O , 2009 Fully automatic hippocampus segmentation and classification in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment applied on data from ADNI. Hippocampus 19 (6 ), 579–587.19437497
Chupin M , Mukuna-Bantumbakulu AR , Hasboun D , Bardinet E , Baillet S , Kinkingn?hun S , Lemieux L , Dubois B , Garnero L , 2007 Anatomically constrained region deformation for the automated segmentation of the hippocampus and the amygdala: method and validation on controls and patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage 34 (3 ), 996–1019.17178234
Cortechs Labs, 2020 NeuroQuant https://www.cortechslabs.com/products/neuroquant.
Costafreda SG , Dinov ID , Tu Z , Shi Y , Liu CY , Kloszewska I , Mecocci P , Soininen H , Tsolaki M , Vellas B , Wahlund LO , Spenger C , Toga AW , Lovestone S , Simmons A , 2011 Automated hippocampal shape analysis predicts the onset of dementia in mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 56 (1 ), 212–219.21272654
Crivello P , Zito L , Sizzano F , Zino E , Maiers M , Mulder A , Toffalori C , Naldini L , Ciceri F , Vago L , Fleischhauer K , 2014 The impact of amino acid variability defines a functional distance predictive of permissive HLA-DPB1 mismatches in hematopoietic cell transplantation. Biol. Blood Marrow Transp 21 10.1016/j.bbmt.2014.10.017 .
Dickerson BC , Bakkour A , Salat DH , Feczko E , Pacheco J , Greve DN , Grodstein F , Wright CI , Blacker D , Rosas HD , Sperling RA , Atri A , Growdon JH , Hyman BT , Morris JC , Fischl B , Buckner RL , 2009 The cortical signature of Alzheimer’s disease: regionally specific cortical thinning relates to symptom severity in very mild to mild AD dementia and is detectable in asymptomatic amyloid-positive individuals. Cereb. Cortex 19 (3 ), 497–510.18632739
Dong Q , Zhang W , Stonnington CM , Wu J , Gutman BA , Chen K , Su Y , Baxter LC , Thompson PM , Reiman EM , Caselli RJ , Wang Y , 2020 Applying surface-based morphometry to study ventricular abnormalities of cognitively unimpaired subjects prior to clinically significant memory decline. Neuroimage Clin 27 , 102338.32683323
Dong Q , Zhang W , Wu J , Li B , Schron EH , McMahon T , Shi J , Gutman BA , Chen K , Baxter LC , Thompson PM , Reiman EM , Caselli RJ , Wang Y , 2019 Applying surface-based hippocampal morphometry to study APOE-E4 allele dose effects in cognitively unimpaired subjects. Neuroimage Clin 22 , 101744.30852398
Douglas J , Rachford HH , 1956 On the numerical solution of the heat conduction problem in 2 and 3 space variables. Trans. Am. Math. Soc 82 , 421–439.
Fagan AM , Roe CM , Xiong C , Mintun MA , Morris JC , Holtzman DM , 2007 Cerebrospinal fluid tau/beta-amyloid (42) ratio as a prediction of cognitive decline in nondemented older adults. Arch. Neurol 64 (3 ), 343–349.17210801
Folstein MF , Folstein SE , McHugh PR , 1975 “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J. Psychiatry Res 12 (3 ), 189–198.
Fox NC , Scahill RI , Crum WR , Rossor MN , 1999 Correlation between rates of brain atrophy and cognitive decline in AD. Neurology 52 (8 ), 1687–1689.10331700
Frisoni GB , Fox NC , Jack CR , Scheltens P , Thompson PM , 2010 The clinical use of structural MRI in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 6 (2 ), 67–77.20139996
Gill PMW , 2007 Efficient calculation of p-values in linear-statistic permutation significance tests. J. Stat. Comput. Simul 77 (1 ), 55–61. 10.1080/10629360500108053 .
Gutman BA , Hua X , Rajagopalan P , Chou YY , Wang Y , Yanovsky I , Toga AW , Jack CR , Weiner MW , Thompson PM , 2013 Maximizing power to track Alzheimer’s disease and MCI progression by LDA-based weighting of longitudinal ventricular surface features. Neuroimage 70 , 386–401.23296188
Han X , Xu C , Prince J , 2003 A topology preserving level set method for geometric deformable models. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell 25 (6 ), 755–768.
Hastie T , Tibshirani R , Wainwright M , 2015 Statistical Learning with Sparsity: The Lasso and Generalizations. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
den Heijer T , van der Lijn F , Koudstaal PJ , Hofman A , van der Lugt A , Krestin GP , Niessen WJ , Breteler MM , 2010 A 10-year follow-up of hippocampal volume on magnetic resonance imaging in early dementia and cognitive decline. Brain 133 (Pt 4 ), 1163–1172.20375138
Higham N , Papadimitriou P , 1995 Matrix Procrustes Problems. Rapport Technique, University of Manchester.
Hoppe H , 1996 Progressive meshes. In: Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 99–108. 10.1145/237170.237216 .
Hosmer DW , Lemeshow S , May S , 2008 Applied Survival Analysis: Regression Modeling of Time-to-Event Data. Wiley-Interscience.
Hua X , Gutman B , Boyle CP , Rajagopalan P , Leow AD , Yanovsky I , Kumar AR , Toga AW , Jack CR , Schuff N , Alexander GE , Chen K , Reiman EM , Weiner MW , Thompson PM , 2011 Accurate measurement of brain changes in longitudinal MRI scans using tensor-based morphometry. Neuroimage 57 (1 ), 5–14.21320612
Hua X , Lee S , Hibar DP , Yanovsky I , Leow AD , Toga AW , Jack CR , Bernstein MA , Reiman EM , Harvey DJ , Kornak J , Schuff N , Alexander GE , Weiner MW , Thompson PM , 2010 Mapping Alzheimer’s disease progression in 1309 MRI scans: power estimates for different interscan intervals. Neuroimage 51 (1 ), 63–75.20139010
Ikonomovic MD , Klunk WE , Abrahamson EE , Mathis CA , Price JC , Tsopelas ND , Lopresti BJ , Ziolko S , Bi W , Paljug WR , Debnath ML , Hope CE , Isanski BA , Hamilton RL , DeKosky ST , 2008 Post-mortem correlates of in vivo PiB-PET amyloid imaging in a typical case of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 131 (Pt 6 ), 1630–1645.18339640
Illan-Gala I , Pegueroles J , Montal V , Vilaplana E , Carmona-Iragui M , Alcolea D , Dickerson BC , Sanchez-Valle R , de Leon MJ , Blesa R , Llea A , Fortea J , 2018 Challenges associated with biomarker-based classification systems for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 10 , 346–357.30175226
Jack C , Petersen R , Xu Y , O’Brien P , Smith G , Ivnik R , Boeve B , Waring S , Tangalos E , Kokmen E , 1999 Prediction of ad with MRI-based hippocampal volume in mild cognitive impairment. Neurology 52 (7 ), 1397 10.1212/WNL.52.7.1397 . 10227624
Jack CR , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Dunn B , Haeberlein SB , Holtzman DM , Jagust W , Jessen F , Karlawish J , Liu E , Molinuevo JL , Montine T , Phelps C , Rankin KP , Rowe CC , Scheltens P , Siemers E , Snyder HM , Sperling R , Elliott C , Masliah E , Ryan L , Silverberg N , 2018 NIA-AA research framework: toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 14 (4 ), 535–562.29653606
Jack CR , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Feldman HH , Frisoni GB , Hampel H , Jagust WJ , Johnson KA , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Scheltens P , Sperling RA , Dubois B , 2016 A/T/N: an unbiased descriptive classification scheme for Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology 87 (5 ), 539–547.27371494
Jack CR , Knopman DS , Jagust WJ , Petersen RC , Weiner MW , Aisen PS , Shaw LM , Vemuri P , Wiste HJ , Weigand SD , Lesnick TG , Pankratz VS , Donohue MC , Trojanowski JQ , 2013 Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol. 12 (2 ), 207–216.23332364
Jack CR , Slomkowski M , Gracon S , Hoover TM , Felmlee JP , Stewart K , Xu Y , Shiung M , O’Brien PC , Cha R , Knopman D , Petersen RC , 2003 MRI as a biomarker of disease progression in a therapeutic trial of milameline for AD. Neurology 60 (2 ), 253–260.12552040
Jang W-D , Lee C , Kim C-S , 2016 Primary object segmentation in videos via alternate convex optimization of foreground and background distributions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 696–704.
Javed S , Mahmood A , Bouwmans T , Jung S , 2016 Spatiotemporal low-rank modeling for complexscene background initialization. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol 28 (6 ), 1315–1329.
Knopman DS , Haeberlein SB , Carrillo MC , Hendrix JA , Kerchner G , Margolin R , Maruff P , Miller DS , Tong G , Tome MB , Murray ME , Nelson PT , Sano M , Mattsson N , Sultzer DL , Montine TJ , Jack CR , Kolb H , Petersen RC , Vemuri P , Canniere MZ , Schneider JA , Resnick SM , Romano G , van Harten AC , Wolk DA , Bain LJ , Siemers E , 2018 The national institute on aging and the Alzheimer’s association research framework for Alzheimer’s disease: perspectives from the research roundtable. Alzheimers Dement 14 (4 ), 563–575.29653607
LaMontagne PJ , Benzinger TL , Morris JC , Keefe S , Hornbeck R , Xiong C , Grant E , Hassenstab J , Moulder K , Vlassenko A , Raichle ME , Cruchaga C , Marcus D , 2019 Oasis-3: longitudinal neuroimaging, clinical, and cognitive dataset for normal aging and alzheimer disease. medRxiv
Landau SM , Harvey D , Madison CM , Reiman EM , Foster NL , Aisen PS , Petersen RC , Shaw LM , Trojanowski JQ , Jack CR , Weiner MW , Jagust WJ , 2010 Comparing predictors of conversion and decline in mild cognitive impairment. Neurology 75 (3 ), 230–238.20592257
Langbaum JB , Fleisher AS , Chen K , Ayutyanont N , Lopera F , Quiroz YT , Caselli RJ , Tariot PN , Reiman EM , 2013 Ushering in the study and treatment of preclinical Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 9 (7 ), 371–381.23752908
Lemasson B , Christen T , Serduc R , Maisin C , Bouchet A , Le Duc G , Remy C , Barbier EL , 2012 Evaluation of the relationship between MR estimates of blood oxygen saturation and hypoxia: effect of an antiangiogenic treatment on a gliosarcoma model. Radiology 265 (3 ), 743–752.22996750
Lin Z , Chen M , Wu L , Ma Y , 2009 The augmented lagrange multiplier method for exact recovery of corrupted low-rank matrices. Coordinated Science Laboratory Report no. UILU-ENG-09-2215, DC-247
Lin Z , Zhang H , 2017 Low-Rank Models in Visual Analysis: Theories, Algorithms, and Applications, first ed. Academic Press, Inc., USA.
Liu G , Yan S , 2012 Active subspace: toward scalable low-rank learning. Neural Comput 24 (12 ), 427–444.
Loop C , 1987 Smooth Subdivision Surfaces Based on Triangles. The University of Utah Master’s thesis.
Lorensen WE , Cline HE , 1987 Marching cubes: a high resolution 3D surface construction algorithm. In: Proceedings of the 14th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 163–169. 10.1145/37401.37422 .
Morris JC , 1993 The clinical dementia rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules. Neurology 43 (11 ), 2412–2414.
Mueller SG , Weiner MW , Thal LJ , Petersen RC , Jack C , Jagust W , Trojanowski JQ , Toga AW , Beckett L , 2005 The Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative. Neuroimaging Clin. N. Am 15 (4 ), 869–877.16443497
Paquette N , Shi J , Wang Y , Lao Y , Ceschin R , Nelson MD , Panigrahy A , Lepore N , 2017 Ventricular shape and relative position abnormalities in preterm neonates. Neuroimage Clin 15 , 483–493.28649491
Patenaude B , Smith S , Kennedy D , Jenkinson M , 2011 A Bayesian model of shape and appearance for subcortical brain segmentation. NeuroImage 56 (3 ), 907–922.21352927
Pennanen C , Kivipelto M , Tuomainen S , Hartikainen P , H?nninen T , Laakso MP , Hallikainen M , Vanhanen M , Nissinen A , Helkala EL , Vainio P , Vanninen R , Partanen K , Soininen H , 2004 Hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in mild cognitive impairment and early AD. Neurobiol. Aging 25 (3 ), 303–310.15123335
Pizer SM , Fritsch DS , Yushkevich PA , Johnson VE , Chaney EL , 1999 Segmentation, registration, and measurement of shape variation via image object shape. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 18 (10 ), 851–865.10628945
Qiu A , Brown T , Fischl B , Ma J , Miller MI , 2010 Atlas generation for subcortical and ventricular structures with its applications in shape analysis. IEEE Trans. Image Process 19 (6 ), 1539–1547.20129863
Racine AM , Brickhouse M , Wolk DA , Dickerson BC , 2018 The personalized Alzheimer’s disease cortical thickness index predicts likely pathology and clinical progression in mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 10 , 301–310.29780874
Rey A , 1964 L’examen Clinique en Psychologie. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Rosen W , Mohs R , Davis K , 1984 A new rating scale for Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Psychiatry 141 , 1356–1364.6496779
Sabuncu MR , Ge T , Holmes AJ , Smoller JW , Buckner RL , Fischl B , 2016 Morphometricity as a measure of the neuroanatomical signature of a trait. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113 (39 ), E5749–5756.27613854
Shi J , Stonnington CM , Thompson PM , Chen K , Gutman B , Reschke C , Baxter LC , Reiman EM , Caselli RJ , Wang Y , 2015 Studying ventricular abnormalities in mild cognitive impairment with hyperbolic Ricci flow and tensor-based morphometry. Neuroimage 104 , 1–20.25285374
Shi J , Thompson PM , Gutman B , Wang Y , 2013 Surface fluid registration of conformal representation: application to detect disease burden and genetic influence on hippocampus. Neuroimage 78 , 111–134.23587689
Sperling RA , Aisen PS , Beckett LA , Bennett DA , Craft S , Fagan AM , Iwatsubo T , Jack CR , Kaye J , Montine TJ , Park DC , Reiman EM , Rowe CC , Siemers E , Stern Y , Yaffe K , Carrillo MC , Thies B , Morrison-Bogorad M , Wagster MV , Phelps CH , 2011 Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the national institute on aging-Alzheimer’s association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 (3 ), 280–292.21514248
Stonnington C , Chu C , Kloppel S , Jack C , Ashburner J , Frackowiak R , 2010 Predicting clinical scores from magnetic resonance scans in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage 51 (4 ), 1405–1413.20347044
Styner M , Oguz I , Xu S , Brechbuhler C , Pantazis D , Levitt JJ , Shenton ME , Gerig G , 2006 Framework for the statistical shape analysis of brain structures using SPHARM-PDM. Insight J (1071 ) 242–250.21941375
Tao M , Yuan X , 2011 Recovering low-rank and sparse components of matrices from incomplete and noisy observations. SIAM J. Optim 21 (1 ), 57–81.
Thompson PM , Hayashi KM , De Zubicaray GI , Janke AL , Rose SE , Semple J , Hong MS , Herman DH , Gravano D , Doddrell DM , Toga AW , 2004 Mapping hippocampal and ventricular change in Alzheimer disease. Neuroimage 22 (4 ), 1754–1766.15275931
Tseng P , 2008 On accelerated proximal gradient methods for convex-concave optimization. SIAM J. Optim
Tu Y , Mi L , Zhang W , H., Z., Zhang J , Fan Y , Goradia D , Chen K , Caselli RJ , Reiman EM , Gu X , Wang Y , 2020 Computing univariate neurodegenerative biomarkers with volumetric optimal transportation: a pilot study. Neuroinformatics.
Vemuri P , Gunter JL , Senjem ML , Whitwell JL , Kantarci K , Knopman DS , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Jack CR , 2008 Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis in individual subjects using structural MR images: validation studies. Neuroimage 39 (3 ), 1186–1197.18054253
Vidal R , Ma Y , Sastry SS , 2016 Generalized Principal Component Analysis, first ed. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated.
Wang H , Nie F , Huang H , Yan J , Kim S , Nho K , Risacher SL , Saykin AJ , Shen L , 2012 From phenotype to genotype: an association study of longitudinal phenotypic markers to Alzheimer’s disease relevant SNPs. Bioinformatics 28 (18 ), i619–i625.22962490
Wang X , Yan J , Yao X , Kim S , Nho K , Risacher SL , Saykin AJ , Shen L , Huang H , 2018 Longitudinal genotype-phenotype association study through temporal structure auto-learning predictive model. J. Comput. Biol 25 (7 ), 809–824.30011249
Wang Y , Song Y , Rajagopalan P , An T , Liu K , Chou YY , Gutman B , Toga AW , Thompson PM , 2011 Surface-based TBM boosts power to detect disease effects on the brain: an N = 804 ADNI study. Neuroimage 56 (4 ), 1993–2010.21440071
Weston PS , Nicholas JM , Lehmann M , Ryan NS , Liang Y , Macpherson K , Modat M , Rossor MN , Schott JM , Ourselin S , Fox NC , 2016 Presymptomatic cortical thinning in familial Alzheimer disease: a longitudinal MRI study. Neurology 87 (19 ), 2050–2057.27733562
Yu P , Sun J , Wolz R , Stephenson D , Brewer J , Fox NC , Cole PE , Jack CR , Hill DL , Schwarz AJ , 2014 Operationalizing hippocampal volume as an enrichment biomarker for amnestic mild cognitive impairment trials: effect of algorithm, test-retest variability, and cut point on trial cost, duration, and sample size. Neurobiol. Aging 35 (4 ), 808–818.24211008
Zhao Y , Raichle ME , Wen J , Benzinger TL , Fagan AM , Hassenstab J , Vlassenko AG , Luo J , Cairns NJ , Christensen JJ , Morris JC , Yablonskiy DA , 2017 In vivo detection of microstructural correlates of brain pathology in preclinical and early Alzheimer disease with magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroimage 148 , 296–304.27989773
Zhou Z , Li X , Wright J , Candes E , Ma Y , 2010 Stable principal component pursuit. In: IEEE ISIT Proceedings, ISIT 2010, pp. 1518–1522.
