LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101591528
42446
Int J Dev Disabil
Int J Dev Disabil
International journal of developmental disabilities
2047-3869
2047-3877

33859818
8046177
10.1080/20473869.2017.1301023
NIHMS877245
Article
Is heart disease a risk factor for low dementia test battery scores in older persons with Down syndrome? Exploratory, pilot study, and commentary
Percy Maire E. 123
Lukiw Walter J. 456
1 Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
2 Department of Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology, Toronto, Canada
3 Surrey Place Centre, Toronto, Canada
4 LSU Neuroscience Center, New Orleans LA, USA
5 Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans LA, USA
6 Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans LA, USA
Correspondence to: Professor Maire Percy, Surrey Place Centre, 2 Surrey Place, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2C2, Canada. maire.percy@utoronto.ca
30 5 2017
9 4 2017
2020
14 4 2021
66 1 2235
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Objectives

Certain heart conditions and diseases are common in Down syndrome (DS; trisomy 21), but their role in early onset dementia that is prevalent in older adults with DS has not been evaluated. To address this knowledge gap, we conducted a study of risk factors for low neurocognitive/behavioral scores obtained with a published dementia test battery (DTB). Participants were adults with DS living in New York (N = 29; average age 46 years). We asked three questions. 1. Does having any type of heart disease affect the association between DTB scores and chronological age? 2. Does thyroid status affect the association between heart disease and DTB scores? 3. Are the E4 or E2 alleles of apolipoprotein E (APOE) associated with DTB scores or with heart disease?

Method

The study was retrospective, pilot, and exploratory. It involved analysis of information in a database previously established for the study of aging in DS. Participants had moderate intellectual disability on average. Information for each person included: gender, age, a single DTB score obtained by combining results from individual subscales of the DTB, the presence or absence of heart disease, thyroid status (treated hypothyroidism or normal), and APOE genotype. Trends were visualized by inspection of graphs and contingency tables. Statistical methods used to evaluate associations included Pearson correlation analysis, Fisher’s exact tests (2-tailed), and odds ratio analysis. P values were interpreted at the 95% confidence level without Bonferroni correction. P values &gt;.05&lt;.1 were considered trends.

Results

The negative correlation between DTB scores and age was significant in those with heart disease but not in those without. Heart disease was significantly associated with DTB scores &gt;1 SD below the sample mean; there was a strong association between heart disease and low DTB scores in those with treated hypothyroidism but not in those with normal thyroid status. The APOE genotype was weakly associated with heart disease (E4, predisposing; E2, protective) in males.

Conclusions

On the basis of the potentially important findings from the present study, large prospective studies are warranted to confirm and extend the observations. In these, particular heart conditions or diseases and other medical comorbidities in individuals should be documented.

Alzheimer’s disease
apolipoprotein E
cognitive function
dementia
dementia test battery
Down syndrome
heart disease
hypoperfusion
hypothyroidism

Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and other dementias, including that which develops prematurely in older persons with Down syndrome (trisomy 21; DS), are likely the result of genetic, environmental, and metabolic factors which exert deleterious effects many years before clinical symptoms appear. It has been hypothesized that any form of cardiac structure or physiology that results in hypoperfusion of the brain may be a risk factor for dementia (de la Torre 2012). Different types of heart disease are very common in DS; hence, studies of the association between heart disease in this population and markers of neurocognitive and/or neurobehavioral function might shed new light on development of dementia in DS and help to guide studies of dementia in the general population. In this paper, we took advantage of a database previously established for the study of aging in DS to explore the possibility that the presence of heart disease in older adults with DS might be associated with low scores in a dementia test battery.

This paper is divided into two main sections. Part I provides comprehensive background information about AD/dementia in the general population and early onset dementia in adults with DS. Because this background section is comprehensive, it has been called a commentary. Part II outlines the exploratory, pilot study. Although some publications may leave the impression that our understanding of triggers that lead to the pathogenetic processes associated with dementia is clear, the situation is complex and controversial. The thoughts and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the International Journal of Developmental Disabilities.

Part I: Commentary

Alzheimer’s disease and dementia in the general population

Overview

AD is the most common form of dementia (general incidence 30.4 per 1000 persons (95% CIs: 16.4–70.9; Fiest et al. 2016). After the age of 65, the age-specific prevalence of AD doubles every five years (von Strauss et al. 1999, Qiu et al. 2009). AD is a multifactorial and genetically heterogeneous disorder. Many different risk factors and different genetic factors are implicated (Iqbal and Grudke-Iqbal 2010, Ringman et al. 2014, Prasher et al. 2017, see also below). Furthermore, there is evidence for several different cognitive subtypes of AD (Scheltens et al. 2016). Vascular dementia is one of the most common forms of dementia after AD, though the prevalence varies widely (O’Brien and Thomas 2015). Brain studies have revealed vascular involvement in as many as two-thirds of dementia cases (Attems and Jellinger 2014). A vascular etiology may be more important than previously believed in the etiology of early onset dementia (that occurring before age 60) (Heath et al. 2015). The two main pathological features of AD in the brain are amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Major components of plaques are fragments of the amyloid beta A4 precursor protein (APP) called amyloid beta peptides — Abeta40 and Abeta42 (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 2016). The primary functions of APP and the amyloid beta peptides are not known, though they have been recently shown to have antimicrobial activity (Kumar et al. 2016). Heavily phosphorylated tau protein is a predominant component of the neurofibrillary tangles (Ballard et al. 2011). Neuron loss also is characteristic of the AD brain. Potter has evidence to support the idea that amyloid beta overproduction results in trisomy 21 and other forms of aneuploidy among neurons and peripheral cells in sporadic and familial AD, in various mouse and cell models of AD as well as in other dementias, and that selective loss of aneuploid neurons contributes to neurodegenerative disease (Potter et al. 2016). Yet another pathological feature of AD is aberrant expression in brain and other tissues of small, single stranded non-coding RNA molecules about 18–28 nucleotides in length called microRNAs (miRNAs). When up-regulated, these target specific messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules and result in gene silencing. Of the miRNAs identified, about 70% are expressed in the brain (Femminella et al. 2015). According to the amyloid cascade hypothesis, deposition of amyloid beta peptide is the primary initiator of neurotoxicity in the brain (Hardy and Allsop 1999). However, the failure of all drugs aimed at reducing the amyloid load is now forcing scientists to ask if factors that trigger production of Abeta rather than deposition of Abeta itself should be targeted (Herrup 2015, Karran and De Strooper 2016).

Risk factors

Advancing age is the strongest known risk factor for AD. In addition, genetic and environmental factors, lifestyle, and various medical conditions also may be involved (National Institute of Aging 2016, Prasher et al. 2017). Genetic risk factors for AD fall into two categories — those which are causally associated with AD, and those which are more weakly associated. In approximately 5% of cases overall, mutations in three genes (presenilin 1, presenilin 2, and APP) cause early onset AD in an autosomal dominant manner (Bird 2008). Many other genetic variants and loci are associated with the sporadic, late-onset form of AD (occurring after age 60) (Alzheimer Society of Canada 2016). The strongest of these is the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE) which lowers the age of AD onset in a dose dependent manner and increases the risk of late-onset sporadic AD, although the nature of its involvement continues to be a mystery (Strittmatter et al. 1993, Lutz et al. 2016). APOE E4 may be a risk factor for the sporadic form of early onset AD as well (Chartier-Harlin et al. 1994, Houlden et al. 1998). The E2 allele of APOE has been associated with a decreased risk and milder form of AD (Corder et al. 1994, Serrano-Pozo et al. 2015). Before being implicated in dementia, APOE was recognized for its importance in lipoprotein metabolism and cardiovascular disease (Eichner et al. 2002). In European populations, the common alleles of APOE are associated not only with different risks of ischemic heart disease (usually caused by atherosclerosis), but also other chronic conditions; furthermore, they also influence longevity (Ewbank 2004). In these associations, E4 is most strongly associated with adverse outcomes, with E2 tending to be protective.

Evidence is growing that traumatic brain injury is an important environmental risk factor for dementia (Barnes et al. 2014). There also is evidence for the involvement of viral and bacterial infections (Hill et al. 2014, Zhao and Lukiw 2015, Itzhaki et al. 2016). Certain lifestyle and environmental factors (e.g. lack of exercise, poor diet, heavy drinking, and smoking, poor quality of sleep, low level of education) are thought to be responsible for much of the cognitive decline that occurs with aging (Yaffe and Hoang 2013, Silverman 2014). Other potentially modifiable risk factors for AD and/or dementia may include disruption of metal ion homeostasis in the brain (e.g. copper, iron, and zinc; Greenough et al. 2013), excessive exposure to aluminum (Percy et al. 2011, Bhattacharjee et al. 2014, Pogue and Lukiw 2016), vitamin D deficiency (Littlejohns et al. 2014), the gut microbiome (Hill et al. 2014), and possibly hypercholesterolemia (Wood et al. 2014). Overt deficiency of B12 may result in a reversible form of dementia in elderly patients (Osimani et al. 2005). Not resolved is whether B12 insufficiency or abnormal B12 metabolism contributes to dementia and stroke (Percy et al. 2015, Spence 2016). There is some evidence that women may be more likely to develop AD than men (Altmann et al. 2014). Some medical conditions that can co-exist with AD and other dementias and possibly increase the risks include: diabetes and stroke (Percy et al. 2014), depression (Bennett and Thomas 2014), chronic kidney disease (Etgen 2015), as well as heart disease and thyroid abnormalities (see below). A condition called mild cognitive impairment sometimes develops into dementia, but not always (Prasher et al. 2017).

Heart and thyroid dysfunction in dementia

An association between heart failure and cognitive impairment has been recognized in the general population but this relationship is far from being understood (Cannon et al. 2015). As of 2016, different forms of cardiovascular disease and underlying risk factors are increasingly being evaluated in relation to vascular pathology such as white matter hyperintensities (areas of high intensity on different types of MRI scans) in the brain (Stampfer 2006, Justin et al. 2013, Cermakova et al. 2015). However, few studies have considered heart disease or any of its subtypes as a risk factor for AD or other forms of dementia. One study found heart failure to be associated with an increased risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease in older adults (Qiu et al. 2006). Another found late-life atrial fibrillation to be a significant risk factor for dementia and AD, the associations being stronger among APOE E4 non-carriers; late-life heart failure but not coronary artery disease increased the risks as well (Rusanen et al. 2014, see also Cermakova et al. 2015). Another possible link between heart dysfunction and AD comes from a study by Troncone et al. (2016) who described deposits of amyloid beta protein (characteristic of the AD brain) in the hearts of AD patients and an association with thickening of the left ventricle wall of the heart in the oldest AD subgroup. One theory posits that any impairment in cardiac structure or physiology resulting in hypoperfusion of the brain will be found to increase the risk of AD as well as of cognitive impairment and other forms of dementia (de la Torre 2012). Although global and regional hypoperfusion of the brain have been demonstrated in people with AD or at risk of developing AD, not clear is whether decreased blood flow is a cause or consequence of disease (Austin et al. 2011).

Disturbances of thyroid function also are associated with dementia (Poblador-Plou et al. 2014) though why is not understood. Thyroid disorders associated with too much or too little thyroid hormone [T3 (triiodothyronine) and its prohormone T4 (thyroxine)] are called hyperthy-roidism or hypothyroidism. When these disorders are associated with thyroid autoimmunity, they are known respectively as Graves’ disease or Hashimoto thyroiditis (Merrill and Mu 2015). The metabolic disorder of clinical hypothyroidism is considered to be a reversible cause of dementia (Smith and Granger 1992). Whether or not clinical hyper- or hypothyroidism or their subclinical forms affect the clinical expression of dementia, including AD, has not been resolved. Several studies have reported an association between subclinical hyperthyroidism and cognitive impairment (Gan and Pearce 2012), whereas others have found an association between low and high thyrotropin (TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone) levels and dementia in women but not men (Tan et al. 2008, Tan and Vasan 2009). One study found hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis function to be abnormal in AD patients (Yong-Hong et al. 2013). Rarely, persons with autoimmune thyroid disease develop encephalopathy which can occur in younger individuals and appear as a dementia-like syndrome and include cognitive alterations or decline. In most cases, this condition is associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis but it sometimes occurs in persons with Graves’ disease. Fortunately, symptoms of this condition respond to corticosteroid treatment and affected individuals eventually recover (Raouf and Tamagno 2014).

Importantly, disturbances of thyroid function are known to be associated with heart problems. Primary dysfunction of the thyroid (e.g. clinical hypo- or hyperthyroidism) can profoundly affect function of the heart and vascular system as the result of deficiency or excess of thyroid hormone (Fazio et al. 2004, Klein and Danzi 2007). Subclinical thyroid disorders also are associated with heart problems. For example, subclinical hyperthyroidism is reported to be a risk factor for atrial fibrillation (Sawin 2002), whereas subclinical hypothyroidism has been associated with chronic heart failure (Triggiani et al. 2016). Not clear, however, is whether thyroid hormone profiles might become disturbed as a consequence of heart disease. In this latter situation, disturbances in thyroid function would be secondary in nature. Consistent with this latter hypothesis is the finding by Silva-Tinoco et al. (2013) that approximately 40% of patients with heart failure developed altered thyroid hormone profiles as their heart problems progressed. These disorders were dubbed ‘heart hypothyroidism’ by Silva-Tinoco and colleagues. One might similarly ask if patients with atrial fibrillation might develop ‘heart hyperthyroidism’. Perhaps, ‘heart hypo- and hyperthyroidism’ explain the association of at least some thyroid dysfunction with AD or dementia.

Dementia in Down syndrome

Overview

The British physician John Langdon Haydon Down (1828–1896), first described the relatively common (incidence 1.7 per 1000 live births) genetic disorder now known as DS in 1866; this disorder remained a neurological curiosity for over 60 years (Roizen and Patterson 2003, Mégarbané et al. 2009, Ballard et al. 2016). Following the report of Struwe (1929) describing features of AD in the brains of persons with DS, George Jervis, a researcher in the United States, published the first article directly linking AD-type neuropathology to clinical dementia in adults with DS (Jervis 1948). Jervis observed that most adults with DS had a high density of plaques in their brain by the age of 40. It is now known that persons with DS are at high risk of developing an early onset dementia, though not everyone is affected (Mann et al. 1990). This kind of dementia is considered to be of the Alzheimer type, and is regarded as a genetic form of AD (Wiseman et al. 2015). It is thought that brain plaque formation occurs so early in DS because of triplication and overexpression of the APP gene which is localized to the long arm of chromosome 21 (Head et al. 2016), and possibly with involvement of other chromosome 21 genes as well (elaborated upon below).

Chromosome 21 and genetics of Down syndrome

First sequenced 16 years ago, chromosome 21 is comprised of about 48 million base pairs; it contains about 1.5 percent of total human DNA and about 634 genes of which 234 are thought to produce proteins (Ensemble release 85: http://useast.ensembl.org/Homosapiens/Location/Chromosome?r=21:1–467099830 ). DS (trisomy 21) is caused by an extra copy of the long arm of human chromosome 21 including known and newly identified protein-coding and RNA genes but excluding pseudogenes. Some research has suggested that a specific region of chromosome 21 causes DS. This has been called the DS ‘critical region’ and is located at bands 21q22.1–q22.3 of the chromosome 21 long arm. Not all research supports this idea, however (Lana-Elola et al. 2011). One study is suggestive that in trisomy 21 the expression of many genes is altered throughout the genome (Letourneau et al. 2014).

One of the chromosome 21 genes of great interest in DS encodes the amyloid precursor protein (APP) located at chr 21q21.3. The extra gene dosage of APP in DS likely explains, at least in part, the strong contribution of amyloid overexpression and amyloidogenesis to DS neuropathology (Hardy and Allsop 1999, Mégarbané et al. 2009, Ballard et al. 2016, Head et al. 2016). Other chromosome 21 genes may contribute to dementia in DS and/or help to explain premature aging that occurs in DS. For example, at least 16 other chromosome 21 genes participate in mitochondrial energy generation and reactive oxygen species metabolism. Several studies have linked mitochondrial dysfunction to dementia in DS (Roizen and Patterson 2003, Perluigi and Butterfield 2012, Ballard et al. 2016). Complicating studies of which genes actually cause DS or predispose to dementia in DS, is the fact that the DS phenotype is very variable. There is great interpersonal variation in the level of intellectual function, the physical phenotype, and in sensitivity to acquiring serious diseases or infections. For example, some people with DS are born with congenital heart disease or gut abnormalities, and some acquire leukemia whereas others do not (Lana-Elola et al. 2011).

A discussion of DS and chromosome 21 would not be complete without mention of miRNAs that are relevant to DS. Recent sequencing analysis has shown that in addition to more than 200 protein-encoding genes, human chromosome 21 also encodes 19 precursor and 26 mature miRNAs. In DS, the expression of five miRNA genes (miRNA-99a, let-7c, miRNA-125b-2, miRNA-155, and miRNA-802) is increased due to gene dosage effects; these may contribute to a systemic immune pathology that is characteristic of DS (Li et al. 2012). In particular, there is evidence that the extra dosage of miRNA-155 in DS, may drive the down-regulation of complement factor H which is a potent suppressor of the innate immune system (Li et al. 2012). Furthermore, these five chr 21 miRNAs appear to be up-regulated in neurons of the fetal brain and heart in DS (Siew et al. 2013).

There is optimism among the research community that understanding the roles of chromosome 21 miRNAs in DS will shed important light on signaling pathways involved not only in the development of intellectual disability in DS, but also in comorbid conditions that are unusually common in DS such as congenital heart defects, early onset dementia, and altered innate immune processes.

Risk factors for dementia in Down syndrome

Besides the extra chromosome 21 gene dosage effects, advancing age is another strong risk factor for dementia in DS as for dementia in the general population. The frequency of dementia in DS increases from about 8 to 25% in those aged between 35 and 40 years to 60 to 75% in those over 60. In individuals with DS who have a mild-to-moderate level of disability, the onset of dementia ranges from about 52 to 55 years (Janicki and Dalton 2000, Prasher et al. 2015, 2017). Higher functioning individuals with DS tend to remain free of symptoms longer than low functioning individuals (Temple et al. 2001). In addition to advancing age, other factors modulate the age at onset of dementia in DS. These include the E4 allele of the APOE gene, especially in males (Schupf and Sergievsky 2002, Prasher et al. 2008), and possibly estrogen deficiency in females (Schupf and Sergievsky 2002). In some but not all reports, the E4 allele of APOE was found to be a significant risk factor for dementia in DS and also to have an independent and strong relation to early mortality even in people with DS who do not have dementia (Prasher et al. 2008). In contrast, E2 may have protective effects against dementia in DS (Tyrrell et al. 1998).Variants of the estrogen receptor-alpha- (Schupf et al. 2008) and -beta genes (Zhao et al. 2011) also may be dementia risk factors in DS. Some studies have been conducted to attempt to confirm associations of genes implicated in AD in the DS type of dementia, but these are limited (Patel et al. 2011). Small sample size may be one factor that has generated conflicting results. Other potential factors complicating interpretation of results may be: the use of ‘convenience’ samples; wide geographic variation in the prevalence rates of genetic variants of interest; and differing diets that may or may not include mandatory fortification with nutrients such as iodine and folic acid. (For example, in the United States, table salt is fortified with iodine and grain products with folic acid, but these practices are not regulated in the United Kingdom). Little is known about factors affecting dementia progression in DS, although it has been hypothesized that periodontitis, which is very common in DS, might be a modifiable risk factor for dementia progression in this population (Kamer et al. 2016). The involvement of heart disease or thyroid dysfunction in DS-type dementia is similarly not well understood.

Heart disease and thyroid disease in Down syndrome

Different types of heart disease are very common in persons with DS. One study has indicated that congenital heart disease is present in as many as 40 to 50% of babies with this condition (Freeman et al. 1998). In a Turkish sample, approximately 72% of children with DS were found to have congenital heart disease (Mıhçı et al. 2010). Excessive alcohol consumption during pregnancy, use of certain medications, and maternal infection such as Rubella virus or measles (German) in the first trimester of pregnancy are risk factors for congenital heart disease (Sun et al. 2015). The most common type of congenital heart disease in children with DS is some type of atrioventricular canal defect. Other congenital conditions in DS include atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, and double outlet right ventricle (Goldhaber et al. 1986, Freeman et al. 1998). Pueschel and Werner (1994) found mitral valve disorders and aortic regurgitation in up to 57% of young adults independently of congenital heart defects. Possibly as the result of abortion of fetuses with DS, the prevalence of complex congenital heart defects in children has decreased substantially since 1992–1994, though risks for ventricular and atrial septal defects are increasing (Bergström et al. 2016). Pulmonary hypertension also is common in DS; this can result from not only from congenital heart disease, but also from gastroesophageal reflux disease and upper airway obstructions (King and Tulloh 2011, Herbert and Tulloh 2015). When severe, pulmonary hypertension results in cyanosis and is called Eisenmenger’s syndrome (Wallace and Dalton 2006). A 2015 study compared the prevalence of risk factors for heart disease in hospitalized persons with DS to a matched group without the syndrome in four different age ranges across the lifespan. The overall prevalences of cardioembolic risk factors (e.g. congenital heart disease, cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary hypertension) and atherosclerotic risk factors (e.g. hypertension, diabetes, sleep apnea, and smoking) were consistently higher in persons with DS than controls, the ratio of atherosclerotic to cardioembolic risk factors increasing with increasing age. The prevalence of ischemic and hemorrhage stroke was higher for persons with DS and the prevalence of coronary events lower for males but not females; smoking was less prevalent in DS than in the controls (Sobey et al. 2015). Others have previously reported that atherosclerosis (i.e. raised lesions and calcium deposits) in coronary arteries is milder in persons with DS than in controls, though why is not known (Ylä-Herttuala et al. 1989, Vis et al. 2009). The frequency of hypertension in DS is surprisingly low (Prasher 1994, Kerins et al. 2008). As well, low pulse rate and low blood pressure readings in DS are typical findings (Prasher 1994). In people with DS and other intellectual disabilities, inactivity is said to result in ‘the sedentary heart’ (Vis et al. 2012). Furthermore, as in the general population, left ventricle diastolic dysfunction can occur in people with DS. One study has described left ventricle diastolic dysfunction and reduced cognitive performance in a sample of adults with DS (average age, 36) who were apparently free of other forms of heart disease (Vetrano et al. 2016). Wilcock et al. (2015) have highlighted potential contributions of cerebrovascular disease to neuropathology associated with dementia in persons with DS.

In addition to heart disease, thyroid dysfunction also is common in DS, especially subclinical hypothyroidism (Percy et al. 1990, Cebeci et al. 2013). Clinical forms of hypothyroidism found in this population include transient and primary hypothyroidism, autoimmune thyroiditis, pituitary-hypothalamic (central) hypothyroidism, thyroxin-binding globulin (TBG) deficiency, chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, and thyroid dysgenesis (Coleman 1994, Cebeci et al. 2013). The most common form of autoimmune thyroiditis in DS is Hashimoto thyroiditis associated with hypothyroidism; however, hyperthyroidism including Graves’s disease also occurs occasionally (Brodtmann 2009). In some cases, Graves’ disease is preceded by Hashimoto thyroiditis (Aversa et al. 2015). Thyroid disorders have been noted at birth, in early childhood, and in adults with DS where mild hypothyroidism and autoimmune thyroiditis increase with increasing age, particularly in women with DS (Percy et al. 1990, Coleman, 1994). Another thyroid anomaly in adults with DS is the occurrence of normal TSH in the presence of normal T4 but low T3 levels (Percy et al. 1990). An ongoing dilemma in DS, and indeed in the general population, has been whether or not to treat subclinical hypothyroidism (characterized by elevated TSH with T4 in the standard reference range). In their 1990 study, Percy and colleagues noted that approximately 24% of older persons with DS had elevated TSH in one test, but only 10% had evidence of elevated TSH in combination with decreased T4. Prasher and colleagues have subsequently noted from an ongoing longitudinal study of adults with DS living in the United Kingdom, that subclinical hypothyroidism does not necessarily progress to overt hypothyroidism, and that published prevalence studies [may] have overstated the association between thyroid dysfunction and DS (Prasher et al. 2011). For some time, it has been suspected that thyroid dysfunction, especially hypothyroidism, may contribute to the development of dementia in DS, but rigorous evidence is lacking (Percy and Prasher 2006). As in the general population, steroid responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroid disease also can occur in DS and should be considered in cases of suspected dementia or rapid cognitive decline especially in younger individuals. In DS this condition is usually associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis but sometimes occurs in persons with hyperthyroidism (Payer et al. 2012).

Part II: Exploratory, pilot study

To facilitate research studies of premature aging and dementia in DS, Percy, Dalton, and colleagues previously had established a unique research database involving a sample of 56 older adults with DS who on average had moderate intellectual disability (Percy et al. 2003). This database included not only information about gender, age, APOE genotype, thyroid status, hepatitis B virus status, but also other indicators of health including the presence or absence of heart disease and for a subset of participants, scores of neurocognitive/behavioral function determined with a dementia test battery (DTB). The first publication utilizing the DS database showed that the E4 and E2 alleles of APOE were positively and negatively associated (respectively) with treated hypothyroidism in females but not males (Percy et al. 2003). The present paper describes a retrospective study conducted with information in the database to determine if heart disease of any type, treated hypothyroidism and APOE alleles affect DTB scores, and also to examine relationships among these variables (other than between APOE genotype and treated hypothyroidism). The study was motivated by information in the literature raising the possibilities of involvement of heart disease in cognitive impairment or dementia, and of co- involvement of thyroid disease and APOE genotype. The study was deemed pilot and exploratory because the sample size was small, only binary ‘yes/no’ information was available in the database about heart disease in the participants, and activities were question-based rather than hypothesis-driven. Three main questions were addressed: Does heart disease affect the association between DTB scores and chronological age?

Does thyroid status affect the association between heart disease and DTB scores?

Are the E4 and E2 alleles of APOE genotype associated with DTB scores or with heart disease in DS in predisposing and protective ways, respectively?

Methods

Participants

Individuals with DS (average age, 46 years) were recruited from eight different group homes and institutions in New York State. Their level of intellectual disability in participants was, on average, moderate. Inclusion criteria for participation included evidence of clinically confirmed DS and medical stability for three months before entry. Exclusion criteria were significant sensory deficits (hearing or visual) and failure to pass a pre-test of short-term memory function (Percy et al. 2003). This group constitutes a ‘convenience sample’. Although 56 older adults with DS fulfilled entry criteria and became study participants, focus in the present study was on a subset of 29 individuals who completed DTB testing and for whom chronological age was known, who were classified as having treated hypothyroidism or normal thyroid function, and who were APOE E4 (E3,4 or E4,4), E3(E3,3), or E2 (E2,2 or E2,3) (see the section below for details).

Neurocognitive/behavioral performance

This had been measured using the DTB developed by Dalton, Mehta, Fedor, and Patti (1999) for use in older persons with DS and others with intellectual/ developmental disabilities. DTB testing was restricted in scope because of limited funding for this activity and a strict time line for completion imposed by a funding source. Persons for DTB testing were selected on the basis of their availability, cooperativity, and gender (efforts were made to recruit similar numbers of males and females), but without knowledge of their heart or thyroid status or their APOE genotype. The three tests used in the DTB consisted of: (1). the Learning/Memory Test (Dalton/ McMurray visual memory test): a 2-part performance test of matching-to-sample (MTS) learning test combined with a 2-part performance delayed matching to sample (DMTS) memory test; (2). the Praxis Test: a 3-part performance test of praxis (i.e. movement related functions); and (3). the Multi-Dimensional Observation Scale for Elderly Subjects Adapted for Persons with Down Syndrome (MOSES): an informant-based behavior rating scale with five subscales which provides rapid assessment of physical, cognitive, emotional, and social behaviors of individuals. For each of the 12 subscales in these three tests, raw data were transformed into Z-scores, which indicate by how many standard deviations the results for individuals are above or below the sample mean (which is zero) (Soper 2016). Then the mean Z score was determined for each participant, each subscale being given equal weight.

Health status

Information from agency files about the past and current health of each participant, including the presence or absence of heart disease, had previously been collected using a health status questionnaire developed for the project (Percy et al. 2003). A copy of the questionnaire is available from the first author upon request.

Thyroid status

Participants denoted as having ‘treated hypothyroidism’ had been taking synthetic thyroid hormone for at least three months prior to study entry. Not known is which persons were affected by subclinical or clinical hypothyroidism or autoimmune thyroiditis. Persons denoted as having normal thyroid functions were not taking any thyroid medication and had been found by the collaborating clinical laboratory after study entry to have serum TSH levels &gt;0.3&lt; 5 mIU/L on at least one occasion after entry into the study and titers of antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin antibodies within the laboratory reference ranges. Persons who did not fall into either of these categories were excluded from analyses involving thyroid status. No participants had evidence of hyperthyroidism. Additional details on thyroid testing have been published elsewhere (Percy et al. 2003).

Apolipoprotein E genotyping

Genotyping for the three common alleles of APOE (E2, E3, and E4) had been done using standard polymerase chain reaction methodology (Percy et al. 2003). Those with a rare APOE type or the APOE 2,4 genotype were excluded from analyses that involved APOE type.

Data analysis

Graphic methods and inspection of data in contingency tables were used to reveal trends. Statistical procedures were then applied to aid with data interpretation; these included Pearson correlation analysis (Stangroom, 2016); contingency table analysis using two-tailed Fisher’s exact probability test for 2 × 2 tables (GraphPad Software, Inc. 2016); the Freeman-Halton extension of Fisher’s test for 2 × 4 tables (Lowry 2016); and odds ratio analysis (MedCalc 2016). P values &lt; .05 were considered to be significant, and those &gt;.05&lt; .1 were considered to be trends. Linear regressions (least squares fittings) were done using EXCEL. Because the sample size was small, Bonferroni corrections were not applied. For each analysis, all available data were used.

Results

Characteristics of the study group

Certain demographic characteristics of the total group of 56 have been described previously (Percy et al. 2003). In Table 1, we have compared the total group with the subgroup who underwent DTB testing with respect to: gender balance; age; presence or absence of heart disease; thyroid status; and APOE E4 positivity. Characteristics of individuals in the total group and subgroup were similar. In the subsample of 29, 11 occurrences of heart disease were reported. All occurrences of thyroid dysfunction were treated hypothyroidism. The prevalence of heart disease was slightly higher in males than females and that of treated hypothyroidism slightly higher in females though these differences did not attain even trends (P values not shown). Four of the participants in the group of 56 had diabetes, but these individuals did not undergo DTB testing.

Relation between DTB scores and chronological age

As depicted in Figure 1, the indicator of DTB performance (the mean Z score) showed an inverse relationship with increasing chronological age, this appearing more pronounced in those with heart disease. Overall, Pearson correlation analysis demonstrated a moderate negative correlation of DTB scores with age (r = –.505; N = 29; P = .00520). For those with heart disease, the negative correlation was stronger (r = –.686; N = 11; P = .0197) than for those without heart disease. In the latter case, the correlation with age was weak and not significant r (= –.357; N = 18; P = .146).

Association of low DTB scores with heart disease

As evident from Figure 1, five of the DTB scores were lower than two standard deviations below Z = 0 (i.e. were within the lowest 5% of scores) and 10 were lower than one standard deviation (SD) below Z = 0 (i.e. were within the lowest 32% of scores). We evaluated the association between DTB scores that were more than 1 SD below Z = 0 and various potential explanatory factors (age &gt; 50, gender, heart disease, treated hypothyroidism, and alleles of APOE using 2 × 2 contingency table analysis (Table 2). As evident from this table, the only factor that was significantly associated with the low DTB scores was evidence of heart disease. The odds ratio for this association was 6.09 (95% CIs: 1.08–33.38; P = .041). There were no significant associations of DTB scores more than 1 SD below Z = 0 with advanced age, gender, the E4 or E2 alleles of APOE, or treated hypothyroidism.

The association of low DTB scores with heart disease was not abolished after DTB scores were corrected for subject age (data not shown). Three of the corrected DTB scores for the persons with heart disease fell below all 18 corrected DTB scores for those with no heart disease. Post analysis review of all research records on file for the study participants revealed that one of the three individuals with the very low DTB scores had hypertension and unspecified heart disease; the second had unspecified heart disease; and the third had bradycardia. The highest DTB score among those with heart disease was attained by an individual who had undergone surgery to repair an atrioventricular septal defect.

Association between heart disease and DTB scores is a affected by thyroid status

We next asked if the association between heart disease and low DTB scores (i.e. more than 1 SD below Z = 0) depended upon thyroid status. Individuals whose DTB scores were available were stratified with respect to the presence or absence of heart disease, and (treated) hypothyroidism (Table 3). Application of Fisher’s test for 2 × 4 tables (Lowry 2016) indicated that there was a trend for the data observed to be different from the data expected (P = .0874). Odds ratio analysis demonstrated a strong effect of heart disease on DTB scores in those with treated hypothyroidism (odds ratio: 16.0 (95% CIs: 1.08–234); P = .0429), but not in those with normal thyroid status (odds ratio; 5.00 (95% CI: .273–91.5); P = .278).

Association of APOE E4 and E2 with heart disease in males

Although APOE genotype did not affect DTB scores (Table 2), we asked if APOE genotype was associated with heart disease (Table 4). As evident from this table, there was a trend for the E4 allele of APOE to be positively associated with heart disease (P = .0743) and a borderline trend for the E2 allele to be negatively associated (P = .104) in males but not females.

Conclusion

In brief, DTB scores demonstrated a significant, moderate negative correlation with increasing chronological age that was more pronounced in persons with heart disease than in those without (Figure 1). Low DTB scores (i.e. those &gt;1 SD below Z = 0) were significantly associated with heart disease (odds ratio: 6.09 (95% CIs: 1.08–33.4) but not with age &gt;50 years, gender, the APOE E4 or E2 genotypes, or treated hypothyroidism (Table 2). The association between heart disease and low DTB scores was strong among those treated for hypothyroidism (odds ratio: 16.0; 95% CIs: 1.08–234) but not significant among those with normal thyroid status (Table 3). There was a trend for the E4 allele of APOE to be positively associated with heart disease, and a marginal trend for the E2 allele to be negatively associated, in males (Table 4).

Study limitations

(1). The biggest limitation to the current study is the small sample size. It was not feasible to apply Bonferroni corrections or to correct data for effects of multiple, potentially confounding variables. (2). There were limitations to the quality of health status information in the database. First, information about heart disease in the database included only ‘yes/no’ information about its presence. Second, distinctions were not made between subclinical or clinical hypothyroidism or autoimmune thyroiditis. (3). The study was cross-sectional — hence, it was not possible to make distinctions between what may be causes and what may be effects. In particular, a potential association of heart disease with low DTB scores should not be interpreted as an association with cognitive decline or dementia in DS. Low DTB scores in this study possibly may reflect underlying intellectual disability and/ or result from neurocognitive/behavioral decline associated with aging. (4). The participants in this study were Caucasians from the state of New York, but were not a representative sample. Those who completed DTB testing were a subgroup of a larger ‘convenience sample’ with moderate intellectual disability on average. Furthermore, the former individuals were selected in part on the basis of their availability and cooperativity, so the possibility cannot be excluded that there was bias toward higher neurocognitive/behavioral functioning. (5). The DTB assessment included three different tests with a total of 12 subscales that previously had been piloted on individuals with DS and other intellectual or developmental disabilities (Dalton et al. 1999). For use in analysis, results from each subscale were combined with equal weight into a single index. This index of neurocognitive/behavioral function may not be the most appropriate indicator of neurocognitive decline associated with development of dementia. (6). Finally, more testing must be done to determine if similar trends are apparent in other populations (e.g. African-Americans, Asian Americans, etc.) and in other countries.

Interpretation

Because of the study limitations, the potentially important findings must be considered tentative. Nevertheless, the results support the ideas that in older persons with DS, having some type of heart disease or dysfunction may exacerbate the effects of aging on the DTB scores (Figure 1 and related text; Table 2); that treatment for hypothyroidism exacerbates effects of heart disease on DTB scores (Table 3); and that the APOE E4 and E2 are positively and negatively associated (respectively, though weakly) with heart disease in males (Table 4). The fact that the majority of individuals with ‘heart disease’ did not have excessively low DTB scores is suggestive that dysfunction of the heart rather than having a specific heart condition per se contributes to low DTB scores. The finding of one individual with bradycardia and a very low DTB score is compatible with the hypothesis of de la Torre (2012) that poor blood flow to the brain may be a risk factor for dementia. One interpretation for the apparent exacerbating effect of treated hypothyroidism on association between heart disease and low cognitive scores is that treatment for hypothyroidism may be having adverse effects on neurocognitive/behavioral function in persons with heart disease but beneficial effects in persons with hypothyroidism and no heart disease; the distribution of data in Table 4 is compatible with this suggestion. We previously reported significant APOE allelic effects on treated hypothyroidism in females with DS — with E4 and E2 being positively and negatively associated with treated hypothyroidism (Percy et al. 2003). In retrospect, the question should now be asked if the high prevalence of hypothyroidism and the APOE allelic effects in females with DS (Percy et al. 2003) might be at least in part a consequence of heart disease — analogous to the ‘heart hypothyroidism’ proposed by Silva-Tinoco et al. (2013). In this case, a new question to ask is whether ‘heart hypothyroidism’ might be protective in those with heart disease, at least initially, but in the long term contribute to inadequate vascular perfusion (i.e. hypoperfusion) which already has been implicated as a risk factor for dementia (de la Torre 2012). Also to consider is whether association of APOE E4 with heart disease in males with DS might account for their earlier onset of dementia and earlier death compared to females (refer to background section).

It is speculated that ‘heart hypothyroidism’ might arise from heart disease for the following reason. Thyroid hormone normally exerts negative feedback control over the hypothalamus as well as the anterior pituitary, thus, controlling the release of both TRH (TSH releasing hormone) from the hypothalamus and TSH from the anterior pituitary gland (Sargis 2017). If the heart is not pumping blood effectively, a slower than normal rate of delivery of thyroid hormones to the hypothalamus and pituitary may result in more than usual TRH and TSH being produced — a state of ‘heart hypothyroidism’.

Originality and significance

To our knowledge, findings reported in this paper have not been reported by other researchers. Although this study was pilot and exploratory, it sheds new light on our understanding of potential risk factors for aging and the development of dementia in DS and in the general population. The findings also highlight issues that are very important for health care of persons with DS and for their care providers and raise new questions to address in future studies.

Implications of findings for health care

Correction or treatment of factors thought to contribute to low neurocognitive function or cognitive decline may help to prevent cognitive deterioration. First, to maximize quality of life, as recommended by others, it is imperative to check for congenital heart disease and pulmonary hypertension or factors predisposing to this condition, shortly after birth (Herbert and Tulloh 2015) and to provide appropriate treatment. Given that heart disease including pulmonary hypertension, or heart atrophy from inactivity as well as ventricular dysfunction can be acquired in DS, it is logical to suggest that assessments for heart dysfunction as well as for heart conditions and diseases should be conducted at regular intervals and appropriate treatment initiated throughout life. Surgical intervention should be considered for infants with severe cases of congenital heart disease (Ko 2015). Surgical intervention for congenital heart disease is prolonging life expectancy for some persons with DS, but 20 to 30 years ago, this was not done. To consider is that patients with genetic syndromes may have an increased risk of death or major complications associated with surgery (Ko 2015). One study has indicated that if done in the first year of life such surgery does not affect neurodevelopmental outcome in school age children with DS though this may not be the case for infants/toddlers (Alsaied et al. 2016). There is considerable interest in magnesium supplementation for the prevention and treatment of acquired heart disease (especially ischemic) in the general population (Joosten et al. 2013, Kolte et al. 2014). It may be timely to consider this approach for at risk persons with DS, along with a heart-healthy diet (Anand et al. 2015) and other lifestyle behavioral factors (Menotti et al. 2015).

Because thyroid dysfunction may develop in response to heart disease, and there still is uncertainty about whether or not to treat subclinical thyroid disease in DS, it would be prudent to evaluate thyroid status concomitantly with heart checks throughout life. With respect to thyroid evaluation, at least for research purposes, it is suggested that a battery of tests be applied (e.g. thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free T4 and free T3, reverse T3, thyroglobulin, and antithyroid antibodies — not only serum TSH, or TSH, and T4, which are commonly used for clinical evaluation. Meanwhile, care should be taken to treat hypothyroidism associated with heart disease with caution, given that at least some cases of thyroid dysfunction might be ‘heart hypothyroidism’ and initially protective to the heart. It is speculated that low T3 in the presence of typical values of TSH and T4 (Percy et al. 1990) might be indicative of one type of heart hypothyroidism in DS. Two important issues that should be addressed are whether the fortification of table salt with iodine is affecting the prevalence of thyroid disorders and early onset dementia in DS. In some countries where iodine has been added to table salt, the rates of autoimmune thyroid disorders in the general population has risen (e.g. Sun et al. 2014).

Implications for future dementia research

Large, prospective studies are warranted to confirm and extend the potentially important findings from the present study. To establish a connection between heart disease and cognitive decline or incident dementia such studies should be longitudinal in nature. Regardless of design, prospective studies of heart and thyroid disease in dementia in DS should include documented information about particular congenital and acquired heart conditions, pulmonary hypertension, a ‘sedentary heart’, left ventricular dysfunction, blood pressure and heart rate, sleep apnea, and diabetes as well as the occurrence of stroke or coronary events so that risks of individual factors or groups of factors (i.e. cardioembolic or atherosclerotic) can be compared. To monitor neurocognitive/behavioral function, the Brief PraxisTest used in an international clinical trial of vitamin E in older adults with DS might be considered (Sano et al. 2016). Discovery of amyloid deposits in the hearts of persons with AD and an apparent association with left ventricular dysfunction in the oldest of old (Troncone et al. 2016) raises the intriguing questions of whether this also might be the case for older persons with DS and whether amyloid deposition differs in extent among different heart conditions. Additionally, in future studies it will certainly also be informative to elucidate what effects the extra microRNA genes or expressed microRNA dosage may have on cerebral, thyroid or cardiovascular signaling in health and disease including dementia in DS. Finally, approaches discussed for dementia research in DS could be adapted to studies in the general population. Comparative studies in DS and the general population would be of great interest because of different risks for atherosclerosis and hypertension.

This paper is dedicated to Dr. Arthur J. Dalton (deceased), a pioneer in research on aging and dementia in older persons with Down syndrome.

Funding M. Percy, none. Dr. Lukiw’s involvement was supported by his National Institutes of Aging [grant number RO1-AGO38834].

Figure 1 Scatter plot of dementia test battery (DTB) scores for older persons with DS vs. age

Notes: The DTB scores for individuals are given as mean Z scores obtained from 12 subscales of three different tests. For those with heart disease there was a significant negative correlation between DTB scores and age (P = .00520); this was not the case for those with no evidence of heart disease (see text for details).

Table 1 Characteristics of the total sample and the subgroup with cognitive scores

	Males	Females	
Total sample			
N	26	30	
*Age (years): mean ± SD	44.9±8.2	48.0±10.2	
Heart disease: No heart disease	11:15	8:22	
**Treated hypothyroidism: Normal thyroid	13:10	16:6	
APOE E4+: Other APOE Types	8:18	5:25	
Subgroup with cognitive scores			
N	17	12	
Age (years): mean ± SD	45.7±8.2	46.0±10.4	
Heart disease: No heart disease	9:8	3:9	
**Treated hypothyroidism: Normal thyroid	6:8	9:2	
APOE E4+: Other APOE types	6:11	5:7	
Notes: Characteristics of individuals in the subgroup who completed DTB testing are similar to those in the total group.

* Ages were missing for 5 persons in the database so mean age was determined on 22 males and 29 females.

** The N values from the Treated hypothyroidism to Normal thyroid ratios do not match the N values in the Total sample (i.e., 26, 30) or Subgroup (i.e., 17, 12) because some participants could not be classified as having treated hypothyroidism or normal thyroid status. See Methods for additional information.

Table 2 Frequency of low DTB scores in presence or absence of potential explanatory variables

Explanatory variable	Heart disease	Age	Gender	APOE E4	APOE E2	Hypothyroidism	
Groups that were compared	HD+ vs. HD-	&gt;50 vs. other	females vs. males	E4+ vs. other genotypes	E2 vs. other genotypes	treated hypothyroidism vs. normal thyroid	
Outcomes of the groups that were compared (i.e. frequency of DTB scores less than 1 SD below Z = 0 in presence vs.absence of potential explanatory variable)	6/11 (54.6%) vs. 3/18 (16.7%)	5/11 (45.5%) vs. 4/18 (22.2%)	4/12 (33.3%) vs. 5/17 (29.4%)	4/11 (36.4%) vs. 5/17 (29.4%)	2/4 (50.0%) vs. 7/24 (29.2%)	6/15 (40.0%) vs. 3/10 (33.3%)	
P values	.0478	.237	1	1	.602	.679	
Odds ratio	6.09 (95% CIs: 1.08–33.4); P = .0407						
Notes: HD+: with evidence of heart disease; HT-: no heart disease; E4+: having the E3,4 or E4,4 genotype; E2+: having the E2,3 or E2,2 genoptype. Having heart disease was significantly associated with DTB scores that were more than 1 SD below Z = 0. The most likely odds ratio for this association was 6.09. Associations of other potential explanatory variables listed in this table with low DTB scores were not significant (see text for details).

Table 3 Relation between low DTB scores, heart disease and thyroid status

Phenotype	HD+/HT-	HD-/HT-	HD+/HT+	HD-/HT+	
DTB scores more than 1 SD below Z = 0	2	1	4	2	
Other DTB scores	2	5	1	8	
Notes: HT+: with evidence of heart disease; HT-: no heart disease; HD+: with treated hypothyroidism.

HT-: normal thyroid status. There is a significant effect of heart disease on DTB scores in those with treated hypothyroidism (most likely odds ratio = 16.0) but not in those with normal thyroid status (see text for details).

Table 4 Relation between APOE type and heart disease in females and males

Females	Males	
	
	HD+(N)	HD-(N)	P values*		HD+	HD-	P values*	
APOE type			sssss	APOE type				
E3,4 or 4,4 (i.e. E4 genotype)	2	4	Frequency of E4 vs. other genotypes in HD+ vs. HD-: 2/7 vs. 4/20	E3,4 or 4,4	5	2	Frequency of E4 vs. other genotypes in HD+ vs. HD-: 5/9 vs. 2/13	
			P =.638				P = .0743	
E3,3	3	13		E3,3	4	7		
E2,2 or 2,3 (i.e. E2 genotype)	2	3	Frequency of E2 vs. other genotypes in HD+ vs. HD-: 2/7 vs. 3/20	E2,2 or 2,3	0	4	Frequency of E2 vs. other genotypes in HD+ vs. HD-:0/9 vs. 4/13	
			P =. 580				P =.104	
Notes: HD+: with evidence of heart disease; HD-: no heart disease; N: number of persons in each category. There was a trend for the APOE E4 genotype to be positively associated with heart disease (P = .0743) and a borderline trend for the E2 genotype to be negatively associated (P = .104) in males but not females.

* Persons with a rare APOE type or the APOE E2,4 genotype were excluded from the analyses.

Disclosure statements

Contributors MEP prepared the first draft of the paper. WJL expanded the references and revised the text. The final version had input from both authors in accord with helpful comments provided by two anonymous reviewers and the IJDD editor.

Conflicts of interest None to declare.

Ethics Activities contributing to the anonymized database were approved by the University of Toronto and the New York State Institute for Basic Research.


Alsaied T Marino BS Esbensen AJ Anixt JS Epstein JN Cnota JF 2016 Does congenital heart disease affect neurodevelopmental outcomes in children with Down syndrome? Congenital Heart Disease 11 26 33 26914309
Altmann A Tian L Henderson VW Greicius MD Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Investigators 2014 Sex modifies the APOE-related risk of developing Alzheimer disease Annals of Neurology 75 563 573 24623176
Alzheimer Society of Canada 2016 About dementia Risk factors Available at: &lt;http://www.alzheimer.ca/en/About-dementia/Alzheimer-s-disease/Risk-factors&gt;
Anand SS Hawkes C de Souza RJ Mente A Dehghan M Nugent R Zulyniak MA Weis T Bernstein AM Krauss RM Kromhout D Jenkins DJ Malik V Martinez-Gonzalez MA Mozaffarian D Yusuf S Willett WC Popkin BM 2015 Food consumption and its impact on cardiovascular disease: importance of solutions focused on the globalized food system: a report from the workshop convened by the World Heart Federation Journal of the American College of Cardiology 66 1590 1614 26429085
Attems J Jellinger KA 2014 The overlap between vascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease — lessons from pathology BMC Medicine 12 206 10.1186/s12916-014-0206-2 25385447
Austin BP Nair VA Meier TB Xu G Rowley HA Carlsson CM Johnson SC Prabhakaran V 2011 Effects of hypoperfusion in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 26 123 133
Aversa T Valenzise M Salerno M Corrias A Iughetti L Radetti G De Luca F Wasniewska M 2015 Metamorphic thyroid autoimmunity in Down syndrome: from Hashimoto’s thyroiditis to Graves’ disease and beyond Italian Journal of Pediatrics 41 87 10.1186/s13052-015-0197-4 26558364
Ballard C Gauthier S Corbett A Brayne C Aarsland D Jones E 2011 Alzheimer’s disease The Lancet 377 1019 1031
Ballard C Mobley W Hardy J Williams G Corbett A 2016 Dementia in Down’s syndrome The Lancet Neurology 15 622 636 27302127
Barnes DE Kaup A Kirby KA Byers AL Diaz-Arrastia R Yaffe K 2014 Traumatic brain injury and risk of dementia in older veterans Neurology 83 312 319 24966406
Bennett S Thomas AJ 2014 Depression and dementia: cause, consequence or coincidence? Maturitas 79 184 190 24931304
Bergström S Carr H Petersson G Stephansson O Bonamy AK Dahlström A Halvorsen CP Johansson S 2016 Trends in congenital heart defects in infants with Down syndrome Pediatrics 138 27544347
Bhattacharjee S Zhao Y Hill JM Percy ME Lukiw WJ 2014 Aluminum and its potential contribution to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 6 62 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00062 24782759
Bird TD 2008 Genetic aspects of Alzheimer disease Genetics in Medicine 10 231 239 18414205
Brodtmann A 2009 Hashimoto encephalopathy and Down syndrome Archives of Neurology 66 663 666 19433669
Cannon JA McMurray JJV Quinn TJ 2015 ‘Hearts and minds’: association, causation and implication of cognitive impairment in heart failure Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy 7 22 10.1186/s13195-015-0106-5
Cebeci AN Guven A Yıldız M 2013 Profile of hypothyroidism in Down’s syndrome Journal of Clinical Research in Pediatric Endocrinology 5 116 120 23748065
Cermakova P Lund LH Fereshtehnejad SM Johnell K Winblad B Dahlström U Eriksdotter M Religa D 2015 Heart failure and dementia: survival in relation to types of heart failure and different dementia disorders European Journal of Heart Failure 17 612 619 25581033
Chartier-Harlin M-C Partita M Legrain S Perez-Tur J Brousseau T Evans A Berr C Vldal O Roques P Gouriet V Fruchart J-C Delacourte A Rossor M Amouyel P 1994 Apolipoprotein E, ε4 allele as a major risk factor for sporadic early and late-onset forms of Alzheimer’s disease: analysis of the 19q13.2 chromosomal region Human Molecular Genetics 3 569 574 8069300
Coleman M 1994 Thyroid dysfunction in Down syndrome: a review DSEducation Online Available at: &lt;https://www.down-syndrome.org/reviews/40/&gt;
Corder EH Saunders AM Risch NJ Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Gaskell PC Jr Rimmler JB Locke PA Conneally PM Schmader KE Small GW Roses AD Haines JL Pericak-Vance MA 1994 Protective effect of apolipoprotein E type 2 allele for late onset Alzheimer disease Nature Genetics 7 180 184 7920638
Dalton AJ Mehta PD Fedor BL Patti PJ 1999 Cognitive changes in memory precede those in praxis in aging persons with Down syndrome Journal of Intellectual &amp; Developmental Disability 24 169 187
de la Torre JC 2012 Cardiovascular risk factors promote brain hypoperfusion leading to cognitive decline and dementia Cardiovascular Psychiatry and Neurology 2012 15 Article ID 367516
Eichner JE Dunn ST Perveen G Thompson DM Stewart KE Stroehla BC 2002 Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and cardiovascular disease: a HuGE review American Journal of Epidemiology 155 487 495 11882522
Etgen T 2015 Kidney disease as a determinant of cognitive decline and dementia Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy 7 29 10.1186/s13195-015-0115-4
Ewbank DC 2004 The APOE gene and differences in life expectancy in Europe The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 59 B16 B20
Fazio S Palmieri EA Lombardi G Biondi B 2004 Effects of thyroid hormone on the cardiovascular system Recent Progress in Hormone Research 59 31 50 14749496
Femminella GD Ferrara N Rengo G 2015 The emerging role of microRNAs in Alzheimer’s disease Frontiers in Physiology 6 40 10.3389/fphys.2015.00040 25729367
Fiest KM Roberts JI Maxwell CJ Hogan DB Smith EE Frolkis A Cohen A Kirk A Pearson D Pringsheim T Venegas-Torres A Jetté N 2016 The prevalence and incidence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences 43 S51 S82
Freeman SB Taft LF Dooley KJ Allran K Sherman SL Hassold TJ Khoury MJ Saker DM 1998 Population-based study of congenital heart defects in Down syndrome American Journal of Medical Genetics 80 213 217 9843040
Gan EH Pearce SH 2012 Clinical review: the thyroid in mind: cognitive function and low thyrotropin in older people The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism 97 3438 3449 22865905
Goldhaber SZ Rubin IL Brown W Robertson N Stubblefield F Sloss LJ 1986 Valvular heart disease (Aortic regurgitation and mitral valve prolapse) among institutionalized adults with down’s syndrome The American Journal of Cardiology 57 278 281 2936232
GraphPad Software, Inc. 2016 QuickCalcs Available at: &lt;http://graphpad.com/quickcalcs/contingency1.cfm&gt;
Greenough MA Camakaris J Bush AI 2013 Metal dyshomeostasis and oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease Neurochemistry International 62 540 555 22982299
Hardy J Allsop D 1999 Amyloid deposition as the central event in the aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 12 383 388
Head E Lott IT Wilcock DM Lemere CA 2016 Aging in DS and the development of Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology Current Alzheimer Research 13 18 29 26651341
Heath CA Mercer SW Guthrie B 2015 Vascular comorbidities in younger people with dementia: a cross-sectional population-based study of 616 245 middle-aged people in Scotland Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, &amp; Psychiatry 86 959 964
Herbert S Tulloh RMR 2015 Treatment of pulmonary hypertension in Down’s syndrome Journal of Genetic Syndromes and Gene Therapy 6 3 10.4172/2157-7412.1000273
Herrup K 2015 The case for rejecting the amyloid cascade hypothesis Nature Neuroscience 18 794 799 26007212
Hill JM Bhattacharjee S Pogue AI Lukiw WJ 2014 The gastrointestinal tract microbiome and potential link to Alzheimer’s disease Frontiers in Neurology 5 43 10.3389/fneur.2014.00043 24772103
Hill JM Clement C Pogue AI Bhattacharjee S Zhao Y Lukiw WJ 2014 Pathogenic microbes, the microbiome, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 6 127 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00127 24982633
Houlden H Crook R Backhovens H Prihar G Baker M Hutton M Rossor M Martin JJ Van Broeckhoven C Hardy J 1998 ApoE genotype is a risk factor in nonpresenilin early-onset Alzheimer’s disease families American Journal of Medical Genetics 81 117 121 9514597
Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I 2010 Alzheimer’s disease, a multifactorial disorder seeking multitherapies Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 6 420 424
Itzhaki RF Lathe R Balin BJ Ball MJ Bearer EL Braak H Bullido MJ Carter C Clerici M Cosby SL Del Tredici K Field H Fulop T Grassi C Griffin WS Haas J Hudson AP Kamer AR Kell DB Licastro F Letenneur L Lövheim H Mancuso R Miklossy J Otth C Palamara AT Perry G Preston C Pretorius E Strandberg T Tabet N Taylor-Robinson SD Whittum-Hudson JA 2016 Microbes and Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 51 979 984
Janicki MP Dalton AJ 2000 Prevalence of dementia and impact on intellectual disability services Mental Retardation 38 276 288 10900935
Jervis GA 1948 Early senile dementia mongoloid idiocy American Journal of Psychiatry 105 102 106
Joosten MM Gansevoort RT Mukamal KJ van der Harst P Geleijnse JM Feskens EJ Navis G Bakker SJ PREVEND Study Group 2013 Urinary and plasma magnesium and risk of ischemic heart disease American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 97 1299 1306
Justin BN Turek M Hakim AM 2013 Heart disease as a risk factor for dementia Clinical Epidemiology 5 135 145 23658499
Kamer AR Fortea JO Videla S Mayoral A Janal M Carmona-Iragui M Benejam B Craig RG Saxena D Corby P Glodzik L Annam KR Robbins M de Leon MJ 2016 Periodontal disease’s contribution to Alzheimer’s disease progression in Down syndrome Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 2 49 57
Karran E De Strooper B 2016 The amyloid cascade hypothesis: are we poised for success or failure? Journal of Neurochemistry 10.1111/jnc.13632
Kerins G Petrovic K Bruder MB Gruman C 2008 Medical conditions and medication use in adults with Down syndrome: a descriptive analysis Down Syndrome Research and Practice 12 141 147
King P Tulloh R 2011 Management of pulmonary hypertension and Down syndrome International Journal of Clinical Practice 174 8 13
Klein I Danzi S 2007 Thyroid disease and the heart Circulation 116 1725 1735 Erratum in: Circulation. 2008 Jan 22;117(3):e18 17923583
Ko JM 2015 Genetic syndromes associated with congenital heart disease Korean Circulation Journal 45 357 361 26413101
Kolte D Vijayaraghavan K Khera S Sica DA Frishman WH 2014 Role of magnesium in cardiovascular diseases Cardiology in Review 22 182 192 24896250
Kumar DK Choi SH Washicosky KJ Eimer WA Tucker S Ghofrani J Lefkowitz A McColl G Goldstein LE Tanzi RE Moir RD 2016 Amyloid-β peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse and worm models of Alzheimer’s disease Science Translational Medicine 8 340ra72 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf1059
Lana-Elola E Watson-Scales SD Fisher EMC Tybulewicz VLJ 2011 Down syndrome: searching for the genetic culprits Disease Models &amp; Mechanisms 4 586 595 21878459
Letourneau A Santoni FA Bonilla X Sailani MR Gonzalez D Kind J Chevalier C Thurman R Sandstrom RS Hibaoui Y Garieri M Popadin K Falconnet E Gagnebin M Gehrig C Vannier A Guipponi M Farinelli L Borel C Migliavacca E Borel C Deutsch S Feki A Stamatoyannopoulos JA Herault Y van Steensel B Guigo R Antonarakis SE 2014 Domains of genome-wide gene expression dysregulation in Down’s syndrome Nature 508 345 350 24740065
Li YY Alexandrov PN Pogue AI Zhao Y Bhattacharjee S Lukiw WJ 2012 miRNA-155 upregulation and complement factor H deficits in Down’s syndrome NeuroReport 23 168 173 22182977
Littlejohns TJ Henley WE Lang IA Annweiler C Beauchet O Chaves PH Fried L Kestenbaum BR Kuller LH Langa KM Lopez OL Kos K Soni M Llewellyn DJ 2014 Vitamin D and the risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease Neurology 83 920 928 25098535
Lowry R 2016 Fisher exact probability test: 2 × 4 Available at: http://vassarstats.net/fisher2×4.html
Lutz MW Crenshaw D Welsh-Bohmer KA Burns DK Roses AD 2016 New genetic approaches to AD: lessons from APOE-TOMM40 phylogenetics Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 16 48 10.1007/s11910-016-0643-8 27039903
Mann DM Royston MC Ravindra CR 1990 Some morphometric observations on the brains of patients with Down’s syndrome: their relationship to age and dementia Journal of the Neurological Sciences 99 153 164 2150858
MedCalc 2016 Odds ratio calculator 16.4.3 Available at: &lt;https://www.medcalc.org/calc/oddsratio.php&gt;
Mégarbané A Ravel A Mircher C Sturtz F Grattau Y Rethoré MO Delabar JM Mobley WC 2009 The 50th anniversary of the discovery of trisomy 21: the past, present, and future of research and treatment of Down syndrome Genetics in Medicine 11 611 616 19636252
Menotti A Puddu PE Maiani G Catasta G 2015 Lifestyle behaviour and lifetime incidence of heart diseases International Journal of Cardiology 201 293 299 26301663
Merrill SJ Mu Y 2015 Thyroid autoimmunity as a window to autoimmunity: an explanation for sex differences in the prevalence of thyroid autoimmunity Journal of Theoretical Biology 375 95 100 25576242
Mıhçı E Akçurin G Eren E Kardelen F Akçurin S Keser I Ertuğ H 2010 Evaluation of congenital heart diseases and thyroid abnormalities in children with Down syndrome Anadolu Kardiyoloji Dergisi [The Anatolian Journal of Cardiology] 10 440 445
National Institute on Aging 2016 Preventing Alzheimer’s disease: what do we know? Available at: &lt;https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/preventing-alzheimers-disease/risk-factors-alzheimers-disease&gt;
O’Brien JT Thomas A 2015 Vascular dementia The Lancet 386 1698 1706
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 2016 104760: amyloid beta A4 precursor protein; APP Available at: &lt;http://www.omim.org/entry/104760?search=amyloid%20precursor%20protein&amp;highlight=amyloid%20precursor%20protein%20proteinaceous&gt;
Osimani A Berger A Friedman J Porat-Katz BS Abarbanel JM 2005 Neuropsychology of vitamin B12 deficiency in elderly dementia patients and control subjects Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology 18 33 38 15681626
Patel A Rees SD Kelly MA Bain SC Barnett AH Thalitaya D Prasher VP 2011 Association of variants within APOE, SORL1, RUNX1, BACE1 and ALDH18A1 with dementia in Alzheimer’s disease in subjects with Down syndrome Neuroscience Letters 487 144 148 20946940
Payer J Petrovic T Lisy L Langer P 2012 Hashimoto encephalopathy: a rare intricate syndrome International Journal of Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism 10 506 514 23843812
Percy ME Dalton AJ Markovic VD Crapper McLachlan DR Gera E Hummel JT Rusk AC Somerville MJ Andrews DF Walfish PG 1990 Autoimmune thyroiditis associated with mild “subclinical” hypothyroidism in adults with down syndrome: a comparison of patients with and without manifestations of Alzheimer disease American Journal of Medical Genetics 36 148 154 2142381
Percy ME Kruck TP Pogue AI Lukiw WJ 2011 Towards the prevention of potential aluminum toxic effects and an effective treatment for Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry 105 1505 1512 22099160
Percy ME Potyomkina Z Dalton AJ Fedor B Mehta P Andrews DF Mazzulli T Murk L Warren AC Wallace RA Chau H Jeng W Moalem S O’Brien L Schellenberger S Tran H Wu L 2003 Relation between apolipoprotein E genotype, hepatitis b virus status, and thyroid status in a sample of older persons with down syndrome American Journal of Medical Genetics 120A 191 198 12833399
Percy M Prasher VP 2006 Thyroid disorders, dementia and Down syndrome Prasher VP Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Biological correlates Abingdon Radcliffe Publishing Ltd 99 140
Percy M Somerville MJ Hicks M Garcia A Colelli T Wright E Kitaygorodsky J Jiang A Ho V Parpia A Wong MK 2014 Risk factors for development of dementia in a unique six-year cohort study. I. An exploratory, pilot study of involvement of the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E, mutations of the hemochromatosis-HFE gene, type 2 diabetes, and stroke Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 38 907 922
Percy ME Somerville MJ Podemski L Wright E Colelli T Cheung A Leung A Kitaygorodsky J Garcia A 2015 Transcobalamin 766G homozygosity, raised homocysteine, raised methylmalonic acid and high creatinine: A dementia-predisposing phenotype? Implications for dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Austin Journal of Clinical Neurology 2 1062 Available at: &lt;http://austinpublishinggroup.com/clinical-neurology/fulltext/ajcn-v2-id1062.php&gt;
Perluigi M Butterfield DA 2012 Oxidative stress and Down syndrome: a route toward Alzheimer-like dementia Current Gerontology and Geriatrics Research 2012 10 Article ID 724904. &lt; 10.1155/2012/724904 &gt;
Poblador-Plou B Calderón-Larrañaga A Marta-Moreno J Hancco-Saavedra J Sicras-Mainar A Soljak M Prados-Torres A 2014 Comorbidity of dementia: A cross-sectional study of primary care older patients BMC Psychiatry 14 1888 10.1186/1471-244X-14-84
Pogue AI Lukiw WJ 2016 Aluminum, the genetic apparatus of the human CNS and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) Morphologie 100 56 64 26969391
Potter H Granic A Caneus J 2016 Role of trisomy 21 mosaicism in sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease Current Alzheimer Research 13 7 17 26651340
Prasher V 1994 Screening of medical problems in adults with Down syndrome Down Syndrome Education Online Available at: &lt;https://www.down-syndrome.org/reports/31/&gt;
Prasher V Ninan S Haque S 2011 Fifteen-year follow-up of thyroid status in adults with Down syndrome Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 56 392 396
Prasher VP Janicki MP Jozsvai E Berg JM Lovering JS Rashid A Percy M Alzeimer’s disease and dementia: Implications for people with Down syndrome and other intellectual and developmental disabilities Wehmeyer M Brown I Percy M Shogren K A comprehensive guide to intellectual and developmental disabilities 2 Baltimore, (MD) Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co 2017 709 733
Prasher VP Sachdeva N Tarrant N 2015 Diagnosing dementia in adults with Down’s syndrome Neurodegenerative Disease Management 5 249 256 26107323
Prasher VP Sajith SG Rees SD Patel A Tewari S Schupf N Zigman WB 2008 Significant effect of APOE epsilon 4 genotype on the risk of dementia in Alzheimer’s disease and mortality in persons with Down Syndrome International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 23 1134 1140 18464295
Pueschel SM Werner JC 1994 Mitral valve prolapse in persons with down syndrome Research in Developmental Disabilities 15 91 97 8085032
Qiu C Kivipelto M von Strauss E 2009 Epidemiology of Alzheimer’s disease: occurrence, determinants, and strategies toward intervention Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 11 111 128 19585947
Qiu C Winblad B Marengoni A Klarin I Fastbom J Fratiglioni L 2006 Heart failure and risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease Archives of Internal Medicine 166 1003 1008 16682574
Raouf AA Tamagno G 2014 Encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroid disease EMJ Neurology 1 72 77
Ringman JM Alison Goate A Colin L Masters CL Cairns NJ Danek A Graff-Radford N Ghetti B Morris JC Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network 2014 Genetic heterogeneity in Alzheimer disease and implications for treatment strategies Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 14 499 10.1007/s11910-014-0499-8 25217249
Roizen NJ Patterson D 2003 Down’s syndrome The Lancet 361 1281 1289
Rusanen M Kivipelto M Levälahti E Laatikainen T Tuomilehto J Soininen H Ngandu T 2014 Heart diseases and long-term risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based CAIDE study Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 42 183 191
Sano M Aisen PS Andrews HF Tsai WY Lai F Dalton AJ International Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease consortium 2016 Vitamin E in aging persons with Down syndrome Neurology 86 2071 2076 27164691
Sargis RM 2017 How your thyroid works Available at: &lt;https://www.endocrineweb.com/conditions/thyroid/how-your-thyroid-works&gt;
Sawin CT 2002 Subclinical hyperthyroidism and atrial fibrillation Thyroid 12 501 503 12165113
Scheltens NM Galindo-Garre F Pijnenburg YA van der Vlies AE Smits LL Koene T Teunissen CE Barkhof F Wattjes MP Scheltens P van der Flier WM 2016 The identification of cognitive subtypes in Alzheimer’s disease dementia using latent class analysis Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, &amp; Psychiatry 87 235 243
Schupf N Lee JH Wei M Pang D Chace C Cheng R Zigman WB Tycko B Silverman W 2008 Estrogen receptor-alpha variants increase risk of Alzheimer’s disease in women with Down syndrome Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 25 476 482 18408366
Schupf N Sergievsky GH 2002 Genetic and host factors for dementia in Down’s syndrome The British Journal of Psychiatry 180 405 410 11983636
Serrano-Pozo A Qian J Monsell SE Betensky RA Hyman BT 2015 APOEɛ2 is associated with milder clinical and pathological Alzheimer disease Annals of Neurology 77 917 929 25623662
Siew W-H Tan K-L Abbaspour Babaei M Cheah P-S Ling K-H 2013 MicroRNAs and intellectual disability (ID) in Down syndrome, X-linked ID, and fragile X syndrome Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 7 41 10.3389/fncel.2013.00041 23596395
Silva-Tinoco R Carrasco Ortíz O Castillo-Martínez L Orea-Tejeda A Navarro Navarro A Reza-Albarrán A Keirns-Davies C Tellez-Olvera L 2013 Persistence of thyroid hormones disorders in chronic heart failure out patients: “Heart hypothyroidism” International Journal of Cardiology 167 2359 2360 23228214
Silverman R 2014 Follow five golden rules to prevent dementia, says study The Telegraph Available at: &lt;http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/11293313/Follow-five-golden-rules-to-prevent-dementia-says-study.html&gt;
Smith CL Granger CV 1992 Hypothyroidism producing reversible dementia. A challenge for medical rehabilitation American Journal of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation 71 28 30 1739441
Sobey CG Judkins CP Sundararajan V Phan TG Drummond GR Srikanth VK 2015 Risk of major cardiovascular events in people with down syndrome PLoS One 10 e0137093 10.1371/journal.pone.0137093 26421620
Soper D 2016 Calculator: Z score Available at: &lt;http://www.danielsoper.com/statcalc/calculator.aspx?id=22&gt;
Spence JD 2016 Metabolic vitamin B12 deficiency: a missed opportunity to prevent dementia and stroke Nutrition Research 36 109 116 26597770
Stampfer MJ 2006 Cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease: common links Journal of Internal Medicine 260 211 223 16918818
Stangroom J 2016 Social science statistics Available at: &lt;http://www.socscistatistics.com/pvalues/pearsondistribution.aspx&gt;
Strittmatter WJ Saunders AM Schmechel D Pericak-Vance M Enghild J Salvesen GS Roses AD 1993 Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 90 1977 1981
Struwe F 1929 Histopathologische Untersuchungen über Entstehung und Wesen der senilen Plaques [Histopathological studies on the origin and nature of the senile plaques] Zeitschrift fur die gesamie Neurologie and Psychiatric 122 291
Sun R Liu M Lu L Zheng Y Zhang P 2015 Congenital heart disease: causes, diagnosis, symptoms, and treatments Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics 72 8578 8560
Sun X Shan Z Teng W 2014 Effects of increased iodine intake on thyroid disorders Endocrinology and Metabolism 29 240 247 25309781
Tan ZS Beiser A Vasan RS Au R Auerbach S Kiel DP Wolf PA Seshadri S 2008 Thyroid function and the risk of Alzheimer disease: the Framingham Study Archives of Internal Medicine 168 1514 1520 18663163
Tan ZS Vasan RS 2009 Thyroid function and Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 16 503 507
Temple V Jozsvai E Konstantareas MM Hewitt TA 2001 Alzheimer dementia in Down’s syndrome: the relevance of cognitive ability Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 45 47 55 11168776
Triggiani V Angelo Giagulli V De Pergola G Licchelli B Guastamacchia E Iacoviello M 2016 Mechanisms explaining the influence of subclinical hypothyroidism on the onset and progression of chronic heart failure Endocrine Metabolic &amp; Immune Disorders — Drug Targets 16 2 7
Troncone L Luciani M Coggins M Wilker EH Ho CY Codispoti KE Frosch MP Kayed R Del Monte F 2016 Aβ amyloid pathology affects the hearts of patients with Alzheimer’s disease Journal of the American College of Cardiology 68 2395 2407 27908343
Tyrrell J Cosgrave M Hawi Z McPherson J O’Brien C McCalvert J McLaughlin M Lawlor B Gill M 1998 A protective effect of apolipoprotein E e2 allele on dementia in Down’s syndrome Biological Psychiatry 43 397 400 9532343
Vetrano DL Carfì A Brandi V L’Angiocola PD Di Tella S Cipriani MC Antocicco M Zuccalà G Palmieri V Silveri MC Bernabei R Onder G 2016 Left ventricle diastolic function and cognitive performance in adults with Down syndrome International Journal of Cardiology 203 816 818 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.11.041 26595792
Vis JC Duffels MG Winter MM Weijerman ME Cobben JM Huisman SA Mulder BJ 2009 Down syndrome: a cardiovascular perspective Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 53 419 425 19228275
Vis JC de Bruin-Bon RH Bouma BJ Backx AP Huisman SA Imschoot L Mulder BJ 2012 ‘The sedentary heart’: physical inactivity is associated with cardiac atrophy in adults with an intellectual disability International Journal of Cardiology 158 387 393 21353712
von Strauss E Viitanen M De Ronchi D Winblad B Fratiglioni L 1999 Aging and the occurrence of dementia: findings from a population-based cohort with a large sample of nonagenarians Archives of Neurology 56 587 592 10328254
Wallace RA Dalton AJ 2006 Clinicians’ guide to physical health problems of older adults with Down syndrome Journal on Developmental Disabilities 12 1 92
Wilcock DM Schmitt FA Head E 2015 Cerebrovascular contributions to aging and Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1862 909 914 26593849
Wiseman FK Al-Janabi T Hardy J Karmiloff-Smith A Nizetic D Tybulewicz VL Fisher EM Strydom A 2015 A genetic cause of Alzheimer disease: mechanistic insights from Down syndrome Nature Reviews Neuroscience 16 564 574 26243569
Wood WG Li L Müller WE Eckert GP 2014 Cholesterol as a causative factor in Alzheimer’s disease: a debatable hypothesis Journal of Neurochemistry 129 559 572 24329875
Yaffe K Hoang T 2013 Nonpharmacologic treatment and prevention strategies for dementia Continuum (Minneapolis, Minn) 9 372 381
Ylä-Herttuala S Luoma J Nikkari T Kivimäki T 1989 Down’s syndrome and atherosclerosis Atherosclerosis 76 269 272 2525042
Yong-Hong L Xiao-Dong P Chang-Quan H Bo Y Qing-Xiu L 2013 Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in patients with Alzheimer Disease (AD) Journal of Investigative Medicine 61 578 581 23360840
Zhao Q Lee JH Pang D Temkin A Park N Janicki SC Zigman WB Silverman W Tycko B Schupf N 2011 Estrogen receptor-beta variants are associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease in women with Down syndrome Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 32 241 249 22156442
Zhao Y Lukiw WJ 2015 Microbiome-generated amyloid and potential impact on amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) Journal of Natural Sciences 1 5 Available at: &lt;http://www.jnsci.org/files/article/e138.pdf&gt;
