LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9504819
22458
Neuroscientist
Neuroscientist
The Neuroscientist : a review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry
1073-8584
1089-4098

32812494
8130863
10.1177/1073858420945964
NIHMS1701426
Article
Dendritic Spines: Mediators of Cognitive Resilience in Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease
Walker Courtney K.
Herskowitz Jeremy H. *
Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental Therapeutics, Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA
* Corresponding author: Jeremy H. Herskowitz, Ph.D. Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental Therapeutics, Departments of Neurology and Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Blvd., Birmingham, AL, 35294, Phone: 205.996.6257, jhersko@uab.edu
7 5 2021
19 8 2020
10 2021
01 10 2022
27 5 487505
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Cognitive resilience is often defined as the ability to remain cognitively normal in the face of insults to the brain. These insults can include disease pathology, such as plaques and tangles associated with Alzheimer’s disease, stroke, traumatic brain injury, or other lesions. Factors such as physical or mental activity and genetics may contribute to cognitive resilience, but the neurobiological underpinnings remain ill-defined. Emerging evidence suggests that dendritic spine structural plasticity is one plausible mechanism. In this review, we highlight the basic structure and function of dendritic spines and discuss how spine density and morphology change in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. We note evidence that spine plasticity mediates resilience to stress, and we tackle dendritic spines in the context of cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease. Finally, we examine how lifestyle and genetic factors may influence dendritic spine plasticity to promote cognitive resilience before discussing evidence for actin regulatory kinases as therapeutic targets for Alzheimer’s disease.

Cognitive resilience
dendritic spine
aging
Alzheimer’s disease
actin cytoskeleton

pmcIntroduction

Various insults to the brain, such as injuries or pathology, often result in cognitive impairment. In Alzheimer’s disease, aggregates of amyloid-β and tau lead to dysfunction and loss of neurons and synapses, resulting in dementia. Accumulation of amyloid-β plaques begins in the cortex and eventually spreads to subcortical regions. Tau neurofibrillary tangles exhibit a more stereotypical pattern of spread throughout the brain. Tangles begin in the entorhinal cortex, spread to the hippocampus, and finally deposit in neocortical regions (Braak and Braak 1991). However, approximately one-third of individuals over the age of 80 are cognitively normal, despite the presence of amyloid-β plaques and tau tangles at levels comparable to that seen in moderate stage Alzheimer’s disease (Bennett and others 2006). Thus, these people are hypothesized to be cognitively resilient to Alzheimer’s disease pathology, since they exhibit greater cognitive abilities than would be expected based on the level of pathology in the brain. How these individuals generate cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology remains an open question, but understanding the underlying neurobiological mechanisms could be the key to developing therapeutics that effectively delay or prevent dementia. Notably, cognitive resilience should not be confused with cognitive reserve, a popular concept which states that each individual’s ability to cope with Alzheimer’s disease pathology depends on how their brains perform tasks, based on pre-existing cognitive processing approaches and compensatory mechanisms (Stern 2012). Cognitive reserve may be one mechanism by which certain individuals exhibit cognitive resilience, but is not a focus of this review.

Despite the crucial role of amyloid-β and tau in Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology, synapse or dendritic spine loss is the strongest correlate of cognitive impairment (Chen and others 2018; DeKosky and Scheff 1990; Terry and others 1991). This established the hypothesis that resilient individuals cope with Alzheimer’s disease pathology through synapse or dendritic spine plasticity. Most excitatory synapses occur on dendritic spines, which are small protrusions off dendrites. Dendritic spines are key mediators of synaptic transmission and their structure is inextricably linked to synaptic strength and activity.

In this review, we describe dendritic spine structure, function, and regulation, followed by examples of dendritic spine changes that occur in aging and disease. This is followed by an overview of three factors that may contribute to cognitive resilience. Finally, we discuss dendritic spines in the context of cognitive resilience, how cognitive resilience factors may act through dendritic spines, and summarize critical questions that must be addressed.

Dendritic Spines

Dendritic spines were first reported as distinct structures by Santiago Ramón y Cajal in 1888, after he observed them in Golgi-stained sections (Garcia-Lopez and others 2007; Ramón y Cajal 1888). Today, these structures are known to be the postsynaptic sites of the majority of excitatory synapses in the brain and are critical for proper neuronal function. In this section, we describe the structure and function of dendritic spines, followed by a brief introduction of how dendritic spine morphology is regulated.

Structure

Dendritic spines are small protrusions on dendrites and exhibit remarkable variability in size and shape. Their density varies along the length of dendritic branches and among cell types and animal species (Elston and DeFelipe 2002; Jacobs and others 1997; Jacobs and others 2001; Rochefort and Konnerth 2012). Each spine has a head and a neck, and within the spine head is a vast array of molecules critical for synaptic signaling. One notable feature of the spine head is the postsynaptic density, which consists of neurotransmitter receptors, signaling molecules, and scaffolding proteins, linked to the spine cytoskeleton (Sheng and Kim 2011). The volume of the spine head is proportional to the size of the postsynaptic density (Freire 1978) and the number of postsynaptic receptors (Kasai and others 2003; Matsuzaki and others 2001; Spacek and Hartmann 1983).

Head diameter and neck length vary considerably from spine to spine. This, in conjunction with the relationship between spine size and synaptic strength, has led to the common classification of spines as thin, stubby, or mushroom, as described by Peters and Kaiserman-Abramof (1969) (see Fig. 1). Mushroom spines are the prototypical spines, with a large head and thin neck, and are generally quite stable over time (Knott and others 2006; Pfeiffer and others 2018; Trachtenberg and others 2002). Thin spines have small heads and necks and are highly plastic structures that may rapidly expand to form long-lived mushroom spines. Stubby spines are hypothesized to be more transitional structures (Hayashi and Majewska 2005). Dendritic filopodia are widely considered precursors to spines and are responsible for forming new synapses with nearby axons (Ziv and Smith 1996).

Synapses are plastic, capable of strengthening and weakening, and the same is true of dendritic spines as well. Even in adult animals dendritic spines exhibit turnover, and can thus form or disappear, with larger spines tending to be more persistent than smaller ones (Grutzendler and others 2002; Holtmaat and Svoboda 2009; Holtmaat and others 2005; Majewska and others 2006; Pfeiffer and others 2018; Trachtenberg and others 2002; Zuo and others 2005). Furthermore, spines are highly dynamic structures and exhibit both intrinsic, activity-independent fluctuations (Bonilla-Quintana and others 2020; Dvorkin and Ziv 2016; Yasumatsu and others 2008) as well as activity-dependent growth or shrinkage in conjunction with synapse strengthening or weakening (Kasai and others 2003; Matsuzaki and others 2004; Noguchi and others 2011; Zhou and others 2004). Such changes rely on rearrangement of the spine cytoskeleton. In the early 1980s, it was discovered that spines are actin-rich structures (Caceres and others 1983; Matus and others 1982), and in 2008, dynamic, activity-dependent entry of microtubules into spines was observed (Dent 2017; Hu and others 2008; Jaworski and others 2009; Mitsuyama and others 2008). Regulation of these two cytoskeletal components underlies dynamic changes in spine morphology.

Dendritic arbors and spines in the brain can be visualized through a variety of neuronal labeling techniques as shown in Figure 1. Broadly, these techniques can be classified as bulk dye loading, intracellular injections, immunolabeling, or genetic labeling (for review, see Parekh and Ascoli (2013)). One of the most popular approaches is Golgi staining, which was used by Ramón y Cajal in his early studies of dendritic spines and continues to be used today. Tissue is incubated in solutions of potassium dichromate and silver nitrate, which react to form silver chromate. The silver chromate is visible as a brown precipitate. Golgi staining enables visualization of the entire dendritic arbor, including dendritic spines. However, only a small proportion of neurons are impregnated, which can be beneficial for observing and measuring spines on individual dendrites. Another useful approach is intracellular injection of fluorescent dyes such as biocytin or Lucifer yellow. This technique allows for visualization of dendritic structures following electrophysiological recording of the same cell. More information on techniques that are commonly used to visualize dendritic spines is provided in Table 1.

Golgi staining and fluorescence-based approaches in tissue require different methods of visualization. Golgi staining is viewed using brightfield microscopy, which illuminates the whole sample with light. The dendrites appear black against a light background. Fluorescent dyes can be imaged using either confocal microscopy or two-photon microscopy. Both methods limit out of focus light that causes noise in the image. Two-photon microscopy is more effective at eliminating out of focus light, but confocal microscopy results in greater spatial resolution (Parekh and Ascoli 2013). Following image acquisition, dendrites can be reconstructed in three dimensions using digital reconstruction software, such as Neurolucida, NeuronStudio, or Imaris Filament Tracer. The reconstruction process can be manual, semiautomatic, or automatic, with most available software providing all three options. Additionally, reconstructions can be generated at the dendritic arbor level, where the entire dendritic tree is reconstructed for arbor analysis, or at the dendritic spine level, where a single segment of a dendritic branch is reconstructed (see Fig. 1). The reconstructions are then analyzed using companion software, such as Neurolucida Explorer, NeuroGL, and NeuronLand.

Function

As the postsynaptic site for the majority of excitatory synapses in the brain, the dendritic spine is critical for proper neuronal function. However, the function of dendritic spines extends beyond simply housing the postsynaptic machinery. These structures also compartmentalize electrical and biochemical signaling. This serves to influence neuronal firing in response to presynaptic inputs and limit synaptic plasticity-mediated changes to specific synapses. The spine neck is particularly important for this compartmentalization. The narrow spine neck limits diffusion of various signaling molecules, including Ca2+, from the spine head to the dendritic shaft, strengthening specific synapses (Ebrahimi and Okabe 2014; Hayashi and Majewska 2005). Moreover, the shape and length of the spine neck influences the amplitude and duration of Ca2+ transients initiated by synaptic activity. This controls the influence of particular synapses on neuronal activity and promotes plasticity in smaller spines (Hayashi and Majewska 2005; Majewska and others 2000; Noguchi and others 2005).

Regulation of Spine Morphology

Actin dynamics play a critical role in synaptic structural and functional plasticity. Long-term potentiation is associated with increased actin polymerization and spine enlargement, whereas long-term depression couples with decreased actin polymerization and spine shrinkage (Okamoto and others 2004). Furthermore, disrupting the balance between actin polymerization and depolymerization impairs long-term potentiation (Ramachandran and Frey 2009; Rex and others 2009). Actin can be regulated by numerous pathways, including signaling of the Rho family of small G proteins: RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 (see Fig. 2).

RhoA affects actin primarily through activation of rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK), which exists in two isoforms: ROCK1 and ROCK2. Collectively, the ROCKs impinge on actin through two predominant pathways. One involves phosphorylation of myosin light chain, along with inhibitory phosphorylation of myosin light chain phosphatase (Saneyoshi and Hayashi 2012). The other pathway is through activation of the LIM kinase (LIMK)/cofilin cascade. ROCK phosphorylates and activates LIMK, which then phosphorylates and inactivates cofilin. Cofilin is an actin depolymerization factor that, when active, severs filamentous F-actin and promotes depolymerization of actin. Through the activation of the ROCK/LIMK cascade, cofilin is inactivated, which reduces the depolymerization of actin (Saneyoshi and Hayashi 2012). Notably, the two ROCK isoforms may affect aspects of dendritic spine morphology through independent signaling cascades. ROCK1 acts preferentially through myosin light chain to regulate spine length, whereas ROCK2 acts through LIMK1 to regulate spine density (Henderson and others 2019).

LIMK and cofilin link spine structural changes with long-term potentiation. During the first 7 min following induction of long-term potentiation, actin and actin modifiers (including cofilin) move from the dendritic shaft into the spine, which promotes actin remodeling and spine head expansion. After this initial phase, LIMK phosphorylates cofilin to inactivate it. Levels of actin modifiers return to baseline, and a greater proportion of actin stabilizers enter the spine. This ultimately results in stabilization of the newly enlarged actin cytoskeleton (Bertling and Hotulainen 2017; Bosch and others 2014).

The other Rho family members, Rac1 and Cdc42, can activate p21-activated kinase (PAK), which in turn activates LIMK. This adds an additional layer of complexity to the regulation of actin via cofilin. In addition to activating PAK, Rac1 also activates the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein family verprolin homologous protein (WAVE1). WAVE1 activates the actin-related protein 2/3 complex (Arp2/3) to promote actin polymerization. Similarly, Cdc42 activates the neuronal Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP). Like its family member, WAVE1, N-WASP promotes actin polymerization by activating Arp2/3 (Saneyoshi and Hayashi 2012).

Striatal medium spiny neurons in mice lacking WAVE1 have fewer thin, stubby, and mushroom spines, and more filopodia, suggesting WAVE1 is required for normal dendritic spine formation. Reducing WAVE1 levels using RNA interference in primary hippocampal neurons resulted in a loss of mushroom spines and an increase of filopodia, indicating WAVE1 may play a role in mushroom spine maintenance after spines have formed (Kim and others 2006). Similarly, inhibiting or reducing levels of N-WASP results in dendritic spine loss in hippocampal neuron cultures (Wegner and others 2008). These findings illustrate the importance of actin regulation in dendritic spine plasticity.

As is true of actin, disrupting the balance of monomeric and polymerized tubulin impairs long-term potentiation (Barnes and others 2010; Jaworski and others 2009; Shumyatsky and others 2005). Microtubules enter spines in an activity-dependent manner, a process which requires both calcium influx to the spine and actin polymerization (Hu and others 2008; Jaworski and others 2009; Merriam and others 2013; Mitsuyama and others 2008). This transient entry of microtubules into spines is thought to be a mechanism by which various cargoes are delivered to the spine for plasticity (Dent 2017; Pchitskaya and others 2018). However, much less is known about the role of microtubules in dendritic spine structure and function.

Dendritic Spines in Aging &amp; Disease

Aging

Humans and non-human primates exhibit age-related decline in cognitive functions that are dependent on the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, including tasks involving working memory and cognitive flexibility (Morrison and Baxter 2012). Since age-related neuronal loss is not observed (Pakkenberg and Gundersen 1997), cognitive decline associated with aging is hypothesized to be driven by subtle alterations in dendritic spine density and morphology (see Fig. 3). This hypothesis is supported by studies showing that dendritic spine loss occurs in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex with age in humans and non-human primates (Boros and others 2019; Dickstein and others 2007; Dumitriu and others 2010; Young and others 2014), and in the analogous prelimbic subregion of the medial prefrontal cortex in rats (Bloss and others 2011).

In rhesus macaques, the reduction of spine density in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is driven by loss of thin spines (Dumitriu and others 2010; Young and others 2014), which are the most dynamic, plastic spine type. Additionally, thin spine density correlates with cognitive performance (Dumitriu and others 2010; Young and others 2014). In older monkeys, the remaining thin spines have larger heads than those in young monkeys. Larger thin spine heads are strongly associated with poorer cognitive performance. In fact, the correlation between thin spine head size and cognition is stronger than that between cognition and thin spine density (Dumitriu and others 2010). Similarly, in humans there was a trending negative correlation between thin spine density and age. The remaining thin spines also had larger heads, with larger spine heads being associated with lower cognitive performance (Boros and others 2019).

The cognitive processes mediated by the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are thought to require high levels of synaptic plasticity, which could explain why this region is particularly vulnerable to aging (Morrison and Baxter 2012). Since thin spines are highly dynamic, they could be critical for the synaptic plasticity underlying complex cognitive processes. Thus, loss of thin spines with age could prevent necessary levels of synaptic plasticity from occurring and impair cognitive function.

Thin spine head diameter is also a key correlate of cognition. The increase in thin spine head diameter with age was speculated by Dumitriu and others (2010) to be caused by a decrease in spine turnover. The decrease in generation of new spines would result in the present spines being older, and therefore larger. However, the contribution of spine head size to cognitive function still remains a critical question to answer.

Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that causes dementia. Although pathological neuron death occurs, synapse or dendritic spine loss is the strongest correlate of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease (Boros and others 2017; Chen and others 2018; DeKosky and Scheff 1990; Terry and others 1991) (see Fig. 3). Synapse and dendritic spine loss have been extensively noted in Alzheimer’s disease brain regions, including (but not limited to): cortex (Boros and others 2017; Brown and others 1998; DeKosky and Scheff 1990; Liu and others 1999; Masliah and others 1990; Samuel and others 1994; Terry and others 1991), hippocampus (Chen and others 2018; Hamos and others 1989), temporal lobe (Scheff and Price 1993), and nucleus basalis (Samuel and others 1994). Despite early involvement of the entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology, several studies observed little or no synapse or dendritic spine loss in the entorhinal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease patients (Domínguez-Álvaro and others 2018; Masliah and others 1991; Scheff and others 1993), which could reflect compensatory plasticity. In the prefrontal cortex, cumulative mean dendritic spine head diameter was reduced significantly in Alzheimer’s disease patients, whereas mean spine length was comparable to controls. Moreover, spine density in the prefrontal cortex inversely correlated with increasing tau pathology, but not amyloid-β pathology, suggesting that tau and amyloid-β may have differing effects on dendritic spine structure and plasticity in Alzheimer’s disease progression (Boros and others 2017).

Studies in vitro and in vivo support the notion that tau and amyloid-β differentially affect dendritic spine structure and plasticity in Alzheimer’s disease. Application of amyloid-β oligomers to neuronal cultures results in degeneration of dendritic spines and neuronal hyperexcitability within 6 hours (Henderson and others 2019; Lacor and others 2007), with mouse models exhibiting spine loss and neuronal hyperexcitability as well (Busche and others 2019; Henderson and others 2019; Šišková and others 2014; Spires and others 2005). On the contrary, culture systems overexpressing either mutant or wildtype tau do not exhibit spine loss (Hoover and others 2010; Shahani and others 2006), and studies of tau transgenic mice report conflicting findings. Some studies of mutant tau-expressing mice report dendritic spine loss (Hoffmann and others 2013; Kandimalla and others 2018; Kopeikina and others 2013; Xu and others 2014), although other studies do not (Kremer and others 2011; Pickett and others 2017). Notably, mice expressing wildtype human tau, which may be more relevant to Alzheimer’s disease, do not exhibit dendritic spine loss (Chabrier and others 2014; Dickstein and others 2010). However, studies in humans linking tau pathology with cognitive decline and synapse loss suggest that tau does play a role in dendritic spine loss in human disease (Arriagada and others 1992; Boros and others 2017; Duyckaerts and others 1998; Giannakopoulos and others 2003). Additionally, several studies have shown that tau impairs long-term potentiation by promoting AMPA receptor internalization, and that tau silences neurons (Busche and others 2019; Hoover and others 2010; Miller and others 2014). In Alzheimer’s disease, tau may silence neuronal activity and eventually lead to dendritic spine loss, but on a time scale that is unique to humans.

However, amyloid-β and tau are not independent of each other in the context of Alzheimer’s disease. Tau is necessary for amyloid-β-driven cognitive impairment, mortality, and seizure susceptibility in mice (Roberson and others 2007; Roberson and others 2011). Additionally, suppression of neuronal firing by tau outweighs amyloid-β-induced hyperexcitability in transgenic mice (Busche and others 2019). A 2014 study examined dendritic spine density in mice expressing mutant human APP, wildtype human tau, or both. They found that while mice expressing APP or tau alone did not exhibit reductions in dendritic spine density, those that expressed both APP and tau had a 35% reduction in dendritic spines and a slight exacerbation of tau pathology (Chabrier and others 2014). Two studies similarly found that co-expression of mutant APP and PSEN1 (APP/PS1) with either wildtype or mutant tau results in greater pathology (Jackson and others 2016; Pooler and others 2015). However, in APP/PS1 mice crossed with mice expressing wildtype tau, synapse density did not differ from mice expressing only mutant APP and PSEN1 (Jackson and others 2016), which conflicts with the findings from Chabrier and others (2014). Collectively, we hypothesize that amyloid-β has more rapid degenerative effects on the physical structure of dendritic spines and causes neuronal hyperexcitability in Alzheimer’s disease, while tau primarily serves to silence synapses, with possible effects on dendritic spine structure and plasticity exhibiting an insidious onset and being less robust.

Stress

Dendritic spines are well-characterized in rodent models of stress, including repeated restraint stress in rats, learned helplessness in rats, and chronic social defeat stress in mice. Similar to observations in human studies of aging and Alzheimer’s disease described above, there are regional differences in dendritic spine density in rodents in response to stress. For instance, both chronic social defeat stress in mice and learned helplessness in rats are associated with decreases in spine density in the prelimbic medial prefrontal cortex, CA3 of the hippocampus, and the dentate gyrus, along with increases in spine density in the nucleus accumbens (Qu and others 2018; Yang and others 2015). Additionally, in the restraint model in rats, a reduction of spine density is observed in the prelimbic cortex, but not infralimbic cortex, and within the prelimbic cortex, only the apical dendrites showed a reduction in spine density (Bloss and others 2011; Goldwater and others 2009; Radley and others 2006). This stress-induced spine loss is due primarily to loss of thin spines, although loss of stubby spines occurred as well (Bloss and others 2011). These findings demonstrate that dendritic spine plasticity can be highly specific, affecting specific spine types only within certain brain regions and certain dendritic arbors.

Aging impacts the spine plasticity that occurs in response to stress (Bloss and others 2011). In contrast to young rats, middle-aged and aged rats (3, 12 and 20 months, respectively) do not lose thin or stubby spines in the prelimbic cortex in response to stress. This suggests that experience-dependent spine plasticity decreases with age in the prelimbic cortex in rats (Bloss and others 2011). Nearly all studies of stress in rodents use young rats. Whether older rats, such as the middle-aged and aged rats used by Bloss and others (2011), exhibit appropriate behavioral responses to stress paradigms despite failing to exhibit stress-dependent spine plasticity remains an open question.

Humans exhibit remarkable variability in their response to stress – some take it in stride, while others struggle to cope. The same variability is observed in rodent models of stress, allowing for the study of susceptible versus resilient animals. Dendritic spines appear to play a role in this difference. In the chronic social defeat stress model in mice and learned helplessness in rats, resilient animals had dendritic spine densities similar to those of their unstressed counterparts in prelimbic medial prefrontal cortex, CA3 of the hippocampus, dentate gyrus, and nucleus accumbens (Qu and others 2018; Yang and others 2015). In studies where interventions were applied to prevent susceptibility to stress, dendritic spines were maintained as well. This has also been shown in studies of exercise (Chen and others 2017; Mul and others 2018) and ketamine (Ng and others 2018). Conversely, pharmacologic manipulation of the ROCK signaling cascade, which is involved in dendritic spine remodeling, protects against both dendritic spine loss and susceptibility to stress (Francis and others 2019; García-Rojo and others 2017). Importantly, the evidence of dendritic spine involvement in resilience to stress bolsters the growing hypothesis that dendritic spine plasticity is a mechanism for cognitive resilience.

Cognitive Resilience

Cognitive resilience is often defined as the ability to remain cognitively normal in the face of insults to the brain. These insults can include disease pathology, such as plaques and tangles associated with Alzheimer’s disease, stroke, traumatic brain injury, and other lesions. However, a number of potential factors that may contribute to an individual’s ability to display cognitive resilience have been identified. These include cardiovascular health, physical activity, genetics, and others (Legdeur and others 2018). Here, we describe physical and mental activity and genetics as potential global mediators of cognitive resilience.

Physical Activity

The lack of effective therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease has led many researchers to investigate other means of modifying disease risk. A 2009 meta-analysis found that physical activity reduces the risk of dementia due to any cause by 28% and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease specifically by 45% (Hamer and Chida 2009). There is evidence that aerobic and mind-body exercises are particularly beneficial, in comparison to stretching and toning exercises (Lee and others 2015). Physical activity may exert its beneficial effects through reducing hypertension and type 2 diabetes, both of which are risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease (Liu-Ambrose and others 2018). In addition, higher levels of physical activity are associated with larger gray matter volumes of Alzheimer’s-relevant brain regions, and higher gray matter volume was associated with reduced risk of future cognitive impairment (Erickson and others 2010). Thus, physical activity may promote cognitive resilience through multiple mechanisms, including neuronal plasticity.

Cognitive Engagement

In addition to physical activity, mental activity may play a substantial role. Having greater linguistic abilities early in life is associated with reduced risk of developing dementia later in life (Iacono and others 2009). Although not observed in every study, there is evidence that higher levels of educational attainment are associated with lower risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease (Bennett and others 2014; Corrada and others 2008; Rastas and others 2010; Skoog and others 2017). Among the oldest-old, aged ninety and above, time spent reading correlated with a lower risk of developing dementia, suggesting that continual enrichment promotes cognitive resilience (Paganini-Hill and others 2016).

Genetics

A small percentage (&lt;1%) of Alzheimer’s disease cases are directly caused by autosomal dominant mutations in APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2, genes that are involved in amyloid-β production. However, many genes are identified as genetic risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease. The APOE ε4 allele is the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. It increases the risk by 3-fold to 15-fold, depending on whether one or two ε4 alleles are expressed (Farrer and others 1997; Jansen and others 2019; Liu and others 2013). The APOE ε4 allele also increases the risk of vascular dementia and dementia from other causes (Rasmussen and others 2018; Yin and others 2012). In contrast, the APOE ε2 allele is protective against Alzheimer’s disease (Farrer and others 1997; Jansen and others 2019; Liu and others 2013). In a study of normal cognitive aging, APOE ε4 carriers exhibited more rapid decline in executive function, whereas ε2 carriers had a slower decline over time (Reas and others 2019).

Studies based on genome-wide association have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms that may promote cognitive function in older adults (Legdeur and others 2018). Among participants in The Religious Orders Study (ROS) and Rush Memory and Aging Project (MAP), the ENC1 allele rs76662990G is associated with slower cognitive decline, and higher ENC1 RNA levels are associated with higher residual cognition (De Jager and others 2018; White and others 2017). Among participants in the Danish 1905 Cohort Study, the MnSOD allele rs4880C, CLU allele rs11136000T, and PICALM allele rs3851179A are associated with better cognitive performance (Mengel-From and others 2011; Soerensen and others 2009). Additionally, a study utilizing the Utah Population Database and the Cache County Study on Memory Health and Aging found that the RAB10 single nucleotide polymorphism rs142787485 is expressed at a higher frequency than expected in cognitively normal individuals with a high genetic risk of Alzheimer’s disease (Ridge and others 2017).

Finally, individuals heterozygous for the KL-VS variant of KLOTHO exhibit greater cognitive abilities than non-carriers, a finding which was replicated in three independent cohorts: the Hillblom Aging Study, the Memory and Aging Project, and the Normal Aging Cohort (Dubal and others 2014). Furthermore, carriers of both KL-VS and APOE ε4 alleles have lower amyloid-β accumulation and are less likely to develop mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s disease, compared to APOE ε4 carriers lacking the KL-VS allele (Erickson and others 2019; Belloy and others 2020).

Dendritic Spines and Resilience to Alzheimer’s disease

Approximately one-third of older individuals are cognitively normal, despite the presence of Alzheimer’s disease pathology in the brain (Bennett and others 2006). These individuals are, by definition, preclinical Alzheimer’s disease patients but can be described as being cognitively resilient, since they exhibit greater cognitive abilities than would be expected based on the extent of pathology in their brains (Driscoll and Troncoso 2011). This disconnect between pathology and cognition has been reported in the Religious Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project, the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging, Honolulu-Asia Aging Study, 90+ Study, and the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (Bennett and others 2006; Head and others 2009; O’Brien and others 2009; Savva and others 2009; White 2009).

The prefrontal cortex is particularly vulnerable to the effects of aging and is impacted by Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Postmortem studies of the prefrontal cortex demonstrate that synapses and dendritic spines are maintained in individuals who exhibit cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease. Synaptophysin (presynaptic) and synaptopodin (postsynaptic) staining in the prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area 46) is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease brains, but present at normal levels in resilient brains (Arnold and others 2013). To study dendritic spines specifically, we performed Golgi staining in postmortem prefrontal cortex samples from controls, Alzheimer’s disease cases, and resilient individuals who were cognitively normal despite the presence of Alzheimer’s disease pathology (Boros and others 2017). A summary of the demographic information for these cases can be found in Table 2, with the full demographic information available in the cited study. While Alzheimer’s disease cases exhibited a reduction in spine density, resilient cases maintained their dendritic spines (see Fig. 4). The resilient cases had significantly more thin and mushroom spines than Alzheimer’s disease patients. This suggests that these spine types are important for normal cognition in the face of Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Additionally, the resilient cases had longer dendritic spines than either controls or Alzheimer’s cases, which may enable them to maintain synaptic connections or form new ones in the presence of pathology. Resilient cases had thin spines with smaller head diameters, which ties in with studies in aging rhesus monkeys and humans showing that thin spine head diameter is negatively correlated with cognitive performance (Boros and others 2019; Dumitriu and others 2010; Young and others 2014).

Biochemical studies of the hippocampus and superior temporal sulcus suggest that dendritic spine maintenance may not contribute to cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology in these regions (Perez-Nievas and others 2013; Scheff and others 2016). These findings are summarized in Table 3. Ultimately, further work is needed to determine whether preservation of spine density and morphology is critical for maintaining information processing in certain brain regions, but not others, among individuals resilient to Alzheimer’s disease pathology.

Effects of Cognitive Resilience Factors on Dendritic Spines

A 2019 study aimed to identify gene transcription changes in the hippocampus that could explain the protective effect of physical activity on Alzheimer’s disease. While Alzheimer’s disease was associated with a reduction in genes related to synaptic function and plasticity, physical activity was associated with an increase in expression of such genes (Berchtold and others 2019). Thus, physical activity could promote cognitive resilience by promoting dendritic spine maintenance and plasticity. Additionally, educational attainment was associated with postsynaptic genes (Koopmans and others 2019), suggesting that education, and by extension cognitive activity, promotes expression of genes involved in postsynaptic structure and function (see Fig. 4).

The APOE ε4 allele increases the risk of Alzheimer’s disease, while the ε2 allele lowers the risk. Several studies have observed that mice expressing the human APOE ε4 allele have fewer dendritic spines than mice expressing the ε2 or ε3 alleles (Dumanis and others 2009; Ji and others 2003; Neustadtl and others 2017). One study in humans similarly observed a gene dose-dependent effect of APOE ε4 on dendritic spine density among Alzheimer’s disease patients, and found that among cognitively normal individuals, ε4 carriers had fewer spines than non-carriers (Ji and others 2003). The majority of studies in humans have observed no relationship between APOE ε4 and dendritic spine or synapse density (Boros and others 2019; Scheff and others 2016; Scheff and others 2007; Scheff and others 2006; Scheff and others 2011). However, we demonstrated that the density of filopodia, or spine precursors, was increased significantly in cognitively normal ε4 carriers (Boros and others 2019). Moreover, cognitively normal APOE ε4 carriers were found to have smaller thin spine head diameters than non-ε4 carriers (Boros and others 2019). Yet, whether ApoE ε2 protects against Alzheimer’s disease through actions on dendritic spines remains to be answered.

A single nucleotide polymorphism in the gene ENC1 was associated with enhanced cognition (White and others 2017). ENC1 is involved in neurite development and neuronal process formation during neural development and is also expressed in the cortex and hippocampus in adulthood. Additionally, ENC1 binds actin (Hernandez and others 1997; White and others 2017). No studies have explored the potential mechanism by which ENC1 promotes cognitive function or whether it plays a role in dendritic spine formation or plasticity. We speculate that the resilience-promoting allele of ENC1 could promote dendritic spine formation during development or spine plasticity in adulthood.

The gene KLOTHO is another putative cognitive resilience factor, having potentially protective effects against cognitive decline (Legdeur and others 2018). Although the relationship between KLOTHO and dendritic spines has not been extensively studied, KLOTHO overexpression in the hAPP J20 Alzheimer’s disease mouse model prevents amyloid-β-induced cognitive impairment and dendritic spine loss (Dubal and others 2015). Moreover, targeted deletion of KLOTHO reduces thin spine density while overexpression increases thin spine density (Vo and others 2019). KLOTHO overexpression in mice enhances cognitive function through a GluN2B-mediated increase in synaptic plasticity (Dubal and others 2014). GluN2B-deficient mice exhibit reductions in spine density (Brigman and others 2010). Conversely, studies in postmortem tissue revealed that schizophrenia subjects have higher levels of GluN2B and an increase in dendritic spine density in CA3 of the hippocampus in comparison to controls (Li and others 2015). Therefore, KLOTHO may protect against the effects of amyloid-β through GluN2B-mediated increases in thin spine density and synaptic plasticity.

Other genes associated with cognitive resilience may indirectly impact dendritic spines through interactions with amyloid-β or tau. For example, the protective variant of the CLU gene, which encodes clusterin, may attenuate amyloid-β pathology (Karch and Goate 2015), which could in turn limit the detrimental effects of amyloid-β on dendritic spines. The protective variant of CLU is associated with lower levels of clusterin in plasma (Schürmann and others 2011). APP transgenic mice lacking CLU exhibit reduced plaque deposition, fewer dystrophic neurites, and lower levels of soluble pathologic amyloid-β, compared to APP transgenic mice expressing CLU (DeMattos and others 2002). Additionally, in postmortem human superior temporal cortex, APOE4-positive Alzheimer’s disease cases had a greater percentage of presynaptic axon terminals that contained clusterin and amyloid-β, as well as a reduction in synaptic density (Jackson and others 2019). Overall, this suggests that clusterin normally contributes to amyloid-β-driven disease processes including dendritic spine loss, but the protective variant attenuates these processes and promotes dendritic spine maintenance.

Targeting Rho Signaling to Promote Resilience

Early studies suggest that targeting ROCK signaling pathways, which regulate dendritic spine actin dynamics, is beneficial in amyloid-β-driven models of Alzheimer’s disease (Henderson and others 2019; Rush and others 2018; Sellers and others 2018). In vitro studies showed that the pan-ROCK inhibitors fasudil and Y-27632 prevent amyloid-β-induced dendritic spine loss (Rush and others 2018; Sellers and others 2018). Additionally, in rats that received an intracerebroventricular injection of amyloid-β oligomers, those treated with fasudil performed normally on a novel object recognition task, while those that did not receive fasudil showed a deficit in novel object recognition (Sellers and others 2018).

In an effort to minimize off-target effects, we looked further downstream in the RhoA/ROCK signaling pathway and assessed the effect of LIMK inhibition in models of Alzheimer’s disease. We found that SR7826, a LIMK inhibitor, prevented amyloid-β-induced dendritic spine loss and neuronal hyperexcitability in primary hippocampal neuron cultures. hAPP J20 mice, which develop amyloid-β plaques, exhibit dendritic spine loss and shorter dendritic spines in the hippocampus. Treatment with SR7826 increased dendritic spine density as well as dendritic spine length (Henderson and others 2019).

Recent studies observed increased Rac1 activity in Alzheimer’s disease brains and two mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease (Borin and others 2018; Wu and others 2019b). In the 3xTg model of Alzheimer’s disease, which contains mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP), tau (MAPT), and presenilin-1 (PSEN1), dendritic spine loss was present at 7 months of age. Administering a constitutively active form of Rac1 rescued this spine loss (Borin and others 2018); however, whether this was associated with an improvement in cognitive function is unknown. Another model of Alzheimer’s disease, the APP/PS1 mouse model, contains mutations in APP and PSEN1. In APP/PS1 mice, administration of a Rac1 inhibitor or a dominant negative form of Rac1 improved performance on the Morris Water Maze and rescued LTP deficits (Wu and others 2019b). However, this study did not report the effects of Rac1 inhibition or dominant negative Rac1 on dendritic spine density. While these studies support dysregulation of Rac1 in Alzheimer’s disease, further work is required to determine whether targeting Rac1 promotes resilience to Alzheimer’s disease, especially given the observed benefit of both increasing or decreasing Rac1 activity.

Collectively, these findings support our hypothesis that actin signaling pathways are putative therapeutic substrates that support dendritic spine plasticity to combat cognitive impairment associated with Alzheimer’s disease pathology.

Gaps in Knowledge

As described earlier, it remains to be determined whether alterations in dendritic spine morphology, such as spine length or head diameter, occur in brain regions other than the prefrontal cortex among individuals cognitively resilient to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Given the importance of the hippocampus in learning and memory, one would expect some type of dendritic spine change in this region among resilient individuals if spine plasticity is a mechanism of resilience. Another unknown is whether those who are resilient start off with more dendritic spines, and thus can tolerate a greater degree of spine loss before cognition is impaired. A third gap in knowledge is the molecular mechanisms by which dendritic spines are maintained in resilient brains. Delineating the signaling pathways that support dendritic spine maintenance in the face of Alzheimer’s disease pathology may yield new therapeutics for a disease that currently lacks effective treatments. In this review, we did not discuss the role of glial cells in synapse loss and/or maintenance in response to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. In light of the evidence of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease (Shi and Holtzman 2018) and the involvement of glial cells in synaptic loss in models of Alzheimer’s disease (Chung and others 2016; Dejanovic and others 2018; Hong and others 2016; Wu and others 2019a), this is an important area of research that warrants further attention. For a list of other questions to be addressed, see Table 4.

Conclusions

Cognitive resilience enables certain individuals to remain cognitively normal in the face of pathology or other insults to the brain. Dendritic spines, as key structures for learning and memory, are hypothesized to be critical mediators of this phenomenon. Thus far, evidence of dendritic spine maintenance and plasticity in humans that appeared resilient to Alzheimer’s disease pathology has only been observed in the prefrontal cortex. However, few studies have assessed synaptic or dendritic spine numbers in human tissue in the context of resilience. Rodent studies examining dendritic spines in resilience to stress support the existing observations in human studies of cognitive resilience: (1) spine maintenance and plasticity in humans underlies cognitive resilience and (2) spine maintenance and plasticity occur in a region-specific manner. Targeting actin regulatory pathways to promote spine structural plasticity shows promise in conferring resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology, and therefore may represent a highly rational therapeutic avenue to explore.

Acknowledgements

We thank Kelsey Greathouse and Ashley Adamson for providing dendrite images and reconstructions in Figure 1.

Funding

The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health through NINDS T32 NS061788 and NIA F31 AG067635 to CKW and NIA AG061800, NIA AG054719, and NIA AG063755 to JHH.

Figure 1. Representative microscope images and corresponding three-dimensional digital reconstruction models of dendrites. A) Representative maximum-intensity confocal image of a dye-filled dendrite from a mouse hippocampus pyramidal neuron after deconvolution. Scale bars represent 5 μm. Three-dimensional digital reconstruction of the dendrite is depicted below the image. Reconstruction was generated in Neurolucida360. Colors correspond to dendritic protrusion classes: blue represents thin spines; orange, stubby spines; green, mushroom spines; and yellow, dendritic filopodia. Neurolucida360 classifies dendritic spines using the following criteria: mushroom spines have a head-to-neck ratio &gt; 1.1 and head diameter &gt; 0.35 μm; thin spines have a head-to-neck ratio &lt; 1.1, spine length &lt; 3 μm, and either length-to-head ratio &gt; 2.5 or head diameter &lt; 0.35 μm; filopodia are those structures that meet the same measurements as thin spines, but are &gt; 3 μm long. B) Representative bright-field image of Golgi impregnated dendrite from human postmortem prefrontal cortex tissue sample. Three-dimensional digital reconstruction of the same dendrite is depicted below the image. C) Representative illustration of dendrite featuring mushroom, thin, and stubby spines.

Figure 2. Rho signaling pathways regulate dendritic spine morphology and plasticity through actin. RhoA activates the rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK) isoforms 1 and 2. ROCK1 then regulates actin motility and dendritic spine length through phosphorylation of myosin light chain (MLC) and inhibition of myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP). Additionally, ROCK2 activates LIM kinase (LIMK), which inhibits cofilin. Both Rac1 and Cdc42 activate p21-activated kinase (PAK), which also activates LIMK. Active cofilin normally depolymerizes actin; thus, inactivation by LIMK reduces actin depolymerization and is a mechanism that regulates dendritic spine maintenance. Rac1 also activates the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein family verprolin homologous protein (WAVE1) and Cdc42 activates the neuronal Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP), both of which promote actin polymerization and regulate dendritic spine maintenance through the actin-related protein 2/3 complex (Arp2/3). Arrows indicate activation, bar-headed lines indicate inhibition. Asterisks (*) are used to denote actin regulatory proteins that are discussed as putative pharmacological targets in the subsection, “Targeting Rho Signaling to Promote Resilience.”

Figure 3. Dendritic spine loss in mammalian aging and Alzheimer’s disease dementia. Humans, non-human primates, and rodents are known to exhibit age-related cognitive decline. Age-related neuron loss is not commonly observed; therefore cognitive decline in aging is likely driven by loss of dendritic spine density, including thin spine reduction in the prefrontal cortex. Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that features dendritic spine loss in multiple brain regions, including the cortex and hippocampus.

Figure 4. Dendritic spines and factors that influence cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. A) Illustration of a pyramidal neuron and its dendrite in healthy aging. B) Illustration of a pyramidal neuron surrounded by amyloid-β plaques and its dendrite with spine loss in Alzheimer’s disease dementia. C) Illustration of a pyramidal neuron surrounded by amyloid-β plaques and its dendrite that exhibits spine preservation and elongation in cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. D) Factors that may contribute to cognitive resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology include exercise, mental activities, and transcription of post-synaptic density genes. These factors likely support maintenance of spine density and promote structural plasticity of dendritic spine morphology.

Table 1. Common Approaches for Visualizing Dendrites and Dendritic Spines

	Technique	Sample Preparation	Visualization Methods	Advantages	Disadvantages	
	
Bulk Dye Loading	Golgi Staining	Fixed or frozen postmortem rodent, primate, or human tissue	• Light microscopy	• Fairly sparse labeling enables visualization of individual dendrites	• Doesnť stain myelinated axons, so full architecture is not visible
• Why only a small number of neurons are stained is unknown
• Not amenable to combining with other visualization techniques	
	Lipophilic Fluorescent Carbocyanine Dyes	Can be used to stain cultured neurons and living or fixed tissue from rodents, primates, or humans. Ballistic delivery is a common approach.	• Fluorescence microscopy	• Fluorescence remains stable for up to 1 year and can withstand strong illumination
• Can be used in conjunction with other fluorescence- based techniques	• Not amenable to techniques requiring permeabilization of the cells - the dye will leak
• Background staining is common	
Intracellular Injections	Bio cytin/Biotinam ide	Often used to fill individual neurons during or following electrophysiological recording of single cells in rodent brain slices.	• Light microscopy
• Fluorescence microscopy	• Can directly link observations of cell structure and function
• Can target brain regions with high specificity	• Labeling is performed on brain slices undergoing ex vivo experimentation	
	Lucifer Yellow	Used to fill neurons in fixed tissue slices from rodents and primates.
Small studies using human samples have been published.	• Fluorescence microscopy	• Can target brain regions with high specificity	• Does not fill axons in fixed tissue
• Affects electrophysiological
recordings	
	
	Technique	Sample Preparation	Visualization
Methods	Advantages	Disadvantages	
	
Immunolabeling	Array Tomography	Can be performed on postmortem rodent, primate, or human tissue. Ultrathin serial sections are cut and stained for proteins of interest.	• Confocal microscopy	• Enables high resolution visualization of synaptic proteins	• More difficult to perform than other techniques	
Genetic Labeling	Transgenic Animals	Restricted to rodents. Can perform in vivo imaging or postmortem imaging of slices.	•Two-photon microscopy
• Confocal microscopy	• Can target specific cell types and subtypes for visualization
• Enables in vivo imaging	• Likely will need to create a new transgenic line	
For more information on a variety of visualization techniques including (but not limited to) those listed here, see Parekh and Ascoli (2013). For a focus on retrograde and anterograde labeling techniques, see Lanciego and Wouterlood (2011). Information on using Lucifer yellow microinjections to visualize dendrites in three dimensions can be found in Dumitriu and others (2011). Information on performing array tomography in postmortem human samples can found in Kay and others (2013).

Table 2. Summary of Demographic Information

	Control	CAD	AD	
	
Age	73.08 ± 15.38	80.75 ± 8.03	82.86 ± 8.03	
Sex	7 F, 5 M	3 F, 5 M	9 F, 12 M	
Race	4 A, 8 W	8 W	2 A, 19 W	
PMI	8.42 ± 4.50	20.06 ± 12.01	13.64 ± 17.40	
Age and postmortem interval (PMI) are provided as mean ± standard deviation. F = female, M = male, A = African American, W = white/Caucasian.

Table 3. Findings in Resilient Individuals Compared to Alzheimer’s Cases

Technique	Brain Region	Results	Reference	
	
Immunohistochemistry	Prefrontal Cortex	↑ synaptophysin
↑ synaptopodin	(Arnold and others 2013)	
Golgi Staining	Prefrontal Cortex	↑ spine density Longer spines	(Boros and others 2017)	
Western Blot	Hippocampal Formation	HP: = synaptophysin
= PSD95
LP: ↑ synaptophysin
↑ PSD95	(Scheff and others 2016)	
	Superior Temporal Sulcus	HP: ↑ synaptophysin
= PSD95
LP: ↑ synaptophysin
↑ PSD95	(Perez-Nievas and others 2013)	
Results are in comparison to Alzheimer’s disease (i.e., increased spine density in resilient cases as compared to Alzheimer’s disease), except for Scheff and others (2016), which is with respect to an amnestic mild cognitive impairment group. HP = resilient with high pathology. LP = resilient with low pathology.

Table 4. Gaps in Knowledge

Basic Spine Structure &amp; Function	• What is the role of microtubules in dendritic spine structure and function?
• What is the function of stubby spines?	
Dendritic Spines in Aging &amp; Alzheimer's Disease	• Is human aging associated with a reduction in experience-dependent dendritic spine plasticity?
• What is the contribution of dendritic spine head size to cognitive function?
• Do tau and amyloid-β have different effects on dendritic spine structure and plasticity?
• How do glial cells contribute to dendritic spine changes in aging and Alzheimer's disease?	
Dendritic Spines in Resilience to Alzheimer's Disease	• Do resilient individuals start off with a greater number of dendritic spines?
• Is preservation of spine density and morphology critical for maintaining information processing in certain brain regions, but not others?
• What are the molecular mechanisms by which dendritic spines are maintained in resilient brains?
• How are glial cells in cognitively resilient brains different from those in susceptible brains?	
Effects of Cognitive Resilience Factors on Dendritic Spines	• Does physical activity promote cognitive resilience through dendritic spine maintenance and plasticity?
• Does cognitive activity promote cognitive resilience by increasing expression of genes involved in postsynaptic structure and function?
• Does the ApoE ε2 allele protect against Alzheimer's disease through actions on dendritic spines?
• Does the ENC1 allele associated with resilience promote dendritic spine formation during development?
• Does the ENC1 allele associated with resilience promote dendritic spine plasticity in adulthood?
• Does KLOTHO protect against cognitive decline by supporting dendritic spine maintenance and structural plasticity?	
Spines as Therapeutic Targets	• Is there a biomarker related to synapses or dendritic spines that could be used to predict cognitive outcomes in people with Alzheimer's disease pathology?
• Are dendritic spines a safe and effective therapeutic target in humans?	

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.


References

Arnold SE , Louneva N , Cao K , Wang L-S , Han L-Y , Wolk DA , and others. 2013. Cellular, synaptic, and biochemical features of resilient cognition in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 34 (1 ):157–168.22554416
Arriagada PV , Growdon JH , Hedley-Whyte ET , Hyman BT . 1992. Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 42 (3 Pt 1 ):631–639.1549228
Barnes SJ , Opitz T , Merkens M , Kelly T , von der Brelie C , Krueppel R , and others. 2010. Stable mossy fiber long-term potentiation requires calcium influx at the granule cell soma, protein synthesis, and microtubule-dependent axonal transport. J Neurosci. 30 (39 ):12996–13004.20881117
Belloy ME , Napolioni V , Han SS , Guen YL , Greicius MD , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. 2020. Association of Klotho-VS heterozygosity with risk of Alzheimer disease in individuals who carry APOE4. JAMA Neurol. e200414.
Bennett DA , Arnold SE , Valenzuela MJ , Brayne C , Schneider JA . 2014. Cognitive and social lifestyle: links with neuropathology and cognition in late life. Acta Neuropathol. 127 (1 ):137–150.24356982
Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Kelly JF , Aggarwal NT , Shah RC , and others. 2006. Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two community-based studies. Neurology. 66 (12 ):1837–1844.16801647
Berchtold NC , Prieto GA , Phelan M , Gillen DL , Baldi P , Bennett DA , and others. 2019. Hippocampal gene expression patterns linked to late-life physical activity oppose age and AD-related transcriptional decline. Neurobiol Aging. 78 :142–154.30927700
Bertling E , Hotulainen P . 2017. New waves in dendritic spine actin cytoskeleton: from branches and bundles to rings, from actin binding proteins to post-translational modifications. Mol Cell Neurosci. 84 :77–84.28479292
Bloss EB , Janssen WG , Ohm DT , Yuk FJ , Wadsworth S , Saardi KM , and others. 2011. Evidence for reduced experience-dependent dendritic spine plasticity in the aging prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci. 31 (21 ):7831–7839.21613496
Bonilla-Quintana M , Worgotter F , Tetzlaff C , Fauth M . 2020. Modeling the shape of synaptic spines by their actin dynamics. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 12 :9.32218728
Borin M , Saraceno C , Catania M , Lorenzetto E , Pontelli V , Paterlini A , and others. 2018. Rac1 activation links tau hyperphosphorylation and Aβ dysmetabolism in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 6 (1 ):61.30005699
Boros BD , Greathouse KM , Gearing M , Herskowitz JH . 2019. Dendritic spine remodeling accompanies Alzheimer’s disease pathology and genetic susceptibility in cognitively normal aging. Neurobiol Aging. 73 :92–103.30339964
Boros BD , Greathouse KM , Gentry EG , Curtis KA , Birchall EL , Gearing M , and others. 2017. Dendritic spines provide cognitive resilience against Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol. 82 (4 ):602–614.28921611
Bosch M , Castro J , Saneyoshi T , Matsuno H , Sur M , Hayashi Y . 2014. Structural and molecular remodeling of dendritic spine substructures during long-term potentiation. Neuron. 82 (2 ):444–459.24742465
Braak H , Braak E . 1991. Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 82 (4 ):239–259.1759558
Brigman JL , Wright T , Talani G , Prasad-Mulcare S , Jinde S , Seabold GK , and others. 2010. Loss of GluN2B-containing NMDA receptors in CA1 hippocampus and cortex impairs long-term depression, reduces dendritic spine density, and disrupts learning. J Neurosci. 30 (13 ):4590–4600.20357110
Brown DF , Risser RC , Bigio EH , Tripp P , Stiegler A , Welch E , and others. 1998. Neocortical synapse density and Braak stage in the Lewy body variant of Alzheimer disease: a comparison with classic Alzheimer disease and normal aging. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 57 (10 ):955–960.9786245
Busche MA , Wegmann S , Dujardin S , Commins C , Schiantarelli J , Klickstein N , and others. 2019. Tau impairs neural circuits, dominating amyloid-beta effects, in Alzheimer’s models in vivo. Nat Neurosci. 22 (1 ):57–64.30559471
Caceres A , Payne MR , Binder LI , Steward O . 1983. Immunocytochemical localization of actin and microtubule-associated protein MAP2 in dendritic spines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 80 (6 ):1738–1742.6572937
Chabrier MA , Cheng D , Castello NA , Green KN , LaFerla FM . 2014. Synergistic effects of amyloid-beta and wild-type human tau on dendritic spine loss in a floxed double transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis. 64 :107–117.24440055
Chen K , Zhang L , Tan M , Lai CS , Li A , Ren C , and others. 2017. Treadmill exercise suppressed stress-induced dendritic spine elimination in mouse barrel cortex and improved working memory via BDNF/TrkB pathway. Transl Psychiatry. 7 (3 ):e1069.28323283
Chen M-K , Mecca AP , Naganawa M , Finnema SJ , Toyonaga T , Lin S-F , and others. 2018. Assessing synaptic density in Alzheimer disease with synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A positron emission tomographic imaging. JAMA Neurol. 75 (10 ):1215–1224.30014145
Chung W-S , Verghese PB , Chakraborty C , Joung J , Hyman BT , Ulrich JD , and others. 2016. Novel allele-dependent role for APOE in controlling the rate of synapse pruning by astrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 113 (36 ):10186–10191.27559087
Corrada MM , Brookmeyer R , Berlau D , Paganini-Hill A , Kawas CH . 2008. Prevalence of dementia after age 90: results from the 90+ study. Neurology. 71 (5 ):337–343.18596243
De Jager PL , Yang HS , Bennett DA . 2018. Deconstructing and targeting the genomic architecture of human neurodegeneration. Nat Neurosci. 21 (10 ):1310–1317.30258235
DeKosky ST , Scheff SW . 1990. Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in Alzheimer’s disease: correlation with cognitive severity. Ann Neurol. 27 (5 ):457–464.2360787
Dejanovic B , Huntley MA , De Mazière A , Meilandt WJ , Wu T , Srinivasan K , and others. 2018. Changes in the synaptic proteome in tauopathy and rescue of tau-induced synapse loss by C1q antibodies. Neuron. 100 (6 ):1322–1336.e7.30392797
DeMattos RB , O’dell MA , Parsadanian M , Taylor JW , Harmony JAK , Bales KR , and others. 2002. Clusterin promotes amyloid plaque formation and is critical for neuritic toxicity in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 99 (16 ):10843–10848.12145324
Dent EW . 2017. Of microtubules and memory: implications for microtubule dynamics in dendrites and spines. Mol Biol Cell. 28 (1 ):1–8.28035040
Dickstein DL , Kabaso D , Rocher AB , Luebke JI , Wearne SL , Hof PR . 2007. Changes in the structural complexity of the aged brain. Aging Cell. 6 (3 ):275–284.17465981
Dickstein DL , Brautigam H , Stockton SD Jr , Schmeidler J , Hof PR . 2010. Changes in dendritic complexity and spine morphology in transgenic mice expressing human wild-type tau. Brain Struct Funct. 214 (2–3 ):161–179.20213269
Domínguez-Álvaro M , Montero-Crespo M , Blazquez-Llorca L , Insausti R , DeFelipe J , Alonso-Nanclares L . 2018. Three-dimensional analysis of synapses in the transentorhinal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 6 (1 ):20.29499755
Driscoll I , Troncoso J . 2011. Asymptomatic Alzheimer’s disease: a prodrome or a state of resilience? Curr Alzheimer Res. 8 (4 ):330–335.21222594
Dubal DB , Yokoyama JS , Zhu L , Broestl L , Worden K , Wang D , and others. 2014. Life extension factor klotho enhances cognition. Cell Rep. 7 (4 ):1065–1076.24813892
Dubal DB , Zhu L , Sanchez PE , Worden K , Broestl L , Johnson E , and others. 2015. Life extension factor klotho prevents mortality and enhances cognition in hAPP transgenic mice. J Neurosci. 35 (6 ):2358–2371.25673831
Dumanis SB , Tesoriero JA , Babus LW , Nguyen MT , Trotter JH , Ladu MJ , and others. 2009. ApoE4 decreases spine density and dendritic complexity in cortical neurons in vivo. J Neurosci. 29 (48 ):15317–15322.19955384
Dumitriu D , Hao J , Hara Y , Kaufmann J , Janssen WG , Lou W , and others. 2010. Selective changes in thin spine density and morphology in monkey prefrontal cortex correlate with aging-related cognitive impairment. J Neurosci. 30 (22 ):7507–7515.20519525
Dumitriu D , Rodriguez A , Morrison JH . 2011. High-throughput, detailed, cell-specific neurotanatomy of dendritic spines using microinjection and confocal microscopy. Nat Protoc. 6 (9 ):1391–1411.21886104
Duyckaerts C , Colle MA , Dessi F , Piette F , Hauw JJ . 1998. Progression of Alzheimer histopathological changes. Acta Neurol Belg. 98 (2 ):180–185.9686277
Dvorkin R , Ziv NE . 2016. Relative contributions of specific activity histories and spontaneous processes to size remodeling of glutamatergic synapses. PLoS Biol. 14 (10 ):e1002572.27776122
Ebrahimi S , Okabe S . 2014. Structural dynamics of dendritic spines: molecular composition, geometry and functional regulation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1838 (10 ):2391–2398.24915021
Elston GN , DeFelipe J . 2002. Spine distribution in cortical pyramidal cells: a common organizational principle across species. Prog Brain Res. 136 :109–133.12143375
Erickson CM , Schultz SA , Oh JM , Darst BF , Ma Y , Norton D , and others. 2019. KLOTHO heterozygosity attenuates APOE4-related amyloid burden in preclinical AD. Neurology. 92 (16 ):e1878–e1889.30867273
Erickson KI , Raji CA , Lopez OL , Becker JT , Rosano C , Newman AB , and others. 2010. Physical activity predicts gray matter volume in late adulthood: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Neurology. 75 (16 ):1415–1422.20944075
Farrer LA , Cupples LA , Haines JL , Hyman B , Kukall WA , Mayeux R , and others. 1997. Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Disease Meta Analysis Consortium. JAMA. 278 (16 ):1349–1356.9343467
Francis TC , Gaynor A , Chandra R , Fox ME , Lobo MK . 2019. The selective RhoA inhibitor Rhosin promotes stress resiliency through enhancing D1-medium spiny neuron plasticity and reducing hyperexcitability. Biol Psychiatry. 85 (12 ):1001–1010.30955841
Freire M 1978. Effects of dark rearing on dendritic spines in layer IV of the mouse visual cortex. A quantitative electron microscopical study. J Anat. 126 (Pt 1 ):193–201.649498
Garcia-Lopez P , Garcia-Marin V , Freire M . 2007. The discovery of dendritic spines by Cajal in 1888 and its relevance in the present neuroscience. Prog Neurobiol. 83 (2 ):110–130.17681416
García-Rojo G , Fresno C , Vilches N , Díaz-Véliz G , Mora S , Aguayo F , and others. 2017. The ROCK inhibitor fasudil prevents chronic restraint stress-induced depressive-like behaviors and dendritic spine loss in rat hippocampus. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 20 (4 ):336–345.27927737
Giannakopoulos P , Herrmann FR , Bussière T , Bouras C , Kövari E , Perl DP , and others. 2003. Tangle and neuron numbers, but not amyloid load, predict cognitive status in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 60 (9 ):1495–1500.12743238
Goldwater DS , Pavlides C , Hunter RG , Bloss EB , Hof PR , McEwen BS , and others. 2009. Structural and functional alterations to rat medial prefrontal cortex following chronic restraint stress and recovery. Neuroscience. 164 (2 ):798–808.19723561
Grutzendler J , Kasthuri N , Gan W-B . 2002. Long-term dendritic spine stability in the adult cortex. Nature. 420 (6917 ):812–816.12490949
Hamer M , Chida Y . 2009. Physical activity and risk of neurodegenerative disease: A systematic review of prospective evidence. Psychol Med. 39 (1 ):3–11.18570697
Hamos JE , DeGennaro LJ , Drachman DA . 1989. Synaptic loss in Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. Neurology. 39 (3 ):355–361.2927643
Hayashi Y , Majewska AK . 2005. Dendritic spine geometry: functional implication and regulation. Neuron. 46 (4 ):529–532.15944122
Head E , Corrada MM , Kahle-Wrobleski K , Kim RC , Sarsoza F , Goodus M , and others. 2009. Synaptic proteins, neuropathology and cognitive status in the oldest-old. Neurobiol Aging. 30 (7 ):1125–1134.18006193
Henderson BW , Greathouse KM , Ramdas R , Walker CK , Rao TC , Bach SV , and others. 2019. Pharmacologic inhibition of LIMK1 provides dendritic spine resilience against beta-amyloid. Sci Signal. 12 (587 ):eaaw9318.31239325
Hernandez MC , Andres-Barquin PJ , Martinez S , Bulfone A , Rubenstein JL , Israel MA . 1997. ENC-1: a novel mammalian kelch-related gene specifically expressed in the nervous system encodes an actin-binding protein. J Neurosci. 17 (9 ):3038–3051.9096139
Hoffmann NA , Dorostkar MM , Blumenstock S , Goedert M , Herms J . 2013. Impaired plasticity of cortical dendritic spines in P301S tau transgenic mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 1 :82.24344647
Holtmaat A , Svoboda K . 2009. Experience-dependent structural synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 10 (9 ):647–658.19693029
Holtmaat AJ , Trachtenberg JT , Wilbrecht L , Shepherd GM , Zhang X , Knott GW , and others. 2005. Transient and persistent dendritic spines in the neocortex in vivo. Neuron. 45 (2 ):279–291.15664179
Hong S , Beja-Glasser VF , Nfonoyim BM , Frouin A , Li S , Ramakrishnan S , and others. 2016. Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science. 352 (6286 ):712–716.27033548
Hoover BR , Reed MN , Su J , Penrod RD , Kotilinek LA , Grant MK , and others. 2010. Tau mislocalization to dendritic spines mediates synaptic dysfunction independently of neurodegeneration. Neuron. 68 (6 ):1067–1081.21172610
Hu X , Viesselmann C , Nam S , Merriam E , Dent EW . 2008. Activity-dependent dynamic microtubule invasion of dendritic spines. J Neurosci. 28 (49 ):13094–13105.19052200
Iacono D , Markesbery WR , Gross M , Pletnikova O , Rudow G , Zandi P , and others. 2009. The Nun study: clinically silent AD, neuronal hypertrophy, and linguistic skills in early life. Neurology. 73 (9 ):665–673.19587326
Jackson RJ , Rudinskiy N , Herrmann AG , Croft S , Kim JM , Petrova V , and others. 2016. Human tau increases amyloid β plaque size but not amyloid β-mediated synapse loss in a novel mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Neurosci. 44 (12 ):3056–3066.27748574
Jackson RJ , Rose J , Tulloch J , Henstridge C , Smith C , Spires-Jones TL . 2019. Clusterin accumulates in synapses in Alzheimer’s disease and is increased in apolipoprotein E4 carriers. Brain Commun. 1 (1 ):fcz003.31853523
Jacobs B , Driscoll L , Schall M . 1997. Life-span dendritic and spine changes in areas 10 and 18 of human cortex: a quantitative Golgi study. J Comp Neurol. 386 (4 ):661–680.9378859
Jacobs B , Schall M , Parther M , Kapler E , Driscoll L , Baca S , and others. 2001. Regional dendritic and spine variation in human cerebral cortex: a quantitative Golgi study. Cereb Cortex. 11 (6 ):558–571.11375917
Jansen IE , Savage JE , Watanabe K , Bryois J , Williams DM , Steinberg S , and others. 2019. Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies new loci and functional pathways influencing Alzheimer’s disease risk. Nat Genet. 51 (3 ):404–413.30617256
Jaworski J , Kapitein LC , Gouveia SM , Dortland BR , Wulf PS , Grigoriev I , and others. 2009. Dynamic microtubules regulate dendritic spine morphology and synaptic plasticity. Neuron. 61 (1 ):85–100.19146815
Ji Y , Gong Y , Gan W , Beach T , Holtzman DM , Wisniewski T . 2003. Apolipoprotein E isoform-specific regulation of dendritic spine morphology in apolipoprotein E transgenic mice and Alzheimer’s disease patients. Neuroscience. 122 (2 ):305–315.14614898
Kandimalla R , Manczak M , Yin X , Wang R , Reddy PH . 2018. Hippocampal phosphorylated tau induced cognitive decline, dendritic spine loss and mitochondrial abnormalities in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Hum Mol Genet. 27 (1 ):30–40.29040533
Karch CM , Goate AM . 2015. Alzheimer’s disease risk genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. Biol Psychiatry. 77 (1 ):43–51.24951455
Kasai H , Matsuzaki M , Noguchi J , Yasumatsu N , Nakahara H . 2003. Structure-stability-function relationships of dendritic spines. Trends Neurosci. 26 (7 ):360–368.12850432
Kay KR , Smith C , Wright AK , Serrano-Pozo A , Pooler AM , Koffie R , and others. 2013. Studying synapses in human brain with array tomography and electron microscopy. Nat Protoc. 8 (7 ):1366–1380.23787894
Kim Y , Sung JY , Ceglia I , Lee K-W , Ahn J-H , Halford JM , and others. 2006. Phosphorylation of WAVE1 regulates actin polymerization and dendritic spine morphology. Nature. 442 (7104 ):814–817.16862120
Knott GW , Holtmaat A , Wilbrecht L , Welker E , Svoboda K . 2006. Spine growth precedes synapse formation in the adult neocortex in vivo. Nat Neurosci. 9 (9 ):1117–1124.16892056
Koopmans F , van Nierop P , Andres-Alonso M , Byrnes A , Cijsouw T , Coba MP , and others. 2019. SynGO: an evidence-based, expert-curated knowledge base for the synapse. Neuron. 103 (2 ):217–234.e214.31171447
Kopeikina KJ , Wegmann S , Pitstick R , Carlson GA , Bacskai BJ , Betensky RA , and others. 2013. Tau causes synapse loss without disrupting calcium homeostasis in the rTg4510 model of tauopathy. PLoS One. 8 (11 ):e80834.24278327
Kremer A , Maurin H , Demedts D , Devijver H , Borghgraef P , Van Leuven F . 2011. Early improved and late defective cognition is reflected by dendritic spines in Tau.P301L mice. J Neurosci. 31 (49 ):18036–18047.22159117
Lacor PN , Buniel MC , Furlow PW , Clemente AS , Velasco PT , Wood M , and others. 2007. Abeta oligomer-induced aberrations in synapse composition, shape, and density provide a molecular basis for loss of connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci. 27 (4 ):796–807.17251419
Lanciego JL and Wouterlood FG . 2011. A half century of experimental neuroanatomical tracing. J Chem Neuroanat. 42 (3 ):157–183.21782932
Lee AT , Richards M , Chan WC , Chiu HF , Lee RS , Lam LC . 2015. Intensity and types of physical exercise in relation to dementia risk reduction in community-living older adults. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 16 (10 ):899.e891–897.
Legdeur N , Badissi M , Carter SF , de Crom S , van de Kreeke A , Vreeswijk R , and others. 2018. Resilience to cognitive impairment in the oldest-old: design of the EMIF-AD 90+ study. BMC Geriatr. 18 (1 ):289.30477432
Li W , Ghose S , Gleason K , Begovic A , Perez J , Bartko J , and others. 2015. Synaptic proteins in the hippocampus indicative of increased neuronal activity in CA3 in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 172 (4 ):373–382.25585032
Liu-Ambrose T , Barha CK , Best JR . 2018. Physical activity for brain health in older adults. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 43 (11 ):1105–1112.30306793
Liu C-C , Kanekiyo T , Xu H , Bu G . 2013. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat Rev Neurol. 9 (2 ):106–118.23296339
Liu X , Passant U , Risberg J , Warkentin S , Brun A . 1999. Synapse density related to cerebral blood flow and symptomatology in frontal lobe degeneration and Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 10 Suppl 1 :64–70.
Majewska A , Tashiro A , Yuste R . 2000. Regulation of spine calcium dynamics by rapid spine motility. J Neurosci. 20 (22 ):8262–8268.11069932
Majewska AK , Newton JR , Sur M . 2006. Remodeling of synaptic structure in sensory cortical areas in vivo. J Neurosci. 26 (11 ):3021–3029.16540580
Masliah E , Terry RD , Alford M , DeTeresa R , Hansen LA . 1991. Cortical and subcortical patterns of synaptophysinlike immunoreactivity in Alzheimer’s disease. Am K Pathol. 138 (1 ):235–246.
Masliah E , Terry RD , Mallory M , Alford M , Hansen LA . 1990. Diffuse plaques do not accentuate synapse loss in Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Pathol. 137 (6 ):1293–1297.2124413
Matsuzaki M , Honkura N , Ellis-Davies GC , Kasai H . 2004. Structural basis of long-term potentiation in single dendritic spines. Nature. 429 (6993 ):761–766.15190253
Matus A , Ackermann M , Pehling G , Byers HR , Fujiwara K . 1982. High actin concentrations in brain dendritic spines and postsynaptic densities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 79 (23 ):7590–7594.6760199
Mengel-From J , Christensen K , McGue M , Christiansen L . 2011. Genetic variations in the CLU and PICALM genes are associated with cognitive function in the oldest old. Neurobiol Aging. 32 (3 ):554.e557–511.
Merriam EB , Millette M , Lumbard DC , Saengsawang W , Fothergill T , Hu X , and others. 2013. Synaptic regulation of microtubule dynamics in dendritic spines by calcium, F-actin, and drebrin. J Neurosci. 33 (42 ):16471–16482.24133252
Miller EC , Teravskis PJ , Dummer BW , Zhao X , Huganir RL , Liao D . 2014. Tau phosphorylation and tau mislocalization mediate soluble abeta oligomer-induced AMPA glutamate receptor signaling deficits. Eur J Neurosci. 39 (7 ):1214–1224.24713000
Mitsuyama F , Niimi G , Kato K , Hirosawa K , Mikoshiba K , Okuya M , and others. 2008. Redistribution of microtubules in dendrites of hippocampal CA1 neurons after tetanic stimulation during long-term potentiation. Ital J Anat Embryol. 113 (1 ):17–27.18491451
Morrison JH , Baxter MG . 2012. The ageing cortical synapse: hallmarks and implications for cognitive decline. Nat Rev Neurosci. 13 (4 ):240–250.22395804
Mul JD , Soto M , Cahill ME , Ryan RE , Takahashi H , So K , and others. 2018. Voluntary wheel running promotes resilience to chronic social defeat stress in mice: a role for nucleus accumbens ΔFosB. Neuropsychopharmacology. 43 (9 ):1934–1942.29875450
Neustadtl AL , Winston CN , Parsadanian M , Main BS , Villapol S , Burns MP . 2017. Reduced cortical excitatory synapse number in ApoE4 mice is associated with increased calcineurin activity. Neuroreport. 28 (10 ):618–624.28542068
Ng LHL , Huang Y , Han L , Chang RC , Chan YS , Lai CSW . 2018. Ketamine and selective activation of parvalbumin interneurons inhibit stress-induced dendritic spine elimination. Transl Psychiatry. 8 (1 ):272.30531859
Noguchi J , Matsuzaki M , Ellis-Davies GC , Kasai H . 2005. Spine-neck geometry determines NMDA receptor-dependent Ca2+ signaling in dendrites. Neuron. 46 (4 ): 609–622.15944129
Noguchi J , Nagaoka A , Watanabe S , Ellis-Davies GCR , Kitamura K , Kano M , and others. 2011. In vivo two-photon uncaging of glutamate revealing the structure-function relationships of dendritic spines in the neocortex of adult mice. J Physiol. 589 (Pt 10 ):2447–2457.21486811
O’Brien RJ , Resnick SM , Zonderman AB , Ferrucci L , Crain BJ , Pletnikova O , and others. 2009. Neuropathologic studies of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA). J Alzheimers Dis. 18 (3 ):665–675.19661626
Okamoto K , Nagai T , Miyawaki A , Hayashi Y . 2004. Rapid and persistent modulation of actin dynamics regulates postsynaptic reorganization underlying bidirectional plasticity. Nat Neurosci. 7 (10 ):1104–1112.15361876
Paganini-Hill A , Kawas CH , Corrada MM . 2016. Lifestyle factors and dementia in the oldest-old: the 90+ study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 30 (1 ):21–26.25710250
Pakkenberg B , Gundersen HJ . 1997. Neocortical neuron number in humans: effect of sex and age. J Comp Neurol. 384 (2 ):312–320.9215725
Parekh R , Ascoli GA . 2013. Neuronal morphology goes digital: a research hub for cellular and system neuroscience. Neuron. 77 (6 ):1017–1038.23522039
Pchitskaya EI , Zhemkov VA , Bezprozvanny IB . 2018. Dynamic microtubules in Alzheimer’s disease: association with dendritic spine pathology. Biochemistry (Mosc). 83 (9 ):1068–1074.30472945
Perez-Nievas BG , Stein TD , Tai HC , Dols-Icardo O , Scotton TC , Barroeta-Espar I , and others. 2013. Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to Alzheimer’s pathology. Brain. 136 (Pt 8 ):2510–2526.23824488
Peters A , Kaiserman-Abramof IR . 1969.The small pyramidal neuron of the rat cerebral cortex. The synapses upon dendritic spines. Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat. 100 (4 ):487–506.5351190
Pfeiffer T , Poll S , Bancelin S , Angibaud J , Inavalli VK , Keppler K , and others. 2018. Chronic 2P-STED imaging reveals high turnover of dendritic spines in the hippocampus in vivo. Elife. 7 :e34700.29932052
Pickett EK , Henstridge CM , Allison E , Pitstick R , Pooler A , Wegmann S , and others. 2017. Spread of tau down neural circuits precedes synapse and neuronal loss in the rTgTauEC mouse model of early Alzheimer’s disease. Synapse. 71 (6 ):e21965.
Pooler AM , Polydoro M , Maury EA , Nicholls SB , Reddy SM , Wegmann S , and others. 2015. Amyloid accelerates tau propagation and toxicity in a model of early Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 3 :14.25853174
Qu Y , Yang C , Ren Q , Ma M , Dong C , Hashimoto K . 2018. Regional differences in dendritic spine density confer resilience to chronic social defeat stress. Acta Neuropsychiatrica. 30 (2 ):117–122.28566105
Radley JJ , Rocher AB , Miller M , Janssen WG , Liston C , Hof PR , and others. 2006. Repeated stress induces dendritic spine loss in the rat medial prefrontal cortex. Cereb Cortex. 16 (3 ):313–320.15901656
Ramachandran B , Frey JU . 2009. Interfering with the actin network and its effect on long-term potentiation and synaptic tagging in hippocampal CA1 neurons in slices in vitro. J Neurosci. 29 (39 ):12167–12173.19793974
Ramón y Cajal S 1888. Estructura de los centros nerviosos de las aves. Revista Trimestral de Histología Normal y Patológica. 1 :10.
Rasmussen KL , Tybjærg-Hansen A , Nordestgaard BG , Frikke-Schmidt R . 2018. Absolute 10-year risk of dementia by age, sex, and APOE genotype: a population-based cohort study. CMAJ. 190 (35 ):E1033–E1041.30181149
Rastas S , Pirttilä T , Mattila K , Verkkoniemi A , Juva K , Niinistö L , and others. 2010. Vascular risk factors and dementia in the general population aged &gt;85 years: prospective population-based study. Neurobiol Aging. 31 (1 ):1–7.18378359
Reas ET , Laughlin GA , Bergstrom J , Kritz-Silverstein D , Barrett-Connor E , McEvoy LK . 2019. Effects of APOE on cognitive aging in community-dwelling older adults. Neurospychology. 33 (3 ):406–416.
Rex CS , Chen LY , Sharma A , Liu J , Babayan AH , Gall CM , and others. 2009. Different rho GTPase-dependent signaling pathways initiate sequential steps in the consolidation of long-term potentiation. J Cell Biol. 186 (1 ):85–97.19596849
Ridge PG , Karch CM , Hsu S , Arano I , Teerlink CC , Ebbert MTW , and others. 2017. Linkage, whole genome sequence, and biological data implicate variants in RAB10 in Alzheimer’s disease resilience. Genome Med. 9 (1 ):100.29183403
Roberson ED , Scearce-Levie K , Palop JJ , Yan F , Cheng IH , Wu T , and others. 2007. Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Science. 316 (5825 ):750–754.17478722
Roberson ED , Halabisky B , Yoo JW , Yao J , Chin J , Yan F , and others. 2011. Amyloid-β/Fyn-induced synaptic, network, and cognitive impairments depend on tau levels in multiple mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci. 31 (2 ):700–711.21228179
Rochefort NL , Konnerth A . 2012. Dendritic spines: from structure to in vivo function. EMBO Rep. 13 (8 ):699–708.22791026
Rush T , Martinez-Hernandez J , Dollmeyer M , Frandemiche ML , Borel E , Boisseau S , and others. 2018. Synaptotoxicity in Alzheimer’s disease involved a dysregulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics through cofilin 1 phosphorylation. J Neurosci. 38 (48 ):10349–10361.30341179
Samuel W , Terry RD , DeTeresa R , Butters N , Masliah E . 1994. Clinical correlates of cortical and nucleus basalis pathology in Alzheimer dementia. Arch Neurol. 51 (8 ):772–778.8042925
Saneyoshi T , Hayashi Y . 2012. The Ca2+ and rho GTPase signaling pathways underlying activity-dependent actin remodeling in dendritic spines. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 69 (8 ):545–554.22566410
Savva GM , Wharton SB , Ince PG , Forster G , Matthews FE , Brayne C . 2009. Age, neuropathology, and dementia. N Engl J Med. 360 (22 ):2302–2309.19474427
Scheff SW , Ansari MA , Mufson EJ . 2016. Oxidative stress and hippocampal synaptic protein levels in elderly cognitively intact individuals with Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Neurobiol Aging. 42 :1–12.27143416
Scheff SW , Price DA . 1993. Synapse loss in the temporal lobe in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol. 33 (2 ):190–199.8434881
Scheff SW , Price DA , Schmitt FA , DeKosky ST , Mufson EJ . 2007. Synaptic alterations in CA1 in mild Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neurology. 68 (18 ):1501–1508.17470753
Scheff SW , Price DA , Schmitt FA , Mufson EJ . 2006. Hippocampal synaptic loss in early Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiol Aging. 27 (10 ):1372–1384.16289476
Scheff SW , Price DA , Schmitt FA , Scheff MA , Mufson EJ . 2011. Synaptic loss in the inferior temporal gyrus in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 24 (3 ):547–557.21297265
Scheff SW , Sparks L , Price DA . 1993. Quantitative assessment of synaptic density in the entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol. 34 (3 ):356–361.8363352
Schürmann B , Wiese B , Bickel H , Weyerer S , Riedel-Heller SG , Pentzek M , and others. 2011. Association of the Alzheimer’s disease clusterin risk allele with plasma clusterin concentration. J Alzheimers Dis. 25 (3 ):421–424.21422520
Sellers KJ , Elliott C , Jackson J , Ghosh A , Ribe E , Rojo AI , and others. 2018. Amyloid β synaptotoxicity is Wnt-PCP dependent and blocked by fasudil. Alzheimers Dement. 14 (3 ):306–317.29055813
Shahani N , Subramaniam S , Wolf T , Tackenberg C , Brandt R . 2006. Tau aggregation and progressive neuronal degeneration in the absence of changes in spine density and morphology after targeted expression of Alzheimer’s disease-relevant tau constructs in organotypic hippocampal slices. J Neurosci. 26 (22 ):6103–6114.16738255
Sheng M , Kim E . 2011. The postsynaptic organization of synapses. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 3 (12 ):a005678.22046028
Shi Y , Holtzman DM . 2018. Interplay between innate immunity and Alzheimer disease: APOE and TREM2 in the spotlight. Nat Rev Immunol. 18 (12 ):759–772.30140051
Shumyatsky GP , Malleret G , Shin RM , Takizawa S , Tully K , Tsvetkov E , and others. 2005. Stathmin, a gene enriched in the amygdala, controls both learned and innate fear. Cell. 123 (4 ):697–709.16286011
Šišková Z , Justus D , Kaneko H , Friedrichs D , Henneberg N , Beutel T , and others. 2014. Dendritic structural degeneration is functionally linked to cellular hyperexcitability in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 84 (5 ):1023–1033.25456500
Skoog I , Börjesson-Hanson A , Kern S , Johansson L , Falk H , Sigström R , and others. 2017. Decreasing prevalence of dementia in 85-year olds examined 22 years apart: the influence of education and stroke. Sci Rep. 7 (1 ):6136.28733627
Soerensen M , Christensen K , Stevnsner T , Christiansen L . 2009. The Mn-superoxide dismutase single nucleotide polymorphism rs4880 and the glutathione peroxidase 1 single nucleotide polymorphism rs1050450 are associated with aging and longevity in the oldest old. Mech Ageing Dev. 130 (5 ):308–314.19428448
Spacek J , Hartmann M . 1983. Three-dimensional analysis of dendritic spines. I. Quantitative observations related to dendritic spine and synaptic morphology in cerebral and cerebellar cortices. Anat Embryol (Berl) 167 (2 ):289–310.6614508
Spires TL , Meyer-Luehmann M , Stern EA , McLean PJ , Skoch J , Nguyen PT , and others. 2005. Dendritic spine abnormalities in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice demonstrated by gene transfer and intravital multiphoton microscopy. J Neurosci. 25 (31 ):7278–7287.16079410
Stern Y 2012. Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 11 (11 ):1006–1012.23079557
Terry RD , Masliah E , Salmon DP , Butters N , DeTeresa R , Hill R , and others. 1991. Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment. Ann Neurol. 30 (4 ):572–580.1789684
Trachtenberg JT , Chen BE , Knott GW , Feng F , Sanes JR , Welker E , and others. 2002. Long-term in vivo imaging of experience-dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex. Nature. 420 (6917 ):788–794.12490942
Vo HT , Phillips ML , Herskowitz JH , King GD . 2019. Klotho deficiency affects the spine morphology and network synchronization of neurons. Mol Cell Neurosci. 98 :1–11.30991103
Wegner AM , Nebhan CA , Hu L , Majumdar D , Meier KM , Weaver AM , and others. 2008. N-wasp and the arp2/3 complex are critical regulators of actin in the development of dendritic spines and synapses. J Biol Chem. 283 (23 ):15912–15920.18430734
White CC , Yang HS , Yu L , Chibnik LB , Dawe RJ , Yang J , and others. 2017. Identification of genes associated with dissociation of genetic, epigenetic, and transcriptional data. PLoS Med. 14 (4 ):e1002287.28441426
White L 2009. Brain lesions at autopsy in older Japanese-American men as related to cognitive impairment and dementia in the final years of life: a summary report from the Honolulu-Asia aging study. J Alzheimers Dis. 18 (3 ):713–725.19661625
Wu T , Dejanovic B , Gandham VD , Gogineni A , Edmonds R , Schauer S , and others. 2019a. Complement C3 is activated in human AD brain and is required for neurodegeneration in mouse models of amyloidosis and tauopathy. Cell Rep. 28 (8 ):2111–2123.e6.31433986
Wu W , Du S , Shi W , Liu Y , Hu Y , Xie Z , and others. 2019b. Inhibition of Rac1-dependent forgetting alleviates memory deficits in animal models of Alzheimer’s disease. Protein Cell. 10 (10 ):745–759.31321704
Xu H , Rosler TW , Carlsson T , de Andrade A , Bruch J , Hollerhage M , and others. 2014. Memory deficits correlate with tau and spine pathology in P301S MAPT transgenic mice. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 40 (7 ):833–843.24865638
Yang C , Shirayama Y , Zhang JC , Ren Q , Hashimoto K . 2015. Regional differences in brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels and dendritic spine density confer resilience to inescapable stress. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 18 (7 ):pyu121.25568287
Yasumatsu N , Matsuzaki M , Miyazaki T , Noguchi J , Kasai H . 2008. Principles of long-term dynamics of dendritic spines. J Neurosci. 28 (50 ):13592–13608.19074033
Yin YW , Li JC , Wang JZ , Li BH , Pi Y , Yang QW , and others. 2012. Association between apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism and the risk of vascular dementia: a meta-analysis. Neurosci Lett. 514 (1 ):6–11.22381401
Young ME , Ohm DT , Dumitriu D , Rapp PR , Morrison JH . 2014. Differential effects of aging on dendritic spines in visual cortex and prefrontal cortex of the rhesus monkey. Neuroscience. 274 :33–43.24853052
Zhou Q , Homma KJ , Poo MM . 2004. Shrinkage of dendritic spines associated with long-term depression of hippocampal synapses. Neuron. 44 (5 ):749–757.15572107
Ziv NE , Smith SJ . 1996. Evidence for a role of dendritic filopodia in synaptogenesis and spine formation. Neuron. 17 (1 ):91–102.8755481
Zuo Y , Yang G , Kwon E , Gan W-B . 2005. Long-term sensory deprivation prevents dendritic spine loss in primary somatosensory cortex. Nature. 436 (7048 ):261–265.16015331
