LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101128963
29630
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing research reviews
1568-1637
1872-9649

34844016
8729113
10.1016/j.arr.2021.101533
NIHMS1762552
Article
Orchestration of the circadian clock and its association with Alzheimer’s disease: role of endocannabinoid signaling
Kumar Deepak 1
Sharma Ashish 2
Taliyan Rajeev 3
Urmera Maiko T. 4
Herrera Calderon Oscar 5
Heinbockel Thomas 6
Rahman Shafiqur 7
Goyal Rohit 1*
1 Department of Neuropharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shoolini University of Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Solan, H.P., 173229, India.
2 School of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, USA.
3 Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology Science, Pilani, Rajasthan, 333301, India.
4 Institute on Aging and Centre for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
5 Department of Pharmacology, Bromatology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Peru.
6 Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
7 Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota, USA.
* Corresponding author: Dr Rohit Goyal, Professor, Department of Neuropharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shoolini University of Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Solan, H.P., 173229, India, rohitgoyal@shooliniuniversity.com; Mob. +91 98160 62679.
30 12 2021
26 11 2021
1 2022
01 1 2023
73 101533101533
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Circadian rhythms are 24-hour natural rhythms regulated by the suprachiasmatic nucleus, also known as the “master clock”. The retino-hypothalamic tract entrains suprachiasmatic nucleus with photic information to synchronise endogenous circadian rhythms with the Earth’s light-dark cycle. However, despite the robustness of circadian rhythms, an unhealthy lifestyle and chronic photic disturbances cause circadian rhythm disruption in the suprachiasmatic nucleus’s TTFL loops via affecting glutamate and γ-aminobutyric acid-mediated neurotransmission in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Recently, considerable evidence has been shown correlating CRd with the incidence of Alzheimer’s disease. The present review aims to identify the existence and signalling of endocannabinoids in CRd induced Alzheimer’s disease through retino-hypothalamic tract- suprachiasmatic nucleus-cortex. Immunohistochemistry has confirmed the expression of cannabinoid receptor 1 in the suprachiasmatic nucleus to modulate the circadian phases of the master clock. Literature also suggests that cannabinoids may alter activity of suprachiasmatic nucleus by influencing the activity of their major neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid or by interacting indirectly with the suprachiasmatic nucleus’s two other major inputs i.e., the geniculo-hypothalamic tract-mediated release of neuropeptide Y and serotonergic inputs from the dorsal raphe nuclei. Besides, the expression of cannabinoid receptor 2 ameliorates cognitive deficits via reduction of tauopathy and microglial activation. In conclusion, endocannabinoids may be identified as a putative target for correcting CRd and decelerating Alzheimer’s disease.

Circadian rhythm
Alzheimer’s disease
Retina
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
Endocannabinoid system

pmc1. Introduction

The term circadian rhythm (CR) comes from the word “circa” which means “around” and “dies” which means “a day”. CRs are natural rhythms of approximately twenty-four hours. CRs are generated and regulated endogenously by the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), also known as the “master clock”, located in the anteroventral section of the hypothalamus. The SCN governs several biological cycles in numerous species of organisms, such as the sleep-wake cycle, hormonal cycle, and body-temperature cycle. The SCN utilizes specific environmental cues such as light, temperature, and food to synchronize the endogenous CRs with the external light-dark cycle, called Zeitgeber, wherein light is identified as a predominant cue determining day and night time (Panda et al., 2002). In many species, the eye, specifically the retina, is the sole sensory tool that transduces light information into electrochemical signals and facilitates the entrainment of the SCN through the retino-hypothalamic tract (RHT) (Gooley et al., 2001). Stimulation of the SCN via mediation by RHT initiates a cascade of transcriptional–translational feedback loops (TTFL) that eventually construct CRs. Later, these CRs are conveyed to local (in the central nervous system (CNS)) and peripheral oscillators through neurohumoral communication (Sharma et al., 2021b). The SCN-generated CRs are robust in nature. However, age, complete blindness, traumatic injuries to the brain, and several other lifestyle-related factors, such as malnutrition, poor dietary practices, social engagement, education, physical activity, addiction, chronic medication, stress, and disrupted sleep can cause asynchrony in CRs, i.e., CR disruption (CRd). CRds can precipitate severe diseases such as depression, insomnia, and cognitive deficits (Walker et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020).

Considerable evidence has been accumulated in the past couple of years that correlates CRd with the incidence of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Recently, Sharma et al. (2021a) demonstrated that photic disturbances to the SCN induced by the chronic light-light condition could lead to dementia of Alzheimer’s type in rodents. They showed the presence of significant oxidative stress, aggregation of amyloid-beta (Aβ42) peptides, and behavioral abnormalities of poor cognition and disorientation in Wistar rats who were subjected to constant light/light interventions for four to five months (Sharma and Goyal, 2020). Bokenberger et al. (2018) showed that individuals who had been subjected to shift or night work for 20 years were at greater risk of developing dementia than the day workers. Also, Jorgensen et al. (2020) showed that female Danish nurses subjected to shift work (n= 6048 working night shifts for ≥six years and n= 8059 working in shifts for ≥six years) have a higher risk of dementia incidence as compared to nurses working in the day for ≥six years. Moreover, chronic jet lag and night shift work-induced CRd expose an individual to prolonged cortisol-mediated CNS insults, eventually leading to cognitive deficits. Gibson et al. (2010) demonstrated that jet lag and shift work are both associated with increased cortisol levels. In addition, they showed that jet lag-mediated activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA-axis) results in the suppression of cell proliferation in the hippocampus of Hamster (Kolla and Auger, 2011).

The evidence above correlates the disturbed activity-rest rhythm with the enhanced risk of dementia. However, another important light-related CR, i.e., the sleep-wake cycle, is also strongly associated with dementia. In support, Sabia et al. (2021) showed a 25-year follow-up study in 7959 individuals (age group of 50–70 years) that concluded a 30% higher risk of dementia in those who had ≤six hours of sleep compared to individuals who had seven hours of sleep. The sleep disturbances also prevail with age, and according to various studies, this prevalence varies from 9.1% to 69%. A meta-analysis including 12,926 articles and 246,786 individuals, reviewed multiple sleep disorders such as insomnia, narcolepsy, sleep-related movement disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, and CR sleep disorder and their association with increased risk of dementia (Kessel et al., 2011; Ohayon et al., 2004; Shi et al., 2018). In addition, the growing availability of artificial lights (such as LEDs; 60 lumens/watt (lux = lumens/m2)) and other light-emitting gadgets, such as smartphones, has made sleep problems common among the metropolitan population (Blume et al., 2019; Christensen et al., 2016). These sleep disturbances are related explicitly to CR sleep disorders, such as shift-work disorder, jet-lag disorder, advanced or delayed sleep-wake phase disorder, and irregular or non-24-hour sleep-wake rhythm disorder (Zhu and Zee, 2012).

AD is a multifactorial and chronic neurodegenerative disease attributed to the accumulation of Aβ and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the brain. Although the exact cause of AD’s pathogenesis is still debatable, it is believed that AD pathology begins earlier in a person’s life and simultaneously progresses through distinct stages with varying physical/psychological outcomes. Unfortunately, with insufficient data, it is nearly impossible to estimate the exact number of people who develop dementia due to CRd. However, the evidence does warn about the actual number because numerous studies have correlated the CRd with the preclinical stage of AD (Cordone et al., 2019; Kress et al., 2018). In support of this, the literature indicates increased severity of symptoms, varying protein profile of the hippocampus, and erratic quantitative electroencephalography (q-EEG) readings of AD brains throughout the Braak’s theory defining six stages of progression of pathology involved in Parkinson’s disease and AD (Hondius et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2020; Kwak, 2006). In addition, studies indicate that sleep deprivation affects the glymphatic pathway and hinders the clearance of Aβ from the CNS (Eugene and Masiak, 2015; Kumar et al., 2020). Further, sleep deprivation also increases the Aβ load in the hippocampus and thalamus (Shokri-Kojori et al., 2018).

The evidence presented above demonstrates the significance of a well-maintained CR in mental health and cognition. As a result, the 1990s were spent proving the importance of some incredibly important chemical messengers that impact the circadian machinery, such as serotonin, Neuropeptide Y (NPY), and GABA. Similarly, just a decade ago, Sanford et al. (2008) discovered a substantial role for the endocannabinoid system (ECS) in modulating the light-mediated phase shifts of SCN generated CRs. Subsequently, Acuna-Goycolea et al. (2010) substantiated the findings of Sanford et al. (2008). In a physiologic state, the ECS acts as an integral and vital part of various brain regions that are predominantly involved in the acquisition, consolidation, and retrieval of memory, such as the hippocampus and cortex (Medina-Vera et al., 2020). In contrast, the normal functioning of the ECS has been found to be disrupted in neurodegeneration. Likewise, CB1 receptor knockout mice were shown to have AD-like symptoms. Also, CB1 receptors were found to be decreased in postmortem cortical brain tissues of AD patients (Maccarrone et al., 2018; Solas et al., 2013).

Based on the evidence presented above, the first half of the article provides an overview of the structural and functional aspects of the circadian machinery and the impact of its disruption on the progression of neurodegeneration. In the second half, we discuss the role of the ECS in neuroprotection and its influence in regulating and resetting CRs.

2. Circadian Rhythm

i) Structural and functional aspects of the circadian machinery

This section will provide an overview of circadian machinery, including the SCN’s inputs and outputs and its morphological and physiological properties. We emphasize the importance of synchronized SCN in health and how its asynchrony can lead to various clinical disorders, most notably neurodegeneration.

a) RHT neurotransmission

The RHT, which comprises the axons of intrinsically photosensitive Retinal Ganglion Cells (ipRGCs), originates from the retina and transmits light information to the SCN, allowing the SCN to be synchronized with our planet’s light-dark cycle. The ipRGCs are classified into six subclasses (M1-M6), with only the M1 subtype innervating the SCN. In addition, M2, M4, and M5 subtypes target several brain areas, such as the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), superior colliculus, and olivary pretectal nucleus (OPN) (Brown et al., 2010; Ecker et al., 2010). The M3 and M6 of ipRGCs subtypes are still understudied (Baver et al., 2008; Schmidt et al., 2011). Besides, the M1 subtype of ipRGCs consists of two subpopulations that can be distinguished on the basis of the expression of Brnb3− and Brnb3+ transcription factors. The axonal projections of Brnb3+ M1 ipRGCs innervate the OPN and facilitate the pupillary light reflex. On the other hand, the axonal projections of Brnb3− M1 ipRGCs projects predominantly to the SCN and photo-entrain it (Qu et al., 2011; Schmidt et al., 2011). Originating from the retina, the axonal fibers of M1 ipRGCs terminate at the ventral core of the SCN (Berson et al., 2002). Without any intermediate synapses (mono-synaptically), these axons transmit non-image-forming photic signals to the SCN core (Czeisler et al., 2005). An action potential generated as a result of the phototransduction cascade in the retina travels down these axons and facilitates the terminal secretion of a principal neurotransmitter, glutamate (Ebling, 1996). In turn, glutamate binds and activates N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) (and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)) receptors, leading to the depolarization of SCN neurons (Colwell, 2001; Mizoro et al., 2010). The influx of Ca2+ ions initiates the intracellular signalling cascades (Ding et al., 1994). An additional neuropeptide that enhances the synaptic stimulation of SCN is the Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) (Hannibal, 2006). In this way, RHT conveys photic cues to the SCN and photo-entrains it. Consequently, the SCN cells initiate the period (PER) and cryptochrome (CRY) protein gene-expression-cascade to induce phase-shifts and synchronize the endogenous CRs with the immediate environmental conditions (Buhr and Takahashi, 2013).

b) SCN

The SCN or master circadian pacemaker is an astonishingly complex, steady, robust, and tractable organization of about twenty thousand self-autonomous neurons in the anteroventral section of the hypothalamus (just above the optic chiasm). Moreover, the SCN is a paired neuronal structure, alienated into two sides by the 3rd ventricle. Each side of SCN consists of about ten thousand neurons that are further distributed in the ventral “core” and dorsal “shell” regions of the SCN. RHT innervates these adjacent ventral cores of SCN and transmits retinal inputs (Abrahamson and Moore, 2001; Reppert and Moore, 1991). Anatomically, the SCN consists of a diverse network of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons that express different neuropeptides, such as Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (Vip), Arginine vasopressin (Avp), Gastrin-releasing peptide (Grp), Prokineticin-2 (Prok2), and Neuromedin-S (Nms) in a site-specific manner (Figure 1: a) (Dardente et al., 2004). Apart from GABAergic neurons, SCN also consists of glial cells (e.g., astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia) with multiple roles, such as morphological assistance, modulation of synaptic transmission, and scavenging neurotransmitters from synaptic clefts (Chi-Castaneda and Ortega, 2018). Interestingly, although the SCN is entrained and synchronized by light zeitgeber, it possesses a self-sustained-cell-autonomous characteristic feature where individual neurons generate their respective rhythms. Finally, these individual SCN cell rhythms are integrated into robust and precise CRs (Welsh et al., 2010).

Afferents

The SCN receives photic and non-photic information from different locations through direct and indirect pathways. For instance, afferents from the retinal ipRGCs travel through RHT and transmit photic information directly into the ventral core of the SCN (Abrahamson and Moore, 2001). SCN neurons that express AVP, VIP, and GRP neuropeptides are targeted as a direct recipient of photic information from the retina (Abrahamson and Moore, 2001; Antle and Silver, 2005; Fernandez et al., 2016). Besides, the SCN core receives indirect photic inputs from the thalamic intergeniculate leaflet (IGL), which colocalizes GABAergic neurons with neurons expressing other neuropeptides such as NPY. In rats and hamsters, NPY immunoreactive IGL neurons travel into the SCN core via the geniculo-hypothalamic tract (GHT) (Moore and Card, 1994; Moore and Speh, 1993; Morin and Blanchard, 1995; Morin and Blanchard, 2001). Further, serotonergic inputs from the dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN) transmit non-photic information to the SCN’s core region (Figure 2) (Hay-Schmidt et al., 2003). On the other hand, the SCN shell receives its afferents from the SCN core. However, evidence also indicates afferents from sources other than the SCN core. These afferents arise from various nuclei of the hypothalamus. Similarly, afferents from the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, basal forebrain, brainstem cholinergic nuclei, and medullary noradrenergic areas innervate the SCN shell (Yan et al., 2007).

Efferents

Several efferents protrude from the SCN core as well as shell and arborize into distinct regions of the brain, such as the medial preoptic area, ventrolateral preoptic area, subparaventricular zone, the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, IGL, periaqueductal gray, paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus, and lateral septum (Abrahamson and Moore, 2001; Kriegsfeld et al., 2004). The local circadian clocks (also known as central circadian clocks) in these regions regulate the feeding-fasting cycle, sleep-wake cycle, etc., and modulate the rhythmicity of autonomic and neuroendocrine systems (Hastings et al., 2018). Interestingly, these central circadian clocks further entrain the local molecular clocks of the peripheral system and, thereby, regulate several physiological rhythms, e.g., rhythms related to metabolism, alertness, blood pressure, and renal activity (Hastings et al., 2003; Morris et al., 2015; Santhi et al., 2016; Voogel et al., 2001). This way, the SCN regulates both behavioral and physiological rhythms (Figure 2).

Transcriptional–translational feedback loops in SCN

SCN maintains its rhythm in the absence of environmental cues, and this robustness is regulated by the positive and negative feedback loop system of clock components, called TTFL (Takahashi, 2017). TTFL exists in individual cells of SCN and comprises various genes and their proteins. In the absence of external light, inside the nucleus of SCN cells, at circadian dawn (circadian time (CT) 0), the positive regulators of TTFL, i.e., circadian locomotor output cycles protein kaput (CLOCK) and brain and muscle ARNT- like 1 (BMAL1), form a heterodimer and bind to the enhancer-box (E-box) regulatory sequences. This interaction promotes the transcription of the PER and CRY genes. Later, mRNAs of PER and CRY translocate into the cytoplasm and get translated by ribosomes into PER (PER 1, 2, 3) and CRY (1, 2) proteins (Lee et al., 2001). Sequentially, PER and CRY proteins form dimer complexes in the cytoplasmic area, and these complexes, by circadian dusk (CT 12), migrate back to the nucleus. Eventually, nuclear accumulation of PER-CRY protein complexes represses their own transcription and serves as the loop’s negative regulators. During the upcoming circadian night (i.e., CT12–CT24), the degradation of PER-CRY complexes occurs. By the time CT0, PER-CRY complexes fully degrade, allowing CLOCK and BMAL1 to reinitiate the transcription of PER and CRY genes and begin the circadian cycle anew. In this way, SCN maintains the ~24-hours circadian cycle. Two additional regulatory loops support the robustness of crucial TTFL. These loops include CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimers mediated transcription of Rev-erbα and Rorα, where RORs trigger transcription of BMAL1 and REV-ERBs repress it (Figure 1: b) (Buhr and Takahashi, 2013; Cho et al., 2012; Guillaumond et al., 2005; Takahashi, 2017).

ii) Disrupted circadian rhythm and neurodegeneration

A complex relationship exists between CRd and neurodegenerative disorders such as AD (Leng et al., 2019). Recent studies reveal that chronic CRd plays a pivotal role in the onset and progression of AD; however, they also suggest that CRd is common among AD patients. Although, it is still unknown if CRd induces AD or vice versa, evidence indicates a bidirectional relationship (Homolak et al., 2018; Kress et al., 2018; Musiek, 2017). Besides, both CRd and AD share identical pathologies and symptoms, such as cognitive disturbances, oxidative stress, disturbed sleep-wake cycle, and metabolic abnormalities (Cai et al., 2012; Zimmet et al., 2019). The evidence suggests that CRd and AD intersect pathophysiologically in Aβ production, glymphatic clearance, oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, secretion of melatonin, and metabolic dysfunction (Homolak et al., 2018; Leng et al., 2019).

Considering the role of the CR-regulated sleep-wake cycle in Aβ regulation, it appears that both factors are bidirectionally related. Over the last few years, our lab has successfully established an animal model displaying CRd-mediated manifestation of an AD-like phenotype in adult male Wistar rats subjected to chronic light/light conditions (Sharma et al., 2021a). The animals exhibit dysregulated gene expression of Per2. Also, a significant dysregulation in hyperoxidized peroxiredoxins (PRX-SO2/3) and peroxiredoxin-1 (PRX1) protein expression was noted. Further, increased oxidative stress and dysregulated glutamate and GABA dynamics were also noted in the SCN. Furthermore, upregulation of Bace1, Mgat3, and Aβ42 levels in the hippocampus was observed (Sharma et al., 2021a). On the other hand, Bero et al. (2011) showed that a rise in Aβ levels in interstitial fluid is caused by endogenous neuronal activity, which eventually leads to local Aβ aggregation.

The Blood-Brain-Barrier (BBB) and the glymphatic pathway clear this increased Aβ concentration from the brain during sleep (Tarasoff-Conway et al., 2015). Also, the glymphatic pathway clears tau from the brain. However, sleep deprivation alters this physiological process and hinders the Aβ clearance through BBB and glymphatic pathway (Wu et al., 2019).

In addition, the literature suggests that CRd, AD, and oxidative stress form a triangular intersection in which one component fuels pathogenesis in the other. Considerable evidence supports this hypothesis, e.g., in the master circadian clock, components of TTFL such as Bmal1 and CLOCK act as a positive regulator of glucocorticoids (e.g., cortisol, a stress hormone) secretion, whereas CRY represses their production (Phan and Malkani, 2018). Further, deletion of Bmal1 and CRY1 and/or CRY2 results in the abnormal regulation of glucocorticoids (Lamia et al., 2011; Leliavski et al., 2014). This indicates that a key stress regulator, i.e., the HPA axis, is strongly governed by the CR (Girotti et al., 2009). Besides, an array of evidence suggests that insufficient sleep raises cortisol levels and enhances the risk of AD (Girotti et al., 2009; Leproult et al., 1997; Ouanes and Popp, 2019). Likewise, a meta-analysis of 17,245 participants found that, in the morning, AD patients possess higher cortisol levels in their saliva, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid (Zheng et al., 2020).

Further, microglia in the CNS has an endogenous CR that regulates immune responses. However, Fonken et al. (2016) discovered that the clock genes of hippocampal microglia exhibit erratic expression with age. They found that, in aged rats, Per1 and Per2 mRNAs express in an aberrant manner. Also, the microglial expression of cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-1 was elevated throughout the day. This study clearly suggests that aging alters the circadian control of neuroinflammatory functions.

SCN regulated secretion of melatonin plays a critical role in brain homeostasis. Melatonin is an endogenous sleep promoter, and with pharmacological interventions, melatonin can induce phase shifts in CR to reset the sleep-wake cycle as desired (Burgess et al., 2010). Besides, melatonin has long been known to exhibit anti-amyloidal and anti-oxidant properties (Vincent, 2018). Additionally, melatonin is also believed to play a vital role in metabolic regulation. For instance, Nishida et al. (2003) showed that pinealectomy in rats results in a significant insulin surge, a condition that resembles type-2 diabetes (Korkmaz et al., 2009; Nishida et al., 2003). These physiological benefits of melatonin appear to be associated with improved sleep rhythms, resulting in reduced Aβ levels and neuroinflammation (Zisapel, 2018). However, melatonin production declines gradually with age, leading to CRd and related complications like an arrhythmic sleep cycle (Karasek, 2004).

Interestingly, the pathologies mentioned above are highly complicated and intricately intertwined, with one influencing the other and being influenced by it. However, they eventually cause substantial disruptions in normal brain homeostasis, leading to neurodegeneration over time (Figure 3).

3. Endocannabinoid system (ECS)

The ECS is a highly distributed biological system that is an essential and integral part of various biological operations throughout the CNS and the peripheral nervous system (PNS), e.g., neuromodulatory actions. Also, its widespread distribution across the CNS implies that it plays an essential role in our physiological and psychological behaviour. Over the last few decades, several studies have demonstrated ECS stimulation with synthetic and natural cannabinoids. The results, however, are dose-dependent, conflicting, and debatable. In addition, the ECS facilitates the development of the CNS and modulates synaptic plasticity and helps alleviate endogenous and exogenous insults to the body. The ECS consists of endocannabinoids (ECs) and their receptors, i.e., cannabinoid receptors (CBRs). ECs are lipid-based retrograde neurotransmitters that primarily bind to CBRs (Lu and Mackie, 2016). This section of the article includes the general pharmacology of the ECS and its localization in the brain. Further, we discuss the role of the ECS in memory, neurodegeneration, and neuroprotection. Also, we addressed a few studies that suggest both detrimental and positive effects of cannabinoid treatment in memory. Finally, we discuss the impact of the ECS on brain homeostasis and CRs regulation.

i) Localization of Cannabinoids

Devane et al. (1992) initially discovered the endocannabinoid anandamide (AEA), whereas two CBRs, i.e., CB1 and CB2, were first identified in 1990 and 1993, respectively (Matsuda et al., 1990; Munro et al., 1993). Despite these two key CBRs, ECs also binds to several other orphan receptors, such as G-protein-coupled receptors (GPR18, GPR55, GPR119) and transient receptor potential channels (TRPV1, TRPM8) (Morales and Reggio, 2017). However, CB1 and CB2 are primary molecular targets of two ECs, AEA and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). AEA act as a partial agonist of CB1 receptors, although 2-AG is a potent agonist of both the CBRs. Also, 2-AG is a major regulator of various patho/physiological processes in the body, such as cognition, emotion, pain sensation, neuroinflammation, and energy balance (Baggelaar et al., 2018; Casarotto et al., 2015). Conversely, phyto-/exocannabinoids such as tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) act as an agonist of CBRs (Baggelaar et al., 2018). Cannabidiol (CBD), another exocannabinoid, weakly antagonizes both the CBRs. Conversely, CBD is a potent agonist of the TRPV1 receptor and strongly antagonizes TRPM8. Besides, CBD also neutralizes certain side effects of THC (De Petrocellis et al., 2011; Hudson et al., 2019). The expression of ECs and CBRs is documented throughout the CNS and PNS (Freitas et al., 2018). In CNS, CB1 is expressed in the amygdala, hippocampus, several nuclei of thalamus and hypothalamus, cerebellar cortex, olfactory and visual system, etc. (Heinbockel and Straiker, 2021; Straiker et al., 1999; Zou and Kumar, 2018). CB2 expression in the CNS is limited and not as densely as compared to CB1 receptors. CB2 receptors are expressed in the brain stem, hippocampus, and certain other CNS regions (Stempel et al., 2016; Van Sickle et al., 2005). Also, the expression of both CB1 and CB2 receptors is found in the peripheral part of the CNS, i.e., the retina (Lu et al., 2000; Straiker et al., 1999). Moreover, the CB1 receptor is strongly expressed in the SCN, although no evidence of CB2 receptor expression in the SCN has been found yet (Acuna-Goycolea et al., 2010).

Endocannabinoids synthesis, release, and degradation

ECs have an exclusive and specific synthesis mechanism. Both the key ECs are synthesized on-site, separately, and on-demand. Moreover, the synthesis of ECs occurs in the postsynaptic neurons. After synthesis, instead of getting stored in vesicles, ECs undergo enzymatic degradation. Diacylglycerol (DAG) acts as a precursor for the synthesis of 2-AG, which is catalyzed by diacylglycerol lipase-α (DAGLα). Besides, AEA gets synthesized from N-acyl-phosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE) by NAPE-specific phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD). ECs are lipophilic; hence they easily traverse the cell membrane. Later in the synaptic cleft, ECs retrogradely activate CBRs that are positioned over presynaptic neurons. Interestingly, AEA is known to activate both presynaptic CBRs and intracellular-postsynaptic non-CBR targets (e.g., TRPV1) (Ulugöl, 2014). Furthermore, ECs also activate the CBRs that are localized in astrocytes (Hablitz et al., 2020). Eventually, fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) degrades AEA into arachidonic acid and ethanolamine in postsynaptic neurons. Whereas, at presynaptic neurons, monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) facilitates the hydrolysis of 2-AG into arachidonic acid and glycerol (Figure 4) (Ulugöl, 2014).

4. Role of Endocannabinoid system in CRs and memory

The ECs mentioned above and CBRs play a critical role in processing memory and maintaining CRs, although the work done in this area is quite limited. Nevertheless, evidence indicates ECS as an integral part of memory and the circadian system.

i) Endocannabinoids in memory

Multiple brain areas are involved in memory acquisition, consolidation, and retrieval. For example, the hippocampus primarily processes declarative memory, including semantic and episodic memory (Roediger et al., 2008). The cerebellum regulates implicit memories such as procedural memory, classical conditioning, and motor learning (Cooke et al., 2004). Also, the amygdala is critical in the processing of fear memories (Josselyn, 2010). Interestingly, the ECS exists throughout the aforementioned brain’s key memory processing areas, and there is substantial evidence that it influences cognitive processes. For instance, Lunardi et al. (2020) investigated the influence of the ECS on memory updation and deletion/extinction. They found that hippocampal infusion of CB1 antagonists/inverse agonist AM251 and rimonabant significantly reduce memory updation, impair behavioral flexibility, and enhance the forgetting of fear memory in Wistar rats (Lunardi et al., 2020). Further, Nedaei et al. (2016) demonstrated that microinjecting the CB1 receptor agonist arachidonylcyclopropylamide (1–4 ng/rat) into the basolateral amygdala of the rat could attenuate the scopolamine-induced impairment in memory consolidation. Furthermore, glucocorticoids appear to recruit ECs signaling in the dorsal striatum to promote memory consolidation in Wistar rats by enhancing retention avoidance after inhibitory avoidance training (Siller-Pérez et al., 2019). Alarcon et al. (2020) further strengthen the idea of ECs participation in memory acquisition and consolidation. They concluded that the CB agonist WIN55,212–2 impairs spatial memory acquisition in the Morris water maze test but does not affect its consolidation. ECs signaling also aids in the reward-based learning of a motor sequence, which is impaired in CB1 and DGLα knockout mice (Tanigami et al., 2019).

ii) Endocannabinoids in neurodegeneration and neuroprotection

Given its significance in cognitive processes, the ECs is also involved in various neurodegenerative processes such as AD, although the evidence appears to argue for its beneficial role. Recently, several studies have attempted to investigate the role of ECs in AD and found that the normal functioning of the ECs is altered in the neurodegenerative state of the brain. Also, Maccarrone et al. (2018) demonstrated that overexpression of full-length human mutant Amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the hippocampus of Tg2576 mice interferes with the membrane localization of CB1 receptors and influences their inhibitory signaling activity. Further, failure of the ECS system in laboratory animals results in increased morbidity and mortality. According to Aso et al. (2018), crossing APP/PS1 (APP-presenilin-1) transgenic mice with CB1 knockout mice resulted in offsprings having imbalanced excitatory/inhibitory neurotransmission in the hippocampus with extremely low survival. In addition, AD-like symptoms such as impaired memory were also observed by the authors. The expression of CBRs and their endogenous ligands are also affected by AD. For instance, CB1 receptors were found to be significantly reduced in the postmortem cortical brain tissues of AD patients. In contrast, the expression of CB2 receptors was found to be significantly enhanced (Solas et al., 2013).

Several studies have presented a contradictory role of the ECS in the CNS during the progression of AD. For instance, Galán-Ganga et al. (2021) demonstrated the overexpression of CB2 receptors as an early event in tauopathies. Also, a significant increase in the AEA levels induced by overexpression of hTAUP301L was observed in the hippocampus. Further, the authors observed a reduction in the levels of degrading enzyme FAAH and concluded that deficiency of CB2 receptors could ameliorate hTAUP301L induced neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits. Interestingly, this study denies any relevant role of CB2 receptors in overexpressed hTAUP301L induced neuroinflammation. However, multiple studies showed cannabinoids effectively ameliorate the Aβ-induced indirect neurotoxicity, such as microglial activation in in-vitro and in-vivo studies. Martín-Moreno et al. (2012) found that chronic oral administration of cannabinoids for four months in Tg APP 2576 mice can attenuate microglial activation, reduce the release of TNF-α, suppress COX-2 expression, decrease cortical Aβ deposition, and ameliorate cognitive deficits. Moreover, cannabinoids also reduce the expression of TNF-α and the production of nitric oxide (Ramírez et al., 2005). Ehrhart et al. (2005) corroborated these findings. They further added that JWH-015 mediated selective activation of CB2 receptors causes a considerable reduction in Interferon-γ induced phosphorylation of JAK/STAT1 and expression of CD40 receptor. CD40 signaling promotes pathological activation of microglial cells and inhibits microglial phagocytosis of Aβ42 peptides. Therefore, cannabinoid-mediated suppression of CD40 appears to be a viable approach of protecting critical brain regions against Aβ-induced neuroinflammation. Further, nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) signaling facilitates the neuroprotective effect of cannabinoid agonist WIN55,212–2 and reduces the elevated levels of TNF-α, active caspase 3, nuclear NF-kB, and TUNEL-positive neurons in the hippocampus (Fakhfouri et al., 2012).

iii) CBs modulation in SCN circuitry for AD

a) CBs modulation in CRd

As previously stated, in the SCN, GABA act as a principal neurotransmitter. However, several other neuropeptides, including serotonin and NPY, have neuromodulatory effects in the SCN. Initially, researchers looked into the role of these neuropeptides in the modulation of SCN-generated CRs. Eventually, they focussed on identifying other probable neuropeptides that can modulate the master clock (Mintz et al., 1999; Moore and Speh, 1993; Sanford et al., 2008). With time, a growing body of evidence suggested that the ECS is somehow associated with the circadian system. For instance, in the rat brain, both the key ligands of ECS, i.e., 2-AG and AEA, exhibit diurnal variations (Valenti et al., 2004); for review, see Vaughn et al. (2010). In addition, studies found that not only does sleep modulate the expression of the CB1 gene in the rat pons, but CBRs expressed at the medial septum nuclei also regulate the sleep-wake cycle. Further, CB1 receptor agonists were found to increase the total percentage of rapid eye movement sleep and enhanced total sleep time. Furthermore, chronic treatment with exogenous Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol was found to invert the CR of brain temperature (Martin et al., 2003; Perron et al., 2001; Puskar et al., 2021). In light of the above evidence, it was postulated that the ECS stayed under the influence of the circadian system or vice versa. It was hypothesized that the ECS is involved in modulating the inputs of various afferents and the internal activity of the SCN. Sanford et al. (2008) initially reported the role of CB1 receptors in modulating the circadian phases of the master clock. This study verifies the role of the CB1 receptor agonist in attenuating the light-induced phase advances of locomotor activity in hamsters. The authors reported a significant phase advanced activity of CB1 agonist CP55940 when administered (i.p.) at CT 18.25, prior to light exposure (20lux) at CT 19.00, for 10 minutes, for ten days. In addition, they also observed the maximal inhibitory effect of CP55940 at an i.p. dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Further, based on immunohistochemical findings, which confirmed the expression of CBRs at SCN, IGL, and DRN, the authors suggest that cannabinoids may alter the activity of SCN cells by influencing the activity of their major neurotransmitter GABA or by interacting indirectly with the SCN’s two other major afferents, i.e., GHT and serotonergic inputs from the DRN.

The proposed hypothesis of how CBRs influence the activity mechanism of SCN by Sanford et al. (2008) correlates with retrospective studies. For instance, Barbacka-Surowiak and Gut (2001) investigated the significance of intact DRN signaling in maintaining a wheel-running activity rhythm in mice. They found that electrical lesions in the DRN result in reduced and fragmented locomotor activity in mice subjected to D/D light conditions. They found that mice subjected to L/D conditions exhibit an early onset of activity, whereas mice subjected to L/L conditions exhibit a longer period of activity. This evidence established a potential influence of DRN signaling in circadian rhythmicity. Later, serotonergic inputs from the DRN were also reported to inhibit RHT mediated activation of SCN neurons (Glass et al., 2003). Activation of NMDA receptors by glutamate, released from the RHT terminals, induces light-like phase shifts in the SCN and appears essential for transmitting the light information from the retina to the SCN (Mintz et al., 1999). Studies suggest that 5HT1B receptors are located presynaptically on RHT axon terminals, and application of 5HT1B agonists (TFMPP and CGS 12066A) inhibit an NMDA-induced phase-shifting mechanism in SCN (Boschert et al., 1994; Pickard et al., 1996). Similarly, Quipazine, a non-selective serotonin (5-HT) receptor agonist, was found to inhibit light-induced c-fos protein (an activity marker) expression in the SCN (Selim et al., 1993). The evidence provided above infers the impact of DRN signaling in CRs. Interestingly, on the other hand, certain evidence supports the speculations of Sanford et al. (2008), which state that ECs signaling influences the SCN’s serotonergic inputs from the DRN. For instance, CB receptor agonist CP 55,940 increases the firing rate of serotonergic dorsal raphe neurons and increases the serotonin level in various nuclei of the hypothalamus (Figure 5) (Arévalo et al., 2001; Gobbi et al., 2005; Sanford et al., 2008). In addition, Lydic et al. (1984) showed a correlation between the activity rhythm, the sleep cycle, and the firing pattern of DRN neurons. According to this study, in single-cell recording, the typical firing pattern of a cat’s DRN during wakefulness is 2–3 spikes/s; however, during slow-wave or synchronized sleep, a reduction in spikes (1 spike/s) was observed, which was further reduced to 0.05 spikes/s during desynchronized sleep rhythm. Interestingly, similar observations were made by Mendiguren and Pineda (2009) , who showed that CB antagonists AM251 (1 µM) and rimonabant (1 µM) diminished the firing rate of DRN’s 5-HT cells, which suggests that both ECs and DRN signaling are related to a critical component of CRs, i.e., sleep. Further, the role of CB agonists in potentiating the synchronized sleep rhythm support the idea that the ECS indirectly influences the activity of NMDA receptors in the SCN by stimulating DRN inputs to the SCN (Puskar et al., 2021; Vaughn et al., 2010).

Moreover, Johnson et al. (1989) observed altered CRs in IGL lesioned hamsters, concluding that GHT influences SCN entrainment. This evidence also potentiates the idea that ECs signaling influences GHT to modulate SCN’s activity. For instance, the NPY is believed to transmit non-photic cues from the IGL to the SCN via GHT. Albers and Ferris (1984) investigated the circadian phase-shifting properties of NPY by microinjecting it into the SCN of hamsters that were exposed to constant light conditions. They reported that animals injected before the activity onset showed an advanced phase; however, animals injected after 12 hours of activity onset showed the opposite effect, i.e., delayed phase. Similarly, NPY-mediated phase shifts were also observed in animals that were subjected to constant darkness. However, both in-vitro and in-vivo studies suggest that NPY-mediated phase shifts occurred when administered only during subjective days (Harrington and Schak, 2000; Huhman and Albers, 1994; Johnson et al., 1989).

Interestingly, NPY treatment prevents NMDA-mediated light-like phase shifts in the lab animals. Several in-vitro and in-vivo studies showed that NPY-mediated inhibition of light-induced phase shifts in laboratory animals occurs via the NPY Y1, Y2, and Y5 receptors. In addition, studies suggest that even though NPY inhibits light-induced phase shifts in NPY Y1−/− mice, it fails to reset the CRs in Y2−/− animals. Further, NPY Y5 receptor antagonists were found to potentiate the influence of light on CRs (Lall and Biello, 2003; Soscia and Harrington, 2004, 2005; Yannielli et al., 2004; Yannielli and Harrington, 2001). The evidence presented above strongly suggests that, alike CB agonists, NPY plays a critical role in preventing the SCN from photic disturbances. Interestingly, CB1 receptor stimulation appears to surge NPY release in the rat hypothalamus. On the other hand, the CB1 receptor antagonist AM251 reduces NPY immunoreactivity in the arcuate nucleus. As stated above, Sanford et al. (2008) identified CB1 receptor immunoreactivity in the IGL, implying that CB agonists may play a role in regulating GHT signaling to the SCN; however, no clear evidence has been provided yet. Nonetheless, the strong association between NPY and CBR ligands and their similarity in adjusting CRs suggest a need for dedicated study (Bakkali-Kassemi et al., 2011; Gamber et al., 2005).

In 2010, Acuna-Goycolea et al. corroborated the findings of Sanford et al. (2008) and showed a significant reduction of light-induced phase delays by a CB1 receptor agonist. They reported that cannabinoids attenuate the SCN’s ability to get entrained to light; however, they also mention no effect of cannabinoids on glutamate release from the RHT inputs. This study was performed on adult (8–12 week old) male C57BL/6J mice, and dose administration was done using an intraventricular cannula. After the free-running period of 14 days in D/D light conditions, mice were infused at CT 15.5 (under 15 W dim red light: &lt; 1 lux at cage level) with WIN55,212,2 (3 nm/μl: 3 μl total volume) and AM251 (6 nm/μl: 1.5 μl total volume) along with DMSO as a vehicle. Thirty minutes later, at CT 16, the mice were exposed to light (50 lux for 10 minutes) and returned to their cage. With cell-attached patch-clamp electrophysiological recordings, the authors found that activation of CB1R by WIN55,212,2 results in reduced GABA release from the presynaptic axon terminals of SCN cells. Further, based on the fact that GABA exhibits dual inhibitory and excitatory roles in the SCN, the authors speculated that the effect of CB1R stimulation on activation or inhibition of SCN’s circuit might depend upon the timing of the subjective day (Acuna-Goycolea et al., 2010). Various studies have shown the importance of GABA-mediated neurotransmission in the SCN. For instance, GABA antagonists were found to be particularly involved in blocking circadian phase delays (Ralph and Menaker, 1985). Also, agents responsible for potentiating GABA activity, such as benzodiazepine diazepam, inhibit light-induced phase advances (Ralph and Menaker, 1989). The evidence mentioned above advocates for the role of GABA in circadian phase shifts but fails to explain whether GABA exhibits inhibitory or stimulatory effects in the SCN. Certain studies suggest its dual role, e.g., Albus et al. (2005) demonstrate that GABA act as a transporter of phase information between ventral and dorsal SCN. Moreover, it excites neurons of the dorsal SCN and imposes inhibitory effects on the ventral part of the SCN. By contrast, in fetal mice, GABA plays a role in refining the circadian output rhythm. However, it appears to exhibit no role in integrating the overall CRs of individual SCN neurons (Ono et al., 2019). Moreover, the ventral SCN is highly vulnerable to light, and therefore alteration in its electrical activity and phase shifts (gene expression) can be observed rapidly. The ventral SCN significantly affects the dorsal SCN and causes a phase shift. However, phase shifting and resynchronization in the dorsal SCN take several days. Besides, the transmission of phase information between ventral and dorsal SCN can be prevented by bicuculline (a competitive antagonist of GABAA receptors) (Albus et al., 2005). Acuna-Goycolea et al. (2010) confirm the possibility of CB1 receptor-mediated alterations of GABAergic communication between the SCN cells, as activation of CB1 receptors alleviates the discharge of GABA from presynaptic axon terminals in the SCN. In another study, Hablitz et al. (2020) corroborated the findings of Acuna-Goycolea et al. (2010) and by using electrophysiological recordings (recording time ZT7– ZT10; lights off at ZT12) showed that CB1 receptors agonist WIN 55,212–2 (3 μM) treatment reduces the frequency (but not amplitude) of GABA receptor-mediated postsynaptic current (mGPSC). They further corroborated their finding by treating SCN coronal slice preparations with CB1 receptors antagonist AM2515 (μM), which completely blocked the activity of WIN 55,212–2. In addition, the authors reported that the activation of astrocytes’ Ca2+ signaling intermediates the CBRs mediated modulation of the presynaptic GABA release from SCN cells. To test this hypothesis, the authors first monitored the Ca2+ levels in the presence of WIN 55,212–2. For this purpose, a transgenic mouse line, GFAP-Cre+ (B6.Cg-Tg(Gfap-cre)73.12Mvs/J), was injected bilaterally into the SCN (coordinates: x, –0.4, y, ±0.2, and z, –5.8 from bregma) with a viral construct that encodes for Cre-recombinase-activated ultrasensitive fluorescent calcium indicator (GCaMP6) for real-time imaging of Ca2+ signaling in SCN astrocytes. The authors found that WIN 55,212–2 (3 μM) treatment significantly increased the Ca2+ levels in the astrocytes. The authors then attempted to examine the mechanism by which postsynaptic SCN neurons use ECs signaling to recruit astrocytes in order to control presynaptic GABA release. Authors hypothesized that ATP released from astrocytes gets converted into adenosine and activates adenosine receptors necessary for the WIN 55,212–2 mediated alterations in the SCN. To test this hypothesis, they demonstrated that in the presence of CGS15943 (50 μM) (a potent adenosine 1 and adenosine 2A receptor antagonist) in the bath, WIN 55,212–2 fails to show its activity, i.e., inhibition of postsynaptic mGPSC. Next, they treated SCN slices with the adenosine 1 receptor-specific antagonist DPCPX and found similar results. Finally, the authors concluded that postsynaptic SCN neurons release ECs into the synaptic region, which then bind to adjacent CB1 receptors on astrocytes and increase intracellular Ca2+ levels in astrocytes, resulting in the release of adenosine into the synaptic region, which then activates the adenosine 1 receptor on presynaptic neurons, resulting in the decrease of GABA release from presynaptic SCN neurons (Hablitz et al., 2020).

The evidence mentioned above supports the notion that EC signaling affects the photic inputs of SCN by modulating various chemical messengers of non-photic afferents of the SCN and interferes with its internal activity (Figure 5). Further, CB receptor activation facilitates the resetting of phase shifts in the SCN. However, the complete picture of the underlying mechanism is yet to be drawn.

b) CBs modulating AD induced by CRd

As discussed previously, CRd-induced AD is a well-established fact (Sharma and Goyal, 2020; Sharma et al., 2021a; Sharma et al., 2021b); however, there is currently no evidence to support the involvement of CBs in the prevention of CRd-induced AD. Nevertheless, we can look at the other side of the picture, where multiple studies advocate for CBs in the prevention of AD-induced CRd; for review, see Verma et al. (2021). The repertoire of AD-mediated disturbances in CRs includes sundowning syndrome (which is an abrupt worsening of confusion, agitation, and aggression at dusk), disturbed sleep-wake cycle and its fluctuating duration, excessive somnolence, eating disturbances, activity-rest rhythm disruption, dysregulated secretion of the stress hormone, altered metabolism and so on (Butterfield and Halliwell, 2019; Hatfield et al., 2004; Kai et al., 2015; McCleery et al., 2016; Peter-Derex et al., 2015; Volicer et al., 2001). CB treatment has been shown to be advantageous in reducing the severity of the aforementioned AD-induced CRd (Verma et al., 2021). Therefore, based on the facts presented above, we emphasize the evaluation of ECS participation in CRd-induced AD.

Based on the evidence, we emphasize the need for investigating the ECS-mediated indirect control of glutamate release in the SCN core by increasing serotonin release in the SCN and activating the 5HT1B receptors at the terminal ends of RHT. Another probable idea is that ECS-mediated activation of IGL neurons potentiates NPY release in SCN, which ultimately inhibits phase shifts of CRs via an unknown mechanism, or that acting directly on intracellular GABAergic communication of SCN and altering it to prevent phase shifts of CRs.

Conclusion

According to the literature discussed in the review, there is ample evidence that a mutual participation of CRd and neurodegeneration exists in exacerbating each other’s severity. An unhealthy lifestyle and chronic photic disturbances are noted to cause CRd in SCN’s TTFL loops via affecting neurotransmission of glutamate and GABA. A widespread distribution of ECs across the CNS and the expression of cannabinoid receptor, CB1, in the SCN modulate the circadian phases of the master clock. The specific modulatory role of CB1 receptors in the SCN associated with AD pathology warrants additional investigation. Furthermore, cannabinoid CB2 receptors have been reported to express in the brain glial cells, including microglia that are involved with inflammatory cytokines, suggesting an important role in the inflammatory pathology of AD. Thus, given the expression and role of CB1 and CB2 receptors mediated signalling, manipulation of the ECs in the SCN may offer novel pharmacological approach to the novel treatment of AD. The present article summarizes evidences for presenting ECs as a putative target for correcting CRd and deaccelerating AD progression. It may be concluded that the cannabinoids, CB1 may alter SCN’s cells’ activity via geniculohypothalamic tract-mediated release of neuropeptide Y, GABA in SCN and serotonergic inputs from raphe nuclei.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the contributions of lab personnel of Neuropharmacology laboratory, Shoolini University, Solan and authors in collaboration that aided the efforts in formulating the manuscript.

Funding

This publication resulted in part from research support to T.H. from the National Science Foundation [NSF IOS-1355034], Howard University College of Medicine, and the District of Columbia Center for AIDS Research, an NIH funded program [P30AI117970], which is supported by the following NIH Co-Funding and Participating Institutes and Centers: NIAID, NCI, NICHD, NHLBI, NIDA, NIMH, NIA, NIDDK, NIMHD, NIDCR, NINR, FIC and OAR. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.

Abbreviation

2-AG 2-Arachidonoylglycerol

AVP Arginine vasopressin

BMAL1 Brain and muscle ARNT- like 1

CB 1, 2 Cannabinoid receptor 1, 2

CNS Central nervous system

CLOCK Circadian locomotor output cycles protein kaput

CR Circadian rhythm

CT Circadian time

CRd CR disruption

CRY Cryptochrome

CRY 1, 2 Cryptochrome 1, 2

DAGLα Diacylglycerol lipase-α

DRN Dorsal raphe nucleus

ECS Endocannabinoid system

ECs endocannabinoids

FAAH Fatty acid amide hydrolase

Grp Gastrin-releasing peptide

GHT Geniculohypothalamic tract

GPR55, 119 G-protein coupled receptor 55, 119

GPCRs G-protein-coupled receptors

HPA-axis hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis

IGL Intergeniculate leaflet

ipRGCs Intrinsically photosensitive Retinal Ganglion Cells

LED Light-emitting diode

MAGL Monoacylglycerol lipase

NAPE-PLD NAPE-specific phospholipase D

Nms Neuromedin-S

NPY Neuropeptide Y

NMDA N-methyl-d-aspartate

OPN Olivary pretectal nucleus

PER Period

PER 1, 2 Period 1, 2

PNS Peripheral nervous system

PLC Phospholipase C

Prok2 Prokineticin-2

PLR Pupillary light reflex

RGCs Retinal Ganglion Cells

RHT Retino-hypothalamic tract

SCN Suprachiasmatic nucleus

TTFL Transcriptional–translational feedback loops

TRPM8 Transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M (melastatin) member 8

TrpV1 Transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1

TRPA1 Transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily A, member 1

Vip Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide

GABA γ-aminobutyric acid

Figure 1: Anatomical elucidation of SCN and TTFL:

Figure 2: Structural and functional aspects of circadian machinery and its influence on biological rhythms: SCN primarily receives its afferents from the retina through RHT, from the IGL through geniculohypothalamic, and from raphe nuclei through serotonergic projections. Subsequently, synchronized SCN entrains various other local and peripheral circadian clocks and thus regulates multiple physiological cycles in the body.

Figure 3: Diagrammatic representation of the bidirectional relationship between CRd and AD: CRd and AD share a bidirectional relationship where one factor potentiates the risks for the other. Risk factors for chronic CRd include unnatural lighting conditions, shift-work, and jet lag. In addition, malnutrition hinders the inter-oscillator-linking between the master clock and peripheral oscillators. Also, malnutrition reduces the ability of SCN to align and lock the endogenous circadian phase with external light-dark conditions in lab animals (Aguilar-Roblero et al., 1997). Besides, after the manifestation of CRd, a cascade of pathologies initiates inside the brain which eventually results in AD. The key components of such pathologies include dysfunction of metabolic homeostasis, dysregulation of brain’s clearance systems (glymphatic clearance and BBB clearance), elevation in neuronal activity and Aβ production, amplified oxidative stress, and dysregulation of melatonin secretion.

Figure 4: Simplified scheme representing endocannabinoids modulated synaptic transmission.

Figure 5: A proposed hypothesis for cannabinoid mediated modulation of CR: Light-mediated retinal stimulation triggers action potentials in RHT, eventually leading to glutamate release in the SCN core from presynaptic RHT terminals. As a result, activation of SCN neurons causes endogenous CR to synchronize with external light-dark conditions. However, light-mediated activation of SCN in the early morning or late evening resulted in advanced and delayed phases, respectively. GABA is primarily responsible for information transmission throughout the SCN, and its modulation appears to affect the regular CR. Cannabinoid agonists affect GABA activity and aid in the resetting of CR. Furthermore, cannabinoid agonists impede the SCN’s ability to entrain to light information. Additionally, serotonergic inputs from raphe nuclei activate presynaptic 5HT1B receptors at RHT, inhibiting glutamate release. Cannabinoid agonists were shown to increase the firing rate of serotonergic dorsal raphe neurons. Furthermore, non-photic cues are transmitted from the IGL to the SCN via NPY, and NPY agonists were found to aid in resetting CR. Interestingly, Cannabinoid agonists are also believed to enhance this physiology.

Highlights

SCN generated CRs are robust in nature; however, lifestyle-related factors, such as chronic photic disturbances, can cause asynchrony in CRs, i.e., CR disruption (CRd).

Numerous evidence correlates CRd with the enhanced risk of dementia.

CRd (e.g., CR sleep disorders) increases the Aβ load in the hippocampus and thalamus. CRd also affects the glymphatic pathway and hinders the clearance of Aβ from the CNS.

Literature suggests the Endocannabinoid system (ECS) as a mutual link between CRd and AD, as the normal functioning of the ECS has been found to be disrupted in neurodegeneration. Likewise, CB1 knockout mice were shown to have AD-like symptoms.

Multiple studies suggest that ECS plays an essential role in modulating the light-mediated phase shifts of SCN generated CRs.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of interests

None declared.


References

Abrahamson EE , Moore RY , 2001. Suprachiasmatic nucleus in the mouse: retinal innervation, intrinsic organization and efferent projections. Brain Res 916 , 172–191.11597605
Acuna-Goycolea C , Obrietan K , van den Pol AN , 2010. Cannabinoids excite circadian clock neurons. J. Neurosci 30 , 10061–10066.20668190
Aguilar-Roblero R , Salazar-Juarez A , Rojas-Castaneda J , Escobar C , Cintra L , 1997. Organization of circadian rhythmicity and suprachiasmatic nuclei in malnourished rats. Am. J. Physiol 273 , R1321–1331.9362295
Alarcon TA , Areal LB , Herlinger AL , Paiva KK , Cicilini MA , Martins-Silva C , Pires RGW , 2020. The cannabinoid agonist WIN-2 affects acquisition but not consolidation of a spatial information in training and retraining processes: Relation with transcriptional regulation of the endocannabinoid system? Behav. Brain Res 377 , 112231.31526770
Albers HE , Ferris CF , 1984. Neuropeptide Y: role in light-dark cycle entrainment of hamster circadian rhythms. Neurosci. Lett 50 , 163–168.6548555
Albus H , Vansteensel MJ , Michel S , Block GD , Meijer JH , 2005. A GABAergic mechanism is necessary for coupling dissociable ventral and dorsal regional oscillators within the circadian clock. Curr. Biol 15 , 886–893.15916945
Antle MC , Silver R , 2005. Orchestrating time: arrangements of the brain circadian clock. Trends Neurosci 28 , 145–151.15749168
Arévalo C , de Miguel R , Hernández-Tristán R , 2001. Cannabinoid effects on anxiety-related behaviours and hypothalamic neurotransmitters. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior 70 , 123–131.
Aso E , Andres-Benito P , Ferrer I , 2018. Genetic deletion of CB1 cannabinoid receptors exacerbates the Alzheimer-like symptoms in a transgenic animal model. Biochem. Pharmacol 157 , 210–216.30096288
Baggelaar MP , Maccarrone M , van der Stelt M , 2018. 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: A signaling lipid with manifold actions in the brain. Prog. Lipid Res 71 , 1–17.29751000
Bakkali-Kassemi L , El Ouezzani S , Magoul R , Merroun I , Lopez-Jurado M , Errami M , 2011. Effects of cannabinoids on neuropeptide Y and β-endorphin expression in the rat hypothalamic arcuate nucleus. Br. J. Nutr 105 , 654–660.21134330
Barbacka-Surowiak G , Gut M , 2001. The effect of dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) lesions on the locomotor activity rhythm in mice. Folia Biol. (Krakow) 49 , 77–84.11732169
Baver SB , Pickard GE , Sollars PJ , Pickard GE , 2008. Two types of melanopsin retinal ganglion cell differentially innervate the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus and the olivary pretectal nucleus. Eur. J. Neurosci 27 , 1763–1770.18371076
Bero AW , Yan P , Roh JH , Cirrito JR , Stewart FR , Raichle ME , Lee JM , Holtzman DM , 2011. Neuronal activity regulates the regional vulnerability to amyloid-beta deposition. Nat. Neurosci 14 , 750–756.21532579
Berson DM , Dunn FA , Takao M , 2002. Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set the circadian clock. Science 295 , 1070–1073.11834835
Blume C , Garbazza C , Spitschan M , 2019. Effects of light on human circadian rhythms, sleep and mood. Somnology : sleep research and sleep medicine 23 , 147–156.
Bokenberger K , Sjölander A , Dahl Aslan AK , Karlsson IK , Åkerstedt T , Pedersen NL , 2018. Shift work and risk of incident dementia: a study of two population-based cohorts. Eur. J. Epidemiol 33 , 977–987.30076495
Boschert U , Amara DA , Segu L , Hen R , 1994. The mouse 5-hydroxytryptamine1B receptor is localized predominantly on axon terminals. Neuroscience 58 , 167–182.8159291
Brown TM , Gias C , Hatori M , Keding SR , Semo M , Coffey PJ , Gigg J , Piggins HD , Panda S , Lucas RJ , 2010. Melanopsin contributions to irradiance coding in the thalamo-cortical visual system. PLoS Biol 8 , e1000558.21151887
Buhr ED , Takahashi JS , 2013. Molecular Components of the Mammalian Circadian Clock, in: Kramer A , Merrow M (Eds.), Circadian Clocks Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 3–27.
Burgess HJ , Revell VL , Molina TA , Eastman CI , 2010. Human phase response curves to three days of daily melatonin: 0.5 mg versus 3.0 mg. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 95 , 3325–3331.20410229
Butterfield DA , Halliwell B , 2019. Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 20 , 148–160.30737462
Cai H , Cong WN , Ji S , Rothman S , Maudsley S , Martin B , 2012. Metabolic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease and related neurodegenerative disorders. Current Alzheimer Research 9 , 5–17.22329649
Casarotto PC , Gomes FV , Guimarães FS , 2015. Chapter 15 - Cannabinoids and obsessive-compulsive disorder, in: Fattore L (Ed.), Cannabinoids in Neurologic and Mental Disease Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 365–387.
Chi-Castaneda D , Ortega A , 2018. Glial Cells in the Genesis and Regulation of Circadian Rhythms. Front. Physiol 9 , 88.29483880
Cho H , Zhao X , Hatori M , Yu RT , Barish GD , Lam MT , Chong LW , DiTacchio L , Atkins AR , Glass CK , Liddle C , Auwerx J , Downes M , Panda S , Evans RM , 2012. Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism by REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta. Nature 485 , 123–127.22460952
Christensen MA , Bettencourt L , Kaye L , Moturu ST , Nguyen KT , Olgin JE , Pletcher MJ , Marcus GM , 2016. Direct Measurements of Smartphone Screen-Time: Relationships with Demographics and Sleep. PLoS One 11 , e0165331.27829040
Colwell CS , 2001. NMDA-evoked calcium transients and currents in the suprachiasmatic nucleus: gating by the circadian system. Eur. J. Neurosci 13 , 1420–1428.11298803
Cooke SF , Attwell PJ , Yeo CH , 2004. Temporal properties of cerebellar-dependent memory consolidation. J. Neurosci 24 , 2934–2941.15044532
Cordone S , Annarumma L , Rossini PM , De Gennaro L , 2019. Sleep and β-Amyloid Deposition in Alzheimer Disease: Insights on Mechanisms and Possible Innovative Treatments. Front. Pharmacol 10 , 695.31281257
Czeisler CA , Buxton OM , Khalsa SBS , 2005. Chapter 31 - The Human Circadian Timing System and Sleep-Wake Regulation, in: Kryger MH , Roth T , Dement WC (Eds.), Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine (Fourth Edition). W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 375–394.
Dardente H , Menet JS , Challet E , Tournier BB , Pevet P , Masson-Pevet M , 2004. Daily and circadian expression of neuropeptides in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of nocturnal and diurnal rodents. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res 124 , 143–151.15135222
De Petrocellis L , Ligresti A , Moriello AS , Allara M , Bisogno T , Petrosino S , Stott CG , Di Marzo V , 2011. Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoid-enriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. Br. J. Pharmacol 163 , 1479–1494.21175579
Devane WA , Hanus L , Breuer A , Pertwee RG , Stevenson LA , Griffin G , Gibson D , Mandelbaum A , Etinger A , Mechoulam R , 1992. Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. Science 258 , 1946–1949.1470919
Ding JM , Chen D , Weber ET , Faiman LE , Rea MA , Gillette MU , 1994. Resetting the biological clock: mediation of nocturnal circadian shifts by glutamate and NO. Science 266 , 1713–1717.7527589
Ebling FJ , 1996. The role of glutamate in the photic regulation of the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Prog. Neurobiol 50 , 109–132.8971980
Ecker JL , Dumitrescu ON , Wong KY , Alam NM , Chen SK , LeGates T , Renna JM , Prusky GT , Berson DM , Hattar S , 2010. Melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion-cell photoreceptors: cellular diversity and role in pattern vision. Neuron 67 , 49–60.20624591
Ehrhart J , Obregon D , Mori T , Hou H , Sun N , Bai Y , Klein T , Fernandez F , Tan J , Shytle RD , 2005. Stimulation of cannabinoid receptor 2 (CB2) suppresses microglial activation. J. Neuroinflammation 2 , 29.16343349
Eugene AR , Masiak J , 2015. The Neuroprotective Aspects of Sleep. MEDtube science 3 , 35–40.26594659
Fakhfouri G , Ahmadiani A , Rahimian R , Grolla AA , Moradi F , Haeri A , 2012. WIN55212–2 attenuates amyloid-beta-induced neuroinflammation in rats through activation of cannabinoid receptors and PPAR-γ pathway. Neuropharmacology 63 , 653–666.22634229
Fernandez DC , Chang YT , Hattar S , Chen SK , 2016. Architecture of retinal projections to the central circadian pacemaker. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 113 , 6047–6052.27162356
Fonken LK , Kitt MM , Gaudet AD , Barrientos RM , Watkins LR , Maier SF , 2016. Diminished circadian rhythms in hippocampal microglia may contribute to age-related neuroinflammatory sensitization. Neurobiol. Aging 47 , 102–112.27568094
Freitas HR , Isaac AR , Malcher-Lopes R , Diaz BL , Trevenzoli IH , De Melo Reis RA , 2018. Polyunsaturated fatty acids and endocannabinoids in health and disease. Nutr. Neurosci 21 , 695–714.28686542
Galán-Ganga M , Rodríguez-Cueto C , Merchán-Rubira J , Hernández F , Ávila J , Posada-Ayala M , Lanciego JL , Luengo E , Lopez MG , Rábano A , Fernández-Ruiz J , Lastres-Becker I , 2021. Cannabinoid receptor CB2 ablation protects against TAU induced neurodegeneration. Acta neuropathologica communications 9 , 90–90.34001284
Gamber KM , Macarthur H , Westfall TC , 2005. Cannabinoids augment the release of neuropeptide Y in the rat hypothalamus. Neuropharmacology 49 , 646–652.15949823
Gibson EM , Wang C , Tjho S , Khattar N , Kriegsfeld LJ , 2010. Experimental ‘jet lag’inhibits adult neurogenesis and produces long-term cognitive deficits in female hamsters. PLoS One 5 , e15267.21152025
Girotti M , Weinberg MS , Spencer RL , 2009. Diurnal expression of functional and clock-related genes throughout the rat HPA axis: system-wide shifts in response to a restricted feeding schedule. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 296 , E888–897.19190255
Glass JD , Grossman GH , Farnbauch L , DiNardo L , 2003. Midbrain raphe modulation of nonphotic circadian clock resetting and 5-HT release in the mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus. J. Neurosci 23 , 7451–7460.12930783
Gobbi G , Bambico FR , Mangieri R , Bortolato M , Campolongo P , Solinas M , Cassano T , Morgese MG , Debonnel G , Duranti A , Tontini A , Tarzia G , Mor M , Trezza V , Goldberg SR , Cuomo V , Piomelli D , 2005. Antidepressant-like activity and modulation of brain monoaminergic transmission by blockade of anandamide hydrolysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 102 , 18620–18625.16352709
Gooley JJ , Lu J , Chou TC , Scammell TE , Saper CB , 2001. Melanopsin in cells of origin of the retinohypothalamic tract. Nat. Neurosci 4 , 1165.11713469
Guillaumond F , Dardente H , Giguere V , Cermakian N , 2005. Differential control of Bmal1 circadian transcription by REV-ERB and ROR nuclear receptors. J. Biol. Rhythms 20 , 391–403.16267379
Hablitz LM , Gunesch AN , Cravetchi O , Moldavan M , Allen CN , 2020. Cannabinoid Signaling Recruits Astrocytes to Modulate Presynaptic Function in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus. eNeuro 7 .
Hannibal J , 2006. Roles of PACAP-containing retinal ganglion cells in circadian timing. Int. Rev. Cytol 251 , 1–39.16939776
Harrington ME , Schak KM , 2000. Neuropeptide Y phase advances the in vitro hamster circadian clock during the subjective day with no effect on phase during the subjective night. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol 78 , 87–92.10737670
Hastings MH , Maywood ES , Brancaccio M , 2018. Generation of circadian rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 19 , 453–469.29934559
Hastings MH , Reddy AB , Maywood ES , 2003. A clockwork web: circadian timing in brain and periphery, in health and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 4 , 649–661.12894240
Hatfield CF , Herbert J , van Someren EJ , Hodges JR , Hastings MH , 2004. Disrupted daily activity/rest cycles in relation to daily cortisol rhythms of home-dwelling patients with early Alzheimer’s dementia. Brain 127 , 1061–1074.14998915
Hay-Schmidt A , Vrang N , Larsen PJ , Mikkelsen JD , 2003. Projections from the raphe nuclei to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the rat. J. Chem. Neuroanat 25 , 293–310.12842274
Heinbockel T , Straiker A , 2021. Cannabinoids Regulate Sensory Processing in Early Olfactory and Visual Neural Circuits. Frontiers in neural circuits 15 , 662349.34305536
Homolak J , Mudrovčić M , Vukić B , Toljan K , 2018. Circadian Rhythm and Alzheimer’s Disease. Medical sciences (Basel, Switzerland) 6 , 52.
Hondius DC , van Nierop P , Li KW , Hoozemans JJM , van der Schors RC , van Haastert ES , van der Vies SM , Rozemuller AJM , Smit AB , 2016. Profiling the human hippocampal proteome at all pathologic stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 12 , 654–668.
Hudson R , Renard J , Norris C , Rushlow WJ , Laviolette SR , 2019. Cannabidiol Counteracts the Psychotropic Side-Effects of Δ−9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in the Ventral Hippocampus through Bidirectional Control of ERK1–2 Phosphorylation. J. Neurosci 39 , 8762–8777.31570536
Huhman KL , Albers HE , 1994. Neuropeptide Y microinjected into the suprachiasmatic region phase shifts circadian rhythms in constant darkness. Peptides 15 , 1475–1478.7700850
Johnson RF , Moore RY , Morin LP , 1989. Lateral geniculate lesions alter circadian activity rhythms in the hamster. Brain Res. Bull 22 , 411–422.2650808
Jorgensen JT , Hansen J , Westendorp RGJ , Nabe-Nielsen K , Stayner LT , Simonsen MK , Andersen ZJ , 2020. Shift work and incidence of dementia: A Danish Nurse Cohort study. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 16 , 1268–1279.
Josselyn SA , 2010. Continuing the search for the engram: examining the mechanism of fear memories. J. Psychiatry Neurosci 35 , 221–228.20569648
Kai K , Hashimoto M , Amano K , Tanaka H , Fukuhara R , Ikeda M , 2015. Relationship between eating disturbance and dementia severity in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 10 , e0133666.26266531
Karasek M , 2004. Melatonin, human aging, and age-related diseases. Exp. Gerontol 39 , 1723–1729.15582288
Kessel L , Siganos G , Jørgensen T , Larsen M , 2011. Sleep disturbances are related to decreased transmission of blue light to the retina caused by lens yellowing. Sleep 34 , 1215–1219.21886359
Kolla BP , Auger RR , 2011. Jet lag and shift work sleep disorders: how to help reset the internal clock. Cleve. Clin. J. Med 78 , 675–684.21968474
Korkmaz A , Topal T , Tan DX , Reiter RJ , 2009. Role of melatonin in metabolic regulation. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord 10 , 261–270.19911281
Kress GJ , Liao F , Dimitry J , Cedeno MR , FitzGerald GA , Holtzman DM , Musiek ES , 2018. Regulation of amyloid-β dynamics and pathology by the circadian clock. J. Exp. Med 215 , 1059–1068.29382695
Kriegsfeld LJ , Leak RK , Yackulic CB , LeSauter J , Silver R , 2004. Organization of suprachiasmatic nucleus projections in Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus): an anterograde and retrograde analysis. J. Comp. Neurol 468 , 361–379.14681931
Kumar D , Sharma A , Sharma L , 2020. A Comprehensive Review of Alzheimer’s Association with Related Proteins: Pathological Role and Therapeutic Significance. Curr. Neuropharmacol 18 , 674–695.32172687
Kwak YT , 2006. Quantitative EEG findings in different stages of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Clin. Neurophysiol 23 , 456–461.17016157
Lall GS , Biello SM , 2003. Attenuation of circadian light induced phase advances and delays by neuropeptide Y and a neuropeptide Y Y1/Y5 receptor agonist. Neuroscience 119 , 611–618.12770573
Lamia KA , Papp SJ , Yu RT , Barish GD , Uhlenhaut NH , Jonker JW , Downes M , Evans RM , 2011. Cryptochromes mediate rhythmic repression of the glucocorticoid receptor. Nature 480 , 552–556.22170608
Lee C , Etchegaray JP , Cagampang FR , Loudon AS , Reppert SM , 2001. Posttranslational mechanisms regulate the mammalian circadian clock. Cell 107 , 855–867.11779462
Leliavski A , Shostak A , Husse J , Oster H , 2014. Impaired glucocorticoid production and response to stress in Arntl-deficient male mice. Endocrinology 155 , 133–142.24189141
Leng Y , Musiek ES , Hu K , Cappuccio FP , Yaffe K , 2019. Association between circadian rhythms and neurodegenerative diseases. Lancet Neurol 18 , 307–318.30784558
Leproult R , Copinschi G , Buxton O , Van Cauter E , 1997. Sleep loss results in an elevation of cortisol levels the next evening. Sleep 20 , 865–870.9415946
Lu HC , Mackie K , 2016. An Introduction to the Endogenous Cannabinoid System. Biol. Psychiatry 79 , 516–525.26698193
Lu Q , Straiker A , Lu Q , Maguire G , 2000. Expression of CB2 cannabinoid receptor mRNA in adult rat retina. Vis. Neurosci 17 , 91–95.10750830
Lunardi P , de Souza LW , dos Santos B , Popik B , de Oliveira Alvares L , 2020. Effect of the Endocannabinoid System in Memory Updating and Forgetting. Neuroscience 444 , 33–42.32739508
Lydic R , McCarley RW , Hobson JA , 1984. Forced activity alters sleep cycle periodicity and dorsal raphe discharge rhythm. Am. J. Physiol 247 , R135–145.6331207
Maccarrone M , Totaro A , Leuti A , Giacovazzo G , Scipioni L , Mango D , Coccurello R , Nisticò R , Oddi S , 2018. Early alteration of distribution and activity of hippocampal type-1 cannabinoid receptor in Alzheimer’s disease-like mice overexpressing the human mutant amyloid precursor protein. Pharmacol. Res 130 , 366–373.29454025
Martín-Moreno AM , Brera B , Spuch C , Carro E , García-García L , Delgado M , Pozo MA , Innamorato NG , Cuadrado A , de Ceballos ML , 2012. Prolonged oral cannabinoid administration prevents neuroinflammation, lowers β-amyloid levels and improves cognitive performance in Tg APP 2576 mice. J. Neuroinflammation 9 , 8.22248049
Martin RS , Secchi RL , Sung E , Lemaire M , Bonhaus DW , Hedley LR , Lowe DA , 2003. Effects of cannabinoid receptor ligands on psychosis-relevant behavior models in the rat. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 165 , 128–135.12404071
Matsuda LA , Lolait SJ , Brownstein MJ , Young AC , Bonner TI , 1990. Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. Nature 346 , 561–564.2165569
McCleery J , Cohen DA , Sharpley AL , 2016. Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in dementia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev 11 , Cd009178.27851868
Medina-Vera D , Rosell-Valle C , López-Gambero AJ , Navarro JA , Zambrana-Infantes EN , Rivera P , Santín LJ , Suarez J , Rodríguez de Fonseca F , 2020. Imbalance of Endocannabinoid/Lysophosphatidylinositol Receptors Marks the Severity of Alzheimer’s Disease in a Preclinical Model: A Therapeutic Opportunity. Biology (Basel) 9 .
Mendiguren A , Pineda J , 2009. Effect of the CB(1) receptor antagonists rimonabant and AM251 on the firing rate of dorsal raphe nucleus neurons in rat brain slices. Br. J. Pharmacol 158 , 1579–1587.19845674
Mintz EM , Marvel CL , Gillespie CF , Price KM , Albers HE , 1999. Activation of NMDA receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus produces light-like phase shifts of the circadian clock in vivo. J. Neurosci 19 , 5124–5130.10366645
Mizoro Y , Yamaguchi Y , Kitazawa R , Yamada H , Matsuo M , Fustin JM , Doi M , Okamura H , 2010. Activation of AMPA receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus phase-shifts the mouse circadian clock in vivo and in vitro. PLoS One 5 , e10951.20532181
Moore RY , Card JP , 1994. Intergeniculate leaflet: an anatomically and functionally distinct subdivision of the lateral geniculate complex. J. Comp. Neurol 344 , 403–430.8063960
Moore RY , Speh JC , 1993. GABA is the principal neurotransmitter of the circadian system. Neurosci. Lett 150 , 112–116.8097023
Morales P , Reggio PH , 2017. An Update on Non-CB(1), Non-CB(2) Cannabinoid Related G-Protein-Coupled Receptors. Cannabis and cannabinoid research 2 , 265–273.29098189
Morin LP , Blanchard J , 1995. Organization of the hamster intergeniculate leaflet: NPY and ENK projections to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, intergeniculate leaflet and posterior limitans nucleus. Vis. Neurosci 12 , 57–67.7536441
Morin LP , Blanchard JH , 2001. Neuromodulator content of hamster intergeniculate leaflet neurons and their projection to the suprachiasmatic nucleus or visual midbrain. J. Comp. Neurol 437 , 79–90.11477598
Morris CJ , Yang JN , Garcia JI , Myers S , Bozzi I , Wang W , Buxton OM , Shea SA , Scheer FA , 2015. Endogenous circadian system and circadian misalignment impact glucose tolerance via separate mechanisms in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 112 , E2225–2234.25870289
Munro S , Thomas KL , Abu-Shaar M , 1993. Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids. Nature 365 , 61–65.7689702
Musiek ES , 2017. Circadian Rhythms in AD pathogenesis: A Critical Appraisal. Current Sleep Medicine Reports 3 , 85–92.29308355
Nedaei SE , Rezayof A , Pourmotabbed A , Nasehi M , Zarrindast M-R , 2016. Activation of endocannabinoid system in the rat basolateral amygdala improved scopolamine-induced memory consolidation impairment. Behav. Brain Res 311 , 183–191.27230394
Nishida S , Sato R , Murai I , Nakagawa S , 2003. Effect of pinealectomy on plasma levels of insulin and leptin and on hepatic lipids in type 2 diabetic rats. J. Pineal Res 35 , 251–256.14521630
Ohayon MM , Carskadon MA , Guilleminault C , Vitiello MV , 2004. Meta-analysis of quantitative sleep parameters from childhood to old age in healthy individuals: developing normative sleep values across the human lifespan. Sleep 27 , 1255–1273.15586779
Ono D , Honma KI , Yanagawa Y , Yamanaka A , Honma S , 2019. GABA in the suprachiasmatic nucleus refines circadian output rhythms in mice. Communications Biology 2 , 232.31263776
Ouanes S , Popp J , 2019. High Cortisol and the Risk of Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review of the Literature. Front. Aging Neurosci 11 , 43.30881301
Panda S , Hogenesch JB , Kay SA , 2002. Circadian rhythms from flies to human. Nature 417 , 329–335.12015613
Perron RR , Tyson RL , Sutherland GR , 2001. Delta9 -tetrahydrocannabinol increases brain temperature and inverts circadian rhythms. Neuroreport 12 , 3791–3794.11726796
Peter-Derex L , Yammine P , Bastuji H , Croisile B , 2015. Sleep and Alzheimer’s disease. Sleep Med. Rev 19 , 29–38.24846773
Phan TX , Malkani RG , 2018. Sleep and circadian rhythm disruption and stress intersect in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of stress 10 , 100133–100133.30937343
Pickard GE , Weber ET , Scott PA , Riberdy AF , Rea MA , 1996. 5HT1B receptor agonists inhibit light-induced phase shifts of behavioral circadian rhythms and expression of the immediate-early gene c-fos in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. J. Neurosci 16 , 8208–8220.8987845
Puskar P , Sengupta T , Sharma B , Nath SS , Mallick H , Akhtar N , 2021. Changes in sleep-wake cycle after microinjection of agonist and antagonist of endocannabinoid receptors at the medial septum of rats. Physiol. Behav 237 , 113448.33957148
Qu M , Zhou Z , Xu S , Chen C , Yu Z , Wang D , 2011. Mortalin overexpression attenuates beta-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells. Brain Res 1368 , 336–345.20974113
Ralph MR , Menaker M , 1985. Bicuculline blocks circadian phase delays but not advances. Brain Res 325 , 362–365.3978427
Ralph MR , Menaker M , 1989. GABA regulation of circadian responses to light. I. Involvement of GABAA-benzodiazepine and GABAB receptors. J. Neurosci 9 , 2858–2865.2549220
Ramírez BG , Blázquez C , Gómez del Pulgar T , Guzmán M , de Ceballos ML , 2005. Prevention of Alzheimer’s disease pathology by cannabinoids: neuroprotection mediated by blockade of microglial activation. J. Neurosci 25 , 1904–1913.15728830
Reppert S , Moore R , 1991. Suprachiasmatic nucleus: the mind’s clock Oxford University Press, USA.
Roediger HL , Zaromb FM , Goode MK , 2008. 1.02 - A Typology of Memory Terms, in: Byrne JH (Ed.), Learning and Memory: A Comprehensive Reference Academic Press, Oxford, pp. 11–24.
Sabia S , Fayosse A , Dumurgier J , van Hees VT , Paquet C , Sommerlad A , Kivimäki M , Dugravot A , Singh-Manoux A , 2021. Association of sleep duration in middle and old age with incidence of dementia. Nature Communications 12 , 2289.
Sanford AE , Castillo E , Gannon RL , 2008. Cannabinoids and hamster circadian activity rhythms. Brain Res 1222 , 141–148.18582849
Santhi N , Lazar AS , McCabe PJ , Lo JC , Groeger JA , Dijk DJ , 2016. Sex differences in the circadian regulation of sleep and waking cognition in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 113 , E2730–2739.27091961
Schmidt TM , Chen SK , Hattar S , 2011. Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells: many subtypes, diverse functions. Trends Neurosci 34 , 572–580.21816493
Selim M , Glass JD , Hauser UE , Rea MA , 1993. Serotonergic inhibition of light-induced fos protein expression and extracellular glutamate in the suprachiasmatic nuclei. Brain Res 621 , 181–188.7902183
Sharma A , Goyal R , 2020. Long-term exposure to constant light induces dementia, oxidative stress and promotes aggregation of sub-pathological Aβ(42) in Wistar rats. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav 192 , 172892.32142744
Sharma A , Mohammad A , Saini AK , Goyal R , 2021a. Neuroprotective Effects of Fluoxetine on Molecular Markers of Circadian Rhythm, Cognitive Deficits, Oxidative Damage, and Biomarkers of Alzheimer’s Disease-Like Pathology Induced under Chronic Constant Light Regime in Wistar Rats. ACS Chem. Neurosci 12 , 2233–2246.34029460
Sharma A , Sethi G , Tambuwala MM , Aljabali AAA , Chellappan DK , Dua K , Goyal R , 2021b. Circadian Rhythm Disruption and Alzheimer’s Disease: The Dynamics of a Vicious Cycle. Curr. Neuropharmacol 19 , 248–264.32348224
Shi L , Chen SJ , Ma MY , Bao YP , Han Y , Wang YM , Shi J , Vitiello MV , Lu L , 2018. Sleep disturbances increase the risk of dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med. Rev 40 , 4–16.28890168
Shokri-Kojori E , Wang GJ , Wiers CE , Demiral SB , Guo M , Kim SW , Lindgren E , Ramirez V , Zehra A , Freeman C , Miller G , Manza P , Srivastava T , De Santi S , Tomasi D , Benveniste H , Volkow ND , 2018. β-Amyloid accumulation in the human brain after one night of sleep deprivation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 115 , 4483–4488.29632177
Siller-Pérez C , Fuentes-Ibañez A , Sotelo-Barrera EL , Serafín N , Prado-Alcalá RA , Campolongo P , Roozendaal B , Quirarte GL , 2019. Glucocorticoid interactions with the dorsal striatal endocannabinoid system in regulating inhibitory avoidance memory. Psychoneuroendocrinology 99 , 97–103.30216767
Solas M , Francis PT , Franco R , Ramirez MJ , 2013. CB2 receptor and amyloid pathology in frontal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 805–808.22763024
Soscia SJ , Harrington ME , 2004. Neuropeptide Y attenuates NMDA-induced phase shifts in the SCN of NPY Y1 receptor knockout mice in vitro. Brain Res 1023 , 148–153.15364030
Soscia SJ , Harrington ME , 2005. Neuropeptide Y does not reset the circadian clock in NPY Y2−/− mice. Neurosci. Lett 373 , 175–178.15619538
Stempel AV , Stumpf A , Zhang HY , Ozdogan T , Pannasch U , Theis AK , Otte DM , Wojtalla A , Racz I , Ponomarenko A , Xi ZX , Zimmer A , Schmitz D , 2016. Cannabinoid Type 2 Receptors Mediate a Cell Type-Specific Plasticity in the Hippocampus. Neuron 90 , 795–809.27133464
Straiker AJ , Maguire G , Mackie K , Lindsey J , 1999. Localization of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the human anterior eye and retina. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 40 , 2442–2448.10476817
Takahashi JS , 2017. Transcriptional architecture of the mammalian circadian clock. Nature Reviews Genetics 18 , 164–179.
Tanigami H , Yoneda M , Tabata Y , Echigo R , Kikuchi Y , Yamazaki M , Kishimoto Y , Sakimura K , Kano M , Ohno-Shosaku T , 2019. Endocannabinoid Signaling from 2-Arachidonoylglycerol to CB1 Cannabinoid Receptor Facilitates Reward-based Learning of Motor Sequence. Neuroscience 421 , 1–16.31682822
Tarasoff-Conway JM , Carare RO , Osorio RS , Glodzik L , Butler T , Fieremans E , Axel L , Rusinek H , Nicholson C , Zlokovic BV , Frangione B , Blennow K , Ménard J , Zetterberg H , Wisniewski T , de Leon MJ , 2015. Clearance systems in the brain—implications for Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews Neurology 11 , 457–470.26195256
Ulugöl A , 2014. The endocannabinoid system as a potential therapeutic target for pain modulation. Balkan medical journal 31 , 115–120.25207181
Valenti M , Vigano D , Casico MG , Rubino T , Steardo L , Parolaro D , Di Marzo V , 2004. Differential diurnal variations of anandamide and 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol levels in rat brain. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 61 , 945–950.15095014
Van Sickle MD , Duncan M , Kingsley PJ , Mouihate A , Urbani P , Mackie K , Stella N , Makriyannis A , Piomelli D , Davison JS , Marnett LJ , Di Marzo V , Pittman QJ , Patel KD , Sharkey KA , 2005. Identification and functional characterization of brainstem cannabinoid CB2 receptors. Science 310 , 329–332.16224028
Vaughn LK , Denning G , Stuhr KL , de Wit H , Hill MN , Hillard CJ , 2010. Endocannabinoid signalling: has it got rhythm? Br. J. Pharmacol 160 , 530–543.20590563
Verma R , Hoda F , Arshad M , Iqubal A , Siddiqui AN , Khan MA , Haque SE , Akhtar M , Najmi AK , 2021. Cannabis, a Miracle Drug with Polyvalent Therapeutic Utility: Preclinical and Clinical-Based Evidence. Medical Cannabis and Cannabinoids 4 , 43–60.34676349
Vincent B , 2018. Protective roles of melatonin against the amyloid-dependent development of Alzheimer’s disease: A critical review. Pharmacol. Res 134 , 223–237.29981776
Volicer L , Harper DG , Manning BC , Goldstein R , Satlin A , 2001. Sundowning and Circadian Rhythms in Alzheimer’s Disease. Am. J. Psychiatry 158 , 704–711.11329390
Voogel AJ , Koopman MG , Hart AA , van Montfrans GA , Arisz L , 2001. Circadian rhythms in systemic hemodynamics and renal function in healthy subjects and patients with nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int 59 , 1873–1880.11318959
Walker WH , Walton JC , DeVries AC , Nelson RJ , 2020. Circadian rhythm disruption and mental health. Translational Psychiatry 10 , 28.32066704
Welsh DK , Takahashi JS , Kay SA , 2010. Suprachiasmatic nucleus: cell autonomy and network properties. Annu. Rev. Physiol 72 , 551–577.20148688
Wu H , Dunnett S , Ho YS , Chang RC , 2019. The role of sleep deprivation and circadian rhythm disruption as risk factors of Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neuroendocrinol 54 , 100764.31102663
Yan L , Karatsoreos I , Lesauter J , Welsh DK , Kay S , Foley D , Silver R , 2007. Exploring spatiotemporal organization of SCN circuits. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol 72 , 527–541.18419312
Yannielli PC , Brewer JM , Harrington ME , 2004. Blockade of the NPY Y5 receptor potentiates circadian responses to light: complementary in vivo and in vitro studies. Eur. J. Neurosci 19 , 891–897.15009136
Yannielli PC , Harrington ME , 2001. The neuropeptide Y Y5 receptor mediates the blockade of “photic-like” NMDA-induced phase shifts in the golden hamster. J. Neurosci 21 , 5367–5373.11438613
Yu JT , Xu W , Tan CC , Andrieu S , Suckling J , Evangelou E , Pan A , Zhang C , Jia J , Feng L , Kua EH , Wang YJ , Wang HF , Tan MS , Li JQ , Hou XH , Wan Y , Tan L , Mok V , Tan L , Dong Q , Touchon J , Gauthier S , Aisen PS , Vellas B , 2020. Evidence-based prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of 243 observational prospective studies and 153 randomised controlled trials. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 91 , 1201–1209.32690803
Zheng B , Tal R , Yang Z , Middleton L , Udeh-Momoh C , 2020. Cortisol hypersecretion and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing Research Reviews 64 , 101171.32971258
Zhu L , Zee PC , 2012. Circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Neurol. Clin 30 , 1167–1191.23099133
Zimmet P , Alberti K , Stern N , Bilu C , El-Osta A , Einat H , Kronfeld-Schor N , 2019. The Circadian Syndrome: is the Metabolic Syndrome and much more! J. Intern. Med 286 , 181–191.31081577
Zisapel N , 2018. New perspectives on the role of melatonin in human sleep, circadian rhythms and their regulation. Br. J. Pharmacol 175 , 3190–3199.29318587
Zou S , Kumar U , 2018. Cannabinoid Receptors and the Endocannabinoid System: Signaling and Function in the Central Nervous System. Int. J. Mol. Sci 19 .
