LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101525337
37346
ACS Chem Neurosci
ACS Chem Neurosci
ACS chemical neuroscience
1948-7193

31545596
8130500
10.1021/acschemneuro.9b00297
NIHMS1695848
Article
Hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole compounds as potential therapeutics for Alzheimer Disease
Doens Deborah 12
Valdés-Tresanco Mario E. 3§
Vasquez Velmarini 25
Carreira Maria Beatriz 4
De La Guardia Yila 1
Stephens David E. 6
Nguyen Viet D. 6
Nguyen Vu T. 6
Gu Jianhua 7
Hegde Muralidhar 5
Larionov Oleg V. 6
Valiente Pedro A. 3¶
Lleonart Ricardo 1
Fernández Patricia L. 1*
1 Centro de Biología Celular y Molecular de Enfermedades, Instituto de Investigaciones Científicas y Servicios de Alta Tecnología (INDICASAT-AIP). City of Knowledge Edif #208, Panama
2 Department of Biotechnology, Acharya Nagarjuna University, Nagarjuna Nagar, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, 522510, India
3 Centro de Estudios de Proteínas, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de La Habana. Calle 25 No. 455, Vedado, La Habana, Cuba
4 Centro de Neurociencias, INDICASAT-AIP. City of Knowledge Edif #208, Panama
5 Department of Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA
6 Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at San Antonio. One UTSA Circle, San Antonio, Texas 78249, USA
7 AFM SEM Core, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA
* Corresponding Author pllanes@indicasat.org.pa
Author Contributions

The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. / All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

§ Present Addresses

Centre for Molecular Simulations and Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada

¶ Donnelly Centre for Cellular &amp; Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto 160 College St, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada

30 4 2021
07 10 2019
16 10 2019
18 5 2021
10 10 42504263
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia among the elderly and has become a leading public health concern worldwide. It represents a huge economic and psychological burden to caregivers and families. The presence of extracellular amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques is one of the hallmarks of this neurodegenerative disorder. Amyloid plaques are comprised of aggregates of Aβ peptides, mainly Aβ42, originated by the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Aβ is a crucial target for the treatment of AD, but to date, no effective treatment for the clearance of Aβ has been found. We have identified four new hexahydropyrroloindoles (HPI) synthetic compounds that are able to inhibit the aggregation of Aβ42 and/or disaggregate the fibril. Docking experiments suggest that the non-polar component of the interaction of compounds with Aβ42 contributes favorably to the binding free energy of each complex. Molecular dynamics simulations suggested fibril disaggregating activity of compounds 1 via interaction with hydrophobic moieties of the fibril. Consistently, compounds 1 and 2 were able to mitigate Aβ42 fibrils induced death in rat pheochromocytoma cells (PC 12). One of the compounds reduces the formation of Aβ aggregates in vivo and the paralysis associated with Aβ toxicity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Our study thus augments efforts for the identification and characterization of new agents that may help stop or delay the progression of AD.

Alzheimer’s disease
HPI compounds
Amyloid beta
aggregation

INTRODUCTION

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the major cause of dementia in the elderly distinguished by progressive episodes of memory loss and language and reasoning problems that culminate in severe cognitive decline and death. According to current estimates, 46.8 million people worldwide suffer from dementia, representing a cost of around 818 billion dollars 1.

Abnormal accumulation of extracellular amyloid β (Aβ) into plaques is one of the hallmarks of the disease 2, 3. Amyloid plaques are composed of Aβ peptides, ranging from 36 to 42 amino acids in length, originated by the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP), a membrane protein involved in cell adhesion, metal homeostasis and synaptic plasticity 4, 5. APP can be processed by two alternative pathways, which can either generate or exclude the formation of toxic Aβ species 6. For the generation of toxic Aβ, APP is first cleaved by β-secretase (BACE1) between the 10 and 11 amino acid of the protein, forming an N-terminal peptide 7. The resulting peptide is then cleaved by the ɣ-secretase complex forming a heterogeneous C-terminus 8. These cleavage events produce Aβ40 and Aβ42 that are prone to self-aggregation, forming clumps of insoluble and toxic species, i.e., dimers and oligomers that culminate in the generation of extracellular deposits of fibrillar Aβ.

The observation of senile plaques in the brain of AD patients and the discovery of Aβ peptide as the main component of these plaques led to the postulation of the amyloid cascade hypothesis 9-11. The amyloid hypothesis posits that the accumulation of Aβ is the initial event that triggers the disease. Hence, the accumulation of Aβ has been considered a major target for the search of therapeutics for AD.

Several studies have been oriented to the search for drugs that prevent the formation of these plaques by inhibiting either the production of Aβ or the aggregation of this protein and also its disaggregation. These studies resulted in the identification of inhibitors of β- and γ-secretases 12-16, inhibitors of Aβ aggregation 17-19 and passive and active immunizations to eliminate Aβ 20-23 Some of these molecules reached phase II and III of clinical trials. However, so far none of these approaches have allowed obtaining a drug that effectively stops or slows down the development of the disease. Among the elements given to explain the failure of these molecules, are the stage of disease in the patients involved in the studies, their immunological status, the side effects, that Aβ species formed in the brain during AD pathogenesis differs from patient to patient, and change with age. Moreover, the poor reproducibility of in vitro experiments with Aβ due to the stochastic feature of the aggregation process, the mixed oligomer populations in Aβ samples, the low affinity of compounds for the monomer or the lack of appropriate animal models 24 makes more complex the scenario for drug development. It might be that the treatment of AD will require the use of several drugs for multiple targets, including Aβ, or mix of molecules, targeting the variety of species forms during the Aβ aggregation process 25. Furthermore, the mechanisms underlying the aggregation process and the role of all the Aβ species formed during this process are not well understood. Hence, the identification of new potential molecules, with effect on Aβ fibril formation, not only continue being of great relevance for the search of new agents for AD treatments but also would allow the better understanding of aggregation process.

The hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole (HPI) unit is a common structural motif among secondary metabolites of terrestrial and marine origin. Over 1000 secondary metabolites share the HPI unit, and many of them show a variety of promising biological activities 26. For example, physostigmine is a reversible cholinesterase inhibitor that has been used to treat myasthenia gravis, glaucoma, delayed gastric emptying, anticholinergic poisoning, and orthostatic hypotension. It was also used in the early stages of AD before it was replaced with safer acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 27. Similarly, both enantiomers of the structurally related alkaloid phenserine were shown to produce neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects via protein kinase C (PKC) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways 28. As part of our work on the chemistry of HPI compounds 29, we were interested in evaluating the neuroprotective properties of our synthetic HPI compounds.

In this study have identified four hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole derivatives as modulators of Aβ aggregation. Time-course experiments have shown the inhibitory capacity of these compounds on the aggregation of Aβ. Modeling studies have predicted that the compounds interact with the Aβ peptide, stabilizing the peptide structure and slowing down the formation of high molecular weight aggregates. Two of those compounds exhibit disaggregation effect, as observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). This effect seems to be dependent on the insertion of the compounds into the hydrophobic core of the fibril and its destabilization by interacting with hydrophobic moieties. These compounds were able to rescue cells from the death induced by Aβ. Among the inhibitors of aggregation identified, one of them prevents the formation of Aβ aggregates and the resulting paralysis in a model of Aβ-mediated toxicity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Taken together, our findings suggest that these compounds may serve as potential candidates in the search of new drugs for reducing Aβ toxicity in AD.

RESULTS

Hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole compounds presented anti-aggregation capacity

We first examined the effect of 16 compounds that share the hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole motif, on the aggregation of Aβ42 at a time point of 48 hours. The effect of the compounds was first evaluated at a concentration of 30 μM. Compounds with higher than 30 % inhibition activity were considered hits and were tested in four-point dose-response experiments. Four compounds, representing 25 % of the total number of initial compounds screened, exhibited a capacity to inhibit Aβ42 aggregation (Tables 1 and S1). The IC50 value for these compounds ranged from 0.76 to 3.74 μM (Table 1 and Figure S1).

Compounds were then incubated with Aβ42 and changes in ThT fluorescence were analyzed at several time points. Aggregation of Aβ42 was observed by an increment of the fluorescence of ThT, with a peak after 30 minutes (Figure 1A). After 50 minutes a slight reduction in the fluorescence of ThT was observed that was followed by an apparent stabilization. Incubation of Aβ in the presence of compounds reduced the ThT fluorescence, thus suggesting that these compounds inhibit Aβ aggregation (Figure 1A). The inhibition of Aβ42 aggregation induced by these compounds was even observed after a longer incubation time (48 hours) (Figure 1B).

Despite ThT assay being the most commonly employed method to identify potential inhibitors of aggregation, it may detect false positives 30, 31. In order to confirm the effect of these compounds on the fibrillation of Aβ, we used AFM to visualize the resulting aggregates. Aβ was incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence of compounds 1, 2, 3 and 4 and the samples were analyzed by AFM. Under these conditions, Aβ peptides produced abundant fibrils in the expected size and shape range consistent with previous studies 32 (Figure 1C). Except for compound 2, all the compounds appeared to reduce the abundance of fibrils (Figure 1C). These results suggest that under these experimental conditions, compound 2 appears not to interfere with the aggregation of Aβ. Morin, the drug used as a positive control 30 completely abrogated the formation of Aβ fibrils (Figure S2).

Hydrophobic contacts of HPIs with the monomeric form of Aβ42 appears to play a critical role in preventing aggregation

The monomeric free Aβ42(m) has a tendency to collapse adopting a more compact structure with an average Rg of 0.9 ± 0.10 nm during the MD simulations (Figure S3). Enhanced hydrophobic contacts throughout the simulation suggested a significant role of these interactions on driving the structural conversion of Aβ42(m) (Figure S3). The secondary structure analysis showed random extended chains as predominant structures during the MD simulations, with a low content of α-helical or β-sheet structure (Table S2). The representative structure of the most populated cluster of the MD simulations was selected as receptor for docking predictions.

The three compounds identified as active (1, 3 and 4) in the in vitro assays, were selected for modeling their anti-aggregation activities. We performed molecular docking simulations to investigate the association of all the putative enantiomers with Aβ42(m). Although, all HPI compounds were prepared as racemic mixtures of cis-fused isomers, for completeness we also included trans-fused stereoisomers in our docking experiments. In general, all the compounds established major interactions with Aβ42(m) through van der Waals contacts with non-polar residues. This is well supported by the favorable contribution of the non-polar component (Vvdw in Figure S4) of the binding free energy. Additionally, we observed almost no polar contacts, which may justify the weak contribution of the polar component of the binding free energy for all the inhibitors (Vestat and Vhb in Figure S4).

In particular, our models predicted that compound 1 interacted with Aβ42(m) through hydrophobic contacts without the formation of any hydrogen bond (Figure 2A). According to our models, the most populated clusters were observed for configurations RR (95/100) and RS (91/100) (Figure S4). The representative structures of those clusters were almost identical both energetically and structurally (Figure S4). Notably, the interaction of the chlorine atom with residues belonging to NT and CHC regions was observed in all the configurations (Figures 2 and S4). Compound 3 interacted with Aβ42(m) predominantly via hydrophobic contacts, although one hydrogen bond was also detected (Figure 2B). We observed the most populated clusters of 3 for configurations RS (65/100) and RR (56/100) (Figure S4). Two opposite poses were predicted for those configurations. This result differs from the one observed for compound 1 (Figure S4). Finally, for compound 4, the most populated clusters were observed for RR (52/100) and RS (55/100) configurations (Figure S4). The representative poses of both clusters were quite similar (Figure S4). Of relevance, the interaction of the naphthalene group with residues belonging to NT, CHC and FL regions was observed in all the configurations (Figures 2C and S4).

Remarkably, the representative pose of each one of these ligands comes from a cluster containing 50 % or more of the predicted poses (Figure S4). However, docking results for the “non-active” compound S9 were not so consistent compared to the active ones, in spite of the high structural similarity with compound 1. There was no cluster containing more than 50% of the predicted poses (Figure S5). On the other hand, MD simulations of the predicted complexes showed that active compound (1, 3, and 4) are able to explore different configurations, although they all remained bound to Aβ42 peptide throughout all the simulation. However, the non-active compound S9 unbinds to the Aß42 monomer after 75 ns (Figures S6 and S7).

Compounds 1 and 2 rescue PC-12 cells from the death induced by Aβ42

It has been extensively described that Aβ fibrils induce neuronal death in vivo and in vitro 33-35. Destruction of amyloid fibrils by using different approaches has been shown to partially restore memory loss in models of AD 12, 36. We, therefore, analyzed if the compounds identified here were able to rescue cells from Aβ42 -induced death. We incubated PC-12 cells for 24 hours in the presence of Aβ42 in the form of peptide or fibrils, with or without compounds. Aβ significantly reduced the cell viability either as peptide or fibril (Figure 3A). Since the monomeric form of Aβ is not toxic for cells 37, we attribute the cell death observed in the presence of Aβ42 peptides to oligomeric species that might be formed during the incubation period. The toxic effect of oligomers on neurons has been demonstrated before 38, 39. Our results showed that compounds 1 and 2 but not 3 or 4, significantly rescued loss of cell viability in the presence of Aβ42 peptide (Figure 3A, left panel). Moreover, in the presence of Aβ fibrils only compound 2 was able to reduce cell toxicity (Figure 3A, right panel). In the absence of Aβ42, none of the compounds affected cell viability (Figure S8). Together, these findings suggest that compounds 1 and 2 may interfere with fibril formation and cell toxicity associated with Aβ42. As compound 2 does not affect amyloid β fibril formation it might be acting by a mechanism that involves Aβ disaggregation.

Compounds 1 and 2 disaggregate the Aβ42 fibril

Since we observed that compounds 1 and 2 rescued cells from the death induced by Aβ fibril and/or peptide, we then evaluated the disaggregation potential of these compounds. Aβ42 was incubated for 48 hours to form fibrils and then compounds were added. The samples were analyzed by AFM 12 and 24 hours after addition of the compounds. AFM images revealed a reduction in the amount of fibrils in the presence of both compounds (Figure 3B). The effect of compound 1 was more pronounced at 24 hours. Although compound 2 does not inhibit the aggregation of Aβ, it efficiently disrupted the preformed fibrils.

Compound 1 partially destabilizes Aβ42 fibril by its insertion into the hydrophobic core

To gain mechanistic insight on fibril disaggregation activity of the two compounds (1 and 2), we employed a combined docking/MD simulations approach. Since these compounds share a similar scaffold, with ~82 % of similarity (Figure S9), we detailed the interactions with only one of them, compound 1. Compound 1 revealed a similar interaction pattern with Aβ42(m) for the configurations within the largest clusters (Figure S6).

An ensemble of Aβ42(f) structures was generated using a 100 ns MD simulation to study the disaggregating effect of this compound. Based on cluster analysis, we found that Aβ42(f) sampled 7 different clusters. Notably, MD structures kept the same structural ordering of the experimental structure (Figure S10).

The first cluster was the most populated containing around 85 % of the structures. Subsequently, we predicted the structure of the Aβ42(f):4(1) complex following a successive molecular docking approach. This protocol saved computational time by avoiding undesirable spurious effects generated from compound-compound interactions. To validate the stability of the predicted binding modes, we performed an 850 ns MD simulation of the Aβ42(f):4(1) complex. Three different conformational states of the Aβ42(f), denoted as states 1-3, were identified based on the free energy landscape reconstruction obtained using principal component analysis (Figure 4).

State 1 showed great stability in the binding modes of 1a, 1c, and 1d (Figure 4). The CT segment of chain A comprising residues 38-42 moved toward the center of Aβ42(f) and interacted with 1a and 1d. The binding mode of 1a involved partial penetration into the hydrophobic core of the fibril (Video SV1). The contact analysis revealed 1a interacting with the CHC, FL and CT regions of the Aβ42(f). An average contact map over 850 ns, showed the binding site mainly formed by the residues Phe19, Phe20, Asn27, Lys28, Gly29, Ala30, Ile31 and Ile32 of chain A. 1a also interacted with the residues: Phe19, Phe20, Asn27, Ala30 of chain B and Gly29 of chain C of Aβ42(f) (Figure S11). At the end of the simulation, 1c was relocated close to the CHC region of Aβ42(f) interacting with both 1b and 1d (Video SV1).

State 2 exhibited a stable interaction of both 1b and 1c with the NT segment (Figure 4). These compounds interacted with the residues: Tyr10, Val12, and His14, from chain A; Phe4 and His13 from chain B and Phe4 from chain C (Figure S11). However, the binding of 1b and 1c to the NT of the Aβ42(f) had little effect on the secondary structure content of the peptide (Figure S12). Meanwhile, 1a and 1d stabilized the CT region of the peptide. This interaction resulted in the formation and stabilization of a helical structure comprising residues 34-38 of chain A of the Aβ42(f). The secondary structure profile for the remaining residues of Aβ42(f):4(1) was similar to that observed in the simulation of free Aβ42(f), with random coil and β-strand as predominant elements (48 and 40 % respectively) (Figure S12).

Finally, state 3 revealed a group of peptide structures stabilized by interacting with 1a, 1b, and 1c (Figure 4). This pose differed from the initial model predicted by docking where 1d was located in the opposite face of the peptide (Video SV1). In state 3, the CT region of chain A was less ordered as a result of the interaction only with 1a.

In order to asses the validity of our results we conducted a similar in silico study by employing a different force field and a more complex system (18-mer of Aβ42). In that regard, we employed amber99SB-ildn force field 40 and the Aβ42 structure resolved by Colvin et al. (PDB ID: 5KK3) 41. The amber99SB-ildn force field contains an improved amino acid side-chain torsion potentials of the amber99SB force field 40. On the other hand, the Aβ42 structure resolved by Colvin et al. (PDB ID: 5KK3) has a very similar chemical-shift fingerprint and the structure of the highly ordered region (residues 15-42) is virtually identical to that of Wälti et al. 42. However, it constitutes an 18-mer which should be more stable than a 3-mer we used initially and close to the real structure of the Aβ42 fibril.

We followed exactly the same protocol we used previously to generate the complex between Aβ42 fibril and compound 1, but this time using an 18-mer and 8 molecules of compound 1 (Figure S13). In order to assess the stability of the predicted complex, we ran four 500 ns MD simulations with different initial velocities each time. The results from these simulations agreed with our previous observations using a simpler system. We observed partial insertion of compound 1 into the hydrophobic core of the fibril. Compound 1 interacted mostly with the CHC, FL and CT regions of the Aβ42 (Figure S14).

Compound 3 reduces paralysis induced by Aβ42 in C. elegans

To examine whether our compounds can effectively counteract the toxicity of Aβ fibrils in vivo we utilized a well-characterized transgenic C. elegans model that expresses human Aβ42 peptide. The CL1476 strain has been engineered to contain a temperature inducible Aβ transgene expressed in muscle cells resulting in gradual paralysis of the worm 43. The CL802 strain, which does not produce Aβ, is used as a transgenic control strain 43. This model allows paralysis to be scored under different treatment conditions to determine if they effectively reduce Aβ toxicity in C. elegans. To this effect, we cultured age-synchronized CL4176 and CL802 worms at the permissive temperature of 16 °C in the presence or absence of compounds 1, 2, 3 or 4. The production of Aβ peptide was induced by shifting worms to the non-permissive temperature of 25 °C, resulting in the expression of Aβ and the subsequent paralysis in CL4176, but not in CL802 44 (Figure 5A). We scored worms for the paralysis phenotype 30 hours post-induction. Worms that did not respond to gentle prodding with a platinum wire or only moved their head slightly were scored as paralyzed. We observed a marked reduction in the extent of paralysis in CL4176 worms treated with compound 3 compared to the vehicle (Figure 5A). However, no significant difference was observed in worms treated with 1, 2, or 4. Furthermore, we examined if worms treated with compound 3 exhibit a reduction in the formation of Aβ deposits compared to the vehicle. Live worms were stained with amyloid-specific X-34 dye and the numbers of stained Aβ deposits were quantified in the head region anterior to the pharyngeal bulb (Figure 5B and C). We found that the mean number of aggregates in CL4276 worms treated with 3 was significantly reduced compared with worms fed vehicle (Figures 5B and C). These results suggest that compound 3 reduces the formation of toxic Aβ deposits in C. elegans.

DISCUSSION

Multiple approaches have been employed to identify drugs that modulate the formation of Aβ plaques by inhibiting either the production or aggregation of Aβ, and even its disaggregation 12, 13, 15, 16, 20-23, 45. However, so far, no drug has been identified that effectively stops or delays the development of the disease. Therefore, the search for new agents that inhibit amyloid aggregation or contribute to its disaggregation continues to be a field of intense study. In this work, we have identified four compounds containing the HPI unit (1-4) that inhibit the aggregation of Aβ or disaggregate the fibril. Molecular dynamics experiments predicted a key role of van der Waals interactions in the anti-aggregation and disaggregation capacity of these compounds. Compounds 1 and 2 rescued mammalian cells from toxicity induced by Aβ. In vivo studies using a C. elegans model of Aβ42-mediated paralysis showed that compound 3 inhibits worm paralysis by a mechanism that involved the reduction of aggregate formation.

It is known that some small molecules may interfere with the fluorescence signal emitted by ThT upon binding to amyloid fibril. This interference may be due to several causes, including competitive inhibition of the ThT binding to the fibril, and quenching due to spectral overlap of the compounds or their oxidation products 31, 46-48. Therefore, we used AFM, a ThT independent technique, to confirm the results observed in the time course ThT assay. We cannot rule out that such ThT interference may be occurring to some extent in some of our compounds, particularly in compound 2, where there was some discrepancy between the results of the ThT assay and those of the AFM 31, 46-48.

Here we combined docking and MD simulations for studying anti-aggregation and disaggregation capacity of some HPI derivatives. Combined approaches seem to be the way forward in shedding light on interactions that can be exploited for the development of effective drugs. First, a diverse set of Aβ42(m) structures was generated through MD simulations. Such a procedure was conducted twice, starting from different velocities. This approach was suggested previously since it would improve statistical reliability and allow for a more thorough evaluation of convergence within and across simulations 49.

It should be recalled that classical MD force fields have limitations that must be considered when interpreting the results we obtain from them. Most characterizations of the Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides remain highly divergent because of differences in simulation conditions, the extent of sampling, or trajectory analysis 50. In that regard, the comparison between outcomes from different force fields and with experimental findings is critical in order to validate the results. Although the current force fields perform well for folded proteins, they tend to produce unrealistic dimensions and poor agreement with residual secondary structure propensities for disordered proteins 50-52.

Over the course of the simulations, we observed Aβ42(m) collapsing over time to form structures with the expected secondary structure distribution 53, 54. Also, the calculated Rg of Aβ42(m) agreed well with experimental findings 55. Since Aβ42(m) adopted a compact structure, we predicted that compounds 1, 3 and 4 interact with several regions of Aβ42(m) at the same time. The presence of a large number of hydrophobic moieties in these compounds results in a favorable non-polar interaction, thus being the major driving force for the interaction of compounds with Aβ42(m). Previous works identified the key role of non-polar groups for the inhibitor interaction with the Aβ42(m) 56, 57. The polar component had a discrete contribution since no optimal polar interactions were detected. Therefore, the inclusion of new polar groups and optimization of hydrogen bonds with the polar residues within the Aβ42(m) may improve the activity of these compounds.

Although molecular docking can be a good technique for unraveling the driving force behind the anti-aggregating activity, definitively it’s challenging when trying to discriminate among “active” and “non-active” compounds in this kind of system (i.e. lack of a well-defined pocket and hydrophobic interactions as predominant). For that reason, the use of MD simulations is required in order to assess the stability of the predicted complexes. Our results about the “non-active” compound S9 are in agreement with what we expected for a less active compound. On the other hand, combined docking/MD simulation results showed that active compounds could interact with Aβ42(m) in other ways different to those predicted by docking alone.

According to our models, we observed the same interaction pattern for each compound, independently of the selected configurations. This fact, together with the key role of van der Waals interactions and a lack of defined pockets in Aβ42(m), suggest that the configurations of the chiral centers are not critical for the interaction of these compounds with Aβ42(m).

We also explored in silico the disaggregating effect of 1 over Aβ42(f). Molecular docking studies suggested that compound 1 may interact with multiple zones of Aβ42(f), simultaneously. This compound contains two hydrophobic moieties separated by a linker, which allowed its binding to the interface of specific regions of Aβ42(f). This chemical scaffold has been described for typical inhibitors of the aggregation of amyloid beta peptides such as congo red, chrysamine G and Curcumin 58, 59. Our results predicted that compound 1 is able to disrupt the hydrophobic core of the Aβ42(f). This observation was confirmed by employing two different Aβ42(f) compositions and force fields in our MD simulations. Although the disaggregation of the trimer was not fully observed across the simulation, compound 1a interacted strongly with both polar (Asn27 and Lys28) and non-polar (Phe19, Phe20, Ala30, Ile32) residues of chain A. These regions have been used as target elements when developing inhibitors, since they are the b-strand-forming self-recognition elements (SREs) 59. Also, Chebaro et al. showed that curcumin, EGCG, 2002-H20, resveratrol, and NQTrp drugs often bind to the side chains of Phe19/Phe20 60.

These interactions allowed a stable binding and partial insertion into the core of the fibril. This behavior has been described for morin, a well-known Aβ42(f) destabilizer 56. Remarkably, the Aβ42(f) structure used previously by Lemkul and Bevan (PDB ID: 2BEG) 61, has a small opening which could favor the partial disruption process. Our results are encouraging because such an opening was missing in the initial structure (PDB ID: 2NAO) 42, used in the MD simulation. This structure contains a higher content of buried hydrophobic side chains and large hydrogen bond network than that used by Lemkul and Bevan 56.

Even so, a plausible mechanism to explain the disaggregating effect of compound 1 seems to be the insertion into the hydrophobic core of the fibril and further destabilization by interacting with hydrophobic moieties. A similar mechanism has been proposed for the flavonoid morin in a previous work 56. In that work, pulling simulations were applied to a molecule of morin to place it into a small, solvent-accessible cavity present in the initial NMR structure. Once morin enters the fibril, it was able to establish favorable polar interactions in this region of Aβ42 while simultaneously packing against the hydrophobic moieties. In the context of morin, Lemkul and Bevan 56 did not observe interactions with phenylalanine dyad (Phe19 and Phe20) in the H14QKLVFF20 sequence. However, aromatic interactions involving the Phe19-Phe20 dyad could lead to structural destabilization of Aβ42, since both residues are inserted into the hydrophobic core. In our study, we observed a strong interaction of 1a with these residues, which is in agreement with the proposed mechanism. Nevertheless, further studies including enhanced sampling techniques and longer simulations will be needed to study the disaggregating effects of compounds 1 and 2.

There are several pieces of evidence that point to the cytotoxic effects of amyloid β on neurons, especially Aβ42, which contribute to the pathogenesis of AD. Interaction of Aβ oligomers and fibrils with neuronal membranes promotes ion influx and oxidative stress that trigger cellular damage 38, 62-65. Likewise, this interaction favors the processing of APP and Aβ aggregation, generating a cycle of toxicity 64, 66. In addition, the larger Aβ aggregates formed at late stages of the process are recognized by a variety of receptors, expressed in microglia and astrocytes, that mediate its clearance, but also generate an inflammatory response with the consequent production of inflammatory mediators, which have multiple different neurotoxic effects 25, 67. All these effects attributed to Aβ species formed during the aggregation process, eventually culminate in synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death. We, therefore, evaluated if the HPI compounds were able to rescue PC-12 cells from death induced by Aβ. While compound 1 only prevented the death induced by Aβ peptides, compound 2 rescued cells from death induced by both, peptides and fibrils. Since Aβ42 rapidly aggregates in aqueous solution, it is probable that small oligomers and fibrils can be formed in the culture medium during the incubation period, so it is possible that only the compounds that present a disaggregation effect are the ones preventing cellular death. The accelerated rate of Aβ aggregation under these experimental conditions could mask the effect of the compounds that inhibit aggregate formation such as compounds 3 and 4.

We then evaluated these molecules in an in vivo model of Aβ-mediated toxicity in C. elegans. While all four compounds showed anti-aggregation activity in vitro, only compound 3 significantly reduced the paralysis of the worms by preventing the formation of Aβ aggregates. Although C. elegans is a convenient and often used model for the screening of drugs for a variety of conditions 68, 69, it also presents some inherent limitations that may affect the sensitivity to detect this biological activity. These include the difficulty to control the amount of compound ingested, and the possibility of its processing by the feeding bacteria, both of which may affect the bioavailability of the active molecule in the nematode.

Several studies have evidenced that the in vitro fibrils formation occurs following steps or pathways that involve the generation of toxic molecular mediators including small oligomers and fibrils 70, 71. Since several amyloid species produced at different steps of this process may have very different toxicities for cells and ultimately for the whole organism, the inhibition of particular steps in the fibrillation process may result in different effects 72, 73. For this reason, it is plausible that the inhibition of the production of specific species, such as the oligomers, would be therapeutically more promising than a general inhibition of the production of fibrils 72. Although the exact identity of the toxic Aβ species in the C. elegans model is not known, it is suggested that oligomers form and correlate with toxicity 74, resembling the situation found in humans 75. In fact, compounds that increase Aβ aggregation rates are capable of reducing aggregates toxicity in worms by consuming oligomers to form fibrils 76. Many effective compounds have been also described as inhibitors of Aβ aggregation at different levels 77-81. We have demonstrated here that compounds 1, 3 and 4 inhibit the aggregation of Aβ and the molecular docking/simulations studies have suggested that these compounds interact with the monomers. However, we do not know in which step of the aggregation process, nucleation, elongation or surface-catalyzed nucleation, this inhibition is taking place. In addition to the issue of sensitivity of the C. elegans model, it is also possible that these compounds may be acting at different levels of the aggregation process, in such a way that only compound 3 achieves the endpoint of paralysis reduction in this animal model. In this regard, further studies are necessary to define the molecular mechanisms of the inhibitory activity of these compounds, both in vitro and in vivo. We can not rule out the possibility that the lack of biological effect of compound 4 is due to a less solubility (estimated Log D=5.87) compared to the rest of the compounds.

The aggregation process of Aβ is extremely complex, and the identification of molecules that inhibit the mechanisms underlying this process is challenging. The inhibition of Aβ aggregation depends on multiple biophysical and biochemical features of the system including the chemical nature of the inhibitor and the strength of the molecular interactions between the inhibitor and the peptide, among others. The understanding of these mechanisms favors the identification of molecules that effectively affect the pathogenicity of Aβ aggregates in AD. We have identified herein four molecules that inhibit the aggregation of Aβ42 or disaggregate the fibril. The inhibitory effect of these molecules was evidenced both in vitro and in vivo. This study adds to the efforts for the search of new agents that contribute to stop or delay the progression of AD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Materials

Recombinant Aβ42 was purchased from rPeptide (Bogart, GA). Thioflavin T (ThT) was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). SensoLyte® Thioflavin T β-Amyloid (1 - 42) aggregation Kit purchased from Anaspec (Fremont, CA). Cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and Murine Aβ42 from GenScript (Piscataway, NJ). The mica slides were obtained from Ted Pella, Inc. (Redding, CA).

Compounds synthesis

Anhydrous dichloromethane was collected under argon from an LC Technologies solvent purification system. Acetonitrile was dried over 4 Å molecular sieves. Three Å molecular sieves were freshly dried at 100 °C and allowed to cool to room temperature under positive argon pressure before use. All chemicals were used as commercially available. Arenediazonium salts and all HPI compounds were prepared following the literature procedure 82. All reactions were conducted with continuous magnetic stirring under an atmosphere of argon in oven-dried glassware. Low-temperature experiments were conducted using a Neslab Cryotrol CB-80 cryostat. Reactions were monitored by TLC until deemed complete using silica gel-coated glass plates (Merck Kieselgel 60 F254) and neutral alumina plates. Plates were visualized under ultraviolet light (254 nm). Column chromatography was performed using CombiFlash Rf-200 (Teledyne-Isco) automated flash chromatography system. 1H, 13C, and 19F NMR spectra were recorded at 300 and 500 (1H), and 75.5 and 125 MHz (13C), 282 MHz (19F) in CDCl3 solutions if not otherwise specified (Supporting information). Chemical shifts (δ) are reported in parts per million (ppm) from the residual solvent peak and coupling constants (J) in Hz. Infrared measurements were carried out neat on a Bruker Vector 22 FT-IR spectrometer fitted with a Specac diamond attenuated total reflectance (ATR) module. The purity of the compounds was assessed by NMR spectroscopy and determined to be &gt;98%.

Sample preparation

Compounds were dissolved at 10 mg/mL in Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO) and stored at −20 °C. For dose-dependent experiments samples were diluted in DMSO to a final concentration in the assay of 30, 10, 3 or 1 μM. The final concentration of DMSO in all the wells, including controls, was 0.5 % (v/v). The recombinant Aβ42 (rAβ42) was resuspended in 1 % NH4OH, at a concentration of 1 mg/mL and sonicated for 1 minute.

Thioflavin T assay

The aggregation of Aβ42 monomers was measured by Thioflavin T (ThT) assay. For dose-response experiments, 10 μM of rAβ42 were combined with or without several concentrations (30, 10, 3, 1 μM) of compounds, in a 96 well black plate. Plates were incubated for 48 hours at 37 °C and then, ThT was added at a final concentration of 20 μM. The fluorescence was measured using a Synergy HT multi-reader from Biotek (Winooski, VT) at 450 nm for excitation and 485 nm for emission. Fluorescence intensity values were determined as the delta (Δ) of ThT fluorescence in the presence of amyloid by subtracting the basal fluorescence of ThT alone. The assay was performed in a final volume of 200 μL and samples were prepared in duplicates in the presence of DMSO (0.5 %). Morin (100 μM) was used as inhibition control.

For time-course experiments, the SensoLyte Thioflavin T β - Amyloid (1-42) aggregation kit was used, following the manufacturer instructions. Compounds were used at a concentration of 30 μM. The ThT fluorescence intensity of each reaction was measured from the top of the plate every 10 min using Synergy HT multi-reader from Biotek (Winooski, VT) with 450/485-nm excitation/emission filters set with 15 seconds of shaking at 100 rpm before each read. The fluorescence intensity values were determined as described above.

Cell culture and treatments

Rat pheochromocytoma cells (PC-12) were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 8 % horse serum, 4 % fetal bovine serum, 1 % penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma) at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. For experiments, cells were seeded on poly-d-lysine (PDL) pre-coated 96-well plates at a density of 5000 cells/well. Twenty-four hours later, cell medium was replaced with fresh one containing 30 μM of each compound (1, 2, 3 and 4) and 10 μM of murine Aβ (Genscript) peptide or fibrils. Plates were incubated at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 for 24 hours. Control cells were incubated in the presence of similar concentrations of DMSO of compounds. Fibrils were generated by incubation of Aβ at 37 °C for 48 hours 83.

Cell viability assay

Cell viability was determined via reduction of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT). PC-12 cells plated on 96-well plates and exposed to Aβ were incubated with MTT (0.5 mg/mL) added to the media for a minimum of 2 hours at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. The medium was then removed and replaced with isopropanol, 0.04 % HCl to dissolve the reduction product of MTT, formazan. The plate was read on a spectrophotometer at 570 nm. The percent of viable cells was calculated using the formula: % viability: [(OD sample) x 100 %]/ (OD control). The non-stimulated cells and medium plus 0.5 % DMSO represented 100 % viability.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM)

For the analysis of anti-aggregation effect, Aβ42 monomers were incubated in the presence or absence of compounds (1, 2, 3 or 4) for 48 hours at 37 °C. For the analysis of dis-aggregation effect, Aβ42 fibrils, obtained after 48 hours of incubation, were incubated with compounds 1 or 2 for 12 and 24 hours at 37 °C. For AFM analysis, 20 μL of each sample was applied onto freshly cleaved mica slides and incubated for 10 min. The sample solution was dried on the mica surface using a compressed dry nitrogen gun. AFM images were acquired using a Multimode 8 (Bruker) instrument and analyzed using NanoScope Analysis software (1.5). Image scanning mode used was ScanAsyst in air and the AFM probe used was a mode of ScanAsyst-air (Bruker).

Predicting the binding mode of the compounds with the monomeric form of the Aβ42

The protocol used for predicting the putative binding mode of the selected compounds to Aβ42 monomer (Aβ42(m)) is depicted in Supporting information (Figure S15). Firstly, a proper structure of the Aβ42(m) was generated for conducting docking studies. Chain A of the Aβ42 fibril (Aβ42(f), PDB ID: 2NAO) was used 42 as starting coordinates for 35 ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. Then, cluster analysis was performed using the gromos method 84 implemented in g_cluster tool from GROMACS (version 4.6.5) 85. The cutoff for backbone heavy atoms was set to 3.5 Å. After selecting the middle structure of the most populated cluster, were performed two additional 40 ns simulations starting with different initial velocities to enhance sampling.

MD simulations were carried out using GROMACS (version 4.6.5) 85, periodic boundary conditions (PBC), the Amber99SB forcefield 86, and the TIP3P 87 water model. Aβ42(m) was solvated in a rhombic dodecahedral box. The protonation states of ionizable residues and histidine tautomers in the protein-ligand complexes were determined using the PDB2PQR program 88, which employed PROPKA for the prediction of pKa values. Details of procedures and parameters used to perform MD simulations are provided in the supporting information material. Secondary structures were assigned according to the DSSP algorithm 89. Radii of gyration (Rg) was calculated with g_gyrate tool from GROMACS (version 4.6.5) 85.

The middle structure of the most populated cluster in MD simulations was used as receptor for docking purposes. Bidimensional structures (2D) of the compounds, in the Structure Data File (SDF) format, were used to generate 3D structures of the selected compounds using Avogadro 90. All the possible enantiomers were generated for each compound using MarvinSketch 17.3.13.0 (ChemAxon Ltd.) (Figure S17). Docking files were prepared using AutoDockTools 91. AutoDock 4.2 92 was used for running and analyzing all the docking simulations. AutoLigand 93 was employed for identifying likely binding sites on the receptor surface. The grid maps were calculated with AutoGrid. The grid dimensions were 30 Å × 20 Å × 20 Å and grid center defined at the center of mass of coordinate files obtained from AutoLigand (x=−2.8, y=−1.3, z=4.0). The compounds were kept flexible in the grid box, and the peptide was kept rigid. The number of genetic algorithm runs for each configuration was set to 100. Thus, we set 400 runs in all for each compound. Other docking parameters were kept as default as suggested previously (see supporting information material for further details) 94. In order to assess the stability of the docking solutions, we performed MD simulations of 100 ns. Then, and root mean square deviation (RMSD) and the number of contacts of the ligand heavy atoms with Aß42 were computed by using g_rms and g_mindist tools from GROMACS, respectively 85.

Computational modeling of the disaggregating effect of compound 1

The disaggregating effect of compound 1 was evaluated in silico according to the scheme shown in Supporting information (Figure S15). The 3D structure of the Aβ42(f) (PDB ID: 2NAO) solved by NMR and EM 42 was used for modeling the disaggregating effect of compound 1. Firstly, the representative structure of Aβ42(f) was obtained by using WHATIF server 95. Next, we ran a 100 ns MD simulation using this structure as starting coordinates, following a similar protocol to that of was described above. The central structure of the most populated cluster was selected for successive molecular docking of four molecules of compound 1, one by one. Finally, the predicted complex between Aβ42(f) and four compound 1 molecules was studied by using MD simulation following a protocol similar to that of was described above.

Secondary structure analysis was conducted as described above. Contacts analysis were performed with g_contact 85, 96 and g_mindist 85 tools, respectively. Maximum distance contact was set to 4 Å. Additionally, the mass-weighted covariance matrix of the atomic positional fluctuations of Aβ42(f) in complex with four inhibitor molecules was constructed with g_covar tool 85. The covariance matrix was diagonalized with g_anaeig tool 85, to obtain the eigenvectors (V) and eigenvalues (λ). The first two eigenvectors, V1 and V2, were used to construct the free energy landscape with g_sham tool 85. In order to extract the representative Aβ42(f) structures for each dominant local minimum, a clustering analysis based on gromos method was performed 84 with a cutoff of 3.5 Å for the backbone heavy atoms. g_rmsf tool 85 was employed to calculate the Root Mean Square Fluctuation (RMSf, i.e. standard deviation) of atomic positions of every structure belonging to the minimum, after fitting to the representative structure of every minimum.

Terminology used for simulations

To gain a better understanding of results we defined the following terms: the enantiomers are denoted according to the order in what the letters R and S appear in their IUPAC name (Figure S16). For example, the IUPAC name for compound 1 is:(3aR,8aS)-1-benzyl-3a-(2-phenyldiazen-1-yl)-1H,2H,3H,3aH,8H,8aH-pyrrolo[2,3-b]indol-2-one, thus, we named this configuration as 1_RS. The complex between the Aβ42 fibril and four molecules of 1 is named as: Aβ42(f):4(1). For clarity, each molecule is named as: 1a, 1b, 1c, and 1d. According to a previous work 97, Aβ42 peptide was segmented in four regions: the N-Terminal (NT, residues 1-16), the central hydrophobic core (CHC, residues 17-21), the fibril-loop region (FL, residues 22-28), and the C-Terminal (CT, residues 29-42).

C. elegans maintenance and strains

Nematodes were cultured following standard conditions 98. Unless otherwise stated, worms were maintained at 16 °C on Nematode Growth Media (NGM) plates seeded with E. coli OP50 as a food source. Strains used in this study were: CL4176 (smg-1(cc546) I; dvIs27 [myo-3p::A-Beta (1-42)::let-851 3'UTR) + rol-6(su1006)] X and CL802 (smg-1(cc546) I; rol-6(su1006) II. The previously described transgenic nematode CL4176 expresses muscle-specific Aβ42 when worms are upshifted to 25 °C and CL802 is its transgenic control 43, 99. C. elegans strains were obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center, University of Minnesota (CGC).

To obtain synchronized populations, gravid adults were placed on freshly seeded NGM agar containing vehicle (0.4 % DMSO) or compounds (1, 2, 3 and 4 at 33 μM). Gravid worms were allowed to lay eggs for 4 hours before they were removed from plates leaving only eggs on the E. coli lawn.

Paralysis Assay

Age synchronized CL802 and CL4176 worms were maintained on freshly seeded 12-well NGM culture plates treated with vehicle (DMSO 0.4 %) or compounds (1, 2, 3 and 4 at 33 μM) for the duration of the experiment. Worms were allowed to grow and develop for 36 hours at 16 °C and were then upshifted to 25 °C to induce the formation of Aβ aggregates. Animals were scored for paralysis 30 hours after temperature upshift. Worms were scored as paralyzed if they did not move or could only move their heads after being gently prodded with a platinum wire. The percentage of paralyzed worms were compared for each treatment.

X-34 Aβ deposit staining and quantification

Staining was performed following the protocol by Link et al. 100, 101. A subset of worms from ongoing paralysis assays was removed from the experiment 24 hours after temperature upshift for live staining. The live nematodes were transferred with OP50 onto 10 μL drops of 1 mM X-34 dye (Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 mM Tris pH 8.0 and stained for 3 hours at 25 °C in a humidity chamber. After staining, animals were transferred to seeded NGM plates and allowed to recover for 4 hours at 25 °C. Worms were then mounted onto 2 % agarose pads with 0.2 % levamisole on glass microscope slides for imaging. Images were captured using a Zeiss Axioscope fluorescent microscope, 400X magnification, BP 365/12 filter set. Aggregates were quantified by counting the number of stained aggregates in the head region, anterior to the pharyngeal bulb 102, 103. Aggregates vary in size, only overall quantity of aggregates per worm was scored.

Statistical analysis

Data were analyzed using the statistical software package GraphPad Prism 6. The half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) was calculated by adjusting a sigmoidal dose-response curve following the procedure in GraphPad Prism 6. Cell viability assays were analyzed by one-way ANOVA’s followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test when appropriate. The inhibition of paralysis was analyzed using Fisher's exact test and Aβ deposits quantification of C. elegans was compared by Student’s t-test. Data are shown as means ± SEM from at least two independent experiments. A difference between groups was considered to be significant if P &lt; 0.05 (*, P &lt; 0.05; **, P &lt; 0.01, *** P &lt; 0.001).

Supplementary Material

Supporting Information

Supporting Information (video)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors are grateful for the support of the Sistema Nacional de Investigación de Panamá (SNI) (SNI142-2018, SNI143-2017, SNI04-2018 and SNI139-2018) and the Secretaría Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (SENACYT)/ Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo (BID) (IND-03-12). Financial support by the Welch Foundation (AX-1788), the NSF (CHE-1455061 and CHE-1625963), NIGMS (SC3GM105579), NIH-NINDS (R01 NS088645) to M.L.H. and Max and Minnie Tomerlin Voelcker Fund is gratefully acknowledged. C. elegans strains were provided by the CGC, which is funded by NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Programs (P40 OD010440). M.E.V.-T. thanks Dr. Sergei Yu Noskov for providing computational time enabled by Resource Allocation Award by Compute Canada (2018-2019). Authors want to thank Rita Giovani and Alejandro Llanes for their help with figures and formatting of the manuscript.

ABBREVIATIONS

AD Alzheimer’s disease

Aβ Amyloid β

HPI hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole

AFM Atomic force microscopy

ThT Thioflavin T

DMSO Dimethyl Sulfoxide

MD molecular dynamics

PC-12 Rat pheochromocytoma cells

Figure 1. HPI compounds inhibit the aggregation of Aβ42.

(A) Time course of the effect of compounds on the aggregation of Aβ42. Aβ42 was incubated with compounds (30 μM) for 3 hours. ThT fluorescence was monitored every 10 minutes. (B) Compounds were incubated with Aβ42 for 48 hours and then ThT was added. Fluorescence was measured after 30 min of ThT addition. Results are represented as mean ± SEM from samples assayed in triplicates and are representative of two independent experiments. (C) AFM images collected after 48 hours of incubation of Aβ42 in the presence or absence of compounds (30 μM). All the experiments were conducted in the presence of DMSO (0.5%).

Figure 2. Graphic representation of the predicted binding mode for each compound.

Ligands are highlighted as sticks (A) 1, (B) 3, (C) 4. Ligand atoms are colored as: carbons in orange, oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, sulfur in yellow, chlorine in green and fluorine in light blue. Protein is shown as gray cartoon. Transparent surface is shown to give an idea of the overall shape of Aβ42(m). Contact residues within 4 Å are highlighted as stick and atoms are shown in color: carbons (yellow), oxygen (red) and nitrogen (blue). Hydrogen bonds are represented as dash red lines.

Figure 3. Compounds 1 and 2 rescue PC-12 cells from death induced by Aβ.

(A) PC-12 cells were incubated with Aβ42 (10 μM) peptide (left panes) or fibril (right panel) in the presence of compounds (30 μM). Viability was assayed 24 hours later by MTT method. Data is normalized to the negative control. Results represent mean ± SEM from three experiments performed in triplicate. C (+) is vehicle alone. (B) Compounds 1 and 2 disaggregate Aβ42. AFM images collected after 12 and 24 hours of incubation of Aβ42 fibrils with compounds 1 or 2 (30 μM). Experiments were conducted in the presence of DMSO (0.5 %). *, P &lt; 0.05; **, P &lt; 0.01, ***, P &lt; 0.001.

Figure 4. Modeling of the interaction of Aβ42(f) with compound 1.

Free energy landscape (kcal/mol) was built from the first two principal components obtained from the PCA analysis. The color gradient from black to white is indicative of an increase in free energy (G). The three main minima of the disaggregation process were denoted as 1, 2 and 3. Aβ42(f) is shown as gray cylinders where the segments with the highest Root Mean Square Fluctuation (RMSf) are shown as thicker cylinders. The spheres represent the center of mass of the ligands in the structures belonging to the pertinent minimum. Spheres are colored according to the pertinent ligand: 1a (magenta), 1b (yellow), 1c (salmon) and 1d (cyan). Chains A, B, and C of Aβ42(f) are colored black, gray and white respectively.

Figure 5. Compound 3 reduces paralysis and quantity of Aβ deposits in C. elegans.

(A) Effects of compounds on paralysis. Nematodes were treated with vehicle or compounds 1, 2, 3 or 4 (33 μM) for the duration of the experiment. Data are shown as the percentage of paralyzed worms scored 30 hours after temperature upshift to 25 °C. Results are represented as mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (n=+45 worms/three independent experiments). (B) Worms treated with vehicle or compound 3 (33 μM) were stained with X-34 dye. Data show mean quantity of stained aggregates in the head region per worm using a fluorescent microscope. Results are represented as mean ± SEM from two independent replicates (n=+8 worms/two independent experiments). (C) Representative image of X-34 staining in CL4176 worms. Arrows indicate aggregates. TB (terminal bulb). **, P &lt; 0.05; **, P &lt; 0.01, compared with vehicle.

Table 1. Anti-aggregation capacity of HPI compounds.

Com-
pound	Structure	ThT
assay
IC50
(μM)a	Cytotoxi-
city CC50
(μM)b	
1		0.80 ± 0.4	&gt;30	
2		3.73 ± 0.7	&gt;30	
3		2.52 ± 1.9	&gt;30	
4		0.76 ± 0.1	&gt;30	
a IC50 values are mean ± standard deviation of two independent experiments.

b CC50 values represent the half-maximal cytotoxic concentration of compounds on PC-12 cells.

Supporting Information

Bioinformatic methods and additional computational and experimental data. Spectroscopic data and characterization for all compounds (PDF).

Molecular dynamics simulation of the interaction between Aβ42(f) and compound 1 (MP4).

The authors declare no competing financial interests


REFERENCES

1. Prince M , Wimo A , Guerchet M , Gemma-Claire A , Wu Y-T , and Prina M (2015) World Alzheimer Report 2015: The Global Impact of Dementia - An analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost and trends., Alzheimer's Disease International 84 .
2. Hardy J , and Selkoe DJ (2002) The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics, Science 297 , 353–356.12130773
3. Glabe CC (2005) Amyloid accumulation and pathogensis of Alzheimer's disease: significance of monomeric, oligomeric and fibrillar Abeta, Subcell Biochem 38 , 167–177.15709478
4. Octave JN , Pierrot N , Ferao Santos S , Nalivaeva NN , and Turner AJ (2013) From synaptic spines to nuclear signaling: nuclear and synaptic actions of the amyloid precursor protein, Journal of neurochemistry 126 , 183–190.23495999
5. Nhan HS , Chiang K , and Koo EH (2015) The multifaceted nature of amyloid precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments: friends and foes, Acta Neuropathol 129 , 1–19.25287911
6. Haass C , Kaether C , Thinakaran G , and Sisodia S (2012) Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 , a006270.22553493
7. Pike CJ , Overman MJ , and Cotman CW (1995) Amino-terminal deletions enhance aggregation of beta-amyloid peptides in vitro, The Journal of biological chemistry 270 , 23895–23898.7592576
8. Sisodia SS , and St George-Hyslop PH (2002) gamma-Secretase, Notch, Abeta and Alzheimer's disease: where do the presenilins fit in?, Nat Rev Neurosci 3 , 281–290.11967558
9. Hardy J (2002) Testing times for the "amyloid cascade hypothesis", Neurobiology of aging 23 , 1073–1074.12470803
10. Harrison JR , and Owen MJ (2016) Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid hypothesis on trial, The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science 208 , 1–3.26729836
11. Selkoe DJ , and Hardy J (2016) The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease at 25 years, EMBO Mol Med 8 , 595–608.27025652
12. Scott JD , Li SW , Brunskill AP , Chen X , Cox K , Cumming JN , Forman M , Gilbert EJ , Hodgson RA , Hyde LA , Jiang Q , Iserloh U , Kazakevich I , Kuvelkar R , Mei H , Meredith J , Misiaszek J , Orth P , Rossiter LM , Slater M , Stone J , Strickland CO , Voigt JH , Wang G , Wang H , Wu Y , Greenlee WJ , Parker EM , Kennedy ME , and Stamford AW (2016) Discovery of the 3-Imino-1,2,4-thiadiazinane 1,1-Dioxide Derivative Verubecestat (MK-8931)-A beta-Site Amyloid Precursor Protein Cleaving Enzyme 1 Inhibitor for the Treatment of Alzheimer's Disease, Journal of medicinal chemistry 59 , 10435–10450.27933948
13. Eketjall S , Janson J , Kaspersson K , Bogstedt A , Jeppsson F , Falting J , Haeberlein SB , Kugler AR , Alexander RC , and Cebers G (2016) AZD3293: A Novel, Orally Active BACE1 Inhibitor with High Potency and Permeability and Markedly Slow Off-Rate Kinetics, J Alzheimers Dis 50 , 1109–1123.26890753
14. Fleisher AS , Raman R , Siemers ER , Becerra L , Clark CM , Dean RA , Farlow MR , Galvin JE , Peskind ER , Quinn JF , Sherzai A , Sowell BB , Aisen PS , and Thal LJ (2008) Phase 2 safety trial targeting amyloid beta production with a gamma-secretase inhibitor in Alzheimer disease, Archives of neurology 65 , 1031–1038.18695053
15. Chavez-Gutierrez L , Bammens L , Benilova I , Vandersteen A , Benurwar M , Borgers M , Lismont S , Zhou L , Van Cleynenbreugel S , Esselmann H , Wiltfang J , Serneels L , Karran E , Gijsen H , Schymkowitz J , Rousseau F , Broersen K , and De Strooper B (2012) The mechanism of gamma-Secretase dysfunction in familial Alzheimer disease, Embo J 31 , 2261–2274.22505025
16. Niva C , Parkinson J , Olsson F , van Schaick E , Lundkvist J , and Visser SA (2013) Has inhibition of Abeta production adequately been tested as therapeutic approach in mild AD? A model-based meta-analysis of gamma-secretase inhibitor data, Eur J Clin Pharmacol 69 , 1247–1260.23288352
17. McLaurin J , Golomb R , Jurewicz A , Antel JP , and Fraser PE (2000) Inositol stereoisomers stabilize an oligomeric aggregate of Alzheimer amyloid beta peptide and inhibit abeta -induced toxicity, J Biol Chem 275 , 18495–18502.10764800
18. Pan X , Gong N , Zhao J , Yu Z , Gu F , Chen J , Sun X , Zhao L , Yu M , Xu Z , Dong W , Qin Y , Fei G , Zhong C , and Xu TL (2010) Powerful beneficial effects of benfotiamine on cognitive impairment and beta-amyloid deposition in amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 transgenic mice, Brain : a journal of neurology 133 , 1342–1351.20385653
19. Sun X , Bromley-Brits K , and Song W (2012) Regulation of beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 gene expression and its role in Alzheimer's disease, J Neurochem 120 Suppl 1 , 62–70.22122349
20. Wisniewski T , and Goni F (2015) Immunotherapeutic approaches for Alzheimer's disease, Neuron 85 , 1162–1176.25789753
21. Ma B , Zhao J , and Nussinov R (2016) Conformational selection in amyloid-based immunotherapy: Survey of crystal structures of antibody-amyloid complexes, Biochimica et biophysica acta 1860 , 2672–2681.27266343
22. Bouter Y , Lopez Noguerola JS , Tucholla P , Crespi GA , Parker MW , Wiltfang J , Miles LA , and Bayer TA (2015) Abeta targets of the biosimilar antibodies of Bapineuzumab, Crenezumab, Solanezumab in comparison to an antibody against Ntruncated Abeta in sporadic Alzheimer disease cases and mouse models, Acta Neuropathol 130 , 713–729.26467270
23. Ivanoiu A , Pariente J , Booth K , Lobello K , Luscan G , Hua L , Lucas P , Styren S , Yang L , Li D , Black RS , Brashear HR , and McRae T (2016) Long-term safety and tolerability of bapineuzumab in patients with Alzheimer's disease in two phase 3 extension studies, Alzheimer's research &amp; therapy 8 , 24.
24. Doig AJ , Del Castillo-Frias MP , Berthoumieu O , Tarus B , Nasica-Labouze J , Sterpone F , Nguyen PH , Hooper NM , Faller P , and Derreumaux P (2017) Why Is Research on Amyloid-beta Failing to Give New Drugs for Alzheimer's Disease?, ACS Chem Neurosci 8 , 1435–1437.28586203
25. De S , Wirthensohn DC , Flagmeier P , Hughes C , Aprile FA , Ruggeri FS , Whiten DR , Emin D , Xia Z , Varela JA , Sormanni P , Kundel F , Knowles TPJ , Dobson CM , Bryant C , Vendruscolo M , and Klenerman D (2019) Different soluble aggregates of Aβ42 can give rise to cellular toxicity through different mechanisms, Nature Communications 10 , 1541.
26. Ruiz-Sanchis P , Savina SA , Albericio F , and Alvarez M (2011) Structure, bioactivity and synthesis of natural products with hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole, Chemistry (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany) 17 , 1388–1408.
27. Coelho F , and Birks J (2001) Physostigmine for Alzheimer's disease, Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD001499.11405996
28. Lilja AM , Luo Y , Yu QS , Rojdner J , Li Y , Marini AM , Marutle A , Nordberg A , and Greig NH (2013) Neurotrophic and neuroprotective actions of (−)- and (+)-phenserine, candidate drugs for Alzheimer's disease, PLoS One 8 , e54887.23382994
29. Zhang Y , Stephens D , Hernandez G , Mendoza R , and Larionov OV (2012) Catalytic diastereo- and enantioselective annulations between transient nitrosoalkenes and indoles, Chemistry (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany) 18 , 16612–16615.
30. Noor H , Cao P , and Raleigh DP (2012) Morin hydrate inhibits amyloid formation by islet amyloid polypeptide and disaggregates amyloid fibers, Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society 21 , 373–382.22238175
31. Hudson SA , Ecroyd H , Kee TW , and Carver JA (2009) The thioflavin T fluorescence assay for amyloid fibril detection can be biased by the presence of exogenous compounds, FEBS J 276 , 5960–5972.19754881
32. Dubnovitsky A , Sandberg A , Rahman MM , Benilova I , Lendel C , and Hard T (2013) Amyloid-beta protofibrils: size, morphology and synaptotoxicity of an engineered mimic, PLoS One 8 , e66101.23843949
33. Yankner BA (1996) Mechanisms of neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer's disease, Neuron 16 , 921–932.8630250
34. Morishima Y , Gotoh Y , Zieg J , Barrett T , Takano H , Flavell R , Davis RJ , Shirasaki Y , and Greenberg ME (2001) Beta-amyloid induces neuronal apoptosis via a mechanism that involves the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway and the induction of Fas ligand, J Neurosci 21 , 7551–7560.11567045
35. Tan MS , Tan L , Jiang T , Zhu XC , Wang HF , Jia CD , and Yu JT (2014) Amyloid-beta induces NLRP1-dependent neuronal pyroptosis in models of Alzheimer's disease, Cell Death Dis 5 , e1382.25144717
36. Klyubin I , Walsh DM , Lemere CA , Cullen WK , Shankar GM , Betts V , Spooner ET , Jiang L , Anwyl R , Selkoe DJ , and Rowan MJ (2005) Amyloid beta protein immunotherapy neutralizes Abeta oligomers that disrupt synaptic plasticity in vivo, Nature medicine 11 , 556–561.
37. Pike CJ , Walencewicz AJ , Glabe CG , and Cotman CW (1991) In vitro aging of beta-amyloid protein causes peptide aggregation and neurotoxicity, Brain Res 563 , 311–314.1786545
38. De Felice FG , Velasco PT , Lambert MP , Viola K , Fernandez SJ , Ferreira ST , and Klein WL (2007) Abeta oligomers induce neuronal oxidative stress through an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanism that is blocked by the Alzheimer drug memantine, The Journal of biological chemistry 282 , 11590–11601.17308309
39. Koffie RM , Meyer-Luehmann M , Hashimoto T , Adams KW , Mielke ML , Garcia-Alloza M , Micheva KD , Smith SJ , Kim ML , Lee VM , Hyman BT , and Spires-Jones TL (2009) Oligomeric amyloid beta associates with postsynaptic densities and correlates with excitatory synapse loss near senile plaques, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 , 4012–4017.19228947
40. Lindorff-Larsen K , Piana S , Palmo K , Maragakis P , Klepeis JL , Dror RO , and Shaw DE (2010) Improved side-chain torsion potentials for the Amber ff99SB protein force field, Proteins 78 , 1950–1958.20408171
41. Colvin MT , Silvers R , Ni QZ , Can TV , Sergeyev I , Rosay M , Donovan KJ , Michael B , Wall J , Linse S , and Griffin RG (2016) Atomic Resolution Structure of Monomorphic Aβ42 Amyloid Fibrils, Journal of the American Chemical Society 138 , 9663–9674.27355699
42. Wälti MA , Ravotti F , Arai H , Glabe CG , Wall JS , Böckmann A , Güntert P , Meier BH , and Riek R (2016) Atomic-resolution structure of a disease-relevant Aβ (1–42) amyloid fibril, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 , E4976–E4984.
43. Link CD , Taft A , Kapulkin V , Duke K , Kim S , Fei Q , Wood DE , and Sahagan BG (2003) Gene expression analysis in a transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans Alzheimer's disease model, Neurobiology of aging 24 , 397–413.12600716
44. Dostal V , and Link CD (2010) Assaying beta-amyloid toxicity using a transgenic C. elegans model, J Vis Exp.
45. Sun XJ , Zhao L , Zhao N , Pan XL , Fei GQ , Jin LR , and Zhong CJ (2012) Benfotiamine prevents increased beta-amyloid production in HEK cells induced by high glucose, Neurosci Bull 28 , 561–566.22961478
46. Kroes-Nijboer A , Lubbersen YS , Venema P , and van der Linden E (2009) Thioflavin T fluorescence assay for beta-lactoglobulin fibrils hindered by DAPH, Journal of structural biology 165 , 140–145.19063973
47. Jameson LP , Smith NW , and Dzyuba SV (2012) Dye-binding assays for evaluation of the effects of small molecule inhibitors on amyloid (abeta) self-assembly, ACS chemical neuroscience 3 , 807–819.23173064
48. Coelho-Cerqueira E , Pinheiro AS , and Follmer C (2014) Pitfalls associated with the use of Thioflavin-T to monitor anti-fibrillogenic activity, Bioorganic &amp; medicinal chemistry letters 24 , 3194–3198.24835632
49. Lemkul JA , and Bevan DR (2012) The role of molecular simulations in the development of inhibitors of amyloid beta-peptide aggregation for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, ACS chemical neuroscience 3 , 845–856.23173066
50. Nasica-Labouze J , Nguyen PH , Sterpone F , Berthoumieu O , Buchete NV , Cote S , De Simone A , Doig AJ , Faller P , Garcia A , Laio A , Li MS , Melchionna S , Mousseau N , Mu Y , Paravastu A , Pasquali S , Rosenman DJ , Strodel B , Tarus B , Viles JH , Zhang T , Wang C , and Derreumaux P (2015) Amyloid beta Protein and Alzheimer's Disease: When Computer Simulations Complement Experimental Studies, Chem Rev 115 , 3518–3563.25789869
51. Robustelli P , Piana S , and Shaw DE (2018) Developing a molecular dynamics force field for both folded and disordered protein states, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 , E4758.
52. Man VH , Nguyen PH , and Derreumaux P (2017) High-Resolution Structures of the Amyloid-beta 1-42 Dimers from the Comparison of Four Atomistic Force Fields, J Phys Chem B 121 , 5977–5987.28538095
53. Kirkitadze MD , Condron MM , and Teplow DB (2001) Identification and characterization of key kinetic intermediates in amyloid beta-protein fibrillogenesis, Journal of molecular biology 312 , 1103–1119.11580253
54. Hou L , Shao H , Zhang Y , Li H , Menon NK , Neuhaus EB , Brewer JM , Byeon IJ , Ray DG , Vitek MP , Iwashita T , Makula RA , Przybyla AB , and Zagorski MG (2004) Solution NMR studies of the A beta(1-40) and A beta(1-42) peptides establish that the Met35 oxidation state affects the mechanism of amyloid formation, J Am Chem Soc 126 , 1992–2005.14971932
55. Nag S , Sarkar B , Bandyopadhyay A , Sahoo B , Sreenivasan VK , Kombrabail M , Muralidharan C , and Maiti S (2011) Nature of the amyloid-beta monomer and the monomer-oligomer equilibrium, The Journal of biological chemistry 286 , 13827–13833.21349839
56. Lemkul JA , and Bevan DR (2010) Destabilizing Alzheimer's Abeta(42) protofibrils with morin: mechanistic insights from molecular dynamics simulations, Biochemistry 49 , 3935–3946.20369844
57. Porat Y , Mazor Y , Efrat S , and Gazit E (2004) Inhibition of islet amyloid polypeptide fibril formation: a potential role for heteroaromatic interactions, Biochemistry 43 , 14454–14462.15533050
58. Reinke AA , and Gestwicki JE (2007) Structure-activity relationships of amyloid beta-aggregation inhibitors based on curcumin: influence of linker length and flexibility, Chem Biol Drug Des 70 , 206–215.17718715
59. Doig AJ , and Derreumaux P (2015) Inhibition of protein aggregation and amyloid formation by small molecules, Curr Opin Struct Biol 30 , 50–56.25559306
60. Chebaro Y , Jiang P , Zang T , Mu Y , Nguyen PH , Mousseau N , and Derreumaux P (2012) Structures of Aβ17–42 Trimers in Isolation and with Five Small-Molecule Drugs Using a Hierarchical Computational Procedure, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 116 , 8412–8422.22283547
61. Luhrs T , Ritter C , Adrian M , Riek-Loher D , Bohrmann B , Dobeli H , Schubert D , and Riek R (2005) 3D structure of Alzheimer's amyloid-beta(1-42) fibrils, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 , 17342–17347.16293696
62. Arispe N , Diaz JC , and Simakova O (2007) Abeta ion channels. Prospects for treating Alzheimer's disease with Abeta channel blockers, Biochim Biophys Acta 1768 , 1952–1965.17490607
63. Diaz JC , Simakova O , Jacobson KA , Arispe N , and Pollard HB (2009) Small molecule blockers of the Alzheimer Abeta calcium channel potently protect neurons from Abeta cytotoxicity, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 , 3348–3353.19204293
64. Cecchi C , and Stefani M (2013) The amyloid-cell membrane system. The interplay between the biophysical features of oligomers/fibrils and cell membrane defines amyloid toxicity, Biophysical chemistry 182 , 30–43.23820236
65. Evangelisti E , Cascella R , Becatti M , Marrazza G , Dobson CM , Chiti F , Stefani M , and Cecchi C (2016) Binding affinity of amyloid oligomers to cellular membranes is a generic indicator of cellular dysfunction in protein misfolding diseases, Scientific reports 6 , 32721.27619987
66. Peters I , Igbavboa U , Schutt T , Haidari S , Hartig U , Rosello X , Bottner S , Copanaki E , Deller T , Kogel D , Wood WG , Muller WE , and Eckert GP (2009) The interaction of beta-amyloid protein with cellular membranes stimulates its own production, Biochimica et biophysica acta 1788 , 964–972.19366591
67. Salminen A , Ojala J , Kauppinen A , Kaarniranta K , and Suuronen T (2009) Inflammation in Alzheimer's disease: amyloid-beta oligomers trigger innate immunity defence via pattern recognition receptors, Prog Neurobiol 87 , 181–194.19388207
68. Lublin A , Isoda F , Patel H , Yen K , Nguyen L , Hajje D , Schwartz M , and Mobbs C (2011) FDA-approved drugs that protect mammalian neurons from glucose toxicity slow aging dependent on cbp and protect against proteotoxicity, PLoS One 6 , e27762.22114686
69. Lublin A , and Link C (2013) Alzheimer's Disease Drug Discovery: In-vivo screening using C. elegans as a model for beta-amyloid peptide-induced toxicity, Drug Discov Today Technol 10 , e115–e119.
70. Adamcik J , Jung JM , Flakowski J , De Los Rios P , Dietler G , and Mezzenga R (2010) Understanding amyloid aggregation by statistical analysis of atomic force microscopy images, Nat Nanotechnol 5 , 423–428.20383125
71. Cohen SI , Linse S , Luheshi LM , Hellstrand E , White DA , Rajah L , Otzen DE , Vendruscolo M , Dobson CM , and Knowles TP (2013) Proliferation of amyloid-beta42 aggregates occurs through a secondary nucleation mechanism, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110 , 9758–9763.23703910
72. Arosio P , Vendruscolo M , Dobson CM , and Knowles TP (2014) Chemical kinetics for drug discovery to combat protein aggregation diseases, Trends Pharmacol Sci 35 , 127–135.24560688
73. Habchi J , Arosio P , Perni M , Costa AR , Yagi-Utsumi M , Joshi P , Chia S , Cohen SI , Muller MB , Linse S , Nollen EA , Dobson CM , Knowles TP , and Vendruscolo M (2016) An anticancer drug suppresses the primary nucleation reaction that initiates the production of the toxic Abeta42 aggregates linked with Alzheimer's disease, Sci Adv 2 , e1501244.26933687
74. Cohen E , Bieschke J , Perciavalle RM , Kelly JW , and Dillin A (2006) Opposing activities protect against age-onset proteotoxicity, Science 313 , 1604–1610.16902091
75. McLean CA , Cherny RA , Fraser FW , Fuller SJ , Smith MJ , Beyreuther K , Bush AI , and Masters CL (1999) Soluble pool of Abeta amyloid as a determinant of severity of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease, Ann Neurol 46 , 860–866.10589538
76. Limbocker R , Chia S , Ruggeri FS , Perni M , Cascella R , Heller GT , Meisl G , Mannini B , Habchi J , Michaels TCT , Challa PK , Ahn M , Casford ST , Fernando N , Xu CK , Kloss ND , Cohen SIA , Kumita JR , Cecchi C , Zasloff M , Linse S , Knowles TPJ , Chiti F , Vendruscolo M , and Dobson CM (2019) Trodusquemine enhances Abeta42 aggregation but suppresses its toxicity by displacing oligomers from cell membranes, Nat Commun 10 , 225.30644384
77. Narayan P , Orte A , Clarke RW , Bolognesi B , Hook S , Ganzinger KA , Meehan S , Wilson MR , Dobson CM , and Klenerman D (2011) The extracellular chaperone clusterin sequesters oligomeric forms of the amyloid-beta(1-40) peptide, Nature structural &amp; molecular biology 19 , 79–83.
78. Sievers SA , Karanicolas J , Chang HW , Zhao A , Jiang L , Zirafi O , Stevens JT , Munch J , Baker D , and Eisenberg D (2011) Structure-based design of non-natural amino-acid inhibitors of amyloid fibril formation, Nature 475 , 96–100.21677644
79. Abelein A , Lang L , Lendel C , Graslund A , and Danielsson J (2012) Transient small molecule interactions kinetically modulate amyloid beta peptide self-assembly, FEBS letters 586 , 3991–3995.23058290
80. Bulawa CE , Connelly S , Devit M , Wang L , Weigel C , Fleming JA , Packman J , Powers ET , Wiseman RL , Foss TR , Wilson IA , Kelly JW , and Labaudiniere R (2012) Tafamidis, a potent and selective transthyretin kinetic stabilizer that inhibits the amyloid cascade, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 , 9629–9634.22645360
81. Johnson SM , Connelly S , Fearns C , Powers ET , and Kelly JW (2012) The transthyretin amyloidoses: from delineating the molecular mechanism of aggregation linked to pathology to a regulatory-agency-approved drug, Journal of molecular biology 421 , 185–203.22244854
82. Stephens DE , and Larionov OV (2014) Straightforward Access to Hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indole Core by a Regioselective C3-Azo Coupling Reaction of Arenediazonium Compounds with Tryptamines, European J Org Chem 2014 , 3662–3670.
83. Doens D , Valiente PA , Mfuh AM , A XTV , Tristan A , Carreno L , Quijada M , Nguyen VT , Perry G , Larionov OV , Lleonart R , and Fernandez PL (2017) Identification of Inhibitors of CD36-Amyloid Beta Binding as Potential Agents for Alzheimer's Disease, ACS chemical neuroscience.
84. Daura X , Gademann K , Jaun B , Seebach D , van Gunsteren WF and Mark AE . (1999) Peptide Folding: When Simulation Meets Experiment., Angewandte Chemie International Edition 38 (1-2 ), 236–240.
85. van der Spoel D , Lindahl E , Hess B , van Buuren AR , Apol E , Meulenhoff PJ , Tieleman DP , Sijbers ALTM , Feenstra KA , van Drunenand R and Berendsen HJC (2013) GROMACS User Manual, Sweden, Royal Institute of Technology and Uppsala University.
86. Hornak V , Abel R , Okur A , Strockbine B , Roitberg A , and Simmerling C (2006) Comparison of multiple Amber force fields and development of improved protein backbone parameters, Proteins 65 , 712–725.16981200
87. Jorgensen W , Chandrasekhar J , Madura J , Klein M and Impey RW (1983) Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water, J Chem Phys 79 .
88. Dolinsky TJ , Czodrowski P , Li H , Nielsen JE , Jensen JH , Klebe G , and Baker NA (2007) PDB2PQR: expanding and upgrading automated preparation of biomolecular structures for molecular simulations, Nucleic acids research 35 , W522–525.17488841
89. Kabsch W , and Sander C (1983) Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features, Biopolymers 22 , 2577–2637.6667333
90. Hanwell MD , Curtis DE , Lonie DC , Vandermeersch T , Zurek E , and Hutchison GR (2012) Avogadro: an advanced semantic chemical editor, visualization, and analysis platform, J Cheminform 4 , 17.22889332
91. Sanner MF (1999) Python: a programming language for software integration and development, J Mol Graph Model 17 , 57–61.10660911
92. Morris GM , Huey R , Lindstrom W , Sanner MF , Belew RK , Goodsell DS , and Olson AJ (2009) AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4: Automated docking with selective receptor flexibility, Journal of computational chemistry 30 , 2785–2791.19399780
93. Harris R , Olson AJ , and Goodsell DS (2008) Automated prediction of ligand-binding sites in proteins, Proteins 70 , 1506–1517.17910060
94. Singh S , Srivastava HK , Kishor G , Singh H , Agrawal P and Raghava GPS (2017) Evaluation of protein-ligand docking methods on peptide-ligand complexes for docking small ligands to peptides, bioRxiv.
95. Vriend G (1990) WHAT IF: A molecular modeling and drug design program, J Mol Graph 8 .
96. Blau C. a. H. G. (2013) g_contacts: Fast contact search in bio-molecular ensemble data, Computer Physics Communications 184 , 2856–2859.
97. Zhang T , Zhang J , Derreumaux P , and Mu Y (2013) Molecular mechanism of the inhibition of EGCG on the Alzheimer Abeta(1-42) dimer, The journal of physical chemistry. B 117 , 3993–4002.23537203
98. Brenner S (1974) The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans, Genetics 77 , 71–94.4366476
99. Link CD (1995) Expression of human beta-amyloid peptide in transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 92 , 9368–9372.7568134
100. Styren SD , Hamilton RL , Styren GC , and Klunk WE (2000) X-34, a fluorescent derivative of Congo red: a novel histochemical stain for Alzheimer's disease pathology, J Histochem Cytochem 48 , 1223–1232.10950879
101. Link CD , Johnson CJ , Fonte V , Paupard M , Hall DH , Styren S , Mathis CA , and Klunk WE (2001) Visualization of fibrillar amyloid deposits in living, transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans animals using the sensitive amyloid dye, X-34, Neurobiology of aging 22 , 217–226.11182471
102. Diomede L , Rigacci S , Romeo M , Stefani M , and Salmona M (2013) Oleuropein aglycone protects transgenic C. elegans strains expressing Abeta42 by reducing plaque load and motor deficit, PLoS One 8 , e58893.23520540
103. Wu Y , Wu Z , Butko P , Christen Y , Lambert MP , Klein WL , Link CD , and Luo Y (2006) Amyloid-β-Induced Pathological Behaviors Are Suppressed by Ginkgo biloba Extract EGb 761 and Ginkgolides in Transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans, The Journal of Neuroscience 26 , 13102–13113.17167099
