LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

32439597
8207829
10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104946
NIHMS1707777
Article
Genetic architecture of common non-Alzheimer’s disease dementias
Guerreiro Rita ab*
Gibbons Elizabeth a
Tábuas-Pereira Miguel cd
Kun-Rodrigues Celia a
Santo Gustavo C. ce
Bras Jose ab
a Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
b Division of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, Michigan State University College of Human Medicine, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
c Department of Neurology, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
d Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
e Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
* Corresponding author at: Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave. N.E., Grand Rapids, MI 49503-2518, USA. Rita.Guerreiro@vai.org (R. Guerreiro).
7 6 2021
19 5 2020
8 2020
16 6 2021
142 104946104946
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and vascular dementia (VaD) are the most common forms of dementia after Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The heterogeneity of these disorders and/or the clinical overlap with other diseases hinder the study of their genetic components. Even though Mendelian dementias are rare, the study of these forms of disease can have a significant impact in the lives of patients and families and have successfully brought to the fore many of the genes currently known to be involved in FTD and VaD, starting to give us a glimpse of the molecular mechanisms underlying these phenotypes. More recently, genome-wide association studies have also pointed to disease risk-associated loci. This has been particularly important for DLB where familial forms of disease are very rarely described. In this review we systematically describe the Mendelian and risk genes involved in these non-AD dementias in an effort to contribute to a better understanding of their genetic architecture, find differences and commonalities between different dementia phenotypes, and uncover areas that would benefit from more intense research endeavors.


1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is consensually known to be the major cause of dementia, comprising around 60–80% of all dementia cases (Erkkinen et al., 2018). Some rare AD cases result from specific mutations and typically present with early-onset of disease and familial structure. The vast majority, however, occurs in a sporadic form, although even that form has an estimated heritability of 58–79%, that includes the small cumulative effects of multiple variants and genes (Gatz et al., 2006). Besides AD, the major causes of dementia include a variety of diseases with the most prominent being dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and vascular dementia (VaD). Lewy body dementia has a prevalence of around 7.5% (Vann Jones and O’Brien, 2014), but this number can be as high as 30% (Erkkinen et al., 2018); FTD accounts for 12% of early-onset dementia cases (Rossor et al., 2010); and VaD is known to cause 13% of neuropathological cases and to contribute to at least an additional 12% of dementia cases (Knopman et al., 2003). The prevalence of each of these diseases can vary with population, age, sex and diagnostic procedures.

Even though in this review we focus on the most common causes of non-AD dementias mentioned above, other rarer forms of degenerative dementia should be briefly mentioned. These often manifest with additional clinical signs or are very rare and include, among others, corticobasal syndrome (CBS), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), prion diseases, Huntington disease, spinocerebellar ataxias, mitochondrial diseases and leukodystrophies (Rossor et al., 2010).

These multiple causes of dementia are considered to be different clinical entities but, in many cases, may share pathogenic pathways and phenotypes. In fact, on an aging brain, different pathologies may occur and overlap, hampering diagnosis and the understanding of the specific biological processes underlying these disorders.

Genetics has played a critical role in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in these diseases. Genetic changes lie upstream of the pathological changes, exerting effects throughout the lifetime. This is important in, at least, two dimensions: genetic signatures may be the best markers of ‘pure’ disorders and, given they are acting from conception, they may be the best targets for treatments and, particularly, preventing interventions. At the same time, the co-occurrence of pathologies suggests the existence of common risk factors and/or dysfunctional pathways, and this may be a result of shared genetic risk factors.

Studying the genetic similarities and contrasts between the different causes of dementia may help to build a framework of neurodegeneration pathways common to all these disorders that ultimately can contribute to more informed diagnoses, as well as the development of treatments and more directed research studies.

Here, we aim to review the current knowledge of the genetic architecture of non-AD dementias by systematically characterizing the genes and genetic loci known to be involved in the Mendelian and sporadic forms of these disorders.

2. Genetics of frontotemporal dementia

Frontotemporal dementia is heterogeneous on many levels: phenotypic, pathological and genetic. The most common clinical subtypes are behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD) and primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Both these phenotypes overlap, in a large number of patients, with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and the atypical parkinsonian syndromes CBS and PSP. Being the second most common cause of early-onset degenerative dementia, about a third of FTD cases are found to be genetic. There are different genes known to cause this disease when mutated, with the majority of cases being associated with genetic changes in progranulin (GRN), microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) (Rohrer et al., 2009). However, there are other genes known to cause FTD in a smaller number of cases and the genetic landscape is rapidly expanding.

2.1. MAPT, GRN and C9ORF72

MAPT, which encodes microtubule-associated protein tau, was the first gene to be associated with FTD. The clinical presentation can vary: 44.8% of the patients develop a behavioral variant of FTD and 3.9% some form of PPA. MAPT mutation carriers have also been reported to present with PSP (4.2%), Parkinson’s disease (PD) (4.9%), AD (3.0%), CBS (1.8%) and rarely ALS (0.4%) phenotypes (Moore et al., 2020). MAPT mutations are relatively more common in the Netherlands and the US west coast (Moore et al., 2020) and, pathologically, are associated with tau deposits.

One of tau’s primary functions is to bind and promote the assembly of microtubules (Caillet-Boudin et al., 2015). It has a natural alternative splicing mechanism at exon 10 that creates an equal number of isoforms containing 3 or 4 repeat segments (3R tau and 4R tau). Assembly of tau occurs at the repeats’ level, so it is not surprising that many of the pathogenic mutations are located on those repeats, affecting how tau interacts with microtubules (Ghetti et al., 2015). Known disease-causing variants are missense, silent or deletions with the majority occurring in exons 9–13, as well as intronic variants. These are mostly clustered in the 5′-splice site of the intron after exon 10. The mutations identified in MAPT can affect protein structure or the alternative splicing of exon 10. This latter mechanism creates an imbalance of the 3R/4R ratio with a relative increase of 4R tau leading to more interactions with microtubules (Ghetti et al., 2015).

GRN encodes progranulin, a precursor protein of 593 amino acids. When cleaved, it leads to the formation of granulins. The exact role of progranulin or granulins is not yet fully understood, but it has been linked to neuronal growth, lysosomal function, inflammation and stress response (Holler et al., 2017; Petkau and Leavitt, 2014).

Around 130 GRN mutations in 483 families have been identified, with a high prevalence in southern Europe, especially in Italy (Moore et al., 2020). Intriguingly, GRN mutations have been found more in women (58.4%) than men (Moore et al., 2020). The most common disease causative mutations are nonsense, frameshift and splice site variants leading to premature stop codons that activate nonsense-mediated decay, leading to haploinsufficiency and subsequent reduced progranulin protein levels (Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006; Cruts and Van Broeckhoven, 2008). Other pathogenic variants include genomic deletions (Rovelet-Lecrux et al., 2008) or elimination of the initiation codon for protein synthesis (Cruts et al., 2006). Some missense mutations have also been associated with disease (Kleinberger et al., 2016). Consistent with the haploinsufficiency theory, patients with heterozygous mutations have 50% less progranulin levels both in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma (Coppola et al., 2008).

Patients carrying GRN mutations have also been reported to present with phenotypes resembling AD, Lewy body dementia or CBS (Moore et al., 2020) and homozygous GRN mutation carriers, presenting complete loss of progranulin, develop neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with early onset retinal degeneration, seizures and cerebellar ataxia (Smith et al., 2012).

Pathogenic repeat expansions in C9ORF72 are the most common genetic cause of FTD and ALS, explaining disease in 4–29% of individuals with FTD (Van Mossevelde et al., 2018). These have also been reported in patients with AD, PD, PSP, CBS, ataxia and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) (Balendra and Isaacs, 2018) and were reported to be the most common cause of Huntington disease phenocopies (Hensman Moss et al., 2014). Although a threshold for pathogenicity has not been clearly determined for the number of repeats, a cut-off of 30 repeats is typically used. Patients usually have expansions ranging from hundreds to thousands and most healthy individuals have less than 12 repeats (Balendra and Isaacs, 2018). The pathogenic mechanisms of C9ORF72 mutations still need to be completely elucidated. Loss of function (possibly leading to defects in autophagy or lysosomal function), gain of protein function (characterized by toxic accumulation of dipeptide repeats) and gain of RNA function (characterized by toxic effects from the sense and antisense foci generated from the repeats) have been hypothesized as the underlying causes (Balendra and Isaacs, 2018). Epigenetic alterations in C9ORF72 associated disease have been postulated as the cause of reduction of gene product. Hypermethylation of the CpG-island located in the promoter region of C9ORF72 was only found in expansion carriers (Xi et al., 2013), and DNA methylation of the repeat expansion itself occurs in all carriers of alleles with &gt; 90 repeats, while small or intermediate alleles are completely unmethylated (Xi et al., 2015). The combined analyses of epigenetic and genetic data in C9ORF72 expansion carriers has also led to the identification of a 124.7 kb linkage disequilibrium block, tagged by rs9357140, and containing two overlapping genes (LOC101929163 and C6ORF10), associated with age at onset of disease not only in C9ORF72 expansion carriers, but also in FTD cases without expansions (Zhang et al., 2018).

2.2. Rare genetic causes of FTD

In addition to the most common mutated genes known to cause familial and a smaller proportion of sporadic FTD cases, there are several other genes that when mutated cause FTD in a much smaller number of cases. Many of these rare genetic forms fall within the spectrum of FTD-ALS with many of the genes identified so far causing one of these phenotypes or both. From these, TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is thought to be the one more frequently harboring FTD-causing mutations after MAPT, GRN and C9ORF72 (Freischmidt et al., 2017; Helgason et al., 2013). TBK1 is a multifunctional kinase involved in the regulation of various cellular pathways, including immune response, inflammation, autophagy, cell proliferation, and insulin signaling. Heterozygous loss of function variants were initially shown to cause ALS and FTD (Freischmidt et al., 2015). Since then, in-frame deletions of single amino acids and missense variants have also been associated with these phenotypes, although their definite role in disease is still not known (Freischmidt et al., 2017).

Mutations in the TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43)-encoding gene, TARDBP, are responsible for a smaller percentage (~1%) of FTD cases (Baizabal-Carvallo and Jankovic, 2016; Caroppo et al., 2016). TDP-43 is a RNA/DNA binding protein involved in RNA-related metabolism (Prasad et al., 2019), with mutations associated with an anticipation phenomenon and reduced penetrance in most families (Caroppo et al., 2016). Reported TARDBP mutations causing FTD are rare and not definitely pathogenic (Hardy and Rogaeva, 2014), although recently, four patients from two kindreds were reported to carry the same mutation, increasing support for its role in “pure” FTD (Ramos et al., 2020).

Mutations in Sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1) were shown to segregate with FTD after the identification of p62 (the protein encoded by this gene) in neuronal and glial ubiquitin-positive inclusions in different neurodegenerative diseases (Le Ber et al., 2013). SQSTM1 mutations were initially associated with Paget’s disease. In FTD and ALS mutations are typically missense, but nonsense and deletions have also been described (Le Ber et al., 2013; van der Zee et al., 2014). In a case-control rare variant association analysis, no differences were found when taking into consideration the whole protein, but authors observed a clustering of rare variants in the ubiquitin-associated domain of p62 and argued that this domain drives the association and variants located there double the risk for FTD (van der Zee et al., 2014). Biallelic loss-of-function variants in SQSTM1 have been shown to cause a childhood or adolescence onset, neurodegenerative disease characterized by ataxia, gait abnormalities, dysarthria, dystonia, vertical gaze palsy, and cognitive decline (Haack et al., 2016). The p62 protein participates in the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins by autophagy and is involved in cell differentiation, apoptosis and immune responses (Le Ber et al., 2013). Disease associated mutations are believed to lead to dysfunction of the degradation of proteins by affecting the binding of the p62 protein leading to disruption of selective autophagy pathways in neurodegenerative disease.

CHMP2B encodes the charged multivesicular body protein 2b, a subunit of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport-III, which is implicated in the final stages of cell division, egress of virus from cells, nuclear envelope reformation after mitosis and lysosomal degradation (Clayton et al., 2018; Gydesen et al., 2002). CHMP2B mutations can cause both FTD and ALS (Parkinson et al., 2006). Clearly pathogenic mutations lead to C-terminus truncation of the protein, causing loss of the VPS4 binding domain. The reported mutations are nonsense or affecting gene splicing (van der Zee et al., 2008). Several missense mutations have also been reported, but their pathogenicity has not yet been clearly established (Han et al., 2012).

VCP encodes the valosin-containing protein, which is a member of a superfamily of proteins that uses the energy gained from ATP hydrolysis to structurally remodel proteins. VCP is part of the ubiquitin-proteasome system and it functions in diverse cellular processes including endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation, mitophagy, autophagy and DNA repair (Meyer et al., 2012). Disease-causing missense mutations were initially associated with inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and FTD (Watts et al., 2004). This is an adult-onset rare disorder characterized by distal muscle weakness where VCP pathogenic variants cause myopathy in 90% of the cases, Paget disease of bone in 50%, and FTD in 30% (Van Mossevelde et al., 2018). The phenotypes associated with VCP mutations have since been extended to include motor neuron disease (Johnson et al., 2010), and, more rarely, PD, AD, and peripheral neuropathies (Van Mossevelde et al., 2018).

A minority of FTD cases result from mutations in CHCHD10 which encodes the mitochondrial protein coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain containing 10 (Bannwarth et al., 2014). Other phenotypes such as myopathy, cerebellar ataxia, ALS and PD have also been associated with mutations in this gene (Perrone et al., 2017). Reported mutations are missense or nonsense (Zhou et al., 2017) and are all concentrated in exon 2 (Zhou et al., 2017). These are thought to lead to disease through a loss of function mechanism (Perrone et al., 2017). CHCHD10 is a multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of mitochondrial metabolism, synthesis of respiratory chain components, and modulation of cell apoptosis (Abramzon et al., 2020). A similar small number of cases have been associated with mutations in fused-in-sarcoma (FUS). In fact, evidence supporting the role of FUS mutations in pure FTD is conflicting (Hardy and Rogaeva, 2014; Lysikova et al., 2019). FUS encodes the fused in sarcoma protein, which is part of a family of DNA/RNA binding proteins. It has several roles related to RNA metabolism, as well as DNA repair and cellular proliferation (Deng et al., 2014; Ling et al., 2013). Most mutations associated with disease are missense, but insertions and deletions (some of them causing frameshift mutations) have also been reported. About half of these disease-associated mutations are located in the last exon of the gene, which encodes a nuclear localization signal. Many of the remaining mutations are located in an exon encoding for a part of the Gly-rich low-complexity (prion-like) domain, similar to the mutation distribution observed in TARDBP (Hardy and Rogaeva, 2014). The pathobiological mechanisms involved in disease may be due to gain of toxic function (overexpression of both the mutant and the normal protein are toxic in animal models) or loss of function (the mutant protein can bind the normal and suppress its and other proteins’ function) (Ling et al., 2013).

Other genes rarely responsible for pure FTD cases that are rare causes of ALS or FTD-ALS include UBQLN2, CCNF, OPTN, DCTN1, TUBA4A, and CYLD. UBQLN2 encodes ubiquilin 2, a component of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (Deng et al., 2011). The inheritance pattern is X-linked dominant, affecting equally men and women, although men have a significantly lower age at onset (Deng et al., 2011). Most patients develop ALS, but cases with FTD-ALS have been reported (Deng et al., 2011). Mutations are mostly missense but one in-frame deletion variant has also been reported (Renaud et al., 2019). Recently, CCNF (which encodes cyclin F) missense mutations have been shown to cause ALS and FTD (Williams et al., 2016a). The identification of mutations was performed initially in a single family, and additional variants were then identified in large international cohorts. It was also shown that expression of mutant CCNF in neuronal cells causes abnormal ubiquitination and accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, including TDP-43 (Williams et al., 2016a). Mutations in OPTN were initially described as causing ALS (Maruyama et al., 2010), with loss-of-function as well as missense mutations being identified. Following this, pathogenic mutations in OPTN were also found in FTD (Pottier et al., 2015). OPTN encodes optineurin, a highly abundant protein, involved in several cellular processes, including the inflammatory response, autophagy, Golgi maintenance and vesicular transport (Toth and Atkin, 2018). DCTN1 encodes the dynactin subunit p150Glued. Dynactin is a motor protein involved in axonal transport, and the p150Glued subunit has an important role in dynactin’s overall function. DCTN1 mutations are associated with Perry syndrome, but have also been found to cause ALS, FTD and PSP phenotypes (Konno et al., 2017). TUBA4A encodes tubulin alpha 4a, a protein involved in microtubule stabilization. TUBA4A mutations have been found at increased frequency in ALS cases, with at least two patients also developing FTD (Smith et al., 2014). Mutations were shown to destabilize the microtubule network, emphasizing the role of the cytoskeleton in ALS. CYLD has been recently shown to cause FTD and ALS in one European-Australian family (Dobson-Stone et al., 2020). Only one missense mutation (p.Met719Val) has been documented so far. CYLD seems to be involved in inflammatory processes by regulating NF-κB, and in autophagy (Dobson-Stone et al., 2020). It has been previously shown to interact with many other genes associated with the FTD-ALS spectrum, such as TBK1 (Friedman et al., 2008), OPTN (Nagabhushana et al., 2011) and SQSTM1 (Jin et al., 2008).

In addition to the well-recognized FTD-ALS spectrum, mutations in genes known to cause AD can also be associated with FTD phenotypes. This is the case for some mutations in PSEN1 and PSEN2 (Dermaut et al., 2004; Marcon et al., 2009). More recently, variants in TREM2 have been identified as a significant genetic risk factor for AD (Guerreiro et al., 2013b). The triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 is a transmembrane glycoprotein innate immune phagocytic receptor expressed on brain microglia that has a key role in regulating the immune response and phagocytic activity in the central nervous system (CNS). Homozygous or compound heterozygous TREM2 mutations cause polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy (or Nasu-Hakola disease) (Paloneva, 2002). Bi-allelic mutations in this gene have also been found in patients presenting a FTD phenotype without bone changes (Guerreiro et al., 2013a). Moreover, a recent meta-analysis of rare TREM2 variants found that variants p.Arg47His and p.Thr96Lys confer an ~2–3-fold increase in risk for FTD (Su et al., 2018), adding to previous suggestions of a possible role of TREM2 rare variants in this disease (Carmona et al., 2018; Cuyvers et al., 2014).

2.2.1. Other genes possibly related to FTD

In addition to TREM2 there are some genes associated with leukodystrophies that have been linked to FTD or FTD phenotypes. CSF1R, encoding the colony stimulating factor 1 receptor, was originally linked to autosomal-dominant adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia and is highly expressed in microglia (Cuyvers et al., 2014). Some groups have identified patients harboring CSF1R mutations with FTD phenotypes (Kim et al., 2018; Swerdlow et al., 2009). AARS2, which encodes the mitochondrial alanyl-tRNA synthetase 2, has been reported to cause a leukodystrophy that sometimes has a frontal lobe-type dementia (Dallabona et al., 2014), and recently it was shown to cause FTD in a Korean cohort (Kim et al., 2018). A homozygous mutation in TMEM106B, a known FTD risk modifier (see next section for more details), was shown to cause a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy (Simons et al., 2017). Mutations in PLP1 cause Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a rare X-linked disorder of the CNS, characterized by a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy. It is usually present in female carriers with a mild phenotype of personality changes, gait dysfunction and dementia, resembling FTD. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may show diffuse leukodystrophy in these cases (Nance et al., 1996). Lastly, homozygous mutations in PSAP (which encodes prosaposin, a regulator of progranulin) are associated with a fatal lysosomal storage disorder, causing metachromatic leukodystrophy (Kuchar et al., 2009; Nicholson et al., 2016). This is intriguing since white matter hyperintensities (WMH) are often seen on MRI brain scans in FTD due to GRN mutations. Whether these changes are related to vascular pathology remains unclear (Sudre et al., 2017).

Other genes have been identified in different conditions that can be related to FTD, although no specific pathogenic mutations have so far been shown to cause FTD. These include mutations in HNRNPA2B1 and HNRNPA1, which are part of the ubiquitously expressed RNA-binding proteins family and known to interact with TDP-43 (Budini et al., 2012). These were initially found as causative in multi-system proteinopathy (Kim et al., 2013a) but, so far, no pathogenic mutations have been identified in FTD (Le Ber et al., 2014; Seelen et al., 2014). In a similar manner, protein kinase CAMP-dependent type I regulatory subunit beta (PRKAR1B) mutations have been identified in cases of FUS-negative neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease, an un-common neurodegenerative disorder that typically presents as early-onset FTD, associated with parkinsonism (Wong et al., 2014).

2.3. Genetic risk factors in FTD

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed several genetic loci relevant for sporadic FTD with varying degrees of replication. In order to identify susceptibility loci specific for FTLD-TDP, Van Deerlin and colleagues performed a GWAS in 515 individuals and were able to identify a significant association with chromosome 7p21 region. This locus contains the transmembrane protein 106B (TMEM106B), a gene that has now been consistently replicated as an FTD risk factor and disease modifier (Pottier et al., 2018; Van Deerlin et al., 2010). It is involved in dendrite morphogenesis and maintenance by regulating lysosomal trafficking. It may act in disease by inhibiting retrograde transport of lysosomes along dendrites, and has been shown to modify disease onset in GRN, C9ORF72 and CHMP2B mutation carriers, with the risk allele being associated with a decrease of 13 years in the age at onset of GRN mutation carriers (Cruchaga et al., 2011; Pottier et al., 2018). More recently, it was also shown to modulate disease in other conditions, such as PD (Tropea et al., 2019) and limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE) (Hokkanen et al., 2020). Currently lacking replication and arising from a targeted approach, genetic variants in the myelin associated oligodendrocyte basic protein (MOBP) have also been suggested to be clinical modifiers in FTD, after the association of one allele with disease duration (Irwin et al., 2014).

Novel potential risk loci were identified in a two-stage GWAS including 3,526 FTD cases and 9,402 controls: the chromosomes 6p21.3 (HLA locus) and 11q14 (RAB38/CTSC) regions. Of these, variants in the HLA locus encompassing butyrophilin-like 2 (MHC class II associated) (BTNL2) and close to the major histocompatibility complex class II HLA-DRA/HLA-DRB5 showed the most consistent associations when analysing the whole cohort. The RAB38/CTSC locus was identified as a potential novel locus for the bvFTD subtype. In this same study a suggestive signal was also observed for the APOE/TOMM40 locus (Ferrari et al., 2014). Although with inconsistent results, APOE has been studied as an FTD risk factor for many years (Verpillat et al., 2002). The ε4 haplotype, the strongest genetic risk factor for AD, has been shown in several studies to also increase the risk of FTD (Mishra et al., 2017; Su et al., 2017). It is important to highlight the possibility of these significant associations in FTD resulting from the clinical overlap consistently seen in cohorts of clinical AD and FTD cases. Interestingly, both APOE and TOMM40 were identified to be associated with bvFTD when performing a gene based association analysis largely in the same cohort. The same analysis also identified ARHGAP35 (encoding Rho GTPase-activating protein 35) and SERPINA1 (encoding alpha-1 anti-trypsin) as modulators of risk of progressive non-fluent PPA FTD (Mishra et al., 2017). More recently a novel risk locus on chromosome 8, encompassing GFRA2, was identified in a genome-wide analysis. This was a replicated finding with support from in vitro studies that will be interesting to see replicated by other research groups in independent cohorts (Pottier et al., 2018).

Other genes also associated with FTD risk include UNC13A and SORT1. The first was initially described to modulate ALS survival, and has subsequently been associated with FTD as well (Diekstra et al., 2014; Placek et al., 2019). UNC13A encodes Unc-13 Homolog A, a member of a family of presynaptic proteins widespread in the nervous system and involved in the priming of presynaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitters before their release (Diekstra et al., 2014). Sortilin-1 (SORT1), a gene previously associated with AD risk, has also been shown to regulate progranulin levels (Carrasquillo et al., 2010). Interestingly, the C-terminus of progranulin is necessary to bind sortilin, a receptor protein that regulates intracellular protein trafficking in the Golgi (Hu et al., 2010).

Some genes known to be involved in polyQ expansion disorders have been associated with FTD. The most relevant of these findings include the identification of intermediary expansions in ATXN2 as a risk factor for FTD and ALS (Lattante et al., 2014); and the description of a family with an intermediate length expansion of TBP (associated with spinocerebellar ataxia-17) presenting as FTD (Olszewska et al., 2019). Further studies clarifying the interactions between polyQ disorders and FTD are warranted, particularly since ATXN1 intermediate-length expansions have also been associated with ALS (Lattante et al., 2018).

A rare MAPT variant (p.Ala152Thr) has been reported to increase the risk of developing FTD. The same variant was also associated with the risk of AD and PSP (Coppola et al., 2012). Common variants near MAPT (tagging the H1 haplotype, which is also associated with higher tau expression) have been associated with AD, PD, FTD, and ALS (Desikan et al., 2015; Karch et al., 2018).

Taken together, these associations add further evidence for shared pathways in neurodegenerative dementias, possibly justify, at least in part, the sometimes intermixed clinical phenotypes and pathological characteristics seen in some dementia patients.

2.4. Considerations on the genetic architecture of FTD

Neurodegenerative dementias can be considered as spectrum disorders. FTD, as an example, is a highly heterogeneous disorder, with several distinct phenotypes and different pathological changes underlying disease. It is difficult to find a common feature for all patients in the FTD spectrum. Genetics reflects this heterogeneity: there is a small number of genes underlying Mendelian disease in a considerable number of cases and a few sporadic patients; and there is an increasing number of mutated genes leading to disease in single families or in a very small number of FTD patients (Fig. 1). However, most of these genes can be assigned to a few pathways, possibly defining an identity molecular skeleton for the disease (Ferrari et al., 2019). Pathological studies suggest aberrant protein inclusions in the cytoplasm and nucleus of neurons and glia hyperproliferation as the major pathological hallmarks of FTD (Mackenzie and Neumann, 2016). A large portion of the genes associated with FTD are involved in cellular waste disposal pathways, leading to accumulation of proteins in the cytoplasm. In parallel, glial hyperproliferation suggests an important role of immune-related processes, with several identified genes having a role in this pathway. It is also interesting to note that, although their deposition is central in FTD, TARDBP, FUS and MAPT do not seem to be associated with these two pathways, suggesting the existence of other dysfunctional molecular processes. TARDBP and FUS (as well as HNRNPA2B1 and HNRNPA1) are involved in processes that control gene expression and RNA metabolism. The role of MAPT in FTD is still not fully understood, with protein aggregation or axonal transport dysfunction having been suggested as potential dysfunctional pathways. In addition to MAPT, other genes, namely TUBA4A and DCTN1, are also involved in axonal transport. Similarly, other pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis of FTD, namely those sustaining neuronal development and homeostasis, synaptic dysfunction and DNA damage response (Ferrari et al., 2019). CHCHD10 (and possibly VCP) may also implicate mitochondrial dysfunction in disease pathogenesis (Fang et al., 2015). Further refinement of the molecular pathways involved in FTD is needed, which may result from larger GWAS studies, similar to what has been seen in AD.

3. Genetics of dementia with Lewy bodies

Apart from the characteristic dementia, symptoms of DLB include parkinsonism, hallucinations, cognitive fluctuations, and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (McKeith et al., 2017). Despite being a common disease, accounting for up to 30% of all dementia cases, the genetics of DLB remains largely understudied (Erkkinen et al., 2018). This is probably due, in part, to overlapping phenotypes with other neurodegenerative diseases, particularly PD and AD, and to a frequent coexistence of other pathologies (Robinson et al., 2018). This can lead to high rates of clinical misdiagnosis, which depending on several factors can range from 20 to 50% when comparing the accuracy of clinical diagnoses against autopsy results (Hohl et al., 2000; Rizzo et al., 2018). Evidence is growing for a strong genetic component to DLB, distinct from the genetic profile of other similar diseases. A recent study estimated the heritability of the disease to be about 60% (Guerreiro et al., 2019), and the number of studies implicating new loci is growing.

The strong overlap in phenotypic characteristics with AD and PD is also reflected in the genetics of DLB, with established risk factors SNCA, GBA, and APOE, also being implicated in PD (SNCA and GBA) and AD (APOE). Only these three genes have been consistently replicated in large scale genetic studies of DLB cases, including two recent GWAS (Guerreiro et al., 2018; Rongve et al., 2019).

3.1. Well established DLB genes

SNCA was the first gene implicated in DLB. It encodes α-synuclein, a small neuron-predominant protein, important for synaptic transmission (Benskey et al., 2016). Familial cases with dementia and parkinsonism were found to carry two point mutations, p.Ala53Thr and p.Glu46Lys (Morfis and Cordato, 2006; Singleton et al., 2003; Zarranz et al., 2004). Since this first report, a variety of mutations have been identified in SNCA in DLB cases (Table 1), however point mutations and copy number changes in SNCA are still rare overall causes of DLB. SNCA mutations in families lead to mixed phenotypes, and pathogenic mutations have been implicated in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases (Bougea et al., 2017; Kiely et al., 2013; Markopoulou et al., 2008; Pasanen et al., 2014), with dementia symptoms often being variable.

The SNCA locus has also been consistently associated with the risk of developing DLB. The profile of association is different from that observed in PD, with the most associated variants located towards the 5’ end of the gene in DLB and towards the 3’ end in PD (Bras et al., 2014a), suggesting a different disease mechanism between DLB and PD.

Another PD risk locus, GBA, has also been implicated in DLB (Gámez-Valero et al., 2016; Nalls et al., 2013; Shiner et al., 2016). GBA encodes glucocerebrosidase, a lysosomal enzyme thought to be responsible for increased protein aggregation and alterations in lipid levels due to lysosomal dysfunction when mutated in Lewy body disorders (Velayati et al., 2010). Mutations in GBA have been reported to increase the risk of dementia in PD, and have been shown to be more frequent in DLB cases than PD cases (Meeus et al., 2012). Similarly to the SNCA locus, the GBA locus has reached genome-wide significance in GWAS of DLB. The variant thought to be driving the association at this locus is the p.Glu365Lys, which is also associated with PD (Berge-Seidl et al., 2017; Blauwendraat et al., 2020). Nonetheless, a variety of other variants within the locus have reported roles in DLB (Bras et al., 2014a; Clark et al., 2009; Gámez-Valero et al., 2016; Goker-Alpan et al., 2006; Nalls et al., 2013; Nishioka et al., 2011; Shiner et al., 2016; Tsuang et al., 2012; Velayati et al., 2010) (Table 1). Some mutations such as p.Glu326Lys, decrease glucocerebrosidase activity. This change is detectable in CSF, making it a potential biomarker (Berge-Seidl et al., 2017). GBA has also been associated with earlier age at onset (Gámez-Valero et al., 2016; Nalls et al., 2013; Shiner et al., 2016) and worse cognitive symptoms in PD (Mata et al., 2016).

The ε4 allele of APOE is known to be the strongest genetic risk factor for AD. Similarly, statistically significant associations for this locus have been reported for the risk of developing DLB (Guerreiro et al., 2018). However, in DLB it has been a matter of debate if this risk arises from the ε4 allele independent stimulation of α-syn pathology (Dickson et al., 2018; Tsuang et al., 2013), or through the effects on amyloid-β and tau pathologies (similar to what happens in AD) (Irwin et al., 2017). If on one side the detection of an association of APOE risk in DLB brains with minimal AD-related pathology supports a dementia mechanism unrelated to amyloid pathology (Tsuang et al., 2013), on the other, the earlier age at onset of the disease as a result of AD pathology accompanying other DLB symptoms seems to support that APOE risk in DLB is driven by AD-related co-pathologies (Prokopenko et al., 2019). Although these are not mutually exclusive mechanisms, more recently, two studies aiming to decipher the effect of APOE on α-synuclein using mouse models, reported that APOE ε4 increased α-synuclein phosphorylation, worsened motor and memory problems and, consequently, exacerbated neurodegeneration (Davis et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020). One of these studies (Davis et al., 2020) also confirmed the protective effect of APOE ε2 in DLB. Again, this protective effect had not been conclusively determined before, with conflicting results found in the literature (Singleton et al., 2002), but it is in line with previous results from our group (Fig. 2) (Guerreiro et al., 2015). APOE has also been associated with shorter survival span in DLB cases (Geiger et al., 2016; Keogh et al., 2016; Larsson et al., 2018) and has a significant potential as a therapeutic target.

3.2. GWAS in DLB

Additional loci have been associated with risk of disease in the two most recent DLB GWAS studies. In one of these studies, three novel loci reached genome-wide significance, but none were replicated in all stages of the analysis. The BCL7C/STX1B locus on chromosome 16 and the GABRB3 locus on chromosome 15 were replicated in a meta-analysis but were not significant in the replication stage alone. However, both these loci remained significant after excluding all non-pathologically diagnosed samples, perhaps indicating a lack of power for the association. Two more loci were suggestive of an association in the discovery stage, SOX17 and CNTN1. The SOX17 association did not improve when considering only pathological samples, however the CNTN1 association improved and maintained a similar effect size in the replication stage, again suggesting the need for a study with improved statistical power (Guerreiro et al., 2018). Another study detected a new locus, ZFPM1, which showed a suggestive association, and may have a role in DLB based on a previously detected association with psychosis in AD (Zheng et al., 2015). None of the other suggestive loci in the previous GWAS were replicated.

While large scale genetic analyses are still limited in DLB, a recent paper investigated the potential role of copy number variations (CNVs) in DLB using the same cohort described by Guerreiro et al. (2018). This study detected 5 CNV regions with a significant association to DLB, 2 of which were not present in controls or publicly available databases: a deletion overlapping LAPTM4B and another deletion overlapping SPG9-NME1-NME2. The other three regions overlapped MSR1, PDZD2, and ADGRG7/TFG. This study also assessed the role of CNVs and genes previously identified to be associated with other neurodegenerative diseases. Five previously associated CNVs and 8 CNVs overlapping neurodegenerative associated genes were detected using this approach (Kun-Rodrigues et al., 2019).

3.3. Other variants in DLB

Given the historical unavailability of large, well-powered DLB datasets, most loci, genes and variants have been implicated in the disease through clinical case studies or using a candidate gene approach. Rare variants identified in a number of genes known to be implicated in other neurodegenerative diseases have been suggested to have a role in DLB. Many of these variants have been detailed in previous reviews (Orme et al., 2018; Outeiro et al., 2019), and are summarized in Table 1. Even though many of these variants are still lacking independent replication confirming their involvement in the disease, it is worth mentioning the potential role of some of these genes and specific variants in DLB.

Very few mutations have been shown to definitely cause DLB. A recent study identified a known pathogenic mutation in CSF1R (p.Ile794Thr) in a patient clinically presenting as DLB (Sharma et al., 2019). In fact, CSF1R has been previously associated with parkinsonian features, in addition to dementia (Sundal et al., 2013). This extends the clinical presentations known to be associated with CSF1R mutations but the co-occurrence of two neuropathological processes (one associating with CSF1R and the other with Lewy body pathology) cannot be excluded. Neuropathological examination of these cases would be helpful in assessing this possibility (Sharma et al., 2019).

Several new, potentially pathogenic, variants have been implicated in a very aggressive, rapidly progressive disorder, clinically similar to CJD. One patient was clinically diagnosed with DLB, but later determined to have CJD. She harbored the p.Val180Ile mutation in PRNP (Tomizawa et al., 2020). Another variant in this gene (p.Met232Arg) had been previously reported in a confirmed DLB case. This particular variant led to the initial diagnosis of CJD, but upon autopsy, extensive Lewy pathology in the substantia nigra and cerebral cortices, along with lack of abnormal prion aggregates, kuru plaques, and spongiform degeneration led to the diagnosis of DLB (Koide et al., 2002). Similarly, two GBA variants (p.Asp140His and p.Glu326Lys) were reported in one patient, and two heterozygous variants in SORL1 (p.Asp140Asn and p.Arg1799Gln) have been identified in patients diagnosed with CJD that were later given a neuropathological diagnosis of DLB (Geut et al., 2019). In both instances, patients had a very rapid disease progression.

Other genes with potential roles in DLB are SNCB and EIF4G1: two variants (p.Val70Met and p.Pro123His) in SNCB were suggested to contribute to DLB (Ohtake et al., 2004), and another study implicated EIF4G1 in two familial DLB cases (Fujioka et al., 2013).

Variants in PLCG2 were originally associated with a protective effect in the risk of developing AD (Sims et al., 2017). More recently, a similar effect was suggested for DLB (and FTD) (van der Lee et al., 2019), although this is yet to be replicated (Orme et al., 2020).

In addition to these individual case studies, exome sequencing has been performed recently on cohorts of DLB cases. One study analyzed the exomes of 91 pathologically confirmed DLB cases for variants in previously known neurodegenerative genes. In total, likely pathogenic variants were identified in 4.4% of the cases with the identification of 18 rare heterozygous variants, 3 of which were reported as pathogenic (CHMP2B p.Ile29Val, PRKN p.Arg275Trp and p.Gly430Asp). Overall, the authors suggested that the lack of family history in most DLB cases can be associated with reduced penetrance of DLB-associated variants (Keogh et al., 2016). Additional variants in PSEN2 (p.Asp439Ala) and SQSTM1 (p.Ala33Val) were also reported as likely pathogenic for DLB. While SQSTM1 had been previously detected in FTD (Fecto et al., 2011; Le Ber et al., 2013) and in a case of early onset AD (Cuyvers et al., 2015), PSEN2 had been previously associated with DLB in another study (Meeus et al., 2012). Four other variants of unknown pathogenicity were also reported in DLB (EIF4G1 p.Met1134Val, SQSTM1 p.Pro27Leu, GIGYF2 p.Ser1029Cys and p.Ser66Thr) (Keogh et al., 2016).

The largest exome analysis to date, looking at 1,118 DLB cases also focused primarily on regions previously associated with neurodegenerative disease. In this analysis a known FTD pathogenic mutation in GRN (p.Arg493*) was identified in one case. The authors suggest that either the case was misdiagnosed as DLB or the phenotypes were largely indistinguishable. Rare variants were also detected in other genes, such as APP, CHCHD2, DCTN1, MAPT, NOTCH3, SQSTM1, TBK1 and TIA1. Given the lack of confirmed pathogenic mutations detected in genes known to be associated with other neurodegenerative diseases, the authors suggested a potential role for novel rare variation, not shared with the other diseases included in the analysis (Orme et al., 2020).

3.4. Considerations on the genetic architecture of DLB

Because Mendelian mutations have not yet been found to specifically cause DLB, this disease has been considered to be non-genetic for many years. However, DLB cases have a history of dementia and PD in the family more frequently than controls (Boot et al., 2013; Papapetropoulos et al., 2006), and siblings have 2.3 fold higher risk of developing DLB if one sibling is affected (Nervi et al., 2011). Families including DLB cases present histories of disease that include parkinsonism and other dementias, which may contribute to the small number of DLB families currently described in the literature. Another contributing factor may be the potential involvement of recessive genetic factors in a late onset disease such as DLB, leading to pedigrees with small numbers of affected relatives and to the occurrence of familial cases as apparently sporadic in the population. These factors may also contribute to the fact that the genetic architecture of DLB is currently the least understood of all common dementias with only three GWAS loci currently associated in a replicated fashion with the disease and mutations in one of these loci (SNCA) representing the only consistent Mendelian cause of DLB (See Fig. 3.).

4. Genetics of vascular dementia

Vascular dementia is an umbrella term referring to a group of cerebrovascular diseases that lead to cognitive impairment, being the most severe clinical manifestation of vascular cognitive impairment (Gorelick et al., 2011). Different clinical entities are covered under this umbrella term, including rare familial forms such as cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL); and sporadic forms such as those due to cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD), large artery atherosclerosis and cardioembolic stroke. Familial forms of VaD are typically monogenic while sporadic forms can be modulated by several risk factors (Ikram et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2015).

4.1. Mendelian forms of VaD

4.1.1. CADASIL

CADASIL is a monogenic disease that is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, although some sporadic cases have also been described (Coto et al., 2006; Joutel et al., 2000; Stojanov et al., 2014). Characteristic symptoms include migraine with aura, recurrent subcortical strokes, gait disturbance, psychiatric disorders, and subcortical dementia due to CSVD (Chabriat et al., 1995). Genetically, CADASIL is caused by mutations in NOTCH3 (Joutel et al., 1996). The NOTCH family is a highly conserved gene group that regulates cell-cell interaction, embryogenesis and tissue commitment. Notch3 is a large type I transmembrane receptor, that regulates vasculogenesis, CNS neural stem cell maintenance and cell fate determination of CNS multipotent progenitor cells (Liu et al., 2010b; Tanigaki et al., 2001).

The vast majority of NOTCH3 variants responsible for disease involve conserved cysteine residues, through amino acid change, deletion or splice site mutations located at the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like repeats domain (Dichgans et al., 2001; Joutel et al., 1997, 1996; Low et al., 2007; Pavlovic et al., 2013; Salloway and Hong, 1998). Mutations in NOTCH3 are usually heterozygous, but there are also rare descriptions of homozygous variants presenting with symptoms that can be milder, similar, or more severe than the typical phenotypes (Liem et al., 2008; Ragno et al., 2013; Soong et al., 2013; Tuominen et al., 2001; Vinciguerra et al., 2014). Whether cysteine-sparing variants can lead to CADASIL is still controversial, as many variants considered in previous studies are frequent in population databases of genome variability such as gnomAD (Bersano et al., 2012; Brass et al., 2009; Scheid et al., 2008). For a systematic review of these variants see Muiño et al. (Muiño et al., 2017). Recently, the effects of two cysteine-sparing mutations that are not present in gnomAD (p.Gly73Ala and p.Arg75Pro) and one known CADASIL mutation (p.Arg133Cys), were tested in cells and shown to follow the same trend on cell survival, suggesting that mutations not involving cysteines but located in the EGF-like repeats domain might have a role in CADASIL (Huang et al., 2020). Interestingly, loss of function mutations do not appear to cause CADASIL (Rutten et al., 2013).

4.1.2. CARASIL

CARASIL (cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) is typically a recessive monogenic disease that results from mutations in HTRA1 and usually presents with symptoms such as alopecia, spondylosis, and cognitive impairment due to CSVD (Hara et al., 2009). Mutations are generally homozygous missense, nonsense or frameshift, although some cases of compound heterozygous missense and frameshift mutations have been reported as well (Bianchi et al., 2014; Cai et al., 2015; Hara et al., 2009; Mendioroz et al., 2010; Xie and Zhang, 2018). More recently, heterozygous mutations in HTRA1 have also been associated with disease (Verdura et al., 2015). It became apparent that there are two different phenotypes resulting from the pleiotropic effect of HTRA1 mutation in homozygous or heterozygous state: younger onset small vessel disease (SVD) with systemic manifestations (autosomal recessive), and later age at onset with absence of the typical extra-neurological features (autosomal dominant) (Verdura et al., 2015). HTRA1 binds and inhibits proteins of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) family. TGF-β proteins normally help control many critical cell functions, including the cells’ proliferation and differentiation, cell motility, and apoptosis, and TGF-β signaling is important for angiogenesis (Launay et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2012).

4.1.3. Fabry disease

Fabry disease is a lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of the α-galactosidase A enzyme, which disrupts the glycosphingolipid metabolism inducing stroke and VaD through one or more distinct mechanisms: CSVD, large artery disease and/or cardioembolism. (Nance et al., 2006). It is an X-linked disease caused by mutations in GLA (Bernstein et al., 1989) that can be missense, nonsense, frameshift or splice site, with the latter having major effects in splicing patterns such as exon skipping, cryptic splicing site activation, new splicing site creation, intron retention, and enhancer disruption (Auray-Blais et al., 2008; Fukuhara et al., 1990; Ishii et al., 2002; Lai et al., 2003). Although in hemizygous males the symptomatology is more severe and the disease has a higher incidence, females can also be affected particularly at later ages and with an overall lower frequency in symptoms manifestation, with the exception of cerebrovascular phenotypes which are as frequent as in males (Mehta et al., 2009). In females, the complete inactivation of the GLA locus and heterozygous missense variants have been described, leading the disease to have an X-linked dominant pattern of inheritance (Guffon, 2003; Whybra et al., 2001).

4.1.4. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is caused by the preferential and progressive deposition of amyloid-β in the walls of small arterioles and capillaries of the leptomeninges and cerebral cortex leading to lobar intracerebral haemorrhage, superficial siderosis and VaD symptoms (Levy et al., 1990). Missense mutations in APP (the first gene where mutations were shown to cause AD) and a deletion of two base pairs in a highly conserved region of the 3’ UTR of the gene, have been shown to cause CAA (Levy et al., 1990; Nicolas et al., 2016). Variants in PSEN1 and PSEN2 have also been described to cause CAA in AD patients (Dermaut et al., 2001; Mann et al., 2001; Nochlin et al., 1998). Du et al. proposed that SORL1, another gene related to AD, causes CAA-related inflammation. However, that finding, based on the identification of p.Lys1634Met, occurred in an APOE ε4 homozygous patient and the variant had an appreciable frequency in East Asia, where the patient originated from (Du et al., 2019). Other genes have also been shown to cause rare forms of CAA: stop-loss variants in ITM2B cause familial British and Danish dementias (Vidal et al., 1999, 2000); a missense mutation in CST3 causes the Icelandic type of CAA (Ghiso et al., 1986); mutations in TTR cause different forms of amyloidosis, including the transthyretin-type CAA (Petersen et al., 1997; Uchida et al., 1993); nonsense mutations in PRNP are associated with PRNP-related CAA (Ghetti et al., 1996; Revesz et al., 2009); and missense mutations in GSN lead to gelsolin amyloid angiopathy (de la Chapelle et al., 1992; Ghiso et al., 1990).

4.1.5. Other types of Mendelian VaD

It is worth briefly mentioning other genes that have also been associated with familial CSVD. These include COL4A1 and COL4A2 where heterozygous missense variants have been shown to cause CSVD with subcortical intracerebral hemorrhages and ischemic lacunar infarcts (Shah et al., 2010; Verbeek et al., 2012). Mutations in COL4A1 3’UTR disrupt a miR-29 binding site with subsequent upregulation of COL4A1, causing pontine autosomal dominant microangiopathy with leukoencephalopathy (PADMAL) (Verdura et al., 2016) and multi-infarct dementia of Swedish type (Siitonen et al., 2017).

CARASAL (cathepsin A–related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy) is a recently described hereditary adult-onset CSVD in which the clinical picture seems to be dominated by therapy-resistant hypertension, ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes and late cognitive deterioration. It is an autosomal dominant disease caused by genetic variants in CTSA, encoding cathepsin A which functions include the degradation of endothelin-1. Whether this peptide, a potent vasoconstrictor, plays a role in the pathogenesis of the disease is still unclear (Bugiani et al., 2016).

Heterozygous frameshift variants in TREX1 cause retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy (Richards et al., 2007). Bi-allelic missense variants in ADA2 cause an autoinflammatory disease presenting in child- or early-adulthood and manifesting with small vessel vasculitis resulting in ischemic and/or hemorrhagic strokes, or Sneddon syndrome (Bras et al., 2014b; Zhou et al., 2014).

Stroke mechanisms in autosomal dominant FOXC1 mutations include CSVD and large artery disease (mainly aneurysms of intracranial segment of internal carotid artery) (Søndergaard et al., 2017).

Other Mendelian conditions that may manifest with ischemic stroke and can lead to vascular cognitive impairment are represented in Table 2.

4.2. Sporadic forms of VaD

The majority of genetic studies in sporadic VaD have, so far, used a candidate gene approach. These case-control association studies typically focused on genes either known to be associated with other relevant diseases (such as AD, peripheral or cerebrovascular diseases), or known to be involved in molecular processes important for VaD (e.g.: inflammation or lipid metabolism) (Chapman et al., 1998; Endo et al., 2019). This approach, as it is the case in many other complex diseases, has not identified consistent, replicated associations between variants of interest and VaD. Examples of genes frequently studied in association with VaD but for which results are still inconclusive include: ACE, AGTR1, APOA1, CLU, F5, PSEN1, SERPINE1, SERPINA3, and UNC5C (Chapman et al., 1998; Kim et al., 2006a; Montañola et al., 2016; Nordestgaard et al., 2018; Skrobot et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2015; Wilson and Turnbough Jr, 1990; Yang et al., 2017; Zuliani et al., 2001). VEGFA is another candidate gene commonly mentioned as a risk factor for VaD. Its function probably relates to atherosclerosis whereas its expression appears to increase after damage caused by VaD to promote angiogenesis and recovery from neurological damage (Howell et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2006b; Park et al., 2018).

GWAS have also been used to study sporadic VaD but to a much smaller extent when compared with AD, for example, with only three GWAS currently reported in the literature specifically for VaD. Additionally, these studies were largely underpowered (the Dutch GWAS based on the Rotterdam Study included 67 patients, for example) and failed at the replication stage (Kim et al., 2013b; Schrijvers et al., 2012; Woo and Lee, 2012). Therefore, until independent replication is achieved, current GWAS hits for VaD should be treated with caution and perceived as not replicated.

In an attempt to overcome the small size of the individual cohorts in VaD association studies, several meta-analyses have been performed. Sun et al. focused on 69 studies comprising a total of 4,462 cases and 11,583 controls. The authors reported different levels of associations, particularly for APOE, MTHFR, PON1, TGFB1 and TNF (Sun et al., 2015). A similar study suggested an association for APOE and MTHFR, but not for PON1 (Skrobot et al., 2016), highlighting the contradictory nature of many of these reports (Alam et al., 2014; Bednarska-Makaruk et al., 2013; Dantoine et al., 2002; Liu et al., 2010a). On the other hand, there is growing evidence for the risk of VaD being modulated by variants in genes related to inflammation, although so far these associations have not reached genome-wide significance. Nonetheless, quantitative association studies have found TGFB1, TNF, IL1B, and IL6 serum or CSF levels to be different between VaD and controls (Kim and Lee, 2006; Peila et al., 2007; Pola et al., 2002; Yasutake, 2006; Yucesoy et al., 2006; Zuliani et al., 2007).

4.2.1. VaD GWAS based on associated diseases and endophenotypes

Additional lines of research have focused on the study of genes and GWAS results identified in related clinical entities, or in intermediate phenotypes. Endophenotypes are usually quantitative and part of disease causal pathway(s). This puts endophenotypes closer to genes when compared to clinical phenotypes, allowing for a greater power in gene discovery studies (Jian and Fornage, 2018). It should be noted that sample selection for association studies based on endophenotypes can be a source of bias if different underlying conditions are related to the endophenotype being tested. This can make interpretation of association signals specific to endophenotypes that show no correlation to association signals related to clinical diagnoses very challenging (Dick et al., 2006). Nonetheless, the use of endophenotypes to understand the genetic basis of several complex diseases has been successful. VaD endophenotypes have been tested for association using GWAS and GWAS meta-analyses approaches, including stroke (Malik et al., 2018; Neurology Working Group of the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium, the Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), and the International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC), 2016; Williams et al., 2016b), ischemic stroke (Malik et al., 2016; NINDS Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC), 2016), intracerebral hemorrhage (Woo et al., 2014), WMHs burden (Fornage et al., 2011; Opherk et al., 2014; Traylor et al., 2016, 2019), and migraine phenotypes (Freilinger et al., 2012; Gormley et al., 2016). In 2016 a two-stage GWAS including 16,851 stroke cases and 32,473 controls replicated previous findings either in stroke or in subtypes of stroke for the associations of ALDH2, HDAC9, PITX2 and ZFHX3 and risk of disease (NINDS Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC), 2016). Two years later, a larger GWAS was performed in a cohort of approximately 70,000 stroke patients and 455,000 controls, and identified genome-wide significant associations at 32 loci. Three of these loci overlapped known Mendelian genes (HTRA1, COL4A1 and COL4A2), while others confirmed previous findings for ABO, FOXF2, MMP12, PMF1/SEMA4A, SH2B3, TSPAN2 and ZCCHC14 (Malik et al., 2018).

In a recent meta-analysis including 60,000 individuals with migraine and 300,000 controls, 44 independent risk variants mapping to 38 loci were identified as genome-wide significant. Several previously reported loci were replicated, including HTRA1, PRDM16, TSPAN2/NGF, MEF2D, TRPM8/HJURP, TGFBR2, PHACTR1, FHL5/UFL1, SUGCT, ASTN2, and LRP1/STAT6/SDR9C7 (Gormley et al., 2016). Two studies focused on WMHs burden in stroke patients replicated the associations with COL4A2, TRIM65, TRIM47, EFEMP1 and PMF1 as well as a novel association for PLEKHG1 (Traylor et al., 2016, 2019). WMHs burden has also been specifically studied in CADASIL patients. Although not reaching genome-wide significance, the results suggested that several variants in addition to NOTCH3 have a role in WMHs in CADASIL (Opherk et al., 2014).

A GWAS study subdivided AD patients by their co-morbid features such as CAA and vascular brain injury (VBI), but none of their hits for both these features were genome-wide significant, with the exception of APOE in CAA. Variants in other loci were close to significance in association with CAA, including HDAC9, MCC and NCALD, and with VBI, AGBL3, CIP2A, CFAP58, PCSK5 and SEZ6L (Beecham et al., 2014). More recently, a meta-analysis of association studies focusing on AD endophenotypes reported CNTNAP2 as a risk factor for the vascular burden in AD, although this result was not genome-wide significant (Moreno-Grau et al., 2019).

4.2.2. APOE in VaD

Over the years APOE has been one of the main targets of genetic studies in VaD. Conflicting results can be found in the literature for the effect of APOE on VaD as some studies showed ε2 and ε4 were risk alleles through different mechanisms (one promoting hemorrhages and the other promoting amyloid-β accumulation), others showed that only one of the two alleles conferred risk, and others that APOE had no effect on risk of VaD (Engelborghs et al., 2003; Frank et al., 2002; McCarron and Nicoll, 2000; Nicoll et al., 1996; Nicoll and McCarron, 2001; Rannikmäe et al., 2014; Yamada et al., 1996). Several reasons have been suggested to underlie these conflicting results, including the study of small sample sizes, diverse populations (APOE haplotypes are known to have very significant differences in the risk of AD across populations) or the study of VaD as a homogeneous clinical entity. Related to the latter, grouping VaD types with different etiologies might be masking the ε2 effect on hemorrhages, since this effect has been consistently shown for sporadic CAA (Charidimou et al., 2019; McCarron and Nicoll, 1998; Nicoll et al., 1997). Thal et al. have actually proposed to separate CAA in two types: type 1 with a high APOE ε4 frequency and type 2 with a high frequency of ε2, and they saw that both types have the same disease severity when compared to controls (Thal et al., 2002). When endophenotypes, such as stroke subtypes, are taken into account to assess allelic risk, the same pattern is observed, where ε2 promotes hemorrhages and ε4 promotes amyloid-β accumulation (Sudlow et al., 2006). Some have suggested that the ε4 allele is only associated with an earlier onset of disease and not with disease severity both in CAA and stroke (Greenberg et al., 1996; Lagging et al., 2019).

Independently of the molecular mechanism involved in disease, the current burden of proof clearly indicates a significant role of APOE genetic variability in the risk of developing VaD, which has been corroborated by different meta-analyses (Skrobot et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2015).

4.3. Considerations on the genetic architecture of VaD

VaD is often considered a different condition when compared with the other dementias described here. It is regarded more as a sporadic, ‘environment-associated’, and non-degenerative type, mostly linked to traditional vascular risk factors. It encompasses a range of distinct diseases which have an end result of cognitive impairment. The heterogeneity of the group makes it difficult to investigate underlying causes, although some genes are starting to be consistently replicated across studies. Interestingly, GWAS identified some loci containing the same genes that had been previously associated with disease using candidate gene approaches. In addition, some forms of VaD genetic disorders imply that continuous degenerative mechanisms underlie at least some forms of the disease. The involvement of APOE and inflammation-associated genes in the genetic architecture of VaD suggests that immune dysfunction is contributing to the condition, as seen in neurodegenerative disorders. The involvement of ADA2, TGFB1, TNF, IL1B and IL6 adds further support to this. Consistent with the association of the disease with vessel dysfunction, many of the genes known to have a role in VaD are related with vessel development or functioning (NOTCH3, HTRA1, COL4A1, COL4A2, FOXC1, VEGFA, AGT, FVL). However, for some other genes their functional role in the disease is currently not clear and may implicate additional mechanisms of disease (TREX1, GLA, MTHFR). Together, this evidence suggests a continuous dysfunction at the vascular and immune levels, challenging the notion of a more static or stepwise disorder (Fig. 4).

5. Discussion

Even though Mendelian forms of dementia are rare, family history is a frequent occurrence in dementia and sporadic cases are now known to have a significant genetic component. Given that dementia is a common disorder, it is important to fully understand the genetic architecture of this group of diseases (Loy et al., 2014).

In a familial setting the identification of genetic causal factors is essential for risk estimation. Even in the absence of effective therapies to prevent or delay dementias, knowing an individual’s genetic risk gives the opportunity for genetic counseling, informed preparation of life affairs (including reproductive options), and may contribute to achieve a more accurate in-life diagnosis (Cohn-Hokke et al., 2012).

Genetic information also has an important role in sporadic disease. It can be used to establish polygenic risk scores and can critically inform the selection of cohorts for enrollment in clinical trials as well as in the evaluation of the response to treatment (Berkowitz et al., 2018). Genetic studies of both familial and sporadic disease have been essential to understand the molecular mechanisms of disease and to the development of successful drugs (Nelson et al., 2015).

In order to use genetics in an effective way in these different scenarios it is important to have a complete knowledge and understanding of all genetic factors involved in each dementia. One important aspect to consider in this context is the many overlaps occurring across dementias.

5.1. Overlaps between dementias

Correlations between pathological and clinical aspects of dementias have never been perfect. As genetic changes are upstream of both pathology and clinical features, genetic knowledge has established important foundations on which to build our understanding of these diseases. Hence, disease classification is increasingly being based on underlying genetic defects or focusing on disease-specific molecular pathways (Iourov et al., 2019). This happens, however, not without challenges. The genetic overlap between different forms of dementia (and other diseases) has been increasingly apparent with the application of modern genetic technologies to the study of familial and sporadic dementias (Guerreiro et al., 2014). Not only the same genes can be associated with clinically and pathologically different diseases, but the proteins abnormally aggregating in these diseases can also be the same.

A common overlap occurs between AD and other dementias, having the potential to significantly complicate the clinical differential diagnosis of dementias. Several studies have examined the accuracy of clinical diagnoses of AD based on autopsy results (considered the “gold standard”). One of these studies used data collected as part of the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center Uniform Data Set between 2005 and 2010 to identify 88 participants misdiagnosed with AD and 438 participants accurately diagnosed with AD (Lim et al., 1999). Sensitivity and specificity of clinical diagnoses of AD were found to range between 70–87% and 44–71%, respectively (Beach et al., 2012) In general, between 12% and 23% of clinically diagnosed AD cases do not have sufficient pathology at autopsy to account for the presence of dementia. The most common misdiagnoses occurs with other forms of progressive dementias such as FTD, DLB and VaD (Gaugler et al., 2013) with Lewy body disease and cerebrovascular injury being the most common AD mimics (Shim et al., 2013). Misdiagnoses can have direct and significant impacts in patients and families. These can lead to wrong/unnecessary treatments and to poor clinical management. A number of medications have been identified as potentially unnecessary for patients with FTD (Kerchner et al., 2011) and DLB (Baskys, 2004), whereas patients with cerebrovascular disease will typically benefit from treatments with statins, antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants. Misdiagnoses can also have an impact on the selection of subjects for genetic studies and clinical trials.

It is worth mentioning that the different degrees of diagnostic accuracy may be dependent of factors such as 1) the cohort being studied (differences have been seen between community and clinical-based case series), 2) the diagnostic criteria used (more recent diagnostic criteria have a tendency to perform better as these are typically developed to address shortcomings of sensitivity and/or specificity of previous criteria), 3) the use of imaging or biomarker tests, and 4) the levels of expertise of the diagnosticians (even among experts, the diagnostic accuracy of clinical AD was found to be variable (Sabbagh et al., 2017)).

While there is a significant amount of evidence suggesting that cerebrovascular and AD pathologies exert an additive, synergistic effect on cognitive impairment, less is known about the impact of cerebrovascular disease in DLB and FTD. Autopsy studies revealed a frequency of 20–34% of cerebrovascular disease (CVD) in DLB (which is not significantly different from controls) (Jellinger, 2003) and that more advanced Lewy body pathology is less likely to show severe CVD, suggesting that cognitive impairment in DLB is independent of vascular disease (Ghebremedhin et al., 2010). In FTD, data on CVD is contradictory with some studies finding a role for SVD in FTD progression (Thal et al., 2015) and others not confirming this (Toledo et al., 2013). Diverging frequencies of CVD in FTD have also been found, ranging from 5% in FTD-tau to 17% in FTD-TDP (Toledo et al., 2013).

Mixed pathologies are common in the brains of elderly individuals and their prevalence and severity increases with advancing age (Jellinger and Attems, 2010). In fact, these are so common that Visanji and colleagues recently proposed the term “concomitant pathology” instead of “co-pathology” to reflect the important contributions of each aberrantly deposited protein in the neurodegenerative process (Visanji et al., 2019).

Genetic pleiotropy (where one genetic locus contributes variance to different phenotypes) is also a common feature of dementias and neurodegenerative diseases in general. The contribution of pleiotropy can be appreciated across the different forms of genetic burden of disease. This has been evident from several GWAS finding common risk loci between different neurodegenerative diseases (Ferrari et al., 2017; Yokoyama et al., 2016), but also from low frequency and very rare variants. Many of these have been mentioned in the genetics of FTD, DLB and VaD sections.

5.2. APOE as a pleiotropic gene

One gene that has been mentioned multiple times across the different dementias discussed here is APOE. Common risk alleles with strong effects are mainly associated with AD risk, but associations have also been found for the risk of development of DLB (Guerreiro et al., 2018) and, potentially, FTD (Ferrari et al., 2017) and for the age at onset in C9ORF72 repeat expansion carriers (van Blitterswijk et al., 2014). In addition to its role in different dementias, APOE has also been implicated in other diseases. It is one of the two loci most consistently associated with longevity (Shadyab and LaCroix, 2015). Its associations with cardiovascular diseases are also well replicated. APOE ε4 carriers have a 30% higher risk of ischemic stroke (Wei et al., 2017) and APOE genotypes are significantly associated with the risk of developing coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction (Wang et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2016). The risk conferred by APOE for the development of these diseases is undeniably linked to the strong correlation between APOE genotypes and the plasma levels of high- and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, as well as triglycerides. However, this strong correlation makes it difficult to fully dissect if the risk is always mediated by changes in cholesterol levels or a proportion of risk can be independent of these changes (Corsetti et al., 2012; Rasmussen et al., 2016).

APOE is a truly pleomorphic gene: the recent analysis of the structure of genetic pleiotropy in the UK biobank hospital data has shown that 96.9% of the associated variants analysed affect more than one diagnostic term. The top 3 most pleomorphic variants identified in this study included a variant in the APOE locus (rs4420638) (Cortes et al., 2020). Making use of these data to analyse the two SNPs involved in the APOE ε2 ε3 ε4 haplotypes (rs429358 and rs7412) we can easily see evidence for association with increased or decreased risk of many different phenotypes in the UK Biobank (Fig. 5). These analyses capture the known impact of these variants by finding the strong associations with AD and cardiovascular disease, and suggest potential interactions with unexpected diseases, such as the protective effect seen for diseases of the digestive system conferred by rs429358. Given the relatively small number of UK Biobank participants with other dementias, currently this dataset does not have enough resolution to assess the effect of APOE in specific dementias like FTD or DLB. It is however a dataset that clearly allows the depiction of the broad and complex range of effects in different phenotypes.

6. Conclusion

On one hand the sharing of genes, proteins and molecular pathways between dementias and diseases in general can complicate the diagnosis not only by leading to similar clinical phenotypes and neuropathological features, but also by creating a challenging framework for the development of specific biomarkers. On the other hand, the identification of common genetic and molecular factors between dementias can help us understand these diseases and can lead to the possibility of using these common points as targets for the development of drugs that ultimately will have an effect on more than one dementia.

Notwithstanding the fact that very significant advances have been made in the last decade in the identification of disease associated variants, the genetic architecture of non-AD dementias is still far from being complete. Future studies attempting to identify the missing pieces of these architectures should apply next generation genomic technologies to the study of families and statistically well powered cohorts of deeply phenotyped cases and controls. Given the extension of genetic, pathological and clinical overlaps of neurodegenerative dementias, a potential alternative avenue of research is to investigate in a given phenotype the relevance of genes and genetic factors known to be involved in a different disease. The application of next generation genomic technologies can facilitate this approach by testing full genomes instead of candidate genes or genetic regions. In addition to ever increasing numbers of samples studied by GWAS, approaches based on endophenotypes and on the integration of functional data can have very positive results (Moreno-Grau et al., 2019).

In summary, replication of recently identified genetic regions and implication of more novel loci will be essential to better characterize the genetic architectures of these diseases. Advancing our understanding of the genetic factors driving concomitant proteinopathies is crucial for the development of disease-modifying interventions. These may be unique to each clinical entity, or, as suggested by the many overlaps and connecting points between the dementias described here, may be based on shared common therapeutic targets, raising the possibility of the development of single therapies providing disease modifying benefits that are horizontal to dementias or even neurodegenerative diseases.

Acknowledgments

Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01AG067426. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Fig. 1. Genetic architecture of FTD.

Circos plot of Mendelian and risk genes with confirmed roles in FTD. The links between genes and the colored outer layer correspond to biological processes annotated from Gene Ontology terms as obtained from GOSlim (https://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermMapper) which prioritizes annotations based on a previously curated subset of GO terms. The terms shown here annotate genes in all three dementias to better highlight the functional differences between these diseases. Here we can see genes in FTD are well dispersed throughout the genome and have roles in a wide range of functions, with many of these genes having annotations in a variety of biological processes.

Fig. 2. Survival analyses of age at death by means of Kaplan–Meier curves for APOE in an international cohort of 679 DLB cases.

On the left, the effect on age at death of the presence/absence of the APOE ε4 allele is shown. The analysis showed a significant difference in the ages at death between carriers and non-carriers of the APOE ε4 risk allele. On the right panel the effect on age at death of the different APOE haplotypes was found to be significantly different groups.

Fig. 3. Genetic architecture of DLB.

Circos plot of genes with established roles in DLB. As in the FTD circos plot, links and colored outer layer represent GOSlim biological processes which are shared by all three dementias. While the number of genes with conclusive roles in DLB are much fewer than other dementias, these genes are involved in a wide variety of biological functions.

Fig. 4. Genetic architecture of VaD.

Circos plot of established VaD genes. Links and colored outer layer were obtained from biological process Gene Ontology annotations shared by all three dementias as described in Fig. 1. Given the burden of proof for genetic risk associations with the different genes studied in VaD we only considered APOE to be represented here. All other genes are Mendelian causes of hereditary vasculopathies which typically cause arteriopathy and microvascular disease leading to vascular cognitive impairment and dementia.

Fig. 5. Posterior decoding of genetic effect direction and strength of evidence for the rs429358 (APOE ε4) and rs7412 (APOE ε2) variants in APOE.

In this figure the International Classification of Diseases, tenth revision (ICD-10) is depicted as a radial tree where the first orbit represents the 22 ICD-10 chapters, followed by an orbit representing blocks of categories, and then by 2 consecutive orbits representing the ICD-10 categories including the observed annotation codes. This TreeWAS (https://treewas.org) refers to a Bayesian approach for mapping genetic risk across disease classification codes within a hierarchical ontology (Cortes et al., 2017). Each genetic variant in the TreeWAS Database was analysed to infer its association with a given diagnostic term. These terms are structured hierarchically, where a given term (ICD-10 clinical code) is nested within a broader disease/disorder category. Here, this tree structure is displayed with the “top node” or “root” as a circle in the middle and nested terms subtend from the root or their parent terms outwards. Each node is colored according to its dominant effect; protective (blue), risk (red), or no effect (gray) posterior probability, computed as Δp = p(protective) − p(risk). The analyses represented here relate to hospitalization episode statistics provided by the UK Biobank as a source of phenotypic data and is derived from linkage with the hospital episode statistics registry (UK Biobank data fields 41142 and 41078).

Table 1 Genes and variants linked to DLB.

Gene	Reference	Proposed reported type of effect in disease	Replicated	Variants	
SNCA	Guerreiro et al. (2018)	GWAS risk and Mendelian	Yes	p.Ala53Thr, p.Glu46Lys, rs7681440	
GBA	Nalls et al. (2013)	GWAS risk	Yes	p.Asp448His, p.Asn409Ser, p.Glu365Lys, p.Arg296Gln, p.Arg87Gln, rs35749011, p.Glu326Lys, p.Asp140His	
APOE	Tsuang et al. (2013)	GWAS risk	Yes	p.Arg176Cys, p.Cys130Arg, rs429358	
CHMP2B	Keogh et al. (2016)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Ile29Val	
PRKN	Keogh et al. (2016)	Recessive Mendelian	No	p.Arg275Trp, p.Gly430Asp	
EIF4G1	Keogh et al. (2016)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Met1134Val, p.Gly686Cys, p.Ala502Val	
PRNP	Koide et al. (2002)	Sporadic case, incomplete penetrance	No	p.Met232Arg	
SORL1	Geut et al. (2019)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Asp140Asn, p.Arg1799Gln	
CSF1R	Sharma et al. (2019)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Ile794Thr	
PSEN2	Keogh et al. (2016)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Asp439Ala	
SQSTM1	Keogh et al. (2016)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Ala33Val, p.Pro27Leu, p.Met404Val	
GIGYF2	Keogh et al. (2016)	Dominant Mendelian	No	p.Ser1029Cys, p.Ser66Thr	
APP	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Val717Ile, p.Glu599Lys, p.Glu674Lys	
CHCHD2	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Gly4Arg	
DCTN1	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Ile780Thr	
GRN	Orme et al. (2020)	Nonsense: rare, potentially pathogenic (pathogenic in FTD) Missense: rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Arg493*, p.Ala276Val	
MAPT	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Gly86Ser	
NOTCH3	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Arg578Cys, p.Arg578His, p.Arg607His	
TBK1	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Arg384Trp, p.Arg384Gln	
TIA1	Orme et al. (2020)	Rare, potentially pathogenic	No	p.Pro362Leu	
CNTN1	Guerreiro et al. (2018)	Suggestive GWAS risk	No	rs7314908	
GABRB3	Guerreiro et al. (2018)	Suggestive GWAS risk	No	rs1426210	
BCL7C/STX1B	Guerreiro et al. (2018)	Suggestive GWAS risk	No	rs897984	
ASH1L	Rongve et al. (2019)	GWAS risk	No	rs12734374	
SCARB2	Bras et al. (2014a)	Suggestive GWAS risk	No	rs6812193	
ZFPM1	Rongve et al. (2019)	Suggestive GWAS risk	No	rs12926163	
PSEN1	Geiger et al. (2016)	Sporadic, incomplete penetrance, present in estimated 10% of cohort, likely risk	No	p.Glu318Gly, p.Gly206Ala	
SNCB	Ohtake et al. (2004)	Dominant with incomplete penetrance or risk	No	p.Val70Met, p.Pro123His	

Table 2 Mendelian conditions that may manifest with ischemic stroke and can lead to vascular cognitive impairment.

Mendelian condition	Gene	Inheritance pattern	Features	Reference	
Marfan’s syndrome	FBN1	Autosomal dominant	Inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The stroke mechanisms implicated are large arterial dissection or cardioembolism.	(Maski et al., 2011)	
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome	COL3A1	Autosomal dominant	Usually causes stroke by arterial dissection	(Superti-Furga et al., 1988)	
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum	ABCC6	Autosomal recessive	Patients may develop small as well as large artery disease	(Chassaing et al., 2005)	
Homocystinuria	CBS	Autosomal recessive	Small and large artery disease, cardioembolism or arterial dissection have been implicated in stroke and vascular cognitive dysfunction	(Kelly et al., 2003)	
Sickle-cell disease	HBB	Autosomal recessive	Progressive stenosis or occlusion of large/medium size intracranial arteries	(Armstrong et al., 1996)	


References

Abramzon YA , Fratta P , Traynor BJ , Chia R , 2020. The overlapping genetics of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Front. Neurosci 14 , 42. 10.3389/fnins.2020.00042 . 32116499
Alam R , Tripathi M , Mansoori N , Parveen S , Luthra K , Lakshmy R , Sharma S , Arulselvi S , Mukhopadhyay AK , 2014. Synergistic epistasis of paraoxonase 1 (rs662 and rs85460) and apolipoprotein E4 genes in pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. Am. J. Alzheimers Dis. Other Dement 29 , 769–776. 10.1177/1533317514539541 .
Armstrong FD , Thompson RJ Jr. , Wang W , Zimmerman R , Pegelow CH , Miller S , Moser F , Bello J , Hurtig A , Vass K , 1996. Cognitive functioning and brain magnetic resonance imaging in children with sickle Cell disease. Neuropsychology Committee of the Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease. Pediatrics 97 , 864–870.8657528
Auray-Blais C , Cyr D , Ntwari A , West ML , Cox-Brinkman J , Bichet DG , Germain DP , Laframboise R , Melançon SB , Stockley T , Clarke JTR , Drouin R , 2008. Urinary globotriaosylceramide excretion correlates with the genotype in children and adults with Fabry disease. Mol. Genet. Metab 93 , 331–340. 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.10.001 . 18023222
Baizabal-Carvallo JF , Jankovic J , 2016. Parkinsonism, movement disorders and genetics in frontotemporal dementia. Nat. Rev. Neurol 12 , 175–185. 10.1038/nrneurol.2016.14 . 26891767
Baker M , Mackenzie IR , Pickering-Brown SM , Gass J , Rademakers R , Lindholm C , Snowden J , Adamson J , Sadovnick AD , Rollinson S , Cannon A , Dwosh E , Neary D , Melquist S , Richardson A , Dickson D , Berger Z , Eriksen J , Robinson T , Zehr C , Dickey CA , Crook R , McGowan E , Mann D , Boeve B , Feldman H , Hutton M , 2006. Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17. Nature 442 , 916–919. 10.1038/nature05016 . 16862116
Balendra R , Isaacs AM , 2018. C9orf72-mediated ALS and FTD: multiple pathways to disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 14 , 544–558. 10.1038/s41582-018-0047-2 . 30120348
Bannwarth S , Ait-El-Mkadem S , Chaussenot A , Genin EC , Lacas-Gervais S , Fragaki K , Berg-Alonso L , Kageyama Y , Serre V , Moore DG , Verschueren A , Rouzier C , Le Ber I , Augé G , Cochaud C , Lespinasse F , N’Guyen K , de Septenville A , Brice A , Yu-Wai-Man P , Sesaki H , Pouget J , Paquis-Flucklinger V , 2014. A mitochondrial origin for frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis through CHCHD10 involvement. Brain 137 , 2329–2345. 10.1093/brain/awu138 . 24934289
Baskys A , 2004. Lewy body dementia: the litmus test for neuroleptic sensitivity and extrapyramidal symptoms. J. Clin. Psychiatry 65 (Suppl. 11 ), 16–22.
Beach TG , Monsell SE , Phillips LE , Kukull W , 2012. Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease at national institute on aging Alzheimer disease centers, 2005–2010. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 71 , 266–273. 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31824b211b . 22437338
Bednarska-Makaruk ME , Krzywkowski T , Graban A , Lipczyńska-Łojkowska W , Bochyńska A , Rodo M , Wehr H , Ryglewicz DK , 2013. Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) gene-108C &gt; T and p.Q192R polymorphisms and arylesterase activity of the enzyme in patients with dementia. Folia Neuropathol. 51 , 111–119. 10.5114/fn.2013.35953 . 23821382
Beecham GW , Hamilton K , Naj AC , Martin ER , Huentelman M , Myers AJ , Corneveaux JJ , Hardy J , Vonsattel J-P , Younkin SG , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , Larson EB , Crane PK , Kamboh MI , Kofler JK , Mash DC , Duque L , Gilbert JR , Gwirtsman H , Buxbaum JD , Kramer P , Dickson DW , Farrer LA , Frosch MP , Ghetti B , Haines JL , Hyman BT , Kukull WA , Mayeux RP , Pericak-Vance MA , Schneider JA , Trojanowski JQ , Reiman EM , Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium (ADGC), Schellenberg GD , Montine TJ , 2014. Genome-wide association meta-analysis of neuropathologic features of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. PLoS Genet. 10 , e1004606. 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004606 . 25188341
Benskey MJ , Perez RG , Manfredsson FP , 2016. The contribution of alpha synuclein to neuronal survival and function – implications for Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem 137 , 331–359. 10.1111/jnc.13570 . 26852372
Berge-Seidl V , Pihlstrøm L , Maple-Grødem J , Forsgren L , Linder J , Larsen JP , Tysnes O-B , Toft M , 2017. The GBA variant E326K is associated with Parkinson’s disease and explains a genome-wide association signal. Neurosci. Lett 658 , 48–52. 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.08.040 . 28830825
Berkowitz CL , Mosconi L , Rahman A , Scheyer O , Hristov H , Isaacson RS , 2018. Clinical application of APOE in Alzheimer’s prevention: a precision medicine approach. J Prev Alzheimers Dis 5 , 245–252. 10.14283/jpad.2018.35 . 30298183
Bernstein HS , Bishop DF , Astrin KH , Kornreich R , Eng CM , Sakuraba H , Desnick RJ , 1989. Fabry disease: six gene rearrangements and an exonic point mutation in the alpha-galactosidase gene. J. Clin. Invest 83 , 1390–1399. 10.1172/JCI114027 . 2539398
Bersano A , Ranieri M , Ciammola A , Cinnante C , Lanfranconi S , Dotti MT , Candelise L , Baschirotto C , Ghione I , Ballabio E , Bresolin N , Bassi MT , 2012. Considerations on a mutation in the NOTCH3 gene sparing a cysteine residue: a rare polymorphism rather than a CADASIL variant. Funct. Neurol 27 , 247–252.23597439
Bianchi S , Di Palma C , Gallus GN , Taglia I , Poggiani A , Rosini F , Rufa A , Muresanu DF , Cerase A , Dotti MT , Federico A , 2014. Two novel HTRA1 mutations in a European CARASIL patient. Neurology 82 , 898–900. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000202 . 24500651
Blauwendraat C , Reed X , Krohn L , Heilbron K , Bandres-Ciga S , Tan M , Gibbs JR , Hernandez DG , Kumaran R , Langston R , Bonet-Ponce L , Alcalay RN , Hassin-Baer S , Greenbaum L , Iwaki H , Leonard HL , Grenn FP , Ruskey JA , Sabir M , Ahmed S , Makarious MB , Pihlstrøm L , Toft M , van Hilten JJ , Marinus J , Schulte C , Brockmann K , Sharma M , Siitonen A , Majamaa K , Eerola-Rautio J , Tienari PJ , 23 and Me Research Team, Pantelyat A , Hillis AE , Dawson TM , Rosenthal LS , Albert MS , Resnick SM , Ferrucci L , Morris CM , Pletnikova O , Troncoso J , Grosset D , Lesage S , Corvol J-C , Brice A , Noyce AJ , Masliah E , Wood N , Hardy J , Shulman LM , Jankovic J , Shulman JM , Heutink P , Gasser T , Cannon P , Scholz SW , Morris H , Cookson MR , Nalls MA , Gan-Or Z , Singleton AB , 2020. Genetic modifiers of risk and age at onset in GBA associated Parkinson’s disease and Lewy body dementia. Brain 143 , 234–248. 10.1093/brain/awz350 . 31755958
Boot BP , Orr CF , Ahlskog JE , Ferman TJ , Roberts R , Pankratz VS , Dickson DW , Parisi J , Aakre JA , Geda YE , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Boeve BF , 2013. Risk factors for dementia with Lewy bodies: a case-control study. Neurology 81 , 833–840. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a2cbd1 . 23892702
Bougea A , Koros C , Stamelou M , Simitsi A , Papagiannakis N , Antonelou R , Papadimitriou D , Breza M , Tasios K , Fragkiadaki S , Geronicola Trapali X , Bourbouli M , Koutsis G , Papageorgiou SG , Kapaki E , Paraskevas GP , Stefanis L , 2017. Frontotemporal dementia as the presenting phenotype of p.A53T mutation carriers in the alpha-synuclein gene. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 35 , 82–87. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2016.12.002 . 28012952
Bras J , Guerreiro R , Darwent L , Parkkinen L , Ansorge O , Escott-Price V , Hernandez DG , Nalls MA , Clark LN , Honig LS , Marder K , Van Der Flier WM , Lemstra A , Scheltens P , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Londos E , Zetterberg H , Ortega-Cubero S , Pastor P , Ferman TJ , Graff-Radford NR , Ross OA , Barber I , Braae A , Brown K , Morgan K , Maetzler W , Berg D , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Lashley T , Compta Y , Revesz T , Lees A , Cairns N , Halliday GM , Mann D , Pickering-Brown S , Dickson DW , Singleton A , Hardy J , 2014a. Genetic analysis implicates APOE, SNCA and suggests lysosomal dysfunction in the etiology of dementia with Lewy bodies. Hum. Mol. Genet 23 , 6139–6146. 10.1093/hmg/ddu334 . 24973356
Bras J , Guerreiro R , Santo GC , 2014b. Mutant ADA2 in vasculopathies. N. Engl. J. Med 10.1056/NEJMc1405506 .
Brass SD , Smith EE , Arboleda-Velasquez JF , Copen WA , Frosch MP , 2009. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 12–2009. A 46-year-old man with migraine, aphasia, and hemiparesis and similarly affected family members. N. Engl. J. Med 360 , 1656–1665. 10.1056/NEJMcpc0810839 . 19369672
Budini M , Buratti E , Stuani C , Guarnaccia C , Romano V , De Conti L , Baralle FE , 2012. Cellular model of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) aggregation based on its C-terminal Gln/Asn-rich region. J. Biol. Chem 287 , 7512–7525. 10.1074/jbc.M111.288720 . 22235134
Bugiani M , Kevelam SH , Bakels HS , Waisfisz Q , Ceuterick-de Groote C , Niessen HWM , Abbink TEM , Lesnik Oberstein SAMJ , van der Knaap MS , 2016. Cathepsin A-related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy (CARASAL). Neurology 87 , 1777–1786. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003251 . 27664989
Cai B , Zeng J , Lin Y , Lin Y , Lin W , Lin W , Li Z , Wang N , 2015. A frameshift mutation in HTRA1 expands CARASIL syndrome and peripheral small arterial disease to the Chinese population. Neurol. Sci 36 , 1387–1391. 10.1007/s10072-015-2121-5 . 25772074
Caillet-Boudin M-L , Buée L , Sergeant N , Lefebvre B , 2015. Regulation of human MAPT gene expression. Mol. Neurodegener 10 , 28. 10.1186/s13024-015-0025-8 . 26170022
Carmona S , Zahs K , Wu E , Dakin K , Bras J , Guerreiro R , 2018. The role of TREM2 in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Lancet Neurol. 17 , 721–730. 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30232-1 . 30033062
Caroppo P , Camuzat A , Guillot-Noel L , Thomas-Antérion C , Couratier P , Wong TH , Teichmann M , Golfier V , Auriacombe S , Belliard S , Laurent B , Lattante S , Millecamps S , Clot F , Dubois B , van Swieten JC , Brice A , Le Ber I , 2016. Defining the spectrum of frontotemporal dementias associated with TARDBP mutations. Neurol. Genet 2 , e80. 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000080 . 27280171
Carrasquillo MM , Nicholson AM , Finch N , Gibbs JR , Baker M , Rutherford NJ , Hunter TA , DeJesus-Hernandez M , Bisceglio GD , Mackenzie IR , Singleton A , Cookson MR , Crook JE , Dillman A , Hernandez D , Petersen RC , Graff-Radford NR , Younkin SG , Rademakers R , 2010. Genome-wide screen identifies rs646776 near sortilin as a regulator of progranulin levels in human plasma. Am. J. Hum. Genet 87 , 890–897. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.002 . 21087763
Chabriat H , Vahedi K , Iba-Zizen MT , Joutel A , Nibbio A , Nagy TG , Krebs MO , Julien J , Dubois B , Ducrocq X , 1995. Clinical spectrum of CADASIL: a study of 7 families. Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy. Lancet 346 , 934–939. 10.1016/s0140-6736(95)91557-5 . 7564728
Chapman J , Wang N , Treves TA , Korczyn AD , Bornstein NM , 1998. ACE, MTHFR, factor V Leiden, and APOE polymorphisms in patients with vascular and Alzheimer’s dementia. Stroke 29 , 1401–1404. 10.1161/01.str.29.7.1401 . 9660395
Charidimou A , Zonneveld HI , Shams S , Kantarci K , Shoamanesh A , Hilal S , Yates PA , Boulouis G , Na HK , Pasi M , Biffi A , Chai YL , Chong JR , Wahlund L-O , Clifford JR , Chen C , Gurol ME , Goldstein JN , Na DL , Barkhof F , Seo SW , Rosand J , Greenberg SM , Viswanathan A , 2019. APOE and cortical superficial siderosis in CAA: meta-analysis and potential mechanisms. Neurology 93 , e358–e371. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007818 . 31243071
Chassaing N , Martin L , Calvas P , Le Bert M , Hovnanian A , 2005. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a clinical, pathophysiological and genetic update including 11 novel ABCC6 mutations. J. Med. Genet 42 , 881–892. 10.1136/jmg.2004.030171 . 15894595
Clark LN , Kartsaklis LA , Wolf Gilbert R , Dorado B , Ross BM , Kisselev S , Verbitsky M , Mejia-Santana H , Cote LJ , Andrews H , Vonsattel J-P , Fahn S , Mayeux R , Honig LS , Marder K , 2009. Association of glucocerebrosidase mutations with dementia with lewy bodies. Arch. Neurol 66 , 578–583. 10.1001/archneurol.2009.54 . 19433657
Clayton EL , Milioto C , Muralidharan B , Norona FE , Edgar JR , Soriano A , Jafar-Nejad P , Rigo F , Collinge J , Isaacs AM , 2018. Frontotemporal dementia causative CHMP2B impairs neuronal endolysosomal traffic-rescue by TMEM106B knockdown. Brain 141 , 3428–3442. 10.1093/brain/awy284 . 30496365
Cohn-Hokke PE , Elting MW , Pijnenburg YAL , van Swieten JC , 2012. Genetics of dementia: update and guidelines for the clinician. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet 159 , 628–643.
Coppola G , Karydas A , Rademakers R , Wang Q , Baker M , Hutton M , Miller BL , Geschwind DH , 2008. Gene expression study on peripheral blood identifies progranulin mutations. Ann. Neurol 64 , 92–96. 10.1002/ana.21397 . 18551524
Coppola G , Chinnathambi S , Lee JJ , Dombroski BA , Baker MC , Soto-Ortolaza AI , Lee SE , Klein E , Huang AY , Sears R , Lane JR , Karydas AM , Kenet RO , Biernat J , Wang L-S , Cotman CW , Decarli CS , Levey AI , Ringman JM , Mendez MF , Chui HC , Le Ber I , Brice A , Lupton MK , Preza E , Lovestone S , Powell J , Graff-Radford N , Petersen RC , Boeve BF , Lippa CF , Bigio EH , Mackenzie I , Finger E , Kertesz A , Caselli RJ , Gearing M , Juncos JL , Ghetti B , Spina S , Bordelon YM , Tourtellotte WW , Frosch MP , Vonsattel JPG , Zarow C , Beach TG , Albin RL , Lieberman AP , Lee VM , Trojanowski JQ , Van Deerlin VM , Bird TD , Galasko DR , Masliah E , White CL , Troncoso JC , Hannequin D , Boxer AL , Geschwind MD , Kumar S , Mandelkow E-M , Wszolek ZK , Uitti RJ , Dickson DW , Haines JL , Mayeux R , Pericak-Vance MA , Farrer LA , Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium, Ross OA , Rademakers R , Schellenberg GD , Miller BL , Mandelkow E , Geschwind DH , 2012. Evidence for a role of the rare p.A152T variant in MAPT in increasing the risk for FTD-spectrum and Alzheimer’s diseases. Hum. Mol. Genet 21 , 3500–3512. 10.1093/hmg/dds161 . 22556362
Corsetti JP , Gansevoort RT , Bakker SJL , Navis G , Sparks CE , Dullaart RPF , 2012. Apolipoprotein E predicts incident cardiovascular disease risk in women but not in men with concurrently high levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and C-reactive protein. Metabolism 61 , 996–1002. 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.11.010 . 22225956
Cortes A , Dendrou CA , Motyer A , Jostins L , Vukcevic D , Dilthey A , Donnelly P , Leslie S , Fugger L , McVean G , 2017. Bayesian analysis of genetic association across tree-structured routine healthcare data in the UK Biobank. Nat. Genet 49 , 1311–1318. 10.1038/ng.3926 . 28759005
Cortes A , Albers PK , Dendrou CA , Fugger L , McVean G , 2020. Identifying crossdisease components of genetic risk across hospital data in the UK Biobank. Nat. Genet 52 , 126–134. 10.1038/s41588-019-0550-4 . 31873298
Coto E , Menéndez M , Navarro R , García-Castro M , Alvarez V , 2006. A new de novo Notch3 mutation causing CADASIL. Eur. J. Neurol 13 , 628–631. 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01337.x . 16796587
Cruchaga C , Graff C , Chiang H-H , Wang J , Hinrichs AL , Spiegel N , Bertelsen S , Mayo K , Norton JB , Morris JC , Goate A , 2011. Association of TMEM106B gene polymorphism with age at onset in granulin mutation carriers and plasma granulin protein levels. Arch. Neurol 68 , 581–586. 10.1001/archneurol.2010.350 . 21220649
Cruts M , Van Broeckhoven C , 2008. Loss of progranulin function in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Trends Genet. 24 , 186–194. 10.1016/j.tig.2008.01.004 . 18328591
Cruts M , Gijselinck I , van der Zee J , Engelborghs S , Wils H , Pirici D , Rademakers R , Vandenberghe R , Dermaut B , Martin J-J , van Duijn C , Peeters K , Sciot R , Santens P , De Pooter T , Mattheijssens M , Van den Broeck M , Cuijt I , Vennekens K. ‘l , De Deyn PP , Kumar-Singh S , Van Broeckhoven C , 2006. Null mutations in progranulin cause ubiquitin-positive frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17q21. Nature 442 , 920–924. 10.1038/nature05017 . 16862115
Cuyvers E , Bettens K , Philtjens S , Van Langenhove T , Gijselinck I , van der Zee J , Engelborghs S , Vandenbulcke M , Van Dongen J , Geerts N , Maes G , Mattheijssens M , Peeters K , Cras P , Vandenberghe R , De Deyn PP , Van Broeckhoven C , Cruts M , Sleegers K , BELNEU consortium, 2014. Investigating the role of rare heterozygous TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia. Neurobiol. Aging 35 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.009 . 726.e11–9.
Cuyvers E , van der Zee J , Bettens K , Engelborghs S , Vandenbulcke M , Robberecht C , Dillen L , Merlin C , Geerts N , Graff C , Thonberg H , Chiang H-H , Pastor P , Ortega-Cubero S , Pastor MA , Diehl-Schmid J , Alexopoulos P , Benussi L , Ghidoni R , Binetti G , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Sanchez-Valle R , Lladó A , Gelpi E , Almeida MR , Santana I , Clarimon J , Lleó A , Fortea J , de Mendonça A , Martins M , Borroni B , Padovani A , Matěj R , Rohan Z , Ruiz A , Frisoni GB , Fabrizi GM , Vandenberghe R , De Deyn PP , Van Broeckhoven C , Sleegers K , BELNEU Consortium and of the EU EOD Consortium, 2015. Genetic variability in SQSTM1 and risk of early-onset Alzheimer dementia: a European early-onset dementia consortium study. Neurobiol. Aging 36 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.02.014 . 2005.e15–22.
Dallabona C , Diodato D , Kevelam SH , Haack TB , Wong L-J , Salomons GS , Baruffini E , Melchionda L , Mariotti C , Strom TM , Meitinger T , Prokisch H , Chapman K , Colley A , Rocha H , Ounap K , Schiffmann R , Salsano E , Savoiardo M , Hamilton EM , Abbink TEM , Wolf NI , Ferrero I , Lamperti C , Zeviani M , Vanderver A , Ghezzi D , van der Knaap MS , 2014. Novel (ovario) leukodystrophy related to AARS2 mutations. Neurology 82 , 2063–2071. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000497 . 24808023
Dantoine TF , Debord J , Merle L , Lacroix-Ramiandrisoa H , Bourzeix L , Charmes J-P , 2002. Paraoxonase 1 activity: a new vascular marker of dementia? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 977 , 96–101. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04802.x . 12480737
Davis AA , Inman CE , Wargel ZM , Dube U , Freeberg BM , Galluppi A , Haines JN , Dhavale DD , Miller R , Choudhury FA , Sullivan PM , Cruchaga C , Perlmutter JS , Ulrich JD , Benitez BA , Kotzbauer PT , Holtzman DM , 2020. APOE genotype regulates pathology and disease progression in synucleinopathy. Sci. Transl. Med 12 . 10.1126/scitranslmed.aay3069 .
de la Chapelle A , Kere J , Sack GH Jr. , Tolvanen R , Maury CP , 1992. Familial amyloidosis, Finnish type: G654 – a mutation of the gelsolin gene in Finnish families and an unrelated American family. Genomics 13 , 898–901. 10.1016/0888-7543(92)90182-r . 1322359
Deng H-X , Chen W , Hong S-T , Boycott KM , Gorrie GH , Siddique N , Yang Y , Fecto F , Shi Y , Zhai H , Jiang H , Hirano M , Rampersaud E , Jansen GH , Donkervoort S , Bigio EH , Brooks BR , Ajroud K , Sufit RL , Haines JL , Mugnaini E , Pericak-Vance MA , Siddique T , 2011. Mutations in UBQLN2 cause dominant X-linked juvenile and adult-onset ALS and ALS/dementia. Nature 477 , 211–215. 10.1038/nature10353 . 21857683
Deng H , Gao K , Jankovic J , 2014. The role of FUS gene variants in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Rev. Neurol 10 , 337–348. 10.1038/nrneurol.2014.78 . 24840975
Dermaut B , Kumar-Singh S , De Jonghe C , Cruts M , Löfgren A , Lübke U , Cras P , Dom R , De Deyn PP , Martin JJ , Van Broeckhoven C , 2001. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is a pathogenic lesion in Alzheimer’s disease due to a novel presenilin 1 mutation. Brain 124 , 2383–2392. 10.1093/brain/124.12.2383 . 11701593
Dermaut B , Kumar-Singh S , Engelborghs S , Theuns J , Rademakers R , Saerens J , Pickut BA , Peeters K , van den Broeck M , Vennekens K. ‘l , Claes S , Cruts M , Cras P , Martin J-J , Van Broeckhoven C , De Deyn PP , 2004. A novel presenilin 1 mutation associated with Pick’s disease but not beta-amyloid plaques. Ann. Neurol 55 , 617–626. 10.1002/ana.20083 . 15122701
Desikan RS , Schork AJ , Wang Y , Witoelar A , Sharma M , McEvoy LK , Holland D , Brewer JB , Chen C-H , Thompson WK , Harold D , Williams J , Owen MJ , O’Donovan MC , Pericak-Vance MA , Mayeux R , Haines JL , Farrer LA , Schellenberg GD , Heutink P , Singleton AB , Brice A , Wood NW , Hardy J , Martinez M , Choi SH , DeStefano A , Ikram MA , Bis JC , Smith A , Fitzpatrick AL , Launer L , van Duijn C , Seshadri S , Ulstein ID , Aarsland D , Fladby T , Djurovic S , Hyman BT , Snaedal J , Stefansson H , Stefansson K , Gasser T , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , ADNI, ADGC, GERAD, CHARGE and IPDGC Investigators, 2015. Genetic overlap between Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease at the MAPT locus. Mol. Psychiatry 20 , 1588–1595. 10.1038/mp.2015.6 . 25687773
Dichgans M , Herzog J , Gasser T , 2001. NOTCH3 mutation involving three cysteine residues in a family with typical CADASIL. Neurology 57 , 1714–1717. 10.1212/wnl.57.9.1714 . 11706120
Dick DM , Jones K , Saccone N , Hinrichs A , Wang JC , Goate A , Bierut L , Almasy L , Schuckit M , Hesselbrock V , Tischfield J , Foroud T , Edenberg H , Porjesz B , Begleiter H , 2006. Endophenotypes successfully lead to gene identification: results from the collaborative study on the genetics of alcoholism. Behav. Genet 36 , 112–126. 10.1007/s10519-005-9001-3 . 16341909
Dickson DW , Heckman MG , Murray ME , Soto AI , Walton RL , Diehl NN , van Gerpen JA , Uitti RJ , Wszolek ZK , Ertekin-Taner N , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Graff-Radford NR , Boeve BF , Bu G , Ferman TJ , Ross OA , 2018. APOE ε4 is associated with severity of Lewy body pathology independent of Alzheimer pathology. Neurology. 10.1212/wnl.0000000000006212 .
Diekstra FP , Van Deerlin VM , van Swieten JC , Al-Chalabi A , Ludolph AC , Weishaupt JH , Hardiman O , Landers JE , Brown RH Jr. , van Es MA , Pasterkamp RJ , Koppers M , Andersen PM , Estrada K , Rivadeneira F , Hofman A , Uitterlinden AG , van Damme P , Melki J , Meininger V , Shatunov A , Shaw CE , Leigh PN , Shaw PJ , Morrison KE , Fogh I , Chiò A , Traynor BJ , Czell D , Weber M , Heutink P , de Bakker PIW , Silani V , Robberecht W , van den Berg LH , Veldink JH , 2014. C9orf72 and UNC13A are shared risk loci for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: a genome-wide meta-analysis. Ann. Neurol 76 , 120–133. 10.1002/ana.24198 . 24931836
Dobson-Stone C , Hallupp M , Shahheydari H , Ragagnin AMG , Chatterton Z , Carew-Jones F , Shepherd CE , Stefen H , Paric E , Fath T , Thompson EM , Blumbergs P , Short CL , Field CD , Panegyres PK , Hecker J , Nicholson G , Shaw AD , Fullerton JM , Luty AA , Schofield PR , Brooks WS , Rajan N , Bennett MF , Bahlo M , Landers JE , Piguet O , Hodges JR , Halliday GM , Topp SD , Smith BN , Shaw CE , McCann E , Fifita JA , Williams KL , Atkin JD , Blair IP , Kwok JB , 2020. CYLD is a causative gene for frontotemporal dementia – amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain. 10.1093/brain/awaa039 .
Du Y , Liu C , Ma C , Xu X , Zhou X , Zhou H , Huang C , 2019. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related inflammation: a case report presenting with a rare variant in SORL1 gene. BMC Neurol. 19 , 97. 10.1186/s12883-019-1326-2 . 31092209
Endo Y , Hasegawa K , Nomura R , Arishima H , Kikuta K-I , Yamashita T , Inoue Y , Ueda M , Ando Y , Wilson MR , Hamano T , Nakamoto Y , Naiki H , 2019. Apolipoprotein E and clusterin inhibit the early phase of amyloid-β aggregation in an in vitro model of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 7 , 12. 10.1186/s40478-019-0662-1 . 30691533
Engelborghs S , Dermaut B , Goeman J , Saerens J , Mariën P , Pickut BA , Van den Broeck M , Serneels S , Cruts M , Van Broeckhoven C , De Deyn PP , 2003. Prospective Belgian study of neurodegenerative and vascular dementia: APOE genotype effects. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 74 , 1148–1151. 10.1136/jnnp.74.8.1148 . 12876259
Erkkinen MG , Kim M-O , Geschwind MD , 2018. Clinical neurology and epidemiology of the major neurodegenerative diseases. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol 10 . 10.1101/cshperspect.a033118 .
Fang L , Hemion C , Pinho Ferreira Bento AC , Bippes CC , Flammer J , Neutzner A , 2015. Mitochondrial function in neuronal cells depends on p97/VCP/Cdc48-mediated quality control. Front. Cell. Neurosci 9 , 16. 10.3389/fncel.2015.00016 . 25698929
Fecto F , Yan J , Vemula SP , Liu E , Yang Y , Chen W , Zheng JG , Shi Y , Siddique N , Arrat H , Donkervoort S , Ajroud-Driss S , Sufit RL , Heller SL , Deng H-X , Siddique T , 2011. SQSTM1 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch. Neurol 68 , 1440–1446. 10.1001/archneurol.2011.250 . 22084127
Ferrari R , Hernandez DG , Nalls MA , Rohrer JD , Ramasamy A , Kwok JBJ , Dobson-Stone C , Brooks WS , Schofield PR , Halliday GM , Hodges JR , Piguet O , Bartley L , Thompson E , Haan E , Hernández I , Ruiz A , Boada M , Borroni B , Padovani A , Cruchaga C , Cairns NJ , Benussi L , Binetti G , Ghidoni R , Forloni G , Galimberti D , Fenoglio C , Serpente M , Scarpini E , Clarimón J , Lleó A , Blesa R , Waldö ML , Nilsson K , Nilsson C , Mackenzie IRA , Hsiung G-YR , Mann DMA , Grafman J , Morris CM , Attems J , Griffiths TD , McKeith IG , Thomas AJ , Pietrini P , Huey ED , Wassermann EM , Baborie A , Jaros E , Tierney MC , Pastor P , Razquin C , Ortega-Cubero S , Alonso E , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Alexopoulos P , Kurz A , Rainero I , Rubino E , Pinessi L , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Rossi G , Tagliavini F , Giaccone G , Rowe JB , Schlachetzki JCM , Uphill J , Collinge J , Mead S , Danek A , Van Deerlin VM , Grossman M , Trojanowski JQ , van der Zee J , Deschamps W , Van Langenhove T , Cruts M , Van Broeckhoven C , Cappa SF , Le Ber I , Hannequin D , Golfier V , Vercelletto M , Brice A , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Bagnoli S , Piaceri I , Nielsen JE , Hjermind LE , Riemenschneider M , Mayhaus M , Ibach B , Gasparoni G , Pichler S , Gu W , Rossor MN , Fox NC , Warren JD , Spillantini MG , Morris HR , Rizzu P , Heutink P , Snowden JS , Rollinson S , Richardson A , Gerhard A , Bruni AC , Maletta R , Frangipane F , Cupidi C , Bernardi L , Anfossi M , Gallo M , Conidi ME , Smirne N , Rademakers R , Baker M , Dickson DW , Graff-Radford NR , Petersen RC , Knopman D , Josephs KA , Boeve BF , Parisi JE , Seeley WW , Miller BL , Karydas AM , Rosen H , van Swieten JC , Dopper EGP , Seelaar H , Pijnenburg YAL , Scheltens P , Logroscino G , Capozzo R , Novelli V , Puca AA , Franceschi M , Postiglione A , Milan G , Sorrentino P , Kristiansen M , Chiang H-H , Graff C , Pasquier F , Rollin A , Deramecourt V , Lebert F , Kapogiannis D , Ferrucci L , Pickering-Brown S , Singleton AB , Hardy J , Momeni P , 2014. Frontotemporal dementia and its subtypes: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurol. 13 , 686–699. 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70065-1 . 24943344
Ferrari R , Wang Y , Vandrovcova J , Guelfi S , Witeolar A , Karch CM , Schork AJ , Fan CC , Brewer JB , International FTD-Genomics Consortium (IFGC), International Parkinson’s Disease Genomics Consortium (IPDGC), International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Project (IGAP), Momeni P , Schellenberg GD , Dillon WP , Sugrue LP , Hess CP , Yokoyama JS , Bonham LW , Rabinovici GD , Miller BL , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , Hardy J , Desikan RS , 2017. Genetic architecture of sporadic frontotemporal dementia and overlap with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 88 , 152–164. 10.1136/jnnp-2016-314411 . 27899424
Ferrari R , Manzoni C , Hardy J , 2019. Genetics and molecular mechanisms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an update and future avenues. Neurobiol. Aging 78 , 98–110. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.02.006 . 30925302
Fornage M , Debette S , Bis JC , Schmidt H , Ikram MA , Dufouil C , Sigurdsson S , Lumley T , DeStefano AL , Fazekas F , Vrooman HA , Shibata DK , Maillard P , Zijdenbos A , Smith AV , Gudnason H , de Boer R , Cushman M , Mazoyer B , Heiss G , Vernooij MW , Enzinger C , Glazer NL , Beiser A , Knopman DS , Cavalieri M , Niessen WJ , Harris TB , Petrovic K , Lopez OL , Au R , Lambert J-C , Hofman A , Gottesman RF , Garcia M , Heckbert SR , Atwood LD , Catellier DJ , Uitterlinden AG , Yang Q , Smith NL , Aspelund T , Romero JR , Rice K , Taylor KD , Nalls MA , Rotter JI , Sharrett R , van Duijn CM , Amouyel P , Wolf PA , Gudnason V , van der Lugt A , Boerwinkle E , Psaty BM , Seshadri S , Tzourio C , Breteler MMB , Mosley TH , Schmidt R , Longstreth WT , DeCarli C , Launer LJ , 2011. Genome-wide association studies of cerebral white matter lesion burden: the CHARGE consortium. Ann. Neurol 69 , 928–939. 10.1002/ana.22403 . 21681796
Frank A , Díez-Tejedor E , Bullido MJ , Valdivieso F , Barreiro P , 2002. APOE genotype in cerebrovascular disease and vascular dementia. J. Neurol. Sci 203–204 , 173–176. 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00286-1 .
Freilinger T , Anttila V , de Vries B , Malik R , Kallela M , Terwindt GM , Pozo-Rosich P , Winsvold B , Nyholt DR , van Oosterhout WPJ , Artto V , Todt U , Hämäläinen E , Fernández-Morales J , Louter MA , Kaunisto MA , Schoenen J , Raitakari O , Lehtimäki T , Vila-Pueyo M , Göbel H , Wichmann E , Sintas C , Uitterlinden AG , Hofman A , Rivadeneira F , Heinze A , Tronvik E , van Duijn CM , Kaprio J , Cormand B , Wessman M , Frants RR , Meitinger T , Müller-Myhsok B , Zwart J-A , Färkkilä M , Macaya A , Ferrari MD , Kubisch C , Palotie A , Dichgans M , van den Maagdenberg AMJM , International Headache Genetics Consortium, 2012. Genome-wide association analysis identifies susceptibility loci for migraine without aura. Nat. Genet 44 , 777–782. 10.1038/ng.2307 . 22683712
Freischmidt A , Wieland T , Richter B , Ruf W , Schaeffer V , Müller K , Marroquin N , Nordin F , Hübers A , Weydt P , Pinto S , Press R , Millecamps S , Molko N , Bernard E , Desnuelle C , Soriani M-H , Dorst J , Graf E , Nordström U , Feiler MS , Putz S , Boeckers TM , Meyer T , Winkler AS , Winkelman J , de Carvalho M , Thal DR , Otto M , Brännström T , Volk AE , Kursula P , Danzer KM , Lichtner P , Dikic I , Meitinger T , Ludolph AC , Strom TM , Andersen PM , Weishaupt JH , 2015. Haploinsufficiency of TBK1 causes familial ALS and frontotemporal dementia. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 631–636. 10.1038/nn.4000 . 25803835
Freischmidt A , Müller K , Ludolph AC , Weishaupt JH , Andersen PM , 2017. Association of mutations in TBK1 with sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. JAMA Neurol. 74 , 110–113. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.3712 . 27892983
Friedman CS , O’Donnell MA , Legarda-Addison D , Ng A , Cárdenas WB , Yount JS , Moran TM , Basler CF , Komuro A , Horvath CM , Xavier R , Ting AT , 2008. The tumour suppressor CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated anti-viral response. EMBO Rep. 9 , 930–936. 10.1038/embor.2008.136 . 18636086
Fujioka S , Sundal C , Strongosky AJ , Castanedes MC , Rademakers R , Ross OA , Vilariño-Güell C , Farrer MJ , Wszolek ZK , Dickson DW , 2013. Sequence variants in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4-gamma (eIF4G1) are associated with Lewy body dementia. Acta Neuropathol. 125 , 425–438. 10.1007/s00401-012-1059-4 . 23124435
Fukuhara Y , Sakuraba H , Oshima A , Shimmoto M , Nagao Y , Nadaoka Y , Suzuki T , Suzuki Y , 1990. Partial deletion of human alpha-galactosidase A gene in Fabry disease: direct repeat sequences as a possible cause of slipped mispairing. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 170 , 296–300. 10.1016/0006-291x(90)91273-u . 2164807
Gámez-Valero A , Prada-Dacasa P , Santos C , Adame-Castillo C , Campdelacreu J , Reñé R , Gascón-Bayarri J , Ispierto L , Álvarez R , Ariza A , Beyer K , 2016. GBA mutations are associated with earlier onset and male sex in dementia with lewy bodies. Mov. Disord 31 , 1066–1070. 10.1002/mds.26593 . 27027900
Gatz M , Reynolds CA , Fratiglioni L , Johansson B , Mortimer JA , Berg S , Fiske A , Pedersen NL , 2006. Role of genes and environments for explaining Alzheimer disease. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 63 , 168–174. 10.1001/archpsyc.63.2.168 . 16461860
Gaugler JE , Ascher-Svanum H , Roth DL , Fafowora T , Siderowf A , Beach TG , 2013. Characteristics of patients misdiagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease and their medication use: an analysis of the NACC-UDS database. BMC Geriatr. 13 , 137. 10.1186/1471-2318-13-137 . 24354549
Geiger JT , Ding J , Crain B , Pletnikova O , Letson C , Dawson TM , Rosenthal LS , Pantelyat A , Gibbs JR , Albert MS , Hernandez DG , Hillis AE , Stone DJ , Singleton AB , North American Brain Expression Consortium, Hardy JA , Troncoso JC , Scholz SW , 2016. Next-generation sequencing reveals substantial genetic contribution to dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurobiol. Dis 94 , 55–62. 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.06.004 . 27312774
Geut H , Vergouw LJM , Galis Y , Ingrassia A , de Jong FJ , Quadri M , Bonifati V , Lemstra AW , Rozemuller AJM , van de Berg WDJ , 2019. Neuropathological and genetic characteristics of a post-mortem series of cases with dementia with Lewy bodies clinically suspected of Creutzfeldt-Jakob’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 63 , 162–168. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.02.011 . 30777654
Ghebremedhin E , Rosenberger A , Rüb U , Vuksic M , Berhe T , Bickeböller H , de Vos RAI , Thal DR , Deller T , 2010. Inverse relationship between cerebrovascular lesions and severity of lewy body pathology in patients with lewy body diseases. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 69 , 442–448. 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181d88e63 . 20418782
Ghetti B , Piccardo P , Spillantini MG , Ichimiya Y , Porro M , Perini F , Kitamoto T , Tateishi J , Seiler C , Frangione B , Bugiani O , Giaccone G , Prelli F , Goedert M , Dlouhy SR , Tagliavini F , 1996. Vascular variant of prion protein cerebral amyloidosis with tau-positive neurofibrillary tangles: the phenotype of the stop codon 145 mutation in PRNP. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 93 , 744–748. 10.1073/pnas.93.2.744 . 8570627
Ghetti B , Oblak AL , Boeve BF , Johnson KA , Dickerson BC , Goedert M , 2015. Invited review: frontotemporal dementia caused by microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) mutations: a chameleon for neuropathology and neuroimaging. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 41 , 24–46. 10.1111/nan.12213 . 25556536
Ghiso J , Jensson O , Frangione B , 1986. Amyloid fibrils in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis of Icelandic type is a variant of gamma-trace basic protein (cystatin C). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 83 , 2974–2978. 10.1073/pnas.83.9.2974 . 3517880
Ghiso J , Haltia M , Prelli F , Novello J , Frangione B , 1990. Gelsolin variant (Asn-187) in familial amyloidosis, Finnish type. Biochem. J 272 , 827–830. 10.1042/bj2720827 . 2176481
Goker-Alpan O , Giasson BI , Eblan MJ , Nguyen J , Hurtig HI , Lee VM-Y , Trojanowski JQ , Sidransky E , 2006. Glucocerebrosidase mutations are an important risk factor for Lewy body disorders. Neurology 67 , 908–910. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000230215.41296.18 . 16790605
Gorelick PB , Scuteri A , Black SE , Decarli C , Greenberg SM , Iadecola C , Launer LJ , Laurent S , Lopez OL , Nyenhuis D , Petersen RC , Schneider JA , Tzourio C , Arnett DK , Bennett DA , Chui HC , Higashida RT , Lindquist R , Nilsson PM , Roman GC , Sellke FW , Seshadri S , American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, and Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, 2011. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/american stroke association. Stroke 42 , 2672–2713. 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182299496 . 21778438
Gormley P , Anttila V , Winsvold BS , Palta P , Esko T , Pers TH , Farh K-H , Cuenca-Leon E , Muona M , Furlotte NA , Kurth T , Ingason A , McMahon G , Ligthart L , Terwindt GM , Kallela M , Freilinger TM , Ran C , Gordon SG , Stam AH , Steinberg S , Borck G , Koiranen M , Quaye L , Adams HHH , Lehtimäki T , Sarin A-P , Wedenoja J , Hinds DA , Buring JE , Schürks M , Ridker PM , Hrafnsdottir MG , Stefansson H , Ring SM , Hottenga J-J , Penninx BWJH , Färkkilä M , Artto V , Kaunisto M , Vepsäläinen S , Malik R , Heath AC , Madden PAF , Martin NG , Montgomery GW , Kurki MI , Kals M , Mägi R , Pärn K , Hämäläinen E , Huang H , Byrnes AE , Franke L , Huang J , Stergiakouli E , Lee PH , Sandor C , Webber C , Cader Z , Muller-Myhsok B , Schreiber S , Meitinger T , Eriksson JG , Salomaa V , Heikkilä K , Loehrer E , Uitterlinden AG , Hofman A , van Duijn CM , Cherkas L , Pedersen LM , Stubhaug A , Nielsen CS , Männikkö M , Mihailov E , Milani L , Göbel H , Esserlind A-L , Christensen AF , Hansen TF , Werge T , International Headache Genetics Consortium, Kaprio J , Aromaa AJ , Raitakari O , Ikram MA , Spector T , Järvelin M-R , Metspalu A , Kubisch C , Strachan DP , Ferrari MD , Belin AC , Dichgans M , Wessman M , van den Maagdenberg AMJM , Zwart J-A , Boomsma DI , Smith GD , Stefansson K , Eriksson N , Daly MJ , Neale BM , Olesen J , Chasman DI , Nyholt DR , Palotie A , 2016. Meta-analysis of 375,000 individuals identifies 38 susceptibility loci for migraine. Nat. Genet 48 , 856–866. 10.1038/ng.3598 . 27322543
Greenberg SM , Briggs ME , Hyman BT , Kokoris GJ , Takis C , Kanter DS , Kase CS , Pessin MS , 1996. Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 is associated with the presence and earlier onset of hemorrhage in cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Stroke 27 , 1333–1337. 10.1161/01.str.27.8.1333 . 8711797
Guerreiro RJ , Lohmann E , Brás JM , Gibbs JR , Rohrer JD , Gurunlian N , Dursun B , Bilgic B , Hanagasi H , Gurvit H , Emre M , Singleton A , Hardy J , 2013a. Using exome sequencing to reveal mutations in TREM2 presenting as a frontotemporal dementia-like syndrome without bone involvement. JAMA Neurol. 70 , 78–84. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.579 . 23318515
Guerreiro R , Wojtas A , Bras J , Carrasquillo M , Rogaeva E , Majounie E , Cruchaga C , Sassi C , Kauwe JSK , Younkin S , Hazrati L , Collinge J , Pocock J , Lashley T , Williams J , Lambert J-C , Amouyel P , Goate A , Rademakers R , Morgan K , Powell J , St George-Hyslop P , Singleton A , Hardy J , Alzheimer Genetic Analysis Group, 2013b. TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med 368 , 117–127. 10.1056/NEJMoa1211851 . 23150934
Guerreiro R , Brás J , Hardy J , Singleton A , 2014. Next generation sequencing techniques in neurological diseases: redefining clinical and molecular associations. Hum. Mol. Genet 23 , R47–R53. 10.1093/hmg/ddu203 . 24794858
Guerreiro R , Kun-Rodrigues C , Darwent L , Orme T , Parkkinen L , Ansorge O , Clark L , Honig L , Marder K , van der Flier W , Lemstra A , Scheltens P , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Londos E , Zetterberg H , Ortega-Cubero S , Pastor P , Barber I , Braae A , Brown K , Morgan K , Maetzler W , Berg D , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Lashley T , Compta Y , Van Deerlin VM , Trojanowski JQ , Clarimon J , Lesage S , Galasko D , Masliah E , Tienari PJ , Revesz T , Lees A , Ferman TJ , Graff-Radford NR , Ross OA , Dickson D , Escott-Price V , Cairns N , Halliday G , Mann D , Pickering-Brown S , Singleton A , Hardy J , Bras J , 2015. Direct genotyping of the APOE E2, E3 and E4 haplotypes in a large international cohort of neuropathologically diagnosed dementia with Lewy bodies cases. Am. J. Neurodegener. Dis 4 (Suppl. 1 ), 103.
Guerreiro R , Ross OA , Kun-Rodrigues C , Hernandez DG , Orme T , Eicher JD , Shepherd CE , Parkkinen L , Darwent L , Heckman MG , Scholz SW , Troncoso JC , Pletnikova O , Ansorge O , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Morenas-Rodriguez E , Clark L , Honig LS , Marder K , Lemstra A , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Londos E , Zetterberg H , Barber I , Braae A , Brown K , Morgan K , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Lashley T , Holton J , Compta Y , Van Deerlin V , Serrano GE , Beach TG , Lesage S , Galasko D , Masliah E , Santana I , Pastor P , Diez-Fairen M , Aguilar M , Tienari PJ , Myllykangas L , Oinas M , Revesz T , Lees A , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Ferman TJ , Escott-Price V , Graff-Radford N , Cairns NJ , Morris JC , Pickering-Brown S , Mann D , Halliday GM , Hardy J , Trojanowski JQ , Dickson DW , Singleton A , Stone DJ , Bras J , 2018. Investigating the genetic architecture of dementia with Lewy bodies: a two-stage genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurol. 17 , 64–74. 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30400-3 . 29263008
Guerreiro R , Escott-Price V , Hernandez DG , Kun-Rodrigues C , Ross OA , Orme T , Neto JL , Carmona S , Dehghani N , Eicher JD , Shepherd C , Parkkinen L , Darwent L , Heckman MG , Scholz SW , Troncoso JC , Pletnikova O , Dawson T , Rosenthal L , Ansorge O , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Morenas-Rodriguez E , Clark L , Honig LS , Marder K , Lemstra A , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Londos E , Zetterberg H , Barber I , Braae A , Brown K , Morgan K , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Lashley T , Holton J , Compta Y , Van Deerlin V , Serrano GE , Beach TG , Lesage S , Galasko D , Masliah E , Santana I , Pastor P , Diez-Fairen M , Aguilar M , Tienari PJ , Myllykangas L , Oinas M , Revesz T , Lees A , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Ferman TJ , Graff-Radford N , Cairns NJ , Morris JC , Pickering-Brown S , Mann D , Halliday GM , Hardy J , Trojanowski JQ , Dickson DW , Singleton A , International Parkinson’s Disease Genomics Consortium, Stone DJ , Bras J , 2019. Heritability and genetic variance of dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurobiol. Dis 127 , 492–501. 10.1016/j.nbd.2019.04.004 . 30953760
Guffon N , 2003. Clinical presentation in female patients with Fabry disease. J. Med. Genet 10.1136/jmg.40.4.e38 .
Gydesen S , Brown JM , Brun A , Chakrabarti L , Gade A , Johannsen P , Rossor M , Thusgaard T , Grove A , Yancopoulou D , Spillantini MG , Fisher EMC , Collinge J , Sorensen SA , 2002. Chromosome 3 linked frontotemporal dementia (FTD-3). Neurology 59 , 1585–1594. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000034763.54161.1f . 12451202
Haack TB , Ignatius E , Calvo-Garrido J , Iuso A , Isohanni P , Maffezzini C , Lönnqvist T , Suomalainen A , Gorza M , Kremer LS , Graf E , Hartig M , Berutti R , Paucar M , Svenningsson P , Stranneheim H , Brandberg G , Wedell A , Kurian MA , Hayflick SA , Venco P , Tiranti V , Strom TM , Dichgans M , Horvath R , Holinski-Feder E , Freyer C , Meitinger T , Prokisch H , Senderek J , Wredenberg A , Carroll CJ , Klopstock T , 2016. Absence of the autophagy adaptor SQSTM1/p62 causes childhood-onset neurodegeneration with ataxia, dystonia, and gaze palsy. Am. J. Hum. Genet 99 , 735–743. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.06.026 . 27545679
Han J-H , Ryu H-H , Jun M-H , Jang D-J , Lee J-A , 2012. The functional analysis of the CHMP2B missense mutation associated with neurodegenerative diseases in the endo-lysosomal pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 421 , 544–549. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.041 . 22521643
Hara K , Shiga A , Fukutake T , Nozaki H , Miyashita A , Yokoseki A , Kawata H , Koyama A , Arima K , Takahashi T , Ikeda M , Shiota H , Tamura M , Shimoe Y , Hirayama M , Arisato T , Yanagawa S , Tanaka A , Nakano I , Ikeda S-I , Yoshida Y , Yamamoto T , Ikeuchi T , Kuwano R , Nishizawa M , Tsuji S , Onodera O , 2009. Association of HTRA1 mutations and familial ischemic cerebral small-vessel disease. N. Engl. J. Med 360 , 1729–1739. 10.1056/NEJMoa0801560 . 19387015
Hardy J , Rogaeva E , 2014. Motor neuron disease and frontotemporal dementia: sometimes related, sometimes not. Exp. Neurol 262 (Pt B ), 75–83. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.11.006 . 24246281
Helgason E , Phung QT , Dueber EC , 2013. Recent insights into the complexity of Tank-binding kinase 1 signaling networks: the emerging role of cellular localization in the activation and substrate specificity of TBK1. FEBS Lett. 587 , 1230–1237. 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.059 . 23395801
Hensman Moss DJ , Poulter M , Beck J , Hehir J , Polke JM , Campbell T , Adamson G , Mudanohwo E , McColgan P , Haworth A , Wild EJ , Sweeney MG , Houlden H , Mead S , Tabrizi SJ , 2014. C9orf72 expansions are the most common genetic cause of Huntington disease phenocopies. Neurology 82 , 292–299. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000061 . 24363131
Hohl U , Tiraboschi P , Hansen LA , Thal LJ , Corey-Bloom J , 2000. Diagnostic accuracy of dementia with Lewy bodies. Arch. Neurol 57 , 347–351. 10.1001/archneur.57.3.347 . 10714660
Hokkanen SRK , Kero M , Kaivola K , Hunter S , Keage HAD , Kiviharju A , Raunio A , Tienari PJ , Paetau A , Matthews FE , Fleming J , Graff C , Polvikoski TM , Myllykangas L , Brayne C , EClipSE Collaboration, 2020. Putative risk alleles for LATE-NC with hippocampal sclerosis in population-representative autopsy cohorts. Brain Pathol. 30 , 364–372. 10.1111/bpa.12773 . 31376286
Holler CJ , Taylor G , Deng Q , Kukar T , 2017. Intracellular proteolysis of progranulin generates stable, lysosomal granulins that are haploinsufficient in patients with frontotemporal dementia caused by GRN mutations. eNeuro 4 . 10.1523/ENEURO.0100-17.2017 .
Howell WM , Ali S , Rose-Zerilli MJ , Ye S , 2005. VEGF polymorphisms and severity of atherosclerosis. J. Med. Genet 42 , 485–490. 10.1136/jmg.2004.025734 . 15937083
Hu F , Padukkavidana T , Vægter CB , Brady OA , Zheng Y , Mackenzie IR , Feldman HH , Nykjaer A , Strittmatter SM , 2010. Sortilin-mediated endocytosis determines levels of the frontotemporal dementia protein, progranulin. Neuron 68 , 654–667. 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.09.034 . 21092856
Huang L , Li W , Li Y , Song C , Wang P , Wang H , Sun X , 2020. A novel cysteine-sparing G73A mutation of NOTCH3 in a Chinese CADASIL family. Neurogenetics 21 , 39–49. 10.1007/s10048-019-00592-3 . 31720972
Ikram MA , Bersano A , Manso-Calderón R , Jia J-P , Schmidt H , Middleton L , Nacmias B , Siddiqi S , Adams HHH , 2017. Genetics of vascular dementia - review from the ICVD working group. BMC Med. 15 , 48. 10.1186/s12916-017-0813-9 . 28260527
Iourov IY , Vorsanova SG , Yurov YB , 2019. Pathway-based classification of genetic diseases. Mol. Cytogenet 12 , 4. 10.1186/s13039-019-0418-4 . 30766616
Irwin DJ , McMillan CT , Suh E , Powers J , Rascovsky K , Wood EM , Toledo JB , Arnold SE , Lee VM-Y , Van Deerlin VM , Trojanowski JQ , Grossman M , 2014. Myelin oligodendrocyte basic protein and prognosis in behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 83 , 502–509. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000668 . 24994843
Irwin DJ , Grossman M , Weintraub D , Hurtig HI , Duda JE , Xie SX , Lee EB , Van Deerlin VM , Lopez OL , Kofler JK , Nelson PT , Jicha GA , Woltjer R , Quinn JF , Kaye J , Leverenz JB , Tsuang D , Longfellow K , Yearout D , Kukull W , Keene CD , Montine TJ , Zabetian CP , Trojanowski JQ , 2017. Neuropathological and genetic correlates of survival and dementia onset in synucleinopathies: a retrospective analysis. Lancet Neurol. 16 , 55–65. 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30291-5 . 27979356
Ishii S , Nakao S , Minamikawa-Tachino R , Desnick RJ , Fan J-Q , 2002. Alternative splicing in the alpha-galactosidase A gene: increased exon inclusion results in the Fabry cardiac phenotype. Am. J. Hum. Genet 70 , 994–1002. 10.1086/339431 . 11828341
Jellinger KA , 2003. Prevalence of vascular lesions in dementia with Lewy bodies. A postmortem study. J. Neural Transm 110 , 771–778. 10.1007/s00702-003-0824-x . 12811637
Jellinger KA , Attems J , 2010. Prevalence of dementia disorders in the oldest-old: an autopsy study. Acta Neuropathol. 119 , 421–433. 10.1007/s00401-010-0654-5 . 20204386
Jian X , Fornage M , 2018. Imaging endophenotypes of stroke as a target for genetic studies. Stroke 49 , 1557–1562. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.117.017073 . 29760278
Jin W , Chang M , Paul EM , Babu G , Lee AJ , Reiley W , Wright A , Zhang M , You J , Sun S-C , 2008. Deubiquitinating enzyme CYLD negatively regulates RANK signaling and osteoclastogenesis in mice. J. Clin. Invest 118 , 1858–1866. 10.1172/JCI34257 . 18382763
Johnson JO , Mandrioli J , Benatar M , Abramzon Y , Van Deerlin VM , Trojanowski JQ , Gibbs JR , Brunetti M , Gronka S , Wuu J , Ding J , McCluskey L , Martinez-Lage M , Falcone D , Hernandez DG , Arepalli S , Chong S , Schymick JC , Rothstein J , Landi F , Wang Y-D , Calvo A , Mora G , Sabatelli M , Monsurrò MR , Battistini S , Salvi F , Spataro R , Sola P , Borghero G , ITALSGEN Consortium, Galassi G , Scholz SW , Taylor JP , Restagno G , Chiò A , Traynor BJ , 2010. Exome sequencing reveals VCP mutations as a cause of familial ALS. Neuron 68 , 857–864. 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.036 . 21145000
Joutel A , Corpechot C , Ducros A , Vahedi K , Chabriat H , Mouton P , Alamowitch S , Domenga V , Cécillion M , Marechal E , Maciazek J , Vayssiere C , Cruaud C , Cabanis EA , Ruchoux MM , Weissenbach J , Bach JF , Bousser MG , Tournier-Lasserve E , 1996. Notch3 mutations in CADASIL, a hereditary adult-onset condition causing stroke and dementia. Nature 383 , 707–710. 10.1038/383707a0 . 8878478
Joutel A , Vahedi K , Corpechot C , Troesch A , Chabriat H , Vayssière C , Cruaud C , Maciazek J , Weissenbach J , Bousser MG , Bach JF , Tournier-Lasserve E , 1997. Strong clustering and stereotyped nature of Notch3 mutations in CADASIL patients. Lancet 350 , 1511–1515. 10.1016/S0140-6736(97)08083-5 . 9388399
Joutel A , Dodick DD , Parisi JE , Cecillon M , Tournier-Lasserve E , Bousser MG , 2000. De novo mutation in the Notch3 gene causing CADASIL. Ann. Neurol 47 , 388–391.10716263
Karch CM , Wen N , Fan CC , Yokoyama JS , Kouri N , Ross OA , Höglinger G , Müller U , Ferrari R , Hardy J , Schellenberg GD , Sleiman PM , Momeni P , Hess CP , Miller BL , Sharma M , Van Deerlin V , Smeland OB , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , Desikan RS , International Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD)–Genomics Consortium, International Collaboration for Frontotemporal Dementia, Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) Genetics Consortium, and International Parkinson’s Disease Genomics Consortium, 2018. Selective genetic overlap between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and diseases of the frontotemporal dementia spectrum. JAMA Neurol. 75 , 860–875. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0372 . 29630712
Kelly PJ , Furie KL , Kistler JP , Barron M , Picard EH , Mandell R , Shih VE , 2003. Stroke in young patients with hyperhomocysteinemia due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency. Neurology 60 , 275–279. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000042479.55406.b3 . 12552044
Keogh MJ , Kurzawa-Akanbi M , Griffin H , Douroudis K , Ayers KL , Hussein RI , Hudson G , Pyle A , Cordell HJ , Attems J , McKeith IG , O’Brien JT , Burn DJ , Morris CM , Thomas AJ , Chinnery PF , 2016. Exome sequencing in dementia with Lewy bodies. Transl. Psychiatry 6 , e728. 10.1038/tp.2015.220 . 26836416
Kerchner GA , Tartaglia MC , Boxer AL , 2011. Abhorring the vacuum: use of Alzheimer’s disease medications in frontotemporal dementia. Expert. Rev. Neurother 10.1586/ern.11.6 .
Kiely AP , Asi YT , Kara E , Limousin P , Ling H , Lewis P , Proukakis C , Quinn N , Lees AJ , Hardy J , Revesz T , Houlden H , Holton JL , 2013. α-Synucleinopathy associated with G51D SNCA mutation: a link between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy? Acta Neuropathol. 125 , 753–769. 10.1007/s00401-013-1096-7 . 23404372
Kim Y , Lee C , 2006. The gene encoding transforming growth factor beta 1 confers risk of ischemic stroke and vascular dementia. Stroke 37 , 2843–2845. 10.1161/01.STR.0000244782.76917.87 . 16990569
Kim Y , Kim J-H , Nam YJ , Kim YJ , Yu K-H , Lee B-C , Lee C , 2006a. Sequence variants of ACE, AGT, AT1R, and PAI-1 as genetic risk factors for vascular dementia. Neurosci. Lett 401 , 276–279. 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.03.035 . 16603315
Kim Y , Nam YJ , Lee C , 2006b. Haplotype analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms in VEGF gene for vascular dementia. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet 141B , 332–335. 10.1002/ajmg.b.30317 . 16583410
Kim HJ , Kim NC , Wang Y-D , Scarborough EA , Moore J , Diaz Z , MacLea KS , Freibaum B , Li S , Molliex A , Kanagaraj AP , Carter R , Boylan KB , Wojtas AM , Rademakers R , Pinkus JL , Greenberg SA , Trojanowski JQ , Traynor BJ , Smith BN , Topp S , Gkazi A-S , Miller J , Shaw CE , Kottlors M , Kirschner J , Pestronk A , Li YR , Ford AF , Gitler AD , Benatar M , King OD , Kimonis VE , Ross ED , Weihl CC , Shorter J , Taylor JP , 2013a. Mutations in prion-like domains in hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 cause multisystem proteinopathy and ALS. Nature 495 , 467–473. 10.1038/nature11922 . 23455423
Kim Y , Kong M , Lee C , 2013b. Association of intronic sequence variant in the gene encoding spleen tyrosine kinase with susceptibility to vascular dementia. World J. Biol. Psychiatry 14 , 220–226. 10.3109/15622975.2011.559272 .
Kim E-J , Kim Y-E , Jang J-H , Cho E-H , Na DL , Seo SW , Jung N-Y , Jeong JH , Kwon JC , Park KH , Park KW , Lee J-H , Roh JH , Kim H-J , Yoon SJ , Choi SH , Jang J-W , Ki C-S , Kim SH , 2018. Analysis of frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and other dementia-related genes in 107 Korean patients with frontotemporal dementia. Neurobiol. Aging 72 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.06.031 . 186.e1–186.e7.
Kleinberger G , Capell A , Brouwers N , Fellerer K , Sleegers K , Cruts M , Van Broeckhoven C , Haass C , 2016. Reduced secretion and altered proteolytic processing caused by missense mutations in progranulin. Neurobiol. Aging 39 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.12.014 . 220.e17–26.
Knopman DS , Parisi JE , Boeve BF , Cha RH , Apaydin H , Salviati A , Edland SD , Rocca WA , 2003. Vascular dementia in a population-based autopsy study. Arch. Neurol 60 , 569–575. 10.1001/archneur.60.4.569 . 12707071
Koide T , Ohtake H , Nakajima T , Furukawa H , Sakai K , Kamei H , Makifuchi T , Fukuhara N , 2002. A patient with dementia with Lewy bodies and codon 232 mutation of PRNP. Neurology 59 , 1619–1621. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000033796.33205.b4 . 12451207
Konno T , Ross OA , Teive HAG , Sławek J , Dickson DW , Wszolek ZK , 2017. DCTN1-related neurodegeneration: Perry syndrome and beyond. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 41 , 14–24. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.06.004 . 28625595
Kuchar L , Ledvinová J , Hrebícek M , Mysková H , Dvoráková L , Berná L , Chrastina P , Asfaw B , Elleder M , Petermöller M , Mayrhofer H , Staudt M , Krägeloh-Mann I , Paton BC , Harzer K , 2009. Prosaposin deficiency and saposin B deficiency (activator-deficient metachromatic leukodystrophy): report on two patients detected by analysis of urinary sphingolipids and carrying novel PSAP gene mutations. Am. J. Med. Genet. A 149A , 613–621. 10.1002/ajmg.a.32712 . 19267410
Kun-Rodrigues C , Orme T , Carmona S , Hernandez DG , Ross OA , Eicher JD , Shepherd C , Parkkinen L , Darwent L , Heckman MG , Scholz SW , Troncoso JC , Pletnikova O , Dawson T , Rosenthal L , Ansorge O , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Morenas-Rodriguez E , Clark L , Honig LS , Marder K , Lemstra A , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Londos E , Zetterberg H , Barber I , Braae A , Brown K , Morgan K , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Lashley T , Holton J , Compta Y , Van Deerlin V , Serrano GE , Beach TG , Lesage S , Galasko D , Masliah E , Santana I , Pastor P , Diez-Fairen M , Aguilar M , Tienari PJ , Myllykangas L , Oinas M , Revesz T , Lees A , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Ferman TJ , Escott-Price V , Graff-Radford N , Cairns NJ , Morris JC , Pickering-Brown S , Mann D , Halliday GM , Hardy J , Trojanowski JQ , Dickson DW , Singleton A , Stone DJ , Guerreiro R , Bras J , 2019. A comprehensive screening of copy number variability in dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurobiol. Aging 75 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.10.019 . 223.e1–223.e10.30448004
Lagging C , Lorentzen E , Stanne TM , Pedersen A , Söderholm M , Cole JW , Jood K , Lemmens R , Phuah C-L , Rost NS , Thijs V , Woo D , Maguire JM , Lindgren A , Jern C , Genetics of Ischaemic Stroke Functional Outcome (GISCOME) network and the International Stroke Genetics Consortium, 2019. APOE ε4 is associated with younger age at ischemic stroke onset but not with stroke outcome. Neurology 93 , 849–853. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008459 . 31619479
Lai L-W , Whitehair O , Wu M-J , O’Meara M , Lien Y-HH , 2003. Analysis of splicesite mutations of the alpha-galactosidase A gene in Fabry disease. Clin. Genet 63 , 476–482. 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00077.x . 12786754
Larsson V , Torisson G , Londos E , 2018. Relative survival in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease dementia. PLoS One 13 , e0202044. 10.1371/journal.pone.0202044 . 30096198
Lattante S , Millecamps S , Stevanin G , Rivaud-Péchoux S , Moigneu C , Camuzat A , Da Barroca S , Mundwiller E , Couarch P , Salachas F , Hannequin D , Meininger V , Pasquier F , Seilhean D , Couratier P , Danel-Brunaud V , Bonnet A-M , Tranchant C , LeGuern E , Brice A , Le Ber I , Kabashi E , French Research Network on FTD and FTD-ALS, 2014. Contribution of ATXN2 intermediary polyQ expansions in a spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders. Neurology 83 , 990–995. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000778 . 25098532
Lattante S , Pomponi MG , Conte A , Marangi G , Bisogni G , Patanella AK , Meleo E , Lunetta C , Riva N , Mosca L , Carrera P , Bee M , Zollino M , Sabatelli M , 2018. ATXN1 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiol. Aging 64 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.11.011 . 157.e1–157.e5.
Launay S , Maubert E , Lebeurrier N , Tennstaedt A , Campioni M , Docagne F , Gabriel C , Dauphinot L , Potier MC , Ehrmann M , Baldi A , Vivien D , 2008. HtrA1-dependent proteolysis of TGF-beta controls both neuronal maturation and developmental survival. Cell Death Differ. 15 , 1408–1416. 10.1038/cdd.2008.82 . 18551132
Le Ber I , Camuzat A , Guerreiro R , Bouya-Ahmed K , Bras J , Nicolas G , Gabelle A , Didic M , De Septenville A , Millecamps S , Lenglet T , Latouche M , Kabashi E , Campion D , Hannequin D , Hardy J , Brice A , Clinical, French, Genetic Research Network on FTD/FTD-ALS, 2013. SQSTM1 mutations in French patients with frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal dementia with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. JAMA Neurol. 70 , 1403–1410. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3849 . 24042580
Le Ber I , Van Bortel I , Nicolas G , Bouya-Ahmed K , Camuzat A , Wallon D , De Septenville A , Latouche M , Lattante S , Kabashi E , Jornea L , Hannequin D , Brice A , French research Network on FTLD/FTLD-ALS, 2014. hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 mutations are rare in patients with “multisystem proteinopathy” and frontotemporal lobar degeneration phenotypes. Neurobiol. Aging 35 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.016 . 934.e5–6.
Levy E , Carman MD , Fernandez-Madrid IJ , Power MD , Lieberburg I , van Duinen SG , Bots GT , Luyendijk W , Frangione B , 1990. Mutation of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid gene in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, Dutch type. Science 248 , 1124–1126. 10.1126/science.2111584 . 2111584
Liem MK , Lesnik Oberstein SAJ , Vollebregt MJ , Middelkoop HAM , van der Grond J , Helderman-van den Enden ATJM , 2008. Homozygosity for a NOTCH3 mutation in a 65-year-old CADASIL patient with mild symptoms: a family report. J. Neurol 255 , 1978–1980. 10.1007/s00415-009-0036-x . 19153638
Lim A , Tsuang D , Kukull W , Nochlin D , Leverenz J , McCormick W , Bowen J , Teri L , Thompson J , Peskind ER , Others, 1999. Clinico-neuropathological correlation of Alzheimer’s disease in a community-based case series. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 47 , 564–569.10323650
Ling S-C , Polymenidou M , Cleveland DW , 2013. Converging mechanisms in ALS and FTD: disrupted RNA and protein homeostasis. Neuron 79 , 416–438. 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.033 . 23931993
Liu H , Yang M , Li G-M , Qiu Y , Zheng J , Du X , Wang J-L , Liu R-W , 2010a. The MTHFR C677T polymorphism contributes to an increased risk for vascular dementia: a meta-analysis. J. Neurol. Sci 294 , 74–80. 10.1016/j.jns.2010.04.001 . 20441995
Liu H , Zhang W , Kennard S , Caldwell RB , Lilly B , 2010b. Notch3 is critical for proper angiogenesis and mural cell investment. Circ. Res 107 , 860–870. 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.218271 . 20689064
Low WC , Junna M , Börjesson-Hanson A , Morris CM , Moss TH , Stevens DL , St Clair D , Mizuno T , Zhang WW , Mykkänen K , Wahlstrom J , Andersen O , Kalimo H , Viitanen M , Kalaria RN , 2007. Hereditary multi-infarct dementia of the Swedish type is a novel disorder different from NOTCH3 causing CADASIL. Brain 130 , 357–367. 10.1093/brain/awl360 . 17235124
Loy CT , Schofield PR , Turner AM , Kwok JBJ , 2014. Genetics of dementia. Lancet 383 , 828–840. 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60630-3 . 23927914
Lysikova EA , Kukharsky MS , Chaprov KD , Vasilieva NA , Roman AY , Ovchinnikov RK , Deykin AV , Ninkina N , Buchman VL , 2019. Behavioural impairments in mice of a novel FUS transgenic line recapitulate features of frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Genes Brain Behav. 18 , e12607. 10.1111/gbb.12607 . 31437340
Mackenzie IRA , Neumann M , 2016. Molecular neuropathology of frontotemporal dementia: insights into disease mechanisms from postmortem studies. J. Neurochem 138 (Suppl. 1 ), 54–70. 10.1111/jnc.13588 . 27306735
Malik R , Traylor M , Pulit SL , Bevan S , Hopewell JC , Holliday EG , Zhao W , Abrantes P , Amouyel P , Attia JR , Battey TWK , Berger K , Boncoraglio GB , Chauhan G , Cheng Y-C , Chen W-M , Clarke R , Cotlarciuc I , Debette S , Falcone GJ , Ferro JM , Gamble DM , Ilinca A , Kittner SJ , Kourkoulis CE , Lemmens R , Levi CR , Lichtner P , Lindgren A , Liu J , Meschia JF , Mitchell BD , Oliveira SA , Pera J , Reiner AP , Rothwell PM , Sharma P , Slowik A , Sudlow CLM , Tatlisumak T , Thijs V , Vicente AM , Woo D , Seshadri S , Saleheen D , Rosand J , Markus HS , Worrall BB , Dichgans M , ISGC Analysis Group, METASTROKE collaboration,Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2 (WTCCC2), NINDS Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), 2016. Low-frequency and common genetic variation in ischemic stroke: the METASTROKE collaboration. Neurology 86 , 1217–1226. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002528 . 26935894
Malik R , Chauhan G , Traylor M , Sargurupremraj M , Okada Y , Mishra A , Rutten-Jacobs L , Giese A-K , van der Laan SW , Gretarsdottir S , Anderson CD , Chong M , Adams HHH , Ago T , Almgren P , Amouyel P , Ay H , Bartz TM , Benavente OR , Bevan S , Boncoraglio GB , Brown RD Jr. , Butterworth AS , Carrera C , Carty CL , Chasman DI , Chen W-M , Cole JW , Correa A , Cotlarciuc I , Cruchaga C , Danesh J , de Bakker PIW , DeStefano AL , den Hoed M , Duan Q , Engelter ST , Falcone GJ , Gottesman RF , Grewal RP , Gudnason V , Gustafsson S , Haessler J , Harris TB , Hassan A , Havulinna AS , Heckbert SR , Holliday EG , Howard G , Hsu F-C , Hyacinth HI , Ikram MA , Ingelsson E , Irvin MR , Jian X , Jiménez-Conde J , Johnson JA , Jukema JW , Kanai M , Keene KL , Kissela BM , Kleindorfer DO , Kooperberg C , Kubo M , Lange LA , Langefeld CD , Langenberg C , Launer LJ , Lee J-M , Lemmens R , Leys D , Lewis CM , Lin W-Y , Lindgren AG , Lorentzen E , Magnusson PK , Maguire J , Manichaikul A , McArdle PF , Meschia JF , Mitchell BD , Mosley TH , Nalls MA , Ninomiya T , O’Donnell MJ , Psaty BM , Pulit SL , Rannikmäe K , Reiner AP , Rexrode KM , Rice K , Rich SS , Ridker PM , Rost NS , Rothwell PM , Rotter JI , Rundek T , Sacco RL , Sakaue S , Sale MM , Salomaa V , Sapkota BR , Schmidt R , Schmidt CO , Schminke U , Sharma P , Slowik A , Sudlow CLM , Tanislav C , Tatlisumak T , Taylor KD , Thijs VNS , Thorleifsson G , Thorsteinsdottir U , Tiedt S , Trompet S , Tzourio C , van Duijn CM , Walters M , Wareham NJ , Wassertheil-Smoller S , Wilson JG , Wiggins KL , Yang Q , Yusuf S , AFGen Consortium, Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium, International Genomics of Blood Pressure (iGEN-BP) Consortium, INVENT Consortium, STARNET, Bis JC , Pastinen T , Ruusalepp A , Schadt EE , Koplev S , Björkegren JLM , Codoni V , Civelek M , Smith NL , Trégouët DA , Christophersen IE , Roselli C , Lubitz SA , Ellinor PT , Tai ES , Kooner JS , Kato N , He J , van der Harst P , Elliott P , Chambers JC , Takeuchi F , Johnson AD , BioBank Japan Cooperative Hospital Group, COMPASS Consortium, EPIC-CVD Consortium, EPIC-InterAct Consortium, International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC), METASTROKE Consortium, Neurology Working Group of the CHARGE Consortium, NINDS Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), UK Young Lacunar DNA Study, MEGASTROKE Consortium, Sanghera DK , Melander O , Jern C , Strbian D , Fernandez-Cadenas I , Longstreth WT Jr. , Rolfs A , Hata J , Woo D , Rosand J , Pare G , Hopewell JC , Saleheen D , Stefansson K , Worrall BB , Kittner SJ , Seshadri S , Fornage M , Markus HS , Howson JMM , Kamatani Y , Debette S , Dichgans M , 2018. Multiancestry genome-wide association study of 520,000 subjects identifies 32 loci associated with stroke and stroke subtypes. Nat. Genet 50 , 524–537. 10.1038/s41588-018-0058-3 . 29531354
Mann DM , Pickering-Brown SM , Takeuchi A , Iwatsubo T , Members of the Familial Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology Study Group, 2001. Amyloid angiopathy and variability in amyloid beta deposition is determined by mutation position in presenilin-1-linked Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol 158 , 2165–2175. 10.1016/s0002-9440(10)64688-3 . 11395394
Marcon G , Di Fede G , Giaccone G , Rossi G , Giovagnoli AR , Maccagnano E , Tagliavini F , 2009. A novel Italian presenilin 2 gene mutation with prevalent behavioral phenotype. J. Alzheimers Dis 16 , 509–511. 10.3233/JAD-2009-0986 . 19276543
Markopoulou K , Dickson DW , McComb RD , Wszolek ZK , Katechalidou L , Avery L , Stansbury MS , Chase BA , 2008. Clinical, neuropathological and genotypic variability in SNCA A53T familial Parkinson’s disease. Variability in familial Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 116 , 25–35. 10.1007/s00401-008-0372-4 . 18389263
Maruyama H , Morino H , Ito H , Izumi Y , Kato H , Watanabe Y , Kinoshita Y , Kamada M , Nodera H , Suzuki H , Komure O , Matsuura S , Kobatake K , Morimoto N , Abe K , Suzuki N , Aoki M , Kawata A , Hirai T , Kato T , Ogasawara K , Hirano A , Takumi T , Kusaka H , Hagiwara K , Kaji R , Kawakami H , 2010. Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 465 , 223–226. 10.1038/nature08971 . 20428114
Maski KP , Sengupta S , Silvera M , Rivkin MJ , 2011. Intracranial artery dissection in an adolescent with Marfan syndrome. Pediatr. Neurol 45 , 39–41. 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2010.12.011 . 21723458
Mata IF , Leverenz JB , Weintraub D , Trojanowski JQ , Chen-Plotkin A , Van Deerlin VM , Ritz B , Rausch R , Factor SA , Wood-Siverio C , Quinn JF , Chung KA , Peterson-Hiller AL , Goldman JG , Stebbins GT , Bernard B , Espay AJ , Revilla FJ , Devoto J , Rosenthal LS , Dawson TM , Albert MS , Tsuang D , Huston H , Yearout D , Hu S-C , Cholerton BA , Montine TJ , Edwards KL , Zabetian CP , 2016. GBA Variants are associated with a distinct pattern of cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord 31 , 95–102. 10.1002/mds.26359 . 26296077
McCarron MO , Nicoll JA , 1998. High frequency of apolipoprotein E epsilon 2 allele is specific for patients with cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related haemorrhage. Neurosci. Lett 247 , 45–48. 10.1016/s0304-3940(98)00286-9 . 9637406
McCarron MO , Nicoll JA , 2000. Apolipoprotein E genotype and cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related hemorrhage. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 903 , 176–179. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06366.x . 10818505
McKeith IG , Boeve BF , Dickson DW , Halliday G , Taylor J-P , Weintraub D , Aarsland D , Galvin J , Attems J , Ballard CG , Bayston A , Beach TG , Blanc F , Bohnen N , Bonanni L , Bras J , Brundin P , Burn D , Chen-Plotkin A , Duda JE , El-Agnaf O , Feldman H , Ferman TJ , Ffytche D , Fujishiro H , Galasko D , Goldman JG , Gomperts SN , Graff-Radford NR , Honig LS , Iranzo A , Kantarci K , Kaufer D , Kukull W , Lee VMY , Leverenz JB , Lewis S , Lippa C , Lunde A , Masellis M , Masliah E , McLean P , Mollenhauer B , Montine TJ , Moreno E , Mori E , Murray M , O’Brien JT , Orimo S , Postuma RB , Ramaswamy S , Ross OA , Salmon DP , Singleton A , Taylor A , Thomas A , Tiraboschi P , Toledo JB , Trojanowski JQ , Tsuang D , Walker Z , Yamada M , Kosaka K , 2017. Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium. Neurology 89 , 88–100. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004058 . 28592453
Meeus B , Verstraeten A , Crosiers D , Engelborghs S , Van den Broeck M , Mattheijssens M , Peeters K , Corsmit E , Elinck E , Pickut B , Vandenberghe R , Cras P , De Deyn PP , Van Broeckhoven C , Theuns J , 2012. DLB and PDD: a role for mutations in dementia and Parkinson disease genes? Neurobiol. Aging 33 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.10.014 . 629.e5–629.e18.
Mehta A , Clarke JTR , Giugliani R , Elliott P , Linhart A , Beck M , Sunder-Plassmann G , Investigators FOS , 2009. Natural course of Fabry disease: changing pattern of causes of death in FOS – Fabry Outcome Survey. J. Med. Genet 46 , 548–552. 10.1136/jmg.2008.065904 . 19473999
Mendioroz M , Fernández-Cadenas I , Del Río-Espinola A , Rovira A , Solé E , Fernández-Figueras MT , García-Patos V , Sastre-Garriga J , Domingues-Montanari S , Alvarez-Sabín J , Montaner J , 2010. A missense HTRA1 mutation expands CARASIL syndrome to the Caucasian population. Neurology 75 , 2033–2035. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ff96ac . 21115960
Meyer H , Bug M , Bremer S , 2012. Emerging functions of the VCP/p97 AAA-ATPase in the ubiquitin system. Nat. Cell Biol 14 , 117–123. 10.1038/ncb2407 . 22298039
Mishra A , Ferrari R , Heutink P , Hardy J , Pijnenburg Y , Posthuma D , International FTD-Genomics Consortium, 2017. Gene-based association studies report genetic links for clinical subtypes of frontotemporal dementia. Brain 140 , 1437–1446. 10.1093/brain/awx066 . 28387812
Montañola A , de Retana SF , López-Rueda A , Merino-Zamorano C , Penalba A , Fernández-Álvarez P , Rodríguez-Luna D , Malagelada A , Pujadas F , Montaner J , Hernández-Guillamon M , 2016. ApoA1, ApoJ and ApoE plasma levels and genotype frequencies in cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Neuro Mol. Med 18 , 99–108. 10.1007/s12017-015-8381-7 .
Moore KM , Nicholas J , Grossman M , McMillan CT , Irwin DJ , Massimo L , Van Deerlin VM , Warren JD , Fox NC , Rossor MN , Mead S , Bocchetta M , Boeve BF , Knopman DS , Graff-Radford NR , Forsberg LK , Rademakers R , Wszolek ZK , van Swieten JC , Jiskoot LC , Meeter LH , Dopper EG , Papma JM , Snowden JS , Saxon J , Jones M , Pickering-Brown S , Le Ber I , Camuzat A , Brice A , Caroppo P , Ghidoni R , Pievani M , Benussi L , Binetti G , Dickerson BC , Lucente D , Krivensky S , Graff C , Öijerstedt L , Fallström M , Thonberg H , Ghoshal N , Morris JC , Borroni B , Benussi A , Padovani A , Galimberti D , Scarpini E , Fumagalli GG , Mackenzie IR , Hsiung G-YR , Sengdy P , Boxer AL , Rosen H , Taylor JB , Synofzik M , Wilke C , Sulzer P , Hodges JR , Halliday G , Kwok J , Sanchez-Valle R , Lladó A , Borrego-Ecija S , Santana I , Almeida MR , Tábuas-Pereira M , Moreno F , Barandiaran M , Indakoetxea B , Levin J , Danek A , Rowe JB , Cope TE , Otto M , Anderl-Straub S , de Mendonça A , Maruta C , Masellis M , Black SE , Couratier P , Lautrette G , Huey ED , Sorbi S , Nacmias B , Laforce R Jr. , Tremblay M-PL , Vandenberghe R , Van Damme P , Rogalski EJ , Weintraub S , Gerhard A , Onyike CU , Ducharme S , Papageorgiou SG , Ng ASL , Brodtmann A , Finger E , Guerreiro R , Bras J , Rohrer JD , Prevention Initiative FTD , 2020. Age at symptom onset and death and disease duration in genetic frontotemporal dementia: an international retrospective cohort study. Lancet Neurol. 19 , 145–156. 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30394-1 . 31810826
Moreno-Grau S , de Rojas I , Hernández I , Quintela I , Montrreal L , Alegret M , Hernández-Olasagarre B , Madrid L , González-Perez A , Maroñas O , Rosende-Roca M , Mauleón A , Vargas L , Lafuente A , Abdelnour C , Rodríguez-Gómez O , Gil S , Santos-Santos MÁ , Espinosa A , Ortega G , Sanabria Á , Pérez-Cordón A , Cañabate P , Moreno M , Preckler S , Ruiz S , Aguilera N , Pineda JA , Macías J , Alarcón-Martín E , Sotolongo-Grau O , GR@ACE consortium, DEGESCO consortium, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Marquié M , Monté-Rubio G , Valero S , Benaque A , Clarimón J , Bullido MJ , García-Ribas G , Pástor P , Sánchez-Juan P , Álvarez V , Piñol-Ripoll G , García-Alberca JM , Royo JL , Franco E , Mir P , Calero M , Medina M , Rábano A , Ávila J , Antúnez C , Real LM , Orellana A , Carracedo Á , Sáez ME , Tárraga L , Boada M , Ruiz A , 2019. Genome-wide association analysis of dementia and its clinical endophenotypes reveal novel loci associated with Alzheimer’s disease and three causality networks: the GR@ACE project. Alzheimers Dement. 15 , 1333–1347. 10.1016/j.jalz.2019.06.4950 . 31473137
Morfis L , Cordato DJ , 2006. Dementia with Lewy bodies in an elderly Greek male due to alpha-synuclein gene mutation. J. Clin. Neurosci 13 , 942–944. 10.1016/j.jocn.2005.11.040 . 17049244
Muiño E , Gallego-Fabrega C , Cullell N , Carrera C , Torres N , Krupinski J , Roquer J , Montaner J , Fernández-Cadenas I , 2017. Systematic review of cysteine-sparing NOTCH3 missense mutations in patients with clinical suspicion of CADASIL. Int. J. Mol. Sci 18 . 10.3390/ijms18091964 .
Nagabhushana A , Bansal M , Swarup G , 2011. Optineurin is required for CYLD-dependent inhibition of TNFα-induced NF-κB activation. PLoS One 6 , e17477. 10.1371/journal.pone.0017477 . 21408173
Nalls MA , Duran R , Lopez G , Kurzawa-Akanbi M , McKeith IG , Chinnery PF , Morris CM , Theuns J , Crosiers D , Cras P , Engelborghs S , De Deyn PP , Van Broeckhoven C , Mann DMA , Snowden J , Pickering-Brown S , Halliwell N , Davidson Y , Gibbons L , Harris J , Sheerin U-M , Bras J , Hardy J , Clark L , Marder K , Honig LS , Berg D , Maetzler W , Brockmann K , Gasser T , Novellino F , Quattrone A , Annesi G , De Marco EV , Rogaeva E , Masellis M , Black SE , Bilbao JM , Foroud T , Ghetti B , Nichols WC , Pankratz N , Halliday G , Lesage S , Klebe S , Durr A , Duyckaerts C , Brice A , Giasson BI , Trojanowski JQ , Hurtig HI , Tayebi N , Landazabal C , Knight MA , Keller M , Singleton AB , Wolfsberg TG , Sidransky E , 2013. A multicenter study of glucocerebrosidase mutations in dementia with Lewy bodies. JAMA Neurol. 70 , 727–735. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1925 . 23588557
Nance MA , Boyadjiev S , Pratt VM , Taylor S , Hodes ME , Dlouhy SR , 1996. Adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder due to proteolipid protein gene mutation in the mother of a man with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Neurology 47 , 1333–1335. 10.1212/wnl.47.5.1333 . 8909455
Nance CS , Klein CJ , Banikazemi M , Dikman SH , Phelps RG , McArthur JC , Rodriguez M , Desnick RJ , 2006. Later-onset Fabry disease: an adult variant presenting with the cramp-fasciculation syndrome. Arch. Neurol 63 , 453–457. 10.1001/archneur.63.3.453 . 16533976
Nelson MR , Tipney H , Painter JL , Shen J , Nicoletti P , Shen Y , Floratos A , Sham PC , Li MJ , Wang J , Cardon LR , Whittaker JC , Sanseau P , 2015. The support of human genetic evidence for approved drug indications. Nat. Genet 47 , 856–860. 10.1038/ng.3314 . 26121088
Nervi A , Reitz C , Tang M-X , Santana V , Piriz A , Reyes D , Lantigua R , Medrano M , Jiménez-Velázquez IZ , Lee JH , Mayeux R , 2011. Familial aggregation of dementia with Lewy bodies. Arch. Neurol 68 , 90–93. 10.1001/archneurol.2010.319 . 21220678
Neurology Working Group of the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium, the Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), and the International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC), 2016. Identification of additional risk loci for stroke and small vessel disease: a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies. Lancet Neurol. 15 , 695–707. 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)00102-2 . 27068588
Nicholson AM , Finch NA , Almeida M , Perkerson RB , van Blitterswijk M , Wojtas A , Cenik B , Rotondo S , Inskeep V , Almasy L , Dyer T , Peralta J , Jun G , Wood AR , Frayling TM , Fuchsberger C , Fowler S , Teslovich TM , Manning AK , Kumar S , Curran J , Lehman D , Abecasis G , Duggirala R , Pottier C , Zahir HA , Crook JE , Karydas A , Mitic L , Sun Y , Dickson DW , Bu G , Herz J , Yu G , Miller BL , Ferguson S , Petersen RC , Graff-Radford N , Blangero J , Rademakers R , 2016. Prosaposin is a regulator of progranulin levels and oligomerization. Nat. Commun 7 , 11992. 10.1038/ncomms11992 . 27356620
Nicolas G , Wallon D , Goupil C , Richard A-C , Pottier C , Dorval V , Sarov-Rivière M , Riant F , Hervé D , Amouyel P , Guerchet M , Ndamba-Bandzouzi B , Mbelesso P , Dartigues J-F , Lambert J-C , Preux P-M , Frebourg T , Campion D , Hannequin D , Tournier-Lasserve E , Hébert SS , Rovelet-Lecrux A , 2016. Mutation in the 3’untranslated region of APP as a genetic determinant of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Eur. J. Hum. Genet 24 , 92–98. 10.1038/ejhg.2015.61 . 25828868
Nicoll JA , McCarron MO , 2001. APOE gene polymorphism as a risk factor for cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related hemorrhage. Amyloid 8 (Suppl. 1 ), 51–55.11676291
Nicoll JA , Burnett C , Love S , Graham DI , Ironside JW , Vinters HV , 1996. High frequency of apolipoprotein E epsilon 2 in patients with cerebral hemorrhage due to cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Ann. Neurol 10.1002/ana.410390521 .
Nicoll JA , Burnett C , Love S , Graham DI , Dewar D , Ironside JW , Stewart J , Vinters HV , 1997. High frequency of apolipoprotein E epsilon 2 allele in hemorrhage due to cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Ann. Neurol 41 , 716–721. 10.1002/ana.410410607 . 9189032
NINDS Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN), International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC), 2016. Loci associated with ischaemic stroke and its subtypes (SiGN): a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurol. 15 , 174–184. 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00338-5 . 26708676
Nishioka K , Ross OA , Vilariño-Güell C , Cobb SA , Kachergus JM , Mann DMA , Snowden J , Richardson AMT , Neary D , Robinson CA , Rajput A , Papapetropoulos S , Mash DC , Pahwa R , Lyons KE , Wszolek ZK , Dickson DW , Farrer MJ , 2011. Glucocerebrosidase mutations in diffuse Lewy body disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 17 , 55–57. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.09.009 . 20971030
Nochlin D , Bird TD , Nemens EJ , Ball MJ , Sumi SM , 1998. Amyloid angiopathy in a Volga German family with Alzheimer’s disease and a presenilin-2 mutation (N141I). Ann. Neurol 43 , 131–135. 10.1002/ana.410430124 . 9450781
Nordestgaard LT , Tybjærg-Hansen A , Rasmussen KL , Nordestgaard BG , Frikke-Schmidt R , 2018. Genetic variation in clusterin and risk of dementia and ischemic vascular disease in the general population: cohort studies and meta-analyses of 362,338 individuals. BMC Med. 16 , 39. 10.1186/s12916-018-1029-3 . 29534716
Ohtake H , Limprasert P , Fan Y , Onodera O , Kakita A , Takahashi H , Bonner LT , Tsuang DW , Murray IVJ , Lee VM-Y , Trojanowski JQ , Ishikawa A , Idezuka J , Murata M , Toda T , Bird TD , Leverenz JB , Tsuji S , La Spada AR , 2004. Beta-synuclein gene alterations in dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurology 63 , 805–811. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000139870.14385.3c . 15365127
Olszewska DA , Fallon EM , Pastores GM , Murphy K , Blanco A , Lynch T , Murphy SM , 2019. Autosomal dominant gene negative frontotemporal dementia-think of SCA17. Cerebellum 18 , 654–658. 10.1007/s12311-018-0998-2 . 30617627
Opherk C , Gonik M , Duering M , Malik R , Jouvent E , Hervé D , Adib-Samii P , Bevan S , Pianese L , Silvestri S , Dotti MT , De Stefano N , Liem M , Boon EMJ , Pescini F , Pachai C , Bracoud L , Müller-Myhsok B , Meitinger T , Rost N , Pantoni L , Lesnik Oberstein S , Federico A , Ragno M , Markus HS , Tournier-Lasserve E , Rosand J , Chabriat H , Dichgans M , 2014. Genome-wide genotyping demonstrates a polygenic risk score associated with white matter hyperintensity volume in CADASIL. Stroke 45 , 968–972. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.004461 . 24578207
Orme T , Guerreiro R , Bras J , 2018. The genetics of dementia with Lewy bodies: current understanding and future directions. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep 18 , 67. 10.1007/s11910-018-0874-y . 30097731
Orme T , Hernandez D , Ross OA , Kun-Rodrigues C , Darwent L , Shepherd CE , Parkkinen L , Ansorge O , Clark L , Honig LS , Marder K , Lemstra A , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Londos E , Zetterberg H , Morgan K , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Lashley T , Holton J , Compta Y , Van Deerlin V , Trojanowski JQ , Serrano GE , Beach TG , Lesage S , Galasko D , Masliah E , Santana I , Pastor P , Tienari PJ , Myllykangas L , Oinas M , Revesz T , Lees A , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Ferman TJ , Escott-Price V , Graff-Radford N , Cairns NJ , Morris JC , Pickering-Brown S , Mann D , Halliday G , Stone DJ , Dickson DW , Hardy J , Singleton A , Guerreiro R , Bras J , 2020. Analysis of neurodegenerative disease-causing genes in dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 8 , 5. 10.1186/s40478-020-0879-z . 31996268
Outeiro TF , Koss DJ , Erskine D , Walker L , Kurzawa-Akanbi M , Burn D , Donaghy P , Morris C , Taylor J-P , Thomas A , Attems J , McKeith I , 2019. Dementia with Lewy bodies: an update and outlook. Mol. Neurodegener 14 , 5. 10.1186/s13024-019-0306-8 . 30665447
Paloneva , 2002. Am J Hum Genet. 10.1086/342259 .
Papapetropoulos S , Lieberman A , Gonzalez J , Singer C , Laufer DZ , Mash DC , 2006. Family history of dementia: dementia with lewy bodies and dementia in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuropsychiatr. Clin. Neurosci 18 , 113–116. 10.1176/jnp.18.1.113 .
Park J-M , Kim YJ , Song MK , Lee J-M , Kim Y-J , 2018. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling in a rat model with vascular dementia. Mol. Med. Rep 18 , 123–130. 10.3892/mmr.2018.8990 . 29749552
Parkinson N , Ince PG , Smith MO , Highley R , Skibinski G , Andersen PM , Morrison KE , Pall HS , Hardiman O , Collinge J , Shaw PJ , Fisher EMC , MRC Proteomics in ALS Study, FReJA Consortium, 2006. ALS phenotypes with mutations in CHMP2B (charged multivesicular body protein 2B). Neurology 67 , 1074–1077. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000231510.89311.8b . 16807408
Pasanen P , Myllykangas L , Siitonen M , Raunio A , Kaakkola S , Lyytinen J , Tienari PJ , Pöyhönen M , Paetau A , 2014. Novel α-synuclein mutation A53E associated with atypical multiple system atrophy and Parkinson’s disease-type pathology. Neurobiol. Aging 35 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.024 . 2180.e1–5.24746362
Pavlovic AM , Dobricic V , Semnic R , Lackovic V , Novakovic I , Bajcetic M , Sternic N , 2013. A novel Notch3 Gly89Cys mutation in a Serbian CADASIL family. Acta Neurol. Belg 113 , 299–302. 10.1007/s13760-012-0174-2 . 23319290
Peila R , Yucesoy B , White LR , Johnson V , Kashon ML , Wu K , Petrovitch H , Luster M , Launer LJ , 2007. A TGF-beta1 polymorphism association with dementia and neuropathologies: the HAAS. Neurobiol. Aging 28 , 1367–1373. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.06.004 . 16904244
Perrone F , Nguyen HP , Van Mossevelde S , Moisse M , Sieben A , Santens P , De Bleecker J , Vandenbulcke M , Engelborghs S , Baets J , Cras P , Vandenberghe R , De Jonghe P , De Deyn PP , Martin J-J , Van Damme P , Van Broeckhoven C , van der Zee J , Belgian Neurology consortium, 2017. Investigating the role of ALS genes CHCHD10 and TUBA4A in Belgian FTD-ALS spectrum patients. Neurobiol. Aging 51 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.12.008 . 177.e9–177.e16.
Petersen RB , Goren H , Cohen M , Richardson SL , Tresser N , Lynn A , Gali M , Estes M , Gambetti P , 1997. Transthyretin amyloidosis: a new mutation associated with dementia. Ann. Neurol 41 , 307–313. 10.1002/ana.410410305 . 9066351
Petkau TL , Leavitt BR , 2014. Progranulin in neurodegenerative disease. Trends Neurosci. 37 , 388–398. 10.1016/j.tins.2014.04.003 . 24800652
Placek K , Baer GM , Elman L , McCluskey L , Hennessy L , Ferraro PM , Lee EB , Lee VMY , Trojanowski JQ , Van Deerlin VM , Grossman M , Irwin DJ , McMillan CT , 2019. UNC13A polymorphism contributes to frontotemporal disease in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiol. Aging 73 , 190–199. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.09.031 . 30368160
Pola R , Gaetani E , Flex A , Aloi F , Papaleo P , Gerardino L , De Martini D , Flore R , Pola P , Bernabei R , 2002. 174 G/C interleukin-6 gene polymorphism and increased risk of multi-infarct dementia: a case-control study. Exp. Gerontol 37 , 949–955. 10.1016/s0531-5565(02)00031-1 . 12086705
Pottier C , Bieniek KF , Finch N , van de Vorst M , Baker M , Perkersen R , Brown P , Ravenscroft T , van Blitterswijk M , Nicholson AM , DeTure M , Knopman DS , Josephs KA , Parisi JE , Petersen RC , Boylan KB , Boeve BF , Graff-Radford NR , Veltman JA , Gilissen C , Murray ME , Dickson DW , Rademakers R , 2015. Whole-genome sequencing reveals important role for TBK1 and OPTN mutations in frontotemporal lobar degeneration without motor neuron disease. Acta Neuropathol. 130 , 77–92. 10.1007/s00401-015-1436-x . 25943890
Pottier C , Zhou X , Perkerson RB 3rd , Baker M , Jenkins GD , Serie DJ , Ghidoni R , Benussi L , Binetti G , López de Munain A , Zulaica M , Moreno F , Le Ber I , Pasquier F , Hannequin D , Sánchez-Valle R , Antonell A , Lladó A , Parsons TM , Finch NA , Finger EC , Lippa CF , Huey ED , Neumann M , Heutink P , Synofzik M , Wilke C , Rissman RA , Slawek J , Sitek E , Johannsen P , Nielsen JE , Ren Y , van Blitterswijk M , DeJesus-Hernandez M , Christopher E , Murray ME , Bieniek KF , Evers BM , Ferrari C , Rollinson S , Richardson A , Scarpini E , Fumagalli GG , Padovani A , Hardy J , Momeni P , Ferrari R , Frangipane F , Maletta R , Anfossi M , Gallo M , Petrucelli L , Suh E , Lopez OL , Wong TH , van Rooij JGJ , Seelaar H , Mead S , Caselli RJ , Reiman EM , Noel Sabbagh M , Kjolby M , Nykjaer A , Karydas AM , Boxer AL , Grinberg LT , Grafman J , Spina S , Oblak A , Mesulam M-M , Weintraub S , Geula C , Hodges JR , Piguet O , Brooks WS , Irwin DJ , Trojanowski JQ , Lee EB , Josephs KA , Parisi JE , Ertekin-Taner N , Knopman DS , Nacmias B , Piaceri I , Bagnoli S , Sorbi S , Gearing M , Glass J , Beach TG , Black SE , Masellis M , Rogaeva E , Vonsattel J-P , Honig LS , Kofler J , Bruni AC , Snowden J , Mann D , Pickering-Brown S , Diehl-Schmid J , Winkelmann J , Galimberti D , Graff C , Öijerstedt L , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Cruchaga C , Cairns NJ , Rohrer JD , Halliday GM , Kwok JB , van Swieten JC , White CL 3rd , Ghetti B , Murell JR , Mackenzie IRA , Hsiung G-YR , Borroni B , Rossi G , Tagliavini F , Wszolek ZK , Petersen RC , Bigio EH , Grossman M , Van Deerlin VM , Seeley WW , Miller BL , Graff-Radford NR , Boeve BF , Dickson DW , Biernacka JM , Rademakers R , 2018. Potential genetic modifiers of disease risk and age at onset in patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration and GRN mutations: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurol. 17 , 548–558. 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30126-1 . 29724592
Prasad A , Bharathi V , Sivalingam V , Girdhar A , Patel BK , 2019. Molecular mechanisms of TDP-43 misfolding and pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Front. Mol. Neurosci 12 , 25. 10.3389/fnmol.2019.00025 . 30837838
Prokopenko I , Miyakawa G , Zheng B , Heikkinen J , Petrova Quayle D , Udeh-Momoh C , Claringbould A , Neumann J , Haytural H , Kaakinen MA , Loizidou E , Meissner E , Bertram L , BIOS consortium, Gveric DO , Gentleman SM , Attems J , Perneczky R , Arzberger T , Muglia P , Lill CM , Parkkinen L , Middleton LT , 2019. Alzheimer’s disease pathology explains association between dementia with Lewy bodies and APOE-ε4/TOMM40 long poly-T repeat allele variants. Alzheimers Dement. 5 , 814–824. 10.1016/j.trci.2019.08.005 .
Ragno M , Pianese L , Morroni M , Cacchiò G , Manca A , Di Marzio F , Silvestri S , Miceli C , Scarcella M , Onofrj M , Trojano L , 2013. “CADASIL coma” in an Italian homozygous CADASIL patient: comparison with clinical and MRI findings in age-matched heterozygous patients with the same G528C NOTCH3 mutation. Neurol. Sci 34 , 1947–1953. 10.1007/s10072-013-1418-5 . 23572112
Ramos EM , Dokuru DR , Van Berlo V , Wojta K , Wang Q , Huang AY , Deverasetty S , Qin Y , van Blitterswijk M , Jackson J , Appleby B , Bordelon Y , Brannelly P , Brushaber DE , Dickerson B , Dickinson S , Domoto-Reilly K , Faber K , Fields J , Fong J , Foroud T , Forsberg LK , Gavrilova R , Ghoshal N , Goldman J , Graff-Radford J , Graff-Radford N , Grant I , Grossman M , Heuer HW , Hsiung G-YR , Huey E , Irwin D , Kantarci K , Karydas A , Kaufer D , Kerwin D , Knopman D , Kornak J , Kramer JH , Kremers W , Kukull W , Litvan I , Ljubenkov P , Lungu C , Mackenzie I , Mendez MF , Miller BL , Onyike C , Pantelyat A , Pearlman R , Petrucelli L , Potter M , Rankin KP , Rascovsky K , Roberson ED , Rogalski E , Shaw L , Syrjanen J , Tartaglia MC , Tatton N , Taylor J , Toga A , Trojanowski JQ , Weintraub S , Wong B , Wszolek Z , Rademakers R , Boeve BF , Rosen HJ , Boxer AL , ARTFL/LEFFTDS consortium, Coppola G , 2020. Genetic screening of a large series of North American sporadic and familial frontotemporal dementia cases. Alzheimers Dement. 16 , 118–130. 10.1002/alz.12011 . 31914217
Rannikmäe K , Kalaria RN , Greenberg SM , Chui HC , Schmitt FA , Samarasekera N , Al-Shahi Salman R , Sudlow CLM , 2014. APOE associations with severe CAA-associated vasculopathic changes: collaborative meta-analysis. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 85 , 300–305. 10.1136/jnnp-2013-306485 . 24163429
Rasmussen KL , Tybjærg-Hansen A , Nordestgaard BG , Frikke-Schmidt R , 2016. Data on plasma levels of apolipoprotein E, correlations with lipids and lipoproteins stratified by APOE genotype, and risk of ischemic heart disease. Data Brief 6 , 923–932. 10.1016/j.dib.2016.01.060 . 26937471
Renaud L , Picher-Martel V , Codron P , Julien J-P , 2019. Key role of UBQLN2 in pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 7 , 103. 10.1186/s40478-019-0758-7 . 31319884
Revesz T , Holton JL , Lashley T , Plant G , Frangione B , Rostagno A , Ghiso J , 2009. Genetics and molecular pathogenesis of sporadic and hereditary cerebral amyloid angiopathies. Acta Neuropathol. 118 , 115–130. 10.1007/s00401-009-0501-8 . 19225789
Richards A , van den Maagdenberg AMJM , Jen JC , Kavanagh D , Bertram P , Spitzer D , Liszewski MK , Barilla-Labarca M-L , Terwindt GM , Kasai Y , McLellan M , Grand MG , Vanmolkot KRJ , de Vries B , Wan J , Kane MJ , Mamsa H , Schäfer R , Stam AH , Haan J , de Jong PTVM , Storimans CW , van Schooneveld MJ , Oosterhuis JA , Gschwendter A , Dichgans M , Kotschet KE , Hodgkinson S , Hardy TA , Delatycki MB , Hajj-Ali RA , Kothari PH , Nelson SF , Frants RR , Baloh RW , Ferrari MD , Atkinson JP , 2007. C-terminal truncations in human 3’−5’ DNA exonuclease TREX1 cause autosomal dominant retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy. Nat. Genet 39 , 1068–1070. 10.1038/ng2082 . 17660820
Rizzo G , Arcuti S , Copetti M , Alessandria M , Savica R , Fontana A , Liguori R , Logroscino G , 2018. Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 89 , 358–366. 10.1136/jnnp-2017-316844 . 29030419
Robinson JL , Lee EB , Xie SX , Rennert L , Suh E , Bredenberg C , Caswell C , Van Deerlin VM , Yan N , Yousef A , Hurtig HI , Siderowf A , Grossman M , McMillan CT , Miller B , Duda JE , Irwin DJ , Wolk D , Elman L , McCluskey L , Chen-Plotkin A , Weintraub D , Arnold SE , Brettschneider J , Lee VM-Y , Trojanowski JQ , 2018. Neurodegenerative disease concomitant proteinopathies are prevalent, age-related and APOE4-associated. Brain 141 , 2181–2193. 10.1093/brain/awy146 . 29878075
Rohrer JD , Guerreiro R , Vandrovcova J , Uphill J , Reiman D , Beck J , Isaacs AM , Authier A , Ferrari R , Fox NC , Mackenzie IRA , Warren JD , de Silva R , Holton J , Revesz T , Hardy J , Mead S , Rossor MN , 2009. The heritability and genetics of frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurology 73 , 1451–1456. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181bf997a . 19884572
Rongve A , Witoelar A , Ruiz A , Athanasiu L , Abdelnour C , Clarimon J , Heilmann-Heimbach S , Hernández I , Moreno-Grau S , de Rojas I , Morenas-Rodríguez E , Fladby T , Sando SB , Bråthen G , Blanc F , Bousiges O , Lemstra AW , van Steenoven I , Londos E , Almdahl IS , Pålhaugen L , Eriksen JA , Djurovic S , Stordal E , Saltvedt I , Ulstein ID , Bettella F , Desikan RS , Idland A-V , Toft M , Pihlstrøm L , Snaedal J , Tárraga L , Boada M , Lleó A , Stefánsson H , Stefánsson K , Ramírez A , Aarsland D , Andreassen OA , 2019. GBA and APOE ε4 associate with sporadic dementia with Lewy bodies in European genome wide association study. Sci. Rep 9 , 7013. 10.1038/s41598-019-43458-2 . 31065058
Rossor MN , Fox NC , Mummery CJ , Schott JM , Warren JD , 2010. The diagnosis of young-onset dementia. Lancet Neurol. 9 , 793–806. 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70159-9 . 20650401
Rovelet-Lecrux A , Deramecourt V , Legallic S , Maurage C-A , Le Ber I , Brice A , Lambert J-C , Frébourg T , Hannequin D , Pasquier F , Campion D , 2008. Deletion of the progranulin gene in patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration or Parkinson disease. Neurobiol. Dis 31 , 41–45. 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.03.004 . 18479928
Rutten JW , Boon EMJ , Liem MK , Dauwerse JG , Pont MJ , Vollebregt E , Maat-Kievit AJ , Ginjaar HB , Lakeman P , van Duinen SG , Terwindt GM , Lesnik Oberstein SAJ , 2013. Hypomorphic NOTCH3 alleles do not cause CADASIL in humans. Hum. Mutat 34 , 1486–1489. 10.1002/humu.22432 . 24000151
Sabbagh MN , Lue L-F , Fayard D , Shi J , 2017. Increasing precision of clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease using a combined algorithm incorporating clinical and novel biomarker data. Neurol Ther 6 , 83–95. 10.1007/s40120-017-0069-5 . 28733959
Salloway S , Hong J , 1998. CADASIL syndrome: a genetic form of vascular dementia. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol 11 , 71–77. 10.1177/089198879801100205 . 9877528
Scheid R , Heinritz W , Leyhe T , Thal DR , Schober R , Strenge S , von Cramon DY , Froster UG , 2008. Cysteine-sparing notch3 mutations: cadasil or cadasil variants? Neurology 71 , 774–776. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000324928.44694.f7 . 18765654
Schrijvers EMC , Schürmann B , Koudstaal PJ , van den Bussche H , Van Duijn CM , Hentschel F , Heun R , Hofman A , Jessen F , Kölsch H , Kornhuber J , Peters O , Rivadeneira F , Rüther E , Uitterlinden AG , Riedel-Heller S , Dichgans M , Wiltfang J , Maier W , Breteler MMB , Ikram MA , 2012. Genome-wide association study of vascular dementia. Stroke 43 , 315–319. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.628768 . 22116812
Seelen M , Visser AE , Overste DJ , Kim HJ , Palud A , Wong TH , van Swieten JC , Scheltens P , Voermans NC , Baas F , de Jong JMBV , van der Kooi AJ , de Visser M , Veldink JH , Taylor JP , Van Es MA , van den Berg LH , 2014. No mutations in hnRNPA1 and hnRNPA2B1 in Dutch patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, and inclusion body myopathy. Neurobiol. Aging 35 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.01.152 . 1956.e9–1956.e11.
Shadyab AH , LaCroix AZ , 2015. Genetic factors associated with longevity: a review of recent findings. Ageing Res. Rev 19 , 1–7. 10.1016/j.arr.2014.10.005 . 25446805
Shah S , Kumar Y , McLean B , Churchill A , Stoodley N , Rankin J , Rizzu P , van der Knaap M , Jardine P , 2010. A dominantly inherited mutation in collagen IV A1 (COL4A1) causing childhood onset stroke without porencephaly. Eur. J. Paediatr. Neurol 14 , 182–187. 10.1016/j.ejpn.2009.04.010 . 19477666
Sharma R , Graff-Radford J , Rademakers R , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Jones DT , 2019. CSF1R mutation presenting as dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurocase 25 , 17–20. 10.1080/13554794.2019.1601230 . 30968732
Shim YS , Roe CM , Buckles VD , Morris JC , 2013. Clinicopathologic study of Alzheimer’s disease: Alzheimer mimics. J. Alzheimers Dis 35 , 799–811. 10.3233/JAD-121594 . 23481687
Shiner T , Mirelman A , Gana Weisz M , Bar-Shira A , Ash E , Cialic R , Nevler N , Gurevich T , Bregman N , Orr-Urtreger A , Giladi N , 2016. High frequency of GBA gene mutations in dementia with Lewy Bodies among Ashkenazi Jews. JAMA Neurol. 73 , 1448–1453. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.1593 . 27723861
Siitonen M , Börjesson-Hanson A , Pöyhönen M , Ora A , Pasanen P , Bras J , Kern S , Kern J , Andersen O , Stanescu H , Kleta R , Baumann M , Kalaria R , Kalimo H , Singleton A , Hardy J , Viitanen M , Myllykangas L , Guerreiro R , 2017. Multiinfarct dementia of Swedish type is caused by a 3’UTR mutation of COL4A1. Brain 140 , e29. 10.1093/brain/awx062 . 28369186
Simons C , Dyment D , Bent SJ , Crawford J , D’Hooghe M , Kohlschütter A , Venkateswaran S , Helman G , Poll-The B-T , Makowski CC , Ito Y , Kernohan K , Hartley T , Waisfisz Q , Taft RJ , Care4Rare Consortium, van der Knaap MS , Wolf NI , 2017. A recurrent de novo mutation in TMEM106B causes hypomyelinating leukodystrophy. Brain 140 , 3105–3111. 10.1093/brain/awx314 . 29186371
Sims R , van der Lee SJ , Naj AC , Bellenguez C , Badarinarayan N , Jakobsdottir J , Kunkle BW , Boland A , Raybould R , Bis JC , Martin ER , Grenier-Boley B , Heilmann-Heimbach S , Chouraki V , Kuzma AB , Sleegers K , Vronskaya M , Ruiz A , Graham RR , Olaso R , Hoffmann P , Grove ML , Vardarajan BN , Hiltunen M , Nöthen MM , White CC , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Epelbaum J , Maier W , Choi S-H , Beecham GW , Dulary C , Herms S , Smith AV , Funk CC , Derbois C , Forstner AJ , Ahmad S , Li H , Bacq D , Harold D , Satizabal CL , Valladares O , Squassina A , Thomas R , Brody JA , Qu L , Sánchez-Juan P , Morgan T , Wolters FJ , Zhao Y , Garcia FS , Denning N , Fornage M , Malamon J , Naranjo MCD , Majounie E , Mosley TH , Dombroski B , Wallon D , Lupton MK , Dupuis J , Whitehead P , Fratiglioni L , Medway C , Jian X , Mukherjee S , Keller L , Brown K , Lin H , Cantwell LB , Panza F , McGuinness B , Moreno-Grau S , Burgess JD , Solfrizzi V , Proitsi P , Adams HH , Allen M , Seripa D , Pastor P , Cupples LA , Price ND , Hannequin D , Frank-García A , Levy D , Chakrabarty P , Caffarra P , Giegling I , Beiser AS , Giedraitis V , Hampel H , Garcia ME , Wang X , Lannfelt L , Mecocci P , Eiriksdottir G , Crane PK , Pasquier F , Boccardi V , Henández I , Barber RC , Scherer M , Tarraga L , Adams PM , Leber M , Chen Y , Albert MS , Riedel-Heller S , Emilsson V , Beekly D , Braae A , Schmidt R , Blacker D , Masullo C , Schmidt H , Doody RS , Spalletta G , Longstreth WT Jr. , Fairchild TJ , Bossù P , Lopez OL , Frosch MP , Sacchinelli E , Ghetti B , Yang Q , Huebinger RM , Jessen F , Li S , Kamboh MI , Morris J , Sotolongo-Grau O , Katz MJ , Corcoran C , Dunstan M , Braddel A , Thomas C , Meggy A , Marshall R , Gerrish A , Chapman J , Aguilar M , Taylor S , Hill M , Fairén MD , Hodges A , Vellas B , Soininen H , Kloszewska I , Daniilidou M , Uphill J , Patel Y , Hughes JT , Lord J , Turton J , Hartmann AM , Cecchetti R , Fenoglio C , Serpente M , Arcaro M , Caltagirone C , Orfei MD , Ciaramella A , Pichler S , Mayhaus M , Gu W , Lleó A , Fortea J , Blesa R , Barber IS , Brookes K , Cupidi C , Maletta RG , Carrell D , Sorbi S , Moebus S , Urbano M , Pilotto A , Kornhuber J , Bosco P , Todd S , Craig D , Johnston J , Gill M , Lawlor B , Lynch A , Fox NC , Hardy J , ARUK Consortium, Albin RL , Apostolova LG , Arnold SE , Asthana S , Atwood CS , Baldwin CT , Barnes LL , Barral S , Beach TG , Becker JT , Bigio EH , Bird TD , Boeve BF , Bowen JD , Boxer A , Burke JR , Burns JM , Buxbaum JD , Cairns NJ , Cao C , Carlson CS , Carlsson CM , Carney RM , Carrasquillo MM , Carroll SL , Diaz CC , Chui HC , Clark DG , Cribbs DH , Crocco EA , DeCarli C , Dick M , Duara R , Evans DA , Faber KM , Fallon KB , Fardo DW , Farlow MR , Ferris S , Foroud TM , Galasko DR , Gearing M , Geschwind DH , Gilbert JR , Graff-Radford NR , Green RC , Growdon JH , Hamilton RL , Harrell LE , Honig LS , Huentelman MJ , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Jarvik GP , Abner E , Jin L-W , Jun G , Karydas A , Kaye JA , Kim R , Kowall NW , Kramer JH , LaFerla FM , Lah JJ , Leverenz JB , Levey AI , Li G , Lieberman AP , Lunetta KL , Lyketsos CG , Marson DC , Martiniuk F , Mash DC , Masliah E , McCormick WC , McCurry SM , McDavid AN , McKee AC , Mesulam M , Miller BL , Miller CA , Miller JW , Morris JC , Murrell JR , Myers AJ , O’Bryant S , Olichney JM , Pankratz VS , Parisi JE , Paulson HL , Perry W , Peskind E , Pierce A , Poon WW , Potter H , Quinn JF , Raj A , Raskind M , Reisberg B , Reitz C , Ringman JM , Roberson ED , Rogaeva E , Rosen HJ , Rosenberg RN , Sager MA , Saykin AJ , Schneider JA , Schneider LS , Seeley WW , Smith AG , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Swerdlow RH , Tanzi RE , Thornton-Wells TA , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Van Deerlin VM , Van Eldik LJ , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Wilhelmsen KC , Williamson J , Wingo TS , Woltjer RL , Wright CB , Yu C-E , Yu L , Garzia F , Golamaully F , Septier G , Engelborghs S , Vandenberghe R , De Deyn PP , Fernadez CM , Benito YA , Thonberg H , Forsell C , Lilius L , Kinhult-Stählbom A , Kilander L , Brundin R , Concari L , Helisalmi S , Koivisto AM , Haapasalo A , Dermecourt V , Fievet N , Hanon O , Dufouil C , Brice A , Ritchie K , Dubois B , Himali JJ , Keene CD , Tschanz J , Fitzpatrick AL , Kukull WA , Norton M , Aspelund T , Larson EB , Munger R , Rotter JI , Lipton RB , Bullido MJ , Hofman A , Montine TJ , Coto E , Boerwinkle E , Petersen RC , Alvarez V , Rivadeneira F , Reiman EM , Gallo M , O’Donnell CJ , Reisch JS , Bruni AC , Royall DR , Dichgans M , Sano M , Galimberti D , St George-Hyslop P , Scarpini E , Tsuang DW , Mancuso M , Bonuccelli U , Winslow AR , Daniele A , Wu C-K , GERAD/PERADES, CHARGE, ADGC, EADI, Peters O , Nacmias B , Riemenschneider M , Heun R , Brayne C , Rubinsztein DC , Bras J , Guerreiro R , Al-Chalabi A , Shaw CE , Collinge J , Mann D , Tsolaki M , Clarimón J , Sussams R , Lovestone S , O’Donovan MC , Owen MJ , Behrens TW , Mead S , Goate AM , Uitterlinden AG , Holmes C , Cruchaga C , Ingelsson M , Bennett DA , Powell J , Golde TE , Graff C , De Jager PL , Morgan K , Ertekin-Taner N , Combarros O , Psaty BM , Passmore P , Younkin SG , Berr C , Gudnason V , Rujescu D , Dickson DW , Dartigues J-F , DeStefano AL , Ortega-Cubero S , Hakonarson H , Campion D , Boada M , Kauwe JK , Farrer LA , Van Broeckhoven C , Ikram MA , Jones L , Haines JL , Tzourio C , Launer LJ , Escott-Price V , Mayeux R , Deleuze J-F , Amin N , Holmans PA , Pericak-Vance MA , Amouyel P , van Duijn CM , Ramirez A , Wang L-S , Lambert J-C , Seshadri S , Williams J , Schellenberg GD , 2017. Rare coding variants in PLCG2, ABI3, and TREM2 implicate microglial-mediated innate immunity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 49 , 1373–1384. 10.1038/ng.3916 . 28714976
Singleton AB , Wharton A , O’Brien KK , Walker MP , McKeith IG , Ballard CG , O’Brien J , Perry RH , Ince PG , Edwardson JA , Morris CM , 2002. Clinical and neuropathological correlates of apolipoprotein E genotype in dementia with Lewy bodies. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 14 , 167–175 (https://doi.org/66022).12411758
Singleton AB , Farrer M , Johnson J , Singleton A , Hague S , Kachergus J , Hulihan M , Peuralinna T , Dutra A , Nussbaum R , Lincoln S , Crawley A , Hanson M , Maraganore D , Adler C , Cookson MR , Muenter M , Baptista M , Miller D , Blancato J , Hardy J , Gwinn-Hardy K , 2003. alpha-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science 302 10.1126/science.1090278.841 .
Skrobot OA , McKnight AJ , Passmore PA , Seripa D , Mecocci P , Panza F , Kalaria R , Wilcock G , Munafò M , Erkinjuntti T , Karhunen P , Pessi T , Martiskainen M , Love S , Genetic and Environmental Risk for Alzheimer’s disease Consortium (GERAD1), Kehoe PG , 2016. A Validation Study of Vascular Cognitive Impairment Genetics Meta-Analysis Findings in an Independent Collaborative Cohort. J. Alzheimers Dis 53 , 981–989. 10.3233/JAD-150862 . 27314523
Smith KR , Damiano J , Franceschetti S , Carpenter S , Canafoglia L , Morbin M , Rossi G , Pareyson D , Mole SE , Staropoli JF , Sims KB , Lewis J , Lin W-L , Dickson DW , Dahl H-H , Bahlo M , Berkovic SF , 2012. Strikingly different clinicopathological phenotypes determined by progranulin-mutation dosage. Am. J. Hum. Genet 90 , 1102–1107. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.04.021 . 22608501
Smith BN , Ticozzi N , Fallini C , Gkazi AS , Topp S , Kenna KP , Scotter EL , Kost J , Keagle P , Miller JW , Calini D , Vance C , Danielson EW , Troakes C , Tiloca C , Al-Sarraj S , Lewis EA , King A , Colombrita C , Pensato V , Castellotti B , de Belleroche J , Baas F , ten Asbroek ALMA , Sapp PC , McKenna-Yasek D , McLaughlin RL , Polak M , Asress S , Esteban-Pérez J , Muñoz-Blanco JL , Simpson M , SLAGEN Consortium, van Rheenen W , Diekstra FP , Lauria G , Duga S , Corti S , Cereda C , Corrado L , Sorarù G , Morrison KE , Williams KL , Nicholson GA , Blair IP , Dion PA , Leblond CS , Rouleau GA , Hardiman O , Veldink JH , van den Berg LH , Al-Chalabi A , Pall H , Shaw PJ , Turner MR , Talbot K , Taroni F , García-Redondo A , Wu Z , Glass JD , Gellera C , Ratti A , Brown RH Jr. , Silani V , Shaw CE , Landers JE , 2014. Exome-wide rare variant analysis identifies TUBA4A mutations associated with familial ALS. Neuron 84 , 324–331. 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.09.027 . 25374358
Søndergaard CB , Nielsen JE , Hansen CK , Christensen H , 2017. Hereditary cerebral small vessel disease and stroke. Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg 155 , 45–57. 10.1016/j.clineuro.2017.02.015 . 28254515
Soong B-W , Liao Y-C , Tu P-H , Tsai P-C , Lee I-H , Chung C-P , Lee Y-C , 2013. A homozygous NOTCH3 mutation p.R544C and a heterozygous TREX1 variant p.C99MfsX3 in a family with hereditary small vessel disease of the brain. J. Chin. Med. Assoc 76 , 319–324. 10.1016/j.jcma.2013.03.002 . 23602593
Stojanov D , Grozdanović D , Petrović S , Benedeto-Stojanov D , Stefanović I , Stojanović N , Ilić DN , 2014. De novo mutation in the NOTCH3 gene causing CADASIL. Bosn. J. Basic Med. Sci 14 , 48–50. 10.17305/bjbms.2014.2297 . 24579972
Su W-H , Shi Z-H , Liu S-L , Wang X-D , Liu S , Ji Y , 2017. Updated meta-analysis of the role of APOE ε2/ε3/ε4 alleles in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Oncotarget 8 , 43721–43732. 10.18632/oncotarget.17341 . 28487499
Su W-H , Shi Z-H , Liu S-L , Wang X-D , Liu S , Ji Y , 2018. The rs75932628 and rs2234253 polymorphisms of the TREM2 gene were associated with susceptibility to frontotemporal lobar degeneration in Caucasian populations. Ann. Hum. Genet 82 , 177–185. 10.1111/ahg.12241 . 29322490
Sudlow C , Martínez González NA , Kim J , Clark C , 2006. Does apolipoprotein E genotype influence the risk of ischemic stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage, or subarachnoid hemorrhage? Systematic review and meta-analyses of 31 studies among 5961 cases and 17,965 controls. Stroke 37 , 364–370. 10.1161/01.STR.0000199065.12908.62 . 16385096
Sudre CH , Bocchetta M , Cash D , Thomas DL , Woollacott I , Dick KM , van Swieten J , Borroni B , Galimberti D , Masellis M , Tartaglia MC , Rowe JB , Graff C , Tagliavini F , Frisoni G , Laforce R Jr. , Finger E , de Mendonça A , Sorbi S , Ourselin S , Cardoso MJ , Rohrer JD , Genetic FTD , Initiative GENFI , 2017. White matter hyperintensities are seen only in GRN mutation carriers in the GENFI cohort. Neuroimage Clin 15 , 171–180. 10.1016/j.nicl.2017.04.015 . 28529873
Sun J-H , Tan L , Wang H-F , Tan M-S , Tan L , Li J-Q , Xu W , Zhu X-C , Jiang T , Yu J-T , 2015. Genetics of vascular dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Alzheimers Dis 46 , 611–629. 10.3233/JAD-143102 . 25835425
Sundal C , Fujioka S , Van Gerpen JA , Wider C , Nicholson AM , Baker M , Shuster EA , Aasly J , Spina S , Ghetti B , Roeber S , Garbern J , Tselis A , Swerdlow RH , Miller BB , Borjesson-Hanson A , Uitti RJ , Ross OA , Stoessl AJ , Rademakers R , Josephs KA , Dickson DW , Broderick D , Wszolek ZK , 2013. Parkinsonian features in hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS) and CSF1R mutations. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 19 , 869–877. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.05.013 . 23787135
Superti-Furga A , Gugler E , Gitzelmann R , Steinmann B , 1988. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV: a multi-exon deletion in one of the two COL3A1 alleles affecting structure, stability, and processing of type III procollagen. J. Biol. Chem 263 , 6226–6232.2834369
Swerdlow RH , Miller BB , Lopes MBS , Mandell JW , Wooten GF , Damgaard P , Manning C , Fowler M , Brashear HR , 2009. Autosomal dominant subcortical gliosis presenting as frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 72 , 260–267. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000339484.61490.a4 . 19153373
Tanigaki K , Nogaki F , Takahashi J , Tashiro K , Kurooka H , Honjo T , 2001. Notch1 and Notch3 instructively restrict bFGF-responsive multipotent neural progenitor cells to an astroglial fate. Neuron 29 , 45–55. 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00179-9 . 11182080
Thal DR , Ghebremedhin E , Rüb U , Yamaguchi H , Del Tredici K , Braak H , 2002. Two types of sporadic cerebral amyloid angiopathy. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 61 , 282–293. 10.1093/jnen/61.3.282 . 11895043
Thal DR , von Arnim CAF , Griffin WST , Mrak RE , Walker L , Attems J , Arzberger T , 2015. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration FTLD-tau: preclinical lesions, vascular, and Alzheimer-related co-pathologies. J. Neural Transm 122 , 1007–1018. 10.1007/s00702-014-1360-6 . 25556950
Toledo JB , Arnold SE , Raible K , Brettschneider J , Xie SX , Grossman M , Monsell SE , Kukull WA , Trojanowski JQ , 2013. Contribution of cerebrovascular disease in autopsy confirmed neurodegenerative disease cases in the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Centre. Brain 136 , 2697–2706. 10.1093/brain/awt188 . 23842566
Tomizawa Y , Taniguchi D , Furukawa Y , 2020. Genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease mimicking dementia with Lewy bodies: clinical and radiological findings. J. Neurol. Sci 409 , 116604. 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116604 . 31805431
Toth RP , Atkin JD , 2018. Dysfunction of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and glaucoma. Front. Immunol 9 , 1017. 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01017 . 29875767
Traylor M , Zhang CR , Adib-Samii P , Devan WJ , Parsons OE , Lanfranconi S , Gregory S , Cloonan L , Falcone GJ , Radmanesh F , Fitzpatrick K , Kanakis A , Barrick TR , Moynihan B , Lewis CM , Boncoraglio GB , Lemmens R , Thijs V , Sudlow C , Wardlaw J , Rothwell PM , Meschia JF , Worrall BB , Levi C , Bevan S , Furie KL , Dichgans M , Rosand J , Markus HS , Rost N , International Stroke Genetics Consortium, 2016. Genome-wide meta-analysis of cerebral white matter hyperintensities in patients with stroke. Neurology 86 , 146–153. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002263 . 26674333
Traylor M , Tozer DJ , Croall ID , Lisiecka-Ford DM , Olorunda AO , Boncoraglio G , Dichgans M , Lemmens R , Rosand J , Rost NS , Rothwell PM , Sudlow CLM , Thijs V , Rutten-Jacobs L , Markus HS , International Stroke Genetics Consortium, 2019. Genetic variation in PLEKHG1 is associated with white matter hyperintensities (n = 11,226). Neurology 92 , e749–e757. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006952 . 30659137
Tropea TF , Mak J , Guo MH , Xie SX , Suh E , Rick J , Siderowf A , Weintraub D , Grossman M , Irwin D , Wolk DA , Trojanowski JQ , Van Deerlin V , Chen-Plotkin AS , 2019. TMEM106B Effect on cognition in Parkinson disease and frontotemporal dementia. Ann. Neurol 85 , 801–811. 10.1002/ana.25486 . 30973966
Tsuang D , Leverenz JB , Lopez OL , Hamilton RL , Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Buchman AS , Larson EB , Crane PK , Kaye JA , Kramer P , Woltjer R , Kukull W , Nelson PT , Jicha GA , Neltner JH , Galasko D , Masliah E , Trojanowski JQ , Schellenberg GD , Yearout D , Huston H , Fritts-Penniman A , Mata IF , Wan JY , Edwards KL , Montine TJ , Zabetian CP , 2012. GBA mutations increase risk for Lewy body disease with and without Alzheimer disease pathology. Neurology 79 , 1944–1950. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182735e9a . 23035075
Tsuang D , Leverenz JB , Lopez OL , Hamilton RL , Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Buchman AS , Larson EB , Crane PK , Kaye JA , Kramer P , Woltjer R , Trojanowski JQ , Weintraub D , Chen-Plotkin AS , Irwin DJ , Rick J , Schellenberg GD , Watson GS , Kukull W , Nelson PT , Jicha GA , Neltner JH , Galasko D , Masliah E , Quinn JF , Chung KA , Yearout D , Mata IF , Wan JY , Edwards KL , Montine TJ , Zabetian CP , 2013. APOE ε4 increases risk for dementia in pure synucleinopathies. JAMA Neurol. 70 , 223–228. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.600 . 23407718
Tuominen S , Juvonen V , Amberla K , Jolma T , Rinne JO , Tuisku S , Kurki T , Marttila R , Pöyhönen M , Savontaus ML , Viitanen M , Kalimo H , 2001. Phenotype of a homozygous CADASIL patient in comparison to 9 age-matched heterozygous patients with the same R133C Notch3 mutation. Stroke 32 , 1767–1774. 10.1161/01.str.32.8.1767 . 11486103
Uchida Y , Kodama K , Minoshima S , Ikeda T , Uno K , Anzai Y , Kitakata Y , Arimizu N , 1993. A case of frontal lobe syndrome followed by serial 123I-IMP SPECT. Kaku Igaku 30 , 303–311.8479098
van Blitterswijk M , Mullen B , Wojtas A , Heckman MG , Diehl NN , Baker MC , DeJesus-Hernandez M , Brown PH , Murray ME , Hsiung G-YR , Stewart H , Karydas AM , Finger E , Kertesz A , Bigio EH , Weintraub S , Mesulam M , Hatanpaa KJ , White CL , Neumann M , Strong MJ , Beach TG , Wszolek ZK , Lippa C , Caselli R , Petrucelli L , Josephs KA , Parisi JE , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Mackenzie IR , Seeley WW , Grinberg LT , Miller BL , Boylan KB , Graff-Radford NR , Boeve BF , Dickson DW , Rademakers R , 2014. Genetic modifiers in carriers of repeat expansions in the C9ORF72 gene. Mol. Neurodegener 9 , 38. 10.1186/1750-1326-9-38 . 25239657
Van Deerlin VM , Sleiman PMA , Martinez-Lage M , Chen-Plotkin A , Wang L-S , Graff-Radford NR , Dickson DW , Rademakers R , Boeve BF , Grossman M , Arnold SE , Mann DMA , Pickering-Brown SM , Seelaar H , Heutink P , van Swieten JC , Murrell JR , Ghetti B , Spina S , Grafman J , Hodges J , Spillantini MG , Gilman S , Lieberman AP , Kaye JA , Woltjer RL , Bigio EH , Mesulam M , Al-Sarraj S , Troakes C , Rosenberg RN , White CL 3rd , Ferrer I , Lladó A , Neumann M , Kretzschmar HA , Hulette CM , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Miller BL , Alzualde A , Lopez de Munain A , McKee AC , Gearing M , Levey AI , Lah JJ , Hardy J , Rohrer JD , Lashley T , Mackenzie IRA , Feldman HH , Hamilton RL , Dekosky ST , van der Zee J , Kumar-Singh S , Van Broeckhoven C , Mayeux R , Vonsattel JPG , Troncoso JC , Kril JJ , Kwok JBJ , Halliday GM , Bird TD , Ince PG , Shaw PJ , Cairns NJ , Morris JC , McLean CA , DeCarli C , Ellis WG , Freeman SH , Frosch MP , Growdon JH , Perl DP , Sano M , Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Beach TG , Reiman EM , Woodruff BK , Cummings J , Vinters HV , Miller CA , Chui HC , Alafuzoff I , Hartikainen P , Seilhean D , Galasko D , Masliah E , Cotman CW , Tuñón MT , Martínez MCC , Munoz DG , Carroll SL , Marson D , Riederer PF , Bogdanovic N , Schellenberg GD , Hakonarson H , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM-Y , 2010. Common variants at 7p21 are associated with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions. Nat. Genet 42 , 234–239. doi:10.1038/ng.536 . 20154673
van der Lee SJ , Conway OJ , Jansen I , Carrasquillo MM , Kleineidam L , van den Akker E , Hernández I , van Eijk KR , Stringa N , Chen JA , Zettergren A , Andlauer TFM , Diez-Fairen M , Simon-Sanchez J , Lleó A , Zetterberg H , Nygaard M , Blauwendraat C , Savage JE , Mengel-From J , Moreno-Grau S , Wagner M , Fortea J , Keogh MJ , Blennow K , Skoog I , Friese MA , Pletnikova O , Zulaica M , Lage C , de Rojas I , Riedel-Heller S , Illán-Gala I , Wei W , Jeune B , Orellana A , Then Bergh F , Wang X , Hulsman M , Beker N , Tesi N , Morris CM , Indakoetxea B , Collij LE , Scherer M , Morenas-Rodríguez E , Ironside JW , van Berckel BNM , Alcolea D , Wiendl H , Strickland SL , Pastor P , Rodríguez Rodríguez E , DESGESCO (Dementia Genetics Spanish Consortium), EADB (Alzheimer Disease European DNA biobank), EADB (Alzheimer Disease European DNA biobank), IFGC (International FTD-Genomics Consortium), IPDGC (The International Parkinson Disease Genomics Consortium), IPDGC (The International Parkinson Disease Genomics Consortium), RiMod-FTD (Risk and Modifying factors in Fronto-Temporal Dementia), Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB), Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Ferman TJ , van Gerpen JA , Reinders MJT , Uitti RJ , Tárraga L , Maier W , Dols-Icardo O , Kawalia A , Dalmasso MC , Boada M , Zettl UK , van Schoor NM , Beekman M , Allen M , Masliah E , de Munain AL , Pantelyat A , Wszolek ZK , Ross OA , Dickson DW , Graff-Radford NR , Knopman D , Rademakers R , Lemstra AW , Pijnenburg YAL , Scheltens P , Gasser T , Chinnery PF , Hemmer B , Huisman MA , Troncoso J , Moreno F , Nohr EA , Sørensen TIA , Heutink P , Sánchez-Juan P , Posthuma D , GIFT (Genetic Investigation in Frontotemporal Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease) Study Group, Clarimón J , Christensen K , Ertekin-Taner N , Scholz SW , Ramirez A , Ruiz A , Slagboom E , van der Flier WM , Holstege H , 2019. A nonsynonymous mutation in PLCG2 reduces the risk of Alzheimer’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal dementia, and increases the likelihood of longevity. Acta Neuropathol. 138 , 237–250. 10.1007/s00401-019-02026-8 . 31131421
van der Zee J , Urwin H , Engelborghs S , Bruyland M , Vandenberghe R , Dermaut B , De Pooter T , Peeters K , Santens P , De Deyn PP , Fisher EM , Collinge J , Isaacs AM , Van Broeckhoven C , 2008. CHMP2B C-truncating mutations in frontotemporal lobar degeneration are associated with an aberrant endosomal phenotype in vitro. Hum. Mol. Genet 17 , 313–322. 10.1093/hmg/ddm309 . 17956895
van der Zee J , Van Langenhove T , Kovacs GG , Dillen L , Deschamps W , Engelborghs S , Matěj R , Vandenbulcke M , Sieben A , Dermaut B , Smets K , Van Damme P , Merlin C , Laureys A , Van Den Broeck M , Mattheijssens M , Peeters K , Benussi L , Binetti G , Ghidoni R , Borroni B , Padovani A , Archetti S , Pastor P , Razquin C , Ortega-Cubero S , Hernández I , Boada M , Ruiz A , de Mendonça A , Miltenberger-Miltényi G , do Couto FS , Sorbi S , Nacmias B , Bagnoli S , Graff C , Chiang H-H , Thonberg H , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Alexopoulos P , Frisoni GB , Bonvicini C , Synofzik M , Maetzler W , vom Hagen JM , Schöls L , Haack TB , Strom TM , Prokisch H , Dols-Icardo O , Clarimón J , Lleó A , Santana I , Almeida MR , Santiago B , Heneka MT , Jessen F , Ramirez A , Sanchez-Valle R , Llado A , Gelpi E , Sarafov S , Tournev I , Jordanova A , Parobkova E , Fabrizi GM , Testi S , Salmon E , Ströbel T , Santens P , Robberecht W , De Jonghe P , Martin J-J , Cras P , Vandenberghe R , De Deyn PP , Cruts M , Sleegers K , Van Broeckhoven C , 2014. Rare mutations in SQSTM1 modify susceptibility to frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Acta Neuropathol. 128 , 397–410. 10.1007/s00401-014-1298-7 . 24899140
Van Mossevelde S , Engelborghs S , van der Zee J , Van Broeckhoven C , 2018. Genotype-phenotype links in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurol 14 , 363–378. 10.1038/s41582-018-0009-8 . 29777184
Vann Jones SA , O’Brien JT , 2014. The prevalence and incidence of dementia with Lewy bodies: a systematic review of population and clinical studies. Psychol. Med 44 , 673–683. 10.1017/S0033291713000494 . 23521899
Velayati A , Yu WH , Sidransky E , 2010. The role of glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson disease and Lewy body disorders. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep 10 , 190–198. 10.1007/s11910-010-0102-x . 20425034
Verbeek E , Meuwissen MEC , Verheijen FW , Govaert PP , Licht DJ , Kuo DS , Poulton CJ , Schot R , Lequin MH , Dudink J , Halley DJ , de Coo RIF , den Hollander JC , Oegema R , Gould DB , Mancini GMS , 2012. COL4A2 mutation associated with familial porencephaly and small-vessel disease. Eur. J. Hum. Genet 20 , 844–851. 10.1038/ejhg.2012.20 . 22333902
Verdura E , Hervé D , Scharrer E , Amador MDM , Guyant-Maréchal L , Philippi A , Corlobé A , Bergametti F , Gazal S , Prieto-Morin C , Beaufort N , Le Bail B , Viakhireva I , Dichgans M , Chabriat H , Haffner C , Tournier-Lasserve E , 2015. Heterozygous HTRA1 mutations are associated with autosomal dominant cerebral small vessel disease. Brain 138 , 2347–2358. 10.1093/brain/awv155 . 26063658
Verdura E , Hervé D , Bergametti F , Jacquet C , Morvan T , Prieto-Morin C , Mackowiak A , Manchon E , Hosseini H , Cordonnier C , Girard-Buttaz I , Rosenstingl S , Hagel C , Kuhlenbaümer G , Leca-Radu E , Goux D , Fleming L , Van Agtmael T , Chabriat H , Chapon F , Tournier-Lasserve E , 2016. Disruption of a miR-29 binding site leading to COL4A1 upregulation causes pontine autosomal dominant microangiopathy with leukoencephalopathy. Ann. Neurol 80 , 741–753. 10.1002/ana.24782 . 27666438
Verpillat P , Camuzat A , Hannequin D , Thomas-Anterion C , Puel M , Belliard S , Dubois B , Didic M , Lacomblez L , Moreaud O , Golfier V , Campion D , Brice A , Clerget-Darpoux F , 2002. Apolipoprotein E gene in frontotemporal dementia: an association study and meta-analysis. Eur. J. Hum. Genet 10 , 399–405. 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200820 . 12107813
Vidal R , Frangione B , Rostagno A , Mead S , Révész T , Plant G , Ghiso J , 1999. A stop-codon mutation in the BRI gene associated with familial British dementia. Nature 399 , 776–781. 10.1038/21637 . 10391242
Vidal R , Revesz T , Rostagno A , Kim E , Holton JL , Bek T , Bojsen-Møller M , Braendgaard H , Plant G , Ghiso J , Frangione B , 2000. A decamer duplication in the 3’ region of the BRI gene originates an amyloid peptide that is associated with dementia in a Danish kindred. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 97 , 4920–4925. 10.1073/pnas.080076097 . 10781099
Vinciguerra C , Rufa A , Bianchi S , Sperduto A , De Santis M , Malandrini A , Dotti MT , Federico A , 2014. Homozygosity and severity of phenotypic presentation in a CADASIL family. Neurol. Sci 35 , 91–93. 10.1007/s10072-013-1580-9 . 24277202
Visanji NP , Lang AE , Kovacs GG , 2019. Beyond the synucleinopathies: alpha synuclein as a driving force in neurodegenerative comorbidities. Transl. Neurodegener 8 , 28. 10.1186/s40035-019-0172-x . 31508228
Wang Y-L , Sun L-M , Zhang L , Xu H-T , Dong Z , Wang L-Q , Wang M-L , 2015. Association between Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and myocardial infarction risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. FEBS Open Biol. 5 , 852–858. 10.1016/j.fob.2015.10.006 .
Watts GDJ , Wymer J , Kovach MJ , Mehta SG , Mumm S , Darvish D , Pestronk A , Whyte MP , Kimonis VE , 2004. Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia is caused by mutant valosin-containing protein. Nat. Genet 36 , 377–381. 10.1038/ng1332 . 15034582
Wei LK , Au A , Menon S , Griffiths LR , Kooi CW , Irene L , Zhao J , Lee C , Alekseevna AM , Hassan MRA , Aziz ZA , 2017. Polymorphisms of MTHFR, eNOS, ACE, AGT, ApoE, PON1, PDE4D, and ischemic stroke: meta-analysis. J. Stroke Cerebrovasc. Dis 26 , 2482–2493. 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2017.05.048 . 28760411
Whybra C , Kampmann C , Willers I , Davies J , Winchester B , Kriegsmann J , Brühl K , Gal A , Bunge S , Beck M , 2001. Anderson-Fabry disease: clinical manifestations of disease in female heterozygotes. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis 24 , 715–724. 10.1023/a:1012993305223 . 11804208
Williams KL , Topp S , Yang S , Smith B , Fifita JA , Warraich ST , Zhang KY , Farrawell N , Vance C , Hu X , Chesi A , Leblond CS , Lee A , Rayner SL , Sundaramoorthy V , Dobson-Stone C , Molloy MP , van Blitterswijk M , Dickson DW , Petersen RC , Graff-Radford NR , Boeve BF , Murray ME , Pottier C , Don E , Winnick C , McCann EP , Hogan A , Daoud H , Levert A , Dion PA , Mitsui J , Ishiura H , Takahashi Y , Goto J , Kost J , Gellera C , Gkazi AS , Miller J , Stockton J , Brooks WS , Boundy K , Polak M , Muñoz-Blanco JL , Esteban-Pérez J , Rábano A , Hardiman O , Morrison KE , Ticozzi N , Silani V , de Belleroche J , Glass JD , Kwok JBJ , Guillemin GJ , Chung RS , Tsuji S , Brown RH Jr. , García-Redondo A , Rademakers R , Landers JE , Gitler AD , Rouleau GA , Cole NJ , Yerbury JJ , Atkin JD , Shaw CE , Nicholson GA , Blair IP , 2016a. CCNF mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Nat. Commun 7 , 11253. 10.1038/ncomms11253 . 27080313
Williams SR , Hsu F-C , Keene KL , Chen W-M , Nelson S , Southerland AM , Madden EB , Coull B , Gogarten SM , Furie KL , Dzhivhuho G , Rowles JL , Mehndiratta P , Malik R , Dupuis J , Lin H , Seshadri S , Rich SS , Sale MM , Worrall BB , METASTROKE, The Genomics and Randomized Trials Network (GARNET) Collaborative Research Group, METASTROKE The Genomics and Randomized Trials Network GARNET Collaborative Research Group, 2016. Shared genetic susceptibility of vascular-related biomarkers with ischemic and recurrent stroke. Neurology 86 , 351–359. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002319 . 26718567
Wilson HR , Turnbough CL Jr. , 1990. Role of the purine repressor in the regulation of pyrimidine gene expression in Escherichia coli K-12. J. Bacteriol 172 , 3208–3213. 10.1128/jb.172.6.3208-3213.1990 . 1971621
Wong TH , Chiu WZ , Breedveld GJ , Li KW , Verkerk AJMH , Hondius D , Hukema RK , Seelaar H , Frick P , Severijnen L-A , Lammers G-J , Lebbink JHG , van Duinen SG , Kamphorst W , Rozemuller AJ , Netherlands Brain Bank, Bakker, E.B., International Parkinsonism Genetics Network, Neumann M , Willemsen R , Bonifati V , Smit AB , van Swieten J , 2014. PRKAR1B mutation associated with a new neurodegenerative disorder with unique pathology. Brain 137 , 1361–1373. 10.1093/brain/awu067 . 24722252
Woo J , Lee C , 2012. Genetic association of the gene encoding RPGRIP1L with susceptibility to vascular dementia. Gene 499 , 160–162. 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.010 . 22425971
Woo D , Falcone GJ , Devan WJ , Brown WM , Biffi A , Howard TD , Anderson CD , Brouwers HB , Valant V , Battey TWK , Radmanesh F , Raffeld MR , Baedorf-Kassis S , Deka R , Woo JG , Martin LJ , Haverbusch M , Moomaw CJ , Sun G , Broderick JP , Flaherty ML , Martini SR , Kleindorfer DO , Kissela B , Comeau ME , Jagiella JM , Schmidt H , Freudenberger P , Pichler A , Enzinger C , Hansen BM , Norrving B , Jimenez-Conde J , Giralt-Steinhauer E , Elosua R , Cuadrado-Godia E , Soriano C , Roquer J , Kraft P , Ayres AM , Schwab K , McCauley JL , Pera J , Urbanik A , Rost NS , Goldstein JN , Viswanathan A , Stögerer E-M , Tirschwell DL , Selim M , Brown DL , Silliman SL , Worrall BB , Meschia JF , Kidwell CS , Montaner J , Fernandez-Cadenas I , Delgado P , Malik R , Dichgans M , Greenberg SM , Rothwell PM , Lindgren A , Slowik A , Schmidt R , Langefeld CD , Rosand J , International Stroke Genetics Consortium, 2014. Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies 1q22 as a susceptibility locus for intracerebral hemorrhage. Am. J. Hum. Genet 94 , 511–521. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.02.012 . 24656865
Xi Z , Zinman L , Moreno D , Schymick J , Liang Y , Sato C , Zheng Y , Ghani M , Dib S , Keith J , Robertson J , Rogaeva E , 2013. Hypermethylation of the CpG island near the G4C2 repeat in ALS with a C9orf72 expansion. Am. J. Hum. Genet 92 , 981–989. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.017 . 23731538
Xi Z , Zhang M , Bruni AC , Maletta RG , Colao R , Fratta P , Polke JM , Sweeney MG , Mudanohwo E , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Tartaglia MC , Rainero I , Rubino E , Pinessi L , Galimberti D , Surace EI , McGoldrick P , McKeever P , Moreno D , Sato C , Liang Y , Keith J , Zinman L , Robertson J , Rogaeva E , 2015. The C9orf72 repeat expansion itself is methylated in ALS and FTLD patients. Acta Neuropathol. 129 , 715–727. 10.1007/s00401-015-1401-8 . 25716178
Xie F , Zhang L-S , 2018. A Chinese CARASIL patient caused by novel compound heterozygous mutations in HTRA1. J. Stroke Cerebrovasc. Dis 27 , 2840–2842. 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.06.017 . 30068478
Xu M , Zhao J , Zhang Y , Ma X , Dai Q , Zhi H , Wang B , Wang L , 2016. Apolipoprotein E gene variants and risk of coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis. Biomed. Res. Int 2016 , 3912175. 10.1155/2016/3912175 . 27868062
Yamada M , Itoh Y , Suematsu N , Matsushita M , Otomo E , 1996. Lack of an association between apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 and cerebral amyloid angiopathy in elderly Japanese. Ann. Neurol 10.1002/ana.410390523 .
Yang H-S , White CC , Chibnik LB , Klein H-U , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , 2017. UNC5C variants are associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Neurol Genet 3 , e176. 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000176 . 28761931
Yasutake C , 2006. Serum BDNF, TNF-α and IL-1β levels in dementia patients. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci 256 , 406. 10.1007/s00406-006-0702-2 . 27520966
Yokoyama JS , Wang Y , Schork AJ , Thompson WK , Karch CM , Cruchaga C , McEvoy LK , Witoelar A , Chen C-H , Holland D , Brewer JB , Franke A , Dillon WP , Wilson DM , Mukherjee P , Hess CP , Miller Z , Bonham LW , Shen J , Rabinovici GD , Rosen HJ , Miller BL , Hyman BT , Schellenberg GD , Karlsen TH , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , Desikan RS , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2016. Association between genetic traits for immune-mediated diseases and Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 73 , 691–697. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0150 . 27088644
Yucesoy B , Peila R , White LR , Wu KM , Johnson VJ , Kashon ML , Luster MI , Launer LJ , 2006. Association of interleukin-1 gene polymorphisms with dementia in a community-based sample: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Neurobiol. Aging 27 , 211–217. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.01.013 . 16226351
Zarranz JJ , Alegre J , Gómez-Esteban JC , Lezcano E , Ros R , Ampuero I , Vidal L , Hoenicka J , Rodriguez O , Atarés B , Llorens V , Gomez Tortosa E , del Ser T , Muñoz DG , de Yebenes JG , 2004. The new mutation, E46K, of alpha-synuclein causes Parkinson and Lewy body dementia. Ann. Neurol 55 , 164–173. 10.1002/ana.10795 . 14755719
Zhang L , Lim SL , Du H , Zhang M , Kozak I , Hannum G , Wang X , Ouyang H , Hughes G , Zhao L , Zhu X , Lee C , Su Z , Zhou X , Shaw R , Geum D , Wei X , Zhu J , Ideker T , Oka C , Wang N , Yang Z , Shaw PX , Zhang K , 2012. High temperature requirement factor A1 (HTRA1) gene regulates angiogenesis through transforming growth factor-β family member growth differentiation factor 6. J. Biol. Chem 287 , 1520–1526. 10.1074/jbc.M111.275990 . 22049084
Zhang M , Ferrari R , Tartaglia MC , Keith J , Surace EI , Wolf U , Sato C , Grinberg M , Liang Y , Xi Z , Dupont K , McGoldrick P , Weichert A , McKeever PM , Schneider R , McCorkindale MD , Manzoni C , Rademakers R , Graff-Radford NR , Dickson DW , Parisi JE , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Miller BL , Seeley WW , van Swieten JC , van Rooij J , Pijnenburg Y , van der Zee J , Van Broeckhoven C , Le Ber I , Van Deerlin V , Suh E , Rohrer JD , Mead S , Graff C , Öijerstedt L , Pickering-Brown S , Rollinson S , Rossi G , Tagliavini F , Brooks WS , Dobson-Stone C , Halliday GM , Hodges JR , Piguet O , Binetti G , Benussi L , Ghidoni R , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Bruni AC , Galimberti D , Scarpini E , Rainero I , Rubino E , Clarimon J , Lleó A , Ruiz A , Hernández I , Pastor P , Diez-Fairen M , Borroni B , Pasquier F , Deramecourt V , Lebouvier T , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Grafman J , Huey ED , Mayeux R , Nalls MA , Hernandez D , Singleton A , Momeni P , Zeng Z , Hardy J , Robertson J , Zinman L , Rogaeva E , International FTD-Genomics Consortium (IFGC), 2018. A C6orf10/LOC101929163 locus is associated with age of onset in C9orf72 carriers. Brain 141 , 2895–2907. 10.1093/brain/awy238 . 30252044
Zhao N , Attrebi ON , Ren Y , Qiao W , Sonustun B , Martens YA , Meneses AD , Li F , Shue F , Zheng J , Van Ingelgom AJ , Davis MD , Kurti A , Knight JA , Linares C , Chen Y , Delenclos M , Liu C-C , Fryer JD , Asmann YW , McLean PJ , Dickson DW , Ross OA , Bu G , 2020. APOE4 exacerbates α-synuclein pathology and related toxicity independent of amyloid. Sci. Transl. Med 12 . 10.1126/scitranslmed.aay1809 .
Zheng X , Demirci FY , Barmada MM , Richardson GA , Lopez OL , Sweet RA , Kamboh MI , Feingold E , 2015. Genome-wide copy-number variation study of psychosis in Alzheimer’s disease. Transl. Psychiatry 5 , e574. 10.1038/tp.2015.64 . 26035058
Zhou Q , Yang D , Ombrello AK , Zavialov AV , Toro C , Zavialov AV , Stone DL , Chae JJ , Rosenzweig SD , Bishop K , Barron KS , Kuehn HS , Hoffmann P , Negro A , Tsai WL , Cowen EW , Pei W , Milner JD , Silvin C , Heller T , Chin DT , Patronas NJ , Barber JS , Lee C-CR , Wood GM , Ling A , Kelly SJ , Kleiner DE , Mullikin JC , Ganson NJ , Kong HH , Hambleton S , Candotti F , Quezado MM , Calvo KR , Alao H , Barham BK , Jones A , Meschia JF , Worrall BB , Kasner SE , Rich SS , Goldbach-Mansky R , Abinun M , Chalom E , Gotte AC , Punaro M , Pascual V , Verbsky JW , Torgerson TR , Singer NG , Gershon TR , Ozen S , Karadag O , Fleisher TA , Remmers EF , Burgess SM , Moir SL , Gadina M , Sood R , Hershfield MS , Boehm M , Kastner DL , Aksentijevich I , 2014. Early-onset stroke and vasculopathy associated with mutations in ADA2. N. Engl. J. Med 370 , 911–920. 10.1056/NEJMoa1307361 . 24552284
Zhou Z-D , Saw W-T , Tan E-K , 2017. Mitochondrial CHCHD-containing proteins: physiologic functions and link with neurodegenerative diseases. Mol. Neurobiol 54 , 5534–5546. 10.1007/s12035-016-0099-5 . 27631878
Zuliani G , Ble’ A , Zanca R , Munari MR , Zurlo A , Vavalle C , Atti AR , Fellin R , 2001. Genetic polymorphisms in older subjects with vascular or Alzheimer’s dementia. Acta Neurol. Scand 103 , 304–308. 10.1034/j.1600-0404.2001.103005304.x . 11328206
Zuliani G , Ranzini M , Guerra G , Rossi L , Munari MR , Zurlo A , Volpato S , Atti AR , Blè A , Fellin R , 2007. Plasma cytokines profile in older subjects with late onset Alzheimer’s disease or vascular dementia. J. Psychiatr. Res 41 , 686–693. 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2006.02.008 . 16600299
