LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101536955
38433
Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA
Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA
Wiley interdisciplinary reviews. RNA
1757-7004
1757-7012

33565261
8195850
10.1002/wrna.1643
NIHMS1673389
Article
Splicing alterations in healthy aging and disease
Angarola Brittany Lynn 1
Anczuków Olga http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0516-2677
123
1 The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut, USA
2 Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, UConn Health, Farmington, Connecticut, USA
3 Institute for Systems Genomics, UConn Health, Farmington, Connecticut, USA
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Brittany Angarola: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; resources; writing-original draft. Olga Anczukow: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; funding acquisition; investigation; methodology; project administration; resources; supervision; visualization; writing-original draft.

Correspondence: Olga Anczuków, The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA. olga.anczukow@jax.org
21 2 2021
09 2 2021
7 2021
01 7 2021
12 4 e1643e1643
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alternative RNA splicing is a key step in gene expression that allows generation of numerous messenger RNA transcripts encoding proteins of varied functions from the same gene. It is thus a rich source of proteomic and functional diversity. Alterations in alternative RNA splicing are observed both during healthy aging and in a number of human diseases, several of which display premature aging phenotypes or increased incidence with age. Age-associated splicing alterations include differential splicing of genes associated with hallmarks of aging, as well as changes in the levels of core spliceosomal genes and regulatory splicing factors. Here, we review the current known links between alternative RNA splicing, its regulators, healthy biological aging, and diseases associated with aging or aging-like phenotypes.

aging
alternative splicing
disease
RNA
splicing factors

1 | INTRODUCTION

All organisms age, a process defined by a progressive decline of fitness and organ functions over time, ultimately leading to death (Kennedy et al., 2014; Kirkwood, 2005). Aging is associated with tissue deterioration and disorganization as a result of widespread genomic and cellular changes including the loss of stem cell renewal capabilities, genomic instability, metabolic alterations, altered cellular communication, loss of proteostasis, telomere attrition, cellular senescence, and epigenetic alterations (Lopez-Otin et al., 2013). Aging is measured on two separate clocks, a chronological age clock—the number of months or years since birth—and a biological age clock—the physiological or phenotypical age/status of cells, tissues, and organs. While both chronological and biological aging are progressive, not all organisms biologically age in the same way or at the same rate (Karasik et al., 2005; Kennedy et al., 2014; Kirkwood, 2005). Aging is the primary risk factor for major human pathologies, including cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases, and therefore extensive research is being carried to understand the molecular basis of biological aging (Kennedy et al., 2014; Kirkwood, 2005). In the context of aging, much research has been targeted at understanding age-related changes in gene expression regulation via age-related genomic and epigenetic instability at the DNA level, transcription factor regulation, and age-related decline of proteasomal function at the protein level (Lopez-Otin et al., 2013; Niedernhofer et al., 2018). Recently, researchers have begun to uncover the significance of age-related gene regulation at the messenger RNA (mRNA) level, including through the regulation of alternative RNA splicing (Bhadra et al., 2020; Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017; Lai et al., 2019; Latorre &amp; Harries, 2017; Li et al., 2017; Stegeman &amp; Weake, 2017). This review will explore the currently published links between alternative splicing (AS) and aging.

The central dogma states that genetic information stored in genomic DNA is transcribed to generate mRNA molecules, which are then translated into downstream, functional protein products. Expression of a gene (i.e., its functional output) is regulated via multiple biological processes at all three levels of this central dogma: at the DNA level via transcriptional regulation, at the RNA level via posttranscriptional regulation, and at the protein level via translational and posttranslational regulation. In the late 1970s, Rich Roberts and Phil Sharp discovered that, in contrast to simpler, bacterial genes, complex eukaryotic genes contain fragments of coding material (exons) interrupted by non-coding material (introns) (Berget et al., 1977; Chow et al., 1977). In the process of mRNA maturation, the introns of the pre-mRNA transcript are removed, and the exons are pieced together to generate a mature mRNA molecule, in a process known as constitutive RNA splicing. Metazoans have also adapted an mRNA editing process known as AS, that controls whether an exon (or intron) is included or skipped in the final mRNA transcript (Baralle &amp; Giudice, 2017; Manning &amp; Cooper, 2017). AS has been instrumental in evolution as it allows generation of diverse mRNA transcripts that can encode proteins of differing functions from the same gene (Nilsen &amp; Graveley, 2010). AS can impact protein function, subcellular localization, stability, regulation, and structure. Over 95% of human genes undergo AS (Pan et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008), and it is therefore a major contributor to proteomic and functional diversity. AS is highly regulated during healthy development and in disease. Alterations in the splicing regulatory machinery have been implicated in a variety of human diseases, including age-related pathologies such as progeria, neurodegenerative disorders, and cancer (Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017; Scotti &amp; Swanson, 2016; Urbanski et al., 2018).

2 | AGE-RELATED ALTERATIONS IN SPLICING REGULATORY COMPONENTS

2.1 | The splicing machinery

Alternative RNA splicing is a highly regulated process carried out by the core splicing machinery, called the spliceosome, along with regulatory splicing factors (SFs). The spliceosome, a very large (~3 MDa) ribonucleoprotein complex, functions as molecular scissors that recognize the intron-exon boundaries of genes defined by the 5′ splice donor, 3′ splice acceptor, and branch sites, and removes intronic regions from the pre-mRNA molecule (Wilkinson et al., 2020) (Figure 1a). The spliceosome contains over 300 components that undergo dynamic remodeling during the splicing reaction (Hegele et al., 2012). The core spliceosome is composed of several small nuclear RNA molecules that interact with “Sm” core proteins and additional proteins to form small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) particles (U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6) (Shi, 2017). During the splicing reaction, first, the U1 snRNP binds, in an ATP-independent manner, the intronic 5′ splice site, including the conserved GU dinucleotide; whereas SF1, U2AF2, and U2AF1 bind to the branch point site, the polypyrimidine tract, and the conserved AG of the 3′ splice site, respectively (Figure 1a). Then, the U2 snRNP interacts, in an ATP-dependent manner, with the branch point site. This interaction is stabilized by the SF3a and SF3b protein complexes, as well as U2AF2 and U2AF1, and leads to the displacement of SF1 from the branch point site. Third, the preassembled U4/U6/U5 tri-snRNP is recruited to form a catalytically inactive complex, which then undergoes conformational changes, including release of U1 and U4, leading to spliceosome activation and formation of the catalytically active complex. The first catalytic step of splicing leads to lariat formation via cleavage of the 5′ splice site. The second catalytic step results in the joining of the two exons. Post-splicing, the spliceosome disassembles in an orderly manner, releasing the mature spliced mRNA, as well as the lariat bound by U2/U5/U6 (Bonnal et al., 2020; Shi, 2017; Wilkinson et al., 2020).

In metazoans, the 5′ and 3′ splice site consensus motifs are quite short and degenerate, that is, only two nucleotides are almost always invariant across splice sites, with the remaining nucleotides of the consensus motif are less conserved, making AS regulation possible (Schwartz et al., 2008). This regulation is carried out by regulatory SFs, a class of RNA-binding proteins that recognizes and binds auxiliary sites on the pre-mRNA, namely intronic or exonic splicing silencer or enhancer sequences, and promotes or represses splicing of that exon (Figure 1b). The serine-arginine rich (SR) proteins and heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNP) are two SF families that regulate AS by binding splicing enhancer or silencer sequences to activate or repress splicing respectively (Geuens et al., 2016; Howard &amp; Sanford, 2015). SFs are critical for normal development and SF defects have been causatively implicated in several pathologies, including cardiac and liver dysfunction, brain abnormalities, diabetes, lupus, and cancer (Baralle &amp; Giudice, 2017; Blech-Hermoni &amp; Ladd, 2013; Colegrove-Otero et al., 2005; Dillman et al., 2013; Su et al., 2018; Torres-Padilla et al., 2001; Urbanski et al., 2018).

The core spliceosome, along with regulatory SFs, allows generation of differentially spliced mRNA isoforms from a given gene, in a given cell, at a given time. These spliced isoforms can include or lack additional exonic or intronic sequence(s) in their coding region or untranslated regions (Figure 1c), thus impacting the gene’s protein coding potential, its expression levels, or its posttranscriptional or posttranslational regulation. Whether an exon is included or skipped relies on numerous inputs, including the levels of SFs, which act in a dose-dependent manner (Geuens et al., 2016; Howard &amp; Sanford, 2015). SF-levels and activity are therefore tightly controlled, at the epigenetic and transcriptional levels, posttranscriptionally via AS coupled to nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD), and posttranslationally by specific kinases (Geuens et al., 2016; Howard &amp; Sanford, 2015). Many of these regulatory mechanisms are altered during aging and could therefore lead to changes in SF levels and activity in human and model organisms. Interestingly, components of the NMD mRNA surveillance machinery are implicated in the regulation of longevity in worms (Son et al., 2017), and may provide a link for RNA homeostasis with aging and longevity.

2.2 | Changes in SF levels are detected with aging in multiple tissues

Aging studies profiling gene expression have highlighted age-related alterations in pathways and/or genes associated with RNA processing, including AS (Harries et al., 2011; Southworth et al., 2009). Changes in SF levels could lead to significant downstream AS changes, including changes in the levels of spliced isoforms implicated in aging hallmarks and age-related diseases. Age-related SF expression changes have been detected in multiple organisms (e.g., mice, rats, and humans) and tissues (e.g., blood, brain, muscle, skin and liver). While still speculative, it has been proposed that &gt;50% of all age-related alterations in spliced isoforms could be linked with age-related changes in SF expression (Mazin et al., 2013; Meshorer &amp; Soreq, 2002) (Figure 2).

2.2.1 | Age-related SF changes in blood and hematopoietic lineages

Several longitudinal aging studies uncovered an enrichment for genes associated with splicing in human whole blood or specific blood cell types. Using 30–104-year-old human subjects from the InCHIANTI cohort, Harries et al. (2011) uncovered surprisingly few age-related transcripts in peripheral blood leukocytes as assayed by microarrays. However, gene set enrichment analysis identified mRNA splicing, polyadenylation, and other posttranscriptional event gene sets as negatively associated with age (Harries et al., 2011) (Figure 2). A complementary expression array study using the InCHIANTI cohort found that ~40% of the tested SF proteins were significantly associated with age, most of which were downregulated (Holly et al., 2013). Similar findings were described in the expression array analysis of the San Antonio Family Heart Study (SAFHS) cohort, comprised of human lymphocyte samples from 15- to 94-year-old subjects (Holly et al., 2013). Differentially expressed age-related transcripts shared between the InCHIANTI and SAFHS studies include spliceosomal components and SFs such as LSM2, LSM5, SF3B1, SRSF1, SRSF6, HNRNPD, HNRNPH3 (all downregulated), SUGP2 (upregulated), and HNRNPAB (different directions) (Holly et al., 2013). Additional analysis of peripheral blood samples of two follow-up visits of the InCHIANTI cohort found that the age-related differential expression of SFs HNRNPM and HNRNPA0 and spliceosomal component AKAP17A, are predictively associated with tests measuring cognitive decline in the same individuals (Lee, Pilling, et al., 2019). Interestingly, age-related expression changes in SRSF1, SRSF6, HNRNPD, HNRNPH3, LSM2, and LSM5, among other SF proteins, were identified in a more recent RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of human peripheral blood (Peters et al., 2015). Moreover, the Prospective Investigation of Uppsala Seniors (PIVUS), a 10-year longitudinal aging study comparing whole blood samples of 70- and 80-year-old subjects, reported, using RNA-seq, a positive enrichment for genes associated with RNA metabolism and ribosomal proteins among the genes differentially expressed with age (Balliu et al., 2019). Changes in specific SF transcript levels were detected between the 80- and 70-year-old individuals (Figure 2). These alterations in SF levels could lead to alterations in their downstream target, and regulate, directly or indirectly, any of the ~500 introns differentially spliced with age detected in this study (Balliu et al., 2019). Interestingly, SF levels generally increased with age in this study, contrasting with the previously described transcriptomic studies. However, it is worth noting that the PIVUS study’s 10-year time scale is shorter than the previous aging studies, and the two PIVUS time points are 70 versus 80 years in age, which would both be considered as older age in previous studies. Therefore, it is possible that changes in SF expression may not be completely linear during aging, but also that the definitions of “young” and “old,” which are somewhat relative to the study design or population cohort, can influence the study’s findings.

2.2.2 | Age-related SF changes in neuronal tissues and cell types

The brain exhibits unique and complex neuronal-specific AS patterns, as well as express a number of neuronal-specific or enriched SFs (Raj &amp; Blencowe, 2015). Human brain samples from the temporal cortex, collected post-mortem from 16- to 102-year-old subjects, exhibited age-related decreased expression of SFs ESPR1, ESPR2, HNRNPK, SNRPB2, and SRSF2, increased expression of SLU7, as well changes in the expression of neuronally enriched SFs NOVA1 (decreased), PTBP1 (increased), and PTBP2 (decreased), which have been shown to regulate AS in neurons (Tollervey, Curk, et al., 2011) (Figure 2). Similarly, in the human cerebellum and prefrontal cortex, Mazin et al. (2013) not only reported age-related changes in expression of SFs (Figure 2), but also identified an enrichment in SF-binding motifs of PTBP1, PTBP2, hnRNPA1, hnRNPH1-3, hnRNPHF, TRA2β, SRSF2, and SRSF5, in the identified age-related spliced isoforms. Analogous to human brain tissues, mouse brain tissues also exhibit several expressional changes in a number of spliceosomal components and SFs. In murine brain early age-related gene expression studies suggested changes in several pre-mRNA processing genes, such as increases in Sf3a2, Ptb, Hprp22, and Hnrnph3, and decrease in Hprp16 (Lee et al., 1999; Meshorer &amp; Soreq, 2002). In mouse cerebral cortex, the levels of several SFs changed in expression, predominantly decreasing with age, including Ptbp1 and Ptbp2, Nova2, and Rbfox2 (Kadota et al., 2020; Stilling et al., 2014; Weyn-Vanhentenryck et al., 2018) (Figure 2).

In Drosophila photoreceptors, another neuronal tissue, genes involved in both RNA processing were found to be both upregulated and downregulated with age. Specifically, two studies showed that over 30 homologs of human genes associated with splicing, including SAFB and SRSF2, were altered, mostly being downregulated with age in photoreceptors of young versus old fruit flies (Hall et al., 2017; Stegeman et al., 2018). Interestingly, many of these SFs were critical for both regulating AS of age-related differentially spliced genes, and for maintaining visual response in older animals, linking the downregulation of SF expression to an aging phenotype. Furthermore, single SF knock-down was not sufficient to recapitulate the age-related vision phenotypes or the age-related splicing profiles of photoreceptors; suggesting that the measured aging phenotypes were controlled by a combination of SFs or other proteins (Stegeman et al., 2018).

2.2.3 | Age-related changes in epithelial tissues and muscles

Similar to blood and brain, enrichment analysis of differential gene expression in skin highlighted genes involved in AS and RNA processing as significantly increasing with age (Glass et al., 2013). For example, Wang, Wu, et al. (2018) demonstrate that PTBP1 expression decreases with age in human skin, but also that this change in SF expression leads to increased exon inclusion in age-related spliced isoforms which are direct targets of PTBP1. In addition, a proteomic study of human dermal fibroblasts identified age-related expression changes in four proteins involved in RNA splicing (i.e., SRSF9, DDX1, DDX3X, DHX15) (Waldera-Lupa et al., 2014). Moreover, Rodriguez et al. (2016) found altered expression of numerous genes, including SFs, with age in murine skin (mostly downregulated) as well as muscle (both up and downregulated), bone, thymus tissues (Figure 2). Similarly, in aging liver, an association study uncovered 88 RNA-binding proteins significantly altered with age in humans, including SFs SRSF4, TRA2β, SFSWAP, and hnRNPUL1 (Chaturvedi et al., 2015). This study did not report a common trend for SF alterations—some SFs were upregulated with age, others downregulated, whereas some initially increased but then decreased during human, mouse, or rat lifespan (Chaturvedi et al., 2015). Finally, an RNA-seq study of the mouse juvenile versus adult transcriptomes revealed that SFs, Srsf7, Ybx1, Hnrnpa0, Hnrnpa1, Hnrnpdl, Sfpq, and Srsf2, were more highly expressed in young cardiomyocytes, hepatocytes, and cerebral cortex (Kadota et al., 2020). Focusing on Srsf7, the authors demonstrated that this SF is critical for maintaining the juvenile identity of each of these cell types, and its knockdown increased the expression of senescence-associated genes and impaired mitochondrial functions (Kadota et al., 2020). Srsf7 regulates numerous age-dependent AS events in the liver, including isoforms of anabolism-associated genes Eif4a2 and Rbm7 (Kadota et al., 2020).

In contrast to blood and brain, studies in muscle have shown a pattern of upregulated SFs levels. In aged human skeletal muscle, multiple SR and HNRNP proteins, as well as RBFOX1, CELF1, CELF2, and MBLN1, are upregulated at the mRNA level (Welle et al., 2003, 2004); similarly, quantitative proteomic studies from human skeletal muscle reported large changes in SF proteins with age, including increased expression of SF3B1, SRSF1, HNRNPA1, HNRNPAB, and 53 additional spliceosomal proteins (Ubaida-Mohien et al., 2019) (Figure 2). Interestingly, a number of SFs have been previously implicated in the regulation of muscle-specific AS, including PTBP1, as well as RBFOX, CELF, or MBNL family members (Nakka et al., 2018). Furthermore, MBLN and CELF proteins are critical for both normal skeletal development, and mediate AS misregulation in muscular dystrophy (Brinegar et al., 2017; Kalsotra et al., 2008; Lee &amp; Cooper, 2009; Lin et al., 2006). Acute upregulation of CELF1, CELF2, and MBLN1 has also been implicated in the response to toxin-mediated muscle injury (Orengo et al., 2011). Finally, defects in MBLN1 and RBFOX1 in muscular dystrophy result in mis-splicing of a number of AS exons (Klinck et al., 2014). Therefore, the upregulation of many of these transcripts and proteins with age may suggest that aged muscles activate regeneration-related pathways. The activation of these regenerative pathways may be a response to age-related muscle decline, potentially similar to the body’s attempt to compensate, albeit unsuccessfully, for muscle loss in muscular dystrophy patients (Yanay et al., 2020).

2.3 | SFs associated with lifespan and longevity

Several studies have linked lifespan with changes in SF expression. In Caenorhabditis elegans, a screen for lifespan regulators identified multiple RNA-binding proteins that extended lifespan when inactivated post-developmentally, including the ortholog of human spliceosomal component PRPF38A (Curran &amp; Ruvkun, 2007). Furthermore, knockdown of the C. elegans ortholog of human spliceosomal component SF1 was sufficient to abolish lifespan extension caused by dietary restriction in C. elegans, but did not shorten wild-type lifespan (Heintz et al., 2017). Mechanistically, SF1 modulates components of the TORC1 and AMPK pathways, two pathways associated with metabolism and aging (Heintz et al., 2017). Inhibition of additional orthologs of human spliceosomal genes SF3A2, SNRPD3, SNRNPB, HNRNPR, U2AF35, and U2AF65 significantly reduced lifespan of both wild-type and dietary restricted animals (Heintz et al., 2017). Another pro-longevity gene in worms is the homolog of human transcription elongation and splicing regulator TCERG1 (Ghazi et al., 2009; Sanchez-Hernandez et al., 2016). TCERG1 regulates splicing of BCL2L1, an apoptosis-regulating gene, by modulating the rate of RNA polymerase II transcription and triggers a switch towards the pro-apoptotic isoform (Montes et al., 2012). Finally, across several mouse strains with varying lifespans, expression of Hnrnpa1, Hnrnpa2b1, Hnrnpk, Hnrnpm, Sf3b1, Srsf3, and Tra2β in the spleen, or of Hnrnpa0, Hnrnpd, and Srsf3 in muscle tissues, correlated with lifespan (Lee et al., 2016). These observations in mice are further supported by findings in human and flies, in which HNRNPA2B1 and HNRNPA1 were also associated with parental longevity and general longevity respectively (Lee et al., 2016; Romano et al., 2014).

In summary, though there is much variability between studies, data from the blood, brain, liver, and skin suggest a pattern of SF downregulation with age, whereas SF transcripts are upregulated with age in skeletal muscle. Downregulation of SRSF1, SRSF2, SRSF5, SRSF6, TRA2B, SRRM1, HNRNPA0, HNRNPD, HNRNPH1, HNRNPH3, HNRNPHK, HNRNPHM, PTBP2, and RBFOX2 has been detected in at least five studies (Figure 2), highlighting a potential role in aging that needs to be further investigated. Yet, while several investigators have uncovered age-related changes in SFs, the mechanisms regulating age-related changes in SF levels are largely unknown. We can speculate that, like studies of SF misregulation in cancer, SF expression changes in aging are due to age-related changes in epigenetics, transcriptional changes and regulation, somatic mutations, signaling pathway alterations, and splicing patterns themselves (Dvinge et al., 2016; Urbanski et al., 2018). However, further investigation is necessary. Interestingly, it appears that no single SF is uniformly dysregulated across all aging gene expression studies. Similarly, the longevity studies do not point to a single or small number of conserved SFs that could be “master regulators” altered with age across all tissues and species. Instead, they suggest that aging is associated with deregulation of multiple SFs which in turn impact downstream spliced isoforms. This is likely due to many factors: (i) although most SFs are expressed ubiq-uitously, with the notable exception of most neuronal SFs, they do exhibit tissue-specificity in their targets. There is evidence for tissue specific regulation of gene expression and splicing (Wang, Wu, et al., 2018) and therefore SFs could display distinct functions across aged tissues; (ii) from a technical standpoint, this collection of studies utilized differing techniques to measure gene expression, used differential computational tools, and had different definitions of young and old ages; (iii) variability across studies may result from differential aging rate of tissues (i.e., Is a 60-year old heart as “old” as a 60-year old brain), as well as from cell composition of tissues used (i.e., some tissues are composed of more homogenous cell populations than others); (iv) many SFs themselves are alternatively spliced, often resulting in production of non-coding transcripts, a mechanism used to regulate SF protein levels (Lareau et al., 2007; Lareau &amp; Brenner, 2015; Leclair et al., 2020). Therefore, while the transcript level could be unchanged or changing, this might not fully reflect the final protein levels. Actually, the idea that with increased age, protein expression, for a given gene, correlates less with its transcript expression has been shown in humans and monkeys—and potentially linked to posttranscriptional regulators including SFs, RNA binding proteins and miRNAs (Wei et al., 2015). Therefore, it is critical to further elucidate the molecular causes of these AS changes and their downstream consequences in the aging process. Whether and which of these SF alterations are the causes or consequences of aging remains to be determined. Expanding our understanding of how SF levels are regulated at the molecular level but also more holistically at the organism level will help answer these questions in the future.

3 | AGE-RELATED ALTERATIONS IN SPLICED ISOFORMS

If the described changes in SFs with age are functionally significant, it might be hypothesized that they would lead to downstream changes in the isoforms spliced with age. Indeed, early studies in mice and rats first documented changes in mRNA processing with increased age that AS of fibronectin changes in aged rat tissues (Yannarell et al., 1977; Pagani et al., 1991). Since then, several transcriptomic studies have comprehensively characterized the AS repertoires in aged human and mouse tissues using RNA-seq or targeted microarrays. The resulting studies in human have supported the initial age-related splicing changes found in mouse and rat. As with the SF expression studies, experiments in humans and mice both support the hypothesis that changes in AS patterns occur with age—though individual AS events may be species-specific (Sieber et al., 2019) or not obviously conserved between species. In the following paragraphs, we will highlight the several studies that have identified age-related AS changes.

3.1 | Age-related isoforms in blood and hematopoietic lineages

First, an early targeted analysis in peripheral human blood leukocytes identified 10 genes differentially spliced with age (Harries et al., 2011). A more recent longitudinal RNA-seq study of human whole blood from elderly females and males over 10 years uncovered robust AS changes in ~300 genes in 80 years old compared to 70 years old individuals (Balliu et al., 2019). The differentially spliced transcripts were implicated in RNA splicing, apoptosis, leukocyte, or circadian rhythm regulation (Balliu et al., 2019). Moreover, a study of human twins reported age-related AS changes, particularly in fat and skin, and to a lesser extend in blood and lymphoblastoid cell lines (Vinuela et al., 2018).

3.2 | Age-related isoforms in neuronal tissues and cell types

Human brain tissues from the prefrontal cortex and cerebellum exhibit age-related changes in ~300 AS events, the majority of which are more included with age, as detected by RNA-seq (Mazin et al., 2013). These age-related AS events follow discrete patterns that could be linked to neural functions in distinct brain regions, and ~30% of these AS changes are predicted to affect the protein-coding portion of the transcript (Mazin et al., 2013). Another study of human temporal cortex detected, using a microarray approach, 1174 exons with age-dependent changes in AS, with an enrichment in transcripts related to metabolic processes and DNA repair (Tollervey, Curk, et al., 2011). Interestingly, these age-related AS changes correlated strongly with AS events detected in brains from subjects afflicted with neurodegenerative diseases (Tollervey, Curk, et al., 2011). In rat cerebral cortex, differential splicing patterns were observed in older animals, comparing isoforms in 6-, 12-, and 28 months old animals, and revealed that nonlinear isoform switching might be prevalent in brain aging, as it is in development (Wood et al., 2013). In the mouse hippocampus, age-related AS events occurred in genes related to neuronal function and, interestingly, transcripts that were differentially spliced had little overlap with genes that were differentially expressed (Stilling et al., 2014). Thus, the functional role of AS in aging may extend beyond determining transcript abundance (Balliu et al., 2019; Mazin et al., 2013; Rodriguez et al., 2016; Stilling et al., 2014; Tollervey, Curk, et al., 2011).

In the aging eye, 75 significant differentially spliced events were detected between young and old flies (Stegeman et al., 2018). Furthermore, RNA-seq using nuclear RNA isolated only from photoreceptor cells revealed 238 differentially spliced events, predominantly involved in visual function (Stegeman et al., 2018), therefore illustrating that tissue heterogeneity can mask critical changes in gene expression and splicing profiles in bulk RNA-seq.

3.3 | Comparing age-related isoforms across tissues and species

Although AS changes with age was described above, comparative studies of samples from multiple tissues and species have not yet uncovered a common splicing signature or set of genes. This is exemplified in an extensive study of 48 distinct human tissues from &gt;500 GTEX donors that found age-related AS events to be prevalent in most tissues but to be largely tissue-specific, with the skin and esophagus-mucosa having the highest number of AS events in old versus young individuals (Wang, Wu, et al., 2018). The age-related spliced transcripts detected across multiple tissues were involved in biological processes linked with aging, including ribosome function, mitochondrial function, DNA repair, DNA damage, and apoptosis. Mechanistically, age-related changes in AS profiles could be explained, at least in part, by concomitant age-related changes in the levels of upstream regulatory SFs. This study suggested that genome-wide AS profiles are a better predictor of biological age than gene or transcript expression profiles (Wang, Wu, et al., 2018). Similarly, in mice, analysis of skin, skeletal muscle, bone, thymus, and white adipose using exon expression microarrays revealed a number of age-related and tissue-specific AS events (Rodriguez et al., 2016). Interestingly, in this study, the number of differential AS events increased with chronological aging, with more differentially spliced events detected at 28 months than at 18 months compared to 3-month-old animals (Rodriguez et al., 2016). Gene ontology, pathway, and network analysis of age-related spliced transcripts across all five tissues highlighted pathways associated with posttranscriptional RNA processing, spliceosome, EIF2 translational control, and cancer (Rodriguez et al., 2016). Finally, a cross-species comparative analysis comparing AS changes in blood, brain, liver, and skin in young versus older humans, mice, and two fish species, revealed that overall less than 5% of transcribed genes are differentially spliced during aging (Sieber et al., 2019). Although most of the age-related differentially spliced transcripts are tissue- and species-specific, several spliced transcripts shared across tissues and species were associated with RNA processing, including splicing and translational control (Sieber et al., 2019).

3.4 | Age-related intron retention

Increased intron retention with age is a pattern that has been highlighted in several studies and may represent an aging splicing signature, especially in the brain. A global increase in intron retention was detected in aging worms (Heintz et al., 2017), as well as Drosophila heads, where it was proposed to be linked with age-related changes in nucleosome occupancy (Adusumalli et al., 2019). Furthermore, several transcripts with age-related intron retention events detected in mouse and flies (Adusumalli et al., 2019; Lister et al., 2013; Stilling et al., 2014) were also conserved in the aging human brain (Adusumalli et al., 2019; Mazin et al., 2013). Moreover, an analysis of a dermal fibroblast dataset from young and old people highlighted intron retention as a significant age-related splicing event (Yao et al., 2020). However, additional studies argue that this is not the only significant trend in age-related AS; for example, in aging skeletal muscle, skipped exons were the most frequently detected AS event type, many of which were in genes implicated in mitochondrial processes and inflammation (Ubaida-Mohien et al., 2019). Also, when considering AS events in all GTEX tissues, the most prevalent AS event type across most tissues were cassette exons (both upregulated and downregulated), whereas intron retention events showed a bias towards being upregulated (Wang, Wu, et al., 2018).

In summary, taken together these studies indicate that AS patterns change with age. Like gene expression, it might not be surprising if AS events do not overlap between tissue types as a number of AS patterns are tissue specific (Barash et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2008; Xu et al., 2002). However, one might argue that aging does not lead to global AS dysregulation, but rather leads to discrete changes in certain types of AS events or altered AS of transcripts associated with specific pathways. To better understand which of these AS events might play a significant role in aging, further efforts need to be focused on elucidating which AS events result in proteins level changes, functional changes, and how those functional changes contribute to aging phenotypes. Furthermore, studies of the mechanistic link between SF expression and splicing of their direct targets, including profiling of binding sites for common SFs in age-related differentially spliced events, are also needed. Interestingly, a common theme of these aging studies is the differential splicing with age of genes implicated themselves in mRNA processing (Balliu et al., 2019; Rodriguez et al., 2016; Sieber et al., 2019; Wang, Wu, et al., 2018). Wang, Wu, et al. (2018) found mRNA processing and mRNA splicing to be among the top categories of age-related differentially spliced transcripts shared across human tissues. Also, age-related changes in exon usage in murine hippocampus were found to impact splicing of SF transcripts, such as Hnrnph1, HnrnpII, Hnrnpab, Srsf5, Srsf6, and Srsf11 (Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017; Stilling et al., 2014). Furthermore, exon expression microarrays across multiple mouse tissues uncovered age-related differential splicing of Sf3b1, Sf3b2, Prpf3, and Prpf8 (Rodriguez et al., 2016). This needs to be further investigated as age-related splicing changes in SFs could change their protein expression and further disrupt AS patterns of their downstream targets.

4 | HALLMARKS OF AGING AND SPLICING

Despite differences between tissues, aging leads to hallmark changes at the cellular and molecular levels, including genomic instability, epigenetic alterations, mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction, telomere attrition, accumulation of senescent cells, loss of proteotasis, altered cell communication, and chronic low-grade inflammation termed inflammaging (Franceschi et al., 2018; Lopez-Otin et al., 2013). Recently, researchers have begun to uncover the significance of age-related gene regulation at the mRNA level. Below we review several of the links between splicing and known aging hallmarks (Figure 3 and Table 1).

4.1 | Metabolism, nutrient sensing, and splicing

Deregulated nutrient sensing is one of the key hallmarks of aging. Genetic polymorphisms or mutations that reduce the functions of the IGF-1 receptor, insulin receptor (IR), or downstream intracellular effectors such as AKT, mTOR, and FOXO, have all been linked to longevity in humans and model organisms (Barzilai et al., 2012; Fontana et al., 2010; Kenyon, 2010). Furthermore, caloric restriction can decrease the physiological manifestations of aging and increase lifespan or health span in all investigated eukaryote species (Balasubramanian et al., 2017). We review below examples of changes in spliced isoform or splicing regulators that have been implicated in cellular metabolism and aging (Bhadra et al., 2020).

4.1.1 | Dietary restriction

During dietary restriction in both worms and mice, hundreds of genes involved in metabolism, RNA-regulatory processes, cellular signaling, and protein processing undergo changes in their AS patterns (Tabrez et al., 2017). In worms, those AS events are regulated at least in part by the ortholog of human HNRNPU, and its knockdown suppresses dietary restriction-mediated longevity (Tabrez et al., 2017). Caloric restriction also leads to expression changes in SF levels; co-expression analysis identified robust changes in gene modules implicated in RNA metabolism and AS regulation in mice, including Cpsf6, Srrn2, Luc7l2, SRm300, Prp44b, Prpf39, Sfpq, Sf3b1, and Sfrs18 (Swindell, 2009). Changes in the expression of SFs Hnrnpa1, Srsf1, Srsf6, Tra2β, or Sf1 were detected in at least one tissue in inbred mouse strains with variable lifespan responses to short-term or long-term caloric restriction (Lee, Mulvey, et al., 2019). Similarly, in monkeys, caloric restriction is linked to changes in numerous spliceosomal components in liver tissues both at the RNA and protein levels, including LSM2, LSM4, SRSF1, SRSF7, NCBP1, PHF5A, PRPF8, ACIN1, RBM8A, and DDX46 (Rhoads et al., 2018). These findings suggest that the AS machinery could be directly impacted by caloric restriction and possibly the enhanced longevity accompanying it.

4.1.2 | Insulin and IGF-1 signaling pathways

The insulin and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling pathway is critical for metabolic signaling and cellular growth, and has been linked with aging (van Heemst, 2010). Specifically, reduced IGF signaling has been associated with increased lifespan in flies, mice and worms (Altintas et al., 2016). Key players of the insulin/IGF signaling pathway undergo AS in mammals, including IGF-1, the ligand that binds the IGF-1 receptor, as well as the IR that is activated by insulin, IGF-I, or IGF-II (van Heemst, 2010). Splicing of IGF-1 produces at least three AS isoforms: IGF-1 Ea, IGF-1 Eb, or IGF-1 Ec (also known as MGF), which encode different precursor polypeptides with distinct posttranslational modification sites (Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017). Interestingly, local expression of either IGF-1Ea or IGF-1Eb transgenes was protective against age-related loss of muscle mass and force in mice (Ascenzi et al., 2019). Furthermore, skipping or inclusion of IR exon 11 results in two isoforms, A or B, that differ in their ligand affinity in mammals (Belfiore et al., 2009). Alterations of the IR-A/IR-B ratio are associated with insulin resistance, aging, and increased proliferative activity of normal and neoplastic tissues and appears to sustain detrimental effects (Belfiore et al., 2017). Several SFs, including CUGBP, MBNL, SR proteins, hnRNPs, and Elav-like family members have been implicated in modulating this IR-A/IR-B balance (Belfiore et al., 2017). Similarly, worms and insects also express multiple IR transcript isoforms, likely generated through a combination of AS and the usage of alternative intronic polyadenylation sites. These short truncated IR isoforms lacks the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain and can act as decoy receptors and soak up substrate (Martinez et al., 2020; Vastermark et al., 2013). In worms, overexpression of these short IR isoforms extends lifespan; however, in this organism, IR isoforms are most physiologically relevant in the entry and exit of the dormant dauer state (Martinez et al., 2020). Continued research will reveal whether these isoforms are important in the context of physiological aging.

4.1.3 | mTOR and AMPK signaling pathways

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase, a negative regulator of aging, is an essential component of two complexes: mTORC1 and mTORC2. mTORC1 signaling is activated in response to available nutrients, growth factors/insulin, ATP, oxygen, and amino acids in order to stimulate anabolic processes (e.g., protein and nucleotide synthesis) and inhibit catabolic process (e.g., autophagy and lysosome biogenesis) (Angarola &amp; Ferguson, 2020; Liu &amp; Sabatini, 2020). Genetic knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of mTORC1 signaling extends lifespan in yeast, worms, flies, and mammals—in part because mTOR inhibition decreases the energetic burden of translation, reduces harmful metabolic by-products, is associated with senescence, and promotes autophagy (Liu &amp; Sabatini, 2020). In recent studies, mTOR has also been implicated in splicing and aging. In worms, dietary restriction leads to AS changes mediated by the ortholog of mammalian core spliceosomal factor SF1 and SF3A2, and SF1 overexpression is sufficient to promotes longevity (Heintz et al., 2017). Furthermore, SF1 knockdown suppresses the lifespan extension phenotype of several mTORC1 and AMPK worm mutants, placing SF1 downstream of mTORC1 signaling, with the exact link between splicing, longevity, and mTOR signaling still being unclear. A recent pair of studies uncovered that, even in yeast, canonical splicing patterns are altered in response to nutrient availability (Morgan et al., 2019; Parenteau et al., 2019). While the two studies did not agree entirely on the molecular mechanism of intron retention or their functional significance, both groups showed that introns accumulate in response to starvation in yeast. This increase in intronic sequences was dependent on mTORC1 and enhanced yeast survival during the stationary phase, likely by downregulating the splicing of ribosomal processing genes (Morgan et al., 2019; Parenteau et al., 2019).

Additional pieces of evidence directly link AS with the mTOR pathway. In human, the SF SRSF1 regulates AS of several targets associated with translational control, including S6K1 and MKNK2 (Anczukow et al., 2012; Karni et al., 2007; Mogilevsky et al., 2018) (Table 1). Moreover, SRSF1 interacts with both the phosphatase PP2A and with the protein kinase mTOR and promotes translation initiation by enhancing phosphorylation of 4E-BP1, a key component of the mTORC1 pathway (Michlewski et al., 2008). Another SR protein family member, SRSF7, impacts mTOR signaling (Kadota et al., 2020), and its protein level in the liver decreases with age in monkeys (Rhoads et al., 2018). In addition, mTORC1-regulated effector kinase, SRPK2, can control the expression of lipogenic enzymes by inducing efficient AS of their mRNAs through the activation of SR proteins and U1 (Lee et al., 2017). Finally, mTOR itself undergoes AS (Table 1), which is regulated by Sam68 (Huot et al., 2012), a SF that protects mice from age-related bone loss (Richard et al., 2005); the relevance of this AS event to aging is still to be determined.

The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is an energy sensor activated when energy levels are low in the cell and plays a key role in cell metabolic regulation. Opposite to mTOR, activated AMPK promotes catabolic processes and inhibits anabolic processes (Mihaylova &amp; Shaw, 2011). Pharmacological activation of AMPK via metformin may increase lifespan in worms, flies, and mice (Salminen &amp; Kaarniranta, 2012). Metformin treatment results in splicing alterations and the downregulation of SFs, including RBM3, though it is unclear whether this a direct effect of activated AMPK signaling (Laustriat et al., 2015). Also, a recent study identified SRSF1 as a substrate of AMPK (Matsumoto et al., 2020), further linking SFs and AMPK signaling.

Lastly, energy levels are also sensed by the NAD-dependent histone deacetylase sirtuin, SIRT1. SIRT1 deacetylates a variety of histones including at K16 of histone 4, K26 of histone 1, and K9 and K14 of histone 3, and its activation has been implicated in the regulation of aging phenotypes and lifespan extension in several studies (Canto et al., 2009; Canto &amp; Auwerx, 2009; Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017). SIRT1 and resveratrol, a plant compound that increases NAD levels and SIRT1 activity, are both being investigated in anti-aging studies, due to SIRT1’s complex roles in metabolism, inflammation, cellular senescence, and genome integrity (Lagouge et al., 2006; Lopez-Otin et al., 2013). Furthermore, stabilization of the SIRT1 mRNA can extend organismal lifespan and delay cellular senescence, and is regulated by SF hnRNPA1 (Wang et al., 2016). In addition, SIRT1 has also been linked with splicing and this link is discussed in more detail in Section 4.6.2.

4.1.4 | Mitochondria dysfunction and reactive oxygen species

The accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to progressive mitochondria dysfunction has been implicated in aging, although it remains to be determined whether it is a causal event or a consequence of the aging process (Back et al., 2012; Blagosklonny, 2008; Liguori et al., 2018). Both mitochondrial damage and/or ROS can lead to changes in AS patterns. For example, cells treated with paraquat, a compound that interferes with mitochondrial function causing energy deficit and oxidative stress, leads to dose- and time-dependent increase of several AS isoforms in apoptotic genes CASP3, CASP8, CASP9, or APAF1, transcription factor SIP1, or SF SMN (Maracchioni et al., 2007). Interestingly, these AS events correlated with ATP depletion, and compounds that generated ROS without directly damaging the mitochondria did not trigger AS changes, suggesting that an energy deficit triggers the signal that alters AS (Maracchioni et al., 2007). It is unclear if ROS can directly activate the splicing machinery, or rather elicits a downstream stress response that leads to changes in SF levels or activity.

In summary, these findings further support a potential, evolutionary conserved link between splicing and the role of dietary restriction and mTORC1 signaling in longevity. In mice, interventions targeting dietary restriction or mTORC1 signaling, such as rapamycin treatment, have been effective in extending lifespan (Harrison et al., 2009; Liu &amp; Sabatini, 2020; Wu et al., 2013), but the role of splicing in these experiments has not yet been investigated comprehensively. However, in humans, the efficacity of dietary restriction or mTORC1 inhibition in modulating health span remains, for now, unclear (Liu &amp; Sabatini, 2020). Future investigations of the links between splicing, longevity, and metabolism are needed to unravel the molecular basis of these differences between species.

4.2 | Telomere attrition and splicing

Telomeres play a vital role in preserving the information in our genome by protecting it from nucleolytic degradation, recombination, repair, and interchromosomal fusion (Shay &amp; Wright, 2019). With each cell division, as a normal cellular process, a small portion of telomeric DNA is lost. When telomere length reaches a critical limit, the cell undergoes replicative senescence and/or apoptosis. Telomere length may therefore serve as a biological clock to determine the lifespan of a cell and an organism. Accelerated telomere shortening is associated with early onset of many age-associated health problems, including coronary heart disease, diabetes, increased cancer risk, and osteoporosis, as well as with genetic disorders such as dyskeratosis congenita (Shay &amp; Wright, 2019).

Telomerase activity, the ability to extend telomeres, is present in germline and certain hematopoietic cells, whereas somatic cells have low or undetectable levels of this activity and their telomeres undergo a progressive shortening with replication. Nearly all cancer cells up-regulate telomerase to re-elongate or maintain telomeres by de novo synthesis of telomere repeats on to chromosome ends (Shay &amp; Wright, 2019). The reverse transcriptase component of telomerase, hTERT, undergoes AS to generate at least 22 distinct spliced isoforms, which differ in their activity—some having a dominant negative effect on telomerase activity—and in their expression in distinct cell types and during development (Wong et al., 2014). Part of the reactivation of telomerase in cancer cells involves AS of hTERT transcripts to produce full-length TERT, whereas many of the AS isoforms lack the domains encoding the telomerase activity. Splicing of hTERT is regulated by SFs hnRNPK, hnRNPD, SRSF11, hnRNPH2, hnRNPL, NOVA1, and PTBP1 (Kang et al., 2009; Listerman et al., 2013; Ludlow et al., 2018; Pont et al., 2012; Sayed et al., 2019). NOVA1 and PTBP1 act as enhancers of full-length hTERT splicing in neuronal cells, increase telomerase activity, and promote telomere maintenance in cancer cells (Ludlow et al., 2018; Sayed et al., 2019). Knockdown of these SF levels alters hTERT splicing, and therefore changes in SF levels, as detected during aging in several human and mouse tissues, could lead to changes in telomerase activity. Telomere length and telomerase activity have been linked with human healthy lifespan in centenarian studies (Tedone et al., 2019), yet hTERT AS patterns during aging have not yet been investigated.

Finally, telomere damage has been linked with other AS events. For example, progressive telomere damage in human fibroblasts leads to extensive changes in AS events in genes associated with cytoskeleton regulation, cell proliferation, or metabolism (Cao et al., 2011). Also, this progressive telomere damage leads to the production of progerin, a mutant lamin A protein generated through AS of the LMNA gene, and which has been implicated in premature aging in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) (Cao et al., 2011), and is further discussed in Section 5.1.

4.3 | Senescence and splicing

Cellular senescence occurs when cells irreversibly arrest the cell cycle. Unlike cellular quiescence, cellular senescence is complex cellular state that involves cell morphological reconstruction, proteomic alterations, apoptotic resistance, and senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) production (Munoz-Espin &amp; Serrano, 2014). Senescence can be induced once a cell has reached its replicative potential or due to the application of a stressor (i.e., DNA damage, oxidative stress, and oncogenes). Throughout the lifespan of an organism, senescent cells accumulate in multiple tissues and organisms progressively lose the ability to clear them out (Jeyapalan et al., 2007). Thus, this accumulation of senescent cells has been deemed a critical hallmark of aging (Sikora et al., 2014). While senescence can be beneficial in deterring abnormal cell growth/cancer, the accumulation of senescent cells, and their pro-inflammatory effects, contributes to aging and age-related disease (van Deursen, 2014). Senescence induces an inflammatory SASP secretome that promotes carcinogenesis and age-related pathologies.

4.3.1 | Senescence and spliced isoforms

Changes in AS have been detected during senescence (Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017), and several spliced isoforms, such as TP53, ING1, and ENG, have been linked both with aging and senescence over the years (Table 1). The tumor suppressor protein p53, encoded by the TP53 gene, plays a critical role in regulating targets in several critical pathways including cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, apoptosis, and cellular senescence (Mijit et al., 2020). In response to DNA damage, the transcription factor p53 is phosphorylated, abrogating its repressive interaction with MDM2 and allowing p53 to promote expression of pro-senescence targets (Mijit et al., 2020). Splicing of TP53 generates multiple isoforms, including Δ40p53 (also called p44) a short isoform of p53 (p47 is the human ortholog), which is upregulated in aged mouse brains (Pehar et al., 2014) (Figure 4 and Table 1). Δ40p53 lacks the first transactivation domain of p53 but retains the second one due to retention of the i2 intron and use of the initiation codon in exon 4 (Ghosh et al., 2004). Its overexpression in mice causes a progeroid phenotype that resembles an accelerated form of aging, a suppression of cell proliferation, and increase in senescence (Maier et al., 2004). Δ40p53 leads to the onset of senescence by hyperactivating IGF signaling in mice (Maier et al., 2004). Typically, p53 decreases the expression of the IGF-1 receptor (Werner et al., 1996). However, overexpression of Δ40p53 in mice results in increases levels of the IGF-1 receptor and the downstream RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, resulting in induction of p21 and cell-cycle arrest (Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017; Maier et al., 2004; Pehar et al., 2014). Similarly, two other TP53 isoforms, Δ133p53, which lacks both transactivations domains, and p53β, which lacks the oligomerization domain and the C-terminal basic region, regulate replicative senescence, but not oncogene-induced senescence, in normal human fibroblasts (Fujita et al., 2009; Horikawa et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2013). AS of p53β is regulated by the downregulation of SRSF3, an SF that triggers senescence when knocked down in fibroblasts (Tang et al., 2013).

Another example of AS detected during senescence is the tumor suppressor and TP53 interacting partner, ING1, which can be spliced into two isoforms, INGa or INGb; increased ratio of the INGa to INGb isoform promotes senescence (Soliman et al., 2008; Vieyra et al., 2002) (Figure 4 and Table 1). Furthermore, AS of ENG to promote intron retention, a gene that encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein of the vascular endothelium, is altered in senescent endothelial cells (Blanco et al., 2008), and is regulated by SF SRSF1 (Blanco &amp; Bernabeu, 2012) (Figure 4 and Table 1).

4.3.2 | Senescence and SFs

Changes in SF levels have been detected during senescence. Replicative senescence in endothelial cells and fibroblasts is associated with changes in the expression of SF transcripts and results in downstream splicing changes (Holly et al., 2013). Altered senescence-induced expression patterns of key SF families suggested a loss of AS regulation complexity with senescence (Holly et al., 2013). Moreover, numerous RNA-binding proteins are downregulated upon senescence induction, and multiple differentially spliced events were shared between distinct pathways that induce senescence in human cells (Dong et al., 2018). Interestingly, many of the AS events occurred in genes associated with RNA splicing or the spliceosome itself. Combining differential gene expression data and binding motif data surrounding the differentially spliced genes, SFs SRSF1, SRSF7, QKI, RBFOX2, PTBP1, HNRNPK, HNRNPM, and HNRNPUL1, were predicted as key regulators of senescence-associated AS events (Dong et al., 2018). Similarly, senescent neuroblastoma cells were shown to suppress expression of SRSF7 (Kadota et al., 2020). Moreover, a recent study uncovered that, in vitro, decreased expression of U2AF1 levels during replicative senescence triggers intron retention in hundreds of transcripts, which in turn downregulates their gene expression (Yao et al., 2020). Interestingly, knockdown of one of the U2AF1 target genes, CNPE1, impacts senescence associated phenotypes, thus suggesting intron retention might directly contribute to senescence (Yao et al., 2020). Finally, several SFs, including PTBP1, have been shown to play a role in SASP production, for example by regulating AS of genes involved in intracellular trafficking, such as EXOC7 (Georgilis et al., 2018). While this example relates to oncogene-induced senescence (and not replicative senescence), changes in PTBP1 detected in aging tissues are evident (Georgilis et al., 2018) (Figure 4). Oncogenic SF SRSF1 has been associated with oncogene-induced senescence (Fregoso et al., 2013).

Moreover, several studies suggest that global dysregulation of regulatory SFs and spliceosomal components could trigger senescence. For example, a study in primary human fibroblasts using replicative and oxidative stress-induced senescence models detected changes in the expression of 58 genes associated with splicing regulation at the pre-senescence stage, prior to the detection of senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity (Kwon et al., 2021). Furthermore, homologs of resveratrol, a compound that can reverse senescent phenotypes and extend lifespans of model organisms, lead to increased SF levels (Latorre et al., 2017). In addition, inhibition of AKT and ERK signaling, two pathways implicated in senescence and lifespan, also increases SF expression indirectly, at least in part through the FOXO1 and ETV6 transcription factors (Latorre et al., 2019). Lastly, in contrast to human and mouse models described above, the naked mole rat, a unique aging model organism, shows little change in SF-levels with age (Lee et al., 2020). The naked mole rat is long-lived relative to its size, is resistant to both spontaneous and experimentally induced cancer, and exhibits an ameliorated stress response and decreased levels of senescence; therefore, the stable expression of SFs across ages might provide a link between AS and healthy aging, and could contribute to the exceptional lifespan and pro-longed health span of these animals (Lee et al., 2020). Therefore, modulating SF levels, either pharmacologically or genetically, could provide novel opportunities to delay or prevent senescence.

4.4 | Genomic instability and splicing

Aging is associated with the accumulation of DNA mutations and increased genomic instability (Niedernhofer et al., 2018; Petr et al., 2020). Several lines of evidence correlate nuclear DNA damage with aging and suggest a causal link between DNA repair defects and accelerated aging in humans and mice (Niedernhofer et al., 2018). Interestingly, many genes implicated in the control of DNA repair are themselves alternatively spliced, including BRCA1, ATM, CHK2, or TP53 (Berge et al., 2010; Joruiz &amp; Bourdon, 2016; Li, Harlan-Williams, Kumaraswamy, &amp; Jensen, 2019). Reciprocally, genotoxic insults, including activation of classical DNA damage response kinases such as ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK, can alter gene expression responses, therefore modulating AS which, in turn, shapes the response to the damaging agent (Botto et al., 2020). Several SFs, including SR and HNRNP proteins, exhibit changes in their levels, AS profiles, phosphorylation or acetylation states, or subcellular distribution in response to DNA damage (Adamson et al., 2012; Busa et al., 2010; Ip et al., 2011; Leva et al., 2012; Magni et al., 2019; Matsuoka et al., 2007; Sakashita &amp; Endo, 2010; Siam et al., 2019). The activation of the DNA damage response leads to changes in AS profiles in genes encoding components involved in DNA repair, cell-cycle control, and apoptosis (Dutertre et al., 2010; Paronetto et al., 2011; Paronetto et al., 2014). An example is the splicing of BCL2L1, a member of the Bcl-2 family, which generates two isoforms, BCL-xL and BCL-xS, that have opposing functions in apoptosis; the first prevents apoptosis whereas the latter promotes it (Boise et al., 1993). Splicing of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-xS isoform is regulated by SRSF10 in a manner dependent on the ATM and CHK2 DNA damage response pathway (Shkreta et al., 2011) (Table 1). Below we further discuss several key players in the DNA damage response pathway that have been linked both with splicing and aging, including BRCA1, ATM, PRMT5, and PARP1.

4.4.1 | BRCA1

BRCA1 is a protein that maintains genomic stability, controls cell-cycle checkpoint activation, directs homologous recombination-mediated DNA double-strand break repair, and regulates transcription (Wu et al., 2010). BRCA1 germline mutations are associated with an increase in breast cancer risk in early adulthood until ages 30–40 years (Kuchenbaecker et al., 2017). Female BRCA carrier also have lower ovarian reserve, often experience premature menopause and increased ovarian aging (Ben-Aharon et al., 2018; Finch et al., 2013; Oktay et al., 2010; Rzepka-Gorska et al., 2006). Mice with homozygous Brca1 deletions display higher levels of cellular senescence and apoptosis and are embryonically lethal (Sharan et al., 1997; Xu et al., 2001); additionally Brca1+/− p53+/− mice display multiple premature aging phenotypes, such as osteoporosis, atrophy, kyphosis, decreased body weight, and increased tumor incidence (Cao et al., 2003). BRCA1 broadly functions as a scaffolding protein, facilitating the assembly of multiple and distinct multiprotein complexes, with various functions within the DNA damage response. However, following DNA damage, BRCA1 can also form a complex with mRNA splicing proteins via BCLAF1 (Savage et al., 2014). BCLAF1 promotes resistance to DNA damage and is required for efficient DNA repair and maintenance of genomic stability. The BRCA1/BCLAF1 interaction mediates the formation of a BRCA1-mRNA splicing complex, which drives the splicing of a subset of genes following DNA damage, including ATRIP, BACH1, and EXO1 (Savage et al., 2014).

4.4.2 | ATM

Another factor involved in resolving double-stranded DNA breaks is ATM, a signaling kinase that acts upstream of p53. ATM activation is also a marker of cellular aging and a precursor to replicative senescence in primary human cells (Bakkenist et al., 2004). ATM and ATM-related DNA damage response proteins levels progressively decline with replicative senescence in human primary cells and with age in murine brain tissues (Qian et al., 2018). Treatment with chloroquine, a compound that increases ATM activity, delays aging and extends lifespan in C. elegans, as well as in a short-lived mouse model of progeria (Qian et al., 2018). Interestingly, the core spliceosome can be both a target and an effector of non-canonical ATM signaling (Tresini et al., 2015). Transcription-blocking DNA lesions promote chromatin displacement of late-stage spliceosomes and initiate a dependent positive feedback loop via ATM. Spliceosome displacement leads to R-loop formation triggered by pausing of RNA polymerase. In turn, R-loops activate ATM, which signals to impede spliceosome organization and augment ultraviolet irradiation-triggered AS at the genome-wide level (Tresini et al., 2015). The DNA-activated kinases ATM and ATR phosphorylate hundreds of proteins in response to ionizing radiation, including several hnRNP and SR proteins (Matsuoka et al., 2007). In addition, ATM knockdown regulates the levels of several SFs, including SRSF1, SRSF2, SRSF3, SRSF7, TRA2β, HNRNPD, HNRNPA1, and LSM14A (Holly et al., 2013).

4.4.3 | PRMT5

Another protein linking double-strand break repair, aging, and splicing is the arginine N-methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5). This enzyme catalyzes the symmetrical arginine dimethylation of histones and non-histone substrates, including essential components of the spliceosome SmB, SmD1, and SmD3. PRMT5 depletion or inhibition induces DNA damage and genomic instability in a variety of tissues (Clarke et al., 2017; Hamard et al., 2018). Arginine methylation is required to maintain cells in a proliferation state and plays a key role in the maintenance of stem cells, cellular senescence, and premature aging (Blanc &amp; Richard, 2017). The loss of PRMT5 leads to cellular senescence in glioblastoma and osteosarcoma models (Banasavadi-Siddegowda et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020). The loss of arginine methylation also leads to the depletion and exhaustion of stem cells in adulthood, and PRMT5 is required for normal adult hematopoiesis (Liu et al., 2015). Moreover, PRMT5 levels are regulated in an age-dependent manner, with a decline in testis, thymus, kidney, lung, and heart from 24-month-old as compared to 6-month-old rats (Hong et al., 2012). Conversely, PRMT5 levels are upregulated in cartilage from older patients with osteoarthritis, a whole-joint disease which occurs in 50% of the population ≥65 years of age (Dong et al., 2020). Mechanistically, PRMT5 depletion leads to aberrant splicing of the multifunctional histone-modifying and DNA-repair factor TIP60/KAT5, which in turn impairs homologous recombination (Hamard et al., 2018). This deficiency in homologous recombination creates a vulnerability in cells, as they increasingly rely on poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes to repair their DNA; and PRMT5 and PARP inhibitors have synergistic effects on cancer cells (Hamard et al., 2018).

4.4.4 | PARP1

Finally, PARPs are a family of DNA repair factors involved in the response to single-stranded DNA breaks and associated with tumor biology, oxidative stress, inflammatory, metabolic diseases, and mammalian longevity (Bai, 2015). First, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 13 mammalian species strongly correlates with their maximum lifespan, and declines with age in both humans and rodents (Grube &amp; Burkle, 1992). Moreover, Parp1−/− mice and cells are hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents and display increased spontaneous genomic instability, and Parp1−/− animals age moderately faster compared to wild-type control (Piskunova et al., 2008). Finally, treatment of human endothelial progenitor cells with a small molecule inhibitor of PARP1 leads to increased SIRT1 activity, decreased p53 acetylation, and attenuated production of stress-induced senescent cells (Zha et al., 2018). In addition to its role in aging, PARP1 has also been linked with splicing. First, PARP-1 binds to RNA, SFs, and chromatin, and might serve as a gene regulatory hub to facilitate co-transcriptional splicing, possibly by bridging chromatin to RNA and recruiting SFs (Krietsch et al., 2012; Matveeva et al., 2016; Melikishvili et al., 2017). Second, it can also influence AS decisions through the regulation of RNA polymerase II elongation (Matveeva et al., 2019). Third, PARP-1 binds to SF3B1, a member of the U2 spliceosomal complex, and both are found together at nucleosomes (Matveeva et al., 2016). Knockdown of PARP-1 decreases SF3B1 association with nucleosomes, implicating PARP1 in stabilizing the SF3B1-nucleosome complex. Depletion of PARP-1 or inhibition of its PARylation activity also results in changes in AS of a specific subset of genes, including genes involved in RNA and protein processing (Matveeva et al., 2016). Moreover, upon activation, PARP-1 generates poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR), which facilitates the recruitment of DNA repair factors. Interestingly, several SFs have been identified as PAR-binding proteins, including NONO, hnRNPA1, RBMX, and SRSF1, and are recruited at sites of DNA damage (Krietsch et al., 2012; Malanga et al., 2008). Upon PAR-dependent recruitment, SF NONO stimulates nonhomologous end joining and represses homologous recombination (Krietsch et al., 2012). Finally, SFs are themselves PARP-1 substrates and PARylation regulates the assembly-disassembly dynamics of RNP granules containing disease-related RNA-binding proteins, including hnRNPA1 and TDP-43 (Duan et al., 2019). hnRNPA1 can both be PARylated and bind to PARylated proteins or PAR. PARylation of hnRNPA1 controls its nucleocytoplasmic transport, whereas PAR-binding regulates its association with stress granules and phase separation (Duan et al., 2019). Given the links between DNA damage and aging, as well as between SFs and aging, one could imagine that age-related changes in SF levels could perturb the ability of PARP-1 to properly function and contribute to aging phenotypes.

4.5 | Inflammation and splicing

Aging is accompanied by a decrease in adaptive immunity and the development of inflammaging, which contributes to the pathogenesis of age-related diseases (Franceschi et al., 2018; Ramos-Casals et al., 2003). This state of mild chronic inflammation, revealed by elevated levels of inflammatory biomarkers such as C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 (IL-6), is associated with and predictive of many aging phenotypes—changes in body composition, energy production and utilization, metabolic homeostasis, immune senescence, and neuronal health. Inflammation also leads to increased levels of ROS which can induce oxidative stress, a key component in chronic inflammation. Aged cells display increased levels of oxidant-damaged DNA, and the resulting oxidative stress leads to activation of pro-inflammatory pathways (Liguori et al., 2018).

4.5.1 | Immune response and spliced isoforms

Although the effects of inflammaging on posttranscriptional gene regulation are not fully characterized yet, AS of immune signaling molecules is found altered in pathological conditions and in response to acute or chronic inflammation across multiple immune cell types (Martinez et al., 2012; Martinez &amp; Lynch, 2013). Immune-activated AS events impact genes with known functions in immune cell biology, including cytokines and cell surface receptors, kinases, phosphatases, and adapter proteins (e.g., CD3, CD28, CD8, CTLA-4, MAP4K2, MAP3K7, MAP2K7, CD45, VAV1), transcription factors controlling inflammatory and antiviral responses (e.g., NFKB1 or STAT2), chromatin modifying enzymes (e.g., LEF1, ATF2, GATA3, RUNX1, EHMT2), or RNA binding proteins (Martinez et al., 2012; Martinez &amp; Lynch, 2013; Rotival et al., 2019). In human monocytes, immune activation triggers a remodeling of the isoform repertoire, half of which correspond to switches between two functional protein-coding isoforms, suggesting AS-driven changes in downstream signaling potential (Rotival et al., 2019).

Several spliced molecules are of particular interest in the context of the immune response during aging. The inflammasome sensor NLRP3 is involved in the recognition of triggers that appear during physiological aging and during metabolic stress (Latz &amp; Duewell, 2018). Human NLRP3, but not mouse Nlrp3, is regulated at the AS level to generate two major isoforms, the full-length variant and a variant lacking exon 5 that is unable to interact with NEK7 and hence loses its activity (Hoss et al., 2019) (Table 1). IL-6, an inflammatory marker elevated with aging, alters the splicing patterns of BCL2L1 promoting the pro-apoptotic BCL-xS isoform (Li et al., 2004). Both IL-6 and its receptor, IL-6R, are also regulated by AS. The soluble forms of IL-6R (sIL-6R) can be generated either by limited proteolysis or by AS of the receptor (Horiuchi et al., 1994; Lamas et al., 2013; Lust et al., 1992) (Table 1).

4.5.2 | Chronic inflammation and spliced isoforms

Chronic inflammation and several AS isoforms with pro-inflammatory functions have been implicated in neurodegenerative and age-related diseases, including Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, and Alzheimer’s. An example in rheumatoid arthritis is IL-32, a proinflammatory cytokine that exists in six AS isoforms which differ in their potency to control inflammation, with IL-32γ being the most and IL-32β the least active isoform (Heinhuis et al., 2011) (Table 1).

Another chronic inflammatory autoimmune disorder, multiple sclerosis, has been associated with AS variants in the interleukin-7 receptor ILR7 that enhances skipping of exon 6 (Evsyukova et al., 2010; Gregory et al., 2007), increasing AS of the secreted form of the receptor sIL7R and its levels in plasma (Hoe et al., 2010; Lundstrom et al., 2013) (Table 1). ILR7 splicing is regulated by DDX39B, a SF which itself is also a risk allele for multiple sclerosis, and shows significant epistasis with the ILR7 risk variant (Galarza-Munoz et al., 2017). Elevated levels of sIL7R exacerbate disease severity in an experimental mouse model of multiple sclerosis, presumably by enhancing the activity or bioavailability of IL-7 (Lundstrom et al., 2013). Moreover, IL7R gene expression and its interacting partners have been associated with human healthy aging and familial longevity in the Leiden Longevity Study (Passtoors et al., 2012; Passtoors et al., 2015). First, relative to controls, “healthy agers,” that is, nonagenarian siblings and their offspring, exhibit reduced IL7R expression in blood. Second, higher IL7R gene expression levels, in both the nonagenarians and middle-aged individuals, associated with better prospective survival. These findings suggest that while gene expression levels of IL7R decrease with chronological age, higher IL7R expression levels could indicate a more “youthful profile” and thus better health (Passtoors et al., 2015). Further evidence that IL7 signaling may contribute to biological aging and longevity is that it is closely connected to mTOR signaling. For example, IL7 induces phosphorylation of the mTORC1 targets S6 and 4EBP1 (Brown et al., 2007), whereas mTORC2 suppresses IL7R gene expression by regulating FoxO1 phosphorylation (Lazorchak et al., 2010).

Finally, susceptibility to multiple sclerosis is also associated with the presence of a single nucleotide polymorphism that increases AS of exon 4 in CD45 at least in a subset of patients (Jacobsen et al., 2000). CD45 is a hematopoietic receptor-like tyrosine phosphatase that sets the threshold for signal transduction from immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif-containing receptors, such as the T cell receptor. AS of exons 4, 5, and 6 produces distinct protein isoforms, which differ in their signaling potential (Shakola et al., 2015), and is regulated in a cell lineage- and stage-specific fashion (Ergun et al., 2013) by several SFs, including hnRNP proteins (Lynch &amp; Weiss, 2001; Motta-Mena et al., 2011; Oberdoerffer et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2013) (Table 1).

4.5.3 | Other spliced isoforms associated with inflammation

Other inflammation-related events include AS of: (i) interleukin-15 receptor, ILR15, a modulator of interleukin-15 signaling, and whose main isoform is localized in the nuclear membrane (Shakola et al., 2015), whereas deletion of exon 2 leads to a retention of the receptor in the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, and cytoplasmic vesicles (Dubois et al., 1999) (Table 1); (ii) interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein, IL-1RAP, an essential component of receptor complexes mediating immune responses to interleukin-1 family cytokines. IL-1RAP exists in two isoforms in the brain, IL-1RAcP and IL-1RAcPb, differing in the C-terminal region, and which play a role in the interplay between inflammation and neuronal survival (Smith et al., 2009; Yoshida et al., 2012) (Table 1); (iii) the cell adhesion molecule-1, CADM1, a member of the Ig superfamily, is spliced into four membrane-spanning isoforms that differ in the region upstream of the transmembrane domain, or a soluble isoform (Shakola et al., 2015) (Table 1). CADM1d, as the predominantly expressed isoform in mature cerebrum, combined with its role in enhancing nerve-mast cell interaction, could lead to exacerbated neurogenic inflammation (Shakola et al., 2015). Interestingly the Cadm1 gene is differentially methylated in old versus young hematopoietic stem cells (Sun et al., 2014).

4.6 | Epigenetics and splicing

DNA methylation involves the addition of a methyl group on position 5 of cytosine by DNA methyltransferases to form 5-methylcytosines (Li &amp; Zhang, 2014). In mammals, the major site for methylation is CpG dinucleotides; and CpG-rich regions, called CpG islands, frequently occur near promoters (Jones &amp; Liang, 2009). Hypermethylated CpG islands in promoters are associated with gene silencing, whereas hypermethylated gene bodies increase gene expression (Li &amp; Zhang, 2014). Strikingly, DNA methylation patterns change with age and age-related diseases (Ashapkin et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2015). Aged tissues and cells exhibit increased genome-wide hypomethylation at non-CpG islands and promoter-specific hypermethylation (Fraga &amp; Esteller, 2007; Maegawa et al., 2010). The Horvath epigenetic clock, an algorithm that measures age using DNA, utilizes the methylation status of 353 CpGs to predict the chronological age of humans across multiple tissues (Horvath, 2013). Interestingly, the CpGs used in the Horvath epigenetic clock are frequently related to splice sites, suggesting a link between epigenetics and splicing regulation during aging (Malousi et al., 2018). While it is unclear if cause or consequence, CpGs associated with a single mRNA transcript are more methylated than sites associate with many transcripts (Malousi et al., 2018). Further investigation is required to understand the connection between age-related changes in methylation and downstream changes in AS.

4.6.1 | Methylation and splicing

Several studies support a strong link between splicing and methylation. First, reducing DNA methylation by either knocking down DNA methyltransferase proteins or treating with the DNA demethylation agent 5′-aza-2′-deoxycytidine alters AS patterns in honey bees, human cell lines, and mouse embryonic cells (Li-Byarlay et al., 2013; Maunakea et al., 2013; Yearim et al., 2015). Second, in multiple species and tissues, exonic sequences exhibit higher levels of methylation than surrounding intronic sequences (Chodavarapu et al., 2010; Gelfman et al., 2013; Khare et al., 2012; Lyko et al., 2010). Third, AS exons have lower levels of methylation than constitutively spliced exons (Choi et al., 2010; Gelfman et al., 2013); yet AS exons that are included tend to exhibit higher levels of methylation than those that are skipped (Flores et al., 2012; Maunakea et al., 2013; Song et al., 2017). However, the link between methylation level and exon inclusion is not linear, and methylation has been shown to promote both inclusion as well as skipping of AS exons (Wan et al., 2013; Yearim et al., 2015). The functional significance of methylation at constitutive exons has been questioned; indeed triple-knockout of Dnmt1/3a/3b in mouse embryonic stem cells had relatively little impact on splicing of constitutive exons, but a profound effect on AS exons (Yearim et al., 2015) Similarly, targeted demethylation using CRISPR-guided DNMT3A, a DNA methyltransferase, or TET1, a component of the demethylation system, alters AS of reporter minigenes in a position dependent manner, with exon-body methylation having a greater effect than intron methylation (Shayevitch et al., 2018). Therefore, methylation at exons might serve as a “fine-tuning” splicing element, and strong splice site consensus sequences at constitutive exons might be less susceptible to methylation induced splicing modulation (Yearim et al., 2015).

Though the underlying mechanisms of methylation-mediated splicing regulation are still debated, there are two working models of how DNA methylation might impact splicing: (i) methylation might recruit SFs to splice sites; or (ii) methylation may alter the kinetics of transcription, and due to the co-transcriptional nature of splicing this could in turn affect AS (Iannone &amp; Valcarcel, 2013). In support of the first model, heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), a family of proteins which interacts with H3K9me3 histone marks via their chromodomains, can also recruit SFs, including SRSF3 and several hnRNP proteins, to sites of methylation in mouse ES cells (Yearim et al., 2015). HP1 impacts AS of a subset of exons, silencing or enhancing exon recognition in a position-dependent manner (Yearim et al., 2015). In support of the second hypothesis, in the absence of DNA methylation, binding of the DNA-binding factor CTCF to CD45 exon 5 slows the elongation rate of RNA polymerase II, thus altering the kinetics of transcription, and promotes exon inclusion in human lymphocytes (Shukla et al., 2011). Conversely, methylation blocks CTCF binding and promotes skipping of the CD45 alternative exon 5. Similarly, depletion of the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 leads to AS misregulation in human fibroblasts and colorectal cancer cells (Maunakea et al., 2013). MeCP2 might AS by recruiting histone deacetylases to histones and change RNA polymerase II kinetics, thus promoting exon inclusion (Maunakea et al., 2013). MeCP2 was also found to regulate AS patterns in mouse neurons, and to interact with transcriptional regulators, SFs, and chromatin-related modifiers (Cheng et al., 2017). MeCP2 could therefore additionally impact AS by acting as a scaffolding protein that bridges splicing and chromatin regulators (Cheng et al., 2017).

4.6.2 | Histone modifications and splicing

Histone modifications, both acetylation and methylation, are other epigenetic marks that change with age and are often associated with specific transcriptional states (Luco et al., 2010; McCauley &amp; Dang, 2014; Michalak et al., 2019). With age, chromatin can take on a more “open” conformation due to increased histone acetylation and reduced histone levels at specific targets (McCauley &amp; Dang, 2014). For example, age-related decline in expression of the histone deacetylase SIRT1 has been observed in yeast, mouse, and rat, and putatively linked to age-associated increases in H4K16 acetylation and altered transcriptional silencing (Braidy et al., 2011; Dang et al., 2009; Gong et al., 2014). In addition, inducible knockout of SIRT1 in neural stem cells resulted in 440 differentially expressed exons, with many of these AS changes occurring in genes related to cell cycle and DNA damage repair (Wang, Wang, et al., 2018). Further linking histone levels and splicing, knockdown of the stem-loop binding protein SLBP decreases the levels of H2B and H3 histones, increases transcription elongation rate, and alters AS patterns (Jimeno-Gonzalez et al., 2015). Moreover, increased levels of histone acetylation H3K9 in gene bodies lead to exon skipping in depolarizing neurons (Schor et al., 2009).

Furthermore, the enzymes that regulate the deposition of histone modifications, histone deacetylases, are themselves alternatively spliced. For example, SIRT1, the enzyme that regulates primary acetylated lysine 16 of histone 4 (H4K16ac), undergoes AS to generate an isoform lacking exon 8. This shorter isoform retains minimal deacetylase activity and exhibits distinct stress sensitivity, RNA/protein stability, and protein-protein interactions compared to full-length SIRT1 (Lynch et al., 2010). AS of SIRT1-ΔExon8 is regulated by p53, and can in return repress p53 expression (Lynch et al., 2010). This stress-sensitive splicing of SIRT1 might be influenced by a stress-induced downregulation of SRSF2 levels (Lynch et al., 2010). However, TIA1/TIAL1 and HuR have also been implicated in promoting exon 8 inclusion and skipping respectively (Deschenes &amp; Chabot, 2017). Another isoform of SIRT1, lacking exons 2–9, is regulated at the splicing level in a p53-dependent manner, as well as at the translational level by CELF2 (Shah et al., 2012). This SIRT1-ΔExon2–9 isoform regulates p53 protein levels in non-stress conditions (Shah et al., 2012). The described SIRT1 spliced isoforms have diminished deacetylase activity, therefore suggesting that SIRT1 might exhibit a deacetylase-independent function, and its role in aging should be further investigated.

Finally, methylated histones located in exons near intronic regions are hypothesized to play a role in pre-mRNA splicing (Kolasinska-Zwierz et al., 2009; Wilhelm et al., 2011). Internal exons exhibit strong nucleosome-positioning signal, and these nucleosomes are enriched in trimethylated histone 3 lysine 36 (H3K36me3) marks (Andersson et al., 2009; Huff et al., 2010). In addition, proteins that bind the H3K36me3 mark can recruit SFs to the pre-mRNA, such as the chromatin-associated protein MRG15 which also binds PTB (Luco et al., 2010), or the short isoform of the chromatin-associated protein Psip1 (p52) which interacts with SRSF1 (Pradeepa et al., 2012), and can lead to downstream AS changes in target pre-mRNAs. Further linking histones, splicing and aging, the H3K36me3 mark plays a role in longevity in C. elegans, in which inactivation of methyltransferase met-1 decreased global H3K36me3 marks and shortened lifespan (Pu et al., 2015). The link between splicing and epigenetic regulation may be bidirectional, with histone methylation impacting the recruitment of SFs as described above, but also with AS patterns affecting the positioning of modifications of histones themselves (de Almeida et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2011).

5 | SPLICING AND AGE-RELATED DISEASES

Alterations in AS have been causatively implicated in a number of human diseases, several of which display premature aging phenotypes or increase in incidence with age (Table 2).

5.1 | Neurodegenerative diseases

The brain exhibits unique AS patterns which contribute to every step of nervous system development, including cell-fate decisions, neuronal migration, axon guidance, and synaptogenesis (Weyn-Vanhentenryck et al., 2018). Among age-related disorders, Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by progressive neurodegenerative phenotypes leading to memory loss and dementia, possibly caused by aggregation of amyloid beta in the brain (Kandalepas &amp; Vassar, 2014; Zheng &amp; Koo, 2011).

5.1.1 | Spliced isoforms and their regulators associated with Alzheimer’s disease

AS isoforms have been identified in Alzheimer’s patients and model systems. For example, the BACE transcript encoding β-secretase, a key enzyme that degrades the amyloid precursor protein into amyloid beta, undergoes extensive AS, generating at least four distinct isoforms (Fisette et al., 2012; Mowrer &amp; Wolfe, 2008). In addition, several studies reported differences in BACE isoforms when comparing young and old mice (Stilling et al., 2014; Zohar et al., 2005).

Furthermore, a comprehensive analysis of AS patterns in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of 450 subjects from two aging cohorts revealed that dysregulation of AS is a feature of Alzheimer’s disease and is, in some cases, genetically driven (Raj et al., 2018). The 84 significantly associated AS events include genes that have been previously shown to be associated with Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis such as phosphofructokinase (PFKP), the α/β-hydrolase fold protein gene NDRG family member 2 (NDRG2), and the amyloid beta precursor protein (APP) (Mitchelmore et al., 2004; Tollervey, Wang, et al., 2011), as well as novel genes such as the Protein Tyrosine Kinase 2 Beta (PTK2B), or genes in known genome-wide association study loci such as PICALM, which codes for a clathrin assembly protein, or CLU, which encodes a secreted chaperone that prevents aggregation of non-native proteins (Raj et al., 2018). These splicing events were enriched in binding sites from 18 RNA binding proteins, including PTBP1, HNRNPC, CPSF7 and ELAVL1 (Raj et al., 2018). Notably, PTBP1 and SRSF1 can also regulate splicing of CD33, leading to an isoform associated with Alzheimer’s risk (van Bergeijk et al., 2019); whereas ELAVL1 has been previously linked with splicing regulation of BIN1 and PICALM in neuronal cells (Scheckel et al., 2016), and hnRNPC with translational regulation of APP mRNA (Borreca et al., 2016). These studies suggest that Alzheimer’s disease-related perturbations in AS are not simply owing to spliceosomal failure but rather that specific genes are reproducibly affected in a specific manner.

Finally, autosomal-dominant familial Alzheimer’s disease is caused by variants in presenilin 1 (PSEN1), presenilin 2 (PSEN2), and APP genes. Skipping of exons in PSEN1 or PSEN2 genes, which could lead to the expression of deleterious protein products, has been linked with the development of Alzheimer’s disease (Braggin et al., 2019; De Jonghe et al., 1999; Love et al., 2015; Nornes et al., 2008; Sato et al., 1999). APP exon 7 containing isoforms, which are regulated by SF members of the RBFOX protein family (Alam et al., 2014), are elevated in brain tissue and can activate the intracellular domain of APP as well as beta secretase and could contribute to the accumulation of toxic β-amyloid peptide (Belyaev et al., 2010).

5.1.2 | Spliced isoforms of Tau

Splicing of Tau, a microtubule-associated protein encoded by the MAPT gene, has been linked with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, and can also contribute to Alzheimer’s disease (Hutton et al., 1998; Varani et al., 1999). AS modulates Tau function in normal brain by altering the domains of the protein, thereby influencing its localization, conformation and posttranslational modifications and hence its availability and affinity for microtubules and other ligands (Liu &amp; Gong, 2008). Changes in the Tau protein isoform ratios lead to the formation of neurofibrillary tangle aggregates, characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies (Chen et al., 2010).

Tau AS is regulated by a variety of SFs, including several SR proteins (Liu &amp; Gong, 2008). Additionally, components of the U1 snRNP co-aggregate with Tau in neurofibrillary tangles in postmortem brain tissues from Alzheimer’s patients (Bai et al., 2013; Hales et al., 2014), Mapt transgenic mice (Maziuk et al., 2018; Vanderweyde et al., 2016), and in vitro (Bishof et al., 2018). Finally, a screen of candidate genes from Alzheimer’s-associated human genomic loci discovered that SmB, the fly ortholog of human SNRPN, modulates Tau-mediated neurotoxicity (Shulman et al., 2014). Follow-up studies in flies demonstrated that Tau expression triggers reductions in multiple core and U1-specific spliceosomal proteins, and genetic disruption of SF SmB, U1-70K, and U1A, enhances Tau-mediated neurodegeneration (Hsieh et al., 2019). Loss of function in SmB decreased survival, progressive locomotor impairment, and neuronal loss, independent of Tau toxicity (Hsieh et al., 2019). Interestingly, RNA-seq revealed similar profiles of AS errors in SmB mutant and Tau transgenic flies, as well as cryptic splicing errors in association with neurofibrillary tangle burden in human brains (Hsieh et al., 2019). Several other SFs have been implicated in neurodegenerative disorders, including TIA-1 that co-localizes with hyperphosphorylated Tau and aggravates Tau pathology (Vanderweyde et al., 2016), but also SFPQ which is recruited into TIA-1-positive stress granules after oxidative stress induction, and colocalizes with Tau (Younas et al., 2020). Hundreds of splicing quantitative trait loci have been identified in distinct human brain regions, including one that disrupts a putative binding site for RBFOX2 and increases inclusion of MAPT exon 3 in cerebellar tissues (Zhang, Yang, et al., 2020). Small molecules targeting AS of Tau are currently in development and can rescue disease-relevant AS of Tau pre-mRNA in a variety of cellular systems, including primary neurons (Chen et al., 2020).

5.2 | Progeria and premature aging diseases

Progeria, or HGPS, is a premature aging disease associated with a high incidence of age-related disorders, such as car-diovascular impairment and atherosclerosis (Hisama et al., 2011; Merideth et al., 2008). One of the most common forms of HGPS exhibits a silent mutation in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A and C proteins. This mutation activates a cryptic splice site and leads to the production of a truncated spliced isoform, named progerin, which lacks 150 nucleotides and encodes a protein with impaired nuclear membrane functions (Hisama et al., 2011; Merideth et al., 2008). Progerin is not only expressed in HGPS patients, but also accumulates during normal aging (Ashapkin et al., 2019). AS of progerin is controlled by multiple SFs, including SRSF1 and SRSF6 (Lopez-Mejia et al., 2011). Splice-switching therapies that prevent or reverse pathogenic Lmna isoforms are currently being tested in HGPS models. Antisense morpholino-based therapy can reduce the accumulation of progerin and its associated nuclear defects, improving the phenotype of HGPS mouse models and substantially extending their life span (Osorio et al., 2011).

Splicing analysis of a mouse model of HGPS, containing an inducible LMNA mutation, revealed that the number of alternatively spliced genes increases with age (Rodriguez et al., 2016). Two-thirds of the age-related events were specific to this mouse model and not detected in wild-type aged animals (Rodriguez et al., 2016). Spliced genes in HGPS were overrepresented in relevant functions such as skin development, ECM-receptor interaction pathway, connective tissue disorders, and inflammatory diseases (Rodriguez et al., 2016).

5.3 | Aging and cancer

Age is the greatest risk factor for developing cancer (de Magalhaes, 2013), and 60% of cancer patients are 65 or older. Most cancers can be considered an aging disease, although the shared mechanisms underpinning the two processes remain unclear. Several of the hallmarks of aging and cancer are shared, including genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic changes, loss of proteostasis, decreased nutrient sensing, and altered metabolism, but also cellular senescence and stem cell function (Aunan et al., 2017). Gene expression analyses have been used to study cancer and aging, but only a few studies have investigated the relationship between gene expression changes in these two processes (Aramillo Irizar et al., 2018; Chatsirisupachai et al., 2019). Studies thus far suggest that the transcriptional alterations observed in degenerative aging diseases and cancer may affect overlapping sets of genes, but that they are regulated in opposite directions (Aramillo Irizar et al., 2018; Chatsirisupachai et al., 2019). Another feature common to both aging and cancer is the dysregulation of the splicing machinery (Urbanski et al., 2018). Tumor-associated alterations in RNA splicing result either from mutations in splicing-regulatory elements or from changes in components of the splicing machinery.

5.3.1 | Mutations in spliceosomal genes

Recurrent somatic mutations in spliceosomal genes SF3B1, U2AF1, and SRSF2 occur in human tumors, most commonly in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Papaemmanuil et al., 2011; Yoshida et al., 2011). Mutations in each of these occur as heterozygous point mutations at specific residues, suggesting gain-of-function alterations, and are mutually exclusive with one another, presumably due to redundant effects and/or a limit on cellular tolerance of disrupted spliceosome function. Interestingly, the two most frequently mutated SFs are SF3B1, a core component of U2 snRNP involved in branch point site selection, and SRSF2, a serine/arginine-rich (SR) protein that acts both in alternative and constitutive splicing and interacts with U1 snRNP. Mutant SF3B1 is associated with decreased splicing fidelity and branchpoint recognition, leading to cryptic 3′ splice site selection (Carrocci et al., 2017; Darman et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2016). Conversely, mutations affecting SRSF2 alter its RNA binding preference in a sequence-specific manner, favoring splicing at C-rich sequences while having reduced affinity for G-rich sequences, and thereby alter the efficiency of exon inclusion (Kim et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). Cells expressing mutant SF3B1 or SRSF2 display aberrant AS of mRNAs that promote NFκB signaling (Lee et al., 2018). Furthermore, SF3B1 and SRSF2 mutations elicit distinct effects on splicing and are synthetically lethal due to the cumulative impact on hematopoietic stem cell survival and quiescence (Lee et al., 2018).

The majority of patients with MDS are older than 55 years of age, and SF mutations are typically thought to be early events in MDS pathogenesis (Mossner et al., 2016; Pellagatti et al., 2016). Aging is associated with an accumulation of somatic mutations in normal dividing cells, including hematopoietic stem cells. Interestingly, large-scale genetic studies have revealed the prevalence of cancer-associated clonal SF mutations in blood of individuals without neoplasia, although at a lower frequency than mutations in epigenetic regulators TET2 and DNMT3A (Genovese et al., 2014; Jaiswal &amp; Ebert, 2019; Xie et al., 2014). These findings suggest that the presence of SF mutations can result in clonal expansion in aging human bone marrow. Yet, hematopoietic stem cells from mice mutant for spliceosomal genes have a competitive disadvantage in vivo, unlike the clonal expansion observed in humans with these mutations (Jaiswal &amp; Ebert, 2019).

5.3.2 | Expression changes in splicing regulatory factors

In solid tumors, SFs exhibit frequent changes at the copy number or expression levels but are rarely mutated (Urbanski et al., 2018). SFs bind directly to pre-mRNA and regulate their downstream targets in a concentration-dependent manner (Long &amp; Caceres, 2009); thus, changes in SF levels cause AS deregulation in tumors even in the absence of mutations. Changes in the expression of SFs from the SR protein family have been detected in several solid tumor types. For example, causal links have been identified between AS misregulation and breast cancer (Anczukow et al., 2012; Anczukow et al., 2015; Climente-Gonzalez et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2020; Koedoot et al., 2019; Sebestyen et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2014; Yoshida et al., 2015; Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2020). Moreover, several SFs are upregulated in breast tumors, and are sufficient to promote tumor initiation in breast cancer models (Anczukow et al., 2012; Anczukow et al., 2015; Karni et al., 2007; Park et al., 2019). A subset of these SF alterations are due to gene amplification (Karni et al., 2007) or to changes in their transcriptional regulators which include the MYC oncogene (Anczukow et al., 2012; Anczukow &amp; Krainer, 2015; Das et al., 2012; Park et al., 2019). Two-thirds of all breast cancers occur above the age of 50 (Benz, 2008), making age the greatest risk factor for this disease in women. Aging is associated with the gradual accumulation of somatic mutations and of epigenetic, transcriptional, and posttranscriptional changes across cell and tissue types (Kenyon, 2010; Li, Shapiro, et al., 2019; Lopez-Otin et al., 2013; Pelissier Vatter et al., 2018). However, the mechanisms through which these aging-related molecular and cellular changes contribute to breast cancer development and risk are poorly understood (Fresques et al., 2019; LaBarge et al., 2016; Yau et al., 2007). Furthermore, how the expression or activity of SFs vary during mammary gland aging—and whether aging-related AS drives functional decline and leads to breast cancer—remains to be determined.

6 | CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE

AS, that is, the process that controls whether an exon or intron is included or skipped in a final mRNA transcript, is clearly altered during aging, across all species and all cell types examined thus far. Given the heterogeneity in AS profiles between tissues, and cell types, but also different aging rates between tissues, one can expect cell-type specific differences in the molecular links between AS and aging. The cumulative evidence that points to tissue- and species-specific heterogeneity in aging-associated AS patterns suggests that the role of AS events in aging may need to be considered on an event-by-event basis. Yet whether aging is a consequence or a driver, or both, of the changes in AS patterns observed in older organisms remains to be determined. A number of technical and conceptual challenges limit our ability to answer this question at the required resolution. First, published AS analyses have often been carried out with differing technologies used to detect AS patterns, or analyzed using distinct computational tools, thus rendering direct comparisons challenging. Second, it is unknown if age-related AS changes arise in a gradual or communitive fashion, or rather appear suddenly at a discrete time point triggered by a specific aging signal. Therefore, the age at which analysis is performed, and the number of timepoints considered, is likely important for detecting key AS patterns in studies with discrete timepoints. Third, model organisms differ in their AS profiles, with &gt;90% of human genes undergoing AS, compared to ~25% in worms and ~65% in mice, rendering cross-species aging comparisons challenging. Moreover, even within the same species, distinct tissues differ in AS patterns during development, as well as with age. Finally, to date, most AS analyses have been carried out using bulk tissues and thus are not well suited for the detection of AS events in specific cell types, which may change in abundance within the tissue with aging. Thus, AS patterns in smaller cell populations may be masked by larger cell populations, and single-cell methods for AS analysis are needed to capture these changes. Finally, the accumulation of mutations that occur with age could impact AS patterns in aged individuals—either by directly impacting the SFs or the splice sites—and impact downstream AS patterns. Nevertheless, understanding the causes and consequences of age-related alterations, possibly at the single-cell level, will provide mechanistic insights into the molecular basis of aging, and might provide novel therapeutic opportunity for age-related diseases or for increased lifespan.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Dr. Taneli Helenius for scientific editing, as well as members of the Anczukow, Ucar, Kornstaje, and Labarge labs for helpful discussion.

Funding information

NIH, Grant/Award Number: T32AG062409A, P30CA034196; The Jackson Laboratory; V Foundation, Grant/Award Number: V2018-018

FIGURE 1 The splicing machinery. (a) Graphical representation of the stepwise assembly of spliceosomal complexes on a pre-mRNA molecule and catalysis of the splicing reaction to generate mature spliced mRNA (5′SS, 5′ splice site; BPS, branch point site; Py-tract, polypyrimidine tract). (b) In addition to core spliceosomal components, regulatory splicing factors (SFs) acting as positive regulators (e.g., SRSF1 to SRFS12, TRA2α and TRA2β), or negative regulators (e.g., HNRNPA1, HNRNPH3, HNRNPM, HNRNPDL, etc.), can bind to exonic or intronic splicing enhancer (ESE or ISE) or silencer (ESS or ISS) sequences to fine tune splicing and promote exon inclusion or skipping. (c) Alternatively spliced sequences can be classified into the following patterns: cassette exon, alternative 5′ or 3′ splice site usage, inclusion of mutually exclusive exons, intron retention, alternative first or last exons. Alternative first exons arise as a result of both alternative promoter usage and alternative splicing, while alternative last exons arise as a result of both alternative polyA usage and alternative splicing

FIGURE 2 Age-related changes in splicing factor (SF) levels detected across multiple studies. Differential expression of genes or proteins implicated in AS regulation, including spliceosomal components, SR proteins, HNRNP proteins, or other regulatory factors, as measured by micro-array, RNA-seq, targeted QPCR, or proteomics, in tissues from young versus old human (h) or mouse (m). Blood samples are (i) human leukocytes (ages ranging from 30- to 104-years old) (Harries et al., 2011); (ii) human peripheral blood (lnCHIANTI study, 30–104-years old) (Holly et al., 2013); (iii) human peripheral blood (SAFHS study, 15–94-years old) (Holly et al., 2013); (iv) human peripheral blood (15–105-years old) (Peters et al., 2015); and (v) human whole blood (PIVUS study, comparing 70- vs. 80-years old) (Balliu et al., 2019). Brain samples are from (i) human pre-frontal cortex and cerebellum (0–98-years old) (Mazin et al., 2013); (ii) human whole brain (16–102-years old) (Tollervey, Curk, et al., 2011); (iii) mouse cortex (postnatal day 7 vs. 21 months) (Weyn-Vanhentenryck et al., 2018); (iv) mouse cerebral cortex (postnatal day 1 vs. day 56) (Kadota et al., 2020); and (v) mouse hippocampus (2 vs. 24 or 29 months) (Stilling et al., 2014). Liver samples are from (i) human liver (1–85-years old) (Chaturvedi et al., 2015); and (ii) mouse hepatocytes (postnatal day 1 vs. day 56) (Kadota et al., 2020) respectively. Mouse skin samples (4 vs. 18 or 28 months) are from Rodriguez et al. (2016). Heart samples are from mouse cardiomyocytes (postnatal day 1 vs. day 56) (Kadota et al., 2020). Skeletal muscle samples are from (i) mouse (4 vs. 18 or 28 months) (Rodriguez et al., 2016); and (ii) human (20–29 years vs. 65–71 years) (Welle et al., 2004); (iii) human (21–27 years vs. 67–75 years) (Welle et al., 2003); and (v) human (GESTALT study, 20–87 years) (Ubaida-Mohien et al., 2019)

FIGURE 3 Age-related splicing alterations. Old versus young tissues and cells exhibit alterations in splicing that can be caused by mutations in, or changes in the levels of, splicing regulatory factors, the latter of which can occur due to copy number changes, or alterations in the epigenetic, transcriptional, posttranscriptional, or posttranslational regulation of SFs in response to signaling changes. These changes in SF levels lead to alterations in alternative splicing (AS) of their downstream targets, promoting events that follow one of the following patterns: cassette exon (CA), alternative 5′ or 3′ splice site selection (A5′SS or A3′SS), inclusion of mutually exclusive exons (MXE), or intron retention (IR). Many of the resulting AS isoforms occur in genes involved in cellular pathways associated with aging hallmarks

FIGURE 4 Splicing events associated with senescence. Senescence hallmarks include senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF), loss of nuclear laminin, increased reactive oxygen species (ROS), expression of senescence associated β-galactosidase (B-Gal), and senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Changes in splicing in TP53, EXOC7, ING1, or ENG gene have been reported to impact these senescence hallmarks. Schematic structures of AS isoforms, along with known SF regulators are shown. For each p53 isoform, the regions alternatively spliced are highlighted, and the protein domain encoded by each exon is indicated (DB, DNA binding domain; OD, oligomerization domain; TD, transactivation domain)

TABLE 1 Isoforms associated with aging hallmarks

Gene namea	Isoform type and nameb	Aging hallmarks	Known SF regulators	References	
TP53	Δ40p53
Δ133p53
p53β	Senescence	SRSF3	Fujita et al. (2009), Horikawa et al. (2014), Maier et al. (2004), Tang et al. (2013)	
ING1	AFE
ING1a/1b	Senescence	Unknown	Soliman et al. (2008), Vieyra et al. (2002)	
ENG	ALE
Exon 13/17	Senescence	SRSF1	Blanco and Bernabeu (2012)	
EXOC7	CA
Exon 7	Senescence	SRSF7	Georgilis et al. (2018)	
SIRT1	CA
Exon 8	Senescence	HUR, TIA, hnRNPA1	Lynch et al. (2010), Wang et al. (2016)	
EXOC7	CA
Exon 7	Senescence	PTBP1	Georgilis et al. (2018)	
LMNA	A5′SS
Exon 11	Telomere attrition
Senescence	SRSF1, SRSF6	Lopez-Mejia et al. (2011)	
hTERT	Multiple	Telomere attrition	NOVA1, PTBP1, SRSF11, hnRNPH2, hnRNPL	Listerman et al. (2013), Ludlow et al. (2018), Sayed et al. (2019)	
RPS6KB1	ALE
Exon 6a,c/7	Metabolism	SRSF1	Mogilevsky et al. (2018)	
MKNK2	ALE
Exon 14a/14b	Metabolism	SRSF1	Mogilevsky et al. (2018)	
mTOR	RI
Intron 5	Metabolism	Sam68	Huot et al. (2012)	
IGF-I	A5′SS/ALE
Exon 5	Metabolism	Unknown	Hameed et al. (2003)	
BCL2L1	A5′SS
Exon 2	Genomic instability
Inflammaging	SRSF1, HNRNPA1, HNRNPA2/B1, PTBP1, RBM4, RBM5, RBM25, RBM10, PTBP1, Sam68	Shkreta et al. (2011)	
NLRP3	CA
Exon 5/7	Inflammaging	Unknown	Hoss et al. (2019), Latz and Duewell (2018)	
IL-6R	CA
Exon 9	Inflammaging	Unknown	Horiuchi et al. (1994), Lamas et al. (2013), Lust et al. (1992)	
IL-32	CA
IL-32γ	Inflammaging	Unknown	Heinhuis et al. (2011)	
IL7R	CA
Exon 6	Inflammaging	DDX39B	Galarza-Munoz et al. (2017)	
CD45	CA
exon 4-5-6	Inflammaging	HNRNPLL	Lynch and Weiss (2001), Motta-Mena et al. (2011), Oberdoerffer et al. (2008), Smith et al. (2013)	
ILR15	CA
Exon 2	Inflammaging	Unknown	Shakola et al. (2015)	
IL-1RAP	ALE
Exon 12/12b	Inflammaging	Unknown	Smith et al. (2009), Yoshida et al. (2012)	
CADM1	CA
Exon 8–9	Inflammaging	Unknown	Shakola et al. (2015)	
a Either human or mouse.

b AS event types are indicated: cassette exon (CA), alternative 5′SS or 3′SS selection (A5′SS or A3′SS), inclusion of mutually exclusive exons (MXE), intron retention (IR), alternative first (AFE) or last (ALE) exon.

TABLE 2 Isoforms associated with age-related diseases

Gene name	Isoforma	Disease	Known regulators	References	
BACE	A5′/3′SS
Exon 3–4	Alzheimer′s	Unknown	Fisette et al. (2012), Mowrer and Wolfe (2008), Stilling et al. (2014), Zohar et al. (2005)	
PFKP	IR
multiple	Alzheimer′s	Unknown	Mitchelmore et al. (2004), Tollervey, Wang, et al. (2011)	
NDRG2	IR
multiple	Alzheimer′s	Unknown	Mitchelmore et al. (2004), Tollervey, Wang, et al. (2011)	
APP	CA
Exon 7/17	Alzheimer′s	RBFOX, ELAVL	Alam et al. (2014), Fragkouli et al. (2017)	
PTK2B	IR
multiple	Alzheimer′s	PTBP1, HNRNPC, CPSF7, ELAVL1	Raj et al. (2018)	
PICALM	IR multiple
CA exon 13	Alzheimer′s	PTBP1, HNRNPC, CPSF7, ELAVL1	Raj et al. (2018), Scheckel et al. (2016)	
CLU	IR multiple	Alzheimer′s	PTBP1, HNRNPC, CPSF7, ELAVL1	Raj et al. (2018)	
CD33	CA
Exon 2	Alzheimer′s	PTBP1, SRSF1	van Bergeijk et al. (2019)	
BIN1	CA
Exon 12a	Alzheimer’s	ELAVL1, SRSF1, HNRNPA2/B1	Scheckel et al. (2016)	
MAPT	CA
Exons 2/3
Exon 10	Alzheimer′s frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17	SRSF1, SRSF2, SRSF3, SRSF3, SRSF6, SRFS7, SRFS9, SRSF11, TRA2B, RBM4, CELF2, CELF3, HNRNPG, HNRPE, PTBP2, RBFOX2	Liu and Gong (2008), Zhang, Yang, et al. (2020)	
PSEN1	CA
Exon 4	Alzheimer′s	Unknown	Braggin et al. (2019), De Jonghe et al. (1999), Love et al. (2015), Nornes et al. (2008), Sato et al. (1999)	
PSEN2	CA
Exon 5	Alzheimer′s	Unknown	Braggin et al. (2019), De Jonghe et al. (1999), Love et al. (2015), Nornes et al. (2008), Sato et al. (1999)	
LMNA	CA
Exon 11	Progeria	SRSF1, SRSF6	Lopez-Mejia et al. (2011)	
a AS event types are indicated: cassette exon (CA), alternative 5′SS or 3′SS selection (A5′SS or A3′SS), inclusion of mutually exclusive exons (MXE), intron retention (IR), alternative first (AFE) or last (ALE) exon.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors have declared no conflicts of interest for this article.

RELATED WIREs ARTICLES

Aging-RNA in development and disease

Connections between chromatin signatures and splicing

Alternative-splicing defects in cancer: Splicing regulators and their downstream targets, guiding the way to novel cancer therapeutics

mRNA methylation in cell senescence

Alternative splicing programming of axon formation


REFERENCES

Adamson B , Smogorzewska A , Sigoillot FD , King RW , &amp; Elledge SJ (2012). A genome-wide homologous recombination screen identifies the RNA-binding protein RBMX as a component of the DNA-damage response. Nature Cell Biology, 14 , 318–328.22344029
Adusumalli S , Ngian ZK , Lin WQ , Benoukraf T , &amp; Ong CT (2019). Increased intron retention is a post-transcriptional signature associated with progressive aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Aging Cell, 18 , e12928.30868713
Alam S , Suzuki H , &amp; Tsukahara T (2014). Alternative splicing regulation of APP exon 7 by RBFox proteins. Neurochemistry International, 78 , 7–17.25125370
Altintas O , Park S , &amp; Lee SJ (2016). The role of insulin/IGF-1 signaling in the longevity of model invertebrates, C. elegans and D. melanogaster. BMB Reports, 49 , 81–92.26698870
Anczukow O , Akerman M , Clery A , Wu J , Shen C , Shirole NH , Raimer A , Sun S , Jensen MA , Hua Y , Allain FH-T , &amp; Krainer AR (2015). SRSF1-regulated alternative splicing in breast cancer. Molecular Cell, 60 , 105–117.26431027
Anczukow O , &amp; Krainer AR (2015). The spliceosome, a potential Achilles heel of MYC-driven tumors. Genome Medicine, 7 , 107.26490253
Anczukow O , Rosenberg AZ , Akerman M , Das S , Zhan L , Karni R , Muthuswamy SK , &amp; Krainer AR (2012). The splicing factor SRSF1 regulates apoptosis and proliferation to promote mammary epithelial cell transformation. Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology, 19 , 220–228.
Andersson R , Enroth S , Rada-Iglesias A , Wadelius C , &amp; Komorowski J (2009). Nucleosomes are well positioned in exons and carry characteristic histone modifications. Genome Research, 19 , 1732–1741.19687145
Angarola B , &amp; Ferguson SM (2020). Coordination of Rheb lysosomal membrane interactions with mTORC1 activation. F1000Res, 9 , F1000.
Aramillo Irizar P , Schauble S , Esser D , Groth M , Frahm C , Priebe S , Baumgart M , Hartmann N , Marthandan S , Menzel U , Müller J , Schmidt S , Ast V , Caliebe A , König R , Krawczak M , Ristow M , Schuster S , Cellerino A , … Kaleta C (2018). Transcriptomic alterations during ageing reflect the shift from cancer to degenerative diseases in the elderly. Nature Communications, 9 , 327.
Ascenzi F , Barberi L , Dobrowolny G , Villa Nova Bacurau A , Nicoletti C , Rizzuto E , Rosenthal N , Scicchitano BM , &amp; Musaro A (2019). Effects of IGF-1 isoforms on muscle growth and sarcopenia. Aging Cell, 18 , e12954.30953403
Ashapkin VV , Kutueva LI , Kurchashova SY , &amp; Kireev II (2019). Are there common mechanisms between the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome and natural aging? Frontiers in Genetics, 10 , 455.31156709
Ashapkin VV , Kutueva LI , &amp; Vanyushin BF (2017). Aging as an epigenetic phenomenon. Current Genomics, 18 , 385–407.29081695
Aunan JR , Cho WC , &amp; Soreide K (2017). The biology of aging and cancer: A brief overview of shared and divergent molecular hallmarks. Aging and Disease, 8 , 628–642.28966806
Back P , Braeckman BP , &amp; Matthijssens F (2012). ROS in aging Caenorhabditis elegans: Damage or signaling? Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, 2012 , 608478.22966416
Bai B , Hales CM , Chen PC , Gozal Y , Dammer EB , Fritz JJ , Wang X , Xia Q , Duong DM , Street C , Cantero G , Cheng D , Jones DR , Wu Z , Li Y , Diner I , Heilman CJ , Rees HD , Wu H , … Peng J (2013). U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex and RNA splicing alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 , 16562–16567.24023061
Bai P (2015). Biology of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases: The factotums of cell maintenance. Molecular Cell, 58 , 947–958.26091343
Bakkenist CJ , Drissi R , Wu J , Kastan MB , &amp; Dome JS (2004). Disappearance of the telomere dysfunction-induced stress response in fully senescent cells. Cancer Research, 64 , 3748–3752.15172978
Balasubramanian P , Howell PR , &amp; Anderson RM (2017). Aging and caloric restriction research: A biological perspective with translational potential. eBioMedicine, 21 , 37–44.28648985
Balliu B , Durrant M , Goede O , Abell N , Li X , Liu B , Gloudemans MJ , Cook NL , Smith KS , Knowles DA , Pala M , Cucca F , Schlessinger D , Jaiswal S , Sabatti C , Lind L , Ingelsson E , &amp; Montgomery SB (2019). Genetic regulation of gene expression and splicing during a 10-year period of human aging. Genome Biology, 20 , 230.31684996
Banasavadi-Siddegowda YK , Russell L , Frair E , Karkhanis VA , Relation T , Yoo JY , Zhang J , Sif S , Imitola J , Baiocchi R , &amp; Kaur B (2017). PRMT5-PTEN molecular pathway regulates senescence and self-renewal of primary glioblastoma neurosphere cells. Oncogene, 36 , 263–274.27292259
Baralle FE , &amp; Giudice J (2017). Alternative splicing as a regulator of development and tissue identity. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology, 18 , 437–451.28488700
Barash Y , Calarco JA , Gao W , Pan Q , Wang X , Shai O , Blencowe BJ , &amp; Frey BJ (2010). Deciphering the splicing code. Nature, 465 , 53–59.20445623
Barzilai N , Huffman DM , Muzumdar RH , &amp; Bartke A (2012). The critical role of metabolic pathways in aging. Diabetes, 61 , 1315–1322.22618766
Belfiore A , Frasca F , Pandini G , Sciacca L , &amp; Vigneri R (2009). Insulin receptor isoforms and insulin receptor/insulin-like growth factor receptor hybrids in physiology and disease. Endocrine Reviews, 30 , 586–623.19752219
Belfiore A , Malaguarnera R , Vella V , Lawrence MC , Sciacca L , Frasca F , Morrione A , &amp; Vigneri R (2017). Insulin receptor isoforms in physiology and disease: An updated view. Endocrine Reviews, 38 , 379–431.28973479
Belyaev ND , Kellett KA , Beckett C , Makova NZ , Revett TJ , Nalivaeva NN , Hooper NM , &amp; Turner AJ (2010). The transcriptionally active amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain is preferentially produced from the 695 isoform of APP in a {beta}-secretase-dependent pathway. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 285 , 41443–41454.20961856
Ben-Aharon I , Levi M , Margel D , Yerushalmi R , Rizel S , Perry S , Sharon E , Hasky N , Abir R , Fisch B , Tobar A , Shalgi R , &amp; Stemmer SM (2018). Premature ovarian aging in BRCA carriers: A prototype of systemic precocious aging? Oncotarget, 9 , 15931–15941.29662617
Benz CC (2008). Impact of aging on the biology of breast cancer. Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology, 66 , 65–74.17949989
Berge EO , Staalesen V , Straume AH , Lillehaug JR , &amp; Lonning PE (2010). Chk2 splice variants express a dominant-negative effect on the wild-type Chk2 kinase activity. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1803 , 386–395.20080130
Berget SM , Moore C , &amp; Sharp PA (1977). Spliced segments at the 5′ terminus of adenovirus 2 late mRNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 74 , 3171–3175.269380
Bhadra M , Howell P , Dutta S , Heintz C , &amp; Mair WB (2020). Alternative splicing in aging and longevity. Human Genetics, 139 , 357–369.31834493
Bishof I , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Kundinger SR , Gearing M , Lah JJ , Levey AI , &amp; Seyfried NT (2018). RNA-binding proteins with basic-acidic dipeptide (BAD) domains self-assemble and aggregate in Alzheimer’s disease. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 293 , 11047–11066.29802200
Blagosklonny MV (2008). Aging: ROS or TOR. Cell Cycle, 7 , 3344–3354.18971624
Blanc RS , &amp; Richard S (2017). Arginine methylation: The coming of age. Molecular Cell, 65 , 8–24.28061334
Blanco FJ , &amp; Bernabéu C (2012). The splicing factor SRSF1 as a marker for endothelial senescence. Frontiers in Physiology, 3 , 54. 10.3389/fphys.2012.00054 . 22470345
Blanco FJ , Grande MT , Langa C , Oujo B , Velasco S , Rodriguez-Barbero A , Perez-Gomez E , Quintanilla M , Lopez-Novoa JM , &amp; Bernabeu C (2008). S-endoglin expression is induced in senescent endothelial cells and contributes to vascular pathology. Circulation Research, 103 , 1383–1392.18974388
Blech-Hermoni Y , &amp; Ladd AN (2013). RNA binding proteins in the regulation of heart development. The International Journal of Biochemistry &amp; Cell Biology, 45 , 2467–2478.23973289
Boise LH , Gonzalez-Garcia M , Postema CE , Ding L , Lindsten T , Turka LA , Mao X , Nunez G , &amp; Thompson CB (1993). bcl-x, a bcl-2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death. Cell, 74 , 597–608.8358789
Bonnal SC , Lopez-Oreja I , &amp; Valcarcel J (2020). Roles and mechanisms of alternative splicing in cancer – Implications for care. Nature Reviews. Clinical Oncology, 17 , 457–474.
Borreca A , Gironi K , Amadoro G , &amp; Ammassari-Teule M (2016). Opposite dysregulation of fragile-X mental retardation protein and heteronuclear ribonucleoprotein C protein associates with enhanced APP translation in Alzheimer disease. Molecular Neurobiology, 53 , 3227–3234.26048669
Botto AEC , Munoz JC , Giono LE , Nieto-Moreno N , Cuenca C , Kornblihtt AR , &amp; Munoz MJ (2020). Reciprocal regulation between alternative splicing and the DNA damage response. Genetics and Molecular Biology, 43 , e20190111.32236390
Braggin JE , Bucks SA , Course MM , Smith CL , Sopher B , Osnis L , Shuey KD , Domoto-Reilly K , Caso C , Kinoshita C , Scherpelz KP , Cross C , Grabowski T , Nik SHM , Newman M , Garden GA , Leverenz JB , Tsuang D , Latimer C , … Jayadev S (2019). Alternative splicing in a presenilin 2 variant associated with Alzheimer disease. Annals of Clinical Translational Neurology, 6 , 762–777.31020001
Braidy N , Guillemin GJ , Mansour H , Chan-Ling T , Poljak A , &amp; Grant R (2011). Age related changes in NAD+ metabolism oxidative stress and Sirt1 activity in wistar rats. PLoS One, 6 , e19194.21541336
Brinegar AE , Xia Z , Loehr JA , Li W , Rodney GG , &amp; Cooper TA (2017). Extensive alternative splicing transitions during postnatal skeletal muscle development are required for calcium handling functions. eLife, 6 , e27192. 10.7554/elife.27192 . 28826478
Brown VI , Hulitt J , Fish J , Sheen C , Bruno M , Xu Q , Carroll M , Fang J , Teachey D , &amp; Grupp SA (2007). Thymic stromal-derived lymphopoietin induces proliferation of pre-B leukemia and antagonizes mTOR inhibitors, suggesting a role for interleukin-7Ralpha signaling. Cancer Research, 67 , 9963–9970.17942929
Busa R , Geremia R , &amp; Sette C (2010). Genotoxic stress causes the accumulation of the splicing regulator Sam68 in nuclear foci of transcriptionally active chromatin. Nucleic Acids Research, 38 , 3005–3018.20110258
Canto C , &amp; Auwerx J (2009). Caloric restriction, SIRT1 and longevity. Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism, 20 , 325–331.19713122
Canto C , Gerhart-Hines Z , Feige JN , Lagouge M , Noriega L , Milne JC , Elliott PJ , Puigserver P , &amp; Auwerx J (2009). AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating NAD+ metabolism and SIRT1 activity. Nature, 458 , 1056–1060.19262508
Cao K , Blair CD , Faddah DA , Kieckhaefer JE , Olive M , Erdos MR , Nabel EG , &amp; Collins FS (2011). Progerin and telomere dysfunction collaborate to trigger cellular senescence in normal human fibroblasts. The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 121 , 2833–2844.21670498
Cao L , Li W , Kim S , Brodie SG , &amp; Deng CX (2003). Senescence, aging, and malignant transformation mediated by p53 in mice lacking the Brca1 full-length isoform. Genes &amp; Development, 17 , 201–213.12533509
Carrocci TJ , Zoerner DM , Paulson JC , &amp; Hoskins AA (2017). SF3b1 mutations associated with myelodysplastic syndromes alter the fidelity of branchsite selection in yeast. Nucleic Acids Research, 45 , 4837–4852.28062854
Chatsirisupachai K , Palmer D , Ferreira S , &amp; de Magalhaes JP (2019). A human tissue-specific transcriptomic analysis reveals a complex relationship between aging, cancer, and cellular senescence. Aging Cell, 18 , e13041.31560156
Chaturvedi P , Neelamraju Y , Arif W , Kalsotra A , &amp; Janga SC (2015). Uncovering RNA binding proteins associated with age and gender during liver maturation. Scientific Reports, 5 , 9512.25824884
Chen JL , Zhang P , Abe M , Aikawa H , Zhang L , Frank AJ , Zembryski T , Hubbs C , Park H , Withka J , Steppan C , Rogers L , Cabral S , Pettersson M , Wager TT , Fountain MA , Rumbaugh G , Childs-Disney JL , &amp; Disney MD (2020). Design, optimization, and study of small molecules that target tau pre-mRNA and affect splicing. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 142 , 8706–8727.32364710
Chen S , Townsend K , Goldberg TE , Davies P , &amp; Conejero-Goldberg C (2010). MAPT isoforms: Differential transcriptional profiles related to 3R and 4R splice variants. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 22 , 1313–1329.
Cheng TL , Chen J , Wan H , Tang B , Tian W , Liao L , &amp; Qiu Z (2017). Regulation of mRNA splicing by MeCP2 via epigenetic modifications in the brain. Scientific Reports, 7 , 42790.28211484
Chodavarapu RK , Feng S , Bernatavichute YV , Chen PY , Stroud H , Yu Y , Hetzel JA , Kuo F , Kim J , Cokus SJ , Casero D , Bernal M , Huijser P , Clark AT , Krämer U , Merchant SS , Zhang X , Jacobsen SE , &amp; Pellegrini M (2010). Relationship between nucleosome positioning and DNA methylation. Nature, 466 , 388–392.20512117
Choi JH , Li Y , Guo J , Pei L , Rauch TA , Kramer RS , Macmil SL , Wiley GB , Bennett LB , Schnabel JL , Taylor KH , Kim S , Xu D , Sreekumar A , Pfeifer GP , Roe BA , Caldwell CW , Bhalla KN , &amp; Shi H (2010). Genome-wide DNA methylation maps in follicular lymphoma cells determined by methylation-enriched bisulfite sequencing. PLoS One, 5 , e13020.20927367
Chow LT , Gelinas RE , Broker TR , &amp; Roberts RJ (1977). An amazing sequence arrangement at the 5′ ends of adenovirus 2 messenger RNA. Cell, 12 , 1–8.902310
Clarke TL , Sanchez-Bailon MP , Chiang K , Reynolds JJ , Herrero-Ruiz J , Bandeiras TM , Matias PM , Maslen SL , Skehel JM , Stewart GS , &amp; Davies CC (2017). PRMT5-dependent methylation of the TIP60 coactivator RUVBL1 is a key regulator of homologous recombination. Molecular Cell, 65 , 900–916.e7.28238654
Climente-Gonzalez H , Porta-Pardo E , Godzik A , &amp; Eyras E (2017). The functional impact of alternative splicing in Cancer. Cell Reports, 20 , 2215–2226.28854369
Colegrove-Otero LJ , Minshall N , &amp; Standart N (2005). RNA-binding proteins in early development. Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 40 , 21–73.15804624
Curran SP , &amp; Ruvkun G (2007). Lifespan regulation by evolutionarily conserved genes essential for viability. PLoS Genetics, 3 , e56.17411345
Dang W , Steffen KK , Perry R , Dorsey JA , Johnson FB , Shilatifard A , Kaeberlein M , Kennedy BK , &amp; Berger SL (2009). Histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation regulates cellular lifespan. Nature, 459 , 802–807.19516333
Darman RB , Seiler M , Agrawal AA , Lim KH , Peng S , Aird D , Bailey SL , Bhavsar EB , Chan B , Colla S , Corson L , Feala J , Fekkes P , Ichikawa K , Keaney GF , Lee L , Kumar P , Kunii K , MacKenzie C , … Buonamici S (2015). Cancer-associated SF3B1 hotspot mutations induce cryptic 3′ splice site selection through use of a different branch point. Cell Reports, 13 , 1033–1045.26565915
Das S , Anczukow O , Akerman M , &amp; Krainer AR (2012). Oncogenic splicing factor SRSF1 is a critical transcriptional target of MYC. Cell Reports, 1 , 110–117.22545246
de Almeida SF , Grosso AR , Koch F , Fenouil R , Carvalho S , Andrade J , Levezinho H , Gut M , Eick D , Gut I , Andrau JC , Ferrier P , &amp; Carmo-Fonseca M (2011). Splicing enhances recruitment of methyltransferase HYPB/Setd2 and methylation of histone H3 Lys36. Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology, 18 , 977–983.
De Jonghe C , Cruts M , Rogaeva EA , Tysoe C , Singleton A , Vanderstichele H , Meschino W , Dermaut B , Vanderhoeven I , Backhovens H , Vanmechelen E , Morris CM , Hardy J , Rubinsztein DC , St George-Hyslop PH , &amp; Van Broeckhoven C (1999). Aberrant splicing in the presenilin-1 intron 4 mutation causes presenile Alzheimer’s disease by increased Abeta42 secretion. Human Molecular Genetics, 8 , 1529–1540.10401002
de Magalhaes JP (2013). How ageing processes influence cancer. Nature Reviews. Cancer, 13 , 357–365.23612461
Deschenes M , &amp; Chabot B (2017). The emerging role of alternative splicing in senescence and aging. Aging Cell, 16 , 918–933.28703423
Dillman AA , Hauser DN , Gibbs JR , Nalls MA , McCoy MK , Rudenko IN , Galter D , &amp; Cookson MR (2013). mRNA expression, splicing and editing in the embryonic and adult mouse cerebral cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 16 , 499–506.23416452
Dong Q , Wei L , Zhang MQ , &amp; Wang X (2018). Regulatory RNA binding proteins contribute to the transcriptome-wide splicing alterations in human cellular senescence. Aging (Albany, NY), 10 , 1489–1505.29936497
Dong Y , Wang P , Yang Y , Huang J , Dai Z , Zheng W , Li Z , Yao Z , Zhang H , &amp; Zheng J (2020). PRMT5 inhibition attenuates cartilage degradation by reducing MAPK and NF-kappaB signaling. Arthritis Research &amp; Therapy, 22 , 201.32887644
Duan Y , Du A , Gu J , Duan G , Wang C , Gui X , Ma Z , Qian B , Deng X , Zhang K , Sun L , Tian K , Zhang Y , Jiang H , Liu C , &amp; Fang Y (2019). PARylation regulates stress granule dynamics, phase separation, and neurotoxicity of disease-related RNA-binding proteins. Cell Research, 29 , 233–247.30728452
Dubois S , Magrangeas F , Lehours P , Raher S , Bernard J , Boisteau O , Leroy S , Minvielle S , Godard A , &amp; Jacques Y (1999). Natural splicing of exon 2 of human interleukin-15 receptor alpha-chain mRNA results in a shortened form with a distinct pattern of expression. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 274 , 26978–26984.10480910
Dutertre M , Sanchez G , De Cian MC , Barbier J , Dardenne E , Gratadou L , Dujardin G , Le Jossic-Corcos C , Corcos L , &amp; Auboeuf D (2010). Cotranscriptional exon skipping in the genotoxic stress response. Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology, 17 , 1358–1366.
Dvinge H , Kim E , Abdel-Wahab O , &amp; Bradley RK (2016). RNA splicing factors as oncoproteins and tumour suppressors. Nature Reviews. Cancer, 16 , 413–430.27282250
Ergun A , Doran G , Costello JC , Paik HH , Collins JJ , Mathis D , Benoist C , &amp; ImmGen C (2013). Differential splicing across immune system lineages. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 , 14324–14329.23934048
Evsyukova I , Somarelli JA , Gregory SG , &amp; Garcia-Blanco MA (2010). Alternative splicing in multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune diseases. RNA Biology, 7 , 462–473.20639696
Finch A , Valentini A , Greenblatt E , Lynch HT , Ghadirian P , Armel S , Neuhausen SL , Kim-Sing C , Tung N , Karlan B , Foulkes WD , Sun P , Narod S , &amp; Hereditary Breast Cancer Study Group. (2013). Frequency of premature menopause in women who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Fertility and Sterility, 99 , 1724–1728.23414920
Fisette JF , Montagna DR , Mihailescu MR , &amp; Wolfe MS (2012). A G-rich element forms a G-quadruplex and regulates BACE1 mRNA alternative splicing. Journal of Neurochemistry, 121 , 763–773.22303960
Flores K , Wolschin F , Corneveaux JJ , Allen AN , Huentelman MJ , &amp; Amdam GV (2012). Genome-wide association between DNA methylation and alternative splicing in an invertebrate. BMC Genomics, 13 , 480.22978521
Fontana L , Klein S , &amp; Holloszy JO (2010). Effects of long-term calorie restriction and endurance exercise on glucose tolerance, insulin action, and adipokine production. Age (Dordrecht, Netherlands), 32 , 97–108.
Fraga MF , &amp; Esteller M (2007). Epigenetics and aging: The targets and the marks. Trends in Genetics, 23 , 413–418.17559965
Fragkouli A , Koukouraki P , Vlachos IS , Paraskevopoulou MD , Hatzigeorgiou AG , &amp; Doxakis E (2017). Neuronal ELAVL proteins utilize AUF-1 as a co-partner to induce neuron-specific alternative splicing of APP. Scientific Reports, 7 , 44507.28291226
Franceschi C , Garagnani P , Parini P , Giuliani C , &amp; Santoro A (2018). Inflammaging: A new immune-metabolic viewpoint for age-related diseases. Nature Reviews. Endocrinology, 14 , 576–590.
Fregoso OI , Das S , Akerman M , &amp; Krainer AR (2013). Splicing-factor oncoprotein SRSF1 stabilizes p53 via RPL5 and induces cellular senescence. Molecular Cell, 50 , 56–66.23478443
Fresques T , Zirbes A , Shalabi S , Samson S , Preto S , Stampfer MR , &amp; LaBarge MA (2019). Breast tissue biology expands the possibilities for prevention of age-related breast cancers. Frontiers in Cell and Development Biology, 7 , 174.
Fujita K , Mondal AM , Horikawa I , Nguyen GH , Kumamoto K , Sohn JJ , Bowman ED , Mathe EA , Schetter AJ , Pine SR , Ji H , Vojtesek B , Bourdon JC , Lane DP , &amp; Harris CC (2009). p53 isoforms Delta133p53 and p53beta are endogenous regulators of replicative cellular senescence. Nature Cell Biology, 11 , 1135–1142.19701195
Galarza-Munoz G , Briggs FBS , Evsyukova I , Schott-Lerner G , Kennedy EM , Nyanhete T , Wang L , Bergamaschi L , Widen SG , Tomaras GD , Ko DC , Bradrick SS , Barcellos LF , Gregory SG , &amp; Garcia-Blanco MA (2017). Human epistatic interaction controls IL7R splicing and increases multiple sclerosis risk. Cell, 169 , 72–84.e13.28340352
Gelfman S , Cohen N , Yearim A , &amp; Ast G (2013). DNA-methylation effect on cotranscriptional splicing is dependent on GC architecture of the exon-intron structure. Genome Research, 23 , 789–799.23502848
Genovese G , Kahler AK , Handsaker RE , Lindberg J , Rose SA , Bakhoum SF , Chambert K , Mick E , Neale BM , Fromer M , Purcell SM , Svantesson O , Landén M , Höglund M , Lehmann S , Gabriel SB , Moran JL , Lander ES , Sullivan PF , … McCarroll SA (2014). Clonal hematopoiesis and blood-cancer risk inferred from blood DNA sequence. The New England Journal of Medicine, 371 , 2477–2487.25426838
Georgilis A , Klotz S , Hanley CJ , Herranz N , Weirich B , Morancho B , Leote AC , D’Artista L , Gallage S , Seehawer M , Carroll T , Dharmalingam G , Wee KB , Mellone M , Pombo J , Heide D , Guccione E , Arribas J , Barbosa-Morais NL , … Gil J (2018). PTBP1-mediated alternative splicing regulates the inflammatory secretome and the pro-tumorigenic effects of senescent cells. Cancer Cell, 34 , 85–102.e9.29990503
Geuens T , Bouhy D , &amp; Timmerman V (2016). The hnRNP family: Insights into their role in health and disease. Human Genetics, 135 , 851–867.27215579
Ghazi A , Henis-Korenblit S , &amp; Kenyon C (2009). A transcription elongation factor that links signals from the reproductive system to lifespan extension in Caenorhabditis elegans. PLoS Genetics, 5 , e1000639.19749979
Ghosh A , Stewart D , &amp; Matlashewski G (2004). Regulation of human p53 activity and cell localization by alternative splicing. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 24 , 7987–7997.15340061
Glass D , Vinuela A , Davies MN , Ramasamy A , Parts L , Knowles D , Brown AA , Hedman AK , Small KS , Buil A , Grundberg E , Nica AC , Di Meglio P , Nestle FO , Ryten M , UK Brain Expression consortium; MuTHER consortium, Durbin R , McCarthy MI , Deloukas P , … Spector TD (2013). Gene expression changes with age in skin, adipose tissue, blood and brain. Genome Biology, 14 , R75.23889843
Gong H , Pang J , Han Y , Dai Y , Dai D , Cai J , &amp; Zhang TM (2014). Age-dependent tissue expression patterns of Sirt1 in senescence-accelerated mice. Molecular Medicine Reports, 10 , 3296–3302.25323555
Gregory SG , Schmidt S , Seth P , Oksenberg JR , Hart J , Prokop A , Caillier SJ , Ban M , Goris A , Barcellos LF , Lincoln R , McCauley JL , Sawcer SJ , Compston DAS , Dubois B , Hauser SL , Garcia-Blanco MA , Pericak-Vance MA , Haines JL , &amp; Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Group. (2007). Interleukin 7 receptor alpha chain (IL7R) shows allelic and functional association with multiple sclerosis. Nature Genetics, 39 , 1083–1091.17660817
Grube K , &amp; Burkle A (1992). Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity in mononuclear leukocytes of 13 mammalian species correlates with species-specific life span. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 89 , 11759–11763.1465394
Hales CM , Dammer EB , Diner I , Yi H , Seyfried NT , Gearing M , Glass JD , Montine TJ , Levey AI , &amp; Lah JJ (2014). Aggregates of small nuclear ribonucleic acids (snRNAs) in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathology, 24 , 344–351.24571648
Hall H , Medina P , Cooper DA , Escobedo SE , Rounds J , Brennan KJ , Vincent C , Miura P , Doerge R , &amp; Weake VM (2017). Transcriptome profiling of aging Drosophila photoreceptors reveals gene expression trends that correlate with visual senescence. BMC Genomics, 18 , 894.29162050
Hamard PJ , Santiago GE , Liu F , Karl DL , Martinez C , Man N , Mookhtiar AK , Duffort S , Greenblatt S , Verdun RE , &amp; Nimer SD (2018). PRMT5 regulates DNA repair by controlling the alternative splicing of histone-modifying enzymes. Cell Reports, 24 , 2643–2657.30184499
Hameed M , Orrell RW , Cobbold M , Goldspink G , &amp; Harridge SD (2003). Expression of IGF-I splice variants in young and old human skeletal muscle after high resistance exercise. The Journal of Physiology, 547 , 247–254.12562960
Harries LW , Hernandez D , Henley W , Wood AR , Holly AC , Bradley-Smith RM , Yaghootkar H , Dutta A , Murray A , Frayling TM , Guralnik JM , Bandinelli S , Singleton A , Ferrucci L , &amp; Melzer D (2011). Human aging is characterized by focused changes in gene expression and deregulation of alternative splicing. Aging Cell, 10 , 868–878.21668623
Harrison DE , Strong R , Sharp ZD , Nelson JF , Astle CM , Flurkey K , Nadon NL , Wilkinson JE , Frenkel K , Carter CS , Pahor M , Javors MA , Fernandez E , &amp; Miller RA (2009). Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice. Nature, 460 , 392–395.19587680
Hegele A , Kamburov A , Grossmann A , Sourlis C , Wowro S , Weimann M , Will CL , Pena V , Luhrmann R , &amp; Stelzl U (2012). Dynamic protein-protein interaction wiring of the human spliceosome. Molecular Cell, 45 , 567–580.22365833
Heinhuis B , Koenders MI , van de Loo FA , Netea MG , van den Berg WB , &amp; Joosten LA (2011). Inflammation-dependent secretion and splicing of IL-32{gamma} in rheumatoid arthritis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 , 4962–4967.21383200
Heintz C , Doktor TK , Lanjuin A , Escoubas C , Zhang Y , Weir HJ , Dutta S , Silva-Garcia CG , Bruun GH , Morantte I , Hoxhaj G , Manning BD , Andresen BS , &amp; Mai WB (2017). Splicing factor 1 modulates dietary restriction and TORC1 pathway longevity in C. elegans. Nature, 541 , 102–106.27919065
Hisama FM , Lessel D , Leistritz D , Friedrich K , McBride KL , Pastore MT , Gottesman GS , Saha B , Martin GM , Kubisch C , &amp; Oshima J (2011). Coronary artery disease in a Werner syndrome-like form of progeria characterized by low levels of progerin, a splice variant of lamin A. American Journal of Medical Genetics. Part A, 155A , 3002–3006.22065502
Hoe E , McKay F , Schibeci S , Heard R , Stewart G , &amp; Booth D (2010). Interleukin 7 receptor alpha chain haplotypes vary in their influence on multiple sclerosis susceptibility and response to interferon Beta. Journal of Interferon &amp; Cytokine Research, 30 , 291–298.20187771
Holly AC , Melzer D , Pilling LC , Fellows AC , Tanaka T , Ferrucci L , &amp; Harries LW (2013). Changes in splicing factor expression are associated with advancing age in man. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development, 134 , 356–366.23747814
Hong E , Lim Y , Lee E , Oh M , &amp; Kwon D (2012). Tissue-specific and age-dependent expression of protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) in male rat tissues. Biogerontology, 13 , 329–336.22484624
Horikawa I , Fujita K , Jenkins LM , Hiyoshi Y , Mondal AM , Vojtesek B , Lane DP , Appella E , &amp; Harris CC (2014). Autophagic degradation of the inhibitory p53 isoform Delta133p53alpha as a regulatory mechanism for p53-mediated senescence. Nature Communications, 5 , 4706.
Horiuchi S , Koyanagi Y , Zhou Y , Miyamoto H , Tanaka Y , Waki M , Matsumoto A , Yamamoto M , &amp; Yamamoto N (1994). Soluble interleukin-6 receptors released from T cell or granulocyte/macrophage cell lines and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells are generated through an alternative splicing mechanism. European Journal of Immunology, 24 , 1945–1948.8056053
Horvath S (2013). DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types. Genome Biology, 14 , R115.24138928
Hoss F , Mueller JL , Rojas Ringeling F , Rodriguez-Alcazar JF , Brinkschulte R , Seifert G , Stahl R , Broderick L , Putnam CD , Kolodner RD , Canzar S , Geyer M , Hoffman HM , &amp; Latz E (2019). Alternative splicing regulates stochastic NLRP3 activity. Nature Communications, 10 , 3238.
Howard JM , &amp; Sanford JR (2015). The RNAissance family: SR proteins as multifaceted regulators of gene expression. WIREs RNA, 6 , 93–110.25155147
Hsieh YC , Guo C , Yalamanchili HK , Abreha M , Al-Ouran R , Li Y , Dammer EB , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , Seyfried NT , Liu Z , &amp; Shulman JM (2019). Tau-mediated disruption of the spliceosome triggers cryptic RNA splicing and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Reports, 29 , 301–316.e10.31597093
Hu X , Harvey SE , Zheng R , Lyu J , Grzeskowiak CL , Powell E , Piwnica-Worms H , Scott KL , &amp; Cheng C (2020). The RNA-binding protein AKAP8 suppresses tumor metastasis by antagonizing EMT-associated alternative splicing. Nature Communications, 11 , 486.
Huff JT , Plocik AM , Guthrie C , &amp; Yamamoto KR (2010). Reciprocal intronic and exonic histone modification regions in humans. Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology, 17 , 1495–1499.
Huot ME , Vogel G , Zabarauskas A , Ngo CT , Coulombe-Huntington J , Majewski J , &amp; Richard S (2012). The Sam68 STAR RNA-binding protein regulates mTOR alternative splicing during adipogenesis. Molecular Cell, 46 , 187–199.22424772
Hutton M , Lendon CL , Rizzu P , Baker M , Froelich S , Houlden H , Pickering-Brown S , Chakraverty S , Isaacs A , Grover A , Hackett J , Adamson J , Lincoln S , Dickson D , Davies P , Petersen RC , Stevens M , de Graaff E , Wauters E , … Heutink P (1998). Association of missense and 5′-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17. Nature, 393 , 702–705.9641683
Iannone C , &amp; Valcarcel J (2013). Chromatin’s thread to alternative splicing regulation. Chromosoma, 122 , 465–474.23912688
Ip JY , Schmidt D , Pan Q , Ramani AK , Fraser AG , Odom DT , &amp; Blencowe BJ (2011). Global impact of RNA polymerase II elongation inhibition on alternative splicing regulation. Genome Research, 21 , 390–401.21163941
Jacobsen M , Schweer D , Ziegler A , Gaber R , Schock S , Schwinzer R , Wonigeit K , Lindert RB , Kantarci O , Schaefer-Klein J , Schipper HI , Oertel WH , Heidenreich F , Weinshenker BG , Sommer N , &amp; Hemmer B (2000). A point mutation in PTPRC is associated with the development of multiple sclerosis. Nature Genetics, 26 , 495–499.11101853
Jaiswal S , &amp; Ebert BL (2019). Clonal hematopoiesis in human aging and disease. Science, 366 , eaan4673.31672865
Jeyapalan JC , Ferreira M , Sedivy JM , &amp; Herbig U (2007). Accumulation of senescent cells in mitotic tissue of aging primates. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development, 128 , 36–44.17116315
Jimeno-Gonzalez S , Payan-Bravo L , Munoz-Cabello AM , Guijo M , Gutierrez G , Prado F , &amp; Reyes JC (2015). Defective histone supply causes changes in RNA polymerase II elongation rate and cotranscriptional pre-mRNA splicing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112 , 14840–14845.26578803
Johnson AA , Akman K , Calimport SR , Wuttke D , Stolzing A , &amp; de Magalhaes JP (2012). The role of DNA methylation in aging, rejuvenation, and age-related disease. Rejuvenation Research, 15 , 483–494.23098078
Jones MJ , Goodman SJ , &amp; Kobor MS (2015). DNA methylation and healthy human aging. Aging Cell, 14 , 924–932.25913071
Jones PA , &amp; Liang G (2009). Rethinking how DNA methylation patterns are maintained. Nature Reviews. Genetics, 10 , 805–811.
Joruiz SM , &amp; Bourdon JC (2016). p53 isoforms: key regulators of the cell fate decision. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 6 , a026039. 10.1101/cshperspect.a026039 . 26801896
Kadota Y , Jam FA , Yukiue H , Terakado I , Morimune T , Tano A , Tanaka Y , Akahane S , Fukumura M , Tooyama I , &amp; Mori M (2020). Srsf7 establishes the juvenile transcriptome through age-dependent alternative splicing in mice. iScience, 23 , 100929.32146325
Kalsotra A , Xiao X , Ward AJ , Castle JC , Johnson JM , Burge CB , &amp; Cooper TA (2008). A postnatal switch of CELF and MBNL proteins reprograms alternative splicing in the developing heart. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105 , 20333–20338.19075228
Kandalepas PC , &amp; Vassar R (2014). The normal and pathologic roles of the Alzheimer’s beta-secretase, BACE1. Current Alzheimer Research, 11 , 441–449.24893886
Kang X , Chen W , Kim RH , Kang MK , &amp; Park NH (2009). Regulation of the hTERT promoter activity by MSH2, the hnRNPs K and D, and GRHL2 in human oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. Oncogene, 28 , 565–574.19015635
Karasik D , Demissie S , Cupples LA , &amp; Kiel DP (2005). Disentangling the genetic determinants of human aging: Biological age as an alternative to the use of survival measures. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 60 , 574–587.
Karni R , de Stanchina E , Lowe SW , Sinha R , Mu D , &amp; Krainer AR (2007). The gene encoding the splicing factor SF2/ASF is a proto-oncogene. Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology, 14 , 185–193.
Kennedy BK , Berger SL , Brunet A , Campisi J , Cuervo AM , Epel ES , Franceschi C , Lithgow GJ , Morimoto RI , Pessin JE , Rando TA , Richardson A , Schadt EE , Wyss-Coray T , &amp; Sierra F (2014). Geroscience: Linking aging to chronic disease. Cell, 159 , 709–713.25417146
Kenyon CJ (2010). The genetics of ageing. Nature, 464 , 504–512.20336132
Khare T , Pai S , Koncevicius K , Pal M , Kriukiene E , Liutkeviciute Z , Irimia M , Jia P , Ptak C , Xia M , Tice R , Tochigi M , Moréra S , Nazarians A , Belsham D , Wong AHC , Blencowe BJ , Wang SC , Kapranov P , … Petronis A (2012). 5-hmC in the brain is abundant in synaptic genes and shows differences at the exon-intron boundary. Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology, 19 , 1037–1043.
Kim E , Ilagan JO , Liang Y , Daubner GM , Lee SC , Ramakrishnan A , Li Y , Chung YR , Micol JB , Murphy ME , Cho H , Kim M-K , Zebari AS , Aumann S , Park CY , Buonamici S , Smith PG , Deeg HJ , Lobry C , … Abdel-Wahab O (2015). SRSF2 mutations contribute to myelodysplasia by mutant-specific effects on exon recognition. Cancer Cell, 27 , 617–630.25965569
Kim S , Kim H , Fong N , Erickson B , &amp; Bentley DL (2011). Pre-mRNA splicing is a determinant of histone H3K36 methylation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 , 13564–13569.21807997
Kirkwood TB (2005). Understanding the odd science of aging. Cell, 120 , 437–447.15734677
Klinck R , Fourrier A , Thibault P , Toutant J , Durand M , Lapointe E , Caillet-Boudin ML , Sergeant N , Gourdon G , Meola G , Furling D , Puymirat J , &amp; Chabot B (2014). RBFOX1 cooperates with MBNL1 to control splicing in muscle, including events altered in myotonic dystrophy type 1. PLoS One, 9 , e107324.25211016
Koedoot E , Wolters L , van de Water B , &amp; Devedec SEL (2019). Splicing regulatory factors in breast cancer hallmarks and disease progression. Oncotarget, 10 , 6021–6037.31666932
Kolasinska-Zwierz P , Down T , Latorre I , Liu T , Liu XS , &amp; Ahringer J (2009). Differential chromatin marking of introns and expressed exons by H3K36me3. Nature Genetics, 41 , 376–381.19182803
Krietsch J , Caron MC , Gagne JP , Ethier C , Vignard J , Vincent M , Rouleau M , Hendzel MJ , Poirier GG , &amp; Masson JY (2012). PARP activation regulates the RNA-binding protein NONO in the DNA damage response to DNA double-strand breaks. Nucleic Acids Research, 40 , 10287–10301.22941645
Kuchenbaecker KB , Hopper JL , Barnes DR , Phillips KA , Mooij TM , Roos-Blom MJ , Jervis S , van Leeuwen FE , Milne RL , Andrieu N , Goldgar DE , Terry MB , Rookus MA , Easton DF , Antoniou AC , the BRCA1 and BRCA2 Cohort Consortium, McGuffog L , Evans DG , Barrowdale D , … Olsson H (2017). Risks of breast, ovarian, and contralateral breast cancer for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. JAMA, 317 , 2402–2416.28632866
Kwon SM , Min S , Jeoun UW , Sim MS , Jung GH , Hong SM , Jee BA , Woo HG , Lee C , &amp; Yoon G (2021). Global spliceosome activity regulates entry into cellular senescence. The FASEB Journal, 35 , e21204.33337569
LaBarge MA , Mora-Blanco EL , Samson S , &amp; Miyano M (2016). Breast cancer beyond the age of mutation. Gerontology, 62 , 434–442.26539838
Lagouge M , Argmann C , Gerhart-Hines Z , Meziane H , Lerin C , Daussin F , Messadeq N , Milne J , Lambert P , Elliott P , Geny B , Laakso M , Puigserver P , &amp; Auwerx J (2006). Resveratrol improves mitochondrial function and protects against metabolic disease by activating SIRT1 and PGC-1alpha. Cell, 127 , 1109–1122.17112576
Lai RW , Lu R , Danthi PS , Bravo JI , Goumba A , Sampathkumar NK , &amp; Benayoun BA (2019). Multi-level remodeling of transcriptional landscapes in aging and longevity. BMB Reports, 52 , 86–108.30526773
Lamas JR , Rodriguez-Rodriguez L , Tornero-Esteban P , Villafuertes E , Hoyas J , Abasolo L , Varade J , Alvarez-Lafuente R , Urcelay E , &amp; Fernandez-Gutierrez B (2013). Alternative splicing and proteolytic rupture contribute to the generation of soluble IL-6 receptors (sIL-6R) in rheumatoid arthritis. Cytokine, 61 , 720–723.23375120
Lareau LF , &amp; Brenner SE (2015). Regulation of splicing factors by alternative splicing and NMD is conserved between kingdoms yet evolutionarily flexible. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 32 , 1072–1079.25576366
Lareau LF , Inada M , Green RE , Wengrod JC , &amp; Brenner SE (2007). Unproductive splicing of SR genes associated with highly conserved and ultraconserved DNA elements. Nature, 446 , 926–929.17361132
Latorre E , Birar VC , Sheerin AN , Jeynes JCC , Hooper A , Dawe HR , Melzer D , Cox LS , Faragher RGA , Ostler EL , &amp; Harries LW (2017). Small molecule modulation of splicing factor expression is associated with rescue from cellular senescence. BMC Cell Biology, 18 , 31.29041897
Latorre E , &amp; Harries LW (2017). Splicing regulatory factors, ageing and age-related disease. Ageing Research Reviews, 36 , 165–170.28456680
Latorre E , Ostler EL , Faragher RGA , &amp; Harries LW (2019). FOXO1 and ETV6 genes may represent novel regulators of splicing factor expression in cellular senescence. The FASEB Journal, 33 , 1086–1097.30088951
Latz E , &amp; Duewell P (2018). NLRP3 inflammasome activation in inflammaging. Seminars in Immunology, 40 , 61–73.30268598
Laustriat D , Gide J , Barrault L , Chautard E , Benoit C , Auboeuf D , Boland A , Battail C , Artiguenave F , Deleuze JF , (2015). In vitro and in vivo modulation of alternative splicing by the biguanide metformin. Molecular Therapy - Nucleic Acids, e262 , 4.
Lazorchak AS , Liu D , Facchinetti V , Di Lorenzo A , Sessa WC , Schatz DG , &amp; Su B (2010). Sin1-mTORC2 suppresses rag and il7r gene expression through Akt2 in B cells. Molecular Cell, 39 , 433–443.20705244
Leclair NK , Brugiolo M , Urbanski L , Lawson SC , Thakar K , Yurieva M , George J , Hinson JT , Cheng A , Graveley BR , &amp; Anczuków O (2020). Poison exon splicing regulates a coordinated network of SR protein expression during differentiation and tumorigenesis. Molecular Cell, 80 , 648–665.e9.33176162
Lee BP , Mulvey L , Barr G , Garratt J , Goodman E , Selman C , &amp; Harries LW (2019). Dietary restriction in ILSXISS mice is associated with widespread changes in splicing regulatory factor expression levels. Experimental Gerontology, 128 , 110736.31521722
Lee BP , Pilling LC , Bandinelli S , Ferrucci L , Melzer D , &amp; Harries LW (2019). The transcript expression levels of HNRNPM, HNRNPA0 and AKAP17A splicing factors may be predictively associated with ageing phenotypes in human peripheral blood. Biogerontology, 20 , 649–663.31292793
Lee BP , Pilling LC , Emond F , Flurkey K , Harrison DE , Yuan R , Peters LL , Kuchel GA , Ferrucci L , Melzer D , &amp; Harries LW (2016). Changes in the expression of splicing factor transcripts and variations in alternative splicing are associated with lifespan in mice and humans. Aging Cell, 15 , 903–913.27363602
Lee BP , Smith M , Buffenstein R , &amp; Harries LW (2020). Negligible senescence in naked mole rats may be a consequence of well-maintained splicing regulation. Geroscience, 42 , 633–651.31927681
Lee CK , Klopp RG , Weindruch R , &amp; Prolla TA (1999). Gene expression profile of aging and its retardation by caloric restriction. Science, 285 , 1390–1393.10464095
Lee G , Zheng Y , Cho S , Jang C , England C , Dempsey JM , Yu Y , Liu X , He L , Cavaliere PM , Chavez A , Zhang E , Isik M , Couvillon A , Dephoure NE , Blackwell TK , Yu JJ , Rabinowitz JD , Cantley LC , &amp; Blenis J (2017). Post-transcriptional regulation of de novo lipogenesis by mTORC1-S6K1-SRPK2 signaling. Cell, 171 , 1545–1558.e18.29153836
Lee JE , &amp; Cooper TA (2009). Pathogenic mechanisms of myotonic dystrophy. Biochemical Society Transactions, 37 , 1281–1286.19909263
Lee SC , North K , Kim E , Jang E , Obeng E , Lu SX , Liu B , Inoue D , Yoshimi A , Ki M , Yeo M , Zhang XJ , Kim MK , Cho H , Chung YR , Taylor J , Durham BH , Kim YJ , Pastore A , … Abdel-Wahab O (2018). Synthetic lethal and convergent biological effects of cancer-associated spliceosomal gene mutations. Cancer Cell, 34 , 225–241.e8.30107174
Leva V , Giuliano S , Bardoni A , Camerini S , Crescenzi M , Lisa A , Biamonti G , &amp; Montecucco A (2012). Phosphorylation of SRSF1 is modulated by replicational stress. Nucleic Acids Research, 40 , 1106–1117.21984412
Li CM-C , Shapiro H , Tsiobikas C , Selfors L , Chen H , Gray GK , Oren Y , Pinello L , Regev A , &amp; Brugge JS (2019). Aging-associated alterations in the mammary gland revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. bioRxiv, 773408.
Li CY , Chu JY , Yu JK , Huang XQ , Liu XJ , Shi L , Che YC , &amp; Xie JY (2004). Regulation of alternative splicing of Bcl-x by IL-6, GM-CSF and TPA. Cell Research, 14 , 473–479.15625014
Li D , Harlan-Williams LM , Kumaraswamy E , &amp; Jensen RA (2019). BRCA1-no matter how you splice it. Cancer Research, 79 , 2091–2098.30992324
Li E , &amp; Zhang Y (2014). DNA methylation in mammals. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 6 , a019133.24789823
Li H , Wang Z , Ma T , Wei G , &amp; Ni T (2017). Alternative splicing in aging and age-related diseases. Translational Medicine of Aging, 1 , 32–40.
Li YH , Tong KL , Lu JL , Lin JB , Li ZY , Sang Y , Ghodbane A , Gao XJ , Tam MS , Hu CD , Zhang HT , &amp; Zha ZG (2020). PRMT5-TRIM21 interaction regulates the senescence of osteosarcoma cells by targeting the TXNIP/p21 axis. Aging (Albany, NY), 12 , 2507–2529.32023548
Li-Byarlay H , Li Y , Stroud H , Feng S , Newman TC , Kaneda M , Hou KK , Worley KC , Elsik CG , Wickline SA , Jacobsen SE , Ma J , &amp; Robinson GE (2013). RNA interference knockdown of DNA methyl-transferase 3 affects gene alternative splicing in the honey bee. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 , 12750–12755.23852726
Liguori I , Russo G , Curcio F , Bulli G , Aran L , Della-Morte D , Gargiulo G , Testa G , Cacciatore F , Bonaduce D , &amp; Abete P (2018). Oxidative stress, aging, and diseases. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 13 , 757–772.29731617
Lin X , Miller JW , Mankodi A , Kanadia RN , Yuan Y , Moxley RT , Swanson MS , &amp; Thornton CA (2006). Failure of MBNL1-dependent post-natal splicing transitions in myotonic dystrophy. Human Molecular Genetics, 15 , 2087–2097.16717059
Lister R , Mukamel EA , Nery JR , Urich M , Puddifoot CA , Johnson ND , Lucero J , Huang Y , Dwork AJ , Schultz MD , Yu M , Tonti-Filippini J , Heyn H , Hu S , Wu JC , Rao A , Esteller M , He C , Haghighi FG , … Ecker JR (2013). Global epigenomic reconfiguration during mammalian brain development. Science, 341 , 1237905.23828890
Listerman I , Sun J , Gazzaniga FS , Lukas JL , &amp; Blackburn EH (2013). The major reverse transcriptase-incompetent splice variant of the human telomerase protein inhibits telomerase activity but protects from apoptosis. Cancer Research, 73 , 2817–2828.23610451
Liu F , Cheng G , Hamard PJ , Greenblatt S , Wang L , Man N , Perna F , Xu H , Tadi M , Luciani L , &amp; Nimer SD (2015). Arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 is essential for sustaining normal adult hematopoiesis. The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 125 , 3532–3544.26258414
Liu F , &amp; Gong CX (2008). Tau exon 10 alternative splicing and tauopathies. Molecular Neurodegeneration, 3 , 8.18616804
Liu GY , &amp; Sabatini DM (2020). mTOR at the nexus of nutrition, growth, ageing and disease. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology, 21 , 183–203.31937935
Long JC , &amp; Caceres JF (2009). The SR protein family of splicing factors: Master regulators of gene expression. The Biochemical Journal, 417 , 15–27.19061484
Lopez-Mejia IC , Vautrot V , De Toledo M , Behm-Ansmant I , Bourgeois CF , Navarro CL , Osorio FG , Freije JM , Stevenin J , De Sandre-Giovannoli A , Lopez-Otin C , Lévy N , Branlant C , &amp; Tazi J (2011). A conserved splicing mechanism of the LMNA gene controls premature aging. Human Molecular Genetics, 20 , 4540–4555.21875900
Lopez-Otin C , Blasco MA , Partridge L , Serrano M , &amp; Kroemer G (2013). The hallmarks of aging. Cell, 153 , 1194–1217.23746838
Love JE , Hayden EJ , &amp; Rohn TT (2015). Alternative splicing in Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Parkinson’s Disease and Alzheimer’s Disease, 2 (2 ), 10.13188/2376-922x.1000010 .
Luco RF , Pan Q , Tominaga K , Blencowe BJ , Pereira-Smith OM , &amp; Misteli T (2010). Regulation of alternative splicing by histone modifications. Science, 327 , 996–1000.20133523
Ludlow AT , Wong MS , Robin JD , Batten K , Yuan L , Lai TP , Dahlson N , Zhang L , Mender I , Tedone E , Sayed ME , Wright WE , &amp; Shay JW (2018). NOVA1 regulates hTERT splicing and cell growth in non-small cell lung cancer. Nature Communications, 9 , 3112.
Lundstrom W , Highfill S , Walsh ST , Beq S , Morse E , Kockum I , Alfredsson L , Olsson T , Hillert J , &amp; Mackall CL (2013). Soluble IL7Ralpha potentiates IL-7 bioactivity and promotes autoimmunity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 , E1761–E1770.23610432
Lust JA , Donovan KA , Kline MP , Greipp PR , Kyle RA , &amp; Maihle NJ (1992). Isolation of an mRNA encoding a soluble form of the human interleukin-6 receptor. Cytokine, 4 , 96–100.1633265
Lyko F , Foret S , Kucharski R , Wolf S , Falckenhayn C , &amp; Maleszka R (2010). The honey bee epigenomes: Differential methylation of brain DNA in queens and workers. PLoS Biology, 8 , e1000506.21072239
Lynch CJ , Shah ZH , Allison SJ , Ahmed SU , Ford J , Warnock LJ , Li H , Serrano M , &amp; Milner J (2010). SIRT1 undergoes alternative splicing in a novel auto-regulatory loop with p53. PLoS One, 5 , e13502.20975832
Lynch KW , &amp; Weiss A (2001). A CD45 polymorphism associated with multiple sclerosis disrupts an exonic splicing silencer. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 276 , 24341–24347.11306584
Maegawa S , Hinkal G , Kim HS , Shen L , Zhang L , Zhang J , Zhang N , Liang S , Donehower LA , &amp; Issa JP (2010). Widespread and tissue specific age-related DNA methylation changes in mice. Genome Research, 20 , 332–340.20107151
Magni M , Buscemi G , Maita L , Peng L , Chan SY , Montecucco A , Delia D , &amp; Zannini L (2019). TSPYL2 is a novel regulator of SIRT1 and p300 activity in response to DNA damage. Cell Death and Differentiation, 26 , 918–931.30050056
Maier B , Gluba W , Bernier B , Turner T , Mohammad K , Guise T , Sutherland A , Thorner M , &amp; Scrable H (2004). Modulation of mammalian life span by the short isoform of p53. Genes &amp; Development, 18 , 306–319.14871929
Malanga M , Czubaty A , Girstun A , Staron K , &amp; Althaus FR (2008). Poly(ADP-ribose) binds to the splicing factor ASF/SF2 and regulates its phosphorylation by DNA topoisomerase I. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 283 , 19991–19998.18495665
Malousi A , Andreou AZ , Georgiou E , Tzimagiorgis G , Kovatsi L , &amp; Kouidou S (2018). Age-dependent methylation in epigenetic clock CpGs is associated with G-quadruplex, co-transcriptionally formed RNA structures and tentative splice sites. Epigenetics, 13 , 808–821.30270726
Manning KS , &amp; Cooper TA (2017). The roles of RNA processing in translating genotype to phenotype. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology, 18 , 102–114.27847391
Maracchioni A , Totaro A , Angelini DF , Di Penta A , Bernardi G , Carri MT , &amp; Achsel T (2007). Mitochondrial damage modulates alternative splicing in neuronal cells: Implications for neurodegeneration. Journal of Neurochemistry, 100 , 142–153.17064354
Martinez BA , Reis Rodrigues P , Nunez Medina RM , Mondal P , Harrison NJ , Lone MA , Webster A , Gurkar AU , Grill B , &amp; Gill MS (2020). An alternatively spliced, non-signaling insulin receptor modulates insulin sensitivity via insulin peptide sequestration in C. elegans. Elife, 9 , e49917.32096469
Martinez NM , &amp; Lynch KW (2013). Control of alternative splicing in immune responses: Many regulators, many predictions, much still to learn. Immunological Reviews, 253 , 216–236.23550649
Martinez NM , Pan Q , Cole BS , Yarosh CA , Babcock GA , Heyd F , Zhu W , Ajith S , Blencowe BJ , &amp; Lynch KW (2012). Alternative splicing networks regulated by signaling in human T cells. RNA, 18 , 1029–1040.22454538
Matsumoto E , Akiyama K , Saito T , Matsumoto Y , Kobayashi KI , Inoue J , Yamamoto Y , &amp; Suzuki T (2020). AMP-activated protein kinase regulates alternative pre-mRNA splicing by phosphorylation of SRSF1. The Biochemical Journal, 477 , 2237–2248.32453427
Matsuoka S , Ballif BA , Smogorzewska A , McDonald ER 3rd , Hurov KE , Luo J , Bakalarski CE , Zhao Z , Solimini N , Lerenthal Y , Shiloh Y , Gygi SP , &amp; Elledge SJ (2007). ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive to DNA damage. Science, 316 , 1160–1166.17525332
Matveeva E , Maiorano J , Zhang Q , Eteleeb AM , Convertini P , Chen J , Infantino V , Stamm S , Wang J , Rouchka EC , &amp; Fondufe-Mittendorf YN (2016). Involvement of PARP1 in the regulation of alternative splicing. Cell Discovery, 2 , 15046.27462443
Matveeva EA , Al-Tinawi QMH , Rouchka EC , &amp; Fondufe-Mittendorf YN (2019). Coupling of PARP1-mediated chromatin structural changes to transcriptional RNA polymerase II elongation and cotranscriptional splicing. Epigenetics &amp; Chromatin, 12 , 15.30777121
Maunakea AK , Chepelev I , Cui K , &amp; Zhao K (2013). Intragenic DNA methylation modulates alternative splicing by recruiting MeCP2 to promote exon recognition. Cell Research, 23 , 1256–1269.23938295
Mazin P , Xiong J , Liu X , Yan Z , Zhang X , Li M , He L , Somel M , Yuan Y , Phoebe Chen YP , Li N , Hu Y , Fu N , Ning Z , Zeng R , Yang H , Chen W , Gelfand M , &amp; Khaitovich P (2013). Widespread splicing changes in human brain development and aging. Molecular Systems Biology, 9 , 633.23340839
Maziuk BF , Apicco DJ , Cruz AL , Jiang L , Ash PEA , da Rocha EL , Zhang C , Yu WH , Leszyk J , Abisambra JF , Li H , &amp; Wolozin B (2018). RNA binding proteins co-localize with small tau inclusions in tauopathy. Acta Neuropathologica Communications, 6 , 71.30068389
McCauley BS , &amp; Dang W (2014). Histone methylation and aging: Lessons learned from model systems. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1839 , 1454–1462.24859460
Melikishvili M , Chariker JH , Rouchka EC , &amp; Fondufe-Mittendorf YN (2017). Transcriptome-wide identification of the RNA-binding landscape of the chromatin-associated protein PARP1 reveals functions in RNA biogenesis. Cell Discovery, 3 , 17043.29387452
Merideth MA , Gordon LB , Clauss S , Sachdev V , Smith AC , Perry MB , Brewer CC , Zalewski C , Kim HJ , Solomon B , Brooks BP , Gerber LH , Turner ML , Domingo DL , Hart TC , Graf J , Reynolds JC , Gropman A , Yanovski JA , … Introne WJ (2008). Phenotype and course of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. The New England Journal of Medicine, 358 , 592–604.18256394
Meshorer E , &amp; Soreq H (2002). Pre-mRNA splicing modulations in senescence. Aging Cell, 1 , 10–16.12882348
Michalak EM , Burr ML , Bannister AJ , &amp; Dawson MA (2019). The roles of DNA, RNA and histone methylation in ageing and cancer. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology, 20 , 573–589.31270442
Michlewski G , Sanford JR , &amp; Caceres JF (2008). The splicing factor SF2/ASF regulates translation initiation by enhancing phosphorylation of 4E-BP1. Molecular Cell, 30 , 179–189.18439897
Mihaylova MM , &amp; Shaw RJ (2011). The AMPK signalling pathway coordinates cell growth, autophagy and metabolism. Nature Cell Biology, 13 , 1016–1023.21892142
Mijit M , Caracciolo V , Melillo A , Amicarelli F , &amp; Giordano A (2020). Role of p53 in the regulation of cellular senescence. Biomolecules, 10 (3 ), 420. 10.3390/biom10030420 .
Mitchelmore C , Buchmann-Moller S , Rask L , West MJ , Troncoso JC , &amp; Jensen NA (2004). NDRG2: A novel Alzheimer’s disease associated protein. Neurobiology of Disease, 16 , 48–58.15207261
Mogilevsky M , Shimshon O , Kumar S , Mogilevsky A , Keshet E , Yavin E , Heyd F , &amp; Karni R (2018). Modulation of MKNK2 alternative splicing by splice-switching oligonucleotides as a novel approach for glioblastoma treatment. Nucleic Acids Research, 46 , 11396–11404.30329087
Montes M , Cloutier A , Sanchez-Hernandez N , Michelle L , Lemieux B , Blanchette M , Hernandez-Munain C , Chabot B , &amp; Sune C (2012). TCERG1 regulates alternative splicing of the Bcl-x gene by modulating the rate of RNA polymerase II transcription. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 32 , 751–762.22158966
Morgan JT , Fink GR , &amp; Bartel DP (2019). Excised linear introns regulate growth in yeast. Nature, 565 , 606–611.30651636
Mossner M , Jann JC , Wittig J , Nolte F , Fey S , Nowak V , Oblander J , Pressler J , Palme I , Xanthopoulos C , Boch T , Metzgeroth G , Röhl H , Witt SH , Dukal H , Klein C , Schmitt S , Gelß P , Platzbecker U , … Nowak D (2016). Mutational hierarchies in myelodysplastic syndromes dynamically adapt and evolve upon therapy response and failure. Blood, 128 , 1246–1259.27268087
Motta-Mena LB , Smith SA , Mallory MJ , Jackson J , Wang J , &amp; Lynch KW (2011). A disease-associated polymorphism alters splicing of the human CD45 phosphatase gene by disrupting combinatorial repression by heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs). The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 286 , 20043–20053.21507955
Mowrer KR , &amp; Wolfe MS (2008). Promotion of BACE1 mRNA alternative splicing reduces amyloid beta-peptide production. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 283 , 18694–18701.18468996
Munoz-Espin D , &amp; Serrano M (2014). Cellular senescence: From physiology to pathology. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology, 15 , 482–496.24954210
Nakka K , Ghigna C , Gabellini D , &amp; Dilworth FJ (2018). Diversification of the muscle proteome through alternative splicing. Skeletal Muscle, 8 , 8.29510724
Niedernhofer LJ , Gurkar AU , Wang Y , Vijg J , Hoeijmakers JHJ , &amp; Robbins PD (2018). Nuclear genomic instability and aging. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 87 , 295–322.
Nilsen TW , &amp; Graveley BR (2010). Expansion of the eukaryotic proteome by alternative splicing. Nature, 463 , 457–463.20110989
Nornes S , Newman M , Verdile G , Wells S , Stoick-Cooper CL , Tucker B , Frederich-Sleptsova I , Martins R , &amp; Lardelli M (2008). Interference with splicing of presenilin transcripts has potent dominant negative effects on Presenilin activity. Human Molecular Genetics, 17 , 402–412.17981814
Oberdoerffer S , Moita LF , Neems D , Freitas RP , Hacohen N , &amp; Rao A (2008). Regulation of CD45 alternative splicing by heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein, hnRNPLL. Science, 321 , 686–691.18669861
Oktay K , Kim JY , Barad D , &amp; Babayev SN (2010). Association of BRCA1 mutations with occult primary ovarian insufficiency: A possible explanation for the link between infertility and breast/ovarian cancer risks. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28 , 240–244.19996028
Orengo JP , Ward AJ , &amp; Cooper TA (2011). Alternative splicing dysregulation secondary to skeletal muscle regeneration. Annals of Neurology, 69 , 681–690.21400563
Osorio FG , Navarro CL , Cadinanos J , Lopez-Mejia IC , Quiros PM , Bartoli C , Rivera J , Tazi J , Guzman G , Varela I ,Depetris D , de Carlos F , Cobo J , Andrés V , De Sandre-Giovannoli A , Freije JMP , Lévy N , &amp; López-Otín C (2011). Splicing-directed therapy in a new mouse model of human accelerated aging. Science Translational Medicine, 3 , 106–107.
Pagani F , Zagato L , Vergani C , Casari G , Sidoli A , &amp; Baralle FE (1991). Tissue-specific splicing pattern of fibronectin messenger RNA precursor during development and aging in rat. The Journal of Cell Biology, 113 , 1223–1229.2040649
Pan Q , Shai O , Lee LJ , Frey BJ , &amp; Blencowe BJ (2008). Deep surveying of alternative splicing complexity in the human transcriptome by high-throughput sequencing. Nature Genetics, 40 , 1413–1415.18978789
Papaemmanuil E , Cazzola M , Boultwood J , Malcovati L , Vyas P , Bowen D , Pellagatti A , Wainscoat JS , Hellstrom-Lindberg E , Gambacorti-Passerini C , Godfrey AL , Rapado I , Cvejic A , Rance R , McGee C , Ellis P , Mudie LJ , Stephens PJ , McLaren S , … Chronic Myeloid Disorders Working Group of the International Cancer Genome Consortium. (2011). Somatic SF3B1 mutation in myelodysplasia with ring sideroblasts. The New England Journal of Medicine, 365 , 1384–1395.21995386
Parenteau J , Maignon L , Berthoumieux M , Catala M , Gagnon V , &amp; Abou Elela S (2019). Introns are mediators of cell response to starvation. Nature, 565 , 612–617.30651641
Park S , Brugiolo M , Akerman M , Das S , Urbanski L , Geier A , Kesarwani AK , Fan M , Leclair N , Lin KT , Hu L , Hua I , George J , Muthuswamy SK , Krainer AR , &amp; Anczuków O (2019). Differential functions of splicing factors in mammary transformation and breast cancer metastasis. Cell Reports, 29 , 2672–2688.e7.31775037
Paronetto MP , Bernardis I , Volpe E , Bechara E , Sebestyen E , Eyras E , &amp; Valcarcel J (2014). Regulation of FAS exon definition and apoptosis by the Ewing sarcoma protein. Cell Reports, 7 , 1211–1226.24813895
Paronetto MP , Minana B , &amp; Valcarcel J (2011). The Ewing sarcoma protein regulates DNA damage-induced alternative splicing. Molecular Cell, 43 , 353–368.21816343
Passtoors WM , Boer JM , Goeman JJ , Akker EB , Deelen J , Zwaan BJ , Scarborough A , Breggen R , Vossen RH , Houwing-Duistermaat JJ , van Ommen GJB , Westendorp RGJ , van Heemst D , de Craen AJM , White AJ , Gunn DA , Beekman M , &amp; Slagboom PE (2012). Transcriptional profiling of human familial longevity indicates a role for ASF1A and IL7R. PLoS One, 7 , e27759.22247756
Passtoors WM , van den Akker EB , Deelen J , Maier AB , van der Breggen R , Jansen R , Trompet S , van Heemst D , Derhovanessian E , Pawelec G , van Ommen GJB , Slagboom PE , &amp; Beekman M (2015). IL7R gene expression network associates with human healthy ageing. Immunity &amp; Ageing, 12 , 21.26566388
Pehar M , Ko MH , Li M , Scrable H , &amp; Puglielli L (2014). P44, the ‘longevity-assurance’ isoform of P53, regulates tau phosphorylation and is activated in an age-dependent fashion. Aging Cell, 13 , 449–456.24341977
Pelissier Vatter FA , Schapiro D , Chang H , Borowsky AD , Lee JK , Parvin B , Stampfer MR , LaBarge MA , Bodenmiller B , &amp; Lorens JB (2018). High-dimensional phenotyping identifies age-emergent cells in human mammary epithelia. Cell Reports, 23 , 1205–1219.29694896
Pellagatti A , Roy S , Di Genua C , Burns A , McGraw K , Valletta S , Larrayoz MJ , Fernandez-Mercado M , Mason J , Killick S , Mecucci C , Calasanz MJ , List A , &amp; Schuh A (2016). Targeted resequencing analysis of 31 genes commonly mutated in myeloid disorders in serial samples from myelodysplastic syndrome patients showing disease progression. Leukemia, 30 , 247–250.25991409
Peters MJ , Joehanes R , Pilling LC , Schurmann C , Conneely KN , Powell J , Reinmaa E , Sutphin GL , Zhernakova A , Schramm K , Wilson YA , Kobes S , Tukiainen T , NABEC/UKBEC Consortium, Ramos YF , Göring HHH , Fornage M , Liu Y , Gharib SA , … Johnson AD (2015). The transcriptional landscape of age in human peripheral blood. Nature Communications, 6 , 8570.
Petr MA , Tulika T , Carmona-Marin LM , &amp; Scheibye-Knudsen M (2020). Protecting the aging genome. Trends in Cell Biology, 30 , 117–132.31917080
Piskunova TS , Yurova MN , Ovsyannikov AI , Semenchenko AV , Zabezhinski MA , Popovich IG , Wang ZQ , &amp; Anisimov VN (2008). Deficiency in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) accelerates aging and spontaneous carcinogenesis in mice. Current Gerontology and Geriatrics Research, 2008 , 754190.
Pont AR , Sadri N , Hsiao SJ , Smith S , &amp; Schneider RJ (2012). mRNA decay factor AUF1 maintains normal aging, telomere maintenance, and suppression of senescence by activation of telomerase transcription. Molecular Cell, 47 , 5–15.22633954
Pradeepa MM , Sutherland HG , Ule J , Grimes GR , &amp; Bickmore WA (2012). Psip1/Ledgf p52 binds methylated histone H3K36 and splicing factors and contributes to the regulation of alternative splicing. PLoS Genetics, 8 , e1002717.22615581
Pu M , Ni Z , Wang M , Wang X , Wood JG , Helfand SL , Yu H , &amp; Lee SS (2015). Trimethylation of Lys36 on H3 restricts gene expression change during aging and impacts life span. Genes &amp; Development, 29 , 718–731.25838541
Qian M , Liu Z , Peng L , Tang X , Meng F , Ao Y , Zhou M , Wang M , Cao X , Qin B , Wang Z , Zhou Z , Wang G , Gao Z , Xu J , &amp; Liu B (2018). Boosting ATM activity alleviates aging and extends lifespan in a mouse model of progeria. eLife, 7 , e34836.29717979
Raj B , &amp; Blencowe BJ (2015). Alternative splicing in the mammalian nervous system: Recent insights into mechanisms and functional roles. Neuron, 87 , 14–27.26139367
Raj T , Li YI , Wong G , Humphrey J , Wang M , Ramdhani S , Wang YC , Ng B , Gupta I , Haroutunian V , Schadt EE , Young-Pearse T , Mostafavi S , Zhang B , Sklar P , Bennett DA , &amp; de Jager PL (2018). Integrative transcriptome analyses of the aging brain implicate altered splicing in Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility. Nature Genetics, 50 , 1584–1592.30297968
Ramos-Casals M , Garcia-Carrasco M , Brito MP , Lopez-Soto A , &amp; Font J (2003). Autoimmunity and geriatrics: Clinical significance of autoimmune manifestations in the elderly. Lupus, 12 , 341–355.12765297
Rhoads TW , Burhans MS , Chen VB , Hutchins PD , Rush MJP , Clark JP , Stark JL , McIlwain SJ , Eghbalnia HR , Pavelec DM , Ong IM , Denu JM , Markley JL , Coon JJ , Colman RJ , &amp; Anderson RM (2018). Caloric restriction engages hepatic RNA processing mechanisms in rhesus monkeys. Cell Metabolism, 27 , 677–688.e5.29514073
Richard S , Torabi N , Franco GV , Tremblay GA , Chen T , Vogel G , Morel M , Cleroux P , Forget-Richard A , Komarova S , Tremblay ML , Li W , Li A , Gao YJ , &amp; Henderson JE (2005). Ablation of the Sam68 RNA binding protein protects mice from age-related bone loss. PLoS Genetics, 1 , e74.16362077
Rodriguez SA , Grochova D , McKenna T , Borate B , Trivedi NS , Erdos MR , &amp; Eriksson M (2016). Global genome splicing analysis reveals an increased number of alternatively spliced genes with aging. Aging Cell, 15 , 267–278.26685868
Romano M , Buratti E , Romano G , Klima R , Del Bel Belluz L , Stuani C , Baralle F , &amp; Feiguin F (2014). Evolutionarily conserved heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) A/B proteins functionally interact with human and Drosophila TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43). Journal of Biological Chemistry, 289 , 7121–7130. 10.1074/jbc.M114.548859 .
Rotival M , Quach H , &amp; Quintana-Murci L (2019). Defining the genetic and evolutionary architecture of alternative splicing in response to infection. Nature Communications, 10 , 1671.
Rzepka-Gorska I , Tarnowski B , Chudecka-Glaz A , Gorski B , Zielinska D , &amp; Toloczko-Grabarek A (2006). Premature menopause in patients with BRCA1 gene mutation. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, 100 , 59–63.16773440
Sakashita E , &amp; Endo H (2010). SR and SR-related proteins redistribute to segregated fibrillar components of nucleoli in a response to DNA damage. Nucleus, 1 , 367–380.21327085
Salminen A , &amp; Kaarniranta K (2012). AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) controls the aging process via an integrated signaling network. Ageing Research Reviews, 11 , 230–241.22186033
Sanchez-Hernandez N , Boireau S , Schmidt U , Munoz-Cobo JP , Hernandez-Munain C , Bertrand E , &amp; Sune C (2016). The in vivo dynamics of TCERG1, a factor that couples transcriptional elongation with splicing. RNA, 22 , 571–582.26873599
Sato N , Hori O , Yamaguchi A , Lambert JC , Chartier-Harlin MC , Robinson PA , Delacourte A , Schmidt AM , Furuyama T , Imaizumi K , Tohyama M , &amp; Takagi T (1999). A novel presenilin-2 splice variant in human Alzheimer’s disease brain tissue. Journal of Neurochemistry, 72 , 2498–2505.10349860
Savage KI , Gorski JJ , Barros EM , Irwin GW , Manti L , Powell AJ , Pellagatti A , Lukashchuk N , McCance DJ , McCluggage WG , Schettino G , Salto-Tellez M , Boultwood J , Richard DJ , McDade SS , &amp; Harkin DP (2014). Identification of a BRCA1-mRNA splicing complex required for efficient DNA repair and maintenance of genomic stability. Molecular Cell, 54 , 445–459.24746700
Sayed ME , Yuan L , Robin JD , Tedone E , Batten K , Dahlson N , Wright WE , Shay JW , &amp; Ludlow AT (2019). NOVA1 directs PTBP1 to hTERT pre-mRNA and promotes telomerase activity in cancer cells. Oncogene, 38 , 2937–2952.30568224
Scheckel C , Drapeau E , Frias MA , Park CY , Fak J , Zucker-Scharff I , Kou Y , Haroutunian V , Ma’ayan A , Buxbaum JD , &amp; Darnell RB (2016). Regulatory consequences of neuronal ELAV-like protein binding to coding and non-coding RNAs in human brain. eLife, 5 , e10421. 10.7554/elife.10421 . 26894958
Schor IE , Rascovan N , Pelisch F , Allo M , &amp; Kornblihtt AR (2009). Neuronal cell depolarization induces intragenic chromatin modifications affecting NCAM alternative splicing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106 , 4325–4330.19251664
Schwartz SH , Silva J , Burstein D , Pupko T , Eyras E , &amp; Ast G (2008). Large-scale comparative analysis of splicing signals and their corresponding splicing factors in eukaryotes. Genome Research, 18 , 88–103.18032728
Scotti MM , &amp; Swanson MS (2016). RNA mis-splicing in disease. Nature Reviews. Genetics, 17 , 19–32.
Sebestyen E , Singh B , Minana B , Pages A , Mateo F , Pujana MA , Valcarcel J , &amp; Eyras E (2016). Large-scale analysis of genome and transcriptome alterations in multiple tumors unveils novel cancer-relevant splicing networks. Genome Research, 26 , 732–744.27197215
Shah ZH , Ahmed SU , Ford JR , Allison SJ , Knight JR , &amp; Milner J (2012). A deacetylase-deficient SIRT1 variant opposes full-length SIRT1 in regulating tumor suppressor p53 and governs expression of cancer-related genes. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 32 , 704–716.22124156
Shakola F , Suri P , &amp; Ruggiu M (2015). Splicing regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines: At the interface of the neuroendocrine and immune systems. Biomolecules, 5 , 2073–2100.26371053
Sharan SK , Morimatsu M , Albrecht U , Lim DS , Regel E , Dinh C , Sands A , Eichele G , Hasty P , &amp; Bradley A (1997). Embryonic lethality and radiation hypersensitivity mediated by Rad51 in mice lacking Brca2. Nature, 386 , 804–810.9126738
Shay JW , &amp; Wright WE (2019). Telomeres and telomerase: Three decades of progress. Nature Reviews. Genetics, 20 , 299–309.
Shayevitch R , Askayo D , Keydar I , &amp; Ast G (2018). The importance of DNA methylation of exons on alternative splicing. RNA, 24 , 1351–1362.30002084
Shi Y (2017). The spliceosome: A protein-directed metalloribozyme. Journal of Molecular Biology, 429 , 2640–2653.28733144
Shkreta L , Michelle L , Toutant J , Tremblay ML , &amp; Chabot B (2011). The DNA damage response pathway regulates the alternative splicing of the apoptotic mediator Bcl-x. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 286 , 331–340.20980256
Shukla S , Kavak E , Gregory M , Imashimizu M , Shutinoski B , Kashlev M , Oberdoerffer P , Sandberg R , &amp; Oberdoerffer S (2011). CTCF-promoted RNA polymerase II pausing links DNA methylation to splicing. Nature, 479 , 74–79.21964334
Shulman JM , Imboywa S , Giagtzoglou N , Powers MP , Hu Y , Devenport D , Chipendo P , Chibnik LB , Diamond A , Perrimon N , Brown NH , de Jager PL , &amp; Feany MB (2014). Functional screening in Drosophila identifies Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility genes and implicates Tau-mediated mechanisms. Human Molecular Genetics, 23 , 870–877.24067533
Siam A , Baker M , Amit L , Regev G , Rabner A , Najar RA , Bentata M , Dahan S , Cohen K , Araten S , Nevo Y , Kay G , Mandel-Gutfreund Y , &amp; Salton M (2019). Regulation of alternative splicing by p300-mediated acetylation of splicing factors. RNA, 25 , 813–824.30988101
Sieber P , Barth E , &amp; Marz M (2019). The landscape of the alternatively spliced transcriptome remains stable during aging across different species and tissues. bioRxiv, 541417.
Sikora E , Bielak-Zmijewska A , &amp; Mosieniak G (2014). Cellular senescence in ageing, age-related disease and longevity. Current Vascular Pharmacology, 12 , 698–706.24350932
Smith DE , Lipsky BP , Russell C , Ketchem RR , Kirchner J , Hensley K , Huang Y , Friedman WJ , Boissonneault V , Plante MM , Rivest S , &amp; Sims JE (2009). A central nervous system-restricted isoform of the interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein modulates neuronal responses to interleukin-1. Immunity, 30 , 817–831.19481478
Smith SA , Ray D , Cook KB , Mallory MJ , Hughes TR , &amp; Lynch KW (2013). Paralogs hnRNP L and hnRNP LL exhibit overlapping but distinct RNA binding constraints. PLoS One, 8 , e80701.24244709
Soliman MA , Berardi P , Pastyryeva S , Bonnefin P , Feng X , Colina A , Young D , &amp; Riabowol K (2008). ING1a expression increases during replicative senescence and induces a senescent phenotype. Aging Cell, 7 , 783–794.18691180
Son HG , Seo M , Ham S , Hwang W , Lee D , An SW , Artan M , Seo K , Kaletsky R , Arey RN , Ryu Y , Ha CM , Kim YK , Murphy CT , Roh T-Y , Nam HG , &amp; Lee S-JV (2017). RNA surveillance via nonsense-mediated mRNA decay is crucial for longevity in daf-2/insulin/IGF-1 mutant C. elegans. Nature Communications, 8 , 14749.
Song K , Li L , &amp; Zhang G (2017). The association between DNA methylation and exon expression in the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas. PLoS One, 12 , e0185224.28945769
Southworth LK , Owen AB , &amp; Kim SK (2009). Aging mice show a decreasing correlation of gene expression within genetic modules. PLoS Genetics, 5 , e1000776.20019809
Stegeman R , Hall H , Escobedo SE , Chang HC , &amp; Weake VM (2018). Proper splicing contributes to visual function in the aging Drosophila eye. Aging Cell, 17 , e12817.30003673
Stegeman R , &amp; Weake VM (2017). Transcriptional signatures of aging. Journal of Molecular Biology, 429 , 2427–2437.28684248
Stilling RM , Benito E , Gertig M , Barth J , Capece V , Burkhardt S , Bonn S , &amp; Fischer A (2014). De-regulation of gene expression and alternative splicing affects distinct cellular pathways in the aging hippocampus. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 8 , 373.25431548
Su CH , Dhananjaya D , &amp; Tarn WY (2018). Alternative splicing in neurogenesis and brain development. Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences, 5 , 12.29484299
Sun D , Luo M , Jeong M , Rodriguez B , Xia Z , Hannah R , Wang H , Le T , Faull KF , Chen R , Gu H , Bock C , Meissner A , Göttgens B , Darlington GJ , Li W , &amp; Goodell MA (2014). Epigenomic profiling of young and aged HSCs reveals concerted changes during aging that reinforce self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell, 14 , 673–688.24792119
Swindell WR (2009). Genes and gene expression modules associated with caloric restriction and aging in the laboratory mouse. BMC Genomics, 10 , 585.19968875
Tabrez SS , Sharma RD , Jain V , Siddiqui AA , &amp; Mukhopadhyay A (2017). Differential alternative splicing coupled to nonsense-mediated decay of mRNA ensures dietary restriction-induced longevity. Nature Communications, 8 , 306.
Tang Q , Rodriguez-Santiago S , Wang J , Pu J , Yuste A , Gupta V , Moldon A , Xu YZ , &amp; Query CC (2016). SF3B1/Hsh155 HEAT motif mutations affect interaction with the spliceosomal ATPase Prp5, resulting in altered branch site selectivity in pre-mRNA splicing. Genes &amp; Development, 30 , 2710–2723.28087715
Tang Y , Horikawa I , Ajiro M , Robles AI , Fujita K , Mondal AM , Stauffer JK , Zheng ZM , &amp; Harris CC (2013). Downregulation of splicing factor SRSF3 induces p53beta, an alternatively spliced isoform of p53 that promotes cellular senescence. Oncogene, 32 , 2792–2798.22777358
Tedone E , Huang E , O’Hara R , Batten K , Ludlow AT , Lai TP , Arosio B , Mari D , Wright WE , &amp; Shay JW (2019). Telomere length and telomerase activity in T cells are biomarkers of high-performing centenarians. Aging Cell, 18 , e12859.30488553
Tollervey JR , Curk T , Rogelj B , Briese M , Cereda M , Kayikci M , Konig J , Hortobagyi T , Nishimura AL , Zupunski V , Patani R , Chandran S , Rot G , Zupan B , Shaw CE , &amp; Ule J (2011). Characterizing the RNA targets and position-dependent splicing regulation by TDP-43. Nature Neuroscience, 14 , 452–458.21358640
Tollervey JR , Wang Z , Hortobagyi T , Witten JT , Zarnack K , Kayikci M , Clark TA , Schweitzer AC , Rot G , Curk T , Zupan B , Rogelj B , Shaw CE , &amp; Ule J (2011). Analysis of alternative splicing associated with aging and neurodegeneration in the human brain. Genome Research, 21 , 1572–1582.21846794
Torres-Padilla ME , Fougere-Deschatrette C , &amp; Weiss MC (2001). Expression of HNF4alpha isoforms in mouse liver development is regulated by sequential promoter usage and constitutive 3′ end splicing. Mechanisms of Development, 109 , 183–193.11731232
Tresini M , Warmerdam DO , Kolovos P , Snijder L , Vrouwe MG , Demmers JA , van IJcken WFJ , Grosveld FG , Medema RH , Hoeijmakers JH , Mullenders LHF , Vermeulen W , &amp; Marteijn JA (2015). The core spliceosome as target and effector of non-canonical ATM signalling. Nature, 523 , 53–58.26106861
Ubaida-Mohien C , Lyashkov A , Gonzalez-Freire M , Tharakan R , Shardell M , Moaddel R , Semba RD , Chia CW , Gorospe M , Sen R , &amp; Ferrucci L (2019). Discovery proteomics in aging human skeletal muscle finds change in spliceosome, immunity, proteostasis and mitochondria. eLife, 8 , e49874.31642809
Urbanski LM , Leclair N , &amp; Anczukow O (2018). Alternative-splicing defects in cancer: Splicing regulators and their downstream targets, guiding the way to novel cancer therapeutics. WIREs RNA, 9 , e1476.29693319
van Bergeijk P , Seneviratne U , Aparicio-Prat E , Stanton R , &amp; Hasson SA (2019). SRSF1 and PTBP1 are trans-acting factors that suppress the formation of a CD33 splicing isoform linked to Alzheimer’s disease risk. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 39 (18 ), e00568–18. 10.1128/MCB.00568-18 . 31208978
van Deursen JM (2014). The role of senescent cells in ageing. Nature, 509 , 439–446.24848057
van Heemst D (2010). Insulin, IGF-1 and longevity. Aging and Disease, 1 , 147–157.22396862
Vanderweyde T , Apicco DJ , Youmans-Kidder K , Ash PEA , Cook C , Lummertz da Rocha E , Jansen-West K , Frame AA , Citro A , Leszyk JD , Ivanov P , Abisambra JF , Steffen M , Li H , Petrucelli L , &amp; Wolozin B (2016). Interaction of tau with the RNA-binding protein TIA1 regulates tau pathophysiology and toxicity. Cell Reports, 15 , 1455–1466.27160897
Varani L , Hasegawa M , Spillantini MG , Smith MJ , Murrell JR , Ghetti B , Klug A , Goedert M , &amp; Varani G (1999). Structure of tau exon 10 splicing regulatory element RNA and destabilization by mutations of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 96 , 8229–8234.10393977
Vastermark A , Rask-Andersen M , Sawant RS , Reiter JL , Schioth HB , &amp; Williams MJ (2013). Insulin receptor-like ectodomain genes and splice variants are found in both arthropods and human brain cDNA. Journal of Systematics and Evolution, 51 , 664–670.27375681
Vieyra D , Toyama T , Hara Y , Boland D , Johnston R , &amp; Riabowol K (2002). ING1 isoforms differentially affect apoptosis in a cell age-dependent manner. Cancer Research, 62 , 4445–4452.12154053
Vinuela A , Brown AA , Buil A , Tsai PC , Davies MN , Bell JT , Dermitzakis ET , Spector TD , &amp; Small KS (2018). Age-dependent changes in mean and variance of gene expression across tissues in a twin cohort. Human Molecular Genetics, 27 , 732–741.29228364
Waldera-Lupa DM , Kalfalah F , Florea AM , Sass S , Kruse F , Rieder V , Tigges J , Fritsche E , Krutmann J , Busch H , Boerries M , Meyer HE , Boege F , Theis F , Reifenberger G , &amp; Stuhler K (2014). Proteome-wide analysis reveals an age-associated cellular phenotype of in situ aged human fibroblasts. Aging (Albany, NY), 6 , 856–878.25411231
Wan J , Oliver VF , Zhu H , Zack DJ , Qian J , &amp; Merbs SL (2013). Integrative analysis of tissue-specific methylation and alternative splicing identifies conserved transcription factor binding motifs. Nucleic Acids Research, 41 , 8503–8514.23887936
Wang ET , Sandberg R , Luo S , Khrebtukova I , Zhang L , Mayr C , Kingsmore SF , Schroth GP , &amp; Burge CB (2008). Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue transcriptomes. Nature, 456 , 470–476.18978772
Wang G , Wang F , Ren J , Qiu Y , Zhang W , Gao S , Yang D , Wang Z , Liang A , Gao Z , &amp; Xu J (2018). SIRT1 involved in the regulation of alternative splicing affects the DNA damage response in neural stem cells. Cellular Physiology and Biochemistry, 48 , 657–669.30025390
Wang H , Han L , Zhao G , Shen H , Wang P , Sun Z , Xu C , Su Y , Li G , Tong T , &amp; Chen J (2016). hnRNP A1 antagonizes cellular senescence and senescence-associated secretory phenotype via regulation of SIRT1 mRNA stability. Aging Cell, 15 , 1063–1073.27613566
Wang K , Wu D , Zhang H , Das A , Basu M , Malin J , Cao K , &amp; Hannenhalli S (2018). Comprehensive map of age-associated splicing changes across human tissues and their contributions to age-associated diseases. Scientific Reports, 8 , 10929.30026530
Wei YN , Hu HY , Xie GC , Fu N , Ning ZB , Zeng R , &amp; Khaitovich P (2015). Transcript and protein expression decoupling reveals RNA binding proteins and miRNAs as potential modulators of human aging. Genome Biology, 16 , 41.25853883
Welle S , Brooks AI , Delehanty JM , Needler N , Bhatt K , Shah B , &amp; Thornton CA (2004). Skeletal muscle gene expression profiles in 20–29 year old and 65–71 year old women. Experimental Gerontology, 39 , 369–377.15036396
Welle S , Brooks AI , Delehanty JM , Needler N , &amp; Thornton CA (2003). Gene expression profile of aging in human muscle. Physiological Genomics, 14 , 149–159.12783983
Werner H , Karnieli E , Rauscher FJ , &amp; LeRoith D (1996). Wild-type and mutant p53 differentially regulate transcription of the insulin-like growth factor I receptor gene. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 93 , 8318–8323.8710868
Weyn-Vanhentenryck SM , Feng H , Ustianenko D , Duffie R , Yan Q , Jacko M , Martinez JC , Goodwin M , Zhang X , Hengst U , Lomvardas S , Swanson MS , &amp; Zhang C (2018). Precise temporal regulation of alternative splicing during neural development. Nature Communications, 9 , 2189.
Wilhelm BT , Marguerat S , Aligianni S , Codlin S , Watt S , &amp; Bahler J (2011). Differential patterns of intronic and exonic DNA regions with respect to RNA polymerase II occupancy, nucleosome density and H3K36me3 marking in fission yeast. Genome Biology, 12 , R82.21859475
Wilkinson ME , Charenton C , &amp; Nagai K (2020). RNA splicing by the spliceosome. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 89 , 359–388.
Wong MS , Wright WE , &amp; Shay JW (2014). Alternative splicing regulation of telomerase: A new paradigm? Trends in Genetics, 30 , 430–438.25172021
Wood SH , Craig T , Li Y , Merry B , &amp; de Magalhaes JP (2013). Whole transcriptome sequencing of the aging rat brain reveals dynamic RNA changes in the dark matter of the genome. Age (Dordrecht, Netherlands), 35 , 763–776.
Wu J , Lu LY , &amp; Yu X (2010). The role of BRCA1 in DNA damage response. Protein &amp; Cell, 1 , 117–123.21203981
Wu JJ , Liu J , Chen EB , Wang JJ , Cao L , Narayan N , Fergusson MM , Rovira II , Allen M , Springer DA , Lago CU , Zhang S , DuBois W , Ward T , de Cabo R , Gavrilova O , Mock B , &amp; Finkel T (2013). Increased mammalian lifespan and a segmental and tissue-specific slowing of aging after genetic reduction of mTOR expression. Cell Reports, 4 , 913–920.23994476
Xie M , Lu C , Wang J , McLellan MD , Johnson KJ , Wendl MC , McMichael JF , Schmidt HK , Yellapantula V , Miller CA , Ozenberger BA , Welch JS , Link DC , Walter MJ , Mardis ER , Dipersio JF , Chen F , Wilson RK , Ley TJ , &amp; Ding L (2014). Age-related mutations associated with clonal hematopoietic expansion and malignancies. Nature Medicine, 20 , 1472–1478.
Xu Q , Modrek B , &amp; Lee C (2002). Genome-wide detection of tissue-specific alternative splicing in the human transcriptome. Nucleic Acids Research, 30 , 3754–3766.12202761
Xu X , Qiao W , Linke SP , Cao L , Li WM , Furth PA , Harris CC , &amp; Deng CX (2001). Genetic interactions between tumor suppressors Brca1 and p53 in apoptosis, cell cycle and tumorigenesis. Nature Genetics, 28 , 266–271.11431698
Xu Y , Gao XD , Lee JH , Huang H , Tan H , Ahn J , Reinke LM , Peter ME , Feng Y , Gius D , Siziopikou KP , Peng J , Xiao X , &amp; Cheng C (2014). Cell type-restricted activity of hnRNPM promotes breast cancer metastasis via regulating alternative splicing. Genes &amp; Development, 28 , 1191–1203.24840202
Yanay N , Rabie M , &amp; Nevo Y (2020). Impaired regeneration in dystrophic muscle-new target for therapy. Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience, 13 , 69.32523512
Yannarell A , Schumm DE , &amp; Webb TE (1977). Age-dependence of nuclear RNA processing. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development, 6 , 259–264.559890
Yao J , Ding D , Li X , Shen T , Fu H , Zhong H , Wei G , &amp; Ni T (2020). Prevalent intron retention fine-tunes gene expression and contributes to cellular senescence. Aging Cell, 19 , e13276.33274830
Yau C , Fedele V , Roydasgupta R , Fridlyand J , Hubbard A , Gray JW , Chew K , Dairkee SH , Moore DH , Schittulli F , Tommasi S , Paradiso A , Albertson DG , &amp; Benz CC (2007). Aging impacts transcriptomes but not genomes of hormone-dependent breast cancers. Breast Cancer Research, 9 , R59.17850661
Yearim A , Gelfman S , Shayevitch R , Melcer S , Glaich O , Mallm JP , Nissim-Rafinia M , Cohen AH , Rippe K , Meshorer E , &amp; Ast G (2015). HP1 is involved in regulating the global impact of DNA methylation on alternative splicing. Cell Reports, 10 , 1122–1134.25704815
Yoshida K , Sanada M , Shiraishi Y , Nowak D , Nagata Y , Yamamoto R , Sato Y , Sato-Otsubo A , Kon A , Nagasaki M , Chalkidis G , Suzuki Y , Shiosaka M , Kawahata R , Yamaguchi T , Otsu M , Obara N , Sakata-Yanagimoto M , Ishiyama K , … Ogawa S (2011). Frequent pathway mutations of splicing machinery in myelodysplasia. Nature, 478 , 64–69.21909114
Yoshida T , Kim JH , Carver K , Su Y , Weremowicz S , Mulvey L , Yamamoto S , Brennan C , Mei S , Long H , Yao J , &amp; Polyak K (2015). CLK2 is an oncogenic kinase and splicing regulator in breast Cancer. Cancer Research, 75 , 1516–1526.25670169
Yoshida T , Shiroshima T , Lee SJ , Yasumura M , Uemura T , Chen X , Iwakura Y , &amp; Mishina M (2012). Interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein organizes neuronal synaptogenesis as a cell adhesion molecule. The Journal of Neuroscience, 32 , 2588–2600.22357843
Younas N , Zafar S , Shafiq M , Noor A , Siegert A , Arora AS , Galkin A , Zafar A , Schmitz M , Stadelmann C , Andreoletti O , Ferrer I , &amp; Zerr I (2020). SFPQ and Tau: Critical factors contributing to rapid progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathologica, 140 , 317–339.32577828
Zha S , Li Z , Cao Q , Wang F , &amp; Liu F (2018). PARP1 inhibitor (PJ34) improves the function of aging-induced endothelial progenitor cells by preserving intracellular NAD(+) levels and increasing SIRT1 activity. Stem Cell Research &amp; Therapy, 9 , 224.30139380
Zhang J , Lieu YK , Ali AM , Penson A , Reggio KS , Rabadan R , Raza A , Mukherjee S , &amp; Manley JL (2015). Disease-associated mutation in SRSF2 misregulates splicing by altering RNA-binding affinities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112 , E4726–E4734.26261309
Zhang L , Zhang X , Zhang H , Liu F , Bi Y , Zhang Y , Cheng C , &amp; Liu J (2020). Knockdown of SF3B1 inhibits cell proliferation, invasion and migration triggering apoptosis in breast cancer via aberrant splicing. Breast Cancer, 27 , 464–476.31919642
Zhang Y , Yang HT , Kadash-Edmondson K , Pan Y , Pan Z , Davidson BL , &amp; Xing Y (2020). Regional variation of splicing QTLs in human brain. American Journal of Human Genetics, 107 , 196–210.32589925
Zheng H , &amp; Koo EH (2011). Biology and pathophysiology of the amyloid precursor protein. Molecular Neurodegeneration, 6 , 27.21527012
Zohar O , Pick CG , Cavallaro S , Chapman J , Katzav A , Milman A , &amp; Alkon DL (2005). Age-dependent differential expression of BACE splice variants in brain regions of tg2576 mice. Neurobiology of Aging, 26 , 1167–1175.15917100
