LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101498165
35723
Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci
Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci
Progress in molecular biology and translational science
1877-1173
1878-0814

33453936
8163103
10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.007
NIHMS1678759
Article
Relevance of transgenic mouse models for Alzheimer’s disease
Tai Leon M.
Weng Juan Maldonado
LaDu Mary Jo *
Brady Scott T.
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
* Corresponding author: mladu@uic.edu
23 5 2021
24 8 2020
2021
28 5 2021
177 148
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Over the last several decades, a number of mouse models have been generated for mechanistic and preclinical therapeutic research on Alzheimer’s disease (AD)-like behavioral impairments and pathology. Acceptance or rejection of these models by the scientific community is playing a prominent role in how research findings are viewed and whether grants get funded and manuscripts published. The question of whether models are useful has become an exceptionally contentious issue. Much time and effort have gone into investigators debating comments such as “there are no mouse models of AD,” “…nice work but needs to be tested in another mouse model,” or “only data from humans is valid.” This leads to extensive written justifications for the choice of a model in grant applications, to the point of almost apologizing for the use of models. These debates also lead to initiatives to create new, better models of AD without consideration of what “better” may mean in this context. On the “other side,” an argument supporting the use of mouse models is one cannot dissect a biological mechanism in postmortem human tissue. In this chapter, we examine issues that we believe must be addressed if in vivo AD research is to progress. We opine that it is not the models that are the issue, but rather a lack of understanding the aspects of AD-like pathology the models were designed to mimic. The goal here is to improve the utilization of models to address critical issues, not to offer a critique of existing models or make endorsements.


1. Introduction

There are diseases that are uniquely human, since no orthologous disease has been identified in other species. Many adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases fall into this category, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD). A corollary of this absence of equivalent diseases is that there are few, if any, effective treatments for this category of disease. Recent history suggests that we need to understand the molecular basis of pathogenesis in these diseases if we are to develop effective therapies. However, many kinds of analysis cannot be done in human patients. Therefore, we are often left with descriptions of postmortem patient tissues that retain few indications of early stage disease and often are confounded by generic neuronal damage (e.g., mitochondrial and other organelle dysfunction, markers of reactive oxygen species stress, lower neuronal marker levels, changes in neuron structure) that is not disease specific and has not been useful in developing treatments.

Sequencing of the human genome and identification of mutations that produce AD in humans led to hope that a genetic solution might be found, but this approach has failed to produce clinically useful therapies. This may reflect (at least in part) the delayed onset of these diseases, which in turn indicates a phenotypic complexity that is not simply a result of gene expression but instead reflects interactions with the environment and posttranslational effects. However, identification of gene mutations that result in AD has led to the generation of animal models expressing mutant human proteins as models. Typically, these models produce pathological changes that partially replicate changes seen in human patients but fail to capture the full characteristics of the disease. Undeterred, a wide range of therapeutic approaches have been considered and many that showed limited success in animal models have been taken to clinical trials and failed. Investigators have reacted by blaming the animal models for the failure to develop therapies, leading to ever more complex models or complete dismissal of animal models as a means to better understand the disease process. This creates a dilemma—if animal models are dismissed then how do we model AD? The time is right to consider the use of models in the study of AD and other adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases. We propose that animal models should not be dismissed but recognized for their strengths in modeling specific aspects of AD-relevant pathology.

2. AD is complex, therefore realistic research expectations are important

The first challenge is to define pathology and pathogenesis in a disease as complicated as AD. Not only are there multiple pathogenic elements involved, but there are extensive co-morbidities leading to multiple types of dementia with overlapping pathology. Here we take a simplistic view of AD but one that still reflects the complexity of the disease and research challenges faced by investigators. AD is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disease preferentially affecting specific brain regions important for learning and memory as well as executive function (hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, etc.) that exhibits both amyloid β-protein (Aβ) and tau pathology. There are two types of AD, familial AD (FAD) and sporadic AD (SAD). FAD is caused by mutations in either the amyloid precursor protein (APP) or in components of the γ-secretase complex that cleave APP to produce Aβ. There are no mutations in tau associated with AD. Factors that initiate pathogenesis and neuronal dysfunction in SAD remain elusive. In both FAD and SAD, similar symptoms, pathology, risk factors and cell types are involved. Symptomatically, AD is characterized by progressive learning and memory dysfunction along with other behavioral abnormalities, including neuropsychiatric symptoms as well as difficulties in speaking, swallowing and coordination. Postmortem imaging and biomarker analysis have identified features of neuronal dysfunction in AD that ultimately underlie the changes in behavior. These include changes in neurotransmitter levels, pre- and post-synaptic protein levels, loss of synaptic connections, neuronal structural changes, altered posttranslational modification of neuronal proteins, and, at later stages, cell death of various glutamatergic, cholinergic, and GABAergic neurons. One of the main hallmarks and diagnostic criteria of AD are extracellular amyloid plaques that are composed of a number of proteins, including Aβ, though the number and distribution of extracellular plaques do not correlate strongly with clinical severity. There are other forms of Aβ detectable in AD that include high levels of soluble and soluble oligomeric Aβ in biochemical extracts and intraneuronal Aβ identified by histochemical analysis. These other forms should also be considered Aβ pathology in the context of AD, but the forms of Aβ that contribute to neuronal dysfunction remains hotly debated. The other main pathological hallmark/diagnostic criteria of AD in postmortem tissue are intraneuronal tangles of the tau protein. However, there are other aspects of tau pathology in AD that include altered phosphorylation and conformation changes. Amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are individually not specific for AD and may be detected during aging and in other neurodegenerative disorders. However, the combination of cognitive deficits, amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles of tau uniquely define AD.

This is not to say that pathology in AD is restricted to plaques and tangles. A number of other pathologies are found in AD patients. Neuroinflammation is evident in AD brains, including activated microglia and astrocytes and changes in cytokine/chemokine profiles. Cerebrovascular dysfunction is another prominent feature of AD, with outcomes including altered cerebral blood flow, higher blood-brain barrier leakiness, deposition of Aβ in or around the vasculature (termed cerebral amyloid angiopathy), vessel degeneration, microbleeds and white matter hyperintensities. Others have reported peripheral inflammation (altered cytokine profiles), peripheral immune cell infiltration into the brain, and alterations in cerebral spinal fluid production/drainage. However, these other pathologies are not specific for AD because they are also found in aging brains and other types of neurodegenerative conditions, and the extent of their dysfunction is not the same in all AD patients. Although many of these factors may exacerbate pathology in AD, they are likely to represent secondary rather than primary pathology. The extent that these other pathologies contribute to neuronal dysfunction at different AD stages is unclear and probably is variable from patient to patient.

There are also a number of risk factors for AD, including age, sex (AD risk is higher in women), genetics (e.g., APOE genotype), lifestyle (diet, physical activity), environment (head trauma) and vascular/metabolic (mid-life hypertension, stroke, heart disease, atherosclerosis, diabetes). These risk factors increase AD risk alone and interactively as often depicted in different versions of an additive “hit hypothesis.” Each individual risk factor can impact AD risk through one or multiple different mechanisms, but it is important to bear in mind that, by definition, a risk factor does not equate to causality. Not every individual with some combination of APOE4, low physical activity, head trauma, hypertension or diabetes will develop AD. These factors are also not specific for AD and increase the risk of other peripheral and central nervous system diseases that often present as co-morbidities in AD patients. Each factor represents a physiological stressor that may increase the likelihood that a pathogenic trigger event (e.g., initiation of the amyloid cascade or nucleation of tau filaments) will lead to disease instead of being resolved through normal homeostatic pathways. This may occur either by increasing the likelihood of such trigger events or by reducing the capacity of neurons to maintain protective responses to pathogenic events at an early stage, so that they reach a critical stage of progression toward disease.

Additional complexity comes from differences in regional and cell-type susceptibility to pathologic factors and different temporal progression of disease in different areas and cells. In addition, due to anatomical and functional connectivity, some types of pathology may occur in brain regions away from initially affected neurons. Death in AD typically occurs 5–15 years after a diagnosis of probable AD through behavioral testing. However, pathogenic changes in the brain begin to develop years or decades before the onset of symptoms and the temporal sequence for development of pathology is not known in detail, particularly for SAD. Thus, multiple pathways are likely to contribute to neuronal dysfunction at different stages of AD and in different patients.

The tendency to present research findings as definitive facts about AD can obscure the complex pathological mechanisms contributing to the clinical presentation. We highlight this complexity because many unknowns exist with respect to what occurs in the brains of AD patients that lead to cognitive impairment. Recognizing that AD is complicated may be a truism, but failure to keep this simple truth in mind has frequently prevented a synthesis of competing ideas that may be necessary to understand the disease. Acknowledging the complexity of AD is, in turn, key to managing expectations from any form of AD research, whether it involves human subjects or mouse models.

3. Why do we need AD animal models?

The failure of multiple clinical trials that were based on approaches reported to be effective in mouse models have led some investigators to question the validity of mouse models. AD is rightly characterized as a uniquely human disease, so why do we need a mouse model of AD? Undoubtedly, analysis of human patients and tissue is a critical part of AD research. Analysis of patient materials defines the disease, characterizes pathological changes (mostly late stage changes) and identifies likely components affecting pathogenesis. Such information is critical to understand on which aspects of the disease to focus. However, there are limitations in the types of studies that can be performed in AD patients or tissue. Analysis of postmortem tissue offers characterization of end stages of the disease, when the early pathogenic triggers may have long been buried by co-morbidities, neuroinflammation, and compensatory reactions. Such data can only provide a snapshot of a pathology that developed over decades and key players in early and intermediate pathology may have been lost with disease progression. End-point analyses can reveal pathologic changes but cannot distinguish between primary mechanistic changes and secondary reactions to the primary pathology. Similarly, identification of risk factors requires analysis of human populations but cannot determine the molecular basis of that increased risk.

Ultimately, however, correlative findings do not provide information on pathologic mechanisms nor the temporal sequence of changes occurring during disease progression. The identification of therapeutic targets is also more difficult if the sole source of data is from human patients. For example, analysis of AD brains consistently identifies deficits in synaptic proteins and synaptic connections but does not indicate the mechanism leading to loss of synaptic proteins and synaptic connections. Overexpression of synaptic components or systemic treatment with neurotransmitters or neurotrophins do not prevent disease progression because they do not address the reasons that synaptic connections are being lost. This is evident from L-Dopa treatments in Parkinson’s and cholinergic mimetics in AD. Similarly, neuroinflammation can accompany neuropathology as axons degenerate and neurons die, but this is a reaction to cell and tissue damage and is not disease specific, though it may be a risk factor. The problem is compounded by the fact that AD patients are typically of advanced age and commonly have co-morbidities that obscure what is primary to AD and what is secondary. It has been said “you can find evidence of disruption in any pathway you want with human AD tissue, and even if you can’t, it doesn’t disprove anything as you may have missed it.” Advances in imaging techniques can aid in diagnosis and tracking progression of AD but are dependent on prior knowledge of the relevant mechanistic read-outs. Moreover, current imaging methods lack the resolution and specificity to probe novel mechanisms in AD.

The answer to the question “why do we need models of AD” is simply that we require systems that can be interrogated at the cellular and molecular level early in the disease process. We need platforms that allow us to evaluate hypotheses about the role of individual genes and disease mechanisms in neurodegeneration. To dissect molecular mechanisms, we need to be able to test pathogenic elements alone and in combination with each other. Transgenic mouse models that mimic certain aspects of AD pathology thus can complement and advance findings found in AD patients, as well as reveal novel information not ethically obtainable in humans. These transgenic mice do not have AD, but they can tell us a great deal about AD, if utilized properly.

3.1 What is a valid disease model?

This is a deceptively simple question, but one that highlights the difficulty of neurodegeneration research. A model by definition is not “the disease” but rather a representation of some aspect of the disease. We can build a scale model of a supersonic passenger plane as an innovative approach to improve efficiency in wind tunnel tests, but we would never consider such a model to be equivalent to the passenger plane itself. Nevertheless, such scale models can be valuable for understanding critical aerodynamic characteristics and are essential for predicting the performance of a full-size version. Ideally, one might wish for a rodent model that would reveal the effects of risk factors, the temporal sequence of symptoms, and the full course of pathology observed in humans. Such a model is rarely, if ever, possible. For the majority of diseases, this is not feasible since rodent and human biology are not the same and there are no perfect in vivo models of human disease. However, there are more similarities than differences in rodent and human biology. As a result, rodent models can replicate critical elements of the disease process. Such in vivo models are useful for investigating specific aspects of pathology that are relevant for the human condition. Indeed, most available mouse models were designed on the basis of risk factors and pathology found in human studies. All disease models are incomplete, but each will have advantages and limitations. As in any experimental investigation, it is critical to match the question being asked to a method that can answer it. Therefore, the choice of disease model depends on the scientific question under investigation and the tools available for probing the model.

The complexity of AD presents a particular challenge in designing and using AD-mouse models. Ultimately, AD remains a uniquely human condition: neither mice nor rats develop AD. Further, even if we were able to design a rodent model that incorporates all the risk factors and pathology of AD in a single transgenic mouse, it is not clear that it would help us develop therapies. For example, to model sporadic forms of AD, only some mice would develop AD and only at advanced ages. We would never know whether the mice examined at younger ages would have developed the disease. Further, the pathology would be variable among those that did develop AD and determining which of the multiple risk factors would be critical for pathogenesis. We would essentially have replicated the conundrum on human patients on a smaller scale, and it would be extremely difficult to test any mechanistic hypothesis.

Rather than attempting to replicate the full AD pathology in a mouse, many studies are better served by more limited models that focus attention on specific aspects of AD pathology. To this end, a number of transgenic mouse models have been developed to evaluate certain pathologies and risk factors found in AD patients. This is a feature of these models, not a flaw. In fact, studies using such limited transgenic models have been extraordinarily useful and provided many critical insights into AD-relevant mechanisms. Analysis of human tissue will continue to be critical for characterizing pathology and risk factors in AD, but research in rodent models can further our mechanistic understanding of the disease. The only relevant question should be “Is the choice of rodent model appropriate for the question being addressed?”

However, there is a related question: Are existing models adequate or do we need to develop new models? As with the original question of what a model is, the answer is complex. At present, there is a tendency to dismiss existing models in favor of the “model of the week.” This is actually a variant of the criticism that mice don’t get AD. If a new model isn’t better suited to address the scientific question, then simply switching one for another doesn’t really help. Many existing models are well characterized and well suited for studying disease mechanisms, making them appropriate for many investigations. Indeed, every new model has to be extensively characterized and validated to minimize the chance that pathologies unrelated to AD (e.g., liver failure, cancers, blindness, etc.) have not been introduced. If we want to know the effects of a particular genetic variant identified in a GWAS study, we need to introduce that variant into an appropriate model. However, if we want to examine the pathological effects of Aβ or tau filaments, existing models may be suitable. We present here a broad overview of the types of models that are available, along with their advantages and limitations. We have focused on mouse models since they are most widely used, although an increasing number of rat models that may offer advantages over mice have been generated and continue to be developed.

3.2 Modeling high levels of human Aβ

After identification of Aβ peptides as the main component of amyloid plaques and demonstrations that all known FAD mutations are in genes encoding proteins involved in Aβ production, models were designed to incorporate high levels of human Aβ (reviewed in Refs. 1,2). Although APP is a conserved protein, processing of mouse APP does not produce Aβ peptides comparable in sequence to human Aβ, differing in three amino acid positions. Functionally, Aβ from standard laboratory rodents do not aggregate or exhibit the biological activity of human Aβ peptides.3 Therefore, mice transgenic for human Aβ were developed via the introduction of human APP containing one or more FAD mutations either alone or as a double or greater transgenics combined with components of the γ-secretase complex (e.g., presenilin-1, or presenilin-2) containing FAD mutations. These FAD mutations are typically expressed under the control of heterologous promoters such as Thy-1, PDGFβ, NSE, or the prion promoter and there are over 50 different transgenic strains described in the literature.1,4–40 A smaller number of models have been engineered to knock-in human genes that include FAD mutations, which are expressed under control of the endogenous mouse promoters.41,42 These FAD models are named based on the number of mutations, the identity of the mutations, the promoter used or a combination of all of these. More recently described models replace the Aβ sequence of mouse APP with the wild-type human Aβ sequence, but published data from this model are limited. All of these models lead to production of Aβ peptides and accumulation of oligomers and/or aggregates of those peptides. Depending on the model, the age of onset of plaque formation and behavioral deficits may vary from 3 to 18 months, but all exhibit amyloid pathology. These are the models that have been studied most extensively and are generally the mouse models used to test strategies for reducing amyloid pathology.

3.2.1 Advantages

Models that incorporate mutations are highly relevant for research on FAD and other familial forms of dementia that involve Aβ. More generally, FAD models develop amyloid pathology in the brain that is a feature of both SAD and FAD. Depending on the model, FAD mice have high levels of soluble, soluble oligomeric, intraneuronal and extracellular Aβ (in various ratios) as well as synaptic dysfunction and behavioral deficits. Therefore, a great strength of these models is the ability to investigate pathways that are involved in the regulation of Aβ levels, and the effect of Aβ peptides on neuronal function. In addition, many FAD models display neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular dysfunction. These models provide the means to determine mechanisms through which high Aβ levels activate glia and to characterize cellular changes in the cerebrovasculature as well as how these changes affect synaptic and behavioral function. A substantial literature exists that characterizes many different aspects of these models, providing a solid foundation for testing candidate interventions. These characterizations include age of onset, rate of disease progression, nature and extent of pathological indicators, behavioral changes, and effects of biological variables such as sex.

FAD models have been widely used for preclinical assessments of treatments that target Aβ levels. One could argue that the clinical observations of higher plaques containing Aβ in humans led to development of FAD mouse models to screen for interventions that reduce the plaque load, several of which advanced to clinical trials. Although these trials have failed, reports suggest that at least some of these treatments lowered plaque size/density in patients just as they had in the FAD mouse models (pharmacodynamic activity). Unfortunately, no significant effects on cognition (efficacy) were observed. This suggests that it was not so much the models that were at fault, since reduction of plaque loads were achieved. Instead, reasons for lack of efficacy may perhaps be the target, time of treatment in clinical studies and/or the mouse study designs. As discussed below, preclinical therapeutic applications require a rigorous protocol that addresses major biological variables and an appropriate choice of both model and readouts. This is the case whether the studies involve testing treatments that target pathology or signaling activated by Aβ (negative modulators) and/or treatments promoting pathways that may be protective (positive modulators).

3.2.2 Limitations

This is not to say that such models do not have limitations. For example, the biological functions of full-length APP, the enzymes that cleave APP to produce Aβ peptides and the other products of APP cleavage are not fully understood, but certainly are more extensive than production of Aβ pathology. These other functions may also be affected by FAD mutations or by the overexpression and altered distribution of human APP genes driven by heterologous promoters. Thus, the question of whether a given model reflects the effects of Aβ pathology or of the FAD mutations for a specific pathology/pathway should be considered. For example, APP and non-Aβ APP metabolites play a role in cell adhesion, synaptic stability, axonal outgrowth and gene transcription in neurons, so the overexpression of FAD mutations may alter these functions.

Transgenic models using FAD mutations typically result in high Aβ accumulation at an early age and rapid progression of pathology. This characteristic has been used to argue that such models are inappropriate because they lack the age component of AD, i.e., gradual accumulation of Aβ thought out the lifespan of the animal. As a result, these transgenic models may be relevant for FAD, but would not be as suitable for modeling SAD. This concern raises questions about whether Aβ differentially affects the same neuronal functions and other pathologies at younger vs older ages in mice. Even if young and old mice are affected equivalently, the high rate of accumulation/levels of Aβ could modulate pathways in ways that are not the same as those observed at the slower rates of accumulation and levels found in patients. This reflects our lack of understanding of the basic neuropathological effects of Aβ or even the age at which all forms of Aβ pathology develop in either FAD or SAD. The early onset of pathology in transgenic FAD models also limits the ability to introduce mimics of AD risk factors at the mid-life time point of mice.

The concern with FAD mutations and aggressive Aβ pathology has been addressed, in part, by the introduction of full-length human APP or the human Aβ sequence into mouse APP. However, these knock-in models fail to develop Aβ pathology substantial enough to mimic that found in AD. One response to this problem has been to knock-in human APP with FAD mutations, with the justification that preservation of the mouse APP promoter will preserve endogenous expression, including the peripheral expression of APP. This concern appears to overlook the fact that human APP is expressed as predominantly three main isoforms, with the relevant neuronal isoform of APP expressed by neurons. Moreover, expression levels may differ even in the knock-in models, as the mouse and human promoter regions differ, and the issue of the FAD mutations remain.

3.2.3 Take-home points

FAD models have the advantage of mimicking Aβ pathology found in AD patients, producing changes in neuronal function, neuroinflammation and behavior. Therefore, there are a number of useful mechanistic and preclinical therapeutic applications for these models related to Aβ pathology. This is not to say that they are complete models of AD. For example, they do not develop tau filaments, although rodent tau is hyperphosphorylated. Similarly, they cannot incorporate many age-related mechanisms or additional mid-life risk factors. For example, mid-life hypertension is an AD risk factor, which would require introduction to 12 months old FAD mice where in many models there is already extensive Aβ pathology and behavioral impairments. Thus, for research questions that are dependent on tau pathology or age-related risk factors, such models would not be useful. If a pathway is modulated by FAD mutations independent of Aβ levels, then alternative models that lack FAD mutations should be considered, though with the disadvantage that Aβ levels may never be very high, even at later ages. If there are concerns that a pathway under investigation is sensitive to the rate of accumulation or to the absolute levels of Aβ accumulation in an aging nervous system, then a less aggressive model incorporating FAD mutations can be selected. Regardless, these FAD models can be platforms for evaluating therapeutic approaches aimed at reducing Aβ pathology, although such strategies may fail to produce clinically significant improvement in patients, if other aspects of AD pathogenesis are not addressed concurrently. This is not a flaw in the model, but a failure to recognize the complexity of AD pathology in designing therapeutic interventions.

3.3 Models of tau and Aβ pathology

AD involves a combination of both Aβ and tau pathology. In FAD models there are higher levels of tau phosphorylation, but mouse tau does not form stable neurofibrillary tangles or exhibit toxicity comparable to human tau aggregates. The reason for differential stability of rodent and human tau aggregates remains unclear. However, we do know that tau pathology in humans is accompanied by a conformational change in the tau protein that exposes an N-terminal region called the phosphatase activating domain (PAD).43 Chronic PAD exposure dysregulates a phosphatase/kinase signaling pathway and induces neuronal dysfunction. While much of the tau molecule is well conserved between rodent and human, the PAD domain is not. Thus, research addressing the role of Aβ on tau pathology is limited to phosphorylation unless transgenic mice replicating tau pathologies are utilized. There are ∼40 models of tau pathology that have been generated to study tauopathies, a few of which have been crossed to AD-relevant models in order to investigate the interaction between human tau and human Aβ.31,35,44,45 Most commonly, FAD mice are crossed with transgenic mice that express mutations found in tauopathies (e.g., P30IL) under heterologous promoters. Additional models are being developed that contain human tau with no mutations and that use the mouse endogenous promoter.

3.3.1 Advantages

The main advantage of FAD-tau models is the simultaneous development of both tau and Aβ pathology. Researchers can assess functional interactions that occur with concurrent Aβ and tau pathology as well as the contribution to other pathological features of AD such as neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular dysfunction. These models, in principle, allow evaluation of therapeutic approaches that target either tau pathology or Aβ in the presence of the other, although this strategy has not yet been exploited extensively.

3.3.2 Limitations

Human tau with a mutation found in tauopathies is typically overexpressed in tau mouse models. In humans, this mutant tau produces frontotemporal dementia or other tauopathies, but tau in AD is not mutated and the distribution of tau pathology differs between the two diseases. Overexpression of mutant and full-length tau also results in localization patterns not typically observed in AD. For example, abnormal localization of pathological proteins to different subcellular organelles, brain regions and fluids (e.g., interstitial fluid) at an early age may lead to different phenotypes. The combination of overexpression and differential distribution makes the relevance of mutated tau to AD unclear.

Given the interest in developing AD-relevant biomarkers, the presence of extracellular tau in these models raise a number of questions. The biology of APP processing allows one to argue that, in AD, high levels of extracellular Aβ are relevant to the disease process. However, the levels and extent that tau is found extracellularly in AD remains unclear. This question is particularly relevant given the recent interest in prion-like spreading of tau pathology in disease. Due to the high levels of tau found in subcellular compartments and in extracellular spaces in these models, hypotheses derived from these models may be over interpreted. Indeed, the distribution of tau in mouse models may only match AD patients at very end stages of the disease, and therefore any functional changes observed in these models may not be relevant. Thus, the nuclear transport/transcriptional activities, prion-like spreading, tau-induced neuroinflammation, and cerebrovascular dysfunction in these models may not be primary components of the disease process in AD. In addition, there are six tau isoforms, generated by alternative splicing, expressed in the human central nervous system, and different tauopathies may preferentially involve specific splice isoforms. Transgenes lack this splicing activity, so the full complexity of tau pathology is not recapitulated with the introduction of high levels of only one form of human tau, even if expression is under the control of the mouse endogenous promoter.

3.3.3 Take-home points

FAD-tau models offer a unique opportunity to assess the interaction between Aβ and tau not possible with FAD alone. Therefore, if a research question involves targeting human tau or evaluating the mechanistic interaction between tau and other AD-relevant pathologies these models may be invaluable. However, it is important to consider that mutated forms of tau may not mimic human tau in AD, tau overexpression/localization may lead to changes that may not be biologically relevant for the human condition, and the presence of different splice variants of tau in humans may be hard to mimic in a mouse.

4. Modeling risk factors

Extensive epidemiological and genetic studies have identified a number of risk factors that increase (or in some cases decrease) the likelihood of developing SAD. These factors are distinct from the FAD mutations in APP and PS1/2. FAD mutations are typically autosomal dominant mutations with high penetrance. Essentially, individuals with one of these FAD mutations or with Down syndrome will develop AD pathology, although the age of onset may vary. In contrast, many patients with increased risk will not develop AD pathology. This is true whether dealing with aging, sex, genetic or environmental risk factors. This uncertainty complicates analysis of the contributions that each of these factors may make to AD pathogenesis in rodent models or humans. If one cannot determine preclinically whether the individual at risk will develop AD pathology, then investigators are often left with studying end-stage pathology. In rodent models, this has been addressed by including the presence of FAD mutant genes that will produce AD-like pathology at a known rate. Alternatively, the risk factors of interest would need to be introduced in rodent models expressing the human APP and tau gene products under physiological promoters if they are to replicate the human condition.

4.1 Universal biological variables of AD (age, sex, APOE)

4.1.1 Aging (Fig. 1)

Aging is the greatest overall risk factor for SAD, and even with FAD mutants, clinical symptoms do not emerge until after 40 years of age. An important point in this regard is how we define aging in model systems. Fig. 1 has a version of general guidelines for equating mouse to human years, albeit imperfectly. A way to evaluate the effect of aging is to assess pathological changes at these time points in FAD or FAD-tau transgenic mice. However, in many FAD mouse models, there is extensive Aβ pathology and behavioral dysfunction even at young or middle ages. An alternative approach is to use pathology as a guide. This is more arbitrary, but some investigators have used ages where advanced behavioral/synaptic dysfunction and high Aβ levels are present as a definition of “old” and the preclinical stages of Aβ deposition as young. However, aging and senescence are complex multisystem phenomena that do not simply translate across species, particularly when the difference in lifespan is so great (3 years vs 100 years). Nevertheless, we cannot realistically conduct multigenerational studies for understanding cell and molecular factors affecting the risk of AD in humans. Fortunately, there are clear changes during senescence in rodents that are corollaries to changes in aging humans.

4.1.1.1 Advantages

The advantages of incorporating aging into research programs that involve FAD and FAD-tau mice are self-evident, with examples including delineating the trajectory of pathological changes, identifying mechanisms involved in any age-dependent changes and assessing whether a treatment is beneficial at different stages of behavioral dysfunction. Given current grant cycles and career trajectories, aging studies in the range of 1–2 years are probably the best one can do for most studies. The aggressive nature of pathology in most FAD mouse models (6–12 months) make them less suited for studies on how age affects AD pathology. At present, there are some models that progress more slowly, and others are under development, but these models may also have incomplete penetrance, which complicates analysis.

4.1.1.2 Limitations

The limitations imposed by the fulminant pathology seen in some FAD models, and the lack of overt pathology in other AD models, is compounded in studies of aging. In an aggressive model, the definition of old/older may end up at 6–8 months and therefore occur prior to natural changes that occur in mouse aging and senescence. For those models that are less aggressive, evaluation at later ages may not reveal significant changes in plaque or oligomeric Aβ levels and therefore the relationship of the aging component in rodents with respect to Aβ pathology may not accurately replicate age-related changes in human. This will continue to be a challenge in development of models suitable for age-related studies.

4.1.1.3 Take-home points

The inclusion of different aged mice in research using FAD and FAD-tau models is common and necessary. An important consideration is prior determination of what aspects of aging are under investigation: physiological aging or the transition from preclinical to clinical stages. For example, if the goal of the research is to evaluate how the natural progression of aging effects Aβ pathology, then less aggressive FAD and FAD-tau models should be considered. If the question is about the time course of pathology that occurs relative to the initiation of Aβ pathology, then more aggressive models are justified. In general, studies aging can be extremely complicated. Examples of pertinent points to consider are: What exactly is aging from a biological standpoint? How does rodent aging compare to human aging? For example, neuronal proteins are subject to cumulative environmental damage, which is simply a function of how long the protein has existed in the body and is not species specific. By that rubric, the age of individual cytoskeletal proteins (neurofilament and microtubule proteins) in the distal axon of long fiber tracts like corticospinal neurons or complex projection neurons in the CNS (3–5 years) will be greater than the lifespan of a laboratory mouse. Another relevant issue is whether any aspects of aging is accelerated by FAD or FAD-tau mutations? Additional questions remain as to how different organ systems change during aging, particularly after the primary reproductive years. Finally, are there environmental challenges that are more likely in aging that are risk factors for AD? These may include altered metabolism, changing stress or sex hormone levels, inflammation, and cardiovascular pathology, among others. The possibility of introducing environmental stressors that accompany aging into FAD mice may also be instructive with less aggressive models, but this is an area of investigation that is underdeveloped.

4.1.2 Sex

AD risk is higher in females than males, and female sex also interacts with other risk factors to increase AD risk. Thus, as recognized by NIH, understanding the impact of sex in AD-like pathology is a critical need that is starting to be addressed systematically. Obvious approaches include simply comparing pathology in male and female FAD or FAD-tau mice at different ages and ensuring that preclinical activity of any treatment is tested in both sexes. Another approach to mimic changes that occur during menopause, which is considered an age-related contributing factor to explain the higher risk of AD in females. The most common approaches to model menopause are surgical (ovariectomy) or chemical (4-vinylcyclohexene; thought to accelerate atresia resulting in accelerated primordial and primary ovarian cell degeneration). These approaches eliminate the reproductive cycle and alter hormonal programs in females, although such treatments may not be equivalent to normal menopause in humans46 and there are differences in the reproductive cycle in rodents and humans. Nevertheless, existing studies in FAD models document significant differences between pathology observed in males and females, with females showing earlier onset and greater severity.

4.1.2.1 Advantages

Given that comparing normal female and male FAD mice has identified sex differences in pathology, this is an area where FAD and FAD-tau models can be extremely useful. Indeed, Aβ pathology, neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular dysfunction all appear greater in female mice than in male mice. These changes can be seen prior to ages that irregular estrous cycles begin to occur in wild-type mice (9–12 months). Thus, there are inherent different sex biases in AD-relevant pathology in FAD mice. In addition, the progression AD-relevant pathology can be affected by ovariectomy or chemical ovary depletion. Thus, all these approaches are suited to evaluating the role of sex and menopause as risk factors for AD.

4.1.2.2 Limitations

Although the sex differences in Aβ pathology in FAD and FAD-tau models are well documented, these occur in normal mice, which are not equivalent to human patterns suggesting increased risk primarily in post-menopausal women. Mice do display age-dependent dysregulation in reproductive cycles, hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, ovarian changes and gonadal hormonal fluctuations.46 However, mice do not exhibit follicle-depleted ovaries by onset of reproductive senescence, and therefore circulating levels of gonadal hormones persist. While ovariectomy will reduce gonadal hormone levels, one drawback of ovariectomy is that the changes produce sudden loss of hormones in mice that is very different from the gradual losses that occur in humans.

4.1.2.3 Take-home points

Incorporating sex into AD research is important, given the higher incidence of AD in females, but no model perfectly recapitulates this risk. The complexity of the disease process is compounded by the complex differences between males and females. The degree to which sex is incorporated as variable, and therefore the research effort applied, depends on the question. However, the existing literature clearly documents the differences between sexes in Aβ pathology with regard to age of onset and rate of progression. These findings document the power of FAD and FAD-tau models for addressing questions about sex differences in AD risk. The simplest approach is to evaluate whether sex modulates the pathology/pathway or treatment of interest using normal mice, followed by additional studies using mimics of menopause.

While sex-based differences in Aβ pathology responses are well established in rodent models of AD, questions about the underlying mechanisms remain. The available data do not indicate what aspects of sex contribute to differential responses to Aβ pathology. Studies in both normal and ovariectomized mice will be needed. For example, more detailed analysis of both short-term and long-term changes in hormone levels could be conducted in both periphery and brain, as could the effects of supplementation of specific hormones. The timing of ovariectomy may be an important variable given the timeline of pathological changes in FAD mice. Similarly, breeding history may be an important variable. Virgin female mice may show responses different from those from retired breeders. Further, it is important to consider how other risk factors affect the differential between males and females. Thus, incorporating sex is important, but the depth (e.g., normal mice, mimics of menopause) that a specific study is conducted should be matched with the goal and resources available. As with all risk factors, both men and women are at risk of developing AD, but the increased risk facing females suggests a critical variable may involve a pathogenic pathway that is relevant for both sexes but enhanced in females or the existence of compensatory mechanisms that are less robust in females.

4.1.3 APOE

APOE is the gene with the greatest effect on risk for SAD. The specific APOE isoform has a substantial effect on AD risk. Thus, individuals homozygous for APOE4 have risk of developing AD that is up to 12-fold greater when compared to APOE3 homozygotes, whereas individuals that are APOE2 homozygotes exhibit decreased AD risk. Unfortunately, there is only one form of rodent APOE, which is structurally and functionally distinct from any of the three human APOE genotypes. Therefore, to evaluate the role of APOE in AD pathogenesis, models had to be developed that expressed human APOE genotypes. The most widely used are knock-in mouse models alone47–49 or those crossed with FAD50,51 and tauopathy mice.52,53 However, APOE genotype induced AD risk is associated primarily with late onset SAD rather than FAD. The APOE knock-in models have distinctive phenotypes, but do not develop either Aβ or tau pathology. Crosses of APOE knock-ins with FAD or tauopathy models do develop AD-like pathology, but these models have been criticized because AD-related pathology will develop without the presence of human APOE. Nonetheless, models combining human APOE with FAD transgenics have replicated a number of critical aspects of AD pathogenesis. In these models, compared to APOE3, APOE4 is associated with earlier and more aggressive pathology; earlier onset in females; and differential effects on neuroinflammation and the cerebrovasculature. All of these data validate the idea that APOE genotype affects the risk of developing AD and interacts with the mechanisms underlying Aβ pathology.

4.1.3.1 Advantages

APOE knock-in mice enable an evaluation of how the APOE genotypes modulate neuronal function and other pathologies (e.g., neuroinflammation, cerebrovascular function) potentially relevant for AD in the absence of high Aβ or tau levels. These changes may be useful for uncovering mechanistic pathways that predispose APOE4 carriers to progress from normal aging to AD. The introduction of FAD mutations provides an opportunity to evaluate the role of APOE genotypes in modulating Aβ levels, and Aβ-induced effects on neuronal function, neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular dysfunction. Similarly, crossing APOE4 models with tau transgenics allows evaluation of the interactions between APOE genotype and different aspects of tau pathology. An additional mechanistic advantage of these models is that different pathways/pathology can be identified, those accelerated by APOE4 compared to APOE3 or APOE2 as well as pathways that are specific for APOE4. For preclinical studies targeting levels/lipidation of the apoE4 protein directly or indirectly, APOE4 transgenic models are critical.

4.1.3.2 Limitations

APOE4 is a risk factor for other conditions of the peripheral and central nervous system, and therefore not all data obtained in knock-in models may be directly relevant specifically for AD. The limitations of FAD and tau models apply to APOE-FAD and APOE-tau models.

4.1.3.3 Take-home points

APOE-FAD models are important for deciphering mechanistic pathways through which APOE4 may affect Aβ pathology and thereby increase AD risk. Thus, for a group interested in research on human apoE proteins or pathways modulated by human APOE genotypes, such models are critical. Limitations of FAD and tau models also apply to these models and should be kept in mind.

4.1.4 Interactions among universal biological variables (age, sex, APOE) (Fig. 2)

In research focused on any gene or risk factor that may work in concert with others, stratification of data is critical. As an example, the number of variables that can affect development of AD requires stratification to consider different combinatorials of variables. Considering the case of APOE3 and APOE4 genotype requires initial stratification into four groups: APOE3, APOE4, APOE3/FAD and APOE4/FAD. Having defined these groups by genotype, we must introduce the variable of sex-based effects (Fig. 2).

Male and females must be included to determine whether sex influences the outcomes because previous studies have shown that females are more likely to develop AD and APOE4 females exhibit pathological changes that present earlier in life and progress more rapidly. To adequately evaluate these variables using a specific readout, requires a study design with 4 (genotypes)×2 (sexes)×20 (n)= 160/age group. Even when only a subset of these variables are under consideration, awareness of these issues is critical for designing a rigorous study. The importance of such considerations can be illustrated by the study of cardiovascular disease (CVD). The initial approach neglected sex-related variables, so males were studied almost exclusively to establish the mechanism, manifestation and treatment for CVD. The conclusions from such studies became dogma that was then applied to females, resulting in catastrophic outcomes. The presentation of CVD in females is not like that of males, resulting in a generation of women being undiagnosed, under-diagnosed or incorrectly diagnosed and then mistreated. Universal risk factors are important because everyone has a sex and an APOE genotype, making them fundamental descriptors for AD risk in humans and AD pathology in APOE/FAD mice. Although we have only considered homozygous examples here, the differential risk also applies to male and female APOE3/4 carriers as the males exhibit no increase in risk while the females exhibit the expected fourfold increase, adding still another level of variability. This type of human data prompted Dr. Michael Greicius, with the Genetic Literacy Project (April 22, 2014), to state that as physician when asked what advice he would give to a male APOE3/4 carrier vs a female APOE3/4 carrier: “People come to me and say: ‘I have an APOE4 gene (sic APOE3/4), what should I do?’ If it is a man, I would say his risk in not increased much if at all. If it is a woman, my advice will be very different.” Data documenting this level of variability in risk is well documented, yet most of the existing and in-progress large human studies were not enrolled with an eye to allow stratification along the lines of these variables. Thus, when results from an APOE/FAD mouse model need to be translated to human disease, we are comparing apples to oranges. Such considerations are relevant for all studies that attempt to incorporate multiple genetic, environmental, lifestyle or other risk factors into a FAD or FAD-Tau mouse model.

4.2 Genetic mutations (e.g., TREM2, ABCA7, apoJ)

In contrast to the universal risk factors, a number of genes that are associated with AD in one or more genome-wide association studies have been or are currently being incorporated into transgenic mouse models. Such genes/gene variants exhibit much less influence on AD risk as they are present in only a fraction of AD cases, but they may illuminate pathological mechanisms. These genes include, but are not limited to, TREM2, CD33, ABCA7, sortilin, apoJ, PICALM, CR1 and BIN1. The manner in which these genes have been investigated include knockouts and introducing the variants that are associated with AD risk into wild-type mice and in mice with FAD mutations, with APOE4 or with each other. Rather than detailing all the different types of information that can be gleaned from each model, we will focus on general features.

4.2.1 Advantages

The advantages of these models are that they may uncover details on how these genes alter the trajectory of AD in a select group of individuals. There is also the possibility that the function of the non-mutated gene plays a role in the progression of AD, and therefore these models may provide information on what aspects of AD-relevant pathology are modulated by the gene/protein, with hopes that a novel mechanisms or therapies will be discovered.

4.2.2 Limitations

The extent to which these genes contribute to risk for AD in the general population is open to debate. None represent increased risk to the level of APOE, sex or aging. Some genes associated with AD in GWAS do so in a small number of patients and therefore the applicability of the specific mutations to SAD is limited. Alternatively, the effects of these candidate genes may be indirect, reducing overall fitness rather than specifically increasing risk for SAD. Regardless, the underlying molecular mechanisms that connect these genes to AD pathology have not been determined. As part of the initiative to generate more useful models, there are proposals to introduce multiple AD risk-associated genes into a single mouse line as a way to generate a model that is more representative of SAD. However, unless these models incorporate human APP and tau as well, they will not be able to replicate SAD pathology and the relevance to human disease in such a complex model may be difficult to discern. Regardless, the overall complexity of multigene transgenics will require extensive validation and characterization of single transgene models before they can be used for probing pathogenesis in SAD. For example, it is important to understand how the gene modifies neuron function and behavior alone, and in the context of Aβ pathology. In addition, the combination of these AD associated genes may produce neuropathology, but not through pathways that are analogous to SAD patients.

4.2.3 Take-home points

If a research question is focused on the role of a particular gene or variant in modulating neuronal or peripheral functions, then these models are useful. However, the broader issue of whether these novel models offer any advantage over models of Aβ or tau in understanding AD pathology or developing effective therapies for AD remains speculative at best. Furthermore, simply changing the transgenes involved does not address the criticisms that have been leveled against the FAD models (i.e., differences in life span and neuronal architecture between mice and humans).

4.3 Environment, lifestyle and co-morbidities (e.g., air pollution, exercise and diabetes)

Any consideration of lifetime risk of developing AD must also consider environmental and lifestyle factors. Identified risk factors for AD include hypertension, diabetes, high fat diets, exercise levels, and chronic inflammation, among others. Each of these have been introduced into one or more FAD models and reported to affect disease progression. The advantage of such an approach is that the impact of each stressor on specific pathological features can be identified with the potential to tease out mechanisms. A caution is that many of these risk factors typically occur in mid-life or later, so they may represent an exacerbation of age-related risks. As noted above, aging studies in rodent models have certain caveats, particularly in FAD models with short life spans and aggressive disease.

4.4 Summary of AD-mouse models (Fig. 3)

Multiple models of AD-like pathology exist, and more are under development. Therefore, before embarking on a research project it is important to choose an appropriate model. As detailed above, models are not equivalent to the human disease, but the best models replicate a key aspect of the disease. While there is no perfect rodent model suitable for all studies, a number of useful models have been generated and validated for addressing critical questions in AD. Thus, a primary goal should be to decide which model and which read-outs are best suited for addressing the hypothesis/question of interest (Fig. 3). An appreciation of both the limitations of a given model and the complexity of AD is key for managing expectations of what can be learned from a given model and experimental design. Finding the cause or cure of AD will continue to be a daunting task, but we can hope to identify pathways and treatments that may mitigate symptoms and pathology in patients with this devastating disease through judicious use of rodent models.

5. Study designs for therapeutic interventions

In a room of researchers discussing AD models, one is likely to hear comments such as “we have cured AD mice hundreds of times, but they never work in humans, so we need better models.” As common as this sentiment may be, it fails to hold up under inspection. First, there are no mice with AD, so we can’t cure AD in mice. Second, none of the available treatments have eliminated AD pathology, even in mice. At best, reductions in amyloid or tangle burden have been achieved with a modest improvement in behavioral indices. In our opinion, there are issues in the design of preclinical therapeutic studies that contributes to this notion; issues that need to be addressed to facilitate replication as well as to minimize false positives and false negatives. A number of recent articles have highlighted the importance of blinding, sample size estimates and statistical analysis, resulting in expanded guidelines for both grant applications and publications. For AD research it is critical that data are reproducible across laboratories and, in some cases, across different models. Further, the notion of statistical significance must be distinguished from a biologically meaningful effect. For example, a 10–20% improvement in cognitive performance or lifespan may be significant with a large enough n, but that may not translate into a meaningful impact on patient symptoms. Is it enough of an effect for detailed future studies? The results to date suggest that it does not, but that has not prevented large scale studies based on such evidence. The question is how we can design better studies and identify therapeutic interventions that will be efficacious.

5.1 Cautionary tale from research in ALS models

The question about models is not unique to AD and a lesson can be learned from the use of models in other neurodegenerative diseases, particularly mouse models of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS). In principle, FALS should be much simpler to model than AD. There are multiple examples of monogenic causes of FALS, where there is a clear toxic gain of function and the transgenic models preferentially affect motor neurons with a pathology remarkably similar to the human ortholog. However, we still have no effective therapies for either FALS or the sporadic forms of ALS. A variety of therapies have been tested in these models and a number were reported to extend lifespan and/or improve motor function, with multiple drugs advancing to clinical trials. All but two were deemed to be failures in the clinic. While two have received FDA approval, their impact on disease progression in humans is minimal at best. This led to similar complaints that mouse models were not good enough and a number of laboratories have endeavored to produce “better” models. However, despite press releases, few of the “cures” identified in these mouse models extended lifespan by more than 10–20% and none fully restored motor function or prevented progression of the disease.

Taking note of this fact, Scott et al.54 undertook a critical re-examination of eight different compounds that were previously reported to be effective in treating motor neuron disease. All had advanced to clinical trials, yet all but one failed. These compounds were tested in a specific mouse model of FALS that expressed mutant SOD1 (G93A), including riluzole, the compound that received FDA approval although it only extends patients survival by 2–3 months. All the other compounds tested had failed to provide significant benefit in clinical trials. Although all used the G93A mouse model, the original preclinical studies for these compounds were highly variable in experimental design. To determine whether the mouse model was useful in predicting clinical outcomes, Scott et al. retested these eight compounds using a rigorous, standardized experimental protocol that included increasing the number of litter matched animals per group to &gt;12; tested males and females as separate groups; used genetically standardized animals; “blinded” both technicians and investigators; established a uniform endpoint criterion; rigorously tracked non-ALS deaths and excluded them from consideration; and used appropriate statistical analysis. The result was that every compound that had failed in clinical trials also failed in the mouse model, including riluzole. Scott et al. concluded that the G93A SOD1 mouse model was well suited for testing ALS therapies, provided a rigorous experimental protocol was followed. Lessons from this study are clearly applicable to studies using AD models: Greater rigor in experiment and trial design are needed.

5.2 Designing a study to fully evaluate compound activity (Fig. 4)

Given the amount of effort and expense required for even a limited clinical trial, appropriately designed and executed preclinical studies are critical. Imagine that a compound targeting a candidate pathway shows promise in a short-term (1–3-month treatment) study in a FAD mouse model. Publishing these types of data are important for highlighting a potential contribution of the pathway to AD-like pathology, and of course, for enabling grant funding for follow-up mechanistic studies. An assumption is made that if a treatment is efficacious over the short-term, even acutely, similar results will be observed in long-term treatment studies. However, there are multiple changes in the brain of FAD mice and patients that contribute to neuronal dysfunction throughout the lifespan. For example, CNS cholinergic neurons are among the earliest neurons affected in AD. Consistent with this, cholinergic mimetics have proven to modestly improve cognition at early stages but lose efficacy as the remaining targeted cholinergic connections are lost. This is analogous to the situation in Parkinson’s disease where L-DOPA is highly effective at ameliorating symptoms initially but loses efficacy as the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons and other affected neuronal populations continues, reflecting a therapeutic window of opportunity for a given response. Therefore, from a therapeutic standpoint, it is critical to assess long-term treatment activity, both to determine timing for efficacy of a given intervention and to recognize that AD is a slowly progressing disease that may require years of treatment for management. Some treatments will only be effective for a short time, while others may have side effects that become problematic with extended treatment.

With so many complex pathologies occurring, even in FAD mice, there is the very real possibility that efficacy of a given treatment is transient or is only active while that pathway is relevant for neuronal dysfunction. If the target is not part of the primary pathogenic sequence, the disease process will continue and eventually overwhelm treatments targeting secondary pathology. As with L-DOPA treatment in Parkinson’s disease, such a result need not be the failure of a target, it is simply a reflection of the complexity of the disease. Mitigation of symptoms may be both tremendously important from a patient standpoint and a more realistic expectation than curing AD, at least until we better understand the disease process.

Whether a compound is designed to ameliorate symptoms or provide a cure, the effort required to fully evaluate the activity of a compound is similar. The experience with ALS suggests there is value in establishing minimum criteria for demonstrating efficacy in a new treatment for AD. As an example, we discuss research using mouse models that incorporate APOE4-AD risk. This is not to argue for or against these types of models in AD research, but to highlight the actual effort involved in doing a detailed study (based on our experience). We provide a simple study design to highlight how much work is involved and point out caveats. Overall read-outs are likely to include efficacy, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and where possible, target engagement, the latter of which we have omitted from this discussion because it will be compound specific. In addition, efficacy must be defined on a study-specific basis with a view to therapeutically relevant criteria.

5.2.1 Mouse numbers

Unfortunately, there are no standard guidelines for determining treatment efficacy in mouse models of AD. Even though these models are incomplete representations of AD, they are typically multifactorial, much like AD itself. As a result, proper study design requires an understanding of both the model and the therapeutic target. Any rigorous study must start with a realistic assessment of the number of mice, samples and assays needed. Here, we offer some guidelines for estimating variability in a population of mice based on our experience with mice that express APOE3 and APOE4, in both the presence and absence of high Aβ levels. One challenge in designing such a study, is that we cannot know a priori whether the dysfunction being targeted is specific for effects of APOE4, APOE4 +Aβ or applicable to all groups. To address this uncertainty, four mouse genotypes are needed: APOE3, APOE4, APOE3/FAD and APOE4/FAD. A second critical consideration is sex as a variable. Male and females must be included to determine whether sex influences the outcomes because previous studies found both that females are more likely to develop AD pathology and APOE4 females exhibit pathological changes earlier in life and progress more rapidly. Standard practice for treatments is to include groups with different doses to provide preliminary dose-response information. The dose-response is critical to the process of demonstrating that an experimental treatment is responsible for any observed effects, among other issues including establishing a therapeutic dose.

If the question to be answered is related to SAD as well as FAD, we need to recognize aging as a parameter, since treatment efficacy may change with age. Using age as a variable involves other consideration. Even inbred mouse strains exhibit variability in lifespan and unrelated health issues (i.e., tumors, blindness, deafness, etc.). To minimize survivor effects in an aging study, we would normally treat mice from 4 to 18 months of age, but this range may need to be adjusted in models with FAD mutations that have more aggressive pathology. Even for a minimal study using only biochemistry and immunocytochemistry as read-outs, we would require a minimum of n = 20 (10 for biochemistry and 10 fixed perfused for immunohistochemistry) for each condition. This would correspond to a study design involving 4 (genotypes)×2 (sexes)×4 (treatments)×20 (n)=640 mice. As additional readouts are added, more animals may be needed. From a practical viewpoint, even this simplified design has additional hidden costs in personnel and resources over and above the animal costs. For example, mice may have other health issues that lead to loss of some animals through problems unrelated to the study, such as cancer or social stress (particularly for the male cohort), so extra animals need to be included to assure an n =20. In addition, mice need regular monitoring, including daily or weekly weighing. This monitoring is important for the general evaluation of toxicity and to discover unanticipated phenotypes, such as sporadic seizures. Finally, behavior testing is typically needed in the assessment of treatments for AD-related pathology.

5.2.2 Efficacy: Behavioral analysis (Fig. 5)

The most recognizable symptom in AD patients is progressive memory loss, and treatment efficacy in clinical trials typically is determined using a battery of cognitive tests. Therefore, mouse tests designed to evaluate cognitive outcomes have obvious advantages for clinical relevance, particularly those evaluating modalities related to learning and memory. Commonly used tests include novel object recognition, Y-maze, T-maze, fear conditioning, versions of Morris water tests, step-through passive avoidance and Barnes Maze, although increasingly tests such as elevated plus maze, open field and light-dark box may be included for other behavior domains. Subsequently, researchers typically correlate behavioral improvements with changes in hippocampal levels of proteins related to the glutamatergic system. Almost without exception, we and others have been guilty of distilling the complexity of behavioral research in mice to simplistic conclusions such as “x improves learning and memory performance and hippocampal function in a model of AD-like pathology.” Mouse cognates of human behavior and AD pathology remain imperfect. Based on this, there have been criticisms in the use of mouse behavior as a measure of efficacy, leading to suggestions that markers of neuronal function, changes in Aβ plaque levels and/or other pathology are more useful. However, readouts for clinical efficacy in humans will be predominantly behavioral. Therefore, we believe it is necessary to consider exactly what the behavioral tests in mice are pointing to in the context of AD treatments.

Initial considerations for the behavioral tests described are practicality and methodology. A battery of behavioral assays for mice have been developed that are thought to correspond to components of human cognition (Fig. 5). Some of these tests allow longitudinal analysis of treatment efficacy, whereas others can only be applied as end-point read-outs. For longitudinal testing, often one or two tests are utilized, e.g., open field combined with novel object recognition, novel object location, spontaneous alternation or novel arm entry in a T- or Y-maze. Despite the relatively simple design of our example, performing 2 behavioral tests on each mouse gives 1280 tests to be performed, at a minimum of at least 3 different stages of the disease, an early preclinical baseline prior to treatment, a point mid-stage for pathology in untreated mice, and an endpoint, for a total of 3840 tests (1280×3). For endpoint testing, different versions of the Morris water maze or fear conditioning are frequently performed as part of a more comprehensive battery of assays for learning and memory. These tests are time consuming and there are limitations in the number of mice that can be tested at any one time. One aspect of mouse behavior that is often neglected is that mice are nocturnal, so conducting certain tests in the dark (active) cycle is important for accurate assessment. The situation is further complicated by the fact that these behavioral tests are not standardized, making comparison between studies problematic. There are variations in the implementation of these tests between laboratories and each mouse line may require test modifications. The level of expertise for researchers conducting the tests may vary substantially and investigator bias can dramatically skew behavioral tests, particularly if the investigators are not blinded. Some behavioral tests, such as fear conditioning and variants of the Morris water test, can modify biological pathways in the brain that can be assessed postmortem, but this may require a separate group to collect samples for biochemical and histochemical analysis from animals that are not behavior tested. Mice are very sensitive to stressors in connection with handling and experimental design. When conducting a battery of tests, one must also be mindful of the order of testing (typically least to most stressful) and over testing/testing fatigue. All these factors can modulate whether a therapeutic treatment is considered efficacious. In addition, changes in testing behavior may be linked to parameters unrelated to the disease model or treatment. For example, blindness, deafness, and motor deficits all can impact performance in learning and memory assays and these variables are often overlooked by inexperienced experimenters looking for a particular result. Overall, consistent behavioral standards are needed to avoid both false positive and false negative results, including timing of assays, blinded investigators (both those conducting the assays and those analyzing the data) and consideration of basic mouse biology.

The second point we wish to highlight is that positive efficacy may be observed because of effects related to behaviors not considered learning and memory, but that are still relevant for AD. The full spectrum of behavioral changes in AD are much more extensive than cognitive impairment. Common neuropsychiatric and other behavioral changes that are reported in AD patients include apathy, social withdrawal, anxiety, psychosis (delusions, suspicions, paranoia, hallucinations, euphoria), confusion, agitation, aggression, irritability, inappropriate sexual behavior, disinhibition, depression, disorientation, sleep/diurnal rhythm disturbances, activity disturbances, appetite and eating abnormalities, and difficulty speaking, swallowing and walking. In this regard, we believe that the excellent research framework developed by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIHM) for investigating mental disorders (https://www.nimh.nih.gov/research/research-funded-by-nimh/rdoc/index.shtml) is highly relevant for behavior research in AD. The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework integrates multiple levels of research for understanding the nature of human behavior in normal and pathologic states (e.g., in mental health illness). This dynamic framework classifies human functioning into five domains containing constructs (behavioral elements, process and mechanisms and response) and units of analysis (molecular, genetic, neurocircuit and behavioral assessment). Through these clear definitions, AD patients display dysfunction in six major domains of human functioning: negative valence symptoms, positive valence symptoms, cognitive symptoms, systems for social processes, arousal/regulatory systems and sensory motor symptoms. Dysfunction across all these domains within this framework in AD reflects changes in multiple brain regions, neurotransmitter systems and circuits.

How does this relate to preclinical therapeutic treatments of mice? Careful evaluation of behavioral tests in mice can illuminate improvements in these same AD-relevant neuron systems due to treatment, since even in mice behavioral assays are more complex than many investigators realize. However, differences are often overlooked, or are considered less important if mice prefer a novel object or find the previous platform area more times than another group. This oversimplifies the complex circuitry described above. For example, in novel object recognition, an AD-relevant mouse may travel less distance, investigate objects less in the training and testing phases, prefer the familiar object more in the testing phase or avoid objects all together compared to a wild-type mouse. A treatment may change any of these parameters but be dismissed as improving anxiety or attention, issues independent of memory deficits. However, such findings are important, since there is body of work in neuropsychiatry and pharmacology that have identified circuits that mimic this type of behavior and may also be disrupted in AD patients. Thus, in this example, the behavioral phenotype points to the types of deficits in neuronal function that are improved by a treatment.

Linked to this issue is the characterization of abnormal behavioral phenotypes in mice with FAD mutations or other risk factors. These abnormal behavioral phenotypes are often unreported or ignored. For example, in mouse models of AD, we have observed behaviors relevant to seizure research, ranging from head bobbing to freezing to complete seizures. However, this is often viewed as a nuisance, rather than indications of disrupted circuitry. Mice with pronounced seizures are often sacrificed without further study, but the surviving mice may have sub-threshold changes in the same circuitry (e.g., hyperactivity in the cortex), which may be highly relevant for alterations in behavioral tasks in the cognitive domain. The incidence of seizures in AD patients has been reported to increase but has not been extensively studied. Through observing these effects in mice, neuronal circuits may be identified that are contributing to symptoms in AD patients and will certainly be a variable in behavioral assays. Indeed, we have qualitatively observed that some treatments can mitigate seizure activity in AD mice, findings that could be relevant for AD patients. Other behavioral traits such as aggression and/or lethargy could be interpreted in a similar way. As data are collected, there may be a need to include additional groups of mice to assess the effect of a treatment on the full range of behavioral responses.

An additional point to note is that standard tests of learning and memory as depicted in Fig. 3, involve multiple brain regions, cells and neurotransmitter systems, all of which can modulate performance. Performance in novel object recognition is modulated by the prefrontal cortex, perirhinal cortex, hippocampus, striatum and thalamus. Morris water maze performance is similarly modulated by the same regions, in addition to the basal forebrain and cerebellum. The circuitry is interconnected between these regions, so altered performance in any of these tests could reflect changes in one region or multiple regions. Adaptation is another critical consideration and the neurotransmitter systems that modulate performance in these behavioral tasks are not limited to glutamatergic receptors, but may include the catecholamine system (dopamine), GABA, acetylcholine and their associated receptors. In humans, there is evidence of dysfunction in many of these brain regions and neurotransmitter systems. Thus, a treatment can impact behavior through single or multiple neuronal markers across different brain regions in mice and in patients.

A transgenic mouse model will never be able to replicate the specifics of cognitive decline or mimic the full range of symptoms found in human AD. Nevertheless, mouse models of AD do have a behavioral repertoire that is altered by dysfunction in neurons that is relevant for the human condition. Behavioral analysis of mice after therapeutic treatment can provide a measure of efficacy, but only if rigorously executed and analyzed.

5.2.3 Tissue processing

It would be remiss to conduct a therapeutic preclinical study without a full-body tissue harvest at the endpoint. These enable checks of peripheral toxicity and/or beneficial off- or on-target changes after treatment. Brains used for biochemical analysis require that regions of interest be dissected and homogenized. The most common regions for analysis are the hippocampus and frontal cortex, but comparison with tissues that are relatively spared in AD, like cerebellum and sensory cortex, may be valuable. In addition, as informed by the behavioral data, there may be a need to sub-divide brain regions (e.g., layers or subregions in the cortex) so that treatment effects are not overlooked. A common approach for homogenization is sequential extraction for analyses using: TBS or PBS for soluble proteins such as oligomeric Aβ, some cytokines; detergent-extraction (either SDS or Triton X-100) to obtain proteins of interest such as synaptic proteins and other cytokines and; formic acid extraction for insoluble proteins such as primarily insoluble Aβ. Therefore, in our example study, there will be a total of 960 extracts per brain region and more if samples from additional brain regions must be analyzed. For immunohistochemical analysis, sets of six or nine sections from different depths of the brain from each mouse are typically utilized per immunohistochemical stain for quantification. For any given stain, the number of images required for quantification can range between 1920 and 2880 (number of mice×sections per mouse). For histochemical analysis, not all stains or antibodies are compatible with fix-perfused brains and/or require different sectioning methods. Thus, extra mice may need to be assigned.

5.2.4 Pharmacokinetics analysis

A factor that is often neglected in the design of experiments to test efficacy of a compound or treatment protocol is pharmacokinetics. Analysis of the temporal changes in compound levels in brain and plasma is important for interpretation of efficacy and pharmacodynamic read-outs, especially with different doses of compounds. This type of analysis requires detailed assay development prior to the evaluation of experimental tissue that takes into account parameters such as protein binding. Often, to keep costs low, pharmacokinetic analysis is conducted using wild-type mice, but results can be misleading if there are changes in cerebrovascular permeability and liver or kidney function in the test model. For example, with a leaky cerebrovascular system or lower levels of efflux transporters, the dose needed to reach therapeutic levels in wild-type mice may lead to much higher tissue levels in AD-relevant mice, which typically exhibit substantial compromises in cerebrovascular permeability. As a result, on- or off-target effects in the brain may manifest in FAD mice that were not present in wild-type mice. We did not include mice for drug distribution evaluation in our study design, but an n =3–4 per group is typically required. A further issue stems from the fact that AD is a slowly developing disease that progresses over decades. There are many caveats for interpreting pharmacokinetic data in the context of long-term treatment studies. The first is that without repeated measures or multiple groups of mice at different time points, detailed information on absorption, clearance, maximum concentrations, etc., is not possible. In addition, the distribution of the drug could change during the treatment with age due to altered metabolism of the compound, changes in compensatory pathways and the possibility of cumulative toxicity. Addressing these issues may require additional groups of mice to evaluate such effects. Further, the time of mouse sacrifice and the administration method can influence drug pharmacokinetic data. All of these issues need to be addressed prior to translating a result in mouse models to clinical trials, but they are not typically addressed in initial preclinical studies.

5.2.5 Efficacy read-outs: Neuronal dysfunction

Analysis of neuronal function can substantiate changes in behavior observed with treatment. There are a number of common methods used to assess neuronal function, of which the most time-efficient is western blot analysis, typically focusing on synaptic markers to evaluate preservation of synaptic connections. Frequently measured proteins are those related to glutamatergic neuronal dysfunction or general pre- and post-synaptic proteins. In our example, treatment comparisons for one brain region within a genotype and sex corresponds to 40 samples and therefore 2×26 well western blot gels. Since we have 4 genotypes and 2 sexes, the number of gels required for one protein is 16. Although multiple proteins can be measured per gel, it is likely that the number would end up closer to 50. A large number of additional gels will be required if cross genotype or sex analysis is to be conducted. IHC analysis readouts include neuronal number, proteins identified by western blot and other structural changes such as changes in spine density.

Aside from the volume of work required to conduct such research, an issue in biochemical assessment is that there are many glutamatergic, GABAergic and other neuronal types and sub-types that are disrupted in FAD mice (see Section 5.2.2) as well as many neuronal populations that are spared in both the mice and AD patients. If the analysis includes a large population of spared neurons, then differential effects may be difficult to document. Therefore, unless a comprehensive analysis is conducted with care to focus on defined brain regions and targets, important markers of neuronal dysfunction may be overlooked. Alternatively, histochemical analysis has advantages in identifying brain regions and cell types that may be improved but comes at the expense of speed and also suffers from the limited choice of markers and availability of suitable probes. Finally, electrophysiological studies of brain slices may be useful, but these are beyond the scope of most treatment studies. There is extensive neuronal cell death in AD patients at the end stage of the disease. Although neuronal cell death in mouse models is not extensive, it could be included as a readout, although neuronal cell death has not been a particularly instructive readout in preclinical studies of AD to date.

5.2.6 Pharmacodynamic readouts: Aβ levels

The choice of model for a study ultimately dictates what aspect of the disease can be targeted and the best readout for determining activity. Based on the APOE/FAD mouse model employed in our hypothetical study, a suitable treatment for analysis could target pathways affected by APOE4 that increase the risk of SAD or act to modulate levels of Aβ pathology directly. Given that we still do not have a definitive answer about how APOE4 increases risk for developing SAD, the most likely readout would be evaluation of Aβ pathology.

The canonical diagnostic for human patients for AD is the presence of Aβ plaques, which can be measured using histochemical analysis. However, there are caveats that must be considered in using plaques as the basis for showing pharmacodynamic activity of a novel therapeutic candidate. For example, the number and distribution of Aβ plaques may vary in different models. There is also wide variation in plaque load in human patients and plaque load is not a strong indicator of cognitive deficits in patients. A variety of studies in both human and animal models suggest that the amount of Aβ plaques is not correlated directly with neurological deficits. Histopathological methods for other Aβ species, such as oligomers, do exist, but they are not as well established and may be more easily quantified using biochemical approaches. The assessment of intraneuronal Aβ by histochemical staining can also be conducted but represents an approach that is less suited for quantitation.

Biochemical approaches have proven to be the most sensitive approach to measure Aβ levels and have the additional advantage of distinguishing among total Aβ, oligomeric Aβ, and insoluble Aβ/plaques for different types of Aβ (Aβ38, Aβ40, Aβ42 etc.) and if required, APP fragments. A combination of tissue extraction and the use of specific Aβ antibodies for ELISA or immunoblots has proven to be effective, particularly when specific brain regions are analyzed. ELISA analysis of biochemical extracts is a rapid, accurate and quantitative manner by which to assess Aβ levels, particularly Aβ42 and Aβ40. In our example there would be 160 brains, 3 extractions and 2 brain regions giving a total of 960 samples or the equivalent of 12×Aβ42, 24×Aβ40 and for completeness 12×apoE and 4×oligomeric Aβ ELISA plates. The costs of these analyses are substantial, but the costs can rapidly escalate if a finer assessment of brain regions is required. Regardless, an accurate picture of how Aβ levels are altered by a treatment may require measures of APP production/processing and/or Aβ clearance pathways to reveal potential mechanisms of action. A further consideration in this example is that APOE4 may affect brain function independent of Aβ levels. As a result, a treatment may improve behavior in both FAD and non-FAD mice expressing APOE4. In this case, the former is in part through modulating Aβ levels and the latter is independent of such an effect. Such a result would necessitate detailed analysis of other pharmacodynamic read-outs.

5.2.7 Pharmacodynamic read-outs: Tau

Along with Aβ pathology, higher levels of phospho-tau and neurofibrillary tangles are also diagnostic features of AD. However, using tau pathology for evaluating pathology in AD models presents challenges. In our example, with rodent tau, the readout is typically a phospho-tau epitope, such as AT8. The extent to which this immunoreactivity corresponds to tau pathology in rodents is uncertain, although it does serve as a reporter for altered kinase/phosphatase activity in these brains. Biochemical analysis of tau has not been used as extensively in mouse models to date, but approaches used for differential extraction as Aβ can also be applied in the case of tau. For our study, analysis is limited to analysis of tau phosphorylation (histochemical) using AT8 and biochemical analysis (western blot). The differences between mouse and human tau may complicate the interpretation of changes in mouse models without human tau, that may or may not be relevant for treatment of AD patients. In AD models incorporating human tau in either wildtype or mutant forms, tangles may be observable. Given that tau pathology in humans correlates better with disease state, changes in the levels and distribution of tau may be useful, with the caveats described in Section 3.3. The use of tau antibodies that recognize tau conformations that are either enriched in, or specific for, pathological forms of tau, increases the power of these methods.

5.2.8 Pharmacodynamic read-outs: Other AD-relevant pathology

Other AD-relevant pathology may include, but is not limited to, neuroinflammation, cerebrovascular dysfunction and peripheral inflammation. While none of these pathologies are specific to AD, they are associated with AD pathology and may affect pathogenesis or progression of the disease. The assessment of changes in these factors could be linked to beneficial effects of a treatment and could also serve as pharmacodynamic biomarkers in eventual human trials. There are a number of outcome measures for these pathologies including multiplex ELISAs (neuroinflammation) and histochemical staining. In some ways, they may be more informative about treatment efficacy than more conventional markers such as plaque load, depending on the treatment target. For example, it may be possible to improve neuronal function through targeting pathways downstream of amyloidosis, or in our case, target dysfunction mediated by APOE4 rather than Aβ.

5.2.9 Other readouts

There are a number of other readouts (e.g., “omics” approaches, MRI, electrophysiology, electron microscopy) that could be incorporated into our study design, depending on resources and therapeutic target. The justification of using these techniques could range from wanting to assess pharmacodynamic activity longitudinally, since biochemical and histopathological approaches are postmortem readouts, to matching clinical read-outs.

PET imaging of amyloid plaques and tau aggregates has been developed in recent years with varying degrees of sensitivity and specificity. While these methods were developed for diagnostic purposes in humans, they are also being used with increasing frequency in animal models. Similarly, MRI-based methods for evaluating cerebrovascular function, myelination, and neurodegeneration are now being used to visualize AD-related pathologies in both humans and mouse models. Given the opportunity these approaches provide to evaluate pathology longitudinally in individual subjects, their use is likely to increase. At present, these approaches suffer from limited sensitivity and resolution, which can be problematic in a small brain. In addition, imaging read-outs may not be fully AD specific, which has limited their use in diagnostic settings. As methods and PET ligands continue to be refined, they will become more useful, but at present they are primarily used to confirm results from other readouts. Caveats for using these methods include the repeated anesthetizing for imaging may modulate brain function, high costs and special expertise.

Blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in both patients and mice could also be studied. Practically speaking, longitudinal sampling of CSF in mice is not usually feasible, but it remains a logical place to look for changes in biomarkers. The search for biomarkers in mice is complicated by the fact that most transgenes lead to overexpression, so the distribution of the transgenes may not reflect the situation in human disease. Looking for the presence of Aβ or tau in plasma or CSF has produced mixed results and no test has proven to be sufficiently reproducible for routine use in patients or mice, although there are promising developments in recent years. Markers of neuronal damage, such as fragments of neurofilament subunits, have proven to be useful in recent years although these are not disease specific markers. Instead, they reflect neuronal damage.

Advances in genomic and proteomic methods that allow analysis of gene and protein expression, including phosphoproteins, have led to efforts to use these methods for evaluating the disease process and therapeutic targets. While they have not been widely used to assess efficacy of novel therapeutics, their use should be considered as the methods become faster and less expensive. While these approaches are potentially powerful, the complexity of the resulting data requires that presently they be used primarily in very carefully designed experimental protocols with well-defined questions and in conjunction with more traditional methods of analysis.

There are a number of other readouts that could be incorporated into a preclinical study design, however the cost, time and expertise required could considerably restrict many laboratories from feasibly using them. Indeed, none of these are well suited as primary screens and generally would be used for validation of an approach after evidence of efficacy had been generated.

5.3 Summary of therapeutic study designs

We have presented the above design as an example illustrating the challenges for studies of the efficacy of therapeutic compounds and the estimation of resources needed. Excluding other read-outs (e.g., MRI, omics, etc.), even our limited analysis gives a sense of the time and effort required to completely assess compound activity. This theoretical endeavor would realistically take at least ∼4–5 years to complete and require an appropriately sized team. While there is an expectation that academia is best suited to take the lead on the testing of compounds in vivo, this is simply not true. Realistically, rodent models of AD are not well suited for screening large numbers of molecules, due to the timeline of phenotype and complexity of readouts. Studies of this duration and magnitude require levels of funding and personnel that are not common in academia, especially considering that mouse costs based on the number and length of these studies can be extremely high. Similarly, the number of people needed for such an effort would probably represent 3–5 full-time equivalents. A project that requires 5 years of funding and millions of dollars to produce a single publication that may ultimately report negative is not realistic given the current size limitations on grant funding and career expectations for faculty, students and postdoctoral fellows. This brings us to the challenge of funding.

Writing a grant to test compound activity as described above will by its very nature have dependent aims, be high in budget and need to compete with other like-minded projects for limited funds. The majority of funding mechanisms will not be able to cover the costs and time frame needed to complete a rigorous study. Such a study becomes risky to propose, as the results may well be negative despite the amount of resources involved. As a result, many compounds are not tested beyond short-term treatment studies with one to two doses. Historically, investigators have chosen to reduce n, read-outs, or doses to deal with the risk. Unfortunately, this increases the chance of false positives, adds to the risk that bias can influence interpretation, and ultimately impedes scientific progress.

Of course, even a positive result in a pilot study is not an endpoint. Many questions remain after even the most rigorous study design. To achieve efficacy in patients, we need to know when the treatment needs to be started. There may be very different outcomes, depending on what disease stage treatments start. Will the treatment translate to humans or is some element specific to the model chosen? The challenge of scaling size and complexity from mouse to human is often overlooked, but the differences in can affect the feasibility of some approaches, such as gene therapy. Nevertheless, treatments that mitigate pathology but do not fully prevent or reverse cognitive dysfunction would still be useful. Indeed, any treatment that can impact the quality of lives of AD patients even for a few years would be of tremendous value, much as L-DOPA treatments dramatically improve the quality of life for many Parkinson’s patients while not changing the course of the disease. The pressure to produce effective therapies may lead to many investigators discounting negative data. However, the need to eliminate unproductive approaches is equally pressing in a search for effective therapies. Models are important in choosing approaches that may work, but unless these models are used appropriately, we merely consume time and resources. If rigorous criteria such as those discussed above are established for studies using models as a platform for understanding AD and developing potential therapies, available models will continue be powerful investigative tools. Application of these criteria will no doubt reduce the number of press releases announcing that we have “cured AD mice” but may increase our chances of finding truly effective treatments.

6. How do we want our work to be perceived both within the field and by the public?

6.1 Do scientists and the press need to sensationalize data?

Another challenge facing the field is the question of how to present results of studies that identify potential treatments. The understandable desperate need to find causes and treatments for AD has often resulted in sensationalization of scientific findings. How often have we read articles where the complexity of science is distilled down to “scientists find that x causes AD” or “miracle drug cures AD in mice.” The intensity of overselling becomes even more extreme in press releases from the parent funding organization. This is a dangerous road to travel, since these press releases strip away the real findings of the study and raise unrealistic expectations. There are only so many times that we can discover the cause of AD, or that we can announce a cure in mouse models of AD-like pathology without generating therapies effective in human patients before skepticism takes over. Communicating research findings to the general public may require simplification, but overselling is not simplification. Accurate descriptions of research findings will not produce the headlines such as the one recently featured in a popular science website, which was reporting on a single epidemiological study that will likely never be replicated: “We may finally know what causes Alzheimer’s—and how to stop it.” That headline will certainly get more clicks than “We found a correlation between a pathogen and AD in a small cohort of patients” but the second statement is accurate and the first is dishonest. We need to encourage press releases stating that “Scientists have identified a treatment that improved a behavior phenotype in a short-term treatment study using a model that incorporates certain aspects of AD-relevant pathology. Further testing could lead to drug development programs that will help AD patients.” While we cannot always manage the headlines, we can encourage press releases that strike a balance in describing the latest results from AD mice models or human studies in order to better manage expectations. Results can be promising or may have potential or may suggest a new therapeutic approach without stretching the credibility of science and scientists. Truth has a habit of overtaking hyperbole eventually and loss of credibility will eventually erode support for research, both fiscally and politically.

6.2 Dogma and copycat science

While press releases are an ongoing issue, careless use of language contributes to this problem. For example, we are taught that proof is an illusory concept in science, but many reports still make statements about proving that “x causes AD” or that “y cures AD.” Diseases as complex as AD will never be explainable in terms as simple as CAG expansion in the huntingtin gene causes Huntington’s disease. Diversity in human populations at many levels (genomic, environmental, co-morbidities, etc.) makes it likely that there will never be a simple explanation for why a given individual will develop SAD and there will be no magic “cure” for all cases of AD. A realistic expectation is identification of pathogenic elements in AD and development of methods for managing symptoms and/or progression of AD. These goals are exactly how rodent models can be most useful.

Another caution in the use of models stems from the influence of preconceived notions on the use of models. Fields as mature as AD accumulate dogmas that discourage critical thinking. Some publications appear in high impact journals because they reinforce belief systems common in the field, while studies that question dogma are discounted and relegated to lower profile journals. This reinforces the dogma, albeit at the expense of progress, because high profile publications may continue to drive research long after they have been proven to be wrong. The proper use of models is to challenge assumptions and critically test ideas. The truism that a hypothesis in science can be disproven, but not proven, may be overly simplistic but still has value.

A corollary is that the newest finding is not always a step forward. Thus, finding a new risk factor in a GWAS screen does not necessarily mean that a new model incorporating that risk factor will enable us to understand AD. This is particularly true when the same ideas are recycled in a new model to reinforce dogma. Pathway “x” that was touted to cause AD becomes incorporated in a number of projects in a correlative manner, even in models that lack the classical hallmarks of AD. In addition, pathway “x” is assessed in existing FAD models, and if found to be altered by Aβ or tau, then the model becomes important again even if the findings are only correlative. Thus, dogma and hypothesis proving rather than testing spreads. “x” then becomes a major focal point of funding and the cycle continues. The flip side of this phenomenon is that studies that fail to confirm prevailing theories are faulty because they are using the wrong model, or the models are not really AD. This result is a vicious cycle that stifles rather than promotes innovation. If the favored pathway “x” is not critical for understanding AD, we may fail to pursue alternative pathways that would have provided critical insights.

6.3 What exactly is innovation?

Recent increases in funding levels for AD research were clearly overdue, but increased funding does not assure that “innovative” and “new” ideas will follow. We should not forget the hard-won lessons provided by prior studies. New techniques and ideas are not necessarily advancing the field. Funding a project simply because it uses a new model, or a new technique will not be productive if the model and methods are not suited to address a component of AD pathology. New techniques and models will not lead to better science unless they address the questions at hand. An AD patient will not care whether a treatment is discovered using an innovative technique or a model. Many critical questions in AD research continue to be understudied due to the complexity of AD. Such questions include “Why do some people develop AD, while others with the same risk factors do not?,” “Why are some neurons susceptible to damage in AD while others are spared?,” “How and to what extent do Aβ and tau contribute to cognitive impairments?,” “What role do other pathologies and co-morbidities, such as neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular dysfunction, play in AD pathogenesis?,” “How do identified risk factors increase AD risk?,” “What are the trigger(s) that lead to Aβ and tau pathology in AD?.” While all of these questions have been around for many years, the answers remain to be found. These questions are critical for our understanding of AD and often are overlooked in favor of the latest model or discovery of a new risk factor or conducting an experiment for the sake of using a new method. Unfortunately, they are not considered innovative, while studies addressing the standard repertoire of questions using a new model or method is innovative. However, the best science comes from asking the right questions, not from reinforcing belief systems in new and clever ways. Using models appropriately to address the questions they are designed to address remains an important component of our search for answers in AD.

Acknowledgments

LMT is supported by NIH/NIA R01AG061114, R21AG061715 and R21AG053876, and the College of Medicine at the University of Illinois at Chicago institutional start-up funds. JMW is supported by NIH/NIA R01 AG057008–03S1. MJL is supported by NIH/NIA R01 AG056472, R01 AG057008, UH2/3 NS10012, R56 AG058655, 1R44 AG060826, RF1 AG058068, Institutional funds from the College of Medicine at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and anonymous philanthropic contributions. STB is supported by NIH/NINDS R01NS082730 and a grant from the Tau Consortium.

Fig. 1 Converting mouse to human years. Adapted from Flurkey K, Currer JM, Harrison DE. Chapter 20—Mouse models in aging research. In: Fox JG, Davisson MT, Quimby FW, Barthold SW, Newcomer CE, Smith AL, eds. The Mouse in Biomedical Research. 2nd ed. American College of Laboratory Animal Medicine. Burlington, MA: Academic Press; 2007:637–672. ISBN 9780123694546, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978–012369454-6/50074–1 and https://www.jax.org/research-and-faculty/research-labs/the-harrison-lab/gerontology/life-span-as-a-biomarker.

Fig. 2 Stratification of an AD population. Stratification by sex, APOE genotype and sex + APOE genotype, with age, the third universal biological variable of AD, not illustrated.

Fig. 3 Decision tree for constructive research design. Please note that #BEHAVIOR is expanded in Fig. 5 and the *PATHOLOGICAL READOUTS presented in this figure is the same for Fig. 4.

Fig. 4 Decision tree for therapeutic research design. Please note that *PATHOLOGICAL READOUTS can be found in Fig. 3 and specifically #BEHAVIOR READOUTS in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5 Decision tree for behavior readouts. Please note that this figure is expanded from #BEHAVIOR in Fig. 3 and *PATHOLOGICAL READOUTS in Fig. 4.

Highlights

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a uniquely human condition. However, transgenic mouse models that mimic specific aspects of AD pathology are necessary to evaluate hypotheses and molecular mechanism not accessible in humans.

Recognizing the complexity of AD is important if expectations from any form of research, whether it involves human subjects or mouse models, are to be managed.

A number of models of AD-relevant pathology have been developed, each with strengths and limitations that should be fully understood before use.

Transgenic mice are available that incorporate universal biological variables that drive AD risk and pathology (age, sex, APOE), and AD-related gene mutations (TREM2, ABCA7, PICALM) that affect a limited cohort of AD patients.

The frequently expressed sentiment “We have cured AD mice hundreds of times, but the cures never work in humans, so we need better models” is false. No mouse model fully replicates AD and no treatment has fully “cured” even the limited pathology of any mouse model.

The most relevant question for the use of a model should be: Is the choice of this rodent model appropriate for the question being addressed? While transgenic mice do not in fact have AD, they can tell us a great deal about specific aspects of AD disease mechanisms if the question is properly framed.

After selecting the model, studies must be planned and executed with an understanding of what information is provided by the readouts.

Current funding mechanisms and career development requirements are impediments to full hypothesis testing, either mechanistic or therapeutic.

Sensationalization of data, promulgation of dogma, and copycat science are hindering the optimal use of transgenic models of AD. Developing new models will not solve this problem.

Answers to fundamental questions about AD that remain elusive may be addressed using current models, or through careful consideration of what a new model should replicate.

As always, the best science comes from asking the right questions, not from following the latest trends in either technology or posited causality.


References

1. Webster SJ , Bachstetter AD , Nelson PT , Schmitt FA , Van Eldik LJ . Using mice to model Alzheimer’s dementia: an overview of the clinical disease and the preclinical behavioral changes in 10 mouse models. Front Genet. 2014;5 :88.24795750
2. Hall AM , Roberson ED . Mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res Bull. 2012;88 (1 ):3–12.22142973
3. Roychaudhuri R , Zheng X , Lomakin A , Role of species-specific primary structure differences in Abeta42 assembly and neurotoxicity. ACS Chem Nerosci. 2015; 6 (12 ):1941–1955.
4. Oakley H , Cole SL , Logan S , Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations: potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. J Neurosci. 2006;26 (40 ): 10129–10140.17021169
5. Sturchler-Pierrat C , Abramowski D , Duke M , Two amyloid precursor protein transgenic mouse models with Alzheimer disease-like pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94 (24 ):13287–13292.9371838
6. Casas C , Sergeant N , Itier JM , Massive CA1/2 neuronal loss with intraneuronal and N-terminal truncated Abeta42 accumulation in a novel Alzheimer transgenic model. Am J Pathol. 2004;165 (4 ):1289–1300.15466394
7. Fukuchi K , Ho L , Younkin SG , High levels of circulating beta-amyloid peptide do not cause cerebral beta-amyloidosis in transgenic mice. Am J Pathol. 1996;149 (1 ): 219–227.8686746
8. Tomiyama T , Matsuyama S , Iso H , A mouse model of amyloid beta oligomers: their contribution to synaptic alteration, abnormal tau phosphorylation, glial activation, and neuronal loss in vivo. J Neurosci. 2010;30 (14 ):4845–4856.20371804
9. Radde R , Bolmont T , Kaeser SA , Abeta42-driven cerebral amyloidosis in transgenic mice reveals early and robust pathology. EMBO Rep. 2006;7 (9 ):940–946.16906128
10. Richards JG , Higgins GA , Ouagazzal AM , PS2APP transgenic mice, coexpressing hPS2mut and hAPPswe, show age-related cognitive deficits associated with discrete brain amyloid deposition and inflammation. J Neurosci. 2003;23 (26 ):8989–9003.14523101
11. Lamb BT , Call LM , Slunt HH , Altered metabolism of familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked amyloid precursor protein variants in yeast artificial chromosome transgenic mice. Hum Mol Genet. 1997;6 (9 ):1535–1541.9285791
12. Borchelt DR , Davis J , Fischer M , A vector for expressing foreign genes in the brains and hearts of transgenic mice. Genet Anal. 1996;13 (6 ):159–163.9117892
13. Borchelt DR , Ratovitski T , van Lare J , Accelerated amyloid deposition in the brains of transgenic mice coexpressing mutant presenilin 1 and amyloid precursor proteins. Neuron. 1997;19 (4 ):939–945.9354339
14. Jankowsky JL , Slunt HH , Ratovitski T , Jenkins NA , Copeland NG , Borchelt DR . Co-expression of multiple transgenes in mouse CNS: a comparison of strategies. Biomol Eng. 2001;17 (6 ):157–165.11337275
15. Jankowsky JL , Fadale DJ , Anderson J , Mutant presenilins specifically elevate the levels of the 42 residue beta-amyloid peptide in vivo: evidence for augmentation of a 42-specific gamma secretase. Hum Mol Genet. 2004;13 (2 ):159–170.14645205
16. Savonenko A , Xu GM , Melnikova T , Episodic-like memory deficits in the APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease: relationships to beta-amyloid deposition and neurotransmitter abnormalities. Neurobiol Dis. 2005;18 (3 ):602–617.15755686
17. Hwang DY , Cho JS , Lee SH , Aberrant expressions of pathogenic phenotype in Alzheimer’s diseased transgenic mice carrying NSE-controlled APPsw. Exp Neurol. 2004;186 (1 ):20–32.14980807
18. Moechars D , Dewachter I , Lorent K , Early phenotypic changes in transgenic mice that overexpress different mutants of amyloid precursor protein in brain. J Biol Chem. 1999;274 (10 ):6483–6492.10037741
19. Dewachter I , Van Dorpe J , Smeijers L , Aging increased amyloid peptide and caused amyloid plaques in brain of old APP/V717I transgenic mice by a different mechanism than mutant presenilin1. J Neurosci. 2000;20 (17 ):6452–6458.10964951
20. Cheng IH , Palop JJ , Esposito LA , Bien-Ly N , Yan F , Mucke L . Aggressive amyloidosis in mice expressing human amyloid peptides with the Arctic mutation. Nat Med. 2004;10 (11 ):1190–1192.15502844
21. Wines-Samuelson M , Handler M , Shen J . Role of presenilin-1 in cortical lamination and survival of Cajal-Retzius neurons. Dev Biol. 2005;277 (2 ):332–346.15617678
22. Mucke L , Masliah E , Yu GQ , High-level neuronal expression of abeta 1–42 in wild-type human amyloid protein precursor transgenic mice: synaptotoxicity without plaque formation. J Neurosci. 2000;20 (11 ):4050–4058.10818140
23. Rockenstein E , Mallory M , Mante M , Sisk A , Masliaha E . Early formation of mature amyloid-beta protein deposits in a mutant APP transgenic model depends on levels of Abeta(1–42). J Neurosci Res. 2001;66 (4 ):573–582.11746377
24. Rockenstein EM , McConlogue L , Tan H , Power M , Masliah E , Mucke L . Levels and alternative splicing of amyloid beta protein precursor (APP) transcripts in brains of APP transgenic mice and humans with Alzheimer’s disease. J Biol Chem. 1995;270 (47 ): 28257–28267.7499323
25. Hsia AY , Masliah E , McConlogue L , Plaque-independent disruption of neural circuits in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96 (6 ): 3228–3233.10077666
26. Duff K , Eckman C , Zehr C , Increased amyloid-beta42(43) in brains of mice expressing mutant presenilin 1. Nature. 1996;383 (6602 ):710–713.8878479
27. Siman R , Reaume AG , Savage MJ , Presenilin-1 P264L knock-in mutation: differential effects on abeta production, amyloid deposition, and neuronal vulnerability. J Neurosci. 2000;20 (23 ):8717–8726.11102478
28. Ozmen L , Albientz A , Czech C , Jacobsen H . Expression of transgenic APP mRNA is the key determinant for beta-amyloid deposition in PS2APP transgenic mice. Neurodegener Dis. 2009;6 (1–2 ):29–36.19066434
29. Holcomb L , Gordon MN , McGowan E , Accelerated Alzheimer-type phenotype in transgenic mice carrying both mutant amyloid precursor protein and presenilin 1 transgenes. Nat Med. 1998;4 (1 ):97–100.9427614
30. Liu P , Paulson JB , Forster CL , Shapiro SL , Ashe KH , Zahs KR . Characterization of a novel mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease—amyloid pathology and unique beta-amyloid oligomer profile. PLoS One. 2015;10 (5 ):e0126317.
31. Grueninger F , Bohrmann B , Czech C , Phosphorylation of tau at S422 is enhanced by Abeta in TauPS2APP triple transgenic mice. Neurobiol Dis. 2010;37 (2 ): 294–306.19781645
32. Wittnam JL , Portelius E , Zetterberg H , Pyroglutamate amyloid beta (Abeta) aggravates behavioral deficits in transgenic amyloid mouse model for Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem. 2012;287 (11 ):8154–8162.22267726
33. Jankowsky JL , Slunt HH , Gonzales V , Persistent amyloidosis following suppression of Abeta production in a transgenic model of Alzheimer disease. PLoS Med. 2005;2 (12 ): e355.
34. Hsiao K , Chapman P , Nilsen S , Correlative memory deficits, Abeta elevation, and amyloid plaques in transgenic mice. Science. 1996;274 (5284 ):99–102.8810256
35. Lewis J , Dickson DW , Lin WL , Enhanced neurofibrillary degeneration in transgenic mice expressing mutant tau and APP. Science. 2001;293 (5534 ):1487–1491.11520987
36. Bouter Y , Dietrich K , Wittnam JL , N-truncated amyloid beta (Abeta) 4–42 forms stable aggregates and induces acute and long-lasting behavioral deficits. Acta Neuropathol. 2013;126 (2 ):189–205.23685882
37. Ronnback A , Sagelius H , Bergstedt KD , Amyloid neuropathology in the single Arctic APP transgenic model affects interconnected brain regions. Neurobiol Aging. 2012;33 (4 ):831 e811–839.
38. Lord A , Kalimo H , Eckman C , Zhang XQ , Lannfelt L , Nilsson LN . The Arctic Alzheimer mutation facilitates early intraneuronal Abeta aggregation and senile plaque formation in transgenic mice. Neurobiol Aging. 2006;27 (1 ):67–77.16298242
39. Chishti MA , Yang DS , Janus C , Early-onset amyloid deposition and cognitive deficits in transgenic mice expressing a double mutant form of amyloid precursor protein 695. J Biol Chem. 2001;276 (24 ):21562–21570.11279122
40. Davis J , Xu F , Deane R , Early-onset and robust cerebral microvascular accumulation of amyloid beta-protein in transgenic mice expressing low levels of a vasculotropic Dutch/Iowa mutant form of amyloid beta-protein precursor. J Biol Chem. 2004;279 (19 ):20296–20306.14985348
41. Saito T , Suemoto T , Brouwers N , Potent amyloidogenicity and pathogenicity of Abeta43. Nat Neurosci. 2011;14 (8 ):1023–1032.21725313
42. Saito T , Matsuba Y , Mihira N , Single app knock-in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci. 2014;17 (5 ):661–663.24728269
43. Kanaan NM , Morfini GA , LaPointe NE , Pathogenic forms of tau inhibit kinesin-dependent axonal transport through a mechanism involving activation of axonal phosphotransferases. J Neurosci. 2011;31 (27 ):9858–9868.21734277
44. Oddo S , Caccamo A , Shepherd JD , Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease with plaques and tangles: intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction. Neuron. 2003;39 (3 ):409–421.12895417
45. Platt B , Drever B , Koss D , Abnormal cognition, sleep, EEG and brain metabolism in a novel knock-in Alzheimer mouse, PLB1. PLoS One. 2011;6 (11 ):e27068.
46. Diaz Brinton R . Minireview: translational animal models of human menopause: challenges and emerging opportunities. Endocrinology. 2012;153 (8 ):3571–3578.22778227
47. Sullivan PM , Mezdour H , Quarfordt SH , Maeda N . Type III hyperlipoproteinemia and spontaneous atherosclerosis in mice resulting from gene replacement of mouse Apoe with human Apoe*2. J Clin Invest. 1998;102 (1 ):130–135.9649566
48. Sullivan PM , Mezdour H , Aratani Y , Targeted replacement of the mouse apolipoprotein E gene with the common human APOE3 allele enhances diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. J Biol Chem. 1997;272 (29 ):17972–17980.9218423
49. Knouff C , Hinsdale ME , Mezdour H , Apo E structure determines VLDL clearance and atherosclerosis risk in mice. J Clin Invest. 1999;103 (11 ):1579–1586.10359567
50. Youmans KL , Tai LM , Nwabuisi-Heath E , APOE4-specific changes in Abeta accumulation in a new transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem. 2012;287 (50 ):41774–41786.23060451
51. Dikranian K , Kim J , Stewart FR , Levy MA , Holtzman DM . Ultrastructural studies in APP/PS1 mice expressing human ApoE isoforms: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5 (6 ):482–495.22949930
52. Shi Y , Yamada K , Liddelow SA , ApoE4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Nature. 2017;549 (7673 ):523–527.28959956
53. Zhao N , Liu CC , Van Ingelgom AJ , APOE epsilon2 is associated with increased tau pathology in primary tauopathy. Nat Commun. 2018;9 (1 ):4388.30348994
54. Scott S , Kranz JE , Cole J , Design, power, and interpretation of studies in the standard murine model of ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2008;9 (1 ):4–15.18273714
