LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8704771
1572
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
Alzheimer disease and associated disorders
0893-0341
1546-4156

33273159
8137512
10.1097/WAD.0000000000000425
NIHMS1643424
Article
Real-world site experiences with GeneMatch: The role of a recruitment-related registry in the context of local site effort to support Alzheimer’s disease prevention research
Bardach Shoshana H. PhD 12
Langbaum Jessica B. PhD 3
Kebodeaux Carey S. MPH 1
Jicha Gregory A. MD, PhD 14
1) Sanders Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
2) Graduate Center for Gerontology, College of Public Health, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
3) Banner Alzheimer’s Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA
4) Department of Neurology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
Corresponding Author: Shoshana Bardach, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Center, 1030 South Broadway, Suite 5, Lexington, KY 40504, Phone: (859) 323-1331, Fax: (859) 257-4233, shbardach@uky.edu
8 11 2020
Apr-Jun 2021
01 1 2022
35 2 148152
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

Registries have been proposed as a novel way to accelerate targeted recruitment for Alzheimer’s disease prevention clinical trials. However, there is limited data regarding registry effectiveness at accelerating recruitment and enrollment in research opportunities. This manuscript explores one site’s experience with GeneMatch, a novel genetic registry for Alzheimer’s disease research.

Method:

Referrals from GeneMatch to the site were tracked to understand the demographics of those referred and ultimate research enrollment outcomes. Referrals were cross-referenced with the site’s existing recruitment database, to better understand the role of GeneMatch in the context of existing recruitment efforts.

Results:

GeneMatch referred 86 individuals to the site, resulting in 54 individuals coming into the site to pursue research involvement further. The majority of referrals (52/86, 60.47%) did not have prior contact with the site about research engagement and having prior site contact did not significantly relate to engaging in on-site research.

Conclusions:

GeneMatch helped identify new individuals for participation in AD prevention studies. Results highlight the value of continuing local site-level efforts while also taking advantage of registries to enhance research recruitment. Ongoing efforts to further develop these and other novel strategies for outreach and engagement are much needed.

Registry
Recruitment
Outreach

Background:

Challenges with participant recruitment are one of the major impediments to scientific progress in the area of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) prevention and treatment1,2. Recently, the National Recruitment Plan proposed registries as one approach for facilitating recruitment into Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials 3. While there is some knowledge of public attitudes towards AD registries and ways of getting individuals involved4,5, as well at the potential for registries to facilitate recruitment, the ways in which registries support recruitment in real-world clinical research settings remains poorly understood6.

In order to get further insight into the role of registries in facilitating research recruitment, this study evaluated one site’s recent recruitment experiences with the Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative Generation Program (NCT02565511; NCT03131453), an AD prevention study that relied on a registry as a primary recruitment resource in the United States7. Prevention studies often try to recruit older adults at heightened risk for the future development of Alzheimer’s disease, either based on elevated brain amyloid levels, heightened genetic risk, or some combination thereof. Genetic risk often focuses on APOE genotype, as individuals with one copy of the APOE e4 gene (heterozygotes) have an increased risk of developing mild cognitive impairment or dementia (hazard ratio of 1.51-2.23) and those with 2 copies of the APOE e4 gene (homozygotes) have an even greater risk of future development of mild cognitive impairment or dementia (hazard ratio 2.63-3.57) than those without any copies of APOE e4 gene8. However, current population estimates suggest that only roughly 20-30% of individuals have one or more copies of the APOE e4 gene, with only 2% having two copies of the gene. This means to identify 25 individuals with one or more copy of the APOE e4 gene, a site relying on direct community recruitment would anticipate needing to recruit and genetically test at least 100 individuals. Presumably, the site would then also need to disclose the results of the genetic testing to these individuals, resulting in many hours of genetic disclosure and conversations about genetic risk.

The Generation Program was an AD prevention study seeking to develop preventive therapeutics for individuals ages 60-75 with normal cognition and elevated genetic risk. The program was divided into three parts: a prescreening epoch to disclose APOE status and two studies based on number of APOE e4 copies. The epoch disclosure portion of the study determined genetic eligibility for the interventional opportunities: Generation Study 1 was for individuals who were APOE e4 homozygotes and Generation Study 2 for individuals who were APOE e4 carriers (homozygotes or heterozygotes, heterozygotes must also have elevated brain amyloid). The genetic disclosure was facilitated by genetic counselors available via telemedicine, and several follow-up phone calls were conducted to mitigate any risks associated with learning about AD genetic risk9. The Generation Program studied two investigational medications: CAD106, designed to act as a vaccine binding to amyloid plaques to accelerate their removal (received via injection) and CNP520, designed to reduce the production of amyloid in the brain and delay accumulation of amyloid plaques (received as an oral medication). Unfortunately, the Generation Program was terminated due to an observed worsening of cognitive decline and greater brain atrophy in the treatment groups10.

Due to the afore-mentioned population statistics, GeneMatch was used to help alleviate site staff burden and support study enrollment during the recruitment phase. GeneMatch (www.endalznow.org/genematch) is a genetic registry that was designed to gather APOE genotype through a mailed in cheek swab11. GeneMatch does not disclose genetic results directly to the individual providing such samples. Rather, GeneMatch is designed to facilitate research recruitment by creating a pool of individuals with their genetic risk already characterized who are willing to engage in future research. In order to avoid unintentional disclosure of risk status, GeneMatch offers research invitations to individuals with and without heightened risk; however, this pool of individuals is enriched to increase the likelihood of those with heightened genetic risk pursuing research participation. By design, when GeneMatch supports AD prevention research, the site should then require fewer total participants to meet their target number of research enrollees with heightened genetic risk profiles. GeneMatch operates by providing invitations to individuals to be referred to sites for research involvement. If an individual accepts that invitation, their contact information is shared with the site, and the site follows up to discuss the research further and coordinate participation.

Recruitment into GeneMatch relies on a combination of advertising, social media efforts, and local site efforts to encourage participation11. In this manuscript, we explore the site level experience with GeneMatch referrals in the context of an AD prevention study. In particular, we were interested in how GeneMatch interacted with site-level efforts to facilitate recruitment. At the research site, individual level contact efforts with potential participants are documented in a recruitment database12. Accordingly, while records will not capture attendees at events who just happen to pick up a flyer, the outreach documentation will include individuals who have expressed interest in research at some event or who have reached out to the site for the purpose of expressing research interest.

This manuscript explores the extent to which individuals referred from GeneMatch had previously been in contact with the site, and whether those who had prior site-level contact differed in terms of their demographics or ultimate likelihood of Generation Program participation from those without documentation of prior site-level contact. We hypothesized that those with prior site level contact would be more likely to ultimately enroll in the Generation Program than those without prior site contact. In addition, using GeneMatch data for the state, we were able to explore factors related to likelihood of invitation acceptance.

Methods:

We created an SPSS dataset that included all referrals from GeneMatch. For each individual, we entered the demographic and contact information available, as well as date of registry referral. We then searched the site recruitment database for each individual to ascertain if the individual had prior site level contact. Individuals are present in the site’s recruitment database if they have previously attended a site event and expressed interest in research or have contacted the site to inquire about research opportunities. For those who had prior site contact, we entered the date of first research database contact and initial recruitment source. We then calculated the difference between the date of first site contact and date of registry referral. We entered the outcomes for all referrals, e.g. did they ever enroll in the Generation Program, and if not, we looked for reasons they did not. We calculated distance from the site, using Google Maps, based on the individual’s mailing address, or zip code when a full mailing address was unavailable. We selected the first mileage distance presented by Google Maps. We used descriptive statistics to explore how those with prior site contact differed from those without prior contact.

In addition, using an anonymized list from GeneMatch of all individuals who were offered invitations for site contact, we explored potential difference between those who accepted their invitation from GeneMatch to participate in the Generation Program and have their information passed on and those that did not accept their invitation. We used Chi-square tests for sex, and independent samples-t-tests for age, distance to site, and time from GeneMatch consent to study invitation, and time from swab kit receipt to invitation.

Results

Study

According to local records, the research site shared GeneMatch materials with at least 1,334 individuals in the area. Between these individuals and others reached through various outreach strategies, GeneMatch documented 1415 enrollees in the state of Kentucky, where the site is located. Of these 1415 individuals, GeneMatch invited 250 individuals to participate in the Generation Program and have their information passed on to the site. Five individuals declined the study invitation, one asked to be reminded about the study opportunity at a later date, six became ineligible due to age by the time they tried to accept the invitation, and 147 (58.8%) never responded to their invitation. Ultimately, 91 (36.4%) agreed to have their information passed on to the site, and 86 of those individuals were passed on to the site before study closure (See Figure 1).

Referral Source

The 91 individuals who agreed to have their information passed on to the site were referred to GeneMatch from a variety of sources. Approximately half of these individuals (n=47) originated from the Alzheimer’s Prevention Registry (www.endalznow.org)13, meaning they joined the Alzheimer’s Prevention Registry first and then joined GeneMatch. Just over a third (n=34, 37.4%) came from a Facebook ad campaign promoting GeneMatch. Roughly a fifth (n=18, 19.7%) accessed GeneMatch directly; these individuals who accessed the website directly were likely referrals from the site. Of the remaining four individuals, two (2.19%) came from either a call center or website associated with the interventional clinical trials for which GeneMatch was referring individuals to the site, and enrollment source is not available for the final two.

Given that the final five individuals did not have an opportunity to be passed on to the site, 86 individuals were received by the site from GeneMatch and potentially eligible for Generation Program study participation. Of these 86, 54 went on to enroll in at least the disclosure phase of the Generation Program. Of the remaining 32 individuals, 13 reported being uninterested, 13 were not eligible due to poorly controlled or exclusionary health conditions (such as cancer, Multiple sclerosis, stage 3 chronic kidney disease) or due to procedure ineligibility (e.g. pacemaker or spinal cord stimulator prohibiting participation in MRI requirements of the study), 2 were non-responsive, and 4 were planning to participate but the Generation Program closed before they could do so. Just over a third (34, 39.53%) of the GeneMatch referrals had previously been in touch with the site prior to their GeneMatch referral. For those with prior site contact, the duration from first documented contact with the site to referral from GeneMatch ranged from seven days (1 week) to 1976 days (5.4 years), with an average of 694.26 days (1.9 years). (See Table 1) GeneMatch did not provide race/ethnicity or educational attainment data and the site did not collect these demographics until after enrollment so these variables are not included. Of note, however, all individuals who enrolled in the initial disclosure portion of the Generation Program were non-Hispanic, White.

Of the 54 GeneMatch referrals who enrolled in the initial disclosure portion of the Generation Program, ultimately 19 enrolled in the interventional portion of the Generation Program, 21 were ineligible based on APOE genotype (e.g. no APOE e4), one was ineligible due to lacking a study partner, three chose to participate at a closer site, one was not interested in a medication intervention, one was not interested but no reason was provided, and eight were planning to enroll but the study closed before they did so. The individual without a study partner, the three who planned to participate at a closer site, and the two who were not interested were all individuals who came directly from GeneMatch without prior site contact.

Prior Site Contact Referral Sources

Of the 34 individuals with prior site contact, initial referral sources varied. These referral sources included: media coverage (n=11), one of the Center’s own annual large educational events (n=8), center presence at a community event (n=6), website/online (n=4), clinical care at the associated neurology center (n=2), and unknown (n=3). (See Figure 2).

Reasons Not Interested

Thirteen of the GeneMatch referrals reported being uninterested in even the disclosure portion of the Generation Program. Many who were uninterested did not provide a reason for their lack of interest (n=5, 38.46%). Others reported specific reasons for their lack of interest: not interested in a medication study (n=3, 23.08%), logistics such as visit frequency or distance to the site (n=2, 15.38%), not satisfied with compensation (n=1, 7.69%), did not want to learn their genetic risk status (n=1, 7.69%), and conflicting research commitment (n=1, 7.69%) (See Figure 3).

Reasons Not Eligible

Thirteen of the GeneMatch referrals were determined, in review with the site, not to be a good fit for the Generation Program. For the majority of these individuals (n=10, 76.92%) the reason they were not eligible was related to a health condition/health issue, including current exclusionary health conditions and history of health conditions that were exclusionary for the study. In addition, two individuals (15.38%) were unable to engage in the required study MRI, and one (7.69%) had travel plans that made the visit schedule for the proposed research impossible.

Differences in Enrollment Based on Prior Site Contact

In contrast to our hypothesis that those with prior site level contact would be more likely to ultimately enroll in studies than those without prior site contact, there was no significant differences in likelihood of enrollment between GeneMatch referrals with prior contact (64.71% enrolled) vs. those without prior contact (61.54% enrolled).

Excluding those who were not eligible to participate and those who prescreened eligible but were unable to enroll due to study closure, 22/25 (88%) GeneMatch referrals with prior contact enrolled, and 32/44 (72.72%) GeneMatch referrals without prior contact enrolled, suggesting that there may still be some support for the anticipated relationship between prior contact and participation. In addition, while non-responsiveness was low overall, it was non-existent among those with prior site contact.

Factors Related to Generation Program Invitation Acceptance

There were no significant differences based on sex or age (though individuals who accepted their invitations trended towards being younger) between those who accepted their invitation from GeneMatch to participate in the Generation Program and have their information passed on (n=91) and those that did not accept their invitation (n=159). Individuals who accepted their invitation tended to be closer to the site (M=52.86 miles, SD=53.60), than those that did not, (M=67.55, SD=56.75), t(246) =2.00, p=.047. Note: zip codes for two individuals were excluded due to zip codes appearing to be out of state, reflecting possible changes in residence status. In addition, increased time between GeneMatch participation – for both online consent date and kit receipt date– and invitation date were related to a decreased likelihood of invitation acceptance. Those who accepted their invitations had shorter lags between GeneMatch consent and invitation (M=350.71 days, SD=289.90) than those that did not accept their invitation (M=456.44, SD=286.25), t(248)=2.80, p=.006. Similarly, those who accepted their invitations had shorter lags between kit receipt and invitation (M=300.28 days, SD=292.37) that those that did not accept their invitation (M=427.53, SD=284.57), t(238) =3.32, p=.001.

Discussion

GeneMatch helped identify novel individuals for participation in AD prevention research. The majority of GeneMatch referrals were individuals without documented prior site contact (60.47%). Contrary to expectations, individuals referred from GeneMatch who had prior site contact were not more likely to enroll in the Generation Program than those who lacked such contact. Overall, those with and without prior site contact looked (in terms of age and sex) and behaved (in terms of ultimate enrollment) very similarly to each other. In addition, GeneMatch expanded the geographic reach of referrals, with an average distance from the site of 32.91 miles for those with prior site contact and 68.76 miles for those without prior site contact. Accordingly, GeneMatch seemed to help facilitate involvement of those who may have otherwise not been touched by the center’s outreach efforts.

These results highlight the value of continuing local site-level efforts while also taking advantage of registries to enhance research recruitment. Findings from an analysis of referral source for those with prior site contact demonstrate that a variety of venues and approaches are reaching participants, with particular success noted from center-focused outreach efforts, center presence at community events, and media coverage. The data regarding reasons individuals were not interested reflect the need to explore non-pharmacological approaches to AD prevention14. Given that a sizable portion (62.55%) of those who received invitations from GeneMatch to be referred to the site never responded, there are likely multiple factors at play. While some may have been more interested in non-pharmacological trials, others may not have wanted to learn their APOE results or may not have had someone available to reach out to as a study partner. Additionally, the data suggest that smaller time intervals between kit receipt and invitation to the study led to more accepted invitations; it seems a faster turnaround time for invitations helped keep potential participants engaged and motivated. Some individuals, when contacted by the site, no longer even recalled having sent in their swabs, highlighting the importance of timely follow-up for sustained interest.

The findings regarding reasons individuals were not eligible highlight the importance of acknowledging the health complexity of older adults and carefully reviewing exclusionary health conditions to ensure that there is consistently a valid justification for exclusionary health conditions. This would help both increase the potential participant population and enhance diversity and generalizability15. Individuals are motivated to participate in AD research for a variety of reasons, including to help themselves or a loved one and to help others in the future; accordingly, increasing strategies and avenues for identifying individuals and appealing to their motivations may support future engagement16,17.

There are several limitations to note. First, records of prior site contact may be underestimates, as only those who express interest in research at those events are recorded in the site’s recruitment database. Accordingly, it is possible that some individuals who are being considered as lacking prior contact may have actually had some prior involvement, but may have not previously expressed interest in research. In addition, due to privacy concerns and data tracking capabilities, we were unable to identify whether individuals sent by the site to GeneMatch ultimately signed up or shared the information with others. Unfortunately, local regulatory roadblocks served as a barrier to such data tracking abilities. Expanding these capabilities would provide further insight into the interaction between site efforts and registry enrollment, as well as levels of research participation motivation in the context of registry and site research opportunities. This capability would also enable a greater ability to evaluate effort and resources of recruitment pathways. Finally, the focus on a single site, while necessary to obtain the prior contact data, results in a small sample size; this may limit external validity, as experiences may vary across sites, and may also prevent the detection of significant differences due to low statistical power.

Despite the aforementioned limitations, this study uses real-world recruitment experiences to understand the role of a novel AD genetic registry and demonstrates the importance of continuing multi-pronged strategies to enhance research engagement. Results suggest that using non-physical recruitment approaches (e.g. Facebook) may help to expand the geographic reach of center outreach efforts. In addition, these findings demonstrate the interplay between local site and registry efforts to facilitate AD prevention trial recruitment. Findings also highlight the ongoing need to better understand and develop novel strategies for engaging minority participants in AD research, as the underrepresentation in registries seems to be even greater than the underrepresentation in clinical studies18-20.

Acknowledgements:

This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Aging (P30 AG028383). We would also like to acknowledge David Gordon and Hayley Salata’s assistance with accessing data to support this manuscript. The GeneMatch program was supported by the NIA (1UF1AG046150), the Alzheimer’s Association, Banner Alzheimer’s Foundation, the Flinn Foundation and GHR Foundation. This Generation Program is funded by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland and Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, in collaboration with the Banner Alzheimer’s Institute located in Phoenix, AZ, USA. Generation Study 1 is supported by funding from the National Institute on Aging (1UF1AG046150), part of the National Institutes of Health, as well as the Alzheimer’s Association, FBRI, GHR Foundation and Banner Alzheimer’s Foundation.

Figure 1. Flow Diagram of Research Engagement

Figure 2. Initial Referral Source of those with Prior Site Contact

Figure 3. Reasons Not Interested

Table 1. GeneMatch Referral Characteristics and Outcomes

	GeneMatch
with Prior
Contact	GeneMatch
without
Prior
Contact	GeneMatch
Total	
Referrals	34	52	86	
Age, yrs. (mean)	67.53	67.44	67.48	
Male (#, %)	8 (23.53)	17 (32.69)	25 (29.07)	
Distance from site, miles (mean)	32.91	68.76	53.73	
Outcomes				
 Enrolled	22 (64.71)	32 (61.54)	54 (62.79)	
 Not Eligible	8 (23.53)	5 (9.62)	13 (15.12)	
 Not Interested	3 (8.82)	10 (19.23)	13 (15.12)	
 Non-responsive	0	2 (3.85)	2 (2.33)	
 Prescreened eligible, but not enrolled	1 (2.94)	3 (5.77)	4 (4.65)	

Declarations of Interest: None.


References:

1. Fargo KN , Carrillo MC , Weiner MW , Potter WZ , Khachaturian Z . The crisis in recruitment for clinical trials in Alzheimer's and dementia: An action plan for solutions. Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association. 2016;12 (11 ):1113–1115.
2. Vellas B , Hampel H , Rougé-Bugat M , Alzheimer’s disease therapeutic trials: EU/US Task Force report on recruitment, retention, and methodology. The journal of nutrition, health &amp; aging. 2012;16 (4 ):339–345.
3. U.S. Department of Health &amp; Human Services. National Plans to Address Alzheimer's Disease. 2016; https://aspe.hhs.gov/national-plans-address-alzheimers-disease. Accessed February 21, 2017.
4. Grill JD , Hoang D , Gillen DL , Constructing a Local Potential Participant Registry to Improve Alzheimer's Disease Clinical Research Recruitment. Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD. 2018;63 (3 ):1055–1063.29710723
5. Grill JD , Holbrook A , Pierce A , Hoang D , Gillen DL . Attitudes toward potential participant registries. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. 2017;56 (3 ):939–946.
6. Grill JD . Recruiting to preclinical Alzheimer's disease clinical trials through registries. Alzheimer's &amp; dementia (New York, N Y). 2017;3 (2 ):205–212.
7. Lopez Lopez C , Caputo A , Liu F , The Alzheimer's Prevention Initiative Generation Program: Evaluating CNP520 Efficacy in the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease. The journal of prevention of Alzheimer's disease. 2017;4 (4 ):242–246.
8. Qian J , Wolters FJ , Beiser A , APOE-related risk of mild cognitive impairment and dementia for prevention trials: an analysis of four cohorts. PLoS medicine. 2017;14 (3 ).
9. Langlois CM , Bradbury A , Wood EM , Alzheimer's Prevention Initiative Generation Program: Development of an APOE genetic counseling and disclosure process in the context of clinical trials. Alzheimer's &amp; dementia (New York, N Y). 2019;5 :705–716.
10. ALZFORUM. Cognitive Decline Trips Up API Trials of BACE Inhibitor. 2019; https://www.alzforum.org/news/research-news/cognitive-decline-trips-api-trials-bace-inhibitor. Accessed May 12, 2020.
11. Langbaum JB , Karlawish J , Roberts JS , GeneMatch: A novel recruitment registry using at-home APOE genotyping to enhance referrals to Alzheimer's prevention studies. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia. 2019;15 (4 ):515–524.
12. Barber JM , Bardach SH , Jicha GA . Alzheimer Disease Clinical Trial Recruitment: Does Participation in a Brief Cognitive Screen at a Community Health Fair Promote Research Engagement? Alzheimer disease and associated disorders. 2018;32 (4 ):333–338.29944475
13. Langbaum JB , High N , Nichols J , Kettenhoven C , Reiman EM , PN T . The Alzheimer’s Prevention Registry: a large internet-based participant recruitment registry to accelerate referrals to Alzheimer’s-focused studies. . The journal of prevention of Alzheimer's disease. In Press.
14. Olanrewaju O , Clare L , Barnes L , Brayne C . A multimodal approach to dementia prevention: A report from the Cambridge Institute of Public Health. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions. 2015;1 (3 ):151–156.26949734
15. Schneider LS , Olin JT , Lyness SA , Chui HC . Eligibility of Alzheimer's Disease Clinic Patients for Clinical Trials. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 1997;45 (8 ):923–928.9256842
16. Bardach SH , Parsons K , Gibson A , Jicha GA . “From Victimhood to Warriors”: Super-researchers’ Insights Into Alzheimer’s Disease Clinical Trial Participation Motivations. The Gerontologist. 2019.
17. Bardach SH , Holmes SD , Jicha GA . Motivators for Alzheimer’s disease clinical trial participation. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research. 2017.
18. Ighodaro ET , Nelson PT , Kukull WA , Challenges and Considerations Related to Studying Dementia in Blacks/African Americans. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. 2017;60 (1 ):1–10.
19. Lechleiter J Closing The Diversity Gap In Clinical Trials. 2014; http://www.forbes.com/sites/johnlechleiter/2014/04/09/closing-the-diversity-gap-in-clinical-trials/#11a4972b3c91. Accessed February 21, 2017.
20. Zhou Y , Elashoff D , Kremen S , Teng E , Karlawish J , Grill JD . African Americans are less likely to enroll in preclinical Alzheimer's disease clinical trials. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions. 2017;3 (1 ):57–64.
