LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100962781
22270
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nature reviews. Neuroscience
1471-003X
1471-0048

31127193
8864539
10.1038/s41583-019-0177-6
NIHMS1609194
Article
A cross-disorder connectome landscape of brain dysconnectivity
van den Heuvel Martijn P. 123*
Sporns Olaf 45
1 Connectome Laboratory, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
2 Department of Clinical Genetics, UMC Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
3 Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands.
4 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
5 Indiana University Network Science Institute, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
Author contributions

The authors both researched data for article, provided substantial contributions to discussion of its content, wrote the article and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission.

* martijn.vanden.heuvel@vu.nl
3 7 2020
7 2019
23 2 2022
20 7 435446
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Many human brain disorders are associated with characteristic alterations in the structural and functional connectivity of the brain. In this article, we explore how commonalities and differences in connectome alterations can reveal relationships across disorders. We survey recent literature on connectivity changes in neurological and psychiatric disorders in the context of key organizational principles of the human connectome and observe that several disturbances to network properties of the human brain have a common role in a wide range of brain disorders and point towards potentially shared network mechanisms underpinning disorders. We hypothesize that the distinct dimensions along which connectome networks are organized (for example, ‘modularity’ and ‘integration’) provide a general coordinate system that allows description and categorization of relationships between seemingly disparate disorders. We outline a cross-disorder ‘connectome landscape of dysconnectivity’ along these principal dimensions of network organization that may place shared connectome alterations between brain disorders in a common framework.


pmcBrain function depends on effective communication between distinct functional brain systems. The anatomical substrate enabling functional neural communication and integration is the ‘connectome’, the complex network of structural connections of a nervous system1. The overarching goal of the field of connectomics is to understand how network organization of the connectome relates to the brain’s capacity for neural processing and brain function2. Conversely, it harbours a powerful toolset to examine how alterations to the connectome may lead to brain dysfunction in disease3,4.

The human connectome displays multiple features of an efficient communication network, including cost-conserving wiring, a community structure that promotes locally specialized neural processing and long-distance projections that facilitate globally short communication relays5,6. The complex architecture of the connectome has an important role in shaping functional communication and connectivity patterns between brain regions7–10, which ultimately underpin brain function and dysfunction. A key attribute of the human connectome is the large investment of neural resources in macroscale connectivity to keep the brain globally connected, with a considerable proportion of the cerebral volume comprising white matter11, the anatomical compartment that contains most of the brain’s long-range communication pathways9. Although high investment in inter-regional connectivity supports integrated brain function, disruption to this connectivity may render brain networks vulnerable to disorders. Adding to a wealth of empirical findings and growing understanding of the biological background of brain disorders at the level of molecular processes, genetics and neuroimaging (for examples, see REFS12–14), considerable effort in the past decade has been directed towards identifying connectivity substrates and biomarkers that are associated with specific brain disorders and that predict disease severity, prognosis and outcome.

Promising progress has been made using various ‘network neuroscience’ tools to search for alterations in structural and functional connectivity underlying brain disorders15 (see BOX 1 for a brief overview of commonly used network features). A rapidly growing body of literature suggests that many neurological and psychiatric disorders involve changes in the network features of the human connectome (see BOXES 2,3 for examples). This work motivated the early notion that these characteristic network metrics could serve as specific biological markers for these disorders16,17. Thus far, the new field of ‘disease connectomics’ has focused on the characterization of network alterations in one disorder at a time, with many studies reporting disturbances in the same set of network attributes across different disorders. For example, alterations in functional connectivity of the default-mode network have been implicated in Alzheimer disease18, autism19, schizophrenia20, depression21, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)22 and epilepsy23, among other disorders. Similarly, disruption of the modular architecture of the connectome has been associated with autism24, depression25, epilepsy26, schizophrenia27 and 22q11 deletion syndrome28. This redundancy naturally has led to a critical discussion of the utility of network metrics as biomarkers for disease29. Here, we suggest that it may also point to the existence of shared patterns of dysconnectivity across disorders.

Extending the growing trend for dimensional approaches (as opposed to categorical approaches) in mental health disorders30–32, transdiagnostic studies have started to emphasize the importance of looking for commonalities and differences in neurobiological changes across brain disorders. In search of common neurobiological substrates33 and cross-diagnostic convergence34, studies have started to suggest that alterations in functional systems and anatomical circuits may have a role in cross-disorder dysfunction and symptoms35,36. Here, we build on this notion and examine potential common connectional substrates for brain disorders. Our intent is not to provide a detailed report on all connectome findings in neurological and psychiatric disorders but to focus on commonalities and differences in disease-related changes in connectome organization and leverage these observations into a common cross-disorder framework.

The majority of empirical disease connectome studies have reported alterations in network organization in a single disorder; therefore, little is known about the dimensions along which the connectional substrates of multiple disorders are potentially linked. In other words, we currently lack a ‘common space’ or ‘landscape’ that could link connectome alterations across disorders. Studying patterns of connectivity in multiple disorders and placing them into a cross-disorder landscape may reveal common biological mechanisms of disease and, as such, account for shared symptomology, as well as common developmental and/or genetic mechanisms across disorders. We hypothesize that shared network mechanisms relate to fundamental principles of how human brain networks are organized, shaping brain dysconnectivity effects across disorders in a characteristic fashion. We begin with a brief overview of two of the major principles of network organization of the human connectome: ‘modularity’ and ‘integration’. We consider how these network dimensions define a continuum of all possible human connectome configurations (a ‘space’ of human brain networks). With this framework in mind, we survey empirical findings relating to connectome alterations that are associated with the aetiology of neurological and psychiatric conditions. We then propose a cross-disorder ‘connectome landscape of dysconnectivity’ of brain disorders that is built on the dimensional approach to connectome architecture and hypothesize that common disease-related alterations in the connectome correspond to shifts or displacements of human brain networks among regions in this dimensional landscape. We conclude with an outlook on the future of cross-disorder connectomics and discuss new avenues towards studying common biological substrates of brain disorders.

Principles of connectivity

Network studies across a wide range of species have revealed common ‘principles of connectivity’5, including network attributes that appear to be widely conserved and represent fundamental features of brain organization and function. Two proposed major driving forces of neural and brain network organization are a tendency to minimize the physical and metabolic cost of wiring (for example, by promoting the use of local circuitry and the formation of local modules) and the need to invest resources in network attributes that promote network efficiency6.

Cost minimization underpins one of the major themes in connectome organization. It favours the formation of structural connections between geometrically close neural elements, promoting dense local circuitry by forming spatially compact (‘or clustered’) network communities (‘network modules’; BOX 1). Both anatomical and functional network communities support specialized neural processing, a foundation for primary as well as higher-order cognitive brain systems in the non-human37,38 and human brain10,39. Variation in functional modules across individuals has been linked to variation in behaviour, for example, in general intelligence40, working memory41 and several personality traits42,43.

A second key principle is the propensity of connectomes to express network attributes that promote global communication and functional integration44. Although costly in terms of neural resources, long-range connections are beneficial for enabling efficient neural communication between brain regions that are not only spatially remote but also functionally distinct. Many of the long-range connections are maintained by highly central hub regions that display diverse connections across a wide range of functional domains45,46. These hub regions tend to connect densely to each other, forming a central ‘core’ or ‘rich club’ in the network9,47. Offsetting its high connection cost6,48, the central topological embedding of this rich club facilitates global integration of information across different functional domains in the network49–51. Empirical observations suggest that inter-individual variation in anatomical and functional hub structure is associated with inter-individual differences in cognition52,53 and with inter-individual differences in brain dysfunction in disease (for examples, see REFS44,54,55).

As is the case with many seemingly distinct attributes of brain networks56, these two principles of connectome organization (‘modularity’ and ‘integration’) should not be considered as mutually independent — instead, they jointly emerge in the course of development and evolution5,57–59. However, they are somewhat opposite poles: the drive to conserve wiring cost (for example, promoting modular organization) is generally incompatible with the simultaneous drive to promote efficient system-wide integration (for example, promoting densely connected hubs and global communication). These competing objectives are resolved in a ‘compromise’ or ‘trade-off’ in the design of a globally optimal network topology, which maximizes their joint expression in cost-efficient connectome architectures6,60.

We note that ‘modularity’ and ‘integration’ certainly do not describe the entire spectrum of complexity in the brain’s network organization and possible connectome alterations in disease. Rather, we adopt them here as candidates for building a parsimonious framework that can capture the rich set of individual variation in the human connectome that is driven by a plethora of specific variations in wiring patterns, myelination, sizes and spatial positions of areas, cortical folding, placement of hubs and the layout of communication paths, among many other factors5,6,58. We focus our exploration of disease-related connectome alterations around these two major wiring principles.

Connectome disruptions

Interest is growing in examining the role of alterations in network attributes in the origin, progression and clinical trajectory of brain disorders. For example, studies have reported functional connectivity changes in hub regions in the default-mode network in Alzheimer disease61,62, alterations in anatomical and functional connectivity in the motor system in ALS63, altered functional core connectivity in patients with Huntington disease64 and changes in functional network dynamics in different forms of epilepsy65. Similarly, disruptions in connectome organization have been implicated in the aetiology of multiple neurodevelopmental psychiatric conditions, for example, hyperconnectivity in autism spectrum disorder24,66,67, altered anatomical hub and rich club organization in schizophrenia68–70 and impaired inter-hemispheric communication71 and reduced connectivity in emotion-regulating hub areas in bipolar disorder72.

As we mentioned, the aim of this article is not so much to provide an in-depth overview of connectome changes in specific psychiatric and neurological disorders (we refer to recent excellent reviews and meta-analyses on this topic4,73–76) but to provide a perspective on how different connectome alterations and accompanying variation in brain dysfunction across disorders may relate to each other; we hypothesize that the observed connectome alterations in brain disorders (‘connectopathies’)77,78 align along the major dimensions of human connectome organization. BOXES 2 and 3 provide a condensed overview of some of the connectome findings commonly reported for individual neurological and psychiatric brain conditions. Below, we again discuss these empirical findings of connectome alterations in disease but now in light of the ‘modularity’ and ‘integration’ dimensions of the human connectome. We hypothesize that these dimensions may together define a proposed connectome landscape of brain dysconnectivity.

Modular organization and disease

Several brain disorders appear to originate from disruptions that are confined to specific local networks. For example, different neurodegenerative syndromes, each characterized by different behavioural symptoms, initially target specific functional subsystems79. Evidence suggests that there is spatial overlap between the pattern of atrophy of different neurodegenerative disorders and the layout of specific functional resting-state networks in the healthy brain79. From these observations, it has been hypothesized that the existence of different specialized functional connectivity systems in the human brain may underpin the existence of a spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders73,79. For example, the pattern of cortical atrophy in Alzheimer disease mirrors the topography of the default-mode network, whereas frontotemporal dementia displays an atrophy pattern that mirrors the layout of the salience network79 and ALS initially mainly affects the motor network63,80. Thus, it appears that each of these neurodegenerative disorders starts from an initial ‘epicentre’81, with progressive atrophy patterns spreading along the epicentre’s connectivity pattern and the modular organization of the network at first confining effects to the initially affected subnetwork.

This notion is supported by findings from molecular studies suggesting that multiple neurodegenerative disorders involve a spreading or transmission of misfolded proteins across the brain, as in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. In Alzheimer disease, for example, longitudinal changes in imaging tau by positron-emission tomography have indicated a progressive spread of pathology82, with MRI findings suggesting that the spread of ‘disease agents’83 such as tau may occur along the underlying wiring structure of the connectome81–83. These observations suggest that the order and extent to which regions become involved in a disorder are related to whether and how strongly they are connected to other regions in the brain. Similar types of disease spread, and underlying spreading mechanisms have been proposed for Parkinson disease84 and ALS63,85, with the pattern of connectome wiring resembling the different stages of disease observed in molecular studies86,87. Computational models simulating diffusion of disease particles along inter-regional connections have generated spreading patterns that are highly similar to those observed by empirical molecular studies in Alzheimer disease83, ALS88 and Parkinson disease89.

This overlap between spatial patterns of neurodegenerative effects and the spatial layout of functional networks leads to the hypothesis that a consequence of the inherent drive towards short wiring and locally connected communities is that disease processes are initially confined by the boundaries of the affected subsystem — the ‘ignition’ point of the disorder73,79,81 (FIG. 1). Thus, the existence of modules initially confines spreading processes to specific network communities, which limits global vulnerability. With a large proportion of connectivity concentrated within communities, locally triggered pathophysiological processes — for example, those involved in neurodegeneration — remain initially restricted to a ‘target’ subsystem, without significant effects on other, topologically more remote parts of the brain79. Thus, the modular organization of the connectome not only imposes constraints on healthy brain communication and information flow but also constrains the range of neural perturbations (including pathologies and affected functioning) in the human brain (FIG. 1).

The concept that the modular organization of the human connectome shapes the types of network perturbations that can occur may not only hold for neurodegenerative disorders involving the physical spread or transmission of proteins across the brain. Principles of ‘spread’, in terms of functional involvement, have also been proposed in the context of neurodevelopmental and/or psychiatric disorders90–92. Here, disease processes may initially involve a highly localized (regional) change, which in turn exposes regions in the topological neighbourhood to altered functional input or communication, leading to a sequence of changes across the brain and subsequent reorganization mechanisms to neural circuitry4,93. Because they are shaped by the wiring structure of the brain, these changes in connectivity initially remain confined to a restricted subset of functional networks, with matching functional domains that define a distinct spectrum of symptoms.

Neural integration and disease

The drive towards investment of neural resources in network attributes that bring benefits to global neural integration, such as the formation of hubs, rich club structures and global communication paths, also leaves a distinct signature on the spectrum of brain disorders. First, as in Internet, communication and transportation networks, the central placement of brain hubs makes them vulnerable and common sources of global network disruption. Their high centrality further entails differences in neuronal architecture, physiology and metabolism, making them common players in disease processes. Second, the general drive towards keeping high levels of global communication and integration predisposes the human brain to the risk that local changes quickly fan out and initiate a critical cascade of failure across the entire network. Below, we discuss these network attributes and their putative involvement in disease in more detail.

Vulnerable hubs.

The tendency to concentrate connectivity in a set of centrally connected hub regions not only promotes integrative brain function but also has been hypothesized to render the brain vulnerable to a wide range of brain disorders44,76. Their ‘rich’ character may make these highly connected regions potential ‘vulnerability hot spots’ for a wide variety of disease processes, and their central position in the network incurs the risk of becoming highly disruptive to the network as a whole. The high participation of hubs in globally short communication pathways predicts disruption of global communication and integration in the case of failure, with damage to hubs and their connections having a disproportional effect on global network organization (FIG. 1).

The general vulnerability of hubs may further owe to the specific biochemistry and metabolism associated with dense connectivity and their role in neural integration. Areas with high structural and functional connectivity have been noted to display a distinct cytoarchitectonic94,95, chemical96 and transcriptional fingerprint97, with characteristic dendritic branching and high synaptic density of pyramidal neurons98,99, a neuronal infrastructure associated with communication and integrative processing100. Hubs are also among the most metabolically active regions of the brain6,101, with a genetic signature characterized by tightly coupled expression of genes involved in the regulation of energy metabolism102. This specific local physiology, high energy utilization and involvement in integrative neural processing suggest that relatively small changes in the functioning of brain network hubs can disproportionately disrupt neural function, making them common players in a wide range of disease conditions.

Cascading network failure.

The drive towards global integration can have consequences for the resilience of a brain network to damage. Recent theories have suggested that neurodegenerative disorders may involve local network disruption (in network terms a failure of one of the ‘nodes’) that starts a cascade of node failure across the network over time103–105 (FIG. 1). In analogy to cascade failures in electrical power grids106, the working load of the initially failing node is redistributed to other nodes by deploying reorganization strategies to maintain network performance. This reorganization, in turn, increases the demand on these other regions, a process eventually leading to the failure of these network nodes as well, starting a cascade across the network. Following this model, the proposed ‘cascading network failure’ theory of Alzheimer disease105, for example, suggests that the disorder starts with an initial failure of regions of the posterior default-mode network. In service of maintaining network function, these compromised areas shift their processing load to other systems containing central hub areas, which in turn places stress on these other areas and their connections, thus starting a cascade of failing areas across the entire brain network. Empirical evidence for this type of cascading failure comes from studies of the spatial patterns of tau depositions across individuals at early and late stages of Alzheimer disease, patterns shown to be related to distinct changes in functional connectivity at the different stages of the disorder105.

The drive towards integration as a risk factor for disease.

Several lines of empirical observations suggest that the drive towards efficient global communication and integration in the brain constitutes a general risk factor for disease. Indeed, meta-analyses of MRI studies reporting on anatomical and functional abnormalities in brain regions in neurological and psychiatric diseases have showed that highest disease involvement is associated with the most densely connected subcortical and cortical regions of the human brain76 and their connections107. The link between the drive towards neural integration and increased risk of vulnerability is further supported by in silico simulations of brain dynamics emerging from the anatomical wiring structure of the connectome. Computational studies have identified neural hubs as having a central role in creating functional network diversity51,108 as well as high levels of neural processing and activity, a feature of hub areas that has been suggested to confer vulnerability to, for example, Alzheimer disease61. Generative models used to examine the growth patterns of structural and functional brain networks have further indicated an important role of local clustering in the formation of connectivity in the healthy brain and have suggested that slightly detuned model parameters in the growth of brain networks can lead to disturbed network configurations as observed in schizophrenia109. These computational findings dovetail with empirical findings suggesting that brain development involves a ‘local-to-global’ reorganization of connectivity110, with a growing role of global connectivity in integrative brain processes during adolescence. These developmental changes towards a more integrative brain coincide with the existence of a period of high vulnerability for the development of neuropsychiatric disorders, for example, psychosis, mood disorders and depression111. Deviating patterns in the development of brain connectivity may thus represent important risk factors for lasting disruptions of brain structure and function112.

Connectome landscape

We began with the idea that the tendency towards conserving network cost through modular (segregated) functional systems on the one hand and promoting global (integrated) processing on the other hand represents two major dimensions along which the human connectome exhibits behaviourally and cognitively meaningful individual variation. We then reviewed empirical findings of connectome studies that suggest that different brain disorders appear to be associated with disturbances in connectome organization along these major organizational principles. On the basis of these common dimensions of connectome variation and disturbances in brain organization, we now hypothesize that disparate disorders can be placed in a shared connectome landscape.

As a first step, we suggest that the major wiring principles (dimensions) of connectome organization define a continuous space that describes possible configurations that brain networks can display (FIG. 2). This construct corresponds to a ‘network morphospace’113 that contains all possible network configurations (topologies) arranged along the two dimensions of ‘modularity’ and ‘integration’. Importantly, these two dimensions are somewhat orthogonal, setting up a competitive interaction between modularity and integration that drives a mutual trade-off.

This 2D space of course does not represent the full complexity of the human connectome; there are probably other important factors (that is, other ‘dimensions’) that similarly have a role in shaping the network organization of the human brain. As indicated above, we focus our discussion here on modularity and integration as they represent commonly examined network features in the context of brain disorders4,6,44. Moreover, although a network space along more dimensions and their potential multidimensional trade-offs would be more realistic, it is also harder to conceptualize.

In this total space of all possible network configurations, an optimal balance between competing dimensions is achieved at the so-called ‘Pareto front’113, where the two objectives of achieving modularity and integration are jointly optimized. We propose that the area near this front describes the extent of ‘normal’ variation reflecting the optimal or near-optimal trade-off encountered in the generally healthy population. The trade-off implies a balance between modularity and specialized brain functionality on the one hand and global integration on the other that supports healthy brain function. Network configurations that would afford greater optimality along one or multiple dimensions cannot be realized given the fundamental constraints of geometry and physiology. Network configurations below the front correspond to networks that are physically and biologically possible, but to a network configuration that is ‘suboptimal’, in the sense that the trade-off between multiple objectives is imperfectly realized.

We propose that this network morphospace may offer a useful representation of network dimensions that characterize dysfunction related to a broad range of brain disorders. As the total network space, by definition, encompasses the full range of individual connectome variation, it naturally also describes the configurations of brain networks that are associated with various disorders. The spectrum of neurological and psychiatric disorders, differing in their behavioural and cognitive manifestations, can thus be mapped to networks that fall within this space. We hypothesize that disease processes move connectomes away from the area of near-optimal trade-off into the domain of ‘suboptimal’ network configurations. Importantly, we now suggest that network configurations associated with brain disorders are not randomly distributed within the suboptimal space. Instead, we propose that network configurations associated with brain disorders occupy specific regions of the proposed morphospace defined by the suboptimal trade-off between modularity and integration and that disease processes exert effects along these same architectural dimensions. We refer to this area of disease-related connectome configurations as a ‘connectome landscape of dysconnectivity’ of brain disorders, wherein disorders are positioned according to their effects on the major organizational dimensions of brain networks.

Distinct disease processes exert distinct effects along the two dimensions, leading to disease-specific trajectories from the optimal to the suboptimal network space (FIG. 2). Different classes of disease processes may as such lead to specific categories of suboptimal connectomes, occupying different ‘disease zones’ in the total landscape. What these disorders share is that their disparate disease processes exert common effects along the principal dimensions of the connectome, thereby sharing aspects of their patterns of dysconnectivity and creating relations among otherwise seemingly discrete and disparate disorders. Depending on the extent to which a disease process affects a specific dimension of the connectome (for example, network efficiency in one and modularity in another), a network will thus move in a characteristic direction away from the optimal trade-off (FIG. 2).

Connectivity reorganization

The alteration of connectome organization in disease with the transition of an individual connectome away from the optimal regime are probably continuous and dynamic processes. Although disease processes may move an individual connectome away from the optimal regime, the existing connectivity could potentially be again reconfigured such that the network moves again closer to the optimal front. Studies have suggested reorganization of functional network connectivity in epilepsy65 and ALS114, after stroke115 and surgery116 and in general ageing and ageing-related conditions93. It remains an open topic of debate to what extent such effects include compensatory mechanisms65,117 in response to changes to the network, or to what extent these effects are related to, for example, a loss of cortical inhibitory influence and thus are part of the disease mechanism118,119. These observations do suggest that changes in the brain’s network structure, either locally or globally, and/or either as a direct or indirect effect of disease processes, can result in adaptive reorganization of connectivity across the network120. Reorganization processes may include mechanisms that render functional communication and connectivity more resilient to disease-related changes by promoting greater stability in functional connectivity patterns. Proposed examples of such adaptive processes include the upregulation of activity and functional connectivity along existing connections to compensate for loss of other connections93,121–123 or, for example, the adaptation of alternative connection pathways in reaction to changes in connectome organization during brain development24,124 (see also REF.4).

Cross-disorder connectomics

A central goal of this article is to underscore the need to look for patterns of connectome alterations across multiple disorders and to underscore the importance of moving towards a field of cross-disorder connectomics. We suggest an integrative framework for how connectome alterations and their effect on brain function may relate across disorders, placing disparate disorders into a common ‘landscape’. We propose that the principles of wiring of the human connectome that shape healthy variation in connectome architecture also shape a connectome landscape of dysconnectivity that accompanies brain disorders.

The growing use of network neuroscience tools in the investigation of various brain disorders allows the field to start addressing new questions about connectome alterations and their general role in brain function and dysfunction. Following developments in other fields of science125, we suggest that disease connectome studies should more extensively recognize the examination of the — sometimes blurry — boundaries between brain disorders. Other such attempts to carve out cross-cutting biological substrates of brain disorders include the Research Domain Criteria approach126 and network-based approaches that emphasize the importance of integrating molecular, genetic and large-scale connectivity disease processes across scales125,127,128. By conceptualizing brain disorders as dysfunction of neural circuitry and of biological networks across scales, these approaches go beyond considering disorders within conventional diagnostic boundaries and provide novel angles to the classification or nosology of brain disorders31,129.

A first step towards experimental testing of the ideas put forward in this article is the application of new multidisorder approaches that go beyond the study of single disorders and focus on the ‘connectotyping’130 of connectivity changes across multiple brain conditions. Such cross-disorder studies need to include the systematic construction of disease connectivity maps of a wide range of brain disorders using uniform acquisition methodology and analysis methods. This should then be followed by a consistent comparison of the resulting ‘disease connectivity fingerprints’ between disorders107,131 and examination of where in the proposed landscape disorders can be placed and how they relate to each other in terms of network alterations. The approach to cross-disorder connectomics we propose may define common and distinct connectome fingerprints132 of disorders and provide a deeper understanding of disease comorbidities and disease-unique behavioural and cognitive changes. Placing disease fingerprints in a common space allows for testing the proposed hypothesis that specific brain network attributes bring general vulnerability to the human brain and are central factors in brain dysfunction. The construction of a cross-disorder connectome landscape also allows for identifying connectome alterations that are potentially unique to brain disorders or subclasses of disorders. Computer-aided approaches for disease classification allow for empirically testing the utility of such connectome fingerprints.

Current multinational initiatives that combine large quantities of neuroimaging data sets across several brain disorders (for examples, see REFS133,134) form a crucial step in finding disease-common and disease-specific effects on brain connectivity. These ‘big data connectomics’ initiatives, which are building detailed databases of multiple conditions, form a vital step in the development of both sensitive and specific disease connectome biomarkers. Connectome information may as such be used to diagnose disorders135–137, classify distinct patient subgroups138,139 and/or make predictions on long-term outcome127,140 and symptom severity141.

Disease connectomics would also benefit from new ways to more directly test causal mechanisms. Thus far, most disease connectome studies have been descriptive and reported differences in connectome organization between individuals with a disorder and healthy controls. One way to provide more insight into the causal effects of connectome alterations is to examine longitudinal changes in connectome structure in patients and individuals from high-risk populations (for examples, see REFS142–144) and examine how connectome alterations may precede behavioural changes.

A complementary way to empirically test the hypothesized involvement of connectome principles in brain dysfunction is the use of perturbation models. Such perturbations may involve the use of animal models as well as advanced computer models that simulate neural dynamics and brain connectivity in silico on the basis of anatomical connectome information145,146. Although there is growing availability of data on the normative wiring structure of various animals5, animal models that describe the effects of wiring alterations in relation to brain dysfunction are limited. This type of study would provide an important source of information on how alterations to the connectome can cause brain dysfunction. It would also be an important resource to examine how disruptions in brain connectivity may be at the basis of — as we hypothesize in this article — multiple psychiatric and neurological conditions147,148. Computational models — for example, simulating the functional effects of damage to the anatomical structure of the connectome149,150 — further represent an important step in elucidating mechanistic principles of how changes to the connectome may lead to brain dysfunction145.

Such models — animal and computational alike — are important tools to empirically test hypotheses on connectome involvement in brain dysfunction as they allow for inducing distinct changes to the system and to systematically test whether disruptions in brain function associated with distinct disorders may better relate to disruptions of local processes due to focal damage to brain regions and/or relate to changes to integrative brain connections and network attributes. In addition, animal models allow deep-rooted questions of how genetic151,152 and environmental risk factors153 for brain disorders may causally relate to network alterations to be addressed. Knockout mouse models, for example, are a powerful tool for systematic testing of whether, and if so how, specific genetic variants associated with a risk of developing a disorder relate to alterations to brain connectivity that underlie brain dysfunction151,152.

Cross-disorder connectotyping has the potential to generate detailed high-dimensional maps of a person’s connectivity profile, which may prove useful in determining an individual’s vulnerability and/or resilience to the development of specific brain disorders (BOX 4). Following in the footsteps of precision medicine, we believe that ‘precision connectomics’, by incorporating data on an individual’s connectome may become a useful component for strategies that customize medical interventions at the level of the individual patient154. Combined with the use of complex computer simulations of brain dynamics (for example, the ‘virtual brain’)146, they could potentially be used in ‘virtual trials’ to test the effectiveness of novel treatment strategies121. Although many steps have yet to be taken, precision connectomics may develop into a promising avenue for understanding the effects of changes to macroscale connectivity in the human brain and the role they play in common and specific disease effects in individual patients.

We hope that insight into how the inherent structure of the human connectome may shape the landscape of brain connectivity dysconnectivity opens a useful new chapter in our understanding of how a large set of biological mechanisms cause a variety of brain disorders, by disclosing common dimensions of network failure and informing a framework for discovering potential cross-disorder relationships.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank A. Griffa and A. Zalesky for helpful comments and discussions on earlier versions of the manuscript. M.P.v.d.H. was funded by VIDI (NWO-VIDI 452-16-015) and ALWopen (ALWOP.179) grants from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research and by a fellowship from MQ. O.S. was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (grant R01 AT009036-01).

Fig. 1 | Modular and hub organization of the human connectome-shaping disease processes.

a | The modular character of the connectome can shape the pattern of the disease-spreading process, with early effects of the disease remaining mostly concentrated in one specific network module. b | Damage to hub nodes (red nodes) and their connections (red connections) can lead to structural and functional changes across many places in the connectome. c | This part illustrates the ‘cascading network failure’ theory, which states that the initial, local changes to the connectome are cascaded across the network. Failure in one of the network nodes triggers compensatory effects in topologically adjacent nodes (for example, increased activity), aiming to take over the role of the failed nodes and to maintain optimal brain function. The increased burden on these nodes will in turn lead to an increased probability of their failure, triggering a cascade of failure of nodes across the entire network. The global connectivity character of hub nodes makes them more likely to be involved in such compensatory processes.

Fig. 2 | Connectome landscape of dysconnectivity.

a | Two of the major principles of wiring the human connectome are the tendency to minimize the overall cost of wiring (x-axis), favouring the formation of local circuitry and local subsystems, and the drive to invest in resources that allow efficient global communication and integration (y-axis).Together, they describe a 2D space (referred to as ‘network morphospace’)113 of all possible network configurations. Within this space, the two principles compete and their trade-off (blue line) defines an efficient organization of the network, where both objectives are together optimized. The region beyond this front113, relating to ‘greater optimization’ (grey area), cannot easily be realized given the constraints of geometry and physiology. In turn, networks in the region below the front could be considered as ‘suboptimal’ (green area, with shades of green indicating less and less optimal network configurations) in the sense that the trade-off between multiple objectives is inefficiently realized: with the subregion furthest away from the trade-off optimum (lower left corner space, lightest green) comprising networks that would be biologically unworkable and thus too maladaptive to support human behaviour. The area around the trade-off optimum and in between the regions of ‘impossible’ and ‘suboptimal’ networks describes the extent of normal variation of efficient cost integration in the general healthy human population (light-blue zone). Within the area of healthy human variation, certain individual variants in connectome organization may represent configurations of the connectome showing resilience or vulnerability to disease. In this framework, disease processes can be theorized to move an individual connectome away from the optimal balance (blue line) into the suboptimal regime (blue dotted line); the disease processes may exert effects along the architectural dimensions (arrows parallel to the x-axis and y-axis). Together, they form a characteristic ‘connectome landscape of dysconnectivity’ (shades of green). b | Distinct disease processes may involve different trajectories away from the area of healthy human variation and efficient network performance (blue) depending on how they affect the network (for example, disease X has a stronger effect on modular organization, whereas disease Y has a stronger effect on network integration). c | This may, in turn, lead to disorganized connectomes displaying specific types of connectional variation that occupy different subspaces (‘disease zones’) in the total landscape. Through this approach, relationships may be observed among otherwise seemingly discrete and disparate disorders. d | In some disorders, reorganization mechanisms (arrows) may work to refind a position for the shifted trade-off (dotted blue line) that is closer to the optimal trade-off in the human connectome (blue area) in order to maintain brain function.

Box 1| Connectomics and network theory

Advances in neuroimaging techniques have made it increasingly feasible to reconstruct anatomical connectivity and to record functional interactions across regions of the human brain. Once acquired, connectivity maps can be represented as a mathematical graph (also called a network) consisting of a collection of ‘nodes’ and ‘edges’, describing, respectively, the different regions of the brain and their reconstructed structural and/or functional connections (see the figure, parts a and b). These graphs can be examined using analytical and modelling tools of graph theory and network science. Graph metrics that are commonly used in the field of disease connectomics are the network’s ‘clustering coefficient’ and ‘modularity’, the ‘characteristic path length’ and various measures of ‘centrality’ that allow the identification of central ‘hub nodes’155 (see the figure, parts c–f). First, brain networks have a strong tendency to form locally dense clusters or modules, reflected by an abundance of connectivity within such a module and relatively sparse connectivity between modules. These features are captured by a high network clustering coefficient, a metric that measures the tendency of network nodes to form locally connected triangles, and by a high level of network modularity, a metric that captures the formation of densely connected network communities. Combined, the presence of these network attributes reflects the brain’s tendency towards information segregation, forming the anatomical basis for specialized neural processing and distinct functional systems58. A second common feature of connectome maps are network attributes that support network-wide integration. These features can be examined by computing the characteristic path length of the graph, a metric that measures the average number of network edges that are minimally traversed when travelling from one node to another node in the network. The presence of highly central nodes can be measured by the metric of ‘degree’, which expresses the number of connections per node. High-degree nodes, often interpreted as candidates for brain hubs, can form a densely connected ‘core’ or ‘rich club’47 by showing a dense level of connectivity between them (see the figure, part f).

Box 2 | Connectome alterations in neurological disorders

Connectome alterations have been described in several neurological disorders. Alzheimer disease (AD) appears to involve widespread changes to the structural and functional connectome, including the loss of small-world organization156,157, a diminished anatomical core54, changes to functional hubs61 and modular reorganization of resting-state networks158. Cross-modal studies suggest that areas that show high levels of amyloid-β deposition overlap with those areas of the brain network that display high levels of functional connectivity18,62 (see the figure, part a; red regions show overlapping areas with high amyloid-β deposition levels (upper image) and high functional connectivity (lower image)). Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which can develop into AD, is reported to involve disorganization of functional hubs and the modular structure of the default-mode network159–161. Indeed, alterations in functional connectivity have been proposed as a marker for identifying MCI162 and other individuals at risk of AD163. In Huntington disease, network studies have indicated reduced regional communication164 and affected hub and rich club connectivity64,165, and Parkinson disease has been associated with frontoparietal-striatal dysconnectivity and a breakdown in the modular structure of cognitive brain networks166. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) appears to involve changes to the anatomical63 and functional114 connectivity of the motor network; these seem to be apparent in patients with the disorder and presymptomatic genetic carriers at risk of ALS167 (see the figure, part b, showing affected brain network regions and connections in individuals with ALS, with red regions indicating primary motor network regions and dark-blue, pink and light-blue regions indicating secondary motor, subcortical and associative brain regions, respectively), with the extent of the changes related to individual disease severity and progression168. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease reported to affect the structural and functional connectome169, including by reducing functional network efficiency170. In MS, variation in network structure has been linked to disease stage170, duration170 and clinical subtypes of the disorder171. In epilepsy, studies have suggested a dynamic reconfiguration towards a strongly clustered network during epileptic seizures172,173, with individual variation in network structure linked to type of seizure propagation and clinical outcome after surgery173,174. Part a is adapted from REF.62, CC-BY-4.0. Part b is adapted from REF.80, CC-BY-4.0.

Box 3 | Connectome alterations in psychiatric disorders

Brain network studies have similarly indicated connectome involvement in a wide range of psychiatric disorders. For example, studies have reported early developmental connectome changes in autism spectrum disorder (ASD)66, including lower white matter integrity, larger fibre count and increased network path length24. Network studies have further reported under-functioning of the brain’s integrative circuitry175,176, combined with functional over-connectivity of local circuitry in ASD67, as well as inter-individual variation in levels of functional connectivity that potentially relates to traits associated with the disorder19. For schizophrenia, brain connectivity studies have reported widespread changes in anatomical connectivity177–179, including alterations in rich club and core architecture in people with the disorder68,70,179 and their siblings180 and in individuals at clinically high risk of developing psychosis143,144. Functional studies have further suggested reduced levels of connectivity as well as more random patterns of functional connectivity in patients with schizophrenia181–184 (see figure, part a; the figure shows differences in brain functional connectivity between individuals with schizophrenia and controls for the left and right hemispheres, with red regions indicating the areas with the largest decreases in connectivity), with the extent to which connectivity is perturbed potentially relating to symptom dimensions and severity183,185. Bipolar disorder in turn has been linked to alterations in anatomical inter-hemispheric connectivity71,186–188, loss of connectivity around hub areas involved in emotional processing72 and disrupted functional connectivity of associative networks188–190. Major depression may involve changes in anatomical connectivity between regions that are key for emotional processing191. Different patterns in functional connectivity have been linked to the type and severity of symptoms in depression192 and distinct clinical subtypes193 (see the figure, part b). The upper left panel of the figure shows the derivation of functional connectivity between brain regions of 12 functional networks (for example, red regions indicate areas of the default-mode network (DMN)) in individuals with major depression, with the panel to the right showing the connectivity matrix depicting the level of functional connectivity (blue indicates low functional connectivity and yellow indicates high functional connectivity) between areas of each of the 12 brain networks. The lower panel shows the different patterns of functional connectivity (named ‘biotypes’) as observed between four different subtypes of depression in the total examined population, supporting the notion that distinct patterns of dysconnectivity relate to different types of depression. AV, auditory-visual network; BOLD, blood oxygen level-dependent; CBL, cerebellum; COTC, cingulo-opercular task-control network; DAN, dorsal attention network; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; FPTC, frontoparietal task-control network; LIMB, limbic; MR, memory retrieval network; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; SN, salience network; SSM, somatosensory-motor network; SubC, subcentral; VAN, ventral attention network. Part a republished with permission of the Society for Neuroscience, Lynall, M. E. et al. Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia. J. Neurosci. 30, 9477–9487 (2010); permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (REF.69). Part b is adapted from REF.193, Springer Nature Limited.

Box 4 | Connectome vulnerability and resilience

The connectome landscape may offer a framework for hypothesizing about how individual variation in connectome layout may define personal vulnerability and/or resilience to brain disorders. Network studies have demonstrated associations between inter-individual differences in connectome organization and inter-individual differences in healthy human behaviour, including individual differences in personality traits43, arousal194, memory41 and cognitive functioning52,195. Conversely, individual variation in connectome structure may also relate to a person’s risk or vulnerability to develop brain disorders. Variations in functional brain network organization have, for example, been associated with dimensions of psychopathology, including variation in mood, psychotic behaviour and feelings of fear196. Other variations of functional brain network organization have been argued to relate to the development of mental illness197 and to confer risk of the development of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease163. Other such examples of inter-individual variation in connectome organization to relate to elevated risk of the development of brain disorders include reports of alterations in intra-modular connectivity198 and hub connectivity144,199 to confer risk of the development of, for example, psychosis.

Within this framework, certain types of brain networks may thus be more vulnerable to the development of mental health problems than others200, with variability in connectivity architecture between individuals potentially linked to disease susceptibility201. We propose that these connectome ‘variants’ could manifest in several forms. In analogy to similar frameworks in genetics, they may constitute a ‘common variant’ and thus occur in a large part of the population or be considered a ‘rare variant’ and only be found in a small part of the population (see the figure, part a). Moreover, they may comprise missing or enhanced connections (‘deletions and duplications’; see the figure, part b) and/or include complex combinations of multiple connections and features of connectome organization (‘polyconnectomic risk’; see the figure, part c).

Aspects of connectome architecture may also act as protective factors against the clinical manifestation of psychiatric and neurological disorders. Such connectome-based protective factors could similarly manifest in several forms; for example, network configurations that are more resilient to initial forms of attack to the network in disease conditions or network configurations that can better compensate for disease-related changes. For example, elevated functional communication among higher-order functional networks may serve as a protective factor for the development of bipolar disorder142, certain patterns of individual connectome organization have been linked to cognitive reserve202 and resilience against mental retardation203,204 and types of brain connectivity configurations may be protective against the development of psychosis205. These observations suggest that individual connectome organization predicts not only potential risk of developing psychiatric and neurological conditions but also strategies for coping with these alterations by conferring resilience against network dysfunction.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


1. Sporns O , Tononi C &amp; Kotter R The human connectome: a structural description of the human brain. PLOS Comput. Biol 1 , e42 (2005).16201007
2. Sporns O Discovering the Human Connectome (MIT Press, Cambridge, 2012).
3. van den Heuvel MP &amp; Fornito A Brain networks in schizophrenia. Neuropsychol. Rev 24 , 32–48 (2014).24500505
4. Fornito A , Zalesky A &amp; Breakspear M The connectomics of brain disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 16 , 159–172 (2015).25697159
5. van den Heuvel MP , Bullmore ET &amp; Sporns O Comparative connectomics. Trends Cogn. Sci 20 , 345–361 (2016).27026480
6. Bullmore E &amp; Sporns O The economy of brain network organization. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 13 , 336–349(2012).22498897
7. Avena-Koenigsberger A , Misic B &amp; Sporns O Communication dynamics in complex brain networks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 19 , 17–33 (2017).29238085
8. Horn A The structural-functional connectome and the default mode network of the human brain. Neuroimage 102 , 142–151 (2014).24099851
9. Hagmann P Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLOS Biol 6 , e159 (2008).18597554
10. van den Heuvel MP Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain. Hum. Brain Mapp 30 , 3127–3141 (2009).19235882
11. Zhang K &amp; Sejnowski TJ A universal scaling law between gray matter and white matter of cerebral cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97 , 5621–5626 (2000).10792049
12. Candal MJ Shared molecular neuropathology across major psychiatric disorders parallels polygenic overlap. Science 359 , 693–697 (2018).29439242
13. Birnbaum R &amp; Weinberger DR Genetic insights into the neurodevelopmental origins of schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 18 , 727–740 (2017).29070826
14. Silbersweig DA &amp; Rauch SL Neuroimaging in psychiatry: a quarter century of progress. Harv. Rev. Psychiatry 25 , 195–197(2017).28885277
15. Bassett DS &amp; Sporns O Network neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci 20 , 353–364 (2017).28230844
16. Kaiser M The potential of the human connectome as a biomarker of brain disease. Front. Hum. Neurosci 7 , 484(2013).23966935
17. Petrella JR Use of graph theory to evaluate brain networks: a clinical tool for a small world? Radiology 259 ,317–320(2011).21502388
18. Pasquini L Individual correspondence of amyloid-beta and intrinsic connectivity in the posterior default mode network across stages of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 58 , 763–773 (2017).28482640
19. Jung M Default mode network in young male adults with autism spectrum disorder: relationship with autism spectrum traits. Int. J. Psychophysiol 94 , 212–212(2014).
20. Whitfield-Cabrieli S Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 1279–1284(2009).19164577
21. Wise T Instability of default mode network connectivity in major depression: a two-sample confirmation study. Transl Psychiatry 7 , e1105 (2017).28440813
22. Chenji S Investigating default mode and sensorimotor network connectivity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PLOS ONE 11 , e0157443 (2016).27322194
23. Lee K Disruption, emergence and lateralization of brain network hubs in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Neuroimage Clin 20 , 71–84 (2018).30094158
24. Rudie JD Altered functional and structural brain network organization in autism. Neuroimage Clin 2 , 79–94(2012).24179761
25. Lord A Changes in community structure of resting state functional connectivity in unipolar depression. PLOS ONE 7 , e41282 (2012).22916105
26. Vaessen MJ Abnormal modular organization of functional networks in cognitively impaired children with frontal lobe epilepsy. Cereb. Cortex 23 , 1997–2006(2013).22772649
27. Alexander-Bloch AF Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia. Front. Syst. Neurosci 4 , 147(2010).21031030
28. Zhan L Baseline connectome modular abnormalities in the childhood phase of a longitudinal study on individuals with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Hum. Brain Mapp 39 , 232–248 (2018).28990258
29. Waller L Evaluating the replicability, specificity, and generalizability of connectome fingerprints. Neuroimage 158 , 371–377 (2017).28710040
30. Crisanzio KA Transdiagnostic symptom clusters and associations with brain, behavior, and daily function in mood, anxiety, and trauma disorders. JAMA Psychiatry 75 , 201–209 (2018).29197929
31. Insel T Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework for research on mental disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 167 , 748–751 (2010).20595427
32. Kraemer HC , Noda A &amp; O’Hara R Categorical versus dimensional approaches to diagnosis: methodological challenges. J. Psychiatr. Res 38 , 17–25(2004).14690767
33. Coodkind M Identification of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness. JAMA Psychiatry 72 , 305–315 (2015).25651064
34. Foss-Feig JH Searching for cross-diagnostic convergence: neural mechanisms governing excitation and inhibition balance in schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders. Biol. Psychiatry 81 , 848–861 (2017).28434615
35. Coleman K &amp; Pierre PJ Assessing anxiety in nonhuman primates. ILAR J 55 , 333–346 (2014).25225310
36. McTeague LM Identification of common neural circuit disruptions in cognitive control across psychiatric disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 174 , 676–685(2017).28320224
37. Bota M , Dong HW &amp; Swanson LW Combining collation and annotation efforts toward completion of the rat and mouse connectomes in BAMS. Front. Neuroinform 6 , 2 (2012).22403539
38. Chiang AS Three-dimensional reconstruction of brain-wide wiring networks in Drosophila at single-cell resolution. Curr. Biol 21 , 1–11 (2010).21129968
39. Smith SM Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 13040–13045 (2009).19620724
40. Hilger K Intelligence is associated with the modular structure of intrinsic brain networks. Sci. Rep 7 , 16088(2017).29167455
41. Stevens AA Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity. PLOS ONE 7 , e30468(2012).22276205
42. Cao Q Extraversion and neuroticism relate to topological properties of resting-state brain networks. Front. Hum. Neurosci 7 , 257 (2013).23781183
43. Adelstein JS Personality is reflected in the brain’s intrinsic functional architecture. PLOS ONE 6 , e27633(2011).22140453
44. van den Heuvel MP &amp; Sporns O Network hubs in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci 17 , 683–696 (2013).24231140
45. van den Heuvel MP &amp; Sporns O An anatomical substrate for integration among functional networks in human cortex. J. Neurosci 33 , 14489–14500(2013).24005300
46. Comez-Cardenes J From modular to centralized organization of synchronization in functional areas of the cat cerebral cortex. PLOS ONE 5 , e12313 (2010).20865046
47. van den Heuvel MP &amp; Sporns O Rich-club organization of the human connectome. J. Neurosci 31 , 11 (2011).
48. Collin C Structural and functional aspects relating to cost and benefit of rich club organization in the human cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 24 , 2258–2267(2014).23551922
49. Zamora-Lopez G , Zhou C &amp; Kurths J Cortical hubs form a module for multisensory integration on top of the hierarchy of cortical networks. Front. Neuroinform 4 , 1 (2010).20428515
50. van den Heuvel MP High-cost, high-capacity backbone for global brain communication. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109 , 11372–11377 (2012).22711833
51. Senden M Rich club organization supports a diverse set of functional network configurations. Neuroimage 96 , 174–182 (2014).24699017
52. Baggio HC Rich club organization and cognitive performance in healthy older participants. J. Cogn. Neurosci 27 , 1801–1810 (2015).25941870
53. Seidlitz J Morphometric similarity networks detect microscale cortical organization and predict inter-individual cognitive variation. Neuron 97 , 231–247(2018).29276055
54. Daianu M Disrupted rich club network in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia and early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Hum. Brain Mapp 37 , 868–883 (2016).26678225
55. Ray S Structural and functional connectivity of the human brain in autism spectrum disorders and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a rich club-organization study. Hum. Brain Mapp 35 , 6032–6048(2014).25116862
56. Rubinov M Constraints and spandrels of interareal connectomes. Nat. Commun 7 , 13812 (2016).27924867
57. Chen Y Trade-off between multiple constraints enables simultaneous formation of modules and hubs in neural systems. PLOS Comput. Biol 9 , e1002937 (2013).23505352
58. Sporns O &amp; Betzel RF Modular brain networks. Annu. Rev. Psychol 67 , 613–640 (2016).26393868
59. Kaiser M &amp; Varier S Evolution and development of brain networks: from Caenorhabditis elegans to Homosapiens. Network 22 , 143–147 (2011).22149674
60. Chen Y Features of spatial and functional segregation and integration of the primate connectome revealed by trade-off between wiring cost and efficiency. PLOS Comput. Biol 13 , e1005776 (2017).28961235
61. de Haan W Activity dependent degeneration explains hub vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease. PLOS Comput. Biol 8 , e1002582 (2012).22915996
62. Buckner RL Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 29 , 1860–1873 (2009).19211893
63. Verstraete E Structural brain network imaging shows expanding disconnection of the motor system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum. Brain Mapp 35 , 1351–1361 (2014).23450820
64. Harrington DL Network topology and functional connectivity disturbances precede the onset of Huntington’s disease. Brain 138 , 2332–2346 (2015).26059655
65. Pedersen M The dynamics of functional connectivity in neocortical focal epilepsy. Neuroimage Clin 15 ,209–214(2017).28529877
66. Uddin LQ , Supekar K &amp; Menon V Reconceptualizing functional brain connectivity in autism from a developmental perspective. Front. Hum. Neurosci 7 , 458(2013).23966925
67. Courchesne E &amp; Pierce K Why the frontal cortex in autism might be talking only to itself: local over-connectivity but long-distance disconnection. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 15 , 225–230 (2005).15831407
68. Griffa A Characterizing the connectome in schizophrenia with diffusion spectrum imaging. Hum. Brain Mapp 36 , 354–366 (2015).25213204
69. Lynall ME Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia. J. Neurosci 30 , 9477–9487(2010).20631176
70. van den Heuvel MP Abnormal rich club organization and functional brain dynamics in schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry 70 , 783–792 (2013).23739835
71. Wang F Abnormal corpus callosum integrity in bipolar disorder: a diffusion tensor imaging study. Biol. Psychiatry 64 , 730–733 (2008).18620337
72. Roberts G Structural dysconnectivity of key cognitive and emotional hubs in young people at high genetic risk for bipolar disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 23 , 413–421 (2018).27994220
73. Filippi M Assessment of system dysfunction in the brain through MRI-based connectomics. Lancet Neurol 12 , 1189–1199(2013).24120645
74. Griffa A Structural connectomics in brain diseases. Neuroimage 80 , 515–526 (2013).23623973
75. Stam CJ Modern network science of neurological disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 15 , 683–695 (2014).25186238
76. Crossley NA The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders. Brain 137 , 2382–2395 (2014).25057133
77. Martin G Network analysis and the connectopathies: current research and future approaches. Nonlinear Dynam. Psychol. Life Sci 16 , 79–90 (2012).
78. Toga AW &amp; Thompson PM Connectopathy in ageing and dementia. Brain 137 , 3104–3106(2014).25413934
79. Seeley WW Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks. Neuron 62 , 42–52 (2009).19376066
80. Verstraete E Impaired structural motor connectome in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PLOS ONE 6 ,e24239(2011).21912680
81. Zhou J Predicting regional neurodegeneration from the healthy brain functional connectome. Neuron 73 , 1216–1227(2012).22445348
82. Cope TE Tau burden and the functional connectome in Alzheimer’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy. Brain 141 , 550–567 (2018).29293892
83. Raj A , Kuceyeski A &amp; Weiner M A network diffusion model of disease progression in dementia. Neuron 73 , 1204–1215(2012).22445347
84. Zeighami Y Network structure of brain atrophy in de novo Parkinson’s disease, eLite 4 , e08440 (2015).
85. Schulthess I Functional connectivity changes resemble patterns of pTDP-43 pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Sci. Rep 6 , 38391 (2016).27929102
86. Visanji NP Iron deficiency in parkinsonism: region-specific iron dysregulation in Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy. J. Parkinsons Dis 3 ,523–537(2013).24113558
87. Brettschneider J Spreading of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: a focus on human studies. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 16 , 109–120 (2015).25588378
88. Schmidt R Simulating disease propagation across white matter connectome reveals anatomical substrate for neuropathology staging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuroimage 124 , 762–769 (2016).25869856
89. Yau Y Network connectivity determines cortical thinning in early Parkinson’s disease progression. Nat. Commun 9 , 12 (2018).29295991
90. Vidal CN Dynamically spreading frontal and cingulate deficits mapped in adolescents with schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 63 , 25–34 (2006).16389194
91. Cauda F The morphometric co-atrophy networking of schizophrenia, autistic and obsessive spectrum disorders. Hum. Brain Mapp 39 , 1898–1928(2018).29349864
92. Raj A &amp; Powell F Models of network spread and network degeneration in brain disorders. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3 , 788–797(2018).30170711
93. Sala-Llonch R , Bartres-Faz D &amp; Junque C Reorganization of brain networks in aging: a review of functional connectivity studies. Front. Psychol 6 , 663 (2015).26052298
94. Hilgetag CC The primate connectome in context: principles of connections of the cortical visual system. Neuroimage 134 , 685–702 (2016).27083526
95. Beul SF , Grant S &amp; Hilgetag CC A predictive model of the cat cortical connectome based on cytoarchitecture and distance. Brain Struct. Funct 220 ,3167–3184(2015).25062666
96. van den Heuvel MP Multimodal analysis of cortical chemoarchitecture and macroscale fMRI resting-state functional connectivity. Hum. Brain Mapp 37 ,3103–3113(2016).27207489
97. Arnatkeviciute A Hub connectivity, neuronal diversity, and gene expression in the Caenorhabditis elegans connectome. PLOS Comput. Biol 14 , e1005989(2018).29432412
98. Scholtens LH Linking macroscale graph analytical organization to microscale neuroarchitectonics in the macaque connectome. J. Neurosci 34 , 12192–12205(2014).25186762
99. van den Heuvel MP Bridging cytoarchitectonics and connectomics in human cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci 35 , 13943–13948 (2015).26468195
100. Elston GN Cortex, cognition and the cell: new insights into the pyramidal neuron and prefrontal function. Cereb. Cortex 13 , 1124–1138 (2003).14576205
101. Vaishnavi SN Regional aerobic glycolysis in the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 17757–17762(2011).
102. Fulcher BD &amp; Fornito A A transcriptional signature of hub connectivity in the mouse connectome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 1435–1440 (2016).26772314
103. Iturria-Medina Y &amp; Evans AC On the central role of brain connectivity in neurodegenerative disease progression. Front. Aging Neurosci 7 , 90 (2015).26052284
104. Jones DT Tau, amyloid, and cascading network failure across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Cortex 97 , 143–159(2017).29102243
105. Jones DT Cascading network failure across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Brain 139 , 547–562 (2016).26586695
106. Pahwa S , Scoglio C &amp; Scala A Abruptness of cascade failures in power grids. Sci. Rep 4 , 3694 (2014).24424239
107. de Lange SC Shared vulnerability for connectome alterations across psychiatric and neurological brain disorders. Preprint at bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/360586v1 (2018).
108. Senden M Task-related effective connectivity reveals that the cortical rich club gates cortex-wide communication. Hum. Brain Mapp 39 , 1246–1262 (2018).29222818
109. Vertes PE Simple models of human brain functional networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109 , 5868–5873(2012).22467830
110. Fair DA Functional brain networks develop from a “local to distributed” organization. PLOS Comput. Biol 5 , e1000381 (2009).19412534
111. Wolf DA &amp; Mash EJ (eds) Behavioral and Emotional Disorders in Adolescents: Nature, Assessment, and Treatment (Guilford Press, 2008).
112. Luby JL Early childhood depression and alterations in the trajectory of gray matter maturation in middle childhood and early adolescence. JAMA Psychiatry 73 , 31–38 (2016).26676835
113. Avena-Koenigsberger A Network morphospace. J. R. Soc. Interface 12 , 20140881 (2015).25540237
114. Menke RAL Increased functional connectivity common to symptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and those at genetic risk. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 87 , 580–588 (2016).26733601
115. Grefkes C &amp; Fink GR Reorganization of cerebral networks after stroke: new insights from neuroimaging with connectivity approaches. Brain 134 , 1264–1276 (2011).21414995
116. Li YX Alterations in spontaneous brain activity and functional network reorganization following surgery in children with medically refractory epilepsy: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Front. Neurol 8 , 374 (2017).28824531
117. Mohammadi B Functional neuroimaging at different disease stages reveals distinct phases of neuroplastic changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum. Brain Mapp 32 , 750–758 (2011).20836159
118. Filippi M Brain network connectivity differs in early-onset neurodegenerative dementia. Neurology 89 , 1764–1772(2017).28954876
119. Douaud G Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 134 , 3470–3479 (2011).22075069
120. Hillary FG &amp; Grafman JH Injured brains and adaptive networks: the benefits and costs of hyperconnectivity. Trends Cogn. Sci 21 , 385–401 (2017).28372878
121. de Haan W Altering neuronal excitability to preserve network connectivity in a computational model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLOS Comput. Biol 13 , e1005707 (2017).28938009
122. Liu J Enhanced interhemispheric functional connectivity compensates for anatomical connection damages in subcortical stroke. Stroke 46 , 1045–1051 (2015).25721013
123. Zhang HY Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease. Radiology 256 ,598–606(2010).20656843
124. Dima D , Roberts RE &amp; Frangou S Connectomic markers of disease expression, genetic risk and resilience in bipolar disorder. Transl Psychiatry 6 , e706(2016).26731443
125. Braun U From maps to multi-dimensional network mechanisms of mental disorders. Neuron 97 , 14–31 (2018).29301099
126. Cuthbert BN The RDoC framework: facilitating transition from ICD/DSM to dimensional approaches that integrate neuroscience and psychopathology. World Psychiatry 13 , 28–35 (2014).24497240
127. van der Burgh HK Deep learning predictions of survival based on MRI in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuroimage Clin 13 , 361–369 (2017).28070484
128. Scholtens LH &amp; van den Heuvel MP Multimodal connectomics in psychiatry: bridging scales from micro to macro. Biol. Psychiatry 3 , 767–776 (2018).
129. Kotov R New dimensions in the quantitative classification of mental illness. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 68 , 1003–1011 (2011).21969458
130. Miranda-Dominguez O Connectotyping: model based fingerprinting of the functional connectome. PLOS ONE 9 , e111048 (2014).25386919
131. O’Donoghue S Anatomical dysconnectivity in bipolar disorder compared with schizophrenia: A selective review of structural network analyses using diffusion MRI. J. Affect. Disord 209 , 217–228 (2017).27930915
132. Finn ES Functional connectome fingerprinting: identifying individuals using patterns of brain connectivity. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 1664–1671 (2015).26457551
133. Thompson PM ENIGMA and the individual: Predicting factors that affect the brain in 35 countries worldwide. Neuroimage 145 , 389–408 (2017).26658930
134. Jack CR Jr The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): MRI methods. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 27 , 685–691 (2008).18302232
135. Mirzaei G , Adeli A &amp; Adeli H Imaging and machine learning techniques for diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Rev. Neurosci 27 , 857–870 (2016).27518905
136. Simpraga S EEG machine learning for accurate detection of cholinergic intervention and Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 7 , 5775 (2017).28720796
137. Brown MR ADHD-200 Global Competition: diagnosing ADHD using personal characteristic data can outperform resting state fMRI measurements. Front. Syst. Neurosci 6 , 69 (2012).23060754
138. Schnack HG Can structural MRI aid in clinical classification? A machine learning study in two independent samples of patients with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and healthy subjects. Neuroimage 84 ,299–306(2014).24004694
139. Salvador R Evaluation of machine learning algorithms and structural features for optimal MRI-based diagnostic prediction in psychosis. PLOS ONE 12 ,e0175683(2017).28426817
140. Weng SF Can machine-learning improve cardiovascular risk prediction using routine clinical data? PLOS ONE 12 , e0174944 (2017).28376093
141. Ramasubbu R Accuracy of automated classification of major depressive disorder as a function of symptom severity. Neuroimage Clin 12 , 320–331 (2016).27551669
142. Doucet GE The role of intrinsic brain functional connectivity in vulnerability and resilience to bipolar disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 174 , 1214–1222 (2017).28817956
143. Schmidt A Structural network disorganization in subjects at clinical high risk for psychosis. Schizophr. Bull 43 , 583–591 (2017).27481826
144. Collin G Affected anatomical rich club and structural-functional coupling in young offspring of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder patients. Biol. Psychiatry 82 , 746–755 (2017).28734460
145. Deco G Rethinking segregation and integration: contributions of whole-brain modelling. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 16 , 430–439 (2015).26081790
146. Sanz Leon P The Virtual Brain: a simulator of primate brain network dynamics. Front. Neuroinform 7 , 10(2013).23781198
147. Grayson DS The rhesus monkey connectome predicts disrupted functional networks resulting from pharmacogenetic inactivation of the amygdala. Neuron 91 , 453–466 (2016).27477019
148. Silasi G &amp; Murphy TH Stroke and the connectome: how connectivity guides therapeutic intervention. Neuron 83 , 1354–1368(2014).25233317
149. Alstott J Modeling the impact of lesions in the human brain. PLOS Comput. Biol 5 , e1000408 (2009).19521503
150. Aerts H Brain networks under attack: robustness properties and the impact of lesions. Brain 139 ,3063–3083(2016).27497487
151. Ellegood J Analysis of neuroanatomical differences in mice with genetically modified serotonin transporters assessed by structural magnetic resonance imaging. Mol. Autism 9 , 24 (2018).29651330
152. Mechling AE Deletion of the mu opioid receptor gene in mice reshapes the reward-aversion connectome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 11603–11608(2016).27671662
153. Crandjean J Chronic psychosocial stress in mice leads to changes in brain functional connectivity and metabolite levels comparable to human depression. Neuroimage 142 , 544–552 (2016).27520750
154. Whitfield-Cabrieli S Brain connectomics predict response to treatment in social anxiety disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 21 , 680–685 (2016).26260493
155. Bullmore E &amp; Sporns O Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 186–198 (2009).19190637
156. Sanz-Arigita EJ Loss of ‘small-world’ networks in Alzheimer’s disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity. PLOS ONE 5 , e13788 (2010).21072180
157. Stam CJ &amp; Reijneveld JC Graph theoretical analysis of complex networks in the brain. Nonlinear Biomed. Phys 1 , 3 (2007).17908336
158. Chen G Modular reorganization of brain resting state networks and its independent validation in Alzheimer’s disease patients. Front. Hum. Neurosci 7 , 456(2013).23950743
159. Prescott JW The Alzheimer structural connectome: changes in cortical network topology with increased amyloid plaque burden. Radiology 273 , 175–184(2014).24865310
160. Castellazzi G A comprehensive assessment of resting state networks: bidirectional modification of functional integrity in cerebro-cerebellar networks in dementia. Front. Neurosci 8 , 223 (2014).25126054
161. Pineda-Pardo JA Guiding functional connectivity estimation by structural connectivity in MEG: an application to discrimination of conditions of mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 101 , 765–777(2014).25111472
162. Zhu DJ Connectome-scale assessments of structural and functional connectivity in MCI. Hum. Brain Mapp 35 , 2911–2923 (2014).24123412
163. Wang JH Disrupted functional brain connectome in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry 73 , 472–481 (2013).22537793
164. Odish OFF Dynamics of the connectome in Huntington’s disease: a longitudinal diffusion MRI study. Neuroimage Clin 9 , 32–43 (2015).26288754
165. McColgan P Selective vulnerability of Rich Club brain regions is an organizational principle of structural connectivity loss in Huntington’s disease. Brain 138 , 3327–3344 (2015).26384928
166. Tinaz S Changes in functional organization and white matter integrity in the connectome in Parkinson’s disease. Neuroimage Clin 13 , 395–404 (2017).28116232
167. Lee SE Network degeneration and dysfunction in presymptomatic C9ORF72 expansion carriers. Neuroimage Clin 14 , 286–297 (2017).28337409
168. de Albuquerque M Longitudinal evaluation of cerebral and spinal cord damage in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuroimage Clin 14 , 269–276 (2017).28203530
169. Shu N Disrupted topological organization of structural and functional brain connectomes in clinically isolated syndrome and multiple sclerosis. Sci. Rep 6 , 29383 (2016).27403924
170. Liu Y Functional brain network alterations in clinically isolated syndrome and multiple sclerosis: a graph-based connectome study. Radiology 282 , 534–541 (2017).27541686
171. Kocevar G Graph theory-based brain connectivity for automatic classification of multiple sclerosis clinical courses. Front. Neurosci 10 , 478 (2016).27826224
172. Burns SP A network analysis of the dynamics of seizure. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc 2012 , 4684–4687(2012).
173. Bernhardt BC , Bonilha L &amp; Gross DW Network analysis for a network disorder: the emerging role of graph theory in the study of epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 50 , 162–170(2015).26159729
174. Bonilha L The brain connectome as a personalized biomarker of seizure outcomes after temporal lobectomy. Neurology 84 , 1846–1853 (2015).25854868
175. Just MA Cortical activation and synchronization during sentence comprehension in high-functioning autism: evidence of underconnectivity. Brain 127 , 1811–1821 (2004).15215213
176. Mevel K &amp; Fransson P The functional brain connectome of the child and autism spectrum disorders. Ada Paediatr 105 , 1024–1035 (2016).
177. Zalesky A Disrupted axonal fiber connectivity in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 69 , 80–89 (2011).21035793
178. Kelly S Widespread white matter microstructural differences in schizophrenia across 4322 individuals: results from the ENIGMA Schizophrenia DTI Working Group. Mol. Psychiatry 23 , 1261–1269(2017).29038599
179. Klauser P White matter disruptions in schizophrenia are spatially widespread and topologically converge on brain network hubs. Schizophr. Bull 43 , 425–435 (2017).27535082
180. Collin G Impaired rich club connectivity in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients. Schizophr. Bull 40 , 438–448 (2014).24298172
181. Calhoun VD Exploring the psychosis functional connectome: aberrant intrinsic networks in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Front. Psychiatry 2 , 75 (2011).22291663
182. Colibazzi T Aberrant temporal connectivity in persons at clinical high risk for psychosis. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 2 , 696–705(2017).29202110
183. Yu Q Disrupted correlation between low frequency power and connectivity strength of resting state brain networks in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res 143 , 165–171 (2013).23182443
184. Lo CYZ Randomization and resilience of brain functional networks as systems-level endophenotypes of schizophrenia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112 , 9123–9128(2015).26150519
185. Sun Y Modular-level alterations of structure-function coupling in schizophrenia connectome. Hum. Brain Mapp 38 , 2008–2025 (2017).28032370
186. Sarrazin S Corpus callosum area in patients with bipolar disorder with and without psychotic features: an international multicentre study. J. Psychiatry Neurosci 40 , 352–359 (2015).26151452
187. Collin G Brain network analysis reveals affected connectome structure in bipolar I disorder. Hum. Brain Mapp 37 , 122–134(2016).26454006
188. Ajilore O Connectome signatures of neurocognitive abnormalities in euthymic bipolar I disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 39 , S227–S228 (2014).
189. Lois G Large-scale network functional interactions during distraction and reappraisal in remitted bipolar and unipolar patients. Bipolar Disord 19 , 487–495 (2017).28960669
190. Wang Y Topologically convergent and divergent functional connectivity patterns in unmedicated unipolar depression and bipolar disorder. Transl Psychiatry 7 , e1165 (2017).28675389
191. Korgaonkar MS Abnormal structural networks characterize major depressive disorder: a connectome analysis. Biol. Psychiatry 76 , 567–574 (2014).24690111
192. Satterthwaite TD Dimensional depression severity in women with major depression and post-traumatic stress disorder correlates with fronto-amygdalar hypoconnectivty. Mol. Psychiatry 21 , 894–902(2016).26416545
193. Drysdale AT Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of depression. Nat. Med 23 , 28–38 (2017).27918562
194. Tagliazucchi E &amp; van Someren EJW The large-scale functional connectivity correlates of consciousness and arousal during the healthy and pathological human sleep cycle. Neuroimage 160 , 55–72(2017).28619656
195. Shine JM The dynamics of functional brain networks: integrated network states during cognitive task performance. Neuron 92 , 544–554 (2016).27693256
196. Xia CH Linked dimensions of psychopathology and connectivity in functional brain networks. Nat. Commun 9 , 3003 (2018).30068943
197. Elliot ML A connectome-wide functional signature of transdiagnostic risk for mental illness. Biol. Psychiatry 84 , 452–459 (2017).
198. Yoon YB Altered fronto-temporal functional connectivity in individuals at ultra-high-risk of developing psychosis. PLOS ONE 10 , e0135347 (2015).26267069
199. Mitchell P Structural dysconnectivity of key cognitive and emotional hubs in young people at high genetic risk for bipolar disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 81 , S318–S319(2017).
200. Kaufmann T Delayed stabilization and individualization in connectome development are related to psychiatric disorders. Nat. Neurosci 20 , 513–515(2017).28218917
201. Mueller S Individual variability in functional connectivity architecture of the human brain. Neuron 77 ,586–595(2013).23395382
202. Wook Yoo S A network flow-based analysis of cognitive reserve in normal ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 5 , 10057 (2015).25992968
203. Bozzali M The impact of cognitive reserve on brain functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 44 , 243–250 (2015).25201783
204. Brickman AM White matter hyperintensities and cognition: testing the reserve hypothesis. Neurobiol. Aging 32 , 1588–1598 (2011).19926168
205. Ganella EP Risk and resilience brain networks in treatment-resistant schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res 193 , 284–292(2017).28735641
