LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8004872
1436
Behav Brain Res
Behav Brain Res
Behavioural brain research
0166-4328
1872-7549

33640394
8005490
10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113207
NIHMS1677919
Article
Microglia and modifiable life factors: Potential contributions to cognitive resilience in aging
Duggan Michael R.
Parikh Vinay *
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122
Author contributions

MD conducted the literature search. MD and VP conceived and designed the study and wrote the paper.

* Corresponding author: Vinay Parikh, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122. Phone: 215-204-1572, vinay.parikh@temple.edu
1 3 2021
25 2 2021
07 5 2021
07 5 2022
405 113207113207
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Given the increasing prevalence of age-related cognitive decline, it is relevant to consider the factors and mechanisms that might facilitate an individual’s resiliency to such deficits. Growing evidence suggests a preeminent role of microglia, the prime mediator of innate immunity within the central nervous system. Human and animal investigations suggest aberrant microglial functioning and neuroinflammation are not only characteristic of the aged brain, but also might contribute to age-related dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease. Conversely, accumulating data suggest that modifiable lifestyle factors (MLFs), such as healthy diet, exercise and cognitive engagement, can reliably afford cognitive benefits by potentially suppressing inflammation in the aging brain. The present review highlights recent advances in our understanding of the role for microglia in maintaining brain homeostasis and cognitive functioning in aging. Moreover, we propose an integrated, mechanistic model that postulates an individual’s resiliency to cognitive decline afforded by MLFs might be mediated by the mitigation of aberrant microglia activation in aging, and subsequent suppression of neuroinflammation.

cognitive aging
microglia
neuroinflammation
diet
exercise
cognitive enrichment

1. Introduction

Across the globe, there is an unprecedented shift in aging demographics; by 2050, the elderly (i.e. &gt; 65 years old) will exceed 21% of the population (an increase from 10% in 2010), and, for the first time in human history, will surpass the population of youth (i.e. 10–24 years old) [1]. Despite the subsequently increased prevalence of cognitive impairments and dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), currently available pharmacotherapies provide only symptomatic relief, and do not halt or reverse the progression of these age-related conditions [2, 3].

Although decline in several cognitive domains is frequently documented in aging, including information processing, attention, memory and executive functions, the extent of age-related functional changes can vary greatly between individuals [4–7]. Some older individuals retain intact cognitive functioning, or display only minimal decline, while others show significant cognitive impairments and can eventually develop AD as well as other forms of dementia [8]. However, the neurobiological underpinnings of this individual variation in cognitive aging remain unclear. Given the contemporary shift in aging demographics, as well as the lack of effective therapies to treat age-related cognitive deficits, there is considerable interest in elucidating the protective mechanisms that afford resilience to cognitive decline in old age. Here, we operationalize resilience as a higher level of cognitive functioning than otherwise expected in the face of age-related injury and/or neuropathology [9].

Accumulating evidence suggests modifiable life factors (MLFs; i.e. diet, physical activity, cognitive engagement) can facilitate variation in cognitive decline and render some individuals more resilient to such age-related detriments [10–12]. As advanced age itself remains the most prominent risk factor for dementia, while MLFs have been shown to induce substantial cognitive benefits, recent investigations have focused on the specific mechanisms by which these factors might modulate neurobiological functioning in aging [13–15].

There is a general consensus that neuroinflammation increases with advancing age, and poses risk for developing neurodegenerative conditions in the elderly [16–18]. Age-related neuroinflammation, if uncontrolled, results in an exaggerated production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, as well as other cytotoxic mediators, that can exert detrimental effects on neurons and contribute to cognitive dysfunction [19–21]. Hence, the abnormal activation of inflammatory mechanisms induced by a chronically dysregulated immune state may contribute to age-related variation in cognitive capacities. As the primary mediators of the brain’s immune responses, microglia cells play a critical role in maintaining an array of homeostatic processes in the central nervous system (CNS) [22, 23]. Recent evidence indicates that during the course of aging, these cells become dysregulated and contribute to a chronic state of neuroinflammation [24, 25]. Provided that MLFs can exert beneficial effects on cognition, while aberrant immune-inflammatory responses can render elderly individuals vulnerable to cognitive deterioration, an individual’s resiliency to cognitive decline afforded by MLFs might be mediated by the mitigation of aberrant microglia activation in aging.

In this review, we summarize the physiological contributions of microglia in maintaining CNS homeostasis in aging, as well as the cellular mechanisms underlying microglia reactivity and subsequent neuroinflammation that might increase an individual’s susceptibility to age-related dementia and AD (see Glossary in Box 1 for key definitions on immune system and inflammation). Next, we review evidence from human and animal studies which highlight the impact of MLFs on cognitive aging. Here, aging generally refers to durations relative to probable life expectancies (i.e. ≥ 65 years in humans, ≥ 20 months in rats, ≥ 18 months in mice). Specifically, we focus on diet, physical activity, and cognitive enrichment as MLFs that can augment cognitive capacities in aging by potentially modulating the brain’s innate immune responses and microglia-driven inflammatory processes. Moreover, we provide a hypothetical mechanistic model which postulates that the benefits of MLFs on cognitive capacities in aging might converge upon microglia functioning. Finally, in stipulating some of the prominent limitations of this framework, we encourage future directions for interdisciplinary research that would inform the proposed model and advance our neurobiological understanding of individual variation in age-related cognitive decline.

2. Microglia and cognitive aging

2.1. Description and functions of microglia

First characterized by Robertson and Nissl over a century ago, microglia are non-neuronal cells that range between 0.5%–16% of all brain cells in mammals, including humans, (i.e. depending upon the neuroanatomical region), and play a fundamental role in various neurobiological processes, such as neurodevelopment, neurogenesis, synaptic pruning and the modulation of synaptic transmission [26–30]. As resident macrophages (i.e. immune cells involved in phagocytic function) of the brain, these cells are unique in their function as the primary mediator of the brain’s innate immune response, and therefore play an important role in the regulation of CNS homeostasis [23, 31, 32]. Microglia express membrane proteins called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs; e.g. toll-like receptors or TLRs, scavenger receptors or SRs) that monitor the CNS environment for pathogens, tissue/cellular injury, or other indications of neuronal dysfunction [33, 34]. The recognition/detection process alerts microglia to danger and involves the interaction of PPRs with specific biomolecules, such as pathogen-associated molecule patterns (PAMPs) or damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), which share conserved molecular structures. PAMPs are foreign molecules expressed by various microbes that trigger an inflammatory response during infection. One of the best characterized PAMPs is lipopolysaccharide (an endotoxin), located in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria [35]. On the other hand, DAMPs are endogenous molecules that can be released either by damaged cells or by cells undergoing apoptosis, such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), purine metabolites (urate crystals), calcium-binding proteins and lipotoxic ceramides, which activate innate immune responses to produce non-infectious (sterile) inflammation [31, 32, 36].

In a normal healthy brain, microglia generally maintain a homeostatic phenotype that is visually characterized by diffuse, ramified and dynamically moving protrusions, which constantly scan the surrounding microenvironment [37–40]. Following the detection of pathogens or endogenous danger signals, microglia migrate to the site of injury/infection, and initiate an immune response through a number of complementary processes (Figure 1). For example, they digest and degrade microbes as well as dead cells via phagocytosis [41]. Microglia also release a wide range of soluble proteins that include inflammatory mediators (e.g. cytokines and chemokines), trophic factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and other immunomodulators which help the clearance of cellular debris that is critical for cellular repair and cellular regeneration [42, 43]. While their classification remains actively debated, these immune mediators can be broadly categorized as pro-inflammatory, (e.g. tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-α], interleukin [IL]-6, IL-1, interferon [IFN]-γ) and anti-inflammatory (e.g. transforming growth factor β, IL-4, IL-10, IFN-β) [33, 44]. Recent evidence indicates that following acute brain injury or infection, activated microglia can change their phenotype and become either pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory/neuroprotective, depending upon the severity and duration of the injury [45–48]. Although the balance between pro-inflammatory and neuroprotective microglia phenotype is critical for CNS repair and maintaining homeostasis, little is known about how the interaction between these two phenotypes governs neuroinflammation.

2.2. Microglia in normal and pathological aging

A mild state of chronic inflammation in the absence of overt infection (referred to as sterile inflammation, or inflammaging) is a pervasive feature of normal aging. Nevertheless, higher levels of inflammaging are a significant risk factor for age-related pathologies [49, 50]. Numerous studies in rodents and humans have shown that during aging, an increasing proportion of microglia across different brain regions, including the hippocampus and cortex, transition to a dystrophic (senescent) phenotype [51–53]. The morphology of dystrophic microglia is distinct from the ramified appearance of the homeostatic phenotype or the reactive/hyperactive morphology of activated microglia, and is usually characterized by deramification (i.e. loss of branching), cytoplasmic deterioration, atrophy, thinning, twisting and fragmentation of protrusions [54]. This age-related shift in microglia morphology is associated with increased production of pro-inflammatory mediators, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6, and reduced levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-10 [55–58].

In a non-elderly CNS, when there is an injury or infection, reactive microglia respond with an optimal balance of secreted pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators to exert neuroprotective effects. However, microglia become highly dysregulated in aging and the balance shifts to a predominantly pro-inflammatory response. This can have deleterious consequences on the surrounding environment, resulting in neuronal dysfunction and contributing to neurodegeneration. For instance, a cross-sectional aging study in mice reported reduced volume coverage by microglial processes – as if they have retracted - in older animals as compared to young animals, which correlated with increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines [58]. Moreover, brain tissues from a transgenic AD mouse model showed a similar microglia phenotype and inflammatory changes in relatively young mice, suggesting that in AD there is an accelerated transition to a microglial phenotype associated with aging. Microglia senescence (or dystrophy) has also been associated with reduced phagocytosis of amyloid-β (Aβ), resulting in its accumulation, and eventual cytotoxic plaque formation in AD [59–62]. Furthermore, microglia express higher densities of antigen binding receptors with age (e.g. TLRs, SRs and mitogen histocompatibility complex class II); in turn, the activation of these receptors can trigger signal transduction cascades that result in the sustained production and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and exert detrimental effects on neuronal functioning [63, 64]. Collectively, these studies support the hypothesis that senescent/dystrophic microglia could impact phagocytic clearance mechanisms for the efficient removal cytotoxic proteins that accumulate with age, and exacerbate chronic neuroinflammation. Although the causal factors underlying age-associated microglial malfunctioning remain debated, several age-dependent variables are likely to contribute. These include the reduced ability of microglia to proliferate due to telomere attrition, abnormal accumulation of lysosomal inclusions and proteinaceous aggregates, elevated mutations in mitochondrial DNA, increased iron load, accumulation of lipid droplets, as well as ROS overproduction and oxidative stress [52, 65].

While the role of microglia is considered to be generally neuroprotective, there are indications that in neurodegenerative disorders, the uncontrolled activation of these cells and an excessive pro-inflammatory response could exert direct neurotoxic effects by phagocytosing not only damaged cellular debris but also intact neurons [66–69]. This raises an important question concerning functional differences between dystrophic microglia and the reactive/hyperactive form of microglia. Post-mortem brains from AD subjects containing high amyloid loads demonstrated a significantly higher degree of microglial dystrophy than is found in nondemented, amyloid-free aged-matched control subjects [70]. Dystrophic rather than activated microglia were found to be colocalized with neural structures positive for neurofibrillary plaques and tangles in the post-mortem brains of AD subjects [54]. Moreover, the phenotype of microglia in aging can differ from those found in AD, as indicated by varying arborization areas and stages of activation, as well other morphological characteristics (e.g. cytoplasmic fragmentation; cytorrhexis) [71–73]. These observations support the idea that microglia senescence rather than microglia activation may contribute to the pathogenesis of AD. However, as noted above, an activated pro-inflammatory state of microglia has been observed in the brains of both aged humans and rodents, even in the absence of overt neuropathology. Moreover, in a phenomenon that has been described as microglial priming, the reactivity of microglia to immunological challenges, including pathogenic infections or increased accumulation of cytotoxic proteins, generally increases with age in humans and animals [74, 75]. Such primed microglia might themselves mediate an exaggerated neuroinflammatory response and disrupt cellular homeostasis in aging [76, 77]. Therefore, it remains unclear whether age-related hyperactive and primed microglia represent penultimate phases of dystrophic microglia, or if these are distinct phenotypes entirely. Further investigations are necessary to discern the functional differences between hyperactive, primed and senescent/dystrophic microglia, and whether the neuroinflammatory changes mediated by these phenotypes differ between normal aging and age-related neurological conditions. Regardless of these phenotypic differences, the consensus amongst current literature indicates that aged microglia, in general, are chronically overactive, disrupted in morphology as well as function, and predominantly release pro-inflammatory mediators that together exert detrimental effects on neuronal systems.

2.3. Microglia, neuroinflammation, and age-related cognitive decline

The postulation for the potential role of microglia in contributing to age-related cognitive decline is due to several justifications, including observations from studies that illustrate disrupted microglia in the brains of cognitively impaired older adults and people with AD (Table 1 summarizes some of the human investigations). Evidence from postmortem human studies demonstrate significantly increased expression of microglial pro-inflammatory proteins and immune dysregulation across numerous brain regions of older adults with cognitive impairments, including those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or AD, as compared to non-demented healthy older adults and/or young adults [72, 78–81]. In humans, there currently exists only one direct way to measure microglia activation and associated neuroinflammation in vivo: Positron Emission Tomography (PET) imaging using radiolabeled ligands that bind to the 18 kDa translocator protein (TSPO) present on the mitochondria of activated microglia and macrophages. Several studies have reported increased TSPO binding in the brains of elderly subjects with cognitive impairments. For instance, a notable imaging study employed the PET ligand [11C](R)-PK11195 to compare microglia activation between healthy young/elderly individuals and those subjects diagnosed with MCI/AD based on assessment of mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and clinical dementia rating (CDR) scale [82]. While the study reported no significant age-related changes in TSPO binding in any brain region except the thalamus in healthy controls, an exaggerated microglial activation response was noted in MCI/AD subjects amongst those brain regions that are implicated in attentional and mnemonic function, including the inferior and middle temporal gyri (right: control 0.13±0.03, MCI/AD 0.23±0.05, p = 0.0001; left: control 0.13±0.04, MCI/AD 0.26±0.08, p = 0.001), left parahippocampal gyrus (control 0.09±0.03, MCI/AD 0.18±0.07, p = 0.003) and inferior parietal lobule (right: control 0.12±0.05, MCI/AD 0.23±0.10, p = 0.01; left: control 0.08±0.04, MCI/AD 0.23±0.12, p = 0.005). Such findings have been replicated by other investigators, where increased microglial TSPO-binding and associated neuroinflammatory changes correlated with impaired performance across a range of neuropsychological tests in older adults with dementia and AD [83–86]. Another PET imaging study reported higher binding in specific brain regions of MCI subjects that developed dementia 5 years after imaging (i.e. compared to healthy, age-matched control participants), indicating that elevated microglial activation may precede the onset of dementia and predict the progression of cognitive decline in AD [87]. Along with genetic and histopathological data specifically implicating dysfunctional microglia in late-onset AD, such neuroimaging results suggest the chronic activation of microglia over time, as well as the corresponding progressive shift towards a more dystrophic phenotype, coincide with later stages of neuropathology [88–90]. While TSPO radioligands have been extensively used to examine microglia activation in age-related neurodegenerative disorders, issues regarding sensitivity and specificity should be considered. For instance, some of these ligands are also known to bind to reactive astrocytes (another type of glial cells in the CNS); likewise, these ligands do not have the ability to discriminate between different phenotypes of microglia (e.g. hyperactive vs dystrophic) [91].

Genomic investigations, including genome wide association studies (GWAS) that examined rare coding variants of genes expressed on microglia, have provided further insights into the role of these immune cells in pathological aging. Several studies have reported a significant association between people diagnosed with AD and a missense mutation (rs75932628-T) in the gene encoding for the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), a receptor expressed by microglia that is known to facilitate phagocytosis [71, 92–94]. Interestingly, older adults who carried this mutation but were not diagnosed with AD also exhibited impaired cognitive functioning (a mean increase of 0.87 units on Cognitive Performance Scale, p = 0.003) as compared to non-carriers [94]. Given the protective role of TREM2 in inflammation, these studies supported the notion that reduced anti-inflammatory response and reduced phagocytosis in aging may interfere with the ability of the brain to clear age-related aberrant/toxic products (such as Aβ) and increase the risk for AD. Complementary to such findings, a separate group of researchers identified differential gene expression of multiple facets of microglial functioning and inflammation, including those associated with TREM2, across multiple brain regions in postmortem tissues of people with late-onset AD [95]. Furthermore, genomic variation in multiple microglia receptors that are known to initiate innate immune responses, including cluster of differentiation 33 (CD33), complement receptor 1 (CR1) and membrane spanning four-domain subfamily A members 4A and 6A, have been associated with late-onset AD, further illustrating the association between disrupted microglia function and pathological age-related cognitive decline [96–103]. Along with investigations that have examined the functional impact of microglia-associated genes, several magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies reported individuals who carry allelic polymorphisms of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β, had higher white matter hypersensitivity, hippocampal shrinkage, disrupted activation of brain networks, and impaired performance on cognitive switching tasks [104–108].

Animal studies suggesting an association between microglia and cognition in aging/AD have primarily employed procedures where the mitigation of microglia activation preserved brain homeostasis and cognition (Table 2). For instance, in transgenic AD mouse models (e.g. APP23, APP/PS1 mice), ablation of genes associated with inflammatory signaling, such as TNF-α receptor or IL12/23 receptor, reduces Aβ load and suppresses microglial activation [109, 110]. Moreover, these manipulations preserved hippocampus-dependent memory capacities across multiple behavioral paradigms, including the hole-board memory test, object recognition task, contextual fear conditioning and the Barnes maze. Likewise, pretreatment with Biacalin (a flavonoid with anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective properties) or overexpression of IL-4 (an anti-inflammatory cytokine) mitigates reactive microglia-induced neuroinflammation and rescues cognitive detriments in transgenic AD mouse models [111, 112]. Similar conclusions were drawn in a study that employed a rat model of AD, where treatment with the anti-inflammatory cytokine IFN-β suppressed microglia activation induced by intra-hippocampal Aβ injections and reversed memory impairments [113, 114].

The association between the detrimental effects of neuroinflammation and cognitive deficits has not only been limited to rodent AD models, but has also been extended to normal aged rodents. For instance, a study conducted by Barrientos and colleagues demonstrated that elevations in pro-inflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus and ensuing memory impairments in a fear conditioning task induced by laparotomy in aged rats were reversed by IL-1β antagonist [115]. Similarly, in aged mice displaying significant impairments on a spatial memory task, the elimination of dystrophic microglia, and subsequent repopulation of homeostatic microglia was capable of restoring hippocampal integrity, synaptic plasticity and improving cognitive function [116].

It is noteworthy that rodent models of AD have multiple translatable limitations, such as the non-physiological development of pathological features and inaccurate representation of functional changes in late-onset AD [117, 118]. Likewise, normally aged rodents do not fully recapitulate the cognitive heterogeneity and neurodegeneration observed in humans [119]. Therefore, direct extrapolation of the reviewed findings on microglia in rodent brains requires extreme caution.

2.4. Limitations and further considerations

Although considerable evidence points towards a robust association between aberrant microglia functioning and age-related cognitive deficits, some human and animal studies have reported conflicting results. For instance, several PET-imaging studies failed to find differences in microglial activation between MCI and non-demented subjects [120, 121]. Further, some post-mortem gene expression studies reported higher expression of immunity-related transcripts in the brains of cognitively-intact elderly subjects [120, 121]. Similarly, transgenic mice lacking a functional subset of microglia receptors known to trigger inflammation (i.e. TLR-2) maintain impaired cognitive functions across multiple behavioral paradigms, while partial restoration of the same receptor rescued such cognitive capacities [122]. In addition, a recent GWAS study in humans reported a positive association between higher polygenic scores for IL-1β and hippocampal volume, which is counterintuitive given the detrimental effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines on neuronal systems [123]; however, it should be noted that such an association may be dependent on age, given that such results were determined from two independent samples (young and older participants). Despite these reports, current evidence remains somewhat inconclusive to sufficiently discriminate between the degree of microglia activation that is necessary to combat the age-dependent accumulation of cytotoxic substrates, and the persistent aberration in microglia functioning as well as subsequent neuroinflammation that is associated with neurodegeneration and cognitive decline.

Along with such considerations, potential alternative mechanisms leading to chronic inflammation in CNS must be considered. Indeed, circulating monocytes are capable of infiltrating the CNS and consequently contributing to a state of chronic inflammation that may exacerbate neuronal damage [124–126]. In addition, the activation of peripheral immune mechanisms can generate inflammatory mediators (e.g. cytokines) that are capable of directly communicating with resident microglia in the brain, thereby lowering the ensuing threshold for their activation and driving subsequent inflammation [127, 128]. Such hypotheses are particularly plausible provided that the blood brain barrier is known to become compromised with age, while peripheral inflammation is known to positively correlate with age [129, 130]. It should also be noted that other cell types within the CNS (e.g. astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, mast cells) as well as neurons themselves can release and respond to pro-inflammatory mediators [131–133]. Although the contribution of peripheral and non-microglia mechanisms in neuroinflammation cannot be dismissed, the primary factor contributing to age-related cognitive decline and AD could still be resident microglia. This view is supported by genomic investigations that reported positive associations between cognitive decline and a number of genes implicated microglia functioning (e.g. CD33, TREM2, CR1), rather than genomic markers of peripheral immunity or other cell-specific immune processes [94, 97, 99]. Therefore, it must be acknowledged that a dysregulated immune response emanating from the periphery and/or non-microglia cells (e.g. astrocytes) may either exacerbate microglia-induced inflammation or contribute to neuroinflammation via mechanisms independent of microglia.

3. Modifiable Life Factors

3.1. Diet and cognition

Growing evidence indicates that a healthy diet is crucial for maintaining overall brain health and cognitive functioning in elderly subjects, while unhealthy dietary habits are associated with deleterious effects of cognition [134–136]. Recent longitudinal and observational cohort studies have focused on the beneficial cognitive effects of the Mediterranean diet (MeDi), which is characterized by the consumption of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, olive oil, fish and nuts. Elderly individuals of Hellenic origin that adherently followed MeDi (self-reported measures) exhibited improved performance across a range of cognitive measures, including visuospatial perception, executive functioning and working memory, as well as lower rates of dementia, in comparison to elderly subjects with lower adherence to this diet [137, 138]. Given the robust association between cardiovascular disorders and cognitive decline, researchers have also found that aged individuals who followed the DASH (Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension) diet (i.e. consuming MeDi but with a higher intake of dairy products and lower intake of saturated fats) maintain slower rates of global cognitive decline [139, 140]. Similarly, elderly subjects who followed the MIND (Mediterranean-DASH diet Intervention for Neurodegeneration Delay) diet, which is a modified version of MeDi that includes high intake of green leafy vegetables and berries, subsequently displayed significantly enhanced cognitive capacities and reduced risk of cognitive impairments [141, 142]. Conversely, an unhealthy diet (e.g. saturated fats, red meat, refined sugars) is a risk factor for cognitive decline [143–145]. In addition, the intake of specific micronutrients common in healthy diets, such as polyphenols and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), are suggested to benefit cognitive capacities in aged subjects [146–153]. A graphic outlining different types of diets that are associated with improved cognitive functions among the elderly in prospective cohort studies is illustrated in Figure 2.

Similar to human studies, animal investigations have amassed a growing body of evidence indicating the benefits of healthy nutrition on cognition in aging. Aged rodents exposed to constituents commonly found in healthy dietary regimens, particularly those that contain high levels of polyphenolic flavonoids (e.g. blueberries) or natural polyphenols such as curcumin, display enhanced performance across a number of behavioral tasks, including object recognition and spatial working memory tests [154–164]. In addition to polyphenols, other organic compounds that are found in healthy diets, such as PUFAs, have also been shown to afford benefits to age-induced cognitive detriments [165]. For instance, aged mice supplemented with omega-3s over the course of two months subsequently exhibit improved associative learning, object recognition and spatial memory [166–168]. The most conclusive evidence yet for the resiliency to cognitive decline afforded by specific micronutrients comes from an investigation that applied a series of multi-nutritional diets in aged animals over the course of 4 months; here, subjects were assigned to one of eight dietary conditions, each with specified concentrations of nutrients commonly found in the dietary regimens used in human studies. The condition with the highest quantity of such nutrients (i.e. citicoline, Vitamins B9 and E, PUFAs, and polyphenol), not only improved associative learning performance compared to other treatment groups, but resulted in performance equivalent to their younger control counterparts [169].

The implementation of modified nutritional programs and micronutrient supplementations are increasingly recognized as potential non-pharmacological strategy to prevent or delay the progression of cognitive decline in the elderly [170, 171]. Indeed, growing bodies of data indicate nutritional interventions can result in cognitive benefits for the elderly [180–196]. The cognitive effects of some of these intervention studies are summarized in Table 3. However, it should be noted that several dietary intervention studies reported either no significant improvement or limited cognitive benefit [172–177]. These inconsistencies may be due to substantial methodological variation across studies designs (e.g. intervention type, dosages, treatment time), cultural differences and eating habits, and other sources of variation between populations that ultimately render it difficult to determine the precise dietary treatments necessary to induce cognitive benefits. For instance, some data suggest positive effects are induced after extended modifications (i.e. &gt; 6 months), while others argue that acute exposure (i.e. &lt; 6 months) is sufficient [178, 179]. In addition, many investigations fail to adequately control for pre-existing metabolic conditions, baseline nutritional intake, and non-intervention eating habits during the course of study. Furthermore, the role of contemporary patterns in food consumption, such as non-GMO, organic, and other alternative eating practices (e.g. vegetarian, vegan) and diets (e.g. Atkins, Paleo, Keto) have not been properly accounted for in some of these investigations. Future investigations are encouraged to adopt more reliable and valid study designs in order to determine the effectiveness of nutritional interventions on cognition in aging and age-related cognitive disorders.

3.2. Diet and age-related cognitive decline: contributions of microglia

Evidence from studies in rodents suggests that increased cognitive decline linked to unhealthy nutrition might be mediated by dysregulated microglia. Investigations utilizing both adult and aged rodents have demonstrated that exposure to diets with a high proportion of saturated fats and cholesterol subsequently causes increased neuroinflammation and microglial activation throughout the CNS, which is accompanied by decreased performance across a multitude of memory tasks [197–203]. Indeed, the depletion of microglia in rodent models inhibits neuronal stress responses, the recruitment of immune cells from the periphery and neuroinflammation otherwise induced by high-fat diets [204, 205]. Similarly, mouse models of hypercholesterolemia demonstrate significantly impaired spatial and working memory capacities, in conjunction with enhanced neuroinflammation, Aβ accumulation and microglia activation [203, 206, 207].

Consistent with such findings, a growing body of evidence suggests the resiliency to cognitive decline afforded by healthy dietary regimens might be exerted through those mechanisms that suppress aberrant microglial functioning (Figure 3). In aged rodents that exhibit impairments across various measures of cognitive performance, polyphenol supplementation (naturally found in chocolate, red wine, and turmeric, as well as other foods) not only improved performance in these subjects, but also ameliorated microgliosis and reduced the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain [161, 208–210]. Similar results were also obtained in transgenic AD mice that otherwise maintained elevated neuroinflammatory profiles and illustrated profound deficits in hippocampal dependent paradigms [112, 161, 208–210].

In addition to polyphenols, the dietary application of PUFAs (found in oily fish and many nuts/seeds) has been shown to mitigate cognitive decline, potentially through the inhibition of those mechanisms that perpetuate the prolonged activation of microglia. In aged (18 month old) mice, the application of a 4-month multinutrient diet with high concentrations of PUFAs subsequently mitigated neuroinflammation in the hippocampus and preserved performance in an associative learning task, in comparison to aged animals given a control diet with less micronutrients [169]. Note that mice typically live about 22–24 months, so this intervention was approximately 1/6th of their life; an equivalent intervention in humans would be about 13 years, based on a life expectancy of 80 years. Importantly, even limited PUFA supplementation (i.e. 2 months) in aged rodents resulted in a similarly attenuated neuroinflammatory state compared to aged-matched controls (e.g. decreased microglia activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine expression), and beneficial effects on measures of spatial memory [211, 212]. Along with observations employing age induced cognitive decline and neuroinflammation, investigations employing transgenic models have illustrated that exposure to increased PUFAs can afford resiliency across multiple cognitive domains, in conjunction with blunted neuroinflammation, including decreased levels of nuclear factor κB (NFκB; a transcription factor that enhances the expression of various pro-inflammatory genes) [213, 214].

The benefits afforded by healthy dietary interventions might also be mediated through those processes that accelerate microglia senescence, such as oxidative stress. Specifically, polyphenols are potent inhibitors of ROS [215, 216]. Indeed, resveratrol treatment has been shown to preserve memory function by reducing ROS and protecting hippocampal neurons in a rat model of AD [217]. Consistent with the effects of polyphenols, PUFAs have been shown to improve cognitive capacities in AD rat models through the reduction in ROS concentrations across multiple brain regions, including those implicated in attentional and memory processes [218, 219].

Although evidence is lacking from human studies to link the beneficial effects of healthy diets directly to the suppression of microglia activation, certain nutritional interventions have been found to exert generalized effects on inflammation. For instance, amongst a cohort of older adults who adhered to 3-month MeDi supplemented with either olive oils or nuts, reduced plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines were observed as compared to the control diet (e.g. TNF-α: MeDi+olive oil, 95% CI −2.7, −1.1, p = 0.006; IFN-γ: MeDi+nuts, 95% CI −10.0, −0.6, p = 0.03) at 5 years follow up [220, 221]. Likewise, reduced circulating inflammatory biomarkers and oxidative stress have been reported in middle-aged and older adults who maintained fish oil and omega-3s supplementation [222, 223]. Indeed, it has been suggested that systemic inflammation is itself a moderator between the effects of diet and cognition [224]. In light of these findings, as well as the direct association between systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation, it is possible that healthy dietary supplements may have the potential to exert cognitive benefits by attenuating systemic inflammation, which can subsequently suppress aberrant microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in aging. However, further research is needed to demonstrate the validity of such a hypothesis.

3.3. Exercise and cognitive aging

Increasing frequency and intensity of physical activity has been shown to predict proportional decreases in the probability and degree of age-related cognitive impairments. For example, aged individuals that engaged in high levels of physical activity for several years had reduced risks for AD and other types of dementia, as compared to age-matched control participants that adopted a sedentary lifestyle with no exercise [225–229]. Along with combating cognitive decline in aging, evidence also suggests that physical activity interventions can in fact boost cognitive performance amongst the elderly (Table 4). For instance, healthy aged subjects enrolled in a 3 month aerobic training regimen (3 times/week, 60 min/day) demonstrated significantly improved executive functions compared to age matched control subjects [230]. Similarly, exercising on a treadmill, stationary bicycle or elliptical trainer over 6 months (4 days/week, 60 minutes/day) resulted in improved performance across a variety of executive and memory functions in aged individuals diagnosed with MCI [231]. Likewise, several other studies that implemented aerobic training programs reported similar results [232–235]. Along with aerobic fitness, data also suggest that regimens of resistance training (i.e. anaerobic exercises, such as strength training) can enhance executive functioning in normal elderly individuals, and stabilize cognitive capacities in people with MCI [236–242].

Similar to patterns observed in human studies, forced or voluntary physical activity (e.g. running on a treadmill) initiated in rodents either in adulthood or in middle age and maintained until old age can reverse age-related impairments across various measures of cognitive performance [243–246]. Moreover, rodents exposed to physical activity of mild intensity and limited duration during old age alone also exhibit improved hippocampus-dependent memory capacities in comparison to sedentary aged animals [247–252]. Likewise, in transgenic animal models of AD, treadmill exercise has been shown to alleviate decline in spatial learning and memory [247–250]. Interestingly, in parallel to results obtained from human studies, preclinical investigations are also beginning to demonstrate the cognitive benefits afforded by anaerobic exercise [253, 254].

Although the implementation of exercise regimens is increasingly recognized as a therapeutic option to combat cognitive decline in aging, it is noteworthy that some investigations do not illustrate significant improvements in cognitive capacities following increased physical activity [255–258]. Substantial variation in the methodology and study design (e.g. control conditions, intervention type, duration) across experimental settings warrants consideration in interpreting such findings. For instance, some investigations indeed suggest slowed cognitive decline in response to increased aerobic activity, but these results can be masked by adherence to exercise interventions or baseline cognitive predispositions (e.g. MCI vs amnesic MCI) [259–262]. In addition, the presently available data are lacking consistency in exercise type (i.e. aerobic vs. restraint), modality (e.g. walking vs. running), as well as the nature of control conditions (e.g. sedentary vs. stretching). Furthermore, given the subjective nature of physical activity, studies have largely failed to implement concurrent objective assessments of physical expenditure, such as a heart rate monitor or VO2 max. Future investigations should implement amended procedures in order to further demonstrate a reliable and valid association between elevated physical activity and the inhibition of cognitive decline.

3.4. Can exercise protect against age-related cognitive decline via microglial-inflammatory mechanisms?

The increased risk for age-related cognitive impairments associated with inadequate levels of physical activity could be a consequence of aberrant microglia activation and an unimpeded CNS inflammatory state. For instance, sedentary rats have elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e. IL1-β, IL1–6) across multiple regions of the brain, including the hippocampus, in comparison to physical active counterparts [263, 264]. Conversely, engagement in aerobic exercise in aged rodents has been associated with reduced activation of microglia and increased levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-10) [265, 266]. Likewise, human studies have consistently shown that physical activity exerts a positive modulatory effect on peripheral inflammation (e.g. as measured by peripheral blood draw) by reducing pro-inflammatory cytokines and increasing anti-inflammatory cytokines [267–269]. In addition, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies conducted in older adults that received 4–12 months of aerobic exercise interventions illustrated increased functional connectivity in brain regions that are critical for executive and mnemonic functions [270, 271]. It remains unknown whether the effects of aerobic exercise observed in these studies are directly linked to reduced neuroinflammation and improved microglia function or if they are due to changes in brain perfusion (e.g. due to increased extension of capillary beds).

The purported relationship between the benefits of exercise on cognitive aging and microglia is derived from investigations which demonstrate that physical activity might counteract those mechanisms associated with chronic microglial activation and neuroinflammation in aging. For instance, age-related decline in aversive memory using the passive avoidance task, and increased hippocampal levels of inflammatory mediators, such as TNF-α, IL1-β and NFκB, have been observed in sedentary rats; however such age-related differences were absent in rats that underwent forced exercise [248]. Furthermore, this study reported a significant association between the levels of inflammatory cytokines and performance. Complementary to such findings, voluntary running in aged subjects was also shown to attenuate peripheral infection-induced neuroinflammatory responses and microglial sensitization, as well as impairments in contextual fear memory [252]. Likewise, compared to sedentary controls, 3-weeks of running in transgenic AD mice not only improved performance in the radial arm maze, but also reduced the levels of neurotoxic cytokines and enhanced Aβ clearance in the brain [272, 273]. In elderly humans, being sedentary and having higher levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-12p40 has been associated with lower volumes of the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, as well as accelerated decline in MMSE, in comparison to those subjects who were physically active and those who had lower cytokine levels [274]. Another clinical study reported increased levels of soluble TREM2 (important for normal microglia function) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of AD subjects who received moderate to high intensity aerobic exercise interventions for 16-weeks as compared to non-exercise controls [275]. Together, these studies suggest that physical activity has the capacity to render some individuals more resilient to the detrimental effects of age and age-related neuropathology, which could presumably be linked to reduced inflammation and preserved microglial function.

Although the precise molecular mechanisms by which exercise enables homeostatic microglia to exert neuroprotection and benefit cognitive capacities in aging remain unclear, data demonstrating its reliable modulation of oxidative stress and trophic factors, such as BDNF, warrant due consideration. For instance, in aged rodents and transgenic AD mouse models, exercise has been shown to alleviate ROS generation and increase the activity of antioxidant enzymes in the brain, which was in turn associated with enhanced memory performance [244, 276]. As microglia reactivity can be exacerbated by ROS in aging, it is plausible that by reducing oxidative stress, physical activity may mitigate the perpetuation of prolonged microglial activation and subsequent elevation in pro-inflammatory cytokines. In regard to trophic factors, ample evidence from rodent models demonstrate that physical activity increases the expression of BDNF, which is known for its enhancement of neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity, and learning and memory [277–282]. Likewise, human studies report elevated levels of blood serum BDNF following physical activity, and this increase correlates with improved cognitive performance, including measures of visuospatial attention and working memory in both young and older adults [283–285]. As microglia derived BDNF is critical for maintaining homeostatic neuronal functioning (e.g. learning-induced spine formation), while decreased BDNF secretion by activated microglia can accompany aging, these studies support the view that the beneficial effects of exercise on cognition could be associated with BDNF [286, 287]. Further studies are warranted to validate the effects of physical activity on the dynamic interaction between BDNF and aberrant microglia reactivity, and to test the hypothesis that the beneficial effects of exercise on cognition in aging could be linked to BDNF-mediated reduction in microglial activation/inflammation as well as enhanced neuronal plasticity.

3.5. Cognitive engagement and age-related cognitive decline

Engagement in cognitively stimulating activities, including lifestyle enrichment, is increasingly considered a reliable strategy to protect against cognitive decline in the elderly [346–360]. This view is based on a construct termed “cognitive reserve”, which posits that lifetime cognitive engagement and other environmental activities can enable the brain to compensate for age-related alterations in neural functioning, either by utilizing pre-existing neural networks more efficiently or engaging alternative networks that can offset deficiencies in existing networks [288, 289]. Thus, individuals with higher cognitive reserve are suggested to cope more efficiently with compromised neuronal functioning in aging, as opposed to individuals with low levels of reserve. In regard to its precise definition, it is notable that researchers have made a distinction between the concepts of cognitive reserve, compensation and maintenance [290, 291]. Specifically, reserve involves increases in neural resources to protect cognitive functions prior to the onset of age-related cognitive decline, while maintenance refers to the enhancement of alternative neural networks during aging itself, and compensation relates to changes in neural resources that occur during short-term increases in cognitive demands. Together, these concepts are applied to enhance the understanding of individual differences in cognitive resilience during aging and to develop approaches that prevent age-related dementia [292].

Epidemiological studies demonstrate that high levels of education, cognitively-demanding occupations, and social engagement correlate with lower incidence of dementia and AD in the elderly [293–295]. Furthermore, evidence from population-based studies have illustrated that elevated levels of routine cognitive activities (i.e. more active tasks, such as reading, playing chess, vs. more passive tasks, such as listening to the radio, watching television) can render individuals more resilient to cognitive decline [296–300]. Increased engagement in these activities has not only been associated with reduced risk of AD, but also elevated performance on a variety of cognitive measures, including global cognition, working memory and perceptual speed in the elderly subjects. Notably, the benefits of cognitively stimulating activities persist even after controlling for level of education as well as known measures of neuropathology [301–305].

Along with such observations, accumulating evidence also suggests that cognitive training given as a behavioral intervention can afford resiliency to age-related cognitive detriments. For instance, limited cognitive training (i.e. 60–75min/10 trainings/6 weeks) via domain-specific tasks subsequently preserves functional capacities across a number of cognitive measures (e.g. executive processing, immediate recall), both in extended (i.e. 2 years) as well as long term (i.e. 10 years) follow up assessments in older adults [306, 307]. Similar benefits were found when measures were assessed more proximal to the intervention (i.e. 2–4 months), regardless if the intervention was communal based (e.g. guided group activities) or employed individual training (e.g. structured neuropsychological training) [308–310]. Moreover, not only do healthy aged individuals and those subjected to age-related detriments benefit from such interventions, but the degree of benefit appears to be proportional to the degree of cognitive training [311, 312]. In addition, some evidence suggests that individuals with the lowest indices of cognitive activity display the greatest resiliency to cognitive detriments following such training regimens [310, 313]. Interestingly, in regard to the increasing implementation of computerized training procedures, not only does evidence indicate that such programs offer similar resiliency to cognitive decline, but they are more cost effective, domain specific and easily accessible compared to traditional behavioral therapies [314–317].

In addition to human investigations, environmental enrichment (EE) and similar modifiable paradigms have allowed researchers to model and assess the effects of cognitive interventions in animal models. Compared to a standard housing environment (i.e. food and water only), EE induces cognitive stimulation through the introduction of novel objects, increases in social interactions or physical contact with conspecifics, as well as more domain specific modifications including cognitive tasks themselves (e.g. maze exploration) [318, 319]. As such, exposure to EE for limited periods (i.e. 3 hours/day for 2 weeks), moderate (i.e. 6 weeks), extended periods (i.e. 10 weeks) or throughout life is capable of preserving memory capacities in aged animals, such that performance in various behavioral tasks is significantly improved in comparison to age matched controls [320–325]. Moreover, rats exposed to enriching environments throughout life not only displayed improved spatial learning performance at all ages, but also had reduced age-related deficits in attention, as compared to those animals that were exposed to standard/impoverished environments [326]. The benefits of cognitive engagement in rodents are not solely limited to normal age-related differences in cognition, but also extended to models of age-related pathologies. For instance, previous work from our laboratory indicated that the disruption of nerve growth factor receptor signaling implicated in AD produced robust impairments in attentional capacities in aged rats; however, such disruption in attentional functions was not observed in aging rats that remained cognitively engaged throughout life [327–329]. Similarly, transgenic AD mice maintained for extended periods of time (i.e. &gt; 4 months) in a cognitively stimulating environment, (i.e. initiated during adolescence, adulthood or in old age), subsequently display significantly improved performance across multiple cognitive domains once in old age, including working memory and spatial recall [330–332]. In interpreting these findings from rodents, it should be noted that baseline conditions in standard housing environments contain minimal levels of stimulation; given that humans inherently maintain more enriched environments during normal daily functioning, the effects of enrichment in rodents may be exacerbated when compared to clinical samples.

Although many studies have demonstrated that elevated cognitive activity protects against age-related cognitive decline, some studies do not report this effect [333–337]. Similar to studies of diet and exercise, variation in methodologies, experimental design, study duration, and control procedures present interpretational challenges that warrant further consideration. For example, while some intervention therapies indeed report improved performance in certain cognitive domains (e.g. working memory), such benefits may not transfer to other cognitive processes (e.g. attention) or may be dependent on a specific cognitive task, despite assessment of the same cognitive domain [338–342]. In addition, some results suggest the positive effects of cognitive stimulation may be dependent on the context in which the stimulation is applied; specifically, although individualized cognitive training sessions with a care provider can result in improved capacities, robotic or self-guided application methods may prove to be more efficacious [343, 344]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that the beneficial effects of cognitive engagement might be temporary and mitigated over time [345]. Therefore, it is possible that continued cognitive enrichment outside of intervention techniques may be necessary to stabilize cognitive benefits across the lifespan.

3.6. Cognitive enrichment, neuroinflammation and microglia

The evidence that engagement in cognitively stimulating activities might exert beneficial effects in aging and AD by mitigating aberrant microglial functioning and neuroinflammation has come primarily from animal studies. In transgenic AD mouse models which otherwise display profound CNS inflammation (i.e. increased pro-inflammatory cytokines) and dystrophic microglia (i.e. ameboid morphology, decreased branching), EE resulted in significantly blunted inflammatory signaling and the preservation of healthy microglia phenotypes [351]. Likewise, in a transcriptomic study conducted in rats, we recently reported that the elevated expression of transcripts associated with innate immune pathways and neuroinflammation in the prefrontal cortex of aged rats was ameliorated by cognitive engagement [352]. Moreover, we reported age-related decrements in attentional capacities associated with increased transcription of genes linked to exosomes; such extracellular vesicles can be released by different brain cells, including microglia, and play a key role in regulating intercellular communication as well as neuroinflammation [353]. Other investigations employing EE in rat models have reported significant reductions amongst a variety of pro-inflammatory mediators, including IL-1β and TNF-α, as well as elevations in neurotropic factors such as BDNF [354, 355].

Several studies have indicated that the beneficial effects of EE on cognition and neuroinflammation could be linked to reduction in oxidative stress. For instance, EE reduced ROS and elevated antioxidant defense mechanisms in those brain regions implicated in higher-order cognitive processes, such as the hippocampus and cortex, in normal rats [356, 357]. Likewise, in both aged-impaired rats and transgenic AD mice that otherwise display cognitive impairments, exposure to EE for several weeks downregulated pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative mediators, reduced the expression of pro-apoptotic markers, and enhanced the levels of antioxidant enzymes while reversing memory deficits [356–359]. As discussed earlier, ROS overproduction in aging and age-related cognitive disorders could perpetuate tonic microglia activation and neuroinflammation. Therefore, it is possible that EE could improve cognitive capacities in pathological aging by attenuating microglia dystrophy via reducing oxidative stress.

While the beneficial effects of cognitive stimulation and EE on cognitive aging is apparent, and the existing evidence from rodent studies provides some support for the involvement of microglia and neuroinflammation as a possible mechanism, no human studies have directly tested such a hypothesis. This raises the question of whether microglial neuroinflammatory mechanisms could be translated to humans and explain the resiliency in aging that is afforded by cognitive enrichment. In light of this gap in knowledge, it is worth noting a number of fMRI studies have reported that healthy older adults or people with MCI/AD with higher education levels (a proxy for cognitive reserve) maintain higher functional connectivity, more efficient recruitment of brain networks, and/or higher activation of compensatory networks, in comparison to those with lower education [360–363]. Moreover, MCI/AD diagnosed individuals with higher cognitive reserve were able to cope with a greater neuropathological burden as compared to patients with lower cognitive reserve [364]. Together, these studies support the view that environmental/cognitive enrichment facilitates neural systems/circuits plasticity, and has the potential to slow age-related cognitive decline as well as the progression of cognitive deterioration in AD. Whether the enhancement of neural network efficiency/plasticity associated with cognitive enrichment is directly linked to reduction in microglia dystrophy, enhanced phagocytic capacity, and reduced neuroinflammation requires further elucidation.

4. Proposed model: Microglia function as a critical determinant of individual variation in cognitive aging

Based on the above discussion, we propose a hypothetical mechanistic model that embodies the state of microglia as a primary determinant of individual variation in cognitive aging, with MLFs as a possible moderator of this relationship (Figure 4). Stable dynamics between the homeostatic and reactive state of microglia is associated with elevated anti-inflammatory response, balanced release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, efficient phagocytosis, and enhanced release of trophic factors to support neuroplasticity. Together, these processes ensure removal of cellular debris and cytotoxic substrates from the extracellular space, promote CNS homeostasis and therefore preserve neural circuits that support higher cognitive functions. With advancing age, the morphology and functionality of microglia progressively switches from a stable functional state to an aberrant dystrophic/senescent state. Although aging alone is associated with dystrophic microglia and their aberrant functioning to some extent, environmental (e.g. sedentary lifestyles) and genetic risk factors, infection and associated systemic inflammation, as well as neuropathology, can further exacerbate microglia malfunctioning. Such a transition to a dystrophic phenotype can result in persistent neuroinflammation, decreased release of anti-inflammatory cytokines, heightened oxidative stress and impaired phagocytic function. In turn, this may lead to a deleterious microenvironment with the accumulation of cytotoxic substrates and compromised neuronal functioning that contributes to cognitive decline. By controlling systemic inflammation, oxidative stress (i.e. lowering ROS, boosting antioxidant defense mechanisms), and elevating the levels of neurotrophins (such as BDNF), modifiable life factors (healthy diet, physical exercise, and cognitive enrichment) inhibit the transition of stable (homeostatic/reactive) microglia to dystrophic microglia, and induce resiliency to cognitive decline in aging. As indicated earlier, our model does not negate the involvement of other glial cells (i.e. astrocytes and oligodendrocytes) which may also play an important role in maintaining CNS homeostasis via interactions with microglia.

Although we acknowledge that there is a clear dichotomy between normal and pathological cognitive aging, and that there could be heterogeneity in cognitive performance within each state, our model considers cognitive variation in the elderly as a continuum between the two dimensions. On one side of the spectrum there could be elderly individuals who perform at par with middle aged subjects and/or young adults (e.g. Super Agers) or those who carry Aβ burden but show no signs of dementia [365–368]. These individuals are categorized as cognitive resilient based on our model. Conversely, on the other side of the spectrum are other individuals who develop MCI, AD and other forms of age-related dementia. Considering aging as a natural process capable of inducing some microglia senescence/dystrophy and related inflammaging, we hypothesize that normal age-related cognitive variation lies between these two extremes, and is dependent upon the transition of microglia from a stable to dystrophic state. Future clinical studies are warranted to test specific hypotheses concerning the causal relationship between microglia senescence and age-related cognitive decline, as well as the moderation of this relationship by MLFs.

5. Conclusions and future directions

Although there are clear generalities and common principles observed in cognitive aging, what is perhaps most compelling about age-related cognitive change is its variability. Given that advancing age remains the most prominent risk factor for cognitive decline, mechanisms that account for such variability and predict resilience to cognitive detriments in aging are becoming increasingly relevant. Moreover, with the percentage of elderly individuals continuing to increase globally and the scarcity of effective pharmacotherapies that limit the progression of MCI/AD as well as other forms of age-related dementia, it is critically important to develop interventions that target such mechanisms to attenuate cognitive decline. This review highlights many of the studies in both animals and humans that help to bridge the gap in our understanding of the contributions from microglia in regulating neuroinflammation and maintaining neurocognitive processes in aging. Moreover, we present a hypothetical mechanistic model that postulates microglia senescence/dystrophy as a primary predictor of an individual’s risk for age-related cognitive impairments; here, an individual’s cognitive resiliency afforded by MLFs might be mediated by mitigating the age-related transition of stable (homeostatic/reactive) microglia phenotype to a dystrophic/aberrant phenotype, and consequent suppression of neuroinflammation.

While the conceptual framework for the proposed model predominantly relies on investigations from animal research, correlational evidence from human PET-imaging studies and investigations of post-mortem brain tissues also supports the association between microglia dysfunction and cognitive decline. A major challenge with human studies is the lack of biomarkers that could provide a valid index of senescent/dystrophic microglia. As noted earlier, although PET ligands that bind to TSPO provide important information concerning microglia activation in the brains of clinical subjects, this marker cannot discern between different microglia phenotypes (i.e. hyperactivated, primed, dystrophic). Furthermore, these ligands are not always specific to microglia and can bind to other cells under certain conditions, such as macrophages and astrocytes. The practicality of PET imaging must also be considered, given that many research centers do not maintain a PET scanner, and the cost of PET scanning can be prohibitive (e.g. in Philadelphia it costs around $3000/subject). Unfortunately, the most readily available technique used to measure inflammatory biomarkers utilizes blood, but this cannot specifically predict microglia senescence, nor can it discriminate between inflammation emanating from microglia and other immune cells (e.g. macrophages). Indeed, the measurement of peripheral biomarkers represents a relatively crude approach as it does not provide reliable information concerning the neural origin of an inflammatory response. One technique that should not be overlooked is the measurement of biomarkers in CSF (e.g. from lumbar puncture), which has the potential to reflect neuroinflammatory changes in the brain. This technique is cheaper than PET imaging and provides stronger evidence than that gleaned from a peripheral blood draw. Further research is needed to develop more specific PET ligands, MRI pulse sequences/contrast agents, and peripheral biomarkers to examine microglia function in cognitive aging and the potential effect of MLFs on this relationship. Given the recent advancements in molecular approaches, such as next-generation RNA sequencing that has allowed researchers to identify gene clusters specific to microglia [369], we also encourage more investigations to determine whether alterations in microglia-specific genes are linked to cognitive variation in aging.

Recent evidence suggests that systemic inflammatory and metabolic changes that begin during young age predict poor outcome in older adults [370]; moreover, such alterations have been linked to impaired microglia function [371, 372]. Similarly, it has been suggested that environmental factors which perturb the physiological functions of microglia during early development may have long term detrimental consequences on behavior [373]. Indeed, environmental factors can substantially influence microglia gene expression, which may contribute to their differential responses during aging [374]. For instance, studies in rodents indicate a balanced diet or aerobic exercise can mitigate the upregulated expression of proinflammatory processes that are otherwise observed in response to advancing age [201, 375]. Therefore, human studies examining the relationship between microglia function and cognitive aging should consider a life span perspective that takes into account the dynamic interplay between environmental factors and physiological functions which could impact microglia senescence/dystrophy in aging.

Although research in both animals and human subjects has provided valid evidence that MLFs can exert beneficial effects in aging and MCI/AD, there remains no direct clinical evidence demonstrating that MLFs can afford resiliency by boosting microglia function and minimizing neuroinflammation. Additionally, the benefits of MLFs likely involve non-microglia mechanisms that should be considered. For instance, GSK3β is a potent regulator of pathological peptides linked to AD (e.g. phosphorylated Tau), and data from rodent models suggest variation in MLFs (i.e. balanced diet, aerobic exercise) may inhibit the accumulation of such peptides by modulating GSK3β [376–380]. Further clinical research is needed to expand our understanding of the causal relationship between microglia functioning as well as non-microglia mechanisms induced by MLFs and behavioral outcomes in human samples. For instance, future studies should determine the optimal timing and degree of each MLF that is necessary to achieve the greatest reduction in microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and subsequent cognitive resiliency among at-risk patients using a longitudinal study design. Provided that the cognitive benefits of MLFs can vary between individuals, such studies should also address individual differences in responding to MLFs, and how corresponding variation in microglia functioning might further optimize conditions. For example, variation in microglia gene expression may determine the efficacy of a particular intervention, as suggested by existing data where individual genetic predispositions can determine the efficacy of multi-domain interventions [381]. Given the current lack of therapies that decelerate or prevent the progression of cognitive decline associated with age-related neurodegenerative disorders, MLFs could be considered as non-pharmacological interventions that improve cognitive resiliency amongst elderly subjects who possess a higher risk of developing dementia, as exemplified by the recently established Alzheimer’s Prevention Clinic [382–384].

Finally, additional research efforts are needed to delineate the biological mechanisms that decelerate microglia senescence or normalize microglia function, which could be exploited as therapeutic targets for developing neuroprotective and cognition–enhancing medications. Studies from animal models have remained critically important for providing us with a vivid understanding of the neurobiological functions of microglia in aging and AD. By better comprehending how this knowledge translates to humans, we can gain insights into the neurobiological underpinnings of cognitive variation in aging and develop more efficacious therapies. To facilitate this translation, we encourage more dynamic collaborations and crosstalk among neuroscientists, psychologists, immunologists, and clinicians.

Acknowledgements

The authors’ research was supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging (AG029592 and AG046580) and from the American Federation for Aging Research. We sincerely thank Drs. Tania Giovannetti and Ingrid Olson from Temple University for helpful comments and suggestions on a draft of this manuscript.

Abbreviations:

Aβ amyloid β

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor

CD Cluster of Differentiation

CDR Clinical Dementia Rating

CNS Central Nervous System

CSF Cerebrospinal Fluid

CR1 Complement Receptor 1

DAMPs Damage Associated Molecular Patterns

DASH Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension

DSM-IV Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV

EE Environmental Enrichment

fMRI Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging

GWAS Genome Wide Association Studies

IFN Interferon

IL Interleukin

MMSE Mini-Mental State Exam

MCI Mild Cognitive Impairment

MeDi Mediterranean Diet

MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging

MLFs Modifiable life factors

NFκB Nuclear Factor nuclear factor κB

PAMPs Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns

PET Positron Emission Tomography

PRRs Pattern Recognition Receptors

PUFAs Polyunsaturated fatty acids

ROS Reactive Oxygen Species

SRs Scavenger Receptors

TLRs Toll-like receptors

TNF-α tumor necrosis factor α

TREM2 triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2

TSPO translocator protein

Figure 1: Illustration depicting the functions of microglia in normal CNS. Under normal physiological conditions, microglia actively surveil their surrounding microenvironment in a homeostatic state. These cells maintain various pattern recognition receptors (e.g. toll-like receptors, scavenger receptors) that are capable of detecting aberrant molecular patterns in their microenvironment, such as those from malformed polypeptides, pathogens or other cellular debris. Following the detection of cytotoxic factors, microglia become reactive (ameboid) to remove and degrade these aberrant materials that might otherwise compromise the CNS microenvironment, while exhibiting a balanced production of both inflammatory and anti-inflammatory messengers, such as cytokines, as well as trophic factors.

Figure 2: Schematic depicting the composition of different diets and micronutrients used in prospective cohort studies to examine the impact of nutritional patterns on cognitive health in the elderly.

Figure 3: Schematic summarizing the effects of dietary supplements on microglia and cognitive functioning in rodent models of aging and AD. Exposure to high-fat/high-cholesterol diets produces abnormal activation of microglia and consequent increase in neuroinflammation, thereby impairing attention and memory. Conversely, supplementation with polyphenols/PUFAs blunt this effect, and preserve cognition by suppressing proinflammatory processes as well as oxidative stress.

Figure 4: Proposed model depicting microglia as a critical determinant of cognitive variation in aging. Normal dynamics between the homeostatic and the reactive state of microglia regulate CNS homeostasis by supporting neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity, reducing inflammation, and fulfilling normal phagocytic role (i.e. removing cellular debris and neurotoxic substrates in response to acute infection or injury that otherwise cause neuronal damage). Together, these processes are critical to maintain the neuronal activity which supports higher cognitive functions. Advancing age produces microglia senescence/dystrophy to some extent and this process could be exacerbated by genetic and environmental factors, systemic inflammation and pathological conditions. Dystrophic microglia result in chronic abnormalities that increase oxidative stress as well as pro-inflammatory cytokines, and compromised ability for optimal phagocytic function. This facilitates sustained neuroinflammation and neurotoxicity, thereby jeopardizing efficient recruitment of neural networks that support cognitive functions, and resulting in increased risk for age-related dementia as well as AD. By controlling oxidative stress (i.e. lowering ROS, boosting antioxidant defense mechanisms), elevating the levels of neurotrophins (such as BDNF), and reducing systemic inflammation, modifiable life factors (healthy diet, physical exercise, and cognitive enrichment) inhibit the transition of stable (homeostatic/reactive) microglia to dystrophic microglia, and induce resiliency to cognitive decline in aging.

Table 1. Summary of human studies linking microglia activation and neuroinflammation to cognitive decline in aging and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD).

Reference	Sample description (age)	Primary behavioral/clinical assessment measure	Assessment of microglia activity, regions of interest and measurement technique	
[79]	AD and NC (not specified): post-mortem	AD subjects were characterized with clinically evaluation; test battery not specified	Medial hippocampus, frontal cortex; HLA-DR
IHC	
[81]	AD and NC (Mean age: 88 years): post-mortem	Clinically evaluated; test battery not specified	Superior temporal cortex;
CD68
IHC	
[80]	AD and NC (73–103 years): post-mortem	CDR	Entorhinal cortex, hippocampus; HLA-DR
IHC	
[78]	AD, NC and dementia with non-AD, and unknown dementia (77–93 years) : post-mortem	MMSE	Cerebral cortex; HLA-DR, CD68, CD64 and MSR-A
IHC	
[82]	AD /MCI and NC (32–80 years)	MMSE, CDR	Entorhinal, temperoparietal, and cingulate cortex, and thalamus; [11C]PK11195-PET	
[83]	MCI/AD (53–81 years)	MMSE, ACE-R, RAVLT	Hippocampus, medial and inferior temporal cortex; [11C]PK11195-PET	
[84]	MCI and NC (65–73 years)	RAVLT and WAIS	Frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex; [11C]PK11195-PET	
[87]	AD /MCI and NC (52–79 years)	MMSE, CDR, ADAS-cog	Prefrontal cortex (dorsolateral and medial) cortex, cingulate cortex, lateral temporal cortex, parietal cortex, occipital cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, striatum, thalamus and cerebellum [11C]DAA1106-PET	
[85]	AD /MCI and NC (52–79 years)	NINDS-ADRDA, DSM-IV	frontal cortex, temporal cortex, parietal cortex, occipital cortex, hippocampus, amygdala and cerebellum; [11C]PK11195-PET	
[86]	AD /MCI and NC (62–73 years)	NINDS-ADRDA, MMSE, CDR	prefrontal cortex, temporal and parietal lobes, striatum; [11C]PBR28-PET	
Abbreviations: ACE-R, Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-Revised; ADAS-cog, Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale; CD, Cluster of Differentiation; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; DSM-IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV; HLA-DR, Human Leukocyte Antigen – D Region, IHC, Immunohistochemistry; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Exam; MSR-A, Macrophage Scavenger Receptor A; MCI: Mild Cognitive Impairment; NINDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association test; NC=normal control; PET, Positron Emission Tomography; RAVLT, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test; WAIS, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale.

Table 2. Summary of animal studies that linked microglia activation and neuroinflammation to cognitive decline in aging and Alzheimer’s disease.

References	Subjects description (age)	Behavioral task	Microglia markers, regions of interest, and measurement technique	
[110]	APP23 and APP23/TNRF1−/− transgenic mice (24 months)	Novel object recognition, hole-board memory task	Entorhinal cortex, hippocampus; CD11b, CD45
IHC	
[112]	APP/PS1 transgenic mice with Baicalin pretreatment (14 months)	Passive avoidance, Morris water maze	Hippocampus; IBA1 immunoreactivity; IL1-β, IL-18, NLRP3 and TLR4
WB	
[109]	APPPS1 and APPPS1 × Il12rb−/− transgenic mice (8 months)	Novel object recognition, contextual fear conditioning, Barnes maze	CD11b, CD11c, CD45 and TNFα flow cytometry; IL23, IL12, TNFα
qPCR	
[115]	F344xBNF1 rats with laparotomy and systemic IL-1R antagonist injection (22 months)	Contextual fear Conditioning	Hippocampus; IL1-β
ELISA
IL1-β, IL-6 and TNFα
qPCR	
[116]	C57BL/6 mice with CSF1R inhibitor treatment (3 months and 22 months)	Morris water maze	Hippocampus; IBA1, CD68, TMEM119, P2RY12
IHC	
[111]	APP+PS1 bigenic mice with AAV-mediated IL-4 expression (8 months)	Radial arm water maze	Hippocampus; IL-4
ELISA
IBA1
IHC	
[114]	Wistar rats with intrahippocampal injection of Aβ and IFNβi treatment (3 months)	Novel object recognition	Hippocampus; IBA1
IHC
IL1-β and IL-6
WB	
Abbreviations: CD: cluster of differentiation; ELISA: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; FACS, fluorescence activated cell sorting; IBA-1, ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1; IHC, immunohistochemistry; IL, interleukin; NLRP3, NOD like receptor protein 3; P2RY12, purinergic receptor P2Y; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction; TLR4, toll-like receptor 4; TMEM119, transmembrane protein 119; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor α; WB, Western blotting

Table 3: Human studies summarizing the effects of nutritional interventions on cognition in the elderly subjects.

References	Subject description, sample size, sex, age	Intervention type, dosage, frequency	Primary cognitive assessment (p value and/or effect size for treatments)	
[195]	N = 183 (120 F, 63 M); non-demented elderly with subjective memory complaints
Mean age: 76 years	Placebo
PUFA supplementation (DHA: 800mg/day + EPA: 225 mg/day)
3 years	Controlled Oral Word Association Test (95% CI 0.6 to 4.0, p = 0.009 vs placebo)	
[186]	N=9 (4 F, 8M); elderly subjects with prospective memory lapses
Mean age: 76.2 years	Blueberry juice (6–9 ml/kg/day)
3 months	Response time-recall (p = 0.027, η2 = 0.12)
Paired Associate Learning test (p = 0.009, d = 1.78)
CVLT free recall (p = 0.040, d = 1.18)
All comparisons vs pre-intervention baseline	
[183]	N = 522 (289 F, 233 M); elderly subjects with higher cardiovascular risk
Mean age: 74.6 years	Low-fat control diet
MeDi + olive Oil (1L/week)
MeDi + mixed nuts (walnuts, hazelnuts, almonds; 30g/day)
6.5 years	MMSE (p = 0.005, 95% CI +0.18 to +1.05; MeDi + olive oil vs control)
MMSE (p = 0.015, 95% CI +0.11 to +1.03; MeDi + mixed nuts vs control)
CDT (p = 0.001, 95% CI +0.20 to +0.82; MeDi + olive oil vs control)
CDT (p = 0.048, 95% CI +0.003 to +0.67; MeDi + mixed nuts vs control)	
[184]	N = 212 (106 F, 106 M); mild AD subjects
Mean age: 73.7 years	Control drink
Souvenaid Multi-nutrient (125mL/day)
3 months	Delayed verbal recall: WMS-r (p = .021, d = 0.20 Souvenoid vs control drink)	
[180]	N = 334 (170 F, 164 M); elderly subjects with higher cardiovascular risk
Mean age: 66.8 years	Control diet
MeDi + olive oil (1L/week)
MeDi + Mixed nuts (walnuts, hazelnuts, almonds; 30g/day)
4.1 years	Memory: RAVLT, WMS-paired associates (95% CI −0.04 to 0.24, p = 0.04 MeDi + mixed nuts vs control diet)
Frontal cognition: WAIS, Color Trail Task (95% CI 0.02 to 0.43, p = 0.004 MeDi + olive oil vs control diet)
Global cognition: all measures, including MMSE (95% CI −0.12 to 0.20; p = 0.008 MeDi + olive oil vs control diet)	
[196]	N = 485 (282 F, 203 M); normal elderly subjects
Mean age: 70 years	Placebo
DHA (900mg/day)
6 months	Paired Associate Learning test (95% CI −3.1 to −0.14, p = 0.032 vs placebo)
Verbal Recognition Memory test (p = 0.015 vs placebo)	
Abbreviations: CVLT, California Verbal Learning Test; DHA, Docosahexaenoic acid; MeDi, Mediterranean diet; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Exam; PUFA, Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids; RAVLT, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test; WAIS, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale; WMS, Wechsler Memory Scale

Table 4. Human studies summarizing the effects of aerobic and resistance training (RT) on cognition in the elderly subjects.

References	Subject description, sample size, sex, age	Intervention type, dosage, frequency	Primary cognitive assessment (p value and/or effect size for treatments)	
[230]	N = 24 (13 F, 11 M); sedentary elderly subjects
Mean age: 70.7 years	Stretching control
Aerobic training: walking, gradual running, circuit training (40–60% of heart rate reserve)
60 min/3days/week; 12 weeks	WCST (p &lt; .05, d = 0.66 vs control)	
[231]	N = 33 (17 F, 16 M); MCI subjects
Mean age: 70 years	Stretching control (&lt;50% of heart rate reserve)
High intensity aerobic exercise: walking, stationary bicycle, elliptical (75–85% of heart rate reserve)
45–60 min/4days/week; 6 months	Symbol-digit modalities (p = 0.05 vs control, fwomen = 0.67, p = 0.04; fmen = 0.29, p =0.33)
Verbal fluency (p = .04 vs control, fwomen = 0.88, p = 0.01; fmen = 0.28, p = 0.39)
Stroop test ((p = 0.02 vs control, fwomen = 0.76, p = 0.02; fmen = 0.05, p = 0.86)
Trails B (p = 0.04 vs control, fwomen = 0.56, p = 0.09; fmen = 0.70, p = 0.05)	
[239]	N = 155 (all F); elderly subjects from community dwelling
Mean age: 69.6 years	BAT (stretching control)
RT (high intensity mini squats, mini lunges and lung walk)
60 min/1–2days/week; 1 year	Stroop test (2 years follow-up: β = 0.48, p = 0.002 1xRT vs BAT; β = 0.31, p = 0.005 2xRT vs BAt)
DSST (2 years follow-up: β = 0.29, p = 0.146 1xRT vs BAT; β = 0.45, p = 0.002 2xRT vs BAt)	
[240]	N = 62; sedentary elderly subjects
Mean age: 68.2 years	Control: warm-up and stretching without overload
EMODERATE (RT with loads 50% of 1RM)
EHIGH (RT with loads 80% of 1RM)
60 min/3 days/week; 24 weeks	DST (Forward: p &lt; 0.001 both
EMODERATE and EHIGH vs control; Backward: p &gt; 0.17 for both training conditions vs control)
Corsi’s block tapping task (similarities score: p &lt; 0.02
EMODERATE vs control; p &lt; 0.08 EHIGH vs control)
Rey-Osterrieth complex figure (immediate recall: p &lt; 0.02 both
EMODERATE and EHIGH vs control)	
[237]	N = 32 (21 F, 11M) inactive elderly subjects
Mean age: 62 years	Control
RT (upper and lower body resistance exercise)
MCT (treadmill 70–75% hear rate for 47 min)
HIIT (4 × 4-min treadmill at 90–95% heart rate)
3days/week; 16 weeks	Stroop neutral; reaction time (p &lt; 0.05 vs pre-test for HIIT d = 1.11, RT d = 1.00)
Stroop-incongruent; reaction time (p &lt; .05 vs pre-test for MCT d = 1.28, RT d = 1.12, control d = 0.94)
Stroop-interference; reaction time (p &lt; .05 vs pre-test for MCT d = 1.31, RT d = 1.07, control d = 0.95)	
[232]	N = 31 (23 F, 8M); patients with age-related dementia
Mean age: 81.9 years	Control (no physical activity)
Aerobic training: walking, stationary bicycle, dancing
60 min/3days/week; 15 weeks	Rapid evaluation of cognitive functions test (p &lt; 0.01 vs control)	
[241]	N = 77 (all F); elderly subjects from community dwelling with MCI and subjective memory complaints
Mean age: 75.1 years	BAT (control)
RT
2days/week; 6 months	Stroop test (p = 0.04 RT vs BAT)
Associative memory task (p = 0.03 RT vs BAT).	
[233]	N = 140 (56 F, 84 M); subjects with AD from community dwelling care
Mean age: 77.9 years	Control (usual community care)
Exercise: strength, balance and aerobic training (nordic walking)
60 min/2days/week; 1 year	CDT (p = .030, d = .31 vs control)
Verbal Fluency and MMSE (no group differences)	
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BAT, balancing and toning; CDT, Clock drawing test; DST, Digit span test; DSST, Digit Symbol Substitution Test; EHIGH, Experimental high; EMODERATE, Experimental moderate; HIIT, High intensity aerobic interval training; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; MCT, Moderate continuous aerobic training; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Exam; RM, Repetition Maximum; WCST, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test

Box 1: Glossary

Adaptive immunity (acquired immunity)

Latent immune responses that are specific to the pathogens presented. Adaptive immune cells include T and B lymphocytes, which provide long-lasting protection against pathogens.

Anti-inflammatory cytokines

Immunoregulatory molecules that counterbalance or suppress inflammation. These include IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-11, IL-13, IFN-β and transforming growth factor β.

Cytokines

Signaling molecules that are primary messengers of immunity-related processes.

Dystrophic (senescent) microglia

Physiologically maladaptive microglial phenotype typically observed in the aging brain and characterized by an exaggerated pro-inflammatory response and reduced release of anti-inflammatory mediators.

Inflamm-aging (sterile inflammation)

Low-grade chronic inflammation that occurs in the absence of overt infection in aging.

Innate immunity

A first line of defense mechanism that is generic to all types of pathogens or tissue injuries. Innate immunity is characterized by a rapid inflammatory response that involves recognition of conserved molecular patterns on pathogens or damaged molecules by the immune cells.

Microglia

Primary mediators of immune responses within the CNS. These non-neuronal cells are distinct from other glial cells (e.g. astrocytes, oligodendrocytes) and maintain a variety of innate immune responses, including phagocytosis as well as cytokine production.

Neuroinflammation

A complex response to brain injury involving the activation of glial cells (primarily microglia) and release of inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and chemokines (a class of cytokines).

Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)

Proteins present on the membranes of immune cells (e.g. microglia) that are capable of recognizing molecules frequently found in pathogens (also called Pathogen-Associated Molecular Patterns or PAMPs), or molecules that are released by damaged cells (also called Damage-Associated Molecular Patterns or DAMPs)

Phagocytosis

A process by which a cell ingests or engulfs other cells or particles.

Pro-inflammatory cytokine

A cytokine that is released from immune cells and promotes inflammation. Examples of proinflammatory cytokines include IL-1, IL-12, IL-18, IFN-γ, TNF-α etc.

Homeostatic microglia

Physiologically favorable microglial phenotype characterized by balanced pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory processes as well as functional benefits for neuronal viability.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)

Unstable damage-causing oxygen-containing molecules that easily react with DNA, RNA and proteins in cells.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have no conflict of interest.


References

[1] Organization WH. (2015). World report on ageing and health. (Luxembourg: World Health Organization).
[2] Herrmann N , Chau S , Kircanski I , Lanctot K . Current and Emerging Drug Treatment Options for Alzheimer’s Disease. Drugs. 2011; 71 : 2031–65.21985169
[3] Herrmann N , Lanctot K , Hogan D . Pharmacological recommendations for the symptomatic treatment of dementia: the Canadian Consensus Conference on the Diagnosis and Treatment of Dementia 2012. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013; 5 : S5.24565367
[4] Hedden T , Gabrieli JD . Insights into the ageing mind: a view from cognitive neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5 : 87–96.14735112
[5] Levy R . Aging-Associated Cognitive Decline. Int Psychogeriatrics. 2005; 6 : 63–8.
[6] Glisky EL . (2007). Changes in Cognitive Function in Human Aging. (Boca Raton (FL): Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC.).
[7] Wilson R , Beckett LA , Barnes LL , Schneider JA , Bach J , Evans DA , Bennett DA . Individual differences in rates of change in cognitive abilities of older persons. Psychol Aging. 2002; 17 : 179–93.12061405
[8] Habib R , Nyberg L , Nilsson LG . Cognitive and non-cognitive factors contributing to the longitudinal identification of successful older adults in the betula study. Neuropsychol Dev Cogn B Aging Neuropsychol Cogn. 2007; 14 : 257–73.17453560
[9] Montine TJ , Cholerton BA , Corrada MM , Edland SD , Flanagan ME , Hemmy LS , Kawas CH , White LR . Concepts for brain aging: resistance, resilience, reserve, and compensation. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019; 11 : 22.30857563
[10] Baumgart M , Snyder HM , Carrillo MC , Fazio S , Kim H , Johns H . Summary of the evidence on modifiable risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia: A population-based perspective. Alzheimers Dement. 2015; 11 : 718–26.26045020
[11] Clare L , Wu Y-T , Teale JC , MacLeod C , Matthews F , Brayne C , Woods B , team CF-Ws. Potentially modifiable lifestyle factors, cognitive reserve, and cognitive function in later life: A cross-sectional study. PLoS Medicine. 2017; 14 : e1002259–e.28323829
[12] Jackson PA , Pialoux V , Corbett D , Drogos L , Erickson KI , Eskes GA , Poulin MJ . Promoting brain health through exercise and diet in older adults: a physiological perspective. J Physiol. 2016; 594 : 4485–98.27524792
[13] Deary IJ , Corley J , Gow AJ , Harris SE , Houlihan LM , Marioni RE , Penke L , Rafnsson SB , Starr JM . Age-associated cognitive decline. Br Med Bulletin. 2009; 92 : 135–52.
[14] Phillips C . Lifestyle Modulators of Neuroplasticity: How Physical Activity, Mental Engagement, and Diet Promote Cognitive Health during Aging. Neural Plasticity. 2017: 22 .
[15] Valero J , Paris I , Sierra A . Lifestyle Shapes the Dialogue between Environment, Microglia, and Adult Neurogenesis. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2016; 7 : 442–53.26971802
[16] Cribbs DH , Berchtold NC , Perreau V , Coleman PD , Rogers J , Tenner AJ , Cotman CW . Extensive innate immune gene activation accompanies brain aging, increasing vulnerability to cognitive decline and neurodegeneration: a microarray study. J Neuroinflammation. 2012; 9 : 179.22824372
[17] Lynch MA . Age-related neuroinflammatory changes negatively impact on neuronal function. Front Aging Neurosci. 2010; 1 : 6.20552057
[18] Gabuzda D , Yankner BA . Physiology: Inflammation links ageing to the brain. Nature. 2013; 497 : 197–8.23636321
[19] Simen AA , Bordner KA , Martin MP , Moy LA , Barry LC . Cognitive dysfunction with aging and the role of inflammation. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2011; 2 : 175–95.23251749
[20] Denver P , McClean PL . Distinguishing normal brain aging from the development of Alzheimer’s disease: inflammation, insulin signaling and cognition. Neural Regen Res. 2018; 13 : 1719–30.30136683
[21] Rea IM , Gibson DS , McGilligan V , McNerlan SE , Alexander HD , Ross OA . Age and Age-Related Diseases: Role of Inflammation Triggers and Cytokines. Front Immunol. 2018; 9 : 586.29686666
[22] Rivest S . Regulation of innate immune responses in the brain. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 9 : 429–39.19461673
[23] Sousa C , Biber K , Michelucci A . Cellular and Molecular Characterization of Microglia: A Unique Immune Cell Population. Front Immunol. 2017; 8 : 198.28303137
[24] Hickman S , Izzy S , Sen P , Morsett L , El Khoury J . Microglia in neurodegeneration. Nat Neurosci. 2018; 21 : 1359–69.30258234
[25] Spittau B . Aging Microglia-Phenotypes, Functions and Implications for Age-Related Neurodegenerative Diseases. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017; 9 : 194.28659790
[26] Mittelbronn M , Dietz K , Schluesener HJ , Meyermann R . Local distribution of microglia in the normal adult human central nervous system differs by up to one order of magnitude. Acta Neuropathol. 2001; 101 : 249–55.11307625
[27] Nissl F . Ueber einige Beziehungen zwishcen Nerven zellerkrankungen und gliosen Erscheinnungen bei ver- schiedenen Psychosen. Archives of Psychiatry. 1899; 21 : 1–21.
[28] Robertson F . A microscopic demonstration of the normal and pathological histology of mesoglia cells. Br J Psychiatry. 1900; 46 : 724-.
[29] Bilbo SD , Schwarz JM . Early-life programming of later-life brain and behavior: a critical role for the immune system. Front Behav Neurosci. 2009; 3 : 14.19738918
[30] Lawson LJ , Perry VH , Gordon S . Turnover of resident microglia in the normal adult mouse brain. Neuroscience. 1992; 48 : 405–15.1603325
[31] Goldberg EL , Dixit VD . Drivers of age-related inflammation and strategies for healthspan extension. Immunol Rev. 2015; 265 : 63–74.25879284
[32] Ransohoff RM , Perry VH . Microglial physiology: unique stimuli, specialized responses. Annu Rev Immunol. 2009; 27 : 119–45.19302036
[33] Kettenmann H , Hanisch UK , Noda M , Verkhratsky A . Physiology of Microglia. Physiological Rev. 2011; 91 : 461–553.
[34] Pocock JM , Kettenmann H . Neurotransmitter receptors on microglia. Trends Neurosci. 2007; 30 : 527–35.17904651
[35] Kielian T . Toll-like receptors in central nervous system glial inflammation and homeostasis. J Neurosci Res. 2006; 83 : 711–30.16541438
[36] Chen GY , Nunez G . Sterile inflammation: sensing and reacting to damage. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010; 10 : 826–37.21088683
[37] Andreasson KI , Bachstetter AD , Colonna M , Ginhoux F , Holmes C , Lamb B , Landreth G , Lee DC , Low D , Lynch MA , Monsonego A , O’Banion MK , Pekny M , Targeting innate immunity for neurodegenerative disorders of the central nervous system. J Neurochem. 2016; 138 : 653–93.27248001
[38] Davalos D , Grutzendler J , Yang G , Kim JV , Zuo Y , Jung S , Littman DR , Dustin ML , Gan W-B . ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat Neurosci. 2005; 8 : 752–8.15895084
[39] Nimmerjahn A , Kirchhoff F , Helmchen F . Resting microglial cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science. 2005; 308 : 1314–8.15831717
[40] Szepesi Z , Manouchehrian O , Bachiller S , Deierborg T . Bidirectional Microglia-Neuron Communication in Health and Disease. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018; 12 : 323.30319362
[41] Neumann H , Kotter MR , Franklin RJM . Debris clearance by microglia: an essential link between degeneration and regeneration. Brain. 2009; 132 : 288–95.18567623
[42] Hanisch UK . Microglia as a source and target of cytokines. Glia. 2002; 40 : 140–55.12379902
[43] Nakamura Y . Regulating factors for microglial activation. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002; 25 : 945–53.12186424
[44] Ferrini F , De Koninck Y . Microglia control neuronal network excitability via BDNF signalling. Neural Plast. 2013; 2013 : 429815.24089642
[45] David S , Kroner A . Repertoire of microglial and macrophage responses after spinal cord injury. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2011; 12 : 388–99.21673720
[46] Kitayama M , Ueno M , Itakura T , Yamashita T . Activated microglia inhibit axonal growth through RGMa. PLoS One. 2011; 6 : e25234.21957482
[47] Hu X , Leak RK , Shi Y , Suenaga J , Gao Y , Zheng P , Chen J . Microglial and macrophage polarization-new prospects for brain repair. Nat Rev Neurol. 2015; 11 : 56–64.25385337
[48] Xu H , Wang Z , Li J , Wu H , Peng Y , Fan L , Chen J , Gu C , Yan F , Wang L , Chen G . The Polarization States of Microglia in TBI: A New Paradigm for Pharmacological Intervention. Neural Plast. 2017; 2017 : 5405104.28255460
[49] Franceschi C , Campisi J . Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its potential contribution to age-associated diseases. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014; 69 Suppl 1 : S4–9.24833586
[50] Franceschi C , Capri M , Monti D , Giunta S , Olivieri F , Sevini F , Panourgia MP , Invidia L , Celani L , Scurti M , Cevenini E , Castellani GC , Salvioli S . Inflammaging and anti-inflammaging: a systemic perspective on aging and longevity emerged from studies in humans. Mech Ageing Dev. 2007; 128 : 92–105.17116321
[51] Streit W , Sammons N , Kuhns A , Sparks D . Dystrophic microglia in the aging human brain. Glia. 2004; 45 : 208–12.14730714
[52] Wong WT . Microglial aging in the healthy CNS: phenotypes, drivers, and rejuvenation. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013; 7 : 22.23493481
[53] Sierra A , Gottfried-Blackmore AC , McEwen BS , Bulloch K . Microglia derived from aging mice exhibit an altered inflammatory profile. Glia. 2007; 55 : 412–24.17203473
[54] Streit W , Braak H , Xue QS , Bechmann I . Dystrophic (senescent) rather than activated microglial cells are associated with tau pathology and likely precede neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 2009; 118 : 475–85.19513731
[55] Chung HY , Cesari M , Anton S , Marzetti E , Giovannini S , Seo AY , Carter C , Yu BP , Leeuwenburgh C . Molecular inflammation: underpinnings of aging and age-related diseases. Ageing Res Rev. 2009; 8 : 18–30.18692159
[56] Von Bernhardi R , Tichauer JE , Eugenin J . Aging-dependent changes of microglial cells and their relevance for neurodegenerative disorders. J Neurochem. 2010; 112 : 1099–114.20002526
[57] Lucin KM , Wyss-Coray T . Immune activation in brain aging and neurodegeneration: too much or too little? Neuron. 2009; 64 : 110–22.19840553
[58] Baron R , Babcock AA , Nemirovsky A , Finsen B , Monsonego A . Accelerated microglial pathology is associated with Abeta plaques in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Aging Cell. 2014; 13 : 584–95.24641683
[59] Lai AY , McLaurin J . Clearance of amyloid-beta peptides by microglia and macrophages: the issue of what, when and where. Future Neurol. 2012; 7 : 165–76.22737039
[60] Hansen DV , Hanson JE , Sheng M . Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. J Cell Biol. 2018; 217 : 459–72.29196460
[61] Krabbe G , Halle A , Matyash V , Rinnenthal JL , Eom GD , Bernhardt U , Miller KR , Prokop S , Kettenmann H , Heppner FL . Functional impairment of microglia coincides with Beta-amyloid deposition in mice with Alzheimer-like pathology. PLoS One. 2013; 8 : e60921.23577177
[62] Zuroff L , Daley D , Black KL , Koronyo-Hamaoui M . Clearance of cerebral Abeta in Alzheimer’s disease: reassessing the role of microglia and monocytes. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2017; 74 : 2167–201.28197669
[63] Letiembre M , Hao W , Liu Y , Walter S , Mihaljevic I , Rivest S , Hartmann T , Fassbender K . Innate immune receptor expression in normal brain aging. Neuroscience. 2007; 146 : 248–54.17293054
[64] Von Bernhardi R , Eugenín-von Bernhardi L , Eugenín J . Microglial cell dysregulation in brain aging and neurodegeneration. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015; 7 .
[65] Marschallinger J , Iram T , Zardeneta M , Lee SE , Lehallier B , Haney MS , Pluvinage JV , Mathur V , Hahn O , Morgens DW , Kim J , Tevini J , Felder TK , Lipid-droplet-accumulating microglia represent a dysfunctional and proinflammatory state in the aging brain. Nat Neurosci. 2020; 23 : 194–208.31959936
[66] Fricker M , Neher JJ , Zhao JW , Thery C , Tolkovsky AM , Brown GC . MFG-E8 mediates primary phagocytosis of viable neurons during neuroinflammation. J Neurosci. 2012; 32 : 2657–66.22357850
[67] Neher JJ , Neniskyte U , Brown GC . Primary phagocytosis of neurons by inflamed microglia: potential roles in neurodegeneration. Front Pharmacol. 2012; 3 : 27.22403545
[68] Luo XG , Ding JQ , Chen SD . Microglia in the aging brain: relevance to neurodegeneration. Mol Neurodegener. 2010; 5 : 12.20334662
[69] Kim YS , Joh TH . Microglia, major player in the brain inflammation: their roles in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Exp Mol Med. 2006; 38 : 333–47.16953112
[70] Flanary B , Sammons N , Nguyen C , Walker D , Streit W . Evidence that aging and amyloid promote microglial cell senescence. Rejuvenation Res. 2007; 10 : 61–74.17378753
[71] Felsky D , Roostaei T , Nho K , Risacher S , Bradshaw E , Petyuk V , Schneider J , Saykin A , Bennett D , De Jager P . Neuropathological correlates and genetic architecture of microglial activation in elderly human brain. Nature Communications. 2019; 10 : 409.
[72] Davies DS , Ma J , Jegathees T , Goldsbury C . Microglia show altered morphology and reduced arborization in human brain during aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol. 2017; 27 : 795–808.27862631
[73] Streit WJ , Xue Q-S , Tischer J , Bechmann I . Microglial pathology. Acta Neuropathologica Communications. 2014; 2 : 142.25257319
[74] Norden DM , Muccigrosso MM , Godbout JP . Microglial priming and enhanced reactivity to secondary insult in aging, and traumatic CNS injury, and neurodegenerative disease. Neuropharm. 2015; 96 : 29–41.
[75] Tay TL , Béchade C , D’Andrea I , St-Pierre MK , Henry MS , Roumier A , Tremblay ME . Microglia Gone Rogue: Impacts on Psychiatric Disorders across the Lifespan. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017; 10 : 421.29354029
[76] Fonken LK , Frank MG , Kitt MM , D’Angelo HM , Norden DM , Weber MD , Barrientos RM , Godbout JP , Watkins LR , Maier SF . The Alarmin HMGB1 Mediates Age-Induced Neuroinflammatory Priming. J Neurosci. 2016; 36 : 7946–56.27466339
[77] Niraula A , Sheridan J , Godbout J . Microglia Priming with Aging and Stress. Neuropsychopharm. 2017; 42 : 318–33.
[78] Minett T , Classey J , Matthews FE , Fahrenhold M , Taga M , Brayne C , Ince PG , Nicoll JA , Boche D . Microglial immunophenotype in dementia with Alzheimer’s pathology. J Neuroinflammation. 2016; 13 : 135.27256292
[79] Styren SD , Civin WH , Rogers J . Molecular, cellular, and pathologic characterization of HLA-DR immunoreactivity in normal elderly and Alzheimer’s disease brain. Exp Neurology. 1990; 110 : 93–104.
[80] Xiang Z , Haroutunian V , Ho L , Purohit D , Pasinetti GM . Microglia activation in the brain as inflammatory biomarker of Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology and clinical dementia. Dis Markers. 2006; 22 : 95–102.16410654
[81] Perez-Nievas BG , Stein TD , Tai H-C , Dols-Icardo O , Scotton TC , Barroeta-Espar I , Fernandez-Carballo L , de Munain EL , Perez J , Marquie M , Serrano-Pozo A , Frosch MP , Lowe V , Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to Alzheimer’s pathology. Brain. 2013; 136 : 2510–26.23824488
[82] Cagnin A , Brooks DJ , Kennedy AM , Gunn RN , Myers R , Turkheimer FE , Jones T , Banati RB . In-vivo measurement of activated microglia in dementia. Lancet. 2001; 358 : 461–7.11513911
[83] Passamonti L , Tsvetanov K , Jones PS , Bevan-Jones WR , Arnold R , Borchert RJ , Mak FK , Su L , O’Brien JT , Rowe JB . Neuroinflammation and functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease: interactive influences on cognitive performance. bioRxiv. 2019.
[84] Parbo P , Ismail R , Hansen KV , Amidi A , Mårup FH , Gottrup H , Brændgaard H , Eriksson BO , Eskildsen SF , Lund TE , Tietze A , Edison P , Pavese N , Brain inflammation accompanies amyloid in the majority of mild cognitive impairment cases due to Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2017; 140 : 2002–11.28575151
[85] Edison P , Archer HA , Gerhard A , Hinz R , Pavese N , Turkheimer FE , Hammers A , Tai YF , Fox N , Kennedy A , Rossor M , Brooks DJ . Microglia, amyloid, and cognition in Alzheimer’s disease: An [11C](R)PK11195-PET and [11C]PIB-PET study. Neurobiol Disease. 2008; 32 : 412–9.
[86] Kreisl WC , Lyoo CH , McGwier M , Snow J , Jenko KJ , Kimura N , Corona W , Morse CL , Zoghbi SS , Pike VW , McMahon FJ , Turner RS , Innis RB . In vivo radioligand binding to translocator protein correlates with severity of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2013; 136 : 2228–38.23775979
[87] Yasuno F , Kosaka J , Ota M , Higuchi M , Ito H , Fujimura Y , Nozaki S , Takahashi S , Mizukami K , Asada T , Suhara T . Increased binding of peripheral benzodiazepine receptor in mild cognitive impairment-dementia converters measured by positron emission tomography with [(1)(1)C]DAA1106. Psychiatry Res. 2012; 203 : 67–74.22892349
[88] Streit W , Khoshbouei H , Bechmann I . Dystrophic microglia in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Glia. 2020; 68 : 845–54.31922322
[89] Efthymiou AG , Goate AM . Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Molecular Neurodegeneration. 2017; 12 : 43.28549481
[90] Fan Z , Okello AA , Brooks DJ , Edison P . Longitudinal influence of microglial activation and amyloid on neuronal function in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2015; 138 : 3685–98.26510952
[91] Venneti S , Wiley CA , Kofler J . Imaging microglial activation during neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2009; 4 : 227–43.19052878
[92] Guerreiro R , Wojtas A , Bras J , Carrasquillo M , Rogaeva E , Majounie E , Cruchaga C , Sassi C , Kauwe JS , Younkin S , Hazrati L , Collinge J , Pocock J , TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368 : 117–27.23150934
[93] Hooli BV , Parrado AR , Mullin K , Yip WK , Liu T , Roehr JT , Qiao D , Jessen F , Peters O , Becker T , Ramirez A , Lange C , Bertram L , The rare TREM2 R47H variant exerts only a modest effect on Alzheimer disease risk. Neurology. 2014; 83 : 1353–8.25186855
[94] Jonsson T , Stefansson H , Steinberg S , Jonsdottir I , Jonsson PV , Snaedal J , Bjornsson S , ttenlocher J , Levey AI , Lah JJ , Rujescu D , Hampel H , Giegling I , Variant of TREM2 Associated with the Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease. N Engl J Med. 2012; 368 : 107–16.23150908
[95] Zhang B , Gaiteri C , Bodea LG , Wang Z , McElwee J , Podtelezhnikov AA , Zhang C , Xie T , Tran L , Dobrin R , Fluder E , Clurman B , Melquist S , Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. 2013; 153 : 707–20.23622250
[96] Bertram L , Lange C , Mullin K , Parkinson M , Hsiao M , Hogan MF , Schjeide BMM , Hooli B , DiVito J , Ionita I , Jiang H , Laird N , Moscarillo T , Genome-wide Association Analysis Reveals Putative Alzheimer’s Disease Susceptibility Loci in Addition to APOE. Am J Hum Genet. 2008; 83 : 623–32.18976728
[97] Bradshaw EM , Chibnik LB , Keenan BT , Ottoboni L , Raj T , Tang A , Rosenkrantz LL , Imboywa S , Lee M , Von Korff A , Morris MC , Evans DA , Johnson K , CD33 Alzheimer’s disease locus: Altered monocyte function and amyloid biology. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16 : 848–50.23708142
[98] Naj AC , Jun G , Beecham GW , Wang LS , Vardarajan BN , Buros J , Gallins PJ , Buxbaum JD , Jarvik GP , Crane PK , Larson EB , Bird TD , Boeve BF , Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 43 : 436–41.21460841
[99] Lambert JC , Heath S , Even G , Campion D , Sleegers K , Hiltunen M , Combarros O , Zelenika D , Bullido MJ , Tavernier B , Letenneur L , Bettens K , Berr C , Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet. 2009; 41 : 1094–9.19734903
[100] Thambisetty M , An Y , Nalls M , Sojkova J , Swaminathan S , Zhou Y , Singleton AB , Wong DF , Ferrucci L , Saykin AJ , Resnick SM . Effect of complement CR1 on brain amyloid burden during aging and its modification by APOE genotype. Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 73 : 422–8.23022416
[101] Hollingworth P , Harold D , Sims R , Gerrish A , Lambert JC , Carrasquillo MM , Abraham R , Hamshere ML , Pahwa JS , Moskvina V , Dowzell K , Jones N , Stretton A , Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 43 : 429–35.21460840
[102] Villegas-Llerena C , Phillips A , Garcia-Reitboeck P , Hardy J , Pocock JM . Microglial genes regulating neuroinflammation in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Opinion Neurobiol. 2016; 36 : 74–81.
[103] Olah M , Patrick E , Villani A-C , Xu J , White CC , Ryan KJ , Piehowski P , Kapasi A , Nejad P , Cimpean M , Connor S , Yung CJ , Frangieh M , A transcriptomic atlas of aged human microglia. Nature Communications. 2018; 9 : 539.
[104] Persson N , Ghisletta P , Dahle CL , Bender AR , Yang Y , Yuan P , Daugherty AM , Raz N . Regional brain shrinkage over two years: individual differences and effects of pro-inflammatory genetic polymorphisms. 2014.
[105] Raz N , Daugherty AM , Bender AR , Dahle CL , Land S . Volume of the hippocampal subfields in healthy adults: differential associations with age and a pro-inflammatory genetic variant. Brain Struct Funct. 2015; 220 : 2663–74.24947882
[106] Raz N , Yang Y , Dahle CL , Land S . Volume of white matter hyperintensities in healthy adults: contribution of age, vascular risk factors, and inflammation-related genetic variants. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012; 1822 : 361–9.21889590
[107] Huang CW , Hsu SW , Tsai SJ , Chen NC , Liu ME , Lee CC , Huang SH , Chang WN , Chang YT , Tsai WC , Chang CC . Genetic effect of interleukin-1 beta (C-511T) polymorphism on the structural covariance network and white matter integrity in Alzheimer’s disease. 2017.
[108] Daugherty A , Hoagey D , Kennedy K , Rodrigue K . Genetic predisposition for inflammation exacerbates effects of striatal iron content on cognitive switching ability in healthy aging. 2019.
[109] Vom Berg J , Prokop S , Miller KR , Obst J , Kälin RE , Lopategui-Cabezas I , Wegner A , Mair F , Schipke CG , Peters O . Inhibition of IL-12/IL-23 signaling reduces Alzheimer’s disease–like pathology and cognitive decline. Nature Medicine. 2012; 18 : 1812.
[110] He P , Zhong Z , Lindholm K , Berning L , Lee W , Lemere C , Staufenbiel M , Li R , Shen Y . Deletion of tumor necrosis factor death receptor inhibits amyloid beta generation and prevents learning and memory deficits in Alzheimer’s mice. J Cell Biol. 2007; 178 : 829–41.17724122
[111] Kiyota T , Okuyama S , Swan RJ , Jacobsen MT , Gendelman HE , Ikezu T . CNS expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-4 attenuates Alzheimer’s disease-like pathogenesis in APP+PS1 bigenic mice. FASEB J. 2010; 24 : 3093–102.20371618
[112] Jin X , Liu M-Y , Zhang D-F , Zhong X , Du K , Qian P , Yao W-F , Gao H , Wei M-J . Baicalin mitigates cognitive impairment and protects neurons from microglia-mediated neuroinflammation via suppressing NLRP3 inflammasomes and TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway. CNS Neuroscience &amp; Therapeutics. 2019; 25 : 575–90.30676698
[113] Jacobsen JS , Wu C-C , Redwine JM , Comery TA , Arias R , Bowlby M , Martone R , Morrison JH , Pangalos MN , Reinhart PH , Bloom FE . Early-onset behavioral and synaptic deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103 : 5161–6.16549764
[114] Mudò G , Frinchi M , Nuzzo D , Scaduto P , Plescia F , Massenti MF , Di Carlo M , Cannizzaro C , Cassata G , Cicero L , Ruscica M , Belluardo N , Grimaldi LM . Anti-inflammatory and cognitive effects of interferon-β1a (IFNβ1a) in a rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2019; 16 : 44.30777084
[115] Barrientos RM , Hein AM , Frank MG , Watkins LR , Maier SF . Intracisternal interleukin-1 receptor antagonist prevents postoperative cognitive decline and neuroinflammatory response in aged rats. J Neurosci. 2012; 32 : 14641–8.23077050
[116] Elmore MRP , Hohsfield LA , Kramár EA , Soreq L , Lee RJ , Pham ST , Najafi AR , Spangenberg EE , Wood MA , West BL , Green KN . Replacement of microglia in the aged brain reverses cognitive, synaptic, and neuronal deficits in mice. Aging Cell. 2018; 17 : e12832.30276955
[117] Drummond E , Wisniewski T . Alzheimer’s disease: experimental models and reality. Acta Neuropathol. 2017; 133 : 155–75.28025715
[118] Foidl BM , Humpel C . Can mouse models mimic sporadic Alzheimer’s disease? Neural Regen Res. 2020; 15 : 401–6.31571648
[119] Mitchell SJ , Scheibye-Knudsen M , Longo DL , de Cabo R . Animal models of aging research: implications for human aging and age-related diseases. Annu Rev Anim Biosci. 2015; 3 : 283–303.25689319
[120] Knezevic D , Mizrahi R . Molecular imaging of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry. 2018; 80 : 123–31.28533150
[121] Katsel P , Tan W , Haroutunian V . Gain in Brain Immunity in the Oldest-Old Differentiates Cognitively Normal from Demented Individuals. PLoS One. 2009; 4 : e7642.19865478
[122] Richard KL , Filali M , Préfontaine P , Rivest S . Toll-Like Receptor 2 Acts as a Natural Innate Immune Receptor to Clear Amyloid β1–42 and Delay the Cognitive Decline in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. J Neurosci. 2008; 28 : 5784.18509040
[123] Avinun R , Nevo A , Knodt AR , Elliott ML , Hariri AR . A genome-wide association study-derived polygenic score for interleukin-1beta is associated with hippocampal volume in two samples. Hum Brain Mapp. 2019; 40 : 3910–7.31119842
[124] Ajami B , Bennett JL , Krieger C , Tetzlaff W , Rossi FM . Local self-renewal can sustain CNS microglia maintenance and function throughout adult life. Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10 : 1538–43.18026097
[125] Mildner A , Schmidt H , Nitsche M , Merkler D , Hanisch UK , Mack M , Heikenwalder M , Bruck W , Priller J , Prinz M . Microglia in the adult brain arise from Ly-6ChiCCR2+ monocytes only under defined host conditions. Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10 : 1544–53.18026096
[126] Simard AR , Soulet D , Gowing G , Julien JP , Rivest S . Bone marrow-derived microglia play a critical role in restricting senile plaque formation in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 2006; 49 : 489–502.16476660
[127] Perry VH , Holmes C . Microglial priming in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014; 10 : 217–24.24638131
[128] Gomez-Nicola D , Perry VH . Microglial dynamics and role in the healthy and diseased brain: a paradigm of functional plasticity. Neuroscientist. 2015; 21 : 169–84.24722525
[129] Holmes C , Cunningham C , Zotova E , Woolford J , Dean C , Kerr S , Culliford D , Perry VH . Systemic inflammation and disease progression in Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 2009; 73 : 768–74.19738171
[130] Perry VH . Contribution of systemic inflammation to chronic neurodegeneration. Acta Neuropathol. 2010; 120 : 277–86.20644946
[131] Colombo E , Farina C . Astrocytes: Key Regulators of Neuroinflammation. Trends Immunol. 2016; 37 : 608–20.27443914
[132] Skaper SD , Facci L , Zusso M , Giusti P . An Inflammation-Centric View of Neurological Disease: Beyond the Neuron. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018; 12 : 72.29618972
[133] Peferoen L , Kipp M , van der Valk P , van Noort JM , Amor S . Oligodendrocyte-microglia cross-talk in the central nervous system. Immunology. 2014; 141 : 302–13.23981039
[134] Psaltopoulou T , Sergentanis TN , Panagiotakos DB , Sergentanis IN , Kosti R , Scarmeas N . Mediterranean diet, stroke, cognitive impairment, and depression: A meta-analysis. Ann Neurol. 2013; 74 : 580–91.23720230
[135] Singh B , Parsaik AK , Mielke MM , Erwin PJ , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Roberts RO . Association of mediterranean diet with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014; 39 : 271–82.24164735
[136] Cao L , Tan L , Wang HF , Jiang T , Zhu XC , Lu H , Tan MS , Yu JT . Dietary Patterns and Risk of Dementia: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies. Mol Neurobiol. 2016; 53 : 6144–54.26553347
[137] Anastasiou CA , Yannakoulia M , Kosmidis MH , Dardiotis E , Hadjigeorgiou GM , Sakka P , Arampatzi X , Bougea A , Labropoulos I , Scarmeas N . Mediterranean diet and cognitive health: Initial results from the Hellenic Longitudinal Investigation of Ageing and Diet. PLoS One. 2017; 12 : e0182048.28763509
[138] Trichopoulou A , Kyrozis A , Rossi M , Katsoulis M , Trichopoulos D , La Vecchia C , Lagiou P . Mediterranean diet and cognitive decline over time in an elderly Mediterranean population. Eur J Nutr. 2015; 54 : 1311–21.25482573
[139] Tangney CC , Li H , Wang Y , Barnes L , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , Morris MC . Relation of DASH- and Mediterranean-like dietary patterns to cognitive decline in older persons. Neurology. 2014; 83 : 1410–6.25230996
[140] Wengreen HJ , Nelson C , Munger R , Corcoran C . DASH diet adherence scores and cognitive decline and dementia among aging men and women: Cache County study of memory health and aging. Alzheimers Dement. 2009; 5 : P128.
[141] McEvoy CT , Guyer H , Langa KM , Yaffe K . Neuroprotective Diets Are Associated with Better Cognitive Function: The Health and Retirement Study. J Am Geriatrics Society. 2017.
[142] Morris MC , Tangney CC , Wang Y , Sacks FM , Barnes LL , Bennett DA , Aggarwal NT . MIND diet slows cognitive decline with aging. Alzheimers Dement. 2015; 11 : 1015–22.26086182
[143] Smyth A , Dehghan M , O’donnell M , Anderson C , Teo K , Gao P , Sleight P , Dagenais G , Probstfield JL , Mente A . Healthy eating and reduced risk of cognitive decline A cohort from 40 countries. Neurology. 2015; 84 : 2258–65.25948720
[144] Ozawa M , Shipley M , Kivimaki M , Singh-Manoux A , Brunner EJ . Dietary pattern, inflammation and cognitive decline: The Whitehall II prospective cohort study. Clin Nutr. 2017; 36 : 506–12.26874911
[145] Shakersain B , Santoni G , Larsson SC , Faxen-Irving G , Fastbom J , Fratiglioni L , Xu W . Prudent diet may attenuate the adverse effects of Western diet on cognitive decline. Alzheimers Dement. 2016; 12 : 100–9.26342761
[146] Kesse-Guyot E , Fezeu L , Andreeva VA , Touvier M , Scalbert A , Hercberg S , Galan P . Total and specific polyphenol intakes in midlife are associated with cognitive function measured 13 years later. J Nutr. 2012; 142 : 76–83.22090468
[147] Letenneur L , Proust-Lima C , Le Gouge A , Dartigues JF , Barberger-Gateau P . Flavonoid intake and cognitive decline over a 10-year period. Am J Epidemiol. 2007; 165 : 1364–71.17369607
[148] van Gelder BM , Tijhuis M , Kalmijn S , Kromhout D . Fish consumption, n-3 fatty acids, and subsequent 5-y cognitive decline in elderly men: the Zutphen Elderly Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007; 85 : 1142–7.17413117
[149] Laitinen MH , Ngandu T , Rovio S , Helkala EL , Uusitalo U , Viitanen M , Nissinen A , Tuomilehto J , Soininen H , Kivipelto M . Fat intake at midlife and risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2006; 22 : 99–107.16710090
[150] Kent K , Charlton K , Roodenrys S , Batterham M , Potter J , Traynor V , Gilbert H , Morgan O , Richards R . Consumption of anthocyanin-rich cherry juice for 12 weeks improves memory and cognition in older adults with mild-to-moderate dementia. Eur J Nutr. 2017; 56 : 333–41.26482148
[151] Nilsson A , Radeborg K , Salo I , Bjorck I . Effects of supplementation with n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on cognitive performance and cardiometabolic risk markers in healthy 51 to 72 years old subjects: a randomized controlled cross-over study. Nutr J. 2012; 11 : 99.23173831
[152] Zhang YP , Miao RJ , Li Q , Wu TF , Ma F . Effects of DHA Supplementation on Hippocampal Volume and Cognitive Function in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment: A 12-Month Randomized, Double- Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial. J Alzheimers Disease. 2017; 55 : 497–507.27716665
[153] Polidori MC , Pratico D , Mangialasche F , Mariani E , Aust O , Anlasik T , Mang N , Pientka L , Stahl W , Sies H , Mecocci P , Nelles G . High fruit and vegetable intake is positively correlated with antioxidant status and cognitive performance in healthy subjects. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009; 17 : 921–7.19542607
[154] Conboy L , Foley AG , O’Boyle NM , Lawlor M , Gallagher HC , Murphy KJ , Regan CM . Curcumin-induced degradation of PKC delta is associated with enhanced dentate NCAM PSA expression and spatial learning in adult and aged Wistar rats. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009; 77 : 1254–65.19161989
[155] Dong S , Zeng Q , Mitchell ES , Xiu J , Duan Y , Li C , Tiwari JK , Hu Y , Cao X , Zhao Z . Curcumin enhances neurogenesis and cognition in aged rats: implications for transcriptional interactions related to growth and synaptic plasticity. PLoS One. 2012; 7 : e31211.22359574
[156] Andres-Lacueva C , Shukitt-Hale B , Galli RL , Jauregui O , Lamuela-Raventos RM , Joseph JA . Anthocyanins in aged blueberry-fed rats are found centrally and may enhance memory. Nutr Neurosci. 2005; 8 : 111–20.16053243
[157] Joseph JA , Shukitt-Hale B , Denisova NA , Bielinski D , Martin A , McEwen JJ , Bickford PC . Reversals of age-related declines in neuronal signal transduction, cognitive, and motor behavioral deficits with blueberry, spinach, or strawberry dietary supplementation. J Neurosci. 1999; 19 : 8114–21.10479711
[158] Shukitt-Hale B , Cheng V , Joseph JA . Effects of blackberries on motor and cognitive function in aged rats. Nutr Neurosci. 2009; 12 : 135–40.19356316
[159] Thangthaeng N , Poulose SM , Gomes SM , Miller MG , Bielinski DF , Shukitt-Hale B . Tart cherry supplementation improves working memory, hippocampal inflammation, and autophagy in aged rats. Geroscience. 2016; 38 : 393–404.
[160] Casadesus G , Shukitt-Hale B , Stellwagen HM , Zhu X , Lee HG , Smith MA , Joseph JA . Modulation of hippocampal plasticity and cognitive behavior by short-term blueberry supplementation in aged rats. Nutr Neurosci. 2004; 7 : 309–16.15682927
[161] Goyarzu P , Malin DH , Lau FC , Taglialatela G , Moon WD , Jennings R , Moy E , Moy D , Lippold S , Shukitt-Hale B , Joseph JA . Blueberry supplemented diet: effects on object recognition memory and nuclear factor-kappa B levels in aged rats. Nutr Neurosci. 2004; 7 : 75–83.15279493
[162] Joseph JA , Shukitt-Hale B , Denisova NA , Prior RL , Cao G , Martin A , Taglialatela G , Bickford PC . Long-term dietary strawberry, spinach, or vitamin E supplementation retards the onset of age-related neuronal signal-transduction and cognitive behavioral deficits. J Neurosci. 1998; 18 : 8047–55.9742171
[163] Malin DH , Lee DR , Goyarzu P , Chang YH , Ennis LJ , Beckett E , Shukitt-Hale B , Joseph JA . Short-term blueberry-enriched diet prevents and reverses object recognition memory loss in aging rats. Nutrition. 2011; 27 : 338–42.21168307
[164] Williams CM , Mohsen MA , Vauzour D , Rendeiro C , Butler LT , Ellis JA . Blueberry-induced changes in spatial working memory correlate with changes in hippocampal CREB phosphorylation and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008; 45 .
[165] Gao H , Yan PP , Zhang S , Huang H , Huang FH , Sun TP , Deng QC , Huang QD , Chen SJ , Ye KQ , Xu JQ , Liu LG . Long-Term Dietary Alpha-Linolenic Acid Supplement Alleviates Cognitive Impairment Correlate with Activating Hippocampal CREB Signaling in Natural Aging Rats. Mol Neurobiol. 2016; 53 : 4772–86.26328539
[166] Cutuli D , Pagani M , Caporali P , Galbusera A , Laricchiuta D , Foti F , Neri C , Spalletta G , Caltagirone C , Petrosini L , Gozzi A . Effects of Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation on Cognitive Functions and Neural Substrates: A Voxel-Based Morphometry Study in Aged Mice. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016; 8 : 38.26973513
[167] Kariv-Inbal Z , Yacobson S , Berkecz R , Peter M , Janaky T , Lutjohann D , Broersen LM , Hartmann T , Michaelson DM . The isoform-specific pathological effects of apoE4 in vivo are prevented by a fish oil (DHA) diet and are modified by cholesterol. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012; 28 : 667–83.22057027
[168] Cutuli D , De Bartolo P , Caporali P , Laricchiuta D , Foti F , Ronci M , Rossi C , Neri C , Spalletta G , Caltagirone C , Farioli-Vecchioli S , Petrosini L . n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids supplementation enhances hippocampal functionality in aged mice. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014; 6 : 220.25202271
[169] Perez SD , Du K , Rendeiro C , Wang L , Wu Q , Rubakhin SS , Vazhappilly R , Baxter JH , Sweedler JV , Rhodes JS . A unique combination of micronutrients rejuvenates cognitive performance in aged mice. Behav Brain Res. 2017; 320 : 97–112.27916687
[170] Scarmeas N , Anastasiou CA , Yannakoulia M . Nutrition and prevention of cognitive impairment. Lancet Neurology. 2018; 17 : 1006–15.30244829
[171] Klimova B , Valis M . Nutritional Interventions as Beneficial Strategies to Delay Cognitive Decline in Healthy Older Individuals. Nutrients. 2018; 10 .
[172] Chew EY , Clemons TE , Agrón E , Launer LJ , Grodstein F , Bernstein PS , for the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 Research G. Effect of Omega-3 Fatty Acids, Lutein/Zeaxanthin, or Other Nutrient Supplementation on Cognitive Function: The AREDS2 Randomized Clinical TrialEffect of Nutrient Supplementation on Cognitive FunctionEffect of Nutrient Supplementation on Cognitive Function. JAMA. 2015; 314 : 791–801.26305649
[173] Kryscio RJ , Abner EL , Caban-Holt A , Lovell M , Goodman P , Darke AK , Yee M , Crowley J , Schmitt FA . Association of Antioxidant Supplement Use and Dementia in the Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease by Vitamin E and Selenium Trial (PREADViSE). JAMA Neurol. 2017; 74 : 567–73.28319243
[174] Kang JH , Cook NR , Manson JE , Buring JE , Albert CM , Grodstein F . Vitamin E, vitamin C, beta carotene, and cognitive function among women with or at risk of cardiovascular disease: The Women’s Antioxidant and Cardiovascular Study. Circulation. 2009; 119 : 2772–80.19451353
[175] van de Rest O , Geleijnse JM , Kok FJ , van Staveren WA , Dullemeijer C , Olderikkert MG , Beekman AT , de Groot CP . Effect of fish oil on cognitive performance in older subjects: a randomized, controlled trial. Neurology. 2008; 71 : 430–8.18678826
[176] Geleijnse JM , Giltay EJ , Kromhout D . Effects of n-3 fatty acids on cognitive decline: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in stable myocardial infarction patients. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia. 2012; 8 : 278–87.
[177] Moran C , Scotto di Palumbo A , Bramham J , Moran A , Rooney B , De Vito G , Egan B . Effects of a Six-Month Multi-Ingredient Nutrition Supplement Intervention of Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids, vitamin D, Resveratrol, and Whey Protein on Cognitive Function in Older Adults: A Randomised, Double-Blind, Controlled Trial. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2018; 5 : 175–83.29972210
[178] Knight A , Bryan J , Wilson C , Hodgson JM , Davis CR , Murphy KJ . The Mediterranean Diet and Cognitive Function among Healthy Older Adults in a 6-Month Randomised Controlled Trial: The MedLey Study. Nutrients. 2016; 8 .
[179] Gleason CE , Carlsson CM , Barnet JH , Meade SA , Setchell KD , Atwood CS , Johnson SC , Ries ML , Asthana S . A preliminary study of the safety, feasibility and cognitive efficacy of soy isoflavone supplements in older men and women. Age Ageing. 2009; 38 : 86–93.19054783
[180] Valls-Pedret C , Sala-Vila A , Serra-Mir M , Corella D , de la Torre R , Martinez-Gonzalez MA , Martinez-Lapiscina EH , Fito M , Perez-Heras A , Salas-Salvado J , Estruch R , Ros E . Mediterranean Diet and Age-Related Cognitive Decline A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama Internal Medicine. 2015; 175 : 1094–103.25961184
[181] Scheltens P , Twisk JWR , Blesa R , Scarpini E , von Arnim CAF , Bongers A , Harrison J , Swinkels SHN , Stam CJ , de Waal H , Wurtman RJ , Wieggers RL , Vellas B , Efficacy of Souvenaid in Mild Alzheimer’s Disease: Results from a Randomized, Controlled Trial. Journal of Alzheimers Disease. 2012; 31 : 225–36.
[182] Rikkert M , Verhey FR , Blesa R , von Arnim CAF , Bongers A , Harrison J , Sijben J , Scarpini E , Vandewoude MFJ , Vellas B , Witkamp R , Kamphuis P , Scheltens P . Tolerability and Safety of Souvenaid in Patients with Mild Alzheimer’s Disease: Results of Multi-Center, 24-Week, Open-Label Extension Study. Journal of Alzheimers Disease. 2015; 44 : 471–80.
[183] Martinez-Lapiscina EH , Clavero P , Toledo E , Estruch R , Salas-Salvado J , San Julian B , Sanchez-Tainta A , Ros E , Valls-Pedret C , Martinez-Gonzalez MA . Mediterranean diet improves cognition: the PREDIMED-NAVARRA randomised trial. Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 2013; 84 : 1318–25.
[184] Scheltens P , Kamphuis PJ , Verhey FR , Olde Rikkert MG , Wurtman RJ , Wilkinson D , Twisk JW , Kurz A . Efficacy of a medical food in mild Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized, controlled trial. Alzheimers Dement. 2010; 6 : 1–10 e1.20129316
[185] Krikorian R , Nash TA , Shidler MD , Shukitt-Hale B , Joseph JA . Concord grape juice supplementation improves memory function in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. Br J Nutr. 2010; 103 : 730–4.20028599
[186] Krikorian R , Shidler MD , Nash TA , Kalt W , Vinqvist-Tymchuk MR , Shukitt-Hale B , Joseph JA . Blueberry Supplementation Improves Memory in Older Adults. J Agric Food Chem. 2010; 58 : 3996–4000.20047325
[187] Terano T , Fujishiro S , Ban T , Yamamoto K , Tanaka T , Noguchi Y , Tamura Y , Yazawa K , Hirayama T . Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation improves the moderately severe dementia from thrombotic cerebrovascular diseases. Lipids. 1999; 34 Suppl : S345–6.10419198
[188] Pipingas A , Silberstein RB , Vitetta L , Rooy CV , Harris EV , Young JM , Frampton CM , Sali A , Nastasi J . Improved cognitive performance after dietary supplementation with a Pinus radiata bark extract formulation. Phytother Res. 2008; 22 : 1168–74.18683195
[189] Bo Y , Zhang X , Wang Y , You J , Cui H , Zhu Y , Pang W , Liu W , Jiang Y , Lu Q . The n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Supplementation Improved the Cognitive Function in the Chinese Elderly with Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Double-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients. 2017; 9 .
[190] Eriksdotter M , Vedin I , Falahati F , Freund-Levi Y , Hjorth E , Faxen-Irving G , Wahlund LO , Schultzberg M , Basun H , Cederholm T , Palmblad J . Plasma Fatty Acid Profiles in Relation to Cognition and Gender in Alzheimer’s Disease Patients During Oral Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation: The OmegAD Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015; 48 : 805–12.26402079
[191] Ryan J , Croft K , Mori T , Wesnes K , Spong J , Downey L , Kure C , Lloyd J , Stough C . An examination of the effects of the antioxidant Pycnogenol on cognitive performance, serum lipid profile, endocrinological and oxidative stress biomarkers in an elderly population. J Psychopharmacol. 2008; 22 : 553–62.18701642
[192] Kotani S , Sakaguchi E , Warashina S , Matsukawa N , Ishikura Y , Kiso Y , Sakakibara M , Yoshimoto T , Guo J , Yamashima T . Dietary supplementation of arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acids improves cognitive dysfunction. Neurosci Res. 2006; 56 : 159–64.16905216
[193] Hashimoto M , Kato S , Tanabe Y , Katakura M , Mamun AA , Ohno M , Hossain S , Onoda K , Yamaguchi S , Shido O . Beneficial effects of dietary docosahexaenoic acid intervention on cognitive function and mental health of the oldest elderly in Japanese care facilities and nursing homes. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017; 17 : 330–7.26822516
[194] Chiu C-C , Su K-P , Cheng T-C , Liu H-C , Chang C-J , Dewey ME , Stewart R , Huang S-Y . The effects of omega-3 fatty acids monotherapy in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment: A preliminary randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry. 2008; 32 : 1538–44.18573585
[195] Hooper C , De Souto Barreto P , Coley N , Cantet C , Cesari M , Andrieu S , Vellas B . Cognitive Changes with Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Non-Demented Older Adults with Low Omega-3 Index. J Nutr Health Aging. 2017; 21 : 988–93.29083439
[196] Yurko-Mauro K , McCarthy D , Rom D , Nelson EB , Ryan AS , Blackwell A , Salem N Jr. , Stedman M . Beneficial effects of docosahexaenoic acid on cognition in age-related cognitive decline. Alzheimers Dement. 2010; 6 : 456–64.20434961
[197] Milanski M , Degasperi G , Coope A , Morari J , Denis R , Cintra DE , Tsukumo DM , Anhe G , Amaral ME , Takahashi HK , Curi R , Oliveira HC , Carvalheira JB , Saturated fatty acids produce an inflammatory response predominantly through the activation of TLR4 signaling in hypothalamus: implications for the pathogenesis of obesity. J Neurosci. 2009; 29 : 359–70.19144836
[198] Posey KA , Clegg DJ , Printz RL , Byun J , Morton GJ , Vivekanandan-Giri A , Pennathur S , Baskin DG , Heinecke JW , Woods SC , Schwartz MW , Niswender KD . Hypothalamic proinflammatory lipid accumulation, inflammation, and insulin resistance in rats fed a high-fat diet. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009; 296 : E1003–12.19116375
[199] Wang J , Wang Z , Li B , Qiang Y , Yuan T , Tan X , Wang Z , Liu Z , Liu X . Lycopene attenuates western-diet-induced cognitive deficits via improving glycolipid metabolism dysfunction and inflammatory responses in gut–liver–brain axis. Int J Obesity. 2018.
[200] Spencer SJ , Basri B , Sominsky L , Soch A , Ayala MT , Reineck P , Gibson BC , Barrientos RM . High-fat diet worsens the impact of aging on microglial function and morphology in a region-specific manner. Neurobiol Aging. 2019; 74 : 121–34.30448612
[201] Yin Z , Raj DD , Schaafsma W , van der Heijden RA , Kooistra SM , Reijne AC , Zhang X , Moser J , Brouwer N , Heeringa P , Yi C-X , van Dijk G , Laman JD , Low-Fat Diet With Caloric Restriction Reduces White Matter Microglia Activation During Aging. Front Mol Neurosci. 2018; 11 .
[202] Ledreux A , Wang XZ , Schultzberg M , Granholm AC , Freeman LR . Detrimental effects of a high fat/high cholesterol diet on memory and hippocampal markers in aged rats. Behav Brain Res. 2016; 312 : 294–304.27343935
[203] Spencer SJ , D’Angelo H , Soch A , Watkins LR , Maier SF , Barrientos RM . High-fat diet and aging interact to produce neuroinflammation and impair hippocampal- and amygdalar-dependent memory. Neurobiol Aging. 2017; 58 : 88–101.28719855
[204] Valdearcos M , Douglass JD , Robblee MM , Dorfman MD , Stifler DR , Bennett ML , Gerritse I , Fasnacht R , Barres BA , Thaler JP , Koliwad SK . Microglial Inflammatory Signaling Orchestrates the Hypothalamic Immune Response to Dietary Excess and Mediates Obesity Susceptibility. Cell Metab. 2017; 26 : 185–97 e3.28683286
[205] Valdearcos M , Robblee MM , Benjamin DI , Nomura DK , Xu AW , Koliwad SK . Microglia dictate the impact of saturated fat consumption on hypothalamic inflammation and neuronal function. Cell Rep. 2014; 9 : 2124–38.25497089
[206] Thirumangalakudi L , Prakasam A , Zhang R , Bimonte-Nelson H , Sambamurti K , Kindy MS , Bhat NR . High cholesterol-induced neuroinflammation and amyloid precursor protein processing correlate with loss of working memory in mice. J Neurochem. 2008; 106 : 475–85.18410513
[207] Rutkowsky JM , Lee LL , Puchowicz M , Golub MS , Befroy DE , Wilson DW , Anderson S , Cline G , Bini J , Borkowski K , Knotts TA , Rutledge JC . Reduced cognitive function, increased blood-brain-barrier transport and inflammatory responses, and altered brain metabolites in LDLr −/−and C57BL/6 mice fed a western diet. PLoS One. 2018; 13 : e0191909.29444171
[208] Assuncao M , Santos-Marques MJ , Carvalho F , Lukoyanov NV , Andrade JP . Chronic green tea consumption prevents age-related changes in rat hippocampal formation. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32 : 707–17.19411127
[209] Jang S , Dilger RN , Johnson RW . Luteolin inhibits microglia and alters hippocampal-dependent spatial working memory in aged mice. J Nutr. 2010; 140 : 1892–8.20685893
[210] Rojanathammanee L , Puig KL , Combs CK . Pomegranate polyphenols and extract inhibit nuclear factor of activated T-cell activity and microglial activation in vitro and in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Nutr. 2013; 143 : 597–605.23468550
[211] Kelly L , Grehan B , Chiesa AD , O’Mara SM , Downer E , Sahyoun G , Massey KA , Nicolaou A , Lynch MA . The polyunsaturated fatty acids, EPA and DPA exert a protective effect in the hippocampus of the aged rat. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32 .
[212] Labrousse VF , Nadjar A , Joffre C , Costes L , Aubert A , Gregoire S , Bretillon L , Laye S . Short-term long chain omega3 diet protects from neuroinflammatory processes and memory impairment in aged mice. PLoS One. 2012; 7 : e36861.22662127
[213] Wu K , Gao X , Shi B , Chen S , Zhou X , Li Z , Gan Y , Cui L , Kang JX , Li W , Huang R . Enriched endogenous n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids alleviate cognitive and behavioral deficits in a mice model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience. 2016; 333 : 345–55.27474225
[214] Cole GM , Frautschy SA . Docosahexaenoic acid protects from amyloid and dendritic pathology in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Nutr Health. 2006; 18 : 249–59.17180870
[215] Davinelli S , Maes M , Corbi G , Zarrelli A , Willcox DC , Scapagnini G . Dietary phytochemicals and neuro-inflammaging: from mechanistic insights to translational challenges. Immun Ageing. 2016; 13 : 16.27081392
[216] Figueira I , Garcia G , Pimpão RC , Terrasso AP , Costa I , Almeida AF , Tavares L , Pais TF , Pinto P , Ventura MR , Filipe A , McDougall GJ , Stewart D , Polyphenols journey through blood-brain barrier towards neuronal protection. Sci Rep. 2017; 7 .
[217] Lin Y-T , Wu Y-C , Sun G-C , Ho C-Y , Wong T-Y , Lin C-H , Chen H-H , Yeh T-C , Li C-J , Tseng C-J , Cheng P-W . Effect of Resveratrol on Reactive Oxygen Species-Induced Cognitive Impairment in Rats with Angiotensin II-Induced Early Alzheimer’s Disease (†). J Clin Med. 2018; 7 : 329.
[218] Hashimoto M , Hossain S , Shimada T , Sugioka K , Yamasaki H , Fujii Y , Ishibashi Y , Oka J , Shido O . Docosahexaenoic acid provides protection from impairment of learning ability in Alzheimer’s disease model rats. J Neurochem. 2002; 81 : 1084–91.12065621
[219] Hashimoto M , Tanabe Y , Fujii Y , Kikuta T , Shibata H , Shido O . Chronic administration of docosahexaenoic acid ameliorates the impairment of spatial cognition learning ability in amyloid beta-infused rats. J Nutr. 2005; 135 : 549–55.15735092
[220] Casas R , Sacanella E , Urpi-Sarda M , Corella D , Castaner O , Lamuela-Raventos RM , Salas-Salvado J , Martinez-Gonzalez MA , Ros E , Estruch R . Long-Term Immunomodulatory Effects of a Mediterranean Diet in Adults at High Risk of Cardiovascular Disease in the PREvencion con DIeta MEDiterranea (PREDIMED) Randomized Controlled Trial. J Nutr. 2016; 146 : 1684–93.27440261
[221] Casas R , Urpi-Sarda M , Sacanella E , Arranz S , Corella D , Castaner O , Lamuela-Raventos RM , Salas-Salvado J , Lapetra J , Portillo MP , Estruch R . Anti-Inflammatory Effects of the Mediterranean Diet in the Early and Late Stages of Atheroma Plaque Development. Mediators Inflamm. 2017; 2017 : 3674390.28484308
[222] Kiecolt-Glaser JK , Belury MA , Andridge R , Malarkey WB , Hwang BS , Glaser R . Omega-3 supplementation lowers inflammation in healthy middle-aged and older adults: a randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun. 2012; 26 : 988–95.22640930
[223] Romieu I , Garcia-Esteban R , Sunyer J , Rios C , Alcaraz-Zubeldia M , Velasco SR , Holguin F . The effect of supplementation with omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on markers of oxidative stress in elderly exposed to PM(2.5). Environ Health Perspect. 2008; 116 : 1237–42.18795169
[224] McGrattan AM , McGuinness B , McKinley MC , Kee F , Passmore P , Woodside JV , McEvoy CT . Diet and Inflammation in Cognitive Ageing and Alzheimer’s Disease. Curr Nutr Rep. 2019; 8 : 53–65.30949921
[225] Laurin D , Verreault R , Lindsay J , MacPherson K , Rockwood K . Physical activity and risk of cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly persons. Archives of Neurology. 2001; 58 : 498–504.11255456
[226] Buchman AS , Boyle PA , Yu L , Shah RC , Wilson RS , Bennett DA . Total daily physical activity and the risk of AD and cognitive decline in older adults. Neurology. 2012; 78 : 1323–9.22517108
[227] Taaffe DR , Irie F , Masaki KH , Abbott RD , Petrovitch H , Ross GW , White LR . Physical activity, physical function, and incident dementia in elderly men: The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A. 2008; 63 : 529–35.
[228] Kishimoto H , Ohara T , Hata J , Ninomiya T , Yoshida D , Mukai N , Nagata M , Ikeda F , Fukuhara M , Kumagai S , Kanba S , Kitazono T , Kiyohara Y . The long-term association between physical activity and risk of dementia in the community: the Hisayama Study. Eur J Epidemiol. 2016; 31 : 267–74.26857126
[229] Podewils LJ , Guallar E , Kuller LH , Fried LP , Lopez OL , Carlson M , Lyketsos CG . Physical activity, APOE genotype, and dementia risk: Findings from the Cardiovascular Health Cognition Study. Am J Epidemiology. 2005; 161 : 639–51.
[230] Albinet CT , Boucard G , Bouquet CA , Audiffren M . Increased heart rate variability and executive performance after aerobic training in the elderly. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2010; 109 : 617–24.20186426
[231] Baker LD , Frank LL , Foster-Schubert K , Green PS , Wilkinson CW , McTiernan A , Plymate SR , Fishel MA , Watson GS , Cholerton BA , Duncan GE , Mehta PD , Craft S . Effects of Aerobic Exercise on Mild Cognitive Impairment A Controlled Trial. Archives of Neurology. 2010; 67 : 71–9.20065132
[232] Kemoun G , Thibaud M , Roumagne N , Carette P , Albinet C , Toussaint L , Paccalin M , Dugue B . Effects of a physical training programme on cognitive function and walking efficiency in elderly persons with dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2010; 29 : 109–14.20150731
[233] Ohman H , Savikko N , Strandberg TE , Kautiainen H , Raivio MM , Laakkonen ML , Tilvis R , Pitkala KH . Effects of Exercise on Cognition: The Finnish Alzheimer Disease Exercise Trial: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016; 64 : 731–8.27037872
[234] Van de Winckel A , Feys H , De Weerdt W , Dom R . Cognitive and behavioural effects of music-based exercises in patients with dementia. Clin Rehabil. 2004; 18 : 253–60.15137556
[235] Vreugdenhil A , Cannell J , Davies A , Razay G . A community-based exercise programme to improve functional ability in people with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized controlled trial. Scand J Caring Sci. 2012; 26 : 12–9.21564154
[236] Fiatarone-Singh MA , Gates N , Saigal N , Wilson GC , Meiklejohn J , Brodaty H , Wen W , Singh N , Baune BT , Suo C , Baker MK , Foroughi N , Wang Y , The Study of Mental and Resistance Training (SMART) study-resistance training and/or cognitive training in mild cognitive impairment: a randomized, double-blind, double-sham controlled trial. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2014; 15 : 873–80.25444575
[237] Coetsee C , Terblanche E . The effect of three different exercise training modalities on cognitive and physical function in a healthy older population. Eur Rev Aging Physical Activity. 2017; 14 : 13.
[238] Forte R , Boreham CAG , Leite JC , De Vito G , Brennan L , Gibney ER , Pesce C . Enhancing cognitive functioning in the elderly: Multicomponent vs resistance training. Clinical Interventions in Aging. 2013; 8 : 19–27.23341738
[239] Best JR , Chiu BK , Liang Hsu C , Nagamatsu LS , Liu-Ambrose T . Long-Term Effects of Resistance Exercise Training on Cognition and Brain Volume in Older Women: Results from a Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society. 2015; 21 : 745–56.26581787
[240] Cassilhas RC , Viana VA , Grassmann V , Santos RT , Santos RF , Tufik S , Mello MT . The impact of resistance exercise on the cognitive function of the elderly. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007; 39 : 1401–7.17762374
[241] Nagamatsu LS , Handy TC , Hsu CL , Voss M , Liu-Ambrose T . Resistance Training Promotes Cognitive and Functional Brain Plasticity in Seniors With Probable Mild Cognitive Impairment. Archives of Internal Medicine. 2012; 172 : 666–8.22529236
[242] Liu-Ambrose T , Nagamatsu LS , Graf P , Beattie BL , Ashe MC , Handy TC . Resistance Training and Executive Functions: A 12-Month Randomized Controlled Trial. Archives of Internal Medicine. 2010; 170 : 170–8.20101012
[243] O’Callaghan RM , Griffin EW , Kelly AM . Long-term treadmill exposure protects against age-related neurodegenerative change in the rat hippocampus. Hippocampus. 2009; 19 : 1019–29.19309034
[244] Navarro A , Gomez C , López-Cepero JM , Boveris A . Beneficial effects of moderate exercise on mice aging: survival, behavior, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial electron transfer. Am J Phys-Reg Int Comp Phys. 2004; 286 : R505–R11.
[245] Pietrelli A , Lopez-Costa J , Goñi R , Brusco A , Basso N . Aerobic exercise prevents age-dependent cognitive decline and reduces anxiety-related behaviors in middle-aged and old rats. Neuroscience. 2012; 202 : 252–66.22183054
[246] Marlatt MW , Potter MC , Lucassen PJ , van Praag H . Running throughout middle-age improves memory function, hippocampal neurogenesis, and BDNF levels in female C57BL/6J mice. Dev Neurobiol. 2012; 72 : 943–52.22252978
[247] Aguiar AS Jr. , Castro AA , Moreira EL , Glaser V , Santos AR , Tasca CI , Latini A , Prediger RD . Short bouts of mild-intensity physical exercise improve spatial learning and memory in aging rats: involvement of hippocampal plasticity via AKT, CREB and BDNF signaling. Mech Ageing Dev. 2011; 132 : 560–7.21983475
[248] Lovatel GA , Elsner VR , Bertoldi K , Vanzella C , Moyses Fdos S , Vizuete A , Spindler C , Cechinel LR , Netto CA , Muotri AR , Siqueira IR . Treadmill exercise induces age-related changes in aversive memory, neuroinflammatory and epigenetic processes in the rat hippocampus. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2013; 101 : 94–102.23357282
[249] Albeck DS , Sano K , Prewitt GE , Dalton L . Mild forced treadmill exercise enhances spatial learning in the aged rat. Behav Brain Res. 2006; 168 : 345–8.16388860
[250] Um HS , Kang EB , Koo JH , Kim HT , Jin L , Kim EJ , Yang CH , An GY , Cho IH , Cho JY . Treadmill exercise represses neuronal cell death in an aged transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Res. 2011; 69 : 161–73.20969897
[251] van Praag H , Shubert T , Zhao C , Gage FH . Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice. J Neurosci. 2005; 25 : 8680–5.16177036
[252] Barrientos RM , Frank MG , Crysdale NY , Chapman TR , Ahrendsen JT , Day HE , Campeau S , Watkins LR , Patterson SL , Maier SF . Little exercise, big effects: reversing aging and infection-induced memory deficits, and underlying processes. J Neurosci. 2011; 31 : 11578–86.21832188
[253] Strickland JC , Smith MA . Animal models of resistance exercise and their application to neuroscience research. J Neurosci Methods. 2016; 273 : 191–200.27498037
[254] Araujo PCO , Quines CB , Jardim NS , Leite MR , Nogueira CW . Resistance exercise reduces memory impairment induced by monosodium glutamate in male and female rats. Exp Phys. 2017; 102 : 845–53.
[255] Lamb SE , Sheehan B , Atherton N , Nichols V , Collins H , Mistry D , Dosanjh S , Slowther AM , Khan I , Petrou S , Lall R . Dementia And Physical Activity (DAPA) trial of moderate to high intensity exercise training for people with dementia: randomised controlled trial. Br Med J. 2018; 361 .
[256] Miller LA , Spitznagel MB , Busko S , Potter V , Juvancic-Heltzel J , Istenes N , Glickman E , Gunstad J . Structured exercise does not stabilize cognitive function in individuals with mild cognitive impairment residing in a structured living facility. Int J Neurosci. 2011; 121 : 218–23.21244306
[257] Steinberg M , Leoutsakos JM , Podewils LJ , Lyketsos CG . Evaluation of a home-based exercise program in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: the Maximizing Independence in Dementia (MIND) study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009; 24 : 680–5.19089875
[258] Venturelli M , Scarsini R , Schena F . Six-month walking program changes cognitive and ADL performance in patients with Alzheimer. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2011; 26 : 381–8.21852281
[259] Suzuki T , Shimada H , Makizako H , Doi T , Yoshida D , Ito K , Shimokata H , Washimi Y , Endo H , Kato T . A Randomized Controlled Trial of Multicomponent Exercise in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment. PLOS ONE. 2013; 8 : e61483.23585901
[260] Sobol NA , Hoffmann K , Frederiksen KS , Vogel A , Vestergaard K , Brændgaard H , Gottrup H , Lolk A , Wermuth L , Jakobsen S , Laugesen L , Gergelyffy R , Høgh P , Effect of aerobic exercise on physical performance in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia. 2016; 12 : 1207–15.
[261] Hoffmann K , Sobol NA , Frederiksen KS , Beyer N , Vogel A , Vestergaard K , Brændgaard H , Gottrup H , Lolk A , Wermuth L . Moderate-to-high intensity physical exercise in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease. 2016; 50 : 443–53.
[262] Yang SY , Shan CL , Qing H , Wang W , Zhu Y , Yin MM , Machado S , Yuan TF , Wu T . The Effects of Aerobic Exercise on Cognitive Function of Alzheimer’s Disease Patients. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2015; 14 : 1292–7.26556080
[263] Chennaoui M , Drogou C , Gomez-Merino D . Effects of physical training on IL-1 beta, IL-6 and IL-1ra concentrations in various brain areas of the rat. Eur Cytokine Network. 2008; 19 : 8–14.
[264] Ang ET , Wong PT , Moochhala S , Ng YK . Cytokine changes in the horizontal diagonal band of Broca in the septum after running and stroke: a correlation to glial activation. J Neurosci. 2004; 129 : 337–47.
[265] Gomes da Silva S , Simoes PS , Mortara RA , Scorza FA , Cavalheiro EA , da Graca Naffah-Mazzacoratti M , Arida RM . Exercise-induced hippocampal anti-inflammatory response in aged rats. J Neuroinflammation. 2013; 10 : 61.23663962
[266] Kohman RA , Bhattacharya TK , Wojcik E , Rhodes JS . Exercise reduces activation of microglia isolated from hippocampus and brain of aged mice. J Neuroinflammation. 2013; 10 : 114.24044641
[267] Petersen AM , Pedersen BK . The anti-inflammatory effect of exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2005; 98 : 1154–62.15772055
[268] Gleeson M , Bishop NC , Stensel DJ , Lindley MR , Mastana SS , Nimmo MA . The anti-inflammatory effects of exercise: mechanisms and implications for the prevention and treatment of disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011; 11 : 607–15.21818123
[269] Pedersen BK . Exercise and cytokines. Immunology &amp; Cell Biology. 2000; 78 : 532–5.11050536
[270] Voss MW , Prakash RS , Erickson KI , Basak C , Chaddock L , Kim JS , Alves H , Heo S , Szabo AN , White SM , Wójcicki TR , Mailey EL , Gothe N , Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults. Front Aging Neurosci. 2010; 2 .
[271] Burdette JH , Laurienti PJ , Espeland MA , Morgan A , Telesford Q , Vechlekar CD , Hayasaka S , Jennings JM , Katula JA , Kraft RA , Rejeski WJ . Using network science to evaluate exercise-associated brain changes in older adults. Front Aging Neurosci. 2010; 2 : 23.20589103
[272] Nichol KE , Poon WW , Parachikova AI , Cribbs DH , Glabe CG , Cotman CW . Exercise alters the immune profile in Tg2576 Alzheimer mice toward a response coincident with improved cognitive performance and decreased amyloid. J Neuroinflammation. 2008; 5 : 13-.18400101
[273] Nichol KE , Parachikova AI , Cotman CW . Three weeks of running wheel exposure improves cognitive performance in the aged Tg2576 mouse. Behav Brain Res. 2007; 184 : 124–32.17698211
[274] Papenberg G , Ferencz B , Mangialasche F , Mecocci P , Cecchetti R , Kalpouzos G , Fratiglioni L , Backman L . Physical activity and inflammation: effects on gray-matter volume and cognitive decline in aging. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016; 37 : 3462–73.27159568
[275] Jensen CS , Bahl JM , Ostergaard LB , Hogh P , Wermuth L , Heslegrave A , Zetterberg H , Heegaard NHH , Hasselbalch SG , Simonsen AH . Exercise as a potential modulator of inflammation in patients with Alzheimer’s disease measured in cerebrospinal fluid and plasma. Exp Gerontol. 2019; 121 : 91–8.30980923
[276] Bo H , Kang W , Jiang N , Wang X , Zhang Y , Ji LL . Exercise-induced neuroprotection of hippocampus in APP/PS1 transgenic mice via upregulation of mitochondrial 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase. Oxidative med cellular longevity. 2014; 2014 .
[277] Mackay CP , Kuys SS , Brauer SG . The Effect of Aerobic Exercise on Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor in People with Neurological Disorders: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Neural Plast. 2017; 2017 : 4716197.29057125
[278] Sleiman SF , Henry J , Al-Haddad R , El Hayek L , Abou Haidar E , Stringer T , Ulja D , Karuppagounder SS , Holson EB , Ratan RR , Ninan I , Chao MV . Exercise promotes the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) through the action of the ketone body beta-hydroxybutyrate. Elife. 2016; 5 .
[279] Kobilo T , Liu QR , Gandhi K , Mughal M , Shaham Y , van Praag H . Running is the neurogenic and neurotrophic stimulus in environmental enrichment. Learn Mem. 2011; 18 : 605–9.21878528
[280] Neeper SA , Gomez-Pinilla F , Choi J , Cotman C . Exercise and brain neurotrophins. Nature. 1995; 373 : 109.7816089
[281] Russo-Neustadt AA , Beard RC , Huang YM , Cotman CW . Physical activity and antidepressant treatment potentiate the expression of specific brain-derived neurotrophic factor transcripts in the rat hippocampus. Neuroscience. 2000; 101 : 305–12.11074154
[282] Seifert T , Brassard P , Wissenberg M , Rasmussen P , Nordby P , Stallknecht B , Adser H , Jakobsen AH , Pilegaard H , Nielsen HB , Secher NH . Endurance training enhances BDNF release from the human brain. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010; 298 : R372–7.19923361
[283] Coelho FG , Gobbi S , Andreatto CA , Corazza DI , Pedroso RV , Santos-Galduroz RF . Physical exercise modulates peripheral levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF): a systematic review of experimental studies in the elderly. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2013; 56 : 10–5.22749404
[284] Hakansson K , Ledreux A , Daffner K , Terjestam Y , Bergman P , Carlsson R , Kivipelto M , Winblad B , Granholm AC , Mohammed AK . BDNF Responses in Healthy Older Persons to 35 Minutes of Physical Exercise, Cognitive Training, and Mindfulness: Associations with Working Memory Function. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017; 55 : 645–57.27716670
[285] Laske C , Banschbach S , Stransky E , Bosch S , Straten G , Machann J , Fritsche A , Hipp A , Niess A , Eschweiler GW . Exercise-induced normalization of decreased BDNF serum concentration in elderly women with remitted major depression. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010; 13 : 595–602.20067661
[286] Parkhurst CN , Yang G , Ninan I , Savas JN , Yates JR 3rd , Lafaille JJ , Hempstead BL , Littman DR , Gan WB . Microglia promote learning-dependent synapse formation through brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Cell. 2013; 155 : 1596–609.24360280
[287] Wu S-Y , Pan B-S , Tsai S-F , Chiang Y-T , Huang B-M , Mo F-E , Kuo Y-M . BDNF reverses aging-related microglial activation. Journal of Neuroinflammation. 2020; 17 : 210.32664974
[288] Stern Y . Cognitive reserve. Neuropsychologia. 2009; 47 : 2015–28.19467352
[289] Stern Y . Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurology. 2012; 11 : 1006–12.23079557
[290] Nyberg L , Lovden M , Riklund K , Lindenberger U , Backman L . Memory aging and brain maintenance. Trends Cogn Sci. 2012; 16 : 292–305.22542563
[291] Cabeza R , Albert M , Belleville S , Craik FIM , Duarte A , Grady CL , Lindenberger U , Nyberg L , Park DC , Reuter-Lorenz PA , Rugg MD , Steffener J , Rajah MN . Maintenance, reserve and compensation: the cognitive neuroscience of healthy ageing. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2018; 19 : 701–10.30305711
[292] Stern Y , Barnes CA , Grady C , Jones RN , Raz N . Brain reserve, cognitive reserve, compensation, and maintenance: operationalization, validity, and mechanisms of cognitive resilience. Neurobiol Aging. 2019; 83 : 124–9.31732015
[293] Evans DA , Beckett LA , Albert MS , Hebert LE , Scherr PA , Funkenstein HH , Taylor JO . Level of education and change in cognitive function in a community population of older persons. Ann Epidemiology. 1993; 3 : 71–7.
[294] Stern Y , Gurland B , Tatemichi TK , Tang MX , Wilder D , Mayeux R . Influence of education and occupation on the incidence of Alzheimer’s disease. JAMA. 1994; 271 : 1004–10.8139057
[295] Wang HX , Karp A , Winblad B , Fratiglioni L . Late-life engagement in social and leisure activities is associated with a decreased risk of dementia: a longitudinal study from the Kungsholmen project. Am J Epidemiol. 2002; 155 : 1081–7.12048221
[296] Scarmeas N , Levy G , Tang MX , Manly J , Stern Y . Influence of leisure activity on the incidence of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 2001; 57 : 2236–42.11756603
[297] Wilson RS , Bennett DA . Cognitive Activity and Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease. Curr Directions Psychological Sci. 2003; 12 : 87–91.
[298] Wilson RS , Bennett DA , Beckett LA , Morris MC , Gilley DW , Bienias JL , Scherr PA , Evans DA . Cognitive activity in older persons from a geographically defined population. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 1999; 54 : P155–60.10363036
[299] Wilson RS , Bennett DA , Bienias JL , Aggarwal NT , Mendes De Leon CF , Morris MC , Schneider JA , Evans DA . Cognitive activity and incident AD in a population-based sample of older persons. Neurology. 2002; 59 : 1910–4.12499482
[300] Wilson RS , Segawa E , Boyle PA , Bennett DA . Influence of late-life cognitive activity on cognitive health. Neurology. 2012; 78 : 1123–9.22491864
[301] Wilson RS , Mendes de Leon CF , Barnes LL , Participation in cognitively stimulating activities and risk of incident alzheimer disease. JAMA. 2002; 287 : 742–8.11851541
[302] Gidicsin CM , Maye JE , Locascio JJ , Pepin LC , Philiossaint M , Becker JA , Younger AP , Dekhtyar M , Schultz AP , Amariglio RE , Marshall GA , Rentz DM , Hedden T , Cognitive activity relates to cognitive performance but not to Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology. 2015; 85 : 48–55.26062627
[303] Sattler C , Toro P , Schonknecht P , Schroder J . Cognitive activity, education and socioeconomic status as preventive factors for mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Psychiatry Res. 2012; 196 : 90–5.22390831
[304] Wilson RS , Nag S , Boyle PA , Hizel LP , Yu L , Buchman AS , Schneider JA , Bennett DA . Neural reserve, neuronal density in the locus ceruleus, and cognitive decline. Neurology. 2013; 80 : 1202–8.23486878
[305] Neely AS , Backman L . Effects of multifactorial memory training in old age: generalizability across tasks and individuals. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 1995; 50 : P134–40.7767691
[306] Ball K , Berch DB , Helmers KF , Effects of cognitive training interventions with older adults: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002; 288 : 2271–81.12425704
[307] Rebok GW , Ball K , Guey LT , Jones RN , Kim HY , King JW , Marsiske M , Morris JN , Tennstedt SL , Unverzagt FW , Willis SL , Grp AS . Ten-Year Effects of the Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and Vital Elderly Cognitive Training Trial on Cognition and Everyday Functioning in Older Adults. J Am Geriatrics Society. 2014; 62 : 16–24.
[308] Spector A , Thorgrimsen L , Woods B , Royan L , Davies S , Butterworth M , Orrell M . Efficacy of an evidence-based cognitive stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry. 2003; 183 : 248–54.12948999
[309] Kinsella GJ , Mullaly E , Rand E , Ong B , Burton C , Price S , Phillips M , Storey E . Early intervention for mild cognitive impairment: a randomised controlled trial. J Neurology Neurosurgery Psychiatry. 2009; 80 : 730.
[310] Carlson MC , McGill S , Fried LP , Hill J , Rebok GW , Tielsch J , Saczynski JS , Frick KD , Seeman T , Glass TA . Exploring the Effects of an “Everyday” Activity Program on Executive Function and Memory in Older Adults: Experience Corps®. The Gerontologist. 2008; 48 : 793–801.19139252
[311] Chiu H-L , Chu H , Tsai J-C , Liu D , Chen Y-R , Yang H-L , Chou K-R . The effect of cognitive-based training for the healthy older people: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One. 2017; 12 : e0176742.28459873
[312] Cheng Y , Wu W Feng W , Wang J , Chen Y , Shen Y , Li Q , Zhang X , Li C . The effects of multi-domain versus single-domain cognitive training in non-demented older people: a randomized controlled trial. 2012.
[313] Mondini S , Madella I , Zangrossi A , Bigolin A , Tomasi C , Michieletto M , Villani D , Di Giovanni G , Mapelli D . Cognitive Reserve in Dementia: Implications for Cognitive Training. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016; 8 : 84.27199734
[314] Lampit A , Hallock H , Valenzuela M . Computerized Cognitive Training in Cognitively Healthy Older Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Effect Modifiers. PLoS Medicine. 2014; 11 : e1001756.25405755
[315] Smith GE , Housen P , Yaffe K , Ruff R , Kennison RF , Mahncke HW , Zelinski EM . A Cognitive Training Program Based on Principles of Brain Plasticity: Results from the Improvement in Memory with Plasticity-based Adaptive Cognitive Training (IMPACT) Study. J Am Geriatrics Society. 2009; 57 : 594–603.
[316] Kueider AM , Parisi JM , Gross AL , Rebok GW . Computerized Cognitive Training with Older Adults: A Systematic Review. PLoS One. 2012; 7 : 13.
[317] Basak C , Boot WR , Voss MW , Kramer AF . Can training in a real-time strategy video game attenuate cognitive decline in older adults? Psychol Aging. 2008; 23 : 765–77.19140648
[318] Nithianantharajah J , Hannan AJ . Enriched environments, experience-dependent plasticity and disorders of the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 7 : 697–709.16924259
[319] van Praag H , Kempermann G , Gage F . Neural consequences of enviromental enrichment. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2000; 1 : 191–8.11257907
[320] Frick KM , Fernandez SM . Enrichment enhances spatial memory and increases synaptophysin levels in aged female mice. Neurobiol Aging. 2003; 24 : 615–26.12714119
[321] Gresack JE , Kerr KM , Frick KM . Life-long environmental enrichment differentially affects the mnemonic response to estrogen in young, middle-aged, and aged female mice. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2007; 88 : 393–408.17869132
[322] Bennett JC , McRae PA , Levy LJ , Frick KM JNol, memory. Long-term continuous, but not daily, environmental enrichment reduces spatial memory decline in aged male mice. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2006; 85 : 139–52.16256380
[323] Harburger LL , Lambert TJ , Frick KM . Age-dependent effects of environmental enrichment on spatial reference memory in male mice. Behav Brain Res. 2007; 185 : 43–8.17707521
[324] Leal-Galicia P , Castaneda-Bueno M , Quiroz-Baez R , Arias C . Long-term exposure to environmental enrichment since youth prevents recognition memory decline and increases synaptic plasticity markers in aging. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2008; 90 : 511–8.18675926
[325] Kempermann G , Gast D , Gage FH . Neuroplasticity in old age: Sustained fivefold induction of hippocampal neurogenesis by long-term environmental enrichment. Ann Neurol. 2002; 52 : 135–43.12210782
[326] Harati H , Majchrzak M , Cosquer B , Galani R , Kelche C , Cassel JC , Barbelivien A . Attention and memory in aged rats: Impact of lifelong environmental enrichment. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32 : 718–36.19398248
[327] Parikh V , Howe WM , Welchko RM , Naughton SX , D’Amore DE , Han DH , Deo M , Turner DL , Sarter M . Diminished trkA receptor signaling reveals cholinergic-attentional vulnerability of aging. Eur J Neurosci. 2013; 37 : 278–93.23228124
[328] Yegla B , Parikh V . Effects of sustained proNGF blockade on attentional capacities in aged rats with compromised cholinergic system. Neuroscience. 2014; 261 : 118–32.24374328
[329] Yegla B , Parikh V . Developmental suppression of forebrain trkA receptors and attentional capacities in aging rats: A longitudinal study. Behav Brain Res. 2017; 335 : 111–21.28803853
[330] Arendash GW , Garcia MF , Costa DA , Cracchiolo JR , Wefes IM , Potter H . Environmental enrichment improves cognition in aged Alzheimer’s transgenic mice despite stable beta-amyloid deposition. Neuroreport. 2004; 15 : 1751–4.15257141
[331] Berardi N , Braschi C , Capsoni S , Cattaneo A , Maffei L . Environmental enrichment delays the onset of memory deficits and reduces neuropathological hallmarks in a mouse model of Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration. J Alzheimers Dis. 2007; 11 : 359–70.17851186
[332] Cracchiolo JR , Mori T , Nazian SJ , Tan J , Potter H , Arendash GW . Enhanced cognitive activity—over and above social or physical activity—is required to protect Alzheimer’s mice against cognitive impairment, reduce Aβ deposition, and increase synaptic immunoreactivity. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2007; 88 : 277–94.17714960
[333] Ackerman PL , Kanfer R , Calderwood C . Use it or lose it? Wii brain exercise practice and reading for domain knowledge. Psychol Aging. 2010; 25 : 753–66.20822257
[334] Peng H , Wen J , Wang D , Gao Y . The Impact of Processing Speed Training on Working Memory in Old Adults. Journal of Adult Development. 2012; 19 : 150–7.
[335] Scogin F , Bienias JL . A three-year follow-up of older adult participants in a memory-skills training program. Psychol Aging. 1988; 3 : 334–7.3268276
[336] Wilson RS , Yu L , Lamar M , Schneider JA , Boyle PA , Bennett DA . Education and cognitive reserve in old age. Neurology. 2019; 92 : e1041–e50.30728309
[337] Zinke K , Zeintl M , Eschen A , Herzog C , Kliegel M . Potentials and limits of plasticity induced by working memory training in old-old age. Gerontology. 2012; 58 : 79–87.21430358
[338] Redick TS , Shipstead Z , Harrison TL , Hicks KL , Fried DE , Hambrick DZ , Kane MJ , Engle RW . No Evidence of Intelligence Improvement After Working Memory Training: A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Study. J Exp Psychology. 2013; 142 : 359–79.
[339] Bozoki A , Radovanovic M , Winn B , Heeter C , Anthony JC . Effects of a computer-based cognitive exercise program on age-related cognitive decline. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics. 2013; 57 : 1–7.23542053
[340] Craik FI , Winocur G , Palmer H , Binns MA , Edwards M , Bridges K , Glazer P , Chavannes R , Stuss DT . Cognitive rehabilitation in the elderly: effects on memory. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2007; 13 : 132–42.17166312
[341] Mozolic JL , Long AB , Morgan AR , Rawley-Payne M , Laurienti PJ . A cognitive training intervention improves modality-specific attention in a randomized controlled trial of healthy older adults. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32 : 655–68.19428142
[342] Dahlin E , Nyberg L , Backman L , Neely AS . Plasticity of executive functioning in young and older adults: immediate training gains, transfer, and long-term maintenance. Psychol Aging. 2008; 23 : 720–30.19140643
[343] Kim GH , Jeon S , Im K , Kwon H , Lee BH , Kim GY , Jeong H , Han NE , Seo SW , Cho H , Noh Y , Park SE , Kim H , Structural Brain Changes after Traditional and Robot-Assisted Multi-Domain Cognitive Training in Community-Dwelling Healthy Elderly. PLOS ONE. 2015; 10 : e0123251.25898367
[344] Margrett JA , Willis SL . In-home cognitive training with older married couples: individual versus collaborative learning.
[345] Ballesteros S , Mayas J , Prieto A , Toril P , Pita C , Laura Pde L , Reales JM , Waterworth JA . A randomized controlled trial of brain training with non-action video games in older adults: results of the 3-month follow-up. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015; 7 : 45.25926790
[346] Lee TS , Quek SY , Goh SJ , Phillips R , Guan C , Cheung YB , Feng L , Wang CC , Chin ZY , Zhang H , Lee J , Ng TP , Krishnan KR . A pilot randomized controlled trial using EEG-based brain-computer interface training for a Chinese-speaking group of healthy elderly. Clin Interv Aging. 2015; 10 : 217–27.25624754
[347] Edwards JD , Valdes EG , Peronto C , Castora-Binkley M , Alwerdt J , Andel R , Lister JJ . The Efficacy of InSight Cognitive Training to Improve Useful Field of View Performance: A Brief Report. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2015; 70 : 417–22.24211819
[348] Garcia-Campuzano MT , Virues-Ortega J , Smith S , Moussavi Z . Effect of cognitive training targeting associative memory in the elderly: a small randomized trial and a longitudinal evaluation. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013; 61 : 2252–4.24329837
[349] Mahncke HW , Connor BB , Appelman J , Ahsanuddin ON , Hardy JL , Wood RA , Joyce NM , Boniske T , Atkins SM , Merzenich MM . Memory enhancement in healthy older adults using a brain plasticity-based training program: a randomized, controlled study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103 : 12523–8.16888038
[350] Shatil E , Mikulecká J , Bellotti F , Bureš V . Novel Television-Based Cognitive Training Improves Working Memory and Executive Function. PLOS ONE. 2014; 9 : e101472.24992187
[351] Xu H , Gelyana E , Rajsombath M , Yang T , Li S , Selkoe D . Environmental Enrichment Potently Prevents Microglia-Mediated Neuroinflammation by Human Amyloid β-Protein Oligomers. J Neurosci. 2016; 36 : 9041–56.27581448
[352] Duggan MR , Joshi S , Tan YF , Slifker M , Ross EA , Wimmer M , Parikh V . Transcriptomic changes in the prefrontal cortex of rats as a function of age and cognitive engagement. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2019; 163 : 107035.31185277
[353] Pegtel DM , Peferoen L , Amor S . Extracellular vesicles as modulators of cell-to-cell communication in the healthy and diseased brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014; 369 .
[354] Williamson LL , Chao A , Bilbo SD . Environmental enrichment alters glial antigen expression and neuroimmune function in the adult rat hippocampus. Brain Behav Immun. 2012; 26 : 500–10.22281279
[355] Birch AM , McGarry NB , Kelly AM . Short-term environmental enrichment, in the absence of exercise, improves memory, and increases NGF concentration, early neuronal survival, and synaptogenesis in the dentate gyrus in a time-dependent manner. Hippocampus. 2013; 23 : 437–50.23460346
[356] Herring A , Blome M , Ambree O , Sachser N , Paulus W , Keyvani K . Reduction of cerebral oxidative stress following environmental enrichment in mice with Alzheimer-like pathology. Brain Pathol. 2010; 20 : 166–75.19134003
[357] Marmol F , Rodriguez CA , Sanchez J , Chamizo VD . Anti-oxidative effects produced by environmental enrichment in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of male and female rats. Brain Res. 2015; 1613 : 120–9.25881892
[358] Prado Lima MG , Schimidt HL , Garcia A , Daré LR , Carpes FP , Izquierdo I , Mello-Carpes PB . Environmental enrichment and exercise are better than social enrichment to reduce memory deficits in amyloid beta neurotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018; 115 : E2403–E9.29463708
[359] Fernandez CI , Collazo J , Bauza Y , Castellanos MR , Lopez O . Environmental Enrichment-Behavior-Oxidative Stress Interactions in the Aged Rat: Issues for a Therapeutic Approach in Human Aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004; 1019 : 53–7.15246994
[360] Marques P , Moreira P , Magalhães R , Costa P , Santos N , Zihl J , Soares J , Sousa N . The functional connectome of cognitive reserve. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016; 37 : 3310–22.27144904
[361] Anthony M , Lin F . A Systematic Review for Functional Neuroimaging Studies of Cognitive Reserve Across the Cognitive Aging Spectrum. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2018; 33 : 937–48.29244054
[362] Bosch B , Bartres-Faz D , Rami L , Arenaza-Urquijo EM , Fernandez-Espejo D , Junque C , Sole-Padulles C , Sanchez-Valle R , Bargallo N , Falcon C , Molinuevo JL . Cognitive reserve modulates task-induced activations and deactivations in healthy elders, amnestic mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease. Cortex. 2010; 46 : 451–61.19560134
[363] Serra L , Bruschini M , Di Domenico C , Gabrielli GB , Marra C , Caltagirone C , Cercignani M , Bozzali M . Memory is Not Enough: The Neurobiological Substrates of Dynamic Cognitive Reserve. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017; 58 : 171–84.28387678
[364] Weiler M , Casseb RF , de Campos BM , de Ligo Teixeira CV , Carletti-Cassani A , Vicentini JE , Magalhães TNC , de Almeira DQ , Talib LL , Forlenza OV , Balthazar MLF , Castellano G . Cognitive Reserve Relates to Functional Network Efficiency in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018; 10 : 255.30186154
[365] Rogalski E , Gefen T , Mao Q , Connelly M , Weintraub S , Geula C , Bigio EH , Mesulam MM . Cognitive trajectories and spectrum of neuropathology in SuperAgers: The first 10 cases. Hippocampus. 2019; 29 : 458–67.29341318
[366] Maarouf CL , Daugs ID , Kokjohn TA , Walker DG , Hunter JM , Kruchowsky JC , Woltjer R , Kaye J , Castano EM , Sabbagh MN , Beach TG , Roher AE . Alzheimer’s disease and non-demented high pathology control nonagenarians: comparing and contrasting the biochemistry of cognitively successful aging. PLoS One. 2011; 6 : e27291.22087282
[367] Sun FW , Stepanovic MR , Andreano J , Barrett LF , Touroutoglou A , Dickerson BC . Youthful Brains in Older Adults: Preserved Neuroanatomy in the Default Mode and Salience Networks Contributes to Youthful Memory in Superaging. J Neurosci. 2016; 36 : 9659–68.27629716
[368] Latimer CS , Keene CD , Flanagan ME , Hemmy LS , Lim KO , White LR , Montine KS , Montine TJ . Resistance to Alzheimer Disease Neuropathologic Changes and Apparent Cognitive Resilience in the Nun and Honolulu-Asia Aging Studies. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2017; 76 : 458–66.28499012
[369] Hickman SE , Kingery ND , Ohsumi TK , Borowsky ML , Wang LC , Means TK , El Khoury J . The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA sequencing. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16 : 1896–905.24162652
[370] Parker D , Sloane R , Pieper CF , Hall KS , Kraus VB , Kraus WE , Huebner JL , Ilkayeva OR , Bain JR , Newby LK , Cohen HJ , Morey MC . Age-Related Adverse Inflammatory and Metabolic Changes Begin Early in Adulthood. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2019; 74 : 283–9.29985987
[371] Maldonado-Ruiz R , Montalvo-Martinez L , Fuentes-Mera L , Camacho A . Microglia activation due to obesity programs metabolic failure leading to type two diabetes. Nutr Diabetes. 2017; 7 : e254.28319103
[372] Tejera D , Mercan D , Sanchez-Caro JM , Hanan M , Greenberg D , Soreq H , Latz E , Golenbock D , Heneka MT . Systemic inflammation impairs microglial Abeta clearance through NLRP3 inflammasome. EMBO J. 2019; 38 : e101064.31359456
[373] Paolicelli RC , Ferretti MT . Function and Dysfunction of Microglia during Brain Development: Consequences for Synapses and Neural Circuits. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2017; 9 : 9.28539882
[374] Gosselin D , Skola D , Coufal NG , Holtman IR , Schlachetzki JCM , Sajti E , Jaeger BN , O’Connor C , Fitzpatrick C , Pasillas MP , Pena M , Adair A , Gonda DD , An environment-dependent transcriptional network specifies human microglia identity. Science. 2017; 356 .
[375] Kohman RA , Rodriguez-Zas SL , Southey BR , Kelley KW , Dantzer R , Rhodes JS . Voluntary wheel running reverses age-induced changes in hippocampal gene expression. PLoS One. 2011; 6 : e22654.21857943
[376] Jeong JH , Kang EB . Effects of treadmill exercise on PI3K/AKT/GSK-3β pathway and tau protein in high-fat diet-fed rats. J Exerc Nutrition Biochem. 2018; 22 : 9–14.
[377] Liu HL , Zhao G , Zhang H , Shi LD . Long-term treadmill exercise inhibits the progression of Alzheimer’s disease-like neuropathology in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Behav Brain Res. 2013; 256 : 261–72.23968591
[378] Hernandez F , Lucas JJ , Avila J . GSK3 and tau: two convergence points in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013; 33 Suppl 1 : S141–4.22710914
[379] Bhat NR , Thirumangalakudi L . Increased tau phosphorylation and impaired brain insulin/IGF signaling in mice fed a high fat/high cholesterol diet. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013; 36 : 781–9.23703152
[380] Elahi M , Motoi Y , Shimonaka S , Ishida Y , Hioki H , Takanashi M , Ishiguro K , Imai Y , Hattori N . High-fat diet-induced activation of SGK1 promotes Alzheimer’s disease-associated tau pathology. bioRxiv. 2020: 2020.05.14.095471.
[381] Solomon A , Turunen H , Ngandu T , Peltonen M , Levälahti E , Helisalmi S , Antikainen R , Bäckman L , Hänninen T , Jula A , Laatikainen T , Lehtisalo J , Lindström J , Effect of the Apolipoprotein E Genotype on Cognitive Change During a Multidomain Lifestyle Intervention: A Subgroup Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol. 2018; 75 : 462–70.29356827
[382] Schelke MW , Hackett K , Chen JL , Shih C , Shum J , Montgomery ME , Chiang GC , Berkowitz C , Seifan A , Krikorian R . Nutritional interventions for Alzheimer’s prevention: a clinical precision medicine approach. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2016; 1367 : 50–6.27116241
[383] Seifan A , Isaacson R . The Alzheimer’s Prevention Clinic at Weill Cornell Medical College / New York - Presbyterian Hospital: Risk Stratification and Personalized Early Intervention. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2015; 2 : 254–66.28529933
[384] Dhana K , Evans DA , Rajan KB , Bennett DA , Morris MC . Healthy lifestyle and the risk of Alzheimer dementia: Findings from 2 longitudinal studies. Neurology. 2020; 95 : e374–e83.32554763
