LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2984726R
1011
Biochem J
Biochem J
The Biochemical journal
0264-6021
1470-8728

34297044
8840812
10.1042/BCJ20200609
NIHMS1776908
Article
Mechanistic roles for altered O-GlcNAcylation in neurodegenerative disorders
Balana Aaron T. 1
Pratt Matthew R. 12*
1 Departments of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 90089, United States
2 Departments of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 90089, United States
* Corresponding Author: Matthew R. Pratt matthew.pratt@usc.edu
3 2 2022
30 7 2021
30 7 2022
478 14 27332758
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s remain highly prevalent and incurable disorders. A major challenge in fully understanding and combating the progression of these diseases is the complexity of the network of processes that lead to progressive neuronal dysfunction and death. An ideal therapeutic avenue is conceivably one that could address many if not all of these multiple misregulated mechanisms. Over the years, chemical intervention for the upregulation of the endogenous posttranslational modification (PTM) O-GlcNAc has been proposed as a potential strategy to slow down the progression of neurodegeneration. Through development and application of tools that allow dissection of the mechanistic roles of this PTM, there is now a growing body of evidence that O-GlcNAc influences a variety of important neurodegeneration-pertinent mechanisms, with an overall protective effect. As a PTM that is appended onto numerous proteins that participate in protein quality control and homeostasis, metabolism, bioenergetics, neuronal communication, inflammation, and programmed death, O-GlcNAc has demonstrated beneficence in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases, and its upregulation is now being pursued in multiple clinical studies.


pmcIntroduction

Neurodegenerative disorders (NDs) are characterized by late-onset decline in cognitive, memory or motor functions. Diseases that fall in this category such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have diverse clinical presentations, but they share a set of altered cellular processes and biochemical pathways that define progressive and pathological hallmarks in NDs1. A common and likely early event that leads to neurodegeneration is the misfolding of proteins generating amyloid-type aggregates2. Importantly, specific forms of NDs correlate to specific identities of proteins that aggregate, and the identification of these proteins in patient brains is often a key step during clinical diagnoses. Specifically, tau and amyloid β peptides are the predominant protein aggregators in AD, while α-Synuclein is implicated in PD2. The specific initial localization of protein aggregates within the brain widely varies; however, their prion-like transmission and spread from cell-to-cell or brain region-to-brain region are well-documented3. Fibrillar aggregates of these proteins can subsequently recruit other non-proteinaceous components such as nucleic acids, membranes, and other organelles into intracellular inclusions (e.g. neurofibrillary tangles in AD, Lewy bodies in PD) or extracellular deposits (amyloid plaques in AD). The irregular presence of these assemblies may be causative towards the disruption of intra- and intercellular membrane trafficking, leading to the downstream weakening of synaptic communications between neurons4. In many NDs, mitochondrial health is also compromised, leading to impaired bioenergetics, metabolism, and oxidative stress responses5. Immune and inflammatory hyperactivation is also observed in aging, and the presence of excess neuroinflammatory molecules also negatively impacts neuronal health6. Ultimately, NDs are also characterized by increased neuronal death and atrophy of distinct brain regions, consequential to uncontrolled autophagic, apoptotic, or necrotic pathways7.

Also linked to the progression of NDs is aberrant patterns in protein posttranslational modifications (PTMs), such as in the overall levels of O-GlcNAcylation. O-GlcNAc is an intracellular form of glycosylation involving the addition of the monosaccharide N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc) onto serine or threonine residues of thousands of proteins. It is an essential form of modification that is absolutely required during embryogenesis and development of higher eukaryotes8. At the protein level, this sugar modification can modulate protein interfaces, with important outcomes protein targets’ structure, function, ability to form intra- or intermolecular interactions, or the propensity to be modified with other forms of PTMs. Thus, O-GlcNAc modifications have important roles in regulating cellular processes and pathways including signal transduction, protein homeostasis (proteostasis), transcriptional regulation, and cytoskeletal organization9.

Global O-GlcNAc levels are typically found to be misregulated in AD patient brains compared to age-matched controls. Significant efforts have been made to understand this link, with the current hypotheses being that O-GlcNAc has an overall protective role against neurodegeneration and that the observed downregulation may be detrimental to neuronal health. Consequently, pharmacological upregulation of O-GlcNAc is currently being explored as a potential therapeutic strategy to slow the progression of NDs. In this review, we summarize the body of work that describes mechanistic roles for O-GlcNAc in neurodegeneration. We briefly present biochemical tools and techniques that have been useful for understanding the roles of O-GlcNAc (Figure 1). We then present the evidence that O-GlcNAc has a multifaceted effect in neurodegeneration by modulating processes such as protein aggregation, PTM crosstalk, mitochondrial and bioenergetics regulation, vesicular transport, neuroinflammation, and neuronal death pathways. Focus is afforded to AD and PD given that these are the most prevalent forms of NDs, and that a large majority of work on O-GlcNAc and neurodegeneration is based on these disorders.

Aberrant mechanisms in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases

Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of ND and is the leading cause of dementia10. The progression of the disease is slow, initially characterized by early changes in neurotransmitter expression, reduction of neutrophil counts and synaptic death11. During later stages, AD patients show large-scale neuronal death and brain atrophy12. Given that most of the neuronal death occurs at the hippocampus, the main clinical presentation includes memory defects and other forms of cognitive decline. AD is linked to a multitude of risk factors including family history, lifestyle (sleep patterns, alcohol consumption, history of head trauma, etc.), and vascular conditions (diabetes, hypertension, stroke), but the major risk factor is age with the likelihood of developing AD rising exponentially after the age of 6513. Less than 1% of AD cases are also linked to genetic factors, although these correlations are rather complex and likely involve multiple genes14. As of yet, AD is incurable and treatment strategies merely address the symptoms or slow down its progression15.

The misfolding and aggregation of amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides or tau protein are believed to be early processes in the sequence of biochemical events leading to neuronal death. Different species in this misfolding process, either oligomeric or fibrillar, have been shown to elicit neurotoxicity, although the main contributor to pathology remains to be conclusively determined. These protein aggregates mature and co-accumulate with other components into either extracellular deposits (amyloid plaques) or intracellular inclusions (neurofibrillary tangles, NFTs) that are resistant to normal proteostatic responses. The postmortem identification of these structures is a defining step that accompanies clinical evaluation during diagnoses although presence of plaques or NFTs can also be found in asymptomatic patients. NFTs also bear large amounts of hyperphosphorylated tau, and this hyperphosphorylation has been suggested to interfere with tau’s endogenous role of stabilizing microtubule filaments. Dissociation of tau from scaffolding and transport structures not only reduces its localization to dendritic spines that are essential for proper synaptic function, but also increases the pool of misfolded monomers that can feed into the protein aggregation cascade16. The formation of aggregates and inclusions also drive further disruptions of other cellular organelles and neuronal processes17,18. Mitochondrial structure is markedly altered in AD brains, resulting in decreased mitochondrial respiration and ATP production as well as elevated oxidative stress19. Pathological Aβ and tau aggregates also cause an upregulation in the proliferation and activation of astrocytes and microglia. This increased neuroinflammation (“gliosis”) has been argued as a protective response, although it has also been proposed to aggravate neuronal atrophy by amplifying pro-inflammatory molecules that signal downstream cell death pathways20.

Parkinson’s disease

The second most common form of ND is Parkinson’s disease which is characterized by various types of motor deficits including gait and posture impairment, bradykinesia (slowness of movement), muscle rigidity, and resting tremors21,22. Similar to AD, neuronal loss is also observed but occurs mostly on dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Since this brain region supplies dopamine to the basal ganglia circuit, reduced dopamine levels is also observed in the striatum of the brain. This reduction causes excessive firing of neurons, making it difficult for PD patients to control their movements23. Risk for PD is also multifactorial and includes family history, exposure to environmental toxins, and most predominantly, aging. Genetics also plays a role, with over 20 different genes correlated to increased risk21. PD is also incurable, although fortunately life expectancy is similar for unaffected people.

Protein aggregation of the small protein α-Synuclein (αSyn) is proposed as an early contributor to the progression of PD. Gene dosage effects have been observed in a subset of PD patients, wherein duplications of the SNCA gene encoding for αSyn were proposed to contribute to PD progression through modest increases in αSyn protein expression levels24,25. Additionally, familial mutations in the SNCA gene are linked to early onset forms of PD, and these mutants (e.g. A53T, A30P, E46K, and H50Q) typically exhibit increased aggregation propensities in vitro26–29. Intracellular, filamentous aggregates of αSyn recruit other proteins, organelles, and membranes, and mature into intracellular inclusions such as Lewy bodies (LBs) or Lewy neurites (LNs)30. Analogous to amyloid plaques or NFTs in AD, LBs and LNs are the hallmark structures identified in postmortem analyses of PD patient brains. Extensive phosphorylation of αSyn specifically at Ser129 is detected in LBs, and this marker is commonly used to detect these structures in immunohistochemical experiments and clinical diagnoses31. αSyn in LBs is also heavily ubiquitylated32, which may indicate resistance against degradation due to impairment of proteostatic mechanisms such as the ubiquitin-proteasome system, molecular chaperone networks, and autophagy-lysosomal pathways. Recapitulation of LB formation in model systems also disrupt normal mitochondrial processes and induce synaptic dysfunctions33, consistent with clinical findings in PD patients. The increased production of inflammatory enzymes in DA neurons of postmortem PD brains also suggests neuroinflammation as a key event that may ultimately lead to neuronal injury and death34.

O-GlcNAc is a dynamic PTM that is essential for brain health but is dysregulated in NDs

Levels of O-GlcNAc within cells are controlled by the cycling enzymes O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) which adds the sugar, and O-GlcNAc hydrolase (OGA) which removes it (Figure 1a). These two enzymes are responsible for the modification of thousands of proteins in the human proteome. Transcriptional or translational control over the protein levels of these enzymes can thus effect changes to global O-GlcNAc levels. Additionally, O-GlcNAc levels also respond to changes in nutrient concentrations due to OGT’s utilization of the high energy sugar donor UDP-GlcNAc. This metabolite is a product of the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway which integrates sugar, nucleotide, and amino acid metabolism, although salvage pathways are also available35. Given these multiple possible avenues for regulation, O-GlcNAc is dynamic and is known to respond to various stimuli including metabolic flux and cellular stress. Along with NDs, global O-GlcNAc levels are also misregulated in other diseases such as cancer and diabetes.

O-GlcNAc is an evolutionarily conserved modification among eukaryotes and has ubiquitous presence across different cell types36. Among different types of tissues, O-GlcNAc levels are highest in the brain consistent with the high glucose consumption of this organ37, as well as increased expression levels and enzymatic activity of the cycling enzymes OGT and OGA36,38–40. Importantly, defects in the chromosome regions coding for both OGT (Xq13) and OGA (10q24) are associated with neurological disorders41–43, suggesting a role for O-GlcNAc in neuronal health. Indeed, early studies identifying and characterizing O-GlcNAcylated proteins in the brain indicated potential participation of this modification in synaptosome formation and intracellular signaling, key processes for normal neuronal communication44,45. Recent proteomics studies that aim to identify O-GlcNAc substrates have also shown that the major aggregating proteins in AD (tau and the amyloid-beta precursor protein) and PD (αSyn) are also O-GlcNAc modified in the brain46, suggesting a likely direct effect of O-GlcNAc to the process of protein aggregation.

The development of pan-O-GlcNAc antibodies for Western blotting or immunohistochemical applications has enabled convenient spatiotemporal quantification of O-GlcNAc levels from different biological samples47. In mammals, O-GlcNAc remains high from embryonic stage until birth, but levels drop throughout aging48. In AD patients, O-GlcNAc levels are consistently found to be lower than age-matched controls49–53. This downregulation is concomitant to impairment of glucose utilization54–56 as well as decreased OGT expression levels57. Contrarily, an increase in O-GlcNAc levels in AD patients has also been reported by a number of groups, and was rationalized by a measured downregulation in OGA expression58,59. With the use of a more sophisticated and sensitive method, a quantitative proteomics analysis of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in AD versus control patient brains has found that instead of a uniform change in modification for all OGT substrates, the up- or downregulation is protein-specific60. These specific alterations were proposed to occur either through direct changes in O-GlcNAc stoichiometry, or in combination with changes in protein expression levels. Importantly, proteins that were found to have decreased O-GlcNAcylation have roles in axonal polarity, membrane integrity, and synaptic health—again indicating a role for O-GlcNAc in the maintenance of normal neuronal functions. Interestingly, the same proteomics study found no abundance changes in either OGT or OGA expression. Taken altogether, O-GlcNAc is invariably dysregulated in NDs, and a lack of consensus among different studies regarding the trend may simply reflect non-standard and incomparable experimental and reporting methods. Possible causes for these discrepancies may be difference in the selection of tissue sample, disease staging, handling procedures (e.g. biopsy time, use of OGT/OGA inhibitors, etc.), or detection techniques, among others.

Tools for studying the mechanistic roles of O-GlcNAc

One approach to studying the role of O-GlcNAc in model organisms is through gene knockout through targeting of the enzymes OGT or OGA. However, given that O-GlcNAc is ubiquitous36,61 and is important in cell cycle progression62, OGT knockout causes mitotic arrest and neolethality, rendering long-term experiments and observations nonviable63. Constitutive neuron-specific knockout of OGT in mice hence resulted in severe developmental abnormalities and shortened life spans compared to littermates63. These mice were also unable to develop normal locomotive functions and had increased levels hyperphosphorylated tau. Thus, instead of embryonic knockout, delayed conditional knockout (cKO) of OGT was also developed and applied to study the post-developmental importance of O-GlcNAc in the excitatory neurons of mice57. Forebrain specific knockout of OGT caused progressive neurodegeneration as evidenced by Aβ-peptide accumulation, tau hyperphosphorylation, protein aggregation, neuroinflammation, neuronal death and memory impairment. Taken together, these indicators suggest a link between O-GlcNAc and Alzheimer’s disease progression. More recently, conditional knockout of OGT and OGA was also used to look at the function of O-GlcNAc in dopaminergic neurons64. Reduced O-GlcNAc in the OGT-cKO mice caused degeneration of dopamine neurons, severe motor deficits, and premature death. On the other hand, upregulation of O-GlcNAc in OGA-cKO mice was not detrimental and even alleviated the adverse biochemical and functional effects induced by αSyn overexpression. This work similarly illustrates a role for O-GlcNAc in the dopamine system and its potential significance in combatting the progression of Parkinson’s disease.

O-GlcNAc levels may also be up or downregulated temporally through genetic (RNAi) or chemical inhibition of the enzymes that regulate the modification. Small molecule inhibition of the enzyme glutamine fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFAT), the key enzyme in the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway that generates the sugar donor UDP-GlcNAc49, enables indirect metabolic downregulation of O-GlcNAc levels. Injection of the GFAT inhibitor 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine (DON) onto rat brains resulted in ~50% reduction in global O-GlcNAc levels and an accompanying increase in tau phosphorylation. It is critical to note that DON is not a GFAT-specific inhibitor but rather a glutamine-mimicking agonist, and its rather simple and electrophilic structure results in engagement and covalent modification of various glutamine-utilizing enzymes65. DON is also cytotoxic although its use as a chemotherapeutic is still currently being considered66. Over the years, substantial research efforts have been given towards the development of chemical inhibitors for OGT and OGA (Figure 1a), not only for their broad utility in O-GlcNAc related studies but importantly for their potential therapeutic use. For a more comprehensive summary of these OGT and OGA inhibitors, please refer to a recent review by Alteen et. al from the Vocadlo lab67. Structure-based design of OGT inhibitors have led to the discovery of Ac45SGlcNAc, a peracetylated 5-thio version of N-acetylglucosamine that is capable of lowering O-GlcNAc levels in cellular assays. Given its modest potency and low aqueous solubility, its use in in vivo studies has been rather limited. Modified versions of the Ac45SGlcNAc scaffold have been proposed that improve on its pharmacokinetic properties, one of which is the 5SGlcNHex variant that has since found use in rodent studies68. More recently, high-throughput screens have also identified a number of compounds with improved potency although improvements on toxicity and solubility are still needed69. On the other hand, OGA inhibitor development has been more fruitful and a number of these inhibitors have been used to study links between O-GlcNAc in models of NDs. Early OGA inhibitors included PUGNAc and streptozotocin (STZ), although PUGNAc was later shown to inhibit lysosomal hexosaminidases70 while STZ was shown to exhibit toxicity71. More recently, mechanism-based inhibitors such as NButGT and Thiamet-G (ThG) have been designed for improved selectivity and pharmacokinetics, with the latter exhibiting a high potency of Ki=2.1 nM and 1850000-fold selectivity for OGA over hexosaminidase B72. ThG has since been a widely adapted tool for in vitro, in cellulo, or in vivo studies given the simplicity in its synthetic preparation and its commercial availability73. Notably, administering ThG to different mice models of AD74–78 or PD64 has shown protective effects against cognitive and motor decline. Consequently, the drug MK-8719 (developed by Alectos and Merck) is based on the ThG structure and is currently being investigated in clinical trials for tau-related diseases (“tauopathies”) 79,80. Preclinical data in mice models of tauopathy showed neuroprotection against brain atrophy81, supporting the hypothesis that upregulation of O-GlcNAc could be beneficial to brain health. Similar trials based on OGA inhibition are also being actively pursued by Eli Lilly82 and Asceneuron83, although the structures of their small molecules remain undisclosed.

While methods that regulate global O-GlcNAc levels are useful in determining the system-wide effects on cells, tissues, or organisms, they often do not determine direct functional effects on individual proteins. Thus, in vitro biochemistry on purified proteins provide complementary insight for the dissection of complex pathways. These types of experiments require preparation of O-GlcNAcylated peptides or proteins that would be amenable to subsequent biochemical or biophysical studies. A convenient way to prepare O-GlcNAc modified proteins involves enzymatic modification of purified substrates with purified OGT84. A modification of this approach involves in vivo modification, where both OGT and the target protein substrate are co-overexpressed in E. coli85 or eukaryotic systems86. In the latter approach, O-GlcNAcylation occurs within cells, and O-GlcNAcylated proteins can be isolated after cell lysis and protein purification. Notably, both methods have been applied on tau, generating O-GlcNAcylated tau that were subsequently used for the evaluation of O-GlcNAc’s effects to the protein’s aggregation propensity78,87,88. The co-overexpression approach has also been applied to ɑ-Synuclein89.

Enzymatic preparation of O-GlcNAc modified proteins suffers from poor reaction efficiency, resulting in substoichiometric modification of substrates. Additionally, given that OGT can modify multiple serine and threonine sites on a single polypeptide chain, heterogeneous mixtures of unmodified, singly and multiply O-GlcNAcylated proteins are often produced from these enzymatic reactions. These complications thus prevent conclusive evaluation of the full and site-specific effects of O-GlcNAc modifications. As of yet, homogeneously and site-specifically O-GlcNAcylated purified proteins can only be prepared through semi-synthesis. Peptide fragments corresponding to different regions of the protein are initially prepared either through recombinant expression or solid phase peptide synthesis (SPPS). Notably, SPPS enables precise installation of the O-GlcNAc monomers with the use of O-GlcNAcylated Fmoc-serine or threonine monomers. In order to assemble the full protein, fragments are then joined together through any of the available chemoselective protein ligation techniques, most prominent of which are native chemical ligation90,91 (NCL) or expressed protein ligation92,93 (EPL) strategies (Figure 1b). Importantly, our lab has specialized in the application of EPL onto a number of ND-related proteins to study the role of O-GlcNAc in the process of protein aggregation.

O-GlcNAc is a multifaceted inhibitor of protein aggregation

The assembly of specific proteins into fibrillar, β-sheet rich structures (typically referred to as “amyloids”) is a detrimental gain-of-function phenomenon observed in many NDs2. The process is well-characterized biochemically and is generally known to occur via a multi-step mechanism (Figure 2) characterized by a sigmoidal increase in aggregate formation94. An initial lag phase represents the primary nucleation step where monomers initially associate to form oligomers95. These oligomers can be amorphous or structured and can exist with high persistence and abundance in solution96. Through molecular reorganization, the nucleation step is completed when oligomers slowly undergo conformational rearrangement to form highly organized protofibrils97. Protofibrils have tightly packed β-sheet stacking and can rapidly undergo extension by acting as “seeds” where monomers can add onto their exposed ends. The presence of small amounts of seeds is catalytic, resulting in the exponential increase in aggregate mass. Additionally, some forms of amyloids can also catalyze through a secondary nucleation mechanism in which monomers use the hydrophobic surfaces of fibrils to form new oligomers or protofibers98. Hence, the fibril growth step is a much faster process than nucleation and the mere addition of seeds to monomers shortens or completely eliminates the lag phase, drastically speeding up the formation of fibers. Fibrils also associate laterally and mature as straight or twisted filamentous structures99.

Fibrillar aggregates were traditionally considered as the major source of toxicity to neurons. However, given that oligomers are formed earlier at higher concentrations, and exhibit greater solubility and faster mobility, recent theories suggest that oligomers are likely the major contributor of toxicity in proteinopathies100. Nonetheless, intermediates, including fibers and smaller oligomers, have been demonstrated to contribute to a cascade of toxic effects101 and without a known biological relevance for ND-related amyloids in the brain102.

Amyloid beta

Aβ pertains to peptides ~40 amino acids in length that are produced from the proteolytic post-processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). APP is a transmembrane protein with most of its length residing in the extracellular space. APP can be synthesized as three alternative splicing variants of 695, 751 or 770 residues. The 695 amino acid variant is primarily expressed in the brain where it likely participates in the formation and repair of synapses103. APP can generate multiple proteolytic fragments via the proteolytic activity of α-, β-, and γ-secretases. Importantly, mutations in the genes encoding for APP or for components of the γ-secretase complex (presenilin; PSEN1 and PSEN2) are linked to increased amyloid load and early onset AD104.

Two distinct processing pathways generate different sets of fragments from APP (Figure 3a). First, in the non-amyloidogenic pathway, newly synthesized APP is transported from the Golgi network to axons where it inserts into the cell membrane. Here, some APP molecules are processed by α-secretase which cuts within the extracellular domain to release a soluble sAPPα fragment while retaining the C-terminal fragment (CTFα) bound to the membrane. Notably, sAPPα produced from the non-amyloidogenic pathway has been shown to have memory-enhancing effects105. A second cleavage by γ-secretase complex on CTFα forms fragments p3 and the intracellular domain (ICD) of APP, both of which are also non-amyloidogenic. Any unprocessed, intact APP gets re-internalized through clathrin-mediated endocytosis into endosomes where the alternative amyloidogenic pathway takes place. β-secretase releases a soluble sAPPβ fragment from the extracellular domain during the initial step of the processing, again leaving a membrane-bound C-terminal fragment (CTFβ). However, during the succeeding γ-secretase cleavage event, Aβ40 or Aβ42 peptides are released (instead of p3) from CTFβ. As the endosomes recycle to the cell surface, Aβ peptides are released extracellularly106. Production of Aβ peptides has unknown biological relevance and appears to be dispensable for normal physiological functions107. However, Aβ monomers can aggregate to form oligomers and fibrillar forms, both of which have been shown to elicit neurotoxicity through multiple downstream mechanisms108. Of the two forms, Aβ40 is produced in greater amounts although the Aβ42 variant aggregates much faster in vitro and is the major component of amyloid plaques in AD brains109. Thus, reducing Aβ production for instance through downregulation of the amyloidogenic proteolysis events is hypothesized to be a beneficial strategy to slow down AD progression110.

Altering O-GlcNAc in various models indicates a beneficial role for limiting the formation of amyloidogenic peptides. In OGT conditional knockout mice, loss of O-GlcNAc in the brain resulted in an increase of Aβ load57. In a mouse model of AD expressing 5 familial AD-linked mutations (5xFAD), treatment with the OGA inhibitor NButGT decreased Aβ production and attenuated neuroinflammation and memory impairment111. This work also reported reduced γ-secretase complex activity in CHO cells overexpressing the Swedish mutant of APP (swAPP) that is known to enhance Aβ production. This reduction was proposed to be via the direct O-GlcNAc modification of the γ-secretase component domain nicastrin at Ser708 which potentially reduces the complex’s proteolytic activity. Similarly, in bigenic tau/APP overexpressing mice (TAPP), ThG treatment also reduced Aβ42 levels and amyloid plaque load and consequently prevented cognitive decline112.

Direct O-GlcNAcylation of APP has also been detected113. In cultured neuronal cell line SH-SY5Y, OGA knockdown by siRNA or chemical inhibition by PUGNAc increased direct O-GlcNAcylation of APP, and resulted in greater secretion of the sAPPɑ fragment that is likely beneficial for neuronal excitability, synaptic plasticity, and memory functions114. Later, it was determined that the modification sites (Thr291, Thr292, Thr576)115,116 are not in the residues that eventually become part of Aβ peptides (597–638), but are in a region that could influence amyloidogenic processing and trafficking. Treatment of swAPP-overexpressing HeLa cells with PUGNAc increased APP trafficking into the plasma membrane and inhibited endocytosis, resulting in greater non-amyloidogenic processing117. This effect was subsequently shown to be dependent on the O-GlcNAcylation of APP at Thr576116. In summary, while no evidence has shown that O-GlcNAc directly affects the aggregation of Aβ, O-GlcNAc appears capable of limiting the production and accumulation of these amyloidogenic peptides. O-GlcNAc is also proposed to alter processing and trafficking, although this model is not universally supported as studies in primary neurons and other cultured cells112 as well as in the 5xFAD rodent model118 found no difference in APP processing.

Tau

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that assists in the polymerization of tubulin and stabilizes pre-formed microtubule structures. In cells, the protein localizes in the axons of growing and mature neurons, indicating a likely role in neuronal communication. Tau proteins isolated from the brain consist of 6 different isoforms formed from the alternative splicing of the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene transcript. These isoforms differ in the number of N-terminal repeats (0N,1N or 2N) in the acidic amino-terminal region that is known to interact with membranes, and in the number of imperfect repeats (3R or 4R, where the presence of repeat 2 is variable) in the C-terminal microtubule binding region (MTBR). Thus, the longest isoform is designated 2N4R (Figure 3b) and is 441 amino acids in length, while the shortest isoform 0N3R is 352 residues long. In solution, tau retains stability, solubility, and tubulin binding activity even after exposure to harsh temperature or pH conditions, indicating a highly unstructured monomer conformation119,120. These properties are expected of highly hydrophilic proteins, and indeed tau has a high proportion of polar amino acids, few hydrophobic and aromatic residues, a high isoelectric point (pI) and highly positive charge at physiological pH121.

Fibrillized tau is found as the predominant component of NFTs, intracellular inclusions that are one of the pathological markers of AD. Given the relative size of NFTs with respect to the neuronal body, fibrillar tau was originally proposed as the predominant source of neurotoxicity. However, more recent theories hypothesize that soluble oligomeric tau are likely more toxic and more easily transmissible, consistent with the observed cell-to-cell transmission and propagation of tau aggregates122. While soluble tau can be phosphorylated at a stoichiometry of 2–3 moles phosphates per molecule, aggregated tau is hyperphosphorylated at &gt;3-fold higher stoichiometries. Immunohistochemical detection of hyperphosphorylated tau is commonly used to establish the presence of NFTs in biological samples123. Structurally, aggregated tau in NFTs are β-sheet rich fibrillar aggregates mostly in the paired helical filament (PHF) and minimally the straight filament (SF) forms124. In high resolution structures of PHFs and SFs obtained from AD brains, repeats R3 and R4 of the MTBR form the compact core of the filaments125, indicating that the MTBR is an important region during nucleation. The exact mechanism of PHF formation from tau monomers is poorly understood both in vivo and in vitro, partly because of the difficulty in aggregating purified tau even at very high concentrations126. However, conditions that counteract the cationic character of the protein such as the addition of phosphate groups during phosphorylation have been shown necessary to induce aggregation127. Addition of negatively charged sulfated glycosaminoglycans (heparin)128 or fatty acids129 to purified tau have thus been used to generate and study filaments in vitro, although aggregates generated in the presence of these additives do not resemble ex vivo PHFs obtained from AD brains130.

O-GlcNAcylated tau was first detected in bovine brains at a high stoichiometry averaging 4 moles GlcNAc per mole of tau131. The sites were not initially identified, but it was proposed that O-GlcNAcylation occurs at more than 12 possible sites. Through the use of in vitro enzymatic modification, mass spectrometry and NMR spectroscopy, two separate groups found that purified OGT modifies tau at a total of 7 potential sites: Thr123, Ser185, Ser191, Ser400, Ser409, Ser412, and Ser413 132,133. Of these, Thr123 and Ser400 were identified as major sites of modification. The Ser400 modification site was also detected in brains of normal rats and the JNPL3 mouse model of tauopathy134,135, while Ser262 was found to be the predominant modification site in AD brains60. Rabbit polyclonal and monoclonal IgGs have since been developed for O-GlcNAc S400 tau, and have since been used to confirm the presence of O-GlcNAc modified tau in various in vitro and in vivo studies132,136. The most current entry on the O-GlcNAc database46 lists a total of 19 modification sites identified in more than 20 different studies using multiple different human cell types.

The role of O-GlcNAc in inhibiting tau aggregation was demonstrated in a number of studies that utilized OGA inhibition to upregulate the modification in mice models of tauopathies. The JNPL3 transgenic mice expresses the 0N4R isoform bearing a tauopathy-related P301L mutation, resulting in NFT development in various regions of the brain ultimately causing neuronal loss and astrogliosis137. Long-term treatment (36 weeks) of JNPL3 mice with ThG increased brain O-GlcNAc levels, blocked neuron loss, slowed down the development of motor deficits, and maintained normal body weight, presumably through preservation of skeletal muscle health78. The authors also noted that the long-term ThG treatment on wild-type mice with the same genetic background did not result in adverse effects on weight, appetite, or motor neuron counts. The amount of O-GlcNAc tau also increased and consequently, less insoluble tau was isolated in ThG-treated JNPL3 mice compared to untreated JNPL3 controls. Similarly, immunohistochemical analysis of ThG-treated JNPL3 mice showed reduction in the formation of NFTs. Given that the levels of hyperphosphorylation remained comparable between ThG-treated and untreated mice, it was proposed that the inhibition of oligomerization by O-GlcNAc occurs independently of its crosstalk with phosphorylation. ThG was also tested in Tau.P301L mice that express the P301L mutation, another validated pre-clinical model for tauopathies75. A similar reduction in NFT formation was detected in treated mice compared to placebo, and this trend corresponded with the improvement of breathing and airway defects. The authors did not find direct O-GlcNAcylation on tau protein and thus suggested an indirect mechanism for decreased NFT formation. More recently, the rTg4510 transgenic mouse model that also expresses the P301L mutant has been used extensively for OGA inhibition studies. Two separate groups found that acute (14 days) and chronic (4 months) ThG treatment increased global and tau-specific O-GlcNAc levels and resulted in less NFT formation76,77. Interestingly, while O-GlcNAcylated tau was detected in the pathological tau fraction of JNPL3 mice, Hastings et. al. reported that O-GlcNAcylation is mostly found in soluble but not aggregated tau in this rTg4510 model. Importantly, the rTg4510 model was also used to validate the ThG-derived OGA inhibitor MK-8719 during pre-clinical studies, where treatment with MK-8719 resulted in increased brain O-GlcNAc, reduction in pathological tau, and attenuation of brain atrophy and forebrain volume loss81. Altogether, these in vivo studies illustrate the protective and potentially therapeutic effects of OGA inhibition. This is also further supported by a cell-based study demonstrating that the opposite regulation is detrimental, as loss of O-GlcNAc via OGT inhibition resulted in greater tau aggregation138.

That a number of mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry-based studies indicate bona fide O-GlcNAcylation of tau raised the question of whether the modification directly affects its aggregation property. To explore this hypothesis, aggregation studies on purified O-GlcNAcylated tau have also been performed. Yuzwa et. al. generated O-GlcNAcylated tau (residues 244–441) corresponding to the aggregation-prone MTBR and the C-terminal tail where the O-GlcNAc modifications are known to occur78. The N-terminal region was truncated in order to enable heparin-induced aggregation in vitro at reasonable time scales. Recombinant co-overexpression with OGT and subsequent purification resulted in 50% modification efficiency at a mixture of sites as assessed by mass spectrometry. O-GlcNAc modified tau exhibited slower aggregation kinetics and formed less aggregates compared to an unmodified preparation. Mutation of Ser400 to alanine reduced the extent of O-GlcNAcylation on tau and completely abolished the inhibitory effect on aggregation, suggesting that this is the major modification site that plays a role in tau oligomerization. Later, the same group generated O-GlcNAcylated full-length tau again through recombinant modification88. O-GlcNAcylation of tau was shown to inhibit both the nucleation and extension steps of heparin-induced aggregation. Importantly, O-GlcNAc did not interfere with tau’s ability to interact with tubulin in microtubule polymerization assays, nor did it change the global fold of the protein in solution as determined by FRET experiments. Subsequent NMR studies on a truncated 353–408 region further confirmed the minimal effect of O-GlcNAc on tau’s conformation and solubility. These results demonstrate that O-GlcNAc directly inhibits the aggregation of tau without affecting intrinsic structure and microtubule-related functions. This could rationalize, at least in part, the reduction in the amount of pathological aggregates observed in in vivo OGA inhibition experiments.

α-Synuclein

Alpha synuclein (αSyn) is a small protein, 140 amino acids in size, found in presynaptic terminals of neurons or vesicle-enriched subcellular regions139,140 Its primary sequence is composed of imperfect repeats of consensus sequence KTKEGV clustered at the N-terminal half of the primary sequence141. The N-terminal residues (1–60) also bear a high frequency of lysine residues making this region highly amphipathic. Meanwhile, the C-terminal tail (residues 96–140) is highly acidic and imparts a low isoelectric point to the full-length protein, consequently stabilizing it against hydrophobic collapse over a wide range of pH. Recombinantly expressed αSyn hence behaves as an unstructured monomer in solution, although native electrophoresis and cross-linking studies of αSyn isolated in vivo have been used to show that it may exist as stable low molecular weight oligomers predominantly forming alpha helical tetramers142,143. In vitro, monomeric αSyn interacts with synthetic lipids to cause membrane remodeling144. This association is mediated by the N-terminal domain with its repeat regions assuming an extended alpha helical conformation upon lipid binding145. Hence, while the exact role of this protein in neurobiological process is not fully understood, its neuronal localization, ability to associate with lipids, and regulation of synaptic transmission all indicate roles in vesicle formation, trafficking, or cargo release146. Additionally, its C-terminal tail also has implicated roles in nuclear localization, metal binding, or mediation of protein-protein interactions147.

Historically, αSyn was discovered and characterized as a 35-amino acid segment that tightly interacts with SDS-resistant deposits isolated from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patient brains141. Since this peptide did not match the sequence of the AD-linked peptide amyloid β, the peptide was tentatively called the non-amyloid component (NAC). This peptide was later mapped as residues 61–95 of the full-length αSyn, characterized by a highly hydrophobic amino acid composition that explains its propensity to co-deposit with other amyloidogenic proteins. Indeed, it is widely demonstrated that purified αSyn can aggregate extensively, and that the NAC region is essential for aggregation141,148. Following its discovery in AD plaques and development of immunohistochemical tools for its detection, αSyn was identified as the principal component of abnormal inclusions such as Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites (LNs), and glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs)149. αSyn detected from these inclusions are subject to numerous modifications including phosphorylation at Ser129 (pS129), ubiquitination, and truncations33,150. Like tau, αSyn aggregates have also been implicated in a number of NDs collectively known as synucleinopathies which include Parkinson’s disease (PD), multiple systems atrophy (MSA) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Importantly, the type of synucleinopathy and the accompanying pathology exhibited by patients correlate with various factors such as the type of inclusions found during postmortem analyses and the type of cells affected151. More recently, high resolution structure studies also provide evidence that alterations in the atomic-scale structure of ɑSyn fibrils may also correlate with the variable clinical presentations observed in these synucleinopathies152.

ɑSyn is consistently identified as O-GlcNAc modified in multiple proteomics studies, with up to nine different modification sites (Figure 3b) detected from rodent mice brains115,134,135 or human tissue60,153. Five of these modification sites are found within the NAC region, thus having the potential to modulate the aggregation of ɑSyn monomers. Using mice in which OGA was conditionally knocked out in dopaminergic neurons, upregulated O-GlcNAc levels were found to be protective against the neurodegeneration induced by the overexpression of either wild-type or mutant A53T ɑSyn64. pS129 levels were also significantly reduced, indicating decreased maturation of αSyn aggregates. These measures associated with elevated O-GlcNAc were also consistent with improvements in synaptic transmission, dopamine function, and motor learning. The authors also noted that chronically upregulated O-GlcNAc levels do not negatively affect neuronal structures. In contrast, conditional knockout of OGT showed detrimental effects, suggesting the essentiality of O-GlcNAc to dopamine neuron health and survival. Importantly, neuroprotective effects against ɑSyn overexpression were also observed when O-GlcNAc is upregulated by ThG treatment, suggesting that pharmacological approaches could be a fruitful intervention in synucleinopathies.

In order to study the direct and site-specific consequences of O-GlcNAcylation on ɑSyn, our group prepared and characterized semi-synthetic O-GlcNAc modified ɑSyn proteins. Initial work on O-GlcNAcylated Thr72 ɑSyn (gT72) demonstrated that the modification inhibits the nucleation but not the extension step of aggregation, without affecting the ability of monomers to induce curvature on lipids154. A follow up work on O-GlcNAc Ser87 ɑSyn (gS87) site found a similar effect on nucleation155, although it was noted that the gT72 variant had a more significant degree of inhibition. The gT72 and gS87 proteins were also later used to show that O-GlcNAc can inhibit proteolytic cleavage by calpain with potential implications for the formation of aggregation-prone truncation fragments in PD156.

Given the site-specific effects observed for gT72 and gS87 ɑSyn, a parallel characterization of 4 different sites (Thr72, Thr75, Thr81, and Ser87) was performed157. All of the O-GlcNAc modified ɑSyn variants showed no difference from unmodified ɑSyn in their ability to interact with lipid membranes. In aggregation assays, O-GlcNAcylation was found to be generally inhibitory during the nucleation step, with the gT75 and gT81 variants showing the greatest reduction in aggregates formed. Notably, gT72 and gS87 ɑSyn were able to form amyloids that are likely different from those formed by unmodified monomers, as evidenced by transmission electron microscopy and limited proteolysis with Proteinase K. During the extension step, O-GlcNAc was also generally inhibitory, although the gT72 variant showed minimal inhibition consistent with the previous study. In addition to studying single O-GlcNAc modifications, a triply-modified variant (3Xg) was also synthesized, bearing O-GlcNAc at positions Thr72, Thr75 and Thr81. The 3Xg ɑSyn showed complete blocking of the nucleation and extension steps, and the triple modification was also able to overcome the higher aggregation propensity of the A53T mutant, indicating that the effect of O-GlcNAc is cumulative. The 3Xg protein was also able to block the extension of unmodified ɑSyn in trans. Importantly, these inhibitory effects observed during in vitro aggregation experiments were recapitulated in the reduction in toxicity observed when these proteins were co-treated with pre-formed fibers onto primary neurons. Collectively, biochemical work on semi-synthetic proteins supports a direct role for O-GlcNAc in inhibiting the aggregation of ɑSyn, and this effect was also observed by an independent group using recombinantly O-GlcNAcylated ɑSyn89.

Small heat shock proteins

Cells are normally equipped with mechanisms that can ameliorate proteotoxic stress caused by protein aggregation. One type of inducible response to protein misfolding is to sequester misfolded intermediates and provide environments for proper refolding. This is enacted by a class of proteins called chaperones and their network of co-chaperone proteins that together maintain protein homeostasis. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are among the most well-characterized class of chaperones, and are highly responsive to different types of stress such as thermal, oxidative, hypoxic, radiative, etc. In neurodegeneration and aging, numerous types of HSPs are also upregulated in response to proteotoxic stress, although downregulation of other types have also been reported158.

The HSP class of proteins includes six major families of varying sizes, only some of which are ATP-dependent, that utilize energy for active refolding. A small subset of HSPs are the ATP-independent small heat shock protein (sHSP) family whose molecular sizes fall under 35 kDa. sHSPs are “holdases” that transiently bind hydrophobic patches in unfolded or misfolded protein clients through a conserved β-sheet rich ɑ-crystallin domain (ACD) cleft. The ACD substrate binding cleft of many sHSPs is known to bind amyloidogenic proteins such as Aβ, tau, and αSyn and can inhibit their aggregation159–161. Interestingly, sHSPs are known to co-deposit within pathological inclusions in NDs, presumably as a result of the kinetics of aggregation overcoming the sHSPs’ chaperone activities162–164. Three members of the sHSPs, namely HSP27, ɑ-crystallin A (ɑAc) and ɑ-crystallin B (ɑBc), also have a conserved IXI-motif at their C-terminal tails. The IXI motif is able to bind to the ACD, and the contacts between the IXI and the ACD can block the substrate binding (i.e. of amyloidogenic clients) or the homo- or heterooligomerization of these sHSPs (Figure 3c). Mutations in the IXI region can hence alter the stability, dynamics, and chaperone activity of sHSPs through altered binding with the ACD165,166. Importantly, HSP27, ɑAc, and ɑBc were long-identified as O-GlcNAc-modified167–169 and recent proteomics studies localize the modification sites near the IXI motif for these three proteins60,170,171.

Through protein semi-synthesis, our group investigated the effects of O-GlcNAc on the chaperone activities of HSP27, ɑAc, and ɑBc53. O-GlcNAcylated variants of these sHSPs exhibited improved chaperone activities, and were able to inhibit the aggregation of ɑSyn and Aβ better than unmodified counterparts. This effect appears to be a tunable gain of function, as even substoichiometric amount of O-GlcNAc modification could impart significant enhancement in chaperone function. We also confirmed that O-GlcNAc near the IXI region indeed alters the IXI-ACD interaction, rationalizing the improvement in chaperone activity and a change in oligomerization dynamics. Quantification of O-GlcNAcylated HSP27 and ɑBc proteins from AD patient brains revealed upregulation (for HSP27) or maintenance (for ɑBc) of the modification levels even though global O-GlcNAc levels are reduced. Taken together, enhancement of chaperone function through O-GlcNAcylation is an additional indirect mechanism by which O-GlcNAc can be protective against neurodegeneration and this modification may be preserved in AD brains for its beneficial role.

Interplay with pathological phosphorylation

Like O-GlcNAcylation, protein phosphorylation is an enzymatic modification that is dynamic and responsive to changes in cellular milieu. Phosphorylation modifications are added by kinases on hydroxyl groups of tyrosine, serine or threonine residues, the latter two also being the addition sites for O-GlcNAc. Thus, O-GlcNAc and phosphorylation engage in various forms of interplay, where the presence of one can influence the addition and the downstream effect(s) of the other172. At the enzyme level, O-GlcNAc modifications of specific kinases have been shown to affect their catalysis, substrate selectivity, and downstream signaling cascades173. The opposite is also true, where phosphorylation on OGT or OGA has been suggested to modulate enzymatic activity and ability to form protein-protein interactions with their targets174,175. At the substrate end, some Ser/Thr residues are sites for competitive modification by both O-GlcNAc or phosphorylation, leading to a reciprocal relationship with often opposite downstream effects (Figure 4a). In addition to reciprocal effects, modification at one site of the substrate may also affect the propensity of a proximal or distal residue to be modified, and these crosstalk avenues may have positive or negative functional effects176.

Tau

Tau has over 80 tyrosine, serine, or threonine residues in its primary sequence that are potential phosphorylation sites. Phosphorylation of soluble tau can influence its role in neurite outgrowth and axon transport by modulating the affinity of tau for microtubules177. Phosphorylation of soluble tau may hence be a physiologically relevant mechanism to dynamically tune these processes within cells. On the other hand, pathological aggregates of tau in AD is invariably hyperphosphorylated at stoichiometries 3 to 4-fold higher than in soluble tau from healthy controls178. A number of phosphorylation sites are specifically and abnormally enriched such as Ser199, Ser202, Thr205, and Ser422, among others179. Although the sequence of events in the progression of AD is not completely clear, in vitro studies suggest that hyperphosphorylation is likely an event that precedes aggregation, as phosphorylation of tau accelerates its fibrillization while dephosphorylation greatly reduces oligomerization propensity127.

Shortly after the discovery of tau O-GlcNAcylation, its competitive crosstalk with phosphorylation has been suggested131. Early mechanistic investigations by the Gong lab using metabolically active rat brain slices showed that upregulation of O-GlcNAc with PUGNAc increased protein O-GlcNAcylation and reduced tau phosphorylation at Ser199, Thr212, Ser262, Ser396, and Ser422180. In this study, a downregulation in O-GlcNAc levels and increase in tau phosphorylation in AD brains were also observed and were linked to dysregulated glucose metabolism. Subsequent work by the same group further demonstrated that short-term fasting in mice decreased O-GlcNAc levels and consequently increased tau hyperphosphorylation181. Notably, forebrain-specific genetic knockout of OGT in mice also resulted in increased tau hyperphosphorylation57.

On the other hand, studies on different mice models of tauopathies utilizing OGA inhibition showed conflicting effects on tau phosphorylation. Treatment of JNPL3 mice with ThG caused no reduction in phosphorylation of either soluble or pathological tau species even though O-GlcNAcylated tau levels increased78. Given that there was also a significant decrease in aggregated tau and NFTs in ThG-treated JNPL3 mice, O-GlcNAc was thus proposed to directly inhibit the oligomerization of tau even when tau is phosphorylated. On the other hand, ThG treatment of rTg4510 mice resulted in decreased tau hyperphosphorylation in aggregates but not in the soluble fraction76,77. Hastings et. al. also reported that O-GlcNAc tau was only detected in the soluble, less phosphorylated fraction of tau, and this was also reflected in an independent ex vivo study of AD brains180 as well as cell culture-based studies on human neuroblastomas and tau-overexpressing HEK cells138,182. It was proposed that the relatively weaker effect of O-GlcNAc towards hyperphosphorylation in JNPL3 mice merely reflects differences in the rodent models used. The rTg4510 model is characterized by higher penetrance of tauopathy due to higher overexpression levels of tau, thus resulting in the more pronounced manifestations of tau-related phenotypes in this transgenic line183.

In the context of global O-GlcNAc alterations via genetic or chemical knockdown, changes in the O-GlcNAc state of multiple kinases can contribute to the interplay between tau phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation. These indirect enzyme-level mechanisms of crosstalk are more complex to analyze, although some attempt has been made184. Meanwhile, direct mechanisms for crosstalk based on substrate-level inhibition of phosphorylation by O-GlcNAc have also been elucidated from in vitro studies. For instance, Ser400 O-GlcNAcylation was shown to inhibit both reciprocal phosphorylation at Ser 400, and adjacent phosphorylations at Ser396 and Ser404 by CDK2 and GSK3β kinases185. Conversely, constitutive phosphorylation at either Ser396, 400 or 404 inhibited O-GlcNAc modification of a tau peptide by purified OGT. A recent NMR study also found that O-GlcNAcylation of tau at Ser400 minimally decreased Ser404 phosphorylation by rat brain extracts but not under conditions of hyperphosphorylation by the ERK2 kinase133.

α-Synuclein

Within its primary sequence, αSyn can be phosphorylated at the N-terminal Tyr39, the NAC-associated Ser87, and the C-terminal Tyr121, Tyr125, Ser129, Tyr133, and Tyr136 residues, through the involvement of multiple kinases31,186,187. These phosphorylation events have been shown to site-specifically modulate membrane binding, aggregation kinetics, aggregate morphology, and neurotoxicity. Similar to tau, aggregated forms of αSyn in pathological inclusions bear a distinct phosphorylation signature primarily characterized by an enrichment of phosphorylated Ser129 (pS129) and some phosphorylated Ser87 residues. In fact, while in normal brains only 4% of total αSyn bears pS129, this number is estimated at 90% in αSyn-staining PD brain deposits188,189. The consequence of this modification in the context of disease progression is still under debate with some models suggesting that it promotes aggregation and neurotoxicity, while some point to its role as a neuroprotective modification190. However, evidence suggests that pS129 accumulates in aggregated rather than monomer species of αSyn, suggesting that it is a potential response mechanism after initiation of intracellular aggregation33,191,192. Nonetheless, its accumulation in synucleinopathies makes pS129 a convenient marker that is widely useful for diagnosis and disease staging, despite recent arguments that pS129 by itself is an insufficient indicator of inclusion body formation and its accompanying pathologies33,193.

Neuron-specific conditional knockout of OGA in αSyn-overexpressing mice decreased the accumulation of pS129 modifications64. In the same study, a similar reduction of pS129 levels was also observed following ThG treatment of αSyn overexpressing mice. Although this appears to be a negative crosstalk phenomenon, it is likely that the reduction in pS129 is due to O-GlcNAc’s inhibition of αSyn aggregation resulting in the formation of fewer species that are the targeted for Ser129 phosphorylation. More direct evidence of crosstalk between phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation on αSyn has also been investigated through the use of semi-synthetic O-GlcNAcylated protein154. In vitro phosphorylation assays using Thr72 O-GlcNAcylated αSyn modulated the activity of three different kinases studied: casein kinase 1 (CK1), polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), and G-receptor kinase 5 (GRK5). Phosphorylation on S87 by CK1 was slightly enhanced by O-GlcNAc, while phosphorylation on S129 by all three kinases was inhibited. Thus, while the physiological consequences of these phosphorylation events are still unclear, O-GlcNAc appears capable of imparting another layer of influence on the progression of synucleinopathies.

O-GlcNAc in synaptic health, vesicular transport and trafficking

The synapse is the major information transfer region of neurons and the maintenance of synaptic health is important for central nervous system processes. Neuronal communication across synapses occurs through transfer of signals either as electrical information in the form of ions or chemical information in the form of neurotransmitters194. Aside from neurotransmitters, synapses also facilitate intra- and extracellular trafficking of other biomolecules when synaptic vesicles are either internalized (endocytosis) or released (exocytosis) along with their cargo195. In NDs, dysfunctional processes that occur on synapses and synaptic vesicles, collectively known as synaptopathies, are proposed to be events that progress downstream of proteotoxic stress196. Notably, the major amyloid proteins Aβ, tau, and αSyn are synapse-associated, as well as other proteins that are genetically linked to NDs including presenilin197 in AD, and parkin198 and LRRK2199 in PD.

Not only is O-GlcNAc highest in the brain among all other organs, it is also highly enriched in synapses44. Given the genetic link between OGT and OGA mutations and developmental or neurological disabilities41–43, O-GlcNAc has been long proposed to play a role in vesicular trafficking and signaling44,45. In mice, conditional knockout of OGT downregulates neurotransmitter co-transmission at dopamine synapses64. In contrast, conditional knockout of OGA does not alter baseline synaptic parameters such as spontaneous firing, membrane excitability, and input resistance. Instead, the increase in O-GlcNAc levels enhanced the transmission of neurotransmitters at dopamine terminals when excitatory input is applied.

Mechanisms involving specific synaptic proteins and the consequences of their O-GlcNAc modification have also been studied. As mentioned in a previous section, inhibition of endocytosis by O-GlcNAc was observed and found important for APP processing, where reduced APP internalization resulted in less amyloidogenic products116,117. Clathrin-associated protein AP180 (previously AP-3) was also previously discovered to be O-GlcNAcylated at its structural domain200. Interestingly, a reduction in O-GlcNAcylated AP180 protein was subsequently detected in AD brains compared to controls201. The same group also determined that the loss in detectable O-GlcNAcylated AP180 is due to a loss in the overall AP180 levels, and thus proposed that O-GlcNAc in AD brains may play a role in stabilizing AP180 against proteolytic degradation202. Since AP180 is known to associate with clathrin-coated synaptic vesicles for recycling and maintaining a pool of releasable vesicles203, it was suggested that the loss of this modification results in a loss of clathrin-coated vesicles in synapses during neurodegeneration. Another O-GlcNAcylated protein, synapsin, was also studied for its role in hippocampal plasticity204. Synapsins are proteins that tether synaptic vesicles onto the cytoskeleton to regulate vesicle release, and they are known to be heavily O-GlcNAcylated at multiple sites that flank phosphorylation sites205,206. Upregulation of O-GlcNAc levels with the OGA chemical inhibitor NPentGT resulted in an increase in phosphorylation of synapsin204. Phosphorylation activates synapsins, promoting the movement of synaptic vesicles from reserve to releasable mode. Thus, O-GlcNAc-related synapsin activation rationalized the observed increase in in vivo hippocampal plasticity in NPentGT-treated brain slices.

The transport and transmission of protein amyloids from cell-to-cell also contributes to the spread of pathologies in NDs3,207. Cellular experiments have shown that tau or αSyn aggregates added exogenously can be internalized by cells and in turn seed the intracellular pool of monomers208,209. This effect is also recapitulated in vivo with direct injection of pre-formed protein fibrils in live mice resulting in neurodegeneration210. Neurons that internalize protein aggregates further propagate the pathology to healthy neurons, through mechanisms involving initial release via exocytosis or cell death, followed by endocytosis by neighboring cells (Figure 4b)211. Given the previously described effects of O-GlcNAc in modulating endocytosis, Tavassoly et. al. investigated the effects of global O-GlcNAc upregulation in the uptake and spread of αSyn aggregates212. Their group found that O-GlcNAc upregulation either via ThG treatment or OGA siRNA knockdown resulted in less endocytosis of exogenous αSyn fibrils by SK-N-SH cultured neuroblastomas, H4 neurogliomas and primary mouse cortical neurons. The opposite effect was observed when O-GlcNAc was downregulated via treatment with the OGT inhibitor 5S-GlcNHex, resulting in greater uptake. Importantly, this regulation of endocytosis may be specific to αSyn fibrils (or other conformationally-similar amyloids), as internalization of other general ligands for endocytosis were not affected by O-GlcNAc alterations.

O-GlcNAc and autophagy

Another inducible response mechanism against the proteotoxic stress induced by protein aggregates is autophagy wherein cytosolic proteins, protein complexes, or organelles undergo non-specific, lysosome-dependent clearance. Various types of autophagy pathways are described213, but the most common associated with the degradation of proteins is macroautophagy. In this pathway, targets for clearance are initially transferred to lysosomal membranes where they bind to lysosome-associated membrane proteins. This results in engulfment and sequestration of the target to form an autophagosome. The autophagosome then fuses with lysosomes, translocating the cargo destined for degradation into the lysosomal lumen where proteases perform degradation. Given that impaired autophagy is observed in NDs, and the amyloid products of Aβ214, tau215, and α-Synuclein216 have all been demonstrated as targets for autophagy, it is proposed that increasing autophagy flux may be a protective and beneficial mechanism against neurodegeneration217.

O-GlcNAc is a well-documented regulator of autophagy, although whether the effect is promotive or inhibitory appears to be highly context-dependent. Genetic studies by Guo et. al. showed that OGT knockdown in C. elegans and HeLa cells upregulated autophagy by directly promoting autophagosome formation and maturation218, suggesting that O-GlcNAc is a negative regulator of autophagy. In genetic studies using Drosophila, the same inhibitory function for O-GlcNAc was found and was proposed to occur through the O-GlcNAcylation of the kinase Akt and the transcription factor FOXO, both known upstream regulators of autophagy219. O-GlcNAc also inhibited autophagy in cardiomyocytes of diabetic mice220. On the other hand, O-GlcNAc was found to be essential for the initiation and activation of autophagy in mammalian cells and mouse livers221, as well as in SH-SY5Y cells222.

In the context of neurodegeneration, ThG treatment of rat primary cortical neurons decreased autophagic flux and correlated with αSyn accumulation223. In this study, Wani et. al. showed that ThG treatment also enhanced the phosphorylation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), a key regulatory kinase that acts as a hub for sensing of stimuli that triggers autophagy as well as for controlling downstream steps in autophagy224. Specifically, phosphorylation of mTOR activates it, and in this activated form, it signals to downregulate autophagy-related processes225. In contrast, the Vocadlo lab reported that pharmacological upregulation of O-GlcNAc in neuroblastoma N2a cells, primary rat neurons, and rat brains stimulated autophagy without causing observable toxic effects226. In two mice models of AD, ThG treatment also resulted in enhanced autophagosome formation and autophagic flux which correlated with a decrease in pathological tau species. They further argued that the activation of autophagy was mTOR-pathway independent as phosphorylation of mTOR was not altered in their ThG treatment experiment.

The conflicting opinions about O-GlcNAc’s effect on autophagy may stem from the complexity of the process, and the presence of multiple nodes in the pathway that O-GlcNAc may influence. In an earlier paper, Wang and Hanover used C. elegans models of tauopathy-, Aβ-, and polyglutamine expansion-induced proteotoxic stress to demonstrate that OGT or OGA loss of function mutants showed the same effect of induction of autophagy as measured by the production of autophagosome marker LGG-1227. They hence suggested that O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes regulate multiple steps in the autophagic flux, both in the upstream signals as well as the downstream targets. Indeed, there are more than 30 core autophagy-related proteins and numerous proteins that interact in complex regulatory networks and pathways. Some of these proteins are known to be O-GlcNAcylated and limited studies on some of these do indicate contradictory effects. For instance, alanine mutants of the autophagy regulator SNAP-29 that could not be O-GlcNAcylated promoted autophagy, suggesting that O-GlcNAc inhibits flux at this point in the pathway218. On the other hand, O-GlcNAcylation of ATG4B (a cysteine protease) increases its proteolytic activity and promotes autophagy222. Taken altogether, O-GlcNAc can have variable consequences in autophagy activation at multiple distinct points, and the restoration of misregulated O-GlcNAc levels in NDs to optimal level could be critical for protein homeostasis.

O-GlcNAc and mitochondrial health

The mitochondrion is a multipurpose organelle that functions in ATP production, generation and balance of reactive oxygen species (ROS), biosynthesis of amino acids, steroids, and fatty acids, calcium homeostasis, and apoptosis5. Mitochondria are numerous and dynamic, and are constantly undergoing fragmentation, swelling, fusion, fission, and recycling under the regulation of multiple proteins and the cytoskeletal network. Mitochondria also house a distinct set of genetic information referred to as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) which encodes for electron transport chain proteins (ATP synthase, cytochromes, and NADH dehydroogenases), transfer RNAs, and ribosomal RNAs228. Due to the high energy requirement of neurons, mitochondrial health, availability and proper distribution are necessary for normal brain functions. Thus, deletions and mutations in mtDNA are identified in PD229 and AD230, as well as functional alterations in genome-coded mitochondrial-associated proteins such as presenilins in AD and PINK1 and parkin in PD231.

Based on its ability to act as a nutrient sensor, O-GlcNAc is hypothesized to play a role in mitochondrial dynamics and function. Sustained up or downregulation of O-GlcNAc levels have been shown to alter mitochondrial structure, proteome composition, cellular respiration, and ROS production, suggesting that optimal O-GlcNAc levels are important for normal activity232,233. One mechanistic insight that links O-GlcNAc and mitochondrial dynamics is based on the work of Pekkurnaz et. al. where they found that O-GlcNAc modification of the protein Milton regulates the motility of mitochondria, and this regulation is responsive to glucose availability234. Milton is an adaptor protein that connects kinesin to mitochondria-associated dynein motors and facilitates mitochondrial movement. Under elevated glucose levels, Milton is O-GlcNAcylated resulting in a decrease in the mobility of mitochondria and their accumulation at regions of increased glucose concentrations. The authors then proposed that in the context of neurons, intensive energy and glucose utilization at synapses would cause the localization of mitochondria at pre- and post-synapses, with the beneficial effect of increased ATP availability for neuronal communication processes. This essential function of O-GlcNAcylation on Milton is potentially altered in neurodegenerative disorders consistent with impaired glucose metabolism. Additionally, an independently described significance of O-GlcNAc to mitochondrial function in neurons is its potential role in the regulation of ATP synthase activity. O-GlcNAcylation of ATP synthase subunit 5α (ATP5A) was detected at Thr432 and found to be lower in AD brains235. Moreover, direct binding of ATP5A to Aβ peptides was proposed to hinder its ability to be modified by the mitochondrial splicing variant of OGT (mOGT). Treatment of HeLa cells with Aβ resulted in decreased ATP5A O-GlcNAcylation, ATP production, and ATP synthase activity. Importantly, treatment with ThG significantly reversed the effect of Aβ treatment and restored ATP production homeostasis.

O-GlcNAc in Inflammation and Cell Death

Another prominent feature in NDs is the elevation of chronic inflammatory reactions and immune activation propagated by glial cells, typically referred to as gliosis. Microglia and astrocytes are types of glial cells that serve to support and protect neuronal cells. One of their functions in the innate immune response is to activate response mechanisms against “danger signals” such as residual molecules from foreign bodies (i.e. viruses and microorganisms) as well as natively produced molecules including proteins, complement factors, cytokines, chemokines, glycation end products, etc.6. In response to sensing these signals, glia alter expression and production of surface markers (e.g. major histocompatibility complex II), receptors, proinflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and other cytotoxic factors including superoxide radicals, nitric oxide, and reactive oxygen species. Activated glia transmit these proinflammatory molecules through communication with neurons, and the balance in this cascade draws the line between neurotoxicity and beneficial effects. In AD, inflammation can also signal neurons to undergo a programmed cell death mechanism known as necroptosis, and an uncontrolled amplification of this effect results in large scale neuronal death and brain atrophy in AD patients236.

Loss of O-GlcNAc has been linked to an upregulation of inflammation in neurons57 while OGA inhibition in 5xFAD rodents elicited downregulation of neuroinflammation111. Whether these observations are due to O-GlcNAc’s role in processes that precede inflammation or O-GlcNAc directly and independently influence inflammatory pathways remains unclear from these studies. In more specific investigations, O-GlcNAc appears able to elicit both pro- or anti-inflammatory effects depending on cell type and protein target of modification237. Some immune-related proteins that O-GlcNAc activates are NF-κB238, Sp1239, and STAT3240—transcription factors that enhance the production of proinflammatory peptides and proteins. On the other hand, O-GlcNAcylation of receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) has been shown to downregulate innate immune signaling and necroptosis241, and this mechanism has important implications in AD. RIPK3 is a kinase that forms a complex with RIPK1 to form the core necroptosis-inducing signaling complex known as the necrosome (Figure 4d). The necrosome then acts through the mixed lineage kinase domain–like pseudo-kinase (MLKL) to signal necroptosis by causing breakdown of membranes and release of cell contents. Li et. al. initially found that O-GlcNAcylation of RIPK3 at Thr467 in mouse macrophages inhibited its ability to form a complex with RIPK1, hence limiting the formation of the necrosome and its downstream immune signaling241. More recently, this mechanism was also investigated in the context of AD118. In AD brains, increased necroptosis correlated with a decrease in global O-GlcNAc levels. In OGA-haploinsufficient (OGA+/−) 5xFAD mice, the elevated O-GlcNAc levels (compared to OGA+/+ 5xFAD) also correlated with a decrease in RIPK1 binding to RIPK3, reduction in the release of necroptosis related factors, restoration of normal mitochondrial function, and suppression of gliosis. Importantly, the reduction in necroptosis and cell death also correlated with the amelioration of cognitive decline, further substantiating the protective and potentially therapeutic role of O-GlcNAc in AD and other NDs.

Conclusions

The potential utility of O-GlcNAc upregulation as a preventive or curative therapy currently being explored in clinical trials appears promising given the abundance of evidence that demonstrates a multilateral influence of O-GlcNAc on neurodegeneration-related processes. Although the major contributing mechanism is unclear and undetermined, multiple pathways likely combine to cause an overall beneficial effect. Importantly, careful consideration also needs to be given to the safety and tolerability of long-term increases in O-GlcNAcylation. This is especially true given the wide scope of proteins and pathways affected by this PTM. Concerns have been raised regarding the possibility that altering with O-GlcNAc levels could result in metabolic dysregulation. This has been supported by the discovery that a single nucleotide polymorphism in the gene encoding for OGA (potentially resulting in decreased OGA expression) correlates with a higher incidence of type II diabetes242. Long-term PUGNAc treatment has also been shown to cause insulin resistance in rat skeletal muscle243. This this has not been widely reproducible, as treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes and rodents with the more specific inhibitor NButGT did not induce the same effect244,245. Most recent data in mice and humans also show high tolerability for MK-871980. This observation might be explained by the fact that OGT and OGA expression are reciprocally regulated to allow cells to maintain a moderate range of O-GlcNAc modifications246. Therefore, it is possible that healthy tissue may be able to adjust to OGA inhibition through downregulation of OGT, potentially limiting the development of long-term complications. It is also possible that pro-drug versions of OGA inhibitors might be created to allow for more targeted OGA inhibition in the brain. However, it is an important future goal to test these possibilities as these compounds move into the clinic. Another important future goal is the development of diagnostics that can detect neurodegenerative diseases at early stages before significant protein aggregation, spread, and the associated toxicity has accumulated. This advance would allow OGA inhibitors to be applied at the appropriate time to allow for increased O-GlcNAc to prevent protein aggregation, as later application may not help clear already aggregated protein and it is not even clear if removing amyloids after they form is beneficial.

Outside of the area of OGA inhibitor development and testing, future work should continue to focus on discovering and characterizing the effect of O-GlcNAc on the myriad untested substrate proteins. This work should span protein biochemistry, cell biology, and animal experiments to provide a holistic view on the many different pathways and processes that are likely simultaneously altered by changes in O-GlcNAc levels. For example, the molecular mechanisms by which O-GlcNAc inhibits the formation of Tau and α-synuclein amyloids is still somewhat mysterious and our work suggests that the mechanism does not seem to be simply the presence of a hydrophilic polyol247. Additionally, for those O-GlcNAc sites that do not completely inhibit protein aggregation more research is needed to determine whether these modifications might change the amyloid structure to form different aggregate “strains” that might have altered pathogenicity. It is also very likely that O-GlcNAc has beneficial effects by altering proteins apart from those that directly form amyloids, and these potential mechanisms need to be identified and characterized. Anecdotally, we have found important biochemical consequences of site-specific O-GlcNAc on all of the modified proteins that we have made, suggesting that there is significant information yet to be learned. We hope that this encourages others to join the still relatively small field exploring O-GlcNAc as a protective modification in neurodegenerative diseases.

Figure 1. Chemical approaches to decipher roles of O-GlcNAc in neurodegeneration.

a. O-GlcNAc is a posttranslational modification that is regulated by the enzymatic activity of the cycling enzymes OGT and OGA, and the availability of the sugar donor UDP-GlcNAc produced from the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP). Inhibitors of the HBP enzyme GFAT or of OGT (in red dotted circles) lower O-GlcNAc levels in cells or animals, while inhibitors of OGA (in blue dotted circle) increase O-GlcNAc. b. Native and expressed protein ligations enable the preparation of homogeneously O-GlcNAcylated proteins. This involves the chemoselective reaction between a peptide fragment bearing a C-terminal thioester and another fragment with an N-terminal thiol (such as that in cysteines). These fragments can be prepared by recombinant expression or solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS), with SPPS also enabling precise installation of O-GlcNAcylated serine/ threonine residues.

Figure 2. The process of protein aggregation.

Soluble, monomeric proteins implicated in NDs can slowly undergo a nucleation step to form compact β-sheet rich oligomers. These oligomers undergo molecular rearrangements and structural transitions to generate protofibrillar seeds. Protofibrils can then catalyze rapid amplification of protein aggregates through a much faster extension step. Mature amyloid fibers are routinely found in extracellular deposits called plaques in AD, or in intracellular inclusions such as neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in AD or Lewy bodies (LBs) in PD.

Figure 3. O-GlcNAc is a multifaceted modulator of protein aggregation.

a. The amyloid precursor protein (APP) can undergo two alternative processing mechanisms through the action of ɑ-, β-, and γ- secretases. The amyloidogenic pathway is pertinent in AD as it generates Aβ peptides that are highly prone towards aggregation. APP O-GlcNAcylation at Thr576 as well as O-GlcNAcylation of a γ-secretase subunit are known to favor the non-amyloidogenic pathway. b. Tau and ɑSyn are O-GlcNAc modified at multiple sites. O-GlcNAcylation of these two proteins have been shown to inhibit both nucleation and extension steps of amyloid formation. c. Small heat shock proteins (sHSPs) bearing a C-terminal IXI motif are O-GlcNAc-modified at this regulator region. O-GlcNAc-modifications near or at the IXI motif inhibits its interaction with the conserved ɑ-crystallin domain (ACD) which bears a well-characterized binding cleft for sequestration of Aβ, tau, or αSyn aggregation intermediates. O-GlcNAcylated sHSPs exhibits better anti-amyloidogenic chaperone activities against the aggregation of Aβ and αSyn.

Figure 4. O-GlcNAc influences multiple mechanisms in neurodegeneration.

a. O-GlcNAc participates in various forms of crosstalk with phosphorylation. Some modification sites can be modified by both types of PTM, leading to direct reciprocal relationship wherein the presence of one prevents the addition of the other. The presence of a PTM on one site can also affect a proximal or distal modification site. Specific O-GlcNAc sites on tau and αSyn are known to inhibit phosphorylation at different sites, and vice versa. b. Cell-to-cell propagation of neurons occur through release of aggregates by an affected neuron, followed by uptake of surrounding neurons. The process of endocytosis of exogenous aggregates is inhibited by upregulation of O-GlcNAc. c. Necroptosis is a programmed form of cell death that is initiated by the formation of a RIPK1-RIPK3 complex that signals downstream toward inflammation and necrosis. O-GlcNAc inhibits the formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex, resulting in reduced neuroinflammation and necroptosis.


References

(1) Jellinger KA Basic Mechanisms of Neurodegeneration: A Critical Update. J. Cell. Mol. Med 2010, 14 (3 ), 457–487. 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01010.x.20070435
(2) Ross CA ; Poirier MA Protein Aggregation and Neurodegenerative Disease. Nat. Med 2004, 10 (7 ), S10. 10.1038/nm1066.15272267
(3) Soto C ; Pritzkow S Protein Misfolding, Aggregation, and Conformational Strains in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Nat. Neurosci 2018, 21 (10 ), 1332–1340. 10.1038/s41593-018-0235-9.30250260
(4) Wishart TM ; Parson SH ; Gillingwater TH Synaptic Vulnerability in Neurodegenerative Disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 2006, 65 (8 ), 733–739. 10.1097/01.jnen.0000228202.35163.c4.16896307
(5) Johri A ; Beal MF Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Neurodegenerative Diseases. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 2012, 342 (3 ), 619–630. 10.1124/jpet.112.192138.22700435
(6) Guzman-Martinez L ; Maccioni RB ; Andrade V ; Navarrete LP ; Pastor MG ; Ramos-Escobar N Neuroinflammation as a Common Feature of Neurodegenerative Disorders. Frontiers in Pharmacology 2019, p 1008.31572186
(7) Gorman AM Neuronal Cell Death in Neurodegenerative Diseases: Recurring Themes around Protein Handling. J. Cell. Mol. Med 2008, 12 (6A ), 2263–2280. 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00402.x.18624755
(8) Bond MR ; Hanover JA A Little Sugar Goes a Long Way: The Cell Biology of O-GlcNAc. J. Cell Biol 2015, 208 (7 ), 869–880. 10.1083/jcb.201501101.25825515
(9) Yang X ; Qian K Protein O-GlcNAcylation: Emerging Mechanisms and Functions. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 2017, 18 (7 ), 452–465. 10.1038/nrm.2017.22.28488703
(10) Kocahan S ; Doğan Z Mechanisms of Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis and Prevention: The Brain, Neural Pathology, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptors, Tau Protein and Other Risk Factors. Clin. Psychopharmacol. Neurosci 2017, 15 (1 ), 1–8. 10.9758/cpn.2017.15.1.1.28138104
(11) Braak H ; Braak E ; Bohl J Staging of Alzheimer-Related Cortical Destruction. Eur. Neurol 1993, 33 (6 ), 403–408. 10.1159/000116984.8307060
(12) Yankner BA Mechanisms of Neuronal Degeneration in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron 1996, 16 (5 ), 921–932. 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80115-4.8630250
(13) Qiu C ; Kivipelto M ; von Strauss E Epidemiology of Alzheimer’s Disease: Occurrence, Determinants, and Strategies toward Intervention. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci 2009, 11 (2 ), 111–128. 10.31887/DCNS.2009.11.2/cqiu.19585947
(14) Bird TD Genetic Aspects of Alzheimer Disease. Genet. Med 2008, 10 (4 ), 231–239. 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31816b64dc.18414205
(15) Se Thoe E ; Fauzi A ; Tang YQ ; Chamyuang S ; Chia AYY A Review on Advances of Treatment Modalities for Alzheimer’s Disease. Life Sci 2021, 276 , 119129. 10.1016/j.lfs.2021.119129.33515559
(16) Guo T ; Zhang D ; Zeng Y ; Huang TY ; Xu H ; Zhao Y Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Underlying the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease. Mol. Neurodegener 2020, 15 (1 ), 1–37. 10.1186/s13024-020-00391-7.31964406
(17) Gendreau KL ; Hall GF Tangles, Toxicity, and Tau Secretion in AD - New Approaches to a Vexing Problem. Front. Neurol 2013, 4 , 160. 10.3389/fneur.2013.00160.24151487
(18) Reiss AB ; Arain HA ; Stecker MM ; Siegart NM ; Kasselman LJ Amyloid Toxicity in Alzheimer’s Disease. Rev. Neurosci 2018, 29 (6 ), 613–627. 10.1515/revneuro-2017-0063.29447116
(19) Abolhassani N ; Leon J ; Sheng Z ; Oka S ; Hamasaki H ; Iwaki T ; Nakabeppu Y Molecular Pathophysiology of Impaired Glucose Metabolism, Mitochondrial Dysfunction, and Oxidative DNA Damage in Alzheimer’s Disease Brain. Mech. Ageing Dev 2017, 161 , 95–104. 10.1016/j.mad.2016.05.005.27233446
(20) Pekny M ; Wilhelmsson U ; Pekna M The Dual Role of Astrocyte Activation and Reactive Gliosis. Neurosci. Lett 2014, 565 , 30–38. 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.12.071.24406153
(21) Maiti P ; Manna J ; Dunbar GL ; Maiti P ; Dunbar GL Current Understanding of the Molecular Mechanisms in Parkinson’s Disease: Targets for Potential Treatments. Transl. Neurodegener 2017, 6 (1 ), 1–35. 10.1186/s40035-017-0099-z.28105331
(22) Poewe W ; Seppi K ; Tanner CM ; Halliday GM ; Brundin P ; Volkmann J ; Schrag AE ; Lang AE Parkinson Disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim 2017, 3 , 1–21. 10.1038/nrdp.2017.13.
(23) Alexander GE Biology of Parkinson’s Disease: Pathogenesis and Pathophysiology of a Multisystem Neurodegenerative Disorder. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci 2004, 6 (3 ), 259–280. 10.31887/DCNS.2004.6.3/galexander.22033559
(24) Chartier-Harlin M-C ; Kachergus , Jennifer Roumier C ; Mouroux V ; Douay X ; Lincoln S ; Levecque C ; Larvor L ; Andrieux J ; Hulihan M ; Waucquier N ; α-Synuclein Locus Duplication as a Cause of Familial Parkinson’s Disease. Lancet 2004, 364 (9440 ), 1167–1169.15451224
(25) Ibanez P ; A.M., B.; B., D.; E., L.; F., T.; P., P.; Y., A.; A., B. Causal Relation between Alpha-Synuclein Gene Duplication and Familial Parkinson’s Disease. Lancet 2004, 364 (9440 ), 1169–1171.15451225
(26) Giasson BI ; Uryu K ; Trojanowski JQ ; Lee VMY Mutant and Wild Type Human α-Synucleins Assemble into Elongated Filaments with Distinct Morphologies in Vitro. J. Biol. Chem 1999, 274 (12 ), 7619–7622. 10.1074/jbc.274.12.7619.10075647
(27) Conway KA ; Lee SJ ; Rochet JC ; Ding TT ; Williamson RE ; Lansbury PT Acceleration of Oligomerization, Not Fibrillization, Is a Shared Property of Both α-Synuclein Mutations Linked to Early-Onset Parkinson’s Disease: Implications for Pathogenesis and Therapy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2000, 97 (2 ), 571–576. 10.1073/pnas.97.2.571.10639120
(28) Conway KA ; Harper JD ; Lansbury PT Accelerated in Vitro Fibril Formation by a Mutant α-Synuclein Linked to Early-Onset Parkinson Disease. Nat. Med 1998, 4 (11 ), 1318–1320. 10.1038/3311.9809558
(29) Peng C ; Gathagan RJ ; Lee VM-Y Distinct Alpha-Synuclein Strains and Implications for Heterogeneity among Alpha-Synucleinopathies. Neurobiol. Dis 2017. 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.07.018.
(30) Fares MB ; Jagannath S ; Lashuel HA Reverse Engineering Lewy Bodies: How Far Have We Come and How Far Can We Go? Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2021. 10.1038/s41583-020-00416-6.
(31) Oueslati A Implication of Alpha-Synuclein Phosphorylation at S129 in Synucleinopathies: What Have We Learned in the Last Decade? J. Parkinsons. Dis 2016, 6 (1 ), 39–51. 10.3233/JPD-160779.27003784
(32) Tofaris GK ; Razzaq A ; Ghetti B ; Lilley KS ; Spillantini MG Ubiquitination of α-Synuclein in Lewy Bodies Is a Pathological Event Not Associated with Impairment of Proteasome Function*. J. Biol. Chem 2003, 278 (45 ), 44405–44411. 10.1074/jbc.M308041200.12923179
(33) Mahul-Mellier A-LL ; Burtscher J ; Maharjan N ; Weerens L ; Croisier M ; Kuttler F ; Leleu M ; Knott GW ; Lashuel HA The Process of Lewy Body Formation, Rather than Simply α-Synuclein Fibrillization, Is One of the Major Drivers of Neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2020, 117 (9 ), 4971–4982. 10.1073/pnas.1913904117.32075919
(34) Bartels AL ; Leenders KL Cyclooxygenase and Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s Disease Neurodegeneration. Curr. Neuropharmacol 2010, 8 (1 ), 62–68. 10.2174/157015910790909485.20808546
(35) Love DC ; Hanover JA The Hexosamine Signaling Pathway: Deciphering the “O-GlcNAc Code”. Sci. STKE 2005, 2005 (312 ), 10–14. 10.1126/stke.3122005re13.
(36) Kreppel LK ; Blomberg MA ; Hart GW Dynamic Glycosylation of Nuclear and Cytosolic Proteins: Cloning and Characterization of a Unique O-GlcNAc Transferase with Multiple Tetratricopeptide Repeats. J. Biol. Chem 1997, 272 (14 ), 9308–9315. 10.1074/jbc.272.14.9308.9083067
(37) Mergenthaler P ; Lindauer U ; Dienel GA ; Meisel A Sugar for the Brain: The Role of Glucose in Physiological and Pathological Brain Function. Trends Neurosci 2013, 36 (10 ), 587–597. 10.1016/j.tins.2013.07.001.23968694
(38) Gao Y ; Wells L ; Comer FI ; Parker GJ ; Hart GW Dynamic O-Glycosylation of Nuclear and Cytosolic Proteins: Cloning and Characterization of a Neutral, Cytosolic β-N-Acetylglucosaminidase from Human Brain. J. Biol. Chem 2001, 276 (13 ), 9838–9845. 10.1074/jbc.M010420200.11148210
(39) Akimoto Y ; Comer FI ; Cole RN ; Kudo A ; Kawakami H ; Hirano H ; Hart GW Localization of the O-GlcNAc Transferase and O-GlcNAc-Modified Proteins in Rat Cerebellar Cortex. Brain Res 2003, 966 (2 ), 194–205. 10.1016/S0006-8993(02)04158-6.12618343
(40) Okuyama R ; Marshall S UDP-N-Acetylglucosaminyl Transferase (OGT) in Brain Tissue: Temperature Sensitivity and Subcellular Distribution of Cytosolic and Nuclear Enzyme. J. Neurochem 2003, 86 (5 ), 1271–1280. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01939.x.12911634
(41) Shafi R ; Iyer SPN ; Ellies LG ; O’Donnell N ; Marek KW ; Chui D ; Hart GW ; Marth JD The O-GlcNAc Transferase Gene Resides on the X Chromosome and Is Essential for Embryonic Stem Cell Viability and Mouse Ontogeny. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2000, 97 (11 ), 5735–5739. 10.1073/pnas.100471497.10801981
(42) Ertekin-Taner N ; Graff-Radford N ; Younkin LH ; Eckman C ; Baker M ; Adamson J ; Ronald J ; Blangero J ; Hutton M ; Younkin SG Linkage of Plasma Aβ42 to a Quantitative Locus on Chromosome 10 in Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease Pedigrees. Science (80-. ) 2000, 290 (5500 ), 2303–2304. 10.1126/science.290.5500.2303.
(43) Willems AP ; Gundogdu M ; Kempers MJE ; Giltay JC ; Pfundt R ; Elferink M ; Loza BF ; Fuijkschot J ; Ferenbach AT ; Van Gassen KLI ; Mutations in N-Acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) Transferase in Patients with X-Linked Intellectual Disability. J. Biol. Chem 2017, 292 (30 ), 12621–12631. 10.1074/jbc.M117.790097.28584052
(44) Cole RN ; Hart GW Cytosolic O-Glycosylation Is Abundant in Nerve Terminals. J. Neurochem 2001, 79 (5 ), 1080–1089. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2001.00655.x.11739622
(45) Khidekel N ; Ficarro SB ; Peters EC ; Hsieh-Wilson LC Exploring the O-GlcNAc Proteome: Direct Identification of O-GlcNAc-Modified from the Brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2004, 101 (36 ), 13132–13137. 10.1073/pnas.0403471101.15340146
(46) Wulff-Fuentes E ; Berendt RR ; Massman L ; Danner L ; Malard F ; Vora J ; Kahsay R ; Olivier-Van Stichelen S The Human O-GlcNAcome Database and Meta-Analysis. Sci. Data 2021, 8 (1 ), 25. 10.1038/s41597-021-00810-4.33479245
(47) Ma J ; Hart GW O-GlcNAc Profiling: From Proteins to Proteomes. Clin. Proteomics 2014, 11 (1 ), 1–16. 10.1186/1559-0275-11-8.24393543
(48) Liu Y ; Li X ; Yu Y ; Shi J ; Liang Z ; Run X ; Li Y ; Dai C. ling ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Iqbal K ; Developmental Regulation of Protein O-GlcNAcylation, O-GlcNAc Transferase, and O-GlcNAcase in Mammalian Brain. PLoS One 2012, 7 (8 ), 1–13. 10.1371/journal.pone.0043724.
(49) Liu F ; Shi J ; Tanimukai H ; Gu J ; Gu J ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Iqbal K ; Gong CX Reduced O-GlcNAcylation Links Lower Brain Glucose Metabolism and Tau Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease. Brain 2009, 132 (7 ), 1820–1832. 10.1093/brain/awp099.19451179
(50) Pinho TS ; Correia SC ; Perry G ; Ambrósio AF ; Moreira PI Diminished O-GlcNAcylation in Alzheimer’s Disease Is Strongly Correlated with Mitochondrial Anomalies. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Mol. Basis Dis 2019, 1865 (8 ), 2048–2059. 10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.10.037.30412792
(51) Liu F ; Iqbal K ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Hart GW ; Gong C-X O-GlcNAcylation Regulates Phosphorylation of Tau: A Mechanism Involved in Alzheimer’s Disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2004, 101 (29 ), 10804–10809. 10.1073/pnas.0400348101.15249677
(52) Aguilar AL ; Hou X ; Wen L ; Wang PG ; Wu P A Chemoenzymatic Histology Method for O-GlcNAc Detection. ChemBioChem 2017, 18 (24 ), 2416–2421. 10.1002/cbic.201700515.29044951
(53) Balana AT ; Levine PM ; Craven TW ; Mukherjee S ; Pedowitz NJ ; Moon SP ; Takahashi TT ; Becker CFW ; Baker D ; Pratt MR O-GlcNAc Modification of Small Heat Shock Proteins Enhances Their Anti-Amyloid Chaperone Activity. Nat. Chem 2021. 10.1038/s41557-021-00648-8.
(54) Kapogiannis D ; Mattson MP Disrupted Energy Metabolism and Neuronal Circuit Dysfunction in Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease. Lancet Neurol 2011, 10 (2 ), 187–198. 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70277-5.21147038
(55) Merlini M ; Meyer EP ; Ulmann-Schuler A ; Nitsch RM Vascular β-Amyloid and Early Astrocyte Alterations Impair Cerebrovascular Function and Cerebral Metabolism in Transgenic ArcAβ Mice. Acta Neuropathol 2011, 122 (3 ), 293–311. 10.1007/s00401-011-0834-y.21688176
(56) Borghammer P ; Hansen SB ; Eggers C ; Chakravarty M ; Vang K ; Aanerud J ; Hilker R ; Heiss WD ; Rodell A ; Munk OL ; Glucose Metabolism in Small Subcortical Structures in Parkinson’s Disease. Acta Neurol. Scand 2012, 125 (5 ), 303–310. 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01556.x.21692755
(57) Wang AC ; Jensen EH ; Rexach JE ; Vinters HV ; Hsieh-Wilson LC Loss of O-GlcNAc Glycosylation in Forebrain Excitatory Neurons Induces Neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2016, 113 (52 ), 15120–15125. 10.1073/pnas.1606899113.27956640
(58) Griffith LS ; Schmitz B O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine Is Upregulated in Alzheimer Brains. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 1995, 213 (2 ), 424–431. 10.1006/bbrc.1995.2149.7646495
(59) Förster S ; Welleford AS ; Triplett JC ; Sultana R ; Schmitz B ; Butterfield DA Increased O-GlcNAc Levels Correlate with Decreased O-GlcNAcase Levels in Alzheimer Disease Brain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Mol. Basis Dis 2014, 1842 (9 ), 1333–1339. 10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.014.
(60) Wang S ; Yang F ; Petyuk VA ; Shukla AK ; Monroe ME ; Gritsenko MA ; Rodland KD ; Smith RD ; Qian WJ ; Gong CX ; Quantitative Proteomics Identifies Altered O-GlcNAcylation of Structural, Synaptic and Memory-Associated Proteins in Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Pathol 2017, 243 (1 ), 78–88. 10.1002/path.4929.28657654
(61) Lubas WA ; Frank DW ; Krause M ; Hanover JA O-Linked GlcNAc Transferase Is a Conserved Nucleocytoplasmic Protein Containing Tetratricopeptide Repeats. J. Biol. Chem 1997, 272 (14 ), 9316–9324. 10.1074/jbc.272.14.9316.9083068
(62) Liu C ; Li J O-GlcNAc: A Sweetheart of the Cell Cycle and DNA Damage Response. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 2018, 9 , 415. 10.3389/fendo.2018.00415.30105004
(63) O’Donnell N ; Zachara NE ; Hart GW ; Marth JD Ogt-Dependent X-Chromosome-Linked Protein Glycosylation Is a Requisite Modification in Somatic Cell Function and Embryo Viability. Mol. Cell. Biol 2004, 24 (4 ), 1680–1690. 10.1128/mcb.24.4.1680-1690.2004.14749383
(64) Lee BE ; Kim HY ; Kim HJ ; Jeong H ; Kim BG ; Lee HE ; Lee J ; Kim HB ; Lee SE ; Yang YR ; O-GlcNAcylation Regulates Dopamine Neuron Function, Survival and Degeneration in Parkinson Disease. Brain 2020, 143 (12 ), 3699–3716. 10.1093/brain/awaa320.33300544
(65) Pinkus LMBT-M in E. [45] Glutamine Binding Sites. In Affinity labeling; Academic Press, 1977; Vol. 46 , pp 414–427. 10.1016/S0076-6879(77)46049-X.
(66) Lemberg KM ; Vornov JJ ; Rais R ; Slusher BS We'Re Not “DON” Yet: Optimal Dosing and Prodrug Delivery of &amp;lt;Em&amp;gt;6-Diazo-5-Oxo-L-Norleucine&amp;lt;/Em&amp;gt; Mol. Cancer Ther 2018, 17 (9 ), 1824 LP–1832. 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-1148.30181331
(67) Alteen MG ; Tan HY ; Vocadlo DJ Monitoring and Modulating O-GlcNAcylation: Assays and Inhibitors of O-GlcNAc Processing Enzymes. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol 2021, 68 , 157–165. 10.1016/j.sbi.2020.12.008.33535148
(68) Liu T-WW ; Zandberg WF ; Gloster TM ; Deng L ; Murray KD ; Shan X ; Vocadlo DJ Metabolic Inhibitors of O-GlcNAc Transferase That Act In Vivo Implicate Decreased O-GlcNAc Levels in Leptin-Mediated Nutrient Sensing. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed 2018, 57 (26 ), 7644–7648. 10.1002/anie.201803254.
(69) Martin SESS ; Tan Z-WW ; Itkonen HM ; Duveau DY ; Paulo JA ; Janetzko J ; Boutz PL ; Törk L ; Moss FA ; Thomas CJ ; Structure-Based Evolution of Low Nanomolar O-GlcNAc Transferase Inhibitors. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2018, 140 (42 ), 13542–13545. 10.1021/jacs.8b07328.30285435
(70) Macauley MS ; Stubbs KA ; Vocadlo DJ O-GlcNAcase Catalyzes Cleavage of Thioglycosides without General Acid Catalysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2005, 127 (49 ), 17202–17203. 10.1021/ja0567687.16332065
(71) Liu K ; Paterson AJ ; Konrad RJ ; Parlow AF ; Jimi S ; Roh M ; Chin E ; Kudlow JE Streptozotocin, an O-GlcNAcase Inhibitor, Blunts Insulin and Growth Hormone Secretion. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol 2002, 194 (1 ), 135–146. 10.1016/S0303-7207(02)00155-7.12242036
(72) Cekic N ; Heinonen JE ; Stubbs KA ; Roth C ; He Y ; Bennet AJ ; McEachern EJ ; Davies GJ ; Vocadlo DJ Analysis of Transition State Mimicry by Tight Binding Aminothiazoline Inhibitors Provides Insight into Catalysis by Human O-GlcNAcase. Chem. Sci 2016, 7 (6 ), 3742–3750. 10.1039/C6SC00370B.29997861
(73) Yuzwa SA ; Macauley MS ; Heinonen JE ; Shan X ; Dennis RJ ; He Y ; Whitworth GE ; Stubbs KA ; McEachern EJ ; Davies GJ ; A Potent Mechanism-Inspired O-GlcNAcase Inhibitor That Blocks Phosphorylation of Tau in Vivo. Nat. Chem. Biol 2008, 4 (8 ), 483–490. 10.1038/nchembio.96.18587388
(74) Shen DL ; Gloster TM ; Yuzwa SA ; Vocadlo DJ Insights into O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) Processing and Dynamics through Kinetic Analysis OfO-GlcNAc Transferase AndO-GlcNAcase Activity on Protein Substrates. J. Biol. Chem 2012, 287 (19 ), 15395–15408. 10.1074/jbc.m111.310664.22311971
(75) Borghgraef P ; Menuet C ; Theunis C ; Louis JV ; Devijver H ; Maurin H ; Smet-Nocca C ; Lippens G ; Hilaire G ; Gijsen H ; Increasing Brain Protein O-GlcNAcylation Mitigates Breathing Defects and Mortality of Tau.P301L Mice. PLoS One 2013, 8 (12 ), 1–13. 10.1371/journal.pone.0084442.
(76) Hastings NB ; Wang X ; Song L ; Butts BD ; Grotz D ; Hargreaves R ; Fred Hess J ; Hong KLK ; Huang CRR ; Hyde L ; Inhibition of O-GlcNAcase Leads to Elevation of O-GlcNAc Tau and Reduction of Tauopathy and Cerebrospinal Fluid Tau in RTg4510 Mice. Mol. Neurodegener 2017, 12 (1 ), 1–16. 10.1186/s13024-017-0181-0.28049533
(77) Graham DL ; Gray AJ ; Joyce JA ; Yu D ; O’Moore J ; Carlson GA ; Shearman MS ; Dellovade TL ; Hering H Increased O-GlcNAcylation Reduces Pathological Tau without Affecting Its Normal Phosphorylation in a Mouse Model of Tauopathy. Neuropharmacology 2014, 79 , 307–313. 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.11.025.24326295
(78) Yuzwa SA ; Shan X ; Macauley MS ; Clark T ; Skorobogatko Y ; Vosseller K ; Vocadlo DJ Increasing O-GlcNAc Slows Neurodegenerationand Stabilizes Tau against Aggregation. Nat. Chem. Biol 2012, 8 (4 ), 393–399. 10.1038/nchembio.797.22366723
(79) Selnick HG ; Hess JF ; Tang C ; Liu K ; Schachter JB ; Ballard JE ; Marcus J ; Klein DJ ; Wang X ; Pearson M ; Discovery of MK-8719, a Potent O-GlcNAcase Inhibitor as a Potential Treatment for Tauopathies. J. Med. Chem 2019, 62 (22 ), 10062–10097. 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b01090.31487175
(80) Sandhu P ; Lee J ; Ballard J ; Walker B ; Ellis J ; Marcus J ; Toolan D ; Dreyer D ; McAvoy T ; Duffy J ; P4–036: Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics to Support Clinical Studies of MK-8719: An O-Glcnacase Inhibitor for Progressive Supranuclear Palsy. Alzheimer’s Dement 2016, 12 (7S_Part_21 ), P1028–P1028. 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.2125.
(81) Wang X ; Li W ; Marcus J ; Pearson M ; Song L ; Smith K ; Terracina G ; Lee J ; Hong KLK ; Lu SX ; MK-8719, a Novel and Selective O-GlcNAcase Inhibitor That Reduces the Formation of Pathological Tau and Ameliorates Neurodegeneration in a Mouse Model of Tauopathy. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 2020, 374 (2 ), 252–263. 10.1124/jpet.120.266122.32493725
(82) Kielbasa W ; Phipps KM ; Tseng J ; Natanegara F ; Cheng E ; Monk SA ; Bundgaard C ; Kevin DB ; Nuthall HN ; McDonald N ; A Single Ascending Dose Study in Healthy Volunteers to Assess the Safety and PK of LY3372689, an Inhibitor of O‐GlcNAcase (OGA) Enzyme. Alzheimer’s Dement 2020, 16 (S9 ), 40473. 10.1002/alz.040473.
(83) Ryan JM ; Quattropani A ; Abd-Elaziz K ; den Daas I ; Schneider M ; Ousson S ; Neny M ; Sand A ; Hantson J ; Permanne B ; O1–12-05: PHase 1 Study In Healthy Volunteers Of The O-Glcnacase Inhibitor ASN120290 As A Novel Therapy For Progressive Supranuclear Palsy And Related Tauopathies. Alzheimer’s Dement 2018, 14 (7S_Part_4 ), P251–P251. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.06.2400.
(84) Lubas WA ; Hanover JA Functional Expression of O -Linked GlcNAc Transferase. J. Biol. Chem 2000, 275 (15 ), 10983–10988. 10.1074/jbc.275.15.10983.10753899
(85) Lim ; Hong K ; Ha CH ; Chang HI Production of O-GlcNAc Modified Recombinant Proteins in Escherichia Coli. Journalof Microbiol. Biotechnol 2002, 12 (2 ), 306–311. 10.1590/S1415-47572004000300022.
(86) Rexach JE ; Rogers CJ ; Yu S-HH ; Tao J ; Sun YE ; Hsieh-Wilson LC Quantification of O-Glycosylation Stoichiometry and Dynamics Using Resolvable Mass Tags. Nat. Chem. Biol 2010, 6 (9 ), 645–651. 10.1038/nchembio.412.20657584
(87) Shen DL ; Gloster TM ; Yuzwa SA ; Vocadlo DJ Insights into O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) Processing and Dynamics through Kinetic Analysis of O-GlcNAc Transferase and O-GlcNAcase Activity on Protein Substrates. J. Biol. Chem 2012, 287 (19 ), 15395–15408. 10.1074/jbc.M111.310664.22311971
(88) Yuzwa SA ; Cheung AH ; Okon M ; McIntosh LP ; Vocadlo DJ O-GlcNAc Modification of Tau Directly Inhibits Its Aggregation without Perturbing the Conformational Properties of Tau Monomers. J. Mol. Biol 2014, 426 (8 ), 1736–1752. 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.01.004.24444746
(89) Zhang J ; Lei H ; Chen Y ; Ma YT ; Jiang F ; Tan J ; Zhang Y ; Li J Da. Enzymatic O-GlcNAcylation of α-Synuclein Reduces Aggregation and Increases SDS-Resistant Soluble Oligomers. Neurosci. Lett 2017, 655 , 90–94. 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.06.034.28673834
(90) Dawson PE ; Muir TW ; Clark-Lewis I ; Kent SB Synthesis of Proteins by Native Chemical Ligation. Science (80-. ) 1994, 266 (5186 ), 776 LP–779. 10.1126/science.7973629.
(91) Agouridas V ; El Mahdi O ; Diemer V ; Cargoët M ; Monbaliu JCM ; Melnyk O Native Chemical Ligation and Extended Methods: Mechanisms, Catalysis, Scope, and Limitations. Chem. Rev 2019, 119 (12 ). 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00712.
(92) Muir TW ; Sondhi D ; Cole PA Expressed Protein Ligation: A General Method for Protein Engineering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 1998, 95 (12 ), 6705–6710. 10.1073/pnas.95.12.6705.9618476
(93) Thompson RE ; Muir TW Chemoenzymatic Semisynthesis of Proteins. Chem. Rev 2020, 120 (6 ), 3051–3126. 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00450.31774265
(94) Arosio P ; Knowles TPJ ; Linse S On the Lag Phase in Amyloid Fibril Formation. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 2015, 17 (12 ), 7606–7618. 10.1039/c4cp05563b.25719972
(95) Buell AK ; Galvagnion C ; Gaspar R ; Sparr E ; Vendruscolo M ; Knowles TPJ ; Linse S ; Dobson CM Solution Conditions Determine the Relative Importance of Nucleation and Growth Processes in -Synuclein Aggregation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2014, 111 (21 ), 7671–7676. 10.1073/pnas.1315346111.24817693
(96) Dear AJ ; Michaels TCT ; Meisl G ; Klenerman D ; Wu S ; Perrett S ; Linse S ; Dobson CM ; Knowles TPJ Kinetic Diversity of Amyloid Oligomers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2020, 117 (22 ), 28–31. 10.1073/pnas.1922267117.
(97) Cremades N ; Cohen SIA ; Deas E ; Abramov AY ; Chen AY ; Orte A ; Sandal M ; Clarke RW ; Dunne P ; Aprile FA ; Direct Observation of the Interconversion of Normal and Toxic Forms of α-Synuclein. Cell 2012, 149 (5 ), 1048–1059. 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.037.22632969
(98) Törnquist M ; Michaels TCT ; Sanagavarapu K ; Yang X ; Meisl G ; Cohen SIA ; Knowles TPJ ; Linse S Secondary Nucleation in Amyloid Formation. Chem. Commun 2018, 54 (63 ), 8667–8684. 10.1039/C8CC02204F.
(99) Vilar M ; Chou HT ; Lührs T ; Maji SK ; Riek-Loher D ; Verel R ; Manning G ; Stahlberg H ; Riek R The Fold of α-Synuclein Fibrils. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2008, 105 (25 ), 8637–8642. 10.1073/pnas.0712179105.18550842
(100) Verma M ; Vats A ; Taneja V Toxic Species in Amyloid Disorders: Oligomers or Mature Fibrils. Ann. Indian Acad. Neurol 2015, 18 (2 ), 138–145. 10.4103/0972-2327.144284.26019408
(101) Karran E ; Mercken M ; Strooper B De. The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis for Alzheimer’s Disease: An Appraisal for the Development of Therapeutics. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2011, 10 (9 ), 698–712. 10.1038/nrd3505.21852788
(102) Greenwald J ; Riek R Biology of Amyloid: Structure, Function, and Regulation. Structure 2010, 18 (10 ), 1244–1260. 10.1016/j.str.2010.08.009.20947013
(103) Gupta S ; Banerjee P ; Laferla FM ; Selkoe DJ Alzheimer ‘ s Disease : Genes, Proteins, and Therapy 2010, 81 (2 ), 741–766.
(104) Bekris LM ; Yu C-E ; Bird TD ; Tsuang DW Genetics of Alzheimer Disease. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol 2010, 23 (4 ), 213–227. 10.1177/0891988710383571.21045163
(105) Meziane H ; Dodart JC ; Mathis C ; Little S ; Clemens J ; Paul SM ; Ungerer A Memory-Enhancing Effects of Secreted Forms of the β-Amyloid Precursor Protein in Normal and Amnestic Mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 1998, 95 (21 ), 12683–12688. 10.1073/pnas.95.21.12683.9770546
(106) O’Brien RJ ; Wong PC Amyloid Precursor Protein Processing and Alzheimer’s Disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 2011, 34 , 185–204. 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613.21456963
(107) Ryan P ; Xu M ; Davey AK ; Danon JJ ; Mellick GD ; Kassiou M ; Rudrawar S O-GlcNAc Modification Protects against Protein Misfolding and Aggregation in Neurodegenerative Disease. ACS Chem. Neurosci 2019, 10 (5 ), 2209–2221. 10.1021/acschemneuro.9b00143.30985105
(108) Chen GF ; Xu TH ; Yan Y ; Zhou YR ; Jiang Y ; Melcher K ; Xu HE Amyloid Beta: Structure, Biology and Structure-Based Therapeutic Development. Acta Pharmacol. Sin 2017, 38 (9 ), 1205–1235. 10.1038/aps.2017.28.28713158
(109) Kuperstein I ; Broersen K ; Benilova I ; Rozenski J ; Jonckheere W ; Debulpaep M ; Vandersteen A ; Segers-Nolten I ; Van Der Werf K ; Subramaniam V ; Neurotoxicity of Alzheimer’s Disease Aβ Peptides Is Induced by Small Changes in the Aβ42 to Aβ40 Ratio. EMBO J 2010, 29 (19 ), 3408–3420. 10.1038/emboj.2010.211.20818335
(110) Macleod R ; Hillert EK ; Cameron RT ; Baillie GS The Role and Therapeutic Targeting of α-, β-and γ-Secretase in Alzheimer’s Disease. Futur. Sci. OA 2015, 1 (3 ). 10.4155/fso.15.9.
(111) Kim C ; Nam DW ; Park SY ; Song H ; Hong HS ; Boo JH ; Jung ES ; Kim Y ; Baek JY ; Kim KS ; O-Linked β-N-Acetylglucosaminidase Inhibitor Attenuates β-Amyloid Plaque and Rescues Memory Impairment. Neurobiol. Aging 2013, 34 (1 ), 275–285. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.03.001.22503002
(112) Yuzwa SA ; Shan X ; Jones BA ; Zhao G ; Woodward ML ; Li X ; Zhu Y ; McEachern EJ ; Silverman MA ; Watson NV ; Pharmacological Inhibition of O-GlcNAcase (OGA) Prevents Cognitive Decline and Amyloid Plaque Formation in Bigenic Tau/APP Mutant Mice. Mol. Neurodegener 2014, 9 , 42. 10.1186/1750-1326-9-42.25344697
(113) Griffith LS ; Mathes M ; Schmitz B β-Amyloid Precursor Protein Is Modified with O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine. J. Neurosci. Res 1995, 41 (2 ), 270–278. 10.1002/jnr.490410214.7650762
(114) Jacobsen KT ; Iverfeldt K O-GlcNAcylation Increases Non-Amyloidogenic Processing of the Amyloid-β Precursor Protein (APP). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2011, 404 (3 ), 882–886. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.080.21182826
(115) Alfaro JF ; Gong CX ; Monroe ME ; Aldrich JT ; Clauss TRW ; Purvine SO ; Wang Z ; Camp DG ; Shabanowitz J ; Stanley P ; Tandem Mass Spectrometry Identifies Many Mouse Brain O-GlcNAcylated Proteins Including EGF Domain-Specific O-GlcNAc Transferase Targets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2012, 109 (19 ), 7280–7285. 10.1073/pnas.1200425109.22517741
(116) Chun YS ; Kwon OH ; Chung S O-GlcNAcylation of Amyloid-β Precursor Protein at Threonine 576 Residue Regulates Trafficking and Processing. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2017, 490 (2 ), 486–491. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.06.067.28624365
(117) Chun YS ; Park Y ; Oh HG ; Kim TW ; Yang HO ; Park MK ; Chung S O-GlcNAcylation Promotes Non-Amyloidogenic Processing of Amyloid-β Protein Precursor via Inhibition of Endocytosis from the Plasma Membrane. J. Alzheimer’s Dis 2015, 44 (1 ), 261–275. 10.3233/JAD-140096.25208619
(118) Park J ; Ha H-J ; Chung ES ; Baek SH ; Cho Y ; Kim HK ; Han J ; Sul JH ; Lee J ; Kim E ; O -GlcNAcylation Ameliorates the Pathological Manifestations of Alzheimer’s Disease by Inhibiting Necroptosis. Sci. Adv 2021, 7 (3 ), eabd3207. 10.1126/sciadv.abd3207.33523877
(119) Weingarten MD ; Lockwood AH ; Hwo SY ; Kirschner MW A Protein Factor Essential for Microtubule Assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 1975, 72 (5 ), 1858 LP–1862. 10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858.1057175
(120) Jebarupa B ; Muralidharan M ; Arun A ; Mandal AK ; Mitra G Conformational Heterogeneity of Tau: Implication on Intrinsic Disorder, Acid Stability and Fibrillation in Alzheimer’s Disease. Biophys. Chem 2018, 241 , 27–37. 10.1016/j.bpc.2018.07.005.30081240
(121) Goedert M ; Spillantini MG ; Potier MC ; Ulrich J ; Crowther RA Cloning and Sequencing of the CDNA Encoding an Isoform of Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau Containing Four Tandem Repeats: Differential Expression of Tau Protein MRNAs in Human Brain. EMBO J 1989, 8 (2 ), 393–399. 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03390.x.2498079
(122) Shafiei SS ; Guerrero-Muñoz MJ ; Castillo-Carranza DL Tau Oligomers: Cytotoxicity, Propagation, and Mitochondrial Damage. Front. Aging Neurosci 2017, 9 , 83. 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00083.28420982
(123) Wang JZ ; Xia YY ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Iqbal K Abnormal Hyperphosphorylation of Tau: Sites, Regulation, and Molecular Mechanism of Neurofibrillary Degeneration. J. Alzheimer’s Dis 2013, 33 (SUPPL. 1 ). 10.3233/JAD-2012-129031.
(124) Crowther RA Straight and Paired Helical Filaments in Alzheimer Disease Have a Common Structural Unit. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 1991, 88 (6 ), 2288–2292. 10.1073/pnas.88.6.2288.1706519
(125) Fitzpatrick AWP ; Falcon B ; He S ; Murzin AG ; Murshudov G ; Garringer HJ ; Crowther RA ; Ghetti B ; Goedert M ; Scheres SHW Cryo-EM Structures of Tau Filaments from Alzheimer’s Disease. Nature 2017, 547 (7662 ), 185–190. 10.1038/nature23002.28678775
(126) Crowther RA ; Olesen OF ; Smith MJ ; Jakes R ; Goedert M Assembly of Alzheimer-like Filaments from Full-Length Tau Protein. FEBS Lett 1994, 337 (2 ), 135–138. 10.1016/0014-5793(94)80260-2.8287967
(127) Alonso ADC ; Zaidi T ; Novak M ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Iqbal K Hyperphosphorylation Induces Self-Assembly of τ into Tangles of Paired Helical Filaments/Straight Filaments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2001, 98 (12 ), 6923–6928. 10.1073/pnas.121119298.11381127
(128) Goedert M ; Jakes R ; Spillantini MG ; Hasegawa M ; Smith MJ ; Crowther RA Assembly of Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau into Alzheimer-like Filaments Induced by Sulphated Glycosaminoglycans. Nature 1996, 383 (6600 ), 550–553. 10.1038/383550a0.8849730
(129) Wilson DM ; Binder LI Free Fatty Acids Stimulate the Polymerization of Tau and Amyloid Beta Peptides. In Vitro Evidence for a Common Effector of Pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s Disease. Am. J. Pathol 1997, 150 (6 ), 2181–2195.9176408
(130) Zhang W ; Falcon B ; Murzin AG ; Fan J ; Crowther RA ; Goedert M ; Scheres SHW Heparin-Induced Tau Filaments Are Polymorphic and Differ from Those in Alzheimer’s and Pick’s Diseases. Elife 2019, 8 , e43584. 10.7554/eLife.43584.30720432
(131) Arnold CS ; Johnson GW ; Cole RN ; Dong DL-Y ; Lee M ; Hart GW The Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau Is Extensively Modified with O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine*. J. Biol. Chem 1996, 271 (46 ), 28741–28744. 10.1074/jbc.271.46.28741.8910513
(132) Yuzwa SA ; Yadav AK ; Skorobogatko Y ; Clark T ; Vosseller K ; Vocadlo DJ Mapping O-GlcNAc Modification Sites on Tau and Generation of a Site-Specific O-GlcNAc Tau Antibody. Amino Acids 2011, 40 (3 ), 857–868. 10.1007/s00726-010-0705-1.20706749
(133) Bourré G ; Cantrelle FX ; Kamah A ; Chambraud B ; Landrieu I ; Smet-Nocca C Direct Crosstalk between O-GlcNAcylation and Phosphorylation of Tau Protein Investigated by NMR Spectroscopy. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 2018, 9 (OCT ), 1–13. 10.3389/fendo.2018.00595.29403440
(134) Wang Z ; Udeshi ND ; O’Malley M ; Shabanowitz J ; Hunt DF ; Hart GW Enrichment and Site Mapping of O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine by a Combination of Chemical/Enzymatic Tagging, Photochemical Cleavage, and Electron Transfer Dissociation Mass Spectrometry. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2010, 9 (1 ), 153–160. 10.1074/mcp.M900268-MCP200.19692427
(135) Morris M ; Knudsen GM ; Maeda S ; Trinidad JC ; Ioanoviciu A ; Burlingame AL ; Mucke L Tau Post-Translational Modifications in Wild-Type and Human Amyloid Precursor Protein Transgenic Mice. Nat. Neurosci 2015, 18 (8 ), 1183–1189. 10.1038/nn.4067.26192747
(136) Cameron A ; Giacomozzi B ; Joyce J ; Gray A ; Graham D ; Ousson S ; Neny M ; Beher D ; Carlson G ; O’Moore J ; Generation and Characterization of a Rabbit Monoclonal Antibody Site-Specific for Tau O-GlcNAcylated at Serine 400. FEBS Lett 2013, 587 (22 ), 3722–3728. 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.09.042.24113653
(137) Lewis J ; McGowan E ; Rockwood J ; Melrose H ; Nacharaju P ; Van Slegtenhorst M ; Gwinn-Hardy K ; Murphy MP ; Baker M ; Yu X ; Neurofibrillary Tangles, Amyotrophy and Progressive Motor Disturbance in Mice Expressing Mutant (P301L) Tau Protein. Nat. Genet 2000, 25 (4 ), 402–405. 10.1038/78078.10932182
(138) Lim S ; Haque MM ; Nam G ; Ryoo N ; Rhim H ; Kim YK Monitoring of Intracellular Tau Aggregation Regulated by OGA/OGT Inhibitors. Int. J. Mol. Sci 2015, 16 (9 ), 20212–20224. 10.3390/ijms160920212.26343633
(139) Iwai A ; Masliah E ; Yoshimoto M ; Ge N ; Flanagan L ; Rohan de Silva HA ; Kittel A ; Saitoh T The Precursor Protein of Non-Aβ Component of Alzheimer’s Disease Amyloid Is a Presynaptic Protein of the Central Nervous System. Neuron 1995, 14 (2 ), 467–475. 10.1016/0896-6273(95)90302-X.7857654
(140) Kahle PJ ; Neumann M ; Ozmen L ; Müller V ; Jacobsen H ; Schindzielorz A ; Okochi M ; Leimer U ; Van Der Putten H ; Probst A ; Subcellular Localization of Wild-Type and Parkinson’s Disease-Associated Mutant α-Synuclein in Human and Transgenic Mouse Brain. J. Neurosci 2000, 20 (17 ), 6365–6373. 10.1523/jneurosci.20-17-06365.2000.10964942
(141) Ueda K ; Fukushima H ; Masliah E ; Xia YU ; Iwai A ; Yoshimoto M ; Otero DAC ; Kondo J ; Ihara Y ; Saitoh T Molecular Cloning of CDNA Encoding an Unrecognized Component of Amyloid in Alzheimer Disease (Neurodegeneration/Chaperone/Amyloid P/A4 Protein/Neuritic Plaque). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1993, 90 (December), 11282–11286.8248242
(142) Bartels T ; Choi JG ; Selkoe DJ α-Synuclein Occurs Physiologically as a Helically Folded Tetramer That Resists Aggregation. Nature 2011, 477 (7362 ), 107–111. 10.1038/nature10324.21841800
(143) Dettmer U ; Newman AJ ; Von Saucken VE ; Bartels T ; Selkoe D KTKEGV Repeat Motifs Are Key Mediators of Normal α-Synuclein Tetramerization: Their Mutation Causes Excess Monomers and Neurotoxicity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2015, 112 (31 ), 9596–9601. 10.1073/pnas.1505953112.26153422
(144) Jiang Z ; De Messieres M ; Lee JC Membrane Remodeling by α-Synuclein and Effects on Amyloid Formation. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2013, 135 (43 ), 15970–15973. 10.1021/ja405993r.24099487
(145) Ulmer TS ; Bax A ; Cole NB ; Nussbaum RL Structure and Dynamics of Micelle-Bound Human α-Synuclein. J. Biol. Chem 2005, 280 (10 ), 9595–9603. 10.1074/jbc.M411805200.15615727
(146) Lashuel HA ; Overk CR ; Oueslati A ; Masliah E The Many Faces of α-Synuclein: From Structure and Toxicity to Therapeutic Target. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2013, 14 (1 ), 38–48. 10.1038/nrn3406.23254192
(147) Emamzadeh FN Alpha-Synuclein Structure, Functions, and Interactions. J. Res. Med. Sci 2016, 21 , 29. 10.4103/1735-1995.181989.27904575
(148) Li H-T ; Du H-N ; Tang L ; Hu J ; Hu H-Y Structural Transformation and Aggregation of Human α-Synuclein in Trifluoroethanol: Non-Amyloid Component Sequence Is Essential and β-Sheet Formation Is Prerequisite to Aggregation. Biopolymers 2002, 64 (4 ), 221–226. 10.1002/bip.10179.12115139
(149) Yang W ; Yu S Synucleinopathies: Common Features and Hippocampal Manifestations. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 2017, 74 (8 ), 1485–1501. 10.1007/s00018-016-2411-y.27826641
(150) Schmid AW ; Fauvet B ; Moniatte M ; Lashuel HA Alpha-Synuclein Post-Translational Modifications as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson Disease and Other Synucleinopathies. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2013, 12 (12 ), 3543–3558. 10.1074/mcp.R113.032730.23966418
(151) Peng C ; Gathagan RJ ; Covell DJ ; Medellin C ; Stieber A ; Robinson JL ; Zhang B ; Pitkin RM ; Olufemi MF ; Luk KC ; Cellular Milieu Imparts Distinct Pathological α-Synuclein Strains in α-Synucleinopathies. Nature 2018. 10.1038/s41586-018-0104-4.
(152) Schweighauser M ; Shi Y ; Tarutani A ; Kametani F ; Murzin AG ; Ghetti B ; Matsubara T ; Tomita T ; Ando T ; Hasegawa K ; Structures of α-Synuclein Filaments from Multiple System Atrophy. Nature 2020, No. February, 2020.02.05.935619. 10.1101/2020.02.05.935619.
(153) Wang Z ; Park K ; Comer F ; Hsieh-Wilson LC ; Saudek CD ; Hart GW Site-Specific GlcNAcylation of Human Erythrocyte Proteins: Potential Biomarker(s) for Diabetes. Diabetes 2009, 58 (2 ), 309–317. 10.2337/db08-0994.18984734
(154) Marotta NP ; Lin YH ; Lewis YE ; Ambroso MR ; Zaro BW ; Roth MT ; Arnold DB ; Langen R ; Pratt MR O-GlcNAc Modification Blocks the Aggregation and Toxicity of the Protein α-Synuclein Associated with Parkinson’s Disease. Nat. Chem 2015, 7 (11 ), 913–920. 10.1038/nchem.2361.26492012
(155) Lewis YE ; Galesic A ; Levine PM ; De Leon CA ; Lamiri N ; Brennan CK ; Pratt MR ; Schwagerus S ; Reimann O ; Despres C ; O-GlcNAcylation of α-Synuclein at Serine 87 Reduces Aggregation without Affecting Membrane Binding. ACS Chem. Biol 2015, 7 (4 ), 327–333. 10.1002/psc.2870.
(156) Levine PM ; De Leon CA ; Galesic A ; Balana A ; Marotta NP ; Lewis YE ; Pratt MR O-GlcNAc Modification Inhibits the Calpain-Mediated Cleavage of α-Synuclein. Bioorganic Med. Chem 2017, 25 (18 ), 4977–4982. 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.04.038.
(157) Levine PM ; Galesic A ; Balana AT ; Mahul-Mellier A-LL ; Navarro MX ; De Leon CA ; Lashuel HA ; Pratt MR α-Synuclein O-GlcNAcylation Alters Aggregation and Toxicity, Revealing Certain Residues as Potential Inhibitors of Parkinson’s Disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2019, 116 (5 ), 1511–1519. 10.1073/pnas.1808845116.30651314
(158) Leak RK Heat Shock Proteins in Neurodegenerative Disorders and Aging. J. Cell Commun. Signal 2014, 8 (4 ), 293–310. 10.1007/s12079-014-0243-9.25208934
(159) Webster JM ; Darling AL ; Uversky VN ; Blair LJ Small Heat Shock Proteins, Big Impact on Protein Aggregation in Neurodegenerative Disease. Front. Pharmacol 2019, 10 (September), 1–18. 10.3389/fphar.2019.01047.30728774
(160) Hochberg GKA ; Ecroyd H ; Liu C ; Cox D ; Cascio D ; Sawaya MR ; Collier MP ; Stroud J ; Carver JA ; Baldwin AJ ; The Structured Core Domain of B-Crystallin Can Prevent Amyloid Fibrillation and Associated Toxicity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2014, 111 (16 ), E1562–E1570. 10.1073/pnas.1322673111.24711386
(161) Freilich R ; Betegon M ; Tse E ; Mok SA ; Julien O ; Agard DA ; Southworth DR ; Takeuchi K ; Gestwicki JE Competing Protein-Protein Interactions Regulate Binding of Hsp27 to Its Client Protein Tau. Nat. Commun 2018, 9 (1 ), 4563. 10.1038/s41467-018-07012-4.30385828
(162) Lowe J ; Landon M ; Pike I ; Spendlove I ; Mcdermott H ; John Mayer R Dementia with β-Amyloid Deposition: Involvement of ΑB-Crystallin Supports Two Main Diseases. Lancet 1990, 336 (8713 ), 515–516. 10.1016/0140-6736(90)92075-S.
(163) Iwaki T ; Wisniewski T ; Iwaki A ; Corbin E ; Tomokane N ; Tateishi J ; Goldman JE Accumulation of Alpha B-Crystallin in Central Nervous System Glia and Neurons in Pathologic Conditions. Am. J. Pathol 1992, 140 (2 ), 345–356.1739128
(164) McLean PJ ; Kawamata H ; Shariff S ; Hewett J ; Sharma N ; Ueda K ; Breakefield XO ; Hyman BT TorsinA and Heat Shock Proteins Act as Molecular Chaperones: Suppression of α-Synuclein Aggregation. J. Neurochem 2002, 83 (4 ), 846–854. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2002.01190.x.12421356
(165) Alderson TR ; Roche J ; Gastall HY ; Dias DM ; Priti I ; Ying J ; Bax A ; Benesch JLP ; Baldwin AJ ; Pritišanac I ; Local Unfolding of the HSP27 Monomer Regulates Chaperone Activity. Nat. Commun 2018, No. 2019 , 1–16. 10.1038/s41467-019-08557-8.29317637
(166) Reid Alderson T ; Adriaenssens E ; Asselbergh B ; Pritišanac I ; Gastall HY ; Wälti MA ; Louis JM ; Timmerman V ; Baldwin AJ ; Benesch JLP Dysregulated Interactions Triggered by a Neuropathy-Causing Mutation in the IPV Motif of HSP27. bioRxiv 2019, No. 11 . 10.1101/708180.
(167) Roquemore EP ; Chevrier MR ; Cotter RJ ; Hart GW Dynamic O-GlcNAcylation of the Small Heat Shock Protein ΑB-Crystallin. Biochemistry 1996, 35 (11 ), 3578–3586. 10.1021/bi951918j.8639509
(168) Guo K ; Gan L ; Zhang S ; Cui FJ ; Cun W ; Li Y ; Kang NX ; Gao MD ; Liu KY Translocation of HSP27 into Liver Cancer Cell Nucleus May Be Associated with Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAc Glycosylation. Oncol. Rep 2012, 28 (2 ), 494–500. 10.3892/or.2012.1844.22664592
(169) Rambaruth ND ; Greenwell P ; Dwek MV The Lectin Helix Pomatia Agglutinin Recognizes O-GlcNAc Containing Glycoproteins in Human Breast Cancer. Glycobiology 2012, 22 (6 ), 839–848. 10.1093/glycob/cws051.22322011
(170) Deracinois B ; Camoin L ; Lambert M ; Boyer J-B ; Dupont E ; Bastide B ; Cieniewski-Bernard C O-GlcNAcylation Site Mapping by (Azide-Alkyne) Click Chemistry and Mass Spectrometry Following Intensive Fractionation of Skeletal Muscle Cells Proteins. J. Proteomics 2018, 186 , 83–97. 10.1016/j.jprot.2018.07.005.30016717
(171) Li J ; Li Z ; Duan X ; Qin K ; Dang L ; Sun S ; Cai L ; Hsieh-Wilson LC ; Wu L ; Yi W An Isotope-Coded Photocleavable Probe for Quantitative Profiling of Protein O-GlcNAcylation. ACS Chem. Biol 2019, 14 (1 ), 4–10. 10.1021/acschembio.8b01052.30620550
(172) Hart GW ; Slawson C ; Ramirez-Correa G ; Lagerlof O Cross Talk between O-GlcNAcylation and Phosphorylation: Roles in Signaling, Transcription, and Chronic Disease. Annu. Rev. Biochem 2011, 80 , 825–858. 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060608-102511.21391816
(173) Schwein PA ; Woo CM The O-GlcNAc Modification on Kinases. ACS Chem. Biol 2020, 15 (3 ), 602–617. 10.1021/acschembio.9b01015.32155042
(174) Whelan SA ; Lane MD ; Hart GW Regulation of the O-Linked β-N-Acetylglucosamine Transferase by Insulin Signaling*. J. Biol. Chem 2008, 283 (31 ), 21411–21417. 10.1074/jbc.M800677200.18519567
(175) Beausoleil SA ; Jedrychowski M ; Schwartz D ; Elias JE ; Villén J ; Li J ; Cohn MA ; Cantley LC ; Gygi SP Large-Scale Characterization of HeLa Cell Nuclear Phosphoproteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2004, 101 (33 ), 12130–12135. 10.1073/pnas.0404720101.15302935
(176) van der Laarse SAM ; Leney AC ; Heck AJR Crosstalk between Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation: Friend or Foe. FEBS J 2018, 285 (17 ), 3152–3167. 10.1111/febs.14491.29717537
(177) Johnson GVW ; Stoothoff WH Tau Phosphorylation in Neuronal Cell Function and Dysfunction. J. Cell Sci 2004, 117 (24 ), 5721 LP–5729. 10.1242/jcs.01558.15537830
(178) Köpke E ; Tung YC ; Shaikh S ; Alonso AC ; Iqbal K ; Grundke-Iqbal I Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau. Abnormal Phosphorylation of a Non-Paired Helical Filament Pool in Alzheimer Disease. J. Biol. Chem 1993, 268 (32 ), 24374–24384. 10.1016/S0021-9258(20)80536-5.8226987
(179) Neddens J ; Temmel M ; Flunkert S ; Kerschbaumer B ; Hoeller C ; Loeffler T ; Niederkofler V ; Daum G ; Attems J ; Hutter-Paier B Phosphorylation of Different Tau Sites during Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 2018, 6 (1 ), 52. 10.1186/s40478-018-0557-6.29958544
(180) Liu F ; Iqbal K ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Hart GW ; Gong CX O-GlcNAcylation Regulates Phosphorylation of Tau: A Mechanism Involved in Alzheimer’s Disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2004, 101 (29 ), 10804–10809. 10.1073/pnas.0400348101.15249677
(181) Li X ; Lu F ; Wang J-Z ; Gong C-X Concurrent Alterations of O-GlcNAcylation and Phosphorylation of Tau in Mouse Brains during Fasting. Eur. J. Neurosci 2006, 23 (8 ), 2078–2086. 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.04735.x.16630055
(182) Lefebvre T ; Ferreira S ; Dupont-Wallois L ; Bussière T ; Dupire M-J ; Delacourte A ; Michalski J-C ; Caillet-Boudin M-L Evidence of a Balance between Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAc Glycosylation of Tau Proteins—a Role in Nuclear Localization. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj 2003, 1619 (2 ), 167–176. 10.1016/S0304-4165(02)00477-4.
(183) Yuzwa SA ; Vocadlo DJ O-GlcNAc and Neurodegeneration: Biochemical Mechanisms and Potential Roles in Alzheimer’s Disease and Beyond. Chem. Soc. Rev 2014, 43 (19 ), 6839–6858. 10.1039/c4cs00038b.24759912
(184) Yu Y ; Zhang L ; Li X ; Run X ; Liang Z ; Li Y ; Liu Y ; Lee MH ; Grundke-Iqbal I ; Iqbal K ; Differential Effects of an O-GlcNAcase Inhibitor on Tau Phosphorylation. PLoS One 2012, 7 (4 ), e35277.22536363
(185) Smet-Nocca C ; Broncel M ; Wieruszeski JM ; Tokarski C ; Hanoulle X ; Leroy A ; Landrieu I ; Rolando C ; Lippens G ; Hackenberger CPR Identification of O-GlcNAc Sites within Peptides of the Tau Protein and Their Impact on Phosphorylation. Mol. Biosyst 2011, 7 (5 ), 1420–1429. 10.1039/c0mb00337a.21327254
(186) Negro A ; Brunati AM ; Donella-Deana A ; Massimino ML ; Pinna LA Multiple Phosphorylation of α-Synuclein by Protein Tyrosine Kinase Syk Prevents Eosin-Induced Aggregation. FASEB J 2002, 16 (2 ), 1–22. 10.1096/fj.01-0517fje.11772930
(187) Paleologou KE ; Oueslati A ; Shakked G ; Rospigliosi CC ; Kim HY ; Lamberto GR ; Fernandez CO ; Schmid A ; Chegini F ; Gai WP ; Phosphorylation at S87 Is Enhanced in Synucleinopathies, Inhibits α-Synuclein Oligomerization, and Influences Synuclein-Membrane Interactions. J. Neurosci 2010, 30 (9 ), 3184–3198. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5922-09.2010.20203178
(188) Anderson JP ; Walker DE ; Goldstein JM ; de Laat R ; Banducci K ; Caccavello RJ ; Barbour R ; Huang J ; Kling K ; Lee M ; Phosphorylation of Ser-129 Is the Dominant Pathological Modification of α-Synuclein in Familial and Sporadic Lewy Body Disease*. J. Biol. Chem 2006, 281 (40 ), 29739–29752. 10.1074/jbc.M600933200.16847063
(189) Fujiwara H ; Hasegawa M ; Dohmae N ; Kawashima A ; Masliah E ; Goldberg MS ; Shen J ; Takio K ; Iwatsubo T α-Synuclein Is Phosphorylated in Synucleinopathy Lesions. Nat. Cell Biol 2002, 4 (2 ), 160–164. 10.1038/ncb748.11813001
(190) Xu Y ; Deng Y ; Qing H The Phosphorylation of α-Synuclein: Development and Implication for the Mechanism and Therapy of the Parkinson’s Disease. J. Neurochem 2015, 135 (1 ), 4–18. 10.1111/jnc.13234.26134497
(191) Waxman EA ; Giasson BI Specificity and Regulation of Casein Kinase-Mediated Phosphorylation of α-Synuclein. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 2008, 67 (5 ), 402–416. 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3186fc995.18451726
(192) Mbefo MK ; Paleologou KE ; Boucharaba A ; Oueslati A ; Schell H ; Fournier M ; Olschewski D ; Yin G ; Zweckstetter M ; Masliah E ; Phosphorylation of Synucleins by Members of the Polo-like Kinase Family. J. Biol. Chem 2010, 285 (4 ), 2807–2822. 10.1074/jbc.M109.081950.19889641
(193) Fares MB ; Jagannath S ; Lashuel HA Reverse Engineering Lewy Bodies: How Far Have We Come and How Far Can We Go? Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2021. 10.1038/s41583-020-00416-6.
(194) Pereda AE Electrical Synapses and Their Functional Interactions with Chemical Synapses. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2014, 15 (4 ), 250–263. 10.1038/nrn3708.24619342
(195) Saheki Y ; De Camilli P Synaptic Vesicle Endocytosis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol 2012, 4 (9 ), a005645–a005645. 10.1101/cshperspect.a005645.22763746
(196) Taoufik E ; Kouroupi G ; Zygogianni O ; Matsas R Synaptic Dysfunction in Neurodegenerative and Neurodevelopmental Diseases: An Overview of Induced Pluripotent Stem-Cell-Based Disease Models. Open Biol 2018, 8 (9 ), 180138. 10.1098/rsob.180138.30185603
(197) Kelleher RJ 3rd ; Shen J Presenilin-1 Mutations and Alzheimer’s Disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2017, 114 (4 ), 629–631. 10.1073/pnas.1619574114.28082723
(198) Sassone J ; Serratto G ; Valtorta F ; Silani V ; Passafaro M ; Ciammola A The Synaptic Function of Parkin. Brain 2017, 140 (9 ), 2265–2272. 10.1093/brain/awx006.28335015
(199) Piccoli G ; Condliffe SB ; Bauer M ; Giesert F ; Boldt K ; De Astis S ; Meixner A ; Sarioglu H ; Vogt-Weisenhorn DM ; Wurst W ; LRRK2 Controls Synaptic Vesicle Storage and Mobilization within the Recycling Pool. J. Neurosci 2011, 31 (6 ), 2225–2237. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3730-10.2011.21307259
(200) Murphy JE ; Hanover JA ; Froehlich M ; DuBois G ; Keen JH Clathrin Assembly Protein AP-3 Is Phosphorylated and Glycosylated on the 50-KDa Structural Domain. J. Biol. Chem 1994, 269 (33 ), 21346–21352. 10.1016/s0021-9258(17)31968-3.8063760
(201) Yao PJ ; Coleman PD Reduction of O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine-Modified Assembly Protein-3 in Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Neurosci 1998, 18 (7 ), 2399–2411. 10.1523/jneurosci.18-07-02399.1998.9502801
(202) Yao PJ ; Coleman PD Reduced O-Glycosylated Clathrin Assembly Protein AP180: Implication for Synaptic Vesicle Recycling Dysfunction in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurosci. Lett 1998, 252 (1 ), 33–36. 10.1016/S0304-3940(98)00547-3.9756352
(203) Morgan JR ; Zhao X ; Womack M ; Prasad K ; Augustine GJ ; Lafer EM A Role for the Clathrin Assembly Domain of AP180 in Synaptic Vesicle Endocytosis. J. Neurosci 1999, 19 (23 ), 10201 LP–10212. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10201.1999.10575017
(204) Tallent MK ; Varghis N ; Skorobogatko Y ; Hernandez-Cuebas L ; Whelan K ; Vocadlo DJ ; Vosseller K In Vivo Modulation of O-GIcNAc Levels Regulates Hippocampal Synaptic Plasticity through Interplay with Phosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem 2009, 284 (1 ), 174–181. 10.1074/jbc.M807431200.19004831
(205) Cole RN ; Hart GW Glycosylation Sites Flank Phosphorylation Sites on Synapsin I. J. Neurochem 1999, 73 (1 ), 418–428. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1999.0730418.x.10386995
(206) Vosseller K ; Trinidad JC ; Chalkley RJ ; Specht CG ; Thalhammer A ; Lynn AJ ; Snedecor JO ; Guan S ; Medzihradszky KF ; Maltby DA ; O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine Proteomics of Postsynaptic Density Preparations Using Lectin Weak Affinity Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry *. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2006, 5 (5 ), 923–934. 10.1074/mcp.T500040-MCP200.16452088
(207) Peng C ; Trojanowski JQ ; Lee VMY Protein Transmission in Neurodegenerative Disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 2020, 16 (4 ), 199–212. 10.1038/s41582-020-0333-7.32203399
(208) Luk KC ; Song C ; O' Brien P ; Stieber A ; Branch JR ; Brunden KR ; Trojanowski JQ ; Lee VM-Y Exogenous α-Synuclein Fibrils Seed the Formation of Lewy Body-like Intracellular Inclusions in Cultured Cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2009, 106 (47 ), 20051 LP–20056. 10.1073/pnas.0908005106.19892735
(209) Strang KH ; Croft CL ; Sorrentino ZA ; Chakrabarty P ; Golde TE ; Giasson BI Distinct Differences in Prion-like Seeding and Aggregation between Tau Protein Variants Provide Mechanistic Insights into Tauopathies. J. Biol. Chem 2018, 293 (7 ), 2408–2421. 10.1074/jbc.M117.815357.29259137
(210) Zhang B ; Kehm V ; Gathagan R ; Leight SN ; Trojanowski JQ ; Lee VM-Y ; Luk KC Stereotaxic Targeting of Alpha-Synuclein Pathology in Mouse Brain Using Preformed Fibrils. Methods Mol. Biol 2019, 1948 , 45–57. 10.1007/978-1-4939-9124-2_5.30771169
(211) Vasili E ; Dominguez-Meijide A ; Outeiro TF Spreading of α-Synuclein and Tau: A Systematic Comparison of the Mechanisms Involved. Front. Mol. Neurosci 2019, 12 , 107. 10.3389/fnmol.2019.00107.31105524
(212) Tavassoly O ; Yue J ; Vocadlo DJ Pharmacological Inhibition and Knockdown of O-GlcNAcase Reduces Cellular Internalization of α-Synuclein Preformed Fibrils. FEBS J 2020, 1–19. 10.1111/febs.15349.
(213) Parzych KR ; Klionsky DJ An Overview of Autophagy: Morphology, Mechanism, and Regulation. Antioxid. Redox Signal 2014, 20 (3 ), 460–473. 10.1089/ars.2013.5371.23725295
(214) Wei Y ; Zhou J ; Wu J ; Huang J ERβ Promotes Aβ Degradation via the Modulation of Autophagy. Cell Death Dis 2019, 10 (8 ), 565. 10.1038/s41419-019-1786-8.31332160
(215) Krüger U ; Wang Y ; Kumar S ; Mandelkow E-M Autophagic Degradation of Tau in Primary Neurons and Its Enhancement by Trehalose. Neurobiol. Aging 2012, 33 (10 ), 2291–2305. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.11.009.22169203
(216) Choi I ; Zhang Y ; Seegobin SP ; Pruvost M ; Wang Q ; Purtell K ; Zhang B ; Yue Z Microglia Clear Neuron-Released α-Synuclein via Selective Autophagy and Prevent Neurodegeneration. Nat. Commun 2020, 11 (1 ), 1386. 10.1038/s41467-020-15119-w.32170061
(217) Menzies FM ; Fleming A ; Caricasole A ; Bento CF ; Andrews SP ; Ashkenazi A ; Füllgrabe J ; Jackson A ; Jimenez Sanchez M ; Karabiyik C ; Autophagy and Neurodegeneration: Pathogenic Mechanisms and Therapeutic Opportunities. Neuron 2017, 93 (5 ), 1015–1034. 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.01.022.28279350
(218) Guo B ; Liang Q ; Li L ; Hu Z ; Wu F ; Zhang P ; Ma Y ; Zhao B ; Kovács AL ; Zhang Z ; O-GlcNAc-Modification of SNAP-29 Regulates Autophagosome Maturation. Nat. Cell Biol 2014, 16 (12 ), 1215–1226. 10.1038/ncb3066.25419848
(219) Park S ; Lee Y ; Pak JW ; Kim H ; Choi H ; Kim J ; Roth J ; Cho JW O-GlcNAc Modification Is Essential for the Regulation of Autophagy in Drosophila Melanogaster. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 2015, 72 (16 ), 3173–3183. 10.1007/s00018-015-1889-z.25840568
(220) Marsh SA ; Powell PC ; Dell’italia LJ ; Chatham JC Cardiac O-GlcNAcylation Blunts Autophagic Signaling in the Diabetic Heart. Life Sci 2013, 92 (11 ), 648–656. 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.06.011.22728715
(221) Ruan H. Bin ; Ma Y ; Torres S ; Zhang B ; Feriod C ; Heck RM ; Qian K ; Fu M ; Li X ; Nathanson MH ; Calcium-Dependent O-GlcNAc Signaling Drives Liver Autophagy in Adaptation to Starvation. Genes Dev 2017, 31 (16 ), 1655–1665. 10.1101/gad.305441.117.28903979
(222) Jo YK ; Park NY ; Park SJ ; Kim BG ; Shin JH ; Jo DS ; Bae DJ ; Suh YA ; Chang JH ; Lee EK ; O-GlcNAcylation of ATG4B Positively Regulates Autophagy by Increasing Its Hydroxylase Activity. Oncotarget 2016, 7 (35 ), 57186–57196. 10.18632/oncotarget.11083.27527864
(223) Wani WY ; Ouyang X ; Benavides GA ; Redmann M ; Cofield SS ; Shacka JJ ; Chatham JC ; Darley-Usmar V ; Zhang J O-GlcNAc Regulation of Autophagy and α-Synuclein Homeostasis; Implications for Parkinson’s Disease. Mol. Brain 2017, 10 (1 ), 32. 10.1186/s13041-017-0311-1.28724388
(224) Schmeisser K ; Parker JA Pleiotropic Effects of MTOR and Autophagy during Development and Aging. Front. Cell Dev. Biol 2019, 7 (SEP), 1–11. 10.3389/fcell.2019.00192.30733944
(225) Dossou AS ; Basu A The Emerging Roles of MTORC1 in Macromanaging Autophagy. Cancers (Basel) 2019, 11 (10 ), 1422. 10.3390/cancers11101422.
(226) Zhu Y ; Shan X ; Safarpour F ; Erro Go N ; Li N ; Shan A ; Huang MC ; Deen M ; Holicek V ; Ashmus R ; Pharmacological Inhibition of O-GlcNAcase Enhances Autophagy in Brain through an MTOR-Independent Pathway. ACS Chem. Neurosci 2018, 9 (6 ), 1366–1379. 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00015.29460617
(227) Wang P ; Lazarus BD ; Forsythe ME ; Love DC ; Krause MW ; Hanover JA O-GlcNAc Cycling Mutants Modulate Proteotoxicity in Caenorhabditis Elegans Models of Human Neurodegenerative Diseases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2012, 109 (43 ), 17669 LP–17674. 10.1073/pnas.1205748109.22988095
(228) Taylor RW ; Turnbull DM Mitochondrial DNA Mutations in Human Disease. Nat. Rev. Genet 2005, 6 (5 ), 389–402. 10.1038/nrg1606.15861210
(229) Bender A ; Krishnan KJ ; Morris CM ; Taylor GA ; Reeve AK ; Perry RH ; Jaros E ; Hersheson JS ; Betts J ; Klopstock T ; High Levels of Mitochondrial DNA Deletions in Substantia Nigra Neurons in Aging and Parkinson Disease. Nat. Genet 2006, 38 (5 ), 515–517. 10.1038/ng1769.16604074
(230) Coskun PE ; Beal MF ; Wallace DC Alzheimer's Brains Harbor Somatic MtDNA Control-Region Mutations That Suppress Mitochondrial Transcription and Replication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2004, 101 (29 ), 10726 LP–10731. 10.1073/pnas.0403649101.15247418
(231) Ge P ; Dawson VL ; Dawson TM PINK1 and Parkin Mitochondrial Quality Control: A Source of Regional Vulnerability in Parkinson’s Disease. Mol. Neurodegener 2020, 15 (1 ), 20. 10.1186/s13024-020-00367-7.32169097
(232) Tan EP ; Villar MT ; E, L.; Lu J ; Selfridge JE ; Artigues A ; Swerdlow RH ; Slawson C Altering O-Linked β-N-Acetylglucosamine Cycling Disrupts Mitochondrial Function*. J. Biol. Chem 2014, 289 (21 ), 14719–14730. 10.1074/jbc.M113.525790.24713701
(233) Tan EP ; McGreal SR ; Graw S ; Tessman R ; Koppel SJ ; Dhakal P ; Zhang Z ; Machacek M ; Zachara NE ; Koestler DC ; Sustained O-GlcNAcylation Reprograms Mitochondrial Function to Regulate Energy Metabolism. J. Biol. Chem 2017, 292 (36 ), 14940–14962. 10.1074/jbc.M117.797944.28739801
(234) Pekkurnaz G ; Trinidad JC ; Wang X ; Kong D ; Schwarz TL Glucose Regulates Mitochondrial Motility via Milton Modification by O-GlcNAc Transferase. Cell 2014, 158 (1 ), 54–68. 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.007.24995978
(235) Cha MY ; Cho HJ ; Kim C ; Jung YO ; Kang MJ ; Murray ME ; Hong HS ; Choi YJ ; Choi H ; Kim DK ; Mitochondrial ATP Synthase Activity Is Impaired by Suppressed O-GlcNAcylation in Alzheimer’s Disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 2015, 24 (22 ), 6492–6504. 10.1093/hmg/ddv358.26358770
(236) Caccamo A ; Branca C ; Piras IS ; Ferreira E ; Huentelman MJ ; Liang WS ; Readhead B ; Dudley JT ; Spangenberg EE ; Green KN ; Necroptosis Activation in Alzheimer’s Disease. Nat. Neurosci 2017, 20 (9 ), 1236–1246. 10.1038/nn.4608.28758999
(237) Li Y ; Xie M ; Men L ; Du J O-GlcNAcylation in Immunity and Inflammation: An Intricate System (Review). Int. J. Mol. Med 2019, 44 (2 ), 363–374. 10.3892/ijmm.2019.4238.31198979
(238) Yang WH ; Park SY ; Nam HW ; Kim DH ; Kang JG ; Kang ES ; Kim YS ; Lee HC ; Kim KS ; Cho JW NFkappaB Activation Is Associated with Its O-GlcNAcylation State under Hyperglycemic Conditions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2008, 105 (45 ), 17345–17350. 10.1073/pnas.0806198105.18988733
(239) Donovan K ; Alekseev O ; Qi X ; Cho W ; Azizkhan-Clifford J O-GlcNAc Modification of Transcription Factor Sp1 Mediates Hyperglycemia-Induced VEGF-A Upregulation in Retinal Cells. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 2014, 55 (12 ), 7862–7873. 10.1167/iovs.14-14048.25352121
(240) Li X ; Zhang Z ; Li L ; Gong W ; Lazenby AJ ; Swanson BJ ; Herring LE ; Asara JM ; Singer JD ; Wen H Myeloid-Derived Cullin 3 Promotes STAT3 Phosphorylation by Inhibiting OGT Expression and Protects against Intestinal Inflammation. J. Exp. Med 2017, 214 (4 ), 1093–1109. 10.1084/jem.20161105.28280036
(241) Li X ; Gong W ; Wang H ; Li T ; Attri KS ; Lewis RE ; Kalil AC ; Bhinderwala F ; Powers R ; Yin G ; O-GlcNAc Transferase Suppresses Inflammation and Necroptosis by Targeting Receptor-Interacting Serine/Threonine-Protein Kinase 3. Immunity 2019, 50 (3 ), 576–590.e6. 10.1016/j.immuni.2019.01.007.30770249
(242) Lehman DM ; Fu D-J ; Freeman AB ; Hunt KJ ; Leach RJ ; Johnson-Pais T ; Hamlington J ; Dyer TD ; Arya R ; Abboud H ; A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in MGEA5 Encoding O-GlcNAc–Selective N-Acetyl-β-DGlucosaminidase Is Associated With Type 2 Diabetes in Mexican Americans. Diabetes 2005, 54 (4 ), 1214 LP–1221. 10.2337/diabetes.54.4.1214.15793264
(243) Arias EB ; Kim J ; Cartee GD Prolonged Incubation in PUGNAc Results in Increased Protein O-Linked Glycosylation and Insulin Resistance in Rat Skeletal Muscle. Diabetes 2004, 53 (4 ), 921 LP–930. 10.2337/diabetes.53.4.921.15047606
(244) Macauley MS ; Bubb AK ; Martinez-Fleites C ; Davies GJ ; Vocadlo DJ Elevation of Global O-GlcNAc Levels in 3T3-L1 Adipocytes by Selective Inhibition of O-GlcNAcase Does Not Induce Insulin Resistance*. J. Biol. Chem 2008, 283 (50 ), 34687–34695. 10.1074/jbc.M804525200.18842583
(245) Macauley MS ; Shan X ; Yuzwa SA ; Gloster TM ; Vocadlo DJ Elevation of Global O-GlcNAc in Rodents Using a Selective O-GlcNAcase Inhibitor Does Not Cause Insulin Resistance or Perturb Glucohomeostasis. Chem. Biol 2010, 17 (9 ), 949–958. 10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.07.005.20851344
(246) Zhang Z ; Tan EP ; VandenHull NJ ; Peterson KR ; Slawson C O-GlcNAcase Expression Is Sensitive to Changes in O-GlcNAc Homeostasis. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 2014, 5 , 206. 10.3389/fendo.2014.00206.25520704
(247) Galesic A ; Rakshit A ; Cutolo G ; Pacheco RP ; Balana AT ; Moon SP ; Pratt MR Comparison of N-Acetyl-Glucosamine to Other Monosaccharides Reveals Structural Differences for the Inhibition of α-Synuclein Aggregation. ACS Chem. Biol 2021, 16 (1 ), 14–19. 10.1021/acschembio.0c00716.33399442
