LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

34634459
8616667
10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105530
NIHMS1755696
Article
Systems biology approaches to unravel the molecular and genetic architecture of Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies
Miyoshi Emily abd
Morabito Samuel bcd
Swarup Vivek abe
a Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
b Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders (MIND), University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
c Mathematical, Computational and Systems Biology (MCSB) Program, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
d Co-first authors
e Correspondence: vswarup@uci.edu, 3224 Biological Sciences III, Irvine, CA 92697
18 11 2021
09 10 2021
12 2021
01 6 2022
160 105530105530
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Over the years, genetic studies have identified multiple genetic risk variants associated with neurodegenerative disorders and helped reveal new biological pathways and genes of interest. However, genetic risk variants commonly reside in non-coding regions and may regulate distant genes rather than the nearest gene, as well as a gene’s interaction partners in biological networks. Systems biology and functional genomics approaches provide the framework to unravel the functional significance of genetic risk variants in disease. In this review, we summarize the genetic and transcriptomic studies of Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies and focus on the advantages of performing systems-level analyses to interrogate the biological pathways underlying neurodegeneration. Finally, we highlight new avenues of multi-omics analysis with single-cell approaches, which provides unparalleled opportunities to systematically explore cellular heterogeneity, and present an example of how to integrate publicly available single-cell datasets. Systems-level analysis has illuminated the function of many disease risk genes, but much work remains to study tauopathies and to understand spatiotemporal gene expression changes of specific cell types.

tauopathy
Alzheimer’s disease
genetics
transcriptomics
epigenetics
network analysis

pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorders and the most common form of dementia, marked by both amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau aggregates (Aβ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, respectively). Other neurodegenerative disorders (termed “tauopathies”) also present pathological tau aggregates but have varied clinical manifestations, ranging from motor-related symptoms, similar to Parkinson’s disease (PD), to behavioral deficits. For AD and several tauopathies, we still do not have a clear understanding of their etiologies; however, we find shared neurological changes, such as extensive neuronal loss and glial dysfunction, suggesting that there may be shared underlying biological mechanisms across the different disorders.

Technological advancements in sequencing have provided the opportunity to uncover novel insights into the molecular bases of diseases, such as tauopathies. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) empowered us to identify disease-associated genetic risk variants, revealing new genes of interest; however, many of these variants reside in non-coding regions, making it difficult to interpret their functional roles. Therefore, many studies have attempted to ascertain the functional significance of GWAS hits through other sequencing techniques, such as RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) (Figure 1). In this review, we summarize recent findings from genetic and transcriptomic studies of AD and related tauopathies. In the future, meta-analysis of high-resolution sequencing datasets will allow us to uncover disease biology with much greater sensitivity than its constituent data sources, and as a proof of principle, we performed an integrative analysis of five published single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) studies of human AD totaling to over 300,000 nuclei. In addition, we highlight the advantages of integrating multiple data modalities and multiple model systems and performing systems-level analyses to understand the cascade of dysregulation initiated by a genetic risk variant to yield a disease phenotype.

Breakthroughs and barriers in genome-wide association studies of AD and related tauopathies

GWAS in European-descended populations have identified several genetic risk factors linked to AD and related tauopathies (Table 1). Out of these conditions, most of the work in this area has focused on uncovering the heritable risk factors underlying AD. Early research into the genetics of AD largely focused on familial mutations in APP and PSEN1/2, which account for a minority of AD cases, specifically early-onset familial AD (EOFAD). The majority of AD cases though are late-onset AD (LOAD) and do not appear to have a single casual gene (‘sporadic’). However, twin studies estimated that LOAD has a heritability between 60% to 80% (Gatz et al., 2006). APOE genotype was the first genetic risk factor identified for LOAD (Corder et al., 1993; Farrer et al., 1997; Saunders et al., 1993), accounting for about 35% of the genetic variance (Naj et al., 2011), where homozygotes for the ε4 allele exhibit 10- to 12-fold increased risk in comparison to those with the homozygous ε3 allele. On the other hand, the ε2 allele confers protection against AD with a 40% reduction in risk (Corder et al., 1994). APOE remained the only identified genetic risk factor for LOAD until the late 2000s with the first GWAS of AD, which revealed CLU as a novel AD risk gene (Harold et al., 2009; Lambert et al., 2009).

Large sample sizes are necessary in population genetic studies to discover disease associated risk signals. Therefore, large consortia of many different research groups have undertaken this challenge to unravel the genetic architecture of AD. For example, the International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Project (IGAP) performed large-scale GWAS meta-analyses using AD patients and cognitively normal controls (Kunkle et al., 2019; Lambert et al., 2013) and has been at the forefront of AD genetics. In 2013, IGAP performed a two-stage meta-analysis of four GWAS datasets (Alzheimer’s Disease Genetic Consortium, Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Consortium, the European Alzheimer’s Disease Initiative, the Genetic and Environmental Risk in Alzheimer’s Disease) comprising 74,046 total individuals, finding a total of 20 significant loci, 11 of which were novel at the time (Lambert et al., 2013). Earlier studies had only identified the strongest risk signals, including variants at the APOE, BIN1, CLU, and PICALM loci. The most recent GWAS meta-analysis of AD from IGAP, using a larger discovery cohort than their previous study (n=21,982 cases, n=41,944 control, n=94,437 total in all stages), confirmed 20 previously identified loci and identified five novel loci (ADAM10, IQCK, WWOX, ACE, ADAMTS1) for a total of 25 significantly associated loci (Kunkle et al., 2019). From AD GWAS, we now recognize microglia as a critical cell population in AD pathophysiology; many of the identified AD risk genes (MS46A, CD33, ABCA7, HLA-DRB1, APOE, TREM2, SPI1, for example) are related to the immune response and/or are expressed by microglia. One of the largest hurdles blocking advancement in GWAS of AD and other complex diseases is collecting a large number of cases, and more nationwide genetics efforts such as the UK BioBank may be required for the next generation of GWAS.

While there are several AD GWAS, there are much fewer GWAS of related tauopathies, which may be attributable in part to the relatively lower prevalence of these disorders, and these studies identified much fewer genetic variants compared to AD. Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), for example, is a tauopathy associated with movement impairments. Hoglinger et al. (2011) performed a two-stage GWAS (stage 1: n=1,114 autopsy-confirmed PSP, n=3,247 controls; stage 2: n=1,051 clinically diagnosed PSP, n=3,560 controls) and identified three novel risk loci (STX6, EIF2AK3, and MOBP), in addition to MAPT, previously implicated in PSP risk. A GWAS meta-analysis of PSP found five loci reaching genome wide significance (MAPT, MOBP, STX6, RUNX2, and SLCO1A2) in a cohort of 1,646 cases and 10,662 controls, which included those from Hoglinger et al. (2011) (Chen et al., 2018). On the other hand, for corticobasal degeneration (CBD), which also presents motor-related symptoms, Kouri et al. (2015) examined 152 autopsy-confirmed CBD cases and 3,311 controls, finding risk variants at lnc-KIF13B-1, SOS1, and MOBP, for example. Notably, both PSP and CBD have genetic risk variants at MAPT, consistent with a critical role of tau in these disorders, and at MOBP, suggesting oligodendrocyte dysfunction is involved in both disorders.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is another common form of dementia, preferentially affecting the frontal and temporal lobes but is both clinically and pathologically heterogeneous. Pathologically, FTD is characterized by inclusions of TDP-43, FUS, or tau, and clinical subtypes include behavioral variant FTD, semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (PPA), nonfluent agrammatic variant PPA, and FTD with motor neuron disease (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011; Neary et al., 1998; Rascovsky et al., 2011). We discuss FTD in this review due to the subset of cases with tau pathology and similar clinical symptoms with AD. Prior to GWAS, we had only identified mutations in the MAPT, GRN, C9orf72, VCP, and CHMP2B genes in familial FTD cases (Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006; DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Hutton et al., 1998; Rohrer and Rosen, 2013; Skibinski et al., 2005; Watts et al., 2004; Zee et al., 2013), but as in AD, a large proportion of cases are sporadic. The largest GWAS of sporadic FTD to date included 3,526 cases and 9,402 controls in total to test for genetic association among the four clinical subtypes of FTD and performed a meta-analysis of all the samples together, finding significant signals at the HLA and BTNL2 loci (Ferrari et al., 2014). Notably, HLA is also an AD risk gene and implicates the immune response in both AD and FTD. However, in this study, FTD cases were determined primarily by clinical diagnoses, with only 3% pathologically confirmed, restricting analysis of FTD risk by its pathological subtypes, and similar to PSP and CBD, the sample numbers are substantially smaller than AD GWAS, thus impeding the identification of additional risk variants.

Due to the large heritable component of many complex traits, the analytical capability of GWAS can be expanded by including individuals with a family history of disease, in addition to primary cases. In 2017, Liu, Elrich, and Pickrell introduced an approach called genome-wide association study by proxy (GWAX), where they replaced cases with first-degree family members to analyze 12 common disorders using UK Biobank data, and the associations found in these GWAX were comparable to those of GWAS with primary cases (Liu et al., 2017). This may be especially useful for rarer disorders, such as PSP and CBD, where it may be more difficult to obtain large sample numbers with primary cases alone. Following this initial study, several groups have used this approach for AD GWAS meta-analysis including cases, controls, and familial proxy cases (Jansen et al., 2019; Marioni et al., 2018; Schwartzentruber et al., 2021). The AD-by-proxy study from Jansen et al. (2019) identified 29 significant risk loci, including novel signals at ADAMTS4, KAT8, CLNK, and several other loci, while Schwartzentruber et al. (2021) identified a total of 37 loci, altogether expanding the catalog of known AD-associated genetic signals. Given its successful track record in many disorders, GWAX should be successful in further uncovering the genetic architecture of related tauopathies.

Researchers also have been particularly interested in investigating shared genetic risk across neurodegenerative disorders. Ferrari et al. (2017) examined the genetic overlap between sporadic FTD and AD or Parkinson’s disease and found one variant at APOE locus jointly associated with FTD and AD. Interestingly, they also identified variants at HLA and MAPT loci shared between FTD and PD but not AD, indicating a distinct genetic architecture of AD (Ferrari et al., 2017). Chen et al. (2018) also investigated the genetic correlation between PSP and AD or FTD but did not find a significant correlation for either disorder. Instead, they found significant overlaps between PSP and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) or PD genetic risk (Chen et al., 2018). Another study identified genetic overlap between ALS and FTD as well (Karch et al., 2018). ALS and PD are typically associated with TDP-43 and alpha-synuclein inclusions, respectively, and thus these genetic studies imply that there may be shared molecular mechanisms driving neurodegeneration independent of protein pathology and suggest new avenues for cross-disorder therapeutic development.

GWAS have illuminated many genetic risk signals for AD and related tauopathies thus strengthening our understanding of neurodegeneration, but there are some key limitations of these studies that need to be addressed in the future. To date, the majority of GWAS in AD and other disorders have only profiled European-descendant populations, which is problematic because different ethnic groups have distinct genetic risk profiles. For example, the APOE ε4 allele is associated with an increased risk of AD in Japanese populations but a diminished risk in African American populations in comparison to European populations (Graff-Radford et al., 2002; Miyashita et al., 2013). There is a clear need for the generation and analysis of more large-scale GWAS datasets of non-European populations to further our understanding of disease.

Additionally, while GWAS are useful for pinpointing variants that are likely causal for disease, this analysis is merely a starting point for the broader task of understanding how genetic variation disrupts the normal function of specific tissues and cell types that thereby contributes to the manifestation of a disease phenotype. Therefore, studies have leveraged expression quantitative trait loci and epigenetic datasets to try to functionally characterize genetic risk variants; however, these datasets are not necessarily from human brain tissue samples, potentially impeding accurate predictions. While deciphering the biology of genetic risk variants in humans remains a daunting task, biotechnological advances and systems genomics may lead us closer towards this goal.

Surveying the diseased brain using co-expression network analysis

To understand the genetic basis of neurodegenerative disorders, we require a comprehensive picture portraying the cascade of interactions between disease-risk signals and cis-regulatory elements, genes, and proteins. Integration of genetic studies with high-throughput functional genomics may lead us towards this goal. The next-generation genomics revolution has paved the way for neuroscientists to study genome-wide molecular signatures of the human brain, such as gene expression, at an unprecedented speed. Multiple studies have performed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) or microarray-based gene expression analysis on AD postmortem human brain tissue samples and to a lesser extent in FTD and PSP, and identified both upregulated and downregulated genes in the respective disorders (Allen et al., 2018; Berchtold et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2018; Rexach et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2016; Webster et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2013). For example, it is now well established that AD GWAS gene BIN1 is upregulated in AD (Chapuis et al., 2013; Holler et al., 2014; Karch et al., 2012; Martiskainen et al., 2015). Additionally, several studies have now identified disease-associated microRNAs (miRNAs) and splicing variants, improving our understanding of alterations in gene regulation with disease (Lau et al., 2013; Raj et al., 2018; Swarup et al., 2019).

However, these studies primarily rely on a gene-level statistical analysis, such as differential expression testing, providing little knowledge about relationships between different genes. Therefore, it is important to also employ a more holistic analysis to achieve a systems-level understanding of gene expression and a more comprehensive view of brain circuits and functions in health and disease. Co-expression network analysis is a powerful systems biology approach that can identify multi-scale gene expression patterns across brain region, cell-types, cortical layers, and neural circuits (Oldham et al., 2008; Parikshak et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2013). This hierarchical organization provides a platform for integrating different types of data, including multi-omics approaches, imaging, and behavioral studies. Network analysis complements differential expression analysis by providing structure to the underlying data, resembling the intricate organization inherent to biological systems. In addition, network analysis goes beyond pathway-based analysis approaches, which are inherently biased towards known biological perspectives and thus hamper discovery-centric data-driven research.

Although different analytical strategies have been used for co-expression network analysis (Chiu and Talhouk, 2018; Gaiteri et al., 2015; Langfelder and Horvath, 2008; Song and Zhang, 2015; Tesson et al., 2010), the general underlying principle is to organize gene (or protein) expression data into groups of modules or communities, comprising nodes (genes or gene-products) and edges, which can represent physical interactions (like protein-protein interactions) or more commonly correlation or mutual information. The connectivity of the edges can be leveraged to understand intra-network (also known as intra-modular) connectivity between different nodes and highlight the most connected genes (“hub” genes) in a network. Several in-silico and functional genomic analyses have shown that co-expression modules are functional biological units (Carter et al., 2013; Chandran et al., 2016; Geschwind and Konopka, 2009; Mitra et al., 2013), and studying the group properties of these modules in health and disease have helped us understand the molecular underpinnings of biological systems.

Co-expression network analysis performed on both microarray and RNA-sequencing datasets of human AD identified several biological pathways dysregulated with disease, such as those related to synaptic transmission, mitochondrial function, and immune response (Forabosco et al., 2013; Miller et al., 2008; Morabito et al., 2020; Mostafavi et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2013). Although initial studies had small sample sizes of under or around 100 individuals, many of the identified biological pathways were also identified in studies of hundreds, if not a thousand individuals, indicating that network analysis identifies robust, disease-relevant gene networks. In addition, many AD-correlated modules are conserved across different brain regions (Forabosco et al., 2013; Morabito et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2016). Multiregional analyses also have indicated regional specificity of AD gene expression changes that reflect the pathological progression of AD; gene expression changes in regions with early tau deposition, such as the hippocampus, are more pronounced than those in regions later affected in the disease (Morabito et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2016). Altogether, these co-expression studies highlighted several genes as key regulators of these biological pathways, laying the groundwork for future studies in AD, and notably helped to clarify the role of microglial genes, such as TYROBP and TREM2, in AD genetic risk. For example, network analysis revealed TYROBP regulates an immune-related module correlated with AD (Zhang et al., 2013).

Network analysis has also highlighted the importance of oligodendrocytes in AD pathophysiology. Oligodendrocytes have been relatively understudied in AD compared to astrocytes and microglia, despite multiple studies revealing AD-related white matter changes (Ihara et al., 2010; Nasrabady et al., 2018). PSEN1 mutations are known to result in EOFAD (Cacace et al., 2016), and co-expression network analysis identified PSEN1 is co-expressed with myelin-related genes (Miller et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2013). Additionally, myelination-related modules are dysregulated in PSP, indicating cross-disorder oligodendrocyte dysfunction (Allen et al., 2018).

Many of these studies, however, have analyzed data from a single brain tissue repository, and differences in tissue processing can affect downstream results. In our previous study, we constructed co-expression modules from data generated by the Accelerating Medicines Partnership-Alzheimer’s Disease (AMP-AD) consortium, consisting of more than 1,000 human AD and control samples from different brain regions across multiple brain banks (Morabito et al., 2020). We used consensus weighted gene co-expression network analysis (cWGCNA), a meta-analytical approach, to identify robust disease-specific co-expressed modules, which we identified as neuronal or non-neuronal (Figure 2a–b). These gene co-expression changes were preserved in the normal human aging brain but were altered only with the progression of AD (Figure 2c–d). We also found that the co-expression modules were highly preserved across several additional human AD microarray datasets, and their trajectories similarly changed in these datasets, demonstrating that these gene co-expression changes are robust, despite technical differences. Additionally, we deeply characterized our consensus co-expression modules by integrating various orthogonal datasets including GWAS, DNA methylation, histone acetylation (H3K9ac), and expression and methylation quantitative loci (eQTLs and mQTLs), to provide a comprehensive picture of the genetic and transcriptomic alterations associated with AD. We identified a microglial module (CM8) that was significantly enriched in AD GWAS genes, supporting the key role of microglia in AD genetic risk, and our analysis revealed transcription factors, such as SPI1 and IRF8, as potential regulators of this module.

Moreover, co-expression network analysis approaches provide a platform for integrating data from different model systems of disease. This provides us the potential to find disease-associated, evolutionary conserved changes. Notably, we found that the consensus glial modules, such as those related to TGFβ and TLR3 signaling, were not preserved in mouse models, such as the 5XFAD, a transgenic mouse model of AD expressing five human AD gene mutations (APP and PSEN1) that result in extensive amyloid deposition, and rTg4510, a tau mouse model with the human MAPT P301L mutation, associated with FTD (Figure 2c), possibly highlighting the lack of translatability from mouse models to human clinical trials (Drummond and Wisniewski, 2017; Onos et al., 2016; Vitek et al., 2020). Neuronal modules though were generally preserved across both tau and Aβ mouse models (Figure 2c). A recent study also constructed co-expression modules from AMP-AD datasets but utilized 5 different co-expression network analysis approaches (MEGENA (Song and Zhang, 2015), WINA (Wang et al., 2016), rWGCNA (Parikshak et al., 2016), speakeasy (Gaiteri et al., 2015), and their own metanetwork), identifying similar modules across the different methods (Wan et al., 2020). Wan et al. (2020) integrated multiple AD and other neurodegeneration-associated mouse models at different stages of disease progression to identify conserved gene co-expression changes. Importantly, they found overlaps between human AD co-expression modules and differentially expressed genes in mouse models of Huntington’s disease and spinocerebellar ataxia, disorders not typically associated with AD, suggesting a generalized transcriptomic signature of neurodegeneration, not specific to AD. Additionally, our own work (Swarup et al., 2019) used mouse models of AD and FTD, induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived neurons, and human postmortem samples to identify two co-expression modules a) neurodegeneration-associated synaptic (NAS) module and b) neurodegeneration-associated inflammatory (NAI) module, which were validated in a dozen other mouse models of disease. We identified a miRNA (miR-203) as a novel regulator of the NAS module.

Additionally, proteomic studies of AD and PSP have leveraged network analysis in order to define the disease-associated proteome and relate genetic risk to protein expression (Johnson et al., 2020; Seyfried et al., 2017; Swarup et al., 2020). These studies revealed that there are disease proteomic networks that are distinct from those found at the transcriptome level. In our previous work (Swarup et al., 2020), we integrated five different proteomic datasets using consensus WGCNA to robustly identify disease-associated proteomic modules, and we found enrichment of AD and PSP GWAS hits in separate modules, indicating that their etiologies are distinct, despite the presence of tau pathology in both disorders. Integration of different data modalities, such as transcriptomic, proteomic, and genetic data, provides a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular changes associated with disease.

Single-cell genomics has uncovered vast cellular dysregulation in Alzheimer’s Disease

Recent advances in sequencing methods have enabled us to profile single cells dissociated from whole tissues (Cao et al., 2017; Hashimshony et al., 2012; Jaitin et al., 2014; Klein et al., 2015; Macosko et al., 2015; Ramsköld et al., 2012; Rosenberg et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2017). In “bulk-tissue” sequencing studies of whole tissue samples, the signal of interest is averaged across all the cells present in the sample. Thus, bulk sequencing techniques are limited in their capacity to faithfully characterize the biology of the brain, which is composed of many different types of neurons and glia with fine-grained regional specificity. Single-cell sequencing approaches employ nucleotide barcoding strategies that allow us to bioinformatically separate all the sequencing reads to their cell of origin. Where a bulk-tissue RNA-seq experiment of one sample yields only one data point describing each gene, a single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) experiment of the same sample could yield hundreds up to tens of thousands of data points describing each cell, depending on the specific single-cell approach. This presents us with new opportunities for characterizing how specific cell types respond to disease, especially in the context of disease risk signals, as well as introducing many new challenges in terms of best practices for data analysis (Lähnemann et al., 2020; Luecken and Theis, 2019).

There are several different approaches for single-cell sequencing, each with their own advantages and disadvantages in terms of throughput and data quality (Ziegenhain et al., 2017). Over a decade ago, the first single-cell sequencing study (Tang et al., 2009) was published, where a single mouse blastomere was manually picked and libraries were prepared for mRNA-seq. Fortunately, modern approaches do not require manual cell picking, rather they use specialized microfluidics devices or combinatorial nucleotide barcoding schemes to prepare single cells or single nuclei for sequencing. To date, scRNA-seq is the most widely used single-cell genomics method, but other techniques, such as single-cell assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with high-throughput sequencing (scATAC-seq), are gaining traction as they are commercialized. A new method called split-pool ligation-based transcriptome sequencing (SPLiT-seq) (Rosenberg et al., 2018) is an attractive cost-effective approach for neurobiologists that are interested in performing their own single-cell sequencing since it does not require a microfluidic device.

Several studies have used sc- or snRNA-seq to characterize the cellular heterogeneity of the AD brain in human patients and mouse models of disease (Grubman et al., 2019; Habib et al., 2020; Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Lau et al., 2020; Leng et al., 2021; Mathys et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020). In general, while each of these studies have used different experimental designs and statistical approaches, all of them have contributed to our understanding of dysregulation of specific cell types and cell subpopulations in AD. The first transcriptomic study of the human AD brain at cellular resolution used the 10x Genomics platform to perform snRNA-seq in 48 prefrontal cortex (PFC) samples from the Religious Order Study (ROS) and the Rush Memory and Aging Project (MAP) (Mathys et al., 2019). This study resolved gene expression profiles of the major cell types of the PFC and identified differentially expressed genes between individuals with AD pathology versus those with no pathology for each of these cell types. Furthermore, this study identified several cell subpopulations that are overrepresented in certain pathological and biological conditions, such as Braak stage, cognitive status, or sex. For example, one subtype of excitatory neurons termed Ex6 (STMN1+, PARK7+, FBXO2+) was more common to male samples in Braak stages one and two, whereas excitatory cluster Ex4 (LINGO1+, RASGEF1B+, SLC26A3+) was enriched in female samples from Braak stage five. Additional sex-specific cell type responses to AD were found in this study, such as a distinct transcriptional activation of oligodendrocytes in males and a clear downregulation of neuronal gene expression in females with respect to pathological variables.

More snRNA-seq studies of AD have followed the initial study from Mathys &amp; Davila-Velderrain et al. (2019), one of which being a study that profiled the entorhinal cortex (EC) in six AD patients and six cognitively normal controls, where the authors specifically investigated cell-type-specific gene expression signatures of AD genetic risk genes (Grubman et al., 2019). For each of the major cell types, they identified significant differences in gene expression of AD risk genes across different cell subpopulations, highlighting BIN1 in a specific astrocyte population and CLU in an oligodendrocyte progenitor population, for example. Furthermore, selective vulnerability is a well-known feature of neurodegeneration, where different neuronal populations exhibit a range of susceptibility to disease. Another recent study used snRNA-seq to characterize the EC and the superior frontal gyrus (SFG) in postmortem tissue from male donors with varying Braak stages to investigate selective vulnerability of neurons in AD, revealing RORB as a marker gene for vulnerable excitatory neurons and noting a distinct lack of vulnerability among inhibitory neuron populations (Leng et al., 2021). A key lesson from these different snRNA-seq studies of AD is that gene expression is widely dysregulated throughout disease progression across cell types and brain regions, but different subpopulations of cells are more responsive or resilient to disease.

Prior to any of these human snRNA-seq studies, one of the first single-cell studies in an AD mouse model (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017) used massively parallel single-cell RNA-seq (MARS-seq) to compare gene expression in brain immune cells between wild type and 5XFAD mice. Their analysis uncovered a subpopulation of microglia enriched in aged 5XFAD mice, which they termed “Disease Associated Microglia” (DAMs), and they revealed the genes that are dynamically expressed throughout the change from homeostatic to disease-associated cell states. The DAM state is marked by an increased expression of AD-associated risk genes, such as Apoe and Trem2, and a decreased expression of homeostatic markers, such as Cx3cr1 and P2ry12. Other studies identified a similar cell state distinct from homeostatic microglia and enriched in diseased samples, which have been termed “Activated Response Microglia” (ARMs) (Frigerio et al., 2019; Sierksma et al., 2020).

Additionally, another group performed a snRNA-seq study of the PFC using samples from human AD patients, including those with the common variant of TREM2 (TREM2-CV) and those with the AD risk variant TREM2-R62H, and Trem2-deficient 5XFAD mice (Zhou et al., 2020). They found DAM genes, such as Apoe and Csf1, are upregulated in 5XFAD compared to Trem2-deficient 5XFAD mice, while homeostatic genes including Cxc3r1 were downregulated, providing support for the Trem2-dependent DAM hypothesis. In contrast, by comparing gene expression in microglia between human controls and AD (TREM2-CV) samples, only a handful of DAM genes, including TREM2, CD68, and APOE, were upregulated in human AD. This study also identified several key differences between human AD and the 5XFAD mouse model in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes.

Our group also recently performed a cross-species snRNA-seq analysis using three human AD datasets and one 5XFAD dataset, and we found one microglia sub-cluster that was enriched for the DAM gene signature (Morabito et al., 2021). By performing differential gene expression analysis comparing mouse and human microglia nuclei in this cluster, we found a distinct depletion of many DAM genes in human microglia. Despite the deep characterization of DAMs and DAM-like cells in mouse models, it is not clear whether these Trem2-dependent Aβ responsive microglia identified in mice directly correspond to disease responsive microglia in human AD brains. Furthermore, another study (Habib et al., 2020) identified a population of Aβ-localized disease responsive astrocytes, termed “Disease Associated Astrocytes” (DAAs), and in our group’s single-cell analysis we found evidence that the DAA gene signature is present in human AD samples (Morabito et al., 2021).

Much work has been done to characterize the transcriptome of AD at cellular resolution; however, many key questions remain unanswered. For instance, while these studies have demonstrated cell type specific gene expression of AD risk genes, and while there is evidence for the role of some of these risk genes in the glial response to Aβ, it is not clear how these risk factors disrupt the gene regulatory networks in the healthy brain to contribute towards the molecular phenotypes of disease. Epigenetic data can aid in clarifying the gene regulatory mechanisms in disease. For example, Nott et al. (2019) generated cell-type specific chromatin conformation and histone modification data from fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) of human brain nuclei and identified a microglia-specific BIN1 enhancer mapping to an AD risk variant. However, in this study, they were unable to distinguish epigenetic changes unique to specific cell subpopulations (Nott et al., 2019), and it is now possible to generate single-cell epigenetic data (without FACS). Similar to single-cell transcriptomic studies, single-cell chromatin accessibility studies have identified heterogeneous subsets of cells in the human brain (Corces et al., 2020; Lake et al., 2017; Morabito et al., 2021). Corces et al. (2020) predicted regulatory targets of AD risk variants in loci such as PICALM and BIN1 in specific cell types, but the data originated from only cognitively normal samples. Our recent study profiled single-cell chromatin accessibility from both late-stage pathology AD samples and cognitively normal samples, and we constructed cell type specific cis-gene regulatory networks (Morabito et al., 2021). We compared the chromatin accessibility landscape and predicted cis-regulatory interactions between cells from AD and control samples at selected GWAS loci, including APOE and BIN1, and found cell-type-specific differences flanking the likely causal SNPs, thus highlighting potential interactions between these non-coding SNPs and neighboring regulatory elements which may underlie disease. Furthermore, we integrated snATAC-seq and snRNA-seq data from the same samples to identify candidate cis-regulatory elements and their potential target genes by cell type, highlighting the strength of integrating single-cell transcriptomic and epigenetic datasets to interrogate the molecular mechanisms underlying neurodegeneration.

Integrating single-cell datasets for meta-analysis

Single-cell sequencing, however, is still rather expensive in comparison to whole tissue approaches, hindering our ability to associate cellular signatures to pathological features, given the small sample size in the present single-cell studies. For example, large-scale studies of bulk AD transcriptomics have jointly analyzed over 1,000 human samples, while to date the Mathys &amp; Davila-Velderrain et al. study has the largest number of samples used in a single-cell study of human AD with 48 samples. However, it is possible to greatly increase the analytical power of an individual study by leveraging other published datasets in the form of a single-cell meta-analysis. Recent breakthroughs in single-cell integration techniques have made it possible to perform large-scale meta-analysis of single-cell data from multiple studies, species, or -omics modalities (Argelaguet et al., 2021). As an example of what can be done with these integration approaches, the BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Network (BICCN) has constructed a multimodal cross-species cell atlas of the motor cortex that combines data from snRNA-seq, scRNA-seq, single-cell DNA methylation (snmC-seq), snATAC-seq, spatial transcriptomics (MERFISH), and other technologies (Adkins et al., 2020).

Here we present a blueprint for constructing an integrated single-cell atlas of AD, and we note that this workflow is applicable to different meta-analysis approaches, which could include multiple species, data modalities, or different disease conditions (Figure 3a). As an example of this integrative analysis, we curated six snRNA-seq datasets of human AD encompassing three brain regions and 124 samples (n=65 AD, n=59 control, see Supplementary Methods). There are several different integration approaches that would be adequate for this task (Hie et al., 2019; Korsunsky et al., 2019; Stuart et al., 2019; Welch et al., 2019), but here we performed integration using single-cell Variational Inference (scVI), a deep neural network that models the biological information underlying measured gene expression values (Lopez et al., 2018). scVI is an ideal approach for creating a cell atlas of AD because it can be updated to incorporate new datasets after the initial training step. After training the scVI model, we performed dimensionality reduction using uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP), a standard tool for visualizing snRNA-seq data in two or three dimensions (Becht et al., 2019), and we grouped cells into clusters using Leiden community detection (Traag et al., 2019). Using this integrative framework, we recovered the same major cell lineages from the original studies (Figure 3b), and we found that the data was well integrated across different studies and brain regions (Figure 3c). As an example of what could be done with this integrated dataset, we wanted to track how the gene signature of each major cell type changes throughout the progression of AD. Using nuclei from control samples only (Braak stages 0, 1, 2), we used the trained scVI model to perform differential gene expression tests iteratively comparing each major cell type to all other cells, thus identifying a robust set of cell-type-specific marker genes (Figure 3d). We then took the top 20 marker genes, sorted by statistical significance in each cluster, and computed “gene module scores” for each cell in the dataset, which represent a common cell type signature present in non-AD brains (Figure 3e). Finally, we plotted the distributions of these cell-type gene signatures throughout different Braak stages using cells in their respective cell types, thus showing from a broad perspective that gene expression profiles of each cell type are dynamic throughout the progression of disease (Figure 3f). In this integrated dataset, we found both astrocyte and oligodendrocyte gene signatures increase from no pathology to mid-stage pathology before decreasing with advanced pathology, possibly reflecting an initial glial response to pathology that declines when the insult becomes too great in the late stages of disease. On the other hand, both excitatory and inhibitory neuron gene signatures are relatively stable across Braak stages. These gene signatures can also be dissected by brain region to determine region specificity of these gene expression changes, in addition to a subpopulation-level analysis.

This example analysis demonstrates how future single-cell transcriptomics studies of AD can take advantage of the previous work that has been done in this field through integration techniques to further study aspects of cellular dysfunction of AD that have not been explored in previous studies. In addition to these published datasets, there are several exciting pre-prints in this area, namely one study that developed a custom protocol to isolate NFT-bearing neurons for single-cell sequencing (Otero-Garcia et al., 2020), another that specifically profiled patients with monogenic AD (Marinaro et al., 2020), and a study that profiled the brain’s vasculature in AD (Yang et al., 2021). Tauopathies have not been investigated using single-cell genomics, but this integrative analysis approach could be used to identify shared and distinct patterns of cellular dysregulation across disorders. In sum, this analysis demonstrates the feasibility of using many different data sources to perform a unified single-cell meta-analysis.

Future Directions

Our knowledge of the function of genetic risk factors for AD and related tauopathies has been greatly accelerated by innovation in high-throughput genomics methods. While there are many emerging -omics approaches that could be used to discover new insights into neurodegeneration, many of these techniques are only used by a small number of labs, since they are not commercially available. On the other hand, while some of these cutting-edge techniques, such as single-cell transcriptomics, have been used to study AD, there are still no published studies of tauopathies at cellular resolution. Furthermore, there are very few high-resolution epigenomics studies of AD or related tauopathies. Over the coming years, we can expect to learn more about the relationship between genetic risk and molecular dysfunction in tauopathies by using -omics and systems-level data analysis.

Transcriptomic dysregulation of the brain in disease can be better understood with spatial information, which is lost in sc- or snRNA-seq. A recent study used spatial transcriptomics to profile AD gene expression changes with spatial context in human patients and a mouse model, identifying gene expression patterns that are associated with the spatial organization of amyloid deposits (Chen et al., 2020). However, many spatial transcriptomics methods do not profile gene expression at cellular resolution, which can make it difficult to disentangle which cell type is driving a certain signal at any given location. High-resolution spatial approaches such as RNA seqFISH+ (Eng et al., 2019) and integrative bioinformatics approaches can now resolve transcriptional information in single cells (Kleshchevnikov et al., 2020), and a preliminary study has identified gene expression profiles of the dendrites and soma of individual neurons (Wang et al., 2020). Additionally, RNA splicing information is lost in many single-cell approaches that use Illumina sequencing, which does not sufficiently capture full length RNA transcripts. New methods for long-read single-cell sequencing can unravel transcript isoforms that are dysregulated with disease in a cell-type-specific manner (Gupta et al., 2018; Joglekar et al., 2021; Rebboah et al., 2021).

High-resolution epigenomic sequencing methods are rapidly emerging, but to date very few have been used to study the diseased brain. Our group’s previous work (Morabito et al., 2021) was the first to use both snATAC-seq and snRNA-seq in the same samples to characterize disease-associated cellular dysregulation in AD, and one other study analyzed AD and Parkinson’s associated risk loci using snATAC-seq in control brains (Corces et al., 2020). Cell-type-specific histone modifications and DNA-protein interactions can be measured using single-cell CUT&amp;Tag (Bartosovic et al., 2021). There are also methods to study DNA methylation (Luo et al., 2018) and 3D chromatin interactions in single cells (Ramani et al., 2017). Furthermore, there are now several sequencing approaches that profile more than one -omic modality in the same cell, such as Paired Tag for profiling the transcriptome and histone modifications (Zhu et al., 2021); SNARE-seq (Chen et al., 2019) and 10X Genomics Multiome to profile the transcriptome and chromatin accessibility; and TEA-seq for profiling the transcriptome, chromatin accessibility, and epitopes (Swanson et al., 2021). In light of these new developments in biotechnology and bioinformatics, there are many opportunities to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of neurodegeneration in tauopathies, to systematically uncover how genetic risk factors play a role in the dysregulation of specific cell types and develop new therapeutics targeting novel regulators of disease.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Methods

Acknowledgement

Funding:

This work was supported by UCI MIND startup funds and the National Institute on Aging 1RF1AG071683 to VS.

Abbreviations:

Aβ Amyloid beta

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ALS Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

AMP-AD Accelerating Medicines Partnership-Alzheimer’s disease

ARM Activated response microglia

ATAC-seq Assay for transposase accessible chromatin with sequencing

BICCN BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Network

CM Co-expression module

CBD Corticobasal degeneration

DAA Disease-associated astrocyte

DAM Disease-associated microglia

EC Entorhinal Cortex

EOFAD Early-onset familial Alzheimer’s disease

FACS Fluorescence-activated cell sorting

FTD Frontotemporal dementia

GWAS Genome-wide association study

GWAX Genome-wide association study by proxy

iPSC Induced pluripotent stem cell

IGAP International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Project

IQR Interquartile range

LOAD Late-onset Alzheimer’s disease

MAP Rush Memory and Aging Project

MARS-seq Massively parallel single-cell RNA-seq

NFT Neurofibrillary tangle

PD Parkinson’s disease

PFC Prefrontal cortex

PPA Primary progressive aphasia

PSP Progressive supranuclear palsy

RNA-seq RNA-sequencing

ROS Religious orders study

scRNA-seq Single-cell RNA-seq

scATAC-seq Single-cell ATAC-seq

scVI Single-cell variational inference

SFG Superior frontal gyrus

snRNA-seq Single-nucleus RNA-seq

SPLiT-seq Split-pool ligation-based transcriptome sequencing

QTL Quantitative trait locus

UMAP Uniform manifold approximation and projection

WGCNA Weighted gene co-expression network analysis

Figure 1: Sequencing techniques and analysis for understanding genetic variants

Schematic diagram for functional analysis of GWAS variants. Genome wide association studies use genotyping chips, whole-genome sequencing, and whole-exome sequencing to reveal genomic loci that are enriched for disease-risk signals, and subsequent genetic fine mapping analysis homes in on likely causal disease risk variants at a given GWAS locus. High-throughput genomics approaches at bulk-tissue or single-cell/nucleus resolution in relevant tissues provide functional annotations at disease risk loci. There are many different approaches to characterize different aspects of the genome; for example ChIP-seq reveals genomic sequences that are bound by a transcription factor or have a histone modification of interest, while ATAC-seq identifies sequences in accessible chromatin regions. RNA-seq provides abundance information for all RNA transcripts in each sample. Integrative bioinformatics approaches combining a variety of data modalities and model systems can elucidate the mechanisms underlying genetic risk variants. Multi-scale information from the epigenome, transcriptome, and proteome can be leveraged from different model systems in downstream bioinformatics analysis to prioritize disease-relevant signatures.

Figure 2: AD consensus gene co-expression modules

a, b, Neuron-specific (a) and glia-specific (b) co-expression modules (CM) significantly correlated with AD diagnosis, annotated with their related biological functions. In these networks, each node represents a gene, colored by co-expression module (gene group), and each edge represents a link between a pair of genes based on co-expression and protein-protein interaction evidence. This visualization provides a general overview of the module size and relationships between genes in the modules. c, AD consensus co-expression modules are robust. Heatmap showing modules are preserved across human AD RNA-seq and microarray datasets, as well as datasets from human non-pathological controls (non-path) and mouse models. d, AD co-expression changes are specific to disease. Scatterplot show module eigengenes CM1 (top) and CM9 (bottom) are not correlated with age.

Figure 3: snRNA-seq meta-analysis of Alzheimer’s Disease

a, Schematic diagram for integrating multiple single-cell transcriptomics datasets. The general principles here can also be applied to other single-cell datasets. b, Cell populations from six AD snRNA-seq datasets (Grubman et al., 2019; Leng et al., 2021; Mathys et al., 2019; Morabito et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020) integrated with single-cell Variational Inference (scVI) are visualized with uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP). Each dot represents a single nucleus and is colored by cell subpopulation (cell cluster, Leiden cluster assignment). Major cell lineages are circled and annotated. c, UMAP plots as in (b), colored based on AD diagnosis and split by study of origin, show how the distributions of the cell populations may differ based on brain region, disease diagnosis, or other technical variables between the different datasets. Ideally, cell populations should be mixed between the datasets, not originating from only one dataset. d, Gene expression signatures for each major cell type by identifying cell type marker genes. Volcano plots summarize iterative “one cell type versus rest” differential gene expression tests for each cell type in control brains only, showing log-scaled fold-change and Bayes factors for each gene. Genes with moderate significance are colored, using a threshold of ln(Bayes Factor) &gt; 1.1), and the top three genes by significance are annotated. e, Cell type marker genes, identified through differential expression analysis, define transcriptionally distinct cell populations by major cell type. UMAP plots as in (b), colored by single cell gene signatures based on the top 20 marker genes from the tests in (d) for astrocytes (top) and microglia (bottom). f, Box and whisker plots show how the distribution of cell type signatures as in (e) change with increasing Braak stage. Distributions for these cell type signatures are visualized only for cells in the corresponding cell types, e.g. the astrocyte signature is plotted in astrocytes only. The range of the box corresponds to the inter-quartile range (IQR), the whiskers extend to the lowest or highest values at most 1.5 times the IQR, and the median is shown within the box. The underlying data points are plotted behind the box and whisker plots.

Table 1: Summary of GWAS of AD and related tauopathies

Title (Author, Year)	Trait	N cases	N controls	total loci	novel loci	nearest genes to risk loci	Ancestry included	
Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease (Lambert et al., 2013)	Alzheimer’s Disease	Stage1: 17,008
Stage 2: 8,572	Stage 1: 37,154
Stage 2: 11,312	20	11	APOE, CR1, BIN1, CD2AP, EPHA1, CLU, MS4A6A, PICALM, ABCA7, CD33, HLA-DRB5/HLA-DRB1, PTK2B, SORL1, SLC24A5/RIN3, DSG2, INPP5D, MEF2C, NME8, ZCWPW1, ZELF1, FERMT2, CASS4	European	
Variants in the ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter (ABCA7), Apolipoprotei n E ϵ4, and the Risk of Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease in African Americans (Reitz et al., 2013)	Alzheimer’s Disease	1,968	3,928	NR*	1	APOE,ELMO1, SOX13, ANCA7, GRIN3B, HMHA1, CR1, BIN1, PICALM, CLU, EPHA1, MS4A, CD2AP, CD33	African American	
Transethnic genome-wide scan identifies novel Alzheimer’s disease loci (Jun et al., 2017)	Alzheimer’s Disease	Stage1: 15,5798
Stage 2: 5,813	Stage 1: 17,690
Stage 2: 20,474	20	9	PFDN1/HBEGF, USP6NL/ECHDC3, BZRAP1-AS1, CR1,BIN1,PTK2B,CLU,MS4A4A,PICA LM,ABCA7, NFIC, TPBG, HBEGF, NME8, CASS4	European, African-American, Japanese, Israeli-Arabs	
GWAS on family history of Alzheimer’s disease (Marioni et al., 2018)	Family history of Alzheimer’s Disease	27,696 Maternal AD; 14,338 Paternal AD	260,980	26	6	CR1, BIN1, PILRA, PICALM, ZNF232, APOE, TOMM40,SCIMP, SPPL2A, IL-34, PLCG2, ADAM10, BCKDK/KAT8, ACE, TREML2, VKORC1, BZRAP1, CNLK, ADAMTS4, CCDC6	European	
Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, immunity and lipid processing (Kunkle et al., 2019)	Alzheimer’s Disease	Stage 1: 21,982
Stage 2: 8,362
Stage 3A: 4,930	Stage 1: 41,944
Stage 2: 10,483
Stage 3A: 6,736	25	5	CR1, BIN1, INPP5D, HLA-DRB1, TREM2, CD2AP, NYAP1, EPHA1, PTK2B, CLU, SPI1, MS4A2, PICALM, SORL1, FERMT2, SLC24A4, ABCA7, APOE, CASS4, ECHDC3, ACE	European	
Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies new loci and functional pathways influencing Alzheimer’s disease risk (Jansen et al., 2019)	Alzheimer’s Disease, AD-by-proxy	Phase 1: 24,087
Phase 2 (proxy): 47,793
Replication: 6,593	Phase 1: 55,058
Phase 2 (proxy): 328,320
Replication: 174,289	29	9	ADAMTS4, CR1, BIN1, INPPD5, HESX1, CLNK, HLA-DRB1, TREM2, CD2AP, ZCWPW1, EPHA1, CNTNAP2, CLU/PTK2B, ECHDC3, MS4A6A, PICALM, SORL1, SLC24A4, ADAM10, APH1B, KAT8, SCIMP, ABI3, ALPK2, ABCA7, AC074212.3, CD33, CASS4	European	
Genome-wide meta-analysis, fine-mapping and integrative prioritization implicate new Alzheimer’s disease risk genes (Schwartzentr uber et al., 2021)	Alzheimer’s Disease, AD-by-proxy	53,042	355,900	37	4	ADAMTS4, CR1, SPRED2, NCK2, BIN1, TMEM163, INPP5D, CLNK, HLA-DRB1, UNC5CL, CD2AP, SPATA48, PILRA, EPHA1, CLU, ECHDC3, CCDC6, TSPAN14, SPI1, MS4A6E, PICALM, SORL1, FERMT2, SLC24A4, SPPL2A, ADAM10, APH1B, KAT8, PLCG2, SCIMP, TSPOAP1, ACE, ABCA7, APOE, CD33, CASS4, ADAMTS1	European	
Novel Alzheimer Disease Risk Loci and Pathways in African American Individuals Using the African Genome Resources Panel: A Meta-analysis (Kunkle et al., 2021)	Alzheimer’s Disease	2,748	5,222	20	11	TRANK1, FABP2, LARP1B, TSRM, ARAP1, STARD10, SPHK1, SERPINB13, SIPA1L2, EDEM1, ALCAM, ACER3, PIK3C2G, IGF1R, RBFOX1, VRK3, WDR70	African American	
Ethnic and trans-ethnic genome-wide association studies identify new loci influencing Japanese Alzheimer’s disease risk (Shigemizu et al., 2021)	Alzheimer’s Disease	3,692	4,074	9	1	APOE, SORL1, FAM47E, PAPOLG, RAB3C, BANK1, LINC01867, LINC00899, LOC101928561, APOE, PICALM, BIN1, CLU, CR1, MS4A4A, SORL1, MADD, HLA-DRA, CD2AP, OR2B2, EPHA1, ADAMTS1, SLC24A4, LACTB2, ELL, FERMT2,ZCWPW1, TSPOAP1	Japansese, European (trans-ethnic meta-analysis)	
Frontotempor al dementia and its subtypes: a genome-wide association study (Ferrari et al., 2014)	Frontotempor al dementia	Stage 1: 3,526	Stage 1: 9,402	NR*	2	RAB38, CTSC, HLA-DRA/HLA-DRB5, BTNL2, MAPT, C9orf72/MOB3B, TMEM106B, TOMM40/APOE	European	
Identification of common variants influencing risk of the tauopathy progressive supranuclear palsy (Höglinger et al., 2011)	Progressive supranuclear palsy	Stage 1: 1,114
Stage 2: 1,051	Stage 1: 3,247 Stage 2: 3,560	3	3	STX6, EIF2AK3, MOBP, MAPT	European	
Joint genome-wide association study of progressive supranuclear palsy identifies novel susceptibility loci and genetic correlation to neurodegener ative diseases (Chen et al., 2018)	Progressive supranuclear palsy	1,646	10,662	5	2	MAPT, MOBP, STX6, EIF2AK3, SEMA4D, DDX27, SP1, RUNX2, DUSP10, WDR63, MIR4423, SLCO1A2, ASAP1, AMHR2, CEP57, RPS6KL1	European	
Genome-wide association study of corticobasal degeneration identifies risk variants shared with progressive supranuclear palsy (Kouri et al., 2015)	Corticobasal degeneration	Discovery: 152
Replication: 67	Discovery: 3,311
Replication: 439	4	3	MAPT, lnc-KIF13B-1, SOS1, MOBP	European	

Declarations of interest

None.


References:

Figure 1 was created with BioRender.

Adkins RS , Aldridge AI , Allen S , Ament SA , An X , Armand E , Ascoli GA , Bakken TE , Bandrowski A , Banerjee S , Barkas N , Bartlett A , Bateup HS , Behrens MM , Berens P , Berg J , Bernabucci M , Bernaerts Y , Bertagnolli D , Biancalani T , Boggeman L , Booeshaghi AS , Bowman I , Bravo HC , Cadwell CR , Callaway EM , Carlin B , O’Connor C , Carter R , Casper T , Castanon RG , Castro JR , Chance RK , Chatterjee A , Chen H , Chun J , Colantuoni C , Crabtree J , Creasy H , Crichton K , Crow M , D’Orazi FD , Daigle TL , Dalley R , Dee N , Degatano K , Dichter B , Diep D , Ding L , Ding S-L , Dominguez B , Dong H-W , Dong W , Dougherty EL , Dudoit S , Ecker JR , Eichhorn SW , Fang R , Felix V , Feng G , Feng Z , Fischer S , Fitzpatrick C , Fong O , Foster NN , Galbavy W , Gee JC , Ghosh SS , Giglio M , Gillespie TH , Gillis J , Goldman M , Goldy J , Gong H , Gou L , Grauer M , Halchenko YO , Harris JA , Hartmanis L , Hatfield JT , Hawrylycz M , Helba B , Herb BR , Hertzano R , Hintiryan H , Hirokawa KE , Hockemeyer D , Hodge RD , Hood G , Horwitz GD , Hou X , Hu L , Hu Q , Huang ZJ , Huo B , Ito-Cole T , Jacobs M , Jia X , Jiang S , Jiang T , Jiang X , Jin X , Jorstad NL , Kalmbach BE , Kancherla J , Keene CD , Kelly K , Khajouei F , Kharchenko PV , Kim G , Ko AL , Kobak D , Konwar K , Kramer DJ , Krienen FM , Kroll M , Kuang X , Kuo H-C , Lake BB , Larsen R , Lathia K , Laturnus S , Lee AY , Lee C-T , Lee K-F , Lein ES , Lesnar P , Li A , Li Xiangning , Li Xu , Li YE , Li Yaoyao , Li Yuanyuan , Lim B , Linnarsson S , Liu CS , Liu H , Liu L , Lucero JD , Luo C , Luo Q , Macosko EZ , Mahurkar A , Martone ME , Matho KS , McCarroll SA , McCracken C , McMillen D , Miranda E , Mitra PP , Miyazaki PA , Mizrachi J , Mok S , Mukamel EA , Mulherkar S , Nadaf NM , Naeemi M , Narasimhan A , Nery JR , Ng L , Ngai J , Nguyen TN , Nickel L , Nicovich PR , Niu S-Y , Ntranos V , Nunn M , Olley D , Orvis J , Osteen JK , Osten P , Owen SF , Pachter L , Palaniswamy R , Palmer CR , Pang Y , Peng H , Pham T , Pinto-Duarte A , Plongthongkum N , Poirion O , Preissl S , Purdom E , Qu L , Rashid M , Reed NM , Regev A , Ren B , Ren M , Rimorin C , Risso D , Rivkin AC , Muñoz-Castañeda R , Romanow WJ , Ropelewski AJ , Bézieux HR de, Ruan Z , Sandberg R , Savoia S , Scala F , Schor M , Shen E , Siletti K , Smith JB , Smith K , Somasundaram S , Song , Sorensen SA , Stafford DA , Street K , Sulc J , Sunkin S , Svensson V , Tan P , Tan ZH , Tasic B , Thompson C , Tian W , Tickle TL , Tieu M , Ting JT , Tolias AS , Torkelson A , Tung H , Vaishnav ED , Berge den KV , Velthoven van CTJ , Vanderburg CR , Veldman MB , Vu M , Wakeman W , Wang P , Wang Q , Wang X , Wang Yimin , Wang Yun , Welch JD , White O , Williams E , Xie F , Xie P , Xiong F , Yang XW , Yanny AM , Yao Z , Yin L , Yu Y , Yuan J , Zeng H , Zhang K , Zhang M , Zhang Z , Zhao S , Zhao X , Zhou J , Zhuang X , Zingg B , 2020. A multimodal cell census and atlas of the mammalian primary motor cortex. Biorxiv 2020.10.19.343129. 10.1101/2020.10.19.343129
Allen M , Wang X , Burgess JD , Watzlawik J , Serie DJ , Younkin CS , Nguyen T , Malphrus KG , Lincoln S , Carrasquillo MM , Ho C , Chakrabarty P , Strickland S , Murray ME , Swarup V , Geschwind DH , Seyfried NT , Dammer EB , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Golde TE , Funk C , Li H , Price ND , Petersen RC , Graff-Radford NR , Younkin SG , Dickson DW , Crook JR , Asmann YW , Ertekin-Taner N , 2018. Conserved brain myelination networks are altered in Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative diseases. Alzheimer’s Dementia 14 , 352–366. 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.09.012
Argelaguet R , Cuomo ASE , Stegle O , Marioni JC , 2021. Computational principles and challenges in single-cell data integration. Nat Biotechnol 1–14. 10.1038/s41587-021-00895-7 33376248
Baker M , Mackenzie IR , Pickering-Brown SM , Gass J , Rademakers R , Lindholm C , Snowden J , Adamson J , Sadovnick AD , Rollinson S , Cannon A , Dwosh E , Neary D , Melquist S , Richardson A , Dickson D , Berger Z , Eriksen J , Robinson T , Zehr C , Dickey CA , Crook R , McGowan E , Mann D , Boeve B , Feldman H , Hutton M , 2006. Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17. Nature 442 , 916–919. 10.1038/nature05016 16862116
Bartosovic M , Kabbe M , Castelo-Branco G , 2021. Single-cell CUT&amp;Tag profiles histone modifications and transcription factors in complex tissues. Nat Biotechnol 39 , 825–835. 10.1038/s41587-021-00869-9 33846645
Becht E , McInnes L , Healy J , Dutertre C-A , Kwok IWH , Ng LG , Ginhoux F , Newell EW , 2019. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using UMAP. Nat Biotechnol 37 , 38–44. 10.1038/nbt.4314
Berchtold NC , Coleman PD , Cribbs DH , Rogers J , Gillen DL , Cotman CW , 2013. Synaptic genes are extensively downregulated across multiple brain regions in normal human aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 34 , 1653–1661. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.11.024 23273601
Cacace R , Sleegers K , Broeckhoven CV , 2016. Molecular genetics of early-onset Alzheimer’s disease revisited. Alzheimer’s Dementia 12 , 733–48. 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.01.012
Cao J , Packer JS , Ramani V , Cusanovich DA , Huynh C , Daza R , Qiu X , Lee C , Furlan SN , Steemers FJ , Adey A , Waterston RH , Trapnell C , Shendure J , 2017. Comprehensive single-cell transcriptional profiling of a multicellular organism. Science 357 , 661–667. 10.1126/science.aam8940 28818938
Carter H , Hofree M , Ideker T , 2013. Genotype to phenotype via network analysis. Curr Opin Genet Dev 23 , 611–621. 10.1016/j.gde.2013.10.003 24238873
Chandran V , Coppola G , Nawabi H , Omura T , Versano R , Huebner EA , Zhang A , Costigan M , Yekkirala A , Barrett L , Blesch A , Michaelevski I , Davis-Turak J , Gao F , Langfelder P , Horvath S , He Z , Benowitz L , Fainzilber M , Tuszynski M , Woolf CJ , Geschwind DH , 2016. A Systems-Level Analysis of the Peripheral Nerve Intrinsic Axonal Growth Program. Neuron 89 , 956–970. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.01.034 26898779
Chapuis J , Hansmannel F , Gistelinck M , Mounier A , Cauwenberghe CV , Kolen KV , Geller F , Sottejeau Y , Harold D , Dourlen P , Grenier-Boley B , Kamatani Y , Delepine B , Demiautte F , Zelenika D , Zommer N , Hamdane M , Bellenguez C , Dartigues J-F , Hauw J-J , Letronne F , Ayral A-M , Sleegers K , Schellens A , Broeck LV , Engelborghs S , Deyn PPD , Vandenberghe R , O’Donovan M , Owen M , Epelbaum J , Mercken M , Karran E , Bantscheff M , Drewes G , Joberty G , Campion D , Octave J-N , Berr C , Lathrop M , Callaerts P , Mann D , Williams J , Buée L , Dewachter I , Broeckhoven CV , Amouyel P , Moechars D , Dermaut B , Lambert J-C , 2013. Increased expression of BIN1 mediates Alzheimer genetic risk by modulating tau pathology. Mol Psychiatr 18 , 1225–1234. 10.1038/mp.2013.1
Chen JA , Chen Z , Won H , Huang AY , Lowe JK , Wojta K , Yokoyama JS , Bensimon G , Leigh PN , Payan C , Shatunov A , Jones AR , Lewis CM , Deloukas P , Amouyel P , Tzourio C , Dartigues J-F , Ludolph A , Boxer AL , Bronstein JM , Al-Chalabi A , Geschwind DH , Coppola G , 2018. Joint genome-wide association study of progressive supranuclear palsy identifies novel susceptibility loci and genetic correlation to neurodegenerative diseases. Mol Neurodegener 13 , 41. 10.1186/s13024-018-0270-8 30089514
Chen S , Lake BB , Zhang K , 2019. High-throughput sequencing of the transcriptome and chromatin accessibility in the same cell. Nat Biotechnol 37 , 1452–1457. 10.1038/s41587-019-0290-0 31611697
Chen W-T , Lu A , Craessaerts K , Pavie B , Frigerio CS , Corthout N , Qian X , Laláková J , Kühnemund M , Voytyuk I , Wolfs L , Mancuso R , Salta E , Balusu S , Snellinx A , Munck S , Jurek A , Navarro JF , Saido TC , Huitinga I , Lundeberg J , Fiers M , Strooper BD , 2020. Spatial Transcriptomics and In Situ Sequencing to Study Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 182 , 976–991.e19. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.038 32702314
Chiu DS , Talhouk A , 2018. diceR: an R package for class discovery using an ensemble driven approach. Bmc Bioinformatics 19 , 11. 10.1186/s12859-017-1996-y 29334888
Corces MR , Shcherbina A , Kundu S , Gloudemans MJ , Frésard L , Granja JM , Louie BH , Eulalio T , Shams S , Bagdatli ST , Mumbach MR , Liu B , Montine KS , Greenleaf WJ , Kundaje A , Montgomery SB , Chang HY , Montine TJ , 2020. Single-cell epigenomic analyses implicate candidate causal variants at inherited risk loci for Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Nat Genet 52 , 1158–1168. 10.1038/s41588-020-00721-x 33106633
Corder E , Saunders A , Strittmatter W , Schmechel D , Gaskell P , Small G , Roses A , Haines J , Pericak-Vance M , 1993. Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families. Science 261 , 921–923. 10.1126/science.8346443 8346443
Corder EH , Saunders AM , Risch NJ , Strittmatter WJ , Schmechel DE , Gaskell PC , Rimmler JB , Locke PA , Conneally PM , Schmader KE , Small GW , Roses AD , Haines JL , Pericak-Vance MA , 1994. Protective effect of apolipoprotein E type 2 allele for late onset Alzheimer disease. Nat Genet 7 , 180–184. 10.1038/ng0694-180 7920638
Cruts M , Gijselinck I , Zee van der J , Engelborghs S , Wils H , Pirici D , Rademakers R , Vandenberghe R , Dermaut B , Martin J-J , Duijn van C , Peeters K , Sciot R , Santens P , Pooter TD , Mattheijssens M , Broeck den MV , Cuijt I , Vennekens K , Deyn PPD , Kumar-Singh S , Broeckhoven CV , 2006. Null mutations in progranulin cause ubiquitin-positive frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17q21. Nature 442 , 920–924. 10.1038/nature05017 16862115
DeJesus-Hernandez M , Mackenzie IR , Boeve BF , Boxer AL , Baker M , Rutherford NJ , Nicholson AM , Finch NA , Flynn H , Adamson J , Kouri N , Wojtas A , Sengdy P , Hsiung G-YR , Karydas A , Seeley WW , Josephs KA , Coppola G , Geschwind DH , Wszolek ZK , Feldman H , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Miller BL , Dickson DW , Boylan KB , Graff-Radford NR , Rademakers R , 2011. Expanded GGGGCC Hexanucleotide Repeat in Noncoding Region of C9ORF72 Causes Chromosome 9p-Linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 72 , 245–256. 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.011 21944778
Drummond E , Wisniewski T , 2017. Alzheimer’s disease: experimental models and reality. Acta Neuropathol 133 , 155–175. 10.1007/s00401-016-1662-x 28025715
Eng C-HL , Lawson M , Zhu Q , Dries R , Koulena N , Takei Y , Yun J , Cronin C , Karp C , Yuan G-C , Cai L , 2019. Transcriptome-scale super-resolved imaging in tissues by RNA seqFISH+. Nature 568 , 235–239. 10.1038/s41586-019-1049-y 30911168
Farrer LA , Cupples LA , Haines JL , Hyman B , Kukull WA , Mayeux R , Myers RH , Pericak-Vance MA , Risch N , Duijn van CM , 1997. Effects of Age, Sex, and Ethnicity on the Association Between Apolipoprotein E Genotype and Alzheimer Disease: A Meta-analysis. Jama 278 , 1349–1356. 10.1001/jama.1997.03550160069041 9343467
Ferrari R , Hernandez DG , Nalls MA , Rohrer JD , Ramasamy A , Kwok JBJ , Dobson-Stone C , Brooks WS , Schofield PR , Halliday GM , Hodges JR , Piguet O , Bartley L , Thompson E , Haan E , Hernández I , Ruiz A , Boada M , Borroni B , Padovani A , Cruchaga C , Cairns NJ , Benussi L , Binetti G , Ghidoni R , Forloni G , Galimberti D , Fenoglio C , Serpente M , Scarpini E , Clarimón J , Lleó A , Blesa R , Waldö ML , Nilsson K , Nilsson C , Mackenzie IRA , Hsiung G-YR , Mann DMA , Grafman J , Morris CM , Attems J , Griffiths TD , McKeith IG , Thomas AJ , Pietrini P , Huey ED , Wassermann EM , Baborie A , Jaros E , Tierney MC , Pastor P , Razquin C , Ortega-Cubero S , Alonso E , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Alexopoulos P , Kurz A , Rainero I , Rubino E , Pinessi L , Rogaeva E , George-Hyslop PS , Rossi G , Tagliavini F , Giaccone G , Rowe JB , Schlachetzki JCM , Uphill J , Collinge J , Mead S , Danek A , Deerlin VMV , Grossman M , Trojanowski JQ , Zee van der J , Deschamps W , Langenhove TV , Cruts M , Broeckhoven CV , Cappa SF , Ber IL , Hannequin D , Golfier V , Vercelletto M , Brice A , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Bagnoli S , Piaceri I , Nielsen JE , Hjermind LE , Riemenschneider M , Mayhaus M , Ibach B , Gasparoni G , Pichler S , Gu W , Rossor MN , Fox NC , Warren JD , Spillantini MG , Morris HR , Rizzu P , Heutink P , Snowden JS , Rollinson S , Richardson A , Gerhard A , Bruni AC , Maletta R , Frangipane F , Cupidi C , Bernardi L , Anfossi M , Gallo M , Conidi ME , Smirne N , Rademakers R , Baker M , Dickson DW , Graff-Radford NR , Petersen RC , Knopman D , Josephs KA , Boeve BF , Parisi JE , Seeley WW , Miller BL , Karydas AM , Rosen H , Swieten van JC , Dopper EGP , Seelaar H , Pijnenburg YAL , Scheltens P , Logroscino G , Capozzo R , Novelli V , Puca AA , Franceschi M , Postiglione A , Milan G , Sorrentino P , Kristiansen M , Chiang H-H , Graff C , Pasquier F , Rollin A , Deramecourt V , Lebert F , Kapogiannis D , Ferrucci L , Pickering-Brown S , Singleton AB , Hardy J , Momeni P , 2014. Frontotemporal dementia and its subtypes: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurology 13 , 686–699. 10.1016/s1474-4422(14)70065-1 24943344
Ferrari R , Wang Y , Vandrovcova J , Guelfi S , Witeolar A , Karch CM , Schork AJ , Fan CC , Brewer JB , (IFGC), I.F.-G.C., (IPDGC), I.P.D.G.C., (IGAP), I.G. of A.P., Momeni P , Schellenberg GD , Dillon WP , Sugrue LP , Hess CP , Yokoyama JS , Bonham LW , Rabinovici GD , Miller BL , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , Hardy J , Desikan RS , 2017. Genetic architecture of sporadic frontotemporal dementia and overlap with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. J Neurology Neurosurg Psychiatry 88 , 152. 10.1136/jnnp-2016-314411
Forabosco P , Ramasamy A , Trabzuni D , Walker R , Smith C , Bras J , Levine AP , Hardy J , Pocock JM , Guerreiro R , Weale ME , Ryten M , 2013. Insights into TREM2 biology by network analysis of human brain gene expression data. Neurobiol Aging 34 , 2699–2714. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.05.001 23855984
Frigerio CS , Wolfs L , Fattorelli N , Thrupp N , Voytyuk I , Schmidt I , Mancuso R , Chen W-T , Woodbury ME , Srivastava G , Möller T , Hudry E , Das S , Saido T , Karran E , Hyman B , Perry VH , Fiers M , Strooper BD , 2019. The Major Risk Factors for Alzheimer’s Disease: Age, Sex, and Genes Modulate the Microglia Response to Aβ Plaques. Cell Reports 27 , 1293–1306.e6. 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.099 31018141
Gaiteri C , Chen M , Szymanski B , Kuzmin K , Xie J , Lee C , Blanche T , Neto EC , Huang S-C , Grabowski T , Madhyastha T , Komashko V , 2015. Identifying robust communities and multi-community nodes by combining top-down and bottom-up approaches to clustering. Sci Rep 5 , 16361. 10.1038/srep16361 26549511
Gatz M , Reynolds CA , Fratiglioni L , Johansson B , Mortimer JA , Berg S , Fiske A , Pedersen NL , 2006. Role of Genes and Environments for Explaining Alzheimer Disease. Arch Gen Psychiat 63 , 168–174. 10.1001/archpsyc.63.2.168 16461860
Geschwind DH , Konopka G , 2009. Neuroscience in the era of functional genomics and systems biology. Nature 461 , 908–915. 10.1038/nature08537 19829370
Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Kertesz A , Mendez M , Cappa SF , Ogar JM , Rohrer JD , Black S , Boeve BF , Manes F , Dronkers NF , Vandenberghe R , Rascovsky K , Patterson K , Miller BL , Knopman DS , Hodges JR , Mesulam MM , Grossman M , 2011. Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology 76 , 1006–1014. 10.1212/wnl.0b013e31821103e6 21325651
Graff-Radford NR , Green RC , Go RCP , Hutton ML , Edeki T , Bachman D , Adamson JL , Griffith P , Willis FB , Williams M , Hipps Y , Haines JL , Cupples LA , Farrer LA , 2002. Association Between Apolipoprotein E Genotype and Alzheimer Disease in African American Subjects. Arch Neurol 59 , 594–600. 10.1001/archneur.59.4.594 11939894
Grubman A , Chew G , Ouyang JF , Sun G , Choo XY , McLean C , Simmons RK , Buckberry S , Vargas-Landin DB , Poppe D , Pflueger J , Lister R , Rackham OJL , Petretto E , Polo JM , 2019. A single-cell atlas of entorhinal cortex from individuals with Alzheimer’s disease reveals cell-type-specific gene expression regulation. Nat Neurosci 22 , 2087–2097. 10.1038/s41593-019-0539-4 31768052
Gupta I , Collier PG , Haase B , Mahfouz A , Joglekar A , Floyd T , Koopmans F , Barres B , Smit AB , Sloan SA , Luo W , Fedrigo O , Ross ME , Tilgner HU , 2018. Single-cell isoform RNA sequencing characterizes isoforms in thousands of cerebellar cells. Nat Biotechnol 36 , 1197–1202. 10.1038/nbt.4259
Habib N , McCabe C , Medina S , Varshavsky M , Kitsberg D , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Green G , Dionne D , Nguyen L , Marshall JL , Chen F , Zhang F , Kaplan T , Regev A , Schwartz M , 2020. Disease-associated astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease and aging. Nat Neurosci 23 , 701–706. 10.1038/s41593-020-0624-8 32341542
Harold D , Abraham R , Hollingworth P , Sims R , Gerrish A , Hamshere ML , Pahwa JS , Moskvina V , Dowzell K , Williams A , Jones N , Thomas C , Stretton A , Morgan AR , Lovestone S , Powell J , Proitsi P , Lupton MK , Brayne C , Rubinsztein DC , Gill M , Lawlor B , Lynch A , Morgan K , Brown KS , Passmore PA , Craig D , McGuinness B , Todd S , Holmes C , Mann D , Smith AD , Love S , Kehoe PG , Hardy J , Mead S , Fox N , Rossor M , Collinge J , Maier W , Jessen F , Schürmann B , Heun R , Bussche van den H , Heuser I , Kornhuber J , Wiltfang J , Dichgans M , Frölich L , Hampel H , Hüll M , Rujescu D , Goate AM , Kauwe JSK , Cruchaga C , Nowotny P , Morris JC , Mayo K , Sleegers K , Bettens K , Engelborghs S , Deyn PPD , Broeckhoven CV , Livingston G , Bass NJ , Gurling H , McQuillin A , Gwilliam R , Deloukas P , Al-Chalabi A , Shaw CE , Tsolaki M , Singleton AB , Guerreiro R , Mühleisen TW , Nöthen MM , Moebus S , Jöckel K-H , Klopp N , Wichmann H-E , Carrasquillo MM , Pankratz VS , Younkin SG , Holmans PA , O’Donovan M , Owen MJ , Williams J , 2009. Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 41 , 1088–93. 10.1038/ng.440 19734902
Hashimshony T , Wagner F , Sher N , Yanai I , 2012. CEL-Seq: Single-Cell RNA-Seq by Multiplexed Linear Amplification. Cell Reports 2 , 666–673. 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.003 22939981
Hie B , Bryson B , Berger B , 2019. Efficient integration of heterogeneous single-cell transcriptomes using Scanorama. Nat Biotechnol 37 , 685–691. 10.1038/s41587-019-0113-3 31061482
Höglinger GU , Melhem NM , Dickson DW , Sleiman PMA , Wang L-S , Klei L , Rademakers R , Silva de R , Litvan I , Riley DE , Heutink P , Wszolek ZK , Uitti RJ , Vandrovcova J , Hurtig HI , Gross RG , Maetzler W , Goldwurm S , Tolosa E , Borroni B , Pastor P , Albin RL , Alonso E , Antonini A , Apfelbacher M , Arnold SE , Avila J , Beach TG , Beecher S , Berg D , Bird TD , Bogdanovic N , Boon AJW , Bordelon Y , Brice A , Budka H , Canesi M , Chiu WZ , Cilia R , Colosimo C , Deyn PPD , Yebenes de JG , Kaat LD , Duara R , Durr A , Engelborghs S , Fabbrini G , Finch NA , Flook R , Frosch MP , Gaig C , Galasko DR , Gasser T , Gearing M , Geller ET , Ghetti B , Graff-Radford NR , Grossman M , Hall DA , Hazrati L-N , Höllerhage M , Jankovic J , Juncos JL , Karydas A , Kretzschmar HA , Leber I , Lee VM , Lieberman AP , Lyons KE , Mariani C , Masliah E , Massey LA , McLean CA , Meucci N , Miller BL , Mollenhauer B , Möller JC , Morris HR , Morris C , O’Sullivan SS , Oertel WH , Ottaviani D , Padovani A , Pahwa R , Pezzoli G , Pickering-Brown S , Poewe W , Rabano A , Rajput A , Reich SG , Respondek G , Roeber S , Rohrer JD , Ross OA , Rossor MN , Sacilotto G , Seeley WW , Seppi K , Silveira-Moriyama L , Spina S , Srulijes K , George-Hyslop P.St. , Stamelou M , Standaert DG , Tesei S , Tourtellotte WW , Trenkwalder C , Troakes C , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Deerlin VMV , Vonsattel JPG , Wenning GK , White CL , Winter P , Zarow C , Zecchinelli AL , Cantwell LB , Han MR , Dillman A , Brug van der MP , Gibbs JR , Cookson MR , Hernandez DG , Singleton AB , Farrer MJ , Yu C-E , Golbe LI , Revesz T , Hardy J , Lees AJ , Devlin B , Hakonarson H , Müller U , Schellenberg GD , 2011. Identification of common variants influencing risk of the tauopathy progressive supranuclear palsy. Nat Genet 43 , 699–705. 10.1038/ng.859 21685912
Holler CJ , Davis PR , Beckett TL , Platt TL , Webb RL , Head E , Murphy MP , 2014. Bridging Integrator 1 (BIN1) Protein Expression Increases in the Alzheimer’s Disease Brain and Correlates with Neurofibrillary Tangle Pathology. J Alzheimer’s Dis 42 , 1221–1227. 10.3233/jad-132450 25024306
Hutton M , Lendon CL , Rizzu P , Baker M , Froelich S , Houlden H , Pickering-Brown S , Chakraverty S , Isaacs A , Grover A , Hackett J , Adamson J , Lincoln S , Dickson D , Davies P , Petersen RC , Stevens M , Graaff de E , Wauters E , Baren van J , Hillebrand M , Joosse M , Kwon JM , Nowotny P , Che LK , Norton J , Morris JC , Reed LA , Trojanowski J , Basun H , Lannfelt L , Neystat M , Fahn S , Dark F , Tannenberg T , Dodd PR , Hayward N , Kwok JBJ , Schofield PR , Andreadis A , Snowden J , Craufurd D , Neary D , Owen F , Oostra BA , Hardy J , Goate A , Swieten van J , Mann D , Lynch T , Heutink P , 1998. Association of missense and 5′-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17. Nature 393 , 702–705. 10.1038/31508 9641683
Ihara M , Polvikoski TM , Hall R , Slade JY , Perry RH , Oakley AE , Englund E , O’Brien JT , Ince PG , Kalaria RN , 2010. Quantification of myelin loss in frontal lobe white matter in vascular dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta Neuropathol 119 , 579–589. 10.1007/s00401-009-0635-8 20091409
Jaitin DA , Kenigsberg E , Keren-Shaul H , Elefant N , Paul F , Zaretsky I , Mildner A , Cohen N , Jung S , Tanay A , Amit I , 2014. Massively Parallel Single-Cell RNA-Seq for Marker-Free Decomposition of Tissues into Cell Types. Science 343 , 776–779. 10.1126/science.1247651 24531970
Jansen IE , Savage JE , Watanabe K , Bryois J , Williams DM , Steinberg S , Sealock J , Karlsson IK , Hägg S , Athanasiu L , Voyle N , Proitsi P , Witoelar A , Stringer S , Aarsland D , Almdahl IS , Andersen F , Bergh S , Bettella F , Bjornsson S , Brækhus A , Bråthen G , Leeuw de C , Desikan RS , Djurovic S , Dumitrescu L , Fladby T , Hohman TJ , Jonsson PV , Kiddle SJ , Rongve A , Saltvedt I , Sando SB , Selbæk G , Shoai M , Skene NG , Snaedal J , Stordal E , Ulstein ID , Wang Y , White LR , Hardy J , Hjerling-Leffler J , Sullivan PF , Flier van der WM , Dobson R , Davis LK , Stefansson H , Stefansson K , Pedersen NL , Ripke S , Andreassen OA , Posthuma D , 2019. Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies new loci and functional pathways influencing Alzheimer’s disease risk. Nat Genet 51 , 404–413. 10.1038/s41588-018-0311-9 30617256
Jiang S , Wen N , Li Z , Dube U , Aguila JD , Budde J , Martinez R , Hsu S , Fernandez MV , Cairns NJ , Harari O , Cruchaga C , Karch CM , 2018. Integrative system biology analyses of CRISPR-edited iPSC-derived neurons and human brains reveal deficiencies of presynaptic signaling in FTLD and PSP. Transl Psychiat 8 , 265. 10.1038/s41398-018-0319-z
Joglekar A , Prjibelski A , Mahfouz A , Collier P , Lin S , Schlusche AK , Marrocco J , Williams SR , Haase B , Hayes A , Chew JG , Weisenfeld NI , Wong MY , Stein AN , Hardwick SA , Hunt T , Wang Q , Dieterich C , Bent Z , Fedrigo O , Sloan SA , Risso D , Jarvis ED , Flicek P , Luo W , Pitt GS , Frankish A , Smit AB , Ross ME , Tilgner HU , 2021. A spatially resolved brain region- and cell type-specific isoform atlas of the postnatal mouse brain. Nat Commun 12 , 463. 10.1038/s41467-020-20343-5 33469025
Johnson ECB , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Ping L , Zhou M , Yin L , Higginbotham LA , Guajardo A , White B , Troncoso JC , Thambisetty M , Montine TJ , Lee EB , Trojanowski JQ , Beach TG , Reiman EM , Haroutunian V , Wang M , Schadt E , Zhang B , Dickson DW , Ertekin-Taner N , Golde TE , Petyuk VA , Jager PLD , Bennett DA , Wingo TS , Rangaraju S , Hajjar I , Shulman JM , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Seyfried NT , 2020. Large-scale proteomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain and cerebrospinal fluid reveals early changes in energy metabolism associated with microglia and astrocyte activation. Nat Med 26 , 769–780. 10.1038/s41591-020-0815-6 32284590
Jun GR , Chung J , Mez J , Barber R , Beecham GW , Bennett DA , Buxbaum JD , Byrd GS , Carrasquillo MM , Crane PK , Cruchaga C , Jager PD , Ertekin-Taner N , Evans D , Fallin MD , Foroud TM , Friedland RP , Goate AM , Graff-Radford NR , Hendrie H , Hall KS , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Inzelberg R , Kamboh MI , Kauwe JSK , Kukull WA , Kunkle BW , Kuwano R , Larson EB , Logue MW , Manly JJ , Martin ER , Montine TJ , Mukherjee S , Naj A , Reiman EM , Reitz C , Sherva R , George-Hyslop PH St , Thornton T , Younkin SG , Vardarajan BN , Wang L-S , Wendlund JR , Winslow AR , Consortium ADG , Adams PM , Albert MS , Albin RL , Apostolova LG , Arnold SE , Asthana S , Atwood CS , Barmada MM , Barnes LL , Beach TG , Becker JT , Bigio EH , Bird TD , Blacker D , Boeve BF , Bowen JD , Boxer A , Burke JR , Cairns NJ , Cao C , Carlson CS , Carlsson CM , Carney RM , Carrasquillo MM , Carroll SL , Chui HC , Clark DG , Corneveaux J , Cribbs DH , Crocco EA , Cruchaga C , Jager PLD , DeCarli C , DeKosky ST , Demirci FY , Dick M , Dickson DW , Doody RS , Duara R , Ertekin-Taner N , Faber KM , Fairchild TJ , Fallon KB , Farlow MR , Ferris S , Frosch MP , Galasko DR , Gearing M , Geschwind DH , Ghetti B , Gilbert JR , Glass JD , Graff-Radford NR , Green RC , Growdon JH , Hakonarson H , Hamilton RL , Hardy J , Harrell LE , Head E , Honig LS , Huebinger RM , Huentelman MJ , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Jarvik GP , Jicha GA , Jin L-W , Karydas A , Kauwe JSK , Kaye JA , Kim R , Koo EH , Kowall NW , Kramer JH , LaFerla FM , Lah JJ , Leverenz JB , Levey AI , Li G , Lieberman AP , Lin C-F , Lopez OL , Lyketsos CG , Mack WJ , Marson DC , Martiniuk F , Mash DC , Masliah E , McCormick WC , McCurry SM , McDavid AN , McKee AC , Mesulam M , Miller BL , Miller CA , Miller JW , Morris JC , Mukherjee S , Murrell JR , Myers AJ , O’Bryant S , Olichney JM , Pankratz VS , Parisi JE , Partch A , Paulson HL , Perry W , Peskind E , Petersen RC , Pierce A , Poon WW , Potter H , Quinn JF , Raj A , Raskind M , Reisberg B , Reisch JS , Reitz C , Ringman JM , Roberson ED , Rogaeva E , Rosen HJ , Rosenberg RN , Royall DR , Sager MA , Sano M , Saykin AJ , Schneider JA , Schneider LS , Seeley WW , Smith AG , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Tanzi RE , Thornton-Wells TA , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Tsuang DW , Deerlin VMV , Eldik LJV , Vardarajan BN , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Williamson J , Wishnek S , Woltjer RL , Wright CB , Wu C-K , Yu C-E , Yu L , Zhang X , Haines J , Mayeux R , Pericak-Vance MA , Schellenberg G , Lunetta KL , Farrer LA , 2017. Transethnic genome-wide scan identifies novel Alzheimer’s disease loci. Alzheimer’s Dementia 13 , 727–738. 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.12.012
Karch CM , Jeng AT , Nowotny P , Cady J , Cruchaga C , Goate AM , 2012. Expression of Novel Alzheimer’s Disease Risk Genes in Control and Alzheimer’s Disease Brains. Plos One 7 , e50976. 10.1371/journal.pone.0050976 23226438
Karch CM , Wen N , Fan CC , Yokoyama JS , Kouri N , Ross OA , Höglinger G , Müller U , Ferrari R , Hardy J , Schellenberg GD , Sleiman PM , Momeni P , Hess CP , Miller BL , Sharma M , Deerlin VV , Smeland OB , Andreassen OA , Dale AM , Desikan RS , Consortium IFD (FTD)–Genomics C., International Collaboration for Frontotemporal Dementia, Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) Genetics Consortium, and International Parkinson’s Disease Genomics, 2018. Selective Genetic Overlap Between Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Diseases of the Frontotemporal Dementia Spectrum. Jama Neurol 75 , 860. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0372 29630712
Keren-Shaul H , Spinrad A , Weiner A , Matcovitch-Natan O , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Ulland TK , David E , Baruch K , Lara-Astaiso D , Toth B , Itzkovitz S , Colonna M , Schwartz M , Amit I , 2017. A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 169 , 1276–1290.e17. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.018 28602351
Klein AM , Mazutis L , Akartuna I , Tallapragada N , Veres A , Li V , Peshkin L , Weitz DA , Kirschner MW , 2015. Droplet Barcoding for Single-Cell Transcriptomics Applied to Embryonic Stem Cells. Cell 161 , 1187–1201. 10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.044 26000487
Kleshchevnikov V , Shmatko A , Dann E , Aivazidis A , King HW , Li T , Lomakin A , Kedlian V , Jain MS , Park JS , Ramona L , Tuck E , Arutyunyan A , Vento-Tormo R , Gerstung M , James L , Stegle O , Bayraktar OA , 2020. Comprehensive mapping of tissue cell architecture via integrated single cell and spatial transcriptomics. Biorxiv 2020.11.15.378125. 10.1101/2020.11.15.378125
Korsunsky I , Millard N , Fan J , Slowikowski K , Zhang F , Wei K , Baglaenko Y , Brenner M , Loh P , Raychaudhuri S , 2019. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nat Methods 16 , 1289–1296. 10.1038/s41592-019-0619-0 31740819
Kouri N , Ross OA , Dombroski B , Younkin CS , Serie DJ , Soto-Ortolaza A , Baker M , Finch NCA , Yoon H , Kim J , Fujioka S , McLean CA , Ghetti B , Spina S , Cantwell LB , Farlow MR , Grafman J , Huey ED , Han MR , Beecher S , Geller ET , Kretzschmar HA , Roeber S , Gearing M , Juncos JL , Vonsattel JPG , Deerlin VMV , Grossman M , Hurtig HI , Gross RG , Arnold SE , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM , Wenning GK , White CL , Höglinger GU , Müller U , Devlin B , Golbe LI , Crook J , Parisi JE , Boeve BF , Josephs KA , Wszolek ZK , Uitti RJ , Graff-Radford NR , Litvan I , Younkin SG , Wang L-S , Ertekin-Taner N , Rademakers R , Hakonarsen H , Schellenberg GD , Dickson DW , 2015. Genome-wide association study of corticobasal degeneration identifies risk variants shared with progressive supranuclear palsy. Nat Commun 6 , 7247. 10.1038/ncomms8247 26077951
Kunkle BW , Grenier-Boley B , Sims R , Bis JC , Damotte V , Naj AC , Boland A , Vronskaya M , Lee van der SJ , Amlie-Wolf A , Bellenguez C , Frizatti A , Chouraki V , Martin ER , Sleegers K , Badarinarayan N , Jakobsdottir J , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Moreno-Grau S , Olaso R , Raybould R , Chen Y , Kuzma AB , Hiltunen M , Morgan T , Ahmad S , Vardarajan BN , Epelbaum J , Hoffmann P , Boada M , Beecham GW , Garnier J-G , Harold D , Fitzpatrick AL , Valladares O , Moutet M-L , Gerrish A , Smith AV , Qu L , Bacq D , Denning N , Jian X , Zhao Y , Zompo MD , Fox NC , Choi S-H , Mateo I , Hughes JT , Adams HH , Malamon J , Sanchez-Garcia F , Patel Y , Brody JA , Dombroski BA , Naranjo MCD , Daniilidou M , Eiriksdottir G , Mukherjee S , Wallon D , Uphill J , Aspelund T , Cantwell LB , Garzia F , Galimberti D , Hofer E , Butkiewicz M , Fin B , Scarpini E , Sarnowski C , Bush WS , Meslage S , Kornhuber J , White CC , Song Y , Barber RC , Engelborghs S , Sordon S , Voijnovic D , Adams PM , Vandenberghe R , Mayhaus M , Cupples LA , Albert MS , Deyn PPD , Gu W , Himali JJ , Beekly D , Squassina A , Hartmann AM , Orellana A , Blacker D , Rodriguez-Rodriguez E , Lovestone S , Garcia ME , Doody RS , Munoz-Fernadez C , Sussams R , Lin H , Fairchild TJ , Benito YA , Holmes C , Karamujić-Čomić H , Frosch MP , Thonberg H , Maier W , Roshchupkin G , Ghetti B , Giedraitis V , Kawalia A , Li S , Huebinger RM , Kilander L , Moebus S , Hernández I , Kamboh MI , Brundin R , Turton J , Yang Q , Katz MJ , Concari L , Lord J , Beiser AS , Keene CD , Helisalmi S , Kloszewska I , Kukull WA , Koivisto AM , Lynch A , Tarraga L , Larson EB , Haapasalo A , Lawlor B , Mosley TH , Lipton RB , Solfrizzi V , Gill M , Longstreth WT , Montine TJ , Frisardi V , Diez-Fairen M , Rivadeneira F , Petersen RC , Deramecourt V , Alvarez I , Salani F , Ciaramella A , Boerwinkle E , Reiman EM , Fievet N , Rotter JI , Reisch JS , Hanon O , Cupidi C , Uitterlinden AGA , Royall DR , Dufouil C , Maletta RG , Rojas de I , Sano M , Brice A , Cecchetti R , George-Hyslop PS , Ritchie K , Tsolaki M , Tsuang DW , Dubois B , Craig D , Wu C-K , Soininen H , Avramidou D , Albin RL , Fratiglioni L , Germanou A , Apostolova LG , Keller L , Koutroumani M , Arnold SE , Panza F , Gkatzima O , Asthana S , Hannequin D , Whitehead P , Atwood CS , Caffarra P , Hampel H , Quintela I , Carracedo Á , Lannfelt L , Rubinsztein DC , Barnes LL , Pasquier F , Frölich L , Barral S , McGuinness B , Beach TG , Johnston JA , Becker JT , Passmore P , Bigio EH , Schott JM , Bird TD , Warren JD , Boeve BF , Lupton MK , Bowen JD , Proitsi P , Boxer A , Powell JF , Burke JR , Kauwe JSK , Burns JM , Mancuso M , Buxbaum JD , Bonuccelli U , Cairns NJ , McQuillin A , Cao C , Livingston G , Carlson CS , Bass NJ , Carlsson CM , Hardy J , Carney RM , Bras J , Carrasquillo MM , Guerreiro R , Allen M , Chui HC , Fisher E , Masullo C , Crocco EA , DeCarli C , Bisceglio G , Dick M , Ma L , Duara R , Graff-Radford NR , Evans DA , Hodges A , Faber KM , Scherer M , Fallon KB , Riemenschneider M , Fardo DW , Heun R , Farlow MR , Kölsch H , Ferris S , Leber M , Foroud TM , Heuser I , Galasko DR , Giegling I , Gearing M , Hüll M , Geschwind DH , Gilbert JR , Morris J , Green RC , Mayo K , Growdon JH , Feulner T , Hamilton RL , Harrell LE , Drichel D , Honig LS , Cushion TD , Huentelman MJ , Hollingworth P , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Marshall R , Jarvik GP , Meggy A , Abner E , Menzies GE , Jin L-W , Leonenko G , Real LM , Jun GR , Baldwin CT , Grozeva D , Karydas A , Russo G , Kaye JA , Kim R , Jessen F , Kowall NW , Vellas B , Kramer JH , Vardy E , LaFerla FM , Jöckel K-H , Lah JJ , Dichgans M , Leverenz JB , Mann D , Levey AI , Pickering-Brown S , Lieberman AP , Klopp N , Lunetta KL , Wichmann H-E , Lyketsos CG , Morgan K , Marson DC , Brown K , Martiniuk F , Medway C , Mash DC , Nöthen MM , Masliah E , Hooper NM , McCormick WC , Daniele A , McCurry SM , Bayer A , McDavid AN , Gallacher J , McKee AC , Bussche van den H , Mesulam M , Brayne C , Miller BL , Riedel-Heller S , Miller CA , Miller JW , Al-Chalabi A , Morris JC , Shaw CE , Myers AJ , Wiltfang J , O’Bryant S , Olichney JM , Alvarez V , Parisi JE , Singleton AB , Paulson HL , Collinge J , Perry WR , Mead S , Peskind E , Cribbs DH , Rossor M , Pierce A , Ryan NS , Poon WW , Nacmias B , Potter H , Sorbi S , Quinn JF , Sacchinelli E , Raj A , Spalletta G , Raskind M , Caltagirone C , Bossù P , Orfei MD , Reisberg B , Clarke R , Reitz C , Smith AD , Ringman JM , Warden D , Roberson ED , Wilcock G , Rogaeva E , Bruni AC , Rosen HJ , Gallo M , Rosenberg RN , Ben-Shlomo Y , Sager MA , Mecocci P , Saykin AJ , Pastor P , Cuccaro ML , Vance JM , Schneider JA , Schneider LS , Slifer S , Seeley WW , Smith AG , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Swerdlow RH , Tang M , Tanzi RE , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Deerlin VMV , Eldik LJV , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Wilhelmsen KC , Williamson J , Wingo TS , Woltjer RL , Wright CB , Yu C-E , Yu L , Saba Y , Pilotto A , Bullido MJ , Peters O , Crane PK , Bennett D , Bosco P , Coto E , Boccardi V , Jager PLD , Lleo A , Warner N , Lopez OL , Ingelsson M , Deloukas P , Cruchaga C , Graff C , Gwilliam R , Fornage M , Goate AM , Sanchez-Juan P , Kehoe PG , Amin N , Ertekin-Taner N , Berr C , Debette S , Love S , Launer LJ , Younkin SG , Dartigues J-F , Corcoran C , Ikram MA , Dickson DW , Nicolas G , Campion D , Tschanz J , Schmidt H , Hakonarson H , Clarimon J , Munger R , Schmidt R , Farrer LA , Broeckhoven CV , O’Donovan MC , DeStefano AL , Jones L , Haines JL , Deleuze J-F , Owen MJ , Gudnason V , Mayeux R , Escott-Price V , Psaty BM , Ramirez A , Wang L-S , Ruiz A , Duijn van CM , Holmans PA , Seshadri S , Williams J , Amouyel P , Schellenberg GD , Lambert J-C , Pericak-Vance MA , 2019. Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, immunity and lipid processing. Nat Genet 51 , 414–430. 10.1038/s41588-019-0358-2 30820047
Kunkle BW , Schmidt M , Klein H-U , Naj AC , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Larson EB , Evans DA , Jager PLD , Crane PK , Buxbaum JD , Ertekin-Taner N , Barnes LL , Fallin MD , Manly JJ , Go RCP , Obisesan TO , Kamboh MI , Bennett DA , Hall KS , Goate AM , Foroud TM , Martin ER , Wang L-S , Byrd GS , Farrer LA , Haines JL , Schellenberg GD , Mayeux R , Pericak-Vance MA , Reitz C , (ADGC), W.G. for the A.D.G.C., Abner E , Adams PM , Albin RL , Apostolova LG , Arnold SE , Atwood CS , Baldwin CT , Barber RC , Barral S , Beach TG , Becker JT , Beecham GW , Bigio EH , Bird TD , Blacker D , Boeve BF , Bowen JD , Boxer A , Burke JR , Burns JM , Cairns NJ , Cao C , Carlsson CM , Carney RM , Carrasquillo MM , Cribbs DH , Cruchaga C , Dick M , Dickson DW , Doody RS , Duara R , Faber KM , Fairchild TJ , Fallon KB , Fardo DW , Farlow MR , Ferris S , Frosch MP , Galasko DR , Gearing M , Geschwind DH , Ghetti B , Gilbert JR , Green RC , Growdon JH , Hakonarson H , Hamilton RL , Hardy J , Harrell LE , Honig LS , Huebinger RM , Huentelman MJ , Hulette CM , Jarvik GP , Jin L-W , Karydas A , Katz MJ , Kauwe J , S.K. Keene , C.D. Kim , Kramer R , J. H. Lah , J. J. Leung , Y.Y. Li , Lieberman G , A. P. Lipton , R. B. Lyketsos , C. G. Malamon , Marson J , D. C. Martiniuk , Masliah F , McCormick E , W. C. McCurry , S. M. McDavid , A. N. McDonough , McKee S , A. C. Mesulam , Miller M , B. L. Miller , C. A. Montine , T. J. Mukherjee , Myers S , A. J. O’Bryant , S. E. Olichney , J. M. Parisi , J. E. Peskind , Pierce E , Poon A , W. W. Potter , Qu H , Quinn L , Raj JF , Raskind A , Reisberg M , Reisch B , Ringman JS , Roberson JM , Rogaeva ED , Rosen E , Royall HJ , Sager DR , Schneider MA , Schneider JA , Seeley LS , Small WW , Sonnen S , Spina JA , George-Hyslop S , Stern PS , Tanzi RA , Troncoso RE , Tsuang JC , Valladares DW , Deerlin O , M. Van V , Vardarajan BN , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Wilhelmsen KC , Williamson J , Wingo TS , Woltjer RL , Wu C-K , Younkin SG , Yu L , Yu C-E , Zhao Y , Graff-Radford NR , Martinez I , Ayodele T , Logue MW , Cantwell LB , Jean-Francois M , Kuzma AB , Adams LD , Vance JM , Cuccaro ML , Chung J , Mez J , Lunetta KL , Jun GR , Lopez OL , Hendrie HC , Reiman EM , Kowall NW , Leverenz JB , Small SA , Levey AI , Golde TE , Saykin AJ , Starks TD , Albert MS , Hyman BT , Petersen RC , Sano M , Wisniewski T , Vassar R , Kaye JA , Henderson VW , DeCarli C , LaFerla FM , Brewer JB , Miller BL , Swerdlow RH , Eldik LJV , Paulson HL , Trojanowski JQ , Chui HC , Rosenberg RN , Craft S , Grabowski TJ , Asthana S , Morris JC , Strittmatter SM , Kukull WA , 2021. Novel Alzheimer Disease Risk Loci and Pathways in African American Individuals Using the African Genome Resources Panel. Jama Neurol 78 , 102–113. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.3536 33074286
Lähnemann D , Köster J , Szczurek E , McCarthy DJ , Hicks SC , Robinson MD , Vallejos CA , Campbell KR , Beerenwinkel N , Mahfouz A , Pinello L , Skums P , Stamatakis A , Attolini CS-O , Aparicio S , Baaijens J , Balvert M , Barbanson de B , Cappuccio A , Corleone G , Dutilh BE , Florescu M , Guryev V , Holmer R , Jahn K , Lobo TJ , Keizer EM , Khatri I , Kielbasa SM , Korbel JO , Kozlov AM , Kuo T-H , Lelieveldt BPF , Mandoiu II , Marioni JC , Marschall T , Mölder F , Niknejad A , Raczkowski L , Reinders M , Ridder de J , Saliba A-E , Somarakis A , Stegle O , Theis FJ , Yang H , Zelikovsky A , McHardy AC , Raphael BJ , Shah SP , Schönhuth A , 2020. Eleven grand challenges in single-cell data science. Genome Biol 21 , 31. 10.1186/s13059-020-1926-6 32033589
Lake BB , Chen S , Sos BC , Fan J , Kaeser GE , Yung YC , Duong TE , Gao D , Chun J , Kharchenko PV , Zhang K , 2017. Integrative single-cell analysis of transcriptional and epigenetic states in the human adult brain. Nat Biotechnol 36 , 70–80. 10.1038/nbt.4038 29227469
Lambert J-C , Heath S , Even G , Campion D , Sleegers K , Hiltunen M , Combarros O , Zelenika D , Bullido MJ , Tavernier B , Letenneur L , Bettens K , Berr C , Pasquier F , Fiévet N , Barberger-Gateau P , Engelborghs S , Deyn PD , Mateo I , Franck A , Helisalmi S , Porcellini E , Hanon O , Investigators EADI , Pancorbo de MM , Lendon C , Dufouil C , Jaillard C , Leveillard T , Alvarez V , Bosco P , Mancuso M , Panza F , Nacmias B , Bossù P , Piccardi P , Annoni G , Seripa D , Galimberti D , Hannequin D , Licastro F , Soininen H , Ritchie K , Blanché H , Dartigues J-F , Tzourio C , Gut I , Broeckhoven CV , Alpérovitch A , Lathrop M , Amouyel P , 2009. Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 41 , 1094–1099. 10.1038/ng.439 19734903
Lambert J-C , Ibrahim-Verbaas CA , Harold D , Naj AC , Sims R , Bellenguez C , Jun G , DeStefano AL , Bis JC , Beecham GW , Grenier-Boley B , Russo G , Thornton-Wells TA , Jones N , Smith AV , Chouraki V , Thomas C , Ikram MA , Zelenika D , Vardarajan BN , Kamatani Y , Lin C-F , Gerrish A , Schmidt H , Kunkle B , Dunstan ML , Ruiz A , Bihoreau M-T , Choi S-H , Reitz C , Pasquier F , Hollingworth P , Ramirez A , Hanon O , Fitzpatrick AL , Buxbaum JD , Campion D , Crane PK , Baldwin C , Becker T , Gudnason V , Cruchaga C , Craig D , Amin N , Berr C , Lopez OL , Jager PLD , Deramecourt V , Johnston JA , Evans D , Lovestone S , Letenneur L , Morón FJ , Rubinsztein DC , Eiriksdottir G , Sleegers K , Goate AM , Fiévet N , Huentelman MJ , Gill M , Brown K , Kamboh MI , Keller L , Barberger-Gateau P , McGuinness B , Larson EB , Green R , Myers AJ , Dufouil C , Todd S , Wallon D , Love S , Rogaeva E , Gallacher J , George-Hyslop PS , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Bayer A , Tsuang DW , Yu L , Tsolaki M , Bossù P , Spalletta G , Proitsi P , Collinge J , Sorbi S , Sanchez-Garcia F , Fox NC , Hardy J , Naranjo MCD , Bosco P , Clarke R , Brayne C , Galimberti D , Mancuso M , Matthews F , Moebus S , Mecocci P , Zompo MD , Maier W , Hampel H , Pilotto A , Bullido M , Panza F , Caffarra P , Nacmias B , Gilbert JR , Mayhaus M , Lannfelt L , Hakonarson H , Pichler S , Carrasquillo MM , Ingelsson M , Beekly D , Alvarez V , Zou F , Valladares O , Younkin SG , Coto E , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Gu W , Razquin C , Pastor P , Mateo I , Owen MJ , Faber KM , Jonsson PV , Combarros O , O’Donovan MC , Cantwell LB , Soininen H , Blacker D , Mead S , Mosley TH , Bennett DA , Harris TB , Fratiglioni L , Holmes C , Bruijn de RFAG , Passmore P , Montine TJ , Bettens K , Rotter JI , Brice A , Morgan K , Foroud TM , Kukull WA , Hannequin D , Powell JF , Nalls MA , Ritchie K , Lunetta KL , Kauwe JSK , Boerwinkle E , Riemenschneider M , Boada M , Hiltunen M , Martin ER , Schmidt R , Rujescu D , Wang L-S , Dartigues J-F , Mayeux R , Tzourio C , Hofman A , Nöthen MM , Graff C , Psaty BM , Jones L , Haines JL , Holmans PA , Lathrop M , Pericak-Vance MA , Launer LJ , Farrer LA , Duijn van CM , Broeckhoven CV , Moskvina V , Seshadri S , Williams J , Schellenberg GD , Amouyel P , 2013. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 45 , 1452–1458. 10.1038/ng.2802 24162737
Langfelder P , Horvath S , 2008. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. Bmc Bioinformatics 9 , 559. 10.1186/1471-2105-9-559 19114008
Lau P , Bossers K , Janky R , Salta E , Frigerio CS , Barbash S , Rothman R , Sierksma ASR , Thathiah A , Greenberg D , Papadopoulou AS , Achsel T , Ayoubi T , Soreq H , Verhaagen J , Swaab DF , Aerts S , Strooper BD , 2013. Alteration of the microRNA network during the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Embo Mol Med 5 , 1613–1634. 10.1002/emmm.201201974 24014289
Lau S-F , Cao H , Fu AKY , Ip NY , 2020. Single-nucleus transcriptome analysis reveals dysregulation of angiogenic endothelial cells and neuroprotective glia in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc National Acad Sci 117 , 25800–25809. 10.1073/pnas.2008762117
Leng K , Li E , Eser R , Piergies A , Sit R , Tan M , Neff N , Li SH , Rodriguez RD , Suemoto CK , Leite REP , Ehrenberg AJ , Pasqualucci CA , Seeley WW , Spina S , Heinsen H , Grinberg LT , Kampmann M , 2021. Molecular characterization of selectively vulnerable neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 24 , 276–287. 10.1038/s41593-020-00764-7 33432193
Liu JZ , Erlich Y , Pickrell JK , 2017. Case–control association mapping by proxy using family history of disease. Nat Genet 49 , 325–331. 10.1038/ng.3766 28092683
Lopez R , Regier J , Cole MB , Jordan MI , Yosef N , 2018. Deep generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nat Methods 15 , 1053–1058. 10.1038/s41592-018-0229-2 30504886
Luecken MD , Theis FJ , 2019. Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial. Mol Syst Biol 15 , e8746. 10.15252/msb.20188746 31217225
Luo C , Rivkin A , Zhou J , Sandoval JP , Kurihara L , Lucero J , Castanon R , Nery JR , Pinto-Duarte A , Bui B , Fitzpatrick C , O’Connor C , Ruga S , Eden MEV , Davis DA , Mash DC , Behrens MM , Ecker JR , 2018. Robust single-cell DNA methylome profiling with snmC-seq2. Nat Commun 9 , 3824. 10.1038/s41467-018-06355-2 30237449
Macosko EZ , Basu A , Satija R , Nemesh J , Shekhar K , Goldman M , Tirosh I , Bialas AR , Kamitaki N , Martersteck EM , Trombetta JJ , Weitz DA , Sanes JR , Shalek AK , Regev A , McCarroll SA , 2015. Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets. Cell 161 , 1202–1214. 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002 26000488
Marinaro F , Haneklaus M , Zhang Z , Strano A , Evans L , Handfield L-F , Ryan NS , Fox NC , Hemberg M , Ramanathan S , Livesey FJ , 2020. Molecular and cellular pathology of monogenic Alzheimer’s disease at single cell resolution. Biorxiv 2020.07.14.202317. 10.1101/2020.07.14.202317
Marioni RE , Harris SE , Zhang Q , McRae AF , Hagenaars SP , Hill WD , Davies G , Ritchie CW , Gale CR , Starr JM , Goate AM , Porteous DJ , Yang J , Evans KL , Deary IJ , Wray NR , Visscher PM , 2018. GWAS on family history of Alzheimer’s disease. Transl Psychiat 8 , 99. 10.1038/s41398-018-0150-6
Martiskainen H , Viswanathan J , Nykänen N-P , Kurki M , Helisalmi S , Natunen T , Sarajärvi T , Kurkinen KMA , Pursiheimo J-P , Rauramaa T , Alafuzoff I , Jääskeläinen JE , Leinonen V , Soininen H , Haapasalo A , Huttunen HJ , Hiltunen M , 2015. Transcriptomics and mechanistic elucidation of Alzheimer’s disease risk genes in the brain and in vitro models. Neurobiol Aging 36 , 1221.e15–1221.e28. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.09.003
Mathys H , Davila-Velderrain J , Peng Z , Gao F , Mohammadi S , Young JZ , Menon M , He L , Abdurrob F , Jiang X , Martorell AJ , Ransohoff RM , Hafler BP , Bennett DA , Kellis M , Tsai L-H , 2019. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 570 , 332–337. 10.1038/s41586-019-1195-2 31042697
Miller JA , Oldham MC , Geschwind DH , 2008. A Systems Level Analysis of Transcriptional Changes in Alzheimer’s Disease and Normal Aging. J Neurosci 28 , 1410–1420. 10.1523/jneurosci.4098-07.2008 18256261
Mitra K , Carvunis A-R , Ramesh SK , Ideker T , 2013. Integrative approaches for finding modular structure in biological networks. Nat Rev Genet 14 , 719–732. 10.1038/nrg3552 24045689
Miyashita A , Koike A , Jun G , Wang L-S , Takahashi S , Matsubara E , Kawarabayashi T , Shoji M , Tomita N , Arai H , Asada T , Harigaya Y , Ikeda M , Amari M , Hanyu H , Higuchi S , Ikeuchi T , Nishizawa M , Suga M , Kawase Y , Akatsu H , Kosaka K , Yamamoto T , Imagawa M , Hamaguchi T , Yamada M , Morihara T , Moriaha T , Takeda M , Takao T , Nakata K , Fujisawa Y , Sasaki K , Watanabe K , Nakashima K , Urakami K , Ooya T , Takahashi M , Yuzuriha T , Serikawa K , Yoshimoto S , Nakagawa R , Kim J-W , Ki C-S , Won H-H , Na DL , Seo SW , Mook-Jung I , Consortium ADG , George-Hyslop PS , Mayeux R , Haines JL , Pericak-Vance MA , Yoshida M , Nishida N , Tokunaga K , Yamamoto K , Tsuji S , Kanazawa I , Ihara Y , Schellenberg GD , Farrer LA , Kuwano R , 2013. SORL1 Is Genetically Associated with Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease in Japanese, Koreans and Caucasians. Plos One 8 , e58618. 10.1371/journal.pone.0058618 23565137
Morabito S , Miyoshi E , Michael N , Shahin S , Martini AC , Head E , Silva J , Leavy K , Perez-Rosendahl M , Swarup V , 2021. Single-nucleus chromatin accessibility and transcriptomic characterization of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 53 , 1143–1155. 10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z 34239132
Morabito S , Miyoshi E , Michael N , Swarup V , 2020. Integrative genomics approach identifies conserved transcriptomic networks in Alzheimer’s disease. Hum Mol Genet 29 , 2899–2919. 10.1093/hmg/ddaa182 32803238
Mostafavi S , Gaiteri C , Sullivan SE , White CC , Tasaki S , Xu J , Taga M , Klein H-U , Patrick E , Komashko V , McCabe C , Smith R , Bradshaw EM , Root DE , Regev A , Yu L , Chibnik LB , Schneider JA , Young-Pearse TL , Bennett DA , Jager PLD , 2018. A molecular network of the aging human brain provides insights into the pathology and cognitive decline of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 21 , 811–819. 10.1038/s41593-018-0154-9 29802388
Naj AC , Jun G , Beecham GW , Wang L-S , Vardarajan BN , Buros J , Gallins PJ , Buxbaum JD , Jarvik GP , Crane PK , Larson EB , Bird TD , Boeve BF , Graff-Radford NR , Jager PLD , Evans D , Schneider JA , Carrasquillo MM , Ertekin-Taner N , Younkin SG , Cruchaga C , Kauwe JSK , Nowotny P , Kramer P , Hardy J , Huentelman MJ , Myers AJ , Barmada MM , Demirci FY , Baldwin CT , Green RC , Rogaeva E , George-Hyslop PS , Arnold SE , Barber R , Beach T , Bigio EH , Bowen JD , Boxer A , Burke JR , Cairns NJ , Carlson CS , Carney RM , Carroll SL , Chui HC , Clark DG , Corneveaux J , Cotman CW , Cummings JL , DeCarli C , DeKosky ST , Diaz-Arrastia R , Dick M , Dickson DW , Ellis WG , Faber KM , Fallon KB , Farlow MR , Ferris S , Frosch MP , Galasko DR , Ganguli M , Gearing M , Geschwind DH , Ghetti B , Gilbert JR , Gilman S , Giordani B , Glass JD , Growdon JH , Hamilton RL , Harrell LE , Head E , Honig LS , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Jicha GA , Jin L-W , Johnson N , Karlawish J , Karydas A , Kaye JA , Kim R , Koo EH , Kowall NW , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Lieberman AP , Lopez OL , Mack WJ , Marson DC , Martiniuk F , Mash DC , Masliah E , McCormick WC , McCurry SM , McDavid AN , McKee AC , Mesulam M , Miller BL , Miller CA , Miller JW , Parisi JE , Perl DP , Peskind E , Petersen RC , Poon WW , Quinn JF , Rajbhandary RA , Raskind M , Reisberg B , Ringman JM , Roberson ED , Rosenberg RN , Sano M , Schneider LS , Seeley W , Shelanski ML , Slifer MA , Smith CD , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Tanzi RE , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Deerlin VMV , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Williamson J , Woltjer RL , Cantwell LB , Dombroski BA , Beekly D , Lunetta KL , Martin ER , Kamboh MI , Saykin AJ , Reiman EM , Bennett DA , Morris JC , Montine TJ , Goate AM , Blacker D , Tsuang DW , Hakonarson H , Kukull WA , Foroud TM , Haines JL , Mayeux R , Pericak-Vance MA , Farrer LA , Schellenberg GD , 2011. Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 43 , 436–441. 10.1038/ng.801 21460841
Nasrabady SE , Rizvi B , Goldman JE , Brickman AM , 2018. White matter changes in Alzheimer’s disease: a focus on myelin and oligodendrocytes. Acta Neuropathologica Commun 6 , 22. 10.1186/s40478-018-0515-3
Neary D , Snowden JS , Gustafson L , Passant U , Stuss D , Black S , Freedman M , Kertesz A , Robert PH , Albert M , Boone K , Miller BL , Cummings J , Benson DF , 1998. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurology 51 , 1546–1554. 10.1212/wnl.51.6.1546 9855500
Nott A , Holtman IR , Coufal NG , Schlachetzki JCM , Yu M , Hu R , Han CZ , Pena M , Xiao J , Wu Y , Keulen Z , Pasillas MP , O’Connor C , Nickl CK , Schafer ST , Shen Z , Rissman RA , Brewer JB , Gosselin D , Gonda DD , Levy ML , Rosenfeld MG , McVicker G , Gage FH , Ren B , Glass CK , 2019. Brain cell type–specific enhancer–promoter interactome maps and disease-risk association. Science 366 , 1134–1139. 10.1126/science.aay0793 31727856
Oldham MC , Konopka G , Iwamoto K , Langfelder P , Kato T , Horvath S , Geschwind DH , 2008. Functional organization of the transcriptome in human brain. Nat Neurosci 11 , 1271–1282. 10.1038/nn.2207 18849986
Onos KD , Rizzo SJS , Howell GR , Sasner M , 2016. Toward more predictive genetic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res Bull 122 , 1–11. 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2015.12.003 26708939
Otero-Garcia M , Xue Y-Q , Shakouri T , Deng Y , Morabito S , Allison T , Lowry WE , Kawaguchi R , Swarup V , Cobos I , 2020. Single-soma transcriptomics of tangle-bearing neurons in Alzheimer’s disease reveals the signatures of tau-associated synaptic dysfunction. Biorxiv 2020.05.11.088591. 10.1101/2020.05.11.088591
Parikshak NN , Luo R , Zhang A , Won H , Lowe JK , Chandran V , Horvath S , Geschwind DH , 2013. Integrative Functional Genomic Analyses Implicate Specific Molecular Pathways and Circuits in Autism. Cell 155 , 1008–1021. 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.031 24267887
Parikshak NN , Swarup V , Belgard TG , Irimia M , Ramaswami G , Gandal MJ , Hartl C , Leppa V , Ubieta de la T. L , Huang J , Lowe JK , Blencowe BJ , Horvath S , Geschwind DH , 2016. Genome-wide changes in lncRNA, splicing, and regional gene expression patterns in autism. Nature 540 , 423–427. 10.1038/nature20612 27919067
Raj T , Li YI , Wong G , Humphrey J , Wang M , Ramdhani S , Wang Y-C , Ng B , Gupta I , Haroutunian V , Schadt EE , Young-Pearse T , Mostafavi S , Zhang B , Sklar P , Bennett DA , Jager PLD , 2018. Integrative transcriptome analyses of the aging brain implicate altered splicing in Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility. Nat Genet 50 , 1584–1592. 10.1038/s41588-018-0238-1 30297968
Ramani V , Deng X , Qiu R , Gunderson KL , Steemers FJ , Disteche CM , Noble WS , Duan Z , Shendure J , 2017. Massively multiplex single-cell Hi-C. Nat Methods 14 , 263–266. 10.1038/nmeth.4155 28135255
Ramsköld D , Luo S , Wang Y-C , Li R , Deng Q , Faridani OR , Daniels GA , Khrebtukova I , Loring JF , Laurent LC , Schroth GP , Sandberg R , 2012. Full-length mRNA-Seq from single-cell levels of RNA and individual circulating tumor cells. Nat Biotechnol 30 , 777–782. 10.1038/nbt.2282 22820318
Rascovsky K , Hodges JR , Knopman D , Mendez MF , Kramer JH , Neuhaus J , Swieten van JC , Seelaar H , Dopper EGP , Onyike CU , Hillis AE , Josephs KA , Boeve BF , Kertesz A , Seeley WW , Rankin KP , Johnson JK , Gorno-Tempini M-L , Rosen H , Prioleau-Latham CE , Lee A , Kipps CM , Lillo P , Piguet O , Rohrer JD , Rossor MN , Warren JD , Fox NC , Galasko D , Salmon DP , Black SE , Mesulam M , Weintraub S , Dickerson BC , Diehl-Schmid J , Pasquier F , Deramecourt V , Lebert F , Pijnenburg Y , Chow TW , Manes F , Grafman J , Cappa SF , Freedman M , Grossman M , Miller BL , 2011. Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain 134 , 2456–2477. 10.1093/brain/awr179 21810890
Rebboah E , Reese F , Williams K , Balderrama-Gutierrez G , McGill C , Trout D , Rodriguez I , Liang H , Wold BJ , Mortazavi A , 2021. Mapping and modeling the genomic basis of differential RNA isoform expression at single-cell resolution with LR-Split-seq. Biorxiv 2021.04.26.441522. 10.1101/2021.04.26.441522
Reitz C , Jun G , Naj A , Rajbhandary R , Vardarajan BN , Wang L-S , Valladares O , Lin C-F , Larson EB , Graff-Radford NR , Evans D , Jager PLD , Crane PK , Buxbaum JD , Murrell JR , Raj T , Ertekin-Taner N , Logue M , Baldwin CT , Green RC , Barnes LL , Cantwell LB , Fallin MD , Go RCP , Griffith P , Obisesan TO , Manly JJ , Lunetta KL , Kamboh MI , Lopez OL , Bennett DA , Hendrie H , Hall KS , Goate AM , Byrd GS , Kukull WA , Foroud TM , Haines JL , Farrer LA , Pericak-Vance MA , Schellenberg GD , Mayeux R , Consortium, for the A.D.G., 2013. Variants in the ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter (ABCA7), Apolipoprotein E ϵ4, and the Risk of Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease in African Americans. Jama 309 , 1483–1492. 10.1001/jama.2013.2973 23571587
Rexach JE , Polioudakis D , Yin A , Swarup V , Chang TS , Nguyen T , Sarkar A , Chen L , Huang J , Lin L-C , Seeley W , Trojanowski JQ , Malhotra D , Geschwind DH , 2020. Tau Pathology Drives Dementia Risk-Associated Gene Networks toward Chronic Inflammatory States and Immunosuppression. Cell Reports 33 , 108398. 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108398 33207193
Ridge PG , Mukherjee S , Crane PK , Kauwe JSK , Consortium ADG , 2013. Alzheimer’s Disease: Analyzing the Missing Heritability. Plos One 8 , e79771. 10.1371/journal.pone.0079771 24244562
Rohrer JD , Rosen HJ , 2013. Neuroimaging in frontotemporal dementia. Int Rev Psychiatr 25 , 221–229. 10.3109/09540261.2013.778822
Rosenberg AB , Roco CM , Muscat RA , Kuchina A , Sample P , Yao Z , Gray L , Peeler DJ , Mukherjee S , Chen W , Pun SH , Sellers DL , Tasic B , Seelig G , 2018. Single-cell profiling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcoding. Science 360 , eaam8999. 10.1126/science.aam8999
Saunders AM , Strittmatter WJ , Schmechel D , George-Hyslop PH St , Pericak-Vance MA , Joo SH , Rosi BL , Gusella JF , Crapper-MacLachlan DR , Alberts MJ , Hulette C , Crain B , Goldgaber D , Roses AD , 1993. Association of apolipoprotein E allele ϵ4 with late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 43 , 1467–1467. 10.1212/wnl.43.8.1467 8350998
Schwartzentruber J , Cooper S , Liu JZ , Barrio-Hernandez I , Bello E , Kumasaka N , Young AMH , Franklin RJM , Johnson T , Estrada K , Gaffney DJ , Beltrao P , Bassett A , 2021. Genome-wide meta-analysis, fine-mapping and integrative prioritization implicate new Alzheimer’s disease risk genes. Nat Genet 53 , 392–402. 10.1038/s41588-020-00776-w 33589840
Seyfried NT , Dammer EB , Swarup V , Nandakumar D , Duong DM , Yin L , Deng Q , Nguyen T , Hales CM , Wingo T , Glass J , Gearing M , Thambisetty M , Troncoso JC , Geschwind DH , Lah JJ , Levey AI , 2017. A Multi-network Approach Identifies Protein-Specific Co-expression in Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell Syst 4 , 60–72.e4. 10.1016/j.cels.2016.11.006 27989508
Shigemizu D , Mitsumori R , Akiyama S , Miyashita A , Morizono T , Higaki S , Asanomi Y , Hara N , Tamiya G , Kinoshita K , Ikeuchi T , Niida S , Ozaki K , 2021. Ethnic and trans-ethnic genome-wide association studies identify new loci influencing Japanese Alzheimer’s disease risk. Transl Psychiat 11 , 151. 10.1038/s41398-021-01272-3
Sierksma A , Lu A , Mancuso R , Fattorelli N , Thrupp N , Salta E , Zoco J , Blum D , Buée L , Strooper BD , Fiers M , 2020. Novel Alzheimer risk genes determine the microglia response to amyloid-β but not to TAU pathology. Embo Mol Med 12 , e10606. 10.15252/emmm.201910606 31951107
Skibinski G , Parkinson NJ , Brown JM , Chakrabarti L , Lloyd SL , Hummerich H , Nielsen JE , Hodges JR , Spillantini MG , Thusgaard T , Brandner S , Brun A , Rossor MN , Gade A , Johannsen P , Sørensen SA , Gydesen S , Fisher EM , Collinge J , 2005. Mutations in the endosomal ESCRTIII-complex subunit CHMP2B in frontotemporal dementia. Nat Genet 37 , 806–808. 10.1038/ng1609 16041373
So H , Gui AHS , Cherny SS , Sham PC , 2011. Evaluating the heritability explained by known susceptibility variants: a survey of ten complex diseases. Genet Epidemiol 35 , 310–317. 10.1002/gepi.20579 21374718
Song W-M , Zhang B , 2015. Multiscale Embedded Gene Co-expression Network Analysis. Plos Comput Biol 11 , e1004574. 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004574 26618778
Stuart T , Butler A , Hoffman P , Hafemeister C , Papalexi E , Mauck WM , Hao Y , Stoeckius M , Smibert P , Satija R , 2019. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell 177 , 1888–1902.e21. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031 31178118
Swanson E , Lord C , Reading J , Heubeck AT , Genge PC , Thomson Z , Weiss MD , Li X , Savage AK , Green RR , Torgerson TR , Bumol TF , Graybuck LT , Skene PJ , 2021. Simultaneous trimodal single-cell measurement of transcripts, epitopes, and chromatin accessibility using TEA-seq. Elife 10 , e63632. 10.7554/elife.63632 33835024
Swarup V , Chang TS , Duong DM , Dammer EB , Dai J , Lah JJ , Johnson ECB , Seyfried NT , Levey AI , Geschwind DH , 2020. Identification of Conserved Proteomic Networks in Neurodegenerative Dementia. Cell Reports 31 , 107807. 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107807 32579933
Swarup V , Hinz FI , Rexach JE , Noguchi K , Toyoshiba H , Oda A , Hirai K , Sarkar A , Seyfried NT , Cheng C , Haggarty SJ , Ferrari R , Rohrer JD , Ramasamy A , Hardy J , Hernandez DG , Nalls MA , Singleton AB , Kwok JBJ , Dobson-Stone C , Brooks WS , Schofield PR , Halliday GM , Hodges JR , Piguet O , Bartley L , Thompson E , Haan E , Hernández I , Ruiz A , Boada M , Borroni B , Padovani A , Cairns NJ , Cruchaga C , Binetti G , Ghidoni R , Benussi L , Forloni G , Albani D , Galimberti D , Fenoglio C , Serpente M , Scarpini E , Clarimón J , Lleó A , Blesa R , Waldö ML , Nilsson K , Nilsson C , Mackenzie IRA , Hsiung G-YR , Mann DMA , Grafman J , Morris CM , Attems J , Griffiths TD , McKeith IG , Thomas AJ , Jaros E , Pietrini P , Huey ED , Wassermann EM , Tierney MC , Baborie A , Pastor P , Ortega-Cubero S , Razquin C , Alonso E , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Alexopoulos P , Kurz A , Rainero I , Rubino E , Pinessi L , Rogaeva E , George-Hyslop P. St. , Rossi G , Tagliavini F , Giaccone G , Rowe JB , Schlachetzki JCM , Uphill J , Collinge J , Mead S , Danek A , Deerlin VMV , Grossman M , Trojanowski JQ , Pickering-Brown S , Momeni P , Zee van der J , Cruts M , Broeckhoven CV , Cappa SF , Leber I , Brice A , Hannequin D , Golfier V , Vercelletto M , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Bagnoli S , Piaceri I , Nielsen JE , Hjermind LE , Riemenschneider M , Mayhaus M , Gasparoni G , Pichler S , Ibach B , Rossor MN , Fox NC , Warren JD , Spillantini MG , Morris HR , Rizzu P , Heutink P , Snowden JS , Rollinson S , Gerhard A , Richardson A , Bruni AC , Maletta R , Frangipane F , Cupidi C , Bernardi L , Anfossi M , Gallo M , Conidi ME , Smirne N , Rademakers R , Baker M , Dickson DW , Graff-Radford NR , Petersen RC , Knopman D , Josephs KA , Boeve BF , Parisi JE , Miller BL , Karydas AM , Rosen H , Seeley WW , Swieten van JC , Dopper EGP , Seelaar H , Pijnenburg YAL , Scheltens P , Logroscino G , Capozzo R , Novelli V , Puca AA , Franceschi M , Postiglione A , Milan G , Sorrentino P , Kristiansen M , Chiang H-H , Graff C , Pasquier F , Rollin A , Deramecourt V , Lebouvier T , Ferrucci L , Kapogiannis D , Grossman M , Deerlin VMV , Trojanowski JQ , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Kondou S , Geschwind DH , 2019. Identification of evolutionarily conserved gene networks mediating neurodegenerative dementia. Nat Med 25 , 152–164. 10.1038/s41591-018-0223-3 30510257
Tang F , Barbacioru C , Wang Y , Nordman E , Lee C , Xu N , Wang X , Bodeau J , Tuch BB , Siddiqui A , Lao K , Surani MA , 2009. mRNA-Seq whole-transcriptome analysis of a single cell. Nat Methods 6 , 377–382. 10.1038/nmeth.1315 19349980
Tesson BM , Breitling R , Jansen RC , 2010. DiffCoEx: a simple and sensitive method to find differentially coexpressed gene modules. Bmc Bioinformatics 11 , 497. 10.1186/1471-2105-11-497 20925918
Traag VA , Waltman L , Eck van NJ , 2019. From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities. Sci Rep 9 , 5233. 10.1038/s41598-019-41695-z 30914743
Vitek MP , Araujo JA , Fossel M , Greenberg BD , Howell GR , Rizzo SJS , Seyfried NT , Tenner AJ , Territo PR , Windisch M , Bain LJ , Ross A , Carrillo MC , Lamb BT , Edelmayer RM , 2020. Translational animal models for Alzheimer’s disease: An Alzheimer’s Association Business Consortium Think Tank. Alzheimer’s Dementia Transl Res Clin Interventions 6 , e12114. 10.1002/trc2.12114
Wan Y-W , Al-Ouran R , Mangleburg CG , Perumal TM , Lee TV , Allison K , Swarup V , Funk CC , Gaiteri C , Allen M , Wang M , Neuner SM , Kaczorowski CC , Philip VM , Howell GR , Martini-Stoica H , Zheng H , Mei H , Zhong X , Kim JW , Dawson VL , Dawson TM , Pao P-C , Tsai L-H , Haure-Mirande J-V , Ehrlich ME , Chakrabarty P , Levites Y , Wang X , Dammer EB , Srivastava G , Mukherjee S , Sieberts SK , Omberg L , Dang KD , Eddy JA , Snyder P , Chae Y , Amberkar S , Wei W , Hide W , Preuss C , Ergun A , Ebert PJ , Airey DC , Mostafavi S , Yu L , Klein H-U , Consortium AMP-AD , Carter GW , Collier DA , Golde TE , Levey AI , Bennett DA , Estrada K , Townsend TM , Zhang B , Schadt E , Jager PLD , Price ND , Ertekin-Taner N , Liu Z , Shulman JM , Mangravite LM , Logsdon BA , 2020. Meta-Analysis of the Alzheimer’s Disease Human Brain Transcriptome and Functional Dissection in Mouse Models. Cell Reports 32 , 107908. 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107908 32668255
Wang G , Ang C-E , Fan J , Wang A , Moffitt JR , Zhuang X , 2020. Spatial organization of the transcriptome in individual neurons. Biorxiv 2020.12.07.414060. 10.1101/2020.12.07.414060
Wang M , Roussos P , McKenzie A , Zhou X , Kajiwara Y , Brennand KJ , Luca GCD , Crary JF , Casaccia P , Buxbaum JD , Ehrlich M , Gandy S , Goate A , Katsel P , Schadt E , Haroutunian V , Zhang B , 2016. Integrative network analysis of nineteen brain regions identifies molecular signatures and networks underlying selective regional vulnerability to Alzheimer’s disease. Genome Med 8 , 104. 10.1186/s13073-016-0355-3 27799057
Watts GDJ , Wymer J , Kovach MJ , Mehta SG , Mumm S , Darvish D , Pestronk A , Whyte MP , Kimonis VE , 2004. Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia is caused by mutant valosin-containing protein. Nat Genet 36 , 377–381. 10.1038/ng1332 15034582
Webster JA , Gibbs JR , Clarke J , Ray M , Zhang W , Holmans P , Rohrer K , Zhao A , Marlowe L , Kaleem M , McCorquodale DS , Cuello C , Leung D , Bryden L , Nath P , Zismann VL , Joshipura K , Huentelman MJ , Hu-Lince D , Coon KD , Craig DW , Pearson JV , Group N-N , Heward CB , Reiman EM , Stephan D , Hardy J , Myers AJ , 2009. Genetic Control of Human Brain Transcript Expression in Alzheimer Disease. Am J Hum Genetics 84 , 445–458. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.011 19361613
Welch JD , Kozareva V , Ferreira A , Vanderburg C , Martin C , Macosko EZ , 2019. Single-Cell Multi-omic Integration Compares and Contrasts Features of Brain Cell Identity. Cell 177 , 1873–1887.e17. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.006 31178122
Yang AC , Vest RT , Kern F , Lee DP , Maat CA , Losada PM , Chen MB , Agam M , Schaum N , Khoury N , Calcuttawala K , Pálovics R , Shin A , Wang EY , Luo J , Gate D , Siegenthaler JA , McNerney MW , Keller A , Wyss-Coray T , 2021. A human brain vascular atlas reveals diverse cell mediators of Alzheimer’s disease risk. Biorxiv 2021.04.26.441262. 10.1101/2021.04.26.441262
Zee van der J , Gijselinck I , Dillen L , Langenhove TV , Theuns J , Engelborghs S , Philtjens S , Vandenbulcke M , Sleegers K , Sieben A , Bäumer V , Maes G , Corsmit E , Borroni B , Padovani A , Archetti S , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Mendonça de A , Miltenberger-Miltenyi G , Pereira S , Pimentel J , Nacmias B , Bagnoli S , Sorbi S , Graff C , Chiang H-H , Westerlund M , Sanchez-Valle R , Llado A , Gelpi E , Santana I , Almeida MR , Santiago B , Frisoni G , Zanetti O , Bonvicini C , Synofzik M , Maetzler W , Hagen JMV , Schöls L , Heneka MT , Jessen F , Matej R , Parobkova E , Kovacs GG , Ströbel T , Sarafov S , Tournev I , Jordanova A , Danek A , Arzberger T , Fabrizi GM , Testi S , Salmon E , Santens P , Martin J-J , Cras P , Vandenberghe R , Deyn De Peter Paul , Cruts M , Broeckhoven CV , Zee van der J , Gijselinck I , Dillen L , Langenhove TV , Theuns J , Philtjens S , Sleegers K , Bäumer V , Maes G , Corsmit E , Cruts M , Broeckhoven CV , Zee van der J , Gijselinck I , Dillen L , Langenhove TV , Philtjens S , Theuns J , Sleegers K , Bäumer V , Maes G , Cruts M , Broeckhoven CV , Engelborghs S , Deyn De Peter P , Cras P , Engelborghs S , Deyn De Peter P , Vandenbulcke M , Vandenbulcke M , Borroni B , Padovani A , Archetti S , Perneczky R , Diehl-Schmid J , Synofzik M , Maetzler W , Hagen JMV , Schöls L , Synofzik M , Maetzler W , Hagen JMV , Schöls L , Heneka MT , Jessen F , Ramirez A , Kurzwelly D , Sachtleben C , Mairer W , Mendonça de A , Miltenberger-Miltenyi G , Pereira S , Firmo C , Pimentel J , Sanchez-Valle R , Llado A , Antonell A , Molinuevo J , Gelpi E , Graff C , Chiang H-H , Westerlund M , Graff C , Ståhlbom AK , Thonberg H , Nennesmo I , Börjesson-Hanson A , Nacmias B , Bagnoli S , Sorbi S , Bessi V , Piaceri I , Santana I , Santiago B , Santana I , Ribeiro MH , Almeida MR , Oliveira C , Massano J , Garret C , Pires P , Frisoni G , Zanetti O , Bonvicini C , Sarafov S , Tournev I , Jordanova A , Tournev I , Kovacs GG , Ströbel T , Heneka MT , Jessen F , Ramirez A , Kurzwelly D , Sachtleben C , Mairer W , Jessen F , Matej R , Parobkova E , Danel A , Arzberger T , Fabrizi GM , Testi S , Ferrari S , Cavallaro T , Salmon E , Santens P , Cras P , Consortium EE-OD , 2013. A Pan-European Study of the C9orf72 Repeat Associated with FTLD: Geographic Prevalence, Genomic Instability, and Intermediate Repeats. Hum Mutat 34 , 363–373. 10.1002/humu.22244 23111906
Zhang B , Gaiteri C , Bodea L-G , Wang Z , McElwee J , Podtelezhnikov AA , Zhang C , Xie T , Tran L , Dobrin R , Fluder E , Clurman B , Melquist S , Narayanan M , Suver C , Shah H , Mahajan M , Gillis T , Mysore J , MacDonald ME , Lamb JR , Bennett DA , Molony C , Stone DJ , Gudnason V , Myers AJ , Schadt EE , Neumann H , Zhu J , Emilsson V , 2013. Integrated Systems Approach Identifies Genetic Nodes and Networks in Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 153 , 707–720. 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.030 23622250
Zheng GXY , Terry JM , Belgrader P , Ryvkin P , Bent ZW , Wilson R , Ziraldo SB , Wheeler TD , McDermott GP , Zhu J , Gregory MT , Shuga J , Montesclaros L , Underwood JG , Masquelier DA , Nishimura SY , Schnall-Levin M , Wyatt PW , Hindson CM , Bharadwaj R , Wong A , Ness KD , Beppu LW , Deeg HJ , McFarland C , Loeb KR , Valente WJ , Ericson NG , Stevens EA , Radich JP , Mikkelsen TS , Hindson BJ , Bielas JH , 2017. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nat Commun 8 , 14049. 10.1038/ncomms14049 28091601
Zhou Y , Song WM , Andhey PS , Swain A , Levy T , Miller KR , Poliani PL , Cominelli M , Grover S , Gilfillan S , Cella M , Ulland TK , Zaitsev K , Miyashita A , Ikeuchi T , Sainouchi M , Kakita A , Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Nichols MR , Beausoleil SA , Ulrich JD , Holtzman DM , Artyomov MN , Colonna M , 2020. Human and mouse single-nucleus transcriptomics reveal TREM2-dependent and TREM2-independent cellular responses in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Med 26 , 131–142. 10.1038/s41591-019-0695-9 31932797
Zhu C , Zhang Y , Li YE , Lucero J , Behrens MM , Ren B , 2021. Joint profiling of histone modifications and transcriptome in single cells from mouse brain. Nat Methods 18 , 283–292. 10.1038/s41592-021-01060-3 33589836
Ziegenhain C , Vieth B , Parekh S , Reinius B , Guillaumet-Adkins A , Smets M , Leonhardt H , Heyn H , Hellmann I , Enard W , 2017. Comparative Analysis of Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Methods. Mol Cell 65 , 631–643.e4. 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.01.023 28212749
