LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101525337
37346
ACS Chem Neurosci
ACS Chem Neurosci
ACS chemical neuroscience
1948-7193

35258946
8986627
10.1021/acschemneuro.1c00801
NIHMS1786483
Article
A mechanistic kinetic model reveals how amyloidogenic hydrophobic patches facilitate the amyloid-β fibril elongation
Xie Hengyi 1
Rojas Ana 2
Maisuradze Gia G. 3*
Khelashvili George 1*
1 Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA
2 Schrödinger, Inc., 1540 Broadway, 24th Floor, New York, NY 10036, USA
3 Baker Laboratory of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Author contributions

G.G.M. and G.K. designed the research; H.X. and A.R. performed the research; H.X., A.R., G.G.M. and G.K. analyzed the data; H.X. and G.K. wrote the paper; and all authors discussed the results and reviewed the manuscript.

* To whom correspondence may be addressed. George Khelashvili (gek2009@med.cornell.edu), Gia Maisuradze (gm56@cornell.edu)
18 3 2022
06 4 2022
08 3 2022
06 4 2023
13 7 9871001
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Abnormal aggregation of the Amyloid β (Aβ) peptides into fibrils play a critical role in the development of Alzheimer’s disease. A two-stage “dock-lock” model have been proposed for the Aβ fibril elongation process. However, the mechanisms of the Aβ monomer-fibril binding process have not been elucidated with the necessary molecular-level precision, and so it remains unclear how the lock phase dynamics leads to the overall in-register binding of the Aβ monomer onto the fibril. To gain mechanistic insight into this critical step during the fibril elongation process we used molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with a physics-based coarse-grained UNited-RESidue (UNRES) force field we sampled extensively the dynamics of the lock phase process, in which a fibril-bound Aβ(9–40) peptide rearranges to establish the native docking conformation. Analysis of the MD trajectories with Markov State Models was used to quantify the kinetics of the rearrangement process and the most probable pathways leading to the overall native docking conformation of the incoming peptide. These revealed a key intermediate state in which an intra-monomer hairpin is formed between the central core amyloidogenic patch 18VFFA21 and the C-terminal hydrophobic patch 34LMVG37. This hairpin structure is highly favored as a transition state during the lock phase of the fibril elongation. We propose a molecular mechanism for the facilitation of the Aβ fibril elongation by amyloidogenic hydrophobic patches.

Graphical Abstract

Aβ peptide
amyloids
replica-exchange molecular dynamics
UNRES force field
Markov state model
transition path theory

pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease prevalent in elderly people and causing severe social and economic burden. To date, no remedy has been found that can slow the progression of AD 1. It has been thought, that AD is associated with the formation and accumulation of proteinaceous deposits in the brain, mainly constituted by the filamentous forms of Amyloid β (Aβ) peptides 2–4. However, more recent studies suggested that larger aggregates, such as Aβ plaques, are not responsible for neurodegeneration and that the smaller soluble oligomers are the toxic species of Aβ 5–7. Aβ fibrils can be viewed as repositories of soluble intermediates, and a source of harmful oligomers 8, 9. Therefore, the Aβ fibril elongation process is one of the possible routes that leads to AD neuropathology 10–16, and studying the mechanisms of the aggregation process of Aβ may provide key information for the prevention and treatment strategy of AD.

Several hypotheses have been proposed to answer a central question: how extracellular amyloid β peptides can damage cells. According to the amyloid hypothesis, supported by experimental evidences, Aβ peptides are often an initiating factor in Alzheimer’s disease. It suggests that the damage to the membrane is due to the fibrillation on the membrane surface (a “detergent-like” mechanism), and excludes the formation of pores 10, 17–22. In contrast, the toxic Aβ oligomer hypothesis proposes that the AD is instigated by soluble Aβ oligomers, which damage the membrane via ion-channel-like pores, and does not take the fibrillation process into account 23. Recently, another hypothesis, named lipid-chaperone hypothesis, has been introduced 24, 25. The lipid-chaperone hypothesis is a more general molecular model, that includes both amyloid and toxic Aβ oligomer hypotheses, where the lipid–protein complex is the main player in membrane damage, and the molecular mechanism of membrane damage is a common factor of intrinsically disordered proteins.

Experimental studies of the kinetics of the Aβ aggregation process led to the suggestion of a two-step model, named “dock-lock mechanism” 26–29. In the dock phase, a free unstructured Aβ monomer rapidly and reversibly adheres to the surface of a pre-formed fibril; in the lock phase, the incoming monomer undergoes a slow conformation rearrangement adapting to the native docking on the fibril lattice irreversibly. However, the detailed reaction pathways of the dock-lock mechanisms have not been determined. This knowledge gap is due to the difficulties in differentiating and tracking the behavior of low-concentration Aβ oligomers in experimental studies at a required molecular-level resolution 30.

Atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have proven to be a valuable tool for gaining insights into the self-assembly of amyloid peptides and the molecular mechanism of inhibition 31–35. The prohibitively high computational costs of MD simulation that would follow the slow process of Aβ fibril elongation (~ 1 second per layer) 36–38 has limited atomistic MD studies of Aβ fibril formation to the aggregation of various fragments of the Aβ peptide 39–46. Commonly studied fragments are the core hydrophobic segments 16KLVFFA21, 29GAIIGLM35, and 36VGGVVIA42 that are believed to constitute the key driving force of the amyloidogenic oligomerization 47, 48. The results from these fragment-based studies are consistent with the dock-lock mechanism of the Aβ fibril formation process, but do not provide information about potential fibrillogenic pathways that may only occur in the longer Aβ peptide constructs for which the fibril elongation mechanism may consist of interactions between different fragments of the peptide.

To enable the study a larger construct containing all the above-mentioned hydrophobic patches and multiple Aβ peptides, simulations are usually carried out using implicit solvent or with coarse-grained force fields, and sampling is enhanced with techniques such as replica-exchange molecular dynamics (REMD) and umbrella sampling 49–54. Interestingly, in most of these studies the incoming monomers were observed to dock on the fibril template with a considerable number of residues remaining bound at misregistered sites 49–52, while the full-native binding of a monomer with overall in-register docking on the template has been reached only with a biased umbrella sampling protocol 53. Thus, the lock phase mechanism – the stage of the fibril formation process in which the monomer-fibril non-native binding complex undergoes structural rearrangement to achieve native docking – still remains to be better sampled and characterized on a detailed molecular level.

In a previous study 54 we sampled the dock phase of a free unrestrained Aβ(9–40) monomer associating with the fibril using a physics-based coarse-grained UNited-RESidue (UNRES) force field 55, 56. The analysis of ten milliseconds of MD simulations revealed a single trajectory that reached the native binding through four sequential phases characterized by different modes of interaction between the monomer and the template. Since this successful sequence of events leading to native binding was observed only once in the previous study, the transitional phase between the native and non-native binding modes remains relatively unexplored and, therefore, not well-understood mechanistically. Specifically, it is not clear how system transitions from the non-native binding modes observed in the 1st and 2nd phases (docking phase) of the process to the fully native binding mode in phase 4 (lock phase). To shed new mechanistic light on this process we have generated extensive MD trajectories with the UNRES force-fields of the lock phase of the Aβ fibril formation process to sample various modes of interactions between an Aβ(9–40) monomer and a fibril template that lead to structural rearrangements from non-native binding to native docking.

Here we report on these new simulations and their analysis the Markov State Model (MSM) analysis of the structural rearrangements in the lock phase. The transition pathways identified from the MSM were used to calculate rate-limiting steps in the lock phase process, and revealed a key intermediate state. This step entails the formation of an intra-monomer hairpin between the central core amyloidogenic patch 18VFFA21 and the C-terminal hydrophobic patch 34LMVG37. We found that this hairpin structure is highly favored as a transition state during the lock phase of the fibril elongation, suggesting it as a potential target for the intervention with Aβ fibril formation mechanism.

Results and Discussion

The key findings from the single trajectory reported in our previous study 54 served as a comparative template in the analysis of the results from the new extensive MD simulations described below (Fig. 1A). Thus, in the first phase of that trajectory we observed that the N-terminal β-strand (N-strand, 9GYEVHHQKLVFFAED23) docks onto the template in one amino acid (1-aa) shifted parallel conformation, whereas the C-terminal β-strand (C-strand, 30AIIGLMVGGVV40) adopts multichain-docking mode (i.e., monomer docks onto the two different chains of template at the same layer of the fibril), whereby residue segment 30AIIGLMV36 binds in anti-parallel conformation onto the analogous segment of the second chain on the same layer of the fibril template (Fig. 1B,C). In the second phase, the N-strand is still docked in the 1-aa shifted mode, while the following middle loop region (24VGSNKG29) and the C-strand of the monomer dock natively on the fibril (Fig. 1D). The third phase is a transitional phase where both the C-strand and the C-terminal half of N-strand (18VFFAED23) become destabilized from their previous bound states (see arrow in Fig. 1A and the snapshot in 1E). Such destabilization allows the peptide to explore further the conformational space towards the fully native binding state. Indeed, in the subsequent, fourth phase, the C-strand re-establishes its native binding mode, and concomitantly the N-strand achieves its native docking conformation, so that the full monomer is natively docking on the template (Fig. 1F).

The lock phase rearrangement involves formation of the hairpin conformations in the Aβ(9–40) monomer absorbing onto the fibril

To better sample the transition pathways between non-native docking to native docking states of Aβ(9–40) fibril, new MD simulations were initiated from five structurally intermediate conformations of the Aβ(9–40) monomer associating with the fibril that were identified during the transition phase of the fibril elongation process in previous MD simulations 54. In these intermediate structures, both the C-strand and half of the N-strand (18VFFAED23) are disassociated from the fibril, while the remaining part of the N-strand is docked onto the fibril in the 1-aa shifted mode (Fig 1E). The five initial structures were simulated in 12 replicates resulting in 60 UNRES MD simulations carried out for 33.5 × 106 steps each (corresponding to 81.9 μs timescale 54) to sample conformational transitions leading to the lock phase (total simulation time of 5 ms). Among these 60 simulations, 11 trajectories reached the N-strand native binding mode, and 4 trajectories reached the native binding of the full monomer. As illustrated by the binding mode time-evolution graph (Fig. S1), these 4 trajectories share a characteristic intermediate conformation in which one half (9GYEVHHQK17) of the monomer N-strand docks non-natively onto the template, whereas the other half (18VFFAED23) docks natively onto the template, and the C-strand binds onto the N-strand to form a hairpin in an anti-parallel manner (Fig. S2). Since the hairpin structure commonly appears in all the trajectories that reached the native binding state, it is of interest to study the detailed structural features and the dynamics of the hairpin conformations for a better understanding of its role in the lock phase assembly pathways.

The general feature of the observed hairpin conformations is the anti-parallel interaction between the N-strand hydrophobic patch 16KLVFFA21 and the C-strand hydrophobic patch 29GAIIGLMVGGVV40. The hairpin conformations can be clustered further into two types differentiated by the position of its turning point. In the “V24-hairpin mode”, the hairpin makes its turn around residues 23DV24 or 24VG25, which are the last residues of the N-strand (Fig. 2A). The residues residing in the loop region that follows, and in the C-strand, bind to the N-strand in an antiparallel fashion so that the N-strand hydrophobic patch residues 16KLVFFA21 bind to segments 28KGAIIGL34 or 26SNKGAI31 at the beginning of the C-strand hydrophobic patch. This results in formation of a long hairpin structure involving residues 12–36 or 12–38. (Fig. 2A). In the second type of hairpin, “K28-hairpin mode”, the hairpin makes its turn around residue 27NK28 or 28KG29, resulting in a shorter hairpin involving residues 18–37 (Fig. 2B). In this mode, the 18VFFA21 or 19FFAE22 hydrophobic patch at the end of the N-strand interacts in an antiparallel manner with the patch of hydrophobic residues 34LMVG37, which is located centrally within the hydrophobic segments in the C-strand. At the same time, hydrophobic patch residues 30AII32 that follow the hairpin turn, pair with hydrophilic residues 23DVG25 or 25GSN27 in the middle loop region (Fig. 2B).

The two hairpin structures described above also show interesting similarities and differences in how they interact with the fibril. In case of both V24- and K28-hairpins, the N-strand of the monomer peptide binds parallel to the fibril N-strand. However, the C-strand region of the monomer peptide engages with the fibril only in the case of K28-hairpin. The hydrophobic 30AII32 segment interacts with the fibril chain hydrophobic patches, either by binding parallelly on the template fibril chain 29GAIIG33 (Fig. 2C) or binding anti-parallelly on the second fibril chain 34LMV36 (Fig. 2D); no C-strand-fibril interactions were observed for the V24-hairpin (Fig. 2A). The K28-hairpins adopt a highly twisted conformation when they are not bound on the fibril with their C-strand (Fig. 2E), and tend to tilt away from the fibril elongation direction, with their N-strand undergoing bending around the 18VFFA21 segment (Fig. 2B–E). In contrast, the V24-hairpins remain straight overall, with the full hairpin docking onto the fibril in a parallel conformation devoid of bending or twisting deformations (Fig. 2A).

Interestingly, we found that only the K28-hairpin conformation was sampled during the lock phase rearrangement in the 4 trajectories that ended in the native binding (Fig. S2), while the trajectories that sampled the V24-hairpin conformation failed to reach the native state. To understand what mechanistic role the K28-hairpin plays in the process of native-binding we carried out quantitative kinetic analysis of the binding process using Markov State Modeling (MSM) analysis 57, 58 of the MD data and identified native-binding pathways using Transition Path Theory (TPT) analysis 59, 60.

Structural characteristics of the metastable states of the Amyloid β peptide during the lock phase rearrangement process identified by the tICA analysis

To perform MSM analysis of the Aβ lock phase transition process, we first carried out dimensionality reduction of the MD trajectory data using time-structure based Independent Component Analysis (tICA). A set of 11 Collective Variables (CVs) were designed to reflect the structural characteristics of the aforementioned conformations (Table 1). These CVs capture the dynamics of (i) the stepwise transition of the N-terminal β strand from full non-native docking to full native docking on the template, (ii) the formation of long hairpin that involves both N- and C-strands of the monomer, (iii) the native and non-native docking of the monomer C-strand on the template, and (iv) the multichain interaction of the monomer C-strand. Using these CVs as the basis, the conformations of the system from all the 60 trajectories were mapped onto a high dimensional vector space with tICA approach (see Methods).

The first 3 tICA eigenvectors, which represent the slowest 3 reaction coordinates in the MD trajectories, contribute to 80% of the variation in the conformational space (Fig. 3A). Thus, the projection of the trajectory frames onto the 3-dimensional (3D) tICA space is sufficient to capture most of the information in the high dimensional conformation space. Analysis of contributions of the CVs to each tICA vector (Fig. 3B) revealed that the tIC 1 eigenvector mostly captures the dynamics of the N-strand from shifted docking to native docking, while the tIC 2 mainly captures the dynamics of “multichain mode” non-native docking conformations, and the tIC 3 eigenvector mainly captures the dynamics of various hairpins in the monomer (Fig. 3B).

The resulting 3D space of the first three tIC vectors contains clusters well separated by the slowest reaction coordinates (Fig. 4A) representing kinetically metastable states in the conformational space. Population densities of these clusters can be conveniently viewed on the 2D filled contours plotted in Fig. S3D–F by projecting the 3D tICA space along three orthogonal viewing axes (defined in Fig. S3A–C),

Inspection of conformations belonging to different clusters in the tICA space revealed that the metastable states can be divided into a stack of four layers (Fig. 4B), aligned along the viewing-axis 1, an axis with similar orientation as the tIC 1 vector (Fig. S3A). The 4 layers represent 4 different binding conformations, differing in the modes of interactions between the N-strand of the monomer and the fibril template:

the 1-aa shifted non-native N-strand binding mode (Fig. 4C): tIC1 ∈ [−1.3, 0.3], or v-axis1 ∈ [−1.0, 0.2];

the partial-non-native N-strand binding mode with 18VFFAE22 binding in-register (Fig. 4D): tIC1 ∈ [−0.2, 1.2], or v-axis1 ∈ [−0.2, 1.2];

the partial-non-native N-strand binding mode with 16KLVFFAE22 binding in-register (Fig. 4E): tIC1 ∈ [0.7, 1.8], or v-axis1 ∈ [1.1, 2.0];

the full-native N-strand binding mode (Fig. 4F): tIC1 ∈ [1.6:2.5], or v-axis1 ∈ [1.9:2.8].

When viewing the 3D tICA space from the orientation of the viewing-axis1 (Fig. 5A), the population density shows that there are multiple free energy basins spanning the corresponding 2D plane (Fig. 5B). The basis of this 2D plane are the viewing-axis2 and viewing-axis3. As shown by the contribution of CVs to the viewing-axes, viewing-axis2 and viewing-axis3 captures only the dynamics of the C-strand (Fig. S4). Thus, the basins on the plane of viewing-axis2 &amp; viewing-axis3 represent conformations of the peptide differing in its C-strand conformation and docking mode:

the basins of the natively docked C-strand are found in cluster 1 (Fig. 5C) (tIC2 ∈ [−1.6, −0.2] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [0.8, 2.0]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [−1.3, −0.5] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [0.7, 2.0], characterized by the small RMSD and high number of contacts between C-strand hydrophobic patches and its binding sites on the fibril (Fig. S5A);

the conformations with antiparallel multichain docking of the C-strand are in cluster 3 (Fig. 5E) (tIC2 ∈ [0.7, 2.0] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [−0.3, 1.0]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [0.7, 1.7] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [0.0, 1.0]), characterized by the small RMSD and high number of contacts between C-strand hydrophobic patches and the 2nd fibril chain bindng site (Fig. S5C);

the conformations with extended multichain docking of the C-strand are in cluster 8 (Fig. 5H) (tIC2 ∈ [0.8, 2.3] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [−1.7, 0.0]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [1.0, 2.2] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [−1.5, 0.0]), characterized by the small RMSD and high number of contacts between C-strand and the extended-multichain-bindng site (Fig. S5H);

the conformations with unbound C-strand (Free Strand) can be found in cluster 7 (Fig. 5J) (tIC2 ∈ [−0.6, 0.7] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [−3.3, 0.1]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [−0.4, 0.9] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [−1.5, 0.0]), characterized by the large distance (no contact) between C-strand to any docking site (Fig. S5G);

The rest of the space describes various types of hairpin structures:

the V24-hairpin conformations are found in cluster 6 (Fig. 5I) (tIC2 ∈ [−1.2, −0.5] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [−2.5, −0.9]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [−1.2, −0.5] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [−2.5, −0.9]), characterized by the high number of contacts between N- and C-strands, and with a large distance between 18VFFA21 and 34LMVG37 (Fig. S5F);

cluster 4 represents the K28-hairpins, either twisted or with 30AII32 binding on the template fibril chain (Fig. 5F) (tIC2 ∈ [−1.8, −0.2] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [−1.0, 0.6]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [−1.6, −0.8] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [−0.9, 0.6]) ]), characterized by the high number of contacts between N- and C-strand, and close distance between N-strand hydrophobic patch residues 18VFFA21 and C-strand hydrophobic patch residues 34LMVG37 (Fig. S5D). Two hairpin-fibril interaction modes are shown by the two peaks in the probability distribution of the distance of 30AII32 to the template.

cluster 5 represents the K28-hairpins conformations with 30AII32 binding in the multichain mode (Fig. 5G) (tIC2 ∈ [−0.6, 0.3] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [0.0, 0.7]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [−0.6, 0.2] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [0.0, 0.6]), characterized by the small distance between 18VFFA21 and 34LMVG37, and interaction of 30AII32 on the 2nd chain 34LMV36 (Fig. S5E). Quick transitions between cluster 5 and cluster 2 are observed, with rapid association and dissociation between the N- &amp; C-strand at the tail of the hairpin.

One additional special type of short K28-hairpin structure is identified as well:

the short K28-hairpin structures belong to cluster 2 (in which the hairpin only includes residues 24VGSNKGAIIG33, but does not contain the interactions between the hydrophobic patches that are featured in the longer hairpin conformations) (Fig. 5D) (tIC2 ∈ [−0.3, 0.4] &amp; tIC3 ∈ [0.7, 1.5]), or (v-axis2 ∈ [−0.2, 0.3] &amp; v-axis3 ∈ [0.7, 1.4]). In cluster 2, N-strand and C-strand hydrophobic patches show close distance but they are not in contact, with only the middle loop and the C-strand involved in the hairpin formation (Fig. S5B).

MSM analysis reveals the rearrangement of the 18VFFA21 binding mode as the rate-limiting step in the Amyloid β lock phase assembly process

To connect the structural characteristicsof the peptide conformations identified above in a mechanistic kinetic model in the context of the lock phase formation process, we applied MSM analysis to the 3D tICA space. To this end, the 3D landscape was discretized into 175 microstates by k-means clustering, and then the MSM transition probability matrix was constructed for the 175 microstates with a lag-time of 733.5 ns (see Methods and Fig. S4).

The eigenvectors of the MSM transition matrix inform on the relaxation modes of the lock phase rearrangement process. A relaxation mode represents a dynamic process in which population flows from the microstates that are characterized with negative values of the eigenvector to the microstates characterized with positive values of the eigenvector 61. The 1st slowest relaxation mode eigenvalues for each microstate are depicted in Fig. 6A with the 2D tICA spaces showing locations of the microstates with positive (red spheres) and negative (blue spheres) eigenvalues. This relaxation mode is the rate-limiting step in the dynamics of the Aβ lock phase rearrangement process with a timescale of ~103 μs, and describes partial disassociation from the 1-aa shifted non-native binding of the N-strand. Indeed, along this relaxation mode, the negative eigenvalue states are all clustered in the tICA space representing the non-native docking of the N-strand; on the other hand, the positive eigenvalue states are found in the region of the tICA space representing the partial-native or full native N-strand (Fig. 6A). The residue segment contributing to the 1st relaxation mode the most is 18VFFA21 which transitions from non-native docking to native docking, suggesting that the rearrangement of this central hydrophobic patch is the rate-limiting step of the lock phase assembly process. The 2nd slowest relaxation mode corresponds to the formation of the multichain interaction of the natively bound C-strand and is characterized with a 56 μs timescale (Fig. 6B). Notable are also the 6th and 9th relaxation modes, characterized by 19 μs and 14 μs timescales, respectively. The former describes the dynamics of the C-strand disassociation from native-binding and transitioning into the K28-hairpin mode, and the latter encodes the dynamics of the K28-hairpin head 30AII32-fibril interaction mode transitioning between template chain docking and multichain docking (Fig. 6C,D).

Transition pathway analysis based on MSM reveals the role of K28-Hairpin in facilitating the rearrangement process in the lock phase

To identify the transition pathways of the amyloid β lock phase rearrangement process we used the transition path theory approach 59, 60 (see Methods). To construct transition pathways, the 175 microstates were lumped into 20 macrostates (Fig. S5), and transition flux matrix between the 20 macrostates was obtained from all the trajectories of the lock phase simulations. Specifically, we first constructed pathways between the states describing the “shifted N-strand &amp; native C-strand mode” (Fig. 1D), and the state corresponding to the “fully native docking mode” (Fig. 1F). The “shifted N-strand &amp; native C-strand mode”is one of the most commonly sampled modes in our previous docking phase simulations 54; i.e., 27% of the trajectories ended up in the “shifted N-strand &amp; native C-strand mode”, among which half of the trajectories resulted in the N-strand shifted by 1-aa. The fluxes along the most probable pathways connecting the “shifted N-strand &amp; native C-strand mode” and the “fully native docking mode” are summarized in Table S1. The top 25 most probable pathways contributed to 93% of the transition flux of the N-strand from shifted to native.

The most probable pathway is shown on the 3D tICA space in Fig. 7A. Along this pathway, the first conformational change (transition from macrostate 18 to 16) is the C-strand disassociating from the fibril and interacting with the N-strand to form a K28-hairpin (Fig. 7B,C). Thus, macrostate 16 represents either the twisted K28-hairpin conformations, or the conformations with the hairpin head 30AII32 docked onto the fibril at its native docking site or with 1-aa shift. These structurally distinct K28-hairpin modes (Fig. 7C) cannot be kinetically differentiated in our model, as they quickly interconvert from one to the other. This transition is followed by the transition to macrostate 9, during which the N-strand residues in the K28-hairpin, 18VFFA21, rearrange from 1-aa shifted docking to native-binding, resulting in a partial non-native binding N-strand (Fig. 7D) which, as described above, is the rate-limiting relaxation mode detected by the MSM (Fig. 6A). Close inspection of the conformations in the trajectories shows that in the K28-hairpin mode represented by macrostates 16 and 9, the bending of the N-strand around 18VFFA21 segment, which destabilizes 18VFFA21-fibril interactions, could provide a mechanism to overcome this rate-limiting step (Fig. 7C,D). During the next stage in the transition, from macrostate 9 to macrostate 13, the N-strand hydrophobic patch 18VFFA21 is attaching natively on the template, followed by the rearrangement of the remaining 1-aa shifted N-strand residues. The macrostate 13 represents the comformation where the entire N-strand binds natively onto the template, while the N-strand hydrophobic patch 18VFFA21 is also involved in the interaction with C-strand in the K28-hairpin mode (Fig. 7E). In the last stage in the transition (macrostate 13 to macrostate 8), the K28-hairpin disassociates. This transition is enabled by the native binding of the head of the K28-hairpin, residues 30AII32, onto the template, which is then followed by the native-binding mode expanding to the other residues in the C-strand as well as to the loop region between the N- and C-strands. Once the C-terminal residues natively dock on the fibril, the K28-hairpin disassociates, so that the interaction between the C-strand and N-strand hydrophobic patches break, leaving the hydrophobic patches to interact only with the template, and the monomer achieves full native binding (Fig. 7F).

By inspecting the sequence of events in the top 25 most probable pathways (Fig. 7 and S6), we found that these pathways could be further clustered into multiple major groups of transition pathways, categorized by the intermediate conformation: with or without K28-hairpin / V24-hairpin / multichain mode as intermediate state. The classification of the top 25 pathways into these intermediate-state-based categories is summarized in Table S2, and the proportion of the flux in each category is listed (shown in brackets are the flux values normalized by the total flux in the top 25 pathways). Among the top 25 pathways, 69% of the flux goes through the K28-hairpin conformations as an intermediate state, and in 40% of the flux the K28-hairpin mode is the only intermediate state with no V24-hairpin, short hairpin or multichain mode present, just as in the above-described most populated pathway. Note that the macrostates with K28-hairpin conformations constitute only 20% of the population, while the macrostates with the V24-hairpin conformation, with the short hairpin conformation, and with the multichain binding conformation, constitute 14%, 14% and 24% of the population, respectively. Thus, relative to its population, the contribution of the K28-hairpin conformation to the lock phase rearrangement pathway is significantly high.

The same TPT analysis was applied to another rearrangement process, in which the native binding mode is reached from the state with “1-aa shifted N-strand &amp; multichain docking C-strand mode” (Fig. 1C). This is also a common conformation achieved by the free monomer docking, found in 46% of the trajectories of the dock phase simulation 54. The identified pathways of this rearrangement process and the quantification of the corresponding fluxes from out TPT analysis are given in Table S3. For this process, the first 25 pathways contribute to 88% of the total flux, and are shown in Fig. S7 and S8. Among these top pathways, the macrostates with K28-hairpin conformations, V24-hairpin conformations, and the short hairpin conformations contribute to 74%, 16%, and 24%, respectively (Table S4). Thus, the K28-hairpin conformations are contributing disproportionally high as an intermediate state in this rearrangement pathway as well.

Taken together, these results suggest that the K28-hairpin – which is characterized by the intra-monomer interactions between the N-strand central hydrophobic patch 18VFFA21 and the C-strand hydrophobic patches 34LMVG37, as well as by the bending of N-strand around 18VFFA21 motif – is highly preferred as an intermediate state during the rearrangement in the lock phase of the Aβ assembly processes.

Dynamic rearrangements during the lock phase of the Aβ fibril assembly process had not been well characterized, and the pathways and mechanism of the lock phase rearrangement had not been elucidated. Here we provided new insights into the Aβ fibril assembly process by extensively sampling the lock phase rearrangement of Aβ(9–40) monomer assembling onto a template. This structural model contains all the amyloidogenic hydrophobic patches in an Aβ peptide, and enables us to identify modes of interactions between the hydrophobic patches within the peptides and with the fibril. The time-evolution of the binding modes, and the transition pathways of the lock phase rearrangement process were then identified with an MSM-based kinetic model. We note that while the kinetics learnt from our MSM formalism is likely to be accelerated, as the transitions are obtained from continuous trajectories in REMD simulations that visit different temperatures, the effect is likely to be insignificant due to several reasons: the highest temperature considered is 350K. The thermal fluctuations in the system at this temperature are strong enough to only cause perturbations in a few H-bonds, while most of the interactions are expected to be maintained and stable, as shown in our previous work 54. In addition, the acceleration effect from the replica exchange is likely to be homogeneous across different dynamic processes in the system, since the time-scales of replica exchange are much faster than the time-scales of the processes of interest 62, 63. Thus, while the absolute values of the timescales from REMD are likely to be underestimated, the relative timescales of the relevant processes and the transition pathways from our model should not be effected.

Through the detailed analysis we identified novel hairpin conformations in the intra-molecular interactions between the hydrophobic patches of the monomer, which involve the central hydrophobic patch 16KLVFFA21. The transition flux analysis revealed that the K28-hairpin is highly preferred in the pathways that leads to the full native binding. Using the MSMs, we inferred that the disassociation of the central hydrophobic patch 16KLVFFA21 from non-native docking mode is the rate-limiting relaxation mode of the lock process. Togetehr, these results lead to the proposal of a possible mechanistic role of K28-hairpin conformation in the Aβ assembly pathway: not only does the the K28-hairpin facilitate the lock phase rearrangement process, but it is also crucial for overcoming the rate-limiting step of the rearrangement process. The latter is mechanistically enabled by interactions between the central hydrophobic patch and the C-terminal hydrophobic residues within the hairpin structure which leads to the destabilization of the 16KLVFFA21 segment from its non-native binding site on the fibril.

Intramolecular hairpin conformations have been reported in fibril elongation pathway in two previous studies based on MD simualtion 52, 53. The results from these studies are in general agreement with our research in that: 1. The majority of transition pathways reported are initiated from the fibril-N-strand interactions; and 2. Structures stabilized by the intramolecular H-bonds between the N- and C-strand hydrophobic patches are reported as intermediates on the pathway. However, there are some differences as well between the earlier studies and our work that can be attributed to somewhat different molecular models and approaches used. Thus, Ref. 52 reports on a a strand-loop-strand structure populating the pathway of the peptide native binding to the fibril template. In this structure, which is different from the hairpin conformations reported in our work, intramolecular H-bonds are established between the N-strand hydrophobic patch and the beginning of the C-strand hydrophobic patch, while the C-terminus is free to fold back to form a S-shape hairpin. This difference can be attributed to the fact that the studies in Ref. 52 were based on shorter length peptides, Aβ17–42 which can result in different modes of peptide-fibril interactions. The other research 53 studied the fibril elongation process of both Aβ17–42 and Aβ9–40 peptides by sampling the stepwise release of a monomer from fibril under harmonic restrains. This paper reported hairpins on the lowest-energy path that share similar interaction pattern as the K28-hairpins described here, but their exact intramolecular and intermolecular structures were not described, nor were their kinetic properties and contributions to the elongation pathway established. To the best of our knowledge, our current work characterizes for the first time multiple hairpin-fibril conformations and interaction modes on the fibril template, and links them to the fibril assembly pathway in a mechanistic context.

We note that the hairpin structures experimentally resolved in the Aβ oligomer studies are structurally somewhat different from the ones we report here. The previously described hairpins are formed by Aβ(16–35) 64, Aβ(16–36) 65, or Aβ(17–36) 66, in which the central hydrophobic patch residues 18VFFA21 are paired with 30AIIG33, 31IIGL34, and 32IGLM35, respectively, in antiparallel fashion. These hairpins are structurally different from the K28-hairpin and V24-hairpin reported in our work. A possible reason for the structural difference is that the hairpins resolved in the previous work are based on Aβ oligomer or monomer studies, while our research focuses on the fibril assembly process.

We found that the fibril assembly pathways favor the K28-hairpin mode as an intermediate state, consistent with the previous research showing that hairpin conformations generally exist as metastable states during the fibril assembly process 52, 53. The K28-hairpin observed in our simulations is formed via interactions between 18VFFA21 and 34LMVG37 segments. Among various hairpin structures identified in our simulations, only the K28-hairpin exhibits a characteristic bending of the N-strand around the hydrophobic patch residues 18VFFA21. This bending deformation re-arranges the 18VFFA21 patch to help overcome the rate-limiting step of the assembly pathway. Furthermore, the overall tilting and bending of the K28-hairpin structure positions the C-strand hydrophobic patch residues 30AII32 so that this region pairs with the hydrophobic residues in the 29GAIIGLMVGGVV40 patch on the fibril chains. The mode of interactions that involves the association of the 30AII32 segment of the monomeric peptide in the hairpin configuration with the same segment on the fibril enables further transition of the C-strand to a native-binding conformation.

In contrast, we found that in the V24-hairpin mode, which is disfavored by the lock phase pathways, the hairpin remains in the straight conformation, and the 30AII32 segment is involved in hydrophobic interactions within the monomer, i.e., not involved in fibril binding. The structure and function of V24-hairpin are similar with the results from the previous experimental studies 64–66, in which the hairpins with 30AII32 involved in intra-molecular interactions with hydrophobic residues were proposed to be side branches in the oligomerization process and to inhibit fibril nucleation. Thus, the structural differences among the binding modes of hydrophobic patches may provide mechanistic explanations for the functional differences among these hairpins.

We note that the fibril conformation in this study is the “U-shaped mode”, which commonly applies to the Aβ(9–40) peptide constructs (residues 1–8 were not resolved in the NMR structure 67, and therefore were excluded from the simulations). Recently, an alternative,“S-shaped mode”has been identified that is only stable for the Aβ(1–42) peptide, the most toxic species of Aβ 68–70. Therefore, it would be important to investigate in the future studies the assembly pathways of the full-length Aβ(1–42) peptide, and compare them quantitatively to the kinetic model we propose here.

Methods

The MD simulations using UNRES Model

Simulations were carried out using the UNRES force field 55, 56, 71–74 as reported in Ref. 54. Briefly, in the UNRES model, a polypeptide chain is represented as a sequence of α-carbon (Cα) atoms with virtual united peptide groups (p) located in the middle of consecutive Cα atoms, and united side chains (SC) are represented as ellipsoids attached to the Cα atoms. The UNRES energy function is constituted by terms of local and site-site interactions as well as multibody interactions. The solvent effect is implicitly included in the SC-SC interaction function, and the force field is optimized to reproduce the structure and thermodynamics of small proteins, without being biased to the formation of amyloid fibrils. In this UNRES application, the parameters calibrated for the study of the WW domain from the forming-binding protein 28 (PDB ID:1E0L) were used 72.

Simulation Setup

Aβ(9–40) fibril template was modeled according to the coordinates by Tycko’s group 67. To minimize computational cost, a two-layer model (4 chains) was used, and distance restraints were applied to the virtual peptide groups of the template chains to ensure its stability, as reported in our previous work 51. The simulations reported in the current work are continuations from the selected trajectory frames accumulated in our previous study 54. Thus, five frames were selected from the transitional phase of the trajectory that reached the native state (see Results). These frames share the same monomer-fibril interaction mode as illustrated in Fig. 1E. Simulations were carried out using replica-exchange molecular dynamics. Each snapshot was simulated in 12 replicas, resulting in a total of 60 trajectories. Each trajectory was 33.5 × 106 steps (81.9 μs) long. The trajectories were simulated with temperatures ranging from 280 to 350 K. Temperature exchanges were attempted every 20 000 steps, and the temperature was held constant between exchanges with the Berendsen thermostat 75. This choice of parameters resulted in exchange acceptance rates of 30% or higher. The analysis described throughout, thus were performed on continuous trajectories that visit different temperatures in the REMD protocol.

Dimensionality reduction using the “time-structure based independent component analysis” (tICA) approach

To reduce high-dimensionality of the system, the MD trajectory frames were projected onto a space of 11 collective variables (CVs, see Table 1 and Fig. 3B) using “time-structure based independent component analysis” (tICA) method, which have been shown to identify the slowest reaction coordinates of a system in the dynamic dataset 76–79. Briefly, the tICA method identifies these slowest reaction coordinates by solving for the generalized eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the time-lagged covariance matrix: CxτVi=λiCx0Vi

in which the Cx(τ) is the time-lagged covariance matrix Cx (τ) = ⟨ X(t)XT (t + τ)⟩t, Cx (0) = ⟨ X(t)XT(t)⟩t is the regular covariance matrix, X(t) is the data vector at time t, τ is the lag-time, Vi is the ith tICA eigenvector, and λi is the ith tICA eigenvalue. The tICA eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue represents the orientation in the conformational space where the relaxation of variance is the slowest, i.e. the linear combination of the CVs that represents the slowest reaction. Moreover, the relative magnitude of the contribution of each CV to the tICA vector reflects the importance of the corresponding variable in forming a particular tICA reaction coordinate.

In this study, the lag-time of the covariance matrix was set to 104 steps (24.4 ns), so that any reaction processes faster than 24.4 ns were ignored (since tICA is designed to identify the slowest process, such fast reactions are not relevant, and it has been shown that the identification of tICA vectors is not critically dependent on the lag time used for the construction of the time-lagged covariance matrix 80). For the tICA analysis, all 60 trajectories in the lock phase simulation were stridden for 1 in 1000 frames, and the first 2.4 μs (1 × 106 steps) were discarded to allow the systems to reach the equilibrium.

Viewing the 3D tICA space

In order for the landscape in 3D clusters to be clearly demonstrated on the 2D images, we choose to present the 3D space by viewing it from the following three orthogonal axes: viewing-axis 1: elevation=−6°, azimuth=14°; viewing-axis 2: elevation=0°, azimuth=−76°; viewing-axis 3: elevation=84°, azimuth=14° (Fig. S3). These axes are close to parallel to the base vectors: tIC 1: elevation=0°, azimuth=90°; tIC 2: elevation=0°, azimuth=0°; tIC 3: elevation=90°, azimuth=0°. The viewing axes are obtained from rotating the tICA vectors, so as its composition: Vv1Vv2Vv3=cos⁡(θ)0sin⁡(θ)000−sin⁡(θ)0cos⁡(θ)cos⁡(φ)sin⁡(φ)0−sin⁡(φ)cos⁡(φ)0000V1V2V3

in which the Vv i are the ith viewing axis, the Vi is the ith tICA eigenvector which are composed by the linear combination of the CVs, and the θ and φ are the elevation angle and azimuth angle with are −6° and 14°. Since the viewing axes are also linear combinations of CVs, just as the tICA vectors, the reactions captured along the viewing axes can be represented by the relative magnitude of the contribution of the CVs.

Construction of the Markov State Model (MSM)

MSMs have proven to be powerful tools for describing the kinetics of equilibrium processes in protein folding 57, 58. The implementation and validation of MSMs have been well documented 61, 81, 82. MSM assumes that the conformational change of a system can be modeled as a Markov chain, given that the transitions between conformations are sampled with a long enough time intervals for the system to be Markovian, meaning that the transitions from one state to the next is independent of the previous transitions. Based on the Markovian property, the MSMs can yield information about long-timescale reaction pathways from a combination of information from relatively short time-scale simulations 83.

To construct MSMs, the 3D conformational space of the first three tIC vectors was discretized into microstates. The transition count matrixes between the microstates were then recorded using different lag-times, in order to verify the Markovian behavior of the system. Then the transition count matrixes were symmetrized by averaging with its transpose matrix in order to satisfy detailed balance and local equilibrium 61, 84. Finally, the transition probability matrixes (TPMs) were built by normalizing the transition count matrix by the transitions departing from the same microstate.

Validation of MSMs

The quality of an MSM depends on two parameters: the lag-time of the transition, and the discretization of the conformational space (i.e., number of microstates) 61, 84.

To ensure the Markovian property, the implied timescale test was carried out: τi=τ′ln⁡(λi)

in which τ′ is the lag-time used for building the transition matrix, λi is the ith eigenvector of the TPM, and τi is the implied timescale corresponding to the ith relaxation mode of the system. When the time interval is sufficiently long for the transitions in the system to reach the Markovian behavior, then τi becomes independent of τ′. According to the implied time-scale test, the lag-time of 733.5 ns ensured the best available Markovian behavior with the minimal loss of data (Fig. S4A).

To find the best method for discretization of the conformational space, multiple versions of automated clustering algorithms were applied on the conformational space, and the resulted MSM were scored with the “generalized matrix Rayleigh quotient” (GMRQ) method 84, 85. In this method, the MSM TPM is trained on a randomly-picked training set that is constituted by half the set of trajectories, and then cross-validated on the test set constituted by the other half the set of trajectories by testing how well the eigenvectors of the training set diagonalize the TPM of the test set, scored as: R=Tr(VTSTV(VTSV)−1)

in which Tr denotes trace of the inner matrix product, V contains the first n eigenvectors of the training set, S is the diagonal matrix composed of equilibrium populations of the test set (i.e. a diagonal matrix composed by the first eigenvector of the test set TPM), and T is the test set TPM. The best MSM parameters yield the highest GMRQ score. Among our models, the GMRQ score analysis revealed that the MSMs built using k-means clusters showed a good consistency between the randomly picked training trajectories and testing trajectories. With more states used in the k-means clustering, the resulted GMRQ scores of the MSMs are decreasing in a negligible extent, suggesting that the model is mainly fitting onto the intrinsic kinetics features of the system instead of overfitting on the training set (Fig. S4B). As a result, 175 k-means microstates were chosen as it provides a good balance between the GMRQ result and the coverage of transitional areas in the 3D conformational space.

Transition path theory (TPT) analysis

Using MSM, long-timescale reaction pathways can be obtained and quantified. To facilitate the visualization of the reaction pathways and the sampling of the transitions, and to interpret the conformations contributing to the pathways in a detailed structural context, the 175 microstates were lumped into 20 macrostates (Fig. S5) according to their kinetic similarities using the Robust Perron Cluster Analysis (PCCA+) algorithm 86. The transition paths were obtained among the 20 macrostates using the TPT analysis 60. TPT is based on the flux matrix between states, whose components are defined as: Jij=πi(1−Ptarget,i)TijPtarget,j

in which πi is the equilibrium population of state I, Tij is the transition probability from state i to state j, and Ptarget,i is the probability of visiting the target state i as the first state during the transition before visiting other states. The most probable transition pathways between specific states are then obtained by iteratively finding the next pathway with the highest flux in the flux matrix using a graph theory algorithm, the Dijkstra algorithm 87 implemented in the MSM builder software package 84.

Supplementary Material

Supporting Information

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Harel Weinstein for his valuable comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM-14312 (to G. G. M). H. X. and G. K are supported by an award from the 1923 Fund. This research was conducted by using the resources of our 588-processor Beowulf cluster at the Baker Laboratory of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University. Some of the computational analysis have been carried out using computational resources of the David A. Cofrin Center for Biomedical Information in the HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine at Weill Cornell Medical College.

Figure 1: Monomer fibril docking modes and representative conformations of the dock phase trajectory that reached full native binding.

(A) Time evolution of the fibril docking modes for every residue of the Aβ(9–40) monomer during the entire trajectory reported in our previous work 54. The binding modes are color-coded as follows: Native hydrogen bonds (grey), 1-aa shifted hydrogen bonds (red), ≥2-aa shifted hydrogen bonds (purple), multichain interaction (yellow), intra-β-strand hairpin (green), cross-β-strand hairpin (cyan). (B) Coarse-grained (UNRES) representation of the backbone and sidechain parts of an Aβ(9–40) monomer, with the N-terminal β-strand colored in cyan, the middle loop colored in orange, and the C-terminal β-strand colored in pink. (C-F) Structures in the simulation of the monomer (opaque) – fibril (transparent) system: (C) Structure representing the multichain binding mode in the 1st phase. (D) Structure representing the C-strand 1-aa shifted binding mode in the 2nd phase. (E) Structure in the transitional phase, chosen at the time point labeled by the arrow in (A), right before the binding mode transition of the N-strand. (F) Structure representing the native binding mode in the 4th and final phase.

Figure 2: Hairpin conformations and hairpin fibril interactions emerging from the MD simulations.

Color code is the same as in Figure 1B–F. (A, B) Structural models and residue pairing maps representing the V24-hairpin mode (A) and the K28-hairpin mode (B), with the intra-molecular hydrogen bonds labeled by the dashed lines between the residue labels. (C-F) Structural models representing the interaction modes between the hairpins and fibril chains, with the monomer-fibril hydrogen bonds labeled by the dashed lines: (C) the K28-hairpin mode with 30AII32 binding on the template fibril chain; (D) the K28-hairpin mode with 30AII32 binding on the second fibril chain; (E) the twisted K28-hairpin without C-strand-fibril interaction.

Figure 3: The contribution and composition of tICA eigenvectors

(A) Percentages of the total variations of the system contributed by tICA eigenvectors, showing that 80% of the information are captured by the first three tICA eigenvectors. (B) Contributions of the CVs used for the dimensionality reduction to the first three tICA eigenvectors: tIC 1 (red), tIC 2 (blue), tIC 3 (green).

Figure 4: 3D tICA space is divided into 4 layers differentiated by the N-strand-fibril binding modes.

(A) The three-dimensional conformational space resulted from the tICA dimension reduction. The surface of the 3D profile is emphasized by the shade applied on the outline. (B) The 3D tICA space can be divided into 4 layers (blue axes) aligned along the viewing-axis 1 (red axes). (C-F) Structural models representing the N-strand-fibril binding mode in each layer: (C) the 1st layer in the tICA space represents the overall 1-aa shifted N-strand binding mode; (D) the 2nd layer in the tICA space represents the partial shifted N-strand binding mode with natively bound 18VFFAE22; (E) the 3rd layer in the tICA space represents the partial shifted N-strand binding mode with natively bound 16KLVFFAE22; (E) the 4th layer in the tICA space represents the native N-strand binding mode. The monomer-fibril hydrogen bonds are labeled by dash lines in black for in-register hydrogen bonds, and in red for 1-aa shifted hydrogen bonds.

Figure 5: 3D tICA space is divided into 8 clusters featured by the C-strand conformations and fibril binding modes.

(A) The three-dimensional conformational space viewed from the orientation of the viewing-axis1 shows the landscape on the layer plane. (B) The population density map shows the free-energy profile spanning on the layer plane, with 8 clusters each featured by the characteristic C-strand interaction mode. The color map represents the population density (see color code on the right). (C-H) Structural model representing the C-strand conformation in each cluster. Color code: the N-terminal β-strand (cyan), the middle loops (orange), the C-terminal β-strand (pink), the monomer chain (opaque), the fibril chains (transparent).

Figure 6: The first, second, sixth and eighth MSM relaxation modes.

The composition and location of the population flow that constitute the dynamics processes captured by the first (A), second (B), sixth (C) and eighth (D) MSM relaxation modes. The upper right panel shows the contribution of each microstate to the relaxation mode as well as the time-scale of the relaxation mode. The location of the microstates contributing to the relaxation mode are shown as dots in the space of viewing-axis1 &amp; viewing-axis2 (upper left panel), in the space of viewing-axis1 &amp; viewing-axis3 (lower left panel), in the space of viewing-axis2 &amp; viewing-axis3 (lower right panel), with the population density maps as the background. Red dots indicate negative values, and blue dots indicate positive values, with the diameters indicating relative contributions in the MSM eigenvector.

Figure 7: Mechanistic steps along the most probable pathway of binding rearrangement from the “shifted mode” to the “native mode”

(A) The macrostates that constitute the pathway are labeled in the 3D space, with the id of the macrostates color-coded, and showed at the top of the upper left panel, as well as the transition sequence. The 3D space is also viewed form the orientation of viewing-axis1 (lower right panel), viewing-axis2 (upper right panel), viewing-axis3 (lower left panel). (B-F) Structural representations of the macrostates and the characteristic structural features are shown. Color code is the same as in Figure 4C–F. The monomer-fibril hydrogen bonds between N-strands are labeled by dash lines in black for in-register hydrogen bonds, and in red for 1-aa shifted hydrogen bonds.

Table 1. Collective variables used for tICA dimensionality reduction.

	CV name	Definition	
Parameters of N-strand native docking	14HQKL17 Docking Site Shift	The Cα RMSD of 14HQKL17 to its native binding site minus the Cα RMSD to its 1-aa shift non-native binding site	
18VFFA21 Docking Site Shift	The Cα RMSD of 18VFFA21 to its native binding site minus the Cα RMSD to its 1-aa shift non-native binding site	
Parameters of hairpins	RMSD of 18VFFA21 &amp; 34LMVG37	Cα RMSD of 18VFFA21 to 34LMVG37	
Contact btw N- &amp; C-Strand	The total contact score* between the N-strand residues 9–23 and C-strand residues 30–40	
Parameters of C-strand native docking	RMSD of 29GAII32 Native mode	The Cα RMSD of 29GAII32 to its native binding site on the template 29GAII32	
RMSD of 33GLMV36 Native mode	The Cα RMSD of 33GLMV36 to its native binding site on the template 33GLMV36	
Contact btw C-Strand &amp; Template	The total contact score* between the C-strand residues 30–40 and the template	
Parameters of C-strand multichain docking	RMSD of 30AII32 Multichain mode	The Cα RMSD of 30AII32 to its antiparallel multichain-docking site on the second chain 34LMV36 (in reversed order)	
RMSD of 33GLMV36 Multichain mode	The Cα RMSD of 33GLMV36 to its antiparallel multichain-docking site on the second chain 30AIIG33 (in reversed order)	
RMSD of 34LMV36 extended-MltCh mode	The Cα RMSD of 34LMV36 to its extended multichain-docking site on the second chain 19FFA21 (in reversed order)	
Contact btw C-Strand &amp; Second Chain	The total contact score* between the C-strand residues 30–40 and the second chain in the same layer of the template	
Contact score: for a pair of residues, the contact score is 1 if the Cα distance is smaller than 4.5 Å, 0 if the distance is larger than 5.5 Å, and linear in between.

Total contact score: the summation of all contact scores defined between any two residues that belong respectively to the two groups of residues

Conflict of Interests Statement

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Associated Content

Supporting Information

Monomer fibril docking modes of the four lock phase trajectories that reached full native binding; Conformations of the hairpin mode observed in the four lock phase trajectories that reached native binding; Three views of the 3D tICA space; MSM quality and convergence checks; 3D macrostate map by layers; Mechanistic steps of the 2nd to 25th most probable pathway of binding rearrangement from the “shifted mode” to the “native mode”; Mechanistic steps of the most probable pathway of binding rearrangement from the “multichain mode” to the “native mode”; MSM-predicted rearrangement pathways and flux, that start from the “shifted mode” and reach the “native mode”; MSM-predicted rearrangement pathways and flux, that start from the “multichain mode” and reach the “native mode”.

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org


References

1. 2021 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 2021, 17 (3 ), 327–406.33756057
2. Selkoe DJ , Alzheimer’s disease: a central role for amyloid. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1994, 53 (5 ), 438–47.8083687
3. Lorenzo A ; Yuan M ; Zhang Z ; Paganetti PA ; Sturchler-Pierrat C ; Staufenbiel M ; Mautino J ; Vigo FS ; Sommer B ; Yankner BA , Amyloid beta interacts with the amyloid precursor protein: a potential toxic mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 2000, 3 (5 ), 460–4.10769385
4. Walsh DM ; Klyubin I ; Fadeeva JV ; Cullen WK ; Anwyl R ; Wolfe MS ; Rowan MJ ; Selkoe DJ , Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid beta protein potently inhibit hippocampal long-term potentiation in vivo. Nature 2002, 416 (6880 ), 535–9.11932745
5. Erten-Lyons D ; Woltjer RL ; Dodge H ; Nixon R ; Vorobik R ; Calvert JF ; Leahy M ; Montine T ; Kaye J , Factors associated with resistance to dementia despite high Alzheimer disease pathology. Neurology 2009, 72 (4 ), 354–60.19171833
6. Gandy S ; Simon AJ ; Steele JW ; Lublin AL ; Lah JJ ; Walker LC ; Levey AI ; Krafft GA ; Levy E ; Checler F ; Glabe C ; Bilker WB ; Abel T ; Schmeidler J ; Ehrlich ME , Days to criterion as an indicator of toxicity associated with human Alzheimer amyloid-beta oligomers. Annals of neurology 2010, 68 (2 ), 220–230.20641005
7. Sengupta U ; Nilson AN ; Kayed R , The Role of Amyloid-beta Oligomers in Toxicity, Propagation, and Immunotherapy. EBioMedicine 2016, 6 , 42–49.27211547
8. Bieschke J ; Herbst M ; Wiglenda T ; Friedrich RP ; Boeddrich A ; Schiele F ; Kleckers D ; Lopez del Amo JM ; Gruning BA ; Wang Q ; Schmidt MR ; Lurz R ; Anwyl R ; Schnoegl S ; Fandrich M ; Frank RF ; Reif B ; Gunther S ; Walsh DM ; Wanker EE , Small-molecule conversion of toxic oligomers to nontoxic beta-sheet-rich amyloid fibrils. Nat Chem Biol 2011, 8 (1 ), 93–101.22101602
9. Cascella R ; Chen SW ; Bigi A ; Camino JD ; Xu CK ; Dobson CM ; Chiti F ; Cremades N ; Cecchi C , The release of toxic oligomers from alpha-synuclein fibrils induces dysfunction in neuronal cells. Nat Commun 2021, 12 (1 ), 1814.33753734
10. Selkoe DJ ; Hardy J , The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years. EMBO Mol Med 2016, 8 (6 ), 595–608.27025652
11. Engel MF ; Khemtemourian L ; Kleijer CC ; Meeldijk HJ ; Jacobs J ; Verkleij AJ ; de Kruijff B ; Killian JA ; Hoppener JW , Membrane damage by human islet amyloid polypeptide through fibril growth at the membrane. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008, 105 (16 ), 6033–8.18408164
12. Okada T ; Ikeda K ; Wakabayashi M ; Ogawa M ; Matsuzaki K , Formation of toxic Abeta(1–40) fibrils on GM1 ganglioside-containing membranes mimicking lipid rafts: polymorphisms in Abeta(1–40) fibrils. J Mol Biol 2008, 382 (4 ), 1066–74.18692507
13. Xue WF ; Hellewell AL ; Hewitt EW ; Radford SE , Fibril fragmentation in amyloid assembly and cytotoxicity: when size matters. Prion 2010, 4 (1 ), 20–5.20305394
14. Last NB ; Rhoades E ; Miranker AD , Islet amyloid polypeptide demonstrates a persistent capacity to disrupt membrane integrity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011, 108 (23 ), 9460–5.21606325
15. Ogawa M ; Tsukuda M ; Yamaguchi T ; Ikeda K ; Okada T ; Yano Y ; Hoshino M ; Matsuzaki K , Ganglioside-mediated aggregation of amyloid beta-proteins (Abeta): comparison between Abeta-(1–42) and Abeta-(1–40). J Neurochem 2011, 116 (5 ), 851–7.20831659
16. Jang H ; Connelly L ; Arce FT ; Ramachandran S ; Kagan BL ; Lal R ; Nussinov R , Mechanisms for the Insertion of Toxic, Fibril-like beta-Amyloid Oligomers into the Membrane. J Chem Theory Comput 2013, 9 (1 ), 822–833.23316126
17. Lambert MP ; Barlow AK ; Chromy BA ; Edwards C ; Freed R ; Liosatos M ; Morgan TE ; Rozovsky I ; Trommer B ; Viola KL ; Wals P ; Zhang C ; Finch CE ; Krafft GA ; Klein WL , Diffusible, nonfibrillar ligands derived from Abeta1–42 are potent central nervous system neurotoxins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998, 95 (11 ), 6448–53.9600986
18. Van Nostrand WE ; Melchor JP ; Cho HS ; Greenberg SM ; Rebeck GW , Pathogenic effects of D23N Iowa mutant amyloid beta -protein. J Biol Chem 2001, 276 (35 ), 32860–6.11441013
19. Lesne S ; Koh MT ; Kotilinek L ; Kayed R ; Glabe CG ; Yang A ; Gallagher M ; Ashe KH , A specific amyloid-beta protein assembly in the brain impairs memory. Nature 2006, 440 (7082 ), 352–7.16541076
20. Tycko R ; Sciarretta KL ; Orgel JP ; Meredith SC , Evidence for novel beta-sheet structures in Iowa mutant beta-amyloid fibrils. Biochemistry 2009, 48 (26 ), 6072–84.19358576
21. Aguzzi A ; O’Connor T , Protein aggregation diseases: pathogenicity and therapeutic perspectives. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010, 9 (3 ), 237–48.20190788
22. Reitz C , Alzheimer’s disease and the amyloid cascade hypothesis: a critical review. Int J Alzheimers Dis 2012, 2012 , 369808.22506132
23. Benilova I ; Karran E ; De Strooper B , The toxic Abeta oligomer and Alzheimer’s disease: an emperor in need of clothes. Nat Neurosci 2012, 15 (3 ), 349–57.22286176
24. Scollo F ; Tempra C ; Lolicato F ; Sciacca MFM ; Raudino A ; Milardi D ; La Rosa C , Phospholipids Critical Micellar Concentrations Trigger Different Mechanisms of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Interaction with Model Membranes. J Phys Chem Lett 2018, 9 (17 ), 5125–5129.30133296
25. Sciacca MF ; Lolicato F ; Tempra C ; Scollo F ; Sahoo BR ; Watson MD ; Garcia-Vinuales S ; Milardi D ; Raudino A ; Lee JC ; Ramamoorthy A ; La Rosa C , Lipid-Chaperone Hypothesis: A Common Molecular Mechanism of Membrane Disruption by Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. ACS Chem Neurosci 2020, 11 (24 ), 4336–4350.33269918
26. Esler WP ; Stimson ER ; Jennings JM ; Vinters HV ; Ghilardi JR ; Lee JP ; Mantyh PW ; Maggio JE , Alzheimer’s disease amyloid propagation by a template-dependent dock-lock mechanism. Biochemistry 2000, 39 (21 ), 6288–95.10828941
27. Collins SR ; Douglass A ; Vale RD ; Weissman JS , Mechanism of prion propagation: amyloid growth occurs by monomer addition. PLoS Biol 2004, 2 (10 ), e321.15383837
28. Cannon MJ ; Williams AD ; Wetzel R ; Myszka DG , Kinetic analysis of beta-amyloid fibril elongation. Anal Biochem 2004, 328 (1 ), 67–75.15081909
29. Ban T ; Yamaguchi K ; Goto Y , Direct observation of amyloid fibril growth, propagation, and adaptation. Acc Chem Res 2006, 39 (9 ), 663–70.16981683
30. Shammas SL ; Garcia GA ; Kumar S ; Kjaergaard M ; Horrocks MH ; Shivji N ; Mandelkow E ; Knowles TP ; Mandelkow E ; Klenerman D , A mechanistic model of tau amyloid aggregation based on direct observation of oligomers. Nat Commun 2015, 6 , 7025.25926130
31. Ma B ; Nussinov R , Simulations as analytical tools to understand protein aggregation and predict amyloid conformation. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2006, 10 (5 ), 445–52.16935548
32. Straub JE ; Thirumalai D , Toward a molecular theory of early and late events in monomer to amyloid fibril formation. Annu Rev Phys Chem 2011, 62 , 437–63.21219143
33. Zhou R ; Maisuradze GG ; Sunol D ; Todorovski T ; Macias MJ ; Xiao Y ; Scheraga HA ; Czaplewski C ; Liwo A , Folding kinetics of WW domains with the united residue force field for bridging microscopic motions and experimental measurements. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014, 111 (51 ), 18243–8.25489078
34. Nasica-Labouze J ; Nguyen PH ; Sterpone F ; Berthoumieu O ; Buchete NV ; Cote S ; De Simone A ; Doig AJ ; Faller P ; Garcia A ; Laio A ; Li MS ; Melchionna S ; Mousseau N ; Mu Y ; Paravastu A ; Pasquali S ; Rosenman DJ ; Strodel B ; Tarus B ; Viles JH ; Zhang T ; Wang C ; Derreumaux P , Amyloid beta Protein and Alzheimer’s Disease: When Computer Simulations Complement Experimental Studies. Chem Rev 2015, 115 (9 ), 3518–63.25789869
35. Chiricotto M ; Tran TT ; Nguyen PH ; Melchionna S ; Sterpone F ; Derreumaux P , Coarse-grained and All-atom Simulations towards the Early and Late Steps of Amyloid Fibril Formation. Israel Journal of Chemistry 2017, 57 (7–8 ), 564–573.
36. Ban T ; Hoshino M ; Takahashi S ; Hamada D ; Hasegawa K ; Naiki H ; Goto Y , Direct observation of Abeta amyloid fibril growth and inhibition. J Mol Biol 2004, 344 (3 ), 757–67.15533443
37. Sciarretta KL ; Gordon DJ ; Petkova AT ; Tycko R ; Meredith SC , Abeta40-Lactam(D23/K28) models a conformation highly favorable for nucleation of amyloid. Biochemistry 2005, 44 (16 ), 6003–14.15835889
38. Qiang W ; Kelley K ; Tycko R , Polymorph-specific kinetics and thermodynamics of beta-amyloid fibril growth. J Am Chem Soc 2013, 135 (18 ), 6860–71.23627695
39. Klimov DK ; Thirumalai D , Dissecting the assembly of Abeta16–22 amyloid peptides into antiparallel beta sheets. Structure 2003, 11 (3 ), 295–307.12623017
40. Nguyen PH ; Li MS ; Stock G ; Straub JE ; Thirumalai D , Monomer adds to preformed structured oligomers of Abeta-peptides by a two-stage dock-lock mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104 (1 ), 111–6.17190811
41. Reddy G ; Straub JE ; Thirumalai D , Dynamics of locking of peptides onto growing amyloid fibrils. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009, 106 (29 ), 11948–53.19581575
42. O’Brien EP ; Okamoto Y ; Straub JE ; Brooks BR ; Thirumalai D , Thermodynamic perspective on the dock-lock growth mechanism of amyloid fibrils. J Phys Chem B 2009, 113 (43 ), 14421–30.19813700
43. Wallace JA ; Shen JK , Probing the strand orientation and registry alignment in the propagation of amyloid fibrils. Biochemistry 2010, 49 (25 ), 5290–8.20491446
44. Schor M ; Vreede J ; Bolhuis PG , Elucidating the locking mechanism of peptides onto growing amyloid fibrils through transition path sampling. Biophys J 2012, 103 (6 ), 1296–304.22995502
45. Jia Z ; Schmit JD ; Chen J , Amyloid assembly is dominated by misregistered kinetic traps on an unbiased energy landscape. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2020, 117 (19 ), 10322–10328.32345723
46. Okumura H ; Itoh SG , Molecular dynamics simulations of amyloid-beta(16–22) peptide aggregation at air-water interfaces. J Chem Phys 2020, 152 (9 ), 095101.33480728
47. Gazit E , A possible role for pi-stacking in the self-assembly of amyloid fibrils. FASEB J 2002, 16 (1 ), 77–83.11772939
48. Colletier JP ; Laganowsky A ; Landau M ; Zhao M ; Soriaga AB ; Goldschmidt L ; Flot D ; Cascio D ; Sawaya MR ; Eisenberg D , Molecular basis for amyloid-beta polymorphism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011, 108 (41 ), 16938–43.21949245
49. Fawzi NL ; Okabe Y ; Yap EH ; Head-Gordon T , Determining the critical nucleus and mechanism of fibril elongation of the Alzheimer’s Abeta(1–40) peptide. J Mol Biol 2007, 365 (2 ), 535–50.17070840
50. Takeda T ; Klimov DK , Replica exchange simulations of the thermodynamics of Abeta fibril growth. Biophys J 2009, 96 (2 ), 442–52.19167295
51. Rojas A ; Liwo A ; Browne D ; Scheraga HA , Mechanism of fiber assembly: treatment of Abeta peptide aggregation with a coarse-grained united-residue force field. J Mol Biol 2010, 404 (3 ), 537–52.20888834
52. Han W ; Schulten K , Fibril elongation by Abeta(17–42): kinetic network analysis of hybrid-resolution molecular dynamics simulations. J Am Chem Soc 2014, 136 (35 ), 12450–60.25134066
53. Gurry T ; Stultz CM , Mechanism of amyloid-beta fibril elongation. Biochemistry 2014, 53 (44 ), 6981–91.25330398
54. Rojas A ; Maisuradze N ; Kachlishvili K ; Scheraga HA ; Maisuradze GG , Elucidating Important Sites and the Mechanism for Amyloid Fibril Formation by Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics. ACS chemical neuroscience 2017, 8 (1 ), 201–209.28095675
55. Liwo A ; Czaplewski C ; Pillardy J ; Scheraga HA , Cumulant-based expressions for the multibody terms for the correlation between local and electrostatic interactions in the united-residue force field. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115 , 2323–2347.
56. Rojas AV ; Liwo A ; Scheraga HA , Molecular Dynamics with the United-Residue Force Field: Ab Initio Folding Simulations of Multichain Proteins. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2007, 111 (1 ), 293–309.17201452
57. Voelz VA ; Bowman GR ; Beauchamp K ; Pande VS , Molecular simulation of ab initio protein folding for a millisecond folder NTL9(1–39). J Am Chem Soc 2010, 132 (5 ), 1526–8.20070076
58. Beauchamp KA ; McGibbon R ; Lin YS ; Pande VS , Simple few-state models reveal hidden complexity in protein folding. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012, 109 (44 ), 17807–13.22778442
59. E W ; Vanden-Eijnden E , Towards a Theory of Transition Paths. Journal of Statistical Physics 2006, 123 (3 ), 503.
60. Berezhkovskii A ; Hummer G ; Szabo A , Reactive flux and folding pathways in network models of coarse-grained protein dynamics. J Chem Phys 2009, 130 (20 ), 205102.19485483
61. Prinz JH ; Wu H ; Sarich M ; Keller B ; Senne M ; Held M ; Chodera JD ; Schutte C ; Noe F , Markov models of molecular kinetics: generation and validation. J Chem Phys 2011, 134 (17 ), 174105.21548671
62. Rosta E ; Hummer G , Error and efficiency of replica exchange molecular dynamics simulations. J Chem Phys 2009, 131 (16 ), 165102.19894977
63. Leahy CT ; Murphy RD ; Hummer G ; Rosta E ; Buchete NV , Coarse Master Equations for Binding Kinetics of Amyloid Peptide Dimers. J Phys Chem Lett 2016, 7 (14 ), 2676–82.27323250
64. Cao Y ; Jiang X ; Han W , Self-Assembly Pathways of beta-Sheet-Rich Amyloid-beta(1–40) Dimers: Markov State Model Analysis on Millisecond Hybrid-Resolution Simulations. J Chem Theory Comput 2017, 13 (11 ), 5731–5744.29019683
65. Kreutzer AG ; Samdin TD ; Guaglianone G ; Spencer RK ; Nowick JS , X-ray Crystallography Reveals Parallel and Antiparallel beta-Sheet Dimers of a beta-Hairpin Derived from Abeta16–36 that Assemble to Form Different Tetramers. ACS Chem Neurosci 2020, 11 (15 ), 2340–2347.32584538
66. Hoyer W ; Gronwall C ; Jonsson A ; Stahl S ; Hard T , Stabilization of a beta-hairpin in monomeric Alzheimer’s amyloid-beta peptide inhibits amyloid formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008, 105 (13 ), 5099–104.18375754
67. Petkova AT ; Yau WM ; Tycko R , Experimental constraints on quaternary structure in Alzheimer’s beta-amyloid fibrils. Biochemistry 2006, 45 (2 ), 498–512.16401079
68. Xiao Y ; Ma B ; McElheny D ; Parthasarathy S ; Long F ; Hoshi M ; Nussinov R ; Ishii Y , Abeta(1–42) fibril structure illuminates self-recognition and replication of amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2015, 22 (6 ), 499–505.25938662
69. Colvin MT ; Silvers R ; Ni QZ ; Can TV ; Sergeyev I ; Rosay M ; Donovan KJ ; Michael B ; Wall J ; Linse S ; Griffin RG , Atomic Resolution Structure of Monomorphic Abeta42 Amyloid Fibrils. J Am Chem Soc 2016, 138 (30 ), 9663–74.27355699
70. Walti MA ; Ravotti F ; Arai H ; Glabe CG ; Wall JS ; Bockmann A ; Guntert P ; Meier BH ; Riek R , Atomic-resolution structure of a disease-relevant Abeta(1–42) amyloid fibril. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016, 113 (34 ), E4976–84.27469165
71. Ołdziej S ; Ła̧giewka J ; Liwo A ; Czaplewski C ; Chinchio M ; Nanias M ; Scheraga HA , Optimization of the UNRES Force Field by Hierarchical Design of the Potential-Energy Landscape. 3. Use of Many Proteins in Optimization. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2004, 108 (43 ), 16950–16959.
72. Liwo A ; Khalili M ; Czaplewski C ; Kalinowski S ; Oldziej S ; Wachucik K ; Scheraga HA , Modification and optimization of the united-residue (UNRES) potential energy function for canonical simulations. I. Temperature dependence of the effective energy function and tests of the optimization method with single training proteins. J Phys Chem B 2007, 111 (1 ), 260–85.17201450
73. Liwo A ; Czaplewski C ; Ołdziej S ; Rojas A ; Kazmierkiewicz R ; Makowski M ; Murarka R ; Scheraga HA , Simulation of protein structure and dynamics with the coarse-grained UNRES force field. Coarse-Graining of Condensed Phase and Biomolecular Systems 2008, 107–122.
74. Maisuradze GG ; Senet P ; Czaplewski C ; Liwo A ; Scheraga HA , Investigation of protein folding by coarse-grained molecular dynamics with the UNRES force field. J Phys Chem A 2010, 114 (13 ), 4471–85.20166738
75. Berendsen HJC ; Postma JPM ; van Gunsteren WF ; DiNola A ; Haak JR , Molecular-Dynamics with Coupling to an External Bath. J. Chem. Phys. 1984, 81 , 3684–3690.
76. Molgedey L ; Schuster HG , Separation of a mixture of independent signals using time delayed correlations. Physical Review Letters 1994, 72 (23 ), 3634–3637.10056251
77. Naritomi Y ; Fuchigami S , Slow dynamics in protein fluctuations revealed by time-structure based independent component analysis: The case of domain motions. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2011, 134 (6 ), 065101.21322734
78. Perez-Hernandez G ; Paul F ; Giorgino T ; De Fabritiis G ; Noe F , Identification of slow molecular order parameters for Markov model construction. J Chem Phys 2013, 139 (1 ), 015102.23822324
79. Schwantes CR ; Pande VS , Improvements in Markov State Model Construction Reveal Many Non-Native Interactions in the Folding of NTL9. J Chem Theory Comput 2013, 9 (4 ), 2000–2009.23750122
80. Razavi AM ; Voelz VA , Kinetic network models of tryptophan mutations in beta-hairpins reveal the importance of non-native interactions. J Chem Theory Comput 2015, 11 (6 ), 2801–12.26575573
81. Noe F ; Fischer S , Transition networks for modeling the kinetics of conformational change in macromolecules. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2008, 18 (2 ), 154–62.18378442
82. Pande VS ; Beauchamp K ; Bowman GR , Everything you wanted to know about Markov State Models but were afraid to ask. Methods 2010, 52 (1 ), 99–105.20570730
83. Chodera JD ; Swope WC ; Pitera JW ; Dill KA , Long-Time Protein Folding Dynamics from Short-Time Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Multiscale Modeling &amp; Simulation 2006, 5 (4 ), 1214–1226.
84. Beauchamp KA ; Bowman GR ; Lane TJ ; Maibaum L ; Haque IS ; Pande VS , MSMBuilder2: Modeling Conformational Dynamics on the Picosecond to Millisecond Scale. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2011, 7 (10 ), 3412–3419.22125474
85. McGibbon RT ; Pande VS , Variational cross-validation of slow dynamical modes in molecular kinetics. J Chem Phys 2015, 142 (12 ), 124105.25833563
86. Deuflhard P ; Weber M , Robust Perron cluster analysis in conformation dynamics. Linear Algebra and its Applications 2005, 398 , 161–184.
87. Dijkstra EW , A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische mathematik 1959, 1 , 269–271.
