LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101128963
29630
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing research reviews
1568-1637
1872-9649

34923167
8761166
10.1016/j.arr.2021.101543
NIHMS1766171
Article
The Protective Role of Exercise Against Age-Related Neurodegeneration
Sujkowski Alyson L. 12
Hong Luke 23
Wessells R. J. 1
Todi Sokol V. 23*
1 Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine
2 Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine
3- Department of Neurology, Wayne State University School of Medicine
* Correspondence:to 540 E Canfield, Scott Hall Rm 3108, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. stodi@wayne.edu
23 12 2021
2 2022
17 12 2021
01 2 2023
74 101543101543
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Endurance exercise is a widely accessible, low-cost intervention with a variety of benefits to multiple organ systems. Exercise improves multiple indices of physical performance and stimulates pronounced health benefits reducing a range of pathologies including metabolic, cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative disorders. Endurance exercise delays brain aging, preserves memory and cognition, and improves symptoms of neurodegenerative pathologies like Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Alzheimer’s Disease, Parkinson’s Disease, Huntington’s Disease, and various ataxias. Potential mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects of exercise include neuronal survival and plasticity, neurogenesis, epigenetic modifications, angiogenesis, autophagy, and the synthesis and release of neurotrophins and cytokines. In this review, we discuss shared benefits and molecular pathways driving the protective effects of endurance exercise on various neurodegenerative diseases in animal models and in humans.

Graphical Abstract:

Summary of Exercise benefits in Age-Related Neurodegeneration. Some of the shared pathogenic mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases discussed in this review are highlighted in red text. Common targets that exercise may upregulate are indicated by green arrows. Common disease pathways that exercise may inhibit are indicated by red lines. For detailed descriptions and citations please see Tables 1 and 2.

Exercise
Mitochondria
Muscle
Neurodegeneration
Proteinopathy

pmcIntroduction

Endurance exercise has well-established, powerful benefits with impact on multiple tissues and organ systems across various species (Laranjeiro et al., 2019; Marosi et al., 2012; Piazza et al., 2009). Endurance exercise, often referred to as aerobic exercise, is one of four types of exercise that additionally includes strength, flexibility, and balance. Endurance activities are characterized by periods of increased heart rate and respiration and are typically performed at sub-maximal intensity. Among the different types of exercise, endurance training is particularly well-suited to improve global metabolism and healthspan (Morici et al., 2016). Regular exercise improves physical performance and brings about striking health benefits that combat a remarkable range of pathological conditions including various types of cancer as well as cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurodegenerative diseases (Buchman et al., 2012; Colditz et al., 1997; Hu et al., 2001; Manson et al., 1999). In fact, physical fitness is a predictor of all-cause mortality and a measure of quality of life (Kodama et al., 2009). Despite experimental evidence supporting the broadly acting, diverse benefits of endurance exercise, overnutrition and sedentary lifestyle continue to pose a major health problem (Ang and Gomez-Pinilla, 2007). One organ system significantly impacted by physical activity and exercise is the brain. Recently, major progress has been made towards understanding the relationship between regular exercise and neurological health. Studies in animal models and humans demonstrate that regular exercise improves memory, cognition, and mood, and prevents several neurodegenerative diseases (Di Liegro et al., 2019). Still, much remains to be discovered about the benefits of endurance exercise and the underlying mechanisms driving its neuroprotective effects.

Aging is the main risk factor for neurodegeneration and prevalence increases further with age (Hirth, 2010; Hou et al., 2019). (Broadly speaking, by aging here we refer to the cellular and organismal changes that occur during the course of an organism’s lifespan; in our use of the word, aging is also characterized by senescence, or the progressive deterioration of physiological and anatomical processes the lead to decline in function over time (da Costa et al., 2016).) Most neurodegenerative diseases are associated with misfolded proteins and pathogenic oligomers that form toxic aggregates and coincide with progressive neuronal cell loss, collectively referred to as proteinopathies (Hirth, 2010). These progressive disorders may be idiopathic or hereditary diseases associated with genetic mutations. Heritable disorders often exhibit genetic anticipation, characterized by the lengthening of abnormal nucleotide repeat expansions in subsequent generations. Genetic anticipation leads to more severe protein misfolding and neuronal loss, resulting in earlier disease onset and increased disease severity (Cooper-Knock et al., 2014). There is no cure for the majority of age-related neurodegenerative disorders and diseases tend to progress irreversibly (Hou et al., 2019).

Epidemiological studies have shown that endurance exercise not only improves overall brain health, but also acts as a potent anti-aging therapeutic with minimal negative effects (Frederiksen et al., 2018). Endurance exercise enhances neuronal survival, promotes synaptic plasticity, and slows disease progression in multiple models of neurodegeneration (Dauwan et al., 2021). The neuroprotective effects of endurance exercise include reduced insulin resistance, reduced neuroinflammation and decreased stress and anxiety, and benefits like increased sleep, increased growth factor release, neurogenesis, and angiogenesis (Mahalakshmi et al., 2020). These changes result in enhanced overall psychological and neuropsychological health (Mahalakshmi et al., 2020). Moreover, endurance exercise protects against ischemic insult and increases skeletal muscle mitochondrial content, both important factors in neurodegenerative diseases (Azizbeigi et al., 2014; Wright et al., 2007).

Dissecting the mechanisms driving these protective effects is critical to our understanding of not only the benefits of endurance exercise, but also its role in decelerating neurodegenerative disease progression. Robust evidence from animal models has provided insight into the neuroprotective molecular pathways activated by exercise. Here, we discuss the effects of endurance exercise on several neurodegenerative disorders, focusing on common pathogenic mechanisms that may be alleviated by the broadly acting pro-healthspan effects activated by endurance training. The molecular mechanisms underlying the neurological benefits of endurance exercise are of significant research interest, and understanding these neuroprotective pathways may open the door to identifying targeted therapeutics that can be deployed for the population at large and especially for patients who are unable to reap the benefits of exercise.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is a neuromuscular disorder characterized by progressive motor neuron degeneration of the upper and lower neurons at the spinal or bulbar level, leading to paralysis and death within 2–4 years of disease onset (Chio et al., 2009). Considered a multisystemic disease, various cell types contribute to the complexity of ALS pathogenesis and there is currently no cure (Cozzolino et al., 2008; Tsitkanou et al., 2019). Mechanisms implicated in motor neuron cell death during ALS progression include axonal transport defects, neurofilament aggregation, and excitotoxicity (Cooper-Knock et al., 2014; Morfini et al., 2009; Spreux-Varoquaux et al., 2002; Williamson et al., 1998). Other factors contributing to ALS pathogenesis include protein misfolding and aggregation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, and microRNA expression (Blokhuis et al., 2013; Faes and Callewaert, 2011; Halter et al., 2010; Henkel et al., 2004; Russell et al., 2013).

The multisystemic nature of ALS makes pharmacotherapy difficult; endurance exercise counteracts many of the pathogenic mechanisms contributing to ALS progression or, alternatively, activates beneficial pathways in parallel, making it an attractive therapeutic option (Figure 1). Nonetheless, endurance exercise implementation in ALS patients is complex because of the rapid nature of disease progression. As a result, studies in both animal models and humans have garnered mixed results (Tsitkanou et al., 2019) (Tables 1, 2).

Idiopathic and familial ALS are clinically indistinguishable, but about 20% of familial ALS patients harbor a point mutation in the superoxide dismutase 1 gene (SOD1) and SOD1 may also contribute to disease progression in sporadic ALS (Abati et al., 2020). While the mechanisms of SOD1 dysfunction and ALS progression are not completely understood, toxic gain-of-function yielding protein misfolding and aggregation of mutant SOD1 may contribute to motor neuron toxicity (Abati et al., 2020; Carreras et al., 2010). Studies in a transgenic mouse model of ALS (SOD1G93A) compared the effects of sex, exercise duration, intensity, mode, and SOD1 transgene expression level (Tsitkanou et al., 2019); (a summary of selected findings in animal models is in Table 1). Disease onset and survival in SOD1G93A ALS mice varies depending on transgene copy number, exercise intensity, metabolic parameters, and sex. (Carreras et al., 2010; Desseille et al., 2017; Kaspar et al., 2005; Veldink et al., 2003). Moderate intensity exercise had significant benefit to SOD1G93A ALS mice, whereas high-intensity exercise reduced survival and motor performance (Carreras et al., 2010). Swimming exercise delayed disease onset and improved motor performance, while SOD1G93A mice that completed a comparable treadmill running program did not improve either parameter (Desseille et al., 2017). Furthermore, swim-trained SOD1G93A ALS mice expressed favorable changes to GLUT4 expression and lipid synthesis, while treadmill-trained SOD1G93A ALS mice did not, indicating differential responses to specific types of exercise in this murine ALS model (Desseille et al., 2017). Sex-specific effects were also observed in SOD1G93A ALS mice, which may explain the male-specific disease prevalence in this model. Treadmill-trained female SOD1G93A ALS mice improved survival while males did not, suggesting that estrogen may play a neuroprotective role (Veldink et al., 2003).

A second study in SOD1G93A mice also found that exercise intensity is important to the prevention of ALS phenotypes (Carreras et al., 2010). SOD1G93A ALS mice were divided into sedentary, moderate-intensity exercise, and high-intensity exercise groups and were examined for changes in body weight, motor function, and motor neuron counts, previously shown to be markedly decreased in this model (Liebetanz et al., 2004). SOD1G93A mice in the moderate-intensity cohort performed treadmill exercise for 30 minutes per day, 3 days per week for 45 days at a speed of 10 meters/minute, while those in the high-intensity cohort performed treadmill exercise of 50 minutes per day, 5 days per week at 20 meters/minute (Carreras et al., 2010). Moderate-intensity exercising of SOD1G93A mice resulted in lower body weight and delayed characteristic declines in performance on the rotarod by more than 10 days compared to sedentary controls. The moderate-intensity group also had higher motor neuron cell count in the ventral horn of the lumbar spinal cord. Although high-intensity exercise also reduced body weight and increased motor neuron density at day 120 in SOD1G93A mice, motor performance was not improved at any age (Carreras et al., 2010), indicating that exercise intensity differentially affects motor performance and motor neuron preservation in this model.

It bears mentioning that the aforementioned studies utilized animal models of forced exercise. In the case of forced treadmill training, experimental parameters such as speed, intensity, and duration can be precisely controlled, and swim exercise recruits whole body systems to induce effective aerobic exercise (Guo et al., 2020). Voluntary wheel running, which tends to be less stressful, is also frequently used in murine models but results in greater individual variation among subjects (Guo et al., 2020). Forced exercise tends to better activate neurogenesis pathways and neuroprotective mechanisms (Hitoshi et al., 2007; Leasure and Jones, 2008), while voluntary running is associated with transcriptional and global metabolic changes (Do et al., 2018). Mechanisms of neuroprotection between forced and voluntary exercise overlap and both can benefit neurodegenerative disease like ALS. Since exercise intensity can be critical to experimental outcomes, it is important to carefully consider the advantages and disadvantages in each system.

In general, cardiovascular exercise is recommended to improve both functional independence and psychological parameters in people (Merico et al., 2018). A 2020 meta-analysis of 94 ALS patients with a wide range of disease severity (1.64 to 20.05 months) who performed variable types of exercise achieved moderate benefits to respiratory and limb function after therapeutic aerobic exercise, but only if treatment was initiated early in disease progression (Park et al., 2020). (A summary of selected findings from human studies is in Table 2). In a second study, ALS patients with mild to moderate disabilities who performed moderate treadmill exercise plus programmed isometric contractions responded with improved muscle power, oxygen consumption, and endurance compared to control patients assigned to standard rehabilitation (Merico et al., 2018). In a third study, sixteen patients diagnosed with ALS, determined by the revised El Escorial criteria (Brooks et al., 2000) (it was not specified whether the ALS participants were sporadic or familial) were selected and randomly assigned to either a trained group or untrained control (Ferri et al., 2019). Patients were characterized by mean disease duration of 20.5 +/− 20.3 months and trained group participants were assigned combined endurance cycling and strength training programs tailored to their exercise capacity and disease stage (Ferri et al., 2019). Patients in the combined endurance and strength exercise group showed significantly improved “Timed Up and Go Time” (TUGT) scores, ALS Functional Rating Scale-revisited scores, ALS-Severity Scale, and quality of life scores compared to the untrained control patients (Ferri et al., 2019).

Historically, exercise treatment for ALS has been controversial for two primary reasons: 1) Athletics and exercise have been associated with increased incidence of ALS; 2) There are concerns that exercise-induced muscle damage may exacerbate progressive functional declines (Lisle and Tennison, 2015). While exercise reduces oxidative stress, decreases inflammation, and protects against cell senescence, strenuous exercise generates high ROS levels that may accelerate disease pathology (Kuraszkiewicz et al., 2020). Furthermore, certain types of long-term physical activity were reported to correlate with a higher incidence of ALS, although recent studies suggest a causal relationship only in genetically at-risk individuals (Julian et al., 2021). Recently, evidence from both humans and animal models has suggested that exercise may in fact improve function and slow disease progression (Lisle and Tennison, 2015). Unfortunately, small sample sizes, variations in protocols and genetic background, lack of subjects, and high cost result in a lack of coordinated data from which to draw conclusions about the effects of exercise on ALS onset and progression. The aforementioned investigations and others suggest that mild-to-moderate exercise may benefit ALS patients, particularly if initiated early in disease progression. Evidence suggests that moderate exercise programs precisely tailored to individuals are particularly useful to improve functional outcomes and protect against neurodegenerative phenotypes in ALS patients. These positive effects, and the lack of negative effects, support the use of exercise as a beneficial therapeutic option for those suffering from ALS.

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)

Alzheimer’s Disease, the most common type of dementia, is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by neuronal loss and cognitive decline. Proposed mechanisms of AD onset and progression include abnormal protein accumulation, altered inflammatory response, cholinergic and free radical damage, and genetic contribution (Breijyeh and Karaman, 2020). Beta-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau that contribute to neurofibrillary tangles are two major histopathological features of AD (Brown et al., 2019).

Aβ peptides are proteolytic fragments of amyloid precursor protein, and tau is a microtubule associated protein enriched in axons and expressed exclusively in the brain (Bloom, 2014). Studies in animal models of AD describe exercise-induced reductions in both Aβ and tau aggregates coincident with improved disease phenotypes (Brown et al., 2019) (Figure 2). In contrast to animal models, human studies have provided inconsistent evidence on the effects of physical exercise on biomarkers like Aβ and tau and on AD symptoms (Brown et al., 2019). One possible reason for these differences is that while animal models of exercise can be carefully controlled, human studies tend to have greater heterogeneity between patient cohorts, exercise modalities and intensities. Similar to ALS, changes in physiology and relevant biomarkers may critically rely on exercise timing, frequency, and intensity. Still, endurance exercise and physical activity are generally recommended to prevent and treat AD (Cass, 2017; Meng et al., 2020; Valenzuela et al., 2020) (Figure 2).

Oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, for example, are two additional pathogenic factors implicated in AD etiology (Yin et al., 2016). Regular exercise supports angiogenesis, neurotrophin synthesis and metabolism, and increases the capacity of neurons and supportive tissues to withstand oxidative stress, all important in neurogenesis, memory, and neuroplasticity (Radak et al., 2010). Studies in humans and animal models suggest that exercise has protective effects against AD and other neurodegenerative disorders, but the underlying mechanisms at play require further investigation (Cass, 2017; Meng et al., 2020; Valenzuela et al., 2020).

Observations from animal models of AD indicate that exercise improves learning and memory concurrent with reductions in Aβ peptide and hyperphosphorylated tau (Laranjeiro et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). Treadmill running in APP/PS1 (amyloid precursor protein/human presenilin 1) double transgenic mice, a commonly used rodent model for AD, improved learning and memory in the Morris water maze task and was associated with enhanced long-term potentiation (Liu et al., 2011). Furthermore, five months of treadmill-training in APP/PS1 mice reduced both hippocampal Aβ deposition and tau phosphorylation in comparison to untrained transgenic control mice, concurrent with reductions in APP phosphorylation and PS1 expression, both associated with non-amyloidogenic processing in the hippocampus (Liu et al., 2013b). Exercise inhibited tau phosphorylation via GSK3α/β but not CDK5, providing a potential mechanism by which exercise prevents AD pathology (Liu et al., 2013b).

In a separate study, treadmill running in APP/PS1 mice inhibited Aβ accumulation by decreasing cholesterol dysregulation and formation of lipid rafts, prominent features of the amyloidogenic pathway and subsequent AD progression (Zhang et al., 2019). Twelve weeks of treadmill exercise reduced Aβ generation by downregulating ADAM10 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10) and BACE1 (β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1) levels, both required for APP processing and Aβ generation. AD therapies are being targeted to these APP processing and amyloidogenic pathways and reducing lipid rafts (Zhang et al., 2019).

The majority of AD is sporadic, characterized by late onset at 80–90 years of age (Masters et al., 2015). One animal model of sporadic AD relies on intracerebroventricular injection of streptozotocin (STZ), a diabetogenic compound that decreases brain glucose metabolism, depleting energy reserves and mimicking dementia symptoms reminiscent of AD (Chen et al., 2013). In a rat model of STZ-induced sporadic AD, swim exercise pretreatment before symptom onset inhibited cognitive dysfunction and induced expression of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2) and downstream antioxidant gene expression. Pre-treated, exercised STZ rats also showed reductions in both endogenous Aβ peptide and hyperphosphorylated tau, accompanied by decreased hippocampal neuronal cell loss compared to unexercised STZ control rats (Wu et al., 2018). This study examined the effects of 3 weeks of endurance exercise pre-treatment on young adult rats in which STZ-induced AD was not induced until swim exercise was complete (Wu et al., 2018). It will be interesting to test the effects of swimming exercise in later stages of this AD model.

Invertebrates have also provided important information about the effects of exercise on neurodegeneration. Simple animal models such as C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster have highly conserved, well characterized genetics and comparatively simple nervous systems, allowing for molecular dissection of the pathways underlying both neurodegenerative disease and endurance exercise (Laranjeiro et al., 2019; McGurk et al., 2015; Sujkowski and Wessells, 2018). Long-term swim exercise, in which in C. elegans perform multiple daily swim sessions of 90 minutes, induces several healthspan-extending parameters that are similar to the effects of mammalian endurance exercise (Laranjeiro et al., 2017; Laranjeiro et al., 2019). In wild-type C. elegans, swim exercise increases muscle gene expression, locomotory performance, mitochondrial respiration and midlife survival (Laranjeiro et al., 2017; Laranjeiro et al., 2019). In a C. elegans model of AD that expresses human Aβ peptide pan-neuronally, swim exercise rescued premature decline in chemotaxis, a phenotypic hallmark of this AD disease model (Laranjeiro et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2006). Swim exercise in C. elegans also reduced gaps in GABAergic motor neurons in an aggregating tau background, improving defects in nerve cord morphology related to declining mobility (Fatouros et al., 2012; Laranjeiro et al., 2019) (Figure 2). These studies highlight the utility of animal models for the molecular dissection of pathways crucial for the potential benefits of endurance exercise in AD. Animal models have been consistently instrumental to elucidate neuroprotective molecular pathways activated by exercise by pinpointing neurogenesis, protection against inflammation and protein aggregation, and synaptic maintenance as critical exercise-induced pathways capable of alleviating neurodegenerative phenotypes.

Importantly, human studies have shown mechanistic (e.g. reduced neuroinflammation) and functional (e.g. preserved cognition) improvements in AD patients who exercise. During 52 weeks of exercise, pre-clinical AD patients adapted to training with increased cardiorespiratory performance, albeit without significant changes to amyloid levels, hippocampal volume, or cognition compared to sedentary control patients. (Vidoni et al., 2021). In a second study, participants with early-stage AD were divided into 2 groups: 1) stretching and toning, performing a series of non-aerobic exercises, or 2) aerobic exercise, performing 60 minutes of exercise at 40–55% maximum heart rate (HR) per week, gradually increasing to 150 minutes per week at 60–75% HR. After 26 weeks, aerobic exercise participants increased functional independence and decreased disability scores in comparison to stretching and toning participants (Vidoni et al., 2019).

In a different study, cognition and quality of life were assessed separately. Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were used to measure cognitive function, whereas ability to perform activities of daily living (ADL) values were used as a measurement of general quality of life. Later-stage AD patients with a mean age of 84 years assigned to either 30 minutes of walking per day or to a sedentary control group were observed after 24 weeks of moderate walking exercise (Venturelli et al., 2011). MMSE scores remained stable and ability to perform ADLs increased in walking group patients, while both parameters declined in the control group participants. These findings indicate that moderate walking exercise prevents AD-related negative changes in both cognitive and functional performance, even in the presence of advanced AD progression (Venturelli et al., 2011).

A 4-month study of AD patients with mild dementia, which prescribed 30 minutes of treadmill walking at 60% HR twice per week, described similar benefits. After the training period, exercise group and controls were cognitively assessed using the Cambridge Cognitive Examination in combination with tests for verbal fluency, memory, executive function, and attention. Functional capacity was measured using TUGT (timed up and go time), Sit-to-Stand test, tests for balance and reach, and standard exercise physiology assessments like EKG and VO2max. After 16 weeks, participants in the exercised group showed improved scores in the Cambridge Cognitive Examination evaluation while control group participant scores declined. Exercise group participants also maintained verbal fluency and executive function scores while control participant scores also declined in these measures. In functional assessments, exercise group participants significantly outperformed controls in all parameters, except Sit-to-Stand, in which there was no significant difference whether exercised or not (Arcoverde et al., 2014). Taken together, these studies strongly indicate that walking exercise is a promising intervention to alleviate both cognitive and functional deterioration in AD patients.

Although general physical activity is recommended, it is unclear whether endurance exercise is an effective therapeutic intervention for AD patients. Two separate studies examined executive function, verbal fluency, cognition, and neuropsychological function in patients with mild-to-severe dementia by looking at MMSE scores, ADLs, and the AD Assessment Scale–Cognitive subscale both before and after moderate and high-intensity exercise: all assessments remained unchanged whether AD participants were exercised or not (Lamb et al., 2018; Toots et al., 2017).

One possible explanation for differences observed in human findings may be a variation in genetics. In the case of AD, various environmental, clinical, and genetic risk factors for developing the disease have been identified. While physical inactivity is a major environmental risk factor, a primary genetic risk factor for developing AD is the apolipoprotein-E (APOE) ε4 allele (Jensen et al., 2019; Strittmatter and Roses, 1996). Hypotheses about the APOE genotype and its influence on AD pathophysiology involve pathways related to inflammation, vascular dysfunction, cholesterol dysregulation and Aβ deposition (Liu et al., 2013a). In the brain, endurance exercise can inhibit Aβ deposition, reduce abnormal cholesterol accumulation, and decrease neuroinflammation in both normal subjects and in the presence of neurodegeneration (Johnson and Stolzing, 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). Cerebral blood flow is also altered by endurance exercise, improving cognition during both normal aging and disease (De la Rosa et al., 2020). Long-term studies examining the interaction between endurance exercise and APOE carriership may elucidate the mechanisms by which APOE contributes to AD disease progression.

A study of 91 patients with mild-to-moderate dementia assigned to either exercised or control groups performed 12 weeks of low-intensity exercise followed by 12 weeks of high-intensity exercise, or attention-matched flexibility and recreational activities. At the end of the exercise-training period, MMSE scores trended toward increased values without reaching significance for exercised non-APOE ε4 carriers, while the same scores decreased for all other groups (Sanders et al., 2020). All other tested cognitive measures and all functional measures — endurance, mobility, balance, and leg strength — were not statistically different between exercised and control cohorts. However, exercised patients retained significantly faster gait speed, an important clinical measure associated with quality of life and cognition (Dumurgier et al., 2017; Sanders et al., 2020). These results were inherently limited by the cognitive deficits of the research subjects; one would also expect physiological adaptations from the exercised group independent of AD pathophysiology. It is possible that exercised subjects did not fully grasp the instructions of the research assistants (Sanders et al., 2020), potentially blunting a response to exercise.

In contrast, a separate post-hoc analysis of 200 early-stage AD patients examined cognitive function through the Neuropsychiatric Inventory and assessed mobility using TUGT: exercised APOE ε4 carriers had significant improvements in all outputs reported, while exercised non-carriers did not improve (Jensen et al., 2019). One key difference in this study was in the exercise modality. Study participants chose either treadmill or cycling exercises, with most selecting cycling as their preferred mode of intervention. Participants reported feeling “unsafe” on the treadmill, which require better trunk strength, coordination, and balance (Jensen et al., 2019). While both studies implicated APOE in AD pathology, neither provided a mechanism by which genotype and exercise modify disease progression. It is possible that exercise modifies the effects of APOE4 ε4 on synaptic function, protein aggregation, vascular function, lipid metabolism, or inflammation, although the relative importance of these factors on AD progression is unclear (Safieh et al., 2019).

A number of lifestyle factors influences the risk for AD; low level of physical activity is one factor that increases the risk of developing AD (De la Rosa et al., 2020). While pharmacological interventions exist for AD, there is currently no cure. Evidence suggests that physical exercise can slow the progression of cognitive declines associated with AD, particularly when intervention occurs early in disease (Cui et al., 2018). Human studies further underscore that exercise improves cognition and function in AD patients, but often fail to reach significance in biomarkers related to disease progression (Dumurgier et al., 2017; Sanders et al., 2020; Venturelli et al., 2011).

Observations in humans associate higher levels of physical activity with reduced cognitive decline and higher overall cognition; nonetheless, study outcomes related to the protective and therapeutic effects of exercise on Alzheimer’s dementia are varied (Jensen et al., 2019). Exercise is one potential therapeutic strategy that may delay brain aging and cognitive decline, perhaps through maintenance of hippocampal volume, perfusion, and neurogenesis (Barnes, 2015). Evidence from human and animal models also suggests that exercise promotes favorable changes in the microbiome, particularly those that increase antioxidant and anti-inflammatory pathways (Gubert et al., 2020). While pharmacotherapy is aimed at treating advanced stages of AD and dementia, exercise in preclinical patients may be able to reduce the likelihood of AD onset and progression (Meng et al., 2020). Exercise protects both muscle and neural functions (Rafalski and Brunet, 2011), including cognitive processes (Erickson and Kramer, 2009), by mechanisms like increased mitochondrial biogenesis/efficiency (Ascensao et al., 2011), decreased triglyceride storage (Kennedy et al., 2004), improved insulin sensitivity (Corcoran et al., 2007; Mittendorfer et al., 2001), and reduced neural inflammation, pathways known to be dysregulated in AD (Valenzuela et al., 2020). In addition, these remodeling events lead to increased physiological capacity in both cardiac and skeletal muscle that may improve quality of life in AD patients in a way that may be additive to other treatments. While these results are encouraging, it is clear that further investigation is needed to reach evidence-based conclusions about the mechanistic effects of exercise on AD. Ultimately, the identification of converging protective pathways triggered by exercise regimens may lead to the generation of therapeutics that can be deployed widely among AD patients, regardless of the precise precipitant(s) of the disease in a specific patient population.

Parkinson’s Disease (PD)

Parkinson’s Disease, the most common progressive neurodegenerative movement disorder, is clinically identified by motor symptoms like resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia or akinesia, and postural instability (Balestrino and Schapira, 2020). While age is the most important risk factor for developing PD, environmental factors like pesticide exposure, β-adrenergic antagonist use, and male gender also increase PD risk (Gillies et al., 2014; Lee and Gilbert, 2016; Mittal et al., 2017). Familial forms of PD account for only 5–15% of cases, but studies in these families have provided invaluable insight on the pathogenesis of the disease (Balestrino and Schapira, 2020). For example, mutations in parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, and PINK1, a kinase, cause early-onset PD. These genes act in the same pathway to remove damaged mitochondria from cells, mitigating oxidative damage and inflammation (Sliter et al., 2018). Similarly, mutations in the oxidative stress sensor DJ-1 are causative in some forms of familial PD, providing further support that oxidative damage may contribute to PD pathogenesis (Hijioka et al., 2017). Missense or triplication mutations in SNCA, the gene that encodes α-synuclein, cause rare, highly penetrant autosomal dominant PD (Kim and Alcalay, 2017). α-synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies, fibrillar aggregates that are a major pathological hallmark of PD (Wakabayashi et al., 2013).

Like previously discussed neurodegenerative disorders, studies in animal models and humans suggest that the effects of exercise on PD are broadly acting: modifying synaptogenesis and activity, increasing neurotrophic factors and angiogenesis, and reducing inflammatory pathways (Ahlskog, 2018) (Fig. 3). PD is characterized by loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (Petzinger et al., 2013). Loss of dopamine (DA) causes motor and cognitive dysfunction as well as mood disorders (Petzinger et al., 2013). While DA-replacement therapy effectively alleviates some motor symptoms, less benefit to cognitive function is observed (Schapira et al., 2009). Endurance exercise enhances mobility and cognition in healthy endurance athletes, partly by modifying both dopaminergic signaling and sensitivity, making exercise an attractive therapeutic target for PD (van Breda et al., 2015).

Rodent models of PD have revealed targeted, activity-dependent effects of exercise including increased endogenous BDNF signaling, enhanced DA release, reductions in DA transporter expression and nigrostriatal DA-ergic cell loss, as well as preservation and restoration of DA-ergic neurons in the midbrain (Ellis and Rochester, 2018). In a chronic 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced mouse model of PD (MPD), in which MPTP causes acute potentiation and long-term depletion of striatal DA (Lau et al., 1990), MPD mice subjected to 18 weeks of treadmill exercise preserved both number and morphology of DA-ergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta compared to sedentary MPD control mice (Lau et al., 2011). Exercise-trained MPD mice also performed better than unexercised controls in both foot slip and latency to fall from a balance beam (Lau et al., 2011). Exercised MPD mice had region-specific increases in the neurotrophic factors BDNF and GDNF in comparison to both unexercised MPD and C57BL/6 genetic background control cohorts, with higher BDNF in the substantia nigra and increased GDNF concentrations in the striatum. Increased neurotrophic factors were associated with exercise-induced recovery in DAergic neural cells and behavior (Lau et al., 2011). Furthermore, exercised MPD mice sustained less striatal oxidative damage and mitochondrial dysfunction than unexercised MPD mice, with respiratory control ratios and expression of striatal antioxidant enzymes MnSOD and Cu-Zn SOD closer to normal C57BL/6 mice than unexercised MPD siblings (Lau et al., 2011). Proper regulation of these antioxidant enzymes is crucial for preventing reactive oxygen species-induced neural injury in the substantia nigra pars compacta, where DAergic neurons are highly sensitive to damage induced dysfunction and death (Callio et al., 2005).

Perhaps surprisingly, two separate, additional studies observed that exercise suppressed defects in gait, spontaneous activity, balance, and cardiorespiratory adaptations without restoring learning or DA-ergic defects in the nigrostriatal pathway of MPD mice (Al-Jarrah et al., 2007; Pothakos et al., 2009). Furthermore, amphetamine-induced locomotion, a stereotypic behavior that depends on DA receptors, was not rescued by endurance exercise (Al-Jarrah et al., 2007; Conti et al., 1997; Pothakos et al., 2009). Exercised PD mice had a slight but not statistically significant increase in Tyrosine Hydroxylase, the rate limiting enzyme in DA synthesis (Al-Jarrah et al., 2007; Nagatsu, 1995). While differences in genetic background, MPD administration and sample size likely contribute to variability in results, it is striking that endurance exercise might restore function even in the absence of significant nigrostriatal restoration.

Gene mutations leading to loss of neuroprotection or toxic gain-of-function are additional contributing factors to PD onset and progression (Zhou et al., 2017). As mentioned above, mutations implicated in Parkinson’s pathogenesis include α-synuclein, Parkin, DJ-1 and PINK1, as well as LRRK2 and VSP35 (Bonifati, 2014). Toxic gain-of-function of α-synuclein, a result of either a single amino acid mutation or triplication of the gene, causes some forms of dominantly inherited PD (Polymeropoulos et al., 1997; Singleton et al., 2003). A mouse model of PD ectopically expressing human mutant α-synuclein (Y39C) pan-neuronally and provided with free access to a running wheel maintained endurance capacity compared to unexercised controls. These exercised mice also maintained exercise capacity and protection from Parkinsonian-like declines in cognitive and motor function, performing better than controls on both rotarod and Morris Water maze (Zhou et al., 2017). Exercised Y39C mice also showed increased protein levels of BDNF, the molecular chaperone HSP70, and DJ-1 (Clements et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2020a; Zhou et al., 2017). DJ-1 is a neuroprotective, PD-associated gene that stabilizes the cytoprotective transcription factor Nrf2 and upregulates antioxidant response (Clements et al., 2006; Tonelli et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2017). Brain α-synuclein was reduced in exercised Y39C mice while plasma α-synuclein levels increased, indicating that exercise may modify brain α-synuclein levels, improving disease phenotypes (Zhou et al., 2017).

While a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms underlying the benefits of endurance exercise in PD progression is incomplete, it is well established that PD patients who exercise improve physiologic, functional, clinical, and molecular outcomes compared to inactive patients (Ellis and Rochester, 2018). Similar to previously discussed neurodegenerative disorders, variability in intervention, disease penetrance, environment and study conditions contribute to mixed results in PD. Diverse meta-analyses of treadmill exercise in PD patients with mild-to-moderate disability generally describe maintenance or improvement in United Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale using mobility outcomes like walking speed, stride, and step length (Flach et al., 2017; Robinson et al., 2019).

Researchers often adjust exercise protocols according to participant disease stage in order to increase patient compliance and the probability of successful outcomes. Varying exercise modality according to specific tasks (i.e. obstacle avoidance or backwards walking) may also provide information about whether exercise adaptations are organ-specific or systemic (de Oliveira et al., 2018; Rawson et al., 2019). Furthermore, progressive disability often limits patient capacity to complete an exercise program, so a “one-size-fits-all” approach is not always appropriate. In a study of 96 patients diagnosed with idiopathic, mild-to-moderate PD, participants were assigned to either 12 weeks of treadmill exercise, or comparable times and intensities of tango dancing or stretching. Only patients assigned to treadmill exercise improved both forward and backward walking. In this case, the diffuse effects of endurance exercise, as opposed to training targeted to specific deficits (e.g., only tango includes backward motion), provided maximum benefit to PD patients (Rawson et al., 2019).

Exercise intensity is another parameter frequently modified to alter therapeutic outcomes in PD. In an 8-week study of 30 early-stage PD patients, participants were randomly assigned to body weight supported, high-intensity treadmill training, low-intensity exercise, or a zero-intensity control group. Exercised groups or zero-intensity controls were assessed using United Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale, biomechanical analysis, walking, Sit-to-Stand and transcranial magnetic stimulation, a non-invasive tool to assess the excitability of the corticospinal motor system (Fisher et al., 2008). The high-intensity group improved in all motor performance parameters including gait speed, stride and step length, joint excursion, gait velocity, range of motion, and Sit-to-Stand. The high-intensity group was the only group to show reduced corticomotor excitability. Corticomotor excitability is generally higher in patients with PD and corticomotor inhibition is associated with improved movement (Fisher et al., 2008; Mak, 2013). Modest mobility improvements in the low-intensity exercise cohort suggested some benefit from increased activity. These findings pointed to dose-dependent improvements in mobility accompanied by normalization of corticomotor excitability in PD patients who completed 12 weeks of high-intensity exercise (Fisher et al., 2008).

As with other neurodegenerative diseases, there is currently no cure for PD. Pharmacotherapy is the primary treatment option for patients (Mak and Wong-Yu, 2019). Diminishing effects of long-term DAergic treatments and persistent motor impairments in PD limit the therapeutic potential of pharmaceutical interventions (Feng et al., 2020; Mak and Wong-Yu, 2019). Physical activity and exercise are promising, complementary interventions with short- and long-term benefits to PD patients, and animal models have provided clues about the mechanisms underlying functional and molecular improvements (Feng et al., 2020; Mak and Wong-Yu, 2019). Physical exercise may alleviate motor and non-motor phenotypes in PD patients by improving corticomotor plasticity and restoring DAergic activity, but further studies are nonetheless needed to clarify the cellular pathways by which exercise modifies PD (Feng et al., 2020). Most likely different, and perhaps overlapping, mechanisms of protection will be activated by exercise depending on the cause of PD in a specific patient population, the stage of disease, and type of regimen. These mechanisms may well include changes in neuroprotective factors, such as BDNF, engagement of anti-oxidative stress factors, and increases in molecular chaperones that can help maintain protein folding during stress.

Huntington’s Disease (HD)

Huntington’s Disease, the most common inherited neurodegenerative disorder, belongs to the large family of proteinopathies (Finkbeiner, 2011) that also includes ALS, AD, PD and the polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases. Proteinopathies present in mid-adulthood despite expression of disease genes during development (Barnat et al., 2020). HD is caused by a highly penetrant tandem repeat expansion of the triplet nucleotide CAG(A) that encodes glutamine (Q), resulting in extended polyQ tracts in the huntingtin (HTT) protein (Huntington, 2003; Macdonald et al., 1993; Mo et al., 2015). The HTT gene normally harbors between 6 to 35 CAG repeats; alleles with 36–39 repeats yield an increased risk of developing HD. HTT alleles with 40 or more repeats confer fully penetrant HD (Bates, 2005). While disease progression is driven by genetics, recent work has also established that environmental factors, like activity level and exercise, have pronounced disease-modifying effects (Mo et al., 2015). Like AD, substantial evidence exists that exercise protects against HD neurodegeneration in preclinical patients, perhaps by enhancing neuroplasticity, antioxidant resistance, anti-inflammatory pathways and epigenetic regulation. Exercise-induced alterations in microbiome composition that reduce apoptosis and inflammation may also play a protective role in genetically at-risk patients, even before the onset of symptoms (Gubert et al., 2020). Clinical presentation of HD includes motor, cognitive, psychological, and behavioral decline with advanced disease progression resulting in complete lack of independence and early mortality (Mueller et al., 2019b). Studies in animal models and humans provide evidence that endurance exercise may alleviate HD symptoms, but, like other neurodegenerative disorders, the mechanisms are not well understood, and the results have been mixed (Fig 4.).

Whether or not exercise can delay HD onset is a common research question given that expression of its disease gene precedes symptom presentation by decades. R6/1 HD model mice, which express the isolated, human exon 1 of HTT with a pathogenic CAG expansion, were given access to a running wheel; they showed delayed onset of motor deficits as measured on the static horizontal rod and in abnormal rear paw clasping when compared to R6/1 mice without wheel access. Interestingly, delayed phenotypes occurred despite exercised R6/1 HD mice having no significant change in protein aggregates or shrinkage in the striatum or anterior cingulate cortex, pathological hallmarks of HD (van Dellen et al., 2008). Also unclear from this study was whether exercise was solely responsible for the observed benefits, or whether environmental enrichment by the presence of the running wheel was a contributing factor.

Similar to other proteinopathies, mitochondrial dysfunction is one pathogenic mechanism that may contribute to HD. In mouse models, mutant HTT (mHTT) directly interacts with mitochondria, modifying bioenergetics (Yu et al., 2003). Endurance exercise has well established effects on mitochondrial dynamics in multiple tissues, improving mitochondrial respiration, biogenesis, fission-fusion, and mitophagy (Laker et al., 2014; Moore et al., 2019; Safdar et al., 2011). R6/1 mice develop symptoms similar to juvenile-onset HD, and several studies observed the reduction of phenotypes without preventing mHTT aggregation (Mangiarini et al., 1996; van Dellen et al., 2008), similar to the study mentioned above. Treadmill running in R6/1 mice for 10 or 20 weeks starting at 7 weeks of age prevented abnormal hindlimb clasping and partially rescued defects in mitochondrial content and function at 17 weeks that persisted until week 27. Exercised R6/1 mice maintained higher mtDNA in the cortex and striatum, regions particularly susceptible to apoptotic cell death in HD. Exercise also prevented the loss of muscle mitochondrial number and function by 17 weeks, and maintained striatal mitochondrial complexes I and III, preserving complex I respiration at 27 weeks (Herbst and Holloway, 2015). These results suggest that endurance exercise normalizes both mitochondrial content and function in R6/1 HD model mice in various tissues (Herbst and Holloway, 2015).

Another molecule that may contribute to HD pathology by altering mitochondrial enzymatic activity is nitric oxide (NO) (Caldwell et al., 2020). Precise regulation of NO both as a retrograde neurotransmitter and as a post-translational modifier in the CNS is essential for healthy brain function, its supply with blood, and the immune response, playing a role in both neuron survival and premature cell death (Dzoljic et al., 2015). Neuronal NO production is downregulated in HD and may exacerbate negative phenotypes and cell loss through excitotoxicity, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and activation of cell death pathways (Deckel, 2001; Padovan-Neto et al., 2019). Studies in humans and animal models showed that endurance exercise elevates NO in muscle and CNS in normal subjects and in the presence of neurodegeneration in HD (Caldwell et al., 2020; Qi et al., 2020; Virarkar et al., 2013); consequently, increasing NO may restore deficits in neuronal mitochondrial complex activity by reversing aberrant elevation of mitochondrial bioenergetics during HD progression (Bernassola et al., 1999; Chen et al., 2006; Kingwell, 2000). In a CAG140 knock-in (KI) mouse model of HD, 12 weeks of treadmill exercise increased NO and normalized levels of transglutaminase, a multi-functional enzyme that can cross-link mitochondrial proteins and is elevated during neurodegenerative disease (Kumar et al., 2012). Abnormally high transglutaminase activity may contribute to inappropriate protein aggregation, sensitivity to reactive oxygen species, and cell death (Kumar et al., 2012). Endurance exercise also increased aconitase activity in CAG140 HD mice, critical for tricarboxylic acid cycle-mediated cellular metabolism and reduced in the caudate and putamen in HD (Caldwell et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2005; Martinez-Reyes and Chandel, 2020). Restoration of NO levels and mitochondrial complex activity was accompanied by improved rotarod performance (Caldwell et al., 2020). Altogether, these studies strongly indicate that exercise can improve HD phenotypes, at least in part by restoring mitochondrial content and oxidative phosphorylation complex activity.

It is also possible that endurance exercise improves HD phenotypes in mice in a non-mutually exclusive manner by directly reducing hyperactive cell death. Inappropriate activation of apoptosis may contribute to HD progression, and in vitro studies linked apoptosis and mHTT protein (Hickey and Chesselet, 2003; Petersen et al., 1999). In an HD mouse model in which the NMDA receptor agonist, quinolinic acid is injected intrastriatally to induce excitotoxicity (Bruyn and Stoof, 1990), 14 days of treadmill exercise increased anti-apoptotic BCL2 protein expression in hippocampus and decreased expression of the apoptotic indicators caspase-3 and BAX relative to unexercised HD controls. Molecular changes were accompanied by improved spatial learning on the radial 8-arm maze and improved rotarod performance (Ji et al., 2015). This study suggests that exercise reduces HD-related deficits triggered by hippocampal apoptosis, where dysfunction contributes to learning and memory impairments (Vidal-Sancho et al., 2020), even after a relatively brief period of endurance training.

Exercise effects have also been tested in a C. elegans HD model in which touch neurons are specifically affected by polyQ expansion (Parker et al., 2001; Vayndorf et al., 2016). Long-term exercise in C. elegans increases organismal healthspan, improving mitochondrial respiration, survival, and function in multiple organ systems including muscle, gut, and nervous system (Laranjeiro et al., 2019). Premature deficits in touch sensitivity were alleviated by swim exercise across ages relative to sedentary HD worm controls, suggesting that long-term exercise improves neuronal healthspan (Laranjeiro et al., 2019).

C. elegans models take advantage of short lifespan, easily manipulated genetics, and a fully mapped nervous system composed of 302 neurons, making them a powerful organism to study the molecular and genetic underpinnings of both exercise and neurodegenerative disease (Liang et al., 2020). Interestingly, swim exercise in C. elegans provides the greatest long-lasting benefit when initiated early, and overtraining yields maladaptive effects, highlighting the importance of exercise timing and intensity to protect against neurodegenerative phenotypes, as observed in patients with ALS, AD and PD.

While multiple studies in animal models indicate health benefits from exercise in HD and propose several potential mechanisms of neuroprotection, less work has been reported in humans. Similar to previously discussed neurodegenerative diseases, exercise is generally recommended in HD, but benefits tend to be related to cardiovascular, metabolic, and psychological health (Mueller et al., 2019b). Effects of exercise on HD progression, if present, tend to be neutral or modest (Mueller et al., 2019b). For example, muscle biopsies from 13 HD patients with low-disease severity and 11 healthy controls completing a 26 week program of 30–50 minutes of 65% max HR cycling demonstrated restoration of mitochondrial bioenergetics by increasing citrate synthase activity, which is known to increase during normal exercise and used as a biomarker of aerobic capacity and mitochondrial density (Leek et al., 2001), complex III and V activity, and Succinate Cytochrome c Reductase activity. These muscle-specific changes were accompanied by decreased complex I and II activities. Respiratory capacity of complexes I and IV, fatty acid oxidative capacity, and oxidative phosphorylation capacity also increased (Mueller et al., 2017). A follow-up study by the same group compared muscle biopsies in 10 early- and intermediate-stage HD patients and 9 healthy controls. Here, no post-exercise changes were observed in myosin heavy chain cross sectional area, myonuclear cell count, or satellite cell count in the samples from HD patients. In contrast, exercised healthy patients showed increases in all histological parameters. Exercised HD patients failed to induce satellite cell activation and proliferation after exercise, suggesting that impaired tissue remodeling and myofiber turnover may contribute to muscle wasting phenotypes sometimes seen in HD patients (Mueller et al., 2019a).

Progression of motor function in HD can be quantified using the Unified Huntington’s Disease Rating Scale motor section, and neuropsychological function can be quantified using tests like the Mattis dementia rating scale, Hopkins verbal learning tests, and the Stroop tests (Hungtington Study Group, 1996; Hodges et al., 1990; Lemiere et al., 2004; Salmon et al., 1989). In a study of 12 male HD patients and 12 healthy age- and sex-matched controls completing 6 months of cycling exercise at 65% VO2peak, exercised HD patients were adapted to endurance exercise with increased VO2peak and improved body composition; also, the Unified Huntington’s Disease Rating Scale and neuropsychological parameters did not decline, suggesting generalized stabilization of disease progression (Frese et al., 2017). Importantly, there were no negative outcomes from this type of training, although HD patients performed worse than healthy controls in all motor and neuropsychological outcomes. This study highlighted that exercise can improve quality of life in HD patients without negatively impacting disease phenotypes.

Accumulating evidence suggests that exercise training in HD patients is a safe option without negative effects on disease progression (Mueller et al., 2019b). Studies in animal models and humans show benefits to cardiovascular, cellular, and mitochondrial function (Caldwell et al., 2020; Frese et al., 2017; Mueller et al., 2019a; Mueller et al., 2019b), while effects on motor function and cognition are less clear (Frese et al., 2017). Although these studies provide support for the use of exercise as complementary intervention to maintain quality of life in HD patients, additional genetically controlled animal investigations and long-term patient studies are needed to strengthen evidence-based conclusions about the potential benefits of exercise and to uncover specific molecular steps that underscore any potential benefits, which may enable clinical intervention for those unable to conduct exercise regimens.

Spinocerebellar Ataxias (SCAs)

Spinocerebellar Ataxias, characterized by progressive loss of balance and coordination as well as speech disruption, include inherited and sporadic diseases (Klockgether et al., 2019). Familial forms of SCAs comprise a form of dominantly inherited ataxias, of which there are over 40 genetically distinct subtypes (Klockgether et al., 2019). SCAs are further subdivided into those caused by dynamic repeat expansions, which we will discuss here, and those caused by non-repeat mutations. The five SCAs on which we will focus are caused by expanded CAG(A) repeats, similar to HD, encoding abnormally long polyQ regions in their disease proteins (Figure 5), thus referred to as polyQ SCAs (Klockgether et al., 2019).

PolyQ disorders share common pathogenic mechanisms, involving primarily a toxic gain-of-function acquired by the disease protein. PolyQ disorders are progressive, show aggregation of the toxic protein, and usually manifest in adults (Buijsen et al., 2019; La Spada and Taylor, 2003; Lieberman et al., 2018; Paulson et al., 2017; Todi et al., 2007; Zoghbi and Orr, 2000). The potential impact of exercise has been examined to a limited extent in patients with advanced polyQ SCAs: some types of exercise might help in certain cases but not others (Chang et al., 2015; D’Abreu et al., 2010; de Oliveira et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018). Here, we review recent work in animal models and in patients that highlights the effects of endurance exercise on most polyQ SCAs, focusing on underlying mechanisms and changes in disease phenotypes (Fig. 6).

SCA1

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 1 (SCA1) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by dysarthria, hypermetric saccades, impaired gait and balance, progressive loss of motor skills, and other neurological symptoms (Perez Ortiz and Orr, 2018). Like other SCAs, the disease protein, ATXN1 is broadly expressed, but in SCA1, cerebellar Purkinje cells and deep cerebellar and brainstem nuclei are particularly prone to dysfunction and premature cell death (Zoghbi and Orr, 2009). Normal alleles of ATXN1 have CAG repeats from 6–35, intermediate alleles have 36–38 repeats, and fully penetrant pathogenic alleles have repeats of 39 or greater (Nethisinghe et al., 2018).

To test the neuroprotective potential of mild exercise in a rodent model of SCA1, a 4-week long, fixed-speed rotarod program was tested in Atxn1154Q KI mice. Although no significant improvement in motor performance was described, exercise significantly extended lifespan in Atxn1154Q mice compared to unexercised Atxn1154Q siblings (Fryer et al., 2011). Lifespan extension was accompanied by increased brainstem expression of EGF and reduction of the transcriptional repressor Capicua (Cic) (Fryer et al., 2011). Furthermore, a 50% reduction of Cic in Atxn1154Q mice (Atxn1154Q;Cic-L+/−) rescued motor performance in the open-field assay, dowel test (in which investigators score the number of times a mouse reaches the enclosed end of a suspended 0.9 cm dowel), rotarod, and a conditioned fear assay of learning and memory. Atxn1154Q;Cic-L+/− mice also retained Purkinje cell number and integrity, were able to increase body weight, and showed extended survival (Fryer et al., 2011). These results suggested that exercise improves longevity of Atxn1154Q KI mice by reducing brainstem Cic levels, and that constitutive Cic reduction may rescue SCA1 motor phenotypes by increasing cerebellar neuron activity and metabolism by ameliorating transcriptional hyper-repression (Fryer et al., 2011). Here, exercise alleviated premature mortality and revealed transcriptional mechanisms important to SCA1 disease progression.

Pathogenesis of SCA1, as with the other polyQ SCAs, is associated with the accumulation of protein aggregates in neurons. The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway regulates cell growth, survival, and proliferation, and has multiple roles in the CNS, including regulation of autophagy (Perluigi et al., 2015). In the broader context of polyQ proteinopathies, both mTOR activation and inhibition have alleviated bioenergetic and neurodegenerative dysfunction (Sanchez et al., 2016; Sarkar, 2013), and endurance exercise is known to modulate mTOR activity (Lloyd et al., 2017; Watson and Baar, 2014). One mechanism by which mTOR activity may alter neurodegeneration is by modifying autophagy, a cellular pathway that degrades several aggregation-prone proteins (Sarkar, 2013).

A study using SCA182Q transgenic mice described the effect of early exercise intervention on the deterioration of cerebellar neurons, mobility, neuron survival and activity, and the expression of mTOR and autophagy related proteins (Chuang et al., 2019). After 4 weeks of daily treadmill exercise, SCA182Q transgenic mice improved motor performance on the rotarod compared to untrained SCA182Q controls (Chuang et al., 2019). Exercised SCA182Q mice also showed reduced cerebellar Purkinje cell loss compared to the untrained group and had increased phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) in the cerebellum, a marker of mTOR activity. Autophagic markers P62 and microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3) did not increase in exercised SCA1 mice, although both increased in exercised wild type control mice (Chuang et al., 2019). This research presented the capacity of endurance exercise to improve mobility and Purkinje cell stability via an autophagy-independent mechanism, at least in part by increasing rpS6. While rpS6 phosphorylation modulates cell size, neuron activity, glucose metabolism and cell proliferation, this study shows that endurance exercise increased mTOR overexpression in both cortical neurons and other cell types, suggesting mTOR-mediated cell proliferation may drive enhanced neuron survival in this context (Chuang et al., 2019). Based on these studies, endurance exercise restores metabolic dysfunction in neurons by regulating both transcription and post-translational modifications, increasing neuron survival in SCA1.

SCA2

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), caused by CAG repeat expansion in ATXN2, is a hereditary polyQ disorder characterized by progressive ataxia and slow saccades (Scoles and Pulst, 2018). Toxic gain-of-function from expanded polyQ in the ATXN2 protein results in slow Purkinje cell firing and eventual neuron loss (Scoles and Pulst, 2018). SCA2 patients experience similar symptoms to other SCA patients and clinically distinct signs like muscle cramping, slow or absent saccades, neuropathy, muscle spasticity, and frontal-executive dysfunction (Ashizawa et al., 2013). SCA2 phenotypes arise almost exclusively from the cerebellum, with the exception of distinct features that originate from the oculomotor brainstem (Gwinn-Hardy et al., 2000). CAG repeats ≥33Q cause SCA2, but intermediate repeats between 27 and 33Q are associated with an increased risk for ALS (Elden et al., 2010). As with other SCAs, there is no cure for SCA2 and therapies are designed to control symptoms. Prevention of toxic aggregate accumulation and examination of endogenous gene function, namely RNA quality control, Ca2+ homeostasis, and ATXN2 expression, are routes considered for therapeutic intervention (Liu et al., 2009; Ragothaman and Muthane, 2008; Ralser et al., 2005).

Like in SCA1, mTOR signaling has been implicated in ATXN2 regulation. Poly(A)-binding protein interacts with the polyA end of mRNA during the initiation of protein translation, and Poly(A)-binding protein and ATXN2 physically interact (Ralser et al., 2005). Cultured mouse embryonic fibroblasts null for Atxn2 show increased levels of phospho-S6K and 4EBP1, which are downstream targets of mTOR signaling. Additionally, ATXN2 mRNA levels are higher in cultured SH-SY5Y cells treated with rapamycin, a specific inhibitor or mTOR, suggesting ATXN2 activation under the translational regulation of Poly(A)-binding protein when mTOR is inhibited (Lastres-Becker et al., 2016). Despite the diverse effects of endurance exercise on the genetic programs related to improved healthspan, little work has been done directly linking exercise to SCA2. Limited investigations in small patient cohorts suggest that exercise may be beneficial.

One study included a controlled trial of prodromal SCA2 patients undergoing 12 weeks of neurorehabilitation. Study participants were prescribed a 12-week walking exercise, balance and coordination regimen for four hours per day, five days per week (Velazquez-Perez et al., 2019). Participants were assessed before and after exercise for five-meter (5-m) tandem gait on the floor, 5-m tandem gait on a mattress, and time upholding tandem position with eyes closed on the floor, on a mattress, and on a seesaw. Secondary outcomes were finger-nose test and heel-shin test, along with time to complete the 9-hole peg board, a test of manual dexterity (Velazquez-Perez et al., 2019). The scores of both the Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (SARA) and the Inventory of Non-Ataxia Symptoms were obtained at the end of rehabilitation (Schmitz-Hubsch et al., 2008; Schmitz-Hubsch et al., 2006). Exercised subjects showed significantly reduced times in the 5-m tandem gait over the floor and mattress, and significantly increased time upholding stance over both the mattress and seesaw. Finger-nose and heel-shin tests also improved in the rehabilitated group (Velazquez-Perez et al., 2019). Although molecular mechanisms were not investigated in this study, improvements in gait, posture, and coordination provide an important link between physical exercise and preservation of motor function in SCA2.

A pilot study of early-stage SCA2 patients and other participants with diverse ataxias (SCA1: 1 participant, SCA3: 2 participants, Friedreich’s Ataxia: 5 participants) used a proprioceptive stabilizer during physical rehabilitative training that uses vibratory energy to lengthen muscles and modulate spinal reflex excitability (Leonardi et al., 2017). After three weeks of 40-minute physiotherapy sessions wearing the device, participants improved their SARA scores, PATA dysarthria scores (patients repeat the syllables “PA-TA” as quickly as possible), six-minute walking time, and space-time gait parameters like cadence, length of gait cycle, and gait/cycle ratio. Interestingly, positive effects were lasting: patients maintained performance in most outputs after three weeks of continued physiotherapy, even after they stopped wearing the proprioceptive stabilizer (Leonardi et al., 2017).

SCA3

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease, is the most common dominantly inherited ataxia worldwide (Carr et al., 2019). SCA3 results from abnormal CAG expansion greater than 54 repeats in its disease gene, ATXN3, which encodes a deubiquitinase. The accumulated disease protein is most often seen as ubiquitin-positive intranuclear inclusions in pontine neurons (Matos et al., 2019; Paulson, 2012; Paulson et al., 1997; Perez et al., 1998; Uchihara et al., 2001; Yamada et al., 2001). Much like the aforementioned SCAs, SCA3 is progressive and results in cell loss in the brain stem, cerebellum, pontine, and other select areas. Progressive neuromotor dysfunction in the brainstem, oculomotor system, pyramidal and extrapyramidal pathways, lower motor neurons, and peripheral nerves leads to gradual weakening of muscles and neurogenic atrophy (Cancel et al., 1995; Dürr et al., 1996; Friedman, 2002; Friedman et al., 2003; Lin and Soong, 2002; Matos et al., 2019; Matsumura et al., 1996; Paulson, 2012; Rub et al., 2004; Rüb et al., 2003; Rüb et al., 2004; Rüb et al., 2002a; Rüb et al., 2002b; Sasaki et al., 1995; Schöls et al., 1996; Sequeiros and Coutinho, 1993; Soong et al., 1997; Takiyama et al., 1994; Watanabe et al., 1998; Zhou et al., 1997). Onset of symptoms begins with gait imbalance, vestibular dysregulation, and speech problems, progressing to advanced pathology including dysphagia and complete loss of mobility. There is no cure for SCA3 and death usually results from asphyxia within 20–25 years of symptom onset (Klockgether et al., 2019; Paulson, 2012).

Extending the period of healthy mobility is of high importance to individuals suffering from ataxia. In fact, among Aboriginal families in communities across Australia’s top end, where SCA3 is more prevalent than in any other global region, patients describe “staying strong on the inside and outside” and “exercising your body” as major factors allowing them to do “what mattered most to them in life” (Carr et al., 2019). Although few investigations directly examined the effect of endurance exercise on SCA3 progression, some work was done that supports the benefits of physical activity on SCA phenotypes.

A study of early-stage SCA patients, including six individuals with SCA3 (and one participant each with SCAs 2 and 7) observed the effects of partial body weight support treadmill training on function and quality of life (de Oliveira et al., 2018). The first stage of the study examined gait performance, treadmill inclination, exercise duration, and cardiorespiratory capacity via cardiopulmonary exercise testing with ventilatory expired gas analysis and respiratory oxygen uptake during exercise (VEpeak/ VO2max). Participants significantly improved gait balance during partial body weight supported treadmill walking, cardiorespiratory capacity, and treadmill inclination (de Oliveira et al., 2018). Five participants moved onto stage two, in which partial body weight supported treadmill walking was combined with catching a ball, testing balance and coordination. Although SARA scores, ADLs and VEpeak/ VO2max did not significantly change, the score in the Berg balance scale, a measure of postural control, increased significantly (de Oliveira et al., 2018; Miyamoto et al., 2004).

A second study by the same investigators examined the impact of static and dynamic balance exercises on Berg balance scale scores before and after intervention in a similar patient cohort (SCA3: 8 participants, SCA2: 2 participants, SCA7: 1 participant) (Santos de Oliveira et al., 2015). In contrast to endurance exercise, which centers around cardiorespiratory performance, balance exercises are geared toward increasing balance and reducing fall rates, particularly important in preventing comorbidities and improving independence in patients with neuromotor defects (Halabchi et al., 2017). Berg balance scale scores significantly increased after balance training for all study participants, even after modifications in the protocol that tailored frequency and intensity downward to account for participant ability, to increase participation and feasibility (Santos de Oliveira et al., 2015).

Conventional balance training has also been directly compared to core stability training in early to moderate stage SCA3 patients able to walk a minimum distance of 10 meters to see if balance and fear from falls was differentially affected depending on training subtype (Tabbassum et al., 2013). After 4 weeks of hourly sessions performed three times per week, participants in the core stability training group significantly increased Balance Evaluation Systems Test Efficacy Scale scores compared to the conventional training group, but neither group improved Modified Falls Efficacy Scale scores, suggesting that more targeted, core-specific training may enhance physiotherapy by improving dynamic balance in SCA patients (Tabbassum et al., 2013).

Exergaming has also been studied to assess whether or not the use of interactive video games during exercise training improves therapeutic outcomes in early stage SCA3 patients (Wang et al., 2018). Patients were assigned to either traditional balance and coordination training or a comparable program paired with an exergaming program and with a Microsoft Xbox Kinect Sensor (Wang et al., 2018). Here, both groups improved SARA scores at the end of the conditioning period. Interestingly, after four weeks of intervention, only the exergaming participants improved gait-posture SARA scores, suggesting that the Kinect Sensor may provide real-time motor-specific feedback to the cerebellum of SCA patients that helps guide performance, often a challenge during normal balance and coordination training (Shih et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018).

SCA6

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6 (SCA6) is a late-onset, slowly progressing ataxia mainly characterized by cerebellar signs and eye movement problems (Globas et al., 2008; Maruyama et al., 2002; Stevanin et al., 1997). SCA6 results from CAG repeat expansions from 20 to 33 in the CACNA1A gene that encodes the α1A subunit of a P/Q type voltage gated Ca2+ channel and the transcription factor α1ACT (Du et al., 2013; Fujioka et al., 2013; Tsou et al., 2016). Disease can last over 25 years with some individuals maintaining unassisted mobility more than 20 years after onset (Gomez et al., 1997). Penetrance is nearly 100% in SCA6 patients, but unlike other SCAs, anticipation is not observed (Ishikawa et al., 1997; Yabe et al., 1998). Atrophy is observed in the cerebellum, pons, brainstem, and basal ganglia (Eichler et al., 2011; Murata et al., 1998; Nagai et al., 1998; Soong et al., 2001).

Characterizations of cerebellar ataxic gait include increased step width, variable foot placement, and trajectory, all resulting in a stumbling walking path and increased fall risk (de Warrenburg et al., 2005; Morton and Bastian, 2004). Thus, fall prevention by coordinative training is a primary therapeutic measure. A study of 16 degenerative cerebellar mild to moderate-severity ataxia patients – including SCA6 patients and patients with degeneration in afferent pathways – examined the motor performance effects of intensive coordinative training using pre-training assessments as an intra-patient control (Ilg et al., 2009). Physiotherapy methods included static and dynamic balance training (including sidesteps and stair climbs), whole-body movement, trunk-limb coordination, and fall-prevention strategies. Primary outcomes included SARA scores for gait and posture, speech, and limb-kinetic function as well as ataxia assessment by the international cooperative ataxia rating scale (Ilg et al., 2010; Schmitz-Hubsch et al., 2006). Balance was tested using Berg balance scale and individual goals were selected using a goal attainment score (Miyamoto et al., 2004). Motor performance was also measured using motion capture to assess velocity, step length and width, and lateral body sway. After weeks of intense coordinative training, both SCA6 patients and those with afferent cerebellar degeneration improved their SARA, International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale, and Berg balance scale scores. Interestingly, after an additional four weeks of home-based self-training, only the SCA6 patients retained a long-lasting benefit (Ilg et al., 2009). Gait analysis revealed similar improvements for SCA6 patients, while the afferent group did not improve motor performance (Ilg et al., 2009). SCA6 participants also achieved better results in their individual goal attainment performance than ‘afferent’ participants (Ilg et al., 2009).

The same patients were reexamined one year later in an effort to study the long-term effects of an intensive coordinative training protocol on motor performance and goal attainment (Ilg et al., 2010). Participants were asked to continue an at-home program in which they performed individualized exercises for an hour daily. After one year, disease progression caused an increase in SARA scores, but they did not reach baseline levels (i.e., before coordinative training intervention) (Ilg et al., 2010). While both Berg balance scale and Goal attainment scores were stable or even improved after one year, quantitative movement analysis revealed that improvements in gait and joint coordination in SCA6 patients did not persist long-term (Ilg et al., 2010). These studies showed specific, long-lasting effects of physical activity on SCA6, namely retention of balance and goal attainment, and highlighted the importance of continued intensive physiotherapy to retain motor function.

Obstacle avoidance during ambulation provides an additional challenge for ataxia patients, contributing to a higher risk of comorbidities from falls (Bakker et al., 2006; Fonteyn et al., 2014). A study of 10 early-stage ataxia patients, including patients with SCA6, compared pre- and post-training obstacle avoidance on a treadmill, as well as measures of dynamic stability and performance on an overground obstacle course upon completion of the program (Fonteyn et al., 2014). The treadmill projected visual obstacles and stepping targets onto the belt and provided real-time feedback of gait parameters that could adjust the timing and visual cues according to participant performance (Fonteyn et al., 2014; Roerdink et al., 2008). Success rates on the obstacle avoidance task on the treadmill increased from 78.5% pre-training to 94.8% post-training, with patients typically increasing dynamic stability by shortening steps to avoid obstacles (Fonteyn et al., 2014). SARA scores and the obstacle subtask of functional ambulation also improved (Baer and Wolf, 2001; Fonteyn et al., 2014). These promising trials demonstrated the adaptive potential of SCA6 patients and others to physiotherapy and underscore the importance of exercise as a therapeutic intervention.

SCA7

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 7 (SCA7) results from abnormal CAG expansion in the ATXN7 gene, which is part of Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA), a conserved transcriptional coactivation complex (Garden and La Spada, 2008; Helmlinger et al., 2004). SAGA has chromatin remodeling activities essential for RNA polymerase II transcription and modifies autophagy, mitochondrial homeostasis, cell-cell interactions, and neuronal differentiation (Bonnet et al., 2014; Niewiadomska-Cimicka and Trottier, 2019). Like previously discussed SCAs, progressive neuronal loss in the cerebellum and brainstem lead to ataxia, while blindness from retinal cell loss is an exclusive feature of SCA7 (Niewiadomska-Cimicka and Trottier, 2019). Studies in cell culture and animal models showed that gene expression and transcriptional regulation contribute to SCA7 pathogenesis, and epigenetic factors like acetylation and microRNAs also play an important role (Abou-Sleymane et al., 2006; Kizilyaprak et al., 2011; Tan et al., 2014; Yoo et al., 2003).

Although there is no cure for SCA7, exercise is known to modify autophagy, mitochondrial health, gene expression, and epigenetics, all important in disease progression (Fernandes et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2020b; Laker et al., 2014). Furthermore, physical training significantly improved outcomes and biomarkers in SCA7, suggesting exercise may provide a non-pharmacological treatment option for patients (Niewiadomska-Cimicka and Trottier, 2019; Tercero-Perez et al., 2019). In a six-month long study of SCA7 patients with moderate disease severity, subjects randomly assigned to an intensive training group or moderate training group performed two-hour sessions of neurorehabilitation exercises five or three days per week, respectively. Neuro-rehabilitative techniques that were utilized included: balance training; relaxation and breathing exercises; stretching, which is particularly helpful in the prevention of muscle spasticity and contracture; and resistance exercise, which can improve fatigue and ambulation (Halabchi et al., 2017; Tercero-Perez et al., 2019). Outcomes from exercised groups were compared to an untrained control group (Tercero-Perez et al., 2019). Physical activities were adjusted according to the visual acuity of the patients and focused on motor control, gait adjustment, coordination, static and dynamic balance, physical conditioning, and muscular strengthening (Tercero-Perez et al., 2019). Participants were assessed pre-training, after 12 weeks, and post-training. SARA scores improved at 12 weeks and post-training in both the moderate and intensive training groups for gait, posture, dysarthria, dysmetria, tremor, and stance, while no significant effect was observed in the control group. Extracerebellar scores and Inventory of Non-Ataxia Signs were unaffected by training (Tercero-Perez et al., 2019). Finally, trained participants had decreased levels of dityrosine, malondialdehyde, and lipid hydroperoxides, markers of protein and lipid damage, which suggested that neurorehabilitation prevents protein damage and enhances antioxidant activity in SCA7 patients (Tercero-Perez et al., 2019).

Large, well-controlled investigations of the motor features and functional declines in SCA patients are partially limited by variability in exercise compliance and participant composition, often comprising patients from multiple SCA classifications (Fonteyn et al., 2014; Leonardi et al., 2017; Miyai et al., 2012; Tabbassum et al., 2013). Tercero-Perez et al., summarized above, report specific, therapeutic effects of exercise in SCA7 patients, namely improved cerebellar symptoms and increased circulating antioxidant defense markers (2019). Future studies may identify clinical and molecular features of distinct ataxias by applying uniform exercise protocols to each ataxia individually.

Few studies have explored the effect of endurance exercise on polyQ SCA phenotypes, but positive associations exist between increased activity and enhanced quality of life (Fujioka et al., 2013). While investigations using animal models of exercise and ataxia are limited, there is consistent clinical evidence that exercise and physical rehabilitation improve function, quality of life, mobility, and balance (Milne et al., 2017). There is a clear need for additional, well-controlled animal studies and longitudinal clinical investigations to clarify both the effects of exercise on specific polyQ SCAs and the mechanisms behind these effects. These studies will allow us to distinguish whether increased physical exercise directly alleviates polyQ SCA phenotypes or complements care.

Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy (SBMA)

Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy, also known as Kennedy’s Disease, is another polyQ disorder. Unlike the previously discussed HD and SCAs, the SBMA-causing mutation is not autosomal but occurs in the androgen receptor (AR) gene on the X chromosome (Brooks and Fischbeck, 1995; Dahlqvist and Vissing, 2016; La Spada et al., 1991). Normal polyQ AR length ranges from 9–36Q, while expansions from 38–62Q residues are pathogenic (Parodi and Pennuto, 2011). SBMA is a slowly progressing disease characterized by lower motor neuron dysfunction yielding weakness and atrophy of bulbar and extremity muscles (Dahlqvist and Vissing, 2016). Disease progression may be a result of motor neuron loss and muscle denervation; direct skeletal muscle involvement is likely another significant contributing factor (Cortes et al., 2014; Giorgetti et al., 2016; Soraru et al., 2008). In other words, motor dysfunction may be a result of toxic gain-of-function in both neurons and muscle. Fortunately, exercise has powerful effects in multiple tissues (Leal et al., 2018; Sujkowski et al., 2015; Sujkowski et al., 2020; Sujkowski et al., 2017; Sujkowski et al., 2019) and may benefit patients with SBMA. Observations in humans and animal models suggest that exercise may improve SBMA phenotypes through enhanced mitochondrial equilibrium, activation of dysfunctional AR by testosterone, and increased levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) that are normally low in SBMA (Palazzolo et al., 2009; Petzinger et al., 2013; Ranganathan et al., 2009).

Like previously discussed progressive neurodegenerative disorders, evidence from animal models suggests that exercise may act through conserved pathways to improve SBMA phenotypes, but excessive modulation of these same pathways may also contribute to dysfunction. Several murine studies show that SBMA progression is characterized by metabolic dysfunction, mitochondrial dysregulation, and defects in autophagy, pathways that are modified by endurance exercise (Chua et al., 2014; He et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2020b; Laker et al., 2014; Rocchi et al., 2016; Sujkowski et al., 2012). In a transgenic mouse model of SBMA (ARQ113), RNAseq showed reduction in carbohydrate metabolism genes and upregulation of lipid mobilizing genes, indicating a shift from glycolytic to oxidative metabolism. SBMA mice had altered mitochondrial number and morphology as well as dysfunctional metabolic and physiological responses to exercise (Giorgetti et al., 2016). SBMA mice fatigued faster than exercised background genetic controls, relying on mobilization of lipid stores to cope with exercise-induced increases in energy requirements and failing to display muscle adaptations characteristic of exercise (Giorgetti et al., 2016). SBMA mice also failed to improve grip strength or endurance, and both Type I and Type II muscle fibers were reduced after exercise, suggesting that endurance exercise may not be well tolerated (Giorgetti et al., 2016).

A second study in ARQ113 mice implicates increased muscle-specific expression of Transcription Factor EB, critical for lysosomal biogenesis, and increased autophagy as important factors contributing to SBMA disease progression (Chua et al., 2014). Here, observations in cultured cells revealed reduced mTOR-signaling, providing a potential mechanism for upregulation of autophagy in ARQ113 cells. Muscle histology from ARQ113 mice identified mTOR-dependent upregulation of Transcription Factor EB and subsequent increases in both baseline and exercise-induced autophagy in muscles (Chua et al., 2014). Although these studies do not suggest exercise-induced improvements in SBMA phenotypes, they provide important clues about the mechanisms of disease progression. Taking these investigations into account, clinical studies may be able to modify protocols to maximize desirable cellular adaptations without inducing maladaptive effects, as indicated by human studies, discussed next.

Studies in SBMA patients have suggested that varying exercise intensity may be one way to improve disease phenotypes without exacerbating degeneration. For example, 50 moderate-severity SBMA patients were recruited to a home-based functional exercise program and assigned to either low-intensity exercise or stretching program control groups; both groups tolerated exercise well but did not achieve significantly different outcomes in the Adult Myopathic Assessment Tool or secondary outcomes like activity level, muscle strength, and balance regardless of training assignment (Harris-Love et al., 2014; Shrader et al., 2015). However, post-hoc analysis that divided participants into low- and high-functioning subgroups noted significant improvement in Adult Myopathic Assessment Tool scores for the exercised, low-functioning subgroup (Shrader et al., 2015). This study suggested dose-dependent benefits of exercise in SBMA patients, and that exercise intensity should be prescribed according to function.

In a second study, eight SBMA patients, pre-screened for baseline ability to complete 20 minutes of uninterrupted cycling, performed 30 minutes of cycling at 65–70% VO2max, gradually increasing session frequency until the end of the 12-week training (Preisler et al., 2009). Primary outputs included VO2max, performed workload, and self-reported ADLs; secondary outputs were muscle morphology, citrate synthase activity, body composition, EMG, static strength, and lung function (Preisler et al., 2009). Moderate-intensity exercise was not well tolerated, and frequency was decreased prior to the end of the training program. At the end of the 12-week cycling program, moderate exercise led to increases in performed workload and citrate synthase activity, but no other output was significantly affected (Preisler et al., 2009). The authors also examined the plasma levels of creatine kinase (CK), a biomarker of muscle degeneration. They found increased levels of CK during intense exercise, indicating primary myopathy. Primary myopathy, in combination with motor neuron dysfunction, likely mitigated any therapeutic potential of moderate-intensity exercise in this disease (Preisler et al., 2009).

A third investigation studied the effects of high-intensity interval training (HIIT) in pre-screened SBMA patients who exercised less than one hour per week. Investigators hypothesized that HIIT would be better tolerated by patients since it requires less time than low- and moderate-intensity training and therefore motor neurons would be active for less time (Heje et al., 2019). Participants were randomized to either a training or a control group and assessed before, during, and after training. The intervention lasted 16 weeks: 8 weeks supervised and 8 weeks unsupervised. HIIT was based on the 30-20-10 s concept in which an eight-minute warm up was followed by five-minute high-intensity blocks where patients trained 30 s in low, 20 s in moderate intensity and 10 s all out five times repeatedly, separated by three minute breaks (Gunnarsson and Bangsbo, 2012). Primary outcomes were VO2max and performed workload, and secondary outcomes were the six-minute walk test, pedometer-recorded changes in activity levels, self-reported levels of activity, fatigue, and pain. Serum CK was measured as a marker of muscle damage (Heje et al., 2019). After eight weeks of HIIT, both VO2max and performed workload significantly increased compared to the non-trained groups. Improvements in VO2max and performed workload persisted after an additional eight weeks of at-home HIIT, indicating that supervised training was not necessary for benefits (Heje et al., 2019). CK levels did not rise, and self-rated fatigue, pain, and activity remained stable throughout the 16 weeks of intervention, suggesting that HIIT is well tolerated in SBMA patients (Heje et al., 2019). Participants also described a preference for HIIT over low- and moderate-intensity exercise (Heje et al., 2019).

Taken together, these studies describe maximum benefit to SBMA patients when exercise programs are prescribed based on both intensity and participant disease stage, with maximum benefit and compliance from short duration, high-intensity programs. Evidence suggests that individually tailored interventions – centered around both disease stage and exercise intensity – are essential for SBMA patients to receive maximum benefit. Also, patients must be carefully monitored for maladaptive biomakers in order to prevent muscle damage and worsening of disease phenotypes.

Conclusions

As the population ages, concerns about increased health care responsibilities, including the impact of progressive degenerative diseases, have been amplified (Houde and Melillo, 2009; Yazdanyar and Newman, 2009). Interventions that can preserve body function across ages and diseases are thus of substantial importance. As highlighted by studies with various degenerative disease models and in patients, one promising therapeutic intervention to impede progressive functional decline is endurance exercise. Endurance training induces remodeling in muscle tissue that alters the metabolic health of the entire organism (Bo et al., 2010; Gibala, 2009; Ventura-Clapier et al., 2007). Evidence from humans and model organisms strongly suggests that endurance exercise has substantially protective effects on various indices of healthspan (Cutler and Mattson, 2006).

The potential impact of endurance exercise and physical activity on progressive neurodegenerative disease has been examined in C. elegans, rodent models, and in humans. New tools and model systems provide significant information about the molecular mechanisms driving the beneficial effects of endurance exercise in neurodegenerative disease. However, substantial obstacles exist against widespread application of endurance exercise therapy in human neurodegeneration patients. Activation of beneficial pathways is inherently dependent on exercise capacity, and progressive neurodegeneration often limits patient capability and compliance to a training program. Generally, higher activity levels correlate with delayed disease onset. Despite this relationship, researchers have yet to differentiate whether exercise mechanisms are disease-modifying or neuroprotective.

Rodent models have been invaluable to the identification of conserved mechanisms underlying the benefits of endurance exercise on neurodegenerative disease (Dar et al., 2020). Recently, invertebrate model systems have emerged as another valuable tool for the study of exercise in the context of neurodegeneration. Model organisms like Drosophila and C. elegans have been used to study neurodegeneration for some time, leveraging their easily-manipulated genetics and relatively simple nervous systems (McGurk et al., 2015). Now, endurance exercise paradigms have been established for both Drosophila and C. elegans, opening the door for complex molecular dissection of neuroprotective pathways (Laranjeiro et al., 2019; Sujkowski and Wessells, 2018). Studies in C. elegans have examined exercise effects on both AD and HD phenotypes, highlighting the utility of isogenous, genetically controlled invertebrate models with which to further our understanding of exercise benefits during neurodegeneration. Rapid generation time and short lifespans allow for large-scale, complex longitudinal analysis of genetically identical populations, reducing background effects and allowing for precise physiological and cellular assessments in vivo. Many genetic invertebrate models already exist, providing the necessary tools for investigations that build a strong foundation for translational research (McGurk et al., 2015).

It is precisely because of these model organisms and their genetic flexibilities that we have begun to uncover some mechanisms of neuroprotection from exercise. Accumulating DNA damage, caused by exogenous (environmental, physical, biochemical) and endogenous (defective DNA repair, reactive oxygen species) factors, plays a major role in both aging and neurodegeneration, while exercise helps maintain genomic stability during normal aging and neurodegeneration (Madabhushi et al., 2014; Rebelo-Marques et al., 2018). The oxidation-sensitive chaperone DJ-1 has been linked to ALS, PD, HD, and ataxias, and can act as a transcriptional co-activator with Nrf2 and nuclear factor kappa B, improving DNA repair (Islam, 2017; Madabhushi et al., 2014; Rebelo-Marques et al., 2018). Similarly, the exercise-induced transcriptional cofactor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC1-α) augments DNA repair mechanisms both during normal aging and in the presence of neurodegenerative diseases like ALS, PD, and HD (Radak et al., 2002; Wrann et al., 2013). In addition, both DJ-1 and PGC1-α are important for oxidative stress response and mitochondrial homeostasis, critical factors in neurological health and preservation (Onyango et al., 2017).

Oxidative stress is strongly linked to the etiology of chronic neurodegenerative diseases (Akbar and Ashizawa, 2015; D’Amico et al., 2013; Streck et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2013). Neurons are particularly susceptible to oxidative damage-induced dysfunction and cell death due to high energy demands and low antioxidant defense mechanisms (Streck et al., 2013). Evidence from rodent models suggests that exercise increases not only DJ-1 and PGC1-α activity, but also SOD1 and the mitochondrial antioxidant enzymes MnSOD/Cu-ZnSOD, required in neurons for defense against reactive oxygen species generated in the presence of neurodegeneration (Carreras et al., 2010; Lau et al., 2011).

Based on these and other studies, PGC1-α has emerged as a major exercise-induced factor that exerts neuroprotection by modulating several intersecting pathways. Not only does PGC1-α coordinate mitochondrial biogenesis and function; its activity is also required to improve cognitive deficits. In mice, PGC1-α acts via FNDC5, a muscle protein induced by exercise and cleaved and secreted as irisin, to increase hippocampal expression of BDNF (Wrann et al., 2013). Furthermore, PGC1-α is essential for regulating neural responses to environmental, metabolic, and genotoxic stress, and plays a role in the prevention of inappropriate protein aggregation and premature cell death (Jones et al., 2012).

Preventing the abnormal accumulation of protein aggregates is another shared pathway by which exercise may alleviate neurodegenerative phenotypes. Autophagy is upregulated by exercise and can degrade cargo material such as aggregation-prone proteins and damaged mitochondria (mitophagy), contributing to intraneural homeostasis (He et al., 2012; Laker et al., 2014; Menzies et al., 2017). Evidence from animal models suggests that increased autophagy is linked to reductions in Aβ and tau oligomers as well as removal of damaged mitochondria, reducing neuroinflammation and abnormal protein aggregation in diseases like AD, PD and several polyQ diseases (Newman and Shadel, 2018; Ohia-Nwoko et al., 2014).

An additional, recently identified molecular target that is required for exercise adaptations and healthy aging is the stress-inducible, exercise-mimicking protein, Sestrin (Kim et al., 2020b). Sestrins are induced by oxidative and genotoxic stress in flies and mammals and promote autophagy (Budanov and Karin, 2008; Lee et al., 2010); they protect against oxidative stress-induced fly neuronal death (Singh and Chowdhuri, 2018); and they reduce accumulation of abnormal protein aggregates in mammalian cells (Reddy et al., 2016). As already mentioned, increased oxidative stress plays a harmful role in diseases like AD, PD and polyQ disorders, contributing to neurodegeneration via mitochondrial dysfunction, excitotoxicity, and apoptotic processes (Chen et al., 2019). Autophagy dysregulation is also implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. Proteins such as Sestrin – that can counteract detrimental effects and regulate neuroprotective pathways – may be critical to identifying effective treatments for neurodegenerative disease (Chen et al., 2019).

In wild-type Drosophila, expression of fly Sestrin is sufficient to extend speed and endurance, and has no additive effect with exercise, consistent with a role as a key effector of exercise (Kim et al., 2020b). In addition, Sestrin mutations nullify gains from exercise in both flies and mice, highlighting this gene as a primary player in exercise-dependent benefits (Kim et al., 2020b). Previous work in flies and mice suggests that Sestrins potentiate TORC2 activity and slightly inhibit TORC1, mimicking exercise by enhancing metabolic health without the unwanted negative effects of chronic mTOR activation (Kim et al., 2020b). These findings suggest that activating Sestrin in neurodegenerative disease patients may enable the development of innovative therapeutics that preserve mobility and quality of life, even in patients no longer able to complete an exercise program. To date, it is not clear how Sestrin is involved in exercise-based benefits in neurodegenerative diseases. Still, the data on this intriguing gene collectively suggest it as a target ready for investigation.

Evidence is clear that various types of exercise positively impact age-related problems, including neurodegenerative diseases. Endurance exercise appears to be nearly universally beneficial in animal models and in patients suffering from various diseases of the nervous system — whether motor-related, cognitive-related, or both. Still, additional long-term studies in humans and better-standardized protocols are needed to clarify the mechanisms that drive the benefits of exercise in neurodegenerative disease. Current limitations include differences in protocols and study design. While studies in animal models allow for tightly controlled experimental conditions, studies in human patients comprise variable exercise modalities, intensities, and patient makeup, making it difficult to form concrete conclusions that are relevant across diseases, biomarkers, and treatments. Genetics, age, and disease stage are also difficult factors to control in human trials. Future efforts to systematically examine which neurodegenerative diseases are responsive to exercise, and what the key mechanisms of exercise effects are, may depend on large, long-term human studies in combination with highly controlled exercise regimens in model organisms. In this way, it may be possible to identify exercise-based molecular mechanisms that can be targeted in the clinic in the future, in lieu of exercise, especially for individuals suffering from severe neurodegeneration who are unable to undergo this type of training. This is of utmost importance given the limited therapeutic interventions for many neurodegenerative diseases.

Funding:

This work was funded at least in part by a Thomas Rumble Graduate Fellowship by Wayne State University to ALS, by NIH R01 AG059683 to RJW, by R21 NS121276 to RJW and SVT, and by R01 NS086778 to SVT.

List of abbreviations from Tables 1 &amp; 2

1RM Maximal Strength of Knee Extensor Muscles

6-MWT 6-Minute Walking Time

9HPT 9-Hole Peg Board Test

ABC Activities Specific Balance Scale

ADAM10 A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase Domain-Containing Protein

ADLs Barthel Index of Activities of Daily Living

AE Aerobic

AKT Serine/Threonine Kinase Akt

ALS-SS ALS Severity Scale

ALSFRS Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale

ALSFRS-R Revised ALSFRS-Respiratory

AMAT Adult Myopathic Assessment Tool

Apoε4 Apolipoprotein E4

BACE1 β-Site Amyloid Precursor Protein Cleaving Enzyme 1

BADL Basic Instrumental Activities of Daily Living

BAX Bcl2-Like Protein 4

BB Balance Beam

BBS Berg Balance Scale

BCL2 Bcl2 Apoptosis Regulator

BDNF Brain Derived Eurotrophic Factor

BECN1 Beclin 1

BEST Balance Evaluation Systems Test Efficacy Scale

BMI Body Mass Index

BMT Barnes Maze Task

BP Blood Pressure

BW Body Weight

BWST Body Weight Supported Treadmill Training

CAMCOG Cambridge Cognitive Examination

CD36 Cluster of Differentiation 36

CDK5 Cyclin Dependent Kinase 5

CIC Capicua

CK Creatine Kinase

CPET Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test

CS Citrate Synthase

DA Dopamine

DAD Disability Assessment for Dementia

DAT Dopamine Uptake Transporter

DGI Dynamic Gait Index

DRS-2 Dementia Rating Scale 2

DJ-1 Protein Deglycase DJ-1

DSBW Digit Span Backward Walking

DSFW Digit Span Forward Walking

DT Dityrosine

ECG Electrocardiogram

EFAP Emory Functional Ambulation Profile

EGF Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor

EMG Electromyography

F-NT Finger-to-Nose Test

FAS Fatty Acid Synthase

FIM Functional Independence Measure

FRDA Friedreich’s Ataxia

FSS Fatigue Severity Scale

fx Function

GAPDH Glyceraldehyde 3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase

GAS Goal Attainment Score

GDNF Glial Cell Line Derived Neurotrophic Factor

GET Gas Exchange Threshold

GLUT4 Glucose Transport Protein 4

GPx Glutathione Peroxidase

GR Glutathione Reductase

GSK3 Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3

GT Glucose Transport

GTT Glucose Tolerance Test

H-ST Heel-to-Shin Test

HIT High-Intensity Training

HIIT High-Intensity Interval Training

HSP70 Heat Shock Protein 70 kD

HVLT-R Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised

IADL Instrumental Activities of Daily Living

ICARS International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale

IL-10 Interleukin 10

INAS Inventory of Non-Ataxia Symptoms

JNK c-JUN N-Terminal kinase

Katz ADL Katz Index of Independence in Activities of Daily Living

KI Knock-In

L- Lactate

LC3 Microtubule-Associated Protein Light Chain 3

LC3B Microtubule-Associated Proteins 1A/1B Light Chain 3B

LCII/III Microtubule-Associated Protein 1A/1 B-Light Chain 3 Flu

LPH Lipid Hydroperoxides

LS Lifespan

LV Left Ventricular

mATPase Myofibrillar Adenosine Triphosphatase

MDA Malondialdehyde

MDS-UPDRS-III Movement Disorders Society Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale-III

MFES Modified Falls Efficacy Scale

MMSE Mini-Mental State Examination

mOxPhos Mitochondrial Oxidative Phosphorylation Complex

MPTP Methyl-4-Phenyl-1 2 3 6-Tetrahydropyridine

MRCSS Medical Research Council Sum Score

mtDNA Mitochondrial DNA

MIT Moderate-Intensity Training

MWMT Morris Water Maze Test

NAD+/NADH Oxidized/Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide

NO Nitric Oxide

NOR Novel Object Recognition

NPI Neuropsychiatric Inventory

NRF2 Nuclear Factor Erythroid 2-Related Factor 2

P-APP668 Phospho-Amyloid Precursor Protein 998

P62 Ubiquitin Binding Protein P62

PASE Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly

PDH Pyruvate Dehydrogenase

PDQ-39 Parkinson Disease Questionnaire-39

POMA Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment

PON-I Paraoxonase

PP Peak Power

PPT Physical Performance Test

PS1 Presenilin

QOL McGill Quality of Life Survey

RCR Respiratory Control Ratio

RHR Resting Heart Rate

ROM Range of Motion

rpS6 Ribosomal Protein S6

RUD Resource Utilization for Dementia

SAOA Sporadic Adult-Onset Ataxia

SARA Scale for Assessment and Rating of Ataxia

SCCR Succinate Cytochrome C Reductase

SDMT Single Digit Modalities Test

SNpc Substantial Nigra Pars Compact

SOD Mn superoxide dismutase

SPPB Short Physical Performance Battery

ST Stretching and Toning

STS Sit to Stand Test

TAG Triacylglycerol

TEM Transmission Electron Microscopy

TFEB Transcription Factor EB

TG Transglutaminase

TH Tyrosine Hydroxylase

TMS Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation

TMTA Trail Making Test A

TNFα Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha

TSH Thyroid Stimulating Hormone

TUGT Timed Up and Go Test

Ub Ubiquitin

UCP3 Uncoupling Protein 3

UHRDS Unified Huntington Disease Rating Scale

VCO2 Carbon Dioxide Production

VLDLR Very Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor

VMSBW Visual Memory Span Backward

VMSFW Visual Memory Span Forward

VO2 Oxygen Consumption ml/min/kg

VO2max Maximal Oxygen Uptake

VO2peak Peak O2 Uptake

Wmax Maximum Workload

Fig 1: Summary of exercise effects on ALS.

Detailed description of data from animal models is in Table 1. Detailed description of data from human studies is in Table 2.

Fig 2: Summary of exercise effects on AD.

Detailed description of data from animal models is in Table 1. Detailed description of data from human studies is in Table 2. Abbreviations: BDNF-brain derived neurotrophic factor, DA-dopamine, DAT-dopamine uptake transporter, DJ-1-protein deglycase DJ-1, GDNF-glial derived neurotrophic factor, Hsp70-Heat shock protein 70kD, TNFα-tumor necrosis factor alpha, SOD-superoxide dismutase.

Fig 3: Summary of exercise effects on PD.

Detailed description of data from animal models is in Table 1. Detailed description of data from human studies is in Table 2. Abbreviations: BACE-β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1, BDNF-brain derived neurotrophic factor, IL-10-interleukin 10, Nrf2-nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2, TNFα-tumor necrosis factor alpha.

Fig 4: Summary of exercise effects on HD.

Detailed description of data from animal models is in Table 1. Detailed description of data from human studies is in Table 2. Abbreviations: Bax-Bcl-like protein 4, Bcl-2-B cell lymphoma protein 2.

Fig 5: The polyQ family of neurodegenerative diseases.

The nine known polyQ diseases are listed along with their causative proteins, the protein’s relative size compared to other polyQ disease proteins and their putative functions. Boxed region in SCA6 indicates transcription factor encoded by α1A-CT. Red bars represent the relative location of the polyQ repeat in each protein, and red arrows indicate the range of repeat lengths associated with disease. Whereas CAG/polyQ repeat length is generally stable in an individual (with modest somatic mosaicism), repeat length often changes size in successive generations of a family (Williams and Paulson, 2008).

Abbreviations: DRPLA = dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy; HD = Huntington’s disease; SBMA = spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SCA = spinocerebellar ataxia.

Fig 6: Summary of exercise effects on polyQ SCAs.

Detailed description of data from animal models is in Table 1. Detailed description of data from human studies is in Table 2.

Abbreviations: EGF-epidermal growth factor receptor, phosphor-rpS6-phophorylated ribosomal protein S6, TFEB-transcription factor EB.

Figures 1–4, 6 created with BioRender.com

Table 1. Exercise Effects in Neurodegenerative Disease: Animal Models

Author, year	Disease	Model system	Exercise Modality	Duration	Frequency	Evaluated Criteria	Significant Outcomes	
Desseille et al. 2017	ALS	SOD1G93A mouse	Swim exercise, Tread mill	45 days	30min/day
5 days/week	GTT, L− ,GLUT4, GAPDH, PDH, Becn1, P62, LC3B, CD36, VLDLR, FAS, UCP3, TAG	Swim EX: ▲GT, muscle GLUT4, glycolysis, glucose uptake, autophagy, FA transport, storage	
Veldink et al. 2003	ALS	Low- and high- copy SOD1G93A mouse	Tread mill	To exhaustion 15 days	45 min/day
5 days/week	Hind paw extension reflex, balance beam, histology, survival	♀ □ EX low copy▲ survival, ▼ disease onset	
Carrer as et al. 2010	ALS	SOD1G93A mouse	Tread mill	Until motor symptom onset	MIT/HIT: 30/60 min/day 3/5 days/week	Body weight, motor performance, cervical, thoracic, lumber spinal cord motor neuron count	MIT: ▼body weight, ▲ rotarod performance , lumber motor neuron count day 95, 120 HIT: ▼body weight, ▲ lumber motor neuron count day 120	
Liu et al. 2011	AD	APP/PS1 mouse	Tread mill	5 months	30 minutes/day
5 days/week	MWMT, Electrophysiol ogy, BDNF expression	▲ spatial learning, memory on MWMT ▲ hippocam pal BDNF, LTP	
Liu, Zhao et al. 2013	AD	APP/PS1 mouse	Tread mill	5 months	30 minutes/day
5 days/week	Hippocampal Aβ, p-Tau, P-APP668, PS1, ADAM10, BACE1, p-CDK5, P-GSK	▼Aβ, p-Tau, P-APP668, PS1 ≠ GSK3	
Zhang et al. 2019	AD	APP/PS1 mouse	Tread mill	12 weeks	45 min/day
5 days/week	Hippocampal Aβ, ADAM10, BACE1, flotilla 1, cholesterol	▼ Hippocam pal Aβ, BACE, flotilla 1 cholesterol ▲ Hippocam pal ADAM10	
Laranj eiro et al. 2019	AD, HD	C. elegans: smg-1(cc546ts)Ps nb-1Aβ1– 42::long 3′- UTR, Prab-3F3ΔK280; Paex-3h4R1NTauV 337M; Punc-25GFP, Pmec-3htt57Q128	Swim exercise	4 days, 90 minute sessions	3+3 (Aβ) 3+3+2+2 (Tau, Htt)	Chemotaxis based, mobility, motor neuron morphology, Touch sensitivity,	▲ chemotaxis, mobility, touch sensitivity GABAergic motor neuron integrity	
Wu et al. 2018	AD	STZ-induced sporadic AD mouse	Swim exercise	4 weeks	60 minutes/day	BMT, NOR, Hippocampal Aβ, p-Tau, synaptophysin , spinophillin, IL-10, TNFα, NRF2DNA binding, spatial memory	▲ spatial learning, memory on BMT, NOR ▲ synaptophysin, spinophillin, IL-10 NRF2 DNA binding ▼Aβ, p-Tau, TNFα	
Lau et al. 2011	PD	1-MPTP-induced PD mouse	Tread mill	18 weeks	40 minutes/day
5 days/week	SNpc anti-TH IHC, mitochondrial respiration, mitoATP, SOD, DAT, BDNF, GDNF, balance beam	▲ striatal TH, DA, DAT, GDNF ▲ SNpc BDNF ▲ MnSOD, Cu-Zn Sod, RCR, mitoATP ▼ balance beam foot slip, latency to fall	
Al-Jarrah et al. 2007	PD	1-MPTP-induced PD mouse	Tread mill	4 weeks	40 minutes/day
5 days/week	SNpc anti-TH IHC, ECG, calorimetry, CS activity, open field	Striatal TH unchanged vs untrained MPD controls ▼ RHR, VO2, VCO2▲CS, LV mass ▼ amphetam ine-stimulated locomotion	
Pothakos et al. 2009	PD	1-MPTP-induced PD mouse	Tread mill	18 weeks	40 minutes/day
5 days/week	SNpc anti-TH IHC, step length, gait analysis, MWMT, BB, open field, spontaneous activity, total distance	Striatal TH unchanged vs untrained MPD controls ▲ balance, coordination ▼ amphetamine-stimulated locomotion	
Zhou et al. 2017	PD	α-synuclein (Y39C) PD mouse	Running wheel	2 weeks	Free access	Rotarod, MWMT, DJ-1, HSP70, BDNF, α-synuclein	▲ Rotarod, MWMT performance ▲ brain, muscle, plasma DJ-1 ▲ brain HSP70 ▼ brain α-synuclein oligomers, ▲ plasma α-synuclein	
van Dellen et al. 2008	HD	R6/1 HD mouse	Running wheel	4 months	Free access	Hind paw extension reflex, static horizontal rod, Rotarod, open field, BW, brain weight, Ub+ aggregates	▲ static horizontal rod coordination ▼ onset rear paw clasping	
Herbst and Holloway 2015	HD	R6/1 HD mouse	Tread mill	20 weeks	60 minutes/day
5 days/week	Hind paw extension reflex, mtDNA, mitochondrial respirometry, pyruvate, glutamate	▲ mitochond rial complex I, III, complex I respiration ▼ onset individual rear paw clasping Clasping phenotype precedes mitochondria I changes	
Caldw ell et al. 2020	HD	CAG140 knock-in HD mouse	Tread mill	12 weeks	40 minutes/day
3 days/week	Rotarod, NO, TG, PDH, NAD+/NADH, aconitase, JNK, AKT	▲ NO, aconitase activity, TCA reducing equivalents ▲ mOxPhos activity, glycolysis, PDH ▼ TG activity	
Ji et al. 2015	HD	Quinolinic acid induced HD rat	Tread mill	14 days	30 minutes/day	BCL2, caspase-3, BAX, radial 8-arm maze, Rotarod	▲ spatial learning in radial maze, Rotarod performance ▼ dentate gyrus caspase-3,BAX/BCL2	
Fryer et al. 2011	SCA1	ATXN1154Q, ATXN1154Q; CIC-L+/−mice	Fixed-speed Rotarod	4 weeks	5 days/week	Lifespan, EGF, CIC expression, open field, dowel, Rotarod, conditioned fear, IHC, BW	EX ATXN1154Q : ▲LS, brainstem EGF, ▼CIC ATXN1154Q ;CIC-L+/− : ▲ LS, BW, motor fx, learning, memory, Purkinje cell number, integrity,	
Chuang et al. 2019	SCA1	SCA1(82Q) mouse	Tread mill	4 weeks	50 minutes/day	Rotarod, IHC, rpS6, p62, LC3	▲ motor performance , cerebellar phospho-rpS6 ▼ Purkinje cell loss	
Giorge tti et al. 2016	SBMA	ARQ113 mouse	Tread mill	6 weeks	30 minutes/day
5 days/week	RNAseq, soleus muscle TEM, mitochondrial copy no., metabolic rate/substrate utilization, muscle histology, grip strength, lifespan	▼ carbohydrate
metabolism genes, grip strength, mitochondria I number/inte grity, muscle fiber size, Type I, II fibers ▲ lipid metabolism genes	
Chua et al. 2013	SBMA	ARQ113 mouse	Tread mill	3 days	Increasing time/intensity, 80 minutes cumulative	TFEB expression, LC-3II/III-GFP	▲ TFEB expression, baseline muscle autophagy, exercise-induced increase in muscle autophagy	
Abbreviations: EX: exercised, GTT: glucose tolerance test, L-: lactate ,GLUT4: glucose transport protein 4, GAPDH: Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, PDH: pyruvate dehydrogenase, Becn1: Beclin 1, P62, LC3B, CD36, VLDLR: very low density lipoprotein receptor, FAS: fatty acid synthase, UCP3: uncoupling protein 3, TAG: triacylglycerol, GT: glucose transport, ADAM10: a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein, BACE1: β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1, P-APP668: phospho-amyloid precursor protein 998, PS1 Presenilin: , CDK5: cyclin dependent kinase 5, GSK3: glycogen synthase kinase 3, MWMT: Morris water maze test, BDNF: brain derived neurotrophic factor, BMT: Barnes maze task, NOR: Novel object recognition, MPTP: methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, SNpc: substantial nigra pars compact, TH: tyrosine hydroxylase, DA: dopamine, SOD: Mn superoxide dismutase, DAT: dopamine uptake transporter, GDNF: glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor, RCR: respiratory control ratio, BB: balance beam, VO2: oxygen consumption, VCO2: carbon dioxide production, LV: left ventricular, CS: citrate synthase, BW: body weight, Ub: ubiquitin, mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA, NO: nitric oxide, TG: transglutaminase, NAD+/NADH: oxidized/reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, JNK: c-JUN N-Terminal kinase, AKT: serine/threonine kinase 1, mOxPhos: mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation complex, KI: knock-in, CIC: Capicua, LS: lifespan fx: function, rpS6: ribosomal protein S6, LC3: and microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 , TEM: transmission electron microscopy, TFEB: transcription factor EB, LCII/III: Microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3

Table 2. Exercise Effects in Neurodegenerative Disease: Human Studies

Author, year	Disease	Participants	Exercise Modality	Duration	Frequency	Evaluated Criteria	Significant Outcomes	
Park et al. 2020	ALS	94 experimental
159 control	Five randomized controlled trials: muscle endurance,
resistance, treadmill, intensive endurance, home-based functional training	6–24 months	2–5 days/week	ALSFRS, ALSFRS-R ALSFRS-Respiratory, ALSFRS-R-Limb	▼ALSFRS,A LSFRS-R ALSFRS-Respiratory =ALSFRS-R-Limb	
Merico et al. 2018	ALS	23 exercised
15 control	Submaximal isometric muscle contraction and 65% Max HR aerobic cycling or treadmill endurance	5 weeks	Resistance: 3 Reps Endurance: 20 minutes	RHR, VO2, 6MWT, MRCss FIM, FSS, muscle dynometry	▲ FIM, FSS, MRCss, bicep muscle strength ▼VO2	
Ferri et al. 2019	ALS	8 trained
8 untrained control	Combined strength and endurance program tailored to participant aerobic capacity, strength and function	12 weeks	3 days/week	PP, VO2peak, GET, CPET, 1RM, TUGT, 6MWT, ALSFRS-R, ALS-SS, QOL	▼ALSFRS-R, ALS-SS, TUGT	
Vidoni et al. 2021	AD	78 exercised
39 education control	Aerobic exercise at 60–75% max HR	52 weeks	150 minutes/week	18F-AV45 PET imaging, MRI, executive function tests, verbal memory domain tests, visuospatial domain tests, VO2peak	▲ VO2peak	
Vidoni et al. 2019	AD	33 (AE) exercised
32 (ST) control	Aerobic exercise at 60–75% max HR	26 weeks	150 minutes/week	DAD, BADL, IADL, RUD	ST: ▼DAD IADL , DAD performance AE: =DAD IADL , DAD performance	
Ventur elli et al. 2011	AD	12 walking group (WG)
12 control (CG)	Moderate Intensity Walking	24 weeks	30 minutes/day	BP, BMI, POMA, PPT, MMSE, 6MWT, ADLs	CG: ▼MMSE,
=ADLs WG: =MMSE, ▼ADLs	
Arcove rde et al. 2014	AD	20 exercise group
10 control group	Treadmill walking at 60% max HR	16 weeks	2 days/week	CAMCOG, verbal fluency test, digit span test, Trail Making Test A, Stroop Test, BBS, TUGT, STS, ECG	▲ CAMCOG, BBS ▼functional reach, TUGT	
Jensen et al. 2019	AD	107 intervention
93 control	Aerobic exercise at 70–80% max HR	16 weeks	3 days/week	Apoε genotyping, NPI, SDMT, TUGT, Timed 10-m walk test, Timed 400-m walk test, dual task performance test, VO2max	EX Apoε4 carriers:=SD MT ▲NPI, TUGT, 10-m, 400-m walk, VO2max EX Apoε4 noncarriers: ▼ SDMT, ▲ VO2max	
Sanders et al. 2020	AD	39 intervention
30 control	Walking and lower limb strength Low-intensity: 5763% max hR High-intensity: 83–89% max HR	12 weeks low- +12 weeks high-intensity	3 days/week	Apoε genotyping, 6MWT, SPPB, 6-m walking speed test, static balance, MMSE, TMTA, DSFW, DSBW, VMSFW, VMSBW, Stroop Test	▲Gait speed No significant effect of Apoε carriership	
Rawson et al. 2019	PD	29 Tread mill
36 Tango
23 Stretching	Treadmill
Tango
Stretching	12 weeks	3 days/week	MMSE, MDS-
UPDRS-III, PASE, forward/backwa rd walking velocity, 6MWT, PDQ-39	Treadmill group ▲forward/backward walking velocity	
Fisher et al. 2008	PD	10 BWST
10 Low-Intensity
10 Zero-Intensity	High-intensity, PBWS Treadmill Low-intensity Aerobic Zero-Intensity	8 weeks	24 sessions	UPDRS, STS, TMS, gait speed, stride/step length, joint excursion, gait velocity, ROM, STS	High-intensity BWST ▲all motor performance parameters ▼ corticomot or excitability	
Mueller et al. 2017	HD	13 HD patients
11 healthy controls	10 weeks constant load cycling
8 weeks HIIT
6 weeks interval/constant load cycling	26 weeks	3 days/week	UHDRS, Stroop Test, skeletal muscle biopsy: CS, mitochondrial respirometry, mATPase, muscle fiber type distribution	Exercised HD patients and controls: ▲CS acitivity, complex III, V, SCCR, capillary-to-fiber ratio	
Mueller et al. 2019	HD	10 HD patients
9 healthy controls	10 weeks constant load cycling 8 weeks HIIT 6 weeks interval/constant load cycling	26 weeks	3 days/week	MyHC cross sectional area, myonuclear cell count, satellite cell count	Exercise HD: = MyHC c.s.area, myonuclear, satellite cell ct. Healthy: ▲ MyHCc.s. area, myonuclear, satellite cell ct.	
Frese et al. 2017	HD	12 HD patients
12 healthy controls	10 weeks cycling at 65% VO2peak
8 weeks HIiT cycling 90% VO2peak
6 weeks cycling 50% VO2peak	26 weeks	3 days/week	UHRDS-motor, HVLT-R, DRS-2, Symbol-Digit modalities test, Stroop Tests, TMTA and B, category fluency task, L-, glucose, HbA1c, TSH, CK, VO2peak	EX HD: lower scores than healthy controls on all motor and neuropsycho logical assessments ▲ VO2peak, improve body composition	
Velazquez-Perez et al. 2019	SCA2	15 rehab
14 control	Neurorehabilitation	12 weeks	4 hours/day
5 days/week	5-m tandem gait on floor/mattress, time upholding tandem position on floor/matress/s eesaw, F-NT, H-ST, 9HPT, SARA, INAS	▲time upholding stance over mattress, seesaw ▼ 5-m tandem gait on floor/mattres s, F-NT, H-ST	
Leonar di et al. 2017	SCA1
SCA2
SCA3
FRDA	SCA1: 1
SCA2: 3
SCA3: 2
FRDA: 5	Physical rehabilitation+proprioceptive stabilizer	6 weeks	180 minutes/day
5 days/week	SARA, PATA dysarthria, 6MWT, 9HPT, cadence, length cycle, support R/L/cycle, support R/L/cycle, flight R/L/cycle, single/double support R/L/cycle	▲ PATA, 6MWT, cadence, all gait parameters except step length ▼SARA, 9HPT dominant hand	
de Oliveira et al. 2018	SCA2
SCA3
SCA7	SCA2: 1
SCA3: 6
SCA7: 1	PBWS Treadmill Training Stage 1: gait/conditioning Stage 2: dynamic balance	8–10
weeks/stage	50 minutes/day
2 days/we
ek	CPET, VO2peak, VO2max, VCO2, treadmill inclination, BBS, DGI, SARA, Katz ADL	▲ CPET, treadmill inclination, DGI, BBS	
de Oliveir a et al. 2015	SCA2
SCA3
SCA7	SCA2: 2
SCA3: 8
SCA7: 1	Static and Dynamic Balance Exercises 3 groups of exercises 10 repetitions of each exercise	4 weeks	&lt;60 minutes/day
2 days/week	BBS	▲BBS	
Tabba ssum et al. 2013	SCA1
SCA2
SCA3	10 Group A
10 Group B	Core Stability Training Group (A) Conventional Balance Training Group (B)	4 weeks	60 minutes/day
3 days/week	BEST, MFES	Group A: ▲ ▲BEST
Group B: ▲BEST	
Wang et al. 2018	SCA3	5 Exergaming
4 Control	Exergaming Training and balance Control	4 weeks	40 minute sessions, 9 total	MMSE, SARA, 9HPT, walking speed	Both groups: ▼SARA
Exergaming: ▼ SARA gait-posture subscore	
IIg et al. 2009	SCA6 Afferent ataxia	SCA6: 10 Afferent ataxia: 6	Intensive coordinative training Intra-patient controls	4 weeks inpatient+ 4 weeks at-home	60 minutes/day
3 days/week	SARA-gait, posture, speech, limb-kinetic subscores, ICARS, BBS, GAS, high speed motion capture motor analysis	Both groups: ▼SARA, ▲ ICARS, BBS, GAS SCA6: ▼SARA, ▲ ICARS BBS, GAS retention at-home ▲ gait velocity, step length, limb coordination	
IIg et al. 2010	SCA6 Afferent ataxia	SCA6: 10
Afferent ataxia: 6	Intensive coordinative training Intra-patient controls	4 weeks inpatient+
4 weeks at-home	60 minutes/day
3 days/week	Longitudinal study of same participants from Ilg et al. 2009	Disease progression related▲Ove rall SARA, ▼ ICARS SCA6: ▼SARA, ICARS compared to 2009 baseline ▲BBS, GAS (stable or improved)	
Fonteyn et al. 2013	SCA3
SCA6
SAOA	SCA3: 1
SCA6: 2
SAOA: 7	Gait adaptability treadmill training	5 weeks	60 minutes/day
2 days/week	SARA, 10-m walking test, TUGT, BBS, EFAP, ABC, obstacle avoidance on treadmill, gait analysis, obstacle	▲Obstacle avoidance on treadmill, gait efficiency, EFAP	
Tercero-Perez et al. 2019	SCA7	6 ITG
6MTG
6UC	Neurorehabilitation: Intensive Training Group (ITG)
Moderate Training Group (MTG)
Untrained Control (UC)	24 weeks	120 minutes/day
3–5 days/week	SARA-gait, posture, dysarthria, dysmetria, tremor, stance subscores, INAS, ADLs, DT, LPH, MDA, GR, GPx, PONI	ITG: ▼SARA, ▼INAS, DT, MDA, LPH▲ ADLs MTG: ▼SARA, INAS, DT , MDA, LPH▲ ADLs	
Schrader et al. 2015	SBMA	24 exercised
26 control	Low-intensity exercise Stretching control	6 weeks	3 sets/exercise
3 times/week	AMAT, total activity, muscle
strength, balance, TUGT, STS, QOL, CK, IGF-1	No significant differences Post-hoc analysis, low-functioning subgroup:▲ AMAT total activity sub score	
Preisler et al. 2009	SBMA	8 SBMA particip ants	Cycling at 65%-70% VO2max	12 weeks	30 minutes/day
4 days/week	VO2max, Wmax, ADL, muscle morphology, CK, CS, body composition, EMG, static strength, lung function	Training not well tolerated, no significant effects	
Heje et al. 2019	SBMA	5 HIIT
5 control	HIIT (cycling)	16 weeks	10 minutes/day
3 days/week	VO2max, Wmax, CK, self-rated muscle pain, muscle fatigue, activity level	▲VO2max, Wmax	
Abbreviations: ST: stretching and toning, AE: aerobic, ALSFRS: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale, ALSFRS-R: revised ALSFRS-Respiratory, ALSFRS-R-Limb, RHR: resting heart rate, VO2: oxygen consumption, ml/min/kg, 6MWT: 6 minute walk time, MRCSS: medical research council sum score, FIM: functional independence measure, FSS: fatigue severity scale, PP: Peak power, VO2peak: peak O2 uptake, GET: gas exchange threshold, CPET: cardiopulmonary exercise test, 1RM: maximal strength of knee extensor muscles, TUGT: timed up and go test, ALSSS: ALS severity scale, QOL: McGill quality of life survey, BMI: body mass index, BP, blood pressure, POMA: performance oriented mobility assessment, PPT: physical performance test, MMSE: Mini-mental state examination, ADLs: Barthel index of activities of daily living, BADL: basic instrumental activities of daily living, DAD: Disability Assessment for Dementia, IADL: instrumental activities of daily living, RUD: Resource Utilization for Dementia, CAMCOG: Cambridge Cognitive Examination, STS: sit to stand test, ECG: electrocardiogram, Apoε4: , NPI: Neuropsychiatric Inventory, SDMT: Single Digit Modalities Test, VO2max: maximal oxygen uptake, SPPB: short physical performance battery, TMTA: Trail Making Test A, DSFW: digit span forward walking, DSBW: backward, VMSFW: visual memory span forward, VMSBW: backward, MDS-UPDRS-III: Movement Disorders Society Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale-III, PASE: Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly, PDQ-39: Parkinson Disease Questionnaire-39, BWST: Body weight supported treadmill training, TMS: transcranial magnetic stimulation, ROM: range of motion, CS: citrate synthase, UHDRS: unified Huntington Disease Rating Scale, HIIT: high intensity interval training, mATPase: myofibrillar adenosine triphosphatase, SCCR: succinate cytochrome c reductase, UHRDS-Unified Huntington Disease Rating Scale, HVLT-R: Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised, DRS-2: dementia rating scale 2, CK: creatine kinase, TSH: thyroid stimulating hormone, F-NT: finger-to-nose test, H-ST: heel-to-shin test, 9HPT: 9-hole peg board test, SARA: Scale for Assessment and Rating of Ataxia, INAS: Inventory of Non-Ataxia Symptoms, FRDA: Friedreich’s ataxia, 6-MWT: 6 minute walking time, BBS: Berg Balance Scale, DGI: Dynamic Gait Index, Katz ADL: Katz index of independence in activities of daily living, BEST: Balance Evaluation Systems Test Efficacy Scale , MFES: Modified Falls Efficacy Scale, ICARS: international cooperative ataxia rating scale, GAS: Goal attainment score, EFAP: emory functional ambulation profile, SAOA: sporadic adult onset ataxia, ABC: activities specific balance scale, DT: dityrosine, LPH: lipid hydroperoxides, MDA: malondialdehyde, GR: glutathione reductase, GPx: glutathione peroxidase, PON-I: Paraoxonase, AMAT: Adult myopathic assessment tool, Wmax: Maximum workload, EMG: Electromyography

Highlights

Studies from invertebrate and rodent models, and in patient populations with various stages of symptomology, indicate that exercise can be a highly effective therapeutic for age-related neurodegeneration.

Exercise activates a number of molecular mechanisms that benefit Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, and various inherited ataxia diseases, as well as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Kennedy’s Disease.

The precise type of exercise, stage of intervention, and mechanisms underlying benefits vary and may well require personalized programs to harness the most benefits and not worsen motor activities in patients.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they do not have any conflicts of interest to disclose.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abati E , Bresolin N , Comi G , Corti S , 2020. Silence superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1): a promising therapeutic target for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Expert Opin Ther Targets 24 , 295–310.32125907
Abou-Sleymane G , Chalmel F , Helmlinger D , Lardenois A , Thibault C , Weber C , Merienne K , Mandel JL , Poch O , Devys D , Trottier Y , 2006. Polyglutamine expansion causes neurodegeneration by altering the neuronal differentiation program. Hum Mol Genet 15 , 691–703.16434483
Ahlskog JE , 2018. Aerobic Exercise: Evidence for a Direct Brain Effect to Slow Parkinson Disease Progression. Mayo Clin Proc 93 , 360–372.29502566
Akbar U , Ashizawa T , 2015. Ataxia. Neurol Clin 33 , 225–248.25432731
Al-Jarrah M , Pothakos K , Novikova L , Smirnova IV , Kurz MJ , Stehno-Bittel L , Lau YS , 2007. Endurance exercise promotes cardiorespiratory rehabilitation without neurorestoration in the chronic mouse model of Parkinsonism with severe neurodegeneration. Neuroscience 149 , 28–37.17869432
Ang ET , Gomez-Pinilla F , 2007. Potential therapeutic effects of exercise to the brain. Curr Med Chem 14 , 2564–2571.17979709
Arcoverde C , Deslandes A , Moraes H , Almeida C , Araujo NB , Vasques PE , Silveira H , Laks J , 2014. Treadmill training as an augmentation treatment for Alzheimer’s disease: a pilot randomized controlled study. Arq Neuropsiquiatr 72 , 190–196.24676435
Ascensao A , Lumini-Oliveira J , Oliveira PJ , Magalhaes J , 2011. Mitochondria as a target for exercise-induced cardioprotection. Curr Drug Targets 12 , 860–871.21269265
Ashizawa T , Figueroa KP , Perlman SL , Gomez CM , Wilmot GR , Schmahmann JD , Ying SH , Zesiewicz TA , Paulson HL , Shakkottai VG , Bushara KO , Kuo SH , Geschwind MD , Xia G , Mazzoni P , Krischer JP , Cuthbertson D , Holbert AR , Ferguson JH , Pulst SM , Subramony SH , 2013. Clinical characteristics of patients with spinocerebellar ataxias 1, 2, 3 and 6 in the US; a prospective observational study. Orphanet J Rare Dis 8 , 177.24225362
Azizbeigi K , Stannard SR , Atashak S , Haghighi MM , 2014. Antioxidant enzymes and oxidative stress adaptation to exercise training: Comparison of endurance, resistance, and concurrent training in untrained males. J Exerc Sci Fit 12 , 1–6.
Baer HR , Wolf SL , 2001. Modified emory functional ambulation profile: an outcome measure for the rehabilitation of poststroke gait dysfunction. Stroke 32 , 973–979.11283399
Bakker M , Allum JH , Visser JE , Gruneberg C , van de Warrenburg BP , Kremer BH , Bloem BR , 2006. Postural responses to multidirectional stance perturbations in cerebellar ataxia. Exp Neurol 202 , 21–35.16808916
Balestrino R , Schapira AHV , 2020. Parkinson disease. Eur J Neurol 27 , 27–42.31631455
Barnat M , Capizzi M , Aparicio E , Boluda S , Wennagel D , Kacher R , Kassem R , Lenoir S , Agasse F , Braz BY , Liu JP , Ighil J , Tessier A , Zeitlin SO , Duyckaerts C , Dommergues M , Durr A , Humbert S , 2020. Huntington’s disease alters human neurodevelopment. Science 369 , 787–793.32675289
Barnes JN , 2015. Exercise, cognitive function, and aging. Adv Physiol Educ 39 , 55–62.26031719
Bates GP , 2005. History of genetic disease: the molecular genetics of Huntington disease - a history. Nat Rev Genet 6 , 766–773.16136077
Bernassola F , Rossi A , Melino G , 1999. Regulation of transglutaminases by nitric oxide. Ann Ny Acad Sci 887 , 83–91.10668466
Blokhuis AM , Groen EJ , Koppers M , van den Berg LH , Pasterkamp RJ , 2013. Protein aggregation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol 125 , 777–794.23673820
Bloom GS , 2014. Amyloid-beta and tau: the trigger and bullet in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. JAMA Neurol 71 , 505–508.24493463
Bo H , Zhang Y , Ji LL , 2010. Redefining the role of mitochondria in exercise: a dynamic remodeling. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1201 , 121–128.20649548
Bonifati V , 2014. Genetics of Parkinson’s disease--state of the art, 2013. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 20 Suppl 1 , S23–28.24262182
Bonnet J , Wang CY , Baptista T , Vincent SD , Hsiao WC , Stierle M , Kao CF , Tora L , Devys D , 2014. The SAGA coactivator complex acts on the whole transcribed genome and is required for RNA polymerase II transcription. Gene Dev 28 , 1999–2012.25228644
Breijyeh Z , Karaman R , 2020. Comprehensive Review on Alzheimer’s Disease: Causes and Treatment. Molecules 25 .
Brooks BP , Fischbeck KH , 1995. Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: a trinucleotide-repeat expansion neurodegenerative disease. Trends Neurosci 18 , 459–461.8545913
Brooks BR , Miller RG , Swash M , Munsat TL , World Federation of Neurology Research Group on Motor Neuron D , 2000. El Escorial revisited: revised criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 1 , 293–299.11464847
Brown BM , Peiffer J , Rainey-Smith SR , 2019. Exploring the relationship between physical activity, beta-amyloid and tau: A narrative review. Ageing Res Rev 50 , 9–18.30615936
Bruyn RP , Stoof JC , 1990. The quinolinic acid hypothesis in Huntington’s chorea. J Neurol Sci 95 , 29–38.2159984
Buchman AS , Boyle PA , Yu L , Shah RC , Wilson RS , Bennett DA , 2012. Total daily physical activity and the risk of AD and cognitive decline in older adults. Neurology 78 , 1323–1329.22517108
Budanov AV , Karin M , 2008. p53 target genes sestrin1 and sestrin2 connect genotoxic stress and mTOR signaling. Cell 134 , 451–460.18692468
Buijsen RAM , Toonen LJA , Gardiner SL , van Roon-Mom WMC , 2019. Genetics, Mechanisms, and Therapeutic Progress in Polyglutamine Spinocerebellar Ataxias. Neurotherapeutics.
Caldwell CC , Petzinger GM , Jakowec MW , Cadenas E , 2020. Treadmill exercise rescues mitochondrial function and motor behavior in the CAG140 knock-in mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Chem Biol Interact 315 , 108907.31778667
Callio J , Oury TD , Chu CT , 2005. Manganese superoxide dismutase protects against 6-hydroxydopamine injury in mouse brains. J Biol Chem 280 , 18536–18542.15755737
Cancel G , Abbas N , Stevanin G , Dürr A , Chneiweiss H , Néri C , Duyckaerts C , Penet C , Cann HM , Agid Y , 1995. Marked phenotypic heterogeneity associated with expansion of a CAG repeat sequence at the spinocerebellar ataxia 3/Machado-Joseph disease locus. Am J Hum Genet 57 , 809–816.7573040
Carr JJ , Lalara J , Lalara G , O’Hare G , Massey L , Kenny N , Pope KE , Clough AR , Lowell A , Barker RN , 2019. ‘Staying strong on the inside and outside’ to keep walking and moving around: Perspectives from Aboriginal people with Machado Joseph Disease and their families from the Groote Eylandt Archipelago, Australia. Plos One 14 .
Carreras I , Yuruker S , Aytan N , Hossain L , Choi JK , Jenkins BG , Kowall NW , Dedeoglu A , 2010. Moderate exercise delays the motor performance decline in a transgenic model of ALS. Brain Res 1313 , 192–201.19968977
Cass SP , 2017. Alzheimer’s Disease and Exercise: A Literature Review. Curr Sports Med Rep 16 , 19–22.28067736
Chang YJ , Chou CC , Huang WT , Lu CS , Wong AM , Hsu MJ , 2015. Cycling regimen induces spinal circuitry plasticity and improves leg muscle coordination in individuals with spinocerebellar ataxia. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 96 , 1006–1013.25668777
Chen MJ , Ivy AS , Russo-Neustadt AA , 2006. Nitric oxide synthesis is required for exercise-induced increases in hippocampal BDNF and phosphatidylinositol 3 ‘ kinase expression. Brain Res Bull 68 , 257–268.16377431
Chen SD , Yang JL , Lin TK , Yang DI , 2019. Emerging Roles of Sestrins in Neurodegenerative Diseases: Counteracting Oxidative Stress and Beyond. J Clin Med 8 .
Chen Y , Liang Z , Blanchard J , Dai CL , Sun S , Lee MH , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K , Liu F , Gong CX , 2013. A non-transgenic mouse model (icv-STZ mouse) of Alzheimer’s disease: similarities to and differences from the transgenic model (3xTg-AD mouse). Mol Neurobiol 47 , 711–725.23150171
Chio A , Logroscino G , Hardiman O , Swingler R , Mitchell D , Beghi E , Traynor BG , Eurals C , 2009. Prognostic factors in ALS: A critical review. Amyotroph Lateral Scler 10 , 310–323.19922118
Chua JP , Reddy SL , Merry DE , Adachi H , Katsuno M , Sobue G , Robins DM , Lieberman AP , 2014. Transcriptional activation of TFEB/ZKSCAN3 target genes underlies enhanced autophagy in spinobulbar muscular atrophy. Hum Mol Genet 23 , 1376–1386.24150846
Chuang CS , Chang JC , Soong BW , Chuang SF , Lin TT , Cheng WL , Orr HT , Liu CS , 2019. Treadmill training increases the motor activity and neuron survival of the cerebellum in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. Kaohsiung J Med Sci 35 , 679–685.31271500
Clements CM , McNally RS , Conti BJ , Mak TW , Ting JP , 2006. DJ-1, a cancer- and Parkinson’s disease-associated protein, stabilizes the antioxidant transcriptional master regulator Nrf2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 , 15091–15096.17015834
Colditz GA , Cannuscio CC , Frazier AL , 1997. Physical activity and reduced risk of colon cancer: implications for prevention. Cancer Causes Control 8 , 649–667.9242482
Conti LH , Segal DS , Kuczenski R , 1997. Maintenance of amphetamine-induced stereotypy and locomotion requires ongoing dopamine receptor activation. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 130 , 183–188.9106917
Cooper-Knock J , Shaw PJ , Kirby J , 2014. The widening spectrum of C9ORF72-related disease; genotype/phenotype correlations and potential modifiers of clinical phenotype. Acta Neuropathol 127 , 333–345.24493408
Corcoran MP , Lamon-Fava S , Fielding RA , 2007. Skeletal muscle lipid deposition and insulin resistance: effect of dietary fatty acids and exercise. Am J Clin Nutr 85 , 662–677.17344486
Cortes CJ , Ling SC , Guo LT , Hung G , Tsunemi T , Ly L , Tokunaga S , Lopez E , Sopher BL , Bennett CF , Shelton GD , Cleveland DW , La Spada AR , 2014. Muscle expression of mutant androgen receptor accounts for systemic and motor neuron disease phenotypes in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Neuron 82 , 295–307.24742458
Cozzolino M , Ferri A , Carri MT , 2008. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: from current developments in the laboratory to clinical implications. Antioxid Redox Signal 10 , 405–443.18370853
Cui MY , Lin Y , Sheng JY , Zhang X , Cui RJ , 2018. Exercise Intervention Associated with Cognitive Improvement in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neural Plast 2018 , 9234105.29713339
Cutler RG , Mattson MP , 2006. The adversities of aging. Ageing Res Rev 5 , 221–238.16950665
D’Abreu A , Franca MC Jr. , Paulson HL , Lopes-Cendes I , 2010. Caring for Machado-Joseph disease: current understanding and how to help patients. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 16 , 2–7.19811945
D’Amico E , Factor-Litvak P , Santella RM , Mitsumoto H , 2013. Clinical perspective on oxidative stress in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Free Radic Biol Med 65 , 509–527.23797033
da Costa JP , Vitorino R , Silva GM , Vogel C , Duarte AC , Rocha-Santos T , 2016. A synopsis on aging-Theories, mechanisms and future prospects. Ageing Res Rev 29 , 90–112.27353257
Dahlqvist JR , Vissing J , 2016. Exercise Therapy in Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy and Other Neuromuscular Disorders. J Mol Neurosci 58 , 388–393.26585990
Dar KB , Bhat AH , Amin S , Reshi BA , Zargar MA , Masood A , Ganie SA , 2020. Elucidating Critical Proteinopathic Mechanisms and Potential Drug Targets in Neurodegeneration. Cell Mol Neurobiol 40 , 313–345.31584139
Dauwan M , Begemann MJH , Slot MIE , Lee EHM , Scheltens P , Sommer IEC , 2021. Physical exercise improves quality of life, depressive symptoms, and cognition across chronic brain disorders: a transdiagnostic systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Neurol 268 , 1222–1246.31414194
De la Rosa A , Olaso-Gonzalez G , Arc-Chagnaud C , Millan F , Salvador-Pascual A , Garcia-Lucerga C , Blasco-Lafarga C , Garcia-Dominguez E , Carretero A , Correas AG , Vina J , Gomez-Cabrera MC , 2020. Physical exercise in the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. J Sport Health Sci 9 , 394–404.32780691
de Oliveira LAS , Martins CP , Horsczaruk CHR , da Silva DCL , Vasconcellos LF , Lopes AJ , Meira Mainenti MR , Rodrigues EC , 2018. Partial Body Weight-Supported Treadmill Training in Spinocerebellar Ataxia. Rehabil Res Pract 2018 , 7172686.29535874
de Warrenburg BPC , Steijns JAG , Munneke MT , Kremer BPH , Bloem BR , 2005. Falls in degenerative cerebellar ataxias. Movement Disord 20 , 497–500.15645525
Deckel AW , 2001. Nitric oxide and nitric oxide synthase in Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci Res 64 , 99–107.11288139
Desseille C , Deforges S , Biondi O , Houdebine L , D’Amico D , Lamaziere A , Caradeuc C , Bertho G , Bruneteau G , Weill L , Bastin J , Djouadi F , Salachas F , Lopes P , Chanoine C , Massaad C , Charbonnier F , 2017. Specific Physical Exercise Improves Energetic Metabolism in the Skeletal Muscle of Amyotrophic-Lateral- Sclerosis Mice. Front Mol Neurosci 10 , 332.29104532
Di Liegro CM , Schiera G , Proia P , Di Liegro I , 2019. Physical Activity and Brain Health. Genes-Basel 10 .
Do K , Laing BT , Landry T , Bunner W , Mersaud N , Matsubara T , Li P , Yuan Y , Lu Q , Huang H , 2018. The effects of exercise on hypothalamic neurodegeneration of Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. PLoS One 13 , e0190205.29293568
Du X , Wang J , Zhu H , Rinaldo L , Lamar KM , Palmenberg AC , Hansel C , Gomez CM , 2013. Second cistron in CACNA1A gene encodes a transcription factor mediating cerebellar development and SCA6. Cell 154 , 118–133.23827678
Dumurgier J , Artaud F , Touraine C , Rouaud O , Tavernier B , Dufouil C , Singh-Manoux A , Tzourio C , Elbaz A , 2017. Gait Speed and Decline in Gait Speed as Predictors of Incident Dementia. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 72 , 655–661.27302701
Dürr A , Stevanin G , Cancel G , Duyckaerts C , Abbas N , Didierjean O , Chneiweiss H , Benomar A , Lyon-Caen O , Julien J , Serdaru M , Penet C , Agid Y , Brice A , 1996. Spinocerebellar ataxia 3 and Machado-Joseph disease: clinical, molecular, and neuropathological features. Ann Neurol 39 , 490–499.8619527
Dzoljic E , Grabatinic I , Kostic V , 2015. Why is nitric oxide important for our brain? Funct Neurol 30 , 159–163.26910176
Eichler L , Bellenberg B , Hahn HK , Koster O , Schols L , Lukas C , 2011. Quantitative assessment of brain stem and cerebellar atrophy in spinocerebellar ataxia types 3 and 6: impact on clinical status. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 32 , 890–897.21372168
Elden AC , Kim HJ , Hart MP , Chen-Plotkin AS , Johnson BS , Fang X , Armakola M , Geser F , Greene R , Lu MM , Padmanabhan A , Clay-Falcone D , McCluskey L , Elman L , Juhr D , Gruber PJ , Rub U , Auburger G , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM , Van Deerlin VM , Bonini NM , Gitler AD , 2010. Ataxin-2 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS. Nature 466 , 1069–1075.20740007
Ellis T , Rochester L , 2018. Mobilizing Parkinson’s Disease: The Future of Exercise. J Parkinsons Dis 8 , S95–S100.30584167
Erickson KI , Kramer AF , 2009. Aerobic exercise effects on cognitive and neural plasticity in older adults. Br J Sports Med 43 , 22–24.18927158
Faes L , Callewaert G , 2011. Mitochondrial dysfunction in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Bioenerg Biomembr 43 , 587–592.22072073
Fatouros C , Pir GJ , Biernat J , Koushika SP , Mandelkow E , Mandelkow EM , Schmidt E , Baumeister R , 2012. Inhibition of tau aggregation in a novel Caenorhabditis elegans model of tauopathy mitigates proteotoxicity. Hum Mol Genet 21 , 3587–3603.22611162
Feng YS , Yang SD , Tan ZX , Wang MM , Xing Y , Dong F , Zhang F , 2020. The benefits and mechanisms of exercise training for Parkinson’s disease. Life Sci 245 , 117345.31981631
Fernandes J , Arida RM , Gomez-Pinilla F , 2017. Physical exercise as an epigenetic modulator of brain plasticity and cognition. Neurosci Biobehav R 80 , 443–456.
Ferri A , Lanfranconi F , Corna G , Bonazzi R , Marchese S , Magnoni A , Tremolizzo L , 2019. Tailored Exercise Training Counteracts Muscle Disuse and Attenuates Reductions in Physical Function in Individuals With Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Front Physiol 10 , 1537.31920728
Finkbeiner S , 2011. Huntington’s Disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 .
Fisher BE , Wu AD , Salem GJ , Song J , Lin CH , Yip J , Cen S , Gordon J , Jakowec M , Petzinger G , 2008. The effect of exercise training in improving motor performance and corticomotor excitability in people with early Parkinson’s disease. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 89 , 1221–1229.18534554
Flach A , Jaegers L , Krieger M , Bixler E , Kelly P , Weiss EP , Ahmad SO , 2017. Endurance exercise improves function in individuals with Parkinson’s disease: A meta-analysis. Neurosci Lett 659 , 115–119.28870627
Fonteyn EM , Heeren A , Engels JJ , Boer JJ , van de Warrenburg BP , Weerdesteyn V , 2014. Gait adaptability training improves obstacle avoidance and dynamic stability in patients with cerebellar degeneration. Gait Posture 40 , 247–251.24786476
Frederiksen KS , Gjerum L , Waldemar G , Hasselbalch SG , 2018. Effects of Physical Exercise on Alzheimer’s Disease Biomarkers: A Systematic Review of Intervention Studies. J Alzheimers Dis 61 , 359–372.29154278
Frese S , Petersen JA , Ligon-Auer M , Mueller SM , Mihaylova V , Gehrig SM , Kana V , Rushing EJ , Unterburger E , Kagi G , Burgunder JM , Toigo M , Jung HH , 2017. Exercise effects in Huntington disease. J Neurol 264 , 32–39.27747393
Friedman JH , 2002. Presumed rapid eye movement behavior disorder in Machado-Joseph disease (spinocerebellar ataxia type 3). Mov Disord 17 , 1350–1353.12465081
Friedman JH , Fernandez HH , Sudarsky LR , 2003. REM behavior disorder and excessive daytime somnolence in Machado-Joseph disease (SCA-3). Mov Disord 18 , 1520–1522.14673890
Fryer JD , Yu P , Kang H , Mandel-Brehm C , Carter AN , Crespo-Barreto J , Gao Y , Flora A , Shaw C , Orr HT , Zoghbi HY , 2011. Exercise and Genetic Rescue of SCA1 via the Transcriptional Repressor Capicua. Science 334 , 690–693.22053053
Fujioka S , Sundal C , Wszolek ZK , 2013. Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type III: a review of the phenotypic and genotypic characteristics. Orphanet J Rare Dis 8 , 14.23331413
Garden GA , La Spada AR , 2008. Molecular pathogenesis and cellular pathology of spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 neurodegeneration. Cerebellum 7 , 138–149.18418675
Gibala M , 2009. Molecular responses to high-intensity interval exercise. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 34 , 428–432.19448710
Gillies GE , Pienaar IS , Vohra S , Qamhawi Z , 2014. Sex differences in Parkinson’s disease. Front Neuroendocrinol 35 , 370–384.24607323
Giorgetti E , Yu Z , Chua JP , Shimamura R , Zhao L , Zhu F , Venneti S , Pennuto M , Guan Y , Hung G , Lieberman AP , 2016. Rescue of Metabolic Alterations in AR113Q Skeletal Muscle by Peripheral Androgen Receptor Gene Silencing. Cell Rep 17 , 125–136.27681426
Globas C , du Montcel ST , Baliko L , Boesch S , Depondt C , DiDonato S , Durr A , Filla A , Klockgether T , Mariotti C , Melegh B , Rakowicz M , Ribai P , Rola R , Schmitz-Hubsch T , Szymanski S , Timmann D , Van de Warrenburg BP , Bauer P , Schols L , 2008. Early symptoms in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, 2, 3, and 6. Mov Disord 23 , 2232–2238.18759344
Gomez CM , Thompson RM , Gammack JT , Perlman SL , Dobyns WB , Truwit CL , Zee DS , Clark HB , Anderson JH , 1997. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6: gaze-evoked and vertical nystagmus, Purkinje cell degeneration, and variable age of onset. Ann Neurol 42 , 933–950.9403487
Group HS , 1996. Unified Huntington’s Disease Rating Scale: reliability and consistency. Huntington Study Group. Mov Disord 11 , 136–142.8684382
Gubert C , Kong G , Renoir T , Hannan AJ , 2020. Exercise, diet and stress as modulators of gut microbiota: Implications for neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiology of Disease 134 .
Gunnarsson TP , Bangsbo J , 2012. The 10-20-30 training concept improves performance and health profile in moderately trained runners. J Appl Physiol (1985 ) 113 , 16–24.22556401
Guo S , Huang Y , Zhang Y , Huang H , Hong S , Liu T , 2020. Impacts of exercise interventions on different diseases and organ functions in mice. J Sport Health Sci 9 , 53–73.31921481
Gwinn-Hardy K , Chen JY , Liu HC , Liu TY , Boss M , Seltzer W , Adam A , Singleton A , Koroshetz W , Waters C , Hardy J , Farrer M , 2000. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 with parkinsonism in ethnic Chinese. Neurology 55 , 800–805.10993999
Halabchi F , Alizadeh Z , Sahraian MA , Abolhasani M , 2017. Exercise prescription for patients with multiple sclerosis; potential benefits and practical recommendations. BMC Neurol 17 , 185.28915856
Halter B , Gonzalez de Aguilar JL , Rene F , Petri S , Fricker B , Echaniz-Laguna A , Dupuis L , Larmet Y , Loeffler JP , 2010. Oxidative stress in skeletal muscle stimulates early expression of Rad in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Free Radic Biol Med 48 , 915–923.20079427
Harris-Love MO , Fernandez-Rhodes L , Joe G , Shrader JA , Kokkinis A , La Pean Kirschner A , Auh S , Chen C , Li L , Levy E , Davenport TE , Di Prospero NA , Fischbeck KH , 2014. Assessing function and endurance in adults with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: validity of the adult myopathy assessment tool. Rehabil Res Pract 2014 , 873872.24876969
He C , Bassik MC , Moresi V , Sun K , Wei Y , Zou Z , An Z , Loh J , Fisher J , Sun Q , Korsmeyer S , Packer M , May HI , Hill JA , Virgin HW , Gilpin C , Xiao G , Bassel-Duby R , Scherer PE , Levine B , 2012. Exercise-induced BCL2-regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose homeostasis. Nature 481 , 511–515.22258505
Heje K , Andersen G , Buch A , Andersen H , Vissing J , 2019. High-intensity training in patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Journal of Neurology 266 , 1693–1697.31004213
Helmlinger D , Hardy S , Sasorith S , Klein F , Robert F , Weber C , Miguet L , Potier N , Van-Dorsselaer A , Wurtz JM , Mandel JL , Tora L , Devys D , 2004. Ataxin-7 is a subunit of GCN5 histone acetyltransferase-containing complexes. Human Molecular Genetics 13 , 1257–1265.15115762
Henkel JS , Engelhardt JI , Siklos L , Simpson EP , Kim SH , Pan T , Goodman JC , Siddique T , Beers DR , Appel SH , 2004. Presence of dendritic cells, MCP-1, and activated microglia/macrophages in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cord tissue. Ann Neurol 55 , 221–235.14755726
Herbst EAF , Holloway GP , 2015. Exercise Training Normalizes Mitochondrial Respiratory Capacity within the Striatum of the R6/1 Model of Huntington’s Disease. Neuroscience 303 , 515–523.26186895
Hickey MA , Chesselet MF , 2003. Apoptosis in Huntington’s disease. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 27 , 255–265.12657365
Hijioka M , Inden M , Yanagisawa D , Kitamura Y , 2017. DJ-1/PARK7: A New Therapeutic Target for Neurodegenerative Disorders. Biol Pharm Bull 40 , 548–552.28458339
Hirth F , 2010. Drosophila melanogaster in the study of human neurodegeneration. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 9 , 504–523.20522007
Hitoshi S , Maruta N , Higashi M , Kumar A , Kato N , Ikenaka K , 2007. Antidepressant drugs reverse the loss of adult neural stem cells following chronic stress. J Neurosci Res 85 , 3574–3585.17668856
Hodges JR , Salmon DP , Butters N , 1990. Differential impairment of semantic and episodic memory in Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s diseases: a controlled prospective study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 53 , 1089–1095.2149861
Hou YJ , Dan XL , Babbar M , Wei Y , Hasselbalch SG , Croteau DL , Bohr VA , 2019. Ageing as a risk factor for neurodegenerative disease. Nature Reviews Neurology 15 , 565–581.31501588
Houde SC , Melillo KD , 2009. Caring for an aging population: review of policy initiatives. J Gerontol Nurs 35 , 8–13.
Hu FB , Manson JE , Stampfer MJ , Colditz G , Liu S , Solomon CG , Willett WC , 2001. Diet, lifestyle, and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in women. N Engl J Med 345 , 790–797.11556298
Huntington G , 2003. On chorea. George Huntington, M.D. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 15 , 109–112.12556582
Ilg W , Brotz D , Burkard S , Giese MA , Schols L , Synofzik M , 2010. Long-term effects of coordinative training in degenerative cerebellar disease. Mov Disord 25 , 2239–2246.20737551
Ilg W , Synofzik M , Brotz D , Burkard S , Giese MA , Schols L , 2009. Intensive coordinative training improves motor performance in degenerative cerebellar disease. Neurology 73 , 1823–1830.19864636
Ishikawa K , Tanaka H , Saito M , Ohkoshi N , Fujita T , Yoshizawa K , Ikeuchi T , Watanabe M , Hayashi A , Takiyama Y , Nishizawa M , Nakano I , Matsubayashi K , Miwa M , Shoji S , Kanazawa I , Tsuji S , Mizusawa H , 1997. Japanese families with autosomal dominant pure cerebellar ataxia map to chromosome 19p13.1-p13.2 and are strongly associated with mild CAG expansions in the spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 gene in chromosome 19p13.1. Am J Hum Genet 61 , 336–346.9311738
Islam MT , 2017. Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction-linked neurodegenerative disorders. Neurol Res 39 , 73–82.27809706
Jensen CS , Simonsen AH , Siersma V , Beyer N , Frederiksen KS , Gottrup H , Hoffman K , Hogh P , Frikke-Schmidt R , Sobol NA , Waldemar G , Wermuth L , Hasselbalch SG , 2019. Patients with Alzheimer’s disease who carry the APOE epsilon4 allele benefit more from physical exercise. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 5 , 99–106.31011620
Ji ES , Kim YM , Shin MS , Kim CJ , Lee KS , Kim K , Ha J , Chung YR , 2015. Treadmill exercise enhances spatial learning ability through suppressing hippocampal apoptosis in Huntington’s disease rats. J Exerc Rehabil 11 , 133–139.26171378
Johnson AA , Stolzing A , 2019. The role of lipid metabolism in aging, lifespan regulation, and age-related disease. Aging Cell 18 , e13048.31560163
Jones AW , Yao Z , Vicencio JM , Karkucinska-Wieckowska A , Szabadkai G , 2012. PGC-1 family coactivators and cell fate: roles in cancer, neurodegeneration, cardiovascular disease and retrograde mitochondria-nucleus signalling. Mitochondrion 12 , 86–99.21983689
Julian TH , Glascow N , Barry ADF , Moll T , Harvey C , Klimentidis YC , Newell M , Zhang S , Snyder MP , Cooper-Knock J , Shaw PJ , 2021. Physical exercise is a risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Convergent evidence from Mendelian randomisation, transcriptomics and risk genotypes. Ebiomedicine 68 .
Kaspar BK , Frost LM , Christian L , Umapathi P , Gage FH , 2005. Synergy of insulin-like growth factor-1 and exercise in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 57 , 649–655.15852403
Kennedy RL , Chokkalingham K , Srinivasan R , 2004. Obesity in the elderly: who should we be treating, and why, and how? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 7 , 3–9.15090896
Kim CY , Alcalay RN , 2017. Genetic Forms of Parkinson’s Disease. Semin Neurol 37 , 135–146.28511254
Kim JY , Barua S , Huang MY , Park J , Yenari MA , Lee JE , 2020a. Heat Shock Protein 70 (HSP70) Induction: Chaperonotherapy for Neuroprotection after Brain Injury. Cells 9 .
Kim M , Sujkowski A , Namkoong S , Gu B , Cobb T , Kim B , Kowalsky AH , Cho CS , Semple I , Ro SH , Davis C , Brooks SV , Karin M , Wessells RJ , Lee JH , 2020b. Sestrins are evolutionarily conserved mediators of exercise benefits. Nat Commun 11 , 190.31929512
Kim SY , Marekov L , Bubber P , Browne S , Stavrovskaya I , Lee J , Steinert PM , Blass JP , Beal MF , Gibson GE , Cooper AJL , 2005. Mitochondrial aconitase is a transglutaminase 2 substrate: Transglutamination is a probable mechanism contributing to high-molecular-weight aggregates of aconitase and loss of aconitase activity in Huntington disease brain. Neurochem Res 30 , 1245–1255.16341586
Kingwell BA , 2000. Nitric oxide as a metabolic regulator during exercise: Effects of training in health and disease. Clin Exp Pharmacol P 27 , 239–250.
Kizilyaprak C , Spehner D , Devys D , Schultz P , 2011. The linker histone H1C contributes to the SCA7 nuclear phenotype. Nucleus 2 , 444–454.21970987
Klockgether T , Mariotti C , Paulson HL , 2019. Spinocerebellar ataxia. Nat Rev Dis Primers 5 , 24.30975995
Kodama S , Saito K , Tanaka S , Maki M , Yachi Y , Asumi M , Sugawara A , Totsuka K , Shimano H , Ohashi Y , Yamada N , Sone H , 2009. Cardiorespiratory fitness as a quantitative predictor of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular events in healthy men and women: a meta-analysis. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 301 , 2024–2035.19454641
Kumar A , Kneynsberg A , Tucholski J , Perry G , van Groen T , Detloff PJ , Lesort M , 2012. Tissue transglutaminase overexpression does not modify the disease phenotype of the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Exp Neurol 237 , 78–89.22698685
Kuraszkiewicz B , Goszczynska H , Podsiadly-Marczykowska T , Piotrkiewicz M , Andersen P , Gromicho M , Grosskreutz J , Kuzma-Kozakiewicz M , Petri S , Stubbendorf B , Szacka K , Uysal H , de Carvalho M , 2020. Potential Preventive Strategies for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Front Neurosci 14 , 428.32528241
La Spada AR , Taylor JP , 2003. Polyglutamines placed into context. Neuron 38 , 681–684.12797953
La Spada AR , Wilson EM , Lubahn DB , Harding AE , Fischbeck KH , 1991. Androgen receptor gene mutations in X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Nature 352 , 77–79.2062380
Laker RC , Xu P , Ryall KA , Sujkowski A , Kenwood BM , Chain KH , Zhang M , Royal MA , Hoehn KL , Driscoll M , Adler PN , Wessells RJ , Saucerman JJ , Yan Z , 2014. A Novel MitoTimer Reporter Gene for Mitochondrial Content, Structure, Stress, and Damage in Vivo. J Biol Chem 289 , 12005–12015.24644293
Lamb SE , Sheehan B , Atherton N , Nichols V , Collins H , Mistry D , Dosanjh S , Slowther AM , Khan I , Petrou S , Lall R , Investigators DT , 2018. Dementia And Physical Activity (DAPA) trial of moderate to high intensity exercise training for people with dementia: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 361 , k1675.29769247
Laranjeiro R , Harinath G , Burke D , Braeckman BP , Driscoll M , 2017. Single swim sessions in C. elegans induce key features of mammalian exercise. BMC Biol 15 , 30.28395669
Laranjeiro R , Harinath G , Hewitt JE , Hartman JH , Royal MA , Meyer JN , Vanapalli SA , Driscoll M , 2019. Swim exercise in Caenorhabditis elegans extends neuromuscular and gut healthspan, enhances learning ability, and protects against neurodegeneration. P Natl Acad Sci USA 116 , 23829–23839.
Lastres-Becker I , Nonis D , Eich F , Klinkenberg M , Gorospe M , Kotter P , Klein FAC , Kedersha N , Auburger G , 2016. Mammalian ataxin-2 modulates translation control at the pre-initiation complex via PI3K/mTOR and is induced by starvation. Bba-Mol Basis Dis 1862 , 1558–1569.
Lau YS , Patki G , Das-Panja K , Le WD , Ahmad SO , 2011. Neuroprotective effects and mechanisms of exercise in a chronic mouse model of Parkinson’s disease with moderate neurodegeneration. Eur J Neurosci 33 , 1264–1274.21375602
Lau YS , Trobough KL , Crampton JM , Wilson JA , 1990. Effects of probenecid on striatal dopamine depletion in acute and long-term 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated mice. Gen Pharmacol 21 , 181–187.2332138
Leal LG , Lopes MA , Batista ML Jr. , 2018. Physical Exercise-Induced Myokines and Muscle-Adipose Tissue Crosstalk: A Review of Current Knowledge and the Implications for Health and Metabolic Diseases. Front Physiol 9 , 1307.30319436
Leasure JL , Jones M , 2008. Forced and voluntary exercise differentially affect brain and behavior. Neuroscience 156 , 456–465.18721864
Lee A , Gilbert RM , 2016. Epidemiology of Parkinson Disease. Neurol Clin 34 , 955–965.27720003
Lee JH , Budanov AV , Park EJ , Birse R , Kim TE , Perkins GA , Ocorr K , Ellisman MH , Bodmer R , Bier E , Karin M , 2010. Sestrin as a feedback inhibitor of TOR that prevents age-related pathologies. Science 327 , 1223–1228.20203043
Leek BT , Mudaliar SR , Henry R , Mathieu-Costello O , Richardson RS , 2001. Effect of acute exercise on citrate synthase activity in untrained and trained human skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 280 , R441–447.11208573
Lemiere J , Decruyenaere M , Evers-Kiebooms G , Vandenbussche E , Dom R , 2004. Cognitive changes in patients with Huntington’s disease (HD) and asymptomatic carriers of the HD mutation--a longitudinal follow-up study. J Neurol 251 , 935–942.15316797
Leonardi L , Aceto MG , Marcotulli C , Arcuria G , Serrao M , Pierelli F , Paone P , Filla A , Roca A , Casali C , 2017. A wearable proprioceptive stabilizer for rehabilitation of limb and gait ataxia in hereditary cerebellar ataxias: a pilot open-labeled study. Neurol Sci 38 , 459–463.28039539
Liang JJH , McKinnon IA , Rankin CH , 2020. The contribution of C. elegans neurogenetics to understanding neurodegenerative diseases. J Neurogenet 34 , 527–548.32772603
Lieberman AP , Shakkottai VG , Albin RL , 2018. Polyglutamine Repeats in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Annu Rev Pathol.
Liebetanz D , Hagemann K , von Lewinski F , Kahler E , Paulus W , 2004. Extensive exercise is not harmful in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Eur J Neurosci 20 , 3115–3120.15579165
Lin KP , Soong BW , 2002. Peripheral neuropathy of Machado-Joseph disease in Taiwan: a morphometric and genetic study. Eur Neurol 48 , 210–217.12422070
Lisle S , Tennison M , 2015. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: the role of exercise. Curr Sports Med Rep 14 , 45–46.25574882
Liu CC , Liu CC , Kanekiyo T , Xu H , Bu G , 2013a. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat Rev Neurol 9 , 106–118.23296339
Liu HL , Zhao G , Cai K , Zhao HH , Shi LD , 2011. Treadmill exercise prevents decline in spatial learning and memory in APP/PS1 transgenic mice through improvement of hippocampal long-term potentiation. Behavioural Brain Research 218 , 308–314.21192984
Liu HL , Zhao G , Zhang H , Shi LD , 2013b. Long-term treadmill exercise inhibits the progression of Alzheimer’s disease-like neuropathology in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Behav Brain Res 256 , 261–272.23968591
Liu J , Tang TS , Tu HP , Nelson O , Herndon E , Huynh DP , Pulst SM , Bezprozvanny I , 2009. Deranged Calcium Signaling and Neurodegeneration in Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2. Journal of Neuroscience 29 , 9148–9162.19625506
Lloyd BA , Hake HS , Ishiwata T , Farmer CE , Loetz EC , Fleshner M , Bland ST , Greenwood BN , 2017. Exercise increases mTOR signaling in brain regions involved in cognition and emotional behavior. Behav Brain Res 323 , 56–67.28130174
Macdonald ME , Ambrose CM , Duyao MP , Myers RH , Lin C , Srinidhi L , Barnes G , Taylor SA , James M , Groot N , Macfarlane H , Jenkins B , Anderson MA , Wexler NS , Gusella JF , Bates GP , Baxendale S , Hummerich H , Kirby S , North M , Youngman S , Mott R , Zehetner G , Sedlacek Z , Poustka A , Frischauf AM , Lehrach H , Buckler AJ , Church D , Doucettestamm L , Odonovan MC , Ribaramirez L , Shah M , Stanton VP , Strobel SA , Draths KM , Wales JL , Dervan P , Housman DE , Altherr M , Shiang R , Thompson L , Fielder T , Wasmuth JJ , Tagle D , Valdes J , Elmer L , Allard M , Castilla L , Swaroop M , Blanchard K , Collins FS , Snell R , Holloway T , Gillespie K , Datson N , Shaw D , Harper PS , 1993. A Novel Gene Containing a Trinucleotide Repeat That Is Expanded and Unstable on Huntingtons-Disease Chromosomes. Cell 72 , 971–983.8458085
Madabhushi R , Pan L , Tsai LH , 2014. DNA damage and its links to neurodegeneration. Neuron 83 , 266–282.25033177
Mahalakshmi B , Maurya N , Lee SD , Bharath Kumar V , 2020. Possible Neuroprotective Mechanisms of Physical Exercise in Neurodegeneration. Int J Mol Sci 21 .
Mak MKY , 2013. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with treadmill training can modulate corticomotor inhibition and improve walking performance in people with Parkinson’s disease. J Physiother 59 , 128–128.23663800
Mak MKY , Wong-Yu ISK , 2019. Exercise for Parkinson’s disease. Int Rev Neurobiol 147 , 1–44.31607351
Mangiarini L , Sathasivam K , Seller M , Cozens B , Harper A , Hetherington C , Lawton M , Trottier Y , Lehrach H , Davies SW , Bates GP , 1996. Exon 1 of the HD gene with an expanded CAG repeat is sufficient to cause a progressive neurological phenotype in transgenic mice. Cell 87 , 493–506.8898202
Manson JE , Hu FB , Rich-Edwards JW , Colditz GA , Stampfer MJ , Willett WC , Speizer FE , Hennekens CH , 1999. A prospective study of walking as compared with vigorous exercise in the prevention of coronary heart disease in women. The New England journal of medicine 341 , 650–658.10460816
Marosi K , Bori Z , Hart N , Sarga L , Koltai E , Radak Z , Nyakas C , 2012. Long-term exercise treatment reduces oxidative stress in the hippocampus of aging rats. Neuroscience 226 , 21–28.22982624
Martinez-Reyes I , Chandel NS , 2020. Mitochondrial TCA cycle metabolites control physiology and disease. Nat Commun 11 , 102.31900386
Maruyama H , Izumi Y , Morino H , Oda M , Toji H , Nakamura S , Kawakami H , 2002. Difference in disease-free survival curve and regional distribution according to subtype of spinocerebellar ataxia: a study of 1,286 Japanese patients. Am J Med Genet 114 , 578–583.12116198
Masters CL , Bateman R , Blennow K , Rowe CC , Sperling RA , Cummings JL , 2015. Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 1 , 15056.27188934
Matos CA , de Almeida LP , Nóbrega C , 2019. Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: lessons from disease pathogenesis and clues into therapy. J Neurochem 148 , 8–28.29959858
Matsumura R , Takayanagi T , Fujimoto Y , Murata K , Mano Y , Horikawa H , Chuma T , 1996. The relationship between trinucleotide repeat length and phenotypic variation in Machado-Joseph disease. J Neurol Sci 139 , 52–57.8836972
McGurk L , Berson A , Bonini NM , 2015. Drosophila as an In Vivo Model for Human Neurodegenerative Disease. Genetics 201 , 377–402.26447127
Meng Q , Lin MS , Tzeng IS , 2020. Relationship Between Exercise and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Narrative Literature Review. Front Neurosci 14 , 131.32273835
Menzies FM , Fleming A , Caricasole A , Bento CF , Andrews SP , Ashkenazi A , Fullgrabe J , Jackson A , Jimenez Sanchez M , Karabiyik C , Licitra F , Lopez Ramirez A , Pavel M , Puri C , Renna M , Ricketts T , Schlotawa L , Vicinanza M , Won H , Zhu Y , Skidmore J , Rubinsztein DC , 2017. Autophagy and Neurodegeneration: Pathogenic Mechanisms and Therapeutic Opportunities. Neuron 93 , 1015–1034.28279350
Merico A , Cavinato M , Gregorio C , Lacatena A , Gioia E , Piccione F , Angelini C , 2018. Effects of combined endurance and resistance training in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: A pilot, randomized, controlled study. Eur J Transl Myol 28 , 7278.29686818
Milne SC , Corben LA , Georgiou-Karistianis N , Delatycki MB , Yiu EM , 2017. Rehabilitation for Individuals With Genetic Degenerative Ataxia: A Systematic Review. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 31 , 609–622.28595509
Mittal S , Bjornevik K , Im DS , Flierl A , Dong XJ , Locascio JJ , Abo KM , Long E , Jin M , Xu B , Xiang YK , Rochet JC , Engeland A , Rizzu P , Heutink P , Bartels T , Selkoe DJ , Caldarone BJ , Glicksman MA , Khurana V , Schule B , Park DS , Riise T , Scherzer CR , 2017. beta(2)-Adrenoreceptor is a regulator of the alpha-synuclein gene driving risk of Parkinson’s disease. Science 357 , 891–897.28860381
Mittendorfer B , Horowitz JF , Klein S , 2001. Gender differences in lipid and glucose kinetics during short-term fasting. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 281 , E1333–1339.11701450
Miyai I , Ito M , Hattori N , Mihara M , Hatakenaka M , Yagura H , Sobue G , Nishizawa M , Cerebellar Ataxia Rehabilitation Trialists, C., 2012. Cerebellar ataxia rehabilitation trial in degenerative cerebellar diseases. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 26 , 515–522.22140200
Miyamoto ST , Lombardi I Junior , Berg KO , Ramos LR , Natour J , 2004. Brazilian version of the Berg balance scale. Braz J Med Biol Res 37 , 1411–1421.15334208
Mo C , Hannan AJ , Renoir T , 2015. Environmental factors as modulators of neurodegeneration: Insights from gene-environment interactions in Huntington’s disease. Neurosci Biobehav R 52 , 178–192.
Moore TM , Zhou ZQ , Cohn W , Norheim F , Lin AJ , Kalajian N , Strumwasser AR , Cory K , Whitney K , Ho T , Ho T , Lee JL , Rucker DH , Shirihai O , van der Bliek AM , Whitelegge JP , Seldin MM , Lusis AJ , Lee S , Drevon CA , Mahata SK , Turcotte LP , Hevener AL , 2019. The impact of exercise on mitochondrial dynamics and the role of Drp1 in exercise performance and training adaptations in skeletal muscle. Mol Metab 21 , 51–67.30591411
Morfini GA , Burns M , Binder LI , Kanaan NM , LaPointe N , Bosco DA , Brown RH Jr. , Brown H , Tiwari A , Hayward L , Edgar J , Nave KA , Garberrn J , Atagi Y , Song Y , Pigino G , Brady ST , 2009. Axonal transport defects in neurodegenerative diseases. J Neurosci 29 , 12776–12786.19828789
Morici G , Gruttad’Auria CI , Baiamonte P , Mazzuca E , Castrogiovanni A , Bonsignore MR , 2016. Endurance training: is it bad for you? Breathe 12 , 141–147.
Morton SM , Bastian AJ , 2004. Cerebellar control of balance and locomotion. Neuroscientist 10 , 247–259.15155063
Mueller SM , Gehrig SM , Petersen JA , Frese S , Mihaylova V , Ligon-Auer M , Khmara N , Nuoffer JM , Schaller A , Lundby C , Toigo M , Jung HH , 2017. Effects of endurance training on skeletal muscle mitochondrial function in Huntington disease patients. Orphanet J Rare Dis 12 , 184.29258585
Mueller SM , Mihaylova V , Frese S , Petersen JA , Ligon-Auer M , Aguayo D , Fluck M , Jung HH , Toigo M , 2019a. Satellite cell content in Huntington’s disease patients in response to endurance training. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 14 .
Mueller SM , Petersen JA , Jung HH , 2019b. Exercise in Huntington’s Disease: Current State and Clinical Significance. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y) 9 , 601.30783551
Murata Y , Kawakami H , Yamaguchi S , Nishimura M , Kohriyama T , Ishizaki F , Matsuyama Z , Mimori Y , Nakamura S , 1998. Characteristic magnetic resonance imaging findings in spinocerebellar ataxia 6. Arch Neurol 55 , 1348–1352.9779664
Nagai Y , Azuma T , Funauchi M , Fujita M , Umi M , Hirano M , Matsubara T , Ueno S , 1998. Clinical and molecular genetic study in seven Japanese families with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. J Neurol Sci 157 , 52–59.9600677
Nagatsu T , 1995. Tyrosine hydroxylase: human isoforms, structure and regulation in physiology and pathology. Essays Biochem 30 , 15–35.8822146
Nethisinghe S , Pigazzini ML , Pemble S , Sweeney MG , Labrum R , Manso K , Moore D , Warner J , Davis MB , Giunti P , 2018. PolyQ Tract Toxicity in SCA1 is Length Dependent in the Absence of CAG Repeat Interruption. Front Cell Neurosci 12 .
Newman LE , Shadel GS , 2018. Pink1/Parkin link inflammation, mitochondrial stress, and neurodegeneration. J Cell Biol 217 , 3327–3329.30154188
Niewiadomska-Cimicka A , Trottier Y , 2019. Molecular Targets and Therapeutic Strategies in Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 7. Neurotherapeutics 16 , 1074–1096.31432449
Ohia-Nwoko O , Montazari S , Lau YS , Eriksen JL , 2014. Long-term treadmill exercise attenuates tau pathology in P301S tau transgenic mice. Mol Neurodegener 9 , 54.25432085
Onyango IG , Khan SM , Bennett JP Jr. , 2017. Mitochondria in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 22 , 854–872.27814651
Padovan-Neto FE , Jurkowski L , Murray C , Stutzmann GE , Kwan M , Ghavami A , Beaumont V , Park LC , West AR , 2019. Age- and sex-related changes in cortical and striatal nitric oxide synthase in the Q175 mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Nitric Oxide 83 , 40–50.30528913
Palazzolo I , Stack C , Kong L , Musaro A , Adachi H , Katsuno M , Sobue G , Taylor JP , Sumner CJ , Fischbeck KH , Pennuto M , 2009. Overexpression of IGF-1 in muscle attenuates disease in a mouse model of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Neuron 63 , 316–328.19679072
Park D , Kwak SG , Park JS , Choo YJ , Chang MC , 2020. Can Therapeutic Exercise Slow Down Progressive Functional Decline in Patients With Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis? A Meta-Analysis. Front Neurol 11 .
Parker JA , Connolly JB , Wellington C , Hayden M , Dausset J , Neri C , 2001. Expanded polyglutamines in Caenorhabditis elegans cause axonal abnormalities and severe dysfunction of PLM mechanosensory neurons without cell death. P Natl Acad Sci USA 98 , 13318–13323.
Parodi S , Pennuto M , 2011. Neurotoxic effects of androgens in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Front Neuroendocrinol 32 , 416–425.21745497
Paulson H , 2012. Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. Handb Clin Neurol 103 , 437–449.21827905
Paulson HL , Das SS , Crino PB , Perez MK , Patel SC , Gotsdiner D , Fischbeck KH , Pittman RN , 1997. Machado-Joseph disease gene product is a cytoplasmic protein widely expressed in brain. Ann Neurol 41 , 453–462.9124802
Paulson HL , Shakkottai VG , Clark HB , Orr HT , 2017. Polyglutamine spinocerebellar ataxias - from genes to potential treatments. Nat Rev Neurosci 18 , 613–626.28855740
Perez MK , Paulson HL , Pendse SJ , Saionz SJ , Bonini NM , Pittman RN , 1998. Recruitment and the role of nuclear localization in polyglutamine-mediated aggregation. J Cell Biol 143 , 1457–1470.9852144
Perez Ortiz JM , Orr HT , 2018. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 1: Molecular Mechanisms of Neurodegeneration and Preclinical Studies. Adv Exp Med Biol 1049 , 135–145.29427101
Perluigi M , Di Domenico F , Butterfield DA , 2015. mTOR signaling in aging and neurodegeneration: At the crossroad between metabolism dysfunction and impairment of autophagy. Neurobiology of Disease 84 , 39–49.25796566
Petersen A , Mani K , Brundin P , 1999. Recent advances on the pathogenesis of Huntington’s disease. Exp Neurol 157 , 1–18.10222105
Petzinger GM , Fisher BE , McEwen S , Beeler JA , Walsh JP , Jakowec MW , 2013. Exercise-enhanced neuroplasticity targeting motor and cognitive circuitry in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol 12 , 716–726.23769598
Piazza N , Gosangi B , Devilla S , Arking R , Wessells R , 2009. Exercise-training in young Drosophila melanogaster reduces age-related decline in mobility and cardiac performance. PLoS One 4 , e5886.19517023
Polymeropoulos MH , Lavedan C , Leroy E , Ide SE , Dehejia A , Dutra A , Pike B , Root H , Rubenstein J , Boyer R , Stenroos ES , Chandrasekharappa S , Athanassiadou A , Papapetropoulos T , Johnson WG , Lazzarini AM , Duvoisin RC , Di Iorio G , Golbe LI , Nussbaum RL , 1997. Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson’s disease. Science 276 , 2045–2047.9197268
Pothakos K , Kurz MJ , Lau YS , 2009. Restorative effect of endurance exercise on behavioral deficits in the chronic mouse model of Parkinson’s disease with severe neurodegeneration. BMC Neurosci 10 , 6.19154608
Preisler N , Andersen G , Thogersen F , Crone C , Jeppesen TD , Wibrand F , Vissing J , 2009. Effect of aerobic training in patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease). Neurology 72 , 317–323.19171827
Qi Y , Wang S , Luo Y , Huang W , Chen L , Zhang Y , Liang X , Tang J , Zhang Y , Zhang L , Chao F , Gao Y , Zhu Y , Tang Y , 2020. Exercise-induced Nitric Oxide Contributes to Spatial Memory and Hippocampal Capillaries in Rats. Int J Sports Med 41 , 951–961.32643775
Radak Z , Hart N , Sarga L , Koltai E , Atalay M , Ohno H , Boldogh I , 2010. Exercise plays a preventive role against Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 20 , 777–783.20182027
Radak Z , Naito H , Kaneko T , Tahara S , Nakamoto H , Takahashi R , Cardozo-Pelaez F , Goto S , 2002. Exercise training decreases DNA damage and increases DNA repair and resistance against oxidative stress of proteins in aged rat skeletal muscle. Pflugers Arch 445 , 273–278.12457248
Rafalski VA , Brunet A , 2011. Energy metabolism in adult neural stem cell fate. Prog Neurobiol 93 , 182–203.21056618
Ragothaman M , Muthane U , 2008. Homozygous SCA 2 mutations changes phenotype and hastens progression. Mov Disord 23 , 770–771.18265007
Ralser M , Albrecht M , Nonhoff U , Lengauer T , Lehrach H , Krobitsch S , 2005. An integrative approach to gain insights into the cellular function of human ataxin-2. J Mol Biol 346 , 203–214.15663938
Ranganathan S , Harmison GG , Meyertholen K , Pennuto M , Burnett BG , Fischbeck KH , 2009. Mitochondrial abnormalities in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Hum Mol Genet 18 , 27–42.18824496
Rawson KS , McNeely ME , Duncan RP , Pickett KA , Perlmutter JS , Earhart GM , 2019. Exercise and Parkinson Disease: Comparing Tango, Treadmill, and Stretching. J Neurol Phys Ther 43 , 26–32.30531383
Rebelo-Marques A , De Sousa Lages A , Andrade R , Ribeiro CF , Mota-Pinto A , Carrilho F , Espregueira-Mendes J , 2018. Aging Hallmarks: The Benefits of Physical Exercise. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 9 , 258.29887832
Reddy K , Cusack CL , Nnah IC , Khayati K , Saqcena C , Huynh TB , Noggle SA , Ballabio A , Dobrowolski R , 2016. Dysregulation of Nutrient Sensing and CLEARance in Presenilin Deficiency. Cell Rep 14 , 2166–2179.26923592
Robinson AG , Dennett AM , Snowdon DA , 2019. Treadmill training may be an effective form of task-specific training for improving mobility in people with Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Physiotherapy 105 , 174–186.30876717
Rocchi A , Milioto C , Parodi S , Armirotti A , Borgia D , Pellegrini M , Urciuolo A , Molon S , Morbidoni V , Marabita M , Romanello V , Gatto P , Blaauw B , Bonaldo P , Sambataro F , Robins DM , Lieberman AP , Soraru G , Vergani L , Sandri M , Pennuto M , 2016. Glycolytic-to-oxidative fiber-type switch and mTOR signaling activation are early-onset features of SBMA muscle modified by high-fat diet. Acta Neuropathol 132 , 127–144.26971100
Roerdink M , Coolen B , Clairbois BE , Lamoth CJC , Beek PJ , 2008. Online gait event detection using a large force platform embedded in a treadmill. J Biomech 41 , 2628–2632.18657816
Rub U , Brunt ER , de Vos RA , Del Turco D , Del Tredici K , Gierga K , Schultz C , Ghebremedhin E , Burk K , Auburger G , Braak H , 2004. Degeneration of the central vestibular system in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) patients and its possible clinical significance. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 30 , 402–414.15305986
Rüb U , Brunt ER , Gierga K , Schultz C , Paulson H , de Vos RA , Braak H , 2003. The nucleus raphe interpositus in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (Machado-Joseph disease). J Chem Neuroanat 25 , 115–127.12663059
Rüb U , Bürk K , Schöls L , Brunt ER , de Vos RA , Diaz GO , Gierga K , Ghebremedhin E , Schultz C , Del Turco D , Mittelbronn M , Auburger G , Deller T , Braak H , 2004. Damage to the reticulotegmental nucleus of the pons in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, 2, and 3. Neurology 63 , 1258–1263.15477548
Rüb U , de Vos RA , Brunt ER , Schultz C , Paulson H , Del Tredici K , Braak H , 2002a. Degeneration of the external cuneate nucleus in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (Machado-Joseph disease). Brain Res 953 , 126–134.12384246
Rüb U , de Vos RA , Schultz C , Brunt ER , Paulson H , Braak H , 2002b. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (Machado-Joseph disease): severe destruction of the lateral reticular nucleus. Brain 125 , 2115–2124.12183356
Russell AP , Wada S , Vergani L , Hock MB , Lamon S , Leger B , Ushida T , Cartoni R , Wadley GD , Hespel P , Kralli A , Soraru G , Angelini C , Akimoto T , 2013. Disruption of skeletal muscle mitochondrial network genes and miRNAs in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiol Dis 49 , 107–117.22975021
Safdar A , Bourgeois JM , Ogborn DI , Little JP , Hettinga BP , Akhtar M , Thompson JE , Melov S , Mocellin NJ , Kujoth GC , Prolla TA , Tarnopolsky MA , 2011. Endurance exercise rescues progeroid aging and induces systemic mitochondrial rejuvenation in mtDNA mutator mice. P Natl Acad Sci USA 108 , 4135–4140.
Safieh M , Korczyn AD , Michaelson DM , 2019. ApoE4: an emerging therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease. BMC Med 17 , 64.30890171
Salmon DP , Kwo-on-Yuen PF , Heindel WC , Butters N , Thal LJ , 1989. Differentiation of Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s disease with the Dementia Rating Scale. Arch Neurol 46 , 1204–1208.2530966
Sanchez I , Balague E , Matilla-Duenas A , 2016. Ataxin-1 regulates the cerebellar bioenergetics proteome through the GSK3 ss-mTOR pathway which is altered in Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1). Human Molecular Genetics 25 , 4021–4040.27466200
Sanders LMJ , Hortobagyi T , Karssemeijer EGA , Van der Zee EA , Scherder EJA , van Heuvelen MJG , 2020. Effects of low- and high-intensity physical exercise on physical and cognitive function in older persons with dementia: a randomized controlled trial. Alzheimers Res Ther 12 , 28.32192537
Santos de Oliveira LA , Martins CP , Horsczaruk CH , Lima da Silva DC , Martins JV , Vasconcelos LF , Rodrigues Ede C , 2015. Decreasing fall risk in spinocerebellar ataxia. J Phys Ther Sci 27 , 1223–1225.25995594
Sarkar S , 2013. Regulation of autophagy by mTOR-dependent and mTOR-independent pathways: autophagy dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases and therapeutic application of autophagy enhancers. Biochem Soc Trans 41 , 1103–1130.24059496
Sasaki H , Wakisaka A , Fukazawa T , Iwabuchi K , Hamada T , Takada A , Mukai E , Matsuura T , Yoshiki T , Tashiro K , 1995. CAG repeat expansion of Machado-Joseph disease in the Japanese: analysis of the repeat instability for parental transmission, and correlation with disease phenotype. J Neurol Sci 133 , 128–133.8583215
Schapira AH , Agid Y , Barone P , Jenner P , Lemke MR , Poewe W , Rascol O , Reichmann H , Tolosa E , 2009. Perspectives on recent advances in the understanding and treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Eur J Neurol 16 , 1090–1099.19723294
Schmitz-Hubsch T , Coudert M , Bauer P , Giunti P , Globas C , Baliko L , Filla A , Mariotti C , Rakowicz M , Charles P , Ribai P , Szymanski S , Infante J , van de Warrenburg BP , Durr A , Timmann D , Boesch S , Fancellu R , Rola R , Depondt C , Schols L , Zdienicka E , Kang JS , Dohlinger S , Kremer B , Stephenson DA , Melegh B , Pandolfo M , di Donato S , du Montcel ST , Klockgether T , 2008. Spinocerebellar ataxia types 1, 2, 3, and 6: disease severity and nonataxia symptoms. Neurology 71 , 982–989.18685131
Schmitz-Hubsch T , du Montcel ST , Baliko L , Berciano J , Boesch S , Depondt C , Giunti P , Globas C , Infante J , Kang JS , Kremer B , Mariotti C , Melegh B , Pandolfo M , Rakowicz M , Ribai P , Rola R , Schols L , Szymanski S , van de Warrenburg BP , Durr A , Klockgether T , Fancellu R , 2006. Scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia: development of a new clinical scale. Neurology 66 , 1717–1720.16769946
Schöls L , Amoiridis G , Epplen JT , Langkafel M , Przuntek H , Riess O , 1996. Relations between genotype and phenotype in German patients with the Machado-Joseph disease mutation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 61 , 466–470.8937340
Scoles DR , Pulst SM , 2018. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2. Adv Exp Med Biol 1049 , 175–195.29427103
Sequeiros J , Coutinho P , 1993. Epidemiology and clinical aspects of Machado-Joseph disease. Adv Neurol 61 , 139–153.8421964
Shih MC , Wang RY , Cheng SJ , Yang YR , 2016. Effects of a balance-based exergaming intervention using the Kinect sensor on posture stability in individuals with Parkinson’s disease: a single-blinded randomized controlled trial. J Neuroeng Rehabil 13 .
Shrader JA , Kats I , Kokkinis A , Zampieri C , Levy E , Joe GO , Woolstenhulme JG , Drinkard BE , Smith MR , Ching W , Ghosh L , Fox D , Auh S , Schindler AB , Fischbeck KH , Grunseich C , 2015. A randomized controlled trial of exercise in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2 , 739–747.26273686
Singh P , Chowdhuri DK , 2018. Modulation of sestrin confers protection to Cr(VI) induced neuronal cell death in Drosophila melanogaster. Chemosphere 191 , 302–314.29045932
Singleton AB , Farrer M , Johnson J , Singleton A , Hague S , Kachergus J , Hulihan M , Peuralinna T , Dutra A , Nussbaum R , Lincoln S , Crawley A , Hanson M , Maraganore D , Adler C , Cookson MR , Muenter M , Baptista M , Miller D , Blancato J , Hardy J , Gwinn-Hardy K , 2003. alpha-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science 302 , 841.14593171
Sliter DA , Martinez J , Hao L , Chen X , Sun N , Fischer TD , Burman JL , Li Y , Zhang Z , Narendra DP , Cai H , Borsche M , Klein C , Youle RJ , 2018. Parkin and PINK1 mitigate STING-induced inflammation. Nature 561 , 258–262.30135585
Soong B , Cheng C , Liu R , Shan D , 1997. Machado-Joseph disease: clinical, molecular, and metabolic characterization in Chinese kindreds. Ann Neurol 41 , 446–452.9124801
Soong B , Liu R , Wu L , Lu Y , Lee H , 2001. Metabolic characterization of spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. Arch Neurol 58 , 300–304.11176970
Soraru G , D’Ascenzo C , Polo A , Palmieri A , Baggio L , Vergani L , Gellera C , Moretto G , Pegoraro E , Angelini C , 2008. Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: skeletal muscle pathology in male patients and heterozygous females. J Neurol Sci 264 , 100–105.17854832
Spreux-Varoquaux O , Bensimon G , Lacomblez L , Salachas F , Pradat PF , Le Forestier N , Marouan A , Dib M , Meininger V , 2002. Glutamate levels in cerebrospinal fluid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a reappraisal using a new HPLC method with coulometric detection in a large cohort of patients. J Neurol Sci 193 , 73–78.11790386
Stevanin G , Durr A , David G , Didierjean O , Cancel G , Rivaud S , Tourbah A , Warter JM , Agid Y , Brice A , 1997. Clinical and molecular features of spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. Neurology 49 , 1243–1246.9371901
Streck EL , Czapski GA , Goncalves da Silva C , 2013. Neurodegeneration, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative stress. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2013 , 826046.24191177
Strittmatter WJ , Roses AD , 1996. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer’s disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 19 , 53–77.8833436
Sujkowski A , Bazzell B , Carpenter K , Arking R , Wessells RJ , 2015. Endurance exercise and selective breeding for longevity extend Drosophila healthspan by overlapping mechanisms. Aging (Albany NY) 7 , 535–552.26298685
Sujkowski A , Gretzinger A , Soave N , Todi SV , Wessells R , 2020. Alpha- and beta-adrenergic octopamine receptors in muscle and heart are required for Drosophila exercise adaptations. PLoS Genet 16 , e1008778.32579604
Sujkowski A , Ramesh D , Brockmann A , Wessells R , 2017. Octopamine Drives Endurance Exercise Adaptations in Drosophila. Cell Rep 21 , 1809–1823.29141215
Sujkowski A , Saunders S , Tinkerhess M , Piazza N , Jennens J , Healy L , Zheng L , Wessells R , 2012. dFatp regulates nutrient distribution and long-term physiology in Drosophila. Aging Cell 11 , 921–932.22809097
Sujkowski A , Spierer AN , Rajagopalan T , Bazzell B , Safdar M , Imsirovic D , Arking R , Rand DM , Wessells R , 2019. Mito-nuclear interactions modify Drosophila exercise performance. Mitochondrion 47 , 188–205.30408593
Sujkowski A , Wessells R , 2018. Using Drosophila to Understand Biochemical and Behavioral Responses to Exercise. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 46 , 112–120.29346165
Tabbassum KN , U-Zia N −., Sachdev HS , S. K , 2013. Core Stability Training with Conventional Balance Training Improves Dynamic Balance in Progressive Degenerative Cerebellar Ataxia. Indian Journal of Physiotherapy &amp; Occupational Therapy 7 , 136–140.
Takiyama Y , Oyanagi S , Kawashima S , Sakamoto H , Saito K , Yoshida M , Tsuji S , Mizuno Y , Nishizawa M , 1994. A clinical and pathologic study of a large Japanese family with Machado-Joseph disease tightly linked to the DNA markers on chromosome 14q. Neurology 44 , 1302–1308.8035935
Tan JY , Vance KW , Varela MA , Sirey T , Watson LM , Curtis HJ , Marinello M , Alves S , Steinkraus B , Cooper S , Nesterova T , Brockdorff N , Fulga T , Brice A , Sittler A , Oliver PL , Wood MJ , Ponting CP , Marques AC , 2014. Cross-talking noncoding RNAs contribute to cell-specific neurodegeneration in SCA7. Nat Struct Mol Biol 21 , 955–961.25306109
Tercero-Perez K , Cortes H , Torres-Ramos Y , Rodriguez-Labrada R , Cerecedo-Zapata CM , Hernandez-Hernandez O , Perez-Gonzalez N , Gonzalez-Pina R , Leyva-Garcia N , Cisneros B , Velazquez-Perez L , Magana JJ , 2019. Effects of Physical Rehabilitation in Patients with Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 7. Cerebellum 18 , 397–405.30701400
Todi SV , Williams A , Paulson H , 2007. Polyglutamine Repeat Disorders, including Huntington’s Disease, in: Waxman SG (Ed.), Molecular Neurology, 1 ed. Academic Press, London, pp. 257–276.
Tonelli C , Chio IIC , Tuveson DA , 2018. Transcriptional Regulation by Nrf2. Antioxid Redox Signal 29 , 1727–1745.28899199
Toots A , Littbrand H , Bostrom G , Hornsten C , Holmberg H , Lundin-Olsson L , Lindelof N , Nordstrom P , Gustafson Y , Rosendahl E , 2017. Effects of Exercise on Cognitive Function in Older People with Dementia: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Alzheimers Dis 60 , 323–332.28800328
Tsitkanou S , Della Gatta P , Foletta V , Russell A , 2019. The Role of Exercise as a Non-pharmacological Therapeutic Approach for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Beneficial or Detrimental? Front Neurol 10 .
Tsou WL , Qiblawi SH , Hosking RR , Gomez CM , Todi SV , 2016. Polyglutamine length-dependent toxicity from alpha1ACT in Drosophila models of spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. Biol Open 5 , 1770–1775.27979829
Uchihara T , Fujigasaki H , Koyano S , Nakamura A , Yagishita S , Iwabuchi K , 2001. Non-expanded polyglutamine proteins in intranuclear inclusions of hereditary ataxias--triple-labeling immunofluorescence study. Acta Neuropathol 102 , 149–152.11563629
Valenzuela PL , Castillo-Garcia A , Morales JS , de la Villa P , Hampel H , Emanuele E , Lista S , Lucia A , 2020. Exercise benefits on Alzheimer’s disease: State-of-the-science. Ageing Res Rev 62 , 101108.32561386
van Breda K , Collins M , Stein DJ , Rauch L , 2015. The COMT val(158)met polymorphism in ultra-endurance athletes. Physiol Behav 151 , 279–283.26253211
van Dellen A , Cordery PM , Spires TL , Blakemore C , Hannan AJ , 2008. Wheel running from a juvenile age delays onset of specific motor deficits but does not alter protein aggregate density in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Bmc Neuroscience 9 .
Vayndorf EM , Scerbak C , Hunter S , Neuswanger JR , Toth M , Parker JA , Neri C , Driscoll M , Taylor BE , 2016. Morphological remodeling of C. elegans neurons during aging is modified by compromised protein homeostasis. Npj Aging Mech Dis 2 .
Velazquez-Perez L , Rodriguez-Diaz JC , Rodriguez-Labrada R , Medrano-Montero J , Aguilera Cruz AB , Reynaldo-Cejas L , Gongora-Marrero M , Estupinan-Rodriguez A , Vazquez-Mojena Y , Torres-Vega R , 2019. Neurorehabilitation Improves the Motor Features in Prodromal SCA2: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. Mov Disord 34 , 1060–1068.30958572
Veldink JH , Bar PR , Joosten EA , Otten M , Wokke JH , van den Berg LH , 2003. Sexual differences in onset of disease and response to exercise in a transgenic model of ALS. Neuromuscul Disord 13 , 737–743.14561497
Ventura-Clapier R , Mettauer B , Bigard X , 2007. Beneficial effects of endurance training on cardiac and skeletal muscle energy metabolism in heart failure. Cardiovasc Res 73 , 10–18.17045979
Venturelli M , Scarsini R , Schena F , 2011. Six-month walking program changes cognitive and ADL performance in patients with Alzheimer. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 26 , 381–388.21852281
Vidal-Sancho L , Fernandez-Garcia S , Soles-Tarres I , Alberch J , Xifro X , 2020. Decreased Myocyte Enhancer Factor 2 Levels in the Hippocampus of Huntington’s Disease Mice Are Related to Cognitive Dysfunction. Mol Neurobiol 57 , 4549–4562.32757160
Vidoni ED , Morris JK , Watts A , Perry M , Clutton J , Van Sciver A , Kamat AS , Mahnken J , Hunt SL , Townley R , Honea R , Shaw AR , Johnson DK , Vacek J , Burns JM , 2021. Effect of aerobic exercise on amyloid accumulation in preclinical Alzheimer’s: A 1-year randomized controlled trial. PLoS One 16 , e0244893.33444359
Vidoni ED , Perales J , Alshehri M , Giles AM , Siengsukon CF , Burns JM , 2019. Aerobic Exercise Sustains Performance of Instrumental Activities of Daily Living in Early-Stage Alzheimer Disease. J Geriatr Phys Ther 42 , E129–E134.29286983
Virarkar M , Alappat L , Bradford PG , Awad AB , 2013. L-arginine and nitric oxide in CNS function and neurodegenerative diseases. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 53 , 1157–1167.24007420
Wakabayashi K , Tanji K , Odagiri S , Miki Y , Mori F , Takahashi H , 2013. The Lewy body in Parkinson’s disease and related neurodegenerative disorders. Mol Neurobiol 47 , 495–508.22622968
Wang RY , Huang FY , Soong BW , Huang SF , Yang YR , 2018. A randomized controlled pilot trial of game-based training in individuals with spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. Sci Rep 8 , 7816.29777115
Watanabe H , Tanaka F , Matsumoto M , Doyu M , Ando T , Mitsuma T , Sobue G , 1998. Frequency analysis of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias in Japanese patients and clinical characterization of spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. Clin Genet 53 , 13–19.9550356
Watson K , Baar K , 2014. mTOR and the health benefits of exercise. Semin Cell Dev Biol 36 , 130–139.25218794
Williams AJ , Paulson HL , 2008. Polyglutamine neurodegeneration: protein misfolding revisited. Trends Neurosci 31 , 521–528.18778858
Williamson TL , Bruijn LI , Zhu Q , Anderson KL , Anderson SD , Julien JP , Cleveland DW , 1998. Absence of neurofilaments reduces the selective vulnerability of motor neurons and slows disease caused by a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked superoxide dismutase 1 mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 9631–9636.9689132
Wrann CD , White JP , Salogiannnis J , Laznik-Bogoslavski D , Wu J , Ma D , Lin JD , Greenberg ME , Spiegelman BM , 2013. Exercise induces hippocampal BDNF through a PGC-1alpha/FNDC5 pathway. Cell Metab 18 , 649–659.24120943
Wright DC , Han DH , Garcia-Roves PM , Geiger PC , Jones TE , Holloszy JO , 2007. Exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis begins before the increase in muscle PGC-1 alpha expression. J Biol Chem 282 , 194–199.17099248
Wu C , Yang L , Tucker D , Dong Y , Zhu L , Duan R , Liu TC , Zhang Q , 2018. Beneficial Effects of Exercise Pretreatment in a Sporadic Alzheimer’s Rat Model. Med Sci Sports Exerc 50 , 945–956.29232315
Wu Y , Wu Z , Butko P , Christen Y , Lambert MP , Klein WL , Link CD , Luo Y , 2006. Amyloid-beta-induced pathological behaviors are suppressed by Ginkgo biloba extract EGb 761 and ginkgolides in transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans. J Neurosci 26 , 13102–13113.17167099
Yabe I , Sasaki H , Matsuura T , Takada A , Wakisaka A , Suzuki Y , Fukazawa T , Hamada T , Oda T , Ohnishi A , Tashiro K , 1998. SCA6 mutation analysis in a large cohort of the Japanese patients with late-onset pure cerebellar ataxia. J Neurol Sci 156 , 89–95.9559993
Yamada M , Hayashi S , Tsuji S , Takahashi H , 2001. Involvement of the cerebral cortex and autonomic ganglia in Machado-Joseph disease. Acta Neuropathol 101 , 140–144.11271368
Yan MH , Wang X , Zhu X , 2013. Mitochondrial defects and oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease. Free Radic Biol Med 62 , 90–101.23200807
Yazdanyar A , Newman AB , 2009. The burden of cardiovascular disease in the elderly: morbidity, mortality, and costs. Clin Geriatr Med 25 , 563–577, vii.19944261
Yin F , Sancheti H , Patil I , Cadenas E , 2016. Energy metabolism and inflammation in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Free Radic Biol Med 100 , 108–122.27154981
Yoo SY , Pennesi ME , Weeber EJ , Xu B , Atkinson R , Chen S , Armstrong DL , Wu SM , Sweatt JD , Zoghbi HY , 2003. SCA7 knockin mice model human SCA7 and reveal gradual accumulation of mutant ataxin-7 in neurons and abnormalities in short-term plasticity. Neuron 37 , 383–401.12575948
Yu ZX , Li SH , Evans J , Pillarisetti A , Li H , Li XJ , 2003. Mutant huntingtin causes context-dependent neurodegeneration in mice with Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci 23 , 2193–2202.12657678
Zhang XL , Zhao N , Xu B , Chen XH , Li TJ , 2019. Treadmill exercise inhibits amyloid-beta generation in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 transgenic mice by reducing cholesterol-mediated lipid raft formation. Neuroreport 30 , 498–503.30882716
Zhou W , Barkow JC , Freed CR , 2017. Running wheel exercise reduces alpha-synuclein aggregation and improves motor and cognitive function in a transgenic mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. PLoS One 12 , e0190160.29272304
Zhou YX , Takiyama Y , Igarashi S , Li YF , Zhou BY , Gui DC , Endo K , Tanaka H , Chen ZH , Zhou LS , Fan MZ , Yang BX , Weissenbach J , Wang GX , Tsuji S , 1997. Machado-Joseph disease in four Chinese pedigrees: molecular analysis of 15 patients including two juvenile cases and clinical correlations. Neurology 48 , 482–485.9040742
Zoghbi HY , Orr HT , 2000. Glutamine repeats and neurodegeneration. Annu Rev Neurosci 23 , 217–247.10845064
Zoghbi HY , Orr HT , 2009. Pathogenic mechanisms of a polyglutamine-mediated neurodegenerative disease, spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. J Biol Chem 284 , 7425–7429.18957430
