LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7613461
6050
Neurochem Res
Neurochem Res
Neurochemical research
0364-3190
1573-6903

33527218
8935665
10.1007/s11064-021-03239-8
NIHMS1787746
Article
Astrocyte Mitochondria in White-Matter Injury
Nguyen Hung 1
Zerimech Sarah 1
Baltan Selva 1
1 Anesthesiology and Peri-Operative Medicine (APOM), Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA
Hung Nguyen and Sarah Zerimech contributed equally to this work.

✉ Selva Baltan, baltan@ohsu.edu
12 3 2022
10 2021
01 2 2021
21 3 2022
46 10 26962714
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
This review summarizes the diverse structure and function of astrocytes to describe the bioenergetic versatility required of astrocytes that are situated at different locations. The intercellular domain of astrocyte mitochondria defines their roles in supporting and regulating astrocyte-neuron coupling and survival against ischemia. The heterogeneity of astrocyte mitochondria, and how subpopulations of astrocyte mitochondria adapt to interact with other glia and regulate axon function, require further investigation. It has become clear that mitochondrial permeability transition pores play a key role in a wide variety of human diseases, whose common pathology may be based on mitochondrial dysfunction triggered by Ca2+ and potentiated by oxidative stress. Reactive oxygen species cause axonal degeneration and a reduction in axonal transport, leading to axonal dystrophies and neurodegeneration including Alzheimer’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease. Developing new tools to allow better investigation of mitochondrial structure and function in astrocytes, and techniques to specifically target astrocyte mitochondria, can help to unravel the role of mitochondrial health and dysfunction in a more inclusive context outside of neuronal cells. Overall, this review will assess the value of astrocyte mitochondria as a therapeutic target to mitigate acute and chronic injury in the CNS.

Glial cells
Mitochondrial dynamics
Neurovascular injuries
Neurodegenerative diseases
Astroglial interactions
Axonal degeneration

pmcIntroduction

Astrocytes are the most widely distributed glial cells in the Central Nervous System (CNS) and they are located throughout grey and white matter, underneath dura matter, and around cerebral vessels (Fig. 1). Subsequently, astrocytes specialize on numerous key functions based upon their locations such as maintaining brain homeostasis, regulating the extracellular environment, forming and maintaining the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and neurovascular unit (NVU) [1], adjusting cerebral blood flow [2–4], and regulating pH [5]. Because astrocytes balance glutamate uptake and release, they monitor neuronal activity and synaptic function and tri-partite synapse to facilitate learning and memory [6]. Astrocytes can store glucose as glycogen, and maintain glycogen storage to convert it to lactate when there is low glucose or increased activity [7, 8] and shuttle lactate to support neuronal and glial metabolism [9–11]. Controlling ATP release [12] and Ca2+ networking, astrocytes adjust sleep-wake cycle [13], and facilitating transfer and exchange of soluble substrates between cerebrospinal fluid and interstitial fluid [14–16]. Astrocytes also actively modulate axon conduction [17] as well as the formation and pruning of synapses [18, 19]. This vast functional repertoire is even more augmented in the human brain due to the significant complexity of human astrocytes compared to rodents [20]. In fact, this increased intricacy of human astrocytes, together with oligodendrocytes and expansion of white-matter volume [21], are proposed to be among the prominent reasons for higher cognitive function in humans compared to rodents.

Because astrocytes integrate into many units serving a specialized function in the brain, it is expected that astrocytes structurally adapt to their location and function [22]. In the CNS, astrocytes are derived mainly from radial glial cells and some from progenitor cells in the spinal cord [23–26], while there is continuous generation of astrocytes in the adult brain in subventricular cells [25]. It is possible that astrocyte origin may also contribute to the morphological heterogeneity and the anatomical destination of the astrocyte, which eventually determines its function. In agreement with this concept, transplantation of astrocytes derived from human immature glial progenitor cells into rodent brains resulted in the formation of astrocytes with the complex morphological complexity of human brain, suggesting that the size and structural architecture of astrocytes are intrinsic to their cell origin [6]. Interestingly, these cells assumed characteristics of their location and function, demonstrating the conducive nature of astrocytes to adaptation [6].

Astrocytes show remarkable differences between brain regions [22]. For example, astrocytes exhibit distinct differences between gray and white matter [22]. Based upon morphological characteristics, astrocytes are named as protoplasmic astrocytes in gray matter and fibrous astrocytes in white matter [1] (Fig. 1). Fibrous astrocytes are characterized by their smaller nuclei, and they extend their branches along the axons in parallel, giving them an elongated morphology [1]. Fibrous astrocytes contain larger amounts of filaments than protoplasmic astrocytes [27] to structurally support their elongated and extended branches [28–30]; therefore, Glial Acidic Fibrillary Protein (GFAP) is more prominent in these cells. Protoplasmic astrocytes are larger in size with fine elaborate branches distributed around the cell body, achieving their characteristic “star-like” shape. Interestingly, this location-dependent specificity of astrocytes is equally well-preserved in the human brain, except that they are bigger and protoplasmic astrocytes have more complex architectural detail [31]. Consequently, the participation of astrocytes in the tripartite synapse is enhanced in the human brain. In agreement with diverse morphology reflecting diverse functions, protoplasmic and fibrous astrocytes have different protein expression profiles. For instance, the cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44; [32] filamentous proteins such as vimentin and GFAP [33] are abundantly expressed by fibrous astrocytes in white matter. The majority of gray-matter astrocytes do not express GFAP [34, 35] unless there is an injury. Expression levels of GFAP are important in that they enable fast repetitive vs. longer but high-fidelity signal conduction in gray matter and white matter, respectively. CD44, on the other hand, is a hyaluronan receptor, suggesting an important interaction between white-matter astrocytes and the extracellular matrix.

Astrocytes also regulate glutamate homeostasis. Gray-matter astrocytes express five major glutamate transporters, while white-matter astrocytes express only GLT-1 and GLAST [36–38]. Despite the fact that expression levels of glutamate transporters are higher in white-matter astrocytes [37], the activity of glutamate transporters is seemingly higher in gray matter due to the higher numbers of synapses [39]. Given the abundant synapse numbers in the cortex, for instance, glutamate transport activity is highest in the corpus callosum [39]. Together with increased capacity for glutamate-to-glutamine cycling in white-matter astrocytes, the need for more effective glutamate clearance becomes apparent to keep glutamate levels at approximately half of gray-matter levels [39]. Excitotoxicity to oligodendrocytes via activation of AMPA and Kainate receptors [40–48], but not NMDA receptors [49], highlights the importance of glutamate clearance by astrocytes in white matter to preserve oligodendrocyte-axon interactions and to sustain conduction.

Activation of a variety of receptors on the astrocyte cell membrane triggers Ca2+ release from internal stores, which can spread to nearby astrocytes and initiate a Ca2+ wave [50] across astrocytes that propagates via gap junctions through an intricate network [51–53] to deliver a fast-long-distance signal. Astrocytes have non-overlapping domains [35] but act in unison to recruit nearby astrocytes due to their gap junctions. Interestingly, this recruitment reaches a diameter of ~400 μm in gray matter, encompassing ~100 astrocytes. This network is shown to be most elaborate in the optic nerve due to the high coupling of astrocytes [54], although the functional correlation remains unknown.

In addition, Na+ signaling plays an important role in maintaining astrocytic homeostasis. Of note, the concentration of cytosolic Na+ in astrocytes is typically higher than neurons [1, 55] and the influx of Na+ in astrocytes propagates from processes to soma and into adjacent cells through gap junctions [55–57]. Na+ can enter astrocytes through either cationic channels (e.g P2X and NMDA receptors, TRP channels, and specific Na+ called Nax channels) or Na+-dependent transporters (e.g. excitatory amino acid transporters types 1 and 2, GABA transporter type 1 and 3, glycine transporters type 1, noradrenaline and dopamine transporters, and Na+-coupled neutral amino acid transporters) [1, 58, 59]. The majority of plasmalemmal transporters not only act as sensors but also modifiers of cytosolic Na+ [1]. On the other hand, Na+/K+ ATPase (NKA) is mainly responsible for the release of Na+ from astrocytes [60]. Astrocytic NKA has a lower affinity to K+ than in neurons because it contains α2 subunit instead of α1 and α3 subunits in neurons [61, 62]. Therefore, astrocytic NKA is important for sensing and maintaining the K+ balance. Also, by buffering K+ during neuronal activity, NKA plays an important role in the production of lactate production in astrocytes [63–65]. Additionally, astrocytes express all three subtypes of Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCX) which is another important player in regulating Na+ [60, 66, 67]. Astrocytic NCX is sensitive to changes in the cytosolic concentration of Na+ and Ca2+ which suitable for their role in preserving the astrocyte ionic homeostasis [68, 69]. In particular, astrocytes mitochondria express a unique version of the exchanger called NCLX in which it can exchange Li+ instead of Na+ and contribute significantly to maintaining mitochondrial function in astrocytes [70–72].

Given the diverse physiological functions of astrocytes and their vast connections to other astrocytes as well as other types of cells, when astrocytes become reactive after an insult and how their interactions with other brain cells change states the importance of these cells in health and disease. Indeed, their gene expression and transcriptional changes show spatial location-, injury type-, disease-, sex-, and age-specific changes [73], collectively known as “astrocyte reactivity” (Fig. 2). Astrocyte reactivity is the sum of a spectrum of changes in molecular expression, function, hypertrophy, and proliferation in response to a CNS injury. Reactive astrocytes are morphologically distinct from resting astrocytes, characterized by larger longer and ramified branches [74–77]. The changes in astrocyte function can be loss-of-function or gain-of-function, which may be beneficial or detrimental for brain tissue, although these changes are not an all-or-none response [78, 79]. Increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) and chemokine production [80–83], together with impaired Ca2+ [84], glutamate [85–87], and synaptic homeostasis [88–90], lead to a variety of clinical consequences, ranging from neurodegenerative diseases, epilepsy, stroke, and cognitive decline [91]. Beneficial astrocytes release a wealth of factors to adjust synapses developmentally, repairing and rewiring them after injury, assist microglia to clear cellular debris, regulate glycogen stores to sustain memory formation, and assist neuronal survival during aglycemia [92–95]. A more controversial role of astrocytes emerges from their role in scar formation, where they limit the injury borders and shield the penumbra region [96–98] as protective cells, while they may become deleterious by forming a barrier and preventing axonal regrowth across the injury area as well [99–102].

Because the response of astrocytes to injury intimately regulates brain function, shapes the extent of injury, and promotes or hinders repair, the energy to sustain astrocytes is crucial for their performance. Astrocytes rely heavily on glycolysis to derive energy; however, they consume ~20% of the brain’s oxygen during oxidative phosphorylation to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP) [103] within astrocytic mitochondria. Although mitochondria in neurons have been extensively studied, the specific roles of astrocyte mitochondria in astroglial function and response to injury are just starting to be investigated. Part of this delay in appreciating the role of astrocyte mitochondria is attributed to a misperception that astrocyte processes are too small to harbor mitochondria. Astrocytes possess almost as many mitochondria as neurons [104] and recent studies have provided accumulating in vivo and in vitro evidence that mitochondria are even found in distal astrocyte processes, triggering further interest in astrocyte mitochondrial function [105–111]. Another reason for this increased interest is based on preliminary studies that have shown astrocyte mitochondria may play unique roles in response to ischemia. Astrocytes have been consistently shown to be resilient to ischemia and the distribution and specific tasks of astrocyte mitochondria may underlie this adaptability to an environment with no oxygen or glucose. This review will first introduce the diverse structure and function of astrocytes to describe the bioenergetic versatility required of astrocytes that are situated at different locations. Secondly, we will describe the intercellular domain of astrocyte mitochondria to define their roles in supporting and regulating astrocyte-neuron and astrocyte-cerebral vasculature interactions and survival against ischemia. Finally, we will review literature documenting the heterogeneity of astrocyte mitochondria and how subpopulations of astrocyte mitochondria may adapt to interact with other glia and regulate axon function in white matter. Overall, this review will assess the value of astrocyte mitochondria as a therapeutic target to mitigate acute and chronic injury in the CNS.

Astrocyte Mitochondrial Dynamics

The extent of diverse structural and functional aspects of astrocytes is expected to affect the location, size, and number of mitochondria in astrocytes. Therefore, mitochondria are strategically dispersed within astrocytes to sense energy consumption and Ca2+ signaling. For instance, increased synaptic activity guides mitochondria to the terminal finer branch areas [112] and immobilizes them to shape Ca2+ waves and regulate Ca2+ fluctuations [105, 113] to regulate glio-transmission [72, 110]. Evidence suggest that astrocytic mitochondria become immobilized near glutamate transporters and synapses in response to glutamate uptake [108] and primarily due to increased intracellular Ca2+ via reversal of the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger [114–116]. Docking of mitochondria near glutamate transporters is proposed to facilitate glutamate metabolism and ATP generation to meet increased energetics while buffering glutamate-uptake-mediated ionic changes [117]. Expectedly, a mismatch of mitochondrial distribution within astrocytes interrupts neuron-astrocyte synchronization and metabolism, threatening neuronal vitality [118].

It is now well-established that astrocyte numbers stay stable after ischemia; therefore, a mismatch in distribution and dynamics of astrocyte mitochondria at the astrocyte-neuron junction seems to cause the irreversible injury. The prevailing idea has been that the collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential leads to astrocyte death [119]; however, astrocytes demonstrate resilience to ischemia despite profound mitochondrial membrane depolarization. For instance, astrocytes maintained their mitochondrial membrane potential for 2 h after application of fluorocitrate (FC), a partially competitive mitochondrial inhibitor [120, 121]. Even after prolonged applications of FC, which eventually depleted mitochondrial potential, there was minimal astrocyte injury or death [120]. Similarly, in vitro experiments using oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) depolarized astrocyte mitochondrial membrane potential without subsequent cell death [122]. In vivo models using middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) further confirmed that astrocyte energy metabolism is impaired after ischemia, but did not result in astrocyte death or correlate with infarct area [123] (Baltan unpublished data Fig. 2). On the other hand, neurons display massive cell death when exposed to OGD (60 min) [124, 125] and when neurons are cocultured with astrocytes treated with FC, an enhanced bi-directional injury is triggered due to astrocyte mitochondrial dysfunction, the subsequent reversal of glutamate transporters, and the resultant excitotoxicity [126, 127]. Similar widespread neuronal death is observed when the astrocyte electron transport chain is specifically targeted [128]. This contrasts with conventional observations that when astrocytes (untreated, control conditions) are co-cultured with neurons, neurons become resilient because astrocyte mitochondria shift from aerobic metabolism to glycolysis to initiate the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle and deliver lactate to neurons to attenuate neuronal loss [49, 93, 122, 129]. This support system is limited by astrocyte glycogen storage content and can be depleted if glucose is not supplied in a timely fashion [9, 10, 93, 129]. Together, these observations indicate that first, that the metabolic coupling of the tripartite synapse is heavily dependent upon the performance of astrocyte mitochondria. Second, they suggest that astrocyte resilience to ischemia is in part supported by energy supply derived by mitochondria. Note that some in vitro findings are difficult to extrapolate to in vivo conditions because astrocytes and their mitochondria in culture may show disparate functions due to the lack of a multi-layered network without tripartite synapses and/or gene alterations and receptor expression.

Recent studies have demonstrated that mitochondria are not confined to astrocyte cell bodies but are also present in the finest branches and end-feet, which were traditionally considered to be too small caliber to accommodate these organelles (Fig. 3). Mitochondria have the capacity to form a complex interconnected network of aggregated assemblies to dissipate into a single individual structure [105, 109, 130, 131]. Using a variety of mito-fluorescent mice (CFP, GFP) with an inducible reporter, a heterogeneous population of interconnected mitochondrial meshwork has been shown to occupy a substantial portion of specialized end-feet structures (Figs. 1, 3). While a dense meshwork of elongated mitochondria is typical for cell bodies, thinner and shorter mitochondria ranging from 0.2 to 0.6 μm in length populate the distal branches and end-feet [106–108, 110, 132]. Because mitochondria are highly dynamic organelles with an ability to rapidly change their dynamics in response to metabolic demands, they go in and out of their meshwork and change location between the cell body and branches within astrocytes. Indeed, the relative rates of fission and fusion dictate the shape, size, and distribution of mitochondria. Mitochondrial shaping proteins, such as Mitofusion-1, (MFN-1), mitofusion-2 (MFN-2), and optic atrophy-1 (OPA-1) merge outer and inner membranes of mitochondria during fusion, while dynamin reactive protein-1 (Drp-1) and fission protein-1 (Fis1) mediate fission. Fusion and fission enable the exchange of mitochondrial components such as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), lipids, and proteins. Fission architecturally allows entry to constrained sites of high activity such as distal fine branches of astrocytes. In fact, smaller mitochondria with higher surface-to-volume ratios have been shown to be more efficient and to generate more ATP as a response to increased activity [133]. Consistent with this concept, neuronal activity regulates mitochondrial fission to enhance the formation of smaller mitochondria, which can be directed to neuronal spines and filopodia. Subsequently, depletion of Drp-1 reduces small mitochondrial distribution in synaptic terminals, highlighting the importance of the balance between fission and fusion for mitochondria to assume the proper structure for the location and function. Naturally, when this precise balance is perturbed, lack of mitochondrial presence at sites of need may underlie pathological outcomes. Furthermore, increased Drp-1 activity leading to extensive fission leads to mitochondrial membrane depolarization, cytochrome c release, and increased free radical production causing mitochondrial dysfunction.

Mitochondrial trafficking is another aspect of mitochondrial dynamics that is mainly supported by Miro1/2 and TRAKs that reversibly attach mitochondria to kinesin and dynein to facilitate anterograde and retrograde motility, respectively. Similar to what has been reported in neurons, about 15–30% of astrocyte mitochondria are motile, while the remainder are stagnant. Blocking neuronal activity with tetrodotoxin increases mitochondrial activity, while electrical or glutamate application arrests mitochondrial movement in astrocyte processes enriched in glutamate transporters and branches that are part of the tri-partite synapse. Hence, astrocytes sense and respond to neuronal activity by modifying their mitochondrial dynamics. It is therefore unsurprising that astrocyte mitochondrial dynamics undergo major modifications and play crucial roles in various pathological processes (see below).

Astrocyte Mitochondrial Response to Injury

Stimuli that initiate astrocyte reactivity such as aging, injury, and diseases similarly affect astrocyte mitochondria, leading to dysfunction. The hallmarks of this dysfunction consist of loss of Ca2+ regulation [134, 135], excessive production of ROS, initiation of cell death cascades, and opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores (mtPTP; [136]). Elevated cytosolic Ca2+ increases and Ca2+ transients lead to more frequent Ca2+ oscillations, and excess Ca2+ accumulation in mitochondria depletes mitochondrial membrane potential, leading to impaired ATP production and opening of mtPTP. Opening of mtPTP results in cytochrome c release as well as other cytokines and ROS [137]. Considering the astrocytic network and the extent of communication among astrocytes, mitochondrial dysfunction, recruiting more astrocytes, and expanding the area of their network can have far-reaching effects. As a result, for instance, β-amyloid-induced oxidative stress in astrocytes causes extensive neuronal damage away from amyloid deposition areas [138, 139]. Neuronal injury can be further potentiated by the release of cytokines, ROS, and inflammatory factors [140–142]. Experiments adding FC to astrocyte cultures, which dissipates astrocyte mitochondrial membrane potentials, reduce glutamate uptake leading to increased neurotoxicity [120]. Likewise, targeting the astrocyte electron transport chain caused diffuse neuronal death [128]. These pieces of evidence imply that astrocytic mitochondria are crucial to support neurons and their function. Therefore, mitochondrial dysfunction impedes the protective roles of astrocytes, suggesting that targeting astrocyte mitochondria may provide therapeutic approaches to surrounding neurons.

Mitochondria at the astrocyte end-feet are associated with cerebrovascular structures and demonstrate high metabolic activity and dynamic Ca2+ signaling [143]. However, how astrocyte mitochondrial dynamics contribute to NVU, BBB, and/or cerebrovascular pathologies such as vascular dementia remain underexplored.

Mitochondrial Trafficking Between Astrocytes and Neurons

Astrocyte mitochondria can also be central to the protective and beneficial roles of astrocytes. Responding to the energy demands of astrocytes, mitochondria may regulate the release of growth factors, support synaptic function, and/or form a glial scar. Consistent with this, following a brain injury astrocyte cannot initiate a protective proliferative response if their mitochondria are dysfunctional [128]. Indeed, astrocytes dispose of their dysfunctional mitochondria via mitophagy [144], presumably to minimize the deleterious effects. Interestingly, astrocytes can take up or traffic mitochondria to and from other cells. For instance, mitochondria from retinal ganglion cells have been shown to be taken up by astrocytes, while mitochondria from astrocytes can be transferred to neurons, suggesting bidirectional trafficking of mitochondria between astrocytes and neurons. Current evidence suggests that the purpose of this activity is to deliver damaged mitochondria from neurons to astrocytes to undergo mitophagy, while healthy mitochondria moving from astrocytes to neurons support neurons in distress. Mitochondria are released in vesicles in a Ca2+-dependent CD38-cADPR signaling pathway [145]. Subsequently, upregulation of CD38 significantly augments the release of mitochondria-containing vesicles under in vitro and in vivo conditions [145]. Mitochondria originating from astrocytes fuse with the neuronal mitochondria located in the penumbra region and enhance the survival of neurons. Expectedly, downregulation of CD38 in an ischemia model negatively impacted the outcome measures, supporting the observation that astrocyte-mediated mitochondrial release is mediated by CD38 signaling in the brain.

There is significant interest in whether a similar survival mechanism, or lack thereof, contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. Using primary neural cells and human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural cells (hPSCs), a dynamic transfer of mitochondria from astrocytes and from neural cells into astrocytes was shown via CD38/cADPR signaling and involving Miro1 and Miro2. Introducing Alexander disease (AxD) -associated hot spot mutations into the GFAP gene of hPSCs impaired mitochondrial transfer between neural cells and astrocytes and revealed that AxD-associated mutations in the GFAP gene disrupted astrocytic mitochondria transfer, providing a potential pathogenic mechanism in AxD [146]. Interestingly, Miro1, as well as Miro2, played a role in mitochondrial transfer, which seems plausible considering the involvement of the two GTPases in intracellular mitochondrial transport and trafficking [147, 148]. The potential of Miro1 to regulate mitochondrial transfer from mesenchymal stem cells into airway epithelial cells and cardiomyocytes has been previously shown [149, 150]. Interestingly, both Miro1 and Miro2 have two EF-hand Ca2+-binding domains [147, 151]; whether they cross-talk with CD38/cADPR signaling remains to be explored. Determining whether mitochondrial transfer between astrocytes and from neuronal cells into astrocytes also occurs in vivo, and revealing more detailed cellular functions of the transfer, require further investigation.

Astrocyte Mitochondria as a Therapeutic Target for Neuronal Diseases

Therapeutic approaches targeting mitochondria for various brain injuries and neurodegenerative diseases using antioxidants, mtPTP inhibitors, uncouplers, and alternative fuels have been a long-standing interest. Conventionally, the majority of these investigations have been performed with the intent of rescuing neuronal mitochondria. However, astrocytic mitochondrial dysfunction may have more widespread effects based on the role, function, and location of astrocytes in various brain structures, causing extensive Ca2+ dysregulation, inflammatory responses, and glutamate dysregulation due to energy deprivation. Treating mitochondria in astrocytes can directly benefit neuronal survival because of neuron-astrocyte interdependence. To develop methods in a cell- and organelle-specific manner is a challenge. Several approaches such as recombinant viral vectors, nanoparticles, or specialized peptides [88, 152–156] have been developed. Using these approaches, evidence to conserve neurons via targeting astrocyte mitochondria have been collected in several disease models such as acute cortical lesions [157] β-amyloid-expressing Alzheimer’s disease [87, 88, 158, 159], chronic pain [160], and spinal cord injury [161] and CNS injury [89, 162]. Based upon these encouraging results, further studies consisting of a cocktail of antioxidants, mtPTP modulators, and alternative energy substrates together with CD38 activators can be tested to establish the therapeutic value of conserving astrocyte mitochondria in various brain injury models.

Isolation of functional and healthy mitochondria from endogenous or exogenous sources to transplant to the site of injury has become another topic of interest. The original inspiring data come from the cardiac field, in that pediatric patients with congenital myocardial disease upon transplantation of pectoral muscle mitochondria have shown instant improvement in clinical trials [163]. Similar studies investigating CNS-related diseases have yet to be conducted. However, encouraging observations from several animal studies [145, 164–167] provide compelling rationale, such the study showing that injecting isolated mitochondria into gliomas of living mice triggers a metabolic switch from glycolysis to aerobic respiration, which correlated with reduced tumor growth [168]. In a mouse model of stroke, transplanted mitochondria were taken up by neuronal cells, and astrocytes in the penumbra region were shown to deliver mitochondria to neurons. As a result, neuronal death was reduced, which was associated with improved motor and neurological function [145]. Mitochondrial delivery supplemented with PEP1, a peptide carrier to the medial forebrain bundle of a Parkinson’s rat model, spared neurons in the substantia nigra and improved locomotor function [169]. In contrast, delivery of viable mitochondria to spinal cord injured-animals maintained energetics but failed to spare tissue or improve functional recovery [166]. These results provide proof of principle that mitochondria are organelles that can be transferred from one organ to another and assume the role of performance required by the recipient tissue. Moreover, it can be exchanged and transferred between different cells to support function and survival. What the signals are that differentiate between the donor and recipient are currently not known.

In summary, there are several important reasons why it is important to investigate astrocyte mitochondria as a therapeutic target. First, in the face of an acute injury such as a stroke, neurons are the first to die; hence the window of opportunity to protect neuronal mitochondria is very narrow from the clinical perspective. Second, astrocytes survive acute injury; hence, maintaining their beneficial nature provides sustained protection in addition to reduced injury onset. Third, because astrocytes integrate into many functional units and interact with most cellular and anatomical structures, the protective measures will act on a multitude of elements in addition to neurons. Finally, different protective measures specific to the course of disease pathology can be implemented as the need for prevention and protection progresses to the regeneration and recovery phases.

Role of Astrocyte Mitochondria in Glial Cell Interactions and White-Matter Function

The role that dysfunctional mitochondria have in glial cell function, and its implications for neuronal homeostasis and white-matter function, have been largely understudied. One underlying reason is the misperception that because the white matter and glial cells are more resilient to injury compared to neurons, they do not die or sustain an injury. Indeed, oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia do not degenerate upon impairment of mitochondrial function, as they rely primarily on glycolysis to produce energy and have a higher antioxidant capacity than neurons. However, oligodendrocytes, axons, and myelin sustain a long-lasting injury due to changes in Ca2+ signaling, inflammation, and oxidative stress, resulting in impaired white-matter function. Moreover, recent evidence highlights the role of mitochondrial metabolism and signaling in glial cell function and nearby neuronal support. Table 1 provides an overview of key findings for the role of astrocyte mitochondria in physiological, pathophysiological state, or aging.

Astrocytes and oligodendrocytes originate from the embryonic ectoderm, while microglia originate from the mesoderm and enter the vertebrate brain during embryogenesis. Advances in counting techniques have demonstrated that while the overall ratio of neurons to glial cells varies between different regions in the brain, a ratio of ~1:1 glia to neuron exists in the entire human brain [170]. Oligodendrocytes are responsible for axon myelination, providing axons with an “insulating coat” that enhances nerve impulse conduction interrupted at regular intervals by internodal segments of myelin separated by gaps (nodes of Ranvier) [171]. Oligodendrocytes are found in both gray matter and white matter, but they are a major fraction of all the cells in white matter. Microglial cells are resident macrophages distributed throughout the central nervous system (CNS) [172]. As innate immune cells, microglia are activated by infection, tissue injury, or xenobiotics. Upon activation, microglia retract their cytoplasmic extensions and migrate to the site of injury, where they proliferate and become antigen-presenting cells. In astrocytes, IFNγ stimulation increased the expression of MHCII, while endocytosis is inhibited to prolong surface retention of antigens [173]. Microglia phagocytose degenerating cells and act as sources of immunoregulatory and neuromodulatory factors such as cytokines, chemokines, and neurotrophic factors. Microglia can be activated by cell-surface receptors for endotoxins, cytokines, chemokines, misfolded proteins, serum factors, and ATP. While mild activation is a key adaptive immune response, continuous activation or overactivation of microglia is thought to contribute to neurodegeneration [174–176]. Despite reports of apoptosis in astrocytes and microglia under different experimental conditions, there is little information regarding the loss or degeneration of these glial cells with respect to human disorders. Conversely, oligodendrocytes are known to degenerate in demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis, and to be affected directly or indirectly by most known disorders in the CNS including ischemia, trauma, and neurodegeneration. Glutamate/Ca2+ excitotoxicity, inflammation (cytokines), and oxidative stress are common triggers for oligodendrocyte injury in these pathological situations. The high lipid and iron content of oligodendrocytes also makes them susceptible to oxidative damage induced by cytokines [177]. Importantly, mitochondrial respiration/metabolism seems to be primarily involved in oligodendrocyte differentiation, while glycolysis appears to be sufficient to maintain post-myelinated (differentiated) oligodendrocytes [178]. Accordingly, demyelination disorders linked to mitochondrial dysfunction seem to be primarily linked to increased oxidative damage and changes in Free Fatty Acid (FFA) metabolism, but not energy failure [179–181].

Dysfunction of glial mitochondria can be detrimental to white-matter function and can trigger and participate in various neurodegenerative diseases. The mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling pattern, and the capacity to initiate and contribute to inflammation and oxidative stress together encompass major injury mechanisms contributing to various disease pathologies. However, very little is known about the impact of mitochondrial Ca2+ homeostasis on glial signaling. As in other cell types, functional mitochondria in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes regulate Ca2+ waves generated by the activation of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) receptors (IP3R) and the release of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [182–184]. Mitochondrial Ca2+ has also been shown to regulate vesicular glutamate release from astrocytes, which modulates synaptic communication and excitability [185]. Ca2+ accumulation in mitochondria also modulates oxidative phosphorylation and energy production. Ca2+ release from the ER stimulates mitochondria-dependent energy production in astrocytes [186]. A recent report demonstrated that Ca2+ release via NCX is coupled to store-operated Ca2+ entry (triggered by Ca2+ depletion from ER stores) and regulates astrocyte proliferation and excitotoxic glutamate release [72, 187, 188]. Therefore, not only do mitochondria regulate Ca2+ accumulation and dynamics, but also its release. Ultrastructural analysis has revealed that mitochondria of white-matter astrocytes are more elongated than those in gray-matter astrocytes [189], but how this contributes to cell-to-cell interaction and function is yet to be explored. Note that in addition to its local impact, astrocyte networking can aggravate and disseminate mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling away from the center of injury, recruiting more cells and contributing to the progression of neurodegenerative diseases in white matter.

It has been established that mitochondrial dysfunction triggers inflammatory responses mainly due to changes in microglial mitochondrial metabolism following activation. Consequently, classic activation of microglia (M1-like phenotype) was recently reported to be paralleled by a metabolic switch from mitochondrial OXPHOS to glycolysis that enhances carbon flux to the Pentose Phosphate Pathway (PPP) [190–192]. Interestingly, inhibition of complex I activity activates microglial cells [193–195], while impairment of mitochondrial fission reduces the production of pro-inflammatory signals [196]. Induction of the M2-like phenotype results in no observable changes in mitochondrial oxygen consumption or lactate production [191]. However, mitochondrial toxins such as 3-nitropropionic acid and rotenone impair the transition to the M2-like phenotype induced by IL-4 [197]. These results suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction in microglia can exacerbate the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype and result in the release of neurotoxic pro-inflammatory cytokines, and enhanced ROS/RNS formation [198]. Pro-inflammatory cytokines released from microglia also “activate” astrocytes, which might also produce TNFα to potentiate microglia activation. Inflammation is a key contributor to most neurological disorders. As a result, co-cultures of microglia and astrocytes produce more neurotoxic factors than either activated cell type alone [199]. Whether astrocytes can be activated in the absence of microglia is still unclear since most studies using primary cultures of astrocytes also contain at least 5% of microglia that significantly contribute to astrocyte activation [200, 201].

The enhanced resistance to oxidative damage in astrocytes is observed despite the fact that astrocyte mitochondria have deficient mitochondrial respiration and increased ROS formation when compared to neurons [202]. Interestingly, a comparative study demonstrated that astrocytes are more resistant to oxidative damage than microglia or oligodendrocytes [203]. Astrocytes contain higher levels of endogenous antioxidants and antioxidant systems that include NADPH and G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase). The importance of astrocytes for neuronal redox homeostasis was established by a recent study demonstrating that conditional depletion of astrocytes promotes neuronal injury by oxidative stress [204]. This study raises the question of what is the role of mitochondria in redox homeostasis in astrocytes and neurons? The loss of GSH by its export to neurons or due to the detoxification of electrophiles is expected to prompt astrocytes to replenish GSH precursors. Interestingly, GSH depletion upregulates mitochondrial activity in astrocytes [205], but the exact mechanisms that regulate this phenomenon are still unclear.

This brief overview of the role of mitochondria in glial cell function that includes metabolism, redox homeostasis, Ca2+ signaling, inflammation, and cell death, clearly indicates the importance of mitochondrial health in glial cells and its relevance to neuronal function. Yet, this review also highlights our limited understanding of mitochondria function in glial cells and the need for further investigations in this rapidly-expanding area. Many questions remain to be answered regarding the role of mitochondria in neurological disorders, suggesting that it is time to think about mitochondrial health and dysfunction in a more inclusive context outside of neuronal cells. It has become clear that mitochondrial mtPTP plays a key role in a wide variety of human diseases whose common pathology may be based on mitochondrial dysfunction triggered by Ca2+ and potentiated by oxidative stress [206]. Reactive oxygen species cause axonal degeneration and a reduction in axonal transport, leading to axonal dystrophies and neurodegeneration including Alzheimer’s disease [207], amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [208], Parkinson’s disease [209], and Huntington’s disease [210]. Given the importance of axonal transport for the preservation of axonal integrity, surprisingly little is known about how oxidative stress affects axonal transport, and whether this contributes to the damaging effects of elevated levels of ROS.

Recent advances investigating small-molecule inhibitors for mtPTP represent compounds of high therapeutic value since mtPTP activation and opening forms a shared target for numerous diseases [206]. Consequently, the search for targeted small-molecule therapeutics for some of the most wide-spread and therapeutically challenging human diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s Disease, and stroke is advancing. For instance, ischemia-reperfusion injury is a key disorder in which mtPTP opening plays a prominent role in ischemic damage of any tissue, which is most pronounced in ischemic damage of the heart and brain. Excitotoxicity, which is a major pathway of ischemia-reperfusion injury, is characterized by the excessive entry of Ca2+ into neurons that can be primarily triggered by glutamate and NMDA receptor activation inducing mtPTP opening. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of mental disability in the elderly and the merging of various mechanisms leading to Ca2+ dyshomeostasis activates mtPTP, initiating the apoptosis of neurons and nearby cells. Dopaminergic neurons are distinctively reliant on voltage-dependent L-type Ca2+ channels for independent pacemaking activity and tonic dopamine release [211]. Consequently, these cells are particularly vulnerable to perturbations in the Ca2+ buffering capacity of mitochondria, which lead to mtPTP opening in Parkinson’s patients. Huntington’s disease, a progressive genetic disorder that results in motor, cognitive, and psychiatric disturbances caused by mutations in the gene encoding huntingtin (Htt) that ultimately leads to death in adulthood, is another example that appears to involve mtPTP-dependent mitochondrial defects in its pathogenesis. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, affected motor neurons show mitochondrial swelling and fragmentation, and mitochondrial Ca2+ induces abnormal membrane depolarizations that lead to mtPTP opening. Multiple sclerosis is the most common disabling disease of young and middle-aged adults, and axonal degeneration is a critical part of the pathogenesis of MS and a major determinant of permanent disability. Axoplasmic Ca2+ overload driven by ionic imbalances and ROS is postulated to lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and result in pathologic opening of the PTP, which ultimately may be critical to axonal degeneration in MS [211]. Therefore, there is a long-list of human pathologies in which such mtPTP inhibitors may play a crucial role. Note that contributing mitochondrial dysfunction has conventionally been attributed to neurons and axons. The importance of glia-axon interactions in terms of metabolism, signaling, and function is now recognized, but questions as to what the role of astrocyte mitochondria is in the pathogenesis of these diseases currently remain unanswered. Future research addressing these questions will reveal a better understanding of neurodegenerative diseases and identify novel therapeutic targets.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from National Institute of Aging (NIA, AG033720) and National Institute of Neurological Diseases (NINDS, NS094881) to S.B. We thank Dr. Chris Nelson for help editing this paper.

Fig. 1 Typical astrocytes in white matter (A) and grey matter (B) show different morphological characteristics. (A) In white matter, GFAP (+) fibrous astrocytes (red) are present with numerous processes elongated parallel along the axons. Collapsed confocal images (z-stacks of 30 each at 1 μm thickness) of corpus callosum obtained from a coronal mouse brain section. (B) In grey matter, protoplasmic astrocytes (magenta) with their intricate branches extending in all directions create the well-known “star-like’” shape. Astrocytic end-feet (yellow asterisk) wrap around the blood vessels to form neurovascular units with endothelial cells and pericytes (not shown). Collapsed confocal images (z-stacks of 30 each at 1 μm thickness) of somatosensory cortex obtained from a coronal mouse brain section. All cellular nuclei are shown in cyan. Scale bars = 20 μm

Fig. 2 Reactive astrocytes (green) have distinct morphology compared to resting astrocytes after an ischemic episode in the brain. (A) After a middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO, 60 min), neuronal death causes abundant loss of MAP2 labeling (red) in the ischemic core area. (B) The penumbra region is demarcated (white dashed line) with MAP2 (+) neurons and GFAP (+) reactive astrocytes (green) that brightly express green fluorescence. Note that astrocytes are more resilient to ischemic insult than neurons, as there are surviving astrocytes (red asterisk) in the core area. (C) Cell nuclei labeled with DAPI show numerous small bright pyknotic nuclei (yellow arrowhead) in the core area, while the penumbra region is recognized by having healthy nuclei (white asterisk). (D) Merged image shows reactive astrocytes in the gray matter penumbra region and in white matter underlying the core area. A capillary located in subcortical white matter is intensely wrapped by astrocyte end-feet (red arrowhead). Collapsed confocal images (z-stack of 30 images taken at 1 μm thickness) were obtained from a coronal mouse brain slice. Scale bars = 50 μm

Fig. 3 Networks of mitochondria (red) are present in GFAP (+) astrocyte (green) cell bodies, branches, and their end-feet accommodating the energy demand in both grey matter (A) and white matter (B). (a–h) Enlarged orthogonal-view images showing the co-localization (white arrow) of mitochondria and GFAP (+) cell bodies (c, d, e, g, cyan arrowhead) and end-feet (a, b, f, h, magenta arrowhead). Astrocyte end-feet with mitochondria wrap around blood vessels (cyan arrows). Note that in white matter (B), mitochondria can also be seen in other cell types such as oligodendrocytes with Sytox (+) nuclei (white) characterized by a “pearls on a string” appearance along the axon (yellow stars). Collapsed confocal images of the somatosensory cortex (A) and corpus callosum (B) were obtained from a transgenic mito-fluorescent mouse (RiKEN, R26R-mito-eGFP). Scale bars = 10 μm

Table 1 Overview of key findings for astrocyte mitochondrial role and structure in the white matter function and injury

Authors, year	Age/Exp. model	Injury Model	Key Points	
Reyes &amp; Parpura, 2008	Astrocytes culture	Physiology	Mitochondria modulate cytoplasmic Ca2+ dynamics in astrocytes and play a role in Ca2+-dependent glutamate release from astrocytes	
Li, Parpura, Ding et al., 2014	Cell culture	Physiology	Novel approach to imaging mitochondrial Ca2+ dynamics in astrocytes	
Hamilton, Verkhratsky, Butt et al., 2008	P15-P30	Physiology	ATP and glutamate evoke Ca2+ signals in white matter astrocytes of the mouse optic nerve. Action potentials trigger axonal release of ATP, which evokes further release of ATP from astrocytes, and this acts by amplifying the initiating signal and by transmitting an intercellular Ca2+ wave to neighboring glia	
Parnis, Parpura, Nolte et al., 2013	Cell culture	Physiology &amp; injury	NCLX plays a major role in mitochondrial Ca2+ extrusion, ATP-induced cytosolic Ca2+ release from organelle, astrocytic wound closure and proliferation	
Ioannou et al., 2019	Primary neurons &amp; astrocytes culture	Fatty acid toxicity	Fatty Acid metabolism is coupled in neurons and astrocytes to protects neurons from FA toxicity during periods of enhanced activity	
Brown, Schousboe, Ransom et al., 2005	Adult Swiss Webster mice	Glucose deprivation	Astrocyte glycogen metabolism is required to maintain axon function (CAP) after glucose deprivation in white matter	
Joshi, Mochly-Rosen et al., 2019	Cell culture	Neurodegenerative diseases	Damaged mitochondria released by microglia in a neuro-inflammatory context, trigger A1 astrocytic response and propagate inflammatory neurodegeneration	
Oksanen et al., 2017	iPSC-Derived Model	Alzheimer disease	AD astrocytes manifest hallmark of AD pathology, and due to altered metabolism show increased oxidative stress, and compromised neuronal supportive function.	
Kawamata et al., 2014	Primary astrocytes culture	ALS	Oxidative stress causes excess calcium release and altered astrocytes response through SNARE-dependent exocytosis via enhanced stored operated calcium entry and ER calcium overload.	
Barodia et al., 2019	Astrocyte culture	Parkinson disease	Astrocytes contribute significantly to PD pathology due to high level of PINK-dependent ubiquitin phosphorylation.	
Polyzos et al., 2019	12–16 weeks; 80 weeks	Huntington disease	Region-specific astrocytes response to altered glucose level and utilizing alternative fuel source play important role in the susceptibility of neuronal death in HD animal model.	
Ishii et al., 2017	4–8-months-; 10–14-months-old	Aging	New model of aging brain: chronic oxidative stress causes astrocyte defects in mice with impaired mitochondrial electron transport chain functionality	
Clarke, Barres et al., 2018	P7; P30; 10-weeks-; 9.5months-; 2-years-old	Aging	Astrocytes display phenotype of neuro-inflammatory Al-like reactive astrocytes, which would contribute to vulnerability of the aged brain to injury	
Hayakawa, Lo et al., 2016	12–14 weeks	Focal cerebral ischemia	Astrocytes release functional mitochondria to neurons; mediated by CD38 and cyclic ADP ribose signaling to amplify cell survival signals. Neuroprotection, neuro-recovery mechanisms after stroke	
Quintana, Simpkins et al., 2019	Primary astrocytes culture	Hypoxia	Hypoxia increases mitochondria fission and fragmentation corresponded to Drpl dephosphorylation at Ser 637. Reoxygenation marks the initiation of elevated mitophagic activity at the perinuclear region where a large number of the smallest mitochondria occurred.	
Fiebig, Beckervordersandforth et al., 2019	4 months	Physiology &amp; stroke	Under physiological conditions, astrocytes survive to dysfunctional mitochondrial ETC and oxPhos, but under injury require functional machinery for proliferation and neuroprotection	
O’Donnell, Jackson and Robinson, 2016	Hippocampal slices culture from P6-P8 rats	Oxygen Glucose deprivation &amp; Excitotoxicity	Transient OGD causes delayed excitoxic death of CA1 pyramidal neurons, delayed loss of mitochondria and increased Ca2+ signaling at astrocytic processes, and increased colocalization of phagosome marker LC3B	
Ren, Zhang et al., 2020	8 months	Traumatic brain injury	In Astrocytes, RvDl induces higher mitophagy of damaged mitochondria, elimination of extra mitochondria-derived ROS, protects mitochondria morphology and astrocyte membrane potential, allowing an enhanced survival of neurons	
Constantinou, Fern, 2009	P10 “throughout”	Overactivation of neurotransmitter receptors	Overactivation of neurotransmitter receptors induces swollen and expended mitochondria, vacuolization, membrane breakdown in white matter astrocyte of developing CNS	
Shu et al., 2019	Primary hippocampal astrocyte culture	Depression; Chronic mild stress	Antidepressant fluoxetine protects astrocyte in CMS model mice by increasing clearance of damaged mitochondria	

Conflict of Interest The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.


References

1. Verkhratsky A , Nedergaard M (2018) Physiology of Astroglia. Physiol Rev 98 :239–389. 10.1152/physrev.00042.2016 29351512
2. Zonta M , Angulo MC , Gobbo S , Rosengarten B , Hossmann KA , Pozzan T , Carmignoto G (2003) Neuron-to-astrocyte signaling is central to the dynamic control of brain microcirculation. Nat Neurosci 6 :43–50. 10.1038/nn980 12469126
3. Iadecola C , Nedergaard M (2007) Glial regulation of the cerebral microvasculature. Nat Neurosci 10 :1369–1376. 10.1038/nn2003 17965657
4. Takano T , Tian GF , Peng W , Lou N , Libionka W , Han X , Nedergaard M (2006) Astrocyte-mediated control of cerebral blood flow. Nat Neurosci 9 :260–267. 10.1038/nn1623 16388306
5. Chesler M , Kaila K (1992) Modulation of pH by neuronal activity. Trends Neurosci 15 :396–402. 10.1016/0166-2236(92)90191-a 1279865
6. Han X , Chen M , Wang F , Windrem M , Wang S , Shanz S , Xu Q , Oberheim NA , Bekar L , Betstadt S , Silva AJ , Takano T , Goldman SA , Nedergaard M (2013) Forebrain engraftment by human glial progenitor cells enhances synaptic plasticity and learning in adult mice. Cell Stem Cell 12 :342–353. 10.1016/j.stem.2012.12.015 23472873
7. Wang DD , Bordey A (2008) The astrocyte odyssey. Prog Neurobiol 86 :342–367. 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2008.09.015 18948166
8. Belanger M , Allaman I , Magistretti PJ (2011) Brain energy metabolism: focus on astrocyte-neuron metabolic cooperation. Cell Metab 14 :724–738. 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.08.016 22152301
9. Brown AM , Tekkok SB , Ransom BR (2002) Hypoglycemia and white matter: pathophysiology of axon injury and role of glycogen. Diabetes Nutr Metab 15 :290–293 discussion 293–294 12625471
10. Brown AM , Tekkok SB , Ransom BR (2003) Glycogen regulation and functional role in mouse white matter. J Physiol 549 :501–512. 10.1113/jphysiol.2003.042416 12679378
11. Tekkok SB , Brown AM , Westenbroek R , Pellerin L , Ransom BR (2005) Transfer of glycogen-derived lactate from astrocytes to axons via specific monocarboxylate transporters supports mouse optic nerve activity. J Neurosci Res 81 :644–652. 10.1002/jnr.20573 16015619
12. Gourine AV , Kasymov V , Marina N , Tang F , Figueiredo MF , Lane S , Teschemacher AG , Spyer KM , Deisseroth K , Kasparov S (2010) Astrocytes control breathing through pH-dependent release of ATP. Science 329 :571–575. 10.1126/science.1190721 20647426
13. Blutstein T , Haydon PG (2013) The importance of astrocyte-derived purines in the modulation of sleep. Glia 61 :129–139. 10.1002/glia.22422 23027687
14. Iliff JJ , Wang M , Liao Y , Plogg BA , Peng W , Gundersen GA , Benveniste H , Vates GE , Deane R , Goldman SA , Nagelhus EA , Nedergaard M (2012) A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid beta. Sci Transl Med 4 :147–111. 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003748
15. Iliff JJ , Nedergaard M (2013) Is there a cerebral lymphatic system? Stroke 44 :S93–S95. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.678698 23709744
16. Iliff JJ , Wang M , Zeppenfeld DM , Venkataraman A , Plog BA , Liao Y , Deane R , Nedergaard M (2013) Cerebral arterial pulsation drives paravascular CSF-interstitial fluid exchange in the murine brain. J Neurosci 33 :18190–18199. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1592-13.2013 24227727
17. Sasaki T , Matsuki N , Ikegaya Y (2011) Action-potential modulation during axonal conduction. Science 331 :599–601. 10.1126/science.1197598 21292979
18. Christopherson KS , Ullian EM , Stokes CC , Mullowney CE , Hell JW , Agah A , Lawler J , Mosher DF , Bornstein P , Barres BA (2005) Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted proteins that promote CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120 :421–433. 10.1016/j.cell.2004.12.020 15707899
19. Eroglu C , Allen NJ , Susman MW , O’Rourke NA , Park CY , Ozkan E , Chakraborty C , Mulinyawe SB , Annis DS , Huberman AD , Green EM , Lawler J , Dolmetsch R , Garcia KC , Smith SJ , Luo ZD , Rosenthal A , Mosher DF , Barres BA (2009) Gabapentin receptor alpha2delta-1 is a neuronal thrombospondin receptor responsible for excitatory CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 139 :380–392. 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.025 19818485
20. Oberheim NA , Wang X , Goldman S , Nedergaard M (2006) Astrocytic complexity distinguishes the human brain. Trends Neurosci 29 :547–553. 10.1016/j.tins.2006.08.004 16938356
21. Zhang K , Sejnowski TJ (2000) A universal scaling law between gray matter and white matter of cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 :5621–5626. 10.1073/pnas.090504197 10792049
22. Emsley JG , Macklis JD (2006) Astroglial heterogeneity closely reflects the neuronal-defined anatomy of the adult murine CNS. Neuron Glia Biol 2 :175–186. 10.1017/S1740925X06000202 17356684
23. Nash B , Ioannidou K , Barnett SC (2011) Astrocyte phenotypes and their relationship to myelination. J Anat 219 :44–52. 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2010.01330.x 21496013
24. Vaccarino FM , Fagel DM , Ganat Y , Maragnoli ME , Ment LR , Ohkubo Y , Schwartz ML , Silbereis J , Smith KM (2007) Astroglial cells in development, regeneration, and repair. Neuroscientist 13 :173–185. 10.1177/1073858406298336 17404377
25. Molofsky AV , Krencik R , Ullian EM , Tsai HH , Deneen B , Richardson WD , Barres BA , Rowitch DH (2012) Astrocytes and disease: a neurodevelopmental perspective. Genes Dev 26 :891–907. 10.1101/gad.188326.112 22549954
26. Tsai HH , Li H , Fuentealba LC , Molofsky AV , Taveira-Marques R , Zhuang H , Tenney A , Murnen AT , Fancy SP , Merkle F , Kessaris N , Alvarez-Buylla A , Richardson WD , Rowitch DH (2012) Regional astrocyte allocation regulates CNS synaptogenesis and repair. Science 337 :358–362. 10.1126/science.1222381 22745251
27. Kettenmann H , Ransom BR (1988) Electrical coupling between astrocytes and between oligodendrocytes studied in mammalian cell cultures. Glia 1 :64–73. 10.1002/glia.440010108 2853139
28. Dahl D , Bignami A (1982) Immunohistological localization of desmin, the muscle-type 100 A filament protein, in rat astrocytes and Muller glia. J Histochem Cytochem 30 :207–213. 10.1177/30.3.7037941 7037941
29. Pixley SK , Kobayashi Y , de Vellis J (1984) A monoclonal antibody against vimentin: characterization. Brain Res 317 :185–199. 10.1016/0165-3806(84)90096-8 6383522
30. Hirako Y , Yamakawa H , Tsujimura Y , Nishizawa Y , Okumura M , Usukura J , Matsumoto H , Jackson KW , Owaribe K , Ohara O (2003) Characterization of mammalian synemin, an intermediate filament protein present in all four classes of muscle cells and some neuroglial cells: co-localization and interaction with type III intermediate filament proteins and keratins. Cell Tissue Res 313 :195–207. 10.1007/s00441-003-0732-2 12845519
31. Oberheim NA , Takano T , Han X , He W , Lin JH , Wang F , Xu Q , Wyatt JD , Pilcher W , Ojemann JG , Ransom BR , Goldman SA , Nedergaard M (2009) Uniquely hominid features of adult human astrocytes. J Neurosci 29 :3276–3287. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4707-08.2009 19279265
32. Kaaijk P , Pals ST , Morsink F , Bosch DA , Troost D (1997) Differential expression of CD44 splice variants in the normal human central nervous system. J Neuroimmunol 73 :70–76. 10.1016/s0165-5728(96)00167-1 9058761
33. Goursaud S , Kozlova EN , Maloteaux JM , Hermans E (2009) Cultured astrocytes derived from corpus callosum or cortical grey matter show distinct glutamate handling properties. J Neurochem 108 :1442–1452. 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.05889.x 19222709
34. Ludwin SK , Kosek JC , Eng LF (1976) The topographical distribution of S-100 and GFA proteins in the adult rat brain: an immunohistochemical study using horseradish peroxidase-labelled antibodies. J Comp Neurol 165 :197–207. 10.1002/cne.901650206 1107363
35. Bushong EA , Martone ME , Jones YZ , Ellisman MH (2002) Protoplasmic astrocytes in CA1 stratum radiatum occupy separate anatomical domains. J Neurosci 22 :183–192 11756501
36. Rothstein JD , Dykes-Hoberg M , Pardo CA , Bristol LA , Jin L , Kuncl RW , Kanai Y , Hediger MA , Wang Y , Schielke JP , Welty DF (1996) Knockout of glutamate transporters reveals a major role for astroglial transport in excitotoxicity and clearance of glutamate. Neuron 16 :675–686. 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80086-0 8785064
37. Goursaud S , Maloteaux JM , Hermans E (2009) Distinct expression and regulation of the glutamate transporter isoforms GLT-1a and GLT-1b in cultured astrocytes from a rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (hSOD1G93A). Neurochem Int 55 :28–34. 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.02.003 19428804
38. Parpura V , Fisher ES , Lechleiter JD , Schousboe A , Waagepetersen HS , Brunet S , Baltan S , Verkhratsky A (2017) Glutamate and ATP at the interface between signaling and metabolism in Astroglia: examples from pathology. Neurochem Res 42 :19–34. 10.1007/s11064-016-1848-6 26915104
39. Hassel B , Boldingh KA , Narvesen C , Iversen EG , Skrede KK (2003) Glutamate transport, glutamine synthetase and phosphate-activated glutaminase in rat CNS white matter. A quantitative study. J Neurochem 87 :230–237. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01984.x 12969269
40. Oka A , Belliveau MJ , Rosenberg PA , Volpe JJ (1993) Vulnerability of oligodendroglia to glutamate: pharmacology, mechanisms, and prevention. J Neurosci 13 :1441–1453 8096541
41. Garcia-Barcina JM , Matute C (1996) Expression of kainate-selective glutamate receptor subunits in glial cells of the adult bovine white matter. Eur J Neurosci 8 :2379–2387. 10.1111/j.1460-9568.1996.tb01201.x 9064077
42. Sanchez-Gomez MV , Matute C (1999) AMPA and kainate receptors each mediate excitotoxicity in oligodendroglial cultures. Neurobiol Dis 6 :475–485. 10.1006/nbdi.1999.0264 10600403
43. Matute C (2006) Oligodendrocyte NMDA receptors: a novel therapeutic target. Trends Mol Med 12 :289–292. 10.1016/j.molmed.2006.05.004 16750425
44. Jourdain P , Bergersen LH , Bhaukaurally K , Bezzi P , Santello M , Domercq M , Matute C , Tonello F , Gundersen V , Volterra A (2007) Glutamate exocytosis from astrocytes controls synaptic strength. Nat Neurosci 10 :331–339. 10.1038/nn1849 17310248
45. Alberdi E , Sanchez-Gomez MV , Marino A , Matute C (2002) Ca(2+) influx through AMPA or kainate receptors alone is sufficient to initiate excitotoxicity in cultured oligodendrocytes. Neurobiol Dis 9 :234–243. 10.1006/nbdi.2001.0457 11895374
46. Tekkok SB , Goldberg MP (2001) Ampa/kainate receptor activation mediates hypoxic oligodendrocyte death and axonal injury in cerebral white matter. J Neurosci 21 :4237–4248 11404409
47. Tekkok SB , Faddis BT , Goldberg MP (2005) AMPA/kainate receptors mediate axonal morphological disruption in hypoxic white matter. Neurosci Lett 382 :275–279. 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.03.054 15925103
48. Tekkok SB , Ye Z , Ransom BR (2007) Excitotoxic mechanisms of ischemic injury in myelinated white matter. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27 :1540–1552. 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600455 17299453
49. Saab AS , Tzvetavona ID , Trevisiol A , Baltan S , Dibaj P , Kusch K , Mobius W , Goetze B , Jahn HM , Huang W , Steffens H , Schomburg ED , Perez-Samartin A , Perez-Cerda F , Bakhtiari D , Matute C , Lowel S , Griesinger C , Hirrlinger J , Kirchhoff F , Nave KA (2016) Oligodendroglial NMDA receptors regulate glucose import and axonal energy metabolism. Neuron 91 :119–132. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.05.016 27292539
50. Charles AC , Merrill JE , Dirksen ER , Sanderson MJ (1991) Intercellular signaling in glial cells: calcium waves and oscillations in response to mechanical stimulation and glutamate. Neuron 6 :983–992. 10.1016/0896-6273(91)90238-u 1675864
51. Orthmann-Murphy JL , Abrams CK , Scherer SS (2008) Gap junctions couple astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. J Mol Neurosci 35 :101–116. 10.1007/s12031-007-9027-5 18236012
52. Parpura V , Scemes E , Spray DC (2004) Mechanisms of glutamate release from astrocytes: gap junction “hemichannels”, purinergic receptors and exocytotic release. Neurochem Int 45 :259–264. 10.1016/j.neuint.2003.12.011 15145541
53. Scemes E , Spray DC (2009) Connexin expression (gap junctions and hemichannels) in astrocytes. In: Haydon PG , Parpura V (eds) Astrocytes in (Patho)physiology of the nervous system. Springer, Boston, pp 107–150. 10.1007/978-0-387-79492-1_5
54. Lee SH , Kim WT , Cornell-Bell AH , Sontheimer H (1994) Astrocytes exhibit regional specificity in gap-junction coupling. Glia 11 :315–325. 10.1002/glia.440110404 7960035
55. Verkhratsky A , Semyanov A , Zorec R (2020) Physiology of Astroglial excitability. Function 1 . 10.1093/function/zqaa016
56. Bernardinelli Y , Magistretti PJ , Chatton JY (2004) Astrocytes generate Na+-mediated metabolic waves. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 :14937–14942. 10.1073/pnas.0405315101 15466714
57. Langer J , Stephan J , Theis M , Rose CR (2012) Gap junctions mediate intercellular spread of sodium between hippocampal astrocytes in situ. Glia 60 :239–252. 10.1002/glia.21259 22025386
58. Verkhratsky A , Rose CR (2020) Na(+)-dependent transporters: the backbone of astroglial homeostatic function. Cell Calcium 85 :102136. 10.1016/j.ceca.2019.102136 31835178
59. Verkhratsky A , Untiet V , Rose CR (2020) Ionic signalling in astroglia beyond calcium. J Physiol 598 :1655–1670. 10.1113/JP277478 30734296
60. Rose CR , Verkhratsky A (2016) Principles of sodium homeostasis and sodium signalling in astroglia. Glia 64 :1611–1627. 10.1002/glia.22964 26919326
61. Larsen BR , Assentoft M , Cotrina ML , Hua SZ , Nedergaard M , Kaila K , Voipio J , MacAulay N (2014) Contributions of the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase, NKCC1, and Kir4.1 to hippocampal K(+) clearance and volume responses. Glia 62 :608–622. 10.1002/glia.22629 24482245
62. Hertz L , Song D , Xu J , Peng L , Gibbs ME (2015) Role of the astrocytic Na(+), K(+)-ATPase in K(+) homeostasis in brain: K(+) uptake, signaling pathways and substrate utilization. Neurochem Res 40 :2505–2516. 10.1007/s11064-014-1505-x 25555706
63. Pellerin L , Magistretti PJ (2012) Sweet sixteen for ANLS. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 32 :1152–1166. 10.1038/jcbfm.2011.149 22027938
64. Pellerin L , Magistretti PJ (1997) Glutamate uptake stimulates Na+, K+-ATPase activity in astrocytes via activation of a distinct subunit highly sensitive to ouabain. J Neurochem 69 :2132–2137. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69052132.x 9349559
65. Chatton JY , Marquet P , Magistretti PJ (2000) A quantitative analysis of L-glutamate-regulated Na+ dynamics in mouse cortical astrocytes: implications for cellular bioenergetics. Eur J Neurosci 12 :3843–3853. 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2000.00269.x 11069579
66. Kimura J , Miyamae S , Noma A (1987) Identification of sodium-calcium exchange current in single ventricular cells of guineapig. J Physiol 384 :199–222. 10.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016450 2443659
67. Kirischuk S , Kettenmann H , Verkhratsky A (1997) Na+/Ca2+ exchanger modulates kainate-triggered Ca2+ signaling in Bergmann glial cells in situ. FASEB J 11 :566–572. 10.1096/fasebj.11.7.9212080 9212080
68. Reyes RC , Verkhratsky A , Parpura V (2012) Plasmalemmal Na+/Ca2+ exchanger modulates Ca2+-dependent exocytotic release of glutamate from rat cortical astrocytes. ASN Neuro 4 . 10.1042/AN20110059
69. Paluzzi S , Alloisio S , Zappettini S , Milanese M , Raiteri L , Nobile M , Bonanno G (2007) Adult astroglia is competent for Na+/Ca2+ exchanger-operated exocytotic glutamate release triggered by mild depolarization. J Neurochem 103 :1196–1207. 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04826.x 17935604
70. Hernandez-SanMiguel E , Vay L , Santo-Domingo J , Lobaton CD , Moreno A , Montero M , Alvarez J (2006) The mitochondrial Na+/Ca2+ exchanger plays a key role in the control of cytosolic Ca2+ oscillations. Cell Calcium 40 :53–61. 10.1016/j.ceca.2006.03.009 16720043
71. Palty R , Silverman WF , Hershfinkel M , Caporale T , Sensi SL , Parnis J , Nolte C , Fishman D , Shoshan-Barmatz V , Herrmann S , Khananshvili D , Sekler I (2010) NCLX is an essential component of mitochondrial Na+/Ca2+ exchange. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 :436–441. 10.1073/pnas.0908099107 20018762
72. Parnis J , Montana V , Delgado-Martinez I , Matyash V , Parpura V , Kettenmann H , Sekler I , Nolte C (2013) Mitochondrial exchanger NCLX plays a major role in the intracellular Ca2+ signaling, gliotransmission, and proliferation of astrocytes. J Neurosci 33 :7206–7219. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5721-12.2013 23616530
73. Liddelow SA , Sofroniew MV (2019) Astrocytes usurp neurons as a disease focus. Nat Neurosci 22 :512–513. 10.1038/s41593-019-0367-6 30858602
74. Wilhelmsson U , Bushong EA , Price DL , Smarr BL , Phung V , Terada M , Ellisman MH , Pekny M (2006) Redefining the concept of reactive astrocytes as cells that remain within their unique domains upon reaction to injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 :17513–17518. 10.1073/pnas.0602841103 17090684
75. Burda JE , Bernstein AM , Sofroniew MV (2016) Astrocyte roles in traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol 275 (Pt 3 ):305–315. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.03.020 25828533
76. Burda JE , Sofroniew MV (2017) Seducing astrocytes to the dark side. Cell Res 27 :726–727. 10.1038/cr.2017.37 28303889
77. Verkhratsky A , Ho MS , Vardjan N , Zorec R , Parpura V (2019) General pathophysiology of Astroglia. Adv Exp Med Biol 1175 :149–179. 10.1007/978-981-13-9913-8_7 31583588
78. Sofroniew MV (2015) Astrocyte barriers to neurotoxic inflammation. Nat Rev Neurosci 16 :249–263. 10.1038/nrn3898 25891508
79. Pekny M , Pekna M , Messing A , Steinhauser C , Lee JM , Parpura V , Hol EM , Sofroniew MV , Verkhratsky A (2016) Astrocytes: a central element in neurological diseases. Acta Neuropathol 131 :323–345. 10.1007/s00401-015-1513-1 26671410
80. Choi SS , Lee HJ , Lim I , Satoh J , Kim SU (2014) Human astrocytes: secretome profiles of cytokines and chemokines. PLoS One 9 :e92325. 10.1371/journal.pone.0092325 24691121
81. Clarke LE , Liddelow SA , Chakraborty C , Munch AE , Heiman M , Barres BA (2018) Normal aging induces A1-like astrocyte reactivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 :E1896–E1905. 10.1073/pnas.1800165115 29437957
82. Farina C , Aloisi F , Meinl E (2007) Astrocytes are active players in cerebral innate immunity. Trends Immunol 28 :138–145. 10.1016/j.it.2007.01.005 17276138
83. Zhu D , Hu C , Sheng W , Tan KS , Haidekker MA , Sun AY , Sun GY , Lee JC (2009) NAD(P)H oxidase-mediated reactive oxygen species production alters astrocyte membrane molecular order via phospholipase A2. Biochem J 421 :201–210. 10.1042/BJ20090356 19392662
84. Ishii T , Takanashi Y , Sugita K , Miyazawa M , Yanagihara R , Yasuda K , Onouchi H , Kawabe N , Nakata M , Yamamoto Y , Hartman PS , Ishii N (2017) Endogenous reactive oxygen species cause astrocyte defects and neuronal dysfunctions in the hippocampus: a new model for aging brain. Aging Cell 16 :39–51. 10.1111/acel.12523 27623715
85. Dossi E , Vasile F , Rouach N (2018) Human astrocytes in the diseased brain. Brain Res Bull 136 :139–156. 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2017.02.001 28212850
86. Schousboe A , Waagepetersen HS (2005) Role of astrocytes in glutamate homeostasis: implications for excitotoxicity. Neurotox Res 8 :221–225. 10.1007/BF03033975 16371316
87. Sompol P , Furman JL , Pleiss MM , Kraner SD , Artiushin IA , Batten SR , Quintero JE , Simmerman LA , Beckett TL , Lovell MA , Murphy MP , Gerhardt GA , Norris CM (2017) Calcineurin/NFAT signaling in activated astrocytes drives network hyperexcitability in Abeta-bearing mice. J Neurosci 37 :6132–6148. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0877-17.2017 28559377
88. Furman JL , Sama DM , Gant JC , Beckett TL , Murphy MP , Bachstetter AD , Van Eldik LJ , Norris CM (2012) Targeting astrocytes ameliorates neurologic changes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 32 :16129–16140. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2323-12.2012 23152597
89. Furman JL , Sompol P , Kraner SD , Pleiss MM , Putman EJ , Dunkerson J , Mohmmad Abdul H , Roberts KN , Scheff SW , Norris CM (2016) Blockade of astrocytic calcineurin/NFAT signaling helps to normalize hippocampal synaptic function and plasticity in a rat model of traumatic brain injury. J Neurosci 36 :1502–1515. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1930-15.2016 26843634
90. Shi Q , Chowdhury S , Ma R , Le KX , Hong S , Caldarone BJ , Stevens B , Lemere CA (2017) Complement C3 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration in aged plaque-rich APP/PS1 mice. Sci Transl Med 9 . 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf6295
91. Verkhratsky A , Steardo L , Parpura V , Montana V (2016) Translational potential of astrocytes in brain disorders. Prog Neurobiol 144 :188–205. 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.003 26386136
92. Suzuki A , Stern SA , Bozdagi O , Huntley GW , Walker RH , Magistretti PJ , Alberini CM (2011) Astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation. Cell 144 :810–823. 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.018 21376239
93. Bastian C , Quinn J , Doherty C , Franke C , Faris A , Brunet S , Baltan S (2019) Role of brain glycogen during ischemia, aging and cell-to-cell interactions. Adv Neurobiol 23 :347–361. 10.1007/978-3-030-27480-1_12 31667815
94. Rich LR , Harris W , Brown AM (2019) The role of brain glycogen in supporting physiological function. Front Neurosci 13 :1176. 10.3389/fnins.2019.01176 31749677
95. Bak LK , Walls AB , Schousboe A , Waagepetersen HS (2018) Astrocytic glycogen metabolism in the healthy and diseased brain. J Biol Chem 293 :7108–7116. 10.1074/jbc.R117.803239 29572349
96. Faulkner JR , Herrmann JE , Woo MJ , Tansey KE , Doan NB , Sofroniew MV (2004) Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 24 :2143–2155. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3547-03.2004 14999065
97. Okada S , Nakamura M , Katoh H , Miyao T , Shimazaki T , Ishii K , Yamane J , Yoshimura A , Iwamoto Y , Toyama Y , Okano H (2006) Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nat Med 12 :829–834. 10.1038/nm1425 16783372
98. Wang H , Song G , Chuang H , Chiu C , Abdelmaksoud A , Ye Y , Zhao L (2018) Portrait of glial scar in neurological diseases. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 31 :2058738418801406. 10.1177/2058738418801406
99. Liddelow S , Barres B (2015) SnapShot: astrocytes in health and disease. Cell 162 (1170–1170 ):e1171. 10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.029
100. Liddelow SA , Barres BA (2017) Reactive astrocytes: production, function, and therapeutic potential. Immunity 46 :957–967. 10.1016/j.immuni.2017.06.006 28636962
101. Perez-Nievas BG , Serrano-Pozo A (2018) Deciphering the astrocyte reaction in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci 10 :114. 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00114 29922147
102. Sofroniew MV , Vinters HV (2010) Astrocytes: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol 119 :7–35. 10.1007/s00401-009-0619-8 20012068
103. Bluml S , Moreno-Torres A , Shic F , Nguy CH , Ross BD (2002) Tricarboxylic acid cycle of glia in the in vivo human brain. NMR Biomed 15 :1–5. 10.1002/nbm.725 11840547
104. Lovatt D , Sonnewald U , Waagepetersen HS , Schousboe A , He W , Lin JH , Han X , Takano T , Wang S , Sim FJ , Goldman SA , Nedergaard M (2007) The transcriptome and metabolic gene signature of protoplasmic astrocytes in the adult murine cortex. J Neurosci 27 :12255–12266. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3404-07.2007 17989291
105. Agarwal A , Wu PH , Hughes EG , Fukaya M , Tischfield MA , Langseth AJ , Wirtz D , Bergles DE (2017) Transient opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore induces microdomain calcium transients in astrocyte processes. Neuron 93 (587–605 ):e587. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.12.034
106. Derouiche A , Haseleu J , Korf HW (2015) Fine astrocyte processes contain very small mitochondria: glial oxidative capability may fuel transmitter metabolism. Neurochem Res 40 :2402–2413. 10.1007/s11064-015-1563-8 25894677
107. Genda EN , Jackson JG , Sheldon AL , Locke SF , Greco TM , O’Donnell JC , Spruce LA , Xiao R , Guo W , Putt M , Seeholzer S , Ischiropoulos H , Robinson MB (2011) Co-compartmentalization of the astroglial glutamate transporter, GLT-1, with glycolytic enzymes and mitochondria. J Neurosci 31 :18275–18288. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3305-11.2011 22171032
108. Jackson JG , O’Donnell JC , Takano H , Coulter DA , Robinson MB (2014) Neuronal activity and glutamate uptake decrease mitochondrial mobility in astrocytes and position mitochondria near glutamate transporters. J Neurosci 34 :1613–1624. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3510-13.2014 24478345
109. Motori E , Puyal J , Toni N , Ghanem A , Angeloni C , Malaguti M , Cantelli-Forti G , Berninger B , Conzelmann KK , Gotz M , Winklhofer KF , Hrelia S , Bergami M (2013) Inflammation-induced alteration of astrocyte mitochondrial dynamics requires autophagy for mitochondrial network maintenance. Cell Metab 18 :844–859. 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.11.005 24315370
110. Stephen TL , Higgs NF , Sheehan DF , Al Awabdh S , Lopez-Domenech G , Arancibia-Carcamo IL , Kittler JT (2015) Miro1 regulates activity-driven positioning of mitochondria within astrocytic processes apposed to synapses to regulate intracellular calcium signaling. J Neurosci 35 :15996–16011. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2068-15.2015 26631479
111. Dugan LL , Kim-Han JS (2004) Astrocyte mitochondria in in vitro models of ischemia. J Bioenerg Biomembr 36 :317–321. 10.1023/B:JOBB.0000041761.61554.44 15377865
112. Bindocci E , Savtchouk I , Liaudet N , Becker D , Carriero G , Volterra A (2017) Three-dimensional Ca(2+) imaging advances understanding of astrocyte biology. Science 356 . 10.1126/science.aai8185
113. Gunter TE , Yule DI , Gunter KK , Eliseev RA , Salter JD (2004) Calcium and mitochondria. FEBS Lett 567 :96–102. 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.03.071 15165900
114. Jackson JG , O’Donnell JC , Krizman E , Robinson MB (2015) Displacing hexokinase from mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel impairs GLT-1-mediated glutamate uptake but does not disrupt interactions between GLT-1 and mitochondrial proteins. J Neurosci Res 93 :999–1008. 10.1002/jnr.23533 25546576
115. Magi S , Arcangeli S , Castaldo P , Nasti AA , Berrino L , Piegari E , Bernardini R , Amoroso S , Lariccia V (2013) Glutamate-induced ATP synthesis: relationship between plasma membrane Na+/Ca2+ exchanger and excitatory amino acid transporters in brain and heart cell models. Mol Pharmacol 84 :603–614. 10.1124/mol.113.087775 23913256
116. Rojas H , Colina C , Ramos M , Benaim G , Jaffe E , Caputo C , Di Polo R (2013) Sodium-calcium exchanger modulates the L-glutamate Ca(i) (2+) signalling in type-1 cerebellar astrocytes. Adv Exp Med Biol 961 :267–274. 10.1007/978-1-4614-4756-6_22 23224886
117. Dienel GA (2013) Astrocytic energetics during excitatory neuro-transmission: what are contributions of glutamate oxidation and glycolysis? Neurochem Int 63 :244–258. 10.1016/j.neuint.2013.06.015 23838211
118. Ito U , Hakamata Y , Kawakami E , Oyanagi K (2009) Degeneration of astrocytic processes and their mitochondria in cerebral cortical regions peripheral to the cortical infarction: heterogeneity of their disintegration is closely associated with disseminated selective neuronal necrosis and maturation of injury. Stroke 40 :2173–2181. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.534990 19359621
119. Dienel GA , Hertz L (2005) Astrocytic contributions to bioenergetics of cerebral ischemia. Glia 50 :362–388. 10.1002/glia.20157 15846808
120. Voloboueva LA , Suh SW , Swanson RA , Giffard RG (2007) Inhibition of mitochondrial function in astrocytes: implications for neuroprotection. J Neurochem 102 :1383–1394. 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04634.x 17488276
121. Brand MD , Evans SM , Mendes-Mourao J , Chappell JB (1973) Fluorocitrate inhibition of aconitate hydratase and the tricarboxylate carrier of rat liver mitochondria. Biochem J 134 :217–224. 10.1042/bj1340217 4723224
122. Reichert SA , Kim-Han JS , Dugan LL (2001) The mitochondrial permeability transition pore and nitric oxide synthase mediate early mitochondrial depolarization in astrocytes during oxygen-glucose deprivation. J Neurosci 21 :6608–6616 11517250
123. Thoren AE , Helps SC , Nilsson M , Sims NR (2005) Astrocytic function assessed from 1–14C-acetate metabolism after temporary focal cerebral ischemia in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25 :440–450. 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600035 15674239
124. Bruno A (1994) Anterior choroidal artery territory infarcts. Stroke 25 :1884–1885. 10.1161/01.str.25.9.1884 7980816
125. Goldberg MP , Choi DW (1993) Combined oxygen and glucose deprivation in cortical cell culture: calcium-dependent and calcium-independent mechanisms of neuronal injury. J Neurosci 13 :3510–3524 8101871
126. Dugan LL , Bruno VM , Amagasu SM , Giffard RG (1995) Glia modulate the response of murine cortical neurons to excitotoxicity: glia exacerbate AMPA neurotoxicity. J Neurosci 15 :4545–4555 7540679
127. Rosenberg PA , Aizenman E (1989) Hundred-fold increase in neuronal vulnerability to glutamate toxicity in astrocyte-poor cultures of rat cerebral cortex. Neurosci Lett 103 :162–168. 10.1016/0304-3940(89)90569-7 2570387
128. Fiebig C , Keiner S , Ebert B , Schaffner I , Jagasia R , Lie DC , Beckervordersandforth R (2019) Mitochondrial dysfunction in astrocytes impairs the generation of reactive astrocytes and enhances neuronal cell death in the cortex upon photothrombotic lesion. Front Mol Neurosci 12 :40. 10.3389/fnmol.2019.00040 30853890
129. Baltan S (2015) Can lactate serve as an energy substrate for axons in good times and in bad, in sickness and in health? Metab Brain Dis 30 :25–30. 10.1007/s11011-014-9595-3 25034458
130. Jackson JG , Robinson MB (2015) Reciprocal regulation of mitochondrial dynamics and calcium signaling in astrocyte processes. J Neurosci 35 :15199–15213. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2049-15.2015 26558789
131. Palmer CS , Osellame LD , Stojanovski D , Ryan MT (2011) The regulation of mitochondrial morphology: intricate mechanisms and dynamic machinery. Cell Signal 23 :1534–1545. 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.05.021 21683788
132. O’Donnell JC , Jackson JG , Robinson MB (2016) Transient oxygen/glucose deprivation causes a delayed loss of mitochondria and increases spontaneous calcium signaling in astrocytic processes. J Neurosci 36 :7109–7127. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4518-15.2016 27383588
133. Leary S , Moyes C (2000) The effects of bioenergetic stress and redox balance on the expression of genes critical to mitochondrial function. In: Storey K , Storey J (eds) Cell and molecular responses to stress, vol 1 . Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 209–229
134. Agulhon C , Petravicz J , McMullen AB , Sweger EJ , Minton SK , Taves SR , Casper KB , Fiacco TA , McCarthy KD (2008) What is the role of astrocyte calcium in neurophysiology? Neuron 59 :932–946. 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.004 18817732
135. Kuchibhotla KV , Lattarulo CR , Hyman BT , Bacskai BJ (2009) Synchronous hyperactivity and intercellular calcium waves in astrocytes in Alzheimer mice. Science 323 :1211–1215. 10.1126/science.1169096 19251629
136. Hunter DR , Haworth RA , Southard JH (1976) Relationship between configuration, function, and permeability in calcium-treated mitochondria. J Biol Chem 251 :5069–5077 134035
137. Krajewski S , Krajewska M , Ellerby LM , Welsh K , Xie Z , Deveraux QL , Salvesen GS , Bredesen DE , Rosenthal RE , Fiskum G , Reed JC (1999) Release of caspase-9 from mitochondria during neuronal apoptosis and cerebral ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 :5752–5757. 10.1073/pnas.96.10.5752 10318956
138. Abramov AY , Canevari L , Duchen MR (2004) Beta-amyloid peptides induce mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in astrocytes and death of neurons through activation of NADPH oxidase. J Neurosci 24 :565–575. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4042-03.2004 14724257
139. Verkhratsky A , Rodriguez-Arellano JJ , Parpura V , Zorec R (2017) Astroglial calcium signalling in Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 483 :1005–1012. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.08.088 27545605
140. Kubik LL , Philbert MA (2015) The role of astrocyte mitochondria in differential regional susceptibility to environmental neurotoxicants: tools for understanding neurodegeneration. Toxicol Sci 144 :7–16. 10.1093/toxsci/kfu254 25740792
141. Mine N , Taniguchi W , Nishio N , Izumi N , Miyazaki N , Yamada H , Nakatsuka T , Yoshida M (2015) Synaptic modulation of excitatory synaptic transmission by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in spinal ventral horn neurons. Neuroscience 290 :18–30. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.01.015 25613686
142. Nahirnyj A , Livne-Bar I , Guo X , Sivak JM (2013) ROS detoxification and proinflammatory cytokines are linked by p38 MAPK signaling in a model of mature astrocyte activation. PLoS One 8 :e83049. 10.1371/journal.pone.0083049 24376630
143. Stobart JL , Ferrari KD , Barrett MJP , Gluck C , Stobart MJ , Zuend M , Weber B (2018) Cortical circuit activity evokes rapid astrocyte calcium signals on a similar timescale to neurons. Neuron 98 (726–735 ):e724. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.050
144. Quintana DD , Garcia JA , Sarkar SN , Jun S , Engler-Chiurazzi EB , Russell AE , Cavendish JZ , Simpkins JW (2019) Hypoxia-reoxygenation of primary astrocytes results in a redistribution of mitochondrial size and mitophagy. Mitochondrion 47 :244–255. 10.1016/j.mito.2018.12.004 30594729
145. Hayakawa K , Esposito E , Wang X , Terasaki Y , Liu Y , Xing C , Ji X , Lo EH (2016) Transfer of mitochondria from astrocytes to neurons after stroke. Nature 535 :551–555. 10.1038/nature18928 27466127
146. Gao L , Zhang Z , Lu J , Pei G (2019) Mitochondria are dynamically transferring between human neural cells and Alexander disease-associated GFAP mutations impair the astrocytic transfer. Front Cell Neurosci 13 :316. 10.3389/fncel.2019.00316 31327963
147. Fransson S , Ruusala A , Aspenstrom P (2006) The atypical Rho GTPases Miro-1 and Miro-2 have essential roles in mitochondrial trafficking. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 344 :500–510. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.163 16630562
148. Lee KS , Lu B (2014) The myriad roles of Miro in the nervous system: axonal transport of mitochondria and beyond. Front Cell Neurosci 8 :330. 10.3389/fncel.2014.00330 25389385
149. Ahmad T , Mukherjee S , Pattnaik B , Kumar M , Singh S , Kumar M , Rehman R , Tiwari BK , Jha KA , Barhanpurkar AP , Wani MR , Roy SS , Mabalirajan U , Ghosh B , Agrawal A (2014) Miro1 regulates intercellular mitochondrial transport &amp; enhances mesenchymal stem cell rescue efficacy. EMBO J 33 :994–1010. 10.1002/embj.201386030 24431222
150. Zhang Y , Yu Z , Jiang D , Liang X , Liao S , Zhang Z , Yue W , Li X , Chiu SM , Chai YH , Liang Y , Chow Y , Han S , Xu A , Tse HF , Lian Q (2016) iPSC-MSCs with high intrinsic MIRO1 and sensitivity to TNF-alpha yield efficacious mitochondrial transfer to rescue Anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy. Stem Cell Rep 7 :749–763. 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.08.009
151. Fransson A , Ruusala A , Aspenstrom P (2003) Atypical Rho GTPases have roles in mitochondrial homeostasis and apoptosis. J Biol Chem 278 :6495–6502. 10.1074/jbc.M208609200 12482879
152. Bosson A , Paumier A , Boisseau S , Jacquier-Sarlin M , Buisson A , Albrieux M (2017) TRPA1 channels promote astrocytic Ca(2+) hyperactivity and synaptic dysfunction mediated by oligomeric forms of amyloid-beta peptide. Mol Neurodegener 12 :53. 10.1186/s13024-017-0194-8 28683776
153. Cannon JR , Sew T , Montero L , Burton EA , Greenamyre JT (2011) Pseudotype-dependent lentiviral transduction of astrocytes or neurons in the rat substantia nigra. Exp Neurol 228 :41–52. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.10.016 21056560
154. Terashima T , Ogawa N , Nakae Y , Sato T , Katagi M , Okano J , Maegawa H , Kojima H (2018) Gene therapy for neuropathic pain through siRNA-IRF5 gene delivery with homing peptides to microglia. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 11 :203–215. 10.1016/j.omtn.2018.02.007 29858055
155. Valiante S , Falanga A , Cigliano L , Iachetta G , Busiello RA , La Marca V , Galdiero M , Lombardi A , Galdiero S (2015) Peptide gH625 enters into neuron and astrocyte cell lines and crosses the blood-brain barrier in rats. Int J Nanomedicine 10 :1885–1898. 10.2147/IJN.S77734 25792823
156. Valori CF , Guidotti G , Brambilla L , Rossi D (2019) Astrocytes in motor neuron diseases. Adv Exp Med Biol 1175 :227–272. 10.1007/978-981-13-9913-8_10 31583591
157. Wilhelmsson U , Li L , Pekna M , Berthold CH , Blom S , Eliasson C , Renner O , Bushong E , Ellisman M , Morgan TE , Pekny M (2004) Absence of glial fibrillary acidic protein and vimentin prevents hypertrophy of astrocytic processes and improves post-traumatic regeneration. J Neurosci 24 :5016–5021. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0820-04.2004 15163694
158. Ceyzeriat K , Ben Haim L , Denizot A , Pommier D , Matos M , Guillemaud O , Palomares MA , Abjean L , Petit F , Gipchtein P , Gaillard MC , Guillermier M , Bernier S , Gaudin M , Auregan G , Josephine C , Dechamps N , Veran J , Langlais V , Cambon K , Bemelmans AP , Baijer J , Bonvento G , Dhenain M , Deleuze JF , Oliet SHR , Brouillet E , Hantraye P , Carrillo-de Sauvage MA , Olaso R , Panatier A , Escartin C (2018) Modulation of astrocyte reactivity improves functional deficits in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol Commun 6 :104. 10.1186/s40478-018-0606-1 30322407
159. Fernandez AM , Hervas R , Dominguez-Fraile M , Garrido VN , Gomez-Gutierrez P , Vega M , Vitorica J , Perez JJ , Torres Aleman I (2016) Blockade of the interaction of calcineurin with FOXO in astrocytes protects against amyloid-beta-induced neuronal death. J Alzheimers Dis 52 :1471–1478. 10.3233/JAD-160149 27079728
160. Li T , Chen X , Zhang C , Zhang Y , Yao W (2019) An update on reactive astrocytes in chronic pain. J Neuroinflammation 16 :140. 10.1186/s12974-019-1524-2 31288837
161. Gaudet AD , Fonken LK (2018) Glial cells shape pathology and repair after spinal cord injury. Neurotherapeutics 15 :554–577. 10.1007/s13311-018-0630-7 29728852
162. Huang L , Nakamura Y , Lo EH , Hayakawa K (2019) Astrocyte signaling in the neurovascular unit after central nervous system injury. Int J Mol Sci 20 . 10.3390/ijms20020282
163. Emani SM , McCully JD (2018) Mitochondrial transplantation: applications for pediatric patients with congenital heart disease. Transl Pediatr 7 :169–175. 10.21037/tp.2018.02.02 29770298
164. Chang JC , Wu SL , Liu KH , Chen YH , Chuang CS , Cheng FC , Su HL , Wei YH , Kuo SJ , Liu CS (2016) Allogeneic/xenogeneic transplantation of peptide-labeled mitochondria in Parkinson’s disease: restoration of mitochondria functions and attenuation of 6-hydroxydopamine-induced neurotoxicity. Transl Res 170 (40–56 ):e43. 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.12.003
165. Cowan DB , Yao R , Akurathi V , Snay ER , Thedsanamoorthy JK , Zurakowski D , Ericsson M , Friehs I , Wu Y , Levitsky S , Del Nido PJ , Packard AB , McCully JD (2016) Intracoronary delivery of mitochondria to the ischemic heart for cardioprotection. PLoS One 11 :e0160889. 10.1371/journal.pone.0160889 27500955
166. Gollihue JL , Patel SP , Eldahan KC , Cox DH , Donahue RR , Taylor BK , Sullivan PG , Rabchevsky AG (2018) Effects of mitochondrial transplantation on bioenergetics, cellular incorporation, and functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 35 :1800–1818. 10.1089/neu.2017.5605 29648982
167. McCully JD , Cowan DB , Pacak CA , Toumpoulis IK , Dayalan H , Levitsky S (2009) Injection of isolated mitochondria during early reperfusion for cardioprotection. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 296 :H94–H105. 10.1152/ajpheart.00567.2008 18978192
168. Sun C , Liu X , Wang B , Wang Z , Liu Y , Di C , Si J , Li H , Wu Q , Xu D , Li J , Li G , Wang Y , Wang F , Zhang H (2019) Endocytosis-mediated mitochondrial transplantation: transferring normal human astrocytic mitochondria into glioma cells rescues aerobic respiration and enhances radiosensitivity. Theranostics 9 :3595–3607. 10.7150/thno.33100 31281500
169. Chang JC , Liu KH , Chuang CS , Su HL , Wei YH , Kuo SJ , Liu CS (2013) Treatment of human cells derived from MERRF syndrome by peptide-mediated mitochondrial delivery. Cytotherapy 15 :1580–1596. 10.1016/j.jcyt.2013.06.008 24199594
170. von Bartheld CS , Bahney J , Herculano-Houzel S (2016) The search for true numbers of neurons and glial cells in the human brain: a review of 150 years of cell counting. J Comp Neurol 524 :3865–3895. 10.1002/cne.24040 27187682
171. Baumann N , Pham-Dinh D (2001) Biology of oligodendrocyte and myelin in the mammalian central nervous system. Physiol Rev 81 :871–927. 10.1152/physrev.2001.81.2.871 11274346
172. Prinz M , Jung S , Priller J (2019) Microglia biology: one century of evolving concepts. Cell 179 :292–311. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.08.053 31585077
173. Bozic M , Verkhratsky A , Zorec R , Stenovec M (2020) Exocytosis of large-diameter lysosomes mediates interferon gamma-induced relocation of MHC class II molecules toward the surface of astrocytes. Cell Mol Life Sci 77 :3245–3264. 10.1007/s00018-019-03350-8 31667557
174. Finsen B , Owens T (2011) Innate immune responses in central nervous system inflammation. FEBS Lett 585 :3806–3812. 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.05.030 21624366
175. Hanisch UK (2013) Proteins in microglial activation – inputs and outputs by subsets. Curr Protein Pept Sci 14 :3–15. 10.2174/1389203711314010003 23441901
176. Hanisch UK , Kettenmann H (2007) Microglia: active sensor and versatile effector cells in the normal and pathologic brain. Nat Neurosci 10 :1387–1394. 10.1038/nn1997 17965659
177. Zhang X , Haaf M , Todorich B , Grosstephan E , Schieremberg H , Surguladze N , Connor JR (2005) Cytokine toxicity to oligodendrocyte precursors is mediated by iron. Glia 52 :199–208. 10.1002/glia.20235 15968631
178. Funfschilling U , Supplie LM , Mahad D , Boretius S , Saab AS , Edgar J , Brinkmann BG , Kassmann CM , Tzvetanova ID , Mobius W , Diaz F , Meijer D , Suter U , Hamprecht B , Sereda MW , Moraes CT , Frahm J , Goebbels S , Nave KA (2012) Glycolytic oligodendrocytes maintain myelin and long-term axonal integrity. Nature 485 :517–521. 10.1038/nature11007 22622581
179. Swalwell H , Latimer J , Haywood RM , Birch-Machin MA (2012) Investigating the role of melanin in UVA/UVB- and hydrogen peroxide-induced cellular and mitochondrial ROS production and mitochondrial DNA damage in human melanoma cells. Free Radic Biol Med 52 :626–634. 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.11.019 22178978
180. Viader A , Sasaki Y , Kim S , Strickland A , Workman CS , Yang K , Gross RW , Milbrandt J (2013) Aberrant Schwann cell lipid metabolism linked to mitochondrial deficits leads to axon degeneration and neuropathy. Neuron 77 :886–898. 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.012 23473319
181. Lin CS , Sharpley MS , Fan W , Waymire KG , Sadun AA , Carelli V , Ross-Cisneros FN , Baciu P , Sung E , McManus MJ , Pan BX , Gil DW , Macgregor GR , Wallace DC (2012) Mouse mtDNA mutant model of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 :20065–20070. 10.1073/pnas.1217113109 23129651
182. Boitier E , Rea R , Duchen MR (1999) Mitochondria exert a negative feedback on the propagation of intracellular Ca2+ waves in rat cortical astrocytes. J Cell Biol 145 :795–808. 10.1083/jcb.145.4.795 10330407
183. Simpson PB , Russell JT (1996) Mitochondria support inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-mediated Ca2+ waves in cultured oligodendrocytes. J Biol Chem 271 :33493–33501. 10.1074/jbc.271.52.33493 8969213
184. Smith IF , Boyle JP , Kang P , Rome S , Pearson HA , Peers C (2005) Hypoxic regulation of Ca2+ signaling in cultured rat astrocytes. Glia 49 :153–157. 10.1002/glia.20083 15390111
185. Reyes RC , Parpura V (2008) Mitochondria modulate Ca2+-dependent glutamate release from rat cortical astrocytes. J Neurosci 28 :9682–9691. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3484-08.2008 18815254
186. Wu J , Holstein JD , Upadhyay G , Lin DT , Conway S , Muller E , Lechleiter JD (2007) Purinergic receptor-stimulated IP3-mediated Ca2+ release enhances neuroprotection by increasing astrocyte mitochondrial metabolism during aging. J Neurosci 27 :6510–6520. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1256-07.2007 17567812
187. Li H , Wang X , Zhang N , Gottipati MK , Parpura V , Ding S (2014) Imaging of mitochondrial Ca2+ dynamics in astrocytes using cell-specific mitochondria-targeted GCaMP5G/6s: mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake and cytosolic Ca2+ availability via the endoplasmic reticulum store. Cell Calcium 56 :457–466. 10.1016/j.ceca.2014.09.008 25443655
188. Parpura V , Grubisic V , Verkhratsky A (2011) Ca(2+) sources for the exocytotic release of glutamate from astrocytes. Biochim Biophys Acta 1813 :984–991. 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.11.006 21118669
189. Lundgaard I , Osorio MJ , Kress BT , Sanggaard S , Nedergaard M (2014) White matter astrocytes in health and disease. Neuroscience 276 :161–173. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.10.050 24231735
190. Gimeno-Bayon J , Lopez-Lopez A , Rodriguez MJ , Mahy N (2014) Glucose pathways adaptation supports acquisition of activated microglia phenotype. J Neurosci Res 92 :723–731. 10.1002/jnr.23356 24510633
191. Orihuela R , McPherson CA , Harry GJ (2016) Microglial M1/M2 polarization and metabolic states. Br J Pharmacol 173 :649–665. 10.1111/bph.13139 25800044
192. Voloboueva LA , Emery JF , Sun X , Giffard RG (2013) Inflammatory response of microglial BV-2 cells includes a glycolytic shift and is modulated by mitochondrial glucose-regulated protein 75/mortalin. FEBS Lett 587 :756–762. 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.067 23395614
193. Shaikh SB , Nicholson LF (2009) Effects of chronic low dose rotenone treatment on human microglial cells. Mol Neurodegener 4 :55. 10.1186/1750-1326-4-55 20042120
194. Ye J , Jiang Z , Chen X , Liu M , Li J , Liu N (2016) Electron transport chain inhibitors induce microglia activation through enhancing mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production. Exp Cell Res 340 :315–326. 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.10.026 26511505
195. Yuan YH , Sun JD , Wu MM , Hu JF , Peng SY , Chen NH (2013) Rotenone could activate microglia through NFkappaB associated pathway. Neurochem Res 38 :1553–1560. 10.1007/s11064-013-1055-7 23645222
196. Park J , Choi H , Min JS , Park SJ , Kim JH , Park HJ , Kim B , Chae JI , Yim M , Lee DS (2013) Mitochondrial dynamics modulate the expression of pro-inflammatory mediators in microglial cells. J Neurochem 127 :221–232. 10.1111/jnc.12361 23815397
197. Ferger AI , Campanelli L , Reimer V , Muth KN , Merdian I , Ludolph AC , Witting A (2010) Effects of mitochondrial dysfunction on the immunological properties of microglia. J Neuroinflammation 7 :45. 10.1186/1742-2094-7-45 20701773
198. Tang Y , Le W (2016) Differential roles of M1 and M2 microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Mol Neurobiol 53 :1181–1194. 10.1007/s12035-014-9070-5 25598354
199. Saijo K , Glass CK (2011) Microglial cell origin and phenotypes in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol 11 :775–787. 10.1038/nri3086 22025055
200. Facci L , Barbierato M , Marinelli C , Argentini C , Skaper SD , Giusti P (2014) Toll-like receptors 2, −3 and −4 prime microglia but not astrocytes across central nervous system regions for ATP-dependent interleukin-1beta release. Sci Rep 4 :6824. 10.1038/srep06824 25351234
201. Marinelli C , Di Liddo R , Facci L , Bertalot T , Conconi MT , Zusso M , Skaper SD , Giusti P (2015) Ligand engagement of Toll-like receptors regulates their expression in cortical microglia and astrocytes. J Neuroinflammation 12 :244. 10.1186/s12974-015-0458-6 26714634
202. Lopez-Fabuel I , Le Douce J , Logan A , James AM , Bonvento G , Murphy MP , Almeida A , Bolanos JP (2016) Complex I assembly into supercomplexes determines differential mitochondrial ROS production in neurons and astrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 :13063–13068. 10.1073/pnas.1613701113 27799543
203. Hollensworth SB , Shen C , Sim JE , Spitz DR , Wilson GL , LeDoux SP (2000) Glial cell type-specific responses to menadione-induced oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med 28 :1161–1174. 10.1016/s0891-5849(00)00214-8 10889445
204. Schreiner B , Romanelli E , Liberski P , Ingold-Heppner B , Sobottka-Brillout B , Hartwig T , Chandrasekar V , Johannssen H , Zeilhofer HU , Aguzzi A , Heppner F , Kerschensteiner M , Becher B (2015) Astrocyte depletion impairs redox homeostasis and triggers neuronal loss in the adult CNS. Cell Rep 12 :1377–1384. 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.07.051 26299968
205. Vasquez OL , Almeida A , Bolanos JP (2001) Depletion of glutathione up-regulates mitochondrial complex I expression in glial cells. J Neurochem 76 :1593–1596. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2001.00223.x 11238744
206. Fang C , Bourdette D , Banker G (2012) Oxidative stress inhibits axonal transport: implications for neurodegenerative diseases. Mol Neurodegener 7 :29. 10.1186/1750-1326-7-29 22709375
207. Decker H , Lo KY , Unger SM , Ferreira ST , Silverman MA (2010) Amyloid-beta peptide oligomers disrupt axonal transport through an NMDA receptor-dependent mechanism that is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase 3beta in primary cultured hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci 30 :9166–9171. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1074-10.2010 20610750
208. Bilsland LG , Sahai E , Kelly G , Golding M , Greensmith L , Schiavo G (2010) Deficits in axonal transport precede ALS symptoms in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 :20523–20528. 10.1073/pnas.1006869107 21059924
209. Sasaki S , Warita H , Abe K , Iwata M (2005) Impairment of axonal transport in the axon hillock and the initial segment of anterior horn neurons in transgenic mice with a G93A mutant SOD1 gene. Acta Neuropathol 110 :48–56. 10.1007/s00401-005-1021-9 15920660
210. Her LS , Goldstein LS (2008) Enhanced sensitivity of striatal neurons to axonal transport defects induced by mutant huntingtin. J Neurosci 28 :13662–13672. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4144-08.2008 19074039
211. Sileikyte J , Roy S , Porubsky P , Neuenswander B , Wang J , Hedrick M , Pinkerton AB , Salaniwal S , Kung P , Mangravita-Novo A , Smith LH , Bourdette DN , Jackson MR , Aube J , Chung TDY , Schoenen FJ , Forte MA , Bernardi P (2010) Small molecules targeting the mitochondrial permeability transition. In: Probe reports from the NIH molecular libraries program. National Institutes of Health (US), Bethesda
