LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0236217
6077
Neuropharmacology
Neuropharmacology
Neuropharmacology
0028-3908
1873-7064

33561449
8286428
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108489
NIHMS1673840
Article
Aged rhesus monkeys: cognitive performance categorizations and preclinical drug testing.
Plagenhoef Marc R. 1
Callahan Patrick M. 1
Beck Wayne D. 1
Blake David T. 2
Terry Alvin V. Jr. 1
1. Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia, 30912
2. Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia, 30912
Credit Author Statement

Marc R. Plagenhoef: Investigation, Data Collection, Data Analysis; Patrick M. Callahan: Data Analysis, Writing- Reviewing and Editing; Wayne D. Beck: Graphics and Figure construction; David T. Blake: Conceptualization; Alvin V. Terry, Jr. Conceptualization, Supervision, Data analysis, Writing- Reviewing and Editing.

Corresponding Author: Alvin V. Terry Jr., Ph.D., Department of Pharmacology &amp; Toxicology, 1120 15th Street, CB-3545, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia 30912, Phone: 706-721-9462, Fax: 706-721-2347, aterry@augusta.edu
24 2 2021
06 2 2021
01 4 2021
01 4 2022
187 108489108489
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Rodent models have facilitated major discoveries in neurobiology, however, the low success rate of novel medications in clinical trials have led to questions about their translational value in neuropsychiatric drug development research. For age-related disorders of cognition such as Alzheimer’ disease (AD) there is interest in moving beyond transgenic amyloid-β and/or tau-expressing rodent models and focusing more on natural aging and dissociating “healthy” from “pathological” aging to identify new therapeutic targets and treatments. In complex disorders such as AD, it can also be argued that animals with closer neurobiology to humans (e.g., nonhuman primates) should be employed more often particularly in the later phases of drug development. The purpose of the work described here was to evaluate the cognitive capabilities of rhesus monkeys across a wide range of ages in different delayed response tasks, a computerized delayed match to sample (DMTS) task and a manual delayed match to position (DMTP) task. Based on specific performance criteria and comparisons to younger subjects, the older subjects were generally less proficient, however, some performed as well as young subjects, while other aged subjects were markedly impaired. Accordingly, the older subjects could be categorized as aged “cognitively-unimpaired” or aged “cognitively-impaired” with a third group (aged-other) falling in between. Finally, as a proof of principle, we demonstrated using the DMTP task that aged cognitively-impaired monkeys are sensitive to the pro-cognitive effects of a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) partial agonist, encenicline, suggesting that nAChR ligands remain viable as potential treatments for age-related disorders of cognition.

aging
Alzheimer’s disease
memory
cognition
nicotinic
drug discovery

1. Introduction

Rats and mice have been the most frequently used model organisms in biomedical research for well over a century (Ellenbroek and Youn, 2016) and within the field of neuroscience, approximately 35–40% of all basic research is currently conducted using these species (Keifer and Summers, 2016). Many important neurophysiology and neurological disease-related hypotheses have been tested successfully in rodents through the use of brain lesions, genetic manipulations, tract tracing, optogenetics, neuroimaging, etc. However, the long list of clinical trial failures of new treatments for brain disorders has led to questions about the translational value of rodent models in neuroscience drug discovery research and arguments that, overall, they have probably been relied upon too heavily (see Garner, 2014; IOM, 2014, Mullane and Williams, 2019; NASEM, 2017; NASEM, 2019).

When evaluating new drugs for neuropsychiatric disorders, especially conditions where cognitive dysfunction is present, there are neuroanatomical, behavioral and pathophysiological limitations to rodent models that may not have been adequately considered previously. The first consideration is the poorly developed cortical regions of their forebrain, particularly the prefrontal cortex. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is especially well developed in humans and more advanced non-human primates (e.g., apes, macaques), compared to rodents and this brain region is often dysfunctional in neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) where cognitive impairments are debilitating (Potkin et al, 2009; Kumar et al., 2017). The DLPFC has been implicated specifically in the most complex human cognitive processes including working memory, decision taking, and executive function (reviewed, Barbey et al., 2013; Laubach et al., 2018), i.e., domains of cognition that are difficult to adequately model in rodents. For modeling age-related cognitive disorders such AD, the deficiency of association cortex and cortical-cortical connections in rodents is particularly problematic since this is the type of cortex and circuitry most affected by AD pathology. Moreover, rodents do not normally develop significant age-related amyloid or tau pathology in their brains, thus to serve as relevant AD models, they require transgenic manipulations most commonly the introduction of humanized gene mutations to mimic this neuropathology (Mullane and Williams, 2019, Arnsten et al., 2019). In addition to the aforementioned limitations to rodent models, there is a general interest in moving beyond amyloid-β and/or tau and focusing more on natural, biological aging processes in animals (see Hara et al., 2019) and dissociating normal (healthy) aging from pathological aging to identify new therapeutic targets and evaluate novel treatments.

For studying age-related effects on cognition and evaluating potential pro-cognitive agents, nonhuman primates (NHPs) have unique translational value due to their neurobiological and behavioral similarities to humans (see reviews, King et al, 1988; Bontrop, 2001; Sibal and Samson KJ. 2001; Goodman and Check, 2002; Capitanio and Emborg 2008; Nelson and Winslow, 2009; Shively and Clarkson, 2009). Within the multiple species of NHPs, old world macaques (e.g., rhesus monkeys) are the most widely used for translational research (reviewed, Harding, 2017) and their genetic homology (~95%), brain anatomy, and behavioral capabilities resemble humans more than of any other laboratory animal, except higher apes (Jackson et al., 1969; Rumbaugh 1973; Rice 1987; Magness et al., 2005). Macaques also exhibit many age-related changes in their brains that are similar to humans including increases in reactive astrocytes and microglia, decreased neurotransmitters and neurotransmitter receptors, and the loss of neocortical neurons, etc. (Walker et al., 1988; Price and Sisodia, 1994; Summers et al., 1997; Smith et al., 1999; Smith et al., 2004). It has been known for decades that aged rhesus macaques also exhibit amyloid pathology in their brains (Uno et al., 1993), but it was originally believed that they did not express neurofibrillary tangles, the other AD hallmark (Gearing et al., 1994). However, these older studies did not examine monkeys over 30 years old, nor did they evaluate brain areas that are particularly vulnerable in AD such as the entorhinal cortex and DLPFC (reviewed, Arnsten et al., 2019). More recent studies, where rhesus macaques greater than 30 years old were examined, demonstrated the same qualitative pattern and sequence of both tau and amyloid cortical pathology as humans (Paspalas et al., 2018). While the quantity of the neuropathology appears much lower than in humans, the vulnerable brain regions, the entorhinal cortex and DLPFC were affected.

The translational value of macaques in cognitive neuroscience is further bolstered by the fact that they exhibit age-related performance deficits across multiple behavioral tasks that are relevant to the domains of cognition often affected in humans with neuropsychiatric disorders including sustained attention, visuospatial learning, working memory, recognition memory, and cognitive flexibility, etc. (see Bachevalier et al., 1991; Buccafusco and Jackson, 1991; Bartus, 2000; Nagahara et al., 2010; Zeamer et al., 2011). Impairments of cognitive function are not inevitable consequences of aging in humans or animals, however, and while some aged individuals are profoundly impaired, other aged subjects can still perform at the level of young adults (Gallagher and Pelleymounter, 1988; Knuttinen et al., 2001a; 2001b; Rose and Rowe, 2012; Rogalski et al., 2013; Curlik et al., 2014; see also reviews, Gallagher and Rapp, 1997; Freeman et al., 2009). Elucidating the molecular mechanisms that differentiate these old, but “healthy and cognitively intact” individuals from “unhealthy, cognitively impaired” subjects could greatly facilitate the identification of new therapeutic targets and future treatment strategies for several age-related cognitive disorders including AD (see Yu et al., 2016). To date, such behavioral classifications have been used primarily in rodents to facilitate the identification of the specific neurobiological mechanisms of cognitive impairment (Brightwell et al., 2004; Rowe et al., 2007; Majdi et al., 2007). While there are a few reports of widely differing cognitive capabilities in old NHPs (e.g., Bachevalier et al., 1991), the process of behavioral phenotyping NHPs and categorizing individual subjects as aged cognitively intact versus aged cognitively impaired does not appear to have been rigorously pursued previously.

The purpose of the work described here was to evaluate rhesus monkeys across a wide range of ages for cognitive capabilities in delayed response tasks and to categorize the older subjects as either “aged cognitively-unimpaired” or “aged cognitively-impaired”. Finally, we evaluated the α7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) partial agonist/5-HT3 receptor antagonist, encenicline for pro-cognitive effects in subjects that were categorized as aged cognitively-impaired in a delayed match to position (DMTP) task as a proof of principle, that nAChR ligands remain viable as potential therapeutic agents for age-related disorders of cognition.

2. Materials and Methods

All animal procedures employed during this study were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and are consistent with AAALAC guidelines. Measures were taken to minimize pain or discomfort in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 11th edition, National Research Council, 2011. Significant efforts were also made to minimize the total number of animals used while maintaining statistically valid group numbers.

2.1 Subjects

The NHP subjects used in this study were male and female rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) ranging in age from approximately 4-31 years old (see further details below). This designation (“aged”) is based on previous studies in rhesus monkeys where cognitive impairments (and accompanying neuroanatomical changes) began to emerge late in the second decade of life (see Price and Sisodia, 1994 for review). Subjects were individually housed in double stainless steel cages composed of two 127 × 71 × 66 cm units in rooms with up to five other monkeys. The room was maintained at a constant temperature (21–23 °C) and humidity (45–50%). Lighting was maintained on a 12-hr light-dark cycle (7:00 a.m.-7:00 p.m.) with behavioral testing occurring during the light portion (9 a.m.-5 p.m.) of the cycle Monday thru Friday. Animals had access to filtered tap water (unlimited) and monkey chow (Envigo Teklad Laboratory monkey diet, Madison, WI) supplemented with fruits and vegetables. Enrichment (e.g., toys, foraging tubes and television viewing) was also provided except during behavioral testing.

2.2 Computerized Delayed Match to Sample (DMTS) Procedure

Initially, we retrospectively evaluated the training records of 54 subjects (20 males and 34 females, ranging in age from approximately 4-28 years old) in a computerized, working/shortterm memory task, the delayed match to sample task (DMTS). This task has been used at the Animal Behavior Center (ABC) at the Medical College of Georgia/Augusta University for more than 30 years in behavioral pharmacology and drug discovery studies. The subjects were further categorized according to their age as being either young (4-12 years of age), middle-aged (13-19 years of age) or aged (≥ 20 years of age). Records were analyzed from subjects trained using an older apparatus where color choice selections were made by pressing clear push keys with light emitting diodes located behind them and the newer (currently used) apparatus where touch-sensitive computer monitors were utilized to present the color choices. In both cases, the DMTS task was conducted as we have described in detail previously using custom made computer-automated systems with pellet dispenser units (Med Associates) mounted in light-weight aluminum chasses attached to the subject’s home cage (see Callahan et al., 2013). Rewards were 300 mg banana flavored food pellet (Bio-Serv, Flemington, NJ).

2.2.1 Shaping procedures -

At the initiation of behavioral testing, subjects were first trained to retrieve food rewards from the hopper and then trained by shaping procedures to 1) first touch the face of the apparatus (or touch screen in the later version) to receive a reward, 2) select an illuminated sample key, 3) select right and left key illuminated choice keys, etc. The stimuli included rectangles of various colors (e.g., red, blue, yellow). The final phase of shaping was a simultaneous match to sample procedure where all three rectangles were lit, the sample, a non-match color, and a match color. When the subject showed stable sample and choice responding for 3-4 consecutive days it was moved to the DMTS procedure. Due to the behavioral differences among individual subjects (e.g., time to initiate pellet retrievals, begin touching the test panel or computer screen), the initial shaping performance was not considered as part of the training “sessions to criterion” (see below).

2.2.2 DMTS training-

A DMTS trial was initiated by the presentation of a sample composed of one of three colors which remained in view until the monkey touched it thereby initiating a pre-programmed delay (retention) interval (see Fig. 1). After the delay interval, two choice colors were presented with one of the two choice colors matching the sample stimulus. Choosing the correct (previously observed) sample color resulted in a reward (correct choice) whereas selecting the non-sample color (incorrect choice) had no consequences (i.e., neither reinforced nor punished). The inter-trial interval was 3 sec and each session consisted of 96 trials. Presentations of stimulus color, choice colors, and choice positions were counterbalanced over the 96 trials according to a pseudorandom sequence. During training sessions, the duration of each delay interval was adjusted for each subject until performance accuracy was established: zero delay (85-100% of trials answered correctly), short delay (75-84%), medium delay (74-65%) and long delay (64-50%) for 10 consecutive sessions. DMTS training began with presentation of the zero delay in order to establish the concept of “matching to sample” followed by the presentation of the short delay (≥ 1 sec) and then the medium and long delays to accomplish the desired step-wise DMTS accuracy profile.

During the assessment of “sessions to criterion” for the DMTS task (i.e., the number of sessions for each subject to meet the performance criteria described above at each delay for 10 consecutive sessions), we observed that within each age group (young, middle-aged and aged) two distinct types of learners (fast and slow) were observed. Fast learners took less training sessions to acquire the various DMTS delays and thus, met the “sessions to criterion” performance goal sooner than did the subjects that took considerably longer to meet the performance criterion (i.e., slow learners). We therefore, sought to categorize all subjects according to a classification scheme of fast and slow learners; a third group was also identified which fell between the two extremes and was designated as “other” (see below). The behavioral designation of learning status of the young, middle-aged and aged monkeys was determined on the basis of their ability to acquire the DMTS training delays relative to the mean number of sessions to criterion of young animals. Thus, using the calculated mean and standard deviation (σ) of the young animal performance (number of trials to reach criterion), we ranked all animals accordingly; fast learners were defined as those monkeys whose mean DMTS performance differed only by ≤ 0.5σ from that of the overall mean of young, whereas slow learners were defined as those monkeys whose mean DMTS performance was ≥ 2.0σ from that of the overall mean of the young animals. Monkeys whose DMTS performance fell between 0.5 and 2.0 σ of the young average were designated “other”.

2.3 Manual Delayed Match to Position (DMTP) task

For our second assessment towards identifying distinctive cohorts of monkeys based on cognitive performance (aged-unimpaired versus aged-impaired), we prospectively evaluated 24 rhesus monkeys (14 males and 10 females), ranging in age from 8-31 years old in a manual DMTP task. Testing was conducted with a Wisconsin General Test Apparatus (WGTA), using a modification of procedures originally described by Rapp and Amaral, 1989; Eberling et al., 1997 (see Fig. 2). Briefly, two experimental procedures were used to determine DMTP performance. In the first procedure we employed a clear barrier while in the second procedure we used an opaque barrier; each with multiple delay intervals (0-60 sec; see below). For each trial of the first DMTP procedure, the subject observed through a clear Plexiglas screen while the experimenter baited one of three wells of the stimulus tray with a food reward (Nestle® Reese’s Pieces Candy). Care was taken by the experimenter to ensure that the animal attended to the baiting procedure. Only the lateral (left and right) wells of the apparatus were baited and each well had a hinged lid that could be raised by the experimenter or the test subject. The center lid always remained in the up position. After a well was baited, the subject was given 2-3 sec to view the baited well and then both lateral wells were shut so that the subject could not see the reward and the clear screen was raised to allow a choice response (zero duration delay). If the correct location was chosen, the subject was permitted to retrieve and consume the reward prior to proceeding to the next trial. Daily test sessions consisted of 30 trials using a 20 sec inter-trial interval. Across trials within a test session, the left and right wells of the stimulus tray were baited equally according to a pseudorandom sequence. Once an animal reached a criterion of 90% correct (≤ 3 errors/30 trial session) for 3 consecutive sessions, the subject was considered proficient at the zero delay and allowed to move on to multiple delay (5, 15, 30 and 60 sec) testing. During this phase, subjects were presented with a specific delay (5, 15, 30 or 60 sec duration) for 30 trials to determine accuracy (% correct); the inter-trial interval was 20 sec. The delays were presented in a pseudorandom sequence with the zero delay occurring between each other delay session to ensure stable performance. DMTP testing occurred Monday through Friday. Upon completion of the first delay evaluation, subjects were tested for a second time to ensure reliable and reproducible accuracy for that particular stimulus delay. Once all subjects completed the DMTP clear barrier testing, they moved on to the second DMTP opaque barrier protocol. The experimental training conditions with the opaque barrier were identical to that of the clear barrier except that instead of the clear barrier allowing the subject to maintain a constant visual and spatial reference to the baited well (left or right) during the delay interval, the opaque barrier was expected to increase DMTP task difficulty by obscuring the baited well position thereby requiring the subject to use a different cognitive strategy to make a correct choice response. As with the clear barrier task, the subjects were assessed twice at each discrete delay interval (5, 15, 30 and 60 sec) in a pseudorandom manner with the opaque barrier; the zero delay test sessions occurred between longer delay testing days. Following the completion of DMTP opaque barrier testing, subjects were classified according to their cognitive performance established in the clear barrier task (see below). Once classified, the designated aged cognitively-impaired (AI) animals were treated with the α7-nAChR partial agonist/5-HT3 receptor antagonist, encenicline to assess its pro-cognitive potential; the remaining young and aged animals were not assessed. AI animals were initially retested under vehicle conditions using the opaque barrier at the 30 sec delay interval to ensure the previously observed ~50 % accuracy. Encenciline dosing (see under Drug Administration below) and vehicle testing then proceeded in a pseudorandom manner with the opaque barrier zero delay test sessions occurring between drug or vehicle test days where the 30 sec delay was administered.

As in the case of the DMTS task, in the DMTP we also compared the number of sessions that the monkeys initially took in training to reach our required accuracy criterion, in this case, 90% correct (≤ 3 errors/30 trial session) for 3 consecutive sessions at zero delays in both the clear and opaque versions of the task and identified fast and slow learners. However, in the DMTP task, we defined the cognitive status of the aged monkeys (i.e., aged-impaired, unimpaired, or other) on the basis of their mean overall DMTP delay response accuracy (% correct) in the clear barrier task relative to the mean response accuracy of young monkeys. We used the accuracy results with the clear barrier to determine cognitive status of aged animals due to its simplicity in task difficulty (i.e., low cognitive demand). If performance deficits within the aged animals were observed it would clearly suggest cognitive dysfunction. Thus, aged cognitively-impaired (AI) monkeys were defined as those animals whose mean overall delay accuracy in the clear barrier task differed by ≥2.0 standard deviations (σ) from that of young monkeys. Aged monkeys were considered cognitively-unimpaired (AU) if their mean overall delay accuracy was ≤ 0.5 σ from young monkeys and aged monkeys whose mean overall accuracy fell between 0.5 and 2.0 σ of the young animals were designated aged-other (AO). A similar cognitive classification scheme for delineating aged animal behavioral performance to that of young animal performance has been extensively utilized in rodents (Callahan et al., 2013; Gallagher and Pelleymounter, 1988; Rose and Rowe, 2012; Rowe et al., 1998).

2.4 Drug Administration

Encenicline (CoMentis Inc, San Francisco, CA,) was prepared in physiological saline (0.9% NaCl) and administered by intramuscular injection in doses ranging from 0.033-0.3 mg/kg in a volume of 0.07 ml/kg 30 minutes before testing in the manual DMTP opaque barrier task. Saline served as the vehicle control. Each dose of encenicline or vehicle was administered 3 times in a pseudorandom sequence with baseline experimental conditions (zero delay) occurring between each encenicline and vehicle test. The results are presented as the mean (± SEM) of the three observations. The doses of encenicline evaluated in the current study were based on previously published rodent studies where pro-cognitive effects in several learning and memory tasks were observed (Prickaerts et al, 2012). Moreover, the lower dose we analyzed (0.033 mg/kg) correlates well with the 2.0 mg dose that was found to improve memory and executive function composite scores in Phase II clinical trials in AD subjects (see Deardorff et al., 2014). Specifically, 2.0 mg in a 70 kg human = 0.029 mg/kg.

2.5 Data analysis

Behavioral data were analyzed using linear regression for training (sessions to criterion) and a one or two factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) for accuracy (% correct) data with repeated measures when indicated. The Student Newman Keuls or Dunnett’s (for comparisons to vehicle controls only) methods were used for post-hoc tests (SigmaPlot 11.2). All results are expressed as the mean (±S.E.M.). Differences between means were considered significant at the p &lt; 0.05 level.

3. Results

3.1 DMTS Zero Delay Training

The results of the analysis of training records for the computerized zero delay DMTS task in 54 rhesus monkeys (34 females and 20 males), ranging in age from 4-28 years old and designated as either young (4-12 years of age), middle-aged (13-19 years of age) and aged (≥ 20 years of age) are presented in Fig 3. In Fig 3A, regression analysis revealed a significant (p=0.0002) age-related increase in the number of sessions to meet a performance criterion with the zero delay (≥85% of trials answered correctly for 10 consecutive sessions). DMTS zero delay accuracy averaged 87% correct (range: 85-94%) for all subjects after the performance criterion were met. Regression analysis also revealed significant age-related performance differences for the male (p=0.004) and female (p=0.033) subjects when they were separated by gender (Fig. 3B). Within each gender, we also performed additional statistical comparisons between the different age groups. In the female monkeys, sessions to criterion for acquiring the zero delay indicated a non-significant trend (p=0.07) toward differences between the young (54.8 ± 19.7, N=7) and aged subjects (108.5 ± 20.3, N=9). No statistical difference was observed between the young and middle-aged subjects (76.7 ± 13.4, N=18) or the middle-aged and aged subjects. In the male monkeys, sessions to criterion for acquiring the zero delay indicated a statistically significant difference (p=0.01) between the young (40.7 ± 14.3, N=11) and aged subjects (122.4 ± 30.5, N=7). No statistical difference was observed between the young and middle-aged subjects (84.5 ± 18.5, N=2) or between the middle-aged and aged subjects. Statistical analysis (one-factor ANOVA) of the DMTS zero delay sessions to criterion across the different age groups (young, middle-aged and aged, males and females combined) revealed a significant group effect [F(2,51)=6.10, p=0.004] with post-hoc analysis demonstrating significant differences between the aged and young monkeys (i.e., aged monkeys took longer to meet the zero delay criterion; Fig 3C). A non-significant statistical trend (p=0.058) was observed for the comparison of middle-aged to aged animals. The bars in Fig 3D illustrate the mean sessions to criterion ± SEM in the different age groups according to the learning classification (fast, slow and other; see Methods) and the numbers above the bars in parentheses indicate the number of animals that fit each classification. As illustrated, there were fewer fast learners and more slow learners in the aged group when compared to the young and middle-aged animals.

3.2 DMTS Short Delay Training

The results of the analysis of DMTS training sessions for the short delay in 54 rhesus monkeys are presented in Fig 4. Regression analysis revealed a significant (p=0.0006) age-related increase in the number of sessions to meet the short delay performance criterion (≥ 75% of trials answered correctly for 10 consecutive sessions; Fig. 4A). DMTS short delay accuracy across the age groups averaged 77.6 % correct (range: 75-82%) for all subjects after the performance criterion were met. Regression analysis also revealed significant age-related performance differences for the male (p=0.009) and female (p=0.039) subjects (Fig. 4B). Within each gender, we also performed additional statistical comparisons between the different age groups. In the female monkeys, sessions to criterion for acquiring the short delay indicated non-significant differences (p=0.39) between the young (74.2 ± 30.0, N=7), middle-aged (111.3 ± 20.7, N=18) and aged subjects (128.6 ± 18.8, N=9). In the male monkeys, sessions to criterion for acquiring the short delay, similar to the zero delay, demonstrated a significant DMTS learning difference (p=0.01) between the young (58.3 ± 13.1, N=11) and aged subjects (173.7 ± 46.5, N=7). No statistical difference was observed between the young and middle-aged subjects (102.5 ± 18.5, N=2) or between the middle-aged and aged subjects. Statistical analysis of the DMTS short delay sessions to criterion across the different age groups (young, middle-aged and aged, males and females combined) revealed a significant group effect [F(2,51)=4.86, p=0.011] with post-hoc analysis demonstrating significant differences between the aged and young monkeys (Fig 4C). No differences were observed between the middle-aged and young animals or the middle-aged and the aged animals. The bars in Fig 4D illustrates the age groups according to learning classification (fast, slow and other) and the numbers above the bars in parentheses indicate the number of animals that fit each classification. As in the case of the zero delays, there were fewer fast learners and more slow learners in the aged group when compared to the young and middle-aged animals at the short delays.

3.3 DMTS Total Training Sessions

The results of the analysis for acquiring all of the DMTS delays (zero, short, medium and long) in 54 rhesus monkeys are presented in Fig 5. Regression analysis revealed a significant (p=0.005) age-related increase in the total number of sessions to complete all DMTS delays meeting the stable performance criterion of 10 consecutive days at the specified accuracy range (Fig. 5A). Regression analysis revealed a significant age-related performance deficit for the males (p=0.02) but not for the females (p=0.141; data not shown). Statistical analysis of the total sessions to acquire all of the DMTS delays across the different age groups revealed a statistical trend toward group-related differences [F(2,51)=2.87., p=0.066] with post-hoc analysis demonstrating significant differences between the young and aged animals (Fig 5B). The bars in Fig 5C illustrates the age groups according to learning classification (fast, slow and other) and the numbers above the bars in parentheses indicate the number of animals that fit each classification. As in the case of the zero and short delays, there were fewer fast learners and more slow learners in the aged group when compared to the young and middle-aged animals at meeting the performance criterion. Fig 5D illustrates the DMTS accuracy (% correct) at each delay interval (zero, short, medium and long) for each age group (young, middle-aged and aged). At the completion of DMTS training all animals performed equally well (i.e., no group % correct differences at any delay). The overall DMTS accuracy was 74.2 ± 0.46% for the young animals, 73.2 ± 0.451% for the middle-aged animals and 73.3 ± 0.36% for the aged animals (data not shown).

3.4 DMTP Training with the Clear Barrier

The statistical analysis of the manual DMTP training data using the clear barrier in 24 rhesus monkeys (10 females and 14 males) ranging in age from 8-31 years old are shown in Fig 6. In Fig 6A, regression analysis revealed a non-significant trend (p=0.074) towards an overall age-related increase in the number of sessions required to meet the performance criterion of 90% correct (≤ 3 errors/30 trial session) for 3 consecutive sessions under the DMTP zero delay condition. Regression analysis also revealed non-significant trends (p&gt;0.05, data not shown) toward age-related performance deficits when the subjects were separated by gender.

While as noted in the Methods, we made the designations of aged-unimpaired (AU), aged-impaired (AI) and aged-other (AO) based on comparisons of accuracy to the young subjects in the clear barrier task across the delays (i.e., the mean of all of the delays, see Fig 6D below), statistical analysis (one-factor ANOVA) indicated a significant group effect on sessions to criterion (Fig 6B) for the zero delay [F(3,20) = 7.27, p=0.0017]. Post-hoc analysis indicated that animals designated AI took significantly longer to acquire the DMTP clear barrier zero delay than either the young animals or the AU animals. There was also a trend towards a significant difference (p=0.056) between the AO and AI animals.

Following DMTP zero delay training with the clear barrier, animals were evaluated for their performance across a series of delays ranging from zero to 60 sec (Fig. 6C and D). As noted above from the mean across the various delays, subjects were designated as AU, AI, and AO based on their standard deviations from to the mean of the young animals. These classifications were verified when additional analyses (ANOVA) were conducted. For example, a two-factor repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of group [F(3,20)=59.74, p&lt;0.0001], delay [F(4,80)=101.1, p&lt;0.0001] and group by delay interaction [F(12,80)=6.73, p&lt;0.0001] (Fig. 6C). Post-hoc analysis indicated that accuracy of the AI animals was significantly impaired compared to the AU, AO and young animals at the 5, 15, 30 and 60 sec delays. In addition, the accuracy of the AO animals was also significantly reduced compared to the young and AU animals at the 15, 30 and 60 sec delay. The AU animals showed DMTP performance similar to that of the young. Analysis of gender and cognitive status (young, AU, AO and AI) on the clear barrier DMTP task revealed non-significant differences in performance between the males and females (p&gt;0.05; data not shown). As expected from the classification scheme, analysis of the overall accuracy (% correct) for the DMTP clear barrier revealed significant differences across the various groups [ANOVA, F(3,20)=62.72, p&lt;0.0001] (Fig.6D). Post-hoc analysis indicated that the overall mean accuracy of the AI animals was significantly different from the young, AU and AO animals. No differences were observed for the young and AU animals and the AO animals fell between the AU and AI animals.

3.5 DMTP Training with the Opaque Barrier

The statistical analysis of the manual DMTP training data using the opaque barrier in 24 rhesus monkeys are shown in Fig 7. In Fig 7A, regression analysis of the DMTP zero delay training with the opaque barrier revealed a non-significant trend (p&gt;0.05) of age on the number of sessions to meet the performance criterion of 90% correct for 3 consecutive sessions. Regression analysis also revealed non-significant trends (p&gt;0.05, data not shown) toward age-related performance deficits when the subjects were separated by gender. Despite these observations, statistical analysis of sessions to criterion across the cohorts (young, AU, AO and AI) that had been classified using the clear barrier task revealed significant differences in acquisition of the opaque barrier task [F(3,20) = 3.97, p=0.022]. Post-hoc analysis indicated that the AI animals, similar to performance with the clear barrier, took significantly longer to acquire the opaque barrier zero delay than either the young or the AU animals and a trend towards a significant difference (p=0.061) was observed for the comparison of AO to AI animals (Fig. 7B).

Results of the DMTP multiple delay testing (0-60 sec) with the opaque barrier are illustrated in Fig 7C and D. Statistical analysis revealed a significant main effect of group [F(3,20)=7.68, p=0.0013] and delay [F(4,80)=137.29, p&lt;0.0001] without a significant group by delay interaction [F(12,80)=1.48, p=0.146] (Fig. 7C). Post-hoc analysis indicated that performance of AI animals was significantly impaired compared to the AU and young animals at the 5, 15, 30, and 60 sec delays. The stepwise, delay dependent decrement in task performance in all of the animals suggested that the opaque barrier added a degree of difficulty (increased cognitive demand) in the DMTP task. As with the clear barrier task, the AU animals showed DMTP opaque barrier performance similar to that of the young animals. Assessment of the overall % correct for the DMTP opaque barrier also revealed significant differences [F(3,20)=7.41, p=0.0016] and post-hoc analysis indicated that performance in the AI animals was significantly impaired compared to the young, AU and AO animals (Fig. 7D). Finally, there were no gender-related differences in performance of the task (data not shown).

3.6 Evaluation of Encenicline on DMTP Performance

In the final phase of the study, we evaluated the α7-nAChR partial agonist/5-HT3 receptor antagonist, encenicline (0.033-0.3 mg/kg, im) for pro-cognitive effects in five AI subjects (4 males and 1 female) using the opaque barrier DMTP task at the 30 sec delay. The 30 sec delay was chosen due to the near chance (~50%) performance in the AI subjects. Statistical analysis revealed that the higher doses of encenicline significantly improved accuracy compared to vehicle, main effect of treatment, [F(3,12)=4.67, p=0.021], with post hoc analysis indicating significant differences (p&lt;0.05) between the 0.1 and 0.3 mg/kg dose of encenicline and vehicle (Fig. 8).

4. Discussion

The initial purpose of the work described in this report was to evaluate rhesus monkeys across a wide range of ages for cognitive performance in two different delayed response tasks, a computerized delayed match to sample (DMTS) task and a manual delayed match to position (DMTP) task. Based on specific training criterion and comparisons to younger subjects, the older subjects were generally less efficient at learning either task. However, some aged subjects performed as well as young subjects, while other aged subjects were markedly impaired, allowing us to successfully categorize many of the monkeys as aged “cognitively intact or unimpaired” and aged “cognitively impaired”. In both the DMTS and DMTP tasks we defined learning impairment (slow learners in the DMTS task and cognitively impaired in the DMTP task) based on mean performance values that were different from the mean performance of young animals by ≥2 standard deviations. While the operational definitions for cognitive impairment and intellectual disabilities are often controversial and can vary by disciplines in neuropsychology and neurology (see de Vent et al., 2020), threshold values of 1.5-2.0 standard deviations from the appropriate normative mean are commonly considered abnormal, thus we chose to apply the higher (more conservative) value in our animal studies. It has been argued previously that while the performance of certain behavioral tasks declines in old monkeys, there was no clear evidence of severe cognitive impairment comparable to that observed in dementia in humans (Jucker 2010; Heuer et al. 2012; Walker and Jucker, 2017). We would argue that our data collected in two different delayed response tasks where performance of some old animals was up to five standard deviations from the performance levels of young animals is suggestive of severe cognitive dysfunction that is on par with dementia in humans. Delayed response tasks such as the computerized DMTS and the manual WGTA-based DMTP task (conducted in monkeys) have particularly strong translational value since they assess short term/working memory which is required for remembering information that varies unpredictably in time and/or in content (see further discussion details below) and this type of memory is particularly impaired in AD and other dementias (see Rodriguez and Paule, 2009).

In animal studies that are relevant to drug discovery for neuropsychiatric disorders, one potential advantage of classifying individual subjects into cognitive performance categories (e.g., unimpaired, mildly impaired, severely impaired) before the evaluation of a potential pro-cognitive agent relates to the power to detect significant differences in a repeated measures design (e.g., before and after, vehicle versus drug). The lack of stratifying human subjects with neuropsychiatric disorders into categories like this has been cited as a potential limitation in clinical trials where potential pro-cognitive agents have failed. For example, it has been argued that schizophrenia patients whose cognitive performance is comparable to healthy controls (i.e., up to 25% of patients) may not benefit from pro-cognitive agents (Granger et al., 2018; DeTore et al., 2019) and a recent analysis of 87 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trials listed on ClinicalTrials.gov indicated that the vast majority of such clinical trials may have been underpowered due to the inclusion of cognitively “normal” patients (Cotter et al., 2019). A somewhat analogous situation may have occurred where novel AD treatments failed in clinical trials in mixed populations of mild, moderate or severely demented patients. As reviewed in Abdullah et al., 2020, in some cases, the same drugs that failed in mixed AD populations were found to show cognitive benefits in more homogenous groups of subjects with mild AD, suggesting that AD severity can significantly influence the treatment outcome. While our animal studies were not specifically designed to identify animals with mild cognitive impairment, the approach of stratifying animal subjects based on cognitive performance categories may be useful when evaluating potential pro-cognitive agents in preclinical drug studies.

In selecting the delayed response tasks to perform these cognitive performance categorizations in monkeys, we initially selected the DMTS task since it is a working/short term memory test that requires multiple behavioral processes that are important to human cognition and executive function such as attention, sensory perception and stimulus discrimination, encoding, and recall of recent events (see Paule et al., 1998). Variations in the DMTS procedure have been used to assess the effects of aging and neuropsychiatric illnesses such as Alzheimer’s disease, Lewy Body Dementia, Korsakoff’s Disease, unipolar depression, and alcoholism on cognitive function (Oscar-Berman and Bonner, 1985; Irle et al., 1987; Aggleton et al., 1988; Sahgal et al., 1992; Perryman and Fitten, 1993; Elliott et al., 1997). An integral component of the acquisition and efficient performance of the DMTS task is the capacity of the test subject to learn to discriminate “sameness” from “difference” (i.e. abstract concepts that are considered higher-order cognitive functions that are dependent on top-down neocortical processing, see Wright and Katz, 2006). While there have been many debates over the years as to whether nonhuman animals truly possess the capabilities of mastering the abstract concept of sameness (for review, see Penn et al., 2008; Zentall et al., 2008; Wasserman and Young, 2010), there is a long tradition in behavioral neuroscience of attempting to compare the intelligence or general cognitive ability of different species using concept learning with sameness/difference discriminations in matching to sample tasks (Wright and Katz, 2006) To date, however, there have been few attempts to use the initial acquisition of the DMTS task as a means of differentiating the cognitive capabilities of individual animals of the same species and to evaluate potential effects of age, gender, gender x age interactions, etc., on cognitive status. In all of our prior studies, which were primarily focused on evaluating the pro-cognitive effects of novel (or potentially repurposed) drugs, monkeys were initially trained in the DMTS task, then delays were assigned on an individual basis to meet specific performance (accuracy) criteria due to their widely varying capabilities and, specifically, to avoid ceiling effects of drugs in the most proficient animals. This “normalization of task performance” approach also insured that each animal began testing at relatively the same level of task difficulty. In contrast, in the current study were we specifically interested in the varying capabilities of individual monkeys to initially learn the DMTS task.

The clear age-related differences in acquisition of the DMTS task at zero delays in our study are suggestive of deficits in either discrimination or encoding, or both, since in our version of DMTS, the sample is terminated immediately prior to the presentation of the comparison stimuli and not visible simultaneously with the choices (see Paule et al., 1998). In the next phase of the training data analysis, there was also a clear age-related deficit in the acquisition of DMTS at very short delays. Here, where a short, albeit significant, delay is interposed between the termination of the sample and the presentation of the comparison stimuli, discrimination, encoding, and retention are all required for an accurate choice. The fact that even the slow-learners of the DMTS task could eventually perform zero delays with an accuracy of 85-100% correct supports the argument that impairments in DMTS acquisition are not simply based on age-related deficits in sensory perception (e.g., visual deficits), and suggest that mastering the sameness concept and encoding of the stimulus features may be the elements of DMTS acquisition that are most impaired by age in monkeys. There were three final observations in our DMTS studies that were notable. The first observation was that, while more aged subjects fit the designation of “slow learners” and fewer fit the designation as “fast learners” when compared to young and middle aged subjects at the zero, short and combined delays (as expected), there were young (1) and middle-aged (2) individuals that also fit the “slow learner” category. The second observation was that while regression analyses revealed clear age-related increases in the number of sessions to achieve the performance criterion at the zero and short delays in both male and female monkeys, when the individual age groups were compared within gender, the differences were more pronounced in the male subjects. This observation was also evident in the subsequent analysis of the trials to reach criterion for acquiring all of the DMTS delays where statistically significant age-related impairments were observed in the males, but not the females. The basis of these gender-related differences is unclear and (in our opinion) should be viewed with caution given the number of male and female test subjects within each age group that were analyzed. The third observation in the DMTS studies was that when we ran additional regression analyses to determine if animals that required extensive training initially (slow learners) could also handle only very short delays later when they were assigned individually to fit the required accuracy range at short, medium and long delay lengths, the results were not significant. Specifically, regression analysis (data not shown) of average delay length assigned x training sessions to criterion and long delay length assigned x training sessions to criterion revealed no significant correlations (r = 0.18, p= 0.18 and r = 0.17, p= 0.22, respectively). Thus, collectively, the long training times required in DMTS, the appearance of slow learners in the young animals, and the lack of a significant correlation between slower learner status and the subsequent delay length capacity led us to seek an additional mechanism for defining aged- cognitively-impaired subjects, hence the subsequent DMTP studies. Moreover, the observation that many of the slowest learners in the DMTS task could eventually perform quite well at longer delays (thus not exhibiting robust impairments in recall), led us to use the designation “slow learners” as opposed to “cognitively impaired” in the DMTS studies.

Like the DMTS, the DMTP task is a working/short term memory test that employs human (clinically relevant) behavioral processes such as attention, sensory perception, encoding, and recall of recent events (see Paule et al., 1998). In contrast to the computerized, non-spatial DMTS procedure, the DMTP task we used was a manual, spatial working memory task that does not require the abstract conceptualization of sameness. The subjects were generally easier to train on this task over a relatively short period of time (compared to DMTS) allowing us to more easily categorize subjects based on their individual cognitive capabilities. An interesting and surprising observation when conducting this task was that some of the aged test subjects required a considerably larger number of test sessions to meet the established training criterion at zero delays with the clear barrier and were thus categorized as aged cognitively-impaired. Moreover, once these same subjects achieved the required criterion at zero delays, their performance rapidly declined when relatively short (e.g., 5 sec) delays were imposed using the clear barrier. Since these subjects could clearly view the location of the correct (baited) well during the delays, and were now capable of making accurate selections at zero delays, the results with short delays are suggestive of deficits in sustained attention, vigilance, and/or the inability to encode the spatial information correctly. Observations by the behavioral technicians indicated that the subjects did not turn or look away from the testing panel or demonstrate any other overt signs of distraction during the testing sessions. An alternative explanation for this vulnerability at short delays is a deficit in the capacity of the visuospatial sketchpad (see Baddeley, 1992; Repovs and Baddeley, 2006), a term used for the processing, temporary storage, and rehearsal of visual or spatial information (e.g. shapes, colors and, importantly, location) that supports working memory and the planning and execution of body movements. It has been argued previously that differences in the capacity of the visuospatial sketchpad could underlie the difficulties in NHPs to solve spatial working memory tasks when compared to humans (see Washburn and Gulledge, 2002). Here, it is unclear, however, if the sketchpad would be required in the monkeys when a clear barrier was employed. Interestingly, and potentially relevant to our age-related findings in NHPs (and the discussion above), is the argument that decreases in processing speed in older subjects can affect multiple components of visual working memory including the speed of encoding and/or the rate of rehearsal, as well as executive resources specifically associated with processing visuospatial material (Brown et al., 2012).

In contrast to the subjects labeled as “aged cognitively-impaired”, there was no statistically significant decline in performance by delay in the clear barrier version of the DMTP task in the young test subjects or those labeled as aged cognitively-unimpaired. As expected, the animals labeled as “aged cognitively-impaired” in the clear barrier version of the DMTP task also showed a delay-dependent decrement in performance with increasing delay in the opaque barrier version of the task which presumably added an element of increased task difficulty and cognitive demand. In this case, the other test groups (young, AU, and AO) also showed a delay-dependent decrement in performance with increasing delay. Since these subjects were not significantly impaired with increasing delays in the clear barrier version, the results suggest that the retention (i.e., recall) component of the working/short term memory task was impaired as the delays were increased as opposed to deficits in sustained attention, vigilance, the visuospatial sketchpad or the inability to encode the location of the correct reward location correctly.

The final portion of this study was conducted to evaluate a cholinergic compound for potential pro-cognitive effects in aged monkeys that we had designated as cognitively-impaired using the DMTP task. From a translational perspective, it has been argued previously that the cholinergic system plays a key role in the encoding component of working memory and that this is the main characteristic of the memory deficit shown by patients with Alzheimer’s disease (White and Ruske, 2002). Among the various cholinergic strategies, interest in nicotinic-acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) ligands as potential therapeutic agents for cognitive disorders began more than 30 years ago when it was first demonstrated that the tobacco alkaloid nicotine could improve cognitive function in nicotine-deprived smokers as well as nonsmokers. In drug discovery programs focused on neuropsychiatric disorders, the α7-nAChR subtype has been targeted more than the other nAChR subtypes, potentially due to its regional expression levels in relevant brain region (e.g., hippocampus, prefrontal cortex), and its role in a wide variety of CNS functions that are important for memory function (e.g., neurotransmitter release, postsynaptic signaling, neuronal plasticity and survival, reviewed, Terry and Callahan, 2020). Encenicline is a potent α7-nAChR partial agonist that readily enters the brain from peripheral administration. The drug is also an antagonist at serotonin 5-HT3, and 5-HT2B receptors (i.e., rat gastric fundus assay, IC50 of 16 μM), but it has very limited activity at other receptors (Prickaerts et al., 2012). A variety of preclinical and early clinical studies support the pro-cognitive effects of encenicline. For example, in rodents, encenicline was shown to improve visual recognition memory, attention, and vigilance, and to reduce impulsivity (Prickaerts et al., 2012; Hayward et al., 2017). In both Phase 1 and 2 clinical studies in subjects with schizophrenia or AD, cognitive enhancement was associated with encenicline (Preskorn et al., 2014; Keefe et al, 2015; Deardorff et al., 2015). However, in larger Phase 3 studies, efficacy was not observed in schizophrenia patients and in AD patients, the studies were discontinued early, presumably due to gastrointestinal side effects (Anonymous, 2016; Lewis et al., 2017). In our studies, encenicline was associated with robust improvements in the manual opaque barrier DMTP task at relatively long (30 sec) delays in subjects previously designated as “aged cognitively-impaired” and the improvements were reproducible as exemplified by the fact that each dose of the compound was repeated 3 times. Enhancement of performance of the DMTP task at long delays likely involved multiple working memory processes since discrimination, encoding, and retention would all be required for an accurate choice after a delay with an opaque barrier. Furthermore, we did not observe any side effects in these animals, a notable observation given that the subjects administered encenicline averaged over 25 years old. Here it is important to note that we did not evaluate encenicline in monkeys designated as “aged-other” or “aged-unimpaired”. This will be an important subject to address in future studies to determine if compounds like encenicline offer the greatest benefit to the most impaired subjects or whether a pro-cognitive effect is maintained regardless of cognitive status.

In conclusion, using two types of delayed response tasks, a computerized DMTS task and a manual DMTP task, we were able to successfully categorize old monkeys as aged “cognitively-intact” and aged “cognitively-impaired”, although the DMTP task appeared to be more suitable for this process of categorization. As a proof of principle, we demonstrated that aged cognitively-impaired monkeys are sensitive to the pro-cognitive effects of a nAChR partial agonist, encenicline, without side effects, suggesting that nAChR ligands remain viable as potential treatments for age-related disorders of cognition.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Ms. Ashley Davis for her administrative assistance in preparing this manuscript. The author’s laboratories and/or salaries are supported in part by the following funding sources, National Institutes of Health grants, MH097695, MH083317, and NS099455, and Prime Behavior Testing Laboratories, Evans, Georgia.

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of a monkey performing the various steps of a computer-automated delayed match to sample (DMTS) trial. A DMTS trial was initiated by the presentation of a sample composed of one of three colors in a rectangle in the upper center portion of a touch panel. The sample remained in view until the monkey touched it. The response darkened the sample box, and all boxes remained darkened during the delay interval. Following the delay interval, the two bottom choice boxes, but not the upper sample box, were then illuminated by two different colors. One of the choice boxes was illuminated by the same (matching) color that had previously illuminated the sample, while the other choice box was illuminated by one of the other (nonmatching) colors. Matching choice responses were rewarded. Monkeys were tested in their home cage and there were 96 trials per session. Arrows indicate the temporal progression of a trial and associated changes in illumination of lights behind sample and choice push-keys.

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of a monkey performing a manual delayed match to position (DMTP) trial. In a DMTP trial, the subject observed through either a clear or opaque (shown) Plexiglas barrier while the experimenter baited one of three wells of the stimulus tray with a food reward. Only the lateral (left or right) wells of the apparatus were baited and each well had a hinged lid that could be raised by the experimenter or the test subject. The center lid always remained in the up position. After a lateral well was baited, both wells were shut so that the subject could not see the reward and a delay was imposed by lowering the barrier between the baited well and the subject for each trial. After the delay, the barrier was raised to allow the subject to make a response. If the correct location was chosen, the subject was permitted to retrieve and consume the reward before initiation of the next trial.

Fig. 3. Training data in the delayed match to sample (DMTS) task at the zero delay interval in 54 rhesus monkeys. In Fig 3A, regression analysis revealed a significant aged-related increase in the number of sessions to meet a performance criterion with the zero delay (≥ 85% of trials answered correctly for 10 consecutive sessions). In Fig 3B, regression analysis also revealed significant age-related performance differences for the male and female subjects when separated by gender. In Fig 3C, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTS zero delay training sessions to meet criterion for each age group (young (4-12 years of age), middle-aged (13-19 years of age) and aged (≥ 20 years of age). In Fig 3D, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTS zero delay training sessions to meet criterion for each age group designated as either fast (≤ 0.5σ), slow (≥ 2.0σ) or other (≥ 0.5σ but ≤ 2.0σ) type learners based upon the mean (± σ) number of zero delay sessions to meet criterion performance of the young animals. The numbers in parentheses above each bar indicate how many animals fit the particular category of fast, slow or other learner * p&lt;0.05 significant differences compared to the young subjects.

Fig. 4. Training data in the delayed match to sample (DMTS) task at the short delay interval in 54 rhesus monkeys. In Fig 4A, regression analysis revealed a significant aged-related increase in the number of sessions to meet a performance criterion with the short delay (≥ 75% of trials answered correctly for 10 consecutive sessions). In Fig 4B, regression analysis also revealed significant age-related performance differences for the male and female subjects when separated by gender. In Fig 4C, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTS short delay training sessions to meet criterion for each age group (young (4-12 years of age), middle-aged (13-19 years of age) and aged (≥ 20 years of age). In Fig 3D, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTS short delay training sessions to meet criterion for each age group designated as either fast (≤ 0.5σ), slow (≥ 2.0σ) or other (≥ 0.5σ but ≤ 2.0σ) type learners based upon the mean (± σ) number of short delay sessions to meet criterion performance of the young animals. The numbers in parentheses above each bar indicate how many animals fit the particular category of fast, slow or other learner * p&lt;0.05 significant differences compared to the young subjects.

Fig. 5. Training data in the delayed match to sample (DMTS) task for the total number of sessions to acquire stable performance in the delayed match to sample (DMTS) task in 54 rhesus monkeys across all four delays. In Fig 5A, regression analysis revealed an aged-related increase in the total number of sessions to complete all DMTS delays (zero, short, medium and long) and stably meet the predetermined performance criterion for 10 consecutive days (see Methods). In Fig 5B, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTS training sessions to establish stable responding for each age group. In Fig 5C, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTS training sessions to establish stable responding across all three delays according to learning status designated as fast (≤ 0.5σ), slow (≥ 2.0σ) or other (≥ 0.5σ but ≤ 2.0σ) type learners based upon the mean (± σ) number of sessions to meet criterion performance of the young animals. The numbers in parentheses above each bar indicate how many animals fit the particular category of fast, slow or other learner. In Fig 5D, the histogram illustrates the DMTS accuracy (% correct) at each delay interval (zero, short, medium and long) for each age group. * p&lt;0.05 significant difference compared to the young subjects.

Fig. 6. Training data in the clear barrier version of the delayed match to position (DMTP) task in 24 rhesus monkeys. In Fig 6A, regression analysis revealed a non-significant trend (p=0.074) toward an overall age-related increase in the number of sessions to meet a performance criterion of 90% correct (≤ 3 errors/30 trial session) for 3 consecutive sessions. In Fig 6B, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTP zero delay training sessions to meet criterion for each designated cohort (age-unimpaired (AU, ≤ 0.5σ), aged-other (AO, ≥ 0.5σ but ≤ 2.0σ) and age-impaired (AI, ≥ 2.0σ)) based upon accuracy of the young animals. In Fig 6C, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) accuracy (% correct) at each DMTP delay for the cohorts and Fig 6D, illustrates the overall mean (± S.E.M.) DMTP accuracy for the cohorts. AI animals showed significant deficits in DMTP performance compared to either the young, AU or AO subjects; young and AU performed similarly. * p&lt;0.05, # p&lt;0.05 and + p&lt;0.05 indicate significant differences between AI performance compared to young, AU and AO subjects, respectively.

Fig. 7. Training data in the opaque barrier version of the delayed match to position (DMTP) task in 24 rhesus monkeys. In Fig 7A, regression analysis reveal non-significant age-related (p&gt;0.05) differences in the number of sessions to meet a performance criterion of 90% correct (≤ 3 errors/30 trial session) for 3 consecutive sessions. In Fig 7B, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) number of DMTP zero delay training sessions to meet criterion for each designated cohort (age-unimpaired (AU, ≤ 0.5σ), aged-other (AO, ≥ 0.5σ but ≤ 2.0σ) and age-impaired (AI, ≥ 2.0σ) based upon accuracy of the young animals. In Fig 7C, the histogram illustrates the mean (± S.E.M.) accuracy at each DMTP delay for the cohorts and Fig 7D illustrates the overall mean (± S.E.M.) DMTP accuracy for the cohorts. AI animals showed significant deficits in DMTP performance compared to the young and AU subjects; young and AU performed similarly. * p&lt;0.05, # p&lt;0.05 and + p&lt;0.05 indicates significant differences in AI performance compared to young, AU and AO subjects, respectively.

Fig. 8. Effects of the potent the α7-nAChR partial agonist encenicline on the performance of a delayed match to position (DMTP) task in aged-cognitively impaired (AI) rhesus monkeys using an opaque barrier at the 30 sec delay. The chemical structure of encenicline is illustrated above the histogram. Bars represent the mean (± S.E.M.) accuracy at each treatment (0.0-0.3 mg/kg) with filled circles representing individual monkeys. * p&lt;0.05, significant improvements in accuracy compared to vehicle-control related performance.

Highlights

There is a need for more translational studies in neuroscience drug discovery.

Here, working memory was evaluated in rhesus monkeys with two behavioral tasks.

Monkeys were categorized as aged, cognitively impaired and unimpaired.

The nicotinic agonist encenicline improved memory in cognitively impaired monkeys.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of interest: The authors do not declare any conflict of interest.


References

Abdullah L , Crawford F , Tsolaki M , Börjesson-Hanson A , Olde Rikkert M , Pasquier F , Wallin A , Kennelly S , Ait-Ghezala G , Paris D , Hendrix S , Blennow K , Lawlor B , Mullan M . The Influence of Baseline Alzheimer’s Disease Severity on Cognitive Decline and CSF Biomarkers in the NILVAD Trial. Front Neurol. 2020;11 :149. doi:10.3389/fneur.2020.00149 32210906
Anonymous, Encenicline Alzforum 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from http://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/encenicline.
Arnsten AFT , Datta D , Leslie S , Yang ST , Wang M , Nairn AC . Alzheimer’s-like pathology in aging rhesus macaques: Unique opportunity to study the etiology and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019;116 (52 ):26230–26238. doi:10.1073/pnas.1903671116
Bachevalier J , Landis LS , Walker LC , Brickson M , Mishkin M , Price DL , Cork LC . Aged monkeys exhibit behavioral deficits indicative of widespread cerebral dysfunction. Neurobiol Aging. 1991;12 (2 ):99–111. doi:10.1016/0197-4580(91)90048-o 2052134
Barbey AK , Koenigs M , Grafman J . Dorsolateral prefrontal contributions to human working memory. Cortex. 2013 5;49 (5 ):1195–205. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.05.022 . 22789779
Bartus RT . On neurodegenerative diseases, models, and treatment strategies: lessons learned and lessons forgotten a generation following the cholinergic hypothesis. Exp Neurol. 2000;163 (2 ):495–529. doi:10.1006/exnr.2000.7397 10833325
Berger F , Gage FH , Vijayaraghavan S . Nicotinic receptor-induced apoptotic cell death of hippocampal progenitor cells. J Neurosci. 1998 9 1;18 (17 ):6871–81.9712657
Bitner RS , Bunnelle WH , Anderson DJ , Briggs CA , Buccafusco J , Curzon P , Decker MW , Frost JM , Gronlien JH , Gubbins E , Li J , Malysz J , Markosyan S , Marsh K , Meyer MD , Nikkel AL , Radek RJ , Robb HM , Timmermann D , Sullivan JP , Gopalakrishnan M . Broad-spectrum efficacy across cognitive domains by alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonism correlates with activation of ERK1/2 and CREB phosphorylation pathways. J Neurosci. 2007 9 26;27 (39 ):10578–87. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2444-07.2007 . 17898229
Bitner RS , Bunnelle WH , Decker MW , Drescher KU , Kohlhaas KL , Markosyan S , Marsh KC , Nikkel AL , Browman K , Radek R , Anderson DJ , Buccafusco J , Gopalakrishnan M . In vivo pharmacological characterization of a novel selective alpha7 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist ABT-107: preclinical considerations in Alzheimer’s disease. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 9 1;334 (3 ):875–86. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.167213 . 20504913
Bontrop RE . Non-human primates: essential partners in biomedical research. Immunol Rev. 2001;183 :5–9. doi:10.1034/j.1600-065x.2001.1830101.x 11782243
Brightwell JJ , Gallagher M , Colombo PJ . Hippocampal CREB1 but not CREB2 is decreased in aged rats with spatial memory impairments. Neurobiol Learn Mem 2004;81 (1 ):19–26. doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2003.08.001 14670355
Buccafusco JJ , Jackson WJ . Beneficial effects of nicotine administered prior to a delayed matching-to-sample task in young and aged monkeys. Neurobiol Aging. 1991;12 (3 ):233–238. doi:10.1016/0197-4580(91)90102-p 1876228
Callahan PM , Hutchings EJ , Kille NJ , Chapman JM , Terry AV Jr . Positive allosteric modulator of α7 nicotinic-acetylcholine receptors, PNU-120596 augments the effects of donepezil on learning and memory in aged rodents and non-human primates. Neuropharmacology. 2013;67 :201–212. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.10.019 23168113
Capitanio JP , Emborg ME . Contributions of non-human primates to neuroscience research. Lancet. 2008;371 (9618 ):1126–1135. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60489-4 18374844
Cotter J , Barnett JH , Granger K . The Use of Cognitive Screening in Pharmacotherapy Trials for Cognitive Impairment Associated With Schizophrenia. Front Psychiatry 2019;10 :648. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00648 31551837
Curlik DM , Weiss C , Nicholson DA , Disterhoft JF . Age-related impairments on one hippocampal-dependent task predict impairments on a subsequent hippocampal-dependent task. Behav Neurosci. 2014;128 (6 ):676–688. doi:10.1037/bne0000018 25420127
Deardorff WJ , Shobassy A , Grossberg GT . Safety and clinical effects of EVP-6124 in subjects with Alzheimer’s disease currently or previously receiving an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor medication. Expert Rev Neurother. 2015;15 (1 ):7–17. doi:10.1586/14737175.2015.995639 25495510
DeTore NR , Mueser KT , Byrd JA , McGurk SR . Cognitive functioning as a predictor of response to comprehensive cognitive remediation. J Psychiatr Res. 2019;113 :117–124. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.03.012 30933830
Eberling JL , Roberts JA , Rapp PR , Tuszynski MH , Jagust WJ . Cerebral glucose metabolism and memory in aged rhesus macaques. Neurobiol Aging. 1997;18 (4 ):437–443. doi:10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00040-7 9330976
Ellenbroek B , Youn J . Rodent models in neuroscience research: is it a rat race? Dis Model Mech 2016 10 1;9 (10 ):1079–1087. doi: 10.1242/dmm.026120 . 27736744
Freeman WM , VanGuilder HD , Bennett C , Sonntag WE . Cognitive performance and age-related changes in the hippocampal proteome. Neuroscience. 2009;159 (1 ):183–195. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.12.004 19135133
Gallagher M , Pelleymounter MA . An age-related spatial learning deficit: choline uptake distinguishes “impaired” and “unimpaired” rats. Neurobiol Aging. 1988;9 (4 ):363–369. doi:10.1016/s0197-4580(88)80082-4 3185855
Gallagher M , Rapp PR . The use of animal models to study the effects of aging on cognition. Annu Rev Psychol. 1997;48 :339–370. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.48.1.339 9046563
Garner JP . The significance of meaning: why do over 90% of behavioral neuroscience results fail to translate to humans, and what can we do to fix it? ILAR J. 2014;55 (3 ):438–56. doi: 10.1093/ilar/ilu047 . 25541546
Gearing M , Rebeck GW , Hyman BT , Tigges J , Mirra SS . Neuropathology and apolipoprotein E profile of aged chimpanzees: implications for Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994;91 (20 ):9382–9386. doi:10.1073/pnas.91.20.9382 7937774
Goodman S , Check E . The great primate debate. Nature. 2002;417 (6890 ):684–687. doi:10.1038/417684a 12066153
Gotti C , Moretti M , Gaimarri A , Zanardi A , Clementi F , Zoli M . Heterogeneity and complexity of native brain nicotinic receptors. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007 10 15;74 (8 ):1102–11.17597586
Granger G , Cotter J , Baker E , Evenden J , Barnett J , Sand M . Exploring participant-level trajectories of cognitive performance among patients with schizophrenia in a multi-national trial. Schizophr Bull (2018) 44 :S353. 10.1093/schbul/sby018.861
Gray R , Rajan AS , Radcliffe KA , Yakehiro M , Dani JA . Hippocampal synaptic transmission enhanced by low concentrations of nicotine. Nature. 1996 10 24;383 (6602 ):713–6.8878480
Hara Y , McKeehan N , Fillit HM . Translating the biology of aging into novel therapeutics for Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 2019;92 (2 ):84–93. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000006745 30530798
Harding JD . Nonhuman Primates and Translational Research: Progress, Opportunities, and Challenges. ILAR J. 2017;58 (2 ):141–150. doi:10.1093/ilar/ilx033 29253273
Hayward A , Adamson L , Neill JC . Partial agonism at the α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor improves attention, impulsive action and vigilance in low attentive rats. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017;27 (4 ):325–335. doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2017.01.013 28161246
Hefft S , Hulo S , Bertrand D , Muller D . Synaptic transmission at nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in rat hippocampal organotypic cultures and slices. J Physiol. 1999 3 15;515 (Pt 3 ):769–76. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.769ab.x 10066903
Heuer E , Rosen RF , Cintron A , Walker LC . Nonhuman primate models of Alzheimer-like cerebral proteopathy. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18 (8 ):1159–1169. doi:10.2174/138161212799315885 22288403
IOM. 2014. Improving and accelerating therapeutic development for nervous system disorders: Workshop summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Jackson WJ , Reite ML , Buxton DF . The chimpanzee central nervous system: a comparative review, in Primates in Medicine, vol. 4. Chimpanzee: Central Nervous System and Behavior; A Review (Reynolds HH , ed.), Karger, New York, pp. 1–51; 1969.
Jucker M The benefits and limitations of animal models for translational research in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Med. 2010;16 (11 ):1210–1214. doi:10.1038/nm.2224 21052075
Keefe RS , Meltzer HA , Dgetluck N , Gawryl M , Koenig G , Moebius HJ , Lombardo I , Hilt DC . Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of encenicline, an alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist, as a treatment for cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015;40 (13 ):3053–3060. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.176 . 26089183
Keifer J , Summers CH . Putting the “Biology” Back into “Neurobiology”: The Strength of Diversity in Animal Model Systems for Neuroscience Research. Front Syst Neurosci. 2016 8 22;10 :69. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00069 . 27597819
King FA , Yarbrough CJ , Anderson DC , Gordon TP , Gould KG . Primates. Science. 1988;240 (4858 ):1475–1482. doi:10.1126/science.3287624 3287624
Knuttinen MG , Gamelli AE , Weiss C , Power JM , Disterhoft JF . Age-related effects on eyeblink conditioning in the F344 x BN F1 hybrid rat. Neurobiol Aging. 2001;22 (1 ):1–8. doi:10.1016/s0197-4580(00)00194-9 11164270
Knuttinen MG , Power JM , Preston AR , Disterhoft JF . Awareness in classical differential eyeblink conditioning in young and aging humans. Behav Neurosci. 2001;115 (4 ):747–757. doi:10.1037//0735-7044.115.4.747 11508714
Kumar S , Zomorrodi R , Ghazala Z , Goodman MS , Blumberger DM , Cheam A , Fischer C , Daskalakis ZJ , Mulsant BH , Pollock BG , Rajji TK . Extent of Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Plasticity and Its Association With Working Memory in Patients With Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017 12 1;74 (12 ):1266–1274. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.3292 . 29071355
Laubach M , Amarante LM , Swanson K , White SR . What, If Anything, Is Rodent Prefrontal Cortex?. eNeuro. 2018;5 (5 ):ENEURO.0315-18.2018. doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0315-18.2018
Lewis AS , van Schalkwyk GI , Bloch MH . Alpha-7 nicotinic agonists for cognitive deficits in neuropsychiatric disorders: a translational metaanalysis of rodent and human studies. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2017;75 :45–53.28065843
Magness CL , Fellin PC , Thomas MJ , Korth MJ , Agy MB , Proll SC , Fitzgibbon M , Scherer CA , Miner DG , Katze MG , Iadonato SP . Analysis of the Macaca mulatta transcriptome and the sequence divergence between Macaca and human. Genome Biol. 2005;6 (7 ):R60. doi: 10.1186/gb-2005-6-7-r60 . 15998449
Majdi M , Ribeiro-da-Silva A , Cuello AC . Cognitive impairment and transmitter-specific pre-and postsynaptic changes in the rat cerebral cortex during ageing. Eur J Neurosci. 2007;26 (12 ):3583–3596. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05966.x 18088281
McGehee DS , Heath MJ , Gelber S , Devay P , Role LW . Nicotine enhancement of fast excitatory synaptic transmission in CNS by presynaptic receptors. Science. 1995 9 22;269 (5231 ):1692–6.7569895
Mullane K , Williams M . Preclinical Models of Alzheimer’s Disease: Relevance and Translational Validity. Curr Protoc Pharmacol 2019 3;84 (1 ):e57. doi: 10.1002/cpph.57 . 30802363
Nagahara AH , Bernot T , Tuszynski MH . Age-related cognitive deficits in rhesus monkeys mirror human deficits on an automated test battery. Neurobiol Aging. 2010;31 (6 ):1020–1031. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.07.007 18760505
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine). 2017. Therapeutic development in the absence of predictive animal models of nervous system disorders: Proceedings of a workshop. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine). 2019. Transgenic neuroscience research: Exploring the scientific opportunities afforded by new nonhuman primate models: Proceedings of a workshop. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/25362 .
Nelson EE , Winslow JT . Non-human primates: model animals for developmental psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;34 (1 ):90–105. doi:10.1038/npp.2008.150 18800061
Paspalas CD , Carlyle BC , Leslie S , Preuss TM , Crimins JL , Huttner AJ , van Dyck CH , Rosene DL , Nairn AC , Arnsten AFT . The aged rhesus macaque manifests Braak stage III/IV Alzheimer’s-like pathology. Alzheimers Dement. 2018 5;14 (5 ):680–691. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.11.005 . 29241829
Potkin SG , Turner JA , Brown GG , McCarthy G , Greve DN , Glover GH , Manoach DS , Belger A , Diaz M , Wible CG , Ford JM , Mathalon DH , Gollub R , Lauriello J , O’Leary D , van Erp TG , Toga AW , Preda A , Lim KO . Working memory and DLPFC inefficiency in schizophrenia: the FBIRN study. FBIRN. Schizophr Bull. 2009 1;35 (1 ):19–31. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn162 . 19042912
Preskorn SH , Gawryl M , Dgetluck N , Palfreyman M , Bauer LO , Hilt DC . Normalizing effects of EVP-6124, an α-7 nicotinic partial agonist, on event-related potentials and cognition: a proof of concept, randomized trial in patients with schizophrenia. J Psychiatr Pract. 2014;20 (1 ):12–24. doi:10.1097/01.pra.0000442935.15833.c5 24419307
Price DL , Sisodia SS . Cellular and molecular biology of Alzheimer’s disease and animal models. Annu Rev Med. 1994;45 :435–446. doi:10.1146/annurev.med.45.1.435 8198393
Prickaerts J , van Goethem NP , Chesworth R , Shapiro G , Boess FG , Methfessel C , Reneerkens OA , Flood DG , Hilt D , Gawryl M , Bertrand S , Bertrand D , König G . EVP-6124, a novel and selective alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial agonist, improves memory performance by potentiating the acetylcholine response of alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, Neuropharmacology. 2012;62 (2 ) :1099–1110. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.10.024 . 22085888
Rapp PR , Amaral DG . Evidence for task-dependent memory dysfunction in the aged monkey. J Neurosci. 1989;9 (10 ):3568–3576. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.09-10-03568.1989 2795141
Rice DC . Primate research: Relevance to human learning and development. Dev Pharmacol Ther. 1987;10 (5 ):314–327. doi:10.1159/000457762 3308377
Rodriguez JS , Paule MG . Working Memory Delayed Response Tasks in Monkeys. In: Buccafusco JJ , ed. Methods of Behavior Analysis in Neuroscience. 2nd ed. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor &amp; Francis; 2009.
Rogalski EJ , Gefen T , Shi J , Samimi M , Bigio E , Weintraub S , Geula C , Mesulam MM . Youthful memory capacity in old brains: anatomic and genetic clues from the Northwestern SuperAging Project. J Cogn Neurosci. 2013;25 (1 ):29–36. doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00300 23198888
Rose GM , Rowe WB . Water maze testing to identify compounds for cognitive enhancement. Curr Protoc Pharmacol. 2012;Chapter 5:. doi:10.1002/0471141755.ph0563s59
Rumbaugh DM . Learning skills of anthropoids in: Primate Behavior: Developments in Field and Laboratory Research (Rosenblum LA , ed.), Academic Press, New York, NY, pp. 1–70; 1973.
Shively CA , Clarkson TB . The unique value of primate models in translational research. Nonhuman primate models of women’s health: introduction and overview. Am J Primatol. 2009;71 (9 ):715–721. doi:10.1002/ajp.20720 19507247
Sibal LR , Samson KJ . Nonhuman primates: a critical role in current disease research. ILAR J. 2001;42 (2 ):74–84. doi:10.1093/ilar.42.2.74 11406709
Smith DE , Roberts J , Gage FH , Tuszynski MH . Age-associated neuronal atrophy occurs in the primate brain and is reversible by growth factor gene therapys [published correction appears in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 Dec 7;96(25):14668]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96 (19 ):10893–10898. doi:10.1073/pnas.96.19.10893 10485922
Smith DE , Rapp PR , McKay HM , Roberts JA , Tuszynski MH . Memory impairment in aged primates is associated with focal death of cortical neurons and atrophy of subcortical neurons. J Neurosci. 2004;24 (18 ):4373–4381. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4289-03.2004 15128851
Summers JB , Prendergast MA , Hill WD , Buccafusco JJ . Localization of ubiquitin in the plaques of five aged primates by dual-label fluorescent immunhistochemistry. Alzheimer’s Res. 1997; 3 , 11e21.
Terry AV Jr , Callahan PM . α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors as therapeutic targets in schizophrenia: Update on animal and clinical studies and strategies for the future. Neuropharmacology. 2020;170 :108053. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2020.108053 32188568
Uno H , Walker LC . The age of biosenescence and the incidence of cerebral beta-amyloidosis in aged captive rhesus monkeys. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1993;695 :232–235. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1993.tb23058.x 8239288
Walker LC , Kitt CA , Cork LC , Struble RG , Dellovade TL , Price DL . Multiple transmitter systems contribute neurites to individual senile plaques. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1988;47 (2 ):138–144. doi:10.1097/00005072-198803000-00006 2828554
Walker LC , Jucker M . The Exceptional Vulnerability of Humans to Alzheimer’s Disease. Trends Mol Med. 2017;23 (6 ):534–545. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2017.04.001 28483344
Zeamer A , Decamp E , Clark K , Schneider JS . Attention, executive functioning and memory in normal aged rhesus monkeys. Behav Brain Res. 2011;219 (1 ):23–30. doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2010.12.021 21168445
