LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

34647685
8940606
10.1002/alz.12474
NIHMS1734469
Article
Brain energy failure in dementia syndromes: opportunities and challenges for glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
Yassine Hussein N. 12*
Solomon Victoria 1
Thakral Angad 1
Sheikh-Bahaei Nasim 3
Chui Helena C. 2
Braskie Meredith N. 4
Schneider Lon. S. 25
Talbot Konrad 6
(1) Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine USC;
(2) Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine USC;
(3) Department of Radiology, Keck School of Medicine USC;
(4) Imaging Genetics Center, Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute, Keck School of Medicine, USC;
(5) Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Keck School of Medicine USC;
(6) Departments of Neurosurgery, Pathology and Human Anatomy, and Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University School of Medicine.
* Hussein N. Yassine, 2250 Alcazar st, rm 210, Los Angeles, CA 90033, University of Southern California: hyassine@usc.edu
22 8 2021
3 2022
14 10 2021
01 3 2023
18 3 478497
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Medications for type 2 diabetes (T2DM) offer a promising path for discovery and development of effective interventions for dementia syndromes. A common feature of dementia syndromes is an energy failure due to reduced energy supply to neurons and is associated with synaptic loss and results in cognitive decline and behavioral changes. Among diabetes medications, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists promote protective effects on vascular, microglial and neuronal functions. In this review, we present evidence from animal models, imaging studies, and clinical trials that support developing GLP-1 receptor agonists for dementia syndromes. The review examines how changes in brain energy metabolism differ in conditions of insulin resistance and T2DM from dementia, and underscores the challenges that arise from the heterogeneity of dementia syndromes. The development of GLP-1 receptor agonists as dementia therapies requires a deeper understanding of the regional changes in brain energy homeostasis guided by novel imaging biomarkers.

Alzheimer’s disease
Type 2 Diabetes
Insulin Resistance
Glucagon-like peptide-1

pmcIntroduction

A common feature of dementia syndromes is an energy failure in neurons1 that associates with synaptic loss2 and results in cognitive and behavioral changes. There are several explanations for energy failure in dementia syndromes. These include breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB)3, changes to blood flow4, reduced glucose transporter protein expression5, or altered signaling pathways that regulate neuronal glucose utilization6. Low energy levels lead to failure in the production of high energy phosphate compounds such as ATP that further cascade into downstream failure of several energy-dependent processes, ultimately leading to synaptic loss.

Medications for type 2 diabetes (T2DM) have favorable effects on brain energy metabolism and offer a viable path for the discovery and development of interventions for dementia syndromes. Indeed, large database studies reveal an association between several classes of anti-diabetes medications and lower risk of dementia7,8. Among T2DM medications, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists (RAs) have neuroprotective properties tied to restoring brain energy metabolism9,10, with direct effects on vascular11, microglial12 and synaptic functions13. Therefore, examining whether GLP-1 agonists can enhance synaptic functions and alleviate the clinical burden of dementia associated with neuronal glucose hypometabolism presents an attractive strategy. With onging efforts to repurpose GLP-1 RA into cognition clinical trials, a deeper understanding is needed of the pathophysiological changes that define brain energy utilization in T2DM, insulin resistance (IR) and dementia.

One of the fundamental mechanisms underlying and preceding T2DM and its complications is the development of systemic IR. Insulin promotes glucose uptake in several peripheral tissues including the liver, where glucose is taken up and stored as glycogen14. In contrast, insulin does not promote brain glucose uptake15,16. IR can be considered from an evolutionary perspective a protective mechanism during starvation to maintain a constant supply of glucose to the brain14, while limiting glucose uptake and utilization by muscle, adipocyte and liver cells17. IR becomes maladaptive in conditions of nutrition abundance and obesity, driving the development of T2DM and its complications. Unlike dementia syndromes that feature brain glucose hypometabolism, glucose transport at the BBB is not reduced in patients with T2DM/IR18. Indeed, some studies reveal an association between systemic hyperglycemia and insulinemia in T2DM/IR with brain glucose hypermetabolism by FDG-PET19 and increased functional connectivity by resting-state fMRI20. Moreover, brain IR defined by reduced insulin signaling in brain cells, can develop without any evidence of systemic IR6.

Notwithstanding, T2DM increases the risk of dementia syndromes including Alzheimer’s disease dementia (ADd) and vascular dementia (VaD)21–23, and systemic IR is commonly found in both conditions24,25. Importantly, vascular brain complications in T2DM associate with regional brain glucose hypometabolism that share some similarities with the dementia brain26. Examining these regional differences in brain glucose hypometabolism can help differentiate the pathology of the dysexecutive VaD clinical presentation from the amnestic ADd27. Such information can guide the development of clinical trials aimed at rescuing the brain energy failure with disease-specific biomarkers and outcomes. Since the brain in T2DM/IR and VaD has inconsistent associations with the core neuropathological features of pure ADd, namely beta amyloid (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)28,29, utilizing these classic AD biomarkers to guide brain energy rescue therapies may prove futile.

In this review, we present evidence from animal models, imaging, and clinical studies to illustrate how changes in brain glucose uptake in T2DM/IR differ from the dementia brain and examine the key mechanisms that regulate brain glucose uptake and utilization, highlighting differences in regional brain pathology changes and cognitive functions that differ between these conditions. We then review preclinical and clinical studies in support of the application of GLP-RAs in neurodegenerative diseases such as ADd and Parkinson’s disease. As GLP-1 RAs are poised to move quickly into larger cognition clinical trials, the evidence reviewed here supports targeting individuals at risk for or with neurodegenerative disease while reconsidering the selection of conventional AD dementia (such as Aβ) biomarkers in favor of imaging biomarkers and clinical outcomes that reflect regional changes in energy metabolism.

Brain energy failure underlie neuronal dysfunction

Glucose is the preferred brain energy substrate30, although during metabolic stress e.g., fasting, exercise, or severe disease, ketone bodies replace glucose as fuel31. Brain glucose metabolism declines during aging and this decline is accelerated in persons with genetic risk of dementia, such as in APOE4 carriers32, or in women who are post menopausal33. Indeed, glucose hypometabolism is a common feature of several dementia syndromes, and the pattern of glucose hypometabolism can help distinguish the type of dementia34,35. Breakdown of the BBB3, atherosclerosis causing alteration in cerebral blood flow4, or reduced glucose transporter expression5 can all result in a reduction in neuronal glucose supply. Brain energy failure resulting from limited glucose supply or utilization is believed to be one of the main crucial precursor events that underlie neuronal dysfunction1 and associate with synaptic loss, dendrite pruning, loss of network connectivity or apoptosis2. Importantly, low energy levels lead to failure in the production of high energy phosphate compounds such as ATP leading to a cascade of further downstream failure of energy-dependent processes. One example is calcium ion signaling36 leading to a deterioration in Ca2+ depolarizations. A key claim of the Ca2+ hypothesis37 is that repetitive ischemic molecular events on an extended time scale could account for the sequence of cellular stress mechanisms (such as ER stress, mitochondrial Ca2+ overload, activation of lipases, and generation of reactive oxygen species38) that underlie a number of neurodegenerative disorders including ADd37.

Brain glucose hypometabolism also forces a shift toward utilization of ketones as sources of energy39. When generation of energy from systemic ketones is compromised, the brain resorts to its own myelin to generate ATP by activating lipid digesting enzymes such as phospholipase A240. This process promotes the production of lysophospholipids that induce potent inflammatory responses41, and arachidonic acid derivatives that generate oxidative stress42. To rescue this brain energy gap, several interventions have been recently exploited using hormones, ketone meals, mitochondria-focused therapeutics, and diabetes medications43. Among diabetes medications, GLP-1 RAs are particularly attractive given their capacity to restore the neurovascular unit10. However, a better understanding of how the diabetes brain differs from the dementia brain in energy consumption and requirement can help guide their development into cognition applications.

Brain insulin and glucose metabolism changes in T2DM/IR vs ADd/VaD

Systemic IR leads to distinct effects on brain glucose metabolism that differ from neurodegenerative diseases. Systemic IR is generally defined as the reduced response to insulin in skeletal muscle, liver, and adipocytes (compared with subjects with normal glucose tolerance). This classic definition of systemic IR was based on insulin-mediated glucose uptake such as lower peripheral glucose consumption (skeletal muscle IR), greater endogenous glucose release (hepatic IR) and impaired suppression of lipolysis in the presence of high insulin levels in adipose tissues44. As our understanding of insulin signaling advanced, it became increasingly clear that insulin has many functions beyond glucose uptake, such as on lipids and protein metabolism, ion and aminoacid transport, cell cycle and proliferation, cell differentiation and nitric oxide synthesis45. As a result, systemic IR is now defined more broadly as reduced sensitivity to the diverse cell actions of insulin46. IR might be considered a protective mechanism during starvation to maintain a constant supply of glucose to the brain14, while limiting glucose uptake in peripheral insulin sensitive cells17.

Brain IR, in comparison, is not defined on the basis of brain glucose uptake. In the brain, insulin does not appear to directly trigger neuronal6,47–50 or astrocytic51,52 glucose uptake. A broader definition of brain IR is the reduced insulin signaling on brain cellular activity which would include glucose-independent effects of insulin such as neuronal activity. As such, brain IR can be directly measured by testing the responsiveness of insulin signaling molecules to physiological levels of insulin, preferably responsiveness of the insulin receptor and/or IRS-1 since these are selectively activated by insulin, unlike more downstream signaling molecules such as Akt6. Insulin receptors are widely expressed in the brain with prominence in olfactory, limbic areas, and the cerebellum53. Brain insulin receptors have also been localized in capillary fractions constituting the BBB. One brain IR definition is centered on the inability of a physiological increase of plasma insulin levels to suppress hepatic glucose production via the mediobasal hypothalamus54. As in peripheral tissues, neuronal insulin action involves the intracellular IRS-PI3K signal transduction pathway. Hypothalamic IRS-PI3K signaling is increased following either intracerebroventricular (icv) or systemic insulin administration55, and the inhibitory effect of icv insulin on both food intake55 and hepatic glucose production can be blocked by icv pretreatment with a PI3K inhibitor56. In rats with untreated insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus induced by the β cell toxin streptozotocin, hypothalamic PI3K signaling is reduced and plays an essential role in the glycemic response to insulin57. These findings suggest that changing systemic insulin levels per se may not have a profound impact on brain glucose utilization and may help us elucidate the limited potential of using brain glucose uptake as surrogate for brain insulin resistance in cognitive diseases.

Brain glucose uptake is not regulated by physiological insulin levels during normoglycemia. In healthy volunteers, hyperinsulinemia within the normal physiological range does not affect BBB glucose transport or net cerebral glucose metabolism15,16. Glucose brain uptake is regulated by complex mechanisms. The predominant brain glucose transporters, GLUT1 and GLUT3 are not regulated by insulin (Table 1). GLUT1 and GLUT3, can be found both in the periphery, in various brain cells, and in the endothelial cells of the BBB. Both GLUT1 and GLUT3 are regulated by cAMP, a second messenger involved in various signaling and metabolic pathways. GLUT2, known largely for having a fairly low affinity for glucose, but playing a role in glucose sensing and glucose metabolism, is also found in the brain and periphery and is not dependent on insulin for activation. GLUT4, the predominant glucose transporter in peripheral cells is insulin-dependent but is also regulated by leptin and exercise. Table 1 summarizes the localization and regulators of GLUTs 1–4. Glucose uptake from the blood occurs mainly as a result of the high-affinity glucose transporter GLUT1 on capillary epithelial cells and astrocytic end feet at the BBB58. During experimental diabetes, GLUT1 expression is decreased in the BBB and in many, though not all, brain areas59,60. This adaptive decrease in GLUT1 expression may provide one explanation for the blunted brain hyperglycemia in those who are obese61 and/or type 1 diabetes62, perhaps a protective mechanism against chronic brain hyperglycemia. Similarly, in the presence of mild hypoglycemia, the brain extracts an increased fraction of glucose from the blood by enhancing GLUT-1 expression63. The role of the insulin-dependent GLUT4 in brain glucose metabolism is less clear, but memory training increases hippocampal GLUT4 translocation and memory acquisition is impaired by GLUT4 blockade in male rats64.

The brains of ADd and VaD patients differ from those with T2DM/IR in that they exhibit reduced concentrations of endothelial GLUT1 and neuronal GLUT3 in the neocortex, hippocampal formation, and caudate nucleus5,18,65. The GLUT1 reductions in brains of ADd cases are restricted to endothelial cells of capillaries66, which is probably a major factor in the reduced uptake of glucose at the BBB in such cases67. The GLUT3 reductions in brains of ADd cases are expected to decrease glucose uptake by neurons, especially by their dendrites. The brains of T2DM cases have been less frequently studied for glucose transporters than AD cases, but it has been found that GLUT3 levels in T2DM, as in ADd, are reduced in frontal neocortex18. Otherwise, glucose transporter levels in the neocortex of T2DM and ADd cases differ with GLUT1 levels being normal in T2DM, GLUT2 being elevated only in ADd, and GLUT3 levels being lower in T2DM than in ADd18. The levels of insulin-sensitive GLUT4 in the brains of ADd cases are comparable to control brains (i.e., frontal neocortex)68. GLUT4 levels in the brains of T2DM cases have not been reported, but systemic IR after a high fat diet is associated with reduced insulin PI3K signaling in hippocampal neurons and memory impairment, potentially via a GLUT4-dependent mechanism69. The largely intact GLUT1 transporters at the BBB in T2DM/IR may indicate that brain glucose uptake is not reduced in these patients. Indeed, this observation is further corroborated by imaging studies discussed below.

It might be expected that the brain in ADd would be hypoglycemic given the reduced blood-brain glucose transport in such cases10,67, probably due to reduced expression of GLUT1 at the BBB in ADd70. Yet CSF glucose levels are normal in ADd cases71 and postmortem studies on such cases report hyperglycemia in brain areas of ADd cases even in the absence of T2DM, specifically in the middle frontal gyrus72, inferior temporal gyrus72, and posterior cingulate/precuneus gyri73. In the inferior temporal gyrus, hyperglycemia is significantly correlated with AD pathology72. Other postmortem studies on ADd cases without T2DM using an ex vivo insulin stimulation method have shown IR in all tested brain areas, namely the prefrontal cortex, hippocampal formation, and cerebellum6. These findings support that brain hyperglycemia and brain IR develop independently of T2DM or systemic IR. Notwithstanding, systemic hyperglycemia and IR could promote or accelerate AD pathogenesis. This is supported by two lines of evidence. The first is that systemic hyperglycemia accelerates conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia74,75. The second line of evidence is that systemic IR in animal models of T2DM often induces brain IR and brain pathology with similarities to AD76–78. More recently, it was demonstrated that metabolic stress induced by high fat consumption, but not changes induced by IR, contributed to worsening brain Aβ pathology in these models79. Importantly, it is still unclear whether therapeutic approaches taken to combat hyperglycemia and systemic IR per se but without directly affecting brain fuel utilization pathways can be effective in treating or preventing dementia.

Brain glucose uptake by FDG-PET in T2DM/IR vs. ADd/VaD

(18F) Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) is the most direct imaging modality for measuring brain glucose uptake in live humans. FDG behaves very similarly to glucose if not identically. It moves from the circulation into brain via GLUT180. It undergoes phosphorylation as the first step of intracellular glycolysis as glucose does, but the similarity stops there. Normal glucose can further degrade to produce ATP. In contrast, FDG remains in the neurons as FDG-6-phosphate (FDG-6-P)81,82. Therefore, hypometabolism identified by FDG-PET in neurodegenerative diseases could be a sign of either poor transport of glucose from extracellular space into the cells or impaired glucose phosphorylation.

FDG-PET has already been put to a great deal of use in the observation of brain glucose hypometabolism as a diagnostic biomarker in clinical AD. The pattern of hypometabolism in AD is similar to atrophy involving temporo-parietal regions and posterior cingulate gyrus. Originally it was claimed that the hypometabolism in AD was a result of cell death and volume loss; however, later data confirmed that changes in FDG-PET precede volume loss and structural changes seen on MRI83. Moreover, in patients with prodromal AD, glucose hypometabolism has commonly been observed in default mode network (DMN) areas such as parietotemporal association cortices, posterior cingulate cortex, and the precuneus84,85. Since neurotransmission and synaptic activity are responsible for at least 80% of metabolic demands in the brain86, it is believed that glucose metabolism correlates strongly with local neuronal activity in the DMN within individuals. FDG-PET signal is also associated with synaptophysin, a marker of synaptic density87. Other data also showed that changes in FDG-PET uptake is associated with glutamate activity and level of excitatory glutamate neurotransmitter83. Therefore, lower glucose uptake in AD may represent lower synaptic activity and density in vulnerable AD regions. As the disease progresses, the affected regions spread to involve the frontal cortices, whereas the metabolism in the striatum, thalamus, primary sensorimotor cortices, visual cortices, and cerebellum are relatively preserved84,88. There is strong evidence that lower glucose uptake and intracellular metabolism disrupts synaptic function, as discussed before35,89,90. It is yet to be determined whether restoring brain energy homeostasis can rescue synaptic functions and we hypothesize that GLP1 RAs present an exciting opportunity to do so.

ADd glucose uptake pattern on FDG-PET differs from that in VaD. Kerrouche et al. 34used a voxel-based multivariate analysis of FDG-PET performed on 153 subjects to separate patients with VaD or ADd from age-matched control subjects. Lower metabolism in the deep gray nuclei, cerebellum, primary cortexes, middle temporal gyrus, and anterior cingulate cortex differentiated VaD from AD, whereas lower metabolism in the hippocampal region, orbitofrontal, posterior cingulate, and posterior parietal cortexes was characteristic of AD, and separated patients with AD from VaD. Hypometabolic patterns common to VaD and AD were shown to be the posterior parietal, precuneus, posterior cingulate, pre-frontal, and anterior hippocampal regions34.

FDG-PET findings in IR and T2DM studies have similarities to and differences from FDG-PET findings in ADd. Young obese individuals have higher global brain glucose uptake and higher plasma insulin levels, while older prediabetic and obese individuals at risk of AD may develop the opposite findings. It is likely that, differences in brain glucose uptake between these conditions are influenced by age, sex, genetics, cognitive state, co-morbid conditions, and importantly GLUT1 activity at the BBB that may decrease with aging and compromised BBB integrity91. In contrast to ADd, there is some evidence that systemic IR increases brain glucose uptake. For example, in one study, 13 patients with impaired glucose tolerance and nine healthy subjects underwent an FDG-PET during a hyperinsulinemic clamp, a measure of IR via insulin and glucose infusion. The hyperinsulinemic clamp only increased brain glucose metabolism in patients with impaired glucose tolerance but not in healthy subjects92. During normal glucose tolerance, insulin has no effect on brain glucose uptake, with the insulin and its receptor interaction at saturation kinetics. However, with systemic IR, increasing insulin levels may increase brain glucose uptake when the response to insulin has not reached maximum saturation. These findings are corroborated by a decrease in brain glucose uptake in 22 morbidly obese patients six months after bariatric surgery induced weight loss that was associated with improved peripheral insulin sensitivity19.

Older prediabetic and obese individuals at risk of AD have evidence of lower brain glucose uptake in AD affected areas, but it is not likely that IR per se is driving the lower brain glucose uptake. In a group of 150 older individuals from the Wisconsin ADRC registry, higher HOMA-IR (a surrogate of IR) was associated with lower glucose uptake in several AD-affected areas93. Another study of 749 participants showed that diabetes and poor glycemic control in non-diabetic individuals was associated with greater glucose hypometabolism in AD-related areas even after adjustment for age, sex, education, APOE4 genotype, glycemic level, and cognitive status26. Similarly, a small study (n=23) correlated greater IR by HOMA-IR with an AD-like pattern of reduced CMRglu in frontal, parietotemporal, and cingulate regions in adults with prediabetes and no cognitive impairment94. This association of lower brain glucose metabolism with IR can possibly be explained through confounding factors such as vascular disease, inflammation, dyslipidemia or oxidative stress that affect BBB or neuronal glucose transport.

Functional connectivity in T2DM/IR vs. ADd/VaD

The application of functional MRI (fMRI) to assess brain connectivity reflects the neurovascular signaling response to synaptic activity95 and has an indirect relationship with glucose uptake. Directly, fMRI measures changes in blood oxygenation levels that are associated with blood flow change. Specifically, synaptic activity results in vasodilation that promotes increased blood flow: an effect mediated by the signaling of neurotransmitters (especially glutamate) after binding to the post-synaptic cells. The glutamate released by the presynaptic cell is also transported into astrocytes, a process that helps to focus neurotransmitter transmission temporally and prevent glutamatergic excitotoxicity. In addition to contributing to the neurovascular response, glutamate also helps to couple neuronal activity with glucose utilization by stimulating the ability of astrocytes to use glucose and produce lactate (glycolysis)96. Functional connectivity, or the extent to which signal over time correlates between multiple brain regions, is further influenced by the integrity of the structural connections between those regions97,98. Within subject, the fMRI regional synchronicity of activity over time in adjacent voxels (regional homogeneity – indicating greater synchronization of local field potentials) mirrors FDG-PET signal, although resting state fMRI (rs-fMRI) signal may only correlate well with FDG-PET signal across subjects in a smaller number of voxels99.

fMRI studies of patients with pre-AD, AD, or T2DM and VaD have found some overlap in trends of connectivity across the conditions, but results were inconsistent. The effect of T2DM on connectivity changes over time and do not reflect a linear pattern. Macro and microvascular disease are common in long standing T2DM and might affect the fMRI response by impairing vascular reactivity or by inducing white matter hyperintensities. In one study, those with early stage T2DM (less than 10 years past diagnosis) had a greater DMN functional connectivity than controls. This effect was reversed in those with later stage (10+ years past diagnosis) T2DM20. Similar to early onset T2DM, those with obesity and pre-diabetes may have an increase in brain connectivity compared to healthy controls100, although findings regarding the direction of those differences are inconsistent. The increase in functional connectivity seen sometimes in obesity/early T2DM agree with the brain glucose hypermetabolism observed in FDG-PET studies. For example, compared with women who have normal weight, obese women showed an increase in task-based fMRI signal during a working memory task and in resting state fMRI connectivity. This decreased after weight loss induced by gastric bypass101, and these findings were similar to those observed by FDG-PET19.

In a prior study of functional connectivity, significant changes in the negative connectivity of T2DM patients were observed in brain areas affected in AD, between the DMN and right superior parietal gyrus, as well as significant changes in the right middle temporal gyrus and the left precentral gyrus20. Positive connectivity followed a similar overall trend to negative connectivity, with early stage T2DM showing significantly larger increases in connectivity to the DMN seed than those with late stage T2DM, although the functional connectivity was not significantly different from normal controls in either group20. The bilateral superior frontal gyrus and right caudate exhibited significant differences in positive connectivity with the DMN, similar to trends in FDG-PET scans of AD and T2DM patients20. Both negative and positive DMN connectivity were correlated with diabetes duration (r = 0.32, p &lt; 0.01 and r = −0.26, p = 0.02)20. In patients with amnestic MCI compared to healthy older adults, the lower synchronicity of signal that was observed was specific to a subset of resting state networks whereas other networks remained unaffected102. The regions affected included left posterior cingulate cortex and right medial prefrontal cortex of the default mode network as well as bilateral superior parietal lobes and bilateral inferior frontal gyri of the executive attention network. This reflects altered connectivity between the medial temporal lobe and neocortical areas and functional dysconnectivity of the executive attention network102. VaD in contrast to AD, appears to affect lower functional connectivity in the medial frontal and superior frontal gyri, part of the central executive network (CEN)103, more than the DMN itself.

Cognitive changes in T2DM/IR vs. ADd/VaD

In contrast to prodromal AD and ADd that are generally characterized by an amnestic cognitive pattern, patients with T2DM appear to be mostly vulnerable to subtle changes in executive function; with these changes in executive functioning become more pronounced in VaD. Executive function can be characterized as a top-down family of mental processes used in working memory and problem-solving. As T2DM advances, there is evidence of brain atrophy, inflammation, and changes to the brain vasculature104,105. Early on, the domains of cognitive function most affected in T2DM include processing speed, memory, and executive function, but these domains may also be impaired in individuals with prodromal AD and ADd105.

Over 100 research studies investigating the relationship between T2DM and executive function have been carried out, with a handful of meta-analyses synthesizing their findings. In Vincent and Hall’s meta-analysis of 59 studies, a significant mild-to-moderate association between T2DM and decreased executive function (d = −0.248, p &lt; .001) was reported, including verbal fluency, mental flexibility, response inhibition, working memory, and attention105. Controlling for the duration of a patient’s T2DM significantly diminished the effect of T2DM status on executive function105. Sadanand et al. further reported in a meta-analysis of 15 studies that T2DM patients had worse scores on executive function than controls, most notably in phonemic fluency (d = −0.35), cognitive flexibility (d = −0.52), and speed of processing (d = −0.22). T2DM patients also had worse episodic memory (d = −0.51) and combined logical memory scores (d = −0.24)106. The importance of executive function in T2DM is further demonstrated after weight loss in women with obesity and T2DM. An active weight loss program started before and immediately after menopause in the Look AHEAD clinical trial was associated with improvement in measures of executive functions but not in memory domains107. Although patients with T2DM had lower cognitive functions at baseline in an analysis of the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center’s Uniform Data, the rate of cognitive decline in patients with T2DM did not differ from those without T2DM108. A summary of the differences between T2DM/IR, ADd and VaD is presented in Table 2.

Even within ADd, there is heterogeneity in clinical dementia syndromes. A recent tau PET brain imaging study revealed 4 subgroups of ADd that present with regional differences of tau spread and subsequent distinct cognitive domain impairments109. There is an opportunity for future studies to select cognitive outcomes based on regional hypometabolism identified by imaging in patients at risk for both AD and VaD. Utilizing imaging biomarkers would not only help classify dementia subtypes with information on regional brain energy hypometabolism but also help select the corresponding cognitive outcomes affected.

GLP-1RAs and relevance to ADd/VaD vs the diabetes brain

GLP-1 is the most potent of the incretin hormones originally known for their ability to potentiate glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by the pancreas, but now known to play many other roles in various organs, including the brain. As discussed above, the primary interest in GLP-1 RAs results from their ability to influence brain energy metabolism. GLP-1 exerts its physiological effects by binding classic GLP-1 receptors (GLP-1Rs) and novel GLP-1Rs yet to be identified110. The classic GLP-1R is of primary interest here since it mediates GLP-1 effects on glucose uptake and insulin sensitivity110. They include the 31–44 amino acid GLP-1 analogues or mimetics approved by the FDA for T2DM, i.e., exendin-4 (Byetta), liraglutide (Victoza), lixisenatide (Adlyxin, Lyxumia), dulaglutide (Trulicity), and semaglutide (Ozempic) . The acylation of GLP-1 RAs that avoids renal clearance and the ability to resist DPP-4 degradation protracted their half-life to extended periods of time111. Though they differ in their ability to enter the brain after systemic administration, GLP-1RAs can do so by infiltration of circumventricular organs112 and subsequent export into cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by tanycytes113 and/or by crossing the BBB114. Consequently, peripherally administered GLP-1RAs could activate GLP-1 receptors known to be expressed by subsets of neurons in the brainstem, basal forebrain, and the cerebral cortex, including the hippocampal formation115–121. Cultured astrocytes and microglia also express GLP-1 receptors122. Although liraglutide has been effective in animal models, there is no evidence that this particular GLP-1 RA is able to effectively pass through the blood-CSF barrier, suggesting it may not readily enter the brain123.

Figure 1 delineates possible mechanisms of action for GLP-1RAs in the brain that include effects on endothelial glucose transport, neuronal energy metabolism pathways, and glial activity to support the neurovascular unit and thereby promoting synaptic activity. GLP-1RAs functions in the brain are not fully known but probably share similar pathways as in the periphery, stimulating cAMP production and activating the EPAC, PKA, PI3K/Akt, and β-arrestin/ERK pathways to induce expression and translocation of GLUT-1 and GLUT3124 . GLP-1RA appear to work in the endothelial cells of the BBB to induce glucose uptake125,126. The bioenergetics of synaptic transmission is dependent in part on glutamine-glutamate shuttling into the neurons from astrocytes, powered by the ATP made from the mitochondria after astrocytic glucose uptake96,127. ATP produced from enhanced glucose uptake allows the interconversion between glutamine and glutamate to induce uptake by the neuron127,128. ATP produced through glycolysis and from metabolic processes in the mitochondria works to acidify vesicles via V-ATPase function so glutamate may enter the synaptic vesicles129. Glutamate entry into the synaptic vesicle is powered by the ATP produced following increased glucose uptake by GLUT-1, GLUT-3, and GLUT-496. Formation of synaptic vesicles containing glutamate works to continually activate GLUT-4 glucose uptake functioning as a positive feedback loop130–132. Glutamate is then exocytosed from the presynapse129. Once in the synaptic cleft, glutamate can bind NMDAR on the postsynaptic neuronal membrane and subsequently activate Ca2+ signaling and produce nitric oxide that can diffuse into blood and produce cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)95,133. cGMP in the blood can trigger vasodilation, inducing an influx of oxygen and glucose into vessels95. Glucose can then be re-taken up by GLUT-1 on the endothelium of the BBB134. Excess glutamate release into the synaptic cleft is taken up again by the astrocyte via a coupled Na+/K+ channel, where it can be converted into glutamine and transported back into the neuron96,127,128. During limited glucose supply, lower ATP production can compromise several energy-dependent processes, such as Ca2+ signaling, leading to Ca2+ overload, cellular stress and ultimately synaptic loss that is associated with activation of astroyctes and microglia.

GLP-1RA for Brain Energy Failure and Cognitive Decline

Analogous to glucose transport in peripheral tissues, cellular studies suggest that glucose utilization9,135 and uptake across the BBB10 is facilitated by GLP-1RAs but there is paucity of preclinical and clinical data to suggest this mechanism. In contrast, there is stronger evidence that GLP-1RAs reverse several features of brain IR that are independent of glucose uptake per se. It is well known that the major insulin signaling pathways mediated by IRS/PI3K/Akt and by Shc/Grb2/ERK are shared by insulin-receptive tissue throughout the body. As in peripheral tissues, IR in neurons is associated with serine phosphorylation of IRS-1136 and it is reduced by GLP-1RAs136,137. This final point is especially important since the degree of IR in the hippocampus is inversely and closely associated with cognitive status in humans6.

It is not surprising, then, that the most frequently studied GLP-1RAs (exendin-4, liraglutide and semaglutide), shown in Table 3, are often found to exert the same therapeutic effects in and outside the brain on many conditions directly or indirectly related to energy homeostasis and/or insulin sensitivity110. These effects include cell promotion of survival138, inhibition of apoptosis138, inflammation139, oxidative stress140, cardiac141, astrocyte142, and neuronal protection138, transcription and/or translation of trophic factors, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor [BDNF], glial-derived neurotrophic factor [GDNF], and nerve growth factor [NGF])122,143, adult neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity144, and cognition124,144,145. Many experimental studies on animal models of obesity and/or T2DM have shown that the GLP-1RAs exendin-4 and liraglutide can reduce IR and its mechanistic basis in the absence of weight loss146–149. However, in a recent post-hoc analysis of semaglutide trials, the effects of treatment on insulin resistance assessed using HOMA-IR was explained by weight loss150. It is likely that GLP-RA benefits have both weight loss dependent and independent effects.

GLP-1 RA Pre-Clinical Animal Studies

The majority of animal studies involving treatments with GLP- RA provide some evidence of metabolic benefit to the brain based on reversal of brain IR, favorable effects on energy utilization pathways, restoring microglial homeostasis and BBB integrity (Table 3). However, there is a paucity of data that directly investigated the effect of GLP-RA on brain glucose uptake151,152. Animal Studies, shown in Table 3, suggest that these receptor agonists may be effective in improving cognitive function, mood, and cell function. Adult rats pretreated for two weeks with the GLP-1RA, exendin-4 (Ex-4), needed less time than controls to find the baits in a radial maze test, indicating increased reference memory117. In the same study, male mice treated chronically with Ex-4, two intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections daily for one week, spent significantly less time immobile during the forced swim test than the vehicle treated mice, indicating elevated mood117. In mice fed high-fat diets to induce obesity, Ex-4 improved cognitive function and ameliorated impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity caused by dietary-induced obesity153. In high-fat fed mice lixisenatide, another GLP-1RA, improved recognition memory during a novel object recognition task, enhanced progenitor cell proliferation in the brain, and was associated with the upregulation of genes involved in synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation154. In rats treated with neurotoxic amyloid-β, i.c.v. pre-treatment with Ex-4 protected against Aβ1–42-induced impairment of spatial memory and learning155. In AD mouse models, lixesenatide treatment was equally as effective at a lower dose compared with liraglutide treatment at improving objection recognition, increasing long-term potentiation in the hippocampus, and reducing chronic inflammation caused by microglia activation156. Overall, the effects of GLP-1 RA in these studies on brain Aβ pathology were inconsistent, but Ex-4 displayed prominent anti-inflammatory effects on brain microglia152, that is consistent protective effects on the neurovascular unit.

GLP-1 RA Clinical Studies

Despite a large number of in vitro, cell based, and preclinical studies performed over the last decade showing neuroprotective effects, GLP-1 RA clinical trials have not yet directly demonstrated any significant cognitive benefits. Clinical studies, shown in Table 4, suggest that GLP-1 RAs can improve brain connectivity, cerebral glucose uptake, and but effects on cognitive function are still unclear. GLP-1RA, exendin-4, potently increased cerebral glucose metabolism in humans with prediabetics or newly T2DM157. In a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, two-period crossover study in nine healthy males, 18-FDG PET was used to determine the effect of a synthetic GLP-1 (7 to 36) amide on cerebral glucose transport and metabolism during a hyperglycemic clamp158. GLP-1 lowered brain glucose in all regions. The cerebral metabolic rate for glucose was increased overall but not to the same extent in all regions. The unidirectional glucose transfer across the BBB remained unchanged in all regions, while the unidirectional clearance and the phosphorylation rate increased, leading to increased net clearance of the glucose tracer. These findings suggest that GLP-1 may play a role in a regulatory mechanism involved in the actions of GLUT1 and glucose metabolism by promoting less fluctuation of brain glucose levels in response to alterations in plasma glucose158.

In a placebo-controlled trial, 43 participants were randomized to 12 weeks of treatment with liraglutide or placebo and 26 individuals completed the study. Participants were between 45 and 70 years of age with subjective cognitive complaints and a Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) score of &gt; 27. Patients with T2DM were excluded. The investigators found an inverse correlation between fasting plasma glucose and functional connectivity between the bilateral hippocampus and anterior medial frontal cortex. Treatment with liraglutide resulted in a greater rs-fMRI connectivity in the DMN between the bilateral hippocampus and three clusters centered on the left middle frontal gyrus, bilateral posterior cingulate, and the left lateral occipital cortex74. In a trial of patients with mild AD, 38 patients were randomized to liraglutide (n = 18) or placebo (n = 20) for 6 months, and blood-brain glucose transfer capacity (T max) in the two groups and a healthy age matched control group (n = 6) were determined. Liraglutide, compared to placebo, significantly raised the T max estimates of cerebral cortex, equal to T max estimates in healthy volunteers135. The result was consistent with the GLP-1 analog treatment restoring glucose transport at the BBB, which was positively correlated to cognition10. Three randomized, double‐blind, multicenter, placebo‐controlled trials (LEADER, SUSTAIN 6 and PIONEER 6) evaluated the cardiovascular effect of liraglutide or semaglutide vs. placebo, added to standard of care. The trials included patients with T2DM and established or high risk of cardiovascular disease. A post‐hoc analysis on pooled data from 15,820 patients with median follow‐up of 3.6 years were included in this analysis. 15 GLP‐1 RA‐treated patients and 32 placebo‐treated patients were identified with development of dementia. Post‐hoc analysis on the pooled data showed a significant estimated hazard ratio of 0.47 [0.25; 0.86] 95%CI in favor of the GLP‐1 RA treatment versus placebo159.

Ongoing clinical trials investigating GLP-1RAs and cognition are shown in Table 5. The ELAD study, using liraglutide in patients over 50 years old with probable AD, is evaluating the change in cerebral glucose metabolic rate after 12 months of treatment with liraglutide compared to the placebo arm. In the DRINN study, researchers are evaluating the ability of weekly exenatide (a synthetic version of exendin-4) treatment for 32 weeks to prevent or slow the progression of cognitive dysfunction and related biomarkers in dysglycemic/prediabetic patients with mild cognitive impairment74. In another recent study, investigators are examining the effect of weekly liraglutide treatment on cognitive function, measured by various cognitive tests. EVOKE (NCT04777396) and EVOKE plus (NCT04777409) trials are planned phase 3 randomized placebo controlled multi-centered clinical trials to test the effect of oral semaglutide (14 mg) in patients with mild cognitive impairment or dementia without (EVOKE) and with significant small vessel brain disease (EVOKE plus) on cognitive outcomes over a period of 173 weeks. It is important to note, that GLP-1RAs are not only being investigated in in individuals with T2DM or AD, but are also being explored as a potential treatment for PD160.

Summary, Recommendations, and Future Directions

Substantial evidence supports that dementia syndromes are associated with glucose hypometabolism in the brain. Whether restoring brain energy pathways can reverse synaptic loss and cognitive decline is yet to be determined. In contrast, T2DM and IR per se are associated with more subtle changes in executive function domains that reflect how systemic IR affects the function of the brain. Long standing T2DM together with components of the metabolic syndrome (hypertension and dsylipidemia) can aggravate existing cognitive impairment and increase the risk of both ADd and VaD.

Recent preclinical studies and clinical trials suggest that GLP1-RAs can restore brain energy metabolism, BBB integrity and attenuate neurovascular inflammation, offering some hope for reversing that process that leads to synaptic loss in the dementia syndromes. There is no current evidence that reversing brain glucose hypometabolism per se can treat or attenuate cognitive impairment in dementia syndromes. Glucose hypometabolism reflects a late stage neurodegenerative process and can help identify dementia subtypes. Restoring brain energy homeostasis may require several metabolic adjustments that not only involve glucose transport, but also other energy substrates (fatty acids, amino acids and ketones) that influence neurotrasmission, Ca2+ flux and synaptic activity. These interlinked metabolic systems may not be simply assessed by measuring only brain glucose uptake. Indeed, glucose uptake can be normal or hypermetabolic in cases of MCI despite evidence of brain pathology. GLP-1 RA agonist treatment reverses several features of brain IR independent of effects on neuronal glucose uptake. As GLP-1 RAs are being studied in patients with and without T2DM and dementia, a consideration of specific populations, novel biomarkers and disease-specific outcomes is warranted. We propose the following recommendations:

Additional research to standardize brain glucose uptake cut-offs and regional distributions by FDG-PET can help define specific disease phenotypes. Since ADd and VaD are heterogenous syndromes, regional glucose uptake changes identified by imaging can guide the selection of cognitive outcomes and refine patient selections for a greater chance of detecting a beneficial effect of treatment.

Functional connectivity, MRI-dynamic contrast enhanced imaging of BBB integrity91, and synaptic imaging161 are novel biomarkers that can provide insight into the functionality of the neurovascular unit and present attractive biomarkers for GLP-RA development. Additional research is required, however, to validate these imaging modalities.

Imaging microglial and astrocytic activation are additional attractive modalities for future development that can guide the efficacy of GLP-1 RA during early stages of the disease before the onset of hypometabolism.

Clinical outcomes in trials that target patients with T2DM and early VaD need to emphasize changes in executive function within cognitive domains.

The data reviewed do not support using Aβ biomarkers to guide the efficacy of GLP-1 RA treatments.

Methods

A systematic review of major literature reviews concerning brain glucose uptake and metabolism in association with T2DM and AD was performed on PubMed searching terms “Alzheimer’s disease and Type 2 diabetes,” “brain insulin resistance,” “brain glucose metabolism and cognition,” “Alzheimer’s disease and insulin resistance,” and “cognitive effects of Type 2 diabetes,” for articles published between 1993 and 2020. 68 publications were included in this review. Of those publications, 29 were literature reviews.

Studies involving brain imaging modalities in MCI, AD, prediabetes, and diabetes were also compiled and summarized. 27 articles involving fMRI in diabetic, prediabetic, AD, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitively healthy populations from the years 2002 to 2017 were included in this review along with 14 publications involving FDG-PET brain imaging in diabetic, prediabetic, AD, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitively healthy populations from the years 2005 to 2019. 8 literature reviews were cited in our summary.

A review of published literature on pre-clinical and clinical investigations involving GLP-1, its receptor, its receptor agonists, and cognition was also performed on PubMed searching terms “GLP1-RA treatment effects on cognition,” “GLP 1 effects in the brain”, and “GLP 1 treatment in AD” from January 2003 until December 2020. 16 pre-clinical studies and 3 clinical studies involving GLP-1RAs were included in this review. A query into ongoing clinical trials involving GLP-1 RAs was also carried out via clinicaltrials.gov searching terms “Lixisenatide,” “Exenatide,” “Liraglutide,” “GLP-1,” “Dulaglutide”, and “Semaglutide.” Only ongoing trials investigating cognition as a primary or secondary outcome were included in the summary table.

Funding sources and disclosures:

HNY was supported by R01AG055770, R01AG054434, R01AG067063 from the National Institute of Aging and NIRG-15-361854 from the Alzheimer’s Association. KT was supported by R01AG057658, and Cure Parkinson’s Trust U.K. This work was also supported by P50AG05142 (HCC) from the National Institutes of Health. LSS was supported by the Della Martin Chair of Psychiatry and Neuroscience at USC, R01AG051346, R01AG062687, R01AG057684, and grants from Eisai, Eli Lilly, Roche/Genentech, Biogen, Biohaven, Novartis, and Washington University/ NIA DIAN-TU. NS was supported by RF1MH123223, P30AG066530, R01AG062007 and U01AG051218. HCC was supported by P30 AG066530, P50AG05142, R01AG055770, R01AG054434. Honorarium were made to HCC from Oregon Health Sciences University, Stanford University, University of California Irvine. Oregon Health Sciences University supported air fare to attend external advisory meeting for HCC. Honorarium to KT paid by the University of Southern California for symposium and by the Seattle Institute for Biomedical and Clinical Research for symposium talk. Seattle Institute for Biomedical and Clinical Research for travel to deliver symposium talk to KT. HNY is the co-chair of the Nutrition, Metabolism and Dementia Professional Interest Area (PIA), ISTAART. HCC sits on advisory panel of the Alzheimer Association Los Angeles - no payments received. MND is the Director of Education for the Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute at USC. LSS receives consulting fees from Abbott, AC Immune, Avraham, Ltd, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cognition Therapeutics, Cortexyme, Eisai, FujiFilm, Immunobrain Checkpoint Ltd, Neurally Inc, Neurim Ltd, Neuronix Ltd, Samus, Takeda, vTv. All other authors report no other disclosures. All grants were made to the insitutions. Funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, interpretation, or writing of the report.

Abbreviations:

T2DM Type 2 diabetes

IR Insulin Resistance

ADd Alzheimer’s disease dementia

VaD Vascular Dementia

GLP-1 Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)

GLP-1 RAs Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists

BBB blood-brain barrier

APOE apolipoprotein E

APOE4 APOE-ε4

ATP Adenosine Tri Phosphate

Figure 1: In this illustration of the neurovascular unit, GLP-1-RA functions on GLP-1 receptors through insulin-independent mechanisms to stimulate cAMP production and activate the EPAC, PKA, PI3K/Akt, and β-arrestin/ERK pathways resulting in expression and translocation of GLUT-1 at the BBB with several neuroprotective properties. Synaptic activity at the neurovascular units is highly dependent on the availability of ATP, regulating its function. Conditions of reduced ATP supply can lead to Ca2+ overload in both neurons and astrocytes, leading to cellular stress, activation of lipases such as phospholipase A2, and activation of microglia, ultimately leading to synaptic loss.

Table 1: Glucose Transporter expression and regulation

	GLP-1R	GLUT-1	GLUT-2	GLUT-3	GLUT-4	
Locations of expression	Brain: Hypothalamus, medulla, hippocampus, thalamus, caudate‐putamen and globus pallidum115,121,162	Brain: BBB, astrocytes	Brain: hypothalamus, caudate‐putamen, mesencephalon and bulb115	Brain: Hippocampus, cerebellum163	Brain: cerebellum, hippocampus, the cortex, and hypothalamus163	
Periphery: Endothelial cells of blood tissue barriers164	Periphery: liver, intestine, kidney and pancreatic islet beta cells165	Periphery: Placenta, liver, heart, kidneys166	Periphery: Fat, skeletal muscle, and cardiac muscle166	
Insulin-Dependent		−	−	−	+	
Other regulators	GLP-1, GLP-1RA	IGF-1, cAMP	Glucose	cAMP	Leptin, muscle contractions	

Table 2: Comparison of AD pathology with IR, T2DM and VaD pathology

Characteristic	Prodromal AD	ADd	IR	T2DM	VaD	
Cognitive domains affected early in disease	Episodic Memory167	Global cognitive decline that predominantly amnestic with decrease in activities in daily living168	Improvement in executive functions after weight loss107	Executive function (information processing speed)22	Global cognitive decline that manifests as dysexecutive function with decrease in activities in daily living169	
Pathogenic pathways	Greater amyloid deposition in AD-related areas early biomarker170	Greater amyloid deposition in AD related areas early biomarker together with evidence of increase in tau NFT171	No consistent association with amyloid deposition26	Pleiotropic effects with a vascular component that vary by disease duration.172	Cerebral small vessel disease, as well as thrombo-embolic stroke173	
Glucose metabolism by FDG PET	Lower uptake in AD affected areas in APOE4 carriers or positive maternal family history of AD174,175	Lower glucose uptake in AD affected areas and correlates with amyloid deposition88	Small differences in the fasting state, but greater glucose uptake after hyperinsulinemia during middle age94	Lower uptake in older age in AD-affected areas93	Lower uptake in deep gray nuclei, cerebellum, primary cortexes, middle temporal gyrus, and anterior cingulate34	
Resting state connectivity	Inconsistent. Greater hippocampal connectivity in AD-affected areas in younger APOE4 carriers but lower connectivity between in older APOE4 carriers or have MCI.102	Lower hippocampal/DMN connectivity to several areas in the brain176	Inconsistent findings.	Lower connectivity when T2DM duration exceeds 10 years20	Lower functional connectivity in the medial frontal and superior frontal gyri, part of the central executive network (CEN)103.	
Brain glucose transporters affected by disease	Less GLUT-1 at the BBB177	Less GLUT-1 at the BBB, and GLUT-3 in cortical tissues70	GLUT-4 expressed in hippocampus but not clear if expression is altered in IR or T2DM in humans178.	White matter lesions associated with glucose hypometabolism in frontal lobe179	

Table 3: Pre-Clinical GLP-1RA Studies

Author	Drug (Treatment)	Animal	Key Findings	
Exendin-4/Exenatide	
Isacson et al.117	Exendin-4 (i.p.) (0.1 μg/kg twice daily for 2 weeks)	Male Sprague–Dawley rats (radial maze)
Male CD-1 mice (forced swim test)	The time necessary to solve a radial maze task and the duration of immobility in the forced swim test were significantly reduced compared to respective vehicle groups when the animals were pre-treated with Ex-4	
Gault et al.153	Exendin-4 (s.c.) (25 nmol/kg twice daily for 21 days)	Mice fed high-fat diet	Treated mice exhibited improved improves cognitive function (increased recognition index highlighting improved learning and memory) and ameliorates impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity in dietary-induced obesity	
Jia et al.155	Exendin-4 (i.c.v) (0.02, 0.2, 2 nmol per rat)	Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats	I.c.v. pre-treatment with Ex-4 was able to protect against Aβ1–42-induced impairment of spatial memory and learning in rats.	
Bomba et al.143	Exendin-4,( i.p.) (500 μg/kg body weight, five times a week for 2 months)	2-month old WT mice	Exenatide-treated mice performed significantly better in parameters related to long-term memory activities.	
Bomfim et al.137	Exendin-4 (25 nmol/kg/day for 3 weeks)	APP/PS1 mice	Exendin-4 treatment decreased levels of hippocampal IRS-1pSer, activated JNK, and improved behavioral measures of cognition following Aβ-induced AD in mice.	
Bomba et al151	Exenatide or saline (500 mg/kg BW) or vehicle, 5 days a week for 9 months	3xTg-AD and PSK1 mcie	Exenatide improved cognition in PS1-KI mice, driven by increasing the brain anaerobic glycolysis rate.	
Zhao et al152	Exenatide (5 nmol/ kg bw, or saline, intra-peritoneally (I.P.) at 17–18 months old for 4–5 weeks prior to experiment	Aged C57BL/6 J mice	Functional recovery in the aged BBB with upregulated energy utilization pathways, and lower microglial inflammatory signaling expression.	
Lixisenatide	
Lennox et al.154	Lixisenatide (s.c.) (50 nmol/kg twice daily for 40 days)	Mice fed high-fat diet	Treated mice exhibited improved recognition memory, enhanced progenitor cell proliferations, and an upregulation in genes associated with synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation.	
Cai et al.180	Lixisenatide (i.p.) (10 nmol/kg/day for 60 days)	12-month-old APP/PS1/tau female mice	Treatment in lixisenatide in AD model female mice reduced amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuroinflammation in the hippocampus.	
Liraglutide	
Hansen et al.181	Liraglutide (s.c.) (100 or 500 μg/kg/day for 4 months)	Senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8 (SAMP8) mice	Liraglutide delayed or partially halted the progressive decline in memory function associated with hippocampal neuronal loss in a mouse model of pathological aging with characteristics of neurobehavioral and neuropathological impairments observed in early-stage sporadic AD	
McClean et al.144	Liraglutide (i.p.) (25 nmol/kg/day for 8 weeks)	APP/PS1 adult mice	Liraglutide prevented memory impairments in object recognition and water maze tasks, prevented synapse loss and deterioration of synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus, and reduced level of activated microglia.	
Qi et al.182	Liraglutide (s.c.) (25nmol/day for 8 weeks)	Amyloid β protein (Aβ)-induced AD mice	Pre-treatment with liraglutide in Aβ1–42-induced AD mice prevent memory impairment, alleviated the ultra-structural changes of pyramidal neurons and chemical synapses in the hippocampal CA1 region, and reduced Aβ1–42-induced tau phosphorylation.	
Yang et al.183	Liraglutide (s.c.) (0.2 mg/kg for 4 weeks)	T2DM adult rats	Liraglutide treatment in T2DM rats ameliorated hyperglycemia and peripheral IR, as well as reversed decreases in CSF insulin and hyperphosphorylation of tau at AD-relevant phosphorylation sites.	
Batista et al.184	Liraglutide (i.p.) (25 nmol/kg/day for 7 days)	Male Swiss mice	Liraglutide prevented loss of brain insulin receptors and synapses, and reversed memory impairment induced by AD-linked amyloid-β oligomers in AD mouse models.	
Batista et al.184	Liraglutide (i.c.v.) (0.006 mg/kg for the first week and 0.012mg/kg after; 1 month total)	Non-human primates (16-year-old macaques)	Liraglutide provided partial protection, decreasing AD‐related insulin receptor, synaptic, and tau pathology in specific brain regions following infusion of amyloid‐β oligomers	
McClean et al.156	Liraglutide (i.p) (2.5 or 25 nmol/kg/day staggered across 10 weeks)
Lixisenatide (i.p) (1 or 10 nmol/kg/ day staggered across 10 weeks)	APP/PS1 adult mice	Lixesenatide treatment was equally as effective at a lower dose compared with Liraglutide at improving object recognition, increasing long-term potentiation in the hippocampus, and reducing chronic inflammation caused by microglia activation	
Porter et al.185	Liraglutide (s.c.) (50 nmol/kg twice a day for 21 days)	Ob/ob mice	Long-term potentiation defects were rescued, and hippocampal synaptic plasticity associated with increased expression of Mash1 was improved.
Treatment also reduced plasma glucose and increased plasma	
Hansen et al.186	Liraglutide (100 or 500 ng/kg/day for 3 months in hAPPLon or 500 ng/kg/day for 5 months in hAPPSwe)	5-month-old hAPPLon/PS1A246E and 7 month-old hAPPSwe/PS1ΔE9 mice	Long-term liraglutide treatment exhibited no effect on cerebral plaque load in two transgenic mouse models of low- and high-grade amyloidosis.	
McClean et al156	Liraglutide (i.p) (2.5 or 25 nmol/kg/day staggered across 10 weeks)
Lixisenatide (i.p) (1 or 10 nmol/kg/ day staggered across 10 weeks)	APP/PS1 adult mice	Lixesenatide equally as effective at a lower dose compared with liraglutide at improving objection recognition, increasing long-term potentiation in hippocampus, and reducing chronic inflammation caused by microglia activation	

Table 4: Completed Clinical GLP-1RA Controlled Trials

Study	Drug (Dose; Duration)	Sample (Age)	Study Design	Outcomes	
GLP-1 analog peptide	
Gejl et al.158 (NCT01185119)	GLP-1 analog peptide (s.c.) (1.2 pmol/kg/min; 300 min total)	Healthy male adults (20–24 years old)
N= 9	Phase 2, Phase 3 placebo-controlled, randomized, crossover assignment, quadruple masking (participant, care provider, investigator, outcomes assessor)	Primary: Acute GLP-1 infusion lowered the intracerebral concentration of glucose, raised cerebral glucose metabolism, and increased glucose clearance and phosphorylation in the brain (18F-FDG PET)	
Exenatide	
Daniele et al157	Exenatide (5 mg) or placebo 30 min before an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)	Male adults without diabetes, prediabetes or early T2DM
N= 15	Double-blind, randomized	Exenatide increased CMRglu in areas of the brain related to glucose homeostasis, appetite, and food reward. (18F-FDG PET)	
Liraglutide	
Watson et al.74 (NCT02140983)	Liraglutide (s.c.) (0.6 mg/d for 1 wk; dose increased to 1.8 mg/d within 3 wks; 12 wks total)	Cognitively normal with subjective cognitive complaints (44–74 years old)
N= 32	Phase 1, placebo- controlled, randomized, parallel group, triple masked (participant, care provider, assessor)	Primary: Liraglutide increased resting state connectivity in the default mode network between the bilateral hippocampus and three clusters centered on the left middle frontal gyrus, bilateral posterior cingulate, and the left lateral occipital cortex (fMRI)
Secondary: No changes in a meta-memory task; glucose tolerance declined slightly in treatment group (OGTT); no difference in fasting plasma glucose at baseline or 12 weeks	
Gejl et al.135 (NCT01469351)	Liraglutide (s.c) (0.6 mg/d for 1 wk; increased to 1.8 mg/d within 3 wks; 26 wks total)	AD patients (50–80 years old)
N= 34	Phase Not Applicable Placebo-controlled, Randomized, Parallel Assignment, Quadruple Masking (Participant, Care Provider, Investigator, Outcomes Assessor)	Primary: Not statistically significant, numerical increase in Aβ accumulation in all cortical areas after 6 months of treatment, with no differences between treatment arms (11C PIB PET)
Secondary: Liraglutide prevented decline of glucose metabolism in several major brain regions, including the precuneus, cerebellum, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes compared to placebo (18F-FDG PET); no change in cognitive scores (WMS-IV)	
Dulaglutide	
Cukierman-Yaffe et al.187 (NCT01394952)	Dulaglutide (1.5 mg/ week) or placebo over 5.4 years	Participants with T2DM and cardiovascular risk factors
N=9901	Multicenter, randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial	Exploratory primary cognitive outcome. Hazard ratio for substantive cognitive impairment for those asigned to dulaglutide compared to placebo (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.79–0.95; p=0.0018)	

Table 5: Ongoing GLP-1RA Clinical Trials Investigating Cognitive Changes

Study	Drug (Dose; Duration)	Sample (Age)	Study Design	Outcomes	Status	
Exenatide	
DRINN (NCT02847403)	Exenatide (s.c.) (2mg/wk; 32 wks total)	Dysglycemia/prediabetes with MCI (over 50 years old)
N= 40 (estimated)	Phase 3 placebo-controlled, randomized, parallel assignment, no masking (open label)	Primary: Improvement of ADAS-cog at 16 and at 32 weeks compared to baseline (V1) and placebo group
Secondary: Improvement in MMSE, phonemic verbal fluency test, semantic verbal fluency test, GDS, CDR, NPI, ADL, and IADL and changes neuronal connectivity (fMRI)	Recruiting as of October 5, 2020	
University of Florida (NCT03456687)	Exenatide (s.c.) (2mg/wk; 1 yr total)	Early stage PD (40–77 years old)
N= 15 (estimated)	Phase 1 Single group, open label	Primary: MRI, change in free-water accumulation in the substantia nigra, blood oxygen level-dependent160 signal in the posterior putamen, M1, and the supplementary motor area after 12 months (fMRI and structural MRI)	Active, not recruiting	
Liraglutide	
ELAD (NCT01843075)	Liraglutide (s.c.) (0.6 mg/wk, escalated to 1.8 mg/wk within 4 weeks; 12 mos total)	Probable AD (over 50 years old)
N= 204	Phase 2 Placebo-controlled, randomized, parallel group, quadruple masking (participant, care provider, investigator, assessor)	Primary: Change in cerebral glucose metabolic rate after 12 months compared to placebo
Secondary: Change in z-scores for the ADAS Exec, MRI changes, microglial activation, and CSF markers (tau and cortical amyloid) after 12 months	Completed	
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (NCT02953665)	Liraglutide (s.c.) (6 mg/mL/d at a maximum dose of 1.8 mg/d; 52 wks total)	Idiopathic PD (25–65 years old)
N= 63 (estimated)	Phase 2 Placebo-controlled, randomized, parallel assignment, quadruple masking (participant, care provider, investigator, outcomes assessor)	Primary: Change in motor function (MDS-UPDRS score; Part III), non-motor function (NMSS score), and cognitive function (MADRS-2) in the active treatment arm versus placebo between baseline, 28, and 54 weeks
Secondary: Change in peripheral IR (HoMA-IR), total MDS-UPDRS, functional status and quality of life (PDQ39), adverse events frequency in the active treatment arm versus placebo between baseline, 28, and 54 weeks	Recruiting	
Zhiming Zhu, Third Military Medical University (NCT03707171)	Liraglutide (s.c.) (0.6 mg/wk, and the dose will be escalated to 1.8 mg/wk within 4 wks; 12 wks total)	T2DM (18–80 years old)
N= 30	Phase 3 placebo-controlled, non-randomized, parallel assignment, no masking (open label)	Primary: Changes in cognitive function after 12 weeks (DST, RAVL, LDFR, TMT, ANT, CDT, MMSE, MES, functional near-infrared spectroscopy)
Secondary: Changes in systolic blood pressure, fasting plasma glucose, and other biomarkers	Completed, results not yet published as of October 5, 2020	
Semaglutide	
GIPD (NCT03659682)	Semaglutide (s.c.) (1.0 mg/wk; 48 mos total)	Newly diagnosed PD (40–77 years old)
N= 120
(estimated)	Phase 2 Placebo-controlled, crossover, delayed start design, quadruple masking (participant, care provider, investigator, outcomes assessor)	Primary: Change in motor functions (MDSR-UPDRS Part III), nigrostriatal degeneration (DAT-scan uptake), cognitive function (MME and MOCA, quality of life (EQFDQ, PDQ) and non-motor symptoms of PD (NMSS) at 12, 24, 36 and 48 months in the treatment arm compared to baseline and placebo	Not yet recruiting	
EVOKE (NCT04777396)	Oral Semaglutide once-daily, dose gradually increased to 14 mg over 173 weeks	1840 participants with MCI or mild AD ( 55–85 years old) excluding participants with significant small brain vessel pathology	Phase 3  Randomised Double-blind Placebo-controlled Clinical Trial	Primary: Change in the Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) score
Secondary: ADCS-ADLMCI, Time to progression to dementia , ADAS-Cog-13, MoCA, ADCOMS, MMSE, NPI, high sensitivity C-reactive protein, time to MACE, time to stroke, EQ-5D-5L	Not yet recruiting	
EVOKE plus (NCT04777409)	Oral Semaglutide once-daily, dose gradually increased to 14 mg over 173 weeks	1840 participants with MCI or mild AD ( 55–85 years old) allowing participants with significant small brain vessel pathology	Phase 3  Randomised Double-blind Placebo-controlled Clinical Trial	Primary: Change in the Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) score
Secondary: ADCS-ADLMCI, Time to progression to dementia , ADAS-Cog-13, MoCA, ADCOMS, MMSE, NPI, high sensitivity C-reactive protein, time to MACE, time to stroke, EQ-5D-5L	Not yet recruiting	

Authors report no conflict of interest


References

1 Minoshima S , Cross DJ , Foster NL , Henry TR &amp; Kuhl DE Discordance between traditional pathologic and energy metabolic changes in very early Alzheimer’s disease. Pathophysiological implications. Ann N Y Acad Sci 893 , 350–352, doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb07852.x (1999).10672264
2 Scheff SW , Neltner JH &amp; Nelson PT Is synaptic loss a unique hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease? Biochemical pharmacology 88 , 517–528, doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2013.12.028 (2014).24412275
3 Nation DA Blood–brain barrier breakdown is an early biomarker of human cognitive dysfunction. Nature Medicine 25 , 270–276, doi:10.1038/s41591-018-0297-y (2019).
4 Iturria-Medina Y Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nature Communications 7 , 11934, doi:10.1038/ncomms11934 (2016).
5 Simpson IA , Chundu KR , Davies-Hill T , Honer WG &amp; Davies P Decreased concentrations of GLUT1 and GLUT3 glucose transporters in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 35 , 546–551, doi:10.1002/ana.410350507 (1994).8179300
6 Talbot K , Wang H-Y , Kazi H , Han L-Y , Bakshi K , Stucky A , Fuino RL , Kawaguchi KR , Samoyedny AJ , Wilson RS , Schneider JA , Wolf BA , Bennett DA , Trojanowski JQ , &amp; Arnold SE Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, dysregulated IRS-1, and cognitive decline. Journal of Clinical Investigation 122 , 1316–1338 (2012).
7 McIntosh EC &amp; Nation DA Importance of Treatment Status in Links Between Type 2 Diabetes and Alzheimer’s Disease. Diabetes Care 42 , 972–979, doi:10.2337/dc18-1399 (2019).30833374
8 Akimoto H Antidiabetic Drugs for the Risk of Alzheimer Disease in Patients With Type 2 DM Using FAERS. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 35 , 1533317519899546, doi:10.1177/1533317519899546 (2020).32162525
9 Daniele G , Iozzo P , Molina-Carrion M , Lancaster J , Ciociaro D , Cersosimo E , Tripathy D , Triplitt C , Fox P , Musi N , DeFronzo R , &amp; Gastaldelli A . Exenatide regulates cerebral glucose metabolism in brain areas associated with glucose homeostasis and reward system. Diabetes 64 , 3406–3411 (2015).26116695
10 Gejl M , Brock B , Egefjord L , Vang K , Rungby J , and Gjedde A . Blood-Brain Glucose Transfer in Alzheimer’s disease: Effect of GLP-1 Analog Treatment. Scientific Reports 7 (2017).
11 Bangshaab M Different mechanisms involved in liraglutide and glucagon-like peptide-1 vasodilatation in rat mesenteric small arteries. British journal of pharmacology 176 , 386–399, doi:10.1111/bph.14534 (2019).30403290
12 Spielman LJ , Gibson DL &amp; Klegeris A Incretin hormones regulate microglia oxidative stress, survival and expression of trophic factors. European Journal of Cell Biology 96 , 240–253, doi:10.1016/j.ejcb.2017.03.004 (2017).28336086
13 Wang XH Val⁸-GLP-1 remodels synaptic activity and intracellular calcium homeostasis impaired by amyloid β peptide in rats. J Neurosci Res 91 , 568–577, doi:10.1002/jnr.23181 (2013).23335292
14 Perry RJ Leptin Mediates a Glucose-Fatty Acid Cycle to Maintain Glucose Homeostasis in Starvation. Cell 172 , 234–248.e217, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.001 (2018).29307489
15 Hasselbalch SG No effect of insulin on glucose blood-brain barrier transport and cerebral metabolism in humans. Diabetes 48 , 1915–1921, doi:10.2337/diabetes.48.10.1915 (1999).10512354
16 Seaquist ER , Damberg GS , Tkac I &amp; Gruetter R The Effect of Insulin on In Vivo Cerebral Glucose Concentrations and Rates of Glucose Transport/Metabolism in Humans. Diabetes 50 , 2203–2209, doi:10.2337/diabetes.50.10.2203 (2001).11574399
17 DeFronzo RA &amp; Tripathy D Skeletal muscle insulin resistance is the primary defect in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes care 32 Suppl 2 , S157–S163, doi:10.2337/dc09-S302 (2009).19875544
18 Liu Y , Liu F , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K &amp; Gong C-X Brain glucose transporters, O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation of tau in diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of neurochemistry 111 , 242–249, doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06320.x (2009).19659459
19 Tuulari JJ Weight loss after bariatric surgery reverses insulin-induced increases in brain glucose metabolism of the morbidly obese. Diabetes 62 , 2747–2751, doi:10.2337/db12-1460 (2013).23493575
20 Liu H Changes in default mode network connectivity in different glucose metabolism status and diabetes duration. Neuroimage Clin 21 , 101629, doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101629 (2019).30573410
21 Rawlings AM , Sharrett AR , Schneider ALC , Coresh J , Albert M , Couper D , Griswold M , Gottesman RF , Wagenknecht LE , Windham BG , and Selvin E . Diabetes in midlife and cognitive change over 20 years, a cohort study. Annals of Internal Medicine 161 , 785–793 (2014).25437406
22 Dash SK Cognitive impairment and diabetes. Recent Patents on Endocrine, Metabolic &amp; Immune Drug Discovery 7 , 155–165 (2013).
23 Li X , Song D &amp; Leng SX Link between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease: from epidemiology to mechanism and treatment. Clin Interv Aging 10 , 549–560, doi:10.2147/CIA.S74042 (2015).25792818
24 Janson J Increased risk of type 2 diabetes in Alzheimer disease. Diabetes 53 , 474–481, doi:10.2337/diabetes.53.2.474 (2004).14747300
25 Macesic M Impaired Insulin Sensitivity and Secretion in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease: The Relationship with Other Atherosclerosis Risk Factors. Curr Vasc Pharmacol 15 , 158–166, doi:10.2174/1570161114666160905170644 (2017).27599805
26 Roberts RO Diabetes and elevated hemoglobin A1c levels are associated with brain hypometabolism but not amyloid accumulation. J Nucl Med 55 , 759–764, doi:10.2967/jnumed.113.132647 (2014).24652830
27 Chui HC , Zheng L , Reed BR , Vinters HV &amp; Mack WJ Vascular risk factors and Alzheimer’s disease: are these risk factors for plaques and tangles or for concomitant vascular pathology that increases the likelihood of dementia? An evidence-based review. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy 3 , 1, doi:10.1186/alzrt98 (2012).
28 Tomita N Brain accumulation of amyloid β protein visualized by positron emission tomography and BF-227 in Alzheimer’s disease patients with or without diabetes mellitus. Geriatr Gerontol Int 13 , 215–221, doi:10.1111/j.1447-0594.2012.00880.x (2013).22680403
29 Roberts RO Association of diabetes with amnestic and nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimers Dement 10 , 18–26, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2013.01.001 (2014).23562428
30 Chih C-P &amp; Roberts EL Energy Substrates for Neurons during Neural Activity: A Critical Review of the Astrocyte-Neuron Lactate Shuttle Hypothesis. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &amp; Metabolism 23 , 1263–1281, doi:10.1097/01.WCB.0000081369.51727.6F (2003).14600433
31 Svart M Regional cerebral effects of ketone body infusion with 3-hydroxybutyrate in humans: Reduced glucose uptake, unchanged oxygen consumption and increased blood flow by positron emission tomography. A randomized, controlled trial. PloS one 13 , e0190556–e0190556, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0190556 (2018).29489818
32 Wolf AB , Caselli RJ , Reiman EM &amp; Valla J APOE and neuroenergetics: an emerging paradigm in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 34 , 1007–1017, doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.10.011 (2013).23159550
33 Mosconi L Perimenopause and emergence of an Alzheimer’s bioenergetic phenotype in brain and periphery. PLOS ONE 12 , e0185926, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0185926 (2017).29016679
34 Kerrouche N , Herholz K , Mielke R , Holthoff V &amp; Baron JC 18FDG PET in vascular dementia: differentiation from Alzheimer’s disease using voxel-based multivariate analysis. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 26 , 1213–1221, doi:10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600296 (2006).
35 Hoffman JM FDG PET imaging in patients with pathologically verified dementia. J Nucl Med 41 , 1920–1928 (2000).11079505
36 Workgroup, A. s. A. C. H. &amp; Khachaturian ZS Calcium Hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease and brain aging: A framework for integrating new evidence into a comprehensive theory of pathogenesis. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 , 178–182.e117, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2016.12.006 (2017).
37 Hachinski V Preventing dementia by preventing stroke: The Berlin Manifesto. Alzheimers Dement 15 , 961–984, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2019.06.001 (2019).31327392
38 Esteras N &amp; Abramov AY Mitochondrial Calcium Deregulation in the Mechanism of Beta-Amyloid and Tau Pathology. Cells 9 , doi:10.3390/cells9092135 (2020).
39 Yassine HN &amp; Finch CE APOE Alleles and Diet in Brain Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease. Frontiers in aging neuroscience 12 , doi:10.3389/fnagi.2020.00150 (2020).
40 Klosinski LP White Matter Lipids as a Ketogenic Fuel Supply in Aging Female Brain: Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease. EBioMedicine 2 , 1888–1904 (2015).26844268
41 Sato H , Taketomi Y &amp; Murakami M Metabolic regulation by secreted phospholipase A2. Inflammation and Regeneration 36 , 7, doi:10.1186/s41232-016-0012-7 (2016).29259680
42 Schönfeld P &amp; Reiser G Why does brain metabolism not favor burning of fatty acids to provide energy? Reflections on disadvantages of the use of free fatty acids as fuel for brain. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 33 , 1493–1499, doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2013.128 (2013).
43 Cunnane SC Brain energy rescue: an emerging therapeutic concept for neurodegenerative disorders of ageing. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 19 , 609–633, doi:10.1038/s41573-020-0072-x (2020).32709961
44 DeFronzo RA &amp; Tripathy D Skeletal muscle insulin resistance is the primary defect in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 32 Suppl 2 , S157–163, doi:10.2337/dc09-S302 (2009).19875544
45 Morisco C , Lembo G &amp; Trimarco B Insulin resistance and cardiovascular risk: New insights from molecular and cellular biology. Trends Cardiovasc Med 16 , 183–188, doi:10.1016/j.tcm.2006.03.008 (2006).16839860
46 Goldstein BJ Insulin resistance as the core defect in type 2 diabetes mellitus. American Journal of Cardiology 90 , 3–10, doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(02)02553-5 (2002).
47 Sloviter HA &amp; Yamada H Absence of direct action of insulin on metabolism of the isolated perfused rat brain. J Neurochem 18 , 1269–1274, doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.1971.tb00225.x (1971).5118882
48 Diamond E &amp; Fishman RA High affinity transport of 2-deoxyglucose in isolated synaptic nerve endings. Nature 242 , 122–123, doi:10.1038/242122a0 (1973).4694300
49 Bhattacharyya MV &amp; Brodsky JL Characterization of the glucose transporter from rat brain synaptosomes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 155 , 685–691, doi:10.1016/s0006-291x(88)80549-7 (1988).3048260
50 Uemura E &amp; Greenlee HW Insulin regulates neuronal glucose uptake by promoting translocation of glucose transporter GLUT3. Exp Neurol 198 , 48–53, doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2005.10.035 (2006).16337941
51 Heni M Insulin Promotes Glycogen Storage and Cell Proliferation in Primary Human Astrocytes. PLOS ONE 6 , e21594, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021594 (2011).21738722
52 Muhič M , Vardjan N , Chowdhury HH , Zorec R &amp; Kreft M Insulin and IGF-1 Modulate Cytoplasmic Glucose and Glycogen Levels but not Glucose Transport across the Membrane in Astrocytes. Journal of Biological Chemistry, doi:10.1074/jbc.M114.629063 (2015).
53 Hill JM , Lesniak MA , Pert CB &amp; Roth J Autoradiographic localization of insulin receptors in rat brain: prominence in olfactory and limbic areas. Neuroscience 17 , 1127–1138, doi:10.1016/0306-4522(86)90082-5 (1986).3520377
54 Pocai A Hypothalamic K(ATP) channels control hepatic glucose production. Nature 434 , 1026–1031, doi:10.1038/nature03439 (2005).15846348
55 Niswender KD Insulin activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus: a key mediator of insulin-induced anorexia. Diabetes 52 , 227–231, doi:10.2337/diabetes.52.2.227 (2003).12540590
56 Obici S Central Administration of Oleic Acid Inhibits Glucose Production and Food Intake. Diabetes 51 , 271–275, doi:10.2337/diabetes.51.2.271 (2002).11812732
57 Gelling RW Insulin action in the brain contributes to glucose lowering during insulin treatment of diabetes. Cell Metabolism 3 , 67–73, doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2005.11.013 (2006).16399506
58 Gruetter R , Ugurbil K &amp; Seaquist ER Steady-state cerebral glucose concentrations and transport in the human brain. J Neurochem 70 , 397–408, doi:10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70010397.x (1998).9422387
59 Pardridge WM , Triguero D &amp; Farrell CR Downregulation of blood-brain barrier glucose transporter in experimental diabetes. Diabetes 39 , 1040–1044, doi:10.2337/diab.39.9.1040 (1990).2384187
60 Duelli R Increased cerebral glucose utilization and decreased glucose transporter Glut1 during chronic hyperglycemia in rat brain. Brain Res 858 , 338–347, doi:10.1016/s0006-8993(00)01942-9 (2000).10708685
61 Hwang JJ Blunted rise in brain glucose levels during hyperglycemia in adults with obesity and T2DM. JCI Insight 2 , doi:10.1172/jci.insight.95913 (2017).
62 Hwang JJ Glycemic Variability and Brain Glucose Levels in Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes 68 , 163–171, doi:10.2337/db18-0722 (2019).30327383
63 Shapiro ET , Cooper M , Chen C-T , Given BD &amp; Polonsky KS Change in Hexose Distribution Volume and Fractional Utilization of [18F]-2-Deoxy-2-Fluoro-D-Glucose in Brain During Acute Hypoglycemia in Humans. Diabetes 39 , 175, doi:10.2337/diab.39.2.175 (1990).2227124
64 Pearson-Leary J &amp; McNay EC Novel Roles for the Insulin-Regulated Glucose Transporter-4 in Hippocampally Dependent Memory. J Neurosci 36 , 11851–11864, doi:10.1523/jneurosci.1700-16.2016 (2016).27881773
65 Harr SD , Simonian NA &amp; Hyman BT Functional Alterations in Alzheimer’s Disease: Decreased Glucose Transporter 3 Immunoreactivity in the Perforant Pathway Terminal Zone. Journal of Neuropathology &amp; Experimental Neurology 54 , 38–41, doi:10.1097/00005072-199501000-00005 (1995).7815078
66 Koepsell H Glucose transporters in brain in health and disease. Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology 472 , 1299–1343, doi:10.1007/s00424-020-02441-x (2020).32789766
67 Jagust WJ Diminished glucose transport in Alzheimer’s disease: dynamic PET studies. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 11 , 323–330, doi:10.1038/jcbfm.1991.65 (1991).
68 Liu Y , Liu F , Iqbal K , Grundke-Iqbal I &amp; Gong C-X Decreased glucose transporters correlate to abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau in Alzheimer disease. FEBS letters 582 , 359–364, doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2007.12.035 (2008).18174027
69 McNay EC Hippocampal memory processes are modulated by insulin and high-fat-induced insulin resistance. Neurobiol Learn Mem 93 , 546–553, doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2010.02.002 (2010).20176121
70 Simpson IA , Chundu KR , Davies-Hill T , Honer WG &amp; Davies P Decreased concentrations of GLUT1 and GLUT3 glucose transporters in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 35 , 546–551 (1994).8179300
71 Fujisawa Y , Sasaki K &amp; Akiyama K Increased insulin levels after OGTT load in peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with dementia of Alzheimer type. Biological Psychiatry 30 , 1219–1228, doi:10.1016/0006-3223(91)90158-I (1991).1790263
72 An Y , Varma VR , Varma S , Casanova R , Dammer E , Pletnikova O , Chia CW , Egan JM , Ferrucci L , Troncoso J , Levey AI , Lah J , Seyfried NT , Legido-Quigley C , O’Brien R , and Thambisetty M . Evidence for brain glucose dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 14 , 318–329 (2018).
73 Mullins R , Reiter D , &amp; Kapogiannis D Magnetic resonance spectroscopy reveals abnormalities of glucose metabolism in the Alzheimer’s brain. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology 5 , 262–272 (2018).29560372
74 Watson KT Neural Correlates of Liraglutide Effects in Persons at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease. Behavioural Brain Research 356 , 271–278 (2019).30099030
75 Morris JK , Vidoni ED , Honea RA ; &amp; Burns JM . Impaired glycemia increases disease progression in mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiology of Aging 35 , 585–589 (2014a).24411018
76 Mielke JG A biochemical and functional characterization of diet-induced brain insulin resistance. Journal of Neurochemistry 93 , 1568–1578, doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03155.x (2005).15935073
77 Calvo-Ochoa E , Hernández-Ortega K , Ferrera P , Morimoto S &amp; Arias C Short-Term High-Fat-and-Fructose Feeding Produces Insulin Signaling Alterations Accompanied by Neurite and Synaptic Reduction and Astroglial Activation in the Rat Hippocampus. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &amp; Metabolism 34 , 1001–1008, doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.48 (2014).24667917
78 Kothari V High fat diet induces brain insulin resistance and cognitive impairment in mice. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease 1863 , 499–508, doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.10.006 (2017).27771511
79 Wakabayashi T Differential effects of diet- and genetically-induced brain insulin resistance on amyloid pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Molecular Neurodegeneration 14 , 15, doi:10.1186/s13024-019-0315-7 (2019).30975165
80 Chiaravalloti A Is cerebral glucose metabolism related to blood-brain barrier dysfunction and intrathecal IgG synthesis in Alzheimer disease?: A 18F-FDG PET/CT study. Medicine (Baltimore) 95 , e4206, doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000004206 (2016).27631200
81 Chen Z &amp; Zhong C Decoding Alzheimer’s disease from perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism: implications for diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. Prog Neurobiol 108 , 21–43, doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004 (2013).23850509
82 Muzic RF Jr. Analysis of metabolism of 6FDG: a PET glucose transport tracer. Nucl Med Biol 38 , 667–674, doi:10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2010.12.007 (2011).21718942
83 Calsolaro V &amp; Edison P Alterations in Glucose Metabolism in Alzheimer’s Disease. Recent Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov 10 , 31–39, doi:10.2174/1872214810666160615102809 (2016).27306508
84 Marcus C , Mena E &amp; Subramaniam RM Brain PET in the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Clin Nucl Med 39 , e413–422; quiz e423–416, doi:10.1097/RLU.0000000000000547 (2014).25199063
85 Ishii K PET approaches for diagnosis of dementia. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 35 , 2030–2038, doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3695 (2014).23945233
86 Berti V , Mosconi L &amp; Pupi A Brain: normal variations and benign findings in fluorodeoxyglucose-PET/computed tomography imaging. PET Clin 9 , 129–140, doi:10.1016/j.cpet.2013.10.006 (2014).24772054
87 Rocher AB , Chapon F , Blaizot X , Baron JC &amp; Chavoix C Resting-state brain glucose utilization as measured by PET is directly related to regional synaptophysin levels: a study in baboons. Neuroimage 20 , 1894–1898 (2003).14642499
88 Mosconi L Brain glucose metabolism in the early and specific diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. FDG-PET studies in MCI and AD. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 32 , 486–510, doi:10.1007/s00259-005-1762-7 (2005).15747152
89 Silverman DH Positron emission tomography in evaluation of dementia: Regional brain metabolism and long-term outcome. JAMA 286 , 2120–2127, doi:10.1001/jama.286.17.2120 (2001).11694153
90 Minoshima S Alzheimer’s disease versus dementia with Lewy bodies: cerebral metabolic distinction with autopsy confirmation. Ann Neurol 50 , 358–365, doi:10.1002/ana.1133 (2001).11558792
91 Montagne A Blood-brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippocampus. Neuron 85 , 296–302, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.032 (2015).25611508
92 Hirvonen J Effects of insulin on brain glucose metabolism in impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes 60 , 443–447, doi:10.2337/db10-0940 (2011).21270256
93 Willette AA Association of Insulin Resistance With Cerebral Glucose Uptake in Late Middle-Aged Adults at Risk for Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol 72 , 1013–1020, doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.0613 (2015).26214150
94 Baker LD Insulin resistance and Alzheimer-like reductions in regional cerebral glucose metabolism for cognitively normal adults with prediabetes or early type 2 diabetes. Archives of neurology 68 , 51–57 (2011).20837822
95 Attwell D Glial and neuronal control of brain blood flow. Nature 468 , 232–243, doi:10.1038/nature09613 (2010).21068832
96 Pellerin L &amp; Magistretti PJ Glutamate uptake into astrocytes stimulates aerobic glycolysis: a mechanism coupling neuronal activity to glucose utilization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 , 10625–10629, doi:10.1073/pnas.91.22.10625 (1994).7938003
97 Greicius MD , Supekar K , Menon V &amp; Dougherty RF Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network. Cereb Cortex 19 , 72–78, doi: (2009).18403396
98 van den Heuvel M , Mandl R , Luigjes J &amp; Hulshoff Pol H Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity. J Neurosci 28 , 10844–10851 (2008).18945892
99 Aiello M Relationship between simultaneously acquired resting-state regional cerebral glucose metabolism and functional MRI: a PET/MR hybrid scanner study. Neuroimage 113 , 111–121, doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.017 (2015).25791784
100 Xu J Brain Functional Networks in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients: A Resting-State Functional MRI Study. Front Neurosci 13 , 239–239, doi:10.3389/fnins.2019.00239 (2019).30941007
101 Frank S Altered brain activity in severely obese women may recover after Roux-en Y gastric bypass surgery. Int J Obes (Lond) 38 , 341–348, doi:10.1038/ijo.2013.60 (2014).23711773
102 Sorg C Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 18760–18765, doi:10.1073/pnas.0708803104 (2007).18003904
103 Kim HJ Distinctive Resting State Network Disruptions Among Alzheimer’s Disease, Subcortical Vascular Dementia, and Mixed Dementia Patients. J Alzheimers Dis 50 , 709–718, doi:10.3233/jad-150637 (2016).26757039
104 Manschot S Brain magnetic resonance imaging correlates of impaired cognition in patients with Type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 55 , 1106–1113 (2006).16567535
105 Vincent C &amp; Hall PA Executive Function in Adults With Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-Analytic Review. Psychosomatic Medicine 5 , 631–642 (2015).
106 Sadanand S , Balanchar R &amp; Bharth S Memory and executive functions in persons with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and Reviews 32 , 132–142 (2016).25963303
107 Yassine HN Do menopausal status and APOE4 genotype alter the long-term effects of intensive lifestyle intervention on cognitive function in women with type 2 diabetes mellitus? Neurobiology of Aging, doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.03.020 (2020).
108 Sano M , Zhu CW , Grossman H &amp; Schimming C Longitudinal Cognitive Profiles in Diabetes: Results From the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center’s Uniform Data. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 65 , 2198–2204, doi:10.1111/jgs.15014 (2017).28771679
109 Vogel JW Four distinct trajectories of tau deposition identified in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Medicine, doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01309-6 (2021).
110 Cantini G , Mannucci E , &amp; Luconi M . Perspectives in GLP-1 research: new targets, new receptors. Trends in Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism 27 , 427–438 (2016).27091492
111 Trier S , Linderoth L , Bjerregaard S , Andresen TL &amp; Rahbek UL Acylation of Glucagon-Like Peptide-2: Interaction with Lipid Membranes and In Vitro Intestinal Permeability. PLOS ONE 9 , e109939, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0109939 (2014).25295731
112 Secher A , Jelsing J , Baquero AF , Hecksher-Sørensen J , Cowley MA , Dalbøge LS , &amp; Hansen G , Grove KL , Pyke C , Raun K , Schäffer L , Tang-Christensen M , Verma S , Witgen BM , Vrang N , &amp; Knudsen LB The arcuate nucleus mediates GLP-1 receptor agonist liraglutide-dependent weight loss. Journal of Clinical Investigation 124 , 4473–4488 (2014).
113 Helms HCC , Gallett S , Imbernon M , Clasadonte J , Brodin B , Hecksher-Sørensen J , Prevot V , &amp; Buckley ST in Abstract 235 from the 12th International Conference on Cerebral Vascular Biology (Melbourne, Australia, 2017).
114 Kastin AJ A. V . Entry of exendin-4 into brain is rapid but may be limited at high doses. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders 27 , 313–318 (2003).12629557
115 Alvarez E , Martínez MD , Roncero I , Chowen JA , García-Cuartero B , Gispert JD , Sanz C , Vázquez P , Maldonado A , de Cáceres J , Desco M , Pozo MA , and Blázquez E . The expression of GLP-1 receptor mRNA and protein allows the effect of GLP-1 on glucose metabolism in the human hypothalamus and brainstem. Journal of Neurochemistry 92 , 798–806 (2005).15686481
116 Hamilton A H. C . Receptors for the incretin glucagon-like peptide-1 are expressed on neurons in the central nervous system. NeuroReport 20 , 1161–1166 (2009).19617854
117 Isacson R , Nielsen E , Dannaeus K , Bertilsson G , Patrone C , Zachrisson O , and Wikström L . The glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist exendin-4 improves reference memory performance and decreases immobility in the forced swim test. European Journal of Pharmacology 650 , 249–255 (2011).20951130
118 Gu G , Roland B , Tomaselli K , Dolman CS , Lowe C , &amp; Heilig JS . Glucagon-like peptide-1 in the rat brain: distribution of expression and functional implication. Journal of Comparative Neurology 521 , 2235–2261 (2012).
119 Cork SC , Richards JE , Holt MK , Gribble FM , Reimann F , &amp; Trapp S . Distribution and characterisation of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor expressing cells in the mouse brain. Molecular Metabolism 4 , 718–731. (2015).26500843
120 Trapp S &amp; Cork SC PPG neurons of the lower brain stem and their role in brain GLP-1 receptor activation. American Journal of Physiology 309 , R795–R804 (2015).26290108
121 Farr OM , Sofopoulos M , Tsoukas MA , Dincer F , Thakkar B , Sahin-Efe A , Filippaios A , Bowers J , Srnka A , Gavrieli A , Ko B-J , Liakou C , Kanyuch N , Tseleni-Balafouta S , &amp; Mantzoros CS . GLP-1 receptors exist in the parietal cortex, hypothalamus and medulla of human brains and the GLP-1 analogue liraglutide alters brain activity related to highly desirable food cues in individuals with diabetes: a crossover, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. . Diabetologia 59 , 954–965 (2016).26831302
122 Spielman LJ , Gibson DL , &amp; Klegeris A Incretin hormones regulate microglia oxidative stress, survival and expression of trophic factors. European Journal of Cell Biology 96 , 240–253 (2017).28336086
123 Christensen M , Sparre-Ulrich AH , Hartmann B , Grevstad U , Rosenkilde MM , Holst JJ , Vilsbøll T , and Knop FK . Transfer of Liraglutide from Blood to Cerebrospinal Fluid Is Minimal in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. International Journal of Obesity 39 , 1651–1654 (2015).26228460
124 Müller TD , Finan B , Bloom SR , D’Alessio D , Drucker DJ , Flatt PR , Fritsche A , Gribble F , Grill HJ , Habener JF , Holst JJ , Langhans W , Meier JJ , Nauck MA , Perez-Tilve D , Pocai A , Reimann F , Sandoval DA , &amp; Tschöp MH Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). Molecular Metabolism 30 , 72–132 (2019).31767182
125 Gejl M Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) raises blood-brain glucose transfer capacity and hexokinase activity in human brain. Frontiers in Neuroenergetics 5 (2013).
126 Fu Z Brain Endothelial Cells Regulate Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Entry Into the Brain via a Receptor-Mediated Process. Frontiers in Physiology 11 (2020).
127 Stobart JL &amp; Anderson CM Multifunctional role of astrocytes as gatekeepers of neuronal energy supply. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 7 (2013).
128 Sibson NR Stoichiometric coupling of brain glucose metabolism and glutamatergic neuronal activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 95 , 316–321 (1998).9419373
129 Tourigny DS , Abdul Karim MK , Echeveste R , Kotter MRN &amp; O’Neill JS Energetic substrate availability regulates synchronous activity in an excitatory neural network. PLoS One 14 , e0220937 (2019).31408504
130 Falkowska A Energy Metabolism of the Brain, Including the Cooperation between Astrocytes and Neurons, Especially in the Context of Glycogen Metabolism. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 16 , 25959–25981 (2015).26528968
131 Ashrafi G , Wu Z , Farrell RJ &amp; Ryan TA Glut4 mobilization supports energetic demands of active synapses. Neuron 93 , 606–615 (2017).28111082
132 Pearson-Leary J &amp; McNay EC Novel Roles for the Insulin-Regulated Glucose Transporter-4 in Hippocampally Dependent Memory. Journal of Neuroscience 36 , 11851–11864 (2016).27881773
133 Meng W , Tobin JR &amp; Busija DW Glutamate-Induced Cerebral Vasodilation Is Mediated by Nitric Oxide Through N-Methyl-d-Aspartate Receptors. Stroke 26 , 857–863 (1995).7740580
134 Lee WL &amp; Klip A Shuttling glucose across brain microvessels, with a little help from GLUT1 and AMP kinase. Focus on “AMP kinase regulation of sugar transport in brain capillary endothelial cells during acute metabolic stress”. Cell Physiology 303 , C803–C805 (2012).22814398
135 Gejl M , Gjedde A , Egefjord L , Møller A , Hansen SB , Vang K , Rodell A , Brændgaard H , Gottrup H , Schacht A , Møller N , Brock B , &amp; Rungby J . In Alzheimer’s disease, 6-month treatment with GLP-1 analog prevents decline of brain glucose metabolism: randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 8 , 108 (2016).27252647
136 Talbot K , &amp; Wang H-Y The nature, significance, and GLP-1 analogue treatment of brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 , S12–S25 (2014).
137 Bomfim TR , Forny-Germano L , Sathler LB , Brito-Moreira J , Houzel J-C , Decker H , Silverman MA , Kazi H , Melo HM , McClean PL , Hölscher C , Arnold SE , Talbot K , Klein WL , Munoz DP , Ferreira ST , &amp; De Felice FG . An anti-diabetes agent protects the mouse brain from defective insulin signaling caused by Alzheimer’s disease–associated Aβ oligomers. Journal of Clinical Investigation 122 , 1339–1353 (2012).
138 Sharma MK , Jalewa J , &amp; Hölscher C Neuroprotective and anti-apoptotic effects of liraglutide on SH-SY5Y cells exposed to methylglyoxal stress. Journal of Neurochemistry 128 , 459–471 (2014).24112036
139 Lee YS , J. H-S . Anti-inflammatory effects of GLP-1-based therapies beyond glucose control. Mediators of Inflammation 2016 , 3094642 (2016).27110066
140 Oh YS , &amp; Jun H-S Effects of glucagon-like peptide-1 on oxidative stress and Nrf2 signaling. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 19 , 26 (2018).
141 Nauck MA , Meier JJ , Cavender MA , Abd El Aziz M , &amp; Drucker DJ Cardiovascular Actions and Clinical Outcomes With Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists and Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 Inhibitors. Circulation Research 136 , 849–870 (2017).
142 Bao Y , Jiang L , Chen H , Zou J , Liu Z , Shi Y (2015) The neuroprotective effect of liraglutide is mediated by glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor-mediated activation of cAMP/ &amp; 2366–2378., P. C. p. C. P. a. B. The neuroprotective effect of liraglutide is mediated by glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor-mediated activation of cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway. Cellular Physiology and Biochemistry 36 , 2366–2378 (2015).26279440
143 Bomba M , Granzotto A , Castelli V , Massetti N , Silvestri E , Canzoniero LMT , Cimini A , &amp; Sensi SL . Exenatide exerts cognitive effects by modulating the BDNF-TrkB neurotrophic axis in adult mice. Neurobiology of Aging 64 , 33–43 (2017).29331730
144 McClean PL , Parthsarathy V , Faivre E , &amp; Hölscher C The diabetes drug liraglutide prevents degenerative processes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neuroscience 31 , 6587–6594 (2011).21525299
145 During MJ , Cao L , Zuzga DS , Francis JS , Fitzsimons HL , Jiao X , Bland RJ , Klugmann M , Banks WA , Drucker DJ , Haile CN Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor is involved in learning and neuroprotection. Nature Medicine 9 , 1173–1179 (2003).
146 Gedulin BR Exenatide (exendin-4) improves insulin sensitivity and {beta}-cell mass in insulin-resistant obese fa/fa Zucker rats independent of glycemia and body weight. Endocrinology 146 , 2069–2076, doi:10.1210/en.2004-1349 (2005).15618356
147 Mells JE Glp-1 analog, liraglutide, ameliorates hepatic steatosis and cardiac hypertrophy in C57BL/6J mice fed a Western diet. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 302 , G225–235, doi:10.1152/ajpgi.00274.2011 (2012).22038829
148 Gastaldelli A , Brodows RG &amp; D’Alessio D The effect of chronic twice daily exenatide treatment on β-cell function in new onset type 2 diabetes. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 80 , 545–553, doi:10.1111/cen.12199 (2014).23574529
149 Noyan-Ashraf MH A Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Analog Reverses the Molecular Pathology and Cardiac Dysfunction of a Mouse Model of Obesity. Circulation 127 , 74–85, doi:doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.091215 (2013).23186644
150 Fonseca VA Reductions in insulin resistance are mediated primarily via weight loss in subjects with type 2 diabetes on semaglutide. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, doi:10.1210/jc.2018-02685 (2019).
151 Bomba M Exenatide promotes cognitive enhancement and positive brain metabolic changes in PS1-KI mice but has no effects in 3xTg-AD animals. Cell Death &amp; Disease 4 , e612–e612, doi:10.1038/cddis.2013.139 (2013).23640454
152 Zhao L Pharmacologically reversible zonation-dependent endothelial cell transcriptomic changes with neurodegenerative disease associations in the aged brain. Nature Communications 11 , 4413, doi:10.1038/s41467-020-18249-3 (2020).
153 Gault VA , P. W , Flatt PR , Hölscher C Actions of exendin-4 therapy on cognitive function and hippocampal synaptic plasticity in mice fed a high-fat diet. Int J Obes (Lond) 34 , 1341–1344, doi:10.1038/ijo.2010.59 (2010).20351729
154 Lennox R , F. P , Gault VA . Lixisenatide improves recognition memory and exerts neuroprotective actions in high-fat fed mice. Peptides 61 , 38–47, doi:10.1016/j.peptides.2014.08.014 (2014).25195184
155 Jia XT , Y.-T. , Yuan-Li , . Exendin-4, a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist, protects against amyloid-β peptide-induced impairment of spatial learning and memory in rats. Physiol Behav. 159 , 72–79, doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.03.016 (2016).26992957
156 McClean PL &amp; H C . Lixisenatide, a drug developed to treat type 2 diabetes, shows neuroprotective effects in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropharmacology 86 , 241–258, doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.07.015 (2014).25107586
157 Daniele G Exenatide Regulates Cerebral Glucose Metabolism in Brain Areas Associated With Glucose Homeostasis and Reward System. Diabetes 64 , 3406, doi:10.2337/db14-1718 (2015).26116695
158 Gejl M , Egefjord L , Lerche S , Vang K , Bibby BM , Holst JJ , Mengel A , &amp; Møller N , Rungby J , Brock B , and Gjedde A . Glucagon-like peptide-1 decreases intracerebral glucose content by activating hexokinase and changing glucose clearance during hyperglycemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 32 , 2146–2152 (2012).22929437
159 Ballard C Liraglutide and semaglutide: Pooled post hoc analysis to evaluate risk of dementia in patients with type 2 diabetes. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 16 , e042909, doi:10.1002/alz.042909 (2020).
160 Molnár G , Faragó N , Kocsis AK , Rózsa M , Lovas S , Boldog E , Báldi R , Csajbók E , Gardi J , Puskás LG ; &amp; Tamás G GABAergic neurogliaform cells represent local sources of insulin in the cerebral cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 34 (2014).
161 Bastin C In vivo imaging of synaptic loss in Alzheimer’s disease with [18F]UCB-H positron emission tomography. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 47 , 390–402, doi:10.1007/s00259-019-04461-x (2020).31468182
162 Zheng H , Cai L , and Rinaman L . Distribution of glucagon-like peptide 1- immunopositive neurons in human caudal medulla. Brain Structure and Function 220 (2015).
163 Simpson IA , Carruthers A , and Vannucci SJ Supply and demand in cerebral energy metabolism: the role of nutrient transporters. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism: official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 27 , 1766–1791 (2007).
164 Simmons R Cell Glucose Transport and Glucose Handling During Fetal and Neonatal Development. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology 1 , 428–435 (2017).
165 Thorens E GLUT2, glucose sensing and glucose homeostasis. Diabetelogia 58 , 221–232 (2014).
166 Fladeby C , Skar R , Serck-Hanssen G Distinct regulation of glucose transport and GLUT1/GLUT3 transporters by glucose deprivation and IGF-I in chromaffin cells. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1593 , 201–208 (2003).12581864
167 Grober E Memory impairment, executive dysfunction, and intellectual decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 14 , 266–278 (2008).18282324
168 Kelley BJ &amp; Petersen RC Alzheimer’s Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment. Neurol Clin. 25 , 577–v. (2007).17659182
169 Ramirez-Gomez L Neuropsychological Profiles Differentiate Alzheimer Disease from Subcortical Ischemic Vascular Dementia in an Autopsy-Defined Cohort. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders 44 , 1–11, doi:10.1159/000477344 (2017).28595184
170 Engler H Two-year follow-up of amyloid deposition in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 2006 (2006).
171 Goedert M , Sisodia SS &amp; Price DL Neurofibrillary tangles and beta-amyloid deposits in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1 , 441–447 (1991).1821689
172 Ho L , Q. W , Pompl PN , Diet-induced insulin resistance promotes amyloidosis in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J 18 , 902–904, doi:10.1096/fj.03-0978fje (2004).15033922
173 Exalto LG , Whitmer RA , Kappele LJ &amp; Biessels GJ An update on type 2 diabetes, vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Experimental Gerontology 47 , 858–864, doi:10.1016/j.exger.2012.07.014 (2012).22884853
174 Liu M Quantitative imaging APOE4 effects on brain tau deposition and glucose metabolism in mild cognitive impairment patients with [18F]AV1451 and [18F]FDG PET. J Nucle Med 59 , 80 (2018).
175 Mosconi L Maternal family history of Alzheimer’s disease predisposes to reduced brain glucose metabolism. PNAS 104 , 19067–19072 (2007).18003925
176 Xue J Altered Directed Functional Connectivity of the Hippocampus in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Resting-State fMRI Study. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 11 (2019).
177 Winkler EA GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease vasculoneuronal dysfunction and degeneration. Nat Neurosci 18 , 521–530 (2015).25730668
178 McNay EC &amp; Pearson-Leary J GluT4: A central player in hippocampal memory and brain insulin resistance. Experimental Neurology 323 , 113076, doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2019.113076 (2020).31614121
179 Tullberg M White matter lesions impair frontal lobe function regardless of their location. Neurology 63 , 246–253, doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000130530.55104.b5 (2004).15277616
180 Cai HY , Y. J , Wang ZJ , . Lixisenatide reduces amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and neuroinflammation in an APP/PS1/tau mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 495 , 1034–1040, doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.11.114 (2018).29175324
181 Hansen HH , F. K , Barkholt P , . The GLP-1 Receptor Agonist Liraglutide Improves Memory Function and Increases Hippocampal CA1 Neuronal Numbers in a Senescence-Accelerated Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 46 , 877–888, doi:10.3233/JAD-143090 (2015).25869785
182 Qi L , K. L , Liu X , Subcutaneous administration of liraglutide ameliorates learning and memory impairment by modulating tau hyperphosphorylation via the glycogen synthase kinase-3β pathway in an amyloid β protein induced alzheimer disease mouse model. Eur J Pharmacol 783 , 23–32., doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.04.052 (2016).27131827
183 Yang Y , Z. J , Ma D , . Subcutaneous administration of liraglutide ameliorates Alzheimer-associated tau hyperphosphorylation in rats with type 2 diabetes. J Alzheimers Dis. 37 , 637–648, doi:10.3233/JAD-130491 (2013).23948890
184 Batista AF , Forny-Germano L , Clarke JR , Lyra e Silva NM , Brito-Moreira J , Boehnke SE , Winterborn A , Coe BC , Lablans A , Vital JF , Marques SA , Martinez AMB , Gralle M , Hölscher C , Klein WL , Houzel J-C , Ferreira ST , Munoz DP , &amp; De Felice FG . The diabetes drug liraglutide reverses cognitive impairment in mice and attenuates insulin receptor and synaptic pathology in a non-human primate model of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Pathology 245 , 85–100 (2018).
185 Porter WD , Flatt PR , Hölscher C and Gault VA Liraglutide improves hippocampal synaptic plasticity associated with increased expression of Mash1 in ob/ob mice. International Journal of Obesity 37 , 678–684 (2013).22665137
186 Hansen HH , F. K , Barkholt P , . Long-Term Treatment with Liraglutide, a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) Receptor Agonist, Has No Effect on β-Amyloid Plaque Load in Two Transgenic APP/PS1 Mouse Models of Alzheimer’s Disease. PLoS One 11 , e0158205, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0158205 (2016).27421117
187 Cukierman-Yaffe T Effect of dulaglutide on cognitive impairment in type 2 diabetes: an exploratory analysis of the REWIND trial. The Lancet Neurology 19 , 582–590, doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30173-3 (2020).32562683
