LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0262322
4968
J Mol Cell Cardiol
J Mol Cell Cardiol
Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology
0022-2828
1095-8584

34798125
8958390
10.1016/j.yjmcc.2021.11.005
NIHMS1787702
Article
Computational model of brain endothelial cell signaling pathways predicts therapeutic targets for cerebral pathologies
Gorick Catherine M. a
Saucerman Jeffrey J. a*
Price Richard J. ab*
a Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
b Department of Radiology &amp; Medical Imaging, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
* Corresponding authors at: Department of Biomedical Engineering, Box 800759, Health System, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. jsaucerman@virginia.edu (J.J. Saucerman), rprice@virginia.edu (R.J. Price).
17 3 2022
3 2022
16 11 2021
01 3 2023
164 1728
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Brain endothelial cells serve many critical homeostatic functions. In addition to sensing and regulating blood flow, they maintain blood-brain barrier function, including precise control of nutrient exchange and efflux of xenobiotics. Many signaling pathways in brain endothelial cells have been implicated in both health and disease; however, our understanding of how these signaling pathways functionally integrate is limited. A model capable of integrating these signaling pathways could both advance our understanding of brain endothelial cell signaling networks and potentially identify promising molecular targets for endothelial cell-based drug or gene therapies. To this end, we developed a large-scale computational model, wherein brain endothelial cell signaling pathways were reconstructed from the literature and converted into a network of logic-based differential equations. The model integrates 63 nodes (including proteins, mRNA, small molecules, and cell phenotypes) and 82 reactions connecting these nodes. Specifically, our model combines signaling pathways relating to VEGF-A, BDNF, NGF, and Wnt signaling, in addition to incorporating pathways relating to focused ultrasound as a therapeutic delivery tool. To validate the model, independently established relationships between selected inputs and outputs were simulated, with the model yielding correct predictions 73% of the time. We identified influential and sensitive nodes under different physiological or pathological contexts, including altered brain endothelial cell conditions during glioma, Alzheimer's disease, and ischemic stroke. Nodes with the greatest influence over combinations of desired model outputs were identified as potential druggable targets for these disease conditions. For example, the model predicts therapeutic benefits from inhibiting AKT, Hif-1α, or cathepsin D in the context of glioma – each of which are currently being studied in clinical or pre-clinical trials. Notably, the model also permits testing multiple combinations of node alterations for their effects on the network and the desired outputs (such as inhibiting AKT and overexpressing the P75 neurotrophin receptor simultaneously in the context of glioma), allowing for the prediction of optimal combination therapies. In all, our approach integrates results from over 100 past studies into a coherent and powerful model, capable of both revealing network interactions unapparent from studying any one pathway in isolation and predicting therapeutic targets for treating devastating brain pathologies.

Endothelium
Cerebrovasculature
Computational model
Focused ultrasound
Molecular signaling

pmc1. Introduction

Many pathologies of the brain are characterized by both devastating daily effects for patients and daunting challenges and limitations to treatment for physicians [1]. These conditions, which include brain tumors, neurodegenerative diseases, and stroke, vary widely in their incidence, molecular mechanisms, and progression, and yet all remain inherently difficult to treat. At least some of the challenge of treatment rests in the nature of the brain structure itself, and more specifically, the blood-brain barrier (BBB). For many years, delivery of therapeutics to the brain required risky and invasive surgery to facilitate direct injections [2-5], or brain-wide disruption of the BBB to allow passage of drugs [6,7]. More recently, focused ultrasound (FUS) in conjunction with intravenously-injected gas-filled microbubbles has been used to facilitate drug delivery to the brain in a spatially-targeted manner. This approach can be used to deliver genes or other therapeutics to a specific structure or region of the brain non-invasively [8-11].

The cerebral microvasculature consists of a continuous, nonfenestrated layer of brain capillary endothelial cells. Brain endothelial cells are held together by tight junctions, which serve as a barrier to paracellular passive diffusion of materials from the systemic circulation into the surrounding brain tissue [12]. The brain endothelium also expresses drug efflux pumps, such as p-glycoprotein, to continuously remove potentially harmful materials from the central nervous system [13]. Thus, in essence, brain endothelial cells are the gatekeepers to the brain. As the gatekeepers, cerebral endothelial cells play a tremendous role in the state of the brain in both physiological and pathological conditions, by dictating the blood flow, oxygenation, nutrient transport, and drug concentrations in the brain parenchyma. Brain endothelial cells experience competing cues from growth factors, neurotrophic factors, and other cytokines and paracrine signaling molecules, and integrate these diverse signals to regulate behaviors such as angiogenesis, immune cell recruitment, and apoptosis. Therefore, appropriate therapeutic strategies to modulate cerebral endothelial cell signaling must function within this complex environment of diverse signaling cues present in the healthy or diseased brain. Designing such therapies relies on understanding how cells integrate these signals, yet to date no computational models of brain endothelial cell signaling exist.

In this study we develop the first computational model of the brain endothelial cell signaling network in order to identify disease context-dependent drivers of therapeutic patterns of molecule expression or phenotypes. The model incorporates the VEGF-A signaling pathway, the BDNF and NGF neurotrophin signaling pathways, and the Wnt signaling pathway. BDNF and NGF can act through either their unprocessed, pro-neurotrophin forms, which preferentially bind sortilin and the p75NTR receptor to activate a number of pro-apoptotic pathways, or can be processed by protein convertases such as furin or plasmin into their mature neurotrophin forms, which preferentially bind the Trk receptors and induce more pro-survival signaling [14]. VEGF-A signaling drives many pro-angiogenic processes [15], and Wnt signaling in the brain endothelium has been implicated in promoting survival and BBB integrity [16]. Additionally, our model features a FUS input node, based upon prior in vivo transcriptomic studies which demonstrated that FUS-mediated BBB opening results in upregulation of cathepsin D in cerebral endothelial cells [17]. The model's outputs were selected for their relevance to brain pathologies of interest. These include the proteins which constitute tight junctions, claudin-5 and occludin, and adherens junctions, VE cadherin, between endothelial cells. Outputs also include expression of the glucose transporter GLUT1 and the efflux transporter p-glycoprotein, as well as nitric oxide production (which helps regulate vasodilation and blood flow), and apoptosis or cell death.

After validating the model at baseline (“normal” physiological conditions) against the existing literature, we simulate the altered signaling network under three disease states (glioma, Alzheimer's disease, and ischemic stroke) and predict the most influential nodes in regulating potential therapeutic responses to those specific pathologies. This analysis reveals novel potential targets (or combinations of targets) for pharmaceutical intervention using FUS as a delivery mechanism. We submit that this model represents a valuable tool to develop strategic therapeutic approaches for FUS-mediated drug and gene delivery in a range of different disease contexts in the brain.

2. Results

2.1. Validation of computational model of brain endothelial cell signaling

A predictive computational model of brain endothelial cell signaling (Fig. 1) was manually reconstructed from previous experimental studies from the literature. The detailed procedure for literature review and network reconstruction is provided in the Materials and Methods section. The list of molecular nodes implemented in the model is provided in Table S1, and full documentation of each reaction and the experimental evidence supporting that reaction is provided in Table S2. We first predicted responses of the endothelial cell signaling network to specific stimuli, and validated these predictions against experimental studies performed in endothelial cells that were independent from those studies used to reconstruct the signaling network. For example, the effect of different concentrations of Wnt or a Wnt agonist on the activity of P-glycoprotein was simulated and compared to experimental data from Lim et al. [18] (Fig. 2A,B). The model predicts a dose-dependent increase in P-glycoprotein activity as Wnt inputs are increased, qualitatively consistent with published data from human brain endothelial cells showing that Wnt/β catenin signaling positively regulates P-glycoprotein expression and activity.

Overall, the model was validated against 26 input-output relationships for which experimental data is available, and accurately predicts 19 of those 26 (73%). Of the relationships for which there is disagreement, 3 of these are disagreements in which either the model or literature claims no change in activity, and the other predicts a change, and 4 are disagreements where the model and literature predict activity changes in opposite directions. Fig. 2C summarizes the predicted relationship of the different individual input stimuli to each of the outputs, and the agreement between model predictions and experimental data where available (26 relationships). The literature sources of the experimental data used to validate the model can be found in Table S3. In order to assess the predictive power of the model compared to random chance, we conducted five independent randomizations of the literature qualitative changes (14 increases, 11 decreases, and 1 no change, all randomized in order) and compared to the model predictions (Table S4). The average success rate of the model in predicting these randomized values across 5 trials was 37%. Thus, the model outperforms random chance by about double the success rate.

In particular, the model performed the best when predicting the outcomes of increased VEGF-A input, correctly predicting all 6 of the output behaviors. Of the 7 total input-output relationships incorrectly predicted by the model, three were related to the Wnt input. In the case of the cell death and GLUT1 activity outputs, the literature reports Wnt-dependent responses while the model predicted no change in these outputs. Additionally, the FUS input resulted in 2 incorrect predictions of outputs, predicting the increases in P-glycoprotein and GLUT1 activity while the literature reported decreases. The outputs best characterized by the model were VE cadherin activity, cell death, and nitric oxide production. There were no disagreements between the available literature and model predictions for these three outputs. The least well characterized output was the activity of the tight junctional proteins (claudin 5 and occludin), for which the model incorrectly predicted behaviors in 3 of the 5 relationships with literature available.

2.2. Identification of key network regulators

After validating the model's predictive capability, we performed a network-wide sensitivity analysis in order to determine quantitative functional relationships across the network. Knockdown of individual nodes was simulated by reducing the Ymax parameter for that node. The resulting change in activity of each other node was then measured, predicting the response of the network to inhibition of specific receptors, kinases, or genes (Fig. 3). “Influential” nodes were defined as those whose knockdown causes the greatest activity changes across the network, as measured by the number of nodes whose activity was altered by at least 20% in response to the knockdown. Based on the network-wide sensitivity analysis (Fig. 3), we identified the 4 nodes with the greatest influence over the rest of the network (Fig. 4A). These most influential nodes were AKT, cathepsin D, VEGF-A, and VEGFR2. As the VEGF-A signaling pathway activates a number of different complex pathways, the presence of VEGF-A and VEGFR2 are perhaps not surprising here. AKT is a well-connected central hub in the network activating a number of downstream cascades, and cathepsin D directly activates both AKT and ERK. “Sensitive” nodes were defined as those with significant activity changes (at least 20%) in response to the most different knockdowns. The top 4 sensitive nodes (Fig. 4B) were occludin, IP3, DAG, and GLUT1. IP3 and DAG are both involved in calcium signaling downstream of VEGF-A, NGF, and BDNF pathways, while occludin and GLUT1 are terminal outputs controlled by the activation of these pathways as well. We also identified the impact of each node knockout on each of the outputs of interest: VE cadherin, claudin-5, occludin, cell death, GLUT1, P-glycoprotein, and nitric oxide activity. The sensitivity of these outputs to systematic node knockout under baseline conditions can be seen in Fig. S1. These simulations show that these six model outputs are differentially regulated.

2.3. Identification of single therapeutic targets within signaling network

In order to utilize the brain endothelial cell signaling network model to identify druggable targets for pathologies of the brain, we first reviewed the literature to determine the relative expression levels of a number of our model inputs (VEGF-A, NGF, BDNF, Wnt, and cathepsin D) in each of three disease states: glioma, Alzheimer's disease, and ischemic stroke (see Table S5 for references). In the context of glioma, all five of these inputs have been demonstrated to be present at a higher level than healthy brain tissue [19-24]. In Alzheimer's disease, NGF and BDNF activity is characterized by a shift towards the pro-neurotrophin forms of each protein (which binds sortilin and p75NTR), as opposed to the mature forms (which are cleaved by pro-convertases like plasmin or MMP and bind the TrkA or TrkB receptors) [25,26]. The brains of Alzheimer's disease patients also display reduced levels of VEGF-A [27], Wnt [28], and cathepsin D [29]. Finally, in the infarcted regions of brains affected by ischemic stroke, reductions in the levels of BDNF [30] and cathepsin D [31] have been observed, as have increases in the concentrations of VEGF-A [32] and Wnt [33]. The differential expression of these inputs was used to create a disease context in which to identify and test potential therapies. Briefly, any input which is elevated in the disease state relative to control was increased in the model by 25% (from 0.4 to 0.65), and any input which is reduced was decreased by 25% (from 0.4 to 0.15). While the range of changes in concentrations of these molecules varied widely in the literature, the 25% change in either direction was selected to avoid under- or over-saturating any input nodes while still producing a significant range of possible values for each input. In each of the disease contexts, we added the FUS input to simulate the delivery mechanism of therapeutics (at the standard input weight of 0.4).

We also reviewed the literature to identify therapeutic goals for each of these pathologies that are currently being investigated. We discovered general treatment aims that aligned with increased or decreased activity of a number of our model outputs (Table S6). Glioma, for example, is characterized by poorly controlled cell division and excessive efflux of chemotherapeutics through the P-glycoprotein efflux pump [34]. For these reasons, we identified the therapeutic goals for glioma of increasing cell death, reducing GLUT1 activity (and subsequent glucose supply to the tumor), and reducing P-glycoprotein activity. In Alzheimer's disease, a leaky BBB is often associated with worse symptom progression [35], and there is often insufficient nutrient transport and efflux along the affected endothelium [36,37]. For this pathology, the therapeutic goals were to increase VE cadherin, claudin-5, occludin, GLUT1, and P-glycoprotein. The BBB is also disrupted following ischemic stroke [38], which is also characterized by increased apoptosis [39]. For stroke, we sought to increase VE cadherin, claudin-5, and occludin, while decreasing cell death. Additionally, we found that nitric oxide upregulation is being investigated to promote increased blood flow in infarcted brain tissue [40], so we included nitric oxide increase as a treatment goal.

After simulating a given disease state through the altered input values, we repeated our systematic sensitivity analysis by knocking out or over-activating each node by changing the value of Ymax (to 0 or 2, respectively) and measuring the impact on each other node in the system (Figs. S2, S3, S4). We then evaluated the impact of each of these knockdowns or over-expressions on the treatment score for the disease state of interest. For example, the glioma therapeutic score was computed by taking a node alteration's effect on cell death (a positive increase being beneficial in this case, as we want to increase cell death in the context of glioma), and subtracting the alteration's effect on GLUT1 expression and P-glycoprotein expression (both of which we want to decrease in this pathology). We identified the top 3–5 nodes from both the knockdown and overexpression cases in terms of their therapeutic index for that disease state. These nodes were further investigated for their specific impacts on each of the individual outputs contributing to the therapeutic index. This workflow was repeated for the glioma, Alzheimer's, and stroke disease states.

Among the top targets for knockdown in the context of glioma were GLUT1 and P-glycoprotein (Fig. 5), which was expected given that they were two of the three metrics for the glioma therapeutic score. Additional top targets included AKT, Hif-1α, and cathepsin D, all of which are currently under investigation as therapeutic targets for glioma in pre-clinical studies [41-43]. The top targets for upregulation or overexpression were all related pro-apoptotic signaling, as a result of the inclusion of increased cell death as a treatment goal. In the Alzheimer's disease context, many of the top targets for over-expression were the individual outputs included in the therapeutic goals (Fig. 6). The most influential nodes for knockdown included MMP, which is involved in the breakdown of three of the therapeutic outputs (VE cadherin, claudin-5, and occludin), as well as NFκB and GSK3β. Lastly, in the context of ischemic stroke, prime targets for knockdown included MMP and components of the VEGF signaling pathway (which decreases BBB integrity) (Fig. 7). Overexpression candidates included some of the treatment goal outputs themselves, as well as ERK and KLF4, both of which increase VE-cadherin expression and reduce apoptosis.

Additionally, we tested the robustness of the model predictions to variations in the degree of input change. We acknowledge that not all relevant changes in input levels would be the same in each disease and for each species. Unfortunately, due to the highly variable nature of human disease and the clinical studies from which we were able to extract data, it is difficult to report a single “consensus value” for the changes in each species. In order to determine how sensitive our model's results are to different choices in the input values, we tested input changes of 15% and 35% in either direction (in addition to the 25% we used to generate therapeutic targets). These results are reported in Supplemental Figs. S5-S10. Generally, while some targets may change slightly in ranking relative to others, many of the same top treatment targets are identified for both overexpression and knockdown in each disease, regardless of the degree of input change.

2.4. Identification of combination therapeutic targets within signaling network

While specific single node modulations, through either overexpression or knockdown, could provide therapeutic benefit in the context of each disease examined, we recognized that many pathologies have complex treatment goals. In such cases, a single node alteration may not be sufficient to achieve all of the therapeutic goals established for the disease. In order to demonstrate the potential for the model to screen combinations of drug or gene targets, we selected one of the top targets for overexpression and one of the top targets for knockdown for each disease state, and modeled their simultaneous modulations and the effects of these combination treatments on the individual therapeutic goal for each condition. For example, in the context of glioma, the p75 neurotrophin receptor was the most beneficial node for overexpression. The top two nodes for knockdown were p-glycoprotein and AKT. Therefore, we modeled the combination of p75 overexpression and Pgp knockdown, as well as the combination of p75 overexpression and AKT knockdown (Fig. 8A). Both of these combinations outperformed their individual components, and achieved improvement in all three of the therapeutic goals (increase cell death, decrease p-glycoprotein, decrease GLUT1). However, in the contexts of Alzheimer's disease and ischemic stroke, we established 5 therapeutic goals instead of 3. In these disease states, even a combination of 2 promising node modulations (one top overexpression and one top knockdown) was insufficient to achieve all of the therapeutic goals (Fig. 8B and C). In each case, only 4 out of the 5 goals could be met with one of the single overexpression and single knockdown combinations. In these disease scenarios, while a combination of two drug or gene targets may outperform a single therapeutic, it may take three or more to meet all of the treatment goals established for the condition.

3. Discussion

Here we manually reconstructed a literature-based network of brain endothelial cell signaling that identifies the nodes regulating the expression of BBB tight junctional and adherens junctional proteins, GLUT1, and the P-glycoprotein efflux receptor, as well as nitric oxide release and apoptosis. This network was used to develop a logic-based predictive model of endothelial cell signaling (with or without FUS treatment), which validated at a rate of 73% in comparison to independent, published studies in endothelial cells. Of note, this agreement rate is similar to other published models utilizing this logic-based differential equation approach [44,45]. A comprehensive sensitivity analysis identified the network's most sensitive (occludin, IP3, DAG, GLUT1) and influential (AKT, cathepsin D, VEGF-A, VEGFR2) nodes. Three unique disease states (glioma, Alzheimer's disease, and ischemic stroke) were simulated based on characteristic patterns of model inputs, and the model was then used to predict the most therapeutically beneficial nodes to inhibit or over-express for each pathology. Additionally, we demonstrated that the model can predict the combinatorial effect of testing multiple drug targets at once. In all, our approach integrates results from over 100 past studies into a coherent and powerful model, capable of both revealing network interactions unapparent from studying any one pathway in isolation and predicting therapeutic targets for treating devastating brain pathologies.

3.1. Model validation

While the model correctly validates 73% of the input-output relationships for which there is independent data, 7 input-output relationships were incorrectly predicted by the model. Three of these were related to the Wnt input. The model predicted no change in cell death or GLUT1 expression, while the literature reports responses of these outputs to Wnt delivery. This suggests that the Wnt pathway, as it currently stands in the model, is incomplete. Further experimental investigation of Wnt signaling in brain endothelium may be required to improve this aspect of the model. We also note a discrepancy in the predictive accuracy of the model for certain outputs. Cell death, nitric oxide, and VE cadherin behaviors are generally predicted accurately, while claudin 5 and GLUT1 trends are not as well predicted. We believe this disparity in predictive agreement is due in part to the fact that the pathways which are more universal and conserved across different types of endothelial cells (such as VE cadherin activity or apoptotic pathways) have been more robustly studied in the literature. As such, we have more confidence in the accuracy and completeness of those pathways. There is less literature available on brain-specific endothelial cell signaling, and so the pathways unique to brain endothelial cells (such as claudin 5 and GLUT1) may be less reliable or complete. As additional in vitro studies of brain endothelial cells are conducted, we anticipate discoveries of additional or different nodes in these pathways, which we will incorporate into the model to determine if it improves predictive performance. Additionally, 2 of the 6 relationships related to the FUS input node were in contradiction with the literature. The model predicted increases in P-glycoprotein and GLUT1 expression following FUS treatment, while the literature reported decreases. This is likely a function of our implementation of FUS as a single node that activates only cathepsin D, when in reality FUS will exert complex effects on endothelial cells [46] The transcriptomic data from which we determined the FUS activation of cathepsin D was collected at 48 h after FUS treatment [9]. Data from more acute timepoints could provide a more nuanced treatment of the varied effects of FUS on brain endothelial cell activity.

3.2. Novel computational simulation of brain endothelial cell signaling and the role of focused ultrasound

The model developed here is, to our knowledge, the first computational model of brain endothelial cell signaling. While there are numerous models investigating how mechanical and chemical cues regulate the dynamics of vascular endothelial cell sprouting and angiogenesis [47-50], signaling network models are less common. A computational model of angiopoietin and Tie signaling in systemic vascular endothelial cells has been generated [51], as well as a Boolean network model of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition [52]. However, no studies could be identified at this point which specifically model signaling activity in the endothelial cells of the brain. As these cells play a unique role among endothelial cells due to their function as the basis of the BBB and the gatekeepers to the central nervous system, modeling these cells specifically is critically important for understanding how different CNS interventions will affect BBB integrity, nutrient transport, and other aspects of brain homeostasis.

Additionally, we are not aware of any other studies to date which incorporate FUS into a signaling network model. While FUS has now been used extensively to deliver therapeutics to the brain, and its systemic effects are under ongoing investigation, the specific impacts of FUS on endothelial cell signaling pathways remain insufficiently understood. While there have been some investigations into the impact of FUS on vascular gene expression [46] and protein activation [53,54], there are currently no available models to simulate the combinatorial effects on the brain endothelium of FUS-mediated BBB disruption and simultaneous delivery of a therapeutic drug or gene. Our model is uniquely designed to incorporate the effects of FUS on brain endothelial cell signaling, so that unexpected impacts of FUS-mediated therapeutic delivery to the brain can be more accurately predicted and accounted for. This will improve the strategic design of FUS-mediated therapies moving forward.

3.3. Simulation of disease states allows prediction of druggable targets

We simulated brain disease states (glioma, Alzheimer's disease, or ischemic stroke) by modulating the network inputs to reflect differential levels of those signaling molecules and computed the potential effects of node alterations (knockdown or overexpression) on the model outputs. In particular, we studied specific combinations of outputs for each disease state based on evidence for that output as a therapeutic goal for the pathology. In the context of glioma, where we sought to increase cell death while minimizing GLUT1 and p-glycoprotein activity, the model revealed that the best targets for inhibition were cathepsin D, Hif-1α, GLUT1, p-glycoprotein, and AKT. Importantly, inhibition of each of these species is currently being studied to reduce glioma growth, in either clinical or pre-clinical trials [41-43,55,56], strengthening our confidence in the model's ability to identify therapeutically beneficial targets. The fact that cathepsin D inhibition is indicated as a therapeutic target, while FUS-mediated BBB disruption increases cathepsin D activity, is also an interesting factor for consideration. It raises the question of whether a cathepsin D inhibitor is sufficient to overcome the activation induced by FUS, or whether an alternative delivery strategy (including a different modality of FUS, such as sonoselective transfection [9]) would be more appropriate in this context.

The model predicted a therapeutic benefit to inhibiting NFκB in the context of both Alzheimer's disease and ischemic stroke. Interestingly, endothelial-specific NFκB inhibition is currently being investigated as a treatment for a number of vascular pathologies outside of the brain, including atherosclerosis [57] and hypertension [58]. While these conditions bear an obvious connection with ischemic stroke in terms of changes in blood flow, vascular stiffness, and inflammation, their similarities to Alzheimer's disease are perhaps less clear. However, as a critical regulator of immune and inflammatory responses [59], NFκB appears to represent an attractive target for inhibition wherever reducing inflammation is a therapeutic goal.

Importantly, the model allows for the predictive testing of not just a single potential node alteration, but combinatorial therapies as well. While such combination therapies were only briefly examined in the context of this study (Fig. S5), this approach allows for the high-throughput screening of many potential combinations of node inhibitions or overexpressions, representing protein antagonists or agonists/gene delivery. As evidenced by the disease simulations presented here, it is often difficult if not impossible to identify a single target which achieves all therapeutic goals. In the case of Alzheimer's and stroke, not even combinations of two node alterations could result in the desired alterations to all five treatment goals. This speaks to the tremendous complexity and widespread changes induced by these diseases, and accounts for the longstanding challenges in their treatment. It is clear that in the complex diseases that plague the brain and central nervous system, combination therapies will likely be necessary to achieve multifaceted symptom improvement or disease remission. These combination therapies may have a variety of unforeseen synergistic or destructive effects, reinforcing the need for large-scale signaling network models like the one presented here to predict outcomes in advance and logically design treatment combinations.

3.4. Limitations

As with all modeling approaches, there are inherent limitations to our computational approach. While the model uses all default parameters, refinement of the parameter weighting (with regard to reaction weighting as well as rate) as more quantitative proteomic data becomes available would increase model accuracy and predictive power. The model structure is not fully comprehensive, focusing instead on signaling pathways related to the cerebral pathologies of interest which are characterized with in vitro data that meets the specified inclusion criteria. To further enrich the model, future curation could incorporate additional paracrine signaling molecules released by astrocytes and pericytes, as well as pathways involved in the recruitment of immune cells and neural stem cells, which also play a major role in the altered signaling activity in various disease states. Additionally, the model relies on simplified equations to represent biochemical interactions. While we would argue it contains enough complexity to capture the majority of the responses observed in vitro, perhaps further development of the equations utilized could reveal additional information about the behavior of the network at large.

Our work also highlights gaps in the current understanding of brain endothelial cell signaling, particularly with regard to neurotrophin signaling (NGF, BDNF, etc). The completeness and accuracy of these existing pathways within the model could be further validated, and as additional studies of brain endothelial cells are conducted, we look forward to updating the model accordingly. We anticipate that there will be additional discoveries related to brain-specific signaling pathways in endothelium that may improve the predictive power of the model, whether it is by removing nodes currently present, adding new ones, or developing new connections among existing nodes. We also acknowledge the limitation generated by occasionally relying upon literature from endothelial cells from non-brain sources when building the model. While we hypothesize that some of these pathways are conserved across all endothelial cells, it is possible that cerebral endothelial cells exhibit key differences in some of the reactions that may impact the model predictions. As additional literature studying these reactions in brain endothelial cells becomes available, we will incorporate or update these relationships accordingly.

4. Conclusions

We present here, to our knowledge, the first computational model of brain endothelial cell signaling. We have demonstrated its utility in modeling signaling pathways in brain endothelial cells in either normal physiology or a variety of different disease states. In each of these different states, combinations of therapeutically beneficial goals can be used to design treatment scores. Maximization of these treatment scores with either overexpression or inhibition of different nodes in the network reveals optimal targets for drug or gene therapy in those disease conditions. We can use this model and treatment score approach to screen combinations of multiple simultaneous drug or gene therapy interventions as well, to identify synergistic interactions between therapeutics and prevent unexpected adverse effects.

5. Materials and methods

5.1. Model construction

A brain endothelial cell signaling network was manually reconstructed from previous in vitro and in vivo experimental studies from the published literature. The network integrates four key inputs of interest, chosen due to their role in angiogenesis, cell survival, or neural stem cell recruitment. These include NGF (nerve growth factor), BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor), VEGF-A (vascular endothelial growth factor-A), and Wnt. Of these, NGF and BDNF can act in either or both of two forms – an immature, pro-neurotrophin (pro-NGF or pro-BDNF), or a mature, fully cleaved neurotrophin (mNGF and mBDNF). We also include an input to represent the effects of focused ultrasound-mediated microbubble activation and blood-brain barrier disruption, which we identified in prior in vivo studies [9]. Briefly, single cell transcriptomic analyses of brain tissue following FUS treatment at different peaknegative pressures revealed a number of differentially regulated transcripts across cell types. One of these, cathepsin D, was significantly upregulated in brain endothelial cells following FUS treatment. In order to better predict the combinatorial effects of the FUS delivery mechanism and the gene or protein therapeutic of interest, a FUS node was added as an input to the model, which would directly activate cathepsin D, to simulate the effects of FUS treatment. Outputs were selected for their role in blood-brain barrier integrity (VE cadherin, claudin 5, and occludin), which has potential implications for sterile inflammatory responses, or for their relevance to the cerebral pathologies of interest (P-glycoprotein, glucose transporter 1, nitric oxide production, and cell death / apoptosis phenotype).

A review of existing literature on endothelial cell signaling was conducted, focusing primarily on the pathways impacted by the inputs described above. During the literature review, studies that investigated direct signaling mechanisms were used to identify and justify interactions that would make up the structure of the signaling network. The majority of interactions were added based on studies providing direct experimental evidence in mammalian endothelial cells (93 interactions). We then performed gap filling of each pathway with intermediate reactions (8 interactions) between those supported in endothelial cells if they were well characterized in the literature for other cell types, especially endothelial-related cell types or other cells of the brain, as a number of reactions were specific to the brain but as of yet poorly characterized in the cerebral endothelium. The network consists of 63 nodes (including mRNA, small molecules, proteins, and cell phenotypes/processes; see Table S1) connected by 82 reactions. The network definition and literature curation is shown in Table S2. Each node in Table S1 has the same initial activity, Yinit (0), maximum activity, Ymax (1), and time constant τ (1). The time constant can be tailored in future studies to provide further information about the temporal nature of the network, but here we run the model to steady state in our predictions which nullifies the effects of the τ values. Previous work has revealed that this type of model is robust to the choices of these parameters [60].

The network reconstruction was then converted into a predictive computational model using a previously described logic-based differential equation modeling approach, in which the activation of one node by another is modeled using a normalized Hill function [44,45,61,62]. Logical AND or OR operations were used to represent pathway crosstalk, using the equation f(x)f(y) for AND gating, and f(x) + f(y) − f(x)f(y) for OR gating. Generally, the OR gating was used when either input for a node is sufficient but not necessary for activation, while AND gating is used when each input is necessary. The default reaction parameters include Hill coefficient (1.4) and EC50 (0.5), which were previously demonstrated to be optimal for replicating a biochemical network [61]. Each species has a unique differential equation, which was computed in units of fractional activation. For example, the joint activation (AND gate) of the mature form of NGF (mNGF) by the proto-form of NGF (proNGF) and a pro-convertase enzyme (proConv) is represented by the following equations.

δmNGFδt=1τ(B•proNGFnKn+proNGFn•B•proConvnKn+proConvn•mNGFmax−mNGF)B=EC50n−12EC50n−1K=(B−1)1n

An example of an OR gate is seen in the activation of PI3K by TrkA or TrkB.

δPI3Kδt=1τ((B•TrkAnKn+TrkAn+B•TrkBnKn+TrkBn−(B•TrkAnKn+TrkAn•B•TrkBnKn+TrkBn))•PI3Kmax−PI3K)

Logic decisions were primarily made using known biochemical mechanisms, but sometimes inferred from comparing experiments in the literature. The system of logic-based differential equations was generated using Netflux (available at https://github.com/saucermanlab/Netflux) and implemented in MATLAB. The input values of 0.4 weight and the weight w = 0.9 for other nodes were chosen to maximize the node activation throughout the network while maintaining a baseline cell death rate below 20% when the model is running at steady-state. The weight of 0.4 for the inputs indicates some basal activity of those nodes in normal physiological conditions. Note that the input for focused ultrasound activity, i9, has a weight of 0 in Table S2. This indicates that for baseline physiological signaling, there is no FUS activity. These are the settings used to generate Figs. 3 and 4. When the FUS input is “on”, we set this input to 0.4 like the other inputs, and can use this set of parameters to model the system when FUS is being applied to the cells, such as for the therapeutic interventions modeled in Figs. 5-8.

5.2. Model validation

Literature for validating network input-output relationships were identified by searching for each network input and output together with the phrase “endothelial cell” in the Pubmed database. Other validation literature was identified while reviewing literature for the development of the network. Validation was performed by comparing the qualitative increase, decrease, or no change in output activity of the model simulation to the experimental results in the literature. Changes of less than 1% in the model output were categorized as “no change”, consistent with previous studies with this style of model [63]. Literature findings were categorized as “no change” if there was no statistically significant difference in the output species compared to baseline.

5.3. Sensitivity analysis

A systematic functional sensitivity analysis was performed by simulating full knockdown or overexpression of each node and then predicting the change in activity of every node in the network. First, the steady-state activity of all nodes was computed under baseline conditions (all inputs = 0.4 with the exception of the FUS node, which was left at 0), serving as a control. We then knocked down the activity of each node (or doubled the maximum value of each node), one at a time, and subtracted the basal activity levels from the activity in the knocked down case to calculate “Change in Activity”. Influence was measured as the number of nodes with 20% change or greater in activity following knockdown of the perturbed node, while sensitivity was the number of nodes that will affect a particular target by a 20% change or greater when knocked out. The tight junction sensitivity is defined as the change in claudin 5 activity + the change in occludin activity when the target node is knocked out.

5.4. Disease modeling and target prediction

Three different pathologies of the brain (glioma, Alzheimer's disease, and ischemic stroke) were simulated using different combinations of values for the model inputs. These were based on literature evidence for elevated or reduced levels of the different model inputs in the brain in the context of that disease. All elevated inputs were raised by 25% (to w = 0.65) and all reduced inputs were decreased by 25% (to w = 0.15). Additionally, we assumed FUS as a delivery mechanism for potential therapeutics, and activated the FUS input node with a weight of w = 0.4. The altered inputs for each disease condition can be found in Table S4. After setting the model inputs to recapitulate a pathology state, the full systemic sensitivity analysis was performed for knockdown or overexpression of each node.

The literature was consulted to determine some of the consensus therapeutic goals for each pathology as they relate to our model outputs. A summary of these treatment goals can be found in Table S5. A disease score metric was created for each condition by summing the combined effects in the desired direction for each altered output. For example: in the context of glioma, our therapeutic goals are to increase cell death, decrease P-glycoprotein expression, and decrease GLUT1 expression. Therefore, the “glioma score” for any given node knockdown or upregulation is (differential cell death activity – differential P-glycoprotein activity – differential GLUT1 activity). A therapeutic score was computed for each node knockdown and upregulation, all in the context of that disease's input settings. The top 3–5 scoring nodes for either direction of altered expression were further investigated for their impacts on each of the contributing factors to the therapeutic goals (eg. Cell death activity vs. P-glycoprotein activity vs. GLUT1 activity). Finally, we tested the effects of combinations of two high-scoring node alterations (one upregulation and one knockdown) for each disease setting to determine optimal synergistic pairings for therapy.

Supplementary Material

Supplement

Acknowledgements

RJP was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01EB030409, R01EB030744, R01NS111102, and R21NS118278. JJS was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01 HL137755 and R01 HL137100.

Fig. 1. Reconstruction of the brain endothelial cell signaling network. Each of the 63 nodes represents a protein, mRNA, small molecule, cell process, or external stimulus in the model. Each arrow indicates a reaction based on experimental data of activation or inhibition from endothelial cells or an endothelial-cell-related cell line. Where shown, some reactions combine the influence of multiple reactants via AND gate logic. Multiple reactions affecting the same product are combined using OR gate logic. The orange line represents the cell membrane, where products on the orange line are localized at the cell membrane.

Fig. 2. Model validation against literature. A) Independent experimental data from Lim et al. 2008 [18] showing the dose-dependent increase in p-glycoprotein expression in response to treatment with a Wnt agonist. B) Predicted response of p-glycoprotein activity in response to increasing levels of Wnt input in the model. The model prediction is expressed as a percent of maximal protein level. C) The qualitative response of selected model outputs is shown in response to each of 7 input stimuli. The responses of outputs to a single input from published experimental observations of endothelial cells are displayed in the first column. The model's predictions of the output responses are displayed in the second column. The model validates 19 of the 26 (73%) of the predictions for which there was experimental data available.

Fig. 3. Sensitivity analysis of model under baseline conditions. Results of a full sensitivity analysis where all possible knockdowns (x-axis) are performed under baseline conditions (0.4 weight for each input with the exception of FUS, 0). The change in activity (knockdown – control) for each output node (y-axis) is measured as a change in color ranging from 20% decrease in activity (blue) to 20% increase in activity (red).

Fig. 4. Full network sensitivity analysis reveals most influential and most sensitive nodes under baseline conditions. A) Influence of each node in the network under baseline conditions, defined as the number of species whose activity is altered by 20% or more following knockdown of that node. The most influential nodes at baseline are AKT, cathepsin D, VEGF-A, and VEGFR2. B) Sensitivity of each node in the network under baseline conditions, defined as the number of species knockdowns that result in a 20% or greater change in activity of that node. The sensitive nodes at baseline are occludin, IP3, DAG, and GLUT1.

Fig. 5. Identification of most influential nodes under glioma + FUS context for therapeutic glioma metrics. A) Sensitivity of glioma therapeutic metrics (increased cell death, decreased GLUT1, decreased p-glycoprotein) to knockdown of any node in the network. B) Effect of most influential knockdowns (cathepsin D, AKT, HIF1a, GLUT1, p-glycoprotein) on each of the individual contributing outputs in the glioma therapeutic metric. C) Sensitivity of glioma therapeutic metrics to overexpression of any node in the network. D) Effect of most influential overexpressions (sortilin, p75, JNK, p53) on the individual contributing outputs in the glioma therapeutic metric.

Fig. 6. Identification of most influential nodes under Alzheimer's + FUS context for therapeutic Alzheimer's metrics. A) Sensitivity of Alzheimer's therapeutic metrics (increased claudin-5, occludin, VE cadherin, GLUT1, and p-glycoprotein) to knockdown of any node in the network. B) Effect of most influential knockdowns (NFkB, MMP, GSK3b) on each of the individual contributing outputs in the Alzheimer's therapeutic metric. C) Sensitivity of Alzheimer's therapeutic metrics to overexpression of any node in the network. D) Effect of most influential overexpressions (ERK, occludin, VE cadherin, GLUT1, p-glycoprotein) on the individual contributing outputs in the Alzheimer's therapeutic metric.

Fig. 7. Identification of most influential nodes under stroke + FUS context for therapeutic stroke metrics. A) Sensitivity of stroke therapeutic metrics (decreased cell death, increased nitric oxide, claudin-5, occludin, and VE cadherin) to knockdown of any node in the network. B) Effect of most influential knockdowns (VEGF-A, NFkB, MMP, AKT, VEGFR2) on each of the individual contributing outputs in the stroke therapeutic metric. C) Sensitivity of stroke therapeutic metrics to overexpression of any node in the network. D) Effect of most influential overexpressions (ERK, eNOS, occludin, VE cadherin, KLF4) on the individual contributing outputs in the stroke therapeutic metric.

Fig. 8. Effects of combinatorial node alterations in different disease contexts. A) Predicted impact of two different combinations of two influential node alterations (one knockdown, one overexpression) on glioma therapeutic output metrics. B) Predicted impact of two different combinations of two influential node alterations (one knockdown, one overexpression) on Alzheimer's therapeutic output metrics. C) Predicted impact of two different combinations of two influential node alterations (one knockdown, one overexpression) on stroke therapeutic output metrics.

Declaration of Competing Interest

None.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2021.11.005.


References

[1] Feigin VL , , Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016, Lancet Neurol. 18 (5 ) (2019) 459–480.30879893
[2] Billiau A , , Tissue distribution of human interferons after exogenous administration in rabbits, monkeys, and mice, Arch. Virol 68 (1 ) (1981) 19–25.6166278
[3] Westphal M , , A phase 3 trial of local chemotherapy with biodegradable carmustine (BCNU) wafers (Gliadel wafers) in patients with primary malignant glioma, Neuro-Oncology 5 (2 ) (2003) 79–88.12672279
[4] Gasmi M , , AAV2-mediated delivery of human neurturin to the rat nigrostriatal system: long-term efficacy and tolerability of CERE-120 for Parkinson’s disease, Neurobiol. Dis 27 (1 ) (2007) 67–76.17532642
[5] Marks WJ , , Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal delivery of CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus serotype 2-neurturin) to patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: an open-label, phase I trial, Lancet Neurol. 7 (5 ) (2008) 400–408.18387850
[6] Matsukado K , Sugita M , Black KL , Intracarotid low dose bradykinin infusion selectively increases tumor permeability through activation of bradykinin B2 receptors in malignant gliomas, Brain Res. 792 (1 ) (1998) 10–15.9593802
[7] Prados MD , , A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 study of RMP-7 in combination with carboplatin administered intravenously for the treatment of recurrent malignant glioma, Neuro-Oncology 5 (2 ) (2003) 96–103.12672281
[8] Mead BP , , Targeted gene transfer to the brain via the delivery of brain-penetrating DNA nanoparticles with focused ultrasound, J. Control. Release 223 (2016) 109–117.26732553
[9] Gorick CM , , Sonoselective transfection of cerebral vasculature without blood–brain barrier disruption, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 117 (11 ) (2020) 5644–5654.32123081
[10] Timbie KF , Mead BP , Price RJ , Drug and gene delivery across the blood-brain barrier with focused ultrasound, J. Control. Release 219 (2015) 61.26362698
[11] Wu SY , , Characterizing focused-ultrasound mediated drug delivery to the heterogeneous primate brain in vivo with acoustic monitoring, Sci. Rep 6 (1 ) (2016) 1–13.28442746
[12] Furuse M , Molecular basis of the core structure of tight junctions, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol 2 (1 ) (2010), 10.1101/cshperspect.a002907.
[13] Löscher W , Potschka H , Drug resistance in brain diseases and the role of drug efflux transporters, Nat. Rev. Neurosci 6 (8 ) (2005) 591–602.16025095
[14] Lee R , Kermani P , Teng KK , Hempstead BL , Regulation of cell survival by secreted proneurotrophins, Science (80-) 294 (5548 ) (2001) 1945–1948.
[15] Zhang ZG , , VEGF enhances angiogenesis and promotes blood-brain barrier leakage in the ischemic brain, J. Clin. Invest 106 (7 ) (2000) 829–838.11018070
[16] Liebner S , , Wnt/β-catenin signaling controls development of the blood - brain barrier, J. Cell Biol 183 (3 ) (2008) 409–417.18955553
[17] Mathew AS , Gorick CM , Price RJ , Single-cell mapping of focused ultrasound-transfected brain, Gene Ther. (2021), 10.1038/s41434-021-00226-0.
[18] Lim JC , , Activation of β-catenin signalling by GSK-3 inhibition increases p-glycoprotein expression in brain endothelial cells, J. Neurochem 106 (4 ) (2008) 1855–1865.18624906
[19] Seyedmirzaei H , Shobeiri P , Turgut M , Hanaei S , Rezaei N , VEGF levels in patients with glioma: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Rev. Neurosci 32 (2 ) (2021) 191–202.33125340
[20] Xiong J , , ProBDNF and its receptors are upregulated in glioma and inhibit the growth of glioma cells in vitro, Neuro-Oncology 15 (8 ) (2013) 990–1007.23576602
[21] Yang B , Qin J , Nie Y , Li Y , Chen Q , Brain-derived neurotrophic factor propeptide inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in C6 glioma cells, Neuroreport 28 (12 ) (2017) 726–730.28640008
[22] Brown MC , , Regulatory effect of nerve growth factor in 9 1 integrin-dependent progression of glioblastoma, Neuro-Oncology 10 (6 ) (2008) 968–980.19074980
[23] Zuccarini M , , The role of wnt signal in glioblastoma development and progression: a possible new pharmacological target for the therapy of this tumor, Genes (Basel) 9 (2 ) (2018), 10.3390/genes9020105.
[24] Fukuda ME , , Cathepsin D is a potential serum marker for poor prognosis in glioma patients, Cancer Res. 65 (12 ) (2005) 5190–5194.15958563
[25] Fleitas C , , ProBDNF is modified by advanced glycation end products in Alzheimer’s disease and causes neuronal apoptosis by inducing p75 neurotrophin receptor processing 11 Medical and Health Sciences 1109 Neurosciences, Mol. Brain 11 (1 ) (2018) 1–16.29301575
[26] Peng S , Wuu J , Mufson EJ , Fahnestock M , Increased proNGF levels in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer disease, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 63 (6 ) (2004) 641–649.15217092
[27] Mateo I , , Low serum VEGF levels are associated with Alzheimer’s disease, Acta Neurol. Scand 116 (1 ) (2007) 56–58.17587256
[28] Palomer E , Buechler J , Salinas PC , Wnt signaling deregulation in the aging and Alzheimer’s brain, Front. Cell. Neurosci 13 (2019) 227.31191253
[29] Kim JW , , Identification of Cathepsin D as a plasma biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease, Cells 10 (1 ) (2021), 10.3390/cells10010138.
[30] Chaturvedi P , Singh A , Tiwari V , Thacker A , Brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in acute stroke and its clinical implications, Brain Circ. 6 (3 ) (2020) 185.33210043
[31] Hossain MI , , Restoration of CTSD (cathepsin D) and lysosomal function in stroke is neuroprotective, Autophagy (2020), 10.1080/15548627.2020.1761219.
[32] Shim JW , Madsen JR , VEGF signaling in neurological disorders, Int. J. Mol. Sci 19 (1 ) (2018), 10.3390/ijms19010275.
[33] Menet R , Lecordier S , ElAli A , Wnt pathway: an emerging player in vascular and traumatic mediated brain injuries, Front. Physiol 11 (2020) 1149.
[34] Henson JW , Cordon-Cardo C , Posner JB , P-glycoprotein expression in brain tumors, J. Neuro-Oncol 14 (1 ) (1992) 37–43.
[35] Yamazaki Y , Kanekiyo T , Blood-brain barrier dysfunction and the pathogenesis of alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Mol. Sci 18 (9 ) (2017), 10.3390/ijms18091965.
[36] Winkler EA , , GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease vasculo-neuronal dysfunction and degeneration, Nat. Neurosci 18 (4 ) (2015) 521–530.25730668
[37] Chiu C , , P-glycoprotein expression and amyloid accumulation in human aging and Alzheimer’s disease: preliminary observations, Neurobiol. Aging 36 (9 ) (2015) 2475–2482.26159621
[38] Abdullahi W , Tripathi D , Ronaldson PT , Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in ischemic stroke: targeting tight junctions and transporters for vascular protection, Am. J. Phys. Cell Phys 315 (3 ) (2018) C343–C356.
[39] Zille M , , The impact of endothelial cell death in the brain and its role after stroke: a systematic review, Cell Stress 3 (11 ) (2019) 330–347.31799500
[40] Chen ZQ , Mou RT , Feng DX , Wang Z , Chen G , The role of nitric oxide in stroke, Med. Gas Res 7 (3 ) (2017) 194–203.29152213
[41] Lo Dico A , Martelli C , Diceglie C , Lucignani G , Ottobrini L , Hypoxia-inducible factor-1α activity as a switch for glioblastoma responsiveness to temozolomide, Front. Oncol 8 (JUL) (2018) 249.30013951
[42] Kaley TJ , , Phase II trial of an AKT inhibitor (perifosine) for recurrent glioblastoma, J. Neuro-Oncol 144 (2 ) (2019) 403–407.
[43] Zheng W , , Inhibition of Cathepsin D (CTSD) enhances radiosensitivity of glioblastoma cells by attenuating autophagy, Mol. Carcinog 59 (6 ) (2020) 651–660.32253787
[44] Zeigler AC , Richardson WJ , Holmes JW , Saucerman JJ , A computational model of cardiac fibroblast signaling predicts context-dependent drivers of myofibroblast differentiation, J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol 94 (2016) 72–81.27017945
[45] Tan PM , Buchholz KS , Omens JH , McCulloch AD , Saucerman JJ , Predictive model identifies key network regulators of cardiomyocyte mechano-signaling, PLoS Comput. Biol 13 (11 ) (2017), 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005854.
[46] McMahon D , Bendayan R , Hynynen K , Acute effects of focused ultrasound-induced increases in blood-brain barrier permeability on rat microvascular transcriptome, Sci. Rep 7 (2017) 45657.28374753
[47] Vega R , Carretero M , Travasso RDM , Bonilla LL , Notch signaling and taxis mechanims regulate early stage angiogenesis: a mathematical and computational model, PLoS Comput. Biol 16 (1 ) (2020), e1006919.31986145
[48] Kuhn C , Checa S , Computational modeling to quantify the contributions of VEGFR1, VEGFR2, and lateral inhibition in sprouting angiogenesis, Front. Physiol 10 (MAR):288 (2019).30971939
[49] Kleinstreuer N , , A computational model predicting disruption of blood vessel development, PLoS Comput. Biol 9 (4 ) (2013) 1002996.
[50] Stepanova D , Byrne HM , Maini PK , Alarcon T , A multiscale model of complex endothelial cell dynamics in early angiogenesis, PLoS Comput. Biol 17 (1 ) (2021), e1008055.33411727
[51] Zhang Y , Kontos CD , Annex BH , Popel AS , Angiopoietin-tie signaling pathway in endothelial cells: a computational model, iScience 20 (2019) 497–511.31655061
[52] Weinstein N , Mendoza L , Álvarez-Buylla ER , A computational model of the endothelial to Mesenchymal transition, Front. Genet 11 (2020) 1.32117431
[53] Cho HS , , Localized Down-regulation of P-glycoprotein by focused ultrasound and microbubbles induced blood-brain barrier disruption in rat brain, Sci. Rep 6 (2016), 10.1038/srep31201.
[54] Deng J , , The role of caveolin-1 in blood-brain barrier disruption induced by focused ultrasound combined with microbubbles, J. Mol. Neurosci 46 (3 ) (2012) 677–687.21861133
[55] Guda MR , , GLUT1 and TUBB4 in Glioblastoma could be effcacious targets, Cancers (Basel) 11 (9 ) (2019), 10.3390/cancers11091308.
[56] Fallacara AL , , A new strategy for glioblastoma treatment: in vitro and in vivo preclinical characterization of Si306, a pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine dual Src/P-glycoprotein inhibitor, Cancers (Basel) 11 (6 ) (2019), 10.3390/cancers11060848.
[57] Gareus R , , Endothelial cell-specific NF-κB inhibition protects mice from atherosclerosis, Cell Metab. 8 (5 ) (2008) 372–383.19046569
[58] Henke N , , Vascular endothelial cell-specific NF-κB suppression attenuates hypertension-induced renal damage, Circ. Res 101 (3 ) (2007) 268–276.17585070
[59] Gupta SC , Sundaram C , Reuter S , Aggarwal BB , Inhibiting NF-κB activation by small molecules as a therapeutic strategy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gene Regul. Mech 1799 (10–12 ) (2010) 775–787.
[60] Zeigler AC , , Computational model predicts paracrine and intracellular drivers of fibroblast phenotype after myocardial infarction, Matrix Biol. 91–92 (2020) 136–151.
[61] Kraeutler MJ , Soltis AR , Saucerman JJ , Modeling cardiac β-adrenergic signaling with normalized-hill differential equations: comparison with a biochemical model, BMC Syst. Biol 4 (2010), 10.1186/1752-0509-4-157.
[62] Ryall KA , , Network reconstruction and systems analysis of cardiac myocyte hypertrophy signaling, J. Biol. Chem 287 (50 ) (2012) 42259–42268.23091058
[63] Khalilimeybodi A , Paap AM , Christiansen SLM , Saucerman JJ , Context-specific network modeling identifies new crosstalk in β-adrenergic cardiac hypertrophy, PLoS Comput. Biol 16 (12 ) (2020), 10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1008490.
