LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985190R
5004
J Neurochem
J Neurochem
Journal of neurochemistry
0022-3042
1471-4159

34272732
8458251
10.1111/jnc.15471
NIHMS1725514
Article
Basal Forebrain Cholinergic System in the Dementias: Vulnerability, Resilience and Resistance
Geula Changiz http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9311-3295

Dunlop Sara R.
Ayala Ivan
Kawles Allegra S. http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3153-5350

Flanagan Margaret E.
Gefen Tamar
Mesulam M.-Marsel
Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
Author contributions

Changiz Geula – Drafted the manuscript, finalized the manuscript, finalized figures

Sara R. Dunlop – Reviewed and edited manuscript for accurate content

Ivan Ayala – Helped prepare figures, reviewed and edited manuscript for accurate content

Allegra S. Kawles – Helped prepare figures, reviewed and edited manuscript for accurate content

Margaret E. Flanagan – Reviewed and edited manuscript for accurate content

Tamar Gefen – Reviewed and edited manuscript for accurate content

M.-Marsel Mesulam – Assisted in drafting manuscript, reviewed and edited manuscript for accurate content

Address correspondence to: Changiz Geula, Ph.D., Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, 300 E. Superior Street, Tarry 8-723, Chicago, IL 60611, Phone: (312) 503-7210, c-geula@northwestern.edu
25 7 2021
06 8 2021
9 2021
01 9 2022
158 6 13941411
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCN) provide the primary source of cholinergic innervation of the human cerebral cortex. They are involved in the cognitive processes of learning, memory and attention. These neurons are differentially vulnerable in various neuropathologic entities that cause dementia. This review summarizes the relevance to BFCN of neuropathologic markers associated with dementias, including the plaques and tangles of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the Lewy bodies of diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), the tauopathy of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TAU) and the TDP-43 proteinopathy of FTLD-TDP. Each of these proteinopathies has a different relationship to BFCN and their corticofugal axons. Available evidence points to early and substantial degeneration of the BFCN in AD and DLBD. In AD, the major neurodegenerative correlate is accumulation of phosphotau in neurofibrillary tangles. However, these neurons are less vulnerable to the tauopathy of FTLD. An intriguing finding is that the intracellular tau of AD causes destruction of the BFCN whereas that of FTLD does not. This observation has profound implications for exploring the impact of different species of tauopathy on neuronal survival. The proteinopathy of FTLD-TDP shows virtually no abnormal inclusions within the BFCN. Thus, the BFCN are highly vulnerable to the neurodegenerative effects of tauopathy in AD, resilient to the neurodegenerative effect of tauopathy in FTLD and apparently resistant to the emergence of proteinopathy in FTLD-TDP and perhaps also in Pick’s disease. Investigations are beginning to shed light on the potential mechanisms of this differential vulnerability and their implications for therapeutic intervention.

Graphical Abstract

This Review is part of the special issue “Cholinergic Mechanisms” and summarizes the relevance to basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCN) of neuropathologic markers associated with dementias. Available evidence points to early and substantial degeneration of the BFCN in Alzheimer’s disease and diffuse Lewy body disease. BFCN are resilient to the neurodegenerative effect of some tauopathies in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), such as that is corticobasal degeneration, and they are apparently resistant to the emergence of proteinopathy in FTLD-TDP and perhaps also in Pick’s disease. These findings have important implications for selective neuronal vulnerability and cholinergic based therapies in dementias.

Basal Forebrain Cholinergic Neurons
Alzheimer’s Disease
Diffuse Lewy Body Disease
Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration
Tauopathy
TDP-43 Proteinopathy

pmcIn 1976, two separate laboratories reported major depletions of the cholinergic synthetic enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), and the cholinergic hydrolytic enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) within many cortical areas in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Davies &amp; Maloney 1976; Bowen et al. 1976). Others demonstrated that cortical cholinergic innervation originates in the ChAT-positive neurons of the basal forebrain (Mesulam &amp; Van Hoesen 1976; Mesulam et al. 1983). Soon thereafter, it became clear that the substantial depletion of cortical cholinergic markers in AD is accompanied by an equally substantial loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCN) (Whitehouse et al. 1981). These observations propelled a decades-long exploration of the basal forebrain cholinergic system in health and disease.

Early vulnerability of the basal forebrain cholinergic system to neurofibrillary tangle pathology and its progressive and severe degeneration in AD are now well established (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1999). Significantly, degeneration of this system in AD is the basis of cholinergic therapy. While not as thoroughly investigated, there is evidence that the BFCN are also vulnerable to degeneration in the dementia caused by diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD). Less is known about this system in other types of dementias such as those caused by frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).

The purpose of this review is to summarize available information on the degeneration of the BFCN and their corticofugal axons in distinct neuropathologic entities that cause dementia. We first set the stage by summarizing the characteristics of the relevant neuropathologic entities. We then outline the functional anatomy of the normal BFCN, and its response to the neurodegenerative entities associated with dementia. We conclude with a discussion of potential mechanisms underlying the selective vulnerability of this system in some types of dementia and their therapeutic implications.

PATHOLOGIC HALLMARKS OF NEURODEGENERATIVE DEMENTIAS

The vast majority of neurodegenerative dementias seen in clinical practice are caused by four pathologic entities: AD, DLBD, FTLD with tauopathy (FTLD-Tau), and FTLD with 43-kDa transactive response element DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) proteinopathy (FTLD-TDP). In this review, we will use the acronym AD exclusively to refer to AD neuropathologic changes. We will refer to the clinical manifestations of each neurodegenerative condition by its descriptive cognitive and behavioral phenotype, such as amnestic ‘dementia of the Alzheimer type’ (DAT), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), corticobasal degeneration syndrome (CBDs) and progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSPs).

Alzheimer’s Disease

In the first report on the disease which now bears his name, Alois Alzheimer described two types of lesions in the brain of his patient: “tangled bundle of fibrils” and “miliary foci resulting from the deposit of a unique substance” (Alzheimer 1977). The terms commonly used today to designate these lesions are the neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) and the senile plaque (SP), respectively (Fig. 1). The characteristic distribution and density of these lesions are used by pathologists for diagnosis of AD (Montine et al. 2012; Hyman et al. 2012; Hyman &amp; Trojanowski 1997; Mirra et al. 1993; Khachaturian 1985).

The plaque is a complex structure found in the neuropil and consists of amyloid, abnormal neurites and glial cells (Terry &amp; Wisniewski 1972) (Fig. 1 A&amp;C). The amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide, which is a major component of all plaques, is a protein of 40–43 amino acids (Iizuka et al. 1995). It is clipped out of a larger amyloid precursor protein through a set of complex proteolytic processes (Selkoe 1994). Aß can exist in various physical conformations, which include small soluble aggregates, large non-fibrillar aggregates, and aggregated fibrillar forms (Klein 2006; Podlisny et al. 1995; Lorenzo &amp; Yankner 1994) (Fig. 1 A). In addition to Aß, abnormal (dystrophic) neurites are associated with a subset of SP, and contain fibrillar elements that may represent degenerating axons and dendrites (Terry &amp; Wisniewski 1972; Trojanowski et al. 1995) (Fig. 1D). The plaques with neurites often have activated microglia and astrocytes associated with them (Terry &amp; Wisniewski 1972). Immunohistochemistry using antibodies to Aβ results in staining of two subtypes (Mann et al. 1990; Wisniewski et al. 1989); the diffuse SP are round or amorphous deposits of aggregated, non-fibrillar Aβ with a granular reaction product and without clear borders (Fig 1 C). The compact SP, on the other hand are well-defined round deposits of darkly stained fibrillar Aβ, and stain positively with thioflavin-S (Fig. 1 A). Compact plaques are frequently associated with dystrophic neurites and glial cells. In addition to the presumptive neurodegenerative effect exerted by fibrillar Aβ upon surrounding neurons and neuropil (Shah et al. 2010), soluble Aβ oligomers may have toxic effects on synapses (Klein 2002; Walsh et al. 2002).

A major component of NFT is the abnormally phosphorylated microtubule associated protein tau (phosphotau). The NFT contain paired helical filaments (PHF) (Terry 1998). They are argentophilic, thioflavin S-positive (Fig. 1 A) and stain immunohistochemically with antibodies against PHF and phosphotau (Terry 1998; Terry et al. 1994) (Fig. 1 B). It is important to note that the neurites within SP (Fig. 1 D), as well as fragmented dendrites and axons in the neuropil (Fig. 1 B), contain components that are identical to those in NFT (Terry &amp; Wisniewski 1972; Trojanowski et al. 1995). NFT appear to be preceded by accumulation of soluble phosphotau in neurons, the so-called pre-tangle, which are thioflavin S-negative (Lauckner et al. 2003). Pre-tangles and NFT are thought to damage neurons by disrupting transport of various cellular components and by displacing cytoplasmic elements and thus leading to the degeneration of the neurons within which they are formed.

Careful mapping of the distribution of cortical SPs and NFTs has revealed different patterns of distribution (Arnold et al. 1991; Arriagada et al. 1992). Plaque deposition is likely initiated in association neocortex where SP density is highest, and gradually spreads to paralimbic and limbic regions. NFT appear first, and display highest density in limbic and paralimbic regions of the medial temporal lobe, namely the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, followed by other paralimbic and then association neocortex (Braak &amp; Braak 1995). Cortical and subcortical areas with high densities of SP, and particularly NFT, display significant loss of neurons, dendrites and synapses (Coleman &amp; Flood 1987; Terry et al. 1991; Scheff et al. 1990). An inevitable consequence of this pathology is the disruption of neural circuits and isolation of affected areas from cortical networks to which they belong. The most common clinical phenotype in AD is the amnestic DAT. However, atypical forms of AD can also cause aphasic, behavioral and visuospatial dementias (Rogalski et al. 2016; Johnson et al. 1999; Hof et al. 1993).

Diffuse Lewy Body Disease (DLBD)

Lewy bodies (LB) are intracytoplasmic inclusions (Hansen 1994) with a dense eosinophilic core surrounded by a less densely stained peripheral halo (Fig. 1 E). They are composed primarily of α-synuclein, a presynaptic protein likely involved in membrane fusion and neurotransmitter release (McKeith et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2021). α-Synuclein also accumulates in neurons with or without mature LB, and in neurites (Fig. 1 F). The LB is a pathological hallmark of Parkinson’s disease (PD), where LB are found most prominently in the substantia nigra and other subcortical nuclei. Sparsely distributed cortical LBs may also be present in PD brains (Braak et al. 2002). A more widespread distribution of LBs, particularly within the cerebral cortex is a hallmark of DLBD (McKeith et al. 2017; McKeith et al. 1996). Brainstem, limbic and neocortical stages of LB pathology have been identified, with some investigators suggesting a sequential spread of pathology along these three groups of regions (McKeith et al. 2017; Braak et al. 2006). Others have pointed out that the three stages may not develop sequentially (Attems et al. 2021). It appears that significant brainstem LB pathology is associated with Parkinsonian signs, and the limbic and neocortical stages with cognitive symptoms (Attems et al. 2021). Some patients will experience dementia without extrapyramidal impairments suggesting that some trajectories of progression may start in limbic and cortical areas without having to go through a brainstem stage (Attems et al. 2021). Similar to AD, DLBD is accompanied by significant neuronal degeneration. The dementia of DLBD can be amnestic, visuospatial, dysexecutive and, rarely, aphasic (Buciuc et al. 2021).

Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD)

Severe atrophy of frontal and anterior temporal cortex characterizes FTLD-Tau and FTLD-TDP. FTLD-Tau is further divided into CBD, PSP and Pick-type neuropathologies (McKeith et al. 2017) whereas FTLD-TDP has been classified into 5 types, A-E (Mackenzie et al. 2011; Lee et al. 2017). Clinical presentations include behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), and three disorders characterized by motor as well as cognitive abnormalities, corticobasal degeneration syndrome (CBDs), progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSPs), and cognitive impairment with motor neuron disease (FTLD-MND). FTLD can also cause the amnestic phenotype of DAT (Nelson et al. 2019). The CBD and PSP neuropathologies have no obligatory relationship to CBDs and PSPs. For example, approximately 40% of CBDs in our brain bank housed within the Northwestern Alzheimer’s Disease Center have AD pathology as the primary neuropathologic diagnosis whereas approximately 30% of PPA cases have CBD or PSP pathology

Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration with Tauopathy

In FTLD-Tau, the tauopathy is completely different from the tauopathy of AD. In contrast to AD where the NFT usually are flame-shaped and contain a mixture of 3 and 4 microtubule binding repeat tau isoforms (3R and 4R tau), the tauopathy in FTLD has either only 3R tau (Pick’s disease), or only 4R tau (PSP and CBD), with morphologies that are either spheroid as in Pick’s disease or that take the form of tufted astrocytes and astrocytic plaques of PSP and CBD (Fig. 1 G&amp;H). The one common feature of all tauopathies, in AD as well as FTLD, is the presence of phosphotau (Mackenzie et al. 2010; Bigio 2013). Unlike AD where the NFT are beta pleated, tau inclusions in FTLD have a folding pattern that do not bind Thioflavin-S. Phosphotau accumulation is seen in neurons, neurites and glia in AD, in neurons and neurites in Pick’s disease (Fig. 1 H), in neurons, tufted astrocytes and neurites in PSP, and in neurons, astrocytic plaques and neurites in CBD (Fig. 1 G). The distributions of cells with tau accumulation differs in each FTLD-Tau disorder. Pick’s disease is characterized by tau accumulation in neurons and neurites primarily in cortical regions, CBD displays tau accumulation in cortical regions as well as subcortical structures, such as the striatum, and PSP displays additional inclusions in the brainstem. The common denominator of this pathology is neurosynaptic damage and loss.

Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration with TDP-43 Proteinopathy

TDP-43 is a 414-amino acid protein with two RNA recognition motifs and normally displays a strictly nuclear localization (Chen-Plotkin et al. 2010; Lee et al. 2012), where it binds to a large number of RNA species (&gt;6,000), and thereby controls RNA transcription, splicing and transport, and the levels of microRNAs (Narayanan et al. 2012; Tollervey et al. 2011; Buratti et al. 2010). In FTLD, TDP-43 is mislocalized from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and neurites, is truncated and hyperphosphorylated (Cairns et al. 2007; Chen-Plotkin et al. 2010). Three types of neuronal inclusions are present in FTLD with TDP-43 pathology (Fig. 1 I), neuronal intranuclear inclusions, neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions or extracellular dystrophic neurites (Mackenzie et al. 2011). Based on the predominance of one or more of the three types of inclusions, the length of dystrophic neurites, and the laminar distribution of cortical inclusions, TDP-43 pathology is categorized into subtypes A-E (Mackenzie et al. 2011; Lee et al. 2017). TDP-43 inclusions appear to be preceded by pre-inclusions of smooth or granular staining in neurons (Kim et al. 2019).

ORGANIZATION OF THE BASAL FOREBRAIN CHOLINERGIC SYSTEM

The mammalian nervous system contains several groups of cholinergic (ChAT-positive) neurons. These include projection neurons, such as those within the basal forebrain, brainstem, spinal cord and the periphery, as well as cholinergic neurons involved in intrinsic circuity, such as those in the striatum (Mesulam et al. 1989; Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988; Geula &amp; Mesulam 1999). Due to their vulnerability to some of the pathologies that cause dementia, the focus of this review is on the cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain. The “Ch” nomenclature (Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988) has been used to refer to the various groups of cholinergic projection neurons. In this review, we will use this designation to refer to specific groups of cholinergic neurons, followed by an abbreviation of the nuclei within which each group is located.

Basal Forebrain Cholinergic Neurons

Based on anatomical location, four groups of cholinergic neurons have been described in the human basal forebrain. The Ch1 neurons are centered in the medial septum (Ch1-ms), the Ch2 around the vertical limb of the diagonal band of Broca (Ch2-dbv), the Ch3 neurons around the horizontal limb of the diagonal band of Broca (Ch3-dbh), and Ch4 neurons around the nucleus basalis of Meynert (Ch4-nbM) (Hedreen et al. 1998; Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988; Mesulam et al. 1983). Among these cell groups, Ch4-nbM is the most extensive and phylogenetically the most progressive (Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988; Geula et al. 1993) (Fig. 2, Fig. 3 A&amp;B). The human Ch4 can be subdivided into anterior (Ch4a, with a medial [Ch4am] and a lateral [Ch4al] sub-sector), anterointermediate (Ch4ai), intermediate (Ch4i, with a dorsal [Ch4id] and a ventral [Ch4iv] sub-sector) and posterior (Ch4p) sectors (Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988) (Fig. 2 A–D).

In the monkey, the Ch1-ms and Ch2-dbv neurons provide the major cholinergic innervation of the hippocampus; the Ch3-dbh neurons provide the major cholinergic innervation of the olfactory bulb; and the Ch4-nbM neurons provide the major cholinergic innervation of the entire cortical mantle and the amygdala. The Ch4am sector projects mainly to the medial aspects of the hemisphere, including the cingulate cortex, the Ch4al sector to the frontoparietal opercular areas and the amygdala, the Ch4i sector to dorsolateral frontal and lateral parieto-occipital cortex, and the Ch4p sector to the superior temporal gyrus and the temporal pole (Mesulam et al. 1983; Koliatsos et al. 1988). The striatum and thalamus also receive lesser cholinergic inputs from Ch1-Ch4 in the monkey and human brains (Mesulam et al. 1992b; Arikuni &amp; Kubota 1984). It is important to note that cortical ChAT-positive neurons have not been observed in the adult primate brain (Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988). Therefore, the cholinergic innervation of the human cerebral cortex is most likely exclusively extrinsic in origin.

Cortical Cholinergic Axons

Investigations based on AChE histochemistry and ChAT immunohistochemistry have allowed a detailed mapping of cortical cholinergic innervation in the human brain (Mesulam et al. 1992a; Geula &amp; Mesulam 1996). The highest density of cholinergic axons is found within core limbic areas such as the amygdala and hippocampus. Paralimbic cortical areas, such as the entorhinal cortex and cingulate cortex show the next highest density of cholinergic axons. Association cortices contain an intermediate density of cholinergic axons. The primary visual cortex (area 17) contains one of the lowest densities of cholinergic axons. Several studies of biochemically determined ChAT and AChE activities have shown similar gradients of cholinergic markers in the human cerebral cortex (Davies &amp; Maloney 1976; Perry et al. 1977; Mesulam et al. 1986).

Cortical Cholinergic Receptors and Acetylcholinesterase-Rich Cholinoceptive Neurons

Cholinergic axons exert their excitatory neurotransmitter effects through the mediation of nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. Molecular biological studies have identified many distinct nicotinic receptor subunits (at least nine neuronal α subunits and three neuronal β subunits), which enter into different combinations of pentameric oligomers, each with distinct pharmacological, kinetic, and physiological properties (Koukouli &amp; Changeux 2020; Graham et al. 2003). Among the homopentameric nicotinic receptors, the α7-containing subtypes account for the greatest proportion of high affinity binding sites in the mammalian nervous systems. In the cerebral cortex, the highest density of nicotinic receptors is found in the hippocampus and other limbic / paralimbic regions, followed by deeper layers of neocortex (Cimino et al. 1992). Recently, the density of α4β2 subtype of nicotinic receptors has been found to show a strong relationship with cognitive performance (Okada et al. 2013).

Five subtypes of muscarinic cholinergic receptors (M1-M5) have been recognized, each the product of a different gene (Brann et al. 1993). Muscarinic receptors couple to multiple G proteins to modulate various signal transduction pathways. Studies of the human brain have shown the highest density of muscarinic cholinergic receptors within the striatum and hypothalamus, intermediate to high densities in the amygdala, hippocampus and cerebral cortex, and the lowest density in the cerebellum (Cortes et al. 1987; Lin et al. 1986). High concentrations of both M1 and M2 receptors have been reported in the monkey cerebral cortex with different distributions (Mash et al. 1988; Lidow et al. 1989). The M2 receptor is particularly prominent in the thalamus. In the cerebral cortex, the M1 receptors are much more numerous than the M2 subtype and display peak densities in almost all limbic and paralimbic regions.

The cerebral cortex of the human brain contains AChE-rich neurons which represent a subset of cortical cholinoceptive neurons (Mesulam &amp; Geula 1991). Some are polymorphic in shape and distributed preferentially in the deeper cortical laminae and adjacent white matter. A majority are pyramidal in shape and are located in cortical laminae III and V.

Functional Affiliations

In keeping with its widespread innervation of the cerebral cortex, the basal forebrain cholinergic system has been implicated in a number of behaviors including sleep and arousal, mood and affect, and particularly attention and memory (Drachman &amp; Leavitt 1974; Muir et al. 1992; Dingledine &amp; Kelly 1977; Janowsky et al. 1972). Lesions of the cholinergic cells of the basal forebrain deplete the cortex of its cholinergic innervation and impair learning and memory in rodents and primates (Flicker et al. 1983; Aigner et al. 1987; Leanza et al. 1996; Walsh et al. 1996; Fine et al. 1997). Basal forebrain lesions have also been shown to affect expectancy and particularly attention (Muir et al. 1992; Stoehr et al. 1997). Given the very dense cholinergic innervation of the cerebral cortex, it is interesting that our understanding of its behavioral and cognitive correlates is rather primitive.

BASAL FOREBRAIN CHOLINERGIC SYSTEM IN DEMENTIA

Alzheimer’s Disease: Cholinergic Axons, Neurons and Receptors

Cortical Cholinergic Innervation

A dramatic loss of cortical ChAT activity (up to 95%) has been established as one of the most consistent findings in AD (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1999). Biochemical studies have also found an up to 90% loss in the activity of cortical AChE in AD (Davies 1979; Zubenko et al. 1989). In keeping with these biochemical results, studies using AChE histochemistry (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1996) (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1989; McGeer et al. 1986) or ChAT immunohistochemistry (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1996; Ransmayr et al. 1989) have demonstrated a widespread loss of cortical cholinergic innervation in AD. We have demonstrated that cortical areas with the greatest loss (&gt;75% reduction) of cholinergic innervation are all in the temporal lobe and include areas 20, 21, 22 and 28 of Brodmann (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1996). The frontal and parietal association areas as well as the insula and temporal pole showed an intermediate magnitude of loss (45–75%) whereas the anterior cingulate gyrus, primary motor, primary somatosensory and primary visual cortex displayed less than 25% loss of cholinergic fibers. Within the hippocampal formation, fiber density was reduced in all sectors. In the amygdala, ChAT immunoreactive varicosities showed a marked depletion in the cortical, accessory basal and lateral nuclei while the cholinergic innervation in the central nucleus remained relatively preserved (Emre et al. 1993). Biochemical studies have also shown the greatest decrement in cholinergic enzymes in AD to occur in cortical structures within the temporal lobe (Rossor et al. 1981; Wilcock et al. 1982) while cingulate cortex (areas 24, 25 and 32) and cortical areas within the occipital lobe, particularly the primary visual cortex (area 17) have been shown to display the least depletion of cholinergic enzymes (Rossor et al. 1982; Siek et al. 1990).

Biochemical studies of the relationship between residual ChAT activity and SP in AD cortex have produced conflicting results (Zubenko et al. 1989; Perry et al. 1981; Wilcock et al. 1982; DeKosky et al. 1992). We conducted a survey of the relationship between the density of SP in 14 cortical areas of AD brains and the total density of residual AChE-positive cholinergic fibers (Geula et al. 1998). We estimated the percentage of depletion through comparison with age-matched controls. We found a moderate negative correlation (−0.46 – −0.57) between the number of SP and the density of remaining cholinergic fibers. There was a moderate positive correlation between the percentage of fiber loss and the density of SP in AD cortex (0.49–0.53). However, the estimated density of lost cholinergic fibers showed no correlation with the density of plaques. Some investigators have found a small but significant negative correlation (0.38–0.58) between residual cortical ChAT levels and density of NFT (Mountjoy et al. 1984; Wilcock et al. 1982) while others have found no such correlation (Zubenko et al. 1989; Ransmayr et al. 1992). Our quantitative anatomical studies of the density of NFT and AChE-positive cholinergic axons indicate a relatively high correlation between NFT density and the estimated number of lost cholinergic axons (0.52–0.79) (Geula et al. 1998). Thus while SP density shows no relationship with the estimated lost density of cholinergic axons, NFT density shows a strong relationship.

Cholinergic Neurons of the Basal Forebrain

Loss of Ch4-nbM neurons in AD had been reported by Pilleri in 1966 (Pilleri 1966). This finding gained considerable support with the study of Whitehouse and colleagues (Whitehouse et al. 1981) which detected a 75% decrease in the number of hyperchromic magnocellular Ch4-nbM neurons in AD patients. Subsequent reports have produced overwhelming support for a consistent loss of Ch4-nbM neurons ranging in magnitude from 30% to 95% (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1999; Liu et al. 2015) (Fig. 3 C). A large number of biochemical investigations have also reported a significant loss of ChAT activity (30–90%) in the Ch4-nbM of AD patients (Henke &amp; Lang 1983; Bird et al. 1983; Etienne et al. 1986). In situ hybridization studies have shown an overall 60% reduction in ChAT mRNA in the Ch4-nbM of these patients.

Neuronal loss is reported in practically all basal forebrain cholinergic cell groups and in all Ch4-nbM subsectors. In general, neuronal loss is less in ms-Ch1 and dbv-Ch2 than in Ch4-nbM (Arendt et al. 1985; Mufson et al. 1989b). Studies which have compared the subsectors of Ch4-nbM have demonstrated that Ch4-nbMp and Ch4-nbMal neurons show the greatest and most consistent range of loss (39–76%), followed by the Ch4-nbMi (25–62%) and Ch4-nbMam (13–46%) (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1999). Observations from our laboratory have confirmed the much greater loss of neurons in Ch4-nbMp than in Ch4-nbMa in AD (Mesulam &amp; Geula 1988). Like cortical ChAT activity, Ch4-nbM neuronal loss in typical amnestic AD shows no hemispheric asymmetry (Doucette &amp; Ball 1987). However, in AD that causes PPA, the Ch4-nbM loss is more prominent in the language dominant (usually left) hemisphere (Mesulam et al. 2019).

A significant relationship has been reported between cortical SPs and Ch4-nbM neuronal loss (r=0.54) and shrinkage (r=0.81) by some investigators (Mann et al. 1985) and not by others (Rinne et al. 1987). Two studies found a larger correlation between Ch4-nbM neuronal loss and SPs in anatomically related as compared with unrelated cortical sites (Arendt et al. 1985). Some investigators have reported a significant correlation between Ch4-nbM neuronal loss and cortical NFT (Mann et al. 1984; Mann et al. 1985) while others found no such relationship (Rinne et al. 1987).

The Ch4-nbM neurons are highly vulnerable to NFT formation, and many of the remaining neurons contain NFT (Mufson et al. 1989b; Geula et al. 1998; Geula et al. 2008) (Fig. 3 D&amp;E). A moderate density of SP has also been reported in the basal forebrain region within which the Ch4-nbM neurons are located (Arendt et al. 1988). However, we have shown that the nbM region is relatively resistant to formation of neuritic SP (Baker-Nigh et al. 2015). We have also demonstrated significant and early accumulation of soluble Aβ oligomers in human Ch4-nbM neurons in the course of normal aging and AD (Baker-Nigh et al. 2015). The size of soluble Aβ oligomers accumulating in these neurons was increased in the course of aging, and in AD. The relationship between soluble Aβ oligomer accumulation and loss of Ch4-nbM neurons in AD remains to be investigated.

Loss of BFCN is seen in all clinical phenotypes of AD. For example, we found that 80% of PPA patients with AD pathology had moderate / severe Ch4-nbM neuronal loss and gliosis. (Mesulam et al. 2019). Detailed quantitative analysis revealed substantial tangle formation in Ch4-nbM neurons, loss of Ch4-nbM neurons and degeneration of cortical cholinergic axons. Loss of histochemically visualized cholinergic axons was observed in all cortical areas studied, but was more severe in regions affiliated with language function. Consistent with the PPA phenotype, degeneration and pathology were more severe in the language-dominant hemisphere. These observations indicate that the presence of AD pathology is likely to be associated with significant degeneration of the BFCN regardless of clinical presentation and anatomical distribution of SP and NFT.

Cholinergic Receptors

Several studies have reported no change or an increase in the density or affinity of the total population of cortical muscarinic receptors in AD (Zubenko et al. 1989; Araujo et al. 1988; DeKosky et al. 1992; Svensson et al. 1997). Others show a small (20–30%) reduction in the density of these receptors, with the largest and most consistent loss observed within the hippocampal formation (Vanderhayden et al. 1987; Nordberg et al. 1992). This loss was reported to represent a reduction in the density of the M2 subtype (Araujo et al. 1988; Mash et al. 1985). Other investigations, however, have reported loss of M1 receptor binding, immunoreactivity, and mRNA in AD cortex (Flynn et al. 1995; Yi et al. 2020). In contrast, markers for the M3 and particularly M4 receptor subtype remained unchanged (Flynn et al. 1995; Rodriguez-Puertas et al. 1997). A number of investigations have found abnormalities in the coupling of muscarinic receptors to G proteins in AD, implicating alterations in signal transduction following receptor stimulation (Ferrari-DiLeo et al. 1995; Cowburn et al. 1996; Ladner et al. 1995). Thus, the residual muscarinic receptors in AD cortex may be functionally impaired.

With two exceptions (Lang &amp; Henke 1983; Shimohama et al. 1986), all investigations report a significant loss of cortical nicotinic receptors in AD cortex (Svensson et al. 1997; Nordberg et al. 1992; Perry et al. 1995; Whitehouse et al. 1988), especially in the temporal cortex (Flynn &amp; Mash 1986). This decrease appears to result from the loss of the high affinity subtype of this receptor (Nordberg et al. 1988). Significantly, the density of cortical α4β2 nicotinic receptors was found to display a strong correlation with cognitive performance in mild AD, and to be associated with progression of cognitive decline (Colloby et al. 2010; Okada et al. 2013; Sabri et al. 2018).

Our quantitative studies revealed a marked loss of the AChE-rich staining pattern in putatively cholinoceptive cortical pyramidal neurons in AD (Heckers et al. 1992). The absence of correlation with local neuronal loss led to the suggestion that this subset of cortical cholinoceptive neurons may display downregulation of AChE in the course of AD. More recently, we have demonstrated significant reduction in histochemical AChE activity in cortical pyramidal neurons in the course of normal aging, and a further significant reduction in elderly with exceptional memory performance (Janeczek et al. 2018). It is tempting to speculate that these neurons display a reactive downregulation of AChE activity to counteract reduced presynaptic transmitter release in the course of aging, and particularly in AD.

Relation to Cognitive Performance

A significant correlation has been reported between cortical ChAT activity and the degree of dementia as confirmed by objective neuropsychological assessment (Wilcock et al. 1982; DeKosky et al. 1992; Bierer et al. 1995) whereas cortical levels of other neurochemicals, such as norepinephrine do not appear to show a significant relationship with the degree of dementia (Palmer et al. 1987). The extent of neuronal loss and density of tangles in Ch4-nbM (Samuel et al. 1991; Lehericy et al. 1993; Mesulam et al. 2004), but not in the serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus (Halliday et al. 1992), have also been shown to be correlated with cognitive impairment along the age-Mild Cognitive Impairment-AD continuum. Thus, depletion of cortical cholinergic innervation is a likely contributor to cognitive abnormalities in AD.

Diffuse Lewy Body Disease

Degeneration of BFCN has been reported in the synucleinopathies of PD and DLBD. As indicated earlier, limbic areas are quite vulnerable to LB formation as well as abnormal α-synuclein deposition in neuronal and neuritic components. The vulnerability of BFCN to PD and DLBD may therefore reflect their location along the mediotemporal and basal forebrain band of limbic formations. Significant reductions in ChAT activity in neocortical regions have been reported in PD and DLBD, and particularly in prefrontal cortex, independent of comorbid AD pathology (Perry et al. 1993; Tiraboschi et al. 2000). Compared to DAT-AD, the reduction of ChAT activity is greater in neocortical but not limbic areas (Perry et al. 1994; Sahin et al. 2006). Loss of ChAT activity in neocortical areas in patients with combined AD and DLBD pathology was greater than that in pure AD (Tiraboschi et al. 2002). Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging with the vesicular acetylcholine transporter has confirmed cholinergic loss in the opercular regions, cingulate cortex, and insular cortex in DLBD (Kanel et al. 2020). The Ch4-nbM neurons are vulnerable to accumulation of LB and α-synuclein accumulation in DLBD (Graeber &amp; Muller 2003) (Fig. 3 F), and significant loss of Ch4-nbM neurons has been reported in PD with or without dementia (Whitehouse et al. 1983; Gasper &amp; Gray 1984; Liu et al. 2015).

Some investigations report no change, or an increase in cortical muscarinic receptors in PD and DLBD (Perry et al. 1993; Tagliavini et al. 1984a), while others find reduced cortical muscarinic receptors in DLBD (Shiozaki &amp; Iseki 2004; Tiraboschi et al. 2002). Reductions are also reported in nicotinic receptor subunits in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in DLBD (Teaktong et al. 2004). Thus, while not as thoroughly investigated as in AD, the basal forebrain cholinergic system spears to display significant degeneration in DLBD and PD.

Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration with Tauopathies

Pick’s Disease – A 3R Tauopathy

The relatively few investigations of the basal forebrain cholinergic system in Pick’s disease primarily point to no or mild degeneration (Mizukami &amp; Kosaka 1989; Tagliavini &amp; Pilleri 1983) (Fig. 3 G), with very few studies (Uhl et al. 1983) finding significant loss. All available studies of ChAT activity in cortical regions, including prefrontal cortex, report no loss in Pick’s disease when compared with controls (Wood et al. 1983b; Hansen et al. 1988; Yates et al. 1980; Wood et al. 1983a). Biochemically determined ChAT and AChE activities were reported to be decreased in basal forebrain in Pick’s disease (Sparks &amp; Markesbery 1991). Consistent with degeneration of cerebral cortex, cortical muscarinic receptor binding is decreased in Pick’s disease (Hansen et al. 1988; Yates et al. 1980). However, one study reported discrepant results (Wood et al. 1983b). A survey of three cases from our collection showed the Ch4-nbM to be unaffected at a stage when the cerebral cortex was devastated by neurodegeneration. Tau immunohistochemistry in these cases showed very high numbers of Pick bodies in cortical areas but almost none in the Ch4-nbM. In summary, the basal forebrain cholinergic system remains intact, or displays very mild degeneration in Pick’s disease. It must be noted that many of the available reports are based on very few cases, sometimes a single patient.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy – A 4R Tauopathy

Little information is available on cortical cholinergic innervation in PSP pathology. The only available study employed PET imaging of vesicular acetylcholine transporter, and found significant loss in the anterior cingulate cortex but not hippocampus (Mazere et al. 2012). A few studies have reported loss of Ch4-nbM neurons in PSP (Kasashima &amp; Oda 2003; Tagliavini et al. 1984b; Tagliavini et al. 1983). This reported loss is variable, small in many cases, and less than that observed in AD. Cortical muscarinic receptors seem to remain unchanged (Asahina et al. 1998; Warren et al. 2008), while one study reported reduced cortical nicotinic receptors in PSP (Whitehouse et al. 1988). Therefore, while PSP appears to be associated with loss of Ch4-nbM neurons, this loss in smaller when compared with AD. Additional experiments are needed to assess the vulnerability of BFCN to phosphotau pathology in PSP.

Corticobasal Degeneration – A 4R Tauopathy

A single study based on one case of CBD found greater loss of BFCN in this tauopathy when compared with PSP (Kasashima &amp; Oda 2003). We conducted an investigation of phosphotau inclusions in the Ch4-nbM and status of cortical cholinergic axons in autopsy confirmed cases of CBD. All CBD cases displayed phosphotau inclusions that encompassed 30–70% of Ch4-nbM neurons (Fig. 3 H). The inclusions were morphologically distinct from NFT of AD. There was no correlation between cellular phosphotau accumulation and neuronal number. Moreover, the density of histochemically visualized cortical cholinergic axons in CBD was similar to those of normal controls and was significantly greater than that of AD cases. Thus, despite CBD-related intracellular 4R tauopathy, the number of BFCN and their cortical cholinergic projections remained intact (Dunlop et al. Basal Forebrain Cholinergic System Resilience to Tauopathy in Corticobasal Degeneration. Soc. Neurosci. Abst., Virtual Global Connectome, Session # P120.02, 2021). The cellular integrity of BFCN is therefore based on resilience to the 4R tauopathy of CBD.

Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration with TDP-43 Proteinopathies

There is a dearth of information on the status of the basal forebrain cholinergic system in TDP-43 proteinopathies. To fill this gap, we conducted an investigation of susceptibility of Ch4-nbM neurons to accumulation of TDP-43 inclusions and to degeneration. Using cases with clinically diagnosed PPA and pathologically confirmed TDP-43 proteinopathy, we found near absence of TDP-43 neuronal inclusions in Ch4-nbM neurons. Few and very sparsely populated Ch4-nbM neurons (&lt;2%) contained TDP-43 pre-inclusions (Fig 3 I), indicating very early TDP-43 pathology within these neurons even at terminal disease stages (Dunlop et al., Vulnerability of the Cholinergic Basal Forebrain to AD vs FTLD-TDP Pathology in Primary Progressive Aphasia. Alzheimer’s Association International Conference, Chicago, 2018). Additionally, in semiquantitative ratings, 90% of FTLD-TDP cases who had PPA in life displayed no or very mild Ch4-nbM neuronal loss and gliosis (Mesulam et al. 2019). These results suggest that the basal forebrain cholinergic system may be resistant to the accumulation of abnormal TDP-43 inclusions.

SELECTIVE VULNERABILITY OF BASAL FOREBRAIN CHOLINERGIC SYSTEM

The evidence reviewed here clearly demonstrates selective vulnerability of the basal forebrain cholinergic system to AD and DLBD. There is evidence that the BFCN degeneration in AD occurs earlier than in other subcortical nuclei (Geula &amp; Mesulam 1999). We have shown that phosphotau accumulation in Ch4-nbM, and abnormalities in cortical cholinergic axons are observed early in the process of normal aging, and are greatly exacerbated in AD (Geula et al. 2008). The substantial increase in the density of tangles in Ch4-nbM neurons is associated with the degeneration of these neurons. Of interest, as reviewed earlier, basal forebrain cholinergic degeneration is not only a feature of the typical amnestic DAT-AD, but is also present in the aphasic PPA variant (Mesulam et al. 2019). Available evidence suggests that the basal forebrain cholinergic system also undergoes degeneration in the synucleinopathy of DLBD, and most likely in PD, particularly when it is accompanied by cognitive impairment.

In contrast to AD, DLBD and PD, the basal forebrain cholinergic system does not display significant degeneration in 3R or 4R tauopathies or in TDP-43 proteinopathies. In fact, in the tauopathy of CBD, the BFCN displays resilience despite accumulation of 4R phosphotau in Ch4-nbM neurons. This observation has important implications for the mechanisms of neurodegeneration within the spectrum of tauopathies. If the intraneuronal abnormality of tau implies abnormal microtubule stabilization, this loss of function cannot be considered a general mechanism of neurodegeneration since it would have been as relevant to AD as to CBD and lead to degeneration in both conditions. Instead, the neurodegenerative impact of tauopathy may reflect a toxic gain of function that is specifically linked to the mixture of 3R and 4R phosphotau that characterizes AD. This differential vulnerability is most likely due to differences in tau conformations and strains. As reviewed earlier, phosphotau in AD forms PHF that have the β-pleated sheet abnormal protein conformations recognized by Thioflavin-S, whereas tau inclusions in most other tauopathies do not (Mackenzie et al. 2011). Furthermore, pathology in each tauopathy appears to be composed of a distinct tau strain that can be distinguished by specific antibodies, and retain distinct cell-specificity and propagation properties when seeded in mouse brains (Narasimhan et al. 2017; Gibbons et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2021). The results reviewed above also suggest that the BFCN may be resistant to intracellular proteinopathy in the 3R tauopathy of Pick’s disease and in FTLD-TDP.

The propensity of limbic and paralimbic regions to formation of inclusions in AD and DLBD is likely to contribute to the vulnerability of BFCN in these disorders. Molecular characteristics of BFCN may also contribute of their vulnerability in AD and DLBD. In the adult human brain, the Ch1-Ch4 complex is the major cell group which expresses substantial immunoreactivity for the high affinity neurotrophin receptor TrkA and the p75 low affinity neurotrophin receptor (p75LANTR) (Mufson et al. 1989a; Kordower et al. 1994), which are receptors for nerve growth factor (NGFr). The NGFr are transported anterogradely to terminal fields of Ch1-Ch4 neurons where they bind NGF. The NGFr-NGF complex is then retrogradely transported to the Ch1-Ch4 perikarya that depend on NGF for survival and protection from damage (Ferguson et al. 1991; Ehlers et al. 1995; Tuszynski et al. 1990). It is therefore conceivable that the selective vulnerability of cortical cholinergic innervation may be caused by a deficiency of cortically produced NGF or the failure of Ch1-Ch4 neurons to express NGFr. Studies of NGF levels in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus have shown either no loss or a significant increase in AD, consistent with defective transport (Allen et al. 1991; Scott et al. 1995). Loss of NGFr in Ch4-nbM has been reported at the level of mRNA and protein in mild cognitive impairment and AD (Mufson et al. 2002; Mufson et al. 2000). A significant decrease in NGF immunoreactivity has also been reported in the remaining Ch4-nbM neurons (Mufson et al. 1995). Thus, disruption of retrograde NGF transport is likely to contribute to the loss of Ch1-Ch4 neurons in AD.

Most Ch1-Ch4 neurons in the primate brain show immunoreactivity for the calcium binding protein calbindin-D28K (Wu et al. 2000; Geula et al. 1993; Celio &amp; Norman 1985). In the human and the non-human primate brain, approximately 75% of Ch4-nbM neurons are calbindin-positive (Wu et al. 2000; Geula et al. 1993). However, none of the ChAT-positive Ch4-nbM in the rodent brain are calbindin-positive (Celio 1990; Geula et al. 1993). In a series of experiments, we have demonstrated a selective, substantial and significant loss of calbindin from the human and monkey BFCN in the course of normal aging (Wu et al. 1997; Geula et al. 2003a; Geula et al. 2003b; Wu et al. 2003). The age-related loss of calbindin from the BFCN was neurochemically and regionally specific, and was not accompanied by loss of ChAT, TrkA, p75LANTR, or AChE (Wu et al. 1997; Wu et al. 2003).

Calbindin possesses a structural domain which binds Ca2+ with high affinity (Miller 1991). Neuronal calbindin regulates intracellular Ca2+ and reduces excessive Ca2+ levels (Mattson et al. 1991). With few exceptions, the presence of calbindin confers protection to a variety of neurons against deleterious effects of increased intracellular Ca2+ (Rintoul et al. 2001). We have hypothesized that the age-related loss of calbindin deprives the BFCN of the capacity to buffer excess Ca2+ and leaves them vulnerable to involutional and neurodegenerative processes. We have found that the Ch4-nbM neurons that degenerate in AD belong to the subpopulation that lack calbindin. Nearly all of the surviving BFCN in AD are calbindin-positive (Riascos et al. 2010). We have also found that calbindin-positive BFCN may be relatively more resistant to NFT formation (Riascos et al. 2011; Ahmadian et al. 2015). It appears, therefore, that the age-related loss of calbindin from Ch4-nbM may be involved in the pathologic cascade underlying their selective vulnerability in AD.

THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS

The discovery of the cholinergic denervation in the cerebral cortex and the therapeutic effect of cholinesterase inhibitors led to the formulation of a ‘cholinergic theory’ of Alzheimer’s disease. However, it is important to keep in mind that the cholinergic innervation of the basal ganglia and thalamus remain nearly intact in the initial stages of AD. It would appear that the preferential loss of cortical cholinergic innervation in AD and DLBD reflects the vulnerability of Ch4-nbM, in specific, not of cholinergic neurotransmission in general. As noted above, the vulnerability of the Ch4-nbM may be based on the continuity of the basal forebrain with the hippocampal-amygdaloid-olfactory band of limbic formations. Nonetheless, the significant degeneration of the basal forebrain cholinergic system in AD, DLBD and PD, and the participation of this system in cognitive processes of memory and attention gave rise to the development of cholinergic therapies based on the inhibition of AChE, the major hydrolytic enzyme that terminates the synaptic action of acetylcholine. Treatment with these cholinergic inhibitors has consistently resulted in modest but statistically robust improvement in cognitive abilities in cases of AD, PD and DLBD (Bullock et al. 2005; Farlow 2002; Bhasin et al. 2007; Emre et al. 2004). The information reviewed here helps explain why cholinesterase inhibitors are ineffective in Pick’s disease, CBD, PSP and FTLD-TDP. Direct cholinergic receptor stimulation employing muscarinic and nicotinic agonists are being pursued as potential cholinergic therapies for dementia (Moran et al. 2019; Hoskin et al. 2019). If successful, such agents may further enhance cholinergic transmission in AD and DLBD, in which the pool of acetylcholine is deficient due to degeneration of BFCN axons in cortex. Reducing Aβ production, suppressing inflammation or promoting neuroplasticity may represent additional avenues through which cholinergic receptor agonists or cholinesterase inhibitors may confer disease-modifying benefits (Hoskin et al. 2019; Fisher 2012; Gamage et al. 2020).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NS085770), National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (DC008552), National Institute on Aging (AG062566, AG065463) and by an Alzheimer’s Disease Center Grant from the National Institute on Aging (AG013854).

Abbreviations:

a Anterior

Aβ Amyloid-β Peptide

AChE Acetylcholinesterase

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

ai Anterointermediate

al Anterolateral

am Anteromedial

BFCN Basal Forebrain Cholinergic Neurons

bvFTD Behavioral Variant Frontotemporal Dementia

CBDs Corticobasal Degeneration Syndrome

Ch Cholinergic Cell Group

ChAT Choline Acetyltransferase

DAT Dementia of the Alzheimer Type

dbh Horizontal Limb of the Diagonal Band of Broca

dbv Vertical Limb of the Diagonal Band of Broca

DLBD Diffuse Lewy Body Disease

FTLD Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration

i Intermediate

id Intermediodorsal

iv Intermedioventral

LANTR Low Affinity Neurotrophin Receptor

LB Lewy Body

M Muscarinic Cholinergic Receptor

ms Medial Septum

nbM Nucleus Basalis of Meynert

NFT Neurofibrillary Tangle

NGF Nerve Growth Factor

NGFr Nerve Growth Factor Receptor

p Posterior

PD Parkinson’s Disease

PHF Paired Helical Filaments

PPA Primary Progressive Aphasia

PSPs Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Syndrome

3R 3 Microtubule Binding Repeat Isoform of Tau

4R 4 Microtubule Binding Repeat Isoform of Tau

SP Senile Plaque

TDP-43 43-kDa Transactive Response Element DNA-Binding Protein

TrkA Tyrosine Kinase A

Figure 1. Pathologic entities associated with dementias.

(A) Thioflavin-S stain visualizes mature extracellular senile plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) cortex. (B) Phosphotau immunoreactivity is present in neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads in AD. (C) Plaques in AD cortex display immunoreactivity for the amyloid-β peptide. (D) Dystrophic neurites within mature plaques in AD brains display immunoreactivity for phosphotau. (E) A substantia nigra neuron in a case of diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD) contains a LB in a hemotoxylin &amp; eosin stained section. (F) α-Synuclein immunoreactivity is present in neurons and neurites in DLBD cortex. (G) Phosphotau immunoreactivity in corticobasal degeneration visualizes inclusions in neurons, neurites and astrocytic plaques (arrow). (H) Cortical Pick bodies containing phosphotau immunoreactivity in Pick’s disease. (I) Phosphorylated TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusions in cortical neurons in TDP-43 proteinopathy.

Figure 2. Anatomical delineation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert (Ch4-nbM) in the human brain.

(Top) Myelin stained whole-brain section, showing the substantia innominata below the crossing anterior commissure within which the anterior aspects of Ch4-nbM neurons are located. (A-D) Acetylcholinesterase stained sections delineating the anterior (A), anterointermediate (B), intermediate (C) and posterior (D) sectors of Ch4-nbM. Ac – anterior commissure; ai – anterointermediate sector of Ch4-nbM; al – anterolateral subsector of Ch4-nbM; am – anteromedial subsector of Ch4-nbM; Am – amygdala; an – ansa lenticularis; ap – ansa peduncularis; bl – basolateral nucleus of amygdala; GP – globus pallidus; GPe – globus pallidus externa; GPi – globus pallidus interna; GPv – ventral globus pallidus; hc – head of caudate; Hp – hippocampus; ic – internal capsule; id – intermediodorsal subsector of Ch4-nbM; iml – internal medullary lamina or globus pallidus; iv – intermedioventral subsector of Ch4-nbM; Nhl – nucleus of the horizontal limb of the diagonal band of Broca; nst – nucleus of stria terminalis; oc – optic chiasm; ot – optic tract; p – posterior sector of Ch4-nbM; Pt – putamen; si – substantia innominata; son – supraoptic nucleus of hypothalamus; v – blood vessel; vt – temporal horn of lateral ventricle; tc – tail of caudate. A-D are reproduced with permission from Wiley and Sons: Mesulam, M. M. and Geula, C. (1988) Nucleus basalis (Ch4) and cortical cholinergic innervation in the human brain: observations based on the distribution of acetylcholinesterase and choline acetyltransferase. J.Comp.Neurol. 275, 216–240.

Figure 3. Cholinergic neurons of the nucleus basalis of Meynert (Ch4-nbM) in dementias.

Low (A) and high (B) power images of choline-acetyltransferase immunoreactive (ChAT) Ch4-nbM neurons in the normal human brain. (C) Ch4-nbM of an AD brain, demonstrating significant loss of ChAT immunoreactive Ch4-nbM neurons. (D) Thioflavin-S staining, demonstrating presence of mature globose neurofibrillary tangles in the remaining Ch4-nbM neurons in AD. (E) Phosphotau immunoreactivity in the remaining Ch4-nbM neurons in AD. (F) α-Synuclein immunoreactivity in Ch4-nbM neurons in diffuse Lewy body dementia. (G) Robust preservation of magnocellular Nissl stained Ch4-nbM neurons in Pick’s disease; Pick bodies are not observed in Ch4-nbM neurons in contrast to abundant Pick bodies in cortex (see Figure 1H). (H) Abundant accumulation of phosphotau accumulation in Ch4-nbM neurons in corticobasal degeneration, despite preservation of Ch4-nbM neurons. (I) Absence of TDP-43 mature inclusions in Ch4-nbM neurons in TDP-43 proteinopathy; only occasional pre-inclusions (arrow) are seen in Ch4-nbM neurons.

Disclosure Statement

The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.


References

Ahmadian SS , Rezvanian A , Peterson M , Weintraub S , Bigio EH , Mesulam MM and Geula C (2015) Loss of calbindin-D28K is associated with the full range of tangle pathology within basal forebrain cholinergic neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of aging 36 , 3163–3170.26417681
Aigner TG , Mitchell SJ , Aggleton JP , Delong MR , Struble RG , Price DL , Wenk GL and Mishkin M (1987) Effects of scopolamine and physostigmine on recognition memory in monkeys with ibotenic-acid lesions of the nucleus basalis of Meynert. Psychopharmacol. 92 , 292–300.
Allen SJ , MacGowan SH , Treanor JJ , Feeney R , Wilcock GK and Dawbarn D (1991) Normal beta-NGF content in Alzheimer’s disease cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Neurosci.Lett 131 , 135–139.1791973
Alzheimer A (1977) A unique illness involving the cerebral cortex. In: Neurological Classics in Modern Translation, (Rothenberg DA and Hochberg FH eds.), pp. 41–43. Hafner Press, London.
Araujo DM , Lapchak PA , Robitaille Y , Gauthier S and Quirion R (1988) Differential alteration of various cholinergic markers in cortical and subcortical regions of human brain in Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neurochem 50 , 1914–1923.3373218
Arendt T , Bigl V , Tennstedt A and Arndt A (1985) Neuronal loss in different parts of the nucleus basalis is related to neuritic plaque formation in cortical target areas in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. 14 , 1–14.
Arendt T , Taubert G , Bigl V and Arendt A (1988) Amyloid deposition in the nucleus basalis of Meynert complex: a topographic marker for degerating cell clusters in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropath. 75 , 226–232.3348080
Arikuni T and Kubota K (1984) Substantia innominata projection to caudate nucleus in macaque monkeys. Brain Res. 302 , 184–189.6203613
Arnold SE , Hyman BT , Flory J , Damasio AR and Van Hoesen GW (1991) The topographical and neuroanatomical distribution of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in the cerebral cortex of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Cerebral Cortex 1 , 103–116.1822725
Arriagada PV , Marzloff K and Hyman BT (1992) Distribution of Alzheimer-type pathologic changes in nondemented elderly individuals matches the pattern in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 42 , 1681–1688.1307688
Asahina M , Suhara T , Shinotoh H , Inoue O , Suzuki K and Hattori T (1998) Brain muscarinic receptors in progressive supranuclear palsy and Parkinson’s disease: a positron emission tomographic study. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry 65 , 155–163.
Attems J , Toledo JB , Walker L (2021) Neuropathological consensus criteria for the evaluation of Lewy pathology in post-mortem brains: a multi-centre study. Acta neuropathologica 141 , 159–172.33399945
Baker-Nigh A , Vahedi S , Davis EG , Weintraub S , Bigio EH , Klein WL and Geula C (2015) Neuronal amyloid-beta accumulation within cholinergic basal forebrain in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138 , 1722–1737.25732182
Bhasin M , Rowan E , Edwards K and McKeith I (2007) Cholinesterase inhibitors in dementia with Lewy bodies: a comparative analysis. International journal of geriatric psychiatry 22 , 890–895.17265415
Bierer LM , Haroutunian V , Gabriel S , Knott PJ , Carlin LS , Purohit DP , Schmeidler J , Kanof P and Davis KL (1995) Neurochemical correlates of dementia severity in Alzheimer’s disease: relative importance of the cholinergic deficits. J.Neurochem 64 , 749–750.7830069
Bird TD , Stranaham S , Sumi SM and Raskind M (1983) Alzheimer’s disease: choline acetyltransferase activity in brain tissue from clinical and pathological subgroups. Ann.Neurol 14 , 284–293.6227276
Bowen DM , Smith CB , White P and Davison AN (1976) Neurotransmitter-related enzymes and indices of hypoxia in senile dementia and other abiotrophies. Brain 99 , 459–496.11871
Braak H and Braak E (1995) Staging of Alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes. Neurobiology of aging 16 , 271–278; discussion 278–284. 7566337
Braak H , Del Tredici K , Bratzke H , Hamm-Clement J , Sandmann-Keil D and Rub U (2002) Staging of the intracerebral inclusion body pathology associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (preclinical and clinical stages). J Neurol 249 Suppl 3 , III/ 1–5.11954855
Braak H , Rub U and Del Tredici K (2006) Cognitive decline correlates with neuropathological stage in Parkinson’s disease. Journal of the neurological sciences 248 , 255–258.16814807
Brann MR , Elis J , Jorgensen H , Hill-Eubanks D and Jones SVP (1993) Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes: Localization and structure/function. In: Prog.Brain Res, (Cuello AC ed.), pp. 121–127. Elsevier Science Publishers, NY.
Buciuc M , Whitwell JL , Kasanuki K (2021) Lewy Body Disease is a Contributor to Logopenic Progressive Aphasia Phenotype. Annals of neurology 89 , 520–533.33274526
Bullock R , Touchon J , Bergman H , Gambina G , He Y , Rapatz G , Nagel J and Lane R (2005) Rivastigmine and donepezil treatment in moderate to moderately-severe Alzheimer’s disease over a 2-year period. Curr.Med.Res.Opin 21 , 1317–1327.16083542
Buratti E , De Conti L , Stuani C , Romano M , Baralle M and Baralle F (2010) Nuclear factor TDP-43 can affect selected microRNA levels. The FEBS journal 277 , 2268–2281.20423455
Cairns NJ , Neumann M , Bigio EH (2007) TDP-43 in familial and sporadic frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions. Am.J.Pathol 171 , 227–240.17591968
Celio MR (1990) Calbindin D-28K and Parvalbumin in the rat nervous system. Neurosci. 35 , 375–475.
Celio MR and Norman AW (1985) Nucleus basalis Meynert neurons contain the vitamin D-induced calcium-binding protein (Calbindin-D 28K). Anat.Embryol 173 , 143–148.
Chen-Plotkin AS , Lee VM and Trojanowski JQ (2010) TAR DNA-binding protein 43 in neurodegenerative disease. Nature reviews. Neurology 6 , 211–220.20234357
Cimino M , Marini P , Fornasari D , Cattabeni F and Clementi F (1992) Distribution of nicotinic receptors in cynomolgus monkey brain and ganglia: localization of alpha 3 subunit mRNA, alpha- bungarotoxin and nicotine binding sites. Neurosci. 51 , 77–86.
Coleman PD and Flood DG (1987) Neuron numbers and dendritic extent in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol.Aging 8 , 521–545.3323927
Colloby SJ , Perry EK , Pakrasi S , Pimlott SL , Wyper DJ , McKeith IG , Williams ED and O’Brien JT (2010) Nicotinic 123I-5IA-85380 single photon emission computed tomography as a predictor of cognitive progression in Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 18 , 86–90.20094022
Cortes R , Probst A and Palacios JM (1987) Quantitative light microscopic autoradiographic localization of cholinergic muscarinic receptors in the human brain: forebrain. Neurosci. 20 , 65–107.
Cowburn RF , Wiehager B , Ravid R and Winblad B (1996) Acetylcholine muscarinic M2 receptor stimulated [35S]GTP gamma S binding shows regional selective changes in Alzheimer’s disease postmortem brain. Neurodegen. 5 , 19–26.
Davies P (1979) Neurotransmitter-related enzymes in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type. Brain Res. 171 , 319–327.37989
Davies P and Maloney AJF (1976) Selective loss of central cholinergic neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 2 , 1403–1403.
DeKosky ST , Harbaugh RE , Schmitt FA (1992) Cortical biopsy in Alzheimer’s disease: diagnostic accuracy and neurochemical, neuropathological, and cognitive correlates. Ann.Neurol 32 , 625–632.1360195
Dingledine R and Kelly JS (1977) Brain stem stimulation and the acetylcholine- evoked inhibition of neurons in the feline nucleus reticularis thalami. J.Physiol.(London) 271 , 135–154.915830
Doucette RB and Ball NJ (1987) Left-right symmetry of neuronal cell counts in the nucleus basalis of Meynert of control and of Alzheimer-diseased brains. Brain Res. 422 , 357–360.3676795
Drachman DA and Leavitt J (1974) Human memory and the cholinergic system: a relationship to aging? Arch.Neurol 30 , 113–121.4359364
Ehlers MD , Kaplan DR , Price DL and Koliatsos VE (1995) NGF-stimulated retrograde transport of trkA in the mammalian nervous system. J.Cell Biol 130 , 149–156.7540615
Emre M , Aarsland D , Albanese A (2004) Rivastigmine for dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease. N.Engl.J.Med 351 , 2509–2518.15590953
Emre M , Heckers S , Mash DC , Geula C and Mesulam MM (1993) Cholinergic innervation of the amygdaloid complex in the human brain and its alterations in old age and Alzheimer’s disease. J.Com.Neurol 336 , 117–134.
Etienne P , Robitaille Y , Wood P , Gauthier S , Nair NPV and Quirion R (1986) Nucleus basalis neuronal loss, neuritic plaques, and choline acetyltransferase activity in advanced Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. 19 , 1279–1291.
Farlow M (2002) A clinical overview of cholinesterase inhibitors in Alzheimer’s disease. Int.Psychogeriatr 14 Suppl 1 , 93–126.12636182
Ferguson IA , Schweitzer JB , Bartlett PF and Johnson EM Jr. (1991) Receptor-mediated retrograde transport in CNS neurons after intraventricular administration of NGF and growth factors. J.Comp.Neurol 313 , 680–692.1664436
Ferrari-DiLeo G , Mash DC and Flynn DD (1995) Attenuation of muscarinic receptor-G-protein interaction in Alzheimer disease. Mol.Chem.Neuropathol 24 , 69–91.7755848
Fine A , Hoyle C , Maclean CJ , Levatte TL , Baker HF and Ridley RM (1997) Learning impairments following injection of a selective cholinergic immunotoxin, ME20.4 IgG-saporin, into the basal nucleus of Meynert in monkeys. Neurosci. 81 , 331–343.
Fisher A (2012) Cholinergic modulation of amyloid precursor protein processing with emphasis on M1 muscarinic receptor: perspectives and challenges in treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of neurochemistry 120 Suppl 1 , 22–33.22122190
Flicker C , Dean RL , Watkins DL , Fisher SK and Bartus RT (1983) Behavioral and neurochemical effects following neurotoxic lesions of a major cholinergic input to the cerebral cortex in the rat. Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav 18 , 973–981.6889421
Flynn DD , Ferraridileo G , Mash DC and Levey AI (1995) Differential regulation of molecular subtypes of muscarinic receptors in Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neurochem 64 , 1888–1891.7891119
Flynn DD and Mash DC (1986) Characterization of L-[3H]nicotine binding in human cerebral cortex: comparison between Alzheimer’s disease and the normal. J.Neurochem 47 , 1948–1954.3772387
Gamage R , Wagnon I , Rossetti I , Childs R , Niedermayer G , Chesworth R and Gyengesi E (2020) Cholinergic Modulation of Glial Function During Aging and Chronic Neuroinflammation. Front Cell Neurosci 14 , 577912.33192323
Gasper P and Gray F (1984) Dementia in idiopathis Parkinson’s disease. A neuropathological study of 32 cases. Acta Neuropathol. 64 , 43–52.6089493
Geula C , Bu J , Nagykery N , Scinto LF , Chan J , Joseph J , Parker R and Wu CK (2003a) Loss of calbindin-D28k from aging human cholinergic basal forebrain: relation to neuronal loss. J.Comp Neurol 455 , 249–259.12454989
Geula C and Mesulam MM (1989) Cortical cholinergic fibers in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: a morphometric study. Neurosci. 33 , 469–481.
Geula C and Mesulam MM (1996) Systematic regional variations in the loss of cortical cholinergic fibers in Alzheimer’s disease. Cerebral Cort. 6 , 165–177.
Geula C and Mesulam MM (1999) Cholinergic systems in Alzheimer disease. In: Alzheimer Disease., (Terry RD , Katzman R , Bick KL and Sisodia SS eds.), Vol. 2 , pp. 269–292. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Geula C , Mesulam MM , Saroff DM and Wu CK (1998) Relationship between plaques, tangles, and loss of cortical cholinergic fibers in Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol 57 , 63–75.9600198
Geula C , Nagykery N , Nicholas A and Wu CK (2008) Cholinergic neuronal and axonal abnormalities are present early in aging and in Alzheimer disease. J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol 67 , 309–318.18379437
Geula C , Nagykery N , Wu CK and Bu J (2003b) Loss of calbindin-D28K from aging human cholinergic basal forebrain: relation to plaques and tangles. J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol 62 , 605–616.12834105
Geula C , Schatz CR and Mesulam MM (1993) Differential localization of NADPH-diaphorase and calbindin-D28k within the cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain, striatum and brainstem in the rat, monkey, baboon and human. Neurosci. 54 , 461–476.
Gibbons GS , Banks RA , Kim B , Changolkar L , Riddle DM , Leight SN , Irwin DJ , Trojanowski JQ and Lee VMY (2018) Detection of Alzheimer Disease (AD)-Specific Tau Pathology in AD and NonAD Tauopathies by Immunohistochemistry With Novel Conformation-Selective Tau Antibodies. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 77 , 216–228.29415231
Graeber MB and Muller U (2003) Dementia with Lewy bodies: disease concept and genetics. Neurogenetics 4 , 157–162.12898286
Graham AJ , Ray MA , Perry EK (2003) Differential nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit expression in the human hippocampus. Journal of chemical neuroanatomy 25 , 97–113.12663058
Halliday GM , McCann HL , Pamphlett R , Brooks WS , Creasey H , McCusker E , Cotton RG , Broe GA and Harper CG (1992) Brain stem serotonin-synthesizing neurons in Alzheimer’s disease: a clinicopathological correlation. Acta Neuropathol. 84 , 638–650.1281956
Hansen LA (1994) Pathology of Other Dementias. In: Alzheimer Disease, (Terry RD , Katzman R and Bick KL eds.), pp. 167–177. Raven Press, New York.
Hansen LA , DeTeresa R , Tobias H , Alford M and Terry RD (1988) Neocortical morphometry and cholinergic neurochemistry in Pick’s disease. Am.J.Pathol 131 , 507–518.3381880
Heckers S , Geula C and Mesulam MM (1992) Acetylcholinesterase-rich pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol.Aging 13 , 455–460.1508295
Hedreen JC , Struble RG , Whitehouse PJ and Price DL (1998) Topography of the magnocellular basal forebrain system in human brain. Neuropath.Exp.Neurol 43 , 1–21.
Henke H and Lang W (1983) Cholinergic enzymes in neocortex, hippocampus and basal forebrain of non-neurological and senile dementia of Alzheimer- type patients. Brain Res. 267 , 281–291.6871677
Hof PR , Archin N , Osmand AP , Dougherty JH , Wells C , Bouras C and Morrison JH (1993) Posterior cortical atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease: analysis of a new case and re-evaluation of a historical report. Acta neuropathologica 86 , 215–223.8213079
Hoskin JL , Al-Hasan Y and Sabbagh MN (2019) Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor Agonists for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Dementia: An Update. Nicotine Tob Res 21 , 370–376.30137524
Hyman BT , Phelps CH , Beach TG (2012) National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 8 , 1–13.22265587
Hyman BT and Trojanowski JQ (1997) Consensus recommendations for the postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer disease from the National Institute on Aging and the Reagan Institute Working Group on diagnostic criteria for the neuropathological assessment of Alzheimer disease. J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol 56 , 1095–1097.9329452
Iizuka T , Shoji M , Harigaya Y , Kawarabayashi T , Watanabe M , Kanai M and Hirai S (1995) Amyloid B-protein ending at Thr-43 is a minor component of some diffuse plaques in the Alzheimer’s disease brain, but is not found in cerebrovascular amyloid. Brain Res. 702 , 275–278.8846089
Janeczek M , Gefen T , Samimi M , Kim G , Weintraub S , Bigio E , Rogalski E , Mesulam MM and Geula C (2018) Variations in Acetylcholinesterase Activity within Human Cortical Pyramidal Neurons Across Age and Cognitive Trajectories. Cereb Cortex 28 , 1329–1337.28334147
Janowsky DS , Davis JM , El-Yousef MK and Sekerke HJ (1972) A cholinergic- adrenergic hypothesis of mania and depression. Lancet 2 , 632–635.4116781
Johnson JK , Head E , Kim R , Starr A and Cotman CW (1999) Clinical and pathological evidence for a frontal variant of Alzheimer disease. Archives of neurology 56 , 1233–1239.10520939
Kanel P , Muller M , van der Zee S , Sanchez-Catasus CA , Koeppe RA , Frey KA and Bohnen NI (2020) Topography of Cholinergic Changes in Dementia With Lewy Bodies and Key Neural Network Hubs. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 32 , 370–375.32498602
Kasashima S and Oda Y (2003) Cholinergic neuronal loss in the basal forebrain and mesopontine tegmentum of progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. Acta Neuropathol. 105 , 117–124.12536222
Khachaturian Z (1985) Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Arch.Neurol 42 , 1097–1105.2864910
Kim G , Bolbolan K , Shahidehpour R (2019) Morphology and Distribution of TDP-43 Pre-inclusions in Primary Progressive Aphasia. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 78 , 229–237.30753613
Klein WL (2002) A beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease: globular oligomers (ADDLs) as new vaccine and drug targets. Neurochemistry International 41 , 345–352.12176077
Klein WL (2006) Synaptic targeting of A-beta oligomers (ADDLs) as a basis for memory loss in early Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s and Dementia 2 , 43–55.
Koliatsos VE , Martin LJ , Walker LC , Richardson RT , Delong MR and Price DL (1988) Topographic, non-collateralized basal forebrain projections to amygdala, hippocampus and anterior cingulate cortex in the rhesus monkey. Brain Res. 463 , 133–139.3196902
Kordower JH , Chen EY , Sladek JR Jr. and Mufson EJ (1994) trk-immunoreactivity in the monkey central nervous system: forebrain. J.Comp.Neurol 349 , 20–35.7852624
Koukouli F and Changeux JP (2020) Do Nicotinic Receptors Modulate High-Order Cognitive Processing? Trends Neurosci 43 , 550–564.32591156
Ladner CJ , Celesia GG , Magnuson DJ and Lee JM (1995) Regional alterations in M1 muscarinic receptor-G protein coupling in Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol 54 , 783–789.7595651
Lang W and Henke H (1983) Cholinergic receptor binding and autoradiography in brains of non-neurological and senile dementia of Alzheimer-type patients. Brain Res. 267 , 271–280.6871676
Lauckner J , Frey P and Geula C (2003) Comparative distribution of tau phosphorylated at Ser262 in pre-tangles and tangles. Neurobiol.Aging 24 , 767–776.12927759
Leanza G , Muir J , Nilsson OG , Wiley RG , Dunnett SB and Bjorklund A (1996) Selective immunolesioning of the basal forebrain cholinergic system disrupts short-term memory in rats. Eur.J.Neurosci 8 , 1535–1544.8758961
Lee EB , Lee VM and Trojanowski JQ (2012) Gains or losses: molecular mechanisms of TDP43-mediated neurodegeneration. Nature reviews. Neuroscience 13 , 38–50.
Lee EB , Porta S , Michael Baer G (2017) Expansion of the classification of FTLD-TDP: distinct pathology associated with rapidly progressive frontotemporal degeneration. Acta neuropathologica 134 , 65–78.28130640
Lehericy S , Hirsch EC , Cervera-Pierot P (1993) Heterogeneity and selectivity of the degeneration of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J.Comp.Neurol 330 , 15–31.8468401
Lidow MS , Gallager DW , Rakic P and Goldman-Rakic PS (1989) Regional differences in the distribution of muscarinic cholinergic receptors in the macaque cerebral cortex. J.Comp.Neurol 289 , 247–259.2808765
Lin SC , Olson KC , Okazaki H and Richelson E (1986) Studies on muscarinic binding sites in human brain identified with [3H]pirenzepine. J.Neurochem 46 , 274–279.2866235
Liu AK , Chang RC , Pearce RK and Gentleman SM (2015) Nucleus basalis of Meynert revisited: anatomy, history and differential involvement in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Acta neuropathologica 129 , 527–540.25633602
Liu C , Zhao Y , Xi H , Jiang J , Yu Y and Dong W (2021) The Membrane Interaction of Alpha-Synuclein. Front Cell Neurosci 15 , 633727.33746714
Lorenzo A and Yankner BA (1994) B-Amyloid neurotoxicity requires fibril formation and is inhibited by Congo red. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA 91 , 12243–12247.7991613
Mackenzie IR , Neumann M , Baborie A (2011) A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology. Acta neuropathologica 122 , 111–113.21644037
Mann DMA , Brown AMT , Prinja D , Jones D and Davies CA (1990) A morphological analysis of senile plaques in the brains of non- demented persons of different ages using silver, immunocytochemical and lectin histochemical staining techniques. Neuropathol.Appl.Neurobiol 16 , 17–25.2157169
Mann DMA , Yates PO and Marcyniuk B (1984) Changes in nerve cells of the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Alzheimer’s disease and their relationship to ageing and to accumulation of lipofuscin pigment. Mech.Ageing Dev 25 , 189–204.6202988
Mann DMA , Yates PO and Marcyniuk B (1985) Correlation between senile plaque and neurofibrillary tangle counts in cerebral cortex and neuronal counts in cortex and subcortical structures in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci.Lett 56 , 51–55.4011048
Mash DC , Flynn DD and Potter LT (1985) Loss of M2 muscarinic receptors in the cerebral cortex in Alzheimer’s disease and experimental cholinergic denervation. Science 228 , 1115–1117.3992249
Mash DC , White WF and Mesulam MM (1988) Distribution of muscarinic receptor subtypes within architectonic subregions of the primate cerebral cortex. J.Comp.Neurol 278 , 265–274.3230164
Mattson MP , Rychlik B , Chu C and Christakos S (1991) Evidence for calcium-reducing and excitoprotective roles for the calcium-binding protein calbindin-D 28K in cultured hippocampal neurons. Neuron 6 , 41–51.1670921
Mazere J , Meissner WG , Mayo W , Sibon I , Lamare F , Guilloteau D , Tison F and Allard M (2012) Progressive supranuclear palsy: in vivo SPECT imaging of presynaptic vesicular acetylcholine transporter with [123I]-iodobenzovesamicol. Radiology 265 , 537–543.23012462
McGeer EG , McGeer PL , Kamo H , Tago H and Harrop R (1986) Cortical metabolism, acetylcholinesterase staining and pathological changes in Alzheimer’s disease. Can.J.Neurol.Sci 13 , 511–516.2431752
McKeith IG , Boeve BF , Dickson DW (2017) Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: Fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium. Neurology 89 , 88–100.28592453
McKeith IG , Galasko D , Kosaka K (1996) Consensus guidelines for the clinical and pathologic diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): report of the consortium on DLB international workshop. Neurology 47 , 1113–1124.8909416
Mesulam M , Shaw P , Mash D and Weintraub S (2004) Cholinergic nucleus basalis tauopathy emerges early in the aging-MCI-AD continuum. Ann.Neurol 55 , 815–828.15174015
Mesulam MM and Geula C (1988) Nucleus basalis (Ch4) and cortical cholinergic innervation in the human brain: observations based on the distribution of acetylcholinesterase and choline acetyltransferase. J.Comp.Neurol 275 , 216–240.3220975
Mesulam MM and Geula C (1991) Acetylcholinesterase-rich neurons of the human cerebral cortex: cytoarchitectonic and ontogenetic patterns of distribution. J.Comp.Neurol 306 , 193–220.2050843
Mesulam MM , Geula C , Bothwell MA and Hersh LB (1989) Human reticular formation: Cholinergic neurons of the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei and some cytochemical comparisons to forebrain cholinergic neurons. J.Comp.Neurol 281 , 611–633.
Mesulam MM , Hersh LB , Mash DC and Geula C (1992a) Differential cholinergic innervation within functional subdivisions of the human cerebral cortex: a choline acetyltransferase study. J.Comp.Neurol 318 , 316–328.1374768
Mesulam MM , Lalehzari N , Rahmani F (2019) Cortical cholinergic denervation in primary progressive aphasia with Alzheimer pathology. Neurology 92 , e1580–e1588.30842294
Mesulam MM , Mash D , Hersh L , Bothwell M and Geula C (1992b) Cholinergic innervation of the human striatum, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, substantia nigra, and red nucleus. J.Comp.Neurol 323 , 252–268.1401259
Mesulam MM , Mufson EJ , Levey AI and Wainer BH (1983) Cholinergic innervation of cortex by the basal forebrain: Cytochemistry and cortical connections of the septal area, diagonal band nuclei, nucleus basalis (substantia innominata), and hypothalamus in the rhesus monkey. J.Comp.Neurol 214 , 170–197.6841683
Mesulam MM and Van Hoesen GW (1976) Acetylcholinesterase-rich projections from the basal forebrain of the rhesus monkey to neocortex. Brain Res. 109 , 152–157.819100
Mesulam MM , Volicer L , Marquis JK , Mufson EJ and Green RC (1986) Systematic regional differences in the cholinergic innervation of the primate cerebral cortex: distribution of enzyme activities and some behavioral implications. Annals of neurology 19 , 144–151.3963756
Miller RJ (1991) The control of neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis. Prog.Neurobiol 37 , 255–285.1947178
Mirra SS , Hart MN and Terry RD (1993) Making the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. A primer for practicing pathologists [see comments]. [Review]. Arch.Pathol.Lab.Med 117 , 132–144.8427562
Mizukami K and Kosaka K (1989) Neuropathological study on the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Pick’s disease. Acta neuropathologica 78 , 52–56.2735190
Montine TJ , Phelps CH , Beach TG (2012) National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach. Acta neuropathologica 123 , 1–11.22101365
Moran SP , Maksymetz J and Conn PJ (2019) Targeting Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors for the Treatment of Psychiatric and Neurological Disorders. Trends in pharmacological sciences 40 , 1006–1020.31711626
Mountjoy CQ , Rossor MN , Iverson LL and Roth M (1984) Correlation of Cortical cholinergic and GABA deficits with quantitative neuropathological findings in senile dementia. Brain 107 , 507–518.6722514
Mufson EJ , Bothwell M , Hersh LB and Kordower JH (1989a) Nerve growth factor receptor immunoreactive profiles in the normal, aged human basal forebrain: colocalization with cholinergic neurons. J.Comp.Neurol 285 , 196–217.2547849
Mufson EJ , Bothwell M and Kordower JH (1989b) Loss of nerve growth factor receptor-containing neurons in Alzheimer’s disease: a quantitative analysis across subregions of the basal forebrain. Exp.Neurol 105 , 221–232.2548888
Mufson EJ , Conner JM and Kordower JH (1995) Nerve growth factor in Alzheimer’s disease: defective retrograde transport to nucleus basalis. Neurorep. 6 , 1063–1066.
Mufson EJ , Ma SY , Cochran EJ , Bennett DA , Beckett LA , Jaffar S , Saragovi HU and Kordower JH (2000) Loss of nucleus basalis neurons containing trkA immunoreactivity in individuals with mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. J.Comp.Neurol 427 , 19–30.11042589
Mufson EJ , Ma SY , Dills J (2002) Loss of basal forebrain p75(NTR) immunoreactivity in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. J.Comp.Neurol 443 , 136–153.11793352
Muir JL , Dunnett SB , Robbins TW and Everitt BJ (1992) Attentional functions of the forebrain cholinergic systems: effects of intraventricular hemicholinium, physostigmine, basal forebrain lesions and intracortical grafts on a multiple-choice serial reaction time task. Exp.Brain Res 89 , 611–622.1644125
Narasimhan S , Guo JL , Changolkar L (2017) Pathological Tau Strains from Human Brains Recapitulate the Diversity of Tauopathies in Nontransgenic Mouse Brain. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 37 , 11406–11423.29054878
Narayanan RK , Mangelsdorf M , Panwar A , Butler TJ , Noakes PG and Wallace RH (2012) Identification of RNA bound to the TDP-43 ribonucleoprotein complex in the adult mouse brain. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal degeneration.
Nelson PT , Dickson DW , Trojanowski JQ (2019) Limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE): consensus working group report. Brain 142 , 1503–1527.31039256
Nordberg A , Adem A , Hardy J and Winblad B (1988) Changes in nicotinic receptor subtypes in temporal cortex of Alzheimer brains. Neurosci.Lett 36 , 317–321.
Nordberg A , Alafuzoff I and Winblad B (1992) Nicotinic and muscarinic subtypes in the human brain: changes with aging and dementia. J.Neurosci.Res 31 , 103–111.1613816
Okada H , Ouchi Y , Ogawa M (2013) Alterations in alpha4beta2 nicotinic receptors in cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s aetiopathology. Brain 136 , 3004–3017.23975517
Palmer AM , Francis PT , Bowen DM , Benton JS , Neary D , Mann DMA and Snowden JS (1987) Catecholaminergic neurons assessed ante-mortem in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. 414 , 365–375.3620938
Perry EK , Blessed G , Tomlinson BE , Perry TH , Crow TJ , Cross AJ , Dockray GJ , Dimaline R and Arragui A (1981) Neurochemical activities in human temporal lobe related to aging and Alzheimer-type changes. Neurobiol.Aging 2 , 251–256.6174877
Perry EK , Gibson PH , Blessed G , Perry RH and Tomlinson BE (1977) Neurotransmitter enzyme abnormalities in senile dementia. J.Neurol.Sci 34 , 247–265.144789
Perry EK , Haroutunian V , Davis KL (1994) Neocortical cholinergic activities differentiate Lewy body dementia from classical Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroreport 5 , 747–749.8018843
Perry EK , Irving D , Kerwin JM (1993) Cholinergic transmitter and neurotrophic activities in Lewy body dementia: similarity to Parkinson’s and distinction from Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis.Assoc.Disord 7 , 69–79.8347330
Perry EK , Morris CM , Court JA , Cheng A , Fairbairn AF , McKeith IG , Irving D , Brown A and Perry RH (1995) Alteration in nicotine binding sites in Parkinson’s disease, Lewy body dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: Possible index of early neuropathology. Neuroscience 64 , 385–395.7700528
Pilleri G (1966) The Kluver-Bucy syndrome in man-a clinico-anatomical contribution to the function of the medial temporal lobe structures. Psychiat.Neurol.(Basel) 152–165.
Podlisny MB , Ostaszewski BL , Squazzo SL , Koo EH , Rydell RE , Teplow DB and Selkoe DJ (1995) Aggregation of secreted amyloid beta-protein into sodium dodecyl sulfate-stable oligomers in cell culture. J.Biol.Chem 270 , 9564–9570.7721886
Ransmayr G , Cervera P , Hirsch E , Ruberg M , Hersh LB , Duyckaerts C , Hauw JJ , Dellumeau C and Agid Y (1989) Choline acetyltransferase-like immunoreactivity in the hippocampal formation of control subjects and patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. 32 , 701–714.
Ransmayr G , Cervera P , Hirsch EC , Berger W , Fischer W and Agid Y (1992) Alzheimer’s disease: is the decrease of the cholinergic innervation of the hippocampus related to intrinsic hippocampal pathology? Neurosci. 47 , 843–851.
Riascos D , de Leon D , Baker-Nigh A , Nicholas A , Yukhananov R , Bu J , Wu CK and Geula C (2011) Age-related loss of calcium buffering and selective neuronal vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta neuropathologica 122 , 565–576.21874328
Riascos D , Girgis D , Baker-Nigh A , Nicholas A and Geula C (2010) Age-related calcium dysregulation may explain selective neuronal vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease: The basal forebrain cholinergic model. Alzheim.Demen 6 (Suppl. 1 ), S386.
Rinne JO , Paljarvi L and Rinne UK (1987) Neuronal size and density in the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Alzheimer’s disease. J.Neurol.Sci 79 , 67–76.3612173
Rintoul GL , Raymond LA and Baimbridge KG (2001) Calcium buffering and protection from excitotoxic cell death by exogenous calbindin-D28k in HEK 293 cells. Cell Calcium. 29 , 277–287.11243935
Rodriguez-Puertas R , Pascual J , Vilaro T and Pazos A (1997) Autoradiographic distribution of M1, M2, M3, and M4 muscarinic receptor subtypes in Alzheimer’s disease. Synapse 26 , 341–350.9215593
Rogalski E , Sridhar J , Rader B (2016) Aphasic variant of Alzheimer disease: Clinical, anatomic, and genetic features. Neurology 87 , 1337–1343.27566743
Rossor MN , Garrett NJ , Johnson AL , Mountjoy CQ , Roth M and Iversen LL (1982) A post-mortem study of the cholinergic and GABA systems in senile dementia. Brain 105 , 313–330.7082992
Rossor MN , Iversen LL , Johnson AJ , Mountjoy CQ and Roth M (1981) Cholinergic deficit in frontal cerebral cortex in Alzheimer’s disease is age dependent. Lancet 2 , 1422–1422.
Sabri O , Meyer PM , Graf S (2018) Cognitive correlates of alpha4beta2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in mild Alzheimer’s dementia. Brain 141 , 1840–1854.29672680
Sahin HA , Emre M , Ziabreva I , Perry E , Celasun B and Perry R (2006) The distribution pattern of pathology and cholinergic deficits in amygdaloid complex in Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta neuropathologica 111 , 115–125.16468020
Samuel WA , Henderson VW and Miller CA (1991) Severity of dementia in Alzheimer disease and neurofibrillary tangles in multiple brain regions. Alz.Dis.Assoc.Disor 5 , 1–11.
Scheff SW , DeKosky ST and Price DA (1990) Quantitative assessment of cortical synaptic density in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol.Aging 11 , 29–37.2325814
Scott SA , Mufson EJ , Weingartner JA , Skau KA and Crutcher KA (1995) Nerve growth factor in Alzheimer’s disease: increased levels throughout the brain coupled with declines in nucleus basalis. J.Neurosci 15 , 6213–6221.7666203
Selkoe DJ (1994) Normal and abnormal biology of the á-amyloid precurser protein. Annu.Rev.Neurosci 17 , 489–517.8210185
Shah P , Lal N , Leung E , Traul DE , Gonzalo-Ruiz A and Geula C (2010) Neuronal and axonal loss are selectively linked to fibrillar amyloid-{beta} within plaques of the aged primate cerebral cortex. Am.J.Pathol 177 , 325–333.20489158
Shimohama S , Taniguchi T , Fujiwara M and Kameyama M (1986) Changes in nicotinic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in Alzheimer-type dementia. J.Neurochem 46 , 288–293.3940287
Shiozaki K and Iseki E (2004) Decrease in GTP-sensitive high affinity agonist binding of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in autopsied brains of dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of the neurological sciences 223 , 145–148.15337615
Siek GC , Katz LS , Fishman EB , Korosi TS and Marquis JK (1990) Molecular forms of acetylcholinesterase in subcortical areas of normal and Alzheimer disease brain. Biolo.Psychiat 27 , 573–580.
Sparks DL and Markesbery WR (1991) Altered serotonergic and cholinergic synaptic markers in Pick’s disease. Arch.Neurol 48 , 796–799.1898253
Stoehr JD , Mobley SL , Roice D , Brooks R , Baker LM , Wiley RG and Wenk GL (1997) The effects of selective cholinergic basal forebrain lesions and aging upon expectancy in the rat. Neurobiol.Lear.Mem 67 , 214–227.
Svensson AL , Warpman U , Hellstrom-Lindahl E , Bogdanovic N , Lannfelt L and Nordberg A (1997) Nicotinic receptors, muscarinic receptors and choline acetyltransferase activity in the temporal cortex of Alzheimer patients with differing apolipoprotein E genotypes. Neurosci.Lett 232 , 37–40.9292886
Tagliavini F , Pillari G , Bouras C , Constantinidis J and Acta NS (1984a) The basal nucleus of Meynert in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. No Journal Found 69 , 20–28.
Tagliavini F and Pilleri G (1983) Basal nucleus of Meynert: a neuropathological study in Alzheimer’s disease, simple senile dementia, pick’s disease and huntington’s chorea. J.Neurol.Sci 62 , 243–260.6230416
Tagliavini F , Pilleri G , Bouras C and Constantinidis J (1984b) The basal nucleus of Meynert in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy. Neurosci.Lett 44 , 37–42.6717850
Tagliavini F , Pilleri G , Gemignani F and Lechi A (1983) Neuronal loss in the basal nucleus of Meynert in progressive supranuclear palsy. Acta Neuropathol. 61 , 157–160.6637400
Teaktong T , Graham AJ , Court JA , Perry RH , Jaros E , Johnson M , Hall R and Perry EK (2004) Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor immunohistochemistry in Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies: differential neuronal and astroglial pathology. Journal of the neurological sciences 225 , 39–49.15465084
Terry RD (1998) The cytoskeleton in Alzheimer disease. J.Neural.Transm.(Suppl) 53 , 141–145.9700652
Terry RD , Masliah E and Hansen LA (1994) Structural basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. In: Alzheimer Disease, (Terry RD , Katzman R and Bick KL eds.), pp. 179–196. Raven Press, New York.
Terry RD , Masliah E , Salmon DP , Butters N , DeTeresa R , Hill R , Hansen LA and Katzman R (1991) Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment. Ann.Neurol 30 , 572–580.1789684
Terry RD and Wisniewski HM (1972) Ultrastructure of senile dementia and of experimental analogues. In: Aging and the Brain, (Gaitz CM ed.), pp. 89–116. Plenum Press, New York.
Tiraboschi P , Hansen LA , Alford M , Merdes A , Masliah E , Thal LJ and Corey-Bloom J (2002) Early and widespread cholinergic losses differentiate dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 59 , 946–951.12365882
Tiraboschi P , Hansen LA , Alford M , Sabbagh MN , Schoos B , Masliah E , Thal LJ and Corey-Bloom J (2000) Cholinergic dysfunction in diseases with Lewy bodies. Neurology 54 , 407–411.10668703
Tollervey JR , Curk T , Rogelj B (2011) Characterizing the RNA targets and position-dependent splicing regulation by TDP-43. Nature neuroscience 14 , 452–458.21358640
Trojanowski JQ , Shin RW , Schmidt ML and Lee VM (1995) Relationship between plaques, tangles, and dystrophic processes in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol.Aging 16 , 335–345.7566343
Tuszynski MH , U HS , Amaral DG and Gage FH (1990) Nerve growth factor infusion in the primate brain reduces lesion- induced cholinergic neuronal degeneration. J.Neurosci 10 , 3604–3614.2230949
Uhl GR , Hilt DC , Hedreen JC , Whitehouse PJ and Price DL (1983) Pick’s disease (lobar sclerosis): depletion of neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert. Neurology 33 , 1470–1473.6685239
Vanderhayden P , Ebinger G , Dierckx R and Vauquelin G (1987) Muscarinic cholinergic receptor subtypes in normal human brain and Alzheimer’s presenile dementia. J.Neurol.Sci 82 , 257–269.3440867
Walsh DM , Klyubin I , Fadeeva JV , Cullen WK , Anwyl R , Wolfe MS , Rowan MJ and Selkoe DJ (2002) Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid beta protein potently inhibit hippocampal long-term potentiation in vivo. Nature 416 , 535–539.11932745
Walsh TJ , Herzog CD , Gandhi C , Stackman RW and Wiley RG (1996) Injection of IgG 192-saporin into the medial septum produces cholinergic hypofunction and dose-dependent working memory deficits. Brain Res. 726 , 69–79.8836547
Warren NM , Piggott MA , Lees AJ , Perry EK and Burn DJ (2008) Intact coupling of M1 receptors and preserved M2 and M4 receptors in the cortex in progressive supranuclear palsy: contrast with other dementias. Journal of chemical neuroanatomy 35 , 268–274.18282687
Whitehouse PJ , Hedreen JC , White CL and Price DL (1983) Basal forebrain neurons in the dementia of Parkinson disease. Ann.Neurol 13 , 243–348.6847136
Whitehouse PJ , Martino AM , Marcus KA , Zweig RM , Singer HS , Price DL and Kellar KJ (1988) Reductions in acetylcholine and nicotine binding in several degenerative diseases. Archives of neurology 45 , 722–724.3390025
Whitehouse PJ , Price DL , Clark AW , Coyle JT and DeLong MR (1981) Alzheimer disease: evidence for selective loss of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis. Annals of neurology 10 , 122–126.7283399
Wilcock GK , Esiri MM , Bowen DM and Smith CCT (1982) Alzheimer’s disease. Correlation of cortical choline acetyltransferase activity with the severity of dementia and histological abnormalities. J.Neurol.Sci 57 , 407–417.7161627
Wisniewski HM , Bancher C , Barcikowska M , Wen GY and Currie J (1989) Spectrum of morphological appearance of amyloid deposits in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 78 , 337–347.2551122
Wood PL , Etienne P , Lal S (1983a) A post-mortem comparison of the cortical cholinergic system in Alzheimer’s disease and Pick’s disease. J.Neurol.Sci 62 , 211–217.6142096
Wood PL , Nair NP , Etienne P (1983b) Lack of cholinergic deficit in the neocortex in Pick’s disease. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 7 , 725–727.6141615
Wu CK , Hersh LB and Geula C (2000) Cyto- and chemoarchitecture of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons in the common marmoset (Callithirx jacchus). Exp.Neurol 165 , 306–326.10993691
Wu CK , Mesulam MM and Geula C (1997) Age-related loss of calbindin from human basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. Neuroreport 8 , 2209–2213.9243613
Wu CK , Nagykery N , Hersh LB , Scinto LF and Geula C (2003) Selective age-related loss of calbindin-D28k from basal forebrain cholinergic neurons in the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus). Neuroscience 120 , 249–259.12849757
Xu H , O’Reilly M , Gibbons GS (2021) In vitro amplification of pathogenic tau conserves disease-specific bioactive characteristics. Acta neuropathologica 141 , 193–215.33385254
Yates CM , Simpson J , Maloney AF and Gordon A (1980) Neurochemical observations in a case of Pick’s disease. J.Neurol.Sci 48 , 257–263.7431041
Yi JH , Whitcomb DJ , Park SJ , Martinez-Perez C , Barbati SA , Mitchell SJ and Cho K (2020) M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor dysfunction in moderate Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Brain Commun 2 , fcaa058.32766549
Zubenko GS , Moossy J , Martinez AJ , Rao GR , Kopp U and Hanin I (1989) A brain regional analysis of morphometric and cholinergic abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease. Arch.Neurol 46 , 634–638.2730375
