LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8100437
6047
Neurobiol Aging
Neurobiol Aging
Neurobiology of aging
0197-4580
1558-1497

34740076
8671378
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.09.018
NIHMS1747228
Article
Evidence from theta-burst stimulation that age-related de-differentiation of the hippocampal network is functional for episodic memory
Hermiller Molly S. abc*
Dave Shruti a
Wert Stephanie L. a
VanHaerents Stephen d
Riley Michaela e
Weintraub Sandra ef
Mesulam M.-Marsel de
Voss Joel L. adf
a Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
b Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY
c Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY
d Ken and Ruth Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
e Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
f Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
* Corresponding author: Molly S. Hermiller, 615 West 131st Street, Studebaker, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10027, msh2217@columbia.edu
Molly S. Hermiller, Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Visualization, Data Curation, Writing- Original draft preparation Shruti Dave Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Stephanie L. Wert Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Writing-Reviewing and Editing, Stephen VanHaerents Supervision, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Michaela Riley Data Curation, Project administration, Sandra Weintraub Supervision, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, M.-Marsel Mesulam Supervision, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Joel L. Voss Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervieon, Writing- Original draft preparation

22 10 2021
02 10 2021
1 2022
01 1 2023
109 145157
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Episodic memory is supported by hippocampal interactions with a distributed network. Aging is associated with memory decline and network de-differentiation. However, the role of de-differentiation in memory decline has not been directly tested. We reasoned that hippocampal network-targeted stimulation could test these theories, as age-related changes in the network response to stimulation would indicate network reorganization, and corresponding changes in memory would suggest that this reorganization is functional. We compared effects of stimulation on fMRI connectivity and memory in younger versus older adults. Theta-burst network-targeted stimulation of left lateral parietal cortex selectively increased hippocampal network connectivity and modulated memory in younger adults. In contrast, stimulation in older adults increased connectivity throughout the brain, without network selectivity, and did not influence memory. These findings provide evidence that network responses to stimulation are de-differentiated in aging and suggest that age-related de-differentiation is relevant for memory. This manuscript is part of the Special Issue entitled “Cognitive Neuroscience of Healthy and Pathological Aging” edited by Drs. M. N. Rajah, S. Belleville, and R. Cabeza.

aging
memory decline
transcranial magnetic stimulation
cognitive enhancement
functional brain networks
theta rhythm

pmcINTRODUCTION

The hippocampus is necessary for episodic memory (Scoville and Milner, 1957; Squire et al., 2004) and supports this function via its interactions with a distributed network that includes the medial-temporal, ventromedial-prefrontal, lateral-parietal, and medial-parieto-occipital cortex as well as a variety of subcortical nuclei (Battaglia et al., 2011; Buckner et al., 2008; Cabeza et al., 2008; Eichenbaum, 2000; Greicius et al., 2003; Kahn et al., 2008; Mesulam, 1990; Ranganath and Ritchey, 2012). Coupling of activity among distant regions via neural oscillations is a putative mechanism for information processing shared among network regions (Buzsaki and Draguhn, 2004; Jacobs et al., 2007). Hippocampal network activity synchrony is prominent in the theta-band frequency range (~4-8 Hz), and this synchrony has been associated with memory processing (Axmacher et al., 2006; Burke et al., 2013; Buzsaki, 2002; Clouter et al., 2017; Düzel et al., 2010; Hanslmayr et al., 2016; Hanslmayr and Staudigl, 2014; Lisman and Jensen, 2013; Nyhus and Curran, 2010; Sederberg et al., 2007; Staudigl and Hanslmayr, 2013).

Aging typically involves cognitive decline (Craik and Rose, 2012; Hedden and Gabrieli, 2004), with prominent reductions in episodic memory (Koen and Yonelinas, 2014) that are particularly evident for tasks that measure hippocampal-dependent recollection (Chen and Naveh-Benjamin, 2012; Mitchell and Johnson, 2009; Old and Naveh-Benjamin, 2008). Neuroimaging studies have identified age-related changes in brain structural and functional connectivity, including for the hippocampal network, which have been related to corresponding memory impairment (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Betzel et al., 2014; Chan et al., 2014; Damoiseaux et al., 2008; Geerligs et al., 2014; Geerligs et al., 2017; Grady, 2012; Li et al., 2015; Nyberg et al., 2012; Sala-Llonch et al., 2014; Spreng et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010; Ystad et al., 2010; Zonneveld et al., 2019). Some findings have characterized aging as involving the weakening of within-network fMRI connectivity in conjunction with the strengthening of between-network fMRI connectivity, suggesting that aging is associated with the loss of functional segregation of brain networks (Chan et al., 2014; Geerligs et al., 2015; Goh, 2011; Grady, 2002; Park et al., 2004; Saverino et al., 2016; Spreng and Turner, 2019), sometimes referred to as “de-differentiation” (Chan et al., 2014; Geerligs et al., 2015; Goh, 2011). Network de-differentiation has been associated with worse memory performance in older versus younger adults (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Chan et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2020).

However, neurobiological mechanisms for such brain functional changes remain unknown, and there are some potential weaknesses with the methods that have been used to identify them. For instance, fMRI network connectivity changes attributed to aging could instead result from nonspecific factors such as reduced fMRI signal due to age-related structural changes (Dukart and Bertolino, 2014), age-related changes in hemodynamics and/or neurovascular coupling (Ajmani et al., 2000; Tarantini et al., 2017; Zaletel et al., 2005), and age-related differences in factors such as motion and in the impact of the preprocessing steps used to mitigate them (Geerligs et al., 2017). Such nonspecific factors can also cloud observed relationships between brain functional changes and memory performance because they can have similar impacts on imaging measures and on cognitive performance (i.e., the “third variable” problem, such as if poor vascular health were to impact fMRI connectivity measures and also impair cognition). This also reduces the advantages typically associated with longitudinal study designs, as changes in these nonspecific factors could drive the observed relationship between brain-network function and cognitive measures similarly across time. For these reasons, conclusions about the impact of aging can be more fully supported by incorporating methods that allow for direct manipulation of putative brain functional changes, such as brain stimulation (Pascual-Leone et al., 2011), so the relationship between such brain functional changes and cognitive performance can be more directly tested.

Motivated by these considerations, the current experiment was designed to test whether the direct impact of stimulation targeting the hippocampal network would differ in younger versus older adults in a manner consistent with the age-related de-differentiation hypothesis. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) guided by fMRI connectivity to target the hippocampal network (“network-targeted stimulation”) can be used to modulate hippocampal network fMRI activity and thereby test how such activity supports memory performance in both younger and older adults (Fox et al., 2012; Hebscher and Voss, 2020). Several previous experiments (Dave et al., 2020; Hermiller et al., 2020; Hermiller et al., 2019b) have focused on the question of whether hippocampal network-targeted stimulation using theta-burst stimulation (Di Lazzaro et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2005; Rossi et al., 2009) has a greater impact on the hippocampal network and its contribution to memory compared to other non-theta patterned stimulation rhythms. Theta-patterned brain stimulation mimics the endogenous theta-nested-gamma activity rhythm characteristic of the hippocampal network. The premise of these experiments is that brain stimulation can affect networks via resonance with endogenous rhythmic activity, such that stimulation applied at frequencies matching the targeted network’s endogenous activity rhythms should entrain oscillatory activity throughout the network (Albouy et al., 2017; Chanes et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2016; Lea-Carnall et al., 2017; Riddle et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2018; Romei et al., 2016; Salinas et al., 2016; Thut et al., 2011a; Thut et al., 2011b; Weinrich et al., 2017). Consistent with this hypothesis, network-targeted theta-burst stimulation had a greater impact on hippocampal network fMRI connectivity, on hippocampal activity, and on memory than network-targeted stimulation using rhythms other than theta-burst (Dave et al., 2020; Hermiller et al., 2020; Hermiller et al., 2019b).

The current experiment was thus designed to test three potential differences in older adults versus younger adults in the effects of hippocampal network-targeted stimulation. First, we sought to test whether older adults would respond preferentially to stimulation applied using a theta-burst rhythm as opposed to a different (beta) rhythm, as has been found for younger subjects in the experiments reviewed above. Next, we sought to test whether the fMRI connectivity change caused by stimulation would be as restricted to the targeted hippocampal network in older adults compared to younger adults. We reasoned that changes in connectivity restricted to the hippocampal network in younger adults but diffuse among various networks in older adults would provide direct evidence for the age-related de-differentiation hypothesis. Finally, we sought to determine if the effects of stimulation on episodic memory performance would differ for younger versus older adults. Given that increases in hippocampal network fMRI connectivity due to stimulation have been associated with corresponding episodic memory improvements (Hermiller et al., 2019b; Wang et al., 2014; Warren et al., 2019), we reasoned that performance would be less affected by stimulation in older adults to the extent that the fMRI connectivity response was less specific to the hippocampal network, relative to younger adults. This would provide direct evidence that age-related de-differentiation has functional consequences for episodic memory performance.

An additional goal of the experiment was to conceptually replicate the rhythm-specific effects of network-targeted stimulation in young adults using an improved design that allows for greater control of nonspecific differences between theta-burst and non-theta stimulation conditions than in a previous experiment. Hermiller et al. (2019) found that a single session of network-targeted continuous theta-burst stimulation applied to left lateral parietal c9ortex had a greater effect on memory-related hippocampal network fMRI connectivity and on memory performance than did network-targeted beta-frequency (20 Hz) rTMS (as well as other control stimulation conditions). However, there was a potential weakness of the experiment design that limits conclusions. Theta-burst stimulation and beta-frequency stimulation followed standard clinical parameters. Therefore, they differed in the intensity of each stimulation pulse (80% motor threshold for theta-burst and 100% motor threshold for beta frequency) and in the overall number of pulses given in the session (600 for theta-burst, 1,600 for beta frequency). These nonspecific differences could have contributed to the differential effects of stimulation rhythm that were observed. The current experiment thus sought to conceptually replicate Hermiller et al. (2019), while equating the pulse intensity and pulse count parameters between theta-burst and beta-frequency stimulation. Additionally, the current experiment used a different memory task involving object-location associations that has shown sensitivity to network-targeted stimulation in young adults (Nilakantan et al., 2017; Tambini et al., 2018), thereby also serving to test conceptual replication of the effects of network-targeted stimulation on this associative memory task.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Overview

We tested the effects of theta-burst versus beta-frequency stimulation on resting-state fMRI connectivity and on performance on an object-location episodic memory test in younger and older adults using a within-subjects (stimulation condition), between-groups (younger versus older) design. Participants completed a baseline assessment of fMRI resting-state connectivity and spatial location recall performance prior to two experimental sessions. In each experimental session, they received one of the two stimulation conditions immediately before undergoing resting-state fMRI and then performing an object-location association memory task (Figure 1A). The baseline fMRI scan was used to identify a subject-specific location of the hippocampal network in parietal cortex, and a different stimulation pattern condition (theta-burst or beta frequency) was delivered to this location for each experimental session, in counterbalanced order (Figure 1B). The object-location task was modified slightly for older adults relative to younger adults in order to better equate overall performance between age groups. We assessed the effects of stimulation rhythm on resting-state fMRI connectivity changes using a whole-brain connectedness analysis (Gotts et al., 2012; Steel et al., 2016; Warren et al., 2018; Warren et al., 2019), which allowed for identification of effects on the hippocampal network as well as effects elsewhere. This analysis approach is advantageous because it is data-driven and able to localize the effects of stimulation to specific networks without any a priori constraints on the networks tested. Effects of stimulation on spatial-location memory performance were measured using a modeling approach that quantified accuracy, precision, and the tendency to “swap” objects in memory (i.e., recalling an object at the location where a different object was presented). Swap errors reflect accurate memory for the locations but relative failure of object-to-location binding, both of which are hippocampal-dependent (Kessels et al., 2001; Watson et al., 2013).

Participants

Eligible participants were those who reported no history of neurological impairment or psychiatric disorders, reported no current use of drugs that with central nervous system action, and passed standard MRI and TMS safety screenings (Rossi et al., 2009). Twenty-seven younger adults (18-30 years of age) and 18 cognitively typical (see below) older adults (65 years of age or older) were recruited for the baseline session of the experiments. Of the younger adults, a total of 12 participants were excluded after the baseline (i.e., did not return for the experimental sessions) due to either failure to complete the task (5 participants), inability to remain still and/or tolerate the full scan duration (6 participants), or the discovery of a structural abnormality (1 participant). Of the older adults, a total of three participants were excluded after baseline due to inability to remain still and/or tolerate the full scan duration. Data from a final sample of 15 younger adults (mean age=23.7 years; SD=2.3; range=21-28; 12 female, 3 male) and 15 older adults (mean age=66.5 years; SD=4.1; range=60-73; 7 female, 8 male) were included in all analyses. Participants provided written informed consent to a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board at Northwestern University and were paid for their time.

Prior to enrollment, older adult participants were screened for age-typical cognitive status using the Alzheimer’s Disease Centers Uniform Dataset (UDS 3.0) neuropsychological battery (Weintraub et al., 2018). This includes assessments of overall cognition (Montreal Cognitive Assessment; MOCA) (Nasreddine et al., 2005), object naming (Multilingual Naming Test; MINT) (Ivanova et al., 2013), visual and verbal recall (Craft Story (Craft et al., 1996), Benson complex figure (Possin et al., 2011), respectively), and Number Span modeled after digit span (Wechsler, 1987), executive function (Trails) (1944), and verbal fluency (Weintraub et al., 2018). Group mean scores (SD; range) ± standard deviations are provided for each test in Table 1. One older adult did not complete the verbal fluency task, as noted in Table 1. Participants were considered cognitively typical based on not meeting criteria for Mild Cognitive Impairment or other neurodegenerative disorders based on performance of this battery as well as a general neurological screening supervised by S.V., S.W., and M-M. M.

Experiment design

Participants completed a baseline session and then two experimental sessions on separate days using a within-subjects, counterbalanced design. During the baseline session, resting-state fMRI and structural MRI were acquired, baseline memory task performance was assessed, and resting motor threshold (RMT) was determined (described below). Baseline resting-state fMRI was used to define the stimulation location used during the two subsequent experimental sessions (described below). The two experimental sessions were scheduled to occur at least two days apart (mean=6.2 days; range=2-32 days). Each experimental session began with an out-of-scanner instructional and practice phase, during which participants completed an abbreviated version of the memory task (see below). After this, the actual experimental session commenced, beginning with stimulation administered in a room adjacent to the scanner room. A different stimulation condition was delivered in each experimental session, either theta-burst or beta frequency stimulation, in a counterbalanced randomized order across subjects. Participants were quickly moved to the MRI immediately following stimulation procedures. There was an approximately 6-minute delay between the final TMS pulse and initiation of MRI localizer (mean=6.2 min; range=4-14 min). Following the localizer, resting-state and task-based fMRI scans were collected following the same protocol previously described for the baseline session. The resting-state scan and the memory task occurred within approximately 1 hour of the final TMS pulse (mean=57.6 min; range=52-68 min).

Memory paradigms

All participants completed an object-location memory task that was modified slightly for younger versus older adults (Task 1 and Task 2, respectively). The tasks varied slightly to accommodate overall performance differences across age groups e.g., (Henson et al., 2016). In both tasks, participants studied objects at unique locations on a computer screen and later had to recall those locations when given the object during the memory test. The task was organized into study-test blocks, such that subjects studied a set of object locations and then were tested after a brief delay before moving onto the next set of object locations. The main differences between the tasks include: a) three blocks of 28 trials in Task 1 and four blocks of 20 trials in Task 2; b) old/new discrimination portion in Task 2 but not Task 1; c) grid background in Task 1 and scene background in Task 2. These differences were implemented in order to reduce the difficulty of Task 2 relative to Task 1 (i.e., smaller memory set per block, not quantifying spatial location memory when object recognition fails, and scene background instead of a grid to allow for richer location information to encode). The dependent variable of interest was the distance error, which was analyzed via a modeling approach described below.

Task 1 – Younger adult memory task

Two hundred fifty-two unique object stimuli (Moreno-Martínez and Montoro, 2012) were used across three sessions. Each object (180x180 pixels) was presented on a custom-made colored grid (red, blue, and grey; 1920x720 pixels; see Figure 1) displayed at the top two-thirds of the screen (1920x1080 pixels). For each participant, objects were randomly assigned to one of the three sessions, such that no object was repeated across sessions.

Each session included three study-test blocks, with 28 trials per study and test phase. The study phases were performed during task-based fMRI data acquisition. Trials in the study phase began with an object presented at a randomized location on the background grid for 4000 ms. Participants were instructed to remember the object’s location as accurately as possible. Immediately following the object presentation, a number appeared in the object's location for either 4000 ms, 6000 ms, or 8000 ms (randomly jittered; mean=6000ms). Participants were instructed to make a button press to indicate if the number was odd (left-hand button) or even (right-hand button). Each study trial was separated by an ITI of 2000 ms. The test phases did not include task-based fMRI acquisition, but the participants remained in the scanner. Trials in the test phase began with one of the 28 studied objects presented at the bottom center of the screen (outside the grid). Participants had 6000 ms to use a mouse to drag the object to its studied location and click when it was in position. The coordinates of the response were recorded at the time of click (or end of 6000 ms interval if no click) to be compared to the studied coordinates. Immediately after the 6000 ms interval, a red and a green square appeared at the bottom of the screen for 4000 ms, 6000 ms, or 8000 ms (randomly jittered; mean = 6000ms). Participants were instructed to click the green square at the bottom of the screen. The red and green squares randomly alternated positions (i.e., right/left) per trial. There was no jitter ITI between test trials.

After the three study-test blocks were complete, a final test block of all 84 objects was administered. The 84 studied scenes appeared one at a time at the bottom of the screen, and the participants used a mouse to drag the object to its studied location and click when it was in position. The coordinates of the response were recorded at the time of the click to be compared with the studied coordinates and the test phase response. After each click, participants rated their confidence in location placement by using the mouse to move a slider bar along a low to high scale (continuous with five visual anchor points) on the bottom of the screen. Analysis of the final test data is not included in this report.

Task 2 – Older adult memory task

Four hundred eighty unique object stimuli (Moreno-Martínez and Montoro, 2012) and 12 complex outdoor scenes (Yue et al., 2007) were used across three sessions. Each object (180x180 pixels) and was presented on a scene (1920x720 pixels; see Figure 1C) displayed at the top two-thirds of the screen (1920x1080 pixels). For each participant, objects and scenes were randomly assigned to one of the three sessions, such that no object or scene was repeated across sessions. Objects were further randomly assigned as either a studied or a lure object.

Each session included four study-test blocks, with 20 trials per study phase and 40 trials per test phase. A different background scene was randomly assigned to each block. Trials in the study phase began with an object presented at a randomized location on the background scene for 4000 ms. Participants were instructed to remember the object’s location as accurately as possible. Each trial was separated by an ITI of either 4000 ms, 6000 ms, or 8000 ms (randomly jittered; mean=6000ms). Trials in the test phase began with one of the 20 studied or 20 lure objects presented at the bottom center of the screen (outside the grid). Participants used a mouse to drag the object to its studied location and click when it was in position or to drag it to the “New” box on the bottom side of the screen. The location of the “New” box randomly alternated between the left and right sides of the screen. The coordinates of the object's location were recorded at the time of click (or end of 5000 ms interval if no click) to be compared to the studied coordinates.

Older adults performed at near-ceiling levels identifying lure objects (mean=96.5%; range= 92.5-100%). Recognition accuracy was similarly high (mean=93.5%, range=76.9-99.4%). In all reported analyses/results, only hit trials (i.e., studied objects correctly identified as old) with recalled locations placed within the test grid are included (mean=69 trials per session, or 86% of trials) to ensure that older adults had successful memory for the items on all trials for which spatial location recall performance is calculated.

MRI acquisition

MRI data were collected using a Siemens 3 T Prisma whole-body scanner with a 64-channel head-neck coil located in the Northwestern University Center for Translational Imaging. Structural images were acquired using a T1-weight MPRAGE sequence (176 frames; TE 1.69 ms; TR 2170 ms; TI 1160 ms; flip angle 7°; voxel resolution 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0 mm; 1mm thick sagittal slices; 256 × 256 mm FOV; scan duration 5.1 min). Functional resting-state images were acquired using a whole-brain BOLD EPI sequence (270 frames; TE 20ms; TR 2000ms; flip angle 80°; voxel resolution 1.7 × 1.7 × 1.7 mm; 1.7 mm thick sagittal slices; multiband factor of 2; 1116 × 1080 mm FOV; scan duration 9.2 min).

During each session (i.e., baseline and both experimental days), resting-state fMRI scans were acquired. Resting-state scan parameters (see above) were matched. Participants were instructed to lie as still as possible and keep their eyes open and focused on a centrally presented fixation cross on a screen. They were asked to let their minds wander during the scan without trying to focus on anything in particular. Resting-state scans were followed by a memory task consisting of blocks of interleaved object-location study and test object-location phases. fMRI was also collected during the study phases of this task, but analysis of these scans is not described in the current report.

fMRI first-level preprocessing

Functional and structural MRI data were preprocessed using AFNI software (Cox, 1996). Structural scans were skull stripped (3dSkullStrip) and transformed to the standardized Talairach TTN27 template (auto_tlrc). Large outliers in the EPI volumes were suppressed (3dDespike). EPI data were corrected for motion by rigid body transformation (3dvolreg), co-registered to the anatomical scan via affine transformation (align_epi_anat), and spatially normalized to the standardized Talairach template TTN27 via affine transformation (auto_tlrc). These transformations were applied simultaneously in a single resampling step (3dAllineate). Motion parameters were calculated for each volume as the Euclidean norm of the first difference of six motion estimates (i.e., angles and translations). Volumes with excessive motion (&gt;0.3-mm), as well as the previous volume, were flagged for later censoring. All data were spatially smoothed using a 4-mm full-width-at-half-maximum isotropic Gaussian kernel (3dmerge), and signal intensity was normalized by the mean of each voxel. Band-pass filtering (0.01-0.1-Hz), motion censoring, and nuisance time series (i.e., estimates of motion parameters and derivatives) were detrended from each voxel simultaneously as a linear regression model (3dDeconvolve, 3dTproject) to yield a residual time series for analysis.

As is often the case, older adults moved more during fMRI scanning than did younger adults, although movement was very low in both groups. In younger adults, an average of 0.4% (SD=1.3%; range=0-6.7%) of the resting-state scan time series was censored due to movement (baseline mean=0.10%; theta-burst session mean=1.1%; beta session mean=0.10%). In older adults, an average of 2.2% (SD=3.3%; range=0-16.6%) of the resting-state scan time series was censored (baseline mean=3.4%; theta-burst stimulation session mean=1.5%; beta stimulation session mean=1.8%). There was no significant difference in motion-based censoring among stimulation conditions in the younger adults (all pairwise comparison Ps&gt;.08) or in the older adults (all pairwise comparison Ps&gt;0.2). Thus, the differential effects of stimulation on resting-state fMRI connectivity in the two groups were not likely due to differences in motion. Given that older adults moved slightly yet significantly more than the younger adults in the scanner (all sessions combined; t88=3.44, P=0.0009) and the potential confounds in fMRI comparisons across age groups reviewed above, we did not directly compare the two groups except to replicate baseline connectivity differences reported in previous studies. We instead tested for the effects of stimulation within each group (see below).

Transcranial magnetic stimulation

Stimulation target identification

Seed-based resting-state fMRI connectivity analysis of the baseline scan was used to determine individualized stimulation locations used in the subsequent experimental sessions. For each subject, a search around a default hippocampal seed (MNI = −29, −25, −13) was performed to identify the voxel in the hippocampal body with the strongest bilateral functional connectivity. The group mean distance from the default seed was 2.86mm (SD=0.72, range=1.41-4.12) in the younger adults and 3.22mm (SD=1.67, range=1.00-6.32) in the older adults. This voxel was used as a seed in a seed-based functional connectivity analysis to generate a hippocampal connectivity map (3dTcorr1D). A search of the hippocampal connectivity map was then performed to identify a voxel within a 40 mm radius from a default parietal stimulation location (MNI = −47, −68, 36) with the most robust connectivity to the hippocampal seed. The group mean distance from the default parietal location was 17.9mm (SD=13.1, range=2.24-46.18) in the younger adults and 17.03mm (SD=11.34, range=0-38.41) in the older adults. The stimulation location was transformed from MNI back to the subject’s native MRI space for anatomically-guided TMS. This individualized stimulation location approach has been implemented successfully by our group in several previous stimulation studies aiming to affect the hippocampal connectivity/activity and memory performance (Dave et al., 2020; Hebscher and Voss, 2020; Hermiller et al., 2020; Hermiller et al., 2019a; Hermiller et al., 2019b; Kim et al., 2018; Nilakantan et al., 2017; Nilakantan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2014; Warren et al., 2019)

Stimulation intensity

TMS was delivered via a MagPro X100 stimulator connected to a MagPro Cool-B65 liquid-cooled butterfly coil (MagVenture A/S, Denmark). The TMS navigation system Localite (Germany) was used to guide parietal cortex targeting. Resting motor threshold (RMT) was determined as the minimum percentage of stimulator outfit necessary to generate contraction of the abductor pollicis brevis (i.e., right thumb) for five out of ten consecutive pulses during the baseline session. Individual RMT values varied from 44-70% of stimulator output (%so) (mean=54%so, SD=6.1) in the younger adults and 38-70%so (mean=53%so, SD=7.5) in the older adults. Per established safety protocols and TMS guidelines (Rossi et al., 2009; Oberman et al., 2011), participants received stimulation at a maximum of 80% of their RMT for the theta-burst stimulation condition. In order to match the stimulation intensity, the beta stimulation condition was also delivered at 80% RMT. Stimulation intensity was reduced for comfort for one younger adult participant (56%so calculated to 50%so applied) and one older adult participant (56%so calculated to 54%so applied).

TMS protocols

For beta frequency stimulation, pulses were at 20-Hz in fifteen 40-pulse trains (i.e., 2 seconds on, 28 seconds off) for a total of 600 pulses. The beta sequence was 7 minutes 3 seconds in duration. For theta-burst stimulation, pulses were delivered in 50-Hz triplets every 200 ms continuously for a total of 600 pulses over a 40-second duration. In order to match the perceived duration of stimulation (i.e., make the theta-burst condition feel as long as the beta condition), the theta-burst condition was preceded with 6.5 minutes of subthreshold (10% RMT) beta frequency stimulation (i.e., 20-Hz pulse delivered in thirteen 40-pulse intervals; 2 seconds on, 28 seconds off). Participants were informed that the stimulation patterns and sensation would vary across sessions but were otherwise unaware of specific study hypotheses. During stimulation, participants watched videos from the BBC series Planet Earth.

Data analysis

Behavioral analysis

As described above, Task 2 (performed by the older adults) included an old/new item recognition component. Only items correctly identified as old (i.e., “hits”) were included in all further analyses.

Probabilistic mixture models following analyses techniques proposed by (Zhang and Luck, 2008) and (Bays et al., 2009) were adapted for two-dimensions spatial tasks and used to analyze the object-location recollection performance via MemToolBox2D (Grogan et al., 2019). Three components were fit, taking into account the stimulus locations: 1) the precision in successfully recalled item’s studied location (i.e., standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution of the distance between the correct and the recalled location), 2) the proportion of hits (1 – proportion of random guesses, as defined via a uniform distribution of possible response locations based on the background grid/scene dimensions), and 3) the proportion of location swaps, which occurred when an object was recalled at the location of another studied object. These models assume that successfully recalled 2-D object-location responses fit a bivariate Gaussian distribution, in which the mean indicates how close responses were on average to the actual location and the standard deviation indicates the precision of the response. If the object-location was not successfully recalled, responses are assumed to fit a uniform distribution across all possible locations in the grid (i.e., guesses). Swaps occur when a studied location is recalled but not for the specific object studied at that location (Bays et al., 2009); i.e., when an object is placed at a location where a different object was studied. Swaps were calculated within blocks, such that only locations studied in the same block were considered as non-targeted locations. The edge-resampling method, which replaces any response outside the grid with a new sample drawn randomly from the same distribution, was implemented (Grogan et al., 2019).

Baseline seed-based fMRI connectivity

The fMRI connectivity of the subject-specific hippocampal targets and parietal cortex stimulation targets was each evaluated in the younger adults and older adults baseline (i.e., no-stimulation day 1) data separately. To assess fMRI connectivity, the spatially averaged time series of the 4 mm target (i.e., hippocampal or parietal site) was correlated with every other voxel to create a seed-based correlation map (3dTcorr1D). A Fisher’s z transformation was applied to yield a normally distributed correlation map for the target for each subject (3dcalc). Voxels with significant connectivity to the target were identified at the group-level using voxel-wise post hoc one-tailed t-tests (3dttest++; P&lt;0.0001, t-threshold=3.8906, FDR q=0.001, 57+ voxels to meet alpha&lt;0.01 via 3dClustSim). They yielded a set of clusters with significant baseline connectivity to the hippocampal target and a set of clusters with significant baseline connectivity to the parietal stimulation target identified in the younger and older adults separately. The maximum standardized t-statistic (z-score) was extracted (3dROIstats) for each cluster.

Effects of stimulation on global fMRI connectedness

A voxel-wise whole-brain connectedness analysis was used to identify clusters that differed in fMRI connectedness with other voxels between theta-burst and beta stimulation for the younger adults and older adults separately. fMRI connectedness maps were created by correlating (Pearson’s r) the time series in each voxel with every other voxel in the brain, averaging the correlations, and assigning the mean value to that voxel in the subject’s connectedness map (3dTcorrMap). Fisher’s z transformation was applied to yield normally distributed connectedness maps for each subject in each stimulation condition. Differences in connectedness between stimulation conditions were evaluated at the group-level to identify hotspots of connectedness change. Monte Carlo permutation testing was performed to determine the appropriate hotspot cluster-size threshold, similar to (Warren et al., 2018). The stimulation-induced difference in connectedness between theta-burst and beta conditions was evaluated using post-hoc paired t-tests (two-tailed) in each voxel (3dttest++) to identify clusters of voxels with differences in connectedness (P&lt;0.05 uncorrected, z(t)-threshold=1.96). This voxel-wise threshold was based on consideration of the dilution of correlation strength that occurs when averaging connectedness across the entire network, as in previous studies, with permutation testing to control for type I error. For permutation testing, 1000 iterations were performed comparing theta-burst versus beta (3dttest++), with random flipping of condition labels for half the subjects per iteration to generate a probability distribution of resulting suprathreshold cluster sizes. Cluster-size thresholds of 51 voxels were required to achieve α &lt;0.05. Using these permutation-defined cluster-size thresholds, a set of clusters with connectedness differences were identified for TBS versus beta in both the younger adult and older adult datasets separately. The maximum standardized t-statistic (z-score) was extracted (3dROIstats) for each connectedness cluster.

Data Analysis

Data were analyzed using AFNI software (Cox, 1996), Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc. Natick, MA, USA), and the MemToolBox2D: https://github.com/johnPGrogan/MemToolbox2D (Grogan et al., 2019). For visualization, Matlab, AFNI, and BrainNet Viewer Matlab toolbox (Xia et al., 2013) were used. Statistical analysis was performed using AFNI and Matlab. Comparisons were performed using two-tailed Students t-tests (t), either as paired if comparing within group or two-sampled if comparing across groups (indicated throughout the text).

RESULTS

Baseline fMRI resting-state connectivity

We first assessed the baseline fMRI connectivity of the hippocampal network in younger and older adults, using the same statistical threshold for seed-based hippocampal connectivity in each group (cluster details in Table S1). The hippocampal connectivity map in younger adults comprised regions that typically exhibit robust hippocampal connectivity (e.g., ventral medial prefrontal cortex, medial and lateral temporal, precuneus, and lateral parietal areas) (Kahn et al., 2008), whereas the older adults’ hippocampal connectivity map was less distinct and more widely distributed, including regions that are not part of the typical hippocampal fMRI connectivity network such as precentral, superior-frontal, and middle-frontal gyri (Figure 2; Table S1). Of the 23,168 voxels making up the hippocampal connectivity maps (younger adults = 9478 voxels; older adults = 13690 voxels), there was ~13% overlap (3092 voxels) between the groups, mostly in the canonical hippocampal network regions (yellow areas in Figure 2). This demonstrates the typical pattern of less network segregation in older versus younger adults.

We also evaluated the baseline pattern of the parietal stimulation site connectivity to the rest of the brain in younger and older adults (cluster details in Table S2). In the younger adults, the parietal stimulation site was robustly connected to regions of the hippocampal-cortical network, including the targeted left hippocampus and surrounding mesial temporal cortex. In contrast, in older adults, the parietal stimulation location was robustly connected to a more widely distributed set of regions, including basal ganglia and parietal-frontal network regions (Table S2). As was the case for findings regarding the hippocampal network, this is consistent with previous interpretations of less segregated connectivity in older versus younger adults. Of the 35,213 voxels making up the parietal connectivity maps (young adults = 5313 voxels; older adults = 29,900 voxels), there was ~8% overlap (2800 voxels) between the groups (yellow areas in Figure 3).

Notably, these age-related changes in fMRI connectivity have potential ramifications for the hippocampal network-targeted stimulation approach that was used, which involves delivering stimulation at parietal cortex locations picked based on the local maximum connectivity with the hippocampus. Although the voxel-wise analyses described above identified differences in older versus younger adults in hippocampal-parietal connectivity, the individualized procedure for hippocampal network-targeted stimulation nonetheless identified stimulation targets in lateral parietal cortex that were similar for older and younger adults (Figure 1B). To test whether the strength of connectivity of these stimulation locations with the hippocampal target differed between the older and younger groups, we quantified fMRI connectivity between the hippocampal target and stimulation site in each subject and compared between groups. As expected, there was higher baseline connectivity between the hippocampal target and the stimulation site for younger adults (mean=0.27, SD=0.08) relative to older adults (mean=0.17, SD=0.14) (t14=2.18, P=0.047). Thus, although individualized methods for network-targeted stimulation produced spatially similar stimulation locations, the connectivity of these regions with the hippocampal target was reduced in older versus younger adults.

Effects of stimulation on fMRI connectedness

We evaluated differential effects of stimulation (i.e., theta-burst – beta) on whole-brain connectedness, whereby the average correlation of each voxel with all other voxels is computed and then submitted to voxel-level pairwise comparisons between conditions (Gotts et al., 2012; Steel et al., 2016; Warren et al., 2018; Warren et al., 2019). This is a data-driven yet conservative measure of fMRI connectivity changes due to stimulation, as any supra-threshold effects must be sufficiently robust to survive being washed out by the mean correlation across the entire brain, including regions that do not respond to stimulation. It does not make any a priori assumptions regarding network definition, yet can be used to identify network-specific effects simply by identifying the locations of supra-threshold effects.

In younger adults, whole-brain resting-state fMRI connectedness analysis identified 11 clusters with significantly greater connectedness for theta-burst relative to beta stimulation. The majority were in canonical regions of the hippocampal network, including the left hippocampus (1704 voxels total; Figure 4, Table S3). In contrast, 20 clusters were identified by the same theta-burst versus beta contrast in older adults, and they were distributed throughout the brain, without constraint to the hippocampal network and with some concentration in occipital and ventral posterior cortex (9341 voxels total; Figure 4, Table S3). In both the younger and older adults, no clusters showed the opposite pattern of connectedness difference for theta-burst versus beta stimulation (i.e., none with higher connectedness for beta relative to theta-burst). There were zero overlapping voxels of connectedness change between the younger and older adults, suggesting regionally distinct rhythm-specific stimulation effects on fMRI connectedness.

Effects of stimulation on memory performance

Memory performance was modeled in a three-component (i.e., guess rate, swap rate, precision) mixed model adapted for a two-dimensional spatial recall task (Figure 5, Table 2) (Grogan et al., 2019). We modeled each group and stimulation condition separately to test our hypothesis that stimulation rhythms would have different effects on memory performance in the younger versus older groups and given the different versions of the task administered to the two groups. The hit rate was calculated as the proportion of the object locations assumed to be successfully recalled based on the model (1 – guess rate) and did not significantly vary between theta-burst and beta stimulation conditions for the younger or older adults (all two-tailed pairwise Ps&gt;0.1). The swap rate was calculated as the proportion of the locations recalled for objects other than the current tested object. We found a significant interaction between stimulation condition (theta-burst, beta) and age group (younger, older) (F1,28=4.37, P=0.045, n2p=0.135). Follow-up pairwise analysis indicated that the swap rate was greater following theta-burst relative to beta stimulation for young adults (t14=3.22, P=0.006, Cohen’s d=0.83) but not for older adults (P&gt;0.1). The effect of theta-burst relative to beta stimulation on the swap rate was significantly greater for younger than for older adults (t28=2.09, P=0.045, Cohen’s d=0.76). Precision was calculated as the distance error for successfully recalled (non guessed) trials and did not differ by stimulation condition in either younger or older adults (all two-tailed pairwise Ps&gt;0.5).

Performance cannot be meaningfully compared for the baseline session versus the two experiment sessions with theta-burst or beta stimulation, as baseline sessions always happened first and there may be effects of repeated testing. However, we show baseline performance values in Figure 5 to give a sense of the overall pattern of stimulation-related performance changes. Younger adults showed more swaps following theta-burst than beta stimulation, reflecting a relative increase in swaps for theta-burst relative to baseline (t14=2.12, P=0.05, Cohen’s d=0.55).

DISCUSSION

In both groups, theta-burst stimulation increased fMRI connectedness values relative to beta stimulation. This frequency-specific effect indicates that both groups responded preferentially to stimulation applied at the theta rhythm. This is notable given previous evidence for reduced theta synchrony in older relative to younger adults (Caplan et al., 2015; Cummins and Finnigan, 2007; Finnigan and Robertson, 2011; Healey and Kahana, 2020; Kardos et al., 2014; Lithfous et al., 2015; Reichert et al., 2016; Strunk et al., 2017; Voytek et al., 2015; Zanto et al., 2010). Notably, as is the case for fMRI, age-related changes in brain structure can confound analyses of differences in EEG activity between older and younger adults (Obrist, 1976; Provencher et al., 2016). Despite any possible age-related reductions in theta, theta-rhythmic stimulation was nonetheless preferentially effective for influencing fMRI connectivity relative to beta-frequency stimulation in older adults as it was for younger adults.

However, the preferential effects of theta-burst stimulation were more constrained to the hippocampal network in younger adults than in older adults. In younger adults, preferential fMRI connectivity increases for theta-burst stimulation occurred in canonical hippocampal network regions, which is consistent with our previous findings of preferential theta-burst stimulation effects on hippocampal network fMRI connectivity (Hermiller et al. 2019) and on hippocampal fMRI activity (Hermiller et al. 2020) in younger adults. Notably, this study conceptually replicates the selective impact of theta-burst stimulation on hippocampal network fMRI connectivity and memory performance relative to beta stimulation reported in Hermiller et al. (2019) with better matching of the theta-burst and beta stimulation parameters than in the previous study.

In contrast to these selective effects in younger adults, older adults responded preferentially to theta-burst stimulation with widespread fMRI connectivity increases that were not specific to the canonical hippocampal network. This finding supports previous reports of increased de-differentiation of hippocampal and parietal networks in older versus younger adults (Betzel et al., 2014; Chan et al., 2014; Geerligs et al., 2017) by showing that the response to stimulation was likewise more diffuse and less specific to the targeted network in older adults. Notably, this evidence for de-differentiated network responses to brain stimulation in older adults is not subject to the many limitations that apply to evidence for age-related fMRI network de-differentiation in purely correlational designs. That is, the many non-neuronal factors that could confound findings of age-related de-differentiation measured via fMRI (e.g., age-related neurovascular changes, motion, etc.) are not relevant here, as such factors were constant across stimulation conditions. Thus, the current findings provide direct evidence that networks are de-differentiated in older adults by showing that their response to stimulation is relatively de-differentiated. Such de-differentiation is surprising given that the overall pattern of interregional anatomical connectivity is relatively preserved in aging, and the neuronal mechanisms are yet to be determined. Yet, the current findings suggest that de-differentiation is functional, in the sense that episodic memory was not affected in older adults with de-differentiated responses to theta-burst stimulation, whereas younger adults showed both selective effects of stimulation on hippocampal network connectivity and on episodic memory, as has been reported previously (Wang et al., 2014; Warren et al., 2019).

Theta-burst stimulation influenced memory performance in younger but not older adults, specifically affecting the swap rate of spatial location recall, with no effects on modeled hit rate or precision in either group. Because hit rates and precision were not affected by stimulation, it is unlikely that theta-burst stimulation weakened memory for object-location associations. Instead, the increase in swap rates indicates that younger adults had a greater tendency to recall objects at the locations where other objects were studied due to theta-burst stimulation. This could have resulted from either an increase in overall memory strength for the object locations (i.e., when specific object-location associations were forgotten, there was a greater tendency to guess the location at a remembered location) or from an increase in inter-object associations. That is, if subjects remembered object locations from previous trials on each encoding trial, they could have then had a greater tendency to confuse the locations of different objects. Such an interpretation would suggest an impact of theta-burst stimulation on processing related to pattern completion. Both of these interpretations are consistent with the corresponding effects of theta-burst stimulation on fMRI connectivity, as both memory strength (Squire et al., 2007) and pattern completion (Yassa and Stark, 2011) depend on the hippocampal network locations that were affected by theta-burst stimulation in younger adults.

A limitation of the study is that stimulation likely affected processing related to both encoding and retrieval, as the study and test periods were all completed within the duration thought to be typical for the aftereffects of theta-burst stimulation, which is ~ 60 min (Huang et al., 2005; Hubl et al., 2008; Oberman et al., 2011; Wischnewski and Schutter, 2015). In contrast, Tambini and colleagues (Tambini et al., 2018) used a similar object-location association task in young adults with network-targeted theta-burst stimulation delivered before the encoding phase, with sufficient washout before the retrieval phase. They found that theta-burst stimulation significantly enhanced associative memory success (i.e., comparable to the hit rate modeled here) and confidence. Similar to the current findings, they also did not find a change in precision. Notably, Tambini et al. did not assess swap rate. Small differences in task parameters and/or the difference in selectivity of stimulation effects on encoding versus on the entire task could be responsible for this discrepancy. Our previous findings of selective theta-burst stimulation effects on memory were measured only for the retrieval portion of a word recognition task (Hermiller et al. 2019), and other findings suggest that theta-burst stimulation can also affect the consolidation interval (Tambini and D'Esposito, 2020). Thus, theta-burst stimulation may influence many stages of memory processing but with effects that might vary based on the influenced stage and on task demands.

In contrast to the relatively nonspecific effects of theta-burst stimulation on fMRI connectivity and the lack of memory modulation in older adults reported here, selective effects on fMRI activity and memory enhancements were identified in a previous study with older adults (Nilakantan et al., 2019). In that experiment, network-targeted stimulation in healthy older adults selectively increased the hippocampal network's encoding-related activation and improved recollection performance. However, there was a major difference between the two studies. The current study compared the immediate aftereffects of a single session of theta-burst stimulation to a single-session of beta stimulation, whereas Nilakantan et al. (2019) analyzed the long-lasting (&gt; 24 hr) effects of five consecutive daily sessions of beta stimulation. Nilakantan et al. (2019) can therefore be thought of as an investigation of how repetitive stimulation remodels the hippocampal fMRI network, whereas the current experiment can be conceptualized as a functional probe of the network. Taken together, the findings suggest that although the hippocampal network may be functionally less segregated in older adults, repeated stimulation may be able to restore functional organization and produce highly specific effects. In contrast to older adults, both single-session and multiple-session stimulation targeting the hippocampal network has specific effects on the network in younger adults (Hebscher and Voss, 2020), which aligns with findings that networks should be well segregated at baseline in younger adults. Future experiments could compare the effects of beta to theta-burst stimulation using multiple-session stimulation designs to determine if hippocampal network connectivity and memory are preferentially affected by repeated theta-burst stimulation.

Network-targeted stimulation is a useful tool for directly testing age-related differences in functional brain network organization measured in observational studies. In this experiment, direct support was provided for previous observations of age-related de-differentiation of fMRI networks and for the functional consequences of hippocampal network de-differentiation for episodic memory performance. Future experiments could use a similar approach to test the many putative differences in brain activity and network organization hypothesized to support memory decline and memory preservation in aging (Cabeza et al., 2018; Nyberg, 2017; Nyberg et al., 2012).

Supplementary Material

1

Acknowledgements

We thank Brennan Durr, Melissa Gunlogson, Erica Karp, and Aneesha Nilakantan for their support of this project. This research was funded by awards R01-MH106512, R01-AG049002, T32-NS0479987, F31-NS111892, and F32-MH118718. Neuroimaging was performed at the Northwestern University Center for Translational Imaging, supported by Northwestern University Department of Radiology. This work was supported in part through the computational resources and staff contributions provided for Quest, the high-performance computing facility at Northwestern University, which is jointly supported by the Office of the Provost, the Office for Research, and Northwestern University Information Technology. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official view of the National Institutes of Health.

Figure 1. Experiment design.

(A) Subjects completed a baseline assessment before returning for two experimental sessions. Resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) and an object-location association memory task were acquired each session following stimulation, depicted as grey and white rectangles, respectively. During the experiment sessions, stimulation was delivered prior to subjects entering the scanner, with a different stimulation condition (i.e., theta-burst, “TBS” or beta) delivered each day, in a counterbalanced order (B) Subject-specific stimulation locations in the parietal cortex determined via resting-state fMRI connectivity with hippocampal targets, depicted as spheres (each representing one subject) on a BrainNet viewer Talairach brain template. (C) Example of one study trial for Task 1 (object studied on a grid background) and Task 2 (object studied on a scene background) used by the Young Adults and Older Adults, respectively.

Figure 2. Baseline resting-state hippocampal connectivity.

Clusters with significant baseline connectivity to the hippocampus for the younger adults (cyan), older adults (red), and the overlap between groups (yellow) shown on coronal slices of a TTN27 template brain (left = left). Slices range from Y=−64 to +94 with ~4mm between each slice.

Figure 3. Baseline resting-state parietal connectivity.

Clusters with significant baseline connectivity to the parietal stimulation location for the younger adults (cyan), older adults (red), and the overlap between groups (yellow) shown on a TTN27 template brain (left = left). Slices range from Y=−64 to +94 with ~4mm between each slice.

Figure 4. Effects of stimulation rhythm (theta burst minus beta) on whole-brain fMRI connectedness.

Clusters with significant differences in whole-brain connectedness following theta-burst relative to beta stimulation (i.e., theta-burst – beta) for the younger adults (blue) and older adults (magenta), shown on a TTN27 template brain (left = left). Slices range from Y=−64 to +94 with ~4mm between each slice.

Figure 5. Effects of stimulation rhythms on spatial location memory performance.

Results of a three-component mixture model, including parameters estimating the proportion of responses that were hits (left), proportion of responses that were swaps (middle), and precision (i.e., standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution; right) for the (A) younger adults and (B) older adults. Error bars indicate group-level standard error. Subject-level differences between stimulation conditions (theta-burst and beta) are depicted by colored lines (one colored line per subject). Statistical comparisons were not made between experimental sessions (theta-burst and beta stimulation) and the baseline session, as the baseline session always occurred first, and so any differences could reflect nonspecific effects of repeated testing. In contrast, the order of experimental sessions was counterbalanced.

Table 1. Neuropsychological scores for older adult participants (N=15)

Test		Mean score (SD; min-max)	
MOCA		28.00 (1.69; 25-30)	
MINT		30.40 (2.29; 25-32)	
Craft story (verbatim)	Immediate	19.60 (7.24; 7-33)	
	Delay	16.87 (6.99; 5-28)	
Benson	Immediate	16.40 (0.91; 14-17)	
	Delay	11.67 (2.77; 6-17)	
Number Span (total)	Forward	8.20 (2.40; 4-12)	
	Backward	7.40 (2.23; 3-12)	
Trails (seconds)	A	31.87 (15.80; 18-80)	
	B	73.47 (32.89; 34-165)	
Verbal fluency *	F words	16.71 (4.98; 8-26)	
	L words	16.79 (4.76; 9-24)	
* n=14 for this assessment

Table 2. Mean model parameters (SD; range)

	Baseline	Theta-burst	Beta	
YOUNG ADULTS				
Hit rate	0.75 (0.12; 0.48-0.91)	0.75 (0.11; 0.54-0.91)	0.69 (0.16; 0.38-0.932)	
Swap rate	0.059 (0.027; 0.013-0.11)	0.097 (0.059; 0.036-0.26)	0.049 (0.023; 0.024-0.12)	
Precision	85.41 (14.96; 60.13-108.32)	67.43 (15.66; 43.86-96.95)	66.83 (22.51; 22.53-97.06)	
OLDER ADULTS				
Hit rate	0.67 (0.20; 0.29-0.92)	0.76 (0.13; 0.54-0.90)	0.72 (0.15; 0.45-0.91)	
Swap rate	0.061 (0.042; 0.025-0.19)	0.052 (0.024; 0.023-0.096)	0.052 (0.056; 0.023-0.25)	
Precision	99.95 (14.90; 76.52-120.82)	103.63 (18.65; 75.95-130.52)	100.54 (21.57; 64.61-133.59)	

Highlights

Stimulation affected hippocampal network connectivity and memory in young adults.

Stimulation effects were rhythm-specific for theta-burst versus beta rhythms.

Theta-burst also increased connectivity in older adults, but non-selectively.

Stimulation did not affect memory in older adults.

Direct evidence that hippocampal network de-differentiation in aging is functional.

Conflict of Interest

All authors report no conflict of interest.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


REFERENCES

1944. Army Individual Test Battery: Manual of Directions and Scoring. War Department, Adjutant General’s Office, Washington D.C.
Ajmani RS , Metter EJ , Jaykumar R , Ingram DK , Spangler EL , Abugo OO , Rifkind JM , 2000. Hemodynamic changes during aging associated with cerebral blood flow and impaired cognitive function. Neurobiol Aging 21 (2 ), 257–269.10867210
Albouy P , Weiss A , Baillet S , Zatorre RJ , 2017. Selective Entrainment of Theta Oscillations in the Dorsal Stream Causally Enhances Auditory Working Memory Performance. Neuron 94 (1 ), 193–206 e195.28343866
Andrews-Hanna JR , Snyder AZ , Vincent JL , Lustig C , Head D , Raichle ME , Buckner RL , 2007. Disruption of large-scale brain systems in advanced aging. Neuron 56 (5 ), 924–935.18054866
Axmacher N , Mormann F , Fernández G , Elger CE , Fell J , 2006. Memory formation by neuronal synchronization. Brain Res Rev 52 (1 ), 170–182.16545463
Battaglia FP , Benchenane K , Sirota A , Pennartz CM , Wiener SI , 2011. The hippocampus: hub of brain network communication for memory. Trends Cogn Sci 15 (7 ), 310–318.21696996
Bays PM , Catalao RF , Husain M , 2009. The precision of visual working memory is set by allocation of a shared resource. J Vis 9 (10 ), 7 1–11.
Betzel RF , Byrge L , He Y , Goñi J , Zuo XN , Sporns O , 2014. Changes in structural and functional connectivity among resting-state networks across the human lifespan. Neuroimage 102 Pt 2 , 345–357.25109530
Buckner RL , Andrews-Hanna JR , Schacter DL , 2008. The brain's default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1124 , 1–38.18400922
Burke JF , Zaghloul KA , Jacobs J , Williams RB , Sperling MR , Sharan AD , Kahana MJ , 2013. Synchronous and asynchronous theta and gamma activity during episodic memory formation. J Neurosci 33 (1 ), 292–304.23283342
Buzsaki G , 2002. Theta oscillations in the hippocampus. Neuron 33 (3 ), 325–340.11832222
Buzsaki G , Draguhn A , 2004. Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks. Science 304 (5679 ), 1926–1929.15218136
Cabeza R , Albert M , Belleville S , Craik FIM , Duarte A , Grady CL , Lindenberger U , Nyberg L , Park DC , Reuter-Lorenz PA , Rugg MD , Steffener J , Rajah MN , 2018. Maintenance, reserve and compensation: the cognitive neuroscience of healthy ageing. Nat Rev Neurosci 19 (11 ), 701–710.30305711
Cabeza R , Ciaramelli E , Olson IR , Moscovitch M , 2008. The parietal cortex and episodic memory: an attentional account. Nat Rev Neurosci 9 (8 ), 613–625.18641668
Caplan JB , Bottomley M , Kang P , Dixon RA , 2015. Distinguishing rhythmic from non-rhythmic brain activity during rest in healthy neurocognitive aging. Neuroimage 112 , 341–352.25769279
Chan MY , Park DC , Savalia NK , Petersen SE , Wig GS , 2014. Decreased segregation of brain systems across the healthy adult lifespan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 (46 ), E4997–5006.25368199
Chanes L , Quentin R , Tallon-Baudry C , Valero-Cabre A , 2013. Causal frequency-specific contributions of frontal spatiotemporal patterns induced by non-invasive neurostimulation to human visual performance. J Neurosci 33 (11 ), 5000–5005.23486970
Chen T , Naveh-Benjamin M , 2012. Assessing the associative deficit of older adults in long-term and short-term/working memory. Psychol Aging 27 (3 ), 666–682.22308997
Clouter A , Shapiro KL , Hanslmayr S , 2017. Theta Phase Synchronization Is the Glue that Binds Human Associative Memory. Curr Biol 27 (20 ), 3143–3148 e3146.28988860
Cox RW , 1996. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 29 (3 ), 162–173.8812068
Craft S , Newcomer J , Kanne S , Dagogo-Jack S , Cryer P , Sheline Y , Luby J , Dagogo-Jack A , Alderson A , 1996. Memory improvement following induced hyperinsulinemia in Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging 17 (1 ), 123–130.8786794
Craik FI , Rose NS , 2012. Memory encoding and aging: a neurocognitive perspective. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 36 (7 ), 1729–1739.22155274
Cummins TD , Finnigan S , 2007. Theta power is reduced in healthy cognitive aging. Int J Psychophysiol 66 (1 ), 10–17.17582632
Damoiseaux JS , Beckmann CF , Arigita EJ , Barkhof F , Scheltens P , Stam CJ , Smith SM , Rombouts SA , 2008. Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging. Cereb Cortex 18 (8 ), 1856–1864.18063564
Dave S , VanHaerents S , Voss JL , 2020. Cerebellar Theta and Beta Noninvasive Stimulation Rhythms Differentially Influence Episodic Memory versus Semantic Prediction. J Neurosci 40 (38 ), 7300–7310.32817245
Di Lazzaro V , Dileone M , Pilato F , Capone F , Musumeci G , Ranieri F , Ricci V , Bria P , Di Iorio R , de Waure C , Pasqualetti P , Profice P , 2011. Modulation of motor cortex neuronal networks by rTMS: comparison of local and remote effects of six different protocols of stimulation. J Neurophysiol 105 (5 ), 2150–2156.21346213
Dukart J , Bertolino A , 2014. When structure affects function--the need for partial volume effect correction in functional and resting state magnetic resonance imaging studies. PLoS One 9 (12 ), e114227.25460595
Düzel E , Penny WD , Burgess N , 2010. Brain oscillations and memory. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20 (2 ), 143–149.20181475
Eichenbaum H , 2000. A cortical-hippocampal system for declarative memory. Nat Rev Neurosci 1 (1 ), 41–50.11252767
Finnigan S , Robertson IH , 2011. Resting EEG theta power correlates with cognitive performance in healthy older adults. Psychophysiology 48 (8 ), 1083–1087.21729101
Fox MD , Halko MA , Eldaief MC , Pascual-Leone A , 2012. Measuring and manipulating brain connectivity with resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Neuroimage 62 (4 ), 2232–2243.22465297
Geerligs L , Maurits NM , Renken RJ , Lorist MM , 2014. Reduced specificity of functional connectivity in the aging brain during task performance. Hum Brain Mapp 35 (1 ), 319–330.22915491
Geerligs L , Renken RJ , Saliasi E , Maurits NM , Lorist MM , 2015. A Brain-Wide Study of Age-Related Changes in Functional Connectivity. Cereb Cortex 25 (7 ), 1987–1999.24532319
Geerligs L , Tsvetanov KA , Cam-Can , Henson RN , 2017. Challenges in measuring individual differences in functional connectivity using fMRI: The case of healthy aging. Hum Brain Mapp 38 (8 ), 4125–4156.28544076
Goh JO , 2011. Functional Dedifferentiation and Altered Connectivity in Older Adults: Neural Accounts of Cognitive Aging. Aging Dis 2 (1 ), 30–48.21461180
Gotts SJ , Simmons WK , Milbury LA , Wallace GL , Cox RW , Martin A , 2012. Fractionation of social brain circuits in autism spectrum disorders. Brain 135 (Pt 9 ), 2711–2725.22791801
Grady C , 2012. The cognitive neuroscience of ageing. Nat Rev Neurosci 13 (7 ), 491–505.22714020
Grady CL , 2002. Age-related differences in face processing: a meta-analysis of three functional neuroimaging experiments. Can J Exp Psychol 56 (3 ), 208–220.12271751
Greicius MD , Krasnow B , Reiss AL , Menon V , 2003. Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 (1 ), 253–258.12506194
Grogan JP , Fallon SJ , Zokaei N , Husain M , Coulthard EJ , Manohar SG , 2019. A new toolbox to distinguish the sources of spatial memory error. PsyArXiv.
Hanslmayr S , Staresina BP , Bowman H , 2016. Oscillations and Episodic Memory: Addressing the Synchronization/Desynchronization Conundrum. Trends Neurosci 39 (1 ), 16–25.26763659
Hanslmayr S , Staudigl T , 2014. How brain oscillations form memories--a processing based perspective on oscillatory subsequent memory effects. Neuroimage 85 Pt 2 , 648–655.23769913
Healey MK , Kahana MJ , 2020. Age-related differences in the temporal dynamics of spectral power during memory encoding. PLoS One 15 (1 ), e0227274.31945080
Hebscher M , Voss JL , 2020. Testing network properties of episodic memory using non-invasive brain stimulation. Curr Opin Behav Sci 32 , 35–42.32266318
Hedden T , Gabrieli JD , 2004. Insights into the ageing mind: a view from cognitive neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci 5 (2 ), 87–96.14735112
Henson RN , Campbell KL , Davis SW , Taylor JR , Emery T , Erzinclioglu S , Kievit RA , Cam-CAN , 2016. Multiple determinants of lifespan memory differences. Sci Rep 6 , 32527.27600595
Hermiller MS , Chen YF , Parrish TB , Voss JL , 2020. Evidence for Immediate Enhancement of Hippocampal Memory Encoding by Network-Targeted Theta-Burst Stimulation during Concurrent fMRI. J Neurosci 40 (37 ), 7155–7168.32817326
Hermiller MS , Karp E , Nilakantan AS , Voss JL , 2019a. Episodic memory improvements due to noninvasive stimulation targeting the cortical-hippocampal network: A replication and extension experiment. Brain Behav 9 (12 ), e01393.31568683
Hermiller MS , VanHaerents S , Raij T , Voss JL , 2019b. Frequency-specific noninvasive modulation of memory retrieval and its relationship with hippocampal network connectivity. Hippocampus 29 (7 ), 595–609.30447076
Huang YZ , Edwards MJ , Rounis E , Bhatia KP , Rothwell JC , 2005. Theta burst stimulation of the human motor cortex. Neuron 45 (2 ), 201–206.15664172
Hubl D , Nyffeler T , Wurtz P , Chaves S , Pflugshaupt T , Luthi M , von Wartburg R , Wiest R , Dierks T , Strik WK , Hess CW , Muri RM , 2008. Time course of blood oxygenation level-dependent signal response after theta burst transcranial magnetic stimulation of the frontal eye field. Neuroscience 151 (3 ), 921–928.18160225
Ivanova I , Salmon DP , Gollan TH , 2013. The multilingual naming test in Alzheimer's disease: clues to the origin of naming impairments. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 19 (3 ), 272–283.23298442
Jacobs J , Kahana MJ , Ekstrom AD , Fried I , 2007. Brain oscillations control timing of single-neuron activity in humans. J Neurosci 27 (14 ), 3839–3844.17409248
Kahn I , Andrews-Hanna JR , Vincent JL , Snyder AZ , Buckner RL , 2008. Distinct cortical anatomy linked to subregions of the medial temporal lobe revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 100 (1 ), 129–139.18385483
Kardos Z , Tóth B , Boha R , File B , Molnár M , 2014. Age-related changes of frontal-midline theta is predictive of efficient memory maintenance. Neuroscience 273 , 152–162.24846615
Kessels RP , de Haan EH , Kappelle LJ , Postma A , 2001. Varieties of human spatial memory: a meta-analysis on the effects of hippocampal lesions. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 35 (3 ), 295–303.11423159
Kim K , Ekstrom AD , Tandon N , 2016. A network approach for modulating memory processes via direct and indirect brain stimulation: Toward a causal approach for the neural basis of memory. Neurobiol Learn Mem 134 Pt A , 162–177.27066987
Kim S , Nilakantan AS , Hermiller MS , Palumbo RT , VanHaerents S , Voss JL , 2018. Selective and coherent activity increases due to stimulation indicate functional distinctions between episodic memory networks. Sci Adv 4 (8 ), eaar2768.30140737
Koen JD , Yonelinas AP , 2014. The effects of healthy aging, amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer's disease on recollection and familiarity: a meta-analytic review. Neuropsychol Rev 24 (3 ), 332–354.25119304
Lea-Carnall CA , Trujillo-Barreto NJ , Montemurro MA , El-Deredy W , Parkes LM , 2017. Evidence for frequency-dependent cortical plasticity in the human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 (33 ), 8871–8876.28765375
Li HJ , Hou XH , Liu HH , Yue CL , Lu GM , Zuo XN , 2015. Putting age-related task activation into large-scale brain networks: A meta-analysis of 114 fMRI studies on healthy aging. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 57 , 156–174.26318367
Lisman JE , Jensen O , 2013. The theta-gamma neural code. Neuron 77 (6 ), 1002–1016.23522038
Lithfous S , Tromp D , Dufour A , Pebayle T , Goutagny R , Després O , 2015. Decreased theta power at encoding and cognitive mapping deficits in elderly individuals during a spatial memory task. Neurobiol Aging 36 (10 ), 2821–2829.26248864
Mesulam MM , 1990. Large-scale neurocognitive networks and distributed processing for attention, language, and memory. Ann Neurol 28 (5 ), 597–613.2260847
Mitchell KJ , Johnson MK , 2009. Source monitoring 15 years later: what have we learned from fMRI about the neural mechanisms of source memory? Psychol Bull 135 (4 ), 638–677.19586165
Moreno-Martínez FJ , Montoro PR , 2012. An ecological alternative to Snodgrass &amp; Vanderwart: 360 high quality colour images with norms for seven psycholinguistic variables. PLoS One 7 (5 ), e37527.22662166
Nasreddine ZS , Phillips NA , Bedirian V , Charbonneau S , Whitehead V , Collin I , Cummings JL , Chertkow H , 2005. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc 53 (4 ), 695–699.15817019
Nilakantan AS , Bridge DJ , Gagnon EP , VanHaerents SA , Voss JL , 2017. Stimulation of the Posterior Cortical-Hippocampal Network Enhances Precision of Memory Recollection. Curr Biol 27 (3 ), 465–470.28111154
Nilakantan AS , Mesulam MM , Weintraub S , Karp EL , VanHaerents S , Voss JL , 2019. Network-targeted stimulation engages neurobehavioral hallmarks of age-related memory decline. Neurology 92 (20 ), e2349–e2354.30996057
Nyberg L , 2017. Functional brain imaging of episodic memory decline in ageing. J Intern Med 281 (1 ), 65–74.27453565
Nyberg L , Lövdén M , Riklund K , Lindenberger U , Bäckman L , 2012. Memory aging and brain maintenance. Trends Cogn Sci 16 (5 ), 292–305.22542563
Nyhus E , Curran T , 2010. Functional role of gamma and theta oscillations in episodic memory. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34 (7 ), 1023–1035.20060015
Oberman L , Edwards D , Eldaief M , Pascual-Leone A , 2011. Safety of theta burst transcranial magnetic stimulation: a systematic review of the literature. J Clin Neurophysiol 28 (1 ), 67–74.21221011
Obrist WD , 1976. Problems of aging, in: Remond A (Ed.) Handbook of electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 275–292.
Old SR , Naveh-Benjamin M , 2008. Differential effects of age on item and associative measures of memory: a meta-analysis. Psychol Aging 23 (1 ), 104–118.18361660
Park DC , Polk TA , Park R , Minear M , Savage A , Smith MR , 2004. Aging reduces neural specialization in ventral visual cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 (35 ), 13091–13095.15322270
Pascual-Leone A , Freitas C , Oberman L , Horvath JC , Halko M , Eldaief M , Bashir S , Vernet M , Shafi M , Westover B , Vahabzadeh-Hagh AM , Rotenberg A , 2011. Characterizing brain cortical plasticity and network dynamics across the age-span in health and disease with TMS-EEG and TMS-fMRI. Brain Topogr 24 (3-4 ), 302–315.21842407
Possin KL , Laluz VR , Alcantar OZ , Miller BL , Kramer JH , 2011. Distinct neuroanatomical substrates and cognitive mechanisms of figure copy performance in Alzheimer's disease and behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. Neuropsychologia 49 (1 ), 43–48.21029744
Provencher D , Hennebelle M , Cunnane SC , Bérubé-Lauzière Y , Whittingstall K , 2016. Cortical Thinning in Healthy Aging Correlates with Larger Motor-Evoked EEG Desynchronization. Front Aging Neurosci 8 , 63.27064767
Ranganath C , Ritchey M , 2012. Two cortical systems for memory-guided behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 13 (10 ), 713–726.22992647
Reichert JL , Kober SE , Witte M , Neuper C , Wood G , 2016. Age-related effects on verbal and visuospatial memory are mediated by theta and alpha II rhythms. Int J Psychophysiol 99 , 67–78.26578354
Riddle J , Scimeca JM , Cellier D , Dhanani S , D'Esposito M , 2020. Causal Evidence for a Role of Theta and Alpha Oscillations in the Control of Working Memory. Curr Biol 30 (9 ), 1748–1754.e1744.32275881
Roberts BM , Clarke A , Addante RJ , Ranganath C , 2018. Entrainment enhances theta oscillations and improves episodic memory. Cogn Neurosci.
Romei V , Thut G , Silvanto J , 2016. Information-Based Approaches of Noninvasive Transcranial Brain Stimulation. Trends Neurosci 39 (11 ), 782–795.27697295
Rossi S , Hallett M , Rossini PM , Pascual-Leone A , Group, S.o.T.C., 2009. Safety, ethical considerations, and application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in clinical practice and research. Clin Neurophysiol 120 (12 ).
Sala-Llonch R , Junqué C , Arenaza-Urquijo EM , Vidal-Piñeiro D , Valls-Pedret C , Palacios EM , Domènech S , Salvà A , Bargalló N , Bartrés-Faz D , 2014. Changes in whole-brain functional networks and memory performance in aging. Neurobiol Aging 35 (10 ), 2193–2202.24814675
Salinas FS , Franklin C , Narayana S , Szabo CA , Fox PT , 2016. Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Educes Frequency-Specific Causal Relationships in the Motor Network. Brain Stimul 9 (3 ), 406–414.26964725
Saverino C , Fatima Z , Sarraf S , Oder A , Strother SC , Grady CL , 2016. The Associative Memory Deficit in Aging Is Related to Reduced Selectivity of Brain Activity during Encoding. J Cogn Neurosci 28 (9 ), 1331–1344.27082043
Scoville WB , Milner B , 1957. Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 20 (1 ), 11–21.13406589
Sederberg PB , Schulze-Bonhage A , Madsen JR , Bromfield EB , McCarthy DC , Brandt A , Tully MS , Kahana MJ , 2007. Hippocampal and neocortical gamma oscillations predict memory formation in humans. Cereb Cortex 17 (5 ), 1190–1196.16831858
Spreng RN , Turner GR , 2019. The Shifting Architecture of Cognition and Brain Function in Older Adulthood. Perspect Psychol Sci 14 (4 ), 523–542.31013206
Spreng RN , Wojtowicz M , Grady CL , 2010. Reliable differences in brain activity between young and old adults: a quantitative meta-analysis across multiple cognitive domains. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34 (8 ), 1178–1194.20109489
Squire LR , Stark CE , Clark RE , 2004. The medial temporal lobe. Annu Rev Neurosci 27 , 279–306.15217334
Squire LR , Wixted JT , Clark RE , 2007. Recognition memory and the medial temporal lobe: a new perspective. Nat Rev Neurosci 8 (11 ), 872–883.17948032
Staudigl T , Hanslmayr S , 2013. Theta oscillations at encoding mediate the context-dependent nature of human episodic memory. Curr Biol 23 (12 ), 1101–1106.23746635
Steel A , Song S , Bageac D , Knutson KM , Keisler A , Saad ZS , Gotts SJ , Wassermann EM , Wilkinson L , 2016. Shifts in connectivity during procedural learning after motor cortex stimulation: A combined transcranial magnetic stimulation/functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Cortex 74 , 134–148.26673946
Strunk J , James T , Arndt J , Duarte A , 2017. Age-related changes in neural oscillations supporting context memory retrieval. Cortex 91 , 40–55.28237686
Tambini A , D'Esposito M , 2020. Causal Contribution of Awake Post-encoding Processes to Episodic Memory Consolidation. Curr Biol 30 (18 ), 3533–3543.e3537.32735812
Tambini A , Nee DE , D'Esposito M , 2018. Hippocampal-targeted Theta-burst Stimulation Enhances Associative Memory Formation. J Cogn Neurosci 30 (10 ), 1452–1472.29916791
Tarantini S , Tran CHT , Gordon GR , Ungvari Z , Csiszar A , 2017. Impaired neurovascular coupling in aging and Alzheimer's disease: Contribution of astrocyte dysfunction and endothelial impairment to cognitive decline. Exp Gerontol 94 , 52–58.27845201
Thut G , Schyns PG , Gross J , 2011a. Entrainment of perceptually relevant brain oscillations by non-invasive rhythmic stimulation of the human brain. Front Psychol 2 , 170.21811485
Thut G , Veniero D , Romei V , Miniussi C , Schyns P , Gross J , 2011b. Rhythmic TMS causes local entrainment of natural oscillatory signatures. Curr Biol 21 (14 ), 1176–1185.21723129
Voytek B , Kramer MA , Case J , Lepage KQ , Tempesta ZR , Knight RT , Gazzaley A , 2015. Age-Related Changes in 1/f Neural Electrophysiological Noise. J Neurosci 35 (38 ), 13257–13265.26400953
Wang JX , Rogers LM , Gross EZ , Ryals AJ , Dokucu ME , Brandstatt KL , Hermiller MS , Voss JL , 2014. Targeted enhancement of cortical-hippocampal brain networks and associative memory. Science 345 (6200 ), 1054–1057.25170153
Wang L , Li Y , Metzak P , He Y , Woodward TS , 2010. Age-related changes in topological patterns of large-scale brain functional networks during memory encoding and recognition. Neuroimage 50 (3 ), 862–872.20093190
Warren KN , Hermiller MS , Nilakantan AS , O'Neil J , Palumbo RT , Voss JL , 2018. Increased fMRI activity correlations in autobiographical memory versus resting states. Hum Brain Mapp 39 (11 ), 4312–4321.29956403
Warren KN , Hermiller MS , Nilakantan AS , Voss JL , 2019. Stimulating the hippocampal posteriormedial network enhances task-dependent connectivity and memory. Elife 8 .
Watson PD , Voss JL , Warren DE , Tranel D , Cohen NJ , 2013. Spatial reconstruction by patients with hippocampal damage is dominated by relational memory errors. Hippocampus 23 (7 ), 570–580.23418096
Wechsler D , 1987. Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised Manual. The Psychological Corporation, San Antonio, Texas.
Weinrich CA , Brittain JS , Nowak M , Salimi-Khorshidi R , Brown P , Stagg CJ , 2017. Modulation of Long-Range Connectivity Patterns via Frequency-Specific Stimulation of Human Cortex. Curr Biol 27 (19 ), 3061–3068 e3063.28966091
Weintraub S , Besser L , Dodge HH , Teylan M , Ferris S , Goldstein FC , Giordani B , Kramer J , Loewenstein D , Marson D , Mungas D , Salmon D , Welsh-Bohmer K , Zhou XH , Shirk SD , Atri A , Kukull WA , Phelps C , Morris JC , 2018. Version 3 of the Alzheimer Disease Centers' Neuropsychological Test Battery in the Uniform Data Set (UDS). Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 32 (1 ), 10–17.29240561
Wischnewski M , Schutter DJ , 2015. Efficacy and Time Course of Theta Burst Stimulation in Healthy Humans. Brain Stimul 8 (4 ), 685–692.26014214
Xia M , Wang J , He Y , 2013. BrainNet Viewer: a network visualization tool for human brain connectomics. PLoS One 8 (7 ), e68910.23861951
Yassa MA , Stark CE , 2011. Pattern separation in the hippocampus. Trends Neurosci 34 (10 ), 515–525.21788086
Ystad M , Eichele T , Lundervold AJ , Lundervold A , 2010. Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study. Neuroimage 52 (1 ), 379–388.20350608
Yue X , Vessel EA , Biederman I , 2007. The neural basis of scene preferences. Neuroreport 18 (6 ), 525–529.17413651
Zaletel M , Strucl M , Pretnar-Oblak J , Zvan B , 2005. Age-related changes in the relationship between visual evoked potentials and visually evoked cerebral blood flow velocity response. Funct Neurol 20 (3 ), 115–120.16324234
Zanto TP , Toy B , Gazzaley A , 2010. Delays in neural processing during working memory encoding in normal aging. Neuropsychologia 48 (1 ), 13–25.19666036
Zhang H , Gertel VH , Cosgrove AL , Diaz MT , 2020. Age-related differences in resting-state and task-based network characteristics and cognition: a lifespan sample. Neurobiol Aging.
Zhang W , Luck SJ , 2008. Discrete fixed-resolution representations in visual working memory. Nature 453 (7192 ), 233–235.18385672
Zonneveld HI , Pruim RH , Bos D , Vrooman HA , Muetzel RL , Hofman A , Rombouts SA , van der Lugt A , Niessen WJ , Ikram MA , Vernooij MW , 2019. Patterns of functional connectivity in an aging population: The Rotterdam Study. Neuroimage 189 , 432–444.30659958
