LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9809671
21092
Nat Neurosci
Nat Neurosci
Nature neuroscience
1097-6256
1546-1726

35115730
8825283
10.1038/s41593-021-01006-0
NIHMS1765375
Article
Answer ALS, A Large-Scale Resource for Sporadic and Familial ALS Combining Clinical and Multi-Omics Data from Induced Pluripotent Cell Lines
Baxi Emily G. 12
Thompson Terri 3
Li Jonathan 5
Kaye Julia A. 4
Lim Ryan G. 10
Wu Jie 11
Ramamoorthy Divya 5
Lima Leandro 4
Vaibhav Vineet 9
Matlock Andrea 9
Frank Aaron 6
Coyne Alyssa N. 12
Landin Barry 14
Ornelas Loren 6
Mosmiller Elizabeth 2
Thrower Sara 8
Michelle Farr S. 15
Panther Lindsey 6
Gomez Emilda 6
Galvez Erick 6
Perez Daniel 6
Meepe Imara 6
Lei Susan 6
Mandefro Berhan 7
Trost Hannah 7
Pinedo Louis 6
Banuelos Maria G. 7
Liu Chunyan 6
Moran Ruby 6
Garcia Veronica 7
Workman Michael 7
Ho Richie 7
Wyman Stacia 4
Roggenbuck Jennifer 16
Harms Matthew B. 17
Stocksdale Jennifer 13
Miramontes Ricardo 10
Wang Keona 13
Venkatraman Vidya 9
Holewenski Ronald 9
Sundararaman Niveda 9
Pandey Rakhi 9
Manalo Danica-Mae 9
Donde Aneesh 5
Huynh Nhan 5
Adam Miriam 5
Wassie Brook T. 5
Vertudes Edward 4
Amirani Naufa 4
Raja Krishna 4
Thomas Reuben 4
Hayes Lindsey 2
Lenail Alex 5
Cerezo Aianna 2
Luppino Sarah 8
Farrar Alanna 8
Pothier Lindsay 8
Prina Carolyn 17
Morgan Todd 18
Jamil Arish 19
Heintzman Sarah 17
Jockel-Balsarotti Jennifer 20
Karanja Elizabeth 20
Markway Jesse 20
McCallum Molly 20
Joslin Ben 21
Alibazoglu Deniz 21
Kolb Stephen 17
Ajroud-Driss Senda 21
Baloh Robert 7
Heitzman Daragh 18
Miller Tim 20
Glass Jonathan D. 19
Patel-Murray Natasha Leanna 5
Yu Hong 8
Sinani Ervin 8
Vigneswaran Prasha 8
Sherman Alexander V. 8
Ahmad Omar 2
Roy Promit 2
Beavers Jay C. 23
Zeiler Steven 2
Krakauer John W. 2
Agurto Carla 14
Cecchi Guillermo 14
Bellard Mary 22
Raghav Yogindra 5
Sachs Karen 5
Ehrenberger Tobias 5
Bruce Elizabeth 22
Cudkowicz Merit E. 8
Maragakis Nicholas 2
Norel Raquel 14
Van Eyk Jennifer E. 9
Finkbeiner Steven 4
Berry James 8
Sareen Dhruv 67
Thompson Leslie M. 10111213
Fraenkel Ernest 5
Svendsen Clive N. 67
Rothstein Jeffrey D. 12*
1 Brain Science Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore MD 21205
2 Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore MD 21205
3 On Point Scientific Inc. San Diego, CA 92130
4 Center for Systems and Therapeutics and the Taube/Koret Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Gladstone Institutes and the Departments of Neurology and Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158
5 Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
6 Cedars-Sinai Biomanufacturing Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048
7 The Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048
8 Department of Neurology, Healey Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02114
9 Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, The Barbra Streisand Heart Center, The Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048
10 UCI MIND, Irvine, CA 92697
11 Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697
12 Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697
13 Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior and Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Center, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697
14 Computational Biology Center, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
15 Technome LLC. Herndon, VA 20171
16 Zofia Consulting, Reston, VA 20190
17 Department of Neurology and Genetics, Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210
18 Texas Neurology, Dallas, TX 75214
19 Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30329
20 Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130
21 Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Chicago IL 60611
22 Microsoft University Relations, Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052
23 Microsoft Research, Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052
* Corresponding Author: Correspondance to: Jeffrey D. Rothstein MD, PhD, jrothstein@jhmi.edu
23 1 2022
2 2022
03 2 2022
03 8 2022
25 2 226237
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Answer ALS is a biological and clinical resource of patient derived iPS cell lines, multi-omic data derived from iPS neurons and longitudinal clinical and smartphone data from over 1000 ALS patients. This resource provides population level biological and clinical data that may be employed to identify clinical-molecular-biochemical subtypes of ALS. A unique smartphone-based system was employed to collect deep clinical data including fine motor activity, speech, breathing and linguistics/cognition. iPS spinal neurons were blood-derived from each patient and these cells underwent multi-omic analytics including whole genome sequencing, RNA transcriptomics, ATAC-Seq and proteomics. The intent of this data is for the generation of integrated clinical and biological signatures using bioinformatics, statistics, and computational biology to establish patterns that may lead to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of disease including subgroup identification. A web portal for open-source sharing of all data was developed for widespread community-based data analytics.


pmcIntroduction

Over the last several decades, tremendous progress in the optimization of therapies for various medical conditions, such as cancer, has been realized. Many factors underlie this therapeutic success, including optimization of clinical trial design, novel pathway-specific pharmaceuticals, and the coordination of participant recruitment efforts across clinics. Perhaps one of the most powerful and fundamental reasons for the success of some cancer therapies is the ability to sample diseased tissues and thereby distinguish the biological and molecular events responsible for individual diseases or disease subgroups within a disease cluster. 1 Thus, skin, breast or prostate biopsies have been important starting points for the investigation of various types of melanomas and breast or prostate cancers. Neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS, Alzheimer’s, and Huntington’s disease, however, have not seen such advances. Clinical trials in human subjects, often based on findings from non-human model systems, have repeatedly proven disappointing.2, 3 Although there are likely many reasons for such failures (e.g. poor pharmakokinetics, wrong biological pathway, lack of target engagement), a critical reason is the inability to identify disease pathways in patient tissues and to segment patients for clinical trials according to these pathways. Because of the high risk of disability, brain and spinal cord biopsies for tissue analysis are not feasible in neurodegenerative diseases and therefore, unlike the biopsy of other organs and tissues, obtaining neural tissue during the disease course is a significant hurdle to effective therapeutic development.

An alternative is to use stem cell technology and infer disease pathways from cell lines derived from the patients’ own blood. Evidence for this approach is begining to emerge. Early work employing induced pluripotent stem (iPS) spinal neurons from C9orf72 ALS/FTD patients led the way to the development of the first antisense based gene therapy for this common familial form of ALS (fALS), with an international clinical trial already underway (clinicaltrials.gov: NCT03626012).4 5 But for the majority of ALS patients, who have sporadic disease (sALS), these discoveries have yet to translate into meaningful therapies. A major barrier has been the lack of a predictive preclinical human model for sALS. However, with advances in iPS cell technology and the unprecedented data and specimen collection efforts of Answer ALS, we can now take an iPS cell-based approach to unraveling mechanisms that may cause or contribute to the heterogeneous clinical spectra of sALS, such as pattern and speed of spread and certain non-motor manifestations. Notably, multiple gene mutations are already known to cause fALS, and represent quite diverse pathways: RNA metabolism, nuclear transport, protein aggregation, axonal trafficking, glial dysfunction, etc.6 Curiously, the variability in clinical features is nearly as great when comparing patients with any single mutated gene as it is when comparing across genes or to sALS. Little is known about the derangements in specific biological pathway(s) driving sALS or whether there are ALS subgroups defined by specific biological derangements. Knowledge of these biological subgroups may be critically important and the success of disease modifying therapies may depend on treating the right “subgroup” with the proper pathway-targeting drug.

The Answer ALS program (AALS) was conceived as program to generate iPS cell lines from a large number of sALS patients and applying well-established molecular, biochemical, and imaging techniques to understand the heterogeneity of sALS in these patient derived spinal neurons, to serve as a “biopsy-like” equivalent. After ensuring that results were reproducible, we assembled comprehensive biological datasets from individual subject iPS cell lines and combined them to the longitdudinal clinical data. In contrast to smaller previous iPS cell experiments, studies of iPS cells from a large population, like AALS, provide the first opportunity to explore biologically relevant subgroups of sALS. This resource program was designed with the core goals of providing large clinical and biological datasets in an open source-like application that affords researchers the proper tools to identify biological subgroups and an extensive collection of IPS cell lines with which to test ALS therapies and hypotheses about ALS pathogenesis.

Results

Clinical Demographics and Clinical Data Generation

Population Demographics.

The enrolled participant population for the Answer ALS program (Figure 1a, Extended Data Figure 1, Supplementary Information, Supplementary Tables 1–5) had clinical characteristics comparable to past large sALS population demographics, with a slightly higher number of male than female participants, site of disease onset predominantly limb rather than bulbar, and a mean age of disease onset of approximately 57. The mean delay in clinical diagnosis for ALS patients included in the study was 14.8 months. A higher percentage of patients with rapid progression had bulbar onset disease. There was a wide range of disease progression rates over the time period of observation (Figure 1,b,c) with an average follow-up duration of 12.5 months and an average rate of decline of 0.77 points per month (Figure 1b,c). The smaller population of fALS patients in the resource had typical representations of the common gene mutations including C9orf72 and SOD1 (Table 1), with a small subset of C9orf72 and non C9orf72 ALS patients developing cognitive decline during the study (see https://dataportal.AnswerALS.org). A small number of individuals were ALS mutation carriers (Asymptomatic ALS) without overt neurological disease (Table 1). Non-ALS MND included patients with predominantly upper motor neuron disease and not formally categorized as ALS (e.g. primary lateral sclerosis) and their demographic information is included in Supplementary Table 4. The healthy control subject population consisted of age matched participants without ALS or a family history of ALS.

App-Based Voice Recordings – Motor and Speech Analyses.

A core tool to gather more comprehensive longitudinal clinical data, ultimately to integrate with the biological data sets, was the development of a novel smartphone app, designed to inform elements of motor activity, speech, breathing, voice and cognition (see Supplemental Information) while patients were at home. Given the nature of a this progressively disabling disorder, the reliability of utilization is an important variable. Compliance for using the smartphone app was analyzed over 18 months from the beginning of the app rollout to a subset of 80 study subjects. Surprisingly, only a modest decrease in compliance was observed with increased duration of use (see Figure 2a).

App data accurately predicted clinical progression.

From speech recordings, we extracted linguistic features to evaluate word diversity and complexity of thought such as semantic similarity, dispersion, and frequency, as recently detailed7. Features derived from the voice tasks (Single-Breath Count, Read Aloud Passage, and Free Speech; Extended Data Figure 2) each correlated highly with the bulbar subdomain of the ALSFRS-R (Pearson R = 0.8; slope = 1.14, Pearson R = 0.89; slope = 0.98; Pearson R = 0.71; slope = 1.12 respectively). Features from the finger tracing showed modest individual correlations with the ALSFRS-R total score (Figure 2b, Extended Data Figure 2). Importantly, the combination of features from all of these tasks correlated very highly with the ALSFRS-R total score (Pearson R = 0.89; slope = 1.16; Figure 2c).

Features obtained from the single breath counting task correlated well with vital capacity (R=0.63) and strongly suggest that that voice analysis could be a proxy for vital capacity measurements in a clinic. Similar results by others employing sustained phonation are in agreement with our new observations.8

Importantly, semantic analysis of the picture description task was highly correlated with the ALS-CBS (R=0.72) and less correlated with the CNS lability scale (R=0.45). These studies then also suggest that at home app analytics can be useful for longitudinal cognition analytics.

This task also predicted well the ALSFRS-R speech sub score (see Figure 2b); however, models using features from the reading task outperformed the counting and picture description tasks. A more detailed account of these results is reported elsewhere7.

These results demonstrate that the modules implemented to assess hand function and speech may be useful to quantify ALS function when patients are not in clinic and can substantially aid in the acquisition of progressively declining clinical indices. Furthermore, the picture description task may be useful to evaluate cognitive function in ALS. The potential to record voice and store it encrypted in the cloud could provide a powerful clinical tool to assess change over time that could be used clinically and in ALS trials.

Induced Pluripotent Cell Line Production

A core design and strength of the program is the set of IPS cell lines from a large population of more than 1000 ALS patients and control subjects, all deeply phenotyped, provided to the research community. To date, more than 800 of the iPS lines have been generated and are available through the web portal. Out of the ~800 unique samples, only 18 lines (~3%) failed reprogramming. Because there are multiple different protocols to generate iPS and to diffrentiate them into motor neurons, it was essetial that the uniformity of the generated cultures be evaluated and thereby establish the reliability of this new and renewable biological resource. To address this central issue, we evaluated the iPS derived spinal neurons from a large cohort of 217 control and ALS iPS lines. Specifically we examined expression of 5 different cell identifying markers for neurons and glia, including cell markers NKX6.1, SMI32, ISL1, TUJ1 and S100beta. This differentiation protocol (Extended Data Figure 3) generates a mixed population of neurons consisting of ~75% (+/-8%) βIII-tubulin (TuJ1) and ~70% (+/-10%) NF-H positive cells, ~19% (+/-6%) Islet-1 and ~34% (+/-9%) Nkx6.1 positive spinal motor neuron, and ~18% (+/13%) S100B positive progenitors 32 days after the onset of differentiation (See Figure 3; Supplementary Table 6). As shown in Figure 3, there was great uniformity in the cellular composition of the cultures for this large selection of the human lines. This was important, as past work or methods can lead to variable cultures, making the interpretation of downstream analysis complicated. Notably the cellular composition was not substantially different between the ALS and control iPS derived neurons. As expected these cultures presented a mixture of motor neurons, neurons, and to a lesser extent glia. This was important, as ALS is not simply a motor neuron disease, but is a disorder of multiple different cell types, as reflected in these uniformly generated cultures.

Generation of Multi-Omics data

Genomics

As an appreciation of the overall diversity of the program’s ALS and control population, especially valuable for future global analytics, we evaluated the AALS cohort using New York Genome Center’s (NYGC) ancestry pipeline9. The majority of participants were Caucasian and had European descent (91.45%), the remainder had ancestry consistent with the Americas (1.69%), Africa (4.94%), East Asia (1.33%) and South Asia (0.6%) (Figure 4). On average, each sample harbored a total of ~ 4.1 million variants and ~ 9,800 protein-altering variants, including SNPs, frameshift and non-frameshift deletions and insertions, and protein–truncating variants (Table 2 and Figure 4a,b,c,d) similar to previous reports.51 Notably, the samples with African descent had a higher number of variants than other ethnic populations, as expected (Figure 4b).10

We used principal component analysis (PCA)11, 12 to visualize the ancestry background of the AALS cohort and a set of 2504 samples from the 1000 genomes project with well-defined ancestry. We find that the majority of the samples clustered with the NYGCs European samples, although some were closer to the African group and a few clustered with the Asian group (Figure 4e), corroborating the NYGC ancestry results and likjly consistant with the local recruiting clinics geographic locations (See Extended Data Figure 1).

Variants in ALS genes

As the majority of the ALS lines were derived from sALS patients, an analysis of the genomic variants is important, especially as future opportunites for researchers to correlate the observed variants along with the deep clinical and mutiomics data; as well as the future use of the living cell lines. Within the 830 samples, we observed 440 exonic variants in the 33-ALS genes (see Supplementary Information) that were less than 1% frequent (Figure 4c,d; Table 2 and Supplementary Table 7). Both controls and ALS cases averaged 1.5 rare ALS variant per individual within the 33-ALS genes. 79% of these were single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 13% uncharacterized, ~1% splicing, ~1% non-frameshift deletion, 1% frameshift deletion, 1% frameshift insertion, 2% frameshift insertion, 2% non-frameshift insertion, 1% stop-gain (Supplementary Table 7).

As future biological pathways in ALS subgroups could reflect the expression of genetic variants of established ALS genes, we first evaluated how many pathogenic or likely pathogenic varients existed as reported in ClinVar (CP) in the 33-ALS genes. We found that 12% of ALS cases harbored a CP variant within one of the 33-ALS gene (Supplementary Tables 7,8). All of these CP variants were rare (&lt;1% frequency within the population) except 2 found within the OPTN gene. For example, we observed 5 SOD1 CP variants (within 8 ALS patients), 2 TDP43 CP variants (within 2 ALS patients), and 1 CP FUS variant in an ALS patient (Supplementary Tables 7,8). CP variants were also detected in individuals that did not show signs of ALS at the time of the clinic visit, and there were 11 CP variants within control samples (within ALS2, SETX, OPTN and PFN1), 4 CP variants in the Pre-fALS cohort (within FIG4, OPTN and CHCHD10), 3 CP variants within individuals with other motor neuron disease (OMND) (within SQSTM1, OPTN, and PFN1) and 3 CP variants in uncharacterized individuals (within SQSTM1 and SETX) (Supplementary Table 8). In summary, rare CP variants were observed in 3.11% (22 total) in ALS cases and 1% in controls (1 out of 92 samples). We also investigated the number of P/LP variants called by Intervar (IP), in in silico prediction (ISD variants) and a novel combination of ACMG gene criteria as well as the in silico prediction and family-based segregation data, a list of high-confidence causal variants in 11 genes—ALS2, CCNF, CHCHD10, FUS, OPTN, PFN1, SOD1, TARDBP, TBK1, UBQLN2, VAPB, and VCP—which have been curated and designated as the HP variants. These are reported in Supplementary Tables 7–11. We investigated CP, IP and ISD variants found across all genes in 830 samples and these are listed in Supplementary Tables 12, 13 and 14.

Expansions in C9orf72 and ATXN2

Genomic expansions of both C9orf72 and ataxin 2, are associated with both fALS and sALS. The availablity of large numbers of iPS cell lines and the matched multi-omics data from this phenotypically variable genetic subgroup provides a unique future opportunity to investigate these genes that alterantivley lead to ALS and/or FTD. Using Expansion Hunter to identify repeat expansions within WGS data, we found 601 expanded regions in the 830 samples.13 In total, 41 ALS patients and 4 Pre-fALS subjects in the Answer ALS study population harbored hexanucleotide expansions in C9orf72 that were greater than 26 repeats (Figure 4f and Supplementary Table 15. We also observed 35 ALS patients, 4 controls, and one uncharacterized individual harboring CAG triplet repeat expansions in ATXN2 greater than 26 repeats (Figure 4g and Supplementary Table 16). All ALS patients with greater than 26 ATXN2 repeats had clinical phenotype characteristics of motor neuron disease and no other reported neurological abnormalities. Notably in this population of patients and cell lines, for carriers of expansions in both ATXN2 and C9orf72 simultaneously, we found no correlation between age of ALS onset and expansion size (Figure 4h,i and Supplementary Tables 15). However, future mutiomic studies of the patient iPS spinal neurons may reveal different biological pathways/properties when both mutations are co-expressed in humans.

ACMG Genes

Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 59 genes are currently considered medically actionable by the ACMG, due to the potential for medical intervention to modify morbidity and mortality in carriers of such variants14. Within the 830 samples, we identified 73 C-PLP variants within 32 ACMG genes (Supplementary Table 17). 50.4% of individuals did not harbor a C-PLP variant in an ACMG gene, 41.2% harbored 1, 7.6% harbored 2, and 0.84% harbored 3 C-PLP variants. 66 of these variants found within 110 individuals were rare (&lt;1%) (Supplementary Table 17). We also found 42 I-PLP variants within ACMG genes within 51 individuals, all of which were rare (Supplementary Table 18). Participants were offered to receive the results of these medically actionable genes through the a return of genetic results substudy (see Extended Methods).

Transcriptomics

For each of the omics assays, vials from an identical pool of differentiated motor neurons were processed to ensure comparability, including BDCs and BTCs from the control 2AE8 line as detailed in the Extended Methods. Overall the analytics revealed minimal to no technical confounders and low batch effects between differentiation and no clear batch-related abnormalies with regards to disease status (Extended Data Figure 4a,d and Extended Data Figure 5a).

Annotation of transcripts detected in the samples revealed various RNA species that were captured in the deep sequencing, with protein coding RNAs accounting for the majority (~82%) of all RNAs, followed by lincRNA (~13%) (Figure 5a). A low proportion of reads mapped to small RNAs and a very minimal portion to rRNAs, which were depleted during library preparation and act as a technical quality assessment. The use of total RNAseq and deeper sequencing allows for differential alternative splicing analyses as well as circular RNA and cryptic exon analyses (Figure 5e,f). As an example of RNAseq analyses, we assessed the ability of our cell model and RNAseq methods to capture common alternative splicing types and found significant enrichment in skipped exon (SE, 52%) and retention of introns(RI, 35%) when comparing male C9 samples to male controls (Figure 5e). RNA binding protein (RBP) motif enrichment analysis of the significant RI events (cryptic exons) predicts that the binding of HNRNPA2B1 (Figure 5f) is upregulated in ALS samples. These findings are consistent with previous reports in human post-mortem brain tissue.15

To assess pathway activities, we used GSVA (Gene Set Variation Analysis) to score samples against canonical KEGG and Biocarta pathways from MsigDB database and identified pathways that are differentially regulated between subjects with bulbar and limb onset (Figure 5g). Using these pathway activities scores, we also identified pathways that are positively or negatively correlated with patient ALSFRS progression slope (Figure 5h).

These data indicate that both gene expression differences and RNA splicing differences could be captured by our differentiated iPS cell model. Notably, these data can be explored for additional novel alterations in ALS and potential associations with ALS subtype and clinical data, and with other omics data that are being captured from these samples.

Epigenomics

Overall the quality of ATAC-Seq data was high, with very good reproducibility of batch differentiation controls and batch technical controls, as assessed by Simple Error Rate Estimate (SERE) (Figure 5b, Extended Data Figure 4b,e; Extended Data Figure 5b and Supplemental Information). Hypersensitive sites were distributed across the genome in the expected regions (Extended Data Figure 6a,b) especially in previously annotated regulatory regions, with very few reads in ENCODE blacklist regions. Although, overall, samples did not cluster by genotype or disease status, many loci did show strong differences between patients and controls (Extended Data Figure 6c). As an example of a potential application of the epigenomic data, we identified potential transcriptional regulators through analysis of sequence motifs in the open chromatin (Extended Data Figure 6d). Consistent with the expected cell composition, we observed an overrepresentation of transcription factors implicated in neuronal differentiation, such as Pdx1, Cux2, and the Lhx family (Extended Data Figure 6d).

Proteomics

In total, greater than 25,000 peptides corresponding to more than 3,600 proteins per sample were quantified. As detailed in the Supplementary Information, for proteomic analytics, there was minimal drift between the batches (Figure 5c, Extended Data Figure 4c,f and Extended Data Figure 6c). Although patient and control iPS neuron clusters are interspersed, indicating their overall similarity, these iPS neuron models have significant individual protein level differences and we selected four representative proteins ECH1 and PCKGM (Figure 5d) that show significant (p≤0.05) differences, based on what is seen in the differential analysis-based evidence (Figure 5d).

Longitudinal single-cell imaging and analysis

Validation of the identification of pathological phenotypes was achieved with longitudinal single cell robotic imaging of mutant SOD1 patient derived iPS spinal neurons as described previously (Figure 6a).16 As shown in Figure 6b, mutant SOD1 neurons exhibited an enhanced cell death profile, similar to that reported previously with spinal motor neurons.17 Future data will be available on similar analytics of cohorts of the sporadic iPS derived neurons from the Answer ALS data set.

Data Dissemination: Data Portal

The Answer ALS Data Portal (http://data.answerals.org/; Supplementary Table 3) was designed to provide information about the various types of biological and clincial data generated by the AALS partners and to allow easy visualization/access to the metadata, data along with links to obtain biofluids and iPS cell lines. Additional details regarding the portal can be found in Extended Methods. In the future, the portal will also host online data analytics and visualization tools.

Discussion

The pathogenesis of sALS remains a mystery and few comprehensive data collections, on a population scale, exist to truly inf orm researchers as to the biological underpinnings of the disease or the possibility of disparate biological subgroups. To date, clinical studies alone have not yielded reliable data to suggest a common pathway, or, more importantly, a means to target relevant biological subgroups. The identification of biological subgroups has been impactful in various cancers, where the ability to actually sample disease tissues from skin, liver, prostate, or pancreas biopsies, coupled with clinical characteristics of tumor type, has led to marked improvements in therapeutic approaches, drug treatments and decisions regarding disease management.18, 19

The core goal of Answer ALS is to provide a comprehensive set of tools including deeply phenotyped longitudinal clinical data and biological tools such as iPS cell lines and a multi-omics platform consisting whole genome, iPS derived spinal neuron-enriched proteome, transcriptome, and epigenome, in order to uncover underlying biological subgroups. Previous studies have demonstrated the ability to generate small populations of fALS or sALS iPS derived motor neurons and glia and as well as relatively limited multi-omics data. However, none approximate true population based tools, with reproducible quality assurance protocols, necessary to accurately assess disease pathways or identify population subgroups combining longitudinal clinical, genomic and living muti-omics data.4, 20 21

The Answer ALS reagent collection includes individual iPS cell lines from approximately 800 sALS and control participants (soon to reach &gt;1200), the iPS cell-derived spinal neurons from each participant, their longitudinal clinical data (collected over one year), sequentially amassed fluid biospecimens (blood and CSF), and the early multi-omics data generated from each participant’s blood (whole genome) as well as from their “spinal cord biopsy” equivalent iPS derived neuronal cell lines. The collection also includes autopsy samples and pathology data from a subset of participants. The autopsy pathology data and CNS specimens will eventually be available through the Answer ALS web portal and coupled with the iPS cell lines from these participants.

A reasonable question is the utlity of patient derived iPS cells to predict a the disease causing pathways in an adult onset disease. Can reprogrammed human spinal neurons reflect adult onset disease pathogenic cascades? Already multiple studies have documented that human iPS cell lines, either in 2D cultures or 3D organoids, can reproduce pathogy seen in humans.22 23 One advantage of the iPS platform is the ablity to dynamically detect early pathogenic events, and even serially occuring events. In fact, early use of the AALS iPS cell lines has already provided evidence that the iPS collection can provide novel insights into new pathways (nuclear pore and nuclear transport defects) in ALS pathophysiology, generate new therapies, and validate gene therapy based the approaches.24 25 4 26

This population and its dataset were never envisioned to enable the identification of new ALS genes. A cohort of ~1000 ALS participants does not amount to a large enough database for new gene identifications. However, sharing the whole genome sequences from this data set has aided in the identification of a new ALS gene, Kif5A27. In fact, the estimated 6+ billion data points generated from each participant, combining the longitudinal clinical demographic and observational data, the longitudinal smartphone app data (motor activity, speech, breathing, cognition), and the aggregate multi-omics data (whole genome, epigenome, proteome, transcriptome), represent an exceptionally large set of data per participant. Furthermore, the core multi-omics data set reflect the human cells affected in individual ALS paricipants, spinal neurons, and act as an organ- or tissue-specific biopsy. When this combined longitudinal and multidimensional clinical and biological data is analyzed by integrative methods, such as artifical intelligence, clinical and biological subgroups might emerge, potentially assigning a unique risk or modifier gene or a unique molecular pathway to a specific patient subgroup, which might one day enable patient-specific interventions, or serve as drug target engagement marker or subgroup biomarker.

How many individual sporadic patient lines would be required to detect one of more pathophysiologically relevant subgroups is simply not known. Prior work in fALS, suggests that at least 10–15 C9orf72 iPS cell lines is sufficient to robustly detect defects in nuclear pore biology. However sALS may have multiple risk pathways associated with gene variants (e.g. ataxin 2 expansion, TMEM 106b)28 29 or environmental stressors and as such, may require more patient cell lines and multiomics data to allow detection of robust pathway readouts. A recent study used targeted imaging based strategies to detect and evaluate an ESCRT-III-based pathway and therapy in &gt;40 different sporadic and C9orf72 ALS and control iPS cell lines, approached the size of a small clinical trial26. However, it remains unclear how may iPS lines are needed to robustly and reproducibly detect pathophysiological alterations from human omics analyses.

The other research advantage to such a dataset and living tools is the immediate ability to test for potentially ALS-relevant pathogenic pathways using the participant’s own iPS cells/iPS cell-derived spinal neurons to test drugs for candidate pathogenic pathways and, importantly, to develop CNS biomarkers from the iPS cells and validate drug target engagement. Libraries of iPS cell lines derived from participants with neurological diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia have been growing in the last several years and represent valuable tool to truly examine specific disease pathways.30, 31 Most of these iPS cell libraries are relatively small, including our original library of 22 fALS iPS cell lines20, with a few selected lines for each disease mutation and when appropriate, isogenic controls. None are representative of the far more common sporadic forms of the disease. Furthermore, none provide deep longitudinal clinical and extensive multi-omics data.

Aside from the biological data generated from the program, the results from the AALS app demonstrate that the modules implemented to assess limb-function, speech and cognition may be useful to identify early bulbar and cognitive symptoms in ALS and track disease progression over time. Specifically, limb-function tests reveal that it can be useful to infer ALSFRS-R scores. Importantly, we observed that by combining the features from multiple domains, motor tests and all the voice tests highly correlated with the ALS functional rating scale, now commonly used as primary or secondary outcome measure in ALS clinical trials, thereby providing a reliable tool for at-home longitudinal monitoring of patient progression. Furthermore, the single-breath testing also correlated well with in-clinic forced vital capacity, often a prominent secondary outcome measure in clinical trials. This test typically requires in-clinic testing, which limits enrollment or followup data collection in clinical trials. The application of this app test alone could greatly enhance patient participation in nationwide clinical trials—especially in those areas where travel to testing center is challenging. Overall, we observe that quantitative motor speech analysis holds tremendous promise in both identifying changes not only limited to ALS rating scales but also to others such as cognitive assessment. The potential to record voice, and store it encrypted in the cloud could provide a powerful clinical tool to assess change over time for use clinically and in ALS trials. Overall, the app data, coupled with in-clinic data, provide deep and longitudinal clinical data sets available for multi-domain biological and clinical correlations for future users.

The overall clinical demographics and population genomics in the Answer ALS program accurately reflect the ALS subject population described in prior studies. This observation validates the Answer ALS iPS cell lines and multi-omics platform as a database that others can employ to generate and test biological hypotheses.

Importantly, all the clinical data, multi-omic data and iPS cell lines were generated to be freely accessible to all researchers, academic and commercial, free of restrictions other than standard HIPAA compliance rules. A web portal for downloading filtered datasets, e.g. proteome, whole genome, etc. has been set up with minimal but appropriate requirements for data access (Supplementary Table 3). The ALS and control iPS cell lines, matched to datasets, are also fully available for research studies, for a minimal fee (to cover the replacement of the depleted stock of cells). Biospecimens (e.g. CSF, plasma) longitudinally collected from patients are also available (Supplementary Table 3). Future web-based links will include access to autopsied CNS tissues from patients matched to the iPS cell lines and iPS based multiomics.

Methods

Program Process

Overall Design (Extended Data Figure 1).

The overall AALS program, from clinical enrollment to smartphone app data collection, iPS cell line generation, biological data generation, and data storage is outlined in Extended Data Figure 1 (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02574390). Methods for each element of the program are provided below and in Supplemental Methods.

Enrollment, Clinical Characterization and Sample Collection

The clinical portions of AALS were coordinated through Johns Hopkins University and Massachusetts General Hospital. The eight enrolling neuromuscular clinics were distributed across the USA and included Johns Hopkins University, Massachusetts General Hospital, Ohio State, Emory University, Washington University, Northwestern University, Cedars Sinai and Texas Neurology (Supplementary Table 1 and Extended Data Figure 1). The study was approved by local institutional review boards, and all participants provided written informed consent. Consent was uniform across all sites and included agreement to share data broadly for medical research (also see Data Access in Supplemental Information). Subjects with sALS, fALS and related motor neuron diseases (referred to as non-ALS motor neuron disease), including those with primary lateral sclerosis, progressive bulbar palsy, and progressive muscular atrophy, along with asymptomatic ALS gene mutation carriers were enrolled in AALS. Age matched control participants without ALS or a family history of ALS were also enrolled. Additional enrollment details are provided in Supplemental Information.

Participants were monitored every three months for a year and when possible, the ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) was conducted by telephone every three months for another year thereafter. Baseline descriptors included: demographics and vital signs, genetic and family history of MND, general medical history, CNS -lability and a brief focused history of environmental exposures. Concomitant medications, and past medical history were collected at enrollment and updated throughout study participation. Measures of ALS progression included: deep tendon reflexes (DTR), Ashworth Spasticity Scale, Hand Held Dynamometry (HHD), ALS Functional Rating Scale – Revised (ALSFRS-R), and pulmonary slow vital capacity (SVC). (See Supplementary Tables 2,3 and Supplementary Information). To enhance depth of longitudinal clinical data collection, a secure and HIPAA-compliant smartphone app with a specific focus on motor activity, voice and cognition, was created for home data collection (See Figure 2 and Extended Data Figure 2). At each in-clinic visit, blood was collected processed according to methods outlined in the Supplemental Information. At the first visit, whole blood was collected for generation of primary peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)-derived induced pluripotent cell lines.

Biofluid Collection and Processing

At each in-clinic visit along with followup visits, approximately 50–100 ml of blood was collected from each participant. Plasma and serum were processed for storage and for PBMC isolation. Whole blood was sent to New York Genome Center (NYGC) for DNA extraction and whole genome sequencing. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was optionally collected and flash-frozen at −80°C. Serum, plasma, and CSF samples were shipped on dry ice to a centralized biofluid repository to be stored at −80°C (See Supplementary Table 3). Additional details are provided in Supplemental Methods

Return of Answer ALS Results

To provide medical and ethically appropriate feedback, study participants with ALS were offered the opportunity to receive the results of their whole genome sequencing for five ALS genes (C9orf72, SOD1, FUS, TARDBP, and TBK1), as well 59 genes designated as medically actionable by the American College of Medical Genetics14, as part of a sub-study, Return of Answer ALS Results (ROAR). ROAR participants completed a separate online consent after enrollment in the parent study. Additional details are provided in Supplemental Information.

Answer ALS Smartphone App

The app has seven modules designed to gather information about upper limb motor function, respiration, bulbar function and cognition. Six modules measured arm function: finger tapping, finger tracing, and phone tilt tracing, each performed using the right and left hand separately (Figure 2a). The speech module (Figure 2c), consisted of three tasks, rotated weekly to reduce learning effect: 1) Single-Breath Count, in which participants were instructed to draw in a deep breath and count at a measured pace (a surrogate for forced vital capacity)33 2) Read Aloud Passage, in which participants read aloud one of four standardized passages from their screen, and 3) Picture Description, in which participants described one of three line-art illustration over 30–120 seconds. Details regarding this digital clinical module are included Supplemental Information.

IPSC Line Methods:

PBMC Processing:

Fresh blood was collected, and samples were centrifuged at 18–25°C in a horizontal rotor centrifuge for 20 minutes at 1800 RCF within 2 hours of collection. The plasma/buffy coat mixture was collected and centrifuged for 15 mins at 300 RCF. Isolated PBMCs were counted and cryopreserved. The average cell count was ~25 million PBMCs per sample with an average cell viability of 91%. Additional details are provided in Supplemental Methods

iPSC Generation, Reprogramming and Quality Control.

iPSCs were generated by reprogramming the cryopreserved and non-expanded PBMCs using a method based on a non-integrating episome. Clones were isolated, expanded and maintained according to standard feeder-free protocols and characterized extensively as described in Supplementary Table 6. iPSC lines were generated from ~25 patients per month and stored frozen until they were differentiated (Extended Data Figure 3A). Each cell line was thawed and cultured for two to three weeks before passaging for differentiation. Cell lines were differentiated in batches of up to eleven lines. PBMCs were used instead of fibroblasts to limit the potential for genetic defects and facilitate sampling from the large number of patients enrolled in our study. Overall, blood draws are less invasive and carry lower risk for patients than skin biopsies, which improved the overall risk-to-benefit ratio for the study. Rigorous QC (Supplementary Table 6) are performed on each Answer ALS iPSC line similar to previously published.34 G-band karyotype was performed at multiple passages for each Answer ALS iPSC line which provides confidence about the genetic integrity of the Answer ALS iPSC repository given that each iPSC line is karyotyped at multiple passages. Cell line authentication is repeated at multiple stages. The STR is performed on the original donor blood/PBMC sample, then performed on the reprogrammed iPSC line and the differentiated neurons (Supplemental Table 6; Supplemental Table 19). Additional details are provided in Supplemental Information.

Generation of iPS Spinal neurons

The iPS cells were differentiated into motor neurons according to the direct iPS cell-derived motor neuron (diMNs) protocol, which comprises three main stages (Extended Data Figure 3, Supplementary Table 6) as described previously.26 Additional details are provided in Supplemental Information. On Day 32 of differentiation, cell lines were collected and pelleted as illustrated in Figure 4. Thus far, ~800 iPS cell lines have been successfully reprogrammed and one clone line banked and characterized per donor. Out of the ~800 unique samples, only 18 lines (~3%) failed reprogramming. Additional details are provided in Supplemental Information.

Quality Control of diMNs.

As referenced in Extended Data Figure 3, on Day 32 one 6-well plate from each cell line for immunostaining was reserved for quality controls which included the following markers of neuronal differentiation: SMI32(NF-H), TUBB3(TUJ), ISL1, NKX6.1, S100β, and Nestin. This protocol generates a mixed population of neurons consisting of ~75% (+/-8%) βIII-tubulin (TuJ1) and ~70% (+/-10%) NF-H positive cells, ~19% (+/-6%) Islet-1 and ~34% (+/-9%) Nkx6.1 positive spinal motor neuron, and ~18% (+/13%) S100B positive progenitors 32 days after the onset of differentiation (See Figure 3). Additional details are provided in Supplemental Information.

Multi-omics data generation for each iPS cell-derived motor neuron line

At the end of the 32-day differentiation protocol, the spinal neurons were harvested for RNA-Seq, proteomics, or epigenome profiling as detailed in Supplementary Methods. Whole-genome sequencing was performed on PBMCs. Day 32 was chosen as independent experiments with selected C9orf72 ALS/FTD iPS derived spinal neurons demonstrated phenotypic and molecular changes in nuclear pore complex and biology, matching that seen in patient autopsies, by this time point.24

Program Quality Controls: Cell generation batch controls.

To detect and compensate for cell culture associated confounders all differentiations were conducted in a single facility and included two key control groups of biological samples: batch differentiation controls (BDC), were differentiated with each batch from the same original line to assess inter-batch variability of iPS cell differentiation to diMNs and Batch Technical controls (BTC), consisting of a single differentiation of the same line was frozen, aliquoted and distributed with each batch to assess technical variability of the omics assay batch runs were performed as detailed in Supplemental Information. Complete details for the design and implementation of these critical operational controls (Extended Data Figure 4,5) can be found in the Supplemental Information.

Data Quality and Batch effects assessments.

RNA-Seq.

For the RNA-Seq data samples were processed and passed all quality controls (QC) metrics including RNA integrity (Extended Data 4a), library, and sequencing QC metrics. To assess data quality and technical batch effects, sample to sample SERE scores (Simple Error Rate Estimate, 0 = identical samples) were generated using gene expression for three groups: the batch differentiation controls (BDCs), batch technical controls (BTCs), and all other samples (Extended Data Figure 4,5).

A heatmap of SERE scores between all samples with hierarchical clustering (Extended Data Figure 5) shows that while BTCs form their own cluster, the rest of the samples fall info multiple small clusters with no clear relation to their disease status.

Proteomics.

Each block of samples was comprised of case, control, BDC (differential batch control) samples and HEK293 cell control samples. The numbers of proteins and peptides quantified for all 66 samples were very consistent (Extended Data Figure 4c). The % coefficient of variation (CV) for the proteins quantified were calculated for the BTC and BDC samples (Extended Data Figure 4f). Individual samples are normalized to the total MS2 spectra intensity across the chromatographic profile of eluting peptides to smooth any inconsistencies in sample loading onto the MS instrument thereby eliminating systemic variation in signal intensities (Extended Data Figure 4c). We find BTCs and BDCs (both originating from 2AE8 CTR cell line) cluster tightly (Extended Data Figure 6c) indicating minimal drift between the MS batches.

Epigenetics.

ATAC-seq data quality was determined according to ENCODE 35. The distribution of fragment sizes across all samples revealed a clear nucleosome-free region and regular peaks corresponding to n-nucleosomal fractions (Extended Data Figure 6). As expected, replicates from our batch control line were highly correlated with each other, with batch technical controls (BTC) having an even smaller variation in correlation values compared to batch differentiation controls (BDC) (Extended Data Figure 4e). We also generated a consensus set of peaks present in &gt;10% of samples using DiffBind (Extended Data Figure 6) and characterized transcription factor motif enrichment within these peaks using HOMER36. There was an overrepresentation of transcription factors implicated in neuronal differentiation, such as Pdx1, Cux2, and the Lhx family (Extended Data Figure 6d). We then obtained a counts matrix of reads mapped to each peak in the consensus peakset across all samples and performed hierarchical clustering using the same approach as the RNA-seq data (Extended Data Figure 4,5,6). Subjects did not cluster by disease status, presence of C9 mutation, sex, or by processing batch. Additional data on quality control can be found in Supplemental Methods.

Whole Genome Methods: Whole-genome sequencing and analysis.

PBMCs were sent by each clinic to The New York Genome Center (NYGC) (https://www.nygenome.org/) for DNA extraction and sample QC and whole-genome sequencing libraries. We evaluated pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants reported in ClinVar (C-PLP) for all genes. We also examined pathogenic variants called by Intervar Li, 37 (I-PLP), and predicted damaging variants as called by in silico prediction tools (IS-D), which is reported in (Table 2 and Supplementary Table 8). The variant calls from NYGC were assessed by examining the actual reads for alignment issues and spot-checking the BAM files for specific variants in IGV determined to be of good quality. The VCFs were converted in to GVCFs, and joint genotyping calling was run using Sentieon v. 201911 (https://www.sentieon.com/), applied variant quality score recalibration (VQSR) was done using GATK v. 3.8 (truth sensitivity level = 99.0), and the files were annotated using Annovar v. 2018Apr1638. For each variant, we also incorporated functional in silico predictions from nine programs, including databases such as SIFT39, PolyPhen240, and Mutation Taster41 and those described in Li et al., 201342. Additional databases were included that assess the variant tolerance of each gene using the RVIS43 and the Gene Damage Index (GDI)44 and are adding LoFTool45. For variants in genes that are highly expressed in the brain, we incorporated data from the Human Protein Atlas46 (http://www.proteinatlas.org) and expression data from GTEx portal 47 48, (https://gtexportal.org/home/) for the cortex and spinal cord. Frequency information from three databases on all known variants from ExAC49, the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP)50, and the 1000 Genomes Project51.

Principal component analysis was carried out (Figure 4d) to reveal how the Answer ALS samples cluster among various ancestry groups of the 1000 genomes project dataset. Principal component analysis was used 11, 12 to visualize the ancestry background of the AALS cohort and a set of 2504 samples from the 1000 genomes project with well-defined ancestry. We used a set of 10,000 randomly chosen autosomal SNPs (singletons and multiallelic SNPs were removed) that were present in both datasets and removed correlated SNPs by LD-pruning. We implemented randomized PCA52 using the Python library scikit-allel package53

The annotation pipeline incorporated elements from ANNOVAR54 and generated reports, including genotypes for all samples. These reports are available upon request. The following annotation was used: For genes and exonic variants that have clinical significance, the Clinical Genomic Database (CGD)55, the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)56, ClinVar57, and genes listed in the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)58 database were incorporated. We also incorporated Intervar, which is based upon the ACMG and AMP standards and guidelines for interpretation of variants59–62. This tool uses 18 criteria to prescribe the clinical significance and classifies based on a five-tiered system63. To flag ALS genes, ALS gene lists and variants were incorporated from ALSoD64 (http://alsod.iop.kcl.ac.uk/), a list provided by Dr. Matthew Harms, a gene list from Dr. John Landers, and associations from DisGeNet65. Functional predictions were based on in silico prediction from nine databases: SIFT39, PolyPhen266–68 (HDIV and HVAR), LRT_Prediction 68, Mutation Taster41, Mutation assessor 69, FATHMM prediction70–72, and dbNSFP (RadialSVM_pred and LR_pred)73–75. Databases that assess the variant tolerance of each gene using the RVIS43 and the Gene Damage Index (GDI)44 were also included, and LoFTool76 will be incorporated. To identify variants in genes that are highly expressed in the brain, data from the Human Protein Atlas46 (http://www.proteinatlas.org) and the GTEx portal77, 78, (https://gtexportal.org/home/) for the cortex and spinal cord were used. Frequency information was derived from ExAC79, the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP)80, and the 1000 Genomes Project10.

A separate annotation pipeline was developed for variants in intergenic and regulatory regions. Variants are reported relative the closest gene, whether intronic, upstream and downstream (up to 4 KBs from the start and stop of a gene) or in 5’ and 3’ UTRs. The annotation was based on RegulomeDB, which annotates variants with known or predicted regulatory elements such as transcription factor binding sites (TFBS), eQTLs, validated functional SNPs and DNase sensitivity81, with source data from ENCODE82, 83 and GEO84. Additional regulatory databases such as Target Scan, an algorithm that uses 14 features to predict and identify microRNA target sites within mRNAs85, and miRBase86–88, were also used. Extensive details on the methods for whole genome analytics can be found in the Supplemental Methods.

RNA Methods

Total RNA was isolated from each sample using the Qiagen RNeasy mini kit. RNA QC was conducted using an Agilent Bioanalyzer and Nanodrop. Our primary QC metric for RNA quality is based on RIN values (RNA Integrity Number) ranging from 0–10, 10 being the highest quality RNA. Additionally, we collected QC data on total RNA concentration and 260/280 and 260/230 ratios to evaluate any potential contamination. Only samples with RIN &gt;8 were used for library prep and sequencing. rRNAs were removed and libraries generated using TruSeq Stranded Total RNA library prep kit with Ribo-Zero (Qiagen). RNA-Seq libraries were titrated by qPCR (Kapa), normalized according to size (Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 High Sensitivity chip). Each cDNA library was then subjected to 100 Illumina (Novaseq 6000) paired end (PE) sequencing cycles to obtain over 50 million PE reads per sample. After sequencing, raw reads were subject to QC measures and reads with quality scores over 20 collected and analyzed. Reads were mapped to the GRCh38 reference genome using Hisat2, QCed, and gene expression quantified with featureCounts89 and differential expression were quantified using DESeq290. Normalized and transformed count data were also used for exploratory analysis and differentially expressed (DE) genes (FDR &lt;0.1) were analyzed with commercial and open-source pathway and network analysis tools, including Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), GSEA, GOrilla, Cytoscape, and other tools to identify transcriptional regulators, predict epigenomic changes, and determine potential effects on downstream pathways and cellular functions.

ATAC seq Methods

We used the Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using Sequencing (ATAC-Seq) to assess chromatin accessibility and identify functional regulatory sites involved in driving transcriptional changes associated with ALS. ATAC-seq sample prep, sequencing, and peak generation was carried out by Diagenode Inc as further described91. Briefly, cells were lysed in ATAC-seq resuspension buffer (RSB; 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitors) with a mixture of detergents (0.1% Tween-20, 0.1% NP-40, 0.01% digitonin) on ice for 5 min. The lysis reaction was washed out with additional ATAC-RSB containing 0.1% Tween-20 and inverted to mix. 50K nuclei were collected and centrifuged at 450 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C. The pellet was re-suspended in 50 µl of transposition mixture (25 µl 2X Illumina Tagment DNA Buffer, 2.5 µl Illumina Tagment DNA Enzyme, 16.5 µl PBS, 0.5 µl 1% digitonin, 0.5 µl 10% Tween-20, 5 µl water). The transposition reaction was incubated at 37°C for 30 min followed by DNA purification. An initial PCR amplification was performed on the tagmented DNA using Nextera indexing primers (Illumina). Real-time qPCR was run with a fraction of the tagmented DNA to determine the number of additional PCR cycles needed and a final PCR amplification was performed. Size selection was done using AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter) to remove small, unwanted fragments (&lt;100 bp). The final libraries were sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq platform (paired-end, 75nt kit). All samples passed quality control checks that included morphological evaluation of nuclei, fluorescence-based electrophoresis of libraries to assess size distribution, and real-time qPCR to assess the enrichment of open-chromatin sites. The quality of the sequencing was assessed using FastQC and the reads were aligned to GRCh38 genome build using Bowtie2. We identified open chromatin regions separately for each sample using the peak-calling software MACS292 and determined differentially open sites using DESeq2 (FDR&lt;0.1). Peaks were assigned to unique genes using the default HOMER36 parameters, and gene ontology analysis was performed using GOrilla93.

Proteome Methods

Whole proteome extracts from frozen diMNs were digested with trypsin and LysC and subjected to acquisition on the SCIEX 6600 as detailed below. Snap frozen cell pellets were stored at −80°C and transferred to the CSMC proteomics lab on dry ice where it was stored at −80°C until use. Samples were lyophilized and aliquoted into 600 ul polystyrene microcentrifuge tubes containing lysis buffer (6M Urea, 1 mM DTT in 1.5 M NH4HCO3). Sample was sonicated (QSonica Q800R1) by alternating 10 seconds on and 10 seconds off at 70% amplitude while rotating in a 4°C water bath until the solution was homogenized (~20 mins). Samples were centrifuges and the protein concentration determined on the supernatant according to manufactures’ instructions (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). 200 ug of each sample was transferred to a 96 well plate in aliquots and processed on the Biomek i7 Automated workstation (Beckman Coulter) as outlined previously. Briefly, samples underwent the following: reduction of disulfide bonds in 3 mM TCEP, alkylated in 5 mM IAA. Addition of Beta-galactosidase at 2 ug and protein digestion in solution using equal molar Trypsin and LysC enzyme mixture (Promega, product #: V5111) at 1:40 enzyme to protein ratio under optimized digestion conditions (4 hours at 37°C). Digested proteins were desalted on a 5 mg Oasis HLB 96 well plate (Waters; product #: 186000309 ) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. Samples were dried to completion using a speed-vac system and stored at −80°C until MS analysis. For MS analysis, digested peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed on a 6600 Triple TOF (Sciex) in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode and on the 6600 Triple TOF (Sciex) for data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Specifically, samples were acquired in DDA mode for ion library generation and in DIA mode over 100 variable windows similar to previously described acquisition protocols 94, 95.

DDA data was used for the generation of a sample specific peptide ion library. DDA files were run through Trans Proteome Pipeline (TPP) using a human canonical FASTA file (Uniprot). A consensus peptide library with decoys was generated and used to quantify ions identified in DIA data files. Previously described DDA library build principles 96 were utilized to generate a cell-specific library, which allowed for greater accuracy in matching DIA data to the DDA library during OpenSWATH, as indicated by higher d-scores in PyProphet. Differential protein expression between ALS and control samples analyzed was calculated using mapDIA. 97

DIA data files were analyzed with OpenSWATH pipeline against the sample specific peptide ion library generated. Protein level quantitation is calculated by summing transition level intensities for all the proteotypic peptides identified. Differential protein expression between ALS and control samples analyzed was calculated using mapDIA.

Imaging Methods

Longitudinal single cell imaging and analysis.

Differentiated iMNs from a subset of the AALS iPSC lines were plated on 96-well plates for longitudinal single cell imaging with robotic microscopy as previously described98–107. At day 25, cells were transduced with expression marker plasmids such as synapsin::EGFP108 to visualize cell morphology and viability. After transduction cells were imaged in an automated fashion with robotic microscopy once per day for 10–14 days. Some image analysis was performed in a computational pipeline constructed within the open-source program Galaxy, to identify and track individual cells and perform survival analysis and other morphological measurements. Additional method details are found in Supplemental Methods.

Statistics

Statistical methods for the various program is detailed in the Supplemental Information for the various programs.

Data Portal

Data Storage and Data Integration/Analytics

Answer ALS was designed to be an “open source” program. All of the clinical data sets, the various omics results, including whole genome, proteome, transcriptome and epigenome along with the data integration have been posted to a portal for data sharing and crowd sourcing (https://data.answerals.org/; Supplementary Table 3). Data are available for download to all academic and commercial researchers.

Web-based analytics.

We have included online analytics for the many ALS researchers who will neither need nor want to download the full dataset. The current set of tools available at http://data.answerals.org/analyze allow users to select genes/pathways of interest and visualize them using braid maps, heat maps, volcano plots, bar charts or networks (Figure 4).

The data portal provides users with information about the AALS program, the data, relevant terminology and data release notes. Users can download a metadata package associated with each versioned release. This versioned package contains comprehensive clinical, iPSC and inventory metadata. In addition, processes for enrolling patients, producing iPSC lines and performing Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) are explained with links provided to the relevant facilities/institutions. Explanations for sample collection and analysis of Epigenomics, Proteomics and Transcriptomics data are available. Finally, precise definitions are provided for our data levels, which are ways to stratify all the various omics data coming from our analyses (Supplementary Table 20).

Data Dissemination

The Answer ALS Data Portal (http://data.answerals.org/; Supplementary Table 3) provides all raw and processed data including longitudinal clinical data and biological data generated by the AALS program and along with visualization/access to the metadata, data and biosamples released. The portal provides an overview of the data release notes, assays, data level descriptions and links to sites for viewing cell lines/biosamples associated with the program. The website allows browsing of all available metadata (using filter and text search functions), the option to download all data and metadata or a filtered subset and links to obtain individual iPS cell lines from the Cedars-Sinai Biomanufacturing Center. Users interested in downloading datasets are required to submit an online form, acknowledge data use parameters and return a signed Data Use Agreement (DUA) in compliance with HIPAA.

Data Organization and Naming.

Data products were organized and named in a unified and systematic manner to allow a smooth end-user experience. Data levels (Supplementary Table 20) were employed as a categorization schema to group similar types of omics data products together. Supplementary Table 21 describes examples of these data levels in action with each experimental assay our program collects. All data products were prefixed in a systematic manner. The prefix consists of the following components: whether the sample is from a disease patient or healthy control patient, the de-identified patient GUID, the sample vial ID and the assay type abbreviation. An example of this is the raw Transcriptomics FASTQ file CASE-NEUAA599TMX-5310-T_P10_1.fastq.gz. The first underscore separates the prefix from any supplementary file information allowing for easy tokenization. This nomenclature is applied consistently to all metadata and data files making it easy to establish relationships with a single study participant.

Extended Data

Extended Data Figure 1. Answer ALS Operations. Top. Answer ALS Research Program.

Graphic illustration of overall program flow. Bottom. Clinical Sites.

Participating clinics were districted nationally at 8 academic or private neurology clinics specializing in ALS clinical care and research.

Extended Data Figure 2. a. Smartphone App. Illustrations from app of various activities. a’. Main Menu, b’. Upper limb motor tests, c’. Bulbar activities, including single breath counting, speech and cognition, d’. Example of cartoon used for speech/cognition analytics. b. Examples of speech and fine motor tasks performed by the smartphone app study participants. Data are collected with an app called “Help us Answer ALS”. Each week, the app asks the participant to perform different tasks. The tasks involve motor control in the upper body, speech and cognition. Each task is performed once per week. The speech tasks include describing a picture (a,b,c), reading a passage (d,e,f), and counting until the subject runs out of breath (not represented). Describing a picture also serves as a cognition task. The motor task involves tracing 3 different contours in sequential order (h,i,j), alternating hand each day of the week.

Extended Data Figure 3. Production of ALS and control iPS cell spinal motor neurons.

a. Example of IPS Generation Schedule. b. Method of generating iPS cell-derived motor neuron cell lines using the diMNs protocol. c. Brightfield images show the morphology of the cells during differentiation from iPS cell stage to the generation of motor neurons over a period of 32 days. d. Production flow and harvesting schematic of diMNs for multi-omics analyses. e. Quality control of the diMNs produced from iPS cells is performed by imaging of representative wells for immunohistochemical staining with neuronal, motor neuron and glial markers after 32 days of differentiation. Scale bar=400μm. Images representative of over 600 patient cell lines.

Extended Data Figure 4. Omics Quality Control metrics.

a. Histogram of RNA integrity numbers for current AALS samples. Density plot and histogram of RIN values for all current AALS samples with RNAseq data. Plot shows all processed samples have RIN &gt; 8. b. fragment size distribution Size distribution of ATAC seq data, with peaks representing different n-nucleosomal fragments and clear nucleosome-free regions separated by ~147bp, the size of a nucleosome. c. Number of Proteins and peptide identification consistency in the data generation batches of AALS samples. d. Violin plot of SERE values for RNAseq data for current AALS samples. Violin plot showing variance of SERE values in BTC (green) and BDC (red) control samples relative to all other (blue) current AALS samples. BTC shows lowest score with the least amount of variance indicating that samples are true technical replicates, while BDC and other samples show increase variance. e. Violin plot of SERE values for ATACseq data for current AALS samples. Similar to RNA data the BTC (green) show lowest variability indicating low technical confounds. f. Coefficient of Variation (CV) for Batch Technical Control (BTC) and Batch differentiation control (BDC) replicates showing 80% proteins to be under a CV of 25%.

Extended Data Figure 5. Heatmap and hierarchical clustering of current AALS samples.

a&amp;b. Heatmap and hierarchical clustering of SERE values using RNA/ATACseq data. Heatmap and clustering of current AALS samples using SERE values from the (a) RNAseq and (b) ATACseq data. Samples are annotated with gender, genotype, and C9orf72 mutation. No distinct clustering separates samples by these categories, but BTC sample cluster together. c. Spearman correlation matrix plot for the AALS proteomics data.

Extended Data Figure 6. ATACSeq data.

a and b. CDFs. The number of all peaks (a) and promoter peaks (b) that are common to different numbers of samples. (c) PLEKHG4B locus. (Left) ATAC-seq read density upstream of the PLEKHG4B gene for ALS (middle) and CTR (bottom) samples. Average coverage for each group is shown at the top. (Right) Zoomed in region around the starred peak. d. Motifs. The most overrepresented genomic motifs corresponding to known transcription factors as determined by the HOMER discovery algorithm for ATAC-seq. Motifs for transcription factors implicated in neuronal identity, such as Pdx1, Cux2, and the Lhx family, are significantly enriched.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Tables 1-6, 19-26

Supplementary Tables 7-18

Supplementary Information

Acknowledgements:

Program support provided by: Robert Packard Center for ALS Research at Johns Hopkins, Travelers Insurance, ALS Finding a Cure Foundation, Stay Strong Vs. ALS, Answer ALS Foundation, Microsoft, Caterpillar Foundation, American Airlines, Team Gleason, National Institutes of Health, Fishman Family Foundation, Aviators Against ALS, AbbVie Foundation, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, ALS Association, National Football League, F.Prime, Mike Armstrong, Bruce Edwards Foundation, The Judith and Jean Pape Adams Charitable Foundation, Muscular Dystrophy Association, Les Turner ALS Foundation, PGA Tour, Mike Armstrong, Bari Lipp Foundation. The authors thank the following for overall AALS program guidance: Lucie Bruijn, Jay Fishman, Ed Rapp, Peter Warlick, Clare Durrett, Peter Foss, Leandro P. Rizzuto, Denis Rizzuto, Steve Gleason, Paul Varisco, Randy Fishman, Beverly Goulet and Margaret Sutherland.

Data Availablity.

All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper, its supplementary information files and the Answer ALS web portals listed in Supplementary Table 3 (or via data.answerals.org).

Figure 1. Clinical Enrollment and Characteristics: ALSFRS-R progression curves for all Answer ALS clinic enrolled subjects over a 40-month period.

a. Answer ALS patient and control subject enrollment. b. ALSFRS-R Total Slope Distribution. Kernel density estimation with Gaussian kernels used to estimate probability density function of ALSFRS-R slope. Dashed line indicates the mean ALSFRS-R slope. c. Longitudinal ALSFRS-R measurements with fast and slow progressors. Participants with 3 or more visits and a maximum visit date within 8 years of symptom onset included. N indicates the number of participants in fast and slow progressing groups, sorted by ALSFRS-R slope.

Figure 2. Smartphone use and analytics

(n = 80 biologically independent samples). a. Smartphone app compliance mean and 95% confidence interval. Compliance was calculated using the average number of tasks done per day and per subject. b. Results of inferring ALSFRS-R total. Pearson values are shown in black contoured bars (left y axis) and mean absolute errors of the prediction are shown in color bars with 95% confidence interval (right y axis). Performance values were obtained using each individual task as well as the combination of all the tasks. The highest performance was obtained using all tasks (R=0.89, p&lt;1E-5), c. Results of inferring ALSFRS-R scores using only speech related tasks. Pearson values are shown in black contoured bars (left y axis) and mean absolute errors of the prediction are shown in color bars with 95% confidence interval (right y axis). Performance values were calculated independently for each of the 3 speech tasks to infer FVC and ALSFRS-R speech and bulbar sub-scores. Highest performance was obtained using information from the reading task for both ALSFRS-R sub-scores obtaining up to R=0.89 (p&lt;1E-5) or ALSFRS-R bulbar sub-score. On the other hand, counting task information produced the best result when infer FVC score (R=0.65, p=2E-2).

Figure 3. Uniformity in the generation of large sets of ALS and control iPS cell lines.

Violin plots of immunofluorescent immunocytochemistry (IF-IC) stained diMNs cultures quantified using Image Express Micro. Induced pluripotent stem cells from both control (CTR) and ALS patients differentiated for 32 days following the Cedars-Sinai Biomanufacturing Center directed motor neuron differentiation (diMN) protocol, then fixed, immunostained, and analyzed for the number of cells that stain positively for neuronal (NKX6.1, SMI32 (NEFH), ISL1, TUJ1 (TUBB3)) and non-neuronal marker proteins (s100β). Data is presented as a positive percentage of total DAPI-labelled nuclei. 217 different subject iPS cell lines analyzed. There were no significant differences between ALS and control for any of the assessments.

Figure 4. Summary of variants for the AALS cohort of 830 sequences.

a. Total number of variants per participant. b. Total variants per participant based on ethnic origin. c. Total exonic variants. d. Nonsynonymous variant types. Each dot represents a participant. e. Principal component analysis plot reveals how the Answer ALS samples cluster among various ancestry groups of the 1000 genomes project dataset. PC1 showed that African samples (green) clustered apart from the other populations, and PC2 that Asian samples (red/brown) were distinct from European samples (purple), with admixed American were located in between. The majority of the AALS samples were clustered with the European samples, although some were closer to the African group and a few clustered with the Asian group corroborating the NYGC ancestry results (Figure 4b). Size of the repeat expansion in C9orf72 (f) and ATXN2 (g) for the AALS cohort. The graphs are based on Expansion Hunter13 reads for 601 sequences out of the AALS 830 samples. Top) 41 ALS cases and 4 individuals that are Pre-fALS have expansions greater than 26 repeats. Bottom) 35 ALS cases have ATXN2 expansions, while 4 normal controls and 1 uncharacterized individual have ATXN2 expansions greater than 26 repeats. The relationship between repeat size in C9orf72 (h) or ATXN2 (i) and age of ALS onset. n = 830 biologically independent samples. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM.

Figure 5 Omics exploratory analysis of results.

a. Violin plot showing counts of RNA species identified in the current AALS samples. As expected, protein coding and lncRNAs represent the largest proportions while rRNA, which have been depleted, are the lowest. Minimal variability has been observed among samples. Types represented are: protein coding, lincRNA, miRNA, snRNA, snoRNA, and rRNA in green, red, gold, purple, blue, and teal, respectively. n = 102 biologically independent samples. b. Peak functional annotations. Analysis of read distribution across all ATAC-seq samples shows an enrichment in known open chromatin regions, such as DNAse 1 hypersensitive sites (DHS) and previously annotated enhancers and promoters. n = 100 biologically independent samples. c. Log2 protein intensity distribution unnormalized (top) and normalized (bottom). d. Log 10 protein intensity comparison of selected proteins (PCKGM, ECH1) showing differential expression between ALS and Controls. Box plots in (c) and (d) indicate median, quartiles, and range. n = 66 biologically independent samples. e. Pie chart of proportions of rMATS analysis of differentially alternative splicing identified events comparing male C9orf72 ALS samples vs. male controls. FDR cutoff of 0.05 was used to define statistical significance. Skipped Exon (SE) has the highest number of events (N=617, 52%), followed by Retention of Intron (RI, N=409, 35%). f: rMAPS2 based motif enrichment analysis of alternatively retained introns (409 RI events) shows that the binding motif of RNA binding protein HNRNPA2B1 is significantly enriched in the male controls samples vs. male C9orf72 ALS samples near the RI sites. Wilcoxon’s rank sum test (one-sided) was used to get the p values for comparing up and down regulated exons (RI) versus control/background exons. Motif scores are plotted in solid lines and p values are in dotted lines. Red designates control samples and blue are ALS. g: Heatmap of pathway activity scores defined by GSVA (Gene Set Variation Analysis) analysis against MsigDB’s C2 canonical pathways from KEGG and Biocarta. Top 30 pathways from comparing samples with bulbar vs limb ALS disease onset. (FDR&lt;0.05). h: Top 14 pathways that have high Pearson correlation between GSVA enrichment scores and ALSFRS clinical progression slope.

Figure 6. Progressive degeneration of spinal neurons derived from mutant SOD1 patients (diMNs) was detected by longitudinal robotic microscopy.

a. Example images of iPS diMNs over time. Control (top OYX7iCTR) and SOD1-ALS (2RJViALS) lines transduced with the fluorescent reporter Synapsin::EGFP32 and were differentiated for ~24 days. Cells were imaged every 24 hours starting at day 24 (Day 1) using robotic microscopy. Although some of the diMNs are clumped in cell clusters, sparse transfection and robotic microscopy enables them to be tracked over time (soma indicated by white arrowheads). Control neurons survive the duration of the experiment; SOD1-ALS neurons degenerate at the last time point. Scale bar, 200 µm.

b. Longitudinal robotic imaging of mutant SOD1 iPS spinal neurons (2RJViALS-SOD1; 8NZiALS-SOD1) compared to 2 control iPS spinal neuron lines (OXY7iCTR; 2AE8iCTR) reveals time dependant invitro neurodegeneration. The diMNs were subjected to robotic microscopy for 7 days starting on differentiation day ~20. The rate of cell death was tracked over time and compared across lines using Cox proportional hazards. diMNs from ALS patients that harbor SOD1 mutations (2RJViALS; n=3 and 391 neurons and 8NZPiALS; n=2 and 221 neurons) die faster than controls (2AE8iCTR; n=2 and 192 neurons and OYX7iCTR; n=3 and 291 neurons). HR= 1.45 p=0.013* Future studies of sporadic lines will be incorporated into the Answer ALS data portal.

Table 1. Answer ALS basic clinical demographics

	Subjects	Statistics	
Variable	Level	Overall	ALS	Asymptomatic ALS	Healthy Control	Non-ALS-MND	(ALS vs Healthy Control)	
Participants	N	100.0% (1047)	82.2% (861)	1.1% (12)	10.3% (108)	6.3% (66)	.	
Sex	Female	40.6% (423)	37.4% (320)	58.3% (7)	66.4% (71)	37.9% (25)	&lt;.001	
	Male	59.4% (618)	62.6% (536)	41.7% (5)	33.6% (36)	62.1% (41)	&lt;.001	
	[missing]	.% (6)	.% (5)	.% (0)	.% (1)	.% (0)	N/A	
Race	American Indian	0.2% (2)	0.1% (1)	0.0% (0)	1.0% (1)	0.0% (0)	0.078	
	Asian	2.0% (21)	1.5% (13)	0.0% (0)	5.7% (6)	3.0% (2)	0.004	
	Black	4.8% (49)	5.0% (42)	0.0% (0)	4.8% (5)	3.0% (2)	0.928	
	Pacific Islander	0.1% (1)	0.1% (1)	0.0% (0)	0.0% (0)	0.0% (0)	0.724	
	White	92.9% (956)	93.3% (789)	100.0% (12)	88.6% (93)	93.9% (62)	0.081	
	[missing]	.% (18)	.% (15)	.% (0)	.% (3)	.% (0)	N/A	
Ethnicity	Hispanic or Latino	4.8% (50)	5.3% (45)	0.0% (0)	2.8% (3)	3.1% (2)	0.271	
	Not Hispanic or Latino	95.2% (989)	94.7% (810)	100.0% (12)	97.2% (104)	96.9% (63)	0.271	
	[missing]	.% (8)	.% (6)	.% (0)	.% (1)	.% (1)	N/A	
Age at baseline (yrs)	Years (mean(SD))	58.9±11.6 (20.0,91.0)	59.3±11.1 (24.0,91.0)	48.3±10.3 (33.0,62.0)	55.0±14.1 (20.0,82.0)	61.9±12.0 (26.0,85.0)	&lt;.001	
Time between symptom onset and diagnosis	Months (mean(SD))	15.9±20.4 (−5.7,286)	14.8±16.8 (−5.7,185)	N/A	N/A	40.8±52.6 (0.1,286)	N/A	
Time between symptom onset and study enrollment	Months (mean(SD))	32.0±39.4 (0.6,458)	29.8±35.6 (0.6,458)	N/A	N/A	78.4±75.3 (11.1,353)	N/A	
BMI at screening visit	mean(SD)	26.8±6.39 (10.1,150)	26.5±4.83 (10.1,44.4)	29.2±3.38 (23.6,34.2)	29.2±14.9 (17.0,150)	27.3±5.61 (16.6,47.3)	&lt;.001	
ALSFRS-R at first ALSFRS-R visit	mean(SD)	33.8±8.65 (0.0,47.0)	33.8±8.67 (0.0,47.0)	N/A	N/A	33.5±8.44 (7.0,46.0)	N/A	
ALSFRS-R slope		−.73±0.87 (−5.1,1.4)	−.77±0.88 (−5.1,1.4)	N/A	N/A	−.11±0.40 (−1.6,1.0)	N/A	
FVC (%-pred) at first ALSFRS-R visit	mean(SD)	69.9±24.0 (4.0,126)	69.6±23.9 (4.0,125)	N/A	N/A	73.7±25.3 (17.0,126)	N/A	
FVC slope		−1.5±2.53 (−16,14.1)	−1.6±2.59 (−16,14.1)	N/A	N/A	−.12±0.86 (−1.9,2.1)	N/A	
Follow-Up Duration	Months (mean(SD))	13.3±17.3 (0.0,340)	12.5±12.6 (0.0,94.1)	N/A	N/A	24.0±47.2 (0.0,340)	N/A	
Time from Onset to Death	Months (mean(SD))	N/A	34.7±27.6 (8.3,187)	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	

Table 2. Summary Table of variants in the AALS cohort.

Variant type	Total Variants in all genes in ALS cases	Total Variants in all genes in CTRLs	ALS Genes* Variants in ALS	ALS Genes* Variants in Controls	Number of Variants per 33-ALS Gene	
All Variants	Sum= 2,941,489,030

Average =
4,166,415 variants per ALS case	Sum= 379,092,863

Average= 4,120,575 variants per control	Sum=1092
Average= 1.5 variant per ALS case	Sum=141
Average= 1.5 variant per control	ALS2 (20), ANG (5), ANXA11 (15), ATXN2 (29), C21orf2 (19), C9orf72 (5), CAMTA1 (24), CCNF (28), CHCHD10 (2), DAO (7), DCTN1 (24), FIG4 (14), FUS (6), HNRNPA1 (2), HNRNPA2B1 (1), KIF5A (9), MATR3 (10), MOBP (4), NEK1 (19), OPTN (10), PFN1 (7), SCFD1 (13), SETX (57), SOD1 (14), SQSTM1 (14), TAF15 (16), TARDBP (11), TBK1 (18), TUBA4A (3), UBQLN2 (7), UNC13A (19), VAPB (4), VCP (4). Details of variants are found in Sup tables Table	
ClinVar P/LP (C-PLP) Variants	Sum= 23,924
Average= 33.9 variant per ALS case
Rare =3,659 5.2 variants per ALS case	Sum= 3,097
Average= 33.7 variant per control
Rare= 461 5 variants per control	Sum= 85 12% of cases harbor
Rare only = 21 (3% of cases harbor)	Sum= 11 12% of controls harbor
Rare only= 3 (3.3% or control harbor)	ALS2 (1) ANG (2), CHCHD10 (1), FIG4 (2), FUS (1), OPTN (2)**, PFN1 (2), SETX (4), SOD1 (5), SQSTM1 (3),TARDBP (2), UBQLN2 (2), VCP (1)	
Harms P/LP (H-PLP) Variants	N/A	N/A	Sum= 24 3.4% of cases harbor)	Sum=1
1% of controls harbor	FUS (1), PFN1 (2), SOD1 (11), TARDBP (3) UBQLN2 (1), VCP (1)	
Intervar P/LP (I-PLP) variants	Sum= 2,346
Average 3.3 variant per sample
Rare= 2272
Average 3.21 per case	Sum= 288
Average 3.1 Variant per sample
Rare= 276
Average 3.2 per control	Sum=25 3.5% of cases harbor	0 (0%)	NEK1 (2), OPTN (1), SOD1 (12), SETX (1), TBK1 (2), VCP (2),	
In silico Prediction 6/9 Predicted to be damaging	Sum= 79,010
Average 112 variant per sample
Rare= 40,910 Average 58 variants per sample	Sum=5,464 Average 113 variant per sample Rare=5,464 Average 59.4 variant per sample	Sum= 97 (13.7% of cases harbor)	Sum=11 (12% of controls harbor)	ALS2(2), ANXA11 (4), ATXN2 (3), C21orf2 (1), CAMTA1 (1), DAO (3), DCTN1 (5), FIG4 (3), FUS (1), HNRNPA2B1 (1), KIF5A (2)MOBP(1), NEK1(2), OPTN (1), PFN1 (3), SCFD1 (2), SETX (14), SOD1 (11), SQSTM1 (2), TARDBP (4), TUBA4A (2), UBQLN2 (1), UNC13A (3), VCP (2)	
Sum= the total number of variants found per group, ALS vs. Control.

** OPTN variants are high frequency &lt; 1%.

Contributions to Answer ALS program. Individual contributions to each of the consortia operations are detailed below.

Conceived the program: JDR and CNS.

Designed the overall program and oversaw all resource development: JDR, LMT, EF, SF, MC, JB, NM, JEVE, CNS, DS

Wrote the manuscript with input and edits from all the authors: JDR, EGB, LMT, EF, SF, MC, JB NM, JEVE, CNV, DS., JAK, JR, RN, JCB, NM SK, and DR

Project Leadership: EGB, TGT, SF, EF, DS, JB, NM, JEVE, LMT, MEC, CNS and JDR

Project Management: EGB, TGT, BL, LO, EM, ST, SMF.

iPS Cell Production: LO, LP, EG, EG, DP, IM, DS.

iPS Cell Differentiation and Distribution: AF, SL, BM, HT, LP, MGB, DS, CNS.

iPS Cell Differentiation Analysis: AF, SL, CL, RM, VG, MW, RH, DS, CNS.

Whole Genome Analysis and Genetics: JAK, EV,NA,LL, SW, JR, MBH, SF.

Transcriptomics: RGL, JW, JS, RM, KW, LMT.

Proteomics: AM, VV, RH, NS, RP, DMM, VV, JEVE.

Epigenomics: AD, NH, MA, BTW, EF.

Cell Imaging and Phenotyping: KR, EV, NA, RT, JAK, SF.

Cell-based Studies: ANC, LH, JDR.

Integrative Analysis and Computational Modeling: JL, DR, RL, JW, JAK, KS, AL, LPM, SF, LMT, EF, NLPM, SF, LMT, EF

Clinical Study Team: EM, ST, AC, SL, AF, LP, CP, AJ, SH, TMorgan, JJB, EK, JM, MM, BJ, DA, SK, SAD, RB, DH, TMiller, JDG,JB, NM, JDR.

Clinical Data Management: DR, HY, ES, PV, AS.

Smartphone App Development:, OA, PR, JCB, EGB, JDR, JK.

Smartphone App Data Analytics: RN, CA, GC.

Web Portal Development: TGT, BL, AL, MB, YR, KS, EGB, TE, EB, EF.

Competing Interests:

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

R.N., C.A., and G.A.C. disclose that their employer, IBM Research, is the research branch of IBM Corporation. R.N, C.A. and G.A.C. own stock in IBM Corporation.

Ethics Statement: The Answer ALS trial and smartphone app were approved by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Board (IRB#00082277 and #00240000). The Answer ALS program is registerd at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02574390).


References

1 Hovestadt V Medulloblastomics revisited: biological and clinical insights from thousands of patients. Nat Rev Cancer 20 , 42–56, doi:10.1038/s41568-019-0223-8 (2020)31819232
2 Katyal N &amp; Govindarajan R Shortcomings in the Current Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Trials and Potential Solutions for Improvement. Front Neurol 8 , 521, doi:10.3389/fneur.2017.00521 (2017)29033893
3 Philips T &amp; Rothstein JD Rodent Models of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Curr Protoc Pharmacol 69 , 5 67 61–21, doi:10.1002/0471141755.ph0567s69 (2015)26344214
4 Donnelly CJ RNA toxicity from the ALS/FTD C9ORF72 expansion is mitigated by antisense intervention. Neuron 80 , 415–428, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.015 (2013)24139042
5 Sareen D Targeting RNA foci in iPSC-derived motor neurons from ALS patients with a C9ORF72 repeat expansion. Sci Transl Med 5 , 208ra149, doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3007529 (2013)
6 Taylor JP , Brown RH Jr. &amp; Cleveland DW Decoding ALS: from genes to mechanism. Nature 539 , 197–206, doi:10.1038/nature20413 (2016)27830784
7 Agurto C Analyzing progression of motor and speech impairment in ALS. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2019 , 6097–6102, doi:10.1109/EMBC.2019.8857300 (2019)31947236
8 Stegmann GM Estimation of forced vital capacity using speech acoustics in patients with ALS. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis &amp; frontotemporal degeneration 22 , 14–21, doi:10.1080/21678421.2020.1866013 (2021)34348537
9 Alexander DH , Novembre J &amp; Lange K Fast model-based estimation of ancestry in unrelated individuals. Genome research 19 , 1655–1664, doi:10.1101/gr.094052.109 (2009)19648217
10 Genomes Project C A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526 , 68–74, doi:10.1038/nature15393 (2015)26432245
11 Patterson N , Price AL &amp; Reich D Population structure and eigenanalysis. PLoS genetics 2 , e190, doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0020190 (2006)17194218
12 McVean G A genealogical interpretation of principal components analysis. PLoS genetics 5 , e1000686, doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000686 (2009)19834557
13 Dolzhenko E Detection of long repeat expansions from PCR-free whole-genome sequence data. Genome research 27 , 1895–1903, doi:10.1101/gr.225672.117 (2017)28887402
14 Kalia SS Recommendations for reporting of secondary findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing, 2016 update (ACMG SF v2.0): a policy statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genetics in medicine : official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics 19 , 249–255, doi:10.1038/gim.2016.190 (2017)27854360
15 Prudencio M Distinct brain transcriptome profiles in C9orf72-associated and sporadic ALS. Nat Neurosci 18 , 1175–1182, doi:10.1038/nn.4065 (2015)26192745
16 Linsley JW Automated four-dimensional long term imaging enables single cell tracking within organotypic brain slices to study neurodevelopment and degeneration. Commun Biol 2 , 155, doi:10.1038/s42003-019-0411-9 (2019)31069265
17 Kiskinis E Pathways disrupted in human ALS motor neurons identified through genetic correction of mutant SOD1. Cell Stem Cell 14 , 781–795, doi:10.1016/j.stem.2014.03.004 (2014)24704492
18 Zhang H Subgroup analysis reveals molecular heterogeneity and provides potential precise treatment for pancreatic cancers. Onco Targets Ther 11 , 5811–5819, doi:10.2147/OTT.S163139 (2018)30254473
19 Ashley EA Towards precision medicine. Nat Rev Genet 17 , 507–522, doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.86 (2016)27528417
20 Li Y A comprehensive library of familial human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis induced pluripotent stem cells. PloS one 10 , e0118266 (2015)25760436
21 Consortium, T. N. An integrated multi-omic analysis of iPSC-derived motor neurons from C9ORF72 ALS patients. bioRxiv, 2020.2011.2001.362269, doi:10.1101/2020.11.01.362269 (2020)
22 Choi SH A three-dimensional human neural cell culture model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 515 , 274–278, doi:10.1038/nature13800 (2014)25307057
23 Lim RG Huntington’s Disease iPSC-Derived Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells Reveal WNT-Mediated Angiogenic and Blood-Brain Barrier Deficits. Cell reports 19 , 1365–1377, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.04.021 (2017)28514657
24 Coyne AN G4C2 Repeat RNA Initiates a POM121-Mediated Reduction in Specific Nucleoporins in C9orf72 ALS/FTD. Neuron 107 , 1124–1140 e1111, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2020.06.027 (2020)32673563
25 Zhang K Stress Granule Assembly Disrupts Nucleocytoplasmic Transport. Cell 173 , 958–971 e917, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.025 (2018)29628143
26 Coyne AN Nuclear accumulation of CHMP7 initiates nuclear pore complex injury and subsequent TDP-43 dysfunction in sporadic and familial ALS. Sci Transl Med 13 , doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abe1923 (2021)
27 Nicolas A Genome-wide Analyses Identify KIF5A as a Novel ALS Gene. Neuron 97 , 1268–1283 e1266, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.02.027 (2018)29566793
28 Vass R Risk genotypes at TMEM106B are associated with cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol 121 , 373–380, doi:10.1007/s00401-010-0782-y (2011)21104415
29 Elden AC Ataxin-2 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS. Nature 466 , 1069–1075, doi:10.1038/nature09320 (2010)20740007
30 Kwart D A Large Panel of Isogenic APP and PSEN1 Mutant Human iPSC Neurons Reveals Shared Endosomal Abnormalities Mediated by APP beta-CTFs, Not Abeta. Neuron 104 , 256–270 e255, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2019.07.010 (2019)31416668
31 Karch CM A Comprehensive Resource for Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells from Patients with Primary Tauopathies. Stem Cell Reports 13 , 939–955, doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2019.09.006 (2019)31631020
32 Marchetto MC A model for neural development and treatment of Rett syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell 143 , 527–539, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.016 (2010)21074045
References: Methods

33. Elsheikh B , Correlation of single-breath count test and neck flexor muscle strength with spirometry in myasthenia gravis. Muscle Nerve 53 , 134–136 (2016).26437790
34. Toombs J , Generation of twenty four induced pluripotent stem cell lines from twenty four members of the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936. Stem cell research 46 , 101851 (2020).32450543
35. Consortium, E.P. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. Nature 489 , 57–74 (2012).22955616
36. Heinz S , Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Molecular cell 38 , 576–589 (2010).20513432
37. Li MX , Gui HS , Kwan JS , Bao SY &amp; Sham PC A comprehensive framework for prioritizing variants in exome sequencing studies of Mendelian diseases. Nucleic acids research 40 , e53 (2012).22241780
38. Wang K , Li M &amp; Hakonarson H ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from high-throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res 38 , e164 (2010).20601685
39. Sim NL , SIFT web server: predicting effects of amino acid substitutions on proteins. Nucleic acids research 40 , W452–457 (2012).22689647
40. Chun S &amp; Fay JC Identification of deleterious mutations within three human genomes. Genome research 19 , 1553–1561 (2009).19602639
41. Schwarz JM , Rodelsperger C , Schuelke M &amp; Seelow D MutationTaster evaluates disease-causing potential of sequence alterations. Nature methods 7 , 575–576 (2010).20676075
42. Li MX , Predicting mendelian disease-causing non-synonymous single nucleotide variants in exome sequencing studies. PLoS genetics 9 , e1003143 (2013).23341771
43. Petrovski S , Wang Q , Heinzen EL , Allen AS &amp; Goldstein DB Genic intolerance to functional variation and the interpretation of personal genomes. PLoS genetics 9 , e1003709 (2013).23990802
44. Itan Y , The human gene damage index as a gene-level approach to prioritizing exome variants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112 , 13615–13620 (2015).26483451
45. Fadista J , Oskolkov N , Hansson O &amp; Groop L LoFtool: a gene intolerance score based on loss-of-function variants in 60 706 individuals. Bioinformatics 33 , 471–474 (2017).27563026
46. Uhlen M , Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science 347 , 1260419 (2015).25613900
47. Consortium, G.T. Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 348 , 648–660 (2015).25954001
48. Consortium, G.T. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat Genet 45 , 580–585 (2013).23715323
49. Lek M , Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature 536 , 285–291 (2016).27535533
50. Tennessen JA , Evolution and functional impact of rare coding variation from deep sequencing of human exomes. Science 337 , 64–69 (2012).22604720
51. Auton A , A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526 , 68–74 (2015).26432245
52. Galinsky KJ , Fast Principal-Component Analysis Reveals Convergent Evolution of ADH1B in Europe and East Asia. Am J Hum Genet 98 , 456–472 (2016).26924531
53. Fabian Pedregosa GV , Gramfort Alexandre , Michel Vincent , Thirion Bertrand , Grisel Olivier , Blondel Mathieu , Andreas Müller Joel Nothman , Louppe Gilles , Prettenhofer Peter , Weiss Ron , Dubourg Vincent , Vanderplas Jake , Passos Alexandre , Cournapeau David , Brucher Matthieu , Perrot Matthieu , Duchesnay Édouard . Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research (2012).
54. Wang K , Li M &amp; Hakonarson H ANNOVAR: Functional annotation of genetic variants from high-throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res 38 , e164 (2010).20601685
55. Solomon BD , Nguyen AD , Bear KA &amp; Wolfsberg TG Clinical genomic database. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110 , 9851–9855 (2013).23696674
56. Amberger JS , Bocchini CA , Schiettecatte F , Scott AF &amp; Hamosh A OMIM.org: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM(R)), an online catalog of human genes and genetic disorders. Nucleic Acids Res 43 , D789–798 (2015).25428349
57. Landrum MJ , ClinVar: public archive of interpretations of clinically relevant variants. Nucleic Acids Res 44 , D862–868 (2016).26582918
58. Green RC , ACMG recommendations for reporting of incidental findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing. Genet Med 15 , 565–574 (2013).23788249
59. Richards CS , ACMG recommendations for standards for interpretation and reporting of sequence variations: Revisions 2007. Genet Med 10 , 294–300 (2008).18414213
60. Kazazian J , Boehm CD , &amp; Seltzer WK ACMG recommendations for standards for interpretation of sequence variations. Genetics in Medicine. Genetics in Medicine, 2 (5 ), 302–303. (2000).
61. Richards S , Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet Med 17 , 405–424 (2015).25741868
62. Li Q &amp; Wang K InterVar: Clinical Interpretation of Genetic Variants by the 2015 ACMG-AMP Guidelines. Am J Hum Genet 100 , 267–280 (2017).28132688
63. Farrer LA , Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Disease Meta Analysis Consortium. JAMA 278 , 1349–1356 (1997).9343467
64. Abel O , Development of a smartphone app for a genetics website: The amyotrophic lateral sclerosis online genetics database (ALSoD). JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 1 , e18 (2013).25098641
65. Pinero J , DisGeNET: a comprehensive platform integrating information on human disease-associated genes and variants. Nucleic Acids Res 45 , D833–D839 (2017).27924018
66. Adzhubei I , Jordan DM &amp; Sunyaev SR Predicting functional effect of human missense mutations using PolyPhen-2. Curr Protoc Hum Genet Chapter 7 , Unit7 20 (2013).
67. Ramensky V , Bork P &amp; Sunyaev S Human non-synonymous SNPs: server and survey. Nucleic Acids Res 30 , 3894–3900 (2002).12202775
68. Sunyaev SR , PSIC: profile extraction from sequence alignments with position-specific counts of independent observations. Protein Eng 12 , 387–394 (1999).10360979
69. Reva B , Antipin Y &amp; Sander C Predicting the functional impact of protein mutations: application to cancer genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 39 , e118 (2011).21727090
70. Shihab HA , Predicting the functional, molecular, and phenotypic consequences of amino acid substitutions using hidden Markov models. Hum Mutat 34 , 57–65 (2013).23033316
71. Shihab HA , Gough J , Cooper DN , Day IN &amp; Gaunt TR Predicting the functional consequences of cancer-associated amino acid substitutions. Bioinformatics 29 , 1504–1510 (2013).23620363
72. Shihab HA , Ranking non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms based on disease concepts. Hum Genomics 8 , 11 (2014).24980617
73. Liu X , Jian X &amp; Boerwinkle E dbNSFP: a lightweight database of human nonsynonymous SNPs and their functional predictions. Hum Mutat 32 , 894–899 (2011).21520341
74. Liu X , Jian X &amp; Boerwinkle E dbNSFP v2.0: a database of human non-synonymous SNVs and their functional predictions and annotations. Hum Mutat 34 , E2393–2402 (2013).23843252
75. Liu X , Wu C , Li C &amp; Boerwinkle E dbNSFP v3.0: A One-Stop Database of Functional Predictions and Annotations for Human Nonsynonymous and Splice-Site SNVs. Hum Mutat 37 , 235–241 (2016).26555599
76. Fadista J , Oskolkov N , Hansson O &amp; Groop L LoFtool: A gene intolerance score based on loss-of-function variants in 60 706 individuals. Bioinformatics 33 , 471–474 (2017).27563026
77. G. TEx Consortium. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat Genet 45 , 580–585 (2013).23715323
78. G. TEx Consortium. Human genomics. The genotype-tissue expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: Multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science (New York, N.Y.) 348 , 648–660 (2015).
79. Lek M , Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature 536 , 285–291 (2016).27535533
80. Tennessen JA , Evolution and functional impact of rare coding variation from deep sequencing of human exomes. Science 337 , 64–69 (2012).22604720
81. Boyle AP , Annotation of functional variation in personal genomes using RegulomeDB. Genome Res 22 , 1790–1797 (2012).22955989
82. Encode Project Consortium. The ENCODE (ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements) Project. Science (New York, N.Y.) 306 , 636–640 (2004).
83. Encode Project Consortium. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. Nature 489 , 57–74 (2012).22955616
84. Barrett T , NCBI GEO: Archive for high-throughput functional genomic data. Nucleic Acids Res 37 , D885–890 (2009).18940857
85. Agarwal V , Bell GW , Nam JW &amp; Bartel DP Predicting effective microRNA target sites in mammalian mRNAs. Elife 4 (2015).
86. Griffiths-Jones S The microRNA Registry. Nucleic Acids Res 32 , D109–111 (2004).14681370
87. Griffiths-Jones S , Grocock RJ , van Dongen S , Bateman A &amp; Enright AJ miRBase: MicroRNA sequences, targets and gene nomenclature. Nucleic. Acids Res 34 , D140–144 (2006).16381832
88. Griffiths-Jones S , Saini HK , van Dongen S &amp; Enright AJ miRBase: Tools for microRNA genomics. Nucleic. Acids Res 36 , D154–158 (2008).17991681
89. Anders S , Pyl PT &amp; Huber W HTSeq--a Python framework to work with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31 , 166–169 (2015).25260700
90. Love MI , Huber W &amp; Anders S Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome biology 15 , 550 (2014).25516281
91. Milani P , Cell freezing protocol suitable for ATAC-Seq on motor neurons derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Sci Rep 6 , 25474 (2016).27146274
92. Zhang Y , Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome biology 9 , R137 (2008).18798982
93. Eden E , Navon R , Steinfeld I , Lipson D &amp; Yakhini Z GOrilla: a tool for discovery and visualization of enriched GO terms in ranked gene lists. BMC bioinformatics 10 , 48 (2009).19192299
94. Holewinski RJ , Parker SJ , Matlock AD , Venkatraman V &amp; Van Eyk JE Methods for SWATH: Data Independent Acquisition on TripleTOF Mass Spectrometers. Methods Mol Biol 1410 , 265–279 (2016).26867750
95. Kirk JA , Pacemaker-induced transient asynchrony suppresses heart failure progression. Science translational medicine 7 , 319ra207 (2015).
96. Parker SJ , Venkatraman V &amp; Van Eyk JE Effect of peptide assay library size and composition in targeted data-independent acquisition-MS analyses. Proteomics 16 , 2221–2237 (2016).27432805
97. Teo G , mapDIA: Preprocessing and statistical analysis of quantitative proteomics data from data independent acquisition mass spectrometry. J Proteomics 129 , 108–120 (2015).26381204
98. Arrasate M &amp; Finkbeiner S Automated microscope system for determining factors that predict neuronal fate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 102 , 3840–3845 (2005).15738408
99. Arrasate M &amp; Finkbeiner S Protein aggregates in Huntington’s disease. Experimental neurology 238 , 1–11 (2012).22200539
100. Arrasate M , Mitra S , Schweitzer ES , Segal MR &amp; Finkbeiner S Inclusion body formation reduces levels of mutant huntingtin and the risk of neuronal death. Nature 431 , 805–810 (2004).15483602
101. Miller J , Identifying polyglutamine protein species in situ that best predict neurodegeneration. Nat. Chem. Biol 7 , 925–934 (2011).22037470
102. Mitra S , Tsvetkov AS &amp; Finkbeiner S Single neuron ubiquitin-proteasome dynamics accompanying inclusion body formation in Huntington disease. J. Biol. Chem 284 , 4398–4403 (2009b).19074152
103. Tsvetkov AS , Proteostasis of polyglutamine varies among neurons and predicts neurodegeneration. Nat. Chem. Biol. 9 , 586–592 (2013).23873212
104. HD iPSC Consortium, Induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with Huntington’s disease show CAG-repeat-expansion-associated phenotypes. Cell Stem Cell 11 , 264–278 (2012).22748968
105. Barmada SJ , Cytoplasmic mislocalization of TDP-43 is toxic to neurons and enhanced by a mutation associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Neurosci 30 , 639–649 (2010b).20071528
106. Bilican B , Mutant induced pluripotent stem cell lines recapitulate aspects of TDP-43 proteinopathies and reveal cell-specific vulnerability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 109 , 5803–5808 (2012).22451909
107. Serio A , Astrocyte pathology and the absence of non-cell autonomy in an induced pluripotent stem cell model of TDP-43 proteinopathy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 110 , 4697–4702 (2013).23401527
108. Marchetto MC , A model for neural development and treatment of Rett syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell 143 , 527–539 (2010).21074045
