LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9319162
2572
Curr Opin Neurol
Curr Opin Neurol
Current opinion in neurology
1350-7540
1473-6551

33928929
8263471
10.1097/WCO.0000000000000947
NIHMS1694784
Article
Update on neuroimaging in Alzheimer’s disease
Sintini Irene
Whitwell Jennifer L. *
Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
* Corresponding author: Jennifer L. Whitwell, PhD, Professor of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St SW, Rochester MN 55905, Tel: 507-284-5576, Fax: 507-284-9778, Whitwell.jennifer@mayo.edu
6 5 2021
01 8 2021
01 8 2022
34 4 525531
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Purpose of review:

The purpose of this review was to discuss the contribution of the most recent neuroimaging studies to our understanding of the mechanisms underlying Alzheimer’s disease.

Recent findings:

Studies have applied cross-sectional and longitudinal PET, structural and resting-state functional MRI to primarily investigate 1) how Alzheimer’s disease pathological hallmarks like tau and amyloid-beta build up and spread across the brain at different disease stage and in different disease phenotypes; and 2) how the spreading of these proteins is related to atrophy, to neuronal network disruption and to neuroinflammation.

Summary:

The findings of these studies offer insight on the mechanisms that drive the pathological and clinical progression of Alzheimer’s disease, highlighting their multifactorial nature, which is a crucial aspect for the development of disease-modifying therapeutics and can be captured with multimodal imaging approaches.

amyloid
functional connectivity
tau-PET
multimodal imaging
neuroinflammation

Introduction

Neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau accumulate in the brain of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients following stereotypical patterns that can be investigated with positron emission tomography (PET). Early studies utilized tau-PET to describe regional distributions of tau pathology in AD, as well as preclinical and prodromal phases of the disease. Longitudinal tau-PET data have now become available, with studies using large and diverse cohorts including individuals from preclinical to advanced disease stages, and different clinical phenotypes of AD. Rates of tau accumulation have been assessed in relation to cognitive decline, baseline tau-PET uptake and other neuroimaging biomarkers. Another important recent development has been the availability of tau-PET cohorts with autopsy, which have provided valuable pathological validation of tau-PET, albeit with some caveats. Attention has also been given to brain network alterations in the course of the disease and their relation to the pathological hallmarks of AD, including both tau and amyloid-beta (Aβ). Particularly, many studies attempted to describe the network-level mechanisms that tau and Aβ may use to spread across the brain, employing advanced mathematical modeling techniques and subject-specific approaches. In addition to this large body of work focusing on tau-PET, neuroimaging studies investigated the potential role of other biological processes in AD, such as neuroinflammation. Although neuroinflammation quantified on PET with microglia activation has been extensively investigated in AD in the past years, its role in the pathophysiology of the disease is still being debated. Recent studies examined multimodal relationships of neuroinflammation with other AD neuroimaging biomarkers, such as tau-PET uptake and atrophy, as well as its relationship to cognition. The present review will discuss recent advances in these areas of research in AD.

Longitudinal tau-PET from cognitively unimpaired to Alzheimer’s disease

Several studies investigated the temporal evolution of tau spatial patterns using longitudinal tau-PET imaging. Such studies expanded the findings of the very few previously published investigations, with larger and more phenotypically diverse AD cohorts and spanning over longer time periods, with multiple scans. In cognitively unimpaired individuals, the only independent predictor of high rates of tau accumulation was amyloidosis [1]. Similarly, another study reported that older cognitively unimpaired individuals with high Aβ-PET levels were most likely to display high rates of tau-PET accumulation in temporal regions, making them a feasible group to recruit for clinical trials targeting tau [2]. When preclinical AD individuals were followed over 7 years, rate of tau accumulation in the inferior temporal neocortex was associated with rate of cognitive decline, while Aβ accumulation was associated with subsequent tau accumulation, and this sequence of successive Aβ and tau changes in neocortex was found to mediate the association of initial Aβ with final cognition [3]. Therefore, it was concluded that Aβ-PET is useful to detect early Alzheimer pathology, whereas tau-PET is useful to track disease progression [3]. In line with the hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers, one study showed that Aβ accumulation rate was attenuated during the surge in tau burden in the cortex and reached a plateau, saturating [4]. The study commented that tau may also reach a saturation point but the later appearance of neocortical tau pathology may limit the observation of attenuation and future studies will need to include AD patients at an advanced stage [4]. In four large cohorts of participants, including cognitively unimpaired, mild cognitively impaired (MCI) and AD individuals, who underwent longitudinal tau- and Aβ-PET, females and younger Aβ-positive individuals accumulated tau at a faster rate, while Aβ accumulation was greater in APOE e4 carriers and older individuals [5]. In cognitively impaired individuals, younger age and higher baseline Aβ were associated with higher rates of tau accumulation in another study [1]. Early onset AD may, therefore, be a highly advantageous group in which to conduct clinical trials that target tau.

Data-driven approaches have been applied to describe baseline and longitudinal patterns of tau accumulation and their associations to other neuroimaging biomarkers of AD, such as atrophy from MRI. Principal components analysis of baseline tau-PET uptake was shown to be useful to predict subsequent rates of tau accumulation and clinical progression of AD [6], consistent with a study in autosomal dominant AD [7]. A couple of studies have also shown that baseline tau-PET predicted future rates of atrophy [8], independently of baseline cortical thickness [9]. Again with principal component analysis, another study analyzed a cohort of amnestic AD, language variant of AD (i.e. logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA)) and posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), showing that longitudinal neuroimaging biomarkers in AD were different for MRI and tau-PET and across phenotypes, particularly for MRI [10]. Baseline tau tracer retention showed the highest fidelity to clinical phenotype, while tau rates of change presented common patterns across phenotypes, particularly in frontal and temporal lobes [10]. The fact that longitudinal rates of tau accumulation differed from cross-sectional patterns of both tau-PET and MRI suggests that atrophy lags behind tau in the course of the disease [10]. Cross-sectionally, the relationship between tau and atrophy also differs across phenotypes according to age [11]. Taken together, the results from these studies support the important causal role of tau as a driver of neurodegeneration and clinical dysfunction in AD.

Pathological correlates of tau-PET imaging

The results from tau-PET studies must be interpreted in the context of the tracer ability to match neuropathological findings, particularly for individuals that are cognitively unimpaired and at early AD stages. Most tau-PET studies so far used the [18F]flortaucipir tracer, which has high affinity for tau in AD. Some recent studies sought to determine the accuracy of antemortem [18F]flortaucipir-PET in detecting tau neuropathology [12–15]. These studies demonstrated that [18F]flortaucipir-PET uptake correlates well with the density and distribution of AD-type tau neurofibrillary tangles at high Braak neuropathological stages (V and VI [12, 13] or ≥ IV [14]), with high sensitivity and good specificity, particularly in neocortical and limbic regions. However, its performance weakens in detecting tau at lower Braak stages, in non-AD tauopathies and subcortically [16]. These findings establish [18F]flortaucipir-PET as a reliable biomarker of advanced tau pathology in AD, with potential for diagnostic and clinical trials utility, while more caution and further analyses are warranted for its use at early disease stages as well as in non-AD tauopathies. New tracers like [18F]-MK-6240 showed promising results across all six Braak stages [17], although these findings still need to be validated against autopsy data.

Brain network alterations across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum

In addition to tau and Aβ deposition, AD is characterized by alterations in brain networks. Recent studies looked at brain network measures across disease spectrum and phenotypes, investigating their correlates with other neuroimaging and cognitive markers. In healthy aging, there is widespread age-related brain network reorganization, potentially associated with general cognitive performance [18]. In preclinical AD, decreased connectivity of the medial temporal lobe starts with the anterior-temporal system, and then it progresses to involve the posterior-medial system, with the emergence of structural brain changes and hyperconnectivity within the medial temporal lobe [19]. This suggests that functional connectivity between the medial temporal lobe and the anterior-temporal and posterior-medial systems could serve as stage-specific functional markers in early AD [19]. While loss of connectivity in the default mode network (DMN) is common across AD phenotypes, each phenotype also presents with syndrome-specific functional connectivity alterations relative to healthy individuals [20]. The amnestic and language AD phenotypes displayed different patterns of network alterations, consistent with their clinical presentation: greater functional connectivity alterations were present from the hippocampus in the amnestic variant and from the inferior frontal gyrus in the aphasic variant, particularly in the language-dominant left hemisphere [20]. Accordingly, individual atrophy localized to syndrome-specific and symptom-specific brain networks in patients with a clinical diagnosis of AD [21]. Even though patient-specific maps of atrophy showed variability across individuals, they all occurred within a common AD-specific brain network, including the medial temporal cortex, precuneus cortex and angular gyrus [21].

Tau and Aβ spreading mechanisms linked to functional and structural connectivity

Brain network alterations are an important aspect of the pathophysiology of AD and they have been shown to map onto atrophy [21]. Joining a growing body of research, a number of recent studies investigated in vivo tau and Aβ spatiotemporal patterns in relation to neuronal networks, in an attempt to elucidate the mechanisms that the two pathological proteins use to spread across the brain in healthy aging and in the AD spectrum. These studies adopted a multimodal approach on large cohorts of participants, combining data from PET for protein deposition with resting state fMRI or, more rarely, FDG-PET for functional networks, and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) with tractography for structural networks.

Although none of them can prove causality, the majority of these studies provided evidence in support of the spreading of tau from neuron to neuron through functional and anatomical connections, from one or more spreading sites (frequently referred to as ‘epicenters’) (Figure 1), whose locations can evolve during the disease course, confirming in vivo the findings from previous animal models or human autopsy studies [22–25]. These results were found at the group-level in most studies and in some cases partially confirmed at the individual level [22, 23]. However, two studies proposed personalized models [24, 26]. One study proposed a connectivity-based patient-specific approach to predict future rates of tau accumulation, which may prove to be valuable in clinical trials [24]. A second study developed two personalized competing models for the diffusion of tau based on either intracellular spreading in a connectivity-weighted network or extracellular spreading in a distance-weighted network, concluding that it is more likely that misfolded tau spreads along neuronal connections, although both models had good predictive capabilities [26].

While most studies inferred their conclusions for tau spreading mechanisms using cross-sectional tau-PET data, a few developed models using longitudinal tau data [23–26]. One study introduced the concept of ‘tau-weighted functional connectivity’, showing that, in AD, the rate at which a region accumulates tau is proportional to the levels of tau in all the functionally connected regions and depends on the strength of such functional connections [25]. This finding was confirmed in a second study that included atypical presentations of AD [23]. Most studies agreed on functional connections being a more important factor than spatial proximity for the spreading of tau from one region to another [22, 23, 25, 26]. Although the proposed models showed good capabilities in predicting tau patterns, all of them had residual errors and were not able to explain the entirety of tau variance, implying that other factors are playing a role in tau diffusion mechanisms.

Several studies highlighted the differences between tau and Aβ in relation to neuronal networks. Aβ patterns overlapped mainly with the DMN, whereas tau patterns overlapped with several different networks and they were associated with white matter integrity from DTI and with cognition [27]. The role of Aβ in enhancing tau diffusion was suggested by one study that modeled tau spread from the entorhinal cortex through a cascade of secondary seeding events informed by macroscale functional or structural connections [22]. This model systematically underestimated the levels of tau in regions where Aβ was present, suggesting that tau spreads through the limbic network in normal aging and that the presence of Aβ accelerates tau tangles expression in neocortical regions [22]. This finding provides mechanistic information on protein spreading, which are consistent with the studies discussed previously on longitudinal tau-PET and brain networks alterations. This study also showed that DTI-based models had superior performance than fMRI in predicting tau deposition, pointing to DTI tractography as a promising technique to generate connectivity measurements. When FDG-PET was employed instead of resting state fMRI to construct functional networks, Aβ was positively related to metabolic network measurements at relatively early phases of AD, while tau burden showed a negative relationship at late phase of AD [28]. The authors suggested that these results might provide some evidence for the speculation that Aβ deposition is protective to neuronal activity [28]. Studies have also highlighted tau-related and not Aβ- related axonal degeneration in AD, measured with neurofilament light chain (NfL) from plasma [29] or from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [30] or with neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging (NODDI) [31].

While most studies recruited participants that presented with the typical amnestic presentation of AD, two focused on atypical AD phenotypes, such as PCA and LPA, again highlighting differences between tau and Aβ in their association to brain networks characteristics [23, 32]. A graph-theory analysis showed that, in both PCA and LPA, cortical regions with high levels of tau were more likely to have less functional connections, suggesting vulnerability to local network failures, whereas regions strongly functionally connected to the disease ‘epicenters’ (i.e. lateral temporal for LPA and occipital for PCA) were more likely to have higher levels of tau [23] (Figure 1). On the other hand, cortical regions with high levels of Aβ were more likely to be functional hubs, with a high number of functional connections important for resilience to cascading network failures [23].

Since tau and Aβ are not exclusively present in the AD spectrum, investigating their patterns in healthy aging is essential to better understand AD pathogenesis. A few studies focused on healthy aging, recruiting younger and older adults without cognitive impairments [33–35], with findings consistent with the results discussed above on AD. Early tau in the entorhinal cortex spread to downstream cortical regions through functional connections, accelerated by the presence of Aβ [33]. Tau pathology was shown to play a role in disconnecting the hippocampus from specific medial temporal lobe memory systems [34]. In clinically normal older adults, lower DMN connectivity was associated with faster cortical thinning, but only in those with elevated baseline Aβ-PET uptake [35].

Multimodal relationships of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease

In addition to hypometabolism and Aβ and tau pathology, PET can be used to measure neuroinflammation in the brain, quantified as activated microglia. Neuroinflammation is a potential contributor to the pathogenesis of AD, but its role (i.e. protective or toxic), its temporal trajectory and its associations to other biomarkers of the disease are being debated. In agreement with previous literature, one recent study reported a biphasic behavior of activated microglia, quantified as [11C]PK11195 binding, with two peaks: the first one driven by Aβ and possibly having a protective role, and the second one driven by tau and being neurotoxic [36]. However, a second study identified a unimodal trajectory of neuroinflammation, measured with [11C]PBR28-PET, with a linear increase along the AD spectrum: first, the increase in microglial activation is interpreted as a specific response to Aβ deposition in the early phase of AD and then as a non-specific response to neurodegeneration present in AD and non-AD dementias [37]. It is important to note that the hypotheses on a protective versus toxic role of activated microglia in AD remain speculative in imaging studies [37]. Both studies showed a correlation between tau and microglial activation levels: the rising in tau burden measured with longitudinal [18F]flortaucipir-PET over 2 years correlated with rising levels of neuroinflammation in prodromal AD [36] and an increase in both microglial activation and tau pathology, from second generation PET tracer [18F] -MK-6240, was shown throughout the progression of AD, in Aβ positive individuals [37]. This second study suggested a temporal order of AD biomarkers, with initial Aβ deposition, followed by neocortical microglial activation, and then medial temporal tau pathology [37].

The potential effect of neuroinflammation on cognitive decline in AD is being investigated, particularly in relation to tau and atrophy. One study reported that, together, temporo-parietal tau pathology and anterior temporal neuroinflammation predicted longitudinal cognitive decline in patients with symptomatic AD over 3 years, over and above MRI atrophy [38]. In contrast, another study found a strong spatial overlap of tau-PET uptake, microglial activation and grey matter atrophy in AD, suggesting that these biomarkers interact with each other, but demonstrated that both tau and neuroinflammation effects on cognition were fully mediated by grey matter atrophy [39]. Similarly, hippocampal grey matter atrophy and parahippocampal cortical thinning were shown to have a direct effect on cognition, not mediated by microglial activation, in MCI and AD, cross-sectionally, although atrophy and increased microglial activation were associated to each other [40]. Taken together, these studies have implications for disease-modifying therapeutics targeting tau and neuroinflammation in AD.

A study focusing on early onset AD with FDG- and [11C]PK11195-PET [41] showed a spatial overlapping of microglia activation and hypometabolism in AD signature regions, such as the temporo-parietal cortex, and also in frontal and occipital regions, with significant correlations between the two biological changes [41]. Neuroinflammation is also related to the functional network alterations in AD. In the same study, FDG-PET was used to construct brain networks and disruption of frontal connectivity was found to be related to the metabolic and microglia effects [41]. A second study measured tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α in CSF, an inflammatory cytokine marker that is released during microglial inflammatory response and can impair neuronal function [42]. Higher CSF TNF-α levels were associated with lower resting-state fMRI functional connectivity among brain regions important for cognition and this effect was moderated by APOE ε4 status, suggesting that that pro-inflammatory mechanisms may contribute to reduced connectivity [42].

Conclusion

Work over the past year has helped to further refine our view of the temporal ordering of imaging biomarkers in AD and provided important mechanistic insights into disease spread. Further longitudinal follow-up, spanning from the earliest to the most advanced stages of the disease, will be needed to clarify tau-PET uptake patterns, possibly with second-generation tracers that may be more sensitive to early stage tau, and their relation to cognition and the other disease biomarkers, particularly functional connectivity and neuroinflammation.

Acknowledgements

JLW is funded by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R01-AG50603, R01-NS89757, R01-DC12519, R01-DC14942, R01-AG37491 and RF1-NS112153.

Figure 1. In 31 PCA participants (A) and 27 LPA participants (B), on average, regions more strongly functionally connected to tau epicenters showed higher level of tau-PET uptake [23]. Epicenters were in the left lateral occipital region for PCA and the left temporal region for LPA. SUVR: standard uptake value ratio. CI: confidence interval.

Key Points

Aβ-PET uptake and younger age are important predictors of future higher rates of tau accumulation.

The ability of tau-PET [18F]flortaucipir tracer to capture the density and distribution of neurofibrillary tangles is higher in cortical regions and after Braak stage IV.

The spreading of tau and Aβ across the brain primarily occurs through functional and structural networks measurable on fMRI and DTI, respectively.

The role of neuroinflammation throughout the course of Alzheimer’s disease remains debatable, although it is related to the other biomarkers of the disease.


References

* References of special interest

** References of outstanding interest

1. Jack CR Jr , , Predicting future rates of tau accumulation on PET. Brain, 2020. 143 (10 ): p. 3136–3150.33094327

**This study identifies high Aβ in cognitively unimpaired individuals and younger age in Alzheimer’s disease patients as the most important predictors of future higher rates of tau accumulation. This finding is crucial for the recruitment of participants in tau-targeting clinical trials.

2. Knopman DS , , Association of Initial beta-Amyloid Levels With Subsequent Flortaucipir Positron Emission Tomography Changes in Persons Without Cognitive Impairment. Jama Neurology, 2020.
3. Hanseeuw BJ , Betensky RA , and Jacobs HIL , Association of Amyloid and Tau With Cognition in Preclinical Alzheimer Disease: A Longitudinal Study (vol, pg, 2019). Jama Neurology, 2019. 76 (8 ): p. 986–986.

*This study followed preclinical Alzheimer’s disease individuals with multiple PET scans for 7 years, highlighting the importance of tau-PET in tracking disease progression and of Aβ-PET in detecting the disease at early stages.

4. Baek MS , , Temporal trajectories of in vivo tau and amyloid-β accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease. European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging, 2020.
5. Smith R , , The accumulation rate of tau aggregates is higher in females and younger amyloid-positive subjects. Brain, 2020.

*This large study concluded that younger and female Aβ-positive individuals experience higher rates of tau accumulation, while Aβ accumulation is higher in older individuals and APOE e4 carriers. This findings are important for clinical trials design.

6. Cho HN , , Principal components of tau positron emission tomography and longitudinal tau accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Research &amp; Therapy, 2020. 12 (1 ).
7. Sanchez JS , , Longitudinal amyloid and tau accumulation in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease: findings from the Colombia-Boston (COLBOS) biomarker study. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy, 2021. 13 (1 ): p. 27.
8. Guo T , , Longitudinal cognitive and biomarker measurements support a unidirectional pathway in Alzheimer’s Disease pathophysiology. Biological psychiatry, 2020.
9. La Joie R , , Prospective longitudinal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with the intensity and topography of baseline tau-PET. Science Translational Medicine, 2020. 12 (524 ).
10. Sintini I , , Longitudinal neuroimaging biomarkers differ across Alzheimer’s disease phenotypes. Brain, 2020.
11. Josephs KA , , MRI and flortaucipir relationships in Alzheimer’s phenotypes are heterogeneous. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology, 2020. 7 (5 ): p. 707–721.32293805
12. Fleisher AS , , Positron Emission Tomography Imaging With [F-18]flortaucipir and Postmortem Assessment of Alzheimer Disease Neuropathologic Changes. Jama Neurology, 2020. 77 (7 ): p. 829–839.32338734

**This study collected tau-PET and autopsy data on a large cohort of Alzheimer’s disease patients, demonstrating that the flortaucipir tracer is a reliable marker of cortical tau pathology at advanced Braak stages. This is an important step in support of the diagnostic use of tau-PET.

13. Soleimani-Meigooni DN , , 18F-flortaucipir PET to autopsy comparisons in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Brain, 2020. 143 (11 ): p. 3477–3494.33141172
14. Lowe VJ , , Tau-positron emission tomography correlates with neuropathology findings. Alzheimers &amp; Dementia, 2020. 16 (3 ): p. 561–571.
15. Pontecorvo MJ , , Comparison of regional flortaucipir PET with quantitative tau immunohistochemistry in three subjects with Alzheimer’s disease pathology: a clinicopathological study. Ejnmmi Research, 2020. 10 (1 ).
16. Ghirelli A , , Sensitivity-Specificity of Tau and Amyloid beta Positron Emission Tomography in Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. Annals of Neurology, 2020. 88 (5 ): p. 1009–1022.32869362
17. Pascoal TA , , 18F-MK-6240 PET for early and late detection of neurofibrillary tangles. Brain, 2020. 143 (9 ): p. 2818–2830.32671408
18. Bagarinao E , , Reorganization of brain networks and its association with general cognitive performance over the adult lifespan. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9 .
19. Berron D , , Medial temporal lobe connectivity and its associations with cognition in early Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2020. 143 : p. 1233–1248.32252068
20. Martersteck A , , Differential neurocognitive network perturbation in amnestic and aphasic Alzheimer disease. Neurology, 2020. 94 (7 ): p. E699–E704.31969462
21. Tetreault AM , , Network localization of clinical, cognitive, and neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2020. 143 : p. 1249–1260.32176777
22. Vogel JW , , Spread of pathological tau proteins through communicating neurons in human Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Communications, 2020. 11 (1 ): p. 1–15.

*This study developed mathematical models to describe the spreading of tau in the Alzheimer’s disease continuum. It provides evidence for the trans-neuronal spread of tau and the acceleration of this process in the presence of amyloid.

23. Sintini I , , Tau and Amyloid Relationships to Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Atypical Alzheimer’s Disease. Annals of Neurology, 2020. 88 : p. S106–S107.

*This study showed that, in atypical presentations of Alzheimer’s disease, tau and Aβ relate differently to resting state fMRI measures. It provides evidence for longitudinal tau accumulation through functional connections.

24. Franzmeier N , , Patient-centered connectivity-based prediction of tau pathology spread in Alzheimer’s disease. Science advances, 2020. 6 (48 ): p. eabd1327.33246962
25. Franzmeier N , , Functional brain architecture is associated with the rate of tau accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Communications, 2020. 11 (1 ).

*This study investigated the relation between longitudinal tau-PET patterns and functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. The findings support the hypothesis of trans-neuronal tau propagation.

26. Schäfer A , Mormino EC , and Kuhl E , Network Diffusion Modeling Explains Longitudinal Tau PET Data. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 2020. 14 : p. 1370.
27. Pereira JB , , Amyloid and tau accumulate across distinct spatial networks and are differentially associated with brain connectivity. Elife, 2019. 8 : p. e50830.31815669
28. Sun X , , Distinct relationships of amyloid-beta and tau deposition to cerebral glucose metabolic networks in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience Letters, 2020. 717 .
29. Benedet AL , , Stage-specific links between plasma neurofilament light and imaging biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2020.
30. Pereira JB , , Untangling the association of amyloid-β and tau with synaptic and axonal loss in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2020.
31. Wen Q , , Tau-related white-matter alterations along spatially selective pathways. NeuroImage, 2020. 226 : p. 117560.33189932
32. Ranasinghe KG , , Neurophysiological signatures in Alzheimer’s disease are distinctly associated with TAU, amyloid-β accumulation, and cognitive decline. Science translational medicine, 2020. 12 (534 ).
33. Adams JN , , Cortical tau deposition follows patterns of entorhinal functional connectivity in aging. Elife, 2019. 8 .
34. Harrison TM , , Tau deposition is associated with functional isolation of the hippocampus in aging. Nature Communications, 2019. 10 .
35. Hampton OL , , Resting-state functional connectivity and amyloid burden influence longitudinal cortical thinning in the default mode network in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. NeuroImage: Clinical, 2020. 28 : p. 102407.32942175
36. Ismail R , , The relationships between neuroinflammation, beta-amyloid and tau deposition in Alzheimer’s disease: a longitudinal PET study. Journal of Neuroinflammation, 2020. 17 (1 ).
37. Zou J , , Microglial activation, but not tau pathology, is independently associated with amyloid positivity and memory impairment. Neurobiology of aging, 2020. 85 : p. 11–21.31698286
38. Malpetti M , , Microglial activation and tau burden predict cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2020. 143 (5 ): p. 1588–1602.32380523

*This study showed that baseline tau and neuroinflammation predict cognitive decline in the subsequent 3 years in symptomatic Alzheimer’s disease patients, outperforming MRI atrophy. This highlights the importance of PET biomarkers.

39. Su L , , Relationship between tau, neuroinflammation and atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease: The NIMROD study. Information Fusion, 2020. 67 : p. 116–124.

**This multimodal study combined data from multi-tracer PET and MRI, showing that neuroinflammation, tau and atrophy co-localize in Alzheimer’s disease, but atrophy fully mediates the effect of the other two on cognitive impairment. This has implication for clinical trials targeting tau and neuroinflammation.

40. Nicastro N , , Gray matter changes related to microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of Aging, 2020. 94 : p. 236–242.32663716
41. Tondo G , , The combined effects of microglia activation and brain glucose hypometabolism in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy, 2020. 12 : p. 1–10.
42. Contreras JA , , Functional connectivity among brain regions affected in Alzheimer’s disease is associated with CSF TNF-alpha in APOE4 carriers. Neurobiology of Aging, 2020. 86 : p. 112–122.31870643
