LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


1275002
4431
J Allergy Clin Immunol
J Allergy Clin Immunol
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
0091-6749
1097-6825

29980278
8034427
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.05.008
NIHMS1685972
Article
Epithelial origin of eosinophilic esophagitis
Rochman Mark PhD
Azouz Nurit P. PhD
Rothenberg Marc E. MD, PhD
Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine.
Corresponding author: Marc E. Rothenberg, MD, PhD, Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, 3333 Burnet Ave, MLC7028, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039. rothenberg@cchmc.org.
23 3 2021
7 2018
09 4 2021
142 1 1023
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic, allergen-driven inflammatory disease of the esophagus characterized predominantly by eosinophilic inflammation, leading to esophageal dysfunction. Converging data have placed the esophageal epithelium at the center of disease pathogenesis. In particular, the main EoE disease susceptibility loci at 2p23 and 5p22 encode for gene products that are produced by the esophageal epithelium: the intracellular protease calpain 14 and thymic stromal lymphopoietin, respectively. Furthermore, genetic and functional data establish a primary role for impaired epithelial barrier function in disease susceptibility and pathoetiology. Additionally, the EoE transcriptome, a set of genes dysregulated in the esophagi of patients with EoE, is enriched in genes that encode for proteins involved in esophageal epithelial cell differentiation. This transcriptome has a high proportion of esophagus-specific epithelial genes that are notable for the unexpected enrichment in genes encoding for proteases and protease inhibitors, as well as in IL-1 family genes, demonstrating a previously unappreciated role for innate immunity responses in the esophagus under homeostatic conditions. Among these pathways, basal production of the serine protease inhibitor, Kazal-type 7 (SPINK7) has been demonstrated to be part of the normal differentiation program of esophageal epithelium. Profound lost expression of SPINK7 occurs in patients with EoE and is sufficient for unleashing increased proteolytic activity (including urokinase plasminogen activator), impaired barrier function, and production of large quantities of proinflammatory and proallergic cytokines, including thymic stromal lymphopoietin. Collectively, we put forth a model in which the esophagus is normally equipped as an anti-inflammatory sensing organ and that defects in this pathway, mediated by epithelial protease/protease inhibitor imbalances, unleash inflammatory responses resulting in disorders, such as EoE.

Eosinophilic esophagitis
eosinophilic oesophagitis
esophageal epithelium
epithelial differentiation
epithelial barrier
proteases
protease inhibitors
serine protease inhibitors
Kazal type

Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic, allergen-driven eosinophilic inflammatory disease of the esophagus. The disease often coexists with other atopic disorders; has a growing prevalence reaching nearly 1:2000 subjects, indicating that it is considered a rare orphan disease; and is associated with an annual cost of $1 billion in the United States alone.1,2 Symptoms include failure to thrive, vomiting, chest and abdominal pain, dysphagia, and food impaction, progressing in this order from childhood to adulthood.3 Compared with other chronic diseases of childhood, EoE has one of the lowest qualities of life, likely because of the restricted diets, chronic pain, relapsing nature, and need for recurrent endoscopies.4,5

The pathogenesis of EoE involves a complex interplay of genetic, environmental, and immunologic components.6–8 Prior studies have demonstrated a high prevalence of white patients with EoE, and approximately 70% of the patients are male.9 A genetic component is supported by twin studies6 because monozygotic twins have 41% disease concordance compared with 22% in dizygotic twins and 2.4% in nontwin siblings of patients with EoE. These results highlight a critical contribution of genetics, as well as early-life environmental factors that account for more than 80% of the phenotypic variation of the disease.7,10–12 Perinatal risk factors for EoE include maternal or newborn fever, antibiotic use, proton pump inhibitor use, and admission into the neonatal intensive care unit. Interestingly, exposure to furry pets in the first year of life protects against EoE.13 Evidence is also emerging that implicates microbiota as a potentially critical factor in esophageal development, epithelial barrier function, and induction of EoE.14–16

EoE is considered to be a type 2 immune disease that often co-occurs with atopic diseases, including atopic dermatitis (AD), asthma, and food allergies.17–20 As such, EoE is characterized by increased levels of the type 2 cytokines, which are critical for promoting cellular responses in patients with EoE. Early mouse studies revealed IL-5 as an important contributing factor for eosinophilic development and tissue infiltration and for remodeling.21,22 Similarly, IL-13 is highly upregulated in esophageal biopsy specimens from patients with EoE,23 and IL-13 overexpression in mice is sufficient to induce esophageal eosinophilia and other structural esophageal changes that are reminiscent of those in patients with EoE.24 In addition, IL-13 stimulation in esophageal epithelial cells induces a molecular transcript signature that overlaps with the esophageal genes that are altered in patients with EoE, known as the EoE transcriptome.23,25 The critical role of IL-13 signaling in EoE pathogenesis is further supported by successful clinical trials of anti–IL-13 antibodies for the treatment of EoE.26

Analysis of gene expression in human tissues revealed that the esophageal mucosa has a unique transcription signature of approximately 250 esophagus-specific genes (https://www.proteinatlas.org/humanproteome/esophagus).27 Esophageal genes are considered to be enriched in the esophagus if their expression is at least 5-fold greater in the esophagus than in any other interrogated tissue. Nearly 40% of the esophagus-specific genes have dysregulated expression in patients with EoE, designated as Eso-EoE genes, with the majority being downregulated.28 Strikingly, Eso-EoE genes were highly enriched in protease-related activities, uncovering proteolytic activity as an intrinsic property of the esophageal tissue and a putative operational pathway in EoE pathogenesis. These genes included serine peptidase inhibitors from the serpin family (serine protease inhibitors [SERPINs]); serine protease inhibitors, Kazal-type (SPINKs); and the calpain protease calpain 14 (CAPN14), the gene for which is located in the 2p23 locus that is strongly genetically linked to increased EoE risk.29,30 Additionally, whole-exome sequencing (WES) analysis identified potentially damaging rare mutations in 18 Eso-EoE genes in patients with active EoE, some carrying more than 1 mutation.28,31 Collectively, these findings uncover potentially critical contributions of the esophageal epithelial responses to maintaining the epithelial barrier in the homeostatic esophagus and to the initiation and propagation of EoE.

Several recent reviews focused on EoE genetics and pathophysiology and involvement of multiple cells, including T and B cells, mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, and dendritic cells, in disease pathogenesis.32–35 In this review we will explore our understanding of the esophageal epithelium in the pathogenesis of EoE, focusing on epithelial genes, inflammatory pathways, barrier function, and the balance of proteases and protease inhibitors.

PROPERTIES OF THE ESOPHAGEAL EPITHELIUM

The esophagus is classically considered a simple organ involved in transferring food and liquids from the oral cavity to the stomach. The embryonic foregut gives rise to the esophagus, as well as the respiratory tract, stomach, liver, and pancreas. After expression of the transcription factors NK2 homeobox 1 (NKX2.1) and SRY-box-2 (SOX2), the anterior region of the foregut is differentiated into the trachea and esophagus, respectively.36 Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and the WNT signaling pathway have been implicated in tracheal-esophageal separation. High levels of WNT signaling molecules preferentially induce NKX2.1 expression and thereby tracheal development, whereas BMP inhibitory molecules maintain high expression of SOX2, leading to esophageal epithelial stratification.37–39 Expression of the transcriptional factors SOX2 and p63 is critical for proper esophageal epithelial stratification during development and maintaining esophageal homeostasis.36 Notably, in the developed esophagus, inhibition of BMP signaling is required to keep basal layer progenitors at an undifferentiated stage, and increased expression of the BMP antagonist follistatin (FST) leads to hyperproliferation of the esophageal epithelium in patients with EoE.40,41

The mucosa of the developed human esophagus is lined by the multilayer squamous nonkeratinized epithelium, which serves as a protective barrier against environmental insults, such as microorganisms, foods, and acid exposure.42 Histologically, the esophageal epithelium can be divided into 2 morphologically distinct regions: (1) the basal zone, with undifferentiated and proliferating cells, and (2) the suprabasal zone, consisting of progressively flattened cells with an increased degree of differentiation as they move closer to the lumen. The basal zone comprises the basal layer of cells in direct contact with the lamina propria and a few layers of dividing cells above the basal layer, which were defined as transit-amplifying cells (TACs). Notably and unlike the human esophagus, TACs in the mouse esophagus are localized to the basal layer of the esophageal epithelium.43,44 Basal layer cells can either overlay the epithelial papillae of the esophagus to form the papillary basal layer (PBL) or cover the interpapillary zone to form the interpapillary basal layer (IBL; Fig 1).45–47 Cells at the basal layers include epithelial progenitors (stem cells), the main function of which is to maintain and renew esophageal epithelium in the homeostatic and damaged esophagus.48 Notably, IBL cells divide asymmetrically, giving rise to 1 basal and 1 suprabasal cell, whereas PBL cells divide symmetrically, resulting in 2 basal cells.46 This raises the possibility that IBL cells, but not PBL cells, are true esophageal epithelial progenitors. Despite uncertainty on the exact nature of the human esophageal progenitor population, progenitor properties of the basal layer cells are supported by their ability to form colonies that express markers of undifferentiated epithelium in culture and differentiate into esophageal spheroids in defined medium.49,50 Most superficial cells in the suprabasal zone of the epithelium are nondividing and considered terminally differentiated cells.

Consistent with their differentiation status and functional roles, esophageal epithelial cells in the basal and suprabasal zones retain distinct molecular characteristics. IBL cells remain largely nondividing, as defined by the lack of the proliferation markers Ki-67, phospho–histone H3, and proliferating cell nuclear antigen. The majority of the proliferation activity in the basal zone is observed in the epibasal layers of TACs, which stain positive for proliferation markers (Fig 1).45,46,51 Notably, IBL cells remain undivided, even in the inflamed esophagi of patients with EoE, whereas the TAC layer expands in patients with EoE, which is consistent with hyperproliferation of the basal zone of the epithelium.47 Expression of the transcription factors p63, SOX2, integrins α6 and β1, a low-affinity receptor for nerve growth factor (p75 receptor), and keratin 5 (KRT5) and KRT14 is a hallmark of undifferentiated epithelial cells in the basal zone. Suprabasal zone cells primarily express more differentiated KRT4 and KRT13 and genes from the epidermal differentiation complex (EDC).28,50,52–55 Both basal and suprabasal layers express E-cad-herin in line with the epithelial origin of these cells.47

Several findings suggest that basal layer cells can contribute uniquely to EoE pathogenesis. For example, in patients with EoE, IBL cells, but not other epithelial cells, markedly overexpress the innate epithelial cytokine IL-33, a prominent inducer of type 2 immune responses.47,56 In addition, expression of the actin-related protein synaptopodin (SYNPO), which is involved in regulating the esophageal epithelial barrier, is limited to basal layer cells in the homeostatic esophagus, whereas its expression expands into the suprabasal zone in patients with EoE.57 Consistent with the role of BMP signaling in squamous epithelial differentiation, the BMP inhibitor FST is expressed in esophageal progenitors, and increased expression of FST in the suprabasal cells is linked to hyperproliferation.41 Taken together, these findings demonstrate a previously underappreciated complexity of esophageal epithelial responses during homeostasis and EoE.

Although the majority of esophageal genes are shared between the esophagus and other organs, a set of approximately 250 genes represents an expression signature of the esophageal mucosa and has been defined as esophageal identity genes.28 These genes include a variety of structural proteins (ie, KRT6C, KRT32, involucrin [IVL], and desmoplakin [DSP]), small proline-rich repeats (SPRRs), enzymes (ie, transglutaminase 1 [TGM1] and TGM3), and a number of proteases and protease inhibitors (ie, SERPINs, SPINKs, kallikreins [KLKs], and CAPN14). Accordingly, functional enrichment analysis of the esophageal transcriptome shows enrichment in the epidermal development and differentiation, desmosome organization and barrier function, and serine-type and endopeptidase regulatory activity (Fig 2 and Table I).58 The emerging contribution of esophageal proteases and protease inhibitors to EoE pathogenesis will be discussed further in this review.

Unexpectedly, the esophageal transcriptome contains the IL-1 receptor family of genes, including those of the cytokines IL-1α, IL-36α, and IL-36β and their receptor antagonists IL-1RN and IL-36RN. Thus molecular functions related to IL-1 receptor binding is highly enriched in the homeostatic esophagus, as well as in patients with EoE, with decreased expression of IL-1 genes being observed in the Eso-EoE gene set and in esophageal epithelial cells in response to IL-13 (Fig 2 and Table I).28 Moreover, expression of the IL-1 family member IL-33, which is a proallergic cytokine, is increased in IBL cells in patients with EoE, and its expression is normalized after successful treatment.47 IL-36 cytokines are expressed predominantly by epithelial and immune cells and are involved in directly polarizing helper T cells, particularly in skin inflammatory responses. By modulating innate and adaptive immune responses, these cytokines regulate inflammatory responses in various tissues, including the skin and lungs.59–61 Activation of the IL-1 family of cytokines requires proteolytic processing, likely by some of the enzymes that are normally expressed by differentiated esophageal epithelium. Although the exact role of IL-1 family members in patients with EoE is not known, we speculate that they are involved in the balancing of proinflammatory and antiinflammatory responses.59,62 Collectively, these findings unveil previously underappreciated innate immune properties of the esophageal epithelium and highlight esophagus-specific genes as possible regulators of esophageal homeostasis and that their aberrant expression possibly contributes to the pathogenesis of EoE.

LOSS OF ESOPHAGEAL TISSUE DIFFERENTIATION IN PATIENTS WITH EoE

EoE is characterized by a unique esophageal gene expression signature designated as the EoE transcriptome.23,25 Initially, the EoE transcriptome was assessed by using expression array analysis and included 574 genes, which distinguished patients with EoE from healthy control subjects and from patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease.23 Later, this transcriptome was refined by using RNA sequencing of esophageal biopsy specimens from healthy control subjects and patients with active EoE, identifying a total of 1607 significantly dysregulated transcripts with around two thirds upregulated and one third downregulated genes.25 A considerable fraction (15%) of the genes expressed in homeostatic esophagus by using RNA sequencing overlapped with genes dysregulated in in vitro–differentiated esophageal epithelial cells grown in air-liquid interface (ALI) conditions.63 Moreover, IL-13 stimulation of these cells induced gene signature and disease-associated pathways, which overlapped with those observed in the inflamed esophageal mucosa of patients with EoE.28,63 These data reinforce the role of IL-13 as a molecular driver of EoE and underscored a substantial contribution of the esophageal epithelial transcriptome to the overall extent of transcriptional responses in patients with EoE.

Although the EoE transcriptome represents the gene expression signature of a number of cell populations involved in EoE pathogenesis (ie, mast cells and eosinophils), the majority of the transcriptional changes are driven by epithelial responses.64,65 Accordingly, the EoE transcriptome revealed a significant downregulation of multiple structural genes, including filaggrin (FLG), IVL, and the SPRR gene family located at chromosome region 1q21, which constitutes the EDC. Changes in genes located at 1q21 occur more frequently than any other loci in the genome.55 Given that the expression of some of these structural genes is highly enriched in the esophagus compared with in other tissues,28 these data suggest that tissue-specific transcriptional dysregulation drives the inflammatory response in patients with EoE. Indeed, intersection of the EoE transcriptome with esophagus-specific genes revealed that around 40% of the esophageal genes were altered transcriptionally and that nearly 90% of these genes, designated as Eso-EoE genes, were downregulated in patients with EoE.28 The Eso-EoE genes were enriched for genes involved in pathways related to keratinization, epidermal development, and differentiation.28

Accordingly, impaired barrier function (IBF) is a hallmark of allergic inflammation in patients with EoE, which has been previously linked to decreased expression of the desmosomal protein desmoglein 1 (DSG1)66,67 and loss of expression of structural epithelial genes from the EDC after epithelial response to IL-13, as well as imbalanced expression of proteases and their inhibitors.28,55,68–70 Similar to alterations in the esophageal transcriptome, major dysregulation in protease-related activities and IL-1–related genes were revealed by means of functional enrichment analysis of Eso-EoE genes. Although CAPN14 and SER-PINs were highly upregulated, SPINKs were downregulated in patients with EoE. IL-1–related cytokines and receptors were also downregulated in patients with EoE. Notably, WES performed in 33 unrelated patients with EoE identified 39 rare variants (&lt;1% minor allele frequency) that were located in 18 Eso-EoE genes, including the protease inhibitors SERPINB3, SPINK5, and alpha-2-macroglobulin like 1 (A2ML1); CAPN14; the structural proteins KRT6B and desmocollin 2 (DSC2); and a member of the peptidyl arginine deiminase family, peptidyl arginine deiminase 3 (PADI3).28 Furthermore, rare variants in mitochondrial genes expressed in a variety of cells, including esophageal epithelium, are likely contributing to EoE pathogenesis and phenotype.31 Collectively, these findings provide potential mechanisms for genetically driven, tissue-specific alterations in patients with EoE and underscore the centrality of proteolytic activity for the disease pathogenesis.

EPITHELIAL BARRIER DYSFUNCTION IN PATIENTS WITH EoE

The healthy, multilayered esophageal epithelium constitutes a defensive mechanism against environmental factors, including food and acid refluxate, penetrating into esophageal tissue and invoking structural damages or inflammatory responses. Unlike the stomach and duodenum, the esophagus has no thick surface mucous layer, and unlike the mouse esophageal epithelium, human epithelium is not keratinized. Therefore the integrity of the esophageal epithelium provided by tight junctions, adherence junctions, and desmosomes is paramount to carrying out its protective function.71 Morphologically, inflamed esophageal epithelium in patients with EoE is characterized by hyperproliferation of the basal zone of the epithelium, which replaces most of the more differentiated upper layer of epithelial cells and the appearance of dilated intercellular spaces.66,72 Importantly, these changes are reproduced in culture in esophageal epithelium differentiated in the presence of IL-13 and are accompanied by loss of barrier function, as measured by using transepithelial electrical resistance and increased permeability.63 Collectively, these changes constitute IBF, which is a hallmark of allergic inflammation in patients with EoE.

On the molecular level, IBF is linked to dysregulation of structural genes that comprise tight junctions (claudins 1 and 7 and occludin),69,73,74 adherens junctions (E-cadherin), and desmosomes (DSG1),66,69 leading to decreased numbers of desmosomes in patients with EoE.72

Accordingly, in patients with EoE, as well as in primary esophageal epithelial cells, the esophageal epithelium exhibits characteristics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), as evidenced by increased expression of vimentin and α smooth muscle actin and decreased expression of E-cadherin.75–77 Altered epithelial differentiation is demonstrated further by lost expression of FLG, IVL, and several SPRR family members (SPRR2C, SPRR2D, and SPRR3).28,55,68 Notably, FLG is expressed on mucosal surfaces and is essential to intact barrier formation because it promotes aggregation of keratin-intermediate filaments into macrofibrils, which adds to the physical strength of the epithelium. FLG monomers are incorporated into the lipid envelope, where they undergo additional protease-dependent processing to release free amino acids that assist in water retention and sealing of the intercellular spaces. These processes block exogenous immune stimuli from entering the epithelium and activate immune responses.78 FLG dysfunction has been associated previously with defects in epidermal barrier function in patients with AD, which frequently co-occurs with EoE.79 In addition, mutations in FLG, as well as in the esophagus-specific genes KRT6B and DSC2, are identified in patients with EoE.28,55

EDC genes are expressed in esophageal epithelial cells and are downregulated in patients with EoE and in response to IL-13 in vitro.55 In contrast, the recently characterized cadherin-like 26, which was suggested to regulate barrier function, is highly upregulated in patients with EoE, as well as those with eosinophilic gastritis and in epithelial cells after IL-13 stimulation.80 Another recent finding implicated the actin-related protein SYNPO, which is also highly upregulated in patients with EoE, in regulating esophageal barrier integrity. Forced expression of SYNPO in esophageal epithelial cells grown at the ALI resulted at the IBF accompanied by transcriptional changes in structural genes.57

These collective data indicate that altered esophageal epithelial integrity is a critical contributor to allergic inflammation in patients with EoE.

GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC MECHANISMS IN EPITHELIAL RESPONSES IN PATIENTS WITH EoE

A central question in the allergy field is why allergic responses manifest in a tissue-specific manner, such as EoE. A number of studies used phenotypic and genetic association and candidate-gene and genome-wide association study (GWAS) approaches to identify multiple genetic variants associated with increased risk of EoE.29,30,55,64,81–83 Notably, most genes associated with increased susceptibility to EoE are expressed in the esophageal epithelium, substantiating the role of epithelial responses in EoE pathogenesis (Table II). Among these genes are proinflammatory epithelium-derived cytokines, including thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) and IL-33, as well as signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6), a transcription factor activated by the type 2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13, which drive the EoE transcriptome, at least in part.23,30,34 Notably, mutations in tumor suppressor lipid phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) have been linked previously to hamartoma tumor syndrome, and the risk of this syndrome and PTEN mutations are increased in patients with EoE.84

Recently, we reported that genetic susceptibility to EoE is mediated at least in part by synergistic interactions between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the loci encoding for TSLP and IL4, which is consistent with the allergic cause of EoE and co-occurrence of EoE with asthma, allergic rhinitis, and AD.85 Furthermore, mutations in genes implicated in maintaining barrier integrity in those atopic diseases, including FLG and DSG1, have been also linked with EoE.55,66,67,86,87 Interestingly, SNPs near the chromosome 11 open reading frame 30 (EMSY [C11ORF30]) gene at 11q13 are associated with EoE susceptibility. EMSYis expressed in multiple types, including the epithelium, and is implicated in the DNA damage response.88,89 It is increased in patients with EoE and is likely involved in regulating the expression of TSLP and CCL5.90 Another epithelium-derived protein, ankyrin repeat domain 27 (VARP), which regulates membrane trafficking and endosome dynamics,91,92 has been implicated in the pathogenesis of EoE based on genetic linkage, but the mechanism is yet to be explored.

Genes linked with EoE share a significant proportion of the esophagus-specific genes recently reported by the Human Protein Atlas.28 The strongest associated EoE risk locus is 2p23, which encodes for the esophagus-specific protease CAPN14.29,30 CAPN14 is a member of the classical calcium-activated calpain family, which is defined by its similar domain structure to the most extensively studied calpains, CAPN1 and CAPN2.93 CAPN14 is dynamically upregulated as a function of EoE disease activity and after exposure of esophageal epithelial cells to IL-13. Calpains are involved in the number of biological processes related to processing of cytoskeletal and membrane proteins, signal transduction pathways, and enzymes controlling cell-cycle progression, gene expression, and apoptosis.94 Overexpression of CAPN14 leads to IBF in the esophageal epithelial cells grown at ALI and is accompanied by loss of expression of DSG1, an intercellular junctional protein implicated in barrier formation.95 Recently, a WES analysis of patients with EoE identified rare damaging mutations in SPINK5 and SERPINB3,28 suggesting critical involvement of esophageal proteases and protease inhibitors in the pathogenesis of EoE, likely by maintaining the epithelial barrier.

A fundamental question in understanding the pathogenesis of EoE is how genetic risk loci and the environment cross-talk to promote the disease. A recent case-control study assessed an interplay between genetic risk loci and early-life environmental factors, including breast-feeding and hospital admission.7 The authors discovered that the EoE risk associated with harboring the CAPN14 susceptibility genotype can be significantly decreased by breast-feeding, further supporting the contribution of the environment to occurrence of EoE. GWASs revealed that the vast majority of EoE risk variants are localized to intronic and intergenic regions and do not directly affect coding regions of the associated genes.29,34 The question then remains of how these variations in genetic code are translated into the phenotypic outcome of the disease. It is well documented that SNPs are often localized to gene regulatory elements, including promoters and enhancers.96 Activity of these elements is modified by environmental cues, including cytokines, which elicit dynamic changes in histone acetylation and methylation and subsequently in gene expression.97 Thus epigenetic profiling combined with gene expression analysis serves as a useful approach to discover molecular mechanisms behind genetic associations, especially because the prevalence of EoE is influenced by gene-environment interactions.6 Indeed, expression of several epithelial genes involved directly in the pathogenesis of EoE is under epigenetic regulation. These genes include CCL26, neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase 1 (NTRK1), SYNPO, and CAPN14.57,98–100 In the case of CAPN14, the EoE risk variant rs76562819 is localized in the peak of histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation, which is dynamically regulated by IL-13 stimulation. Importantly, CAPN14 was expressed in a haplotype-dependent manner, with subjects with the risk allele expressing 30% less CAPN14 than those without the risk haplotype.29 Decreased expression of CAPN14 was correlated with the ability of the risk allele to interact with an as yet to be identified nuclear protein; however, the effect of risk and non-risk alleles on the epigenetic status of the gene has not been assessed. Although how the molecular mechanisms related to these genetic variations contribute to phenotypic outcome is yet to be determined, differential expression of esophageal genes located within 25 kb of EoE risk loci was sufficient to segregate patients with EoE from the control subjects.29 Collectively, these findings unify transcriptional and epigenetic responses of esophagus-specific genes and provide the framework for future studies of gene regulatory mechanisms in patients with EoE.

Given that EoE is triggered primarily by exposure to food allergens, genetic predisposition to food allergy (FA) provides additional insight into EoE pathogenesis. Unlike EoE, a previous GWAS linked FA with the human MHC region encoding for the HLA genes.101–103 A recent GWAS identified 5 loci associated with FA.104 Similar to EoE, FA risk variants were associated with the FLG locus, signifying the importance of barrier integrity in both pathologies.55 Consistent with the role of TGF-β signaling in patients with FA and EoE74,105,106 and in agreement with a previous report, association was found with leucine-rich repeat–containing 32 (LRRC32).83 Although the function of LRRC32 in patients with EoE is not known, it is reported to be a TGF-β binding protein on the surfaces of regulatory T cells.107,108 Moreover, similar to EoE, FAwas genetically linked to SERPINs, in the case of FA to SERPINB7/B2. Although the mechanism of how SERPINs contribute to FA is not known, both we and the original authors of the FA GWAS article speculate that this could be related to tissue-specific expression of these genes, perhaps in the esophagus.

Given the frequent co-occurrence of EoE and AD, a candidate-gene approach was used to examine genetic association between FA, EoE, and AD by using risk loci previously found with a GWAS.109 The authors identified 14 genetic loci in significant association with FA, including the STAT6 and TSLP/WDR6 loci, which were common between patients with FA and those with EoE. Interestingly, genetic variants in the TSLP locus associate with increased numbers of food triggers in patients with EoE.110 The role of the STAT6 gene variants in patients with FA is further supported by association of the specific SNPs in the STAT6 gene with more severe symptoms during food challenges.111 Similar to the GWAS analysis,104 the candidate-gene analysis identified FLG as a common risk factor for AD and FA, again reinforcing the importance of barrier integrity.109

Collectively, these data show significant functional overlap between patients with FA and those with EoE in several genes linked to the epithelial barrier, type 2 response, and protease activity, yet some associations, such as CAPN14, remain specific to EoE, emphasizing the role of esophageal epithelial genes in the pathophysiology of EoE (Fig 3).28–30,34,55,101–104,109,111

PHYSIOLOGIC ROLE OF PROTEASES AND THEIR INHIBITORS IN EPITHELIAL CELL DIFFERENTIATION AND BARRIER FORMATION

Stratified esophageal epithelium comprises a few layers of epithelial cells that not only provide a barrier from the external environment but also sense and respond to perturbations to eliminate toxic stimuli. This sophisticated role of the epithelium is controlled by a series of ordered processes that occur during formation of the epithelial barrier and homeostasis. A distinct repertoire of proteases and inhibitors is found in each layer of the epithelium and resides in various cellular compartments, as well as in the extracellular space.112 Proteases catalyze the hydrolysis of peptide bonds on their target substrates in a fundamentally irreversible reaction113; therefore their activity is tightly regulated. An activation cascade, in which other proteases often remove a propeptide from the nonactive protease, is required for the protease to be activated. Once a protease is activated, a protease inhibitor can bind to it and inhibit the proteolytic activity. In addition, the microenvironment regulates the activity of the proteases by controlling the optimal pH and the abundance of ions, such as calcium and zinc, that can either stimulate or inhibit the proteolytic activity.114,115 The balance between proteases and their tailored protease inhibitors dictates the steps required for generation and maintenance of the epithelial barrier and serves as a mechanism that senses damages and environmental insults, allowing immune response and regeneration of damaged tissues.

Imbalance between proteases and their inhibitors is a hallmark of several disorders; the number of the known pathologic conditions caused by altered proteolytic activity increased dramatically over recent years and includes many diseases. For example, a highly investigated protease is urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), which cleaves and activates plasminogen into active plasmin. uPA binds to its urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) on the leading migratory edge of tumor cells and enhances tumor cell migration and invasion by degrading extracellular matrix components, thereby promoting metastatic development of several cancers. In addition, proteases drive cell-cycle progression by regulating the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases. Therefore dysregulation of proteases leads to altered proliferation.116,117

Another example comes from Alzheimer disease, in which amyloid β-peptide levels in the brain are the primary trigger for neuronal cell death. Levels of amyloid β-peptide are dictated by the balance between its synthesis and removal. Currently, more than 20 amyloid-degrading proteases are implicated in the process of amyloid peptide processing and degradation, and several of those are decreased in specific brain areas with age or after hypoxia, ischemia, or stroke, thus contributing significantly to the development of Alzheimer disease pathology.113,117,118 Therefore dysregulation of proteases is an emerging key mechanism in the pathogenesis of multiple pathologies.

In the stratified epithelium a tight epithelial barrier is progressively formed after basal epithelial cell proliferation, movement of the cells outward toward the epithelial surface, initiation of the differentiation program, and subsequent formation of intercellular junctional complexes. Epithelial fate is regulated by membrane-bound a disintegrins and metalloproteases, which expose and process ligands and receptors (eg, members of the Delta/Serrate/lag-2 and Notch families) to the keratinocytes in the skin, switching from proliferation to differentiation mode.119 In the differentiated epithelial layers of the skin, intracellular organelles are destroyed after TGM-mediated cross-linking and assembling multiple proteins and cornified envelope components. This process is regulated by a protease cascade and protease inhibitors.120,121 Subsequently, proteases promote final maturation of connective tissue elements, such as FLG.112 After a proper barrier is achieved, the desquamation process occurs. In this process, corneodesmosomal components, such as corneodesmosin, DSG1, and DSC1, are cleaved, and cells are detached from the tissue. Cathepsin D, KLK5, and KLK7 cleave these corneodesmosomal proteins during homeostasis.122,123 Notably, IBF in patients with EoE is linked to the loss of epithelial DSG1, likely mediated in part by increased expression of CAPN14.66,95

Unlike in the skin, the role of KLKs in the esophagus is much less investigated. Analysis of esophagus-specific genes in public data sets reveals that several KLKs (ie, KLK5, KLK7, KLK8, KLK10, KLK11, KLK12, and KLK13) are esophagus-enriched genes. Expression of KLK7 and KLK10 is increased in patients with active EoE compared with that in control subjects (Fig 4),124 suggesting that KLKs might regulate esophageal epithelial barrier maintenance and that altered KLK expression and/or activity might be an inducing factor in barrier impairment. Lastly, regeneration of the tissue after damage is mostly orchestrated by the balance between the extracellular matrix–degrading proteases (ie, metalloproteases) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases.125 These processes are likely involved in EMT, which is found in patients with EoE.75

ALTERATIONS IN PROTEASES AND PROTEASE INHIBITORS IN PATIENTS WITH EoE

Recent publications highlighted the role of the cysteine protease CAPN14 in EoE pathology. CAPN14 has a unique expression pattern, with the highest levels in the upper gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the squamous epithelium of the esophagus. CAPN14 expression is induced in the esophagi of patients with EoE compared with control subjects. In addition, CAPN14 is the only calpain that is upregulated by IL-13. Overexpression of CAPN14 in esophageal epithelial cells is sufficient to induce disruption of epithelial cell architecture and IBF, probably by downregulating DSG1, at least in part. Downregulation of CAPN14 disturbs IL-13–induced epithelial cell changes, as demonstrated by increased dilated intercellular spaces and basal cell disorder after CAPN14 gene silencing.95 Interestingly, 2 cysteine inhibitors, cystatin (CST) A and CSTB, are highly enriched in the esophagus, and their expression is significantly downregulated in patients with EoE (Fig 4).27,66 Notably, loss-of-function mutations in CSTA results in acral peeling skin syndrome.126 Although inhibitory activity of CST toward CAPN14 has not been shown, it is intriguing to speculate that CSTs can modulate CAPN14 activity in patients with EoE. Given the important emerging role of CAPN14 in patients with EoE, identifying CAPN14 substrates and elucidating the natural, tissue-resident inhibitors of CAPN14 will be beneficial for elucidating the molecular mechanisms that are altered in patients with EoE and for targeting this pathway for therapeutic intervention.

Along with dysregulated expression of proteases, expression of several protease inhibitors is also altered in patients with EoE, indicating putative proteolytic imbalance. For example, several lines of evidence suggest a role for the protease inhibitor lymphoepithelial Kazal-type–related inhibitor (also known as SPINK5) in EoE pathoetiology. The role of SPINK5 was investigated primarily in the development of barrier function and type 2 immune response in the skin. Loss-of-function mutation of SPINK5 results in a rare disease termed Netherton syndrome, which is characterized by a severe hyperatopy phenotype mainly involving loss of the skin barrier, development of atopic manifestations with increased IgE levels, and recurrent infections (likely because of loss of the skin barrier).127 Imbalance between SPINK5 and KLK proteases has been proposed to contribute to disease pathogenesis.128 High prevalence of esophageal eosinophilia was observed in a cohort of patients with Netherton syndrome, supporting SPINK5 involvement in patients with EoE.129,130 SPINK5 is enriched in the esophageal epithelium and downregulated in biopsy specimens of patients with EoE.28 SPINK5 is a multidomain proteinase inhibitor that consists of 15 potential serine proteinase inhibitory domains. Furin cleaves SPINK5 into fragments that contain 1 or more inhibitory domains.131 Each domain has different affinities to a variety of serine proteases. Therefore deficiency of SPINK5 in the esophagus can unleash uncontrolled proteolytic activity of numerous proteases. In support of its role in the esophagus, a WES analysis identified rare mutations in SPINK5 in a cohort of patients with EoE,28 and a candidate-gene approach linked 4 SNP sites in the SPINK5 gene with EoE susceptibility in an EoE cohort compared with the nonatopic cohort.85 The molecular pathways that are orchestrated by SPINK proteins in the esophagus merit further investigation.

SPINK7 is another SPINK member that has emerged as a key regulator of epithelial homeostasis in the esophagus.70 SPINK7 is highly expressed by healthy esophageal epithelial cells and is decreased markedly in patients with EoE. Interestingly, SPINK5 and SPINK7 have distinct spatial and cellular expression patterns in the esophagus, suggesting that SPINK7 function in the esophagus is not completely redundant with SPINK5. The low percent-age of identity between the active domains of SPINK5 and SPINK7 suggests that each inhibitor has different affinities to distinct repertoire of proteases, and therefore each inhibitor orchestrate unique pathways in the esophagus. Loss of SPINK7 is sufficient to induce epithelial barrier impairment and a marked production of proinflammatory and proallergic cytokines and chemokines by epithelial cells, including TSLP. In addition, loss of SPINK7 and subsequent aberrant regulation of its downstream targets result in a defect in esophageal epithelial cell differentiation, induction of EMT, and production of an innate transcript signature that overlaps with processes seen in EoE-related allergic inflammation. Studies with SPINK7-deficient epithelial cells suggest that loss of SPINK7 might be upstream of loss of SPINK5, providing a mechanistic connection between these squamous epithelial enriched SPINK family members.70,105 SPINK7 mediates its function partially by inhibiting uPA, whereas other targets of SPINK7 are yet unknown. Preliminary restoration of SPINK7 has been demonstrated to have anti–EoE-like activity, at least in vitro.70 Identification of SPINK7 downstream targets is important for a deeper understanding of the dysregulated pathways and future intervention strategies for EoE therapy.

The esophagus is also enriched with SERPINs from clade B of the superfamily of SERPINs (SERPINB), including SERPINB2, SERPINB3, SERPINB4, SERPINB5, SERPINB11, and SERPINB13 (Fig 4). Expression of the majority of these SERPINs is altered in biopsy specimens of patients with EoE compared with control subjects (Fig 4). WES analysis of patients with EoE identified 2 rare mutation in SERPINB3 (located on chromosome 18) in 3 unrelated patients.28 SERPINBs are intracellular SERPINs that possibly protect cells from exogenous and endogenous protease-mediated injury. Interestingly, a novel FA locus had been identified in the SERPINB gene cluster at 18q21.3. This locus is associated with increased risk for FA with genome-wide significance.104 One lead SNP, rs12964116, is located in an intron of SERPINB7, which is expressed in the upper layers of the epidermis, and loss-of-function mutations in this gene result in Nagashima-type palmoplantar keratosis syndrome, an autosomal recessive keratoderma associated with skin barrier impairment.132 Apart from the skin, SERPINB7 is expressed in a few stratified squamous epithelia, including the esophagus. Its expression pattern suggests a potential role in the epithelial barrier integrity and function of the upper digestive tract, which might be relevant to the development of FA. The second SNP from this study, rs1243064, was correlated with SERPINB10 expression in the blood.

Interestingly, although SERPINBs are emerging as potential drivers of both EoE and FA, distinct SERPINBs regulate these diseases.104 These findings further demonstrate the similarities between the 2 atopic conditions and can partly explain the high prevalence of FA in patients with EoE. Further investigation is needed to understand the fine tuning of these SERPINs and how SERPINs can potentially dictate the risk to acquire EoE, FA, or both. In addition, the roles of SERPINBs and their targets are mostly unknown.

Another protein from the same superfamily is SERPINE1 (also known as PAI-1), which is induced in patients with EoE compared with control subjects. SERPINE1 is regulated by TGF-β1 and has been shown to mediate TGF-β1–induced fibrosis in esophageal epithelial cells in vitro.74,105,106

To add further complexity, the esophageal epithelium is not the only source of proteases and protease inhibitors in patients with EoE. The presence of esophageal mast cells and basophils in inflamed esophageal epithelium in patients with EoE has been described in the past 2 decades. Mast cells and basophils contain preformed proteases that are stored in intracellular secretory granules and discharged upon activation. Mast cell degranulation is observed in patients with EoE compared with control subjects.133 In addition, mast cell tryptase A and carboxypeptidase A expression is detected in patients with EoE. Tryptase regulates bronchoconstricting activities, antibacterial peptide activity, and protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR2) activation134; chymase and mast cell carboxypeptidase A3 regulate the endothelin-1 pathway; and chymase and cathepsin G can degrade and eliminate cytokines.134 These processes become germane in patients with EoE when these proteases are released into the environment deprived of counteracting protease inhibitors. Fig 4 summarizes different families of proteases and protease inhibitors that are enriched in the esophagus and are dysregulated in patients with EoE.

CONCLUSION

The role of proteases and their inhibitors is not limited to regulating epithelial barrier function but is also implicated directly in inducing type 2 immune responses. Proteases can elicit release of epithelium-derived TH2 cytokines and chemokines by activating PAR2 and indirectly by promoting the release of fibrinogen cleavage products, which activate Toll-like receptor 4 signaling. Proteases can also cleave antimicrobial peptides and cytokines, such as IL-1β, IL-18, IL-33, IL-36, and TGF-β1, resulting in their activation.135–137

Notably, the IL-1 pathway is enriched in esophagus-specific genes,28 suggesting that regulation of this pathway by proteases might be potentially critical in maintaining proper esophageal homeostasis. Data have already indicated aberrant regulation of the IL-1 pathway occurs in patients with EoE (eg, IL-33 overexpression), and identifying the responsible transcriptional and proteolytic mechanisms is underway; their importance for disease propagation certainly requires further investigation.

It is interesting to speculate that increased exposure to chemical proteases (eg, those found in detergents) might be a recently changed environmental exposure138 that is linked with the EoE epidemic, and future research might prove an etiologic contribution. In addition, some allergens contain an exogenous source of proteases that directly activate PAR2 and induce type 2 immunity; therefore the expression of protease inhibitors by epithelial cells is critical for limiting the proteolytic activities of such allergens. The involvement of proteases in these processes has been shown in several allergic disorders, including asthma, AD, Netherton syndrome, and chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.128,139–141

We have presented evidence that the epithelium is a primary driver of EoE pathogenesis. Genetic linkage of EoE susceptibility has uncovered the importance of epithelium-derived genes, such as TSLP and CAPN14. Resultant eosinophilia is likely secondary to epithelial activation by T cell–derived cytokines, which is most highlighted by IL-13 (with subsequent release of eosinophil active cytokines, such as eotaxin-3). The EoE epithelium is defective in its differentiation and dysregulates a number of key transcriptional programs, most notably reflected by loss of esophageal identity genes, as well as imbalanced expression of proteases and their inhibitors, and substantial evidence is emerging linking the SPINK family of protease inhibitors, especially SPINK7. As such, protease inhibitors might have therapeutic potential for the treatment of EoE. We provide an illustration of how proteolytic enzymes and their inhibitors can be involved in EoE, with a particular focus on the central involvement of the epithelium (Fig 5). Identifying the endogenous substrate repertoire of the proteases and their coupled inhibitors will facilitate our understanding of their roles in EoE pathoetiology, and development of specific inhibitors might provide new strategies for the treatment of EoE. Given that the esophageal epithelium is reachable by topical delivery of drugs, as demonstrated by the utility of simply swallowing glucocorticoids designed for respiratory delivery to patients with asthma,142–148 the findings summarized in this article present new epithelium-based strategies to treat EoE.

We propose a previously unappreciated role for the esophagus as an anti-inflammatory sensing organ and that epithelial proteases/protease inhibitor imbalances unleash inflammatory responses, resulting in disorders, such as EoE.

This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant R01 AI124355, NIH grant R37 A1045898, NIH grant U19 AI070235, the Campaign Urging Research for Eosinophilic Disease (CURED) Foundation, the Sunshine Charitable Foundation and its supporters, Denise A. Bunning and David G. Bunning, as well as CEGIR (U54 AI117804) as part of the Rare Disease Clinical Research Network (RDCRN), an initiative of the Office of Rare Diseases Research (ORDR), National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), which is co-funded by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), and NCATS. CEGIR is also supported by patient advocacy groups including the American Partnership for Eosinophilic Disorders (APFED), Campaign Urging Research for Eosinophilic Disease (CURED), and Eosinophilic Family Coalition (EFC).

We thank Susanne Wells, PhD, and Chen Rosenberg, MD, for their comments and Shawna Hottinger for editorial assistance.

Abbreviations used

AD Atopic dermatitis

ALI Air-liquid interface

BMP Bone morphogenetic protein

CAPN14 Calpain 14

CST Cystatin

DSC Desmocollin

DSG1 Desmoglein 1

DSP Desmoplakin

EDC Epidermal differentiation complex

EMSY (C11ORF30) Chromosome 11 open reading frame 30

EMT Epithelial-mesenchymal transition

EoE Eosinophilic esophagitis

FA Food allergy

FLG Filaggrin

FST Follistatin

GWAS Genome-wide association study

IBF Impaired barrier function

IBL Interpapillary basal layer

IVL Involucrin

KLK Kallikrein

KRT Keratin

LRRC32 Leucine-rich repeat-containing 32

NKX2.1 NK2 homeobox 1

PAR2 Protease-activated receptor 2

PBL Papillary basal layer

SERPIN Serine protease inhibitor

SNP Single nucleotide polymorphism

SOX2 SRY-box-2

SPINK Serine protease inhibitor, Kazal type

SPRR Small proline-rich repeat

STAT Signal transducer and activator of transcription

SYNPO Synaptopodin

TAC Transit-amplifying cell

TGM Transglutaminase

TSLP Thymic stromal lymphopoietin

uPA Urokinase plasminogen activator

uPAR Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor

WES Whole-exome sequencing

GLOSSARY

BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEINS (BMPs) A group of multifunctional growth factors belonging to the TGF-β superfamily. BMP inhibitory molecules maintain high SOX2 expression, leading to esophageal epithelial differentiation.

DESMOSOME A hyperadhesive intercellular junction between individual cells that is crucial to epithelial barrier formation. Mutations in the desmosomal proteins desmocollin and desmoglein are linked to EoE pathogenesis and impaired barrier function.

EPIDERMAL DIFFERENTIATION COMPLEX (EDC) A gene locus comprising more than 50 genes (including filaggrin [FLG]) that encode for proteins involved in the terminal differentiation and cornification of squamous epithelial cells located at 1q21. Genes from this complex, including involucrin (IVL) and SPRR family members, are downregulated in patients with EoE and after IL-13 stimulation in esophageal epithelial cells in culture, leading to impaired barrier function, a primary feature of EoE pathogenesis. Mutations in FLG are genetically linked to atopic dermatitis and EoE.

EPITHELIAL-MESENCHYMAL TRANSITION (EMT) A process by which epithelial cells lose their cell polarity and cell-cell contacts and gain migratory and invasive properties. In patients with EoE, EMT is correlated with disease activity and likely contributes to subepithelial fibrosis.

IL-1 FAMILY IL-1 family genes encode for up to 11 cytokines that bind to IL-1 family receptors, leading to initiation and regulation of the inflammatory response. Some cytokines and their receptors, including IL-36α, IL-36RN, IL-1α, and IL-1RN, are highly enriched in the esophagus compared with other tissues, and their expression is downregulated in patients with EoE. Conversely, expression of IL-33 is increased in patients with EoE in the subpopulation of esophageal epithelial progenitors in the basal layer of the epithelium.

NK2 HOMEOBOX 1 (NKX2.1) AND SRY-BOX 2 (SOX2) Transcription factors involved in embryonic development of the trachea and esophagus, respectively.

p63 A member of the p53 gene family that codes for 6 known transcripts with transactivation or oncogenic effects on p53 reporter genes. It is a marker of epithelial progenitor cells.

SERPIN A superfamily of proteins with similar structure that primarily function as irreversible serine protease inhibitors. Genetic variants in SERPINs are associated with food allergy.

SPINK A family of serine peptidase inhibitors that contain inhibitory Kazal domains. SPINK proteins are expressed in various tissues and are usually secreted from the cells. SPINKs regulate the activity of extracellular serine proteases, and their dysregulation can promote epithelial barrier impairment and an innate immune response. SPINK5 deficiency causes Netherton syndrome with severe skin barrier impairment and atopy. SPINK7 is expressed in the esophageal epithelium, and its deficiency is associated with EoE pathogenesis.

UROKINASE PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR (uPA) Known as plasminogen activator, uPA is a serine protease involved in degradation of the extracellular matrix, thrombolysis, and eosinophil activation through its receptor, uPAR. Its gene is PLAU.

WNT SIGNALING PATHWAY A group of evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathways consisting of a variety of proteins that signal through cell-surface receptors that regulate organogenesis during embryogenesis. High levels of WNT signaling molecules preferentially induce NKX2.1 expression and thereby tracheal development.

FIG 1. Basic organization of human esophageal epithelium. Nonkeratinized, stratified squamous epithelium (E) and the underlying lamina propria (LP) are shown. Invaginations of the epithelial layer form characteristic papillae (P). The epithelium is divided into the basal zone, which contains the IBL and PBL, several layers of dividing TACs, and the suprabasal zones of nondividing more differentiated cells. Prototypic markers of each cell layer of the epithelium are shown. Notably, IBL cells express IL-33 in patients with active EoE47 and form colonies when grown in vitro. Part of the figure was extracted from Travers et al47 with copyright permission.

FIG 2. Functional enrichment analysis of the esophageal transcriptome. The top 10 overrepresented gene ontology terms for molecular functions and biological processes for the esophagus-specific genes obtained from the Human Protein Atlas are shown. Genes associated with enriched pathways are shown in Table I. Enrichment analysis was performed with ToppFun (https://toppgene.cchmc.org/enrichment.jsp).58

FIG 3. Genetic associations in patients with EoE and those with FA. Genetic risk loci for EoE and FA were identified by using GWASs29,30,101–104 and candidate-gene studies.55,109,111 Genes associated with individual and common risk loci are shown. *Genes with damaging rare mutations identified in WES.28 #Genes identified by using a candidate-gene approach (STAT6 for patients with FA and FLG for patients with EoE).

FIG 4. Summary of proteases and protease inhibitors with putative roles in EoE pathogenesis grouped according to their origins. Esophageal enriched protease and protease inhibitors were identified by using proteomic analysis.27 Proteases and protease inhibitors with altered expression in patients with EoE were identified by using RNA sequencing.66 Genes in italics indicate genes with altered mRNA expression in patients with EoE, and genes not in italics indicate altered protein expression in patients with EoE. The inner green circle represents esophageal specific genes that are dysregulated in EoE. Classification of the genes in the inner green circle are indicated in the rectangular boxes.

FIG 5. A schematic illustration of the potential role of the balance between proteases and protease inhibitors in the esophagus. Downregulation of protease inhibitors unleashes uncontrolled proteolytic activity. Proteolytic activation can lead to innate immune response by PAR2 or Toll-like receptor 4 activation, which in turn promote type 2 immunity. In addition, increased proteolytic activity can result in degradation of junctional proteins and an impaired epithelial barrier. As a result, antigen-presenting cells show increased access to external antigens and promote type 2 immunity.

TABLE I. Molecular functions and biological processes enriched in esophagus-specific genes*

Name	P value†	Hits in query list	
Molecular functions			
 Structural molecule activity	2.71E-10	MYH8, MAL, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, IVL, JUP, KRT24, KRT6C, CLDN17, PKP1, KRT3, KRT4, KRT5, KRT6A, KRT6B, CRCT1, KRT13, KRT78, KRT15, KRT16, DSP, KRT31, KRT32, KRT33A, ANXA1, LAD1, PPL, LCE3E, EVPLL, KRTAP3–2, CSTA	
 Serine-type endopeptidase inhibitor activity	2.42E-04	PI3, SERPINB5, SERPINB13, SPINK7, SERPINB3, SERPINB4, SERPINB11, A2ML1, SPINK5, SERPINB2	
 Serine-type peptidase activity	3.13E-04	KLK7, KLK6, KLK10, PRSS22, TMPRSS11F, TMPRSS11B, TMPRSS11D, ENDOU, KLK11, TMPRSS11E, KLK12, PRSS27, KLK8, KLK13, TMPRSS11A	
 Serine hydrolase activity	3.66E-04	KLK7, KLK6, KLK10, PRSS22, TMPRSS11F, TMPRSS11B, TMPRSS11D, ENDOU, KLK11, TMPRSS11E, KLK12, PRSS27, KLK8, KLK13, TMPRSS11A	
 Serine-type endopeptidase activity	4.20E-04	KLK7, KLK6, KLK10, PRSS22, TMPRSS11F, TMPRSS11B, TMPRSS11D, KLK11, TMPRSS11E, KLK12, PRSS27, KLK8, KLK13, TMPRSS11A	
 Endopeptidase inhibitor activity	1.22E-03	PI3, SERPINB5, SERPINB13, SPINK7, SERPINB3, SERPINB4, SERPINB11, A2ML1, SPINK5, SERPINB2, CSTA, CSTB	
 Endopeptidase regulator activity	1.75E-03	PI3, SERPINB5, SERPINB13, SPINK7, SERPINB3, SERPINB4, SERPINB11, A2ML1, SPINK5, SERPINB2, CSTA, CSTB	
 Peptidase inhibitor activity	2.09E-03	PI3, SERPINB5, SERPINB13, SPINK7, SERPINB3, SERPINB4, SERPINB11, A2ML1, SPINK5, SERPINB2, CSTA, CSTB	
 IL-1 receptor binding	2.60E-03	IL36B, IL36A, IL36RN, IL1A, IL1RN	
 Peptidase regulator activity	3.41E-03	MAL, PI3, SERPINB5, SERPINB13, SPINK7, SERPINB3, SERPINB4, SERPINB11, A2ML1, SPINK5, SERPINB2, CSTA, CSTB	
Biological processes			
 Epidermis development	1.94E-30	KLK7, CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, SCEL, TGM5, IVL, GRHL1, GJB5, SFN, SPINK5, FOXN1, KRT5, KRT6B, CRCT1, KRT15, KRT16, DSP, KRT31, KRT32, ANXA1, TMEM79, BARX2, CRABP2, PPL, LCE3E, ZNF750, TGM1, TGM3, OVOL1, SOX21, EVPLL, EPHA2, TP63, CERS3, CSTA, GRHL3, IL1A, DKK4	
 Skin development	6.65E-26	CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, SCEL, IVL, JUP, GRHL1, GJB3, ALOX12, SFN, SPINK5, FOXN1, KRT6B, CRCT1, KRT16, DSP, ANXA1, TMEM79, BARX2, PPL, LCE3E, TGM1, TGM3, OVOL1, SOX21, EPHA2, TP63, CERS3, CSTA, GRHL3, IL1A, DKK4	
 Keratinocyte differentiation	3.64E-25	CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, SCEL, IVL, GRHL1, SFN, FOXN1, KRT6B, CRCT1, KRT16, DSP, ANXA1, TMEM79, PPL, LCE3E, TGM1, TGM3, EPHA2, TP63, CERS3, CSTA, IL1A	
 Keratinization	2.21E-21	CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, IVL, SFN, KRT6B, KRT16, TMEM79, PPL, LCE3E, TGM1, TGM3, IL1A	
 Epidermal cell differentiation	2.40E-21	CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, SCEL, IVL, GRHL1, SFN, SPINK5, FOXN1, KRT6B, CRCT1, KRT16, DSP, ANXA1, TMEM79, PPL, LCE3E, TGM1, TGM3, EPHA2, TP63, CERS3, CSTA, IL1A	
 Peptide cross-linking	2.29E-17	SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, TGM5, IVL, CRCT1, DSP, ANXA1, LCE3E, TGM1, TGM3, CSTA	
 Epithelial development	1.73E-15	KLK7, CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, SCEL, AKR1C2, TGM5, PTK6, PRDM1, IVL, GRHL1, SERPINB5, GJB5, NKX6–1, SDC1, ALOX12, SFN, SPINK5, RHCG, FOXN1, KRT3, KRT4, KRT5, KRT6B, CRCT1, RAB25, KRT15, KRT16, UPK1A, DSP, KRT31, KRT32, ANXA1, TMEM79, RIPK4, BARX2, CRABP2, PPL, LCE3E, ZNF750, TGM1, TGM3, OVOL1, SOX21, EVPLL, EPHA2, TP63, CERS3, CSTA, GRHL3, IL1A, TACSTD2, DKK4	
 Epithelial cell differentiation	1.36E-14	CNFN, SPRR1A, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR2B, SPRR2D, SPRR2E, SPRR2F, SPRR3, EVPL, SCEL, AKR1C2, PTK6, PRDM1, IVL, GRHL1, NKX6–1, SDC1, ALOX12, SFN, SPINK5, RHCG, FOXN1, KRT3, KRT4, KRT6B, CRCT1, RAB25, KRT16, UPK1A, DSP, ANXA1, TMEM79, PPL, LCE3E, TGM1, TGM3, EPHA2, TP63, CERS3, CSTA, IL1A	
 Desmosome organization	2.30E-06	PERP, JUP, GRHL1, NECTIN1, DSP, PKP3	
 Establishment of skin barrier	1.42E-05	GRHL1, ALOX12, SFN, KRT16, TMEM79, TP63, GRHL3	
* Enrichment analysis was performed with ToppFun (https://toppgene.cchmc.org/enrichment.jsp).

† Adjusted P value, Bonferroni correction.

TABLE II. Epithelium-derived proteins with genetic association with EoE

Protein name	Protein family	Putative function in patients with EoE	
CAPN14*	Calpain protease	Regulates epithelial barrier homeostasis and repair	
EMSY (C11ORF30)*	Nuclear protein	Possibly regulates transcription and chromatin remodeling	
STAT6*	Transcription factor	IL-4/IL-13 signaling pathway	
TSLP*	Common receptor γ chain cytokine	Induces allergic inflammation by activating immune cells	
ANKRD27 (VARP)*	Possibly a guanine exchange factor	Regulates enzyme trafficking	
FLG†	Filament-associated protein	Aggregates keratin intermediate filaments in differentiation	
CCL26†	Chemokine	Eosinophilic chemoattractant	
IL-33†	IL-1 family cytokine, alarmin	Induces allergic inflammation, might regulate gene expression	
DSP/DSG1†‡	Structural proteins	Major components of the desmosome; regulate barrier integrity	
SPINK5‡	Serine protease inhibitor, Kazal-type	Contributes to barrier integrity	
PTEN‡	Phosphatase	Negative regulation of signaling pathways, might regulate eosinophilic responses	
ANKRD27, Ankyrin repeat domain 27; C11ORF30, chromosome 11 open reading frame 30; DSG1, desmoglein; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; SPINK5, serine peptidase inhibitor, Kazal-type 5.

* Identified by means of GWAS.

† Candidate genes.

‡ Mendelian genetic association.

Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: M. E. Rothenberg is a consultant for PulmOne, Spoon Guru, ClostraBio, Celgene, Shire, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Allakos, Adare, Regeneron, and Novartis; has an equity interest in the first 4 listed companies and Immune Pharmaceuticals; and has received royalties from reslizumab (Teva Pharmaceuticals) and UpToDate. M. Rochman, N. P. Azouz, and M. E. Rothenberg are inventors of patents owned by Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.


REFERENCES

1. Abonia JP , Rothenberg ME . Eosinophilic esophagitis: rapidly advancing insights. Annu Rev Med 2012;63 :421–34.22034864
2. Jensen ET , Kappelman MD , Martin CF , Dellon ES . Health-care utilization, costs, and the burden of disease related to eosinophilic esophagitis in the United States. Am J Gastroenterol 2015;110 :626–32.25267327
3. Noel RJ , Putnam PE , Rothenberg ME . Eosinophilic esophagitis. N Engl J Med 2004;351 :940–1.15329438
4. Ingerski LM , Modi AC , Hood KK , Pai AL , Zeller M , Piazza-Waggoner C , Health-related quality of life across pediatric chronic conditions. J Pediatr 2010; 156 :639–44.20117793
5. Safroneeva E , Coslovsky M , Kuehni CE , Zwahlen M , Haas NA , Panczak R , Eosinophilic oesophagitis: relationship of quality of life with clinical, endoscopic and histological activity. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;42 :1000–10.26271642
6. Alexander ES , Martin LJ , Collins MH , Kottyan LC , Sucharew H , He H , Twin and family studies reveal strong environmental and weaker genetic cues explaining heritability of eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014; 134 :1084–92.e1.25258143
7. Jensen ET , Kuhl JT , Martin LJ , Langefeld CD , Dellon ES , Rothenberg ME . Early-life environmental exposures interact with genetic susceptibility variants in pediatric patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141 :632–7.e5.29029802
8. Cianferoni A , Spergel JM . From genetics to treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;15 :417–25.26258919
9. Mansoor E , Cooper GS . The 2010–2015 prevalence of eosinophilic esophagitis in the USA: a population-based study. Dig Dis Sci 2016;61 :2928–34.27250980
10. Radano MC , Yuan Q , Katz A , Fleming JT , Kubala S , Shreffler W , Cesarean section and antibiotic use found to be associated with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2 :475–7.e1.25017541
11. Slae M , Persad R , Leung AJ , Gabr R , Brocks D , Huynh HQ . Role of environmental factors in the development of pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis. Dig Dis Sci 2015;60 :3364–72.26062820
12. Jensen ET , Bertelsen RJ . Assessing early life factors for eosinophilic esophagitis: lessons from other allergic diseases. Curr Treat Options Gastroenterol 2016;14 : 39–50.26801504
13. Jensen ET , Kuhl JT , Martin LJ , Rothenberg ME , Dellon ES . Prenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal factors are associated with pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141 :214–22.28601683
14. Benitez AJ , Hoffmann C , Muir AB , Dods KK , Spergel JM , Bushman FD , Inflammation-associated microbiota in pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis. Microbiome 2015;3 :23.26034601
15. Dellon ES . The esophageal microbiome in eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterology 2016;151 :364–5.27375194
16. Harris JK , Fang R , Wagner BD , Choe HN , Kelly CJ , Schroeder S , Esophageal microbiome in eosinophilic esophagitis. PLoS One 2015;10 :e0128346.26020633
17. Liacouras CA , Furuta GT , Hirano I , Atkins D , Attwood SE , Bonis PA , Eosinophilic esophagitis: updated consensus recommendations for children and adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;128 :3–22.e6.21477849
18. Krupp NL , Sehra S , Slaven JE , Kaplan MH , Gupta S , Tepper RS . Increased prevalence of airway reactivity in children with eosinophilic esophagitis. Pediatr Pulmonol 2016;51 :478–83.26509459
19. Letner D , Farris A , Khalili H , Garber J . Pollen-food allergy syndrome is a common allergic comorbidity in adults with eosinophilic esophagitis. Dis Esophagus 2018;31 .
20. Benninger MS , Strohl M , Holy CE , Hanick AL , Bryson PC . Prevalence of atopic disease in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol 2017; 7 :757–62.28614630
21. Mishra A , Hogan SP , Brandt EB , Rothenberg ME . IL-5 promotes eosinophil trafficking to the esophagus. J Immunol 2002;168 :2464–9.11859139
22. Mishra A , Rothenberg ME . Intratracheal IL-13 induces eosinophilic esophagitis by an IL-5, eotaxin-1, and STAT6-dependent mechanism. Gastroenterology 2003;125 :1419–27.14598258
23. Blanchard C , Mingler MK , Vicario M , Abonia JP , Wu YY , Lu TX , IL-13 involvement in eosinophilic esophagitis: transcriptome analysis and reversibility with glucocorticoids. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120 :1292–300.18073124
24. Zuo L , Fulkerson PC , Finkelman FD , Mingler M , Fischetti CA , Blanchard C , IL-13 induces esophageal remodeling and gene expression by an eosinophil-independent, IL-13R alpha 2-inhibited pathway. J Immunol 2010; 185 :660–9.20543112
25. Sherrill JD , Kiran KC , Blanchard C , Stucke EM , Kemme KA , Collins MH , Analysis and expansion of the eosinophilic esophagitis transcriptome by RNA sequencing. Genes Immun 2014;15 :361–9.24920534
26. Rothenberg ME , Wen T , Greenberg A , Alpan O , Enav B , Hirano I , Intravenous anti-IL-13 mAb QAX576 for the treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135 :500–7.25226850
27. Uhlen M , Fagerberg L , Hallstrom BM , Lindskog C , Oksvold P , Mardinoglu A , Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science 2015;347 : 1260419.25613900
28. Rochman M , Travers J , Miracle CE , Bedard MC , Wen T , Azouz NP , Profound loss of esophageal tissue differentiation in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;140 :738–49.e3.28104354
29. Kottyan LC , Davis BP , Sherrill JD , Liu K , Rochman M , Kaufman K , Genome-wide association analysis of eosinophilic esophagitis provides insight into the tissue specificity of this allergic disease. Nat Genet 2014;46 :895–900.25017104
30. Sleiman PM , Wang ML , Cianferoni A , Aceves S , Gonsalves N , Nadeau K , GWAS identifies four novel eosinophilic esophagitis loci. Nat Commun 2014;5 : 5593.25407941
31. Sherrill JD , Kc K , Wang X , Wen T , Chamberlin A , Stucke EM , Whole-exome sequencing uncovers oxidoreductases DHTKD1 and OGDHL as linkers between mitochondrial dysfunction and eosinophilic esophagitis. JCI Insight 2018;3 .
32. Davis BP . Pathophysiology of eosinophilic esophagitis. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2018 [Epub ahead of print].
33. O’Shea KM , Aceves SS , Dellon ES , Gupta SK , Spergel JM , Furuta GT , Pathophysiology of eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterology 2018;154 :333–45.28757265
34. Kottyan LC , Rothenberg ME . Genetics of eosinophilic esophagitis. Mucosal Immunol 2017;10 :580–8.28224995
35. Caldwell JM , Paul M , Rothenberg ME . Novel immunologic mechanisms in eosinophilic esophagitis. Curr Opin Immunol 2017;48 :114–21.28965008
36. Rosekrans SL , Baan B , Muncan V , van den Brink GR . Esophageal development and epithelial homeostasis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2015;309 : G216–28.26138464
37. Que J , Choi M , Ziel JW , Klingensmith J , Hogan BL . Morphogenesis of the trachea and esophagus: current players and new roles for noggin and Bmps. Differentiation 2006;74 :422–37.16916379
38. Zorn AM , Wells JM . Vertebrate endoderm development and organ formation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2009;25 :221–51.19575677
39. Kraus MR , Grapin-Botton A . Patterning and shaping the endoderm in vivo and in culture. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2012;22 :347–53.22742850
40. Daniely Y , Liao G , Dixon D , Linnoila RI , Lori A , Randell SH , Critical role of p63 in the development of a normal esophageal and tracheobronchial epithelium. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004;287 :C171–81.15189821
41. Jiang M , Ku WY , Zhou Z , Dellon ES , Falk GW , Nakagawa H , BMP-driven NRF2 activation in esophageal basal cell differentiation and eosinophilic esophagitis. J Clin Invest 2015;125 :1557–68.25774506
42. Squier CA , Kremer MJ . Biology of oral mucosa and esophagus. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2001;29 :7–15.
43. DeWard AD , Cramer J , Lagasse E . Cellular heterogeneity in the mouse esophagus implicates the presence of a nonquiescent epithelial stem cell population. Cell Rep 2014;9 :701–11.25373907
44. Croagh D , Phillips WA , Redvers R , Thomas RJ , Kaur P . Identification of candidate murine esophageal stem cells using a combination of cell kinetic studies and cell surface markers. Stem Cells 2007;25 :313–8.17038667
45. Seery JP . Stem cells of the oesophageal epithelium. J Cell Sci 2002;115 :1783–9.11956310
46. Seery JP , Watt FM . Asymmetric stem-cell divisions define the architecture of human oesophageal epithelium. Curr Biol 2000;10 :1447–50.11102807
47. Travers J , Rochman M , Caldwell JM , Besse JA , Miracle CE , Rothenberg ME . IL-33 is induced in undifferentiated, non-dividing esophageal epithelial cells in eosinophilic esophagitis. Sci Rep 2017;7 :17563.29242581
48. Doupe DP , Alcolea MP , Roshan A , Zhang G , Klein AM , Simons BD , A single progenitor population switches behavior to maintain and repair esophageal epithelium. Science 2012;337 :1091–3.22821983
49. Yamamoto Y , Wang X , Bertrand D , Kern F , Zhang T , Duleba M , Mutational spectrum of Barrett’s stem cells suggests paths to initiation of a precancerous lesion. Nat Commun 2016;7 :10380.26783136
50. Jeong Y , Rhee H , Martin S , Klass D , Lin Y , Nguyen le XT , Identification and genetic manipulation of human and mouse oesophageal stem cells. Gut 2016;65 : 1077–86.25897018
51. Pan Q , Nicholson AM , Barr H , Harrison LA , Wilson GD , Burkert J , Identification of lineage-uncommitted, long-lived, label-retaining cells in healthy human esophagus and stomach, and in metaplastic esophagus. Gastroenterology 2013;144 :761–70.23266557
52. Zhang Y , Jiang M , Kim E , Lin S , Liu K , Lan X , Development and stem cells of the esophagus. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2017;66 :25–35.28007661
53. Okumura T , Shimada Y , Imamura M , Yasumoto S . Neurotrophin receptor p75(NTR) characterizes human esophageal keratinocyte stem cells in vitro. Oncogene 2003;22 :4017–26.12821936
54. Croagh D , Thomas RJ , Phillips WA , Kaur P . Esophageal stem cells—a review of their identification and characterization. Stem Cell Rev 2008;4 :261–8.18679835
55. Blanchard C , Stucke EM , Burwinkel K , Caldwell JM , Collins MH , Ahrens A , Coordinate interaction between IL-13 and epithelial differentiation cluster genes in eosinophilic esophagitis. J Immunol 2010;184 :4033–41.20208004
56. Liew FY , Girard JP , Turnquist HR . Interleukin-33 in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2016;16 :676–89.27640624
57. Rochman M , Travers J , Abonia JP , Caldwell JM , Rothenberg ME . Synaptopodin is upregulated by IL-13 in eosinophilic esophagitis and regulates esophageal epithelial cell motility and barrier integrity. JCI Insight 2017;2 .
58. Chen J , Bardes EE , Aronow BJ , Jegga AG . ToppGene Suite for gene list enrichment analysis and candidate gene prioritization. Nucleic Acids Res 2009;37 : W305–11.19465376
59. Gresnigt MS , van de Veerdonk FL . Biology of IL-36 cytokines and their role in disease. Semin Immunol 2013;25 :458–65.24355486
60. Vigne S , Palmer G , Martin P , Lamacchia C , Strebel D , Rodriguez E , IL-36 signaling amplifies Th1 responses by enhancing proliferation and Th1 polarization of naive CD41 T cells. Blood 2012;120 :3478–87.22968459
61. Ramadas RA , Ewart SL , Iwakura Y , Medoff BD , LeVine AM . IL-36alpha exerts pro-inflammatory effects in the lungs of mice. PLoS One 2012;7 : e45784.23029241
62. Palomo J , Dietrich D , Martin P , Palmer G , Gabay C . The interleukin (IL)-1 cytokine family—balance between agonists and antagonists in inflammatory diseases. Cytokine 2015;76 :25–37.26185894
63. Kc K , Rothenberg ME , Sherrill JD . In vitro model for studying esophageal epithelial differentiation and allergic inflammatory responses identifies keratin involvement in eosinophilic esophagitis. PLoS One 2015;10 : e0127755.26039063
64. Blanchard C , Wang N , Stringer KF , Mishra A , Fulkerson PC , Abonia JP , Eotaxin-3 and a uniquely conserved gene-expression profile in eosinophilic esophagitis. J Clin Invest 2006;116 :536–47.16453027
65. Sherrill JD , Rothenberg ME . Genetic dissection of eosinophilic esophagitis provides insight into disease pathogenesis and treatment strategies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;128 :23–34.21570716
66. Sherrill JD , Kc K , Wu D , Djukic Z , Caldwell JM , Stucke EM , Desmoglein-1 regulates esophageal epithelial barrier function and immune responses in eosinophilic esophagitis. Mucosal Immunol 2014;7 :718–29.24220297
67. Samuelov L , Sarig O , Harmon RM , Rapaport D , Ishida-Yamamoto A , Isakov O , Desmoglein 1 deficiency results in severe dermatitis, multiple allergies and metabolic wasting. Nat Genet 2013;45 :1244–8.23974871
68. Simon D , Radonjic-Hosli S , Straumann A , Yousefi S , Simon HU . Active eosinophilic esophagitis is characterized by epithelial barrier defects and eosinophil extracellular trap formation. Allergy 2015;70 :443–52.25620273
69. Simon D , Page B , Vogel M , Bussmann C , Blanchard C , Straumann A , Evidence of an abnormal epithelial barrier in active, untreated and corticosteroid-treated eosinophilic esophagitis. Allergy 2018;73 :239–47.28712126
70. Azouz NPY-DM , Caldwell JM , Jain A , Rochman M , The anti-protease SPINK7 serves as an inhibitory checkpoint for esophageal epithelial inflammatory responses. Sci Transl Med 2018;10 (444 ).
71. Orlando RC . The integrity of the esophageal mucosa. Balance between offensive and defensive mechanisms. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2010;24 :873–82.21126700
72. Parfitt JR , Gregor JC , Suskin NG , Jawa HA , Driman DK . Eosinophilic esophagitis in adults: distinguishing features from gastroesophageal reflux disease: a study of 41 patients. Mod Pathol 2006;19 :90–6.16258505
73. Abdulnour-Nakhoul SM , Al-Tawil Y , Gyftopoulos AA , Brown KL , Hansen M , Butcher KF , Alterations in junctional proteins, inflammatory mediators and extracellular matrix molecules in eosinophilic esophagitis. Clin Immunol 2013;148 :265–78.23792687
74. Nguyen N , Fernando SD , Biette KA , Hammer JA , Capocelli KE , Kitzenberg DA , TGF-beta1 alters esophageal epithelial barrier function by attenuation of claudin-7 in eosinophilic esophagitis. Mucosal Immunol 2018;11 :415–26.28832026
75. Kagalwalla AF , Akhtar N , Woodruff SA , Rea BA , Masterson JC , Mukkada V , Eosinophilic esophagitis: epithelial mesenchymal transition contributes to esophageal remodeling and reverses with treatment. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129 :1387–96.e7.22465212
76. Muir AB , Lim DM , Benitez AJ , Modayur Chandramouleeswaran P , Lee AJ , Ruchelli ED , Esophageal epithelial and mesenchymal cross-talk leads to features of epithelial to mesenchymal transition in vitro. Exp Cell Res 2013;319 :850–9.23237990
77. Muir AB , Dods K , Noah Y , Toltzis S , Chandramouleeswaran PM , Lee A , Esophageal epithelial cells acquire functional characteristics of activated myofibroblasts after undergoing an epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Exp Cell Res 2015;330 :102–10.25183431
78. Rawlings AV , Harding CR . Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol Ther 2004;17 (suppl 1 ):43–8.14728698
79. O’Regan GM , Sandilands A , McLean WH , Irvine AD . Filaggrin in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;122 :689–93.18774165
80. Caldwell JM , Collins MH , Kemme KA , Sherrill JD , Wen T , Rochman M , Cadherin 26 is an alpha integrin-binding epithelial receptor regulated during allergic inflammation. Mucosal Immunol 2017;10 :1190–201.28051089
81. Sherrill JD , Gao PS , Stucke EM , Blanchard C , Collins MH , Putnam PE , Variants of thymic stromal lymphopoietin and its receptor associate with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126 :160–5.e3.20620568
82. Rothenberg ME , Spergel JM , Sherrill JD , Annaiah K , Martin LJ , Cianferoni A , Common variants at 5q22 associate with pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis. Nat Genet 2010;42 :289–91.20208534
83. Asai Y , Eslami A , van Ginkel CD , Akhabir L , Wan M , Ellis G , Genome-wide association study and meta-analysis in multiple populations identifies new loci for peanut allergy and establishes C11orf30/EMSY as a genetic risk factor for food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141 :991–1001.29030101
84. Henderson CJ , Ngeow J , Collins MH , Martin LJ , Putnam PE , Abonia JP , Increased prevalence of eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders in pediatric PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;58 : 553–60.24345843
85. Martin LJ , He H , Collins MH , Abonia JP , Biagini Myers JM , Eby M , Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) genetic susceptibility is mediated by synergistic interactions between EoE-specific and general atopic disease loci. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141 :1690–8.29129581
86. Matoso A , Mukkada VA , Lu S , Monahan R , Cleveland K , Noble L , Expression microarray analysis identifies novel epithelial-derived protein markers in eosinophilic esophagitis. Mod Pathol 2013;26 :665–76.23503644
87. Polivka L , Hadj-Rabia S , Bal E , Leclerc-Mercier S , Madrange M , Hamel Y , Epithelial barrier dysfunction in desmoglein-1 deficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018 [Epub ahead of print].
88. Cousineau I , Belmaaza A . EMSY overexpression disrupts the BRCA2/RAD51 pathway in the DNA-damage response: implications for chromosomal instability/recombination syndromes as checkpoint diseases. Mol Genet Genomics 2011;285 :325–40.21409565
89. Hughes-Davies L , Huntsman D , Ruas M , Fuks F , Bye J , Chin SF , EMSY links the BRCA2 pathway to sporadic breast and ovarian cancer. Cell 2003; 115 :523–35.14651845
90. Fahey LM , Guzek R , Ruffner MA , Sullivan KE , Spergel J , Cianferoni A . EMSY is increased and activates TSLP and CCL5 expression in eosinophilic esophagitis. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2018 [Epub ahead of print].
91. Zhang X , He X , Fu XY , Chang Z . Varp is a Rab21 guanine nucleotide exchange factor and regulates endosome dynamics. J Cell Sci 2006;119 :1053–62.16525121
92. Fukuda M Multiple roles of VARP in endosomal trafficking: rabs, retromer components and R-SNARE VAMP7 meet on VARP. Traffic 2016;17 :709–19.27103185
93. Litosh VA , Rochman M , Rymer JK , Porollo A , Kottyan LC , Rothenberg ME . Calpain-14 and its association with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139 :1762–71.e7.28131390
94. Ono Y , Saido TC , Sorimachi H . Calpain research for drug discovery: challenges and potential. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2016;15 :854–76.27833121
95. Davis BP , Stucke EM , Khorki ME , Litosh VA , Rymer JK , Rochman M , Eosinophilic esophagitis-linked calpain 14 is an IL-13-induced protease that mediates esophageal epithelial barrier impairment. JCI Insight 2016;1 :e86355.27158675
96. Heinz S , Romanoski CE , Benner C , Allison KA , Kaikkonen MU , Orozco LD , Effect of natural genetic variation on enhancer selection and function. Nature 2013;503 :487–92.24121437
97. Corradin O , Scacheri PC . Enhancer variants: evaluating functions in common disease. Genome Med 2014;6 :85.25473424
98. Rochman M , Kartashov AV , Caldwell JM , Collins MH , Stucke EM , Kc K , Neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 1 is a direct transcriptional and epigenetic target of IL-13 involved in allergic inflammation. Mucosal Immunol 2015;8 : 785–98.25389033
99. Sherrill JD , Rothenberg ME . Genetic and epigenetic underpinnings of eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2014;43 :269–80.24813515
100. Lim E , Rothenberg ME . Demethylation of the human eotaxin-3 gene promoter leads to the elevated expression of eotaxin-3. J Immunol 2014;192 : 466–74.24323578
101. Khor SS , Morino R , Nakazono K , Kamitsuji S , Akita M , Kawajiri M , Genome-wide association study of self-reported food reactions in Japanese identifies shrimp and peach specific loci in the HLA-DR/DQ gene region. Sci Rep 2018;8 :1069.29348432
102. Asai Y , Eslami A , van Ginkel CD , Akhabir L , Wan M , Yin D , Canadian genome-wide association study and meta-analysis confirm HLA as a risk factor for peanut allergy independent of asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141 : 1513–6.29325868
103. Hong X , Hao K , Ladd-Acosta C , Hansen KD , Tsai HJ , Liu X , Genome-wide association study identifies peanut allergy-specific loci and evidence of epigenetic mediation in US children. Nat Commun 2015;6 :6304.25710614
104. Marenholz I , Grosche S , Kalb B , Ruschendorf F , Blumchen K , Schlags R , Genome-wide association study identifies the SERPINB gene cluster as a susceptibility locus for food allergy. Nat Commun 2017;8 :1056.29051540
105. Rawson R , Yang T , Newbury RO , Aquino M , Doshi A , Bell B , TGF-beta1-induced PAI-1 contributes to a profibrotic network in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;138 :791–800.e4.27212082
106. Aceves SS , Newbury RO , Dohil R , Bastian JF , Broide DH . Esophageal remodeling in pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119 : 206–12.17208603
107. Wang R , Zhu J , Dong X , Shi M , Lu C , Springer TA . GARP regulates the bioavailability and activation of TGFbeta. Mol Biol Cell 2012;23 :1129–39.22278742
108. Fridrich S , Hahn SA , Linzmaier M , Felten M , Zwarg J , Lennerz V , How soluble GARP enhances TGFbeta activation. PLoS One 2016;11 :e0153290.27054568
109. Hirota T , Nakayama T , Sato S , Yanagida N , Matsui T , Sugiura S , Association study of childhood food allergy with genome-wide association studies-discovered loci of atopic dermatitis and eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;140 :1713–6.28629743
110. Fahey LM , Chandramouleeswaran PM , Guan S , Benitez AJ , Furuta GT , Aceves SS , Food allergen triggers are increased in children with the TSLP risk allele and eosinophilic esophagitis. Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2018;9 :139.29511165
111. van Ginkel CD , Pettersson ME , Dubois AEJ , Koppelman GH . Association of stat6 gene variants with food allergy diagnosed by double-blind placebo-controlled food challenges. Allergy 2018 [Epub ahead of print].
112. de Veer SJ , Furio L , Harris JM , Hovnanian A . Proteases: common culprits in human skin disorders. Trends Mol Med 2014;20 :166–78.24380647
113. Perez-Silva JG , Espanol Y , Velasco G , Quesada V . The Degradome database: expanding roles of mammalian proteases in life and disease. Nucleic Acids Res 2016;44 :D351–5.26553809
114. Jang H , Matsuda A , Jung K , Karasawa K , Matsuda K , Oida K , Skin pH is the master switch of kallikrein 5-mediated skin barrier destruction in a murine atopic dermatitis model. J Invest Dermatol 2016;136 :127–35.26763432
115. Goettig P , Magdolen V , Brandstetter H . Natural and synthetic inhibitors of kallikrein-related peptidases (KLKs). Biochimie 2010;92 :1546–67.20615447
116. Pavon MA , Arroyo-Solera I , Cespedes MV , Casanova I , Leon X , Mangues R . uPA/uPAR and SERPINE1 in head and neck cancer: role in tumor resistance, metastasis, prognosis and therapy. Oncotarget 2016;7 :57351–66.27385000
117. Lopez-Otin C , Hunter T . The regulatory crosstalk between kinases and proteases in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2010;10 :278–92.20300104
118. Nalivaeva NN , Belyaev ND , Kerridge C , Turner AJ . Amyloid-clearing proteins and their epigenetic regulation as a therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci 2014;6 :235.25278875
119. Hartmann M , Herrlich A , Herrlich P . Who decides when to cleave an ectodomain? Trends Biochem Sci 2013;38 :111–20.23298902
120. Zeeuwen PL , van Vlijmen-Willems IM , Cheng T , Rodijk-Olthuis D , Hitomi K , Hara-Nishimura I , The cystatin M/E-cathepsin L balance is essential for tissue homeostasis in epidermis, hair follicles, and cornea. FASEB J 2010;24 : 3744–55.20495178
121. Zheng Y , Chen H , Lai W , Xu Q , Liu C , Wu L , Cathepsin D repairing role in photodamaged skin barrier. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2015;28 :97–102.25402676
122. Borgono CA , Michael IP , Komatsu N , Jayakumar A , Kapadia R , Clayman GL , A potential role for multiple tissue kallikrein serine proteases in epidermal desquamation. J Biol Chem 2007;282 :3640–52.17158887
123. Fischer J , Meyer-Hoffert U . Regulation of kallikrein-related peptidases in the skin—from physiology to diseases to therapeutic options. Thromb Haemost 2013;110 : 442–9.23446429
124. D’Mello RJ , Caldwell JM , Azouz NP , Wen T , Sherrill JD , Hogan SP , LRRC31 is induced by IL-13 and regulates kallikrein expression and barrier function in the esophageal epithelium. Mucosal Immunol 2016;9 :744–56.26462420
125. Cui N , Hu M , Khalil RA . Biochemical and biological attributes of matrix metal-loproteinases. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2017;147 :1–73.28413025
126. Krunic AL , Stone KL , Simpson MA , McGrath JA . Acral peeling skin syndrome resulting from a homozygous nonsense mutation in the CSTA gene encoding cystatin A. Pediatr Dermatol 2013;30 :e87–8.23534700
127. Chavanas S , Bodemer C , Rochat A , Hamel-Teillac D , Ali M , Irvine AD , Mutations in SPINK5, encoding a serine protease inhibitor, cause Netherton syndrome. Nat Genet 2000;25 :141–2.10835624
128. Furio L , de Veer S , Jaillet M , Briot A , Robin A , Deraison C , Transgenic kallikrein 5 mice reproduce major cutaneous and systemic hallmarks of Netherton syndrome. J Exp Med 2014;211 :499–513.24534191
129. Hannula-Jouppi K , Laasanen SL , Heikkila H , Tuomiranta M , Tuomi ML , Hilvo S , IgE allergen component-based profiling and atopic manifestations in patients with Netherton syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134 :985–8.25159469
130. Paluel-Marmont C , Bellon N , Barbet P , Leclerc-Mercier S , Hadj-Rabia S , Dupont C , Eosinophilic esophagitis and colonic mucosal eosinophilia in Netherton syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139 :2003–5.e1.28025013
131. Deraison C , Bonnart C , Lopez F , Besson C , Robinson R , Jayakumar A , LEKTI fragments specifically inhibit KLK5, KLK7, and KLK14 and control desquamation through a pH-dependent interaction. Mol Biol Cell 2007;18 : 3607–19.17596512
132. Kubo A , Shiohama A , Sasaki T , Nakabayashi K , Kawasaki H , Atsugi T , Mutations in SERPINB7, encoding a member of the serine protease inhibitor superfamily, cause Nagashima-type palmoplantar keratosis. Am J Hum Genet 2013;93 :945–56.24207119
133. Abonia JP , Blanchard C , Butz BB , Rainey HF , Collins MH , Stringer K , Involvement of mast cells in eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126 :140–9.20538331
134. Caughey GH . Mast cell proteases as protective and inflammatory mediators. Adv Exp Med Biol 2011;716 :212–34.21713659
135. Hentze H , Lin XY , Choi MS , Porter AG . Critical role for cathepsin B in mediating caspase-1-dependent interleukin-18 maturation and caspase-1-independent necrosis triggered by the microbial toxin nigericin. Cell Death Differ 2003;10 : 956–68.12934070
136. Afonina IS , Muller C , Martin SJ , Beyaert R . Proteolytic processing of interleukin-1 family cytokines: variations on a common theme. Immunity 2015;42 :991–1004.26084020
137. Emami N , Diamandis EP . Potential role of multiple members of the kallikrein-related peptidase family of serine proteases in activating latent TGF beta 1 in semen. Biol Chem 2010;391 :85–95.19919178
138. Sarlo K , Ritz HL , Fletcher ER , Schrotel KR , Clark ED . Proteolytic detergent enzymes enhance the allergic antibody responses of guinea pigs to nonproteolytic detergent enzymes in a mixture: implications for occupational exposure. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997;100 :480–7.9338541
139. Matsumura Y Role of allergen source-derived proteases in sensitization via airway epithelial cells. J Allergy (Cairo) 2012;2012 :903659.22523502
140. Zhu Y , Underwood J , Macmillan D , Shariff L , O’Shaughnessy R , Harper JI , Persistent kallikrein 5 activation induces atopic dermatitis-like skin architecture independent of PAR2 activity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;140 :1310–22.e5.28238749
141. Wu D , Wei Y , Bleier BS . Emerging role of proteases in the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2017;7 :538.29376037
142. Alexander JA , Jung KW , Arora AS , Enders F , Katzka DA , Kephardt GM , Swallowed fluticasone improves histologic but not symptomatic response of adults with eosinophilic esophagitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10 : 742–9.e1.22475741
143. Schaefer ET , Fitzgerald JF , Molleston JP , Croffie JM , Pfefferkorn MD , Corkins MR , Comparison of oral prednisone and topical fluticasone in the treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis: a randomized trial in children. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;6 :165–73.18237866
144. Butz BK , Wen T , Gleich GJ , Furuta GT , Spergel J , King E , Efficacy, dose reduction, and resistance to high-dose fluticasone in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterology 2014;147 :324–33.e5.24768678
145. Konikoff MR , Noel RJ , Blanchard C , Kirby C , Jameson SC , Buckmeier BK , A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of fluticasone propionate for pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterology 2006;131 :1381–91.17101314
146. Miehlke S , Hruz P , Vieth M , Bussmann C , von Arnim U , Bajbouj M , A randomised, double-blind trial comparing budesonide formulations and dosages for short-term treatment of eosinophilic oesophagitis. Gut 2016;65 :390–9.25792708
147. Greuter T , Bussmann C , Safroneeva E , Schoepfer AM , Biedermann L , Vavricka SR , Long-term treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis with swallowed topical corticosteroids: development and evaluation of a therapeutic concept. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112 :1527–35.28719593
148. Dellon ES , Katzka DA , Collins MH , Hamdani M , Gupta SK , Hirano I , Budesonide oral suspension improves symptomatic, endoscopic, and histologic parameters compared with placebo in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterology 2017;152 :776–86.e5.27889574
