LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370121
6712
Prog Neurobiol
Prog Neurobiol
Progress in neurobiology
0301-0082
1873-5118

33716161
8627566
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2021.102032
NIHMS1685668
Article
ApoE4 Activates C/EBPβ/δ-secretase with 27-hydroxycholesterol, Driving the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease
Wang Zhi-Hao 12#
Xia Yiyuan 13#
Liu Pai 14
Liu Xia 1
Edgington-Mitchell Laura 5
Lei Kecheng 1
Yu Shan Ping 6
Wang Xiao-Chuan 37*
Ye Keqiang 1*
1 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine
2 Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China
3 Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education of Neurological Diseases, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
4 Neuroscience Graduate Program, Laney Graduate School, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
5 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology The University of Melbourne, Melbourne Victoria, 3010, Australia
6 Department of Anesthesiology, Emory University School of Medicine
7 Co-innovation Center of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, JS 226001, China
# These authors equally contribute to the work.

* To whom all correspondence should be addressed (kye@emory.edu; wxch@mails.tjmu.edu.cn)
19 11 2021
11 3 2021
7 2021
01 7 2022
202 102032102032
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
ApoE4, an apolipoprotein implicated in cholesterol transport and amyloid-β (Aβ) metabolism, is a major genetic risk determinant for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and drives its pathogenesis via Aβ-dependent and -independent pathways. C/EBPβ, a proinflammatory cytokines-activated transcription factor, is upregulated in AD and mediates cytokines and δ-secretase expression. However, how ApoE4 contributes to AD pathogenesis remains incompletely understood. Here we show that ApoE4 and 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OHC) co-activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling in neurons, mediating AD pathogenesis, and this effect is dependent on neuronal secreted Aβ and inflammatory cytokines. Inhibition of cholesterol metabolism with lovastatin diminishes neuronal ApoE4’s stimulatory effects. Furthermore, ApoE4 and 27-OHC also mediate lysosomal δ-secretase leakage, activation, secretion and endocytosis. Notably, 27-OHC strongly activates C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway in human ApoE4-TR mice and triggers AD pathologies and cognitive deficits, which is blocked by C/EBPβ depletion. Hence, our findings demonstrate that ApoE4 and 27-OHC additively trigger AD pathogenesis via activating C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway. Lowering cholesterol levels with statins should benefit the ApoE4 AD carriers.

Alzheimer’s Disease
ApoE
C/EBPβ
δ-secretase
Cholesterol

pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a complex and genetically heterogeneous disease, featured by progressive memory deficit and personality changes accompanied by brain structural abnormality (Puglielli et al., 2003). The prominent pathologic hallmarks include extracellular senile plaques, predominantly composed of amyloid-β (Aβ), and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), mainly consisted of hyperphosphorylated and truncated Tau. These events are associated with progressive neuronal loss and chronic neuro-inflammation. Late-onset AD (LOAD), or the sporadic occurrence of the disease later in life, represents the majority of AD cases (Hardy and Selkoe, 2002). In LOAD, the disturbance of Aβ clearance machinery appears to trigger Aβ accumulation in the brain (Mawuenyega et al., 2010). ApoE is a 299 amino acid glycoprotein and the major protein component of very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL). ApoE is one of the major apolipoproteins in the plasma and the principal cholesterol carrier in the brain. In humans, APOE gene exists as three polymorphic alleles (ε2, ε3, and ε4), with the APOE ε3 allele being the most common (77%) and ε2 allele the least common (8%) (Mahley, 1988). Numerous studies have confirmed that the APOE ε4 allele is the most prevalent risk factor for AD (Haroldet al., 2009; Lambert et al., 2009; Tanzi and Bertram, 2001), as APOE4 significantly increases the risk for both early-onset AD and late onset AD (Chartier-Harlin et al., 1994; Houlden et al., 1998). The risk for AD conferred by APOE ε4 increases in a dose-dependent manner; individuals that are homozygous for APOE ε4 alleles are eight times more likely to develop AD than are homozygotes for APOE ε3. However, APOE ε4 is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause AD (Tanzi and Bertram, 2001). The proposed mechanism(s) through which APOE4 increases AD risk are multifactorial, including both amyloid-β (Aβ)-dependent effects, i.e. modulation of Aβ levels, aggregation, neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation, and Aβ-independent effects, i.e. neuronal development, brain activity and lipid metabolism (Liu et al., 2013). A number of epidemiological studies suggest that high levels of cholesterol may contribute to the pathogenesis of AD. Individuals with elevated levels of plasma cholesterol have an increased susceptibility to AD, apparently influenced by APOE ε4 genotype (Jarvik et al., 1995). In addition to directly facilitating Aβ internalization and aggregation, ApoE4 also alter brain cholesterol homeostasis by modifying lipoprotein-particle formation. Subjects homozygous for the APOE ε4 allele have higher levels of cholesterol in the plasma and 24S-hydroxycholesterol (24-OHC) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). 24-OHC is a catabolic derivative of cholesterol and represents the major metabolic route for cholesterol clearance from the brain (Holtzman, 2001). Usually, 24-OHC is the most abundant oxysterol in the brain, whereas 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OHC) is most enriched in plasma. However, under conditions when the BBB (brain blood barrier) becomes leaky, more 24S-OHC enters the blood more easily, while 27-OHC moves into the brain interior more readily (Bjorkhem, 2006; Leoni et al., 2003; Saeed et al., 2014). Increased BBB permeability is mainly caused by disruption to tight and adherent junctions, enzymatic degradation of the capillary basement membrane, and increased bulk-flow fluid transcytosis. AD brains display decreased levels of many tight junction proteins, their adaptor molecules and adherent junction proteins, leading to disruption to tight and adherent junctions and breakdown of the BBB (Zlokovic, 2011). Interestingly, 27-OHC is highly increased in the serum (Popp et al., 2012) and CSF (Besga et al., 2012; Heverin et al., 2004) of AD patients, correlated with the memory deficits in AD (Bjorkhem et al., 2009). There are mainly three reasons for increased levels of 27-OHC in AD serum and CSF: 1. Cholesterol hydroxylase CYP27A1 expression is increased in AD, which is responsible for production of 27-OHC (Testa et al., 2016). 2. The flux of 27-OHC across the BBB is increased in AD, because of either damaged BBB integrity (Leoni et al., 2003) or hypercholesterolemia associated oxidative stress (Björkhem, 2006). 3. There is a reduced CYP7B expression in the brains of AD patients. CYP7B is the neuronal enzyme responsible for 27-OHC metabolism (Yau et al., 2003).

In AD, one of the hallmarks is chronic neuro-inflammation mediated by astrocytes and microglial cells, most likely induced by Aβ deposits. C/EBPβ is involved in neuro-inflammation and mediates IL-6 transcription (Cardinaux et al., 2000; Tengku-Muhammad et al., 2000). There is a positive feed-back loop between inflammatory components and C/EBPβ in the brain (Li et al., 2004). For example, Aβ and inflammatory cytokine IL-6 additively enhance p-C/EBPβ TI88, a biomarker for its activation (Strohmeyer et al., 2014). C/EBPβ acts as a major transcription factor for δ-secretase mRNA expression in the brain in an age-dependent manner (Wang et al., 2018d). Interestingly, both APP and MAPT promoters contain the CCAAT binding motif and have been proposed to as C/EBPβ downstream targets (Kfoury and Kapatos, 2009). δ-secretase is also called AEP (asparagine endopeptidase) that is a lysosomal cysteine protease (Chen et al., 1997). Previously, we showed that AEP cuts SET, a DNase and PP2A inhibitor, stimulating neuronal cell death (Liu et al., 2008). AEP is highly activated in AD patients and enhances Tau hyperphosphorylation via inhibiting PP2A through truncated SET (Basurto-Islas et al., 2013). δ-secretase predominantly cleaves both APP and Tau at N585 and N368, respectively, and promotes Aβ production and NFT formation, facilitating AD pathologies onset (Zhang et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2015). Co-expression of APP C586–695 and Tau N368 fragments exhibit both Aβ aggregation and NFT deposition in wild-type mice, leading to learning and memory dysfunctions (Zhang et al., 2018). Remarkably, Tau N368 levels in AD patient CSF are associated with cognitive impairments and Tau PET signals in AD brains (Leuzy et al., 2019). Most recently, we reported that C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway spatiotemporally mediates AD pathogenesis in 3xTg mouse model (Wang et al., 2018b).

Despite mounting evidence indicating ApoE4’s manifold deleterious effects leading to AD pathophysiology, the mechanistic details of how ApoE4 causes these effects remain unclear. Though ApoE is constitutively expressed in glial cells in the brain (Kim et al., 2009), it is induced in neurons under stresses. Notably, the neuronal ApoE4 is neurotoxic (Xu et al., 2006). Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism of how neuronal ApoE4 exerts its detrimental effect remains unclear. In the current report, we show that ApoE4 and 27-OHC additively activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase in primary neuronal cultures via both secreted Aβ and inflammatory cytokines, leading to δ-secretase upregulation and APP and Tau cleavage. Depletion of C/EBPβ abolishes 27-OHC-induced AD pathologies in ApoE4-TR mice.

Results

rApoE4 and 27-OHC mediate Aβ production via activating C/EBPβ/δ-secretase axis

ApoE is a major component of lipoproteins mediating cholesterol metabolism and distribution, and it is mainly secreted from astrocytes in the brain. To explore whether secreted ApoE4’s biological effects on C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling is mediated by cholesterol, we treated primary rat neuronal cultures with cholesterol or 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OHC) (cholesterol: 50 μM; 27-OHC: 10 μM), a major neurotoxic metabolite in the brain, in the presence or absence of recombinant ApoE3 or ApoE4 (rApoE3 or rApoE4) proteins. It is worth noting that 27-OHC induced C/EBPβ upregulation and activation stronger than cholesterol, and these effects were increased in the presence of rApoE3 and further escalated by rApoE4. The downstream targets of C/EBPβ including δ-secretase, Tau5 and APP FL and their subsequent proteolytic fragments (Tau N368 and APP N585) by δ-secretase closely coupled with p-C/EBPβ activation patterns (Figure 1A-B). The mRNA level of Cebpb, Lgmn, App and Mapt were in alignment with the protein amounts (Figure 1C). Aβ ELISA analysis showed that 27-OHC significantly elevated both Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels, which were further augmented by rApoE4 and rApoE3 with the former much stronger than the latter. Neuronal IL-6 displayed a similar effect (Figure 1D). Again, δ-secretase also exhibited the same activation manner (Figure 1E). Immunofluorescent (IF) staining showed C/EBPβ were mainly distributed in the cytoplasm, and its nuclear expression was strongly induced by rApoE3 or rApoE4 with 27-OHC effects more robustly than cholesterol. The neurite morphologies were clearly damaged by rApoE3 or rApoE4, and the effect was exacerbated by cholesterol or 27-OHC with the latter stronger than the former (Figure 1F-G), suggesting that ApoE4 is more neurotoxic in the presence of 27-OHC.

To investigate whether 27-OHC in vivo also mediates δ-secretase activation in human AD brains in ApoE3 or ApoE4 genotype-dependent manner or not, we quantified [27-OHC] from ApoE3/3 and ApoE4/4 AD brains and analyzed their correlation with Braak stages. Notably, the levels of 27-OHC displayed much higher lineage and correlation with Braak stages in ApoE4/4 AD brains versus ApoE3/3 AD brains (Supplementary Figure 1A &amp; B). Subcellular fractionation showed that with the brain [27-OHC] gradual increase, lysosomal δ-secretase concentrations were progressively reduced. Consequently, cytosolic levels of both δ-secretase FL and active form escalated in both ApoE3/3 and ApoE4/4 AD brains with the latter much stronger than the former (Supplementary Figure 1C-E). Therefore, these findings support that ApoE4 and 27-OHC potently activate δ-secretase in human AD brains.

To assess whether ApoEs and cholesterol also mediate δ-secretase intracellular trafficking, we conducted subcellular fractionation with neuronal SH-SY5Y cells, treated with rApoE3 or rApoE4 in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC, respectively. Remarkably, 27-OHC strongly augmented δ-secretase levels and triggered its activation in the lysosomes in the presence of rApoE4, and the stimulatory effects were much stronger than with rApoE3. Notably, rApoE4 potently stimulated δ-secretase FL leakage from the lysosomes into the cytoplasm with most of active and truncated δ-secretase under rApoE4 and 27-OHC treatment. Though δ-secretase FL was demonstrable in the rat neuronal medium under all conditions, the active form was only detected in the medium treated with rApoE4 and 27-OHC. By contrast, cholesterol weakly activated δ-secretase in the lysosomes in the presence of rApoE4 but not rApoE3, but it failed to elicit active δ-secretase cytosolic translocation or secretion (Figure 1H-I). Hence, ApoE4 and 27-OHC additively trigger C/EBPβ activation and elevate δ-secretase levels. Consequently, active δ-secretase is translocated from the lysosomes into the cytoplasm and secreted into the medium.

rApoE4 and 27-OHC augment δ-secretase intraneuronal activation, secretion and endocytosis

δ-secretase is an acidosis-regulated cysteine protease that acts as asparagine endopeptidase and is activated after sequential cleavage at N323 and D25 by autocleavage and caspases (Li et al., 1997). To monitor its activation and subcellular trafficking, we treated primary rat neurons with rApoE3 or rApoE4 in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC, and examined δ-secretase activity with a fluorescent dye LE28, which lights up upon proteolytic cleavage by active δ-secretase (Edgington et al., 2013). IF co-staining showed that 27-OHC increased δ-secretase fluorescent intensities. The effect was elevated when co-incubated with rApoE3 and further augmented with rApoE4. It is worth noting that some of rApoE3 and 27-OHC or rApoE4-induced δ-secretase was not co-localized with LAMP1, and most of rApoE4 and 27-OHC induced δ-secretase distributed outside of the lysosomes. LE28 fluorescent signals were evident in the presence of rApoE4 and the peak activities occurred in neurons treated with rApoE4 and 27-OHC (Figure 2A). Quantification revealed that LE28 activities were significantly higher in neurons treated with rApoE4 and 27-OHC than control neurons (Figure 2B). Both δ-secretase/LAMP1 and LE28/LAMP1 co-localization analysis showed that the signals elicited by rApoE4 and 27-OHC were substantially reduced (Figure 2C &amp; D). Thus, rApoE4 and 27-OHC elevate δ-secretase expression in neurons and active δ-secretase predominantly resides in the cytoplasm outside the lysosomes.

Delta-secretase has been reported to secrete in the extracellular space, and it is also recycled back via endocytosis (Smith et al., 2012). Extracellular δ-secretase may re-enter the cells via endocytosis (Dall and Brandstetter, 2016), leading to an increase in intracellular proteolytic cleavage. It is important to analyze this process as endocytosis is a critical process for δ-secretase to cleave its intracellular AD-related downstream substrates, such as Tau N368 and SRPK2 N342 (Wang et al., 2018c; Zhang et al., 2014). To assess whether rApoE4 and 27-OHC mediate this process, we prepared C-terminal-His-tagged δ-secretase recombinant proteins and introduced into the rat neuronal culture medium. After treatment with rApoE3 or rApoE4 in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC for 2 h, primary rat neurons were incubated with His-δ-secretase (3×10−5 mg/mL) for 5 or 30 min at 37 °C. IF co-staining revealed that His-δ-secretase (Green) was endocytosed within the EEA1-positive early endosomes (Red) upon treatment for 5 min. Exogenous His-δ-secretase was distinguished by co-staining with both anti-His and anti-AEP antibodies. In 30 min, His-δ-secretase endocytosis also occurred in the rat neurons treated with rApoE3 in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC. However, this effect was much more prominent with rApoE4 and 27-OHC (Figure 3A). Quantification showed that recombinant His-δ-secretase proteins were significantly endocytosed into the rat neurons in 5 min, and longer duration increased its endocytosis by 27-OHC in the presence of rApoE3 and rApoE4, with the latter much stronger than the former (Figure 3B). Hence ApoE4 and 27-OHC additively regulate δ-secretase intraneuronal activation trafficking and endocytosis.

rApoE4 and 27-OHC escalate δ-secretase via activating C/EBPβ by inflammatory cytokines

ApoE4 and 27-OHC elicit inflammatory cytokines upregulation and Aβ production in primary neurons. However, it is unclear whether the secreted cytokines from neurons play any role in mediating these biological events. To explore this possibility, we pre-incubated a cocktail of cytokine antibodies (anti-IL-1β, anti-IL6 and anti-TNFα, 1 μg/mL, 24 h) with primary rat neuronal cultures, followed by treatment with rApoE3 or rApoE4 with or without 27-OHC. Under control IgG, ApoE4 exhibited stronger effect in activating p-C/EBPβ and escalating its protein levels than rApoE3, which were further enhanced by 27-OHC. Notably, 27-OHC alone increased p-C/EBPβ activities and total levels of C/EBPβ as well. Consequently, the downstream effector δ-secretase tightly coupled with p-C/EBPβ signals. Remarkably, APP and Tau expression also displayed the similar pattern. rApoE4 robustly triggered APP N585 and Tau N368 cleavage by active δ-secretase, which were further augmented by 27-OHC. By contrast, pretreatment with the mixture of cytokine antibodies evidently repressed these effects (Figure 4A, Supplementary Figure 2A). Quantitative analysis via RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) showed that rApoE4 and 27-OHC-elicited CEBPB, LGMN, APP and MAPT mRNA levels were significantly inhibited by the cocktail of cytokine antibodies (Figure 4B). Accordingly, Aβ40, Aβ42 and IL-6 concentrations in the cell lysates revealed the similar formats (Figure 4C). Enzymatic assay showed that rApoE4 and 27-OHC-activated δ-secretase was greatly antagonized by neutralization of the proinflammatory cytokine antibodies (Figure 4D).

Next, we examined whether rApoE4 and 27-OHC-incurred biological effects are indeed mediated by C/EBPβ, we prepared the primary mouse neuronal cultures from C/EBPβ +/+ and +/− embryos (C/EBPβ −/− mice are abnormal and hard to breed). 27-OHC activated C/EBPβ and escalated its downstream effectors including δ-secretase, APP and Tau in a dose-dependent manner in the presence of rApoE3 or rApoE4, with the latter much stronger than the former. Strikingly, these effects were conspicuously blocked in mouse C/EBPβ +/− neurons (Figure 4E), suggesting that rApoE4 and 27-OHC-mediated AD-like events are principally mediated by C/EBPβ. qRT-PCR analysis of mRNAs echoed these effects (Figure 4F). Noticeably, Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations were tightly coupled with APP N585 proteolytic fragmentation activities, so were the levels of IL-6, a well-characterized downstream target of C/EBPβ (Figure 4G). Again, δ-secretase enzymatic activities mirrored the immunoblotting results of active δ-secretase (Figure 4H). Interestingly, medium-secreted δ-secretase FL remained constant regardless of control IgG or anti-cytokines pretreatment. Markedly, 27-OHC-stimulated active δ-secretase in the medium was much higher with rApoE4 than rApoE3. Neutralization of the inflammatory cytokines with the antibodies evidently mitigated active δ-secretase concentrations in the medium (Figure 4I). Thus, blockade of neuronal secreted inflammatory cytokines abolishes rApoE4 and 27-OHC-stimulated effects, which are predominantly mediated via activating C/EBPβ.

To further explore whether C/EBPβ is also implicated in activating δ-secretase, we employed C/EBPβ +/+ and +/− primary mouse neurons, which were pretreated with anti-IgG or antibodies against the cytokine triad, followed by stimulation with rApoE4 and 27-OHC. IF co-staining revealed that C/EBPβ was activated by rApoE4 and 27-OHC in the nucleus of WT neurons, as revealed with p-C/EBPβ antibody staining. The activation was abolished by cytokine antibodies mixture or in C/EBPβ +/− mouse neurons (Supplementary Figure 2B). We also examined C/EBPβ’s role in δ-secretase activation with LE28. Consistent with p-C/EBPβ activation, δ-secretase was highly induced in WT mouse neurons by rApoE4 and 27-OHC, and active δ-secretase co-localized with LE28 outside the lysosomes. By contrast, neutralizing the inflammatory cytokines in WT mouse neurons or deletion of C/EBPβ from the mouse neurons apparently attenuated δ-secretase expression and repressed its enzymatic activities elicited by rApoE4 and 27-OHC (Supplementary Figure 2C). Quantification showed that co-localization of δ-secretase/LAMP1 was significantly higher in mouse neurons when inflammatory cytokines were blocked or C/EBPβ was depleted as compared to WT mouse neurons under control or pretreated with IgG (Supplementary Figure 2D). Co-localization of δ-secretase/LE28 fluorescent signals also displayed the similar pattern (Supplementary Figure 2E). Hence, cellular fluorescent staining and LE28 δ-secretase activity assays validate that rApoE4 and 27-OHC activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling and triggers active δ-secretase leakage from the lysosomes into the cytoplasm in neurons.

Neuronal ApoE4 and 27-OHC activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway via neuronal secreted Aβ or inflammatory cytokines

The exogenous recombinant rApoE4 and 27-OHC in the medium activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling in primary neuronal cultures. It remains unknown whether neuronal generated ApoE4 possesses the same effects. To address this question, we infected primary rat neurons with AAV-ApoE4, and pre-incubated rat neuronal cultures with either control IgG or a mixture of antibodies against the cytokine triad: IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα, followed by different doses of 27-OHC. In the presence of control IgG, 27-OHC dose-dependently escalated C/EBPβ and its phosphorylation, which were coupled with gradual increase of δ-secretase. Subsequently, active δ-secretase progressively cleaved both APP N585 and Tau N368. In contrast, these effects were drastically suppressed by the mixture of cytokines’ antibodies (Figure 5A, Supplementary Figure 3A), indicating that secreted inflammatory cytokines might mediate the stimulatory effect by ApoE4 and 27-OHC. qRT-PCR analysis revealed mRNAs of CEBPB, LGMN, APP and MAPT were strongly antagonized by preincubation of cytokines’ antibodies (Figure 5B). Accordingly, inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα were all inhibited by their specific antibodies, as were the rat neuronal secreted Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Supplementary Figure 3B &amp; C). To assess the role of secreted Aβ peptides in this process, we preincubated AAV-ApoE4 infected rat neurons with control IgG or Aβ antibody, followed by cholesterol or 27-OHC treatment. Once again, 27-OHC displayed a much stronger effect than cholesterol in stimulating C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway, resulting in APP N585 and Tau N368 proteolytic cleavage by active δ-secretase. These biological events were greatly antagonized by Aβ antibody (Figure 5C, Supplementary Figure 3D). qRT-PCR analysis of mRNAs of Cebpb, Lgmn, App and Mapt revealed the same effect (Figure 5D). As expected, 27-OHC-induced Aβ40 and Aβ42 were both ardently blocked by pretreatment with Aβ antibody (Figure 5E). Both cholesterol and 27-OHC strongly increased inflammatory cytokines production, which were repressed by anti-Aβ pre-incubation (Supplementary Figure 3E). Moreover, BACE1 or γ-secretase inhibitor prevented the upregulation of C/EBPβ/δ-secretase and cleavage of Tau and APP in primary rat neuronal cultures infected with AAV-ApoE4, followed by treatment with 27-OHC (Supplementary Figures 4A). To further assess the role of C/EBPβ in these events, we infected primary rat neurons with AAV-ApoE3 or AAV-ApoE4 and lentivirus expressing shRNA against C/EBPβ to selectively knock down this transcription factor, followed by 27-OHC treatment. 27-OHC-induced C/EBPβ/δ-secretase upregulation in ApoE4-expressed neurons was prevented by knockdown of C/EBPβ. Accordingly, elevated δ-secretase expression, APP N585 and Tau N368 proteolytic cleavage were antagonized (Supplementary Figure 4B). We made the similar findings in C/EBPβ heterozygous knockout mouse neuronal cultures (Supplementary Figure 4C). To prove that all the described consequences are mediated by C/EBPβ-induced δ-secretase activation, we prepared the primary mouse neuronal cultures from WT and δ-secretase knockout (AEP −/−) embryos. Western blot analyses of C/EBPβ, δ-secretase, Tau FL, APP FL and their subsequent proteolytic fragments in the cell lysates of WT (AEP +/+) or δ-secretase knockout (AEP −/−) mouse neurons treated with ApoE and 27-OHC indicated that silencing δ-secretase blocks ApoE4 and 27-OHC-triggered C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling that mediates APP and Tau proteolytic cleavage in neurons (Supplementary Figure 4D). To better understand the role of 27-OHC and cholesterol in ApoE4-induced biological events, we treated AAV-ApoE4-infected rat neurons with different concentrations of lovastatin, a cholesterol-lowering statin drug. Immunoblotting showed that ApoE4-induced C/EBPβ upregulation was blunted by lovastatin dose-dependently (Supplementary Figure 4E). The aforementioned effects with 27-OHC also occurred to cholesterol with reduced potency (Supplementary Figure 5). Therefore, ApoE4 and 27-OHC stimulate the activation of C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway via secreted proinflammatory cytokines and Aβ.

27-OHC activates C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway in human ApoE4-TR knock-in mice

To assess whether these events truly take place in vivo, we employed human ApoE3 and ApoE4-TR knock-in mice and depleted endogenous C/EBPβ with lentivirus expressing sh-C/EBPβ in the hippocampus, followed by an injection of 27-OHC (20 mg/kg, subcutaneous injection) once every 2 days consecutively for 6 weeks. GFP-tagged virus was successfully injected into the CA1 and CA2 regions, and robustly eradicated endogenous C/EBPβ in hippocampus (Supplementary Figure 6A&amp;B). Immunoblotting revealed that 27-OHC elicited C/EBPβ upregulation and phosphorylation in ApoE3-TR mice, and these effects were much stronger in ApoE4-TR. Consequently, C/EBPβ-mediated δ-secretase was elevated, as was its active fragment. Again, mouse APP and Tau and their proteolytic fragments APP N585 and Tau N368 were augmented upon 27-OHC stimulation in ApoE4-TR mice much more potently than ApoE3-TR mice, which were substantially blunted when C/EBPβ was depleted (Figure 6A-B). Moreover, 27-OHC strongly increased mRNA levels of Cebpb, Lgmn, App and Mapt with ApoE4-TR more abundant than ApoE3-TR, and these effects were suppressed when C/EBPβ was knocked down (Figure 6C). Quantification of inflammatory cytokines showed IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα displayed the same effect (Figure 6D). δ-secretase enzymatic activities echoed its protein concentrations (Figure 6E). Subcellular fractionation revealed that 27-OHC-stimulated δ-secretase FL and active truncate in both lysosomal and cytosolic fractions were potently diminished upon shRNA C/EBPβ treatment (Supplementary Figure 6C). Next, we conducted IF co-staining on the brain sections with the antibodies against Iba1 and GFAP. Noticeably, 27-OHC strongly elicited Iba1 activities, accompanied by enormous GFAP signals in ApoE4-TR hippocampus, which were attenuated when C/EBPβ was depleted. By contrast, these events were substantially weaker in ApoE3-TR mice (Figure 6F &amp; G). Thus, these findings suggest that 27-OHC strongly induces extensive gliosis and microglia activation, fitting with the potent inflammatory cytokines in ApoE4-TR mice, for which C/EBPβ is indispensable.

27-OHC induces Aβ deposition and Tau hyperphosphorylation, associated with cognitive disorders in ApoE4-TR mice

To investigate whether these biochemical reactions result in pathological effects, we monitored Aβ aggregation. Notably, IF co-staining showed that massive mouse Aβ was accumulated in the brains of ApoE4-TR mice treated with 27-OHC, and mouse Aβ aggregation was evidently reduced when C/EBPβ was deleted. Interestingly, the deposited Aβ inclusions, which was ThS positive, co-localized with δ-secretase-truncated APP N585; in contrast, these effects were not found in ApoE3-TR mice (Figure 7A &amp; B, Supplementary Figure 6D). Aβ40 and Aβ42 quantification in insoluble (FA) and soluble fractions (DEA) also validated the augmentation in the ApoE4-TR brains by 27-OHC, for which C/EBPβ was required (Figure 7C, Supplementary Figure 6E). IF co-staining with the antibodies against aggregated Tau T22 and hyperphosphorylated Tau AT8 demonstrated that 27-OHC intensely provoked intraneuronal Tau aggregation, associated with hyperphosphorylation in the hippocampal neurons, and depletion of C/EBPβ abrogated these effects. The NFT pathologies were also confirmed by Silver staining. Nonetheless, these occurrences were not observed in ApoE3-TR mice (Figure 7D &amp; E). Immunoblotting revealed that the insoluble fractions from the brains of ApoE4-TR mice treated with 27-OHC displayed demonstrable smeared aggregated Aβ. Nevertheless, the insoluble fractions from ApoE4-TR mice treated with vehicle exhibited few Aβ aggregation. We made similar observations with aggregated Tau monoclonal antibody T22 and total-Tau antibody Tau5 (Supplementary Figure 6F–6G). It is worth noting that 27-OHC also sturdily induced neuronal apoptosis in the hippocampus of ApoE4-TR mice, indicated by active caspase-3 IF staining, which were accompanied by widespread δ-secretase augmentation. Again, eradication of C/EBPβ eliminated 27-OHC-triggered neurodegeneration in ApoE4-TR mice. However, the neuronal loss was not detectable in ApoE3-TR mice (Supplementary Figure 7A&amp; B). GFP-labeled dendritic spines in hippocampal neurons were markedly reduced in ApoE4-TR mice upon 27-OHC treatment, which were rescued when C/EBPβ was knocked down (Supplementary Figure 7C&amp;D). Electronic microscope (EM) analysis revealed that the synapses in the hippocampus of ApoE4-TR mice were apparently mitigated by 27-OHC as compared to ApoE3-TR mice, and depletion of C/EBPβ significantly restored the synapses (Supplementary Figure 7E&amp;F). Consequently, the electrophysiology analysis supported that synaptic plasticity was obviously attenuated in ApoE4-TR mice elicited by 27-OHC as compared with ApoE3-TR mice, which was rescued by C/EBPβ deletion (Figure 7F). In alignment with the synaptic plasticity results, cognitive behavioral assays including Morris Water Maze (MWM) and the fear conditioning tests demonstrated that 27-OHC-stimulated learning and memory deficits in ApoE4-TR mice were alleviated by C/EBPβ deletion. By contrast, 27-OHC failed to induce any cognitive disorders in ApoE3-TR mice (Figure 7G&amp;H), fitting with the biochemical and pathological findings that C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway was not activated in ApoE3-TR mice as strongly as in ApoE4-TR mice. Fear conditioning tests also showed the similar cognitive results (Figure 7I). Hence, 27-OHC induces AD pathologies and cognitive dysfunctions in ApoE4-TR but not ApoE3-TR mice via activating C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway.

Discussion

In the current work, we explore the molecular mechanism of how exogenous or neuronal ApoE4 exerts its deleterious effect in AD pathologies and find that ApoE4 activates the crucial transcription factor C/EBPβ in neurons in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC, with the latter much stronger than the former. Noticeably, the effect that ApoE4 robustly activates C/EBPβ is dependent on the secreted Aβ and inflammatory cytokines secreted from primary neurons, because neutralizing either of them antagonizes the stimulatory effects by ApoE4. Therefore, 27-OHC and ApoE4 proteins additively activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway in primary neurons, escalating Aβ production and neuro-inflammation. Though ApoE is predominantly expressed in glial cells in the brain (Boyles et al., 1985; Kim et al., 2009), the stressful conditions induce neuronal ApoE4 that is neurotoxic (Xu et al., 2006). Therefore, in order to explore glial cell-secreted ApoE4, we employed purified recombinant ApoE4 proteins and introduced them into the neuronal medium in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC (Figure 1–4). To mimic the stress or damage-induced ApoE4 in neurons, we infected primary rat neurons with AAV virus expressing ApoE4, and treated the cells with cholesterol of 27-OHC, respectively (Figure 5; Supplementary Figure 3–5). In both cellular modes, we find that 27-OHC displays much stronger effect than cholesterol in these events, fitting with its biological roles that are associated with AD and PD pathogenesis via binding and activating LXR (liver X receptors), causing Aβ overproduction, Tau hyperphosphorylation, α-Synuclein accumulation, oxidative stress and inflammation (Marwarha and Ghribi, 2015; Marwarha et al., 2011). Remarkably, 27-OHC exhibits much stronger neurotoxicity in the presence of rApoE4 than rApoE3 (Figure 1F). These findings are in alignment with recent observation that 27-OHC induces aberrant morphology and synaptic dysfunction in hippocampal neurons(Merino-Serrais et al., 2019). Interestingly, we show that 27-OHC strongly augments δ-secretase expression and triggers its cytoplasmic translocation and activation in the presence of rApoE4 (Figure 2 &amp;3, Supplementary Figure 2). These effects are consistent with previous report that 27-OHC damages lysosomal membrane, triggering lysosome proteases leakage into the cytoplasm (Chen et al., 2019b). Moreover, rApoE4 and 27-OHC also robustly promote δ-secretase endocytosis (Figure 2 &amp;3). Hence, rApoE4 and 27-OHC tightly mediates δ-secretase trafficking and activation.

The effect of ApoE on cholesterol synthesis and metabolism or oxysterol-mediated receptor activation that induces local ApoE biosynthesis may posit the underlying mechanism for how ApoE4 and 27-OHC interact to modulate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase activation. Also, previous studies show that cholesterol plays a role in the modulation of APP processing in vivo. APP gene-targeted mice lacking ApoE have high serum cholesterol levels but do not show alterations in APP processing, suggesting that effects of cholesterol on APP processing require the presence of ApoE (Howland et al., 1998). Interestingly, 27-OHC-induced ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress attenuates leptin expression by activating C/EBP Homologous Protein (CHOP) that negatively regulates C/EBPα, a transcription factor required for leptin expression, and these effects are correlated with increased levels of Aβ and p-Tau (Marwarha et al., 2012; Marwarha et al., 2010). Consequently, under oxidative stress, normal levels of cholesterol, either in the peripheral system or in the brain, can be converted to 27-OHC, altering the 27-OHC: 24-OHC ratio in the brain that may have deleterious consequences by increasing the risk for AD/PD (Marwarha and Ghribi, 2015). Conceivably, under stress of Aβ or neuro-inflammation, neuronal ApoE4 is induced in human APOE ε4 carriers. Subsequently, neuronal ApoE4 and 27-OHC strongly activate C/EBPβ and results in upregulation of δ-secretase that robustly cleaves both APP and Tau, leading to augmentation of Aβ production and Tau hyperphosphorylation. The extensive gliosis and microglia activation indicate that ApoE4 and 27-OHC-activated C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway plays an important role in mediating neuro-inflammation in AD pathogenesis, supported by the findings of C/EBPβ knockdown in the hippocampus of ApoE4-TR mice. The subsequent AD pathologies including Aβ deposition, NFT, neuro-inflammation and neuronal loss strongly support that C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway plays a crucial role in mediating ApoE4 pathological effects in AD pathogenesis, and this conclusion is strongly supported by the findings of C/EBPβ knockdown in the hippocampus of ApoE4-TR mice (Figure 6 &amp; 7).

Regulation of transcription of AD genes might be an important player in the neurodegenerative process. In the current study, we provide a large amount of evidence supporting that ApoE4 triggers AD pathologies via activating the inflammatory transcription factor C/EBPβ that forms hetero- and homodimers, thereby altering its preferential DNA binding to initiate transcription of target genes involved in various cellular processes (Greenbaum et al., 1998; Tanaka et al., 1995). The APOE proximal promoter has numerous cis-acting positive and negative regulatory elements, and APOE is transcriptionally controlled by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) and LXRs (which form complexes with RXRs) (Chawla et al., 2001; Cramer et al., 2012). Moreover, the polymorphisms in the promoter region are proposed to affect the transcriptional activity of the APOE gene in both the periphery and the CNS (Artiga et al., 1998). Presumably, C/EBPβ might feedback and regulate APOE mRNA transcription in AD pathogenesis as well. Interestingly, several studies have demonstrated an indirect role of ApoE4 in gene transcription. For instance, ApoE4 acts like a signaling molecule by increasing the nuclear translocation of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in human neurons that in turn reduce BDNF expression, in comparison to ApoE3 (Sen et al., 2015). In another recent study using human neurons, Huang et al. showed that ApoE4 robustly stimulates APP transcription and Aβ production by activating a non-canonical MAP kinase pathway involving DLK, MKK7, and ERK1/2. This cascade finally stimulates c-Fos phosphorylation and APP gene transcription, leading to increased APP and Aβ synthesis (Huang et al., 2017). Intriguingly, C/EBPβ T188 is phosphorylated by Erk1/2, which increases its transcriptional activity (Pulido-Salgado et al., 2015). Conceivably, APP gene mRNA transcription might be also mediated by Erk1/2-phosphorylated C/EBPβ, in addition to p-c-Fos. Previous studies support that neuronal ApoE4 significantly stimulates Aβ production and increases phospho-tau levels. Neuronal ApoE4 is also proteolytically fragmented and triggers neurotoxicity, inducing hyperphosphorylation of Tau and mitochondrial dysfunctions. In addition, neuronal ApoE4 induces GABAergic interneuron degeneration and/or dysfunction (Wang et al., 2018a) (Mahley, 2016). Different from neuronal ApoE4, glial expression of APOE4 impairs glial physiology and leads to deficient clearance of Aβ, lipid dysregulation, deficient glucose metabolism in astrocytes and a pro-inflammatory response in microglia and astrocytes, inducing neurodegeneration and AD (Fernandez et al., 2019).

It has been questioned whether mouse Aβ or mouse Tau could aggregate into pathological fibrils, though extensive previous studies support that mouse Aβ and mouse Tau undeniably aggregate into senile plaques and NFT (Adams et al., 2009; Ahlemeyer et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2015), mimicking the pathological features in human AD patient brains. In order to support that mouse Aβ and Tau indeed aggregate into senile plaques and NFT, we employed various approaches to confirm their identities including immunoblotting and ELISA from the insoluble fractions from mouse brains, anti-Aβ co-staining with ThS, anti-AT8 co-staining with Tau T22, Gyllas-Braak Silver staining etc. in ApoE4-TR mice chronically treated with 27-OHC (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure 6). In the current research, we show that the major AD pathologies including senile plaques, NFT, neuroinflammation, and neuronal death are recapitulated in 27-OHC-treated ApoE4-TR mice. These striking in vivo pathologies fit well with the observations in the primary neuronal cultures (Figure 1–5). In addition, these mice display extensive synaptic loss, associated with cognitive disorders (Figure 6 &amp; 7, Supplementary Figure 7). Hence, mouse Aβ and mouse Tau can form pathological senile plaques and NFT as human counterparts in AD patients. Notably, our findings are consistent with previous report. For instance, anti-NGF mice AD11 recapitulate many of the neurodegenerative markers that characterize AD including insoluble endogenous Tau hyperphosphorylation aggregates and senile plaques with endogenous mouse Aβ (Capsoni et al., 2002) and deficits in synaptic plasticity (Pesavento et al., 2002). Our data support that the mouse machinery is able to recapitulate AD pathologies in ApoE4-TR mice upon chronic 27-OHC treatment. These exciting results are in accordance with previous findings in human patients. For instance, in Apoε4 carriers, a higher ratio of 27-OHC to cholesterol is related to poor memory performance (van den Kommer et al., 2009). In a cohort study, ApoE 4/4 AD patients treated with statins show better cognitive functions. The use of statins may benefit all AD patients with potentially greater therapeutic efficacy in those homozygous for ApoE4 (Geifman et al., 2017). This finding is consistent with our in vitro results that lovastatin dose-dependently blocks ApoE4-triggered C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling that mediates APP and Tau proteolytic cleavage in neurons (Supplementary Figure 4E).

Accumulating evidence suggests that ApoE isoforms impact AD pathogenesis partially by driving Aβ pathology. While Aβ is continuously generated in the brain, it is efficiently eliminated under physiological conditions. Three major pathways by which Aβ is cleared from the brain have been proposed: (1) through proteolytic degradation, (2) by cellular clearance through lysosomal degradation in brain parenchyma cells (microglia, astrocytes, neurons), and (3) by cerebrovascular system-mediated clearance including the interstitial fluid (ISF) drainage pathway, local cellular clearance, and blood brain barrier (BBB) (Yamazaki et al., 2019). Remarkably, Aβ clearance is slower in ApoE4-TR mice compared with ApoE3-TR mice, and ApoE4-TR mice exhibit greater inflammatory responses to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) compared with ApoE3-TR mice (Lynch et al., 2003). Additionally, young APOE ε4 carriers show an increased inflammatory response that may relate to AD risk later in life (Ringman et al., 2012). It has been reported that Aβ and inflammatory cytokine IL-6 additively activate C/EBPβ (Strohmeyer et al., 2014). C/EBPβ is important in the differentiation and maturation of adipocytes and is increased during ER stress and proinflammatory conditions. In the brain, astrocytes, microglia and vascular smooth muscle cells constitutively express ApoE (Kim et al., 2009), whereas neurons predominantly synthesize ApoE under stress conditions (Xu et al., 2006). In addition, ApoE is a crucial regulator of the innate immune system, with ApoE4 promoting pro-inflammatory responses that exacerbates AD pathogenesis. ApoE co-localizes with amyloid plaques and microglia, suggesting a role for ApoE in the innate immune response in AD. Lack of ApoE in mice is associated with increased inflammation in response to Aβ (LaDu et al., 2001; Lynch et al., 2001). However, ApoE isoforms might differently regulate the innate immune responses (Keene et al., 2011). Recently, we have also reported that C/EBPβ expression is induced in neurons in the brain upon oxidative or inflammatory stresses (Wang et al., 2018d).

Together, our study supports that ApoE4 and elevated 27-OHC in the brain additively activates C/EBPβ, which subsequently increases APP, MAPT and δ-secretase mRNA transcription and protein levels. The active δ-secretase is leaked into the cytoplasm, where it cleaves numerous substrates including APP and Tau and promotes Aβ production and Tau proteolytic cleavage and aggregation, leading to AD pathogenesis. Clearly, our findings demonstrate that lowering cholesterol levels with statins should benefit the ApoE4 AD carriers.

Materials and Methods

Animals and materials

Wild-type C57BL/6J mice and C/EBPβ+/− mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (stock #000664, #006873, respectively). ApoE3-TR and ApoE4-TR mice were purchased from TACONIC (stock # 1548 and 1549, respectively). To determine the effect of exogenous 27-OHC on AD, 6-month-old female WT, ApoE3-TR and ApoE4-TR mice were treated with vehicle or 27-OHC (20 mg/kg body weight) by subcutaneous injection every 2 days for 6 weeks, and pathologies were then evaluated. The 27-OHC was dissolved in 30% (2-hydroxypropyl)-β-cyclodextrin solution, and the same solution served as the control treatment. Animal care and handling was performed according to the NIH animal care guidelines and Emory Medical School guidelines. The protocol was reviewed and approved by the Emory Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All procedures performed in studies involving animals were in accordance with the ethical standards of the Emory Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Research materials listed in the Methods are included in Table 1. Please see Table 1 in the Supplemental Material.

Human tissue samples

Post-mortem brain samples were dissected from frozen brains of AD and aged-match non-demented controls from the Emory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center. The study was approved by the Biospecimen Committee. AD was diagnosed according to the criteria of the Consortium to Establish a Registry for AD and the National Institute on Aging. Diagnoses were confirmed by the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in formalin-fixed tissue. Informed consent was obtained from the subjects.

The information of the human case materials in Figure S1:

ApoE3/3 group:

Control 1: Age at Death:70, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: I;

Control 2: Age at Death:75, ApoE3/3, female, Braak Score: I;

Control 3: Age at Death:74, ApoE3/3, female, Braak Score: I;

AD 1: Age at Death:69, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: II;

AD 2: Age at Death:74, ApoE3/3, female, Braak Score: III;

AD 3: Age at Death:67, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: III;

AD 4: Age at Death:74, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: IV;

AD 5: Age at Death:68, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: V;

AD 6: Age at Death:54, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: V;

AD 7: Age at Death:91, ApoE3/3, female, Braak Score: VI;

AD 8: Age at Death:61, ApoE3/3, female, Braak Score: VI;

AD 9: Age at Death:73, ApoE3/3, male, Braak Score: VI;

ApoE4/4 group:

Control 1: Age at Death: 52, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: 0;

Control 2: Age at Death:78, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: I;

Control 3: Age at Death:59, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: I;

Control 4: Age at Death:70, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: II;

AD 1: Age at Death:77, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: III;

AD 2: Age at Death:67, ApoE4/4, female, Braak Score: IV;

AD 3: Age at Death:60, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: IV;

AD 4: Age at Death:77, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: V;

AD 5: Age at Death:69, ApoE4/4, female, Braak Score: V;

AD 6: Age at Death:71, ApoE4/4, female, Braak Score: V;

AD 7: Age at Death:73, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: VI;

AD 8: Age at Death:75, ApoE4/4, female, Braak Score: VI;

AD 9: Age at Death:77, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: VI;

AD 10: Age at Death:72, ApoE4/4, male, Braak Score: VI.

27-Hydroxycholesterol ELISA Kit was from Abbexa (abx257403) and validated by the previous research(Ahsan et al., 2018). All procedures were performed according to manufacturer’s instructions.

Primary cultured neurons

All pregnant rats were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. All pregnant mice were from Ye lab. The protocol was reviewed and approved by the Emory Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Primary cortical neurons were isolated from embryonic E18 Sprague–Dawley rats or P0 mice. Briefly, tissues were dissected, dissociated and incubated with 5 mL of D-Hanks containing 0.25% trypsin for 5 min, centrifuged at 1000 × g for 5 min after addition of 4 mL of the neuronal plating medium containing DMEM/F12 with 10% fetal bovine serum. Then the cells were resuspended, about 5 × 105 cells were plated onto each well of 12-well plates for western blotting, and 1 × 105 cells were plated onto each glass coverslip for cell imaging. The neurons were then put into a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. The medium was changed to neurobasal medium supplemented with 2% B27 (maintenance medium) after 2–4 h. Neurons at 13 days in vitro (DIV) were treated with vehicle (control)/rApoE and 27-OHC/cholesterol for 72 hours. For the control group, the neurons were treated with an equal amount of vehicle (97% ethanol). The concentrations of 27-OHC and cholesterol in the brain tissues and CSF are not comparable, so we did not use the same concentrations in cell models. The level of cholesterol in brain is significantly higher than that of 27-OHC (Besga et al., 2012; Heverin et al., 2004). For 27-OHC and cholesterol treatments and concentrations, we used the protocols that were reported (Chen et al., 2019a) (Valenza et al., 2015).

SH-SY5Y cell cultures

Human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells (A.T.C.C., Manassas, VA) were cultured in DMEM, F-12 Ham with HEPES (25 mM) and NaHCO3 (1:1) and supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS, glutamine (1.0 mM) and antibiotics. Cell cultures were maintained in a 5.0% CO2 humidified atmosphere at 37 °C and grown until they reached 80% confluence for a maximum of 20 passages.

Transfection and infection of the cells

LV-shC/EBPβ-GFP (titer: 3 × 109 IU mL−1) and LV-GFP (titer: 5 × 109 IU mL−1): Coding sequence of shC/EBPβ was inserted into pFCGW-N1 lentiviral vectors (CMV promoter). The virus was packaged by viral vector core (VVC) of Emory University. AAV2-CMV-ApoE3 (titer: 1×1013 GC mL−1) and AAV2-CMV-ApoE4 (titer: 1×1013 GC mL−1) were purchased from GeneCopoeia (AA02-CS-C0189–01-200 and AA02-CS-C0189–02-200). 1.5 μL of virus was added to 1 mL culture medium and applied to primary neurons.

Cytokines and Aβ blocked by neutralizing antibodies

To address whether the release of Aβ, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα to the culture medium was mechanistically connected to the ApoE4-mediated C/EBPβ activation, we performed experiments in which they were blocked by neutralizing antibodies added to the cultured medium. We co-cultured neurons for 24 h in the presence of neutralizing antibodies against Aβ, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα (1 μg mL−1), respectively, and then exposed the cultures to rApoE and 27-OHC.

ELISA used for Aβ and cytokines

The cells were homogenized in cell lysis buffer, and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was analyzed by ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The soluble and insoluble proteins were extracted following the protocol(Casali and Landreth, 2016) and then were analyzed by ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Subcellular fractionation

Isolation and enrichment for intact lysosomes from crude cell and tissue extracts were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and were validated by Western blots using anti-LAMP1 and anti-Tubulin antibodies.

Fixation and IF of primary neurons

The neurons were then fixed in 4% formaldehyde. The slides were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. Then, the neurons were also incubated with an Alexa Fluor 488 or 594 conjugated isotype-specific secondary antibody for 1 hour at room temperature. The slides were washed 4 times with TBST. Pictures of the neurons were taken by confocal microscopy. The neurons were chosen for imaging by a blind observer, and each neuron was chosen from a different field on the plate.

AEP activity assay

Tissue homogenates or cell lysates (10 μg) were incubated in 200 μL reaction buffer (20 mM citric acid, 60 mM Na2HPO4, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% CHAPS and 1 mM DTT, pH 5.5) containing AEP substrate Z-Ala-Ala-Asn-AMC (20 μM, Bachem). AMC released by substrate cleavage was quantified by measuring at 460 nm in a fluorescence plate reader at 37 °C in kinetic mode. Enzyme activity was also measured by using fluorescence imaging flow cytometry using the AEP probe LE28. LE28 CY5 specifically binds to active AEP enzyme. Briefly, cells were incubated with the AEP probe LE28 cy5 (1 μM) for 5–6 h at 37 °C, and then fixed with formaldehyde.

Immunoprecipitation and western blot analysis

Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 15 mM MgCl2, 60 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.1 mMM NaF, 0.1 mM benzamide, 10 mg mL−1 aprotinin, 10 mg mL−1 leupeptin and 1 mM PMSF) at 4 °C for 2 h with rotation. Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was blocked with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 5% nonfat milk and 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) at RT for 1 h, followed by the incubation with primary antibody at 4 °C overnight, and with the secondary antibody at RT for 1 h. After washing with TBST, the membrane was developed using the enhanced chemiluminescent (ECL) detection system. For the detergent-insoluble protein aggregates analysis, the soluble and insoluble proteins were extracted by following the protocol (Diner et al., 2017) and analyzed by Western blots.

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry was performed by using the peroxidase protocol. Briefly, tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene, hydrated through descending ethanol concentrations, and endogenous peroxidase activity was eliminated by incubation in 3% hydrogen peroxide in methanol for 5 min. After antigen-retrieval in boiling sodium citrate buffer (10 mM), the sections were incubated with primary antibodies for overnight at 4 °C. The signal was developed using Histostain-SP kit (Invitrogen). For the double immunofluorescence staining, the sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with a mixture of antibodies. After being washed with TBS, the sections were incubated with a mixture of Alexa Fluor 488-/594- and CY5-coupled secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) for detection. Images were acquired through Confocal (Olympus FV1000).

Thioflavin S (ThS) and Aβ double staining

For Thioflavin S (ThS) and Aβ double staining, slides were rinsed in PBS after finishing the Aβfirst antibodies and the second antibody staining. Freshly dissolved ThS (3.125 mg) in 100 mL 50% Ethanol. Incubated the stained slides in ThS solution at room temperature for 7 minutes in the dark. Then wash the slides in PBS three times. The fluorescence staining was visualized with an Olympus confocal microscope.

Quantification of co-localization

Pearson’s coefficient was used to analyze the co-localization in dual-labeled IF images. It is a standard statistical analysis to measure the strength of a linear relationship between two variables. We used ImageJ to perform quantitative analysis of confocal images. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were quantified by the ‘Colocalization’ tool in the ImageJ. The values are set between 0 and 1 (1: co-localization, 0: no co-localization).

Real-time PCR

Levels of mRNA were analyzed by real-time, quantitative PCR. RNA was isolated by Trizol (Life Technologies). Reverse transcription was performed with SuperScriptIII reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies). Gene-specific primers and probes were designed and bought from Life Technologies. All real-time PCR reactions were performed using the ABI 7500-Fast Real-Time PCR System and TaqMan Universal Master Mix Kit (Life Technologies). The relative quantification of gene expression was calculated as the 2-ΔΔCt method. For each data point, at lease duplicated wells were used. GAPDH was used for housekeeping gene control. And each experiment was repeated at least 3 times.

Electron Microscopy

After deep anesthesia, mice were perfused transcardially with 2% glutaraldehyde and 3% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Hippocampal slices were post-fixed in cold 1% OsO4 for 1 h. Samples were prepared and examined using standard procedures. Ultrathin sections (90 nm) were stained with uranyl acetate and lead acetate and viewed at 100 kV in a JEOL 200CX electron microscope. Synapses were identified by the presence of synaptic vesicles and postsynaptic densities.

Stereotaxic injection in mouse hippocampus

Animals received bilateral injections of virus. Animals were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injections of ketamine/xylazine (100/10 mg kg−1) and given buprenorphine (0.1 mg kg−1) subcutaneously for pain management. Depth of anesthesia was assessed via toe-pinch. The mice had their heads shaved and restrained in a stereotaxic frame with mouse adaptor (Stoeltling, Wood Dale, IL). Sterile Bausch &amp; Lomb erythromycin ophthalmic ointment (0.5%) was applied to the eyes to keep them from drying out, and their heads cleaned with 70% ethanol. A small incision was made in the skin down the midline of the cranium, exposing the skull landmarks lambda and Bregma. Hydrogen peroxide was used to clean the top of the skull. Target injection coordinates were mapped from Bregma, and a small hole drilled through the skull directly above target sites with a bone drill. Hippocampal coordinates were anteroposterior (AP) −2.1 mm, mediolateral (ML) ± 1.5 mm, dorsoventral (DV) 1.8 mm. (3 μL of LV). Injection rate was 0.2 μL per minute, and the needle was left in place for 10-min post-injection. After injections, the incision was sutured and Neosporin applied. Animals recovered on heating pads until awake and monitored 1, 2, 7, and 10 days post-surgery. All surgeries were performed with IACUC approval. Mice were assigned into gender- and age- matched treatment groups using a randomized block design.

Golgi staining

Mouse brains were fixed in 10% formalin for 24 h, and then immersed in 3% potassium bichromate for 3 days in the dark. The solution was changed each day. Then the brains were transferred into 2% silver nitrate solution and incubated for 24 h in the dark. Vibratome sections were cut at 60 mm, air-dried for 10 min, dehydrated through 95% and 100% ethanol, cleared in xylene and coverslipped.

Electrophysiology

Mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane, decapitated, and their brains dropped in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (a-CSF) containing 124 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 6.0 mM MgCl2, 26 mM NaHCO3, 2.0 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM glucose. Hippocampi were dissected and cut into 400-mm thick transverse slices with a vibratome. After incubation at room temperature (23–24 °C) in a-CSF for 60–90 min, slices were placed in a recording chamber (RC-22C, Warner Instruments) on the stage of an up-right microscope (Olympus CX-31) and perfused at a rate of 3 mL per min with a-CSF (containing 1 mM MgCl2) at 23–24 °C. A 0.1 MU tungsten monopolar electrode was used to stimulate the Schaffer collaterals. The field excitatory post-synaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were recorded in CA1 stratum radiatum by a glass microelectrode filled with a-CSF with resistance of 3–4 MU. The stimulation output (Master-8; AMPI, Jerusalem) was controlled by the trigger function of an EPC9 amplifier (HEKA Elektronik, Lambrecht, Germany). fEPSPs were recorded under current-clamp mode. Data were filtered at 3 kHz and digitized at sampling rates of 20 kHz using Pulse software (HEKA Elektronik). The stimulus intensity (0.1 ms duration, 10–30 mA) was set to evoke 40% of the maximum f-EPSP and the test pulse was applied at a rate of 0.033 Hz. LTP of fEPSPs was induced by 3 theta-burst-stimulation (TBS), it is 4 pulses at 100 Hz, repeated 3 times with a 200-ms interval). The magnitudes of LTP are expressed as the mean percentage of baseline fEPSP initial slope.

Morris Water maze

Mice were trained in a round, water-filled tub (52 inches diameter) in an environment rich with extra maze cues as described previously (Zhang et al., 2014). The water maze was surrounded by extra-maze visual cues that remained in the same position for the duration of training and filled to cover the platform by 1 cm at 22 °C. Water was made opaque with nontoxic, white tempera paint. The escape platform was a circular, nonskid surface (area 127 cm2) placed in the NW quadrant of the maze. Each subject was given 4 trials per day for 5 consecutive days with a 15 min intertrial interval. The maximum trial length was 60 s, and if subjects did not reach the platform in the allotted time, they were manually guided to it. Following the 5 d of task acquisition, a probe trial was presented, during which time the platform was removed and the percentage of time spent in the quadrant that previously contained the escape platform during task acquisition was measured over 60 s. All trials were analyzed for latency and swim speed by means of MazeScan (Clever Sys).

Contextual and cued fear conditioning

The ability to form and retain an association between an aversive experience and environmental cues was tested with a standard fear conditioning paradigm that occurs over a period of 3 d. Mice were placed in the fear conditioning apparatus (7” W, 7” D, 12” H, Coulbourn) composed of Plexiglass with a metal shock grid floor and allowed to explore the enclosure for 3 min. Following this habituation period, 3 conditioned stimulus (CS)-unconditioned stimulus (US) pairings were presented with a 1 min intertrial interval. The CS was composed of a 20 s, 85-dB tone and US was composed of 2 s of a 0.5-mA footshock, which was co-terminate with each CS presentation. One minute following the last CS-US presentation, mice were returned to their home cage. On day 2, the mice were presented with a context test, during which subjects were placed in the same chamber used during conditioning on day 1 and the amount of freezing was recorded via a camera and the software provided by Coulbourn. No shocks were given during the context test. On day 3, a tone test was presented, during which time subjects were exposed to the CS in a novel compartment. Initially, animals were allowed to explore the novel context for 2 min. Then the 85 db tone was presented for 6 min and the amount of freezing behavior was recorded.

Quantification and Statistical Analysis

All data are expressed as mean ± SEM from three or more independent experiments and analyzed using GraphPad Prism statistical software (GraphPad Software). All of the statistical details of experiments can be found in the figure legends for each experiment, including the statistical tests used, number of mice in animal experiments (represented as n, unless otherwise stated), number of wells in cell culture experiments (represented as n, unless otherwise stated), definition of center (mean). Sample size was determined by Power and Precision (Biostat). The level of significance between two groups was assessed with unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. For more than two groups, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test was applied. The two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc test compared the differences between groups that have been split on two independent factors. A value of p &lt; 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

Supplementary Material

1

2

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from NIH grant (RF1, AG051538) to K. Y., and the National Natural Science Foundation (NSFC) of China (No. 31771114) to X.C.W. We thank ADRC at Emory University for human AD patients and healthy control samples. The authors are thankful for Dr. Arthur W. English at Cell Biology Department at Emory University for critical proof reading the manuscript and providing a lot of valuable advice. This study was supported in part by the Rodent Behavioral Core (RBC), which is subsidized by the Emory University School of Medicine and is one of the Emory Integrated Core Facilities. Additional support was provided by the Viral Vector Core of the Emory Neuroscience NINDS Core Facilities (P30NS055077). Further support was provided by the Georgia Clinical &amp; Translational Science Alliance of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number UL1TR002378.

Abbreviation

24-OHC 24S-hydroxycholesterol

27-OHC 27-hydroxycholesterol

δ-secretase, AEP asparagine endopeptidase

Aβ amyloid-beta

AAV adeno-associated virus

AD Alzheimer’s disease

AFU arbitrary fluorescence units

ApoE Apolipoprotein E

ApoE3 or ApoE4-TR mice ApoE3 or ApoE4 target replacement mice

APP amyloid precursor protein

BACE1 beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme-1

BBB brain blood barrier

C/EBPβ CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein beta

c-Fos cellular oncogene fos

DEA diethylamine

DLK Dual leucine zipper kinase

CSF cerebrospinal fluid

EEA1 early endosomal autoantigen 1

ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

EM electronic microscopy

ERK extracellular signal-regulated kinases

FA formic acid

fEPSPs field Excitatory Postsynaptic Potentials

FL full-length

GFP green fluorescent protein

LAMP1 lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1

IF immunofluorescence

IgG immunoglobulin G

IHC immunohistochemistry

IL-1β Interleukin 1beta

IL-6 Interleukin 6

Lgmn legumin gene name of δ-secretase

LOAD late-onset AD

LTP long-term potentiation

LV lentivirus

LXR liver X receptors

MAPT microtubule-associated protein tau

MKK mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase

MW molecular weight

MWM Morris Water Maze

NFT neurofibrillary tangles

PHFs paired helical filaments

PP2A protein phosphatase 2A

PPR paired-pulse ratio

RT-qPCR real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction

SET PP2A Inhibitor 2

shRNA short hairpin RNA

shCt control shRNA

shC/EBPβ shRNA against C/EBPβ

TBS theta-burst stimulation

ThS, or ThioS Thioflavin S

TNFα tumor necrosis factor alpha

Veh vehicle

VLDL very low-density lipoproteins

WB Western Blot

WT wild-type

Figure 1. rApoE4 and 27-OHC activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway in primary neurons and SH-SYSY cells.

(A-D) Primary rat neurons (DIV. 13) treated with vehicle, cholesterol (50 μM), 27-OHC (10 μM) or/and recombinant human ApoE3/4 (rApoE3/4) protein (100 nM) for 3 days, respectively. Then cells were harvested for Western blot (A-B), real-time PCR (C), and ELISA assay (D). Data in A represent of three independent experiments. (B-D) Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (E) δ-secretase enzymatic assay in primary rat neurons. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 3, *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (F-G) Immunofluorescence (IF) assay (F). Immunofluorescence of primary rat neurons showed C/EBPβ expression level and location, C/EBPβ (Red), DAPI (Blue). Scale bar, 20 μm. Quantifications of C/EBPβ level (G) represent mean ± SEM (n = 9, *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (H-I) rApoE4 and 27-OHC stimulate δ-secretase leakage from the lysosomes in SH-SY5Y cells. SY-SY5Y cells were treated with vehicle, cholesterol (50 μM), 27-OHC (10 μM) or/and rApoE3/4 (100 nM) for 3 days, respectively. The lysosomal/cytosolic fractions and secreted protein extracted from the culture medium by Chloroform/Methanol precipitation were prepared and analyzed by immunoblotting. Data represent of three independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). Asterisk: Cleaved AEP.

Figure 2. rApoE4 and 27-OHC stimulate activation and translocation of δ-secretase in primary neurons.

(A) Immunofluorescent staining. Shown is co-localization of AEP, LE28 and LAMP1 in rat primary rat neurons treated with rApoE3 or rApoE4 in the presence of cholesterol or 27-OHC. Scale bars, 10 μm. (B-D) Quantification of LE28 intensity (B), AEP and LAMP1 (C), and LE28 and LAMP1 (D) co-localization. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (15–18 rat neurons were analyzed from each group for each experiment, *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). Arrow indicates δ-secretase leakage.

Figure 3. ApoE4 and 27-OHC accelerate δ-secretaseendocytosis in primary neurons.

(A) Exogenous δ-secretase endocytosis to the early endosomes. After different treatments, primary rat neurons were incubated with His-δ-secretase (3×10−5 mg/mL) for 5 or 30 min at 37 °C. The cells were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with anti-EEA1, anti-His, and anti-AEP antibodies.Scale bars, 10 μm.(B) Quantitative analysis of endocytosed His-δ-secretase was performed with results from 3 independent experiments. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (16–20 rat neurons were analyzed from each group for each experiment, *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).

Figure 4. ApoE4 and 27-OHC escalate δ-secretase via activating C/EBPβ by inflammatory cytokines.

(A) Immunoblotting was conducted from primary rat neurons pre-incubated with anti-cytokine antibodies, followed by treatment with rApoE3 or rApoE4 with or without 27-OHC. Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (B) qRT-PCR analysis of CEBPB and its downstream AD targets in primary rat neurons. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (C-D) ELISA assays for Aβ and IL-6 (C) and δ-secretase enzymatic assay (D) in primary rat neurons. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (E) Immunoblotting was conducted from C/EBPβ+/− mouse neurons treated with rApoE4 and 27-OHC. Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (F) qRT-PCR analysis of CEBPB and its downstream AD targets in C/EBPβ+/− mouse neurons. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (G-H) ELISA assays for Aβ and IL-6 (C) and δ-secretase enzymatic assay (D) in C/EBPβ+/− mouse neurons. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (I) Secreted proteins extracted from the mouse neuronal medium were prepared and analyzed by immunoblotting. Data represent of three independent experiments. Asterisk: Cleaved AEP.

Figure 5. Neutralizing cytokines or anti-Aβ treatment inhibits C/EBPβ/δ-secretase activation triggered by ApoE4 and 27-OHC.

(A) Immunoblotting was conducted from AAV-ApoE4-infected rat neurons treated with 27-OHC and cytokine antibodies. 27-OHC enhanced C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway activation in a dose-dependent manner. Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (B) qRT-PCR analysis of CEBPB and its downstream AD targets. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (C) Immunoblotting was conducted from AAV-ApoE4-infected rat neurons treated with 27-OHC/cholesterol and anti-Aβ antibodies. Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (D) qRT-PCR analysis. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt;0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (E) Quantification of Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels by ELISA represents mean ± SEM (n = 3, *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). Arrow: Full-length AEP; Arrowhead: Cleaved AEP.

Figure 6. 27-OHC induces C/EBPβ/δ-secretase activation and gliosis in ApoE4-TR mice.

(A) Western blot assays demonstrated 27OHC-induced activation of C/EBPβ and C/EBPβ-mediated upregulation of AEP, APP and Tau in the hippocampus of ApoE4-TR mice. Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (B) Quantitation of Western blot data. Data represent mean ± SEM of 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (C) qRT-PCR analysis of CEBPB and its downstream AD targets. Data represent mean ± SEM of 4 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (D) ELISA of inflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus lysates. Data represent mean ± SEM of 4 samples per group from 3 independent experiments (*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, unpaired t test with Welch’s correction). (E) δ-secretase enzymatic activity assay. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 4, *p &lt; 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (F-G) Immunofluorescent co-staining of Iba-1 and GFAP on the hippocampal sections of vehicle or 27-OHC-treated mice. Scale bar: 50 μm. The quantifications of Iba-1 and GFAP-positive cells were analyzed. (Mean ± SEM, n = 8, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, * p&lt; 0.05, ** p&lt; 0.01). Asterisk: Cleaved AEP.

Figure 7. 27-OHC triggers AD-like pathologies and cognitive deficits in ApoE4-TR mice.

(A) 27-OHC induces Aβ aggregation in ApoE4-TR brain. Immunofluorescent co-staining of anti-Aβ and cleaved APP N585. Scale bar: 50 μm. (B) Quantitative analysis of average senile plaques (Mean ± SEM, n = 8–10, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, ** p &lt; 0.01). (C) Quantification of Aβ40 and Aβ42 from the insoluble (extracted with formic acid, FA) fractions of the hippocampus. (Mean ± SEM, n = 4, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, *p&lt; 0.05, **p&lt; 0.01). (D) Immunofluorescent co-staining of anti-AT8 and aggregated Tau T22 and Silver staining for the Tau pathology. Scale bar: 50 μm. (E) Quantification of the signals (Mean ± SEM, n = 6, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, ** p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01). (F) LTP of fEPSPs (Mean ± SEM, n = 6 in each group; ** p &lt; 0.01 ApoE4–27-OHC-shC/EBPβ versus ApoE4–27-OHC-shCt, two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc test). (G) Morris Water Maze cognitive behavioral test (Mean ± SEM, n = 7 mice for each group, ** p &lt; 0.01 ApoE4–27-OHC-shC/EBPβ versus ApoE4–27-OHC-shCt, two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc test for left panel; one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test for right panel, * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01). (H) Swim speed in probe trial of Morris Water Maze (Mean ± SEM, n = 6–7 mice for each group). (I) Fear conditioning tests. Contextual (left) and cued (right) fear conditionings were impaired in ApoE4–27-OHC-shCt group (Mean ± SEM, n = 7 mice for each group, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, * p &lt; 0.05).

Table 1. Key resources table

REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	
Anti-LAMP1	Santa Cruz	Cat# sc-5570	
Anti-LAMP1	Santa Cruz	Cat# sc-17768	
Rat IL-6 Antibody	R&amp;D	AF506-SP	
Rat IL-1 beta Antibody	R&amp;D	AF-501-SP	
Rat TNF-alpha Antibody	R&amp;D	AF-510-SP	
phosho-C/EBPbeta	CST	3081s	
phosho-C/EBPβ	CST	3084s	
C/EBPβ Antibody (H-7)	Santa Cruz	sc-7962	
Cleaved Caspase-3 (Asp175) Antibody	CST	9661	
Anti-AEP 6E3	Colin Watts Lab	N/A	
Anti-AEP	R&amp;D Systems	AF2199	
Anti-APP	Sigma-Aldrich	SAB4200536	
Anti-APP N585	Ye Lab	N/A	
Anti-Tau FL (Tau5)	Abcam	ab80579	
Anti-Tau N368	Ye Lab	N/A	
Anti-Tau22	Abcam	ABN454	
Anti-α-Tubulin	Sigma-Aldrich	T6074	
Anti-beta-actin	Abcam	ab8227	
Anti-Phospho-Tau Ser202, Thr205 (AT8)	Thermo Fisher	MN1020	
Purified anti-β-Amyloid, 4G8	BioLegend	800712	
Anti-ApoE	millipore	AB947	
Anti-GFAP antibody	Sigma-Aldrich	G3893	
Anti-Iba1	VWR	019–19741	
Anti-His-tag	Thermo Fisher	MA121315	
LE28	Edgington-Mitchell lab	N/A	
DAPI	Sigma-Aldrich	D9542	
Recombinant human apoE3	Fitzgerald Industries	Cat# 30R-2381	
Recombinant human apoE4	Fitzgerald Industries	Cat# 30R-2382	
27-hydroxycholesterol	Sigma-Aldrich	SML2042	
Cholesterol	Sigma-Aldrich	C8667	
AEP substrate Z-Ala-Ala-Asn-AMC	Bachem	N/A	
Legumain Protein, Recombinant (His Tag)	Sinobiological	50051	
β-Secretase Inhibitor	Calbiochem	171601	
DAPT (γ-Secretase Inhibitor)	Calbiochem	565770	
Rat Beta Amyloid 1–40 ELISA Kit	Lifespan Biosciences	LS-F24096	
Rat Beta Amyloid 1–42 ELISA Kit	Lifespan Bioscience	LS-F23254	
Amyloid beta 40 ELISA Kit, Mouse	Thermo Fisher	KMB3481	
Amyloid beta 42 ELISA Kit, Mouse	Thermo Fisher	KMB3441	
IL-1 alpha Mouse ELISA Kit	Thermo Fisher	88-5019-22	
IL-1 alpha Rat ELISA Kit	Thermo Fisher	BMS627TEN	
IL-6 Mouse ELISA Kit	Thermo Fisher	BMS603HS	
IL-6 Rat ELISA Kit	Thermo Fisher	BMS625	
TNF alpha Mouse ELISA Kit	Thermo Fisher	BMS607-3	
TNF alpha Rat ELISA Kit	Thermo Fisher	KRC3011	
Lysosome Enrichment Kit for Tissues and Cultured Cells	Thermo Fisher	89839	

Highlights

ApoE4 and 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OHC) co-activate C/EBPβ/δ-secretase signaling in neurons, which is mediated by Aβ and inflammatory cytokines.

ApoE4 and 27-OHC mediate lysosomal δ-secretase leakage, activation, secretion and endocytosis.

27-OHC triggers AD pathologies and cognitive deficits in ApoE4-TR mice via activating C/EBPβ/δ-secretase pathway.

Data availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References:

Adams SJ , Crook RJ , Deture M , Randle SJ , Innes AE , Yu XZ , Lin WL , Dugger BN , McBride M , Hutton M , Dickson DW , McGowan E , 2009. Overexpression of wild-type murine tau results in progressive tauopathy and neurodegeneration. Am J Pathol 175 , 1598–1609.19717642
Ahlemeyer B , Halupczok S , Rodenberg-Frank E , Valerius KP , Baumgart-Vogt E , 2018. Endogenous Murine Amyloid-beta Peptide Assembles into Aggregates in the Aged C57BL/6J Mouse Suggesting These Animals as a Model to Study Pathogenesis of Amyloid-beta Plaque Formation. J Alzheimers Dis 61 , 1425–1450.29376876
Ahsan F , Maertzdorf J , Guhlich-Bornhof U , Kaufmann SH , Moura-Alves P , 2018. IL-36/LXR axis modulates cholesterol metabolism and immune defense to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Scientific reports 8 , 1–13.29311619
Artiga MJ , Bullido MJ , Sastre I , Recuero M , Garcia MA , Aldudo J , Vazquez J , Valdivieso F , 1998. Allelic polymorphisms in the transcriptional regulatory region of apolipoprotein E gene. FEBS Lett 421 ,105–108.9468288
Basurto-Islas G , Grundke-Iqbal I , Tung YC , Liu F , Iqbal K , 2013. Activation of asparaginyl endopeptidase leads to Tau hyperphosphorylation in Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem 288 , 17495–17507.23640887
Besga A , Cedazo-Minguez A , Kareholt I , Solomon A , Bjorkhem I , Winblad B , Leoni V , Hooshmand B , Spulber G , Gonzalez-Pinto A , Kivipelto M , Wahlund LO , 2012. Differences in brain cholesterol metabolism and insulin in two subgroups of patients with different CSF biomarkers but similar white matter lesions suggest different pathogenic mechanisms. Neurosci Lett 510 , 121–126.22281444
Bjorkhem I , 2006. Crossing the barrier: oxysterols as cholesterol transporters and metabolic modulators in the brain. J Intern Med 260 , 493–508.17116000
Björkhem I , 2006. Crossing the barrier: oxysterols as cholesterol transporters and metabolic modulators in the brain. Journal of internal medicine 260 , 493–508.17116000
Bjorkhem I , Cedazo-Minguez A , Leoni V , Meaney S , 2009. Oxysterols and neurodegenerative diseases. Mol Aspects Med 30 , 171–179.19248803
Boyles JK , Pitas RE , Wilson E , Mahley RW , Taylor JM , 1985. Apolipoprotein E associated with astrocytic glia of the central nervous system and with nonmyelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system. J Clin Invest 76 , 1501–1513.3932467
Capsoni S , Giannotta S , Cattaneo A , 2002. Nerve growth factor and galantamine ameliorate early signs of neurodegeneration in anti-nerve growth factor mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 , 12432–12437.12205295
Cardinaux JR , Allaman I , Magistretti PJ , 2000. Pro-inflammatory cytokines induce the transcription factors C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta in astrocytes. Glia 29 , 91–97.10594926
Casali BT , Landreth GE , 2016. Abeta extraction from murine brain homogenates. Bio Protoc 6 .
Chartier-Harlin MC , Parfitt M , Legrain S , Perez-Tur J , Brousseau T , Evans A , Berr C , Vidal O , Roques P , Gourlet V , , 1994. Apolipoprotein E, epsilon 4 allele as a major risk factor for sporadic early and late-onset forms of Alzheimer’s disease: analysis of the 19q13.2 chromosomal region. Hum Mol Genet 3 , 569–574.8069300
Chawla A , Boisvert WA , Lee CH , Laffitte BA , Barak Y , Joseph SB , Liao D , Nagy L , Edwards PA , Curtiss LK , Evans RM , Tontonoz P , 2001. A PPAR gamma-LXR-ABCA1 pathway in macrophages is involved in cholesterol efflux and atherogenesis. Mol Cell 7 , 161–171.11172721
Chen JM , Dando PM , Rawlings ND , Brown MA , Young NE , Stevens RA , Hewitt E , Watts C , Barrett AJ , 1997. Cloning, isolation, and characterization of mammalian legumain, an asparaginyl endopeptidase. J Biol Chem 272 , 8090–8098.9065484
Chen S , Zhou C , Yu H , Tao L , An Y , Zhang X , Wang Y , Wang Y , Xiao R , 2019a. 27-Hydroxycholesterol contributes to lysosomal membrane permeabilization-mediated pyroptosis in co-cultured SH-SY5Y cells and C6 cells. Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience 12 , 14.30881285
Chen S , Zhou C , Yu H , Tao L , An Y , Zhang X , Wang Y , Wang Y , Xiao R , 2019b. 27-Hydroxycholesterol Contributes to Lysosomal Membrane Permeabilization-Mediated Pyroptosis in Co-cultured SH-SY5Y Cells and C6 Cells. Front Mol Neurosci 12 , 14.30881285
Cramer PE , Cirrito JR , Wesson DW , Lee CY , Karlo JC , Zinn AE , Casali BT , Restivo JL , Goebel WD , James MJ , Brunden KR , Wilson DA , Landreth GE , 2012. ApoE-directed therapeutics rapidly clear beta-amyloid and reverse deficits in AD mouse models. Science 335 , 1503–1506.22323736
Dall E , Brandstetter H , 2016. Structure and function of legumain in health and disease. Biochimie 122 , 126–150.26403494
Diner I , Nguyen T , Seyfried NT , 2017. Enrichment of detergent-insoluble protein aggregates from human postmortem brain. JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments), e55835.
Edgington LE , Verdoes M , Ortega A , Withana NP , Lee J , Syed S , Bachmann MH , Blum G , Bogyo M , 2013. Functional imaging of legumain in cancer using a new quenched activity-based probe. J Am Chem Soc 135 , 174–182.23215039
Fernandez CG , Hamby ME , McReynolds ML , Ray WJ , 2019. The role of APOE4 in disrupting the homeostatic functions of astrocytes and microglia in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Frontiers in aging neuroscience 11 , 14.30804776
Geifman N , Brinton RD , Kennedy RE , Schneider LS , Butte AJ , 2017. Evidence for benefit of statins to modify cognitive decline and risk in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 9 , 10.28212683
Greenbaum LE , Li W , Cressman DE , Peng Y , Ciliberto G , Poli V , Taub R , 1998. CCAAT enhancer- binding protein beta is required for normal hepatocyte proliferation in mice after partial hepatectomy. J Clin Invest 102 , 996–1007.9727068
Hardy J , Selkoe DJ , 2002. The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297 , 353–356.12130773
Harold D , Abraham R , Hollingworth P , Sims R , Gerrish A , Hamshere ML , Pahwa JS , Moskvina V , Dowzell K , Williams A , Jones N , Thomas C , Stretton A , Morgan AR , Lovestone S , Powell J , Proitsi P , Lupton MK , Brayne C , Rubinsztein DC , Gill M , Lawlor B , Lynch A , Morgan K , Brown KS , Passmore PA , Craig D , McGuinness B , Todd S , Holmes C , Mann D , Smith AD , Love S , Kehoe PG , Hardy J , Mead S , Fox N , Rossor M , Collinge J , Maier W , Jessen F , Schurmann B , Heun R , van den Bussche H , Heuser I , Kornhuber J , Wiltfang J , Dichgans M , Frolich L , Hampel H , Hull M , Rujescu D , Goate AM , Kauwe JS , Cruchaga C , Nowotny P , Morris JC , Mayo K , Sleegers K , Bettens K , Engelborghs S , De Deyn PP , Van Broeckhoven C , Livingston G , Bass NJ , Gurling H , McQuillin A , Gwilliam R , Deloukas P , Al-Chalabi A , Shaw CE , Tsolaki M , Singleton AB , Guerreiro R , Muhleisen TW , Nothen MM , Moebus S , Jockel KH , Klopp N , Wichmann HE , Carrasquillo MM , Pankratz VS , Younkin SG , Holmans PA , O’Donovan M , Owen MJ , Williams J , 2009. Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 41 , 1088–1093.19734902
Heverin M , Bogdanovic N , Lutjohann D , Bayer T , Pikuleva I , Bretillon L , Diczfalusy U , Winblad B , Bjorkhem I , 2004. Changes in the levels of cerebral and extracerebral sterols in the brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Lipid Res 45 , 186–193.14523054
Holtzman DM , 2001. Role of apoe/Abeta interactions in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease and cerebral amyloid angiopathy. J Mol Neurosci 17 , 147–155.11816788
Houlden H , Crook R , Backhovens H , Prihar G , Baker M , Hutton M , Rossor M , Martin JJ , Van Broeckhoven C , Hardy J , 1998. ApoE genotype is a risk factor in nonpresenilin early-onset Alzheimer’s disease families. Am J Med Genet 81 , 117–121.9514597
Howland DS , Trusko SP , Savage MJ , Reaume AG , Lang DM , Hirsch JD , Maeda N , Siman R , Greenberg BD , Scott RW , Flood DG , 1998. Modulation of secreted beta-amyloid precursor protein and amyloid beta-peptide in brain by cholesterol. J Biol Chem 273 , 16576–16582.9632729
Huang YA , Zhou B , Wernig M , Sudhof TC , 2017. ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 Differentially Stimulate APP Transcription and Abeta Secretion. Cell 168 , 427–441 e421.28111074
Jarvik GP , Wijsman EM , Kukull WA , Schellenberg GD , Yu C , Larson EB , 1995. Interactions of apolipoprotein E genotype, total cholesterol level, age, and sex in prediction of Alzheimer’s disease: a case-control study. Neurology 45 , 1092–1096.7783869
Keene CD , Cudaback E , Li X , Montine KS , Montine TJ , 2011. Apolipoprotein E isoforms and regulation of the innate immune response in brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21 , 920–928.21907569
Kfoury N , Kapatos G , 2009. Identification of neuronal target genes for CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins. Mol Cell Neurosci 40 , 313–327.19103292
Kim J , Basak JM , Holtzman DM , 2009. The role of apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 63 , 287–303.19679070
LaDu MJ , Shah JA , Reardon CA , Getz GS , Bu G , Hu J , Guo L , Van Eldik LJ , 2001. Apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein E receptors modulate A beta-induced glial neuroinflammatory responses. Neurochem Int 39 , 427–434.11578778
Lambert JC , Heath S , Even G , Campion D , Sleegers K , Hiltunen M , Combarros O , Zelenika D , Bullido MJ , Tavernier B , Letenneur L , Bettens K , Berr C , Pasquier F , Fievet N , Barberger-Gateau P , Engelborghs S , De Deyn P , Mateo I , Franck A , Helisalmi S , Porcellini E , Hanon O , European Alzheimer’s Disease Initiative, I., de Pancorbo MM , Lendon C , Dufouil C , Jaillard C , Leveillard T , Alvarez V , Bosco P , Mancuso M , Panza F , Nacmias B , Bossu P , Piccardi P , Annoni G , Seripa D , Galimberti D , Hannequin D , Licastro F , Soininen H , Ritchie K , Blanche H , Dartigues JF , Tzourio C , Gut I , Van Broeckhoven C , Alperovitch A , Lathrop M , Amouyel P , 2009. Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 41 , 1094–1099.19734903
Leoni V , Masterman T , Patel P , Meaney S , Diczfalusy U , Björkhem I , 2003. Side chain oxidized oxysterols in cerebrospinal fluid and the integrity of blood-brain and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barriers. Journal of lipid research 44 , 793–799.12562838
Leuzy A , Cicognola C , Chiotis K , Saint-Aubert L , Lemoine L , Andreasen N , Zetterberg H , Ye K , Blennow K , Hoglund K , Nordberg A , 2019. Longitudinal tau and metabolic PET imaging in relation to novel CSF tau measures in Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 46 , 1152–1163.30610252
Li R , Strohmeyer R , Liang Z , Lue LF , Rogers J , 2004. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) expression and elevation in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 25 , 991–999.15212823
Liu CC , Liu CC , Kanekiyo T , Xu H , Bu G , 2013. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat Rev Neurol 9 , 106–118.23296339
Liu Z , Jang SW , Liu X , Cheng D , Peng J , Yepes M , Li XJ , Matthews S , Watts C , Asano M , Hara-Nishimura I , Luo HR , Ye K , 2008. Neuroprotective actions of PIKE-L by inhibition of SET proteolytic degradation by asparagine endopeptidase. Mol Cell 29 , 665–678.18374643
Lynch JR , Morgan D , Mance J , Matthew WD , Laskowitz DT , 2001. Apolipoprotein E modulates glial activation and the endogenous central nervous system inflammatory response. J Neuroimmunol 114 , 107–113.11240021
Lynch JR , Tang W , Wang H , Vitek MP , Bennett ER , Sullivan PM , Warner DS , Laskowitz DT , 2003. APOE genotype and an ApoE-mimetic peptide modify the systemic and central nervous system inflammatory response. J Biol Chem 278 , 48529–48533.14507923
Mahley RW , 1988. Apolipoprotein E: cholesterol transport protein with expanding role in cell biology. Science 240 , 622–630.3283935
Mahley RW , 2016. Central nervous system lipoproteins: ApoE and regulation of cholesterol metabolism. Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology 36 , 1305–1315.
Marwarha G , Dasari B , Ghribi O , 2012. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced CHOP activation mediates the down-regulation of leptin in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells treated with the oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol. Cell Signal 24 , 484–492.21983012
Marwarha G , Dasari B , Prasanthi JR , Schommer J , Ghribi O , 2010. Leptin reduces the accumulation of Abeta and phosphorylated tau induced by 27-hydroxycholesterol in rabbit organotypic slices. J Alzheimers Dis 19 , 1007–1019.20157255
Marwarha G , Ghribi O , 2015. Does the oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol underlie Alzheimer’s disease-Parkinson’s disease overlap? Exp Gerontol 68 , 13–18.25261765
Marwarha G , Rhen T , Schommer T , Ghribi O , 2011. The oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol regulates alpha-synuclein and tyrosine hydroxylase expression levels in human neuroblastoma cells through modulation of liver X receptors and estrogen receptors--relevance to Parkinson’s disease. J Neurochem 119 , 1119–1136.21951066
Mawuenyega KG , Sigurdson W , Ovod V , Munsell L , Kasten T , Morris JC , Yarasheski KE , Bateman RJ , 2010. Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 330 , 1774.21148344
Merino-Serrais P , Loera-Valencia R , Rodriguez-Rodriguez P , Parrado-Fernandez C , Ismail MA , Maioli S , Matute E , Jimenez-Mateos EM , Björkhem I , DeFelipe J , 2019. 27-Hydroxycholesterol induces aberrant morphology and synaptic dysfunction in hippocampal neurons. Cerebral cortex 29 , 429–446.30395175
Pesavento E , Capsoni S , Domenici L , Cattaneo A , 2002. Acute cholinergic rescue of synaptic plasticity in the neurodegenerating cortex of anti-nerve-growth-factor mice. Eur J Neurosci 15 , 1030–1036.11918663
Popp J , Lewczuk P , Kolsch H , Meichsner S , Maier W , Kornhuber J , Jessen F , Lutjohann D , 2012. Cholesterol metabolism is associated with soluble amyloid precursor protein production in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 123 , 310–316.22845771
Puglielli L , Tanzi RE , Kovacs DM , 2003. Alzheimer’s disease: the cholesterol connection. Nat Neurosci 6 , 345–351.12658281
Pulido-Salgado M , Vidal-Taboada JM , Saura J , 2015. C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta transcription factors: Basic biology and roles in the CNS. Prog Neurobiol 132 , 1–33.26143335
Ringman JM , Elashoff D , Geschwind DH , Welsh BT , Gylys KH , Lee C , Cummings JL , Cole GM , 2012. Plasma signaling proteins in persons at genetic risk for Alzheimer disease: influence of APOE genotype. Arch Neurol 69 , 757–764.22689192
Saeed AA , Genove G , Li T , Lutjohann D , Olin M , Mast N , Pikuleva IA , Crick P , Wang Y , Griffiths W , Betsholtz C , Bjorkhem I , 2014. Effects of a disrupted blood-brain barrier on cholesterol homeostasis in the brain. J Biol Chem 289 , 23712–23722.24973215
Sen A , Nelson TJ , Alkon DL , 2015. ApoE4 and Abeta Oligomers Reduce BDNF Expression via HDAC Nuclear Translocation. J Neurosci 35 , 7538–7551.25972179
Smith R , Johansen HT , Nilsen H , Haugen MH , Pettersen SJ , Maelandsmo GM , Abrahamson M , Solberg R , 2012. Intra- and extracellular regulation of activity and processing of legumain by cystatin E/M. Biochimie 94 , 2590–2599.22902879
Strohmeyer R , Shelton J , Lougheed C , Breitkopf T , 2014. CCAAT-enhancer binding protein-beta expression and elevation in Alzheimer’s disease and microglial cell cultures. PLoS One 9 , e86617.
Tanaka T , Akira S , Yoshida K , Umemoto M , Yoneda Y , Shirafuji N , Fujiwara H , Suematsu S , Yoshida N , Kishimoto T , 1995. Targeted disruption of the NF-IL6 gene discloses its essential role in bacteria killing and tumor cytotoxicity by macrophages. Cell 80 , 353–361.7530603
Tanzi RE , Bertram L , 2001. New frontiers in Alzheimer’s disease genetics. Neuron 32 , 181–184.11683989
Tengku-Muhammad TS , Hughes TR , Ranki H , Cryer A , Ramji DP , 2000. Differential regulation of macrophage CCAAT-enhancer binding protein isoforms by lipopolysaccharide and cytokines. Cytokine 12 , 1430–1436.10976009
Testa G , Staurenghi E , Zerbinati C , Gargiulo S , Iuliano L , Giaccone G , Fantò F , Poli G , Leonarduzzi G , Gamba P , 2016. Changes in brain oxysterols at different stages of Alzheimer’s disease: Their involvement in neuroinflammation. Redox biology 10 , 24–33.27687218
Valenza M , Marullo M , Di Paolo E , Cesana E , Zuccato C , Biella G , Cattaneo E , 2015. Disruption of astrocyte-neuron cholesterol cross talk affects neuronal function in Huntington’s disease. Cell Death &amp; Differentiation 22 , 690–702.25301063
van den Kommer TN , Dik MG , Comijs HC , Fassbender K , Lutjohann D , Jonker C , 2009. Total cholesterol and oxysterols: early markers for cognitive decline in elderly? Neurobiol Aging 30 , 534–545.17888546
Wang C , Najm R , Xu Q , Jeong D. e. , Walker D , Balestra ME , Yoon SY , Yuan H , Li G , Miller ZA , 2018a. Gain of toxic apolipoprotein E4 effects in human iPSC-derived neurons is ameliorated by a small-molecule structure corrector. Nature medicine 24 , 647–657.
Wang H , Liu X , Chen S , Ye K , 2018b. Spatiotemporal activation of the C/EBPbeta/delta-secretase axis regulates the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 , E12427–E12434.30530690
Wang Z-H , Liu P , Liu X , Yu SP , Wang J-Z , Ye K , 2018c. Delta-secretase (AEP) mediates tau-splicing imbalance and accelerates cognitive decline in tauopathies. Journal of Experimental Medicine 215 , 3038–3056.
Wang ZH , Gong K , Liu X , Zhang Z , Sun X , Wei ZZ , Yu SP , Manfredsson FP , Sandoval IM , Johnson PF , Jia J , Wang JZ , Ye K , 2018d. C/EBPbeta regulates delta-secretase expression and mediates pathogenesis in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 9 , 1784.29725016
Xu G , Ran Y , Fromholt SE , Fu C , Yachnis AT , Golde TE , Borchelt DR , 2015. Murine Abeta over-production produces diffuse and compact Alzheimer-type amyloid deposits. Acta Neuropathol Commun 3 , 72.26566997
Xu Q , Bernardo A , Walker D , Kanegawa T , Mahley RW , Huang Y , 2006. Profile and regulation of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) expression in the CNS in mice with targeting of green fluorescent protein gene to the ApoE locus. J Neurosci 26 , 4985–4994.16687490
Yamazaki Y , Zhao N , Caulfield TR , Liu CC , Bu G , 2019. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: pathobiology and targeting strategies. Nat Rev Neurol.
Yau J , Rasmuson S , Andrew R , Graham M , Noble J , Olsson T , Fuchs E , Lathe R , Seckl J , 2003. Dehydroepiandrosterone 7-hydroxylase cyp7b: predominant expression in primate hippocampus and reduced expression in alzheimer’s disease☆. Neuroscience 121 , 307–314.14521990
Zhang Z , Li XG , Wang ZH , Song M , Yu SP , Kang SS , Liu X , Zhang Z , Xie M , Liu GP , Wang JZ , Ye K , 2018. delta-Secretase-cleaved Tau stimulates Abeta production via upregulating STAT1-BACE1 signaling in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Psychiatry.
Zhang Z , Song M , Liu X , Kang SS , Kwon IS , Duong DM , Seyfried NT , Hu WT , Liu Z , Wang JZ , Cheng L , Sun YE , Yu SP , Levey AI , Ye K , 2014. Cleavage of tau by asparagine endopeptidase mediates the neurofibrillary pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Med 20 , 1254–1262.25326800
Zhang Z , Song M , Liu X , Su Kang S , Duong DM , Seyfried NT , Cao X , Cheng L , Sun YE , Ping Yu S , Jia J , Levey AI , Ye K , 2015. Delta-secretase cleaves amyloid precursor protein and regulates the pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 6 , 8762.26549211
Zlokovic BV , 2011. Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 12 , 723–738.22048062
