LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9607332
20707
Semin Cell Dev Biol
Semin Cell Dev Biol
Seminars in cell &amp; developmental biology
1084-9521
1096-3634

33077405
8050165
10.1016/j.semcdb.2020.09.004
NIHMS1638386
Article
RNA processing in neurological tissue: development, aging and disease
Szeto Ryan a
Tran Timothy a
Truong Justin a
Negraes Priscilla D. a
Trujillo Cleber A. a*
a Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
Author Contributions

All authors conceptualized and reviewed the manuscript for publication.

* Correspondence to: Dr. Cleber A. Trujillo, 2880 Torrey Pines Scenic Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, ctrujillo@ucsd.edu.
18 10 2020
16 10 2020
6 2021
01 6 2022
114 5767
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Gene expression comprises a diverse array of enzymes, proteins, non-coding transcripts, and cellular structures to guide the transfer of genetic information to its various final products. In the brain, the coordination among genes, or lack thereof, characterizes individual brain regions, mediates a variety of brain-related disorders, and brings light to fundamental differences between species. RNA processing, occurring between transcription and translation, controls an essential portion of gene expression through splicing, editing, localization, stability, and interference. The machinery to regulate transcripts must operate with precision serving as a blueprint for proteins and non-coding RNAs to derive their identity. Therefore, RNA processing has a broad scope of influence in the brain, as it modulates cell morphogenesis during development and underlies mechanisms behind certain neurological diseases. Here, we present these ideas through recent findings on RNA processing in development and post-developmental maturity to advance therapeutic discoveries and the collective knowledge of the RNA life cycle.

RNA processing
brain development
neurological disorder
therapy

Introduction

Gene expression patterns spatially, temporally, and mechanistically coordinate with each other to enable the proper function of the nervous system [1,2]. Central to this regulation is RNA processing: the repertoire of actions responsible for guiding post-transcriptional RNA units to their ultimate purpose, whether for regulation, translation into protein products, or intentional degradation. Increases, decreases, or direct alterations in expression can arise from RNA processing. For instance, alternative splicing (AS) generates isoform diversity through an array of proteins and RNA molecules to synergistically combine different exons of the same gene, forming a variety of related mature messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts. Mutations upon the basal splicing machinery’s ability to modulate transcripts can lead to numerous neurological pathologies. RNA interference induces cleavage of mRNA transcripts to silence gene expression, which can indirectly increase neural progenitor cell (NPC) proliferation in the developing brain [3]. Moreover, RNA editing modifies specific transcript sequences to form a unique protein product, which has been implicated as a mechanism for adult-onset cases of glioma [4].

From a nascent transcript’s first moments in the nucleus to its expected transformation into protein product at the ribosome or a functional non-coding RNA (ncRNA), the journey takes many paths and is not immune to perturbations along the way (Figure 1). Centerstage in RNA processing is the nucleus. Immediate 3’ polyadenylation and 5’ capping prime the mRNA for further modifications and subsequent transport [5]. The spliceosome can contiguously target the transcript for AS during or immediately following transcription. The RNA editing enzymes adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADARs) produce specific nucleotide alterations in the transcript [6]. During the suppression of mRNA expression, the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), in conjunction with microRNA (miRNA) or small interfering RNA (siRNA), can target transcripts for cleavage in the cytoplasm. Likewise, mRNA transcripts can be transported away from the ribosomal machinery toward cytoplasmic processing bodies (P-bodies) for degradation [7,8] (Figure 1).

In this review, we discuss the phenomenon of RNA processing regarding two critical areas of brain physiology: development and maturity. We first discuss corticogenesis in the context of RNA-binding protein families and associated elements controlling the delicate balance of gene expression as the brain develops. Secondly, we consider the post-developmental aging brain and the broad reach of RNA processing subtypes in modulating normal function throughout the lifespan. We also examine intricate molecular networks underlying diseases stemming from RNA mis-processing in the context of development and aging.

1. RNA processing and development

At the early stages of embryonic development, neural induction shapes the neural plate to begin forming the central nervous system (CNS). Through corticogenesis, the cerebral cortex develops from deeper to shallower layers as an array of projection neurons arranged within horizontal layers intersected by radial scaffolding. The first layer to form is the ventricular zone (VZ). In the VZ, NPCs simultaneously self-renew and produce daughter cells that will form the adjacent subventricular zone (SVZ) and the cortical layers. The SVZ contains intermediate progenitor cells that will undergo asymmetric division to produce immature excitatory neurons [9], which travel up the radial glia scaffold to form the cortical layers in a bottom to top fashion. RNA processing guides this highly regulated process, with genes being expressed or repressed in temporally regulated mechanisms to ensure successful corticogenesis and neurological development.

1.1 RNA-binding proteins in neural development:

Approximately 95% of all multi-exon genes undergo AS, and the brain displays a high frequency of AS throughout development [10]. The isoforms of the RNA binding protein (RBP) Polypyrimidine Tract Binding Protein (PTBP1 and PTBP2) control asymmetric division, neural differentiation, and postsynaptic formation in corticogenesis [13]. PTBP1 is the shortest isoform due to the exclusion of exon 9, while PTBP2 includes it. PTBP1 expression decreases as cells transition from progenitor to neuron, while the number of PTBP2-mediated splicing events increases [2]. Despite the shift of expression from PTBP1 to PTBP2, the overall splicing targets of each protein remain overlapped. Additionally, the antagonistic and redundant splicing patterns of PTBP1 and PTBP2 serve as hallmarks for AS regulation complexity in neurological development [13].

PTBP1 temporally regulates isoform diversity to ensure the proper protein expression before and during embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation. In mice, PTBP1 represses exon 7 expression on the pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1 (Pbx1) gene to encode the Pbx1b embryonic isoform while concurrently preventing the switch to the neuronal Pbx1a isoform [14]. As PTBP1 expression decreases during differentiation into NPCs, Pbx1 is no longer subjected to PTBP1 regulation and is expressed in the neural isoform. Mouse embryos with Ptbp1 knockout have severe developmental delays, including an inability to differentiate into the three germ layers characteristic of gastrulation [15].

PTBP2 governs aspects of neuronal development including synapse organization, actin cytoskeleton interaction, and axonogenesis [16]. PTBP2 temporally regulates the isoforms of many neuronal and synaptic proteins, as suggested by precocious switches from embryonic to adult isoforms in Ptbp2−/− mice. This mice model displays adult splicing patterns of postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95) and the neurotransmitter receptor GABAA Rγ2. Moreover, PTBP2 regulates the expression of functionally unique isoform Drebrin A, which promotes postsynaptic scaffolding protein accumulation in neurons. Drebrin, consisting of isoforms embryonic Drebrin E and mature neuronal Drebrin A, was expressed in its mature isoform earlier in Ptbp2 knockouts than in wild-type mice [17,18]. CLIP-seq analysis of mRNA implicated in PTBP2 splicing further showed that most of the PTBP2 target transcripts precariously overexpress mature isoforms in the absence of proper splicing.

PTBP1 also regulates PTBP2 expression by alternatively splicing the PTBP2 transcript to skip exon 10, producing a premature termination codon (PTC) and leading to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) [19]. NMD is a correction mechanism to degrade erroneous PTC-containing transcripts and regulate gene/protein expression. The separation of expression alongside overlapping PTBP1 and PTBP2 exon targets demonstrates these proteins’ antagonistic AS patterns. While PTBP1 excludes exons that prevent differentiation, PTBP2-mediated splicing promotes differentiation. As PTBP1 levels decrease during NPC maturation, repression of PTBP2 and additional differentiation factors decreases, relinquishing PTBP1’s control over cell fate.

While the two proteins can work antagonistically, they also synergistically regulate specific genes. For example, Dlg4, which encodes components of PSD-95, is regulated by both PTBP1 and PTBP2 [12]. PTBP1 and PTBP2 repress exon 18 on Dlg4, and inclusion of Dlg4 exon 18 in progenitors and early neural cells causes NMD due to a frameshift mutation leading to an early stop codon. It is not until PTBP2 levels decrease after early neuronal maturation that exon 18 is included, allowing for synaptic formation to continue as needed. Therefore, without the regulation of PTBP1 and PTBP2 by AS, corticogenesis’ ordered proliferation and differentiation can be severely impaired. Understanding the overlapping targets of these two proteins and their regulatory effects on corticogenesis would help elucidate the significance of AS regulation in development.

Rbfox proteins are tissue-specific splicing regulators for neurological development. Rbfox mice models reveal mutations associated with neurodevelopmental disorders such as Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) [20]. The Rbfox family of proteins affects the splicing of a host of genes, including those necessary for cytoskeleton and synaptic formation [21]. Notably, up to 50% of genes encoding the initial axon segment, a structure after the axon hillock vital for action potential initiation, are spliced by Rbfox proteins [22]. For instance, the Nin transcript is controlled by Rbfox proteins and encodes Ninein, which is a protein required for proper centromere function [23]. Ninein has been implicated in the movement and proliferation of ventricular progenitor cells. Rbfox proteins bind downstream of exon 29 on Nin transcripts to promote exon inclusion, producing Ninein neuronal isoforms. Furthermore, Jacko and coworkers demonstrated that human neuron knockouts for all three Rbfox proteins displayed embryonic splicing patterns comparatively immature to wild-type neurons at the same age, suggesting Rbfox promotes shifts to more mature splicing patterns [21].

AS affects significant pathways for proper axon development in the nascent cortex. The KH-domain RBPs neuro-oncological ventral antigen 1 and 2 (NOVA1 and NOVA2) are widely expressed throughout the cortical layers and are vital in the AS of axon guidance and cortical layer development [24]. NOVA1/2 proteins achieve this by regulating the splicing of Netrin/DCC and SLIT/ROBO proteins, which have antagonistic effects on axon projection towards and away from the nervous system midline. Commissural neuron axons project towards the CNS midline but are then immediately repelled in order to facilitate crossing [25]. As Netrin/DCC signaling promotes axon development, NOVA proteins target exon 17 on the Dcc transcript to produce a long variant of Dcc. Nova knockouts display axon outgrowth defects and an upregulation of the shorter version regarding the Dcc splice variant. Robo1 and Robo2 expression within neurons and progenitors repulses axons from repassing the CNS midline [26]. Binding of NOVA1/2, which flanks exon 6b on the Robo1 and Robo2 transcripts, excludes exon 6b and subsequently inhibits translation. In healthy neurological progenitors, NOVA expression increases during maturation, causing higher expression of the long Dcc variant and causing decreased Robo expression. This interplay between Nova, Dcc, and Robo creates a safeguard against early axon growth through AS, indicating the time-sensitive aspects of neurological development.

1.2 Developmental silencers of gene expression:

NMD and miRNA regulation pathways have a predominantly negative effect on transcript levels and gene expression. NMD has been implicated as a method of regulating normal transcript expression by degrading transcripts containing PTCs. Within the developing nervous system, NMD pathways determine whether NPCs proliferate or differentiate [27]. The expression of UPF1, is essential to NMD and promotes NPC proliferation. Lou and coworkers observed UPF1 downregulation in developing mice leading to decreased proliferative P19 carcinoma cell levels and upregulated differentiation, while overexpression had the opposite effects (Figure 2). The shift from proliferation to differentiation depends on NMD factor recruitment, namely SMG family kinases, by phosphorylated UPF1 to an exon-junction complex bound in the 3’ untranslated region (UTR). Subsequently, NMD is initiated upon mRNA encoding proteins responsible for blocking the G1/S cell cycle transition [28]. UPF3B, another NMD factor, regulates dendritic arborization by enhancing neurite growth but suppressing branch formation. In this context, NMD seems linked to retaining pluripotency by downregulating pro-differentiation encoded mRNAs.

During neurological development, miRNA regulates differentiation, migration, and proliferation. miRNA, a form of conserved small non-coding RNA highly expressed in both the VZ and SVZ, represses gene expression by complementing specific mRNA transcripts for the RISC to target and cleave [29]. Members from the miR-17 family inhibit the bone morphogenic protein pathway in NPCs, repressing differentiation into astrocytes and promoting the proliferation of NPCs [3], while other miRNAs like miR-124 affect neural projection growth. miR-128 has been implicated in numerous developmental aspects including neuronal migration, progenitor cell fate, and centrosome function [30]. In addition, miR-128 downregulates NMD in differentiating NPCs by binding and silencing UPF1 transcription, indicating a direct link between miRNA, RNA processing, and neurological development [31].

1.3 Long non-coding RNA in neural development:

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) encompass various RNA transcripts longer than 200 base pairs and not primarily translated into protein. Long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs), natural antisense transcripts (NATs), and small nucleolar RNA-ended lncRNAs (sno-lncRNAs) are all classified as lncRNAs [32]. lncRNAs possess multiple mRNA characteristics including splice sites, and similar histone modifications. For example, lincRNAs, classified as those which do not overlap protein-coding genes, undergo capping, splicing, and polyadenylation.

In 2015, Ramos and coworkers observed that knockdown of the neural-specific lncRNA Pinky (Pnky) in NPCs promote similar splicing changes to knockdown of splicing regulator PTBP1, suggesting a shared set of regulated transcripts [33]. Furthermore, PTBP1 and Pnky were specifically bound (Figure 2), demonstrating a shared splicing pathway in which lncRNAs are necessary for the proper splicing of RBP targets. lincRNA may be necessary for the recruitment of PTBP1 and other RBPs, further entrenching the significance of lncRNA species in splicing regulation [34].

RBPs Staufen (STAU) 1 and 2 localize RNA and contribute to asymmetric cell division during neurogenesis in Drosophila and mice [35]. STAU proteins have also been identified as the lynchpin of a unique RNA decay mechanism dependent on lncRNA: Staufen-mediated messenger RNA decay (SMD). SMD selectively degrades translationally active mRNA by the binding activity of STAU1 and STAU2 to a 19-bp stem-loop structure on the 3’ UTR of the transcript. However, stem-loop structure absence in specific SMD targets led to the discovery of certain lncRNAs, termed half-Stau1-binding site RNAs (1/2-sbsRNAs), which can bind to the lacking targets to form a secondary structure site for SMD protein complex selection and corresponding transactivation. Additionally, the lncRNA TINCR mediates mRNA stabilization through association with STAU1, adding further complexity to the function of lncRNA and the STAU protein complex [36].

1.4 RNA processing crosstalk in neural development:

RNA processing events do not occur isolated, but within a set of connected regulatory steps that collectively affect expression. As previously mentioned, members of the PTBP protein family antagonistically regulate both themselves and overlapping sets of transcripts to create a network of genes whose expression shifts from stem cells to NPC differentiation [13]. Splicing targets of PTBP1 include Tcf20, Med23, Gatad2a, and Pbx1, post-transcriptional regulators that have the potential to further alter the splicing and subsequent expression of genes responsible for neuronal development [14]. PTBP inhibits the REST protein complex, a transcription regulator of a broad array of neuronal-specific genes [37]. PTBP regulates REST complex expression through competition with miRNA-124. In addition, PTBP directly regulates another protein, SCP1, within the REST complex. SCP1 downregulation by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) sufficiently activates neuronal differentiation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. REST contribution to neural cell fate highlights the significant network of regulation partly governed by RBP and RNA processing.

RNA processing can yield unique protein isoforms and create regulatory networks affecting a wide variety of transcripts from one single gene [38]. For instance, Rbfox1 is an RBP responsible for splicing and expression due to its two isoforms: nuclear Rbfox1 (Rbfox_N), which acts as a splicing factor, and cytoplasmic (Rbfox_C) which promotes transcript stability and translation by sequestering miRNA through competitive binding (Figure 1). Splicing and translational expression of Camk2g are regulated by Rbfox1_N and Rbfox1_C, respectively. Other proteins of the CaM family are only regulated by either Rbfox1_N or Rbfox1_C. Rbfox1 is also involved with significant ASD-related hub genes and accompanying genes including CNTNAP1, CHRM1, and KLC2 through 3’ UTR binding activity, supporting cytoplasmic stabilization and translation. Rbfox splicing allows for wide concerted expression of neurological transcripts necessary for development and function within the nucleus and cytoplasm, allowing for widespread reach of control via RBPs in neurological systems (Figure 2).

1.5 Neurodevelopmental disorder:

Disruption of developmental RNA processing events can lead to impairments in neural development and subsequent neurological disorders [39]. Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is the most commonly inherited form of ASD-related neurodevelopmental disorder and is characterized by behavioral disorders and learning disabilities. FXS is caused by trinucleotide (CGG) repeat expansion at the 5’ UTR of FMR1, repressing expression of Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP). FMRP regulates the downstream expression of transcripts fundamental to neurodevelopmental processes [40,41], and it usually travels between the neuronal nucleocytoplasmic space to localize mRNA to postsynaptic areas of dendritic spines and facilitate subsequent translation of synaptic transcripts. FMRP impairments lead to dysregulation upon synaptic function, dendritic spine morphology, and synaptic plasticity [42]. FMRP promotes localized translation by stalling protein production until mRNA is properly transported by RNA granules, which are large nuclear or cytoplasmic RNP assemblies consisting of RBPs, coding/non-coding RNA, scaffolding proteins, and enzymes. RNA granule interaction with FMRP modulates mRNA stability, degradation, and transport to specific regions along neurites via kinesin, myosin, and dynein motor protein interactions [42–44]. mRNA and receptor targets fundamental to neuronal development and subject to FMRP regulation include Arc, MAPb1, α-CaMKII, Munc13, mGluR5, Homer1, SAPAP 1–4, Sema3F, PSD-95, and NMDARs which are involved in functions of synaptic scaffolding, neurotransmitter release, dendrite formation, and axonal development [40,41].

Evidence verified across human cohorts points to RNA hypoediting as a molecular mechanism for ASD [45]. Examination of FMRP binding sites revealed enrichment around editing sites affected by ASD, suggesting many FMRP RNA editing events are dysregulated in autistic brains. RNA targets transcribed from neuronal-associated genes such as contactins (CNTNAP2, CNTNAP4), neurexins (NRXN1, NRXN3), ankyrins (ANK2), and neuronal splicing factors (NOVA1 and RBFOX1), are both subject to these editing alterations and implicated in ASD molecular pathology. Additionally, changes found in AS programs of Rbfox1, SRRM4, and PTBP1 knockouts strongly resemble AS changes found in the human ASD patient cortex. Given these similarities, Parikshak and coworkers observed a substantial overlap between ASD splicing events and splicing events regulated by spiking activity [46]. These findings indicate that neuronal activity-dependent gene regulation contributes to ASD pathophysiology through AS of necessary genes.

RNA processing, either through AS or controlled silencing, has regulatory properties crucial for proper nervous system development. The pathways and mechanisms underlying this system of development are temporally and spatially specific, requiring precise switches and handoffs between regulating players. In post-developmental neurological tissue, RNA processing regulators remain a vital part of an organism’s ability to function as it matures into adulthood and old age properly.

2. Post-development and Aging

RNA processing regulates gene expression in post-development to maintain synaptic function, facilitate signal transmission, and aid in the resistance against disease [4,47,48]. While AS occurs prominently throughout adulthood and aging, other post-transcriptional modifications such as editing, silencing, RNA-binding protein interactions, and molecular accumulation are also evident during these stages. Once the brain matures, AS optimizes the proteome to emphasize efficient biological function [49]. Aging acts as a risk factor for a variety of functional disorders and impairments. Several observed phenotypes in the brain, such as connectivity dysregulation and cognitive decline, indicate that the aging process markedly decreases the quality of life [50].

2.1 AS in the post-development brain:

The muscleblind-like (MBNL) family of proteins consists of MBNL1, MBNL2, and MBNL3, each of which operates distinctively in AS [51]. MBNL2 is expressed evenly throughout the body within the liver, muscle, and particularly brain tissue, and upregulates splicing patterns indicative of post-development during the transition into adulthood [48]. Mouse models of myotonic dystrophy (DM) highlight the role of MBNL proteins in regulating underlying splicing mechanisms [52]. DM is a neuromuscular disease in humans characterized by CTG and CCTG repeat expansions in DMPK and ZNF9, respectively, which inhibits the binding activity of MBNL proteins on the produced transcripts. The resulting impaired pre-mRNA splicing causes heart, muscle, and nervous system dysfunction, manifesting in muscle weakness and deterioration, intellectual disability, and cognitive decline. Underlying the symptoms, patients display abberant transcript accumulation in muscle nuclei and irregular action potential activity. Mbnl2-null mice displayed the upregulation of fetal exon inclusion in tandem with adult exon skipping [48]. For example, fetal exons for genes Tanc2, Ppp1r12a, Add1 were included, while adult exons for genes Kcnma1, Csnk1d, Cacna1d were skipped. Since Cacna1d encodes a subunit for the calcium channel Caᵥ1.3, and Kcnma1 encodes a calcium-activated potassium channel alpha-subunit [53,54], their dysregulation potentially explains the decreased performance on spatial memory tasks and decreased responsiveness of recorded N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in adult Mbnl2-null mice.

Purkinje cell-specific homozygous double-knockout (DKO) mice for Rbfox1 and Rbfox2, which generally developed with both proteins but later lacked expression of them in adulthood, performed considerably worse than corresponding controls in motor control tasks and failed to display the improvement after multiple training periods [55]. Notably, the motor task, in which Purkinje cells are strongly implicated, was the only conducted task in which DKO mice fared significantly worse than the wild-type mice. Rbfox1+/−/Rbfox2−/− mice displayed lower splicing levels of post-developmentally expressed exons 5A and 18A in mature Scn8a transcripts. Subsequently, the Rbfox1+/−/Rbfox2−/− mice exhibited a 50% decrease in cerebellar Nav1.6 channel abundance relative to controls, which supports the measured 60% lower Purkinje cell spike rate observed in DKO mice.

Keihani and coworkers reported a nuclear-bound lncRNA termed neuroLNC binding to TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43), an RBP commonly implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and dementia. The functional interaction between neuroLNC and TDP-43 facilitates increases in synaptic vesicle release and possibly stems from the documented processes involved with TDP-43, such as splicing, mRNA stability, and miRNA biogenesis [47]. Furthermore, neuroLNC demonstrates control of presynaptic processes through interactions with SNAP25, Stx1b, and Rab3c mRNA, which code for proteins important to synaptic vesicle exocytosis and ion channel regulation [56,57]. An additional highly conserved lncRNA, Metastasis associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (Malat1, or NEAT2), localizes with nuclear speckles, which are nuclear chambers housing splicing factors and small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) that regulate multiple levels of mRNA processing [58]. The inhibition of Malat1 expression impairs proper localization of nuclear speckle-bound factors. Following an injury to the brain, Malat1 modulates the expression of specific miRNAs and small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), which both exhibiting downstream function in AS and other forms of RNA processing [59]. Importantly, Malat1’s unique expression patterns in injury and disease qualify it as a candidate for further research and therapeutic opportunities [60].

2.2 RNA editing in the post-development brain:

RNA editing alters transcript sequences to generate transcript and isoform diversity. Common forms of editing include adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) editing, and cytidine-to-uridine (C-to-U) editing, in which enzyme-directed deamination of adenosine and cytidine results in inosine and uridine, respectively. A-to-I editing is strongly associated with neurological tissue; it results in adenosine being translated as guanosine, leading to changes in codon arrangement and a modified transcript identity [6].

The ADAR family, composed of ADAR1, ADAR2, and ADAR3, converts adenosine to inosine through the removal of an amino group. While ADAR1 and ADAR2 have been studied in brain development [61], less is currently known about ADAR3 [62]. RNA editing induces cellular changes in the brain to regulate normal function and concurrently interacts with the individual’s surrounding environment. In this context, A-to-I editing demonstrates cell type specific patterns of activity in addition to differential modes of action across brain regions. Overall editing activity by ADAR enzymes was reported to be higher for adult human neurons in comparison to fetal neurons and several types of glia [63]. Notably, adult neurons displayed more editing activity at amino acid-altering recoding sites, indicating a higher propensity for functional shifts in gene expression in post-development.

Differential RNA editing between brain regions identifies ADAR enzymes as a regulator of regional transcript identity [64]. Shapiro and coworkers identified specific populations of Corazonin neuropeptide (Crz) and Neuropeptide F Receptor (NPFR)-expressing neurons in Drosophila which displayed a marked upregulation and downregulation, respectively, of Ile-to-Val editing activity for the voltage-gated potassium channel Shaker (Sh). The structural effect of this precise editing event possibly influences the channel’s ever-shifting conformation, leading to altered membrane potential dynamics across neuronal populations. The loss of Adar in Drosophila modified synaptic function at the neuromuscular junction through mislocalized synaptic vesicles, dysregulated neurotransmitter release, and deficit of certain receptors [65,66]. Furthermore, editing activity at multiple transcript sites for the serotonin receptor 5-HT2C results in the creation of several distinct isoforms and consequently modulates the binding activity of associated ligands. ADAR3 inhibition of ADAR2 editing activity at the glutamine/arginine (Q/R) site for the glutamate receptor subunit GluA2 increases receptor permeability to Ca2+, enabling cell survival, migration, and tumor expansion in glioma [4,67]. An Ile-to-Met edit for the Gabra-3 GABA receptor subunit induces higher levels of lysosomal decay and localizes unedited receptors to the cell membrane, which may initiate a shift toward the establishment of adult-specific GABA receptor expression [65,68].

Finally, RNA editing mediates interactions between the individual and the surrounding physical environment. In adult Adar2+/+ mice who underwent transection of spinal nerve L5, ADAR2 mRNA expression and subsequent RNA editing activity increased at L5 dorsal root ganglions relative to controls [69]. Post-injury Adar2−/− did not increase RNA editing events after transfection and displayed a higher threshold for pain compared to their Adar2+/+ counterparts, revealing ADAR2 RNA editing to contribute to neuropathic pain. Knockout of Adar2 in mice was demonstrated to impair circadian rhythms mediated by the superchiasmatic nucleus (SCN), and Adar2−/− mice displayed a distinct decrease in editing levels of transcripts coding for common receptors and ion channels such as Gria2, Cacna1d, and Kcna1 [70]. Accompanying data indicates that ADAR2’s interaction with a light-transmitting SCN pathway, coupled with the lack of ADAR2-mediated editing, is involved in the observation that Adar2−/− mice showed less difficulty adapting to new light/dark cycles.

2.3 Aging:

AS strongly influences the proteome, wherein accumulated changes can alter physiology and function in the aging brain. Nearly 30% of age-related splicing changes in observed human brains occurred in protein-coding genes [71]. Moreover, similar age-related splicing changes in the human brain are also present in the killifish Nothobranchius furzeri, highlighting the possible conserved effect of aging [72]. Aging neurological tissue across multiple species revealed a trend of increased intron retention for genes implicated in protein homeostasis, metabolism, and disease [73]. Aging-mediated AS can manifest in unnecessary NMD and isoform imbalance, potentially resulting in a variety of diseases and functional deficits [74]. A separate analysis of a cohort of human brains found that age has a strong effect on the splicing of genes implicated in age-related disorders, such as PICALM and KIF1B [75,76]. Furthermore, the young and aging mouse brain exhibit differential splicing for genes involved in synapse production, synapse maintenance, and neurite development [77].

miRNA and circular RNA (circRNA) participate in post-transcriptionally modifying gene expression during aging. Preliminary results have associated circRNA, which are highly stable transcripts whose ends are covalently bonded to form a circular shape, in “sponging” miRNA in the brain and consequently silencing the silencer of gene expression [78]. Although further research will provide more context, the double-negative interaction between miRNA and circRNA, in addition to the observed upregulation of circRNAs in the aging brain relative to other tissue, has been well documented [79–81]. Resulting changes in mRNA levels may be implicated in observed proteomic alterations in the aging brain [82] and lead to age-related phenotypes. circRNAs may consequently serve as both a biomarker and a modulator of gene expression in the aging brain.

2.4 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS):

ALS, a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by motor neuron death, muscle loss, and debilitating paralysis, is uniquely marked by the cytoplasmic aggregation of RBPs. Normally, the RBPs TDP-43 and fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS) participate in splicing, transport, mRNA stability, and local translation [39]. FUS/TLS is involved in transport and localized translation of numerous transcripts such as the glutamate transporter EAAT2 and the apoptosis-inhibiting enzyme SOD1 [83]. However, C-terminal domain mutations and some N-terminal domain mutations in TDP-43 and FUS/TLS are causative of familial ALS and fewer cases of sporadic ALS. Both RBPs form toxic neurological cytoplasmic aggregates independent of each other in ALS [84], which prevent the underlying RBPs from performing their normal functions on target transcripts. The resulting cascade of downstream effects includes dysregulated mitochondrial function, impaired neurite growth, and oxidative stress [85]. Furthermore, TDP-43 and FUS/TLS converge at a unique mechanism underlying neuronal death in ALS, wherein both RBPs upregulate the expression of shared target neuronal transcripts containing particularly long introns. The shared transcript set encodes proteins essential for proper function such as Nrxn1, that encodes presynaptic neurexin proteins, Nlgn3, that encodes postsynaptic neuroligins, and Kcnip4, that encodes a potassium channel subunit [83]. The heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 (hnRNP A2/B1), encoded by the HNRNPA2B1 gene, underlies a distinct mechanism in ALS [86]. HnRNP A2/B1 normally function in mRNA splicing, transport, and stability both in the nucleus and cytoplasm. A hnRNP A2/B1 mutation in the glycine-rich domain near the C-terminal end can result in ALS, which is reminiscent of the aforementioned C-terminal domain mutations in TDP-43 and FUS/TLS. Nuclear aggregation of mutant hnRNP A2/B1 occurs in motor neurons derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells and coincided with dysregulated AS and increased levels of cell death, which is a defining feature of ALS. Additionally, hnRNP A2/B1 aggregates in the cytoplasm appeared under conditions of induced cellular stress. The nuclear assembly of mutant hnRNP A2/B1 can both influence the function of itself and of surrounding RBPs, indicating that a vast network of proteins oversees the observed aberrant AS.

The lncRNA Nuclear Paraspeckle Assembly Transcript 1 (NEAT1), encoding isoforms NEAT1_1 and NEAT1_2, is involved in the formation of nuclear paraspeckles, which are nuclear foci minimally composed of bound paraspeckle proteins scaffolded on the NEAT1_2 isoform [87,88]. NEAT1_2 allows binding of an array of RBPs to form the nuclear paraspeckles, essential for post-transcriptional processing through nuclear retention of varying RNA. One process includes prion-like domains within paraspeckle proteins enabling RNA granule formation as a result of phase separation/liquid demixing mechanisms. The nuclear foci also contribute to miRNA biogenesis, neuronal excitability, axonal maintenance, mitochondrial function, inflammatory response, stress response, apoptosis, and regulating proteotoxicity. In mutant FUS spinal neurons, paraspeckle integrity is compromised due to the inadequate interaction of FUS with paraspeckle proteins. This defect dissociates NEAT1 from the paraspeckle, leading to high levels of free-floating cytoplasmic NEAT1; aberrant paraspeckle function due to FUS mutation may contribute to ALS. NONO, another paraspeckle protein highly relevant to paraspeckle stability, displays similar loss and gain of function as FUS in ALS-FUS patients, increasing the draw for further research (Figure 3).

Hexanucleotide repeat expansions (GGGGCC) of the C9orf72 gene are present in a majority of ALS cases [89,90]. Repeat-containing transcripts encode aberrant dipeptide repeat proteins strongly linked to RNA toxicity and malfunction, making C9orf72 a prominent cause of RNA processing defects in neurodegenerative diseases. The mutation results in the production of nuclear RNA foci, which sequester ALS-associated RBPs and produce a loss of function [89,91]. The RNA editing enzyme ADARB2 and the mRNA transport ribonucleoprotein hnRNPH1 localize to the foci and are unable to carry out their functions. C9orf72-related ALS consists of major AS alterations ranging over 1000 total intron retention events and ~4600 total cassette exon events. Most of the cases containing cassette exons involve exon skipping. For instance, exon 21 is spliced out in ATXN2 transcripts and exon 10 is excluded in MAPT. Both events are associated with signatures to ALS pathology, and although ATXN2 function is unclear, MAPT controls axonal microtubule stability via a balanced ratio of tau isoforms 3 and 4.

2.5 Alzheimer’s Disease (AD):

AD is characterized by severe adult-onset dementia and memory loss. Dysregulated AS, leading to intron retention in mature transcripts, is commonly observed in AD pathology [73]. Abnormal intron excision for PFKP, NDRG2, APP, and PICALM transcripts is associated with AD, but MAPT dysregulation particularly stands out [92–94]. Mutations within and around exon 10 of the MAPT transcript impair mRNA splicing and produce an imbalance of the encoded 3R/4R Tau isoforms [95]. Mutated Tau proteins hinder microtubule polymerization and cause Tau to self-aggregate into malignant clusters known as neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), that are notorious hallmarks of AD pathogenesis. Abnormal Tau expression further affects mRNA splicing for other genes such as NDRG2 and APP, and therefore exemplifies how aberrant splicing leads to a cascade of increased post-transcriptional complications for a network of other AD-associated transcripts. Resultant molecular phenotypes associated with AD include impaired synapse formation, reduced internalization of cell receptors, decreased protection from amyloid β–peptide (Aβ) toxicity, and irregular glycolytic function. Furthermore, vital U1 snRNP spliceosomal subunits, including the U1–70k component, physically localize with NFTs in the cytoplasm of human AD brain tissue indicating that an impairment of spliceosomal machinery underlies its pathology [96].

The upregulation of the NEAT1 lncRNA in the hippocampus and temporal cortex of AD mice exacerbates cognitive disabilities and Aβ accumulation through NEAT1’s ability to modulate the expression of the PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and the ubiquitin ligase neuronal precursor cell-expressed developmentally downregulated 4-like (NEDD4L) [97]. PINK1 facilitates mitophagy by turning over damaged mitochondria and consequently clearing accumulated Aβ deposits from the brain, which aids in preventing the disruption of neuronal function seen in AD mice. NEAT1 upregulation increased NEDD4L’s rate of ubiquitination on PINK1, which, in turn, decreased PINK1 expression and magnified symptoms of AD through resultant decreases in mitophagy activity. AD mice receiving a knockdown of NEAT1 or overexpression of PINK1 displayed impaired Aβ production and mitigation of learning and memory deficits. Huang and coworkers propose a network consisting of NEAT1, PINK1, and NEDD4L, where NEAT1 serves as a therapeutic downregulation target for alleviating molecular and cognitive symptoms of AD (Figure 3).

3. Conclusion

RNA processing vitally regulates neurological tissue development and relies upon the proper function and temporal expression of many RBPs and non-coding transcripts. Post-transcriptional regulation contributes to the success of numerous functions including neuronal migration, NPC differentiation, and axon development, crucial processes of development that require strict timing and management. Further silencing mechanisms such as RNA interference and NMD regulation have been implicated in neurological development, demonstrating the diverse and unique methods necessary for the development of the brain. Post-transcriptional modifications remain important throughout maturity and into old age. AS in the adult brain appears to be highly crucial for the preservation of motor function. The disruption of ADAR enzymes may serve as a mechanism for observable pathological symptoms in affected individuals. As the brain progresses into old age, AS deviation from its activity in previous stages of life can in part provide the foundation for some age-related pathologies.

In neurological tissue, RNA processing shapes gene expression to allow the individual to develop and mature properly. In this review, we discussed the mechanisms underlying RNA processing from the perspective of the developing, adult, and diseased brain. AS reigns as the most prominent and well-studied of RNA processing’s subtypes, but the contributions of non-coding RNA, RNA interference, editing, and stabilizing remain critical across all backgrounds. The field provides boundless future areas of study. It remains to be determined why circRNA expression correlates so strongly with aging, and whether age-related accumulation occurs in the human brain. Additional forms of non-coding RNA are still being discovered, and their unique properties have the potential to reshape our understanding of the gene expression landscape [98]. Therefore, further RNA processing studies are crucial to continue connecting the dots between transcription and translation within the central dogma.

Funding

C.A.T. was partly funded by K01 NIAAA and a CDKL5 Program of Excellence Grant (Loulou Foundation).

Figure 1 – mRNA processing within the cell.

After being generated in the nucleus, mRNA transcripts are subject to 5’ capping and 3’ polyadenylation. Proximally, nascent transcripts are also target of alternative splicing by the spliceosome, and RNA editing by enzymes such as the ADAR family of editing enzymes. After transport outside of the nucleus, proteins like the cytoplasmic isoform of Rbfox1 can bind to their target transcripts to modulate stability and promote translation at the ribosome. Alternatively, mRNA transcripts targeted by the RNA-induced silencing complex can be directly cleaved at the point of contact or transported to cytoplasmic P-bodies for degradation. ADAR enzyme- RNA editing machinery. A&gt;I Nucleotides adenosine and inosine. RISC- RNA-induced silencing complex. P body- Cytoplasmic structures housing mRNA for degradation. Rbfox1- RNA binding protein. Rb- Ribosome.

Figure 2 – The impact of RNA processing in neural development.

A, Representation of corticogenesis over time. Shown are radial glial cells, neural progenitor cells, intermediate progenitors, migrating neurons, and differentiating neurons. As the cortex develops, neural progenitor cells produce intermediate progenitors that differentiate into neurons migrating up the radial glial scaffold. B, PBX1 is alternatively spliced by PTBP1. Exclusion of exon 7 produces an embryonic isoform PBX1b that is only present in symmetrically dividing progenitor cells. After differentiation, when PTBP1 levels are diminished, exon 7 is included and PBX1a, the neuronal isoform, is produced. C, Pnky specifically binds to PTBP1 to repress pro-differentiation genes Ntsr2 and Igfbp5 in NPCs. Knockdown of either Pnky or PTBP1 causes an early upregulation in these transcripts that leads to precocious differentiation. D, Rbfox1 is alternatively spliced to produce nuclear Rbfox1 (Rbfox1_N) and cytoplasmic Rbfox (Rbfox1_C). Rbfox1_C may compete with miRNA to bind to ASD hub genes CNTNAP1 and CHRM1 to promote stability and translation. Rbfox1_C deficiency may cause affect CNTNAP1 and CHRM1, leading to ASD. E, UPF1 is a vital component of NMD. NMD of transcripts such as Smad7 and Cdkn1a contributes to repressing neural differentiation in NPC. miRNA 128 expression increases during differentiation and binds to Upf1 transcripts. Low levels of UPF1 allow pro-differentaition and anti-proliferation transcripts to be translated.

Figure 3 – Nuclear Paraspeckle formation in healthy and diseased cells.

Left, Healthy paraspeckle formation involves recruitment of numerous paraspeckle proteins, NONO, nRNPK, FUS, TDP-43, and other RBPs, to lncRNA NEAT1_2 scaffold. Scaffold-protein complexes cluster into shell structures to form nuclear paraspeckles, which serve regulative roles upon transcription, translation, gene expression, miRNA biogenesis, nuclear RNA retention, protein localization, and RBP function. Sponge-like idealization portrays paraspeckle activity of dynamic binding, unbinding, retention, and distribution; nuclear paraspeckles affect apoptosis, gene silencing, mRNA expression, mitochondrial signaling, and axon growth. Right, impaired paraspeckle formation results when mutant RBPs, FUS and TDP-43, form harmful cytoplasmic aggregates that sequester necessary paraspeckle components from reaching the NEAT1_2 scaffold. Essential RBPs are trapped within the toxic aggregates and impair nuclear paraspeckle formation, function, stability, and lead to molecular pathology. ALS-mutant TDP-43 aggregates correlate with increased assembly of dysfunctional paraspeckles. ALS-mutant FUS aggregates correlate with decreased assembly of paraspeckles. Mutant cytoplasmic aggregates isolating RBPs is a common mechanism of pathology for neurological disease. NIS- Nuclear interchromatin space. RBP- ribonucleic binding protein. lncNEAT1_2 and abbreviated NEAT1_2- Nuclear Paraspeckle Assembly Transcript 1 isoform 2 scaffold. Mutant TDP-43 and FUS- Harmful cytoplasmic aggregate forming RBPs. Healthy TDP-43 and FUS- RBPs for proper paraspeckle assembly and function. NONO and hnRNPK- RBPs relevant to paraspeckle stability.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


References

[1] Campbell K , Cortical neuron specification: It has its time and place, Neuron. 46 (2005) 373–376.15882634
[2] Keppetipola N , Sharma S , Li Q , Black DL , Neuronal regulation of pre-mRNA splicing by polypyrimidine tract binding proteins, PTBP1 and PTBP2, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol 47 (2012) 360–378.22655688
[3] Mao S , Li H , Sun Q , Zen K , Zhang C-Y , Li L , miR-17 regulates the proliferation and differentiation of the neural precursor cells during mouse corticogenesis, FEBS J 281 (2014) 1144–1158.24314167
[4] Oakes E , Anderson A , Cohen-Gadol A , Hundley HA , Adenosine deaminase that acts on RNA 3 (adar3) binding to glutamate receptor subunit B Pre-mRNA Inhibits RNA editing in glioblastoma, J. Biol. Chem 292 (2017) 4326–4335.28167531
[5] Roundtree IA , Evans ME , Pan T , He C , Dynamic RNA Modifications in Gene Expression Regulation, Cell. 169 (2017) 1187–1200.28622506
[6] Eisenberg E , Levanon EY , A-to-I RNA editing - Immune protector and transcriptome diversifier, Nat. Rev. Genet 19 (2018) 473–490.29692414
[7] Sen GL , Blau HM , Argonaute 2/RISC resides in sites of mammalian mRNA decay known as cytoplasmic bodies, Nat. Cell Biol 7 (2005) 633–636.15908945
[8] Pratt AJ , MacRae IJ , The RNA-induced silencing complex: A versatile gene-silencing machine, J. Biol. Chem 284 (2009) 17897–17901.19342379
[9] Tan X , Shi S-H , Neocortical neurogenesis and neuronal migration, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol 2 (2013) 443–459.24014417
[10] Su CH , Dhananjaya D , Tarn WY , Alternative splicing in neurogenesis and brain development, Front. Mol. Biosci 5 (2018).
[11] Pilaz L-J , Silver DL , Post-transcriptional regulation in corticogenesis: how RNA-binding proteins help build the brain, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA. 6 (2015) 501–515.26088328
[12] Zheng S , Gray EE , Chawla G , Porse BT , O’Dell TJ , Black DL , PSD-95 is post-transcriptionally repressed during early neural development by PTBP1 and PTBP2, Nat. Neurosci 15 (2012) 381–388.22246437
[13] Vuong JK , Lin CH , Zhang M , Chen L , Black DL , Zheng S , PTBP1 and PTBP2 Serve Both Specific and Redundant Functions in Neuronal Pre-mRNA Splicing, Cell Rep 17 (2016) 2766–2775.27926877
[14] Linares AJ , Lin CH , Damianov A , Adams KL , Novitch BG , Black DL , The splicing regulator PTBP1 controls the activity of the transcription factor Pbx1 during neuronal differentiation, Elife. 4 (2015).
[15] Suckale J , Wendling O , Masjkur J , Jäger M , Münster C , Anastassiadis K , Stewart AF , Solimena M , PTBP1 Is Required for Embryonic Development before Gastrulation, PLoS One. 6 (2011) e16992.21423341
[16] Zhang M , Ergin V , Lin L , Stork C , Chen L , Zheng S , Axonogenesis Is Coordinated by Neuron-Specific Alternative Splicing Programming and Splicing Regulator PTBP2, Neuron. 101 (2019) 690–706.e10.30733148
[17] Kojima N , Hanamura K , Yamazaki H , Ikeda T , Itohara S , Shirao T , Genetic disruption of the alternative splicing of drebrin gene impairs context-dependent fear learning in adulthood, Neuroscience. 165 (2010) 138–150.19837137
[18] Li Q , Zheng S , Han A , Lin C-H , Stoilov P , Fu X-D , Black DL , The splicing regulator PTBP2 controls a program of embryonic splicing required for neuronal maturation, Elife. 3 (2014).
[19] Makeyev EV , Zhang J , Carrasco MA , Maniatis T , The MicroRNA miR-124 Promotes Neuronal Differentiation by Triggering Brain-Specific Alternative Pre-mRNA Splicing, Mol. Cell. 27 (2007) 435–448.17679093
[20] Zhang X , Chen MH , Wu X , Kodani A , Fan J , Doan R , Ozawa M , Ma J , Yoshida N , Reiter JF , Black DL , Kharchenko PV , Sharp PA , Walsh CA , Cell-Type-Specific Alternative Splicing Governs Cell Fate in the Developing Cerebral Cortex, Cell. 166 (2016) 1147–1162.e15.27565344
[21] Jacko M , Weyn-Vanhentenryck SM , Smerdon JW , Yan R , Feng H , Williams DJ , Pai J , Xu K , Wichterle H , Zhang C , Rbfox Splicing Factors Promote Neuronal Maturation and Axon Initial Segment Assembly, Neuron. 97 (2018) 853–868.e6.29398366
[22] Leterrier C , The axon initial segment: An updated viewpoint, J. Neurosci 38 (2018) 2135–2145.29378864
[23] Shinohara H , Sakayori N , Takahashi M , Osumi N , Ninein is essential for the maintenance of the cortical progenitor character by anchoring the centrosome to microtubules, Biol. Open. 2 (2013) 739–749.23862022
[24] Lennox AL , Mao H , Silver DL , RNA on the brain: emerging layers of post-transcriptional regulation in cerebral cortex development, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol 7 (2018) e290.
[25] Johnson V , Junge HJ , Chen Z , Temporal regulation of axonal repulsion by alternative splicing of a conserved microexon in mammalian robo1 and Robo2, Elife. 8 (2019).
[26] Saito Y , Miranda-Rottmann S , Ruggiu M , Park CY , Fak JJ , Zhong R , Duncan JS , Fabella BA , Junge HJ , Chen Z , Araya R , Fritzsch B , Hudspeth AJ , Darnell RB , NOVA2-mediated RNA regulation is required for axonal pathfinding during development, Elife. 5 (2016).
[27] Lou CH , Shao A , Shum EY , Espinoza JL , Huang L , Karam R , Wilkinson MF , Posttranscriptional Control of the Stem Cell and Neurogenic Programs by the Nonsense-Mediated RNA Decay Pathway, Cell Rep 6 (2014) 748–764.24529710
[28] Kim YKI , Maquat LE , UPFront and center in RNA decay: UPF1 in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and beyond, RNA. 25 (2019) 407–422.30655309
[29] Fabian MR , Sonenberg N , The mechanics of miRNA-mediated gene silencing: A look under the hood of miRISC, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol 19 (2012) 586–593.22664986
[30] Yu JY , Chung KH , Deo M , Thompson RC , Turner DL , MicroRNA miR-124 regulates neurite outgrowth during neuronal differentiation, Exp. Cell Res 314 (2008) 2618–2633.18619591
[31] Bruno IG , Karam R , Huang L , Bhardwaj A , Lou CH , Shum EY , Song HW , Corbett MA , Gifford WD , Gecz J , Pfaff SL , Wilkinson MF , Identification of a MicroRNA that Activates Gene Expression by Repressing Nonsense-Mediated RNA Decay, Mol. Cell. 42 (2011) 500–510.21596314
[32] Yao RW , Wang Y , Chen LL , Cellular functions of long noncoding RNAs, Nat. Cell Biol 21 (2019) 542–551.31048766
[33] Ramos AD , Andersen RE , Liu SJ , Nowakowski TJ , Hong SJ , Gertz CC , Salinas RD , Zarabi H , Kriegstein AR , Lim DA , The long noncoding RNA Pnky regulates neuronal differentiation of embryonic and postnatal neural stem cells, Cell Stem Cell. 16 (2015) 439–447.25800779
[34] Lin N , Chang KY , Li Z , Gates K , Rana ZA , Dang J , Zhang D , Han T , Yang CS , Cunningham TJ , Head SR , Duester G , Dong PDS , Rana TM , An evolutionarily conserved long noncoding RNA TUNA controls pluripotency and neural lineage commitment, Mol. Cell. 53 (2014) 1005–1019.24530304
[35] Gong C , Maquat LE , LncRNAs transactivate STAU1-mediated mRNA decay by duplexing with 39 UTRs via Alu eleme, Nature. 470 (2011) 284–290.21307942
[36] Kretz M , Siprashvili Z , Chu C , Webster DE , Zehnder A , Qu K , Lee CS , Flockhart RJ , Groff AF , Chow J , Johnston D , Kim GE , Spitale RC , Flynn RA , Zheng GXY , Aiyer S , Raj A , Rinn JL , Chang HY , Khavari PA , Control of somatic tissue differentiation by the long non-coding RNA TINCR, Nature. 493 (2013) 231–235.23201690
[37] Xue Y , Ouyang K , Huang J , Zhou Y , Ouyang H , Li H , Wang G , Wu Q , Wei C , Bi Y , Jiang L , Cai Z , Sun H , Zhang K , Zhang Y , Chen J , Fu XD , Direct conversion of fibroblasts to neurons by reprogramming PTB-regulated MicroRNA circuits, Cell. 152 (2013) 82–96.23313552
[38] Lee JA , Damianov A , Lin CH , Fontes M , Parikshak NN , Anderson ES , Geschwind DH , Black DL , Martin KC , Cytoplasmic Rbfox1 Regulates the Expression of Synaptic and Autism-Related Genes, Neuron. 89 (2016) 113–128.26687839
[39] Nussbacher JK , Tabet R , Yeo GW , Lagier-Tourenne C , Disruption of RNA Metabolism in Neurological Diseases and Emerging Therapeutic Interventions, Neuron. 102 (2019) 294–320.30998900
[40] Darnell JC , Klann E , The translation of translational control by FMRP: Therapeutic targets for FXS, Nat. Neurosci 16 (2013) 1530–1536.23584741
[41] Bassell GJ , Warren ST , Fragile X Syndrome: Loss of Local mRNA Regulation Alters Synaptic Development and Function, Neuron. 60 (2008) 201–214.18957214
[42] Darnell JC , Van Driesche SJ , Zhang C , Hung KYS , Mele A , Fraser CE , Stone EF , Chen C , Fak JJ , Chi SW , Licatalosi DD , Richter JD , Darnell RB , FMRP stalls ribosomal translocation on mRNAs linked to synaptic function and autism, Cell. 146 (2011) 247–261.21784246
[43] Anderson P , Kedersha N , RNA granules: Post-transcriptional and epigenetic modulators of gene expression, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 10 (2009) 430–436.19461665
[44] Bagni C , Zukin RS , A Synaptic Perspective of Fragile X Syndrome and Autism Spectrum Disorders, Neuron. 101 (2019) 1070–1088.30897358
[45] Tran SS , Jun HI , Bahn JH , Azghadi A , Ramaswami G , Van Nostrand EL , Nguyen TB , Hsiao YHE , Lee C , Pratt GA , Martínez-Cerdeño V , Hagerman RJ , Yeo GW , Geschwind DH , Xiao X , Widespread RNA editing dysregulation in brains from autistic individuals, Nat. Neurosci 22 (2019) 25–36.30559470
[46] Parikshak NN , Swarup V , Belgard TG , Irimia M , Ramaswami G , Gandal MJ , Hartl C , Leppa V , Ubieta LDLT , Huang J , Lowe JK , Blencowe BJ , Horvath S , Geschwind DH , Genome-wide changes in lncRNA, splicing, and regional gene expression patterns in autism, Nature. 540 (2016) 423–427.27919067
[47] Keihani S , Kluever V , Mandad S , Bansal V , Rahman R , Fritsch E , Caldi Gomes L , Gärtner A , Kügler S , Urlaub H , Wren JD , Bonn S , Rizzoli SO , Fornasiero EF , The long noncoding RNA neuroLNC regulates presynaptic activity by interacting with the neurodegeneration-associated protein TDP-43, Sci. Adv 5 (2019) eaay2670.31897430
[48] Charizanis K , Lee KY , Batra R , Goodwin M , Zhang C , Yuan Y , Shiue L , Cline M , Scotti MM , Xia G , Kumar A , Ashizawa T , Clark HB , Kimura T , Takahashi MP , Fujimura H , Jinnai K , Yoshikawa H , Gomes-Pereira M , Gourdon G , Sakai N , Nishino S , Foster TC , Ares M , Darnell RB , Swanson MS , Muscleblind-like 2-Mediated Alternative Splicing in the Developing Brain and Dysregulation in Myotonic Dystrophy, Neuron. 75 (2012) 437–450.22884328
[49] Ince-Dunn G , Okano HJ , Jensen KB , Park WY , Zhong R , Ule J , Mele A , Fak JJ , Yang CW , Zhang C , Yoo J , Herre M , Okano H , Noebels JL , Darnell RB , Neuronal Elav-like (Hu) Proteins Regulate RNA Splicing and Abundance to Control Glutamate Levels and Neuronal Excitability, Neuron. 75 (2012) 1067–1080.22998874
[50] Damoiseaux JS , Effects of aging on functional and structural brain connectivity, Neuroimage. 160 (2017) 32–40.28159687
[51] Pascual M , Vicente M , Monferrer L , Artero R , The Muscleblind family of proteins: An emerging class of regulators of developmentally programmed alternative splicing, Differentiation. 74 (2006) 65–80.16533306
[52] Kanadia RN , Johnstone KA , Mankodi A , Lungu C , Thornton CA , Esson D , Timmers AM , Hauswirth WW , Swanson MS , A Muscleblind Knockout Model for Myotonic Dystrophy, Science (80-. ). 302 (2003) 1978–1980.
[53] Li X , Poschmann S , Chen Q , Fazeli W , Oundjian NJ , Snoeijen-Schouwenaars FM , Fricke O , Kamsteeg EJ , Willemsen M , Wang QK , De novo BK channel variant causes epilepsy by affecting voltage gating but not Ca2+ sensitivity, Eur. J. Hum. Genet 26 (2018) 220–229.29330545
[54] Pinggera A , Striessnig J , Cav1.3 (CACNA1D) L- type Ca2+ channel dysfunction in CNS disorders, J. Physiol 594 (2016) 5839–5849.26842699
[55] Gehman LT , Meera P , Stoilov P , Shiue L , O’Brien JE , Meisler MH , Ares M , Otis TS , Black DL , The splicing regulator Rbfox2 is required for both cerebellar development and mature motor function, Genes Dev 26 (2012) 445–460.22357600
[56] Pozzi D , Corradini I , Matteoli M , The Control of Neuronal Calcium Homeostasis by SNAP-25 and its Impact on Neurotransmitter Release, Neuroscience. 420 (2019) 72–78.30476527
[57] Schubert J , Siekierska A , Langlois M , May P , Huneau C , Becker F , Muhle H , Suls A , Lemke JR , De Kovel CGF , Thiele H , Konrad K , Kawalia A , Toliat MR , Sander T , Rüschendorf F , Caliebe A , Nagel I , Kohl B , Kecskés A , Jacmin M , Hardies K , Weckhuysen S , Riesch E , Dorn T , Brilstra EH , Baulac S , Møller RS , Hjalgrim H , Koeleman BPC , Jurkat-Rott K , Lehman-Horn F , Roach JC , Glusman G , Hood L , Galas DJ , Martin B , De Witte PAM , Biskup S , De Jonghe P , Helbig I , Balling R , Nürnberg P , Crawford AD , Esguerra CV , Weber YG , Lerche H , Mutations in STX1B, encoding a presynaptic protein, cause fever-associated epilepsy syndromes, Nat. Genet 46 (2014) 1327–1332.25362483
[58] Zhang X , Hamblin MH , Yin KJ , The long noncoding RNA Malat1: Its physiological and pathophysiological functions, RNA Biol 14 (2017) 1705–1714.28837398
[59] Patel NA , Moss LD , Lee JY , Tajiri N , Acosta S , Hudson C , Parag S , Cooper DR , Borlongan CV , Bickford PC , Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 in exosomes drives regenerative function and modulates inflammation-linked networks following traumatic brain injury, J. Neuroinflammation. 15 (2018) 204.30001722
[60] Wu Q , Yi X , Down-regulation of Long Noncoding RNA MALAT1 Protects Hippocampal Neurons Against Excessive Autophagy and Apoptosis via the PI3K/Akt Signaling Pathway in Rats with Epilepsy, J. Mol. Neurosci 65 (2018) 234–245.29858824
[61] Hwang T , Park CK , Leung AKL , Gao Y , Hyde TM , Kleinman JE , Rajpurohit A , Tao R , Shin JH , Weinberger DR , Dynamic regulation of RNA editing in human brain development and disease, Nat. Neurosci 19 (2016) 1093–1099.27348216
[62] Mladenova D , Barry G , Konen LM , Pineda SS , Guennewig B , Avesson L , Zinn R , Schonrock N , Bitar M , Jonkhout N , Crumlish L , Kaczorowski DC , Gong A , Pinese M , Franco GR , Walkley CR , Vissel B , Mattick JS , Adar3 Is Involved in Learning and Memory in Mice, Front. Neurosci 12 (2018).
[63] Picardi E , Horner DS , Pesole G , Single-cell transcriptomics reveals specific RNA editing signatures in the human brain, RNA. 23 (2017) 860–865.28258159
[64] Sapiro AL , Shmueli A , Henry GL , Li Q , Shalit T , Yaron O , Paas Y , Li JB , Shohat-Ophir G , Illuminating spatial A-to-I RNA editing signatures within the Drosophila brain, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 116 (2019) 2318–2327.30659150
[65] Behm M , Öhman M , RNA Editing: A Contributor to Neuronal Dynamics in the Mammalian Brain, Trends Genet 32 (2016) 165–175.26803450
[66] Maldonado C , Alicea D , Gonzalez M , Bykhovskaia M , Marie B , Adar is essential for optimal presynaptic function, Mol. Cell. Neurosci 52 (2013) 173–180.23127996
[67] Venkatesh HS , Morishita W , Geraghty AC , Silverbush D , Gillespie SM , Arzt M , Tam LT , Espenel C , Ponnuswami A , Ni L , Woo PJ , Taylor KR , Agarwal A , Regev A , Brang D , Vogel H , Hervey-Jumper S , Bergles DE , Suvà ML , Malenka RC , Monje M , Electrical and synaptic integration of glioma into neural circuits, Nature. 573 (2019) 539–545.31534222
[68] Danie C , Wahlstedt H , Ohlson J , Björk P , Öhman M , Adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing affects trafficking of the γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor, J. Biol. Chem 286 (2011) 2031–2040.21030585
[69] Uchida H , Matsumura S , Okada S , Suzuki T , Minami T , Ito S , RNA editing enzyme ADAR2 is a mediator of neuropathic pain after peripheral nerve injury, FASEB J 31 (2017) 1847–1855.28126736
[70] Terajima H , Yoshitane H , Yoshikawa T , Shigeyoshi Y , Fukada Y , A-to-I RNA editing enzyme ADAR2 regulates light-induced circadian phase-shift, Sci. Rep 8 (2018) 14848.30287844
[71] Mazin P , Xiong J , Liu X , Yan Z , Zhang X , Li M , He L , Somel M , Yuan Y , Phoebe Chen Y , Li N , Hu Y , Fu N , Ning Z , Zeng R , Yang H , Chen W , Gelfand M , Khaitovich P , Widespread splicing changes in human brain development and aging, Mol. Syst. Biol 9 (2013) 633.23340839
[72] Baumgart M , Groth M , Priebe S , Savino A , Testa G , Dix A , Ripa R , Spallotta F , Gaetano C , Ori M , Terzibasi Tozzini E , Guthke R , Platzer M , Cellerino A , RNA-seq of the aging brain in the short-lived fish N. furzeri - conserved pathways and novel genes associated with neurogenesis, Aging Cell. 13 (2014) 965–974.25059688
[73] Adusumalli S , Ngian Z , Lin W , Benoukraf T , Ong C , Increased intron retention is a post- transcriptional signature associated with progressive aging and Alzheimer’s disease, Aging Cell. 18 (2019) e12928.30868713
[74] Scotti MM , Swanson MS , RNA mis-splicing in disease, Nat. Rev. Genet 17 (2016) 19–32.26593421
[75] Zhao Z , Sagare AP , Ma Q , Halliday MR , Kong P , Kisler K , Winkler EA , Ramanathan A , Kanekiyo T , Bu G , Owens NC , Rege SV , Si G , Ahuja A , Zhu D , Miller CA , Schneider JA , Maeda M , Maeda T , Sugawara T , Ichida JK , Zlokovic BV , Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood-brain barrier transcytosis and clearance, Nat. Neurosci 18 (2015) 978–987.26005850
[76] Xu F , Takahashi H , Tanaka Y , Ichinose S , Niwa S , Wicklund MP , Hirokawa N , KIF1Bβ mutations detected in hereditary neuropathy impair IGF1R transport and axon growth, J. Cell Biol 217 (2018) 3480–3496.30126838
[77] Stilling RM , Benito E , Gertig M , Barth J , Capece V , Burkhardt S , Bonn S , Fischer A , Deregulation of gene expression and alternative splicing affects distinct cellular pathways in the aging hippocampus, Front. Cell. Neurosci 8 (2014).
[78] Memczak S , Jens M , Elefsinioti A , Torti F , Krueger J , Rybak A , Maier L , Mackowiak SD , Gregersen LH , Munschauer M , Loewer A , Ziebold U , Landthaler M , Kocks C , Le Noble F , Rajewsky N , Circular RNAs are a large class of animal RNAs with regulatory potency, Nature. 495 (2013) 333–338.23446348
[79] Piwecka M , Glažar P , Hernandez-Miranda LR , Memczak S , Wolf SA , Rybak-Wolf A , Filipchyk A , Klironomos F , Jara CAC , Fenske P , Trimbuch T , Zywitza V , Plass M , Schreyer L , Ayoub S , Kocks C , Kühn R , Rosenmund C , Birchmeier C , Rajewsky N , Loss of a mammalian circular RNA locus causes miRNA deregulation and affects brain function, Science (80-. ). 357 (2017).
[80] Kleaveland B , Shi CY , Stefano J , Bartel DP , A Network of Noncoding Regulatory RNAs Acts in the Mammalian Brain, Cell. 174 (2018) 350–362.e17.29887379
[81] Gruner H , Cortés-López M , Cooper DA , Bauer M , Miura P , CircRNA accumulation in the aging mouse brain, Sci. Rep 6 (2016).
[82] Akhter R , Circular RNA and Alzheimer’s disease, in: Adv. Exp. Med. Biol, Springer New York LLC, 2018: pp. 239–243.
[83] Lagier-Tourenne C , Polymenidou M , Hutt KR , Vu AQ , Baughn M , Huelga SC , Clutario KM , Ling SC , Liang TY , Mazur C , Wancewicz E , Kim AS , Watt A , Freier S , Hicks GG , Donohue JP , Shiue L , Bennett CF , Ravits J , Cleveland DW , Yeo GW , Divergent roles of ALS-linked proteins FUS/TLS and TDP-43 intersect in processing long pre-mRNAs, Nat. Neurosci 15 (2012) 1488–1497.23023293
[84] Lagier-Tourenne C , Polymenidou M , Cleveland DW , TDP-43 and FUS/TLS: emerging roles in RNA processing and neurodegeneration, Hum. Mol. Genet 19 (2010) 46–64.
[85] Hergesheimer RC , Chami AA , De Assis DR , Vourc’h P , Andres CR , Corcia P , Lanznaster D , Blasco H , The debated toxic role of aggregated TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A resolution in sight?, Brain. 142 (2019) 1176–1194.30938443
[86] Martinez FJ , Pratt GA , Van Nostrand EL , Batra R , Huelga SC , Kapeli K , Freese P , Chun SJ , Ling K , Gelboin-Burkhart C , Fijany L , Wang HC , Nussbacher JK , Broski SM , Kim HJ , Lardelli R , Sundararaman B , Donohue JP , Javaherian A , Lykke-Andersen J , Finkbeiner S , Bennett CF , Ares M , Burge CB , Taylor JP , Rigo F , Yeo GW , Protein-RNA Networks Regulated by Normal and ALS-Associated Mutant HNRNPA2B1 in the Nervous System, Neuron. 92 (2016) 780–795.27773581
[87] Fox AH , Nakagawa S , Hirose T , Bond CS , Paraspeckles: Where Long Noncoding RNA Meets Phase Separation, Trends Biochem. Sci 43 (2018) 124–135.29289458
[88] An H , Skelt L , Notaro A , Highley JR , Fox AH , La Bella V , Buchman VL , Shelkovnikova TA , ALS-linked FUS mutations confer loss and gain of function in the nucleus by promoting excessive formation of dysfunctional paraspeckles, Acta Neuropathol. Commun 7 (2019) 7.30642400
[89] Ortega JA , Daley EL , Kour S , Samani M , Tellez L , Smith HS , Hall EA , Esengul YT , Tsai YH , Gendron TF , Donnelly CJ , Siddique T , Savas JN , Pandey UB , Kiskinis E , Nucleocytoplasmic Proteomic Analysis Uncovers eRF1 and Nonsense-Mediated Decay as Modifiers of ALS/FTD C9orf72 Toxicity, Neuron. 106 (2020) 90–107.e13.32059759
[90] Prudencio M , Belzil VV , Batra R , Ross CA , Gendron TF , Pregent LJ , Murray ME , Overstreet KK , Piazza-Johnston AE , Desaro P , Bieniek KF , DeTure M , Lee WC , Biendarra SM , Davis MD , Baker MC , Perkerson RB , Van Blitterswijk M , Stetler CT , Rademakers R , Link CD , Dickson DW , Boylan KB , Li H , Petrucelli L , Distinct brain transcriptome profiles in C9orf72-associated and sporadic ALS, Nat. Neurosci 18 (2015) 1175–1182.26192745
[91] Taylor JP , Brown RH , Cleveland DW , Decoding ALS: From genes to mechanism, Nature. 539 (2016) 197–206.27830784
[92] Zhao Z , Sagare AP , Ma Q , Halliday MR , Kong P , Kisler K , Winkler EA , Ramanathan A , Kanekiyo T , Bu G , Owens NC , Rege SV , Si G , Ahuja A , Zhu D , Miller CA , Schneider JA , Maeda M , Maeda T , Sugawara T , Ichida JK , Zlokovic BV , Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood-brain barrier transcytosis and clearance, Nat. Neurosci 18 (2015) 978–987.26005850
[93] Hsieh YC , Guo C , Yalamanchili HK , Abreha M , Al-Ouran R , Li Y , Dammer EB , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , Seyfried NT , Liu Z , Shulman JM , Tau-Mediated Disruption of the Spliceosome Triggers Cryptic RNA Splicing and Neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s Disease, Cell Rep 29 (2019) 301–316.e10.31597093
[94] Raj T , Li YI , Wong G , Humphrey J , Wang M , Ramdhani S , Wang YC , Ng B , Gupta I , Haroutunian V , Schadt EE , Young-Pearse T , Mostafavi S , Zhang B , Sklar P , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , Integrative transcriptome analyses of the aging brain implicate altered splicing in Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility, Nat. Genet 50 (2018) 1584–1592.30297968
[95] Wood JG , Mirra SS , Pollock NJ , Binder LI , Neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease share antigenic determinants with the axonal microtubule-associated protein tau (τ), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 83 (1986) 4040–4043.2424015
[96] Bai B , Hales CM , Chen PC , Gozal Y , Dammer EB , Fritz JJ , Wang X , Xia Q , Duong DM , Street C , Cantero G , Cheng D , Jones DR , Wu Z , Li Y , Diner I , Heilman CJ , Rees HD , Wu H , Lin L , Szulwach KE , Gearing M , Mufson EJ , Bennett DA , Montine TJ , Seyfried NT , Wingo TS , Sun YE , Jin P , Hanfelt J , Willcock DM , Levey A , Lah JJ , Peng J , U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex and RNA splicing alterations in Alzheimer’s disease, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 110 (2013) 16562–16567.24023061
[97] Huang Z , Zhao J , Wang W , Zhou J , Zhang J , Depletion of LncRNA NEAT1 Rescues Mitochondrial Dysfunction Through NEDD4L-Dependent PINK1 Degradation in Animal Models of Alzheimer’s Disease, Front. Cell. Neurosci 14 (2020) 28.32140098
[98] Cech TR , Steitz JA , The noncoding RNA revolution - Trashing old rules to forge new ones, Cell. 157 (2014) 77–94.24679528
