LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0121103
280
Adv Exp Med Biol
Adv Exp Med Biol
Advances in experimental medicine and biology
0065-2598
2214-8019

33433878
8672701
10.1007/978-3-030-51140-1_14
NIHMS1740221
Article
Lysosomal Dysfunction and Other Pathomechanisms in FTLD: Evidence from Progranulin Genetics and Biology
Zhou Xiaolai Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA

Kukar Thomas Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA

Rademakers Rosa Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA
VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Antwerp-CDE, Antwerp, Belgium

rosa.rademakers@uantwerpen.vib.be
8 12 2021
2021
15 12 2021
1281 219242
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

pmcIntroduction

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a complex disease, characterized by progressive degeneration of frontal and temporal lobes and extensive neuroinflammation, which manifests with a range of clinical disorders and inevitably leads to death [1]. The most common clinical presentation is behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) characterized by progressive deterioration of personality, social behavior with disinhibition, and cognition [2]. However, in other FTLD patients, language dysfunction in the form of primary progressive aphasia is the predominant feature [3]. FTLD spectrum disorders are a leading cause of early-onset dementia with most patients presenting first symptoms around 60 years of age; however, a range from 25 to 90 years has been reported [4]. Importantly, more than 40% of FTLD patients have a positive family history of FTLD or related neurodegenerative disorders, sometimes with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which speaks to the strong genetic component of the disease [5–7].

In 1998, mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) were identified as the first genetic cause of FTLD in a set of families with bvFTD and parkinsonism [8–10]. The subsequent identification of several FTLD families that lacked mutations or rearrangements in MAPT, despite genetic linkage to the same chromosomal region, suggested the presence of another genetic cause for FTLD close to the MAPT locus on chromosome 17q21 [11]. Intriguingly, these families also had pathology distinct from the MAPT carriers: they showed pathological inclusions positive for ubiquitin but negative for the tau protein. This remained a conundrum in the field until 2006 when systematic sequencing of candidate genes in a 6 Mb critical region, defined by the linked families, led to the identification of heterozygous progranulin gene (GRN) mutations as the second cause of autosomal dominant FTLD [12, 13]. In the same year, the TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) was found to be the main component of the ubiquitin inclusions in the GRN families, and FTLD with TDP-43 pathology (FTLD-TDP) was discovered to be the most common type of FTLD pathology [14, 15]. We now know that GRN mutation carriers always present with FTLD-TDP type A, a specific FTLD-TDP subtype defined based on the distribution, cellular localization, and shape of the TDP-43 inclusions [16].

Progranulin (PGRN), encoded by GRN, is a conserved 593-amino-acid secreted glycoprotein. It has an unusual structure with seven full-length and one half-length granulin domains connected by linker regions and can be proteolytically cleaved to release individual 6 kDa granulin peptides [17] (Fig. 1). Multiple proteases are able to generate granulins from PGRN including neutrophil elastase [18, 19], proteinase 3 (a neutrophil protease) [19], matrix metalloproteinase 12 (MMP-12) [20], MMP-14 [21], and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 7 (ADAMTS-7) [22]. On the other hand, PGRN can be stabilized from proteolysis by secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI). Notably, in vitro assays showed that the cleavage of PGRN by proteases does not always result in the release of solely 6–12 kDa granulin fragments; instead, multiple intermediate-sized granulin products are also produced [18–20].

PGRN is highly expressed in epithelial cells such as those in the intestinal crypt, skin, kidney, and reproductive tracts, as well as immune cells within the lymphoid tissue of the lung, gut, and spleen [23, 24]. In the brain, PGRN is mainly expressed in microglia and in different types of neurons including Purkinje cells, hippocampus pyramidal cells, and cerebral cortical neurons [23, 25, 26]. Both PGRN and granulins have been implicated in diverse functional processes. Specifically, early work focused on the role of PGRN in cell cycle progression and cell migration in a range of tissue remodeling processes including development, wound repair/inflammation, and tumorigenesis [27]. It was later determined that PGRN and one of the granulins, granulin E, exhibited neurotrophic properties [28] and most recently PGRN and granulins were shown to act as a key regulator of lysosomal health [29]. How GRN mutations affect these various biological processes and which mechanism is most important for the development and progression of FTLD remains an area of active investigation.

In this chapter, we briefly summarize the GRN mutational spectrum and its associated phenotypes, followed by an in-depth discussion on possible GRN-related disease mechanisms with emphasis on the recent evidence implicating PGRN and granulins in lysosomal function and dysfunction.

PGRN Mutational Spectrum and Associated Phenotypes

Heterozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in GRN Cause FTLD

Through sequencing studies in FTLD and early-onset dementia populations, GRN mutations are now estimated to account for 5–20% of patients with a positive family history and 1–5% of apparently sporadic FTLD patients [30]. Mutations are mostly small insertions, deletions, or duplications affecting the GRN reading frame, splice-site mutations, or nonsense mutations, all leading to a premature termination codon and degradation of the mutant GRN mRNA transcript through nonsense-mediated decay. Larger partial or complete gene deletions have also been reported [31–33]. Mutations affecting the signal-peptide sequence of PGRN, such as p.W7R and p.A9D, are also considered pathogenic because these mutants are unable to recruit the signal recognition particle, preventing secretion, leading to degradation of mutant GRN mRNA [34–36]. Two recent international studies summarized the different GRN mutations and number of families reported, showing at least 140 different loss-of-function mutations in more than 400 unrelated families (more families were reported by Moore et al., but genomic information was not used to determine cryptic relationships) [4, 37]. The most common mutation is c.813_816del (p.T272Sfs*10), with hundreds of affected patients from a founder population in Italy [38]. Other common mutations include c.1477C &gt; T (p.R493*), c.709–1G &gt; A (p.?), and c.26C &gt; (p.A9D), all of which are more geographically distributed [4].

FTLD patients are heterozygous carriers; thus, a loss of 50% PGRN is the uniform consequence of all known pathogenic mutations resulting in PGRN haploinsufficiency. Because PGRN is a secreted protein, the reduction in PGRN can be detected in plasma or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from GRN mutation carriers and used as a diagnostic biomarker [39–42]. Together with in vitro functional assays, these PGRN measurements in human biofluids have also proven useful in the study of GRN missense variants which were identified through routine screening of FTLD patients but for which the pathogenicity is less obvious [35, 43–45]. For a select few missense mutations (including p.C105R, p.C139R, and p.C521Y affecting critical conserved cysteine residues), compelling evidence has now been gathered to support an effect on PGRN; however, most of these mutations do not completely eliminate PGRN expression and/or function and thus may represent FTLD risk factors rather than clear pathogenic mutations. The notion that a partial loss of PGRN (resulting in less than 100% but more than 50% remaining expression) could function as an FTLD risk factor is already demonstrated by rs5848, a common variant in the 3’ untranslated region of GRN which was first described as a risk factor for FTLD-TDP in 2008 and was shown to partially reduce PGRN expression [46]. A highly significant association of this variant with risk to develop FTLD-TDP type A (indistinguishable from the pathology seen in GRN mutation carriers) was recently confirmed in a large international study [47]. Interestingly, this same variant has been implicated in other neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and hippocampal sclerosis of aging, which may point to the fact that a partial loss of PGRN leads to a general increase in neurodegenerative disease risk [48–51].

Homozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in GRN Cause Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis

Unexpectedly, homozygous loss-of-function mutations in GRN were reported in 2012 as the cause of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) type 11 [52]. NCLs are neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the accumulation of abnormal lipopigment in lysosomes and clinical features of (usually) childhood-onset visual failure, cerebellar ataxia, seizures, and progressive decline in cognitive and motor functions [53]. The discovery of homozygous GRN mutations in patients with a lysosomal storage disorder marked a landmark finding providing novel and strong evidence for a functional role of PGRN within lysosomes. To date, eight different families with a total of 11 homozygous GRN mutation carriers have been reported (summarized in [54]). Strikingly, while most patients presented with classical NCL symptoms with a juvenile onset, three patients developed behavioral and cognitive symptoms that would allow the diagnosis of probable bvFTD [2], with one patient only developing symptoms at 56 years of age. This suggests that FTLD and NCL are extreme phenotypes on a spectrum with as yet unknown factors contributing to the phenotypic presentation. Residual expression of PGRN in homozygous GRN mutation carriers, as a result of hypomorphic variants that still synthesize some PGRN, may explain the bvFTD phenotype in some patients, but other factors likely play a role. Importantly, neuropathological examination in one patient homozygous for GRN mutations showed typical hallmarks of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis but no TDP-43 inclusions similar to those observed in FTLD [54].

Genetic Modifiers of FTLD-GRN

The large variability in age at disease onset among pathogenic GRN mutation carriers, even within single families [55], recently prompted an unbiased two-stage genome-wide association study using more than 400 patients from unrelated GRN families [37]. No genome-wide significant association with age at onset was identified. However, when symptomatic GRN carriers were compared to healthy individuals (in an attempt to identify possible protective factors), a genome-wide significant association was reported for genetic variants at the TMEM106B locus (rs1990622) and the GFRA2 locus (rs36196656). These findings imply that even pathogenic GRN mutations are not fully penetrant and provide hope that TMEM106B-related and/or GFRA2-related pathways might be future targets for treatments for FTLD. The current biological knowledge on these candidate proteins in relation to PGRN is discussed in sections “PGRN Neurotrophic Receptors and Signaling Pathways” (GFRA2) and “Lessons from TMEM106B”. (TMEM106B).

PGRN Deficiency Leads to a Loss of Neurotrophic Support

Neurotrophic Effect of PGRN and Granulins

Before the link of PGRN with FTLD, its function in cell growth had been extensively studied in the cancer biology field. Increased expression of PGRN was reported in several types of cancer including liver, breast, kidney, prostate, and ovarian cancer and was found to be associated with poor prognosis (for review, see [56, 57]). In vitro studies found PGRN functions as a growth factor. Treatment with PGRN induced cell proliferation [58, 59] and prevented the apoptosis of tumor cells [18, 60–63]. In vivo, a reduction in PGRN expression greatly reduced tumor formation [64–67].

Prompted by the discovery of GRN mutations in FTLD patients, it was subsequently shown that PGRN was able to regulate survival and neurite outgrowth of different types of neurons. Primary cultured cortical and hippocampal neurons derived from Grn−/− mice showed deficits in neurite outgrowth and branching, significantly reduced neuronal survival, and increased caspase-mediated apoptosis [68, 69]. PGRN knockdown in NSC-34 motor neurons and human neural cells, differentiated from NHNP cells (a human neural progenitor cell line), also significantly reduced survival [70, 71], whereas PGRN-deficient hippocampal slices were susceptible to glucose deprivation [72]. On the other hand, either overexpression of PGRN or treatment with recombinant PGRN protein increased neurite outgrowth and the survival of primary cortical, hippocampal, and motor neurons [28, 70, 73]. Moreover, in vivo studies using zebrafish showed that PGRN knockdown decreased axonal outgrowth inducing motor neuron deficits, which could be rescued by overexpression of PGRN [74, 75]. Interestingly, overexpression of human PGRN mRNA also rescued human TDP-43-induced axon growth deficits in zebrafish [76].

It is known that PGRN can be cleaved into mature ∼6 kDa granulin peptides as well as intermediate-length cleavage products (as mentioned in the introduction). Whereas the function of intermediate progranulin products in this context remains to be determined, diverse effects of granulins have been reported. Granulin A was shown to either induce cell growth or inhibit cell proliferation in different cell lines, while granulin B presented with inhibitory or antagonistic effects to granulin A [77–79]. Granulin D has been shown to regulate DNA synthesis in cultured astrocytes and glioblastoma cells [80]. Granulins C and E have also been shown to have neurotrophic properties. In hippocampal neurons, granulin C was shown to have comparable neurotrophic effects to granulin E [69], whereas in another study in primary motor neurons and cortical neurons, granulin E but not granulin C had an effect [81]. Moreover, granulin AaE (equivalent to human granulin E in zebrafish) was shown to promote the survival of neuronal cells in zebrafish [82]. Interestingly, deletion of granulin E from PGRN completely abolished the neurotrophic effect of PGRN suggesting that granulin E may be the key domain or region involved in the neurotrophic effect of PGRN [82]. In line with these findings, inhibition of PGRN processing (by SLPI) abolishes PGRN-enhanced survival and neurite outgrowth in cortical neurons [28].

PGRN Neurotrophic Receptors and Signaling Pathways

In both cancer cells and primary neurons, PGRN has been shown to stimulate cell proliferation and promote cell survival through the activation of typical growth factor signal transduction pathways such as extracellular regulated kinase (ERK1/2) and the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) cell survival pathways [59, 60, 68, 83–87]. One study revealed that PGRN treatment stimulated the phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3β) in cultured neurons and knockdown of PGRN in SH-SY5Y cells impaired retinoic acid-induced differentiation and reduced the level of phosphorylated GSK-3β [73]. In addition, loss of PGRN in a human neural progenitor cell line led to an increase in Wnt/β-catenin signaling [71]. The involvement of a wide range of signaling cascades suggests PGRN might function through different neurotrophic receptors. However, thus far, the nature of the neurotrophic receptor(s) in the CNS remains unclear.

Sortilin (SORT1), a member of the vacuolar protein sorting 10 protein (VPS10P) domain receptor family [88], is one of the best-studied cell receptors for PGRN. Like PGRN, SORT1 is highly expressed in neurons in the frontal cortex, one of the most vulnerable brain regions in FTLD-GRN, and SORT1 also has a high binding affinity to PGRN [89]. SORT1 is known to be involved in the trafficking and signaling of several neurotrophins [90]. For instance, SORT1, forming a receptor complex with the common neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), binds to the pro-form of nerve growth factor-β (proNGF) and triggers cell death signaling [91]. However, SORT1 solely functions as a sorting receptor for PGRN [89]. Indeed, multiple studies have shown the neurotrophic effect of PGRN and granulins is independent of SORT1. Either pharmacologic inhibition of the granulin E-SORT1 interaction or deletion of the SORT1 binding site of granulin E failed to abolish the neurotrophic function of granulin E [81]. In support of this notion, knockout or knockdown of SORT1 in mouse and zebrafish does not cause axonal outgrowth defects [81], and loss of SORT1 fails to abrogate the neurotrophic effect of PGRN in cultured neurons [69].

What about other candidate neurotrophic receptors? By using an unbiased antibody-based screen for differential tyrosine phosphorylation levels of 49 different human receptor tyrosine kinases, Neill et al. recently found that PGRN rapidly increased tyrosine phosphorylation of ephrin type A receptor 2 (EphA2) in a human urinary bladder carcinoma cell line [92]. PGRN binds to EphA2 with an affinity comparable to SORT1 (both of them are around the nanomolar range) [89]. PGRN binds to EphA2 on the cell surface and activates both mitogen-activated protein kinase and Akt and promotes capillary morphogenesis (Fig. 2). Separately, proteomic analysis of transgenic mice with inducible neuronal PGRN overexpression predicted activation of Notch signaling pathways in this model [93], and additional experiments confirmed that PGRN can bind to all four Notch receptors through the extracellular domain. PGRN also co-localized with Notch1 in primary dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. Interestingly, upon nerve injury, the expression of Hey1 and Hes (two Notch target genes) increased in Grn overexpression and decreased in Grn−/− mouse DRG neurons compared to wild-type mice. These findings indicate that PGRN can activate Notch and EphA2 in the peripheral nervous system. Given the established survival support roles of EphA2 and Notch, further studies are warranted to determine if basal levels of PGRN activate EphA2 or Notch in the brain.

Finally, we recently identified genetic variants at the GFRA2 locus as novel modifiers of the disease risk in FTLD patients carrying a GRN mutation [37]. GDNF family receptor alpha 2 (GFRA2) is a member of the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) receptor family and is known to function as the preferred receptor for neurturin (NRTN) [94]. GFRA2 binds with NRTN and further recruits and activates a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor known as RET, which can activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt signaling pathways (Fig. 2). The risk haplotype at the GFRA2 locus is associated with lower mRNA levels of GFRA2 in brain tissue as compared to the protective haplotype. Moreover, we determined that PGRN can directly interact with GFRA2 [37]. Notably, GFRA2 is also abundantly expressed in different brain regions, especially in the frontal cortex [37], a vulnerable brain region in FTLD-GRN. While more studies are needed, this work suggests that GFRA2 could potentially function as a signaling receptor for PGRN in the CNS and upregulation of GFRA2 could be considered as a therapeutic strategy.

Role of Inflammation in FTLD-GRN

Overview of PGRN and Inflammation

Although PGRN is widely expressed throughout the body, the expression of PGRN is enriched in the spleen and cells of the hematopoietic lineage, supporting the idea that PGRN is involved in the function and maintenance of the immune system. In particular, GRN expression is enriched in monocytes, dendritic cells, and granulocytes within the blood and microglia in the brain [95]. Further, early work isolated and identified peptide fragments of PGRN from inflammatory cells leading to speculation that PGRN may be involved in inflammation and wound healing [96].

Subsequent studies have found increased levels of PGRN in tissue and biofluids from many types of inflammatory states and conditions, ranging from bacterial and viral infections [97–101], insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes [102–104], liver dysfunction [105], and arthritis [106, 107]. Further, the GRN promoter has multiple binding sites for transcription factors related to inflammation, such as phorbol esters and multiple cytokines involved in the inflammatory response [108]. Indeed, treatment of murine embryo fibroblasts with interleukin-1 (IL-1) or tumor necrosis factor (TNF), two pro-inflammatory cytokines, leads to robust upregulation of GRN expression [109].

These observations led investigators to study whether the upregulation of PGRN was a consequence of inflammation or if PGRN can directly modulate inflammation. Work from the Bateman lab demonstrated that PGRN expression was upregulated during the wound response and PGRN likely functioned as a growth factor to facilitate wound healing [110]. In particular, they found that delivery of extracellular PGRN increased neutrophils, macrophages, fibroblasts, and blood vessel formation within the wound, leading them to conclude PGRN helped stimulate inflammation that is necessary for wound repair. Other labs, however, have found PGRN has the opposite effect in different models of inflammation. In 2002, PGRN (also called proepithelin or PEPI) was reported to have anti-inflammatory activity through blocking TNF activation of neutrophils [18]. In contrast, one of the granulins, granulin B (also called epithelin B), was pro-inflammatory in multiple assays. For example, granulin B inhibited proliferation of epithelial cells and induced the release of IL-8, a chemokine that attracts neutrophils. Work from Kessenbrock et al. found that application of recombinant PGRN can also reduced the influx of neutrophils following immune complex (IC)-stimulated inflammation in vivo [19].

Although some of these observations are conflicting, when considered together, these studies provide compelling evidence that PGRN expression is correlated with inflammation in different model systems and may play a modulatory role in inflammatory pathways. Nevertheless, the precise mechanism(s) how PGRN and granulins might mediate such pleiotropic effects on specific inflammatory cascades is much less clear. Future studies to understand the precise functions of PGRN and granulins will hopefully shine a light on these questions.

PGRN and Central Neuroinflammation

While early work focused on the role of PGRN on inflammation in peripheral tissues, the discovery of GRN mutations in FTLD prompted researchers to investigate whether PGRN was involved in inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS). PGRN is expressed in multiple neuronal populations as well as microglia throughout the brain [23, 111, 112], whereas astrocytes and oligodendrocytes do not appear to express PGRN at significant levels in vivo [113]. Multiple studies have discovered that the expression of PGRN by microglia is dramatically upregulated following an injury or other insults in animal models. For example, spinal cord injury [114], traumatic brain injury [115], injection of the neurotoxin quinolinic acid [116], or the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide [117] all activate microglia and lead to robust upregulation of GRN mRNA and PGRN protein. Most relevant to FTLD is the fact that PGRN levels are elevated across a wide variety of neurodegenerative diseases, which are often associated with neuroinflammation. Indeed, microglial PGRN itself is elevated in FTLD cases not caused by GRN mutations [118]. In contrast, FTLD cases with GRN mutations have reduced immunoreactivity for neuronal and microglia PGRN, supporting the idea that haploinsufficiency of PGRN and granulins extends to multiple cell types in the brain [119, 120]. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, PGRN expression is upregulated in the spinal cord, most likely due to activation of microglia [121]. Expression profiling of microglia from a mouse model of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) found increased levels of PGRN among a host of other genes involved in inflammation, interferon response, and complement pathways. Unbiased expression studies also identified changes in PGRN levels in multiple lysosomal storage disease models, likely driven by activated microglia [122].

Studies have also found increased PGRN expression in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which is especially relevant given the association of the GRN SNP rs5848 that decreases PGRN levels and increases the risk of developing AD [50, 51]. Increased immunoreactivity for PGRN in AD brain tissue labels activated microglia surrounding amyloid plaques as well as dystrophic neurites [13, 112, 113]. This observation extends to mouse models of AD where multiple groups have found increased levels of PGRN associated with amyloid plaques [123–125]. In clinical late-onset AD, higher CSF PGRN levels were associated with more advanced disease stages and cognitive impairment which was thought to reflect microglial activation during disease [126]. Importantly, a recent detailed immunohistochemical analysis of PGRN in AD brains replicated earlier findings that PGRN levels are increased with AD disease status but concluded that the increased PGRN signal is derived primarily from extracellular PGRN associated directly with amyloid beta (Aβ). Thus, further work is needed to understand the specific role of PGRN in AD pathology and pathogenesis [127].

Potential Mechanisms of Neuroinflammation in FILD-GRN

The clearest evidence that PGRN has an important role in central and peripheral inflammation comes from experiments examining the phenotype of Grn-deficient mice (reviewed in depth elsewhere) [57, 128]. Five unique Grn−/− and a novel GrnR493X/R493X knock-in mouse models have been developed thus far [72, 129–133]. All six models share a consistent age-dependent microgliosis and astrogliosis throughout the brain including the cortex, hippocampus, and thalamus [133–136]. Moreover, macrophages and microglia isolated from Grn−/−or GrnR493X/R493X mice have an exacerbated inflammatory response when challenged with pro-inflammatory molecules [137–140]. Further, loss of PGRN leads to microglial upregulation of multiple lysosomal genes, increased production of cytokines and complement, and enhanced synaptic pruning by microglia in Grn−/− mice [138]. The authors suggest that PGRN may normally function as a “brake” to suppress aberrant activation of microglia during aging by facilitating proper phagocytosis and lysosome function. Taken together, it is clear that PGRN plays an important role in decreasing, or modulating, neuroinflammation; however, the precise mechanism(s) by which this is accomplished still needs further investigation. Next, we will examine a few possible mechanisms that could help explain how PGRN may modulate neuroinflammation and how loss of PGRN function contributes to FTLD pathogenesis.

PGRN Anti-inflammatory Activity Through Signaling

A key unresolved question is whether PGRN has inherent anti-inflammatory activity. It is well established that administration of exogenous PGRN has pleiotropic effects in cells, some of which can be considered anti-inflammatory. These observations led many investigators to search for PGRN receptors that may mediate these effects. In 2002, PGRN was reported to decrease inflammation through inhibition of TNF signaling in neutrophils, likely downstream after TNF binding to its receptors [18]. Subsequent work supported an anti-inflammatory effect of PGRN, potentially mediated through the TNF pathway. Extracellular PGRN was found to moderately reduce secretion of IL-8 from human aortic smooth muscle cells induced by TNF treatment [141]. In 2011, Tang et al. reported that PGRN bound directly to the TNF receptors (TNFRSF1A and TNFRSF1A) and functioned as a TNF antagonist [142]. Intriguingly, PGRN bound to TNFRSF1A and TNFRSF1A with a higher affinity compared to TNF, the known ligand. Further, recombinant PGRN was found to block TNF-induced inflammation in multiple cell culture assays and mouse models of TNF activity [142]. These results were initially greeted with excitement by the FTLD community because it might explain how decreased levels of PGRN lead to a pro-inflammatory state and ultimately set the stage for neurodegeneration. Unfortunately, following the original report, multiple pharmaceutical companies (personal communication) and academic labs have been unable to replicate the ability of PGRN to antagonize TNF binding or function [143–148]. The reasons for these discrepancies are unknown. Furthermore, from a broader perspective, it was never clear how an excess of TNF activity, theoretically caused by decreased levels of PGRN, could be the fundamental driver of either FTLD or NCL.

Although the potential anti-inflammatory activity of PGRN is fascinating, the preponderance of evidence suggests that it is unlikely to be mediated through antagonism of TNF activity. Alternatively, the binding of PGRN to other cell surface receptors may modulate inflammation. PGRN has been reported to bind directly, or indirectly, to a number of transmembrane receptors including delta homolog 1 (DLK1) [149], SORT1 [89], Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) [150], Notch1 [93], EphA2 [92], prosaposin (PSAP) mediated binding to the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor (M6PR), low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) [151], tyrosine-protein kinase receptor (Tyro3) [147], and GFRA2 [37]. Besides SORT1, most of these interactions have only been reported once and have not been extensively investigated, especially in the CNS. Moreover, the role of PGRN binding to any of these receptors and downstream effects on inflammation is speculative and needs to be validated and more thoroughly investigated.

The PGRN:Granulin Balance

Granulins are thought to be pro-inflammatory and could be another potential player in inflammation related to decreases in PGRN. The name “granulin” was derived from the fact that they were enriched in granules isolated from granulocytes and speculated to be cytokines [96]. Seminal work by Zhu et al. in 2002 found that PGRN could be cleaved in the extracellular space by elastase released from white blood cells, blocking PGRN’s anti-inflammatory activity [18]. In contrast, the cleaved and released granulins reduced cell growth and produced a pro-inflammatory response. How might this observation be involved in FTLD? Some have speculated that the ratio of circulating PGRN to granulins is altered in FTD-GRN carriers leading to an imbalance, an increase in granulins, and subsequent inflammation. This idea has not been formally tested and awaits the development of antibodies specific to granulins, which is ongoing [120]. Although compelling, this hypothesis does not explain the even greater neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation that occurs in mice and humans completely deficient in PGRN and granulins [52, 54, 134, 152, 153]. Further, the precise pro-inflammatory mechanism for granulins, such as a signaling receptor, is unknown. Additionally, granulins have also been reported to have many beneficial effects, such as enhancing survival of motor neurons in culture [28], inducing neuronal outgrowth and branching [69], enhancing neuron survival and axon growth [154], and protecting retinal photoreceptor cell degeneration [155]. Finally, we, and other labs, have found that granulins are a common, endogenous protein produced in the lysosome of many cells [120, 156, 157]. This would suggest that granulins have a normal, homeostatic function inside the cell and aren’t necessarily pro-inflammatory. In summary, granulins may play divergent roles depending on their location, and unraveling their function both inside of lysosomes and outside of the cell is an important focus of future research.

Contribution of Lysosomal Dysfunction in FTLD-GRN

Involvement of Lysosomal Dysfunction in FTLD-GRN

While the neurotrophic and anti-neuroinflammatory effects of PGRN have been well documented and studied for some time, recent evidence suggested a previously unrecognized but important function of PGRN within lysosomes. Firstly, although PGRN is a secreted protein, its main localization within the cells is in lysosomes [89, 114]. Moreover, at the transcriptional level, GRN is co-regulated with other lysosomal genes such as cathepsin D (CTSD) by transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis [158]. Finally, as discussed in the section “Homozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in GRN Cause Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis”, a complete loss of PGRN due to homozygous loss-of-function GRN mutations leads to NCL, a lysosomal storage disease characterized by the accumulation of autofluorescent storage material (lipofuscin) [52]. Interestingly, lipofuscin accumulation is also consistently seen in the brains of different Grn−/− mouse lines [130, 132, 134, 159, 160]. Accumulation of ubiquitin [72, 130, 132, 134–136] and p62-positive [132, 161, 162] protein aggregates and increased levels of lysosomal proteins such as CTSD and LAMP1/2 [162–164] have also been detected in Grn−/− mice.

But what evidence suggests that even a partial loss of PGRN, such as is the case in FTLD-GRN patients, is sufficient to develop lysosomal dysfunction or NCL-like pathology? First, sphingolipid activator protein (saposin) D and subunit c of mitochondrial ATP synthase (SCMAS), two major protein components of lipofuscin [165, 166], are elevated in patients with FTLD-GRN [163]. In addition, preclinical retinal lipofuscinosis was detected in retinas of heterozygous loss-of-function GRN mutation carriers, and increased lipofuscinosis and intracellular NCL-like storage material also occurred in circulating lymphoblasts as well as postmortem cortex of these patients. Interestingly, the NCL-like pathological changes found in lymphoblasts from heterozygous GRN mutation carriers could be fully rescued by normalizing PGRN expression [167]. Similarly, FTLD-GRN patient induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cortical neurons have been shown to develop NCL-like pathologies including enlarged vesicles and lipofuscin accumulation [168]. Together, these findings strongly suggest that PGRN plays vital roles in lysosomes and dysfunction of the lysosomes due to (even a partial) loss of PGRN may be an important disease mechanism in FTLD-GRN. To provide further context to these recent developments, we will next summarize current insights into lysosomal trafficking of PGRN, its processing into granulins within lysosomes, and the functional evidence of the involvement of PGRN and granulins in the regulation of a growing list of lysosomal enzymes.

Lysosomal Trafficking of PGRN

Using an alkaline phosphatase-mediated cell surface binding assay, Hu et al. identified SORT1 as a high-affinity binding cell surface receptor for PGRN [89]. PGRN binds to the beta-propeller region of SORT1 in the extracellular domain through its last three amino acids (QLL) [89, 169]. SORT1 is a well-known sorting receptor [170]. The cytoplasmic tail of SORT1 encodes two sorting motifs, a tyrosine-based YSVL motif and an acidic dileucine cluster motif, which facilitate both endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of SORT1 [171]. Further studies found SORT1 functions as a sorting receptor for PGRN. It binds to PGRN both intracellularly and extracellularly and facilitates its lysosomal trafficking from the biosynthetic pathway and from the extracellular space [89] (Fig. 3). Overexpression of SORT1 reduces extracellular PGRN levels, whereas downregulation of SORT1 or abolishing the binding between PGRN and SORT1 increases extracellular PGRN levels [89, 169, 172, 173]. Interestingly, genetic knockout of Sort1 in Grn+/− mice completely corrects PGRN serum levels from the haploinsufficiency state back to normal [89]. Notably, Carrasquillo et al. took a human genetic-based approach and performed a genome-wide association analysis of common genetic variants with human plasma PGRN levels. Genetic variants at the SORT1 locus were found to be the most significantly associated with plasma PGRN levels, suggesting that differences in SORT1 expression (predicted to result from these variants) also regulate extracellular levels of PGRN in vivo [173].

Importantly, while a complete loss of Sort1 in mice leads to a robust accumulation of Pgrn in serum, a substantial amount of Pgrn (∼50%) can still be detected in lysosomes in cortical neurons derived from these mice suggesting the existing of alternative lysosomal pathway(s) for PGRN, in addition to SORT1 [89]. Using an unbiased proteomic approach, Zhou et al. identified PSAP as a strong binding partner of PGRN [151]. Like PGRN, PSAP is also a secreted glycoprotein that is predominantly localized to lysosomes [174]. Similar to the binding to SORT1, PSAP binds to PGRN within the cell as well as in the extracellular space. Through further binding to two trafficking receptors (M6PR and LRP1), PSAP allows PGRN a piggyback ride and delivers it into lysosomes [151] (Fig. 3). Disruption of the binding of PGRN and PSAP completely abolishes the PSAP-mediated lysosomal trafficking of PGRN from both the biosynthetic pathway and extracellular space [175]. Loss of Psap in mice increases serum Pgrn level to a similar extent as loss of Sort1 (∼five- to sixfold) [89, 151]. Interestingly, Nicholson et al. independently demonstrated a physical interaction between PGRN and PSAP in functional follow-up experiments after genetic variants at the PSAP locus were found to be associated with human plasma PGRN levels [176].

Notably, PSAP-mediated lysosomal trafficking of PGRN is independent from the SORT1 pathway since loss of SORT1 failed to abolish PSAP-mediated lysosomal trafficking of PGRN. Moreover, the deficits of lysosomal trafficking of PGRN that resulted from the loss of PSAP can be fully rescued by overexpression of SORT1 [151]. Thus, the SORT1 and PSAP pathways are two complementary pathways that regulate the lysosomal trafficking of PGRN. The contribution that each of these two pathways plays in the lysosomal trafficking of PGRN might be determined by the expression levels or abundance of the pathway components in different types of tissues and different developmental stages. Indeed, SORT1 is almost undetectable in mouse fibroblasts, and as a consequence, the lysosomal trafficking is completely dependent on PSAP, whereas in neurons where both SORT1 and PSAP/LRP1/M6PR are highly expressed, both pathways contribute to the lysosomal trafficking of PGRN. Taken together, these findings suggest SORT1 and PSAP pathways coordinate with each other to regulate the lysosomal trafficking of PGRN in a spatiotemporal-dependent manner. Further studies on examining lysosomal localization of PGRN in Psap and Sort1 double-knockout mice will be important to reveal whether other pathway(s) might still exist.

Lysosomal Processing of PGRN

PGRN and PSAP share multiple biological features including lysosomal localization and trafficking mechanisms. In addition, PGRN and PSAP are both precursor proteins which can be further processed into a group of smaller mature functional proteins. Whereas PGRN had been shown to be proteolytically processed into seven and a half granulin peptides in the extracellular space [18], PSAP is proteolytically processed into four saposin peptides within lysosomes [177]. Given these similarities, it was hypothesized that PGRN, like PSAP, could be processed into granulin peptides within lysosomes [178], which was eventually experimentally demonstrated by three independent groups in 2017 [120, 156, 157] (Fig. 3). Multiple lines of evidence were provided to support this important discovery: first, mature granulins were detected in multiple different cell lines including Hela, HEK293T, H4, SH-SY5Y, SW13, and primary fibroblasts as well as multiple different tissues such as brain, liver, spleen, kidney, and heart [120, 157]. Second, either disruption of the lysosomal trafficking of PGRN or inhibition of lysosomal activities abolished the generation of granulins suggesting that the intracellular processing of PGRN indeed occurs within lysosomes [120, 157]. Finally, in vitro cleavage assays directly showed multiple lysosomal proteases such as cathepsin L, B, and D are able to cleave PGRN into granulins [120, 156, 157]. The cleavage effects of these lysosomal proteases were further verified within cells by using different cathepsin knockout mouse fibroblasts [157]. Of note, in addition to stable granulins, multiple intermediate products, like di- or multi-granulin peptides, were also produced [120, 156, 157]. The observation of different cleavage patterns of PGRN upon incubation with different lysosomal proteases [157] suggested that the lysosomal processing of PGRN might require the coordination of different lysosomal proteases, further highlighting the complexity of PGRN processing and its regulation. Most important in the context of FTLD is the fact that haploinsufficiency of PGRN in Grn+/− mice and FTLD-GRN patients was shown to lead to a comparable reduction of the granulin peptides [120, 157]. Taken together, these findings clearly demonstrated that PGRN is converted into granulins within lysosomes. Further study toward the understanding of the function of individual granulins as well as its processing intermediates in lysosomes might ultimately reveal the disease mechanism of both NCL and FTLD caused by GRN mutation.

Lysosomal Function of PGRN

Effect on PSAP

In the section “Lysosomal Trafficking of PGRN”, we described how PSAP binds to PGRN, thereby offering PGRN a way into lysosomes through PSAP receptors: LRP1 and M6PR [151]. Interestingly, the reverse also appears to take place. Specifically, PGRN can facilitate the lysosomal trafficking of PSAP through its receptor SORT1 [26]. Loss of Grn in mice compromised the neuronal lysosomal targeting of Psap leading to a reduction of neuronal lysosomal Psap and saposins and an increase of Psap in serum. Loss of Sort1 also leads to a comparable increase of Psap in serum as compared to what is seen upon Grn loss. Similarly, neuronal PSAP and saposins were found to be decreased in FTLD-GRN but not control individuals or FTLD patients with tau pathology. Furthermore, it is known that loss of PSAP or saposins can also cause lysosomal storage disease [177]. Moreover, loss of Psap in mice results in FTLD-like behavioral phenotypes as well as FTLD-like pathologies including accumulation of phospho-TDP-43 (pTDP-43) and massive gliosis [26]. Together, these findings suggest that PGRN indirectly influences lysosomal function by controlling the lysosomal level of PSAP and saposins and that reduced levels of neuronal lysosomal PSAP and saposins due to the haploinsufficiency of PGRN may be a contributing factor in the development or progression of FTLD-GRN.

Effect on CTSD

Recently, multiple groups independently demonstrated a surprising role of PGRN and granulins in the regulation of cathepsin D (CTSD) enzymatic activity [167, 168, 180, 181]. CTSD is an important aspartyl protease responsible for the degradation of proteins in lysosomes. PGRN directly interacts with CTSD [168, 180, 181] and increases its enzymatic activity [168, 180]. Furthermore, granulin E is also able to bind CTSD [181], and co-incubation of granulin E with CTSD is sufficient to stimulate the proteolytic activity of CTSD in vitro [168, 180]. In support of the function of PGRN in CTSD activity regulation, loss of Grn in different mouse tissues such as brain, liver, and spleen [180, 181] as well as the partial loss of PGRN in human fibroblasts [167] and iPSC-derived human cortical neurons from FTLD-GRN patients [168] resulted in a reduction of CTSD activity. In fact, elevated CTSD protein level was detected in both postmortem brains of FTLD-GRN patients [163] and Grn-deficient mouse tissues [163, 180], likely due to a feedback loop resulting from the reduced CTSD activity. Most recently, in vitro experiments found PGRN may enhance the conversion of the CTSD precursor to mature CTSD in a concentration-dependent manner [182]. Combined with the fact that loss of Ctsd in mice was shown to induce pTDP-43 aggregates [163], these findings suggest that reduced CTSD activity due to PGRN haploinsufficiency might play a role in the development of FTLD-GRN.

Effect on GBA

An important association of PGRN with glucocerebrosidase (GBA), a lysosomal enzyme involved in the glucocerebroside degradation, has also been revealed [183–187]. Homozygous GBA mutations cause Gaucher disease (GD), a common lysosomal storage disease [188], whereas heterozygous GBA mutations are associated with Parkinson’s disease and Lewy-body dementia [189]. Jian et al. recently reported an association of decreased serum PGRN levels with GD [183]. In the animal study, they showed that under challenging conditions such as ovalbumin-induced chronic inflammation or during aging, Grn−/− mice develop GD-like phenotypes, including typical Gaucher-like cells in lung, spleen, and bone marrow as well as GD-like lysosomal morphological changes [183]. Mechanistically, they speculated that loss of PGRN leads to disruption of lysosomal trafficking of GBA, but the enzymatic activity of GBA was not affected [183, 184]. Inconsistently, loss of Grn in mice has been shown to result in a significant reduction of GBA activity in multiple different tissues including liver, spleen, and brain [185]. The reduced GBA enzymatic activity has been further confirmed in postmortem brains from FTLD-GRN patients [187]. Importantly, comparable amounts of GBA were detected in the lysosomal fractions of wild-type andGrn−/− mouse tissues strongly arguing that this Grn deficiency-mediated reduction in GBA activity is unlikely due to its lysosomal trafficking deficits [185]. Notably, although PGRN and granulins bind to GBA, addition of recombinant PGRN or granulins fails to increase GBA activity in vitro suggesting the contribution of indirect mechanisms. In this regard, it is known that saposins, the processing products from PSAP, positively regulate GBA activity [190]. CTSD is the major protease for PSAP processing [191], and its activity is further regulated by PGRN as described above [167, 168, 180, 181]. Thus, it is possible that PGRN regulates GBA activity through its control on the CTSD-PSAP-saposin axis. Indeed, a recent study showed loss of PGRN impairs the processing of PSAP to saposin C and the treatment of saposin C rescued the reduction of GBA activity in PGRN-deficient cells [186].

Effect on HexA

Most recently, PGRN has been associated with β-hexosaminidase A (HexA) [192], a lysosomal enzyme that is involved in GM2 ganglioside degradation. Loss of Hex A results in GM2 ganglioside accumulation, leading to Tay-Sachs disease (TSD), a typical lysosomal storage disease [193]. PGRN binds to HexA and increases the enzymatic activity and lysosomal delivery of HexA. Both aged and ovalbumin-challenged adult Grn-deficient mice were shown to have significant GM2 ganglioside accumulation and the appearance of typical TSD cells containing zebra bodies [192]. Treatment of either recombinant PGRN or Pcgin, an engineered PGRN derivative, reversed PGRN deficiency-induced lysosomal accumulation of GM2 ganglioside.

Lessons from TMEM106B

Genetic studies have clearly established TMEM106B variants as genetic modifiers of disease risk in GRN mutation carriers [37, 194, 195]. While the functional variant(s) responsible for the risk-modifying effect remain largely unknown, multiple studies have suggested that the “risk” haplotype is associated with higher levels of transmembrane protein 106B (TMEM106B) as compared to the “protective” haplotype [194, 196]. Mechanistically, it has been suggested that a noncoding variant could change the transcription of TMEM106B by altering chromatin architecture [196]; however, a role of the coding p.T185S variant cannot be excluded [197–199].

Given that TMEM106B is a type II transmembrane protein with its main intracellular localization at lysosomes [198, 200, 201], this genetic finding provides independent support for the important role of PGRN in lysosomes and its possible dysfunction in FTLD-GRN. Overexpression of TMEM106B in vitro results in multiple lysosomal dysfunctions, including enlarged lysosomal size, reduced lysosomal pH, decreased degradation capacity of endocytic cargo, and deficits of endolysosomal trafficking [198–202], eventually leading to cell death [203]. Elevated levels of TMEM106B have been found in postmortem brains of FTLD-TDP patients [200, 204] as well as brains of Grn−/− mice [160]. Furthermore, increased TMEM106B exacerbated the FTLD-related pathologies such as lipofuscin and lysosome dysfunction in Grn−/− brains at old age [160]. Intriguingly, loss of Tmem106b in Grn−/− mice was shown to ameliorate both the lysosomal and FTLD-related phenotypes in young Grn−/− mice [205]. Other studies, however, failed to observe noticeable benefits from the loss of Tmem106b in heterozygous Grn+/− mice and in C9orf72-repeat overexpressing mice, a mouse model for another type of FTD-TDP, where genetic studies had also identified a disease-modifying effect for TMEM106B haplotypes [206, 207]. Moreover, our unpublished work shows loss of Tmem106b results in myelination deficits and further loss of Tmem106b in Grn−/− mice exacerbates its FTLD-related pathologies leading to severe motor deficits (personal communication). These studies underscore a functional interaction between TMEM106B and PGRN, but additional mechanistic insight into the biology of either one of these proteins remains to be learned. They also illustrate that more work is needed before lowering TMEM106B can be considered as a therapeutic strategy in GRN carriers.

Concluding Remarks

Almost 14 years after the initial discovery of GRN mutations in FTLD patients, important new insights into its function and dysfunction have emerged. At least three independent disease mechanisms have been proposed to contribute to the development of FTLD-GRN: a loss of neurotrophic support, an increase in neuroinflammation, and lysosomal dysfunction (Fig. 4). In individual patients, a combination of these pathways may well be involved, potentially modified by additional genetic and/or environmental factors. In parallel to this increase in knowledge, global efforts have emerged to prepare the field for PGRN-related clinical trials by focusing on the identification of cohorts of mutation carriers and the development of robust biomarkers of disease onset and progression [208, 209]. It is the hope that the significant progress in this field will lay the foundation for the future development of successful therapies for FTLD-GRN. However, until then, key outstanding questions remain to be answered in relation to the normal function of PGRN and its role in disease, including but not limited to: (1) What is the lysosomal function of PGRN and/or granulins? (2) Which receptors are most critical for the neurotrophic and inflammatory activities of PGRN and granulins? (3) How does the PGRN-granulin balance affect disease development or progression? (4) What is the functional interaction between PGRN and granulins and TMEM106B within lysosomes? Future studies should focus on these important topics.

Fig. 1 PGRN, granulins, and associated disease phenotypes. Schematic of a part of the genomic structure of the progranulin gene (GRN) with 12 coding exons represented by green boxes. Following mRNA transcription and translation, the precursor protein progranulin (PGRN) is generated consisting of a signal-peptide, seven full-length granulin domains (granulins G, F, B, A, C, D, E) and one half-length granulin domain (granulin P). PGRN can be further cleaved by multiple enzymes to generate individual granulins. The cleavage of PGRN can be inhibited through its binding to secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI). Heterozygous loss-of-function GRN mutations which reduce PGRN levels to 50% of normal levels cause frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), whereas homozygous loss-of-function GRN mutations with no residual PGRN expression cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL). NE neutrophil elastase; PR3 proteinase 3; MMP matrix metalloproteinase; ADAMTS-7 a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 7

Fig. 2 Possible PGRN neurotrophic receptors and signaling pathways. Progranulin (PGRN) may bind to ephrin type A receptor 2 (EphA2) on the neuronal cell surface in the presence of ephrinA (from an adjacent cell) and activate its receptor tyrosine kinase, initiating neurotrophic signaling through MAPK/ERK and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways. PGRN might bind to Notch on the neuronal cell surface in the presence of Notch ligand (from adjacent cell) and trigger its cleavage to release the intracellular domain of the Notch protein (NICD), which then moves to the nucleus and increases the expression of genes involved in cell survival. PGRN might bind to GDNF family receptor alpha 2 (GFRA2) and further recruit and activate a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor RET, which can activate MAPK/ERK and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways. MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase; ERK extracellular regulated kinase; PI3K phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase; Akt protein kinase B

Fig. 3 Lysosomal trafficking and function of PGRN. Progranulin (PGRN) is targeted into lysosomes through either sortilin 1 (SORT1) or PSAP-LRP1/M6PR pathways from the extracellular space and trans-Golgi network (TGN). Lysosomal targeted PGRN is further processed into stable granulin peptides (GRNs) by lysosomal enzymes including cathepsin L (CTSL), cathepsin B (CTSB), and cathepsin D (CTSD). Recent work provided some first insights into the role of PGRN in lysosomes. It was suggested that PGRN may indirectly regulate lysosomal function by controlling the lysosomal trafficking and processing of prosaposin (PSAP) or may directly regulate lysosomal enzymes such as CTSD, glucocerebrosidase (GBA), and β-hexosaminidase A (HEXA) in concert with GRNs. TMEM106B might either directly or indirectly interact with PGRN and GRNs to co-regulate lysosomal function. M6PR mannose-6-phosphate receptor; LRP1 low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1

Fig. 4 Summary of potential disease mechanisms in FTLD-GRN. Progranulin (PGRN) is secreted by neurons and microglia in the brain, which can have beneficial activity through neurotrophic support and/or suppressing inflammation, both of which are decreased by PGRN haploinsufficiency. PGRN is normally trafficked to the lysosome in neurons and microglia, processed into granulins, which are thought to have a homeostatic function. The extracellular role of granulins in the brain is unclear but may increase inflammation. In neurons, decreased lysosomal function leads to defects in protein homeostasis and accumulation of ubiquitinated TDP-43 inclusions. In microglia, lysosome dysfunction can activate TFEB, which may exacerbate the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and increase synaptic pruning, contributing to neuronal toxicity and degeneration


References

1. Graff-Radford NR , Woodruff BK (2007) Frontotemporal dementia. Semin Neurol 27 (1 ):48–57 17226741
2. Rascovsky K , Hodges JR , Knopman D , Mendez MF , Kramer JH , Neuhaus J (2011) Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain 134 (Pt 9 ):2456–2477 21810890
3. Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Kertesz A , Mendez M , Cappa SF (2011) Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology 76 (11 ):1006–1014 21325651
4. Moore KM , Nicholas J , Grossman M , McMillan CT , Irwin DJ , Massimo L (2020) Age at symptom onset and death and disease duration in genetic frontotemporal dementia: an international retrospective cohort study. Lancet Neurol 19 (2 ):145–156 31810826
5. Ratnavalli E , Brayne C , Dawson K , Hodges JR (2002) The prevalence of frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 58 (11 ):1615–1621 12058088
6. Rosso SM , Donker Kaat L , Baks T , Joosse M , de Koning I , Pijnenburg Y (2003) Frontotemporal dementia in The Netherlands: patient characteristics and prevalence estimates from a population-based study. Brain 126 (Pt 9 ):2016–2022 12876142
7. Goldman JS , Farmer JM , Wood EM , Johnson JK , Boxer A , Neuhaus J (2005) Comparison of family histories in FTLD subtypes and related tauopathies. Neurology 65 (11 ):1817–1819 16344531
8. Hutton M , Lendon CL , Rizzu P , Baker M , Froelich S , Houlden H (1998) Association of missense and 5’-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17. Nature 393 (6686 ):702–705 9641683
9. Poorkaj P , Bird TD , Wijsman E , Nemens E , Garruto RM , Anderson L (1998) Tau is a candidate gene for chromosome 17 frontotemporal dementia. Ann Neurol 43 (6 ):815–825 9629852
10. Spillantini MG , Murrell JR , Goedert M , Farlow MR , Klug A , Ghetti B (1998) Mutation in the tau gene in familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 (13 ):7737–7741 9636220
11. Rademakers R , Cruts M , Dermaut B , Sleegers K , Rosso SM , Van den Broeck M (2002) Tau negative frontal lobe dementia at 17q21: significant fine-mapping of the candidate region to a 4.8 cM interval. Mol Psychiatry 7 (10 ):1064–1074 12476321
12. Cruts M , Gijselinck I , van der Zee J , Engelborghs S , Wils H , Pirici D (2006) Null mutations in progranulin cause ubiquitin-positive frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17q21. Nature 442 (7105 ):920–924 16862115
13. Baker M , Mackenzie IR , Pickering-Brown SM , Gass J , Rademakers R , Lindholm C (2006) Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17. Nature 442 (7105 ):916–919 16862116
14. Neumann M , Sampathu DM , Kwong LK , Truax AC , Micsenyi MC , Chou TT (2006) Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 314 (5796 ):130–133 17023659
15. Arai T , Hasegawa M , Akiyama H , Ikeda K , Nonaka T , Mori H (2006) TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 351 (3 ):602–611 17084815
16. Mackenzie IR , Neumann M , Baborie A , Sampathu DM , Du Plessis D , Jaros E (2011) A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology. Acta Neuropathol 122 (1 ):111–113 21644037
17. Bateman A , Bennett HP (1998) Granulins: the structure and function of an emerging family of growth factors. J Endocrinol 158 (2 ):145–151 9771457
18. Zhu J , Nathan C , Jin W , Sim D , Ashcroft GS , Wahl SM (2002) Conversion of proepithelin to epithelins: roles of SLPI and elastase in host defense and wound repair. Cell 111 (6 ):867–878 12526812
19. Kessenbrock K , Frohlich L , Sixt M , Lammermann T , Pfister H , Bateman A (2008) Proteinase 3 and neutrophil elastase enhance inflammation in mice by inactivating antiinflammatory progranulin. J Clin Invest 118 (7 ):2438–2447 18568075
20. Suh HS , Choi N , Tarassishin L , Lee SC (2012) Regulation of progranulin expression in human microglia and proteolysis of progranulin by matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12). PLoS One 7 (4 ):e35115
21. Butler GS , Dean RA , Tam EM , Overall CM (2008) Pharmacoproteomics of a metalloproteinase hydroxamate inhibitor in breast cancer cells: dynamics of membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase-mediated membrane protein shedding. Mol Cell Biol 28 (15 ):4896–4914 18505826
22. Bai XH , Wang DW , Kong L , Zhang Y , Luan Y , Kobayashi T (2009) ADAMTS-7, a direct target of PTHrP, adversely regulates endochondral bone growth by associating with and inactivating GEP growth factor. Mol Cell Biol 29 (15 ):4201–4219 19487464
23. Daniel R , He Z , Carmichael KP , Halper J , Bateman A (2000) Cellular localization of gene expression for progranulin. J Histochem Cytochem 48 (7 ):999–1009 10858277
24. Daniel R , Daniels E , He Z , Bateman A (2003) Progranulin (acrogranin/PC cell-derived growth factor/granulin-epithelin precursor) is expressed in the placenta, epidermis, microvasculature, and brain during murine development. Dev Dyn 227 (4 ):593–599 12889069
25. Zhang Y , Chen K , Sloan SA , Bennett ML , Scholze AR , O’Keeffe S (2014) An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 34 (36 ):11929–11947 25186741
26. Zhou X , Sun L , Bracko O , Choi JW , Jia Y , Nana AL (2017) Impaired prosaposin lysosomal trafficking in frontotemporal lobar degeneration due to progranulin mutations. Nat Commun 8 :15277 28541286
27. Bateman A , Bennett HP (2009) The granulin gene family: from cancer to dementia. BioEssays 31 (11 ):1245–1254 19795409
28. Van Damme P , Van Hoecke A , Lambrechts D , Vanacker P , Bogaert E , van Swieten J (2008) Progranulin functions as a neurotrophic factor to regulate neurite outgrowth and enhance neuronal survival. J Cell Biol 181 (1 ):37–41 18378771
29. Paushter DH , Du H , Feng T , Hu F (2018) The lysosomal function of progranulin, a guardian against neurodegeneration. Acta Neuropathol 136 (1 ):1–17 29744576
30. Rademakers R , Neumann M , Mackenzie IR (2012) Advances in understanding the molecular basis of frontotemporal dementia. Nat Rev Neurol 8 (8 ):423–434 22732773
31. Clot F , Rovelet-Lecrux A , Lamari F , Noel S , Keren B , Camuzat A (2014) Partial deletions of the GRN gene are a cause of frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurogenetics 15 (2 ):95–100 24469240
32. Rovelet-Lecrux A , Deramecourt V , Legallic S , Maurage CA , Le Ber I , Brice A (2008) Deletion of the progranulin gene in patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration or Parkinson disease. Neurobiol Dis 31 (1 ):41–45 18479928
33. Gijselinck I , van der Zee J , Engelborghs S , Goossens D , Peeters K , Mattheijssens M (2008) Progranulin locus deletion in frontotemporal dementia. Hum Mutat 29 (1 ):53–58 18157829
34. Pinarbasi ES , Karamyshev AL , Tikhonova EB , Wu IH , Hudson H , Thomas PJ (2018) Pathogenic signal sequence mutations in progranulin disrupt SRP interactions required for mRNA stability. Cell Rep 23 (10 ):2844–2851 29874572
35. Shankaran SS , Capell A , Hruscha AT , Fellerer K , Neumann M , Schmid B (2008) Missense mutations in the progranulin gene linked to frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-immunoreacti ve inclusions reduce progranulin production and secretion. J Biol Chem 283 (3 ):1744–1753 17984093
36. Saracino D , Sellami L , Clot F , Camuzat A , Lamari F , Rucheton B (2020) The missense p.Trp7Arg mutation in GRN gene leads to progranulin haploinsufficiency. Neurobiol Aging 85 :154 e9–154e11
37. Pottier C , Zhou X , Perkerson RB 3rd , Baker M , Jenkins GD , Serie DJ (2018) Potential genetic modifiers of disease risk and age at onset in patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration and GRN mutations: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurol 17 (6 ):548–558 29724592
38. Benussi L , Rademakers R , Rutherford NJ , Wojtas A , Glionna M , Paterlini A (2013) Estimating the age of the most common Italian GRN mutation: walking back to Canossa times. J Alzheimers Dis 33 (1 ):69–76 22890101
39. Ghidoni R , Benussi L , Glionna M , Franzoni M , Binetti G (2008) Low plasma progranulin levels predict progranulin mutations in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurology 71 (16 ):1235–1239 18768919
40. Finch N , Baker M , Crook R , Swanson K , Kuntz K , Surtees R (2009) Plasma progranulin levels predict progranulin mutation status in frontotemporal dementia patients and asymptomatic family members. Brain 132 (Pt 3 ):583–591 19158106
41. Sleegers K , Brouwers N , Van Damme P , Engelborghs S , Gijselinck I , van der Zee J (2009) Serum biomarker for progranulin-associated frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Ann Neurol 65 (5 ):603–609 19288468
42. Galimberti D , Fumagalli GG , Fenoglio C , Cioffi SMG , Arighi A , Serpente M (2018) Progranulin plasma levels predict the presence of GRN mutations in asymptomatic subjects and do not correlate with brain atrophy: results from the GENFI study. Neurobiol Aging 62 :245 e9–245e12
43. Karch CM , Ezerskiy L , Redaelli V , Giovagnoli AR , Tiraboschi P , Pelliccioni G (2016) Missense mutations in progranulin gene associated with frontotemporal lobar degeneration: study of pathogenetic features. Neurobiol Aging 38 :215 e1–215e12
44. Wang J , Van Damme P , Cruchaga C , Gitcho MA , Vidal JM , Seijo-Martinez M (2010) Pathogenic cysteine mutations affect progranulin function and production of mature granulins. J Neurochem 112 (5 ):1305–1315 20028451
45. Kleinberger G , Capell A , Brouwers N , Fellerer K , Sleegers K , Cruts M (2016) Reduced secretion and altered proteolytic processing caused by missense mutations in progranulin. Neurobiol Aging 39 :220 e17–220 e26
46. Rademakers R , Eriksen JL , Baker M , Robinson T , Ahmed Z , Lincoln SJ (2008) Common variation in the miR-659 binding-site of GRN is a major risk factor for TDP43-positive frontotemporal dementia. Hum Mol Genet 17 (23 ):3631–3642 18723524
47. Pottier C , Ren Y , Perkerson RB 3rd , Baker M , Jenkins GD , van Blitterswijk M (2019) Genome-wide analyses as part of the international FTLD-TDP whole-genome sequencing consortium reveals novel disease risk factors and increases support for immune dysfunction in FTLD. Acta Neuropathol 137 (6 ):879–899 30739198
48. Hokkanen SRK , Kero M , Kaivola K , Hunter S , Keage HAD , Kiviharju A (2019) Putative risk alleles for LATE-NC with hippocampal sclerosis in population-representative autopsy cohorts. Brain Pathol 30 (2 ):364–372 31376286
49. Nho K , Saykin AJ , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I , Nelson PT (2016) Hippocampal sclerosis of aging, a common Alzheimer’s disease ‘mimic’: risk genotypes are associated with brain atrophy outside the temporal lobe. J Alzheimers Dis 52 (1 ):373–383 27003218
50. Sheng J , Su L , Xu Z , Chen G (2014) Progranulin polymorphism rs5848 is associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Gene 542 (2 ):141–145 24680777
51. Xu HM , Tan L , Wan Y , Tan MS , Zhang W , Zheng ZJ (2017) PGRN is associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: a case-control replication study and meta-analysis. Mol Neurobiol 54 (2 ):1187–1195 26820675
52. Smith KR , Damiano J , Franceschetti S , Carpenter S , Canafoglia L , Morbin M (2012) Strikingly different clinicopathological phenotypes determined by progranulin-mutation dosage. Am J Hum Genet 90 (6 ):1102–1107 22608501
53. Mole SE , Anderson G , Band HA , Berkovic SF , Cooper JD , Kleine Holthaus SM (2019) Clinical challenges and future therapeutic approaches for neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Lancet Neurol 18 (1 ):107–116 30470609
54. Huin V , Barbier M , Bottani A , Lobrinus JA , Clot F , Lamari F (2020) Homozygous GRN mutations: new phenotypes and new insights into pathological and molecular mechanisms. Brain 143 (1 ):303–319 31855245
55. Rademakers R , Baker M , Gass J , Adamson J , Huey ED , Momeni P (2007) Phenotypic variability associated with progranulin haploinsufficiency in patients with the common 1477C--&gt;T (Arg493X) mutation: an international initiative. Lancet Neurol 6 (10 ):857–868 17826340
56. Toh H , Chitramuthu BP , Bennett HP , Bateman A (2011) Structure, function, and mechanism of progranulin; the brain and beyond. J Mol Neurosci 45 (3 ):538–548 21691802
57. Chitramuthu BP , Bennett HPJ , Bateman A (2017) Progranulin: a new avenue towards the understanding and treatment of neurodegenerative disease. Brain 140 (12 ):3081–3104 29053785
58. He Z , Bateman A (1999) Progranulin gene expression regulates epithelial cell growth and promotes tumor growth in vivo. Cancer Res 59 (13 ):3222–3229 10397269
59. Lu R , Serrero G (2001) Mediation of estrogen mitogenic effect in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells by PC-cell-derived growth factor (PCDGF/granulin precursor). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 (1 ):142–147 11134521
60. He Z , Ismail A , Kriazhev L , Sadvakassova G , Bateman A (2002) Progranulin (PC-cell-derived growth factor/acrogranin) regulates invasion and cell survival. Cancer Res 62 (19 ):5590–5596 12359772
61. Tangkeangsirisin W , Hayashi J , Serrero G (2004) PC cell-derived growth factor mediates tamoxifen resistance and promotes tumor growth of human breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 64 (5 ):1737–1743 14996734
62. Kim WE , Serrero G (2006) PC cell-derived growth factor stimulates proliferation and confers Trastuzumab resistance to Her-2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 12 (14 Pt 1):4192–4199 16857791
63. Pizarro GO , Zhou XC , Koch A , Gharib M , Raval S , Bible K (2007) Prosurvival function of the granulin-epithelin precursor is important in tumor progression and chemoresponse. Int J Cancer 120 (11 ):2339–2343 17266030
64. Zhang H , Serrero G (1998) Inhibition of tumorigenicity of the teratoma PC cell line by transfection with antisense cDNA for PC cell-derived growth factor (PCDGF, epithelin/granulin precursor). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 (24 ):14202–14207 9826678
65. Lu R , Serrero G (2000) Inhibition of PC cell-derived growth factor (PCDGF, epithelin/granulin precursor) expression by antisense PCDGF cDNA transfection inhibits tumorigenicity of the human breast carcinoma cell line MDA-MB-468. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 (8 ):3993–3998 10760271
66. Chen XY , Li JS , Liang QP , He DZ , Zhao J (2008) Expression of PC cell-derived growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and their clinicopathologic significance. Chin Med J 121 (10 ):881–886 18706200
67. Cheung ST , Wong SY , Leung KL , Chen X , So S , Ng IO (2004) Granulin-epithelin precursor overexpression promotes growth and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 10 (22 ):7629–7636 15569995
68. Kleinberger G , Wils H , Ponsaerts P , Joris G , Timmermans JP , Van Broeckhoven C (2010) Increased caspase activation and decreased TDP-43 solubility in progranulin knockout cortical cultures. J Neurochem 115 (3 ):735–747 20731760
69. Gass J , Lee WC , Cook C , Finch N , Stetler C , Jansen-West K (2012) Progranulin regulates neuronal outgrowth independent of sortilin. Mol Neurodegener 7 :33 22781549
70. Ryan CL , Baranowski DC , Chitramuthu BP , Malik S , Li Z , Cao M (2009) Progranulin is expressed within motor neurons and promotes neuronal cell survival. BMC Neurosci 10 :130 19860916
71. Rosen EY , Wexler EM , Versano R , Coppola G , Gao F , Winden KD (2011) Functional genomic analyses identify pathways dysregulated by progranulin deficiency, implicating Wnt signaling. Neuron 71 (6 ):1030–1042 21943601
72. Yin F , Banerjee R , Thomas B , Zhou P , Qian L , Jia T (2010) Exaggerated inflammation, impaired host defense, and neuropathology in progranulin-deficient mice. J Exp Med 207 (1 ):117–128 20026663
73. Gao X , Joselin AP , Wang L , Kar A , Ray P , Bateman A (2010) Progranulin promotes neurite outgrowth and neuronal differentiation by regulating GSK-3beta. Protein Cell 1 (6 ):552–562 21204008
74. Chitramuthu BP , Baranowski DC , Kay DG , Bateman A , Bennett HP (2010) Progranulin modulates zebrafish motoneuron development in vivo and rescues truncation defects associated with knockdown of survival motor neuron 1. Mol Neurodegener 5 :41 20946666
75. Laird AS , Van Hoecke A , De Muynck L , Timmers M , Van den Bosch L , Van Damme P (2010) Progranulin is neurotrophic in vivo and protects against a mutant TDP-43 induced axonopathy. PLoS One 5 (10 ):e13368
76. Chitramuthu BP , Kay DG , Bateman A , Bennett HP (2017) Neurotrophic effects of progranulin in vivo in reversing motor neuron defects caused by over or under expression of TDP-43 or FUS. PLoS One 12 (3 ):e0174784
77. Shoyab M , McDonald VL , Byles C , Todaro GJ , Plowman GD (1990) Epithelins 1 and 2: isolation and characterization of two cysteine-rich growth-modulating proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 (20 ):7912–7916 2236009
78. Plowman GD , Green JM , Neubauer MG , Buckley SD , McDonald VL , Todaro GJ (1992) The epithelin precursor encodes two proteins with opposing activities on epithelial cell growth. J Biol Chem 267 (18 ):13073–13078 1618805
79. Culouscou JM , Carlton GW , Shoyab M (1993) Biochemical analysis of the epithelin receptor. J Biol Chem 268 (14 ):10458–10462 8387520
80. Liau LM , Lallone RL , Seitz RS , Buznikov A , Gregg JP , Kornblum HI (2000) Identification of a human glioma-associated growth factor gene, granulin, using differential immuno-absorption. Cancer Res 60 (5 ):1353–1360 10728698
81. De Muynck L , Herdewyn S , Beel S , Scheveneels W , Van Den Bosch L , Robberecht W (2013) The neurotrophic properties of progranulin depend on the granulin E domain but do not require sortilin binding. Neurobiol Aging 34 (11 ):2541–2547 23706646
82. Wang P , Chitramuthu B , Bateman A , Bennett HPJ , Xu P , Ni F (2018) Structure dissection of zebrafish progranulins identifies a well-folded granulin/epithelin module protein with pro-cell survival activities. Protein Sci 27 (8 ):1476–1490 29732682
83. Feng JQ , Guo FJ , Jiang BC , Zhang Y , Frenkel S , Wang DW (2010) Granulin epithelin precursor: a bone morphogenic protein 2-inducible growth factor that activates Erk1/2 signaling and JunB transcription factor in chondrogenesis. FASEB J 24 (6 ):1879–1892 20124436
84. Zanocco-Marani T , Bateman A , Romano G , Valentinis B , He ZH , Baserga R (1999) Biological activities and signaling pathways of the granulin/epithelin precursor. Cancer Res 59 (20 ):5331–5340 10537317
85. Monami G , Gonzalez EM , Hellman M , Gomella LG , Baffa R , Iozzo RV (2006) Proepithelin promotes migration and invasion of 5637 bladder cancer cells through the activation of ERK1/2 and the formation of a paxillin/FAK/ERK complex. Cancer Res 66 (14 ):7103–7110 16849556
86. Ong CH , Bateman A (2003) Progranulin (granulin-epithelin precursor, PC-cell derived growth factor, acrogranin) in proliferation and tumorigenesis. Histol Histopathol 18 (4 ):1275–1288 12973694
87. Xu J , Xilouri M , Bruban J , Shioi J , Shao Z , Papazoglou I (2011) Extracellular progranulin protects cortical neurons from toxic insults by activating survival signaling. Neurobiol Aging 32 (12 ):2326 e5–2326 16
88. Jansen P , Giehl K , Nyengaard JR , Teng K , Lioubinski O , Sjoegaard SS (2007) Roles for the pro-neurotrophin receptor sortilin in neuronal development, aging and brain injury. Nat Neurosci 10 (11 ):1449–1457 17934455
89. Hu F , Padukkavidana T , Vaegter CB , Brady OA , Zheng Y , Mackenzie IR (2010) Sortilin-mediated endocytosis determines levels of the frontotemporal dementia protein, progranulin. Neuron 68 (4 ):654–667 21092856
90. Nykjaer A , Willnow TE (2012) Sortilin: a receptor to regulate neuronal viability and function. Trends Neurosci 35 (4 ):261–270 22341525
91. Nykjaer A , Lee R , Teng KK , Jansen P , Madsen P , Nielsen MS (2004) Sortilin is essential for proNGF-induced neuronal cell death. Nature 427 (6977 ):843–848 14985763
92. Neill T , Buraschi S , Goyal A , Sharpe C , Natkanski E , Schaefer L (2016) EphA2 is a functional receptor for the growth factor progranulin. J Cell Biol 215 (5 ):687–703 27903606
93. Altmann C , Vasic V , Hardt S , Heidler J , Haussler A , Wittig I (2016) Progranulin promotes peripheral nerve regeneration and reinnervation: role of notch signaling. Mol Neurodegener 11 (1 ):69 27770818
94. Airaksinen MS , Saarma M (2002) The GDNF family: signalling, biological functions and therapeutic value. Nat Rev Neurosci 3 (5 ):383–394 11988777
95. Uhlen M , Karlsson MJ , Zhong W , Tebani A , Pou C , Mikes J (2019) A genome-wide transcriptomic analysis of protein-coding genes in human blood cells. Science 366 (6472 ):eaax9198
96. Bateman A , Belcourt D , Bennett H , Lazure C , Solomon S (1990) Granulins, a novel class of peptide from leukocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 173 (3 ):1161–1168 2268320
97. Gong Y , Zhan T , Li Q , Zhang G , Tan B , Yang X (2016) Serum progranulin levels are elevated in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection, reflecting viral load. Cytokine 85 :26–29 27281451
98. Wei F , Jiang Z , Sun H , Pu J , Sun Y , Wang M (2019) Induction of PGRN by influenza virus inhibits the antiviral immune responses through downregulation of type I interferons signaling. PLoS Pathog 15 (10 ):e1008062
99. Zou S , Luo Q , Song Z , Zhang L , Xia Y , Xu H (2017) Contribution of progranulin to protective lung immunity during bacterial pneumonia. J Infect Dis 215 (11 ):1764–1773 28595330
100. Suh HS , Gelman BB , Lee SC (2014) Potential roles of microglial cell progranulin in HIV-associated CNS pathologies and neurocognitive impairment. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 9 (2 ):117–132 23959579
101. Suh HS , Lo Y , Choi N , Letendre S , Lee SC (2014) Evidence of the innate antiviral and neuroprotective properties of progranulin. PLoS One 9 (5 ):e98184
102. Alissa EM , Sutaih RH , Kamfar HZ , Alagha AE , Marzouki ZM (2017) Serum progranulin levels in relation to insulin resistance in childhood obesity. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 30 (12 ):1251–1256 29176029
103. Abella V , Pino J , Scotece M , Conde J , Lago F , Gonzalez-Gay MA (2017) Progranulin as a biomarker and potential therapeutic agent. Drug Discov Today 22 (10 ):1557–1564 28651064
104. Korolczuk A , Beltowski J (2017) Progranulin, a new adipokine at the crossroads of metabolic syndrome, diabetes, dyslipidemia and hypertension. Curr Pharm Des 23 (10 ):1533–1539 28120721
105. Tanaka Y , Takahashi T , Tamori Y (2014) Circulating progranulin level is associated with visceral fat and elevated liver enzymes: significance of serum progranulin as a useful marker for liver dysfunction. Endocr J 61 (12 ):1191–1196 25231693
106. Yamamoto Y , Takemura M , Serrero G , Hayashi J , Yue B , Tsuboi A (2014) Increased serum GP88 (Progranulin) concentrations in rheumatoid arthritis. Inflammation 37 (5 ):1806–1813 24803297
107. Cerezo LA , Kuklova M , Hulejova H , Vernerova Z , Kasprikova N , Veigl D (2015) Progranulin is associated with disease activity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Mediat Inflamm 2015 :740357
108. Bhandari V , Daniel R , Lim PS , Bateman A (1996) Structural and functional analysis of a promoter of the human granulin/epithelin gene. Biochem J 319 (Pt 2 ):441–447 8912679
109. Li X , Massa PE , Hanidu A , Peet GW , Aro P , Savitt A (2002) IKKalpha, IKKbeta, and NEMO/IKKgamma are each required for the NF-kappa B-mediated inflammatory response program. J Biol Chem 277 (47 ):45129–45140 12221085
110. He Z , Ong CH , Halper J , Bateman A (2003) Progranulin is a mediator of the wound response. Nat Med 9 (2 ):225–229 12524533
111. Mackenzie IR , Baker M , Pickering-Brown S , Hsiung GY , Lindholm C , Dwosh E (2006) The neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration caused by mutations in the progranulin gene. Brain 129 (Pt 11 ):3081–3090 17071926
112. Ahmed Z , Mackenzie IR , Hutton ML , Dickson DW (2007) Progranulin in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and neuroinflammation. J Neuroinflammation 4 :7 17291356
113. Mukherjee O , Pastor P , Cairns NJ , Chakraverty S , Kauwe JS , Shears S (2006) HDDD2 is a familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative inclusions caused by a missense mutation in the signal peptide of progranulin. Ann Neurol 60 (3 ):314–322 16983685
114. Naphade SB , Kigerl KA , Jakeman LB , Kostyk SK , Popovich PG , Kuret J (2010) Progranulin expression is upregulated after spinal contusion in mice. Acta Neuropathol 119 (1 ):123–133 19946692
115. Tanaka Y , Matsuwaki T , Yamanouchi K , Nishihara M (2013) Exacerbated inflammatory responses related to activated microglia after traumatic brain injury in progranulin-deficient mice. Neuroscience 231 :49–60 23201826
116. Petkau TL , Neal SJ , Orban PC , MacDonald JL , Hill AM , Lu G (2010) Progranulin expression in the developing and adult murine brain. J Comp Neurol 518 (19 ):3931–3947 20737593
117. Ma Y , Matsuwaki T , Yamanouchi K , Nishihara M (2017) Progranulin protects hippocampal neurogenesis via suppression of neuroinflammatory responses under acute immune stress. Mol Neurobiol 54 (5 ):3717–3728 27215202
118. Mao Q , Wang D , Li Y , Kohler M , Wilson J , Parton Z (2017) Disease and region specificity of granulin immunopositivities in Alzheimer disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 76 (11 ):957–968 29044416
119. Mao Q , Zheng X , Gefen T , Rogalski E , Spencer CL , Rademakers R (2019) FTLD-TDP with and without GRN mutations cause different patterns of CA1 pathology. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 78 (9 ):844–853 31361008
120. Holler CJ , Taylor G , Deng Q , Kukar T (2017) Intracellular proteolysis of progranulin generates stable, lysosomal granulins that are haploinsufficient in patients with frontotemporal dementia caused by GRN mutations. eNeuro 4 (4 ):ENEURO.0100–17
121. Malaspina A , Kaushik N , de Belleroche J (2001) Differential expression of 14 genes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cord detected using gridded cDNA arrays. J Neurochem 77 (1 ):132–145 11279269
122. Ohmi K , Greenberg DS , Rajavel KS , Ryazantsev S , Li HH , Neufeld EF (2003) Activated microglia in cortex of mouse models of mucopolysac-charidoses I and IIIB. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 (4 ):1902–1907 12576554
123. Minami SS , Min SW , Krabbe G , Wang C , Zhou Y , Asgarov R (2014) Progranulin protects against amyloid beta deposition and toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Nat Med 20 (10 ):1157–1164 25261995
124. Gowrishankar S , Yuan P , Wu Y , Schrag M , Paradise S , Grutzendler J (2015) Massive accumulation of luminal protease-deficient axonal lysosomes at Alzheimer’s disease amyloid plaques. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 (28 ):E3699–E3708 26124111
125. Pereson S , Wils H , Kleinberger G , McGowan E , Vandewoestyne M , Van Broeck B (2009) Progranulin expression correlates with dense-core amyloid plaque burden in Alzheimer disease mouse models. J Pathol 219 (2 ):173–181 19557827
126. Suarez-Calvet M , Capell A , Araque Caballero MA , Morenas-Rodriguez E , Fellerer K , Franzmeier N (2018) CSF progranulin increases in the course of Alzheimer’s disease and is associated with sTREM2, neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. EMBO Mol Med 10 (12 ):e9712 30482868
127. Mendsaikhan A , Tooyama I , Bellier JP , Serrano GE , Sue LI , Lue LF (2019) Characterization of lysosomal proteins progranulin and prosaposin and their interactions in Alzheimer’s disease and aged brains: increased levels correlate with neuropathology. Acta Neuropathol Commun 7 (1 ):215 31864418
128. Kleinberger G , Capell A , Haass C , Van Broeckhoven C (2013) Mechanisms of granulin deficiency: lessons from cellular and animal models. Mol Neurobiol 47 (1 ):337–360 23239020
129. Kayasuga Y , Chiba S , Suzuki M , Kikusui T , Matsuwaki T , Yamanouchi K (2007) Alteration of behavioural phenotype in mice by targeted disruption of the progranulin gene. Behav Brain Res 185 (2 ):110–118 17764761
130. Petkau TL , Neal SJ , Milnerwood A , Mew A , Hill AM , Orban P (2012) Synaptic dysfunction in progranulin-deficient mice. Neurobiol Dis 45 (2 ):711–722 22062772
131. Kao AW , Eisenhut RJ , Martens LH , Nakamura A , Huang A , Bagley JA (2011) A neurodegenerative disease mutation that accelerates the clearance of apoptotic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 (11 ):4441–4446 21368173
132. Wils H , Kleinberger G , Pereson S , Janssens J , Capell A , Van Dam D (2012) Cellular ageing, increased mortality and FTLD-TDP-associated neuropathology in progranulin knockout mice. J Pathol 228 (1 ):67–76 22733568
133. Nguyen AD , Nguyen TA , Zhang J , Devireddy S , Zhou P , Karydas AM (2018) Murine knockin model for progranulin-deficient frontotemporal dementia with nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 (12 ):E2849–E2E58 29511098
134. Ahmed Z , Sheng H , Xu YF , Lin WL , Innes AE , Gass J (2010) Accelerated lipofuscinosis and ubiquitination in granulin knockout mice suggest a role for progranulin in successful aging. Am J Pathol 177 (1 ):311–324 20522652
135. Ghoshal N , Dearborn JT , Wozniak DF , Cairns NJ (2012) Core features of frontotemporal dementia recapitulated in progranulin knockout mice. Neurobiol Dis 45 (1 ):395–408 21933710
136. Yin F , Dumont M , Banerjee R , Ma Y , Li H , Lin MT (2010) Behavioral deficits and progressive neuropathology in progranulin-deficient mice: a mouse model of frontotemporal dementia. FASEB J 24 (12 ):4639–4647 20667979
137. Martens LH , Zhang J , Barmada SJ , Zhou P , Kamiya S , Sun B (2012) Progranulin deficiency promotes neuroinflammation and neuron loss following toxin-induced injury. J Clin Invest 122 (11 ):3955–3959 23041626
138. Lui H , Zhang J , Makinson SR , Cahill MK , Kelley KW , Huang HY (2016) Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-specific synaptic pruning by microglia via complement activation. Cell 165 (4 ):921–935 27114033
139. Krabbe G , Minami SS , Etchegaray JI , Taneja P , Djukic B , Davalos D (2017) Microglial NFkappaB-TNFalpha hyperactivation induces obsessive-compulsive behavior in mouse models of progranulin-deficient frontotemporal dementia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 (19 ):5029–5034 28438992
140. Gotzl JK , Brendel M , Werner G , Parhizkar S , Sebastian Monasor L , Kleinberger G (2019) Opposite microglial activation stages upon loss of PGRN or TREM2 result in reduced cerebral glucose metabolism. EMBO Mol Med 11 (6 ):e9711 31122931
141. Kojima Y , Ono K , Inoue K , Takagi Y , Kikuta K , Nishimura M (2009) Progranulin expression in advanced human atherosclerotic plaque. Atherosclerosis 206 (1 ):102–108 19321167
142. Tang W , Lu Y , Tian QY , Zhang Y , Guo FJ , Liu GY (2011) The growth factor progranulin binds to TNF receptors and is therapeutic against inflammatory arthritis in mice. Science 332 (6028 ):478–484 21393509
143. Chen X , Chang J , Deng Q , Xu J , Nguyen TA , Martens LH (2013) Progranulin does not bind tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors and is not a direct regulator of TNF-dependent signaling or bioactivity in immune or neuronal cells. J Neurosci 33 (21 ):9202–9213 23699531
144. Etemadi N , Webb A , Bankovacki A , Silke J , Nachbur U (2013) Progranulin does not inhibit TNF and lymphotoxin-alpha signalling through TNF receptor 1. Immunol Cell Biol 91 (10 ):661–664 24100384
145. Hu Y , Xiao H , Shi T , Oppenheim JJ , Chen X (2014) Progranulin promotes tumour necrosis factor-induced proliferation of suppressive mouse CD4(+) Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells. Immunology 142 (2 ):193–201 24383743
146. Stubert J , Waldmann K , Dieterich M , Richter DU , Briese V (2014) Progranulin shows cytoprotective effects on trophoblast cells in vitro but does not antagonize TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 290 (5 ):867–873 25027814
147. Fujita K , Chen X , Homma H , Tagawa K , Amano M , Saito A (2018) Targeting Tyro3 ameliorates a model of PGRN-mutant FTLD-TDP via tau-mediated synaptic pathology. Nat Commun 9 (1 ):433 29382817
148. Lang I , Fullsack S , Wajant H (2018) Lack of evidence for a direct interaction of progranulin and tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 and tumor necrosis factor receptor-2 from cellular binding studies. Front Immunol 9 :793 29740434
149. Baladron V , Ruiz-Hidalgo MJ , Bonvini E , Gubina E , Notario V , Laborda J (2002) The EGF-like homeotic protein dlk affects cell growth and interacts with growth-modulating molecules in the yeast two-hybrid system. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 291 (2 ):193–204 11846389
150. Park B , Buti L , Lee S , Matsuwaki T , Spooner E , Brinkmann MM (2011) Granulin is a soluble cofactor for toll-like receptor 9 signaling. Immunity 34 (4 ):505–513 21497117
151. Zhou X , Sun L , Bastos de Oliveira F , Qi X , Brown WJ , Smolka MB (2015) Prosaposin facilitates sortilin-independent lysosomal trafficking of progranulin. J Cell Biol 210 (6 ):991–1002 26370502
152. Almeida MR , Macario MC , Ramos L , Baldeiras I , Ribeiro MH , Santana I (2016) Portuguese family with the co-occurrence of frontotemporal lobar degeneration and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis phenotypes due to progranulin gene mutation. Neurobiol Aging 41 :200 e1–200 e5
153. Kamate M , Detroja M , Hattiholi V (2019) Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type-11 in an adolescent. Brain and Development 41 (6 ):542–545 30922528
154. Hyung S , Im SK , Lee BY , Shin J , Park JC , Lee C (2019) Dedifferentiated Schwann cells secrete progranulin that enhances the survival and axon growth of motor neurons. Glia 67 (2 ):360–375 30444070
155. Tanaka M , Kuse Y , Nakamura S , Hara H , Shimazawa M (2019) Potential effects of progranulin and granulins against retinal photoreceptor cell degeneration. Mol Vis 25 :902–911 32025182
156. Lee CW , Stankowski JN , Chew J , Cook CN , Lam YW , Almeida S (2017) The lysosomal protein cathepsin L is a progranulin protease. Mol Neurodegener 12 (1 ):55 28743268
157. Zhou X , Paushter DH , Feng T , Sun L , Reinheckel T , Hu F (2017) Lysosomal processing of progranulin. Mol Neurodegener 12 (1 ):62 28835281
158. Belcastro V , Siciliano V , Gregoretti F , Mithbaokar P , Dharmalingam G , Berlingieri S (2011) Transcriptional gene network inference from a massive dataset elucidates transcriptome organization and gene function. Nucleic Acids Res 39 (20 ):8677–8688 21785136
159. Filiano AJ , Martens LH , Young AH , Warmus BA , Zhou P , Diaz-Ramirez G (2013) Dissociation of frontotemporal dementia-related deficits and neuroinflammation in progranulin haploinsufficient mice. J Neurosci 33 (12 ):5352–5361 23516300
160. Zhou X , Sun L , Brady OA , Murphy KA , Hu F (2017) Elevated TMEM106B levels exaggerate lipofuscin accumulation and lysosomal dysfunction in aged mice with progranulin deficiency. Acta Neuropathol Commun 5 (1 ):9 28126008
161. Chang MC , Srinivasan K , Friedman BA , Suto E , Modrusan Z , Lee WP (2017) Progranulin deficiency causes impairment of autophagy and TDP-43 accumulation. J Exp Med 214 (9 ):2611–2628 28778989
162. Tanaka Y , Chambers JK , Matsuwaki T , Yamanouchi K , Nishihara M (2014) Possible involvement of lysosomal dysfunction in pathological changes of the brain in aged progranulin-deficient mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2 :78 25022663
163. Gotzl JK , Mori K , Damme M , Fellerer K , Tahirovic S , Kleinberger G (2014) Common pathobio-chemical hallmarks of progranulin-associated frontotemporal lobar degeneration and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Acta Neuropathol 127 (6 ):845–860 24619111
164. Gotzl JK , Colombo AV , Fellerer K , Reifschneider A , Werner G , Tahirovic S (2018) Early lysosomal maturation deficits in microglia triggers enhanced lysosomal activity in other brain cells of progranulin knockout mice. Mol Neurodegener 13 (1 ):48 30180904
165. Tyynela J , Palmer DN , Baumann M , Haltia M (1993) Storage of saposins A and D in infantile neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. FEBS Lett 330 (1 ):8–12 8370464
166. Elleder M , Sokolova J , Hrebicek M (1997) Follow-up study of subunit c of mitochondrial ATP synthase (SCMAS) in Batten disease and in unrelated lysosomal disorders. Acta Neuropathol 93 (4 ):379–390 9113203
167. Ward ME , Chen R , Huang HY , Ludwig C , Telpoukhovskaia M , Taubes A (2017) Individuals with progranulin haploinsufficiency exhibit features of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Sci Transl Med 9 (385 ):eaah5642
168. Valdez C , Wong YC , Schwake M , Bu G , Wszolek ZK , Krainc D (2017) Progranulin-mediated deficiency of cathepsin D results in FTD and NCL-like phenotypes in neurons derived from FTD patients. Hum Mol Genet 26 (24 ):4861–4872 29036611
169. Zheng Y , Brady OA , Meng PS , Mao Y , Hu F (2011) C-terminus of progranulin interacts with the beta-propeller region of sortilin to regulate progranulin trafficking. PLoS One 6 (6 ):e21023
170. Willnow TE , Petersen CM , Nykjaer A (2008) VPS10P-domain receptors – regulators of neuronal viability and function. Nat Rev Neurosci 9 (12 ):899–909 19002190
171. Nielsen MS , Madsen P , Christensen EI , Nykjaer A , Gliemann J , Kasper D (2001) The sortilin cytoplasmic tail conveys Golgi-endosome transport and binds the VHS domain of the GGA2 sorting protein. EMBO J 20 (9 ):2180–2190 11331584
172. Lee WC , Almeida S , Prudencio M , Caulfield TR , Zhang YJ , Tay WM (2014) Targeted manipulation of the sortilin-progranulin axis rescues progranulin haploinsufficiency. Hum Mol Genet 23 (6 ):1467–1478 24163244
173. Carrasquillo MM , Nicholson AM , Finch N , Gibbs JR , Baker M , Rutherford NJ (2010) Genome-wide screen identifies rs646776 near sortilin as a regulator of progranulin levels in human plasma. Am J Hum Genet 87 (6 ):890–897 21087763
174. Schulze H , Sandhoff K (2014) Sphingolipids and lysosomal pathologies. Biochim Biophys Acta 1841 (5 ):799–810 24184515
175. Zhou X , Sullivan PM , Sun L , Hu F (2017) The interaction between progranulin and prosaposin is mediated by granulins and the linker region between saposin B and C. J Neurochem 143 (2 ):236–243 28640985
176. Nicholson AM , Finch NA , Almeida M , Perkerson RB , van Blitterswijk M , Wojtas A (2016) Prosaposin is a regulator of progranulin levels and oligomerization. Nat Commun 7 :11992 27356620
177. Kishimoto Y , Hiraiwa M , O’Brien JS (1992) Saposins: structure, function, distribution, and molecular genetics. J Lipid Res 33 (9 ):1255–1267 1402395
178. Cenik B , Sephton CF , Kutluk Cenik B , Herz J , Yu G (2012) Progranulin: a proteolytically processed protein at the crossroads of inflammation and neurodegeneration. J Biol Chem 287 (39 ):32298–32306 22859297
179. Haimovich B , Tanaka JC (1995) Magainin-induced cytotoxicity in eukaryotic cells: kinetics, dose-response and channel characteristics. Biochim Biophys Acta 1240 (2 ):149–158 8541286
180. Beel S , Moisse M , Damme M , De Muynck L , Robberecht W , Van Den Bosch L (2017) Progranulin functions as a cathepsin D chaperone to stimulate axonal outgrowth in vivo. Hum Mol Genet 26 (15 ):2850–2863 28453791
181. Zhou X , Paushter DH , Feng T , Pardon CM , Mendoza CS , Hu F (2017) Regulation of cathepsin D activity by the FTLD protein progranulin. Acta Neuropathol 134 (1 ):151–153 28493053
182. Butler VJ , Cortopassi WA , Argouarch AR , Ivry SL , Craik CS , Jacobson MP (2019) Progranulin stimulates the in vitro maturation of pro-Cathepsin D at acidic pH. J Mol Biol 431 (5 ):1038–1047 30690031
183. Jian J , Zhao S , Tian QY , Liu H , Zhao Y , Chen WC (2016) Association between progranulin and Gaucher disease. EBioMedicine 11 :127–137 27515686
184. Jian J , Tian QY , Hettinghouse A , Zhao S , Liu H , Wei J (2016) Progranulin recruits HSP70 to beta-Glucocerebrosidase and is therapeutic against Gaucher disease. EBioMedicine 13 :212–224 27789271
185. Zhou X , Paushter DH , Pagan MD , Kim D , Nunez Santos M , Lieberman RL (2019) Progranulin deficiency leads to reduced glucocerebrosidase activity. PLoS One 14 (7 ):e0212382
186. Valdez C , Ysselstein D , Young TJ , Zheng J , Krainc D (2019) Progranulin mutations result in impaired processing of prosaposin and reduced glucocerebrosidase activity. Hum Mol Genet 29 (5 ):716–726
187. Arrant AE , Roth JR , Boyle NR , Kashyap SN , Hoffmann MQ , Murchison CF (2019) Impaired beta-glucocerebrosidase activity and processing in frontotemporal dementia due to progranulin mutations. Acta Neuropathol Commun 7 (1 ):218 31870439
188. Brady RO , Kanfer JN , Shapiro D (1965) Metabolism of glucocerebrosides. Ii. Evidence of an enzymatic deficiency in Gaucher’s disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 18 :221–225 14282020
189. Do J , McKinney C , Sharma P , Sidransky E (2019) Glucocerebrosidase and its relevance to Parkinson disease. Mol Neurodegener 14 (1 ):36 31464647
190. Sidransky E (2004) Gaucher disease: complexity in a “simple” disorder. Mol Genet Metab 83 (1–2 ):6–15 15464415
191. Hiraiwa M , Martin BM , Kishimoto Y , Conner GE , Tsuji S , O’Brien JS (1997) Lysosomal proteolysis of prosaposin, the precursor of saposins (sphingolipid activator proteins): its mechanism and inhibition by ganglioside. Arch Biochem Biophys 341 (1 ):17–24 9143348
192. Chen Y , Jian J , Hettinghouse A , Zhao X , Setchell KDR , Sun Y (2018) Progranulin associates with hexosaminidase A and ameliorates GM2 ganglioside accumulation and lysosomal storage in Tay-Sachs disease. J Mol Med (Berl) 96 (12 ):1359–1373 30341570
193. Sandhoff K (2016) Neuronal sphingolipidoses: membrane lipids and sphingolipid activator proteins regulate lysosomal sphingolipid catabolism. Biochimie 130 :146–151 27157270
194. Van Deerlin VM , Sleiman PM , Martinez-Lage M , Chen-Plotkin A , Wang LS , Graff-Radford NR (2010) Common variants at 7p21 are associated with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions. Nat Genet 42 (3 ):234–239 20154673
195. Finch N , Carrasquillo MM , Baker M , Rutherford NJ , Coppola G , Dejesus-Hernandez M (2011) TMEM106B regulates progranulin levels and the penetrance of FTLD in GRN mutation carriers. Neurology 76 (5 ):467–474 21178100
196. Gallagher MD , Posavi M , Huang P , Unger TL , Berlyand Y , Gruenewald AL (2017) A dementia-associated risk v ariant near TMEM106B alters chromatin architecture and gene expression. Am J Hum Genet 101 (5 ):643–663 29056226
197. Nicholson AM , Finch NA , Wojtas A , Baker MC , Perkerson RB 3rd , Castanedes-Casey M (2013) TMEM106B p.T185S regulates TMEM106B protein levels: implications for frontotemporal dementia. J Neurochem 126 (6 ):781–791 23742080
198. Brady OA , Zheng Y , Murphy K , Huang M , Hu F (2013) The frontotemporal lobar degeneration risk factor, TMEM106B, regulates lysosomal morphology and function. Hum Mol Genet 22 (4 ):685–695 23136129
199. Stagi M , Klein ZA , Gould TJ , Bewersdorf J , Strittmatter SM (2014) Lysosome size, motility and stress response regulated by fronto-temporal dementia modifier TMEM106B. Mol Cell Neurosci 61 :226–240 25066864
200. Chen-Plotkin AS , Unger TL , Gallagher MD , Bill E , Kwong LK , Volpicelli-Daley L (2012) TMEM106B, the risk gene for frontotemporal dementia, is regulated by the microRNA-132/212 cluster and affects progranulin pathways. J Neurosci 32 (33 ):11213–11227 22895706
201. Lang CM , Fellerer K , Schwenk BM , Kuhn PH , Kremmer E , Edbauer D (2012) Membrane orientation and subcellular localization of transmembrane protein 106B (TMEM106B), a major risk factor for frontotemporal lobar degeneration. J Biol Chem 287 (23 ):19355–19365 22511793
202. Schwenk BM , Lang CM , Hogl S , Tahirovic S , Orozco D , Rentzsch K (2014) The FTLD risk factor TMEM106B and MAP6 control dendritic trafficking of lysosomes. EMBO J 33 (5 ):450–467 24357581
203. Suzuki H , Matsuoka M (2016) The lysosomal trafficking transmembrane protein 106B is linked to cell death. J Biol Chem 291 (41 ):21448–21460 27563066
204. Busch JI , Martinez-Lage M , Ashbridge E , Grossman M , Van Deerlin VM , Hu F (2013) Expression of TMEM106B, the frontotemporal lobar degeneration-associated protein, in normal and diseased human brain. Acta Neuropathol Commun 1 :36 24252750
205. Klein ZA , Takahashi H , Ma M , Stagi M , Zhou M , Lam TT (2017) Loss of TMEM106B ameliorates lysosomal and frontotemporal dementia-related phenotypes in progranulin-deficient mice. Neuron 95 (2 ):281–96 e628728022
206. Arrant AE , Nicholson AM , Zhou X , Rademakers R , Roberson ED (2018) Partial Tmem106b reduction does not correct abnormalities due to progranulin haploinsufficiency. Mol Neurodegener 13 (1 ):32 29929528
207. Nicholson AM , Zhou X , Perkerson RB , Parsons TM , Chew J , Brooks M (2018) Loss of Tmem106b is unable to ameliorate frontotemporal dementia-like phenotypes in an AAV mouse model of C9ORF72-repeat induced toxicity. Acta Neuropathol Commun 6 (1 ):42 29855382
208. Rohrer JD , Warren JD , Fox NC , Rossor MN (2013) Presymptomatic studies in genetic frontotemporal dementia. Rev Neurol (Paris) 169 (10 ):820–824 24012408
209. Boeve B , Bove J , Brannelly P , Brushaber D , Coppola G , Dever R (2020) The longitudinal evaluation of familial frontotemporal dementia subjects protocol: framework and methodology. Alzheimers Dement 16 (1 ):22–36 31636026
