LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7503062
4443
J Am Geriatr Soc
J Am Geriatr Soc
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
0002-8614
1532-5415

34590304
8821127
10.1111/jgs.17496
NIHMS1743041
Article
Firearm Access and Dementia: A Qualitative Study of Reported Behavioral Disturbances and Responses
Polzer Evan R. MA a
Nearing Kathryn A. PhD, MA bc
Knoepke Christopher E. MSW, PhD de
Matlock Daniel D. MPH, MD bef
Betz Marian E. MPH MD ac
a. Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, 80045
b. Division of Geriatrics and Multidisciplinary Center on Aging, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, 80045
c. VA Eastern Colorado Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Rocky Mountain Regional VA Medical Center, Aurora, CO, 80045
d. Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, 80045
e. Adult and Child Consortium for Outcomes Research and Delivery Science, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, 80045
f. Division of Geriatric Medicine, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, 80045
Author Contributions

Study concept and design: ERP, KAN, CEK, DDM, MEB

Drafting of manuscript: ERP, KAN, MEB

Data collection: ERP, KAN

Data analysis: ERP, KAN, CEK, DDM, MEB

Editing and proofing of manuscript: ERP, KAN, CEK, DDM, MEB

Correspondence To: Evan Polzer, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, 12469 E. 17th Pl., Aurora, CO 80045, Mail Stop F423 – evan.polzer@cuanschutz.edu
23 10 2021
2 2022
29 9 2021
01 2 2023
70 2 439448
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

Cognitive impairment and behavioral changes associated with Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) can impair safe firearm handling ability, an issue that can be challenging for ADRD caregivers to address. In this qualitative analysis, we sought to explore behavioral disruptions that raise concerns about firearm access in dementia and how caregivers react and respond.

Methods:

Secondary qualitative analysis using data from semi-structured, one-on-one interviews originally conducted as part of a study to develop firearm safety educational materials for ADRD caregivers. Interviewees were English-speaking adults (≥18 years) from three stakeholder groups: ADRD caregivers (professional or informal), medical professionals (geriatricians, neurologists), and firearm professionals (retailers, range employees, instructors). For secondary analysis, transcripts of interviews were re-coded and analyzed following an inductive-deductive thematic analysis process.

Results:

Among 24 participants, 17 (70%) were female and 20 (83%) white; 13 (54%) had personal or professional experience with ADRD caregiving and 5 (21%) had a firearm affiliation. Major themes were: (1) behavioral disturbances that make caregivers concerned about firearm access; (2) caregiver emotional responses to and difficulties associated with these disturbances; and (3) caregiver actions (planned or actual) to limit firearms access.

Conclusion:

Various behavioral disturbances and emotional burdens can trigger ADRD caregiver concern about firearms access, but strategies exist for restricting or safeguarding firearms in the home. Study findings suggest a need for caregiver support on this topic, including counseling by healthcare providers, advance planning for older firearm owners, and development of community resources.

dementia
cognitive impairment
firearms
caregivers
behavioral disturbances

pmcINTRODUCTION

Approximately 50 million people live with Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementias (ADRD) worldwide, with the number projected rise to 152 million by 2050.1 ADRD brings changes in memory, thinking, and personality, and individuals with ADRD can experience paranoia, anxiety, and agitation.2 All of these changes can potentiate aggressive behavior and risk of injury, be it unintentional (e.g., while driving, or aggression toward caregivers) or intentional (e.g., suicide). ADRD caregivers must navigate the complex, evolving clinical status of the person with ADRD, as well as their relationship with them.

The presence of a firearm in the home further complicates the situation. A firearm increases the likelihood of death in suicide attempts3 and can escalate the severity of a hostile interaction between the person with ADRD and another individual. Although the incidence of near-shootings in dementia is not known,4 an estimated 20% of home-based dementia caregivers experience aggression or violence.5

In the United States, approximately one third of adults live in a home with a firearm (handgun, rifle, or shotgun).6 For many, firearms are linked to a sense of personal identity, security, and independence,7 which challenges caregivers to balance safety with respect for the individual with ADRD, while also not increasing anxiety or agitation in the person with ADRD. Only Hawaii and Texas have laws specifically regulating firearm possession in ADRD,8 so the issue of access generally falls to family.

A recent large survey of informal dementia caregivers living in homes with firearms explored perceptions on the risks of firearm-related injury (e.g., accidental, assault, or suicide) and highlighted high interest in receiving safety counseling by health care providers.9 Here, we sought to build on prior work by exploring ADRD-related behavioral disturbances that raise concerns about firearm access, along with their impact on caregivers. Findings may help clinicians and community organizations develop programs and resources to support caregivers and individuals living with ADRD.

METHODS

Data Collection

Data were collected as part of a parent project focused on engaging key stakeholders in developing “Safety in Dementia”, a decision support tool for ADRD caregivers.10 For the parent study, we conducted one-on-one interviews with key informants from three key stakeholder groups: ADRD caregivers (professional, informal), medical professionals (geriatricians, neurologists), and firearm professionals (retailers, range employees, instructors).

Eligibility:

Eligible caregivers self-identified as either a professional or informal caregivers of an individual with ADRD who maintained access to a firearm. Healthcare providers were eligible if employed as a medical professional providing care or counselling for individuals with ADRD, or if belonging to a professional organization working with individuals with ADRD. Eligible firearm stakeholder participants included retailers, range safety officers, or other professionals in the industry. Eligible participants were then consented and scheduled for interviews. Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to the interview.

Recruitment:

ADRD caregivers were recruited through study postings on both ResearchMatch (a database for individuals interested in participating in academic studies)11 and the Alzheimer’s Associations Trial Match registry. ResearchMatch postings were renewed monthly while the Trial Match posting remained static throughout the recruitment period. Medical professionals and individuals from caregiving or aging organizations were recruited through professional networks and email listservs (e.g., American Geriatrics Society, Alzheimer’s Association). Firearm professionals were recruited through emails to retailers, alongside printed materials. Individuals were invited to complete a telephone or Zoom interview for compensation; interviews gathered perspectives on safety in the context of cognitive impairment and on a prototype decision aid for ADRD caregivers. For all groups, snowball sampling was used to identify and recruit potential future participants.

Interviews were led by a team member experienced in qualitative data collection (EP). The interview guide for the parent project was informed by the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change,12 the Health Belief Model,13 and other research on ADRD caregivers and safety concerns. Interview guide topics most salient to the present paper included: ADRD safety issues, like firearm access;14,15 caregiver responses to home firearm access; and caregiver self-efficacy to address these concerns. Recorded interviews were transcribed via a professional transcription service and verified against the audio recordings of the interview. This research was reviewed and approved by the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board (COMIRB 17–0670).

Data collection and qualitative analysis occurred in an iterative process, allowing prior interview findings to inform exploratory probes for use in future interviews. Recruitment continued until qualitative analysis revealed thematic saturation;16 in the parent project, we completed 24 interviews (45–60 minutes), resulting in 350 pages of total transcribed data.

Data Analysis

Here, we completed a more nuanced secondary analysis of a specific set of codes pertaining to behavioral disturbances and caregiver experiences. Qualitative analysis for the parent study followed a systematic process involving two coders (EP and KN) with expertise in qualitative data analysis; this process has been described elsewhere.10 Here, as in the parent study, we used a mixed inductive-deductive approach;17,18 this approach incorporated emerging codes alongside a priori theory utilized in the interview guide (Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change and the Health Belief Model).12,13 The codebook was iteratively refined through ongoing team discussions on the application and operational definitions of the codes. Over 75% of data were coded by both researchers. Any differences in coding were discussed and resolved until high levels of agreement were reached. Once strong interrater reliability was established (kappa=0.83),19 we independently coded the remaining transcripts, with emergent themes based on code co-occurrences, associations, and discussions between coders and the research team. We followed COREQ standards for reporting qualitative research findings.20

RESULTS

Analysis included data from all individuals from the parent study who participated in one-on-one interviews (n = 24; Table 1). Participants were predominantly female (n=17) and white (n = 20). Participants included those with personal/professional experience with ADRD (n = 13; 9 family, 4 professional), healthcare professionals (n = 7), and firearms owners and firearm industry professionals (n = 5).

Three themes emerged: (1) behavioral disturbances encountered by caregivers that gave rise to concerns about firearm access; (2) caregiver emotional responses and difficulties associated with these disturbances; and, (3) caregiver actions (planned or actual) to limit firearms access. Descriptive examples of these themes can be found in Table 2.

Behavioral Disturbances and Firearms

Interviewees noted that impaired judgement, diminished memory, lapses in attention, and impaired recognition of family or friends all contribute to firearm safety concerns. Changes in mood, behavior, affect, and aggression can also impair firearm safety. Participants discussed these issues and identified specific concerns related to suicide and depression (harm towards self) and to increased paranoia, agitation, and misperceptions (harm towards others).

Changes in Mood

Changing moods, including increased depression and suicide ideation, in persons with ADRD were a major concern for interviewees. One home health aide noted: “Depression is huge in dementia…if they still know how to use a gun, it’s a real thing”. When asked about changes in mood, another family caregiver expressed how it’s caused the person she cares for “lots of depression, super lot of depression. And he’s always talked about ending his life. He doesn’t want to live the way he is”. Feelings of depression, anhedonia, and awareness of one’s condition (brought about by both cognitive and physical changes, like physical and hearing deficits) among persons with dementia all weighed heavily on caregivers, leading to concerns about how firearms might be used for suicide, a ubiquitous sentiment throughout interviews.

Changes in Affect and Behavior

Interviewees were also attuned to how changes to affect, particularly regarding increases in paranoia, agitation, confusion, and other mood swings increased risk of harm to others. Participants shared stories of “close calls”, dangerous misunderstandings, and frightening scenarios: being misidentified as intruders and having firearms pointed in their direction, due in part to both diminished physical (declining hearing and eyesight) and cognitive abilities (changes in affect and memory resulting in unsafe behaviors). A caregiver recalled how a family member with mild dementia accessed a firearm: “He pointed it at me. It was very scary. But he didn’t know what he had [done]”. Another caregiver recalled how his grandmother handled her firearms: “She was waving them around. She was clearly not safely handling them”. In yet another instance, a retirement planner described how a paranoid client surrounded himself with firearms, leading to an escalation involving police and SWAT units. The key informant noted that the incident was resolved peacefully due to the actions of his caregiver: “Thank God the wife had hidden the bullets and taken them out”.

Caregiver Emotional Responses

Fear

Participants described fears about the behavioral changes they observed and what could happen if the person with ADRD could access firearms. Stress about making (or not making) a correct decision, uncertainties about practical solutions, and interpersonal conflicts about firearms compounded burdens associated with the caregiving role. One caregiver described the various fears she had when caring for her older brother. She noted he “was getting a lot [angrier] and his mood change[d] real drastically.” Consequently, she became concerned about the number of firearms on their property: “We don’t know if he’s got anymore hidden somewhere. It’s scary”. She noted that even with their large gun locker, her brother still had moments when he was more lucid and could access these firearms. “You really can’t [rely on] a gun safe, lock box, or locking device … [laughs] My brother’s not stupid. Even though he has dementia, he’s smart”.

Uncertainty

Interviewees described uncertainty about the logistical aspects of limiting firearm access; how to lock up, store, or remove the firearms from the home; when to make definitive plans; and who to ask for help. In describing her experiences with ADRD caregivers, a care coordinator explained, “I think what I was hearing from these caretakers was, ‘I don’t know how to handle this’. And a lot of it [had to do with] the relationship with the gunowner. They didn’t feel comfortable challenging them and the gun owner [was maybe] very keen on maintaining their guns”. Participants often felt that they lacked resources to address firearm access, especially legal resources. A legal fiduciary noted, “I think there’s a lot of confusion over what to do – what they can do legally. I just got an inquiry last week from someone in California saying, ‘How do we legally take the guns away from this person? We’re afraid of them, and they have dementia.’ [Because] every state is different, it’s kind of difficult”.

Conflict and Stress

Interviewees spoke of caregivers feeling conflict and stress, especially related to interpersonal dynamics. When discussing efforts to limit her grandfather’s access to firearms, one family caregiver noted a tension between wanting to ensure safety and not wanting to “baby” him: “It was just emotionally difficult to feel like I had to constantly tell him he couldn’t do stuff, because, you know, he’s obviously my elder and an adult.” She continued, “It feels like you’re treating him like a kid, and he didn’t like it. I mean, he would get agitated”. Conflicts were amplified when the firearm-owning individual with ADRD was at an early stage in their disease and still exercising agency over life decisions. Conversely, matters were also complicated when others did not understand the severity of the individual’s dementia or the caregiver’s concerns regarding firearms. A family caregiver stated that despite her best efforts and pleas, members of her brother’s gun club would still afford him access to firearms. She explained: I really [don’t] want to put his business out to all of his friends. [Yet,] we got into an argument about that this morning, because he wanted to go see one of his friends from the gun club. And I told him, I said, ‘No, you can’t go.’ And then the guys call him up and say, ‘Come on over, I want to show you what [firearm] I got.’ What do I do?

Caregiver Actions

Despite these challenges, participants described strategies that caregivers used to address firearms access. Temporary solutions included use of lock boxes, cable locks, or other firearm safety devices. For some caregivers, these solutions worked while they considered more permanent options. Hiding the keys to locking devices was a common strategy for caregivers: “A gun safe with a key [is] like hiding the car keys. If you can do that, you’ve succeeded [by] hiding the keys to the gun safe”. Introducing the use of these devices could be difficult, however. Firearm owners might not see the need or desire to use them, prompting caregivers to devise various strategies to implement safe storage. Caregivers mentioned buying a firearm safety device as a “gift” or replacing an old or dysfunctional lock box with one with a new PIN. One family caregiver, who bought a new gun safe, shared their strategy: “I mentioned to him that I bought another one. The other one [was] wearing out, ‘cause it was an old one… We gave him a combination just to make him happy, but the combination doesn’t work”.

While temporary solutions could buy time and provide enhanced safety and relief, participants said the fluid nature of behavioral disturbances presses caregivers to find permanent solutions. One caregiver said, “He comes in and out. And he still could have access to them at any time. I mean, one minute he’s fine and he’s just as normal as can be. And that could be that one moment where he’s like, ‘Oh, wait, I want to go clean a gun.’ And then right after he gets it, where is it gonna be then?” Permanent options might include selling or giving them to other family, requiring delicate strategies. One caregiver described watching his mother wave around a handgun; after seeing that, he told her, “‘Those were granddad’s. You know he would have wanted those to go to the grandsons. [The firearms] just left the house really quickly.” Participants felt that “therapeutic lying” (a strategy used to deliberately avoid causing emotional distress in those with ADRD)21 could be used to remove firearms when all else fails: “‘We’ll get it fixed as fast as we can and we’re working on it’, and that day never came. So, that’s how we dealt with that,” a caregiver told of a strategy of “planning to fix” a broken firearm locker but actually intending to leave it inoperable to prevent access to firearms in the home.

DISCUSSION

With the aging of the population and the growing number of individuals living with ADRD, concerns about firearm access and safety are likely to grow. This qualitative analysis highlighted the experiences of ADRD caregivers and the behavioral disturbances in those they care for, their own emotional responses, and their resulting actions. While previous work described legal and logistical challenges caregivers face in addressing firearms access,22 the present findings have implications for clinical care of patients with ADRD and support for their caregivers, including through broader community-based programs that increase knowledge, awareness, and access to resources on this issue.

Behavioral Disturbances: Early Identification and Intervention for Firearm Safety

Dementia is a complex set of disorders with behavioral manifestations that vary over time. Our findings underscore the importance of clinician counseling about potential escalations. Given the prevalence of firearms in the homes of older adults, firearm access is an essential topic that should be addressed in counseling patients and families.

Ideally, provider counseling would include discussions regarding firearm access and direct caregivers to appropriate resources. Recent work suggests caregivers are open to such counseling but may not receive it. Nearly 80% of surveyed caregivers in homes with firearms thought healthcare providers should address firearm safety in dementia, but only 5% had ever received such counseling.9 While care is generally coordinated through primary care providers or geriatricians, additional providers (e.g., neurologists, psychiatrics, social workers) should be engaged. Engagement and coordination across care teams could optimize patient care and safety and reduce patient and caregiver stressors, and clinical resources or protocols should account for varied provider backgrounds and clinical workflows.23

Aging and caregiver organizations should consider the development of programs or materials to promote firearm safety in ADRD. Early identification of ADRD and a proactive approach to discussing various options for storing, transferring, or removing firearms from the home might mitigate risks of both physical and emotional harm. Such conversations with individuals with ADRD could support autonomy and rights while taking actions to address safety concerns.8 Medical organizations could encourage members to assess firearm accessibility, storage practices, and any need for intervention. Firearm organizations could similarly encourage members to be cognizant of signs of cognitive impairment and address firearm safety. Broad dissemination of messages regarding the necessity to address firearm access, especially as ADRD progresses, could help normalize such conversations and support broader uptake within the firearms community.

Caregiver Emotional Responses: Support Structures to Mediate Stress and Conflict

Our analysis underscored the need to support caregivers in dealing with dementia-related behavioral disturbances, which can be frightening, threatening, and isolating. Caregivers experience additional challenges when coping with behavioral disturbances within the context of firearm access, including managing interpersonal dynamics with the person with ADRD and with their social networks. Caregiver burden, burnout, and emotional strain are well-documented and impact caregivers’ own physical, emotional, and social health and coping strategies.24,25 Additional stressors related to firearm access may arise for caregivers, particularly in cases where there are strong disagreements or caregivers themselves lack firearm training. Clinicians can support caregivers through offering techniques for reacting to and managing behavioral disturbances. Strategies may include internal coping skills and external support systems like counselors or support groups.26–28 For stresses specific to decision-making about firearm access, clinicians can support caregivers with frameworks based on dementia severity8 and with decision aids that provide a range of options and a step-wise process for choosing the option that best suits their situation.10

Clinicians might benefit from having training or resources about firearm storage and transfers tailored to local availability and laws. Such materials could also link caregivers with community-based partners (such as firearm retailers or law enforcement) who could assist in finding legal, practical solutions. Such linkages for practical help or information could help alleviate caregiver anxieties by reducing ambiguities and concerns about what actions they may choose to pursue in improving home safety.

Caregiver Actions: Community-Based Programs or Resources

Community-based programs or resources could support caregivers and individuals with ADRD in considering how and when to reduce firearm access. In recent work, caregivers had varied opinions about the type of resources they would – or would not - use to answer questions related to firearm access in dementia.9 Some rely on trusted family or friends, while others turn to organizations (local or national) specializing in either firearms or dementia care. Dissemination of resources, with appropriate messaging, could assist caregivers accessing information they need and want. An example of community-focused programming includes Alzheimer’s San Diego provisioning firearm locking devices, provided through a partnership with a local firearm retailer.29 “Gun Shop Projects” are a model for suicide prevention education through firearm retailers and might be adapted to include safety in dementia.30 Broader programs to facilitate temporary out-of-home firearm storage could benefit caregivers, programs like statewide storage maps.31 “Extreme Risk Protection Orders,” which allow for at-least temporary confiscation of weapons from an individual at imminent risk of harm to self or others, could be an option for dementia caregivers in some states.

Additional areas for attention include engagement of other trusted community resources – e.g., financial planners, law enforcement – in these conversations, along with consideration of legal issues that impact firearm transfers when the owner has ADRD.22 Training local law enforcement on emotional and behavioral disturbances that manifest in cognitive impairment may help with de-escalation of scenarios involving individuals with ADRD and firearms. Such community partnerships may increase trust and empower the public to contact such partners for assistance regarding ADRD and firearms.

Strengths and Limitations

This study’s strengths include the use of interview data from ADRD caregivers and other stakeholders to explore a subject that has been largely absent from the literature. Despite increased attention recently, the issue of firearms and cognitive impairment has lacked insights from caregivers on how they manage this issue. Data were analyzed using a rigorous grounded theory approach, led by two investigators with expertise in this methodology. Findings, however, may not be generalizable to all caregivers who are contemplating decisions about firearm access. Caregivers in our sample primarily cared for individuals with apparent moderate- to late-stage cognitive impairment, which may result in caregiver responses to behavioral disturbances being different from those with MCI or early-stage cognitive impairment. Our sample was predominantly white; while firearm ownership is most common among white Americans (reported by 36% of white adults, versus 24% and 15% among black and Hispanic adults), future work should investigate how experiences may differ across populations. More research is required to further understand the needs of caregivers and views of older adults with dementia themselves.

Ensuring the health, safety, and well-being of individuals with ADRD and their caregivers is a pressing issue. For caregivers, addressing firearm access in dementia is complicated by behavioral disturbances exhibited by individuals with dementia. A better understanding of caregiver concerns, emotional responses, and actions can inform development of resources for clinical and community settings.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We appreciate the time and effort of participants for their insights into these issues and the challenges they face. These include individuals from the UCHealth Seniors Clinic, the Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC) Older Veterans Engagement Team, and the caregiver networks in our local areas.

Funding Sources

Funding for this research was supported by the National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Mental Health/National Institute on Aging (R34MH113539-02S1).

Sponsor’s Role

The funding sponsor had no role in the conception, design, review, nor approval of this manuscript. The views expressed here are solely those of the contributing authors and do not necessarily reflect the official views of the funding agency nor the affiliated agencies of Veterans Affairs.

Table 1 – Participant Demographics (N=24)

Characteristic	n (%)	
Gender		
 Female	17 (70)	
 Male	7 (30)	
Race		
 White	20 (83)	
 Asian	3 (13)	
 Hispanic	1 (4)	
 African American	0 (0)	
 American Indian/Alaska Native	0 (0)	
Stakeholder group (≥1 allowed)		
 ADRD caregiver (formal or informal)	5 (21)	
 ADRD family member	4 (17)	
 Work in dementia field (including volunteer work, advocacy, or paid work other than as caregiver)	4 (17)	
 Firearm owner or enthusiast	4 (17)	
 Work at/with firearm retailer, range, organization	1 (4)	
 Work with or affiliated with the VA or other veteran service provider	2 (8.3)	
 Work in suicide prevention field (including volunteer work)	2 (8.3)	
 Healthcare provider	7 (28)	

Table 2 – Illustrative Quotes from Relevant Domains

	Description	Sample quote	
Behavioral disturbance			
Depression/suicide risk	Caregiver concerns regarding increased feelings of depression or suicide risk in the person with ADRD	“ And to me, the bigger – and I don’t know the statistics, but I just know peripherally – the bigger reason that people kill themselves or use their gun, I guess I should say, is depression.”	
Agitation/threat to others	Increased levels of agitation, anger, or short-temperedness that culminate in intentional or unintentional threats to others	“But I can see if there will be a day, soon, probably that she won’t even know that she knows me anymore at all. If she had access to a firearm, I think that would be a bad thing because she would certainly know how to use it still.”	
Caregiver response			
Fear	Caregiver fears about potential injuries or deaths that may arise from unsupervised or unknown firearm access by the person with ADRD	“I mean, if they start getting violent, then you’ve got an issue there. But it has to be done. They have to be taken out of those hands. Because we had an incident already with that, with his ex-wife. And that’s where this whole firearm [issue] started was when he – it was less than about five months ago when he was like mild. Well, he was pointed at her. It was very scary. But he didn’t know what he had done. He didn’t know what he had did.”	
Uncertainty	General confusion, ambiguity, or uncertainties about firearms access, what to do about them, and how to best manage safety concerns when caring for the person with ADRD	“For a lot of families, we’re the first one to bring [the firearms] up and they were just like, ‘Oh gosh, I hadn’t thought about that. Yeah, dad does have a ton of guns and I think they’re in a shoe box under the bed, huh. Let me go see what I can find,’ you know, like that kind of a thing.	
Conflict	Stress and interpersonal conflicts between the caregiver and person with ADRD regarding the person with ADRD’s condition and access to their firearms	“He was diagnosed with dementia I think it was about two years ago and he did a real downslide. And he started having real bad issues with other people taking care of him. He was fighting with them and really being very obnoxious…I mean, this issue with these guns have always been an issue. And as he’s getting worse – he’s way older than I am – as he’s gotten worse, it seems like that is all he can think about and driving his car. That’s two worrisome things for me.”	
Caregiver action			
Temporary removal or storage	Discussions of efforts to temporarily remove, lock, or render inoperable firearms in the home with a person with ADRD	“We talked about a lockbox, but then the question is, who can keep the key? In the past, there have been issues where, let’s say, the male patient doesn’t believe the wife can find the key if they need it. And then that just becomes an issue. I think that’s both for the lockbox and a locked cabinet. So again, I think a lockbox is a good idea. It’s something that I offer.”	
Permanent removal or storage	Discussion of efforts to permanently remove, sell, or give away firearms in the home with a person with ADRD	“He knows where everything is, no matter what. I’ve tried to hide the keys. That didn’t work. But he had spares that he had that we didn’t even know were there…But all in all, [the guns] got to be taken away, completely, 100 percent”.	
Therapeutic lying20	A communication strategy that is deliberately used to avoid causing emotional distress for the person with ADRD.	“So what I mentioned to him is that I bought another [gun safe]. The other one, it’s wearing out, ‘cause it was an old one. And so that’s what we did. We bought a new one and of course we gave him a combination, but the combination doesn’t work, just to make him happy.”	

Key Points

Firearm access is a danger among people with dementia.

Firearm access complicates the management of behavioral disturbances related to dementia.

Dementia caregivers experience varying emotional responses to this issue

Practical efforts taken by caregivers show an ability to limit firearm access

Why Does This Paper Matter?

Understanding caregiver needs is essential in preventing firearm injuries or deaths

Conflicts of Interest

The authors have no competing conflicts of interest to disclose.


References

1. World Health Organization. Dementia - Facts Sheet. Published 2020. Accessed October 2, 2020. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia
2. Müller-Spahn F Behavioral disturbances in dementia. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2003;5 (1 ):49–59.22034255
3. Dahlberg LL , Ikeda RM , Kresnow M . Guns in the Home and Risk of a Violent Death in the Home: Findings from a National Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2004;160 (10 ):929–936. doi:10.1093/aje/kwh309 15522849
4. Rosen T , Makaroun LK , Conwell Y , Betz M . Violence In Older Adults: Scope, Impact, Challenges, And Strategies For Prevention. Health Affairs. 2019;38 (10 ):1630–1637. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2019.00577 31589527
5. O’Leary D , Jyringi D , Sedler M . Childhood conduct problems, stages of Alzheimer’s disease, and physical aggression against caregivers. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2005;20 (5 ):401–405. doi:10.1002/gps.1293 15852459
6. Betz ME , Azrael D , Barber C , Miller M . Public Opinion Regarding Whether Speaking With Patients About Firearms Is Appropriate: Results of a National Survey. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165 (8 ):543–550. doi:10.7326/M16-0739 27455516
7. Boine C , Siegel M , Ross C , Fleegler EW , Alcorn T . What is gun culture? Cultural variations and trends across the United States. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications. 2020;7 (1 ):1–12. doi:10.1057/s41599-020-0520-6
8. Betz ME , McCourt AD , Vernick JS , Ranney ML , Maust DT , Wintemute GJ . Firearms and Dementia: Clinical Considerations. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169 (1 ):47–49. doi:10.7326/M18-0140 29801058
9. Betz ME , Azrael D , Johnson RL , Views on Firearm Safety Among Caregivers of People With Alzheimer Disease and Related Dementias. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3 (7 ):e207756. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.7756 32667652
10. Polzer E , Nearing K , Knoepke C , “Safety in Dementia”: Development of an online caregiver tool for firearm, driving and home safety. Journal for the American Geriatrics Society. 2020;((In press)).
11. Harris PA , Scott KW , Lebo L , Hassan N , Lightner C , Pulley J . ResearchMatch: A National Registry to Recruit Volunteers for Clinical Research: Academic Medicine. 2012;87 (1 ):66–73. doi:10.1097/ACM.0b013e31823ab7d2 22104055
12. Prochaska JO , Johnson S , Lee P . The Transtheoretical Model of behavior change. In: The Handbook of Health Behavior Change, 3rd Ed. Springer Publishing Company; 2009:59–83.
13. Rosenstock IM . The Health Belief Model and Preventive Health Behavior. Health Education Monographs. 1974;2 (4 ):354–386. doi:10.1177/109019817400200405
14. Chen R , Chien W-C , Kao C-C , Analysis of the risk and risk factors for injury in people with and without dementia: a 14-year, retrospective, matched cohort study. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy. 2018;10 (1 ):111. doi:10.1186/s13195-018-0437-0
15. Pinholt EM , Mitchell JD , Butler JH , Kumar H . “Is There a Gun in the Home?” Assessing the Risks of Gun Ownership in Older Adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2014;62 (6 ):1142–1146. doi:10.1111/jgs.12836 24898055
16. Saunders B , Sim J , Kingstone T , Saturation in qualitative research: exploring its conceptualization and operationalization. Qual Quant. 2018;52 (4 ):1893–1907. doi:10.1007/s11135-017-0574-8 29937585
17. Fereday J , Muir-Cochrane E . Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid Approach of Inductive and Deductive Coding and Theme Development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods. 2006;5 (1 ):80–92. doi:10.1177/160940690600500107
18. Timmermans S , Tavory I . Theory Construction in Qualitative Research: From Grounded Theory to Abductive Analysis. Sociological Theory. 2012;30 (3 ):167–186. doi:10.1177/0735275112457914
19. McHugh ML . Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochem Med (Zagreb). 2012;22 (3 ):276–282.23092060
20. Tong A , Sainsbury P , Craig J . Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care. 2007;19 (6 ):349–357. doi:10.1093/intqhc/mzm042 17872937
21. Seaman AT , Stone AM . Little White Lies: Interrogating the (Un)acceptability of Deception in the Context of Dementia. Qual Health Res. 2017;27 (1 ):60–73. doi:10.1177/1049732315618370 26613971
22. Polzer E , Nearing K , Knoepke CE , Matlock DD , McCourt A , Betz ME . “Firearm access in dementia: legal and logistic challenges for caregivers.” International Review of Psychiatry. 2021;0 (0 ):1–9. doi:10.1080/09540261.2021.1887098
23. LoConte NK , Gleason CE , Gunter-Hunt G , Carlsson CM , Siebers M . Standardized note template improves screening of firearm access and driving among veterans with dementia. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2008;23 (4 ):313–318. doi:10.1177/1533317508317061 18453646
24. Tremont G Family Caregiving in Dementia. Med Health R I. 2011;94 (2 ):36–38.21456372
25. Snyder CM , Fauth E , Wanzek J , Dementia caregivers’ coping strategies and their relationship to health and well-being: the Cache County Study. Aging &amp; Mental Health. 2015;19 (5 ):390–399. doi:10.1080/13607863.2014.939610 25093439
26. Mierlo LDV , Meiland FJM , Roest HGV der, Dröes R-M. Personalised caregiver support: effectiveness of psychosocial interventions in subgroups of caregivers of people with dementia. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2012;27 (1 ):1–14. doi:10.1002/gps.2694 21520288
27. Chu H , Yang C-Y , Liao Y-H , The effects of a support group on dementia caregivers’ burden and depression. J Aging Health. 2011;23 (2 ):228–241. doi:10.1177/0898264310381522 20847363
28. Akkerman RL , Ostwald SK . Reducing anxiety in Alzheimer’s disease family caregivers: the effectiveness of a nine-week cognitive-behavioral intervention. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2004;19 (2 ):117–123. doi:10.1177/153331750401900202 15106393
29. San Diego AA. New: Gun safety program. Alzheimer’s San Diego. Published August 10, 2018. Accessed January 23, 2020. https://www.alzsd.org/new-gun-safety-program/
30. Polzer E , Brandspigel S , Kelly T , Betz M . “Gun shop projects” for suicide prevention in the USA: current state and future directions. Inj Prev. Published online March 25, 2020. doi:10.1136/injuryprev-2020-043648
31. Kelly T , Brandspigel S , Polzer E , Betz ME . Firearm Storage Maps: A Pragmatic Approach to Reduce Firearm Suicide During Times of Risk. Ann Intern Med. 2020;172 (5 ):351–353. doi:10.7326/M19-2944 31958811
