LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101500072
35770
Nat Rev Neurol
Nat Rev Neurol
Nature reviews. Neurology
1759-4758
1759-4766

34285392
8403643
10.1038/s41582-021-00529-1
NIHMS1730216
Article
The human connectome in Alzheimer disease — relationship to biomarkers and genetics
Yu Meichen http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4551-0269
123
Sporns Olaf 1234
Saykin Andrew J. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1376-8532
123✉
1 Indiana Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
2 Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
3 Indiana University Network Science Institute, Bloomington, IN, USA.
4 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
Author contributions

M. Y. researched data for the article, made a substantial contribution to discussion of content, wrote the article, and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission. O. S. and A. J. S. researched data for the article, made a substantial contribution to discussion of content, and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission.

✉ asaykin@iupui.edu
4 8 2021
20 7 2021
9 2021
01 9 2022
17 9 545563
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The pathology of Alzheimer disease (AD) damages structural and functional brain networks, resulting in cognitive impairment. The results of recent connectomics studies have now linked changes in structural and functional network organization in AD to the patterns of amyloid-β and tau accumulation and spread, providing insights into the neurobiological mechanisms of the disease. In addition, the detection of gene-related connectome changes might aid in the early diagnosis of AD and facilitate the development of personalized therapeutic strategies that are effective at earlier stages of the disease spectrum. In this article, we review studies of the associations between connectome changes and amyloid-β and tau pathologies as well as molecular genetics in different subtypes and stages of AD. We also highlight the utility of connectome-derived computational models for replicating empirical findings and for tracking and predicting the progression of biomarker-indicated AD pathophysiology.


Alzheimer disease (AD) is a prevalent and disabling neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive neuronal and synaptic loss and concomitant decline in neuronal connectivity. These pathological features damage structural and functional brain networks, leading to severe disturbances of cognition and behaviour. Clinically, early-stage AD is typically characterized by memory disturbances that result from neurodegeneration in the medial temporal lobe1,2. As the disease progresses, this neurodegeneration gradually spreads to the temporal and parietal cortices and, eventually, to most of the cortex. AD-associated disturbances are also observed in other cognitive domains, such as language, visuospatial ability, attention and executive functions. For example, patients might become less able to remember the names of people or objects, navigate while driving, or make financial or other important decisions. Biologically, AD is defined by two principal neuropathological hallmarks: the abnormal accumulation of extracellular amyloid-β (Aβ)-containing plaques and intracellular tau-containing neurofibrillary tangles. Converging evidence indicates that Aβ initially accumulates in the medial frontal cortex and medial parietal cortex3,4, which are both elements of the default-mode network (DMN)5. In contrast, tau is initially deposited in the medial temporal lobe memory system6,7, spreading from the entorhinal cortex to the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex, and then to other brain regions.

Aβ and tau can be examined in vivo in humans using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assays or PET. In addition, promising blood-based assays for AD pathophysiology have now been developed; these assays are less invasive and less costly than the CSF and PET alternatives8. Biomarkers of neurodegeneration or neuronal injury are detected with a range of techniques, including PET (glucose metabolism), MRI (structural, functional and diffusion), EEG and magnetoencephalography (MEG). Of note, changes in AD biomarkers follow a series of stages9,10, with Aβ and tau starting to accumulate in individuals without cognitive impairment decades before AD symptom onset (preclinical AD). Prodromal AD is defined by the onset of initial mild cognitive symptoms that are typically accompanied by changes in biomarkers, including those indicating neurodegeneration. Last, AD dementia is defined by the presence of cognitive impairment coupled with a decline in the ability to perform instrumental activities of daily living. The A/T(N) framework is a practical research-analytic scheme based on specific biomarkers11,12 (BOX 1) that provides a well-defined biological basis for mechanistic brain-network studies in AD.

AD can be categorized on the basis of genetic variants, age of onset and clinical phenotype into familial (or autosomal-dominant) AD and sporadic AD13. Among individuals with sporadic AD, late-onset AD (onset ≥65 years) is typical but a small percentage of individuals have early-onset AD (onset &lt;65 years). Autosomal-dominant AD14,15 is characterized by the presence of a monogenic mutation in one of three genes: APP, which encodes amyloid precursor protein, and PSEN1 and PSEN2, which encode presenilin 1 and 2, respectively15. In contrast to autosomal-dominant AD, sporadic late-onset AD, the most common form of AD, is considered a polygenic disorder and is associated with variants in at least 50 genes16–18, among which the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is the strongest risk factor19,20. Patients with late-onset AD typically present with onset of episodic memory impairment21,22. In contrast, patients with early-onset AD progress more rapidly and present with a higher Aβ and tau burden23,24, greater glucose hypometabolism23, and more diverse cognitive phenotypes25,26 (for example, impairment of language, visuospatial ability, attention, executive functions and apraxia). The three different subtypes of AD share common attributes with regards to Aβ and tau pathologies27 as well as neurodegeneration; however, the other underlying neurobiological mechanisms might differ.

Normal cognitive functioning requires the efficient transfer of information among distributed neuronal populations in functionally specialized brain areas28,29; the disturbance of this information transfer leads to cognitive dysfunction in multiple neurological disorders30–32, including AD33. The neuropathology of Aβ plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles causes progressive neuronal loss and shrinkage together with synaptic impairment in specific cortical and subcortical brain regions, suggesting that AD can be described as a ‘disconnection syndrome’34,35. Recent human connectome studies have provided a theoretical framework, novel quantitative analytic tools and computational network models directed towards a better understanding of the structure and function of brain networks36,37. Here, we survey empirical and modelling studies of the human connectome in AD and examine how such studies can further elucidate the relationship between the connectome and AD pathologies (Aβ and tau), subtypes (autosomal-dominant AD, late-onset AD and early-onset AD), and genetic variation (APOE ε4 and other genes) and might eventually lead to network-level diagnostic biomarkers.

Construction of the human connectome

Large-scale brain networks representing the human connectome can be constructed using several neuroimaging and neurophysiological techniques. This Review focuses on the functional connectome derived from functional MRI (fMRI), EEG, and MEG and the structural connectome extracted from structural and diffusion MRI. The networks within the connectome are composed of nodes (or edges) and links (or connections). EEG and MEG measure oscillatory neuronal activity and, with these techniques, a single source produces a signal at multiple recording sites (EEG electrodes or MEG sensors), an effect known as spatial leakage. This spatial leakage might lead to erroneous estimations of functional connectivity between brain regions. Therefore, EEG and MEG connectivity and network studies usually project the sensor-space neuronal activity back to the underlying sources, the so-called source space. Thus, network nodes can be defined as EEG or MEG electrodes in the sensor space and source-reconstructed brain regions in the source space30.

In MRI studies, nodes are defined by brain parcellations that are based on cytoarchitectonics, anatomical landmarks or connectivity patterns. Links can be defined by four types of brain connectivity: structural connectivity, structural co-variance, functional connectivity and effective connectivity (or directed information flow). Structural connectivity is studied with diffusion (or diffusion tensor) MRI, which uses the diffusion properties of water molecules to assess the local brain tissue microstructure and reflects the physical connection of regions by white matter tracts. Structural co-variance is measured by the co-variance or correlation of morphological measurements, such as brain volume, cortical thickness and surface area, in two or more brain regions. Functional connectivity denotes symmetrical statistical dependencies in the recorded time series of neuronal activity in different brain regions and is established indirectly from fMRI or directly from EEG and MEG38. Effective connectivity29,39,40, defined as a directed causal influence from one brain region on another, is not covered here.

Cytoarchitectonics

The study of the spatial distribution pattern of neurons within the central nervous system; the size, shape, packing density and staining intensity of neuronal cell bodies in six layers are used to characterize a specific cytoarchitectural area.

The structural or functional connectome can be represented as a connectivity matrix41. In this matrix, each row or column corresponds to a node (or a brain region in a structural or functional connectome) and the matrix entry or element corresponds to the link (structural or functional connectivity) between two nodes. In this Review, we focus on connectomes constructed from neuroimaging data, which contain links that are generally undirected or symmetrical. Depending on the scientific questions of interest, the connectivity matrices can be analysed as weighted graphs42 or further binarized to unweighted matrices43, where each element is either 1 (if there is a link between two nodes) or 0 (if there is no link). Then, the topological properties of a connectome can be characterized by computing a series of graph theoretical metrics, such as clustering coefficient, path length-based metrics, centrality and modularity (BOX 2), on the weighted or binarized connectivity matrix.

Clustering coefficient

The fraction of a node’s directly connected neighbours that are also neighbours of each other.

Path length

The number of links connecting any two nodes in a network.

Centrality

Measures that quantify the importance of a node or a link in a network.

Modularity

A measure that quantifies the degree to which a network can be partitioned into subnetworks or modules.

The connectome in health

Since 2000, studies of the structural and functional brain connectomes30,44,45 in individuals without cognitive impairment have identified small-world46, rich-club47,48 and (hierarchically) modular49–51 organization, evident at multiple scales52. In the human brain, the precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) are two of the largest network hubs to be consistently identified in MEG53, fMRI54,55 and DTI56,57 studies. Evidence also indicates that the hippocampus is a critical hub in the human connectome58 and that it supports memory formation and consolidation59. Similarly, the medial and lateral entorhinal cortices in the medial temporal lobe form putative hubs in the network topology of the connectome across several species60.

Small-world

A network property of high average clustering coefficient and short average shortest path length.

Rich-club

A network has this property when nodes with high degree centrality are more densely interconnected between each other than expected.

The human brain connectome consists of multiple subnetworks, called modules or communities. Brain network modules promote the segregation of neural information and hubs promote the integration of such information51,61; both processes are essential for the operation of the distributed networks that underlie cognitive function29. In particular, resting-state fMRI62,63, task-based fMRI64,65 and structural MRI66 studies have identified a number of similar subnetworks in the human brain, including the DMN, frontoparietal, salience, dorsal/ventral attention, cingulo-opercular, sensorimotor, visual, auditory and subcortical networks (FIG. 1). These subnetworks are connected by hubs and each has important roles in specific sensorimotor and cognitive domains67. Importantly, these network properties, particularly network hubs68,69, have been associated with genetic variation70 and transcriptomic71 factors in healthy individuals.

The connectome in AD

Both structural and functional network studies have shown that, compared with ageing individuals without cognitive impairment, brain networks in individuals with AD are characterized by a loss of small-world features (trending towards random and/or regular network topology)30, disturbed modular structure72–74 and changes in hub regions — particularly those located in the DMN53,75,76 and medial temporal lobe53,77. Of note, the precuneus/PCC (part of the DMN) and entorhinal cortex (located in the medial temporal lobe) are initial deposition sites of the Aβ and tau78 proteins, respectively (FIG. 2). Many summaries of human connectome studies in individuals without cognitive impairment28,36,41,79 and in individuals with AD dementia80,81 are available. Here, we specifically discuss studies that provide information on the effects of Aβ pathology, tau pathology and genetic variation on functional and structural network organization in different subtypes and stages of AD.

Aβ-associated changes

Structural connectome.

The results of imaging studies indicate distinctive stage-specific effects of Aβ pathology on different structural connectome features. The topology of structural covariance networks, including grey-matter networks and cortical-thickness networks, constructed from structural MRI data82 shows an association with the overall degree of Aβ pathology in individuals with subjective cognitive decline (SCD; BOX 1) or mild cognitive impairment (MCI; BOX 1). In particular, several grey-matter network83,84 studies have shown that, in individuals with SCD who are positive for Aβ, a greater severity of Aβ pathology measured by CSF Aβ42 (REF.85) and PET imaging86 is not associated with global or local grey matter volume but is associated with a lower degree of grey-matter network small-worldness, especially at the medial temporal lobe and hub areas (precuneus and orbitofrontal cortex) in the DMN. These studies involved the construction of one grey-matter network per participant (single-participant connectome) in contrast to the more common practice of constructing grey-matter networks at a group level. The results of other single-participant grey-matter network studies indicate that a grey-matter network topology in individuals who are positive for Aβ is associated with the risk of clinical progression from SCD to MCI or AD dementia87, enabling the prediction of future hippocampal atrophy and cognitive impairment88. Of note, this association was not observed in age-matched individuals who were negative for Aβ, indicating that the relationship between grey-matter network topology and hippocampal atrophy is specific to individuals with Aβ pathology at the preclinical stage of AD.

Consistent with the findings in grey-matter networks, cortical-thickness networks in individuals without cognitive impairment who were positive for Aβ showed no significant regional cortical atrophy but did have lower global efficiency, modularity and hubness than individuals without cognitive impairment who were negative for Aβ89. These structural network changes preceded detectable cortical thinning and suggest that metrics derived from structural covariance networks are associated with biomarkers of Aβ pathology.

Global efficiency

The average inverse shortest path length in the network.

The reported associations between Aβ pathology and DTI-derived structural network metrics are inconsistent across studies. One study reported that local structural connectivity — quantified by several weighted structural connectome metrics, including the nodal strength, weighted local efficiency and weighted clustering coefficient — decreased as a function of disease stage (without cognitive impairment &gt; MCI &gt; AD), particularly in the bilateral frontal and temporal regions90. Of note, these weighted structural connectome metrics were negatively correlated with cortical Aβ burden, independent of brain region. Another DTI study91 investigated the association between the cortical Aβ burden and post-mortem structural connectome topology in individuals without dementia. In this study, Aβ burden was negatively correlated with several global (global efficiency, degree and clustering coefficient) and local (nodal degree in PCC and clustering coefficient in precuneus) connectivity metrics but positively correlated with local efficiency in the highly connected PCC. The inconsistency regarding local efficiency might be a result of the use of different graph metrics (applied to weighted or unweighted networks) and differences in DTI data acquisition (in vivo or in situ) as well as differences in processing between the two studies.

Local efficiency

The inverse of the average shortest path length of all neighbours of the node and an alternative local connectivity metric to the clustering coefficient.

The DTI studies described above provided evidence that the progression of Aβ pathology along the AD continuum gives rise to a shift towards a more regular network topology and the diffuse loss of local structural connectivity. Notably, in a diffusion MRI study, reduced structural connectivity in the posteromedial hubs of the DMN was observed in individuals with MCI and AD compared with older individuals without cognitive impairment; however, the degeneration of white matter fibre tracts was observed in individuals who are negative for Aβ, indicating that the neurodegenerative changes are not specifically related to Aβ pathology92. DTI-derived measures of white matter integrity, for example, fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity, are useful markers for the prediction of longitudinal cognitive decline in preclinical AD93–95. However, evidence suggests that Aβ pathology does not influence white matter integrity at early stages of AD93,94,96. One possible interpretation of these findings is that global and local structural brain connectome metrics are more sensitive than measures of white matter integrity to Aβ-related changes97,98. Further study of the possible link between Aβ pathology and abnormalities in the DTI-derived structural brain connectome could provide more information on the effects of Aβ pathology on network-level neurodegeneration and its relationship to cognitive dysfunction. Of note, a study published in 2018 reported that the integrity of white matter connections along the uncinate fasciculus, superior longitudinal fasciculus and cingulum bundle was altered in individuals with AD who were positive for Aβ compared with individuals without cognitive impairment with a mixed Aβ positivity (27% individuals who were positive for Aβ); however, no significant difference in structural connectome organization was observed between the two groups99. This inconsistency could be a result of network thresholding issues (BOX 3). Furthermore, the results of DTI-derived structural brain connectome studies should be interpreted with caution as the anatomical accuracy of structural connectivity measures100 and the reliability of tractography estimations101,102 continue to be subject to methodological investigation and refinement.

Functional connectome.

Functional connectome studies generally involve fMRI or electromagnetic recording of resting brain activity. The results of these studies suggest that, in individuals with AD, Aβ accumulation and abnormal brain network connectivity are spatially colocalized in highly connected hub areas. In early AD, including preclinical and prodromal AD, studies using different neuroimaging modalities, such as MEG53 and fMRI103, have shown that the degree of abnormality in functional brain network connectivity is associated with the degree of Aβ pathology (CSF and PET) but not tau pathology (CSF). These findings suggest that Aβ pathology, as opposed to tau pathology, drives functional connectome changes at the early stages of AD. Indeed, a seminal fMRI-based connectome study found that, in individuals with AD, Aβ tends to accumulate at cortical hubs located in the DMN, including the PCC/precuneus, lateral parietal cortex, lateral temporal cortex, and medial and lateral prefrontal cortices75. Furthermore, a striking colocalization of Aβ accumulation and abnormal hub connectivity was observed, accompanied by a strong positive correlation between the level of Aβ deposition and degree centrality. Several subsequent studies have found evidence that the association between Aβ pathology and decreased DMN (in particular, the posteromedial components of DMN) connectivity is also identifiable in preclinical AD3,104,105, prodromal AD106,107,174,175 and early-onset AD108. Evidence also indicates that the reduction in DMN connectivity mediates the association between Aβ pathology and cognitive impairment in prodromal AD106.

Degree centrality

The number of links a node has to other nodes in a network.

The results of a longitudinal study showed that, in individuals with normal levels of CSF Aβ42 and Aβ-PET who subsequently converted to having abnormal CSF Aβ42, Aβ initially accumulated in the DMN and parts of the frontoparietal network; the sensorimotor and visual networks showed the least Aβ accumulation at these early stages4 (FIG. 3). Of note, when CSF Aβ42 levels became abnormal, individuals had hypoconnectivity within the DMN and between the DMN and the frontoparietal network but without brain atrophy or glucose hypometabolism. This finding suggests that Aβ-associated network hypoconnectivity in preclinical AD precedes other biomarkers of neurodegeneration such as brain atrophy and glucose hypometabolism. In another fMRI study, DMN connectivity was examined at different stages along the AD continuum: without cognitive impairment, SCD, early-stage MCI, late-stage MCI and AD109. The results support the hypothesis that the network failure associated with AD starts in the posterior components of the DMN before amyloid plaques can be identified by PET imaging and spread to other brain areas through network hubs.

The results of several studies indicate that Aβ-associated abnormalities in functional network connectivity are not confined to the DMN but also involve other brain networks at both early stages of AD as well as later in the disease. In a MEG study, several hub regions — located in the left hippocampus, posterior parts of the DMN and occipital regions — had altered connectivity in young (age 60.6 ± 5.4 years) individuals with AD compared with healthy controls53. In the individuals with AD, the degree of abnormality in the connectivity of these hubs correlated with the severity of cognitive impairment and with Aβ pathology (CSF Aβ42). Several fMRI studies have identified Aβ-related connectivity changes in multiple resting-state networks. For example, an fMRI study reported negative correlations between regional severity of Aβ pathology and longitudinal changes in functional connectivity between the DMN, the frontoparietal network and the temporal cortex in individuals without cognitive impairment. A densely sampled (five observations over 3 years) fMRI study110 reported a similar (in effect size) influence of Aβ pathology on longitudinal change in DMN and salience network connectivity as well as on longitudinal changes in cognitive performance and hippocampal volume in individuals with preclinical AD. However, the change in network connectivity was independent of the changes in cognitive performance and hippocampal volume, suggesting that functional network connectivity in the DMN and salience network can be used to track aspects of AD progression that are not captured by cognitive and structural measurements.

The human medial temporal lobe, consisting of hippocampus, parahippocampal cortex, entorhinal cortex and perirhinal cortex, plays an important role in supporting episodic memory, which is typically disturbed in individuals with AD. Therefore, it has been hypothesized that AD pathology (Aβ and/or tau) causes decreased functional connectivity between the medial temporal lobe and the anterior and posterior components of DMN, resulting in cognitive dysfunction in early AD. In line with this notion, a longitudinal multi-modal MRI (fMRI and DTI) study reported Aβ-related changes in functional connectivity between the medial temporal lobe and DMN in individuals without cognitive impairment who were positive for Aβ and in individuals with MCI111. In particular, in comparison with individuals without cognitive impairment who were negative for Aβ, individuals without cognitive impairment who were positive for Aβ had decreased functional connectivity between the anterior parts of the medial temporal lobe and the anterior DMN and individuals with MCI who were positive for Aβ had decreased connectivity between the hippocampus and the posteromedial DMN. Of note, in individuals without cognitive impairment who were positive for Aβ, the degree of functional hypoconnectivity between the medial temporal lobe and anterior DMN was correlated with tau pathology (measured by CSF phosphorylated tau (p-tau)) and baseline memory impairment; the relationship between functional hypo-connectivity and memory impairment was present at baseline as well as during the 8 years of follow-up. The degree of functional hypoconnectivity between the medial temporal lobe and posterior DMN in individuals with MCI who were positive for Aβ correlated with entorhinal atrophy and reduced white matter integrity of the parahippocampal cingulum. These findings not only support the theory that functional network abnormalities and/or cognitive dysfunction in preclinical AD is driven by Aβ pathology and precedes structural changes but also suggest that subsequent structural changes in prodromal AD are related to increased tau pathology, with disease progression facilitated by Aβ pathology.

In summary, the studies discussed in this section provide converging evidence that Aβ pathology is preferentially associated with decreased network connectivity in the DMN and medial temporal lobe in early stages of AD and that the association extends to other brain networks with progression of the disease.

Tau-associated changes

Structural connectome.

One hypothesis regarding the progression of tau pathology in AD is that tau protein spreads from the medial temporal lobe to other network hubs, in particular the posteromedial DMN112. Ongoing research is attempting to determine the cellular mechanisms of tau pathology progression, which might include cell-to-cell ‘prion-like’ spreading; however, this level of detail cannot be resolved using current neuroimaging techniques. The results of a landmark multi-modal (Aβ-PET, tau-PET, and structural and diffusion MRI) longitudinal imaging study in individuals with preclinical AD showed that tau indeed spreads from the hippocampus in the medial temporal lobe to the posteromedial DMN, particularly the PCC, through the hippocampal cingulum bundle113. The study reported an association between hippocampal cingulum bundle diffusivity and tau accumulation in the PCC and this association was stronger in the presence of higher levels of amyloid accumulation, providing evidence that Aβ pathology facilitates tau spreading. In addition, hippocampal cingulum bundle diffusivity predicted progressive memory dysfunction in individuals who were positive for Aβ with high levels of tau accumulation in the PCC, providing evidence that Aβ and tau pathologies facilitate memory dysfunction.

In another multi-modal study, the relationship between levels of tau accumulation and structural connectivity differed on the basis of Aβ status in individuals with amnestic MCI or mild AD114. For example, in individuals who were negative for Aβ without cognitive impairment, levels of tau deposition in the medial temporal lobe and across the entire cerebrum showed a positive correlation with structural connectivity. Conversely, in individuals who were positive for Aβ and with amnestic MCI or mild AD, tau deposition negatively correlated with structural connectivity in the same medial temporal lobe areas and in the cerebrum as a whole as well as in some DMN hubs, including the anterior and posterior cingulate cortices and precuneus. These results suggest that the relationship between tau and structural connectivity changes in an Aβ-dependent manner as AD progresses.

Data on the effects of tau pathology on the organization of the structural connectome as estimated by conventional structural MRI-based measurements, such as grey matter volumes and cortical thickness values, are not yet available. However, quite a few studies have detected prospective and retrospective relationships between elevated tau burden and cortical atrophy115–117 as well as grey matter lesions118–120 at different stages of the AD continuum. As structural covariance network metrics have shown superior sensitivity to conventional structural measurements for capturing the effects of Aβ pathology on the progression of AD (see section on Aβ-associated structural connectome changes), future studies will be required to probe whether tau has an additional or distinctive role in shaping the changes in structural covariance network organization that occur in AD.

Functional connectome.

Tau pathology has been hypothesized to have specific effects on the human functional connectome, depending on and/or independent of Aβ pathology. Early studies investigated the relationships between functional network connectivity and tau pathology (CSF levels of p-tau)121,122. For example, in MEG122 and fMRI121 studies, higher levels of CSF p-tau and lower levels of CSF Aβ42 in preclinical AD (without cognitive impairment and/or with MCI) were independently correlated with reduced functional connectivity involving the anterior and posterior (PCC) hubs of the DMN and medial temporal areas.

With the development of in vivo tau-PET tracers, more recent studies have focused on examining spatial associations between tau pathology and the organization of the functional brain connectome. To date, most of these studies used data from individuals who were positive for Aβ or groups of individuals with mixed Aβ status (positive and negative for Aβ). A resting-state fMRI study provided evidence that, in individuals who are positive for Aβ without cognitive impairment, higher tau accumulation in the inferior temporal cortex is associated with lower functional connectivity in the DMN and the salience network, where the Aβ preferentially deposits123. This result suggests that the associations between tau and functional connectivity in individuals who are positive for Aβ at early AD stages might be modulated by the Aβ pathology. In addition, the results of a recent task-based fMRI study124 in individuals without cognitive impairment with mixed Aβ status indicate that the abnormal accumulation of tau burden in the medial temporal lobe memory system is associated with increased neural activation in both the medial temporal lobe and the posteromedial hubs of the DMN. Of note, it seems that initial deposits of both tau and Aβ, although they accumulated at different locations in the brain, negatively correlated with cognitive performance at the preclinical stage of AD124. Indeed, the results of an fMRI study in older adults and young adults without cognitive impairment indicated that tau pathology has a key role in disconnecting the hippocampus from other components of the medial temporal lobe in healthy ageing, leading to worse memory performance125.

By the time prodromal AD progresses to AD dementia, Aβ pathology is diffusely distributed across the cerebral cortex126,127. Therefore, if Aβ pathology facilitates the association between tau pathology and functional connectivity in Aβ-positive AD dementia, tau pathology would be expected to affect multiple brain networks and global network properties at this stage of the disease. Indeed, recent resting-state studies128,129 have reported that, in Aβ-positive AD dementia, the association between tau burden and functional connectivity does not seem to be specific to the DMN but also affects other resting-state networks. In particular, the results of a resting-state fMRI study showed that, in Aβ-positive AD dementia, covariance in tau accumulation was positively associated with functional connectivity within and/or between multiple resting-state networks, including the DMN, frontoparietal network, limbic network, dorsal/ventral attention networks, and visual and sensorimotor networks129 (FIG. 4). This study also found that the functional network connectivity, together with levels of tau accumulation at baseline, could accurately predict future tau accumulation, further supporting the hypothesis that tau spreads via functional connections in AD130,131. In addition, the results of an fMRI study in individuals with AD dementia indicated that hub areas from multiple resting-state networks show more tau accumulation than non-hubs132. This accumulation of tau at hubs was associated with a reduction in local connectivity, as quantified by weighted degree and local efficiency (degree and local efficiency can be computed in weighted brain networks without thresholding; BOX 3), supporting the hypothesis that tau pathology affects network hubs in AD dementia.

One hypothesis is that Aβ and tau pathology affect different resting-state networks133,134. This hypothesis also states that — at the late stage of AD — it is tau pathology, not Aβ pathology, that is correlated with cognitive decline and changes in other AD biomarkers133,134. In agreement with this notion, several studies125,131,135,136 have reported that patterns of Aβ accumulation predominantly overlap with the DMN, whereas patterns of tau accumulation overlap with other resting-state networks such as the limbic network, the anterior-temporal network and the visual network. In these studies, the degree of tau accumulation also correlated with several downstream biomarkers, including glucose hypometabolism, white matter integrity and grey matter volume, as well as with multiple cognitive functions. Therefore, integrating Aβ and tau imaging data in the same studies might help us identify specific contributors to neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment.

It should be noted that the associations between tau pathology and functional connectivity in the above studies might be affected by the presence of Aβ pathology. Indeed, several recent studies have reported interactive effects of Aβ and tau on functional connectivity123,137. For example, a multi-modal neuroimaging study measured fMRI, Aβ-PET and tau-PET in older adults without cognitive impairment. Participants who were positive for Aβ and with low neocortical tau levels had higher levels of DMN and salience network connectivity than participants who are negative for Aβ, and connectivity in these networks decreased as tau levels increased in these individuals over time123. However, another fMRI-PET study found that, in older adults without cognitive impairment, tau accumulation in the inferior temporal cortex was associated with increased hippocampal activity but not with Aβ accumulation137. Therefore, to isolate the effects of Aβ pathology on the association between tau and functional connectivity, studies will need to be conducted in individuals who are negative for Aβ.

In support of this notion, an fMRI-PET study reported that higher functional connectivity between any given pair of brain regions is associated with stronger tau covariance, particularly in the inferior temporal cortex and medial temporal lobe130. Importantly, this association between tau and functional connectivity was present in the absence of detectable Aβ pathology: it was observed in both individuals without cognitive impairment who are either positive or negative for Aβ and in individuals with a diagnosis of MCI or AD. Indeed, in another fMRI-PET study, entorhinal cortex seed-based connectivity analysis confirmed that stronger connectivity between the entorhinal seed and other brain regions was associated with higher levels of tau accumulation138. Moreover, although this relationship between tau and functional connectivity was enhanced by Aβ accumulation, it was also present in individuals who were negative for Aβ.

The connectome in subtypes of AD

Late-onset AD

Functional connectome.

Different subtypes of AD, such as late-onset AD, autosomal-dominant AD and early-onset AD, are associated with distinctive genetic variants, which raises the question of whether these subtypes alter the connectome in different ways. APOE ε4 has a dominant effect on neuropathology139,140 and cognitive dysfunction141 in late-onset AD. Therefore, connectome studies in this subtype of AD have focused on comparing APOE ε4 carriers and APOE ε4 non-carriers13,142. Convergent evidence from several fMRI studies suggests that APOE ε4 has an important role in modulating network connectivity changes, particularly in the DMN, at different stages of AD. An early fMRI study reported that, in the absence of abnormal Aβ accumulation, APOE ε4 carriers had lower levels of functional connectivity in the DMN than APOE ε4 non-carriers143. The results of subsequent fMRI studies supported this finding144–146 and identified APOE ε4-related changes in functional network connectivity and network topology in multiple resting-state networks, including the salience147,148, temporal146, visual149, frontoparietal and sensorimotor networks145, at the preclinical stages of AD. Of note, in a longitudinal fMRI study, the effects of APOE ε4 on DMN connectivity in individuals with SCD persisted with the progression of the disease, regardless of the level of Aβ accumulation144.

The relationship between family history and functional network connectivity has also been studied in APOE ε4 non-carriers with late-onset AD150–152. Even in the absence of APOE ε4, individuals without cognitive impairment with a family history of late-onset AD had lower resting-state DMN connectivity than individuals without a family history of the disease150. In individuals with a family history of late-onset AD, SCD was associated with higher resting-state DMN connectivity151; in these individuals with memory decline, a higher connectivity was associated with better memory, attention and global cognition at baseline but was associated with a greater degree of memory decline over time. One hypothesis is that, as functional network connectivity measurements seem to be closely related to cognitive and clinical phenotypes, they might be useful for predicting disease progression in individuals with late-onset AD and a known family history of the disease. Indeed, in a machine-learning study, functional network connectivity in the DMN, salience network and limbic network, together with grey matter volumes, accurately predicted age of symptom onset in individuals with late-onset AD and a family history of the disease152.

Structural connectome.

APOE ε4-associated alterations to the structural brain connectome are similar to those observed in the functional brain connectome, that is, they involve the DMN and medial temporal lobe. In particular, DTI studies have reported that APOE ε4 carriers with preclinical late-onset AD have an age-related loss of local connectivity, which is characterized by a reduction in clustering coefficient153, local efficiency154 and betweenness centrality155 compared with non-carrier controls without cognitive impairment. This reduction affects both the posterior and frontal hubs of the DMN, including the precuneus, medial orbitofrontal cortex, and anterior and posterior cingulate cortices. In these DTI studies, the degree of DMN connectivity abnormality was associated with the degree of episodic memory impairment as well as with attentional and executive dysfunction. In addition, substantial APOE ε4-associated disruption of structural connectivity in the medial temporal lobe regions, for example, lower efficiency in the right hippocampus156 and parahippocampal gyrus157, has been reported in individuals without cognitive impairment and in individuals with MCI. Of note, a resting-state DTI-fMRI study found that APOE ε4-associated network changes were already detectable in APOE ε4 carriers during middle age158. This observation suggests that connectome organization is affected by APOE ε4 decades before the onset of symptoms and might be a promising biomarker for the early detection of AD.

Going beyond the APOE genotype, two genome-wide association studies reported specific associations between changes in the organization of the structural connectome and multiple AD-associated genetic variants159,160. One of these studies, a novel cross-sectional genome-wide association study in healthy adult twins, identified a connectome-wide, genome-wide association between DTI-based structural connectivity and a variant in SPON1 (REF.160). Of note, SPON1 encodes Spondin 1 (also known as F-spondin), which is expressed in the hippocampus and facilitates outgrowth of hippocampal embryonic neurons161. SPON1 also interacts with APOE to regulate Aβ accumulation162,163. Importantly, individuals with the SPON1 variant had less severe dementia than individuals without the variant, independent of APOE genotype, indicating protective effects of the SPON1 variant in preclinical, late-onset AD. Taken together, these findings indirectly suggest a role for SPON1 in the structural connectivity changes that occur in late-onset AD, indicating that structural brain network changes in this type of AD are related to variants in multiple genes and not to the APOE genotype alone.

Autosomal-dominant AD

In contrast to late-onset AD and sporadic early-onset AD, autosomal-dominant AD is caused by monogenic, deterministic mutations in one of three genes: APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2. In addition, individuals with autosomal-dominant AD often show a consistent temporal pattern of biomarker changes126,127: first, an increase in Aβ (CSF Aβ42 and Aβ-PET); second, an increase in tau (CSF p-tau and tau-PET); third, hypometabolism; fourth, cortical atrophy; and last, clinical decline. The age at onset of autosomal-dominant AD is also consistent within families14,15. Therefore, studying brain connectome changes in individuals with autosomal-dominant AD, in whom biomarker changes and symptom onset are predictable, could enable a more precise assessment of the effects of known genetic mutations and disease progression than is possible in individuals with other AD subtypes.

Structural connectome.

Quite a few studies have reported evidence of grey mater atrophy126,127 and altered diffusion properties of white matter164,165 in individuals at the preclinical stages of autosomal-dominant AD; however, published work on the structural brain connectome in this subtype of the disease remains scarce. In a comprehensive longitudinal study, structural grey-matter networks were constructed for 269 autosomal-dominant AD mutation carriers and 170 non-carriers; both cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses were performed166. In the cross-sectional analysis, the earliest difference between carriers and non-carriers was a lower normalized path length — particularly in the precuneus — in carriers ~12 years before estimated symptom onset. In the longitudinal analysis, the earliest difference between the two groups of participants was a reduction in normalized clustering coefficient, connection density and degree in the mutation carriers 6 years before symptom onset. In the cross-sectional analysis, greater Aβ accumulation, higher levels of neurodegeneration biomarkers (glucose hypometabolism and precuneus cortical thinning) and greater cognitive decline were associated with a lower small-world coefficient at baseline. In the longitudinal analysis, faster changes in Aβ accumulation, neurodegeneration biomarker levels and cognitive decline were related to the concurrent decrease in the small-world coefficient over time. The study also found that global network connectivity was lower in PSEN1 mutation carriers than in APP or PSEN2 mutation carriers, suggesting that mutations in the different autosomal-dominant AD genes do not result in the same connectivity changes.

Functional connectome.

To date, functional connectome changes in autosomal-dominant AD have been assessed with fMRI only. In one such fMRI study, Chhatwal et al. assessed DMN functional connectivity in asymptomatic autosomal-dominant AD mutation carriers (APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2) and non-carriers from the same families and found that the mutation carriers had a lower connectivity, particularly in the PCC/precuneus and right parietal cortex167. Of note, the disruption of DMN connectivity in mutation carriers worsened as the disease progressed. In a more recent fMRI study, both autosomal-dominant AD and late-onset AD were associated with reduced functional connectivity in multiple resting-state networks, including the DMN, dorsal attention network and cingulo-opercular network (also referred to as the salience network)168. Consistent with the findings of Chhatwal et al.167, autosomal-dominant AD mutation carriers showed a lower functional connectivity in these multiple resting-state networks than non-carriers, slightly preceding their predicted age of symptom onset. The most recent of this series of fMRI connectivity studies, published in 2018, also reported specific effects of autosomal-dominant AD mutations on the degradation of the DMN and dorsal attention network in the preclinical stage of the disease169. The results of these three fMRI studies suggest that mutations in APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 influence the rate of network-level neurodegeneration.

The relationship between functional connectome organization, tau accumulation and cognitive decline in the various subtypes of AD has also been studied using fMRI techniques. In particular, one study reported an association between higher functional connectivity in frontal hub areas and slower impairment of memory and global cognition in individuals with late-onset AD and in autosomal-dominant AD mutation carriers170. This higher connectivity was also associated with smaller effects of tau on cognitive decline in individuals with preclinical, Aβ-positive late-onset AD.

Early-onset AD

Compared with late-onset and autosomal-dominant AD, fewer brain connectome studies have been performed in sporadic early-onset AD, which comprises about 4–6% of all AD171,172. In one fMRI study, compared with individuals without cognitive impairment, individuals with early-onset AD had alterations in global and local network connectivity, characterized by a lower clustering coefficient in sensorimotor regions and a longer path length in the temporal lobe173.

A few DTI studies reported that early-onset AD is associated with impaired structural connectivity176,177 and rich-club attributes178 in posterior brain regions. As discussed in the previous section, typical late-onset AD is characterized by the disruption of functional and structural network connectivity involving the DMN and hippocampus, which are likely to play prominent roles in memory processing. Therefore, the connectivity changes in posterior brain regions associated with early-onset AD might explain why individuals with early-onset AD usually show cognitive dysfunction in diverse cognitive domains, including the visuo-spatial, attention and executive domains, in contrast to the loss of episodic memory that is observed in late-onset AD.

Pathological protein spread

Converging evidence from both human studies and transgenic mouse models (BOX 4) have shown that the misfolded proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases — such as Aβ and tau in AD and α-synuclein in Parkinson disease — exhibit stereotypical spatiotemporal patterns of accumulation. One hypothesis is that these patterns reflect prion-like transneuronal spread along structural connections179–182. This hypothesis is supported by the findings of many studies in transgenic mouse models. These studies reported that misfolded tau can spread via neuronal pathways following a prion-like process, which seems to be facilitated by Aβ pathology183,184. The tau spreading hypothesis is also supported by studies in humans that combine tau-PET with functional and/or diffusion MRI113,129,130.

The other main hypothesis185 is that these patterns reflect a selective neuronal abnormality (or vulnerability) of specific brain regions186–189. This hypothesis originates from the observation that some neurons become structurally and functionally abnormal earlier in the course of AD than others186,187. The initial patterns of Aβ and tau accumulation detected with PET seem to support this hypothesis as Aβ is initially deposited in the medial hubs (medial prefrontal cortex and PCC/precuneus) of the DMN and tau is initially deposited in the entorhinal cortex, providing evidence that specific hub regions are selectively vulnerable to Aβ and tau pathologies in AD. In addition, the hubs that show early Aβ accumulation are also areas of high metabolic demand190. Thus, the selective abnormality of network hubs in AD could be interpreted in terms of metabolism. Specifically, studies have demonstrated that highly connected hub regions demand high metabolic energy by means of oxidative glucose metabolism191,192. In addition, a mouse connectome study68 found that hub connectivity is driven by gene pathways that regulate the oxidative synthesis and metabolism of ATP. Therefore, these high-cost hubs will be prone to showing abnormal connectivity when under metabolic stress193. Indeed, growing evidence indicates that higher Aβ accumulation in the DMN is related to stronger regional hypometabolism in the DMN and other functionally connected brain regions107,190. In other studies, the spatial location of hypometabolism was strongly associated with patterns of tau accumulation in different subtypes of AD (late-onset AD194,195, early-onset AD196 and autosomal-dominant AD27). However, the relationship between tau-associated hypometabolism and connectome changes has not yet been investigated in AD. In the future, studies integrating connectome (measured by MRI or MEG) with multi-modal (tau, Aβ and FDG) PET might facilitate the identification of interactive associations among the connectome, tau, Aβ and glucose hypometabolism.

Connectome-based computational models

Computational models (BOX 5) provide a complementary method to test theoretical hypotheses — model findings can then be compared with empirical data. In particular, computational models can be used to simulate and replicate patterns of Aβ and tau pathologies identified by PET imaging data, testing the selective vulnerability hypothesis and the pathogenic spreading hypothesis discussed above. Going beyond replicating empirical findings, computational models could also be used to track and predict the trajectories of Aβ and tau progression, uncovering the dynamic relationships between connectome changes and AD pathologies. Indeed, the selective abnormality of hubs to misfolded protein is supported by the results of studies that simulated network changes with neural mass models, which are typically built on an anatomical network estimated from DTI data and generate EEG and MEG-like data (BOX 5). In particular, a computational model of AD found that abnormal hub connectivity was caused by excessive neuronal activity, which resulted in the degeneration of networks197. In a more recent computational study, the disruption of functional network hubs by pathological increases in neuronal activity198 could be opposed by the targeted adjustment of neuronal excitability levels199. An Aβ-PET and FDG-PET study reported that Aβ accumulation propagates through hubs in the human DMN, leading to hypometabolism in spatially distant but functionally connected brain regions, contributing to the evidence that distant Aβ accumulation can induce regional metabolic abnormalities190,200,201. This observation was reproduced in transgenic rats that form Aβ pathology but do not form neurofibrillary tangles (tau pathology), indicating that the Aβ-induced abnormal connectivity of hubs is independent of tau pathology. Taken together, these findings highlight the importance of network hubs in maintaining an optimal balance between the segregation and integration of information transfer and also suggest that hubs can facilitate the early spreading of AD pathology.

In a few studies, epidemic spreading models (ESM) (BOX 5) successfully replicated the Aβ accumulation and tau spreading patterns identified in empirical data. In particular, one simulation study used an ESM to test the tau spread hypothesis202. Using the entorhinal cortex as the epicentre, the ESM was applied to the DTI-based structural connectome of young individuals without cognitive impairment and explained &lt;70% of the variance in the spatial pattern of tau-PET signal in individuals along the AD continuum (FIG. 5). The ESM was also fitted over the functional connectome and a euclidean distance matrix, but the ESM fitted over the structural connectome outperformed both, suggesting that tau proteins mainly spread through structural connectome pathways rather than through functional connectivity203 or simply between neighbouring brain regions184. The results of this study also support the hypothesis that, although tau accumulation occurs independent of Aβ pathology, tau spreading is facilitated by a greater Aβ burden. A more recent tau-PET study identified four subtypes of tau spreading patterns, each of which spatially overlaps with a different brain subnetwork, that is, the limbic network, the medial temporal lobe network, the visual network or the lateral temporal network204. Of note, in this study, ESMs with different preselected epicentres (BOX 5) were used to simulate the four tau spreading subtypes, indicating that tau spreads through different subnetworks in different subtypes.

Epidemic spreading models

(eSM). Computational models simulating the spreading patterns of amyloid-β and tau from a preselected epicentre to different brain regions via structural connections.

Euclidean distance matrix

A symmetric matrix, in which each element is computed by estimating the euclidean distance between the centre coordinates of two brain regions.

Network diffusion models (NDNs; BOX 5) have also been used to investigate the patterns of pathology in AD. These models indicated that AD pathology spreads diffusively and predicted future patterns of cortical atrophy and glucose hypometabolism patterns205–208. Specifically, one study reported that the abnormal connectivity of network hubs in AD can be predicted by a linear model based on the regional expression of a few candidate AD genes (APP, MAPT, PRNP) in healthy brains207. Moreover, combining NDN and regional gene expression patterns in the linear prediction model and selecting the entorhinal cortex as the seed improved the ability of the model to predict regional atrophy and hypometabolism patterns. These results support a role for brain connectivity patterns in the spreading of AD pathology97 and the importance of network models in terms of predicting disease progression, going beyond their utility as descriptive tools for the characterization of brain structure and function36,209. Of note, both the NDN and ESM have been used for the prediction of disease progression but the performance of the two models has not been directly compared using identical connectome data, which could be an interesting future direction.

Network diffusion models

(NDMs). Computational models simulating Alzheimer disease progression on brain networks using a network heat equation.

Challenges and opportunities

Despite the substantial progress that has been made in the analysis of brain networks in AD, two major questions remain unanswered. First, in preclinical AD, Aβ initially accumulates in the frontal and posterior hubs in the DMN midline, whereas tau first accumulates in the medial temporal lobe hubs — the reason why Aβ and tau pathologies affect different brain networks at this stage of the disease is not yet clear. Second, how Aβ and tau interact and how they interactively and/or independently affect the organization of the connectome in AD are not yet known. Therefore, we need to develop a better understanding of the connection between these AD pathologies and associated brain network changes as well as the underlying cause and temporal order of the changes in AD biomarkers observed in different AD subtypes.

One hypothesis, known as the molecular hypothesis, states that genetic risk factors for AD modulate Aβ and tau pathology18,210 as well as downstream connectome changes in AD13,142. Therefore, examining the gene expression profiles of the brain regions most affected by Aβ and tau pathology could provide partial answers to both of the above questions. Regional gene expression profiles for 20,736 protein-coding genes in healthy brains were derived from brain-wide microarray-based transcriptome data from the Allen Human Brain Atlas (AHBA)211 and used in two studies of Aβ and tau accumulation patterns. In the first study, which had a cross-sectional design, the Aβ-PET signal in individuals with AD was associated with regional expression levels of APP from the AHBA212. Neurodegeneration characterized by cortical atrophy in individuals with AD was associated with regional expression levels of MAPT from the AHBA. In a follow-up study, the longitudinal pattern of Aβ accumulation, characterized by PET, was associated with regional expression levels of CLU and an ‘axon-related’ genetic profile, whereas the tau spreading pattern was related to the regional expression levels of MAPT and a ‘dendrite-related’ genetic profile213. Of note, both Aβ and tau propagation patterns were also related to a common genetic profile of ‘lipid metabolism’, in which the APOE gene played a crucial role.

These spatial gene–protein associations might explain the discordance between the localization of Aβ and tau deposits and their presumed downstream patterns of neurodegeneration. In support of this notion, a study in transgenic mice reported that LRP1 is a master regulator of tau accumulation and spread214. Of note, the protein product of LRP1 (LRP1) is involved in the regulation of cholesterol (a type of lipid) metabolism, which is one of the biological pathways causing Aβ accumulation215–217. The observation that LRP1 regulates tau pathology in transgenic mice raises the question of whether regional LRP1 expression is linked to patterns of tau accumulation and spread in the human connectome. In the future, multi-modal neuroimaging (PET, fMRI and DTI) studies that integrate spatial gene expression profiles with information on the organization of the brain structural and functional connectome as well as Aβ and tau propagation patterns at different stages of AD might further our understanding of the distinctive but related patterns of Aβ and tau pathology (FIG. 6).

Several limitations could influence the interpretation of the findings discussed in this Review. First, neuronal and vascular factors change differently with age and both factors contribute to the blood oxygenation level-dependent signals measured by fMRI218. In addition, dysfunction of cerebrovascular haemodynamics is associated with white matter hyperintensities in aging219. Therefore, age-related changes in the neuro–vascular interaction could influence the interpretation of fMRI and diffusion MRI results. A set of methods aiming to dissociate the age-related neuronal and vascular effects on MRI measurements have now been developed and are recommended for future studies218. The second limitation is that most datasets discussed in this Review are heavily weighted towards individuals with European ancestry. Future studies should include a broader and more diverse sample of the global population, including African, Asian, Hispanic and admixed subpopulations.

Conclusions and future directions

Here, we reviewed recent data that relate the human connectome organization to molecular and neuropathological markers in different types and stages of AD. The existing data suggest that selective hub vulnerability is responsible for the preferential accumulation of Aβ in the medial hubs of the DMN and the preferential accumulation of tau in medial temporal lobe hubs in preclinical AD. The data also suggest that the pathogenic spread hypothesis is the most likely explanation for the transcellular spreading of tau from the medial temporal lobe to the posterior hubs of the DMN in prodromal AD. It seems the molecular hypothesis is the most likely explanation for the APOE ε4-derived changes in the brain connectome and Aβ and tau pathologies. Of note, these hypotheses need to be more directly investigated using a multi-omic research framework that integrates empirical multi-modal neuroimaging and gene expression data with computational brain-network models18.

The higher-order relationships among the Aβ and tau pathologies, genetic variants, markers of neurodegeneration (including at a network level), and cognitive impairment along the AD continuum remain largely unknown134,220. Research on specific subtypes of AD can help to address the challenges presented by heterogeneity in pathology, genetic architecture and clinical phenotypes. Longitudinal studies221, machine learning222 and multivariate data analysis223 (for example, canonical correlation analysis224–226) could elucidate the associations among different classes of AD biomarkers and identify clinical and biological subtypes227, thus aiding the development of effective treatments228. In addition, the use of multi-site neuroimaging and genetic data generally improves statistical power and the generalizability of results; however, multi-site data also contain considerable non-biological variability owing to the use of scanners from different manufacturers and different acquisition protocols. Therefore, the use of a statistical harmonization technique229 is required to eliminate site effects while preserving biological variability. Emerging study designs and methods that are capable of addressing the complexity of AD — for example, a multilayer network framework230,231 that spans cognitive functioning, the connectome, gene networks and pathophysiology — are critically needed to enable precision medicine for AD and related disorders.

Acknowledgements

The preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by U.S. National Institutes of Health grants: R01 AG197711, P30 AG10133, 1U01AG024904, R01 CA129769, R01 AG057739, R01 LM013463, R01 AG068193 and U01 AG068057. The authors would like to thank Dr. Martijn van den Heuvel for assisting with the drawing of Fig. 1b. The authors thank Dr. Kwangsik Nho and Dr. Shannon Risacher for valuable discussions.

Fig. 1 | Network models.

a | An example network model consists of three communities (dotted circles) linked by three connector hubs (red). The three interconnected hubs constitute a rich club. The three blue lines show the shortest path between the two blue nodes. b | An example of rich-club regions and connections forming a group-averaged human structural connectome. c | An example of a group-averaged human functional connectome consists of four communities, including the default-mode network, frontoparietal network, cingulo-opercular network and visual network. Part b is reprinted with permission from REF.48, The Journal of Neuroscience. Part c is adapted with permission from REF.232, Elsevier.

Fig. 2 | Patterns of tau accumulation in AD.

Tau accumulation patterns in 5 young healthy adults, 17 older adults negative for amyloid-β (Aβ), 16 older adults positive for Aβ and 15 individuals with Alzheimer disease (AD). Tau accumulation was measured by 18F-AV-1451 PET imaging; Aβ status was defined based on Pittsburgh compound B PET signal. No tau accumulation was observed in the cortical areas of the young healthy adults. The older adults who were negative for Aβ had tau accumulation in some medial temporal lobe regions, such as the entorhinal cortex and parahippocampal gyrus, and in some inferior and lateral temporal regions. The older adults positive for Aβ had tau accumulation in the same regions as individuals who were negative for Aβ but to a greater degree. In addition, in the individuals who were positive for Aβ, tau accumulation was observed in the parietal regions such as the precuneus. In the individuals with AD, tau accumulation in the temporal and parietal regions was significantly higher than in the other groups of older adults; tau accumulation was also observed in broader parietal regions and in frontal and visual cortices in individuals with AD. SUVR, standardized uptake value ratios. Reprinted with permission from REF.78, Elsevier.

Fig. 3 | Early Aβ accumulation in resting-state functional brain networks.

Brain regions of early amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation (red) and the regions comprising six key resting-state functional brain networks (blue) are superimposed upon a 3D rendering of the brain surface. At the preclinical stage of Alzheimer disease, Aβ mainly accumulates in the regions of the default-mode network and, to a lesser degree, the frontoparietal network, the ventral and dorsal attention networks, and the frontotemporal network. The sensorimotor network and the visual network showed the least Aβ accumulation at the preclinical stage. Reprinted from REF.4, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Fig. 4 | Association between functional connectivity and covariance in tau-PeT change.

a | Associations between group-averaged functional connectivity and tau-PET covariance at the whole-brain level (top panel) and the level of seven resting-state networks (lower panels) in individuals positive for amyloid-β (Aβ) from two independent samples (53 participants from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) datasets and 41 participants from the BioFINDER datasets). The functional connectivity analysis used a resting-state connectome template derived from the functional MRI data of 500 participants from the Human Connectome Project. Functional connectivity was significantly associated with tau accumulation pattern, both at the whole-brain level and at the level of each of the resting-state networks. DAN, dorsal attention network; DMN, default-mode network; FPN, frontoparietal control network; Limbic, limbic system; SMN, sensorimotor network; VAN, ventral attention network; VIS, visual network. Reprinted from REF.129, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Fig. 5 | Hypothesized, empirical and predicted tau spreading patterns.

a | Hypothetical patterns of tau pathology, according to Braak staging6,78. Tau initially deposits in the entorhinal cortex at Stage I, spreads to the hippocampus and parahippocampus at Stage II, spreads to the inferior and middle temporal and the cingulate (for example, the posterior cingulate cortex) cortices at Stage III, and finally extends to the frontal, visual and parietal (for example, the precuneus) regions at Stage IV. b | Patterns of tau pathology at different stages of AD from empirical tau-PET data. c | Patterns of tau pathology predicted by an epidemic spreading model (ESM) built on a structural connectome derived from diffusion tensor imaging data. d | Patterns of tau pathology predicted by an ESM built on a functional connectome derived from resting-state functional MRI data. The ESM-predicted tau spreading patterns simulated by the structural connectome (part c) are more similar to the hypothetical (part a) and empirical (part b) tau spreading patterns than those simulated by the functional connectome (part d). Note that warmer colours in the empirical and predicted tau spreading patterns represent higher levels of tau accumulation. Reprinted from REF.202, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Fig. 6 | Gene expression, AD pathology and the human connectomes.

In the brain, evidence indicates that regional expression levels of CLU213 and APP212 modulate amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation, whereas the regional expression levels of MAPT213 and LRP1 (REF.214) regulate tau accumulation and spread. In addition, regional APOE expression plays a central role in regulating both the Aβ and tau accumulation patterns213. Human connectomes consist of five subnetworks: the medial temporal lobe network, the salience network, the visual network, the default-mode network and the sensorimotor network. These networks are interconnected via hubs: anterior cingulated cortex (ACC), entorhinal cortex (EN), hippocampus (HIPP), middle occipital gyrus (MOG), medial orbitofrontal cortex (MOF), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), precuneus (PCUN) and supplementary motor area (SMA). The characteristics of the human connectome in Alzheimer disease (AD) are a result of the, as yet unclear, interactions between Aβ and tau pathologies as well as APOE expression. The gene expression mappings were created using publicly available microarray-based regional gene expression data from the Allen Human Brain Atlas as described in REF.211. Warmer colours represent higher gene expression levels; the same colour in different gene expression maps might denote different gene expression values as the expression values were not normalized across the different genes. The maps of the Aβ and tau accumulation patterns were manually created according PET data from REF.4 and REF.78, respectively. Warmer colours in the brain maps of Aβ and tau represent earlier and higher levels of Aβ and tau accumulation.

Key points

Amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology is associated with decreased hub connectivity in the default-mode network (DMN) during the preclinical stage of Alzheimer disease (AD) and the association extends to other brain networks as the disease progresses.

Selective hub vulnerability might explain the preferential accumulation of Aβ in the medial hubs of the DMN, and of tau in medial temporal lobe hubs, in preclinical AD.

Tau pathology spreads from the medial temporal lobe hubs — along structural connections — to other brain regions, supporting the pathogenic spread hypothesis.

Aβ pathology has a common role in driving DMN hypo-connectivity in late-onset AD, autosomal-dominant AD and early-onset AD; however, the association between Aβ pathology and DMN hypoconnectivity is regulated by different genetic variants across AD subtypes.

Spatial gene expression profiles might contribute to the relationships between the patterns of Aβ and tau accumulation and patterns of structural and functional connectome changes in AD.

Computational modelling studies will be important for understanding the role of the connectome in relation to progression of Aβ, tau and other pathogenic features of AD.

Box 1 | The AT(N) research framework

The National Institute on Ageing and the Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) published a biomarker-based research framework for Alzheimer disease (AD), often referred to as the AT(N) framework, to categorize research participants who might have AD or a related disorder. Specifically, in vivo neuroimaging233,234 (PET and MRI) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biological markers are grouped into three categories. The first group, or ‘A’, consists of markers of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques, that is, amyloid-PET and CSF Aβ42. The second group, or ‘T’, consists of markers of tau neurofibrillary tangles, that is, tau-PET and CSF phosphorylated tau (p-tau). The last group, ‘N’, consists of markers of neurodegeneration, that is, FDG-PET, diffusion MRI, structural MRI, functional MRI, EEG and magnetoencephalography (MEG). According to the AT(N) system, the Aβ and tau biomarkers are used to define AD and related disorders in vivo and the neurodegeneration biomarkers are used to clinically stage the disease on a continuum from no cognitive impairment (preclinical235,236) to subjective cognitive decline (SCD)237 (preclinical), to mild cognitive impairment (MCI)238 (prodromal) and probable AD dementia239.

Clinically, individuals with SCD have self-reported experience of cognitive decline, which has not been detected objectively through standardized neuropsychological tests. MCI is considered the first clinical stage of AD; individuals with MCI show deficits in performance in one or multiple cognitive domains on standardized psychometric tests. Individuals with MCI owing to typical AD dementia, termed amnestic MCI, typically have memory impairments, although changes in other domains can begin during this prodromal period. The AT(N) classification scheme has been applied in recent studies of SCD240, MCI241 and AD242. Importantly, age-associated brain pathologies are not limited to plaques, tangles and atrophy. Other processes, for example cerebrovascular factors, can also contribute to white-matter lesions, cerebral hypoperfusion and cognitive dysfunction243,244.

Box 2 | Hubs and community structure

Hubs

Hubs can be defined by many different aspects of networks and thus many different ways of measuring centrality have been proposed, including degree (or strength in weighted networks), betweenness, closeness, eigenvector and PageRank centrality47. Of note, centrality measures that are defined by path length, such as betweenness and closeness, are less straightforward to interpret in functional networks than in structural networks43. In some real networks, including brain networks, hubs are more densely interconnected than expected, forming a rich-club organization47.

Community structure or modules

Complex networks often consist of a few relatively distinct and yet interconnected clusters, called communities or modules245. Many algorithms246 have been developed for the identification of communities in real-world networks and have been applied in the field of network neuroscience49. A family of the most widely used methods for the detection of brain communities are known as modularity maximization methods247,248. These methods partition nodes of a network into multiple non-overlapping modules by maximizing a modularity quality function. However, modularity maximization often encounters a resolution limit: relatively small, but very dense modules may be undetectable in the presence of relatively large modules249. A few studies have used multi-resolution techniques to avoid the resolution limit issue246.

Once a network has been partitioned into modules, nodes in this network can be classified on the basis of their connections to other nodes within and between modules, which are quantified by within-module degree and participation coefficient250. For example, hubs can be classified into provincial (high within-module degree) and connector (high participation coefficient) hubs: provincial hubs mostly connect to nodes in the same module; connector hubs link nodes from multiple modules. In functional brain networks, the participation coefficient is thought to be a more meaningful index of hubs than the node degree54 and it can enable the identification of nodes that play important roles in the integration of neural information.

Box 3 | Graph theoretical analysis: methodological considerations

To characterize network topology, a threshold is often applied to structural or functional connectivity matrices to remove spurious links that result from low and, thus, potentially less reliable (noisy) correlations and to generate sparsely connected adjacency matrices41,251,252. As different thresholds will generate networks with different numbers of links (or link density) from the same data, a range of thresholds are often used to explore the topological properties of the network. The results of multiple studies253–256 indicate that most network characteristics are dependent on link density; therefore, the estimated network topology is biased by the arbitrary choice of the threshold or range of thresholds. Of note, performing weighted network analysis without applying a threshold to the connectivity matrix does solve the link density issue; however, network comparison is still biased owing to the differences in overall connectivity strength between patient and control groups253,257. For example, networks with lower overall connectivity strength will have a lower clustering coefficient than other networks253. As a result, statistical differences in network metrics between patient and control groups might simply be a result of differences in overall connectivity strength and not directly linked to disease-related differences in network organization. The use of normalized network metrics reduces but does not completely remove the bias in both unweighted and weighted network analyses253. Several novel network construction approaches (for example, the minimum spanning tree73,258 and consistency-based thresholding259) and statistical approaches (for example, the multi-threshold permutation correction260 and mixture modelling261 methods) have been proposed. However, to date, no single approach completely solves the aforementioned methodological issues, which might hamper the reliable and reproducible comparison of network topology between patient and control groups262. Therefore, results of graph theoretical analyses of such group differences should be interpreted with caution257.

Box 4 | Mechanistic insights from animal models

Although this Review focuses on human studies134,263, studies in animal models have also produced evidence of a relationship between the connectome and amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau pathology33,182,228,264. For example, evidence from transgenic mouse models indicates that neuronal activity can regulate Aβ accumulation265 in specific brain areas and can facilitate the release and cell-to-cell spread of tau266. One study used a mouse model of tauopathy and reported that regional tau accumulation was mainly driven by anatomical connectivity rather than by cell-intrinsic factors (gene expression profiles)184. In another study, injections of human tau preformed fibrils into the hippocampus of transgenic mice induced tau spreading, which affected the caudal entorhinal cortex and contralateral hippocampus first267, further supporting a relationship between tau spreading and the connectome268–270. Moreover, the hypothesis of Aβ-facilitated tau spreading via neuronal connections has also been tested in mouse models183,271. Therefore, although it is still challenging to directly translate animal models to humans272–274, findings from animal models can provide important mechanistic insights into the pathogenesis of AD-associated connectome changes.

Box 5 | Computational models in network neuroscience

In general, computational models in the field of network neuroscience use a set of differential equations that describe the dynamic evolution of variables of interest, which are usually associated with neuronal populations275. The equations are computed on a structural connectivity matrix that describes large-scale anatomical networks. Here, we define three variants of such models that have been applied in the context of dementia.

Neural mass models

Neural mass models consist of interconnected nodes, each of which represents the average neural activity in a large population (a ‘neural mass’) of connected excitatory and inhibitory neurons276. The neural mass model is characterized by average membrane potentials (for example, simulated EEG or magnetoencephalography signals) and spike density (or firing rates) of the neuronal populations. The local dynamics of the model are influenced by structural couplings (anatomical pathways) that link spatially remote neuronal populations and brain regions. The couplings may be reciprocal or directed, depending on the anatomical data used to define the coupling matrix, and they generally incorporate both connection weights as well as distance-dependent time delays.

Network diffusion models

Network diffusion models simulate patterns of spread via structural networks205. For example, these models can simulate the cell-to-cell spread of proteins across structural connectivity networks by use of a network heat equation, which provides an analytical, closed-form solution for trans-neuronal spread. The model assumes that the average activation signal over all neurons in a brain region is proportional to the number of firing neurons.

Epidemic spreading models

Epidemic spreading models simulate the epidemic diffusion processing of a signal, such as toxic amyloid-β and tau proteins, from a preselected epicentre to different brain regions over time277. The spreading pattern is simulated on a structural connectivity network and several model parameters, denoting individual-specific global production rate, global clearance rate and onset time, can be fitted for each individual. These parameters, in combination with regional structural connectivity patterns, determine the spreading speed. In contrast to network diffusion models, epidemic spreading models require production and/or clearance terms to be specified and are implemented via stochastic differential as opposed to analytical equations.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.


1. Squire LR , Stark CEL &amp; Clark RE The medial temporal lobe. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 27 , 279–306 (2004).15217334
2. Dubois B Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations of the International Working Group. Lancet Neurol 4422 , 1–13 (2021).
3. Sperling RA Amyloid deposition is associated with impaired default network function in older persons without dementia. Neuron 63 , 178–188 (2009).19640477
4. Palmqvist S Earliest accumulation of β-amyloid occurs within the default-mode network and concurrently affects brain connectivity. Nat. Commun 8 , 1214 (2017).29089479
This article provides compelling evidence that Aβ accumulation preferentially starts in the DMN.

5. Buckner RL &amp; DiNicola LM The brain’s default network: updated anatomy, physiology and evolving insights. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 20 , 593–608 (2019).31492945
6. Braak H &amp; Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol 82 , 239–259 (1991).1759558
7. Small SA , Schobel SA , Buxton RB , Witter MP &amp; Barnes CA A pathophysiological framework of hippocampal dysfunction in ageing and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 12 , 585–601 (2011).21897434
8. Hampel H Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer disease: mapping the road to the clinic. Nat. Rev. Neurol 14 , 639–652 (2018).30297701
9. Jack CR Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol 12 , 207–216 (2013).23332364
10. Jack CR &amp; Holtzman DM Biomarker modeling of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 80 , 1347–1358 (2013).24360540
11. Jack CR , Hampel HJ , Universities S , Cu M &amp; Petersen RC A/T/N: an unbiased descriptive classification scheme for Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology 87 , 539–547 (2016).27371494
12. Jack CR Prevalence of biologically vs clinically defined Alzheimer spectrum entities using the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association Research Framework. JAMA Neurol 76 , 1174–1183 (2019).
13. Gaiteri C , Mostafavi S , Honey CJ , De Jager PL &amp; Bennett DA Genetic variants in Alzheimer disease-molecular and brain network approaches. Nat. Rev. Neurol 12 , 413–427 (2016).27282653
14. Bateman RJ Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med 367 , 795–804 (2012).22784036
15. Bateman RJ Autosomal-dominant Alzheimer’s disease: a review and proposal for the prevention of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther 3 , 1 (2011).21211070
16. Kunkle BW Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, immunity and lipid processing. Nat. Genet 51 , 414–430 (2019).30820047
17. Jansen IE Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies new loci and functional pathways influencing Alzheimer’s disease risk. Nat. Genet 51 , 404–413 (2019).30617256
18. Sims R , Hill M &amp; Williams J The multiplex model of the genetics of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci 38 , 30–34 (2020).
19. Verghese PB , Castellano JM &amp; Holtzman DM Apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurological disorders. Lancet Neurol 10 , 241–252 (2011).21349439
20. Yamazaki Y , Zhao N , Caulfield TR , Liu C-C &amp; Bu G Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: pathobiology and targeting strategies. Nat. Rev. Neurol 15 , 501–518 (2019).31367008
21. Masters CL Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim 1 , 15056 (2015).27188934
22. Gallagher M &amp; Koh MT Episodic memory on the path to Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 21 , 929–934 (2011).22079495
23. Ossenkoppele R Amyloid burden and metabolic function in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease: parietal lobe involvement. Brain 135 , 2115–2125 (2012).22556189
24. Cho H Amyloid deposition in early onset versus late onset Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 35 , 813–821 (2013).23507771
25. Balasa M Clinical features and APOE genotype of pathologically proven early-onset Alzheimer disease. Neurology 76 , 1720–1725 (2011).21576687
26. Snowden JS The clinical diagnosis of early-onset dementias: diagnostic accuracy and clinicopathological relationships. Brain 134 , 2478–2492 (2011).21840888
27. Gordon BA Tau PET in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease: relationship with cognition, dementia and other biomarkers. Brain 142 , 1063–1076 (2019).30753379
28. Bullmore E &amp; Sporns O The economy of brain network organization. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 13 , 336–349 (2012).22498897
29. Park HJ &amp; Friston K Structural and functional brain networks: from connections to cognition. Science 342 , 1238411 (2013).24179229
30. Stam CJ Modern network science of neurological disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 15 , 683–695 (2014).25186238
This review article provides a comprehensive review of the application of graph theory and network science to multiple brain disorders.

31. Fornito A , Zalesky A &amp; Breakspear M The connectomics of brain disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 16 , 159–172 (2015).25697159
32. Menon V Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a unifying triple network model. Trends Cogn. Sci 15 , 483–506 (2011).21908230
33. Palop JJ &amp; Mucke L Network abnormalities and interneuron dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 17 , 777–792 (2016).27829687
34. Delbeuck X , Van der Linden M &amp; Collette F Alzheimer’s disease as a disconnection syndrome. Neuropsychol. Rev 13 , 79–92 (2003).12887040
35. Catani M &amp; Ffytche DH The rises and falls of disconnection syndromes. Brain 128 , 2224–2239 (2005).16141282
36. Sporns O Contributions and challenges for network models in cognitive neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci 17 , 652–660 (2014).24686784
37. Bassett DS &amp; Sporns O Network neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci 20 , 353–364 (2017).28230844
38. Yu M Benchmarking metrics for inferring functional connectivity from multi-channel EEG and MEG: a simulation study. Chaos 30 , 123124 (2020).33380013
39. Yu M , Hillebrand A , Gouw AA &amp; Stam CJ Horizontal visibility graph transfer entropy (HVG-TE): a novel metric to characterize directed connectivity in large-scale brain networks. Neuroimage 156 , 249–264 (2017).28539247
40. Hillebrand A Direction of information flow in large-scale resting-state networks is frequency-dependent. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 3867–3872 (2016).27001844
41. Bullmore E &amp; Sporns O Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 312–312 (2009).
This review article provides a thorough review of structural and functional connectome studies.

42. Rubinov M &amp; Sporns O Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks. Neuroimage 56 , 2068–2079 (2011).21459148
43. Rubinov M &amp; Sporns O Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 52 , 1059–1069 (2010).19819337
44. Sporns O , Tononi G &amp; Kötter R The human connectome: a structural description of the human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol 1 , 0245–0251 (2005).
45. Smith SM Functional connectomics from resting-state fMRI. Trends Cogn. Sci 17 , 666–682 (2013).24238796
46. Bassett DS &amp; Bullmore ET Small-world brain networks revisited. Neuroscientist 23 , 499–516 (2016).27655008
47. van den Heuvel MP &amp; Sporns O Network hubs in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci 17 , 683–696 (2013).24231140
48. van den Heuvel MP &amp; Sporns O Rich-club organization of the human connectome. J. Neurosci 31 , 15775–15786 (2011).22049421
49. Sporns O &amp; Betzel RF Modular brain networks. Annu. Rev. Psychol 67 , 613–640 (2016).26393868
50. Meunier D , Lambiotte R &amp; Bullmore ET Modular and hierarchically modular organization of brain networks. Front. Neurosci 4 , 200 (2010).21151783
51. Sporns O Network attributes for segregation and integration in the human brain. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 23 , 162–171 (2013).23294553
52. Betzel RF &amp; Bassett DS Multi-scale brain networks. Neuroimage 160 , 73–83 (2016).27845257
53. Yu M Selective impairment of hippocampus and posterior hub areas in Alzheimer’s disease: an MEG-based multiplex network study. Brain 140 , 1466–1485 (2017).28334883
This paper was the first to describe relationships between MEG-based functional multiplex network topology and Aβ and tau pathologies as well as cognitive decline in AD.

54. Power JD , Schlaggar BL , Lessov-Schlaggar CN &amp; Petersen SE Evidence for hubs in human functional brain networks. Neuron 79 , 798–813 (2013).23972601
55. Zuo XN Network centrality in the human functional connectome. Cereb. Cortex 22 , 1862–1875 (2012).21968567
56. Gong G Mapping anatomical connectivity patterns of human cerebral cortex using in vivo diffusion tensor imaging tractography. Cereb. Cortex 19 , 524–536 (2009).18567609
57. Hagmann P Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol 6 , 1479–1493 (2008).
58. Mišić B , Goñi J , Betzel RF , Sporns O &amp; McIntosh AR A network convergence zone in the hippocampus. PLoS Comput. Biol 10 , e1003982 (2014).25474350
59. Battaglia FP , Benchenane K , Sirota A , Pennartz CMA &amp; Wiener SI The hippocampus: Hub of brain network communication for memory. Trends Cogn. Sci 15 , 310–318 (2011).21696996
60. Swanson LW , Hahn JD &amp; Sporns O Organizing principles for the cerebral cortex network of commissural and association connections. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114 , E9692–E9701 (2017).29078382
61. Tononi G , Sporns O &amp; Edelman GM A measure for brain complexity: relating functional segregation and integration in the nervous system. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91 , 5033–5037 (1994).8197179
62. Yeo BTT The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol 106 , 1125–1165 (2011).21653723
63. Schaefer A Local-global parcellation of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Cereb. Cortex 28 , 3095–3114 (2018).28981612
64. Cole MW Multi-task connectivity reveals flexible hubs for adaptive task control. Nat. Neurosci 16 , 1348–1355 (2013).23892552
65. Cole MW , Bassett DS , Power JD , Braver TS &amp; Petersen SE Intrinsic and task-evoked network architectures of the human brain. Neuron 83 , 238–251 (2014).24991964
66. Smith S Structural variability in the human brain reflects fine-grained functional architecture at the population level. J. Neurosci 39 , 6136–6149 (2019).31152123
67. Fox MD &amp; Raichle ME Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 8 , 700–711 (2007).17704812
68. Fulcher BD &amp; Fornito A A transcriptional signature of hub connectivity in the mouse connectome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 1435–1440 (2016).26772314
69. Arnatkevičiūtė A , Fulcher BD &amp; Fornito A Uncovering the transcriptional correlates of hub connectivity in neural networks. Front. Neural Circuits 13 , 47 (2019).31379515
70. Thompson PM , Ge T , Glahn DC , Jahanshad N &amp; Nichols TE Genetics of the connectome. Neuroimage 80 , 475–488 (2013).23707675
71. Fornito A , Arnatkevičiūtė A &amp; Fulcher BD Bridging the gap between connectome and transcriptome. Trends Cogn. Sci 23 , 34–50 (2019).30455082
This article reviews the relationships between brain connectome topology and brain-wide gene expression.

72. De Haan W Disrupted modular brain dynamics reflect cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage 59 , 3085–3093 (2012).22154957
73. Yu M Hierarchical clustering in minimum spanning trees. Chaos 25 , 023107 (2015).25725643
74. Yu M Different functional connectivity and network topology in behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: an EEG study. Neurobiol. Aging 42 , 150–162 (2016).27143432
75. Buckner RL Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 29 , 1860–1873 (2009).19211893
76. Crossley NA The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders. Brain 137 , 2382–2395 (2014).25057133
77. Filippi M Changes in functional and structural brain connectome along the Alzheimer’s disease continuum. Mol. Psychiatry 25 , 230–239 (2020).29743583
78. Schöll M PET imaging of tau deposition in the aging human brain. Neuron 89 , 971–982 (2016).26938442
79. Bassett DS , Zurn P &amp; Gold JI On the nature and use of models in network neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 19 , 566–578 (2018).30002509
80. Pievani M , Filippini N , Van Den Heuvel MP , Cappa SF &amp; Frisoni GB Brain connectivity in neurodegenerative diseases - From phenotype to proteinopathy. Nat. Rev. Neurol 10 , 620–633 (2014).25287597
81. Tijms BM Alzheimer’s disease: connecting findings from graph theoretical studies of brain networks. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 2023–2036 (2013).23541878
82. Alexander-Bloch A , Giedd JN &amp; Bullmore E Imaging structural co-variance between human brain regions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 14 , 322–336 (2013).23531697
83. Tijms BM , Seris P , Willshaw DJ &amp; Lawrie SM Similarity-based extraction of individual networks from gray matter MRI scans. Cereb. Cortex 22 , 1530–1541 (2012).21878484
84. Tijms BM Single-subject grey matter graphs in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 8 , e58921 (2013).23536835
85. Tijms BM Gray matter network disruptions and amyloid beta in cognitively normal adults. Neurobiol. Aging 37 , 154–160 (2016).26559882
86. ten Kate M Gray matter network disruptions and regional amyloid beta in cognitively normal adults. Front. Aging Neurosci 10 , 67 (2018).29599717
87. Tijms BM Gray matter networks and clinical progression in subjects with predementia Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 61 , 75–81 (2018).29040871
88. Dicks E , van der Flier WM , Scheltens P , Barkhof F &amp; Tijms BM Single-subject grey matter networks predict future cortical atrophy in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 94 , 71–80 (2020).32585492
89. Voevodskaya O Altered structural network organization in cognitively normal individuals with amyloid pathology. Neurobiol. Aging 64 , 15–24 (2018).29316528
90. Prescott JW The Alzheimer structural connectome: changes in cortical network topology with increased amyloid plaque burden. Radiology 273 , 175–184 (2014).24865310
91. Jonkman L Relationship between β-amyloid and structural network topology in decedents without dementia. Neurology 95 , e532–e544 (2020).32661099
This article was the first to describe relationships between Aβ accumulation and structural brain network topology in decedents without dementia.

92. Mito R Fibre-specific white matter reductions in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Brain 141 , 888–902 (2018).29309541
93. Kantarci K White matter integrity determined with diffusion tensor imaging in older adults without dementia: Influence of amyloid load and neurodegeneration. JAMA Neurol 71 , 1547–1554 (2014).25347157
94. Rabin JS Global white matter diffusion characteristics predict longitudinal cognitive change independently of amyloid status in clinically normal older adults. Cereb. Cortex 29 , 1251–1262 (2019).29425267
95. Parra MA Memory binding and white matter integrity in familial Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138 , 1355–1369 (2015).25762465
96. Kantarci K White-matter integrity on DTI and the pathologic staging of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 56 , 172–179 (2017).28552181
97. Iturria-Medina Y &amp; Evans AC On the central role of brain connectivity in neurodegenerative disease progression. Front. Aging Neurosci 7 , 90 (2015).26052284
98. Kuang W , Cieslak M , Greene C , Grafton ST &amp; Carlson JM Sensitivity analysis of human brain structural network construction Kuang. Netw. Neurosci 1 , 446–467 (2017).30090874
99. Powell F , Tosun D , Sadeghi R , Weiner M &amp; Raj A Preserved structural network organization mediates pathology spread in Alzheimer’s disease spectrum despite loss of white matter tract integrity. J. Alzheimers Dis 65 , 747–764 (2018).29578480
100. Maier-Hein KH The challenge of mapping the human connectome based on diffusion tractography. Nat. Commun 8 , 1349 (2017).29116093
101. Thomas C Anatomical accuracy of brain connections derived from diffusion MRI tractography is inherently limited. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111 , 16574–16579 (2014).25368179
102. Schilling KG Limits to anatomical accuracy of diffusion tractography using modern approaches. Neuroimage 185 , 1–11 (2019).30317017
103. Millar PR Evaluating resting-state BOLD variability in relation to biomarkers of preclinical Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol. Aging 96 , 233–245 (2020).33039901
104. Hedden T Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden. J. Neurosci 29 , 12686–12694 (2009).19812343
105. Johnson KA , Sperling RA &amp; Sepulcre J Functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease: measurement and meaning. Biol. Psychiatry 74 , 318–319 (2013).23932342
106. Koch K Disrupted intrinsic networks link amyloid-β pathology and impaired cognition in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease. Cereb. Cortex 25 , 4678–4688 (2015).24996404
107. Drzezga A Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden. Brain 134 , 1635–1646 (2011).21490054
108. Lehmann M Intrinsic connectivity networks in healthy subjects explain clinical variability in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110 , 11606–11611 (2013).23798398
109. Jones DT Cascading network failure across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Brain 139 , 547–562 (2016).26586695
110. Schultz AP Longitudinal degradation of the default/salience network axis in symptomatic individuals with elevated amyloid burden. NeuroImage Clin 26 , 102052 (2020).31711955
111. Berron D Medial temporal lobe connectivity and its associations with cognition in early Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 143 , 1233–1248 (2020).32252068
112. Ossenkoppele R &amp; Hansson O Towards clinical application of tau PET tracers for diagnosing dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 10.1002/alz.12356 (2021).
113. Jacobs HIL Structural tract alterations predict downstream tau accumulation in amyloid-positive older individuals. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 424–431 (2018).29403032
This article provides evidence that tau spreads through structural connections facilitated by Aβ pathology.

114. Shigemoto Y Association of deposition of tau and amyloid-β proteins with structural connectivity changes in cognitively normal older adults and Alzheimer’s disease spectrum patients. Brain Behav 8 , e01145 (2018).30358161
115. Harrison TM Longitudinal tau accumulation and atrophy in aging and alzheimer disease. Ann. Neurol 85 , 229–240 (2019).30597624
116. Joie RL Prospective longitudinal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with the intensity and topography of baseline tau-PET. Sci. Transl. Med 12 , eaau5732 (2020).31894103
117. Reimand J , Collij L , Scheltens P , Bouwman Femke &amp; Ossenkoppele R Amyloid-β CSF/PET discordance vs tau load 5 years later: it takes two to tangle. Neurology 95 , e2648–e2657 (2020).32913020
118. Mattsson N Predicting diagnosis and cognition with 18 F-AV-1451 tau PET and structural MRI in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 15 , 570–580 (2019).30639421
119. Jacobs HIL The presubiculum links incipient amyloid and tau pathology to memory function in older persons. Neurology 94 , e1916–e1928 (2020).32273431
120. Iaccarino L Spatial relationships between molecular pathology and neurodegeneration in the Alzheimer’s disease continuum. Cereb. Cortex 31 , 1–14 (2020).
121. Wang L Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42, phosphorylated tau181, and resting-state functional connectivity. JAMA Neurol 70 , 1242–1248 (2013).23959173
122. Canuet L Network disruption and cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta and phospho-tau levels in mild cognitive impairment. J. Neurosci 35 , 10325–10330 (2015).26180207
123. Schultz AP Phases of hyperconnectivity and hypoconnectivity in the default mode and salience networks track with amyloid and tau in clinically normal individuals. J. Neurosci 37 , 4323–4331 (2017).28314821
124. Maass A Alzheimer’s pathology targets distinct memory networks in the ageing brain. Brain 142 , 2492–2509 (2019).31199481
This study reports evidence that tau and Aβ pathologies target distinctive functional brain networks in the ageing brain.

125. Harrison TM Tau deposition is associated with functional isolation of the hippocampus in aging. Nat. Commun 10 , 4900 (2019).31653847
126. Gordon BA Spatial patterns of neuroimaging biomarker change in individuals from families with autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease: a longitudinal study. Lancet Neurol 17 , 211–212 (2018).
127. Benzinger TLS Regional variability of imaging biomarkers in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110 , E4502–E4509 (2013).24194552
128. Hansson O Tau pathology distribution in Alzheimer’s disease corresponds differentially to cognition-relevant functional brain networks. Front. Neurosci 11 , 167 (2017).28408865
129. Franzmeier N Functional brain architecture is associated with the rate of tau accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun 11 , 347 (2020).31953405
This study reports the spatial relationships between that tau accumulation and functional brain networks in AD.

130. Franzmeier N Functional connectivity associated with tau levels in ageing, Alzheimer’s, and small vessel disease. Brain 142 , 1093–1107 (2019).30770704
131. Ossenkoppele R Tau covariance patterns in Alzheimer’s disease patients match intrinsic connectivity networks in the healthy brain. NeuroImage Clin 23 , 101848 (2019).31077982
132. Cope TE Tau burden and the functional connectome in Alzheimer’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy. Brain 141 , 550–567 (2018).29293892
This study was the first to assess the relationship between tau burden and fMRI-based functional network topology characterized by graph-theoretic measures.

133. Schöll M Biomarkers for tau pathology. Mol. Cell. Neurosci 97 , 18–33 (2019).30529601
134. Jagust W Imaging the evolution and pathophysiology of Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 19 , 687–700 (2018).30266970
This article provides a comprehensive review of neuroimaging studies in different types and stages of AD.

135. Pereira JB Amyloid and tau accumulate across distinct spatial networks and are differentially associated with brain connectivity. eLife 8 , e50830 (2019).31815669
136. Sepulcre J Tau and amyloid β proteins distinctively associate to functional network changes in the aging brain. Alzheimers Dement 13 , 1261–1269 (2017).28366797
137. Huijbers W Tau accumulation in clinically normal older adults is associated with increases in hippocampal fMRI activity. J. Neurosci 39 , 548–556 (2019).30482786
138. Adams JN , Maass A , Harrison TM , Baker SL &amp; Jagust WJ Cortical tau deposition follows patterns of entorhinal functional connectivity in aging. eLife 8 , e49132 (2019).31475904
139. Therriault J Association of apolipoprotein e ε4 with medial temporal tau Independent of amyloid-β. JAMA Neurol 77 , 470–479 (2020).31860000
140. Therriault J APOEε4 potentiates the relationship between amyloid-β and tau pathologies. Mol. Psychiatry 10.1038/s41380-020-0688-6 (2020).
141. Wolk DA &amp; Dickerson BC Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype has dissociable effects on memory and attentional-executive network function in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 10256–10261 (2010).20479234
142. Chiesa PA , Cavedo E , Lista S , Thompson PM &amp; Hampel H Revolution of resting-state functional neuroimaging genetics in Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Neurosci 40 , 469–480 (2017).28684173
143. Sheline YI APOE4 allele disrupts resting state fMRI connectivity in the absence of amyloid plaques or decreased CSF A 42. J. Neurosci 30 , 17035–17040 (2010).21159973
144. Chiesa PA Differential default mode network trajectories in asymptomatic individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 15 , 940–950 (2019).31113760
This article provides evidence that APOE ε4 leads to changes in DMN, independent of Aβ pathology.

145. Wang J Apolipoprotein E ε4 modulates functional brain connectome in Alzheimer’s disease. Hum. Brain Mapp 36 , 1828–1846 (2015).25619771
146. Contreras JA Functional connectivity among brain regions affected in Alzheimer’s disease is associated with CSF TNF-α in APOE4 carriers. Neurobiol. Aging 86 , 112–122 (2020).31870643
147. Machulda MM Effect of APOE ε4 status on intrinsic network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly subjects. Arch. Neurol 68 , 1131–1136 (2011).21555604
148. Butt OH Network dysfunction in cognitively normal APOE ε4 carriers is related to subclinical tau. Alzheimers Dement 10.1002/alz.12375 (2021).
149. Meije Wink A Functional brain network centrality is related to APOE genotype in cognitively normal elderly. Brain Behav 8 , e01080 (2018).30136422
150. Wang L Alzheimer disease family history impacts resting state functional connectivity. Ann. Neurol 72 , 571–577 (2012).23109152
151. Verfaillie SCJ Subjective cognitive decline is associated with altered default mode network connectivity in individuals with a family history of Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3 , 463–472 (2018).29735156
152. Vogel JW Brain properties predict proximity to symptom onset in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141 , 1871–1883 (2018).29688388
153. Brown JA Brain network local interconnectivity loss in aging APOE-4 allele carriers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108 , 20760–20765 (2011).22106308
154. Shu N Effects of APOE promoter polymorphism on the topological organization of brain structural connectome in nondemented elderly. Hum. Brain Mapp 36 , 4847–4858 (2015).26314833
155. Chang P The effects of an APOE promoter polymorphism on human white matter connectivity during non-demented aging. J. Alzheimers Dis 55 , 77–87 (2016).
156. Ma C Disrupted brain structural connectivity: pathological interactions between genetic APOE ε4 status and developed MCI condition. Mol. Neurobiol 54 , 6999–7007 (2017).27785756
157. Chen Y Disrupted functional and structural networks in cognitively normal elderly subjects with the APOE ε4 allele. Neuropsychopharmacology 40 , 1181–1191 (2015).25403724
158. Korthauer LE , Zhan L , Ajilore O , Leow A &amp; Driscoll I Disrupted topology of the resting state structural connectome in middle-aged APOE ε4 carriers. Neuroimage 178 , 295–305 (2018).29803958
This study shows that APOE ε4-related structural connectome changes occur even in middle-aged individuals.

159. Elsheikh SSM , Chimusa ER , Mulder NJ &amp; Crimi A Genome-wide association study of brain connectivity changes for Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 10 , 1433 (2020).31996736
160. Jahanshad N Genome-wide scan of healthy human connectome discovers SPON1 gene variant influencing dementia severity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110 , 4768–4773 (2013).23471985
161. Feinstein Y F-spondin and mindin: two structurally and functionally related genes expressed in the hippocampus that promote outgrowth of embryonic hippocampal neurons. Development 126 , 3637–3648 (1999).10409509
162. Hoe HS &amp; William Rebeck G Functional interactions of APP with the apoE receptor family. J. Neurochem 106 , 2263–2271 (2008).18554321
163. Hafez DM F-spondin gene transfer improves memory performance and reduces amyloid-β levels in mice. Neuroscience 223 , 465–472 (2012).22863679
164. Lee S White matter hyperintensities are a core feature of Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence from the dominantly inherited Alzheimer network. Ann. Neurol 79 , 929–939 (2016).27016429
165. Araque Caballero MÁ White matter diffusion alterations precede symptom onset in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141 , 3065–3080 (2018).30239611
166. Vermunt L Single-subject grey matter network trajectories over the disease course of autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease. Brain Commun 2 , fcaa102 (2020).32954344
This article reports evidence that single-subject structural grey matter covariance network metrics can track the progression of autosomal-dominant AD.

167. Chhatwal JP Impaired default network functional connectivity in autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease. Neurology 81 , 736–744 (2013).23884042
168. Thomas JB Functional connectivity in autosomal dominant and late-onset Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol 71 , 1111–1122 (2014).25069482
169. Chhatwal JP Preferential degradation of cognitive networks differentiates Alzheimer’s disease from ageing. Brain 141 , 1486–1500 (2018).29522171
170. Franzmeier N Left frontal hub connectivity delays cognitive impairment in autosomal-dominant and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141 , 1186–1200 (2018).29462334
171. Mendez MF Early-onset Alzheimer disease and its variants. Contin. Lifelong Learn. Neurol 25 , 34–51 (2019).
172. Mendez MF Early-onset Alzheimer disease. Neurol. Clin 35 , 263–281 (2017).28410659
173. Filippi M Brain network connectivity differs in early-onset neurodegenerative dementia. Neurology 89 , 1764–1772 (2017).28954876
A functional brain network study shows distinctive network connectivity patterns in early-onset AD and frontotemporal dementia.

174. Lee E-S Default mode network functional connectivity in early and late mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 30 , 289–296 (2016).26840545
175. Buckner RL , Andrews-Hanna JR &amp; Schacter DL The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 1124 , 1–38 (2008).18400922
176. Li KC Distinct patterns of interhemispheric connectivity in patients with early-and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Aging Neurosci 10 , 261 (2018).30237764
177. Daianu M An advanced white matter tract analysis in frontotemporal dementia and early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Imaging Behav 10 , 1038–1053 (2016).26515192
178. Daianu M Disrupted rich club network in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia and early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Hum. Brain Mapp 37 , 868–883 (2016).26678225
179. Goedert M Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases: the prion concept in relation to assembled Aβ, tau, and α-synuclein. Science 349 , 61–69 (2015).
180. Frost B &amp; Diamond MI Prion-like mechanisms in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 11 , 155–159 (2010).20029438
181. Fornari S , Schäfer A , Jucker M , Goriely A &amp; Kuhl E Prion-like spreading of Alzheimer’s disease within the brain’s connectome. J. R. Soc. Interface 16 , 20190356 (2019).31615329
182. Peng C , Trojanowski JQ &amp; Lee VMY Protein transmission in neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol 16 , 199–212 (2020).32203399
183. He Z Amyloid-β plaques enhance Alzheimer’s brain tau-seeded pathologies by facilitating neuritic plaque tau aggregation. Nat. Med 24 , 29–38 (2018).29200205
184. Mezias C , LoCastro E , Xia C &amp; Raj A Connectivity, not region-intrinsic properties, predicts regional vulnerability to progressive tau pathology in mouse models of disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 5 , 61 (2017).28807028
185. Walsh DM &amp; Selkoe DJ A critical appraisal of the pathogenic protein spread hypothesis of neurodegeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 17 , 251–260 (2016).26988744
186. Small SA &amp; Swanson LW A network explanation of Alzheimer’s regional vulnerability. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol 83 , 193–200 (2018).30642996
187. Roussarie JP Selective neuronal vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease: a network-based analysis. Neuron 107 , 821–835 (2020).32603655
188. Jagust W Vulnerable neural systems and the borderland of brain aging and neurodegeneration. Neuron 77 , 219–234 (2013).23352159
189. Mattsson N , Schott JM , Hardy J , Turner MR &amp; Zetterberg H Selective vulnerability in neurodegeneration: Insights from clinical variants of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 87 , 1000–1004 (2016).26746185
190. Pascoal TA Aβ-induced vulnerability propagates via the brain’s default mode network. Nat. Commun 10 , 2353 (2019).31164641
191. Vaishnavi SN Regional aerobic glycolysis in the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 17757–17762 (2010).20837536
192. Tomasi D &amp; Volkow ND Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks. Cereb. Cortex 21 , 2003–2013 (2011).21282318
193. Vlassenko AG Spatial correlation between brain aerobic glycolysis and amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 17763–17767 (2010).20837517
194. Hanseeuw BJ Fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism associated with tau-amyloid interaction predicts memory decline. Ann. Neurol 81 , 583–596 (2017).28253546
195. Adams JN , Lockhart SN , Li L &amp; Jagust WJ Relationships between tau and glucose metabolism reflect Alzheimer’s disease pathology in cognitively normal older adults. Cereb. Cortex 29 , 1997–2009 (2019).29912295
196. Ossenkoppele R Tau PET patterns mirror clinical and neuroanatomical variability in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 139 , 1551–1567 (2016).26962052
197. de Haan W , Mott K , van Straaten ECW , Scheltens P &amp; Stam CJ Activity dependent degeneration explains hub vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS Comput. Biol 8 , e1002582 (2012).22915996
198. Jafari Z , Kolb BE &amp; Mohajerani MH Neural oscillations and brain stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Prog. Neurobiol 194 , 101878 (2020).32615147
199. de Haan W , van Straaten ECW , Gouw AA &amp; Stam CJ Altering neuronal excitability to preserve network connectivity in a computational model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS Comput. Biol 13 , e1005707 (2017).28938009
200. Chételat G Amyloid-PET and 18F-FDG-PET in the diagnostic investigation of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. Lancet Neurol 19 , 951–962 (2020).33098804
201. Altmann A , Ng B , Landau SM , Jagust WJ &amp; Greicius MD Regional brain hypometabolism is unrelated to regional amyloid plaque burden. Brain 138 , 3734–3746 (2015).26419799
202. Vogel JW Spread of pathological tau proteins through communicating neurons in human Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun 11 , 2612 (2020).32457389
This computational modelling study provides evidence in humans that tau spreads through neuronal network pathways facilitated by Aβ accumulation.

203. Detrez JR Progressive tau aggregation does not alter functional brain network connectivity in seeded hTau.P301L mice. Neurobiol. Dis 143 , 105011 (2020).32653674
204. Vogel JW Four distinct trajectories of tau deposition identified in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med 27 , 871–881 (2021).33927414
205. Raj A &amp; Powell F Models of network spread and network degeneration in brain disorders. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3 , 788–797 (2018).30170711
206. Torok J , Maia PD , Powell F , Pandya S &amp; Raj A A method for inferring regional origins of neurodegeneration. Brain 141 , 863–876 (2018).29409009
207. Acosta D , Powell F , Zhao Y &amp; Raj A Regional vulnerability in Alzheimer’s: the role of cell-autonomous and transneuronal processes. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 797–810 (2018).29306583
208. Raj A , Kuceyeski A &amp; Weiner M A network diffusion model of disease progression in dementia. Neuron 73 , 1204–1215 (2012).22445347
209. Stam CJ &amp; Reijneveld JC Graph theoretical analysis of complex networks in the brain. Nonlinear Biomed. Phys 1 , 3 (2007).17908336
210. van der Kant R , Goldstein LSB &amp; Ossenkoppele R Amyloid-β-independent regulators of tau pathology in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 21 , 21–35 (2020).31780819
211. Hawrylycz M Canonical genetic signatures of the adult human brain. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 1832–1844 (2015).26571460
This landmark paper identified reproducible gene expression signatures related to functional brain connectivity.

212. Grothe MJ Molecular properties underlying regional vulnerability to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Brain 141 , 2755–2771 (2018).30016411
213. Sepulcre J Neurogenetic contributions to amyloid beta and tau spreading in the human cortex. Nat. Med 24 , 1910–1918 (2018).30374196
This article was one of the first linking Aβ accumulation and tau spreading with brain-wide gene expression in the human AD.

214. Rauch JN LRP1 is a master regulator of tau uptake and spread. Nature 580 , 381–385 (2020).32296178
215. Shinohara M , Tachibana M , Kanekiyo T &amp; Bu G Role of LRP1 in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence from clinical and preclinical studies. J. Lipid Res 58 , 1267–1281 (2017).28381441
216. Tachibana M APOE4-mediated amyloid-β pathology depends on its neuronal receptor LRP1. J. Clin. Invest 129 , 1272–1277 (2019).30741718
217. Liu Q Amyloid precursor protein regulates brain apolipoprotein E and cholesterol metabolism through lipoprotein receptor LRP1. Neuron 56 , 66–78 (2007).17920016
218. Tsvetanov KA , Henson RNA &amp; Rowe JB Separating vascular and neuronal effects of age on fMRI BOLD signals. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 376 , 20190631 (2021).33190597
219. Purkayastha S Impaired cerebrovascular hemodynamics are associated with cerebral white matter damage. J. Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab 34 , 228–234 (2014).24129749
220. Buckley RF Associations between baseline amyloid, sex, and APOE on subsequent tau accumulation in cerebrospinal fluid. Neurobiol. Aging 78 , 178–185 (2019).30947113
221. Sintini I Longitudinal neuroimaging biomarkers differ across Alzheimer’s disease phenotypes. Brain 143 , 2281–2294 (2020).32572464
222. Myszczynska MA Applications of machine learning to diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Rev. Neurol 16 , 440–456 (2020).32669685
223. McIntosh AR &amp; Mišić B Multivariate statistical analyses for neuroimaging data. Annu. Rev. Psychol 64 , 499–525 (2013).22804773
224. Smith SM A positive-negative mode of population covariation links brain connectivity, demographics and behavior. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 1565–1567 (2015).26414616
225. Yu M Childhood trauma history is linked to abnormal brain connectivity in major depression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116 , 8582–8590 (2019).30962366
226. Yu M Structural brain measures linked to clinical phenotypes in major depression replicate across clinical centres. Mol. Psychiatry 10.1038/s41380-021-01039-8 (2021).
227. Ferreira D , Nordberg A &amp; Westman E Biological subtypes of Alzheimer disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurology 94 , 436–448 (2020).32047067
228. Long JM &amp; Holtzman DM Alzheimer disease: an update on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell 179 , 312–339 (2019).31564456
229. Yu M Statistical harmonization corrects site effects in functional connectivity measurements from multi-site fMRI data. Hum. Brain Mapp 39 , 4213–4227 (2018).29962049
This paper was one of the first to use a statistical harmonization technique, called ComBat, to eliminate the impact of site effects on functional connectivity and brain network measures.

230. Badhwar A A multiomics approach to heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s disease: focused review and roadmap. Brain 143 , 1315–1331 (2020).31891371
231. Nativio R An integrated multi-omics approach identifies epigenetic alterations associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 52 , 1024–1035 (2020).32989324
232. Power JD Functional network organization of the human brain. Neuron 72 , 655–678 (2011).
233. Johnson KA , Fox NC , Sperling RA &amp; Klunk WE Brain imaging in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 , a006213 (2012).22474610
234. Hansson O Biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Med 27 , 954–963 (2021).34083813
235. Dubois B Preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: definition, natural history, and diagnostic criteria. Alzheimers Dement 12 , 292–323 (2016).27012484
236. Sperling RA Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 , 280–292 (2011).21514248
237. Jessen F The characterisation of subjective cognitive decline. Lancet Neurol 19 , 271–278 (2020).31958406
238. Gauthier S Mild cognitive impairment. Lancet 367 , 1262–1270 (2006).16631882
239. Jack CR NIA-AA research framework: toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 535–562 (2018).29653606
240. Ebenau JL ATN classification and clinical progression in subjective cognitive decline. Neurology 95 , e46–e58 (2020).32522798
241. Mattsson-Carlgren N The implications of different approaches to define AT(N) in Alzheimer disease. Neurology 94 , e2233–e2244 (2020).32398359
242. Cousins KAQ ATN status in amnestic and non-amnestic Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Brain 143 , 2295–2311 (2020).32666090
243. Badji A &amp; Westman E Cerebrovascular pathology in Alzheimer’s disease: hopes and gaps. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 306 , 111184 (2020).32950333
244. Love S &amp; Miners JS Cerebrovascular disease in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol 131 , 645–658 (2016).26711459
245. Newman MEJ Communities, modules and large-scale structure in networks. Nat. Phys 8 , 25–31 (2011).
246. Fortunato S &amp; Hric D Community detection in networks: a user guide. Phys. Rep 659 , 1–44 (2016).
247. Newman MEJJ &amp; Girvan M Finding and evaluating community structure in networks. Phys. Rev. E 69 , 026113 (2004).
248. Blondel VD , Guillaume J-LL , Lambiotte R &amp; Lefebvre E Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp 2008 , P10008 (2008).
249. Fortunato S &amp; Barthélemy M Resolution limit in community detection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104 , 36–41 (2007).17190818
250. Guimera R &amp; Amaral LAN Functional cartography of complex metabolic networks. Nature 433 , 895–900 (2005).15729348
251. Stam CJ The trees and the forest: characterization of complex brain networks with minimum spanning trees. Int. J. Psychophysiol 92 , 129–138 (2014).24726900
252. Zalesky A , Fornito A &amp; Bullmore E On the use of correlation as a measure of network connectivity. Neuroimage 60 , 2096–2106 (2012).22343126
253. van Wijk BCM , Stam CJ &amp; Daffertshofer A Comparing brain networks of different size and connectivity density using graph theory. PLoS One 5 , e13701 (2010).21060892
254. Fornito A , Zalesky A &amp; Breakspear M Graph analysis of the human connectome: Promise, progress, and pitfalls. Neuroimage 80 , 426–444 (2013).23643999
255. Garrison KA , Scheinost D , Finn ES , Shen X &amp; Constable RT The (in)stability of functional brain network measures across thresholds. Neuroimage 118 , 651–661 (2015).26021218
256. de Reus MA &amp; van den Heuvel MP Estimating false positives and negatives in brain networks. Neuroimage 70 , 402–409 (2013).23296185
257. van den Heuvel MP Proportional thresholding in resting-state fMRI functional connectivity networks and consequences for patient-control connectome studies: Issues and recommendations. Neuroimage 152 , 437–449 (2017).28167349
258. Tewarie P , van Dellen E , Hillebrand A &amp; Stam CJ The minimum spanning tree: an unbiased method for brain network analysis. Neuroimage 104 , 177–188 (2015).25451472
259. Roberts JA , Perry A , Roberts G , Mitchell PB &amp; Breakspear M Consistency-based thresholding of the human connectome. Neuroimage 145 , 118–129 (2017).27666386
260. Drakesmith M Overcoming the effects of false positives and threshold bias in graph theoretical analyses of neuroimaging data. Neuroimage 118 , 313–333 (2015).25982515
261. Bielczyk NZ Thresholding functional connectomes by means of mixture modeling. Neuroimage 171 , 402–414 (2018).29309896
262. Braun U Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures. Neuroimage 59 , 1404–1412 (2012).21888983
263. Brettschneider J , Del Tredici K , Lee VMY &amp; Trojanowski JQ Spreading of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: a focus on human studies. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 16 , 109–120 (2015).25588378
264. Scearce-Levie K , Sanchez PE &amp; Lewcock JW Leveraging preclinical models for the development of Alzheimer disease therapeutics. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 19 , 447–462 (2020).32612262
265. Bero AW Neuronal activity regulates the regional vulnerability to amyloid-beta deposition. Nat. Neurosci 14 , 750–756 (2011).21532579
266. Wu JW Neuronal activity enhances tau propagation and tau pathology in vivo. Nat. Neurosci 19 , 1085–1092 (2016).27322420
267. Iba M Synthetic tau fibrils mediate transmission of neurofibrillary tangles in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s-like tauopathy. J. Neurosci 33 , 1024–1037 (2013).23325240
268. Mudher A What is the evidence that tau pathology spreads through prion-like propagation? Acta Neuropathol. Commun 5 , 99 (2017).29258615
269. Jucker M &amp; Walker LC Propagation and spread of pathogenic protein assemblies in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 1341–1349 (2018).30258241
270. Stancu IC Templated misfolding of Tau by prion-like seeding along neuronal connections impairs neuronal network function and associated behavioral outcomes in Tau transgenic mice. Acta Neuropathol 129 , 875–894 (2015).25862635
271. Bassil F Amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaques promote seeding and spreading of alpha-synuclein and tau in a mouse model of Lewy body disorders with Aβ pathology. Neuron 105 , 260–275.e6 (2020).31759806
272. Götz J , Bodea LG &amp; Goedert M Rodent models for Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 19 , 583–598 (2018).30194347
273. Kitazawa M , Medeiros R &amp; LaFerla MF Transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer disease: developing a better model as a tool for therapeutic interventions. Curr. Pharm. Des 18 , 1131–1147 (2012).22288400
274. Myers A &amp; McGonigle P Overview of transgenic mouse models for Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Protoc. Neurosci 89 , e81 (2019).31532917
275. Breakspear M Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nat. Neurosci 20 , 340–352 (2017).28230845
This review discusses multiple computational models of brain activity dynamics.

276. Cabral J , Kringelbach ML &amp; Deco G Exploring the network dynamics underlying brain activity during rest. Prog. Neurobiol 114 , 102–131 (2014).24389385
277. Iturria-Medina Y , Sotero RC , Toussaint PJ &amp; Evans AC Epidemic spreading model to characterize misfolded proteins propagation in aging and associated neurodegenerative disorders. PLoS Comput. Biol 10 , e1003956 (2014).25412207
