LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8704771
1572
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
Alzheimer disease and associated disorders
0893-0341
1546-4156

33044305
8032819
10.1097/WAD.0000000000000419
NIHMS1631044
Article
Tailoring Research Recruitment for Acute Care Settings: Recommendations from People with Dementia and their Caregivers
Friz Amanda M. PhD 1
Benson Clark BS 1
Mullen Shannon BS 1
Block Laura BS 1
Gilmore-Bykovskyi Andrea PhD, RN 123
1 University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Nursing, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
2 Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine &amp; Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
3 William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Corresponding Author: Andrea Gilmore-Bykovskyi, PhD, RN, UW-Madison School of Nursing, 3173 Cooper Hall, 701 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, Phone: (608) 262-3057 | Fax: (608) 280-7248, algilmore@wisc.edu
21 9 2020
Jul-Sep 2021
01 1 2022
35 3 191199
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

There is a pressing need to increase enrollment and representation in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia (ADRD) research. Current recruitment approaches focus largely on clinic and community settings, with minimal engagement of acute care environments despite their broad use across diverse populations. The objectives of this study were to examine views, preferences, and recommendations regarding acute care-based ADRD research recruitment among persons with dementia and their caregivers.

Methods:

We conducted semi-structured interviews with recently hospitalized persons with dementia (N=3) and family caregivers (N=28). Interviews were analyzed using thematic analysis.

Findings:

All participants endorsed acute care as an appropriate time for recruitment into ADRD research provided interpersonally effective research staff and a tailored recruitment approach. Participants emphasized this approach should consider the acute care context with respect for participant situation, uncertainty, and timing. Participant suggestions informed the design of a 5-step process to guide ADRD research recruitment in the context of acute care.

Discussion

Findings provide valuable insights from people with dementia and their caregivers regarding opportunities for research engagement surrounding acute care, and can inform expanded recruitment in these settings.

Alzheimer’s and Dementia
Recruitment
Enrollment
Acute Care

Introduction

The World Health Organization’s Global Plan to address the societal challenges presented by Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) emphasizes the need for comprehensive action toward improving research participation to ensure continued progress toward identification of effective prevention, treatment, and care.1,2 Along with the need to increase enrollment in ADRD research, there is growing recognition of the need to address long-standing under-inclusion of underrepresented populations in ADRD research, particularly given their disproportionately higher disease risk and poorer outcomes. Efforts to bolster representation in ADRD research may necessitate expanding settings through which ADRD research recruitment takes place, in addition to careful consideration of the accessibility and inclusivity of recruitment approaches used by garnering broader input from prospective participants. Most ADRD research recruitment takes place through clinic and community-based networks.3,4 Yet reliance on these settings may inadvertently exclude individuals who are not connected to outpatient care, are socially isolated or otherwise lack connections to the formal community networks typically leveraged in recruitment efforts (e.g. churches or faith networks, community centers), which may disproportionately impact individuals from underrepresented backgrounds.5–7

Research suggests that some underrepresented populations, including racial/ethnic minority, immigrant and socioeconomically disadvantaged populations are less likely to have access to care and are more likely to use acute care settings for routine health needs.8,9 Acute care settings, including emergency and inpatient settings, are commonly engaged to facilitate research recruitment in other fields such as emergency and palliative medicine.10,11 However, they have been largely overlooked as potential additional settings to facilitate ADRD research recruitment. Such settings are particularly relevant to ADRD populations, as persons with ADRD are frequent utilizers of acute care compared to counterparts, having nearly two times as many hospital stays as their counterparts without ADRD.12,13,14 Reasons for limited ADRD research recruitment in acute care settings are poorly understood, but may be due in part to an assumption that acute care is an undesirable time for research recruitment. Input from people with ADRD and their caregivers can inform our understanding of the potential utility of acute care environments for facilitating ADRD research recruitment. Understanding caregivers’ perspectives is particularly important as they frequently serve as proxy decision-makers for research participation decisions and are often prospective participants themselves as approximately half are biological children who may be eligible for recruitment into preclinical trials.15,16

Little is known regarding perceptions of prospective participants regarding ADRD research recruitment in the specific context of acute care, limiting potential decisions around setting-specific recruitment approaches and strategies. Key informant interviews are an effective strategy for eliciting perspectives regarding experiences, preferences, and values that may shape participant priorities and needs specific to research recruitment through acute care settings. Thus, the objective of this study was to elicit and examine the views, preferences, and recommendations of patients with ADRD and their caregivers regarding acute care-based recruitment for ADRD research through semi-structured interviews.

Methods

Design

This study used a prospective descriptive qualitative design with semi-structured individual and dyadic interviews. Major research questions were established a priori and informed interview questions and development of a semi-structured interview guide. Interviews were designed to: (1) elicit participants’ perspectives in response to invitations to participate in an ADRD study (recruitment practices) in the acute care context, (2) identify factors participants weighed when deciding to participate, (3) probe perceived readiness, barriers, and facilitators, and (4) garner input on steps researchers should take when recruiting people with ADRD and their caregivers in acute care environments.

Study Setting and Participants

All study procedures were reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) prior to commencement of study procedures. Potential participants were recruited from the emergency department (ED), medical, and surgical units of an urban academic medical center via referrals from ED and transitional care staff. These specific services (ED and transitional care) were selected as they provide broad coverage of units across the institution. Staff on these services identified patients with a pre-hospitalization diagnosis of ADRD through routine review of patients’ electronic health records (EHR) to screen for a pre-hospitalization diagnosis of ADRD. Prior to referring potentially eligible patients to the study team, clinical staff reviewed the EHR to determine presence of a primary caregiver and/or legally authorized representative, and whether legally authorized representatives were activated (i.e. presence of an activated power of attorney indicating patient lacks medical decisional capacity). In the absence of a legally authorized representative and other indicators of a lack of capacity to consent to research participation, staff on these services determined initial interest on behalf of both the primary caregiver and person with ADRD in learning more about the study from the research team. If a legally authorized representative was present, initial contact was made only with the legally authorized representative and/or other eligible caregivers. If interested in learning more about the research study, staff facilitated hand-off to the research team by providing either the patient’s room number if they desired an in-person conversation and/or potential participant’s preferred contact information for follow-up at a later time. Research staff followed up in a timely manner to explain the study details, including the purpose, requirements, risks and benefits, and elective nature, and to answer any questions.

Research staff performed a brief eligibility screen for persons interested in the study. Eligibility criteria for ADRD participants included: (1) presence of a pre-hospitalization diagnosis of ADRD, (2) ability to participate in an interview in English, and (3) demonstrated decisional capacity via established procedures designed for acute care dementia recruitment.17 Caregiver participants were eligible if they (1) provided care to a hospitalized patient with a pre-hospitalization diagnosis of dementia and (2) provided direct or supportive care to the person with ADRD at least monthly, and (3) could participate in an interview in English. For situations where both the person with ADRD and caregiver were eligible to participate, they could participate in the interview as a dyad or individually. Participants received a $50 honorarium upon completion of the study.

Data Collection

If eligible and prior to data collection, research staff completed informed consent with all study participants. During the informed consent procedure, research staff reviewed an information sheet including all pertinent study details and provided ample time for participants to ask questions. Participants provided verbal consent prior to participation, with informed consent waived by the IRB to minimize risk of loss of confidentiality to participants. The research team had no prior relationship with participants. Data collection took place over eight months in one hour-long interviews, and thematic saturation was reached after 25 participants had been interviewed. A further six participants were interviewed to confirm data saturation across major findings. All interview materials were reviewed by a Community Advisory Board to ensure clarity. Throughout data collection, the study team met to discuss emerging themes which were recorded using a memoing procedure.

Data Analysis

All transcripts were analyzed in their entirety using a thematic analysis approach which is an iterative, systematic, and inductive method for reliably discerning common themes across research participants.18 To develop a standardized data-driven coding framework (Supplementary Material 1), all study team members reviewed a subset of transcripts to determine relevant codes and met to iteratively derive the coding framework. This coding framework was then trialed on a separate subset of transcripts, after which study team members again convened to discuss the ease of applying the coding framework and whether any interview data were insufficiently or accurately represented by the coding framework, with revisions applied yielding a standardized coding framework. The standardized coding framework was then applied across transcripts through line-by-line coding in NVivo 12.19 Twelve transcripts were reviewed independently by at least two coders to enable assessment of inter-coder agreement and identify the need for re-training or clarification of codes. Inter-rater reliability for the coding of these 12 transcripts was high with an average percent agreement of 98.9% (kappa=0.832). Disagreements were resolved in discussion with the entire coding team. Given the high agreement amongst coders, all subsequent transcripts were coded individually.

Codes were reviewed to identify patterns and similarities across interviews to identify salient themes.18 The study team did not utilize a preconceived theoretical framework, but instead relied on participant data to guide analysis. To enhance rigor, after saturation was achieved resultant findings and recommended acute care recruitment guidance were brought to an additional six participants in a visual and video format to provide an opportunity for endorsement, refutation, or expansion of suggested recruitment steps. Referencing Lincoln &amp; Guba’s concept of qualitative trustworthiness, our analysis procedures demonstrated credibility and dependability through the study team’s engagement in critical discussion throughout each step of analysis to reduce researcher-biased interpretation of the data.20

Results

Participants

Collectively, 95 potentially eligible patients were referred to the study team by hospital staff. Of these 95 referrals, 30 were not able to be contacted by the study team as an activated legally authorized representative was not present during the hospital stay. Remaining participants were not enrolled for the following reasons: 26 due to challenges making phone contact, 3 were discharged prior to first contact by the research team, and 8 declined to participate. Twenty-eight interviews were conducted with 31 participants, including three people with dementia and 28 caregivers. Three interviews were dyadic. Twenty-eight participants were White, one African American, one Hispanic, and one Native American. Participant demographic characteristics are detailed in Table 1.

All participants felt an acute illness care episode was an appropriate time for recruitment into ADRD studies, given specific considerations for timing and the nature of invitations, as well as preferred abilities among research staff facilitating invitations. Four participants also requested to complete the study interview while within the acute illness care setting; this was not a preference or option for all participants primarily due to timing with discharge and space constraints. No major differences were found between the perspectives of caregiver and person with ADRD participants.

Thematic Findings

Research Staff Attributes and Skills May be the Most Important Consideration for Acute Care Recruitment

Participants described specific researcher attributes and skills as critical to successful recruitment, with these descriptions far outweighing any other considerations shared by participants. Participants preferred staff to be “very kind, very thoughtful,” “very personable,” “knowledgeable,” and “attuned to [the person’s] feelings,” and to have “a very accepting personality.” Participants described preferring researchers who approach them with respect and free of pressure, recommending staff who were “not pushy,” “not forceful,” and “sweet, no high pressure or anything.” Participants emphasized needing researchers to communicate clearly, directly, and authentically as they explain key study details in plain language but without “talking down” to them. Participants wanted research staff to be genuine and skilled in adapting communication to each unique person and circumstance. Altogether, participants described these preferred researcher attributes and skills as enabling researcher-participant relationships to foster quickly, thus facilitating their interest and subsequent engagement. In some instances, the perceived impact of these relationships extended to the institution at large. One participant who said they generally “detest” research but linked positive relationships with previous researchers to the larger institution and subsequent participation: “but I did it because I had an unusually positive experience with [hospital name].” Participants also spontaneously shared that they appreciated having a conversation with research staff. The importance of conversation and relationship carried beyond the recruitment phase; several caregivers and participants with dementia preferred to have the same researcher who approached them to also facilitate their participation in research, both for consistency and as a way to build a relationship.

Acute Care Recruitment Approach Must Consider Situation, Periods of Uncertainty, and Preferred Timing

Participants stated that the acute care situation (e.g. reason for hospitalization), periods of uncertainty (e.g. discharge planning), and timing (e.g. early afternoon) were important considerations for the recruitment approach. Participants wanted researchers to be cognizant of the person with ADRD’s reason for hospitalization and to avoid the earlier periods of the hospital stay when they are more likely to receive more intensive care. Participants also suggested avoiding periods that require complex decision-making by the care network (e.g. determining discharge location later in the stay): “… don’t burden people when they are trying to make their decisions. They are making the decision to admit to the hospital or hospice or go back to where she’s been or move her right away and if it’s life and death.” Participants also described the “revolving door” phenomenon that occurs during hospitalization wherein multiple staff enter the room and the feelings of confusion and disruption that can ensue, presenting important timing considerations for research staff: “I couldn’t really tell who were researchers and who were doctors I was mainly focused on you know the caregivers wanted to know who the primary caregiver were. I didn’t really distinguish, there might have been researchers there.” Caregiver participants also noted the potential for changes in mood and cognition that can occur during hospitalization, describing later in the day as a more common time of increased confusion.

Though participants raised these points for consideration, none felt these factors were prohibitive for research recruitment. Rather, many noted enthusiasm about any ADRD specific research opportunity and also emphasized there was a lot of “down time” across the acute care stay, from the emergency room to inpatient unit: “it worked quite nicely because it was taking us a while to get us discharged and the research recruiter met with me during this time so that was really no problem.” Specifically, several participants identified early afternoons as potentially opportune times for recruitment, to avoid the busyness of the morning when rounds often occur and the fatigue and confusion that can accompany the evening. Participants also suggested allowing potential participants the opportunity to weigh in on timing (e.g. asking “Is this an okay time to talk?”), following up via email or phone call, or scheduling another time to come back. Finally, participants emphasized their need for time to make decisions, especially given the importance of shared or distributed decision-making patterns across the caregiving network.

Resultant Recruitment Steps Condoned by Caregiver Participants and Community Members

Collectively, participant preferences and recommendations regarding tailored recruitment approaches in the acute care setting shaped 5 participant-endorsed recruitment steps (Figure 1): 1. Determining Timing for Approach, 2. Clear Introduction as a Research Staff, 3. Building Rapport, 4. Understanding Situation and Preferences, 5. If Interested, Clearly and Succinctly Describing Study.

In Step 1, participants and community members alike felt the research staff must determine appropriate times to approach the hospitalized person with dementia and/or their caregiver about a research study. Specifically, participants felt the research staff should understand the trajectory of their hospital stay and relevant medical or social information (e.g. whether the person with dementia has an activated power of attorney), which could be obtained through chart review or by speaking to the referring clinician. However, participants did not feel strongly that research staff be introduced by the hospital staff, as long as the research staff clearly introduced themselves. As such, Step 2 for research staff involves a clear introduction inclusive of all persons in the room, ensuring their conversation includes the person with dementia and not solely caregivers or family. Critical aspects of the introduction include name, role as a researcher, and affiliation to help differentiate researchers from clinical staff.

Participants and community members alike shared the importance of relationship-building, leading to Step 3 of building rapport, which facilitates many participants’ desire for interaction during a hospital stay and provides research staff with valuable time to complete Step 4 of understanding prospective participants’ unique situation and preferences. For example, through conversation the research staff may learn whether the participant is feeling fatigued or if the participant would prefer that a family member be present.

After building rapport and understanding, the research staff can determine whether to proceed to describe the study or if a different avenue for follow-up is necessary (Step 5). Several participants preferred inclusion of a brief eligibility screen prior to in-depth explanation of procedures to avoid wasting potential participants’ time if they do not meet the inclusion criteria. Participants emphasized the need for clarity and brevity, desiring information on the type of study, procedures involved, participation requirements (when, where, duration), and benefits and risks. Participants shared study safety, reasonable requirements for duration and location, and appropriate incentives could maximize potential participation. Participants expressed the importance of having this information on a handout, brochure, or flyer to refer back to at a later time, particularly given the quantity of information provided during a hospital stay. After hearing about the research, participants wanted time to make decisions and to be asked for their preferred methods for follow up (e.g., phone call, mail or email correspondence).

Across Steps, Participants Emphasized Role of Person with Dementia and Caregiver Network in Making Decisions to Participate in Research

Caregiver participants identified inclusion of the person with dementia as important during initial recruitment and decision-making. Some caregivers emphasized the agency of the person with dementia to hold meaningful conversation beyond early disease stages, though they might require support with specific aspects of the conversation research: “she [person with dementia] can have conversations very easily … I like being there at times to advocate for her and once in a while make a little correction.” Altogether, caregiver participants emphasized the need to provide persons with dementia with adequate time and space to maximize their potential for involvement. Of note, caregivers felt that inclusion of the person with dementia was important even in situations where only the caregiver is eligible as a proxy informant, as they felt the study inherently “involved” disclosure about information with the care recipient, and overwhelmingly sought their input in decision-making.

General Perspectives on Research May Play a Role in More Specific Acute Care Recruitment Interactions

Though interviews were specific to acute care recruitment, all participants readily shared a variety of pre-existing perspectives on research, often relating these to their motivations to participate in research generally (Table 2). Although some participants drew from prior participation in research, most had no prior research experience. While most participants felt that research is beneficial to society, central to finding treatment and cures, and personally helpful and rewarding; some responses highlighted negative, cautious, or indifferent attitudes towards research participation. For example, knowledge of research misconduct and suspicion about research methods or goals had a significant impact on multiple participants’ views of research. One participant specifically mentioned the Henrietta Lacks case and said, “I do know that sometimes research can be not carried out appropriately. And sometimes if it’s sponsored by certain pharmaceutical companies, then maybe it’s, you know, I think you have to be ethical.”

Participants also identified a range of personal motivations for participating in research studies (Table 2). Several participants explained their motivation to participate in research as stemming from a kind of reciprocal altruism, or the belief that participating in research would provide both researchers and participants with benefits. The specific benefits participants hoped to reap from participating in research included contributing (even in a small way) to a cure, helping to advance knowledge in general, and learning the ultimate results of the study. Ten participants explicitly expressed an interest in learning the results of the study they participate in, stating that it “sure would be nice” and “I would love to know the results.”

Other common motivators included access to resources and support as well as access to treatment. Specific to resources and support, participants expressed a desire for information and tools on dementia, a way to express their difficulties, and an opportunity to meet similar people. Specific to treatment, participants frequently described their motivation as a desire for personal prognosis improvement and obtaining access to treatment for themselves or for their care recipient. Participants often struggled to readily differentiate between clinical and research staff, blurring treatment and research and complicating decision making and interpretation of motivational factors.

Discussion

Emergent research suggests that multi-faceted recruitment mechanisms, incorporating a variety of recruitment settings and media-based strategies, may bolster study accessibility, enrollment, and representativeness.21,22 Findings from this study provide tangible insights from participants regarding steps researchers can take to expand recruitment efforts into acute care environments specifically, which may help to broaden accessibility by making another recruitment channel available. In this study, participants with dementia and caregiver participants endorsed acute care settings as an appropriate venue for ADRD research recruitment, though they also communicated clear preferences for how and when research invitations are presented in this setting. Namely, participants emphasize the critical need for relationship; a thoughtful, respectful, and genuine interpersonal approach; and consideration of their unique situation and timing requirements throughout the research recruitment process. Findings also highlight the importance of person-centered recruitment efforts adapted to the needs of participants with dementia and their caregivers, and suggest that approaching a potential research participant should be viewed as the beginning of the cultivation of a researcher-participant relationship.

Prior research has emphasized linking attitudes about ADRD research to motivation to participate.23–26 Previous research has found that motivation to participate depends considerably on the participants’ attitudes toward research, with specific concerns regarding the potential harm, time consumption, or futility of research participation contributing to poorer attitudes towards research.26–30 Results of the present study suggest that decisions to participate in ADRD research may involve more factors than extant attitudes alone. In agreement with research that has identified institutional factors,7 this study found interpersonal, situational, and study-specific factors play a vital role, suggesting that a host of factors beyond extant attitudes might be salient and should be further investigated. Consistent with our findings, in an interview study of participants of Alzheimer’s disease-related clinical trials and their decisions to engage in research, Bardach et al. found that an understanding of the importance of research and motivation to help others in the future were acknowledged as motivators for participating in ADAD research, and that positive relationships with research personnel encouraged continued involvement.27 Rather than treat barriers and facilitators as isolated factors, investigators might better conceptualize them as interdependent pieces of a holistic recruitment context. Furthermore, these results suggest training procedures in the five recruitment steps and practice of nonverbal communication may be useful in making future research recruitment more effective, regardless of extant attitudes.

Most caregiver participants wanted the person with dementia to be included in research as much as possible. Such supported or surrogate decision-making has been described as the product of multiple agents such as family members, friends, associates, or public attorneys.25,31,32 This broader inclusion was very meaningful to participants as they relied upon inclusion of the person with dementia to shape decisions. This preference may have implications for recruitment in other environments and can inform growing efforts to identify improved methods for inclusion of people with dementia in research.

It is important to note that the research recruitment steps participants endorsed have potential to apply regardless of the acute illness care context. Reinforcing positive research staff attributes, considering context and timing of recruitment approach, and including the personal network of the person with dementia in the research recruitment process are all factors that can be considered universal to research recruitment involving individuals with dementia. These endorsed steps therefore may have utility for research recruitment in other contexts.

This study has a number of limitations. Most participants were college/post bachelor educated, white, English-speaking and retired. Not only do the sample limitations limit the generalizability of the study, but they may have further biased the results of the study toward more ethnocentric perspectives. In addition, persons holding these identities may have varying historical and current reference points with research that may shape their research preferences. Additional research in non-academic contexts and with more diverse populations is a critical next step to address facilitators and barriers to research participation surrounding acute care, and to confirm the utility of the development recruitment steps with more diverse populations.

In addition, this study recruited participants from a single acute care setting, which may limit the transferability of the findings. The study recruitment site was an academic, not-for-profit hospital, which could mean participants had greater exposure to academic research and third-party observations during their hospital visits that may bias the study results. Additionally, the fact that the participants interviewed had already agreed to be recruited through the context of acute care possibly biased results towards the acceptability of acute care research recruitment, and data was not collected from the persons who declined to participate or were lost to attrition on their perceived acceptability of the recruitment mechanism. It is important to note that declining to participate or otherwise may not equate to negative views on the recruitment mechanism as there are multifaceted reasons that surround an individuals’ choice to participate. Moreover, the current study did not attempt to determine participant views on acute care recruitment versus other settings of recruitment, as many of the interview questions were facilitated by reflecting on the participants’ proximal lived experiences with acute care-based dementia research recruitment. Future research that aims to compare different recruitment settings or modes must be cognizant of the challenge of determining participant views on unfamiliar experiences.

Some participants in the present study felt comfortable expressing hesitancy or disinclination toward research participation in general, which indicates the kind of research being conducted might be a factor affecting willingness to participate and should be investigated in future research. There is also a need for prospective data collection on the effectiveness of research recruitment, including measure of attitudes that capture relationship development in addition to attitudes among caregivers regarding participation in research.4 Although other measures exist (notably the Research Attitudes Questionnaire),33 such tools do not reflect degree and quality of researcher-participant relationship building.

Finally, though we found no major differences in attitudes towards research recruitment during acute illness care episodes between participants with ADRD and caregivers, this may be due to the fact that we did not include comparative analysis between participant types as a study objective, which drove unequal recruitment of each participant group and the use of the same interview questions for both participants with ADRD and caregivers. Future research is needed to better delineate the perspectives of people with ADRD on research recruitment in acute-illness care settings, and whether their views differ from caregivers who may experience the hospitalization from a different viewpoint and role. Along these lines, the underlying health conditions that led people with ADRD to an acute-illness care setting were not systemically collected, limiting our ability to determine whether health status played a role in participants’ views on research recruitment. This information was instead shared voluntarily during interviews.

Settings and methods for ADRD research recruitment will undoubtedly need to be expanded to increase enrollment and diversity of research participants. These tailored recruitment strategies for acute care settings are the first derived solely from person with dementia and caregiver input, and can serve to inform future efforts to expand ADRD research recruitment into these environments.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental Data File (.doc, .tif, pdf, etc.)

Acknowledgements

Funding

This work was supported by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number [K76AG060005 (Gilmore-Bykovskyi)] and the University of Wisconsin Institute for Clinical and Translational Research under Award Title “Development of Tailored Approaches for Optimizing Research Engagement among Disadvantaged Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease and their Caregivers in Acute Care Settings” (Gilmore-Bykovskyi). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Figure 1. Participant endorsed steps for acute care based ADRD research recruitment.

Table 1. Participant characteristics.

Characteristics	n (%)	
Age		
	
20-29	2 (6.45)	
30-39	1 (3.23)	
40-49	1 (3.23)	
50-59	4 (12.90)	
60-69	7 (22.58)	
70-79	10 (35.71)	
80-89	1 (3.23)	
90-100	1 (3.23)	
Not reported	4 (12.90)	
	
Gender		
	
Female	20 (64.52)	
Male	8 (25.81)	
Not reported	3 (9.68)	
	
Ethnicity		
	
African American	1 (3.23)	
Hispanic	1 (3.23)	
Native American	1 (3.23)	
White	28 (90.32)	
	
Education level		
	
High School Diploma or Equivalent	2 (6.45)	
Technical School, Vocational Training, Community College	3 (9.68)	
Some College	1 (3.23)	
4-Year College	9 (29.03)	
Post College	12 (38.71)	
Not reported	4 (12.90)	
	
Employment Status		
	
Full-Time	7 (22.58)	
Part-Time	3 (9.68)	
Not Working	1 (3.23)	
Retired	16 (51.61)	
	
Interview Type		
	
Dyadic	3 (10.71)	
Individual	25 (89.29)	
	
Participant Type		
	
Person with Dementia	3 (9.67)	
Caregiver	28 (90.32)	
	
Caregiver Relation to Care Recipient		
	
Spouse	14 (45.16)	
Child	10 (32.26)	
Other Relative	3 (9.68)	
Friend	3 (9.68)	
Person with dementia only (no caregiver present)	1 (3.23)	
	
Care Recipient Living Conditions		
	
Person with dementia lives with caregiver in their home	17 (54.84)	
Person with dementia lives in assisted living facility	14 (45.16)	
	
Participant Population Density		
	
Rural	2 (6.45)	
Urban Cluster	8 (25.81)	
Urban	5 (16.13)	
Not Reported	16 (51.61)	

Table 2. Major thematic findings in participant recommendations for acute care recruitment into Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias research studies

Example Dimensions of Thematic Findings	Illustrative Quotes	
Research Staff Attributes and Skills May Be Most Important Consideration for Acute Care Recruitment	
Positive personal attributes among research staff desired	“He [the recruiter] is just a relaxed kind of guy. Had kind of a caring feeling about it, not ‘oh-we need to do this’.”

“They have just always been very respectful in terms of asking me to participate.”	
Adaptive communication skills critical for recruitment	“You have to, when you’re dealing with these people, you have to back off and figure out how they respond to things before you dig into things. So how do they respond? What is their personality like?”

“Try to be attuned to their [potential participants’] feelings”

“I don’t like to be put on the spot by someone coming in and saying will you do this.”	
Detailed and clear communication needed central to recruitment approach and description of study	“You need a little more detail. Describing what it is before you describe the goal. Make sure they understand what it means. Because if they don’t you could have problems down the road.”

“Come and being straightforward, saying who they are, what they are there for and stuff is an important thing.”

“How many days a week it involves, how much time it would be every day if it was every day, and would it interfere with my already busy schedule.”	
Importance of having a conversation and building a relationship to successful recruitment	“I think an actual person you know over the phone or an actual conversation is more effective for me.”

“When I talked to this gal that I got these phone calls from [the research interviewer] and that was nice and I liked that cause I could sit there and talk to her for hours-hour and a half.”	
Acute Care Recruitment Approach Must Consider Situation, Periods of Uncertainty, and Preferred Timing	
Reason for and context of a person’s acute care situation including related acute care work processes are important considerations	“She was there for something very life-threatening … I probably wouldn’t want the person to contact me about doing a study at that particular moment in time.”

“I couldn’t really tell who were researchers and who were doctors I was mainly focused on you know the caregivers wanted to know who the primary caregiver were. I didn’t really distinguish, there might have been researchers there.”

“If I just found out some horrible health news and somebody came to talk about a research study to participate I would be like not so much.”	
Periods of uncertainty may pose challenges for recruitment and decisions to participate	“When she first arrived. She had been there quite a while when… you gotta get them settled in and get a sense of how stable they are.”

“Don’t burden people when they are trying to make their decisions. They are making the decision to admit to the hospital or hospice or go back to where she’s been or move her right away and if it’s life and death.”	
Recruiters must consider person with dementia’s patterns in cognition and preferred timing	“I don’t know, all I can say is the afternoons are better to make it comfortable and has somebody that has a very pleasant personality.”

“You have to make sure that … the person’s not medicated in a way that’s going to make them drowsy.”	
Across Steps, Participants Emphasized Role of Person with Dementia and Caregiver Network in Making Decisions to Participate in Research	
Inclusion of persons with dementia in conversations about research participation viewed as important, though perspectives on how differed	Caregiver participant describing the person with dementia’s ability to participate in conversations and research: “I mean she [the person with dementia] can have those conversations very easily. She doesn’t advocate well for herself but she can speak up very well.”

“I’d be too worried to leave him [the person with dementia] alone … I don’t know maybe a researcher should know the caregiver feels like they have to be there all the time you know that they are well cared for.”

“When it’s introduced to her [the person with dementia] I would want to be there. I wouldn’t need to be there for the study because then I know that she knows what’s going on.”	
General Perspectives on Research May Play a Role in More Specific Acute Care Recruitment Interactions	
Varying familiarity with and perspectives on research may influence acute care recruitment preferences	“I love research! My husband is in research so it was our life for many years”

“Well, I mean, you’ve probably read the Henrietta Lacks books and things like that where I think if it’s not handled appropriately, and I think we’re doing so much better, but I do know that sometimes research can be not carried out appropriately. And sometimes if it’s sponsored by certain pharmaceutical companies then maybe it’s, you know, I think you have to be ethical. So I do obviously think about the ethics of things.”	
Shared personal motivations for research participation may influence acute care research recruitment preferences	Reciprocal altruism: “I guess our motivation all along has been strong in maybe they can find something that will help us and maybe we could do something that will help them.”

Altruism, related to personal connection to disease: “I feel that anything I can do to help down the road, is well worth, my time, and energy, and well with the Alzheimer’s thing, it’s very close to our family, I feel very strongly about that.”

Gaining access to resources or support: “Well a lot of the challenges I met while being a caregiver was not knowing how to be a caregiver and all the sudden you’re thrown into it […]. And I think it would’ve been really helpful to have been in a study and have someone on the inside saying now you do this.”

Monetary compensation: “Like because some people are just like no I don’t want anything to do with it. But then if that’s something like, or say hey it’s a paid research study going on would that be something you are interested in learning about?”

Generating a sense of worth: “‘you have this diagnosis where you can help us so much by sharing what’s going on with you and just a lot more affirmation that his contribution is really valuable. […].’ And to have a diagnosis like that and yet still be valued as a contributing member of society I think is really important even if they don’t remember it the next day.”	


References

1 World Health Organization. Global action plan on the public health response to dementia 2017–2025 [web site]. 2017. Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259615/9789241513487-eng.pdf;jsessionid=5E2E4E182B6896E35C51C6B02DEB13A1?sequence=1. Accessed February 10, 2020.
2 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Plan to Address Alzheimer’s Disease: 2019 Update [web site]. 2019. Available at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/262601/NatlPlan2019.pdf. Accessed February 12, 2020.
3 Gleason CE , Norton D , Zuelsdorff M , Association between enrollment factors and incident cognitive impairment in Blacks and Whites: Data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Center. Alzheimers Dement. 2019;15 :1533–1545.31601516
4 Gilmore-Bykovskyi AL , Jin Y , Gleason C , Recruitment and retention of underrepresented populations in Alzheimer’s disease research: A systematic review. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2019;5 :751–770.31921966
5 Connell CM , Scott Roberts J , McLaughlin SJ , Akinleye D . Racial differences in knowledge and beliefs about Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2009;23 :110–116.19474569
6 Swanson GM , Ward AJ . Recruiting minorities into clinical trials: toward a participant-friendly system. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1995;87 :1747–1759.7473831
7 Joseph G , Dohan D . Recruiting minorities where they receive care: Institutional barriers to cancer clinical trials recruitment in a safety-net hospital. Contemp Clin Trials. 2009;30 :552–559.19580887
8 Mayberry RM , Mili F , Ofili E . Racial and ethnic differences in access to medical care. Med Care Res Rev. 2000;57 Suppl 1 :108–145.11092160
9 Derose KP , Gresenz CR , Ringel JS . Understanding disparities in health care access--and reducing them--through a focus on public health. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011;30 :1844–1851.21976325
10 Cofield SS , Conwit R , Barsan W , Quinn J . Recruitment and retention of patients into emergency medicine clinical trials. Acad Emerg Med. 2010;17 :1104–1112.21040112
11 Dykes C , Glick J , Abar B , Dozier A . Effectiveness and cost of recruiting participants to a research registry using an emergency department research associate program. Clin Transl Sci. 2020;13 :53–56.31643132
12 Sampson EL , Blanchard MR , Jones L , Dementia in the acute hospital: prospective cohort study of prevalence and mortality. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;195 :61–66.19567898
13 Briggs R , Dyer A , Nabeel S , Dementia in the acute hospital: the prevalence and clinical outcomes of acutely unwell patients with dementia. QJM. 2016;110 :33–37.27486262
14 Alzheimer’s Association. 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 2019;15 :321–387.
15 Fisher GG , Franks MM , Plassman BL , Caring for individuals with dementia and cognitive impairment, not dementia: findings from the aging, demographics, and memory study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011;59 :488–494.21391939
16 Maust DT , Blass DM , Black BS , &amp; Rabins PV . Treatment decisions regarding hospitalization and surgery for nursing home residents with advanced dementia: the CareAD Study. Int Psychogeriatr. 2008;20 :406–418.17825116
17 Holden TR , Keller S , Kim A , Procedural framework to facilitate hospital-based informed consent for dementia research. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2018;66 :2243–2248.30246863
18 Braun V , Clarke V . Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol. 2006;3 :77–101.
19 NVivo 12 [software program]. Version 12. QSR International; 2019.
20 Lincoln YS , Guba EG . Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
21 Grill JD , Galvin JE . Facilitating Alzheimer disease research recruitment. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2014;28 :1–8.24322484
22 Rabinowitz YG , Gallagher-Thompson D . Recruitment and retention of ethnic minority elders into clinical research. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2010;24 Suppl :S35–41.22720320
23 Neugroschl J , Sewell M , De La Fuente A , Attitudes and perceptions of research in aging and dementia in an urban minority population. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016;53 :69–72.27128368
24 Cary MS , Rubright JD , Grill JD , Karlawish J . Why are spousal caregivers more prevalent than nonspousal caregivers as study partners in AD dementia clinical trials? Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2015;29 :70–74.24805971
25 Kim SY , Kim HM , McCallum C , Tariot PN . What do people at risk for Alzheimer disease think about surrogate consent for research? Neurology 2005;65 :1395–1401.16275826
26 Karlawish J , Rubright J , Casarett D , Older adults’ attitudes toward enrollment of non-competent subjects participating in Alzheimer’s research. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166 :182–188.18923066
27 Bardach SH , Parsons K , Gibson A , Jicha GA . “From Victimhood to Warriors”: Super-researchers’ insights into Alzheimer’s disease clinical trial participation motivations. Gerontologist. 2020;60 (4 ):693–703.31322657
28 Boada M , Santos-Santos MA , Rodríguez-Gomez O , Patient engagement: The Fundacio ACE framework for improving recruitment and retention in Alzheimer’s disease research. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62 ;1079–1090.29562541
29 Grill JD , Karlawish J . Addressing the challenges to successful recruitment and retention in Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials. Alzheimer’s Res Ther. 2010;2 (34 ).
30 Connell CM , Shaw BA , Holmes SB , Foster NL . Caregivers’ attitudes toward their family members’ participation in Alzheimer disease research: Implications for recruitment and retention. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2001;15 ;137–145.11522931
31 Sinclair C , Gersbach K , Hogan M , “A Real Bucket of Worms”: Views of people living with dementia and family members on supported decision-making. J Bioeth Inq. 2019;16 :587–608 31832863
32 Karlawish J , Kim SYH , Knopman D , The views of Alzheimer disease patients and their study partners on proxy consent for clinical trial enrollment. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008;16 :240–247.18310554
33 Rubright JD , Cary MS , Karlawish JH , Kim SY . Measuring how people view biomedical research: Reliability and validity analysis of the Research Attitudes Questionnaire. J Empir Res Hum Res Ethics. 2011;6 :63–68.21460589
