LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8700909
28143
J Cross Cult Gerontol
J Cross Cult Gerontol
Journal of cross-cultural gerontology
0169-3816
1573-0719

35579786
9262861
10.1007/s10823-022-09450-6
NIHMS1818954
Article
Knowledge, attitudes, and cultural beliefs about healthy aging and Alzheimer’s disease among older Chinese Americans in New York City
Robbins Rebecca 12
Chong Stella 3
Liang Alice 3
Chanko Nicholas 3
Trinh-Shevrin Chau 4
Kwon Simona 2
1 Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115
2 Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
3 Center for Healthful Behavior Change, Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY 10016
4 Center for the Study of Asian American Health, Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY 10016
Corresponding author: Rebecca Robbins, 221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115 rrobins4@bwh.harvard.edu
1 7 2022
6 2022
17 5 2022
08 7 2022
37 2 161180
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Introduction:

Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementia (ADRD) are a growing concern across the globe. Unfortunately, racial/ethnic minorities in the United States (U.S.), such as Chinese Americans, have lower ADRD knowledge, and these individuals are less likely to be targeted and engaged in recommended dementia prevention and care.

Objective:

The objective of this study is to examine knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about healthy aging, ADRD, and dementia among older Chinese Americans living in New York City.

Method:

Chinese Americans with very low English proficiency were recruited from a senior center in New York City. Accordingly, surveys were translated and focus groups were conducted in Mandarin or Cantonese. Questionnaires assessed demographic and health characteristics. Focus groups followed an open-ended protocol which was guided by the published literature. Focus group discussions were audio recorded, transcribed, and translated to English for qualitative analysis. Analysis of qualitative data proceeded according to the constant comparative method.

Results:

A total of 18 participants were recruited. Average age of participants was 76.4 years and participants were 72.2% female. The majority were married (72.2%). Participants reported chronic conditions, including diabetes (38.9%) and dyslipidemia (22.2%). Participants commonly reported that their health limited their ability to accomplish things (66.7%) and achieve things (66.7%). While 16.7% of participants reported no bodily pain, slight pain was reported by 44.4%, moderate pain by 33.3%, and extreme pain by 5.6%. Qualitative analysis revealed several prominent themes, including: (1) perceptions about normal aging; (2) fears about loneliness and cognitive decline; (3) understanding of healthy aging; (4) cultural influences on aging; and (5) perceptions of AD and dementia.

Conclusion:

Results from this study highlight a set of cultural beliefs about healthy aging as well as knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs pertaining to AD and dementia. These results may inform opportunities for increasing healthy aging practices and knowledge about dementia among underserved older Chinese Americans.


pmcIntroduction

Addressing Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia (ADRD) is a major global priority. These conditions, however, may be particularly concerning among race/ethnic minority groups. Meta-analysis from Cooper and colleagues examining studies conducted among older racial/ethnic minority populations including Chinese Americans, found that these individuals were at a three-fold greater risk for cognitive impairment than the general population. Yet, they are significantly less likely to seek adequate ADRD care.1 In the US, Asian Americans are the fastest growing racial/ethnic group2 and according to American Community Survey data, Chinese Americans have the highest proportion of older adults above the age of 65, highest poverty, and lowest education levels of all Asian Americans.3

Research suggests that, compared to White individuals, Chinese Americans may have lower knowledge and awareness of ADRD. Research comparing ADRD knowledge and awareness among White, Asian, African American individuals living in the US has shown that minority groups (Asian and African American) have significantly lower knowledge of ADRD dementia than White individuals.4 In this work, Ayalon and colleague also found, after controlling for age, that number of years of speaking English was strongly associated with higher AD knowledge levels among Asian Americans. However, according to the US Census Bureau, the majority of Chinese Americans have limited English proficiency (58%),5 and low language proficiency is associated with poor health literacy, or limited ability to seek and comprehend health-related information.6,7

Research has also examined ADRD knowledge among Asian Americans. In one community-based survey conducted among Asian Americans living in the Austin, TX area, 25% of whom were Chinese Americans, those individuals had concerningly low ADRD knowledge (38.1%) compared to all other Asian American groups (48.8%–70.8%). Another survey of older Chinese Americans in the San Francisco area found 71.2% of respondents identified dementia as a mental illness and did not recognize the mental disease origin of the condition.8

In other research conducted by Jones and colleagues with Asian Americans from a range of ages living in high density Asian American communities in Southern California, awareness of ADRD was moderate among all groups;9 however, understanding of ADRD was deeply informed by cultural values and beliefs, such as the use of traditional Chinese medicine for treatment. Jones and colleagues also found that the Chinese American participants were more likely to support institutionalizing individuals with ADRD. This finding aligns with previous research, which suggests that, similar to other cultures, dementia is a stigmatized condition. In the Chinese language, the word for dementia is synonymous with ‘crazy’, ‘stupid’, and ‘slow.’10,11 More nuanced findings were reported in a cross sectional study of older Chinese Americans in Phoenix, Arizona. Findings indicated that fatalism about ADRD, rather than stigmatization, were associated with higher levels of concern for ADRD.12 Another focus group study conducted with a diverse sample of older adults, including Chinese Americans, African Americans, American Indians, Latinos, and White individuals, living in the San Francisco area found Chinese American participants reported high awareness of ADRD, yet were 4 times more likely to mention a positive outlook and healthy lifestyle as primary prevention strategies as compared to other race/ethnic groups with very few Chinese American participants citing Western medicine as an approach to ADRD prevention or care.13

In 2011, the U.S. National Prevention Council called for a focus on prevention of ADRD.14 Previous research using qualitative approaches with older Chinese Americans found participants reported prevention measures, such as healthy nutrition and lifestyles, for reducing AD risk,9 yet no previous studies have focused on beliefs and attitudes toward healthy aging among older Chinese Americans. Our study objective was to conduct focus groups to identify the knowledge and attitudes toward healthy aging and ADRD among limited English proficient, older Chinese American adults in New York City, home to the largest population of Chinese Americans in the U.S. (over 800,000 Chinese Americans).15

Methods

Participants and recruitment

We recruited older (age 65 and above) community-dwelling Chinese American individuals in New York City. We recruited individuals from a Chinese American-serving community senior center in New York City. To recruit eligible participants, we posted in-language flyers in common areas and made announcements during regularly scheduled events at the senior center. All recruitment materials and study activities were conducted in either Mandarin or Cantonese.

Data collection

We conducted two focus groups. Each focus group included between 6 and 9 participants. Participants first completed a demographic and health questionnaire before proceeding to the focus group discussion. Focus groups were conducted by native Mandarin or Cantonese speaking research assistants trained in qualitative methods. At the time of enrollment, participants indicated their language of choice (i.e., Mandarin or Cantonese) then were scheduled into a focus group according to their language preference.

Focus groups followed a semi-structured interview guide informed by a review of the published literature. The interviewers posed open-ended questions to the individuals in each group for discussion pertaining to knowledge and beliefs about healthy aging. In the Chinese language, there is not a direct translation for the concept of remaining healthy as one ages. The focus groups, led by a trained native speaker, translated the term ‘healthy aging’ as ‘healthy longevity’ (“健康长寿) as this was the closest representation of the term. Participants were asked about this term with questions such as “What does it mean to you to age?” and ”If we say healthy aging, what does that mean to you?” Participants were also asked to share their day-to-day activities with the question “Tell me about your daily routine.” Next, participants were asked about memory with questions such as “Do you find yourself more forgetful as you age?” and “Do you think becoming a bit forgetful is a normal part of aging?” Finally, participants were asked about ADRD with questions such as “Have you heard of Alzheimer’s disease” and “What do you think are common reasons Alzheimer’s disease or symptoms start?” The interview guide can be found in the Appendix. Focus groups were audio recorded with permission from participants. Audio tapes were transcribed verbatim. Transcripts were translated verbatim into English for qualitative analysis by a native Mandarin or Cantonese speaking research assistant. The translation was checked for accuracy by a second native speaker who attended the focus groups.

Questionnaires

Surveys assessed demographic characteristics, self-reported chronic conditions, and general health. All surveys were translated into written simplified Chinese and verbally presented in Mandarin or Cantonese to match the language of the focus group. Participants marked responses to demographic questions and were asked to self-report health conditions (e.g., hypertension, diabetes). Finally, the survey administered the psychometrically valid Short-Form 12 (SF-12), a widely used tool tested in various populations for assessing mental and physical health. The SF-12 asks participants to mark their overall health from 1 (very poor) to 5 (excellent); if a physical detriment interfered with their ability to climb stairs, work or participate in activities, accomplish what they used to be able to accomplish and carefully accomplish tasks. Participants were also asked the extent to which pain interfered with their normal work either outside the home or inside the home (e.g., housework) on a scale from 1 (not at all limited) to 3 (limited a lot). Participants were asked if an emotional problem caused them to accomplish less than they would like and if they did not perform work as carefully as usual on scales from 1 (yes) to 2 (no). Participants were asked the extent to which an emotional problem interfered with their ability to accomplish what they would like or as carefully as they would like from 1 (yes) to 2 (no). Participants were also asked how often they felt calm and peaceful, if they have a lot of energy, and how often they felt downhearted and blue on a scale from 1 (none of the time) to 6 (all of the time). The SF-12 has not been validated for Mandarin or Cantonese speaking individuals. The English version of the SF-12 was translated independently by the two native Mandarin and Cantonese research assistants. Differences in translation were discussed among the two assistants and resulted in a translated scale for either language. Due to the small sample size, the SF-12 scoring was not performed, but instead the descriptive statistics for each item on the SF-12 were reported separately. Questionnaires took approximately 15 minutes to complete.

Qualitative analysis

Transcripts were analyzed by three trained independent coders according to the constant comparative method of qualitative inquiry.16 According to this methodology, coders engage in several rounds of coding of the qualitative data. We considered each utterance a unit of observation. The first round of coding included reading the transcripts without assigning any codes. The aim of this first round of analysis was to orient the reader to the data. In the subsequent rounds, coders engaged in an iterative process whereby they assigned codes to the utterances. First, coders were instructed to be highly descriptive in their coding. In the second coding phase, and each subsequent pass at coding, coders coded the entire transcript, then aggregated their codes, before using that code list as the “codebook” for each subsequent round of coding. In the constant comparative method, each coding round developed a more refined and concise set of codes pertaining to the themes regarding knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about healthy aging and ADRD. Discrepancies among coders were discussed by the entire group until a majority approved of the change or coding approach.

RESULTS

A total of 18 participants were recruited into the study. Among participants, the average age was 76.4 years (s.d.=9.37). There were more female (72.2%) than male (28.8%) participants. Most participants were married (72.2%) and the remainder were widowed (22.2%) or divorced (5.6%). Self-reported health condition diagnoses from the participants, in order of prevalence, included diabetes (28.9%), dyslipidemia (22.2%), sleep apnea (11.1%) heart problems (11.1%), anxiety (5.6%), and depression (5.6%). See table 1.

Regarding health characteristics among the sample, in order of the most common responses, 61.1% reported ‘fair’ health, 22.2% reported ‘good’ health, and 16.7% reported ‘poor’ health. Regarding the activities that participants reported being limited in the past 4 weeks due to their health, most participants reported their health ‘limited a little’ their physical activity (61.1%) or their ability to climb stairs (61.1%). Most participants reported that health limited their daily activities, including being able to accomplish things (66.7%), achieve things (66.7%), and be careful (72.2%). Most participants reported either ‘slight’ (44.4%), ‘moderate’ (33.3%), or ‘extreme’ (5.6%) bodily pain, while 16.7% reported no pain at all. Most individuals reported feeling peaceful either ‘all the time’ (27.8%), ‘most of the time’ (27.8%) or ‘a good bit’ of the time (22.2%). Most individuals reported having a lot of energy ‘some’ of the time (55.6%) or a little of the time (11.1%). Most individuals reported ‘never’ feeling downhearted and blue (33.3%), or a ‘little’ of the time (38.9%). Finally, most individuals reported health limiting their social activities ‘some of the time’ (44.4%), ‘a little of the time’ (22.2%), or ‘none of the time’ (22.2%). See Table 2.

Perceptions of normal aging

Qualitative analyses revealed several themes pertaining to beliefs about aging among our sample of older Chinese Americans. Specifically, three primary themes were identified, including: 1) perceptions about normal aging; 2) fear pertaining to loneliness and poor mental health; and 3) challenges to everyday activities. First, pertaining to perceptions about normal aging, participants reported two general beliefs: 1) aging and physical pain; and 2) beliefs about aging and cognitive decline. Regarding comments pertaining to aging and pain, as one participant noted: “Bodily deterioration is common among old people” and another participant indicated “That’s what old people experience. Pain here today, and somewhere else tomorrow.” Regarding memory decline, participants reported beliefs about memory decline and forgetfulness. A male participant shared, “Right, like the things I read today, by tomorrow, I won’t remember any of them.” In addition to documenting the prevalence of these factors (i.e., lapses in memory and forgetfulness), several reported this to be a ‘normal’ part of aging. Second, participants reported fear of loneliness and poor mental health. For instance, one participant explained, “When you are getting old, you are most afraid of loneliness.” Regarding the third theme, participants reported challenges to incorporating healthy behaviors into everyday activities as they age. For instance, as one participant mentioned, they desired to incorporate healthy eating yet found it difficult, particularly for individuals living alone, to purchase healthy food in U.S. supermarkets: “It’s hard to cook just for one person” and “In the Chinese market, we need to buy one pack of garlic. But in the western market, you can buy a single garlic.” Table 3 features all exemplary quotes for each theme.

Understanding ‘healthy aging’

Regarding perceptions about healthy aging among older Chinese Americans, two main themes emerged: 1) confusion about the concept of ‘healthy aging’; and 2) beliefs about maintaining health and preventing decline. First, participants mostly reported confusion regarding the concept of ‘healthy aging.’ As one participant asked “Does it mean deterioration?” and “Healthy aging, it’s my first time seeing the word.” However, one participant reported “It means do more to prevent aging,” to which others responded with affirmation after hearing this definition. Second, although the term ‘healthy aging’ was unfamiliar to some, participants nevertheless reported healthy everyday routines, such as exercise and healthy nutrition. Specifically, participants reported the importance of remaining physically active as they age, “Exercise is priceless, it’s really good.” Another theme pertaining to maintaining health and preventing decline had to do with brain stimulation. Participants reported playing games “After dinner, I usually play Mahjong” and another reported it being important to “practice more with our brains” as they age. Finally, participants reported seeking health information online and via social networking mobile phone applications. As one participant mentioned, “I read from WeChat that elderly should eat more things with shells like walnut and squash seeds are good too,” and another participant mentioned “Read the newspaper and WeChat.” Participants also reported the importance of good nutrition to prevent decline, as evidenced by the comment from one participant “I guess what you eat is what you are. For instance, walnut, right?” Also, participants reported the importance of a positive outlook for healthy aging. As one person indicated “One more thing, keeping a positive mindset is also important to healthy aging” and “Yes, the way you think! Even though you are diagnosed with some disease, don’t be afraid!” Finally, participants referenced their participation in activities and events at their senior community center as a vital part of their healthy lifestyle. As one participant mentioned “Fortunately, we have this senior center to keep me busy. If I am home alone, I will watch TV. If I watch for a little while, my eyes will hurt. If there isn’t the center, just sitting home alone will make me irritated for no reason.” Another participant commented that the “best day” is one spent at the senior center. More exemplary quotes are shown in Table 4.

The role of cultural values and beliefs on aging

During the focus group discussion, several comments arose that pertained to cultural beliefs about aging. Three themes were identified that had to do with cultural factors pertaining to aging. First, participants commonly referred to the Chinese-Buddhist concept of “the King of Hell” Or “Yan Wang.” Specifically, participants reported “Death is not under your control as well, it is up to the King of the Hell.” Another person indicated “The King of Hell will notify you when it’s time to leave.” These comments reflect a realistic view of death that it is inevitable, and that death, and risk for dementia, are out of one’s control. Second, the participants reported an emphasis on family harmony and a strong desire to avoid being a burden to their families. As noted by one participant “You burden the children by having them take care of you every day” and “Death is not scary. If you die earlier, you will be relieved, and not only you, and your family will be relieved too.” Third, health and dignity were also discussed as being closely linked. For instance, one participant explained when “describing becoming sick, “If he’s sick or disabled, I would think he is a pitiful guy.” Participants reported a desire to die comfortably and with dignity, as one participant mentioned “The problem is not fear of death, but how to die with dignity.” Another participant explained “If I were sick today, there will be tubes going in here and there. I would lose my good image, I would rather die via euthanasia.” Additional quotes are shown in Table 5.

Perceptions of ADRD and dementia

Several primary themes were identified in the comments pertaining to symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs. First, there were several comments that indicated perceptions that ADRD was more than simple forgetfulness, but that individuals with the condition “would not know anything” or have an “empty brain.” As one participant mentioned “You don’t know anything if you suffer from dementia, so it doesn’t matter anymore.” Another theme had to do with physical manifestations of ADRD, such as the brain shrinking. One participant said “I heard that the brain shrink, right?” Also, referring to someone diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, “His brain might have shrunk.” A third theme had to do with loss of control of bodily functions, as well as mental and emotional connections. As one participant noted, “People have Alzheimer’s and can’t even recognize their family members.” Another participant stated, in describing someone with Alzheimer’s disease, “Incontinence. They don’t know that they pooped on themselves.”

Another theme had to do with the impact Alzheimer’s disease has upon social relationships. As one participant mentioned, “One person in a family has Alzheimer’s disease, everyone will be affected.’ Another participant commented on the impact of Alzheimer’s disease on relationships:

“Just like my friend, her mother always gets lost, and she has to find her. Ai yah, such a headache. She has six siblings and they take turn caring for their mother. It is difficult. Her mother doesn’t sleep at night. They tried to use the sofa to block the door, but she is still able to escape outside. She told me that her mother is full of energy. Before she sleeps, the siblings have to take her to the stairs so she can go up and down until she is tired and goes to sleep. Only until then can they go to sleep. It’s miserable!” Finally, participants commonly reported a strong desire to not discuss ADRD. As one participant mentioned, “I just think it’s useless to talk about it.” Another person mentioned “If there’s a way to cure it, then it is worth to talk about it, but there is not even a way to prevent it, why bother?” More exemplary quotes are shown in Table 6.

DISCUSSION

ADRD are pressing public health concerns.17 Chinese Americans are the fastest growing racial/ethnic group in the U.S. and yet may be less reached and engaged in recommended dementia care than other communities.18 In order to be effective, it is critically important that service providers understand the cultural context for the elders from ethnic minority communities, such as older Chinese Americans, for whom they provide care. Our mixed methods study identified knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs pertaining to ADRD and cultural beliefs about healthy aging among community-dwelling older Chinese Americans with the ultimate aim of improving the ability of providers to better understand the cultural context of the older Chinese Americans for whom they provide care.

Our survey identified diabetes and dyslipidemia as the most common health conditions among this sample of older Chinese Americans. Many participants reported that their health limited their ability to accomplish or achieve things. More than three quarters of participants reported moderate or extreme bodily pain. Surprisingly, few reported ever feeling downhearted and blue, not feeling peaceful, or not having a lot of energy.

Results from the qualitative analysis identified several prominent beliefs, perceptions about normal aging, fears of loneliness and cognitive decline, understanding of healthy aging, cultural influences on aging, and perceptions of ADRD. In the first category, participants indicated beliefs about physical and cognitive decline. Participants also reported fears of being lonely as they age. Previous research document similar fears among older Asian Americans about being lonely as they age.19 Although having social support is a basic human desire, it could be that Chinese Americans place particular importance upon social support as they age, perhaps in part due to the traditional value of filial piety in the Chinese culture.20 Our findings regarding fears of loneliness are also concordant with findings from another study conducted among older Chinese Americans in Chicago.21

Many of the participants also reported experiencing difficulty with day-to-day activities such as cooking due to their independent living situation and lack of familial, social support. They noted the challenges of buying groceries, cooking, and eating hearty and nutritious meals for themselves. These findings are consistent with previous research among older Chinese Americans that identified a desire to maintain a healthy diet, yet barriers to doing so.9 Healthy aging, is a new concept for older adult Chinese Americans. There is no direct translation of the term in the Chinese language, thus we adopted the closest term we could find, whose literal translation is ‘health longevity.’ Participants reported initial confusion about the concept of ‘healthy aging,” yet nevertheless several individuals reported the importance of, and their current, healthy habits such as good nutrition, exercise, keeping the mind active, and maintaining a positive outlook as they age. Findings highlight the need to more actively engage the community in concepts around healthy aging and health promotion as the community ages. Participants also reported valuing their local community centers, and reported the best days were those they were able to visit the senior center to visit with their friends, participate in activities, and other events. Previous work has demonstrated the importance of neighborhood social cohesion for life satisfaction and buffering against psychological distress among older Chinese Americans.22

Regarding cultural beliefs about aging, several themes identified in the focus group transcripts suggest a lack of agency in the onset of death. Several participants referred to ‘the King of Hell,’ who tells you when it is time for death. The reference of ‘King of Hell’ originates from Buddhism, one of the fundamental religions in Chinese culture, including ancestral worship and Taoism.23 Chinese beliefs of death and dying are grounded on the Buddhist concept of samsara, the cyclical stages of birth-death-rebirth. Samsara is divided into six realms of existence, of which hell is the final realm before reincarnation.23 Under this cultural-religious belief, participants have no control over when death comes, which is consistent with our findings that many older Chinese Americans held realistic beliefs about death and dying as inevitable and something out of their control. On one hand, this attenuates worry about dying, but may also result in inaction when individuals should otherwise seek recommended care. The influence of these cultural-religious values is important in examining the association between aging, health promotion, and dying among older Chinese Americans.

Several additional cultural themes were highlighted including the fear of burdening one’s family and a disruption of family harmony. Participants repeatedly emphasized the negative impact of Alzheimer’s disease or related-dementias on their family and family relationships if they were to be diagnosed with either illness. These findings are consistent with previous research which shows that Alzheimer’s disease is often viewed as a significant disruption to familial harmony.24 Future research may explore how not wishing to burden others plays out in the context of parent-family relationships in Chinese culture, particularly for relationships between adult children and their older Chinese American parents.

There is also a strong sense of dignity associated with health, or alternatively fear of losing face if one declines physically or cognitively. This finding is similar to the literature documenting the strong Chinese cultural value of saving face, which can come at the expense of engaging in recommended healthcare.25 In addition, participants’ strong sense of aging and dying with dignity may be attributed to the Chinese Buddhist belief that the final state of mind during a person’s last moments of life can influence their next rebirth in the samsara cycle.26

Finally, our research suggests a high level of understanding about ADRD symptoms among this limited English proficiency sample of older Chinese American participants. Participants reported that the condition was associated with a decline in memory and ability to retain information, as well as shrinkage of the brain. In addition, participants reported fear of symptoms, which threatens one’s ability to save face among members of their community, such as losing control bodily functions. These findings are consistent with other evidence from qualitative research showing general awareness and knowledge about Alzheimer’s disease among Chinese Americans.9,13

Future Directions

Our research illuminates a number of opportunities for future research. First, our findings suggest an interesting paradox that older Chinese Americans commonly reported pain in their everyday life and their condition limiting activities they would otherwise like to perform. However, there were very low reports of “feeling blue” or “not feeling at peace.” Cultural beliefs and customs create a broader context that matters for how individuals cope with pain. Therefore, it is possible that older Chinese Americans have effective coping strategies for their pain, making them more resilient to mental health symptoms, such as “feeling blue.” It is also possible the participants were afraid to disclose underlying negative mood states due to cultural norms or customs that hinder the disclosure of such feeling states. Future research may examine the practices relating to stress management among the population as one approach to understanding the contributing factors to the apparent very positive mood and sense of peace among these individuals. Second, our findings show, as other work has, the strong cultural beliefs about aging among Chinese Americans, some of which suggest that views of ADRD and cognitive decline are stressful as individuals with these conditions are viewed poorly in the community. Future research may consider designing behavioral interventions and campaigns that aim to attenuate the strong fatalistic beliefs about ADRD and death and focus on opportunities for health promotion and healthy aging. With the call for greater attention to healthy aging and the rapidly increasing population of Chinese American older adults,14 our findings offers a significant contribution to identifying the beliefs, values and knowledge to inform programs and services for this underserved population. Future research, however, is warranted to further promote culturally and linguistically appropriate interventions to curb or address ADRD.

Limitations

This study, while offering several contributions to the literature, has limitations that must be noted. First, the study was conducted in one geographic area and one senior center. Results would certainly be different if multiple community stakeholders were engaged in this research. Second, there may have been language difficulties with certain topics of discussion in the focus groups. For instance, there was no direct translation for the concept ‘healthy aging’. Third, our sample size was limited due to the nature of this pilot study. Future research may recruit a larger sample for the ability to gain a broader understanding of healthy aging and ADRD knowledge among older Chinese Americans. Finally, our data collection efforts did not include number of years in the US or religious affiliation. These data may be important to capture in future research.

Conclusion

ADRD is a pressing public health concern, particularly among racial/ethnic minorities, who are less likely to be engaged and targeted for recommended care than other groups. We examine beliefs and attitudes toward healthy aging and ADRD among older Chinese Americans living in New York City. Our findings suggest strong cultural beliefs about aging and knowledge about healthy behaviors as being important for health. Our findings illuminate a number of opportunities for future research to improve health and aging for this community.

Supplementary Material

Interview Guide

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the NYU Center for the Study of Asian American Health Under the NIH National Institute on Minority Health &amp; Health Disparities grant award #U54MD000538-15.

Funding:

This work was supported by grants from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences grant award UL1TR001445 and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) grant award U58DP006911.

Table 1 Descriptive statistics summarizing demographic characteristics of focus group participants (n=18).

	N or Mean	Percent or S.D.	
Age* (in years)	76.4	9.37	
Sex			
 Male	5	27.8	
 Female-	13	72.2	
Marital Status			
 Single, widowed	4	22.2	
 Single, divorced	1	5.6	
 Married	13	72.2	
Health Conditions			
 Diabetes	7	38.9	
 Dyslipidemia	4	22.2	
 Anxiety	1	5.6	
 Sleep Apnea	2	11.1	
 Depression	1	5.6	
 Heart Problems	2	11.1	

Table 2 Descriptive statistics summarizing health among focus group participants (n=18).

Variable	Response	N	%	
Self-Reported Health	Excellent	0	0.0	
	Very good	0	0.0	
	Good	4	22.2	
	Fair	11	61.1	
	Poor	3	16.7	
Health Limiting Factors – Physical
“Does your health limit you in your ability to perform any of the following”	
 Vigorous physical activity	Yes, limited a lot	3	16.7	
	Yes, limited a little	11	61.1	
	No, not limited at all	4	22.2	
 Climbing stairs	Yes, limited a lot	3	16.7	
	Yes, limited a little	11	61.1	
	No, not limited at all	2	11.1	
Health Limiting Factors – Relating to Productivity
“Did your health limit you in your ability to perform any of the following work-related or daily activities”	
 Accomplishing things	Yes	12	66.7	
	No	5	27.8	
 Achieving things	Yes	12	66.7	
	No	5	27.8	
 Being careful	Yes	13	72.2	
	No	5	27.8	
Bodily Pain Rating	Not at all	3	16.7	
	Slightly	8	44.4	
	Moderately	6	33.3	
	Extremely	1	5.6	
Health Limiting Factors – Relating to Feelings
“Please give the answer that comes closest to the way you have been feeling”	
 Felt peaceful	All of the time	5	27.8	
	Most of the time	5	27.8	
	A good bit of the time	3	16.7	
	Some of the time	4	22.2	
	A little of the time	0	0.0	
	None of the time	1	5.6	
 Having a lot of energy	All of the time	0	0.0	
	Most of the time	4	22.2	
	A good bit of the time	1	5.6	
	Some of the time	10	55.6	
	A little of the time	2	11.1	
	None of the time	1	5.6	
 Feeling downhearted and blue	All of the time	1	5.6	
	Most of the time	0	0.0	
	A good bit of the time	0	0.0	
	Some of the time	4	22.2	
	A little of the time	7	38.9	
	None of the time	6	33.3	
Health impacted social activities	All of the time	1	5.6	
	Most of the time	1	5.6	
	Some of the time	8	44.4	
	A little of the time	4	22.2	
	None of the time	4	22.2	

Table 3 Knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about aging among older Chinese Americans

TOPIC	QUOTES	
Perceptions about normal aging	Physical or bodily painP13: Body deterioration is very common among old people. They always have pain here and there. As for myself, I suffer from low back pain. I have done surgery to replace my knees, and I cannot feel any sense here and there. That being said, except for brain degradation, the other parts of my body have worsened. So that is the reason why fewer people are coming. When you ask people “why didn’t I see you yesterday?” You will hear a common answer, “Aiyah, I have pain here and there.

P7: My leg are in pain, great pain.

P6: That’s what old people experience. Pain here today, and somewhere else tomorrow.

P7: Who doesn’t cherish their own life? There is just no way to stop it. Living is like being in pain. There are many medications to take every day. When the medication fades, the pain will come back again. Need to take shots and go to the hospital. Falls then ambulance comes.

P12: Evolution. This is the law of nature; everyone will get old.

Memory decline P7: Forget everything. It is normal.

P6: Bad memory. If you want to take something, you will forget what you want to take. You walk there, then… What I was there for? And I would run back to where I was to take a look. This happens very frequently!

P6: Right. Like the things I read today, by tomorrow, I won’t remember any of them.

P12: I would be holding my ID and simultaneously be looking for my ID and wondering where it went. Why is it gone? I would keep searching for it, and realize that it is inside my pants pocket. I would search the whole day and can’t find it. Seriously!

P10: For me, I have to go back to the original place to remember. I would remember what I need to get, but by the time I get to the place I would forget. I have to walk back to the original place I came from and think to finally remember.

P18: Sometimes, I can’t remember the names of my own relatives and grandchildren. I would open my mouth, but I wouldn’t remember their names. My brain knows who they are, but my mouth wouldn’t say their names.

P12: I remember the things that happened long time ago, regardless good or bad. I remember them all. But now I keep forgetting things that happen very recently. For example, the things that we discussed here today, later I will probably forget it all when I step out the door. Haha!

	
Fear of loneliness and poor mental health	P3: It’s helpless when the disease affect the mood. In general, when you are sick, it’s easy to develop depression.

P3: Well… A lot! What depresses him? It’s even difficult for him to step out of the door by himself, right? No one cares, someone might go to visit you, but only stay for a while.

P3, P4: When you are getting old, you are most afraid of loneliness.

	
Challenge to everyday activities	P3: It is hard to cook just for one person.

P9: When you buy too much and can’t finish, the food will go bad. I also cannot finish them all and I cannot eat the same type of vegetable every day.

P9: I want a diversified diet so this is my problem. Sometimes I will wonder, why are my eyes bad? Is it because I am lacking certain vitamins? I do take a lot of vitamin pills but I still think that eating fresh food is a better source of vitamins than taking vitamin pills. The problem is I cannot eat so much. If you buy a pound of each vegetable, that is too little and no one would want to sell to you. If you buy a lot, you don’t know how long you will be eating that for.

P3: It is different. In the Western supermarkets, you can buy a single tomato and that’s not an issue.

P10: No. In the Chinese market, we need to buy one pack of garlic. But in Western market, you can buy a single garlic.

	
Health and dignity are closely linked	P3: If he’s sick or disable, I would think he is a pitiful guy.

P2: But if you are healthy, you will be happy, no matter what age you are at. When you are young, you might be healthy, but you are always busy, busy, busy, and don’t have time for yourself. Busy for life, for children, for parents, and other things. But when you are retired, if you are healthy, it’s really good. You can go to travel, play balls, do whatever you like, and eat whatever you like. Very good.

P4: No illness, no pain is the best time of the day.

P1: When you are healthy and have no accident, you will have good mood.

P2: You can bear with others. But if you cannot take care of yourself, you will suffer. If you can taking care of yourself, you still have a life. That’s ok.

P3: Yes, no illness and pain. If I can’t take care of myself, I would rather die.

P11: You have to ask for help to do everything. It is very difficult.

P10: Life is meaningless that way.

	

Table 4 Perceptions of healthy aging among older Chinese Americans.

TOPIC	QUOTES	
Confusion about ‘healthy aging’	P11: Healthy aging, it’s my first time seeing the word.

P12: Me too. In fact, I still don’t understand what healthy aging is.

P2: Does it mean deterioration?

P9: Healthy - I think it is when you haven’t reached old age, but you are already showing signs of aging. In other words, your physical appearance does not match your age. Your physical appearance is ahead of your age.

P3: It means the older you get, the healthier you will be. I get it now.

P10: It means do more to prevent aging.

	
Beliefs about maintaining health and preventing decline	Importance of remaining physically activeP3: Table tennis, good for the eyes too.

P6: Exercise is priceless, it’s really good.

P1: That’s why I said, no matter how old you are, keep being active. When you are unable to exercise any more, you will regret.

P6: Just like me. If I am able to walk, I will walk even just a little while. It’s the best.

Brain stimulationP6: After combing my hair, I touch my eye bags (acupuncture point). Combing hair is necessary and will benefit my brain.

P3: Math game is just about filling numbers. A lot of people play it.

P2: It make you think a lot.

P6: After dinner, I usually play Mahjong.

P6: In order to prevent dementia.

P6：Play online can prevent dementia too since you have to think about how to win the game.

P3: Practice more with our brains?

Reading news and using media for healthy agingP4: I like to read the articles on WeChat when I go home. I like to watch the shows where doctors telling the elderly things pay attention to. The doctor mentioned three key things: don’t eat well, don’t eat full, and don’t fall. I have to memorize all these three.

P4: I read from WeChat that elderly should eat more things with shells, like walnut, and squash seeds are good too. So I went to buy the squash seeds after I learned that.

P4: I read the newspaper and WeChat.

P4: when I read about what is good for us, I will remember it. Oh, squash seed is good, and I will go buy them and start eating them, same with walnut.

P4: Whenever I learn from Wechat that certain foods are good for our health, I will go and buy those foods to eat. For instance, squash seeds, almonds, and melon seeds, etc.

P9: There’s only three ways for me now. The first one is reading the news on the phone. My TV is very archaic. I bought it before 911 and I haven’t changed it since. It has already been several years since I last watched TV. I just watch the news on my phone. Also, there used to be free newspaper so I would read free newspaper. I would read the free newspaper with the weekly roundup news. But now there is no more free newspaper so recently I don’t have the chance to read them. I am afraid that my brain will go bad. I need to exercise my brain so recently, I have been playing math games.

Foods for healthy agingP3: I guess what you eat is what you are. For instance, walnut, right?

P9: I want to said, even for walnut, any kind of nut, you have to have good teeth. The teeth of elderly are not so good in general. I heard chewing is good for the brain, and that’s why nuts are good. That’s why I eat nuts for breakfast. My teeth on this side are not good. I realized that I always use the same side of mouth to chew, so I try to use the other side as much as possible. When chewing, it will stimulate the brain, therefore both sides, left and right, need to be used for that purpose.

P4: Squash seed and walnut, I always eat these kind of food.

P4: I usually eat the squash seed while I watch TV, especially the black seeds. The black seed is a kind of squash seed too. I will eat those as I watch TV, and she’s sleeping already. I go to bed past 10pm.

Positive outlook for healthy agingP3: One more thing, keeping a positive mindset is also important to healthy aging.

P3: Nowadays, people suggest positive thinking. Small illnesses are inevitable for old people. But we shouldn’t focus too much on our small illness. It is ok to live with them, but the mood and mindset is very important.

P8: Yes, the way you think. Even though you are diagnosed with some disease, don’t be afraid!

P3: Yes, Mentality! It’s to not say that you have absolutely no illness and pain. But even if you have some small illness, small pain, as long as you keep a positive mindset, you can still live comfortably.

P18: Some people can live up to 90 years old and still be healthy. I think it depends, but the most important thing is that your own mentality needs to be positive.

P12: Having more positive energy and don’t complain every day.

Social connections for healthy agingP6: Fortunately, we have this senior center to keep me busy. If I am home alone, I will watch TV. If I watch for a little while, my eyes will hurt. If there isn’t the center, just sitting home alone will make me irritated for no reason.

P7: Senior center is for enjoyment, not for the food. Chat around with everyone.

P3: I wish this senior center opens Monday to Sunday.

P4: Saturday and Sunday, it’s closed, and we have nothing to do.

P1: Monday to Friday are happy time. When it’s Saturday and Sunday at home, there’s nothing to do, just watching TV or do some cleaning. That’s it.

	

Table 5 Cultural beliefs and normal aging

TOPIC	QUOTES	
King of Hell and realistic beliefs about AD and death	P1: Birth, old, illness, death, and the scariest one is illness. Birth, you couldn’t control it, you parents did. Death, is not under your control as well; it is up to the king of the hell.

P7: The king of the hell will notify you when it’s time to leave.

P1: The king of the hell said he didn’t take me. Bodhisattva blesses me.

P2: It means you are about to die, but your life is returned and revived.

P7: That means the king of the hell didn’t take him, extension.

	
Desire to avoid family burden	P2: Not interested, just don’t want to cumber my children. If I were sick today, there will be tubes going in here and there. I would lose my good image, I would rather die via euthanasia.

P4: Right, you always have to go to the hospital for treatment. Illnesses like cancer can’t be cured. You burden the children by having them take care of you every day.

P3: Your heart wouldn’t feel good.

P4: True. We, elderly are not afraid of death. We just don’t want to cumber children. You’re lying down on the bed with tubes plugged in here. When people come to visit you and see this, and you will lose all your dignity. All of a sudden, you lose your image. Why bother, you can’t live long anyway, why bother?

P8: One more, the scariest one is illness. Death is not scary. If you die earlier, you will be relieved, and not only you, and your family will be relieved too.

P4: If I get this disease and cannot be cured, I hope my children could understand and don’t pity me, let me choose euthanasia as soon as possible. Otherwise, if I walk outside and get into any accident, my children are going to suffer.

	
Health and saving face	P3: If he’s sick or disable, I would think he is a pitiful guy.

P2: But if you are healthy, you will be happy, no matter what age you are at. When you are young, you might be healthy, but you are always busy, busy, busy, and don’t have time for yourself. Busy for life, for children, for parents, and other things. But when you are retired, if you are healthy, it’s really good. You can go to travel, play balls, do whatever you like, and eat whatever you like. Very good.

P4: No illness, no pain is the best time of the day.

P1: When you are healthy and have no accident, you will have good mood.

P2: You can bear with others. But if you cannot take care of yourself, you will suffer. If you can taking care of yourself, you still have a life. That’s ok.

P3: Yes, no illness and pain. If I can’t take care of myself, I would rather die.

P11: You have to ask for help to do everything. It is very difficult.

P10: Life is meaningless that way.

	
Desire to die comfortably, with dignity	P6: I had a surgery to cut my stomach. I guess there’s something injected into my nose, then I went to sleep. When I woke up, I thought if a person die this way, it’s good/satisfying.

P6: Yes. After that, I was unconscious. When I woke up, I ask him, if I can die this way, I will be comfortable. He responded a lot of elderly told him the same thing.

P7: Just want to die in a comfortable way.

P4: In the past, people claimed that euthanasia is not humane. I don’t agree with it. It’s the most humane way.

P2: If I were sick today, there will be tubes going in here and there. I would lose my good image, I would rather die via euthanasia.

P4: True. We, elderly are not afraid of death. We just don’t want to cumber children. You’re lying down on the bed with tubes plugged in here. When people come to visit you and see this, and you will lose all your dignity. All of a sudden, you lose your image. Why bother, you can’t live long anyway, why bother? P4: The problem is not fear of death, but how to die with dignity.

P4: The problem is not fear of death, but how to die with dignity.

	

Table 6 Codes and quotes pertaining to perceptions of ADRD.

TOPIC	QUOTES	
Halt in brain functioning	P6: Dementia means you don’t know anything

P2: You don’t know anything if you suffer from dementia, so it doesn’t matter anymore.

P6: As an individual, she would not know anything.

P1: She would not know anything. Her brain is empty.

	
Physical manifestation of ADRD	P11: I heard that the brain shrink, right?

P12: Some illness related to nerve system.

P11: I heard one of my friend say this because her mom has Alzheimer’s disease. She took her mom for a CT scan and it showed that her mom’s brain shrank. Because humans have two brains; her mom’s cerebellum shrank.

P11: His brain might have shrunk.

P10: Not the brain, it is the nervous system. He went to see his neurologist and the neurologist told him that it was his nervous system that was causing the problem.

	
Loss of control	P2: Incontinence. They don’t know that they pooped on themselves. “Oh my goodness, you have pooped on yourself, and all over the floor.” “No, that’s not my poop.”

P2: Not able to identify faces, can’t even recognize their own children.

P3: People have Alzheimer’s and can’t even recognize their family members.

	
Impact of ADRD on family and social relationships	P3: One person in a family has Alzheimer’s disease, everyone will be affected.

P6: The whole family will be in chaos.

P4: Not only the family will be affected, I guess everywhere will be chaos. Police might be everywhere, helping to search the lost one, haha!

P3: Very big problem. Family issues. If one person in a family has this problem, his whole family will be in trouble.

P2: Yes, Yes, the whole family will be in trouble.

P3: Just like my friend, her mother always gets lost, and she has to find her. Ai yah, such a headache. She has six siblings and they take turn caring for their mother. It is difficult. Her mother doesn’t sleep at night. They tried to use the sofa to block the door, but she is still able to escape outside. She told me that her mother is full of energy. Before she sleeps, the siblings have to take her to the stairs so she can go up and down until she is tired and goes to sleep. Only until then can they go to sleep. It’s miserable! Haha!

P6: If a family has just one elderly like that, the whole family is disrupted.

	
Strong social desire to avoid discussion of ADRD	P2: It’s something to be avoided.

P2: Some of them are like this. They don’t want to talk about topic like this.

P3: I bear it on my own, not saying it.

P3: Not only does it sounds ominous, but for another reason, it’s useless to say it. There’s no way to stop it, and no way to cure it, why bother?

P3: If there’s a way to cure it, then it is worth to talk about it, but there is not even a way to prevent it, why bother?

P11: I just think it’s useless to talk about it.

P2: Useless.

P3: Once it’s cooked, we’ll eat it. Haha! (Chinese saying)

P12: When the car arrives in front of the mountain, there will be a road. (Chinese saying)

P10: True, it haven’t happened yet.

	

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


References

1. Cooper C , Tandy AR , Balamurali TBS &amp; Livingston G A systematic review and meta-analysis of ethnic differences in use of dementia treatment, care, and research. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Off. J. Am. Assoc. Geriatr. Psychiatry 18 , 193–203 (2010).
2. Lopez G , Patten E &amp; Inquiries D 20036USA202-419-4300 | M.−857-8562 | F.−419-4372 | M. Key facts about Asian Americans. Pew Research Center https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/09/08/key-facts-about-asian-americans/ (2017).
3. Pew Research Center. Analysis of 2013 to 2015 American Community Survey. http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/fact-sheet/asian-americans-chinese-in-the-u-s/ (2017).
4. Ayalon L &amp; Areán PA Knowledge of Alzheimer’s disease in four ethnic groups of older adults. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 19 , 51–57 (2004).14716699
5. 2000 Census of Population and Housing. (U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S. Census Bureau, 2003).
6. Berkman ND , Sheridan SL , Donahue KE , Halpern DJ &amp; Crotty K Low Health Literacy and Health Outcomes: An Updated Systematic Review. Ann. Intern. Med 155 , 97–107 (2011).21768583
7. DeWalt DA , Berkman ND , Sheridan S , Lohr KN &amp; Pignone MP Literacy and health outcomes. J. Gen. Intern. Med 19 , 1228–1239 (2004).15610334
8. Zheng X &amp; Woo BKP Association between recognizing dementia as a mental illness and dementia knowledge among elderly Chinese Americans. World J. Psychiatry 6 , 233–238 (2016).27354966
9. Jones RS , Chow TW &amp; Gatz M Asian Americans and Alzheimer’s disease: Assimilation, culture, and beliefs. J. Aging Stud 20 , 11–25 (2006).
10. Braun KL &amp; Browne CV Perceptions of dementia, caregiving, and help seeking among Asian and Pacific Islander Americans. Health Soc. Work 23 , 262–274 (1998).9834879
11. Dick MB , Dick-Muehlke C &amp; Teng EL Assessment of cognitive status in Asians. in Ethnicity and the dementias 77–92 (Routledge, 2013).
12. Shi Y , Sun F , Liu Y &amp; Marsiglia F Perceived threat of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias among older Chinese Americans in subsidized housing: Through a cultural lens. Dementia 11 , (2018).
13. Friedman DB Ethnically diverse older adults’ beliefs about staying mentally sharp. Int. J. Aging Hum. Dev 73 , 27–52 (2011).21922798
14. National Prevention Council. Healthy Aging in Action: Advancing the National Prevention Strategy. (US Department of Health and Human Services, 2016).
15. Pew Research Center. Top 10 metro areas by Chinese American population. Pew Research Center’s Social &amp; Demographic Trends Project https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/chart/top-u-s-metro-areas-chinese-population/ (2017).
16. Charmaz K Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. (Sage Publications Ltd, 2006).
17. National Institute on Aging. Alzheimer’s Disease Fact Sheet. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers-disease-fact-sheet.
18. Rait G Survival of people with clinical diagnosis of dementia in primary care: cohort study. BMJ 341 , c3584 (2010).20688840
19. Peplau LA &amp; Perlman D Prespectives on loneliness. in Loneliness: A sourcebook of current theory, research, and therapy (eds. Peplau LA &amp; Perlman D ) 1–18 (John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc, 1982).
20. Ho DY-F Filial piety, authoritarian moralism, and cognitive conservatism in Chinese societies. Genet. Soc. Gen. Psychol. Monogr 120 , 347–365 (1994).
21. Dong X , Chang E-S , Wong E &amp; Simon M Perception and negative effect of loneliness in a Chicago Chinese population of older adults. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr 54 , 151–159 (2012).21621865
22. Zhang W , Liu S , Zhang K &amp; Wu B Neighborhood Social Cohesion, Resilience, and Psychological Well-Being Among Chinese Older Adults in Hawai’i. The Gerontologist 60 , 229–238 (2020).31322675
23. Hsu C-Y , O’Connor M &amp; Lee S Understandings of death and dying for people of Chinese origin. Death Stud. 33 , 153–174 (2009).19143109
24. Sun F , Ong R &amp; Burnette D The Influence of Ethnicity and Culture on Dementia Caregiving: A Review of Empirical Studies on Chinese Americans. Am. J. Alzheimers Dis. Dementias® 27 , 13–22 (2012).
25. Kramer EJ , Kwong K , Lee E &amp; Chung H Cultural factors influencing the mental health of Asian Americans. West. J. Med 176 , 227–231 (2002).12208826
26. Yin J Death from the buddhist view: Knowing the unknown. in 93–103 (2006).
