LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101302316
33345
Cell Host Microbe
Cell Host Microbe
Cell host &amp; microbe
1931-3128
1934-6069

35654045
9283381
10.1016/j.chom.2022.05.005
NIHMS1811966
Article
Gut Bacterial Isoamylamine Promotes Age-Related Cognitive Dysfunction by Promoting Microglial Cell Death
Teng Yun 212*
Mu Jingyao 212
Xu Fangyi 212
Zhang Xiangcheng 21112
Sriwastva Mukesh K. 212
Liu Qiaohong M. 412
Li Xiaohong 68
Lei Chao 2
Sundaram Kumaran 2
Hu Xin 7
Zhang Lifeng 2
Park Juw Won 58
Hwang Jae Yeon 5
Rouchka Eric C. 58
Zhang Xiang 9
Yan Jun 2
Merchant Michael L. 10
Zhang Huang-Ge 12313*
1 Robley Rex Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Louisville, KY 40206, USA
2 Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY40202, USA
3 Department of Microbiology &amp; Immunology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY40202, USA
4 Peak Neuromonitoring Associates–Kentucky, Louisville, KY 40202, USA
5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY40202, USA
6 Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA
7 Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
8 Kentucky IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence Bioinformatics Core, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA
9 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA
10 Kidney Disease Program and Clinical Proteomics Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA
11 Department of ICU, The affiliated Huaian No. 1 People’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Huaian, Jiangsu 223300, China
12 These authors contributed equally
13 Lead Contact
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Y.T. and H.-G.Z. designed the study, analyzed and interpreted the data and prepared the manuscript; J.M., F.X., X.Z., M.K.S., Q.M.L., X.L., C.L., K.S. and L.Z. performed the experiments and interpreted the data; J.W.P., J.H.H. and X.H. performed bioinformatic analysis and E.C.R., X.Z., Y.J., M.L.M., interpreted the findings.

* Correspondence: h0zhan17@louisville.edu (H.-G.Z.), yun.teng@louisville.edu (Y.T.), Dr. Huang-Ge Zhang, Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, CTRB Room 309, 505 S. Hancock Street, Louisville, KY 40202
7 6 2022
13 7 2022
01 6 2022
13 7 2023
30 7 944960.e8
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
SUMMARY

The intestinal microbiome releases a plethora of small molecules. Here, we show that the Ruminococcaceae metabolite isoamylamine (IAA) is enriched in aged mice and elderly people, while Ruminococcaceae phages, belonging to the Myoviridae family, are reduced. Young mice orally administrated IAA show cognitive decline, while Myoviridae phage administration reduces IAA levels. Mechanistically, IAA promotes apoptosis of microglial cells by recruiting the transcriptional regulator p53 to the S100A8 promoter region. Specifically, IAA recognizes and binds the S100A8 promoter region to facilitate the unwinding of its self-complementary hairpin structure thereby subsequently enabling p53 to access the S100A8 promoter and enhance S100A8 expression. Thus, our findings provide evidence that small molecules released from the gut microbiome can directly bind genomic DNA and act as transcriptional coregulators by recruiting transcription factors. These findings further unveil a molecular mechanism that connects gut metabolism to gene expression in the brain with implications for disease development.

Graphical abstract

eTOC blurb

Teng et al. reveal age-related shifts in the gut microbiome increase isoamylamine (IAA) in humans. Similar shifts in mice cause cognitive decline via S100A8 activation. Blocking IAA binding to the S100A8 promoter reverses the memory and learning loss in mice, suggesting a potential causal role for gut microbes in neurodegeneration.

Gut bacteria
isoamylamine
binding promoter
DNA unwinding
transcription factor p53
sensome gene S100A8
aged brain
microglial
gut bacteriophages
cognitive dysfunction

pmcINTRODUCTION

Metabolism is a key area where the host and microbiota interact. Recent advances have clearly defined a role for gut microbiome metabolites in disease initiation and progression. Bacterial metabolites appear to have the potential to alter physiological pathways of host cells and in specific circumstances, such as in aging and cancer, to modulate the expression of genes and switch the function of a gene, such as p53 (Kadosh et al., 2020), therefore affecting the disease process. However, whether bacterial metabolites can affect the expression of genes by directly modulating transcription machinery is not known.

Gut microbiota and the brain communicate with each other via various routes, involving gut microbial metabolites. The composition of altered aged gut microbiota accelerates the aging process by way of toxic gut metabolites (Doulberis et al., 2019). As key players in the brain’s immune function, microglia shape neuronal wiring and activity, synaptic plasticity, phagocytosis and support the survival of neurons and neuronal progenitors via the secretion of growth factors (Fujita and Yamashita, 2021; Zengeler and Lukens, 2021). During the aging process, microglia develop into a highly reactive and unbalanced state promoting cognitive dysfunction including altered brain plasticity and neurodegeneration (Angelova and Brown, 2019; Niraula et al., 2017). Sensing changes in the brain milieu is a major microglial function that regulates the ability of these cells to perform other tasks including host defense and homeostasis. Microglia express a cluster of genes including S100A8 and S100A9 that allow them to perform their sensing functions termed the sensome (Hickman et al., 2013; Mattei and Notter, 2020). The increasing release of the heterodimer formed by S100A8 and S100A9 proteins, is associated with aging (Cho et al., 2016; Swindell et al., 2013). This heterodimer is a toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products) ligand that is situated upstream of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) (Vogl et al., 2018), CXCL (Simard et al., 2014) synthesis and secretion, promotes NF-κB activation (Riva et al., 2012) and secretion of multiple inflammatory proteins, such as IL-6 (Wang et al., 2018). S100A8 and S100A9 proteins are increased with aging in the mouse brain (Lodeiro et al., 2017), and promote microglial cell apoptosis and inflammatory cytokine induction (Hu and Lin, 2021) and play a role in local and systemic inflammation (Ren et al., 2021). However, whether the expression of S100A8 and S100A9 is regulated by gut microbiome metabolite mediated transcription machinery is not known.

Gene expression is regulated by the binding of transcription factors (TFs) to specific DNA sequence motifs across the genome. TFs do not always have access to these binding sites depending on the availability of these sites that are exposed to TFs (Holwerda and de Laat, 2013; Narlikar et al., 2002). Because there is no available approach to label metabolites to demonstrate the direct interaction between the promoter region and metabolites, there is an inability to know whether gut microbiome metabolites regulate the accessibility of TFs to its regulated genes via direct binding to its motif region. Developing such technology is significant since unaccountable and numerous small molecules released from gut microbiomes regulate the expression of genes in host cells and play a physiological and pathophysiological role.

In this study, as a proof of concept, we developed a simple and effective strategy with the single-strand gel shift (SSGS) technology to test our hypothesis that isoamylamine (IAA), a small molecule released from gut bacteria, binds to the promoter region of S100A8 and subsequently modulates the gene expression of S100A8.

We found that IAA and expression of S100A8 are both increased in an aging dependent manner. We further discovered that pre-binding of IAA to the promoter region of S100A8 is required for subsequently recruiting of p53, which in turn leads to inducing the expression of S100A8. Our findings reveal an unexpected role of IAA as a mediator of neurodegeneration elicited by IAA and p53 jointly activating S100A8 signaling of microglia leading to cognitive decline in aged mice and provide an example of how gut microbiome metabolites can now be applied to microglial cells to define mechanisms of neurodegeneration.

RESULTS

Gut Bacterial IAA Induces S100A8 Leading to Microglial Cell Death

Given the death of brain cells including neuron, oligodendrocytes, microglia and astrocytes is one of hallmark of cognitive decline in aging (Bernard-Patrzynski et al., 2019; Cardona et al., 2006; Weil et al., 2019), apoptotic cells (Annexin V+7-AAD−) were quantitatively analyzed from mice at different ages from 2-months (m) to 24m. We found that microglia exhibited significant earlier apoptosis, starting in 12m-old mice, while this phenomenon was not seen in neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes until approximately 18m (Figure S1). Microglia play a key role in memory retention (Hemonnot et al., 2019), and regulate the survivability of neurons (Kim and Joh, 2006), therefore, we focused our study on the cellular and molecular mechanism underlying aging related factors that contribute to microglial cell mediated brain dysfunction and cognitive decline.

Microglia, the principal sentinels of the brain, sense changes in their environment and respond to invading pathogens, toxins and cellular debris via expressing a cluster of genes that allow them to perform their sensing functions termed the sensome. With aging, the expression of sensome transcripts are altered (Hickman et al., 2013). Thus, the sensome expressed in the microglia of brain from 2m (young) and 12m (aged) old mice was quantitively analyzed (Figure 1A). Fourteen of the sensome genes were increased in microglial cells of aged mice (Figure 1B). In aged mice the induction of S100 calcium-binding protein A8 (S100A8), S100A9, ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1) and lactotransferrin (Ltf) in the microglia has been verified by individual qPCR (Figure S2A). Considering the diverse roles and functions of the various regions of the central nervous system, it was necessary to determine the level of sensome expression in different regions of the brain (the cerebrum, thalamus, hippocampus, cerebellum and brainstem). Interestingly, we found that the sensome expression is not evenly distributed in all regions of brain and exhibited diverse alterations in aged brain (Figure 1C). The profile of sensome expression suggested that the sensome significantly induced in aged mice is S100A8 and C4b in the cerebrum; Ltf, S100A8, S100A9 and C4b in the cerebellum; S100A9 and C4b in the hippocampus; Ltf, S100A9 and C4b in the thalamus; Ltf, S100A8, S100A9 and C4b in the brainstem; TLR4 and TNFα in hippocampus; and Iba1 in cerebrum and cerebellum (Figure 1C). The diversity of more sensome expression in different regions of brain was demonstrated (Figure S2B). Western blots confirmed the induction of S100A8, S100A9 expression as protein in microglia (Figure 1D and S2C). The TUNEL assay suggested extensive apoptosis in Iba1+ cells in the brain of aged mice (Figure 1E), which is consistent with the induction of cleaved caspase-3 in the microglia of aging (Figure 1D).

Although the role of S100A8/A9 in the regulation of amyloid peptide and Tau phosphorylation (Cristóvão and Gomes, 2019) has been reported, the relationship between S100A8/S100A9 and microglia death was not clear. We transfected CRISPR activation plasmid and CRISPR/Cas9 knockout (KO) plasmid to overexpress and KO the expression of S100A8 and S100A9 in microglial BV2 cells. We found that the cleaved caspase-3, a marker of a dying cell, was induced by the overexpression of S100A8 but not S100A9. Knockout of S100A8 but not S100A9 caused a reduction of cleaved caspase-3 (Figure 1F and S2D). These data suggested that induction of S100A8 contributes to microglial cell death.

The gut microbiota can help to modulate homeostasis and behavior in its animal host through chemical communication with the nervous system (Liberti and Engel, 2020; Morais et al., 2021; Sgritta et al., 2019). To determine whether gut microbe metabolites contribute to the modulation of microglia death in aging, we performed a comparative metabolomics analysis of the gut microbe from specific pathogen-free (SPF) and germ-free (GF) mice at different ages. A total of 442 microbial metabolites were identified in the murine gut based on the MetAboliC pAthways DAtabase for Microbial taxonomic groups (MACADAM) and MetaCyc database (Le Boulch et al., 2019) (Figure 2A, Table S2). Based on excluding no significant change in SPF mice (aged vs young, p&gt;0.05) and significant change in GF mice (aged vs young, p&lt;0.05), 56 reductions and 22 inductions, and 35 reductions and 5 inductions were selected subsequently (Figure 2A and 2B). The five inductive metabolites, which included isoamylamine (IAA), alachlor ethanesulfonic acid (ESA), crotonic acid (CA), pyridoxine (B6) and S-adenosylmethionine, exhibited the most significant induction in SPF aged mice and no change in in the GF age matched mice when compared to appropriate young mice (Figure 2B). A linear regression analysis was performed to identify which of the changes in metabolites was correlated with the expression of the S100A8. This analysis indicated that gut bacterial IAA and CA were significantly positively correlated with the expression of S100A8 expression in the aged mice brains (Figure 2C). High throughput LC-MS analysis of IAA and CA was further confirmed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis (Figure 2D), which was consistent with the high level of IAA and CA in the serum (Figure S3A, left panel) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (Figure S3A, right panel) of aged mice. IAA was found to pass through the blood–brain barrier (BBB) in higher amounts than CA in aged mice (Figure S3B) which may indicate that IAA plays a more critical role on the induction of S100A8 as well as influencing brain function compared to CA during the aging processing.

To determine whether IAA and CA have direct effects on the induction of apoptosis of microglial cells, the microglial cells were isolated from mice brains. We found that adding IAA and CA to the ex vivo cultured microglial cells isolated from young mice led to increasing the cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP (Figure 2E). The effect of IAA and CA on the microglia was abolished in S100A8 deficient microglia cells (Figure S3C). FACS analysis revealed a significant higher percentage of Annexin-FITC+ apoptotic bodies (ABs) in the supernatants of cultured FACS sorted microglial cells from aged mice when compared to supernatants from cultured microglial cells from young mice (Figure 2F). Adding IAA and CA to microglial cells isolated from young mice led to an increase in the ABs released into the culture supernatants (Figure 2F).

Reduction of Gut Bacteriophages Contributes to the Overproduction of Gut Bacterial IAA and CA

To determine whether specific bacteria contribute to the apoptosis of microglia in aging, the composition of gut bacteria in humans at different ages was assessed using next-generation sequencing (NGS) of 16s ribosomal RNA (rRNA). We applied principal coordinates analyses (PCoA) to UniFrac distances of 16S rRNA amplicon profiles generated from fecal samples collected from young (25.6 ± 4.2 years old, n=12) and old (65.3 ± 5.6 years old, n=12) healthy human subjects (Figure 3A, 3B and Table S4). Differences in microbiome composition between the two groups were observed by PCoA analysis (Figure 3B, left panel) and rRNA analysis indicates that microbiota from the aged individuals are significantly different from the young individuals (p=0.023, Wilcoxon; Figure 3B, right panel). We did notice that the Ruminococcaceae, Clostridiaceae and Lachnospiraceae families were significantly overrepresented taxa in older people (Figure 3A). The young people group had more Lactobacillaceae and Prevotellaceae. These results are consistent with previous human studies (Langille et al., 2014), as well as qPCR analysis of selected bacteria abundance in the mouse large and small intestine (Figure 3C). Given the crucial roles of intestinal bacteriophages (phages) in shaping gut bacterial composition (Sausset et al., 2020; Zuo et al., 2018), we hypothesized that phages may have an impact on their host by modulating the bacterial composition as well as their metabolites, including chemical substances that gain entry into the brain (Chu et al., 2019). To test our hypothesis, we first predicted the phages using Virus-Host DB (https://www.genome.jp/virushostdb/) that would potentially play a role in the enrichment of the bacteria Ruminococcaceae, Clostridiaceae and Lachnospiraceae in the aged murine gut. A total of 29 phage genera were found to be candidate phages that could target bacteria overproduced in the gut of elderly subjects. Six genera of Myoviridae and two genera of Siphoviridae potentially target Ruminococcaceae bacteria, while four genera of Myoviridae, nine genera of Siphoviridae and seven genera of Podoviridae potentially target Clostridiaceae bacteria (Figure 3D). Only one unclassified Siphoviridae phage potentially targets Lachnospiraceae. Siphoviridae was the most abundant family, accounting for 55.3 ± 9.8% of all identified phages, followed by Myoviridae (21.7 ± 9.9%) and Podoviridae (10.6 ± 8.4%) in human gut (Ma et al., 2018). We next sought to assess the phage genomic analysis with qPCR. Interestingly, in phages potentially targeting Ruminococcaceae, only phages belonging to the Myoviridae family, including the Brigitvirus, Eponavirus, but not the Siphoviridae family, were dramatically reduced in aged mouse gut (Figure 3E), which is consistent with the induction of the putative target bacteria family Ruminococcaceae. In phages potentially targeting Clostridiaceae, although we did not find a difference in the Myoviridae family phiCT19406B or phiCDHM19 or the Siphoviridae family c-st or phi3626 between aged and young mice, the family Podoviridae CPS1 and CPS2 was detected in low levels in aged mice (Figure 3E). The level of the Siphoviridae phage family displayed no difference between young and aged mice which agrees with data showing no difference in the level of potential Siphoviridae phage targeting bacterial Lachnospiraceae between aged and young mice (Figure 3C). These results indicated that the Myoviridae and Podoviridae families specifically regulates the bacteria Ruminococcaceae and the Clostridiaceae family, respectively. To further demonstrate the role of the phages in the growth of their putative target bacteria, total gut bacterial phages from feces of young subjects were isolated and purified, and subsequently used for infection of Ruminococcaceae (ATCC, TSD-27) bacteria. Then, bacterial phages (phageTSD-27) from infected TSD-27 were isolated and exposed to TSD-27 in cell culture or gavage-given to mice (Figure 3F). The result suggested that growth of TSD-27 was inhibited by the human gut-derived phages that targeted the TSD-27 bacterium (Figure 3F), along with the reduction of metabolites IAA and CA in the growth medium (Figure 3G, left panel). The virome sequencing analysis using NGS indicated that Myoviridae are alleviated in the gut of older subjects and predominate in phageTSD-27 comparing to the phageLGG (Figure 3H). Orally gavage administrated phageTSD-27 also resulted in the reduction of the metabolites IAA and CA in mouse gut (Figure 3G, right panel) as well as decreased the expression of S100A8, cleaved caspase-3 (Figure S3D and S3E) and production of apoptosis bodies in microglia (Figure S3F and S3G). Taken together, these lines of experimental evidence support two notions: (1) that reduction of the bacteriophage family Myoviridae contributes to the induction of gut microbiota families Ruminococcaceae leading to the induction of the metabolites IAA and CA in aged mice; and (2) that gut bacterial metabolites IAA induces microglia apoptosis via modulation of S100A8 expression. IAA induces the expression of an aging related sensome including S100A8 in microglia, eventually resulting in the microglia activation and apoptosis.

IAA Prebinding is Required for p53 Accessing to S100A8 Promoter Region by Unwinding the Promoter Hairpin Structure of S100A8

Given induction of bacterial metabolite IAA causes the degeneration of microglia by elevation of S100A8 at both the transcription and protein level, we hypothesized that IAA might directly target the promoter of S100A8 and regulate the expression of S100A8. Studying the interaction of metabolites, particularly small molecules, with nucleic acid is challenging due to a lack of appropriate tags for the metabolites. Because of this challenge, we developed a strategy raising the possibility to investigate the interaction of small molecules and nucleic acid. Considering that the single strand nucleic acid chain exhibits conformational differences on nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) (Liu et al., 2000), we assumed that single-strand DNA will display an electrophoretic mobility shift on native PAGE when the small molecules bind to DNA, which is named as single-strand gel shift (SSGS) (Figure 4A). To test our hypothesis, we first tested the effect of the well-known DNA binding chemical ethidium bromide (EB) (Vardevanyan et al., 2003) on the migration of 20 mer length of DNA oligo in the nondenaturing PAGE. The evidence indicated a significant alteration of oligo migration by EB (Figure S4A). We then synthesized short single-DNA strains (around 60 mer length each) whose sequences spanned the promoter of S100A8 (Figure S4B and Table S5). The site and sequence of the promoter and transcription start site (TSS) were determined according to the entire mRNA (Accession# NC_000069.7 (90,576,378…90,577,341)) and genomic sequence (Accession# L76381) from the NCBI nucleic acid database (Figure S4B). These DNA oligos (2 μM) were incubated with IAA (10 μM) following native PAGE analysis (Figure 4A).

Interestingly, we found that only oligo S100p1 (−57 to −1 upstream from the TSS) was mobility shifted by IAA or IAA enriched fecal supernatant from aged mice (Figure 4B and S4C). To define the accurate binding site of IAA, we synthesized 10 mer length DNA oligos covering the sequence of S100p1 (Table S5). Unfortunately, the 10 mer length oligo lost the conformational mobility shift in PAGE (Figure S4D). We then tested the mobility shift with 20 mer oligos. Only oligo S100p1-G displayed a shift (Figure 4C and S4E), which indicated that the sequence of S100p1-G contained a potential essential sequence for metabolite IAA binding. To further verify the dynamic interaction of IAA and oligo S100p1-G, we next performed surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis, which is an optical technique for detecting the interaction of two different molecules in which a biotin labeled oligo is immobilized on a streptavidin sensor chip while the IAA is brought into contact via the flow cells of an SPR instrument. The SPR assay indicated that biotin labeled (Bio-) S100p1-G and S100p1, rather than mutant oligo (S100p1-GM), were targeted by IAA (Figure 4D) which is consistent with the observation from the SSGS assay. The luciferase assay demonstrated that IAA activated the pLuc-S100p with the promoter sequence of S100A8 but not the mutant (Figure 4E). To further reveal the specific DNA motif necessary for IAA binding, we synthesized 20 mer length DNA oligos that contained the potential IAA binding motif. Among the 20 oligos, each oligo contained one mutated base. We assumed that the IAA binding activity of an oligo would diminish if an essential base was replaced. As expected, the SSGS analysis suggested that the sequence TGGnCAGCTGnCCA, −41 to −54 upstream of the S100A8 TSS was necessary for IAA binding (Figure 4F).

This finding is significant in that it provides a basis for developing mechanism-driven approaches for studying gut metabolites as signaling conduits that interconnect extrinsic microbial presence with activity of brain microglial cells and provides the foundation for further studying whether other gut microbiome derived small molecules are also capable of regulating the activity of transcription machinery in general.

Next, we addressed how a small molecule like IAA could activate the expression of S100A8. The prediction of transcription factor binding sites using PROMO 3.0 (http://alggen.lsi.upc.edu) indicated that the binding sequence resides at a p53 binding motif (GGGCAGC). Although IAA activates the transcription of S100A8 (Figure 4E), p53 deficiency attenuated the IAA-induced S100A8 activation (Figure 5A). However, the effect of IAA on the S100A8 transcription was recovered with additional p53 (Figure 5B). More interestingly, further analysis demonstrated that this IAA binding motif containing a p53 binding site is a self-complementary sequence that potential curls back onto itself to form a hairpin structure (Figure 5B). These characteristics of the IAA binding motif have allowed us to develop a hypothesis regarding the role of IAA in the transcription activation of S100A8. Transcription factor p53 cannot bind and activate S100A8 due to the hairpin structure until IAA recognizes and binds to the S100A8 promoter region. IAA binding to the promoter of S100A8 interrupts the formation of the hairpin structure and exposes the binding motif to p53, leading to transcription activation (Figure 5B). A DNA unwinding assay further indicated that IAA enhanced the activity of helicase unwinding of the self-complementary binding sequence (Figure 5C, left panel). Activation that promoted unwinding of mutant sequence was attenuated by IAA (Figure 5C, right panel). The interaction of IAA and promoter of S100A8 genomic DNA was demonstrated by the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay as described (Anders et al., 2014) (Figure 5D). Additional analysis of the SPR demonstrated that p53 binds to the promoter of S100A8 in an IAA dependent manner (Figure 5E). The results generated from test tube experiments were further demonstrated in live cells. Microglial cells were treated with gut fecal supernatant and Bio-S100p1-G (Bio-WT) or Bio-S100p1-G mutant (Bio-Mutant) for 6 h and the complex was pull-downed from the cell lysate with streptavidin beads for quantitative analysis of metabolites. The LC-MS results suggest that IAA was recruited to the complex by the S100p1-G rather than the mutate of S100p1-G (Figure 5F). Western blot analysis suggested that S100A8 induced by IAA was p53 dependent (Figure 5G, Figure S4F). To further identify the site and structure of molecular binding between IAA and S100p1-G, the hairpin structure of oligo S100p1-G was tested using Mfold (Jeddi and Saiz, 2017; Zuker, 2003) (Figure 5H) followed by IAA and S100p1-G docking using the HDOCK Server (http://hdock.phys.hust.edu.cn/). The potential mode of molecular interaction was analyzed using UCSF Chimera (Huang et al., 2014). The result indicated the interaction between IAA and S100p1-G at position G-4 and G-11 takes place via two hydrogen bonds with a docking score of −39.98 and ligand rmsd (Å) of 19.83 (Figure 5H). Multiple sequence alignment using CLUSTAL 2.1 (Larkin et al., 2007) suggested that this IAA binding motif is a conserved sequence since divergent species including human (Homo sapiens, M21005.1), mouse (Mus musculus, L76381), gorilla (Gorilla gorilla, NC_044602.1) and bovine (Bos taurus, JX070094) share this consensus sequence in the promoter region of the S100A8 gene (Figure 5I). However, horse (Equus caballus, NC_009148.3) and aardvark (Orycteropus afer, NW_006921804.1) have a deficient IAA binding motif. To demonstrate the evolutionary relationship of this IAA binding motif, we next constructed phylogenetic trees for the six species in mammalian, based on the segment of S100A8 promoter sequences by using r package “ape” in the R 4.0 environment (Figure 5J) (Hu et al., 2021). The genes from Primates (human and gorilla) and Glires (mouse) share the consensus sequence to which IAA binds. However, although they share the same superorder Laurasiatheria, the order of Artiodactyla (cow) contains the IAA binding motif and the order of Perissodactyla (horse) is deficient for the IAA binding motif (Figure 5J). SSGS analysis revealed that IAA binds to the oligo of human S100A8 sequence (M21005.1) containing the consensus IAA binding motif as well as a few divergent flank bases (Figure S4G and Table S5).

IAA Promotes the Cognitive Decline Whereas PhageTSD-27 Reverses Cognitive Decline in a Mouse Model

To ascertain the effect of IAA or Ruminococcaceae targeting phage on microglia and brain function in vivo, the young or aged mice were treated with IAA or phageTSD-27, respectively, for two months via oral gavage prior to behavioral testing (Figure 6A). The HPLC analysis of IAA in serum indicated that gavage-given IAA increased IAA levels in the serum and gavage-given phageTSD-27 significantly decreased the level of IAA in the serum of aged mice (Figure S5A). To estimate the memory and learning in mice, we performed three behavioral and cognitive assays which included the Morris water maze (MWM), T maze spontaneous alternation (TMSA) and two-object novel object recognition (NOR). 2m-old (young) and 12m-old (aged) C57BL/6 mice were pretreated with IAA (0.5 g/kg of body weight) or phageTSD-27 (1x109 pfu/mouse) every other day by oral gavage for two months prior to performing the three behavioral and cognitive assays. All subjects were trained for four consecutive days before formal testing (Figure 6A). To test spatial learning with MWM, both young and aged mice were given a series of daily trials using five random start locations, north (N), northwest (NW), west (W), southwest (SW) and south (S) around the perimeter of the tank in the MWM (Figure 6B). The first trial of training was measured, and swim speeds declined noticeably in untreated aged mice compared to young mice (28.6 ± 5.9 cm/s vs 20.0 ± 4.1 cm/s, p=0.006) (Figure S5B). However, IAA treatment reduced the swim speeds of young mice and phage treatment improved the swim speeds of aged mice. Figure 6C shows the swim-paths of representative animals for the trial for the W and S locations for each group. The quantification of swim path indicated that the aged mice spent more latency time to reach the platform in all start locations (Vorhees and Williams, 2006) and IAA induced and phage treatment reduced the latency time of young and aged mice, respectively (Figure 6D, left panel). Some studies use swim time that animals navigate toward the hidden platform (Chen et al., 2000). However, to avoid the bias of different swim speeds, we normalized the test path length for each mouse based on the initial trial path length as a better way to estimate the ability to learn. The results suggested that IAA induced the memory and learning loss of young mice and phage treatment improved the memory and learning of aged mice (Figure 6D, right panel). To verify the finding in the MWM test, we next estimated the cognitive ability of mice using the TMSA. For the purposes of analysis, the percentage of correct choices was used to distinguish the difference between aged mice and young mice as well as treatment groups (Figure 6E, left panel). Consistently, IAA induced the deficit of spatial learning in the TMSA in young mice and phage treatment attenuated the deficit in aged mice (Figure 6E, right panel). The percentage of alternating choices showed that aged mice prefer to visit a familiar arm of the maze rather than a new arm. IAA administration reduced young mice exploring the new path. On the contrary, phageTSD-27 administration to the aged mice resulted in the mice exploring the new arm, which indicated that the TMSA was an efficient behavioral test for measuring the willingness to explore and evaluate memory a new environment. Many regions of the brain-including the hippocampus, septum, basal forebrain, and prefrontal cortex are involved in this task (Clark et al., 2021). NOR is a non-stressful task and an appropriate means to assess memory updating for both young and aged rodents (Figure 6F, left panel) (Kwapis et al., 2020). The result of NOR suggested that phage administration resulted in and proved beneficial for improving age-related cognitive decline (Figure 6F, right panel). The analysis of histology in the brain indicated that IAA significantly promoted the neuronal loss and dying neurons in the brain of young and phageTSD−27 attenuated the neuronal loss and dying neurons in the brain of aged mice, especially in the cerebrum and cerebellum (Figure 6G).

Electroencephalography (EEG) is widely utilized for behavioral and pharmacological studies in animal models as well as in humans because it is non-invasive, provides high performance and is convenient (Nardone et al., 2021). To determine whether EEG phenotypes between young and aged mice are different and if the IAA or phage treatment influences EEG phenotypes, we captured the epidural EEG from multiple cortical surface loci in mice using a modified method (Wang et al., 2015). By designing an epidural EEG electrode, we simplified the surgical procedure to minimize brain damage and optimized the experimental setup for EEG in mice (Figure S5C). The epidural EEG and the analysis of the density spectral assay (DSA) power presented distinctive waveforms and distribution of EEG strength over time between treatment and control of mice (Figure 6H). EEG patterns in IAA mice exhibited an incoherence in the EEG rhythms compared to the EEG in control mice. Phage administration to aged mice resulted in a recovery of the coherence (Figure 6H, left panel). EEG frequency is usually described in terms of five frequency bands: σ (below 4 Hz), θ (4 – 8 Hz), α (8 – 12 Hz), β (12 – 22 Hz) and γ (beyond 22 Hz) (Baker et al., 2008). Based on the quantification of wave frequency, we found that the aged mice showed a shift towards less fast α and β waves but slower σ waves in the frontal and occipital lobes when comparing young mice and aged mice. Phage administration to aged mice reversed the alternation of wave frequency (Figure 6H, left panel, 6I). More interesting, the distribution of DSA in aged mice and IAA treated young mice were asymmetric bilaterally, but young mice and phage treated aged mice were more symmetric bilaterally. The occipital lobes on both the left and right side exhibited higher DSA power when comparing to the frontal lobes of the brain on the same animal, as well as the corresponding lobes of the young mice. Phage significantly eliminated the induction of DSA in the occipital regions in the brain of aged mice (Figure 6H, right panel). The analysis of gene expression indicated that IAA induces S100A8 and cleaved caspase-3 in the microglia from all five major regions of the brain (Figure 6J). Collectively, these data suggest that IAA promotes memory and learning loss; whereas, the phageTSD-27 reverses IAA mediated memory and learning loss.

IAA Plays a Causative Role in the Cognitive Decline

Next, we determined whether depletion of gut bacterial metabolite IAA would prevent gut metabolite mediated induction of cognitive dysfunction. Given that S100p1-G can specifically bind to IAA, we hypothesized that IAA from gut fecal supernatant could be depleted with oligo S100p1-G (Figure 7A), leading to less IAA targeting to the promoter of S100A8. As a result of this manipulation, IAA mediated activation of microglial cells would be prevented via the S1008A mediated pathway. Beyond verifying the biological role of IAA in induction of cognitive dysfunction, S100p1-G based therapy may be beneficial for improving or reversing the cognitive decline. To estimate the stability of small DNA oligo in stomach and intestine, the 20 nt oligo S100p1-G was exposed to gastric and intestine juice collected from mouse for three hours. The electrophoresis indicated that the oligo is stable in gastric and intestine juice (Figure S5D). This result is also supported by others (Liu et al., 2015; Virgilio et al., 2018). HPLC analysis suggested that the majority of the IAA (78.4 ± 8.2%) in the gut supernatant (Sup) of aged mice could be depleted by biotin-S100p1-G pull-down using streptavidin beads (IAAdep) but not by control S100p1-G mutant (Ctrldep) (Figure 7B, left panel). Gut supernatant of aged mice gavage-given to young mice leads to increasing the IAA levels in serum (Figure 7B, right panel) as well as in CSF (Figure S5E) in 24 h. The depletion of IAA in aged mice derived gut supernatants abolished the increase of IAA in young mice. Next, to determine the effect of oligo S100p1-G on the memory loss caused by Ruminococcaceae derived IAA, the Ruminococcaceae family bacteria TSD-27 was administered to young mice along with TSD-27 targeting phage and S100p1-G. The Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) binding phage and S100p1 mutant were used as controls. The brain memory and cognitive assay MWM (Figure 7C) and TMSA (Figure 7D) suggested that TSD-27 increased the latency time and swim path to find the platform, as well as reduced young mice exploring the new path. These effects of TSD-27 on the activity of brain memory and cognitive function were abolished by phageTSD-27 but not phageLGG. The fecal supernatant of aged mice showed that memory and learning loss is IAA dependence (Figure 7C, 7D). Aged mice IAA level analysis confirmed that gavage-given TSD-27 increased the IAA level, and phageTSD-27 cancelled the effect of TSD-27 on the increasing IAA (Figure 7E). Collectively, these results suggest that phageTSD-27 can prevent gut bacterial IAA induced learning and spatial learning loss. We further identified whether the treatments as described above alters the microglial cell activity. Analysis by qPCR (Figure 7F) and western blot (Figure 7G) indicated that gavage-given TSD-27 and aged supernatant induce the expression of S100A8 and more apoptotic cleaved caspase-3 induced in microglia cells; phageTSD-27 and IAA depletion with S100p1-G prevented these TSD-27 and aged supernatant induced effects.

From a therapeutic standard point, we next sought to determine whether oligo S100p1-G could reverse the brain cognitive dysfunction in aged mice by blocking IAA. S100p1-G was administered to aged mice via an intravenous route twice a week for two months. Memory and spatial learning were recovered by treatment with S100p1-G (Figure 7H) along with a decline of IAA in CSF of mice (Figure 7I); these results were not seen with the mutant S100p1-G. Collectively, our data suggest that the induction of Ruminococcaceae due to reduction of its phages leads to an increase of the bacterial metabolite IAA. In turn, IAA joins with transcription factor p53 to induce the expression of the pro-inflammatory and pro-apoptosis S100A8 in microglial cells by binding the promoter motif of S100A8. The activation of microglial cells contributes to the cognitive dysfunction in aged mice. S100p1-G therapy has the potential to reverse the IAA mediated memory and learning losing in aging.

DISCUSSION

Despite advances in metabolic techniques, a complete portrait of the metabolism and its complement of dynamic interactions with DNA remains unrealized. Specifically, traditional biological and analytical approaches have not been able to address key questions relating to the interactions of DNA with small molecules, including drugs, drug candidates, and metabolites. The introduction of a simple and effective strategy such as the single-strand gel shift (SSGS) technology we developed in this study in combination with other metabolic technologies to parse and enrich subsets of the “functional” small molecules that bind to DNA will allow scientists to delve more deeply and precisely into the gene expression state of cells. Additionally, this technology will facilitate researchers to explore perturbations by small molecules to overcome limitations of biological approaches to enable the selective marking and functional investigation of critical DNA-small-molecule interactions in biological environments such as a gut microbiome enriched environment.

Recent advances in metabolic technologies have greatly enhanced our understanding of metabolites as a complement to the genome and have provided valuable insight into numerous physiological processes and disease mechanisms. However, such methods alone do not capture the myriad of post-metabolite events such as gut microbiome derived metabolites and molecular interactions that can affect gene expression. The dramatic contextual and temporal variability of metabolites is part of what sets it apart from the relatively stable genome, limiting the reach of genome-based strategies to study metabolites and their interactions. Our approach as described in this study provides a foundation for further studying the mechanism underlying how temporal variability of the metabolites, such as gut metabolites generated under physiological versus pathophysiological conditions, has an effect on gene expression.

Traditional biological approaches, including the genetic incorporation of affinity tags and the creation of selective antibodies, have been transformative for the detection of protein-protein interactions. However, this approach does not apply to small molecules because unlike proteins that are relatively large, when a tag is incorporated into a small molecule, like a drug or metabolite, the tag likely perturbs the ability of the small molecule to interact with DNA. Investigating small molecules without labeling them as with the SSGS technology we developed in this study has bridged this experimental gap to demonstrate small molecule binding to DNA. This technology allows for the screening of many small molecules that potentially bind to DNA in a DNA sequencing specific manner for downstream investigations. With this technology, this study discovered that IAA and p53 jointly activate S100A8 signaling of microglia leading to cognitive decline in aged mice. p53, a transcription factor (TF) discovered 40 years ago, is one of the most extensively studied genes (Levine and Oren, 2009), and has previously been implicated in neurodegeneration. A significant increase in (Levine and Oren, 2009) p53 levels and activity was detected in postmortem CNS tissues of patients with ALS as well as in other neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and Huntington disease (Bae et al., 2005; de la Monte et al., 1997; Szybińska and Leśniak, 2017). In this study, we uncovered aging dependent induction of IAA which advances p53 accessibility to the promoter region of S100A8 by shaping the hairpin structure of S100A8 promoter region.

Using IAA as a proof of concept, we have demonstrated that shifting gut metabolites can be a signaling conduit that interconnects the extrinsic microbial environment with activity of brain microglial cells and provides a foundation for further studying whether other gut microbiome derived metabolites are also capable of regulating the activity of transcription factors in general. Unlike a standard CHIP assay which generates background noises/off-target signals, with PCR technology in combination with the ChIP assay, we can not only confirm the specific interaction of S100A8 promoter with IAA, but this method also provides a strategy to investigate whether other detected signals generated from the ChIP assay are actually signals due to IAA treatment. In this study, we also demonstrated that specific sequencing of S100A8 promoter is required for IAA binding. The docking analysis indicated that the IAA butan-1-amine carrying a methyl substituent at position 3 is required for the recognition of the oligo S100p1-G binding motif (-NTGGNCAGCTGNCCA-) via binding to the 4th and 11th guanine base of S100p1-G with the hydrogen bonds. This docking analysis also agrees with our experimental data presented in Figure 4C,D,F. Moreover, the LC-MS analysis of the Bio-S100p1-G complex from cell lysates indicated that only IAA interacts with S100p1-G (Figure 5F), and we did not find that the other molecules including polyamines, GABA, lysine are within Bio-S100p1-G complex, suggesting that the S100p1-G/IAA interaction is IAA specific.

The G-rich DNA oligo is able to distinguish one atomic difference between small molecule ochratoxin analogues A (OTA) and OTB, showing specificity recognition and affinity among hundreds of aptamers for small molecules (Xu et al., 2022). Given the S100p1-G is G-enriched, the selectivity of interaction between S100A8 and IAA could be contributed by specific tertiary (3D) structure of DNA and a high level of G enrichment.

Additionally, we also found that the microbiome-bacteriophage-metabolite axis is dysregulated during aging, leading to induction of IAA which impairs microglial cell function, contributing to exacerbated brain memory loss. In this study, we show that the IAA mediated pathological effect can be prevented. We have demonstrated that S100p1-G oligo prevents the IAA induced memory loss. The significance of this finding lies not only in developing personalized oligo therapy to delay aging, but also holds the potential to change the therapeutic landscape for many neurological and non-neurological conditions by oligo mediated manipulation of gut metabolite activity.

Our study focused on exploring the effects of the microbiome/bacteriophage regulated IAA on microglial cell activation including apoptosis and inflammation, which may impact downstream neuron function in both direct and indirect manners. The pathways regulated by IAA in neuron cells and microglial cells in the later stages of aging may necessitate cross-talk to have an effect on downstream brain function and inflammation and thus merits further investigation.

STAR ★ METHODS

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Lead Contact

Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Huang-Ge Zhang (h0zhan17@louisville.edu)

Materials Availability

Plasmids generated in this study will be made available on request, but we may require a payment and/or a completed Materials Transfer Agreement if there is potential for commercial application.

Data and Code Availability

Next generation 16s rRNA sequencing and phage sequencing have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the key resources table. All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request after publication. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the Lead Contact upon request. This paper does not report original code.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Mice

Given women are more resilient than men in age-related cognitive decline studies (McCarrey et al., 2016; van Exel et al., 2001), as well among men, mean age at first incidence of cognitive impairment is earlier than women (Hale et al., 2020), we used only male mice in this study. 6-8 weeks old (young group), 12-14 months old (middle aged group), 18-20 months old and 22-24 months old (aged group) male specific pathogen-free (SPF) C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). 6-8 weeks old and 12-14 months old male C57BL/6 syngeneic germ-free (GF) mice were purchased from the National Gnotobiotic Rodent Resource Center (University of Northern Carolina, NC Chapel Hill, NC) and maintained in flexible film isolators (Taconic Farm) at the Clean Mouse Facility of the University of Louisville. Animal care was performed following the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research (ILAR) guidelines and all animal experiments were done in accordance with protocols approved by the University of Louisville Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC, Louisville, KY). The mice were acclimated for at least 1 week before any experiments were conducted.

Human Subjects

The study involved 24 healthy volunteers divided into a young group (25.6 ± 4.2 years old, n=12) and an older group (65.3 ± 5.6 years old, n=12) by age. The participants in the two groups were matched for age and gender. All clinical fecal samples from healthy volunteers were collected in the Department of Surgery, Huai’an First People’s Hospital, Huai’an, Jiangsu, China with written informed consent from patients. Approval for the study was granted by the Institute Research Ethics Committee at the Health Department of Huai’an. All subjects provided signed informed consent to this study. Volunteers were recruited from the population in 2017 in Huai’an, Jiangsu, China. No subjects had a history of chronic gastrointestinal disease, taking antibiotics within three months of testing, alcohol abuse, or smoking.

Cells

The C57BL/6 syngeneic microglia BV2 cell line (AcceGen Biotech Cat.# ABC-TC212S) was grown at 37°C in 5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin.

Bacteria

Ruminococcaceae sp. (ATCC, TSD-27) was grown in brain heart infusion (BHI) medium at 37°C in a BactronEZ SHEL LAB anaerobic chamber (Sheldon Manufacturing, Inc. Cornelius, OR). Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG, ATCC# 53103, Manassas, VA) was grown in De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) broth (Hardy Diagnostics, Santa Maria, CA) and incubated in anaerobic conditions also.

METHOD DETAILS

Isolation of cells from the brain

Mice were anaesthetized with a mixture of ketamine (16%) and xylazine (3%) by intraperitoneal injection and then sacrificed under basal conditions by transcardial perfusion with perfusion buffer (Ca2+-Mg2+free HBSS containing 0.5 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES and 4.2 mM NaHCO3; pH 7.2). The perfused brain was removed and gently mechanically disaggregated with tweezers in dissociation buffer (HBSS containing 10mM HEPES and 4.2 mM NaHCO3 supplemented with Type I collagenase (0.05%), Dispase II (25 mg/ml), DNase I (2.5 mg/ml), trypsin inhibitor (50 μg/ml); pH 7.5) followed by incubation at 37°C for 1 h. The tissue homogenate was centrifuged at 1,350x g for 5 min at 4°C. For the isolation of microglia, the digestion enzymes in the tissue homogenate were inactivated by addition of PBS/EDTA containing 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and the digested brain bits were triturated gently, passed over a 100μm filter (Fisher Scientific) and centrifuged. Cell pellets were resuspended in 10 ml RPMI/L glutamine, mixed gently with 4.5 ml of physiologic Percoll® (Sigma Aldrich), and centrifuged at 850x g for 40 minutes. The pellet of cells was rinsed in PBS. Any contaminating red blood cells (RBC) were lysed using RBC lysis buffer (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, rinsed twice with PBS and passed through a 40μm filter (Fisher Scientific). Cells were then stained for CD11b and CD45 for flow cytometry analysis (Cardona et al., 2006). The astrocytes were isolated from mouse cortices (n=10). The tissue homogenate was centrifuged at 800x g for 10 min at 4°C following digestion with type II collagenase (1 mg/ml) and type I DNase (10 U/ml) in DMEM for 10 min. The cells pelleted by centrifugation were plated in a 100 mm culture dish coated with poly-L-ornithine (Sigma) (Bernard-Patrzynski et al., 2019). For the isolation of oligodendrocytes, the glial cells above were cultured in specific media containing T3 and T4 (0.5 mM) as well as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF, 10 ng/ml) to promote the growth of the different cell types (Tanti et al., 2019; Weil et al., 2019). Isolated glial cells were labelled with the following antibodies against surface markers: CD11b (Biolegend, Cat# 101206), CD45 (Biolegend, Cat# 147710), GFAP (Biolegend, Cat# 837508) and MOG (Biorbyt, Cat# orb412341-FITC). Cells positive for CD11b and CD45Med were identified as microglia. Cells positive for GFAP and negative for CD45 and CD11b were identified as astrocytes. Cells sorted with MOG+CD11b− were identified as oligodendrocytes.

Neurons were isolated from mouse brain using the Pierce Primary Neuron Isolation Kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat# 88280). Briefly, the tissue homogenate from freshly dissected cortexes was suspended in an equal volume of ice cold HBSS (Sigma) and replaced with Neuronal Isolation Enzyme (with papain) in a 37°C incubator for 30 min. After washing with HBSS, the tissue was cultured in a poly-D-lysine coated plate with Neuronal Culture Medium.

Isolation of phage from gut feces

One gram of fecal sample was weighed and homogenized in 40 mL of PBS with a benchtop homogenizer (MP Biomedical). The sample was then centrifuged at 17,000x g for 5 min and the supernatant was filtered sequentially through a 2 μm and 0.45 μm filter. Phages were then concentrated using a polyethylene glycol (PEG) method(Luong et al., 2020). Briefly, one molar solid NaCl and 10% (v/v) PEG 8000 (Sigma) were dissolved in PBS and incubated overnight at 4°C as recommended for a constant and stable precipitation. The phages mixed in the solution were pelleted by centrifugation at 5,250x g for 1 h at 4°C and re-suspended in 500 μl of SM buffer (NaCl 100 mM, MgSO4.7H2O 8 mM, Tris-Cl 50 mM).

Phage DNA extraction and sequencing

Isolated phages were treated with 10 U/ml of DNase (Sigma) for 30 min at 37°C followed by 10 min at 65°C to inactivate the DNase. DNA was then extracted using the QIAamp DNA Microbiome Kit (Qiagen, 51704). Phage DNA was sequenced with the Illumina MiSeq Nano V2 PE_250 bases method using the Nextera XT Kit with an input of 1 ng DNA. All samples were sequenced using paired-end reads (numbers of reads mentioned in this manuscript always refer to paired-end reads). To identify viral genomes, raw sequencing fastq files were first converted to fasta files and duplicate sequences were removed using SeqKit v2.1.0 (Shen et al., 2016). Then the viral genomes were searched to the NCBI complete RefSeq of viral squences using BLASTn. Only perfectly matched sequences and high similarity of E-value &lt; 10−10 from BLASTn search were selected for further analysis. For taxonomic classification, sequences were assigned to different viral families according to ICTV-defined families and Virus-Host DB. Sequences assigned to multiple families were excluded and only sequences assigned to a unique family were used. Composition of taxonomic families were calculated based on the number of reads assigned to each family (Mihara et al., 2016).

Microbiota 16S rRNA gene sequencing

Microbial genomic DNA from fecal samples was isolated with QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kits (Qiagen), and bacterial strains were investigated using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. DNA (15 ng) was used as a template to amplify the 16S rRNA gene using a High Fidelity PCR system kit (Roche). The v1-v3 regions of 16S ribosomal RNA gene were amplified using 27f (AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG) and 534r (ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGG) primers (1 μM). The primers were anchored with adaptor (adopter A: 5’ CCATCTCATCCCTGCGTGTCTCCGACTCAG 3’ and adopter B: 5’ CCTATCCCCTGTGTGCCTTGGCAGTCTCAG 3’) and Multiplex Identifiers (MIDs; 10 bp long). The multiplexed amplicons were purified using a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). The amplicon sequence was conducted using the 454 Jr. Sequencing platform. The 16S rRNA gene sequences were analyzed using QIIME 2 platform scripts (www.qiime.org). The microbial classification was performed with the two main 16S rRNA reference databases: SILVA and GreenGenes using QIIME 2 tools (Bolyen et al., 2019; DeSantis et al., 2006; Lu and Salzberg, 2020; Pruesse et al., 2007). By applying hierarchical clustering algorithms (HCAs), we determined the species clustering based on the operational taxonomic unit (OTU) using amplicon sequencing of 16S RNA. The reference sequences allowed sorting of the results into OTUs by clustering 97% sequence similarity (uclust) and classification according to various taxonomic ranks (phylum, order, class, family, genus, and species). The percentage of each bacterial species was virtualized with R software.

Quantitative Real-Time PCR for mRNA expression

Total RNA was isolated from tissues and cells with a RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen). For analysis of gene mRNA expression, 1 μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed by Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and quantitation was performed using primers (Eurofins) with SsoAdvancedTM Universal SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad); GAPDH was used for normalization. The primer sequences are listed in Supplementary table 3. qPCR was run using the BioRad CFX96 qPCR System with each reaction run in triplicate and the specific primers listed (Table S1). Analysis and fold-change were determined using the comparative threshold cycle (Ct) method. The ratio of each gene to that of the internal control was calculated, and the relative expression levels are shown in the figures. Gene expression was normalized to the control expression by calculating the Δ Ct = (Ct of control – Ct of the gene). Setting the expression value of GAPDH to 1.0, the relative expression values were calculated as 2ΔCt. The change in mRNA expression was calculated as fold-change.

Quantification of bacteria and phages by qPCR

For gut bacteria identification, qPCR was performed from gut microbiota-derived DNA extracted with QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen). All kits were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitation was performed using SsoAdvancedTM Universal SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad) and the bacterial specific primers listed (Table S3). qPCR was run using the BioRad CFX96 qPCR System with each reaction run in triplicate. Analysis and fold-change were determined using the comparative threshold cycle (Ct) method.

Analysis of microbial metabolites using LC-MS

Fecal samples were suspended in PBS (1 g/ml). After centrifugation at 10,000x g for 10 min, the supernatant was collected for LC-MS analysis. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was carried out using a method as described (Teng et al., 2017). Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.114 (Thermo) was used to analyze the data collected by the mass spectrometer. The database used in Mascot v2.5.1 and SequestHT searches was the 2/17/2017 version of the bacterial metabolites from UniprotKB (Proteome ID UP000000955). Scaffold was used to calculate the false discovery rate using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms. Proteins were grouped to satisfy the parsimony principle. The proteins were clustered based on differential expression and heat maps representing differentially regulated proteins by GELNs were generated using software R.

HPLC analysis of microbial metabolites

The fecal samples and TSD-27 growth medium were diluted with an equal volume of methanol. After centrifugation at 10,000x g for 30 min, 50 μl of supernatant was used for high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis. The HPLC analysis was performed on an Agilent 1260 Infinity system equipped with an Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18 column (4.6 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm), having the following parameters: mobile phase A: 5 mM NH4Ac in water modified with 0.1% formic acid (v/v); mobile phase B: 5 mM NH4Ac in 90% acetonitrile modified with 0.1% formic acid (v/v); gradient: 5% B in first 5 min, 5–20% B for 10 min, hold 20% B for 5 min, 20%-50% B for 5 min, hold 50% B for 5 min, 50%-100% B for 5 min, hold 100% B for 10 min, 100–5% B for 5 min; flow rate: 1.0 ml/min; temperature: 30°C. FLD (ex=280 nm, em=350 nm) was used for detection of isoamylamine (IAA), crotonic acid (CA) and pyridoxine. The standard for IAA (cat#: 126810) and CA (cat#: 113018) were purchased from Sigma.

Interaction of S100p1-G and metabolite

Microglial BV2 cells (2 x 106) were transfected with biotinylated oligo S100p1-G or mutant using Lipofectamin RNAiMAX Reagent (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions overnight at 37°C. 100 μl of aged mouse fecal supernatant (from one-gram feces) was added into the cell growth medium. After six hours, the cells were collected in RIPA lysis buffer. 100 μg of cell lysate was incubated with 50 μl of Dynabeads® Streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher) at room temperature for 1 h. The bio-oligo complex was eluted with biotin (4 mg/ml)) in 25 mM Tris-HCL containing 0.3 M NaCl (PH 8.5) at 95°C for 5 minutes. Metabolite analysis was performed with LC-MS.

Flow cytometry

Isolated cells were incubated with blocking solution (0.5% BSA/PBS) for 15 min at 4°C. For surface staining, cells were stained with various antibodies at room temperature for 1 h and then washed with PBS. Washed cells were stained for 40 min at 4°C with the appropriate fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies in PBS with 2% FBS. Data were acquired using a BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR). The following antibodies purchased from Biolegend were used for flow cytometry: anti-CD11b (101208), anti-CD45 (103112) and FITC Annexin V (640945). For the ABs analysis, extracellular vesicles were collected. To recognize the ABs, as described previously (Hristov et al., 2004), size gates set based on forward scatter (FSC) were applied in combination with Annexin V staining. From these vesicles total ABs were detected using Annexin V staining events.

Isolation of apoptotic bodies

Apoptotic bodies (ABs) were isolated from culture supernatants as previously described (Masvekar et al., 2019). Briefly, cell culture medium was harvested and cells were removed by pelleting at 335x g for 10min. To remove cell-debris, supernatants were centrifuged at 1,000x g for 10min, followed by another centrifugation at 2,000x g for 30min to pellet ABs. Pelleted ABs were resuspended and washed with PBS.

Western blotting

Cells were treated as indicated in individual figure legends and whole cell extracts (WCE) were prepared in the radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Sigma) with addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA). Dual color precision protein MW markers (BioRad) were separated in parallel. Antibodies were purchased as follows: cleaved-caspase-3 (ab214430), cleaved PARP (ab203467) and GAPDH (ab9657, Abcam) from Abcam; S100A8 (47310) and S100a9 (72590) from Cell Signaling; and Ltf (GTX81085) from GeneTex. The secondary antibodies conjugated to Fluors Alex-488 (A32723) or Alex-594 (A11012) were purchased from Invitrogen (Eugene, OR). The bands were visualized on the Odyssey Imager (LiCor Inc, Lincoln, NE).

Histological analysis

For hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) staining, tissues were fixed with buffered 10% formalin solution (SF93–20; Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ) overnight at 4°C. Dehydration was achieved by immersion in a graded ethanol series of 70%, 80%, 95%, and 100% ethanol for 40 min each. Tissues were embedded in paraffin and subsequently cut into ultra-thin slices (5 μm) using a microtome. Tissues were deparaffinized by xylene (Fisher) and rehydrated by decreasing concentrations of ethanol and PBS. Tissue sections were stained with H&amp;E and slides were scanned with an Aperio ScanScope. For frozen sections, tissues were fixed with periodate-lysine-paraformaldehyde (PLP) and dehydrated with 30% sucrose in PBS at 4°C overnight. The sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-Iba1 (FujiFilm, #019-19741) and anti-CD-11b (Biolegend, #101204) diluted1:100. The signal was visualized with the secondary antibodies conjugated to Fluors Alex-488 or Alex-594 (Invitrogen) and nuclei were stained with 4′,6-Diamidino- 2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI). The slides were scanned using an Aperio ScanScope or visualized using confocal laser scanning microscopy (Nikon, Melville, NY).

Apoptosis analysis by TUNEL

Formalin-fixed mouse lung tissues were embedded in paraffin and sectioned. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) was used to detect apoptosis in the sections placed on slides according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Tissue sections were analyzed to detect localized green fluorescence (GFP) of apoptotic cells using an in situ Cell Death Detection kit (Roche) and DAPI blue fluorescence to detect cell nuclei. The signal was visualized using confocal laser scanning microscopy (Nikon, Melville, NY).

Morris water maze test

Mice were trained in a 122 cm diameter, 50 cm height open-field water maze with non-reflective interior surfaces. The pool water was filled with water maintained at 25 ± 1 °C and mixed with non-toxic white tempera paint. Distinctive and extra-maze cues were marked on the wall at specific locations and were visible to the mice in the maze. Mice were removed from cages, placed into the water from quasi-random start points and allowed a maximum of 60 seconds to probe the escape platform. The inter interval of each trial remained for 15 seconds. For four consecutive days, four trials (training) were recorded each day with a final test on day 5 (Figure 4A). Performance was evaluated by the mean escape latencies base on every training trial (Vorhees and Williams, 2006).

Novel object recognition test

During the habituation phase, mice were allowed free exploration of a 40 X 40 cm open-field box for 5min. The arena was thoroughly cleaned with 70% (v/v) ethanol between mouse use. On the first training run, two identical objects were placed in opposite quadrants of the box and the mice were allowed to familiarize themselves with the objects for 10 min. After 24 h, one of the objects was replaced by a novel one of different color and shape but in in the same location. Mice were removed from the cages and placed in the box. The time that mice spent in discovery of the familiar and the new object was recorded over a 10 min period. For four consecutive days, four trials (training) were recorded each day with a final test on day 5 (Figure 4A). The three- or four- day intersession interval is used to assess recognition memory performances (Leger et al., 2013).

T-maze test

To evaluate the cognitive impairment without requirement of full motor function, modified T-Maze test (Deacon and Rawlins, 2006) was carried out. Mice were gently handled, habituated to the T-Maze apparatus, and subjected to food deprivation. On the forced alternation sample trial (T1), the animals were exposed to the T-maze with one of the arms opened and rewarded with pellet at end of the arm. The opposite arm was blocked by a guillotine door. The mouse was allowed to explore the open arm and consume the reward. Ten consecutive trials were performed, then the mouse was removed. After 30 min, retrieval testing (T2) was performed. The blocked arm was opened and the mouse was placed in the same start position. If the mouse entered the previously blocked arm the response was recorded as “correct” and the animal received a reward. If the mouse entered the same arm as in T1, the mouse was confined for 10 seconds and this response was marked as an “Error”. Each mouse was subjected to 10 consecutive runs. Forced Alternation [%] was defined as the percent of mice first entering the novel arm during T2. For four consecutive days, four trials (training) were recorded each day with a final test on day 5 (Figure 4A). The three- or four-day intersession interval is used to assess recognition memory performances.

Electroencephalography recording in mice

Groups of mice were anesthetized by peritoneal administration of ketamine (90 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg) mixture. Mice that were not responsive to nociceptive stimuli were consider anesthetized and were administered the analgesic buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg). The fur of the skull area was removed, placed on surgical bench and skin area were cleaned with betadine and 70% ethyl alcohol. The midline scalp skin was lifted using forceps and an incision made from the frontal cranial bone to the back of the parietal cranial bones. The skin was push aside and cleaned with betadine using cotton swabs. The skull was cleaned and marked for placement of electrodes. Two craniotomies 0.25–0.5 mm in diameter on the side of each hemisphere were established a 3 mm distance from the midline vertical fissure in the frontal and occipital regions; a hand-held drill (Kopf) with matching drill bits (0.5 mm) was used for the craniotomies. Four electrodes were placed in appropriate skull holes over the frontal cortex (FC) and occipital cortex (OC). A ground/reference electrode was also implanted in the most anterior region of cerebellum. Thus, two independent EEG channels were created for FC and OC on each side of the hemisphere. Tissue adhesive (Vetbond) was applied to fix the electrodes on the skull and dental acrylic cement (Fixodent ultra) was used to cover the entire open skull area to secure the electrodes. The mice were allowed to wake-up in a clean cage pre-warmed on a heating pad. EEG recordings were conducted spontaneously and simultaneously for 10-20 min when the subjects were awake using the Cascade PRO IONM system (Cadwell). EEG signals were amplified 1,000x and digitized at 1 kHz. Data was collected using a standard PC computer (Optiplex GX620, Dell) running Cascade® IDNM software (Cadwell).

Single-strand gel shift assay

To identify the metabolite binding site of S100A8, we synthesized a series of oligonucleotides (oligos) (Eurofins Genomics LLC, KY) specific to the response putative IAA binding site at the promoter region of S100A8. The sequences of the oligos are listed in Table S5. The oligos (10 pmol) were incubated with 1 nM of IAA at 37°C for 30 min following electrophoresis on a 15% native PAGE without SDS in 0.5x TBE buffer. The oligos were stained with ethidium bromide (0.5 μg/ml) and visualized under ultraviolet (UV) light.

Surface plasmon resonance

To identify the binding activity of the metabolite IAA and S100A8 promoter sequence, SPR experiments were conducted on an OpenSPR™ (Nicoya, Lifesciences, CA). Experiments were performed on a streptavidin sensor (Nicoya, Lifesciences). SPR was run at a flow rate of 20 μl/min using HBS running buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4). First, the streptavidin sensor chip was cleaned with octyl β-D-glucopyranoside (40 mM) and CHAPS (20 mM). 200 μl of biotin-conjugated oligos (1 μg/ml, Table S5) were injected on the sensor chip for 10 min until a stable resonance was obtained. After immobilization of bio-oligo, the surface was blocked with BSA (3%) in running buffer. After a stable signal was obtained, IAA (10 nM) was run over the immobilized bio-oligo until a stable resonance was obtained. A negative control test was also performed by injecting IAA onto a blank sensor chip to check for non-specific binding. The sensograms were analyzed using TraceDrawer kinetic analysis software.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay

To identify the interaction of IAA and promoter of S100A8, 1 mg of IAA was labeled with biotin using the EZ-Link NHS-PEG4 Biotinylation kit (Thermo Fisher Sci., #21455) and excess biotin was removed using a desalting column. Biotinylated IAA was incubated with microglia BV2 cells for 3 h at 37°C following 37% formaldehyde (final 1%) in 1 ml PBS for one more hour for cross-linking. The cell lysate was collected in 1 ml of RIPA buffer and sonication was used to shear the chromatin into 0.5~1 kb fragment. Streptavidin Dynabeads (50 μl) were added to the DNA samples for 1 h at room temperature. PBS replaced the DNA and was incubated with the beads as the control to exclude non-specific interactions. After washing beads with PBS, biotinylated IAA was eluted from the beads with the biotin (4mg/ml) in 25 mM Tris-HCL containing 0.3 M NaCl (pH 8.5) as the elution buffer at room temperature for 1 h or 95°C for 5 min. The supernatant was collected and the DNA was purified with acetic acid (2%, v/v) and dissolved into 10 μl of H2O. Two μl of DNA was used in quantitative PCR reactions using the primers of S100A8-ChIP (Table S3) (Anders et al., 2014; Deal and Henikoff, 2011).

Construction of S100A8 promoter into the reporter

To determine the activity of IAA on the promoter of S100A8, a sequence containing 1,037 bp of S100A8 promoter (Accession #: L76381) upstream −1,037 to −1 from transcription start site (TSS) was constructed into the luciferase C1 vector (Addgene, #163523). A DNA fragment was generated by PCR amplification with genomic DNA extracted from mouse liver tissue using DNeasy Blood &amp; Tissue Kits (Qiagen, #69504). PCR was conducted using Q5 High-Fidelity PCR kit (New Engliand Biolabs® Inc.) with the primers S1008A-prom, pLuc163523 and genomic DNA, luciferase C1 plasmid as the templates, respectively. The primer sequences are listed in Table S3. The two PCR products purified using the Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) were seamlessly assembled into the pLuc-S100p using the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Cloning Kit (New Engliand Biolabs® Inc.). The plasmid pLuc-S100p was transformed into DH5α and selected using kanamycin resistance. The DNA sequence was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Site-directed mutagenesis of S100A8 promoter

A mutant of IAA with the potential binding site on the S100A8 promoter was generated with the oligonucleotide primer S1008A-prom-Mut, which was designed to specifically disrupt the putative S100A8 binding site at its promoter (Figure 3C). Q5® Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (New England Biolabs, MA, USA) was used in conjunction with specific primers (Table S3) to introduce S100A8 promoter mutations in the pLuc-S100p construct according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After mutant strand synthesis and ligation, resultant plasmids were introduced into E. coli and transformants were selected using kanamycin resistance. The DNA sequence of mutants was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Nucleic acid unwinding assay

Helicase reactions were carried out in triplicate in 96-well plates. To prepare DNA substrate, 20 μM single strand DNA (WT: 5’-Cy3-GTGGGCAGCTGGCCAA-BHQ1-3’; Mutant: 5’-Cy3-GTATGCAGCTGGATAA-BHQ1-3’ (Eurofins Genomics LLC, KY) were denatured at 95°C for 5 min in the reaction buffer (25 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 15 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mg/ml BSA) and cooled slowly to room temperature before add IAA (100 nM) and/or helicase (100 μg/ml). After ATP (2 mM) was added to initiate the helicase activity, the fluorescence value was recorded using a microplate reader with an excitation wavelength of 550 and an emission wavelength of 570. BHQ: black-hole quencher.

IAA depletion from gut supernatant

To remove the IAA from gut fecal supernatant, biotin-binding oligo S100p1-G (1 nM/ml, Eurofins) was incubated with fecal supernatant (1 g feces/ml) in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. 100 μl of Dynabeads MyOne™ streptavidin (Thermo fisher) were incubated with the oligo/supernatant for 30 min and the tube containing the solution was place on a magnet for 1 min. The supernatant was collected and the IAA level was estimated by HPLC.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Unless otherwise indicated, all statistical analyses in this study were performed using SPSS 16.0 software (Gouda, 2015). The data are presented as values with standard deviation (as the mean ± SD). The significance of differences in mean values between two groups was analyzed using the Student’s t-test. Differences between individual groups were analyzed via one- or two-way ANOVA. Differences between percentages of bacterial composition were analyzed with a chi-square test. Differences were considered significant when the P-value was less than 0.05 or 0.01. A P value greater than 0.05 was considered non-significant (NS). Both animals and human subjects were randomly assigned to a control group and different experimental condition groups matched for age and sex using simple randomization. Double-blinded studies were used for animal and human subject studies. Unless otherwise indicated, the mice used in the in vivo study were male C57BL/6 mice. Using one-way ANOVA comparing up to four groups, for a power of 0.7, a large effect size (0.75) and a significance level of 0.05, the minimum sample size needed in each group was 4.992 (rounded = 5) (Festing and Altman, 2002). The reported “n” in animal and human studies represents the number of animals and human subjects. Data are representative of at least three independent experiments.

DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY

Data Resources

The sequenced data of bacteria and phages were deposited in NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database with accession number GSE165471 and GSE196622, respectively.

Supplementary Material

1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Dr. Pike-See Cheah (Massachusetts General Hospital, Department Neurology, Boston MA 02114) for invaluable help with primary neuron cell cultures and helpful comments and advice. We thank Dr. J. Ainsworth for editorial assistance. Funding: This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (R01AT008617), the Robley Rex VA Medical Center Merit Review Grants (H-GZ) and COBRE Pilot Project, NIH (P20GM125504-05, YT). Huang-Ge Zhang is supported by a Research Career Scientist (RCS) Award and P20GM125504. X.Z. and M.M. are supported by P50 AA024337 and P20 GM113226. J.P. is supported by the NIH National Institute of General Medical Sciences (P20GM103436) and NIH National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences grant (P30ES030283).

Figure 1. Comparative Analysis of Sensome Genes Expression and Apoptosis in Microglia of Young and Aged Mice

(A) Microglial cells isolated from mouse brains by Percoll gradient centrifugation and sorted by FACS with gating on the CD11b+CD45med population (red circle).

(B) A heat map showing aging genes in microglia significantly (p&lt;0.05) changed between 2-month-old (young, Y) mice and 12-month-old (aged, A) mice (n=3, each group mixed from three mice) using a quantitative real-time (qPCR) array. Red and blue colors represent elevated and decreased expression of mRNAs, respectively.

(C) An individual qPCR analysis of microglia recovered from FACS sorted CD11b+CD45med cells from different regions of mouse brain specimens. The ratio of each gene to that of GAPDH was calculated and the relative expression levels normalized by cerebrum in the young mouse PBS group are shown. Red and blue colors represent elevated and decreased expression of mRNAs, respectively.

(D) Western blot analysis of microglial cells from cerebral cortex. GAPDH was used as a loading control. The numbers under the blots indicate the density of bands normalized to the density of GAPDH.

(E) Analysis of apoptosis in the brain of mice using the TUNEL assay. Scale bar, 100 μm.

(F) Microglial cells isolated from mice and transfected with S100A8, S100A9 overexpression (pS100A8, pS100A9) and knockout (KO) plasmids, respectively. Western blot analysis of the expression of S100A8, S100A9, cleaved caspase-3 in microglia.

Data are representative of three independent experiments.

Related to Figure S1 and S2 and Table S1 and S3.

Figure 2. Gut Bacterial Metabolites IAA and CA Promote Apoptosis of Microglia cells in Aged Mice

(A) Analysis workflow of the relationship between gut microbe metabolites and brain microglial cell sensome.

(B) Metabolite profiles of gut feces from 2m and 12m-old specific pathogen-free (SPF) and germ free (GF) mice (n=2, each group mixed from three mice) using liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS). The color scale represents log10 of signal intensity of MS data.

(C) Integrated data of metabolite profiles and expression of sensome genes from young and aged mice (n=6), linear regression analysis indicating the relationship between the gut metabolites isoamylamine (IAA), crotonic acid (CA) and the S100A8 of microglia.

(D) Quantification of IAA and CA in gut feces using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).

(E) Western blot analysis of cleaved caspase-3 and PARP in microglia of mice. GAPDH was used as a loading control. The numbers under the blots indicate the density of bands normalized to the density of GAPDH.

(F) Analysis of apoptosis bodies (ABs) in the medium of primary microglia cells from mouse with FACS (left panel). Quantification of ABs (right panel).

Data are representative of three independent experiments (error bars, SD). * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 (two-tailed t-test).

Related to Figure S3 and Table S2.

Figure 3. Aging Dependent Reduction of Gut Bacteriophages Leads to the Production of Bacterial IAA and CA

(A) A heat map showing the composition of bacteria (family level) in the feces from healthy young (n=12) and aged people (n=12) using 16s rRNA next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis.

(B) Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of 16s rRNA sequencing.

(C) Real-time qPCR analysis of selected bacteria in mice fecal samples (n=10). Fold changes are shown relative to young mice.

(D) Predictive analysis of the potential of bacteriophages (family level) to target higher abundance bacteria Ruminococcaceae and Clostridiaceae in the aged mouse intestine.

(E) Analysis of phage level in feces of mice using qPCR.

(F) Schematic diagram of Ruminococcaceae (ATCC, TSD-27) binding phages isolated from human feces following the administration to TSD-27 and mice (top panel). TSD-27 exposed to TSD-27 binding phages (phageTSD-27). The phage titer and relative bacterial survival rate estimated by spectrophotometer (bottom panel).

(G) HPLC analysis of the metabolites IAA and CA in the growth medium of TSD-27 treated with phageTSD-27 (left panel) and in the fecal supernatants of mice gavage-given phageTSD-27 (right panel).

(H) A heat map showing the relative abundance of TSD-27 binding phage and Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) binding phage in human feces, as well as phage from young and old subjects using NGS analysis.

Data are representative of four independent experiments (error bars, SD). * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 (two-tailed t-test); NS, not significant.

Related to Figure S3 and Table S4.

Figure 4. Identification of Gut Metabolite IAA Targeted S100A8 Promoter Region

(A) Schematic diagram of the strategy to demonstrate the interaction of IAA and the promoter of S100A8 (left panel). Oligo binding to IAA with the expected mobility shift on PAGE (right panel). The transcription start site (TSS) is marked by the bent arrow. ATG; translation start code.

(B) 10 pmol of synthetic DNA oligo S100p1 and S100p2 (60 mer/each) corresponding to the sequence on the promoter of S100A8 incubated with IAA (1 μM) or fecal supernatant (1 g feces/ml) for 30 min at 37°C. The oligos separated on 15% PAGE and visualized with ethidium bromide. P: PBS; I: IAA; S: gut feces supernatant.

(C) The shorter synthetic DNA oligos S100p1-A to S100p1-I (20 mer/each) correspond to the sequence of S100p1 (top panel). Representative PAGE for the oligos S100p1-F to S100p1-I with or without IAA (bottom panel).

(D) SPR analysis of the interaction of biotin labeled oligos S100p1, S100p1-G and mutant S100p1-GM with IAA (1 μM.)

(E) The promoter sequences of S100A8 inserted into a luciferase reporter pLuc and transfection of microglia. Luciferase activities assessment 12 h after treatment of IAA.

(F) Representation of a 15% PAGE for the oligo S1001-G, as well as mutants indicated in the figure. Each oligo contained a single base mutation. The base in pink replaced by different base caused the abolishment of IAA binding shift.

Data are representative of three independent experiments (error bars, SD). * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 (two-tailed t-test); NS, not significant.

Related to Figure S4 and Table S5.

Figure 5. IAA, a Promoter-unfolding Enabler, Facilitates p53 Access to the S100A8 Promoter Region via Unwinding of the Hairpin Structure

(A) The sequence of S100A8 promoter indicating the distance from TSS containing the IAA potential binding motif (pink) and p53 binding site (box) (top panel). The analysis of luciferase activity for the p53 KO microglia transfected with the luciferase plasmid inserted S100A8 promoter sequence. Treatment of IAA and/or recombinant mouse p53 protein is indicated in the figure (bottom panel).

(B) Schematic diagram of the IAA binding motif forming a hairpin structure with complementary sequences. IAA promotes the unwinding of the hairpin exposing the transcription factor p53 binding site (box).

(C) IAA binding oligo and mutant synthesized with modification of fluorescence Cy3 at the 5’ and the Quencher BHQ1 3’-end. DNA (20 μM) unwound with helicase (100 ng/ml) and/or IAA. The fluorescence value was recorded at an excitation wavelength at 550 and emission wavelength at 570.

(D) Biotinylated IAA incubated with shearing BV2 genomic DNA. The interaction of IAA and the promoter of S100A8 indicated using the ChIP assay.

(E) SPR analysis of interaction between p53 protein and biotinylated oligo covalently immobilized onto the sensor chip with or without IAA.

(F) Biotinylated oligo S100p1-G (WT) and mutant transfected into microglia cells for 12 h and incubate with mouse gut supernatant for additional 6 h. Metabolite analysis with LC-MS after pull-down with streptavidin beads.

(G) KO p53 with CRISPR/Cas9 transfection for 48 h and the expression of S100A8 in microglia after treatment with IAA for 12 h analyzed by western blot.

(H) 3D predicted structures of interaction between IAA and oligo S100p1-G (G-Red; T-Yellow; C-Green; A-Cyan) at position G-4 and G-11 by two hydrogen bonds.

(I) Multi-sequences alignment of S100A8 orthologues on promoter using CLUSTAL 2.1. The depth of color shading indicates the degree of residue conservation.

(J) Phylogenetic tree of S100A8 orthologues on promoter sequences containing the IAA binding motif using r package “ape” in a R 4.0 environment. The horizonal lines are branches and represent evolutionary lineages changing over time. The length of a branch represents genetic variation among these sequences.

Data are representative of three independent experiments (error bars, SD). * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01 (two-tailed t-test).

Related to Figure S4 and Table S5.

Figure 6. IAA Promotes Cognitive Decline Whereas PhageTSD-27 Reverses Cognitive Decline

(A) Schematic diagram of the treatment schedule and timeline for Learning and Memory Tests. Administration of IAA (0.5 g/kg) and phageTSD-27 (1x109 pfu/each) to young and aged mice (n=10 each group), respectively, for two months prior to the behavioral tests.

(B) Schematic diagram of the Morris water maze (MWM) test indicating a variety of insertion points (S, south; SW, southwest; W, west; NW, northwest; N, north).

(C) Representative search paths taken by mice on the day of test at the insertion point of west (W, top panel) and south (S, bottom panel).

(D) MWM performance of all groups of mice in the test (day 5). The aged mice revealed a greater path length per pool diameter as well as a longer escape latency as compared with young mice. Administration of IAA and phageTSD-27 to young and aged mice, respectively, for two months significantly altered the search path and escape latency (left panel); MWM performance of mice in the exploration (day 1) and acquisition trials (day 2 to day 4) (right panel). * Y-IAA vs Y-PBS; # Aged-phageTSD-27 vs Aged-PBS.

(E) Schematic diagram of the T Maze Spontaneous Alternation (T-maze, TMSA) Test (left panel); Quantification of T-maze spontaneous alternation in test day (right panel).

(F) Schematic diagram of the 2-Object Novel Object Recognition (NOR) test (left panel); Percentage of the times for the novel objects out of the total exploration times (right panel).

(G) H&amp;E-stained sections of the cerebrum, thalamus, cerebellum, hippocampus and brain stem (400x magnification, scale bar, 200 μm). Arrows in the left panel indicate neuronal loss and dying neurons in aged mice (n=5 per group).

(H) A representative 10-second clip of epidural electroencephalographic (EEG) captured from four electrodes (left panel) in the freely behaving mice (n=5 per group) in a wakened state. Different EEG channels are colored. Each EEG channel is identified with a two-letter label indicating its position: F, frontal; O, occipital; L, left and R, right (middle panel). Density spectral array (DSA) showing the distribution of EEG strength in relation to frequency over time (right panel). The color scale represents power from 0 to 10 pW.

(I) A heat map showing composition of EEG signal frequency in cerebral cortex of mice (n=5). Orange and blue colors represent high and low percentage of waveforms, respectively.

(J) Represent analysis of western blot for the expression in microglia from different regions of the brain (left panel). The ratio of each band density to that of GAPDH was calculated and the relative expression levels normalized by cerebrum in the young mouse untreated group are shown. Red and blue colors represent elevated and decreased expression, respectively (right panel).

Data are representative of five independent experiments (error bars, SD). *,# p &lt; 0.05, **,#,# p &lt; 0.01 (two-tailed t-test).

Related to Figure S5.

Figure 7. S100p1-G Mediated Depletion of Gut Metabolite IAA Leads to Prevention of Cognitive Dysfunction

(A) Schematic diagram of IAA depletion (dep) from aged mice fecal supernatant (Sup) with biotinylated oligo S100p1-G, followed by pull-down with streptavidin beads.

(B) IAA removed from the fecal supernatant of aged mice (12-month-old, male) with wild-type S100p1-G (IAAdep) or mutant S100p1-G (Ctrldep) at 1.0 nM/ml. HPLC analysis of IAA in the supernatant (left panel); fecal supernatant with/without IAA depletion administered to 2-month-old male mice (n=6) via oral gavage and HPLC analysis of IAA in the serum collected 24 h after oral administration (right panel).

(C) Young mice (2-month-old, male) were gavage-given TSD-27 bacterium (1x109 /mouse) along with phageTSD-27(1x109 pfu/mouse) and phageLGG (1x109 pfu/mouse). A different group of young mice (2-month-old, male) were gavage-given aged mouse derived gut supernatant with IAAdep, Ctrldep depletion (n=10 each group) or without depletion (−) as a control group. All mice were treated as described above every other day for two months prior to the behavioral tests and other tests (D-G). Representative search paths in the MWM taken by mice on the day of test at the insertion point of west (W) (left panel). Quantification of relative search path taken by mice (right panel).

(D) Quantification of T-maze spontaneous alternation.

(E) Analysis of IAA in serum using HPLC.

(F) Analysis of S100A8 in microglia of the brain using qPCR.

(G) Analysis of S100A8 and cleaved caspase-3 in microglia of the brain by western blot. The color of the arrows represents the treatment group indicated in panel C.

(H) Oligo S100p1-G and S100p1-G mutant were intravenously administered to aged mice (12-month-old, male) via the tail vein at 1 μg/kg body weight (n=10) twice a week for two months prior to the MWM testing. Representative search paths taken by mice in the MWM test (left panel). Quantification of relative search path taken by mice (right panel).

(I) HPLC analysis of IAA in CSF collected at 1 h after the last oligo S100p1-G and S100p1-G mutant treatments.

Data are representative of five independent experiments (error bars, SD). * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01 (two-tailed t-test).

Related to Figure S5.

KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	
Antibodies	
	
Anti-mouse S100A8	Cell Signaling	Cat# 47310;	
Anti-mouse S100A89	Cell Signaling	Cat# 72590; RRID:AB_2734726	
Anti-mouse cleaved-caspase-3	Abcam	Cat# ab214430;	
Anti-mouse GAPDH	Abcam	Cat# ab9485; RRID:AB_307275	
Anti-mouse cleaved PARP	Abcam	Cat# ab203467;	
Anti-mouse Ltf	GeneTex	Cat# GTX81085; RRID:AB_11170565	
PE anti-mouse/human CD11b	Biolegend	Cat# 101208; RRID:AB_312791	
anti-mouse/human CD11b	Biolegend	Cat# #101204; RRID:AB_312787	
FITC anti-mouse/human CD45b	Biolegend	Cat# 147710; RRID:AB_2563542	
FITC anti-mouse/human GFAP	Biolegend	Cat# 837508; RRID:AB_2728555	
FITC anti-mouse/human MOG	Biorbyt	Cat# orb412341-FITC;	
Anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 647	Invitrogen	Cat# A21236; RRID:AB_2535805	
Anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488	Invitrogen	Cat# A32723; RRID:AB_2633275	
Anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 594	Invitrogen	Cat# A11005; RRID:AB_2534073	
Anti-mouse Iba1	Fujifilm	Cat# 019-19741; RRID:AB_839504	
	
Bacterial and Virus Strains	
	
Lactobacillus rhamnosus (LGG)	ATCC	Cat# 53103	
Escherichia coli	Inserm	Cat# U1048	
Ruminococcaceae sp.	ATCC	Cat# TSD-27	
	
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins	
	
MRS broth	Hardy Diagnostics	Cat# C5931	
BHI broth	Hardy Diagnostics	Cat# C5141	
LB broth	Hardy Diagnostics	Cat# C9272	
10% formalin solution	Fisher Scientific	Cat# SF93–20	
ketamine	Mylan	Cat# 67457-0108-10	
xylazine	Bimeda	Cat# 13985-615	
Dynabeads MyOneTM streptavidin	Thermo fisher	Cat# 65602	
Lipofectamin RNAiMAX Reagent	Thermo Fisher	Cat# 13778150	
FITC-conjugated Annexin V	Biolegend	Cat# 640945	
Isoamylamine	Sigma	Cat# 126810	
Crotonic acid	Sigma	Cat# 113018	
	
Critical Commercial Assays	
	
miRNeasy mini kit	Qiagen	Cat# 217004	
QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kits	Qiagen	Cat# 51504	
In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit	Roche	Cat# 11684795910	
Q5® Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit	New England Biolabs	Cat# E0554S	
EZ-Link NHS-PEG4 Biotinylation kit	Thermo Fisher	Cat# 21455	
DNeasy Blood &amp; Tissue Kits	Qiagen	Cat# 69504	
Superscript III reverse transcriptase	Thermo Fisher	Cat# 18080044	
NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Cloning Kit	New Engliand	Cat# E5520S	
	
Deposited Data	
	
Next generation 16s rRNA sequencing	GEO database	GSE165471	
Next generation phage sequencing	GEO database	GSE196622	
	
Experimental Models: Cell Lines	
	
microglia BV2	AcceGen Biotech	Cat# ABC-TC212S	
	
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains	
	
Mouse: C57BL/6	Jackson Laboratory Stock	Cat# 000664	
Mouse: Germ free	National Gnotobiotic Rodent Resource Center	N/A	
	
Oligonucleotides	
	
Primers for qPCR, see Table S1 and S3	Eurofins	N/A	
Oligo DNA, see Table S5	Eurofins	N/A	
	
Recombinant DNA	
	
luciferase C1 vector	Addgene	Cat# 163523	
	
Software and Algorithms	
	
QIIME2	Bolyen et al., 2019	https://qiime2.org	
GreenGenes	DeSantis et al., 2006	http://greengenes.lbl.gov	
SILVA	Pruesse et al., 2007	http://www.arb-silva.de	
SPSS 16.0	Gouda et al., 2015	https://spss-64bits.en.softonic.com/	
R	Hu et al, 2021	https://www.r-project.org/	
Mfold	M. Zuker, 2003	http://www.unafold.org/mfold/	
UCSF Chimera	Huang et al., 2014	https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/	
CLUSTAL 2.1	Larkin MA, 2007	http://www.clustal.org/clustal2/	
	
Other	
	
Bacterial genomes	RefSeq database	ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/refseq/bacteria/	
Virus-Host DB	Virus database	https://www.genome.jp/virushostdb/	
Mascot v2.5.1	Mass spectrometry proteomics database	https://www.matrixscience.com/	

Highlights:

Age-related enrichment of the gut bacterial isoamylamine (IAA) causes cognitive decline

Myoviridae phages are reduced in aged mice, correlating with IAA enrichment

IAA and p53 jointly activate S100A8 signaling to initiate murine microglial death

Oligo S100p1-G blocking IAA mediated S100A8 activation delays the cognitive decline

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.


REFERENCES

Anders L , Guenther MG , Qi J , Fan ZP , Marineau JJ , Rahl PB , Lovén J , Sigova AA , Smith WB , Lee TI , (2014). Genome-wide localization of small molecules. Nat Biotechnol 32 , 92–96. 10.1038/nbt.2776.24336317
Angelova DM , and Brown DR (2019). Microglia and the aging brain: are senescent microglia the key to neurodegeneration? J Neurochem 151 , 676–688. 10.1111/jnc.14860.31478208
Bae BI , Xu H , Igarashi S , Fujimuro M , Agrawal N , Taya Y , Hayward SD , Moran TH , Montell C , Ross CA , (2005). p53 mediates cellular dysfunction and behavioral abnormalities in Huntington’s disease. Neuron 47 , 29–41. 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.06.005.15996546
Baker M , Akrofi K , Schiffer R , and Boyle MW (2008). EEG Patterns in Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) Patients. Open Neuroimag J 2 , 52–55. 10.2174/1874440000802010052.19018315
Bernard-Patrzynski F , Lécuyer MA , Puscas I , Boukhatem I , Charabati M , Bourbonnière L , Ramassamy C , Leclair G , Prat A , and Roullin VG (2019). Isolation of endothelial cells, pericytes and astrocytes from mouse brain. PLoS One 14 , e0226302. 10.1371/journal.pone.0226302.31851695
Bolyen E , Rideout JR , Dillon MR , Bokulich NA , Abnet CC , Al-Ghalith GA , Alexander H , Alm EJ , Arumugam M , Asnicar F , (2019). Reproducible, interactive, scalable and extensible microbiome data science using QIIME 2. Nat Biotechnol 37 , 852–857. 10.1038/s41587-019-0209-9.31341288
Cardona AE , Huang D , Sasse ME , and Ransohoff RM (2006). Isolation of murine microglial cells for RNA analysis or flow cytometry. Nat Protoc 1 , 1947–1951. 10.1038/nprot.2006.327.17487181
Chen G , Chen KS , Knox J , Inglis J , Bernard A , Martin SJ , Justice A , McConlogue L , Games D , Freedman SB , and Morris RG (2000). A learning deficit related to age and beta-amyloid plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 408 , 975–979. 10.1038/35050103.11140684
Cho YE , Latour LL , Kim H , Turtzo LC , Olivera A , Livingston WS , Wang D , Martin C , Lai C , Cashion A , and Gill J (2016). Older Age Results in Differential Gene Expression after Mild Traumatic Brain Injury and Is Linked to Imaging Differences at Acute Follow-up. Front Aging Neurosci 8 , 168. 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00168.27468266
Chu C , Murdock MH , Jing D , Won TH , Chung H , Kressel AM , Tsaava T , Addorisio ME , Putzel GG , Zhou L , (2019). The microbiota regulate neuronal function and fear extinction learning. Nature 574 , 543–548. 10.1038/s41586-019-1644-y.31645720
Clark SV , Semmel ES , Aleksonis HA , Steinberg SN , and King TZ (2021). Cerebellar-Subcortical-Cortical Systems as Modulators of Cognitive Functions. Neuropsychol Rev. 10.1007/s11065-020-09465-1.
Cristóvão JS , and Gomes CM (2019). S100 Proteins in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Neurosci 13 , 463. 10.3389/fnins.2019.00463.31156365
de la Monte SM , Sohn YK , and Wands JR (1997). Correlates of p53- and Fas (CD95)-mediated apoptosis in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Sci 152 , 73–83. 10.1016/s0022-510x(97)00131-7.9395128
Deacon RM , and Rawlins JN (2006). T-maze alternation in the rodent. Nat Protoc 1 , 7–12. 10.1038/nprot.2006.2.17406205
Deal RB , and Henikoff S (2011). The INTACT method for cell type-specific gene expression and chromatin profiling in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nat Protoc 6 , 56–68. 10.1038/nprot.2010.175.21212783
DeSantis TZ , Hugenholtz P , Larsen N , Rojas M , Brodie EL , Keller K , Huber T , Dalevi D , Hu P , and Andersen GL (2006). Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database and workbench compatible with ARB. Appl Environ Microbiol 72 , 5069–5072. 10.1128/aem.03006-05.16820507
Doulberis M , Papaefthymiou A , Polyzos SA , Boziki M , Deretzi G , Giartza-Taxidou E , Vardaka E , Grigoriadis N , Katsinelos T , Touloumtzi M , (2019). Microbes and Alzheimer’ disease: lessons from H. pylori and GUT microbiota. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 23 , 1845–1846. 10.26355/eurrev_201903_17218.30915725
Festing MF , and Altman DG (2002). Guidelines for the design and statistical analysis of experiments using laboratory animals. ILAR journal / National Research Council, Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources 43 , 244–258.
Fujita Y , and Yamashita T (2021). Neuroprotective function of microglia in the developing brain. Neuronal Signal 5 , Ns20200024. 10.1042/ns20200024.
Gouda MA (2015). Common Pitfalls in Reporting the Use of SPSS Software. Med Princ Pract 24 , 300. 10.1159/000381953.25895435
Hemonnot AL , Hua J , Ulmann L , and Hirbec H (2019). Microglia in Alzheimer Disease: Well-Known Targets and New Opportunities. Front Aging Neurosci 11 , 233. 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00233.31543810
Hickman SE , Kingery ND , Ohsumi TK , Borowsky ML , Wang LC , Means TK , and El Khoury J (2013). The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA sequencing. Nat Neurosci 16 , 1896–1905. 10.1038/nn.3554.24162652
Holwerda SJ , and de Laat W (2013). CTCF: the protein, the binding partners, the binding sites and their chromatin loops. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368 , 20120369. 10.1098/rstb.2012.0369.23650640
Hristov M , Erl W , Linder S , and Weber PC (2004). Apoptotic bodies from endothelial cells enhance the number and initiate the differentiation of human endothelial progenitor cells in vitro. Blood 104 , 2761–2766. 10.1182/blood-2003-10-3614.15242875
Hu W , and Lin C (2021). S100a8 silencing attenuates inflammation, oxidative stress and apoptosis in BV2 cells induced by oxygenglucose deprivation and reoxygenation by upregulating GAB1 expression. Mol Med Rep 23 . 10.3892/mmr.2020.11702.
Hu X , Estecio MR , Chen R , Reuben A , Wang L , Fujimoto J , Carrot-Zhang J , McGranahan N , Ying L , Fukuoka J , (2021). Evolution of DNA methylome from precancerous lesions to invasive lung adenocarcinomas. Nat Commun 12 , 687. 10.1038/s41467-021-20907-z.33514726
Huang CC , Meng EC , Morris JH , Pettersen EF , and Ferrin TE (2014). Enhancing UCSF Chimera through web services. Nucleic Acids Res 42 , W478–484. 10.1093/nar/gku377.24861624
Jeddi I , and Saiz L (2017). Three-dimensional modeling of single stranded DNA hairpins for aptamer-based biosensors. Sci Rep 7 , 1178. 10.1038/s41598-017-01348-5.28446765
Kadosh E , Snir-Alkalay I , Venkatachalam A , May S , Lasry A , Elyada E , Zinger A , Shaham M , Vaalani G , Mernberger M , (2020). The gut microbiome switches mutant p53 from tumour-suppressive to oncogenic. Nature 586 , 133–138. 10.1038/s41586-020-2541-0.32728212
Kim YS , and Joh TH (2006). Microglia, major player in the brain inflammation: their roles in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Exp Mol Med 38 , 333–347. 10.1038/emm.2006.40.16953112
Kwapis JL , Alaghband Y , Keiser AA , Dong TN , Michael CM , Rhee D , Shu G , Dang RT , Matheos DP , and Wood MA (2020). Aging mice show impaired memory updating in the novel OUL updating paradigm. Neuropsychopharmacology 45 , 337–346. 10.1038/s41386-019-0438-0.31202213
Langille MG , Meehan CJ , Koenig JE , Dhanani AS , Rose RA , Howlett SE , and Beiko RG (2014). Microbial shifts in the aging mouse gut. Microbiome 2 , 50. 10.1186/s40168-014-0050-9.25520805
Larkin MA , Blackshields G , Brown NP , Chenna R , McGettigan PA , McWilliam H , Valentin F , Wallace IM , Wilm A , Lopez R , (2007). Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 23 , 2947–2948. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm404.17846036
Le Boulch M , Dehais P , Combes S , and Pascal G (2019). The MACADAM database: a MetAboliC pAthways DAtabase for Microbial taxonomic groups for mining potential metabolic capacities of archaeal and bacterial taxonomic groups. Database (Oxford) 2019. 10.1093/database/baz049.
Leger M , Quiedeville A , Bouet V , Haelewyn B , Boulouard M , Schumann-Bard P , and Freret T (2013). Object recognition test in mice. Nat Protoc 8 , 2531–2537. 10.1038/nprot.2013.155.24263092
Levine AJ , and Oren M (2009). The first 30 years of p53: growing ever more complex. Nat Rev Cancer 9 , 749–758. 10.1038/nrc2723.19776744
Liberti J , and Engel P (2020). The gut microbiota - brain axis of insects. Curr Opin Insect Sci 39 , 6–13. 10.1016/j.cois.2020.01.004.32078985
Liu Q , Scaringe WA , and Sommer SS (2000). Discrete mobility of single-stranded DNA in non-denaturing gel electrophoresis. Nucleic Acids Res 28 , 940–943. 10.1093/nar/28.4.940.10648786
Lodeiro M , Puerta E , Ismail MA , Rodriguez-Rodriguez P , Ronnback A , Codita A , Parrado-Fernandez C , Maioli S , Gil-Bea F , Merino-Serrais P , and Cedazo-Minguez A (2017). Aggregation of the Inflammatory S100A8 Precedes Abeta Plaque Formation in Transgenic APP Mice: Positive Feedback for S100A8 and Abeta Productions. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 72 , 319–328. 10.1093/gerona/glw073.27131040
Lu J , and Salzberg SL (2020). Ultrafast and accurate 16S rRNA microbial community analysis using Kraken 2. Microbiome 8 , 124. 10.1186/s40168-020-00900-2.32859275
Luong T , Salabarria AC , Edwards RA , and Roach DR (2020). Standardized bacteriophage purification for personalized phage therapy. Nat Protoc 15 , 2867–2890. 10.1038/s41596-020-0346-0.32709990
Ma Y , You X , Mai G , Tokuyasu T , and Liu C (2018). A human gut phage catalog correlates the gut phageome with type 2 diabetes. Microbiome 6 , 24. 10.1186/s40168-018-0410-y.29391057
Masvekar R , Mizrahi J , Park J , Williamson PR , and Bielekova B (2019). Quantifications of CSF Apoptotic Bodies Do Not Provide Clinical Value in Multiple Sclerosis. Front Neurol 10 , 1241. 10.3389/fneur.2019.01241.31849814
Mattei D , and Notter T (2020). Basic Concept of Microglia Biology and Neuroinflammation in Relation to Psychiatry. Curr Top Behav Neurosci 44 , 9–34. 10.1007/7854_2018_83.30739307
Mihara T , Nishimura Y , Shimizu Y , Nishiyama H , Yoshikawa G , Uehara H , Hingamp P , Goto S , and Ogata H (2016). Linking Virus Genomes with Host Taxonomy. Viruses 8 , 66. 10.3390/v8030066.26938550
Morais LH , Schreiber H.L.t. , and Mazmanian SK (2021). The gut microbiota-brain axis in behaviour and brain disorders. Nat Rev Microbiol 19 , 241–255. 10.1038/s41579-020-00460-0.33093662
Nardone R , Sebastianelli L , Versace V , Ferrazzoli D , Saltuari L , and Trinka E (2021). TMS-EEG Co-Registration in Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment, Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias: A Systematic Review. Brain Sci 11 . 10.3390/brainsci11030303.
Narlikar GJ , Fan HY , and Kingston RE (2002). Cooperation between complexes that regulate chromatin structure and transcription. Cell 108 , 475–487. 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00654-2.11909519
Niraula A , Sheridan JF , and Godbout JP (2017). Microglia Priming with Aging and Stress. Neuropsychopharmacology 42 , 318–333. 10.1038/npp.2016.185.27604565
Pruesse E , Quast C , Knittel K , Fuchs BM , Ludwig W , Peplies J , and Glöckner FO (2007). SILVA: a comprehensive online resource for quality checked and aligned ribosomal RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids Res 35 , 7188–7196. 10.1093/nar/gkm864.17947321
Ren X , Wen W , Fan X , Hou W , Su B , Cai P , Li J , Liu Y , Tang F , Zhang F , (2021). COVID-19 immune features revealed by a large-scale single-cell transcriptome atlas. Cell 184 , 1895–1913 e1819. 10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.053.33657410
Riva M , Källberg E , Björk P , Hancz D , Vogl T , Roth J , Ivars F , and Leanderson T (2012). Induction of nuclear factor-κB responses by the S100A9 protein is Toll-like receptor-4-dependent. Immunology 137 , 172–182. 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2012.03619.x.22804476
Sausset R , Petit MA , Gaboriau-Routhiau V , and De Paepe M (2020). New insights into intestinal phages. Mucosal Immunol 13 , 205–215. 10.1038/s41385-019-0250-5.31907364
Sgritta M , Dooling SW , Buffington SA , Momin EN , Francis MB , Britton RA , and Costa-Mattioli M (2019). Mechanisms Underlying Microbial-Mediated Changes in Social Behavior in Mouse Models of Autism Spectrum Disorder. Neuron 101 , 246–259 e246. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.11.018.30522820
Shen W , Le S , Li Y , and Hu F (2016). SeqKit: A Cross-Platform and Ultrafast Toolkit for FASTA/Q File Manipulation. PLoS One 11 , e0163962. 10.1371/journal.pone.0163962.27706213
Simard JC , Noël C , Tessier PA , and Girard D (2014). Human S100A9 potentiates IL-8 production in response to GM-CSF or fMLP via activation of a different set of transcription factors in neutrophils. FEBS Lett 588 , 2141–2146. 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.04.027.24796790
Swindell WR , Johnston A , Xing X , Little A , Robichaud P , Voorhees JJ , Fisher G , and Gudjonsson JE (2013). Robust shifts in S100a9 expression with aging: a novel mechanism for chronic inflammation. Sci Rep 3 , 1215. 10.1038/srep01215.23386971
Szybińska A , and Leśniak W (2017). P53 Dysfunction in Neurodegenerative Diseases - The Cause or Effect of Pathological Changes? Aging Dis 8 , 506–518. 10.14336/ad.2016.1120.28840063
Tanti GK , Srivastava R , Kalluri SR , Nowak C , and Hemmer B (2019). Isolation, Culture and Functional Characterization of Glia and Endothelial Cells From Adult Pig Brain. Front Cell Neurosci 13 , 333. 10.3389/fncel.2019.00333.31474831
Teng Y , Ren Y , Hu X , Mu J , Samykutty A , Zhuang X , Deng Z , Kumar A , Zhang L , Merchant ML , (2017). MVP-mediated exosomal sorting of miR-193a promotes colon cancer progression. Nature communications 8 , 14448. 10.1038/ncomms14448.
Vardevanyan PO , Antonyan AP , Parsadanyan MA , Davtyan HG , and Karapetyan AT (2003). The binding of ethidium bromide with DNA: interaction with single- and double-stranded structures. Exp Mol Med 35 , 527–533. 10.1038/emm.2003.68.14749530
Vogl T , Stratis A , Wixler V , Völler T , Thurainayagam S , Jorch SK , Zenker S , Dreiling A , Chakraborty D , Fröhling M , (2018). Autoinhibitory regulation of S100A8/S100A9 alarmin activity locally restricts sterile inflammation. J Clin Invest 128 , 1852–1866. 10.1172/jci89867.29611822
Vorhees CV , and Williams MT (2006). Morris water maze: procedures for assessing spatial and related forms of learning and memory. Nat Protoc 1 , 848–858. 10.1038/nprot.2006.116.17406317
Wang S , Song R , Wang Z , Jing Z , Wang S , and Ma J (2018). S100A8/A9 in Inflammation. Front Immunol 9 , 1298. 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01298.29942307
Wang X , Pinto-Duarte A , Behrens MM , Zhou X , and Sejnowski TJ (2015). Characterization of spatio-temporal epidural event-related potentials for mouse models of psychiatric disorders. Sci Rep 5 , 14964. 10.1038/srep14964.26459883
Weil MT , Schulz-Ëberlin G , Mukherjee C , Kuo-Elsner WP , Schäfer I , Müller C , and Simons M (2019). Isolation and Culture of Oligodendrocytes. Methods Mol Biol 1936 , 79–95. 10.1007/978-1-4939-9072-6_5.30820894
Xu G , Zhao J , Yu H , Wang C , Huang Y , Zhao Q , Zhou X , Li C , and Liu M (2022). Structural Insights into the Mechanism of High-Affinity Binding of Ochratoxin A by a DNA Aptamer. J Am Chem Soc. 10.1021/jacs.2c00478.
Zengeler KE , and Lukens JR (2021). Innate immunity at the crossroads of healthy brain maturation and neurodevelopmental disorders. Nat Rev Immunol 21 , 454–468. 10.1038/s41577-020-00487-7.33479477
Zuker M (2003). Mfold web server for nucleic acid folding and hybridization prediction. Nucleic Acids Res 31 , 3406–3415. 10.1093/nar/gkg595.12824337
Zuo T , Wong SH , Lam K , Lui R , Cheung K , Tang W , Ching JYL , Chan PKS , Chan MCW , Wu JCY , (2018). Bacteriophage transfer during faecal microbiota transplantation in Clostridium difficile infection is associated with treatment outcome. Gut 67 , 634–643. 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-313952.28539351
