LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

35307514
9631958
10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105695
NIHMS1844160
Article
Gut dysbiosis and age-related neurological diseases in females
Korf Janelle M. ab
Ganesh Bhanu P. a
McCullough Louise D. a*
a Department of Neurology, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin Street, Houston, TX 77370, USA
b University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 6767 Bertner Ave, Houston, TX 77030, USA
* Corresponding author. Louise.D.McCullough@uth.tmc.edu (L.D. McCullough).
28 10 2022
15 6 2022
18 3 2022
03 11 2022
168 105695105695
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Historically, females have been underrepresented in biological research. With increased interest in the gut microbiome and the gut-brain axis, it is important for researchers to pursue studies that consider sex as a biological variable. The composition of the gut microbiome is influenced by environmental factors, disease, diet, and varies with age and by sex. Detrimental changes in the gut microbiome, referred to as dysbiosis, is believed to influence the development and progression of age-related neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and stroke. Many are investigating the changes in microbial populations in order or to better understand the role of the gut immunity and the microbiome in neurodegenerative diseases, many of which the exact etiology remains elusive, and no cures exist. Others are working to find diagnostic markers for earlier detection, or to therapeutically modulate microbial populations using probiotics. However, while all these diseases present in reproductively senescent females, most studies only use male animals for their experimental design. Reproductively senescent females have been shown to have differences in disease progression, inflammatory responses, and microbiota composition, therefore, for research to be translational to affected populations it is necessary for appropriate models to be used. This review discusses factors that influence the gut microbiome and the gut brain axis in females, and highlights studies that have investigated the role of dysbiosis in age-related neurodegenerative disorders that have included females in their study design.

Gut-brain axis
Dysbiosis
Microbiome
Sex differences
Neurodegenerative
Age
Alzheimer’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
Huntington’s disease
Stroke

pmc1. Introduction

The gut microbiome consists of a diverse and dynamic ecosystem of bacteria, fungi, archaea, viruses, and helminths. Recently, a large number of studies investigating the role of the gut microbiome in pathologies ranging from cancer (Sepich-Poore et al., 2021), inflammatory bowel disease (Ni et al., 2017), mood disorders (Huang et al., 2019), and neurodegenerative diseases (Cryan et al., 2020) have been published. Most research has focused on the bacterial populations, largely due to insights provided by 16S rRNA sequencing. The bacteria found within the gut have been broadly categorized into 11 phyla. The majority of the bacteria (&gt;90%) consist of Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria while Fusobacteria and Vermcomicrobia phyla are present in low abundance (Eckburg et al., 2005; Hugon et al., 2015; Li et al., 2014). Though most of the bacteria have been sequenced and identified, researchers are still in the process of identifying and characterizing new bacterial strains that colonize the gut. The gut microbiota contains a wealth of organisms, some of which generate metabolites that humans cannot produce (Brial et al., 2018; Lavelle and Sokol, 2020). Importantly, characteristic shifts in population ratios at the phyla, genus, and species level between healthy subjects and diseased patients have inspired the pursuit of causative, rather than correlative, research to understand the role of microbes in causing or preventing various diseases. The gut microbiome is especially unique in that it is relatively accessible for modulation, making it an exciting potential therapeutic option for many different diseases. However, the diversity and complexity of the gut microbiome still exceeds our understanding. More studies investigating the impact of various bacterial phyla and species on health outcomes is needed, especially as these relate to factors such as age and sex.

2. The role of the gut microbiome

The role of microbes is multifaceted, and much of what we know has come from the study of “germ-free” animals. Germ-free animals are model organisms that are born and maintained in sterile environments. In the absence of microbial colonization, they can be compared to specific pathogen free (SPF) animals to determine how the microbiota and its secreted metabolites contribute to homeostatic function and development. Germ-free animals have abnormal immune development with alterations in immune cell populations and behavior (Erny et al., 2015; Erny and Prinz, 2020; Luck et al., 2020), also reviewed in (Kennedy et al., 2018). The gut is the largest immune organ in the body, and its epithelial cells, tight junctions, and mucosa serve as the main point of interaction between the host and the gut microbiota (Chassaing et al., 2016). The gut microbiota can stimulate T cells that aid in host defense against enteric pathogens involving local and systemic inflammation (Haghikia et al., 2015; Ivanov et al., 2008; Maeda et al., 2016; Tan et al., 2016). Diet derived long chain fatty acids interact with gut immune cells and decrease Prevotellaceae and Bacteroidetes populations, enhancing Th1 and Th17 cell responses and exacerbating inflammatory responses in murine experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE) (Haghikia et al., 2015).

Microbes produce unique metabolites that the host cannot. These metabolites have beneficial and detrimental effects in regulating the immune system and can influence development. A microbially derived metabolite that has garnered considerable interest is Trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO). TMAO increases in patients with atherosclerotic disease, recently reviewed in (Yang et al., 2019), and is elevated in male and female patients with Alzheimer’s disease (Vogt et al., 2018). Alternatively, selective microbial communities are known to produce beneficial products by fermentation. On that note, insoluble fiber, such as inulin, can be digested by gut bacteria to produce short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) such as acetate, butyrate, and valerate. SCFA promote regulatory T cell responses and ameliorate inflammation (Haghikia et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2020). Levels of SCFA butyrate in serum is greater in males than females, which may contribute to variations in Treg abundance (Vemuri et al., 2019). SCFA also influence healthy development in infants (Erny et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2020), and even rescue detrimental neurological effects found in offspring of obese mothers (L et al., 2021). The absence of the SCFA butyrate, due to disruption of bacterial populations or lack of insoluble fiber in diet, can have a causal role in diseases such as hypertension (Ganesh et al., 2018). The composition of species within a single population is the alpha diversity, and it describes the richness (number) and distribution (eveness). Beta diversity compares environmental variables and microbial composition differences between populations. Metrics for beta diversity include Bray-Curtis dissimilarity (compares differences in microbial abundances between two samples at the species level), Jaccard distance (compares the presence or absense of a species between two populations), and UniFrac (unweighted only compares sequence differences, and weighted applies the relative abundance of species with the sequence differences). Alterations and loss of biological diversity in the gut microbiome that are associated with detrimental outcomes are considered “dysbiotic changes.” The makeup and diversity of the biome changes in response to pathology, medications, the environment and most importantly diet (Jaggar et al., 2020).

3. Factors that influence the gut microbiome

The gut microbiome is first colonized at the time of birth and reflects the composition of the maternal biome (Nash et al., 2017). Over the first five years of life, the gut microbiome increases in number and diversity, then stabilizes with age (Cheng et al., 2015). Diet is a major modifiable factor that can result in the selection of various microbes that then flourish within the gut. In particular, the western diet, consisting of high fat, high sugar, low fiber foods have been shown to increase the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) producing Gram-negative bacteria (Bailey and Holscher, 2018; Cani et al., 2007). Women who are obese are more likely to have atherosclerotic disease, which is associated with proinflammatory states and gut dysbiosis (Zhai et al., 2019). Increased adipose tissue from obesity can result in an increase in systemic estrogen, which reduces LPS-induced inflammation (Blasco-Baque et al., 2012) and bacteria containing β-glucuronidase, an enzyme that deconjugates estrogens into their active forms, can contribute to an increase in systemic estrogen (Baker et al., 2017). Estrogen has a widespread influence on human physiology, effecting vascular function, inflammatory responses, development of multiple cancers, and also has demonstrated neuroprotective effects in stroke, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s disease (Deroo and Korach, 2006; Murphy, 2011). Gut microbiome richness and diversity in males and post-menopausal women is directly correlated with the amount of excreted estrogen in urine, and fecal β-glucuronidase levels are inversely related to excreted fecal estrogen levels (Fuhrman et al., 2014). In fact, some researchers refer to the gut microbiome as an “endocrine organ”, due to the productive and tightly integrated role it has with the endocrine system, which may variously influence the development, manifestation and progression of diseases in males and females (Clarke et al., 2014).

The gut microbiome diverges in males and females starting at puberty in humans (Yatsunenko et al., 2012) and in experimental mouse models (Steegenga et al., 2014). These differences are partially attributed to increased estrogens in females and increased androgens in males (Klein and Flanagan, 2016). Many diseases are sexually dimorphic, and a better understanding of alterations in the gut microbiome may reveal potential mechanisms for these differences (Mauvais-Jarvis et al., 2020). However, while most studies have observed sex differences in the gut microbiome, specific microbial population tend to vary widely in clinical populations and their attributed beneficial or detrimental consequences remain undefined (Kim et al., 2020). Two separate studies observed that men have higher levels of Bacteroidetes and Prevotella than women (Dominianni et al., 2015; Mueller et al., 2006). In contrast, a different study observed a significant decrease in the Bacteroides genus (a member of the Bacteroidetes phylum) in males compared to females (Haro et al., 2016). Differences in geographic distribution, diet, genetics, environment, and health disparities make characterizing universal differences in the gut microbiome based on sex extremely difficult in clinical populations (Kim et al., 2020).

In preclinical studies, where variables such as diet and environment can be controlled, a comparison of males and females from 89 inbred mouse strains demonstrated significant sex differences in the gut microbiome across all strains (Org et al., 2016). Notably, the specific changes in microbial composition differences depended on strain, with no consistent sex dependent trends, suggesting that factors beyond gonadal hormones or sex chromosomes, such as host genetics, influence microbiome composition. To directly assess the role of sex hormones, males and females from three different mouse strains underwent gonadectomy. All strains demonstrated sex differences compared to shams, with sham females presenting with a greater abundance of Akkermansia. Interestingly, administration of testosterone in males prevented the gonadectomy associated increase in the family Ruminococcacea in all strains. Together, these results reveal that both host genotype and the presence of sex hormones contribute to sex differences in the gut microbiome (Org et al., 2016). Work from our lab has also shown significant changes in acyclic females compared to young females (unpublished). To further investigate the interaction between estrogens and the gut microbiome, researchers modulated the gut microbiome in rats using letrozole induced polycystic ovarian syndrome (Guo et al., 2016). Rats treated with fecal matter transplants FMT from healthy females or with Lactobacillus probiotics improved their estrus regularity, decreased androgen biosynthesis, and normalized ovarian morphologies. Additionally, increased Lactobacilli correlated with increased estradiol and estrone levels (Guo et al., 2016).

Estrogen levels in post-menopausal women are noted to have a different microbiome composition, specifically an increase in the class Clostridia, including the order Clostridiales and the family Ruminococcaceae and a decrease in the genus Bacteroides (Fuhrman et al., 2014). Notably, estrogen levels in males and postmenopausal females correlate with richness and diversity of the microbiome (Vemuri et al., 2019), further indicating that estrogen, regardless of the host sex, influences the gut microbiome. Estrogen levels increase in the luteal phase and decrease in the follicular phase of the menstrual/estrus cycle, and is at its highest levels during pregnancy. Levels decrease at menopause when estrogen production by the ovaries cease (Fig. 1). Interestingly, there are no reported differences in the gut microbiome during the estrus cycle in female mice (Wallace et al., 2018), and information on alterations in the gut microbiome throughout the human menstrual cycle is sparse. One study found no significant changes in beta diversity between the luteal and follicular phase of the menstrual cycle for 9 women, but they did observe a relative increase in diversity when compared to women taking combined hormonal contraceptives (decreasing estradiol) (Mihajlovic et al., 2021). Premenopausal women have rapidly fluctuating estrogen levels, and no correlation between excreted estrogen levels and gut microbiome diversity or β-glucuronidase levels has been observed (Fuhrman et al., 2014). During pregnancy there is an overall increase in diversity and in Proteobactena and Actinobactena, (Koren et al., 2012). However, it is not clear if these changes are due to a direct effect of hormones, or secondary to indirect effects on the immune system (Tetel et al., 2018). Studies investigating changes in the gut microbiome through the female lifespan are presented in Table 1. Moreover, rather than defining specific populations of microbes present in females, it is advantageous to understand how the host’s immune system interacts with the gut microbiome in females compared to males.

Hormonal effects and sex chromosomal differences (XX vs. XY) contribute to differences in immunity (Ahnstedt and McCullough, 2019). This is due to differential expression of two X chromosomes in females, in addition to influences of estrogen on immune cell behavior and activation of estrogen receptors and estrogen dependent transcription factors (Klein and Flanagan, 2016). Females have increased levels of peripheral T cell proliferation and activation, with more CD4 T cells and IL-1β and Th17 than males (Sankaran-Walters et al., 2013). To elucidate the role of sex chromosomes, the Four Core Genotype model was developed by deleting the Sry gene, the mammalian sex determining gene, from the Y chromosome. This model generates XX and XY mice that each have either testes (with Sry, XXM, or XYM) or ovaries (without Sry, XXF, or XYF). This model revealed that the sex chromosomes contribute to increase in infarct size and innate immune response in XXF and XXM aged mice after stroke (McCullough et al., 2016). In addition, the presence of two X chromosomes is linked to increased adiposity and dyslipidemia in mouse models and in XXY men (Zore et al., 2018). The influence of the microbiome on obesity and diabetes has been well documented (Napolitano and Covasa, 2020), but the contribution of sex chromosomes to biome composition and diversity has been less studied. As females age and estrogen levels decrease during reproductive senescence, there is a correlative functional decline in immune function, characterized by a persistent increase in proinflammatory factors (Castelo-Branco and Soveral, 2014). Collectively, accounting for chromosomal and hormonal effects in females is challenging, and often studies only use males in their studies. Furthermore, aging alters the composition of the microbiome accompanied by a decrease in the protective mucosal later of the gut, loss of enteric neurons, and increased gut permeability (Crapser et al., 2016; Jasarevic et al., 2016). Fundamental alterations in the gut microbiome and sex differences in immune system regulation may contribute to difference in disease susceptibility, progression, response to therapy, and development.

4. The gut brain axis

A notable contribution of the gut microbiome is in the bi-directional communication between the gut and the central nervous system, often referred to as the gut-brain axis. The gut microbiota influences neurological health, and likewise, dysbiotic changes to the gut microbiome occur after neurological injury in what is referred to as the gut-brain axis (Lee et al., 2020; Spychala et al., 2018). Systemic inflammation which weakens gut integrity (Ahnstedt et al., 2020; Blasco et al., 2020), vagus nerve stimulation effecting the parasympathetic system, bacterial translocation, and metabolite production are mechanisms that contribute to dysbiotic changes that exacerbate brain pathology (Fried et al., 2021; Morais et al., 2020) depicted in Fig. 2.

Conversely, interventions at the level of the gut microbiome in pre-clinical models can improve mortality and morbidity after neurological injury (Lee et al., 2020; Spychala et al., 2018). One method of intervention is administration of a probiotic, or a specific bacterial strain demonstrated to have beneficial effects on the host. Most studies have implicated certain bacterial species, or even phyla as being pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory. This is an oversimplification, made apparent in studies testing the effects of specific probiotics in disease outcomes. For example, the genus Lactobacillus is generally considered to be beneficial and gives rise to numerous probiotics (Reid, 1999). However, this genus is consistently increased in patients with Parkinson’s disease and is correlated with worsening cognition and motor symptoms (Hasuike et al., 2020; Hopfner et al., 2017; Mihaila et al., 2018; Petrov et al., 2017). Akkermansia muciniphila is often categorized as a commensal member of the gut microbiome that might show beneficial effect in obese patients (Zou and Chen, 2020). However, it also can degrade mucin, an important host defense mechanism to prevent bacterial translocation (Ganesh et al., 2013) and maintenance of gut barrier integrity and is increased in Alzheimer’s patients (Nagpal et al., 2019; Syeda et al., 2018), Parkinson’s disease (Hertel et al., 2019; Hill-Burns et al., 2017) in both cases, correlating disease progression and dysbiosis.

One of the most direct ways to alter the gut microbiome is through fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), a process involving the delivery of stool from a healthy donor to a dysbiotic recipient (Kim and Gluck, 2019). This has successfully been used clinically to treat cases of recurrent Clostridium difficile infections. Recently, investigators are exploring the potential of this technique to treat a variety of other disorders, including but not limited to ulcerative colitis, mood disorders, autoimmune diseases, and neurological disorders (Settanni et al., 2021; Vendrik et al., 2020; Vrieze et al., 2012). FMT is a more complex intervention compared to probiotic supplementation, in that it also transfers viruses, fungi, metabolites, and genetic material. While serving as a comprehensive approach to alter the gut microbiome, FMTs can potentially expose the recipient to pathogens undetectable with 16S screening (Bibbò et al., 2020). Furthermore, its diverse composition makes identifying and developing biome targeted therapeutics difficult. This highlights the utility of in vitro studies to investigate purified FMT components to develop a safer, synthetic FMT alternative.

Probiotics, cultures of beneficial bacteria, have also been proven to be beneficial therapeutics in specific situations (Reid, 1999); however, they cannot be universally applied, as they could potentially add to dysbiotic states. Additionally, sex is another factor to consider in the administration of probiotics (Vemuri et al., 2019). A probiotic cocktail of multiple Lactobacillus strains given to mice lowered IL-6, IgG2a and IgA, and increased IL-10 in female and castrated males, but there were no anti-inflammatory changes in gonadally intact males (Mu et al., 2017). Probiotic intervention is an exciting potential therapy for many conditions. However, more work must be done to understand dysbiotic changes in various disease states and in understanding if, and how, differential responses occur in male and female recipients before any meaningful contributions can be made.

5. Age related neurodegenerative disorders

Notable age-related neurodegenerative disorders include dementia (predominantly Alzheimer’s, followed by vascular and Lewy body dementia), Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease (Mauvais-Jarvis et al., 2020). Stroke is also increasingly common with aging and leads to both acute and chronic disability (Doyle and Buckwalter, 2020). While diverse in their etiology, all these pathologies characteristically affect older individuals. All have been associated with gut dysbiosis (Cryan et al., 2020). Most neurodegenerative disorders occur after reproductive senescence in females, suggesting that female gonadal hormones, such as estrogen, may only play a small role in how the gut microbiota shape sex differences in neurodegenerative diseases. Reproductively senescence females have a microbiota and immunological behavior that is distinct from males and young females (Klein and Flanagan, 2016) and must be treated as a biological variable in study designs.

Historically, clinical research was exclusively performed using males and neglected to account for biological variability inherent to males and females skewed clinical decision making and resulted in increased health risks to women (Mauvais-Jarvis et al., 2020). Despite growing evidence defining sex differences, males are disproportionally overrepresented in gut microbiota studies. Nevertheless, several studies have either directly investigated sex differences, or included both sexes in their study design for investigating the role of the gut microbiome in neurodegenerative diseases. These studies are highlighted below (Tables 2-5).

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the most common type of neurodegenerative disease, is more common in women than in men, and is the 6th most common cause of death in the U.S (Alzheimers Dement, 2020). The exact etiology of AD is unknown; however, genetic factors that affect amyloid precursor protein (APP), Presilin-1, 2, and APOε4 have been associated with familial and early onset forms of AD (Jayadev et al., 2010). Diagnosis of AD is primarily clinical, and the disease is characterized by a steady decrease in cognitive function (Nelson et al., 2012). Increased phosphorylated-tau protein and decreased β-amyloid proteins (Aβ1–42) in the cerebrospinal fluid of AD patients are useful biomarkers. Brains of AD patients have cerebral atrophy in the hippocampus, parahippocampus, axonal degeneration, and neuronal loss, notably in cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert. Increasing “senile plaques”, a term used to describe the extracellular deposition of β-amyloid protein, in the cortex and neurofibrillary tangles from the intracellular accumulation of tau protein are hallmarks of the disease. Cerebral amyloid can also deposit in the media and adventitia of small and medium vessels in the brain and leptomeninges, increasing the risk of hemorrhage and vascular disease (Alzheimers Dement, 2020).

Several murine models are used to model AD in the laboratory. Male and female mice differ in both biome composition throughout disease progression and in amyloid deposition during aging, with females having a higher Aβ burden (Carranza-Naval et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2003). These differences are strain dependent, with FAD mice showing sex differences in microbiota α-diversity (Maldonado Weng et al., 2019; Parikh et al., 2020). Female APPps1 mice had a decreased Ruminococcaceae which correlated with cognitive deficits, and increased butyrate levels in females positively associated with better working- and object recognition-memory compared to males (Cuervo-Zanatta et al., 2021). Gut dysbiosis, characterized by changes in Lactobacillus and Ruminococcus, precedes accumulation of Aβ in male and female Tg2576 mice (Honarpisheh et al., 2020). Male and female germ-free APPps1 mice both demonstrated an increase in plaque formation and decreased cognitive function after gut colonization with SPF APPps1 mice (Colombo et al., 2021), a finding that was further supported by decreasing plaque formation by depleting the gut microbiome with long term antibiotic treatment in male and female APPSWE/PS1ΔE9 mice (Minter et al., 2016). Human gut microbiome studies have attempted to control for sex differences by balancing male and female patients to explore the role of the gut microbiota and gut integrity in the development of AD, particularly in the formation of senile plaques (see Table 2a). Additionally, researchers are exploring potential biological markers that may serve as a way to diagnose AD early, and while promising results have been found (Table 2b) more work is required to validate them. A summary of microbiome-based treatments that are being explored in an effort to develop disease modifying interventions are summarized in Table 2c. The complex interactions between the host and the microbiome also can contribute to disease phenotype, as highlighted in Table 2d.

Parkinson’s Disease (PD) involves the progressive depletion of dopaminergic neurons within the basal ganglia, specifically in the substantia nigra. The age of onset is typically 60 years, and most cases are idiopathic, with only 10–15% of cases attributed to genetic risk factors (mutations in α-synuclein, glucocerebrosidase, LRRK2, and PARK2) (Kalia and Lang, 2015; Pringsheim et al., 2014). Other risk factors for PD include environmental exposures, diet/metabolic factors (low levels of vitamin D, high iron intake, and obesity), and/or a history of traumatic brain injury. Early symptoms present as constipation, anosmia, sleep disturbance, and mood disorders such as depression, apathy, and anxiety. Eventually, this progresses to PD’s hallmark motor symptoms of bradykinesia, resting tremor, rigidity, and postural instability (Kalia and Lang, 2015). Variations in PD include multiple system atrophy, which is characterized by degermation of the substantia nigra, striatum, cerebellum, inferior olivary nuclei, and/or ventromedial column of the spinal cord. Onset is ~60 years and is divided into a Parkinson form (MSA-P) and the olivopontocerebellar (MSA-C) variant, both of which have unknown etiology (Deutschländer et al., 2018). Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is another variant of PD in which atrophy of structures in the midbrain-diencephalic junction and cerebellum, as well as mid-cortical atrophy. The age of onset is also 60–80 years old. However, PSP progresses more rapidly than the other PD variants, and is often fatal within 5–10 years of onset (Deutschländer et al., 2018).

PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disease and has a 1.4–3.7 times higher incidence in males than females (Abraham et al., 2019; Cerri et al., 2019). The exact cause of the difference in incidence is not fully understood; however, there is evidence that estrogen has neuroprotective activity on dopaminergic neurons (Lee et al., 2019). The importance of estrogen in the development of PD is further supported by the increased risk of PD in females who have undergone oophorectomies before menopause (Canonico et al., 2021; Cereda et al., 2013; Rocca et al., 2008). As previously discussed, the gut microbiome can influence estrogen levels through mechanism such as β-glucuronidase levels (Baker et al., 2017). However, estrogen levels are just one of the many potential mechanisms for how the gut microbiome can influence PD development.

Gut dysbiosis promotes α-synuclein mediated motor dysfunction and enhances PD progression (Sampson et al., 2016). One study by Sampson et al. found that gut bacteria E. coli can produce an amyloid protein called “curli” which enhances α-synuclein pathologic changes and behavior abnormalities in mice. They determined that microbiota derived amyloid has a causative role in PD development, as monocolonization by curli producing bacteria exacerbated neurological injury which could then be alleviated with administration of a gut specific amyloid inhibitor (Sampson et al., 2020). Most clinical studies control for sex and do not pursue investigations on sex differences. There are extensive human clinical studies characterizing gut microbiome changes using 16S rRNA sequencing and its correlation with clinical presentation of motor symptoms(Table 3a). Two consistent trends in PD dysbiosis were a decrease in Lachnospiraceae and increased Lactobacillaceae (Barichella et al., 2019; Hasuike et al., 2020; Hill-Burns et al., 2017; Hopfner et al., 2017; Mihaila et al., 2018; Petrov et al., 2017; Pietrucci et al., 2019). Studies have also examined Multiple System Atrophy (MSA) and followed these patients longitudinally to assess stability/progression over time and associated pharmacological effects on the biome. Additionally, studies have investigated the role of microbial derived metabolites, such as reduced levels of SCFAs and SCFA producers (Hill-Burns et al., 2017; Tan et al., 2021), as well as the influence of the gut microbiome on other metabolic processes, such a bile acids (Li et al., 2021) and tryptophan metabolism (Cassani et al., 2015), in Parkinson’s patients (Table 3b). Many of these studies have been used as the foundation of interventions at the level of the gut microbiome, by means of probiotics, prebiotics, and fecal matter transplants (Table 3c). The microbiome has been used as a potential source for biomarkers for PD that can been screened for early detection (Table 3d). Finally, the role of gut inflammation and gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms such as constipation as correlating with PD development and disease severity in both males and females (Table 3e). Unfortunately, most murine studies resulting from Pubmed searches were only performed in male mice, and so were excluded from this review. Of the animal models used to study PD, rhesus monkeys treated with MPTP are the gold standard. One study used a cohort of 5 rhesus monkeys and found males were more susceptible to PD development, and had an increased ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (Joers et al., 2020). While these results are from a small cohort, it highlights potential sex-based variations that are under investigated in human populations.

Huntington’s Disease (HD) is a genetic neurodegenerative disease, resulting from CAG repeats in the Huntingtin gene on chromosome 4. Age of onset is typically ~40 years; however, due to genetic anticipation, it presents earlier in each successive generation (Walker, 2007). Less research on the microbiome is done in HD, given its heritable mechanism; however, in recent years studies have investigated the role that the gut microbiome may play in the progression of the disease. While Huntington’s disease primarily manifests with brain pathology, HD is a systemic disease and mutant Huntingtin is expressed throughout the body, including the gut. Dysbiotic changes, characterized by an increase in diversity in males only (Kong et al., 2020; Wasser et al., 2020) as well as microbial derived metabolite changes both correlate with HD progression (Rosas et al., 2015). This research is new, and more is needed as gut microbiota studies in HD serve to both expand our understanding of host-microbiome interactions and may also provide more insights into understanding early and systemic presentations of HD (Table 4).

Stroke is the 5th cause of death in the United States (Virani et al., 2020). Unlike the aforementioned diseases, there are many known modifiable risk factors for stroke prevention. Risk factors such as obesity and atherosclerotic disease also are strongly influenced by the gut microbiome in women (Haro et al., 2016). Female reproductive senescence is associated with poorer outcomes after stroke when compared to pre-menopausal women and in animal models (Haast et al., 2012; Manwani et al., 2013; Park et al., 2020). The mechanism for these differences in recovery are not fully understood; however, the gut microbiome may contribute. Reproductively senescent female Sprague-Dawley rats showed baseline elevation in Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F:B), decreased α-diversity, and significant shifts in β-diversity which worsened after stroke as compared to younger female adult rats (Park et al., 2020). This study also performed a fecal matter transplant between ovariectomized females, with and without estrogen supplementation, and intact females. Adult and middle-aged, estrogen-treated, ovariectomized (OVX + E) females had increased Prevotella and Lactobacillus, with decreased SFCA and increased LPS levels. This indicates that the gut biome and microbial metabolites are affected by estrogen. Most importantly, when the middle aged, reproductively senescent rat’s dysbiotic biome was transplanted by an adult OVX + E female, there was a significant improvement in infarct volume and behavioral outcomes. The importance of examining the role of the biome is further supported by increased mortality after stroke in female mice with antibiotic depleted microbiome (Winek et al., 2016); however this study was only conducted in females, and so it cannot be determined if this was a sex specific effect. Studies evaluating interventions at the level of the gut microbiome for stroke are detailed in Table 5a. Gut dysbiosis after stroke is often investigated in parallel to gut functional changes (Table 5b) and worsening gut function is useful in determining the role of gut inflammation in gut microbiota-brain communications (Ahnstedt et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019; Roth et al., 2020; Stanley et al., 2016). Once a stroke has occurred, there is an increase in gut permeability and decreased mucin production (Crapser et al., 2016). Furthermore, gut and microbiome disruptions lead to changes in microbiota diversity and metabolite production (Table 5c). Microbially derived TMAO negatively impacts the outcomes of atherosclerotic diseases, such as stroke (Jones et al., 2020a). Collectively the baseline microbiome diversity, immunity, and gut function in reproductively senescent females results in increased mortality and morbidity after stroke when compared to non-senescent females. In addition to susceptibility and incidence, there are sex differences in post stroke recovery, with aged males fairing worse than aged females as measured by mortality and hemorrhagic conversion two weeks after an induced stroke (Ahnstedt et al., 2020). These changes were associated with more persistent changes in gut integrity, microbiome composition, and inflammation in males. However, studies specifically investigating sex differences in clinical populations have not yet included the examination of human gut microbiome. Therefore, more work should be done to determine if female dysbiosis influences stoke incidence and outcomes in humans.

5.1. Future directions

The gut microbiome is a major factor in both the development and progression of neurological diseases, and its effects and interactions with the immune system differs in a sex specific manner. The potential to develop new treatments for these age-related neurological disorders, many of which have no cure, by targeting the microbiome is an area of active investigation. While this literature review focused primarily on post-menopausal females, the impact of the gut microbiome begins long before senescence. The gut microbiome also has effects that are transmitted from mother to fetus and has the ability to impart transgenerational effects (Gohir et al., 2014). Understanding the effects of the gut microbiome in the mother can lead to a better appreciation of the risk for neurological disability and stroke predisposition in offspring. By improving our awareness of the effects of the gut microbiome in females, we may better predict, prevent, and treat various neurodegenerative diseases in aged women, as well as in young women who will give rise to the next generation.

Acknowledgements

Figures created in Biorender.com

Funding

This work was supported by the NIH/National Institute on Aging (NIA) and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS): NIH/NIA 1-RF1-AG058463-01 (Dynamic Non-Neuronal Interactions between the Gut Microbiota and the Brain in Aging and CAA to LDM), NIH/NINDS 5-R01-NS103592-02 (Detrimental Effects of Age Related Dysbiosis to LDM), NIH/NINDS R21-NS114768-01A1 (Mast Cell Signaling Connects the Brain and the Gut Post-Stroke to BPG), NIH/NIA 1-R01-AG070934-01 (Link between early gut dysfunction and amyloid beta aggregation in Alzheimer’s Disease related dementia to BPG), and NIH/NINDS 5-R01-NS094543-04 (Reversing Age Related Inflammation to LDM).

Abbreviations:

AD Alzheimer’s disease

EAE Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis

PD Parkinson’s disease

HD Huntington’s disease

MCI Stroke, Mild cognitive impairment

SPF Specific Pathogen Free

SCFA Short chain fatty acids

TMAO Trimethylamine N-oxide

APP Amyloid precursor protein

MSA Multiple System Atrophy

PSP Progressive supranuclear palsy

Fig. 1. Graphical depiction of change in estradiol levels, gut integrity and biome over the lifespan on females.

Fig. 2. Graphical depiction of the microbiota-gut-brain axis in the context of neurodegenerative diseases.

Table 1 Gut microbiome studies throughout the female lifespan.

Pre-pubertal	Pre-menopausal	Post-Menopausal	
Menstruation	Pregnancy	
Microbiota changes at puberty in mice (Steegenga et al., 2014)	Estrus cycle show no biome changes in changes in mice (Wallace et al., 2018)	Alterations during pregnancy in humans (Koren et al., 2012)	Changes in microbiota diversity in postmenopausal women (Fuhrman et al., 2014)	
Sex differences and microbiota changes at puberty in humans (Yuan et al., 2020)	Follicular and luteal phase microbiota composition, and hormonal contraceptive effects in humans (Mihajlovic et al., 2021)	Microbiota changes in preeclampsia and abnormal placenta growth in humans (Huang et al., 2021)		
Pediatric gut microbiome (Hollister et al., 2015)	Irregular estrus cycle and gut microbiota changes in rats (Guo et al., 2016)			

Table 2a Literature review of Alzheimer’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key effect	Proposed mechanism	Bacteria	Model	Sex	References	
Observational Gut Microbiome Alterations	
APOE-associated differences present in male/female EFAD mice Sex differences in E3FAD and E4FAD		↑Prevotella and Ruminococcus in Female E4FAD vs Female E3FAD ↑Sutterella in Male E4FAD vs Male E3FAD	E3FAD and E4FAD mice	F/M	(Maldonado Weng et al., 2019)	
α-diversity ↔ w/APOE, 5xFAD status and sex.β -diversity associated with APOE genotype, not sex or 5xFAD status	APOE genotype		FAD mice	F/M	(Parikh et al., 2020)	
Direct impact on brain amyloid-β pathology in males, but not in females	↓ Butyrate in Female	↓Ruminococcaceae in Female	APPPS1 mice	M/F	(Cuervo-Zanatta et al., 2021)	
 Cognitive decline(M &gt; F), working and object recognition memory Cognitive advantage of females was lost in APPPS1						
↓Density of small plaques	Bacterial colonization ↑ plaque formation SCFA ↑ plaque formation	Germ-free	Germ-free APPPS1 mice	F/M	(Colombo et al., 2021)	
↑Amyloid deposition
 ↓Cognitive function	MAPK pathway	↑Bacteroides acidifaciens, ↑SCFA producers	APPswe/PS1ΔE9 (PAP) mice	F	(Li et al., 2020)	
Correlation with disease progression	Divergence of biome began at 6 months	↔Bacteroidetes, ↑Proteobacteria (sutterella) (Betaproteobacteria), Erysipeotrichaceae family	APP/PSS1 (TG) and C57BL/6 mice	F	(Bäuerl et al., 2018)	
APOE genotype has specific gut microbiome profiles in both humans and APOE-TR mice.		↑Prevotellaceae, Ruminococcaceae and several butyrate-producing genera w/APOE genotypes	Human, APOE-targeted replacement (TR) mice	F/M	(Tran et al., 2019)	
↓Microbial diversity in AD		↓Firmicutes, ↑Bacteroidetes, and ↓Bifidobacterium in AD	25 AD, 25 Control	F/M	(Vogt et al., 2017)	
↑TMAO in CSF of individuals with MCI and AD dementia	CSF TMAO are associated with CSF biomarkers of AD pathology and neuronal degeneration	Gut microbiota-derived metabolite TMAO	40 AD 35 MCI 335 cognitively-unimpaired individuals	F/M	(Vogt et al., 2018)	
↑Peripheral inflammatory state
 ↑Brain amyloidosis
 ↑Cognitive impairment		↑Escherichia/Shigella, ↓ Eubacterium rectale	CI with and with no brain amyloidosis (n = 33, Amy−) (n = 40, Amy+) 10 controls	F/M	(Cattaneo et al., 2017)	
↓Butyrate synthesizers
 ↑Proinflammatory taxa in AD	P-glycoprotein pathway	↑Bacteroides, Alistipes, Odoribacter, Barnesiella ↓Lachnoclostridium in AD ↑Odoribacter,Barnesiella↓Eubacterium, Roseburia Lachnoclostridium, and Collinsella in other dementia types	Human fecal prospective cohort study, T84 intestinal epithelial cells	F/M	(Haran et al., 2019)	
	Aluminum sulfate significantly induces the generation of BF-LPS	Bacteroides fragilis generates pro-inflammatory glycolipid lipopolysaccharide (BF-LPS)	B. fragilis (B. fragilis; ATCC 23745	–	(Alexandrov et al., 2020)	

Table 2b Literature review of Alzheimer’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key effect	Proposed mechanism	Bacteria	Model	Sex	References	
Therapeutics	
Antibiotics ↓Aβ plaque deposition, attenuated plaque-localized glial reactivity, and significantly altered microglial morphology	↑ Soluble Aβ	Prolonged shifts in gut microbial composition and diversity induced by long-term broad-spectrum combinatorial antibiotic treatment	APPSWE/PS1ΔE9 mice	F/M	(Minter et al., 2016)	
Brain pathology ↑ w/ gut inflammation/leakiness

 Probiotics ↓intestinal inflammation/ leakiness, ↔ amyloid-β, cytokine, or gliosis in the brain.	VSL#3* Altered levels of bile acids and prostaglandins in the serum and brain		AppNL-G-F mice	F	(Kaur et al., 2020)	
Lactobacillus sakei Probio 65 and Lactobacillus paracasei 0291 alleviated eye neurodegeneration	Probiotic treatment**	↓ Wolbachia ↑ Stenotrophomonas, Acetobacter	GMR-OreR (Control) GMR-Aβ42 Drosophila	F/M	(Liu et al., 2020)	
↓Cognitive decline	Long-term calorie restriction	↓ Bacteroides	Tg2576 mice	F	(Cox et al., 2019)	
↓ Aβ aggregates, tau hyperphosphorylation, ↓MDA levels, astrocyte and microglial activation, PSD-95, synaptophysin, GluR1 and ARC protein levels, and ↑levels of pGSK-3. ↑ cognition	Fed BF*** for 7 months	↑Prevotella copri, Lactobacillus ruminis, Streptococcus anginosus, Actinobacillus parahaemolyticus, and Haemophilus parainfluenzae vs WT. BF ↓these abundances and ↑Bacteroides uniformis, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Akkermansia miciniphila	3xTg-AD (TG) mice	F	(Syeda et al., 2018)	
MMKD**** modulates the gut microbiome and metabolites in association with improved AD biomarkers in CSF.

 Specific gut microbial signatures may depict the mild cognitive impairment	MMKD and AHAD**** intervention for 6-weeks	↑ Enterobacteriaceae, Akkermansia, Slackia, Christensenellaceae and Erysipelotriaceae ↓Bifidobacterium and Lachnobacterium in MMKD, ↑Mollicutes with AHAD	11 MCI
6 Control	F/M	(Nagpal et al., 2019)	
No significant changes		F. prausnitzii	20 AD outpatients	F/M	(Leblhuber et al., 2018)	
* = f8 strains of lactic acid-producing bacteria: L. plantarum, Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. Bulgaricus, L. paracasei, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium longum, B. infantis, and Streptococcus salivarius subsp. Thermophilus.

** = seven different LAB strains (L. paracasei 0291, Lactobacillus helveticus 1515, Lactobacillus reuteri CDV, L. reuteri 8513d, Lactobacillus fermentum 8312, Lactobacillus casei Y, L. sakei Probio65).

*** = a combination of dried nopal, soy, chia oil, and turmeric.

**** = MMKD (Mediterranean-style ketogenic diet) and AHAD (American Heart Association Diet).

Table 2c Literature review of Alzheimer’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key effect	Proposed
mechanism	Bacteria	Model	Sex	References	
Diagnostic Markers	
Actinobacteria concentrations		↓Relative abundances of Actinetobarteria and TM7 in 3xTg-AD	3xTg-AD mice	F	(Bello-Medina et al., 2021)	
miRNAs are regulators in bacterial pathways relevant to AD or PD.	miRNAs	Ruminococcaceae	Human meta-analysis	F/M	(Hewel et al., 2019)	
Serum-based bile acid metabolites			1562 AD, meta-analysis	F/M	(Nho et al., 2019)	
↑ White matter hyperintensity and cortical and hippocampal atrophy		↑Bacteroides associated with MCI in patients without dementia	82 patients, cross sectional	F/M	(Saji et al., 2019)	
Microbiome associated w/ AD compared with pre-onset stage amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) and healthy subjects.
 Correlation between the severity scores of AD and the abundance of altered microbes		↓ Firmicutes ↑ Proteobacteria in AD ↑Gammaproteobacteria Enterobacteriales, Enterobacteriaceae in aMCI and AD	33 AD
32 aMCI
32 controls	F/M	(Liu et al., 2019)	

Table 2d Literature review of Alzheimer’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key effect	Proposed
mechanism	Bacteria	Model	Sex	References	
Gut health and contributing factors	
↓Serum primary BA (cholic acid CA) and ↑ secondary BA, deoxycholic acid (DCA)
 ↑Ratio of DCA:CA, which reflects 7α-dehydroxylation of CA by gut bacteria, strongly associated with ↓cognition	Bile acid levels		370 control, 284 early MCI, 505 late MCI, 305 AD	F/M	(MahmoudianDehkordi et al., 2019)	
Gut inflammation ↑ Aβ deposition in the intestine ↑ IL-9, VEGF and IP-10.	Gut dysfunction	↓Ruminiclostridium (early) ↑ Lactobacillus (late)	Tg2576 mice	F/M	(Honarpisheh et al., 2020)	
↓Butyrate and IL-10
 Endothelial dysfunction ↑ with pro-inflammatory cytokines, acetate and valerate and ↓ with butyrate and IL10 levels	Endothelial dysfunction		89 AD patients, PET and blood collection	F/M	(Marizzoni et al., 2020)	
AD patients had higher CLEC-2 and zonulin levels compared with MCI patients. In addition, CLEC-2 levels ↑ w/ zonulin levels ↑ CLEC-2 and zonulin ↓ w/ (MMSE) score.	CLEC-2 and zonulin levels		110 AD, 110 MCI, 110 control	F/M	(Wang et al., 2020)	
IBS ↑risk of dementia in ≥50 years old.	Inflammatory bowel		IBS patients	F/M	(Chen et al., 2016)	

Table 3a Literature review of Parkinson’s Disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key findings	Study type	Model	Sex	References	
Observational Gut-Microbiome Alterations	
MPTP* administration has a greater effect in males than females with ↓ Firmicutes, ↓Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio, and ↑ Verrucomicrobia		5 rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta, 5–7 yrs. of age, 3 females, 2 males)	F/M	(Joers et al., 2020)	
↑ opportunistic** oral pathogens were detected in males, both with and without PD. ↔nasal microbiota PD patients		PD patients (oral: n = 72, nasal: n = 69) control (oral: n = 76, nasal: n = 67)	F/M	(Pereira et al., 2017)	
↓Lachnospiraceae family in PD ↓Prevotellaceae ↑Verrucomicrobia, Lactobacillaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae in MSA ↓Lachnospiraceae, Streptococcaceae,and ↑Verrucomicrobia, Christensenellaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae in PSP	Observational	PD (n = 193, 39 drug naïve) PSP (n = 22), MSA (n = 22), HC (n = 113)	F/M	(Barichella et al., 2019)	
↓ Clostridium coccoides, C. leptum, and Bacteroides fragilis ↑ Lactobacillus ↓ antiparkinsonian drug dosage, serum TG and bilirubin levels in Small intestinal overgrowth (SIBO+) patients ↔caloric intake	Prospective investigation	39 PD 19 SIBO+, 16 SIBO−, 4 equivocal	F/M	(Hasuike et al., 2020)	
Differentially abundant gut microbes (Akkermansia) and no differences in nasal microbiota in PD 80% of differential gut microbes in PD versus healthy controls showed similar trends in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (Anaerotruncus and several Bacteroides spp., and correlated with nonmotor symptoms)		Stool and nasal wash from 76 PD, 21 idiopathic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder patients, 78 controls	F/M	(Heintz-Buschart et al., 2018)	
↑ Lactobacillaceae, Barnesiellaceae and Enterococcacea with PD		29 PD, 29 age-matched controls	F/M	(Hopfher et al., 2017)	
Different abundances of Lactobacillus, Gordonibacter, Phascolarctobacterium, and Haemophilus in feces and of Leucobacter, and Bacteroides in blood between MSA patients and healthy controls (HC). ↓ Phascolarctobacterium, Ruminococcus in MSA-P than those in MSA-C Blastococcus, Bacillus, and Acinetobacter in blood were different between MSA subtypes. The differential genera were associated with disease duration, anxiety, and autonomic dysfunction		40 MSA patients (23 MSA-P, 17 MSA-C) and spouses (HC)	F/M	(Du et al., 2019)	
↑Akkermansia muciniphila and Bilophila wadsworthia drive PD-specific patterns in microbial-host sulfur co-metabolism that may contribute to PD severity	Longitudinal de novo Parkinson’s disease (DeNoPa)	PD and healthy controls	F/M	(Hertel et al., 2019)	
↑Akkermansia, ↓ Megamonas, Bifidobacterium, Blautia, and Aggregatibacter in MSA		15 MSA 15 controls	F/M	(Wan et al., 2019)	
↓ Tenericutes, Euryarchaeota, Firmicutes ↓Lachnospiraceae in PD ↑ Rikenellaceae, Deferribacteraceae ↓Phytobacterium in PD for more than five years. ↔ Ruminococcaceae ↔α- and β-diversity not significantly different between early and late PD onset		75 patients with PD and 45 age-matched controls	F/M	(Lin et al., 2018)	
Significant changes in a set of 9 host miRNAs, correlating with some of the significantly changed microbial taxa. Robust correlations between many microbiota and cognition, balance, and disease duration ↑Bifidobacteriaceae and Lactobacillaceae		Saliva of 8 PD subjects and 36 healthy controls	F/M	(Mihaila et al., 2018)	
↓Dorea, Bacteroides, Prevotella, Faecalibacterium, Bacteroides massiliensis, Stoquefichus massiliensis, Bacteroides coprocola, Blautia glucerasea, Dorea longicatena, Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides plebeus, Prevotella copri, Coprococcus eutactus, and Ruminococcus callidus ↑ Christensenella, Catabacter, Lactobacillus, Oscillospira, Bifidobacterium, Christensenella minuta, Catabacter hongkongensis, Lactobacillus mucosae, Ruminococcus bromii, and Papillibacter cinnamivorans.		89 PD 66 controls (patients w/out severe somatic pathology w/parkinsonism)	F/M	(Petrov et al., 2017)	
↑Clostridium IV, Aquabacterium, Holdemania, Sphingomonas, Clostridium XVIII, Butyricicoccus and Anaerotruncus ↓Escherichia/Shigella correlates w/ ↑disease duration. ↓Dorea and Phascolarctobacterium correlates w/ ↑levodopa equivalent doses (LED). ↑ Butyricicoccus and Clostridium XlVbcorrelates w/ ↓ cognition		Feces of 45 patients and their healthy spouses	F/M	(Qian et al., 2018)	
↑Lactobacillus, Akkermansia, and Bifidobacterium ↓Lachnospiraceae family and the Faecalibacterium genus, most consistent PD gut microbiome alterations	Meta-analysis re-analyzing 16S microbiome datasets	23 studies on microbiome of PD using metagenomics		(Romano et al., 2021)	
* = 1-Methy-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is a potent neurotoxin extensively used to model Parkinson’s disease (PD).

** = Lactobacillus, Capnocytophaga, Leptotrichia, Veillonella, Aggregatibacter, Porphyromonas, and Prevotella.

Table 3b Literature review of Parkinson’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key findings	Study
type	Model	Sex	References	
Gut-Microbiome derived metabolite differences	
↓ N-acyl-phosphatidylethanolamines (NAPEs) in plasma of PD patients, with sex-specific profiles		319 controls; 268 PD, mouse strain undisclosed	F/M/M	(Hamid et al., 2019)	
Urinary indican ↑ in PD and DPD (tryptophan metabolism is characteristically impaired in PD patients, with a significant reduction in its metabolites)	Case-control study	Urine 68 PD with levodopa (PD) 34 de novo PD (DPD) 50 control	F/M	(Cassani et al., 2015)	
↓SCFAs ↓cognition and low BMI.
 ↓ butyrate ↓postural instability–gait disorder scores.
 ↑Akkermansia, Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Clostridium saccharolyticum, Veillonella, and Coriobacteriia		Stool from 104 PD and 96 controls	F/M	(Tan et al., 2021)	
↑Akkermansia, Lactobacillus, and Bifidobacterium and ↓Lachnospiraceae in PD, consistent with SCFA depletion		197 PD and 130 controls	F/M	(Hill-Burns et al., 2017)	
↑Burkholderia ssp. encode the rate-limiting enzyme for secondary bile acid synthesis (bile-acid dehydratase)		Appendix of PD patients	F/M	(Li et al., 2021)	
Parkin dysfunction may perturb several metabolic pathways, signifying common pathomechanisms in PARK2 and iPD subjects Profiles from PARK2 patients ↑ of fatty acid (FA) metabolites and oxidized lipids, and ↓antioxidant, caffeine, and benzoate-related metabolites		15 PARK2 patients, 19 healthy controls	F/M	(Okuzumi et al., 2019)	
↑Lactobacillaceae, Enterobacteriaceae and Enterococcaceae in PD patients ↓ Lachnospiraceae ↓Lachnospiraceae and ↑Enterobacteriaceae families also correlated with ↑disease severity and motor impairment Metagenomics indicated a significant variation of genes involved in the metabolism of short chain fatty acids amino acids, and in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis		80 PD and 72 healthy controls	F/M	(Pietrucci et al., 2019)	

Table 3c Literature review of Parkinson’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key findings	Study type	Model	Sex	References	
Therapeutics	
Consumption of a multi-strain probiotic (Hexbio®) over 8 weeks improved bowel opening frequency and whole gut transit time in PD patients with constipation.		PD patients with constipation (ROME III criteria)	F/M	(Ibrahim et al., 2020)	
B. subtilis probiotic strain PXN21 inhibits α-synuclein aggregation and clears aggregates in C. elegans model of synucleinopathy, partly mediated by DAF-16. B. subtilis strains protect via spores, vegetative cells, biofilm formation, and sphingolipid metabolism (genes lagr-1, asm-3, and sptl-3)		C. elegans strain NL5901	–	(Goya et al., 2020)	
The UDPRS III significantly improved and the levodopa-equivalent daily dose ↓ after vegetarian diet and fecal enema in a one-year follow-up Significant correlation between the gut microbiome diversity and the UPDRS III and the abundance of Ruminococcaceae. ↓ Clostridiaceae after enema.	Case-control study	54 PD 32 healthy controls (HC)	F/M	(Hegelmaier et al., 2020)	
Inconclusive rifaximin treatment for SIBO	Single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial (NCT02470780)	SIBO-positive PD	F/M	(Vizcarra et al., 2018)	

Table 3d Literature review of Parkinson’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key findings	Study type	Model	Sex	References	
Predictive/ Diagnostic ↓ Dysbiosis correlates with clinical phenotypes and severity. Altered plasma cytokine profiles associated with gut microbiome composition alterations suggest aberrant immune responses may contribute to inflammatory processes in PD ↑Verrucomicrobia, Mucispirillum, Porphyromonas, Lactobacillus, and Parabacteroides ↓Prevotella

 ↑Bacteroides were increased in patients with non-tremor PD subtype than patients with tremor subtype			F/M	(Lin et al., 2019)	
PD predicted based on selected OTUs after the binary transformation, age, and sex	Computational	Predictive modeling OTUs	F/M	(Dong et al., 2020)	
↓Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides fragilis at year 0 associated with worsening of UPDRSI scores in 2 years. ↓Bifidobacterium at year 0 ↑ hallucinations/delusions in 2 years ↓ B.fragilis at year 0 ↓motivation/initiative in 2 years Deteriorated group ↓Bifidobacterium, B. fragilis, and Clostridium leptium than the stable group at year 0 but not year2		36 patients	F/M	(Minato et al., 2017)	
↑ WP_087393524.1 protein of Akkermansia muciniphila, ↔Prevotellaceae/Prevotella in PD	Case-control study	Feces from 40 PD and healthy spouses Cohort of 78 PD, 75 control subjects, 40 MSA and 25 AD.	F/M	(Qian et al., 2020)	

Table 3e Literature review of Parkinson’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key findings	Study type	Model	Sex	References	
Gut integrity	
↑GI-symptoms ↓performance on letter fluency, visuospatial, learning and memory tests. Cognitive performance was uniquely associated with GI-symptoms and unrelated to non-GI autonomic symptoms.	Secondary analysis of Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI)	423 newly diagnosed PD patients followed for up to 5 years.	F/M	(Jones et al., 2020b)	
PD may have colonic dysfunction beyond constipation as part of a dysautonomic non-motor phenotype IBS-like symptoms had more non-motor symptoms and ↓ Prevotella	Case–control study	74 PD patients with 75 controls	F/M	(Mertsalmi et al., 2017)	
GI infections correlated with ↑ risk for PD	Prospective cohort study, human		F/M	(Nerius et al., 2020)	
SIBO was highly prevalent in PD, and nearly one-third was detected. SIBO was associated with worse gastrointestinal symptoms and worse motor function.		82 PD, and 200 controls	F/M	(Niu et al., 2016)	

Table 4 Literature review of Huntington’s disease and gut microbiome in females.

Key Findings	Bacteria	Model	Sex	References	
Microbiota composition coincided w/ ↓weight and ↑food intake, ↑motor deficits, ↑fecal water content in HD mice at 12 weeks of age	↑ Bacteriodetes
↓Firmicutes
↑ diversity in M
↔diversity in F	R6/1 mice	F/M	(Kong et al., 2020)	
↔Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes
↑E. hallii correlated to ↑Huntington’s disease progression and ↓cognition.
↔Verrucomicrobia, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria correlated to ↔cognition	↓α-diversity and β-diversity
↓Firmicutes, Lachnospiraceae and Akkermansiaceae in HDGEC males
↔ Phylum and Family in F	19 HD,
23 Premanifest HD
36 healthy controls	F/M	(Wasser et al., 2020)	
Gut-microbiome-derived metabolites differed in PHD metabolome

 Metabolites reflecting mutant huntingtin toxicity and neurodegeneration differed in symptomatic HD metabolome	↓Indole-3-propionic acid in PHD
↓Serotonin in PHD and HD
↓5-hydroxyindoleacetate in PHD
↓2-hydroxyphenylacetate in HD
↓3-hydroxyphenylacetate in HD
↓4-hydroxyphenylacetate in HD
↔Hypoxanthine, guanosine
↓Xanthosine in HD,
↓Xanthine in PHD and HD	Plasma from 52 pre-manifest HD(PHD), 102 early symptomatic HD, and 140 healthy controls	F/M	(Rosas et al., 2015)	

Table 5a Literature review of stoke and gut microbiome in females.

Outcomes	Bacteria	Markers	Model	Sex	Reference	
Treatments	
Fecal transfer from adult ovariectomized and estrogen-treated (OVX + E) to middle-aged OVX + E ↓ infarct volume, and ↑behavioral recovery	OVX + E ↔ phyla, ↑Prevotella and Lactobacillus ↓Butyrate baseline in the middle-aged OVX + E ↑LPS in OVX + E post-stroke	↑serum endotoxin ↓ SCFAs ↑ IL-17A	Sprague-Dawley rats (a) gonadally intact adult and middle-aged, (b) OVX + E (c) in middle-aged OVX + E after fecal microbiome transfer	F	(Park et al., 2020)	
↔infarct volumes ↓ survival in microbiota-depleted mice compared to MCAO-SPF and sham-microbiota-depleted mice.

 All microbiota-depleted animals developed severe colitis. This was rescued by continuous Abx or colonization with SPF microbiota pre-op	Antibiotic depleted gut biome		C57BL/6 J mice after an 8-week decontamination with quintuple broad-spectrum antibiotic cocktail. Microbiota-depleted animals were subjected to 60 min middle cerebral artery occlusion or sham operation (ABX stopped 3 days pre MCOA)	F	(Winek et al., 2016)	

Table 5b Literature review of stoke and gut microbiome in females.

Outcomes	Bacteria	Markers	Model	Sex	Reference	
Gut Function	
Mortality (50% vs 14%, p &lt; 0.05) and hemorrhagic transformation (44% vs 0%) ↑males than in females	Stroke induced non-reversible alterations in microbiota diversity in males	Stroke induced greater gut permeability in males at day 3 (p &lt; 0.05)	Aged (20-22 months) C57BL/6 N mice	F/M	(Ahnstedt et al., 2020)	
Stroke-induced gut barrier permeability and dysfunction preceded the dissemination of bacteria to peripheral tissues 37.5% mortality in stroke patients w/ infections	&gt;70% of microorganisms in the infected stroke patients were commensal (Enterococcus spp., Escherichia coli and Morganella morganii)		36 stroke patients, 36 controls, (7- to 10-week-old male C57BL/6 J mice)	F/M/M	(Stanley et al., 2016)	
↑ CVA risk with disorders of the stomach, and functional, inflammatory, and infectious GI disorders. ↔diseases of the anus, rectum, or neoplastic GI disorders			Retrospective cohort study (claims data between 2008 and 2015) from a 5% sample of Medicare beneficiaries ≥66 years of age	F/M	(Roth et al., 2020)	
CI patients showed significant dysbiosis of the gut microbiota	↑Odoribacter, Akkermansia		30 CI and 30 healthy control	F/M	(Li et al., 2019)	

Table 5c Literature review of stoke and gut microbiome in females.

Outcomes	Bacteria	Markers	Model	Sex	Reference	
Observational Gut Microbiome Alterations	
↑risk of myocardial infarction, recurrent stroke and cardiovascular death in males and females &gt; 66 years of age, and in patients with hypertension		TMAO level &gt; 4.86 μM

TMAO dose-dependently related ↑ risk of recurrent stroke and subsequent cardiovascular events in patients after 1st stroke	n = 78, Second independent validation cohort (n = 593)	F/M	(Haghikia et al., 2018)	
Stroke and TIA patients had ↑ opportunistic pathogens and ↓commensal or beneficial genera. Correlating w/ disease severity	↑ Enterobacter, Megasphaera, Oscillibacter, and Desulfovibrio ↓Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Faecalibacterium	TMAO level in stroke and TIA patients was significantly ↓ than asymptomatic group.	322 stroke/TIA, 231 controls did not use an age- and sex-matching, age range from 18 to 80 years	F/M	(Yin et al., 2015)	
	↑opportunistic (Enterobacteriacea, Veillonellaceae) ↑lactate-producers (Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus) ↓butyrate-producers (Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae) in high vs low-risk.	↓Butyrate in high-risk group ↔acetate, propionate, isobutyrate, isovalerate, and valerate among the three groups	141 participants ≥60 years w/o prior history of stroke. Divided into low, medium, and high-risk	F/M	(Zeng et al., 2019)	
3 months after admission, patients with ↑TMAO levels were more likely to have ↑risks of poor functional outcome		Median TMAO concentration was 3.8 μM	225 acute ischemic stroke patients	F/M	(Zhai et al., 2019)	
↑TMAO was an independent predictor for cognitive impairment in post-stroke patients		Mean TMAO level was 5.6 ± 2.4 μM,	256 total, 86 (33.6%) patients were diagnosed as PSCI	F/M	(Zhu et al., 2020)	
Patients with END showed ↑TMAO at admission Levels of TMAO predicted of early neurological deterioration (END) in patients with ischemic stroke.		Median TMAO concentrations were 4.8 μmol/L	362 patients END was diagnosed in 97 subjects	F/M	(Hou et al., 2020)	
↑Christensenellaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae associated w/ ↑ risk of death

 ↑Enterobacteriales and Enterobacteriaceae in 1st week in the neuro ICU associated w/92%↑ risk of 180-day mortality	↓α-diversity ↓Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae over time in patients followed longitudinally.

↑Enterobacteriaceawas associated with ↑Rankin Scale at discharge.		98 patients and 84 age- and sex-matched healthy subjects	F/M	(Xu et al., 2019)	
	↑Actinobacteria in control group

↑Coriobacteriales, Vagococcus, Sphingobacteriales and Adlercreutzia in CI

OSAHS+CI ↑Bifidobacterium, Parascardovia, Metascardovia and Anaerostipes caccae.	↑ IL-4, TNF-β, IL-1β and C-reactive protein in CI group

↑myeloperoxidase, malondialdehyde ↑homocysteine ↓Adiponectin

In Control vs CI and OSAHS+CI vs CI	30 control group, 28 cerebral infarction (CI) and 28 patients with OSAHS complicated by CI (OSAHS+CI)	F/M	(Zhang et al., 2020)	
↑SVD scores were associated with ↑cognitive decline and behavioral and psychological symptoms. Certain gut microbes may double the risk of white matter hyperintensity.	Enterotype-I (Bacteroides &gt;30%)

↑cognitive decline and cerebral SVD and ↑VSRAD scores	Fecal metabolites were significantly ↑in patients with

↑total SVD scores	87 patients without dementia or a history of stroke, 64 of whom exhibited mild cognitive impairment	F/M	(Saji et al., 2021)	
	Escherichia, Bacteroides, Megamonas, Parabacteroides, Akkermansia, Prevotella, Faecalibacterium, Dialister, Bifidobacterium and Ruminococcus were significantly different of CI and IS patients compared with controls	CI and IS were closely associated with internal glucose metabolism	8 patients with CI, 2 patients with IS and 10 healthy volunteers as controls	F/M	(Ji et al., 2017)	

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no competing interests


References

Abraham DS , Gruber-Baldini AL , Magder LS , McArdle PF , Tom SE , Barr E , Schrader K , Shulman LM , 2019. Sex differences in Parkinson’s disease presentation and progression. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 69 , 48–54. 10.1016/J.PARKRELDIS.2019.10.019.31677455
Ahnstedt H , McCullough LD , 2019. The impact of sex and age on T cell immunity and ischemic stroke outcomes. Cell. Immunol 10.1016/j.cellimm.2019.103960.
Ahnstedt H , Patrizz A , Chauhan A , Roy-O’Reilly M , Furr J , Spychala M , D’Aigle J , Blixt F , Zhu L , Bravo Alegria J , McCullough L , 2020. Sex differences in T cell immune responses, gut permeability and outcome after ischemic stroke in aged mice. Brain Behav. Immun 87 , 556–567. 10.1016/J.BBI.2020.02.001.32058038
Alexandrov PN , Hill JM , Zhao Y , Bond T , Taylor CM , Percy ME , Li W , Lukiw WJ , 2020. Aluminum-induced generation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from the human gastrointestinal (GI)-tract microbiome-resident Bacteroides fragilis. J. Inorg. Biochem 203 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2019.110886.
Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 16 , 2020, 391–460. 10.1002/ALZ.12068.
Bailey MA , Holscher HD , 2018. Microbiome-mediated effects of the mediterranean diet on inflammation. Adv. Nutr 9 , 193. 10.1093/ADVANCES/NMY013.29767701
Baker J , Al-Nakkash L , Herbst-Kralovetz M , 2017. Estrogen-gut microbiome axis: physiological and clinical implications. Maturitas 103 , 45–53. 10.1016/J.MATURITAS.2017.06.025.28778332
Barichella M , Severgnini M , Cilia R , Cassani E , Bolliri C , Caronni S , Ferri V , Cancello R , Ceccarani C , Faierman S , Pinelli G , De Bellis G , Zecca L , Cereda E , Consolandi C , Pezzoli G , 2019. Unraveling gut microbiota in Parkinson’s disease and atypical parkinsonism. Mov. Disord 34 , 396–405. 10.1002/mds.27581.30576008
Bäuerl C , Collado MC , Diaz Cuevas A , Viña J , Pérez Martínez G , 2018. Shifts in gut microbiota composition in an APP/PSS1 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease during lifespan. Lett. Appl. Microbiol 66 , 464–471. 10.1111/lam.12882.29575030
Bello-Medina PC , Hernández-Quiroz F , Pérez-Morales M , González-Franco DA , Cruz-Pauseno G , García-Mena J , Díaz-Cintra S , Pacheco-López G , 2021. Spatial memory and gut microbiota alterations are already present in early adulthood in a pre-clinical transgenic model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Neurosci 15 , 595583 10.3389/fnins.2021.595583.33994914
Bibbò S , Settanni CR , Porcari S , Bocchino E , Ianiro G , Cammarota G , Gasbarrini A , 2020. Fecal microbiota transplantation: screening and selection to choose the optimal donor. J. Clin. Med 9 , 1–14. 10.3390/JCM9061757.
Blasco MP , Chauhan A , Honarpisheh P , Ahnstedt H , d’Aigle J , Ganesan A , Ayyaswamy S , Blixt F , Venable S , Major A , Durgan D , Haag A , Kofler J , Bryan R , McCullough LD , Ganesh BP , 2020. Age-dependent involvement of gut mast cells and histamine in post-stroke inflammation. J. Neuroinflammation 17 . 10.1186/s12974-020-01833-1.
Blasco-Baque V , Serino M , Vergnes JN , Riant E , Loubieres P , Arnal JF , Gourdy P , Sixou M , Burcelin R , Kemoun P , 2012. High-fat diet induces periodontitis in mice through lipopolysaccharides (LPS) receptor signaling: protective action of estrogens. PLoS One 7 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0048220.
Brial F , Le Lay A , Dumas M-E , Gauguier D , 2018. Implication of gut microbiota metabolites in cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 2018 75 21 75, 3977–3990. 10.1007/S00018-018-2901-1.30101405
Cani P , Amar J , Iglesias M , Poggi M , Knauf C , Bastelica D , Neyrinck A , Fava F , Tuohy K , Chabo C , Waget A , Delmée E , Cousin B , Sulpice T , Chamontin B , Ferrières J , Tanti J , Gibson G , Casteilla L , Delzenne N , Alessi M , Burcelin R , 2007. Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes 56 , 1761–1772. 10.2337/DB06-1491.17456850
Canonico M , Pesce G , Bonaventure A , Le Noan-Lainé M , Benatru I , Ranoux D , Moisan F , Elbaz A , 2021. Increased risk of Parkinson’s disease in women after bilateral oophorectomy. Mov. Disord 36 , 1696–1700. 10.1002/MDS.28563.33724550
Carranza-Naval MJ , Vargas-Soria M , Hierro-Bujalance C , Baena-Nieto G , Garcia-Alloza M , Infante-Garcia C , del Marco A , 2021. Alzheimer’s disease and diabetes: role of diet, microbiota and inflammation in preclinical models. Biomol. 2021 11 . 10.3390/BIOM11020262. Page 262 11, 262.
Cassani E , Barichella M , Cancello R , Cavanna F , Iorio L , Cereda E , Bolliri C , Zampella Maria P , Bianchi F , Cestaro B , Pezzoli G , 2015. Increased urinary indoxyl sulfate (indican): New insights into gut dysbiosis in Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 21 , 389–393. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.02.004.25707302
Castelo-Branco C , Soveral I , 2014. The immune system and aging: a review. Gynecol. Endocrinol 30 , 16–22. 10.3109/09513590.2013.852531.24219599
Cattaneo A , Cattane N , Galluzzi S , Provasi S , Lopizzo N , Festari C , Ferrari C , Guerra UP , Paghera B , Muscio C , Bianchetti A , Volta GD , Turla M , Cotelli MS , Gennuso M , Prelle A , Zanetti O , Lussignoli G , Mirabile D , Bellandi D , Gentile S , Belotti G , Villani D , Harach T , Bolmont T , Padovani A , Boccardi M , Frisoni GB , 2017. Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-inflammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral inflammation markers in cognitively impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 49 , 60–68. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.08.019.27776263
Cereda E , Barichella M , Cassani E , Caccialanza R , Pezzoli G , 2013. Reproductive factors and clinical features of Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 19 , 1094–1099. 10.1016/J.PARKRELDIS.2013.07.020.23931933
Cerri S , Mus L , Blandini F , 2019. Parkinson’s disease in women and men: what’s the difference? J. Parkinsons Dis 9 , 501–515. 10.3233/JPD-191683.31282427
Chassaing B , Kumar M , Baker MT , Singh V , Vijay-Kumar M , 2014. Mammalian gut immunity. Biom. J 37 , 246. 10.4103/2319-4170.130922.
Chen CH , Lin CL , Kao CH , 2016. Irritable bowel syndrome is associated with an increased risk of dementia: a nationwide population-based study. PLoS One 11 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0144589.
Cheng J , Ringel-Kulka T , Heikamp-de Jong I , Ringel Y , Carroll I , de Vos WM , Salojärvi J , Satokari R , 2015. Discordant temporal development of bacterial phyla and the emergence of core in the fecal microbiota of young children. ISME J 2016 10 4 10, 1002–1014. 10.1038/ismej.2015.177.26430856
Clarke G , Stilling RM , Kennedy PJ , Stanton C , Cryan JF , Dinan TG , 2014. Minireview: Gut Microbiota: The Neglected Endocrine Organ. Mol. Endocrinol 28 , 1221. 10.1210/ME.2014-1108.24892638
Colombo AV , Sadler RK , Llovera G , Singh V , Roth S , Heindl S , Sebastian Monasor L , Verhoeven A , Peters F , Parhizkar S , Kamp F , Gomez de Aguero M , MacPherson AJ , Winkler E , Herms J , Benakis C , Dichgans M , Steiner H , Giera M , Haass C , Tahirovic S , Liesz A , 2021. Microbiota-derived short chain fatty acids modulate microglia and promote Aβ plaque deposition. Elife 10 . 10.7554/elife.59826.
Cox LM , Schafer MJ , Sohn J , Vincentini J , Weiner HL , Ginsberg SD , Blaser MJ , 2019. Calorie restriction slows age-related microbiota changes in an Alzheimer’s disease model in female mice. Sci. Rep 9 10.1038/s41598-019-54187-x.
Crapser J , Ritzel R , Verna R , Venna VR , Liu F , Chauhan A , Koellhoffer E , Patel A , Ricker A , Maas K , Graf J , McCullough LD , 2016. Ischemic stroke induces gut permeability and enhances bacterial translocation leading to sepsis in aged mice. Aging (Albany NY) 8 doi:10.18632/aging.100952.
Cryan JF , O’Riordan KJ , Sandhu K , Peterson V , Dinan TG , 2020. The gut microbiome in neurological disorders. Lancet Neurol. 19 , 179–194. 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30356-4.31753762
Cuervo-Zanatta D , Garcia-Mena J , Perez-Cruz C , 2021. Gut microbiota alterations and cognitive impairment are sexually dissociated in a transgenic mice model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 1–20 10.3233/JAD-201367.
Deroo BJ , Korach KS , 2006. Estrogen receptors and human disease. J. Clin. Invest 116 , 561. 10.1172/JCI27987.16511588
Deutschländer AB , Ross OA , Dickson DW , Wszolek ZK , 2018. Atypical parkinsonian syndromes: a general neurologist’s perspective. Eur. J. Neurol 25 , 41–58. 10.1111/ENE.13412.28803444
Dominianni C , Sinha R , Goedert J , Pei Z , Yang L , Hayes R , Ahn J , 2015. Sex, body mass index, and dietary fiber intake influence the human gut microbiome. PLoS One 10 . 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0124599.
Dong M , Li L , Chen M , Kusalik A , Xu W , 2020. Predictive analysis methods for human microbiome data with application to Parkinson’s disease. PLoS One 15 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0237779.
Doyle KP , Buckwalter MS , 2020. Immunological mechanisms in poststroke dementia. Curr. Opin. Neurol 33 , 30–36. 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000783.31789707
Du J , Huang P , Qian Y , Yang X , Cui S , Lin Y , Gao C , Zhang P , He Y , Xiao Q , Chen S , 2019. Fecal and blood microbial 16s rRNA gene alterations in Chinese patients with multiple system atrophy and its subtypes. J. Parkinsons Dis 9 , 711–721. 10.3233/JPD-191612.31381527
Eckburg PB , Bik EM , Bernstein CN , Purdom E , Dethlefsen L , Sargent M , Gill SR , Nelson KE , Relman DA , 2005. Microbiology: diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science (80-.) 308 , 1635–1638. 10.1126/science.1110591.
Erny D , Prinz M , 2020. How microbiota shape microglial phenotypes and epigenetics. Glia 68 , 1655–1672. 10.1002/glia.23822.32181523
Erny D , De Angelis ALH , Jaitin D , Wieghofer P , Staszewski O , David E , Keren-Shaul H , Mahlakoiv T , Jakobshagen K , Buch T , Schwierzeck V , Utermöhlen O , Chun E , Garrett WS , Mccoy KD , Diefenbach A , Staeheli P , Stecher B , Amit I , Prinz M , 2015. Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of microglia in the CNS. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 965–977. 10.1038/nn.4030.26030851
Fried S , Wemelie E , Cani P , Knauf C , 2021. Interactions between the microbiota and enteric nervous system during gut-brain disorders. Neuropharmacology 197 . 10.1016/J.NEUROPHARM.2021.108721.
Fuhrman B , Feigelson H , Flores R , Gail M , Xu X , Ravel J , Goedert J , 2014. Associations of the fecal microbiome with urinary estrogens and estrogen metabolites in postmenopausal women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 99 , 4632–4640. 10.1210/JC.2014-2222.25211668
Ganesh BP , Klopfleisch R , Loh G , Blaut M , 2013. Commensal akkermansia muciniphila exacerbates gut inflammation in salmonella typhimurium-infected gnotobiotic mice. PLoS One 8 , e74963. 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0074963.24040367
Ganesh BP , Nelson JW , Eskew JR , Ganesan A , Ajami NJ , Petrosino JF , Bryan RM , Durgan DJ , 2018. Prebiotics, probiotics, and acetate supplementation prevent hypertension in a model of obstructive sleep apnea. Hypertension 72 . 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.118.11695.
Gohir W , Ratcliffe EM , Sloboda DM , 2014. Of the bugs that shape us: maternal obesity, the gut microbiome, and long-term disease risk. Pediatr. Res 2015 77 1 77, 196–204. 10.1038/pr.2014.169.25314580
Goya ME , Xue F , Sampedro-Torres-Quevedo C , Arnaouteli S , Riquelme-Dominguez L , Romanowski A , Brydon J , Ball KL , Stanley-Wall NR , Doitsidou M , 2020. Probiotic bacillus subtilis protects against α-synuclein aggregation in C. elegans. Cell Rep. 30 , 367–380.e7. 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.12.078.31940482
Guo Y , Qi Y , Yang X , Zhao L , Wen S , Liu Y , Tang L , 2016. Association between polycystic ovary syndrome and gut microbiota. PLoS One 11 , e0153196. 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0153196.27093642
Haast R , Gustafson D , Kiliaan A , 2012. Sex differences in stroke. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 32 , 2100–2107. 10.1038/JCBFM.2012.141.23032484
Haghikia A , Jörg S , Duscha A , Berg J , Manzel A , Waschbisch A , Hammer A , Lee DH , May C , Wilck N , Balogh A , Ostermann AI , Schebb NH , Akkad DA , Grohme DA , Kleinewietfeld M , Kempa S , Thöne J , Demir S , Muller DN , Gold R , Linker RA , 2015. Dietary fatty acids directly impact central nervous system autoimmunity via the small intestine. Immunity 43 , 817–829. 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.09.007.26488817
Haghikia Arash , Li XS , Liman TG , Bledau N , Schmidt D , Zimmermann F , Kränkel N , Widera C , Sonnenschein K , Haghikia Aiden , Weissenborn K , Fraccarollo D , Heimesaat MM , Bauersachs J , Wang Z , Zhu W , Bavendiek U , Hazen SL , Endres M , Landmesser U , 2018. Gut microbiota-dependent trimethylamine N-oxide predicts risk of cardiovascular events in patients with stroke and is related to proinflammatory monocytes. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 38 , 2225–2235. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.118.311023.29976769
Hamid Z , Basit A , Pontis S , Piras F , Assogna F , Bossù P , Pontieri FE , Stefani A , Spalletta G , Franceschi P , Reggiani A , Armirotti A , 2019. Gender specific decrease of a set of circulating N-acylphosphatidyl ethanolamines (NAPEs) in the plasma of Parkinson’s disease patients. Metabolomics 15 . 10.1007/s11306-019-1536z.
Haran JP , Bhattarai SK , Foley SE , Dutta P , Ward DV , Bucci V , McCormick BA , 2019. Alzheimer’s disease microbiome is associated with dysregulation of the anti-inflammatory P-glycoprotein pathway. MBio 10 . 10.1128/mBio.00632-19.
Haro C , Rangel-Zúñiga OA , Alcalá-Díaz JF , Gómez-Delgado F , Pérez-Martínez P , Delgado-Lista J , Quintana-Navarro GM , Landa BB , Navas-Cortés JA , Tena-Sempere M , Clemente JC , López-Miranda J , Pérez-Jiménez F , Camargo A , 2016. Intestinal microbiota is influenced by gender and body mass index. PLoS One 11 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0154090.
Hasuike Y , Endo T , Koroyasu M , Matsui M , Mori C , Yamadera M , Fujimura H , Sakoda S , 2020. Bile acid abnormality induced by intestinal dysbiosis might explain lipid metabolism in Parkinson’s disease. Med. Hypotheses 134 . 10.1016/j.mehy.2019.109436.
Hegelmaier T , Lebbing M , Duscha A , Tomaske L , Tönges L , Holm JB , Bjørn Nielsen H , Gatermann SG , Przuntek H , Haghikia A , 2020. Interventional influence of the intestinal microbiome through dietary intervention and bowel cleansing might improve motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease. Cells 9 . 10.3390/cells9020376.
Heintz-Buschart A , Pandey U , Wicke T , Sixel-Döring F , Janzen A , Sittig-Wiegand E , Trenkwalder C , Oertel WH , Mollenhauer B , Wilmes P , 2018. The nasal and gut microbiome in Parkinson’s disease and idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder. Mov. Disord 33 , 88–98. 10.1002/mds.27105.28843021
Hertel J , Harms AC , Heinken A , Baldini F , Thinnes CC , Glaab E , Vasco DA , Pietzner M , Stewart ID , Wareham NJ , Langenberg C , Trenkwalder C , Kruger R , Hankemeier T , Fleming RMT , Mollenhauer B , Thiele I , 2019. Integrated analyses of microbiome and longitudinal metabolome data reveal microbial-host interactions on sulfur metabolism in Parkinson’s disease. Cell Rep. 29 , 1767–1777.e8. 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.035.31722195
Hewel C , Kaiser J , Wierczeiko A , Linke J , Reinhardt C , Endres K , Gerber S , 2019. Common miRNA patterns of Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease and their putative impact on commensal gut microbiota. Front. Neurosci 13 10.3389/fnins.2019.00113.
Hill-Burns EM , Debelius JW , Morton JT , Wissemann WT , Lewis MR , Wallen ZD , Peddada SD , Factor SA , Molho E , Zabetian CP , Knight R , Payami H , 2017. Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson’s disease medications have distinct signatures of the gut microbiome. Mov. Disord 32 , 739–749. 10.1002/mds.26942.28195358
Hollister EB , Riehle K , Luna RA , Weidler EM , Rubio-Gonzales M , Mistretta TA , Raza S , Doddapaneni HV , Metcalf GA , Muzny DM , Gibbs RA , Petrosino JF , Shulman RJ , Versalovic J , 2015. Structure and function of the healthy preadolescent pediatric gut microbiome. Microbiome 3 , 36. 10.1186/S40168-015-0101-X/FIGURES/4.26306392
Honarpisheh P , Reynolds CR , Conesa MPB , Manchon JFM , Putluri N , Bhattacharjee MB , Urayama A , McCullough LD , Ganesh BP , 2020. Dysregulated gut homeostasis observed prior to the accumulation of the brain amyloid-β in Tg2576 mice. Int. J. Mol. Sci 21 10.3390/ijms21051711.
Hopfner F , Künstner A , Müller SH , Künzel S , Zeuner KE , Margraf NG , Deuschl G , Baines JF , Kuhlenbäumer G , 2017. Gut microbiota in Parkinson disease in a northern German cohort. Brain Res. 1667 , 41–45. 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.04.019.28506555
Hou L , Zhang Y , Zheng D , Shi H , Zou C , Zhang H , Lu Z , Du H , 2020. Increasing trimethylamine N-oxide levels as a predictor of early neurological deterioration in patients with acute ischemic stroke. Neurol. Res 42 , 153–158. 10.1080/01616412.2019.1710416.31928326
Huang T-T , Lai J-B , Du Y-L , Xu Y , Ruan L-M , Hu S-H , 2019. Current understanding of gut microbiota in mood disorders: an update of human studies. Front. Genet 0 , 98. 10.3389/FGENE.2019.00098.
Huang L , Cai M , Li L , Zhang X , Xu Y , Xiao J , Huang Q , Luo G , Zeng Z , Jin C , Jin Y , He J , Yang W , 2021. Gut microbiota changes in preeclampsia, abnormal placental growth and healthy pregnant women. BMC Microbiol. 21 , 265. 10.1186/S12866-021-02327-7.34607559
Hugon P , Dufour JC , Colson P , Fournier PE , Sallah K , Raoult D , 2015. A comprehensive repertoire of prokaryotic species identified in human beings. Lancet Infect. Dis 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00293-5.
Ibrahim A , Raja Ali RA , Abdul Manaf MR , Ahmad N , Tajurruddin FW , Qin WZ , Md Desa SH , Ibrahim NM , 2020. Multi-strain probiotics (Hexbio) containing MCP BCMC strains improved constipation and gut motility in Parkinson’s disease: A randomised controlled trial. PLoS One 15 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0244680.
Ivanov II , de Frutos RL , Manel N , Yoshinaga K , Rifkin DB , Sartor RB , Finlay BB , Littman DR , 2008. Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell Host Microbe 4 , 337–349. 10.1016/j.chom.2008.09.009.18854238
Jaggar M , Rea K , Spichak S , Dinan TG , Cryan JF , 2020. You’ve got male: Sex and the microbiota-gut-brain axis across the lifespan. Front. Neuroendocrinol 10.1016/j.yfrne.2019.100815.
Jašarević E , Morrison KE , Bale TL , 2016. Sex differences in the gut microbiome - Brain axis across the lifespan. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci 10.1098/rstb.2015.0122.
Jayadev S , Leverenz JB , Steinbart E , Stahl J , Klunk W , Yu C-E , Bird TD , 2010. Alzheimer’s disease phenotypes and genotypes associated with mutations in presenilin 2. Brain 133 , 1143–1154. 10.1093/BRAIN/AWQ033.20375137
Ji W , Zhu Y , Kan P , Cai Y , Wang Z , Wu Z , Yang P , 2017. Analysis of intestinal microbial communities of cerebral infarction and ischemia patients based on high throughput sequencing technology and glucose and lipid metabolism. Mol. Med. Rep 16 , 5413. 10.3892/MMR.2017.7227.28849032
Joers V , Masilamoni G , Kempf D , Weiss AR , Rotterman TM , Murray B , Yalcin-Cakmakli G , Voll RJ , Goodman MM , Howell L , Bachevalier J , Green SJ , Naqib A , Shaikh M , Engen PA , Keshavarzian A , Barnum CJ , Nye JA , Smith Y , Tansey MG , 2020. Microglia, inflammation and gut microbiota responses in a progressive monkey model of Parkinson’s disease: A case series. Neurobiol. Dis 144 10.1016/j.nbd.2020.105027.
Jones E , Wei J , Nelson M , Bakir M , Mehta P , Shufelt C , Minissian M , Sharif B , Pepine C , Handberg E , Cook-Wiens G , Sopko G , Bairey Merz C , 2020a. N-Terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide and coronary microvascular dysfunction in women with preserved ejection fraction: A report from the Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation-Coronary Vascular Dysfunction (WISE-CVD) study. PLoS One 15 . 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0243213.
Jones JD , Rahmani E , Garcia E , Jacobs JP , 2020b. Gastrointestinal symptoms are predictive of trajectories of cognitive functioning in de novo Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 72 , 7–12. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2020.01.009.32058266
Kalia LV , Lang AE , 2015. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 386 , 896–912. 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61393-3.25904081
Kaur H , Nagamoto-Combs K , Golovko S , Golovko MY , Klug MG , Combs CK , 2020. Probiotics ameliorate intestinal pathophysiology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 92 , 114–134. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.04.009.32417748
Kennedy EA , King KY , Baldridge MT , 2018. Mouse microbiota models: comparing germ-free mice and antibiotics treatment as tools for modifying gut bacteria. Front. Physiol 0 , 1534. 10.3389/FPHYS.2018.01534.
Kim KO , Gluck M , 2019. Fecal microbiota transplantation: an update on clinical practice. Clin. Endosc 52 , 137. 10.5946/CE.2019.009.30909689
Kim YS , Unno T , Kim BY , Park MS , 2020. Sex differences in gut microbiota. World J. Mens. Health 10.5534/wjmh.190009.
Klein Sabra L. , Flanagan KL , 2016. Sex differences in immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol 2016 16 10 16, 626–638 doi:10.1038/nri.2016.90.27546235
Kong G , Cao KAL , Judd LM , Li SS , Renoir T , Hannan AJ , 2020. Microbiome profiling reveals gut dysbiosis in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis 135 10.1016/j.nbd.2018.09.001.
Koren O , Goodrich J , Cullender T , Spor A , Laitinen K , Bäckhed H , Gonzalez A , Werner J , Angenent L , Knight R , Bäckhed F , Isolauri E , Salminen S , Ley R , 2012. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during pregnancy. Cell 150 , 470–480. 10.1016/J.CELL.2012.07.008.22863002
Lavelle A , Sokol H , 2020. Gut microbiota-derived metabolites as key actors in inflammatory bowel disease. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol 2020 17 4 17, 223–237. 10.1038/s41575-019-0258-z.32076145
Leblhuber F , Steiner K , Schuetz B , Fuchs D , Gostner JM , 2018. Probiotic supplementation in patients with Alzheimer’s Dementia - An explorative intervention study. Curr. Alzheimer Res 15 , 1106–1113. 10.2174/1389200219666180813144834.30101706
Lee YH , Cha J , Chung SJ , Yoo HS , Sohn YH , Ye BS , Lee PH , 2019. Beneficial effect of estrogen on nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons in drug-naïve postmenopausal Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Report 2019 9 1 9, 1–9. 10.1038/S41598-019-47026-6.
Lee J , d’Aigle J , Atadja L , Quaicoe V , Honarpisheh P , Ganesh BP , Hassan A , Graf J , Petrosino J , Putluri N , Zhu L , Durgan DJ , Bryan RM , McCullough LD , Venna VR , 2020. Gut microbiota–derived short-chain fatty acids promote poststroke recovery in aged mice. Circ. Res 127 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.119.316448.
Li J , Jia H , Cai X , Zhong H , Feng Q , Sunagawa S , Arumugam M , Kultima JR , Prifti E , Nielsen T , Juncker AS , Manichanh C , Chen B , Zhang W , Levenez F , Wang Juan , Xu X , Xiao L , Liang S , Zhang D , Zhang Z , Chen W , Zhao H , Al-Aama JY , Edris S , Yang H , Wang Jian , Hansen T , Nielsen HB , Brunak S , Kristiansen K , Guarner F , Pedersen O , Doré J , Ehrlich SD , Bork P , Wang Jun , Pons N , Le Chatelier E , Batto JM , Kennedy S , Haimet F , Winogradski Y , Pelletier E , Lepaslier D , Artiguenave F , Bruls T , Weissenbach J , Turner K , Parkhill J , Antolin M , Casellas F , Borruel N , Varela E , Torrejon A , Denariaz G , Derrien M , van Hylckama Vlieg JET , Viega P , Oozeer R , Knoll J , Rescigno M , Brechot C , M’rini C , Mérieux A , Yamada T , Tims S , Zoetendal EG , Kleerebezem M , de Vos WM , Cultrone A , Leclerc M , Juste C , Guedon E , Delorme C , Layec S , Khaci G , van de Guchte M , Vandemeulebrouck G , Jamet A , Dervyn R , Sanchez N , Blottière H , Maguin E , Renault P , Tap J , Mende DR , 2014. An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nat. Biotechnol 32 , 834–841. 10.1038/nbt.2942.24997786
Li N , Wang Xingcui , Sun C , Wu X , Lu M , Si Y , Ye X , Wang T , Yu X , Zhao X , Wei N , Wang Xingbang , 2019. Change of intestinal microbiota in cerebral ischemic stroke patients. BMC Microbiol. 19 10.1186/S12866-019-1552-1.
Li Z , Zhu H , Guo Y , Du X , Qin C , 2020. Gut microbiota regulate cognitive deficits and amyloid deposition in a model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurochem 155 , 448–461. 10.1111/jnc.15031.32319677
Li P , Killinger BA , Ensink E , Beddows I , Yilmaz A , Lubben N , Lamp J , Schilthuis M , Vega IE , Woltjer R , Andrew Pospisilik J , Brundin P , Brundin L , Graham SF , Labrie V , 2021. Gut microbiota dysbiosis is associated with elevated bile acids in parkinson’s disease. Metabolites 11 , 1–15. 10.3390/metabo11010029.
Lin A , Zheng W , He Y , Tang W , Wei X , He R , Huang W , Su Y , Huang Y , Zhou H , Xie H , 2018. Gut microbiota in patients with Parkinson’s disease in southern China. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 53 , 82–88. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2018.05.007.29776865
Lin CH , Chen CC , Chiang HL , Liou JM , Chang CM , Lu TP , Chuang EY , Tai YC , Cheng C , Lin HY , Wu MS , 2019. Altered gut microbiota and inflammatory cytokine responses in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 16 . 10.1186/s12974-019-1528-y.
Liu P , Wu L , Peng G , Han Y , Tang R , Ge J , Zhang L , Jia L , Yue S , Zhou K , Li L , Luo B , Wang B , 2019. Altered microbiomes distinguish Alzheimer’s disease from amnestic mild cognitive impairment and health in a Chinese cohort. Brain Behav. Immun 80 , 633–643. 10.1016/j.bbi.2019.05.008.31063846
Liu G , Tan FH , Lau SA , Jaafar MH , Chung FY , Azzam G , Liong M , Li Y , 2020. Lactic acid bacteria feeding reversed the malformed eye structures and ameliorated gut microbiota profiles of Drosophila melanogaster Alzheimer’s Disease model. J. Appl. Microbiol 10.1111/jam.14773.
Liu X , Li X , Xia B , Hou M , Liu Z , Liu X Correspondence, 2021. High-fiber diet mitigates maternal obesity-induced cognitive and social dysfunction in the offspring via gut-brain axis. 10.1016/j.cmet.2021.02.002.
Luck B , Engevik MA , Ganesh BP , Lackey EP , Lin T , Balderas M , Major A , Runge J , Luna RA , Sillitoe RV , Versalovic J , 2020. Bifidobacteria shape host neural circuits during postnatal development by promoting synapse formation and microglial function. Sci. Rep 10 10.1038/s41598-020-64173-3.
Maeda Y , Kurakawa T , Umemoto E , Motooka D , Ito Y , Gotoh K , Hirota K , Matsushita M , Furuta Y , Narazaki M , Sakaguchi N , Kayama H , Nakamura S , Iida T , Saeki Y , Kumanogoh A , Sakaguchi S , Takeda K , 2016. Dysbiosis contributes to arthritis development via activation of autoreactive T cells in the intestine. Arthritis Rheum. 68 , 2646–2661. 10.1002/art.39783.
MahmoudianDehkordi S , Arnold M , Nho K , Ahmad S , Jia W , Xie G , Louie G , Kueider-Paisley A , Moseley MA , Thompson JW , St John Williams L , Tenenbaum JD , Blach C , Baillie R , Han X , Bhattacharyya S , Toledo JB , Schafferer S , Klein S , Koal T , Risacher SL , Kling MA , Motsinger-Reif A , Rotroff DM , Jack J , Hankemeier T , Bennett DA , De Jager PL , Trojanowski JQ , Shaw LM , Weiner MW , Doraiswamy PM , van Duijn CM , Saykin AJ , Kastenmüller G , Kaddurah-Daouk R , 2019. Altered bile acid profile associates with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease—An emerging role for gut microbiome. Alzheimers Dement. 15 , 76–92. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.07.217.30337151
Maldonado Weng J , Parikh I , Naqib A , York J , Green SJ , Estus S , Ladu MJ , 2019. Synergistic effects of APOE and sex on the gut microbiome of young EFAD transgenic mice. Mol. Neurodegener 14 10.1186/s13024-019-0352-2.
Manwani B , Liu F , Scranton V , Hammond M , Sansing L , McCullough L , 2013. Differential effects of aging and sex on stroke induced inflammation across the lifespan. Exp. Neurol 249 , 120–131. 10.1016/J.EXPNEUROL.2013.08.011.23994069
Marizzoni M , Cattaneo A , Mirabelli P , Festari C , Lopizzo N , Nicolosi V , Mombelli E , Mazzelli M , Luongo D , Naviglio D , Coppola L , Salvatore M , Frisoni GB , 2020. Short-chain fatty acids and lipopolysaccharide as mediators between gut dysbiosis and amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 78 , 683–697. 10.3233/JAD-200306.33074224
Mauvais-Jarvis F , Merz NB , Barnes PJ , Brinton RD , Carrero J-J , DeMeo DL , De Vries GJ , Epperson CN , Govindan R , Klein SL , Lonardo A , Maki PM , McCullough LD , Regitz-Zagrosek V , Regensteiner JG , Rubin JB , Sandberg K , Suzuki A , 2020. Sex and gender: modifiers of health, disease, and medicine. Lancet (London, England) 396 , 565. 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31561-0.
McCullough LD , Mirza MA , Xu Y , Bentivegna K , Steffens EB , Ritzel R , Liu F , 2016. Stroke sensitivity in the aged: sex chromosome complement vs. gonadal hormones. Aging (Albany NY) 8 , 1432. 10.18632/AGING.100997.27405096
Mertsalmi TH , Aho VTE , Pereira PAB , Paulin L , Pekkonen E , Auvinen P , Scheperjans F , 2017. More than constipation – bowel symptoms in Parkinson’s disease and their connection to gut microbiota. Eur. J. Neurol 24 , 1375–1383. 10.1111/ene.13398.28891262
Mihaila D , Donegan J , Barns S , LaRocca D , Du Q , Zheng D , Vidal M , Neville C , Uhlig R , Middleton FA , 2018. The oral microbiome of early stage Parkinson’s disease and its relationship with functional measures of motor and non-motor function. PLoS One 14 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0218252.
Mihajlovic J , Leutner M , Hausmann B , Kohl G , Schwarz J , Röver H , Stimakovits N , Wolf P , Maruszczak K , Bastian M , Kautzky-Willer A , Berry D , 2021. Combined hormonal contraceptives are associated with minor changes in composition and diversity in gut microbiota of healthy women. Environ. Microbiol 23 , 3037–3047. 10.1111/1462-2920.15517.33876556
Minato T , Maeda T , Fujisawa Y , Tsuji H , Nomoto K , Ohno K , Hirayama M , 2017. Progression of Parkinson’s disease is associated with gut dysbiosis: two-year follow-up study. PLoS One 12 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0187307.
Minter MR , Zhang C , Leone V , Ringus DL , Zhang X , Oyler-Castrillo P , Musch MW , Liao F , Ward JF , Holtzman DM , Chang EB , Tanzi RE , Sisodia SS , 2016. Antibiotic-induced perturbations in gut microbial diversity influences neuroinflammation and amyloidosis in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 6 10.1038/srep30028.
Morais LH , Schreiber HL , Mazmanian SK , 2020. The gut microbiota–brain axis in behaviour and brain disorders. Nat. Rev. Microbiol 2020 19 4 19, 241–255. 10.1038/s41579-020-00460-0.33093662
Mu Q , Zhang H , Liao X , Lin K , Liu H , Edwards M , Ahmed S , Yuan R , Li L , Cecere T , Branson D , Kirby J , Goswami P , Leeth C , Read K , Oestreich K , Vieson M , Reilly C , Luo X , 2017. Control of lupus nephritis by changes of gut microbiota. Microbiome 5 , 73. 10.1186/S40168-017-0300-8.28697806
Mueller S , Saunier K , Hanisch C , Norin E , Alm L , Midtvedt TAC , Silvi S , Orpianesi C , Verdenelli M , Clavel T , Koebnick C , Zunft H , Doré J , Blaut M , 2006. Differences in fecal microbiota in different European study populations in relation to age, gender, and country: a cross-sectional study. Appl. Environ. Microbiol 72 , 1027–1033. 10.1128/AEM.72.2.1027-1033.2006.16461645
Murphy E , 2011. Estrogen signaling and cardiovascular disease. Circ. Res 109 , 687–696. 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.236687.21885836
Nagpal R , Neth BJ , Wang S , Craft S , Yadav H , 2019. Modified Mediterranean-ketogenic diet modulates gut microbiome and short-chain fatty acids in association with Alzheimer’s disease markers in subjects with mild cognitive impairment. EBioMedicine 47 , 529–542. 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.08.032.31477562
Napolitano M , Covasa M , 2020. Microbiota transplant in the treatment of obesity and diabetes: current and future perspectives. Front. Microbiol 11 10.3389/FMICB.2020.590370.
Nash MJ , Frank DN , Friedman JE , 2017. Early microbes modify immune system development and metabolic homeostasis—The “Restaurant” hypothesis revisited. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 8 , 349. 10.3389/FENDO.2017.00349.29326657
Nelson PT , Alafuzoff I , Bigio EH , Bouras C , Braak H , Cairns NJ , Castellani RJ , Crain BJ , Davies P , Del Tredici K , Duyckaerts C , Frosch MP , Haroutunian V , Hof PR , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Iwatsubo T , Jellinger KA , Jicha GA , Kövari E , Kukull WA , Leverenz JB , Love S , Mackenzie IR , Mann DM , Masliah E , McKee AC , Montine TJ , Morris JC , Schneider JA , Sonnen JA , Thal DR , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Wisniewski T , Woltjer RL , Beach TG , 2012. Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 71 , 362–381. 10.1097/NEN.0B013E31825018F7.22487856
Nerius M , Doblhammer G , Tamgüney G , 2020. GI infections are associated with an increased risk of Parkinson’s disease. Gut. 10.1136/gutjnl-2019-318822.
Nho K , Kueider-Paisley A , MahmoudianDehkordi S , Arnold M , Risacher SL , Louie G , Blach C , Baillie R , Han X , Kastenmüller G , Jia W , Xie G , Ahmad S , Hankemeier T , van Duijn CM , Trojanowski JQ , Shaw LM , Weiner MW , Doraiswamy PM , Saykin AJ , Kaddurah-Daouk R , 2019. Altered bile acid profile in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: relationship to neuroimaging and CSF biomarkers. Alzheimers Dement. 15 , 232–244. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.08.012.30337152
Ni J , Wu GD , Albenberg L , Tomov VT , 2017. Gut microbiota and IBD: causation or correlation? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol 2017 14 10 14, 573–584. 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.88.28743984
Niu XL , Liu L , Song ZX , Li Q , Wang ZH , Zhang JL , Li HH , 2016. Prevalence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in Chinese patients with Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural Transm 123 , 1381–1386. 10.1007/s00702-016-1612-8.27589873
Okuzumi A , Hatano T , Ueno SI , Ogawa T , Saiki S , Mori A , Koinuma T , Oji Y , Ishikawa KI , Fujimaki M , Sato S , Ramamoorthy S , Mohney RP , Hattori N , 2019. Metabolomics-based identification of metabolic alterations in PARK2. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 6 , 525–536. 10.1002/acn3.724.30911576
Org E , Mehrabian M , Parks BW , Shipkova P , Liu X , Drake TA , Lusis AJ , 2016. Sex differences and hormonal effects on gut microbiota composition in mice. Gut Microbes 7 , 313–322. 10.1080/19490976.2016.1203502.27355107
Parikh IJ , Estus JL , Zajac DJ , Malik M , Maldonado Weng J , Tai LM , Chlipala GE , LaDu MJ , Green SJ , Estus S , 2020. Murine gut microbiome association with APOE alleles. Front. Immunol 11 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00200.
Park M , Pilla R , Panta A , Pandey S , Sarawichitr B , Suchodolski J , Sohrabji F , 2020. Reproductive senescence and ischemic stroke remodel the gut microbiome and modulate the effects of estrogen treatment in female rats. Transl. Stroke Res 11 , 812–830. 10.1007/S12975-019-00760-5.31845185
Pereira PAB , Aho VTE , Paulin L , Pekkonen E , Auvinen P , Scheperjans F , 2017. Oral and nasal microbiota in Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 38 , 61–67. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.02.026.28259623
Petrov VA , Saltykova IV , Zhukova IA , Alifirova VM , Zhukova NG , Dorofeeva YB , Tyakht AV , Kovarsky BA , Alekseev DG , Kostryukova ES , Mironova YS , Izhboldina OP , Nikitina MA , Perevozchikova TV , Fait EA , Babenko VV , Vakhitova MT , Govorun VM , Sazonov AE , 2017. Analysis of gut microbiota in patients with parkinson’s disease. Bull. Exp. Biol. Med 162 , 734–737. 10.1007/s10517-017-3700-7.28429209
Pietrucci D , Cerroni R , Unida V , Farcomeni A , Pierantozzi M , Mercuri NB , Biocca S , Stefani A , Desideri A , 2019. Dysbiosis of gut microbiota in a selected population of Parkinson’s patients. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 65 , 124–130. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.06.003.31174953
Pringsheim T , Jette N , Frolkis A , Steeves TDL , 2014. The prevalence of Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mov. Disord 29 , 1583–1590. 10.1002/MDS.25945.24976103
Qian Y , Yang X , Xu S , Wu C , Song Y , Qin N , Di Chen S , Xiao Q , 2018. Alteration of the fecal microbiota in Chinese patients with Parkinson’s disease. Brain Behav. Immun 70 , 194–202. 10.1016/j.bbi.2018.02.016.29501802
Qian Y , Yang X , Xu S , Huang P , Li B , Du J , He Y , Su B , Xu LM , Wang L , Huang R , Chen S , Xiao Q , 2020. Gut metagenomics-derived genes as potential biomarkers of Parkinson’s disease. Brain 143 , 2474–2489. 10.1093/brain/awaa201.32844199
Reid G , 1999. The scientific basis for probiotic strains of lactobacillus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol 65 , 3763.10473372
Rocca WA , Bower JH , Maraganore DM , Ahlskog JE , Grossardt BR , De Andrade M , Melton LJ , 2008. Increased risk of parkinsonism in women who underwent oophorectomy before menopause. Neurology 70 , 200–209. 10.1212/01.WNL.0000280573.30975.6A.17761549
Romano S , Savva GM , Bedarf JR , Charles IG , Hildebrand F , Narbad A , 2021. Meta-analysis of the Parkinson’s disease gut microbiome suggests alterations linked to intestinal inflammation. npj Park. Dis 7 10.1038/s41531-021-00156-z.
Rosas HD , Doros G , Bhasin S , Thomas B , Gevorkian S , Malarick K , Matson W , Hersch SM , 2015. A systems-level “misunderstanding”: the plasma metabolome in Huntington’s disease. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 2 , 756–768. 10.1002/acn3.214.26273688
Roth W , Cai A , Zhang C , Chen M , Merkler A , Kamel H , 2020. Gastrointestinal disorders and risk of first-ever ischemic stroke. Stroke 51 , 3577–3583. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.030643.33040706
Saji N , Murotani K , Hisada T , Tsuduki T , Sugimoto T , Kimura A , Niida S , Toba K , Sakurai T , 2019. The relationship between the gut microbiome and mild cognitive impairment in patients without dementia: a cross-sectional study conducted in Japan. Sci. Rep 9 10.1038/s41598-019-55851-y.
Saji N , Murotani K , Hisada T , Tsuduki T , Sugimoto T , Kimura A , Niida S , Toba K , Sakurai T , 2021. The association between cerebral small vessel disease and the gut microbiome: a cross-sectional analysis. J. Stroke Cerebrovasc. Dis 30 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.105568.
Sampson TR , Debelius JW , Thron T , Janssen S , Shastri GG , Ilhan ZE , Challis C , Schretter CE , Rocha S , Gradinaru V , Chesselet MF , Keshavarzian A , Shannon KM , Krajmalnik-Brown R , Wittung-Stafshede P , Knight R , Mazmanian SK , 2016. Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell 167 , 1469–1480.e12. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.018.27912057
Sampson TR , Challis C , Jain N , Moiseyenko A , Ladinsky MS , Shastri GG , Thron T , Needham BD , Horvath I , Debelius JW , Janssen S , Knight R , Wittung-Stafshede P , Gradinaru V , Chapman M , Mazmanian SK , 2020. A gut bacterial amyloid promotes a-synuclein aggregation and motor impairment in mice. Elife 9 . 10.7554/eLife.53111.
Sankaran-Walters S , Macal M , Grishina I , Nagy L , Goulart L , Coolidge K , Li J , Fenton A , Williams T , Miller MK , Flamm J , Prindiville T , George M , Dandekar S , 2013. Sex differences matter in the gut: effect on mucosal immune activation and inflammation. Biol. Sex Differ 4 , 10. 10.1186/2042-6410-4-10.23651648
Sepich-Poore GD , Zitvogel L , Straussman R , Hasty J , Wargo JA , Knight R , 2021. The microbiome and human cancer. Science 80-.), 371 . 10.1126/SCIENCE.ABC4552.
Settanni CR , Ianiro G , Bibbò S , Cammarota G , Gasbarrini A , 2021. Gut microbiota alteration and modulation in psychiatric disorders: Current evidence on fecal microbiota transplantation. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 109 , 110258. 10.1016/J.PNPBP.2021.110258.
Spychala MS , Venna VR , Jandzinski M , Doran SJ , Durgan DJ , Ganesh BP , Ajami NJ , Putluri N , Graf J , Bryan RM , McCullough LD , 2018. Age-related changes in the gut microbiota influence systemic inflammation and stroke outcome. Ann. Neurol 84 10.1002/ana.25250.
Stanley D , Mason LJ , Mackin KE , Srikhanta YN , Lyras D , Prakash MD , Nurgali K , Venegas A , Hill MD , Moore RJ , Wong CHY , 2016. Translocation and dissemination of commensal bacteria in post-stroke infection. Nat. Med 2016 22 11 22, 1277–1284. 10.1038/nm.4194.27694934
Steegenga WT , Mischke M , Lute C , Boekschoten MV , Pruis MG , Lendvai A , Verkade HJ , Boekhorst J , Timmerman HM , Plösch T , Müller M , 2014. Sexually dimorphic characteristics of the small intestine and colon of prepubescent C57BL/6 mice. Biol. Sex Differ 5 , 11. 10.1186/S13293-014-0011-9.25243059
Syeda T , Sanchez-Tapia M , Pinedo-Vargas L , Granados O , Cuervo-Zanatta D , Rojas-Santiago E , Díaz-Cintra S , Torres N , Perez-Cruz C , 2018. Bioactive food abates metabolic and synaptic alterations by modulation of gut microbiota in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 66 , 1657–1682. 10.3233/JAD-180556.30475761
Tan TG , Sefik E , Geva-Zatorsky N , Kua L , Naskar D , Teng F , Pasman L , Ortiz-Lopez A , Jupp R , Wu HJJ , Kasper DL , Benoist C , Mathis D , 2016. Identifying species of symbiont bacteria from the human gut that, alone, can induce intestinal Th17 cells in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 113 , E8141–E8150. 10.1073/pnas.1617460113.27911839
Tan AH , Chong CW , Lim SY , Yap IKS , Teh CSJ , Loke MF , Song SL , Tan JY , Ang BH , Tan YQ , Kho MT , Bowman J , Mahadeva S , Yong H. Sen , Lang AE , 2021. Gut microbial ecosystem in Parkinson disease: new clinicobiological insights from multi-omics. Ann. Neurol 89 , 546–559. 10.1002/ana.25982.33274480
Tetel MJ , de Vries GJ , Melcangi RC , Panzica G , O’Mahony SM , 2018. Steroids, stress and the gut microbiome-brain axis. J. Neuroendocrinol 30 10.1111/JNE.12548.
Tran TTT , Corsini S , Kellingray L , Hegarty C , Le Gall G , Narbad A , Muller M , Tejera N , O’Toole PW , Minihane AM , Vauzour D , 2019. APOE genotype influences the gut microbiome structure and function in humans and mice: relevance for Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology. FASEB J. 33 , 8221–8231. 10.1096/fj.201900071R.30958695
Vemuri R , Sylvia KE , Klein SL , Forster SC , Plebanski M , Eri R , Flanagan KL , 2019. The microgenderome revealed: sex differences in bidirectional interactions between the microbiota, hormones, immunity and disease susceptibility. Semin. Immunopathol 41 , 265. 10.1007/S00281-018-0716-7.30298433
Vendrik KEW , Ooijevaar RE , de Jong PRC , Laman JD , van Oosten BW , van Hilten JJ , Ducarmon QR , Keller JJ , Kuijper EJ , Contarino MF , 2020. Fecal microbiota transplantation in neurological disorders. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol 10 , 98. 10.3389/FCIMB.2020.00098/BIBTEX.32266160
Virani SS , Alonso A , Benjamin EJ , Bittencourt MS , Callaway CW , Carson AP , Chamberlain AM , Chang AR , Cheng S , Delling FN , Djousse L , Elkind MSV , Ferguson JF , Fornage M , Khan SS , Kissela BM , Knutson KL , Kwan TW , Lackland DT , Lewis TT , Lichtman JH , Longenecker CT , Loop MS , Lutsey PL , Martin SS , Matsushita K , Moran AE , Mussolino ME , Perak AM , Rosamond WD , Roth GA , Sampson UKA , Satou GM , Schroeder EB , Shah SH , Shay CM , Spartano NL , Stokes A , Tirschwell DL , VanWagner LB , Tsao CW , Wong SS , Heard DG , 2020. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2020 update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation E139–E596. 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000757.31992061
Vizcarra JA , Wilson-Perez HE , Fasano A , Espay AJ , 2018. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in Parkinson’s disease: tribulations of a trial. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2018.04.003.
Vogt NM , Kerby RL , Dill-McFarland KA , Harding SJ , Merluzzi AP , Johnson SC , Carlsson CM , Asthana S , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Bendlin BB , Rey FE , 2017. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 7 10.1038/S41598-017-13601-y.
Vogt NM , Romano KA , Darst BF , Engelman CD , Johnson SC , Carlsson CM , Asthana S , Blennow K , Zetterberg H , Bendlin BB , Rey FE , 2018. The gut microbiota-derived metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide is elevated in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther 10 10.1186/s13195-018-0451-2.
Vrieze A , Van Nood E , Holleman F , Salojärvi J , Kootte RS , Bartelsman JFWM , Dallinga-Thie GM , Ackermans MT , Serlie MJ , Oozeer R , Derrien M , Druesne A , Van Hylckama Vlieg JET , Bloks VW , Groen AK , Heilig HGHJ , Zoetendal EG , Stroes ES , De Vos WM , Hoekstra JBL , Nieuwdorp M , 2012. Transfer of intestinal microbiota from lean donors increases insulin sensitivity in individuals with metabolic syndrome. Gastroenterology 143 , 913–916.e7. 10.1053/J.GASTRO.2012.06.031.22728514
Walker F , 2007. Huntington’s disease. Lancet (London, England) 369 , 218–228. 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60111-1.
Wallace JG , Potts RH , Szamosi JC , Surette MG , Sloboda DM , 2018. The murine female intestinal microbiota does not shift throughout the estrous cycle. PLoS One 13 , e0200729. 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0200729.30011327
Wan L , Zhou X , Wang C , Chen Z , Peng H , Hou Xuan , Peng Y , Wang P , Li T , Yuan H , Shi Y , Hou Xiaocan , Xu K , Xie Y , He L , Xia K , Tang B , Jiang H , 2019. Alterations of the gut microbiota in multiple system atrophy patients. Front. Neurosci 13 , 1102. 10.3389/fnins.2019.01102.31680836
Wang J , Tanila H , Puoliväli J , Kadish I , van Groen T , 2003. Gender differences in the amount and deposition of amyloidbeta in APPswe and PS1 double transgenic mice. Neurobiol. Dis 14 , 318–327. 10.1016/J.NBD.2003.08.009.14678749
Wang X , Liu GJ , Gao Q , Li N , Wang R. Tao , 2020. C-type lectin-like receptor 2 and zonulin are associated with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neurol. Scand 141 , 250–255. 10.1111/ane.13196.31715011
Wasser CI , Mercieca EC , Kong G , Hannan AJ , McKeown SJ , Glikmann-Johnston Y , Stout JC , 2020. Gut dysbiosis in Huntington’s disease: associations among gut microbiota, cognitive performance and clinical outcomes. Brain Commun. 2 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa110.
Winek K , Engel O , Koduah P , Heimesaat MM , Fischer A , Bereswill S , Dames C , Kershaw O , Gruber AD , Curato C , Oyama N , Meisel C , Meisel A , Dirnagl U , 2016. Depletion of cultivatable gut microbiota by broad-spectrum antibiotic pretreatment worsens outcome after murine stroke. Stroke. 47 , 1354. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.011800.27056982
Xu R , Tan C , Zhu J , Zeng X , Gao X , Wu Q , Chen Q , Wang H , Zhou H , He Y , Pan S , Yin J , 2019. Dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota in neurocritically ill patients and the risk for death. Crit. Care 23 . 10.1186/S13054-019-2488-4.
Yang S , Li Xinye , Yang F , Zhao R , Pan X , Liang J , Tian L , Li Xiaoya , Liu L , Xing Y , Wu M , 2019. Gut microbiota-dependent marker TMAO in promoting cardiovascular disease: inflammation mechanism, clinical prognostic, and potential as a therapeutic target. Front. Pharmacol 0 , 1360. 10.3389/FPHAR.2019.01360.
Yang LL , Millischer V , Rodin S , MacFabe DF , Villaescusa JC , Lavebratt C , 2020. Enteric short-chain fatty acids promote proliferation of human neural progenitor cells. J. Neurochem 154 , 635–646. 10.1111/jnc.14928.31784978
Yatsunenko T , Rey FE , Manary MJ , Trehan I , Dominguez-Bello MG , Contreras M , Magris M , Hidalgo G , Baldassano RN , Anokhin AP , Heath AC , Warner B , Reeder J , Kuczynski J , Caporaso JG , Lozupone CA , Lauber C , Clemente JC , Knights D , Knight R , Gordon JI , 2012. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Nature 486 , 222. 10.1038/NATURE11053.22699611
Yin J , Liao S , He Y , Wang S , Xia G , Liu F , Zhu J , You C , Chen Q , Zhou L , Pan S , Zhou H , 2015. Dysbiosis of gut microbiota with reduced trimethylamine-N-oxide level in patients with large-artery atherosclerotic stroke or transient ischemic attack. J. Am. Hear. Assoc. Cardiovasc. Cerebrovasc. Dis 4 10.1161/JAHA.115.002699.
Yuan X , Chen R , Zhang Y , Lin X , Yang X , 2020. Sexual dimorphism of gut microbiota at different pubertal status. Microb. Cell Factories 19 . 10.1186/s12934-020-014122.
Zeng X , Gao X , Peng Y , Wu Q , Zhu J , Tan C , Xia G , You C , Xu R , Pan S , Zhou H , He Y , Yin J , 2019. Higher risk of stroke is correlated with increased opportunistic pathogen load and reduced levels of butyrate-producing bacteria in the gut. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol 9 10.3389/FCIMB.2019.00004.
Zhai Q , Wang X , Chen C , Tang Y , Wang Y , Tian J , Zhao Y , Liu X , 2019. Prognostic value of plasma trimethylamine N-oxide levels in patients with acute ischemic stroke. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol 39 , 1201–1206. 10.1007/S10571-019-00714-3.31332666
Zhang W , JY N , C H , 2020. Associations of OSAHS complicated by cerebral infarction with intestinal flora, inflammatory factors, homocysteine and adiponectin expression. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci 24 , 12993–12999. 10.26355/EURREV_202012_24204.33378050
Zhu C , Li G , Lv Z , Li J , Wang X , Kang J , C Z , 2020. Association of plasma trimethylamine-N-oxide levels with post-stroke cognitive impairment: a 1-year longitudinal study. Neurol. Sci 41 , 57–63. 10.1007/S10072-019-04040-W.31420758
Zore T , Palafox M , Reue K , 2018. Sex differences in obesity, lipid metabolism, and inflammation-A role for the sex chromosomes? Mol. Metab 15 , 35–44. 10.1016/J.MOLMET.2018.04.003.29706320
Zou Y , Chen T , 2020. Engineered Akkermansia muciniphila: a promising agent against diseases (Review). Exp. Ther. Med 20 , 1–10. 10.3892/ETM.2020.9415.32934666
