LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0101032
1015
Biochem Pharmacol
Biochem Pharmacol
Biochemical pharmacology
0006-2952
1873-2968

35219701
9159505
10.1016/j.bcp.2022.114979
NIHMS1787790
Article
Therapeutic Strategies for Tauopathies and Drug Repurposing as a Potential Approach
Islam Majedul †*
Shen Fengyun †
Regmi Deepika †
Du Deguo †*
† Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida 33431, United States
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: mislam2018@fau.edu, ddu@fau.edu
28 5 2022
4 2022
24 2 2022
01 4 2023
198 114979114979
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Tauopathies are neurodegenerative diseases characterized by the deposition of abnormal tau in the brain. To date, there are no disease-modifying therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) for the treatment of tauopathies. In the past decades, extensive efforts have been provided to develop disease-modifying therapies to treat tauopathies. Specifically, exploring existing drugs with the intent of repurposing for the treatment of tauopathies affords a reasonable alternative to discover potent drugs for treating these formidable diseases. Drug repurposing will not only reduce formulation and development stage effort and cost but will also take a key advantage of the established toxicological studies, which is one of the main causes of clinical trial failure of new molecules. In this review, we provide an overview of the current treatment strategies for tauopathies and the recent progress in drug repurposing as an alternative approach to treat tauopathies.

Graphical Abstract

tau
tauopathy
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)
post-translational modifications (PTMs)
phosphorylated tau (p-tau)
microtubule (MT)
repurposing

pmc1 INTRODUCTION

The microtubule-associated protein (MAP) tau was identified by Weingarten et al. in 1975 as adulteration in purified microtubule (MT) [1]. Within the brain, tau is highly populated in the axonal part of neuronal cells [2]. It is also distributed in dendrites, nucleus, cell membrane, synapses, and outside of the cell such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [3–5]. Structural modifications and external influences can lead to abnormalities of tau. More than twenty different neurodegenerative diseases are found to be related to abnormalities of tau [6,7]. Tauopathies are neurodegenerative disorders marked by aberrant tau accumulation in the brain [7].

The involvement of different anatomical sites, cell types, and the existence of various tau variants in the pathological deposits define the neuropathological classifications of tauopathies [7]. The word primary tauopathy is used when tau buildup is the principal neuropathological feature [8]. Although tau aggregates are the main etiological conditions for primary tauopathies, clinical presentations may vary greatly and overlap between diseases, creating complicated manifestations of clinical syndromes [9]. Several types of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) are classified as primary tauopathies, which include a behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 (FTDP-17), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) syndrome, corticobasal syndrome (CBS), and traumatic encephalopathy syndromes (TES) [10–15]. Secondary tauopathies are marked as the condition where tau deposition may coexist with other types of etiological features. Even though the term ‘secondary tauopathy’ implies a subsidiary or downstream role of tau, there may be no direct correlation between tau and other pathological causes [8]. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a classic example of secondary tauopathy, whereby tau aggregates intracellularly to form neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid-β (Aβ) plaque formation takes place in extracellular space. However, the underlying correlation between Aβ plaques and tau deposition is yet to be determined [8].

As of the current date, there are no disease-modifying therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) for the treatment of tauopathies. The enormous therapeutic challenge may in part be attributed to the poor characterization of the diseases related to tauopathies along with unresolved underlying biological processes related to the pathogenesis of tauopathies. These may also be part of the reasons that numerous new drug candidates for the treatment of tauopathies failed in different stages of clinical trials. Many more new agents are still in clinical trials with the hope to find effective drugs for the treatment of tauopathies. Even though the current pipeline of new drugs is long, these candidates must go through a long way to see the light at the end of the tunnel. Therefore, exploring existing drugs with the intent of repurposing affords an alternative to discover potent candidates for the treatment of these formidable diseases. Drug repurposing is an approach of recognizing novel applications of approved or investigational drugs besides their originally endorsed therapeutic indications [16]. Repurposing offers advantages over new drug development such as a lowered risk of failure as the medication has already established safety data from preclinical models and early stages of human trials, which also can aid in the minimization of cost and time required for the formulation and development steps [17,18]. In this review, we give an overview of tau and tauopathies, current treatment strategies for tauopathies, and recent progress in drug repurposing as an alternative approach to treat tauopathies.

2 TAU PROTEIN

Six different isoforms of tau have been recognized (Fig. 1) [19]. The longest isoform (2N4R) contains 441 residues. It is amphipathic in nature with asymmetric charge distribution along the chain [20]. The primary sequence of tau can be divided into several regions where the N-terminus (with two inserts, N1, N2) is followed by the proline-rich region (P1 and P2), the microtubule binding region composed of four pseudo-repeats (R1-R4), and finally a shorter C- terminal tail (Fig. 1). Two hexapeptide motifs, 275VQIINK280 in R2 and 306VQIVYK311 in R3, are known for their high tendencies to form β-sheet structures [21,22]. The N-terminal inserts and the R2 repeat can be omitted in different tau isoforms. The two N-terminal inserts can be partly or completely missing in four isoforms (1N4R, 1N3R, 0N4R, and 0N3R), and the R2 repeat is missing in 2N3R, 1N3R, and 0N3R isoforms (Fig. 1) [23]. The human brain equally expresses 3R and 4R tau [24] with some variations as seen in granular cells of the dentate gyrus, which only express 3R isoform [25]. The shortest tau isoform 0N3R is only found in fetal human brain, while other isoforms are expressed in adult human brain [26]. The ratio of 3R and 4R tau isoforms may play a vital role in the development of etiological characters of neurodegenerative diseases: 3R tau is the dominant species in Pick’s disease (PiD), while 4R tau is the major isoform in progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), and globular glial tauopathy (GGT). However, dementia-related neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) from AD consist of a mixture of 3R and 4R tau [7,27].

The biological functions of Tau are diverse. Tau might be a key component for several signaling pathways [27]. As an intrinsically disordered protein, tau has a natural tendency to fluctuate in different tertiary conformations [28–30]. The flexible structure along with its presentation in various isoforms is indicative of the interactions of tau with miscellaneous partners and signaling pathways [31]. At dendrites of neurons, it might have a role in signaling for tyrosine kinase family such as Src and Fyn kinases [32,33]. Tau was also reported to bind with nucleic acids, suggesting its involvement in nuclear localization and chromatin remodeling (reviewed by [27]). Tau is also widely recognized for its role in assisting microtubule (MT) stability. MTs act as tracks for the transportation of cargo in the axonal transport system [34]. The repeat regions of tau (Fig. 1) bind to the MT surface (Fig. 2a) to promote tubulin assembly, and thereby help in maintaining the integrity of the axonal transport system [35,36].

3 AGGREGATION OF TAU

Tau is an intrinsically disordered protein and is highly soluble in an aqueous solution [37]. It usually requires external cofactors for triggering the aggregation of tau (Fig. 2c). In vitro, negatively charged co-factor molecules such as heparin, fatty acids, lipids, carboxylated microspheres, or RNA can induce aggregation of tau by assisting in overcoming the nucleation barrier in the aggregation [38–41]. Under in vivo conditions, RNA and lipid membranes may play a similar role in the aggregation of tau, and their interactions with tau are documented in several investigations [42–44]. Polyanionic molecules electrostatically interact with positively charged residues in the repeat regions of tau, and the interactions reduce the net charge of tau and stabilize the β-conformation [36]. The repeat fragments (R2 and R3) contain the short hexapeptide motifs that are crucial to initiate fibrillation of tau through the development of paired helical filaments (PHFs) [45]. These hexapeptide motifs are reported as the smallest structural units required to induce tau aggregation through the formation of β-sheets [36,46–48]. The PHF formed by the first hexapeptide motif 275VQIINK280 in the R2 region is termed PHF6*, and the PHF formed by the 306VQIVYK311 sequence in the R3 region is known as PHF6. The 4R isoforms of tau contain both PHF6* and PHF6 motifs, whereas the 3R isoforms contain only PHF6 [47,48]. Structurally, PHF is a twisted left-handed helical ribbon with a width of 8 – 20 nm (Fig. 2d) [49]. Another minor filamentous structure of around 15 nm width termed as straight filaments (SFs) is also present in NFTs in AD (Fig. 2d) [50].

While the formation of NFTs is one of the hallmarks of tauopathies, elevated levels of oligomeric tau species have also been found to be correlated with the onset of tauopathies like AD and PSP (reviewed by [51]). Administration of oligomeric species of tau to wild-type mice (C57BL/6) resulted in cognitive deficits and reduced synaptic function due to mitochondrial malfunction [52]. Berger et al. identified two types of tau oligomers (140 and 170 kDa) that are associated with the early stages of disease progression in tauopathic mouse model (rTg4510) [53]. Also, granular oligomers of tau composed of ~40 monomers were detected in the frontal cortex of patients in the early stages of AD when NFTs and clinical symptoms were absent [54].

4 EFFECT OF POST-TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATION ON TAU AGGREGATION AND TAUOPATHIES

Post-translational modifications (PTMs) can convert functional tau into filamentous depositions in tauopathies (reviewed by [55]). Examples of PTM of tau include phosphorylation, acetylation, glycosylation, glycation, ubiquitination, small ubiquitin-like modification (SUMOylation), and truncation (reviewed by [55,56]). Among these PTMs, phosphorylation of tau is recognized to be crucial for NFT formation, memory impairments, and neuronal damages [57]. Serine (Ser), threonine (Thr), and tyrosine (Tyr) are the putative phosphorylation sites in tau [55]. The phosphorylation of tau is promoted by kinases like glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β) while protein phosphatases (PP) such as PP1, PP2A, and PP5 dephosphorylate tau [58]. Tau kinase enzymes can be broadly classified into three major groups: proline-directed protein kinases (PDPK), non-PDP kinases, and Tyr kinases [51]. Generally, functional tau is only slightly phosphorylated [59], with 2–3 moles of phosphate per mole of normal tau [60]. This modest amount of phosphorylation is essential for tau to function optimally as a microtubule assembly regulator, whereas hyperphosphorylated tau loses its physiological function [61]. The rate of hyperphosphorylation might be inversely related to tau's affinity to MTs [55]. Hyperphosphorylation may induce conformational change to disengage tau (Fig. 2b) from the MT surface [62]. These soluble tau molecules can be further modified by other PTM events, resulting in more conformational changes that would cause misfolded tau to form oligomers, which might serve as nucleation sites for fibrillation and NFT formation (Fig. 2) [63,64]. Tau hyperphosphorylation and NFT formation in hippocampus are the major pathological hallmarks of AD [65]. In the cases of primary tauopathies, hyperphosphorylated tau can also accumulate in different regions of the brain like the brainstem in PSP and CBD and the frontal lobe in FTD [66].

While phosphorylation of tau introduces negative charges via the addition of phosphate groups [67], acetylation on the Lys residues neutralizes the positive charge of Lys side chain [56]. The longest isoform of tau (2N4R) has 44 Lys residues that can be acetylated. Acetylation of Lys may prevent other PTMs such as ubiquitination, SUMOylation, methylation, and glycation (reviewed by [68]). It also been suggested that the acetylation of tau might compromise the ability of tau to bind MTs [69]. One mouse model study reported that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) regulates the acetylation of the KXGS motifs (consisting of KIGS and KCGS motifs) in the MT-binding domain of tau [70]. Acetylation at Lys259, Lys290, Lys321 or Lys353 in KXGS motifs was detected in normal tau (reviewed by [71]), while acetylation at Lys280 in a KXGS motif was identified in both primary (e.g., AGD, PiD, FTDP 17, and PSP) and secondary (e.g., AD) tauopathies [72]. The effects of acetylation on the fibril formation of tau reported in the literatures are contradictory. Some reported that tau acetylation favors fibril formation in an in vitro environment [69], while other studies showed that tau acetylation inhibits heparin-induced fibril assembly of tau [70,73].

Attachment of saccharides on tau can play an important role in the functionality of tau. Glycans can be attached to Ser and Thr through O-glycosylation or to Asn through N-glycosylation. O-glycosylation might help maintaining functional tau, while N-glycosylation promotes fibril formation (reviewed by [34]). Attachment of a monosaccharide O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) on Ser and Thr residues of tau through O-GlcNAcylation was reported to decrease tau hyperphosphorylation in a mouse model [74]. On the other hand, N-glycosylation on the hyperphosphorylated tau can stabilize PHF and suppress phosphatase activities [74,75].

Under normal physiological conditions, tau can be cleared up by autophagy-lysosomal and ubiquitin-proteasomal processes, just like other proteins [76,77]. Improper ubiquitination of tau may result in aggregation and NFT formation [34,78]. SUMOylation is found to inhibit ubiquitination and degradation of tau, suggesting its pathogenic role in tauopathies [34,77]. SUMOylation of the Lys residue can also induce hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of tau [77,79]. Tau was found to have two small ubiquitin-like modifier SUMO consensus sequences and a major SUMOylation site at Lys340 [79]. As mentioned above, a variety of protease enzymes are involved in the clearance of tau through proteasomal degradation system [76]. The cleavage of tau by these enzymes could form modified tau species related to the disease development [80]. More than fifty distinct tau fragments produced from proteolytic cleavage have been proposed to be linked to tauopathies (reviewed by [23]). Deposition of the C-terminal truncated tau has been linked to cognitive loss and the early phases of neurofibrillary pathology in AD patients [81]. Calpain cleavage produces tau 45–230 fragment and overexpression of the protein in a mouse model caused neuronal death and synaptic damage [82–84]. Another proteolytic enzyme family caspase can cleave tau after the Asp residue to generate fragments witnessed in AD and PSP origin [85–87].

5 CURRENT TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR TAUOPATHIES

Currently, there is no US FDA-approved disease-modifying agent available for the treatment of tauopathies. Drugs that are approved for other neurodegenerative diseases are used as off-label medications for the management of cognitive and behavioral symptoms in tauopathies. For instance, memantine, a prescription drug used for symptomatic relief of AD, has an off-label use for the cognitive and behavioral symptoms in other tauopathies. However, the outcome of the treatment remained inconsistent, and worsening of the cognition in some individuals was observed [88,89]. AD symptomatic relief drug acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as donepezil might be helpful in the management of memory dysfunction in other tauopathies, but their safety and efficacy need to be proven by clinical trials [88,89]. Levodopa or dopamine agonists, symptomatic relievers for Parkinson’s disease (PD), could help to minimize motor symptoms such as bradykinesia or rigidity [88,89]. Most of these drugs are only used for the symptomatic management of the disease but not for slowing down or stopping the progression of tauopathies; over time, they may become resistant or even worsen the underlying conditions [8].

Searching through clinicaltrials.gov with the keyword “tauopathies” shows around 2600 results at the current moment, indicating the vastness of attempts to tackle these diseases. Major therapeutic approaches in clinical trial development for various tauopathies include tau aggregation inhibitors, gene therapy, immunotherapy, kinase inhibitors, O-GlcNAcase inhibitors, microtubule stabilizers, etc. Table 1 lists examples of recent clinical trials and outcomes.

5.1 Tau aggregation inhibitors

Tau aggregation is the major pathological hallmark of tauopathies where neurofibrillary tangles containing full-length and truncated tau may lead to dementia [90,91]. Therefore, molecules that can inhibit tau aggregation may serve as effective drug candidates to treat tauopathies. A breakthrough came with methylene blue (or methylthioninium chloride, MTC) from the phenothiazine family, which was reported to reverse PHFs by blocking the interaction of tau-tau repeat domains [90]. Later, a study reported that MTC helped in maintaining monomeric tau by oxidizing cysteine sulfhydryl groups in tau [92]. However, due to its polymorphic nature, MTC exists as a mixture of reduced [leucomethylthioninium (LMT)] and oxidized (MT+) forms which caused inhomogeneity in dose-response in a phase II clinical trial [91]. Salified forms of LMT such as leucomethylthioninium dihydromesylate (LMTM, TRx0237) may solve the problem as it maintains a single polymorph [93]. LMTM also shares the same mode of action against tauopathy as that of MTC (Fig. 3) [94]. Unfortunately, a phase III clinical trial (Table 1) of LMTM with mild-to-moderate AD and bvFTD patients did not show significant improvement of disease conditions [95,96]. Another phase III clinical trial (Table 1) of the drug in patients with AD and mild cognitive impairment due to AD (MCI-AD) started in January 2018. The estimated study completion date is December 2022 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03446001, [8]).

Anle138b [5-(1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-3-(3-bromophenyl)-1H-pyrazole] is a promising aggregation inhibitor of several amyloidogenic proteins including tau, α-synuclein, and Aβ [97–99]. In transgenic tauopathic PS19 mice model overexpressing P301S mutant human tau, symptoms such as behavioral deficits and high mortality were ameliorated by anle138b [97]. The treatment also improved cognition, decreased synaptic and neuronal loss, and reduced gliosis in the hippocampus. In vitro fluorescence studies from the same group reported that Anle138b was able to dissociate preformed tau aggregates (Fig. 3). Furthermore, this small molecule was also found to inhibit the formation of toxic oligomers of tau. A simulation study suggested that anle138b can diminish the total quantity of intermolecular hydrogen bonds that remodel the conformational dispersions inside the small oligomeric peptide, and efficiently hinder interpeptide main chain interactions to impede the formation of ordered β-sheet structures [100]. A human phase I clinical trial of the drug (NCT04208152) on healthy subject to assess the safety was successfully completed in 2020 (Table 1). The drug is currently in recruiting state for PD in another phase I clinical trial (NCT04685265). Grape seed polyphenolic extract (GPSE) is also an aggregation inhibitor of tau. In an in vitro study, GPSE inhibited the aggregation of synthetic Ac-306VQIVYK311 tau fragment peptide and dissociated the preformed peptide aggregates [101]. Furthermore, GSPE significantly hampered tau oligomerization (Fig. 3) by interfering with the early phases of self-assembly of the fragment peptide [101]. A phase II clinical trial (NCT02033941) to investigate the effect of GSPE (Table 1) as an anti-oligomerization agent in AD is ongoing [102]. The primary goal of the study is to analyze the pharmacokinetics profile and the effects of the drug on tau and abnormally phosphorylated tau in CSF.

5.2 Gene therapy

Gene therapies have shown great potential in the intervention of tauopathies. Silencing gene involved in the development of malfunctional tau may help in lowering the level of toxic tau species. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), a small synthetic nucleic acid polymer, can regulate specific gene expression. As such, ASOs may play a significant role in the inhibition of toxic tau expression via complementary blocking of mRNA translation. A clinical trial on ASO class therapy for tauopathy (with BIIB080, developed by IONIS Pharmaceuticals) in mild AD (Table 1) is expected to complete by May 2022 (NCT03186989). In preclinical studies with P301S tau transgenic mice, BIIB080 exhibited a 50% reduction of tau expression, leading to the reduction of neurofibrillary toxicities and lessened neuronal loss [103,104].

5.3 Immunotherapy

Boosting the immune system to neutralize toxic tau species is an immunotherapeutic approach for treating tauopathies. The development of active immunization such as vaccination may provide an antibody-like response that would potentially inhibit malicious tau or a specific part of tau fibrils. AADvac1 vaccine was developed against the NFTs. It was the first NFT inhibitor vaccine to move into clinical trials. More specifically, AADvac1 targets the aggregation-prone truncated tau repeat region as the immunotherapeutic approach [105]. The antigenic component of the AADvac1 vaccine is a synthetic peptide generated from 4R tau's residual backbone (294–305), connected to keyhole limpet hemocyanin via an N-terminal cysteine, and administered with an Al-hydrogel alum adjuvant [8,106,107]. The results of a phase II clinical trial (Table 1) of the vaccine with mild AD patients (NCT02579252) were published in June 2021. The vaccine was found safe and tolerable to the treatment group, and it rallied robust antibody responses among nearly all participants; unfortunately, the vaccine did not slow cognitive decline activity [108].

Other tau targeting antibodies have also been developed. Two distinct epitopes from discontinuous segments of the tau sequence, 7EFE9, and 313VDLSKVTSKC322 [109–111], are targeted by AD-specific antibodies such as MC1 and Alz50. MC1 antibody can identify conformational changes of tau during pathologic development. In 2018, humanized MC1 monoclonal antibody Zagotenemab (also known as LY3303560) enrolled a phase II clinical trial (Table 1) to treat early AD (NCT03518073), but failed to meet the primary endpoint as declared in October 2021 [112]. Gosuranemab (also known as BIIB092, BMS-986168, IPN007), a passive immunotherapy constituted with humanized IgG4 monoclonal anti-tau antibody, was developed for the treatment of primary tauopathies (CBS, non-fluent variant PPA as nfvPPA, TES, PSP) and AD [113]. The antibody was built against extracellular, N-terminal fragments of tau to stop spreading tauopathies in healthy cells [113]. A phase Ib clinical trial of the treatment was terminated due to failure to meet the primary targets (NCT03658135). In 2019, another phase II investigation of Gosuranemab (Table 1) in PSP was discontinued as the drug did not meet the efficacy goal (NCT03068468) [114].

5.4 Kinase inhibitors

Phosphorylation is one of the most critical PTMs of tau. The presence of overwhelming numbers of potential phosphorylation sites (more than 80) in tau residual sequence [56,115] and the hyperactivation of various kinase enzymes during pathological development justifies the research approaches targeting phosphorylation of tau. Fyn, a Src Tyr kinase, is overactivated during the pathogenesis of AD. This may lead to tau phosphorylation at Tyr18, toxic oligomeric Aβ development, and increased level of cellular prion protein (PrPc) [116]. The small molecule anticancer drug Saracatinib (AZD0530) (Fig 3), a Fyn inhibitor, exhibited repressive activities against Aβ deposition and tau aggregation along with the reduction of synaptic loss and memory deficits in the transgenic mice model [117,118]. Although the drug was well tolerated in the phase I clinical trial [119], it failed in the phase II trial (Table 1) (NCT02167256) due to the lack of pharmacological effect along with gastrointestinal side effects in AD patients [120].

AD was reported to be linked with abnormalities in p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) which might induce Aβ toxicity and activate several tau kinases (reviewed by [51]). LM11A, a small molecular inhibitor of p75NTR, presented in vitro activities against GSK-3β, cyclin dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), c-Jun kinases, and reduced tau phosphorylation (Fig 3) significantly in a mouse model of AD [121]. A phase II clinical trial (Table 1) of the intervention in patients with mild to moderate AD was completed in 2020, though the results are yet to be published. Another drug Tideglusib (NP031112, NP-12, Nypta®, Zentylor™) (Table 1), a thiadiazolidinone derivative, was reported to inhibit GSK-3β (Fig 3) in animal models but failed in clinical trials for AD (NCT00948259) and PSP (NCT01049399) as no significant results were observed [8,122].

5.5 O-GlcNAcase inhibitors

In comparison to a healthy brain, the degree of O-GlcNAcylation of tau can decrease rapidly in the AD brain, and this event might have an inverse correlation with tau hyperphosphorylation [123]. O-GlcNAcase (OGA) hydrolyzes O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (N-GlcNAc). By preventing OGA from hydrolyzing N-GlcNAc at the residual side chains of tau, OGA inhibitors may serve as potential drug development targets (Fig 3) [124]. In fact, in transgenic mice, a small molecule OGA inhibitor (Thiamet-G) proved successful in decreasing the amounts of tau aggregates [125]. Later, a small molecule OGA inhibitor (MK-8719) completed a phase I clinical trial for tauopathies [126]. The drug was claimed to produce favorable human pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic effects in the blood. Though the drug was awarded orphan drug status by US FDA [126], further development was not reported. Another OGA inhibitor, ASN120290, boosted O-GlcNAcylated tau and diminished tau phosphorylation [127]. In phase I trials (Table 1), the drug was registered safe [128] and the phase II clinical trials of the drug for PSP treatment has started [129].

5.6 Microtubule (MT) stabilizers

Microtubules (MT) maintain the integrity of axonal transport system [34] and tau helps maintain the stability of MTs [35]. In the case of loss-of-function of tau in tauopathies, means of stabilizing MT may benefit the treatment for the diseases (Fig. 4). A cancer chemotherapeutic agent taxol was reported to stabilize MTs in stress conditions such as cold-and calcium ion-induced depolymerization [130]. A taxol-derived small molecule TPI 287, also known as Abeotaxane, has an excellent ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) [131] and has a potential MT stabilization effect. A phase I trial (Table 1) of the molecule on CBS or PSP (NCT02133846) and mild to moderate AD (NCT01966666) ended when dose dependent worsening of disease conditions and hypersensitivity reactions were discovered [132]. Epothilone D (BMS-241027), a macrolide-derived investigational anti-cancer drug, was found to be capable of stabilizing MTs [133]. It can also cross the BBB, increase MT density, and reduce cognitive deficits as reported in studies on PS19 tau transgenic mice [133]. The phase 1/2 study (Table 1) (NCT01492374) results of Epothilone D in 40 mild AD patients were not published, and the development was discontinued afterward.

A growth factor-derived neuropeptide Davunetide can stabilize MTs in neurons through an unknown mechanism. Davunetide (NAP, AL-108) is an eight-residue oligopeptide (Asn-Ala-Pro-Val-Ser-Ile-Pro-Gln) developed from the activity-dependent neurotrophic protein (ADNP) [134]. In mice models, Davunetide decreased tau phosphorylation, stabilized MTs, attenuated cognitive deficit, and restored axonal transport [135–137]. A phase II study of Davunetide (Table 1) in different primary tauopathies (PSP, FTD-Tau, CBS, and nfvPPA) (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01056965) was unsuccessful and the drug was discontinued from further development [138].

6 DRUGS WITH REPURPOSING POTENTIAL FOR THE TREATMENT OF TAUOPHATHIES

As aforementioned, while many promising clinical trials are underway, to date, there is no landmark treatment available for tauopathies, and the need for effective treatments against tauopathies is urgent. As such, repurposing of existing drugs may expedite the search for effective therapeutic agents. Numerous classes of drugs including anticancer, antidepressants, antidiabetic, antimicrobials, antipsychotics, cholesterol-lowering agents, iron chelators, L-carnitine derivatives, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), phosphodiesterases (PDEs) inhibitors, and proton pump inhibitors have the potential for being used for the treatment of tauopathies. Various drug candidates under the niche areas and their probable mechanism against tauopathies are the subjects of the following discussion.

6.1 Anticancer drugs

Anticancer drugs could be appealing candidates for therapeutic repurposing in tauopathies. Many anticancer medications have shown promise in preclinical research, suggesting that they could be repurposed to treat tauopathies and other neurodegenerative diseases. In this section, two specific group of anticancer drugs, cell cycle inhibitors and kinase inhibitors, will be discussed as potential disease-modifying drugs for treating tauopathies.

6.1.1 Cell cycle inhibitors

A group of anticancer drugs, known as cell cycle inhibitors, may act as suitable candidates for repurposing in tauopathies as these drugs can stabilize MT polymerization by providing dynamic stability to the mitotic spindle [139]. Antimitotic breast cancer drug paclitaxel (common brand name taxol) induces apoptosis in cancer cells by stabilizing the MT, arresting the cell cycle at the G2/M stage [140–142]. Polymers of MTs are formed through a head-to- tail assembly of two globular proteins, α-tubulin and β-tubulin. MTs can switch between lengthening and shortening phases known as dynamic instability. This instability is needed for the transference of chromosomes to the opposite terminal of the mitotic spindle during the cell cycle [143]. Paclitaxel binds to β-tubulin subunits and disrupts MT dynamics (Fig. 4), promoting mitotic arrest [144]. In tauopathies, a low dose of paclitaxel may provide a positive therapeutic effect by stabilizing MT [145]. It has been suggested that tau and paclitaxel may stabilize MT protofilaments through distinctive mechanisms, which could be mutually exclusive. Paclitaxel promotes polymerization of MT through seeding of smaller protofilaments (length of ~2 μm) [146] while the MTs stabilized by tau are much longer (length of ~ 20 μm) [147].

Another group of antimitotic drug Vinca alkaloids (e.g., vinblastine, vincristine) suppress dynamic instability of mitotic spindle microtubules and activate mitotic spindle checkpoint for mitotic arrest [148,149]. One major downside noted for these drugs (including paclitaxel) was the induction of tau hyperphosphorylation at a higher dose though lower dose effects were relatively inconsequential on neuroblastoma cell line study [148].

6.1.2 Kinase inhibitor anticancer drugs

During pathological development, tau can be hyperphosphorylated by several classes of kinases. Some anticancer drugs are suggested to have promising activities against various kinases that hyperphosphorylate tau. CDKs, the catalytic elements of a group of mammalians heterodimeric Ser/Thr kinases, play an important regulatory function in the brain. CDKs are involved in the control of cell-cycle progression, transcription and neuronal function [150]. Though CDKs are required to be activated by regulatory subunits cyclins, CDK5 is different as its activation is not controlled by cyclins. To exert its catalytic activities, CDK5 monomers are required to be activated by two brain-specific regulatory subunits namely p35 or p39 [151]. Defects on CDK5 can result in the development of malfunctioning nervous system [150]. During neurotoxicity, p35 can be cleaved by calcium-regulated calpains to p25 [152], and p25-CDK5 interaction may stabilize different dimeric forms of CDK5 and alter the substrate specificity, which might potentially lead to tau phosphorylation and neurodegeneration [153]. A bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) screening study on 1700 small drug molecules identified tamoxifen, a drug for breast cancer treatment, as a blocker of CDK5/p25 interaction (Fig. 5) [154]. Tamoxifen can preferentially bind with p25, which would ultimately decrease tau phosphorylation as reported in a neuronal cell model study [154].

The longest human tau isoform contains five Tyr residues in the primary protein structure. Hyperphosphorylated tau at Tyr18 and Tyr394 were found in samples of the AD brain [155,156]. In cotransfected cells, Tyr394 was reported to be phosphorylated preferentially by Abelson murine leukemia (Abl) [156]. FDA-approved chronic myeloid leukemia drug nilotinib [157], a small molecular Abl inhibitor (Fig. 5) [158], demonstrated the capacity to decline p-tau in pre-clinical studies [159]; thereby it can modulate brain and peripheral immune profiles and reverse cognitive decline in AD models [160]. A phase II clinical trial (Table 2) in 42 patients with mild to moderate AD (NCT02947893) marked nilotinib as a safe drug. The trial also reported that nilotinib achieved significant CSF concentration to produce pharmacological activities [160]. Besides, nilotinib and bosutinib (another chronic myeloid leukemia drug) demonstrated the potential to decline p-tau from hippocampus, cortex, brainstem and thalamus of P301L tau mice model via autophagy and reversal of neurotransmitter imbalance [161]. The presence of p-tau in the brainstem and glial cells, particularly in astrocytes, could mimic p-tau accumulation in PSP [162,163]. As a result, removing p-tau from brainstem could be beneficial for primary tauopathies like PSP [161].

6.2 Antidiabetics drugs

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most prevalent endocrine and metabolic disorder around the world. Patients with DM are highly susceptible to other pathological developments including cognitive impairment, dementia, and AD [164,165]. Besides, dementia patients with diabetes were observed to have a high level of hyperphosphorylated tau while the Aβ42 level might remain close to normal [166].

6.2.1 Insulin

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) can increase the risk of dementia by two fold [167]. Specifically, insulin and insulin receptors were reduced in the AD brain [168,169]. Insulin signaling pathway impairment may lead to hyperactivation of GSK-3β, which can hyperphosphorylate tau at Ser [170]. Downregulation of GSK-3β with insulin or insulin-like growth factor-1 may affect tau phosphorylation. In fact, in human neuronal NT2N cells, insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 stimulation were successful in reduction of tau phosphorylation through the inhibition of GSK-3β [171]. An AD rodent model study reported the decline of p-tau and Aβ buildup as a consequence of insulin treatment [172]. When patients with both T2D and AD were treated with either a combination of insulin and oral anti-diabetic or an oral anti-diabetic only, the former group showed a significant slower cognitive decline [173].

6.2.2 Glucagon-like peptide-1

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) hormone increases insulin secretion and decreases glucagon secretion from the pancreas [174]. GLP-1 receptor agonists Exendin-4 or liraglutide have a potential neuroprotective role in restoring insulin signaling in the AD brain. A study of Exendin-4 in diabetes-related AD rat models showed improvement of memory function along with the reversal of tau hyperphosphorylation through the downregulation of GSK-3β activity (Fig. 5) [175]. A phase II clinical trial (Table 2) of Exendin-4 to investigate safety and tolerability in MCI-AD (NCT01255163) was terminated due to lack of sponsorship. Liraglutide is another GLP-1 receptor agonist with several modes of action against tau phosphorylation and NFTs formation. Liraglutide reduced p-tau and NFTs in a mouse model by improving protein O-glycosylation, enhancing the JNK and ERK signaling pathway, and lowering neuronal degeneration [176]. The treatment also enhanced binding of tau with MTs and improved the learning and memory function of mice [176]. Another study reported that liraglutide, through modulating GSK-3β, reduced tau hyperphosphorylation and cognitive impairment in C57BL/6J mice with AD-like tau pathology [177]. Besides, liraglutide was also able to reverse Aβ oligomer induced memory impairment [178]. These studies have motivated several clinical trials of liraglutide in AD patients (NCT01843075, NCT01469351, NCT02140983).

6.2.3 Insulin sensitizers (Thiazolidinediones)

Anti-diabetic drug thiazolidinedione group stimulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ), which alters the transcription of several genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism [179]. This group has a prospective role in the management of AD as it can lower inflammatory cytokines, oxidative stress, Aβ deposition, glial activation, tau phosphorylation, and glucocorticoid signaling [180–183]. FDA-approved thiazolidinedione drug rosiglitazone improved cognition and memory function in mild to moderate AD patients [184,185]. Another thiazolidinedione drug pioglitazone improved cognition and functionality in AD patients with T2D [186]. In an experiment on Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats with T2D, pioglitazone lessened tau hyperphosphorylation via downregulation of pAkt/GSK-3β pathway [187]. In addition, in a study of human neuroblastoma (M1C) cell lines and primary neuronal cultures, pioglitazone reduced cleaved caspase3 and caspase proteolytic products such as C-terminal truncated tau [188]. Interestingly, the drug was found to diminish high molecular weight (120 kDa) oligomeric tau species (Fig. 5) in the same investigation [189]. Therefore, pioglitazone could be a valuable disease-modifying drug for tauopathies by targeting tau oligomerization and NFT formation. Moreover, in an experiment of pioglitazone on triple transgenic AD mice (3xTg-AD), hippocampal Aβ and tau depositions were decreased, learning capacity was improved, and short and long-term plasticity was enhanced [190].

6.2.4 Biguanides (Metformin)

Glucose lowering agent metformin which belongs to the biguanide anti-diabetic family that improves insulin sensitivity [191]. Metformin may decline hyperphosphorylated tau level in diabetic encephalopathy (DE) through the initiation of macroautophagy, a common type of autophagy [192]. T2D downregulates autophagy, which may lead to consequences like misfolded protein aggregation as seen in AD (reviewed by [193]). A study by Chen et al. reported that metformin considerably decreased hyperphosphorylated tau without altering the level of total tau in the hippocampus of mice and cultured HT22 cells [192]. On the downside, metformin was reported to induce BACE1 transcription, which in turn upregulated Aβ production in neuronal cell lines; however, the effect can be mitigated by the supplementation of insulin [194]. A phase III clinical trial (Table 2) of extended-release metformin tablet, as preventive care on AD dementia is expected to be completed in March 2025 (NCT04098666).

6.3 Antiepileptics

A commonly prescribed antiepileptic medication valproic acid (VPA) is a potent GSK-3β inhibitor drug [195]. In SH-SY5Y cell model, VPA significantly reduced tau phosphorylation through the inhibition of GSK-3β and CDK5 [196]. The drug was registered for a clinical trial to treat PSP as a disease-modifying agent, but failed to meet the primary and secondary goals for tolerability and efficacy on cognitive and behavioral state in the phase II study (NCT00385710) (Table 2) [197]. Interests also grew in other antiepileptic drugs such as topiramate (TPM) and levetiracetam (LEV). In a study, okadaic acid pre-treatment induced hyperphosphorylation of tau in the SH-SY5Y cell model; afterward, therapy with TPM and LEV reduced phosphorylation level significantly, and this effect was reported to be due to the inhibition of GSK-3β activation [198].

6.4 Antimicrobial drugs

6.4.1 Antibiotics

Broad-spectrum antibiotic rifampicin is used for the treatment of mycobacterium infections, including tuberculosis and leprosy. It can cross BBB [199]. Interestingly, it was reported that patients treated with rifampicin for leprosy are less likely to develop dementia and senile plaque [200–202]. This drug was reported to inhibit oligomerization of Aβ, tau, and α-synuclein under cell-free condition [203]. In mice studies, rifampicin exhibited inhibitory activities against oligomerization of tau (tau609 mice as tauopathy model) and Aβ (APPOSK mice as Aβ oligomer model) [203]. The study hypothesized that rifampicin binds to low molecular weight oligomers of amyloidogenic proteins by detecting a specific conformation, causing dissociation of oligomers into monomers. Besides, the drug also modulate lysosome mediated autophagy. Though rifampicin did not directly activate autophagy in tau609 mice, IMR-32 cell, and COS-7 cell studies, it did restore its function by preventing abnormal protein accumulation beyond the capability of autophagy-lysosomal protein-degradation [203]. In the study of tau609 mice model, the drug decreased oligomeric tau buildup, tau hyperphosphorylation, synapse loss, microglial activation, and improved the memory function [203]. As it has been suggested that elevated level of oligomeric tau is closely related to impaired synaptic and cognitive function in AD and PSP symptoms [54,204–207], rifamycin could be a promising candidate for targeting toxic tau oligomers in tauopathies (Fig. 5). Unfortunately, a phase III clinical trial (NCT00439166) on mild-to-moderate AD reported unresponsive to rifampicin (Table 2) [208]. Dapsone, another antibiotic for the treatment of leprosy, received early attention when its ability to reduce dementia symptoms was published [209]. However, conflicting results were observed in the following up studies [210]. An anti-tuberculotic drug, isoniazid, commonly used for treating mycobacterium infections, was reported to reduce the level of insoluble tau in transgenic nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) [211].

6.4.2 Antivirals

Viruses are suggested to contribute to pathogenicity of tauopathies. For instance, infection with HIV may lead to hyperphosphorylation of tau [212,213]. Besides, viruses like the Zika can replicate in adult human brain tissues, damage synapses, deteriorate memory function, and create Alzheimer-like symptoms in mice models [214,215]. In the neural cellular model, the Herpes simplex virus HSV1 (responsible for oral herpes) was reported to cause abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau, emulating the pathological traits of tau in the AD brain [216]. In fact, during HSV1 infection, the level of tau phosphorylating enzymes like kinase A (PKA) and GSK-3β was found to increase significantly [216]. A survey study reported the elevated level of HSV1 binding proteins, up to 15-fold higher, in amyloid plaques and NFTs of patients [217]. HSV is a common infection and most adults get exposed to HSV at least once during their lifetime [218]. Following several years of latent period in the trigeminal ganglion, the virus can reactivate itself [219]. Antivirals such as acyclovir, penciclovir, and foscarnet were reported to reduce HSV1 particles, Aβ, and phosphorylated tau buildup in cellular models [220]. Another antiviral drug valacyclovir, a prescription medication for HSV1 and HSV2 [221], is currently on a phase II clinical trial (Table 2) in patients with mild AD (NCT03282916). The estimated primary completion date for the trial is August 2022.

6.5 Antioxidants

Xanthophyll carotenoid astaxanthin (ASX) is a powerful antioxidant supplement and beneficial for eye heart health, skin tone, and lowering inflammation (reviewed by [222]). In an experiment with Wistar rats, infusion of Aβ(1–42) developed cognitive impairment and activated GSK-3β [223]. Treatment with oral ASX alleviated a significant amount of memory impairment, improved cognition, attenuated Aβ42, and reduced GSK-3β activity. GSK-3β is also recognized to make a significant contribution in tau hyperphosphorylation in tauopathies [224]. Inhibition of GSK-3β was found to be correlated with the inhibition of p-tau in other AD models [224]. Though the trial did not explain the effect of ASX on tau, attenuation of GSK-3β activity indicates that ASX might also have an activity of reducing p-tau. A clinical trial of ASX (NCT05015374) on AD patients (Table 2) has been launched to assess the supplemenťs effect on mental state, cognitive ability, dementia, and the neuropsychiatric inventory of AD patients. The study is scheduled to be completed in 2024.

6.6 Antipsychotics

6.6.1 Dopamine D2 receptor antagonist

Antipsychotic drug dopamine D2 receptor antagonists have been playing a central role in the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists have been found to suppress tau pathology [211]. Inhibition of dopamine D2 signal was reported to protect C. elegans against tauopathies, including neurodegeneration and accumulation of detergent-insoluble tau aggregates [225]. However, the outcomes of antipsychotic treatments in neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia are controversial and justified by a black box warning from the US FDA for high risk of mortality [226]. A D2 receptor inhibitor antipsychotic drug haloperidol [227] has controversial effects on tau hyperphosphorylation. The drug was reported to induce p-tau via oxidative stress in neuronal culture cells [228]. Nevertheless, more recent research on transgenic rTg (tauP301L) mice described the inhibitory activity of haloperidol against p-tau, driven by the deactivation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (Fig. 5) [229]. Other D2 receptor antagonists are also found to have inhibitory activities against tauopathies. In a screening study, flupentixol, a chronic schizophrenia treatment approved in Canada [230], was effective in lowering insoluble tau aggregates in transgenic C. elegans [211]. Therefore, D2 receptor antagonists demand further studies such as SAR studies against tauopathies.

6.6.2 Lithium

Lithium, an old drug approved for bipolar disorders, was reported beneficial in the initial stages of FTD [231]. Lithium can inhibit GSK-3β activation (Fig. 5) by negatively interfering with magnesium- GSK-3β binding [232,233]. A 28-week long experiment with LISPRO (ionic co-crystal of lithium salicylate and L-proline) in transgenic mice registered a reduction of hyperphosphorylated tau and Aβ plaque [234]. The study reported the decline of GSK-3β, the downregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, the upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines, and the suppression of renal cyclooxygenase 2 expressions in transgenic Tg2576 mice [234]. Another 12-month trial of low-dose lithium in mild AD patients reported cognition improvement along with decreased p-tau level in CSF [235]. Unfortunately, due to side-effects and tolerability issues, a clinical trial (Table 2) of lithium for PSP and CBS stopped (NCT00703677). Another clinical trial is underway where the effect of lithium will be noted on agitation and aggression in 60 patients with bvFTD (NCT02862210).

6.7 Cholesterol-lowering agent (statins)

Cholesterol metabolism can modulate tau entangle development in Niemann Pick Type C (NPC) disease [236,237]. In a study, cholesterol-lowering drug statins (e.g., atorvastatin, simvastatin) effectively reduced NFT burdens in short and long term therapy in a transgenic tauopathic mouse model carrying double-mutations (P301S/ K257T) [238]. Cholesterol metabolism also has a proven correlation to AD [239]. Long-term use of statins (e.g., atorvastatin, simvastatin, fluvastatin, and rosuvastatin) were reported to reduce hyperphosphorylated tau and Aβ secretion [240,241]. In isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived neural cell lines, statins suppressed the mevalonic acid pathway of cholesterol synthesis, resulting in lower p-tau and overall tau concentration [241]. On the other hand, statins were found to be cytotoxic in iPSC-derived astrocytes at higher concentrations [241]. More specific targets of cholesterol could help to overcome the toxicities on astrocytes. For instance, the level of the storage cholesterol, cholesteryl esters (CE), was reported to increase when Aβ and p-tau levels were elevated in mouse models of familial AD ( FAD) and sporadic AD (sAD) [242,243]. Van der Kant et al. reported that allosteric activation of a neuron-specific CE-lowering enzyme CYP46A1 was successful in reducing the level of p-tau and toxicities in iPSC-derived astrocytes, which may serve as a novel target for the treatment of tauopathies [241].

6.8 Iron chelators

Elevated iron deposition was noticed in amyloid plaques and NFTs in the brain of AD patients [244,245]. Dysregulation of the cerebral iron level might be a contributor of oxidative burden in tauopathies as NFT-iron interaction is reported to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) in neurons [246–248]. Besides, iron can modulate kinase-mediated tau hyperphosphorylation through the aberrant activation of tau kinases such as GSK-3β, CDK-5, and MAPK [249–251]. Between the two oxidation states of iron, Fe2+ is highly reactive and participates in many cellular functions, whereas Fe3+ (redox-inert state) is stored in ferritin [252]. Fe3+ is mainly associated with NFTs in AD &amp; PSP, and it can induce aggregation of p-tau [246,247,253].

Iron III chelators are the effective molecules to treat iron poisoning including acute and chronic iron overload. Iron III chelators such as deferoxamine and deferiprone are also promising candidates for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders such as tauopathies and AD. In a mice model, deferoxamine was able to inhibit iron-induced p-tau and amyloidogenic pathways of Aβ [254,255]. A phase II clinical trial (NCT03234686) is ongoing to explore the safety and efficacy of deferiprone (Table 2) in prodromal AD and mild AD. The trial is expected to complete in December 2021.

6.9 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

6.9.1 Ibuprofen

The commonly prescribed analgesic medicine ibuprofen may delay the onset of AD in prophylactic treatment. In one study, AD triple transgenic (3×Tg-AD) mice developed cognitive deficit due to Aβ deposition and NFT formation from hyperphosphorylated tau. When the mice were prophylactically treated with ibuprofen, cognitive function was improved, and intraneuronal oligomeric Aβ and hippocampal p-tau levels were decreased [256]. Interestingly, Aβ deposition in 3xTg-AD mice model was reported to precede tau tangle formation [257], and Aβ lying upstream of tau can trigger the conversion of functional tau to a toxic state in AD (reviewed by [258]). Thus, ibuprofen mediated diminution of p-tau could be secondary to Aβ reduction. Another study indicated that ibuprofen suppressed active microglia in AD [259]. Reduced activation of microglia also decreases the production of cytokines (such as GSK-3β, CDK5, p38-MAPK) which would catalyze tau phosphorylation. [260–263].

6.9.2 Tau acetylation inhibitor Salsalate

Salsalate, a salicylic acid derived NSAID, is frequently used for the treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and related rheumatic disorders. Salsalate and salicylate can inhibit acetyltransferase p300-induced tau acetylation (Fig. 5) [264]. A salsalate study reported the reduction of acetylated tau (at Lys174) and the reversal of memory deficits in the FTD mouse model [264]. Unfortunately, a phase I clinical trial (NCT02422485) of oral salsalate in PSP reported no progression (Table 2) [265]. Another phase Ib trial (Table 2) of the drug in mild to moderate AD patients is estimated to be completed by December 2021 (NCT03277573).

6.9.3 Tolfenamic acid

A non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) tolfenamic acid (TA), approved by Europe and other countries as analgesic and pain reliever [266], exhibited modulation of total tau in transgenic mice [267]. TA improved spatial learning deficiencies, reversed memory impairments, reduced p-tau and total tau in the frontal cortex, hippocampus, and striatum in transgenic mice [267]. Previously TA exhibited inhibitory activities against Aβ plaque. In rodent brain, it promoted the degradation of transcription factor specificity protein 1 (Sp1) followed by the decline of amyloid precursor protein (APP) transcription and Aβ levels [268,269]. These findings suggest that TA has a great potential to be repurposed in AD.

6.10 Phosphodiesterase inhibitors

US FDA approved phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors for multiple indications including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pulmonary arterial hypertension, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, atopic dermatitis, and erectile dysfunction [270,271]. Cyclic nucleotides regulators such as cAMP and cGMP of transcriptional genes are degraded by PDEs, which may impair long-lasting memory formation (reviewed by [272]). Interestingly, several animal model studies suggested that selective PDE inhibitors may reverse memory deficits in tauopathies (reviewed by [272]). More specifically, sildenafil, a PDE5 inhibitor, reversed memory deficit in an AD mouse model [273,274]. However, studies on another PDE5 inhibitor, tadalafil, exhibited controversial results. One group found tadalafil to be ineffective [273], as it failed to cross the BBB, while another group reported that the drug successfully crossed the BBB and reversed memory deficit in AD mice [272]. García-Barroso et al. suggested that memory restoration by tadalafil was mediated by lessening tau phosphorylation via downregulation of pAkt/ GSK-3β pathway [272].

6.11 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and other antidepressants

Commonly used antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), also have the potential to be repurposed in AD. Several SSRIs including fluoxetine, citalopram, and desvenlafaxine can drop Aβ level in the AD mouse model (reviewed by [210]). Paroxetine can decrease Aβ level, reduce tau phosphorylation, and protect cognitive function in 3xTg-AD mice [275]. The mechanism by which paroxetine lowers tau phosphorylation is not clear. As Aβ is upstream of tau and can trigger the conversion of tau from a normal to a toxic state [258], inhibiting Aβ deposition by paroxetine [275] might be a reason for the reduction of tau phosphorylation. Amitriptyline (AMI), another FDA-approved tricyclic antidepressant, may help in maintaining the nervous system both central and peripheral origin, and has the beneficial effects on AD [276,277]. AMI significantly reduced soluble and phosphorylated tau in a transgenic mouse (3xTg-AD) model study [278], while the underlying mechanism of the activity of AMI is unknown. In this study, AMI also converted toxic Aβ dimers into non-toxic monomers [278]. In a test case, AMI improved motor function significantly in PSP patients as well [279]. Therefore, the drug demands more attention for study to establish its efficacy and therapeutic mechanisms in tauopathies.

7 CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE

While extensive efforts have been devoted in the discovery of treatments for tauopathies, there is no disease arresting therapy available to treat the disorder. Various therapeutic methods, such as tau aggregation inhibitors, MT stabilization, gene therapy, immunotherapy, etc., have been the subject of recent clinical trials. In addition to the novel molecules as potential drug candidate, a variety of the approved drug molecules hold the promise to be repurposed for treating tauopathies. Here we reviewed the recent progresses of repurposing of drug classes such as anticancer, antidiabetics, antioxidants, antidepressants, antiepileptics, antipsychotics and others against tauopathies. Screening through currently approved molecules will not only reduce formulation and development stage effort and cost but will also present a key advantage of established toxicological studies, which is one of the leading causes for clinical trial failures with new molecules.

Many drug developments and clinical trials for treating tauopathies have failed in various stages. This may in part be attributed to the fact that the underlying etiology of these diseases still remain unclear. Therefore, there is a probability that the treatment strategies may not target the origin of the diseases. For instance, although hyperphosphorylation of tau has been suggested to play a critical role in tau detachment from MTs, the hypothesis of tau phosphorylation leading to NFT formation has been challenged [280]. In addition, it has been reported that behavioral deficits, synaptic dysfunction, and cell death were detected in the absence of NFTs, while the presence of NFTs did not interfere in vivo functionalities such as signal transductions (reviewed by [51]). Recently, multilevel classification of tauopathies based on the structure of tau filaments was investigated by Shi et. al [281]. Their studies depicted that the tau filaments in different tauopathies contain distinct folding patterns of tau, indicating a structure-disease relationship between misfolded tau conformations and specific tauopathies. Therefore, it appears critical to develop effective therapeutic strategies that can target characteristic tau conformations that are essential to pathology of specific tauopathies.

Importantly, oligomeric species of tau have been reported to be more correlated with cognitive, synaptic, and mitochondrial dysfunction than monomeric or fibrillar states of tau [52]. A number of studies reported the correlation of the elevated level of oligomeric tau with the inception of AD and PSP symptoms [54,204–207]. Tau oligomers have been implicated in synaptic loss [53,282], and granular oligomers of tau have been suggested to be correlated with neuronal loss [283]. Furthermore, if NFTs are formed as a defensive mechanism against the toxic oligomers, targeting NFT may even deteriorate underlying disease conditions. Consequently, there is a burning need of developing effective therapeutic strategies targeting tau oligomers. Identification of the critical toxic oligomeric structures and conformations of tau in tauopathies would be important for understanding the pathogenesis of the diseases and identifying effective molecules targeting specific conformers of toxic oligomeric tau that could lead to breakthrough drug development in the near future.

Acknowledgement

D.D. gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the National Institutes of Health (R15GM116006) and the Alzheimer’s Association (AARG-17–531423).

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of full-length tau (2N4R) and five isoforms. The repeat regions contain two hexapeptide motifs (275VQIINK280 in R2, 306VQIVYK311 in R3) with higher tendencies to form β-sheet [21,22]. Because of the alternate splicing of MAPT gene, six different isoforms of tau protein are formed. N2 is missing in 1N4R; both N1 and N2 are missing in 0N4R; R2 is missing in 2N3R; N2 and R2 are missing in 1N3R; N1, N2, and R2 are missing in 0N3R [23].

Fig. 2. Summary of the aggregation process of tau to form neurofibrillary tangles. (a) Binding of tau on the surface of MT enhances the stability of MT. (b) Post-translational modifications (PTMs) can disengage tau from MT. (c) External or internal factors, e.g., polyanions or acidic cofactor such as RNA and lipid membranes or repeat fragments, help the fibrillation process through the nucleation of oligomers and NFT formation via PHF and SF (d) [37,42–44,49,50,64,282].

Fig. 3. Examples of potential drug candidates for the treatment of tauopathies by modification of tau aggregation process.

Fig. 4. (a) Schematic representation of the function of drug molecules to bind to MT and act as MT stabilizers. (b) Examples of newly developed MT stabilizers. (c) Examples of drugs with repurposing potential to stabilize MT.

Fig. 5. Examples of drugs with repurposing potential for the treatment of tauopathies by modification of tau aggregation process.

Table 1: Clinical trials of potential disease-modifying drug candidates for the treatment of tauopathies.

Drug class	Agent	Indication	Trial phase	ClinicalTrials.gov identifier	Outcome	
	
Tau aggregation inhibitor	Methylene blue derivative: LMTM (leuco-methyl thioninium)	AD,
bvFTD,
MCI-AD	Phase
III	NCT01689246
NCT01626378
NCT03446001	Insignificant [95,96].
Ongoing for MCI-AD, estimated completion date: Dec 2022.	
	
Grape seed polyphenolic extract (GPSE)	AD	Phase II	NCT02033941	Active, not recruiting. Estimated completion date (Dec 2021) has already passed.	
	
Gene therapy	Anti-sense oligonucleotides (ASOs): BIIB080	Mild AD	Phase II	NCT03186989	Ongoing, estimated completion date: May 2022.	
	
Immunotherapy	Vaccine: AADvac1	Mild AD	Phase II	NCT02579252	The vaccine did not slow cognitive decline [108].	
	
Antibody: Zagotenemab	Early AD	Phase II	NCT03518073	Failed in Phase II clinical trial [112].	
	
Antibody: Gosuranemab	PSP and AD	Phase Ib	NCT02460094	Stopped in 2019, due to failure to show any visible improvement [114].	
	
Kinase inhibitor	Fyn inhibitor: Saracatinib	AD	Phase II	NCT02167256	Well tolerated in Phase I (Nygaard et al. 2015), failed in Phase II trial due to lack of pharmacological effect along with gastrointestinal side [120].	
	
GSK-3β inhibitor: Tideglusib	PSP
Mild-to-moderate AD	Phase II	NCT01049399
NCT00948259
NCT01350362	No significant results were observed [8,122].	
	
p75NTR inhibitor: LM11A	Mild-to-moderate AD	Phase II	NCT03069014	Completed in 2020, results are yet to be published.	
	
Tideglusib	AD PSP	Phase II
Phase N/A	NCT00948259
NCT01049399	Failed or no significant results were observed [8,122].	
	
O-GlcNAcase (OGA) inhibitor	MK-8719	PSP	Phase I	-	Produce favorable pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic effects, and US FDA awarded orphan drug status [126].	
	
ASN120290	PSP	Phase II	-	Found safe in phase I [128], phase II yet to embark [129].	
	
Microtubule (MT) stabilizer	TPI 287	CBS &amp; PSP AD	Phase I	NCT02133846
NCT01966666	Dose depended worsening and hypersensitivity reactions [132].	
	
Epothilone D	mild AD	Phase 1/2	NCT01492374	Results were never published.	
	
Growth factor: Davunetide	PSP, FTLD-Tau, CBS,
and nfvPPA	Phase II	NCT01056965	Treatment was unsuccessful and the drug was discontinued from further development [138].	

Table 2: Repurposed drugs in clinical trials for the treatment of tauopathies.

Drug Class	Agents	Approved indication	Putative mechanism for repurposing in tauopathies	Clinical trial	
	
Anticancer	Nilotinib	Chronic leukemia myeloid	Can inhibit Tyr kinase Abl mediated phosphorylation of tau on Tyr394 [158]. Besides, it also can reduce p-tau via autophagy and reversal of neurotransmitter imbalance [161].	Phase II trial for mild to moderate AD
(NCT02947893).	
	
Antidiabetic	Exendin-4	Glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists to treat T2D	Can reverse p-tau through downregulation of GSK-3β activity [175].	Phase II trial for MCI-AD (NCT01255163).	
	
Metformin	Biguanides for type T2D	Can decline p-tau through the initiation of macroautophagy [192]. Besides, Metformin-Midline1 interaction can diminish translation of BACE 1 mRNA to reduce tau phosphorylation [283].	Phase III trial for AD dementia (NCT04098666).	
	
Antiepileptic	Valproic acid,	Epilepsy	Can inhibit p-tau through GSK-3β and CDK5 inhibition [195,196]..	Phase II trial for PSP (NCT00385710).	
	
Antimicrobial	Rifampicin	Treat Mycobacterium infections in tuberculosis and leprosy	It binds to oligomers of amyloidogenic proteins by detecting a specific conformation, causing them to dissociate into monomers [203].	Phase III clinical trial for mild-to-moderate AD (NCT00439166).	
	
Valacyclovir	Herpes simplex virus	Can reduce Aβ and phosphorylated tau accumulation [220,221]	Phase II clinical trial for patients with mild AD (NCT03282916).	
	
Antioxidant	Astaxanthin	Beneficial to relief Oxidative stress	Can attenuate Aβ (1–42) induced GSK-3β activity. GSK-3β is also known to play a significant role in p-tau [223,224].	Phase N/A clinical trial on AD (NCT05015374).	
	
Antipsychotic	Lithium	Bipolar disorders	Displaces Magnesium [232] required for enzyme-like GSK3β activation [233]. Thereby, it can lower phosphorylated tau [234].	Phase I for PSP and phase II for CBS (NCT00703677).
Another phase II trial for bvFTD (NCT02862210).	
	
Iron III chelator	Deferiprone	Iron or aluminum toxicity	Can inhibit iron-induced tau phosphorylation and amyloidogenic pathways of Aβ [254,255].	Phase II clinical trial for AD (NCT03234686).	
	
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)	Salsalate	Chronic inflammatory diseases	Can inhibit acetyltransferase p300-induced tau acetylation [264]	Phase I clinical trial for PSP (NCT02422485). Another phase Ib trial for mild to moderate AD (NCT03277573).	

Declaration of Interest: None

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

[1] Weingarten MD , Lockwood AH , Hwo SY , Kirschner MW , A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 72 (1975) 1858–1862. 10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858.1057175
[2] Binder LI , Frankfurter A , Rebhun LI , The distribution of tau in the mammalian central nervous system, J. Cell Biol. 101 (1985) 1371–1378. 10.1083/jcb.101.4.1371.3930508
[3] Sotiropoulos I , Galas MC , Silva JM , Skoulakis E , Wegmann S , Maina MB , Blum D , Sayas CL , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E , Spillantini MG , Sousa N , Avila J , Medina M , Mudher A , Buee L , Atypical, non-standard functions of the microtubule associated Tau protein, Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 5 (2017) 91. 10.1186/s40478-017-0489-6.29187252
[4] Sato C , Barthélemy NR , Mawuenyega KG , Patterson BW , Gordon BA , Jockel-Balsarotti J , Sullivan M , Crisp MJ , Kasten T , Kirmess KM , Kanaan NM , Yarasheski KE , Baker-Nigh A , Benzinger TLS , Miller TM , Karch CM , Bateman RJ , Tau Kinetics in Neurons and the Human Central Nervous System, Neuron. 97 (2018) 1284–1298.e7. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.02.015.
[5] Yamada K , Cirrito JR , Stewart FR , Jiang H , Finn MB , Holmes BB , Binder LI , Mandelkow EM , Diamond MI , Lee VMYY , Holtzman DM , In vivo microdialysis reveals age- dependent decrease of brain interstitial fluid tau levels in P301S human tau transgenic mice, J. Neurosci. 31 (2011) 13110–13117. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2569-11.2011.
[6] Dickson DW , Kouri N , Murray ME , Josephs KA , Neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration-Tau (FTLD-Tau), J. Mol. Neurosci., Springer, in, 2011. 10.1007/s12031-011-9589-0.
[7] Kovacs GG , Invited reSview: Neuropathology of tauopathies: Principles and practice, Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 41 (2015) 3–23. 10.1111/nan.12208.25495175
[8] Panza F , Imbimbo BP , Lozupone M , Greco A , Seripa D , Logroscino G , Daniele A , Colosimo C , Disease-modifying therapies for tauopathies: agents in the pipeline, Expert Rev. Neurother. 0 (2019) 14737175.2019.1606715. 10.1080/14737175.2019.1606715.
[9] Josephs KA , Current understanding of neurodegenerative diseases associated with the protein tau, in: Mayo Clin. Proc, 2017: pp. 1291–1303.28778262
[10] Josephs KA , Hodges JR , Snowden JS , MacKenzie IR , Neumann M , Mann DM , Dickson DW , Neuropathological background of phenotypical variability in frontotemporal dementia, Acta Neuropathol. 122 (2011) 137–153. 10.1007/s00401-011-0839-6.21614463
[11] MacKenzie IRAA , Neumann M , Bigio EH , Cairns NJ , Alafuzoff I , Al E , Al E ., Nomenclature and nosology for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: An update, Acta Neuropathol., Springer, in, 2010. 10.1007/s00401-009-0612-2.
[12] Rascovsky K , Hodges JR , Knopman D , Mendez MF , et al JH Kramer, Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia, Brain. 134 (2011) 2456–2477. 10.1093/brain/awr179.21810890
[13] Höglinger GU , Respondek G , Stamelou M , Kurz C , Josephs KA , Lang, Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder society criteria., Mov. Disord. 32 (2017) 853–864. 10.1002/mds.26987.28467028
[14] Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Kertesz A , Mendez M , Cappa SF , Ogar JM , Rohrer JD , Black S , Boeve BF , Manes F , Dronkers NF , Vandenberghe R , Rascovsky K , Patterson K , Miller BL , Knopman DS , Hodges JR , Mesulam MM , Grossman M , Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants, Neurology. 76 (2011) 1006–1014. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821103e6.21325651
[15] Armstrong MJ , Litvan I , Lang AE , Bak TH , Bhatia KP , Borroni B , Boxer AL , Dickson DW , Grossman M , Hallett M , Josephs KA , Kertesz A , Lee SE , Miller BL , Reich SG , Riley DE , Tolosa E , Tröster AI , Vidailhet M , Weiner WJ , Criteria for the diagnosis of corticobasal degeneration, Neurology. 80 (2013) 496–503. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0fd1.23359374
[16] Ashburn TT , Thor KB , Drug repositioning: identifying and developing new uses for existing drugs, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 3 (2004) 673–683. 10.1038/nrd1468.15286734
[17] Breckenridge A , Jacob R , Overcoming the legal and regulatory barriers to drug repurposing, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 18 (2019) 1–2. 10.1038/nrd.2018.92.29880920
[18] Pushpakom S , Iorio F , Eyers PA , Escott KJ , Hopper S , Wells A , Doig A , Guilliams T , Latimer J , McNamee C , Norris A , Sanseau P , Cavalla D , Pirmohamed M , Drug repurposing: progress, challenges and recommendations, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 18 (2019) 41–58. 10.1038/nrd.2018.168.30310233
[19] Goedert M , Spillantini MG , Jakes R , Rutherford D , Crowther RA , Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease., Neuron. 3 (1989) 519–526. 10.1016/0896-6273(89)90210-9.2484340
[20] Mandelkow EEMEE-M , Mandelkow EEMEE-M , Biochemistry and cell biology of Tau protein in neurofibrillary degeneration, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2 (2011) 1–25. 10.1101/cshperspect.a006247.
[21] Goode BL , Denis PE , Panda D , Radeke MJ , Miller HP , Wilson L , Feinstein SC , Functional interactions between the proline-rich and repeat regions of tau enhance microtubule binding and assembly., Mol. Biol. Cell. 8 (1997) 353–365. 10.1091/mbc.8.2.353.9190213
[22] Gustke N , Trinczek B , Biernat J , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow EM , Domains of τ Protein and Interactions with Microtubules, Biochemistry. 33 (1994) 9511–9522. 10.1021/bi00198a017.8068626
[23] Quinn JP , Corbett NJ , Kellett KABB , Hooper NM , Tau Proteolysis in the Pathogenesis of Tauopathies: Neurotoxic Fragments and Novel Biomarkers, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 63 (2018) 13–33. 10.3233/JAD-170959.29630551
[24] Sergeant N , David J-P , Goedert M , Jakes R , Vermersch P , Buée L , Lefranc D , Wattez A , Delacourte A , Two-Dimensional Characterization of Paired Helical Filament-Tau from Alzheimer’s Disease: Demonstration of an Additional 74-kDa Component and Age-Related Biochemical Modifications, J. Neurochem. 69 (2002) 834–844. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69020834.x.
[25] Goedert M , Spillantini MG , Potier MC , Ulrich J , Crowther RA , Cloning and sequencing of the cDNA encoding an isoform of microtubule-associated protein tau containing four tandem repeats: differential expression of tau protein mRNAs in human brain., EMBO J. 8 (1989) 393–399. 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03390.x.2498079
[26] Buée L , Bussière T , Buée-Scherrer V , Delacourte A , Hof PR , De Toni GB , Buée L , Bussière T , Buée-Scherrer V , Delacourte A , Hof PR , Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders, Brain Res. Rev. 33 (2000) 95–130. 10.1016/S0165-0173(00)00019-9.10967355
[27] Jadhav S , Avila J , Schöll M , Kovacs GG , Kövari E , Skrabana R , Evans LD , Kontsekova E , Malawska B , de Silva R , Buee L , Zilka N , A walk through tau therapeutic strategies, Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 7 (2019) 22. 10.1186/s40478-019-0664-z.30767766
[28] Inekci D , Jonesco DS , Kennard S , Karsdal MA , Henriksen K , The potential of pathological protein fragmentation in blood-based biomarker development for dementia - with emphasis on Alzheimer’s disease, Front. Neurol. 6 (2015) 90. 10.3389/fneur.2015.00090.26029153
[29] Schechter I , Berger A , On the active site of proteases. III. Mapping the active site of papain; specific peptide inhibitors of papain, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 32 (1968) 898–902. 10.1016/0006-291X(68)90326-4.5682314
[30] Derisbourg M , Leghay C , Chiappetta G , Fernandez-Gomez FJ , Laurent C , Demeyer D , Carrier S , Buée-Scherrer V , Blum D , Vinh J , Sergeant N , Verdier Y , Buée L , Hamdane M , Role of the Tau N-terminal region in microtubule stabilization revealed by new endogenous truncated forms, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 1–10. 10.1038/srep09659.
[31] Skrabana R , Sevcik J , Novak M , Intrinsically disordered proteins in the neurodegenerative processes: Formation of tau protein paired helical filaments and their analysis, Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 26 (2006) 1085–1097. 10.1007/s10571-006-9083-3.16779670
[32] Burnouf S , Martire A , Derisbourg M , Laurent C , et Al B ., NMDA receptor dysfunction contributes to impaired brain-derived neurotrophic factor-induced facilitation of hippocampal synaptic transmission in a Tau transgenic model, Aging Cell. 12 (2013) 11–23. 10.1111/acel.12018.23082852
[33] Ittner LM , Ke YD , Delerue F , Bi M , Gladbach A , van Eersel J , Wölfing H , Chieng BC , Christie MJ , Napier IA , Eckert A , Staufenbiel M , Hardeman E , Götz J , Dendritic Function of Tau Mediates Amyloid-β Toxicity in Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Models, Cell. 142 (2010) 387–397. 10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.036.20655099
[34] Chong FP , Ng KY , Koh RY , Chye SM , Tau Proteins and Tauopathies in Alzheimer’s Disease, Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 38 (2018) 965–980. 10.1007/s10571-017-0574-1.29299792
[35] Himmler A , Drechsel D , Kirschner MW , Martin DW , Tau consists of a set of proteins with repeated C-terminal microtubule-binding domains and variable N-terminal, Domains., Mol. Cell. Biol. 9 (1989) 1381–1388. 10.1128/mcb.9.4.1381.2498649
[36] Mukrasch MD , Biernat J , Von Bergen M , Griesinger C , Mandelkow E , Zweckstetter M , Sites of tau important for aggregation populate β-structure and bind to microtubules and polyanions, J. Biol. Chem. 280 (2005) 24978–24986. 10.1074/jbc.M501565200.
[37] Von Bergen M , Barghorn S , Biernat J , Mandelkow EE-MM , Mandelkow EE-MM , Tau aggregation is driven by a transition from random coil to beta sheet structure, Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Mol. Basis Dis. 1739 (2005) 158–166. 10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.09.010.
[38] Goedert M , Jakes R , Spillantini MG , Hasegawa M , Smith MJ , Crowther RA , Assembly of microtubule-associated protein tau into Alzheimer-like filaments induced by sulphated glycosaminoglycans, Nature. 383 (1996) 550–553. 10.1038/383550a0.8849730
[39] Kampers T , Friedhoff P , Biernat J , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow EM , RNA stimulates aggregation of microtubule-associated protein tau into Alzheimer-like paired helical filaments, FEBS Lett. 399 (1996) 344–349. 10.1016/S0014-5793(96)01386-5.8985176
[40] Pérez M , Valpuesta JM , Medina M , Montejo De Garcini E , Avila J , Polymerization of τ into filaments in the presence of heparin: The minimal sequence required for τ-τ interaction, J. Neurochem. 67 (1996) 1183–1190. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.67031183.x.8752125
[41] Wilson DM , Binder LI , Free fatty acids stimulate the polymerization of tau and amyloid β peptides: In vitro evidence for a common effector of pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease, Am. J. Pathol. 150 (1997) 2181–2195. /pmc/articles/PMC1858305/?report=abstract (accessed December 6, 2020).9176408
[42] Brandt R , Léger J , Lee G , Interaction of tau with the neural plasma membrane mediated by tau’s amino-terminal projection domain, J. Cell Biol. 131 (1995) 1327–1340. 10.1083/jcb.131.5.1327.8522593
[43] Farah CA , Perreault S , Liazoghli D , Desjardins M , Anton A , Lauzon M , Paiement J , Leclerc N , Tau interacts with Golgi membranes and mediates their association with microtubules, Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton. 63 (2006) 710–724. 10.1002/cm.20157.16960886
[44] Violet M , Delattre L , Tardivel M , Sultan A , Chauderlier A , Caillierez R , Talahari S , Nesslany F , Lefebvre B , Bonnefoy E , Buée L , Galas MC , A major role for Tau in neuronal DNA and RNA protection in vivo under physiological and hyperthermic conditions, Front, Cell. Neurosci. 8 (2014) 84. 10.3389/fncel.2014.00084.24672431
[45] Kidd M , Paired Helical Filaments in Electron Microscopy of Alzheimer’s Disease, Nature. 197 (1963) 192–193. 10.1038/197192b0.
[46] von Bergen M , Barghorn S , Li L , Marx A , Biernat J , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E , Mutations of tau protein in frontotemporal dementia promote aggregation of paired helical filaments by enhancing local beta-structure., J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 48165–48174. 10.1074/jbc.M105196200.
[47] Barghorn S , Mandelkow E , Drubin DG , Toward a Unified Scheme for the Aggregation of Tau into Alzheimer Paired Helical Filaments †, J. Cell Biol. 41 (1986) 2739–2746. 10.1021/bi026469j.
[48] von Bergen M , Barghorn S , Li L , Marx A , Biernat J , Mandelkow E-M , Mandelkow E , Mutations of Tau Protein in Frontotemporal Dementia Promote Aggregation of Paired Helical Filaments by Enhancing Local β-Structure, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 48165–48174. 10.1074/jbc.M105196200.
[49] Crowther RA , Wischik CM , Image reconstruction of the Alzheimer paired helical filament., EMBO J. 4 (1985) 3661–3665. 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1985.tb04132.x.2419127
[50] Tellez-Nagel I , Wiśniewski HM , Ultrastructure of Neurofibrillary Tangles in Steele-Richardson-Olszewski Syndrome, Arch. Neurol. 29 (1973) 324–327. 10.1001/archneur.1973.00490290064007.4743882
[51] Gerson JE , Castillo-Carranza DL , Kayed R , Advances in therapeutics for neurodegenerative tauopathies: Moving toward the specific targeting of the most toxic tau species, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 5 (2014) 752–769. 10.1021/cn500143n.25075869
[52] Lasagna-Reeves CA , Castillo-Carranza DL , Sengupta U , Clos AL , Jackson GR , Kayed R , Tau oligomers impair memory and induce synaptic and mitochondrial dysfunction in wild-type mice, Mol. Neurodegener. 6 (2011) 39. 10.1186/1750-1326-6-39.21645391
[53] Berger Z , Roder H , Hanna A , Carlson A , Rangachari, Accumulation of Pathological Tau Species and Memory Loss in a Conditional Model of Tauopathy, J. Neurosci. 27 (2007) 3650–3662. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0587-07.2007.17409229
[54] Maeda S , Sahara N , Saito Y , Murayama S , Ikai A , Takashima A , Increased levels of granular tau oligomers: An early sign of brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease, Neurosci. Res. 54 (2006) 197–201. 10.1016/j.neures.2005.11.009.16406150
[55] Martin L , Latypova X , Terro F , Post-translational modifications of tau protein: Implications for Alzheimer’s disease, Neurochem. Int. 58 (2011) 458–471. 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.12.023.21215781
[56] Morris M , Knudsen GM , Maeda S , Trinidad JC , Ioanoviciu A , Burlingame AL , Mucke L , Tau post-translational modifications in wild-type and human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice, Nat. Neurosci. 18 (2015) 1183–1189. 10.1038/nn.4067.26192747
[57] Iqbal K , Liu F , Gong C-X , Grundke-Iqbal I , Tau in Alzheimer Disease and Related Tauopathies, Curr. Alzheimer Res. 7 (2010) 656–664. 10.2174/156720510793611592.20678074
[58] Chung SH , Aberrant phosphorylation in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, BMB Rep. 42 (2009) 467–474. 10.5483/BMBRep.2009.42.8.467.19712581
[59] Seubert P , Mawal-Dewan M , Barbour R , Jakes R , Goedert M , Johnson GVWW , Litersky JM , Schenk D , Lieberburg I , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VMYY , Detection of phosphorylated Ser262 in fetal tau, adult tau, and paired helical filament tau, J. Biol. Chem. 270 (1995) 18917–18922. 10.1074/jbc.270.32.18917.
[60] Ksiezak-Reding H , Liu WK , Yen SH , Phosphate analysis and dephosphorylation of modified tau associated with paired helical filaments, Brain Res. 597 (1992) 209–219. 10.1016/0006-8993(92)91476-U.1472994
[61] Gong CX , Liu F , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K , Post-translational modifications of tau protein in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neural Transm. 112 (2005) 813–838. 10.1007/s00702-004-0221-0.15517432
[62] Fischer D , Mukrasch MD , Biernat J , Bibow S , Blackledge M , Griesinger C , Mandelkow E , Zweckstetter M , Conformational changes specific for pseudophosphorylation at serine 262 selectively impair binding of tau to microtubules., Biochemistry. 48 (2009) 10047–10055. 10.1021/bi901090m.
[63] Meraz-Ríos MA , Lira-De León KI , Campos-Peña V , De Anda-Hernández MA , Mena-López R , Tau oligomers and aggregation in Alzheimer’s disease., J. Neurochem. 112 (2010) 1353–1367. 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06511.x.19943854
[64] Sorrentino G , Bonavita V , Neurodegeneration and Alzheimer’s disease: the lesson from tauopathies, Neurol. Sci. 28 (2007) 63–71. 10.1007/S10072-007-0789-X.17464468
[65] Selkoe DJ , Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy, Physiol. Rev. 81 (2001) 741–766. 10.1152/PHYSREV.2001.81.2.741.11274343
[66] Boxer AL , Yu JT , Golbe LI , Litvan I , Lang AE , Höglinger GU , Advances in progressive supranuclear palsy: new diagnostic criteria, biomarkers, and therapeutic approaches, Lancet. Neurol. 16 (2017) 552–563. 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30157-6.28653647
[67] del AC , Mederlyova AM , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K , Promotion of hyperphosphorylation by frontotemporal dementia tau mutations., J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 34873–34881. 10.1074/jbc.M405131200.
[68] Alquezar C , Arya S , Kao AW , Tau Post-translational Modifications: Dynamic Transformers of Tau Function, Degradation, and Aggregation, Front. Neurol. 11 (2021). 10.3389/fneur.2020.595532.
[69] Cohen TJ , Guo JL , Hurtado DE , Kwong LK , Mills IP , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VMYY , The acetylation of tau inhibits its function and promotes pathological tau aggregation, Nat. Commun. 2 (2011). 10.1038/ncomms1255.
[70] Cook C , Carlomagno Y , Gendron TF , Dunmore J , Scheffel K , Stetler C , Davis M , Dickson D , Jarpe M , Deture M , Petrucelli L , Acetylation of the KXGS motifs in tau is a critical determinant in modulation of tau aggregation and clearance, 2014. 10.1093/hmg/ddt402.
[71] Wang Y , Mandelkow E , Tau in physiology and pathology, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17 (2016) 5–21. 10.1038/nrn.2015.1.26631930
[72] Irwin DJ , Cohen TJ , Grossman M , Arnold SE , McCarty-Wood E , Van Deerlin VM , Lee VMY , Trojanowski JQ , Acetylated Tau Neuropathology in Sporadic and Hereditary Tauopathies, Am. J. Pathol. 183 (2013) 344. 10.1016/J.AJPATH.2013.04.025.23885714
[73] Kamah A , Huvent I , Cantrelle F-X , Qi H , Lippens G , Landrieu I , Smet-Nocca C , Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Analysis of the Acetylation Pattern of the Neuronal Tau Protein, Biochemistry. 53 (2014) 3020–3032. 10.1021/bi500006v.24708343
[74] Liu F , Iqbal K , Grundke-Iqbal I , Hart GW , Gong CX , C. X, C.X. Gong, O-GlcNAcylation regulates phosphorylation of tau: A mechanism involved in Alzheimer’s disease, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 (2004) 10804–10809. 10.1073/pnas.0400348101.
[75] Wang J-Z , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K , Glycosylation of microtubule–associated protein tau: An abnormal posttranslational modification in Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Med. 2 (1996) 871–875. 10.1038/nm0896-871.8705855
[76] Lee MJ , Lee JH , Rubinsztein DC , Tau degradation: The ubiquitin-proteasome system versus the autophagy-lysosome system, Prog. Neurobiol. 105 (2013) 49–59. 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.03.001.23528736
[77] Luo H-B , Xia Y-Y , Shu X-J , Liu Z-C , Feng Y , Liu X-H , Yu G , Yin G , Xiong Y-S , Zeng K , Jiang J , Ye K , Wang X-C , Wang J-Z , SUMOylation at K340 inhibits tau degradation through deregulating its phosphorylation and ubiquitination., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (2014) 16586–91. 10.1073/pnas.1417548111.
[78] Iqbal K , Grundke-Iqbal I , Ubiquitination and abnormal phosphorylation of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Neurobiol. 5 (1991) 399–410. 10.1007/BF02935561.1726645
[79] Dorval V , Fraser PE , Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) Modification of Natively Unfolded Proteins Tau and α-Synuclein, J. Biol. Chem. 281 (2006) 9919–9924. 10.1074/jbc.M510127200.16464864
[80] Chesser AS , Pritchard SM , Johnson GVWW , Tau clearance mechanisms and their possible role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease, Frontiers, 2013. 10.3389/fneur.2013.00122.
[81] Filipcik P , Zilka N , Bugos O , Kucerak J , Koson P , Novak P , Novak M , First transgenic rat model developing progressive cortical neurofibrillary tangles, Neurobiol. Aging. 33 (2012) 1448–1456. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.10.015.21196063
[82] Yang L-S , Ksiezak-Reding H , Calpain-Induced Proteolysis of Normal Human Tau and Tau Associated with Paired Helical Filaments, Eur. J. Biochem. 233 (1995) 9–17. 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.009_1.x.7588778
[83] Garg S , Timm T , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E , Wang Y , Cleavage of Tau by calpain in Alzheimer’s disease: The quest for the toxic 17 kD fragment, Neurobiol. Aging. 32 (2011) 1–14. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.09.008.20961659
[84] Lang AE , Riherd Methner DN , Ferreira A , Neuronal degeneration, synaptic defects, and behavioral abnormalities in tau45–230 transgenic mice, Neuroscience. 275 (2014) 322–339. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.06.017.24952329
[85] Zhao X , Kotilinek LA , Smith B , Hlynialuk C , Zahs K , Ramsden M , Cleary J , Ashe KH , Caspase-2 cleavage of tau reversibly impairs memory, Nat. Med. 22 (2016) 1268–1276. 10.1038/nm.4199.27723722
[86] Guo H , Albrecht S , Bourdeau M , Petzke T , Bergeron C , LeBlanc AC , Active Caspase-6 and Caspase-6-Cleaved Tau in Neuropil Threads, Neuritic Plaques, and Neurofibrillary Tangles of Alzheimer’s Disease, Am. J. Pathol. 165 (2004) 523–531. 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63317-2.15277226
[87] Gamblin TC , Chen F , Zambrano A , Abraha A , Lagalwar S , Guillozet AL , Lu M , Fu Y , Garcia-Sierra F , LaPointe N , Miller R , Berry RW , Binder LI , Cryns VL , Caspase cleavage of tau: Linking amyloid and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 10032–10037. 10.1073/pnas.1630428100.
[88] Karakaya T , Fußer F , Prvulovic D , Hampel H , Treatment options for tauopathies., Curr. Treat. Options Neurol. 14 (2012) 126–136. 10.1007/s11940-012-0168-7.22307450
[89] VandeVrede L , Ljubenkov PA , Rojas JC , Welch AE , Boxer AL , Four-Repeat Tauopathies: Current Management and Future Treatments, Neurotherapeutics. 17 (2020) 1563–1581. 10.1007/s13311-020-00888-5.32676851
[90] Wischik CM , Edwards PC , Lai RYKK , Roth M , Harrington CR , Selective inhibition of Alzheimer disease-like tau aggregation by phenothiazines, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 (1996) 11213–11218. 10.1073/pnas.93.20.11213.
[91] Baddeley TC , McCaffrey J , Storey JMD , Cheung JKS , Melis V , Horsley D , Harrington CR , Wischik CM , Complex Disposition of Methylthioninium Redox Forms Determines Efficacy in Tau Aggregation Inhibitor Therapy for Alzheimers Disease, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 352 (2015) 110–118. 10.1124/jpet.114.219352.25320049
[92] Akoury E , Pickhardt M , Gajda M , Biernat J , Mandelkow E , Zweckstetter M , Mechanistic basis of phenothiazine-driven inhibition of Tau aggregation., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 52 (2013) 3511–3515. 10.1002/anie.201208290.23401175
[93] Harrington CR , Storey JMD , Clunas S , Harrington KA , Horsley D , Ishaq A , Kemp SJ , Larch CP , Marshall C , Nicoll SL , Rickard JE , Simpson M , Sinclair JP , Storey LJ , Wischik CM , Cellular Models of Aggregation-dependent Template-directed Proteolysis to Characterize Tau Aggregation Inhibitors for Treatment of Alzheimer Disease*, J. Biol. Chem. 290 (2015) 10862–10875. 10.1074/jbc.M114.616029.
[94] Wischik C , Staff R , Challenges in the conduct of disease-modifying trials in AD: practical experience from a phase 2 trial of Tau-aggregation inhibitor therapy., J. Nutr. Health Aging. 13 (2009) 367–369. 10.1007/s12603-009-0046-5.19300883
[95] Novak P , Schmidt R , Kontsekova E , Zilka N , Kovacech B , Al E ., Safety and immunogenicity of the tau vaccine AADvac1 in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial, Lancet Neurol. 16 (2017) 123–134. 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30331-3.27955995
[96] No, International Conference on Frontotemporal Dementias 2016, ALZFORUM. (2016). https://www.alzforum.org/print-series/689746 (accessed December 4, 2020).
[97] Wagner J , Krauss S , Shi S , Ryazanov S , Steffen J , Miklitz C , Leonov A , Kleinknecht A , Göricke B , Weishaupt JH , Weckbecker D , Reiner AM , Zinth W , Levin J , Ehninger D , Remy S , Kretzschmar HA , Griesinger C , Giese A , Fuhrmann M , Reducing tau aggregates with anle138b delays disease progression in a mouse model of tauopathies, Acta Neuropathol. 130 (2015) 619–631. 10.1007/S00401-015-1483-3.26439832
[98] Dominguez-Meijide A , Vasili E , König A , Cima-Omori MS , Ibáñez de Opakua A , Leonov A , Ryazanov S , Zweckstetter M , Griesinger C , Outeiro TF , Effects of pharmacological modulators of α-synuclein and tau aggregation and internalization, Sci. Rep. 10 (2020). 10.1038/S41598-020-69744-Y.
[99] Martinez Hernandez A , Urbanke H , Gillman AL , Lee J , Ryazanov S , Agbemenyah HY , Benito E , Jain G , Kaurani L , Grigorian G , Leonov A , Rezaei-Ghaleh N , Wilken P , Arce FT , Wagner J , Fuhrman M , Caruana M , Camilleri A , Vassallo N , Zweckstetter M , Benz R , Giese A , Schneider A , Korte M , Lal R , Griesinger C , Eichele G , Fischer A , The diphenylpyrazole compound anle138b blocks Aβ channels and rescues disease phenotypes in a mouse model for amyloid pathology, EMBO Mol. Med. 10 (2018) 32–47. 10.15252/EMMM.201707825.29208638
[100] Matthes D , Gapsys V , Griesinger C , De Groot BL , Resolving the Atomistic Modes of Anle138b Inhibitory Action on Peptide Oligomer Formation, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 8 (2017) 2791–2808. 10.1021/ACSCHEMNEURO.7B00325/SUPPL_FILE/CN7B00325_SI_002.AVI.28906103
[101] Ho L , Yemul S , Wang J , Pasinetti GM , Grape seed polyphenolic extract as a potential novel therapeutic agent in tauopathies, J. Alzheimers. Dis. 16 (2009) 433–439. 10.3233/JAD-2009-0969.19221432
[102] Pasinetti GM , Ksiezak-Reding H , Santa-Maria I , Wang J , Ho L , Development of a grape seed polyphenolic extract with anti-oligomeric activity as a novel treatment in progressive supranuclear palsy and other tauopathies, J. Neurochem. 114 (2010) 1557–1568. 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06875.x.20569300
[103] VandeVrede L , Boxer AL , Polydoro M , Targeting tau: Clinical trials and novel therapeutic approaches, Neurosci. Lett. 731 (2020) 134919. 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.134919.
[104] DeVos SL , Miller RL , Schoch KM , Holmes BB , Kebodeaux CS , Al E ., Tau reduction prevents neuronal loss and reverses pathological tau deposition and seeding in mice with tauopathy, Sci. Transl. Med. 9 (2017). 10.1126/scitranslmed.aag0481.
[105] Paholikova K , Salingova B , Opattova A , Skrabana R , Majerova P , Zilka N , Kovacech B , Zilkova M , Barath P , Novaka M , N-terminal truncation of microtubule associated protein tau dysregulates its cellular localization, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 43 (2015) 915–926. 10.3233/JAD-140996.25147106
[106] Lagraoui M , Sukumar G , Latoche JR , Maynard SK , Dalgard CL , Schaefer BC , Salsalate treatment following traumatic brain injury reduces inflammation and promotes a neuroprotective and neurogenic transcriptional response with concomitant functional recovery, Brain. Behav. Immun. 61 (2017) 96–109. 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.12.005.27939247
[107] Rosenmann H , Grigoriadis N , Karussis D , Boimel M , Touloumi O , Ovadia H , Abramsky O , Tauopathy-like abnormalities and neurologic deficits in mice immunized with neuronal tau protein, Arch, Neurol. 63 (2006) 1459–1467. 10.1001/archneur.63.10.1459.17030663
[108] Novak P , Kovacech B , Katina S , Schmidt R , Scheltens P , Kontsekova E , Ropele S , Fialova L , Kramberger M , Paulenka-Ivanovova N , Smisek M , Hanes J , Stevens E , Kovac A , Sutovsky S , Parrak V , Koson P , Prcina M , Galba J , Cente M , Hromadka T , Filipcik P , Piestansky J , Samcova M , Prenn-Gologranc C , Sivak R , Froelich L , Fresser M , Rakusa M , Harrison J , Hort J , Otto M , Tosun D , Ondrus M , Winblad B , Novak M , Zilka N , ADAMANT: a placebo-controlled randomized phase 2 study of AADvac1, an active immunotherapy against pathological tau in Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Aging. 1 (2021) 521–534. 10.1038/s43587-021-00070-2.
[109] Fitzpatrick AWP , Falcon B , He S , Murzin AG , Murshudov G , Garringer HJ , Crowther RA , Ghetti B , Goedert M , Scheres SHW , Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer’s disease, Nature. 547 (2017) 185–190. 10.1038/nature23002.28678775
[110] Jicha GA , Bowser R , Kazam IG , Davies P , Alz-50 and MC-1, a new monoclonal antibody raised to paired helical filaments, recognize conformational epitopes on recombinant tau, J. Neurosci. Res. 48 (1997) 128–132. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(19970415)48:2&amp;lt;128::AID-JNR5&amp;gt;3.0.CO;2-E.9130141
[111] Jicha GA , Lane E , Vincent I , Otvos L , Hoffmann R , Davies P , A conformation- and phosphorylation-dependent antibody recognizing the paired helical filaments of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurochem. 69 (1997) 2087–2095. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69052087.x.9349554
[112] Zagotenemab | ALZFORUM, (n.d.). https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/zagotenemab.
[113] Qureshi IA , Tirucherai G , Ahlijanian MK , Kolaitis G , Bechtold C , Grundman M , A randomized, single ascending dose study of intravenous BIIB092 in healthy participants, Alzheimer’s Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv. 4 (2018) 746–755. 10.1016/j.trci.2018.10.007.
[114] Boxer AL , Qureshi I , Ahlijanian M , Grundman, Safety of the tau-directed monoclonal antibody BIIB092 in progressive supranuclear palsy: a randomised, placebo-controlled, multiple ascending dose phase 1b trial, Lancet Neurol. 18 (2019) 549–558. 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30139-5.31122495
[115] Reynolds CH , Garwood CJ , Wray S , Price C , Kellie S , Perera T , Zvelebil M , Yang A , Sheppard PW , Varndell IM , Hanger DP , Anderton BH , Phosphorylation Regulates Tau Interactions with Src Homology 3 Domains of Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase, Phospholipase Cγ1, Grb2, and Src Family Kinases*, J. Biol. Chem. 283 (2008) 18177–18186. 10.1074/jbc.M709715200.
[116] Nygaard HB , van Dyck CH , Strittmatter SM , Fyn kinase inhibition as a novel therapy for Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers. Res. Ther. 6 (2014) 8. 10.1186/alzrt238.24495408
[117] Hennequin LF , Allen J , Breed J , Curwen J , Fennell M , Green TP , Lambert-van der Brempt C , Morgentin R , Norman RA , Olivier A , Otterbein L , Plé PA , Warin N , Costello G , N -(5-Chloro-1,3-benzodioxol-4-yl)-7-[2-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)ethoxy]-5- (tetrahydro-2 H - pyran-4-yloxy)quinazolin-4-amine, a Novel, Highly Selective, Orally Available, Dual-Specific c-Src/Abl Kinase Inhibitor †, J. Med. Chem. 49 (2006) 6465–6488. 10.1021/jm060434q.17064066
[118] Kaufman AC , Salazar SV , Haas LT , Yang J , Kostylev MA , Jeng AT , Robinson SA , Gunther EC , Van Dyck CH , Nygaard HB , Strittmatter SM , Fyn inhibition rescues established memory and synapse loss in Alzheimer mice, Ann. Neurol. 77 (2015) 953–971. 10.1002/ana.24394.25707991
[119] Nygaard HB , Wagner AF , Bowen GS , Good SP , et al MG MacAvoy, A phase Ib multiple ascending dose study of the safety, tolerability, and central nervous system availability of AZD0530 (saracatinib) in Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s Res. Ther. 7 (2015). 10.1186/s13195-015-0119-0.
[120] Van Dyck CH , Nygaard HBH , Chen K , Donohue MC , Raman R , Al E ., Effect of AZD0530 on Cerebral Metabolic Decline in Alzheimer Disease, 76 (2019) 1219–1229. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2050.
[121] Nguyen T-VV , Shen L , Vander Griend L , Quach LN , Belichenko NP , Saw N , Yang T , Shamloo M , Wyss-Coray T , Massa SM , Longo FM , Small Molecule p75NTR Ligands Reduce Pathological Phosphorylation and Misfolding of Tau, Inflammatory Changes, Cholinergic Degeneration, and Cognitive Deficits in AβPPL/S Transgenic Mice, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 42 (2014) 459–483. 10.3233/JAD-140036.24898660
[122] Tolosa E , Litvan I , Höglinger GU , Burn D , Lees A , Andrés MV , Gómez-Carrillo B , León T , del Ser T , A phase 2 trial of the GSK-3 inhibitor tideglusib in progressive supranuclear palsy, Mov. Disord. 29 (2014) 470–478. 10.1002/mds.25824.24532007
[123] Liu F , Iqbal K , Grundke-Iqbal I , Hart GW , Gong CX , O-GlcNAcylation regulates phosphorylation of tau: A mechanism involved in Alzheimer’s disease, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 (2004) 10804–10809. 10.1073/pnas.0400348101.
[124] Liu F , Shi J , Tanimukai H , Gu J , Gu J , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K , Gong C-X , Reduced O-GlcNAcylation links lower brain glucose metabolism and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease, Brain. 132 (2009) 1820–1832. 10.1093/brain/awp099.19451179
[125] Yuzwa S , Shan X , Macauley M , … chemical TC-N , undefined 2012, Increasing O-GlcNAc slows neurodegeneration and stabilizes tau against aggregation, Nature.Com. (n.d.). https://www.nature.com/nchembio/journal/v8/n4/abs/nchembio.797.html (accessed December 4, 2020).
[126] Alectos Therapeutics Announces FDA Orphan Drug Designation for MK-8719: An Investigational Small-molecule OGA Inhibitor for Treatment of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, (n.d.). www.psp.org. (accessed February 2, 2022).
[127] Permanne B , Quattropani A , Hantson J , Neny M , Ousson S , Sand A , Wiessner C , Beher D , O3–04-04: Pharmacological intervention with the novel o-glcnacase inhibitor ASN-561 reduces pathological tau in transgenic mice, Alzheimer’s Dement. 11 (2015) P227–P227. 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.07.257.
[128] Ryan JM , Quattropani A , Abd-Elaziz K , den Daas I , Schneider M , Ousson S , Neny M , Sand A , Hantson J , Permanne B , Wiessner C , Beher D , Al E ., Phase 1 study in healthy volunteers of the O-glcnacase inhibitor asn120290 as a novel therapy for progressive supranuclear palsy and related tauopathies, Alzheimer’s Dement. 14 (2018) P251–P251. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.06.2400.
[129] Pipeline | Asceneuron, (n.d.). https://www.asceneuron.com/pipeline (accessed February 2, 2022).
[130] Schiff PB , Fant J , Horwitz SB , Promotion of microtubule assembly in vitro by taxol [19], Nature. 277 (1979) 665–667. 10.1038/277665a0.423966
[131] Fitzgerald DP , Emerson DL , Qian Y , Anwar T , Liewehr DJ , Steinberg SM , Silberman S , Palmieri D , Steeg PS , TPI-287, a New Taxane Family Member, Reduces the Brain Metastatic Colonization of Breast Cancer Cells, Mol. Cancer Ther. 11 (2012) 1959–1967. 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0061.22622283
[132] Tsai RM , Miller Z , Koestler M , Rojas JC , Ljubenkov, Reactions to Multiple Ascending Doses of the Microtubule Stabilizer TPI-287 in Patients With Alzheimer Disease, Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, and Corticobasal Syndrome: A Randomized Clinical Trial., JAMA Neurol. 77 (2020) 215–224. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.3812.31710340
[133] Brunden KR , Zhang B , Carroll J , Yao Y , Potuzak JS , Hogan A-ML , Iba M , James MJ , Xie SX , Ballatore C , Smith AB , Lee VM-Y , Trojanowski JQ , Epothilone D Improves Microtubule Density, Axonal Integrity, and Cognition in a Transgenic Mouse Model of Tauopathy, J. Neurosci. 30 (2010) 13861–13866. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3059-10.2010.
[134] Gozes I , Bassan M , Zamostiano R , Pinhasov A , Davidson A , Giladi E , Perl O , Glazner GW , Brenneman DE , A novel signaling molecule for neuropeptide action: Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein, in: Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., New York Academy of Sciences, 1999: pp. 125–135. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb07884.x.
[135] Dai C , Chen X , Kazim SF , Liu F , Gong C-X , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K , Passive immunization targeting the N-terminal projection domain of tau decreases tau pathology and improves cognition in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer disease and tauopathies, J. Neural Transm. 122 (2015) 607–617. 10.1007/s00702-014-1315-y.25233799
[136] Jarskog LF , Dong Z , Kangarlu A , Colibazzi T , Girgis RR , Kegeles LS , Barch DM , Buchanan RW , Csernansky JG , Goff DC , Harms MP , Javitt DC , Keefe RS , McEvoy JP , McMahon RP , Marder SR , Peterson BS , Lieberman JA , Effects of Davunetide on N-acetylaspartate and Choline in Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex in Patients with Schizophrenia, Neuropsychopharmacology. 38 (2013) 1245–1252. 10.1038/npp.2013.23.23325325
[137] Javitt DC , Buchanan RW , Keefe RSE , Kern R , McMahon RP , Green MF , Lieberman J , Goff DC , Csernansky JG , McEvoy JP , Jarskog F , Seidman LJ , Gold JM , Kimhy D , Nolan KS , Barch DS , Ball MP , Robinson J , Marder SR , Effect of the neuroprotective peptide davunetide (AL-108) on cognition and functional capacity in schizophrenia, Schizophr. Res. 136 (2012) 25–31. 10.1016/j.schres.2011.11.001.22169248
[138] Davunetide | ALZFORUM, (n.d.). https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/davunetide (accessed January 9, 2022).
[139] Kinoshita K , Habermann B , Hyman AA , XMAP215: A key component of the dynamic microtubule cytoskeleton, Trends Cell Biol. 12 (2002) 267–273. 10.1016/S0962-8924(02)02295-X.12074886
[140] Baker NC , Ekins S , Williams AJ , Tropsha A , A bibliometric review of drug repurposing, Drug Discov. Today. 23 (2018) 661–672. 10.1016/j.drudis.2018.01.018.29330123
[141] Blagosklonny MV , Fojo T , Molecular effects of paclitaxel: Myths and reality (a critical review), 1999. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0215(19991008)83:2&amp;lt;151::AID-IJC1&amp;gt;3.0.CO;2-5.
[142] Jordan MA , Toso RJ , Thrower D , Wilson L , Mechanism of mitotic block and inhibition of cell proliferation by taxol at low concentrations, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90 (1993) 9552–9556. 10.1073/pnas.90.20.9552.8105478
[143] Mitchison T , Kirschner M , Dynamic instability of microtubule growth, Nature. 312 (1984) 237–242. 10.1038/312237a0.6504138
[144] Jordan MA , Wilson L , Microtubules and actin filaments: Dynamic targets for cancer chemotherapy, Curr, Opin. Cell Biol. 10 (1998) 123–130. 10.1016/S0955-0674(98)80095-1.9484604
[145] Zhang B , Maiti A , Shively S , Lakhani F , McDonald-Jones G , Bruce J , Lee EB , Xie SX , Joyce S , Li C , Toleikis PM , Lee VMYY , Trojanowski JQ , Al E ., Microtubule-binding drugs offset tau sequestration by stabilizing microtubules and reversing fast axonal transport deficits in a tauopathy model, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (2005) 227–231. 10.1073/pnas.0406361102.15615853
[146] Carlier MF , Pantaloni D , Taxol effect on tubulin polymerization and associated guanosine 5’-triphosphate hydrolysis, Biochemistry. 22 (1983) 4814–4822. 10.1021/bi00289a031.6138095
[147] Brandt R , Lee G , Orientation, assembly, and stability of microtubule bundles induced by a fragment of tau protein, Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton. 28 (1994) 143–154. 10.1002/cm.970280206.8087873
[148] Conejero-Goldberg C , Townsend K , Davies P , and B H . 2012, Effects of Cell Cycle Inhibitors on Tau Phosphorylation in N2aTau3R Cells, Bone. 23 (2008) 1–7. 10.1038/jid.2014.371.
[149] Jordan M , Mechanism of Action of Antitumor Drugs that Interact with Microtubules and Tubulin, Curr. Med. Chem. Agents. 2 (2012) 1–17. 10.2174/1568011023354290.
[150] Malumbres M , Barbacid M , Mammalian cyclin-dependent kinases, Trends Biochem. Sci. 30 (2005) 630–641. 10.1016/j.tibs.2005.09.005.16236519
[151] Tarricone C , Dhavan R , Peng J , Areces LB , Tsai L-H , Musacchio A , Structure and Regulation of the CDK5-p25nck5a Complex, Mol. Cell. 8 (2001) 657–669. 10.1016/S1097-2765(01)00343-4.11583627
[152] Lee M , Kwon YT , Li M , Peng J , Friedlander RM , Tsai L-H , Neurotoxicity induces cleavage of p35 to p25 by calpain, Nature. 405 (2000) 360–364. 10.1038/35012636.10830966
[153] Patrick GN , Zukerberg L , Nikolic M , de la Monte S , Dikkes P , Tsai L-H , Conversion of p35 to p25 deregulates Cdk5 activity and promotes neurodegeneration, Nature. 402 (1999) 615–622. 10.1038/45159.10604467
[154] Corbel C , Zhang B , Le Parc A , Baratte B , Colas P , Couturier C , Kosik KS , Landrieu I , Le Tilly V , Bach S , Al E ., Parc AL Baratte B , Colas P , Al E , Tamoxifen Inhibits CDK5 Kinase Activity by Interacting with p35/p25 and Modulates the Pattern of Tau Phosphorylation, Chem. Biol. 22 (2015) 472–482. 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.03.009.25865311
[155] Lee G , Thangavel R , Sharma VM , Litersky JM , Bhaskar K , Fang SM , Do LH , Andreadis A , Van Hoesen G , Ksiezak-Reding H , Phosphorylation of tau by fyn: implications for Alzheimer’s disease., J. Neurosci. 24 (2004) 2304–2312. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4162-03.2004.14999081
[156] Derkinderen P , Scales TME , Hanger DP , Leung K-YK-Y , Byers HL , Al E , Al E ., Tyrosine 394 Is Phosphorylated in Alzheimer’s Paired Helical Filament Tau and in Fetal Tau with c-Abl as the Candidate Tyrosine Kinase, Soc Neurosci, Soc Neurosci. (2005). 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1487-05.2005.
[157] Drug Approval Package: Tasigna (Nilotinib) NDA #022068, (2007). https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2007/022068TOC.cfm (accessed December 26, 2020).
[158] Skorski T , BCR-ABL1 kinase: Hunting an elusive target with new weapons, Chem. Biol. 18 (2011) 1352–1353. 10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.11.001.22118668
[159] Lonskaya I , Hebron ML , Desforges NM , Schachter JB , Moussa CEH , Nilotinib-induced autophagic changes increase endogenous parkin level and ubiquitination, leading to amyloid clearance, J. Mol. Med. 92 (2014) 373–386.24337465
[160] Turner RS , Hebron ML , Lawler A , Mundel EE , Al E ., Nilotinib Effects on Safety, Tolerability, and Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s Disease, Ann. Neurol. 88 (2020) 183–194. 10.1002/ana.25775.32468646
[161] Hebron ML , Javidnia M , Moussa CEH , Tau clearance improves astrocytic function and brain glutamate-glutamine cycle, J. Neurol. Sci. 391 (2018) 90–99. 10.1016/J.JNS.2018.06.005.30103978
[162] Javidnia M , Hebron ML , Xin Y , Kinney NG , Moussa CEH , Pazopanib reduces phosphorylated tau levels and alters astrocytes in a mouse model of tauopathy, J. Alzheimers. Dis. 60 (2017) 461. 10.3233/JAD-170429.28869476
[163] Whitwell JL , Jack CR , Parisi JE , Gunter JL , Weigand SD , Boeve BF , Ahlskog JE , Petersen RC , Dickson DW , Josephs KA , Midbrain atrophy is not a biomarker of progressive supranuclear palsy pathology, Eur. J. Neurol. 20 (2013) 1417–1422. 10.1111/ENE.12212.23746093
[164] Leibson CL , Rocca WA , Hanson VA , Cha R , Kokmen E , O’Brien PC , Palumbo PJ , Risk of dementia among persons with diabetes mellitus: A population- based cohort study, Am. J. Epidemiol. 145 (1997) 301–308. 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a009106.9054233
[165] Khan SH , Hegde V , Obesity and Diabetes Mediated Chronic Inflammation : A Potential Biomarker in Alzheimer ’ s Disease, (2020).
[166] Moran C , Beare R , Phan TG , Bruce DG , Callisaya ML , Srikanth V , Type 2 diabetes mellitus and biomarkers of neurodegeneration, Neurology. 85 (2015) 1123–1130. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001982.26333802
[167] Ott A , Stolk RP , Van Harskamp F , Pols HAP , Hofman A , Breteler MMB , Diabetes mellitus and the risk of dementia: The Rotterdam Study, Neurology. 53 (1999) 1937–1942. 10.1212/wnl.53.9.1937.10599761
[168] Talbot K , Wang HY , Kazi H , Han LY , Al E ., Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysregulation, and cognitive decline, J. Clin. Invest. 122 (2012) 1316–1338. 10.1172/JCI59903.22476197
[169] Chetram Deochand MT , CSF and Brain Indices of Insulin Resistance, Oxidative Stress and Neuro-Inflammation in Early versus Late Alzheimer’s Disease, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. Park. 03 (2013) 128. 10.4172/2161-0460.1000128.
[170] Phukan S , Babu VS , Kannoji A , Hariharan R , Balaji VN , GSK3β: Role in therapeutic landscape and development of modulators, Br. J. Pharmacol. 160 (2010) 1–19. 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00661.x.20331603
[171] Hong M , Lee VMY , Insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 regulate tau phosphorylation in cultured human neurons, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 19547–19553. 10.1074/JBC.272.31.19547.
[172] Planel E , Tatebayashi Y , Miyasaka T , Liu L , Wang L , Herman M , Yu WH , Luchsinger JA , Wadzinski B , Duff KE , others, Insulin dysfunction induces in vivo tau hyperphosphorylation through distinct mechanisms, J. Neurosci. 27 (2007) 13635–13648.
[173] Plastino M , Fava A , Pirritano D , Cotronei P , Sacco N , Sperlì T , Spanò A , Gallo D , Mungari P , Consoli D , Bosco D , Effects of insulinic therapy on cognitive impairment in patients with Alzheimer disease and, Diabetes Mellit. Type-2, J. Neurol. Sci. 288 (2010) 112–116. 10.1016/j.jns.2009.09.022.19836029
[174] Dailey MJ , Moran TH , Glucagon-like peptide 1 and appetite, Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 24 (2013) 85–91. 10.1016/j.tem.2012.11.008.23332584
[175] Chen S , Liu AR , An FM , Yao WB , Gao XD , Amelioration of neurodegenerative changes in cellular and rat models of diabetes-related Alzheimer’s disease by exendin-4, Age (Omaha). 34 (2012) 1211–1224. 10.1007/s11357-011-9303-8.
[176] Xiong H , Zheng C , Wang J , Song J , Zhao G , Shen H , Deng Y , The neuroprotection of liraglutide on alzheimer-like learning and memory impairment by modulating the hyperphosphorylation of tau and neurofilament proteins and insulin signaling pathways in mice, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 37 (2013) 623–635. 10.3233/JAD-130584.24008687
[177] Qi LQ , Chen Z , Wang YP , Liu XY , Liu XH , Ke LF , Zheng Z , Lin XW , Zhou Y , Wu LJ , Bin Liu L , Subcutaneous liraglutide ameliorates methylglyoxal-induced alzheimer-like tau pathology and cognitive impairment by modulating tau hyperphosphorylation and glycogen synthase kinase-3β, Am. J. Transl. Res. 9 (2017) 247–260. www.ajtr.org (accessed December 3, 2020).28337257
[178] Batista AF , Forny-Germano L , Clarke JR , Lyra e Silva NM , Brito-Moreira J , Boehnke SE , Winterborn A , Coe BC , Lablans A , Vital JF , Marques SA , Martinez AMB , Gralle M , Holscher C , Klein WL , Houzel JC , Ferreira ST , Munoz DP , De Felice FG , Lyra e Silva, The diabetes drug liraglutide reverses cognitive impairment in mice and attenuates insulin receptor and synaptic pathology in a non-human primate model of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Pathol. 245 (2018) 85–100. 10.1002/path.5056.29435980
[179] Hauner H , The mode of action of thiazolidinediones, Diabetes. Metab. Res. Rev. 18 (2002). 10.1002/dmrr.249.
[180] Heneka MT , Sastre M , Dumitrescu-Ozimek L , Hanke A , Dewachter I , Kuiperi C , O’Banion K , Klockgether T , Van Leuven F , Landreth GE , O’Banion K , Klockgether T , Leuven FV , Landreth GE , Acute treatment with the PPARγ agonist pioglitazone and ibuprofen reduces glial inflammation and Aβ1–42 levels in APPV717I transgenic mice, Brain. 128 (2005) 1442–1453. 10.1093/brain/awh452.15817521
[181] Nicolakakis N , Aboulkassim T , Ongali B , Lecrux C , Fernandes P , Rosa-Neto P , Tong X-K , Hamel E , Complete Rescue of Cerebrovascular Function in Aged Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice by Antioxidants and Pioglitazone, a Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor Agonist, J. Neurosci. 28 (2008) 9287–9296. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3348-08.2008.18784309
[182] To AWMM , Ribe EM , Chuang TT , Schroeder JE , Lovestone S , The ε3 and ε4 alleles of human APOE differentially affect tau phosphorylation in hyperinsulinemic and pioglitazone treated mice, PLoS One, PLoS One, 2011. 10.1371/journal.pone.0016991.
[183] García-Bueno B , Madrigal JLM , Lizasoain I , Moro MA , Lorenzo P , Leza JC , Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma activation decreases neuroinflammation in brain after stress in rats, Biol. Psychiatry. 57 (2005) 885–894. 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.01.007.15820709
[184] Risner ME , Saunders AM , Altman JFB , Ormandy GC , Craft S , Foley IM , Zvartau-Hind ME , Hosford DA , Roses AD , Efficacy of rosiglitazone in a genetically defined population with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease, Pharmacogenomics J. 6 (2006) 246–254. 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500369.16446752
[185] Escribano L , Simón AM , Pérez-Mediavilla A , Salazar-Colocho P , Del Río J , Frechilla D , Rosiglitazone reverses memory decline and hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor down-regulation in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 379 (2009) 406–410. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.071.19109927
[186] Sato T , Hanyu H , Hirao K , Kanetaka H , Sakurai H , Iwamoto T , Efficacy of PPAR-γ agonist pioglitazone in mild Alzheimer disease, Neurobiol. Aging. 32 (2011) 1626–1633. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.10.009.19923038
[187] Hu SH , Jiang T , Yang SS , Yang Y , Pioglitazone ameliorates intracerebral insulin resistance and tau-protein hyperphosphorylation in rats with type 2 diabetes, Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes. 121 (2013) 220–224. 10.1055/S-0032-1333277.23512416
[188] Hamano T , Shirafuji N , Makino C , Yen SH , Kanaan NM , Ueno A , Suzuki J , Ikawa M , Matsunaga A , Yamamura O , Kuriyama M , Nakamoto Y , Pioglitazone prevents tau oligomerization, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 478 (2016) 1035–1042. 10.1016/J.BBRC.2016.08.016.27543203
[189] Hamano T , Shirafuji N , Makino C , Yen SH , Kanaan NM , Ueno A , Suzuki J , Ikawa M , Matsunaga A , Yamamura O , Kuriyama M , Nakamoto Y , Pioglitazone prevents tau oligomerization, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 478 (2016) 1035–1042. 10.1016/J.BBRC.2016.08.016.27543203
[190] Searcy JL , Phelps JT , Pancani T , Kadish I , Popovic J , Anderson KL , Beckett TL , Murphy MP , Chen KC , Blalock EM , Landfield PW , Porter NM , Thibault O , Long-term pioglitazone treatment improves learning and attenuates pathological markers in a mouse model of alzheimer’s disease, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 30 (2012) 943–961. 10.3233/JAD-2012-111661.22495349
[191] Zang M , Zuccollo A , Hou X , Nagata D , Walsh K , Herscovitz H , Brecher P , Ruderman NB , Cohen RA , AMP-activated Protein Kinase Is Required for the Lipid-lowering Effect of Metformin in Insulin-resistant Human HepG2 Cells, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 47898–47905. 10.1074/jbc.M408149200.
[192] Chen J-L , Luo C , Pu D , Zhang G-Q , Zhao Y-X , Sun Y , Zhao K-X , Liao Z-Y , Lv A-K , Zhu S-Y , Zhou J , Xiao Q , Metformin attenuates diabetes-induced tau hyperphosphorylation in vitro and in vivo by enhancing autophagic clearance, Exp. Neurol. 311 (2019) 44–56. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.09.008.30219731
[193] Wilson C , Magnaudeix A , Yardin C , Terro F , Autophagy Dysfunction and its Link to Alzheimer’s Disease and Type II Diabetes Mellitus, CNS Neurol. Disord. - Drug Targets. 13 (2014) 226–246. 10.2174/18715273113126660146.24059314
[194] Chen Y , Zhou K , Wang R , Liu Y , Kwak Y-D , Ma T , Thompson RC , Zhao Y , Smith L , Gasparini L , Luo Z , Xu H , Liao F-F , Antidiabetic drug metformin (GlucophageR) increases biogenesis of Alzheimer’s amyloid peptides via up-regulating BACE1 transcription., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 (2009) 3907–3912. 10.1073/pnas.0807991106.19237574
[195] Long ZM , Zhao L , Jiang R , Wang KJ , Luo SF , Zheng M , Li XF , He GQ , Valproic Acid Modifies Synaptic Structure and Accelerates Neurite Outgrowth Via the Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3β Signaling Pathway in an Alzheimer’s Disease Model, CNS Neurosci. Ther. 21 (2015) 887–897. 10.1111/CNS.12445.26385876
[196] Hu J-P , Xie J-W , Wang C-Y , Wang T , Wang X , Wang S-L , Teng W-P , Wang Z-Y , Valproate reduces tau phosphorylation via cyclin-dependent kinase 5 and glycogen synthase kinase 3 signaling pathways, Brain Res. Bull. 85 (2011) 194–200. 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.03.006.21435383
[197] Leclair-Visonneau L , Rouaud T , Debilly B , Durif F , Houeto JL , Kreisler A , Defebvre L , Lamy E , Volteau C , Nguyen JM , Le Dily S , Damier P , Boutoleau-Bretonnière C , Lejeune P , Derkinderen P , Randomized placebo-controlled trial of sodium valproate in progressive supranuclear palsy, Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 146 (2016) 35–39. 10.1016/J.CLINEURO.2016.04.021.27136096
[198] Shi JQ , Wang BR , Tian YY , Xu J , Gao L , Zhao SL , Jiang T , Xie HG , Zhang YD , Antiepileptics topiramate and levetiracetam alleviate behavioral deficits and reduce neuropathology in APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice, CNS Neurosci. Ther. 19 (2013) 871–881. 10.1111/cns.12144.23889921
[199] Rifampin , Tuberculosis. 88 (2008) 151–154. 10.1016/S1472-9792(08)70024-6.18486058
[200] McGeer PL , Harada N , Kimura H , McGeer EG , Schulzer M , Prevalence of Dementia amongst Elderly Japanese with Leprosy: Apparent Effect of Chronic Drug Therapy, Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 3 (1992) 146–149. 10.1159/000107010.
[201] Namba Y , Kawatsu K , Izumi S , Ueki A , Ikeda K , Neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques in brain of elderly leprosy patients, Lancet (British Ed. 340 (1992).
[202] Chui D-H , Tabira T , Izumi S , Koya G , Ogata J , Decreased β-amyloid and increased abnormal tau deposition in the brain of aged patients with leprosy, Am. J. Pathol. 145 (1994) 771–775.7943169
[203] Umeda T , Ono K , Sakai A , Yamashita M , Mizuguchi M , Klein WL , Yamada M , Mori H , Tomiyama T , Rifampicin is a candidate preventive medicine against amyloid-β and tau oligomers, Brain. 139 (2016) 1568–1586. 10.1093/brain/aww042.27020329
[204] Patterson KR , Remmers C , Fu Y , Brooker S , Kanaan NM , Vana L , Ward S , Reyes JF , Philibert K , Glucksman MJ , Binder LI , Characterization of Prefibrillar Tau Oligomers in Vitro and in Alzheimer Disease, J. Biol. Chem. 286 (2011) 23063–23076. 10.1074/jbc.M111.237974.
[205] Maeda S , Sahara N , Saito Y , Murayama M , Yoshiike Y , Kim H , Miyasaka T , Murayama S , Ikai A , Takashima A , Granular Tau Oligomers as Intermediates of Tau Filaments, Biochemistry. 46 (2007) 3856–3861. 10.1021/bi061359o.17338548
[206] Gerson JE , Sengupta U , Lasagna-Reeves CA , Guerrero-Muñoz MJ , Troncoso J , Kayed R , Characterization of tau oligomeric seeds in progressive supranuclear palsy, Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2 (2014) 73. 10.1186/2051-5960-2-73.24927818
[207] Lasagna-Reeves CA , Castillo-Carranza DL , Sengupta U , Sarmiento J , Troncoso J , Jackson GR , Kayed R , Identification of oligomers at early stages of tau aggregation in Alzheimer’s disease, FASEB J. 26 (2012) 1946–1959. 10.1096/fj.11-199851.22253473
[208] Molloy DW , Standish TI , Zhou Q , Guyatt G , A multicenter, blinded, randomized, factorial controlled trial of doxycycline and rifampin for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: The DARAD trial, Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry. 28 (2013) 463–470. 10.1002/gps.3846.22718435
[209] Chow TW , Pollock BG , Milgram NW , Potential cognitive enhancing and disease modification effects of SSRIs for Alzheimer’s disease, Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 3 (2007) 627–636. /pmc/articles/PMC2656299/?report=abstract (accessed December 10, 2020).19300592
[210] Appleby BS , Nacopoulos D , Milano N , Zhong K , Cummings JL , A Review: Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease Discovered in Repurposed Agents, Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 35 (2013) 1–22. 10.1159/000345791.23307039
[211] McCormick AV , Wheeler JM , Guthrie CR , Liachko NF , Kraemer BC , Dopamine D2 Receptor Antagonism Suppresses Tau Aggregation and Neurotoxicity, Biol. Psychiatry. 73 (2013) 464–471. 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.08.027.23140663
[212] Miklossy J , Kis A , Radenovic A , Miller L , Forro L , Martins R , Reiss K , Darbinian N , Darekar P , Mihaly L , Khalili K , Beta-amyloid deposition and Alzheimer’s type changes induced by Borrelia spirochetes, Neurobiol. Aging. 27 (2006) 228–236. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.01.018.15894409
[213] Anthony IC , Ramage SN , Carnie FW , Simmonds P , Bell JE , Accelerated Tau deposition in the brains of individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus-1 before and after the advent of highly active anti-retroviral therapy, Acta Neuropathol. 111 (2006) 529–538. 10.1007/s00401-006-0037-0.16718349
[214] Figueiredo CP , Barros-Aragão FGQ , Neris RLS , Frost PS , Soares C , Al E ., Zika virus replicates in adult human brain tissue and impairs synapses and memory in mice, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 3890. 10.1038/s41467-019-11866-7.31488835
[215] Sabbir A , Islam M , Begum MM , Poddar SK , Ganguly A , A review on Zika infection: From strain identification to Guillain-Barré syndrome complication, Asian Pacific J. Trop. Dis. 6 (2016) 925–927. 10.1016/S2222-1808(16)61157-X.
[216] Wozniak MA , Frost AL , Itzhaki RF , Alzheimer’s disease-specific tau phosphorylation is induced by herpes simplex virus type 1, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 16 (2009) 341–350. 10.3233/JAD-2009-0963.19221424
[217] Carter CJ , Alzheimer’s disease plaques and tangles: Cemeteries of a Pyrrhic victory of the immune defence network against herpes simplex infection at the expense of complement and inflammation-mediated neuronal destruction, Neurochem. Int. 58 (2011) 301–320. 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.12.003.21167244
[218] Xu F , Sternberg MR , Kottiri BJ , McQuillan GM , Lee FK , Nahmias AJ , Berman SM , Markowitz LE , Trends in Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 and Type 2 Seroprevalence in the United States, JAMA. 296 (2006) 964. 10.1001/jama.296.8.964.16926356
[219] Steiner I , Kennedy PG , Pachner AR , The neurotropic herpes viruses: herpes simplex and varicella-zoster, Lancet Neurol. 6 (2007) 1015–1028. 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70267-3.17945155
[220] Wozniak MA , Frost AL , Preston CM , Itzhaki RF , Antivirals Reduce the Formation of Key Alzheimer’s Disease Molecules in Cell Cultures Acutely Infected with Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1, PLoS One. 6 (2011) e25152. 10.1371/journal.pone.0025152.
[221] Beutner KR , Valacyclovir: a review of its antiviral activity, pharmacokinetic properties, and clinical efficacy, Antiviral Res. 28 (1995) 281–290. 10.1016/0166-3542(95)00066-6.8669888
[222] Giannaccare G , Pellegrini M , Senni C , Bernabei F , Scorcia V , Cicero AFG , Clinical Applications of Astaxanthin in the Treatment of Ocular Diseases: Emerging Insights, Mar. Drugs. 18 (2020) 239. 10.3390/md18050239.
[223] Rahman SO , Panda BP , Parvez S , Kaundal M , Hussain S , Akhtar M , Najmi AK , Neuroprotective role of astaxanthin in hippocampal insulin resistance induced by Aβ peptides in animal model of Alzheimer’s disease, Biomed. Pharmacother. 110 (2019) 47–58. 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.11.043.30463045
[224] Ma Q , Ruan Y , Xu H , Shi X , Wang Z , Hu Y , Safflower yellow reduces lipid peroxidation, neuropathology, tau phosphorylation and ameliorates amyloid β-induced impairment of learning and memory in rats, Biomed. Pharmacother. 76 (2015) 153–164. 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.10.004.26653563
[225] Kraemer BC , Zhang B , Leverenz JB , Thomas JH , Trojanowski JQ , Schellenberg GD , Neurodegeneration and defective neurotransmission in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of tauopathy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 9980–9985. 10.1073/pnas.1533448100.12872001
[226] US Food and Drug Administration, US Food and Drug Administration, Public Health Advisory: Deaths with Antipsychotics in Elderly Patients with Behavioral Disturbances, Public Health. (2005) 2005–2005. http://psychrights.org/drugs/FDAantipsychotics4elderlywarning.htm (accessed December 6, 2020).
[227] Schotte A , Janssen PFMM , Megens AAHPAHP , Leysen JE , Occupancy of central neurotransmitter receptors by risperidone, clozapine and haloperidol, measured ex vivo by quantitative autoradiography, Brain Res. 631 (1993) 191–202. 10.1016/0006-8993(93)91535-Z.7510574
[228] Benítez-King G , Ortíz-López L , Jiménez-Rubio G , Ramírez-Rodríguez G , Haloperidol causes cytoskeletal collapse in N1E-115 cells through tau hyperphosphorylation induced by oxidative stress: Implications for neurodevelopment, Eur, J. Pharmacol. 644 (2010) 24–31. 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.06.057.20621083
[229] Koppel J , Jimenez H , Adrien L , Greenwald BS , Marambaud P , Cinamon E , Davies P , Haloperidol inactivates AMPK and reduces tau phosphorylation in a tau mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv. 2 (2016) 121–130. 10.1016/j.trci.2016.05.003.
[230] Agent A , FLUANXOL ® Flupentixol Tablets (as flupentixol dihydrochloride) 0.5 mg, 3 mg, and 5 mg Pr FLUANXOL ® DEPOT Flupentixol Decanoate Intramuscular Injection 2% and 10% flupentixol decanoate, (2017).
[231] Papazacharias A , Lozupone M , Barulli MR , Capozzo R , Imbimbo BP , Veneziani F , De Blasi R , Nardini M , Seripa D , Panza F , Logroscino G , Bipolar disorder and frontotemporal dementia: An intriguing association, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 55 (2017) 973–979. 10.3233/JAD-160860.27802240
[232] Phiel CJ , Klein PS , Molecular targets of lithium action, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 41 (2001) 789–813. 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.41.1.789.11264477
[233] Klein PS , Melton DA , A molecular mechanism for the effect of lithium on development, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 (1996) 8455–8459. 10.1073/pnas.93.16.8455.8710892
[234] Habib A , Sawmiller D , Li S , Xiang Y , Rongo D , Tian J , Hou H , Zeng J , Smith A , Fan S , Giunta B , Mori T , Currier G , Shytle DR , Tan J , LISPRO mitigates β-amyloid and associated pathologies in Alzheimer’s mice, Cell Death Dis. 8 (2017) e2880–e2880. 10.1038/cddis.2017.279.
[235] Forlenza OV , Diniz BS , Radanovic M , Santos FS , Talib LL , Gattaz WF , Disease-modifying properties of long-term lithium treatment for amnestic mild cognitive impairment: Randomised controlled trial, Br. J. Psychiatry. 198 (2011) 351–356. 10.1192/bjp.bp.110.080044.21525519
[236] Love S , Bridges LR , Case CP , Neurofibrillary tangles in Niemann—Pick disease type C, Brain. 118 (1995) 119–129. 10.1093/brain/118.1.119.7894998
[237] Suzuki K , Parker CC , Pentchev PG , Katz D , Ghetti B , D’Agostino AN , Carstea ED , Neurofibrillary tangles in Niemann-Pick disease type C, Acta Neuropathol. 89 (1995) 227–238. 10.1007/BF00309338.7754743
[238] Boimel M , Grigoriadis N , Lourbopoulos A , Touloumi O , Rosenmann D , Abramsky O , Rosenmann H , Statins Reduce the Neurofibrillary Tangle Burden in a Mouse Model of Tauopathy, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 68 (2009) 314–325. 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31819ac3cb.19225406
[239] Di Paolo G , Kim TW , Paolo GD , Kim TW , Linking lipids to Alzheimer’s disease: Cholesterol and beyond, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12 (2011) 284–296. 10.1038/nrn3012.21448224
[240] Shepardson NE , Cholesterol Level and Statin Use in Alzheimer Disease, Arch. Neurol. 68 (2011) 1239. 10.1001/archneurol.2011.203.21987540
[241] van der Kant R , Langness VF , Herrera CM , Williams DA , Fong LK , Leestemaker Y , Steenvoorden E , Rynearson KD , Brouwers JF , Helms JB , Ovaa H , Giera M , Wagner SL , Bang AG , Goldstein LSBB , Cholesterol Metabolism Is a Druggable Axis that Independently Regulates Tau and Amyloid-β in iPSC-Derived Alzheimer’s Disease Neurons, Cell Stem Cell. 24 (2019) 363–375.e9. 10.1016/j.stem.2018.12.013.
[242] Chan RB , Oliveira TG , Cortes EP , Honig LS , Duff KE , Small SA , Wenk MR , Shui G , Di Paolo G , Paolo GD , Comparative lipidomic analysis of mouse and human brain with Alzheimer disease, J. Biol. Chem. 287 (2012) “2678–2688." # "M111.274142.” 10.1074/jbc.M111.274142.22134919
[243] Tajima Y , Ishikawa M , Maekawa K , Murayama M , Senoo Y , Nishimaki-Mogami T , Nakanishi H , Ikeda K , Arita M , Taguchi R , Okuno A , Mikawa R , Niida S , Takikawa O , Saito Y , Lipidomic analysis of brain tissues and plasma in a mouse model expressing mutated human amyloid precursor protein/tau for Alzheimer’s disease, Lipids Health Dis. 12 (2013) 1–14. 10.1186/1476-511X-12-68.23295061
[244] Falangola MF , Lee SP , Nixon RA , Duff K , Helpern JA , Histological co-localization of iron in Aβ plaques of PS/APP transgenic mice, Neurochem. Res. 30 (2005) 201–205. 10.1007/s11064-004-2442-x.15895823
[245] Good PF , Perl DP , Bierer LM , Schmeidler J , Selective accumulation of aluminum and iron in the neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease: A laser microprobe (LAMMA) study, Ann. Neurol. 31 (1992) 286–292. 10.1002/ana.410310310.1637136
[246] Smith MA , Harris PLRR , Sayre LM , Perry G , Iron accumulation in Alzheimer disease is a source of redox-generated free radicals, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 (1997) 9866–9868. 10.1073/pnas.94.18.9866.9275217
[247] Pérez M , Valpuesta JM , de Garcini EM , Quintana C , Arrasate M , López Carrascosa JL , Rábano A , García de Yébenes J , Avila J , Ferritin is associated with the aberrant tau filaments present in progressive supranuclear, Palsy., Am. J. Pathol. 152 (1998) 1531–1539. /pmc/articles/PMC1858430/?report=abstract (accessed December 7, 2020).9626057
[248] Sayre LM , Perry G , Harris PLR , Liu Y , Schubert KA , Smith MA , In situ oxidative catalysis by neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques in Alzheimer’s disease: A central role for bound transition metals, J. Neurochem. 74 (2000) 270–279. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2000.0740270.x.10617129
[249] Egaña JT , Zambrano C , Nuñez MT , Gonzalez-Billault C , Maccioni RB , Iron-induced oxidative stress modify tau phosphorylation patterns in hippocampal cell cultures, in: BioMetals, Springer, 2003: pp. 215–223. 10.1023/A:1020727218493.
[250] MUÑOZ P , ZAVALA G , CASTILLO K , AGUIRRE P , HIDALGO C , NÚÑEZ MT , Effect of iron on the activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway in PC12 neuroblastoma cells, Biol. Res. 39 (2006) 189–190. 10.4067/S0716-97602006000100021.16629179
[251] Bautista E , Vergara P , Segovia J , Iron-induced oxidative stress activates AKT and ERK1/2 and decreases Dyrk1B and PRMT1 in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 34 (2016) 62–69. 10.1016/j.jtemb.2015.11.005.26854247
[252] Que EL , Domaille DW , Chang CJ , Metals in Neurobiology: Probing Their Chemistry and Biology with Molecular Imaging, Chem. Rev. 108 (2008) 1517–1549. 10.1021/cr078203u.18426241
[253] Yamamoto A , Shin R-W , Hasegawa K , Naiki H , Sato H , Yoshimasu F , Kitamoto T , Iron (III) induces aggregation of hyperphosphorylated τ and its reduction to iron (II) reverses the aggregation: implications in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurochem. 86 (2002) 1568–1568. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2002.01061.x.
[254] Guo C , Wang P , Zhong ML , Wang T , Huang XS , Li JY , Wang ZY , Deferoxamine inhibits iron induced hippocampal tau phosphorylation in the Alzheimer transgenic mouse brain, Neurochem. Int. 62 (2013) 165–172. 10.1016/j.neuint.2012.12.005.23262393
[255] Guo C , Wang T , Zheng W , Shan Z-Y , Teng W-P , Wang Z-Y , Intranasal deferoxamine reverses iron-induced memory deficits and inhibits amyloidogenic APP processing in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Neurobiol. Aging. 34 (2013) 562–575. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.05.009.22717236
[256] McKee AC , Carreras I , Hossain L , Ryu H , Klein WL , Oddo S , LaFerla FM , Jenkins BG , Kowall NW , Dedeoglu A , Ibuprofen reduces Aβ, hyperphosphorylated tau and memory deficits in Alzheimer mice, Brain Res. 1207 (2008) 225–236. 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.01.095.18374906
[257] Oddo S , Caccamo A , Kitazawa M , Tseng BP , LaFerla FM , Amyloid deposition precedes tangle formation in a triple transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease, Neurobiol. Aging. 24 (2003) 1063–1070. 10.1016/J.NEUROBIOLAGING.2003.08.012.14643377
[258] Bloom GS , Amyloid-β and tau: the trigger and bullet in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis, JAMA Neurol. 71 (2014) 505–508. 10.1001/JAMANEUROL.2013.5847.24493463
[259] Mackenzie IR , Munoz DG , Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and Alzheimer-type pathology in aging., Neurology. 50 (1998) 986–990. 10.1212/wnl.50.4.986.9566383
[260] Griffin WST , Liu L , Li Y , Mrak RE , Barger SW , Interleukin-1 mediates Alzheimer and Lewy body pathologies., J. Neuroinflammation. 3 (2006) 5. 10.1186/1742-2094-3-5.16542445
[261] Kitazawa M , Oddo S , Yamasaki TR , Green KN , LaFerla FM , Lipopolysaccharide- induced inflammation exacerbates tau pathology by a cyclin-dependent kinase 5-mediated pathway in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease., J. Neurosci. 25 (2005) 8843–8853. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2868-05.2005.16192374
[262] Li Y , Liu L , Barger SW , Griffin WST , Interleukin-1 mediates pathological effects of microglia on tau phosphorylation and on synaptophysin synthesis in cortical neurons through a p38-MAPK pathway., J. Neurosci. 23 (2003) 1605–1611. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-05-01605.2003.12629164
[263] Sheng JG , Zhu SG , Jones RA , Griffin WS , Mrak RE , Interleukin-1 promotes expression and phosphorylation of neurofilament and tau proteins in vivo., Exp. Neurol. 163 (2000) 388–391. 10.1006/exnr.2000.7393.10833312
[264] Min S-W , Chen X , Tracy TE , Li Y , Zhou Y , Wang C , Shirakawa K , Sakura Minami S , Defensor E , Ann Mok S , Dongmin Sohn P , Schilling B , Cong X , Ellerby L , Gibson BW , Johnson J , Krogan N , Shamloo M , Gestwicki J , Masliah E , Verdin E , Gan L , Critical role of acetylation in tau-mediated neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits, Nat. Med. (2015). 10.1038/nm.3951.
[265] VandeVrede L , Dale ML , Fields S , Frank M , Hare E , Heuer HW , Keith K , Koestler M , Ljubenkov PA , McDermott D , Ohanesian N , Richards J , Rojas JC , Thijssen EH , Walsh C , Wang P , Wolf A , Quinn JF , Tsai R , Boxer AL , Open-Label Phase 1 Futility Studies of Salsalate and Young Plasma in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. 7 (2020) 440–447. 10.1002/mdc3.12940.32373661
[266] Krymchantowski AV , The use of combination therapies in the acute management of migraine, Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 2 (2006) 293–297. 10.2147/nedt.2006.2.3.293.
[267] Chang JK , Leso A , Subaiea GM , Lahouel A , Masoud A , Mushtaq F , Deeb R , Eid A , Dash M , Bihaqi SW , Zawia NH , and Gillentine CMA , Berry LN , Goin-Kochel RP , Ali MA , Ge J , Guffey D , Rosenfeld JA , Hannig V , Bader P , Proud M , Shinawi M , Graham1 BH , Lin A , Lalani SR , Reynolds J , Chen M , Grebe T , Minard CG , Stankiewicz P , Beaudet AL , Schaaf , Chang JK , Leso A , Subaiea GM , Lahouel A , Masoud A , Mushtaq F , Deeb R , Eid A , Dash M , Bihaqi SW , Zawia NH , N. Program, T. Program, C. Biology, Tolfenamic acid: A modifier of the tau protein and its role in cognition and tauopathy, Curr, Alzheimer Res. 15 (2018) 549–562. 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31823da96d.Hydrogen.
[268] Adwan L , Subaiea GM , Basha R , Zawia NH , Tolfenamic acid reduces tau and CDK5 levels: Implications for dementia and tauopathies, J. Neurochem. 133 (2015) 266–272. 10.1111/jnc.12960.25279694
[269] Adwan LI , Basha R , Abdelrahim M , Subaiea GM , Zawia NH , Tolfenamic acid interrupts the de novo synthesis of the β-amyloid precursor protein and lowers amyloid beta via a transcriptional pathway, Curr. Alzheimer Res. 8 (2011) 385–392. 10.2174/156720511795745285.21557719
[270] Zebda R , Paller AS , Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 78 (2018) S43–S52. 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.11.056.29248522
[271] Giembycz MA , Phosphodiesterase-4: Selective and dual-specificity inhibitors for the therapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, in: Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc., Proc Am Thorac Soc, 2005: pp. 326–333. 10.1513/pats.200504-041SR.16267357
[272] García-Barroso C , Ricobaraza A , Pascual-Lucas M , Unceta N , Rico AJ , Goicolea MA , Sallés J , Lanciego JL , Oyarzabal J , Franco R , Cuadrado-Tejedor M , García-Osta A , Tadalafil crosses the bloodebrain barrier and reverses cognitive dysfunction in a mouse model of AD, Neuropharmacology. 64 (2013) 114–123. 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.06.052.22776546
[273] Puzzo D , Staniszewski A , XianDeng S , Privitera L , Leznik E , Liu S , Zhang H , Feng Y , Palmeri A , Landry DW , Arancio O , Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibition improves synaptic function, memory, and amyloid-β load in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model, J. Neurosci. 29 (2009) 8075–8086. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0864-09.2009.19553447
[274] Cuadrado-Tejedor M , Hervias I , Ricobaraza A , Puerta E , Pérez-Roldán JM , García-Barroso C , Franco R , Aguirre N , García-Osta A , Sildenafil restores cognitive function without affecting β-amyloid burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Br. J. Pharmacol. 164 (2011) 2029–2041. 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01517.x.21627640
[275] Nelson RL , Guo Z , Halagappa VM , Pearson M , Gray AJ , Matsuoka Y , Brown M , Martin B , Iyun T , Maudsley S , Clark RF , Mattson MP , Prophylactic treatment with paroxetine ameliorates behavioral deficits and retards the development of amyloid and tau pathologies in 3xTgAD mice., Exp. Neurol. 205 (2007) 166–76. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2007.01.037.17368447
[276] Jang SW , Liu X , Chan CB , Weinshenker D , Hall RA , Xiao G , Ye K , Amitriptyline is a TrkA and TrkB Receptor Agonist that Promotes TrkA/TrkB Heterodimerization and Has Potent Neurotrophic Activity, Chem. Biol. 16 (2009) 644–656. 10.1016/j.chembiol.2009.05.010.19549602
[277] Martin B , Brenneman R , Golden E , Walent T , Becker KG , Prabhu VV , Wood W , Ladenheim B , Cadet JL , Maudsley S , Growth factor signals in neural cells: Coherent patterns of interaction control multiple levels of molecular and phenotypic responses, J. Biol. Chem. 284 (2009) 2493–2511. 10.1074/jbc.M804545200.19038969
[278] Chadwick W , Mitchell N , Caroll J , Zhou Y , Park SS , Wang L , Becker KG , Zhang Y , Lehrmann E , Wood WH , Martin B , Maudsley S , Amitriptyline-mediated cognitive enhancement in aged 3×Tg Alzheimer’s disease mice is associated with neurogenesis and neurotrophic activity, PLoS One. 6 (2011). 10.1371/journal.pone.0021660.
[279] Engel PA , Treatment of progressive supranuclear palsy with amitriptyline: therapeutic and toxic effects, J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 44 (1996) 1072–1074. 10.1111/J.1532-5415.1996.TB02940.X.8790233
[280] Wischik CM , Harrington CR , Storey JMD , Tau-aggregation inhibitor therapy for Alzheimer’s disease, Biochem. Pharmacol. 88 (2014) 529–539. 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.12.008.24361915
[281] Shi Y , Zhang W , Yang Y , Murzin AG , Falcon B , Kotecha A , van Beers M , Tarutani A , Kametani F , Garringer HJ , Vidal R , Hallinan GI , Lashley T , Saito Y , Murayama S , Yoshida M , Tanaka H , Kakita A , Ikeuchi T , Robinson AC , Mann DMA , Kovacs GG , Revesz T , Ghetti B , Hasegawa M , Goedert M , Scheres SHW , Structure-based classification of tauopathies, Nature. 598 (2021) 359–363. 10.1038/S41586-021-03911-7.34588692
[282] Verwilst P , Kim HS , Kim S , Kang C , Kim JS , Shedding light on tau protein aggregation: The progress in developing highly selective fluorophores, Chem. Soc. Rev. 47 (2018) 2249–2265. 10.1039/c7cs00706j.29484335
[283] Kickstein E , Krauss S , Thornhill P , Rutschow D , Al E ., E. Al, Biguanide metformin acts on tau phosphorylation via mTOR/protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) signaling, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (2010) 21830–21835. 10.1073/pnas.0912793107.
