LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J Alzheimers Dis
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

28527212
9996388
10.3233/JAD-161299
NIHMS1875879
Article
Apolipoprotein E4, Gender, Body Mass Index, Inflammation, Insulin Resistance, and Air Pollution Interactions: Recipe for Alzheimer’s Disease Development in Mexico City Young Females
Calderón-Garcidueñas Lilian ab*
de la Monte Suzanne M. c
a The University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA
b Universidad del Valle de México, Ciudad de México, México
c Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
* Correspondence to: Lilian Calderón-Garcidueñas, MA, MD, PhD, University of Montana,32 Campus Drive, 287 Skaggs Building, Missoula, MT59812, USA. Tel.: + 1 406 243 4785; Fax: +1 406 243 5228; lilian.calderon-garciduenas@umontana.edu.
2 3 2023
2017
09 3 2023
58 3 613630
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Given the epidemiological trends of increasing Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and growing evidence that exposure and lifestyle factors contribute to AD risk and pathogenesis, attention should be paid to variables such as air pollution, in order to reduce rates of cognitive decline and dementia. Exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and ozone (O3) above the US EPA standards is associated with AD risk. Mexico City children experienced pre- and postnatal high exposures to PM2.5, O3, combustion-derived iron-rich nanoparticles, metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and endotoxins. Exposures are associated with early brain gene imbalance in oxidative stress, inflammation, innate and adaptive immune responses, along with epigenetic changes, accumulation of misfolded proteins, cognitive deficits, and brain structural and metabolic changes. The Apolipoprotein E (APOE) 4 allele, the most prevalent genetic risk for AD, plays a key role in the response to air pollution in young girls. APOE 4 heterozygous females with &gt;75% to &lt;94% BMI percentiles are at the highest risk of severe cognitive deficits (1.5–2 SD from average IQ). This review focused on the relationships between gender, BMI, systemic and neural inflammation, insulin resistance, hyperleptinemia, dyslipidemia, vascular risk factors, and central nervous system involvement in APOE4 urbanites exposed to PM2.5 and magnetite combustion-derived iron-rich nanoparticles that can reach the brain. APOE4 young female heterozygous carriers constitute a high-risk group for a fatal disease: AD. Multidisciplinary intervention strategies could be critical for prevention or amelioration of cognitive deficits and long-term AD progression in young individuals at high risk.

APOE
Alzheimer’s disease
body mass index
children
cognition
dementia
diabetes
female gender
glucose
insulin resistance
leptin
metabolic syndrome
Mexico City
nanoparticles
PM 2.5

pmcINTRODUCTION

Increasing evidence suggests that Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathogenesis includes strong interactions between a harmful environment and systemic and neural inflammatory, immunological, and metabolic responses impacting the brain from the early stages of AD development. Detrimental effects of exposures to complex mixtures of air pollutants are seen in urban children and young adults including progressive cognitive deficits together with structural, volumetric, and neuropathological hallmarks of neurodegeneration. In the developing brain, from fetus through adolescence and young adulthood, harmful exposures can lead to dysregulation of genes and result in oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, DNA damage, and NFκB signaling, deficiencies in neuroprotective mechanisms, and activation of neurodegenerative cascades. Genes that confer risk for early or late onset AD pose additional burdens that strongly influence occurrence of neurodegeneration.

The apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is the most prevalent genetic risk factor for AD [1], and poses a stronger risk in women. In Mexico City and the US, ε3 is the most common allele, while the prevalence of ε4 allele in Mexico varies from 8.4% in Guadalajara, to 11.5% in Nayarit and Durango, to 28% among Huichol Indians [2]. In our experience (LCG personal data), 18–20% of Mexico City residents carry an allele 4, compared to about 13% of a predominantly white Caucasian population in the Framingham Heart Study [3, 4].

However, since AD is an aging-associated disease, co-factors, particularly those that accelerate various aspects of aging most likely interact with the APOE ε4 allele to impact key factors favoring neurodegeneration, likely at an earlier age than in people who lack an APOE ε4 allele [5]. Systemic inflammation, metabolic imbalance, and neuroinflammation are recognized factors contributing to neurodegeneration, and the very same effects occur in response to chronic exposure to urban air pollution [5-20]. Based on a 9- year cohort follow-up study of 95,690 individuals, 65 years of age and older, Jung et al. estimated that AD risk increases by 211% per 10.91 ppb increase in ozone (O3), and by 138% per 4.34 μg/m3 increase in environmental particulate matter &lt;2.5 μm (PM2.5) [21]. Their findings suggest long-term exposure to levels of O3 and PM2.5 that exceed the current US EPA standards increases risk of AD [21].

In this review, we present published data concerning cognitive, behavioral, and cerebral neuroimaging effects of air pollutant exposure in children, and posit a hypothesis that positive feedback loops set the stage for progressive neurodegeneration. However, in Mexico City, the etiopathogenic factors are likely to be multifaceted such that, besides chronic exposures to complex mixtures of air pollutants, lifestyle and socioeconomic factors also cause stresses that drive systemic inflammation, insulin resistance, hyperleptinemia, neuroinflammation, neurodegeneration, structural/metabolic brain changes, and epigenetic modifications. APOE ε4 genotype is at the center-piece of our hypothesis.

Our discussion will focus on evidence that the effects of APOE ε4 allele “cooperate” with chronic air pollutant exposures and socioeconomic/lifestyle factors to promote obesity, diabetes, systemic inflammation, insulin resistance, and cognitive impairment, leading to AD-type neurodegeneration at high rates and at early ages (Fig. 1).

AIR POLLUTANT EXPOSURES, COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL EFFECTS IN CHILDREN

Millions of children around the world regularly breathe air that has unsafe, toxic levels of air pollutants. Chronic exposure to polluted air has been linked to premature deaths, particularly in developing nations [22]. Although everyone is potentially harmed, genetic factors, age, gender, nutritional status, epigenetic factors, cognitive reserve, socioeconomic status, health status, occupation, and lifestyles pertaining to physical activity and modes of transportation, can increase “susceptibility” to the adverse effects of chronic air pollutant exposure. What makes this type of research difficult to generate clear conclusive messages is that risk is modified by a host of environmental factors including characteristics of air pollutants, e.g., the nature and levels of toxic gases, the sources and sizes of organic and inorganic components of PM, meteorological conditions, and ambient temperature [23-26]. The abundant presence of Fe-rich magnetite nanoparticles in the brains of Mexico City young and old residents, the location of these particles in key organelles such as mitochondria, their association with transition metals, and their ubiquitous presence in airborne PM warrants the need to examine these powerful producers of damaging reactive oxygen species as part of the pollution scenario [27].

Air pollution-associated cognitive, behavioral, and cerebral imaging effects in the pediatric population are broad-ranging in nature and severity, and include: 1) behavioral problems; 2) deficits in sustained attention; 3) higher indices of hyperactivity; 4) decreased verbal IQ index; 5) reduced growth in cognitive development; 6) lower scores on metacognition assessments; and 7) reduced functional integration and segregation in key brain networks such as the default mode network and stimulus-driven mental operations [28-36]. In addition, significant reductions in placental brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and synapsin 1, which are key mediators of normal neurodevelopmental trajectories, have been linked to childhood neurobehavioral deficits following maternal chronic air pollutant exposures during pregnancy [37].

We strongly suggest that air pollution is a causative agent because in contrast to children exposed to low concentration of PM and other pollutants, children residing in Mexico City where the ambient fine PM (PM2.5), the magnetite combustion-derived nanoparticles, and ozone concentrations are significant, exhibit pronounced cognitive deficits with metabolic, structural, and volumetric changes in the brain [6, 10, 12, 15, 16]. Furthermore, more recent findings revealed that the APOE ε4 genotype is a major factor contributing to worse adverse effects associated with air pollution in Mexico City [18]. These observations lend strong support to the concept that APOE ε4 genotype interacts with molecular and biochemical adverse effects of childhood environmental exposures, including air pollution, to enhance deleterious effects of metabolic dysfunction that already has been shown to cause or propagate neurodegenerative diseases, including AD.

APOE ε4 AND CHILDREN’S NEURAL RESPONSES

The fact APOE ε4 allele is the strongest known genetic risk factor for late and early onset AD, and it is strongly associated with oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, endoplasmic reticulum stress, immune dysfunction, dysregulated lipid and glucose metabolism, and impairments in white matter (WM) integrity is relevant to highly exposed air pollution pediatric populations since we are able to identify precisely these associations in children [1, 38-50]. Its direct link to AD pathology pertains in part to the earlier and higher levels of amyloid-β (Aβ)1-42 accumulation in brains of individuals with APOE ε4 allele. Mechanistically, APOE ε4 influences Aβ clearance and aggregation, and it also impacts AD pathology in Aβ-independent ways [1, 51-54]. Besides the APOE ε4 genotype, age and female sex are established risk factors for AD [1, 51, 55-57].

APOE ε4 is a key modulator of children’s responses to cumulative air pollution exposures, leading to early detrimental effects on cognition [18]. In a study by Dean et al. [58], brain magnetic resonance imaging of 162 healthy, 2- to 25-month-old infants and toddlers showed that the APOE ε4 carriers had reduced WM myelin water fraction and gray matter volume measurements compared with APOE ε4-negative subjects. Altered WM myelin water fraction measurements were observed in the precuneus, middle and posterior cingulate, lateral temporal, and medial occipitotemporal regions, which are targeted in AD [58]. Independent of air pollution or other known chronic exposure effects, Heise et al. [46] used diffusion tensor imaging to show that APOE ε4 modulates brain WM structure long before clinical and neurophysiological manifestations of impending AD emerge in healthy younger (aged 20–35 years) and older (aged 50–78 years) adults.

Through the use of neuroimaging and assessments of neurofunction, Chang et al. [59] also demonstrated striking effects of APOE ε4 in young children. Those with ε2/ε4 genotype had the smallest hippocampi, while those with ε4/ε4 genotype had the lowest measurements of hippocampal fractional anisotropy and age-dependent thinning of the entorhinal cortex, and those with ε3/ε4 genotype had the largest cortical area measurements in the medial orbitofrontal region [59]. Importantly, the APOE ε4 effects on brain structure were predictive of low scores on executive function and working memory tasks [59]. Similarly, using combined approaches to assess effects of APOE genotype on brain function and structure, Filippini et al. [60] found that brain functional over-activity of young APOE ε4 carriers was disproportionately reduced with advancing age, before the onset of measurable memory impairment. While researchers generally agree that APOE genotype has intrinsic effects on differentiation of functional networks in the brain [61-63] and impact cerebrovascular reactivity in young subjects, whether genotype is sufficient and causal remains controversial. For example, contrary to the above studies, Dell’Acqua et al. [52] found no associations between microstructural properties in WM and the APOE ε4 or APOE ε2 alleles in young healthy adolescents. They concluded that neural effects of these variants are not evident in 14-year-olds, and may only develop later in life. While their observations appear to contradict results from other studies, in fact they may reinforce our proposed interactive roles of APOE ε4 genotype with injurious early life exposures such as air pollution since the Dell’Acqua et al. study was conducted with subjects who resided in low pollution environments. This concept should be considered in future studies that evaluate pediatric populations from multiple residential environments that differ with respect to levels of air pollution exposure [59].

APOE ε4 AND SYSTEMIC CHANGES

APOE influences lipid serum levels in children and adults [64, 65]. Correspondingly in a study of 400 women from Southwest Mexico, APOE ε4 carrier status was found to be correlated with high levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [66]. Furthermore, the APOE ε4 allele is an independent risk factor for Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), cerebrovascular disease, and dyslipidemia across ethnic groups [66-72]. In a study of 300 Mexican children age 9.05 ± 0.80 years, 46% of children were either overweight or obese, and waist circumference, a surrogate marker of visceral obesity and insulin resistance, was significantly correlated with APOE ε4 allele carrier status [71]. In essence, besides its role in Aβ clearance, APOE β4 carrier status promotes dyslipidemia, phospholipid dysregulation, and insulin resistance, which increase the risk for AD [50, 53, 54, 73].

APOE ε4 AND VASCULAR RISK FACTORS

Vascular pathology is extremely common in neurodegenerative diseases [74-82], yet it is not known whether this is a cause or consequence of the underlying disease mechanisms. However, given the strong association between APOE ε4 and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, it is likely that APOE ε4 carrier status contributes to vascular degeneration and dysfunction in AD and vascular dementia [74]. This concept is supported by the finding that harboring one or two APOE ε4 alleles elevates the risk of vascular dementia [78]. The lower risk for vascular dementia compared with AD [78] is explainable by the other adverse effects that APOE ε4 has on Aβ1-42, glucose, and lipid metabolism, and rates of T2DM and metabolic syndrome (MetS). It is widely accepted that diabetes (controlled and uncontrolled) and MetS along with vascular risk factors, smoking, and excess body weight/obesity negatively impact multiple cognitive domains [81] and increase the risks for mild cognitive impairment and AD.

The confusion regarding the role of vascular factors in dementia concerns the nature of vascular-mediated injury. It is important to distinguish effects of large infarcts resulting from large and medium size vascular occlusions from extensive small vessel disease, which is quite prominent in WM. While large infarcts alone are not sufficient to cause dementia and instead lead to focal deficits, less well delineated types of injury falling under the category of leukoaraiosis, occur in many neurodegenerative diseases, including AD. In the Nun-Study [83], although brain infarcts alone were found to have little effect on cognitive status, their presence did increase the risk of dementia associated with AD pathology. A second pertinent finding in that study was that APOE ε4 carrier status significantly influenced development of AD but not vascular dementia. However, since the Nun study [83] included only women, it was not possible to assess effects of sex. Moreover, as discussed earlier, it is likely that the APOE ε4 genotype’s effects are heterogeneous [76] and mediated through various pathways including metabolism, insulin responsiveness, and Aβ clearance.

The aspects of degenerative vascular pathology that are least understood in relation to AD and probably many other forms of neurodegeneration, concern the mechanisms and consequences of microvascular disease. This subject has proven to be stubbornly difficult to tease out due to the presence of concomitant pathology in WM. Brun and Englund were first to recognize WM atrophy and degeneration in AD [84]. Subsequently, it was found that WM pathology and vascular degeneration occurred early in the course of, including in its preclinical stages [85]. Moreover, AD-associated WM microvascular pathology resembles the histopathologic changes associated with T2DM and hypertension. Is WM microvascular pathology always the result of metabolic dysfunction as occurs throughout the body in diabetes and hypertension? What is the role of the APOE ε4 allele? Does it cause injury or does it fail to protect? This discussion is important because it is well established that aging is the most important risk factor for AD, yet vascular risk factors and reduced WM integrity are most prevalent in older adults, and APOE ε4 carrier status exacerbates microvascular disease related alterations in WM microstructure [86].

Microvascular disease contributes to brain pathology in three major ways: 1) it restricts flow due to narrowed lumens; 2) vasoreactivity is poor due to fibrosis of the walls; and 3) poor integrity leads to leakage of blood products and other potentially toxic substances from the peripheral circulation. Cerebral vasoreactivity is critical for maintaining continuous perfusion. Reduced vasoreactivity, which marks microvascular injury, is significantly associated with APOE ε4 carrier status [82]. With regard to the loss of vascular integrity, evidence suggests that a glial-lymphatic (glymphatic) system distributed in perivascular spaces has an important role in clearing Aβ from the brain [80]. Using convective flow generated by arterial pulsations, glymphatic clearance may be responsible for draining approximately 60% of Aβ from the brain to cervical lymph nodes [87]. Early in AD, reduced cerebral blood flow and local gray matter blood volume correlate with increased vascular leakage, and potentially links neurovascular damage to impairments in cerebral blood flow, function of neurovascular unit, and integrity of the blood-brain barrier [88]. Mechanistically, dysfunction of the neurovascular unit is mediated by diseased/damaged astrocytes and pericytes during the course of AD development [89-91]. Early damage to the neurovascular unit is a key feature of Mexico City residents [17, 19]. Tight junction and neural antibodies are present in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of Mexico City children. Cryptic ‘self’ tight junction antigens can trigger an autoimmune response potentially contributing to the neuroinflammatory status. Major findings in healthy Mexico City resident dogs (age 3.17 ± 0.74 years), and children and teens (age: 12.64 ± 4.2 years) versus clean air controls, included leaking capillaries and small arterioles, significant amounts of lipofuscin in pericytes, smooth muscle and endothelial cells, thick cerebrovascular basement membranes with small deposits of amyloid, patchy absence of the perivascular glial sheet, enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces and nanosize particles (20–48 nm) in endothelial cells, basement membranes, mitochondria, axons, and dendrites. Tight junctions, a key component of the neurovascular unit, were abnormal in Mexico City versus control dogs (χ2 &lt; 0.0001), and WM perivascular damage was significantly worse in Mexico City dogs (p = 0.002) [19]. Thus, the microvascular component is strongly associated with air pollution environmental exposures in young urbanites and undoubtedly contributes to brain pathology.

THE IMPACT OF POLLUTED AIR ON A DEVELOPING APOE ε4 BRAIN: THE MEXICO CITY FEMALE SCENARIO. DO ALL ROADS LEAD TO ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE IN YOUNG GIRLS?

The daily challenges faced by most children living in Mexico City are multifaceted and dire. They can be categorized as: environmental (severe air pollution), genetic (APOE ε4 allele), socioeconomic (poverty, high urban stress), nutrition and lifestyle-based (high sugar intake, poor unbalanced diets, and lack of exercise), maternal-child health based (maternal obesity and diabetes), and social (low safety, poor schools, violence, addictions, adolescent pregnancies, very low rate of criminal convictions) [92-99].

Over the last two decades, life expectancy in Mexico has stagnated due to the high rates of homicides among men [95], T2DM and its complications, and childhood and adolescent obesity and MetS [93,100]. Canudas-Ramos and coworkers [95] stated that the number of years Mexicans lived with perceived vulnerability has increased by 30.5 million person-years over the last 10 years. This situation has a serious detrimental health impact over children and adults alike.

Mexican children and young adolescents are affected by obesity, MetS, and vitamin deficiencies. Children ages 10.6 ± 2.7 years with exogenous obesity and body mass indices (BMI) greater than 2.0 standard deviations from the mean, showed high prevalence rates (37.5% to 54.5%) of MetS [100, 101]. The lack of exposure to UV light, the nutrition deficiencies, and the reluctance of parents of allowing children to play outdoors due to the violence, are translated into vitamin D deficiencies among 87% of clinically healthy children residing in Mexico City (serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D below 30 ng/mL) [14].

With regard to obesity and alterations in metabolism, normal weight healthy children living in Mexico City have significant elevations in serum leptin and the powerful vasoconstrictor, endothelin-1. Leptin levels are strongly associated with the cumulative levels of PM2.5 exposure. Therefore, chronic exposures to high environmental levels of PM2.5 are associated with basal hyperleptinemia, altered appetite-regulating peptides, and increases in endothelin-1 (contributing to brain hypoperfusion) in clinically healthy Mexico City children [14, 102]. These findings may account for the increased rates of hypertension and early development of atherosclerosis among adolescents residing in Mexico City [103], and increased rates of liver injury manifested by elevated serum aminotransferase levels with MetS and obesity in adults who grew up and remained living in Mexico City [104].

Genes by environment

The impact of environmental exposures on susceptibility of Mexican populations to obesity, T2DM, and MetS is governed by genetic backgrounds that dictate susceptibility to disease and proneness to inflammatory responses. For example, functional polymorphisms of inflammatory-response genes such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ2, are associated with insulin resistance and T2DM [105-107]. Native American ancestry is also a strong risk factor for diabetes among overweight and obese Mexican-American women [108], indicating that interactions between BMI and Native American ancestry modulate insulin resistance disease proneness. These interactive effects extend further and become very complex when considering interactions among genetic ancestry, environment, obesity, and behavioral patterns of food intake in Mexican mestizo children and adolescents, particularly girls [109, 110]. Conceivably, the complexity of these interactive responses could be the result of epigenetic modifications of brain function. For example, generations of maternal dietary imbalances that fail to meet nutritional needs of the fetus can cause intrauterine growth restriction, preterm delivery, low birth weight, excessive impairments in postnatal growth, and metabolic functions [108].

Maternal-fetal/child health and inflammation

The chronic inflammatory state associated with urban polluted environments renders placental barriers permeable to environmental insults [111, 112] that can significantly impact fetal development, including via epigenetic changes. In this regard, Tsamou and coworkers [112] measured expression levels of 6 candidate microRNAs (miRs) in 210 paired placental-neonate blood samples. Trimester-specific PM2.5 exposures were estimated based on home address. Multiple regression analysis showed that placental expression of miR-21, miR-146a, and miR-222 was inversely associated with PM2.5 exposure in the 2nd trimester, while placental expression of miR-20a and miR-21 was positively associated with 1st trimester exposures. The tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a common target of the affected miRs, and placental PTEN expression was strongly and positively associated with 3rd trimester PM2.5 exposure [112]. PTEN is a multifunctional protein that is deregulated in many types of cancer; its silencing by mutation promotes tumorigenesis [113-116] and PTEN suppression could enhance axonal growth and functional recovery in adult central nervous system after injury [117]. However, while low levels of PTEN promote carcinogenesis and axonal growth, high levels activate pro-apoptosis and cellular degeneration pathways [118]. In addition, insulin and IGF-1 regulate PTEN phosphorylation [119] and a fat diet induces insulin resistance through TNFα and positive modulation of PTEN [120]. In fact, one of the common genetic variants of PTEN is associated with peripheral insulin resistance and T2DM [121]. Insulin resistance and T2DM have significant adverse effects on placenta and fetus [122]. Thus, the marked placental trimester specific changes in the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog associated with PM2.5 certainly deserve investigation in different environmental scenarios.

Systemic inflammation and brain development

The PM2.5 and toxic metabolic exposures that occur during pregnancy introduce one of the first hits to the developing brain. A second hit is introduced by return of the mothers with neonates to the urban home environment with continuous high levels of air pollution. The attendant chronic inflammation produced in the respiratory tract of infants leads to chronic systemic inflammation. Circulating inflammatory mediators can reach the brain, establishing a link between inflammatory responses to PM2.5 and neuroinflammation [5-8, 10-12, 13, 123-125]. Consequences include increased formation of reactive oxygen species [126]. Another source of injury and neuroinflammation is direct inhalation of Ultrafine PM (UFPM), magnetite nanoparticles, PM–associated lipopolysaccharides (PM-LPS), and metal uptake via olfactory neurons which extend to corticolimbic pathways in the brain, i.e., the most vulnerable targets of AD. UFPM and magnetite nanoparticles can also traffic to the central nervous system via cranial nerves such as the trigeminal and vagus, the systemic circulation, and macrophage-like cells originating in the lungs [5, 8, 27]. Neuroinflammation is initiated by innate immune responses, activated via interactions between circulating cytokines and constitutively expressed cytokine receptors on brain endothelial cells, and propagated by local adaptive immune responses [127]. Innate immunity if mediated by monocytes that produce and secrete TNFα, interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and IL-6, which recruit and stimulate other immune cells. Fine and UFPM exposures may trigger neuroinflammatory cascades leading to endothelial cell activation and disruption of the neurovascular unit. We speculate that attendant alterations in the innate immune response to PM2.5 and UFPM could trigger production of autoantibodies to actin and occludin/zonulin [17, 19] that attack cell junctions and neural proteins, worsen neuroinflammation, and set the stage for later onset of neurodegeneration. Without early intervention, such as avoidance of PM2.5 and UFPM exposures [5, 13, 128], the developing brains are rendered highly susceptible to progressive neurodegeneration [128-130].

Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration

Both systemic and neural inflammation propagate cascades of neurodegeneration by driving pathogenic innate and adaptive immune responses in the brain [131-138]. Chronic exposures to PM2.5 and toxic metabolites can produce these effects [139] because they readily cross blood-brain and blood-placental-fetal barriers. Besides vasculocentric pathology, neuroinflammation increases reactive oxygen species which triggers aberrant signaling that mediates hyperphosphorylation of tau and activation of ubiquitin-proteasome pathways associated with neurodegeneration, including AD [140-141]. One of our most disturbing observations was that major AD-associated neuropathologic abnormalities including tau hyperphosphorylation and Aβ1-42 diffuse plaques in the frontal lobe, and deposition of aggregated, hyperphosphorylated α-synuclein in olfactory nerves and key brainstem nuclei develop very early and are present in brains of young Mexico City residents [5, 9, 7, 19, 142]. Likewise, changes in major neural proteins are detectable in cerebrospinal fluid samples read as normal [20]. In 129 CSF samples from children, ages 11.9 ± 4.8 years, the mean levels of Aβ1-42 and BDNF were significantly lower in Mexico City versus clean air control subjects (p = 0.005 and p = 0.02, respectively) [20]. Cumulative exposures to PM2.5 up to 5 μg/m3 increased CSF levels of total cellular prion protein (TPrP), whereas higher exposure levels decreased CSF TPrP. The clinical, neurobehavioral, and neuropathological correlates of PM2.5 exposure-related alterations in CSF Aβ1-42, BDNF, and TPrP among young Mexico City urbanites include impairments in cognitive processing, deficits in odor identification, downregulation of frontal cellular prion protein PrPC, and histopathological lesions of AD and Parkinson’s disease [20].

Excessive vulnerability of girls in Mexico City

Based on human and experimental data, we have argued that chronic exposures to ambient air pollutants drives inflammatory cascades that disrupt fetal and brain development and function. These effects could potentially adversely affect long-term brain function and activate major cascades of neurodegeneration. Given the in utero exposures mediated by blood-placental-fetus transfer of PM and other air pollutants, there is also potential for transgeneration transmission of innate and adaptive aberrant neuroinflammatory responses. A disturbing aspect of this scenario is that girls residing in Mexico City are significantly more vulnerable to these air pollutant responses, and as discussed earlier, this increased vulnerability is linked to APOE ε4 carrier status together with systemic insulin resistance mediated in part by overweight body habitus [18].

In the cohort study of 105 Mexico City children (12.32 ± 5.4 years), APOE ε3/ε4 (n: 36) genotype was associated with deficits in attention, short-term memory, and Verbal, Performance and Full Scale IQ assessments relative to APOE ε3/ε3 (n = 69). In addition, fasting blood glucose was significantly higher in APOE ε4 carriers. Further dissection of the data divulged additional co-factors mediating these effects. Among them were BMI and female sex. BMIs were higher in APOE ε3/ε4 females than in APOE ε3/ε4 males and APOE ε3/ε3 boys and girls, and girls with BMIs between the 75th and 94th percentiles had the largest deficits in Total IQ, Performance IQ, Digit Span, Picture Arrangement, Block Design, and Object Assembly, i.e., they were at high risk for severe cognitive impairment. In addition, female sex was the main variable accounting for inter-group differences in serum insulin, HOMA-IR and leptin [18]. Altogether, the findings support our thesis that Mexico City APOE ε4 young girls are at significantly increased risk for developing neurodegeneration, particularly AD.

Being a young female in Mexico City is associated with negative IQ effects, particularly on Performance IQ. There is an extensive literature examining gender and neurocognitive function [143-151], but the literature is scarce in identifying complex air pollution exposures as a risk factor for gender related cognition deficits in children [152]. Factors at play to explain sex differences in selective attention for example, include underlying sex differences in core abilities, including spatial or verbal cognition [153], while others include variables such as exercise regime, duration, and intensity playing a role in hippocampal structural plasticity and in adult hippocampal neurogenesis [149]. Gender differences in volume and surface area are observed across time during brain development, suggesting a few cerebral regions exhibit cortical developmental changes as a function of gender [154]. The Gender Similarities Hypothesis states that males and females are quite similar on the majority-but not all-psychological variables [155]. Therefore, we expect equal cognitive abilities for males and females. This is interesting when one considers data on the dementia risk in both sexes, given that we see clear sex-specific differences in the modulation of redox proteins and WM and mitochondria proteomes of females [156]. Laws and colleagues reported that men outperform women at the same stage of AD in episodic memory, visuospatial tasks, language, and semantic abilities [157]. Thus, the gender differences are carried out at later times in life.

The issue is important because we see the significant contrast between APOE ε4 versus ε3 Mexico City children in the reduction of the right frontal WM NAA/Cr ratio in association with decreased attention, short-term memory, and significantly lower scores in Verbal and Full Scale IQ [15, 16]. Moreover, we have reported APOE modulated the group effects between WISC-R and left frontal and parietal WM, and hippocampus metabolites.

Very relevant for this review, hyperphosphorylated tau, Aβ1-42 diffuse plaques, and neuroinflammation, are already present in Mexico City children regardless of APOE status but are significantly more severe in APOE ε4 children [5]. Equally relevant, APOE4 impacted negatively both children and parents sharing the allele 4 [16].

Reynolds and co-workers suggested APOE could represent a variability gene for depressive symptoms and spatial reasoning, but without an impact on BMI [158]. Ihle et al. [159] did not report APOE ε4–related cognitive effects in children and young adults, while Heise and co-workers [46] found in APOE ε4 carriers versus non-carriers, a reduction of fractional anisotropy and increase in mean diffusivity using diffusion tensor imaging in healthy 20–35 and 50-78-year-old adults. Interestingly, Heise and coworkers [46] found no significant interactions between APOE ε4 and age, suggesting that differences in WM structure do not show significant differential changes with age.

Both, the early reduction of fractional anisotropy and the increase in mean diffusivity values in APOE ε4 young individuals is a key observation for our Mexico City cohorts, given that WM metabolic and structural alterations impact cognition [46, 78, 160-171]. We strongly support that the interaction between air pollution and APOE alleles has to be taken into account at all ages [15, 16, 172]. Torres-Pérez and colleagues’ [173] work on APOE ε4 as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease is a key reference for this review. They analyzed 4,408 men and their data showed a gene dose-dependent association between APOE ε4 and increased risk for MetS [173]. This association was primarily from the overweight individuals. The same group evaluated 3,908 healthy young individuals from the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults cohort followed-up for 25 years, and APOE ε4 was significantly associated with increased risk of developing MetS. The critical interplay between APOE ε4 and the longitudinal development of fatness towards the onset of MetS occurred throughout the study, a key observation for Mexico City APOE ε4 girls. Torres-Pérez and colleagues concluded APOE ε4 increases MetS risk in a dose-dependent manner [173].

The work of Torres-Pérez [173] substantiates our pediatric findings: female gender is the main variable accounting for the difference in insulin, HOMA-IR, and leptin, while APOE ε4 is critical for the fasting glucose levels.

We are dealing with an ill-fated interplay of gender, APOE ε4, and metabolic abnormalities in young girls residing in a highly-polluted environment.

A key study by Jiménez-Pavón et al. [152] in European adolescents shows leptin as the only risk factor for insulin resistance in male adolescents, while in females, leptin, vitamin D, and fitness were the key independent risk factors [152]. Thus, gender is very important for insulin resistance in adolescents and relationships between obesity/adiposity and vitamin D reservoirs along with expression of insulin receptors and glucose transport likely play key roles in insulin resistance [152].

The issue is important because we have published evidence that systemic inflammation and immunodysregulation are early findings in exposed Mexico City children [8, 123] and since overweight and obesity causes low grade systemic inflammation-associated with dysfunctional adipose tissue [174, 175], consideration for a synergistic effect with air pollution inflammation is justified [176].

Lean Mexico City children exhibit hyperleptinemia and food reward hormone dysregulation versus controls, and PM2.5 cumulative exposures are strongly positively associated with leptin [14].

The trajectory of seemingly healthy Mexico City children suggests that hyperleptinemia and food reward hormone dysregulation can be detected in the early pubertal stage (11.1 ± 3.2 years), before these children start putting on weight and before APOE ε4 heterozygous females show severe cognitive deficits (1.5-2SD from average IQ) at age 12.32 ± 5.4 years [18]. More worrisome, at age 11.9 ± 4.8 years, their CSF values for Aβ1-42 and BDNF concentrations are already significantly lower versus controls [20]. Lavigne and coworkers [177] have a relevant paper showing strong associations between air pollution variables and cord blood leptin levels adjusted for birth weight z-score. Their sample included 1,257 mother-infant pairs from the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals Study, conducted in Canada between 2008 and 2011 [177]. We agree with Lavigne that prenatal exposure is very relevant to the potential development of childhood obesity.

Obesity is increased in low socioeconomic status minority populations, and the problem is of serious concern in Mexicans and Mexican-Americans for whom socioeconomic disadvantage, race/ethnic disparities and genetics play a key role in overweight and obesity status [84, 178-181].

Mexico City children have two serious problems: 1) They are unable to play outdoors or to travel to places where they can safely exercise due to the violence on the streets, playgrounds, and the public transport system, and 2) their intake of beverages with high fructose is encouraged by the media and allowed by the school system.

Mexico City has witnessed a steady increase in violent crime in the last decade along with a negative trust of authorities [182-183]. Homicides, kidnappings, armed robberies, car thefts, and various forms of residential/street crime are everyday concerns [184]. Muggah and Vilalta [182] discussed the strong relationships between high-crime areas and underdevelopment, income, and family disruption. Kristiansson et al. [94] hypothesized that the effects of poverty and associated air pollution-related stress on impaired cognitive skills are mediated by inflammatory cytokines. All these factors are negatively impacting children and teens, unable to have age-related activities outside the home. Also of serious health negative impact, Mexico is the world’s biggest per capita consumer of soft drinks and the change from cane sugar to high fructose corn syrup will aggravate obesity, chronic metabolic disease, cognitive decline, and the risk of AD [185-187]. Making the problem more complicated,&gt;85% of Mexico City children and teens have 25-hydroxyvitamin D serum concentrations below &lt;30 ng/mL [14], and since vitamin D synthesis is greatly influenced by outdoor pollution, latitude, altitude, darker skin pigmentation, and deficient nutritional intake [14, 188, 189], the problem is likely not to be solved for a while.

THE RECIPE FOR ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE DEVELOPMENT AND WHAT ABOUT PREVENTION?

A growing theme for prevention of neurodegenerative diseases is the characterization of individuals’ APOE genotype to identify at-risk participants [173]. Currently, our group is making progress in identifying APOE ε4 girls with serious cognitive deficits. The work of Sampedro et al. [190] is pertinent to our discussion: the effects of APOE ε4 on brain metabolism and structure are modified by gender. Their work demonstrates healthy elderly female APOE ε4 carriers had lower CSF Aβ1-42 and higher CSF p-tau181p values compared with non-carriers and showed greater hypometabolism and atrophy than male carriers [190].

The dreadful picture in Mexico City APOE ε4 girls could signal their future trajectory toward the development of progressively worse cognitive impairment and AD.

This is complicated by underprovided Mexico City public schools, deficient in the development of executive function skills with a resultant lack of cognitive reserves [11], deficits in Performance and Total IQ tests in APOE ε4 children with a resultant negative impact on a projected 2.16 million APOE ε4 pediatric carriers out of the 24 million residents in the Mexico City Metropolitan Area including 16 delegaciones in Mexico City and 28 municipios in the adjacent Mexico State.

We would like to be optimistic in this issue and assume we have roughly a 50-year window of opportunity between the time urban children might be experiencing the detrimental effects we are describing and when they might undergo neurologic diagnostic assessment, allowing for targeted preventive intervention of vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency, access to indoor spaces for exercise away from air pollutants, public school curricula improvement to build executive function skills and increase their cognitive reserves, free school healthy lunches, and good pediatric care including mental health services. Early interventions should be integrated in health and educational agendas targeting Mexico City children, especially girls. The need for interventions aimed at breaking the cycle of poverty, poor food security, high unemployment, economic inequality, low maternal education, poor quality of the home environment epidemic violence, feminicides, impunity, corruption, addictions, air pollution, and their negative health consequences becomes heightened [95, 191, 192].

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

Chronic exposures to ambient air pollutants drives inflammatory cascades that disrupt fetal and brain development and function. Epidemiological human data and experimental animal studies support our thesis that Mexico City young populations with chronic exposures to high, above standard concentrations of PM2.5 and ozone, together with other significant insulin-metabolic derangements including obesity, T2DM, and MetS, female sex, and APOE ε4 carrier status, are at significantly increased risk for developing neurodegeneration, particularly AD. Factors such as the high exposures to endotoxins, metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and massive presence of high-temperature, combustion-derived iron-rich magnetite in brains of young and old Mexico City residents alike ought to be included in this unfortunate equation.

Identifying early determinants of gender-specific risk trajectories would greatly facilitate multidisciplinary prevention efforts for potentially modifying disease course at early stages. What are we waiting for?

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by CONACYT #255956 and R01-AA-11431 from the NIH.

Authors’ disclosures available online (http://j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/16-1299r1).

Fig. 1. Conceptual framework of how air pollution interacts with apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 genotype, female gender, and obesity to drive metabolic syndrome (MetS), cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In the setting of chronic high-level exposures to PM2.5 and significantly high concentrations of iron-rich combustion-derived magnetite nanoparticles, present in Mexico City’s polluted air, individuals carrying an APOE ε4 allele, particularly girls, are predisposed to develop insulin resistance and metabolic dysfunction which drive obesity. Having a single risk factor (APOE ε4, increased BMI, or female sex) increases the likelihood of developing mild insulin resistance, Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Dual risk factors are more precarious and promote moderate insulin resistance, MetS, and cognitive decline. Finally, having three risk factors is the most serious as that state predisposes children to developing obesity, severe systemic insulin resistance (IR), MetS, and brain IR, and ultimately dementia due to AD.


REFERENCES

[1] Michaelson DM (2014) APOEε4: The most prevalent yet understudied risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 10 , 861–868.25217293
[2] Aceves D , Ruiz B , Nuño P , Roman S , Zepeda E , Panduro A (2006) Heterogeneity of apolipoprotein E polymorphism in different Mexican populations. Human Biol 78 , 65–75.16900882
[3] Wilson PW , Schaefer EJ , Larson MG , Ordovas JM (1996) Apolipoprotein E alleles and risk of coronary disease: A meta-analysis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 16 , 1250–1255.8857921
[4] Eichner JE , Dunn ST , Perveen G , Thompson DM , Stewart KE , Stroehla BC (2002) Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and cardiovascular disease: A HuGE review. Am J Epidemiol 155 , 487–495.11882522
[5] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Kavanaugh M , Block ML , D’Angiulli A , Delgado-Chávez R , Torres-Jardón R , González-Maciel A , Reynoso-Robles R , Osnaya N , Villarreal-Calderon R , Guo R , Hua Z , Zhu H , Perry G , Diaz P (2012) Neuroinflammation, hyperphosphorylated tau, diffuse amyloid plaques and down-regulation of the cellular prion protein in air pollution exposed children and adults. J Alzheimers Dis 28 , 93–107.21955814
[6] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Mora-Tiscareño A , Gómez-Garza G , Broadway J , Chapman S , Valencia-Salazar G , Jewells V , Maronpot RR , Henríquez-Roldán C , Pérez-Guillé B , Torres-Jardón R , Herrit L , Brooks D , Osnaya-Brizuela N , Monroy ME , González-Maciel A , Reynoso-Robles R , Villarreal-Calderon R , Solt AC , Engle RW (2008) Air pollution, cognitive deficits and brain abnormalities: A pilot study with children and dogs. Brain Cogn 68 , 117–127.18550243
[7] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Solt AC , Henríquez-Roldan C , Torres-Jardon R , Nuse B , Villarreal-Calderon R , Osnaya N , Stone I , Garcia R , Brooks DM , Gonzalez-Maciel A , Reynoso-Robles R , Delgado-Chavez R , Reed W (2008) Long-term air pollution exposure is associated with neuroinflammation, an altered innate immune response, disruption of the blood-brain-barrier, ultrafine particulate deposition, and accumulation of amyloid beta-42 and alpha-synuclein in children and young adults. Toxicol Pathol 36 , 289–310.18349428
[8] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Villarreal-Calderon R , Valencia-Salazar G , Henríquez-Roldán C , Gutiérrez-Castrellón P , Torres-Jardón R , Osnaya-Brizuela N , Romero L , Torres-Jardón R , Solt A , Reed W (2008) Systemic inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and activation in clinically healthy children exposed to air pollutants. Inhal Toxicol 20 , 499–506.18368620
[9] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Franco-Lira M , Henríquez-Roldán C , González-Maciel A , Reynoso-Robles R , Villarreal-Calderon R , Herritt L , Brooks D , Keefe S , Palacios-Moreno J , Villarreal-Calderon R , Torres-Jardón R , Medina-Cortina H , Delgado-Chávez R , Aiello-Mora M , Maronpot RR , Doty RL (2010) Urban air pollution: Influences on olfactory function and pathology in exposed children and young adults. Exp Toxicol Pathol 62 , 91–102.19297138
[10] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Engle R , Mora-Tiscareño A , Styner M , Gomez-Garza G , Zhu H , Jewells V , Torres-Jardón R , Romero L , Monroy-Acosta ME , Bryant C , González-González LO , Medina-Cortina H , D’Angiulli A (2011) Exposure to severe urban pollution influences cognitive outcomes, brain volume and systemic inflammation in clinically healthy children. Brain Cogn 77 , 345–355.22032805
[11] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Torres-Jardón R (2012) Air pollution, socioeconomic status and children’s cognition in megacities: The Mexico City scenario. Front Psycho 3 , 217.
[12] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Mora-Tiscareño A , Styner M , Gómez-Garza G , Zhu H , Torres-Jardón R , Carlos E , Solorio-López E , Medina-Cortina H , Kavanaugh M , D’Angiulli A (2012) White matter hyperintensities, systemic inflammation, brain growth and cognitive functions in children exposed to air pollution. J Alzheimers Dis 31 , 183–191.22531421
[13] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Franco-Lira M , Mora-Tiscareño A , Medina-Cortina H , Torres-Jardon R , Kavanaugh M (2013) Early Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease pathology in urban children: Friend versus Foe responses-it is time to face the evidence. Biomed Res Int 2013 , 161687.23509683
[14] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Franco-Lira M , D’Angiulli A , Rodríguez-Díaz J , Blaurock-Busch E , Busch Y , Chao CK , Thompson C , Mukherjee PS , Torres-Jardón R , Perry G (2015) Mexico City normal weight children exposed to high concentrations of ambient PM2.5 show high blood leptin and endothelin-1, vitamin D deficiency, and food reward hormone dysregulation versus low pollution controls. Relevance for obesity and Alzheimer disease. Environ Res 140 , 579–592.26037109
[15] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Mora-Tiscareño A , Franco-Lira M , Zhu H , Lu Z , Solorio E , Torres-Jardón R , D’Angiulli A (2015) Decreases in short term memory, IQ and altered brain metabolic ratios in urban apolipoprotein ε4 children exposed to air pollution. APOE modulates children’s brain air pollution responses. J Alzheimers Dis 45 , 757–770.25633678
[16] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Mora-Tiscareño A , Melo-Sánchez G , Rodríguez-Díaz J , Torres-Jardón R , Styner M , Mukherjee PS , Lin W , Jewells V (2015) A critical Proton MR Spectroscopy marker of Alzheimer’s disease early neurodegenerative change: Low hippocampal NAA/Cr ratio impacts APOE ε4 Mexico City children and their parents. J Alzheimers Dis 48 , 1065–1075.26402110
[17] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Vojdani A , Blaurock-Busch E , Busch Y , Friedle A , Franco-Lira M , Sarathi-Mukherjee P , Martínez-Aguirre X , Park SB , Torres-Jardón R , D’Angiulli A (2015) Air pollution and children: Neural and tight junction antibodies and combustion metals, the role of barrier breakdown and brain immunity in neurodegeneration. J Alzheimers Dis 43 , 1039–1058.25147109
[18] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Jewells V , Galaz-Montoya C , van Zundert B , Pérez-Calatayud A , Ascencio-Ferrel E , Valencia-Salazar G , Sandoval-Cano M , Carlos E , Solorio E , Acuña-Ayala H , Torres-Jardón R , D’Angiulli A (2016) Interactive and additive influences of gender, BMI and Apolipoprotein 4 on cognition in children chronically exposed to high concentrations of PM2.5 and ozone. APOE4 females are at highest risk in Mexico City. Environ Res 150 ,411–422.27376929
[19] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Reynoso-Robles R , Vargas-Martínez J , Gómez-Maqueo-Chew A , Pérez-Guille B , Mukjerhee PS , Torres-Jardón R , Perry G , González-Maciel A (2016) Prefrontal white matter pathology in air pollution exposed Mexico City Young urbanites and their potential impact on neurovascular unit dysfunction and the development of Alzheimer’s disease. Environ Res 146 , 404–417.26829765
[20] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Avila-Ramírez J , Calderón-Garcidueñas A , González-Heredia T , Acuña-Ayala H , Chao CK , Thompson C , Ruiz-Ramos R , Cortés-González V , Martínez-Martínez L , García-Pérez MA , Reis J , Mukherjee PS , Torres-Jardón R , Lachmann I (2016) Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in highly exposed PM2.5 urbanites: The risk of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases in young Mexico City residents. J Alzheimers Dis 54 , 597–613.27567860
[21] Jung CR , Lin YT , Hwang B (2015) Ozone, particulate matter, and newly diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease: A population-based cohort study in Taiwan. J Alzheimers Dis 44 , 573–584.25310992
[22] West JJ , Cohen A , Dentener F , Brunekreef B , Zhu T , Armstrong B , Bell ML , Brauer M , Carmichael G , Costa DL , Dockery DW , Kleeman M , Krzyzanowski M , Künzli N , Liousse C , Lung SC , Martin RV , Pöschl U , Pope CA 3rd , Roberts JM , Russell AG , Wiedinmyer C (2016) What we breathe impacts our health: Improving understanding of the link between air pollution and health. Environ Sci Technol 50 , 4895–4904.27010639
[23] D’Amato G , Holgate ST , Pawankar R , Ledford DK , Cecchi L , Al-Ahmad M , Al-Enezi F , Al-Muhsen S , Ansotegui I ,Baena-Cagnani CE , Baker DJ , Bayram H , Bergmann KC , Boulet LP , Buters JT , D’Amato M , Dorsano S , Douwes J , Finlay SE , Garrasi D , Gómez M , Haahtela T , Halwani R , Hassani Y , Mahboub B , Marks G , Michelozzi P , Montagni M , Nunes C , Oh JJ , Popov TA , Portnoy J ,Ridolo E , Rosário N , Rottem M , Sánchez-Borges M , Sibanda E , Sienra-Monge JJ , Vitale C , Annesi-Maesano I (2015) Meteorological conditions, climate change, new emerging factors, and asthma and related allergic disorders. A statement of the World Allergy Organization. World Allergy Organ 8 , 25.
[24] Esposito K , Petrizzo M , Maiorino MI , Bellastella G , Giugliano D (2016) Particulate matter pollutants and risk of type 2 diabetes: A time for concern? Endocrine 51 , 32–37.26024974
[25] Gruzieva O , Xu CJ , Breton CV , Annesi-Maesano I , Antó JM , Auffray C , Ballereau S , Bellander T , Bousquet J , Bustamante M , Charles MA , de Kluizenaar Y , den Dekker HT , Duijts L , Felix JF , Gehring U , Guxens M , Jaddoe VV , Jankipersadsing SA , Merid SK , Kere J , Kumar A , Lemonnier N , Lepeule J , Nystad W , Page CM , Panasevich S , Postma D , Slama R , Sunyer J , Söderhäll C , Yao J , London SJ , Pershagen G , Koppelman GH , Melén E (2017) Epigenome-wide meta-analysis of methylation in children related to prenatal NO2 air pollution exposure. Environ Health Perspect 125 , 104–110.27448387
[26] Mueller N , Rojas-Rueda D , Basagaña X , Cirach M , Cole-Hunter T , Dadvand P , Donaire-Gonzalez D , Foraster M , Gascon M , Martinez D , Tonne C , Triguero-Mas M , Valentín A , Nieuwenhuijsen M (2016) Urban and transport planning related exposures and mortality: A health impact assessment for cities. Environ Health Perspect 125 , 89–96.27346385
[27] Maher B , Ahmed IAM , Karloukovski V , MacLaren DA , Foulds PG , Allsop D , Mann DMA , Torres-Jardón R , Calderón-Garcidueñas L (2016) Magnetite pollution nanoparticles in the human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 10797–10801.27601646
[28] Newman NC , Ryan P , Lemasters G , Levin L , Bernstein D , Hershey GK , Lockey JE , Villareal M , Reponen T , Grinshpun S , Sucharew H , Dietrich KN (2013) Traffic-related air pollution exposure in the first year of life and behavioral scores at 7 years of age. Environ Health Perspect 121 , 731–736.23694812
[29] Guxens M , García-Esteban R , Giorgis-Allemand L Forns J , Badaloni C , Ballester F , Beelen R , Cesaroni G , Chatzi L , de Agostini M , de Nazelle A , Eeftens M , Fernandez MF , Fernández-Somoano A , Forastiere F , Gehring U , Ghassabian A , Heude B , Jaddoe VW , Klümper C , Kogevinas M , Krämer U , Larroque B , Lertxundi A , Lertxuni N , Murcia M , Navel V , Nieuwenhuijsen M , Porta D , Ramos R , Roumeliotaki T , Slama R , Sørensen M , Stephanou EG , Sugiri D , Tardón A , Tiemeier H , Tiesler CM , Verhulst FC , Vrijkotte T , Wilhelm M , Brunekreef B , Pershagen G , Sunyer J (2014) Air pollution during pregnancy and childhood cognitive and psychomotor development: Six European birth cohorts. Epidemiology 25 , 636–647.25036432
[30] Harris MH , Gold DR , Rifas-Shiman SLMelly SJ , Zanobetti A , Coull BA , Schwartz JD , Gryparis A , Kloog I , Koutrakis P , Bellinger DC , White RF , Sagiv SK , Oken E (2015) Prenatal and childhood traffic-related pollution exposure and childhood cognition in the project viva cohort (Massachusetts, USA). Environ Health Perspect 123 , 1072–1078.25839914
[31] Harris MH , Gold DR , Rifas-Shiman SL , Melly SJ , Zanobetti A , Coull BA , Schwartz JD , Gryparis A , Kloog I , Koutrakis P , Bellinger DC , Belfort MB , Webster TF , White RF , Sagiv SK , Oken E (2016) Prenatal and childhood traffic-related air pollution exposure and childhood executive function and behavior. Neurotoxicol Teratol 57 , 60–70.27350569
[32] Kicinski M , Vermeir G , Van Larebeke N , Den Hond E , Schoeters G , Bruckers L , Sioen I , Bijnens E , Roels HA , Baeyens W , Viaene MK , Nawrot TS (2015) Neurobehavioral performance in adolescents is inversely associated with traffic exposure. Environ Int 75 , 136–143.25461422
[33] Sunyer J , Esnaola M , Alvarez-Pedrerol M , Forns J , Rivas I , López-Vicente M , Suades-González E , Foraster M , Garcia-Esteban R , Basagaña X , Viana M , Cirach M , Moreno T , Alastuey A , Sebastian-Galles N , Nieuwenhuijsen M , Querol X (2015) Association between traffic-related air pollution in schools and cognitive development in primary school children: A prospective cohort study. PLoS Med 12 , e1001792.25734425
[34] Jedrychowski WA , Perera FP , Camann D , Spengler J , Butscher M , Mroz E , Majewska R , Flak E , Jacek R , Sowa A (2015) Prenatal exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and cognitive dysfunction in children. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 22 , 3631–3639.25253062
[35] Pujol J , Martínez-Vilavella G , Macià D , Fenoll R , Alvarez-Pedrerol M , Rivas I , Forns J , Blanco-Hinojo L , Capellades J , Querol X , Deus J , Sunyer J (2016) Traffic pollution exposure is associated with altered brain connectivity in school children. Neuroimage 129 , 175–184.26825441
[36] Basagaña X , Esnaola M , Rivas I , Amato F , Alvarez-Pedrerol M , Forns J , López-Vicente M , Pujol J , Nieuwenhuijsen M , Querol X , Sunyer J (2016) Neurodevelopmental deceleration by urban fine particles from different emission sources: A longitudinal observational study. Environ Health Perspect 124 , 1630–1636.27128166
[37] Saenen ND , Plusquin M , Bijnens E , Janssen BG , Gyselaers W , Cox B , Fierens F , Molenberghs G , Penders J , Vrijens K , De Boever P , Nawrot TS (2015) In utero fine particle air pollution and placental expression of genes in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling pathway: An ENVIRONAGE Birth Cohort study. Environ Health Perspect 123 , 834–840.25816123
[38] Schächter F , Faure-Delanef L , Guénot F , Rouger H , Froguel P , Lesueur-Ginot L , Cohen D (1994) Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE loci. Nat Genet 6 , 29–32.8136829
[39] Small GW , Mazziotta JC , Collins MT , Baxter LR , Phelps ME , Mandelkern MA , Kaplan A , La Rue A , Adamson CF , Chang L (1995) Apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and cerebral glucose metabolism in relatives at risk for familial Alzheimer disease. JAMA 273 , 942–947.7884953
[40] Ramassamy C , Averill D , Beffert U , Bastianetto S , Theroux L , Lussier-Cacan S , Cohn JS , Christen Y , Davignon J , Quirion R , Poirier J (1999) Oxidative damage and protection by antioxidants in the frontal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease is related to the apolipoprotein E genotype. Free Radic Biol Med 27 , 544–553.10490274
[41] Chang S , Ran Ma T , Miranda RD , Balestra ME , Mahley RW , Huang Y (2005) Lipid- and receptor-binding regions of apolipoprotein E4 fragments act in concert to cause mitochondrial dysfunction and neurotoxicity. Proc Natl AcadSci U S A 102 , 18694–18699.
[42] Kregel KC , Zhang HJ (2007) An integrated view of oxidative stress in aging: Basic mechanisms, functional effects, and pathological considerations. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 292 , 18–36.
[43] Jofre-Monseny L , Minihane AM , Rimbach G (2008) Impact of ApoE genotype on oxidative stress, inflammation and disease risk. Mol Nutr Food Res 52 , 131–145.18203129
[44] Zhong N , Ramaswamy G , Weisgraber KH (2009) Apolipoprotein E4 domain interaction induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and impairs astrocyte function. J Biol Chem 284 , 27273–27280.19666463
[45] Tarnus E , Wassef H , Carmel JF , Rondeau P , Roche M , Davignon J , Bernier L , Bourdon E (2009) Apolipoprotein E limits oxidative stress-induced cell dysfunctions in human adipocytes. FEBS Lett 583 , 2042–2048.19450584
[46] Heise V , Filippini N , Ebmeier KP , Mackay CE (2011) The APOE ε4 allele modulates brain white matter integrity in healthy adults. Mol Psychiatry 16 , 908–916.20820167
[47] Dose J , Huebbe P , Nebel A , Rimbach G (2016) APOE genotype and stress response- a mini review. Lipids Health Dis 15 , 121.27457486
[48] Hanson AJ , Craft S , Banks WA (2015) The APOE genotype: Modification of therapeutic responses in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Pharm Des 21 , 114–120.25330331
[49] Hanson AJ , Banks WA , Hernandez Saucedo H , Craft S (2016) Apolipoprotein E genotype and sex influence glucose tolerance in older adults: A cross-sectional study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra 6 , 78–89.27065114
[50] Salameh TS , Rhea EM , Banks WA , Hanson AJ (2016) Insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and apolipoprotein E interactions as mechanisms in cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 241 , 1676–1683.27470930
[51] Huang Y , Mahley RW (2014) Apolipoprotein E: Structure and function in lipid metabolism, neurobiology and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 72 (Pt A ), 3–12.25173806
[52] Dell’Acqua F , Khan W , Gottlieb N , Giampietro V , Ginestet C ,Bouls D , Newhouse S , Dobson R , Banaschewski T , Barker GJ , Bokde AL , Büchel C , Conrod P , Flor H , Frouin V , Garavan H , Gowland P , Heinz A , Lemaítre H , Nees F , Paus T , Pausova Z , Rietschel M , Smolka MN , Ströhle A , Gallinat J , Westman E , Schumann G , Lovestone S , Simmons A , consortium IMAGEN, (http://www,com) imagen-europe (2015) Tract based spatial statistic reveals no differences in white matter microstructural organization between carriers and non-carriers of the APOE ε4 and ε2 alleles in young healthy adolescents. J Alzheimers Dis 47 , 977–984.26401776
[53] Malkki H (2015) Alzheimer disease: APOE* ε4-associated increase in AD risk linked to phospholipid dysregulation. Nat Rev Neurol 11 , 610.
[54] Zhu L , Zhong M , Elder GA , Sano M , Holtzman DM , Gandy S , Cardozo C , Haroutunian V , Robakis NK , Cai D (2015) Phospholipid dysregulation contributes to ApoE4-associated cognitive deficits in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 , 11965–11970.26372964
[55] Mahley RW , Rall SC Jr (2000) Apolipoprotein E: Far more than a lipid transport protein. Ann Rev Genomics Human Genet 1 , 507–537.11701639
[56] Simonovitch S , Schmukler E , Bespalko A , Iram T , Frenkel D ,Holtzman DM , Masliah E , Michaelson DM , Pinkas-Kramarski R (2016) Impaired autophagy in APOE4 astrocytes. J Alzheimers Dis 51 , 915–927.26923027
[57] Dolejší E , Liraz O , Rudajev V , Zimčík P , DoleŽal V , Michaelson DM (2016) Apolipoprotein E4 reduces evoked hippocampal acetylcholine release in adult mice. J Neurochem 136 , 503–509.26526158
[58] Dean DC 3rd , Jerskey BA , Chen K , Protas H , Thiyyagura P , Roontiva A , O’Muircheartaigh J , Dirks H , Waskiewicz N , Lehman K , Siniard AL , Turk MN , Hua X , Madsen SK , Thompson PM , Fleisher AS , Huentelman MJ , Deoni SC , Reiman EM (2014) Brain differences in infants at differential genetic risk for late-onset Alzheimer disease: A cross-sectional imaging study. JAMA Neurol 71 , 11–22.24276092
[59] Chang L , Douet V , Bloss C , Lee K , Pritchett A , Jernigan TL , Akshoomoff N , Murray SS , Frazier J , Kennedy DN , Amaral DG , Gruen J , Kaufmann WE , Casey BJ , Sowell E , Ernst T ; Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition, and Genetics (PING) Study Consortium (2016) Gray matter maturation and cognition in children with different APOE ε genotypes. Neurology 87 , 585–594.27412137
[60] Filippini N , MacIntosh BJ , Hough MG , Goodwin GM , Frisoni GB , Smith SM , Matthews PM , Beckmann CF , Mackay CE (2009) Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele. Proc Natl AcadSci U S A 106 , 7209–7214.
[61] Trachtenberg AJ , Filippini N , Ebmeier KP , Smith SM , Karpe F , Mackay CE (2012) The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain. Neuroimage 59 , 565–572.21851856
[62] Trachtenberg AJ , Filippini N , Mackay CE (2012) The effects of APOE-ε4 on the BOLD response. Neurobiol Aging 33 , 323–334.20409610
[63] Trachtenberg AJ , Filippini N , Cheeseman J , Duff EP , Neville MJ , Ebmeier KP , Karpe F , Mackay CE (2012) The effects of APOE on brain activity do not simply reflect the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 33 , 618.e1–618.e13.
[64] Breitling C , Gross A , Büttner P , Weise S , Schleinitz D , Kiess W , Scholz M , Kovacs P , Körner A (2015) Genetic contribution of variants near SORT1 and APOE on LDL cholesterol independent of obesity in children. PLoS One 10 , e0138064.26375028
[65] Klančar G , Grošelj U , Kovač J , Bratanič N , Bratina N , Trebušak Podkrajšek K , Battelino T (2015) Universal screening for familial hypercholesterolemia in children. JAm Coll Cardiol 66 , 1250–1257.26361156
[66] Cahua-Pablo G , Cruz M , Moral-Hernández OD , Leyva-Vázquez MA , Antúnez-Ortiz DL , Cahua-Pablo JA , Alarcón-Romero Ldel C , Ortuño-Pineda C , Moreno-Godínez ME , Hernández-Sotelo D , Flores-Alfaro E (2016) Elevated levels of LDL-C are associated with ApoE4 but not with the rs688 polymorphism in the LDLR gene. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost 22 , 465–470.25601895
[67] Landázuri P , Loango N , Gallego ML , Restrepo B (2009) Gender, age and plasma lipids differences associated with apolipoprotein E polymorphism in school children. Biomedica 29 , 382–391.20436990
[68] Maxwell TJ , Ballantyne CM , Cheverud JM , Guild CS , Ndumele CE , Boerwinkle E (2013) APOE modulates the correlation between triglycerides, cholesterol, and CHD through pleiotropy, and gene-by-gene interactions. Genetics 195 , 1397–1405.24097412
[69] Alharbi KK , Khan IA , Syed R (2014) Association of apolipoprotein E polymorphism with type 2 diabetes mellitus in a Saudi population. DNA Cell Biol 33 , 637–641.24979464
[70] Hall JR , Wiechmann AR , Johnson LA , Edwards M , Barber RC , Cunningham R , Singh M , O’Bryant SE (2014) The impact of APOE status on relationship of biomarkers of vascular risk and systemic inflammation to neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 40 , 887–896.24577461
[71] Rodríguez-Carmona Y , Pérez-Rodríguez M , Gámez-Valdez E , López-Alavez FJ , Hernández-Armenta CI , Vega-Monter N , Leyva-García G , Monge-Cázares T , Barrera Valencia D , Balderas Monroy M , Pfeffer F , Meléndez G , Pérez Lizaur AB , Pardío J , Tejero ME (2014) Association between Apolipoprotein E variants and obesity-related traits in Mexican school children. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics 7 , 243–251.25968937
[72] El-Lebedy D , Raslan HM , Mohammed AM (2016) Apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism and risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Cardiovasc Diabetol 15 , 12.26800892
[73] Arbones-Mainar JM , Johnson LA , Torres-Pérez E , Garcia AE , Pérez-Diaz S , Raber J , Maeda N (2016) Metabolic shifts toward fatty-acid usage and increased thermogenesis are associated with impaired adipogenesisi in mice expressing human APOE4. Int J Obese (Lond) 40 , 1574–1581.
[74] Altman R , Rutledge JC (2010) The vascular contribution to Alzheimer’s disease. Clin Sci (Lond) 119 , 407–421.20684749
[75] Mielke MM , Leoutsakos JM , Tschanz JT , Green RC , Tripodis Y , Corcoran CD , Norton MC , Lyketsos CG (2011) Interaction between vascular factors and the APOE ε4 allele in predicting rate of progression in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 26 , 127–134.21593560
[76] Kofler BM , Miles EA , Curtis PArmah CK , Tricon S , Grew J , Napper FL , Farrell L , Lietz G , Packard CJ , Caslake MJ , Mathers JC , Williams CM , Calder PC , Minihane AM (2012) Apolipoprotein E genotype and the cardiovascular disease risk phenotype: Impact of sex and adiposity (the FINGEN study). Atherosclerosis 221 , 467–470.22365656
[77] Gungor Z , Anuurad E , Enkhmaa B , Zhang W , Kim K , Berglund L (2012) Apo E4 and lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 synergistically increase cardiovascular risk. Atherosclerosis 223 , 230–234.22632920
[78] Rohn TT (2014) Is apolipoprotein E4 an important risk factor for vascular dementia? Int J Clin Exp Pathol 7 , 3504–3511.25120729
[79] de Frias CM , Schaie KW , Willis SL (2014) Hypertension moderates the effect of APOE on 21 year cognitive trajectories. Psychol Aging 29 , 431–439.24956008
[80] Kyrtsos CR , Baras JS (2015) Modeling the role of the glymphatic pathway and cerebral blood vessel properties in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. PLoS One 10 , e0139574.26448331
[81] Marseglia A , Fratiglioni L , Laukka EJ , Santoni G , Pedersen NL , Bäckman L , Xu W (2016) Early cognitive deficits in type 2 diabetes: A population-based study. J Alzheimers Dis 53 , 1069–1078.27314527
[82] Wolters FJ , de Bruijn RF , Hofman A , Koudstaal PJ , Ikram MA ; Heart Brain Connection Collaborative Research Group (2016) Cerebral vasoreactivity, Apolipoprotein E, and the risk of dementia: A population-based study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 36 , 204–210.26586657
[83] Mortimer JA (2012) The Nun Study: Risk factors for pathology and clinical-pathologic correlations. Curr Alzheimer Res 9 , 621–627.22471869
[84] Brun A , Englund E (1986) A white matter disorder in dementia of the Alzheimer type: A pathoanatomical study. Ann Neurol 19 , 253–262.3963770
[85] de la Monte S (1989) Quantitation of cerebral atrophy in preclinical and end-stage Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 25 , 450–459.2774485
[86] Wang R , Fratiglioni L , Laukka EJ , Lövdén M , Kalpouzos G , Keller L , Graff C , Salami A , Bäckman L , Qiu C (2015) Effects of vascular risk factors and APOE4 on white matter integrity and cognitive decline. Neurology 84 , 1128–1135.25672924
[87] Weller RO , Hawkes CA , Kalaria RN , Werring DJ , Carare RO (2015) White matter changes in dementia: Role of impaired drainage of interstitial fluid. Brain Pathol 25 , 63–78.25521178
[88] van de Haar HJ , Jansen JF , van Osch MJ , van Buchem MA , Muller M , Wong SM , Hofman PA , Burgmans S , Verhey FR , Backes WH (2016) Neurovascular unit impairment in early Alzheimer’s disease measured with magnetic resonance imaging. Neurobiol Aging 45 , 190–196.27459939
[89] Garwood CJ , Ratcliffe LE , Simpson JE , Heath PR , Ince PG , Wharton SB (2016) Review: Astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease and other age associated dementias; a supporting player with a central role. Neuropathol Applied Neurobiol. doi: 10.1111/nan.12338
[90] Zenaro E , Piacentino G , Constantin G (2016) The blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis. pii: S0969-9961(16)30165-6
[91] Sweeney MD , Ayyadurai S , Zlokovic BV (2016) Pericytes of the neurovascular unit: Key functions and signaling pathways. NatNeurosci 19 , 771–783.
[92] Falb KL , Diaz-Olavarrieta C , Campos PA , Valades J , Cardenas R , Carino G , Gupta J (2014) Evaluating a health care provider delivered intervention to reduce intimate partner violence and mitigate associated health risks: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial in Mexico City. BMC Public Health 14 , 772.25079882
[93] Espinoza Giacinto R , Castañeda SF , Pérez RL , Nodora JN , González P , Lopez EJ , Talavera GA (2016) Diabetes cultural beliefs and traditional medicine use among health center patients in Oaxaca, Mexico. J Immigr Minor Health 18 , 1413–1422.26660485
[94] Kristiansson M , Sörman K , Tekwe C , Calderón-Garcidueñas L (2015) Urban air pollution, poverty, violence and health. Neurological and immunological aspects as mediating factors. Environ Res 140 , 511–513.26005121
[95] Canudas-Romo V , Aburto JM , García-Guerrero VM , Beltrán-Sánchez H (2017) Mexico’s epidemic of violence and its public health significance on average length of life. J Epidemiol Community Health 71 , 188–193.27451436
[96] Popkin BM , Hawkes C (2016) Sweetening of the global diet, particularly beverages: Patterns, trends, and policy responses. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 4 , 174–186.26654575
[97] Elizondo-Montemayor L , Hernández-Escobar C , Lara-Torre E , Nieblas B , Gómez-Carmona M (2017) Gynecologic and obstetric consequences of obesity in adolescent girls. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 30 , 156–168.26915924
[98] Zambrano E , Ibáñez C , Martínez-Samayoa PM , Lomas-Soria C , Durand-Carbajal M , Rodríguez-González GL (2016) Maternal obesity: Lifelong metabolic outcomes for offspring from poor developmental trajectories during the perinatal period. Arch Med Res 47 , 1–12.26827819
[99] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Torres-Jardón R (2015) The impact of air pollutants in the brain. JAMA Psychiatry 72 , 529–530.25923326
[100] Romero-Velarde E , Aguirre-Salas LM , Álvarez-Román YA , Vásquez-Garibay EM , Casillas-Toral E , Fonseca-Reyes S (2016) Prevalence of metabolic syndrome and associated factors in children and adolescents with obesity. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc 54 , 568–575.27428337
[101] García-De la Torre JI , Rodríguez-Valdez A , Delgado-Rosas A (2016) Risk factors for fetal macrosomia in patients without gestational diabetes mellitus. Ginecol Obstet Mex 84 , 164–171.27424442
[102] Thomson EM , Kumarathasan P , Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Vincent R (2007) Air pollution alters brain and pituitary endothelin-1 and inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression. Environ Res 105 , 224–233.17662977
[103] Rosas-Peralta M , Medina-Concebida LE , Borrayo-Sánchez G , Madrid-Miller A , Ramírez-Arias E , Pérez-Rodríguez G (2016) Systemic arterial hypertension in child and adolescent. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc 54 (Suppl 1 ), s52–s66.27284843
[104] Flores YN , Auslander A , Crespi CM , Rodriguez M , Zhang ZF , Durazo F , Salmerón J (2016) Longitudinal association of obesity, metabolic syndrome and diabetes with risk of elevated aminotransferase levels in a cohort of Mexican health workers. J Dig Dis 17 , 304–312.26991251
[105] Mendoza-Carrera F , Castro-Martínez XH , Leal C , Portilla-de Buen E , Sánchez-Corona J , Flores-Martínez SE , García-Zapién A , Ramírez-López G , Gómez-Espinel I , Báez-Duarte BG , Zamora-Ginez I , Velarde-Félix JS , Guillermo Sánchez-Zazueta J (2017) Analysis of cytokine gene polymorphisms in Mestizo and native populations from Mexico. Am J Hum Biol. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22900
[106] Stryjecki C , Peralta-Romero J , Alyass A , Karam-Araujo R , Suarez F , Gomez-Zamudio J , Burguete-Garcia A , Cruz M , Meyre D (2016) Association between PPAR-γ2 Pro12Ala genotype and insulin resistance is modified by circulating lipids in Mexican children. Sci Rep 6 , 24472.27075119
[107] Leong A , Porneala B , Dupuis J , Florez JC , Meigs JB (2016) Type 2 diabetes genetic predisposition, obesity, and all-cause mortality risk in the U.S.: A multiethnic analysis. Diabetes Care 39 , 539–546.26884474
[108] Hu H , Huff CD , Yamamura Y , Wu X , Strom SS (2015) The relationship between Native American ancestry, body mass index and diabetes risk among Mexican-Americans. PLoS One 10 , e0141260.26501420
[109] Galavíz KI , Tremblay MS , Colley R , Jáuregui E , López y Taylor J , Janssen I (2012) Associations between physical activity, cardiorespiratory fitness, and obesity in Mexican children. Salud Publica Mex 54 , 463–469.23011497
[110] Héroux M , Onywera V , Tremblay MS , Adamo KB , Lopez Taylor J , Jáuregui Ulloa E , Janssen I (2013) The relation between aerobic fitness, muscular fitness, and obesity in children from three countries at different stages of the physical activity transition. ISRN Obes 2013 , 134835.24533216
[111] Wilhelm-Benartzi CS , Houseman EA , Maccani MA , Poage GM , Koestler DC , Langevin SM , Gagne LA , Banister CE , Padbury JF , Marsit CJ (2012) In utero exposures, infant growth, and DNA methylation of repetitive elements and developmentally related genes in human placenta. Environ Health Perspect 120 , 296–302.22005006
[112] Tsamou M , Vrijens K , Madhloum N , Lefebvre W , Vanpoucke C , Nawrot TS (2016) Air pollution-induced placental epigenetic alterations in early life: A candidate miRNA approach. Epigenetics. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2016.1155012
[113] Li DM , Sun H (1997) TEP1, encoded by a candidate tumor suppressor locus, is a novel protein tyrosine phosphatase regulated by transforming growth factor beta. Cancer Res 57 , 2124–2129.9187108
[114] Wu X , Senechal K , Neshat MS , Whang YE , Sawyers CL (1998) The PTEN/MMAC1 tumor suppressor phosphatase functions as a negative regulator of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 15587–15591.9861013
[115] Lee JO , Yang H , Georgescu MM , Di Cristofano A , Maehama T , Shi Y , Dixon JE , Pandolfi P , Pavletich NP (1999) Crystal structure of the PTEN tumor suppressor: Implications for its phosphoinositide phosphatase activity and membrane association. Cell 99 , 323–334.10555148
[116] Schubbert S , Jiao J , Ruscetti M , Nakashima J , Wu S , Lei H , Xu Q , Yi W , Zhu H , Wu H (2016) Methods for PTEN in stem cells and cancer stem cells. Methods Mol Biol 1388 , 233–285.27033080
[117] Ohtake Y , Hayat U , Li SP (2015) TEN inhibition and axon regeneration and neural repair. Neural Regen Res 10 ,1363–1368.26604880
[118] Hu JZ , Huang JH , Zeng L , Wang G , Cao M , Lu HB (2013) Anti-apoptotic effect of miRNA-21after contusion spinal cord injury in rats. J Neurotrauma 30 , 1349–1360.23647386
[119] Al-Khouri AM , Ma Y , Togo SH , Williams S , Mustelin T (2005) Cooperative phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) by casein kinases and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta. J Biol Chem 280 , 35195–35202.16107342
[120] Da Costa RM , Neves KB , Mestriner FL , Louzada-Junior P , Bruder-Nascimento T , Tostes RC (2016) TNF-α induces vascular insulin resistance via positive modulation of PTEN and decreased Akt/eNOS/NO signaling in high fat diet-fed mice. Cardiovasc Diabetol 15 , 119.27562094
[121] Grinder-Hansen L , Ribel-Madsen R , Wojtaszewski JF , Poulsen P , Grunnet LG , Vaag A (2016) A common variation of the PTEN gene is associated with peripheral insulin resistance. Diabetes Metab 42 , 280–284.27068875
[122] Spradley FT , Palei AC , Granger JP (2015) Increased risk for the development of preeclampsia in obese pregnancies: Weighing in on the mechanisms. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 309 , R1326–R1343.26447211
[123] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Cross JV , Franco-Lira M , Aragón-Flores M , Kavanaugh M , Torres-Jardón R , Chao CK , Thompson C , Chang J , Zhu H , D’Angiulli A (2013) Brain immune interactions and air pollution: Macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF), prion cellular protein (PrPc), interleukin-6 (IL6), interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), and interleukin-2 (IL-2) in cerebrospinal fluid and MIF in serum differentiate urban children exposed to severe vs low air pollution. Front Neurosci 7 , 183–194.24133408
[124] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Azzarelli B , Acuna H , García R , Gambling TM , Osnaya N , Monroy S , DEL Tizapantzi MR , Carson JL , Villarreal-Calderon A , Rewcastle B (2002) Air pollution and brain damage. Toxicol Pathol 30 , 373–389.12051555
[125] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , Reed W , Maronpot RR , Henríquez-Roldán C , Delgado-Chavez R , Calderón-Garcidueñas A , Dragustinovis I , Franco-Lira M , Aragón-Flores M , Solt AC , Altenburg M , Torres-Jardón R , Swenberg JA (2004) Brain inflammation and Alzheimer’s-like pathology in individuals exposed to severe air pollution. Toxicol Pathol 32 , 650–658.15513908
[126] Block ML , Calderón-Garcidueñas L (2009) Air pollution: Mechanisms of neuroinflammation and CNS disease. Trends Neurosci 32 , 506–516.19716187
[127] Lampron A , Elali A , Rivest S (2013) Innate immunity in the CNS: Redefining the relationship between the CNS and Its environment. Neuron 78 , 214–232.23622060
[128] Castellani RJ , Lee HG , Zhu X , Nunomura A , Perry G , Smith MA (2006) Neuropathology of Alzheimer disease: Pathognomonic but not pathogenic. Acta Neuropathol 111 , 503–509.16718346
[129] Castellani RJ , Perry G (2014) The complexities of the pathology-pathogenesis relationship in Alzheimer disease. Biochem Pharmacol 88 , 671–676.24447936
[130] Nunomura A , Castellani RJ , Zhu X , Moreira PI , Perry G , Smith MA (2006) Involvement of oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 65 , 631–641.16825950
[131] Blasko I , Stampfer-Kountchev M , Robatscher P , Veerhuis R , Eikelenboom P , Grubeck-Loebenstein B (2004) How chronic inflammation can affect the brain and support the development of Alzheimer’s disease in old age: The role of microglia and astrocytes. Aging Cell 3 , 169–176.15268750
[132] Dik MG , Jonker C , Hack CE , Smit JH , Comijs HC , Eikelenboom P (2005) Serum inflammatory proteins and cognitive decline in older persons. Neurology 64 , 1371–1377.15851726
[133] Finch CE , Morgan TE (2007) Systemic inflammation, infection, ApoE alleles and Alzheimer disease: A position paper. Curr Alzheimer Res 4 , 185–189.17430245
[134] Bonotis K , Krikki E , Holeva V , Aggouridaki C , Costa V , Baloyannis S (2008) Systemic immune aberrations in Alzheimer’s disease patients. J Neuroimmunol 193 , 183–187.18037502
[135] Gómez Ravetti M , Moscato P (2008) Identification of a 5-protein biomarker molecular signature for predicting Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 3 , e3111.18769539
[136] Holmes C , Cunningham C , Zotova E , Woolford J , Dean C , Kerr S , Culliford D , Perry VH (2009) Systemic inflammation and disease progression in Alzheimer disease. Neurology 73 , 768–774.19738171
[137] Keene CD , Cudaback E , Li X , Montine KS , Montine TJ (2011) Apolipoprotein E isoforms and regulation of the innate immune response in brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21 , 920–928.21907569
[138] Marsh SE , Abud EM , Lakatos A , Karimzadeh A , Yeung ST , Davtyan H , Fote GM , Lau L , Weinger JG , Lane TE , Inlay MA , Poon WW , Blurton-Jones M (2016) The adaptive immune system restrains Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis by modulating microglial function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , E1316–E1325.26884167
[139] Eikelenboom P , Veerhuis R , van Exel E , Hoozemans JJ , Rozemuller AJ , van Gool WA (2011) The early involvement of the innate immunity in the pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: Neuropathological, epidemiological and genetic evidence. Curr Alzheimer Res 8 , 142–150.21345167
[140] Campbell A (2004) Inflammation, neurodegenerative diseases and environmental exposures. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1035 , 117–132.15681804
[141] Win-Shwe TT , Yamamoto S , Fujitani Y , Hirano S , Fujimaki H (2008) Spatial learning and memory function-related gene expression in the hippocampus of mouse exposed to nanoparticle-rich diesel exhaust. Neurotoxicology 29 , 940–947.18926851
[142] Calderón-Garcidueñas L , D’Angiulli A , Kulesza RJ , Torres-Jardón R , Osnaya N , Romero L , Keefe S , Herritt L , Brooks DM , Avila-Ramirez J , Delgado-Chávez R , Medina-Cortina H , González-González LO (2011) Air pollution is associated with brainstem auditory nuclei pathology and delayed brainstem auditory evoked potentials. Int J Dev Neurosci 29 , 365–375.21458557
[143] Linn MC , Petersen AC (1985) Emergence and characterization of sex differences in spatial ability: A meta-analysis. Child Dev 56 , 1479–1498.4075870
[144] Suades-González E , Gascon M , Guxens M , Sunyer J (2015) Air pollution and neuropsychological development: A review of the latest evidence. Endocrinology 156 , 3473–3482.26241071
[145] Yasen AL , Raber J , Miller JK , Piper BJ (2015) Sex, but not Apolipoprotein E polymorphism, differences in spatial performance in young adults. Arch Sex Behav 44 , 2219–2226.25750133
[146] Miraglia F , Vecchio F , Bramanti P , Rossini PM (2015) Small-worldness characteristics and its gender relation in specific hemispheric networks. Neuroscience 310 , 1–11.26384963
[147] Newman SD (2016) Differences in cognitive ability and apparent sex differences in corpus callosum size. Psychol Res 80 , 853–859.26208632
[148] Sano M , Gandy S (2016) Sex differences in cognition: Does the “fairer sex” need a fairer test? Neurology 86 , 1364–1365.26984948
[149] Triviño-Paredes J , Patten AR , Gil-Mohapel J , Christie BR (2016) The effects of hormones and physical exercise on hippocampal structural plasticity. Front Neuroendocrinol 41 ,23–43.26989000
[150] Mansouri FA , Fehring DJ , Gaillard A , Jaberzadeh S , Parkington H (2016) Sex dependency of inhibitory control functions. Biol Sex Differ 7 , 11.26862388
[151] Riedel BC , Thompson PM , Brinton RD (2016) Age, APOE and sex: Triad of risk of Alzheimer’s disease. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 160 , 134–147.26969397
[152] Jiménez-Pavón D , Ruiz JR , Ortega FB , Martínez-Gómez D , Moreno S , Urzanqui A , Gottrand F , Molnár D , Castillo MJ , Sjóstróm M , Moreno LA ; HELENA Study group (2013) Physical activity and markers of insulin resistance in adolescents: Role of cardiorespiratory fitness levels-The HELENA study. Pediatr Diabetes 14 , 249–258.23301989
[153] Stoet G (2016) Sex differences in the Simon task help to interpret sex differences in selective attention. Psychol Res 81 , 571–581.26957425
[154] Vijayakumar N , Allen NB , Youssef G , Dennison M , Yücel M , Simmons JG , Whittle S (2016) Brain development during adolescence: A mixed-longitudinal investigation of cortical thickness, surface area, and volume. Hum Brain Mapp 37 , 2027–2038.26946457
[155] Hyde JS (2016) Sex and cognition: Gender and cognitive functions. Curr Opin Neurobiol 38 , 53–56.26953847
[156] Gallart-Palau X , Lee BS , Adav SS , Qian J , Serra A , Park JE , Lai MK , Chen CP , Kalaria RN , Sze SK (2016) Gender differences in white matter pathology and mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease with cerebrovascular disease. Mol Brain 9 , 27.26983404
[157] Laws KR , Irvine K , Gale TM (2016) Sex differences in cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. World Psychiatry 6 , 54–65.
[158] Reynolds CA , Gatz M , Christensen K , Christiansen L , Dahl Aslan AK , Kaprio J , Korhonen T , Kremen WS , Krueger R , McGue M , Neiderhiser JM , Pedersen NL , Interplay of Genes and Environment across Multiple Studies (IGEMS) consortium (2016) Gene-environment interplay in physical, psychological, and cognitive domains in mid to late adulthood: Is APOE a variability gene? Behav Genet 46 , 4–19.26538244
[159] Ihle A , Bunce D , Kliegel M (2012) APOE 4 and cognitive function in early life: A meta-analysis. Neuropsychology 26 , 267–277.22329498
[160] Bjartmar C , Battistuta J , Terada N , Dupree E , Trapp BD (2002) N-acetylaspartate is an axon-specific marker of mature white matter in vivo: A biochemical and immunohistochemical study on the rat optic nerve. Ann Neurol 51 , 51–58.11782984
[161] Haier RJ , Jung RE , Yeo RA , Head K , Alkire MT (2004) Structural brain variation and general intelligence. Neuroimage 23 , 425–433.15325390
[162] Schmithorst VJ , Wilke M , Dardzinski BJ , Holland SK (2005) Cognitive functions correlate with white matter architecture in a normal pediatric population: A diffusion tensor MRI study. Hum Brain Mapp 26 , 139–147.15858815
[163] Moffett JR , Ross B , Arun P , Madhavarao CN , Namboodiri AM (2007) N-acetylaspartate in the CNS: From neurodiagnostics to neurobiology. Prog Neurobiol 81 , 89–131.17275978
[164] Braak H , Del Tredeci K (2011) The pathological process underlying Alzheimer’s disease in individuals under thirty. Acta Neuropathol 121 , 171–181.21170538
[165] Braak H , Thal DR , Ghebremedhin E , Del Tredeci K (2011) Stages of the pathologic process in Alzheimer’s disease: Age categories from 1-100 years. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 , 960–969.22002422
[166] Penke L , Maniega SM , Bastin ME , Valdés Hernández MC , Murray C , Royle NA , Starr JM , Wardlaw JM , Deary IJ (2012) Brain white matter tract integrity as a neural foundation for general intelligence. Mol Psychiatry 17 , 1026–1030.22614288
[167] Lyall DM , Harris SE , Bastin ME , Muñoz Maniega S , Murray C , Lutz MW , Saunders AM , Roses AD , Valdés Hernández Mdel C , Royle NA , Starr JM , Porteous DJ , Wardlaw JM , Deary IJ (2014) Are APOE ε genotype and TOMM40 poly-T repeat length associations with cognitive ageing mediated by brain white matter tract integrity? Transl Psychiatry 4 , e449.25247594
[168] Kantarci K (2007) 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy in dementia. Br J Radiol 80 , S146–S152.18445744
[169] Kantarci K (2013) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy in common dementias. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 23 , 393–406.23928196
[170] Kantarci K (2013) Proton MRS in mild cognitive impairment. J Magn Reson Imaging 37 , 770–777.23526756
[171] Kantarci K , Weigand SD , Przybelski SA , Preboske GM , Pankratz VS , Vemuri P , Senjem ML , Murphy MC , Gunter JL , Machulda MM , Ivnik RJ , Roberts RO , Boeve BF , Rocca WA , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Jack CR Jr (2013) MRI and MRS predictors of mild cognitive impairment in a population-based sample. Neurology 81 , 126–133.23761624
[172] Schikowski T , Vossoughi M , Vierkötter A , Vierkötter A , Schulte T , Teichert T , Sugiri D , Fehsel K , Tzivian L , Bae IS , Ranft U , Hoffmann B , Probst-Hensch N , Herder C , Krämer U , Luckhaus C (2015) Association of air pollution with cognitive functions and its modification by APOE gene variants in elderly women. Environ Res 142 , 10–16.26092807
[173] Torres-Pérez E , Ledesma M , García-Sobreviela MP , Leon-Latre M , Arbones-Mainar JM (2016) Apolipoprotein E4 association with metabolic syndrome depends on body fatness. Atherosclerosis 245 , 35–42.26691908
[174] Pérez LM , Pareja-Galeano H , Sanchis-Gomar F , Emanuele E , Lucia A , Gálvez BG (2016) ‘Adipaging’: Aging and obesity share biological hallmarks related to a dysfunctional adipose tissue. J Physiol 594 , 3187–3207.26926488
[175] Varma MC , Kusminski CM , Azharian S , Gilardini L , Kumar S , Invitti C , McTernan PG (2016) Metabolic endotoxaemia in childhood obesity. BMC Obes 3 , 3.26819711
[176] Wei Y , Zhang JJ , Li Z , Gow A , Chung KF , Hu M , Sun Z , Zeng L , Zhu T , Jia G , Li X , Duarte M , Tang X (2016) Chronic exposure to air pollution particles increases the risk of obesity and metabolic syndrome: Findings from a natural experiment in Beijing. FASEB J 30 , 2115–2122.26891735
[177] Lavigne E , Ashley-Martin J , Dodds L , Arbuckle TE , Hystad P , Johnson M , Crouse DL , Ettinger AS , Shapiro GD , Fisher M , Morisset AS , Taback S , Bouchard MF , Sun L , Monnier P , Dallaire R , Fraser WD (2016) Air pollution exposure during pregnancy and fetal markers of metabolic function: The MIREC study. Am J Epidemiol 183 , 842–851.27026336
[178] Bonvecchio A , Safdie M , Monterrubio EA , Gust T , Villalpando S , Rivera JA (2009) Overweight and obesity trends in Mexican children 2 to 18 years of age from 1988 to 2006. Salud Publica Mex 51 , S586–594 20464234
[179] Safdie M , Lévesque L , González-Casanova I , Salvo D , Islas A , Hernández-Cordero S , Bonvecchio A , Rivera JA (2013) Promoting healthful diet and physical activity in the Mexican school system for the prevention of obesity in children. Salud Publica Mex 55 , 357–373.24643485
[180] Fowler SP , Puppala S , Arya R , Chittoor G , Farook VS , Schneider J , Resendez RG , Upadhayay RP , Vandeberg J , Hunt KJ , Bradshaw B , Cersosimo E , Vandeberg JL , Almasy L , Curran JE , Comuzzie AG , Lehman DM , Jenkinson CP , Lynch JL , Defronzo RA , Blangero J , Hale DE , Duggirala R (2013) Genetic epidemiology of cardiometabolic risk factors and their clustering patterns in Mexican American children and adolescents: The SAFARI study. Hum Genet 132 , 1059–1071.23736306
[181] Rossen LM (2014) Neighborhood economic deprivation explains racial/ethnic disparities in overweight and obesity among children and adolescents in the USA. J Epidemiol Community Health 68 , 123–129.24072744
[182] Muggah R , Vilalta C (2016) The real reason behind rising violence in mexico city. Americas Quarterly. http://www.americasquarterly.org/content/real-reason-behind-rising-violence-Mexico-city.
[183] Blanco L (2016) The impact of judicial reform on crime victimization and trust in institutions in Mexico. Violence Vict 31 , 27–50.26645670
[184] Overseas Security Advisory Council - Bureau of Diplomatic Security. Mexico 2015 Crime and Safety Report: Mexico City. Available from https://www.osac.gov/pages/ContentReportDetails.aspx?cid=17114
[185] Lustig RH (2013) Fructose: It’s “alcohol without the buzz”. Adv Nutr 4 , 226–235.23493539
[186] Regnault TR , Gentili S , Sarr O , Toop CR , Sloboda DM (2013) Fructose, pregnancy and later life impacts. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 40 , 824–837.24033459
[187] Sloboda DM , Li M , Patel R , Clayton ZE , Yap C , Vickers MH (2014) Early life exposure to fructose and offspring phenotype: Implications for long term metabolic homeostasis. J Obes 2014 , 203474.24864200
[188] Wacker M , Holick MF (2013) Sunlight and Vitamin D: A global perspective for health. Dermatoendocrinol 5 , 51–108.24494042
[189] Kelishadi R , Moeini R , Poursafa P , Farajian S , Yousefy H , Okhovat-Souraki AA (2014) Independent association between air pollutants and vitamin D deficiency in young children in Isfahan, Iran. Paediatr Int Child Health 34 , 50–55.24090719
[190] Sampedro F , Vilaplana E , de León MJ , Alcolea D , Pegueroles J , Montal V , Carmona-Iragui M , Sala I , Sánchez-Saudinos MB , Antón-Aguirre S , Morenas-Rodríguez E , Camacho V , Falcón C , Pavía J , Ros D , Clarimón J , Blesa R , Lleó A , Fortea J , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2015) APOE-by-sex interactions on brain structure and metabolism in healthy elderly controls. Oncotarget 6 , 26663–26674.26397226
[191] Gamlin J (2015) Violence and homicide in Mexico: A global health issue. Lancet 385 , 605–606.25706082
[192] Rubio-Codina M , Attanasio O , Grantham-McGregor S (2016) Mediating pathways in the socio-economic gradient of child development: Evidence from children 6–42 months in Bogota. Int J Behav Dev 40 , 483–491.27885311
