LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

36401868
9931659
10.1002/alz.12871
NIHMS1846268
Article
Hypertension and Hyperhomocysteinemia as Modifiable Risk Factors for Alzheimer’s disease and dementia: new evidence, potential therapeutic strategies and biomarkers
Carey Ashley 1
Fossati Silvia 1
1 Alzheimer’s Center at Temple, Department of Neural Sciences, Temple University Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia
Corresponding Author: Silvia Fossati, the Alzheimer’s Center at Temple, Department of Neural Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia. silvia.fossati@temple.edu
23 11 2022
2 2023
19 11 2022
01 2 2024
19 2 671695
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
This review summarizes recent evidence on how mid-life hypertension, hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) and blood pressure variability, as well as late-life hypotension, exacerbate AD and dementia risk. Intriguingly, HHcy also increases the risk for hypertension, revealing the importance of understanding the relationship between comorbid cardiovascular risk factors. Hypertension-induced dementia presents more evidently in women, highlighting the relevance of sex differences in the impact of cardiovascular risk. We summarize each major antihypertensive drug class’s effects on cognitive impairment and AD pathology, revealing how carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, diuretics modulating cerebral blood flow, have recently gained preclinical evidence as promising treatment against AD. We also report novel vascular biomarkers for AD and dementia risk, highlighting those associated with hypertension and HHcy. Importantly, we propose that future studies should consider hypertension and HHcy as potential contributors to cognitive impairment, and that uncovering the underlying molecular mechanisms and biomarkers would aid in the identification of preventive strategies.

cardiovascular risk
hypertension
hyperhomocysteinemia
dementia
Alzheimer’s disease
prevention
biomarkers
therapeutic strategies
cerebrovascular dysfunction

pmcIntroduction

As the aging population exponentially grows, the prevalence and severity of dementias continues to rise (2022 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures). Although a vast array of neurodegenerative diseases exists, a common neurobiological thread underlies many neurodegenerative disorders, namely progressive degenerative death of neurons and loss of synaptic connections, ultimately leading to some degree of cognitive impairment and in some cases dementia. The neuronal degeneration and synaptic loss associated with multiple types of dementias, including Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), clinically manifests in cognitive impairments, such as memory loss, speech and communication deficits, reduced capacity to organize, plan, and reason, difficulty completing complex tasks, confusion, disorientation, agnosia, as well as psychological challenges, such as personality and behavior changes, depression, anxiety, hallucinations, mood swings, and apathy1. As these symptoms progress, dementia patients progressively lose independence and heavily rely on caregivers, highlighting the heavy caregiving and financial burden that dementia imposes on society. Cases of dementia are estimated to rapidly increase within the coming years due to the aging of the baby-boomer generation and the lack of a cure1. The number of Americans age 65 and older is predicted to double from 52 million in 2018 to 95 million by 2060, representing a potentially substantial social and economic burden and demonstrating the need for more research to help understand the underlying molecular mechanisms and contributions to dementia pathology and risk in order to develop better treatments and more preventative strategies1,2.

In recent years, dementia, more specifically AD, is being recognized more and more as a multi-factorial disorder or syndrome, with the presence of multiple concurrent pathological events leading to loss of optimal neuronal functioning and the development of cognitive impairment. Among these events, cerebral vascular dysfunction, which also results in the reduction of brain oxygen and glucose supplies, has been recognized as one of the earliest pathological features found in the majority of AD patients. Today we know that mixed pathology dementias account for more than half of the total cases, with amyloidosis and vascular disease being the most frequent combination2–8. Interestingly, it has been recognized that patients with mixed vascular and AD pathologies have nearly twice the incremental risk of dementia compared with patients with only AD-type lesions9. The cerebral vasculature acts as a neuronal lifeline, providing vital metabolites and nutrients required for proper neuronal functioning. Cerebrovascular insults not only negatively affect the cerebral vasculature but every other cell comprising the neurovascular unit, including neurons and glial cells, leading to impairments in major brain functions. Therefore, shifting the focus of AD and dementia research from disease hallmark lesions such as amyloid-beta (Aβ) and tau to studying the contribution of other factors, such as cardiovascular risk factors, and the specific mechanisms through which each cardiovascular risk factor promotes cognitive decline and disease onset is a pressing issue for the research community10–13. If specific vascular risk factors can be linked to defined aspects of dementia pathology and the molecular mechanisms through which these risk factors promote dementia-related neurodegeneration can be clarified, preventative medicine will be able screen for these factors or mechanisms earlier in time and combat them before they can facilitate the pathological progression of dementia. Currently, treatment options for dementia are limited to purely conducting damage control on amyloid pathology and managing symptomology. A game changer for dementia treatment would be identifying risk factors that emerge during midlife, the prodromal phase of dementia where pathology begins to accumulate, thus allowing to significantly prevent dementia onset or intervene with early multifactorial disease-modifying treatment strategies. The overall goal and hypothesis of this review is that cardiovascular risk factors, specifically hypertension and hyperhomocysteinemia, can themselves promote dementia pathology as well as potentiate the effects of Aβ and tau, eventually resulting in neurovascular unit failure, neuronal death and synaptic dysfunction, and ultimately in the development of cognitive decline and dementia. The content of this review is based on a literature search conducted on PubMed and Google Scholar utilizing the following key words: “Cardiovascular Risk Factors and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “Hypertension and AD/Dementia Risk”, “Hyperhomocysteinemia and AD/Dementia Risk”, “Hyperhomocysteinemia and Hypertension Risk”, “Sex Differences and Hypertension-Induced AD/Dementia Risk”, “α-Adrenergic Drugs and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “β-Blockers and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “Angiotensin Receptor Blockers and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “Diuretics and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors and AD/Dementia Risk/Pathology”, “Vitamin Supplementation and AD Risk/Pathology”, “Vascular Dementia Biomarkers”, “Hypertension Biomarkers”, and “Hyperhomocysteinemia Biomarkers”.

Alzheimer’s Disease, Mixed Vascular Dementias, and Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is an extremely prevalent neurodegenerative disease and the most common form of age associated dementia, currently affecting approximately 5.8 million individuals in the United States14. Pathological hallmarks of AD include intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau, parenchymal amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques enriched in the Aβ42 species, vascular Aβ deposits enriched in Aβ40, cerebrovascular dysfunction, cerebral atrophy, synaptic loss and neuronal death, all resulting in cognitive impairment15. AD is clinically characterized by progressive loss of memory and cognitive functioning, with early symptoms including difficulty recalling recent conversations, event or names. As pathology progresses, patients develop impaired communication skills, confusion, behavioral changes, poor judgement, and often experience passiveness and depression1,3.

Increasing evidence has emerged to suggest that AD is a multi-factorial disease, with several simultaneous pathological events working in conjunction with Aβ and tau in order to produce cerebral pathology and, ultimately, cognitive decline. In particular, a growing number of studies implicate cerebrovascular disturbances as substantial players in AD onset. Indeed, cerebral vascular dysfunction has begun to be acknowledged as one of the earliest pathological features found in most AD patients15,16. It is widely accepted that more than half of total cases of dementia consist of mixed pathology dementias, with the most common combination being amyloidosis and vascular disease1–7. Individuals revealing mixed vascular and AD pathologies have almost twice the dementia risk as those with only AD-type lesions16, demonstrating the importance of considering vascular factors as major contributors to AD risk and pathology. In fact, a recent NIA study conducting autopsies on AD patients revealed that 54% had coexisting pathologies in addition to hallmark AD brain changes, with the most common coexisting abnormality being undetected blood clots and other evidence of vascular disease17. Neuropathological studies have demonstrated that Mixed Vascular-Alzheimer’s Dementia (MVAD) is a typical pathological finding within the aging population, with a 22% prevalence18. Brain autopsy studies conducted by the NIA utilizing samples from individuals diagnosed with dementia have demonstrated that most patients 80 years of age and beyond likely had mixed dementia including AD-related neurodegeneration, vascular disease-related processes, or other conditions involving neurodegeneration14. Moreover, multiple studies propose that the most frequent cause of dementia within the aging population is mixed vascular-degenerative dementia14 [The Dementias: Hope Through Research (NIH.gov)].

A major contributor to cerebrovascular dysfunction in AD is Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy (CAA), defined as the deposition of Aβ specifically at the brain vasculature19. CAA has become increasingly recognized as a major component in the pathology of AD, being evident in approximately 85–95% of AD patients19,20, and is also frequently found in non-demented elderly people21. In fact, an aging study conducted autopsies of 1079 deceased patients (mean death age= 89.7 years) and demonstrated that 36% of patients exhibited some level of CAA pathology22. Aβ40 is the most abundant peptide in vascular deposits23–26. Certain Aβ40 variants, such as the Dutch mutant (Aβ40E22Q) which contains a Glutamic acid to Glutamine mutation at amino acid 22 and corresponds to a human familial disorder within the Dutch population manifesting as early onset CAA, cerebral hemorrhages, strokes, and cognitive dysfunction, have been shown to induce accelerated endothelial cell dysfunction and cerebral vascular pathology, as they are significantly more aggregation-prone than the Aβ40-WT peptide26–32. Cerebrovascular Aβ deposits contribute to increased blood brain barrier (BBB) permeability and heightened incidents of microhemorrhages, leading to leakage of neurotoxic proteins and infiltration of blood-borne peripheral immune cells from the cerebral blood vessels into the brain parenchyma, causing high levels of neuroinflammation and dysfunction of the neurovascular unit33,34. CAA has been found to disrupt cerebral capillaries as well as small and medium diameter arteries and arterioles, which leads to focal ischemia, decreased cerebral blood flow, and subsequent neuronal death35. Proper neuronal function relies greatly on adequate cerebral perfusion to deliver oxygen and required nutrients, like glucose, to the brain and when cerebral blood flow is disrupted due to pathology like AD and CAA, neurons are particularly sensitive to the resulting oxygen and glucose deprivation19,36,37.

Contribution of Cardiovascular Risk Factors to AD Onset and Pathology

Due to the emerging evidence suggesting that cerebrovascular dysfunction plays a prominent role in AD pathology, many studies have begun to investigate the relationship between cardiovascular diseases and the pathological conditions associated with AD. Studies within the last decade have suggested that cardiovascular risk factors, including hyperhomocysteinemia (Hhcy), hypertension, atherosclerosis, and others38–41, can exacerbate AD pathology and can increase individuals’ risk for developing AD. A study published in 2022 has revealed that a rapidly progressing cardiovascular risk trajectory anticipated an increased AD and vascular dementia risk, as well as increased memory decline risk, while a stable or controlled cardiovascular risk trajectory was able to partially alleviate this correlation42. Vascular aging and cardiovascular risk factors lead to cerebral endothelial dysfunction and thus cerebral hypoperfusion, which may be an early contributor to AD pathology43. Importantly, stroke and dementia confer risks for each other and many of the same, often modifiable, risk factors, protective factors, and molecular mechanisms, are shared between these 2 diseases44. Cerebral hypoperfusion induces a metabolic energy crisis, leading to a cascade of events that compromises many cells composing the neurovascular unit, including neurons, and increases oxidative stress and neuroinflammation45. Dysfunction of neuronal metabolism has also been found to upregulate the expression of β-secretase, which is an enzyme involved in the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) to form amyloidogenic Aβ species, thus exacerbating Aβ accumulation and deposition46. It is also known that Aβ deposition can contribute to endothelial dysfunction and damage, particularly causing vasoconstriction and disrupting endothelial barrier integrity, which can further induce cerebral blood flow reduction19. Recently, cerebral hypoperfusion and ischemia have also been shown to promote neuroinflammation and increase pro-inflammatory cytokines through NLRP3 and AIM2 inflammasome upregulation in microglia and astrocytes47. Endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and high levels of neuroinflammation compromise the integrity of the BBB, also impeding Aβ clearance and leading to more Aβ accumulation. Although the exact chronology of the AD timeline remains unclear, it is apparent that dysfunction of the BBB triggers an extremely damaging cycle, where cerebral perfusion progressively gets more impaired, leading to further exacerbation of neurodegenerative processes43. This review focuses on the contributions of hypertension and Hhcy to the risk of developing AD and mixed dementia syndromes, as well as on their ability to precipitate cognitive dysfunction. Improving this knowledge will help to identify possible early biomarkers and preventive therapies that could be applied at the prodromal asymptomatic phase of the disease, before cognitive symptoms arise.

Hypertension and AD risk

Hypertension has gained increasing recognition as a risk factor for AD development and several studies have demonstrated that midlife hypertension specifically contributes to AD pathology. Hypertension can arise from abnormalities in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Systolic blood pressure represents the amount of pressure blood exerts against the artery walls as the heart is beating (normal range &lt; 120 mmHg), while diastolic blood pressure is a measure of the amount of pressure blood exerts against the artery walls while the heart is at rest between beats (normal range &lt; 80 mmHg)48.

Recent evidence has emerged suggesting a relationship specifically between elevated systolic blood pressure and increased risk for AD and cognitive impairment. The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study has demonstrated an association between elevated midlife systolic blood pressure and increased risk of cognitive dysfunction, revealing that individuals with midlife systolic blood pressure &gt; 140 mmHg have a 1.77 times higher risk for developing dementia later in life49. A recent meta-analysis similarly revealed that a relationship exists between systolic hypertension, when systolic blood pressure is &gt; 160 mmHg, and AD risk, while diastolic hypertension was not significantly associated with AD risk50. A longitudinal study from the “Whitehall II Cohort” has also demonstrated that systolic blood pressure ≥ 130 mmHg during midlife (age 50), but not in late-life, was associated with higher incidence of dementia, while high diastolic blood pressure did not reveal this relationship51. This study also indicated that the longer the time individuals exhibited systolic hypertension in midlife, the further their AD risk increased51. A study conducted in 2021 demonstrated that high resting heart rate (≥80 bpm), which is highly associated with hypertension, corresponded to a higher risk of dementia as well as accelerated progression of cognitive decline in an aging population52. Another recent longitudinal study has revealed that longer duration of hypertension during early adulthood corresponded to weakened verbal memory performance during midlife, demonstrating hypertension as a risk factor for cognitive decline53. It was also shown that systolic blood pressure is negatively associated with blood flow in the cortex as well as specifically in the hippocampus, with a decrease in cortical and hippocampal perfusion as systolic blood pressure increases54. Interestingly, this study found that individuals with hypertension also experience this trend, but there seems to be an optimal mid-range systolic blood pressure that allows perfusion to be maximized and this should be further explored54.

Ample evidence has shown that late-life hypotension is also a risk factor for the development of AD pathology. A recent meta-analysis comparing 138 publications has found no significant association between late-life hypertension and AD risk, but rather late-life hypotension and low diastolic blood pressure were associated with greater risk for the development of AD and cognitive impairment55. Surprisingly, this study revealed that slightly elevated diastolic blood pressure later in life, specifically between the range of 90–100 mmHg, reduces risk for dementia by 23% in individuals included in the studies analyzed55. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that a longitudinal decrease in mean arterial pressure was associated with memory decline and increase in phosphorylated tau, but only in participants that started the study with hypertension, suggesting that hypertension can prime individuals to be more sensitive to the negative effects of late-life hypotension, a common phenomenon in the aging population56. High blood pressure variability has also been implicated as a risk for AD and cognitive decline. The “Three-City Study” conducted in 2014 demonstrated that individuals with higher variability in their systolic blood pressure measurements had higher risk for AD57. Another study analyzing visit-to-visit variability in blood pressure revealed that higher blood pressure variability was associated with increased cognitive impairment, indicated by worse outcomes on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)58. An even more recent study revealed an association between high systolic blood pressure variability and white matter integrity loss59. Interestingly, the correlation between blood pressure variability and the integrity of cerebral white matter was significant stronger in individuals with CAA pathology and CAA patients with higher blood pressure variability demonstrated progressively worse executive function59. All these studies demonstrate a clear relationship between blood pressure and dementia risk, but future studies are needed in order to dissect the specific mechanisms by which midlife hypertension or late-life hypotension cause or exacerbate AD and CAA pathology, as well as the direct relationship between high, low or variable blood pressure and cerebrovascular risk.

Hyperhomocystenemia and AD Risk

In addition to hypertension, another major cardiovascular risk factor that has been implicated as a contributor to AD pathology and risk is Hhcy. Hhcy is a disorder involving excess plasma homocysteine (Hcy) levels due to Hcy metabolism disruption typically caused by low folate and vitamin B12 and B6 levels, which are needed to metabolize Hcy, and/or high methionine levels, which is the precursor to Hcy60. Hhcy is prevalent in 5–7% of the US population, with prevalence increasing with age60. Hhcy is gaining more attention as a major risk factor for AD and vascular dementia, being found to promote similar dementia-associated pathologies as hypertension, such as oxidative stress, vascular inflammation, and endothelial cell dysfunction61–63. A study conducted in 2018 demonstrated that AD patients had elevated serum Hcy levels when compared to control subjects64. In a recent meta-analysis, it was demonstrated that AD, as well as dementia and vascular dementia patients exhibit elevated plasma Hcy levels when compared to non-demented individuals65. It was also recently demonstrated that even patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) show higher Hcy levels compared to control subjects66,67. Levels of Hcy have also recently been found to correlate with dementia severity. Individuals with moderate to severe dementia had higher Hcy levels compared to patients with MCI or mild dementia66.

Recent meta-analyses and longitudinal aging studies have further solidified evidence that high plasma or serum Hcy levels and the often-associated deficiencies in folate as well as vitamin B6 and B12 significantly contribute to increased AD risk and AD-associated pathology and cognitive decline. Many current studies have provided further evidence that elevation of Hcy levels corresponds to increased risk for AD and other types of dementia68,69. A meta-analysis conducted in 2019 has demonstrated that a linear relationship exists between Hcy levels in the blood and AD risk, with risk increasing for every 5 μmol/L increase in Hcy69. Another study has similarly demonstrated that increased plasma Hcy was correlated with increased dementia, AD, and vascular dementia risk, with each 5 μmol/L increase in plasma Hcy specifically increasing dementia risk by 9% and AD risk by 12%65. An additional study recently published also revealed that older individuals with elevated serum Hcy (≥10.6 μmol/L) were 4–5 times more at risk for dementia and AD development versus those with normal serum Hcy (9.0–10.5 μmol/L)70. Interestingly, this same study has revealed that elderly individuals with low serum Hcy (≤8.9 μmol/L) are also 4–5 times more likely to develop dementia and AD compared to those with normal serum Hcy levels70. This is extremely similar to the chronological risk that blood pressure levels have on the likelihood of dementia development, as hypertension and hypotension have both been found to increase dementia risk, but only when they are present at certain periods of an individual’s life, being midlife and late life, respectively. In general, a correlation between elevated serum Hcy levels and the cognitive, behavioral, and psychological symptoms of AD has been established64. A study analyzing the cognitive abilities of AD patients has demonstrated that elevated Hcy is associated with impairment of memory, especially short and long-term spatial and verbal memory, and motor planning71. Another study additionally demonstrated that higher Hcy levels lead to worsened neuropsychiatric symptom and functional impairment severity, as well as more severe and frequent cognitive impairment in AD and vascular dementia66.

As previously mentioned, abnormalities within bodily concentrations of vitamins and metabolites required for Hcy production and metabolism have been found in dementia patients and these abnormalities have also been implicated to promote cognitive decline and increase dementia risk. A study conducted in 2021, found reduced serum Vitamin B6, B12, and folate levels in AD patients compared to normal age-matched controls67. Similarly, a study conducted within the Chinese population has revealed that patients with AD have reduced serum Vitamin B2, B9, B12, D, and E levels versus controls, with specifically vitamin B12 deficiency being highly associated with elevated AD risk72. Despite this, conflicting results were revealed by Soni et al. 2018, which found no differences in Vitamin B12 and folate levels between AD and control patients, but this study lacked a large population of patients and also would have benefited from being conducted in a more longitudinal manner64. Another recent study has also shown that elevations in methionine levels, the precursor to Hcy and often the metabolite that Hcy is broken back down into, correlated with decreased dementia risk68. Specifically, this study showed that an increased methionine to Hcy ratio was associated with lower AD and dementia risk, as well as a diminished rate of brain tissue volume loss68. Interestingly, a longitudinal aging study recently published has demonstrated that low plasma folate levels in individuals 50 years or older was correlated with faster cognitive decline73. Plasma folate levels &lt;21.8 nmol/L were associated with episodic memory impairment, while plasma folate levels &lt;11.2 nmol/L corresponded to overall global cognitive function decline73.

Additionally, there a several studies conducted in vivo in animal models demonstrating the Hhcy promotes AD and CAA pathology, particularly increased Aβ accumulation, tau phosphorylation, neuroinflammation, BBB permeability and microhemorrhages, cerebral blood flow deficits and cognitive impairment74–81. Overall, these studies convey convincing evidence that Hhcy is a major cardiovascular risk factor that potentiates dementia risk and pathogenesis, yet the causality of these effects and the molecular mechanisms linking Hhcy’s to increased AD risk and pathology require further investigation. Interestingly, a recent study demonstrated that Hcy has the ability to self-assemble into amyloid-like toxic fibrils, which can seed the aggregation of Aβ1–42 and increase intracellular amyloid staining in a yeast model82. These results open a new avenue, suggesting that metabolites, such as Hcy, can self-assemble and cross-seed the aggregation of pathological proteins, such as Aβ, providing a possible mechanistic explanation for the increased AD risk.

Hyperhomocystenemia as a Risk Factor for Hypertension

Hcy has also been found to impact blood pressure and promote hypertension due to its strong vascular effects, namely through increasing arterial stiffness and promoting vasodilatory impairment83,84. A very early study has concluded that elevated Hcy levels are significantly associated with isolated systolic hypertension within older adults85. Another early study has demonstrated that every ~5 μmol/L increase in Hcy is associated with a 0.5 mmHg diastolic blood pressure increase and a 0.7 mmHg systolic blood pressure increase in men, while women demonstrated a 0.7 mmHg increase in diastolic blood pressure and a 1.2 mmHg increase in systolic blood pressure86. This study also demonstrated that increased bodily Hcy levels are associated with increased hypertension risk, with men having a two-fold risk increase and women having a three-fold risk increase, demonstrating an increased vulnerability of the female sex86. A more recent study specifically demonstrated that 1 lnHcy (log transformation of tHcy level) was associated with a 3.78 mmHg systolic blood pressure increase and a 3.02 mmHg diastolic blood pressure increase87. Another study conducted in the Chinese population showed that a 5 μmol/L increase in tHcy corresponded to a ~0.445 mmHg increase in systolic blood pressure and a ~0.215 increase in diastolic blood pressure88. This study also concluded that the incidence of hypertension was far more apparent in individuals with tHcy levels ≥ 15 μmol/l, with this trend being more evident in women compared to men88, although this was contradicted by a different study, which found higher risk in men89. Other studies conducted within the Chinese population, including Yang et al., 2017, revealed that increased Hcy levels corresponded to increased blood pressure and elevated hypertension risk90. A follow up study, Yang et al., 2018, more specifically found that both systolic and diastolic blood pressure were significantly increased in individuals from the general Chinese adult population with tHcy levels greater than 10 μmol/L91. When considering the prevalence of Hhcy and hypertension comorbidity, a study conducted in 2019 demonstrated that 44.7% of patients in this study that exhibited hypertension also had Hhcy92. Even more recent data demonstrated that out of a population of hypertensive patients, 36.1% comorbidly exhibited Hhcy, with Hcy levels within the serum averaging 14.1 μmol/L93. It has also been shown that following ischemic stroke, patients with hypertension and Hhcy most prevalently exhibited early cognitive impairment, specifically decreased visual space and executive scores and decreased delayed recall scores, compared to post-stroke patients with hypertension or Hhcy alone94.

Common Cellular Mechanisms

Hypertension has been found to affect both the structural integrity as well as the function of cerebrovascular endothelial cells. Hypertrophy and remodeling of cerebrovascular vessels and increased media-to-lumen ratio has been found under conditions of hypertension, attributed to enlargement of vascular smooth muscle cells and build-up of extracellular matrix proteins inside the walls of cerebral vessels95,96. Hypertension is also a major factor involved in the development of atherosclerosis, which can occur intracranially, and atherosclerotic plaques can narrow the diameter of cerebral vessels, contributing to reductions in cerebral blood flow19. Atherosclerotic plaques often will rupture leading to thrombosis of the vessel, which can cause cerebral vascular occlusion, further disrupting cerebral blood flow19. In addition to structural changes, endothelial dilatory function has been found to be impaired due to hypertensive pathology in mouse models of AD. Cerebral vessels isolated from APP/PS1 AD mice with high systolic blood pressure had impairments of endothelial dilatory function in response to acetylcholine compared to vessels from wild-type mice and had exacerbated impairments compared to vessels from APP/PS1 mice with normal blood pressure ranges97. It is also known that hypertension decreases nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability and thus impairs NO-mediated vasodilatory functions of endothelial cells, which can contribute to increased vasoconstriction of vessels98. Increased systolic blood pressure in APP/PS1 mice was also found to contribute to decreased barrier function of cerebral endothelial cells, due to decreased expression of endothelial tight junction proteins such as Occludin, ZO-1, and Claudin-5, as well as increased instances of cerebral endothelial cell death97.

These hypertension-induced changes in structure and function of cerebrovascular endothelial cells promote impairment of cerebral blood flow autoregulation, increased BBB permeability, increased presence of microhemorrhages, and decreased cerebral micro-vessel density, which can lead to hypoperfusion and promote an ischemic cerebral environment that may contribute to AD pathology19. A major pathological issue for hypertensive patients is the loss of proper cerebral autoregulation, which helps sustain cerebral homeostasis by maintaining cerebral perfusion constant despite changes in peripheral blood pressure levels99,100. Loss of cerebral autoregulation elevates transmission pressure to the cerebral capillaries, which has been found to cause loss of BBB integrity, cerebral edema, and neuroinflammation101. Hypertensive patients experience a shift within their cerebral blood flow regulation limits, causing an increase in both the lower and upper limits of blood flow regulation56,99,102. When the lower limit of autoregulation corresponds to a higher blood pressure level, cerebral hypoperfusion is established at significantly higher blood pressure levels compared to individuals with normal blood pressure56,99,102. The resulting ischemic cerebral environment can lead to a neuronal energy crisis due to the lack of nutrient and oxygen availability and thus the inability to meet the high energy demands required to sustain proper neuronal function103, as well as neurovascular uncoupling and neuronal damage due to increases in neuroinflammation, reactive oxygen species and calcium influx, which can increase individual’s risk for AD15,104,105. Hypertension has also been found to increase Aβ deposition possibly through increased amyloidogenic processing of the APP through β-secretase or due to decreased clearance function resulting from BBB dysfunction95,106. Due to the evidence suggesting that midlife hypertension can contribute to increased risk of AD and promote the progression of AD pathology, utilizing anti-hypertensive drugs to reduce the incidence of midlife hypertension can be a promising intervention to decrease the development of AD and cognitive decline later in life.

Sex Differences in Hypertension Induced AD Risk

Following age, female sex is the second greatest AD risk factor, with two-thirds of late-onset AD patients being women107–109. Women not only have increased AD risk, but more severe pathology and exacerbated disease progression compared to men110. Due to this, it is important to consider whether there are sex differences in hypertension as a risk factor for dementia in order to create more targeted preventive strategies111. One of the early studies that has demonstrated that vascular risk factors increase dementia risk differentially depending on sex has revealed that hypertension correlated to increased vascular dementia risk only within women112. Recently, more evidence has backed these early findings up. A study conducted in 2021 has revealed that midlife hypertension correlated with a 65% increased risk for dementia exclusively in women113. Additionally, this study demonstrated that the hypertension during midlife resulted in a 73% elevated risk of dementia in women, but this was not evident in men113. Other recent studies demonstrated that elevation of systolic blood pressure correlated with increased dementia risk exclusively in women114, and that midlife hypertension was correlated with memory decline specifically in women115. Interestingly, diastolic blood pressure levels were significantly correlated with decreased dementia risk in men, but this was not evident in women114. When compared to normotensive individuals, men in varying hypertension stages had lower dementia risk, but dementia risk increased with worsened hypertension stages in women and midlife high blood pressure had a dose-response relation to increased dementia (including vascular dementia and AD) risk in women, but not in men114. A study conducted in 2022 specifically within a cohort of women demonstrated that increased systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure correlated with a significant increase in MCI risk and cognitive performance116. Overall, these studies point to a higher susceptibility of the female sex to the effects of midlife hypertension on increasing the risk for AD and dementia.

Molecular Mediators and Possible Effective Pharmacological Treatments

Adrenergic Receptors and Control of Blood Pressure

α1-adrenergic receptors are located predominantly on smooth muscle cells within blood vessels117,118. These adrenergic receptors are coupled to Gq proteins which stimulate Phospholipase C, leading to increased release of intracellular calcium and eventually the activation of Protein Kinase C, causing a downstream protein phosphorylation cascade117. Activation of α1-adrenergic receptors leads to contraction of smooth muscle and vessel vasoconstriction, which if overactivated can lead to hypertension117,119. α2-adrenergic receptors, which are coupled to inhibitory Gi/o proteins, which cause inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, are found on pre-synaptic neurons and their activation in this location leads to decreased sympathetic activity through negative feedback mechanisms and can contribute to reduction of systemic blood pressure117,118. α2-adrenergic receptors are also located on post-synaptic neurons that communicate with the smooth muscle of vessels, where activation of these receptors can contribute to smooth muscle cell constriction, which can also contribute to high blood pressure117. β1-andrenergic receptors are found primarily in cardiac muscle and are coupled to Gs120 proteins that activate adenylyl cyclase, resulting in increased levels of the second messenger cAMP117. These receptors, when activated, function to increase the contractile force of the heart and to increase heart rate, which can also contribute to hypertension117,120. Due to the high impact that the adrenergic system has on blood pressure and incidence of hypertension, drugs that can target these receptors effectively to reduce blood pressure may be beneficial as an intervention strategy to decrease midlife hypertension and thus decrease future risk of AD development.

Adrenergic Drugs and Reduction of AD Risk and Pathology

The utilization of anti-hypertensive drugs targeting the adrenergic system has become of increasing interest as a possible therapeutic strategy to decrease AD pathology and the incidence of cognitive impairment, as summarized in Table 1. The Aβ peptide has been found to decrease cerebral blood flow by inducing vasoconstriction and endothelial dysfunction in cerebral vessels through Aβ-mediated activation of α1-adrenergic signaling121. Prazosin and Urapidil, both of which are α1-adrenergic receptor antagonists, have been found to alleviate Aβ-mediated vasoconstriction of cerebral vessels by blocking α1-adrenergic signaling121. Additionally, antagonism of the α1-adrenergic receptor by Prazosin has been found to prevent cognitive and memory impairments in the APP23 mouse model of AD, through possibly promoting an anti-inflammatory response122. Tamsulosin, another antagonist of the α1-adrenergic receptor, has recently been found to improve age-related memory impairment in rats due to increased hippocampal neurogenesis and prevention of apoptosis within the hippocampus123. An even more recent study demonstrated that knockdown of α1-adrenergic receptors within APP/PS1 AD mice improved performances on y-maze, open field test, Morris water maze and elevated plus maze124. Additionally, knockdown of α1-adrenergic receptors lessened brain amyloid burden and specifically the α1-adrenergic receptor inhibitor, terazosin, significantly decreased Aβ deposition and attenuated hyperphosphorylation of tau, glial activation, neuronal death, and synaptic dysfunction124. It has been found that the expression of α1-adrenergic receptors is preserved in the cerebrovasculature within the aging population and in individuals that have CAA, further supporting the feasibility of using α1-adrenergic antagonists to combat dementia related vascular pathology125. Not many studies have investigated how drugs that target the α2-adrenergic system affect AD pathology. Overall, more studies exploring the effects of α2-adrenergic drugs in animal models of AD and more clinical and epidemiological studies on the use of α-adrenergic drugs in humans and their effects on AD risk are needed.

β-blockers have long been utilized to treat hypertension, but some studies have also begun to investigate these anti-hypertensive drugs’ effects on AD pathology and cognitive impairment (Table 2). In Tg2576 mouse models of AD, the β-blocker propranolol was able to attenuate cognitive impairment in novel object recognition and fear conditioning tests, as well as hippocampal Aβ42 deposits and hyperphosphorylated tau126. The β1-adrenergic receptor selective antagonist nebivolol, which also has additional NO-associated vasodilatory abilities, has been used as an anti-hypertensive, and has been shown to reduce Aβ deposition in the brains of Tg2576 AD mice with chronic treatment, but it was unable to prevent cognitive impairments127. Although benefits of β-blockers on AD pathology have been observed in vivo with AD animal models, conflicting evidence regarding β-blockers effects on AD and dementia risk have been seen in analysis of human patients. The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study conducted in 2013 revealed that patients taking β-blockers consistently demonstrated decreased cognitive impairment risk compared to patients taking other categories of anti-hypertensive drugs or no anti-hypertensive drugs at all128. Two recent studies conducted by the same group demonstrated that within a hypertensive population of nearly 70,000 Danish individuals being treated with β-blockers, those taking β-blockers with high BBB permeability, such as propranolol and carvedilol, exhibited 24% reduced AD risk compared to those taking low BBB permeability β-blockers, such as atenolol, bisoprolol, and sotalol129,130. This decreased risk was only true for AD but not dementia as a whole and the reduced risk of AD from taking β-blockers did not differ from other antihypertensive medications129,130. The authors hypothesized that by inhibiting β-adrenergic receptors, CSF-related waste clearance could be improved, thus helping prevent Aβ accumulation and AD pathology, especially in patients taking high BBB permeable beta blockers129. In contrast, a recent study investigating the effect of β-blockers on the longitudinal risk of vascular dementia, AD, and mixed forms of dementia has revealed that β-blockers are significantly associated with increased risk for the development of vascular dementia, but not AD or mixed forms of dementia131. However, long-term beta blocker administration has been shown to exacerbate neuroinflammation; specifically, metoprolol increased phagocytic markers and produced impaired cognition, learning and memory in both wildtype and APP overexpressing mice containing the London and Swedish mutation132. This study also demonstrated in vitro that treatment with beta-blockers elevated synaptic phagocytosis by primary microglia, while interestingly beta-adrenergic agonists prevented synaptosome phagocytosis132. Similarly, a recent study explored how agonism of beta-adrenergic receptors affects AD related pathology. Treatment of 16-month-old 3xTg-AD mice with CL-316,243, a selective β3AR agonist, improved recognition index by 19% in the novel object recognition test, suggesting improvement in memory133. Tau pathology was not affected by administration of the β3AR agonist but there was a 27% reduction of the insoluble Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice133. This collection of experimental results demonstrates that beta-blockers have been found to be associated with both decreased or increased AD pathology and risk. Additionally, it has been shown that agonism of beta-adrenergic receptors can also be beneficial on AD pathology development. Therefore, further studies are needed to dissect whether and when beta adrenergic antagonists or agonists would be beneficial to combat risk of AD and which specific mechanisms these drugs work through to affect AD pathology.

The Renin-Angiotensin System and Blood Pressure Control

The Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS) is a major player in the control of systemic blood pressure. Renin, which is released from the kidneys into the bloodstream, facilitates the conversion of angiotensinogen, released from the liver, into angiotensin I. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) functions to then convert angiotensin I into angiotensin II134. Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor, which increases blood pressure and thus can lead to the development of hypertension134. Angiotensin II’s effects on the RAS can also impact the brain and can contribute to vascular forms of dementia through promoting endothelial dysfunction and cerebrovascular remodeling due to increased levels of neuroinflammation and oxidative stress134. Through binding to the angiotensin 1 receptor, angiotensin II has been found to promote Aβ deposition through several processes, such as elevating APP mRNA levels and increasing β-secretase activity and has also been found to promote tau phosphorylation and increase reactive oxygen species production135. Due to the RAS’s contribution to dementia development and pathology, drugs targeting this system may be beneficial for reducing individual’s risk for developing AD.

Renin-Angiotensin System Drugs and Reduction of AD Risk and Pathology

Two main drugs that target the RAS include Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACEIs; prevents conversion of angiotensin I into the vasoactive angiotensin II) and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs; prevents angiotensin II from binding to the angiotensin 1 receptor), both of which have been shown to demonstrate beneficial effects on AD pathology. Treatment of Tg2576 AD mice with the ACEI Captopril has been found to decrease neurodegenerative AD pathology by reducing amyloidogenic APP processing and Aβ plaque deposition and by lowering reactive oxygen species levels within the hippocampus136. Perindopril, another ACEI, has been found to preserve learning and memory and to delay the onset of AD pathology in rats with Aβ injections into their hippocampus137. Both Captopril and Perindopril have been found to decrease the release of pro-inflammatory mediators from microglia in vitro, which is a common pathological event in AD, and short term treatment of 5XFAD mice with both of these ACEIs was found to cause reduction of Aβ burden and decreased expression of the microglial marker CD11b138. Captopril was further shown to play a neuroprotective role by regulating activation of microglia’s inflammatory response, with Captopril treatment of BV2 microglia causing decreased inflammatory nitric oxide and TNF-α expression and increased anti-inflammatory IL-10 production in vitro, suggesting that Captopril shifts microglia to assume a more neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory phenotype139. The same study also demonstrated that Captopril treated 5XFAD AD mice exhibited decreased Aβ burden accompanied by increased CD11b expression, suggestive of increased microglial activation likely of the M2 phenotype, as suggested by the anti-inflammatory profile assumed by Captopril treated microglia in vitro139. A study conducted in 2021 found that in an AD rat model, the mean escape latency in the Morris Water Maze test was substantially decreased in animals treated with captopril and donepezil, suggesting improved learning and memory140. Additionally, this study demonstrated that ROS levels and 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosin were substantially decreased in AD rats taking captopril and donepezil140. Treatment with captopril decreased cerebral cell death and demonstrated an ability to rescue memory deficits also in a Drosophila model expressing the Aβ42 transgene, but this trend was not seen in flies expressing human tau, suggesting that ACEIs may work through targeting Aβ pathology141. Another recent study also conducted in Drosophila that overexpressed APP and the human β-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE) in neurons, demonstrated that treatment of AD flies with the ACEI Isinopril improved learning and memory deficits on the aversive phototaxic suppression assay and reduced ROS levels142. Although ACEIs have been found to exhibit beneficial effects on AD pathology, some studies have demonstrated detrimental effects of ACEIs, with the main concern being that the Angiotensin Converting Enzyme is capable of cleaving Aβ peptides into less aggregable species, thus its inhibition may actually lead to enhanced Aβ deposition143. This was demonstrated in APP Swedish transgenic mice treated with ACEI, captopril, resulting in increased cerebral Aβ deposition144. Additionally, this study demonstrated that transgenic AD mice with ACE deficiency had elevated Aβ42 deposition and neuronal apoptosis144, and included a longitudinal component conducted over 8 years in male hypertensive patients. Patients using ACEIs had a more rapidly declining mean intelligence quotient then those not prescribed ACEIs, but this was interestingly not true for women144. Therefore, the potential use of ACEI to decrease AD pathology in humans may be controversial as well as sex-dependent.

Regarding the Angiotensin Receptor Blockers, valsartan and losartan have been found to reduce Aβ levels as well as decrease Aβ oligomerization in neuronal cultures145. Additionally, Tg2576 mice that were treated with the ARB valsartan, demonstrated decreased cerebral Aβ deposition in vivo and lower levels of cognitive impairment due to improvements in spatial learning abilities146. Telmisartan has been found to decrease glial activation in 5XFAD mice, resulting in reduced AD pathology147. Human APP mouse models treated with the ARB losartan, demonstrated preservation of cognitive function and maintenance of proper cerebrovascular activity, particularly in terms of the dilatory ability of the vasculature148. Moreover, the utilization of ARBs correlated with decreased Aβ accumulation in cognitively healthy patients and slower rates of decline in several cognitive domains within AD patients149. Losartan was also able to alleviate cerebral cell death and reversed memory deficits in drosophila expressing human Aβ42, while similarly to ACEIs, losartan was unable to rescue cerebral cell death in flies expressing human tau, suggesting that RAS inhibitors in general may work through specifically targeting Aβ-mediated AD pathology141.

A recent meta-analysis investigating the relationship between drugs that block the RAS and individuals’ risk of dementia revealed that individuals that take either ACEIs of ARBs demonstrated significantly reduced occurrence of dementia development150. Another longitudinal study analyzing the effect of ACEIs and ARBs on dementia risk demonstrated that hypertensive individuals who took ACEIs had a 26% decreased risk for development of dementia compared to those who did not take ACEIs, while hypertensive individuals who took ARBs had a 40% lower risk for developing dementia compared to those who did not take ARBs151. Interestingly, the decreased risk was specifically significant for vascular forms of dementia rather than AD151. A study comparing the effect of anti-hypertensive drugs acting on the RAS versus other categories of anti-hypertensive drugs on the reduction of AD onset risk found that RAS acting anti-hypertensives were slightly more effective at reducing risk of AD onset152. When comparing the effectiveness of ARBs versus ACEIs, it was found that individuals taking ARBs had a greater reduction in AD risk compared to those taking ACEIs, suggesting that blocking the angiotensin receptor directly may be more protective152. Interestingly, this study revealed that these various anti-hypertensive drugs’ ability to reduce the risk of AD onset varies based on sex as well as ethnicity, which needs to be investigated further152. A recent longitudinal analysis following non-demented subjects 55 to 90 years of age found that participants utilizing an ARB had slower brain atrophy rates compared to those taking ACEIs153. It was also demonstrated that AD patients utilizing ARBs exhibited a 9.4% slower decline in delayed recall performance compared to those who utilized ACEIs. ARB use was also associated with better performance over time on the Trail Making Test (TMT-A) and the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), both of which assess attention and psychomotor processing speed154. In addition, within cognitively healthy older individuals, those who took ARBs demonstrated a slower rate of cortical Aβ accumulation in the caudal anterior cingulate, precuneus and precentral and postcentral gyri versus those taking ACEIs. However, in patients with AD or MCI, there was no difference in amyloid accumulation rates in patients taking ARBs versus ACEIs155. The effects of Renin-Angiotensin System drugs on dementia risk and incidence of cognitive impairment and dementia pathology is outlined in Table 3.

Diuretics and Blood Pressure Control

Diuretics are another common form of antihypertensive medications that can reduce blood pressure by increasing urination, thus increasing excretion of water from the body156. Specifically, diuretics cause reduced reabsorption of sodium chloride within the kidney, which results in urine that is more concentrated in sodium, which the body compensates by excreting more water156. Increased excretion of water from the body, thus lowers blood volume which results in a reduction of blood pressure. A study conducted in 2013 utilizing data from the “Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory Study” conducted in elderly cognitively healthy adults or elderly adults with MCI revealed that utilization of antihypertensive drugs in general diminished the hazard ratio for incidence of AD in cognitively healthy participants, but people with MCI only revealed decreased AD risk when taking diuretics157. Similarly, the “Cache County Study of Memory Health and Aging” found that utilization of any anti-hypertensive medication correlated with lessened AD incidence, and that it was specifically found that thiazide and potassium-sparing diuretics correlated with the most drastic AD risk reduction158. Another study that analyzed data from 15 longitudinal studies (52,599 people) demonstrated that diuretics consistently correlated with decreased dementia and AD risk compared to other antihypertensive drugs159. A study conducted in 2016 with 6,537 participants found that decreased risk for dementia was seen with loop diuretics as well160. A recent meta-analysis found that individuals taking diuretics, as well as ARBs, had lower AD risk versus those with no antihypertensive use and that specifically thiazide and potassium-sparing diuretics correlated with decreased AD risk and maintained cognitive abilities161. In a study investigating Aβ accumulation via PiB PET analysis in hypertensive subjects, it was shown that the use of diuretics, as well as ARBs, predicted lower cerebral amyloid accumulation162. An even more recent study conducted autopsy analysis and determined that utilization of any anti-hypertensive drugs correlated with a less severe Braak stage of neurofibrillary tangles and less evidence of CAA, but specifically use of diuretics was associated with lower Braak stage, lower neuritic plaque density, less diffused plaques, and less CAA pathology163. The effects of diuretics on dementia risk and incidence of cognitive impairment and dementia pathology are summarized in Table 4.

Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors and Reduction of AD Risk and Pathology

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs), such as Methazolamide (MTZ) and Acetazolamide (ATZ), were first developed as diuretics, and have recently begun to be investigated as potential therapeutics for AD164,165. CAIs inhibit carbonic anhydrases, which catalyze the reversible hydration of CO2 to bicarbonate and a proton. CAIs reduce Na+ reabsorption in the kidney and promote alkaline diuresis156,166. MTZ and ATZ are both already FDA approved not only for hypertension, but also for treatment of glaucoma, by reducing intraocular pressure and for high-altitude sickness, via reduction in pulmonary vasoconstriction, as well as through their ability to increase cerebral blood flow, and reduce cerebral edema165,167. Based on the vast array of diseases that CAIs are beneficial for it is clear that they work through multiple molecular mechanisms, which still remain to be elucidated165. Interestingly, recent studies are highlighting CAI’s potential as promising drugs to also treat neurovascular pathology associated with AD and CAA, through their ability to prevent Aβ-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death164,165 (Table 5).

The CAI MTZ was first observed to be among a small number of drugs able to prevent CytC release from isolated mitochondria and in Huntington models168. Our group was the first to show that MTZ could protect cerebral endothelial cells and cerebral vascular SMCs from mitochondrial cytochrome c release and apoptosis typically induced by Aβ species26,169. A following study further demonstrated that in vitro treatment of neurons and glial cells with MTZ inhibited fragmentation of DNA, release of mitochondrial cytochrome c, and caspase 9 and 3 activation, which are all pathological events typically caused by Aβ170. This same study provided in vivo demonstration that intraperitoneal MTZ treatment of mice injected with Aβ into the hippocampus decreased the activation of caspase 3 in both neurons and microglia located around the area of injection170. A more recent study dissecting the molecular mechanism responsible for the mitochondrial effects of CAIs analyzed 2 widely used CAIs, MTZ and ATZ, and showed that both drugs were able to protect neurons and cerebrovascular cells from mitochondrial dysfunction triggered by Aβ, specifically by inhibiting depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane as well as preventing the generation of hydrogen peroxide171. This study also revealed that ATZ had protective effects at concentrations 10 times lower than MTZ, which has very important clinical relevance171. The results of these various studies provide strong evidence that these FDA approved CAIs could be therapeutically effective for treating various aspects of AD pathology. Further studies in transgenic AD animal models are ongoing and clinical trials will be needed to clarify if this therapy is efficient to reduce cognitive dysfunction in AD, vascular dementia, as well as in subjects presenting these conditions comorbid with hypertension. Importantly, since CAIs also have BP lowering effects and they are able to increase CBF and vasoreactivity, these drugs would be ideal to tackle the AD/hypertension comorbidity as well as comorbid AD and other cerebrovascular pathologies.

Clinical Trials

Anti-Hypertensive Drugs to Prevent Dementia and Decrease Dementia Pathology

Due to promising leads within pre-clinical data, several clinical trials have been conducted to determine if various anti-hypertensive drugs can lower dementia risk and pathology in humans, with a majority focusing on renin-angiotensin system targeting drugs. A study conducted in 2012 included 48 patients with essential hypertension and apparent AD, with a subset being treated with Telmisartan, an ARB, and being compared to patients taking a calcium channel blocker172. Patients treated with Telmisartan demonstrated decreased CSF IL-1β and TNF-α levels, elevated mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog) scale scores as well as higher levels of improvement on these tests by the end of the study. Interestingly, these patients also demonstrated higher CSF Aβ42 levels172. A similar study included a total of 20 patients with probable AD and essential hypertension that were treated with Telmisartan and compared to patients taking a calcium channel blocker (Amlodipine). In this study, patients on Telmisartan showed no improvement in cognitive test scores but demonstrated increased regional CBF levels within the right supramarginal gyrus, superior parietal lobule, cuneus and lingual gyrus173. These results suggest that treatment of AD patients with Telmisartan reveals contradicting results, and that more studies are clearly required. A study conducted in 2017 investigated the dementia incidence rate in older participants taking difference classes of anti-hypertensive medications174. Interestingly, after about 7 years of follow-up this study concluded that patients taking ARBs (and calcium channel blockers) demonstrated decreased dementia risk compared to patients taking other classes of anti-hypertensive medications174. A more recent phase 2 trial, the RADAR trial, investigating whether the ARB, Losartan, could decrease brain atrophy in AD diagnosed patients demonstrated that Losartan was not effective at reducing brain atrophy rates in patients with AD175. A randomized, blinded preclinical trial conducted in hypertensive rats post-stroke induction and treated with ARB, Candesartan, or compound-21 (an angiotensin type 2 receptor (AT2R)- agonist) demonstrated that both treatments preserved cognition, decreased cytotoxicity, and prevented microgliosis post-stroke176. These results suggest that AT2R stimulation, directly or indirectly by blocking the angiotensin 1 receptor, prevents cognitive impairment, cell death, and neuroinflammation post-stroke176. Another study conducted in 2020 investigated dementia risk in non-demented patients with a mean age of 74.5 who were taking angiotensin-2 stimulating drugs, ACEIs, or both drug types177. Results from this study revealed that participants taking angiotensin 2 stimulating anti-hypertensives exhibited a 45% decreased dementia incidence rate and patients taking both drugs had a nonsignificant 20% decreased dementia incidence rate compared to those taking ACEIs177. A study from 2012 investigated the effects of the BBB-crossing ACEI, Ramipril, on 14 cognitively normal participants with mild hypertension178. The participants were treated with Ramipril or placebo, followed by assessment of CSF Aβ42 and ACE activity, arterial function, and cognition178. Participants treated with Ramipril demonstrated inhibited CSF ACE activity and lowered blood pressure, but treatment with this ACEI had no positive effect on CSF Aβ42, arterial function, or cognition178. Another study investigated cognitive decline rates in patients with mild to moderate AD treated with centrally acting ACEIs versus patients not currently treated with centrally acting ACEIs179. AD patients taking centrally acting ACEIs, specifically Perindopril, revealed improved activities of daily living (ADL) rating, as well as slowed disease progression (Clinical Dementia Rating Scale, CDR-SB)179. In terms of other classes of anti-hypertensive drugs, very few clinical trials have been conducted. The “Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory Study” investigated whether usage of specific classes of antihypertensive drugs could improve learning and memory in adults older than 75 years of age180. Participants taking potassium-sparing diuretics demonstrated improved verbal learning and memory (California Verbal Learning test) versus participants not taking anti-hypertensive medications or taking other classes of medication, while interestingly this study demonstrated no cognitive benefit of taking ACEIs or AT2RBs180. Very few clinical trials have been conducted to investigate how adrenergic drugs affect dementia risk and pathology. A study conducted in 2018 determined that healthy participants 75 years of age or older that were supplemented with Guanfacine, an α-2a-adrenoceptor agonist, failed to demonstrate improved prefrontal cognitive function181. A recent study investigated CBF via MRI analysis in mild to moderate AD patients (mean age of 72.8 years) taking the calcium channel blocker, Nilvadipine182. This study showed that AD patients taking Nilvadipine demonstrated preserved cerebral autoregulation and increased CBF specifically within the hippocampus, revealing positive cerebrovascular effects of this anti-hypertensive drug182. Based on the results of these clinical trials, it is unclear whether certain anti-hypertensive drugs have beneficial pathological outcomes for AD patients and whether these drugs are certain to reduce dementia risk. A large limitation within a majority of these studies is that many participants within these studies are well past the prodromal phase of AD, where pathology begins to accumulate. Future clinical trials are needed in order to determine the optimal age that starting these anti-hypertensive drug treatments have beneficial effects, especially considering that mid-life hypertension has the highest impact on AD risk. If at risk individuals can be identified earlier in life and treatment with anti-hypertensive drugs is started earlier, these drugs may have a more preventative effect and longitudinal clinical trials may have a better outcome. Additionally, no clinical trials have yet determined whether carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, which preclinically improve cerebrovascular apoptosis, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction, in addition to lowering blood pressure and increasing CBF, could be a more effective treatment to prevent and reduce AD pathology and risk.

Vitamin Supplementation to Prevent Dementia and Decrease Dementia Pathology

It is known that vitamins such as vitamin B12, B6, and Folate are vital for Hcy metabolism, thus lowering Hcy levels in individuals with Hhcy. Extensive evidence has been outlined in this review to suggest that Hhcy contributes to AD risk, and several major clinical trials have been conducted to determine whether vitamin supplementation can lower AD risk and pathological severity. A clinical trial conducted in 2010 supplemented MCI patients that were over the age of 70 with high dosages of folic acid, vitamin B12 and vitamin B6 and compared brain atrophy rates to MCI patients treated with a placebo183. This study demonstrated a slowing of brain atrophy rates in MCI patients that were treated with folic acid and vitamin B6 and B12, with participants showing Hcy levels &gt;13 μmol/L specifically having a 53% lower brain atrophy rate compared to individuals in the placebo group183. Similarly, a study conducted in 2013 involving aged participants with elevated dementia risk (with MCI) demonstrated that treatment with high dosages of folic acid, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 decreased and slowed the rate of atrophy within AD vulnerable gray matter regions by as much as 7-fold, with this effect being specific to participants with Hhcy184. Another study looking specifically at folic acid supplementation in AD patients demonstrated that patients treated with folic acid had a trend towards improved cognition, based on a slight increase in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score compared to the control group185. This study also revealed that AD patients supplemented with folic acid demonstrated lower Aβ40, Presenilin 1, and TNFα-mRNA levels185. A study conducted in 2019 involved MCI patients treated with only folic acid, only vitamin B12, folic acid and vitamin B12, or a placebo186. Compared to the control group and the groups treated with folic acid alone or vitamin B12 alone, MCI patients supplemented with both folic acid and vitamin B12 demonstrated significant decreases in blood IL6, TNFα, and MCP-1 levels as well as improved cognitive performance on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, specifically improved overall IQ, verbal IQ, information scores and digit span scores186. An even more recent study involving AD patients either supplemented with folic acid and vitamin B12 or a placebo revealed that AD patients supplemented with folic acid and vitamin B12 had improved Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) Test scores (specifically naming and orientation scores) and Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) domain score of attention as well as decreased serum TNFα levels compared to control subjects187. The studies mentioned above demonstrate that supplementation with folate and vitamins that improve Hcy metabolism and treat Hhcy, also have positive cognitive effects and can combat some aspects of dementia pathology, but a few conflicting studies exist. A study conducted in 2010 found no improvement in cognitive function and did not find a reduced risk of cognitive impairment or dementia from daily vitamin B12, vitamin B6, and folic acid supplementation, but this study only contained hypertensive men that were older than 75 years of age thus the results may be swayed due to only considering men for the study and starting this supplementation later in life188. Similarly, a more recent study involving MCI patients aged 65 years or older supplemented with either Methylcobalamin, which is used to treat vitamin B12 deficiency, and folic acid or placebo found no significant reduction in cognitive decline in MCI patients supplemented with vitamins compared to the placebo group189. Again, this study utilized individuals that were well past midlife, a period of time in which intervention would likely be the most optimal, since AD pathology begins to accumulate decades prior to disease manifestation. This study also acknowledges that the cognitive decline level within the placebo group was very minimal and the sample size utilized was likely too small to detect small differences in cognitive function between the treated and placebo groups, thus justifying why this study found no cognitive benefit of vitamin supplementation189. Overall, the majority of clinical trials reveal promising results of vitamin supplementation on slowing the development or progression as well as severity of dementia pathology and cognitive decline. Preventative dementia medicine would benefit from future clinical trials that start vitamin supplementation prior to the average age of onset of the prodromal phase of dementia in order to determine if early vitamin supplementation could prevent dementia onset or pathological severity.

Biofluid Biomarkers Associated to Vascular Risk in AD

It’s now known that the prodromal asymptomatic phase of AD starts many years before the onset of symptoms. In a majority of AD patients, age-related vascular changes can also precede Aβ and tau pathology19,190,191. If these vascular changes could be detected early within the progression of pathology, both patients and physicians would be able to implement preventative measures to slow pathology progression and reduce risk and severity of dementia. A major key to detecting vascular damage earlier in time is the identification of novel biofluid biomarkers, beyond Aβ, tau pathology, and neurodegeneration (ATN). In recent years, more vascular specific fluid biomarkers have been identified, with some having the capability to differentiate AD from vascular dementia. Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β (PDGFRβ), which is associated with pericytes, capillaries, and BBB integrity, has recently received more attention as a novel vascular-related cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarker. A recent study has shown that increased levels of soluble CSF PDGFRβ, indicative of cerebral capillary and pericyte damage and BBB breakdown, was associated with more advanced cognitive impairment192,193. Additionally, this study demonstrated that patients with early cognitive decline had cerebral capillary damage and BBB breakdown within the hippocampus regardless of Aβ and/or tau biomarker changes, further suggesting that PDGFRβ could be an early biomarker of cognitive decline192,193. Elevated serum C-Reactive Protein (CRP), which is associated with inflammation and heart disease, has been found to be correlated with lower cognitive functioning levels in patients under 80 and also has been associated with an increased dementia risk of about 55%194,195. Vascular dementia-specific biomarkers are also starting to be unveiled, opening avenues to differentiate between heterogeneous forms of dementia and AD using fluid biomarkers. For example, increased CSF levels of lipocalin 2 (LCN2), a secreted glycoprotein that helps mediate neuronal damage within vascular cerebral injuries, has been found specifically in vascular dementia patients compared to controls, AD patients, neurodegenerative dementia patients, and cerebrovascular disease patients196. Another recent study demonstrated that brevican and neurocan peptides, which are CNS-specific extracellular matrix proteoglycans that are degraded by metalloproteinases, are decreased significantly in vascular dementia patients compared to controls and AD patients197. Additionally, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; marker of astrocytes and neuroinflammation), vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A; angiogenesis), placental growth factor (PIGF) were plasma biomarkers positively associated with elevated level of AD neuropathological change198.

Considering the risk that cardiovascular risk factors, such as hypertension and hyperhomocystenemia, pose on the neurovascular unit, causing individuals to become more likely to develop dementia later in life, it is important to consider that cardiovascular disease biomarkers can also be repurposed to predict the risk of dementia development. One study following 1456 non-hypertensive patients, of which 232 participants developed hypertension, looked at 9 biomarkers, including C-reactive protein (inflammation; found to be a dementia related biomarker), fibrinogen (inflammation/thrombosis), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (fibrinolytic potential), aldosterone, renin, B-type natriuretic peptide, and N-terminal proatrial natriuretic peptide (neurohormonal functions), homocysteine (oxidant stress; increases both AD and hypertension risk), and urinary albumin/creatinine ration (glomerular endothelial function) in order to understand which biomarkers were associated with hypertension development199. The biomarker panel as a whole was significantly associated with the development of hypertension, in particular C-reactive protein, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, and urinary albumin/creatinine ratio. Indeed, the incidence of hypertension was higher when the number of elevated biomarkers increased199. Biofluid biomarkers, in addition to Hcy itself, have also been identified for Hhcy. A recent study looking at blood and CSF samples from 72 patients examined several potential Hhcy biomarkers, finding not only that Hcy can be detected within the CSF of patients but also that CSF Hcy concentrations correlated with CSF folate, S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), and albumin indicating that these may serve as additional biomarkers to detect Hhcy200. Similarly, another study has demonstrated that cerebral Hcy concentrations significantly related to circulating B vitamin levels and CSF albumin201. Interestingly, this study also demonstrated that higher CSF SAH concentrations and lower CSF folate concentrations were correlated to increased levels of CSF phosphorylated tau201. Since there is strong evidence to suggest that both hypertension and Hhcy exacerbate dementia risk, future studies should consider investigating how hypertension and Hhcy biomarkers correlate to dementia incidence, risk, and canonical AD biomarkers. These new biomarkers, many of which are easily detectable in blood, may eventually be used to pinpoint subjects with increased dementia risk and apply preventive measures before significant pathology accumulates, or include these “high risk” asymptomatic subjects in clinical trials.

Genetic Risk Biomarkers

In addition to fluid biomarkers, recent studies have begun to look at how gene polymorphisms that are related to hypertension and Hhcy relate to dementia pathology and risk. In terms of hypertension, it is known that ACE contributes to elevated blood pressure levels and as previously mentioned, this enzyme is targeted to control hypertension and in turn decrease dementia risk. ACE2 protein expression levels have been found to be upregulated within AD brains and positive correlations between ACE2 protein expression and oxidative stress levels in AD brains have also been revealed202,203. Interestingly, a recent metanalysis including 82 cohorts from 65 individual studies revealed significant associations between the rs1799752 ACE polymorphism and increased AD risk204. Another recent study comparing AD patients to age and gender matched cognitively healthy controls demonstrated that the rs4646994 ACE gene polymorphism was also associated with increased AD risk205. Gene polymorphisms within the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene, which encodes a protein necessary for homocysteine metabolism, have been found to increase circulating Hcy levels and promote memory impairment and cognitive dysfunction, decrease cortical and hippocampal volumes, increase cerebral atrophy, and increase hippocampal apoptosis in mice206,207. In humans, the MTHFR gene polymorphism C677T (rs1801133), as well as MTHFR A1298C, were associated with increased late-onset AD risk208–211. Interestingly the prevalence of MTHFR 677CT gene polymorphism was increased in patients carrying APOEɛ4, which has long been accepted as an AD genetic risk factor208.

Conclusions

As extensively outlined within this review, midlife hypertension has been found to cause pathologies that affect the cerebrovascular environment, and by consequence the whole neurovascular unit, similarly to AD and CAA. Hypertension has been found to cause the loss of cerebral autoregulation, increasing transmission of pressure to cerebral vessels, to induce cerebral endothelial cell dysfunction, namely decreased barrier and vasodilatory function as well as increased cerebral endothelial cell apoptosis. As depicted in Figure 1, damage to endothelial cell integrity and function thus results in increased BBB permeability, leading to increased presence of micro-hemorrhages and increased infiltration of blood borne toxins and peripheral immune cells, which causes neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. Additionally, hypertension can impair perivascular Aβ clearance and promote capillary rarefaction and decreased microvessel density, leading to hypoperfusion and a hypoxic and nutrient deficient cerebral environment. Since hypertension begins to negatively impact the cerebral environment during midlife, a time in which Aβ also begins to accumulate in prodromal asymptomatic AD, we hypothesize that hypertension can exacerbate and/or accelerate the onset and accumulation of AD pathology, leading to worsened disease outcome. Hhcy, on the other hand, not only promotes, similarly to hypertension, endothelial cell dysfunction and death, oxidative stress, Aβ accumulation and vascular inflammation, but can also increase individuals’ risk for other cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension. This sheds light on the phenomenon that cardiovascular risk factors can both be contemporaneous comorbidities, and also independently and additively increase AD risk and pathology.

Major gaps in knowledge include dissecting the specific initiators and pathways contributing to neuronal loss besides Aβ and tau. Among these, we propose that cerebral hypoperfusion, neurovascular unit impairment, neuroinflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction, will need to be thoroughly assessed to define and understand diverse dementia endophenotypes and how each of these endophenotypes results in neuronal dysfunction, synaptic loss, cognitive impairment, and in the development of the “AD syndrome”. We propose that it is vital for future studies to better elucidate the specific molecular mechanisms responsible for hypertension and Hhcy’s contribution to amyloid-related AD pathology and cognitive impairment, particularly in regard to cerebral endothelial cell death, impaired BBB function, neuroinflammation, effects on cerebral angiogenesis, cerebral hypoperfusion, oxidative stress, dysfunctional Ca2+ signaling and regulation, all of which lead to synaptic loss, a cerebral energy crisis, and eventually, cognitive impairment. It is also of great importance that future studies work to understand if comorbid cardiovascular risk factors work together to exacerbate amyloid-related pathology through common cellular and molecular mechanisms or if different cardiovascular risk factors work through separate pathways to promote AD pathology, particularly focusing on pathways involved in mitochondrial function, ROS production, BBB integrity and function, cerebrovascular cell death, and cerebral angiogenesis. The field of AD is greatly lacking research on tau-related cerebrovascular pathology, so future studies should also begin to elucidate how the presence of cardiovascular risk factors impacts tau-specific vascular pathologies. As mentioned within this review, female sex is not only the second greatest risk factor for AD development, but females are also at higher risk for hypertension development, thus demonstrating the multiple angles at which female sex can heighten risk for AD and worsened dementia syndromes. Future studies need to consider sex-specific and longitudinal interactions between cardiovascular risk factors, AD risk and tau/Aβ pathology. We postulate that understanding through which molecular mechanisms different cardiovascular risk factors operate to promote specific aspects of Aβ and tau related pathologies and considering how the variables of sex and age differentially promote cardiovascular risk factor-associated dementia risk will stimulate the generation of new preventive therapies and treatment options for AD able to address its multifactorial pathology before the disease progresses to the symptomatic stage.

This review has provided a vast array of evidence to demonstrate that utilization of various classes of anti-hypertensive drugs can reduce AD risk and pathological severity, with some classes being more effective compared to other. Based on the data we complied, strong evidence points to ARBs and diuretics to most significantly reduce AD risk, AD pathology and symptomology. Even more recently, strong evidence has begun to accumulate in favor of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors being promising novel AD treatments due their ability to be neuroprotective and prevent several aspects of AD pathology, including mitochondrial dysfunction, ROS production, cerebrovascular cell death, and neuroinflammation, as well as to promote cerebrovascular reactivity, cerebral blood flow, and reduce hypertension. It is becoming increasingly clear that AD is a multifactorial disease with many risk factors and that development of AD pathology is caused by much more than just Aβ or tau. Most of the available treatments and therapies for AD and dementia focus on targeting amyloid, but there has been a high failure rate of amyloid-only targeting therapies. Although amyloid is an important player in AD pathology, it is vital that we expand our pathological targets and acknowledge the multifactorial nature of dementia and AD syndromes. It is vital that multi-target therapies for AD begin to be developed, including some that focus on targeting the impact that the CV risk factors that we discussed. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors not only can reduce hypertension, but also target the vascular cells and specifically the mitochondria to combat AD pathology, including the detrimental effects of Aβ, and possibly improve clearance through the stimulation of cerebral blood flow. MTZ and ATZ are also FDA approved, safe, and they are known to pass the BBB. Additional animal studies by our group and collaborators are in progress with very promising results, and if confirmed, clinical trials should be designed to test these compounds in MCI or even SCI subjects.

In conclusion, both midlife hypertension and hyperhomocystenemia, which also increases the risk for hypertension, play a prominent role in increasing AD risk and cerebrovascular pathology in the aging population. This review clearly demonstrates that regardless of Aβ and tau pathology levels, the consequences of cardiovascular risk factors, such as increased oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species, cerebral hypoperfusion, dysregulation of Ca2+ signaling, lead to increased synaptic loss and eventually cognitive impairment. It is likely that the presence of cardiovascular risk factors leaves individuals more susceptible to synaptic loss and dysfunction and cognitive impairment and primes individuals for the negative cerebral effects that Aβ and tau accumulation confer. Hence, just as proposed in the Berlin Manifesto regarding stroke and dementia risk, and based on the evidence outlined here, it is likely that a potential roadmap to combating dementia can be achieved by preventing other cardiovascular risk factors besides stroke, including hypertension and Hhcy44. Future studies should continue to explore which drugs could most effectively reduce midlife hypertension and thus be used as a prevention strategy to reduce individual’s risk for AD development and cognitive decline. Drugs able to treat both disorders in people presenting with comorbid AD/CAA and hypertension, or other cardiovascular risk factors, should also be explored. To reduce the impact of cardiovascular risk factors, such as hypertension and hyperhomocystenemia, on risk of AD pathology, AD clinical treatment should strive to be more preventative rather than only focusing on symptoms reduction. The increased investigation and development of drugs targeting simultaneously multiple pathways responsible for AD, such as cardiovascular/cerebrovascular compromise, synaptic loss, Ca2+ signaling dysregulation as well as inflammatory, mitochondrial stress and cell death pathways, will be likely to produce more effective therapeutic strategies for this extremely devastating and multifactorial neurodegenerative disease. Additionally, the identification of novel biofluid and genetic biomarkers that have the capability of differentiating AD from vascular forms of dementia as well as pin-pointing specific vascular comorbidities, can be repurposed to also detect the risk for developing AD and vascular dementia. This will allow for earlier detection of dementia risk and thus earlier clinical intervention to delay disease onset and reduce severity of pathology, thus paving the way for preventive dementia medicine.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by NIH R01NS104127 and R01AG062572 grants, the Edward N. and Della L. Thome Memorial Foundation Awards Program in Alzheimer’s Disease Drug Discovery Research, the Alzheimer’s Association (AARG), the Pennsylvania Department of Heath Collaborative Research on Alzheimer’s Disease (PA Cure) Grant, awarded to SF, and by the Karen Toffler Charitable Trust, and the Lemole Center for Integrated Lymphatics research.

Figure 1. Graphical hypothesis:

Hypertension and HHcy cause BBB permeability, endothelial cell stress, microhemorrhages, ROS production, inflammation, and cerebrovascular dysfunction, resulting in hypoperfusion, synaptic and neuronal loss, and cognitive impairment.

Table 1. Alpha-Adrenergic Drugs’ Effects on Incidence of Cognitive Impairment and Dementia Pathology

Incidence of Cognitive Impairment				
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
α1-adrenergic receptor antagonists	Prazosin	APP23 AD mouse model	Prevents cognitive and memory impairment	(122)	
α1-adrenergic receptor antagonists	Tamsulosin	Aged rats	Improves age-related memory impairment	(123)	
Knockdown of α1-adrenergic receptors	Knockdown of α1-adrenergic receptors	APPswe/PS1 AD mice	Improved performances on y-maze, open field test, morris water maze and elevated plus maze	(124)	
Incidence of Dementia Pathology			
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
α1-adrenergic receptor antagonists	Prazosin and Urapidil	Middle cerebral artery segments from Male wild-type C57BL/6 mice	Prevents Aβ-mediated vasoconstriction of cerebral vessels by blocking α1-adrenergic signaling	(121)	
α1-adrenergic receptor antagonists	Tamsulosin	Aged rats	Increased hippocampal neurogenesis and prevention of hippocampal cell apoptosis	(123)	
Knockdown of α1-adrenergic receptors	Knockdown of α1-adrenergic receptors	APPswe/PS1 AD mice	Decreased cerebral amyloid burden	(124)	
α1-adrenergic receptor inhibitor	Terazosin	APPswe/PS1 AD mice	Decreased amyloid-beta deposition, hyperphosphorylation of tau, glial activation, neuronal death, and synaptic dysfunction	(124)	

Table 2. Beta-Adrenergic Drugs’ Effects on Incidence of Cognitive Impairment and Dementia Pathology

Incidence of Cognitive Impairment				
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
β-blocker	Propranolol	Tg2576 AD mice	Attenuated cognitive impairment on novel object recognition and fear conditioning tests	(126)	
β1-adrenergic receptor selective antagonist	Nebivolol	Tg2576 AD mice	Unable to prevent cognitive impairment	(127)	
β-blockers		Humans	Reduced cognitive impairment risk vs. patients taking other or no anti-hypertensive drugs	(128)	
β-blockers	High BBB permeability β-blockers, propranolol and carvedilol;		24% reduced AD risk vs. low BBB permeability β-blockers	(129) (130)	
β-blockers		Humans	Increased vascular dementia risk	(131)	
β-blockers	Metoprolol	APP AD mice	Impaired cognition, learning and memory	(132)	
selective β3AR agonist	CL-316,243	3xTg-AD mice	Improved recognition index by 19% in novel object recognition test	(133)	
Incidence of Dementia Pathology				
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
β-blocker	Propranolol	Tg2576 AD mice	Decreased hippocampal Aβ42 deposits and hyperphosphorylated tau	(126)	
β1-adrenergic receptor selective antagonist	Nebivolol	Tg2576 AD mice	Reduce cerebral Aβ deposition	(127)	
β-blockers	Metoprolol	APP AD mice	Worsened neuroinflammation and increased phagocytic markers	(132)	
β-blockers		Primary microglia	Increased synaptic phagocytosis (synaptic degradation) (beta-adrenergic agonists prevented synaptosome phagocytosis)	(132)	
selective β3AR agonist	CL-316,243	3xTg-AD mice	27% reduction within insoluble Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio in the hippocampus	(133)	

Table 3. Renin-Angiotensin System Drugs’ Effects on Dementia risk and Incidence of Cognitive Impairment and Dementia Pathology

Dementia Risk and Incidence of Cognitive Impairment			
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
ACEI	Perindopril	Rats with hippocampal Aβ injections	Preserved learning and memory	(137)	
ACEI	Captopril and Donepezil	AD model rats induced by expression of human Aβ42	Decreased mean escape latency within the Morris Water Maze (improved learning and memory)	(140)	
ACEI	Isinopril	Drosophila overexpressing APP and the human β-site APP-cleaving enzyme in neurons	Improved AD related learning and memory deficits on aversive phototaxic suppression assay	(142)	
ACEI		Humans	Men had declining mean intelligence quotient vs. those not taking ACEIs	(144)	
ARB	Valsartan	Tg2576 AD mice	Reduced cognitive impairment (improved spatial learning)	(146)	
ARB	Losartan	Human APP AD mice	Preserved cognitive function	(148)	
ARBs		AD patients	Decreased rates of cognitive decline	(149)	
ARB	Losartan	Drosophila expressing the Aβ42 transgene	Reversed memory deficits	(141)	
ACEIs and ARBs		Humans	Reduced occurrence of dementia	(150)	
ACEIs and ARBs		Hypertensive humans	ACEIs: decreased vascular dementia development by 26%
ARBs: decreased vascular dementia development by 40%	(151)	
ACEIs and ARBs		Hypertensive humans	ACEIs: decreased vascular dementia development by 26%
ARBs: decreased vascular dementia development by 40%	(151)	
ACEIs and ARBs		Humans	ARBs more effectively decreased AD risk versus ACEIs	(152)	
ACEIs and ARBs		AD patients	ARBs exhibited 9.4% slower decline in delayed recall performance versus ACEIs; ARBs were associated with better performance on the Trial Making Test and the Digit Symbol Substitution Test	(154)	
Incidence of Dementia Pathology				
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
ACEI	Captopril	Tg2576 AD mice	Reduced amyloidogenic amyloid precursor protein processing, amyloid-beta plaque deposition, hippocampal reactive oxygen species	(136)	
ACEI	Perindopril	Rats with hippocampal Aβ injections	Delayed AD pathology onset	(137)	
ACEI	Captopril and Perindopril	Microglia	Decreased release of pro-inflammatory mediators	(138)	
ACEI	Captopril and Perindopril	5XFAD AD mice	Reduced cerebral Aβ burden and decreased expression of microglial marker CD11b	(138)	
ACEI	Captopril	BV2 microglia	Shifted microglia to neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype: Decreased inflammatory nitric oxide and TNF-α expression and increased anti-inflammatory IL-10 production	(139)	
ACEI	Captopril	5XFAD AD mice	Decreased Aβ burden and increased CD11b expression	(139)	
ACEI	Captopril and Donepezil	AD model rats induced by expression of human Aβ42	Decreased ROS levels and 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosin	(140)	
ACEI	Captopril	Drosophila expressing the Aβ42 transgene	Decreased cerebral cell death and rescued memory deficits	(141)	
ACEI	Isinopril	Drosophila overexpressing APP and the human β-site APP-cleaving enzyme in neurons	Reduced ROS levels	(142)	
ACEI	Captopril	Human APP Swedish transgenic AD mice	Increased cerebral amyloid-beta deposition	(144)	
ACE Deficiency		Transgenic AD mice with ACE deficiency	Elevated Aβ42 deposition and neuronal apoptosis	(144)	
ARB	Valsartan and Losartan	Neuronal Cultures	Reduced Aβ levels and decreased Aβ oligomerization	(145)	
ARB	Valsartan	Tg2576 AD mice	Decreased cerebral Aβ deposition	(146)	
ARB	Telmisartan	5XFAD AD mice	Decreased glia activation	(147)	
ARB	Losartan	Human APP AD mice	Preserved vascular dilatory function	(148)	
ARBs		Cognitively healthy patients	Decreased Aβ accumulation	(149)	
ARB	Losartan	Drosophila expressing the Aβ42 transgene	Alleviated cerebral cell death	(141)	
ACEIs and ARBs		Humans with no dementia	ARBs caused slower brain atrophy rates versus ACEIs	(153)	
ACEIs and ARBs		Cognitively healthy elderly humans	ARBs produced slower rate of cortical Aβ accumulation versus ACEIs	(155)	

Table 4. Diuretics’ Effects on Dementia Risk and Incidence of Cognitive Impairment and Dementia Pathology

Dementia Risk and Incidence of Cognitive Impairment			
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
Diuretics		Cognitively healthy elderly humans/elderly humans with MCI	Usage of antihypertensive drugs decreased hazard ratio for AD incidence in healthy participants; participants with MCI had decreased AD risk specifically with diuretic use	(157)	
Diuretics	Thiazide and potassium-sparing		Usage of antihypertensive drugs decreased AD risk; Thiazide/potassium-sparing diuretics most drastically decreased AD risk	(158)	
Diuretics		Humans	Diuretics most consistently correlated with decreased dementia/AD risk versus other anti-hypertensive drugs	(159)	
Diuretics	Loop	Humans	Decreased dementia risk	(160)	
Diuretics/ARBs	Thiazide/Potassium-Sparing	Humans	Usage of diuretics, specifically thiazide/potassium-sparing, (and ARBs) lowered AD risk and maintained cognitive abilities	(161)	
Incidence of Dementia Pathology				
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
Diuretics		Hypertensive humans	Diuretics (and ARBs) predicted less cerebral amyloid accumulation	(162)	
Diuretics		Humans	Usage of anti-hypertensive drugs correlated with less severe Braak stage of neurofibrillary tangles and less CAA; Diuretics correlated with lower Braak stage, lower neuritic plaque density, less diffused plaques, and less CAA pathology	(163)	

Table 5. Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors’ Effects on Incidence of Dementia Pathology

Incidence of Dementia Pathology				
Hypertension Drug Category	Drug Name (s)	Model	Finding	Reference	
CAIs	MTZ	Neurons, cerebrovascular endothelial cells, and cerebrovascular smooth muscle cells	Protected cells from Aβ-induced mitochondrial cytochrome c release and apoptosis	(26) (169)	
CAIs	MTZ	Neurons and glial cells	Inhibited DNA fragmentation, mitochondrial cytochrome c release, and caspase 9 and 3 activation	(170)	
CAIs	MTZ	Mice with hippocampal Aβ injections	Decreased neuronal and microglial caspase 3 activation and neuronal loss.	(170)	
CAIs	MTZ and ATZ	Neurons and cerebrovascular cells	Protected cells from Aβ-induced mitochondrial dysfunction (inhibited mitochondrial membrane depolarization and hydrogen peroxide production)	(171)	

1. Systematic review:

The authors reviewed the literature using PubMed. Cerebrovascular dysfunction is a major contributor to Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and dementia. Recent evidence suggests that cardiovascular (CV) risk factors, such as mid-life hypertension and blood pressure variability, as well as late-life hypotension and hyperhomocysteinemia, increase risk for dementia and AD as well as contributing to similar causal molecular mechanisms responsible for the disease pathology.

2. Interpretation:

Our findings led to an integrated hypothesis describing the importance of these CV risk factors in the etiology of AD and dementia, as well as pointing to novel potential biomarkers and therapeutic strategies for CV/AD comorbid conditions.

3. Future directions:

The manuscript defines research gaps and proposes that future studies should consider hypertension and HHcy as potential contributors to increased dementia risk, and that uncovering the underlying molecular mechanisms and biomarkers would aid in the identification of subjects who will profit from preventive strategies against dementia.

Competing interest: We declare no conflict of interest. SF has US Patent 10780094 for the use of CAIs in Alzheimer’s disease and CAA.


1. Erkkinen MG , Kim MO , Geschwind MD . Clinical Neurology and Epidemiology of the Major Neurodegenerative Diseases. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2018;10 (4 ). Epub 2017/07/19. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a033118.
2. Corriveau RA , Bosetti F , Emr M , Gladman JT , Koenig JI , Moy CS , Pahigiannis K , Waddy SP , Koroshetz W . The Science of Vascular Contributions to Cognitive Impairment and Dementia (VCID): A Framework for Advancing Research Priorities in the Cerebrovascular Biology of Cognitive Decline. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2016;36 (2 ):281–8. Epub 2016/04/21. doi: 10.1007/s10571-016-0334-7.27095366
3. Attems J , Jellinger KA . The overlap between vascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease--lessons from pathology. BMC medicine. 2014;12 :206. doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0206-2.25385447
4. Jellinger KA , Attems J . Prevalence and pathogenic role of cerebrovascular lesions in Alzheimer disease. J Neurol Sci. 2005;229–230:37–41. Epub 2005/03/12. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.11.018.
5. Jellinger KA , Attems J . Neuropathological evaluation of mixed dementia. Journal of the neurological sciences. 2007;257 (1–2 ):80–7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.01.045.17324442
6. Jellinger KA , Attems J . Challenges of multimorbidity of the aging brain: a critical update. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2015;122 (4 ):505–21. Epub 2014/08/06. doi: 10.1007/s00702-014-1288-x.25091618
7. Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Bang W , Bennett DA . Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons. Neurology. 2007;69 (24 ):2197–204. Epub 2007/06/15. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000271090.28148.24.17568013
8. Snyder HM , Corriveau RA , Craft S , Faber JE , Greenberg SM , Knopman D , Lamb BT , Montine TJ , Nedergaard M , Schaffer CB , Schneider JA , Wellington C , Wilcock DM , Zipfel GJ , Zlokovic B , Bain LJ , Bosetti F , Galis ZS , Koroshetz W , Carrillo MC . Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia including Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2015;11 (6 ):710–7. Epub 2014/12/17. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.10.008.25510382
9. Azarpazhooh MR , Avan A , Cipriano LE , Munoz DG , Sposato LA , Hachinski V . Concomitant vascular and neurodegenerative pathologies double the risk of dementia. Alzheimer’s &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer’s Association. 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.07.755.
10. Gorelick PB , Scuteri A , Black SE , Decarli C , Greenberg SM , Iadecola C , Launer LJ , Laurent S , Lopez OL , Nyenhuis D , Petersen RC , Schneider JA , Tzourio C , Arnett DK , Bennett DA , Chui HC , Higashida RT , Lindquist R , Nilsson PM , Roman GC , Sellke FW , Seshadri S , American Heart Association Stroke Council CoE, Prevention CoCNCoCR, Intervention, Council on Cardiovascular S, Anesthesia. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/american stroke association. Stroke. 2011;42 (9 ):2672–713. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182299496.21778438
11. Iadecola C The pathobiology of vascular dementia. Neuron. 2013;80 (4 ):844–66. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.008.24267647
12. Iadecola C The overlap between neurodegenerative and vascular factors in the pathogenesis of dementia. Acta neuropathologica. 2010;120 (3 ):287–96. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0718-6.20623294
13. Iadecola C , Yaffe K , Biller J , Bratzke LC , Faraci FM , Gorelick PB , Gulati M , Kamel H , Knopman DS , Launer LJ , Saczynski JS , Seshadri S , Zeki Al Hazzouri A , American Heart Association Council on H, Council on Clinical C, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Y, Council on C, Stroke N, Council on Quality of C, Outcomes R, Stroke C. Impact of Hypertension on Cognitive Function: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2016;68 (6 ):e67–e94. doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000053.27977393
14. 2020 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 2020. Epub 2020/03/12. doi: 10.1002/alz.12068.
15. Masters CL , Bateman R , Blennow K , Rowe CC , Sperling RA , Cummings JL . Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2015;1 :15056. Epub 2015/01/01. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.56.27188934
16. Azarpazhooh MR , Avan A , Cipriano LE , Munoz DG , Sposato LA , Hachinski V . Concomitant vascular and neurodegenerative pathologies double the risk of dementia. Alzheimers Dement. 2018;14 (2 ):148–56. Epub 2017/10/05. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.07.755.28974416
17. James BD , Wilson RS , Boyle PA , Trojanowski JQ , Bennett DA , Schneider JA . TDP-43 stage, mixed pathologies, and clinical Alzheimer’s-type dementia. Brain. 2016;139 (11 ):2983–93. Epub 2016/10/04. doi: 10.1093/brain/aww224.27694152
18. Custodio N , Montesinos R , Lira D , Herrera-Perez E , Bardales Y , Valeriano-Lorenzo L . Mixed dementia: A review of the evidence. Dement Neuropsychol. 2017;11 (4 ):364–70. Epub 2018/01/23. doi: 10.1590/1980-57642016dn11-040005.29354216
19. Cortes-Canteli M , Iadecola C . Alzheimer’s Disease and Vascular Aging: JACC Focus Seminar. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75 (8 ):942–51. Epub 2020/03/05. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2019.10.062.32130930
20. Jellinger KA . Alzheimer disease and cerebrovascular pathology: an update. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2002;109 (5–6 ):813–36. Epub 2002/07/12. doi: 10.1007/s007020200068.12111471
21. Opeskin K Cerebral amyloid angiopathy. A review. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 1996;17 (3 ):248–54. Epub 1996/09/01. doi: 10.1097/00000433-199609000-00013.8870877
22. Boyle PA , Yu L , Wilson RS , Leurgans SE , Schneider JA , Bennett DA . Person-specific contribution of neuropathologies to cognitive loss in old age. Ann Neurol. 2018;83 (1 ):74–83. Epub 2017/12/16. doi: 10.1002/ana.25123.29244218
23. Rensink AA , de Waal RM , Kremer B , Verbeek MM . Pathogenesis of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2003;43 (2 ):207–23. Epub 2003/10/24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2003.08.001.14572915
24. Castano EM , Prelli F , Soto C , Beavis R , Matsubara E , Shoji M , Frangione B . The length of amyloid-beta in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis, Dutch type. Implications for the role of amyloid-beta 1–42 in Alzheimer’s disease. J Biol Chem. 1996;271 (50 ):32185–91. Epub 1996/12/13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.50.32185.8943274
25. Kalaria RN . The blood-brain barrier and cerebral microcirculation in Alzheimer disease. Cerebrovasc Brain Metab Rev. 1992;4 (3 ):226–60.1389957
26. Fossati S , Cam J , Meyerson J , Mezhericher E , Romero IA , Couraud PO , Weksler BB , Ghiso J , Rostagno A . Differential activation of mitochondrial apoptotic pathways by vasculotropic amyloid-beta variants in cells composing the cerebral vessel walls. FASEB J. 2010;24 (1 ):229–41. Epub 2009/09/23. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-139584.19770225
27. Bornebroek M , Haan J , Van Duinen SG , Maat-Schieman ML , Van Buchem MA , Bakker E , Van Broeckhoven C , Roos RA . Dutch hereditary cerebral amyloid angiopathy: structural lesions and apolipoprotein E genotype. Ann Neurol. 1997;41 (5 ):695–8. Epub 1997/05/01. doi: 10.1002/ana.410410523.9153536
28. Van Broeckhoven C , Haan J , Bakker E , Hardy JA , Van Hul W , Wehnert A , Vegter-Van der Vlis M , Roos RA . Amyloid beta protein precursor gene and hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis (Dutch). Science. 1990;248 (4959 ):1120–2. Epub 1990/06/01. doi: 10.1126/science.1971458.1971458
29. Maat-Schieman M , Roos R , van Duinen S . Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis-Dutch type. Neuropathology. 2005;25 (4 ):288–97. Epub 2005/12/31. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2005.00631.x.16382777
30. Levy E , Prelli F , Frangione B . Studies on the first described Alzheimer’s disease amyloid beta mutant, the Dutch variant. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006;9 (3 Suppl ):329–39. Epub 2006/08/18. doi: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s337.16914871
31. Levy E , Carman MD , Fernandez-Madrid IJ , Power MD , Lieberburg I , van Duinen SG , Bots GT , Luyendijk W , Frangione B . Mutation of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid gene in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, Dutch type. Science. 1990;248 (4959 ):1124–6. Epub 1990/06/01. doi: 10.1126/science.2111584.2111584
32. Tcw J , Goate AM . Genetics of beta-Amyloid Precursor Protein in Alzheimer’s Disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2017;7 (6 ). Epub 2016/12/23. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a024539.
33. Parodi-Rullan RM , Javadov S , Fossati S . Dissecting the Crosstalk between Endothelial Mitochondrial Damage, Vascular Inflammation, and Neurodegeneration in Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy and Alzheimer’s Disease. Cells. 2021;10 (11 ). Epub 2021/11/28. doi: 10.3390/cells10112903.
34. Ghiso J , Tomidokoro Y , Revesz T , Frangione B , Rostagno A . Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy and Alzheimer’s Disease. Hirosaki Igaku. 2010;61 (Suppl ):S111–S24.21037967
35. Fossati S , Ghiso J , Rostagno A . TRAIL death receptors DR4 and DR5 mediate cerebral microvascular endothelial cell apoptosis induced by oligomeric Alzheimer’s Abeta. Cell Death Dis. 2012;3 :e321. Epub 2012/06/15. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.55.22695614
36. Daulatzai MA . Cerebral hypoperfusion and glucose hypometabolism: Key pathophysiological modulators promote neurodegeneration, cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci Res. 2017;95 (4 ):943–72. Epub 2016/06/29. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23777.27350397
37. Tini G , Scagliola R , Monacelli F , La Malfa G , Porto I , Brunelli C , Rosa GM . Alzheimer’s Disease and Cardiovascular Disease: A Particular Association. Cardiol Res Pract. 2020;2020 :2617970. Epub 2020/05/27. doi: 10.1155/2020/2617970.32454996
38. de Bruijn RF , Ikram MA . Cardiovascular risk factors and future risk of Alzheimer’s disease. BMC Med. 2014;12 :130. Epub 2014/11/12. doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0130-5.25385322
39. Santiago JA , Potashkin JA . The Impact of Disease Comorbidities in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021;13 :631770. Epub 2021/03/02. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.631770.33643025
40. Wang JH , Wu YJ , Tee BL , Lo RY . Medical Comorbidity in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Nested Case-Control Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;63 (2 ):773–81. Epub 2018/04/18. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170786.29660933
41. Zhu D , Montagne A , Zhao Z . Alzheimer’s pathogenic mechanisms and underlying sex difference. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2021;78 (11 ):4907–20. Epub 2021/04/13. doi: 10.1007/s00018-021-03830-w.33844047
42. Farnsworth von Cederwald B , Josefsson M , Wahlin A , Nyberg L , Karalija N . Association of Cardiovascular Risk Trajectory With Cognitive Decline and Incident Dementia. Neurology. 2022;98 (20 ):e2013–e22. Epub 2022/04/22. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200255.35444051
43. Di Marco LY , Venneri A , Farkas E , Evans PC , Marzo A , Frangi AF . Vascular dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease--A review of endothelium-mediated mechanisms and ensuing vicious circles. Neurobiol Dis. 2015;82 :593–606. Epub 2015/08/28. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.08.014.26311408
44. Hachinski V , Einhaupl K , Ganten D , Alladi S , Brayne C , Stephan BCM , Sweeney MD , Zlokovic B , Iturria-Medina Y , Iadecola C , Nishimura N , Schaffer CB , Whitehead SN , Black SE , Ostergaard L , Wardlaw J , Greenberg S , Friberg L , Norrving B , Rowe B , Joanette Y , Hacke W , Kuller L , Dichgans M , Endres M , Khachaturian ZS . Preventing dementia by preventing stroke: The Berlin Manifesto. Alzheimers Dement. 2019;15 (7 ):961–84. Epub 2019/07/23. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2019.06.001.31327392
45. Moreira PI , Smith MA , Zhu X , Nunomura A , Castellani RJ , Perry G . Oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1043 :545–52. Epub 2005/07/23. doi: 10.1196/annals.1333.062.16037277
46. O’Brien RJ , Wong PC . Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer’s disease. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2011;34 :185–204. Epub 2011/04/05. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613.21456963
47. Matsuyama H , Shindo A , Shimada T , Yata K , Wakita H , Takahashi R , Tomimoto H . Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion activates AIM2 and NLRP3 inflammasome. Brain Res. 2020;1736 :146779. Epub 2020/03/17. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146779.32171704
48. Tin LL , Beevers DG , Lip GY . Systolic vs diastolic blood pressure and the burden of hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2002;16 (3 ):147–50. Epub 2002/03/16. doi: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1001373.11896501
49. Freitag MH , Peila R , Masaki K , Petrovitch H , Ross GW , White LR , Launer LJ . Midlife pulse pressure and incidence of dementia: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Stroke. 2006;37 (1 ):33–7. Epub 2005/12/13. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000196941.58869.2d.16339468
50. Lennon MJ , Makkar SR , Crawford JD , Sachdev PS . Midlife Hypertension and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;71 (1 ):307–16. Epub 2019/08/06. doi: 10.3233/JAD-190474.31381518
51. Abell JG , Kivimaki M , Dugravot A , Tabak AG , Fayosse A , Shipley M , Sabia S , Singh-Manoux A . Association between systolic blood pressure and dementia in the Whitehall II cohort study: role of age, duration, and threshold used to define hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2018;39 (33 ):3119–25. Epub 2018/06/15. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehy288.29901708
52. Imahori Y , Vetrano DL , Xia X , Grande G , Ljungman P , Fratiglioni L , Qiu C . Association of resting heart rate with cognitive decline and dementia in older adults: A population-based cohort study. Alzheimers Dement. 2021. Epub 2021/12/04. doi: 10.1002/alz.12495.
53. Zhou H , Zhu Z , Liu C , Bai Y , Zhan Q , Huang X , Zeng Q , Ren H , Xu D . Effect of Hypertension Duration and Blood Pressure Control During Early Adulthood on Cognitive Function in Middle Age. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;85 (2 ):779–89. Epub 2021/12/06. doi: 10.3233/JAD-215070.34864670
54. Glodzik L , Rusinek H , Tsui W , Pirraglia E , Kim HJ , Deshpande A , Li Y , Storey P , Randall C , Chen J , Osorio RS , Butler T , Tanzi E , McQuillan M , Harvey P , Williams SK , Ogedegbe G , Babb JS , de Leon MJ . Different Relationship Between Systolic Blood Pressure and Cerebral Perfusion in Subjects With and Without Hypertension. Hypertension. 2019;73 (1 ):197–205. Epub 2018/12/21. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.118.11233.30571554
55. Ou YN , Tan CC , Shen XN , Xu W , Hou XH , Dong Q , Tan L , Yu JT . Blood Pressure and Risks of Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 209 Prospective Studies. Hypertension. 2020;76 (1 ):217–25. Epub 2020/05/27. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.120.14993.32450739
56. Glodzik L , Rusinek H , Pirraglia E , McHugh P , Tsui W , Williams S , Cummings M , Li Y , Rich K , Randall C , Mosconi L , Osorio R , Murray J , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , de Leon M . Blood pressure decrease correlates with tau pathology and memory decline in hypertensive elderly. Neurobiol Aging. 2014;35 (1 ):64–71. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.06.011.23969178
57. Alperovitch A , Blachier M , Soumare A , Ritchie K , Dartigues JF , Richard-Harston S , Tzourio C . Blood pressure variability and risk of dementia in an elderly cohort, the Three-City Study. Alzheimers Dement. 2014;10 (5 Suppl ):S330–7. Epub 2013/08/21. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.05.1777.23954028
58. van Middelaar T , van Dalen JW , van Gool WA , van den Born BH , van Vught LA , Moll van Charante EP , Richard E . Visit-To-Visit Blood Pressure Variability and the Risk of Dementia in Older People. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62 (2 ):727–35. Epub 2018/02/27. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170757.29480175
59. Mecca AP , van Dyck CH . Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association. Alzheimers Dement. 2021;17 (2 ):316–7. Epub 2020/10/14. doi: 10.1002/alz.12190.33047474
60. Son P , Lewis L . Hyperhomocysteinemia StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL) 2022.
61. Lai WK , Kan MY . Homocysteine-Induced Endothelial Dysfunction. Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;67 (1 ):1–12. Epub 2015/07/24. doi: 10.1159/000437098.
62. Tinelli C , Di Pino A , Ficulle E , Marcelli S , Feligioni M . Hyperhomocysteinemia as a Risk Factor and Potential Nutraceutical Target for Certain Pathologies. Front Nutr. 2019;6 :49. Epub 2019/05/10. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2019.00049.31069230
63. Balint B , Jepchumba VK , Gueant JL , Gueant-Rodriguez RM . Mechanisms of homocysteine-induced damage to the endothelial, medial and adventitial layers of the arterial wall. Biochimie. 2020;173 :100–6. Epub 2020/02/28. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.02.012.32105811
64. Soni RM , Tiwari SC , Mahdi AA , Kohli N . Serum Homocysteine and Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia: Is There Any Correlation in Alzheimer’s Disease? Ann Neurosci. 2019;25 (3 ):152–9. Epub 2019/03/01. doi: 10.1159/000487068.30814822
65. Wang Q , Zhao J , Chang H , Liu X , Zhu R . Homocysteine and Folic Acid: Risk Factors for Alzheimer’s Disease-An Updated Meta-Analysis. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021;13 :665114. Epub 2021/06/15. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.665114.34122042
66. Lauriola M , D’Onofrio G , Ciccone F , Germano C , Cascavilla L , Paris F , Greco A . Relationship of Homocysteine Plasma Levels with Mild Cognitive Impairment, Alzheimer’s Disease, Vascular Dementia, Psychobehavioral, and Functional Complications. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;82 (1 ):235–48. Epub 2021/06/01. doi: 10.3233/JAD-210166.34057086
67. Hoffmann J , Busse S , von Hoff F , Borucki K , Frodl T , Busse M . Association Between Homocysteine and Vitamin Levels in Demented Patients. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;81 (4 ):1781–92. Epub 2021/05/18. doi: 10.3233/JAD-201481.33998538
68. Hooshmand B , Refsum H , Smith AD , Kalpouzos G , Mangialasche F , von Arnim CAF , Kareholt I , Kivipelto M , Fratiglioni L . Association of Methionine to Homocysteine Status With Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging Measures and Risk of Dementia. JAMA Psychiatry. 2019;76 (11 ):1198–205. Epub 2019/07/25. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.1694.31339527
69. Zhou F , Chen S . Hyperhomocysteinemia and risk of incident cognitive outcomes: An updated dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Ageing Res Rev. 2019;51 :55–66. Epub 2019/03/04. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2019.02.006.30826501
70. Bae JB , Han JW , Song J , Lee K , Kim TH , Kwak KP , Kim BJ , Kim SG , Kim JL , Moon SW , Park JH , Ryu SH , Youn JC , Lee DY , Lee DW , Lee SB , Lee JJ , Jhoo JH , Kim KW . Hypohomocysteinemia may increases the risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: A nationwide population-based prospective cohort study. Clin Nutr. 2021;40 (7 ):4579–84. Epub 2021/07/07. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2021.05.034.34229262
71. Luzzi S , Papiri G , Viticchi G , Baldinelli S , Fiori C , Silvestrini M , Toraldo A . Association between homocysteine levels and cognitive profile in Alzheimer’s Disease. J Clin Neurosci. 2021;94 :250–6. Epub 2021/12/06. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2021.09.033.34863447
72. Liu XX , Wu PF , Liu YZ , Jiang YL , Wan MD , Xiao XW , Yang QJ , Jiao B , Liao XX , Wang JL , Liu SH , Zhang X , Shen L . Association Between Serum Vitamins and the Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease in Chinese Population. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;85 (2 ):829–36. Epub 2021/12/06. doi: 10.3233/JAD-215104.34864672
73. O’Connor DMA , Scarlett S , De Looze C , O’Halloran AM , Laird E , Molloy AM , Clarke R , McGarrigle CA , Kenny RA . Low folate predicts accelerated cognitive decline: 8-year follow-up of 3140 older adults in Ireland. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2022. Epub 2022/01/14. doi: 10.1038/s41430-021-01057-3.
74. Li JG , Pratico D . High levels of homocysteine results in cerebral amyloid angiopathy in mice. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;43 (1 ):29–35. Epub 2014/07/26. doi: 10.3233/JAD-141101.25061050
75. Di Meco A , Li JG , Barrero C , Merali S , Pratico D . Elevated levels of brain homocysteine directly modulate the pathological phenotype of a mouse model of tauopathy. Molecular psychiatry. 2019;24 (11 ):1696–706. Epub 2018/05/08. doi: 10.1038/s41380-018-0062-0.29728702
76. Li JG , Chu J , Barrero C , Merali S , Pratico D . Homocysteine exacerbates beta-amyloid pathology, tau pathology, and cognitive deficit in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease with plaques and tangles. Ann Neurol. 2014;75 (6 ):851–63. Epub 2014/03/20. doi: 10.1002/ana.24145.24644038
77. Zhuo JM , Portugal GS , Kruger WD , Wang H , Gould TJ , Pratico D . Diet-induced hyperhomocysteinemia increases amyloid-beta formation and deposition in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2010;7 (2 ):140–9. Epub 2009/11/27. doi: 10.2174/156720510790691326.19939226
78. Braun DJ , Abner E , Bakshi V , Goulding DS , Grau EM , Lin AL , Norris CM , Sudduth TL , Webster SJ , Wilcock DM , Van Eldik LJ . Blood Flow Deficits and Cerebrovascular Changes in a Dietary Model of Hyperhomocysteinemia. ASN Neuro. 2019;11 :1759091419865788. Epub 2019/08/01. doi: 10.1177/1759091419865788.31362539
79. Weekman EM , Woolums AE , Sudduth TL , Wilcock DM . Hyperhomocysteinemia-Induced Gene Expression Changes in the Cell Types of the Brain. ASN Neuro. 2017;9 (6 ):1759091417742296. Epub 2017/12/05. doi: 10.1177/1759091417742296.29198136
80. Sudduth TL , Powell DK , Smith CD , Greenstein A , Wilcock DM . Induction of hyperhomocysteinemia models vascular dementia by induction of cerebral microhemorrhages and neuroinflammation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013;33 (5 ):708–15. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.1.23361394
81. Weekman EM , Sudduth TL , Price BR , Woolums AE , Hawthorne D , Seaks CE , Wilcock DM . Time course of neuropathological events in hyperhomocysteinemic amyloid depositing mice reveals early neuroinflammatory changes that precede amyloid changes and cerebrovascular events. J Neuroinflammation. 2019;16 (1 ):284. Epub 2020/01/01. doi: 10.1186/s12974-019-1685-z.31888650
82. Sade Yazdi D , Laor Bar-Yosef D , Adsi H , Kreiser T , Sigal S , Bera S , Zaguri D , Shaham-Niv S , Oluwatoba DS , Levy D , Gartner M , Do TD , Frenkel D , Gazit E . Homocysteine fibrillar assemblies display cross-talk with Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid polypeptide. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021;118 (24 ). Epub 2021/06/09. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2017575118.
83. McMahon JA , Skeaff CM , Williams SM , Green TJ . Lowering homocysteine with B vitamins has no effect on blood pressure in older adults. J Nutr. 2007;137 (5 ):1183–7. Epub 2007/04/24. doi: 10.1093/jn/137.5.1183.17449579
84. Skeete J , DiPette DJ . Relationship between homocysteine and hypertension: New data add to the debate. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2017;19 (11 ):1171–2. Epub 2017/09/25. doi: 10.1111/jch.13073.28942602
85. Sutton-Tyrrell K , Bostom A , Selhub J , Zeigler-Johnson C . High homocysteine levels are independently related to isolated systolic hypertension in older adults. Circulation. 1997;96 (6 ):1745–9. Epub 1997/10/10. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.96.6.1745.9323056
86. Lim U , Cassano PA . Homocysteine and blood pressure in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988–1994. Am J Epidemiol. 2002;156 (12 ):1105–13. Epub 2002/12/14. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwf157.12480655
87. Sun P , Wang Q , Zhang Y , Huo Y , Nima N , Fan J . Association between homocysteine level and blood pressure traits among Tibetans: A cross-sectional study in China. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019;98 (27 ):e16085. Epub 2019/07/07. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000016085.31277103
88. Weng H , Li Y , Fan F , Yang H , Zhou G , Sun P , Liu S , Yi T , Huo Y , Li J . The association between total homocysteine and blood pressure in two independent Chinese populations. J Hum Hypertens. 2020;34 (9 ):657–65. Epub 2019/11/14. doi: 10.1038/s41371-019-0288-6.31719670
89. Li Z , Guo X , Chen S , Zheng L , Yang H , Sun G , Yu S , Li W , Zhou L , Wang J , Hu W , Sun Y . Hyperhomocysteinemia independently associated with the risk of hypertension: a cross-sectional study from rural China. J Hum Hypertens. 2016;30 (8 ):508–12. Epub 2015/07/15. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2015.75.26155996
90. Yang B , Fan S , Zhi X , He J , Ma P , Yu L , Zheng Q , Sun G . Interactions of homocysteine and conventional predisposing factors on hypertension in Chinese adults. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2017;19 (11 ):1162–70. Epub 2017/09/25. doi: 10.1111/jch.13075.28942612
91. Wu H , Wang B , Ban Q , Chen L , Yan D , Yu Y , Song Y , Liu C , Cao J , Zhang J , Zhang Y , Zhang T , Zhang H , Guo H , Tang G , Zhang Y , Li J , Huo Y , Zang T , Qin X , Xu X . Association of total homocysteine with blood pressure in a general population of Chinese adults: a cross-sectional study in Jiangsu province, China. BMJ Open. 2018;8 (6 ):e021103. Epub 2018/06/21. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-021103.
92. Patcharaporn A , Tanyarat J , Krid T , Chiraporn T . Serum lipid, homocysteine, and platelet derived growth factor in patients with hypertension Journal of Health Research 2018;33 :293–300. doi: DOI 10.1108/JHR-07-2018-0056.
93. Cheng M , Xue H , Li X , Yan Q , Zhu D , Wang Y , Shi Y , Fu C . Prevalence of hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) and its major determinants among hypertensive patients over 35 years of age. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2022;76 (4 ):616–23. Epub 2021/09/01. doi: 10.1038/s41430-021-00983-6.34462555
94. Lu ZH , Li J , Li XL , Ding M , Mao CJ , Zhu XY , Liu CF . Hypertension with Hyperhomocysteinemia Increases the Risk of Early Cognitive Impairment after First-Ever Ischemic Stroke. Eur Neurol. 2019;82 (4–6 ):75–85. Epub 2019/12/12. doi: 10.1159/000504704.31825940
95. Faraco G , Iadecola C . Hypertension: a harbinger of stroke and dementia. Hypertension. 2013;62 (5 ):810–7. Epub 2013/08/28. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01063.23980072
96. Iadecola C , Gottesman RF . Neurovascular and Cognitive Dysfunction in Hypertension. Circ Res. 2019;124 (7 ):1025–44. Epub 2019/03/29. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.313260.30920929
97. de Montgolfier O , Pincon A , Pouliot P , Gillis MA , Bishop J , Sled JG , Villeneuve L , Ferland G , Levy BI , Lesage F , Thorin-Trescases N , Thorin E . High Systolic Blood Pressure Induces Cerebral Microvascular Endothelial Dysfunction, Neurovascular Unit Damage, and Cognitive Decline in Mice. Hypertension. 2019;73 (1 ):217–28. Epub 2018/12/21. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.118.12048.30571552
98. Perrin-Sarrado C , Dahboul F , Leroy P , Lartaud I . Aging and hypertension decrease endothelial NO-related dilating function and gamma-glutamyl transferase activity but not S-nitrosoglutathione-induced aortic vasodilation. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2018;32 (2 ):134–40. Epub 2018/01/18. doi: 10.1111/fcp.12347.29337396
99. Peixoto AJ . Acute Severe Hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2019;381 (19 ):1843–52. Epub 2019/11/07. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcp1901117.31693807
100. Claassen J , Thijssen DHJ , Panerai RB , Faraci FM . Regulation of cerebral blood flow in humans: physiology and clinical implications of autoregulation. Physiol Rev. 2021;101 (4 ):1487–559. Epub 2021/03/27. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00022.2020.33769101
101. Shekhar S , Liu R , Travis OK , Roman RJ , Fan F . Cerebral Autoregulation in Hypertension and Ischemic Stroke: A Mini Review. J Pharm Sci Exp Pharmacol. 2017;2017 (1 ):21–7.29333537
102. Di Chiara T , Del Cuore A , Daidone M , Scaglione S , Norrito RL , Puleo MG , Scaglione R , Pinto A , Tuttolomondo A . Pathogenetic Mechanisms of Hypertension-Brain-Induced Complications: Focus on Molecular Mediators. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23 (5 ). Epub 2022/03/11. doi: 10.3390/ijms23052445.
103. Khachaturian ZS . The role of calcium regulation in brain aging: reexamination of a hypothesis. Aging (Milano). 1989;1 (1 ):17–34. Epub 1989/09/01. doi: 10.1007/BF03323872.2488296
104. Kunz A , Iadecola C . Cerebral vascular dysregulation in the ischemic brain. Handb Clin Neurol. 2009;92 :283–305. Epub 2008/09/16. doi: 10.1016/S0072-9752(08)01914-3.18790280
105. Presa JL , Saravia F , Bagi Z , Filosa JA . Vasculo-Neuronal Coupling and Neurovascular Coupling at the Neurovascular Unit: Impact of Hypertension. Front Physiol. 2020;11 :584135. Epub 2020/10/27. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.584135.33101063
106. Faraco G , Park L , Zhou P , Luo W , Paul SM , Anrather J , Iadecola C . Hypertension enhances Abeta-induced neurovascular dysfunction, promotes beta-secretase activity, and leads to amyloidogenic processing of APP. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016;36 (1 ):241–52. Epub 2015/04/30. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.79.25920959
107. Mosconi L Glucose metabolism in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease: Methodological and physiological considerations for PET studies. Clin Transl Imaging. 2013;1 (4 ). Epub 2014/01/11. doi: 10.1007/s40336-013-0026-y.
108. Mosconi L , Berti V , Quinn C , McHugh P , Petrongolo G , Varsavsky I , Osorio RS , Pupi A , Vallabhajosula S , Isaacson RS , de Leon MJ , Brinton RD . Sex differences in Alzheimer risk: Brain imaging of endocrine vs chronologic aging. Neurology. 2017;89 (13 ):1382–90. Epub 2017/09/01. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004425.28855400
109. Mosconi L , Berti V , Quinn C , McHugh P , Petrongolo G , Osorio RS , Connaughty C , Pupi A , Vallabhajosula S , Isaacson RS , de Leon MJ , Swerdlow RH , Brinton RD . Perimenopause and emergence of an Alzheimer’s bioenergetic phenotype in brain and periphery. PLoS One. 2017;12 (10 ):e0185926. Epub 2017/10/11. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185926.29016679
110. Yang JT , Wang ZJ , Cai HY , Yuan L , Hu MM , Wu MN , Qi JS . Sex Differences in Neuropathology and Cognitive Behavior in APP/PS1/tau Triple-Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurosci Bull. 2018;34 (5 ):736–46. Epub 2018/08/14. doi: 10.1007/s12264-018-0268-9.30099679
111. Gannon OJ , Robison LS , Custozzo AJ , Zuloaga KL . Sex differences in risk factors for vascular contributions to cognitive impairment &amp; dementia. Neurochem Int. 2019;127 :38–55. Epub 2018/11/25. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2018.11.014.30471324
112. Hayden KM , Zandi PP , Lyketsos CG , Khachaturian AS , Bastian LA , Charoonruk G , Tschanz JT , Norton MC , Pieper CF , Munger RG , Breitner JC , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Cache County I . Vascular risk factors for incident Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia: the Cache County study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2006;20 (2 ):93–100. Epub 2006/06/15. doi: 10.1097/01.wad.0000213814.43047.86.16772744
113. Gilsanz P , Mayeda ER , Glymour MM , Quesenberry CP , Mungas DM , DeCarli C , Dean A , Whitmer RA . Female sex, early-onset hypertension, and risk of dementia. Neurology. 2017;89 (18 ):1886–93. Epub 2017/10/06. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004602.28978656
114. Gong J , Harris K , Peters SAE , Woodward M . Sex differences in the association between major cardiovascular risk factors in midlife and dementia: a cohort study using data from the UK Biobank. BMC Med. 2021;19 (1 ):110. Epub 2021/05/20. doi: 10.1186/s12916-021-01980-z.34006267
115. Anstey KJ , Peters R , Mortby ME , Kiely KM , Eramudugolla R , Cherbuin N , Huque MH , Dixon RA . Association of sex differences in dementia risk factors with sex differences in memory decline in a population-based cohort spanning 20–76 years. Sci Rep. 2021;11 (1 ):7710. Epub 2021/04/10. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-86397-7.33833259
116. Liu L , Hayden KM , May N , Haring B , Liu Z , Henderson V , Chen J , Gracely E , Wassertheil-Smoller S , Rapp S . Association between blood pressure levels and cognitive impairment in older women: a prospective analysis of the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study The Lancet Healthy Longevity. 2022;3 (1 ):e42–e53.35112096
117. Motiejunaite J , Amar L , Vidal-Petiot E . Adrenergic receptors and cardiovascular effects of catecholamines. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2021;82 (3–4 ):193–7. Epub 2020/06/01. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2020.03.012.32473788
118. Reid JL . Alpha-adrenergic receptors and blood pressure control. The American Journal of Cardiology. 1986;57 (9 ):E6–E12. doi: 10.1016/0002-9149(86)90716-2.
119. Sheng Y , Zhu L . The crosstalk between autonomic nervous system and blood vessels. Int J Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol. 2018;10 (1 ):17–28.29593847
120. Madamanchi A Beta-adrenergic receptor signaling in cardiac function and heart failure. Mcgill J Med. 2007;10 (2 ):99–104.18523538
121. Haase N , Herse F , Spallek B , Haase H , Morano I , Qadri F , Szijarto IA , Rohm I , Yilmaz A , Warrington JP , Ryan MJ , Gollasch M , Muller DN , Dechend R , Wallukat G . Amyloid-beta peptides activate alpha1-adrenergic cardiovascular receptors. Hypertension. 2013;62 (5 ):966–72. Epub 2013/09/05. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01348.24001898
122. Katsouri L , Vizcaychipi MP , McArthur S , Harrison I , Suarez-Calvet M , Lleo A , Lloyd DG , Ma D , Sastre M . Prazosin, an alpha(1)-adrenoceptor antagonist, prevents memory deterioration in the APP23 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2013;34 (4 ):1105–15. Epub 2012/10/16. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.010.23063647
123. Kim S , Han JH , Ko IG , Kim CJ , Kim K . Alpha1-adrenergic receptor antagonist tamsulosin ameliorates aging-induced memory impairment by enhancing neurogenesis and suppressing apoptosis in the hippocampus of old-aged rats. Animal Cells and Systems 2017;21 (6 ):404–11.
124. Yu ZY , Yi X , Wang YR , Zeng GH , Tan CR , Cheng Y , Sun PY , Liu ZH , Wang YJ , Liu YH . Inhibiting α1-adrenergic Receptor Signaling Pathway Ameliorates Alzheimer’s Disease Type Pathologies and Behavioral Deficits in an AD Mouse Model. Research Square. 2021. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-824580/v1.
125. Frost M , Keable A , Baseley D , Sealy A , Andreea Zbarcea D , Gatherer M , Yuen HM , Sharp MM , Weller RO , Attems J , Smith C , Chiarot PR , Carare RO . Vascular alpha1A Adrenergic Receptors as a Potential Therapeutic Target for IPAD in Alzheimer’s Disease. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2020;13 (9 ). Epub 2020/09/26. doi: 10.3390/ph13090261.
126. Dobarro M , Gerenu G , Ramirez MJ . Propranolol reduces cognitive deficits, amyloid and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;16 (10 ):2245–57. Epub 2013/06/19. doi: 10.1017/S1461145713000631.23768694
127. Wang J , Wright HM , Vempati P , Li H , Wangsa J , Dzhuan A , Habbu K , Knable LA , Ho L , Pasinetti GM . Investigation of nebivolol as a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;33 (4 ):1147–56. Epub 2012/11/07. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120904.23128558
128. Gelber RP , Ross GW , Petrovitch H , Masaki KH , Launer LJ , White LR . Antihypertensive medication use and risk of cognitive impairment: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Neurology. 2013;81 (10 ):888–95. Epub 2013/08/06. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a351d4.23911753
129. Beaman EE , Bonde AN , Ulv Larsen SM , Ozenne B , Lohela TJ , Nedergaard M , Gislason GH , Knudsen GM , Holst SC . Blood-brain barrier permeable beta-blockers linked to lower risk of Alzheimer’s disease in hypertension. Brain. 2022. Epub 2022/02/24. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac076.
130. Beaman EE , Bonde AN , Ulv Larsen SM , Ozenne B , Lohela TJ , Gislason GH , Knudsen GM , Holst SC . Effect of β-adrenergic antagonists on the risk of alzheimer’s disease amongst hypertensive patients: a nation-wide cohort study. European Neuropsychopharmacology. 2020;40 :S219–20. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2020.09.286.
131. Holm H , Ricci F , Di Martino G , Bachus E , Nilsson ED , Ballerini P , Melander O , Hansson O , Nagga K , Magnusson M , Fedorowski A . Beta-blocker therapy and risk of vascular dementia: A population-based prospective study. Vascul Pharmacol. 2020;125–126:106649 . Epub 2020/01/21. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2020.106649.
132. Evans AK , Ardestani PM , Yi B , Park HH , Lam RK , Shamloo M . Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonism is proinflammatory and exacerbates neuroinflammation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;146 :105089. Epub 2020/09/25. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2020.105089.32971233
133. Tournissac M , Vu TM , Vrabic N , Hozer C , Tremblay C , Melancon K , Planel E , Pifferi F , Calon F . Repurposing beta-3 adrenergic receptor agonists for Alzheimer’s disease: beneficial effects in a mouse model. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021;13 (1 ):103. Epub 2021/05/23. doi: 10.1186/s13195-021-00842-3.34020681
134. Noureddine FY , Altara R , Fan F , Yabluchanskiy A , Booz GW , Zouein FA . Impact of the Renin-Angiotensin System on the Endothelium in Vascular Dementia: Unresolved Issues and Future Perspectives. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21 (12 ). Epub 2020/06/21. doi: 10.3390/ijms21124268.
135. Gebre AK , Altaye BM , Atey TM , Tuem KB , Berhe DF . Targeting Renin-Angiotensin System Against Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Pharmacol. 2018;9 :440. Epub 2018/05/16. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00440.29760662
136. AbdAlla S , Langer A , Fu X , Quitterer U . ACE inhibition with captopril retards the development of signs of neurodegeneration in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Mol Sci. 2013;14 (8 ):16917–42. Epub 2013/08/21. doi: 10.3390/ijms140816917.23959119
137. Hou D , Wang Y , Zhou L , Chen K , Tian Y , Song Z , Bao J , Yang Q . Altered angiotensin-converting enzyme and its effects on the brain in a rat model of Alzheimer disease. Chinese Medical Journal 2008;121 (22 ):2320–3.19080340
138. Torika N , Asraf K , Roasso E , Danon A , Fleisher-Berkovich S . Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors Ameliorate Brain Inflammation Associated with Microglial Activation: Possible Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2016;11 (4 ):774–85. Epub 2016/08/27. doi: 10.1007/s11481-016-9703-8.27562846
139. Asraf K , Torika N , Apte RN , Fleisher-Berkovich S . Microglial Activation Is Modulated by Captopril: in Vitro and in Vivo Studies. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018;12 :116. Epub 2018/05/17. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00116.29765306
140. Zhang S , Dai L , Wang Y , Liu W , Huang Z . Effects of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors on oxidative stress related factors in a rat model of beta-amyloid 1–42 dementia. Chinese Journal of Tissue Engineering Research. 2021;25 (35 ):5650–5. doi: 10.12307/2021.295.
141. Lee SH , Gomes SM , Ghalayini J , Iliadi KG , Boulianne GL . Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers Rescue Memory Defects in Drosophila-Expressing Alzheimer’s Disease-Related Transgenes Independently of the Canonical Renin Angiotensin System. eNeuro. 2020;7 (6 ). Epub 2020/10/17. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0235-20.2020.
142. Thomas J , Smith H , Smith CA , Coward L , Gorman G , De Luca M , Jumbo-Lucioni P . The Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitor Lisinopril Mitigates Memory and Motor Deficits in a Drosophila Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Pathophysiology. 2021;28 (2 ):307–19. Epub 2022/04/03. doi: 10.3390/pathophysiology28020020.35366264
143. Lebouvier T , Chen Y , Duriez P , Pasquier F , Bordet R . Antihypertensive agents in Alzheimer’s disease: beyond vascular protection. Expert Rev Neurother. 2020;20 (2 ):175–87. Epub 2019/12/24. doi: 10.1080/14737175.2020.1708195.31869274
144. Liu S , Ando F , Fujita Y , Liu J , Maeda T , Shen X , Kikuchi K , Matsumoto A , Yokomori M , Tanabe-Fujimura C , Shimokata H , Michikawa M , Komano H , Zou K . A clinical dose of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor and heterozygous ACE deletion exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease pathology in mice. J Biol Chem. 2019;294 (25 ):9760–70. Epub 2019/05/11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006420.31072831
145. Zhao W , Wang J , Ho L , Ono K , Teplow DB , Pasinetti GM . Identification of antihypertensive drugs which inhibit amyloid-beta protein oligomerization. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;16 (1 ):49–57. Epub 2009/01/23. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0925.19158421
146. Wang J , Ho L , Chen L , Zhao Z , Zhao W , Qian X , Humala N , Seror I , Bartholomew S , Rosendorff C , Pasinetti GM . Valsartan lowers brain beta-amyloid protein levels and improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Clin Invest. 2007;117 (11 ):3393–402. Epub 2007/10/30. doi: 10.1172/JCI31547.17965777
147. Torika N , Asraf K , Danon A , Apte RN , Fleisher-Berkovich S . Telmisartan Modulates Glial Activation: In Vitro and In Vivo Studies. PLoS One. 2016;11 (5 ):e0155823. Epub 2016/05/18. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155823.27187688
148. Ongali B , Nicolakakis N , Tong XK , Aboulkassim T , Papadopoulos P , Rosa-Neto P , Lecrux C , Imboden H , Hamel E . Angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker losartan prevents and rescues cerebrovascular, neuropathological and cognitive deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Neurobiol Dis. 2014;68 :126–36. Epub 2014/05/09. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.04.018.24807206
149. Ouk MT . Longitudinal Differences in Cerebral Amyloid Accumulation and Cognition Between Users of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto; 2020.
150. Zhuang S , Wang HF , Li J , Wang HY , Wang X , Xing CM . Renin-angiotensin system blockade use and risks of cognitive decline and dementia: A meta-analysis. Neurosci Lett. 2016;624 :53–61. Epub 2016/05/11. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2016.05.003.27163195
151. Kuan YC , Huang KW , Yen DJ , Hu CJ , Lin CL , Kao CH . Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers reduced dementia risk in patients with diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Int J Cardiol. 2016;220 :462–6. Epub 2016/07/09. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.06.215.27390970
152. Barthold D , Joyce G , Wharton W , Kehoe P , Zissimopoulos J . The association of multiple anti-hypertensive medication classes with Alzheimer’s disease incidence across sex, race, and ethnicity. PLoS One. 2018;13 (11 ):e0206705. Epub 2018/11/02. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206705.30383807

alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The company had no role in any stage of the research process. The concept, design, acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data, manuscript drafting, and revisions, were completed without any involvement from the company.

153. Moran C , Xie K , Poh S , Chew S , Beare R , Wang W , Callisaya M , Srikanth V . Observational Study of Brain Atrophy and Cognitive Decline Comparing a Sample of Community-Dwelling People Taking Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers Over Time. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;68 (4 ):1479–88. Epub 2019/03/26. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180943.30909218
154. Ouk M , Wu CY , Rabin JS , Jackson A , Edwards JD , Ramirez J , Masellis M , Swartz RH , Herrmann N , Lanctot KL , Black SE , Swardfager W . The use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors vs. angiotensin receptor blockers and cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease: the importance of blood-brain barrier penetration and APOE epsilon4 carrier status. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021;13 (1 ):43. Epub 2021/02/13. doi: 10.1186/s13195-021-00778-8.33573702
155. Ouk M , Wu CY , Rabin JS , Edwards JD , Ramirez J , Masellis M , Swartz RH , Herrmann N , Lanctot KL , Black SE , Swardfager W , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I . Associations between brain amyloid accumulation and the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors versus angiotensin receptor blockers. Neurobiol Aging. 2021;100 :22–31. Epub 2021/01/19. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.12.011.33461049
156. Wile D Diuretics: a review. Ann Clin Biochem. 2012;49 (Pt 5 ):419–31. Epub 2012/07/12. doi: 10.1258/acb.2011.011281.22783025
157. Yasar S , Xia J , Yao W , Furberg CD , Xue QL , Mercado CI , Fitzpatrick AL , Fried LP , Kawas CH , Sink KM , Williamson JD , DeKosky ST , Carlson MC , Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory Study I. Antihypertensive drugs decrease risk of Alzheimer disease: Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory Study. Neurology. 2013;81 (10 ):896–903. Epub 2013/08/06. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a35228.23911756
158. Chuang YF , Breitner JCS , Chiu YL , Khachaturian A , Hayden K , Corcoran C , Tschanz J , Norton M , Munger R , Welsh-Bohmer K , Zandi PP , Cache County I . Use of diuretics is associated with reduced risk of Alzheimer’s disease: the Cache County Study. Neurobiol Aging. 2014;35 (11 ):2429–35. Epub 2014/06/10. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.05.002.24910391
159. Tully PJ , Hanon O , Cosh S , Tzourio C . Diuretic antihypertensive drugs and incident dementia risk: a systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression of prospective studies. J Hypertens. 2016;34 (6 ):1027–35. Epub 2016/02/18. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000868.26886565
160. Tully PJ , Dartigues JF , Debette S , Helmer C , Artero S , Tzourio C . Dementia risk with antihypertensive use and blood pressure variability: A cohort study. Neurology. 2016;87 (6 ):601–8. Epub 2016/07/13. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002946.27402894
161. DeLoach T , Beall J . Diuretics: A possible keystone in upholding cognitive health. Ment Health Clin. 2018;8 (1 ):33–40. Epub 2018/06/30. doi: 10.9740/mhc.2018.01.033.29955543
162. Glodzik L , Rusinek H , Kamer A , Pirraglia E , Tsui W , Mosconi L , Li Y , McHugh P , Murray J , Williams S , Osorio RS , Randall C , Butler T , Deshpande A , Vallabhajolusa S , de Leon M . Effects of vascular risk factors, statins, and antihypertensive drugs on PiB deposition in cognitively normal subjects. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2016;2 :95–104. Epub 2016/05/31. doi: 10.1016/j.dadm.2016.02.007.27239540
163. Xu C , Apostolova LG , Oblak AL , Gao S . Association of antihypertensive medications and Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association 2020;16 (S10 ). doi: 10.1002/alz.042283.
164. Provensi G , Carta F , Nocentini A , Supuran CT , Casamenti F , Passani MB , Fossati S . A New Kid on the Block? Carbonic Anhydrases as Possible New Targets in Alzheimer’s Disease. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20 (19 ). Epub 2019/09/27. doi: 10.3390/ijms20194724.
165. Lemon N , Canepa E , Ilies MA , Fossati S . Carbonic Anhydrases as Potential Targets Against Neurovascular Unit Dysfunction in Alzheimer’s Disease and Stroke. Frontiers in aging neuroscience. 2021;13 :772278. Epub 2021/12/07. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.772278.34867298
166. Supuran CT . Carbonic anhydrase activators. Future Med Chem. 2018;10 (5 ):561–73. Epub 2018/02/27. doi: 10.4155/fmc-2017-0223.29478330
167. Mishra CB , Tiwari M , Supuran CT . Progress in the development of human carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and their pharmacological applications: Where are we today? Med Res Rev. 2020;40 (6 ):2485–565. Epub 2020/07/22. doi: 10.1002/med.21713.32691504
168. Wang X , Zhu S , Pei Z , Drozda M , Stavrovskaya IG , Del Signore SJ , Cormier K , Shimony EM , Wang H , Ferrante RJ , Kristal BS , Friedlander RM . Inhibitors of cytochrome c release with therapeutic potential for Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci. 2008;28 (38 ):9473–85. Epub 2008/09/19. doi: 28/38/9473 [pii] 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1867-08.2008.18799679
169. Fossati S , Todd K , Sotolongo K , Ghiso J , Rostagno A . Differential contribution of isoaspartate post-translational modifications to the fibrillization and toxic properties of amyloid beta and the Asn23 Iowa mutation. Biochem J. 2013;456 (3 ):347–60. Epub 2013/09/14. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130652.24028142
170. Fossati S , Giannoni P , Solesio ME , Cocklin SL , Cabrera E , Ghiso J , Rostagno A . The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor methazolamide prevents amyloid beta-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and caspase activation protecting neuronal and glial cells in vitro and in the mouse brain. Neurobiol Dis. 2016;86 :29–40. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.11.006.26581638
171. Solesio ME , Peixoto PM , Debure L , Madamba SM , de Leon MJ , Wisniewski T , Pavlov EV , Fossati S . Carbonic anhydrase inhibition selectively prevents amyloid beta neurovascular mitochondrial toxicity. Aging Cell. 2018;17 (4 ):e12787. Epub 2018/06/07. doi: 10.1111/acel.12787.29873184
172. Li W , Zhang JW , Lu F , Ma MM , Wang JQ , Suo AQ , Bai YY , Liu HQ . [Effects of telmisartan on the level of Aβ1–42, interleukin-1β, tumor necrosis factor α and cognition in hypertensive patients with Alzheimer’s disease]. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct 23;92 (39 ):2743–6. Chinese.23290159
173. Kume K , Hanyu H , Sakurai H , Takada Y , Onuma T , Iwamoto T . Effects of telmisartan on cognition and regional cerebral blood flow in hypertensive patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2012 Apr;12 (2 ):207–14. doi: 10.1111/j.1447-0594.2011.00746.x. Epub 2011 Sep 19.21929736
174. van Middelaar T , van Vught LA , Moll van Charante EP , Eurelings LSM , Ligthart SA , van Dalen JW , van den Born BJH , Richard E , van Gool WA . Lower dementia risk with different classes of antihypertensive medication in older patients. J Hypertens. 2017 Oct;35 (10 ):2095–2101. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000001411.28509727
175. Kehoe PG , Turner N , Howden B , Jarutyte L , Clegg SL , Malone IB , Barnes J , Nielsen C , Sudre CH , Wilson A , Thai NJ , Blair PS , Coulthard E , Lane JA , Passmore P , Taylor J , Mutsaerts HJ , Thomas DL , Fox NC , Wilkinson I , Ben-Shlomo Y ; RADAR investigators. Safety and efficacy of losartan for the reduction of brain atrophy in clinically diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease (the RADAR trial): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Neurol. 2021 Nov;20 (11 ):895–906. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00263-5.34687634
176. Ahmed HA , Ishrat T , Pillai B , Fouda AY , Sayed MA , Eldahshan W , Waller JL , Ergul A , Fagan SC . RAS modulation prevents progressive cognitive impairment after experimental stroke: a randomized, blinded preclinical trial. J Neuroinflammation. 2018 Aug 13;15 (1 ):229. doi: 10.1186/s12974-018-1262-x.30103772
177. van Dalen JW , Marcum ZA , Gray SL , Barthold D , Moll van Charante EP , van Gool WA , Crane PK , Larson EB , Richard E . Association of Angiotensin II-Stimulating Antihypertensive Use and Dementia Risk: Post Hoc Analysis of the PreDIVA Trial. Neurology. 2021 Jan 5;96 (1 ):e67–e80. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010996. Epub 2020 Nov 5.33154085
178. Wharton W , Stein JH , Korcarz C , Sachs J , Olson SR , Zetterberg H , Dowling M , Ye S , Gleason CE , Underbakke G , Jacobson LE , Johnson SC , Sager MA , Asthana S , Carlsson CM . The effects of ramipril in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease: results of a pilot clinical trial. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;32 (1 ):147–56. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120763.22776970
179. O’Caoimh R , Healy L , Gao Y , Svendrovski A , Kerins DM , Eustace J , Kehoe PG , Guyatt G , Molloy DW . Effects of centrally acting angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors on functional decline in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40 (3 ):595–603. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131694.24496072
180. Yasar S , Lin FM , Fried LP , Kawas CH , Sink KM , DeKosky ST , Carlson MC; Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory (GEM) Study Investigators. Diuretic use is associated with better learning and memory in older adults in the Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory Study. Alzheimers Dement. 2012 May;8 (3 ):188–95. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.010. Epub 2012 Mar 30.22465175
181. Barcelos NM , Van Ness PH , Wagner AF , MacAvoy MG , Mecca AP , Anderson GM , Trentalange M , Hawkins KA , Sano M , Arnsten AFT , van Dyck CH . Guanfacine treatment for prefrontal cognitive dysfunction in older participants: a randomized clinical trial. Neurobiol Aging. 2018 Oct;70 :117–124. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.05.033. Epub 2018 May 31.30007160
182. de Jong DLK , de Heus RAA , Rijpma A , Donders R , Olde Rikkert MGM , Günther M , Lawlor BA , van Osch MJP , Claassen JAHR. Effects of Nilvadipine on Cerebral Blood Flow in Patients With Alzheimer Disease. Hypertension. 2019 Aug;74 (2 ):413–420. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.119.12892. Epub 2019 Jun 17.31203725
183. Smith AD , Smith SM , de Jager CA , Whitbread P , Johnston C , Agacinski G , Oulhaj A , Bradley KM , Jacoby R , Refsum H . Homocysteine-lowering by B vitamins slows the rate of accelerated brain atrophy in mild cognitive impairment: a randomized controlled trial. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 8;5 (9 ):e12244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012244.20838622
184. Douaud G , Refsum H , de Jager CA , Jacoby R , Nichols TE , Smith SM , Smith AD . Preventing Alzheimer’s disease-related gray matter atrophy by B-vitamin treatment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 4;110 (23 ):9523–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1301816110. Epub 2013 May 20.23690582
185. Chen H , Liu S , Ji L , Wu T , Ji Y , Zhou Y , Zheng M , Zhang M , Xu W , Huang G . Folic Acid Supplementation Mitigates Alzheimer’s Disease by Reducing Inflammation: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016 :5912146. doi: 10.1155/2016/5912146. Epub 2016 Jun 2.27340344
186. Ma F , Zhou X , Li Q , Zhao J , Song A , An P , Du Y , Xu W , Huang G . Effects of Folic Acid and Vitamin B12, Alone and in Combination on Cognitive Function and Inflammatory Factors in the Elderly with Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Single-blind Experimental Design. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2019;16 (7 ):622–632. doi: 10.2174/1567205016666190725144629.31345146
187. Chen H , Liu S , Ge B , Zhou D , Li M , Li W , Ma F , Liu Z , Ji Y , Huang G . Effects of Folic Acid and Vitamin B12 Supplementation on Cognitive Impairment and Inflammation in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease: A Randomized, Single-Blinded, Placebo-Controlled Trial. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2021;8 (3 ):249–256. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2021.22.34101780
188. Ford AH , Flicker L , Alfonso H , Thomas J , Clarnette R , Martins R , Almeida OP . Vitamins B(12), B(6), and folic acid for cognition in older men. Neurology. 2010 Oct 26;75 (17 ):1540–7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f962c4. Epub 2010 Sep 22.20861451
Erratum in: Neurology. 2011 Aug 23;77 ((8 ):804. Dosage error in published abstract; MEDLINE/PubMed abstract corrected; Dosage error in article text.
189. Kwok T , Wu Y , Lee J , Lee R , Yung CY , Choi G , Lee V , Harrison J , Lam L , Mok V . A randomized placebo-controlled trial of using B vitamins to prevent cognitive decline in older mild cognitive impairment patients. Clin Nutr 2020 Aug;39 (8 ):2399–2405. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2019.11.005. Epub 2019 Nov 20.31787369
190. Iturria-Medina Y , Sotero RC , Toussaint PJ , Mateos-Perez JM , Evans AC , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I . Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat Commun. 2016;7 :11934. Epub 2016/06/22. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11934.27327500
191. Love S , Miners JS . Cerebrovascular disease in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 2016;131 (5 ):645–58. Epub 2015/12/30. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1522-0.26711459
192. Nation DA , Sweeney MD , Montagne A , Sagare AP , D’Orazio LM , Pachicano M , Sepehrband F , Nelson AR , Buennagel DP , Harrington MG , Benzinger TLS , Fagan AM , Ringman JM , Schneider LS , Morris JC , Chui HC , Law M , Toga AW , Zlokovic BV . Blood-brain barrier breakdown is an early biomarker of human cognitive dysfunction. Nat Med. 2019;25 (2 ):270–6. Epub 2019/01/16. doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0297-y.30643288
193. Sweeney MD , Sagare AP , Pachicano M , Harrington MG , Joe E , Chui HC , Schneider LS , Montagne A , Ringman JM , Fagan AM , Morris JC , Pa J , Nation DA , Toga AW , Zlokovic BV . A novel sensitive assay for detection of a biomarker of pericyte injury in cerebrospinal fluid. Alzheimers Dement. 2020;16 (6 ):821–30. Epub 2020/04/18. doi: 10.1002/alz.12061.32301266
194. Lewis NA , Knight JE . Longitudinal associations between C-reactive protein and cognitive performance in normative cognitive ageing and dementia. Age Ageing. 2021;50 (6 ):2199–205. Epub 2021/07/30. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afab152.34324642
195. Hsu PF , Pan WH , Yip BS , Chen RC , Cheng HM , Chuang SY . C-Reactive Protein Predicts Incidence of Dementia in an Elderly Asian Community Cohort. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2017;18 (3 ):277 e7– e11. Epub 2017/02/06. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2016.12.006.
196. Llorens F , Hermann P , Villar-Pique A , Diaz-Lucena D , Nagga K , Hansson O , Santana I , Schmitz M , Schmidt C , Varges D , Goebel S , Dumurgier J , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Paquet C , Baldeiras I , Ferrer I , Zerr I . Cerebrospinal fluid lipocalin 2 as a novel biomarker for the differential diagnosis of vascular dementia. Nat Commun. 2020;11 (1 ):619. Epub 2020/02/01. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14373-2.32001681
197. Minta K , Brinkmalm G , Portelius E , Johansson P , Svensson J , Kettunen P , Wallin A , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Andreasson U . Brevican and Neurocan Peptides as Potential Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers for Differentiation Between Vascular Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;79 (2 ):729–41. Epub 2020/12/19. doi: 10.3233/JAD-201039.33337373
198. Winder Z , Sudduth TL , Anderson S , Patel E , Neltner J , Martin BJ , Snyder KE , Abner EL , Jicha GA , Nelson PT , Wilcock DM . Examining the association between blood-based biomarkers and human post mortem neuropathology in the University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center autopsy cohort. Alzheimers Dement. 2022. Epub 2022/03/11. doi: 10.1002/alz.12639.
199. Wang TJ , Gona P , Larson MG , Levy D , Benjamin EJ , Tofler GH , Jacques PF , Meigs JB , Rifai N , Selhub J , Robins SJ , Newton-Cheh C , Vasan RS . Multiple biomarkers and the risk of incident hypertension. Hypertension. 2007;49 (3 ):432–8. Epub 2007/01/24. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000256956.61872.aa.17242302
200. Obeid R , Kostopoulos P , Knapp JP , Kasoha M , Becker G , Fassbender K , Herrmann W . Biomarkers of folate and vitamin B12 are related in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Clin Chem. 2007;53 (2 ):326–33. Epub 2007/01/04. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2006.076448.17200133
201. Obeid R , Kasoha M , Knapp JP , Kostopoulos P , Becker G , Fassbender K , Herrmann W . Folate and methylation status in relation to phosphorylated tau protein(181P) and beta-amyloid(1–42) in cerebrospinal fluid. Clin Chem. 2007;53 (6 ):1129–36. Epub 2007/03/27. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2006.085241.17384003
202. Ding Q , Shults NV , Gychka SG , Harris BT , Suzuki YJ . Protein Expression of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) is Upregulated in Brains with Alzheimer’s Disease. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22 (4 ). Epub 2021/02/12. doi: 10.3390/ijms22041687.
203. Ding Q , Shults NV , Harris BT , Suzuki YJ . Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is upregulated in Alzheimer’s disease brain. bioRxiv. 2020. Epub 2020/10/15. doi: 10.1101/2020.10.08.331157.
204. Xin XY , Lai ZH , Ding KQ , Zeng LL , Ma JF . Angiotensin-converting enzyme polymorphisms AND Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility: An updated meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2021;16 (11 ):e0260498. Epub 2021/11/25. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260498.34818351
205. Nissar K , Rauf I , Hussain A , Shah P , Ganai B . Association of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme gene polymorphism and Alzheimer’s risk in Kashmiri population. Gene Reports. 2021;25 . doi: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101309.
206. Jadavji NM , Deng L , Leclerc D , Malysheva O , Bedell BJ , Caudill MA , Rozen R . Severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency in mice results in behavioral anomalies with morphological and biochemical changes in hippocampus. Mol Genet Metab. 2012;106 (2 ):149–59. Epub 2012/04/24. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.020.22521626
207. Dam K , Fuchtemeier M , Farr TD , Boehm-Sturm P , Foddis M , Dirnagl U , Malysheva O , Caudill MA , Jadavji NM . Increased homocysteine levels impair reference memory and reduce cortical levels of acetylcholine in a mouse model of vascular cognitive impairment. Behav Brain Res. 2017;321 :201–8. Epub 2017/01/15. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.12.041.28087280
208. Stoccoro A , Tannorella P , Salluzzo MG , Ferri R , Romano C , Nacmias B , Siciliano G , Migliore L , Coppede F . The Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase C677T Polymorphism and Risk for Late-Onset Alzheimer’s disease: Further Evidence in an Italian Multicenter Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;56 (4 ):1451–7. Epub 2017/02/18. doi: 10.3233/JAD-161081.28211809
209. Zuin M , Cervellati C , Trentini A , Roncon L , Guasti P , Zuliani G . Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C667T polymorphism and susceptibility to late-onset Alzheimer’s disease in the Italian population. Minerva Med. 2021;112 (3 ):365–71. Epub 2020/07/24. doi: 10.23736/S0026-4806.20.06801-9.32700867
210. Rai V Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (MTHFR) C677T Polymorphism and Alzheimer Disease Risk: a Meta-Analysis. Mol Neurobiol. 2017;54 (2 ):1173–86. Epub 2016/01/29. doi: 10.1007/s12035-016-9722-8.26820674
211. Durmaz A , Kumral E , Durmaz B , Onay H , Aslan GI , Ozkinay F , Pehlivan S , Orman M , Cogulu O . Genetic factors associated with the predisposition to late onset Alzheimer’s disease. Gene. 2019;707 :212–5. Epub 2019/05/19. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.030.31102717
