LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0404511
7473
Science
Science
Science (New York, N.Y.)
0036-8075
1095-9203

35771920
9610444
10.1126/science.abn5582
NIHMS1838903
Article
Mutations linked to neurological disease enhance self-association of low complexity protein sequences
Zhou Xiaoming
Sumrow Lily
Tashiro Kyuto
Sutherland Lillian
Liu Daifei
Qin Tian
Kato Masato
Liszczak Glen *
McKnight Steven L. *
Department of Biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
Author contributions:

Conceptualization: S.L.M., G.L., and X.Z. Methodology: G.L., S.L.M., T.Q., X.Z., and K.T. Investigation: X.Z., L.S., K.T., L.S. and D.L. Visualization: X.Z., G.L., S.L.M. and M.K. Writing, original draft: S.L.M. and G.L. Writing, review and editing: S.L.M., G.L., X.Z. and K.T.

* Corresponding authors. glen.liszczak@utsouthwestern.edu, steven.mcknight@utsouthwestern.edu
23 10 2022
7 2022
01 7 2022
01 1 2023
377 6601 eabn5582eabn5582
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Protein domains of low sequence complexity do not fold into stable, three-dimensional structures. Nevertheless, proteins with these sequences assist in many aspects of cell organization including assembly of nuclear and cytoplasmic structures not surrounded by membranes. The dynamic nature of these cellular assemblies traces to the ability of low complexity (LC) domains to transiently self-associate via labile, cross-β structures. Mechanistic studies useful for the study of LC domain self-association have evolved over the past decade in the form of simple assays of phase separation. Here we have used such assays to demonstrate that the interactions responsible for LC domain self-association can be dictated by labile protein structures poised close to equilibrium between the folded and unfolded states. We further show that missense mutations causative of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and frontotemporal dementia/Alzheimer’s disease manifest their pathophysiology by enhancing the stability of otherwise labile molecular structures formed upon LC domain self-association.


pmcIntroduction:

Most genes of eukaryotic cells encode proteins that fold into stable, morphologically unique structures. Methods of protein structure determination deployed over the past six decades, including recent contributions from computer-enabled structure prediction, have resolved the shapes of a large fraction of the proteins that enable biological life. Knowledge of the molecular structures of proteins has been of considerable value to the understanding of many aspects of biology.

Between 10 and 20% of the proteome found in eukaryotic cells are unusual in failing to be capable of adopting a stable, three-dimensional structure (1). These proteins were first discovered as the activation domains of transcription factors (2, 3), and differ from normal proteins by virtue of utilizing no more than a few of the twenty amino acid residues found in normal proteins. In this regard these unusual protein domains have been described as being of low sequence complexity. The activation domain of the SP1 transcription factor, as an example, is composed almost exclusively of glutamine residues (4). Knowing that normal proteins rely on the chemical complexity of many different types of amino acid residues to adopt their specific, three-dimensional shape, it is not surprising that transcriptional activation domains fail to adopt stable molecular structures.

Since their discovery three decades ago in studies of gene-specific transcription factors, it is now appreciated that low complexity (LC) domains are widespread. They decorate both ends of all 75 intermediate filament proteins found in mammals, they fill the central channel of nuclear pores, they adorn almost all RNA binding proteins, and they occur on the cytoplasmic faces of integral membrane proteins associated with mitochondria, neuronal vesicles, peroxisomes, lysosomes and the Golgi apparatus. Whereas LC domains constitute no more than 10–20% of the proteomes of eukaryotic organisms, they serve as the reservoir for 75% of the combined forms of post-translational modification used by cells to regulate protein function (5, 6). Unfolded LC domains allow optimal access to the enzymes responsible for both depositing and eliminating marks of post-translational modification.

Over the past two decades numerous reports have revealed the capacity of LC domains to self-associate in a manner leading to their phase separation from aqueous solution (7–11). Assays of phase separation have facilitated mechanistic studies probing how low complexity (LC) domains interact. Here we report two complementary approaches to study how LC domains self-associate. First, we describe biochemical experiments on the LC domain of an RNA binding protein designated TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43). Second, we investigate ten idiosyncratic mutations causative of human neurological disease that map within LC domains.

TDP-43 is an RNA binding protein involved in the movement of messenger RNA (mRNA) from the nucleus to cytoplasmic sites of translation. A growing list of mRNAs have been found to be translated in a localized manner, such that newly formed proteins are produced in locations proximal to their intended sites of need (12). During the process of movement from nuclear synthesis to cytoplasmic translation, mRNAs can be transiently organized in granular particles visible by light microscopy (12). These RNA granules are not encased within lipid membranes, and there is considerable interest in understanding how they are organized and regulated.

TDP-43 has long been recognized as a component of neuronal RNA granules that move mRNA molecules along the dendrites of neurons to facilitate enhanced translation at active synapses (13–15). A role in pathology is indicated by the fact that TDP-43 is frequently found in an aggregated state in the brain tissue of patients suffering from neurodegenerative disease (16, 17).

A carboxyl terminal region of the TDP-43 protein has been implicated in both its partitioning into RNA granules and its aberrant aggregation associated with disease. The carboxyl terminal 153 residues of TDP-43 represent an LC region thought to be intrinsically disordered (18). That the TDP-43 LC domain may help facilitate RNA granule formation is evidenced by its ability to become phase separated from aqueous solution. Upon incubation at high concentration under conditions of neutral pH and physiologically relevant monovalent salts, the TDP-43 LC domain quickly forms liquid-like droplets that mature into a gel-like state (19, 20). This behavior is reminiscent of the LC domains associated with many other RNA binding proteins that have likewise been implicated in the organization of RNA granules (9, 10, 21). The relationship of the TDP-43 LC domain to pathologic aggregation has been supported by the discovery of mutant amino acid substitutions within it causative of neurodegenerative disease (22, 23).

The LC domain of TDP-43 is different in one conspicuous regard from prototypical LC domains that phase separate. The latter proteins are routinely enriched with tyrosine or phenylalanine residues functionally important for phase separation (7, 8, 24–26). Instead of being enriched in aromatic amino acids, the LC domain of TDP-43 contains ten evolutionarily conserved methionine residues. This feature imparts oxidation sensitivity to phase separated liquid-like droplets and hydrogels formed from the TDP-43 LC domain (19). When exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), TDP-43 droplets melt in a manner correlated to the formation of methionine sulfoxide adducts. Upon chemical reduction by methionine sulfoxide reductase enzymes, thioredoxin, thioredoxin reductase and NADPH, the TDP-43 LC domain again coalesces into phase-separated droplets. This form of post-translational modification of the TDP-43 LC domain may define a redox switch allowing for locally controlled dissolution of RNA granules (19).

A segment of twenty five amino acids defines the region of the TDP-43 LC domain critical for self-association and phase separation. This region has been perfectly conserved through the 400M years of evolutionary divergence between fish and humans (19). This region has also been observed by chemical footprinting to assume a structurally ordered state in phase separated liquid-like droplets, hydrogels and living cells (19). The same region of the TDP-43 LC domain has been reported to form the molecular core of a morphologically specific cross-β structure (27).

The molecular assembly enabling self-association of the TDP-43 LC domain, like all cross-β structures, should be reliant on intermolecular hydrogen bonds to help anneal adjacent β strands. If the role of main-chain hydrogen bonding is essential to self-association and phase separation of the TDP-43 LC domain, it can be concluded that self-association and phase separation result from the formation of labile structural order. An understanding of structural order should in turn allow for an understanding of the effects of subtle, disease-causing mutations within LC domains. Here we report the results of experiments designed to test these assumptions.

Results:

A purified protein fragment corresponding to the intact low complexity (LC) domain of TDP-43 forms phase-separated liquid-like droplets within seconds after suspension at room temperature in a neutral pH buffer supplemented with 150 mM NaCl. As compared with denatured, unfolded protein, methionine residues 322 and 323 are protected from H2O2-mediated oxidation in phase separated preparations of the TDP-43 LC domain (19). These oxidation-resistant methionine residues co-localize with a dagger-like cross-β structure composed of 16 residues observed in three cryo-EM reconstructions of polymers formed from the TDP-43 LC domain (27). The dagger-like structure and locus of oxidation protection themselves co-localize with a stretch of 25 residues corresponding to the most evolutionarily conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain (19).

Similar patterns of oxidation protection of methionine residues 322 and 323 of the TDP-43 LC domain have been observed in liquid-like droplets, labile cross-β polymers and living cells (19). Based on co-localization of these two methionine residues within the three structures resolved by cryo-EM, we hypothesized that self-association and consequential phase separation of the TDP-43 LC domain might be nucleated by an assembly defined by the small cross-β structure.

Individual, main-chain hydrogen bonds are important for TDP43 self-association:

To experimentally investigate this hypothesis, we prepared twenty three variants of the TDP-43 LC domain differing only in chemical modification of the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of each residue within the ultra-conserved region of the protein. Variants carried an Nα-methyl group on individual peptide backbone nitrogen atoms, thus enabling a systematic analysis of the involvement of main-chain hydrogen bonding in self-association and phase separation of the protein into liquid-like droplets. Cryo-EM structures of TDP-43 LC domain polymers show that inter-peptide hydrogen bonds represent favorable adhesive forces holding protein chains together in a parallel, in-register cross-β conformation. Our experimental strategy allowed assessment as to whether hydrogen bonds located either within or outside of the cross-β structure might be required for phase separation.

Variants of the TDP-43 LC domain methyl-capped at individual backbone nitrogen atoms were assembled using a three-piece native chemical ligation strategy. Briefly, synthetic peptide thioesters bearing methyl-capped backbone nitrogen atoms at individual sites were inserted between flanking fragments of the TDP-43 LC domain that had been expressed in bacterial cells (Fig. 1). Ligation products were purified by HPLC and analyzed by mass spectrometry to confirm the addition of a single backbone methylation site. The only amino acid not evaluated in this manner was proline residue 320. Proline, which has a side chain that is twice connected to the peptide backbone to form a pyrrolidine ring, is the only amino acid devoid of the NH group required for main-chain hydrogen bonding.

The native TDP-43 LC domain sample and all twenty three variants were purified and assayed for the formation of phase separated liquid-like droplets in the presence of standard buffer as well as buffers supplemented with 0.4 M, 0.8 M or 1.2 M urea. Droplet formation was quantified in triplicate by a spectroscopic assay of turbidity and microscopic images of all proteins as observed in normal buffer and the three different concentrations of urea are shown in Supplemental Data, Fig. S1. As shown in Fig. 1, the intact LC domain of TDP-43 formed liquid-like droplets in native buffer. Fewer droplets were observed at 0.4 M urea, fewer still at 0.8 M urea, and no liquid-like droplets were observed in buffer supplemented with 1.2 M urea.

Compared with the native LC domain of TDP-43, the variant bearing a methyl cap on the peptide backbone nitrogen associated with alanine residue 324 formed fewer droplets in native buffer, fewer droplets in buffer supplemented with 0.4 M urea, and no droplets in buffer supplemented with either 0.8 M or 1.2 M urea. Thus, the variant bearing a methyl cap on the peptide backbone nitrogen associated with alanine 324 was diminished in its capacity to phase separate under the three conditions supportive of droplet formation by the intact TDP-43 LC domain. By contrast, a variant of the TDP-43 LC domain bearing a methyl cap on the peptide backbone nitrogen associated with methionine residue 337 formed morphologically indistinguishable droplets as compared with the native protein under all conditions tested. Droplet numbers quantified by turbidity for the 337meM variant were indistinguishable from the native protein.

In this way, spectroscopic measurements for phase separation and microscopic images were gathered for all twenty three Nα-methylated TDP-43 LC domain variants. The turbidity assays displayed in Fig. 2 revealed nine variants as being significantly impaired in their ability to phase separate, two variants as being partially impaired, and twelve variants as phase separating in a manner indistinguishable from the native protein. The histograms of Fig. 2C show normalized turbidity measurements for the twenty four protein samples (Y axis) relative to residue positions along the protein chain (X axis). One histogram shows normalized turbidity data collected in the absence of urea, one shows data collected in the presence of 0.4 M urea, and one shows data collected in the presence of 0.8 M urea. All three histograms reveal that all nine of the significantly impaired variants cluster between alanine residue 321 and alanine residue 329. The data shown in Fig. 2D and 2E further reveal that the region wherein removal of single hydrogen bonds impedes phase separation co-localizes with both the footprinted region of structure-dependent oxidation protection, as well as the cross-β structure resolved by cryo-EM (19, 27).

A molecular structure has been determined for a hexapeptide segment of the TDP-43 LC domain spanning residues 321–326 (28). This hexapeptide forms parallel β-sheets wherein strands are held together by main-chain hydrogen bonds. Each of these six residues, if bearing a methyl group on their peptide backbone nitrogen in the context of the intact TDP-43 LC domain, exhibited a weakened propensity to phase separate into liquid-like droplets (Fig. 2).

Having analyzed the twenty three Nα-methylated TDP-43 LC domain variants, we prepared samples wherein three peptide backbone nitrogen atoms were concomitantly methylated. One such variant capped the peptide backbone nitrogen atoms of residues A321, M323 and A325, the other capped the peptide nitrogen atoms of residue M323, A325 and Q327. The same methods of peptide synthesis and three-piece chemical ligation as described in Fig. 1 were used to assemble these variants of the TDP-43 LC domain. As shown in Fig. 3, both variants were severely impeded with respect to the formation of phase separated liquid-like droplets. No droplets were observed for either variant in the presence of any concentration of added urea, and the number of droplets formed in the absence of urea was significantly reduced.

By devising and deploying methods of semi-synthetic protein chemistry, we have systematically evaluated the importance of twenty three peptide backbone amide protons within the TDP-43 LC domain for formation of phase-separated liquid-like droplets. Denial of hydrogen bonding capacity in a localized region of the TDP-43 LC domain distinctly weakened protein self-association. This region of sensitivity to the focused removal of hydrogen bonds falls within a known cross-β structure. As such, our observations comport with the proposed involvement of the small cross-β structure in self-association and phase separation by the TDP-43 LC domain. These observations further conform to previous studies of the fused-in-sarcoma (FUS) and hnRNPA2 LC domains where labile cross-β structures also play a role in phase separation (9, 29).

The experimental observations reported in this study give evidence of the importance of main-chain hydrogen bonding for self-association and phase separation of the TDP-43 LC domain. That elimination of single hydrogen bonds can reproducibly yield distinct phenotypic deficits gives evidence of the inherent lability of the cross-β structure responsible for self-association of the TDP-43 LC domain.

Several publications suggest that the TDP-43 LC domain can adopt an α-helical conformation in the same region we have shown to function via the formation of labile cross-β interactions (18, 30, 31). Evidence of α-helical conformation has been observed by solution NMR spectroscopy under conditions of acidic pH and in the absence of monovalent salt. Two such studies have shown that when pH is raised to neutral, NMR spectra diagnostic of α-helical conformation disappear and are replaced by spectra diagnostic of β strand conformation (18, 30). Thus the α-helical conformation is likely not stable under physiological conditions of pH and salt, as used in our experiments.

Amino acid side chains are important to self-association of the TDP-43 LC domain:

Whereas data presented in Figures 1, 2 and 3 give evidence that main-chain hydrogen bonding is important for self-association of the TDP-43 LC domain, they fail to address the potential importance of amino acid side chains. In the absence of side chain-mediated chemical interactions, there would be no opportunity for specificity in formation of the cross-β structure itself. To investigate the functional involvement of amino acid side chains, we performed glycine scanning mutagenesis across the ultra-conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain. We chose glycine because of the chemical simplicity of its side chain.

The pattern of effects of twenty six side chain variants from amino acids 315–340 of the TDP-43 LC domain upon phase separation was similar to the pattern of effects resulting from hydrogen bond removal (Fig. 4). Substitution of any native residue between alanine 324 and leucine 330 by glycine led to the formation of either amorphous precipitates or distinctly misshapen droplets. This region of the protein was also most sensitive to methyl capping of individual peptide backbone nitrogen atoms (Fig. 2).

Of the ten variants located on the carboxyl-terminal side of leucine 330, only two caused notable changes in droplet morphology (G335S and G338S). These are the only positions within the region chosen for study that are represented by glycine in the native sequence of TDP-43 (and were changed to serine as part of the mutagenesis scan). Of the nine variants located on the amino-terminal side of alanine 324, only two caused notable changes in phase separation. Both the N319G and P320G variants led to the formation of amorphous precipitates. Among all twenty six variants tested, the P320G variant revealed the most profound effect on droplet formation. Immediately following suspension in aqueous buffer, the P320G variant formed a heavily tangled precipitate.

In addition to inspecting the twenty six glycine scanning variants in normal aqueous buffer, we analyzed droplet morphology in buffers supplemented with 0.4 M, 0.8 M and 1.2 M urea. As shown in Supplemental Data Fig. S2, the pattern of effects of glycine scanning variants was largely similar irrespective of the addition of urea. These added assays revealed that certain variants were, relative to the native protein, either more or less sensitive to the urea denaturant. In particular, the four “outlying” variants – N319G, P320G, G335S and G338S - continued to display either precipitates or misshapen droplets in the presence of 1.2 M urea (a condition that fully melts liquid-like droplets made from the native TDP-43 LC domain). In summary, these experiments confirm the importance of several amino acid side chains within the ultra-conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain for the formation of labile and morphologically spherical, phase separated droplets.

Proline residue 320 is important for the proper balance of TDP-43 self-association:

Having observed profound deficits in phase separation assays for the P320G variant, we wondered whether mutation of other proline residues within the TDP-43 LC domain might also lead to significant deficits. In addition to P320, the sequence of the LC domain specifies proline residues at positions 280, 349 and 363 outside of the ultra-conserved region (Fig. 5A). Each of these residues was individually changed to glycine followed by expression, purification and assay of phase separation. None of the three variants caused any effect on either the morphology or stability of phase separated liquid-like droplets (Fig. 5B). We thus conclude that proline residue 320 is of particular importance to function of the TDP-43 LC domain.

A number of well-validated, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-causing missense mutations map within or close to the ultra-conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain (23). Included among such mutations is the particularly well-studied M337V variant that leads to the formation of oxidation-resistant liquid-like droplets (19). These observations raise the question of why human genetic studies have failed to report ALS-causing missense mutations in proline residue 320?

Given its severe propensity to aggregate into stable precipitates, we considered the possibility that expression of the P320G variant might be incompatible with cell viability. To test this, U2OS cells were stably transformed with inducible transgenes encoding native TDP-43, the M337V ALS-causing variant, or the P320G variant. After isolating cell clones expressing comparable levels of the three proteins upon conditional induction, and no detectable expression of the proteins in the absence of the chemical inducer, we performed viability studies as a function of time post-induction. As shown in Fig. 5C, conditionally induced expression of the P320G variant substantially reduced cell viability. No such impediment to viability was observed for cells transformed with the parental expression vector, nor for cells conditionally expressing either the native TDP-43 protein or the ALS-causing M337V variant. We conclude that the P320G variant has not appeared in human genetic studies as an ALS-causing missense mutation because it is cell-lethal.

To investigate the behavior of the P320G variant in living cells, as compared with the native protein, the ALS-disposing M337V variant, and the three P-to-G variants at positions 280, 349 and 363, expression vectors were prepared linking each variant of TDP-43 to green fluorescent protein (GFP). U2OS cells were transiently transfected with each expression vector. Twenty four hours later the cells were visualized by confocal microscopy as shown in Fig. 5D. GFP signal associated with the fusion protein linked to the native TDP-43 protein was restricted to the nuclei of transfected cells, and the P280G, P349G and P363G variants yielded patterns of nuclear staining indistinguishable from the native TDP-43 protein. Similarly, we observed nuclear staining for the ALS-causing M337V variant. By contrast, the GFP signal for the P320G variant was almost exclusively restricted to the cytoplasm, with residual nuclear staining confined to prominent nuclear puncta.

Why does P320G show such an unusual phenotype? Recognizing that proline is the only amino acid not permissive of forming main-chain hydrogen bonds, its replacement by any other amino acid would obviously restore hydrogen bonding capacity. In addition to the P320G variant characterized thus far, we also mutated proline 320 to either serine or alanine. Both variants caused equally profound precipitation of the TDP-43 LC domain relative to the P320G variant in phase separation assays (Supplemental Data, Fig. S3). These observations suggest that P320 might function as a chemical insulator functioning to locally buffer the extent of cross-β interactions. This is consistent with the location of P320 between two adjacent β strands as revealed both by the dagger structure resolved by Eisenberg and colleagues, as well as an independent cryo-EM structure recently deduced for polymers formed from the intact TDP-43 LC domain (Fig. 2F) (27, 32). These independently resolved structures are virtually identical for the region of the TDP-43 LC domain spanning residues 314 to 327.

If the glycine or serine substitutions of proline residue 320 increase TDP-43 aggregation propensity by regenerating main-chain hydrogen bonds, this should be reversed by methylating the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of the glycine residue in P320G, or that of the serine residue in P320S. We again employed the TDP-43 synthesis strategy detailed in Fig. 1 to introduce a methyl cap onto the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of these two variant residues. In both cases, these efforts led to the rescue of phase separated liquid-like droplets (Fig. 5E).

Mutational variants of evolutionarily conserved proline residues in NFL, tau and hnRNPA2 enhance the stability of otherwise labile cross-β interactions:

The effects of the glycine, serine and alanine missense variants of proline 320 within the TDP-43 LC domain prompted us to search for disease-causing mutations within LC domains that might map to proline residues. We found idiosyncratic disease associated proline mutations within LC domains of the neurofilament light (NFL) chain protein, the microtubule-associated protein tau, and the heterogeneous nuclear RNPA2 (hnRNPA2) protein. Each of these proteins is known to be subject to autosomal dominant mutations of proline residues causative of disease, and each became the focus of our biochemical approach to the study of LC domains.

Mutations changing proline residue 8 or 22 of NFL cause CMT disease:

Human Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease can be caused by mutation of either of two proline residues located within the head domain of the NFL protein (33, 34). These autosomal dominant mutations change proline residue 8 to leucine, arginine or glutamine, or proline residue 22 to serine, threonine or arginine. Various assays have been used to confirm that these mutations impede the proper assembly of neurofilaments in living cells (33, 35, 36).

Intermediate filament (IF) proteins can be expressed in bacterial cells, purified and incubated under conditions permissive of formation of mature filaments. The first two steps in assembly - dimerization and tetramerization - are mediated solely by centrally located, α helical rod domains and can proceed in the absence of the head domain. By contrast, the head domains of IF proteins are essential for the subsequent assembly of eight tetramers into cylindrical filaments (37–39).

The head domains of IF proteins are of low sequence complexity and have long been thought to function in the absence of molecular structure (40, 41). Alternative observations, by contrast, have now been reported for the head domains of the desmin, vimentin, peripherin, neurofilament light chain, neurofilament medium chain and neurofilament heavy chain IF proteins. Isolated protein sample of each of these IF head domains have been found to phase separate via the formation of labile cross-β structures (42). In this regard, IF head domains share functional relatedness with the LC domains of certain RNA binding proteins that self-associate in the form of liquid-like droplets and hydrogels (8, 9).

A solid state NMR spectroscopy study showed that the head domains of the desmin and NFL intermediate filament proteins form labile cross-β structures (43). By use of intein ligation enabled segmental isotopic labeling, we showed that the NMR spectra of the isolated desmin and NFL head domains match the spectra observed in fully assembled intermediate filaments. Such studies are inconsistent with the notion that IF head domains function in the absence of molecular structure, and instead concluded that they form labile and reversible cross-β interactions. This concept of LC domain self-association conforms to similar studies on the LC domains of hnRNPA2, yeast ataxin-2, FUS (9, 29, 44) and our findings here on TDP-43.

The recent Zhou et al. (2021) study of IF head domains also evaluated human mutations in desmin causative of cardiac deficits, and in NFL causative of CMT disease (43). All desmin and NFL head domain mutations were found to enhance the stability of otherwise labile cross-β interactions. Such observations comport with the autosomal dominant nature of the human mutations in desmin and NFL, and suggest that aberrantly enhanced head domain self-association is incompatible with proper intermediate filament assembly.

The proximity of the P8 and P22 CMT mutations to the observed position of labile cross-β structure within the NFL head domain is reminiscent of findings for the P320G, P320S and P320A variants of the TDP-43 LC domain (Fig. 5 and Fig. S3). We reasoned that, as for P320 in TDP-43, proline residues 8 and 22 within the NFL head domain might locally buffer against the aberrant spread of cross-β structure. Consequently, mutations at these positions, which insulate cross-β structures, result in pathologic strengthening of head domain self-association. If correct, aberrant self-association may be reversed by eliminating the added hydrogen bond in mutant constructs. This idea was tested via methyl capping of the peptide backbone nitrogen atoms associated with the leucine, arginine and glutamine variants of P8, as well as the serine, threonine and arginine variants of P22.

Methylation of the peptide backbone nitrogen of CMT-causing mutational variants restores normal NFL protein function:

A native chemical ligation reaction was used to link synthetic peptides containing single, Nα-methyl amino acids to the remaining 517 residues of the NFL polypeptide (Fig. 6A). These semi-synthetic NFL proteins were purified and incubated under conditions conducive to assembly of mature intermediate filaments. As shown in Fig. 6B, NFL proteins bearing any of the six CMT mutations formed amorphous tangles. By contrast, all six of the methyl cap-repaired variants formed morphologically normal intermediate filaments indistinguishable from those assembled from the native NFL protein.

It was noticed that the P8Q, P8L, P8R, P22R, P22S and P22T N-terminal peptides were much more prone to precipitation than the cognate peptide bearing the native sequence. Surprisingly, the methyl-capped versions of these six CMT-mutated variants were uniformly more soluble than the parental substrates bearing normal peptide nitrogen atoms at the P8Q, P8L, P8R, P22R, P22S and P22T positions. We turned to acquisition of thioflavin-T (ThT) fluorescence to evaluate the kinetics of peptide aggregation (Fig. 6C). The peptide containing the native NFL sequence showed no evidence of polymerization as revealed by time-dependent increase in ThT fluorescence. In contrast, peptides containing each of the six CMT-causing variations within the NFL head domain showed prominent ThT curves. In the case of all six CMT mutants, methyl-capping of the peptide backbone nitrogen atom associated with the variant amino acids completely eliminated peptide polymerization.

Of note, three of the variant peptides, P8L, P8Q and P8R, became insoluble immediately upon dilution into aqueous buffer, thus preventing assays of time-dependent polymerization. The problem of insolubility was overcome by performing ThT assays in the presence of either 1M urea (for P8Q and P8R) or 2M urea (for P8L). All other peptides were assayed in normal aqueous buffer.

Enhanced peptide polymerization (Fig. 6C) and aberrant IF assembly (Fig. 6B) were assumed to result from mutation-directed strengthening of NFL head domain self-association. To test this prediction, synthetic peptides carrying the P8Q and P22S mutations, or Nα-methyl derivatives thereof, were ligated to the remainder of the NFL head domain (Fig. 6A). Ligation products were purified and incubated under conditions known to distinguish between the solubility of the native head domain of NFL relative to CMT mutational variants (43). As shown in Supplemental Data Fig. S5, the native NFL head domain was soluble under such conditions, variants carrying either the P8Q or P22S mutations were not, and methyl-capping of the peptide backbone nitrogen atoms associated with P8Q and P22S fully restored solubility.

Esterification of the peptide bond associated with the P8L CMT variant of the NFL head domain restores normal protein function:

We propose that each of the three variants at the P8 position, as well as the three variants at the P22 position, cause the strengthening of an otherwise labile and transient cross-β structure useful for NFL head domain self-assembly. Enhanced strength of self-association is interpreted to result from an extended hydrogen bond network, and this extension is prevented by methyl capping of the peptide backbone nitrogen atoms associated with the variant amino acid residues. To further probe this concept, we employed a different chemical approach to prevent hydrogen bonding by one of the variant amino acid residues. Instead of methyl capping the peptide backbone nitrogen associated with the leucine residue of the P8L CMT mutant, we replaced the peptide backbone nitrogen with oxygen (Fig. 7A).

A synthetic peptide bearing an amide-to-ester backbone substitution at the P8L site was ligated to the remainder of the NFL protein. The semi-synthetic protein was purified and incubated under conditions suitable for assembly of intermediate filaments. As shown in Fig. 7B, this amide-to-ester variant formed intermediate filaments indistinguishable from those assembled from the native NFL protein. Thus, esterification at the appropriate position of the polypeptide chain repaired the P8L deficit to an extent indistinguishable from methyl-capping of the P8L peptide backbone nitrogen. We further observed that the amide-to-ester substitution fully solubilized the P8L synthetic peptide as determined by time-dependent acquisition of ThT fluorescence (Fig. 7C).

L-5,5-dimethylproline functionally replaces proline residue 8 of the NFL head domain:

Other than being the sole amino acid incapable of forming main-chain hydrogen bonds, proline is also notable for its ability to adopt either the cis or trans peptide bond conformation. To probe the potential importance of this chemical feature of proline, we replaced proline residue 8 of the NFL head domain with 5,5-dimethyl-L-proline (dmP) (Fig. 7A). Relative to the normal proline side chain, dmP strongly prefers the cis conformation (45).

A synthetic peptide carrying dmP at residue eight was ligated to the remainder of NFL. The purified ligation product was tested for capacity of the semi-synthetic protein to assemble into intermediate filaments. As shown in Fig. 7B, the dmP derivative assembled into intermediate filaments indistinguishable from those formed from the native NFL protein. Consistently, the dmP-containing peptide was equally soluble to the native peptide corresponding to the first twenty five residues of the NFL head domain as assayed by time-dependent acquisition of ThT fluorescence (Fig. 7C). These experiments provide no evidence that restriction of proline residue 8 of the NFL head domain to its cis conformation has any effect on protein function.

The rescue experiments of Fig. 6 strongly suggest that no aspect of proline residues 8 or 22 of the NFL polypeptide, other than their inability to participate in main-chain hydrogen bonding, is of substantive relevance to function of the NFL head domain. Any of three different amino acids, leucine, glutamine or arginine, can substitute for P8 so long as their peptide backbone nitrogen atom is methylated. Likewise, arginine, serine or threonine residues can functionally substitute for P22 so long as their peptide backbone nitrogen atom is methylated. Given the substantive differences between the chemical scaffolds of leucine, glutamine, arginine, serine and threonine – relative to that of proline – we conclude that our observations of functional rescue are likely attributable to removing hydrogen bonding capacity.

Methylation of the peptide backbone nitrogen of tau mutational variants restores protein solubility:

With this insight into why mutation of NFL to several other amino acids in place of proline 8 or proline 22 manifests in a biochemical sense, we looked for similarly idiosyncratic proline mutations causative of neurodegenerative disease. Perhaps the most penetrant mutation of the cytoplasmic tau protein causative of neurodegenerative disease maps to proline residue 301. Disease-causing changes of this P301 residue include substitution by leucine, serine or threonine (46–50). Knowing that tau mutations prompt formation of amyloid-like aggregates (51, 52), we reasoned that P301 might insulate against the spread of localized cross-β structure in the normal protein.

Previous studies have already provided compelling evidence that synthetic peptides corresponding to residues 295–311 of tau gain a strong propensity to aggregate if proline residue 301 is changed to either leucine or serine (52). The importance of peptide backbone rotation was favored based on the differential effects of substituting proline with either the cis (2S,4S) or trans (2S,4R) conformer of 4-fluoroproline (Fig. 8A) (53). The latter conformer was reported to favor peptide aggregation in a manner similar to the P301L and P301S mutations.

We prepared these same peptides, spanning residues 295–311 of the tau polypeptide, and confirmed that the P301L, P301S and P301T mutations profoundly affect solubility, relative to the peptide bearing the native tau sequence, as deduced by ThT fluorescence. We failed, however, to observe any difference in peptide solubility when either the cis or trans conformer of 4-fluoroproline was used in place of proline at residue 301 (Fig. 8B).

Extending from these observations we prepared peptide derivatives in which a methyl cap was placed on the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of the leucine, serine or threonine mutational variant residues. As shown in Fig. 8B, the methyl-capped derivatives of all three tau variant peptides regained solubility indistinguishable from the native tau peptide.

Moving from test tube reactions to living cells, we employed a tau biosensor cell line expressing tau-CFP and tau-YFP. The fluorescent tau protein in these cells is homogeneously distributed, yet can be converted to a punctate distribution when the cells are exposed to pathological tau aggregates (54, 55). Each of the tau peptides studied in biochemical assays (Fig. 8B) was internalized by lipofection into the tau biosensor cell line. As shown in Fig. 8C, the native tau peptide did not affect the intracellular distribution of fluorescent tau, nor did peptide variants carrying either conformer of 4-fluroproline. Peptides corresponding to the P301L, P301S and P301T mutations, upon introduction into the tau biosensor cells, led to aggregation of the endogenous tau protein. Finally, synthetic peptide variants of the P301L, P301S and P301T mutants bearing a methyl cap on the leucine, serine or threonine residue caused no detectable aggregation of endogenous tau.

Methylation of the peptide backbone nitrogen of an hnRNPA2 mutational variant restores protein function:

We also examined the familial, early-onset Paget’s disease mutation of proline residue 298 in the gene encoding hnRNPA2 (56). Our attention to this mutation, aside from its altering of a conserved proline residue, came from the fact that the mutation is located within an LC domain long understood to self-associate in a manner leading to phase separation. Indeed, the P298L Paget’s disease mutation is located in the middle of the labile cross-β core of the hnRNPA2 protein as characterized by biochemical footprinting, solid state NMR spectroscopy and cryo-electron microscopy (56–58).

A three-piece native chemical ligation strategy was implemented to incorporate a synthetic peptide encompassing the site of the P298L mutation into the remainder of the hnRNPA2 LC domain (Fig. 9A). Reconstruction of the native hnRNPA2 LC domain yielded a protein that phase separated into spherical, liquid-like droplets. The reconstructed variant carrying the P298L mutation formed distinctly misshapen droplets as have been observed by other investigators (59). Methyl-capping of the variant leucine residue yielded a protein that phase separated into spherical, liquid-like droplets indistinguishable from those made by the native hnRNPA2 LC domain (Fig. 9B).

To further evaluate variant-mediated enhancement of self-association of the hnRNPA2 LC domain, we monitored the time-dependent acquisition of ThT fluorescence. The same, 20 residue peptides used to assemble the intact LC domain of hnRNPA2 assayed in Fig. 9B were incubated in the presence of ThT. Neither the peptide bearing the native sequence, nor that bearing a methyl cap on the leucine residue of the P298L variant, exhibited any evidence of polymerization. By contrast, the P298L peptide exhibited robust, time-dependent acquisition of ThT fluorescence (Fig. 9C).

As in the cases of the other nine mutations evaluated in this study, removing the capacity for main-chain hydrogen bonding for the leucine residue of the P298L variant fully restored properly balanced self-associative capacity to the hnRNPA2 LC domain. This conclusion can be drawn from assays of both phase separation of the intact LC domain (Fig. 9B), and peptide polymerization as visualized by time-dependent acquisition of ThT flourescence (Fig 9C).

Discussion:

We have applied a combination of biochemical and genetic approaches to the study of LC domain function. These efforts allowed us to systematically evaluate the importance of twenty three peptide backbone amide protons within the TDP-43 LC domain for formation of phase-separated liquid-like droplets. Denial of hydrogen bonding capacity in a localized region of the TDP-43 LC domain distinctly weakened protein self-association. This region of sensitivity to the focused removal of main-chain hydrogen bonds falls within a known cross-β structure.

Our findings comport with the proposed involvement of a small cross-β structure in self-association and phase separation by the TDP-43 LC domain, and conform to previous studies of the FUS, hnRNPA2, and ataxin-2 LC domains that also employ labile cross-β structures accounting for the mechanistic basis of phase separation (9, 29, 44, 60). These data further agree with studies of the LC head domains functionally essential for assembly of the desmin and NFL intermediate filament proteins (42, 43), and the LC tail domain of the Drosophila melanogaster TM1-I/C protein essential for the formation of germ granules located at the posterior tip of fly eggs (61).

In addition to studies focused on main-chain hydrogen bonding, glycine scanning mutagenesis experiments were performed to assess the importance of amino acid side chains to the phenomena of LC domain self-association and phase separation. The results confirm the importance of many amino acid side chains, particularly those proximal to the region of the TDP-43 LC domain that is both protected from methionine oxidation in the self-associated state and responsible for formation of the cross-β structure.

Whereas the same region of the TDP-43 LC domain is sensitive to systematic elimination of the capacity for main-chain hydrogen bonding (Fig. 2 and Fig. S1), and systematic variation of side chains (Fig. 4 and Fig. S2), close inspection of the data reveals that the different methods of disruption led to different trends. If a variant resulting from peptide backbone methylation had any phenotypic effect on phase separation, the effect universally weakened liquid-like droplets (Fig. 2 and Fig. S1). By contrast, many side chain variants caused the formation of droplets or aggregates that were more urea-resistant than those formed by the native TDP-43 LC domain.

A second difference between variants made by the two approaches was observed for droplet morphology. Preventing single main-chain hydrogen bonds tended to yield liquid-like droplets with normal spherical morphology. Almost all side chain variants with phenotypic effects either yielded droplets with misshapen morphology, or amorphous precipitates as exemplified by the P320G variant. We offer that spherically homogeneous droplet morphology may represent a surrogate assay for formation of the properly organized molecular assembly.

Serendipitously, we discovered the importance of proline residue 320. We propose that by lacking the backbone amide proton essential for main-chain hydrogen bonding, P320 attenuates the network of hydrogen bonds employed to form a small and labile cross-β structure located in the ultra-conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain. Having noticed β strands on both sides of P320 in Cryo-EM structures (Fig. 2F), we propose that restoration of the capacity for main-chain hydrogen bonding at this position might allow formation of a long and aberrantly stable cross-β structure. The properties of this aberrant structure are predicted to drive aggregation that restricts TDP-43 to the cytoplasm and kills cultured mammalian cells.

Recognition of the importance of proline 320 to the proper balance of self-association by the TDP-43 LC domain led to focused studies of ten idiosyncratic proline mutations causative of human disease. All ten mutations localize to one of four proline residues, two in the head domain of NFL, one in tau, and one in hnRNPA2. Functional assays of the NFL, tau and hnRNPA2 proteins allowed us to probe how mutations of these four proline residues might manifest at a mechanistic level. In all ten cases, we were able to functionally repair the mutation-specified variant proteins by eliminating the capacity of the variant amino acid residue to participate in main-chain hydrogen bonding.

These studies revealed functional rescue of the NFL P8L variant by either methylation of the peptide backbone nitrogen of the variant leucine residue, or replacement of this nitrogen with oxygen. Amide nitrogen methylation can influence phi:psi angles of the peptide backbone (62). It is likewise possible that the amide-to-ester chemical change might influence protein function in some manner other than elimination of the capacity for hydrogen bonding. That both backbone nitrogen methylation and esterification resulted in full correction of protein function favors the parsimonious conclusion that both chemical modifications manifest restorative activity by eliminating the capacity for hydrogen bonding.

The results reported herein help bridge human genetics and biochemistry. If our interpretations are correct, we are now able to understand how the variant proteins encoded by certain proline mutations change the properties of the LC domain in which they reside. Our experiments should also facilitate bioinformatic searches for similarly idiosyncratic proline mutations described by geneticists over the past several decades. We predict that if a proline residue is the locus of recurrent mutations, if the mutations are dominant, and if the mutations lie within an LC domain, then the mechanistic basis for their deleterious effects might match what we describe for mutations in NFL, tau and hnRNPA2.

Here we began with biochemical experiments and leveraged the knowledge gained to examine disease mutations identified by human genetics. Overall our results yield a common interpretation. Protein domains of low sequence complexity self-associate through the formation of labile structures poised at the threshold of equilibrium. Importantly, despite their labile nature, there is sequence specificity to the formation of these structures. This specificity is dictated by the cardinal rules of structural biology taught to us by Pauling, Perutz, Kendrew and the icons of X-ray crystallography. Our interpretations give evidence that evolution of LC domains has favored the formation of protein chains designed to self-associate weakly. Deleterious effects result if these domains bear mutation-specified variation causative of enhanced self-association.

These and previous studies have mapped the regions responsible for LC domain self-association to relatively small cross-β cores constituting no more than a fraction of the intact LC domain. Once these localized cross-β cores self-associate, the remaining regions of the LC domain dangle off in an unstructured state. Others have suggested how these unstructured regions that flank the transiently formed cross-β elements of LC domains might be of biological utility. Tyrosine, phenylalanine or methionine residues might function as adhesive “stickers” to facilitate non-specific interactions with other LC domains (63), thus allowing the self-assembled cross-β core to nucleate a larger and more complex assembly. It is likewise possible that small sequence elements designated LARKS (low-complexity aromatic-rich kinked segments) may facilitate biologically useful tertiary interactions (64).

We note that the disease associated mutational variants of the NFL head domain and the hnRNPA2 LC domain studied herein localize to cross-β cores, not to the unstructured protein regions located outside of the cores. Core-proximal ALS-causing mutations have also been characterized for FUS, hnRNPA1, hnRNPDL, and a mutational variant of hnRNPA2 different from that characterized in this study (57, 65). We offer that a polypeptide region that exists in conformational equilibrium between a folded and unfolded state could have the folded state stabilized by a single missense mutation. By contrast, we predict that the opportunity for mutational variants to influence LC domain function is diminished if they occur in polypeptide regions that do not specify labile, structure-based self-association.

All cross-β interactions allowing for LC domain self-association reported to date are organized in a parallel, “in-register” conformation (27, 29, 32, 61, 66). This organization aligns each residue along the self-interacting interface with its sister residue of the paired polypeptide chain. Despite the fact that hydrogen bonding along the polypeptide main-chain contributes significant interaction energy to each structure, amino acid side chains are undoubtedly important both for interaction specificity and properly tuned avidity. Given the small sizes of the cross-β forming regions, coupled with the uniform, “in-register” geometry of pairing, it may someday be possible to deduce an interaction code that will allow for computational identification of the regions of LC domains responsible for self-interaction.

We close with two considerations. First, the labile interactions conceptualized in this and other studies of LC domain self-association likely assist in thousands of different cellular processes. Second, the labile and reversible nature of these interactions frequently leaves LC domains in an unstructured state readily accessible for almost any form of post-translational modification. The combination of these features raises the possibility that many forms of dynamic cell behavior may be controlled by regulatory events directly operative upon LC domains.

Materials and Methods

Molecular cloning

Standard gene cloning and mutagenesis strategies were used to generate expression constructs for all recombinant proteins.

For plasmid constructs used in the glycine mutagenesis scanning experiment, wild type TDP-43 low complexity domain (residues: 262–414) and its variants were cloned into pHis-parallel vector to yield His-TDP-43 low complexity domain (LCD) constructs. Recombinant GyrA intein fusion fragments of the TDP-43 low complexity domain that were required for expressed protein ligation were cloned into the pHis-parallel vector. The complete scan required two distinct three-piece ligation strategies and thus two separate intein fusion fragments (Strategy A, Piece 1, residues 262–314 and Strategy B, Piece 1, residues 262–326) of the TDP-43 LCD. The two separate, recombinant piece three constructs (Strategy A, Piece 3, residues 328–414 and Strategy B, Piece 3, residues 341–414) of the TDP-43 LCD were fused with a 6×His-SUMO tag at N-terminus and a GryA intein at C-terminus in pET-28a vector. Wild type TDP-43 and mutant constructs for transient transfection of cultured U2OS cells were cloned as N-terminal GFP fusions in the pCDNA 3.1 vector with an N-terminal FLAG tag. For stable, inducible TDP-43 expression in mammalian cells, full Length WT, P320G, and M337V were constructed in the CMV mammalian expression vector containing the Tet operator and an N-terminal FLAG-GFP tag.

For native chemical ligation-compatible NFL fragments, an N-terminal 6×His-GFP tag was fused to constructs that would ultimately yield the head domain (residues 27–87) and full length (residues 27–543) constructs. A caspase 3 cleavage site (GDEVDC) was inserted between GFP and the NFL fragments such that digestion would yield NFL fragments bearing an N-terminal cysteine at amino acid position 27. These constructs were built into the pHis-parallel vector.

The hnRNPA2-intein fusion fragment (hnRNPA2 residues 181–284 with a C-terminal GyrA intein fusion) was inserted in the pHis-parallel vector. A 6×His tag was appended to C-terminus, and N-terminal 6×His tag was omitted during cloning. The N-terminal 6×His-tagged wild type hnRNPA2 LCD (residues 181–341) and its variants were made by inserting the LCD fragment into the pHis-parallel vector.

Recombinant TDP-43 Piece 1 and Piece 3 sequences

Strategy 1, Piece 1: 6xHis-TDP-43 (residues 262–314)

SYYHHHHHHDYDIPTTENLYFQGAMDPEFPKHNSNRQLERSGRFGGNPGGFGNQGGFGNSRGGGAGLGNNQGSNMGGGMNFG-thioester

Strategy 2, Piece 1: 6xHis-TDP-43 (residues 262–327)

SYYHHHHHHDYDIPTTENLYFQGAMDPEFPKHNSNRQLERSGRFGGNPGGFGNQGGFGNSRGGGAGLGNNQGSNMGGGMNFGAFSINPAMMAAAQA-thioester

Strategy 1, Piece 3: TDP-43 (residues 329–414; A329C)

CLQSSWGMMGMLASQQNQSGPSGNNQNQGNMQREPNQAFGSGNNSYSGSNSGAAIGWGSASNAGSGSGFNGGFGSSMDSKSSGWGM

Strategy 2, Piece 3: TDP-43 (residues 341–414; A341C)

CSQQNQSGPSGNNQNQGNMQREPNQAFGSGNNSYSGSNSGAAIGWGSASNAGSGSGFNGGFGSSMDSKSSGWGM

Recombinant NFL and hnRNPA2 fragment sequences

hnRNPA2 (residues: 181–284)

MQEVQSSRSGRGGNFGFGDSRGGGGNFGPGPGSNFRGGSDGYGSGRGFGDGYNGYGGGPGGGNFGGSPGYGGGRGGYGGGGPGYGNQGGGYGGGYDNYGGGNYG-thioester

NFL (S27C, residues 27–86, for head domain assembly)

CSVRSGYSTARSAYSSYSAPVSSSLSVRRSYSSSSGSLMPSLENLDLSQVAAISNDLKSI

NFL (S27C, residues 27–543, for full length assembly)

CSVRSGYSTARSAYSSYSAPVSSSLSVRRSYSSSSGSLMPSLENLDLSQVAAISNDLKSIRTQEKAQLQDLNDRFASFIERVHELEQQNKVLEAELLVLRQKHSEPSRFRALYEQEIRDLRLAAEDATNEKQALQGEREGLEETLRNLQARYEEEVLSREDAEGRLMEARKGADEAALARAELEKRIDSLMDEISFLKKVHEEEIAELQAQIQYAQISVEMDVTKPDLSAALKDIRAQYEKLAAKNMQNAEEWFKSRFTVLTESAAKNTDAVRAAKDEVSESRRLLKAKTLEIEACRGMNEALEKQLQELEDKQNADISAMQDTINKLENELRTTKSEMARYLKEYQDLLNVKMALDIEIAAYRKLLEGEETRLSFTSVGSITSGYSQSSQVFGRSAYGGLQTSSYLMSTRSFPSYYTSHVQEEQIEVEETIEAAKAEEAKDEPPSEGEAEEEEKDKEEAEEEEAAEEEEAAKEESEEAKEEEEGGEGEEGEETKEAEEEEKKVEGAGEEQAAKKKD

Recombinant protein expression and purification

All recombinant proteins used in this study were expressed in E.coli BL21 (DE3) cells grown to an OD600 of 0.6 in LB medium.

Expression of His-TDP-43 LCD proteins and Piece 1 proteins were induced with presence of 0.8 mM IPTG at 37° C for 4 h. Expression of Piece 3 proteins was induced with 0.6 mM IPTG at 16° C for 16 h. The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 15 min.

Expression of NFL proteins was induced with 0.6 mM IPTG at 16° C for 16 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 15 min. The hnRNPA2 LCD proteins were expressed via addition of 0.8 IPTG at 37° C and cells were harvested after 4 h.

For purification of His-TDP-43 LCD wild type and its variants, the cell pellets were resuspended in buffer A containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME), 20 mM imidazole, and disrupted by sonication. The cell lysates were clarified via centrifugation at 40,000 × g for 50 min. Supernatant was then applied to Ni2+-NTA resin (Qiagen) and the column washed with buffer A and eluted with buffer A supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. Pure protein was concentrated by centrifugal filtration (Amicon Ultra-15) and samples were aliquoted, flash frozen, and stored at −80 °C for future use.

For purification of recombinant TDP-43 LCD Piece 1 protein thioesters, the cell pellets were resuspended in buffer B, containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 8 M Urea, 1 mM TCEP, 20 mM imidazole, and disrupted by sonication. The resulting cell lysates were centrifugated at 40,000 × g for 50 min. The supernatants were applied to Ni2+-NTA resin (Qiagen) and the column washed with buffer B and eluted with buffer B supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. The purified protein was refolded via overnight dialysis against a buffer containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 1 M Urea, 1 mM TCEP. The refolded protein was centrifugated at 4,000 × g for 30 min to remove precipitation, and the supernatant was supplemented with 300 mM MES-Na, 10 mM TCEP, adjusted to pH 7.0, and incubated at room temperature for 16 h to achieve thiolysis. Following thiolysis, protein solution was spun at 4,000 × g for 30 min to isolate precipitation. Precipitated protein was resolubilized in a buffer containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl, 1 mM TCEP, and combined with the supernatant fraction and loaded onto Ni2+-NTA resin. The column was washed with a buffer containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl, 1 mM TCEP, 20 mM imidazole to remove unbound proteins. Piece 1-thioester was then eluted with the same buffer supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. The eluted Piece 1 fragment was supplemented with 1% TFA and purified by RP-HPLC (C4 preparative column). Fractions were analyzed by RP-HPLC and intact ESI-MS and pure fractions were lyophilized.

For purification of recombinant TDP-43 LCD Piece 3 constructs, the cell pellets were resuspended in buffer C containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 2 M Urea, 1 mM TCEP, 20 mM imidazole, and disrupted by sonication. The cell lysates were clarified via centrifugation at 40,000 × g for 50 min and supernatants were applied to Ni2+-NTA resin and the column washed with buffer C and eluted with buffer C supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. The eluted proteins were dialyzed against buffer C without imidazole for 3 h to remove imidazole. Following dialysis, Ulp1 enzyme was added to the protein solution for 1 h to remove the SUMO tag and 200 mM BME was added for 16 h to achieve GryA fusion hydrolysis. The solution was passed over Ni2+-NTA resin to capture cleaved SUMO and GryA proteins. Flow through containing Piece 3 was collected, supplemented with 1% TFA and purified by HPLC (C4 preparative column). Fractions were analyzed by RP-HPLC and intact ESI-MS and pure fractions were lyophilized.

For purification of NFL fragments, the cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 2 M Urea, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME), 20 mM imidazole, and disrupted by sonication. The cell lysates were clarified via centrifugation at 36,000 × g for 50 min and supernatants were applied to Ni2+-NTA resin (Qiagen) and the column washed with the lysis buffer and eluted with lysis buffer supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. The eluted proteins were dialyzed against lysis buffer without imidazole for 3 h. The caspase-3 enzyme was then added to the protein solution for 2 h to cleave the GFP tag while generating the N-terminal cysteine. The protein solution was again passed over Ni2+-NTA resin to capture the GFP fusion tag and any undigested protein. Flow through containing NFL fragments was collected, supplemented with 1% TFA, and purified via RP-HPLC (C4 preparative column). Purity was determined by analytical RP-HPLC and ESI-MS and pure fractions were pooled and lyophilized.

For purification of the hnRNPA2 LCD fragment, the cell pellet was resuspended in a lysis buffer containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 8 M Urea, 1 mM TCEP, 20 mM imidazole, and disrupted by sonication. The resulting cell lysates were centrifugated at 40,000 × g for 50 min. The supernatants were applied to Ni2+-NTA resin and the column washed with lysis buffer and eluted with lysis buffer supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. The purified protein was refolded via overnight dialysis against a buffer containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 1 M Urea, 1 mM TCEP. The refolded protein was then centrifugated at 4,000 × g for 30 min to remove any precipitates, and the cleared supernatant was supplemented with 300 mM MES-Na and incubated at room temperature for 16 h. Following the GryA thiolysis reaction, the protein solution was spun at 4,000 × g for 30 min to pellet any precipitate. The precipitated protein was resolubilized by a buffer containing 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl, 1 mM TCEP, and combined with supernatant fraction and loaded on Ni2+-NTA resin. The flow through containing free hnRNPA2 LCD fragment was collected, supplemented with 1% TFA, and purified by RP-HPLC. Purity was determined by analytical RP-HPLC and ESI-MS and pure fractions were pooled and lyophilized.

Preparation of SEA resin

bis(2-sulfanylethyl)amido (SEA) polystyrene resin was made following the protocol from Ollivier et al, 2014 (67).

Piece 2 TDP-43 peptides with C-terminal SEA (Strategy 1 residues 315–328; Strategy 2 residues 328–340)

Strategy 1, Piece 2 peptides

Sequence of TDP-43 WT (315–328, A315Thz)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 F316meF (315–328, A315Thz, F316meF)- SEA: Thz-meFSINPAMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 S317meS (315–328, A315Thz, S317MeS)- SEA: Thz-FmeSINPAMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 I318meI (315–328, A315Thz, I318MeI)- SEA: Thz-FSmeINPAMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 N319meN (315–328, A315Thz, N319meN)- SEA: Thz-FSImeNPAMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A321meA (315–328, A315Thz, A321meA)- SEA: Thz-FSINPmeAMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 M322meM (315–328, A315Thz, M322meM)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAmeMMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 M323meM (315–328, A315Thz, M323meM)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMmeMAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A324meA (315–328, A315Thz, A324meA)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMMmeAAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A325meA (315–328, A315Thz, A325meA)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMMAmeAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A326meA (315–328, A315Thz, A326meA)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMMAAmeAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 Q327meQ (315–328, A315Thz, Q327meQ)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMMAAAmeQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A328meA (315–328, A315Thz, A328meA)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMMAAAQmeA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A321meA-M323meM-A325meA (315–328, A315Thz, A321meA-M323meM-A325meA)- SEA: Thz-FSINPmeAMmeMAmeAAQA-SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 M323meM-A325meA-Q327meQ (315–328, A315Thz, M323meM-A325meA-Q327meQ)- SEA: Thz-FSINPAMmeMAmeAAmeQA-SEA

Strategy 2, Piece 2 peptides

Sequence of TDP-43 WT (328–340, A328Thz)- SEA: Thz-ALQSSWGMMGML - SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 A329meA (328–340, A329meA, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-meALQSSWGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 L330meL (328–340, L330meL, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-AmeLQSSWGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 Q331meQ (328–340, Q331meQ, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALmeQSSWGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 S332meS (328–340, S332meS, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQmeSSWGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 S333meS (328–340, S333meS, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSmeSWGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 W334meW (328–340, W334meW, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSSmeWGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 G335meG (328–340, G335meG, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSSWmeGMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 M336meM (328–340, M336meM, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSSWGmeMMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 M337meM (328–340, M337meM, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSSWGMmeMGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 G338meG (328–340, G338meG, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSSWGMMmeGML – SEA

Sequence of TDP-43 M339meM (328–340, M339meM, A328Thz)-SEA Thz-ALQSSWGMMGmeML – SEA

NFL peptides with C-terminal SEA

NFL wild type (2–26, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8L (2–26, P8L, I26L): SSFSYELYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8meL (2–26, P8meL, I26L): SSFSYEmeLYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8Q (2–26, P8Q, I26L): SSFSYEQYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8meQ (2–26, P8meQ, I26L): SSFSYEmeQYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8R (2–26, P8R, I26L): SSFSYERYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8meR (2–26, P8meR, I26L): SSFSYEmeRYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8dmP (2–26, P8dmP, I26L): SSFSYEdmPYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P8esL (2–26, P8esL, I26L): SSFSYEesLYYSTSYKRRYVETPRVHL-SEA

NFL P22R (2–26, P22R, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETRRVHL-SEA

NFL P22meR (2–26, P22meR, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETmeRRVHL-SEA

NFL P22S (2–26, P22S, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETSRVHL-SEA

NFL P22meS (2–26, P22meS, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETmeSRVHL-SEA

NFL P22T (2–26, P22T, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETTRVHL-SEA

NFL P22meT (2–26, P22meT, I26L): SSFSYEPYYSTSYKRRYVETmeTRVHL-SEA

hnRNPA2 peptides with C-terminal SEA

hnRNP A2 wild type (285–305, A285Thz): Thz-GNYNDFGNYNQQPSNYGPMK-SEA

hnRNP A2 P298L (285–305, P298L, A285Thz): Thz-GNYNDFGNYNQQLSNYGPMK-SEA

hnRNP A2 P298meL (285–305, P298meP, A285Thz): Thz-GNYNDFGNYNQQmeLSNYGPMK-SEA

where, SEA = bis(2-sulfanylethyl)amido group, dmP = L-5,5-Dimethylproline, me = Nα-methyl, es = ester, Thz = thiazolidine

Amidated peptides described in this study

hnRNPA2 (306–341, S306C):

CGNFGGSRNMGGPYGGGNYGPGGSGGSGGYGGRSRY-CONH2

tau-RD (295–311): DNIKHVPGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301S (295–311, P301S): DNIKHVSGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301meS (295–311, P301meS): DNIKHVmeSGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301T (295–311, P301T): DNIKHVTGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301meT (295–311, P301meT): DNIKHVmeTGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301L (295–311, P301L): DNIKHVLGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301meL (295–311, P301meL): DNIKHVmeLGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301P-cis (295–311, P301P-cis): DNIKHVPcisGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

tau-RD P301P-trans (295–311, P301P-trans) DNIKHVPtransGGGSVQIVYK-CONH2

where, me = Nα-methyl

Peptide synthesis

All fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl (Fmoc)-protected amino acids were purchased from Oakwood Chemical or Combi-Blocks. Peptide synthesis resins (Trityl-OH ChemMatrix and Rink Amide ChemMatrix) were purchased from Biotage. All analytical reversed-phase HPLC (RP-HPLC) was performed on an Agilent 1260 series instrument equipped with a quaternary pump and an XBridge Peptide C18 or C4 column (5 μm, 4 × 150 mm; Waters) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Similarly, semi-preparative scale purifications were performed employing a XBridge Peptide C18 or C4 semi-preparative column (5 μm, 10 mm × 250 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 4 mL/min. Preparative RP-HPLC was performed on an Agilent 1260 series instrument equipped with a preparatory pump and a XBridge Peptide C18 or C4 preparatory column (10 μM; 19 × 250 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 20 mL/min. All instruments were equipped with a variable wavelength UV-detector. All RP–HPLC steps were performed using 0.1% (trifluoroacetic acid, TFA, Oakwood Chemical) in H2O (Solvent A) and 90% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% TFA in H2O (Solvent B) as mobile phases. For LC/MS analysis, 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was substituted for TFA in mobile phases. Mass analysis was carried out for each product on an LC/MSD (Agilent Technologies) equipped with a 300SB-C18 column (3.5 μM; 4.6 × 100 mm, Agilent Technologies) or a X500B QTOF (Sciex).

All peptides containing C-terminal SEA were synthesized via solid-phase peptide synthesis on a CEM Discover Microwave Peptide Synthesizer (Matthews, NC) using the Fmoc-protection strategy on SEA resin (0.16 mmol/g; Iris Biotech). SEA resin was washed and swelled with N,N dimethylformamide (DMF, Oakwood Chemical) and bubbled in N2 for 15 min respectively. For manual loading of the first amino acid to SEA resin, Fmoc-alanine (10 eq; for Strategy 1 peptides), Fmoc-leucine (10 eq; for Strategy 2 peptides and NFL peptides), Fmoc-lysine (10 eq; hnRNPA2 peptides), HATU (10eq, Oakwood Chemical), and DIPEA (30eq, Sigma-Aldrich) were mixed in DMF and the resin was bubbled with N2 for 1 h. This step was repeated with fresh reagents to ensure complete loading. The resin was then washed with DMF and bubbled in acetic anhydride:DIPEA (20 eq:40 eq) in DMF for 20 min to quench unreacted sites. Subsequent peptide synthesis reactions were performed on an automated, microwave synthesizer. For coupling reactions, amino acids (5 eq) were activated with DIC (5 eq, Oakwood Chemical):Oxyma (5 eq, Oakwood Chemical) and heated to 90 °C for 2 min while bubbling with nitrogen gas in DMF. Fmoc deprotection was carried out with 20% piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMF supplemented with 0.1 M HOBt (Oakwood Chemical) at 90 °C for 1 minute while bubbling with nitrogen gas. Resin cleavage was performed with 95% TFA, 2.5% triisopropylsilane (TIS, Sigma-Aldrich), and 2.5% H2O for 3 h at 25 °C. The crude peptide was then precipitated by the addition of a 10-fold volume of ice-cold ether and centrifuged at 4,000 RCF for 10 min at 4 °C. To oxidize the C-terminal SEA, the pellet was washed with ice-cold ether and resuspended with buffer containing 6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.1 M sodium phosphate and 5% (v/v) DMSO at pH 7.5–8.0. This reaction was nutated at 25 °C for 16 h and SEA ring oxidation was confirmed by a −2 Da mass change via LC-MS. To deprotect Thz ring, 200 mM of O-methylhydroxylamine HCl (Combi-Blocks) was added to the reaction mixture and the pH of the reaction was adjusted to 4.0 and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Deprotection of the thiazolidine ring was confirmed by a −12 Da mass change via LC-MS. Oxidized and Thz deprotected peptides were purified via preparative C4 RP-HPLC. Fractions were analyzed on analytical C4 RP-HPLC and ESI-MS and those containing pure product (&gt;95%) were pooled, lyophilized, and stored at −80 °C.

The above amidated peptides were synthesized via solid-phase peptide synthesis on a CEM Discover Microwave Peptide Synthesizer (Matthews, NC) using the Fmoc-protection strategy on Rink Amide-ChemMatrix resin (0.5 mmol/g). For coupling reactions, amino acids (5 eq) were activated with N,N-diisopropylcarbodiimide (DIC, 5 eq, Oakwood Chemical)/Oxyma (5 eq, Oakwood Chemical) and heated to 90 °C for 2 min while bubbling with N2 in N,N dimethylformamide (DMF, Oakwood Chemical). Fmoc deprotection was carried out with 20% piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMF supplemented with 0.1 M 1-hydroxybenzotriazole hydrate (HOBt, Oakwood Chemical) at 90 °C for 1 min while bubbling with N2. Cleavage from resin was performed with 92.5% TFA, 2.5% triisopropylsilane (TIS, SigmaAldrich), 2.5% 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT, Sigma-Aldrich), and 2.5% H2O for 2 h at 25 °C on an end-over-end rotisserie. The crude peptide was then precipitated by the addition of a 10-fold volume of ice-cold ether and centrifuged at 4,000 RCF for 10 min at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in solvent A and purified via preparative C18 RP-HPLC. Fractions were analyzed on analytical C18 RP-HPLC and ESI-MS and those containing pure product (&gt;95%) were pooled, lyophilized and stored at −80 °C.

For peptide chain elongation from the dmP building block, resin was removed from the synthesizer and manual coupling was performed with Fmoc-5,5-dmP-OH (6 eq, Iris Biotech), PyAOP (6 eq, Oakwood Chemical) and DIPEA (12 eq, SigmaAldrich) for 1 hour at 50 °C. Coupling was repeated with fresh reagents to maximize yield. Resin was acetyl capped (acetic anhydride:DIPEA, 20 eq:40 eq in DMF) to quench unreacted sites and placed back on automated synthesizer to complete synthesis.

The L-leucic acid building block was manually coupled to resin in a reaction containing L-leucic acid (5 eq, Combi-Blocks), DIC (5 eq) and oxyma (5 eq) in DMF for 30 min at 20 °C. Coupling was repeated twice with fresh reagents to maximize yield. For peptide chain elongation from the L-leucic acid building block, a reaction containing amino acid (5 eq, Fmoc-Glu(OtBu)-OH), MSNT (5 eq, SigmaAldrich), and 1-methylimidazole (3.75 eq, SigmaAldrich) in DCM was purged with N2 and incubated for 2 h on an end-over-end rotisserie. Coupling was repeated thrice with fresh reagents to maximize yield. Following final reaction, resin was placed back on automated synthesizer to complete synthesis.

Assembly of semi-synthetic TDP-43 constructs

To scan Nα-methyl amino acids from amino acids 316–328, we assembled all Strategy 1 pieces described above. To scan Nα-methyl amino acids from amino acids 329–339, we assembled all Strategy 2 pieces described above. Two separate strategies were required as we were unable to synthesize a single peptide from residues 316–339 on the requisite SEA resin at sufficient yields. The following three-piece assembly strategy was carried out for Strategy 1 and Strategy 2 assemblies.

Piece 1 (bearing MES thioester) and Piece 2 (bearing free N-terminal cysteine and oxidized SEA ring) were combined at ~10 mM Piece 1 and ~8 mM Piece 2 in a degassed buffer of 6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.1 M sodium phosphate, and 100 mM 2,2,2-trifluoroethanethiol (TFET, Sigma-Aldrich) and adjusted to pH 7.0. Excess Piece 2 was used to push all peptide to ligated product and ensure efficient separation of ligated product from starting material during purification. Reactions were incubated at 37 °C for 4 h and progress was monitored via C4 RP-HPLC and ESI-MS analysis. Note the C-terminal oxidized SEA ring remained intact and inert throughout this reaction. Ligation products were purified on a semi-preparative C4 RP-HPLC column and fractions containing target mass were pooled, lyophilized, and stored at −80 °C. This product is referred to as ‘Piece 1+2’.

The lyophilized Piece 1+2 construct was resuspended in 0.3–1 ml of degassed buffer (final Piece 1+2 concentration ~0.5 mM) containing 6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.1 M sodium phosphate, 200 mM MES-Na (Sigma-Aldrich), and 50 mM TCEP and adjusted to pH 4.0. This reaction was incubated at 37 °C for 16 h to convert the C-terminal SEA moiety to a MES-thioester as confirmed by a −5 Da mass shift via LC-MS. Once MES conversion was complete, Piece 3 (bearing an N-terminal cysteine) was directly added to this reaction mixture to a concentration of ~1.5 mM. Excess Piece 3 was used to push all Piece 1+2 to ligated product and ensure efficient separation of ligated product from starting material during purification. Reactions were supplemented with 20 mM TCEP and 100 mM TFET, adjusted to pH 7.0, and incubated 37 °C for 16 h. Upon completion of the ligation reaction as judged by RP-HPLC and ESI-MS analysis, excess TFET was removed by dialyzing the reaction mixture against a buffer containing 6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.1 M sodium phosphate at pH 4.0 for 3 h. Desulfurization of the final product to the native TDP-43 LCD sequence achieved through free radical-mediated desulfurization by addition of 200 mM TCEP, 60 mM VA-044 radical initiator and 150 mM of reduced glutathione. Reactions were adjusted to pH 7.0 and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Ligation products were purified on a semi-preparative C4 RP-HPLC column and pure fractions were pooled, lyophilized, and stored at −80 °C. Final purities of &gt;95% were judged by analytical RPHPLC, ESI-MS analysis and SDS-PAGE.

Assembly of semi-synthetic NFL constructs

To assemble NFL head domains (residues 2–86), native chemical ligation reactions were performed by combining 5 mM peptide bearing C-terminal SEA moieties (NFL residues 2–26; wt, P8Q, PmeQ, P8dmP, P22S or P2meS) with 1 mM of the NFL head domain fragment bearing an N-terminal cysteine (S27C, residues 27–86) in a degassed buffer of 6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.1 M sodium phosphate, 20 mM TCEP, 200 mM MES-Na (Sigma-Aldrich), and 150 mM 2,2,2-trifluoroethanethiol (TFET, Sigma-Aldrich). Reaction pH was adjusted to 7.0 and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Reaction progress was monitored via RP-HPLC and ESI-MS analysis. Ligation products were purified on a preparative C18 RP-HPLC column and fractions were analyzed via analytical RP-HPLC and ESI-MS. Fractions containing target mass were pooled, lyophilized, and stored at −80 °C.

To assemble full length NFL (2–543), native chemical ligation reactions were performed by combining peptides bearing C-terminal SEA moieties (NFL 2–26, wt, P8L, P8esL, P8meL, P8Q, P8meQ, P8R, P8meR, P8dmP, P22S, P22meS, P22R, P22meR, P22T, P22meT) with the NFL truncated fragment bearing N-terminal cysteine (S27C, residues 27–543). Ligation reactions were performed as described for isolated NFL head domain assembly.

Assembly of semi-synthetic hnRNPA2 LCD constructs

To assemble the hnRNPA2 LCD (residues 181–341) a three-piece native chemical ligation strategy was devised. In Ligation 1, peptides bearing an N-terminal Thz and C-terminal SEA moiety (hnRNPA2 residues 285–305, hnRNPA2 residues 285–305 with P298L mutation, or hnRNPA2 residues 285–305 with P298meL mutation) were combined with the hnRNPA2 C-terminal peptide (residues 306–341, S306C). Reactions included 1 mM SEA peptide, 0.5 mM C-amidated peptide, 200 mM MES-Na, 20 mM TCEP, and 150 mM TFET in a degassed buffer of 6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.1 M sodium phosphate at pH 7.0. Reactions were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h and progress was monitored via RP-HPLC and ESI-MS analysis. Upon completion of the reaction, Thz deprotection was initiated by addition of 200 mM O-methylhydroxylamine-HCl and 20 mM TCEP in a degassed buffer of 6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.1 M sodium phosphate. Reactions were adjusted to pH 4.0 and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. Products were purified on a preparative C18 RP-HPLC column and analyzed via analytical RP-HPLC and ESI-MS. Fractions containing target mass were pooled, lyophilized and stored at −80 °C. These products (wild type, P298L and P298meL) are referred to as hnRNPA2 Piece 2+3.

For Ligation 2, the hnRNPA2 Piece 2+3 constructs, each bearing a free N-terminal cysteine, were combined with the recombinant hnRNPA2 thioester construct (residues 181–284). These reactions included 1 mM Piece 2+3, 0.5 mM recombinant hnRNPA2 thioester fragment, 20 mM TCEP, and 150 mM TFET in a degassed buffer of 6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.1 M sodium phosphate at pH 7.0. Reactions were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h and progress was monitored via RP-HPLC and ESI-MS analysis. Upon completion of the reactions, the ligation products were purified on a semi-preparative C18 RP-HPLC column and fractions were characterized via RP-HPLC and ESI-MS. Pure fractions were pooled, lyophilized and stored at −80 °C.

TDP-43 LCD phase-separated droplet formation

All His-TDP-43 LCD wild type constructs, mutation variants, and single Nα-methyl variants were dissolved in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME) and diluted to 300 μM with same buffer. Since yield of triple Nα-methyl variants is low, triple Nα-methyl variants (triple-me (321–323-325), triple-me (323–325-327)) and wild type His-TDP-43 LCD were dissolved and diluted to 100 μM with the same buffer. For glycine scanning mutagenesis experiments, droplet formation was induced by diluting all constructs 30-fold in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME) in the presence of 0 M, 0.4 M, 0.8 M or 1.2 M urea. Solutions were loaded onto a clear bottom Corning Costa 384-well plate and imaged on a ZOE Fluorescent Cell Imager (Bio-Rad).

For Nα-methyl scanning experiments, droplet formation was induced by diluting all constructs 30-fold in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM β-ME, and 5 μM NiCl2 in the presence of 0 M, 0.4 M, 0.8 M or 1.2 M urea. Wild type and triple Nα-methyl variants were diluted 10 folds to a 10 μM final concentration with the droplet formation buffer used in Nα-methyl scanning experiments. The formed droplets were immediately loaded onto a clear bottom 384-well plate and absorbance at 600 nm was measured to determine turbidity. Triplicate measurements were performed for all constructs at each condition. Following turbidity measurements, droplets were also imaged on a ZOE Fluorescent Cell Imager.

Transient transfection of U2OS cells

U2OS cells were cultured in a Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The U2OS cells were seeded on a 35 mm glass bottom confocal dish one day prior to transfection. Cells were transfected with FLAG-GFP-TDP-43 plasmid (or mutations thereof) via lipofectamine 3000 (ThermoFisher). After 24 h, cells were washed twice with PBS, incubated with Hoechst staining reagent (diluted in PBS) for 10 min and imaged by confocal microscopy. Cells were also harvested in SDS sample loading buffer for western blotting (α-FLAG-HRP; MilliporeSigma) to confirm similar expression levels of each TDP-43 variant.

Creation of TDP-43 inducible expression cell line and cell viability assay

All constructs were transfected into a Tet inducible cell line, U2OS-TR. The U2OS-TR cells were grown in Tet negative FBS to minimize leaky expression. Cells (1 × 106) were plated 24 h prior to transfection. DNA (1 μg) was transfected with Lipofectamine 3000 (ThermoFisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol. After 24 h, cells were split into 10 × 100 mm plates in media containing G418 at a concentration of 700 μg/mL. Selection continued for approximately 3 weeks (refreshing G418 twice per week). Single colonies were picked using clonal rings, propagated, and doxycycline induced expression levels were analyzed. For FLAG-GFP-TDP-43 induction, doxycycline was added to a concentration of 1 μg/mL for 24 h. Clonal populations were harvested in SDS sample loading buffer for western blotting (α-FLAG) to confirm similar expression levels of each TDP-43 variant. Colonies from each variant that exhibited similar FLAG-GFP-TDP-43 expression levels were used in the viability assays.

Each stable expression cell line was plated in quadruplet into 7 × 96-well plates at 4,000 cells/well. Induction proceeded as previously mentioned using doxycycline starting at 24 h after plating. Plates were assayed for cell viability via CellTiter-Glo (Promega) according to manufacturer’s protocol (CellTiter-Glo / Promega) each day for 7 days.

Phenotypic analysis of NFL filament assembly, NFL N-terminal peptide solubility and head domain polymer formation

NFL filament assembly was performed as previously described (43).

To test NFL peptide solubility, the lyophilized peptides were first completely dissolved with neat TFA, which was then evaporated under a gentle stream of N2. Residual TFA was removed via lyophilization for 30 min. This step is important to ensure peptides are completely disaggregated prior to Thioflavin-T analysis (68). Lyophilized peptides were then dissolved in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-ME, 6 M guanidine-HCl and diluted into a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-ME and 20 μM Thioflavin-T (final peptide concentration = 200 μM). Solutions were next loaded into a 384-well fluorescence assay plate (50 μL per well), sealed and Thioflavin-T fluorescence was monitored for 99 h (Cytation 5 plate reader, BioTek). Five repeats were performed for all samples.

To test NFL head domain polymer formation, each variant was dissolved in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-ME, and 8 M urea, and dialyzed against an identical buffer with a reduced urea concentration (3 M urea). Sample turbidity was measured by absorbance at 600 nm and head domain polymers were confirmed by negative-staining EM.

Thioflavin-T assay for tau peptides

Lyophilized tau peptides were first completely dissolved with neat TFA, which was then evaporated under a gentle stream of N2. Residual TFA was removed via lyophilization for 30 min (52). Next, peptides were dissolved in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl and diluted into PBS supplemented with 20 μM Thioflavin-T (final peptide concentration = 100 μM). Solutions were loaded into a 96-well fluorescence assay plate, sealed (Constar 6570 sealing tape) and Thioflavin-T fluorescence was monitored for 99 h (Cytation 5 plate reader, BioTek). Five repeats were performed for all samples.

Phenotypic analysis of tau peptides in tau biosensor cell line

The tau biosensor cell line was purchased from ATCC and cultured in a Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Tau biosensor cells were seeded in a 96-well tissue culture plate a day prior to tau peptide transfection.

Tau peptides were disaggregated, diluted in PBS to 300 μM, and sonicated in a water bath sonicator (BRANSON 2800) for 2 min. Tau peptide solution was mixed with same volume of a lipofectamine 3000-OptiMEM solution incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Ten μl of tau peptide transfection mixture was added to 90 μl of tau biosensor cells to reach a final peptide concentration of 15 μM in medium. The cells were imaged by EVOS FL Fluorescence Microscope 48–72 h post transfection.

Phenotypic analysis of hnRNPA2 LCD phase-separated droplets

hnRNPA2 LCD proteins were dissolved in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl. hnRNPA2 LCD phase-separated droplet formation was induced by diluting protein in either a buffer containing 25 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-ME, or a buffer containing 50 mM 2-(N-Morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (pH 5.5), 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-ME to a final concentration of 15 μM. Identical results were observed for the wild type hnRNPA2 LCD and its variants in these two buffers. However, the average size of hnRNPA2 droplets increased in the pH 5.5 buffer and these conditions were used for image analysis via the ZOE Fluorescent Cell Imager.

Thioflavin-T assay for hnRNPA2 LCD peptides

Synthesized hnRNPA2 LCD peptides were dissolved in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 6 M guanidine-HCl. The dissolved peptides were diluted into a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 20 μM Thioflavin-T (final peptide concentration = 400 μM), loaded in a 384-well fluorescence assay plate (50 μL per well) and sealed. Thioflavin-T fluorescence was monitored for 99 h by plate reader (Cytation 5 plate reader, BioTek). Five repeats were performed for all samples.

Supplementary Material

Data S1_Mass Spec of TDP43 products_Science

Data S2_Mass spectrometry of NFL_hnRNPA2_tau_Science

1

Acknowledgments:

We thank Deepak Nijhawan and Rob Thompson for encouragement and technical advice. We thank Jugal Mohapatra for assistance for synthesizing peptides. This work was supported by an anonymous donor and National Institute of General Medical Science of NIH grant R35 GM130358 and National Cancer Institute of NIH grant U54 CA231649 to SLM. This work was also supported by Welch Foundation grant I-2039–20200401 and I-2020–20190330 to GL and TQ, respectively, and a Cancer Prevention Research Institute of Texas grant RR180051 to GL.

Data and materials availability:

All data are available in the main text or the supplementary materials.

Fig. 1. Preparation of semi-synthetic derivatives of the TDP-43 LC domain carrying single, methyl-capped peptide backbone nitrogen atoms.

(A) Schematic representation of the LC domain of TDP-43 (residue 262–414) with an ultra-conserved region (residue 316–339) highlighted by darker shading. Nα-methyl amino acid (red) scanning analysis was applied on the ultra-conserved region. (B) Schematic depicting of the strategy to prepare Nα-methyl amino acid (red asterisk)-incorporated TDP-43 LC domains. Nα-methyl amino acids were introduced into synthetic peptides that were conjugated via sequential native chemical ligation reactions to flanking protein fragments produced in bacteria. Ligation products contained cysteine residues in place of alanine residues at both ligation boundaries. Both cysteine residues were chemically desulfurized to alanine such that the only difference between engineered LC domains and the native LC domain was the presence of a single Nα-methyl group at the desired site. (C) Representative result of HPLC trace (left) and high resolution, intact mass spectrometry (right) for confirming ligation production from (B). (D) Light microscopic analyses of phase separation for three representative samples, including the reconstructed, semi-synthetic, native TDP-43 LC domain (WT), a variant carrying a methyl cap on the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of alanine residue 324 (324 meA), and a variant carrying a methyl cap on the peptide backbone nitrogen of methionine residue 337 (337 meM). Each protein was incubated under conditions of neutral pH and physiologically normal monovalent salts allowing for formation of phase separated liquid-like droplets. Droplet formation was assayed in triplicate in normal buffer as well as buffers supplemented by 0.4 M urea, 0.8 M urea and 1.2 M urea. Scale bar = 25 μm. (E) Quantitative analysis of phase separation for all protein samples was monitored by spectroscopic analysis of turbidity.

Fig. 2. Phase separation capacities of twenty three variants of the TDP-43 LC domain differing according to the presence of a single, methyl-capped peptide backbone nitrogen atom.

(A) Purity and integrity evaluation of all Nα-methyl variants of the TDP-43 LC domain by SDS-PAGE. (B) Normalized turbidity measurement of TDP-43 LC domain phase separation induced in buffer of neutral pH and physiological monovalent salt, or in buffers supplemented by 0.4 M urea, 0.8 M urea and 1.2 M urea. All samples were analyzed in triplicate and further evaluated and photographed by light microscopy (Fig. S1). Turbidity measurements revealed two classes of variants irrespective of the presence or absence of urea. One class composed of nine variants showed, relative to the native TDP-43 LC domain, reduced turbidity and fewer liquid-like droplets under all conditions. The other class, composed of thirteen variants, showed evidence of phase separation indistinguishable from the native protein. (C) Histograms reveal the normalized, average turbidity measurements of twenty four protein samples as evaluated in the absence of urea as well as in the presence of either 0.4 M or 0.8 M urea. Turbidity is graphed on the Y axis of each plot relative to the amino acid sequence of the ultra-conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain between phenylalanine residue 316 and methionine residue 339 (X axis). Irrespective of assay condition, all nine of variants exhibiting impediments to phase separation clustered between alanine residue 321 and alanine residue 329. (D) Reproductions of published data pinpointing the region of the TDP-43 LC domain footprinted to reveal structure-dependent protection from methionine oxidation (19). (E) Molecular structure of cross-β polymers formed from the TDP-43 LC domain as resolved by cryo-electron microscopy (EM) (27). The region of the protein that was observed to be of the same molecular structure in three independent cryo-EM reconstructions extends from proline residue 320 to methionine residue 337. (F) Top image shows ribbon diagram representations of residues 314–327 from one of the three cryo-EM structures of cross-β polymers made from the TDP-43 LC domain shown in (E) (27). Bottom image shows ribbon diagram representation of residues 314–327 from a different cryo-EM structure of cross-β polymers made from the intact TDP-43 LC domain (32).

Fig. 3. Preparation and analysis of semi-synthetic derivatives of the TDP-43 LC domain carrying three methyl-capped peptide backbone nitrogen atoms.

(A) Synthetic peptides carrying methyl caps on the peptide backbone nitrogen atoms of residues A321, M323 and A325 (Triple-me (321–323-325)), or residues M323, A325 and Q327 (Triple-me (323–325-327)), were inserted into the full-length LC domain of TDP-43 by chemical ligation as described in Fig. 1. Purity and integrity of the ligation products were evaluated by SDS-PAGE (top panel). Phase separation of the ligation products was quantified by turbidity measurement (bottom panel). The phase separation was induced in buffer of neutral pH and physiological monovalent salt, supplemented with no urea, 0.4 M urea, 0.8 M urea, or 1.2 M urea. (B) Presentation of normalized turbidity measurements in the form of histograms. No evidence of turbidity above background was observed for either sample bearing three methyl-capped peptide backbone nitrogen atoms when assayed in the presence of 0.4 M, 0.8 M or 1.2 M urea. In the absence of supplemented urea, both samples bearing three methyl-capped nitrogen atoms displayed turbidity levels reduced by between 60% and 70% relative to that of the native TDP-43 LC domain. (C) Light microscopic analyses of phase separation for native TDP-43 LC domain (WT), Triple-me (321–323-325) and Triple-me (323–325-327) variants assayed in (A) and (B). Scale bar = 25 μm.

Fig. 4. Phase separation capacities of twenty six variants of the TDP-43 LC domain differing according to the replacement of a single amino acid residue with glycine.

Single amino acid residues within the ultra-conserved region of the TDP-43 LC domain were changed to glycine by conventional mutagenesis and expression in bacterial cells. Two of the twenty six positions already contained glycine (G335 and G338) in the native sequence and were mutationally changed to serine. Each protein was purified and tested for phase separation in buffer of neutral pH and physiologically normal monovalent salt ions. Light microscopic images were photographed 1 h subsequent to initiation of each reaction. In addition to assays performed in standard buffer, each protein sample was also evaluated for its capacity to phase separate in the presence of 0.4 M urea, 0.8 M urea and 1.2 M urea (Fig. S2). Scale bar = 25 μm.

Fig. 5. Evidence of the particular importance of proline residue 320 of the TDP-43 LC domain.

(A) Schematic depicting of positions of four proline residues (280, 320, 349 and 363) and ALS-causing M337V variant within the LC domain of TDP-43. Darker shading marked region corresponds to the ultra-conserved region. (B) Protein samples corresponding to the native LC domain of TDP-43 (WT), four proline-to-glycine variants (P280G, P320G, P349G and P363G), and M337V variant were assayed for the formation of liquid-like droplets. Other than the P320G variant, which formed aggregated tangles, all other proline to glycine variants generated spherical droplets indistinguishable from those made from the native TDP-43 LC domain. The M337V variant maintained phase separation capacity but yielded misshaped droplets. Scale bar = 25 μm. (C) U2OS cells were stably transformed with vectors allowing for conditional, doxycycline-mediated expression of FLAG-tagged versions of native, full-length TDP-43 (WT), the ALS-causing M337V variant of TDP-43, or the P320G variant causative of severe precipitation. Single transformant clones were isolated in the absence of doxycycline and screened for the purpose of finding stable clones that expressed equivalent protein levels post-doxycycline induction. Cell lysates were recovered before and 24 hours after doxycycline induction, and western-blotted using a FLAG antibody or antibodies to GADPH as a loading control (left panel). Cell viability was monitored daily post-induction for each clone, revealing minimal effects from doxycycline-induced expression of either the native TDP-43 protein (WT) or the ALS-causing M33V variant, as compared with substantial deficits resulting from expression of the P320G variant (right panel). (D) Constitutive expression vectors encoding fusion proteins linking GFP to the amino terminus of full-length TDP-43 were transiently transfected into U2OS cells. Nucleus-restricted GFP was observed for native TDP-43 linked to GFP, as well as for the proline-to-glycine variants of residues 280, 349 and 363, and the ALS-causing M337V variant. Transient expression of the P320G variant led to predominantly cytoplasmic GFP staining, with residual nuclear staining appearing aberrantly punctate. Scale bar = 20 μm. (E) Semi-synthesis of variants of the TDP-43 LC domain, P320G and P320S, formed tangled precipitates upon tests of phase separation. Methyl capping of the peptide backbone nitrogen atom associated with the glycine residue of the P320G variant, or the peptide backbone nitrogen atom associated with the serine residue of the P320S variant, yielded proteins for which formation of phase separated liquid-like droplets was restored. Scale bar = 25 μm.

Fig. 6. Effects of methyl-capping peptide backbone nitrogen atoms associated with disease-causing residues within the NFL head domain.

(A) Schematic representation of the strategy to prepare Nα-methyl amino acids (red color, red asterisks) incorporated NFL head domain and NFL full-length protein. Synthetic peptide thioesters corresponding to the amino-terminal twenty five residues of the NFL protein were prepared to contain: (i) the native sequence of NFL; (ii) Charcot-Tooth-Marie (CMT) mutational variants at position 8 or 22; or (iii) CMT variants methyl-capped at the peptide backbone nitrogen in the mutated amino acid. Native chemical ligation was used to produce full-length NFL protein or the isolated head domain bearing different synthetic peptides at the amino-terminus. (B) Full-length NFL proteins carrying P8L, P8Q and P8R variations, P22R, P22S or P22T variations, or Nα-methyl variants of these six residues, were incubated under conditions receptive to the formation of intermediate filaments. Filament assembly was monitored by transmission electron microscopy. Assembly assays for all six CMT variants yielded tangled, amorphous precipitates. Assembly assays for semi-synthetic CMT variants containing a methyl-capped nitrogen (P8meL, P8meQ and P8meR, P22meR, P22meS or P22meT) yielded homogenous intermediate filaments indistinguishable from those made from the native NFL protein (WT). Scale bar = 200 nm. (C) Synthetic peptides used to generate semi-synthetic, full-length NFL proteins were assayed for polymerization as monitored by acquisition of ThT fluorescence. All six peptides bearing a CMT-causing lesion (P8L, P8Q, P8R, P22R, P22S and P22T) yielded ThT curves indicative of time-dependent polymerization. No evidence of polymerization was observed for the parental peptide (WT), nor for any of the six CMT-causing variants (P8meL, P8meQ and P8meR, P22meR, P22meS or P22meT) that were modified to methyl-cap the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of the variant amino acid residue.

Fig. 7. Effects of eliminating main-chain hydrogen bonding via amide-to-ester substitutions in the peptide backbone, and effects of replacing proline 8 of the NFL head domain with 5,5-dimethyl-L-proline (dmP).

(A) Structures of synthetic peptides with chemical variation at proline residue 8 of the NFL head domain highlighted in red. Synthetic peptides were prepared replacing proline residue 8 of the NFL head domain with leucine, L-leucic acid or dmP. (B) Semi-synthetic, full-length NFL proteins bearing the structures shown in (A) were assayed for assembly of bona-fide intermediate filaments. Reconstruction of the P8L CMT variant yielded tangled, amorphous precipitates. Amide-to-ester backbone substitution at leucine residue 8 (P8esL), thus eliminating a hydrogen bond donor from this site, facilitated assembly of intermediate filaments indistinguishable from those assembled from the native NFL protein. Replacement of proline residue 8 with dmP (P8dmP) allowed assembly of homogeneous intermediate filaments morphologically indistinguishable from those produced by the native protein (WT). Scale bar = 200 nm. (C) Synthetic peptides used to generate full-length NFL proteins were assayed for polymerization as monitored by acquisition of ThT fluorescence. The P8L CMT variant peptide exhibited clear evidence of polymerization not observed for the parental peptide bearing the native sequence of NFL (WT). The WT, P8esL, and P8dmP peptides showed no evidence of polymerization.

Fig. 8. Restorative effects of eliminating main-chain hydrogen bonding by methyl-capping of peptide backbone nitrogen atoms of the P301S, P301T and P301L mutational variants of tau.

(A) At left, a schematic of the tau (2N4R) protein with the position of the synthetic tau peptide (residues 295–311) and three disease-causing variants (P301S, P301T and P301L) highlighted via a red asterisk. At right, the chemical structures of trans (2S,4R; P-trans) or cis (2S,4S; P-cis) conformer of 4-fluoroproline. (B) tau peptides with native sequence of tau residues 295–311 (WT), disease-causing variants (P301S, P301T and P301L), methyl-capped forms of the three disease-causing variants (P301meS, P301meT and P301meL) and P-trans and P-cis conformer variants were synthesized and assayed for polymerization as monitored by acquisition of ThT fluorescence. Each of the disease-causing variants led to strong increases in ThT fluorescence relative to WT. No such increase was observed if the peptide backbone nitrogen atoms associated with the disease variant residues were methyl-capped. No enhancement of ThT fluorescence was observed for peptides wherein proline residue 301 was replaced by either the P-trans or P-cis conformer of 4-fluoroproline. (C) Each of the peptides bearing a disease-causing substitution (P301S, P301T and P301L) led to the formation of distinct aggregates upon assay in the tau biosensor cell line. Whereas, WT tau peptide, the peptide nitrogen methyl-capped derivatives of disease-causing variants (P301meS, P301meT and P301meL), and P-trans and P-cis conformer variants didn’t induce endogenous tau to form distinct aggregates in the biosensor cells. Scale bar = 50 μm.

Fig. 9. Restorative effect of eliminating the main-chain hydrogen bond by methyl-capping the peptide backbone nitrogen atom of the P298L mutational variant of hnRNPA2.

(A) At top, a schematic representation of the hnRNP2 LC domain with the position of the disease-causing mutant P298L (red asterisk) and synthetic peptide fragment (dark blue shading) highlighted. Below is an outline of the strategy to prepare semi-synthetic variants of the full-length LC domain of hnRNPA2. (B) The assembled hnRNPA2 LC domains contained the native sequence (WT), P298L variant and P298meL variant were tested for phase separation in an aqueous buffer. WT hnRNPA2 LC domain formed spherical, liquid-like droplets (left). The P298L variant formed distinctly misshapen droplets (middle). P298meL variant formed spherical droplets indistinguishable from those formed by the native protein (right). Scale bar = 25 μm. (C) Synthetic peptides used to assemble semi-synthetic proteins assayed in (B) were incubated in the presence of ThT as an assay of time-dependent polymerization. No evidence of fluorescence increase was observed for WT peptide. A large, time-dependent increase in ThT fluorescence was observed for P298L peptide, and no fluorescence increase was observed for P298meL peptide.

Competing interests: Authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary Materials

Materials and Methods

Figs. S1 to S6

References 43, 52, 67, 68. 67 and 68 are only cited in SM.

Captions of Data S1 to S2


References:

1. Oates ME , D(2)P(2): database of disordered protein predictions. Nucleic Acids Res 41 , D508–516 (2013).23203878
2. Ma J , Ptashne M , Deletion analysis of GAL4 defines two transcriptional activating segments. Cell 48 , 847–853 (1987).3028647
3. Triezenberg SJ , Kingsbury RC , McKnight SL , Functional dissection of VP16, the trans-activator of herpes simplex virus immediate early gene expression. Genes Dev 2 , 718–729 (1988).2843425
4. Courey AJ , Holtzman DA , Jackson SP , Tjian R , Synergistic activation by the glutamine-rich domains of human transcription factor Sp1. Cell 59 , 827–836 (1989).2512012
5. Pejaver V , The structural and functional signatures of proteins that undergo multiple events of post-translational modification. Protein Sci 23 , 1077–1093 (2014).24888500
6. Woodsmith J , Kamburov A , Stelzl U , Dual coordination of post translational modifications in human protein networks. PLoS Comput Biol 9 , e1002933 (2013).23505349
7. Frey S , Gorlich D , A saturated FG-repeat hydrogel can reproduce the permeability properties of nuclear pore complexes. Cell 130 , 512–523 (2007).17693259
8. Kato M , Cell-free formation of RNA granules: low complexity sequence domains form dynamic fibers within hydrogels. Cell 149 , 753–767 (2012).22579281
9. Xiang S , The LC Domain of hnRNPA2 Adopts Similar Conformations in Hydrogel Polymers, Liquid-like Droplets, and Nuclei. Cell 163 , 829–839 (2015).26544936
10. Molliex A , Phase separation by low complexity domains promotes stress granule assembly and drives pathological fibrillization. Cell 163 , 123–133 (2015).26406374
11. Patel A , A Liquid-to-Solid Phase Transition of the ALS Protein FUS Accelerated by Disease Mutation. Cell 162 , 1066–1077 (2015).26317470
12. Das S , Vera M , Gandin V , Singer RH , Tutucci E , Intracellular mRNA transport and localized translation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 22 , 483–504 (2021).33837370
13. Alami NH , Axonal transport of TDP-43 mRNA granules is impaired by ALS-causing mutations. Neuron 81 , 536–543 (2014).24507191
14. Chu JF , Majumder P , Chatterjee B , Huang SL , Shen CJ , TDP-43 Regulates Coupled Dendritic mRNA Transport-Translation Processes in Co-operation with FMRP and Staufen1. Cell Rep 29 , 3118–3133 e3116 (2019).31801077
15. Narayanan RK , Identification of RNA bound to the TDP-43 ribonucleoprotein complex in the adult mouse brain. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 14 , 252–260 (2013).23134510
16. Arai T , TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 351 , 602–611 (2006).17084815
17. Neumann M , Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 314 , 130–133 (2006).17023659
18. Lim L , Wei Y , Lu Y , Song J , ALS-Causing Mutations Significantly Perturb the Self-Assembly and Interaction with Nucleic Acid of the Intrinsically Disordered Prion-Like Domain of TDP-43. PLoS Biol 14 , e1002338 (2016).26735904
19. Lin Y , Redox-mediated regulation of an evolutionarily conserved cross-beta structure formed by the TDP43 low complexity domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 , 28727–28734 (2020).33144500
20. Portz B , Lee BL , Shorter J , FUS and TDP-43 Phases in Health and Disease. Trends Biochem Sci 46 , 550–563 (2021).33446423
21. Murakami T , ALS/FTD Mutation-Induced Phase Transition of FUS Liquid Droplets and Reversible Hydrogels into Irreversible Hydrogels Impairs RNP Granule Function. Neuron 88 , 678–690 (2015).26526393
22. Johnson BS , TDP-43 is intrinsically aggregation-prone, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked mutations accelerate aggregation and increase toxicity. J Biol Chem 284 , 20329–20339 (2009).19465477
23. Buratti E , Functional Significance of TDP-43 Mutations in Disease. Adv Genet 91 , 1–53 (2015).26410029
24. Schmidt HB , Gorlich D , Nup98 FG domains from diverse species spontaneously phase-separate into particles with nuclear pore-like permselectivity. Elife 4 , (2015).
25. Lin Y , Currie SL , Rosen MK , Intrinsically disordered sequences enable modulation of protein phase separation through distributed tyrosine motifs. J Biol Chem 292 , 19110–19120 (2017).28924037
26. Martin EW , Mittag T , Relationship of Sequence and Phase Separation in Protein Low-Complexity Regions. Biochemistry 57 , 2478–2487 (2018).29517898
27. Cao Q , Boyer DR , Sawaya MR , Ge P , Eisenberg DS , Cryo-EM structures of four polymorphic TDP-43 amyloid cores. Nat Struct Mol Biol 26 , 619–627 (2019).31235914
28. Guenther EL , Atomic structures of TDP-43 LCD segments and insights into reversible or pathogenic aggregation. Nat Struct Mol Biol 25 , 463–471 (2018).29786080
29. Murray DT , Structure of FUS Protein Fibrils and Its Relevance to Self-Assembly and Phase Separation of Low-Complexity Domains. Cell 171 , 615–627 e616 (2017).28942918
30. Jiang LL , Structural transformation of the amyloidogenic core region of TDP-43 protein initiates its aggregation and cytoplasmic inclusion. J Biol Chem 288 , 19614–19624 (2013).23689371
31. Conicella AE , Zerze GH , Mittal J , Fawzi NL , ALS Mutations Disrupt Phase Separation Mediated by alpha-Helical Structure in the TDP-43 Low-Complexity C-Terminal Domain. Structure 24 , 1537–1549 (2016).27545621
32. Li Q , Babinchak WM , Surewicz WK , Cryo-EM structure of amyloid fibrils formed by the entire low complexity domain of TDP-43. Nat Commun 12 , 1620 (2021).33712624
33. Jordanova A , Mutations in the neurofilament light chain gene (NEFL) cause early onset severe Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Brain 126 , 590–597 (2003).12566280
34. Shin JS , NEFL Pro22Arg mutation in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1. J Hum Genet 53 , 936–940 (2008).18758688
35. Perez-Olle R , Jones ST , Liem RK , Phenotypic analysis of neurofilament light gene mutations linked to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in cell culture models. Hum Mol Genet 13 , 2207–2220 (2004).15282209
36. Perez-Olle R , Mutations in the neurofilament light gene linked to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease cause defects in transport. J Neurochem 93 , 861–874 (2005).15857389
37. Ching GY , Liem RK , Analysis of the roles of the head domains of type IV rat neuronal intermediate filament proteins in filament assembly using domain-swapped chimeric proteins. J Cell Sci 112 ( Pt 13 ), 2233–2240 (1999).10362553
38. Gill SR , Wong PC , Monteiro MJ , Cleveland DW , Assembly properties of dominant and recessive mutations in the small mouse neurofilament (NF-L) subunit. J Cell Biol 111 , 2005–2019 (1990).2121744
39. Petzold A , Neurofilament phosphoforms: surrogate markers for axonal injury, degeneration and loss. J Neurol Sci 233 , 183–198 (2005).15896809
40. Kornreich M , Avinery R , Malka-Gibor E , Laser-Azogui A , Beck R , Order and disorder in intermediate filament proteins. FEBS Lett 589 , 2464–2476 (2015).26231765
41. Herrmann H , Aebi U , Intermediate Filaments: Structure and Assembly. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8 , (2016).
42. Lin Y , Toxic PR Poly-Dipeptides Encoded by the C9orf72 Repeat Expansion Target LC Domain Polymers. Cell 167 , 789–802 e712 (2016).27768897
43. Zhou X , Transiently structured head domains control intermediate filament assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 , (2021).
44. Kato M , Redox State Controls Phase Separation of the Yeast Ataxin-2 Protein via Reversible Oxidation of Its Methionine-Rich Low-Complexity Domain. Cell 177 , 711–721 e718 (2019).30982603
45. An SSA , Retention of the Cis Proline Conformation in Tripeptide Fragments of Bovine Pancreatic Ribonuclease A Containing a Non-natural Proline Analogue, 5,5-Dimethylproline. Journal of the American Chemical Society 121 , 11558–11566 (1999).
46. Bugiani O , Frontotemporal dementia and corticobasal degeneration in a family with a P301S mutation in tau. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58 , 667–677 (1999).10374757
47. Clark LN , Pathogenic implications of mutations in the tau gene in pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration and related neurodegenerative disorders linked to chromosome 17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 13103–13107 (1998).9789048
48. Sperfeld AD , FTDP-17: an early-onset phenotype with parkinsonism and epileptic seizures caused by a novel mutation. Ann Neurol 46 , 708–715 (1999).10553987
49. Lossos A , Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism with the P301S tau gene mutation in a Jewish family. J Neurol 250 , 733–740 (2003).12796837
50. Llado A , A novel MAPT mutation (P301T) associated with familial frontotemporal dementia. Eur J Neurol 14 , e9–10 (2007).
51. Strang KH , Distinct differences in prion-like seeding and aggregation between Tau protein variants provide mechanistic insights into tauopathies. J Biol Chem 293 , 4579 (2018).29572329
52. Chen D , Tau local structure shields an amyloid-forming motif and controls aggregation propensity. Nat Commun 10 , 2493 (2019).31175300
53. Renner C , Fluoroprolines as Tools for Protein Design and Engineering. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 40 , 923–925 (2001).
54. Holmes BB , Proteopathic tau seeding predicts tauopathy in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , E4376–4385 (2014).25261551
55. Seidler PM , Structure-based inhibitors halt prion-like seeding by Alzheimer’s disease-and tauopathy-derived brain tissue samples. J Biol Chem 294 , 16451–16464 (2019).31537646
56. Qi X , Familial Early-Onset Paget’s Disease of Bone Associated with a Novel hnRNPA2B1 Mutation. Calcif Tissue Int 101 , 159–169 (2017).28389692
57. Murray DT , Structural characterization of the D290V mutation site in hnRNPA2 low-complexity-domain polymers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 , E9782–E9791 (2018).30279180
58. Lu J , CryoEM structure of the low-complexity domain of hnRNPA2 and its conversion to pathogenic amyloid. Nat Commun 11 , 4090 (2020).32796831
59. Ryan VH , Mechanistic View of hnRNPA2 Low-Complexity Domain Structure, Interactions, and Phase Separation Altered by Mutation and Arginine Methylation. Mol Cell 69 , 465–479 e467 (2018).29358076
60. Yang YS , Yeast Ataxin-2 Forms an Intracellular Condensate Required for the Inhibition of TORC1 Signaling during Respiratory Growth. Cell 177 , 697–710 e617 (2019).30982600
61. Sysoev VO , Dynamic structural order of a low-complexity domain facilitates assembly of intermediate filaments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 , 23510–23518 (2020).32907935
62. Chatterjee J , Rechenmacher F , Kessler H , N-methylation of peptides and proteins: an important element for modulating biological functions. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 52 , 254–269 (2013).23161799
63. Martin EW , Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase behavior of prion-like domains. Science 367 , 694–699 (2020).32029630
64. Hughes MP , Atomic structures of low-complexity protein segments reveal kinked beta sheets that assemble networks. Science 359 , 698–701 (2018).29439243
65. Kato M , McKnight SL , The low-complexity domain of the FUS RNA binding protein self-assembles via the mutually exclusive use of two distinct cross-beta cores. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 , (2021).
66. Gui X , Structural basis for reversible amyloids of hnRNPA1 elucidates their role in stress granule assembly. Nat Commun 10 , 2006 (2019).31043593
67. Ollivier N , Tidbits for the synthesis of bis(2-sulfanylethyl)amido (SEA) polystyrene resin, SEA peptides and peptide thioesters. J Pept Sci 20 , 92–97 (2014).24254655
68. O’Nuallain B , Kinetics and thermodynamics of amyloid assembly using a high-performance liquid chromatography-based sedimentation assay. Methods Enzymol 413 , 34–74 (2006).17046390
