LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

35917209
9926498
10.1002/alz.12732
NIHMS1869753
Article
Putting Participants and Study Partners FIRST When Clinical Trials End Early
Largent Emily A. JD, PhD, RN Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine

Walter Sarah MSc Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern California

Childs Nancy PhD Care Partner

Dacks Penny A. PhD The Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration

Dodge Shana PhD The Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration

Florian Hana MD AbbVie Neuroscience Clinical Development

Jackson Jonathan PhD Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School

Guerra Jorge J. Llibre MD, MSc Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine in St.Louis

Iturriaga Erin DNP, MSN, RN National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Miller David S. MD, MA Signant Health

Moreno Monica Alzheimer’s Association

Nosheny Rachel L. PhD Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California San Francisco, VA Advanced Imaging Research Center, San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical Center

Obisesan Thomas O. MD, MPH Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Howard University and Hospital

Portacolone Elena PhD, MBA, MPH Institute for Health &amp; Aging, Philip Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies, University of California San Francisco

Siddiqi Bernadette MA The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research

Silverberg Nina PhD National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging

Warren Rueben C. DDS, MPH, DrPH. M.Div. National Center for Bioethics in Research and Health Care, Tuskegee University

Welsh-Bohmer Kathleen A. PhD Department of Psychiatry, Duke University School of Medicine

Edelmayer Rebecca M. PhD Alzheimer’s Association

Participant FIRST Work Group
Corresponding Author: Emily A. Largent, JD, PhD, RN, 423 Guardian Drive, Room 1403, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 215.573.8106, elargent@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
8 2 2023
12 2022
02 8 2022
01 12 2023
18 12 27362746
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
In 2018-2019, multiple AD/ADRD trials ended earlier than planned, resulting in calls to improve communication with and support for participants and their study partners (“dyads”). The multidisciplinary Participant Follow-Up Improvement in Research Studies and Trials (Participant FIRST) Work Group met throughout 2021. Its goals were to identify best practices for communicating with and supporting dyads affected by early stopping. The Participant FIRST Work Group identified 17 key recommendations spanning the pre-trial, mid-trial, and post-trial periods. These focus on prospectively allocating sufficient resources for orderly closeout; developing dyad-centered communication plans; helping dyads build and maintain support networks; and, if a trial stops, informing dyads rapidly. Participants and study partners invest time, effort, and hope in their AD/ADRD research participation. The research community should take intentional steps towards better communicating with and supporting participants when clinical trials end early. The Participant FIRST recommendations are a practical guide for embarking on that journey.


pmcMultiple high-profile Alzheimer’s disease (AD) clinical trials ended earlier than planned between 2018 and 2019 due either to futility or safety concerns.[1–5] Although sponsors had communication plans in place, many research participants and their study partners first learned about the trials’ early and abrupt ending through news coverage, rather than through direct communication from personnel at their study site.[6] Early termination of trials is not a new challenge in Alzheimer’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease related dementias (AD/ADRD) research.[7,8] However, participants’ and study partners’ understandable disappointment about the end of these trials—and how they learned about it—led to renewed calls from within the AD/ADRD research community to identify better ways to communicate with and support participants.[9]

This led to the creation of the Participant Follow-Up Improvement in Research Studies and Trials (Participant FIRST) Work Group, which first met in January 2021. The multidisciplinary work group had 31 members, including research participants and their study partners (i.e., knowledgeable informants who enroll in AD/ADRD research with the participant), clinical trialists and study personnel, as well as representatives from academia, industry, patient advocacy organizations, and the U.S. National Institutes of Health. The goals motivating this work group were: (1) improving communication with research participants and their study partners when trials end early and (2) supporting those affected by early trial stopping. To this end, members met regularly to describe the central issues, define the limitations of current approaches, and iteratively develop and refine recommendations.

Here, we outline opportunities identified by the Participant FIRST Work Group for improving communication spanning the pre-, mid-, and post-trial periods.

Early Trial Stopping

Based on regular reviews of accumulating data, an independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB; sometimes also called a Data Monitoring Committee)[10], study sponsor, or principal investigator will make recommendations concerning the continuation, modification, or termination of a clinical trial.[11] We focus on termination of clinical trials here.

Why Trials End Early

Why might a recommendation be made to terminate a trial early? There are three main reasons.[12] First, it may be due to a finding of benefit. In such cases, one arm of a study is found to be clearly superior to the other, and a decision is made that continuing to expose participants to the inferior arm (and to research-related risks) cannot be ethically justified. Second, it may be due to safety. Due to the occurrence of adverse events such as serious illness or death, risks to participants are determined to outweigh any potential benefits of participation. Once this determination is made, the study cannot continue due to ethical and regulatory requirements. Third, it may be due to futility. In these cases, analyses of study data suggest that there is unlikely to be a meaningful treatment effect even if the study were to attain its planned sample size, and so termination of the trial may be recommended for ethical reasons or to conserve the sponsor’s resources, especially time and money.

Within clinical trials, a crucial challenge is to balance the interests of the trial participants with the longer-term benefits to all patients in generating reliable conclusions rooted in data. While there are rich debates within the literature about how to best strike this balance, they are beyond the scope of this article.[13–18] Rather, our focus is on communicating with and supporting participants and their study partners[19] after a decision to terminate a clinical trial is reached.

Constraints on Participant Notification

Although direct notification about early stopping in clinical trials is an essential step in study termination, participants and their study partners may learn this from a press release or news coverage. In part, this is due to the sometimes-underappreciated legal context of federal securities laws. Most clinical trials on AD/ADRD are conducted by large pharmaceutical companies that are public companies. In the United States (US), public companies are subject to various obligations under the federal securities laws, which are enforced by the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).[20] Similar laws exist in the European Union and other jurisdictions, though our focus here is the US.

Under US securities law, withholding material information from those with financial interests in a public company is a crime. Favorable or unfavorable business developments, such as the early termination of an important clinical trial, are examples of material information.[21] Information is material if there is a substantial likelihood that a reasonable investor would consider it important in making an investment decision and view the fact as altering the totality of available information (17 CFR § 240.12b-2). If the early termination is determined to be material, this information must be disclosed on a timely basis. Such information is considered nonpublic until it is disseminated through recognized channels of distribution and investors have had reasonable time to react. The SEC recognizes several methods of disclosure, including press releases or press conferences.[22]

The dominant concern for disclosure requirements is that withholding material information could lead to the crime of insider trading. Insider trading has been identified as a concern in health care broadly and in clinical trials specifically.[23] For example, the SEC has previously prosecuted clinicians involved in a clinical trial for insider trading after they used nonpublic information about early stopping to sell stocks, thereby avoiding substantial financial losses.[24]

Companies must promptly notify shareholders of material information. Moreover, they cannot tell research sites, participants, or study partners before they notify shareholders. Companies usually cannot directly contact participants, so there is a natural delay in communication because study sites serve as crucial intermediaries. For an example of how it plays out, consider that at 7:00 am EST on March 21, 2019, Biogen issued a press release halting its Phase III aducanumab trials following independent analyses suggesting the trials were unlikely to meet their primary endpoint.[4] Extensive news coverage followed.[25,26] Even as trial sites rushed to notify participants and study partners across the globe, some participant-study partner dyads (hereafter, “dyads”) inevitably learned about the trial’s early end by viewing electronic news feeds, turning on the TV, or reading the newspaper.[9]

Although private companies are not immune from scrutiny under federal securities law, they are not subject to the same disclosure requirements as public companies. When a clinical trial is funded solely by the National Institutes of Health or a private foundation, it may be exempt from disclosure requirements. The disclosure requirements for any particular study should be determined in collaboration with the sponsor, funder, study personnel, and (as needed) legal counsel.

Participant and Study Partner Reactions

Although systematic data on participants’ experiences of early stopping are lacking, there is anecdotal evidence that participants have a range of reactions when trials end.[6,9,27] Here, we highlight three reactions that came up frequently in the Participant FIRST Work Group’s discussions, as well as in members’ conversations with participants and study partners who were part of trials that stopped early.

Feelings of uncertainty, loss, and vulnerability were common. First, when a trial ends early, many participants and study partners describe being plunged into uncertainty and having questions about “what comes next?” Second, individuals who enjoyed good rapport with their study team care for—and feel cared for in return by—study personnel. Often, these participants and their study partners looked forward to study visits as a chance to socialize and find support. When a trial ends early, these valued relationships and interactions abruptly end, which creates a sense of loss. Third, for individuals with serious diagnoses like mild cognitive impairment or dementia, as well as for their study partners, having access to specialists and specialized care through participation in a clinical trial can promote health and foster feelings of security and safety. For some, the trial may be a means of gaining access to health care that isn’t otherwise available to them. Thus, the termination of a clinical trial may precipitate feelings of vulnerability for participants and their study partners.

These participant reactions are an important signal, indicating an imbalance in the partnership between participants and researchers. Participants and study partners invest time, effort, and hope in their research participation, and they ought to be treated with care and respect. Moreover, the experiences of today’s participants may influence tomorrow’s prospective participants and their willingness to enroll in the next AD/ADRD clinical trial. There is a real urgency to address this issue, which prompted the Participant FIRST Work Group to develop recommendations to help research teams communicate with and support research participants.

Recommendations

The Participant FIRST Work Group’s recommendations (Table 1) are divided into three time periods—pre-trial, mid-trial, and post-trial. Responsibility for implementing these recommendations may be assigned to the clinical trial sponsor (i.e., an organization that initiates and takes responsibility for a clinical trial, often holds the investigational new drug application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration), funder (i.e., an organization that provides financial support for a clinical trial), principal investigator (i.e., the individual responsible for the preparation, conduct, and administration of the entire clinical trial), site investigator (i.e., the individual responsible for the conduct and administration of the clinical trial at a particular study site), or study personnel (i.e., individuals who interact or intervene with research participants under the supervision of the site investigator, such as research nurses or coordinators). We acknowledge that when responsibility is distributed over many stakeholders, accountability is also diffused; however, this is unavoidable given the scale of many clinical trials and the infrastructure necessary to conduct them. Ideally, clear communication and coordination among these stakeholder groups—and well-defined roles and responsibilities—will produce timely, seamless, effective support for participants and study partners impacted by early clinical trial termination. Ultimately, broader infrastructural mechanisms may be necessary to clarify roles and responsibilities to promote timely, effective communication with respect to early termination of clinical trials.

In AD/ADRD research, participants are generally required to enroll as part of a dyad with a study partner. Therefore, the work group recommendations embrace the needs of both participants and study partners. Further, in formulating these recommendations, work group members were mindful that clinical trials are conducted in a variety of settings—from academic institutions to independent research clinics. These sites have different organizational structures and different resources available to them. Recommendations are meant to be feasible across settings.

Pre-Trial Recommendations

Recommendation 1: Sponsors and funders should provide resources and funding to ensure orderly trial close-out in the study budget.

Study budgets should account for the possibility of early stopping from the outset, as adequate preparation begins pre-trial, continues throughout a trial, and extends into the post-trial period. For example, close-out budgets should cover a research coordinator’s time for some pre-specified period after the trial ends to ensure participants have a contact person and advocate at the study site. Given the importance of treating participants with respect, funders should consider requiring plans for orderly trial closeout to be proposed as a condition of funding.

Recommendation 2: Sponsors or principal investigators should ensure that the communication plan developed for the trial addresses the possibility of early stopping.

Being prepared is essential for communicating with and supporting participants. All communications should be clear and accessible to participants with cognitive impairment, culturally sensitive, and available in participants’ preferred language(s). This article contains model language throughout, recognizing that it will need to be tailored for use in any particular clinical trial and should be translated to account for participants’ diverse language needs across study sites, such as in multinational clinical trials. Tailoring may best be accomplished by soliciting input from an advisory board that includes representative patient-participants and study partners.[28] These individuals may offer insights into what information they would like and how they would like to receive it, which should inform the development of the communication plan.

An essential piece of the communication plan is an email to notify dyads that the trial has ended early. The goal of this email would not be to provide comprehensive information about early stopping but rather to reassure participants and study partners that study personnel recognize that there will be many questions and will follow up soon. For sample text see Table 2. We suggest that this neutral text be pre-approved by an institutional review board (IRB) and saved for use if and only if the trial stops early. This pre-approval would allow for rapid notification, if needed (see Recommendation 11).

Recommendation 3: Study personnel must address the possibility of early stopping during the informed consent process.

Throughout our discussions, work group members emphasized the importance of educating participants and study partners about early stopping and, as appropriate, about the federal securities laws that shape the dissemination of news that a trial is being terminated. Education should begin in the consent process, and written information should be included in both the consent document and study brochure. Sample language is found in Table 3.

Recommendation 4: General information about early stopping should be available to members of the public.

In addition to providing trial-specific education, it is also helpful to refer participants and study partners to resources such as the National Institute on Aging’s website (www.nia.nih.gov), which offers extensive clinical trials information for members of the public, including a discussion of early stopping.[29] The work group recommends that patient advocacy organizations also link to or post information about early stopping on their websites, as they can be an important source of information and support for research participants or those considering research participation. For examples, see the Alzheimer’s Association (www.alz.org/whentrialsend) and the Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration (http://www.theaftd.org/research-clinical-trials/clinical-trials/) websites.

Recommendation 5: Study personnel should encourage participants and study partners to build and sustain their support networks.

The pre-trial period is an opportunity for participants and study partners, should they choose, to build and sustain their support networks and supportive relationships—beyond the relationships formed with individuals at their site—that will persist past the trial’s end. To this end, site investigators and study personnel should highlight opportunities throughout the trial.

Study personnel can encourage dyads to discuss their research participation with family members and friends, or with trusted others such as a primary care clinician or faith leader. Study personnel may, for example, provide participants with pamphlets about the study that address common questions and concerns, and to stimulate supportive conversations. The work group recognizes that some participants and study partners may be reluctant to discuss their research participation with others, given the stigma of AD/ADRD [30], and this should be respected. Research participants and study partners (if they are also care partners) might also be referred to support groups, whether at the study site or elsewhere. Or, the study site might connect dyads with community-based services and supports or clinicians if they identify unmet needs.

It is important to identify disease-specific patient advocacy organizations; these patient advocacy organizations can serve as a resource for dyad members and should be seen as partners in supporting participants and study partners (see, e.g., Recommendation 14). Sponsors or principal investigators may wish to connect with national organizations, while site investigators or study personnel might connect with local chapters to learn about their offerings. Some patient advocacy organizations have materials available in multiple languages. The goal may simply be to make dyads aware of resources available to them.

Social media and online forums such as AlzConnected (www.alzconnected.org), a message board for persons with AD/ADRD and their caregivers, offer additional places where participants and study partners might find connection and support. Budget and resources permitting, clinical trials might also offer an online portal where participants and study partners can share their experiences with one another. Concerns have previously been expressed about how online communication might introduce bias or otherwise affect the integrity of a clinical trial, though strategies to mitigate such risks have been detailed elsewhere.[31]

Mid-Trial Recommendations

Recommendation 6: Study personnel should regularly check and update contact information for participants and study partners.

Study sites must maintain current contact information–including phone numbers, email addresses, and mailing addresses–for research participants and study partners to allow for timely study-related communication, including but not limited to notification of early stopping. Confirmation of contact information might be conducted as a routine part of study visits, such as upon arrival and check-in. Sites should also proactively document and utilize participants’ preferred means of communicating with research staff.

Recommendation 7: Study personnel should remind participants and study partners that clinical trials might end early.

Work group members noted that while dyads ought to be reminded about the possibility of early stopping, it is important not to undermine their confidence in and commitment to the ongoing clinical trial by overemphasizing this point. Communication regarding early stopping might, as an example, be conveyed to participants and study partners as part of broader education about trial designs, including information about periodic review of trial data for evidence of safety, benefit, or futility.

Recommendation 8: Sponsors and principal investigators should anticipate and proactively address participants and study partners’ questions and concerns when there is news from related clinical trials.

When a clinical trial ends early, participants, study partners, investigators, and study personnel in that trial are affected. Individuals involved in other trials may also be affected and will reasonably have questions or even concerns about the implications for their own research participation. For instance, if one trial has stopped early for reasons of safety, participants in a trial evaluating a similar drug (e.g., another anti-amyloid therapy) may worry about their own safety or wonder if their study will also end early. Therefore, sponsors and principal investigators should work with study personnel to support dyads enrolled in their study if a related study ends. This recommendation applies to other “big” news that may come out over the course of a trial, such as approval of a similar drug by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or news coverage of participants experiencing severe adverse events.

Post-Trial Recommendations

Recommendation 9: If a sponsor announces early stopping via a press release, that press release should explicitly address participants and study partners.

If early stopping will be announced in a press release, sponsors should work with their media team or press office to ensure that the press release addresses participants and their study partners. While press releases often thank dyads for their contributions to research, press releases should also anticipate that dyads will want to know “what happens next”—even if this is simply saying that participants should expect their study site to be in touch soon with more information.

Some sponsors allow members of the public to sign up for email alerts—for example, to be notified that a new press release has been issued. It may be helpful for study personnel to sign up for these emails as a backup form of notification (see Recommendation 10), and some participants may wish to sign up. However, work group members generally advise against study sponsors and sites relying upon these email alerts as the primary source of communication with participants, given the important role of study sites in communicating research-related information to dyads (see Recommendations 11 and 12).

Recommendation 10: The sponsor or principal investigator should communicate news of early stopping to site investigators and study personnel.

Participants and study partners are not the only ones taken by surprise and affected by early stopping, and the relationships dyads have built with research nurses, study coordinators, and others involved in the trial are very important. Therefore, site investigators and study personnel–especially those responsible for communicating with participants and study partners–should immediately be notified that the trial is ending. The reason for stopping should be communicated in a straightforward way and paired with additional information to assist site investigators and study personnel in answering participants’ and study partners’ questions consistently and correctly.

This communication has the benefit of ensuring that all study personnel, not just site investigators, are in possession of relevant information. By extension, it ensures that study personnel are equipped to notify participants, if appropriate, and to respond consistently and supportively to participants’ questions or concerns. Work group members heard anecdotal reports of participants and study partners who inadvertently informed study personnel at their site that a trial had been terminated by reaching out for more information; when news of early stopping flows in this direction, it undermines trust in the research community.

Recommendation 11: Upon learning of early stopping, study sites should initially contact participants via email as soon as possible.

Although participants would prefer to be notified by phone (see Recommendation 12), there was broad agreement that notification by phone may unfold too slowly, particularly if trial stopping is covered by the news media. An email can ensure that all dyads are notified simultaneously and receive consistent messaging. Moreover, the email offers reassurance that study personnel will soon be in touch. As detailed in Recommendation 2, a notification email should be prepared and IRB approved in the pre-trial period to ensure rapid notification at this step.

When communicating with participants and study partners as a group, study personnel should ensure privacy and confidentiality and not, for example, make identifying information such as names or email addresses visible to other recipients. The work group acknowledges that older adults may not be online, and there are socio-economic and geographic disparities in internet access in this population.[32] Thus, it is important to know dyads’ preferred communication channels and to identify the preferred means of connecting with participants or study partners who are not online. Even individuals who are online will not regularly check email. Therefore, it may be desirable to also send a text message prompting members of the dyad to check their email; however, no sensitive information should be sent by text message.

Recommendation 12: As soon as possible after the initial notification email is sent, study personnel should call participants and study partners and personally inform them that the trial has stopped.

Work group members agree that it is preferable for dyads to learn about early stopping from someone at their study site, and the best method of notification is by telephone. Ideally, messaging will be consistent within and across sites. To promote consistency, sponsors or principal investigators should consider providing discussion points to guide these phone calls. Study sites should also consider identifying one or two point persons for trial-related communication; these individuals can be a resource for study personnel as well as a consistent point of contact for participants and study partners.

Recommendation 13: Sponsors, principal investigators, and study sites should consider leveraging social media to disseminate consistent information about early stopping to participants and study partners.

Several work group members noted that social media sites (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) provide additional avenues to disseminate information about early stopping, particularly given that social media use is relatively common amongst older adults and growing.[32] For example, a study site might retweet a sponsor’s press release or post the body of the initial email notifying participants that the trial has ended to its Facebook page. When considering use of social media, the ability to monitor and, if needed, to manage online activity–for instance, addressing misinformation or answering questions posted by participants and study partners–should be considered.

Recommendation 14: Sponsors and principal investigators should collaborate with patient advocacy organizations to support participants and study partners when trials end early.

The work group recommends that sponsors and principal investigators anticipate where dyads might turn for advice when a study ends. They can then share information about the trial’s termination, such as the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) described in Recommendation 15, with these organizations. This will prepare these organizations to share accurate, appropriate information with individuals who contact them. For example, the Alzheimer’s Association and the Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration maintain hotlines for patients and families and facilitate support groups where questions about trial ending may arise. Patient advocacy organizations might also be encouraged to share information on their websites or social media channels.

Recommendation 15: Sponsors should prepare answers to FAQs and disseminate them broadly.

Work group members, with additional input from current and past research participants and study partners, prepared a list of FAQs (Table 4). Sponsors may address these FAQs on their own website; share them with study sites to use in answering dyads’ questions; or share them with patient advocacy organizations for use by hotline operators and support group leaders.

Patient advocacy organizations might post these questions—without answers—on their websites to prompt participants and study partners to think about what questions they might have for study personnel if their study ends and to encourage self-advocacy.

Recommendation 16: Site investigators should invite participants and study partners to a personalized close-out meeting to cover information like participant arm assignment.

A detailed checklist of points to cover during this close-out meeting is provided in Table 5. As with other materials, this information should be communicated to dyads in a manner that is accessible and that meets their needs and preferences. The checklist reflects the necessity of imparting information about the trial and any ongoing health considerations and also addressing participants’ and study partners’ social and emotional needs.

While site investigators or their designees will conduct these meetings, they will need support from the sponsor or principal investigator to do this. For example, the work group recommends that sponsors or principal investigators provide sites with this checklist, modified as appropriate, and share information, such as a participant’s study assignment, with sites to ensure the success of close-out meetings. It may be desirable to offer these meetings in-person, or to consider other modalities like videoconferencing; choice of modality should be informed by dyads’ preferences. As noted in the checklist, it is important to provide dyads with written materials that they can refer to after the close-out meeting.

It is possible that not all of this information will immediately be available when close-out meetings are conducted. If so, the site investigator or their designees should commit to following up with dyads and share a timeline for doing so, if possible. Participants and study partners may want to follow-up with study personnel if they do not receive timely information.

Recommendation 17: Sponsors or principal investigators and sites should collaborate to ensure top-line results are shared with participants and study partners.

There is an ethical obligation to demonstrate respect for research participants, one element of which is informing them of research results.[33] This obligation holds even when trials stop early. Work group members recommend providing a webinar or other public forum to share top-line results in an accessible manner (e.g., with captioning, in dyads’ preferred language(s)) and to invite participants and study partners to submit questions in advance.

Conclusion

The Participant FIRST Work Group’s recommendations aim to assist the research community in taking intentional steps towards better supporting participants and study partners when clinical trials end early. Although the impetus for Participant FIRST was instances of early stopping in AD/ADRD clinical trials, the best practices outlined herein are not disease-specific and are therefore relevant to early stopping across other therapeutic areas.[34] Additionally, as these recommendations reflect a participant-centered approach to research, some lessons are applicable even beyond the early stopping context—for instance, when a study is paused due to a public health emergency like the COVID-19 pandemic—and could be used to improve communication and build partnership with research participants and study partners more broadly.

Culture change will require advocacy and commitment from sponsors, funders, principal investigators, site investigators, and study personnel. Notably, each of these stakeholder groups was reflected within the Participant FIRST membership; their respective contributions speak to a broad willingness within the research community to learn and improve: to put participants and study partners first when trials end early.

Acknowledgements:

Thank you to the members of the AGREED Stakeholder Committee for their feedback.

Additional Participant FIRST Work Group Members:

Poorvi Chablani

Biogen

Grayson Donley

National Institutes of Health

National Institute on Aging

Stephen Hall, MPH

Alzheimer’s Association

Jessica Langbaum, PhD

Banner Alzheimer’s Institute

Liz Mascherino

Biogen

Pam Montana

Person Living with Alzheimer’s Disease

Ed Patterson

Person Living with Alzheimer’s Disease

Nadezda Radoja, PhD

National Institutes of Health

National Institute on Aging

Laurie M. Ryan, PhD

National Institutes of Health

National Institute on Aging

David Sims

Care Partner

Angela Taylor

Lewy Body Dementia Association

Stacie Weninger, PhD

FBRI

Table 1. Summary of the Participant FIRST Work Group’s Recommendations

Pre-Trial	1. Sponsors and funders should provide resources and funding to ensure orderly trial close-out in the study budget.
2. Sponsors or principal investigators should ensure that the communication plan developed for the trial addresses the possibility of early stopping.
3. Study personnel must address the possibility of early stopping during the informed consent process.
4. General information about early stopping should be available to members of the public.
5. Study personnel should encourage participants and study partners to build and sustain their support networks.	
Mid-Trial	6. Study personnel should regularly check and update contact information for participants and study partners.
7. Study personnel should remind participants and study partners that clinical trials might end early.
8. Sponsors and principal investigators should anticipate and proactively address participants and study partners’ questions and concerns when there is news from related clinical trials.	
Post-Trial	9. If a sponsor announces early stopping via a press release, that press release should explicitly address participants and study partners.
10. The sponsor or principal investigator should communicate news of early stopping to site investigators and study personnel.
11. Upon learning of early stopping, study sites should initially contact participants via email as soon as possible.
12. As soon as possible after the initial notification email is sent, study personnel should call participants and study partners and personally inform them that the trial has stopped.
13. Sponsors, principal investigators, and study sites should consider leveraging social media to disseminate consistent information about early stopping to participants and study partners.
14. Sponsors and principal investigators should collaborate with patient advocacy organizations to support participants and study partners when trials end early.
15. Sponsors should prepare answers to FAQs and disseminate them broadly.
16. Site investigators should invite participants and study partners to a personalized close-out meeting to cover information like participant arm assignment.
17. Sponsors or principal investigators and sites should collaborate to ensure top-line results are shared with participants and study partners.	

Table 2. Template for Initial Email Notifying Participants and Study Partners the Trial Has Ended Early

Dear [Participant and/or Study Partner],	
Thank you for being a valuable partner in [Trial Name]. We are writing to inform you this trial has been ended early by [sponsor]. A press release explaining this decision can be found at [link to press release on sponsor’s website].	
We know you will likely have many questions. It may take time for us to answer all your questions, but we are committed to sharing what we know, as soon as possible. Right now, we are gathering additional information to share with you. Someone from our team will be following up by phone [define time frame for call] to answer your questions and discuss next steps.	
In the meantime, please contact [identify a site investigator, study coordinator, etc.] at [email and/or phone] if our team can assist you.	
Having support is important, so please consider sharing this email with those in your support system, such as family members, friends, a physician, faith leader, or others. If you are interested in support resources, here are a few options: [links to disease-specific advocacy organizations or other appropriate groups].	
Respectfully,	
[Site Investigator]	

Table 3. Template Language for Consent Document and Study Guide

Consent Form	
If there is any news relevant to your participation, the study team from [Study Site] will inform you and your study partner as soon as possible [via email/text and then by phone] to discuss pertinent information and next steps. This may include new information about safety, modifications to the study protocol, or early stopping of the study. If you would like more information about reasons why a study may end earlier than initially planned, please see the study guide.	
	
Study Guide	
An important obligation for any clinical trial is to protect and promote the well-being of participants like you. There are many ways that study teams accomplish this. In this study, we have a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) – a group of independent experts including [statisticians, clinicians, and a research ethicist]. The DSMB will periodically review data as they are collected and then make recommendations to the study sponsor and investigators as to whether the study can continue, should be modified, or should end early. A study may end early for many reasons. For example, the DSMB may conclude the intervention is working so well the study does not need to continue, or it may conclude that the intervention is not working or is harming participants. Even if a study ends early, your participation is valuable because it advances our knowledge and can help patients in the future.	
   Where the Intellectual Property is Owned by a Public Company:	
   In some cases, you may learn that the trial has ended through the news media before the study site is able to notify you personally. While not ideal, this is the result of legal requirements. If the study ends early for any reason, [Sponsor] is legally required by the [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] to announce this decision promptly to its shareholders, which it typically does via a press release. Additionally, [Sponsor] is prohibited from telling the study sites, study team, research participants or anyone else prior to that public release of information. We understand this is not ideal, and we want you to know that your contributions to this research are very important. The research team will notify you via email and then by phone as soon as possible to discuss the end of the trial and next steps. If you experience delays in receiving information from your study site after the press release, you can also contact them directly. For more information about what happens when a trial ends, see the [NIA website or patient advocacy websites].	
   Where the Intellectual Property is Owned by a Private Company or Academic Investigator:	
   The study site will notify you via [email/text] and then by phone as soon as possible to discuss the end of the trial and next steps. For more information about what happens when a trial ends, see the [NIA website or patient advocacy websites].	
Our study team encourages you continually to be in conversation with your support network about your research participation. Some people share information about their research participation with family members, friends, a physician, a faith leader, or others. If the study ends early, these individuals can serve as valuable sources of support for you.	

Table 4. Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)

• Why did the trial end?	
• What were the adverse events, and what do they mean for me? (Consider participants’ age, genetic or biomarker risk profile, race, and ethnicity.)	
• Did I experience an adverse event? Do I need to be assessed for a specific risk?	
• When will I learn whether I was on an active drug or placebo? Or treatment vs. control?	
• Will I receive any of my personal results?	
• What do my personal results mean for my diagnosis? (This is especially important for less common dementias where diagnosis can take years.)	
• What’s the typical timeframe for data to be released? Where can I access updates?	
• What are the “top-line” or overall results from the study?	
• What are the next steps for research of this treatment or intervention?	
• Are there additional research opportunities that I might be eligible for? (e.g., Would I need to wait a certain amount of time before I am eligible for another study? Are there other resources to provide more information on new trial opportunities?)	
• Can I continue to receive the study drug or other intervention now that the trial has ended? Or, if I have not been receiving the study drug or other intervention, can I receive it now? If so, where and how can I get it?	
• Where can I go to get more support? Am I able to talk to my physician about this or is the information confidential?	
• Whom should I contact if I have questions? Is my point of contact the pharmaceutical company, the study site, or someone else?	
• Will I continue to have appointments at my study site?	

Table 5. Checklist for Personalized Trial Close-Out Meeting

• Express thanks. Thank the participant and their study partner for participating in the trial and contributing to scientific advancement; acknowledge the time and effort involved in participating. If the trial ended early for reasons of harm or futility, express that a negative trial isn’t a failure because we learn from negative trials, too.	
• Validate feelings. Recognize that participants and study partners may react to the news of early stopping with a range of emotions and honor those reactions. The emotions they experience may differ depending on why a trial stops. For example, participants may feel disappointment or fear if a trial ends for futility or harm. They may feel satisfied or relieved if the trial ends for benefit. They may be anxious that their access to the research drug or other intervention will not be maintained.	
• Explain why the trial ended. Provide participants and study partners with information about the reason(s) for early stopping.	
• Disclose key information. Share key information about the study generally and the participant specifically. If key information cannot be provided during the close-out, tell participants if they can expect to receive that information; if they can, address when, from whom, and how they will receive it. Key information includes:	
  ∘ “Top-line” or overall study results.	
  ∘ The participant’s study assignment (e.g., randomization to active drug or placebo).	
  ∘ The participant’s testing results (e.g., MRI or PET scan summary or images, genetic testing, cognitive testing scores).	
  ∘ Adverse events or side-effects that may require ongoing monitoring.	
• Outline next steps. Provide information about what comes next. For example, will there be additional study visits? If so, when? What should participants do with extra trial-related medications they may have at home?	
• Discuss the possibility of ongoing access to the study intervention. Talk with interested participants about whether it is possible—and, if so, how—to continue receiving the study drug or other intervention. For example, will there be an open-label extension? Will the sponsor approve requests for expanded access?	
• Encourage future research participation. Ask if the participant would like information about other research opportunities.	
  ∘ Anticipate that participants will have questions about how their participation in the study that just ended may affect their eligibility for future studies (e.g., washout period; contraindications).	
  ∘ Consider inviting them to participate in a brain health research registry or connect them with resources like TrialMatch (www.alz.org/trialmatch), an AD/ADRD clinical trial matching service maintained by the Alzheimer’s Association, or the FTD Disorders Registry (www.ftdregistry.org), a non-profit co-founded by AFTD and the Bluefield Project to empower people to both learn about FTD research opportunities and to share their insights via survey-based research.	
  ∘ Participants and study partners may also be interested in learning about research-related roles such as openings on a patient/family advisory board or advocacy work.	
• Provide referrals to meet care needs. Connect participants with clinical or psychological care, if needed.	
• Identify services and supports. Equip participants and study partners with information about disease-specific advocacy organizations, support groups, or other relevant services and supports. Encourage participants and study partners to engage with their social networks for support.	
• Facilitate goodbyes. Recognize that many participants and study partners build relationships with study personnel over the course of a trial. Acknowledge that the end of a study can mean the loss of meaningful relationships, and facilitate goodbyes. If individuals have questions about what the trial’s early end means for study personnel or the study site (e.g., Will there be layoffs? Will the study site shut down?), these should be answered truthfully.	
• Allow time for questions. Ask whether the participant or study partner has any additional questions; provide contact information for study personnel, particularly if there is a new point-person for communication, so that individuals can follow up if additional questions arise.	
• Allow time for feedback. Inquire about what did or didn’t work for the participant and study partner in the study generally and the close-out process specifically.	
• Provide written records. Give participants written materials that address the points above, since the conversation might be stressful or emotional; the participant or study partner may not recall all of the details they are given.	

Disclaimers: The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; the National Institute on Aging; the National Institutes of Health; or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

This manuscript was facilitated by the Participant FIRST Work Group, which brought together stakeholders from the academic, industry, government, and non-profit research communities along with research participants and study partners to establish recommendations for the Alzheimer’s and dementia field. The views and opinions expressed by authors and working group members in this publication represent those of Participant FIRST and do not necessarily reflect those of the broader organizations for which individuals are employed.


Works Cited

[1] Merck. Merck Announces Discontinuation of APECS Study Evaluating Verubecestat (MK-8931) for the Treatment of People with Prodromal Alzheimer’s Disease 2018. https://www.merck.com/news/merck-announces-discontinuation-of-apecs-study-evaluating-verubecestat-mk-8931-for-the-treatment-of-people-with-prodromal-alzheimers-disease/ (accessed February 11, 2022).
[2] Taylor P Janssen drops the BACE as Alzheimer’s candidate joins fail list. Fierce Biotech 2018.
[3] Roche. Roche to discontinue Phase III CREAD 1 and 2 clinical studies of crenezumab in early Alzheimer’s disease (AD) - other company programmes in AD continue 2019. https://www.roche.com/media/releases/med-cor-2019-01-30.htm (accessed February 11, 2022).
[4] Biogen. Biogen and Eisai to Discontinue Phase 3 ENGAGE and EMERGE Trials of aducanumab in Alzheimer’s Disease 2019. https://investors.biogen.com/news-releases/news-release-details/biogen-and-eisai-discontinue-phase-3-engage-and-emerge-trials (accessed October 7, 2021).
[5] Novartis. Novartis, Amgen and Banner Alzheimer’s Institute discontinue clinical program with BACE inhibitor CNP520 for Alzheimer’s prevention 2019. https://www.novartis.com/news/media-releases/novartis-amgen-and-banner-alzheimers-institute-discontinue-clinical-program-bace-inhibitor-cnp520-alzheimers-prevention (accessed February 11, 2019).
[6] Span P When a Drug Study Abruptly Ends, Volunteers Are Left to Cope. The New York Times 2020.
[7] Gauthier S , Albert M , Fox N , Goedert M , Kivipelto M , Mestre‐Ferrandiz J , Why has therapy development for dementia failed in the last two decades? Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 2016;12 :60–4. 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.12.003.
[8] Huang L-K , Chao S-P , Hu C-J . Clinical trials of new drugs for Alzheimer disease. J Biomed Sci 2020;27 :18. 10.1186/s12929-019-0609-7.31906949
[9] Largent EA , Karlawish J . Rescuing Research Participants After Alzheimer Trials Stop Early: Sending Out an SOS. JAMA Neurol 2020;77 :413–4. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.4974.32011643
[10] FDA. Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees - Guidance for Clinical Trial Sponsors 2006. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/establishment-and-operation-clinical-trial-data-monitoring-committees (accessed October 6, 2021).
[11] Eckstein L Assessing the legal duty to use or disclose interim data for ongoing clinical trials. Journal of Law and the Biosciences 2019;6 :51–84. 10.1093/jlb/lsz012.31666965
[12] Deichmann RE , Krousel-Wood M , Breault J . Bioethics in Practice: Considerations for Stopping a Clinical Trial Early. Ochsner J 2016;16 :197–8.27660563
[13] Pocock SJ . When to stop a clinical trial. BMJ 1992;305 :235–40. 10.1136/bmj.305.6847.235.1392832
[14] Baum M , Houghton J , Abrams K . Early stopping rules - clinical perspectives and ethical considerations. Statist Med 1994;13 :1459–69. 10.1002/sim.4780131322.
[15] Iltis AS . Stopping trials early for commercial reasons: the risk-benefit relationship as a moral compass. Journal of Medical Ethics 2005;31 :410–4. 10.1136/jme.2004.008771.15994362
[16] Snapinn S , Chen M-G , Jiang Q , Koutsoukos T . Assessment of futility in clinical trials. Pharm Stat 2006;5 :273–81. 10.1002/pst.216.17128426
[17] Mueller PS , Montori VM , Bassler D , Koenig BA , Guyatt GH . Ethical Issues in Stopping Randomized Trials Early Because of Apparent Benefit. Ann Intern Med 2007;146 :878. 10.7326/0003-4819-146-12-200706190-00009.17577007
[18] Aisen PS , Raman R . Viewpoint: Futility Analyses in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) Clinical Trials: A Risky Business. J Prev Alzheimers Dis 2020;7 :195–6. 10.14283/jpad.2020.20.32463073
[19] Largent EA , Karlawish J , Grill JD . Study partners: essential collaborators in discovering treatments for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy 2018;10 :101. 10.1186/s13195-018-0425-4.
[20] Securities Exchange Act of 1934. n.d.
[21] Li Y Biogen posts its worst day in a decade after ending trial for blockbuster Alzheimer’s drug 2019. https://www.cnbc.com/2019/03/21/biogen-shares-plunge-more-than-25percent-after-ending-trial-for-alzheimers-drug-aducanumab.html (accessed September 10, 2019).
[22] Securities and Exchange Commission. 17 CFR Parts 240, 243, and 249 n.d. https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-7881.htm (accessed September 10, 2019).
[23] Kesselheim AS , Sinha MS , Joffe S . Physicians and Insider Trading. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175 :1955. 10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.5610.26457747
[24] Pfeifer S SEC accuses doctors of insider trading after clinical trial halted. Los Angeles Times 2014.
[25] Bell J Biogen halts Alzheimer’s drug trials in major setback for biotech. BioPharma Dive 2019. https://www.biopharmadive.com/news/biogen-alzheimers-aducanumab-clinical-failure-halt/551004/ (accessed September 10, 2019).
[26] Feuerstein A Biogen halts study of Alzheimer’s drug, a blow to hopes for new treatment. STAT 2019. https://www.statnews.com/2019/03/21/biogen-eisai-alzheimer-trial-stopped/ (accessed September 10, 2019).
[27] Clinical trials: Feelings when a trial ends n.d. https://healthtalk.org/clinical-trials/feelings-when-a-trial-ends (accessed October 7, 2021).
[28] Frank L , Jennings LA , Petersen RC , Majid T , Gilmore‐Bykovskyi A , Schicker L , Participation of persons with dementia and their caregivers in research. J Am Geriatr Soc 2021;69 :1784–92. 10.1111/jgs.17340.34245586
[29] NIA. Common Questions About Participating in Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias Research n.d. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/common-questions-about-participating-alzheimers-and-related-dementias-research#ends (accessed October 7, 2021).
[30] Stites SD , Rubright JD , Karlawish J . What features of stigma do the public most commonly attribute to Alzheimer’s disease dementia? Results of a survey of the U.S. general public. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 2018;14 :925–32. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.01.006.
[31] Fernandez Lynch H , Largent EA , Joffe S , DeMichele A . Protecting Clinical Trial Participants and Study Integrity in the Age of Social Media. Cancer 2018.
[32] Anderson M , Perrin A . Tech Adoption Climbs Among Older Adults. 2017.
[33] Emanuel EJ , Wendler D , Grady C . What Makes Clinical Research Ethical? JAMA 2000;283 :2701–11.10819955
[34] Walter SD , Han H , Guyatt GH , Bassler D , Bhatnagar N , Gloy V , A systematic survey of randomised trials that stopped early for reasons of futility. BMC Med Res Methodol 2020;20 :10. 10.1186/s12874-020-0899-1.31948397
