LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101505086
36963
Sci Transl Med
Sci Transl Med
Science translational medicine
1946-6234
1946-6242

35648810
9554345
10.1126/scitranslmed.abi8593
NIHMS1839242
Article
Reversal of synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models by targeting mGluR5 to prevent synaptic tagging by C1Q
Spurrier Joshua 1†
Nicholson LaShae 1†
Fang Xiaotian T. 2†
Stoner Austin J. 1†
Toyonaga Takuya 2
Holden Daniel 2
Siegert Timothy R. 3
Laird William 1
Allnutt Mary Alice 1
Chiasseu Marius 1
Brody A. Harrison 1
Takahashi Hideyuki 1
Nies Sarah Helena 14
Pérez-Cañamás Azucena 1
Sadasivam Pragalath 2
Lee Supum 2
Li Songye 2
Zhang Le 1
Huang Yiyun H. 2
Carson Richard E. 2
Cai Zhengxin 2*
Strittmatter Stephen M. 1*
1 Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair Program, Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
2 Yale PET Center, Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
3 Allyx Therapeutics Inc., New Haven, CT 06513, USA.
4 Graduate School of Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72074, Germany.
* Corresponding author. jason.cai@yale.edu (Z.C.); stephen.strittmatter@yale.edu (S.M.S.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Author contributions: J.S. designed experiments, wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and completed the mouse dosing, tissue handling, and snRNA-seq. L.N. and L.Z. processed the snRNA-seq data. A.J.S., W.L., M.A.A., and M.C. completed histological assessments of brain. J.S. and M.C. completed mouse behavior. X.T.F., T.T., D.H., P.S., S. Lee, and S. Li completed SynVesT-1 PET and mouse FPEB studies. D.H. completed monkey FPEB PET studies. T.R.S. supervised toxicological studies. A.H.B., H.T., S.H.N., and A.P.C. contributed to histology and biochemistry. Y.H.H., R.E.C., and Z.C. supervised the PET studies, whereas S.M.S. designed the study, wrote the paper, and supervised all aspects.

6 10 2022
6 2022
01 6 2022
01 6 2023
14 647 eabi8593eabi8593
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Microglia-mediated synaptic loss contributes to the development of cognitive impairments in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). However, the basis for this immune-mediated attack on synapses remains to be elucidated. Treatment with the metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) silent allosteric modulator (SAM), BMS-984923, prevents β-amyloid oligomer–induced aberrant synaptic signaling while preserving physiological glutamate response. Here, we show that oral BMS-984923 effectively occupies brain mGluR5 sites visualized by [18F]FPEB positron emission tomography (PET) at doses shown to be safe in rodents and nonhuman primates. In aged mouse models of AD (APPswe/PS1ΔE9 overexpressing transgenic and AppNL-G-F/hMapt double knock-in), SAM treatment fully restored synaptic density as measured by [18F]SynVesT-1 PET for SV2A and by histology, and the therapeutic benefit persisted after drug washout. Phospho-TAU accumulation in double knock-in mice was also reduced by SAM treatment. Single-nuclei transcriptomics demonstrated that SAM treatment in both models normalized expression patterns to a far greater extent in neurons than glia. Last, treatment prevented synaptic localization of the complement component C1Q and synaptic engulfment in AD mice. Thus, selective modulation of mGluR5 reversed neuronal gene expression changes to protect synapses from damage by microglial mediators in rodents.


pmcINTRODUCTION

Despite the millions of individuals afflicted, there remains no disease-modifying therapy for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Evidence of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide accumulation is required for AD diagnosis (1); however, other hallmarks are misfolded TAU (MAPT) accumulation, phosphorylation and spreading, and microglial and astroglial reactivity (2, 3). Genetic evidence from dominant early-onset AD mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilins, from Down’s syndrome, and from protective APP alleles are all consistent with a causative role for Aβ (4). Biomarker studies found Aβ accumulation 2 decades before symptoms, suggesting an early role for Aβ in disease pathophysiology (5). However, the temporal disconnection between Aβ accumulation and symptoms, as well as the clinical failure of multiple Aβ-lowering therapies have expanded the focus of AD pathophysiology. Genetic studies implicate microglia in AD risk and progression. For example, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) signaling has been shown to exert multiple effects on Aβ-driven pathology (6). In addition, classic complement cascade components have been directly implicated in phagocytic synaptic removal in AD (7), although the basis of synaptic selectivity is not defined.

Crucial for clinical AD progression from presymptomatic to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia is the loss of synapses (8, 9). Synapse loss was initially documented ultrastructurally at autopsy, although it can now be tracked indirectly with fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) or directly by synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A (SV2A) PET (10-12). PET tracers targeting SV2A, which is ubiquitously expressed in synaptic vesicles, permit quantification of synaptic density from noninvasive scans, facilitating tracking of neurodegenerative disease progression and drug development. PET imaging with [11C]UCB-J previously demonstrated reduced hippocampal synaptic density of patients with MCI relative to unimpaired controls (10, 12, 13) and was also able to detect drug rescue of synapse loss in a mouse amyloidogenic model [APPswe/PS1ΔE9 (14); henceforth, APP/PS1] (15). The second-generation tracer, [18F]SynVesT-1, with longer half-life, higher resolution, and greater potential for clinical translation, was able to discern differences in synaptic density between APP/PS1 mice and control littermates (16).

With regard to biochemical events at failing AD synapses, cellular prion protein (PRPC) was identified as a high-affinity receptor for Aβ oligomers (Aβo) in an unbiased genome-wide expression cloning screen (17). PRPC exhibits a unique selectivity for oligomeric Aβ (17-24). In amyloidogenic AD mouse models, Aβo binding to PRPC contributes to synaptic plasticity impairment, learning and memory deficits, and synapse loss (17, 25-29). Fyn and Pyk2 (PTK2B) kinases downstream of Aβo and PRPC have been previously linked to TAU (30-34) and implicated in AD risk (35). A screen for postsynaptic transmembrane proteins linking Aβo and PRPC to intraneuronal signaling identified neuronal metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) (23, 36-45). Genetic loss and pharmacological inhibition studies have demonstrated that reduced mGluR5 activity alleviated synaptic and memory deficits in multiple amyloidogenic AD mouse models (25, 36, 37, 40-42, 46-54). However, the molecular and cellular bases mediating the role of mGluR5 in synaptic loss in AD, including neuroglial interactions and complement-driven synaptic phagocytosis, remain unclear.

Allosteric mGluR5 modulators have been subdivided into positive (PAMs), negative (NAMs), and silent (SAMs). PAMs enhance and NAMs suppress glutamate-induced G protein–mediated Ca2+ mobilization and/or shift glutamate efficacy. Multiple NAMs reduce both physiological glutamate signaling and Aβo-PRPC–dependent synaptic deficits. As a dose-limiting side effect, blockade of glutamate at mGluR5 with a NAM impaired learning and memory independently of AD (36, 55-60). We identified a SAM, BMS-984923, that does not alter basal or glutamate signaling (61-63) but does inhibit the PRPC-mGluR5 interaction to prevent pathological Aβo signaling (39). This SAM has the potential for expanding the therapeutic window for mGluR5 as a disease-modifying AD target.

Here, we use BMS-984923 to explore the connection between neuronal mGluR5 and glia-dependent synapse loss. We showed that altered expression of neuronal and glial genes modified neuroimmune interaction in murine amyloidogenic (APP/PS1) and AD {homozygous double knock-in strain [APPNL-G-F/hMAPT (64, 65)]; henceforth labeled dKI} models, resulting in reduced synaptic density. Treatment with SAM restored synaptic density. Complement tagging of synapses destined for removal is reported to attract microglia and astroglia for phagocytosis of synaptic fragments (66). We showed here that SAM treatment prevented synaptic localization of C1Q without altering total C1Q amount or overall gliosis, suggesting that targeting mGluR5 might be effective for producing therapeutic effects in AD.

RESULTS

SAM occupies mGluR5 receptors at well-tolerated doses

Our previous data suggested that the mGluR5 SAM, BMS-984923, is able to reduce AD-related phenotypes in cell culture, brain slices, and amyloidogenic transgenic (TG) mice (39). Here, to assess mGluR5 receptor occupancy, we completed [18F]FPEB PET in rhesus monkeys and in mice. In monkeys, single intravenous doses of SAM (0.03 to 1.0 mg/kg) blocked mGluR5 in the brain in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1, A and B). Receptor occupancy from Lassen plots ranged from 27% for the 0.03 mg/kg dose to 94.4 ± 0.4% for the 1.0 mg/kg dose (Fig. 1B). Plasma total SAM concentrations were measured throughout the course of the scan. The full dose-response curve revealed that SAM bound to mGluR5 with an ED50 (median effective dose) of 0.11 ± 0.02 mg/kg dose or with an IC50 (median inhibitory concentration) of 24.8 ± 5.1 ng/ml total plasma concentration. Separate plasma protein binding studies indicated a free fraction of 0.1 to 0.5% in different species (data file S1A); therefore, the measured IC50 value equates to a free drug concentration of about 0.3 nM, closely similar to the measured 0.6 nM Ki (inhibition constant) for displacement of [3H]MPEPy for in vitro mGluR5 binding (39). In mice, a single oral dose of SAM (7.5 mg/kg) administered 2 hours before [18F]FPEB PET blocked brain mGluR5 with an average receptor occupancy of 98% across brain regions (Fig. 1C). To further assess occupancy of mGluR5, we tested the ability of SAM pretreatment to prevent PAM-induced seizures in mice (39, 67). Doses at 3.75 mg/kg or above completely blocked mGluR5-PAM–induced seizures (Fig. 1D; ED50 = 1.5 ± 0.8 mg/kg), whereas high doses of the chiral enantiomer of BMS-984923 (SAM enantiomer, eSAM, at 30 mg/kg) had no effect on seizures, demonstrating stereoselective receptor binding (Fig. 1D).

To evaluate the translational potential of SAM, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, selectivity, and toxicological analyses were pursued. Studies were conducted in mouse, rat, dog, and monkey to measure the plasma kinetics of SAM after intravenous and oral administration. We also assessed the metabolic stability and profile of SAM, and observed reduced stability in dog, which led us to choose monkey rather than dog as the second toxicology species (data file S1B). Metabolite profiling of SAM identified unchanged parent compound and 38 tentative minor metabolites across human and preclinical species; metabolic pathways observed in human were also observed in investigated preclinical species, and no major metabolite comprised more than 5% of total (data file S1B). Whereas plasma protein binding of SAM was &gt;99% in rat, monkey, and human (data file S1A), oral bioavailability was 50 to 90%, and mouse brain concentrations were about twice plasma concentrations (data file S1C). Safety evaluation of SAM included a standard Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) mutagenic program, which demonstrated that SAM was not mutagenic (data file S1D). In addition, rats tolerated single oral doses of SAM at 5, 15, and 45 mg/kg without relevant effects on neurobehavioral function, as evaluated using a modified Irwin test, or on body temperature (data file S1E). Repeat-dose toxicity studies of up to 7 days in rat and monkey were used to set the dose for the GLP 28-day repeat-dose studies in both species. Rats received 5, 15, or 45 mg kg−1 day−1, and monkeys received 10, 50, or 200 mg kg−1 day−1. From the 28-day GLP studies, the no-observed-adverse effect level (NOAEL, data file S1E) doses were 15 and 200 mg kg−1 day−1 for rat and monkey, respectively. The 28-day average maximum concentration and area under the curve values at the NOAEL are 10,700 ng/ml and 191,000 ng hour/ml in rat and 15,100 ng/ml and 169,000 ng hour/ml in monkey. The average exposure over 24 hours in monkey at NOAEL was more than 250-fold greater than the plasma IC50 measured from the receptor occupancy study using [18F]FPEB PET.

To further evaluate the specificity and selectivity of SAM, in vitro assays were completed to evaluate any potential interactions with other targets. SAM was tested in a total of 508 binding and cell-based functional assays in a CEREP panel using a single concentration at 10 μM in duplicate (data file S1F). Overall, SAM showed no affinity/potency or a selectivity &gt;300-fold for all targets, with the exception of PAR1 (protease-activated receptor 1) and PR (progesterone receptor) for which there was a selectivity between 100- and 300-fold relative to the mGluR5 Ki of 0.6 nM. We assessed the in vitro potential for SAM to be an inhibitor of the human transporters P-glycoprotein (P-gp), organic ion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1), OATP1B3, and BSEP, as well as the potential of SAM to be a substrate of the human transporter P-gp. The IC50’s for each were all far above efficacious SAM concentrations, and SAM showed no evidence to be a P-gp substrate (data file S1G). Furthermore, we investigated potential CYP inhibition and activation from SAM parent and metabolite compounds and found that IC50’s were all far above efficacious SAM drug concentration (data file S1G). SAM inhibited hERG (human ether-a-go-go related gene) in a GLP cell culture assay with an IC50 of 1.14 μM, 1900-fold above efficacious exposure concentration (data file S1H). During an in vivo monkey cardiovascular study at doses up to 200 mg/kg, the QT interval corrected for heart rate was unaltered, and there was no observed effect on respiratory, central nervous system (CNS), or cardiovascular function. Thus, oral dosing with SAM occupied brain mGluR5 sites and was well tolerated at exposures more than 250-fold greater than required to occupy 50% of the mGluR5 receptor sites.

mGluR5 SAM rescues synapse density in TG APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice

We sought to evaluate whether SAM rescue of preexisting synaptic density deficit in aged AD mice was observed by repeated synaptic PET imaging. Mice were aged to the point that synapse loss was detectable using SV2A PET, a tool for monitoring synapse density with clinical utility in AD and other conditions (fig. S1, A to C and G). At 12 to 13 months of age, a comparison of baseline [18F]SynVesT-1 PET found reduced [18F]SynVesT-1 binding in the hippocampus (HC) and cerebral cortex (CX) of APP/PS1 relative to wild-type (WT) mice (Fig. 2, A to C; P &lt; 0.0001). Rescans of the same mice after a 1-month treatment with the mGluR5 SAM showed a significant (P &lt; 0.0001) increase in hippocampal [18F]SynVesT-1 standardized uptake value ratio minus 1 (SUVR-1) in APP/PS1 compared to WT mice (Fig. 2, D to F).

We also tested whether SAM had a chronic disease–modifying effect after treatment cessation by analyzing synaptic marker immunostaining. Twelve-month-old APP/PS1 mice were treated for 1 month, followed by 1 month of drug washout, which is more than 60 halflives in mice. After 1 month of treatment, vehicle-treated TG animals exhibited significant (P &lt; 0.05) reduction of both the presynaptic marker SV2A and the postsynaptic marker postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95), in both dentate gyrus (DG) and CX, compared with the WT, whereas synaptic markers in SAM-treated APP/PS1 animals were restored to WT amounts in all contexts (P &gt; 0.05), consistent with previously published results (fig. S2, A to E) (39). This rescue persisted for at least a month after treatment cessation, as SAM-treated TG samples had significantly higher (P &lt; 0.01) synaptic density (with both SV2A and PSD-95 in both DG and CX) than vehicle-treated TG samples after drug washout (Fig. 2, G to K, and fig. S2, F to H). Together, the data showed a sustained disease-modifying benefit of blocking the PRPC/mGluR5 synaptic signaling pathway.

mGluR5 SAM rescues synapse density in dKI APPNL-G-F/hMAPT mice

As APP mutant mice can have confounding issues resulting from overexpression, competition with endogenous genes, and transgenic promotors, we also tested a homozygous APPNL-G-F/hMAPT dKI strain (64, 65). We repeated the mGluR5 SAM treatment from 12 to 13 months of age in dKI mice and assessed SV2A PET and synaptic immunohistology in different cohorts (fig. S1, D to G). Baseline [18F]SynVesT-1 PET found decreased synapse density in transgenic dKI mice compared to WT at 12 months of age (Fig. 3A), which was further confirmed by region of interest (ROI)–based analysis to be 19% lower hippocampal SUVR-1 in dKI mice compared to WT (Fig. 3B, P &lt; 0.01). In addition,1-month SAM treatment increased synaptic density by 17% as detected by posttreatment [18F]SynVesT-1 PET compared to baseline PET in the same dKI mice (P &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 3, C and D) to a density comparable to WT mice.

We sought to confirm the PET end point by immunohistological analysis. Both hippocampal and cortical sections of vehicle-treated dKI mice exhibited significantly (P &lt; 0.05) reduced SV2A and PSD-95 punctate staining relative to WT controls (Fig. 3, E to I, and fig. S3, A to C). In particular, 1-month treatment with SAM restored synaptic markers to amounts equal to that of WT mice. To the extent that the amount of the pre- and postsynaptic markers reflects synapse density, then the changes are expected to be similar in individual animals. SV2A and PSD-95 immunoreactivity strongly correlated with one another in both DG and CX from both APP/PS1 and dKI animal models (fig. S4, A to D; P &lt; 0.0001). Furthermore, SV2A staining in DG was significantly correlated with hippocampal SV2A PET SUVR-1 (fig. S4E; P &lt; 0.0001), providing cross-validation of the two methods.

Multiple studies have provided clinical and preclinical evidence supporting an increased incidence of AD in females compared to males. One recent experiment investigating sex differences in AD concluded that the mGluR5 NAM, CTEP, blocked Aβ pathophysiology and improved cognitive declines selectively in male but not female APP/PS1 mice (54). In contrast, our SV2A PET studies showed rescue of synaptic density loss in females by treatment with SAM in both the APP/PS1 and dKI models of AD. To further investigate a potential sex difference, we carried out a meta-analysis of our SV2A and PSD-95 histology data segregated by sex (fig. S5, A to C). Staining results from both synaptic markers in both DG and CX were compiled into a synaptic score for each individual animal (see Materials and Methods). In the APP/PS1 cohorts (fig. S5A), the dKI cohorts (fig. S5B), and in an analysis of the two models combined (fig. S5C), both males and females were fully rescued by SAM treatment with highly robust statistical significance (AD-veh versus WT-veh: P &lt; 0.01; AD-SAM versus WT-veh: P &gt; 0.05).

To further confirm that these synaptic markers reflected synaptic density, we assessed the juxtaposition of SV2A and PSD-95 puncta in three dimensions using a modified SEQUIN method (68). For this purpose, we used super-resolution Airyscan microscopy in confocal Z series of double-stained sections of the CA1 from vehicle- and SAM-treated dKI mice and scored synapses as pairs of puncta stained with pre- and postsynaptic proteins within 250 nm of one another. We observed that SAM treatment significantly (P &lt; 0.05) increased the density of synaptic loci relative to vehicle-treated dKI (Fig. 3, J and K). Thus, in multiple strains with multiple measures, blocking the mGluR5 pathway with SAM had a disease-modifying effect to support recovery of synaptic density.

We considered the extent to which our primary outcome, synapse density, matched with behavioral deficits in these mouse models. We have previously shown that recovery of synapse density associated with behavioral benefit after treatment with SAM in APP/PS1 mice (39). SAM rescued spatial memory in the Morris water maze, novel object memory, and passive avoidance learning. We also showed that rescue of APP/PS1 synapse density by the related mGluR5 NAM compound, MTEP, is accompanied by recovery of spatial memory and novel object memory (19, 27, 36). Here, we measured memory performance in the dKI model. At 3 months of age, the dKI mice exhibited no spatial memory deficit (fig. S6, A and B), but 12-month-old dKI mice treated with vehicle for 1 month exhibited significantly impaired learning (fig. S6C; P &lt; 0.0001) and could not recall a hidden platform location during a probe trial (fig. S6D). In contrast, age-matched dKI mice treated with SAM for 1 month spent significantly (P = 0.0059) more time in the target quadrant than adjacent areas (fig. S6C). These memory phenotypes occurred without any effect of dKI genotype or SAM treatment on the ability to swim to a visual platform (fig. S6E). DG SV2A area was also positively correlated with spatial memory performance (fig. S4F; P = 0.048). Thus, the ability of SAM compound treatment to restore synapse density in both APP/PS1 and dKI mice correlated with recovery of spatial memory.

Phospho-TAU accumulation is reduced in dKI mice by mGluR5 SAM

TAU hyperphosphorylation and neurofibrillary tangles are key components of AD pathology and are thought to be driven by upstream Aβ synaptopathology in human brain and to synergize with Aβ for further synapse loss (69-71). However, many mouse amyloidogenic AD models (including APP/PS1) show little or no TAU pathology. The dKI strain inserts human MAPT into the mouse Mapt locus and shows increases in certain phospho-TAU (pTAU) epitopes without tangles (65). Therefore, we assessed pTAU pathology in the dKI strain and its response to SAM treatment. The dKI mice were previously shown to have higher AT8 immunoreactivity in cortical brain tissue (65). Here, we confirmed by immunohistochemistry and biochemistry that AT8 amounts were increased in cortical tissue from 12-month-old dKI animals (Fig. 4, A to D; P &lt; 0.0001). One-month SAM treatment significantly reduced AT8 in the CX (Fig. 4, C and D; P &lt; 0.05).

We evaluated two additional disease-associated pTAU markers in dKI brain sections. TAU phosphorylation at S396/S404 has been reported as an early event in AD progression (72), and the pT217-TAU epitope has been documented as a specific plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) marker of AD tauopathy (73). pS396-TAU–positive area was significantly (P &lt; 0.0001) increased in dKI cerebral CX and in CA1, and this signal was decreased significantly (P &lt; 0.01) in CX by 1-month SAM treatment (Fig. 4, E to G). pT217-TAU–positive area, although less than pS396-TAU, still showed accumulation (P &lt; 0.0001) in cerebral CX and in CA1, and was significantly decreased (P &lt; 0.05) by SAM treatment in both regions (Fig. 4, H and I). Thus, rescue of synapse loss by SAM in the dKI model might, at least in part, be mediated by reduced pTAU accumulation; alternatively, reduced pTAU accumulation may be secondary, in part, to synapse recovery with SAM.

Single-nuclei transcriptomics of mGluR5 SAM–treated mice reveals neuronal rescue

To explore the molecular underpinnings linking SAM treatment with synaptic recovery in an unbiased manner, we conducted deep single-nuclei transcriptomic analysis of amyloidogenic and AD models with and without mGluR5 SAM treatment (Figs. 5 and 6 and figs. S7 to S13). We collected brain tissue from aged WT and APP/PS1 TG mice treated twice daily with either vehicle (V) or SAM (3.75 mg/kg) (D) for 1 month from 12 to 13 months of age (WTV, WTD, TGV, and TGD), as well as a separate cohort of similarly aged and treated WT and dKI animals (WTV, WTD, dKIV, and dKID) (Fig. 5A). Each group included four mice, and all were on a pure C57/Bl6J background. Cerebral CX and HC from each brain were dissected, and the two regions were processed together for each mouse. Nuclei isolated by sucrose density gradient centrifugation were processed for mRNA profiles with the 10X Genomics platform (~15,000 per sample). In total, nearly 500,000 nuclei were sequenced to a depth of ~20,000 reads each (fig. S7, A to D). The resulting DNA sequences were processed in Seurat, and no confounding batch effects were observed (fig. S8, A and B). Integrated data were clustered in Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) space (fig. S8C). Cell clusters were identified by canonical cell type markers, with at least three for each cell type (fig. S8D). The expression of one marker for each is shown (fig. S8G). Both models exhibited similar numbers and proportions of each cell type (fig. S8, E and F).

We examined expression profiles for AD-associated and SAM-regulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) across cell types. All cell types showed substantial changes induced by APP/PS1 or dKI compared to WT. For excitatory neurons (ExNs), a “volcano” plot revealed the pattern of up- and down-regulated genes in TGV or dKIV group compared to the WTV group (Fig. 5, B and D). In contrast, many fewer DEGs were present in the comparison of SAM-treated TG or dKI samples with the WTV group (Fig. 5, C and E). Indeed, 83 and 63% of AD-associated expression changes within ExNs of APP/PS1 and dKI samples, respectively, were corrected by SAM treatment (Fig. 5F). Expression patterns across the different groups for each DEG revealed that SAM treatment restored both up-regulated and down-regulated genes (Fig. 5F). Similar rescue was observed in inhibitory neurons (InNs) (Fig. 5G). The list of all SAM-corrected DEGs from ExNs and InNs and from either mouse model was analyzed for pathway enrichment with ClueGO (74). Differences in enrichment of networks composed of Gene Ontology (GO) cell compartment terms were detected (fig. S9, A to C). Specifically, neuronal SAM–corrected DEGs were strongly enriched in GO terms related to neuronal synapses, with less prominently populated networks related to ribosome, V–adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), and glial projection. This analysis is consistent with expected primary action of SAM and mGluR5 at neuronal synapses.

SAM-mediated correction was predominantly neuronal, because SAM treatment failed to correct most DEGs in each glia cell population analyzed (Fig. 5, H and I, and fig. S10, A to C). Increasing the threshold stringency for differential expression analysis had minimal effect on the proportion of SAM-corrected DEGs across cell types (fig. S11), highlighting not only that SAM-mediated corrections were primarily neuronal but also that treatment corrected at least 73% of neuronal DEGs with the greatest fold-change difference, regardless of model.

To visualize differential expression transcriptome-wide between TGV, TGD, and WTV, the log fold change (logFC) for WTV compared to TGV (AD effect, x axis) was plotted against that for TGD compared to TGV (SAM effect, y axis) (Fig. 6, A to I, and fig. S12, A to F). In this plot, points along the identity line of slope = 1 are equal in TGD and WTV, indicating that there is complete rescue. Points along the line y = 0 reflect an AD-related phenotype unaffected by SAM treatment. Although the linear regression of all genes showed a highly significant difference from slope = 0 in every cell type examined (P &lt; 2.2 × 10−16), the effect was much more pronounced in neuronal subtypes. For APP/PS1 ExN, the slope was 0.70 and Pearson R was 0.72, with close to full normalization by SAM (Fig. 6B). The regression of expression profiles for DEGs in InNs showed a slope nearly as close to 1. In these neuronal populations, most DEGs were corrected by SAM [colored pink (APP/PS1) or green (dKI)] and largely fell along the y = x identity line. In contrast, although the slopes in microglia and astrocytes were also significantly different from 0 (P &lt; 2.2 × 10−16), they were substantially shallower than in neurons, because most DEGs failed to be corrected (black dots) (Fig. 6, B to I, and fig. S12, A to F).

Both the APP/PS1 and dKI models showed a substantial (P &lt; 2.3 × 10−50) rescue of expression patterns by SAM, in correlation with synapse rescue by immunohistology and PET imaging (Figs. 2 and 3). We compared the AD-related DEGs of all major cell types of the two models and found significant overlap in each context (P &lt; 4.8 × 10−4) (fig. S13). In ExN, the overlap of DEGs contained 46 genes (fig. S10, A and B). Of these 46 core DEGs, most were expression-normalized by SAM in both models; 36 were rescued in APP/PS1, and 31 in dKI (fig. S13B). Thus, single-nuclei RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) profiling methods revealed robust expression changes across multiple cell types and pronounced global rescue by SAM treatment, but the rescue was far more complete in neurons than in glia.

Research into the role of glial cells in AD progression has identified expression signatures of disease-associated microglia (DAM) (75) and astrocytes (DAA) (76) in the 5XFAD TG amyloidogenic mouse model, each with unique transcriptomic profiles. Our data here demonstrated conservation of a subset of these characteristic DEGs in both cell types (fig. S13, G to I). Although microglia from dKI animals had a higher number of DEGs relative to WT controls than did APP/PS1 (and thus greater overlap with DAMs), both mouse models had a similar number of overlapping DEGs with DAA.

C1Q localization to PSD-95 puncta is prevented by mGluR5 blockade, and synaptic engulfment is reduced

Although our single-nuclei transcriptomic data revealed minimal glial normalization by SAM, activation of glial cells and C1Q synaptic tagging have been strongly implicated in AD synapse loss (7, 77, 78). We hypothesized that gliosis and complement release may still occur in the presence of SAM but that innate immune mediators might fail to target the expression-normalized neuronal synaptic elements. Specifically, the synapse-rescuing effect of SAM treatment might relate to a prevention of complement tagging of synapses rather than an upstream reduction of microgliosis or complement production. First, we examined whether the synapse-rescuing mGluR5 SAM normalized gliosis, C1Q amounts, or colocalization with PSD-95. We have previously examined astrocyte, microglia, and Aβ area in the hippocampi of treated and nontreated APP/PS1 mice and found that SAM treatment had no effect on gliosis or plaque load (39, 79, 80). Here, we obtained similar results for SAM-treated dKI (fig. S14, A to F). IBA1 (a microglial marker; fig. S14, A and B), GFAP (an astrocyte marker; fig. S14, C and D), and thioflavin S (amyloid plaques; fig. S14, E and F) staining were significantly increased (P &lt; 0.01, P &lt; 0.05, and P &lt; 0.0001, respectively) in 12-month-old vehicle-treated dKI animals, relative to WT, and none was affected by SAM treatment. To assess total C1Q protein, we completed C1Q immunoblots in the dKI and APP/PS1 samples with and without SAM treatment. Total C1Q in dKI HC samples was substantially increased in the vehicle-treated samples relative to WT, and this was not altered by the SAM treatment (dKI; Fig. 7, A and B; P &lt; 0.0001).

To assess innate immune tagging of synapses by complement, we analyzed DG sections by super-resolution Airyscan microscopy with antibodies against C1Q and PSD-95 (Fig. 7C). At 12 months old, the fraction of PSD-95 overlapping with C1Q was significantly increased in both dKI (Fig. 7D; P &lt; 0.0001) and APP/PS1 (Fig. 7E; P &lt; 0.01) vehicle-treated mice, consistent with published reports in other models (7, 81, 82). In contrast, animals treated for 1 month with SAM exhibited PSD-95/C1Q colocalization that was reduced relative to vehicle-treated animals (P &lt; 0.05) and was indistinguishable from WT. C1Q overlap with the presynaptic marker SYNAPSIN 1/2 was also significantly elevated (P &lt; 0.05) in DG of vehicle-treated dKI mice and restored to WT amount in SAM-treated animals (fig. S15, A and B). This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that SAM normalization of synaptic signaling and neuronal gene expression in these amyloidogenic and AD models eliminates synaptic tagging by complement, despite persistent glial activation and C1Q production.

After synaptic tagging by C1Q, both astrocytes and microglia are thought to participate in synaptic removal by phagocytic mechanisms. One study highlighted a greater role for astrocytes in clearing synaptic debris and microglia for somatic debris (83). To assess astroglial engulfment of synaptic elements, brain samples from 12- to 13-month-old WT and dKI animals were costained with SV2A and GFAP after 1 month of treatment with vehicle or SAM (Fig. 7, F and G). SAM-treated dKI samples exhibited significantly (P &lt; 0.05) lower SV2A signal contained within GFAP-positive astrocytes in CA1, relative to dKI-vehicle samples. Although SAM-treated dKI samples did exhibit reductions in astrocytic engulfment of SV2A, the engulfment was still significantly higher than WT samples (Fig. 7G; P &lt; 0.0001). Together, SAM blockade of mGluR5-dependent and AD-selective synaptic signaling normalizes neuronal gene expression and is associated with reductions of both C1Q synaptic tagging and histologic evidence of synaptic engulfment.

DISCUSSION

In the current study, we showed that synapse loss can be tracked using longitudinal PET imaging in rodents. Using this method, we found that synapse loss was mGluR5-dependent in both a MAPT gene KI AD mouse model and a TG amyloidogenic mouse model. The mGluR5 intervention was initiated after synapse density had declined at 12 months of age, and SAM treatment was able to reverse the deficit in reimaged mice. This disease-modifying benefit persisted for 1 month after washout and was coupled with reduced pTAU accumulation by dKI mice expressing human TAU. Mechanistically, single-nuclei transcriptomic profiling revealed normalization of neuronal signatures, but little change in glial cells. However, this does not imply that glial responses are separable from AD-related synapse loss. In contrast, the mGluR5-mediated neuronal changes eliminated the AD-dependent localization of C1Q to synaptic sites and reduced the AD-associated synaptic fragment engulfment by astrocytes. Our data support the hypothesis that the synapse-depleting neuroglial interaction in these amyloidogenic and AD models is prevented by mGluR5 blockade–dependent normalization of neuronal gene expression. However, we cannot rule out additional effects of SAM treatment on nonneuronal cells that were not detected by extensive expression profiling or immunohistology but contributed to synaptic density restoration. Of translational relevance, a subnanomolar potent and orally available mGluR5 SAM (BMS-984923) blocked this AD process, while preserving physiological glutamate signaling, and had a broad safety margin in toxicology studies. Thus, SAM-mediated correction of neuronal expression blocked C1Q synaptic localization and prevented synaptic engulfment to preserve synapses in rodent models.

Synapse loss is a robust biomarker of AD progression that correlates well with cognitive decline (8-12). Development of a noninvasive in vivo imaging approach to quantify synaptic density is essential for early diagnosis of AD. SV2A, a ubiquitously and homogenously expressed isoform of SV2, is found in synapses throughout the brain. Expanding on recent studies (16, 84, 85), we used longitudinal PET imaging with [18F]SynVesT-1 to first demonstrate decreases in hippocampal synaptic density of two separate mouse models of amyloidogenesis and AD and then to show pharmacological rescue. These findings were confirmed using immunohistochemical staining of SV2A. The successful application of [18F]SynVesT-1 in preclinical evaluation of treatment advances its utility as a tool for development of therapeutic agents of AD and other neurodegenerative diseases, and supports its development as a tool for diagnosis and assessment of AD disease progression.

Pharmacological rescue of synaptic density in aged APP/PS1 and dKI mice revealed that new synapses are being formed in these animals. It is documented by repeated in vivo two-photon imaging that aged WT mice (86) and aged APP/PS1 mice (87) continue to form dendritic spines and stabilize new synapses. Because new dendritic spines are continually gained and stabilized throughout aging, it is potentially possible to restore overall synaptic density by blocking the mechanisms underlying accelerated synaptic loss without an effect on synaptogenesis per se. On the basis of the acute effect of Aβo to drive dendritic spine loss and the ability of SAM treatment to prevent this acute loss (19, 36, 39), we favor the hypothesis that synaptogenesis is not altered by SAM but rather that increased density over time is due to a shift in the balance of gain and loss. The observation that SAM treatment of WT animals did not result in greater synaptic density is also consistent with a specific action to limit AD-related synaptic loss and thereby permit a net increase of synapse density over 1 month in the disease model.

In addition to synapse loss, microscopic pathological hallmarks of AD in humans include Aβ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated TAU (2, 3). APP/PS1 mice recapitulate amyloid phenotypes but do not develop TAU tangles. To assess SAM-mediated rescue of pathological TAU phenotypes, we previously treated 3×Tg mice (39). These mice express the human MAPT (P301L) transgene in addition to the APPswe transgene and a Psen1 transgene with the familial AD (fAD) M146V mutation (88). SAM treatment of aged 3×Tg mice reduced soluble p(S199/S202)-TAU and insoluble TAU. To extend this finding to a setting without overexpression or FTLD-mutant TAU, we used the homozygous dKI model APPNL-G-F/hMAPT. We confirmed pTAU accumulation and found that pTAU phenotypes were decreased by SAM treatment. We have previously shown that SAM treatment prevents aberrant activation of proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2, PTK2B) (39), a kinase linked to AD risk and reported to phosphorylate TAU at Y18 (89). In the amyloidogenic and AD models studied here, SAM treatment lowered Aβ-triggered TAU phosphorylation, at least in part by normalization of downstream Pyk2. SAM-mediated reduction of pTAU accumulation may contribute to restoration of synaptic density.

Previous studies support sex-dependent differences in AD incidence. Using APP/PS1 mice, a recent study found that negative allosteric modulation of mGluR5 selectively improved cognitive decline in male but not female mice. However, our SV2A PET studies and extensive histological data found no difference between sexes in multiple brain regions using the same APP/PS1 background or the dKI model. One explanation for the difference in sex dependency between these studies relates to the use of a SAM in the current study at full receptor occupancy, in contrast to a NAM with attendant toxicity and dose limitation in the previous work. Pharmacokinetic and receptor occupancy were not monitored in the CTEP study (54). Nonetheless, it is clear that both male and female AD mice of different strains benefit from SAM treatment targeting mGluR5.

The list of genes altered in the AD mouse neurons and corrected by SAM overlaps strongly with data from human AD expression profiling. Nineteen of the 46 SAM-corrected ExN DEGs common to both models are human dorsolateral prefrontal CX ExN DEGs (90). A number of these genes have also been reported as AD biomarkers. Aldolase, fructose-bisphosphate A (ALDOA) function is down-regulated in AD hippocampal tissue (91) and is a CSF biomarker discriminating between AD and non-AD cognitive impairment (92). Calmodulin (CALM1) is part of an intersecting subnetwork from four consensus modules of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for CSF t-TAU/Aβ1–42 ratio in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (93). CYSC (CST3) correlates with CSF concentrations of Aβ42 and TAU (94) and is reduced in AD CSF (95). Prostaglandin D2 synthase/β-trace (PTGDS) is also reduced in AD CSF (95) and is part of network module with a positive correlation to AD in frontal CX tissue (96). The ATPase subunit ATP1B1 is included in a network module with a negative correlation to AD phenotypes (96). Malate dehydrogenase 1 (MDH1) is elevated in AD CSF (97) and is a hub in gene networks contributing to AD (98). Heat shock protein 90 alpha family class B member 1 (HSP90AB1), a molecular chaperone, is a subnetwork node within an “amyloid neuropathies” network of AD (51). Integral membrane protein 2B (ITM2B) regulates glutamate release and synaptic function (99), whereas dominant ITM2B mutations cause familial British and Danish dementias, diseases with amyloid angiopathy, and neurofibrillary tangles (100). BRI2 (encoded by ITM2B) binds APP and inhibits Aβ42 aggregation (100). BRI2 is also increased in early-stage AD HC, and deposits are associated with Aβ plaques (101). CAMK2N1 is a potent and specific inhibitor of CAMKII in the postsynaptic density. CAMKII is downstream of the PRPC-mGluR5 signaling complex aberrantly activated by Aβo (38). Dysregulation of hippocampal CAMKII has been reported in AD (102).

Despite synapse recovery by SAM treatment, microglial and astrocyte gene expression and histologic changes in the amyloidogenic and AD models were altered by SAM to a minimal extent. Although there was a relative absence of glial changes, we cannot rule out direct effects of SAM on glial action as a potential contributing factor. However, even if SAM directly acts on glial cells, most AD-related transcriptional changes were observed selectively in neurons. This is consistent with glial activation being driven by amyloid accumulation rather than synaptic damage (103). Subsequent to glial activation in control AD mice, C1Q production tags synapses for engulfment by both astrocytes and microglia (7, 104). C1Q and C3 were found to be up-regulated and colocalized to synapses in AD models, whereas inhibition of classic complement components blocked synapse loss. Consistent with these findings, we show here that preventing localization of C1Q to synapses by SAM treatment is sufficient to prevent synaptic engulfment. snRNA-seq analysis demonstrated that SAM treatment had the strongest effect in neurons, with minimal alterations to expression changes in glial cells. Specifically, neuronal SAM–corrected DEGs are enriched in GO terms related to synapses. Biochemical and histological analysis showed that C1Q, IBA1, and GFAP amounts were not altered by SAM treatment, supporting the transcriptomic data. Despite the persistence of gliosis and plaque density in SAM-treated samples, we showed elimination of the synaptic localization of C1Q and a reduction of synaptic engulfment markers in astrocytes. The observed reduction of synaptic engulfment by GFAP-positive cells may be sufficient for synaptic recovery by itself, although it is also possible that SAM treatment reduces engulfment by other glial populations not examined here, including microglia and other GFAP-negative phagocytic cells. Both multiple epidermal growth factor–like domains 10 (Megf10), a C1Q receptor, and MerTk contribute to astrocytic clearance of neuronal debris and synaptic elimination in developing and adult CNS (77, 105). However, no expression changes in these receptors were detected in neurons in the current analysis. Among the genes differentially expressed in both amyloidogenic and AD models and rescued by SAM in both ExNs and InNs is CD47, a protein shown to inhibit complement-dependent synaptic pruning (106). Thus, normalization of the phagocytosis-inhibiting signal CD47 in neurons by SAM may contribute to synaptic protection. Although CD47 is normalized by SAM treatment in both models, the direction of differential expression in the two models is opposite (up-regulated in APP/PS1 neurons, down-regulated in dKI neurons), perhaps due to a later disease stage for APP/PS1 versus dKI. Regardless, rescuing the altered neuronal expression profile prevented synaptic tagging, effectively blocking complement-dependent synaptic loss.

Our study has limitations. Although we used two different strains, the data are derived from murine models that do not fully recapitulate human AD. In particular, the TAU phenotypes and cell death in these models are limited compared to the human condition. Human AD also has a substantially slower progression and much longer course than any murine model. The mouse strains are inbred, and mice were housed in conditions relatively free of pathogens. Thus, the translation of these studies to human requires detailed clinical investigation.

Although our snRNA-seq data were supported by histological evidence, most identified DEGs were not validated. Additional experiments are necessary to confirm the transcriptional changes and investigate whether these changes manifest at the protein level. Such experiments will also shed light on the mechanistic underpinnings of synaptic engulfment, including specific C1Q receptors and the responsible cell types.

Although SAM rescue is mediated by mGluR5, we cannot rule out contributions of other Aβ cell surface receptors to neurodegeneration. This could potentially explain the failure of SAM treatment to fully rescue the observed increases in pTAU in the dKI model. Despite this, synaptic density was restored to WT levels in dKI mice, so these contributions must not be essential.

In conclusion, SAM is a potent and selective inhibitor of the Aβo-induced mGluR5 complex. Toxicological studies showed safety and tolerability at doses more than 250-fold above the dose required for 50% receptor occupancy in primate brain and for rescue of pathophysiological TAU, C1Q synaptic localization, synaptic engulfment, and synaptic depletion in mouse amyloidogenic and AD models. This work further reinforces that targeting an Aβo-induced mGluR5 complex can modify the course of AD and supports the advancement of SAM intervention into human testing (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04805983). SAM treatment was shown to have a disease-modifying benefit, because synaptic density is maintained even after a month of drug washout. Because gliosis and plaque density are unchanged by SAM treatment, SAM intervention was still effective even after plaque accumulation. As such, there is potential for synergy with pharmacological treatments that suppress gliosis and/or target Aβ or TAU. Future work should explore the molecular details of C1Q synaptic recruitment, the mechanisms of synaptic engulfment, and the therapeutic development of the SAM compound.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study design

The objective of this study was to investigate the ability of an mGluR5 SAM (BMS-984923) to restore synaptic density and the underlying molecular mechanisms. For nonclinical pharmacology, drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics (DMPK), and toxicology experiments, multiple cell lines and animal models were used (Supplementary Materials). To assess synaptic density, rescue, and its mechanisms, we treated amyloidogenic AD mice and subjected them to PET imaging and behavioral assays; after sacrifice, tissue was used for immunohistochemistry, biochemistry, and snRNA-seq. Research methods and results are reported in compliance with the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines. Sample sizes were chosen on the basis of previous results to enable adequate statistical power. Mice were randomized to treatment groups using the standard = RAND() function in Microsoft Excel, and groups were matched for age and gender (fig. S1). Details about sample number for each experiment are outlined in fig. S1G and in the relevant figure legend. For experimental groups with n &lt; 20, individual data values are provided in data file S3. All experiments were conducted in a blinded fashion with respect to genotype and treatment. Outliers were identified in PRISM by ROUT and removed. For specific experiments, see relevant Materials and Methods section for exclusion criteria, outcome measures, statistical methods, and experimental procedures. Reagents and experimental animals are summarized in data file S4.

Statistics

All results are presented as means ± SEM, unless otherwise specified. GraphPad Prism 9 software was used for statistical analysis. Data were analyzed using unpaired t tests and one-way, two-way, or three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test, Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test, or Fisher’s least significant difference post hoc pairwise comparisons test as specified in the figure legends. Only two-sided tests were used, and all data analyzed met the assumption for the specific statistical test that was performed. Probability levels of P &lt; 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical tests for gene expression in single-nuclei data were carried out in Seurat V3.6 (107).

Supplementary Material

Figs. S1 to S15 Legends for data files S1 to S4 References (108–120)

Table S1

Table S2

Table S3

Table S4

Acknowledgments:

We thank T. Saito and T. C. Saido for APPNL-G-F/hMAPT mice. We thank K. DeLuca and the Yale PET Center staff for their expert technical support.

Funding:

This work was supported by research grants from the NIH to Z.C. (R01AG069921), to S.M.S. (U01AG058608, R01AG034924, R01AG066165, RF1AG070926, and R56AG074015), and to A.H.B. (F31AG066483, T32NS007224, and T32NS041228), and by the Thome Memorial Foundation and the Falk Medical Research Trust to S.M.S.

Fig. 1. SAM receptor occupancy of mGluR5.

(A) Template MR images (top) and aligned PET images from a typical rhesus brain subject before (middle) and after intravenous dose of SAM (1 mg/kg, bottom), summed from 30 to 45 min after [18F]FPEB injection. Activity is expressed as SUVR, normalized using cerebellum. (B) Relationship between measured SAM plasma concentration and mGluR5 receptor occupancy. Fit shown is two-parameter nonlinear mixed effect (NLME) model. (C) Template MR images (top) and aligned averaged mouse brain PET images after oral dose of either vehicle (middle) or SAM (7.5 mg/kg, bottom), summed from 45 to 60 min after injection of [18F]FPEB. Activity is expressed as SUVR, normalized using cerebellum. (D) Mice were treated with increasing doses of SAM (0 to 7.5 mg/kg) or SAM enantiomer (eSAM; 7.5 to 30 mg/kg) by oral gavage 90 min before receiving PAM (20 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection. Graphs depict the normalized severity of seizure activity (based on Racine scale) after PAM administration.

Fig. 2. In vivo and in vitro assessment of synaptic density in APP/PS1 mice.

(A) Averaged baseline [18F]SynVesT-1 PET images for WT (top) and APP/PS1 (bottom) mouse brain. Activity is expressed as SUVR-1 (normalized to brain stem). (B) Voxel-wise analysis t value map comparing APP/PS1 to WT mouse brain. Color scale represents decrease in APP/PS1 compared to WT. (C) ROI-based comparison of hippocampal [18F]SynVesT-1 SUVR-1 shows synapse density in APP/PS1 compared to WT mice. (D) Voxel-wise analysis t value map comparing baseline and posttreatment synaptic density in APP/PS1 mice. Color scale represents increase in posttreatment compared to pretreatment mice. (E) ROI-based comparison of hippocampal [18F]SynVesT-1 SUVR-1 from aged WT and APP/PS1 animals at baseline (Pre) and after SAM treatment (Post).(F) Baseline (Pre) and posttreatment (Post) hippocampal [18F]SynVesT-1 SUVR-1 from SAM-treated APP/PS1 animals [seventh and eighth bars in (E)] illustrates individual changes. (G) Representative images of SV2A immunofluorescent staining of DG and CX of APP/PS1 mice after a month-long treatment washout period. Scale bar, 20 μm. Images from SV2A staining in DG and CX of WT animals and from PSD-95 in DG of WT and APP/PS1 animals are shown in fig. S2 (F to H). (H to K) Fractional area of SV2A (H and I) or PSD-95 (J and K) immunoreactive puncta from DG (H and J) or CX (I and K) of post-washout animals treated with vehicle or SAM. In (C), (E), (F), and (H) to (K), each individual mouse is shown as a single dot. In (C), data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 24 mice per group and compared by unpaired t test. In (E), data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 12 mice per group and compared by repeated-measures two-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. In (H) to (K), data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 14 to 24 mice per group and compared by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. **P &lt; 0.01, ***P &lt; 0.001, ****P &lt; 0.0001. ns, not significant.

Fig. 3. In vivo and in vitro assessment of synaptic density in dKI mice.

(A) Voxel-wise analysis t value map comparing synaptic density of dKI to WT mice. Color scale represents decrease in dKI compared to WT. (B) ROI-based comparison of hippocampal [18F]SynVesT-1 SUVR-1 in dKI mice compared to WT (WT values are from APP/PS1 cohort presented in Fig. 2C). (C) Voxel-wise analysis t value map comparing synaptic density pre- and posttreatment with SAM. Color scale represents increase in posttreatment compared to pretreatment mice. (D) Paired comparison of ROI-based analysis of hippocampal SUVR-1 between pretreatment and posttreatment dKI mice. (E) Representative images of PSD-95 immunofluorescent staining of DG of WT and dKI mice after treatment with vehicle or SAM. Scale bar, 20 μm. Images from SV2A staining of DG and CX and from PSD-95 staining of CX are shown in fig. S3 (A to C). (F to I) Fractional area of PSD-95 (F and G) or SV2A (H and I) immunoreactive puncta from DG (F and H) or CX (G and I) of WT and dKI animals treated with vehicle or SAM. (J) Representative images of SV2A and PSD-95 immunofluorescent costaining of CA1 of dKI mice after treatment with vehicle or SAM. Scale bar, 2 μm. (K) Quantification of synaptic loci (per cubic micrometer) in CA1 of vehicle- or SAM-treated dKI animals. In (B), (D), (F) to (I), and (K), each individual mouse is shown as single dot. In (B), data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 24 (WT) or 10 (dKI) mice per group and compared by unpaired two-tailed t test. In (D), data are compared by paired two-tailed t test. In (F) to (I), data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 21 to 34 mice per group and compared by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. In (K), data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 12 (dKI-veh) or 11 (dKI-SAM) mice per group and compared by unpaired t test. *P &lt; 0.05, **P &lt; 0.01, ****P &lt; 0.0001. ns, not significant.

Fig. 4. In vitro assessment of TAU pathophysiology in dKI mice.

(A) Representative images of AT8 and NEUN immunofluorescent staining of medial CX of WT and dKI mice after treatment with vehicle or SAM. Scale bar, 50 μm. (B) Representative immunoblots of AT8 amounts in cortical tris-buffered saline (TBS) fraction of WT and dKI animals treated with vehicle or SAM; actin was used as loading control. (C) Fractional area of AT8 immunoreactive puncta from medial CX of treated WT and dKI animals, from micrographs as in (A). (D) Quantification of AT8 summed from TBS and Triton X-100 fractions, normalized to actin, from immunoblots as in (B). (E) Representative images of pS396 immunofluorescent staining of medial CX of WT and dKI mice after treatment with vehicle or SAM. Scale bar, 100 μm. (F and G) Fractional area of pS396 immunoreactive puncta from medial CX (F) or hippocampal CA1 (G) of WT and dKI animals treated with vehicle or SAM. (H and I) Fractional area of pT217 immunoreactive puncta from medial CX (H) or hippocampal CA1 (I) of WT and dKI animals treated with vehicle or SAM. In (C) and (D) and (F) to (I), each individual mouse is shown as single dot. Data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 7 to 20 mice per group and compared by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. *P &lt; 0.05, **P &lt; 0.01, ****P &lt; 0.0001. ns, not significant.

Fig. 5. snRNA-seq shows SAM-mediated correction of expression changes in neuronal and glia cell populations from amyloidogenic and AD mouse models.

(A) Cerebral CX and HC from WT, APP/PS1, and dKI mice treated with vehicle or SAM (n = 4 mice per group) from 12 to 13 months of age were fractionated to single nuclei and processed by 10X Genomics. (B to E) Volcano plots of DEGs identified in APP/PS1 (B and C) or dKI (D and E) ExN cell populations. Plots show statistical significance (–log10, P value) versus magnitude of gene expression changes (logFC) of AD-veh (B and D) or AD-SAM (C and E) when compared to WT-vehicle–treated mice; vertical dashed line indicates 0.0 logFC, and vertical solid lines indicate +0.1 logFC. A selection of significant, AD-associated DEGs is marked in red, with gene names identified (B and D). DEGs are deemed significant if they exhibit an absolute logFC &gt; 0.1 with P &lt; 0.005 (Wilcoxon rank sum test). The same AD-associated DEGs are marked in green (B and D) if their absolute logFC &lt; 0.1. For full DEG list from all cell types, refer to data file S2. (F to I) Total number of AD-associated DEGs in ExNs (F), InNs (G), microglia (H), and reactive astrocytes (I) from APP/PS1 or dKI samples. Pie charts illustrate percentage of DEGs that are fully corrected by SAM treatment (Fisher’s exact test); the size of the chart is relative to total number of DEGs. Heatmaps show single DEG expression within each cell type. Analyses of remaining cell types are included in fig. S11.

Fig. 6. Transcriptome-wide correction by SAM treatment in neuronal and glial cell types.

(A) Cell type-specific comparison of AD-associated DEGs and SAM-corrected DEGs in APP/PS1 and dKI samples. LogFC between WT-veh and either APP/PS1-veh or dKI-veh (AD effect) is plotted along the x axis. LogFC between vehicle- and SAM-treated APP/PS1 or dKI samples (SAM effect) is plotted along the y axis. Black points represent genes with logFC &gt; 0.1 and P &lt; 0.005. Colored points (pink = APP/PS1, green = dKI) represent DEGs that were corrected by SAM treatment. Points along the identity line (x = y) represent genes with equivalent differential expression between AD-SAM and WT-veh, relative to AD-veh, indicating complete rescue by SAM. Points along the line “y = 0” reflect genes unaffected by SAM. The regression line (Pearson’s correlations) represents transcriptome-wide effects of SAM treatment. Expression pattern for different cell types is provided for ExNs (B and C), InNs (D and E), microglia (F and G), and reactive astrocytes (H and I). Analyses of remaining cell types are included in fig. S12.

Fig. 7. Synaptic localization of C1Q in amyloidogenic and AD mouse models.

(A) Total C1Q in HC from WT and dKI animals treated with vehicle or SAM were measured by Western blotting; actin was used as loading control. (B) Quantification of immunoblot in (A). C1Q intensity was normalized to actin. Data are means ± SEM from n = 6 mice per group and compared by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (C) Representative images of C1Q and PSD-95 immunofluorescent staining of DG of WT and dKI mice after treatment with vehicle or SAM imaged with Airyscan super-resolution. Scale bar, 5 μm. Yellow arrows highlight C1Q/PSD-95 colocalization. (D and E) Fractional area of PSD-95 immunoreactive puncta overlapping C1Q in DG of dKI (D) or APP/PS1 (E) animals treated with vehicle or SAM. Each individual mouse is shown as a single dot. Data are presented after measurement by Mander’s coefficient as means ± SEM from n = 6 to 10 mice per group and compared by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (F) Representative orthogonal views from different planes (x/y, x/z, or y/z) of SV2A and GFAP immunofluorescent staining of CA1 of dKI mice after treatment with vehicle or SAM. Scale bar, 5 μm. (G) Fractional area of SV2A immunoreactive puncta engulfed in GFAP in CA1 of WT or dKI animals treated with vehicle or SAM. Each individual mouse is shown as a single dot. Data are presented as means ± SEM from n = 8 to 10 mice per group and compared by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. *P &lt; 0.05, **P &lt; 0.01, ****P &lt; 0.0001.

Competing interests: T.R.S. is an employee, and S.M.S. is founder, equity holder, director, and paid consultant of Allyx Therapeutics, which seeks to develop mGluR5 compounds for AD and holds a license for BMS-984923. Y.H.H., Z.C., S. Li, and R.E.C. are inventors on the patent application (PCT/US2018/018388) submitted by Yale University that covers the production and use of the radioligand [18F]SynVesT-1 (formerly referred to as [18F]SDM-8). T.R.S. and S.M.S. are inventors on a planned patent application to be submitted jointly by Yale University and Allyx Therapeutics that covers the production and use of BMS-984923 for neurodegenerative disease. S.M.S. also consults for ReNetX Bio and Proteowise on unrelated topics.

Data and materials availability: All data associated with this study are present in the paper or the Supplementary Materials. The snRNA-seq data are available from NCBI GEO database, accession number GSE171095.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scitranslmed.abi8593


REFERENCES AND NOTES

1. Jack CR Jr. , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Dunn B , Haeberlein SB , Holtzman DM , Jagust W , Jessen F , Karlawish J , Liu E , Molinuevo JL , Montine T , Phelps C , Rankin KP , Rowe CC , Scheltens P , Siemers E , Snyder HM , Sperling R , NIA-AA Research Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement. 14 , 535–562 (2018).29653606
2. Long JM , Holtzman DM , Alzheimer disease: An update on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell 179 , 312–339 (2019).31564456
3. De Strooper B , Karran E , The cellular phase of Alzheimer's disease. Cell 164 , 603–615 (2016).26871627
4. Pimenova AA , Raj T , Goate AM , Untangling genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease. Biol. Psychiatry 83 , 300–310 (2018).28666525
5. McDade E , Wang G , Gordon BA , Hassenstab J , Benzinger TLS , Buckles V , Fagan AM , Holtzman DM , Cairns NJ , Goate AM , Marcus DS , Morris JC , Paumier K , Xiong C , Allegri R , Berman SB , Klunk W , Noble J , Ringman J , Ghetti B , Farlow M , Sperling RA , Chhatwal J , Salloway S , Graff-Radford NR , Schofield PR , Masters C , Rossor MN , Fox NC , Levin J , Jucker M , Bateman RJ ; Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network, Longitudinal cognitive and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer disease. Neurology 91 , e1295–e1306 (2018).30217935
6. Deczkowska A , Weiner A , Amit I , The physiology, pathology, and potential therapeutic applications of the TREM2 signaling pathway. Cell 181 , 1207–1217 (2020).32531244
7. Hong S , Beja-Glasser VF , Nfonoyim BM , Frouin A , Li S , Ramakrishnan S , Merry KM , Shi Q , Rosenthal A , Barres BA , Lemere CA , Selkoe DJ , Stevens B , Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352 , 712–716 (2016).27033548
8. Scheff SW , DeKosky ST , Price DA , Quantitative assessment of cortical synaptic density in Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol. Aging 11 , 29–37 (1990).2325814
9. Scheff SW , Price DA , Schmitt FA , Mufson EJ , Hippocampal synaptic loss in early Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiol. Aging 27 , 1372–1384 (2006).16289476
10. Mecca AP , Chen MK , O'Dell RS , Naganawa M , Toyonaga T , Godek TA , Harris JE , Bartlett HH , Zhao W , Nabulsi NB , Wyk BCV , Varma P , Arnsten AFT , Huang Y , Carson RE , van Dyck CH , In vivo measurement of widespread synaptic loss in Alzheimer's disease with SV2A PET. Alzheimers Dement. 16 , 974–982 (2020).32400950
11. Colom-Cadena M , Spires-Jones T , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Caggiano A , DeKosky ST , Fillit H , Harrison JE , Schneider LS , Scheltens P , de Haan W , Grundman M , van Dyck CH , Izzo NJ , Catalano SM ; Synaptic Health Endpoints Working Group, The clinical promise of biomarkers of synapse damage or loss in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther 12 , 21 (2020).32122400
12. Chen MK , Mecca AP , Naganawa M , Finnema SJ , Toyonaga T , Lin SF , Najafzadeh S , Ropchan J , Lu Y , McDonald JW , Michalak HR , Nabulsi NB , Arnsten AFT , Huang Y , Carson RE , van Dyck CH , Assessing synaptic density in Alzheimer disease with synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A positron emission tomographic imaging. JAMA Neurol. 75 , 1215–1224 (2018).30014145
13. Nabulsi NB , Mercier J , Holden D , Carre S , Najafzadeh S , Vandergeten MC , Lin SF , Deo A , Price N , Wood M , Lara-Jaime T , Montel F , Laruelle M , Carson RE , Hannestad J , Huang Y , Synthesis and preclinical evaluation of 11C-UCB-J as a PET tracer for imaging the synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A in the brain. J. Nucl. Med 57 , 777–784 (2016).26848175
14. Jankowsky JL , Fadale DJ , Anderson J , Xu GM , Gonzales V , Jenkins NA , Copeland NG , Lee MK , Younkin LH , Wagner SL , Younkin SG , Borchelt DR , Mutant presenilins specifically elevate the levels of the 42 residue beta-amyloid peptide in vivo: Evidence for augmentation of a 42-specific gamma secretase. Hum.Mol. Genet 13 , 159–170 (2004).14645205
15. Toyonaga T , Smith LM , Finnema SJ , Gallezot JD , Naganawa M , Bini J , Mulnix T , Cai Z , Ropchan J , Huang Y , Strittmatter SM , Carson RE , In vivo synaptic density imaging with 11C-UCB-J detects treatment effects of saracatinib in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J. Nucl. Med 60 , 1780–1786 (2019).31101744
16. Sadasivam P , Fang XT , Toyonaga T , Lee S , Xu Y , Zheng MQ , Spurrier J , Huang Y , Strittmatter SM , Carson RE , Cai Z , Quantification of SV2A binding in rodent brain using [18F]SynVesT-1 and PET imaging. Mol. Imaging Biol 23 , 372–381 (2021).33258040
17. Lauren J , Gimbel DA , Nygaard HB , Gilbert JW , Strittmatter SM , Cellular prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-beta oligomers. Nature 457 , 1128–1132 (2009).19242475
18. Kostylev MA , Kaufman AC , Nygaard HB , Patel P , Haas LT , Gunther EC , Vortmeyer A , Strittmatter SM , Prion-protein-interacting Amyloid-β oligomers of high molecular weight are tightly correlated with memory impairment in multiple Alzheimer mouse models. J. Biol. Chem 290 , 17415–17438 (2015).26018073
19. Um JW , Nygaard HB , Heiss JK , Kostylev MA , Stagi M , Vortmeyer A , Wisniewski T , Gunther EC , Strittmatter SM , Alzheimer amyloid-β oligomer bound to postsynaptic prion protein activates Fyn to impair neurons. Nat. Neurosci 15 , 1227–1235 (2012).22820466
20. Smith LM , Strittmatter SM , Binding sites for amyloid-β oligomers and synaptic toxicity. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 7 , a024075 (2017).27940601
21. Kostylev MA , Tuttle MD , Lee S , Klein LE , Takahashi H , Cox TO , Gunther EC , Zilm KW , Strittmatter SM , Liquid and hydrogel phases of PrPC linked to conformation shifts and triggered by Alzheimer's Amyloid-β oligomers. Mol. Cell 72 , 426–443.e12 (2018).30401430
22. Chen S , Yadav SP , Surewicz WK , Interaction between human prion protein and amyloid-beta (Abeta) oligomers: Role of N-terminal residues. J. Biol. Chem 285 , 26377–26383 (2010).20576610
23. Haas LT , Kostylev MA , Strittmatter SM , Therapeutic molecules and endogenous ligands regulate the interaction between brain cellular prion protein (PrPC) and metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5). J. Biol. Chem 289 , 28460–28477 (2014).25148681
24. Fluharty BR , Biasini E , Stravalaci M , Sclip A , Diomede L , Balducci C , La Vitola P , Messa M , Colombo L , Forloni G , Borsello T , Gobbi M , Harris DA , An N-terminal fragment of the prion protein binds to Amyloid-β oligomers and inhibits their neurotoxicity in vivo. J. Biol. Chem 288 , 7857–7866 (2013).23362282
25. Haas LT , Salazar SV , Kostylev MA , Um JW , Kaufman AC , Strittmatter SM , Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 couples cellular prion protein to intracellular signalling in Alzheimer's disease. Brain 139 , 526–546 (2016).26667279
26. Salazar SV , Gallardo C , Kaufman AC , Herber CS , Haas LT , Robinson S , Manson JC , Lee MK , Strittmatter SM , Conditional deletion of Prnp rescues behavioral and synaptic deficits after disease onset in transgenic Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurosci 37 , 9207–9221 (2017).28842420
27. Gimbel DA , Nygaard HB , Coffey EE , Gunther EC , Lauren J , Gimbel ZA , Strittmatter SM , Memory impairment in transgenic Alzheimer mice requires cellular prion protein. J. Neurosci 30 , 6367–6374 (2010).20445063
28. Corbett GT , Wang Z , Hong W , Colom-Cadena M , Rose J , Liao M , Asfaw A , Hall TC , Ding L , DeSousa A , Frosch MP , Collinge J , Harris DA , Perkinton MS , Spires-Jones TL , Young-Pearse TL , Billinton A , Walsh DM , PrP is a central player in toxicity mediated by soluble aggregates of neurodegeneration-causing proteins. Acta Neuropathol. 139 , 503–526 (2020).31853635
29. Purro SA , Nicoll AJ , Collinge J , Prion protein as a toxic acceptor of Amyloid-β oligomers. Biol. Psychiatry 83 , 358–368 (2018).29331212
30. Lee G , Newman ST , Gard DL , Band H , Panchamoorthy G , Tau interacts with src-family non-receptor tyrosine kinases. J. Cell Sci 111 (Pt. 21 ), 3167–3177 (1998).9763511
31. Ittner LM , Ke YD , Delerue F , Bi M , Gladbach A , van Eersel J , Wolfing H , Chieng BC , Christie MJ , Napier IA , Eckert A , Staufenbiel M , Hardeman E , Gotz J , Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer's disease mouse models. Cell 142 , 387–397 (2010).20655099
32. Roberson ED , Halabisky B , Yoo JW , Yao J , Chin J , Yan F , Wu T , Hamto P , Devidze N , Yu GQ , Palop JJ , Noebels JL , Mucke L , Amyloid-β/Fyn-Induced synaptic, network, and cognitive impairments depend on tau levels in multiple mouse models of Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurosci 31 , 700–711 (2011).21228179
33. Larson M , Sherman MA , Amar F , Nuvolone M , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , Aguzzi A , Lesne SE , The complex PrPc-Fyn couples human oligomeric Aβ with pathological tau changes in Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurosci 32 , 16857–16871 (2012).23175838
34. Kaufman AC , Salazar SV , Haas LT , Yang J , Kostylev MA , Jeng AT , Robinson SA , Gunther EC , van Dyck CH , Nygaard HB , Strittmatter SM , Fyn inhibition rescues established memory and synapse loss in Alzheimer mice. Ann. Neurol 77 , 953–971 (2015).25707991
35. Lambert JC , Ibrahim-Verbaas CA , Harold D , Naj AC , Sims R , Bellenguez C , DeStafano AL , Bis JC , Beecham GW , Grenier-Boley B , Russo G , Thorton-Wells TA , Jones N , Smith AV , Chouraki V , Thomas C , Ikram MA , Zelenika D , Vardarajan BN , Kamatani Y , Lin CF , Gerrish A , Schmidt H , Kunkle B , Dunstan ML , Ruiz A , Bihoreau MT , Choi SH , Reitz C , Pasquier F , Cruchaga C , Craig D , Amin N , Berr C , Lopez OL , De Jager PL , Deramecourt V , Johnston JA , Evans D , Lovestone S , Letenneur L , Moron FJ , Rubinsztein DC , Eiriksdottir G , Sleegers K , Goate AM , Fievet N , Huentelman MW , Gill M , Brown K , Kamboh MI , Keller L , Barberger-Gateau P , McGuiness B , Larson EB , Green R , Myers AJ , Dufouil C , Todd S , Wallon D , Love S , Rogaeva E , Gallacher J , George-Hyslop PS , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Bayer A , Tsuang DW , Yu L , Tsolaki M , Bossu P , Spalletta G , Proitsi P , Collinge J , Sorbi S , Sanchez-Garcia F , Fox NC , Hardy J , Naranjo MCD , Bosco P , Clarke R , Brayne C , Galimberti D , Mancuso M , Matthews F ; European Alzheimer's Disease Initiative (EADI); Genetic and Environmental Risk in Alzheimer's Disease; Alzheimer's Disease Genetic Consortium; Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology, Moebus S , Mecocci P , Del Zompo M , Maier W , Hampel H , Pilotto A , Bullido M , Panza F , Caffarra P , Nacmias B , Gilbert JR , Mayhaus M , Lannefelt L , Hakonarson H , Pichler S , Carrasquillo MM , Ingelsson M , Beekly D , Alvarez V , Zou F , Valladares O , Younkin SG , Coto E , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Gu W , Razquin C , Pastor P , Mateo I , Owen MJ , Faber KM , Jonsson PV , Combarros O , O'Donovan MC , Cantwell LB , Soininen H , Blacker D , Mead S , Mosley TH Jr. , Bennett DA , Harris TB , Fratiglioni L , Holmes C , de Bruijn RF , Passmore P , Montine TJ , Bettens K , Rotter JI , Brice A , Morgan K , Foroud TM , Kukull WA , Hannequin D , Powell JF , Nalls MA , Ritchie K , Lunetta KL , Kauwe JS , Boerwinkle E , Riemenschneider M , Boada M , Hiltuenen M , Martin ER , Schmidt R , Rujescu D , Wang LS , Dartigues JF , Mayeux R , Tzourio C , Hofman A , Nothen MM , Graff C , Psaty BM , Jones L , Haines JL , Holmans PA , Lathrop M , Pericak-Vance MA , Launer LJ , Farrer LA , van Duijn CM , Van Broeckhoven C , Moskvina V , Seshadri S , Williams J , Schellenberg GD , Amouyel P , Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet 45 , 1452–1458 (2013).24162737
36. Um JW , Kaufman AC , Kostylev M , Heiss JK , Stagi M , Takahashi H , Kerrisk ME , Vortmeyer A , Wisniewski T , Koleske AJ , Gunther EC , Nygaard HB , Strittmatter SM , Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is a coreceptor for Alzheimer Aβ oligomer bound to cellular prion protein. Neuron 79 , 887–902 (2013).24012003
37. Beraldo FH , Ostapchenko VG , Caetano FA , Guimaraes AL , Ferretti GD , Daude N , Bertram L , Nogueira KO , Silva JL , Westaway D , Cashman NR , Martins VR , Prado VF , Prado MA , Regulation of amyloid β oligomer binding to neurons and neurotoxicity by the prion protein-mGluR5 complex. J. Biol. Chem 291 , 21945–21955 (2016).27563063
38. Haas LT , Strittmatter SM , Oligomers of amyloid β prevent physiological activation of the cellular prion protein-metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 complex by glutamate in Alzheimer disease. J. Biol. Chem 291 , 17112–17121 (2016).27325698
39. Haas LT , Salazar SV , Smith LM , Zhao HR , Cox TO , Herber CS , Degnan AP , Balakrishnan A , Macor JE , Albright CF , Strittmatter SM , Silent allosteric modulation of mGluR5 maintains glutamate signaling while rescuing Alzheimer's mouse phenotypes. Cell Rep. 20 , 76–88 (2017).28683325
40. Hamilton A , Vasefi M , Vander Tuin C , McQuaid RJ , Anisman H , Ferguson SS , Chronic pharmacological mGluR5 inhibition prevents cognitive impairment and reduces pathogenesis in an Alzheimer disease mouse model. Cell Rep. 15 , 1859–1865 (2016).27210751
41. Hamilton A , Esseltine JL , DeVries RA , Cregan SP , Ferguson SS , Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 knockout reduces cognitive impairment and pathogenesis in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Mol. Brain 7 , 40 (2014).24886239
42. Hu N-W , Nicoll AJ , Zhang D , Mably AJ , O'Malley T , Purro SA , Terry C , Collinge J , Walsh DM , Rowan MJ , mGlu5 receptors and cellular prion protein mediate amyloid-β-facilitated synaptic long-term depression in vivo. Nat. Commun 5 , 3374 (2014).24594908
43. Zhang D , Qi Y , Klyubin I , Ondrejcak T , Sarell CJ , Cuello AC , Collinge J , Rowan MJ , Targeting glutamatergic and cellular prion protein mechanisms of amyloid β-mediated persistent synaptic plasticity disruption: Longitudinal studies. Neuropharmacology 121 , 231–246 (2017).28390893
44. Lee S , Salazar SV , Cox TO , Strittmatter SM , Pyk2 signaling through Graf1 and RhoA GTPase is required for amyloid-β oligomer-triggered synapse loss. J. Neurosci 39 , 1910–1929 (2019).30626696
45. Salazar SV , Cox TO , Lee S , Brody AH , Chyung AS , Haas LT , Strittmatter SM , Alzheimer's disease risk factor Pyk2 mediates amyloid-β-induced synaptic dysfunction and loss. J. Neurosci 39 , 758–772 (2019).30518596
46. Wang Q , Walsh DM , Rowan MJ , Selkoe DJ , Anwyl R , Block of long-term potentiation by naturally secreted and synthetic amyloid beta-peptide in hippocampal slices is mediated via activation of the kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase, cyclin-dependent kinase 5, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase as well as metabotropic glutamate receptor type 5. J. Neurosci 24 , 3370–3378 (2004).15056716
47. Renner M , Lacor PN , Velasco PT , Xu J , Contractor A , Klein WL , Triller A , Deleterious effects of amyloid beta oligomers acting as an extracellular scaffold for mGluR5. Neuron 66 , 739–754 (2010).20547131
48. Zhang H , Wu L , Pchitskaya E , Zakharova O , Saito T , Saido T , Bezprozvanny I , Neuronal store-operated calcium entry and mushroom spine loss in amyloid precursor protein knock-in mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurosci 35 , 13275–13286 (2015).26424877
49. Raka F , Di Sebastiano AR , Kulhawy SC , Ribeiro FM , Godin CM , Caetano FA , Angers S , Ferguson SS , Ca2+/Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II interacts with group I metabotropic glutamate and facilitates receptor endocytosis and ERK1/2 signaling: Role of β-amyloid. Mol. Brain 8 , 21 (2015).25885040
50. Overk CR , Cartier A , Shaked G , Rockenstein E , Ubhi K , Spencer B , Price DL , Patrick C , Desplats P , Masliah E , Hippocampal neuronal cells that accumulate α-synuclein fragments are more vulnerable to Aβ oligomer toxicity via mGluR5–implications for dementia with Lewy bodies. Mol. Neurodegener 9 , 18 (2014).24885390
51. He Y , Wei M , Wu Y , Qin H , Li W , Ma X , Cheng J , Ren J , Shen Y , Chen Z , Sun B , Huang ED , Shen Y , Zhou YD , Amyloid β oligomers suppress excitatory transmitter release via presynaptic depletion of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate. Nat. Commun 10 , 1193 (2019).30867420
52. Abd-Elrahman KS , Hamilton A , Albaker A , Ferguson SSG , mGluR5 contribution to neuropathology in Alzheimer mice is disease stage-dependent. ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci 3 , 334–344 (2020).32296772
53. Kazim SF , Chuang SC , Zhao W , Wong RK , Bianchi R , Iqbal K , Early-onset network hyperexcitability in presymptomatic Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice is suppressed by passive immunization with anti-human APP/Aβ antibody and by mGluR5 blockade. Front. Aging Neurosci 9 , 71 (2017).28392767
54. Abd-Elrahman KS , Albaker A , de Souza JM , Ribeiro FM , Schlossmacher MG , Tiberi M , Hamilton A , Ferguson SSG , Aβ oligomers induce pathophysiological mGluR5 signaling in Alzheimer's disease model mice in a sex-selective manner. Sci. Signal 13 , eabd2494 (2020).33323410
55. Porter RH , Jaeschke G , Spooren W , Ballard TM , Buttelmann B , Kolczewski S , Peters JU , Prinssen E , Wichmann J , Vieira E , Muhlemann A , Gatti S , Mutel V , Malherbe P , Fenobam: A clinically validated nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic is a potent, selective, and noncompetitive mGlu5 receptor antagonist with inverse agonist activity. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther 315 , 711–721 (2005).16040814
56. Rodriguez AL , Grier MD , Jones CK , Herman EJ , Kane AS , Smith RL , Williams R , Zhou Y , Marlo JE , Days EL , Blatt TN , Jadhav S , Menon UN , Vinson PN , Rook JM , Stauffer SR , Niswender CM , Lindsley CW , Weaver CD , Conn PJ , Discovery of novel allosteric modulators of metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 5 reveals chemical and functional diversity and in vivo activity in rat behavioral models of anxiolytic and antipsychotic activity. Mol. Pharmacol 78 , 1105–1123 (2010).20923853
57. Campbell UC , Lalwani K , Hernandez L , Kinney GG , Conn PJ , Bristow LJ , The mGluR5 antagonist 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine (MPEP) potentiates PCP-induced cognitive deficits in rats. Psychopharmacology 175 , 310–318 (2004).15024550
58. Abou Farha K , Bruggeman R , Balje-Volkers C , Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 negative modulation in phase I clinical trial: Potential impact of circadian rhythm on the neuropsychiatric adverse reactions-do hallucinations matter? ISRN Psychiatry 2014 , 652750 (2014).24729909
59. Lu YM , Jia Z , Janus C , Henderson JT , Gerlai R , Wojtowicz JM , Roder JC , Mice lacking metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 show impaired learning and reduced CA1 long-term potentiation (LTP) but normal CA3 LTP. J. Neurosci 17 , 5196–5205 (1997).9185557
60. Xu J , Zhu Y , Contractor A , Heinemann SF , mGluR5 has a critical role in inhibitory learning. J. Neurosci 29 , 3676–3684 (2009).19321764
61. Gregory KJ , Dong EN , Meiler J , Conn PJ , Allosteric modulation of metabotropic glutamate receptors: Structural insights and therapeutic potential. Neuropharmacology 60 , 66–81 (2011).20637216
62. Gregory KJ , Malosh C , Turlington M , Morrison R , Vinson P , Daniels JS , Jones C , Niswender CM , Conn PJ , Lindsley CW , Stauffer SR , in Probe Reports from the NIH Molecular Libraries Program (National Center for Biotechnology Information, 2010).
63. Gregory KJ , Noetzel MJ , Rook JM , Vinson PN , Stauffer SR , Rodriguez AL , Emmitte KA , Zhou Y , Chun AC , Felts AS , Chauder BA , Lindsley CW , Niswender CM , Conn PJ , Investigating metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 allosteric modulator cooperativity, affinity, and agonism: Enriching structure-function studies and structure-activity relationships. Mol. Pharmacol 82 , 860–875 (2012).22863693
64. Saito T , Matsuba Y , Mihira N , Takano J , Nilsson P , Itohara S , Iwata N , Saido TC , Single App knock-in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Neurosci 17 , 661–663 (2014).24728269
65. Saito T , Mihira N , Matsuba Y , Sasaguri H , Hashimoto S , Narasimhan S , Zhang B , Murayama S , Higuchi M , Lee VMY , Trojanowski JQ , Saido TC , Humanization of the entire murine Mapt gene provides a murine model of pathological human tau propagation. J. Biol. Chem 294 , 12754–12765 (2019).31273083
66. Stevens B , Allen NJ , Vazquez LE , Howell GR , Christopherson KS , Nouri N , Micheva KD , Mehalow AK , Huberman AD , Stafford B , Sher A , Litke AM , Lambris JD , Smith SJ , John SW , Barres BA , The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131 , 1164–1178 (2007).18083105
67. Yang F , Snyder LB , Balakrishnan A , Brown JM , Sivarao DV , Easton A , Fernandes A , Gulianello M , Hanumegowda UM , Huang H , Huang Y , Jones KM , Li YW , Matchett M , Mattson G , Miller R , Santone KS , Senapati A , Shields EE , Simutis FJ , Westphal R , Whiterock VJ , Bronson JJ , Macor JE , Degnan AP , Discovery and preclinical evaluation of BMS-955829, a potent positive allosteric modulator of mGluR5. ACS Med. Chem. Lett 7 , 289–293 (2016).26985317
68. Sauerbeck AD , Gangolli M , Reitz SJ , Salyards MH , Kim SH , Hemingway C , Gratuze M , Makkapati T , Kerschensteiner M , Holtzman DM , Brody DL , Kummer TT , SEQUIN multiscale imaging of mammalian central synapses reveals loss of synaptic connectivity resulting from diffuse traumatic brain injury. Neuron 107 , 257–273.e5 (2020).32392471
69. Mucke L , Selkoe DJ , Neurotoxicity of amyloid β-protein: Synaptic and network dysfunction. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 , a006338 (2012).22762015
70. Tu S , Okamoto S , Lipton SA , Xu H , Oligomeric Aβ-induced synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease. Mol. Neurodegener 9 , 48 (2014).25394486
71. Busche MA , Hyman BT , Synergy between amyloid-β and tau in Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Neurosci 23 , 1183–1193 (2020).32778792
72. Mondragon-Rodriguez S , Perry G , Luna-Munoz J , Acevedo-Aquino MC , Williams S , Phosphorylation of tau protein at sites Ser(396-404) is one of the earliest events in Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol 40 , 121–135 (2014).24033439
73. Palmqvist S , Janelidze S , Quiroz YT , Zetterberg H , Lopera F , Stomrud E , Su Y , Chen Y , Serrano GE , Leuzy A , Mattsson-Carlgren N , Strandberg O , Smith R , Villegas A , Sepulveda-Falla D , Chai X , Proctor NK , Beach TG , Blennow K , Dage JL , Reiman EM , Hansson O , Discriminative accuracy of plasma phospho-tau217 for Alzheimer disease vs other neurodegenerative disorders. JAMA 324 , 772–781 (2020).32722745
74. Bindea G , Mlecnik B , Hackl H , Charoentong P , Tosolini M , Kirilovsky A , Fridman WH , Pages F , Trajanoski Z , Galon J , ClueGO: A Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation networks. Bioinformatics 25 , 1091–1093 (2009).19237447
75. Keren-Shaul H , Spinrad A , Weiner A , Matcovitch-Natan O , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Ulland TK , David E , Baruch K , Lara-Astaiso D , Toth B , Itzkovitz S , Colonna M , Schwartz M , Amit I , A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of Alzheimer's disease. Cell 169 , 1276–1290.e17 (2017).28602351
76. Habib N , McCabe C , Medina S , Varshavsky M , Kitsberg D , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Green G , Dionne D , Nguyen L , Marshall JL , Chen F , Zhang F , Kaplan T , Regev A , Schwartz M , Disease-associated astrocytes in Alzheimer's disease and aging. Nat. Neurosci 23 , 701–706 (2020).32341542
77. Iram T , Ramirez-Ortiz Z , Byrne MH , Coleman UA , Kingery ND , Means TK , Frenkel D , El Khoury J , Megf10 is a receptor for C1Q that mediates clearance of apoptotic cells by astrocytes. J. Neurosci 36 , 5185–5192 (2016).27170117
78. Henstridge CM , Tzioras M , Paolicelli RC , Glial contribution to excitatory and inhibitory synapse loss in neurodegeneration. Front. Cell. Neurosci 13 , 63 (2019).30863284
79. Cox TO , Gunther EC , Brody AH , Chiasseu MT , Stoner A , Smith LM , Haas LT , Hammersley J , Rees G , Dosanjh B , Groves M , Gardener M , Dobson C , Vaughan T , Chessell I , Billinton A , Strittmatter SM , Anti-PrPC antibody rescues cognition and synapses in transgenic alzheimer mice. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 6 , 554–574 (2019).30911579
80. Gunther EC , Smith LM , Kostylev MA , Cox TO , Kaufman AC , Lee S , Folta-Stogniew E , Maynard GD , Um JW , Stagi M , Heiss JK , Stoner A , Noble GP , Takahashi H , Haas LT , Schneekloth JS , Merkel J , Teran C , Naderi ZK , Supattapone S , Strittmatter SM , Rescue of transgenic Alzheimer's pathophysiology by polymeric cellular prion protein antagonists. Cell Rep. 26 , 145–158.e8 (2019).30605671
81. Lui H , Zhang J , Makinson SR , Cahill MK , Kelley KW , Huang HY , Shang Y , Oldham MC , Martens LH , Gao F , Coppola G , Sloan SA , Hsieh CL , Kim CC , Bigio EH , Weintraub S , Mesulam MM , Rademakers R , Mackenzie IR , Seeley WW , Karydas A , Miller BL , Borroni B , Ghidoni R , Farese RV Jr. , Paz JT , Barres BA , Huang EJ , Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-specific synaptic pruning by microglia via complement activation. Cell 165 , 921–935 (2016).27114033
82. Dejanovic B , Huntley MA , De Maziere A , Meilandt WJ , Wu T , Srinivasan K , Jiang Z , Gandham V , Friedman BA , Ngu H , Foreman O , Carano RAD , Chih B , Klumperman J , Bakalarski C , Hanson JE , Sheng M , Changes in the synaptic proteome in tauopathy and rescue of Tau-induced synapse loss by C1q antibodies. Neuron 100 , 1322–1336.e7 (2018).30392797
83. Damisah EC , Hill RA , Rai A , Chen F , Rothlin CV , Ghosh S , Grutzendler J , Astrocytes and microglia play orchestrated roles and respect phagocytic territories during neuronal corpse removal in vivo. Sci. Adv 6 , eaba3239 (2020).32637606
84. Naganawa M , Li S , Nabulsi N , Henry S , Zheng MQ , Pracitto R , Cai Z , Gao H , Kapinos M , Labaree D , Matuskey D , Huang Y , Carson RE , First-in-human evaluation of 18F-SynVesT-1, a radioligand for PET imaging of synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A. J. Nucl. Med 62 , 561–567 (2021).32859701
85. Li S , Cai Z , Wu X , Holden D , Pracitto R , Kapinos M , Gao H , Labaree D , Nabulsi N , Carson RE , Huang Y , Synthesis and in vivo evaluation of a novel PET radiotracer for imaging of synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A (SV2A) in nonhuman primates. ACS Chem. Nerosci 10 , 1544–1554 (2019).
86. Mostany R , Anstey JE , Crump KL , Maco B , Knott G , Portera-Cailliau C , Altered synaptic dynamics during normal brain aging. J. Neurosci 33 , 4094–4104 (2013).23447617
87. Heiss JK , Barrett J , Yu Z , Haas LT , Kostylev MA , Strittmatter SM , Early activation of experience-independent dendritic spine turnover in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Cereb. Cortex 27 , 3660–3674 (2017).27365298
88. Oddo S , Caccamo A , Shepherd JD , Murphy MP , Golde TE , Kayed R , Metherate R , Mattson MP , Akbari Y , LaFerla FM , Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease with plaques and Tangles. Neuron 39 , 409–421 (2003).12895417
89. Li C , Gotz J , Pyk2 is a novel Tau tyrosine kinase that is regulated by the tyrosine kinase Fyn. J. Alzheimers Dis 64 , 205–221 (2018).29782321
90. Mathys H , Davila-Velderrain J , Peng Z , Gao F , Mohammadi S , Young JZ , Menon M , He L , Abdurrob F , Jiang X , Martorell AJ , Ransohoff RM , Hafler BP , Bennett DA , Kellis M , Tsai LH , Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer's disease. Nature 570 , 332–337 (2019).31042697
91. Brooks WM , Lynch PJ , Ingle CC , Hatton A , Emson PC , Faull RL , Starkey MP , Gene expression profiles of metabolic enzyme transcripts in Alzheimer's disease. Brain Res. 1127 , 127–135 (2007).17109828
92. Zhou M , Haque RU , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Ping L , Johnson ECB , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Seyfried NT , Targeted mass spectrometry to quantify brain-derived cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease. Clin. Proteomics 17 , 19 (2020).32514259
93. Cong W , Meng X , Li J , Zhang Q , Chen F , Liu W , Wang Y , Cheng S , Yao X , Yan J , Kim S , Saykin AJ , Liang H , Shen L ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Genome-wide network-based pathway analysis of CSF t-tau/Aβ1-42 ratio in the ADNI cohort. BMC Genomics 18 , 421 (2017).28558704
94. Sundelof J , Sundstrom J , Hansson O , Eriksdotter-Jonhagen M , Giedraitis V , Larsson A , Degerman-Gunnarsson M , Ingelsson M , Minthon L , Blennow K , Kilander L , Basun H , Lannfelt L , Cystatin C levels are positively correlated with both Abeta42 and tau levels in cerebrospinal fluid in persons with Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment, and healthy controls. J. Alzheimers Dis 21 , 471–478 (2010).20555147
95. Hansson SF , Andreasson U , Wall M , Skoog I , Andreasen N , Wallin A , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Reduced levels of amyloid-beta-binding proteins in cerebrospinal fluid from Alzheimer's disease patients. J. Alzheimers Dis 16 , 389–397 (2009).19221428
96. Zhang Q , Ma C , Gearing M , Wang PG , Chin LS , Li L , Integrated proteomics and network analysis identifies protein hubs and network alterations in Alzheimer's disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun 6 , 19 (2018).29490708
97. Higginbotham L , Ping L , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Zhou M , Gearing M , Hurst C , Glass JD , Factor SA , Johnson ECB , Hajjar I , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Seyfried NT , Integrated proteomics reveals brain-based cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in asymptomatic and symptomatic Alzheimer's disease. Sci. Adv 6 , (2020).
98. Mahajan UV , Varma VR , Griswold ME , Blackshear CT , An Y , Oommen AM , Varma S , Troncoso JC , Pletnikova O , O'Brien R , Hohman TJ , Legido-Quigley C , Thambisetty M , Dysregulation of multiple metabolic networks related to brain transmethylation and polyamine pathways in Alzheimer disease: A targeted metabolomic and transcriptomic study. PLOS Med. 17 , e1003012 (2020).31978055
99. Yao W , Yin T , Tambini MD , D'Adamio L , The familial dementia gene ITM2b/BRI2 facilitates glutamate transmission via both presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms. Sci. Rep 9 , 4862 (2019).30890756
100. Del Campo M , Teunissen CE , Role of BRI2 in dementia. J. Alzheimers Dis 40 , 481–494 (2014).24473189
101. Del Campo M , Hoozemans JJ , Dekkers LL , Rozemuller AJ , Korth C , Muller-Schiffmann A , Scheltens P , Blankenstein MA , Jimenez CR , Veerhuis R , Teunissen CE , BRI2-BRICHOS is increased in human amyloid plaques in early stages of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol. Aging 35 , 1596–1604 (2014).24524963
102. Reese LC , Laezza F , Woltjer R , Taglialatela G , Dysregulated phosphorylation of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-α in the hippocampus of subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurochem 119 , 791–804 (2011).21883216
103. Wyss-Coray T , Rogers J , Inflammation in Alzheimer disease-a brief review of the basic science and clinical literature. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 , a006346 (2012).22315714
104. Wu T , Dejanovic B , Gandham VD , Gogineni A , Edmonds R , Schauer S , Srinivasan K , Huntley MA , Wang Y , Wang TM , Hedehus M , Barck KH , Stark M , Ngu H , Foreman O , Meilandt WJ , Elstrott J , Chang MC , Hansen DV , Carano RAD , Sheng M , Hanson JE , Complement C3 is activated in human AD brain and is required for neurodegeneration in mouse models of amyloidosis and tauopathy. Cell Rep. 28 , 2111–2123.e6 (2019).31433986
105. Chung WS , Clarke LE , Wang GX , Stafford BK , Sher A , Chakraborty C , Joung J , Foo LC , Thompson A , Chen C , Smith SJ , Barres BA , Astrocytes mediate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways. Nature 504 , 394–400 (2013).24270812
106. Lehrman EK , Wilton DK , Litvina EY , Welsh CA , Chang ST , Frouin A , Walker AJ , Heller MD , Umemori H , Chen C , Stevens B , CD47 protects synapses from excess microglia-mediated pruning during development. Neuron 100 , 120–134.e6 (2018).30308165
107. Butler A , Hoffman P , Smibert P , Papalexi E , Satija R , Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol 36 , 411–420 (2018).29608179
108. Huang H , Degnan AP , Balakrishnan A , Easton A , Gulianello M , Huang Y , Matchett M , Mattson G , Miller R , Santone KS , Senapati A , Shields EE , Sivarao DV , Snyder LB , Westphal R , Whiterock VJ , Yang F , Bronson JJ , Macor JE , Oxazolidinone-based allosteric modulators of mGluR5: Defining molecular switches to create a pharmacological tool box. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett 26 , 4165–4169 (2016).27496211
109. Sheldrick GM , A short history of SHELX. Acta Crystallogr. A 64 , 112–122 (2008).18156677
110. Bachmanov AA , Reed DR , Beauchamp GK , Tordoff MG , Food intake, water intake, and drinking spout side preference of 28 mouse strains. Behav. Genet 32 , 435–443 (2002).12467341
111. Lim K , Labaree D , Li S , Huang Y , Preparation of the metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) PET tracer [(18)F]FPEB for human use: An automated radiosynthesis and a novel one-pot synthesis of its radiolabeling precursor. Appl. Radiat. Isot 94 , 349–354 (2014).25305528
112. Sandiego CM , Nabulsi N , Lin SF , Labaree D , Najafzadeh S , Huang Y , Cosgrove K , Carson RE , Studies of the metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 radioligand [11C]ABP688 with N-acetylcysteine challenge in rhesus monkeys. Synapse 67 , 489–501 (2013).23424090
113. Innis RB , Cunningham VJ , Delforge J , Fujita M , Gjedde A , Gunn RN , Holden J , Houle S , Huang SC , Ichise M , Iida H , Ito H , Kimura Y , Koeppe RA , Knudsen GM , Knuuti J , Lammertsma AA , Laruelle M , Logan J , Maguire RP , Mintun MA , Morris ED , Parsey R , Price JC , Slifstein M , Sossi V , Suhara T , Votaw JR , Wong DF , Carson RE , Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging of reversibly binding radioligands. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 27 , 1533–1539 (2007).17519979
114. Cunningham VJ , Rabiner EA , Slifstein M , Laruelle M , Gunn RN , Measuring drug occupancy in the absence of a reference region: The Lassen plot re-visited. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 30 , 46–50 (2010).19738632
115. Ma Y , Smith D , Hof PR , Foerster B , Hamilton S , Blackband SJ , Yu M , Benveniste H , In vivo 3D digital atlas database of the adult C57BL/6J mouse brain by magnetic resonance microscopy. Front. Neuroanat 2 , 1 (2008).18958199
116. Verhaeghe J , Bertoglio D , Kosten L , Thomae D , Verhoye M , Van Der Linden A , Wyffels L , Stroobants S , Wityak J , Dominguez C , Mrzljak L , Staelens S , Noninvasive relative quantification of [11C]ABP688 PET imaging in mice versus an input function measured over an arteriovenous shunt. Front. Neurol 9 , 516 (2018).30013509
117. Racine RJ , Modification of seizure activity by electrical stimulation: II. Motor seizure. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol 32 , 281–294 (1972).4110397
118. Bolte S , Cordelieres FP , A guided tour into subcellular colocalization analysis in light microscopy. J. Microsc 224 , 213–232 (2006).17210054
119. McGinnis CS , Murrow LM , Gartner ZJ , DoubletFinder: Doublet detection in single-cell RNA sequencing data using artificial nearest neighbors. Cell Syst. 8 , 329–337.e4 (2019).30954475
120. Wickham H , in Use R! (Springer International Publishing, 2016).
